THE    LIBRARY 

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  VI  I VEPSITY 

PROVO,  UTAH 


^ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


http://www.archive.org/details/preachersconnplet26newy 


THE   PREACHER'S  COMMENTARY 


ON 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


THE 


|j  teacher's  Complete  Jomiletkal 

COMMENTARY 


ON    THE 


NEW    TESTAMENT 

(ON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLANJ 

xfy  Critical  gift  (fephtt&torg  Ifates,  Jftttriaa,  $z.,  fe. 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS 


i£eto  gorfe 

FUNK   &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
London  and  Toeonto 
1896 


££/i 


w 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON   THE 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


BY 

REV.   THOMAS  WHITELAW,  MA.,   D.H. 

AUTHOR  OF  EXPOSITIONS  AND  HOMILETICS  IN  "  PULPIT  COMMENTARY  "  ON  GENESIS,   "  AN  EXEGETICAL 
AND  HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.   JOHN,"  ETC.,   ETC. 


Printed  in  the  U.S.A. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1896 


tttE    LIBRATT? 

BR IGHAr.i  YOUNG  U:  IV;    FY 

PROVO,  UTAH 


THE 

PREACHER'S  HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 


INTBODUCTION. 

While  the  present  volume  does  not  aim  at  furnishing  an  elaborate  and  ex- 
haustive discussion  of  such  topics  as  are  usually  included  in  the  department  of 
Introduction,  on  the  following  points,  as  likely  to  be  useful  to  the  student,  a 
few  observations  may  be  offered — the  title  and  contents ;  the  integrity  and 
credibility ;  the  author  and  date ;  the  sources  and  aim  of  the  Acts. 

§  I.  Title  and  Contents. 

1.  The  Title. — Like  the  name  "G-ospel,"  evayye'Aiov,  prefixed  to  the  first  four 
Books  of  the  New  Testament,  that  of  "  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles,"  irpd£ei<;  rutv 
airoo-Tokw,  Acta  or  Actus  Apostolorum — in  some  MSS.  "  Acts,"  "  Acts  of  all  the 
Apostles,"  and  "  Acts  of  the  Holy  Apostles  " — though  of  long  standing,  is  not 
original,  but  was  added  by  a  later  hand.  Neither  can  it  be  pronounced  remark- 
ably appropriate,  since  the  volume  to  which  it  is  prefixed  is  mainly  occupied 
with  the  words  and  deeds  of  the  two  principal  apostles,  Peter  and  Paul,  and  does 
little  more  than  mention  the  others — the  eleven  once  (i.  13),  Judas  (i.  16,  25), 
and  Matthias  the  twelfth  (i.  23,  26)  twice,  and  John  five  times  (iii.  1,  11,  iv.  13, 
viii.  14,  xii.  2) — while  it  introduces  a  variety  of  persons  who  were  not  of 
apostolic  rank,  such  as  Stephen  and  Philip,  Barnabas  and  Mark,  Silas  and 
Timothy.  If  for  the  author  himself  the  work  had  a  title,  that  was  probably 
"  The  Second  Treatise  "  as  distinguished  from  "  The  First,"  or  the  Gospel  of 
Luke,  which  claims  to  have  proceeded  from  the  same  pen,  and  to  have  been 
addressed  to  the  same  patron,  the  most  excellent  Theophilus  (i.  1 ;  Luke  i.  3). 

2.  The  Contents. — These,  as  just  indicated,  concern  chiefly  the  apostolic  and 
missionary  activity  of   Peter   and  of   Paul — of  the  former  in  planting  and 

,b  1 


introduction.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 

establishing  the  Christian  Church  within  the  bounds  of  the  Holy  Land,  of 
the  latter  in  carrying  the  Gospel  into  regions  beyond.  Beginning  with  what 
might  be  styled  "The  Acts  of  Peter"  (i. — xii.),  after  a  brief  account  of  the 
appearances  of  our  Lord  to  the  eleven  during  the  forty  days  which  intervened 
between  His  resurrection  and  ascension  (i.  1-11),  the  writing  treats  in  succession 
of  (1)  the  election  of  a  twelfth  apostle,  at  Peter's  instigation,  to  supply  the  place 
left  vacant  by  Judas  (i.  12-26) ;  (2)  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost,  with  Peter's  sermon  explanatory  of  the  wonderful  phenomena  that 
followed  thereupon  (ii.) ;  (3)  the  growing  acceptance  of  the  New  Faith  among 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  consequent  upon  Peter's  healing  of  a  lame  man  (iii.) ; 
(4)  the  first  symptoms  of  Jewish  Opposition  against  the  Church,  shown  in  the 
imprisonment  of  Peter  and  John  (iv.) ;  (5)  the  first  signs  of  corruption  inside 
the  Church,  with  the  strong  measures  used  by  Peter  for  its  suppression  (v.); 
(6)  the  first  murmurs  of  division  in  the  ranks  of  the  disciples,  with  the  means 
adopted  by  the  Twelve  for  its  removal  (vi.  1-6)  ;  and  (7)  the  first  actual  persecu- 
tion that  assailed  the  Church,  which  arose  in  connection  with  Stephen  (vi.  8 — 
viii.  3) ;  after  which  (8)  it  traces  the  forward  movement  and  outward  spread 
of  Christianity  from  Jerusalem  as  a  centre,  till  first  the  Gospel  is  planted  in 
Samaria  (viii.  4-24),  carried  north  to  Damascus  (ix.),  preached  in  Csesarea 
(viii.  40,  x. — xi.  18),  and  finally  established  in  Antioch  (xi.  19 — xii.).  Then 
continuing  in  what  with  equal  fitness  may  be  termed  "  The  Acts  of  Paul,"  it 
reports  how,  through  the  missionary  enterprise  of  that  illustrious  servant  of 
Jesus  Christ  whose  conversion  has  been  related  in  the  preceding  part  (ix.),  the 
Gospel  finds  its  way  now  from  Antioch  as  a  centre,  first  through  A:-ia  Minor,  in 
Paul's  first  missionary  journey  with  Barnabas  (xiii. — xv.) ;  next  to  the  shores  of 
Europe,  in  a  second  journey  with  Silas  and  a  third  with  Timothy  (xvi. — xxi.)  ; 
and  ultimately,  through  Paul's  imprisonment,  reaches  Rome,  the  capital  of  the 
world  (xxviii.). 

Though  the  continuously  flowing  narrative  contains  no  indications  of  divisions 
properly  so  called,  yet  various  attempts  have  been  made  to  arrange  its  material 
into  appropriate  sections.  Zeller,  for  example,  distributes  it  into  three  groups  of 
passages,  of  which  the  first  (i. — v.,  xii.)  "  treats  "  of  the  original  apostles  and  the 
Jerusalem  Church,  while  the  second  (vi. — xi.,  with  the  exception  of  ix.  1-30) 
deals  with  the  two  Hellenist  deacons,  Stephen  and  Philip,  and  the  third 
(ix.  1-30,  xiii. — xxviii.)  narrates  the  history  of  Paul.  As  this,  however,  is 
rather  a  rearrangement  of  the  contents  of  the  work  for  study  than  a  natural 
division  of  these  into  sections,  a  different  method  of  partition  is  usually  adopted. 
The  threefold  division,  corresponding  roughly  to  the  three  centres  of  activity, 
Jerusalem,  Antioch,  Rome,  has  found  pretty  general  acceptance,  only  the 
dividing  lines  between  the  sections  are  not  always  drawn  by  different  writers  in 
the  same  places,  Weiss  inserting  them  at  viii.  4  and  xv.  33,  Schulze  at  vi.  7 
and  xix.  20,  and  Baumgarten  at  viii.  4  and  xii.  25.  The  Rev.  J.  O.  F. 
Murray,  M.A.,  in  the  Cambridge  Companion  to  the  Bible,  p.  71,  following  our 
Lord's  words  in  i.  8,  arranges  the  contents  of  the  Book  thus :  I.  The  witness 
in  Jerusalem  (i. — v.).  II.  The  witness  in  Judsea  and  Samaria  (vi. — ix.  31)  in 
2 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS,    introduction. 

three  stages  :  (1)  the  dispersion  caused  by  Stephen's  martyrdom  (vi.  8 — viii.  3) ; 
(2)  the  work  of  Philip  (viii.  4-40) ;  and  (3)  the  conversion  and  early  preaching 
of  Saul  of  Tarsus  (ix.  1-31).  III.  The  witness  unto  the  uttermost  parts  of 
the  earth  (ix.  32 — xxviii.  31)  again  in  three  sub- divisions  :  (1)  the  opening  of 
the  door  for  world-wide  extension  of  the  gospel  by  the  baptism  of  Cornelius 
(x.  1 — xi.  26),  (2)  the  activity  of  the  Church  at  Antioch  through  its  accredited 
representatives,  Barnabas  and  Saul  (xi.  27 — xiv.) ;  and  (3)  the  independent 
missionary  activity  of  Paul  (xv. — xxviii.).  Perhaps,  however,  the  simplest 
distribution  of  the  material  is  that  already  indicated,  which  divides  it  into 
two  parts,  of  which  the  first  (i. — xii.)  reports  the  development  of  the  Church 
under  the  leadership  of  Peter  and  within  the  Holy  Land,  from  Jerusalem  as  a 
centre,  till  it  reaches  Antioch,  and  the  second  (xiii. — xxviii.)  rehearses  the  story 
of  its  progress,  through  the  missionary  activity  of  Paul,  outside  those  limits  in 
Asia  Minor  and  on  the  shores  of  Europe,  or  in  other  words  from  Antioch  to  Rome. 

§  2.  Integrity  and  Credibility. 

1.  The  Integrity. — That  the  Book  of  Acts  is  no  mere  patchwork  or  mosaic  of 
literary  fragments  left  by  a  variety  of  writers  and  put  together  by  a  late  editor 
who  flourished  at  some  considerable  distance  of  time  from  the  incidents  narrated, 
but  a  homogeneous  composition,  proceeding  from  one  hand,  may  be  said  to 
admit  of  almost  unchallengeable  demonstration.  In  its  second  part,  indeed,  occur 
portions  (the  "we"  passages  as  they  are  commonly  styled,  xvi.  10-17,  xx.  5-15, 
xxi.  1-18,  xxvii.  1 — xxviii.  16)  which  excite  suspicion  of  diverse  authorship ;  but 
as  the  result  of  investigations  conducted  by  Gersdorf,  Credner,  and  Zeller,  it  may 
now  be  confidently  maintained  that  both  portions  of  the  Book — the  first  in  which 
the  writer  preserves  the  third  person  throughout,  and  the  second  in  which  he 
occasionally  speaks  in  the  first  person — have  emanated  from  one  mind  and  been 
set  down  by  one  pen.  The  actual  composer  may  have  utilised  pre-existing 
documents,  or  such  other  helps  as  were  available  for  his  purpose ;  he  may  even 
have  modified  and  combined  these  according  to  the  plan  and  aim  he  had  in  view 
in  the  construction  of  his  narrative  ;  but  there  can  be  no  ground  for  charging 
him  with  having  simply  set  these  documents  side  by  side  without  regard  to  any 
particular  design.  What  is  signified  by  asserting  the  unity  and  integrity  of  the 
work  is  that  such  documents  as  may  have  been  possessed  by  the  author  were  not 
inserted  unchanged  in  his  pages  without  respect  to  any  connection  between  them 
and  the  main  thread  of  his  history,  but  were  employed  by  him  as  sources  of 
information  from  which  to  draw  materials  for  his  work,  so  that  the  work  itself 
could  in  no  sense  be  regarded  as  a  collection  of  fragments,  but  constituted  a 
homogeneous  whole.  Those  who  care  to  understand  how  completely  this 
character  has  been  vindicated  for  the  Acts  will  find  a  thoroughgoing  dis- 
cussion of  the  question  in  the  Apostelgeschichte  of  Zeller  (pp.  387  ff.),  who 
has  conclusively  shown  not  only  that  the  two  portions  of  the  Book  possess  points 
of  resemblance  in  respect  of  diction  and  style,  doctrinal  contents  and  method  of 
composition,  ns  well  as  of  forward  and  backward  reference  of  passages  in  the 
different  parts  to  one  another,  but  that  the   citations  commonly  adduced  as 

3 


introduction.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 

presenting  traces  of  different  authorship  are  totally  insufficient  to  support  the 
thesis  for  which  they  are  produced.  So  satisfactorily  has  the  unity  of  Acts 
been  established  that  no  one  now  thinks  of  assailing  it  on  this  point.  The  Acts 
of  the  Apostles  is  admittedly  the  work  of  one  composer. 

2.  The  Credibility. — (1)  The  grounds  upon  which  this  has  been  challenged, 
though  varied,  may  be  reduced  to  six  :  (a)  the  miracles  reported  in  its  narrative, 
which,  after  the  manner  of  rationalising  critics,  are  ascribed  to  the  mythical 
tendency  of  a  later  age  to  embellish  the  historical  facts  of  an  earlier  generation ; 
(/5)  the  speeches  it  contains,  which,  objectors  allege,  were  never  delivered  as  set 
down,  but  can  only  be  regarded  as  having  been  manufactured  by  the  author ; 
(y)  the  artificial  structure  of  its  narrative,  which  shows  itself  in  the  parallelisms 
apparent  in  the  histories  of  Peter  and  of  Paul ;  (8)  its  author's  defective  under- 
standing of  the  antagonisms  of  the  apostolic  age;  (e)  the  supposed  conflict 
between  its  statements  and  those  of  Paul's  epistles ;  and  (£)  its  remarkable 
silence  about  the  differences  between  Paul  and  the  other  apostles. 

With  regard  to  (a),  the  miracles  reported  in  the  Acts,  unless  criticism  is  to  start 
with  the  presupposition  that  anything  approaching  the  supernatural  in  a  writing 
is  sufficient  to  discredit  it,  these  must  be  held  to  be,  abstractly  considered,  neither 
impossible  nor  incredible ;  while  their  authenticity,  in  each  particular  instance, 
must  be  determined  by  the  marks  of  truthfulness  or  its  opposite  which  appear  in 
the  document  reporting  them.  But  apart  from  the  dogma  that  "  miracles  are 
incredible,  if  not  impossible,"  it  has  never  been  proved  either  that  the  super- 
natural phenomena  incorporated  in  the  Acts  are  susceptible  of  natural  explanation, 
or  that  the  parts  of  Acts  which  record  these  phenomena  are  intrinsically  contra- 
dictory or  untrustworthy  ;  while  in  almost  every  instance  marks  of  verisimilitude 
can  be  pointed  out  which  justify  the  reader  in  accepting  both  the  record  and  the 
fact  recorded  as  true. 

Concerning  (/?),  the  speeches  which  it  is  alleged  the  speakers  never  spoke,  but 
the  author  manufactured,  it  may  suffice  to  answer,  that  while  on  the  one  hand 
it  is  not  denied  that  the  author  may  have  set  down  not  the  ipsissima  verba 
which  were  uttered,  but  the  substance  of  what  was  spoken,  and  may  have 
frequently  done  so  with  more  or  less  of  touching  up  from  his  own  pen,  on  the 
other  hand  it  cannot  be  demonstrated  either  that  he  ever  drew  upon  his  imagina- 
nation  instead  of  deriving  his  information  from  written  documents  or  reliable  oral 
communications  (see  below  on  the  sources  of  the  Acts),  or  that  he  ever  deviated 
by  so  much  as  a  hair's  breadth  from  the  truth,  so  as  to  convey  to  his  readers  an 
impression  different  from  what  they  would  have  received  had  they  listened  with 
their  own  ears  to  the  speech. 

In  support  of  the  third  charge  (y),  the  artificial  structure  of  the  narrative,  it 
is  customary  to  affirm  that  there  is  no  sort  of  act  or  experience  ascribed  to  Peter 
in  the  first  division  of  the  Acts  that  has  not  its  counterpart  in  the  second 
division  which  relates  the  history  of  Paul.  "  Both  epistles  begin  their  miraculous 
healings  with  the  restoration  of  a  lame-born  man  (iii.  2,  xiv.  8).  Peter  works 
miracles  through  his  own  shadow  (v.  15) ;  Paul  through  his  aprons  and  napkins 
(xix.  12).  Peter's  name  is  feared  by  demons  (v.  16,  viii.  7);  as  afterwards  is 
4 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS,    introduction. 

that  of  Paul  (xvi.  18,  xix.  11,  15,  xxviii.  9).  If  Peter  overcomes  Simon  Magus 
(viii.  18),  so  does  Paul  overthrow  Elymas  (xiii.  6)  and  the  Ephesian  wizards 
(xix.  13).  Miracles  of  punishment  are  performed  in  the  above-cited  cases  by 
Paul  as  well  as  by  Peter  (v.  1).  To  awaken  the  dead  is  just  as  possible  to 
the  one  as  to  the  other  (ix.  36,  xx.  9).  To  Tabitha  corresponds  Eutychus, 
as  to  iEneas  (ix.  33),  Publius's  father  (xxviii.  8).  Does  Cornelius  fall  down 
and  worship  Peter  (x.  25)?  So  is  Paul  deemed  worthy  of  divine  honour  at 
Lystra  (xiv.  11)  and  Malta  (xxviii.  6),  which  he  refuses  in  almost  the  same 
words  as  Peter.  .  .  .  Is  Paul  imprisoned  and  placed  before  the  judgment-seat? 
The  same  thing  happens  first  to  Peter  and  John,  and  afterwards  to  all  the 
apostles.  Has  Paul  been  beaten  at  Philippi  before  the  two  Duumviri  ?  So 
were  the  first  apostles  before  the  Sanhedrim.  Was  Paul  stoned  at  Lystra  ?  So 
was  Stephen  in  Jerusalem.  Has  an  angel  delivered  Peter  from  his  prison  ?  An 
earthquake  does  the  same  thing  for  Paul  "  (Holtzmann,  Einleitung,  pp.  410,  411). 
The  correspondences  are  undoubted,  but  after  all  they  exist  in  only  a  few 
instances,  and  seldom  in  any  instance  in  more  than  a  few  particulars.  Anything 
like  a  complete  parallel  between  the  histories  of  Peter  and  Paul  such  as  the 
Tubingen  critics  suggested  cannot  be  made  out.  "  Where,"  for  instance,  "  are 
the  parallels  to  the  Pentecostal  wonder,  to  the  choice  of  the  Seven,  to  the  sea 
voyage  of  Paul,  or  to  his  four  years'  imprisonment  in  Csesarea  and  Rome  ? " 
And  "  Why,"  more  particularly,  "  did  the  composer  forget  to  set  the  crown  upon 
his  whole  presentation  [of  history]  by  bringing  Peter  to  Pome  and  making  both 
apostles  die  as  martyrs  in  the  same  persecution  ? "  (Holtzmann,  Einleitung, 
p.  415.)  The  truth  is,  as  the  writer  just  cited  remarks,  the  parallel  is  almost 
always  accidental  (which  proves  it  to  have  been  undesigned),  and  always  breaks 
down  in  its  most  crucial  point,  as,  for  example,  when  attempted  to  be 
established  between  the  stoning  of  Paul  at  Lystra  and  the  stoning  of  Stephen 
in  Jerusalem.  If  the  writer  wished  to  make  the  two  correspond,  why  did  he 
allow  Paul  to  rise  up  and  walk  away  unhurt  after  lapidation,  when  he  knew 
that  Stephen  lost  his  life  in  passing  through  a  similar  experience?  In  short, 
whatever  resemblances  exist  between  the  two  histories  are  "not  more  than 
might  be  expected  in  any  age  from  simple  parity  of  situation  and  condition  " 
(Sanday,  Inspiration,  p.  327),  and  all  the  rest  is,  on  the  part  of  critics,  baseless 
imagination. 

The  charge  (8)  of  not  understanding  the  antagonisms  of  the  apostolic  age, 
which  some  have  pressed  against  the  author  of  the  Acts,  is  entirely  a  matter  of 
opinion;  and  concerning  this  the  judgment  of  so  competent  a  scholar  as  Professor 
Sanday  will  probably  have  as  much  weight  as  the  contrary  allegation.  "  Looking 
at  the  matter  with  such  a  measure  of  intelligence  as  I  can  command  for  myself," 
writes  he,  "  I  should  say  that  the  Acts  showed,  on  the  whole,  a  very  good  under- 
standing of  the  different  opposing  forces  which  brought  the  history  to  the  point 
at  which  the  author  left  it"  {Inspiration,  p.  321).  With  this  verdict  the 
majority  of  candid  readers  will  agree.  The  first  conflict  which  arose  within  the 
Church  out  of  the  supposed  or  real  neglect  of  the  widows  of  Hellenistic  Jews  in 
favour  of  those  of  native-born  Palestinians  is  introduced  and  explained  in  a 

5 


introduction.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 

manner  which  shows  the  writer  to  have  been  in  possession  of  authentic  informa- 
tion about  the  whole  dispute ;  while  it  is  sheer  assertion  to  maintain  that  the 
author  of  the  Acts  failed  to  comprehend  the  controversy  which  inevitably  sprung 
up  and  for  some  time  fiercely  raged  around  the  question  of  what  terms  of  com- 
munion should  be  imposed  upon  Gentile  converts.  Nor  is  there  ground  for 
contending  that  the  author  inadequately  grasped  Paul's  theological  teaching,  of 
which  the  central  doctrine,  that  of  Justification  by  Faith,  is  reported  by  him  in 
the  Apostle's  speech  at  Antioch  (xiii.  38  ff.),  and  that  of  the  Atonement  in  the 
address  to  the  elders  at  Miletus  (xx.  28),  though  even  could  it  be  established 
that  he  did  not  thoroughly  comprehend  the  Pauline  theology  in  all  its  details, 
that  would  not  prove  him  to  have  been  incapable  of  writing  authentic  history. 

As  to  (c),  the  pretended  conflict  between  the  statements  in  Acts  and  certain 
other  statements  in  Paul's  Epistles,  more  is  made  of  this  than  the  actual  facts 
of  the  case  will  warrant.  When  it  is  urged,  for  example,  that  because  Paul's 
epistles  never  refer  to  his  second  visit  to  Jerusalem  in  company  with  Barnabas 
(xi.  30),  or  to  the  apostolic  decrees  (xv.),  these  cannot  have  been  historical; 
or  that  the  chronicles  in  Acts  cannot  be  trustworthy  because  of  not  men- 
tioning either  Paul's  bodily  weakness  (1  Cor.  iv.  9  ff.  ;  2  Cor.  i.  8,  9  ;  Gal.  iv. 
13,  14),  or  the  stake  in  the  flesh  (2  Cor.  xii.  7)  under  which  he  suffered, 
or  the  "  deaths  oft,"  "prisons  more  abundant,"  "three  shipwrecks,"  and  "eight 
bodily  punishments"  of  which  he  speaks  (2  Cor.  vi.  5,  xi.  23-25),  or  the  journey 
he  made  to  Arabia  (Gal.  i.  17),  or  the  dispute  he  had  at  Antioch  with  Peter 
(Gal.  ii.  11) ;  any  one  can  perceive  that  such  reasoning  is  not  conclusive,  unless 
it  can  be  shown  that  a  writer  is  always  bound  to  mention  everything  he  knows ; 
while  as  for  the  so-called  contradictions  between  the  Acts  and  Epistles  which 
critics  so  confidently  parade  as  evidence  of  the  unreliable  character  of  the  former, 
these  mostly  exist  in  the  imaginations  of  the  critics.  The  intellect  which  can 
discern  irreconcilable  antagonisms  between  such  statements  as  that  Paul  went 
up  to  Jerusalem  as  the  messenger  of  the  Church  at  Antioch  (xv.  2),  and 
likewise  in  obedience  to  divine  revelation  (Gal.  ii.  2) ;  that  he  laid  his  own 
personal  views  about  the  gospel  before  a  private  meeting  of  the  apostles  (Gal.  ii.  2), 
and  afterwards  the  public  question  concerning  the  terms  of  communion  for 
Gentile  converts  before  a  general  assembly  of  the  apostles  and  elders  (xv. 
6,  12,  23,  25) ;  that  he  refused  to  circumcise  Titus  because  of  the  false  brethren 
who  wanted  to  enforce  this  rite  upon  all  Christians  (Gal.  ii.  3),  and  afterwards 
in  Lystra  circumcised  Timothy,  whose  mother  was  a  Jewess  (xvi.  3),  in  order 
(it  is  believed)  to  make  his  ministry  more  acceptable  to  the  Jews ;  that  when 
Paul  reached  Rome  the  Jews  spoke  as  if  Christianity  had  scarcely  been  heard 
of  in  that  city  (xxviii.  21,  22),  whereas  the  Apostle  had  years  before  written 
that  the  faith  of  the  Roman  Church  was  spread  abroad  throughout  the  whole 
world  (Rom.  i.  8) ;  the  intellect  that  can  see  in  these  propositions  irreconcilable 
antagonisms  deserves  to  be  pronounced  incapable  of  reasonable  criticism. 

The  last  objection  (£)  the  silence  of  Acts  concerning  the  differences  between 
Paul  and  the  other  Apostles,    and  in   particular  Peter,   is   no  real  difficulty 
unless,  as  already  explained,  on  the  assumption  that  a  writer  is  always  bound, 
6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS,    introduction. 


on  pain  of  losing  his  reputation  for  truthfulness,  to  communicate  all  he  knows. 
Besides,  by  the  time  the  Acts  was  penned,  the  supposed  friction  between  the  two 
Apostles,  if  it  ever  reached  the  severity  suggested  by  this  objection,  which  there 
is  no  reason  to  believe  it  did,  must  have  been  considerably  allayed,  so  that  no 
good  purpose  could  have  been  served  by  recalling  it  to  the  remembrance  of 
Christian  readers,  or  even  by  disturbing  the  flow  of  his  narrative  through  the 
introduction  of  personalities,  which  probably  both  good  men  regretted,  the  more 
especially  as  the  story  had  already  been  told  to  the  Church  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians. 

(2)  The  positive  evidence  in  support  of  the  trustworthy  character  of  the  Acts 
is  extremely  satisfactory. 

(a)  A  considerable  portion  of  the  Book — the  "we"  passages  already  more 
than  once  alluded  to — consists  of  reports  from  an  eyewitness,  who,  even  on  the 
supposition  of  a  late  authorship  for  the  whole  work,  must  have  been  a  fellow- 
traveller  of  the  Apostle  in  those  districts  to  which  his  reports  refer  ;  while,  if  the 
writer  of  the  "  we"  passages  was  the  actual  author  of  the  whole,  a  presumption 
arises  from  his  having  been  a  contemporary  of  Paul's,  that  he  had  access  to 
reliable  sources  of  information  for  what  he  wrote.  (See  below  on  the  sources  of 
the  Acts.) 

(/?)  The  undesigned  coincidences  which  have  been  detected  between  state- 
ments in  the  Acts  on  the  one  hand,  and  statements  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul  on 
the  other,  furnish  a  second  testimony  to  the  accuracy  of  the  author  of  the  Acts. 
For  these  Paley's  Horce  Paulince,  Blunt's  Undesigned  Coincidences,  and  Birks's 
Horce  Apostolicce,  should  be  consulted,  though  the  following  instances  may  be 
studied  as  illustrations  of  the  sort  of  evidence  that  is  meant  : — 


Acts. 

Epistles. 

viii.  3,  ix.  1-10    . 

Paul's  conversion     ..... 

1  Tim.  i.  13-16. 

ix.  23-25      . 

Paul's  escape  from  Damascus  .        . 

2  Cor.  xi.  32,  33. 

ix.  28,  xv.  2,  xx.  \ 
16,  xxiv.  17      / 

Paul's  visits  to  Jerusalem 

/Gal.  i.  17, 18,  ii.  1 ; 
\     25,  26. 

Rom.  xv. 

xiv.  19 

Paul's  stoning  at  Lystra  .... 

2  Cor.  xi.  25. 

xvi.  16-22    . 

Paul's  sufferings  at  Philippi    . 

Phil.  i.  29,  30,  ii.  1,2; 
ii.  2,  ii  i.  4. 

1  Thess. 

xvii.  5-9 

Paul's  sufferings  at  Thessalonica     . 

1  Thess.  iii.  4. 

xvii.  16 

Paul  left  alone  at  Athens 

1  Thess-  ii.  18,  iii.  1 

,6,7. 

xviii.  1,  xx.  2 

Paul's  two  visits  to  Corinth     . 

1  Cor.  ii.  1,  iv.  19,  xvi.  5. 

xviii.  24-28  . 

Work  of  Apollos  at  Corinth     . 

1  Cor.  i.  12,  iii.  6. 

xix.  20,  26  . 

The  "  effectual  door  "  opened  at  Ephesus 

1  Cor.  xvi.  9. 

xix.  29,  30  . 

"Fighting  with  wild  beasts  "  at  Ephesus 

1  Cor.  xv.  32. 

xix.  33 

Alexander  the  silversmith 

2  Tim.  iv.  14. 

xx.  2    . 

Gospel  preached  in  Illyricum  . 

Rom.  xv.  9. 

xx.  4    .        . 

Tychicus  known  to  the  Ephesians  . 

Eph.  vi.  21. 

xx.  4    . 

Trophimus  left  at  Miletus 

2  Tim.  iv.  20. 

xxviii.  16-20 

Paul  a  prisoner 

Eph.  vi.  19,  20. 

(y)  The  speeches  in  the  Acts  which  purport  to  have  been  delivered  by  Peter, 
Paul,  and  James,  when  compared  with  the  Epistles  left  by  these  writers,  are 
found  to  exhibit  an  agreement  with  them  which  could  hardly  have  existed  had 
the  speeches  been  fictitious.  Of  the  correctness  of  this  assertion  one  may  quickly 
convince  himself  by  means  of  a  concordance.     Nor  does  it  accord  with  fact,  as  is 

,=  .--  7 


introduction.    HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 

sometimes  asserted,  that  the  characteristics  of  Luke  run  through  the  discourses 
of  Peter  and  Paul,  but  on  the  contrary,  by  "  the  general  type  of  their  teaching 
and  minute  peculiarities  of  style,"  these  are  most  carefully  distinguished  from 
Luke's  compositions  (Ebrard,  The  Gospel  History,  p.  501,  E.  T.). 

(8)  The  knowledge  now  possessed  of  the  countries  and  age  to  which  Acts 
refers  enables  the  correctness  of  its  statements  to  be  placed  beyond  dispute. 
Not  only  does  the  writer  show  himself  accurately  informed  about  the  titles 
of  Roman  magistrates  in  the  first  century,  calling  Sergius  Paulus  (xiii.  7)  and 
Gallio  (xviii.  12)  proconsuls  and  governors  of  senatorial  provinces,  avOviraToi, 
the  magistrates  of  Thessalonica  (xvii.  6)  politarchs,  TroXirdp-^i,  those  of  Philippi 
(xvi.  21),  prsetors,  o-Tparwyoi,  and  the  governor  of  Melita  merely  head  man, 
7rpwTos  (xxviii.  7),  but  he  can  tell  that  in  Asia  Minor  (xiii.  50),  and  indeed 
throughout  the  Roman  empire  (xvii.  4,  12),  during  the  first  century  women 
exercised  great  social  influence,  that  Iconium,  though  from  B.C.  100  to  a.d. 
100  regarded  by  the  Romans  as  included  in  the  district  of  Lycaonia,  was  by 
the  native  population  distinguished  as  belonging  to  Phrygia  (xiv.  6),  and  that 
until  towards  the  close  of  the  first  century  Christians  were  never  persecuted 
by  the  Roman  State  for  being  Christians,  but  only  for  being  disturbers  of 
the  peace  and  (supposed)  enemies  of  social  order  (xvi.  7,  xxiv.  5,  G).  (See 
Ramsay's  The  Church  in  the  Roman  Empire,  pp.  37,  38,  67,  68,  194,  195.) 
Recent  archaeological  discovery  also  has  set  its  seal  on  the  historical  character 
of  such  narratives  as  those  of  Paul's  three  years'  residence  in  Ephesus  (Ibid., 
143),  and  of  Paul's  voyage  to  Rome.  In  short,  notwithstanding  the  minutest 
criticism  to  which  this  work  has  been  subjected,  it  may  be  fairly  said  that 
no  single  instance  can  be  produced  in  which  the  writer  has  erred  in  a  geo- 
graphical, political,  or  social  allusion.  Indeed  it  has  been  well  said,  "A  man 
who  could  have  been  so  wondrously  accurate  in  his  forgeries  concerning  countries 
so  widely  separated,  as  the  writer  of  the  Acts  must  have  been,  would  have  been 
a  greater  miracle  than  the  greatest  miracle  which  his  pen  records  "  (George  T. 
Stokes,  D.D.,  Recent  Discoveries  and  the  Christian  Faith;  Sunday  at  Home, 
August  1889,  p.  552). 

§  3.  Author  and  Date. 

1.  The  Author. — The  following  line  of  thought  may  aid  in  arriving  at  a  just 
conclusion  with  respect  to  the  personality  of  the  writer  from  whom  Acts 
emanated. 

(1)  The  writing  claims  to  have  proceeded  from  the  pen  which  composed  the 
Gospel  of  Luke  (i.  1 ;  Luke  i.  3)  ;  and  an  examination  of  the  two  treatises 
abundantly  confirms  this  claim.  Not  only  do  the  two  bear  a  close  resemblance 
to  one  another  in  diction,  in  the  use  of  words  and  phrases  either  peculiar  to  them- 
selves or  more  frequently  occurring  in  them  than  in  other  writings,  but  the  Acts 
in  several  instances  refers  to  incidents  which  are  mentioned  elsewhere  only  in 
Luke — as,  e.g.,  the  command  not  to  depart  from  Jerusalem  (Luke  xxiv.  29),  and 
the  return  of  the  eleven  to  the  city  after  the  Ascension  (Luke  xxiv.  52),  while 
its  catalogue  of  the  Apostles  (i.  13)  agrees  with  that  of  Luke  (vi  14-16), 
8 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS,    introduction. 


rather  than  with  that  of  Matthew  or  with  that  of  Mark,  in  calling  Simon 
the  Zealot  rather  than  the  Canaanean  (Matt.  x.  4 ;  Mark  iii.  18),  and  in 
substituting  for  Thaddeus  (Matt.  x.  3  ;  Mark  iii.  18)  Judas  the  son  of  James. 
It  has  also  been  observed  that  Stephen's  prayer  (vii.  59)  echoes  words  of  our 
Lord  which  have  been  preserved  by  the  third  evangelist  alone  (Luke  xxiii.  34). 
Hence  whatever  arguments  go  to  establish  Luke's  authorship  of  the  Third 
Gospel  (upon  which  it  is  not  proposed  to  enter  here)  may  be  reasonably  claimed 
as  making  for  Luke's  authorship  of  the  Acts. 

(2)  The  writing  has  so  manifestly  emanated  from  one  composer  (see  above  on 
the  integrity),  that,  if  the  author  of  one  portion  of  it  can  be  agreed  upon,  that 
person  must  be  forthwith  pronounced  responsible  for  the  whole.  Now  the  "  we  " 
passages  leave  no  uncertainty  upon  the  mind  as  to  their  authorship.  They  must 
have  proceeded  from  a  travelling  companion  of  the  Apostle,  who  joined  him  at 
Troas  (xvi.  10),  left  him  at  Philippi  (xvi.  40),  was  again  picked  up  by  him 
in  that  city  some  years  after  (xx.  5,  6),  and  journeyed  with  him  to  Jerusalem 
(xxi.  17),  Csesarea  (xxvii.  1),  and  Rome  (xxviii.  16).  Of  course  the  hypothesis 
is  far  from  being  impossible,  that  a  late  writer — say  about  the  end  of  the 
first  or  beginning  of  the  second  century — having  obtained  access  to  these 
"  we  "  documents,  incorporated  them  in  his  own  narrative  without  alteration, 
only  it  does  not  appear  why  so  skilful  a  composer  as  the  author  of  Acts 
should  not  have  changed  the  "  we"  into  "they,"  unless  it  was  that  he  desired 
his  readers  to  understand  that  he  himself  was  included  in  the  "  we."  In  other 
words,  it  is  hard  to  resist  the  inference  that  the  hand  which  recorded  the  "  we  " 
passages  wrote  the  whole  book. 

(3)  As  to  who  the  author  of  the  "  we  "  passages  actually  was,  the  best  existing 
evidence  points  to  Luke,  the  beloved  physician  who  was  with  Paul  in  Rome 
(Col.  iv.  14).  Claims  have  been  advanced  for  Timothy,  Titus,  and  Silas,  but  the 
considerations  favourable  to  any  one  of  these  are  outweighed  by  those  which 
speak  for  Luke.  The  way  in  which  the  first  "  we  "  passage  (xvi.  10)  is  introduced 
excludes  the  supposition  that  Timothy  composed  it,  while  xvi.  19  does  the  same 
for  Silas.  Again,  when  "  we "  reappears  (xx.  6),  Silas  is  not  among  Paul's 
companions,  though  Timothy,  already  excluded,  is.  As  for  Titus,  who  certainly 
accompanied  Paul  to  the  Jerusalem  council  (Gal.  ii.  1),  no  reason  exists  for 
believing  that  he  attended  Paul  and  Silas  on  the  second  missionary  journey,  or 
was  ever  with  Paul  in  Philippi.  So  that  Luke  alone  remains  as  a  possible 
author  of  the  passages  in  question.  It  only  needs  to  be  added  that  this  conclu- 
sion harmonises  with  the  almost  unanimous  verdict  of  ecclesiastical  tradition. 

2.  The  Date. — The  authorship  of  Luke  established,  the  contention  of  those  who 
relegate  the  Acts  to  the  second  century  will  need  no  refutation.  Internal  evidence 
reveals  that  the  work  belongs  to  the  first  century ;  and  the  sole  question  calling 
for  solution  is  at  what  point  of  time  in  Luke's  own  life  it  was  issued.  That  it 
presupposed  the  existence  of  Luke's  Gospel  is  apparent.  As,  according  to  some 
critics,  that  Gospel  could  not  have  been  composed  till  after  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  then  the  date  of  the  Acts  must  be  looked  for  after  a.d.  70.  As, 
however,  no  plausible  reason  for  assigning  the  Gospel  to  this  late  date  can  be 

9 


introduction.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 

found,  except  the  dogmatic  assumption  that  Luke  xix.  43  could  not  have  been 
written  till  after  the  event,  those  who  still  regard  prediction  in  the  strict  sense 
of  the  term  as  neither  impossible,  nor  incredible  may  be  excused  if  they  demand 
stronger  evidence  for  setting  aside  the  widely  accepted  belief  that  Acts  was 
composed  in  the  lifetime  and  during  the  imprisonment  (Dollinger,  Langen, 
Michaelis,  Kuinoel,  Tholuck,  Ebrard,  Godet,  etc.)  of  Paul,  and  therefore  about 
a.d.  62.  Had  Paul  been  dead  when  Luke  wrote,  it  is  at  least  likely  that  some 
hint  would  have  been  dropped  that  the  great  missionary  had  finished  his  course. 

§  4.  Sources  and  Aim. 

1.  The  Sources. — (1)  It  is  obvious  that  for  the  "  we  "  passages  Luke  would 
require  simply  to  draw  upon  his  own  recollection  or  notes  of  the  scenes  and 
incidents  of  which  he  had  been  an  eyewitness. 

(2)  Of  those  portions  of  Paul's  missionary  journeys  of  which  he  had  not  been 
an  eyewitness  his  information  would  most  likely  be  derived  from  the  Apostle 
himself.  Whether  Paul  had  prepared  such  a  travel  document  as  Ramsay 
contends  for  (The  Church  in  the  Roman  Empire,  p.  6)  may  be  uncertain,  though 
highly  probable.  It  is  undeniable  that  Luke,  through  long  companionship  with 
Paul  at  Csesarea  and  at  Rome — two  years  in  each — had  ample  opportunity  for 
hearing  the  story  over  and  over  again  from  the  Apostle's  lips,  while  "  it  is  hard 
to  believe  that  Paul's  letters  were  unknown  to  Luke"  (Ramsay,  St.  Paul  the 
Traveller,  and  the  Roman  Citizen,  p.  16). 

(3)  Nor  could  he  'have  experienced  much  difficulty  in  becoming  acquainted 
with  the  facts  recorded  in  the  earlier  chapters  of  his  Book,  as,  while  Paul  could 
have  told  him  all  about  the  martyrdom  of  Stephen,  Philip  the  Evangelist,  whom 
he  met  at  Csesarea  (xxi.  8),  could  as  readily  have  informed  him  about  the 
conversion  of  Cornelius  of  Csesarea  (x.),  of  which  he  must  have  often  heard, 
of  the  conversion  of  the  Eunuch,  which  was  brought  about  through  his  own 
instrumentality  (viii.  26),  and  of  the  preaching  in  Samaria,  which  also  had  been 
carried  on  by  himself  (viii.  1-24).  About  the  Pentecostal  wonder  and  the 
commencement  of  the  Church  in  Jerusalem,  as  Luke  accompanied  Paul  to  the 
Jewish  metropolis,  and  without  doubt  (xxi.  18)  was  introduced  to  James  and  the 
elders,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that  he  stood  in  immediate  connection  with  those 
to  whom  the  history  of  the  first  days  was  perfectly  familiar.  If  amongst  these 
written  documents  already  existed,  beyond  question  Luke  would  not  be  denied 
access  to  them ;  if  written  documents  did  not  exist,  Luke  would  have  had  no 
difficulty  in  preparing  them  from  the  oral  accounts  to  which  he  listened. 

Note. — With  the  explanation  above  given  corresponds  in  some  measure  that 
put  forth  by  Friedrich  Spitta  (Die  Apostelgeschichte,  ihre  Quellen  und  deren 
geschichtlicher  Wert,  1891),  who  detects  in  the  Acts  "two  separate  documents 
— one,  A,  probably  composed  by  Luke,  beginning  with  the  report  of  the 
Ascension,  in  Luke  xxiv.  50-53,  containing  the  '  we '  passages,  and  concluding 
with  the  narrative  of  Paul's  voyage  to  Rome ;  another,  B,  commencing  with  the 
Ascension  story  in  the  Acts,  and  ending  with  Paul's  discussion  with  the  Jews 
in  Rome ;  and  both  put  together  by  an  editor,  R,  who  worked  still  in  the  first 
10 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS,    introduction. 

century."  The  different  characteristics  of  these  documents  are  thus  indicated : 
"  In  A  the  history  is  authentic,  while  that  in  B,  which  relates  the  miracles,  is 
manufactured.  From  A  the  editor  extracted  the  speeches,  but  from  B  the 
narratives  about  the  miracles.  In  A  the  question  chiefly  is  about  Paul's 
relation  to  the  Jews,  whilst  his  relation  to  the  Gentiles  retreats  into  the  back- 
ground; in  B,  on  the  other  hand,  Paul's  relation  to  the  Gentiles  steps  to  the 
front,  whilst  his  relation  to  the  Jews  retires  into  the  shade.  Hence  it  is  in  B 
that  signs  first  appear  of  the  separation  of  the  Jewish  Christians  from  the  Law- 
free  Gentile  Christians.  For  R  the  question  is  the  combination  of  these  two 
sources.  Neither  A  nor  B  concluded  with  the  two  years'  imprisonment  of  Paul 
at  Rome,  where  R  stops.  This  writer  had  in  view  the  composition  of  a  third 
essay,  a  rpiros  Aoyos,  though  he  appears  never  to  have  carried  it  out"  (A. 
Hilgenfeld  im  Zeitschrift  fur  wissenschaftliche  Theologie  (1895),  1,  pp.  67,  68). 
Though  a  good  deal  of  this  is  fanciful  and  arbitrary,  yet  its  main  idea  of 
"  separate  documents  "  may  be  harmonised  with  what  has  been  stated  above  by 
supposing  that  A  was  a  record  written  by  Luke  of  what  he  had  seen  and 
heard,  while  B  consisted  in  large  part  of  narratives  prepared  by  Paul  and 
others,  and  that  Luke  himself  was  R.  (Compare  Ramsay's  The  Church  in  the 
Roman  Empire,  pp.  6-8,  148-168;  and  St  Paul,  the  Traveller,  etc.,  pp.  10  ff.). 

2.  The  Aim. — (1)  That  Luke's  aim  in  composing  this  work  was  neither,  as 
Grotius  imagined,  to  write  a  biography  of  the  two  principal  apostles,  nor,  as 
Credner  suggested,  to  prepare  a  Pauline  Church  history,  may  be  regarded  as 
self-evident.     To  neither  of  these  conceptions  does  the  treatise  answer. 

(2)  Still  less  can  the  view  of  Schneckenburger,  Zeller,  Baur,  and  their  followers 
be  entertained — that  it  was  written  for  the  purpose  of  conciliating  the  opposing 
parties  in  the  early  Christian  Church  (the  Petrine  or  Jewish  and  the  Pauline 
or  Gentile),  by  showing  that,  while  on  the  one  hand  Paul  was  an  orthodox  Jew, 
on  the  other  hand  Peter  was  in  full  sympathy  with  Paul's  universalism.  In 
support  of  this  theory,  besides  pointing  to  the  parallelism  (designed,  as  this 
theory  requires  it  to  have  been)  between  the  acts  and  experiences  of  Peter  and 
of  Paul,  it  is  usual  to  call  attention  to  the  facts  that  the  first  Gentile  mission 
was  undertaken  by  Peter,  who  opened  the  door  of  the  Church  to  Cornelius  (x.) 
and  that  Paul,  by  his  constant  practice  of  offering  the  gospel  first  to  the  Jews 
(xiii.  16,  xiv.  1,  xvii.  2,  xviii.  4),  by  his  frequent  journeyings  to  Jerusalem  to 
keep  the  feasts  (xviii.  21,  xx.  16),  by  his  circumcision  of  Timothy  (xvi.  3),  and 
by  his  Nazarite  vow  (xxi.  24),  showed  himself  to  be  deeply  and  heartily  attached 
to  the  old  Hebrew  faith.  But  while  all  this  is  true,  it  is  pure  imagination  to 
assert  either  that  such  antagonism  as  is  ordinarily  depicted  by  the  Tubingen 
critics  raged  between  the  Petrine  and  Pauline  parties  among  the  early 
Christians — if,  indeed,  the  existence  of  such  parties  at  all  is  not  a  fiction  of  the 
critical  mind — or  that  the  reconciliation  of  such  parties  formed  any  part  of 
Luke's  object  in  writing  his  treatise.  If  it  was,  he  assuredly  took  a  most 
unfortunate  way  to  do  so,  by  calling  attention  so  repeatedly  and  emphatically 
as  he  does  to  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews,  and  by  accentuating  at  the  very  crises 
in   Paul's  history  (xxi.   20)  the  jealousy  which  was  felt  towards  him  by  his 

11 


introduction.    HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY ;    THE  ACTS. 

countrymen.  Besides,  as  Weiss  pertinently  asks,  what  hope  could  there  have 
been  of  gaining  over  the  Paulines  by  setting  up  a  criterion  of  the  apostolate 
(i.  21,  x.  41)  which,  in  view  of  the  Judaists,  would  have  excluded  Paul  from  it  ? 
(A  Manual  of  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,  ii.,  pp.  330,  331.)  And 
"  How,"  inquires  Holtzmann,  "  does  it  agree  with  the  conciliatory  character  of 
the  work  that  exactly  that  tangible  token  of  brotherly  love,  the  collection,  which 
Paul  brought  to  Jerusalem  from  his  third  journey,  is  scarcely  mentioned  ?  " 
(Einleiiung,  p.  416.)  In  short,  so  inadequately  can  this  theory  be  made  out, 
that  not  a  few  advanced  critics  are  becoming  disposed  to  give  it  up,  like 
Schenkel,  who  says  :  "  Having  never  been  able  to  convince  myself  of  the  sheer 
opposition  between  Petrinism  and  Paulinism,  it  has  also  never  been  possible  for 
me  to  get  a  credible  conception  of  a  reconciliation  effected  by  means  of  a  litera- 
ture sailing  between  the  contending  parties  under  false  colours  "  (Das  Christus- 
bild  der  Apostel,  etc.,  Preface). 

(3)  A  third  object  with  which  the  writer  of  the  Acts  is  credited  is  that  of 
preparing  an  apology  v;hich  should  make  Christianity  acceptable  to  the  Roman 
or  Gentile  public  by  representing  its  distinguished  champion  as  a  Roman  citizen, 
who,  in  the  tumult  raised  against  him  by  the  Jews  as  he  passed  from  city  to 
city  preaching  Christ,  constantly  found  protection  against  their  violence  at  the 
hands  of  Roman  magistrates,  and  who,  ultimately  conveyed  to  Rome  by  a 
Roman  centurion,  carried  on  in  the  metropolis  the  duties  of  his  apostleship  under 
the  protection  of  Roman  laws  (Schwegler,  Schneckenburger,  Overbeck).  "  Every- 
where," says  Haweis,  "  there  is  a  wide  sympathy  with  the  Gentiles.  The  future 
of  the  Church  is  felt  to  be  with  them.  Luke's  respect  for  the  Roman  officials 
and  the  Roman  government  is  quite  Pauline.  Gallio,  the  Corinthian  magistrate, 
the  Ephesian  town-clerk,  the  Roman  soldiers,  the  Roman  governors,  even  Felix 
and  Agrippa,  appear  to  advantage.  The  Roman  police  are  kind  to  Paul ;  the 
judges  are  indulgent  and  conciliatory.  One  hears  him  gladly ;  another  wishes 
to  set  him  at  liberty ;  a  third  only  wants  a  little  bribe,  but  means  no  harm  to 
Paul"  (The  Story  of  the -Four,  p.  132).  Those  who  embrace  this  view  of  the 
aim  contemplated  by  the  author  do  not  hold  the  just-recited  details  of  Paul's 
history  to  be  historical  occurrences,  but  look  upon  them  as  pure  invention.  This 
opinion,  however,  may  in  just  retort  be  characterised  as  "  vain  imagination,"  as 
no  ground  whatever  can  be  found  for  challenging  either  the  Roman  citizenship 
of  the  Apostle  or  the  authenticity  of  his  reported  appeal  to  the  Roman  tribunal ; 
while,  if  he  enjoyed  the  protection  of  Roman  officials,  this  harmonised  exactly 
with  the  attitude  of  the  Empire  to  Christianity  during  the  first  century  (see 
Ramsay,  The  Church  in  the  Roman  Empire,  p.  194). 

4.  The  only  tenable  account  of  Luke's  aim  is  that  which  is  indirectly  given 
by  himself  (i.  8) — that  he  wished  to  show  how  the  apostles,  in  carrying  out 
their  commission  to  be  "  witnesses  for  Christ  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judsea, 
and  Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth,"  had  borne  the  glad 
tidings  of  salvation  through  a  crucified  and  risen  Christ  first  through  the  Holy 
Land  as  far  as  to  Antioch,  and  then  from  Antioch  to  Rome,  the  metropolis  of 
the  world. 

12, 


PAET  1 

THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST  IN  PALESTINE ;  OR.  ITS  PROGRESS  FROM 
JERUSALEM  TO  ANTIOCH.— THE  ACTS  OF  PETER. 

Chapters  I.— XII. 


CHAPTER  I. 
Introductory — Preparations  for  the  Founding  of  the  Church. 

§  1.  The  Two  Treatises ;  or,  the  connection  between  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and 

the  Gospel  of  Luke  (vers.  1,  2). 
§  2.  The   Forty   Days;   or,   the   Interval   between   the   Resurrection   and   the 

Ascension  of  Christ  (vers.  3-5). 
§  3.  The   Taking    Up   of   Jesus;    or,   the   Exaltation   of    the   Church's   Head 

(vers.  6-11). 
§  4.  The  Ten  Days  before  Pentecost ;  or,  Waiting  for  the  Promise  (vers.  12-14). 
§  5.  Completing  the  Apostleship;  or,  the  Election  of  Matthias  (vers.  15-26). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  The  former  treatise  have  I  made. — Better,  the  first  (irpG/Tos  for  n-pdrepos,  as  in 
John  i.  15-30,  unless  irpuiros  was  intended  to  point  to  a  rpiros  :  Ramsay)  treatise  (\6yos  in 
ancient  written  speech  meaning  the  separate  book  rolls  in  a  connected  work — Holtzmann) 
I  made.  That  the  first  treatise  was  the  Gospel  of  Luke  the  name  of  its  recipient  (Luke 
i.  3)  declares. 

Ver.  2.  Through  the  Holy  Ghost. — Should  be  connected  with  "  given  commandments  " — see 
John  xx.  22  (Meyer,  Weiss,  Overbeck,  Spitta,  and  others),  rather  than  with  either  "chosen" 
(De  Wette,  Wendt,  Holtzmann,  Zockler,  and  others) — though  see  xx.  28 — or  "  taken  up,"  the 
Ascension  never  being  in  Scripture  ascribed  to  the  Spirit,  but  commonly  represented  as  the 
work  of  the  Father  (ii.  33 ;  Eph.  i.  20 ;  Phil.  ii.  9),  though  sometimes  depicted  as  the  free  act 
of  Christ  Himself  (John  xx.  17  ;  Eph.  iv.  10 ;  Heb.  i.  3). 

Ver.  3.  Being  seen  of  them,  or  showing  Himself  to  them,  not  in  a  subjective  vision,  but  object- 
ively and  really,  during  (did  with  gen.  as  in  v.  19  ;  xvi.  9)  forty  days — i.e.,  not  continuously, 
but  at  intervals.  Compare  the  forty  days  of  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai  (Exod.  xxiv.  18),  of  Elias's 
journey  (1  Kings  xix.  8),  and  of  Christ's  fasting  in  the  wilderness  (Matt.  iv.  2  ;  Mark  i.  13  ; 
Luke  iv.  2).  Holtzmann  regards  the  forty  days,  for  which  the  Valentinians,  according  to 
Irenaeus,  had  eighteen  months,  as  a  kind  of  propylceon  or  "  porch  "  for  the  following 
historical  narration ;  while  Weizsacker  consigns  them  to  the  domain  of  legend  on  the  ground 
that  they  indicate  "  a  desire  "  on  the  part  of  the  narrator  "  to  gain  time  for  a  more  advanced 
instruction  of  the  apostles  in  the  life  of  Jesus,  and  consequently  for  their  preparation  to 
receive  the  spirit." 

Ver.  4.  Being  assembled,  or  eating  together  with  them  (compare  x.  41 ;  Luke  xxiv.  30,  41-43), 
not  assembling  them,  though  the  verb,  which  occurs  only  here  in  N.T.,  has  this  meaning  in 
Josephus  ( Wars,  III.  ix.  4). 

13 


chap.  I.  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Ver.  5.  With  water,  {/5cm.  the  element  by  which  the  outward  rite  of  baptism  was  per- 
formed. With,  rather  in  (iv)  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  element  in  which  the  spiritual  baptism 
should  take  place. 

Ver.  6.  When  they  were  come  together. — (The  Sinaitic  codex  omits  together.)  This  was 
not  the  meeting  referred  to  in  ver.  4,  but  the  last  interview  recorded  in  Luke  xxiv.  36-53, 
which  began  in  Jerusalem  and  ended  near  Bethany.  Wilt,  rather  dost  Thou?  el  introducing 
a  direct  question,  "  which  is  contrary  to  classical  usage,  though  not  uncommon  in  the  N.T. 
and  the  LXX."  (Hackett).  The  kingdom  to  Israel  shows  that  as  yet  the  expectations  of  the 
apostles  had  not  passed  beyond  the  bounds  of  their  own  nation. 

Ver.  7.  Put,  set,  fixed,  or  appointed  in  His  own  power- --i.e.,  in  the  sovereign  exercise  of  it. 
Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  36,  and  1  Thess.  v.  1. 

Ver.  8.  Afcer  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you. — Literally,  the  Holy  Ghost  having 
come  upon  you.  This  should  be  the  source  of  their  power.  "  Before  the  Ascension  the 
disciples  were  led  through  the  Spirit  as  a  transcendent  power  standing  over  them ;  first  with 
the  Pentecostal  event  does  He  become  an  immanent  principle  "  (Holtzmann).  Witnesses  unto 
Me  should  be  My  witnesses,  the  reading  fiov  being  preferable  to  /jlol.  Compare  Luke  xxiv.  48. 
In  Jerusalem,  etc.,  gives  a  hint  about  the  plan  of  the  book. 

Ver.  9.  When  He  had  spoken,  ratber  saying  these  things,  and  while  they  beheld,  or  they 
behold,  He  was  taken,  or  was  raised  up  into  the  air,  but  not  yet  into  heaven,  eirripdr)  being 
different  from  dveX-qcpd-q  (ver.  2)  and  vire\aj3ev,  received  up  from  under. 

Ver.  10.  The  two  men  who  stood  or  were  standing  by  them  in  white  apparel  or  garments 
were  angels,  as  in  Mark  xvi.  5  ;  Luke  xxiv.  4  ;  John  xx.  12. 

Ver.  11.  In  like  manner  signified  that  Christ's  return  would  be  in  the  air  and  visible. 
Compare  Mark  xiv.  62  ;  Luke  xxL  27  ;  Rev.  i.  7. 

Ver.  12.  A  Sabbath  day's  journey — according  to  Josephus  six  {Ant.,  XX.  viii.  6)  or  five 
{Wars,  V. ii.  3)  furlongs — marked  the  distance  of  the  Mount  of  Olives  from  Jerusalem, not  of 
Bethany,  which  was  fifteen  furlongs  from  the  city  (John  xi.  18).  Luke  (xxiv.  50)  does  not 
say  the  Ascension  took  place  at,  but  over  against  (irpds)  Bethany.  Nor  does  Acts  affirm  that 
it  occurred  at  the  sixth  furlong  from  the  city,  but  merely  that  Olivet,  the  scene  of  the 
Ascension,  was  distant  a  Sabbath  day's  journey  from  Jerusalem.  The  two  statements  do  not 
collide.  From  the  latter  statement  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  Ascension  happened  on  a 
Sabbath  ;  but  ver.  3  rather  points  to  a  Thursday,  the  exact  date  being  28th  April,  A.D.  29, 
shortly  before  midday  (Holtzmann). 

Ver.  13.  Come  in.  — '*  To  the  city  probably,  not  the  house  "  (Hackett) ;  though  Holtzmann 
considers  it  was  the  temple  they  entered  (compare  ii.  46  ;  Luke  xxiv.  53).  Not  an  but  the 
upper  chamber  should  be  read,  meaning  "  of  the  private  house  "  where  they  were  abiding — 
most  likely  that  mentioned  in  Mark  xiv.  15  ;  Luke  xxii.  12. 

Ver.  14.  With  one  accord,  or  with  one  mind.  Omit  "  supplication  "  and  "  the  "  before 
women.  Last  mention  in  Scripture  of  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  whose  reappearance  after 
the  crucifixion  (John  xix.  27)  is  noteworthy.  His  brethren  were  most  probably  Mary's 
children,  though  the  idea  that  they  were  only  His  kinsmen  or  relatives  is  not  excluded  by 
the  term. 

Ver.  15.  Those  days  lay  between  the  Ascension  and  Pentecost.  For  disciples,  fiadrjrCov,  the 
R.V.  reads  brethren,  dde\(pQu,  as  in  Matt.  xxv.  40;  Acts  ix.  30,  xi.  29;  1  Cor.  v.  11.  Names  = 
persons,  as  in  Rev.  iii.  4,  xi.  13.  Unclassical.  Together,  eirl  rb  avrb,  has  always  a  local  sig- 
nification.    (See  iii.  1  ;  Luke  xvii.  35.) 

Ver.  16.  Scripture  .  .  .  which  the  Holy  Ghost  spake. — A  testimony  to  the  Inspiration'  of 
the  Old  Testament.  Compare  2  Peter  i.  21.  By  the  mouth  of  David  seems  to  guarantee  that 
David  was  the  author  of  some  parts  of  the  Psalter — in  particular  of  Psalm  lxix.,  and  perhaps 
also  of  Psalm  xli.  Who  was  (or  became)  guide.  Originally  a  disciple,  Judas  turned  to  be  a 
traitor,  and  acted  as  a  leader  to  the  Roman  cohort  which  apprehended  Christ  (Matt.  xxvi.  47 ; 
John  xviii.  3). 

Ver.  17.  For,  tin,  indicates  that  Judas  supplied  the  conditions  that  were  requisite  to 
enable  him  to  fulfil  the  Scripture.  The  figurative  expression  lot,  K\9jpos,  used  in  its  l'teral 
sense  in  ver.  26,  is  here  employed,  as  in  viii.  21,  xxvi.  18,  to  denote  anything  obtained  by  lot, 
and  hence  generally  any  portion,  share,  or  office  without  regard  to  the  mode  of  its  attain- 
ment. The  term  "  clergy  "  is  derived  from  K\rjpos,  the  order  of  the  ministry  being  viewed  as 
divinely  appointed. 

Ver.  18.  Purchased.  —  Obtained  (R.V.),  got  possession  of  (Plumptre),  or  caused  to  be 
purchased  (Hackett) ;  what  was  bought  with  Judas's  money  being  considered  as  bought  by 
himself.  Qui  facit  per  aliumfacit  per  se.  Falling  headlong. — Having  probably  first  hanged 
himself,  and  afterwards,  through  the  breaking  of  the  rope,  fallen  to  the  ground,  which  would 
cause  him  to  burst  asunder  in  the  midst.  Matthew's  account  (xxvii.  5)  suggests  this.  "  The 
traitor  may  have  struck  in  his  fall  upon  some  pointed  rock,  which  entered  the  body  and 
caused  his  bowels  to  gush  out "  (Hackett).  Papias  was  acquainted  with  a  version  of  this 
story,  which  reported  that  Judas  died  of  a  loathsome  disease. 

14 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  i. 


Ver.  19.  Aceldama,  'AKeXdafxh,  formed  from  the  Syro-Chaldaic  N£n  b|?n,  and  signifying 
11  field  of  blood  "  —  i.e.,  either  purchased  by  the  blood  money  paid  to  Judas  and  returned  by 
him  (Matthew),  or  sprinkled  with  the  traitor's  blood  when  he  fell  (Luke).  Perhaps  both 
reasons  contributed  to  the  fixing  of  the  name  subsequently  borne  by  the  potter's  field,  which 
became  a  burial  place  for  strangers.  According  to  tradition  Aceldama  lay  on  the  south  side 
of  Mount  Zion. 

Vers.  18  and  19  are  commonly  regarded  as  no  part  of  Peter's  speech,  but  an  interposition 
by  Luke  (Calvin  and  others)  ;  yet  odv  (ver.  1 8)  renders  this  doubtful  (Holtzmann). 

Ver.  20.  In  the  Book  of  Psalms.— The  two  citations  (Psalm  Ixix.  25,  cix.  8),  given  with  slight 
modifications  from  the  LXX.  recite  the  doom  of  the  enemies  of  David  and  his  kingdom,  and 
therefore  of  the  enemies  of  Christ  and  His  kingdom,  of  which  the  former  were  types ;  con- 
sequently also  of  Judas,  "  as  the  first  and  most  notable  of  these  "  (Alford). 

Ver.  21.  Went  in  and  ont  among  us. — "An  exact  construction  of  the  Greek  would  have 
placed  'unto  us,'  e0'  ijixas,  after  'went  in '  or  '  came  in,'  and  inserted  'from  us,'  d0'  y/xQu, 
after  ;  went  out '  "  (Hackett).     Compare  ix.  28  ;  John  x.  9. 

Ver.  22.  The  baptism  of  John  signified  not  John's  baptism  of  Christ,  but  John's  baptism 
generally  as  a  well-known  date. 

Ver.  23.  They,  i.e.,  the  congregation  and  the  apostles,  appointed,  or  put  before  God,  or 
before  themselves  for  selection. 

Ver.  24.  Thou  Lord. — Whether  addressed  to  God  or  Christ  is  disputed.  For  the  former 
opinion  (Meyer,  Plumptre,  Holtzmann)  appeal  is  taken  to  xv.  7,  8,  in  which  God  is  called 
KapdioyvibcrTrjs,  and  Peter  represents  himself  as  being  chosen  by  God.  For  the  latter 
(Olshausen,  Alford,  Hackett,  Spence)  it  is  argued  (1)  that  in  the  N.T.  generally  Christ  is 
usually  styled  Lord ;  (2)  that  Christ  is  stated  in  ver.  2  to  have  selected  the  other  apostles  ; 
(3)  that  the  first  Christians  were  in  the  habit  of  praying  to  Him  (vii.  59,  ix.  14)  ;  and  (4)  that 
Peter  in  the  Gospel  (John  xxi.  17)  ascribes  to  Christ  the  knowledge  of  all  things,  which  cer- 
tainly include  the  hearts  of  all  men. 

Ver.  25.  Fell. — Went  aside  by  transgression.  His  own  place. — His  own  proper  destiny, 
Gehenna,  or  the  place  of  punishment,  from  which  he  (Judas)  was  kept  back  so  long  as  he 
was  in  the  apostleship. 

Ver.  26.  Lots. — These  were  either  tablets  or  slips  of  parchment  with  the  names  of  the 
candidates  written  upon  them,  which  were  cast  into  a  vase  or  other  vessel,  which  was  then 
shaken,  when  the  fir«t  tablet  or  slip  thrown  out  indicated  the  candidate  elected. 


HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—2. 

The  Two  Treatises ;  or,  The  Connection  between  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the 
Gospel  of  Luke. 

I.  Their  names. — 1.  Of  the  former  treatise,  the  Gospel  of  Luke.  Recognised  by 
being  addressed  like  the  Acts  to  Theophilus.  2.  Of  the  latter,  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles.  In  some  MSS.  "  Acts  of  all  the  Apostles,  "  Acts  of  the  Holy  Apostles," 
or  some  other  such  variation.  Neither  title  originated  with  the  author  of  the 
writing,  but  was  afterwards  appended  when  the  writing  found  a  place  in  the 
Canon. 

II.  Their  contents. — 1.  Of  the  former,  the  earthly,  or  pre-ascension  ministry  of 
Christ.  Not  everything  Christ  said  and  did  (see  John  xxi.  25),  but  as  many  of 
His  deeds  and  words  as  were  needful  to  furnish  an  adequate  picture  of  Him  as 
a  teacher  and  worker.  2.  Of  the  latter,  the  post-ascension  or  heavenly  ministry 
of  Jesus.  The  word  "  began  "  suggests  that  Christ's  activity  did  not  terminate 
with  His  taking  up,  but  continued  after.  Hence  the  Acts,  which  records  that 
activity,  is  neither  a  full  series  of  apostolical  biographies,  the  actions  and 
utterances  of  Peter  and  Paul  only  being  narrated  at  any  length,  while  of  the 
other  apostles,  the  sons  of  Zebed^e  alone  are  incidentally  mentioned ;  nor  a 
complete  Church  history,  since  it  leaves  untold  much  that  happened,  and  carries 
the  story  of  the  Church  no  further  than  the  time  when  Paul  reaches  Rome ; 
but  an  account  of  Christ's  doing  and  teaching  since  His  Ascension  through  the 
instrumentality  of  the  two  above-named  Apostles,  their  colleagues,  and  assistants 
(Stephen,  Philip,  James  the  Brother  of  the  Lord,  Barnabas,  Mark,  Silas, 
Timothy,   Titus,    Apollos,  and  others),  first,  in   founding   and   developing  the 

15 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Church  at  Jerusalem  and  within  the  Holy  Land,  and,  secondly,  in  extending 
and  establishing  it  among  the  Gentiles  in  Asia  Minor  and  in  Europe. 

III.  Their  author. — The  writer  of  the  "  we  "  passages  in  the  Acts  (xvi.  10, 
11,  xx.  5,  6).  1.  Not  Timothy,  whom  the  writer  of  the  Acts  distinguishes  from 
himself  (Acts  xvi.  10).  2.  Still  less  Silas,  an  opinion  having  no  better  support 
than  the  resemblance  ingeniously  detected  between  Silvanus  (from  silva,  a  wood) 
and  Lucanus  (from  lucus,  a  grove).  3.  But  Luke,  a  physician  by  profession 
(Col.  iv.  14),  who  joined  Paul  as  a  companion  in  travel  at  Troas  (xvi.  10),  and 
was  with  him  as  a  fellow- worker  at  Home  (2  Tim.  iv.  11;  Phil.  24).  See 
Introduction. 

IY.  Their  recipient. — Theophilus.  Possibly  his  baptismal  name  (Ramsay). 
Most  likely  a  Gentile  Christian,  probably  a  member  of  the  Roman  Church ; 
manifestly  a  patron  of  learning  and  an  inquirer  after  truth.  That  his  social 
rank  was  high  may  be  inferred  from  the  epithet  "  most  excellent "  given  him 
by  Luke  (i.  3) — a  title  of  honour  used  by  Paul  in  addressing  Felix  (xxiii.  26) 
and  Festus  (xxvi.  25). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  inter-connection  of  the  various  books  of  Scripture.  2.  The 
purely  natural  way  in  which  the  existing  Scriptures  arose.  3.  The  value  of 
Scripture  independent  of  a  knowledge  of  the  authorship  of  its  several  parts.  4. 
The  excellence  of  grace  in  persons  of  high  station. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.    1.    The   Earthly   Ministry    of  Saviour,   of  whom  Luke  had  already 

Christ]  or,  the  work  and  wisdom  (the  written  in  the  Gospel  (ii.  21). 

doing  and  doctrine)  of  Jesus.  II.     His    sphere. — On     earth     and 

I.  The  Work  of  Jesus. — 1.  Personal,  among  men,  as  distinguished  from 
—  He  fulfilled  all  righteousness  His  pre-existent  and  post -resurrection 
(Matt.  iii.   15).     2.  Philanthropical. —  theatres  of  activity. 

He  healed  all  manner  of  sickness  and  III.    His  character. — As  a  worker, 

disease  among  the  people  (Matt.  iv.  23  ;  1.  Faithful.    2.  Loving.    3.  Unwearied. 

Acts   x.    38).       3.    Legal. — He   made  4.  Effective.     5.  Disinterested, 

atonement  for  the  sins  of  men  (John  i.  IY.  His  continuance. — 1.  Until  the 

29).    4.  Social. — He  founded  a  kingdom  day  of  His  Ascension.     2.  Until  now 

of  heaven  upon  earth  (Matt.  v.  1-20;  (John  v.  18). 
John  xviii.  36). 

II.  The  Wisdom   of  Jesus. — 1.  He  The  Incomparable  Teacher. 
revealed  the  nature  (the  Trinity)  and  I.  His  person. — Jesus,  who  spoke  of 
character  (love)  of  God  (John  iii.  16).  Himself  as  the  Truth  (John  xiv.   6), 

2.  He  taught  the  necessity  and  nature  and  whom  men  recognised  as  a  Teacher 
of  the  New  Birth  for  man  (John  iii.  3).  (John  iii.  2,  xi.  28). 

3.  He  promulgated  the  way  of  salva-  II.  His  doctrine. — 1.  What  it  con- 
tion  —  through  faith  in  His  name  cerned. — (1)  God,  whom  He  revealed 
(John  vi.  47).  4.  He  disclosed  the  (John  i.  18).  (2)  Man,  whom  He  un- 
ceriainty  of  a  future  life  of  blessed-  veiled  as  to  His  nature,  character, 
ness  for  believers  (John  xiv.  1,  2).  responsibility,  destiny  (Luke  vi.  8 ; 
5.  He  announced  the  terms  of  citizenship  John  ii.  24,  v.  42,  xvi.  30).  (3)  Salva- 
in  the  kingdom  of  God  (Matt.  v.  1-8).  tion,  as  to  its  essence  and  conditions 

Conclusion. — Christ's     pre-eminence  (John  iii.  16).     (4)  The  future  life,  as 

in    both    departments.      The    noblest  to  its  rarity,  and  the  means  of  attaining 

worker   and   the   loftiest   teacher   the  thereunto  (John  xiv.  1-6).     2.   Wheme 

world  has  ever  seen.  it  came. — Not  of  Himself  or  from  men, 

but  from  above  (John  v.  20;  vii.  16). 
The  Heavenly  Worker.  III.  His  method. — 1.  Simple  (Mark 

I.    His    name.  —  Jesus,    signifying  xii.   37).     2.  Gracious  (Luke  iv.  22). 

16 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  I. 


3.  Authoritative     (Matt. 

4.  Original  (John  vii.  46). 


vn. 


29). 


The  Name  of  Jesus. 

I.  A  historic  name.  —  Borne  by 
Joshua,  the  successor  of  Moses  (vii.  45  ; 
Heb.  iv.  8). 

II.  A  personal  name. — As  dis- 
tinguished from  that  of  Christ  (Luke 
ii.  21),  or  Messiah,  an  official  name. 

III.  A  symbolic  name. — Signifying 
Saviour  and  foreshadowing  its  posses- 
sor's work  (Matt.  i.  21). 

IY.  An  exalted  name. — Glorified 
above  every  other  name  in  heaven  or 
on  earth  (Phil.  ii.  9). 

Y.  A  powerful  name. — 1.  The  ground 
of  salvation  (iv.  12).  2.  The  plea  of 
prayer  (John  xiv.  13).  3.  The  potent 
instrument  of  working  miracles  (Mark 
xvi.  17). 

A  Momentous  Beginning — that  of  the 
ministry  of  Jesus.     In  relation  to — 

I.  Jesus  Himself. — In  respect  of — 

1.  His  ability  to  finish  what  He  had 
begun  (Luke  xiv.  28).  And  2.  The 
consequences  it  would  entail  upon  Him- 
self if  carried  out  and  finished  (John 
xii.  27). 

II.  The  Old  Testament  Dispensa- 
tion.— Of  which  the  work  of  Jesus  was 
—  1.  The  fulfilment  (Matt.  v.  17),  and 

2.  The  setting  aside  (Heb.  vii.  19,  viii. 
13). 

III.  The   World.— Of  this,   it   was 
destined  to  be  either — 1 .  The  salvation, 
or  2.  The  condemnation,  according  as  • 
it  was  accepted  by  the  world  or  rejected. 

The  Christ  of  God  and  Christian 
History. — The  expression,  "  all  that 
Jesus  began  to  do  and  teach,"  is  a 
peculiar  one,  and  seems  to  imply  two 
things  :  first,  that  the  Gospel  was  to 
be  a  record  of  the  doings  and  sayings 
of  Jesus  from  the  very  beginning, 
which  it  pre-eminently  is,  recording 
the  previous  prophecy,  the  angelic 
annunciation,  the  conception  and  birth 
of  Jesus.  Of  the  human  side  of  Jesus, 
the  Christ  of  God,  Luke  especially 
records  the  beginning.  And  all,  from 
the    very   first,    is    grace   and    truth. 


But  the  expression  "  began "  means, 
secondly,  that  this  record  is  the  begin- 
ning or  fountain  head  of  all  subsequent 
Christian  history ;  that  out  of  these 
doings  and  teachings  have  flowed  all 
things  connected  with  the  Church  of 
God  down  to  the  last.  It  is  a  fontal 
record ;  a  root ;  a  well-spring ;  the 
source  of  a  river  which  is  still  flowing 
amongst  us,  and  refreshing  the  sons  of 
men. 

I.  We  connect  all  subsequent  testi- 
mony with  Christ's  doings  and  sayings. 
— All  the  testimony  delivered  by  Chris- 
tian witnesses  goes  back  to  Christ's 
life ;  and  is,  as  it  were,  a  prolongation  of 
His  own  voice,  a  continuation  of  His 
own  doings.  It  is  of  His  life  and 
death  that  the  witnesses  speak  ;  and 
it  is  that  life  and  death  that  contain 
the  power  which  their  testimony  em- 
bodies. The  power  of  our  testimony 
lies  in  the  directness  of  its  communica- 
tion with  the  manger  and  the  cross  ;  as 
well  as  with  all  between.  It  is  Jesus 
Himself  that  is  working  His  miracles 
before  our  very  eyes,  and  speaking  to 
us  still. 

II.  We  connect  each  individual  con- 
version with  Christ's  sayings  and 
doings. — The  soul,  in  the  moment  of 
its  mighty  change,  is  brought  into 
direct  communication  with  these  ;  it  is 
transported  back  over  eighteen  cen- 
turies, and  feels  itself  in  the  very  pres- 
ence of  Jesus  of  Nazareth — speaking, 
working,  loving,  blessing,  saving,  par- 
doning, comforting.  Yirtue  goes  out 
from  these  sayings  and  doings  of  this 
personal  Christ  to  lay  hold  on  the  sinner. 
And  this  is  the  beginning  of  his  eternal 
history ! 

III.  We  connect  each  planting  of  a 
church  with  what  Jesus  did  and 
taught. — We  see  this  very  clearly  in 
Luke's  story  of  the  planting  of  Chris- 
tianity. Trace  up  the  history  of  a 
church — at  Jerusalem,  or  Samaria,  or 
Antioch,  or  Thessalonica — to  its  true 
source,  and  you  are  landed  at  once 
among  the  scenes  of  Christ's  life  on 
earth.  There  is  no  church  where  there 
is  no  direct  link  of  this  kind.  Other 
foundation   can   no    man    lay;    other 

17 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


soil  can  no  church  root  itself  in  ;  round 
no  other  centre  can  any  church  revolve. 
For  what  is  the  temple  if  the  shekinah 
be  not  there  ?  What  is  a  church  or 
congregation  if  the  Holy  Ghost,  re- 
vealing Christ  in  His  grace  and  glory, 
be  not  the  indwelling  and  inworking 
energy  ? 

IV.  We  connect  each  true  revival 
of  religion  with  what  Jesus  did  and 


preached. — No  quickening  can  be 
genuine  save  that  which  goes  back  to 
this,  and  takes  its  rise  from  this. 
Excitement,  earnestness,  impression, 
there  may  be  ;  but  only  that  is  authen- 
tic, and  divine,  and  abiding,  which 
springs  directly  out  of  that  which  Jesus 
began  to  do  and  to  teach. — H.  Bonar, 
D.D. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  2—5. 

The  Forty  Days  ;  or,  Fellowship  with  the  Risen  Christ. 

I.  The  termini  of  this  interval. — 1.  The  terminus  a  quo.  The  resurrection. 
Demonstrated  to  be  a  reality  by  many  "  proofs"  or  "infallible  signs."  (1)  To 
the  eye,  manifestations.  "  Being  seen  of,"  or  appearing  unto  His  disciples,  forty 
days — not  continuously,  but  from  time  to  time,  and  not  always  in  the  same 
place  but  in  different  localities.  Of  these  manifestations  of  the  risen  Christ 
Scripture  records  eleven  or  twelve,  of  which  at  least  three  are  narrated  by 
Luke  (see  below).  (2)  To  the  ear,  words  :  "  Speaking  of  the  things  concerning 
the  kingdom  of  God."  Of  this  examples  are  furnished  by  Luke  in  the  conver- 
sations Christ  had  with  the  Emmaus  travellers,  and  the  eleven  in  the  upper 
room  (Luke  xxiv.).  (3)  To  the  touch,  an  invitation  to  satisfy  themselves,  by 
handling,  that  He  was  no  bodiless  apparition,  but  a  veritable  human  person, 
clothed  with  "  flesh  and  bones."  Though  not  mentioned  in  the  Acts,  this  is  stated 
in  the  Gospel  (Luke  xxiv.  39).  Whether  the  disciples  accepted  the  invitation  is 
not  recorded.  Most  likely,  as  Thomas  afterwards  (John  xx.  28),  they  felt  this 
to  be  unnecessary,  and  prostrated  themselves  before  Him  in  adoring  worship,  if 
they  did  not  audibly  exclaim — "  My  Lord !  and  my  God  !  "  (See  "  Hints  on  ver.  3.") 
2.  The  terminus  ad  quern.  The  ascension.  Spoken  of  in  the  passive  voice,  this 
was  none  the  less  a  free  act  of  Christ  Himself  (John  vi.  62,  xiv.  2,  xvi.  5, 
xx.  17  ;  Eph.  iv.  10  ;  Heb.  iv.  14).  Though  referring  principally  to  a  change  of 
condition,  an  exaltation  from  the  form  of  terrestrial  existence  in  which  Christ 
had  accomplished  His  redeeming  work  to  that  of  celestial  glory  which  He  had 
with  the  Father  before  the  world  was  (John  xvii.  5),  there  is  no  room  for 
doubting  that  it  likewise  pointed  to  a  visible  departure  from  the  earth  and 
passage  through  the  opened  heavens  (John  vi.  62 ;  Heb.  iv.  14).  (See  on 
vers.  9-11). 

II.  The  transactions  of  this  interval. — 1.  The  occupation  of  Christ.  (1)  Ap- 
pearing, manifesting  Himself  to  His  disciples.  This  was  needful  for  the 
confirmation  of  their  faith  in  His  resurrection,  and  by  consequence  in  His 
Messiah  ship  and  Divinity.  The  forty  days  constituted  an  important  link  in  the 
chain  of  evidence  which  bound  together  the  superstructure  of  the  Christian 
religion.  (2)  Teaching.  Enlightening  the  minds  of  His  disciples.  "  Speaking  of 
the  things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God."  These  were  chiefly  "  things  con- 
cerning Himself"  as  the  Founder  and  Head  of  the  kingdom.  About  the 
significance  of  His  earthly  career  of  humiliation,  which  culminated  in  the 
decease  accomplished  at  Jerusalem  (Luke  ix.  31)  ;  about  the  import  of  His 
resurrection,  as  attesting  at  once  the  divinity  of  His  Person,  and  the  atoning 
work  of  His  sufferings  ;  about  the  meaning  of  His  exaltation  for  Himself,  for 
them,  and  for  the  world  (see  next  "  Homily  ")  ;  and  about  the  terms  of  His  gospel 
message  of  which  they  were  henceforth  to  be  the  bearers.  (3)  Commanding. 
Laying  injunctions  on  the  hearts  of  His  disciples.     In  particular,  enjoining  them 

18 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  i. 


"  not  to  depart  from  Jerusalem,  but  to  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father  " — a 
command  reasonable  on  the  part  of  Christ,  who  was  henceforth  more  than  ever 
to  be  their  Lord  and  Master,  since  to  Him  alone  belonged  the  prerogative  of  pre- 
scribing their  duty,  while  the  injunction  laid  upon  them  related  to  the  reception 
of  a  gift  He  alone  could  bestow;  suitable  to  the  condition  of  the  disciples,  inas 
much  as  it  was  fitted  to  discipline  them  in  greatly  needed  virtues,  such  as  patience, 
caution,  expectation,  submission,  courage  ;  and  necessary  for  the  proper  execution 
of  their  work,  which  could  only  be  injured  by  overhasty  action  and  insufficiently 
qualified  zeal.  (4)  Promising.  Holding  out  to  His  disciples  a  prospect  of 
blessing,  "  Ye  shall  be  baptised  with  (or  in)  the  Holy  Ghost,  not  many  days 
hence."  A  great  promise — the  entering  into  them  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  practically 
the  implantation  in  them  of  the  life  of  the  Eisen  Christ,  the  exaltation  of  them  to 
spiritual  fellowship  with  Him,  and  the  endowment  of  them  with  a  power  proceed- 
ing from  Him.  A  certain  promise — the  words  first  uttered  by  the  Baptist 
(Luke  iii.  16;  John  i.  33),  and  again  by  Christ  before  His  death  (John  xiv.  16, 
xv.  26,  xvi.  7),  being  a  third  time  repeated  after  His  resurrection,  when  on  the 
eve  of  departing  to  secure  their  fulfilment.  A  near  promise — "  not  many  days 
hence,"  intimating  the  decisive  moment  when  this  baptism  should  come  upon  them 
to  be  at  hand.  2.  The  business  of  the  disciples.  This  corresponded  to  Christ's 
occupation,  and  consisted  of  four  things  :  (1)  Beholding.  Contemplating,  not  with 
the  spirit's  eye  merely,  but  with  the  body's  eye  also,  Christ's  manifestations  of 
Himself.  The  former  a  main  part  of  the  duty  of  believers  still  (John  xiv. 
21,22).  The  latter  will  be  possible  for  believers  only  in  the  day  of  Christ's  glorious 
appearing  (Titus  ii.  13  ;  1  Peter  i.  7 ;  1  John  iii.  2).  (2)  Listening.  The  more 
attentively  because  His  ''comings"  were  intermittent,  and  everything  connected 
with  them  betokened  their  speedy  cessation — last  words  are  always  precious — 
because  the  theme  on  which  they  talked  was  one  in  which  they  were  profoundly 
interested — the  restoration  of  the  kingdom  to  Israel,  though  as  yet  their  con- 
ceptions both  of  the  kingdom  and  of  the  manner  of  its  restoration  were  somewhat 
carnal.  To  hear  Christ's  words,  with  faith  and  love,  an  abiding  mark  of  disciple- 
ship  (John  xviii.  37).  (3)  Obeying.  Whatever  commandments  Christ  laid  upon 
them,  it  may  be  assumed,  they  promptly  honoured.  Obedience  is  always 
required  of  Christ's  followers  (John  xv.  14). 

"  Theirs  not  to  reason  why ; 
Theirs  but  to  do  or  die." — Tennyson. 

(4)  Waiting.  This  also  formed  part  of  the  business  of  the  apostles  during  the 
forty  days.  The  context  tells  us  they  waited  for  the  promise  as  directed. 
Waiting  one  of  the  hardest  tasks  of  the  Christian  life,  demanding  strong  faith, 
resolute  self-control,  and  eager  hope.  Thousands  can  act  who  cannot  wait.  Yet 
is  waiting  not  less  needful  tl  an  acting  for  the  proper  development  of  the 
individual  life,  and  the  successful  conduct  of  Christian  work  (1  Cor.  i.  7 ; 
2  Thess.  iii.  5) ;  while  it  certainly  is  highly  beneficial  to  all  who  practise  it  in 
patient  humility  (Tsa.  xl.  31). 

Learn. — 1.  The  value  of  God's  intervals  in  providence  and  in  grace.  2.  The 
main  business  of  a  Christian,  which  is  to  study,  hear,  obey,  and  wait  for  his 
Lord.  3.  The  mistake  of  undue  haste  in  working  for  Christ.  4.  The  certainty 
that  all  God's  promises  will  be  fulfilled. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  3.  "  Alive  after  His  passion" ;  of  New  Testament  Scripture. — 1.  Of 

or,  Did  Jesus  Christ  actually  rise  from  Paul,  not  only  in  his  preachings  in  the 

the  dead?  Acts  (xvii.  31,  xxvi.   23),  but  also  in 

I.  This  is  undoubtedly  the  teaching  his  Epistles  (Rom.  i.  4,  iv.  24,  vi.  4, 

19 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


viii.  11,  x.  9 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  14,  xv.  4,  20;  given  to  the  disciples  the  impression 

Eph.  i.  20;  Col.  i.  18,  ii.   12;  2  Tim.  that  He  was  a  Conqueror  over  death 

ii.  8).     It  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  and  the  grave,  the  Prince  of  Life,  an 

Paul  both  taught  and  believed  in  an  impression  which  lay  at  the  bottom  of 

actual   bodily   resurrection   of   Christ.  their  future  ministry,"  and  Keim,  after 

2.  Of  Peter,  in  his  sermons  (ii.  24,  mentioning  other  difficulties,  echoing 
iii.  15,  iv.  10,  x.  40)  and  letters  his  predecessor's  sentiments:  "Then 
(1  Peter  i.  3,  21,  iii.  18,  21).  Just  as  there  is  the  most  impossible  thing  of 
clearly  was  Christ's  resurrection  an  all,  the  poor,  weak,  sick  Jesus,  with 
article  in  Peter's  creed  and  teaching.  difficulty    holding    Himself    erect,    in 

3.  Of  the  Gospel  writers,  who  report  hiding,  disguised,  and  finally  dying — 
that  not  only  was  Christ's  tomb  seen  this  Jesus  an  object  of  faith,  of  exalted 
to  be  empty  by  those  who  visited  it  emotion,  of  the  triumph  of  His  ad- 
(Matt.  xxviii.  6 ;  Mark  xvi.  6 ;  Luke  herents,  a  risen  conqueror  and  Son  of 
xxiv.  3,  6  ;  John  xx.  2,  6,  7),  but  that  God  !  Here,  in  fact,  the  theory  begins 
He  was  subsequently  beheld  by  His  to  grow  paltry,  absurd,  worthy  only  of 
disciples  (Matt,  xxviii.  9,  17 ;  Mark  rejection,  since  it  makes  the  apostles 
xvi.  9,  12,  14;  Luke  xxiv.  15,  36;  either  miserable  victims  of  deceit,  or 
John  xx.  14,  19,  26,  xxi.  1).  Unless,  with  Jesus  themselves  deceivers" 
therefore,  these  New  Testament  writ-  (Jesus  von  Nazara,  vol.  vi.,  p.  330, 
ings  are  all  unhistorical — a  conclusion  E.  T.).  3.  The  vision  theory,  espoused 
which  criticism  has  not  only  not  esta-  by  Celsus,  Strauss,  Penan,  and  others, 
blished,  but  successfully  disproved — a  that  first  Mary  Magdalene,  and  after 
presumption  in  favour  of  Christ's  re-  her  others  of  the  disciples,  had  visions, 
surrection  is  created  by  their  conjoint  which  were  the  result  of  nervous  ex- 
testimony,  citement,   and  in  which  they  fancied 

II.  The,  hypotheses  which  have  been  they   beheld    Christ   alive    after    His 

started  to  account  lor  this  unanimous  passion,  and  resuscitated  from  the  tomb, 

belief  in  the  resurrection,  without  ad-  against   which  also  lie  a  number  of 

mitting  its  truth,  are  all  unsatisfactory,  insurmountable  objections  which  have 

— These  hypotheses  may  be  reduced  to  been  skilfully  urged  by  various  critics — 

five  :  1.  The  jheft  theory,   propagated  as,  e.g.,  (1)  That  the  interval  between 

originally  by  the  Jews  (Matt,  xxviii.  the  resurrection  and  the  commencement 

11-15),  and  resuscitated  by  rationalist  of  these  visions — viz.,  three  days — was 

theologians   like   Peimarus — a   theory  too  short  for  their  origination  by  the 

"  with  which,"   says   Professor  Bruce,  excited     feelings     of     the     disciples ; 

"  men  of  all  schoolsin  modern  times  would  (2)  That  so  far  from  being  in  a  state 

hi  ashamed  to  identify  themselves  "(Apo-  of  expectancy  with  regard  to  Christ's 

logetics,  p.  385).     2.  The  swoon  theory,  resurrection     during    these   days    the 

proposed  by  Paulus,  that  Jesus  never  disciples   were   in   an   exceedingly  de- 

really  died,  but  simply  lost  conscious-  pressed  state  of  mind,  and  had  no  hope 

ness  on  the  cross,  and  regained  it  in  the  whatever    of    His   resurection    (Luke 

cool   cavern  in   which   His   seemingly  xxiv.     11,     21,     37;    John    xx.    25); 

lifeless  body  was  deposited — a  theory  (3)  That  if  widespread  excitement  was 

on  which  both  Strauss  and  Keim  turn  at  this  time  characteristic  of  the  dis- 

their   backs   as   totally  inadequate,  if  ciples,  it  is  not  easy  to  understand  why 

not  absurd,  Strauss  (New  Life  of  Jesus,  the  visions  were  so  few  in  number — 

i.,  412)  saying  "  it  is  impossible  that  a  limited  at  most  to  ten  instances — and 

being  who  had  stolen  half  dead  out  of  why  they  ceased  altogether  after  forty 

the  sepulchre,  who  crept  about  weak  days,  and  why  the  apostles  so  soon  after 

and   ill,   wanting   medical    treatment,  returned   to  a   grave   and  sober   con- 

who  required  bandaging,  strengthening,  dition  of  mind  such  as  they  exhibit  in 

and  indulgence,  and  who  still  at  last  the  Acts ;  (4)  that  if  all  the  Chiisto- 

yielded  to  His  sufferings,  could  have  phanies  were  purely  subjective  visions 

20 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  I. 


it  is  surprising  either  that  they  should 
have  differed  from  each  other,  as  they 
did — Mary  having  first   thought  that 
the  person  on  whom  she  looked  was 
not  her  Lord,  but  the  gardener  (John 
xx.   15),   and   the    Emmaus  travellers 
that  the  companion  who  joined  them 
was  not  Christ  but  a  stranger  (Luke 
xxiv.  16) — or,  if  differences  were  to  be 
expected,  that   they   (the  visions)  did 
not  differ  from  each  other  more  than 
they  did ;  and  (5)  that  the  facts  just 
adverted  to  concerning  Mary  and  the 
Emmaus  travellers  that   they  did  not 
at   first    recognise  Jesus    but   mistook 
Him  for  another,  afford    strong  proof 
that  Christ's  appearances  were  not  sub- 
jective visions,  but  objective  manifesta- 
tions (compare  Kostlin's  Der  Glaube  und 
seine  Bedeutung  fur  Erkenntniss,  etc., 
pp.   38,   39).      4.  The   telegram   theory, 
suggested  by  Keim,  that  J  esus  sTgnalled 
to  His  disciples  from  heaven  that  He 
was  still  alive,  by  causing  an  objective 
image  or  likeness  of  His  body  as  they 
had  known  it  to  appear  before  their  eyes, 
and  that   out  of  this  grew  their  faith 
in  His  resurrection.     But  against  this 
hypothesis  it  has  been  forcibly  urged 
that  the  production  of  such  an  image 
of  Christ's  body  was  no  less  a  miracle 
than   the   rising   of    the   actual   body 
would   have   been,    and   that   on   this 
theory,  equally  with  the  proceeding,  the 
faith  of  the  disciples  would  be  made  to 
rest   on   a  halluciation  (Bruce,  Apolo- 
getics, pp.  392,  393).     5.  The  lggend&vy 
theory,   favoured   by   Weizsacker   and 
Martineau,  that  Christ  not  only  never 
rose,    but    that    there    were    no    ap- 
pearances to  explain,   the  doctrine  of 
Christ's  resurrection  -being  only  a  later 
legend  manufactured  for  the  purpose 
of  expressing  the  Church's  strong  con- 
viction that  Jesus  still  lived — a  theory 
which    does   not   harmonise   with   the 
experiences  of  the  first  disciples,  whose 
visions  of  Christ  (Paul's  included)  were 
not    purely    spiritual,   as   this  class  of 
critics     so    dogmatically     assert,    and 
which  does  not  account  satisfactorilv 
for  the  legend  of  a  physical  resurrection, 
saying   as  it  does  that    "faith  in  the 
continued  existence  of  Jesus  produced 


the  later  tradition  of  optical  visions, 
not  such  visions  the  faith"  (Bruce, 
p.  397). 

III.  The  results  that  flow  from  a 
denial  of  Christ's  resurrection  are  ab- 
solutely   incompatible    with    an    ac- 
ceptance of  the  Christian  religion. — 
These  results  may  be  thus  summarised  : 
If    Christ   never  rose  from  the  dead, 
then —  1 .  Christ  was  a  false  prophet  and 
a  deceiver,  since  He  distinctly  claimed 
that    He   would   rise    (Matt.   xvi.   21, 
xx.   19,  xxvi.   32  ;    Mark  ix.  9  ;  John 
ii.     19),    and    a    false   prophet    could 
neither   have   been  sinless  nor  divine, 
neither   a   Messiah   for    Israel   nor   a 
Saviour  for  the  world.     2.  Christ's  dis- 
ciples and  first  followers  were  all  victims 
of  hallucination,  and  hence   were  far 
from    being    trustworthy   teachers   of 
religion  for  after  ages.     If  they  were 
wrong   in   teaching  that   Christ   rose, 
what  guarantee   exists  that  they  are 
right  in  teaching  He  will  come  again  ? 
3.  The   whole   magnificent  structure   of 
Christianity  rests  upon  a  lie,  which  is 
barely  conceivable,   even   though   Mo- 
hammedanism and  Buddhism  originated 
with  founders  whose  claims  to  divine 
inspiration    cannot    be   conceded.       4. 
Christians    must   be   of  all   men    most 
miserable,  since  there  can  be  no  atone- 
ment and  no  salvation,  no  resurrection 
and  no  eternal  life,  if  so  be  that  Christ 
never   rose   (1    Cor.    xv.    12-19).     See 
"  Hints"  on  xxv.  19. 

The  Appearances  of  the  Risen  Christ. 

I.  Their  time. — 1.  After  His  passion. 
This  clause  implies  that  Christ  had 
really  died,  and  excludes  the  idea  that 
He  had  merely  swooned.  2.  After  His 
resurrection.  That  His  resurrection  was 
not  merely  spiritual,  but  physical,  is 
involved  in  the  term  "  alive,"  which 
points  not  to  a  disembodied  existence 
like  that  of  the  "  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect "  (Heb.  xii.  23),  but  to  a 
corporeal  form  of  being  like  that  which 
Christ  possessed  before  He  died. 

II.  Their  continuance.  —  During 
forty  days.  This  precludes  the  notion 
that  they  were  mere  subjective  illusions, 
since  it  is  hardly  supposable  that  illu- 

21 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


sions  would  repeat  themselves  always 
in  the  same  form  to  different  persons 
and  at  different  times  throughout  so 
lengthened  a  period. 

III.  Their  number. -^Ten.  To— 
1.  Mary  Magdalene  at  the  sepulchre 
(John  xx.  11).  2.  The  women,  return- 
ing to  Jerusalem  (Matt.  xxv.  8). 
3.  Pete?',  on  the  resurrection  morning, 
hour  and  place  unknown  (Luke  xxiv. 
34).  4.  The  Emmaus  travellers,  the 
afternoon  of  the  same  day  (Luke  xxiv. 
13-31).  5.  The  ten,  the  evening  of  the 
same  day,  in  the  upper  room  (Luke 
xxiv.  33  \  John  xx.  19).  6.  The  eleven 
in  the  upper  room,  eight  days  later 
(John  xx.  26).  7.  The  seven  in  Galilee, 
beside  the  lake  (John  xxi.  1).  8.  The 
five  hundred  brethren  at  once,  time 
and   place   unknown    (1    Cor.   xv.    6). 

9.  James,  the  Lord's  brother,  time  and 
place   also   unknown   (1    Cor.    xv.   7). 

10.  The  eleven  at  Bethany  (1  Cor  xv. 
7  ;  Luke  xxiv.  50). 

IV.  Their  certainty. — Proved  by 
many  infallible  signs ;  such  as — 1.  Their 
number  and  continuance,  as  above  ex- 
plained. 2.  Christ's  eating  and  drink- 
ing in  presence  of  His  apostles  (ver.  4 ; 
x.  41).  This  is  fatal  to  the  hypothesis 
that  Christ's  manifestations  were  purely 
spiritual  and  subjective.  3.  His  request 
that  the  disciples  should  handle  Him 
and  see  (Luke  xxiv.  39  ;  John  xx.  27). 
Christ  would  never  have  subjected 
Himself  to  such  a  test  had  He  not 
been  corporeally  present  with  His 
disciples. 

V.  Their  j)bj  ect . — Probably  three- 
fold. 1.  To  attest  the  reality  of  His 
resurrection,  which,  as  the  central  fact 
in  Christianity,  was  to  form  the  theme 
of  apostolic  preaching.  2.  To  confirm 
the  faith  of  His  disciples  at  once  in  His 
Messiahship  and  His  divinity.  3.  To 
instruct  them  concerning  the  kingdom 
He  was  setting  up,  and  whose  heralds 
the  apostles  were  soon  to  be. 

The  Words  of  the  Forty  Days. 

I.  Words  spoken  to  the  whole  body, 
or  to  the  majority  of  the  apostles. — 
1.  A  benediction.  "  Peace  be  unto 
you"    (Luke   xxiv.    36;  John  xx.   19, 

22 


21).  2.  A  commission.  "As  the 
Father  hath  sent  Me,  even  so  send  I 
you  "  (John  xx.  21).  3.  An  instruction. 
"  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature "  (Matt, 
xxvii.  19,  20;  Mark  xvi.  15).  4.  A 
dotation.  "  Receive  ye  the  Holy 
Ghost  "  (John  xx.  33).  5.  An  exposi- 
tion. "  Thus  it  is  written,  and  thus  it 
behoved  Christ  to  suffer  and  rise  again 
from  the  dead"  (Luke  xxiv.  46). 
6.  A  prediction.  "  Ye  shall  receive 
power  when  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come 
upon  you"  (i.  8).  7.  A  caution. 
"It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times 
and  seasons"  (i.  7).  KB. — These 
seven  words  express  the  indispensable 
conditions  of  all  apostleship  or 
ministerial  service  in  the  Christian 
Church. 

II.  Words  spoken  to  individual  dis- 
ciples.—1.  To  Mary  at  the  sepulchre. 
"  Woman  !  why  weepest  thou  ? "  A 
question  for  Christian  mourners.  2.  To 
the  women  on  the  way.  "  All  hail !  " 
(Matt,  xxviii.  9.)  A  salutation  to 
anxious  seekers.  3.  To  Thomas  in  the 
upper  room.  "Reach  hither  thy 
finger  !"  (John  xx.  27.)  An  invitation 
to  doubters.  Also  "  Because  thou  hast 
seen  Me  thou  hast  believed,"  etc. 
(John  xx.  29.)  A  commendation  of 
faith  without  sight.  4.  To  Peter  at 
the  lake  side.  (1)  "  Lovest  thou  Me  1 " 
(John  xxi.  16.)  A  question  for  self- 
examination.  (2)  "  Feed  My  lambs." 
"Tend  My  sheep"  (John  xxi.  15,  17). 
A      promotion     for      the      penitent. 

(3)  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee," 
etc.  (John  xxi.  18.)     A  trial  for  faith. 

(4)  "If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I 
come,"  etc.  (John  xxi.  23.)  An 
admonition  for  the  forward. 

III.  Words  spoken  to  apostles  and 
disciples  combined.  1.  To  the  seven 
on  the  sea.  "  Children,  have  ye  any 
meat  ?  "  (John  xxi.  5.)  An  inquiry  of 
love  and  solicitude.  2.  "  Cast  ye  on 
the  right  side  of  the  ship,"  etc.  (John 
xxi.  6.)  A  direction  for  desponding 
workers,  always  to  obey  Christ's  orders. 
3.  "Bring  of  the  fish  ye  have  now 
taken  "  (John  xxi.  10).  An  encourage- 
ment for  all  faithful  servants. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Chap.  i. 


Things  concerning  the  Kingdom. 

I.  Concerning  the  founding  of  the 
kingdom,  which  accomplished  itself  in 
His  (Christ's)  person  after  He,  through 
His  death  and  resurrection,  had  com- 
pleted His  work. 

IT.  Concerning  the  collection  of  the 
kingdom,  which  was  to  be  effected 
through  the  instrumentality  of  the 
apostles,  and  by  the  ministry  of  the 
word. 

III.  Concerning  the  perfecting  of 
the  kingdom,  which  should  be  carried 
forward  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  whom  He  was  to  send  from  the 
Father,  and  who  should  sanctify  all 
who  believed  on  His  (Christ's)  name. 

IV.  Concerning  the  revelation  of 
the  kingdom  which  should  take  place 
at  the  end  of  time  when  He  came  again 
from  heaven  in  the  glory  of  His  Father. 
— Besser. 

The  Kingdom  of  God. 

I.  The    underlying     conception. — 

"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  that  perfect 
arrangement  of  all  things,  in  which 
God  Himself  is  the  Ruler  and  His 
will  alone  is  active  and  decisive.  The 
conception  includes  three  elements  or 
ingredients:  1.  A  people.  2.  A  con- 
stitution. 3.  A  land,  a  sure  dwelling- 
place  and  possession.  Only  where 
these  three  things  are  united  can  we 
speak  of  a  kingdom"  (Bornemann's 
Unterricht  im  Christenthum,  p.  30). 

II.  The  threefold  realisation. — 1.  The 
Israelitish,  or  the  past.  (1)  The  people 
were  the  children  of  Abraham  after 
the  flesh.  (2)  The  constitution  was 
the  law,  moral  and  ceremonial,  pro- 
mulgated by  Moses  at  Sinai.  (3)  The 
land  was  Canaan,  into  which  the  people 
were  conducted  by  Joshua.  2.  The 
Christian,  or  the  present.  (1)  The 
people  are  professed  believers  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  The  constitu- 
tion may  be  said  to  consist  of  repentance 
toward  God  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  (3)  The  land  is  the  earth 
which  has  been  given  over  to  the  Church 
for  subjugation  and  occupation. 
3.  The  heavenly,  or,  the  future.  (1)  The 
people  will  be  those  who  are  truly  born 


again  and  united  to  Christ  by  the 
spirit.  (2)  The  constitution  will  be 
the  possession  of  perfect  holiness,  or 
absolute  submission  to  Christ.  (3)  The 
land  will  be  the  heavenly  Canaan,  or 
an  eternal  life  of  uninterrupted  and 
intimate  fellowship  with  Christ. 

Yer.  4.  The  Command  of  the  Ascend- 
ing Lord. 

I.  Depart  not  from  Jerusalem. — 
1.  Neither  in  fear  for  your  safety. 
It  would  not  have  been  surprising  had 
the  apostles,  in  alarm  for  their  persons, 
withdrawn  from  the  holy  city  when 
Christ  ceased  appearing  to  them. 
Human  nature  is  not  naturally  coura- 
geous, but  essentially  weak;  and 
though  the  apostles  were  by  this  time 
renewed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds, 
being  Christians,  yet  were  they  not 
entirely  delivered  from  the  power  of 
their  constitutional  infirmities,  while 
the  unusual  circumstances  in  which 
they  would  be  placed  by  Christ's 
ascension  would  tend  to  excite  these 
into  more  than  ordinary  activity. 
Still  they  were  not  to  retire  from  the 
metropolis  till  they  got  the  signal  from 
their   Lord.     Premature   flight  would 

(1)  reveal  a  lack  of  fortitude  on  their 
part,  showing  them  to  be  afraid  of 
what  man  might  do  unto  them,  in 
which  case  they  would  not  prove 
t  indent     preachers     of     the     gospel ; 

(2)  display  a  feebleness  of  faith,  as  if 
they  could  not  trust  an  unseen  equally 
with  a  seen  master  to  protect  them, 
which  would  likewise  prove  fatal  to 
their  success  ;  and  (3)  indicate  a  dulness 
of  understanding  which  failed  to  per- 
ceive that  in  retiring  from  Jerusalem 
they  would  be  practically  acknowledg- 
ing defeat,  and  surrendering  the  cause 
of  their  Master.  2.  Nor  from  ex- 
uberance of  zeal.  The  world  might  ap- 
pear to  them  to  be  perishing  for  lack 
of  knowledge,  and  they  might  be  eager 
to  spread  abroad  the  tidings  of  sal- 
vation, they  might  even  be  desirous  of 
proving  on  the  instant  their  devotion 
to  their  Master,  and  their  willingness 
to  champion  His  cause,  yea,  the  time 
before    their    Master's    return    might 

23 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


seem  too  short  to  admit  of  being 
wasted  in  delay.  Yet  nothing  would 
be  gained  by  precipitate  haste.  It  was 
not  for  them  to  give  the  signal  to  ad- 
vance. Their  duty  was  to  follow,  not 
to  lead,  not  to  order,  but  to  obey. 

II.  Wait  for  the  promise  of  the 
Father. — 1.  Without  this  only  failure 
would  attend  their  efforts.  In  spiritual 
matters  nothing  can  be  successfully 
accomplished  without  divine  help 
(Zech.  iv.  6 ;  John  xv.  5).  In  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  upon  earth  the 
prime  actor  is  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Apostles,  prophets,  evangelists,  pastors, 
and  teachers  are  subordinate  instru- 
ments. 2.  With  this  success  would  be 
certain.  The  Holy  Ghost  would  clothe 
them  with  power — power  to  understand 
and  expound  the  truth  (John  xvi.  13), 
power  to  convince  gainsay ers  (Luke 
xi.  15;  Actsvi.  10),  power  to  touch  the 
conscience  (2  Cor.  iv.  2) — which  nothing 
and  no  one  would  be  able  to  resist, 
3.  Waiting  for  this  would  be  an  admir- 
able test  of  their  faith. — Only  in  the 
strength  supplied  by  a  living  faith 
could  they  hope  to  successfully  dis- 
charge their  commission.     4.    Waiting 


for  this  would  evoke  the  best  and  strongest 
qualities  in  their  characters.  The  Lord 
is  always  good  to  them  that  wait  for 
Him,  and  only  great  men  can  wait. 
"  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall 
renew  their  strength,"  and  "  they  also 
serve  that  only  stand  and  wait." 

Two  Lessons. — 1.  "There  are  seasons 
in  our  lives  when  God  appears  to  call 
us  simply  to  wait  "  ;  and  2.  True  pro- 
gress is  often  better  secured  by  waiting 
than  by  working. 

Ver.  5.  The  Two  Baptisms. 

I.  John's  baptism. — 1.  Material. 
A  water  baptism.  2.  External. 
Affecting  the  body.  3.  Symbolic. 
Representing  moral  cleansing.  4.  Pre- 
paratory.— In  anticipation  of  Christ's 
coming.  5.  Temporary.  Intended 
only  for  a  season. 

II.  The  baptism  of  Jesus. — 
1.  Spiritual.  A  baptism  in  the  Holy 
Ghost.  2.  Internal.  Descending  on 
the  heart.  3.  Essential.  Imparting 
spiritual  renovation.  4.  Complemen- 
tary. Realising  what  had  been  symbol- 
ised by  John's  rite.  5.  Permanent. 
Designed  to  abide  for  ever. 


HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS. —Verses  6—11. 

The  Ascension]  or,  the  Exaltation  of  the  Church's  Head. 

I.  The  attendant  circumstances. — 1.  The  place.  Olivet.  This  agrees  with  the 
statement  of  Luke  (xxiv.  50),  that  the  scene  of  the  "  taking  up "  was  near 
Bethany,  and  contradicts  not  the  account  of  Mark  (xvi.  14-19),  which  seems 
to,  but  really  does  not,  indicate  as  the  point  of  departure  the  upper  room  in 
Jerusalem,  in  which  Christ  had  appeared  to  His  disciples  as  they  sat  at  meat. 
The  words  "  so  that  "  (Mark  xvi.  19)  refer  not  necessarily  to  the  immediately 
preceding  conversation,  but  to  the  "  speakings  "  in  general  of  the  Lord  with  His 
disciples  during  the  forty  days.  (Compare  Weiss,  The  Life  of  Christ,  iii.  408, 
E.  T.)  2.  The  time.  The  last  of  the  forty  days,  the  day  of  the  Bethany 
manifestation,  which,  however,  was  not  the  interview  enjoyed  by  the  ten 
(John  xx.  19;  compare  Luke  xxiv.  36-49),  but  that  granted  to  all  the  apostles 
(1  Cor.  xv.  7),  which  most  likely  happened  in  Jerusalem  on  the  evening  of  the 
fortieth  day.  In  this  case  the  journey  to  Bethany  would  be  performed  during 
night,  and  the  ascension  accomplished  in  the  early  morning,  at  the  dawning  of  the 
day.  3.  The  spectators.  The  eleven.  That  others  besides  them  should  have 
witnessed  the  departure  was  not  necessary,  since  to  them  alone,  as  His  ambassa- 
dors, was  about  to  be  committed  the  task  of  witnessing  both  concerning  and  for 
Him.  But  that  others  along  with  them  were  in  the  upper  room  when  Christ 
came  to  lead  them  forth  is  the  natural  deduction — others  from  whom  they  were 
withdrawn,  who  were  left  behind  (compare  Gen.  xxii.  5  ;  2  Kings  ii.  6),  and  to 
whom  they  returned  (see  ver.  13)  when  the  sublime  spectacle  was  over. 

24 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  i. 


II.  The  supernatural  phenomenon. — 1.  The  antecedent  conversation.  (1)  The 
curious  question,  "  Lord  !  dost  Thou  at  this  time  restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel  %  " 
Surprising  that  the  apostles,  after  three  years'  training  in  the  school  of  Christ, 
after  the  tragic  event  of  the  crucifixion,  after  the  transcendent  experience  of  the 
resurrection,  and  after  listening  to  the  risen  Christ's  exposition  of  the  things  con- 
cerning the  kingdom,  should  have  still  clung  to  the  idea  of  a  temporal  monarchy: 
Yet  neither  unnatural  nor  difficult  to  understand  when  one  remembers  how  full 
the  air  then  was  of  materialistic  and  carnal  conceptions  of  the  coming  Messianic 
kingdoms,  how  the  apostles  from  their  youthful  days  had  drunk  in  these  ideas 
and  practically  lived  upon  them,  and  how  invincible,  even  in  good  men,  early 
prejudice  is.  (2)  The  discouraging  reply.  Leaving  their  mistaken  notions  to  be 
corrected  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (John  xvi.  13),  the  risen  Christ  assured  them  their 
wisdom  lay  in  not  endeavouring  beforehand  to  know  times  and  seasons  in  con- 
nection with  the  kingdom — a  hint  to  students  of  prophecy ;  that  times  and 
seasons  were  solely  within  the  ken  of  the  Father  who  had  appointed  these  in  the 
sovereign  exercise  of  His  own  authority  (Deut.  xxix.  29) ;  and  that  their 
special  task  would  be  that  of  witnessing  for  Christ,  beginning  at  Jerusalem 
(Luke  xxiv.  47),  but  progressing  "  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  " — light 
upon  the  mission  of  the  gospel.  (3)  The  comforting  assurance.  Great  and 
arduous  as  the  work  of  witness -bearing  would  unquestionably  prove,  they 
would  not  be  left  for  its  execution  to  their  own  unaided  strength,  but,  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  about  to  come  upon  them,  would  be  endowed  with  power  sufficient  to 
meet  every  emergency  that  might  arise  in  their  sacred  calling — a  word  of  conso- 
lation to  Christians  in  every  sphere,  but  especially  to  preachers  and  missionaries. 
2.  The  immediate  exaltation.  (1)  He  was  taken  up,  raised  into  the  air,  im- 
mediately after  He  had  ceased  speaking,  and  while  the  apostles  were  looking  at 
Him  in  wondering  adoration.  Luke  (xxiv.  50,  51)  describes  Him  at  the  moment 
as  lifting  up  His  hands  and  blessing  them,  and  as  in  the  act  of  stepping  back  and 
being  parted  from  them.  (2)  A  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight,  folding 
round  Him  like  a  fleecy  garment.  "  He  maketh  the  clouds  His  chariot " 
(Psalm  civ.  3).  Imagination  may  picture  the  upward  path  of  the  ascending  king. 
Scripture  leaves  that  unpainted,  and  confines  itself  to  state  the  unadorned  fact 
that  He  was  taken  up,"  that  "  He  passed  through  the  heavens  "  (Heb.  iv.  10 ; 
1  Peter  iii.  22),  that  He  "  took  His  seat  at  the  right  hand  of  God"  (Col.  iii.  1 ; 
Heb.  xi.  12).  3.  The  subsequent  vision.  Two  men  in  white  apparel  stood  beside 
the  apostles  as  they  looked  steadfastly  into  heaven.  Not  Moses  and  Elias 
(Ewald),  who  had  talked  with  Christ  on  the  Transfiguration  Mount,  else  Luke 
would  have  named  them  as  he  does  in  the  Gospel,  but  two  angels,  probably  the 
two  who  had  figured  at  the  resurrection  (Luke  xxiv.  4  ;  John  xx.  12).  (1)  Re- 
proving the  heaven-gazers,  thereby  reminding  them  their  duty  henceforth  would 
be  not  so  much  contemplation  as  action,  these  celestial  monitors  (2)  comforted 
them  with  the  assurance  that  Christ  would  in  like  manner  return  as  they  had 
seen  Him  depart,  thereby  confirming  Christ's  promise  that  He  would  come  again 
(Matt.  xvi.  27  ;  Luke  ix.  26  ;  John  xiv.  3),  and  (3)  directed  them  to  look  for  His 
future  appearing  (Phil.  iii.  20 ;  1  Thess.  i.  20 ;  Heb.  ix.  28). 

III.  The  doctrinal  interpretation. — 1.  What  the  Ascension  signified  to  Christ. 
— (1)  The  termination  of  His  earthly  humiliation  and  the  commencement  of  His 
heavenly  glory.  (2)  The  conclusion  of  His  redeeming  work  and  its  formal 
acceptance  as  well  as  reward  by  His  Father.  (3)  The  cessation  of  His  direct 
visible  activity  on  the  earth,  and  the  inauguration  of  His  indirect  and  invisible 
working  from  heaven  and  through  the  Spirit.  2.  What  the  Ascension  signified 
to  the  apostles.  (1)  The  certainty  of  Christ's  resurrection.  If  Christ  visibly 
withdrew  from  the  earth  He  must  have  really  risen  from  the  dead.  (2)  The 
confirmation  of  their  faith  in  Christ's  Messiahship  and  Divinity.     This  followed 

25 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


as  a  consequence  from  their  faith  in  His  resurrection.  (3)  The  verification  of 
Christ's  authority  as  a  Teacher,  Christ  having  before  the  Crucifixion  announced 
that  the  Son  of  man  should  ascend  up  to  where  He  had  been  before  (John  vi.  62). 
When  the  apostles  beheld  this  prediction  fulfilled,  they  must  have  reasoned  that 
in  like  manner  all  His  other  promises  would  be  Yea  and  Amen  !  And  in 
particular  that  His  word  about  the  Holy  Ghost  would  not  fail.  (4)  The 
necessity  of  henceforth  knowing  Christ  no  more  after  the  flesh.  This  probably 
was  the  import  of  His  word  to  Mary — "  Touch  Me  not !  for  I  am  not  yet 
ascended"  (John  xx.  17).  (5)  The  certainty  that  they  would  ultimately  follow 
whither  He  had  gone.  This  had  been  promised  at  the  supper  table  (John 
xiv.  3).  When,  therefore,  they  saw  Christ  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high,  they  would  no  longer  fear,  if  they  ever  feared,  that  He  might 
not  be  able  to  implement  His  loving  word  concerning  and  gracious  purpose 
toward  them.  3.  What  the  Ascension  signified  in  the  world.  (1)  The  trustworthy 
character  of  Christ's  redeeming  work.  His  exaltation  supplied  proof  that  He 
was  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  all  that  came  unto  God  through  Him 
(Heb.  vii.  25).  (2)  Christ's  supremacy  over  all  things  and  persons  on  earth. 
This  was  an  unavoidable  deduction  from  Christ's  investiture  with  all  power  in 
heaven  and  on  earth  (Matt,  xxviii.  18  ;  John  xiii.  3).  If  Christ  had  "  gone  into 
heaven,  angels,  authorities,  and  powers  being  made  subject  unto  Him  "  (1  Peter 
iii.  22),  one  might  rest  assured  that  all  things  on  earth  had  likewise  been  placed 
beneath  His  feet  (Eph.  i.  22),  so  that  henceforth  He  should  be  Lord  of  both  the 
living  and  the  dead  (Rom.  xiv.  9).  (3)  The  certainty  that  Christ  would 
eventually  conquer  His  foes.  "  He  must  reign  till  He  hath  put  all  His  enemies 
under  His  feet  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  25 ;  compare  Heb.  x.  12,  13). 

Learn. — 1.  The  title  Christ  has  to  be  worshipped  (Phil.  ii.  10,  11).  2.  The 
duty  of  seeking  those  things  which  are  above  (Col.  iii.  1).  3.  The  propriety  of 
looking  for  Christ's  return  (Titus  ii.  13). 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  6.  A    Questionable  Question. —  sidering :     1.    That   the    Father   hath 

•'  Lord,  dost  Thou  at  this  time  restore  arranged  these  in  the  exercise  of  His 

the  kingdom  %  "  own  sovereign  authority  ;    2.  That   in 

I.  Authorised. — When  dictated  by :  other  realms  besides  that  of  religion 
1.  Shows  faith,  which  expects  the  man's  capacity  to  forecast  the  future 
kingdom.  2.  Tender  love,  which  wishes  is  limited;  and  3.  That  a  knowledge 
the  salvation  of  the  world.  3.  Holy  of  the  times  and  seasons  might  act 
grief,  which  feels  for  the  miseries  of  injuriously  on  man. 

the  times.  II.  A  beneficial  arrangement. — As 

II.  Unauthorised. — When  prompted  tending:  1.  To  inspire  humility, 
by:  1.  Carnal  impatience,  which  wishes  teaching  man  that  some  subjects  are 
to  see  the  kingdom  of  God  coming  with  beyond  his  ken.  2.  To  repress  curiosity, 
external  show.  2.  Spiritual  curiosity,  which  is  always  prone  to  overstep  the 
which  will  pry  into  what  the  Father  bounds  of  what  is  legitimate.  3.  To 
hath  reserved  for  Himself.  3.  Pious  cultivate  submission,  directing  man  to 
indolence,  which  with  folded  hands  looks  leave  secret  affairs  in  the  hands  of  the 
at  the  clouds  instead  of  working  for  Father.  4.  To  discipline  faith,  training 
the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  calling  it  to  believe  that  He  doeth  all  things  well, 
entrusted  to  it. — Gerok. 

Yer.   8.  Christ7 s    Witnesses. — Christ- 
Ver.  7.  Not  for  Man  to  know  Times      ians     in    their    several     spheres    and 
and  Seasons.  capacities  should  be  testifiers  : 

I,  A  reasonable  restriction. — Con-         I.  Of  the  facts  of  Clrrist's  history.— 

26 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  I. 


Of  His  incarnation,  life,  death,  re- 
surrection, and  ascension,  to  those  who 
are  ignorant  of  these. 

II.  Of  the  doctrines  of  His  Gospel. 
— Of  His  vicarious  sacrifice  for  sin, 
His  free  offer  of  forgiveness,  and  His 
gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  believers,  to 
such  as  are  in  need  of  these. 

III.  Of  the  character  and  destiny  of 
His  Church. — Of  its  spiritual  nature, 
holy  calling,  and  ultimate  victory  over 
the  world,  to  those  who  are  outside  its 
pale. 

The  Christian's  vocation. 

I.  Its  glory. — Witnesses  of  the 
Exalted  King,  His  witnesses. 

II.  Its  lowliness. — Only  His  wit- 
nesses, nothing  more. 

III.  Its  sufferings. — Witnesses  of 
the  Lord  in  a  hostile  world. 

IV.  Its  promise. — Strength  from 
above. — Gerok. 

Power  for  Service. 

L  In  what  it  consists. — The  in- 
dwelling of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Whence 
the  power  is  1.  Supernatural  in  its 
character ;  2.  Natural  in  its  operations, 
employing  man's  ordinary  faculties; 
and  3.  Adequate  in  its  measure,  meeting 
all  the  necessities  of  those  who  f  erve. 

IT.  From  whom  it  comes. — From 
*  the  Father  as  its  source,  and  from 
Christ  as  its  dispenser.  Hence  to  be 
sought  from  these  alone  by  :  1.  Obedient 
waiting  (ver.  4);  2.  Earnest  praying 
(i.  14,  ii.  1) ;  and  3.  Humble  self- 
emptying. 

III.  To  whom  it  is  given.— 1.  To 
those  who  are  chosen,  as  the  Apostles 
were  by  Christ.  2.  To  those  who 
surrender  themselves  unreservedly  for 
Christ's  service.  3.  To  those  who 
believingly  wait  for  the  heavenly  gift. 

IV.  For  what  it  is  granted. — To 
enable  its  recipients  to  witness  for 
Christ.  This  the  Holy  Ghost  does  by 
witnessing  for  Christ  in  them .  Without 
the  Spirit's  help  no  words  of  apostle, 
prophet,  evangelist,  or  preacher  could 
efficiently  testify  for  Christ — i.e.,  testify 
in  such  a  way  as  to  savingly  reach  the 
hearts  and  consciences  cf  hearers. 


Pentecostal  Power. — Let  us  look  at 
this  pentecostal  power  and  see  some 
of  its  characteristics  and  conditions. 
What  is  it?  1,  First,  it  is  the  power 
of  religious  earnestness.  Half-hearted 
religion  is  no  religion  at  all.  God 
wants*  the  whole  heart  or  none. 
Earnestness  is  working  at  religion,  not 
playing  at  it.  Earnestness  makes 
religion  one's  chief  business.  It  goes 
at  it  as  men  dig  for  gold  in  the  moun- 
tains, determined  to  have  it  if  it  is 
there.  That  was  the  way  with  these 
first  disciples.  They  knew  the  power 
existed  and  was  meant  for  them.  So 
they  were  going  to  have  it.  They 
would  meet  God's  conditions.  2.  Pen- 
tecostal power  is  the  power  of  union. 
In  union  there  is  strength.  In  division 
or  separation  there  is  weakness.  Again 
and  again  are  we  told  that  those  one 
hundred  and  twenty  disciples  were  all 
in  that  upper  room — not  one  hundred 
and  nineteen,  but  one  hundred  and 
twenty.  All  there,  and  all  with  one 
accord.  The  heat  generated  fused  all 
hearts  into  one.  Did  37ou  ever  see  the 
bard,  cold  pieces  of  iron  melt  and  flow 
together  in  the  furnace?  Then  the 
moulder  can  make  whr.t  he  pleases 
out  of  the  molten  mass.  The  lack  of 
union  destroys  the  power  of  the  human 
body  or  of  the  Christian  Church. 
Think  how  a  few  church  members  who 
never  unite  in  prayer  and  work  with 
the  rest  shear  the  Church  of  strength. 
3.  Pentecostal  power  is  the  power  to 
witness  for  Christ.  Christianity  is  a 
religion  that  advances  by  means  of 
testimony;  and  only  so.  Where  no 
one  speaks  for  it,  it  dies.  Imagine 
Peter  spending  a  week  or  a  month 
without  mentioning  the  name  of  Jesus. 
Imagine  groups  of  the  disciples  meeting 
and  talking  about  the  weather,  the 
crops,  politics,  or  finances,  ard  not  say- 
ing a  solitary  word  about  their  ascended 
Lord.  True,  holy  living  is  good  testi- 
mony for  Christ.  Without  it  talk  is 
mere  hypocrisy.  But  true,  also,  that 
out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the 
mouth  speaketh,  but  when  the  heart  is 
as  full  of  Jesus  as  were  the  hearts  of 
the  first  disciples,  the  tongue  reveals 

27 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


the   fact.     How  many  Christians  are 
tongue-tied  !      4.    Again,    Pentecostal 
power   is   the    power  of   the    Word   of 
God.     Have  you  noticed  at  Pentecost 
what   a  reasoner,   what  an    expositor, 
what  an  orator  Peter  became  ?    .Have 
you  observed  how  his  eloquence  burned 
its  way  into  the  hearts  of  his  auditors  ? 
What  gave  him  that  power  to  move 
men  ?     Read  over  his  address,  and  you 
will  find  nothing  there  you  can  explain 
by  the   ordinary  rules   of  rhetoric  or 
canons  of  secular  eloquence.     It  is  the 
plainest  kind  of  a  speech.       Did  you 
ever  know  an  earnest  student  of  God's 
Word   that   did   not   grow   in    piety? 
Did  you  ever  know  a  Church  that  fed 
on  God's  Word  that  did  not  have  some- 
thing  like   Pentecostal   power?      Did 
you   ever   know   that   power   to  come 
where    the     Divine     Word    was    not 
honoured?     5.  Pentecostal  power  was 
the   power   of  prayer.      6.  There  are 
many  other  characteristics  of  this  Pen- 
tecostal power.     It  is  the  power  of  a 
complete  consecration,  the  power  of  an 
indomitable    courage,   the     power    of 
spiritual  concentration,   the  power  to 
win  souls  to  Jesus  Christ.     But  they 
are  all  summed  up  in  this,  it  is  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost — the  power 
of  human  hearts  when  taken  posses- 
sion  of   by  the  Divine  Spirit.      Will 
there  be   any   mistaking   this   power? 
Will  there  be  any  doubt  what  has  hap- 
pened to  us  when  we  are  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost?     Did  any  one  ever  try 
to  make  you  believe  that   a  kerosene 
lamp  or  a  gas-jet  or  even  an  electric 
light  was  the  spring  or  summer  sun  ? 
Could  electric  lights  enough  be  manu- 
factured to  make  the  earth  put  forth 
her  buds,  and  flowers,  and  fruits  ?    Oh, 
how  easily  the  sun  awakens  the  sleep- 
ing forces  of  nature,  and  clothes  the 
earth  with  verdure  !     What  transfor- 
mations when  the  sun  goes  to  work ! 
And  what  transformations  when  the 
Holy   Ghost  descends !      Are   the   re- 
sources of  the  Holy  Spirit  limited  ?     Is 
He  not  infinite  ?     Are  not  all  things 
possible  with  God  ?     We  have  waited 
six  thousand  years  for  steam  and  elec- 
tricity ;  but  these  forces  existed  even  in 

28 


Eden,  and  might  have  been  used  if  we 
had  only  known  how.  We  have  waited 
two  thousand  years  since  Christ  for 
the  promised  conversion  of  the  world. 
The  power  to  bring  it  about  exists.  It 
is  possessed  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is 
Pentecostal  power.  Shall  we  have  it  ? 
Have  it  now?  Or  wait  another  two 
thousand  years,  while  the  world  rolls  on 
in  iniquity  and  generation  after  genera- 
tion passes  on  into  hell  ? — F.  P.  Berry. 

Yer.  9.  The  Ascension  of  Christ  and 
its  Lessons. 

I.  The  doctrine  of  the  Ascension  of 
our  Lord  holds  a  foremost  place  in 
apostolic  teaching. — "  The  doctrine  of 
the  Resurrection,  apart  from  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Ascension,  would  have 
been  a  mutilated  fragment,  for  the 
natural  question  would  arise,  not  for 
one,  but  for  every  age :  If  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  has  risen  from  the  dead, 
where  is  He  ?  " 

II.  The  Ascension  of  our  Lord 
meant  His  withdrawal  from  this 
earthly  scene.— "The  Book  of  the 
Acts  does  not  describe  our  Saviour  as 
ascending  through  infinite  space.  It 
simply  describes  Him  as  removed  from 
off  this  earthly  ball,  and  then  a  cloud 
shutting  Him  out  from  view,  Christ 
passed  into  the  inner  and  unseen 
universe  wherein  He  now  dwells." 

III.  The  Ascension  of  our  Lord  was 
a  fitting  and  natural  termination  of 
Christ's  ministry. — "The  departure  of 
the  eternal  King  was  like  His  first 
approach,  a  part  of  a  scheme  which 
forms  one  united  and  harmonious 
whole.  The  Incarnation  and  Ascension 
were  necessarily  related  the  one  to  the 
other." 

IV.  The  Ascension  of  our  Lord  was 
a  necessary  completion  and  finish  to 
His  earthly  work. — "  For  some  reasons 
secret  from  us,  but  hidden  in  the 
awful  depths  of  that  Being  who  is  the 
beginning  and  the  end,  the  source  and 
condition  of  all  created  existence,  the 
return  of  Christ  to  the  bosom  of  the 
Father  was  absolutely  necessary  before 
the  outpouring  of  the  Divine  Spirit  of 
Life  and  Love  could  take  place. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  I. 


V.  The  Ascension  of  our  lord  ren- 
dered Christ  an  ideal  object  of  worship 
for    the    whole    human    race. — The 

Ascension  of  Jesus  Christ  was  ab- 
solutely necessary  to  equip  the  Church 
for  its  universal  mission,  by  with- 
drawing the  bodily  presence  of  Christ 
into  that  unseen  region  which  bears 
no  special  relation  to  any  terrestrial 
locality,  but  is  the  common  destiny, 
the  true  fatherland  of  all  the  sons  of 
God. 

VI.  The  Ascension  of  our  Lord 
glorified  humanity  as  humanity,  and 
ennobled  man  simply  as  man. — "  The 
Ascension  thus  transformed  '  life  by 
adding  a  new  dignity  to  life  and  to 
life's  duties.  From  the  beginning 
Christianity  declared  to  all  the  dignity 
and  glory  of  human  nature  in  itself. 
Much  of  modern  speculation  tends  to 
debase  and  belittle  the  human  body.  .  .  . 
The  doctrine  of  evolution,  to  say  the 
least,  has  not  an  elevating  influence 
upon  the  masses.  .  .  .  The  doctrine  of 
the  Ascension  teaches  men  a  higher  and 
nobler  view."— G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D. 

The  Ascension  of  Christ. — What  it 
meant. 

I.  A  continuation  of  the  redemptive 
work  of  Christ. — Without  it  the  king- 
dom of  God  would  have  been  but  a 
divine  dream.  So  long  as  the  apostles 
were  under  Christ's  visible  guidance 
they  could  not  dissociate  His  kingdom 
from  the  empire  of  physical  conquest 
which  had  so  long  been  the  vision  of 
Jewish  passions  and  prejudices.  "  Not 
until  they  could  no  longer  speak  to 
Christ  face  to  face  did  a  purer  faith 
draw  them  within  the  sweep  of  God's 
redemptive  purpose,  and  open  tbeir  eyes 
to  the  invisible  kingdom  of  truth  and 
justice,  of  love  and  moral  beauty." 

II.  A  revelation  of  the  unity  of 
life. — "  Instead  of  being  a  parting  it 
was  a  drawing  near  of  the  Lord  in  a 
higher  and  mightier  fellowship  with 
man,  in  a  more  fruitful  and  compre- 
hensive relationship."  "  He  was  taken 
from  the  sight  of  His  disciples  that  He 
might  come  into  touch  with  all  the 
springs  of  human  thought  and  action." 


III.  An  enlargement  of  Christ's 
personal  influence. — "  Death  does  not 
change  but  intensifies  human  relation- 
ships. Death  is  the  gate  through 
which  the  soul  of  the  disciple  ascends 
with  Christ  to  larger  life  and  more 
blessed  influences."  "Moses  and  Paul 
are  greater  forces  in  human  society 
now  than  they  ever  dreamed  of  being 
while  in  the  flesh.  The  influence  of 
Calvin  increases  not  only  in  power  but 
in  purity  with  each  succeeding  genera- 
tion." So  with  Christ,  whose  ascension 
was  "  an  uplifting  and  glorifying  of  all 
human  life." — George  D.  Herron,  D.D. 

The  Ascension  of  Jesus. 

I.  The  conclusion  of  the  appearances 
of  the  Risen  One  in  the  past. 

II.  The  counterpart  of  His  future 
return. 

III.  The  point  of  entrance  for  His 
present  sovereignty. — Bomemann. 

Taken  up;  or,  Views  of  the  Ascension. 
Christ  ascended  into  heaven. 

I.  As  a  servant,  to  receive  His  re- 
ward. Having  finished  His  Father's 
work  He  ascended  to  receive  His  stipu- 
lated recompense  (Heb.  xii.  2). 

II.  As  a  Son  into  His  Father's 
bosom.  Out  of  this  having  come,  into 
this  He  delighted  to  return  (John 
xvii.  5). 

III.  As  a  High  Priest,  to  intercede 
for  His  people.  Having  ofTertd  Him- 
self once  for  all  as  a  sacrifice,  He  passed 
into  the  heavens,  there  to  appear  in  the 
presence  of  God  for  them  for  whom  He 
shed  His  blood  (Heb.  ix.  24). 

IV.  As  a  King,  to  sit  upon  His 
throne.  As  appointed  mediator  He  is 
Lord  of  all  (x.  36). 

The  Ascension  of  Christ  a  Necessity. 

I.  Because  the  polluted  earth  was  not 
suited  as  an  abode  for  the  glorified 
Body  of  the  Redeemer. — Heaven  was 
its  appropriate  sphere  of  existence. 
Before  it  could  tabernacle  again  in  this 
world,  the  new  heavens  and  the  new 
earth  must  be  introduced. 

II.  Because  an  essential  part  of  His 
priestly  office  was  to  be  exerciaed  in 

29 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Heaven." — "What  the  high  priest 
did  in  the  earthly  temple  it  was  neces- 
sary for  the  High  Priest  of  our  pro- 
fession to  do  in  the  temple  made  with- 
out hands  in  the  heavens." 

III.  Because  it  was  necessary  that 
redemption  should  not  only  be  acquired 
but  applied. — "  Men  if  left  to  them- 
selves would  have  remained  in  their 
sins,  and  Christ  would  have  died  in 
vain."  To  avert  this  the  Holy  Ghost 
required  to  be  given,  and  heaven  was 
the  place  whence  the  Holy  Spirit 
could  be  outpoured. 

IV.  Because  Heaven  itself  required 
to  be  prepared  for  His  people. — Hence 
Christ  said,  "I  go  to  prepare  a  place 
for  you,"  etc.  (John  xiv.  2,  3). — Charles 
Hodge,  D.D. 

The  Visible  Ascension. 

I.  The  most  befitting,  and  naturally 
to  be  expected  attestation  of  Christ's 
heavenly  origin  (John  hi.  13,  vi.  62, 
xvi.  28). 

II.  The  final  and  most  evident — for 
the  first  witnesses  indispensable — exhi- 
bition of  the  truth  that  the  kingdom 
of  Jesus  should  be  established  by  the 
Spirit  from  heaven. 

III.  The  most  assuring  guarantee  of 
Christ's  heavenly  power. 

IV.  The  strongest  pledge  of  His 
future  visible  return. — Stier. 

Clouds  that  conceal  Christ. 

I.  Clouds  of  vapour  conceal  His 
glorious  form  from  the  eyes  of  sense. 

II.  Clouds  of  ignorance  conceal  His 
image  from  the  eyes  of  the  under- 
standing. 

III.  Clouds  of  unbelief  conceal  His 
grace  from  the  eyes  of  the  heart. 

IV.  Clouds  of  sin  conceal  His  pre- 
sence from  the  eyes  even  of  faith. 

Ver.  11.  Why  stand  we  gazing  into 
heaven  ?     Because  we  see — 

I.  Jesus  crowned  with  glory  and 
honour  (Heb.  ii.  9). 

II.  Humanity  glorified  in  Him 
(Heb.  iv.  15). 

III.  Redemption  fully  completed  by 
Him  (Phil.  ii.  9). 

30 


IV.  The  whole  creation  in  future 
recovered  by  Him  (Rev.  xi.  15). — 
Oosterzee. 

The  Second  Corning  of  Christ. 

I.  Personal. — The  same  Lord  Jesus. 

II.  Visible. — In  like  manner  as  ye 
beheld  Him  going. 

ill.  Glorious. — On  the  clouds  of 
heaven. 

IV.  Certain.  —He  shall  come. 

Vers.  9-11.  Was  Christ's  Ascension  a 
visible   'phenomenon  ? 

I.  Against  this    the  following  con- 
siderations     are     commonly      urged : 
1.  Scientific.      The  idea  of  a  "local" 
heaven    beyond    the    atmospheric    fir- 
mament   and    out   in    the    depths   of 
space  has  been  rendered  inconceivable 
by   modern    astronomy.     But  without 
admitting    that    heaven    cannot    pos- 
sibly be  a  place,  all  that  the  Ascension 
as   narrated   in  Scripture    involves   is 
merely  a  visible  withdrawal  beyond  the 
limits  of  this  sensible  sphere.     2.  Theo- 
logical.    "  The  proper   Christian  faith 
conception  of  the  present  exaltation  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  not  dependent  on  that 
external    ascension  which  is   reported 
in    the    Acts,    the     last    not     being 
for  the  Christian  faith   essential,  and 
fundamental,  while  the  first  is  (Borne- 
niann).       A   statement   such    as   this, 
however,  is  incorrect,  since  without  a 
visible  bodily  ascension,  not  only  would 
the  doctrine  of  Christ's  bodily  resurrec- 
tion  be  insecure,  but  the  doctrine  of 
Christ's   media torsfyip    would     be   im- 
perilled (see  Heb.  ivM4-16).      3.  Criti- 
cal.   (1)  The  account  of  Luke  (xxiv.  20), 
which  seems  to  place  the  Ascension  at 
or  near  Bethany,  fifteen  furlongs  from 
Jerusalem,  whereas  Acts  represents  it 
as  having  occurred  only  five  or  six  fur- 
longs from  the  city.     See  this  difficulty 
met  in  Critical  Remarks  and  Homileti- 
cal  Analysis.     Of  course,  if  the  reading 
which  omits  "  and  was  carried  up  into 
heaven "     be     adopted,    the    difficulty 
vanishes.      (2)  The   representation    in 
Mark   (xvi.    19,  20),  which  places  (or 
appears  to  place)  the  Ascension  imme- 
diately after   the   interview  with   the 


* 

HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  I. 


eleven  as  they  sat  at  meat.     But  not  to  to   heaven  "   (Ebrard,    Gospel  History, 

insist   upon  the  incongruity  of  repre-  §  102). 

senting  Christ  as  vanishing  through  II.  For  this  the  undermentioned 
the  heavens  from  a  dining-room  and  at  arguments  should  be  weighed.  1.  Scien- 
night,  there  is  no  more  necessity  for  tific.  There  can  be  nothing  scientific- 
supposing  that  Christ  immediately  went  ally  impossible  in  the  idea  of  Christ 
forth  from  the  chamber  and  ascended  ascending  into  heaven,  since  Christ's 
than  there  is  for  thinking  that  the  body  had  already  undergone  a  trans- 
apostles  rose  from  their  seats  at  the  formation  of  which  science  can  take  no 
banquet  and  went  forth  to  preach.  cognisance.  2.  Theological.  If  Christ 
(3)  The  silence  of  Matthew  (xxviii.),  actually  rose  from  the  grave  in  a  bodily 
which  at  least  suggests  that  he  did  not  form,  a  visible  departure  from  earth 
know  of  any  such  occurrence  as  Luke  would  seem  to  be  necessary  to  avert  the 
and  Mark  report.  But  Matthew  may  suspicion  that  He  may  again  have  died, 
have  simply  regarded  the  Ascension  as  3.  Critical.  The  concurrent  testimony 
lying  beyond  the  scope  of  his  Gospel  of  the  Gospel  and  Epistle  writers  is  too 
history,  or  may  have  regarded  it  as  strong  to  be  set  aside.  Compare  Mark 
directly  implied  in  the  Saviour's  xvi.  19;  Luke  xxiv.  50,  51;  Eph. 
promise,  "Lo!  I  am  with  you  always,"  iv.  8,  10 ;  1  Tim.  hi.  16;  Heb.  iv.  14, 
etc.,  "since  it  could  not  have  been  vi.  20,  viii.  26,  ix.  12;  1  Peter  i.  22, 
unknown  to  any  Christian  at  that  time,  iii.  22.  (See  Whitelaw's  How  is  the 
that  Christ  was  no  longer  with  His  Divinity  of  Jesus  depicted  ?  Part  iii., 
people  'in  the  flesh,'  but  had  ascended  Chap.  I.) 

HOMILETIC AL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  12—14. 

The  Church  in  Jerusalem  ;  or,  the  Ten  Days  before  Pentecost. 

I.  The  Church's  meeting-place. — An  upper  room  in  Jerusalem.  1.  Humble. 
Not  a  splendid  cathedral  or  ornate  ecclesiastical  edifice ;  but  an  apartment  in  a 
private  house,  in  the  topmost  story  beneath  the  flat  roof.  Compare  the  meeting- 
place  of  the  Christians  at  Tfoas  (xx.  8)  and  Pome  (xxviii.  13  ;  Rom.  xvi.  5). 
2.  Obscure.  Not  a  chamber  connected  with  the  temple,  as  some  suppose,  but 
most  likely  a  room  belonging  to  a  follower  of  the  Pisen  Christ,  perhaps  in  the 
house  of  the  goodman  mentioned  in  Luke  xxii.  11,  or  in  that  of  John  Mark's 
mother  (xii.  12).  3.  Small.  Large  for  a  private  house,  but  in  comparison  with 
the  buildings  afterwards  possessed  by  Christians,  contracted  and  meagre.  Yet 
4.  Sufficient.  Capable  of  holding  the  entire  company  of  Christ's  disciples  in 
Jerusalem  before  Pentecost.  And  5.  Consecrated.  If  the  goodman's  upper 
room,  by  the  Last  Supper  there  held ;  if  Mary's,  by  the  last  interview  of  Christ 
with  the  Twelve  before  His  Ascension  (vers.  4,  13). 

II.  The  Church's  Membership. — 1.  Its  number.  "  About  a  hundred  and 
twenty."  (1)  Pepresenting  the  fruits  of  Christ's  ministry  in  Jerusalem,  not 
throughout  the  country  (see  1  Cor.  xv.  6),  the  five  hundred  Galilean  brethren 
having  not  yet  come  up  to  the  metropolis.  Christ's  ministry,  externally  judged, 
had  not  been  eminently  successful.  (2)  Not  a  large  or  powerful  band  of 
spiritual  soldiers.  Indeed,  in  comparison  with  Christ's  army  of  to-day,  extremely 
diminutive  and  feeble.  Yet  (3)  Christ  was  about  to  employ  them  in  the 
magnificent  task  of  reducing  the  world  into  subjection  to  Himself,  the  weakness 
of  the  weapon  being  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  Almightiness  of  the  Arm 
that  was  to  wield  it  (1  Cor.  i.  27).  2.  Its  composition.  (1)  Men  and  women. 
A  distinct  advance  upon  the  Church  of  the  Old  Testament,  in  which  woman  had 
no  place  as  an  individual,  but  only  in  and  through  and  as  represented  by  the 
male  head  of  the  family  to  which  she  belonged.  The  exceptional  case  of 
Zelophehad's  daughters  (Numb.  xxvi.  6,  7)  proved  the  rule.     But  now  in  Christ 

31 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  aCTS. 


Jesus  there  is  neither  male  nor  female  (Gal.  iii.  28).  In  the  Church  of  the  New 
Testament  woman  finds  a  place  in  her  individual  capacity,  and  enjoys  rights  and 
privileges  equal  with  those  of  her  male  companion.  Nothing  more  characteristic 
of  Christianity  or  more  demonstrative  of  her  heavenly  origin  than  the  change 
she  has  effected  on  the  position  of  woman  both  in  Church  and  State.  (2)  Persons 
of  distinction  and  people  of  no  name.  Individuals  of  repute,  ability,  and 
influence  like  the  Apostles  who  had  been  selected  by  Christ,  and  had  companied 
with  Him  from  the  beginning  (ver.  21)  ;  like  the  Galilean  women  who  had 
followed  Him  with  devotion  and  ministered  to  Him  of  their  substance  (Luke  viii.  3); 
like  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  like  the  brethren  of  our  Lord,  of  whom  one 
(James)  was  soon  to  take  his  place  (if  already  he  had  not  secured  it)  as  president 
of  the  congregation.  Happily,  however,  also  men  and  women  of  no  name  or 
fame,  influence  or  ability,  rank  or  wealth.  Christian  Churches  should  never  be 
of  one  class  ;  but  "  rich  "  and  "  poor,"  "  wise  "  and  "  unwise,"  "  patrician  "  and 
"  plebeian,"  should  meet  together  in  profession  of  a  common  faith,  in  acts  of 
common  worship  and  in  service  of  a  common  Lord.  3.  Its  leaders.  Leadership 
not  incompatible  with  equality.  Never  had  the  Church  such  a  company  of  able 
and  trusted  guides  as  when  it  started  on  its  glorious  career.  (1)  Males,  the 
Apostles.  The  first  three  :  Peter,  the  man  of  rock  (Matt.  xvi.  18;  John  i.  42) 
and  Apostle  of  action  (Matt.  xiv.  28  ;  John,  xviii.  10) ;  John,  the  beloved  disciple 
(John  xxi.  20)ancl  A  postle  of  love  (1  John  iii.  18,  iv.  7);  and  James,  his  elder  brother, 
who  afterwards  suffered  martyrdom  (xii.  2),  perhaps  distinguished  by  courageous 
zeal  (Luke  ix.  54).  The  next  five :  Andrew,  one  of  the  first  to  follow  Christ, 
a  man  of  decision  (John  i.  40) ;  Philip,  whom  Christ  found  in  the  wilderness 
(John  i.  43),  representing  spiritual  aspiration  (John  xiv.  8);  Thomas,  called 
Didymus,  doubtful  and  anxious  (John  xx.  25),  touched  with  melancholy 
(John  xi.  16),  yet  of  ardent  devotion  (John  xx.  28) ;  Bartholomew  or  Nathanael 
(John  i.  45),  the  soul  of  guileless  simplicity  ;  Matthew,  who  left  all  and  followed 
Christ  (Matt.  ix.  9  ;  Luke  v.  28),  the  man  of  whole-hearted  consecration.  The 
last  three :  James,  the  son  of  Alphaaus,  sometimes  called  "  James  the  Less " 
(Mark  xv.  40),  though  "  James  the  Little  "  would  be  better,  of  whose  character 
nothing  is  reported  ;  Simon  Zelotes,  otherwise  named  The  Canaanite  (Matt.  x.  4  ; 
Mark  iii.  18),  or  the  Zealot,  perhaps  noted  for  fervour;  and  Judas,  the  brother 
or  son  of  James,  styled  Lebbseus  (Matt.  x.  2)  and  Thaddasus  (Matt.  iii.  18), 
presumably  from  the  warmth  of  his  disposition,  hence  the  man  of  heart.  Along 
with  these  James,  the  brother  of  our  Lord,  enjoyed  the  reputation  and  held  the 
position  of  a  leader  (xv.  13  ;  Gal.  i.  19).  (2)  Females,  the  women  already 
referred  to,  Mary  Magdalene,  Mary  the  Mother  of  James  and  Joses,  Joanna, 
the  wife  of  Chuza,  Herod's  steward,  Salome,  the  mother  of  John  and  James, 
and  Susanna  (Luke  viii.  1  ;  John  xix.  25),  and  Mary  the  Mother  of  Jesus,  here 
mentioned  for  the  last  time  in  Scripture  and  not  assigned  that  precedence  given 
her  by  the  Church  of  Home. 

III.  The  Church's  disposition. — Unanimous.  Her  members  were  all  of  one 
mind.  The  spirit  of  discord  had  not  yet  revealed  itself  among  them.  Their 
ranks  were  unbroken  .through  either  jealousy  or  rivalry.  2.  Steadfast  They 
persevered  in  maintaining  this  becoming  and  excellent  temper.  Doubtless  it 
had  not  then  been  tried  by  either  prosperity  or  adversity.  Yet  was  it  praiseworthy 
that  they  did  not  themselves  grow  weary  of  the  monotony  of  concord. 

IV.  The  Church's  occupation. — Waiting  for  the  promise.  1.  Praying.  Always 
becoming  on  the  part  of  Christians  (Phil.  iv.  6 ;  1  Thess.  v.  17),  it  was  specially 
suited  to  the  circumstances  of  the  Church  during  the  ten  days  before  Pentecost. 
That  the  chief  theme  of  their  supplications  was  the  heavenly  baptism  for  which 
they  were  looking  need  not  be  doubted.  That,  though  sure  of  it,  they  still 
prayed  for  its  coming,  accorded  with  a  law  of  the  kingdom  (Ezek.  xxxvi.   37; 

32 


HO  MI  LET  1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  I. 


Matt.  xxi.  22  ;  James  i.  5).  That  they  prayed  in  a  social  as  distinguished  from 
a  private  capacity,  was  grounded  on  Christ's  well-known  assurance  (Matt,  xviii.  1 9). 
2.  Working.  The  duty  lying  to  their  hand  they  did.  They  proceeded  to  fill  the 
vacancy  in  the  apostolic  college.  A  hint  to  Christians  to  leave  no  known  duty 
unperformed  while  waiting  for  other  tasks  to  be  enjoined. 

"  Stroug  in  His  faithfulness,  praise  Him  and  sing, 
Then  as  He  beckons  thee, — '  Doe  the  next  thing.' " 

Learn. — 1.  Not  to  suppose  a  splendid,  or  indeed  any,  building  necessary  to 
constitute  a  church.  2.  Not  to  despise  the  clay  of  small  things.  3.  Not  to 
foster  the  class  spirit  in  connection  with  Christian  Churches.  4.  Not  to  resent 
the  leadership  of  those  who  by  superior  ability  or  influence  are  manifestly  called 
to  that  office.  5.  Not  to  mar  by  discord  or  division  the  unity  of  fellowship 
among  believers.  6.  Not  to  think  praying  can  ever  be  out  of  place.  7.  Not  to 
mistake  idleness  for  waiting. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Yer.  13.  The  Upper  Boom. — The 
upper  chamber  still  forms  the  distinctive 
feature  of  a  Syrian  house.  It  is  the 
guest  chamber,  where  the  guest  is 
quartered  outside  the  part  of  the  house 
used  by  the  host  and  his  family  in 
private  life.  The  poor  were  generally 
content  to  leave  their  terraces  un- 
covered, but  the  first  luxury  they 
indulged  in  was  an  upper  chamber. 
The  rich  Shunamite  made  one  for 
Elisha  (2  Kings  iv.  8).  This  was  the 
most  convenient  part  of  the  house, 
because  it  was  large  compared  to  the 


rooms  inside,  and  was  entirely  inde- 
pendent of  the  rest  of  the  building.  It 
served  for  numberless  uses.  There  the 
corpse  was  laid  before  burial  (ix.  37).  It 
was  in  an  upper  chamber  Jesus  met  with 
His  apostles  to  bid  them  farewell,  to  eat 
the  Passover  with  them  for  the  last 
time,  and  to  institute  the  Lord's  Supper. 
The  ordinary  meals  He  no  doubt  took, 
as  they  are  still  taken,  in  the  court 
of  the  house  and  in  public. — Stapfer, 
Palestine  in  the  Time  of  Christ,  p.  178. 

The  Four  Lists  of  the  Apostles. 


Matthew. 

Mark. 

Luke. 

Acts. 

Peter 

Peter 

Peter 

Peter 

Andrew 

James 

Andrew 

John 

James 

John 

James 

James 

John 

Andrew 

John 

Andrew 

Philip 

Philip 

Philip 

Philip 

Bartholomew 

Bartholomew 

Bartholomew 

Thomas 

Thomas 

Matthew 

Matthew 

Bartholomew 

Matthew 

Thomas 

Thomas 

Matthew 

James  (of  Alpheus) 

James  (of  Alpheus) 

James  (of  Alpheus) 

James  (of  Alpheus) 

Thaddeus 

Thaddeus 

Simon  the  Zealot 

Simon  the  Zealot 

Simon  the  Cananean 

Simon  the  Cananeau 

Judas  son  of  James 

Judas  son  of  James 

Judas  Iscariot 

Judas  Iscariot 

Judas  Iscariot 

From  a  comparison  of  these  lists  the 
following  conclusions  may  be  drawn  : 
1.  That  Peter  was  universally  recog- 
nised as  the  leader  of  the  apostolic 
band.  2.  That,  following  him,  Andrew, 
James,  and  John  enjoyed  a  precedence 
over  the  remaining  eight.  3.  That, 
after  these,  the  next  in  rank  was 
Philip,  who  in  all  the  lists  occupies  the 


D 


fifth  place.  4.  That  Bartholomew  was 
another  name  for  Nathanael.  5.  That 
Thomas  and  Matthew,  like  Peter  and 
John,  Philip  and  Bartholomew,  were 
probably  companions.  6.  That  Thad- 
deus and  Judas  were  the  same  indi- 
vidual. 7.  That  Judas  Iscariot  deserved 
the  lowest  place  in  the  apostolic  brother- 
hood. 

33 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Ver,  1 4.   The  Brethren  of  Our  Lord. 

I.  Their  names. — James,  Joses, 
Simon,  and  Juclah  (Matt.  xiii.  55). 
With  the  exception  of  the  first,  all 
ordinary  men,  who  would  probably 
never  have  been  heard  of  but  for  their 
connection  with  Christ.  The  vast 
majority  of  this  world's  population  are 
names,  and  nothing  more  ;  and  even 
of  those  who  emerge  from  obscurity  it 
is  not  always  true  that  they  shine  in 
their  own  lustre.  Reflected  radiance, 
or  renown  at  secondhand,  is  more 
common  than  most  suppose. 

II.  Their  relation  to  Jesus.  —  1. 
According  to  some  His  cousins — i.e., 
the  children  of  Alpheus  and  Mary. 
An  opinion  in  support  of  which  it  is 
usual  to  advert  to:  (1)  the  customary 
practice  among  the  Jews  of  employing 
the  term  "  brother  "  in  a  loose  sense, 
as  equivalent  to  "  near  kinsman  " ; 
(2)  the  circumstance  that  Christ,  when 
dying,  commended  His  mother  to  John 
(xix.  26),  which,  it  is  thought,  He  would 
hardly  have  done  had  she  possessed 
other  children  besides  Himself  ;  (3)  the 
Scripture  statement  that  Alpheus  or 
Cleopas  and  Mary  had  two  sons  named 
James  and  Joses  (Mark  xv.  40),  if  not 
a  third  called  Judas  (i.  13) ;  and  (4)  the 
appearance  of  individuals  bearing  the 
names  of  James,  Simon,  and  Judas  in 
the  circle  of  the  apostles,  who  are  not 
the  brethren  of  our  Lord,  but  the  sons 
of  Alpheus  (Matt.  x.  3 ;  Mark  iii.  8). 
Against  this  opinion,  however,  it  is 
urged,  and  with  force,  (1)  that  they 
are  never  styled  Christ's  cousins,  but 
always  his  brethren — a  fact  remark- 
able, but  not  decisive ;  (2)  that  they 
always  appear  associated  with  the 
mother  of  Jesus,  and  not  with  the 
wife  of  Cleopas;  (3)  that  one  cannot 
be  certain  whether  Mary,  the  mother 
of  James  and  Joses,  was  the  sister  of 
our  Lord's  mother  (see  John  xix.  25)  ; 
and  (4)  that  our  Lord's  brethren  were 
not  even  among  His  disciples  till 
towards  the  close  of  His  ministry 
(John  vii.  5),  whereas  the  two  sons  of 
Alpheus  and  Mary  were  among  the 
apostles  from  the  first.  2.  According 
to  others,   His  half  brothers — i.e.,   the 

34 


sons  of  Joseph  by  a  former  marriage. 
But  this  opinion,  though  not  impro- 
bable, rests  solely  on  the  authority  of 
the  Gospel  of  James.  3.  According  to 
a  third  class  of  interpreters,  His  ivhole 
brothers — i.e.,  children  of  Mary  by  her 
husband  Joseph.  In  favour  of  this 
the  arguments  run — (1)  that  it  is  the 
simplest  and  most  natural  hypothesis  ; 
(2)  that  Our  Lord's  brethren  are 
always  spoken  of  as  brothers,  not  as 
cousins ;  (3)  that  they  are  never  said 
to  be  sons  of  Joseph,  but  always  repre- 
sented as  brethren  of  Jesus;  and  (4) 
that  they  always  appear  to  be  under 
Mary's  care.  (See  White] aw  on  The 
Gospel  of  St.  John,  ii.  12.) 

III.  Their  changed  attitude  towards 
Jesus.  1.  The  nature  of  the  change. 
They  had  become  believers,  which  they 
were  not  prior  to  His  crucifixion. 
Then  they  refused  to  accept  His  Mes- 
sianic pretensions,  though  they  found 
it  impossible  to  deny  His  miracles 
(John  vii.  3).  Now  their  doubt  was 
dispelled  and  their  unbelief  changed 
into  faith.  2.  The  cause  of  the  change. 
This  was  unquestionably  the  fact  of 
Our  Lord's  Resurrection,  and  perhaps 
in  particular  His  manifestation  of 
Himself  to  James  (1  Cor.  xv.   7). 

Vers.  1-14.  The  Ascending  Lord  and 
His  Witnesses. — The  ascension  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  is  the  one  fact  which 
properly  belongs  both  to  the  story  of 
the  Gospels  and  to  the  history  of  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles. 

I.  The  preparation  of  the  witnesses. 
— For  witnesses  must  be  qualified.. 
You  cannot  lay  hands  on  any  man  at 
random,  and  ask  him  to  bear  testimony 
even  to  undisputed  facts.  He  must 
have  seen  the  things  of  which  he 
claims  to  be  the  witness.  And  then 
he  must  be  a  man  of  truthful  spirit. 
These  two  qualifications  for  a  faithful 
witness  Jesus  supplies  in  the  things 
which  He  does  and  says  in  thislast  inter- 
view with  His  disciples.  By  what  He 
did  that  day  before  their  eyes  He  gave 
them  knowledge  of  the  final  fact  which 
was  to  complete  the  circle  of  their 
testimony.       They   had    wept    by    the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  I. 


cross  and  mourned  beside  the  sepulchre. 
They  had  seen  Him,  heard  Him, 
touched  Him  risen  from  the  dead,  and 
had  been  glad  when  they  saw  the  Lord 
again.  And  now  they  are  assembled 
that  the  last  needed  link  in  the  evi- 
dence they  are  to  give  may  be  added  to 
make  the  chain  complete.  But  what 
He  said  was  needful,  too,  that  they 
might  discharge  their  office  rightly. 
Not  merely  must  their  eyes  behold  the 
dying  and  the  rising  of  the  Son  of  man, 
but  it  was  quite  as  essential  that  their 
spiritual  vision  should  be  illumined. 
It  was  for  this  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
was  needed.  His  coming  is  to  com- 
plete what  their  outward  vision  had 
begun.  He  will  teach  all  things,  and 
bring  all  Jesus's  sayings  to  remem- 
brance. He  will  show  things  to  come. 
They  are  to  have  power ;  but  it  shall 
be  power,  not  to  be  warriors,  but  to  be 
J  witnesses.  This  is  the  work  of  His 
disciples  in  every  age.  For  this  cause 
the  Master  came  into  the  world — to 
bear  witness  to  the  truth.  As  the 
Father  sent  Him  into  the  world,  so  He 
sends  us.  As  He  equipped  the  Twelve, 
so  He  furnishes  us  for  the  work.  In- 
stead of  the  vision  of  His  face  we  have 
the  fourfold  Gospel. 

II.  The  limitation  of  the  witnesses. 
— For,  even  u  while  they  beheld,  a 
cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight." 
There  was  clear  vision  for  a  way,  and 
then  an  utter  mystery.  Between  Him 
and  the  eyes  which  gazed  their  love 
into  the  heavens  came  the  intercepting 
cloud.  So  all  our  knowledge  ends  in 
mystery.  Even  where  a  veil  is  not 
hung  to  hide  the  divine  realities  from 
us,  the  shortness  of  our  vision  is  as 
effective  to  conceal  them.  The  strength 
and  power  of  the  witnessing  of  the 
early  disciples  was  in  this  very  thing : 
that  they  testified  with  all  boldness  up 
to  the  limits  of  their  knowledge,  and 
then  relapsed  into  utter  silence.  It 
will  be  well  for  the  later  witnesses  for 
Christ  to  follow  more  nearly  the 
example  of  these  earlier  martyrs.  We 
may  with  all  boldness  declare  the  well- 
attested  facts.  But  do  not  let  us  try 
to   witness   to   the   things   which   are 


beyond  the  cloud,  whether  it  may  have 
been  spread  by  divine  wisdom  or  by 
human  ignorance.  Many  an  earnest 
witness  has  lost  his  power  in  the  world 
because  there  was  no  clear  line  between 
the  things  which  he  has  seen  and 
known  and  the  things  which  he  has 
only  felt  and  fancied.  ISTor  is  it 
necessary,  because  a  cloud  hides  that 
wThich  we  long  to  see,  that  it  should 
cast  a  shadow  upon  us,  or  darken  onr 
horizon.  The  cloud  which  underlies 
the  mysteries  of  heavenly  truth  is  not 
black  with  thunderbolts,  not  scarred 
with  seams  of  lightning,  but  edged  at 
least  with  the  silver  glory  which  it 
hides,  and  only  laden  for  us  with 
showers  of  peace  and  plenty.  For  it 
is  not  the  darkness  which  hides  God 
from  us,  but  the  light  in  which  He 
dwells,  which  no  man  can  approach 
unto,  whom  no  man  hath  seen  nor  can 
see.  This  was  the  cloud  of  the  trans- 
figuration— the  cloud  of  brightness. 
Paul,  telling  the  story  of  his  conversion, 
says,  "  I  could  not  see  for  the  glory  of 
that  light."  Jesus  is  the  brightness  of 
the  Father's  glory  and  the  Light  of  the 
World,  but  it  is  a  light  softened  and 
screened  for  human  eyes  by  the  veil  of 
His  flesh ;  so  that  we  now  can  look 
and  see,  and  look  and  live.  The  cloud 
is  the  condescension  of  divine  love  to 
our  weak  sight.  It  testifies  God's 
grace  equally  with  the  sunshine. 

III.  The  attitude  of  the  witnesses. 
— They  stand  gazing  after  Him  up 
into  heaven — how  long  we  do  not 
know  •  long  enough,  it  is  evident,  to 
lead  to  the  rebuke  and  reassurance 
which  came  to  them  from  the  lips  of 
the  two  angels.  However  full  of  love 
or  faith  their  motive  may  have  been, 
their  posture  was  not  approved.  It  is 
when  they  cease  their  gazing  and 
begin  their  going  that  they  assume 
their  true  relation  to  the  risen  Christ. 
For  the  return  to  Jerusalem  was  their 
first  act  of  obedience  to  Him.  There 
He  had  told  them  to  go,  and  there 
to  wait,  and  there  to  witness  first. 
To  testify  of  Him  first  where  it  is 
hardest  and  most  perilous  to  do 
it ;    back    where    the    people    of    all 

35 


CHAP.  I. 


II0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


tongues  will  gather  soon — they  are  to 
speak  where  their  word  will  reach  the 
greatest  number ;  back  where  He  bids 
them — that  is,  more  than  all  beside, 
that  they  obey  His  last  command.  It 
is  not  by  peering  into  the  mysteries  of 
God's  unrevealed  truth  that  any 
disciple  gains  grace  to  be  a  faithful 
witness.  It  is  far  rather  by  unques- 
tioning obedience  to  His  plain  com- 
mand that  we  shall  come  to  such 
further  light  as  He  may  have  to  give 
us.  They  who  are  actively  engaged  in 
doing  His  will  and  work  shall  be  led  on 
with  surest  step  into  the  mysteries  of 
gcdliness.  They  shall  have  more  to 
witness  who  witness  faithfully  to  what 
they  know,  rather  than  they  who  wait 
and  watch  for  more  to  tell.  JSTor  did 
they  separate  when  the  Master,  who 
had  at  first  drawn  them  together,  had 
left  them.     He  had  appointed  them  a 


common  mission.  There  was  to  come 
on  them  a  common  gift  of  power. 
And  so  they  stayed  together  during 
the  interval  till  it  should  come.  And  as 
it  is  in  the  way  of  obedience  that  we 
learn  the  truth,  it  is  in  the  way  of 
fellowship  that  we  most  often  receive 
the  richest  spiritual  gifts.  If  we  would 
share  the  gifts  which  Jesus  bestows 
upon  His  own,  we  shall  be  wise  to 
keep  with  the  other  disciples.  And 
then,  of  course,  they  prayed  ;  not  of 
necessity  only  for  that  which  He  had 
promised,  and  which  was  to  come  to 
them  so  soon,  but  quite  as  much,  per- 
haps, for  patience  to  wait  for  it,  and 
then  for  grace  to  use  it  for  His  praise. 
Obedience,  fellowship,  and  prayer, 
shall  make  you  strong  to  be  witnesses, 
martyrs  if  needs  be,  unto  Plim. — 
Monday  Club  Sermons. 


I10MILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  15—26. 

Completing  the  Apostleship  ;  or,  the  Election  of  Matthias. 

I.  The  vacancy  in  the  apostolic  college. — 1.  The  honoured  place  of  Judas. 
(1)  Numbered  with  the  apostles  (see  Luke  vi.  16).  Peter  explains  not  the 
motives  (he  could  not)  which  led  Christ,  who  knew  the  traitor  from  the  beginning 
(John  vi.  70),  to  select  him  for  this  signal  favour,  but  dwells  upon  the  fact  that  in 
being  so  selected  he  received  a  mark  of  special  confidence.  Many  besides  Judas 
have  obtained  high  privileges,  and  been  called  to  important  trusts  by  Christ,  who, 
like  him,  have  misapplied  the  one  and  abused  the  other.  (2)  Invested  with  minis- 
terial office.  Generally  like  his  colleagues,  but  particularly  also  by  being  made 
the  treasurer  of  the  company  (Johnxiii.  29).  The  management  of  their  finances 
appears  to  have  been  "  his  portion  in  this  ministry,"  or  the  duty  assigned  to  him 
in  connection  with  the  apostolate.  If  the  Twelve  required  a  treasurer,  it  can- 
not be  sinful  for  churches  and  congregations  either  to  have  secular  affairs  or  to 
depute  persons  to  attend  to  them.  2.  The  melancholy  fall  of  Judas.  (1)  Ten- 
derly referred  to,  not  with  vituperation,  but  in  mildness.  He  was  "  guide  to 
them  that  took  Jesus."  Even  the  worst  sins  of  the  worst  men  should  be  under 
rather  than  over  stated.  (2)  Sufficiently  indicated,  What  Peter  says  implies 
the  rest  of  the  pathetic  story  of  the  betrayal  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  Hence 
he  dilates  not  on  the  sad  theme,  but  leaves  his  hearers'  imaginations  to  call  it  up 
to  their  own  thoughts.  A  lesson  for  preachers,  never  to  enlarge  more  than  they 
can  help  upon  the  backsliding,  of  individual  believers.  (3)  Divinely  foreseen. 
By  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  inspired  David  to  pen  words  and  thoughts  exactly  fitting 
the  traitor's  case,  and  depicting  his  ejection  from  office,  "  Let  his  habitation  be 
made  desolate,  and  let  no  man  dwell  therein  "  (Psalm  lxix.  26),  and  "  His  office  let 
another  take"  (Psalm  cix.  8).  3.  The  appalling  end  of  Judas.  Slain — (1)  In  his 
own  field,  which  he,  or  the  priests  (Matt,  xxvii.  7),  purchased  with  the  blood  money 
received  for  betraying  Christ.  (2)  By  his  own  hand,  it  being  most  likely  that  he 
hanged  himself  on  a  tree  in  his  field,  and  that  the  rope  breaking  he  fell  heavily 
to  the  ground,  with  the  consequence  stated  by  Peter.    (3)  To  his  own  shame,  the 

36 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  i. 


name  given  to  the  field,  "  Aceldama,"  or  "  The  field  of  blood,"  perpetuating  the 
memory  at  once  of  his  wicla  dness  and  of  his  woe.  (For  the  apparent  discrepancy 
between  Matthew's  account  and  Luke's,  see  "  Critical  Remarks.") 

IT.  The  proposal  to  fill  the  vacancy. — 1.  Made  by  Peter.  "  And  in  those  days 
Peter  stood  up,"  etc.  Peter's  forwardness  on  this  occasion  was  completely  in 
harmony  (1)  with  the  place  assigned  him  in  the  lists  of  the  apostles,  (2)  with  his 
ardent  and  impulsive  character,  (3)  with  his  practice  in  pre -crucifixion  days  to 
take  the  lead  among  his  brethren  and  be  their  spokesman,  (4)  with  the  charge 
given  him  by  Christ,  when  once  he  had  been  converted,  to  strengthen  his  brethren 
(Luke  xxii.  32),  and  (5)  with  the  foreshadowings  that  were  beginning  to  appear 
of  that  spiritual  pre-eminence  to  which  he  was  henceforth  to  attain  in  the  New 
Testament  Church.  2.  Defined  by  Peter.  (1)  As  to  the  qualifications  demanded 
of  those  who  should  fill  the  office.  They  must  have  companied  with  the  apostles 
and  been  eyewitnesses  of  the  Lord  Jesus  from  His  baptism  by  John  to  the  day 
of  His  taking  up.  (Compare  1  Cor.  ix.  1.)  (2)  As  to  the  business  to  be  done  by  / 
the  elected  candidate,  "  To  witness,"  with  his  colleagues,  "to  Christ's  resur- 
rection." (Compare  Acts  iv.  33.)  (3)  As  to  the  urgency  for  proceeding  with  the 
election.  "  Of  these  must  one  become  a  witness."  Peter  has  been  accused  of 
precipitation  in  filling  up  the  ranks  of  the  Twelve  ;  but  as  Peter  acted  in  this 
under  the  Holy  Spirit's  guidance,  such  an  indictment  is  inadmissible. 

III.  The  method  of  carrying  out  the  proposal. — 1.  The  nomination  of  candi- 
dates. Joseph,  called  Barsabas,  or  son  of  Sabas,  surnamed  Justus,  and  Matthias. 
Both,  mentioned  only  here,  probably  belonged  to  the  Seventy,  and,  it  may  be  as- 
sumed, possessed  the  requisite  qualifications.  Of  neither  does  historical  infor- 
mation survive.  Eusebius  states,  on  the  authority  of  Papias,  that  the  former 
drank  a  cup  of  poison  without  being  hurt — a  legend  modelled  upon  Mark  xvi.  18. 
The  latter,  according  to  one  tradition,  suffered  martyrdom  in  Ethiopia,  according 
to  another  in  Colchis,  according  to  a  third  in  Judaea,  by  being  stoned.  Justus 
was  a  Roman  cognomen,  "  probably  assumed  according  to  prevalent  custom " 
(Alford).  2.  The  asking  of  divine  direction.  The  prayer  of  the  congregation, 
presumably  led  by  Peter,  was  (1)  directed  to  the  glorified  Christ,  in  the  context 
styled  "  Lord  "  (ver.  21),  (2)  on  the  ground  that  He  knew  the  hearts  of  all  men 
(John  i.  50,  ii.  25,  vi.  64,  xxi.  17),  (3)  requesting  Him  to  show  of  the  two 
candidates  which  He  had  chosen,  since  Christ's  choice  was  indispensable  to  the 
holding  of  apostleship  (John  vi.  70,  xiii.  18,  xv.  16).  3.  The  casting  of  lots. 
"  These  were  probably  tablets  with  the  names  of  the  persons  written  on  them,  and 
shaken  in  a  vessel  or  in  the  lap  of  a  robe  (Prov.  xvi.  33)  ;  he  whose  lot  first 
leaped  out  being  the  person  designated"  (Alford).  This  method  of  ascertaining 
the  divine  decision,  derived  from  the  Old  Testament  ChurcK,~  in  which  "  lot- 
casting  "  was  common  (Lev.  xvi.  8 — over  the  two  goats  on  the  great  day  of  atone- 
ment :  Numb,  xxxiv.  13;  Josh.  xiv.  2,  xviii.  2 — at  the  dividing  of  the  land; 
1  Chron.  xxi  v.  5,  xxv.  8 — in  the  appointment  of  temple  singers),  appears  to  have 
never  again  been  followed  in  the  election  of  office-bearers  in  the  New  Testament 
Church.  Instead  of  lot-casting,  vote-giving  by  show  of  hands  seems  to  have  been 
substituted  (Acts  xiv.  23,  which  see).  4.  The  enrolling  of  the  chosen.  Matthias 
the  elected  was  numbered  with  the  eleven  apostles.  That  he  was  formally 
"  voted  "  in  by  the  suffrages  of  the  congregation,  which  thereby,  as  it  were,  con- 
firmed the  divine  selection,  may  be  suggested  by  the  verb  (Plumptre),  but  hardly 
appears  admissible  in  the  circumstances.  If  the  congregation  added  anything  to 
the  decision  of  lot  it  was  merely  an  intimation  (unanimous  doubtless)  of  its 
acquiescence  in  the  appointment. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  danger  of  falling.  2.  The  heinousness  of  betraying  Christ. 
3.  The  appalling  doom  of  apostates.  4.  The  grand  theme  of  apostolic  preach- 
ing.    5.   The  cessation  of  the  apostolate  in  the  New  Testament  Church. 

37 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  15.  The  first  Christian  Assembly. 

I.  The  ornament  of  Jerusalem. — 
Its  members  more  distinguished  in 
Heaven's  eye  than  Caiaphas,  Annas,  or 
any  other  Jerusalem  dignitary. 

II.  The  glory  of  Christ. — Having 
been  called  into  existence  by  Him. 

III.  The  commencement  of  God's 
kingdom. — The  hundred  and  twenty 
persons  have  since  grown  into  an 
innumerable  company. — Oosterzee. 

Ver.  16.  Old  Testament  Scripture — 
Its  fourfold  relation : 

I.  To  the  Holy  Ghost.— Indicated 
by  the  words  "  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
spake."  Though  perhaps  the  express 
authority  of  the  Holy  Ghost  should  not 
be  claimed — in  this  place,  at  least — for 
more  than  the  two  citations  from  the 
Book  of  Psalms  which  are  given  in 
ver.  20  ;  yet  it  cannot  be  doubted  that 
both  Christ  and  His  apostles  regarded 
the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  Author  of  the 
whole  book  in  such  a  way  and  to  such 
an  extent  as  to  make  Him  responsible 
for  its  contents.  ( See  Matt.  xxii.  31,43; 
Luke  i.  70 ;  Acts  xxviii.  25  ;  2  Tim. 
iii.  1 6 ;  Heb.  i.  1  ;  1  Peter  i.  11; 
2  Peter  i.  21.) 

II.  To  David. — As  representing  its 
writers.  This  pointed  to  by  the  clause 
"spake  by  the  mouth  of  David." 
Although  this  appears  to  guarantee 
that  David  had  a  hand  in  producing 
the  Psalter — an  honour  which  modern 
critics  are  extremely  anxious  to  deny 
him — it  does  not  necessarily  signify 
that  David  (or  the  other  holy  prophets 
and  psalmists)  were  merely  passive  in- 
struments in  the  hand  of  the  Spirit, 
who  mechanically  reproduced  what  the 
Spirit  inbreathed.  All  the  facts  go 
to  show  that,  while  the  writers  of  Old 
Testament  Scripture  maintained  their 
personalities  and  individualities  in  what 
they  spoke  or  penned,  they  were 
nevertheless  in  a  mysterious  (and  pro- 
bably incomprehensible)  manner  super- 
intended and  controlled  by  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

III.  To   Jesus. — A  glimpse  of  this 

38 


looks  out  from  the  words,  "  It  was 
needful  that  the  Scripture  should  be 
fulfilled."  Besides  being  the  sacred 
books  of  His  people,  the  Old  Testament 
Scripture  was  Ifor  Him,  Jesus,  the 
Father's  and  the  Holy  Ghost's  vade 
mecum,  which  they  had  prepared  for 
Him  to  be  used  as  a  light  unto  His 
feet  and  a  lamp  unto  His  path — a  sort 
of  Messianic  programme — when  He 
entered  on  His  public  career.  What 
Old  Testament  Scripture  was  to  Jesus 
the  whole  Bible  should  be  to  His  people 
— a  directory  for  daily  life. 

IV.  To  Judas. — Referred  to  in  the 
words  "concerning  Judas."  That  the 
traitor's  person,  character,  and  trans- 
gression were  outlined  beforehand  in 
Old  Testament  Scripture  neither  com- 
pelled him  to  act  as  He  did  nor  relieved 
him  of  responsibility  for  his  deeds,  any 
more  than  in  ordinary  matters  the 
divine  foreknowledge  destroys  the  in- 
dividual's liberty  of  will. 

Concerning  Judas. 

I.  His  early  fame.  —  "  Numbered 
among  the  apostles." 

II.  His  guilty  fall. — "  Guide  to  them 
that  took  Jesus." 

III.  His  woful  fate.  — Committed 
suicide,  and  went  to  his  own  place. 

Ver.  19.  Aceldama,  the  field  of  blood. 

I.  Purchased  by  the  price  of  blood. — 
Whether  Judas  or  the  chief  priests  were 
the  purchasers  is  immaterial.  The 
money  payment  was  the  thirty  pieces 
of  silver  delivered  to  the  traitor  in 
reward  for  his  iniquity.  The  field  was 
"  the  clay -yard  of  a  potter  of  the  town  " 
(Geikie),  and  to  purchase  this  the  blood 
money  was  devoted,  because  to  cast  it 
into  the  treasury  would  have  been  un- 
lawful. 

II.  Defiled  by  the  stain  of  blood. — 
Somewhere  in  this  clay-yard  the  traitor 
put  an  end  to  his  life  by  hanging. 
"  Nor  was  even  this  the  end,  for  the 
cord  by  which  he  had  suspended  him- 
self gave  way,  and  he  fell  beneath, 
ruptured     and     revolting"     (Geikie). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  I. 


Matthew  agrees  with  Luke  in  reporting 
the  suicide  ;  Luke  differs  from  Matthew 
in  describing  the  rupture. 

III.  Kept  as  a  memorial  of  blood. — 
The  name  could  not  fail  to  preserve  a 
recollection  of  both  of  Judas's  crimes — 
his  infamous  treachery  towards  his 
Master,  .and  his  cowardly  execution  of 
himself.  "The  righteous  shall  be  in 
everlasting  remembrance,  but  the  name 
of  the  wicked  shall  rot." 

'Vers.  17-20.  The  Wages  of  Sin ;  or, 
the  Miserable  End  of  Judas. 

I.  He  ought  to  have  been  a  disciple 
of  Christ,  and  he  betrayed  his  Lord. 

II.  He  ought  to  have  performed  the 
duties  of  his  bishopric,  and  he  acquired 
the  field  of  blood. 

III.  He  ought  to  have  proclaimed 
the  Risen  One,  and  he  perished  as  a 
suicide. 

IV.  He  ought  to  have  received  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  he  went  into  con- 
demnation.— Florey,  in  Lange. 

Ver.  23.  Justus  and  Matthias. 

I.  Justus  the  equal  of  Matthias,  in 
being  :  1.  A  disciple  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  2.  Esteemed  by  his  fellow- 
believers.  3.  Proposed  for  the  apostle- 
ship.  4.  Honoured  with  a  place  in 
sacred  history. 

II.  Matthias  preferred  to  Justus. — 
1.  Elected  to  the  apostleship.  2.  Chosen 
by  Christ.  3.  Numbered  with  the 
Eleven. 

Ver.  24.  Prayer  addressed  to  Christ. 

I.  As  a  personal  divine  Being. — 
"  Thou,  Lord." 

II.  As  a  possessor  of  Omniscience. — 
"  Who  knowest  the  hearts  of  all  men." 

III.  As  the  director  of  His  people. 
— "  Show  us !  " 

IV.  As  the  disposer  of  offices  in  the 
Church. — "  Show  of  these  two  the  one 
whom  Thou  hast  chosen." 

Vers.  16-25.  The  Personal  History  of 
Jesus. 

I.  His  baptism  by  John. 

II.  His  companionship  with  the 
apostles. 


III.  His  betrayal  by  Judas. 

IV.  His  arrestment  by  the  Romans. 
V.  His  death  upon  the  cross. 

VI.  His  resurrection. 
VII.  His    ascension. — In    all    these 
points   Peter   agrees   with  the  Gospel 
writers. 

Ver.  25.  Individual  Destiny. 

I.  Every  man's  destiny  is  prepared 
for  him  beforehand. — As  Daniel  had 
his  lot  (Dan.  xii.  13),  so  had  Judas  his 
own  place.  The  Father's  kingdom  is 
prepared  for  Christ's  people  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world  (Matt.  xxv.  34). 
Paul  speaks  of  vessels  of  wrath  fitted 
unto  destruction,  and  vessels  of  mercy 
prepared  unto  glory  (Rom.  ix.  22,  23). 

II.  Every  man's  destiny  will  cor- 
respond with  the  character  which  he 
possesses. — Like  Judas,  every  man  will 
go  to  his  own  place — he  who  by  patient 
continuance  in  well  doing  has  sought 
for  glory  and  honour  and  incorruption, 
to  eternal  life  ;  he  that  has  obeyed  not 
the  truth,  but  obeyed  unrighteousness, 
to  tribulation  and  anguish  (Pom.  ii. 
7-9).  In  every  case  the  environment 
will  correspond  with  the  life. 

III.  Every  man's  destiny  will  be 
the  outcome  of  his  own  doings. — Each 
individual  on  earth  will  ultimately  be 
what  he  makes  himself.  He  may  per- 
mit himself  to  become  the  victim  of  his 
surroundings,  but  the  fault  will  be  his 
own.  He  may  be  helped  by  divine 
grace,  but  even  divine  grace  does  not 
enable  him  to  dispense  with  personal 
exertion.  The  solemnity  which  this 
gives  to  life  needs  no  remark. 

Natural  Selection  in  the  Spiritual 
World. — The  subject  of  the  text  of 
practical  moment  to  us,  is  one  of  moral 
adjustment,  and  involves  fitness  for  the 
sphere  occupied.  Every  realm  of  crea- 
tion— mind  or  matter,  animate  or  in- 
animate— has  its  order  and  label  because 
of  its  nature,  its  identity,  its  surround- 
ings peculiar  to  itself,  with  relations 
and  dependencies — essential  adjuncts 
of  the  nature  and  surroundings  of  the 
realm.  That  this  principle  may  be 
seen  in  its  tangible  actuality  turn  to 

39 


CHAP.  I. 


1I0MILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


the  pages  of  natural  history,  where  we 
find  represented  the  families,  tribes, 
and  species  of  the  different  continents, 
each  with  its  peculiar  nature  and  the 
environment  contributing  most  to  its 
vigorous  development.  Also  in  logic 
and  psychology,  in  the  sense  of  a 
peculiar  office  or  sphere,  than  "  place  " 
there  is  no  more  pregnant  term  nor 
more  requisite  factor.  It  is  the  third 
foot  of  a  tripod — a  sine  qua  non.  But 
interesting  as  it  may  be  for  us  to  con- 
sider the  import  of  "  place "  in  the 
spheres  of  natural  and  intellectual 
science,  still  greater  is  its  significance 
amid  the  species  and  graduations  of  the 
moral  and  spiritual  world  ;  for  here  the 
term  is  used  not  only  in  mechanical 
arrangement  and  scientific  analysis,  but 
it  has  also  all  the  additional  gravity  of 
the  moral  and  eternal  world,  with  its 
attraction  and  repulsion,  its  reward  and 
retribution. 

I.  The  preservation  intact  of  the 
families,  species,  and  habitat  of  the 
spiritual  world  requires  that  the  mem- 
bers of  each  great  family,  the  redeemed 
and  the  unredeemed,  should  be  assigned 
to  their  fittest  place  or  habitat  for 
eternity.  1.  This  must  be  true  out  of 
respect  for  the  harmony,  purity,  and 
order  of  heaven.  There  is  no  one  in 
the  city  of  God  of  whom  it  could  be 
said  :  "  He  is  a  disturber  of  the  peace, 
a  shame  and  grief  to  his  relatives,  and 
a  disgrace  to  the  avenue  on  which  he 
lives."  Such  a  character  or  species  can- 
not be  permitted  there.  The  order  of 
the  celestial  community  may  not  be  so 
disturbed.  The  role  of  eternal  praise 
and  the  spotaneity  of  the  currents  of 
felicitous  thought  are  inviolable  rights 
which  inhere  in  the  citizenship  of 
heaven.  2.  Not  only  for  order's  sake, 
but  from  moral  considerations  must  he 
go  to  his  "  own  place."  All  the  oppor- 
tunity which  unfathomed  depths  of 
compassion  and  the  sweep  of  mercy's 
unbounded  forecast  could  provide  have 
been  extended.  By  all  the  inducements 
which  life's  opportune  and  sanguine 
day  of  probation  could  proffer,  he  has 
been  overturned.  The  die  is  cast. 
Before  God  and   His   government   he 

40 


stands  unacquitted — a  rebel.  Through 
all  life's  paths  he  has  afforded  the 
material  for  the  record  of  a  rebel — the 
habits  and  the  development  of  a  rebel ; 
the  wishes,  heart,  and  character  of  a 
rebel — against  his  own  soul's  require- 
ments, the  provisions  for  an  eternity  of 
peace  and  the  beneficent  laws  of  God. 
Probation  is  past ;  and  now  to  the  place 
of  what  grade  or  species  of  character 
does  he  belong  ? 

II.  Let  us  now  consider  the  means 
of  reaching  one's  moral  grade,  destina- 
tion, or  "  place "  in  the  spirit  world. 
,  We  need  not  falter  in  the  belief  that 
God,  whose  scrutiny  none  can  evade,  is 
able  by  His  word  directly  to  appoint 
each  to  his  place.  But  in  the  apportion- 
ment to  the  abodes  of  the  righteous 
and  wicked — heaven  and  hell — the 
respective  habitat  of  each  of  the  two 
great  families  under  the  genus  Spirit, 
there  are  certain  natural  forces  or  laws 
of  moral  adjustment  which  may  well 
claim  our  attention.  1.  There  are 
characteristic  functions  of  privilege  or 
duty  in  every  position  of  honour  :  and 
this  is  intuitively  true  of  the  home  of 
the  saints  of  God.  2.  A  second  function 
of  the  life  in  heaven  is  fellowship. 
Now,  if  permitted,  could  the  unre- 
pentant soul  endure  such  association? 
3.  Another  function  of  the  heavenly 
life  is  unveiled  mental  vision  and  un- 
trammeled  mental  freedom.  What 
kind  of  freedom  here  could  the  im- 
penitent soul  enjoy — whose  habits  of 
life  have  drilled  him  in  wrong  methods 
and  whose  sources  of  pleasure  have 
blinded,  deafened,  and  paralysed  his 
conscience  and  spiritual  functions  in 
company  with  the  redeemed  whose 
pinions  never  tire  1  But  another 
mighty  agency  in  moral  adjustment 
and  consequent  assignment  to  "  place  " 
to  which  sinners  are  subject  and  which 
is  a  positive  and  not  a  negative  factor 
in  the  work  of  adjustment  is  natural 
retribution,  one  of  the  forces  of  which 
is  the  reason,  which  now  sees  the  effect 
of  a  wrong  ideal,  a  practical  idolatry, 
selfish  and  gross,  by  which  the  soul 
which  might  have  been  assimilated  into 
the  likeness  of  Christ — the  model   of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  I. 


heaven — has  been  gradually  metamor- 
phosed into  a  type  of  moral  degrada- 
tion. The  conscience  also  presents  its 
unmet  claims,  and  sad  regret  causes 
memory,  as  another  factor  in  natural 
retribution,  to  point  backward  to  days 
of  opportunity,  and  a  con3cientious  re- 
flection iterates : 

"  Of  all  sad  words  of  tongue  or  pen, 
The  saddest  are  these  ;  it  might  have  been." 

4.  But  still  another  force,  which  is 
decisive  in  effecting  God's  own  procla- 
mation of  a  separation  between  the 
redeemed  and  unredeemed,  may  be 
mentioned ;  it  is  the  law  of  sustenta- 
tion.  Just  because  the  ponderous  iron 
mass  or  the  stone  block  should  see  the 
balloon  sustained  in  mid-air,  ascending 
to  the  clouds,  shall  they  say,  "  Oh,  we 
shall  fly  too  "  ?  Never  in  their  present 
gross  form.  Never,  until  by  fiercest 
heat  they  become  sublimated  into 
gaseous  matter.  Never  as  iron  and 
stone  will  they  fly.  So  the  fact  that 
the  inhabitants  of  heaven  can  remain 
there  sustained  and  enjoy  the  fulness 
of  bliss  is  only  by  the  support  and  pro- 
tection of  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  of 
God  ;  and  to  the  sinner  in  "  outer  dark- 
ness "  there  is  no  protection  or  support 
from  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  of  God, 
therefore  he  cannot  remain  in  heaven — 
nor  enter  there.  To  illustrate :  The 
rigor  of  the  frigid  zone  is  so  great  that 
only  such  animals  as  are  provided  to 
endure  its  exposures  can  there  sustain 
life.  The  sloth  and  ant-eater  are 
animals  which  are  not  provided  to 
endure  the  exposures  of  the  frigid  zone  ; 
therefore  they  cannot  there  sustain 
life.     Let  us  now  briefly  notice — 

III.  The  sense  in  which  the  hell  of 
the  hereafter  is  the  unrepentant  sinner's 
"  own  place."  The  adjective  "  own  " 
signifies  a  "  place  "  peculiar  to  himself, 
But  it  is  his  own  also  as  a  member  of 
a  class  or  grade.  Students  belong  to 
a  class,  and  yet  each  holds  his  "  own 
place  "  according  to  his  standing.  So 
you,  if  you  choose  the  way  of  death, 
must  take  your  place  according  to  your 
proficiency  in  the  customs  of  that  dark 
abode,  along  with  adulterers,  the  lust- 


ful, the  hypocrites,  unbelievers,  drunk- 
ards, liars,  and  all  that  is  profane  and 
abominable.  It  is  peculiarly  his  "  own 
place,"  then — 1.  By  course  of  prepara- 
tion, which  course  may  be  termed  the 
conservation  of  energy  in  the  spiritual 
realm — i.e.,  all  the  forces  of  the 
sensibilities,  intellect,  and  will  are 
differentiated  into  a  unit  of  essential 
wickedness.  In  natural  science,  heat 
and  electricity  are  proved  to  be  only 
different  phenomena  of  a  single  force  ; 
so  in  this  course  of  preparation  for  his 
"  own  place,"  the  different  faculties  and 
functions,  conscience,  moral  account- 
ability, etc.,  are  by  the  voluntary 
course  in  sin  transmuted  into  the  dis- 
tinctive features  of  a  unity  and  sub- 
stance of  wickedness.  2.  It  is  peculiarly 
his  "  own  place,"  in  that  it  is  a  greatly 
curtailed  sphere  of  activity.  The  fish 
of  Mammoth  Cave  are  blind — not  by 
accident  nor  special  creation,  but  being 
so  situated  that  the  organs  of  vision 
may  not  be  exercised,  the  energies  or 
life  force  which  would  have  utilised 
these  avenues  of  communication  with 
the  outer  world  were  applied  elsewheie 
and  that  apartment  abandoned,  and 
the  fish  left  blind  in  a  dark  cave  as 
a  consequence  of  the  disuse  of  its  eyes. 
So  the  moral  and  spiritual  faculties  are 
atrophied  and  the  privilege  of  their 
healthful  functions  lost  through  disuse. 
It  is  the  sinners'  own  place,  then, 
because  it  is  the  contracted  and 
degraded  sphere  in  which  he  has  en- 
closed himself. 

IV.  The  eternity  of  this  doom. 
1.  This  doom  is  eternal,  because  it  is 
the  verdict  of  moral  government.  The 
protection  of  the  good  demands  it.  The 
finale  is  pronounced,  and  to  no  higher 
court  can  you  appeal.  2.  It  is  a  self- 
imposed  destiny,  and  never,  until  "  the 
Ethiopian  can  change  his  skin  and  the 
leopard  his  spots"  and  transmute  them- 
selves into  a  different  type  or  species, 
will  there  be  any  commutation  of  the 
sentence.  3.  This  matter  is  eternal 
with  the  lost,  who  abide  in  their  own 
"  place  "  not  only  because  they  have 
cut  themselves  off  from  agencies  and 
appliances  in  the  kingdom  of  grace,  but 

41 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


V 


because  all  the  conditions  are  now 
complied  with  for  growing  worse  and 
worse. — C.  R.  Hunt. 

Vers.  12-26.  The  Waiting  Time. — 
What  were  its  characteristics?    It  was  : 

I.  A  time  of  transition. — "  It  stood 
midway  between  Christ's  work  on  earth 
now  completed  and  the  yet  unopened 
work  of  the  Spirit  from  heaven.  In 
the  history  of  redemption  the  first  or 
preparatory  chapter  closed  on  the  day 
of  the  Incarnation."  The  second, 
"  though  ending  tragically,  in  a  sense 
unknown  to  human  history,  brought 
life  and  immortality  to  light  through 
the  darkness  and  death  of  the  cross." 
The  third  and  last  chapter,  the  dispen- 
sation of  the  Spirit,  was  about  to  open. 

II.  A  time  of  felt  need. — As  yet  the 
eleven  had  no  clear  conception  of  the 
tale  they  were  to  tell,  while  they  could 
not  but  feel  that  they  had  neither  the 
position,  culture,  nor  influence  to  move 
the  world,  and  not  one  ground  to  hope 
for  success  save  in  their  assurance  of 
the  truth  of  their  story  and  the  help 
they  might  receive  from  above  in  the 
telling  of  it. 

III.  A  time  of  expectancy. — How 
often  would  they  recall,  and  find  it 
indispensable  to  recall,  such  words  as 


these,  "  Behold,  I  send  the  promise  of 
My  Father  upon  you  "  ;  "Ye  shall  be 
baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost  not  many 
days  hence." 

IV.  A  time  of  prayer. — "  These  all 
continued  with  one  accord  steadfastly 
in  prayer."  And  who  can  have  any 
doubt  what  would  be  the  burden  of  their 
prayers  1 

V.  A  time  of  fraternal  conference. 
— It  seems  only  reasonable  to  assume 
that  the  intervals  (between  the  prayers) 
would  be  filled  up  by  free  interchange 
of  recollections  and  reflections  on  the 
astonishing  events  and  thrilling  scenes 
in  the  earthly  life  of  their  now  glorified 
Lord  and  the  encouragements  thence 
arising. 

VI.  A  time  of  action. — "  On  one  of 
these  days  Peter — now  fully  restored, 
and,  as  originally  designed,  taking  the 
lead — rose  and  explained  to  the  as- 
sembly why  the  vacancy  amongst  the 
Twelve  which  the  fall  of  Judas  had 
created  required  to  be  filled  up;  and 
having  pointed  out  the  qualifications 
required,  he  left  it  to  themselves  to 
select  one  of  their  number  whom  they 
might  lay  before  their  enthroned  Lord 
for  His  approval."  This  resulted  in 
the  choice  of  Matthias. — David  Brown, 
D.D. 


42 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  n. 


CHAPTER    II. 

The  Church  of  Christ  equipped  for  its  Work — The  Implementing  of  the 

Promise. 

§  1.  The  Baptism  of  Fire ;  or,  the  Descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (vers.  1-4). 

§  2.  Excitement  in  Jerusalem;  or,  what  the  Multitude  thought  of  the  Pheno- 
menon (vers.  5-13). 

§3.  Peter's  Sermon. — 1.  The  First  Christian  Apology;  or,  the  Pentecostal 
Mystery  explained  (vers.  14-21). 

§  4.  Peter's  Sermon. — 2.  The  Mystery  of  Pentecost  traced  up  to  Christ 
(vers.  22-36).  * 

§  5.  The  First  Converts;  or,  the  First  Fruits  of  the  Gospel  Harvest  (vers.  37-41). 

§  6.  The  Pentecostal  Church ;  or,  the  Daily  Life  of  Primitive  Believers 
(vers.  42-47). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Pentecost. — So  called  from  the  date  of  its  occurrence,  the  fiftieth  from  the  second 
day  of  the  Passover.  Fully  come. — Lit.  was  being  fulfilled,  referring  to  the  completion  of 
the  interval  between  the  two  feasts.  If  the  16th  Nisan  was  a  Friday,  the  fiftieth  day 
forward  would  fall  upon  a  Saturday,  or  the  Jewish  Sabbath.  With  one  accord. — ofiodv/jiadbv 
=  d/JLo\pvxus,  with  one  mind.  The  Revised  Text  reads  o/xov,  together,  which  seems  super- 
fluous when  followed  by  tiri  to  avrd,  in  one  or  the  same  place.     (Compare  i.  15.) 

Ver.  2.  A  sound  as  of  shows  that  the  noise  was  not  occasioned  by  the  wind,  but  by  a 
mighty  blowing  which  resembled  the  vehement  rushing  of  air.  In  the  Old  Testament 
(2  Sam.  v.  24),  Josephus  (Ant.,  VII.  iv.  1),  and  Homer  (Od.,  I.  98),  the  noise  of  wind  was  a 
sign  of  the  Divine  Presence.  According  to  Josephus  (  Wars,  VI.  v.  3),  earthquakes  and  super- 
natural sounds  were  heard  in  the  Temple  at  the  feast  of  Pentecost  before  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem. 

Ver.  3.  Cloven  tongues  as  of  fire. —  These,  which  consisted  not  of,  but  merely  resembled 
material  flame,  and  certainly  were  not  electrical  or  light  manifestations  (Penan),  real  or 
pretended,  appeared  to  part  themselves  asunder,  hafxepL^bixevaL,  which  may  signify  either 
that  each  tongue  divided  itself  (Alford)  or  that  the  flame  divided  itself  so  that  the  tongues 
were  distributed  amongst  the  company  (Zockler,  Hackett). 

Ver.  4.  Other  tongues. — In  this  case  foreign  languages,  not  previously  learnt  by  the 
speakers,  which  required  no  interpreter  (ver.  8),  but  were  understood  by  the  hearers. 
Ver.  13  shows  that  they  resembled  the  "  tongues  "  of  the  later  Corinthian  church  by  being 
accompanied  in  their  possessors  with  an  -ecstatic  condition  of  consciousness.  (See  Homily 
on  vers.  1-4.) 

Ver.  5.  Dwelling  at  Jerusalem. — Not  "permanently  residing"  only,  a  sense  the  word 
usually  has  in  Luke's  writings  (Luke  i.  19;  iv.  16,  xiii.  4),  but  also  "  temporarily  sojourn- 
ing," a  meaning  not  excluded  by  the  term,  and  apparently  demanded  by  the  context, 
which  speaks  of  the  multitude  (ver.  6)  as  embracing  "  dwellers  in  Mesopotamia  " — i.e., 
persons  having  their  homes  there,  and  "strangers  of  Rome" — i.e.,  Romans  at  the  time 
sojourning  in  the  city.  Devout  men. — Lit.  cautious,  circumspect,  hence  God-fearing  persons, 
"  men  of  piety  and  weight "  (Alford),  like  Simeon  (Luke  ii.  25),  those  who  buried  Stephen 
(viii.  2),  Cornelius  and  his  servant  (x.  2,  7). 

Ver.  6.  When  this  was  noised  abroad. — Better,  when  this  sound,  occurred,  or  was  heard 
(R.V.).  Not  when  this  report  arose  (Calvin),  or  when  these  tongues  were  listened  to 
(Neander),  but  when  this  sound  (of  the  mighty,  rushing  wind)  was  heard  (Meyer,  Alford, 
Hackett,  Holtzmann.  Zockler,  and  others).  If  the  house  stood  in  one  of  the  thoroughfares 
leading  to  the  Temple  the  sound  may  have  been  audible  all  over  Jerusalem.  Every  man 
...  in  his  own  language — i.e.,  one  apostle  spoke  in  one  language  and  another  in  another. 
By  this  time  the  apostles  and  their  company  had  probably  gone  forth  into  the  streets. 

Ver.  7.  Galileans. — This  constituted  the  marvel,  that  the  speakers  were  all  recognised  as 
natives  of  the  northern  Palestinian  province.  This  suggests  that  only  the  eleven  addressed 
the  multitude,  or — what  is  more  probable— that   the  eleven  being  most  prominent  were 

43 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


regarded  as  leaders  of  the  rest,  and  their  nationality  taken  as  representative  of  the 
nationality  of  their  followers,  the  one  hundred  and  twenty,  who,  however,  were  not  all 
Galileans. 

Vers.  9-11.  Parthians  and  Medes,  etc. — The  catalogue  of  peoples,  fifteen  in  all,  begins  in 
the  north-east  (three),  passes  round  to  the  north  (one)  and  north-west  (five,  or  including 
Judaea,  six),  moves  toward  the  south  (two),  and  closes  in  the  west  (one),  Cretes  and 
Arabians  (two)  being  added  as  an  afterthought.  That  Judaea  should  come  between 
Mesopotamia  and  Cappadocia  has  led  to  the  supposition  that  Idumcea  should  be  read.  But 
the  MSS.  forbid.  The  reason  for  the  mention  of  Judaea  is  obscure.  It  may  have  been 
simply  to  serve  as  a  connecting  link  between  Mesopotamia  and  Cappadocia  (Holtzmann),  or 
in  order  to  complete  the  enumeration  of  languages  (Bengel,  Meyer),  or  for  the  sake  of  Roman 
readers  (Olshausen).  Though  the  dialects  may  have  been  fifteen,  Holtzmann  thinks  the 
actual  tongues  spoken  were  only  three,  or  at  most  four— the  Zend  (Medes  and  Elamites), 
Semitic  (Mesopotamia,  Judaea,  Arabia),  Greek  (Asia  and  Egypt),  Latin  (Rome).  Both  Jews 
and  proselytes  refers  to  persons  from  all  the  preceding  places,  and  not  exclusively  to  the 
Romans  sojourning  at  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  11.  The  wonderful  works  of  God. — Lit.  the  great  tilings  of  God  (magnalia  dei,  Vulgate) 
done  by  Him  through  Christ  for  the  salvation  of  men.     (Compare  Luke  i.  49.) 

Ver.  12.  Amazed  depicts  the  astonishment,  in  doubt  the  perplexity  of  the  multitude. 

Ver.  13.  New  wine.— Lit.  sweet  drink.  A  peculiarly  intoxicating  beverage  made  from  dried 
grapes  by  soaking  them  in  old  wine  and  pressing  them  a  second  time.  "Furrer"  (in 
Schenkel's  Lexicon)  reports  that  a  Jew  in  Hebron  prepared  such  sweet  wine  by  pouring 
water  on  dried  grapes  and  distilling  the  infusion  with  an  addition  of  spice  "  (Riehm's 
Handworterbuch  des  Biblischen  Alter  turns,  art.  Weill). 

Ver.  14.  Men  of  Judaea. — Natives  of  Jerusalem.  Ye  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem. — Foreign 
Jews,  sojourners  in  the  city  from  other  parts. 

Ver.  15.  These. — Not  the  eleven  with  Peter  merely,  but  all  who  had  been  heard  speaking 
(ver.  7).  The  third  hour. — Nine  a.m.  in  our  time ;  the  hour  of  morning  prayer  (Schiirer 
considers  this  doubtful),  before  which  no  respectable  Jew  allowed  himself  to  become 
intoxicated  (Isa.  v.  11). 

Ver.  16.  Through  the  prophet. — Joel  ii.  28-32.  5ih  since  he  was  not  the  author  but  the 
medium  of  the  message. 

Ver.  17.  The  last  days. — The  LXX.  read  fiera  ravra,  after  these  things.  The  Hebrew 
"  afterwards,"  expounded  by  Peter  as  referring  to  Messianic  times.  Saith  God  indicates  the 
source  of  the  prophecy.  Young  men  .  .  .  old  men. — The  order  of  the  clauses  in  Joel  is 
transposed. 

Ver.  20.  That  great  and  notable  day  of  the  Lord. — Notable  =  clear,  far  shining.  (Compare 
Luke  xvii.  21.)  The  Hebrew  prophets  used  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  to  signify  any  remarkable 
interposition  of  Jehovah  for  the  punishment  of  His  enemies  (Isa.  ii.  12;  Jer.  xlvi.  10; 
Zeph.  i.  7).     Joel  used  it  to  describe  the  Messianic  coming,  both  first  and  second. 

Ver.  22.  Mighty  works,  wonders,  and  signs. — Compare  2  Cor.  xii.  12 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  9 ; 
Heb.  ii.  4.  Of  these  terms,  the  first,  dvvdfxeis,  refers  to  the  powers  by  which  Christ's  miracles 
were  performed ;  the  second,  ripara,  to  the  astonishment  they  awakened ;  the  third,  c^eTa, 
to  the  significance  they  possessed. 

Ver.  23.  Counsel  and  foreknowledge  are  distinguished  as  antecedent  and  consequent. 

Ver.  24.  The  pains  of  death. — ras  ufuvas  rod  davdrov.  Quoted  from  the  LXX.  (Psalm 
xviii.  5,  cxvi.  3) — the  Hebrew  having  "  the  cords  of  death." 

Ver.  25.  David  speaketh. — In  Psalm  xvi.  8-11,  which  is  here  ascribed  to  the  sweet  singer  of 
Israel  as  distinguished  from  the  Hebrew  Psalmist  generally  (xiii.  35).  Concerning  Him. — 
Not  merely  words  that  might  be  applied  to  Him — i.e.,  Christ — but  words  that  typically  and 
prophetically  referred  to  Him. 

Ver.  26.  My  tongue  as  in  the  LXX.  instead  of  "my  glory  "  as  in  the  Hebrew.  The  LXX. 
may  have  regarded  man's  faculty  of  speech  as  his  highest  excellence ;  and  Peter,  reflecting  on 
the  miracle  of  Pentecost,  may  have  agreed  with  them. 

Ver.  27.  Hell,  adrjs,  Hades,  the  unseen  world,  the  realm  of  the  dead,  comprising  two 
regions,  Paradise,  the  abode  of  the  blessed  (Luke  xxiii.  43),  and  Gehenna,  the  prison  of  the 
lost  (Matt.  v.  29,  30),  is  here  represented  as  a  rapacious  destroyer. 

Ver.  28.  The  ways  of  life  were  those  which  led  from  the  realm  of  death  to  that  of  life — a 
hint  of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  With  Thy  countenance  signified  not  "  by  "  but  "in 
Thy  presence" — i.e.,  in  heaven. 

Ver.  29.  Let  me  freely  speak. — Better,  it  is  lawful  for  me  to  sjyeak  with  boldness.  David  is 
here  called  patriarch  as  founder  of  the  royal  family.  His  sepulchre  is  with  us.—  On  Mount 
Zion  (1  Kings  ii.  10),  where  most  of  the  kings  of  Judah  were  buried.  Compare  Neh.  iii.  16  ; 
Josephus,  Ant.,  VII.  xv.  3,  XIII.  viii.  4;  Wars,  I.  ii.  5.  "David's  tomb,  on  the  south  tide  of 
Mount  Zion,  is  still  pointed  out  by  the  guides.  The  tomb  is  described  by  one  who  has  seen 
it  as  an  immense  sarcophagus  in  a  room  comparatively  insignificant  in  its  dimensions,  but 

u 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  ii. 


very  gorgeously  furnished  by  the  Moslems,  under  one  of  whose  mosques  it  stands  "  (Lawrence 
Hutton,  in  Harper's  Monthly  Magazine,  March  1895,  p.  549). 

Ver.  30.  A  prophet  was  a  divinely  inspired  person,  hence  one  who  could  predict  future  events. 
The  words,  according  to  the  flesh  He  would  raise  up  Christ,  are  wanting  in  the  best  MSS. 

Ver.  31.  His  soul  is  also  omitted  by  the  best  authorities. 

Ver.  32.  Whereof,  or  of  whom.  In  the  former  case  the  subject  of  witness  is  the  resurrec- 
tion ;  in  the  latter,  the  person  of  Christ. 

Ver.  33.  By  the  right  hand  of  God. — I.e.,  through  His  almighty  power;  compare  v.  31 
(Calvin,  Meyer,  Zockler,  and  others).  The  translation  "at  or  to  the  right  hand  of  God" 
(Neander,  De  Wette,  Bleek,  Hackett,  and  others),  though  admissible,  is  not  so  good. 

Ver.  34.  For  David  is  not  ascended  should  be  did  not  ascend ;  but  he  saith  himself  in 
Psalm  ex.  (1)  which  Christ  ascribes  to  David  (Matt.  xxii.  43 ;  Mark  xii.  36).  The  Lord  said 
unto  my  Lord.  etc. — Thus  distinguishing  between  himself  and  his  Lord,  who  could  be  no 
other  than  the  Messiah. 

Ver.  36.  All  the,  or  every  house  of  Israel  shows  that  Peter's  address  was  directed  exclusively 
to  the  Jews.  Lord  and  Christ.— Compare  Eph.  i.  22:  "Head  over  all "  and  "Head  of  the 
Church."     In  both  passages  the  general  expression  precedes,  the  specific  follows. 

Ver.  37.  What  shall  we  do  ?— As  in  Luke  iii.  10,  12,  14.  The  cry  showed  how  deeply 
Peter's  words  had  penetrated. 

Ver.  38.  Be  baptised. — The  rite  known  to  the  Jews  as  a  means  of  admitting  proselytes  to 
the  Jewish  Church  had  been  practised  by  John  (Matt.  iii.  6)  and  commanded  by  Christ 
(Matt,  xxviii.  19).  In  or  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ. — I.e.,  Not  for  the  sake  of  the  sal- 
vation accomplished  by  Jesus  Christ  (Hofmann),  but  upon  the  ground  of  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ  or  with  confession  of  that  which  this  name  signified  (Zockler,  Holtzmann,  Hackett, 
and  others).  To  the  question,  Why  in  the  Acts  (x.  48,  xix.  5)  baptism  is  never,  as  in  Matt, 
(xxviii.  19),  performed  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 
various  answers  have  been  given.  1.  Baptism  in  the  name  of  any  one  of  the  Persons  of  the 
Trinity  involves  baptism  in  the  names  of  the  other  two.  2.  Luke,  though  employing  the 
shorter,  really  meant  the  longer  formula.  3.  The  longer  formula  was  designed  for  Gentiles 
who  had  never  known  the  Father,  the  shorter  for  converts  from  Jewish  people  or  Jewish 
proselytes.  The  Didache,  or  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  (x.),  seems  to  favour  the  second 
explanation  by  using  as  synonymous  the  two  expressions,  "  baptism  into  the  name  of  the 
Lord  "  (ix.  5)  and  "  baptism  into  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost "  (vii.  1).  For,  or  in  order  to,  et's,  the  remission  of  sins  (compare  Matt.  xxvi.  28,  and 
Luke  iii.  3),  defines  the  negative  aspect  of  the  blessing  which  ensues  upon  a  right  reception  of 
baptism.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (compare  x.  45,  xi.  17)  represents  the  positive  side  of 
the  same  blessing. 

Ver.  39.  Your  children.— "  Little  ones"  rather  than,  though  not  exclusive  of,  posterity  or 
descendants.  All  that  are  afar  off. — Not  remotely  dwelling  Jews  only  (Bengel,  Meyer, 
Wendt,  Holtzmann),  but  Gentiles  as  well  (Calvin,  Neander,  Lange,  Zockler,  Hackett).  Shall 
call,  sc.  unto  Him  ;  so  preserving  the  force  of  the  preposition  irpbs. 

Ver.  41.  Were  baptised. — How?  By  immersion?  or  by  sprinkling  or  pouring?  The 
Didaehe,  vii.  2,  3  seems  to  suggest  that  both  methods  may  have  been  employed.  See  further 
on  this  under  "  Hints  and  Suggestions." 

Ver.  42.  They  continued  steadfastly. — Lit.  constantly  applying  themselves  unto,  or  being 
engaged  in.  A  term  characteristic  of  Luke  (see  ii.  46,  vi.  4,  viii.  13,  x.  7).  The  apostles' 
doctrine — I.e.,  listening  to  and  applying  to  themselves  the  teaching  of  the  Twelve.  From 
this  expression,  rfj  didaxv  T&v  aw oar oKwv,  the  title  of  Didaehe  seems  to  have  been  borrowed. 
(Compare  Wohlenberg,  Die  Lthre  der  Zwolf  Apostel,  s.  49).  And  fellowship. — Bather,  and  in 
fellowship,  but  whether:  (1)  unity  of  spirit  and  brotherly  intercourse  with  one  another 
(Gal.  ii.  9),  or  (2)  in  acts  of  sacramental  communion,  or  (3)  in  communication — i.e.,  dis- 
tribution of  money  (Bom.  xv.  26)  is  disputed.  The  second  sense  is  excluded  by  the  fact 
that  "  fellowship"  was  not  used  to  mean  communion  in  the  Lord's  Supper  before  the  fourth 
century.  The  third,  though  supported  by  eminent  authorities  (Olshausen,  Bengel,  Zockler, 
Hackett,  Spence,  and  others),  does  not  appear  so  good  as  the  first  (Meyer,  Holtzmann,  Alford, 
Lechler,  and  others).  Breaking  of  bread  meant  the  Lord's  Supper,  as  in  Luke  xxii.  12  ; 
xx.  7-11 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  23.     Prayers  were  public  and  private  devotions  (iii.  1,  iv.  24). 

Ver.  44.  All  things  common. — This  pointed  not  merely  to  an  exuberant  and  spontaneous 
liberality  (De  Wette,  Neander,  Bengel),  but  to  an  actual  community  of  goods — which, 
however,  was  not  legally  instituted,  but  voluntarily  practised.  See  iv.  32  ff.,  v.  1.  "A  sort 
of  community  of  goods  appears  already  to  have  existed  in  the  lifetime  of  Christ.  See 
Luke  viii.  3 ;  John  xii.  6,  xiii.  29  "  (Holtzmann). 

Ver.  46.  From  house  to  house,  though  not  inadmissible  (Titus  i.  5 ;  compare  kclt  o'ikovs, 
xx.  20,  and  Kara  ttoKlv,  Luke  viii.  1),  should  perhaps  be  rendered  "  at  home "  (Phil.  2), 
as  distinguished  from  "  in  the  temple.  Possibly  both  ideas  should  be  included,  as  the 
number  of  believers  was  already  too  large  to  find  accommodation  in  one  house. 

45 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Ver.  47.  Added  to  the  Church  should  be  added,  the  words  "  to  the  Church  "  being  omitted 
in  the  best  MSS.,  and  "together,"  iwi  rb  avrb,  found  in  its  stead.  Such  as  should  be  saved. — 
Eather,  such  as  are  being  saved.  The  present  participle  denoting  a  process  rather  than  a 
completed  fact.  "  The  Greek  should  have  been  roi)s  aecrwafxeuovs,  to  signify  that  they  had 
already  secured  their  salvation ;  and  roi)s  aud-qcrofxtvovs  to  signify  that  they  were  certain  of  its 
completion  "  (Hackett). 

HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—4. 

The  Baptism  of  Fire  ;  or,  the  Descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I.  When  it  happened. — 1.  When  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come. — 
Literally,  when  it  was  being  fulfilled ;  which  has  led  to  the  idea  that  the  time 
referred  to  was  the  evening  with  which  Pentecost  closed,  but  the  notion  rather 
is  that  the  interval  which  lay  between  the  Passover  and  the  Pentecost  was  then 
filled  up.  Pentecost,  as  its  name  implied,  was  the  feast  of  the  fiftieth  day,  and 
was  celebrated  seven  weeks  after  the  Passover.  The  suitability  of  this  feast  for 
the  implementing  of  the  Father's  promise  lay  in  three  things :  1 .  Its  nearness. 
The  next  national  festival  after  the  Passover  it  fitted  admirably  to  the  words  of 
the  promise — "  Ye  shall  be  baptised  .  .  .  not  many  days  hence."  Had  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  been  deferred  till  Tabernacles  in  October,  the  interval 
would  have  been  long,  and  the  Church's  faith  and  patience  might  have  been 
overstrained.  But  the  sending  of  the  Spirit  at  Pentecost,  not  more  than  ten 
days  after  the  Ascension,  averted  this  danger,  and,  as  it  were,  caught  up  the 
hearts  of  Christ's  followers,  when  their  enthusiasm  stood  at  its  height.  The 
Lord  of  the  Church  knows  the  best  times  for  His  movements,  and  can  so  order 
the  gifts  of  His  grace  as  not  to  overstrain  the  patience,  overtax  the  faith,  or  over 
discourage  the  zeal  of  His  people,  but  rather  to  reward  their  patience,  increase 
their  faith,  and  fan  their  zeal  into  a  flame.  2.  Its  popularity.  At  no  other 
religious  celebration  did  such  numbers  flock  to  Jerusalem  as  at  Pentecost,  the 
early  spring  (the  time  of  the  Passover)  and  the  late  autumn  (the  date  of  Taber- 
nacles) being  less  suitable  for  travellers  from  distant  parts.  If,  therefore,  the 
high  endowment  of  the  Holy  Ghost  or  the  miraculous  phenomenon  by  which  it 
was  heralded  and  symbolised  were  to  efficiently  impress  the  world  it  was  needful 
that  the  number  of  those  witnessing  it  should  be  as  large  as  possible.  The 
Gospel  of  Christ,  doing  nothing  in  a  corner,  has  no  need  to  shun  the  light.  It 
invites  and  will  bear  the  closest  observation  and  the  keenest  scrutiny.  3.  Its 
significance.  (1)  As  the  great  harvest  festival  of  the  Hebrew  Church  (Exod. 
xxiii.  16),  it  was  a  fitting  time  for  the  first  ingathering  of  souls  into  the  Chris- 
tian Church.  (2)  As  the  feast  of  the  firstfruits  in  which  two  wave  loaves  of  fine 
flour,  baked  with  leaven,  were  presented  to  the  Lord  (Lev.  xxiii.  17),  it  supplied 
a  proper  season  for  the  presentation  to  Jehovah  of  the  firstfruits  of  redeemed 
souls  in  the  persons  of  the  Jewish  disciples  and  the  Gentile  converts  which  were 
to  be  gathered  in  as  the  result  of  the  Pentecostal  effusion.  (3)  As  a  feast  at 
which  sacrifices  of  all  kinds  were  offered  (Lev.  xvii.  20),  it  formed  a  suitable 
occasion  for  the  dispensation  of  that  Spirit  which  was  to  bring  about  the  entire 
consecration  of  believers  to  God.  (4)  As  a  feast  in  which  remembrance  was 
made  of  the  Egyptian  bondage  (Deut.  xvi.  12)  and  of  the  Exodus  from  Egypt, 
it  served  as  a  fit  moment  for  endowing  the  Church  with  that  spirit  which 
is  pre-eminently  styled  the  spirit  of  liberty  (2  Cor.  iii.  17).  2.  When  all  the 
disciples  vjere  together  in  one  place.  That  this  place  was  the  upper  room  already 
referred  to  in  i.  3  (which  see) — and  not,  as  many  excellent  expositors  prefer, 
one  of  the  chambers  belonging  to  the  temple — is  upon  the  whole  the  likelier 
hypothesis ;  and  that  on  this  occasion  the  entire  body  of  the  disciples,  one 
hundred  and  twenty  in  number,  and  not  merely  the  twelve  apostles,  were  con- 
vened, is  sufficiently  apparent  from  the  context.     Nor  is  it  without  suggestiveness 

46 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  ii. 


that  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  on  them  when  all  were  present  in  their  usual 
place  of   assembly.      Does  this  not  afford  some  reason  for  believing  that  the 
heavenly  gift  would  have  been  withheld  or  at  least  delayed  had  any  of  the 
company  been  absent  1     If  so,  how  many  blessings,  it  may  be  asked,  what  out- 
pourings of  the  Spirit,  what  times  of  revival  and  refreshing,  may  Churches  and 
congregations  not  miss  because  of  the  irregularity  with  which  their  members  come 
together  1     It  is  a  signal  error  to  suppose  that  absence  from  Church  on  the  part 
of  a  professed  Christian  inflicts  no  injury  or  loss  on  his  fellow-Christians  who 
repair  thither.     May  not  the  absence  of  the  one  seriously  diminish,  if  not  effec- 
tually hinder,   the  blessing  of   the   many?     Then   quite   as   inaccurate   is  the 
reasoning  that  one  may  derive  as  large  benefit  at  home  from  private  meditation 
as  in  the  Church  from  social  devotion.     The  blessing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  should 
be  observed,  was  dispensed  in  the  public  assembly  and  not  in  the  private  chamber 
— was  given  to  the  disciples  when  together  and  not  when  isolated  one  from 
another.     3.    When  all  the  brethren  were  of  one  mind.     The  words  "  with  one 
accord,"  though  omitted  in  the  R.V.,  are  better  than  the  adverb  "  together," 
which  is  substituted  in  their  stead,  but  which  is  almost  synonymous  with  "  in 
one  place,"  and  therefore  superfluous.      In  any  case  "with  one  accord"  ex- 
presses the  inward  disposition  of  the  disciples  on  that  eventful  morning  when 
the  Holy  Ghost  for  the  first  time  fell  upon  them.     Had  they  been  otherwise — 
disunited  in  heart  and  mind,  torn  with  jealousies  and  rivalries,  broken  up  into 
hostile  factions  or  unfriendly  cliques — does   any  one    believe  the    Spirit  would 
have  fallen  on  them — that  Spirit,  who,  if  anything,  is  a  Spirit  of  concord  and 
unity  (Eph.   iv.  |3)  ?      What  a  rebuke  to  the  Church  of  to-day,  which  is  not 
only  marred  by  divisions  and  separations,  but  too  often  also  actuated  by  mutual 
antipathies,  cut  up  into  sects  and  animated  by  a  spirit  of  proselytism  rather  than 
of  co-operation,  a  spirit  of  reciprocal  opposition  rather  than  of  mutual  affection  ! 
And  what  an  explanation  of  the  comparatively  slow  progress  of  the  Church  in 
past  ages,  as  well  as  of  its  spiritual  deadness  at  the  present  time  !    If  the  Church 
is  to  awake  from  her  lethargy  and  clothe  herself  with  energy,  if  she  is  to  shake 
herself  from  the  dust  and  put  on  her  beautiful  garments,  she  must  receive  a 
fresh  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  before  that  can  take  place  there  must  be 
a  laying  aside  of  hostilities  and  a  cessation  of  animosities  on  the  part  of  rival 
denominations  and  congregations,  there  must  be  a  healing  of  breaches  in  the 
walls  of  God's  Spiritual  Zion,  there  must  be  a  gathering  into  one  of  the  tribes  of 
the  New  Testament  Israel. 

II.  How  it  was  accompanied. — 1.  By  a  mysterious  sound.  (1)  Sudden.  At  a 
moment  when  it  was  not  expected  there  was  heard  from  heaven  a  noise.  Divine 
movements  are  mostly  of  this  character.  It  is  not  possible  for  us  to  discern 
beforehand  the  noise  of  Jehovah's  footsteps  (Psalm  lxxvii.  19),  though  it  is  by  no 
means  impossible  for  Him  to  detect  ours  (Psalm  cxxxix.  1-5).  God's  interpositions 
in  the  original  work  of  creation  partook  of  this  character  (Gen.  i.  3,  9,  11, 
14,  20,  24).  So  did  they  in  His  providential  judgments,  as,  e.g.,  the  Deluge  and  the 
destruction  of  Sodom  (Matt.  xxiv.  39  ;  Luke  xvii.  26,  28).  So  were  they  of  this 
sort  when  Christ  came  in  the  flesh  (Luke  ii.  3-14).  So  will  they  be  when  He 
returns  in  glory  (Mark  xiii.  35,  36).  (2)  Violent.  Strong  and  impetuous,  like 
a  current  of  air  rushing  vehemently  in  upon  and  roaring  through  the  chamber, 
like  the  trumpet  sound  which  was  heard  at  Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  19 ;  Heb.  xii.  19), 
or  like  the  "  great  and  strong  wind "  that  rent  the  mountains  of  Horeb 
(1  Kings  xix.  11).  (3)  All  pervading.  Filling  the  chamber  in  which  the 
disciples  sat,  it  left  no  part  untouched  by  its  mysterious  breath.  All  within  the 
room  could  hear  the  strange,  weird  sound.  (4)  Supernatural.  This  must  have 
been  apparent  to  all.  The  sound  was  not  produced  by  ordinary  physical  causes. 
All  attempts  to  explain  it  as  a  natural  phenomenon,  whether  as  thunder  or  as 

47 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


an  earthquake,  signally  fail.  It  came  from  heaven,  caused  directly  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  whose  breathing  it  was  (John  xx.  22).  2.  By  an  unusual  siyht.  There 
appeared  unto  the  disciples  "cloven  tongues  "  or  "  tongues  parted  asunder  like 
as  of  fire."  Like  the  wind  these  tongues  were  also:  (1)  Supernatural.  "  Elec- 
trical phenomena,  such  as  the  gleaming  lights  sometimes  seen  on  the  highest 
points  of  steeples  or  on  the  masts  of  vessels,  and  which  have  been  known  even 
to  alight  on  men,  bear  a  very  faint  resemblance,  if  any,  to  those  wondrous 
tongues  of  fire  "  (Spence).  Besides,  "  this  phenomenon  took  place  not  in  the  open 
air,  but  in  the  inside  of  a  house  "  (Lechler).  Then,  if  possible,  even  less  admissible 
is  the  notion  of  a  Hash  of  lightning  which  sat  simultaneously  on  one  hundred  and 
twenty  heads  without  doing  injury  to  one  of  them,  which  would  have  been  a 
miracle  as  great  as  that  for  which  it  is  proposed  to  be  substituted.  "But  indeed 
the  expression  "  tongues  as  of  fire  "  demands  that  the  words  be  taken  in  their 
literal  signification  "  (Zeller).  Whether  the  tongues  were  also  (2)  cloven — i.e., 
divided,  or  parting  asunder,  as  a  flame  occasionally  does,  is  doubtful.  Though 
the  word  admit  of  this  interpretation,  it  is  better  taken  to  mean  dividing 
themselves,  so  that  the  tongues  were  (3)  distributed — i.e.,  parted  amongst  the 
company,  one  resting  upon  the  head  of  each.  In  this  way  they  became  (4)  visible 
to  all  within  the  chamber,  each  seeing  the  tongues  resting  on  his  neighbours' 
heads,  but  not  that  sitting  on  own.  A  happy  hint  that  each  Christian  should 
be  quick  to  discern  the  gifts  of  his  fellow-Christians — which  is  charity,  and  slow 
to  recognise  those  belonging  to  himself — which  is  humility.  Finally,  the  tongues, 
again  resembling  the  wind,  were  (5)  symbolic.  Of  the  effect  which  should  result 
from  the  baptism  about  to  be  experienced ;  of  the  exalted  and  consecrated  speech 
which  would  thereby  be  set  in  motion  ;  and  of  the  illumination  which  thereby 
would  come  to  others.  3.  By  a  peculiar  touch.  The  distributed  fiery  tongues 
sat  one  upon  each  man's  head.  As  the  tongues  only  resembled  fire,  so  their 
contact  with  the  heads  of  the  disciples  differed  from  that  of  ordinary  flame, 
which  would  have  scorched  the  disciples'  heads,  whereas  they  were  quite  uncon- 
scious of  burning.  The  touch  of  the  tongues  was  like  the  touch  of  Christ  when 
He  healed  men's  bodies ;  it  was  the  touch  by  which  He  influenced  souls. 

III.  By  what  it  was  followed. — 1.  The  disciples  ivere  all  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  (1)  The  Holy  Ghost  now  came  upon  them  in  the  fulness  of  His  saving 
operations  as  He  had  not  done  before  (John  vii.  39).  Prior  to  the  Ascension 
Christ  had  breathed  on  them,  and  said  "  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost  "  (John  xx. 
22) ;  not  until  now  had  the  Holy  Ghost  been  imparted  to  them  in  the  plenitude 
of  His  gracious  influences.  (2)  They  were  taken  possession  of  by  the  new 
endowment  in  all  departments  of  their  being,  so  that  they  were  filled  with  it. 
(3)  This  inhabitation  of  their  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  was  to  be  permanent. 
Under  the  Old  Testament  the  Spirit  had  descended  upon  men  at  special  times 
and  for  special  purposes,  as  upon  Bezaleel  (Exod.  xxxi.  3)  and  Joshua  (Deut. 
xxxiv.  9),  to  impart  to  them  wisdom.  Now  He  entered  the  disciples'  hearts  to 
abide  with  them  for  ever  (John  xiv.  16).  And  this  stupendous  endowment  was 
not  conferred  on  the  apostles  only  but  upon  the  brethren  as  well,  and  not  upon 
the  leaders  of  the  Church  merely  but  upon  the  followers  likewise  ;  nor  upon  the 
eminent  personages  alone  but  also  upon  the  hnmble  and  obscure  individuals. 
2.  They  all  began  to  speak  with  tongues.  That  those  tongues  were  something 
higher  than  and  beyond  those  conferred  on  the  churches  at  Corinth  (1  Cor. 
xiv.  2-33),  may  be  inferred  from  the  circumstance  mentioned  in  vers.  6  and  8, 
that  the  multitude  who  lis-ened  to  the  inspired  utterances  of  the  apostles  and 
brethren  "were  confoui.de  1  because  that  every  man  heard  them  speaking  in  his 
own  language."  The  Corinthian  tongues  were  unintelligible  to  those  who  heard 
them,  and  to  be  of  service  for  public  edification  required  interpretation ;  at 
Pentecost  the  tongues  needed  no  exposition  by  a  third  party.      The  listeners 

48 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  ii. 


"  heard  every  man  in  his  own  language  wherein  he  was  born."  Yet,  like  the 
tongues  at  Corinth,  those  of  Pentecost  were  not  required  for  edification,  which 
was  principally  secured  by  Peter's  sermon ;  and  were  accompanied  by  a  kind  of 
ecstatic  utterance  which  led  some  at  least  of  the  auditors  to  think  and  say  the 
speakers  were  intoxicated,  as  Paul  afterwards  suggested  some  hearing  the 
Corinthians  talk  with  tongues  might  allege  they  were  mad  (1  Cor.  xiv.  23).  As 
to  what  these  Jerusalem  "  tongues  "  were,  the  traditional  opinion  which  sees  in 
them  foreign  languages  which  the  apostles  and  their  company  were  enabled  to 
speak,  though  not  without  difficulty,  is  probably  correct.  Nor  does  it  militate 
against  this  idea  that  such  foreign  languages  were  not  necessary  to  qualify  the 
apostles  for  preaching  to  the  multitudes  at  Pentecost,  since  the  majority,  if  not 
all,  of  these  would  be  able  to  understand  either  Greek  or  Aramaic,  or  both,  and 
that  the  apostles  do  not  appear  afterwards  to  have  used  these  new  dialects 
(compare  Paul  at  Lycaonia,  xiv.  14)  in  addressing  themselves  to  foreigners. 
The  answer  to  both  objections  is,  that  the  Pentecostal  tongues  may  not  have  been 
intended  to  be  permanent  but  only  temporary,  as  a  sign  to  arrest  the  attention 
of  the  multitude  and  accredit  the  apostles  as  heaven-sent  ambassadors.  All 
attempts  to  discover  other  explanations  of  the  tongues  than  the  natural  one  lie 
open  to  as  great,  if  not  greater,  difficulties  than  those  they  are  devised  to 
surmount.  The  fancy  that  the  apostles  spoke  an  original  elementary  "  tongue 
of  the  Spirit,"  which  every  listener  in  the  crowd  heard  as  if  it  were  his  own 
mother  tongue  (Erasmus,  Meyer,  Delitzsch,  etc.),  only  adds  a  miracle  of  hearing  to 
the  existing  one  of  speaking.  That  the  tongues  were  merely  ecstatic  utterances 
which  acted  on  the  hearers  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  them  think  they  were 
being  addressed  in  their  native  languages  (Beyschlag)  is  to  put  a  construction  on 
the  narrative  which  it  will  not  bear.  The  hearers  did  not  think,  but  knew  they 
were  listening  to  their  mother  tongues.  Besides,  the  tongues  were  spoken  before 
the  multitudes  were  present  to  hear.  Then  the  notion  that  the  assembly  of 
believers  was  composed  of  Jews  of  various  nations  who  spoke  as  the  Spirit 
moved  them,  but  in  their  ordinary  speech  (Paulus,  Kuinoel,  etc.),  is  expressly 
contradicted  by  the  narrative  which  affirms  that  the  one  hundred  and  twenty  were 
all,  or  at  least  mostly,  Galikeans.  The  solution  which  detects  in  the  narrative 
only  a  legendary  or  mythical  reproduction  of  the  Rabbinical  fable,  that  the  law 
was  given  from  Sinai  in  a  tongue  which  was  intelligible  to  the  seventy  different 
peoples  of  the  Table  of  Nations  (Over beck,  Hausrath,  etc.)  is  completely  to 
destroy  the  credibility  of  the  historian. 

IV.  What  it  signified. — 1 .  It  attested  the  reality  of  Christ's  ascension  (see  ver. 
33).  Before  His  death  Christ  had  promised  on  returning  to  His  Father  to  send 
forth  the  Spirit  (John  xvi.  7).  Forty  days  after  His  resurrection  they  had  seen 
Him  ascend  through  the  opened  heavens  (i.  10).  The  descent  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  after  ten  days'  waiting  was  the  intimation  to  them  that  Christ  had  been 
exalted  to  the  Father's  right  hand.  2.  It  gave  the  signal  for  commencing  the 
work  of  witness  bearing,  for  which  they  had  been  selected  and  appointed,  while 
it  was  natural  for  the  apostles  and  their  company  to  suppose  that  immediately 
on  Christ's  departure  they  should  begin  the  glorious  business  of  publishing  the 
good  news  of  a  crucified,  risen  and  exalted  Saviour.  Christ  Himself  commanded 
them  not  to  start  upon  their  mission  until  they  got  the  signal  from  the  Father, 
who  alone  understood  the  times  and  seasons  (i.  7).  That  signal  they  recog- 
nised when  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  on  them.  3.  It  equipped  the  apostles 
and  first  believers  for  their  service.  The  task  committed  to  them  was  one  that 
immeasurably  transcended  their  native  ability.  Power  from  on  high  was  abso- 
lutely indispensable  for  its  efficient  discharge.  That  power  was  to  be  supplied  by 
a  special  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (i.  8) ;  and  now  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
had  come  they  were  prepared  (1  Cor.  ii.  4  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  5). 

e  49 


CHAP.  II. 


1I0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Learn. — 1.  The  faithfulness  of  the  Father  in  implementing  His  promise 
(Titus  i.  2  ;  Heb.  vi.  18).  2.  The  blessedness  of  those  who  humbly  and  prayer- 
fully wait  on  God  (Isa.  xl.  31  ;  Heb.  vi.  15).  3.  The  reality  of  superterrestrial 
things  (2  Cor.  iv.  18).  4.  The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  shown  in  the  gift  of 
tongues  (2  Peter  i.  21).  5.  The  mission  of  the  Christian  Church — to  utter  what 
the  Holy  Ghost  teaches  (1  Cor.  ii.  13).  6.  The  diversities  of  gift  and  service  in 
the  Christian  Church  ;  all  had  not  the  same  tongue,  but  each  as  the  Spirit  gave 
him  utterance  (1  Cor.  xii.  4). 


HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  1.  The  Feast  of  the  Fulfilment. 
— On  this  day  (Pentecost)  was  ful- 
filled :— 

I.  The  most  beautiful  anticipation 
of  antiquity. — The  hope  that  not  only 
an  atonement  would  be  made  to 
Jehovah  for  the  sins  of  the  people, 
but  also  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit 
should  be  given  them. 

II.  The  deepest  want  of  humanity. 
— Fellowship  with  God  now  for  the 
first  time  rendered  possible  by  the  recon- 
ciliation effected  through  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ,  and  the  renovation  accom- 
plished by  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit. 

III.  The  highest  manifestation  of 
Divinity. — All  that  went  before,  even 
the  gift  of  the  Son,  being  designed  as 
a  preparation  for  the  dispensation  of 
the  Spirit. — Oosterzeu 

Ver.  3.  Tongues  of  Fire. 

I.  Whence  they  come. — From  heaven, 
from  the  Father,  from  the  glorified 
Christ — i.e.,  they  are  gifts  of  grace 
bestowed  in  fulfilment  of  God's  promise, 
and  on  account  of  the  merit  of  Christ. 

II.  On  whom  they  are  bestowed. 
— On  praying,  waiting,  and  united 
believers  ;  on  souls  possessed  of  faith, 
hope,  love,  and  longing. 

III.  How  they  are  fed. — By  the 
Holy  Ghost,  Avhose  creation  they  are, 
for  whose  manifestation  they  serve, 
and  under  whose  control  they  perpetu- 
ally remain. 

IV.  What  they  speak.— Not  the 
wisdom  of  this  wTorld,  but  words  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth. 

V.  The  Effects  they  produce. — 
Always  amazement,  sometimes  unbelief 
and  mockery,  frequently  conviction  and 
conversion. 

50 


Ver.  4.  A  Sermon  on  the  Holy  Ghost 

I.  His  personality.  —  Though  not 
here  specially  emphasised,  yet  involved 
in  the  scriptural  representations  given 
of  Him  generally  (see  v.  3,  32,  vii.  51  ; 
Eph.  iv.  30). 

II.  His  Divinity. — Implied  in  His 
co-ordination  with  the  Father  and  the 
Son  (Matt,  xxviii.  19;  2  Cor.  xiii.  14). 

III.  His  agency. — Symbolised  by 
the  Sound,  the  Fire,  and  the  Tongues. 

The  Personality  and  Divinity  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  customary  objections 
to  this  doctrine  are  thus  summarised 
by  Bornemann  {Untervichtim  Christen- 
tum,  p.  151)  : 

I  The  Trinitarian  formula  proves 
nothing. — This,  however,  is  only  Borne- 
mann's  opinion.  Others  hold  it  in- 
conceivable that  unless  the  Son  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  had  been  co-equal 
with  the  Father  they  would  have  been 
thus  associated  with  the  Father  by 
either  Christ  or  God. 

II.  The  phrase  "The  Spirit  Speaks" 
(Acts  xxi.  11 ;  Rev.  xiv.  13)  no  more 
establishes  the  personality  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  than  the  similar  phrase  "  The 
Scripture  speaks"  (Gal.  iv.  30)  demon- 
strates the  personality  of  the  Bible. 
But  other  personal  attributes  are 
ascribed  to  the  Holy  Spirit  which  are 
not  and  cannot  be  assigned  to  Scripture, 
such  as  giieving  (Eph.  iv.  30),  com- 
forting (Acts  ix.  31),  interceding 
(Rom.  viii.  26),  etc. 

III.  Nowhere  in  the  New  Testament 
is  the  Holy  Ghost  represented  as  the 
object  of  worship.— Yet  all  true 
worship  is  in  the  New  Testament  dis- 
tinctly declared  to  be  the  inspiration  of 
the  Spirit  (John  iv.  24 ;  Rom.  viii.  26 ; 
Gal.  iv.  6  ;  Eph.  ii.  18). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  II. 


TV.  The  word  person  as  applied  to 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  the  same  thing 
as  Moderns  mean  by  this  term. — 
Granted.  Yet  whatever  the  vocable 
"  person  "  signifies  as  applied  to  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  that  same  it 
imports  as  applied  to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Filled  ivith  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I.  A  transcendent  mystery. — That 
the  soul  of  a  creature  should  be  in- 
habited by  the  Spirit  of  its  Creator. 

II.  A  demonstrable  fact. — Proved 
in  Pentecostal  and  early  Christian 
times  by  the  gift  of  tongues,  evinced 
now  by  the  production  of  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit. 

III.  A  gracious  privilege.  —  Be- 
stowed upon  believers  not  of  merit  on 
their  part,  but  of  spontaneous  kindness 
on  God's  part. 

IV.  A  comforting  experience.  — 
Being  the  seal  of  acceptance  with  the 
Father,  and  an  earnest  of  the  heavenly 
inheritance. 

V.  A  valuable  talent. — Such  as  are 
its  recipients  are  thereby  endowed  for 
service,  and  will  eventually  be  held 
answerable  for  its  employment. 

Vers.  1-4.  The  Ideal  of  Christian 
Unity. — Believers  united. 

I.  In  Worship. — "  Together  in  one 
place." 

II.  In  Heart. — "  With  one  accord." 

III.  In  Privilege. —All  witnessing 
and  sharing  alike. 

IV.  In  Endowment.— "All  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost." 

V.  In  Service. — All  speaking  with 
tongues. 

The  Pentecostal  Blessing. 

I.  The  conditioning  circumstances. 

1.  The  Time.  "When  the  day  of 
Pentecost  was  now  come."  "  Here 
again,  as  in  the  fact  of  the  Ascension 
and  the  waiting  of  the  Church,  we 
trace  the  outline  of  Christianity  in 
Judaism,  and  see  in  x,he  typical  cere- 
monial of  the  Old  Dispensation  the  out- 
line and  shadow  of  heavenly  realities." 

2.  The  Place.  An  upper  chamber. 
"  Bound  this  upper  room  at  Jerusalem 
has  gathered  many  a  story  dating  from 


very  early  ages  indeed.  This  upper 
room  has  been  identified  with  the 
chamber  in  which  the  Last  Supper 
was  celebrated."  3.  The  Spirit.  With 
one  accord.  "  There  was  unity  of  spirit 
and  unity  in  open  manifestation  to  the 
world  at  large.  Christ's  disciples,  when 
they  received  the  gifts  of  Heaven's 
choicest  blessings,  were  not  split  up 
into  dozens  of  different  organisations, 
each  of  them  hostile  to  the  others,  and 
each  striving  to  aggrandise  itself  at 
the  expense  of  kindred  brotherhood." 

II.  The  external  manifestations. — 
Three.  1.  A  Sound  as  of  a  Rushing 
Mighty  Wind.  "  The  marvels  of  the 
story  told  in  the  first  of  Genesis  find 
a  parallel  in  the  marvels  told  in  the 
second  of  Acts.  The  one  passage  sets 
forth  the  foundation  of  the  material 
universe,  the  other  proclaims  the  nobler 
foundations  of  the  Spiritual  universe." 
2.  Tongues  as  of  Fire,  separate  and  dis- 
tinct, sitting  upon  each  of  the  Disciples. 
"  The  sign  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 
presence  was  a  tongue  of  fire.  It  was 
a  most  suitable  emblem,  pregnant  with 
meaning,  and  indicative  of  the  large 
place  which  the  human  voice  was  to 
play  in  the  work  of  the  new  dispensa- 
tion, while  its  supernatural  character 
declared  that  the  mere  unaided  human 
voice  would  avail  nothing."  The 
separateness  of  the  tongues  also  was 
11  significant  of  the  individual  character 
of  our  holy  religion."  3.  A  Miraculous 
Gift  of  Tongues.  "  That  gift  indicated 
to  the  Apostles  and  to  all  ages  the 
tongue  as  the  instrument  by  which  the 
gospel  wa  to  be  propagated."  The 
gift  itseir  was  "  the  power  of  speaking 
in  foreign  languages,  according  to 
Christ's  promise,  '  They  shall  speak 
with  ne  .  tongues'"  (Mark  xvi.  17). 
G.  T.  &_,j,  D.D. 

The  Pentecostal  Wonder. 

I.  The  rushing  sound. — "  The  Divine 
power  which  descended  on  the  waiting 
company  of  disciples  reveak  d  itself  first 
according  to  its  new  creative  energy  or 
as  heavenly  life  "  (Lehe7i,  ttvoyj,  Odem, 
Windshauch,  ver.  2). 

II.  The    fiery    tongues.  —  "  The 

51 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Divine  power  revealed  itself  secondly 
according  to  its  critically  separating 
force  as  heavenly  light  or  fire  "  (ver.  3). 
III.  The  foreign  tongues.— "  The 
Divine  power  revealed  itself  thirdly 
according  to  its  salvation -revealing 
might  as  heavenly  discourse  and  speech, 
XaXetv  yAaWais  kripais  "  (ver.  4). — Dr. 
Otto  Zockler. 

The  Phenomena  at  Pentecost. 
I.   The  praying  congregation. 
II.  The  sound  from  heaven. 
III.  The  holy  flames. 
IY.  The  new  tongues. — Lisco. 

Three  Marvels. 

I.  In  the  realm  of  Nature. — The 
sound,  the  tongues,  the  speech. 

II.  In  the  sphere  of  mind. — Men 
speaking  languages  they  never  learnt. 

III.  In  the  domain  of  grace. — Sin- 
ful men  endowed  with  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  Descending  Spirit. — Among  the 
thoughts  and  lessons  that  readily 
connect  themselves  with  the  event  of 
our  chapter  are  the  following  :  1.  The 
Christian  Church  was  born  at  Pente- 
cost. "There  is  no  Christian  Church 
history  before"  that  point.  The 
materials  of  the  Church  were  already 
present,  but  standing  out  of  organic 
relation  with  each  other.  It  was  the 
brooding  of  the  Spirit  that,  as  we  are 
told  in  the  first  of  Genesis,  produced 
the  formless  elemenftT*of  things  into 
a  shapely  and"^prblific  world.  It  was 
the  inbreathing  of  God  into  the  being 
of  our  first  parent  that  developed  him 
into  a  living  soul.  It  was  the  influx 
similarly  of  the  divine  Spirit  that 
composed  the  disciples  of  Christ  into 
an  organised  and  living  Church.  A 
Church  is  Christianity  organised. 
2.  This  was  the  first  Christian  revival 
of  religion.  The  Church  was  born  in 
a  revival,  and  the  survival  of  the 
Church  has  been  along  a  continuous 
line  of  revival.  A  revival  is  substanti- 
ally a  fresh  appropriation  of  divine 
power.  The  dynamic  element  enters 
Christianity  not  at  the  cross,  not  at 
the  Easter  sepulchre,  but  at  Pentecost. 
Pentecost  is  as  much  a  fact  of  Chris- 

52 


tianity  as  is  the  crucifixion.  The 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  is  the  Gospel 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  Gospel  of 
power.  It  is  the  scope  of  a  revival  to 
work  in  men  Christian  sinew.  There 
is  nothing  in  the  whole  New  Testament 
narrative  more  startling  than  the 
transformation  which  the  Twelve 
suddenly  underwent  on  the  fiftieth 
day  after  Calvary.  An  apostle  is  a 
disciple  plus  the  Holy  Ghost.  Ap- 
pliances are  valuable,  but  only  as 
vehicles  for  the  conveyance  of  energy 
that  is  from  God.  Christianity  would 
have  stopped  at  Olivet  had  it  not  been 
for  the  event  of  our  chapter  or  its 
equivalent.  3.  The  Spirit  descended 
upon  the  disciples  when  they  were 
together.  The  full  meaning  of  Chris- 
tianity is  not  exhausted  in  any  re- 
lation in  which  it  sets  us  individually 
to  Christ.  It  comprises  a  relation 
between  men  mutually  as  well  as  a 
relation  to  God  personally  and  sepa- 
rately. There  are  blessings  and  en- 
richments that  accrue  to  Christians 
only  by  their  standing  in  fellowship 
with  each  other.  That  first  Sunday 
evening,  the  evening  of  Pesurrection- 
day,  Christ  showed  Himself  unto  His 
disciples  while  they  were  together.  The 
week  after,  the  second  Sunday  evening, 
He  again  appeared  to  them  while  they 
were  together.  And  similarly,  as  we 
learn  from  the  first  verse  of  our 
chapter,  the  Holy  Spirit  descended 
upon  them  while  "  they  were  all  with 
one  accord  in  one  place."  And  this 
gathering  together  of  theirs  was  not 
for  the  purpose  of  instruction,  but  in 
order  that  they  might  remain  together 
in  the  fellowship  of  concerted  prayer 
and  holy  waiting.  The  Church  was 
born  thus  in  a  prayer-meeting.  The 
first  Christian  revival  was  inaugurated 
in  a  prayer-meeting.  In  spiritual 
matters  two  are  considerably  more 
than  twice  as  many  as  one.  4.  This 
first  revival  of  religion  began  with  the 
spiritual  replenishment  of  those  al- 
ready Christian.  It  is  time  wasted, 
and  runs  counter  to  the  divine,  order 
of  things,  for  a  Church  that  is  not 
itself  revived   to   attempt   revivalistic 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  II. 


operations  among  the  unconverted. 
Christianity,  to  the  degree  in  which  it 
extends  itself,  does  so  as  a  kind  of 
contagion.  5.  After  the  ascension  of 
their  Lord  the  disciples  simply  waited 
for  Pentecost.  They  prayed  together, 
as  it  would  seem,  but  exactly  what  was 
the  subject  of  their  prayers  it  would  be 
very  hard  to  tell.  They  probably  did 
not  pray  for  a  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  They  had  not  been  instructed 
to  pray  for  it,  but  to  "tarry"  till  it 
came.  There  was  no  farther  work 
that  needed  to  be  wrought  in  them 
before  its  bestowment.  They  were 
ready  to  be  blessed.  The  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit  was  deferred  till  Pente- 
cost, only  because  that  day  would  give 
to  the  event  greater  publicity.  Our 
prayers  would  often  seem  to  imply 
that  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
something  that  has  got  to  be  wrestled 
from  God  by  hard  struggling.  His 
Spirit  is  with  us.  He  has  already 
entered  into  the  world.  He  is  among 
us  like  a  subtle  atmosphere  that 
crowds  itself  with  a  gentle  intrusion 
into  every  space  of  our  hearts  and 
lives  that  is  left  open  to  its  occupancy. 
He  is  like  the  sunshine,  that  fills  with 
brightness  and  touches  with  colour 
every  object  of  ground,  sea,  and  sky 
that  is  bared  to  its  silent  impact. 
When  we  are  not  illumined,  it  is  not 
because  we  have  neglected  to  pray  for 
the  sun's  rise  upon  us,  but  because  we 
have  neglected  to  stand  out  in  the  sun- 
shine. 6.  The  Holy  Spirit  descended 
upon  all  the  disciples — not  only  upon 
the  Twelve,  but  upon  the  whole 
hundred  and  twenty.  So  far  as  we 
are,  then,  Holy  Ghost  Christians,  all 
substantial  distinctions  in  this  respect 
between  the  laity  and  the  clergy  are 
erased.  7.  The  Holy  Spirit  revealed 
Himself  outwardly  in  the  shape  of 
tongues.  This  was  prophetic  of  the 
way  in  which  revealed  truth  was  to 
be  disseminated.  It  does  not  suffice 
that  men  should  simply  live  lives  of 
Christian  consistency,  and  that  they 
should  think  that  conduct  fills  to  the 
full  their  measure  of  obligation. 
Christ  not  only  lived,   He    preached. 


"  It  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of 
preaching  to  save  them  that  believe." 
And  the  word  "  preaching  "  must  not 
be  construed  too  narrowly.  "  Out  of 
the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth 
speaketh  "  ;  "  We  cannot  but  speak 
the  things  which  we  have  seen  and 
heard.  The  first  revival,  then,  opened 
men's  mouths  and  set  men  talking. 
It  was  a  gift  of  tongues.  There  is  no 
place  for  silent  Christians  under  the 
administration  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Inspiration  and  utterance  are  in- 
separable.— C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D. 

I.  Distinguish  the  permanent  from 
the  transient  manifestations  of  this 
descending  Spirit. — The  miraculous 
displays  w7ere  designed  to  attract  at- 
tention, and  to  teach  by  symbols  His 
nature  and  power.  Air  is  necessary 
to  life.  The  Spirit,  of  whom  no  one 
can  tell  whence  He  comes,  or  whither 
He  goes,  is  symbolised  by  the  air  we 
breathe.  Air  in  motion  represents 
power.  Fire  is  purifying.  In  great 
crises  of  the  ancient  Church  God  had 
revealed  Himself  by  fire.  The  tongues 
of  fire  were  tokens  of  the  living,  con- 
quering, purifying  energy  by  which 
the  Spirit  spreads  truth  through  the 
world.  They  sat  on  each  of  the 
disciples,  showing  that  each  Christian 
has  a  special  commission  and  a  special 
power  given  him  from  heaven.  The 
disciples,  thus  supernaturally  excited, 
spoke  of  the  wonderful  works  of  God 
in  dialects  which  men  from  all  lands 
heard  and  understood.  Here  was  dis- 
played the  sign  that  the  obstacles  to 
the  spread  of  the  gospel  were  removed. 
The  transient  symbol  has  departed, 
but  the  Word  of  God  has  leaped  the 
barriers  of  strange  tongues  and  spread 
through  all  the  world.  The  miracle  of 
that  hour,  emphasised  by  the  miracle 
of  centuries,  says  to  us :  "  The  gospel 
from  heaven  has  been  committed  to 
you.  The  power  of  God  is  promised  to 
you.  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature." 
We  see,  then,  what  abides  in  the 
Church  from  the  descending  Spirit. 
A  great  change  had  already,  within  a 

53 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


few  days,  taken  place  in  the  apostles.  and  to  enable  them   to  proclaim  His 

But   the   task   before   them    required  gospel.     This  gift  was  and  is  a  fruit  of 

supernatural   power   in  them.      They  the  continued  operation  of  the  earthly 

were  to  undertake  a  new  kind  of  work.  life   of  Jesus.     These   truths   realised 

When,   then,  the  Spirit  descended  to  will  help  us  to  feel  more  deeply  the 

dwell    in   them,     He    changed    their  immense   responsibility   that  rests  on 

thoughts.     He   gave  them   confidence  each   disciple   of   Christ.       "  There   is 

in  the  place  of  timidity.     He  led  them  offered  to  you,  as  a  gift,  that  which 

to  perceive  the  grandeur  and  spiritu-  wrought  all  these  wonders.     Take  it, 

ality  of  their  mission,  and  their  own  and  greater   works  than    these   shall 

position  in  it.     They  not  only  recog-  you  do."      Then  think  of  the  misery 

nised   that   they   were   divinely   com-  that   sin  is    still    working,    of    lives 

missioned,     but    they    were    divinely  blasted   by  passion,   of   homes   ruined 

illuminated.        The    effects    of    their  and  actions  ruled  by  selfishness,  of  the 

preaching  were  what  we  should  expect  millions   that  sit  in  darkness,  of  im- 

from  such  changes  in  themselves.     The  mortal   souls  disappearing  from  these 

Spirit    gave   them    utterance.       Their  scenes  to   wake   to   shame  and   ever- 

word    was   with   power.       Men    were  lasting    contempt.      Only  one    power 

moved  to  acknowledge  the  truths  they  can   change    these   things — the   Holy 

proclaimed.       Paul    the    Apostle    set  Spirit  in  the  disciples  of  Christ.     God 

against  the  power  of  Eome,  the  greatest  has  placed  this  measure  of  opportunity 

nation   on   earth,   the   power  of   God  in   our   hands.      Is   it   possible    that 

unto   salvation.     Rome  yielded.     The  Christians    will    allow     anything    to 

gospel    triumphed.       It   is   the    most  hinder  the  descent  of  this  Spirit   on 

impressive   truth   which  God   has  re-  them  in  His  fulness?     But  evidently 

vealed,  that  each  of  His  disciples  can,  whatever  wastes  this  power  brings  on 

by  his  daily  thoughts  and  acts,  bring  us   fearful    loss ;    and   we    know   the 

down    upon   the   Church   the    power  things  that  waste  it.     It  is  not  merely 

which    has    achieved     the    mightiest  the   open   breaking  of  the  Decalogue 

triumphs  of  history.  which   appears   inexcusable   in  Chris- 

II.  We  see  that  the  power  imparted  tians,  but  that  any  of  them  can  waste 

by   the  Holy   Spirit    is  unique    and  in  trifling  pleasures  and  selfish  pursuits 

supernatural. — He  created  the  Chris-  the  abilities  given  from  God  to  save 

tian   Church,    and  now   sustains   and  our   fellow-men    from    eternal   death, 

extends  it.     Without  Him,  it  is  with-  and  plead  in  excuse  that  they  do  not 

out  Christ ;  and   apart  from  Christ  it  transgress     any     definite     command, 

can   do   nothing.     This   gift,   then,  is  What   do   we   need   so   much   as   the 

not  eloquence,  nor  logic,  nor  rhetoric,  baptism  of  fire  for  spiritual  life,  and 

nor  any  acquired  power.      The  Spirit  the  tongue  of  fire  to  tell  that  life  to 

can  employ  all   these  things,  all  that  the  world  ?      One  thing  more.      This 

there  is  of  a  man,  for  His  great  ends,  gift  is  offered  to  the  unconverted.     Do 

But  His  presence  is  the  breath  of  Him  any  who  have  not  received  the  Holy 

who   created   all  worlds.        And    His  Spirit  wonder  at  and  criticise  the  want 

presence  distinguishes  the  Church  from  of  power  and  zeal  in  Christians  ?     You 

all  other  institutions.     Without  that,  may  yourselves  receive  that  which  you 

with  all  its  splendid  history,  it  would  think    wanting  in    them.       "  Repent 

be  only  a  Samson  shorn.      There  are  ye,"    said    Peter    to    the    wondering 

diversities  of  gifts  ;  but  it  is  the  same  audience,  "  and  be  baptised  every  one 

Spirit  that  divides  them  to  every  man  of  you  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and 

severally  as  He  will.  ye    shall    receive   the    Holy    Ghost." 

II.  We  see  the  purposes  for  which  Yes,   you  whose  ambitions    are    un- 

the  Holy  Spirit  descended  and  abides  satisfied,  whose  affections  are  unstirred 

with   Christians — to    perpetuate    the  by  heavenly  things — this  promise  is  to 

presence  of  Christ  with  His  disciples,  you. — Monday  Club  Sermons, 

54 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  ii. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS  (Verses  5—13). 

Excitement  in  Jerusalem  ;    or,  what  the  Multitude  thought  of  the  Phenomenon. 

I  The  subjects  of  this  excitement. — 1.  The  regular  inhabitants  of  the  cdy. 
"  Devout  men  dwelling  at  Jerusalem."  Besides  the  ordinary  native  population, 
these  would  naturally  include  pious  Jews  from  foreign  countries  who  had  become 
domiciled  in  the  city  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter  period.  2.  The  feast  pilgrims 
temporarily  sojourning  in  the  city.  "  Devout  men  from  every  nation  under 
heaven."  Of  these  fifteen  different  classes  are  mentioned.  (1)  Parthians,  from 
the  north-east  of  Media — referred  to  nowhere  else  in  Scripture.  (2)  Medes, 
inhabiting  the  region  between  the  Caspian  Sea  on  the  north,  Armenia  on  the 
west,  Hyrcania  on  the  east,  and  Persia  on  the  south  (2  Kings  xvii.  6  ;  Ezra  vi.  2  ; 
Dan.  v.  28).  (3)  Elamites,  located  east  of  the  Tigris,  north  of  Susiania,  and 
south  of  Media  (Ezra  iv.  9).  (4)  Mesopotamians,  from  the  lands  between  the 
Tigris  and  the  Euphrates  (Gen.  xxiv.  10;  Judges  iii.  8;  1  Chron.  xix.  6). 
(5)  Judseans,  including  Jerusalemites,  from  the  Holy  Land — i.e.,  from  different 
parts  of  Palestine.  (6)  Oappadocians,  whose  settlements  lay  in  the  east  of  Asia 
Minor  (1  Peter  i.  1).  (7)  Pontians,  who  resided  in  the  north-east  (1  Peter  i.  1), 
and  (8)  Asians  from  Proconsular  Asia  in  the  west  of  Asia  Minor  (vi.  9,  xvi.  6, 
xix.  10).  (9)  Phrygians,  also  from  the  east  of  Asia  Minor,  and  north  of 
Pamphylia  (xvi.  6,  xviii.  23).  (10)  Pamphylians,  whose  territory  stretched 
along  the  Mediterranean  coast,  south  of  Phrygia  (xiii.  13,  xv.  38,  xxvii.  5). 
(11)  Egyptians  from  the  Nile  valley  (vii.  22).  (12)  Lybians  from  Cyrene  on 
the  west  of  Egypt  (Jer.  xlvi.  9 ;  Dan.  xi.  43),  the  native  place  of  Simon, 
who  bore  Christ's  cross  (Luke  xxiii.  26),  and  of  Lucius,  the  prophet  in  the 
Church  at  Antioch  (xiii.  1).  (^13)  Romans,  from  the  world's  capital  on  the 
banks  of  the  Tiber  (John  xi.  48  ;  Pom.  i.  7).  (14)  Cretans,  islanders  from  the 
Mediterranean  (xxvii.  7  ;  Titus  i.  5).  (15)  Arabians  from  the  desert  regions 
east  of  the  Nile  (1  Kings  x.  15;  2  Chron.  xvii.  11;  Gal.  i.  17).  A  motley 
group,  a  veritable  microcosmus,  or  little  world  in  the  heart  of  Judsea. 

II.  The  cause  of  this  excitement. — 1.  A  mysterious  sound.  The  noise  of  the 
rushing  wind,  or  what  resembled  this,  which  pervaded  the  town  arrested  the 
attention  of  those  who  were  abroad,  and  led  them  to  investigate  its  cause.  It  is 
hardly  to  be  supposed  that  thunder  or  even  an  earthquake  would  have  produced 
the  same  sort  of  commotion.  2.  A  more  mysterious  experience.  Every  man  in 
Jerusalem,  from  whatsoever  regions  arrived,  heard  one  at  least  in  the  apostolic 
company  preaching  in  his  own  tongue.  Probably  fifteen  foreign  languages,  or 
dialects,  were  that  day  spoken  in  the  streets  of  the  Jewish  capital.  (See  "  Critical 
Remarks  "  on  vers.  9-11.)  3.  A  most  mysterious  circumstance.  That  none  of  the 
speakers  were  themselves  foreigners,  but  all  (or  most)  of  them  were  Galileans, 
who  had  never  been  abroad  and  certainly  had  never  been  at  school  to  acquire  such 
command  of  foreign  tongues.  It  is  obvious  that  the  tongues  of  Pentecost  were  not 
mere  unintelligible  gibberish,  ecstatic  or  frenzied  utterances,  "  sound  and  fury 
signifying  nothing,"  but  distinct,  articulate,  and  reasonable  speech  which  could 
be  followed  and  understood.  Nor  is  it  at  all  likely  that  the  miracle  was  one  of 
hearing  rather  than  of  speaking. 

III.  The  manifestations  of  this  excitement. — These  were  three.  1.  Astonish- 
ment. All,  without  exception,  were  confounded,  amazed,  and  constrained  to 
marvel.  And  no  wonder.  What  they  saw  and  heard  was  no  every-day 
occurrence,  but  something  altogether  out  of,  and  beyond,  their  usual  experience. 
The  universality  of  this  astonishment  guaranteed  the  reality  of  the  phenomenon. 
2.  Perplexity.  They  could  neither  explain  nor  understand  the  phenomenon. 
Yet  they  did  not  on  this  account  deny  it.  They  felt  at  a  loss  to  fathom 
its  significance.      Yet   they  did  not  conclude  it  had   no   significance.      They 

55 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


realised  that  it  must  import  something,  and  kept  on  asking  one  another 
what  each  man  thought  about  it.  In  this  their  conduct  was  praiseworthy 
so  far  as  it  was  serious ;  where  it  was  insincere  it  was  frivolous  and  deserving 
of  blame.  3.  Mockery.  This  was  the  attitude  assumed  by  a  portion  of  the 
crowd,  who,  because  they  failed  to  comprehend  the  phenomenon,  lost  their  judg- 
ment, and  began  to  scoff,  accusing  the  Spirit-borne  speakers  of  being  under  the 
influence  of  strong  drink:  "These  men  are  filled  with  new  wine" — a  strongly 
intoxicating  beverage.  Ridicule  and  calumny  have  always  been  common  weapons 
in  the  hands  of  unbelief  since  the  days  of  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  19).  But  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  is  a  satisfactory  way  of  dealing  with  religion.  Neither  can 
disprove  religion,  scarcely  even  hinder  its  advancement;  frequently  they  hasten 
its  triumph,  and  often  reveal  the  folly  of  those  who  resort  to  them. 

Learn. — 1.  The  wide  court  to  which  Christianity  appeals — men  out  of  every 
nation  under  heaven.  2.  The  effect  Christianity  never  fails  to  produce  in  every 
community  it  visits — excitement,  wonder,  inquiry,  faith,  and  unbelief.  3.  The 
adaptation  of  Christianity  to  every  people  under  heaven  a  striking  evidence 
of  its  supernatural  origin.  4.  The  mystery  which  sometimes  accompanies 
Christianity ;  its  phenomena  are  not  always  capable  of  being  accounted  for  by 
natural  causes.  5.  The  unreasonable  treatment  Christianity  often  receives — 
ridicule  instead  of  refutation  or  reception. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.  5.  Devout  Men.  of  a  lost  world  through  the    atoning 

I.  Are  to  be  found  in  every  nation  death  of  Christ  (Gal.  iv.  4).  2.  The 
under  heaven — a  lesson  of  charity  regeneration  and  renewal  of  souls 
(x.  35).    Examples  Job  and  Cornelius.  through    the     Spirit     and    the    word 

II.  Are    in   the    way    of    meeting     (Eph.  ii.  10 ;  Titus  hi.  5). 
Heaven's  revelations— a    ground    for 

hopefulness     as     to     men's     ultimate  Yers.    7-11.  How  the  World  receives 

destinies  (Psalm  xxv.  14  ;  Isa.  lxiv.  5).  the  Spirit's  Utterances. 

III.  Are  often  perplexed  at  the  I.  It  commonly  undervalues  the 
divine  dealings  with  themselves  and  Spirit's  witnesses.  "  Are  not  all  these 
others — a  cause  for   humility    (Micah  Galileans?" 

iv.  12  ;  Job  xxxvii.  21 ;  John  xiii.  7).  II.  It  is  startled  at  the  sound  of  the 

IV.  Are  sometimes  led  into  sin — a  truth  in   its  own   conscience.     "  How 
warning  against  rashness  in  judgment  hear  we  each  in  our  own  language  ?  " 
(Eccles.  v.  2).  III.  It  distrusts  the  issue  of  the  ways 

of  God.     "  What  meaneth  this  ?  " 
Yer.    11.  The    Wonderful    Works    of         IV.  It  mistakes  the  source  of  the 
God.  Spirit's  operations.     "  These  men  are 

I.  In  nature. — 1.   The    creation    of      full  of  sweet  wine." — Gerok. 
the    material    universe    (Gen.    i.     1). 

2.  The  origination  of  life  (Gen.  i.  20).  Yer.   12.   What  meaneth  this  ? 

3.  The  formation  of  man  (Gen.  i.  26).  I.  The  majesty  of  the  Father,  from 

II.  In  providence. — 1.  Thepreserva-  whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and 
tion  of  created  things — of  the  material  on  earth  is  named. 

cosmos  (Heb.  i.  3)  and  of  all  animated  II.  The  glory  of  the  Son,  which  now 

beings  (Psalm  xxxvi.  6,  civ.  27).    2.  The  appears   in   heightened   splendour,    as 

selection  and  education  of  Israel  (Isa.  the   glory  of  the  exalted  sovereign  of 

xliii.  21).     3.  The   preparation,  inspi-  God's  kingdom. 

ration,  and  preservation  of  the  Bible  III.  The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 

(1  Cor.  x.  11  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  16).  which  is  here  seen  in  signs  and  tokens 

III.  In  grace. — 1.  The   redemption  which,  at   the  same  time,   presage   a 

56 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  n. 


higher    and    more   glorious   future. — ■  from  iniquity.     2.    Perplexity.      They 

Oosterzee.  know  not  what  to  think.     They  see  and 

hear,  and  are  puzzled.     These  "  great 

Yers.  12,  13.    Man's  Reception  of  the  things   of   God"    were   not   meant   to 

Great  Things  of  God.  breed  perplexity,    nor   to  end  in  per- 

I.  The  great  things  of  God. — These  plexity,  yet  how  often  do  we  find  them 
great  things  are  everywhere,  for  God  is  doing  both,  through  man's  perversity, 
everywhere ;  and  everywhere  they  pro-  or  cowardice,  or  love  of  sin  and  dark- 
duce  much  the  same  effects  on  man.  ness.  3.  Mockery.  This  is  the  worst, 
Truly  great  is  our  Jehovah,  and  of  yet  not  the  least  common  treatment 
great  power  !  He  has  not  forsaken  which  the  great  things  of  God  receive 
man  nor  man's  earth.  He  shows  Him-  at  the  hands  of  men.  Thus  the  natural 
self  more  signally  than  by  lightning,  or  heart  speaks  out.  Let  God's  great 
thunder,  or  earthquake,  or  tempest ;  things  produce  their  due,  their  natural 
even  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  impression.     He  does  not  work  them 

II.  The  impression  made  by  them  for  mere  show.  (1)  Let  them  overawe 
on  man. — 1.  Wonder.  With  that  their  us.  (2)  Let  them  break  us  down.  Our 
religion  begins  and  ends.  They  wonder,  hearts  need  breaking.  (3)  Let  them 
but    believe   not.      They  wonder,   but  lead  us  to  faith. — H.  Bonar,  D.D. 

love  not.     They  wonder,  but  depart  not 

HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses    14—21. 

Peter's  Sermon.  1 .  The  First  Christian  Apology ;  or,  the  Pentecostal  Mystery 
explained. 

I.  The  attention  of  the  people  summoned. — 1.  By  a  courageous  attitude. 
Peter's  standing  up  with  the  eleven  signified  that  they  did  not  intend  to  shirk 
investigation,  be  overborne  by  clamour,  or  hurried  away  with  excitement.  A 
reasonable  amount  of  fortitude  is  requisite  for  all  who  would  bespeak  the 
attention  of  their  fellows  on  any  subject,  but  especially  on  religion.  This 
fortitude  ought  never  to  be  wanting  when  the  interests  of  Christ's  kingdom  are 
at  stake,  or  anything  about  the  behaviour  of  Christ's  ambassadors  requires  to 
be  investigated.  2.  By  an  earnest  utterance.  As  Peter's  manner  was  unshrink- 
ing, so  were  his  words  fervent.  Like  the  multitude  around,  he,  too,  was  under 
strong  excitement,  only  different  from  theirs.  Besides,  he  perceived  a  crisis  had 
arisen  in  the  history  of  His  Master's  cause — the  time  had  passed  for  keeping 
silence,  and  the  hour  struck  for  speech  (Eccl.  iii.  7).  3.  By  a  frank  appeal. 
Intending  to  hide  nothing  from  his  auditors,  he  invited  the  attention  of  all  who 
could  understand  him,  the  men  of  Judaea,  and  of  those  who  could  only  reach 
his  meaning  through  translation,  the  foreign  dwellers  at  Jerusalem. 

II.  The  charge  of  drunkenness  repelled.— 1.  As  mistaken.  Founded  on  a 
hasty  generalisation,  and  grounded  on  appearance,  which  is  seldom  reliable  as 
a  basis  for  judgment  (John  vii.  24),  it  was  an  altogether  unwarranted  inference. 

2.  As  impossible.  Not  because  wine  was  not  obtainable  before  9  a.m.,  the 
third  hour  of  the  Jewish  day,  but  because  during  festal  seasons  it  was  unlawful 
to  take  food,  and  much  more  to  drink  wine  earlier  than  the  hour  of  morning 
prayer,  and  because  the  characters  of  the  accused  rendered  the  charge  absurd. 
"  These  men,"  said  the  Apostle,  "  whom  ye  all  see  and  know,  and  who  like  your- 
selves have  come  up  to  worship  at  the  feast,  are  not  likely  to  be  drunk  at  9  a.m." 

3.  As  ridiculous.  Drunken  men,  he  might  have  added,  have  commonly  a  difficulty 
in  speaking  their  own  tongues,  let  alone  making  use  of  foreign  languages. 

III.  The  mystery  of  the  tongues  explained. — As  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy. 
1.  Of  the  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (1)  By  God,  whose  the  Spirit  was,  and 
who  had  engaged  to  pour  it  forth  in  the  last  times,  or  in  the  closing  dispensa- 

57 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


tion  of  the  world.  (2)  Upon  all  flesh,  without  distinction  of  sex — "Upon 
your  sons  and  your  daughters " ;  or  age — upon  "  young  men  and  old  " ;  or 
condition — upon  "  bondmen  "  and  "  bondmaidens,"  as  well  as  upon  free  persons. 
(3)  With  inward  illumination,  so  that  they  who  received  it  should  "  prophesy  " 
or  utter  divine  communications  of  religious  truth,  as  the  apostles  and  other 
Christians  who  had  the  gift  of  prophecy  did  (see  1  Cor.  xiv.  3),  should  "see 
visions,"  or  possess  insight  into  spiritual  and  unseen  realities,  as  Stephen  did 
in  the  judgment  hall  (vii.  55),  Peter  on  the  housetop  (x.  10),  and  Paul  on  the 
Damascus  road  (ix.  3),  and  in  the  Temple  (xxii.  17),  and  should  "dream 
dreams,"  as  perhaps  John  did  in  Patmos  on  the  Lord's  day  (Rev.  i.  10).  2.  Of 
the  Second  Coming  of  Christ.  Characterised  as  a  "  great  and  notable  "  day. 
(1)  In  comparison  with  His  first  advent,  which  was  lowly  and  obscure,  whereas 
this  was  to  be  conspicuous  and  glorious  (Matt.  xxv.  31).  (2)  Because  of  the 
portents  which  should  attend  it,  "  the  wonders  in  heaven  above  and  signs  on 
th6  earth  beneath,"  etc. — language  descriptive  of  the  woes  and  horrors  that 
should  overtake  such  as  refused  to  acknowledge  Christ — which  received  its  first 
and  partial  fulfilment  in  the  Destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  will  attain  its 
complete  realisation  at  the  Last  Day,  when  those  who  decline  to  believe  and 
obey  Christ  will  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence 
of  God,  and  from  the  glory  of  His  power  (2  Thess.  i.  9).  3.  Of  the  free  publi- 
cation of  the  Gospel.  This  also,  according  to  the  prophet,  should  distinguish 
Messianic  times.  Under  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  whosoever  should  call 
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  not  merely  evoking  but  accepting  Him  and  trusting 
in  Him  for  all  that  His  name  should  imply,  should  be  saved.  (Compare  Rom. 
x.  13.) 

Learn. — 1.  It  is  no  disparagement  to  a  Christian  to  be  found  fault  with  by 
the  world.  2.  It  is  better  to  be  drunk  with  the  Spirit  than  to  be  intoxicated 
with  wine.  3.  The  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  4.  The 
gospel  has  two  outlooks — one  of  mercy  for  the  believer,  another  of  wrath  for  the 
unbeliever. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.   15.  Drunkenness  and  Spiritual  ceeds. — Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  ancient 

Influence.  Church  and  the  founder  of  the  new, 

I.  Compared. — 1.  Both  accompanied  the  God  and  Father  of  Our  Lord  and 
by   bodily    manifestations.       2.    Both  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
frequently  attended  by  mental  excite-  III.  The   persons    on   whom    it  de- 
ment.    3.  Both,  as  a  rule,  followed  by  scends. — "All  flesh,"  without  distinc- 
corresponding  prostration.  tion  of  sex  or  age,   provided  they  be 

IT.  Contrasted. — 1.    The    one    is   a  "servants  and   handmaidens"   of  the 

carnal    excitement;     the    other    is    a  Lord. 

spiritual    ravishment.     2.   The   one,  a  IV.  The   measure    in    which    it    is 

degrading  sin  ;  the  other,  an  elevating  given. — Not  in   drops  but  in  streams, 

grace.     2.  The  one  leads  to  moral  and  "  I  will  pour  out." 

spiritual  ruin,  the  other  terminates  in  V.  The  effects  by  which  it  is  followed, 

salvation  and  eternal  life.  — The  highest  forms  of  spiritual  illu- 
mination— prophesying,  seeing  visions, 

Vers.   17-18.  The  Dispensation  of  the  and  having  dreams. 
Spirit. 

I.  The  age  to  which  it  belongs. — The  Ver.  17.    Visions  for  Yo mi g  Men. 
last  days— i.e.,  all  the  days  of  the  New  I.  The  vision  of  the  Saviour  Christ. 
Testament  era.  — Such  as  Saul  of  Tarsus  received  in 

II.  The  author  from  whom  it  pro-      the  hour  of  his  conversion  (xxii.  14) — 

58 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  II. 


a  vision  of  Christ  as  the  Righteous 
One,  "  as  the  greatest,  the  wisest,  the 
dearest,  and  the  best— all  one's  salva- 
tion and  all  one's  desire." 

II.  The  vision  of  a  better  self. — 
Such  as  every  young  man  obtains  when 
he  gets  his  vision  of  Christ.  In  this 
vision  of  a  better  self  are  included  two 
spiritual  experiences  :  1.  An  immediate 
and  an  intense  self-depreciation,  as  if  the 
first  outcome  of  the  vision  of  the  divine 
ideal  of  goodness  were  "  to  send  down 
into  the  dust  and  break  all  to  pieces  "  ; 
as  with  Simon  Peter  (Luke  v.  8)  and 
the  Publican  (Luke  xviii.  13).  2.  The 
springing  up  of  an  intense  aspiration. 
"  There  is  a  gradual  emptying  of  self, 
and  a  gradual  abandonment  to  the 
ideal  in  Christ,  so  much  so  that  the 
motto  of  Paul  becomes  that  of  every 
Christian,  '  To  me  to  live  is  Christ.'  " 

III.  The  vision  of  a  better  society. 
— "  A  common  vision  with  the  saints  of 
God  is  to  see  the  kingdom  of  God 
established  on  the  earth."  "  A  modern 
preacher  of  righteousness — the  Rev. 
Hugh  Price  Hughes — specifies  no  less 
than  a  round  dozen  of  devils  which 
must  be  cast  out  of  modern  society — 
drunkenness,  lust,  slavery,  ignorance, 
gambling,  pauperism,  disease,  crime, 
war,  the  opium  trade,  the  torture  of 
dumb  animals  the  sale  of  spirits  and 
gunpowder  to  savages." 

IV.  The  vision  of  a  better  Church. 
— "  Of  a  Church  free,  united,  and  ener- 
getic " — i.e.,  free  to  recognise  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  alone  as  its  head,  and 
neither  pope  nor  prelate,  Queen  nor 
State ;  united,  in  the  sense  that  all 
unnecessary  separations  shall  have 
ceased ;  and  energetic  in  doing  its  God- 
appointed  work  amongst  men. 

V.  The  vision  of  a  heavenly  in- 
heritance.—" On  the  wall  of  the  house 
in  Hamburgh,  where  the  poet  Klop- 
stock  lived  and  died,  was  a  board  with 
this  inscription — '  Immortality  is  a 
great  thought';  but  the  thought  of 
Eternal  Life  in  an  eternal  Home  is 
greater  still."     A   vision  of   this  will 


defy  all  the  negations  of  science,  and 
lift  the  soul  higher  than  all  the  guesses 
of  philosophers  and  all  the  dreams  of 
poets."  "  Hopeful  saw  the  gates  of 
the  city,  and  that  was  enough.  He 
looked,  and  from  that  happy  peace 
(the  Delectable  Mountains)  God's  glory 
smote  him  on  the  face.  *  Blessed  are 
the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see 
God.'"— P.  Wilson,  M. A. 

Ver.  20.  The  Day  of  the  Lord.— Great 
and  notable. 

I.  As  regards  the  splendour  of 
Christ's  manifestation. — On  that  day 
the  Son  of  man  will  appear  in  the 
glory  of  His  Father  and  with  His 
holy  angels. 

II.  As  regards  the  blessedness  of 
Christ's  people. — Then  this  will  reach 
its  highest  point.  They  will  appear 
with  Him  in  glory. 

III.  As  regards  the  destruction  of 
Christ's  foes. — This  will  then  be  sudden, 
complete,  and  final. 

Ver.  21.   The  Messianic  Salvation. 

I.  Its  import. — Deliverance  from  the 
guilt  and  power  of  sin — victory  over 
death  and  the  grave — Resurrection  and 
Eternal  Life. 

II.  Its  foundation. — The  Name  of 
the  Lord.  The  merciful  and  gracious 
character  of  God  in  Christ,  the  only 
plea  of  a  sinner's  justification. 

III.  Its  condition. — Calling  on  that 
Name,  which  implies  faith  and  earnest- 
ness on  the  part  of  the  caller,  as  well 
as  an  acknowledgment  of  his  need  of 
salvation  and  utter  helplessness  to  pro- 
cure it  for  himself. 

IV.  Its  universality. — It  is  offered 
to  every  one  who  chooses  to  comply 
with  the  aforesaid  condition.  "Who- 
soever shall  call  shall  be  saved." 

V.  Its  certainty.—"  It  shall  be,"  of 
a  verity,  without  any  peradventure. 
The  believer's  salvation  is  guaranteed 
by  the  oath  and  promise  of  God, 
both  of  which  are  Yea  and  Amen 
in   Christ. 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


HOMILETICAL    ANALYSIS.— Verses  22-36. 

Peter's  Sermon.     2.  The  Mystery  of  Pentecost  traced  up  to  Christ. 

I.  The  earthly  life  of  Jesus  Christ  (ver.  22). — 1.  His  human  nature.  "A 
man  " — i.e.,  no  mythical  creation  or  docetical  simulacrum,  but  a  bond  fide  flesh 
and  blood  personality ;  a  genuine  member  of  the  race,  possessed  of  a  true  body 
and  a  reasonable  soul  like  the  ordinary  descendants  of  Adam.  The  certainty  of 
this  was  attested  by  the  fact  that  He  lived  among  men,  performed  actions  which 
they  saw  and  uttered  words  which  they  heard,  sorrowed  and  suffered  like  the 
rest  of  His  contemporaries,  and  was  eventually  put  to  death  at  their  hands. 
That  Peter  in  connecting  the  Pentecostal  effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  with  Him 
takes  as  a  starting  point  His  humanity  does  not  signify  that  Peter  was  in  doubt 
of  His  divinity  (Matt.  xvi.  16;  John  xxi.  17),  or  regarded  that  only  as  a 
consequence  of  His  exaltation,  but  merely  that  in  attempting  to  gain  a  hearing 
from  his  countrymen  he  commenced  with  a  proposition  which  he  and  they  held 
in  common — viz.,  that  Christ  had  been  amongst  them  as  a  man.  That  He  had 
been  even  from  the  first  more  than  this  Peter  believed  and  proceeded  to  show 
(vers.  34-36).  2.  His  divine  attestation.  "  Approved,"  shown  forth,  accredited 
as  a  special  messenger  to  His  countrymen — (1)  by  God,  so  that,  like  the  prophets 
of  old,  He  could  at  least  claim  to  be  an  ambassador  of  Heaven,  a  plenipotentiary 
and  representative  of  Jehovah  (Luke  iv.  18;  John  vi.  39,  xvi.  28).  (2)  Through 
"  mighty  works  and  wonders  and  signs" — i.e.,  deeds  of  power,  of  mystery,  and 
of  significance,  which  God  did,  by  Him,  so  that  men,  reasoning  like  Nicodemus 
(John  iii.  2),  ought  to  have  had  no  hesitation  in  recognising  Him  as  "  a  teacher 
come  from  God."  3.  In  the  most  public  manner — not  at  all  in  secret,  as  His 
unbelieving  brethren  insinuated  (John  vii.  4) — so  that  the  fullest  evidence  was 
furnished  of  who  and  what  He  was  and  claimed  to  be  (John  xiv.  11).  Though 
Peter  represents  God  as  working  by  and  through  Jesus,  he  does  not  thereby 
deny  that  Christ  performed  His  miracles  by  His  own  inherent  power ;  simply  in 
addressing  his  countrymen,  he  asserts  the  least  that  could  be  affirmed  about 
Christ — viz.,  that  the  divine  power  manifested  itself  through  Him. 

II.  The  atoning  death  of  Jesus  Christ  (ver.  23). — This  Peter  represents  as 
having  been  brought  about  by  a  concurrence  of  human  and  divine  will  and 
action.  1.  In  accordance  with  the  divine  purpose.  Reverting  to  the  original 
and  eternal  decrees  of  God,  who  worketh  all  things  according  to  the  counsel  of 
His  own  will  (Eph.  i.  11),  Peter  finds  a  place  among  them  for  the  crucifixion 
of  Jesus.  The  death  of  Christ  was  in  his  view  no  accident  which  had  surprised 
either  Christ  Himself  or  God.  As  the  story  of  the  arrest  in  Gethsemane  shows 
that  Christ  freely  surrendered  Himself  into  the  hands  of  His  captors  (John  xviii. 
1-11),  so  does  Peter  here  affirm  that  God  delivered  Him  into  their  toils,  not 
because  He  was  unable  to  rescue  His  darling  from  the  power  of  the  dog  (Psalm 
xxii.  20),  but  in  pursuance  of  a  deliberate  and  determinate  counsel,  formed 
in  eternity,  to  thus  save  man  from  sin  and  death  (1  Peter  i.  2,  20).  2.  By  an 
infamous  act  of  betrayal.  Though  the  person  of  the  traitor  is  not  named,  clearly 
Judas  is  thought  of  as  the  perpetrator  of  this  wicked  deed.  (Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  15 ; 
John  xix.  11.)  As  the  counsel  of  God  did  not  compel  the  man  of  Kerioth  to  sell 
Christ  to  His  foes,  so  neither  did  it  absolve  him  from  guilt  for  so  doing.  While 
the  predestination  and  foreknowledge  of  God  are  incontrovertible  facts,  being 
involved  in  the  very  conception  of  God,  yet  must  they  ever  be  conceived  by  us 
in  such  a  way  as  neither  to  make  God  the  Author  of  sin  nor  to  destroy  the 
efficiency  of  second  causes.  3.  By  a  cruel  deed  of  crucifixion.  The  tragic  event 
was  too  recent  for  any  call  on  Peter's  part  to  reproduce  the  spectacle.  Doubtless 
the  strangers  from  foreign  parts  had  been  made  acquainted  with  the  deed  of 
blood.     Peter  restricts  himself  to  two  points:  (1)  That  while  the  instruments 

60 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  II. 


of  the  crucifixion  were  "  lawless  men,"  meaning,  most  likely,  the  Roman  soldiers, 
(2)  The  real  authors  of  it  were  the  people  "  ye,"  who  cried  "  Away  with  Him  !  " 
or  their  leaders  who  instigated  them  to  demand  His  death.  Both  acted  in 
ignorance,  comparatively  at  least,  of  the  personal  dignity  of  Christ  and  of  the 
heinous  character  of  their  crime  (iii.  17 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  8),  yet  were  neither  thereby 
excused. 

III.  The  triumphant  resurrection  of  Christ  (vers.  24-32).  Peter  presents  this 
in  a  fourfold  light.  1.  As  effected  by  God.  "  Whom  God  raised  up  "  (ver.  24  ; 
compare  iii.  15,  iv.  10,  x.  40,  xiii.  30,  xvii.  31 ;  1  Peter  i.  21),  "  having  loosed  the 
pangs  of  death."  Quoted  from  the  LXX.  version  of  Psalm  xviii.  5,  which  in  the 
Hebrew  reads  "  cords  of  death  "  ;  the  imagery  lying  in  "  the  pangs  of  death  "  may 
be  different,  but  the  sense  is  the  same.  The  Hebrew  poet  represents  death  as 
a  strong  man,  who  binds  his  victim  with  cords,  which  must  be  untied  to  admit 
of  resurrection  ;  the  Christian  apostle  compares  death's  agonies  to  the  pains 
of  parturition — doubtless  because  in  both  cases  life  follows — with  this  difference, 
that  he  depicts  these  as  not  ending  with  the  expiry  of  physical  life,  but  as 
pursuing  the  body  into  the  grave  in  the  form  of  corruption,  and  requiring  to  be 
loosed-or  made  to  cease  in  order  that  their  victim  might  be  raised.  In  Christ's 
case  both  conceptions  were  realised.  His  body  saw  no  corruption,  and  the  cords 
of  death  were  unloosed.  2.  As  necessitated  by  Christ  Himself.  "  It  was  not 
possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  death  "  (ver.  24).  Inasmuch  as  the  like 
averment  could  not  be  made  of  any  ordinary  son  of  man,  the  use  of  it  concerning 
Christ  marked  Him  off  as  standing  in  a  distinct  category  by  Himself.  The 
impossibility  of  death's  dominion  over  Christ  remaining  unbroken  lay  in  this, 
either  that  He,  Christ,  was  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life  (John  v.  26  ;  xi.  25), 
and  had  power  in  Himself  to  resume  as  well  as  to  lay  down  His  life  when  He 
pleased  (John  x.  17,  18),  or  that,  having  satisfied  the  claims  of  justice  in  behalf 
of  man  by  dying  and  lying  in  a  sinner's  grave,  the  conditions  of  His  covenant 
with  the  Father  demanded  His  restoration  to  life  (La.  liii.  10-12).  3.  As  foretold 
by  David.  "  David  saith  concerning  Him."  (1)  That  Peter  referred  to  David 
the  sweet  singer  of  Israel  as  the  author  of  this  psalm,  and  did  not  merely  use 
the  term  David  as  a  convenient  synonym  for  the  Hebrew  poet,  or  for  the 
collection  of  hymns  and  spiritual  songs  that  passed  current  under  his  name,  is 
obvious  from  even  a  cursory  glance  at  the  passage,  and  must  be  held  as  confirmed 
by  the  fact  that  Paul  also,  indirectly  at  least,  ascribed  it  to  the  son  of  Jesse 
(xiii.  35),  notwithstanding  that  the  higher  critics  of  to-day  pretty  generally 
assert  that  both  Peter  and  Paul  were  mistaken  (?).  (2)  That  the  psalm  was 
prophetically  written  with  an  outlook  to  Christ  must  be  maintained  on  the 
same  twofold  apostolic  authority.  That  the  passage  cited  literally  from  the 
LXX.  version  of  the  psalm  (vers.  8-11)  could  not  have  been  meant  by  David  to 
apply  to  himself  was  apparent,  first,  from  the  language  {e.g.,  Thy  Holy  One), 
which  befitted  not  a  sinful  mortal;  and  secondly,  from  the  circumstance  that 
David  saw  corruption  and  never  rose  again — his  tomb  being  amongst  them  on 
Mount  Zion  at  the  very  moment  when  the  Apostle  spoke  (ver.  29,  compare  xiii.  36). 
That  it  was  designed  to  fore-announce  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  Peter  contended, 
was  the  unambiguous  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (ver.  31).  4.  As  attested  by 
the  apostles  and  primitive  disciples.  "  Whereof  "  or  "  of  whom  " — i.e.,  of  the  fact 
or  the  person;  "we  all,"  the  one  hundred  and  twenty  of  i.  15,  "  are  witnesses  " 
(ver.  32).  If  none  of  them  had  been  present  at  the  opening  of  the  sepulchre, 
it  is  probable  that  all  of  them  had  looked  on  their  risen  Lord  after  His  emergence 
from  the  tomb.  Nor  can  it  be  doubtful  that  what  these  first  witnesses  understood 
by  Christ's  resurrection  was  not  the  exaltation  of  His  spirit  to  celestial  life  after 
His  death  (Ritschl),  but  the  actual  return  of  His  body,  though  in  a  glorified 
form,  from  the  tomb. 

61 


chap.  II.  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


IV.  The  glorious  exaltation  of  Jesus  Christ  (vers.  33-36). — That  Peter,  as 
well  as  Luke  and  Paul,  distinguished  between  the  resurrection  and  the  exaltation 
of  Christ  is  too  manifest  to  be  successfully  challenged.  Having  treated  of  the 
former  occurrence,  he  naturally  advances  to  speak  of  the  latter,  replying  in 
succession  to  the  following  unspoken  inquiries :  1.  Whither  ? — "  Into  the 
heavens  "  (compare  i.  11  ;  Luke  xxiv.  51 ;  1  Peter  iii.  22  ;  Heb.  ix.  24)  and  up  to 
the  right  hand  of  God"  (see  vii.  55;  Mark  xiv.  62,  xvi.  19;  Rom.  viii.  34; 
Col.  iii.  1).  This  also  had  been  a  subject  of  prophecy  by  David  in  Psalm  ex.  1,  2, 
who  could  not  have  referred  to  himself  for  the  simple  reason  that  he  "  had 
not  ascended  into  the  heavens,"  and  therefore  must  have  spoken  of  Christ. 
IST.B. — The  Davidic  authorship  of  Psalm  ex.  is  guaranteed  by  Christ  (Matt, 
xxii.  43-45).  2.  By  whom  ? — "  By  the  right  hand  of  God."  Though  not  the 
better  of  the  possible  renderings  of  this  clause,  it  contains  a  thought  in  full 
accord  with  the  teaching  of  Scripture,  that  Christ's  exaltation  was  the  work  of 
the  Father  (see  Eph.  i.  20 ;  Phil.  ii.  9),  who  so  rewarded  Him  for  His  redeeming 
work.  3.  For  what?— To  be  "  both  Lord  and  Christ"  (ver.  36).  (1)  Lord,  or 
possessor  of  divine  dominion,  an  idea  already  expressed  in  His  sitting  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  as  partner  of  His  throne,  which  dominion,  though  originally  and 
from  eternity  belonging  to  Him  as  the  preincarnate  Word  (John  i.  1,  xvii.  5), 
was  now  conferred  on  His  divine  manhood  in  reward  for  His  obedience  unto 
death  (Phil.  ii.  9  ;  Heb.  i.  3  ;  Rev.  iii.  21).  (2)  Christ  or  Messiah,  which 
signified  not  that  Christ  had  not  been  Messiah  in  the  days  of  His  flesh 
(John  iv.  26),  but  that  His  Messiahship  was,  by  His  exaltation,  incontestably 
proved,  and  that  the  purposes  for  which  His  Messiahship  had  been  constituted 
could  not  begin  to  realise  themselves  in  all  their  fulness  until  after  His  Ascension. 
That  is  to  say,  He  was  not  to  be  a  temporal  deliverer  rescuing  Israel  from 
political  thraldom  and  erecting  a  world-empire  upon  earth,  but  a  spiritual 
Saviour,  wielding  authority  from  heaven.  4.  How  long  ? — "  Till  His  enemies 
should  be  made  the  footstool  of  His  feet  "  (ver.  35).  Till  the  ends  contemplated 
by  His  mediatorial  sovereignty  should  be  accomplished  (1  Cor.  xv.  23-28).  Till 
all  His  believing  people  should  be  fully,  perfectly,  and  finally  saved  (John  xvii.  24). 
Till  all  His  unbelieving  adversaries  should  be  reduced  into  absolute,  if  still 
unwilling  subjection  (Phil.  ii.  10,  11). 

V.  The  Mediatorial  Activity  of  Jesus  Christ  (ver.  33). — This,  according  to 
Peter,  was — 1.  Authorised  by  Christ's  exaltation  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father. 
Manifestly,  only  one  possessed  of  divine  authority  could  act  as  the  glorified 
Redeemer  is  here  represented  as  doing.  More,  only  one  who  was  the  equal  and 
fellow  of  the  Most  High.  A  Moses  might  serve  as  mediator  for  a  nation  ;  a 
mere  man  would  be  insufficient  to  officiate  as  mediator  for  the  race.  2.  Prepared 
for  by  the  promise  of  the  Father  that  He  would  pour  out  the  Spirit  upon  all 
flesh  in  Christ's  days — a  promise  given  to  Christ  beforehand  in  the  words  of  Old 
Testament  prophecy  which  referred  to  Him,  and  renewed  to  Him  on  His 
exaltation.  3.  Manifested  by  the  Pentecostal  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which 
Peter  now  ascribes  to  Him.  "  He  hath  poured  forth  this,"  an  indirect  proof  of 
Christ's  exaltation  and  divinity.  4.  Verified  by  the  unusual  phenomena  which 
the  house  of  Israel  saw  and  heard. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  close  and  intimate  connection  with  one  another  of  all 
evangelical  doctrines.  This  a  powerful  argument  in  favour  of  their  truth. 
2.  The  reality  of  distinct  Messianic  prophecy.  A  point  contested  by  modern 
criticism.  3.  The  inspiration  of  the  sacred  Scriptures  and,  in  particular,  of  the 
Psalms  of  David. 


62 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  II. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  22.  Did  Jesus  of  Nazareth  really 
Work  Miracles  ? — 1.  "  It  is  incontest- 
able that  Christ "  (in  asking  the  faith 
of  his  contemporaries)  "  appealed  very 
emphatically  to  His  miracles,  to  His 
1  works/  which  He  was  able  to  perform 
in  virtue  of  the  divine  power  which 
stood  at  His  command,  to  His  *  signs  ' 
in  which  His  Godlike  character,  and 
specially  the  energy  and  grace  per- 
taining  thereto,    showed    themselves." 

2.  "In  all  the  wonderful  works  which 
the  Evangelists  report  of  Him,  the 
question  concerns  occurrences  in  which, 
if  they  really  happened  so  (i.e.,  as 
reported),  we  cannot  at  all  find  merely 
specially  striking  arrangements  of  a 
common  divine  providence  ruling  in  the 
world  and  nature,  but  must  recognise 
a  direct  intrusion  of  superterrestrial 
divine  power  into  the  regularly  ordered 
connection  of  finite  natural  things  and 
the  forces  deposited  in  them  by  God." 

3.  "It  is,  and  remains,  incontestable, 
that  Jesus  intended  to  perform  such 
works  and  referred  (His  contemporaries) 
to  them — and  that  such  works  were  not 
first  assigned  to  Him  by  a  late,  fabulous 
tradition,  which,  at  the  same  time,  put 
into  His  mouth  the  (above-mentioned) 
appeal  to  them."  4.  "  Apart  from 
every  other  thing,  it  is  unthinkable 
that  His  first  disciples  and  apostles 
would  have  ascribed  to  themselves 
miraculous  powers,  as  they  unquestion- 
ably did,  had  not  such  miraculous 
powers  been  known  of  Him."  5. 
Hence  "  to  a  historical  critic,  who  will 
deny  to  Jesus  all  real  miraculous 
activity,  remains  only  the  supposition 
possible — at  least,  if  he  is  clear  and 
honest — that  Jesus  and  His  disciples, 
with  respect  to  this  matter  of  miracles, 
practised  deliberate  and  constant  de- 
ception "  (Kostlin,  Der  Glaube,  p.  28). 

Ver.  23.  Divine  Afterknowledge  and 
Foreknowledge. 

I.  The  divine  afterknowledge. — 
Does  God  know  all  persons,  other 
creatures,  or  things  that  have  existed, 
as  well  as  all   occurrences  that   have 


taken  place  in  the  past?  1.  This 
question  must  be  answered  in  the  affirma- 
tive. God's  eye  never  closes.  It  never 
droops.  He  has  never  slumbered  or 
slept.  He  is  never  unobservant  (Psalm 
exxxix.  1-16,  cxlvii.  4;  John  xxi.  17; 
Heb.  iv.  13).  2.  The  effect  of  this  know- 
ledge on  persons,  creatures,  things, 
events  past,  is  nothing.  It  does  not  in 
the  least  degree  modify  their  nature. 
It  does  not  make  them  either  good  or 
bad.  It  does  not  alter  their  relations 
to  one  another  or  to  God. 

II.  The  divine  foreknowledge. — 
Does  God  foreknow  all  the  persons, 
other  creatures,  events,  and  things  that 
shall  be  in  the  future  1  1.  Some  theo- 
logians have  maintained  that  God  can 
and  does  foreknow  things  necessary,  but 
not  things  contingent — i.e.,  such  things 
as  owe  their  existence  to  free  will. 
But  this  idea  is  not  tenable,  inasmuch 
as — (1)  It  ascribes  ignorance  to  God, 
and  (2)  is  at  variance  with  the  ex- 
istence of  prophecy  in  the  Bible,  and 
(3)  traverses  the  statements  of  both 
Peter  (1  Peter  i.  2)  and  Paul  (Rom. 
viii.  28-30).  2.  Other  theologians  hold 
that  it  is  neither  logical  nor  scriptural 
to  maintain  the  universal  foreknowledge 
of  God.  "  Whatever  is  actually  fore- 
known must,  they  think,  be  actually 
fixed  by  being  foreknown."  But 
"knowledge,  whether  simple  (i.e., 
present)  or  after  or  fore,  never  fixes 
the  object  which  it  knows."  "  Things 
foreknown,  whether  necessary  or  con- 
tingent, will  come  to  pass,  but  each 
according  to  its  own  nature  " — things 
necessary  as  necessary,  things  con- 
tingent as  contingent.  3.  The  true 
theology  is  that  while  all  things  are 
foreknown  nothing  is  thereby  bound  to 
be.  "  There  is  no  certainty  imparted 
to  the  essence  of  the  things  that  are 
foreknown." — James  Morison,  D.D. 

Vers.  25  and  34.— The  Two  Right 
Hands. 

I.  God  upon  the  right  hand  of 
Christ  (ver.  25). — This  was  equivalent 
to  a  promise  from  God  to   Christ   of 

63 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


four  things.  1.  Of  support  and  pro- 
tection in  the  execution  of  His  redemptive 
work.  Compare  Isa.  xlii.  1  ;  Matt, 
xii.  18.  2.  Of  joy  and  satisfaction  in 
the  inception  and  progress  of  His  work. 
Compare  Prov.  viii.  31  ;  Isa.  xlii.  4  ; 
John  xv.  11,  xvii.  13.  3.  Of  hope  in 
death. — Not  merely  of  inward  peace, 
but  of  prospective  recovery  from  death's 
dominion.  Compare  Isa.  liii.  10,  11. 
4.  Of  a  glorious  resurrection  to  em- 
bodied existence  beyond  the  grave. — 
Isa.  liii.  11,  12. 

II.  Christ  upon  the  right  hand  of 
God  (ver.  34). — This  could  only  mean 
the  enjoyment  on  Christ's  part  of  three 
things  additional.  1.  Co-ordination  (in 
the  sense  of  equality)  with  God — i.e., 
essential  divinity.  Compare  Zech. 
xiii.  7.  2.  Communion  (in  the  sense 
of  fellowship)  with  God — i.e.,  such  con- 
verse as  alone  could  be  held  by  equals. 
Compare  John  i.  1,  v.  19,  20.  3.  Co- 
partnership (in  the  sense  of  dominion) 
with  God — i.e.,  the  possession  of  absolute 
power.  Compare  Dan.  vii.  13;  Matt, 
xxviii.  18 ;  Eph.  i.  21 ;  Phil.  ii.  9 ; 
1  Peter  hi.  22 ;  Rev.  xvii.  14. 

Vers.  25-28.  The  Lord  upon  the  Right 
Hand. — What  that  signifies  to  the 
follower  of  Christ. 

I.  Confidence. — He  shall  not  be 
moved.  With  such  a  Companion  and 
Protector,  why  should  we  either  be 
troubled  or  afraid  1  (Prov.  xxix.  28 ; 
Isa.  xxvi.  3). 

II.  Joy. — Arising  from  a  sense  of 
the  divine  presence  and  fellowship. 
All  the  nobler  faculties  of  that  man 
who  has  God  for  a  defence  begin  to 
exult  (Psalm  v.  11  ;  Pom.  v.  11). 

III.  Hope. — When  the  good  man's 
flesh  lies  down  to  tabernacle  in  the 
grave,  it  does  not  do  so  in  despair,  but 
rather  with  the  joyous  expectation  of 
a  future  coming  forth  (Prov.  xiv.  32 ; 
Acts  xxiv.  15;  Pom.  viii.  19). 

IV.  Resurrection. — His  soul  will  not 
be  left  in  Hades,  neither  will  his  body 
be  abandoned  as  a  prey  to  corruption. 
It  may  be  allowed  to  see  corruption,  but 
that  which  is  sown  in  corruption  will  be 
raised  in  incorruption  (1  Cor.  xv.  42). 

64 


V.  Immortality. — The  good  man 
will  not  be  raised  to  judgment  and 
condemnation,  but  to  justification  and 
eternal  life  (John  v.  29). 

VI.  Glory.— He  will  be  filled 
with  gladness  with  Jehovah's  counte- 
nance; he  will  behold  Christ's  glory 
and  experience,  the  highest  felicity  in 
Christ's  presence  (1  John  iii.  2 ;  feev. 
vii.  13-17;  John  xvii.  24). 

Ver.  31.  The  Resurrection  of  Christ. 
_Was— 

I.  The  necessary  counterpart  of  His 
death. 

II.  His  final  victory  over  all  hostile 
powers. 

III.  The  divine  attestation  of  His 
Messiahship. 

IV.  The  presupposition  of  His  ex- 
altation as  "  the  Son  of  God  in 
power." 

V.  The  pledge  of  His  supremacy 
over  the  living  and  the  dead. 

VI.  The  seal  of  all  blessings,  rights, 
and  privileges  given  through  Christ, 
especially  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins  and 
the  future  resurrection. 

VII.  The  constraining  argument  for 
a  new  life  in  the  spirit  on  the  part  of 
Christians. 

VIII.  The  decisive  proof  for  the 
reality,  supernaturalness,  and  eternity 
of  the  kingdom  of  God. 

IX.  The  starting  point  of  all  Apos- 
tolic missions  and  evangelical  preaching. 
— Bornemann,  Unterricht  im  Christen- 
tum,  p.  102). 

Ver.  34.   The  Mediatorial  Throne. 

I.  Its  divine  appointment. — "  The 
Lord  said  unto  My  Lord."  Jehovah 
its  Author.  By  His  decree  was  it 
constituted. 

II.  Its  glorious  occupant. — "My 
Lord."  1.  David's  divine  Sovereign. 
2.  Jehovah's  personal  fellow. 

III.  Its  specific  object. — Here  re- 
presented to  be  the  subjugation  of  all 
the  enemies  of  that  throne — i.e.,  all  the 
foes  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  kingdom. 

IV.  Its  long  duration. — Till  that 
subjugation  is  effected.  But  not  for 
ever.     (See  1  Cor.  xv.  28.) 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap,  il 


Vers.  22-36.  Four  Remarkable  Things  that  very  death,  so  paving  the  way  for 

in  Peter's  Sermon.  holding  forth  this  crucified  One  as  their 

I.  The  courage  that  could  venture  own  now  exalted  Lord  and  Christ. 

to   charge   upon   an    immense   miscel-  III.  The  dread  harmony  with  which 

laneous  street  audience  the  death  of  one  and  the  same  event  is  here  pre- 

God's  Messiah,   and  this  in  the  most  sented   as   on  men's   part  a  crime  of 

naked  terms,  and  by  a  man  who  had  unparalleled  atrocity,  and  on  the  part 

himself    but    a    short     while    before,  of  God  the  result  of  an  eternal  decree 

quailing    before    a    servant    maid    in  of  saving  mercy. 

the  high  priest's  palace,  denied  Him  IV.  The   description  given  of   that 

thrice.  death    itself — by    a    word    signifying 

II.  The  tenderness  which  tempered  travail  pangs,  as  the  throes  of  a  death 
this  awful  charge  with  the  announce-  which  was  to  give  birth  to  a  new  life. — 
ment  of  an  eternal  purpose  of  God  in  David  Brown,  D.D. 

HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  37—41. 

The  First  Converts  ;  or,  the  Firstfruits  of  the  Gospel  Harvest. 

I.  The  anxious  inquiry. — By  whom  it  was  preferred.  The  men  and  women 
who  had  listened  to  Peter's  sermon  ;  who  had  manifestly  kept  awake  when  the 
Apostle  preached,  attended  to  his  words,  taken  in  and  reflected  on  their  signifi- 
cance, as  well  as  applied  them  to  their  own  circumstances  and  condition ;  in  all 
which  they  offered  an  example  to  hearers  of  the  Gospel  in  general.  2.  To  whom 
it  was  addressed.  "  To  Peter  and  the  rest  of  the  Apostles."  From  this 
conjunction  of  the  eleven  with  Peter  (see  ver.  14)  it  should  perhaps  be  inferred 
that  they  also  as  well  as  Peter  solicited  a  hearing  from  the  crowd.  Nor  need 
it  be  doubted  that,  enjoying  the  same  inspired  assistance  as  Peter,  they  treated 
their  themes  in  much  the  same  way  as  he  did  his.  In  any  case  they  were 
believed  by  the  multitude  to  be  able,  as  well  as  Peter,  to  direct  those  who  asked 
from  them  guidance.  It  is  good  when  preachers  have  the  confidence  of  their 
hearers,  in  respect  of  both  intelligence  and  willingness  to  place  that  intelligence 
at  their  service ;  it  is  better  when  hearers  in  their  anxiety  appeal  for  spiritual 
counsel  to  such  preachers  ;  it  is  best  when  they  repair  to  Him  who  is  the  Lord 
both  of  hearers  and  preachers.  3.  By  what  it  was  prompted.— A  heartfelt 
conviction  of  guilt.  Realising  the  terrible  mistake  they  had  been  under  both  as  to 
who  Jesus  of  Nazareth  had  been  and  as  to  their  behaviour  in  sending  Him  to 
a  cross,  they  understood  the  heinous  criminality  of  their  lawless  deed ;  and 
discerning  clearly  that  if  Christ  were  now  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  God  they 
were  in  danger  indeed,  they  became  forthwith  filled  with  alarm.  Besides,  by 
their  exclamation  they  practically  owned  their  sin,  and  openly  confessed  their 
belief  that  the  Christ  they  had  crucified  was  Lord  of  all.  Once  more  furnishing 
a  pattern  to  hearers  of  the  Gospel,  who  should  allow  it  when  addressed  to  them 
to  carry  conviction  of  its  truth  to  their  understandings  and  of  their  guilt  to  their 
hearts  and  consciences.  4.  For  what  it  was  directed.  Guidance  in  their  distressful 
perplexity :  "  What  shall  we  do  ? "  Pierced  through  with  the  arrows  of 
conviction,  rent  with  spiritual  anguish  under  a  sense  of  guilt,  enlightened  as  to 
their  wickedness,  and  alarmed  for  their  safety,  they  felt  that  to  remain  indifferent 
or  do  nothing  was  impossible.  They  must  escape  from  the  peril  in  which  they 
stood,  know  how  to  act  in  the  crisis  that  had  come  upon  them,  find  out  where  to 
turn  and  what  to  do  in  order  to  obtain  remission  of  their  guilt,  peace  for  their 
consciences,  and  eternal  life  for  their  souls.  A  fourth  time  their  behaviour  was 
a  splendid  illustration  of  how  convicted,  anxious,  and  distressed  Gospel  hearers 
should  act  in  time  of  soul  concern. 

II.     The  comforting  reply. — 1.  The  direction.     Two  things  were  needful  Cnr 

f  G5 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


all,  without  exception  and  without  delay.  (1)  Repentance.  "Repent  ye." 
Without  a  change  of  mind,  heart,  and  behaviour,  salvation  was  impossible. 
Repentance  for  them  meant  an  alteration  in  their  way  of  thinking  about  Christ, 
who  must  no  more  be  looked  upon  as  a  man,  and  far  less  as  a  malefactor,  but 
regarded  as  Lord  and  Christ ;  in  their  way  of  feeling  towards  Christ,  who  must 
no  more  be  treated  with  indifference  and  unbelief,  far  less  with  hate  and 
persecution,  but  honoured  with  earnest  faith  and  cordial  love ;  in  their  way  of 
acting  before  Christ,  who  must  no  more  be  pained  by  seeing  them  walking  after 
their  own  ways,  and  far  less  in  ways  of  sin,  but  must  behold  them  following 
holiness  and  keeping  His  commandments.  (2)  Baptism.  "  Be  baptised  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  repentance,  faith,  and  obedience  already  demanded, 
if  existing  in  the  heart,  must  be  outwardly  expressed  by  submission  to  baptism, 
in  which  it  was  designed  that  all  should  be  symbolised.  Rightly  viewed,  this 
religious  ordinance  was  intended  for  a  material  and  visible  representation  not  of 
the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  of  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience 
or  the  laying  aside  of  the  works  of  the  flesh  in  repentance  (1  Peter  hi.  21),  of 
the  faith  which  looked  for  cleansing  from  guilt  and  sin  to  the  sprinkling  of  a 
Saviour's  blood  (Heb.  xii.  24),  and  of  that  spirit  of  submission  to  Christ  which 
acknowledged  Him  as  Lord  (Gal.  iii.  27).  That  baptism  was  connected  with 
repentance  as  necessary  for  the  remission  of  sins  did  not  signify  that  any 
saving  efficacy  resided  in  the  water,  or  in  the  ceremony,  but  merely  that  without 
compliance  with  this  ritual  there  could  be  no  guarantee  of  that  repentance  which 
was  required  for  salvation.  Where,  however,  baptism  was  sincerely  submitted  to, 
it  became  a  visible  pledge  to  the  repenting  and  believing  recipient  that  the 
covenant  of  salvation,  of  which  it  was  a  seal,  would  be  kept  in  his  experience,  and 
that  the  blessings  of  the  covenant,  of  which  it  was  a  sign  (washing  from  guilt  or 
pardon,  and  washing  from  pollution  or  regeneration),  would  be  bestowed  upon 
him.  2.  The  promise.  "  Ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Their 
cry  indicated  that  already  they  had  been  visited  by  the  gracious  operations  of 
that  Spirit  who  Christ  said  (John  xvi.  8)  should  convict  the  world  of  sin ;  what 
Peter's  statement  imported  was  that  the  Holy  Ghost  should  descend  upon  them 
as  He  had  upon  the  Apostles  themselves  and  their  fellow- believers,  and  should 
remain  with  them  as  a  permanent  endowment  (John  xiv.  16),  enlightening  their 
minds  (1  Cor.  ii.  12),  purifying  their  hearts  (2  Thess.  ii.  13),  sanctifying  their 
whole  natures  (1  Cor.  vi.  11),  witnessing  with  their  spirits  (Rom.  viii.  16),  and 
conferring  upon  them  sundry  gifts  for  the  edification  of  themselves  and  the 
Church  (1  Cor.  xii.  7).  The  permanent  inhabitation  of  the  believer  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  a  recognised  doctrine  of  the  New  Testament  (v.  32,  x.  44,  xiii.  52, 
xv.  8;  Rom.  v.  5  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  16;  2  Cor.  i.  22,  etc.).  3.  The  encouragement. 
"  The  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  which  was  virtually  a  promise  of  salvation, 
had  been  freely  extended  unto  them,  the  Jews,  domestic  and  foreign,  then 
present  in  the  city  and  listening  to  the  Apostle,  along  with  their  children, 
descendants,  or  offspring  (a  warrant  for  infant  baptism),  and  unto  all  that  were 
afar  off,  not  merely  Jews  of  the  dispersion,  but  Gentiles  as  well ;  an  unambiguous 
hint  that  from  the  first  the  Gospel,  as  preached  by  Peter,  contemplated  the 
admission  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  Church,  though  Peter  from  the  first  did  not 
understand  the  exact  terms  and  conditions  upon  which  their  reception  should 
take  place.  The  only  limitation  to  that  universality  which  sounds  in  the 
Gospel  offer  arises  from  the  appended  clause,  "  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God 
shall  call  unto  Him,"  which  may  signify  either  that  the  promise  would  realise  itself 
only  in  the  case  of  those  whom  God  inwardly  called  to  Himself  by  His  grace,  or  that 
it  was  extended  only  to  those  who  were  invited  by  the  Gospel.  Both  propositions 
are  correct.  All  who  hear  the  Gospel  call  are  invited  freely  to  lay  hold  of  the 
promise ;  but  the  promise  is  fulfilled  to  them  alone  who  by  faith  embrace  it,  and 

66 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  II. 


so  prove  themselves  to  have  been  inwardly  drawn  by  the  Father  (John  vi.  44). 
4.  The  appeal.  Besides  encouraging  his  hearers  Peter  endeavours  to  arouse 
them  to  instant  action,  by  exhorting  them  to  save  themselves  from  the  then 
existing  crooked  generation  (compare  Phil.  h.  15),  for  which  the  Hebrew  Scriptures 
threatened  ultimate  destruction  (Psalm  cxxv.  5) ;  and  this  he  tells  them  they  could 
do  only  by  repenting  and  being  baptised.  In  no  other  way  yet  can  men  rescue 
themselves  from  the  doom  which  overhangs  this  present  evil  world  (1  Cor.  xi.  32 ; 
Gal.  i.  4). 

III.  The  happy  result. — About  three  thousand  souls  (persons)  responded  to 
this  appeal.  1.  They  received  the  Apostle's  ivord.  With  faith.  A  customary 
New  Testament  phrase  for  believing  acceptance  of  the  Gospel  (xi.  1,  xvii.  7  ; 
1  Thess.  i.  6,  ii.  13).  2.  They  submitted  to  baptism.  Whether  this  rite  was 
administered  on  the  spot,  or  at  a  subsequent  hour  of  the  same  day,  or  still  later, 
to  suit  the  convenience  of  the  recipients,  is  not  certain  from  the  text  (see  "  Critical 
Remarks  "),  though  the  second  alternative  is  the  more  probable.  (On  the  subjects 
of  baptism,  see  "  Hints  on  ver.  39.")  4.  They  were  added  to  the  Church.  The  word 
Church,  though  not  expressed,  is  understood.  The  new  converts  were  reckoned 
to  the  number  of  professed  disciples,  and  professed  disciples  form  the  visible 
Church. 

Learn. — 1.  The  genesis  of  true  religion  in  the  soul.  Conviction  of  sin, 
repentance,  faith  (implied  in  baptism),  pardon,  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  The 
defectiveness  of  those  (so-called)  evangelical  systems  that  have  no  place  in  their 
teaching  for  conviction  of  sin  or  repentance.  3.  The  certain  test  of  religion's 
reality  in  the  soul  of  an  individual — his  having  received  the  Holy  Spirit. 
4.  The  universality  of  the  Gospel  promise  of  salvation,  not  inconsistent  with 
Divine  Sovereignty  in  respect  of  the  Gospel  call.  5.  The  urgency  of  seeking 
after  personal  salvation,  by  separation  from  the  sinful  world.  6.  The  necessity 
of  confessing  Christ  before  men  by  submitting  to  baptism.  7.  The  duty  of 
believers  connecting  themselves  with  the  visible  fellowship  of  the  saints. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  37.  Conviction  of  Sin. 

I.  By  whom  required  ? — All,  seeing 
that  all  have  sinned. 

II.  Wherein  lies  its  seat  ? — In  the 
heart,  as  distinguished  from  the  head. 

III.  By  what  produced?— 1.  The 
instrument — the  word  of  God,  either 
preached  or  read.  2.  The  agent — the 
Holy  Ghost  applying  the  word  to  the 
conscience. 

IV.  To  what  it  leads? — A  sense  of 
danger  and  feeling  of  alarm,  prompting 
the  cry,  "  What  shall  we  do  1 " 

V.  How  removed  ? — By  :  1.  Repent- 
ance. 2.  Remission  of  sin.  3.  Recep- 
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  Cry  of  awakened  Souls,  '*  What 
shall  we  do  1 "     The  cry  of  : 
I.  Acknowledged  guilt. 
II.  Realised  danger. 
III.  Conscious  helplessness. 


IV.  Earnest  desire. 
V.  Eager  hope. 
VI.  Humble  docility. 
VII.  Arising  faith. 

The  Spirit  and  the  New  Sense  of 
Sin. — Confucius  is  said  to  have  once 
exclaimed,  in  an  outburst  of  despond- 
ency, "  It  is  all  over  S  I  have  not  yet 
seen  one  who  could  perceive  his  fault 
and  inwardly  accuse  himself."  Con- 
fucius is  not  alone  in  that  verdict  upon 
human  nature.  The  lament  is  sugges- 
tive. It  implies  the  enormous  diffi- 
culty of  bringing  an  average  man  to 
admit  his  fault.  It  is  all  but  impossible 
to  argue  the  world  into  a  frank  and 
unreserved  acknowledgment  of  its 
follies  and  misdemeanours.  The  most 
horrible  offences  which  have  ever 
blotted  and  befouled  the  history  of 
mankind  find  ingenious  apologists.    At 

67 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


this  very  hour  men  will  write  to  the  tion  to  this  code  of  etiquette  ;  for,  in 
newspapers  to  defend  with  sociological  spite  of  all  it  has  to  say  about  the  de- 
sophistries  every  vice  that  saps  and  pravity  of  human  nature,  it  enforces 
smirches  our  national  life.  Where  the  the  universal  honour  of  man  as  man. 
Spirit  of  God  does  not  work  in  the  Can  we  be  content  to  honour  ourselves 
fulness  of  His  power  true  moral  dis-  less  than  it  is  claimed  others  must 
cernment  is  wanting.  You  might  as  honour  us  ?  We  are  built  up  in  pride 
well  make  a  colour-blind  man  judge  at  by  that  habit  of  expecting  honour  at 
a  flower-show,  as  accept  from  one  who  the  hands  of  others,  the  germ  of  which 
has  not  the  Spirit  of  God  a  verdict  is  perhaps  hereditary,  and  we  repel  and 
upon  questions  of  morals  not  already  resent  that  self-humiliation  to  which 
determined  by  statute  law  or  public  the  Spirit  must  needs  bring  the  best 
opinion.     To  convince  of  sin  is  a  work  of  us. 

of  supreme  difficulty  worthy  of  the  II.  The  work  of  the  sin-convincing 
Spirit's  matchless  light  and  wisdom  and  Spirit  is  further  hindered  by  the  fact 
resource.  So  many  forces  militate  that  we  judge  ourselves  in  the  light  of 
against  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  con-  an  imaginary  future,  as  well  as  by  the 
vincing  the  world  of  sin,  that  the  ideals  of  an  outfading  past.  We  draw 
wonder  is  we  should  come  to  see  any  the  material  for  our  own  portraiture 
dawning  humility,  reproach,  and  self-  from  the  flattering  hopes  we  have  been 
accusation  in  human  nature  at  all.  wont  to  cherish,  rather  than  from  the 
I.  The  instinctive  pride  of  human  practical  record  we  have  left  behind  us. 
nature  is  arrayed  against  this  first  We  had  meant  to  be  holy  and  noble 
task  of  the  Comforter. — The  man  who,  and  without  reproach,  and  have  not  yet 
born  to  wealth,  lands  himself  in  an  un-  relinquished  our  great  intentions,  and 
happy  bankruptcy  is  rarely  able  to  it  is  from  that  standpoint  we  form  the 
adapt  himself  to  a  life  of  straitened  estimate  of  ourselves.  It  is  not  the 
circumstance.  He  will  think  he  has  spendthrift  youth  only,  with  a  small 
the  right  to  ride  behind  horses,  to  be  income  and  extravagant  conceptions  of 
waited  on,  and  to  drink  the  best  wines,  life,  who  makes  audacious  drafts  upon 
to  the  end  of  his  days,  although  he  the  future.  We  are  all  prone  to  live 
may  never  redeem  his  fortunes.  His  in  a  fool's  paradise,  in  the  ethical  sense, 
habits  cling  to  him,  and  he  goes  upon  We  are  not  yet  at  the  end  of  our  career, 
the  assumption  that  once  a  merchant  and  of  course  we  are  going  some  clav 
prince,  always  a  prince.  A  fallen  to  be  faultless  from  every  point  of  view, 
king  can  rarely  reconcile  himself  to  the  And  the  glamour  of  that  dream  is 
position  of  a  mere  subject.  Poor  play-  always  before  our  eyes  when  we  are 
thing  of  chance  though  he  is,  he  looks  called  to  the  task  of  knowing  ourselves, 
upon  his  hereditary  rights  as  inter-  The  future,  as  we  intend  to  shape  it, 
minable,  and  claims  from  his  followers  will  more  than  outbalance  the  past, 
on  the  tossing  sea,  or  in  the  mountain  III.  Another  difficulty  encountered 
cave  or  island  prison,  to  which  his  by  the  Spirit  in  this  preparatory  work 
conquerors  have  banished  him,  the  is  that  we  find  ourselves  with  person- 
deference  he  had  claimed  when  the  alities  whose  natural  perceptions  are 
head  of  a  brilliant  court.  And  so  with  more  active  than  their  moral. — Two 
human  nature.  It  seems  to  possess  diseases  work  within  us,  our  physical 
some  faint  hereditary  consciousness  of  senses  are  in  a  condition  of  hyperses- 
its  own  high  birth.  It  has  some  thesia  and  morbid  sleeplessness,  and 
pathetic  and  indefinable  reminiscence  our  spiritual  senses  are  blunted  by  an 
of  the  position  to  which  it  was  desig-  ominous  coma  and  a  fast- developing  in- 
nated  in  the  beginning.  The  rever-  duration.  The  perceptions  of  pleasure 
ence  of  children  and  the  honour  of  and  pain  are  so  much  keener  than  the 
neighbours  are  demanded  as  rights,  consciousness  of  right  and  wrong,  that 
The  Bible,  too,  seems  to  give  its  sane-  we  never  forget  the  wrongs  done  to  us 

68 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  n. 


by  others,  and  spend  our  lives  in  count-  it  is  not  easy  to  make  them  lean  in  the 
ing  up  the  pitiful  sum,  whilst  our  heart  other  direction.  A  passing  hurricane 
grows  stone-dead  to  the  trespasses  we  will  not  effect  the  reversion, 
have  committed  against  both  God  and  Y.  Our  passionate  self-interests 
our  fellows.  We  are  occupied  with  an  league  themselves  against  the  work 
arithmetic  that  is  entirely  false,  vicious,  of  the  Spirit  as  He  comes  to  convince 
and  misleading,  and  can  never  give  us  us  of  sin. — We  live  in  a  world  sadly 
an  equation  of  justice  and  of  truth,  lacking  in  charity  and  tenderness,  and 
Whilst  our  natural  sensibilities  are  so  to  plead  guilty  of  a  trespass  in  the 
keen,  that  we  can  give  a  most  minute  common  affairs  of  life  would  often  be 
and  detailed  account  of  all  the  wrongs  to  invite  punishment  more  or-  less 
inflicted  upon  us  by  others,  our  moral  severe.  The  world  gives  us  the  full 
sensibilities  seem  to  be  represented  by  benefit  of  all  the  confessions  we  pour 
a  single  attenuated  nerve-thread  only,  into  its  ear,  and  we  soon  learn  the  art 
which  is  so  obtuse  that  it  fails  to  of  keeping  confessions  to  ourselves.  In 
register  a  tithe  of  the  wrongs  we  do  to  very  few  communities  indeed  is  the 
others ;  and  it  is  hard  to  bring  us  to  admission  of  error  a  highway  to  ad- 
that  state  of  soul  described  by  the  vancement.  Wherever  Governments 
expression  "  pricked  in  the  heart."  are  cruel  and  public  opinion  is  harsh 
And  we  come  to  look  upon  these  soli-  and  pitiless,  you  will  find  a  proportion- 
tary  delinquencies  as  more  than  out-  ate  reluctance  to  admit  error  and  short- 
weighed  by  the  losses  of  which  we  are  coming.  The  most  immaculate  people 
the  victims  through  the  multitudinous  in  the  world,  according  to  their  own 
delinquencies  of  others.  And  by  think-  estimate  at  least,  are  to  be  found  in 
ing  of  these  possible  offsets  in  judgment,  the  lands  where  rule  is  despotic  and 
we  shut  out  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  public  opinion  pitiless.  And  some 
as  He  seeks  to  convince  of  sin.  traces  of  this  fact  are  present  in  our 
IV.  We  are  sometimes  trained  to  own  midst.  For  the  servant  to  con- 
self-justification  by  the  exigencies  of  fess  error  would  be  in  many  instances 
our  daily  life,  and  a  tenacious  habit  is  to  challenge  dismissal,  especially  if  his 
formed  within  us  adverse  to  the  sin-  position  is  one  of  trust  and  responsi- 
convincing  work  of  the  Spirit.  The  bility ;  for  a  master  to  confess  error 
current  conditions  of  society  are  such  would  be  to  invite  strikes  and  to  risk 
that  certain  cardinal  moralities,  and  a  the  break  up  of  his  authority ;  for  a 
reputation  for  them,  are  necessary  to  tradesman  to  confess  grave  error  would 
worldly  success.  We  must  vindicate  in  some  cases  lead  to  a  discontinuance 
our  name  at  every  turn  if  we  are  to  of  the  business  that  has  been  given 
live.  The  competition  that  prevails  in  him.  I  have  heard  some  men  plead 
all  sections  of  the  world,  grave  and  gay  that  authority  must  be  upheld  when 
alike,  is  in  the  last  analysis  the  com-  it  is  wrong,  because  to  allow  that 
petition  of  reputations,  and  we  must  it  had  made  mistakes  might  pave  the 
keep  up  our  reputations,  unless  we  are  way  to  anarchic  conditions  of  feeling, 
to  go  to  the  wall.  It  has  become  And  this  repugnance  to  the  acknow 
a  second  nature  to  us  to  overlook  ledgment  of  error,  ingrained  into  us 
our  own  faults  entirely,  and  to  be  through  our  worldly  training  and  ex- 
ever  dressing  out  our  virtues  for  the  perience,  influences  us  when  the  Spirit 
eye  of  the  world ;  and  we  carry  the  begins  to  deal  with  us  and  to  convince 
habit  of  self-vindication  into  God's  us  of  our  sin.  Confession  is  almost 
presence,  and  exercise  it  before  His  bar,  inseparably  associated  with  the  idea  of 
perhaps  at  the  very  time  we  are  join-  drastic  punishment.  What  is  the 
ing  in  the  General  Confession  of  the  method  of  the  Spirit's  logic  ?  By  what 
Liturgy.  When  trees  have  been  bent  process  do?s  He  introduce  into  the 
by  the  prevailing  winds  that  have  been  human  mind  and  implant  there  these 
beating  upon  them  for  half  a  century,  stern,  unflattering  convictions  of  sin  ? 

69 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


His  work  is  creative,  and  we  cannot 
penetrate  its  many  secrets ;  and  answers 
to  these  questions  are  necessarily  frag- 
mentary and  inadequate.  1.  The  Holy 
Spirit  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  appointed 
work  puts  an  environment  of  new  ideals 
before  the  mind.  He  testifies  of  Christ, 
and  in  so  doing  makes  us  see  how  in 
His  humanity  all  divine  excellencies 
have  come  down  into  the  midst  of  men 
and  made  themselves  a  new  law  to  the 
conscience.  Some  little  time  ago  I  was 
passing  through  a  country  lane,  and 
saw  a  flock  of  sheep  feeding  on  the 
hillside.  They  seemed  to  be  milk-white, 
justifying  the  scriptural  metaphor, 
"  He  scattereth  hoar-frost  like  wool," 
and  fit  to  be  welcomed  as  pets  into  a 
drawing-room.  In  comparison  with 
the  green  pastures  in  which  they  were 
feeding,  their  fleeces  seemed  bleached 
into  spotlessness.  Not  long  after,  a 
snowstorm  came,  and  I  had  occasion  to 
pass  by  the  same  field.  But  the  sheep 
did  not  seem  to  be  the  same  creatures 
at  all.  The  background  had  changed 
as  if  by  magic,  and  they  were  in  a  new 
world,  the  conditions  of  which  served 
to  bring  out  their  griminess.  The 
collier,  rising  out  of  the  pit  into  the 
sunshine  after  a  night  of  toil,  scarcely 
looked  grimier  than  those  spotless  sheep 
of  yesterday.  So  when  the  Spirit 
brings  down  from  the  presence  of  God 
on  high  into  these  human  souls  new 
ideals  of  truth  and  righteousness,  love, 
purity,  faithfulness,  the  soul  sees  it- 
self against  a  new  ethical  background. 
The  philanthropist  puts  himself  by  the 
side  of  churl  and  niggard,  and  says, 
How  open-handed  I  am  !  A  man  poses 
before  the  background  of  ethical 
mediocrity  current  in  his  town,  or  city, 
or  nation,  and  is  quite  content  with  his 
past  record.  And  for  the  time  his 
self-satisfaction  seems  to  be  warranted. 
But  by-and-by  the  new  background 
comes  in.  He  awakes  to  the  fact  that 
he  is  in  God's  presence,  and  sees  him- 
self standing  by  the  side  of  the  spotless 
Son  of  man  in  whom  the  Father  has 
revealed  Himself,  and  before  the  great 
white  throne  of  all-searching  judgment, 
and  he  is  filled  with  shame  and  self- 

70 


condemnation.  2.  The  Spirit  enwraps 
the  man  to  whom  He  comes  with  a 
new  atmosphere  of  sympathy  andgracious- 
ness,  unlike  that  which  exists  in  the 
world  and  provokes  to  ingenuous  self- 
justification.  He  who  comes  under 
this  ministry  feels  almost  instinctively 
His  right  to  search  the  heart  and  bring 
every  delinquency  before  a  divine 
tribunal.  It  is  useless  to  attempt 
concealment,  for  the  Spirit  knows  us 
more  thoroughly  than  we  know  our- 
selves, and  can  constrain  the  most 
reluctant  natures  into  a  consciousness 
of  their  own  evil.  He  acts  upon  us, 
not  like  the  angry  storm  which  leads 
men  to  bar  their  doors  and  close  their 
shutters,  but  like  the  soft  south  wind, 
which  opens  every  labyrinth  of  the 
heart  and  life  to  the  light.  It  is  no 
treachery  or  ill-will  or  unrelenting 
antagonism  which  is  bringing  right 
home  to  us  the  unwelcome  facts  of  the 
past,  but  helping  and  healing  benefi- 
cence. 3.  But  over  and  above  these 
things,  a  neiv  power  of  moral  discern- 
ment needs  to  be  aroused  in  those  who 
are  to  be  re-created  by  the  ministry  of 
the  Spirit.  The  Pharisee  met  Jesus, 
and  had  no  sense  of  guilt.  The  idea 
of  spiritual  sin  seemed  to  be  entirely 
foreign  to  the  genius  of  his  thought. 
He  looked  upon  the  surpassing  excel- 
lence of  this  man  of  Nazareth  as  mere 
eccentricity,  a  freak  of  fanaticism,  a 
spasm  of  madness.  Men  needed  new 
senses,  an  enlargement  of  the  conscience 
that  would  enable  them  to  feel  the 
guilt  of  unchastened  desire,  evil  imagi- 
nation, soulless  worship.  And  where 
the  Spirit  comes,  whilst  He  deadens 
to  the  illusions  of  the  world  and  its 
vain  shows,  He  makes  men  conscious 
of  the  paramount  significance  of  the 
faintest  things  which  touch  their  re- 
lation to  the  invisible.  By  awakening 
these  new  perceptions  the  Spirit  brings 
into  view  the  countless  spiritual  sins  of 
the  former  days,  and  shuts  men  up  for 
hope  to  the  one  common  law  of  mercy. 
The  fact  that  the  sins  of  the  spirit  as 
well  as  the  sins  of  the  body  are  rebuked 
by  this  inward  Teacher  is  indicated  by 
that  expansion  of  the  words  immediately 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  II. 


added — indeed,  sins  of  the  spirit  are  the 
roots  of  all  outward  transgression — 
"of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on 
Me."  In  the  view  of  the  Spirit  this  is 
the  core  of  all  heinousness  in  either 
the  ancient  or  the  modern  world,  and 
the  Spirit  will  demonstrate  it  to  those 
with  whom  He  deals.  4.  The  convic- 
tion of  sin  is  the  groundivork  of  all 
religious  belief,  and  there  can  be  no 
genuine  consciousness  of  divine  things 
which  does  not  begin  here.  Remember 
in  what  an  awful  state  the  man  is  who 
lacks  this  new  sense  of  sin.  If  the 
natural  senses  were  blotted  out,  a  man 
would  walk  into  some  death-trap  or 
other  in  less  than  twenty-four  hours. 
And  when  a  man  lacks  these  spiritual 
senses,  is  the  peril  less  tragic,  think 
you  1  The  highest  thing  that  the  love 
of  God  or  man  can  seek  for  you  is  that 
you  may  have  this  sense  of  sin.  Has 
it  been  born  within  you?  Do  you 
possess  this  sign  of  a  dawning  spiritual 
life?— T.  G.  Selby. 

Yer.  38.  The  Gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
I.  Supernatural  as  to  its  origin. 
II.  Mysterious  as  to  its  enjoyment. 

III.  Free  as  to  its  bestowment. 

IV.  Conditioned  as  to  its  reception. 
V.  Permanent  as  to  its  duration. 

VI.  Saving  as  to  its  effect. 

Vers.  36-38.  The    Cross,   the  Cruci- 
fiers,  and  the  Crucified. 

I.  The  crucified  One. — Let  us  note 
concerning  this.  1.  Who  He  was. 
"  That  same  Jesus " ;  yes,  Jesus  of 
Nazareth.  2.  What  was  done  to  Him. 
He  was  betrayed,  tried,  condemned, 
crucified,  slain.  3.  By  whom  was  this 
done  ?  By  "  His  own  " ;  by  "  Israel," 
the  house  of  Israel.  4.  What  God  has 
made  Him.  "  Both  Lord  and  Christ." 
The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected 
has  been  made  the  head  of  the  corner. 
II  The  crucifiers. — They  were,  as 
we  have  seen,  "the  house  of  Israel." 
They  had  deliberately  united  to  crucify. 
— 1.  An  innocent  man.  2.  A  good 
man.  3.  A  prophet.  4.  The  Lord  of 
Glory.  5.  Their  own  Messiah.  They 
were  thus  not  merely  murderers,  but 


no    ordinary    ones ;    criminals   in    the 
highest  and  darkest  sense. 

III.  The  connection  between  the 
crucified  and  the  crucifiers  for  evil  and 
for  good.  1.  For  evil.  For  condem- 
nation. It  was  this  that  they  felt  so 
awfully  when  the  Apostle  had  stated 
the  simple  facts.  (1)  They  were 
pricked  in  their  hearts.  (2)  They  cried 
out,  What  shall  we  do?  A  full  sense 
of  their  awful  criminality  flashed 
through  them.  2.  For  good.  This 
connection  for  evil  might  be  disannulled, 
and  a  new  one  formed. — H.  Bonar, 
D.D. 

Ver.  39.  The  Promise  of  the  Gospel. 
I.  As  to  its  giver,  divine. 
II.  As  to  its  contents,  saving. 

III.  As  to  its  terms,  free. 

IV.  As  to  its  recipients,  universal. 
V.  As    to    its    continuance,    irre- 
vocable. 

To  you  and  to  your  Children  ;  or,  the 
Church  Membership  of  Children. 

I.  The  import  of  this  statement. — 
Not  that  all  children  indiscriminately 
and  promiscuously  should  be  regarded 
as  within  the  pale  of  the  Church 
visible,  but  only  those  of  such  parents 
or  parent  as  accepted  and  relied  upon 
the  promise. 

II.  The  ground  of  this  statement. — 
That  children  were  considered  as  within 
the  pale  of  the  Old  Testament  Church, 
and  that  under  the  New  the  promise 
of  salvation  (remission  of  sins  and  recep- 
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost),  and  therefore 
of  Church  membership,  is  distinctly 
offered  to  men  and  women  not  by 
themselves,  but  along  with  their 
offspring. 

III.  The  consequence  of  this  state- 
ment.— 1.  The  salvation  of  children 
dying  in  infancy.  This  seems,  in  the 
case  at  least  of  the  children  of  believing 
parents,  involved  in  their  relation  to  the 
promise.  The  promise  belongs  to  them 
in  virtue  of  their  connection  with  be- 
lieving parents,  and  is  given  to  them 
the  moment  they  accept  it  by  an  act  of 
personal  repentance  and  faith.  Hence, 
in  the  case  of  such  as  die  before  this 

71 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


repentance  and  faith  can  be  exercised, 
it  seems  reasonable  to  conclude  that 
they  are  saved.  Nor  is  it  an  unnatural 
supposition  with  regard  to  infants  gener- 
ally who  die  before  attaining  to  years  of 
responsibility  that  they  also,  for  Christ's 
sake,  share  intheblessing  of  thepromise. 
2.  The  reasonableness  of  infant  bap- 
tism. If  to  them  belongs  the  promise 
of  salvation,  why  should  they  not 
receive  its  sign  and  seal  ?  If  it  be 
answered  that  faith  must  precede  bap- 
tism, the  answer  is  that  faith  must  also 
precede  salvation.  If,  then,  a  child 
cannot  be  baptised  without  faith,  the 
conclusion  is  that  neither  can  he  be 
saved  without  faith.  In  other  words, 
a  child  dying  in  infancy  must  be  lost. 
We  prefer  to  believe  Christ :  "  Of  such 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

Vers.  37-40.  Words  for  Anxious  In- 
quirers. 

I.  Their  duty  pointed  out. — 1 .  Re- 
pent.    2.  Believe.     3.  Be  baptised. 


II.  Their  salvation  assured. — I.  The 

Holy  Ghost  is  for  them  who  perform 
these  duties.  2.  As  a  free  gift.  3.  In 
undoubted  certainty. 

III.  Their    warrant    set    forth. — 

1.  The  promise  of  salvation  is  for  them. 

2.  They  are  called  to  believe  the  promise 
and  accept  the  gift. 

Ver.  41.  The  Miraculous  Draught  of 
Souls. 

I.  The    deep    sea. — The     listening 
multitude. 

II.  The  gospel  net. — The  sermon  of 
Peter. 

III.  The  great  catch. — Three  thou- 
sand converts  in  one  day. 

Vers.  38-41.  Scala   Salutis ;  or,  the 
Ladder  of  Salvation. 

I.  Repentance  cherished. 
II.  Faith  expressed. 

III.  Sin  forgiven. 

IV.  The  Holy  Ghost  received. 
V.  Baptism  submitted  to. 

VI.  The  Church  entered. 


HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  42-47. 

The  Pentecostal  Church  ;  or,  the  Daily  Life  of  Primitive  Believers. 

I.  The  leaders  of  the  Church. — The  apostles,  who  were  employed  in  two  ways : 

1.  Teaching.  Instructing  the  newly  baptised  converts  in  the  elements  of 
Christian  truth.  Baptising  and  teaching  the  order  prescribed  by  Christ 
(Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20).  This  traverses  the  idea  that  baptism  should  not  be  admini- 
stered to  infants  because  these  cannot  understand  the  gospel  before  being  baptised. 

2.  Working  miracles.  Doing  signs  and  wonders  ;  most  likely  healing  sick  persons. 
The  curing  of  the  lame  man  (hi.  1-10)  an  example  of  their  activity  in  this 
direction.  Their  "  works  "  secured  a  hearing  for  their  "  words."  "  Good  works  " 
should  always  accompany  "  good  words." 

II.  The  members  of  the  Church. — 1.  The  New  Converts.  Devoted  to  four 
things :  (1)  Waiting  on  the  teaching  of  the  apostles.  An  example  for  young 
Christians,  who  should  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  world  that  they  might  grow 
thereby  (1  Peter  ii.  2).  (2)  Cultivating  religious  fellowship  with  one  another. 
Joining,  doubtless,  in  common  acts  of  worship  and  mutual  deeds  of  kindness. 
So  should  Christ's  disciples  not  forsake  the  assembling  cf  themselves  together 
(Heb.  x.  25),  or  forget  to  be  kindly  affectioned  one  to  another  (Eph.  iv.  32), 
speaking  to  one  another  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs  (Eph.  v.  19), 
and  endeavouring  to  preserve  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace 
(Eph.  iv.  3).  (3)  Celebrating  the  Lord's  Supper.  At  first  observed  on  the 
evening  of  every  day,  at  the  close  of  a  common  meal  or  lovefeast  (Agapse),  it 
gradually  came  to  be  dissociated  from  the  lovefeast,  and  to  be  celebrated  at  wider 
intervals.  (4)  Engaging  in  acts  of  devotion.  Praying  both  in  public  "in  the 
temple "  and  privately  "  at  home."  Perhaps  using  the  prayers  of  the  Jewish 
sanctuary ;  more  likely  employing  the  prayer  which  Christ  had  taught  His 
disciples  (Matt.  vi.  9) ;  and  outpouring  besides,  in  speech  of  their  own,   their 

72 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap  .11. 


hearts'  desires  for  themselves  and  for  one  another.  2.  The  whole  body  of 
believers.  Of  these,  who  also  continued  daily  in  the  temple  praising  God 
and  celebrating  the  Lord's  Supper  in  their  homes,  three  things  additional 
are  recorded  :  (1)  They  maintained  visible  unity  among  themselves.  Not  only 
being  of  "  one  accord,"  but  meeting  "  in  one  place."  Not  necessarily  in  one 
building  all  at  once,  since  a  commodious  enough  chamber  might  be  difficult  to 
find  in  Jerusalem,  but  in  separate  groups  in  different  rooms,  the  essential  thing 
about  their  meetings  being  that  they  were  characterised  by  a  spirit  of  concord 
and  unity.  (2)  They  supported  themselves  by  a  common  purse.  Those  who  had 
"  lands  "  or  "  estates  " — i.e.,  real  property — and  those  who  had  "  goods  "  or  personal 
property,  sold  what  belonged  to  them  and  cast  the  proceeds  into  a  common  fund, 
out  of  which  each  man  received  what  was  needful  for  his  daily  sustenance.  This, 
the  first  effort  after  Christian  socialism,  was  probably  dictated  by  two  things — 
a  desire  to  live  as  nearly  as  possible  like  Christ  and  His  apostles  (John  xiii.  29), 
and  the  necessity  of  finding  a  livelihood  for  those  who,  by  becoming  Christians, 
had  been  thrown  out  of  their'  customary  employments,  and  so  reduced  to  want. 
How  far  this  experiment  of  the  Jerusalem  Church  was  binding  on  the  Churches 
that  afterwards  arose,  or  how  far  it  should  be  followed  by  Churches  to-day,  are 
questions  on  which  the  "  Hints  on  iv.  34,  35  "  may  be  consulted.  (3)  They 
grew  in  popularity  with  the  outside  public.  Owing  doubtless  to  the  "  signs  and 
wonders  of  the  apostles,"  by  which  the  populace  were  impressed  j  to  the  increasing 
number  of  believers,  which  caused  the  new  movement  to  be  respected  ;  to  the 
peaceful  character  of  the  Christians,  who,  not  being  turbulent  fellows,  gradually 
disarmed  the  people's  fears  and  suspicions ;  and  to  the  kindness  they  exhibited 
towards  each  other,  which  naturally  drew  the  people  to  regard  them  with 
sympathy. 

III.  The  Head  of  the  Church. — The  Lord — i.e.,  Jesus  Christ.  Occupied  in  two 
ways.  1.  Impressing  the  people.  (1)  With  fear  towards  Himself.  Religious  awe 
(Luke  i.  65)  fell  on  every  soul  who  witnessed  what  was  going  on.  They  said  "  This 
is  the  doing  of  the  Lord  !  "  (Psalm  cxviii.  23).  (2)  With  favour  towards  the 
disciples.  These  came  to  be  looked  upon  with  approbation  (Luke  ii.  52),  on 
account  doubtless  of  their  serious  characters  and  peaceful  lives.  2.  Increasing 
the  Church.  Adding  f  0  it  daily  through  the  preaching  of  the  apostles  — not  those 
who  should  be,  or  those  who  were,  but  those  who  were  being  saved. 

Learn. — 1.  The  secret  of  spiritual  growth — continuing  in  the  apostles'  doctrine, 
etc.  (ver.  42).  2.  The  secret  of  Church  stability — walking  in  love  and  bearing 
one  another's  burdens  (ver.  44).  3.  The  secret  of  happiness — the  cultivation^ 
piety  at  home  and  the  exhibition  of  it  abro5cT(ver.  46).  4.  The  secret  of  ecclesi- 
astical prosperity — God  adding  to  the  Church  those  who  are  being  saved. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  42.  Christian  Steadfastness.  vi.  18  ;  Phil.  iv.  6;  Col.  iv.  2 ;  1  Thess. 

I.  In  the  Apostle's  doctrine.    (Com-  v.  17.) 
pare  xiv.  22  ;  1  Thess.  v.  21  j  2  Thess. 

ii.  15;   2  Tim.  iii.  14;  Heb.  x.  23.)  Yers.    44,  45.    Primitive    Christian 

II.  In  mutual  fellowship.     Compare  Socialism    and     Modern     Unchristian 
Rom.  xii.  10,  xv.  2;  Gal.  v.  13;  Eph.  Communism  compared  and  contrasted. 
iv.  2,  v.  2.)  I.  Points  of  resemblance. — 1.  The 

III.  In  the  breaking  of  bread.  Com-  sale  (or  surrender)  of  lands  and  goods, 
pare  xx.  7  ;  1  Cor.  v.  7,  8,  x.  16,  17,  2.  The  creation  of  a  common  sustenta- 
xi.  17-34.)  tion  fund.     3.  The  distribution  to  each 

IV.  In    prayers.      (Compare    Eph.  man  according  to  his  need. 

73 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


II.  Points  of  difference. — 1.  Chris- 
tian socialism  (as  practised  in  Pente- 
costal days)  said — "  What  is  mine  is 
thine " ;  modern  communism,  as  fre- 
quently advocated,  says,  "  What  is 
thine  is  mine."  2.  Christian  socialism 
said,  "  Take  what  I  have "  ;  modern 
communism  says,  "  Give  what  thou 
hast."  3.  Christian  socialism  was 
prompted  by  love  to  the  poor  ;  modern 
communism  is  too  often  actuated  by 
hatred  to  the  rich.  4.  Christian 
socialism  drew  men  together  in  love 
and  sympathy ;  modern  communism 
rather  tends  to  separate  men  by  anger 
and  hostility. 

III.  Points  of  suggestion. — 1.  That 
if  Christian  socialism  were  more  prac- 
tised modern  communism  would  be 
less  rampant.  2.  That  the  existence 
of  modern  communism  shows  some- 
thing to  be  wrong  in  the  social  body. 
3.  That  the  equality  of  classes  and 
individuals  should  rather  be  brought 
about  by  Christian  socialism  than  by 
modern  communism.    , 

Yer.  46.  Model  Christians. 

I.  In  their  duty  towards  God. — 
Worshipping  daily  with  one  accord  in 
the  temple. 

II.  In  their  love  towards  each  other. 
— Cultivating  friendly  relationships  in 
private  life.     Breaking  bread  at  home. 

III.  In  their  happiness  by  them- 
selves.— Eating  their  meat  with  glad- 
ness and  singleness  of  heart. 

Ver.  47.  A  Prosperous  Church. 
I.  Increasing  in  numbers. 
II.  Increasing  in  numbers  daily. 

III.  Increasing  through  the  addition 
of  saved  souls. 

IV.  Increasing  through  additions 
made  by  the  Lord. 

Vers.  37-47.  The  Believing  People. 

I.  We  are  shown,  first,  the  elements 
of  genuine  conversion. — Two  words 
may  express  these — "repentance," 
"  faith."  Conversion  is  turning  round 
and  coming  back  to  God.  Sin  is  the 
only  thing  which  can  keep  men  from 
God.     But  for  that,  we  should  fly  to 

74 


him,  as  a  raindrop  hastes  to  the  ocean. 
The  beginning  of  salvation  with  this 
multitude  was  in  honest  conviction  of 
guilt.  Peter  charged  them  with  the 
greatest  crime — crucifying  their  Mes- 
siah. They  admitted  the  charge  with- 
out excuse  or  resentment.  If  such  a 
sinner  ever  gets  to  heaven,  something 
more  than  repentance  and  consecration 
must  bring  him  there.  The  sinner  has 
violated  the  eternal  law  of  righteous- 
ness, compared  with  which  the  law  of 
gravitation  is  weak  and  transient.  He 
may  repent,  he  may  yield  to  God  ;  but 
something  harder  to  be  managed  than 
a  cold  heart  and  a  stubborn  will  is  a 
broken  law.  Deep  conviction  cannot 
rest  short  of  expiation.  It  demands 
not  only  forgiveness,  but  cleansing. 
This  it  finds  by  an  absolute  trust  in 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  Just  as  soon 
as  the  people  learned  what  to  do  they 
joined  the  company  of  disciples ;  so  we 
are  to  notice — 

II.  The  qualifications  for  Church: 
membership. — Plainly,  conversion  at 
the  outset.  The  Church  was  to  be 
made  up  of  regenerate  souls.  This  was 
a  new  thing.  In  the  Jewish  Church, 
one  came  into  membership  by  being 
born  of  the  flesh.  To  enter  Christ's 
Church  he  must  be  born  of  the  Spirit. 
At  the  birth  of  the  Christian  Church, 
the  apostles,  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
set,  as  Conditions  of  membership,  true 
conversion  and  public  confession  of  a 
sound  faith. 

III.  The  characteristic  life  of  the 
Church  is  also  described  here. — 1. 
Worship.  2.  Fellowship.  3.  Thus 
strengthened  within,  it  had  a  Zeal 
which  reached  out  to  bless  the  world. 
Born  in  a  revival,  it  breathed  a  revival 
spirit  into  all  its  work. — Monday  Club 
Sermons. 

1.  Observe  the  effect  of  Peter's  ser- 
mon, which  was  instrumental  in  win- 
ning the  first  converts.  His  hearers  were 
"  pricked  in  their  hearts."  2.  Next  we 
have  the  cry  of  the  wounded  conscience ; 
and  there  are  no  wounds  which  prompt 
to  so  earnest  a  cry  as  those  which  an 
awakened  conscience  suffers.       "  Men 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  ii. 


and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  1 "  3.  longer  held,  it  will  not  be  out  of 
We  are  taught  the  means  of  cure — re-  place  to  take  the  words  in  their  more 
pentance  and  baptism  into  the  name  of  restricted  application.  And  how  im- 
Jesus.  Of  course  faith  in  Jesus  is  here  portant  the  observance  of  the  Lord's 
clearly  implied.  4.  Next  consider  how  Supper  is  to  the  development  of  the 
this  large  company  of  believers  grew  in  Christian  life  need  not  be  largely  in- 
grace  and  acquired  strength  in  their  sisted  upon.  It  brings  us,  we  all  know, 
spiritual  life.  The  means  employed  were  into  special  communion  with  our  Loid 
four — every  one  essential  to  Christian  in  the  mystery  of  His  great  sacrifice  in 
progress.  (1)  "  Steadfast  continuance  our  behalf.  Sacramental  seasons  are 
in  the  apostles'  doctrine."  Christianity  therefore  the  Church's  festal  seasons, 
is  a  religion  based  on  facts,  all  of  which  They  should  be  so  celebrated,  and  mark 
embody  vital  and  eternal  truths.  And  as  they  come  the  stages  of  its  enlarge- 
this  is  ever  one  of  the  indispensable  ment.  (4)  "  In  prayers."  Whether 
methods  of  nourishing  the  soul  in  piety  there  are  intended  here  public  or 
and  holiness.  We  must  study  the  private  supplications,  the  essential  thing 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  be  .built  up  is  "  the  offering  up  of  the  heart's  desires 
into  Him  in  all  things.  Moreover,  for  things  agreeable  to  God's  will  in  the 
there  must  be  "  steadfast  continuance  "  name  of  Christ."  Such  prayer  is  the 
in  this  work.  Never  will  the  time  breath  of  the  Christian  life.  No  soul 
come  for  even  the  most  studious  to  that  has  been  quickened  to  feel  its  own 
say,  "  I  have  learned  it  all."  If  a  Paul  ignorance  and  weakness  and  perverse- 
could  say,  "  I  count  not  myself  to  have  ness,  that  has  been  awakened  to  discern 
apprehended,"  there  is  no  chance  for  a  the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  see  what 
reasonable  boast  with  any  of  us  that  it  ought  to  become,  that  has  learned 
we  have  attained  all  and  are  perfect  something  of  the  glory  of  God's  king- 
in  knowledge.  The  more  we  know  clom,  and  what  a  renovation  it  was 
truly,  the  better  shall  we  become.  (2)  •  designed  to  effect  on  earth,  can  live 
The  second  means  of  edification  is  without  prayer.  If  Christians  would 
"  fellowship."  By  this  I  understand  grow  in  grace  they  must  pray  for 
friendly  intercourse  of  believers  with  grace.  5.  A  Church  thus  alive  and 
each  other  as  brethren  and  sisters  in  edified  will  be  likely  to  exhibit  some 
Jesus  Christ.  Their  faith  had  united  fruits  of  its  new  life.  What  fruit 
them  in  a  new  and  holier  sympathy.  the  early  Church  bore  the  text 
One  divine  Spirit  pervaded  their  hearts.  tells  us.  First,  there  was  the  largest 
Fellowship  is  one  of  the  essential  condi-  liberality.  The  time  was  one  which 
tions  of  a  healthful,  happy,  and  vigorous  called  for  special  sacrifices  on  the  part 
existence.  The  Church  that  does  not  of  believers  resident  at  Jerusalem.  A 
take  pains  to  cultivate  it  is  untrue  to  large  number  of  people  had  come  from 
itself.  Disintegration  by  reason  of  a  distance  to  attend  the  feast  of  Pente- 
class-distinctions  or  mutual  jealousies  cost,  and,  expecting  soon  to  return  to 
and  rivalries  or  personal  alienations  is  their  homes,  they  had  not  provided  for 
weakness,  is  destruction.  Let  it  be  a  long  stay.  And  the  need  was  heartily 
avoided  by  all  means.  The  "  com-  supplied.  In  the  first  fervours  of  their 
munion  of  saints"  should  be  no  dead  love  and  joy  all  selfishness  seems  to 
article  of  our  creed,  but  a  living  fact.  have  melted  away.  No  one  called 
(3)  "  The  breaking  of  bread "  is  the  aught  he  had  his  own,  but  they  had 
third  specific.  This  expression  may  be  all  things  common.  Generosity  is  one 
taken  in  a  broader  sense  to  denote  the  mark  of  a  true  Church.  Let  no  person 
lovefeasts  of  the  earlier  time,  or  it  may  deem  himself  a  Christian  who  does  not 
be  restricted  to  denote  simply  the  exhibit  something  of  it.  Other  fruits 
sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  with  were  gladness,  singleness  of  heart, 
which  the  lovefeast  was  always  con-  praise.  Indeed,  to  such  an  extent  did 
eluded.     Now,  since  lovefeasts  are  no  these   fruits   abound   that   one   would 

75 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


infer  that  the  early  days  of  the  Church 
were  one  continuous  festal  season.  The 
new  life  burst  forth  at  once  in  full 
beauty  and  fragrance  as  a  spring-time, 
and  all  hearts  blossomed  with  joys  and 
gushed  out  in  song.  How  could  it  be 
otherwise  1  This  is  the  natural  effect 
of  that  religion  the  object  of  whose 
worship  is  a  God  of  love,  and  whose 
spirit  breathes  love  into  every  believing 
soul.  Love  is  gladsome,  love  is  musical. 
6.  Finally,  we  see  the  influence  which 
this  exhibition  of  this  Christian  spirit 
had  upon  the  multitude.  The  new 
converts  "  found  favour  with  all  the 
people."  And  this,  too,  was  a  legitimate 
result.  The  gospel,  truly  acted  out, 
commends  itself  to  every  man's  con- 
science. It  creates  a  blessedness  which 
wins  admiration.  "  The  Lord  added 
to  the  Church  daily."  This  is  the  way 
every  Church  must  grow  and  spread. 
It  must  aim  to  make  itself  attractive 
by  catching  and  reflecting  the  beauty 


and  the  glory  of  its  risen  Lord.  There 
is  no  community  on  earth  that  has  in 
itself  the  possibility  of  exercising  such 
an  all-conquering  power  over  mankind 
as  the  Church  possesses. — D.  W.  Poor, 
D.D. 

Vers.  1-47  (on  the  whole  chapter.) 
— The  Day  of  Pentecost. 

I.  The  descent  of  the  Spirit  (vers. 
1-4).      1.    The   time.      2.   The   signs. 

3.  The  tongues. 

II.  The  effect  (vers.  5-13).  1.  As- 
tonishment. 2.  Perplexity.  3.  Mockery. 

III.  The  explanation  (vers.  14-36). 
1.  The  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  2.  The 
realisation  of  the  same  in  Christ. 

IV.  The  fruit  (vers.  37-41).  1.  Con- 
version of  multitudes.  2.  Their  re- 
ception into  the  Church  by  baptism. 

V.  The  Beginnings  of  Church  life 
(vers.  42-47). — 1.  Instruction.  2. 
Fellowship.     3.  The  breaking  of  bread. 

4.  Prayers. — David  Brown,  D.D, 


CHAPTER    III. 

The  Church  op  Christ  entering  on  its  Mission — The  First 

Apostolic  Miracle. 

§  1.   The   Beautiful   Gate   of   the   Temple;   or,  the  healing  of   a  Lame  Man 

(vers.  1-10). 
§  2.  Solomon's  Porch;  or,  Peter's  Second  Sermon  (vers.  11-26). 

1.  The  Secret  of  the  Miracle  explained  (vers.  11-16). 

2.  The  People  comforted  and  counselled  (vers.  17-26). 


CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Peter  and  John. — The  old  companionship  which  had  existed  between  these  two 
disciples  before  the  crucifixion  (John  i.  20  ;  Matt.  xvii.  1),  and  was  resumed  after  the 
resurrection  (John  xx.  2),  is  here  continued.  A  peculiar  affinity  of  nature  as  well  as  of 
grace  appears  to  have  bound  these  together.  Went  up.— Rather,  were  (in  the  act  of) 
going  up— up  because  the  Temple  stood  on  Mount  Moriah.  Together.— Lit,,  into  the  same 
place,  as  in  i.  15,  hence  together  or  in  company.  The  ninth  hour. — I.e.,  about  3  p.m.,  at 
which  time  the  evening  sacrifice  was  offered.     For  the  hours  of  prayer  see  iL15t  x.  9f  30. 

Ver.  2.  Was  carried.  —  Was  being  carried  along  just  when  the  apostles  arrived.  Compare 
Luke  v.  18,  19.  They  laid. — Or,  it  was  their  custom  to  lay,  taking  at  the  hours  of  prayer  and 
carrying  him  back  between  times  (Alford).  The  gate  of  the  temple  which  is  called  Beautiful. 
— Either,  1.  The  gate  Shvshan  of  the  Talmud  on  the  east  side  of  the  outer  wall  which  led 
into  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  (Bengel,  Alford,  Zockler)  ;  or  2.  The  Corinthian  gate,  which 
opened  from  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  into  that  of  the  women  (Lightfoot,  Delitzsch, 
Olshausen,  Schiirer,  etc. ;  or  3.  The  Nicanor  gate  (Ewald,  Holtzmann,  Lechler,  and  Gerok), 

76 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  hi. 


between  the  women's  court  and  that  of  the  men.  Other  gates  have  been  selected,  as,  4. 
That  from  the  Tyroplicean  bridge  in  the  south-west  to  the  beautiful  southern  cloister  built 
by  Herod  (Conder)  ;  and  5.  The  gate  of  the  Cotton  Merchants,  in  the  west  wall  of  the 
Haram  (Wilson).  The  choice  lies  between  the  first  and  second,  the  third  being  too  far 
within  the  sacred  enclosure,  and  the  fourth  and  fifth  too  distant  from  Solomon's  porch.  The 
first  lay  in  close  proximity  to  this  colonnade,  and  may  have  been  styled  wpaia,  Beautiful, 
because,  in  commemoration  of  Cyrus  the  Liberator,  a  picture  of  Shushan,  the  City  of  Lilies, 
(whence  its  name),  the  royal  residence  of  the  Persian  kings,  was  painted  or  carved  upon  its 
panels,  or  because  of  the  lily-shaped  capitals  with  which  it  was  crowned.  Whether  this 
gate  should  be  identified  with  the  golden  door  in  the  east  Haram  wall  is  doubtful.  Yet 
ground  exists  for  thinking  the  Golden  Door  has  supplanted  the  gate  Shushan  of  the 
Mischna.  The  second  derives  countenance  from  this,  that  if  it,  the  Corinthian  gate,  was  the 
door  described  by  Josephus  (Wars,  V.  v.  3 ;  VI.  v.  3) — which  is  not  certain— the  epithet, 
wpaia,  "  beautiful,"  must  in  its  case  have  been  exceedingly  appropriate  (see  "  Homily  ").  To 
ask  alms. — "  The  approaches  of  the  Temple,  like  those  of  modern  mosques,  were  commonly 
thronged  with  the  blind,  lame,  and  other  mendicants.     Compare  John  ix.  8  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  4.  Fastening  his  eyes. — Or,  having  gazed  intently  (compare  i.  10,  xiii.  9),  so  as  to 
read  the  man's  character  and  (perhaps)  discern  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed. 

Ver.  5.  Gave  heed  unto  them. — The  apostles.  Rather,  fixed  his  mind  (vovv  being  implied) 
upon  them  (compare  Luke  xiv.  7),  expecting  to  receive  something,  n,  somewhat  from  them. 

Ver.  6.  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ. — I.e.,  speaking  and  acting  with  His  authority. 
Christ  always  wrought  miracles  in  His  own  name  and  with  His  own  authority  (Luke  v.  24). 
Rise  up  and  are  omitted  in  the  best  MSS.,  as  an  imitation  of  Luke  v.  23,  24.  Post-apostolic 
writers  report  marvellous  deeds  as  having  been  wrought  in  the  name  of  Jesus  (Origen, 
c.  Celsum,  I.  ;  Justin,  Dial,  c  Tryp.,   85 ;  Lact.,  Inst.,  iv.  6). 

Ver.  7.  Feet  and  ankle  bones. — These  words,  like  "came  from  his  mother's  womb  "  (ver.  2), 
show  traces  of  Luke's  professional  knowledge.     Proprie  locutus  est  medicus,  Lucas  (Bengel). 

Ver.  8.  And  he  leaping  up,  stood. — A  proof  of  the  reality  of  the  miracle,  though,  of  course, 
rationalistic  interpreters  see  in  this  only  a  proof  of  the  unhistorical  character  of  the  whole 
narrative. 

Ver.  9.  All  the  people  saw  him. — Another  evidence  that  the  healing  was  no  deception. 

Ver.  10.  Wonder. — d&fi(3os,  belongs  more  to  the  domain  of  the  feelings.  Amazement. — 
^coTcum,  more  to  that  of  the  intellect. 

Ver.  11.  For  the  lame  man  which  was  healed  the  best  codices  read  he.  The  porch  (or 
portico)  that  is  called  Solomon's  ran  along  the  eastern  wall  of  the  temple  on  both  sides  of 
the  gate  of  Susa,  and  overlooked  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  It  had  three  rows  of  columns 
fifty  feet  high,  and  two  walks  thirty  feet  wide.  The  columns  were  each  of  one  stone  (white 
marble),  the  walks  were  paved  with  stones  of  various  colours,  and  the  roofs  adorned  with 
sculptures  in  wood.  The  porch,  which  was  a  survival  from  the  Solomonic  temple,  was 
frequently  resorted  to,  especially  in  winter,  as  a  promenade  or  public  walk  (John  x.  23  ; 
Jos.,  Ant.,  XV.  xi.  5). 

Ver.  12.  At  this. — Sc.  man  rather  than  thing.  Look  earnestly. — Fasten  your  eyes,  as  in 
ver.  4.     For  this  man  read  him. 

Ver.  13.  Hath  glorified. — Better,  glorified  not  by  this  particular  miracle  (Meyer,  Spence), 
or  by  all  the  mighty  works  which  attested  His  mission  (Hackett),  but  by  His  exaltation 
through  death,  as  in  John  xii.  23,  xvii.  10  (Alford).  His  son. — Should  be  His  servant,  this 
being  an  Old  Testament  title  of  Messiah  (Isa.  xii.  8,  xlii.  1-7,  xlix.  3-6)  ;  and  applied  as 
such  to  Christ  by  Matthew  (xii.  18),  and  outside  of  canonical  scripture  by  Clem.,  I.  ad  Cor. 
lix.  3  ;  Barnalas,  vi.  1 ;  Didache,  ix.  2.  Had  determined. — Or  decided  that  it  was  just  (see 
Luke  xxiii.  16,  20-23  ;  John  xix.  4). 

Ver.  15.  Prince.— Author,  in  the  fullest  sense  (see  Heb.  ii.  10,  xii.  2).  Whereof.— Or  of 
whom  (compare  ii.  32,  xiii.  31). 

Ver.  16.  Through,  or  on  the  ground  of,  faith. — Not  the  man's  or  the  people's  (Olshausen) 
but  the  apostles'  (Alford,  Spence,  Holtzmann,  Hackett)  faith  in  His  Christ's  name. 

Ver.  18.  All  His  holy  prophets. — Best  taken  as  a  collective  phrase  for  the  prophets  as  a 
whole.  Most  of  the  Books  of  the  Old  Testament  foretell  distinctly  the  sufferings  and  death 
of  the  Messiah  (Hackett), 

Ver.  19.  That  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out.— According  to  Isa.  liii.  12,  Christ's  death  was 
to  be  the  meritorious  cause  of  forgiveness.  When  the  times  of  refreshing  shall  come,  should 
be  in  order  that  times  or  seasons  of  refreshing  may  come.  These  "  seasons  of  refreshing  "  have 
been  interpreted  as  equivalent  to  "the  times  of  the  restitution  of  all  things*'  of  ver.  21. 
Both  seasons  considered  as  identical  have  been  explained  differently  :  1.  as  referring  to  the 
Second  Coming  of  Christ  (according  to  this  view  spoken  of  in  ver.  20),  which  will  be 
(subjectively  considered)  a  season  of  refreshment,  peace,  and  repose,  after  the  toils  and 
tribulations  of  life,  but  objectively  regarded  a  season  of  the  restoration  of  all  things 
(Alford,  Hackett,  Spence,  Gloag,  Holtzmann);  2.  as  alluding  to  the  inward  refreshment  of 

77 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


soul  which  follows  after  the  blotting  out  of  sins  consequent  on  conversion,  which  refreshment 
is  also  a  fulfilment  of  all  those  gracious  promises  God  had  before  spoken  by  the  mouth 
of  His  holy  prophets  since  the  world  began  (Stier,  Zockler).  A  third,  and  in  our  judgment, 
a  better  interpretation  distinguishes  the  "  seasons  of  refreshing  "  and  "  times  of  restitution," 
making  the  former  the  inward  quickening  which  should  follow  on  sincere  repentance  and 
experience  of  forgiveness,  and  the  latter  the  restoration  of  all  things  which  should  accom- 
pany the  Second  Coming  of  the  Saviour  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  21.  "Whom  the  heaven  must  receive. — Decidedly  preferable  to  who  must  possess  the 
heaven  (Bengel,  Luther,  Olshausen,  Stier). 

Ver.  22.  For  and  unto  the  fathers  should  be  omitted  as  a  gloss.  A  prophet,  etc. — Partly 
cited  from  the  LXX.  (Deut.  xviii.  18,  19),  and  partly  new.  Stephen  (vii.  37)  as  well  as  Peter 
ascribes  this  prophecy  to  Moses,  and  interprets  it  of  Christ,  Raise  up. — Not  M  from  the 
dead,"  but  in  the  sense  of  causing  to  appear.     Like  unto  me.— Or  as  He  raised  up  Me. 

Ver.  23.  Shall  be  destroyed  from  among  the  people,  should  be,  shall  be  utterly  destroyed. 
Peter  here  interprets  the  Deuteronomic  phrase,  "I  will  require  it  of  him,"  which  meant  that 
he  would  be  excluded  from  the  congregation. 

Ver.  24.  Samuel. — Though  nothing  remains  from  him  which  can  be  construed  into  a 
prediction  of  the  latter  times,  he  may  nevertheless  have  uttered  such  ;  or  his  name  may  be 
introduced  simply  because  he  was  the  "  father  of  the  prophets." 

Ver.  25.  Children  of  the  prophets  and  of  the  covenant. — Not  "  sons "  in  the  sense  of 
"  descendants,"  which  would  be  incongruous  with  the  clause  "  of  the  covenant,"  but  sons  in 
the  sense  of  participants  of  what  the  prophets  and  the  covenant  held  out  (compare  Matt, 
viii.  12 ;  John  iv.  22  ;  Rom.  ix.  4,  etc.). 

Ver.  26.  Raised  up,  as  in  ver.  22.  From  your  iniquities. — A  conclusion  similar  to  ii.  40. 
11  Aculeus  in  fine  orationis  "  (Bengel) — A  sting  in  the  tail  of  his  address. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—10. 

The  Beautiful  Gate  of  the  Temple  ;  or,  the  Healing  of  a  Lame  Man. 

I.  The  scene  of  the  miracle. — 1.  The  temple.  Herod's,  which,  when  Christ 
entered  on  His  public  ministry,  had  been  building  for  six-and-forty  years 
(John  ii.  20).  It  stood  upon  the  threshing  floor  of  Araunah,  on  the  summit  of 
Mount  Moriah,  the  site  formerly  occupied  by  the  temples  of  Solomon  and 
Zerubbabel,  and  presently  covered  by  the  "  noble  sanctuary  "  of  the  Mahomme- 
dans.  In  Herod's  time  the  area  was  surrounded  by  a  wall  which  Joseph  us 
(Ant,  XV.  xi.  3)  thought  "the  most  prodigious  work  that  had  ever  been  heard 
of  by  man,"  while  the  sacred  edifice,  in  his  estimation,  "  wanted  nothing  that  was 
likely  to  surprise  men's  minds  or  eyes."  Built  of  immense  blocks  of  beautiful 
white  limestone,  from  the  royal  quarries  under  Bezetha,  a  hill  in  the  north  cf 
Jerusalem,  and  gleaming  with  gold  and  marble,  viewed  from  a  distance  it  must 
have  been  a  gorgeous  spectacle  (compare  Psalm  xlviii.  2).  2.  The  beautiful  gate. 
Either  (1)  the  gate  Shushan,  whose  site  is  now  occupied  by  the  golden  door  in 
the  eastern  wall  of  the  great  quadrangle  on  Mount  Moriah,  and  which  led  from 
the  outer  world  into  the  court  of  the  Gentiles ;  or  (2)  the  Corinthian  gate,  which 
opened  from  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  court  of  the  women,  The  prefer- 
ence should  perhaps  be  given  to  the  former  in  consequence  of  its  proximity  to  the 
porch  called  Solomon's.    (See  "  Critical  Bern  arks.") 

II.  The  time  of  the  miracle. — Probably  a  few  weeks,  or,  it  might  be  months 
after  Pentecost.  At  the  ninth  hour,  or  3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  at  which  hour 
three  things  were  taking  place  in  connection  with  the  temple.  1.  The  Jerusalem 
populace  were  flocking  towards  it.  The  Jews  were  a  religious  people,  fond  of  their 
temple,  and  given  to  devotion,  and  this  was  the  hour  of  evening  sacrifice,  the 
favourite  season  for  devotion  in  Jerusalem,  as  then  the  business  of  the  day  was 
over,  and  the  time  for  the  evening  meal  had  now  arrived.  2.  Peter  and  John 
were  bending  their  steps  towards  it.  The  disciples  of  Christ  had  not  yet  broken 
with  the  outward  forms  of  Jewish  worship  (ii.  46),  and  Peter  and  John,  who 
possibly  since  their  early  days  had  been  companions  (Matt.  iv.  18,  21  ; 
Luke  v.    10),  and  who  certainly  since  they  had  cast  in  their  lot  with  Christ 

78 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  in. 


(John  i.  40,  41)  had  frequently  acted  in  concert  (Luke  xxii.  8  ;  John  xviii.  16; 
John  xx.  6,  xxi.  7),  were,  in  accordance  with  wont,  as  pious  Jews  repairing  to  the 
house  of  prayer.  An  example  worthy  of  imitation  by  all,  and  much  needed  in 
days  when  men  are  so  engrossed  with  business  that  only  with  difficulty  can  they 
find  leisure  for  devotion.  3.  A  cripple  was  being  borne  along  to  be  laid  at  its  gate. 
Like  the  gates  of  heathen  mosques,  that  of  the  temple  was  a  frequent  resort  for 
mendicants.  This  particular  mendicant  had  probably  been  deposited  at  his  usual 
station  when  the  two  apostles  arrived  upon  the  scene.  Worth  observing  how  all 
the  above-mentioned  three  groups  of  persons,  which  were  necessary  for  the 
miracle,  converged  towards  the  temple  at  this  moment — the  multitude  to  witness 
it,  the  apostles  to  work  it,  and  the  lame  man  to  be  the  subject  of  it.  Nothing 
wonderful  when  it  is  remembered  who  the  Prime  Mover  was. 

III.  The  subject  of  the  miracle. — The  malady  from  which  the  patient  suffered 
was — 1.  Extremely  severe.  Lame  in  both  feet,  he  required  to  be  carried.  Difficult 
to  say  which  form  of  affliction  is  easiest  to  be  borne — blindness,  deafness, 
or  want  of  power  to  walk  or  stand.  All  fitted  to  excite  pity  for  such  as  suffer 
from  them.  2.  Of  long  standing.  Forty  years.  Indeed  his  lameness  was  con- 
genital. He  had  never  known  the  luxury  of  leaping,  walking,  or  even  standing. 
Compare  the  cripples  at  the  pool  of  Bethesda  (John  v.  5),  and  at  Lystra 
(xiv.  8),  and  the  man  blind  from  birth  (John  ix.  1).  3.  Greatly  aggravated. 
Poor,  he  had  no  means  of  supporting  himself,  except  by  soliciting  alms.  A  man 
who  could  not  stand  would  not  quickly  learn  a  trade.  Clearly  a  sad  case, 
deserving  commiseration,  and  a  fit  subject  for  miraculous  assistance.  A  case  also 
impressively  symbolising  the  natural  estate  of  man. 

IV.  The  performance  of  the  miracle. — 1.  A  voice  of  invitation.  "  Look  on  us." 
Intended  to  enlist  the  man's  attention,  and  spoken  by  Peter  in  John's  name  as 
well  as  his  own.  The  man's  response  indicated  that  he  expected  to  receive  some- 
thing from  them ;  as  yet  his  faith  rose  not  to  the  height  of  anticipating  a  cure. 
Even  Christians  little  dream  of  the  great  things  God  is  preparing  for  them 
(1  Cor.  ii.  9).  2.  A  note  of  exposition.  "  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none."  Designed 
to  repress  the  carnal  and  material  hopes  of  the  beggar,  to  explain  that  Christi- 
anity was  not  merely  a  philanthropic  mission  to  relieve  man's  bodily  wants,  and 
to  kindle  anticipations  of  something  higher.  3.  A  word  of  command.  "  In  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  walk."  On  the  face  of  it,  an  order  impossible 
1o  be  obeyed;  yet  an  order  issued  in  the  name  of  One  who  had  all  power  in 
heaven  and  on  earth,  and  was  both  able  and  willing  to  give  what  He  com- 
manded. 4.  An  act  of  assistance.  As  if  to  proffer  the  divine  aid,  without 
which  the  injunction  could  not  be  carried  through,  Peter  took  him  by  the  right 
hand  and  raised  him  up  (compare  Mark  ix.  27).  Suggesting  two  thoughts — 
that  God  never  enjoins  orders  He  is  not  willing  to  extend  help  to  perform,  and 
that  in  seeking  to  succour  others  more  is  demanded  than  simply  to  say  "  do 
this  "  ;  there  is  needed  also  sympathy  and  assistance. 

V.  The  proof  of  the  miracle. — 1.  The  behaviour  of  the  man.  In  the  con- 
sciousness of  new  power  he  leaped  up,  stood,  began  to  walk,  entered  with  the 
apostles  into  the  temple,  and  gave  thanks  to  God,  all  of  which  actions  were 
inconsistent  with  the  idea  that  the  man  had  not  been  healed  but  only  deceived, 
perhaps  through  a  species  of  hypnotism  energised  for  a  season  but  not  perma- 
nently restored  to  health.  So,  when  a  soul  has  been  cured,  the  spiritual  health 
it  has  received  manifests  itself  in  an  analogous  way.  It  leaps  np  out  of  its  old 
sinful  condition;  it  stands,  realising  its  new-found  power,  it  walks  in  the  wray  of 
God's  commandments ;  it  exults  or  dances  inwardly  for  joy ;  it  praises  God  for 
His  grace  and  mercy.  2.  The  testimony  of  the  people.  They  saw  Him  walking, 
and  heard  him  praising  God.  They  knew  he  was  not  what  he  had  once  been,  a 
cripple  and  a  beggar.     They  could  not  account  by  natural  means  for  what  had 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


happened.  So  is  it  a  strong  argument  that  one  has  been  spiritually  healed 
when  those  who  knew  one  formerly  can  perceive  and  are  obliged  to  confess  the 
change.  3.  The  admission  of  the  Sanhedrim.  When  the  case  was  brought  before 
the  highest  tribunal  of  the  day  it  could  not  be  gainsaid  (see  iv.  14).  So  is  it 
the  crowning  evidence  of  one's  conversion  when  his  enemies  are  constrained  to 
acknowledge  its  reality. 

Learn. — 1.  That  Christ's  people  should  love  to  pray  in  Christ's  house.  2.  That 
intending  worshippers  may  be  lawfully  detained  from  Church  by  works  of 
necessity  and  mercy.  3.  That  the  cries  of  the  poor  should  not  fall  unheeded  on 
the  ears  of  Christ's  people.  4.  That  the  best  help  Christ's  people  can  give  is  to 
point  men  to  Jesus  Christ.  5.  That  the  clearest  evidence  of  conversion  is  a 
reformed  life. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  1.  Peter  and  John. 

I.  In  early  days  partners  in  trade 
(Matt.  iv.  18,  21 ;  Luke  v.  10). 

II.  In  the  time  of  the  Baptist 
seekers  after  God  (John  i.  37,  42). 

III.  After  their  conversion  col- 
leagues in  the  apostleship  (Matt.  x.  2 ; 
Acts  i.  13). 

IV.  During  the  days  of  the  Son  of 
man  fellow  intimates  of  Christ  (Luke 
viii.  51,  ix.  28;  Matt.  xxvi.  37). 

V.  In  the  passion  week  companions 
in  action  (Luke  xxii.  8 ;  John  xviii.  16). 

VI.  After  the  resurrection,  com- 
rades in  witness  bearing  (viii.  14). 

The  Hour  of  Prayer. 
I.  Divinely  appointed. 
II.  Devoutly  hallowed. 

III.  Sweetly  refreshing. 

IV.  Always  profitable. 
V.  Frequently  forgotten. 

Ver.  2.  Alms-asking  and  Alms- 
giving. 

I.  Alms-asking. — 1.  Should  never 
be  practised  unless  absolutely  neces- 
sary. 2.  Should  always  be  practised 
with  respectful  courtesy. 

II.  Alms-giving. — 1.  Should  always 
be  performed  with  discretion  and  kind- 
ness (Rom.  xii.  8).  2.  Should  never  be 
performed  with  ostentation  or  vanity 
(Matt.  vi.  3,  4). 

The  Beautifid  Gate  of  the  Temple. — 
That  gate  is  entitled  to  be  so  called, 
which — 

I.  Admits  sincere  worshippers. 

80 


II.  Echoes  with  the  sound  of  the 
gospel. 

III.  Witnesses  deeds  of  love  and 

mercy. 

Ver.  6.  The  Church's  Poverty  and  the 
Church's  Wealth. 

I.  Destitute  of  silver  and  gold. — 
No  great  calamity  since :  1.  Material 
wealth  is  not  indispensable  to  her 
progress.  2.  Material  wealth  might 
corrupt  her  sincerity.  3.  Whatever 
material  wealth  she  needs  can  be  ob- 
tained from  her  exalted  Head,  to  whom 
the  gold  and  silver  belong. 

II.  Abounding  in  the  treasures  of 
salvation. — Which  are :  1.  Laid  up 
in  Christ  her  living  Lord  (John  i.  16  ; 
Col.  i.  19,  ii.  39).  2.  For  distribution 
through  her  hands  (Matt.  v.  16 ; 
Phil.  ii.  16).  3.  Without  money  and 
without  price  (Matt.  x.  8). 

Peter's  Pence ;  or,  the  Wealth  of  the 
Apostles. — A  study  for  persons  in  the 
Christian  ministry. 

I.  Not  material. — "  Silver  and  gold 
have  I  none."  1.  It  had  not  been  their 
practice  to  levy  contributions  from  the 
faithful.  Although  the  faithful  may 
have  ministered,  and  doubtless  did 
minister,  to  their  support  (Luke  x.  7). 
N.B. — It  cannot  be  argued  from  this 
practice  of  the  Twelve  or  of  Paul 
(xx.  34;  2  Cor.  xi.  7)  that  a  paid 
ministry  is  unscriptural  (1  Cor.  ix.  14). 
2.  They  had  not  applied  their  talents  to 
the  acquisition  of  money  (Matt.  vi.  19), 
but  had  consecrated  their  lives  to  tha 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  in. 


work  of  preaching  the  gospel,  having    /that  Pontiff  was  engaged  in  counting  a 

left  all — Peter  and  John  with  Andrew    J  large  sum  of  money,  "  See,  Thomas," 

and  James,  their  boats  and  nets  (Matt.   /  said   the  Pope,   "  the  Church  can  no 

iv.  18-22),  Matthew  his  customs'  booth  j  longer  say,    '  Silver  and  gold  have  I 

(Matt.   ix.    9),   and   the    others   their  I  none,' "   to   which  Aquinas  answered, 

respective  occupations,  to  follow  Christ  (.  "  True,  Holy  Father,  but  neither  can 

(Mark   x.   28;    Matt.  xix.   27).      The  I  she  now  say,  ' Arise  and  walk.'" 
work  of  the  ministry  is  too  important, 

and,    where    faithfully    executed,    too  Apostolical  Generosity. 

laborious    to    admit    of    the    sacred  I.  A  believing  man  is  a  man  of  large 

calling   being   combined   with   secular  possessions. — Silver  and  gold  he  may 

avocations.       3.     Whatever   goods   they  have  none ;  but  not  the  less  on  that 

may    have    had     they     had     doubtless  account    are    his     possessions     great. 

cast  into  the  common  fund  (ii.  44). —  There  is  no  end,  no  measure  of  his  pos- 

This    fact    alone    would   account    for  sessions,  for  they  are  summed  up  in  the 

Peter's  being  without  pence  on  his  way  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all. 

to  the  temple.     Here,  again,  it  cannot  He  is  rich  beyond  measure  in  all  things 

be  inferred  that  a  Christian  minister  whereby  he  can  benefit  his  fellows, 

should  devote  all  his  goods  to  feed  the  II.  A  believing  man  is  a  man  of 

poor  (1  Cor.  xiii.  3),  though  undoubt-  large   liberalities. — He    cannot    keep 

edly  he  ought  to  practise  charity  (Gal.  anything  he  has  got  to  himself.     His 

vi.  10).  joy  is  in  pouring  out,  not  in  hoarding 

II.  But  spiritual. — "  Such  as  I  have."  up.     But,  indeed,  the   heavenly  gifts 

Peter  and  John,  with  their  colleagues,  which  constitute  his  possessions  cannot 

were  possessed  of  unseen  and  imperish-  be  hoarded.     They  must  be  used,   or 

able  treasure.     1.  Of  personal  grace. —  they  will  vanish  away. 

The  beauty  of  holiness  by  which  their  III.  A  believing  man  is  a  man  of 

characters  were  adorned  (iv.  33  ;  com-  large  sympathies. — He  pities  the  world 

pare  Psalm  xc.  17).     Such  wealth  im-  in  the  midst  of  whose  miseries  and  sins 

measurably  superior  to  material  riches,  he  lives,  and  would  fain  contribute  to 

2.  Of  spiritual  power.     Which  enabled  its  relief. 

them  (not  at  discretion,  but  when  di-  IV.  A  believing  man  is  a  man  of 

rected    by  the   Holy   Spirit)   to  work  large   powers. — He   has   power   from 

miracles,  a  power  which  has  ceased  in  God,    and   power   with    God.      He   is 

the  Church,  though  the  power  of  work-  strong  in  weakness,  and  resistless  in 

ing  (instrumentally)  spiritual  miracles  dependence. 

(such  as  conversion)  remains.     3.   Of  V.  A  believing  man  has  large  op- 

posthumous     influence.     The     apostles  portunities. — He  both  has  and  he  makes 

still   sit   upon  twelve   thrones    in  the  opportunities  every  hour. 

Christian  Church  (Matt,  xix   28),  their  VI.    A    believing    man   has    large 

writings   and  example   constituting  a  returns  for   his    gifts. — "  Give  and  it 

standard  for   the   regulation   of   duty  shall  be  given ;  good  measure,  pressed 

and  the  determination  of  controversies.  down,  and  running  over."    Some  of  this 

Similar  influence,  though  in  a  lesser  now,  most  hereafter.— If.  Bonar,  D.D. 
degree,  is  exerted  by  all  true  disciples. 

4.  Of  heavenly  glory.     Of  such  treasure  Vers.     1-6.      The     First     Apostolic 

in  the  heavens  as  awaits  all  who  on  Miracle.  —  Typical    of    the    Church's 

earth  are  rich  in  faith  and  abound  in  future  work. 

good  works  (Matt.  vi.  20).  I.  It  was  a  beggar  that  was  healed, 

and  the  beggar  typified  humanity  at 

Changed    Times,  etc. — Cornelius   A.  large. 

Lapide  relates   that   on   one   occasion  II.    The   beggar   received    blessing 

Thomas  Aquinas  paid  a  visit  to  Inno-  when  the  Church  roused  itself  to  the 

cent  II.,  arriving  at  a  moment  when  discharge  of  its  great  mission. 

g  81 


CHAP.  III. 


H0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


III.  The  beggar's  conversion  was 
effected  through  his  healing.  Spiritual 
work  went  hand  in  hand  with  healing 
power.— G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D. 

A  Miracle  of  Healing. — Look  at  this 
miracle  in  the  light  of  what  has  already 
taken  place.  There  is  great  enthu- 
siasm in  the  Church.  The  divine  life 
is,  so  to  speak,  at  its  highest  point. 
The  Church,  though  on  earth,  has  been 
brought  very  nearly  to  the  gate  of 
heaven.  We  are  now  invited  to  go 
beyond  the  Church  line,  and  at  our 
very  first  step  we  find  a  man  who 
appeals  to  our  sympathy  in  his  pain 
and  helplessness.  See  how  world  lies 
within  world,  and  how  misleading  are 
all  the  inferences  drawn  from  a  limited 
set  of  facts :  1.  The  man  who  has 
access  to  every  means  of  mental  and 
spiritual  culture  may  think  all  the 
world  as  highly  privileged  as  himself. 
2.  The  healthy  and  prosperous  family 
may  forget  that  other  households 
are  afflicted  and  depressed.  Look 
beyond  your  own  sphere.  You  have 
not  far  to  look;  there  is  but  a  step 
between  thee  and  the  world  which 
is  either  higher  or  lower  than  thine 
own. 

I.  The  social  side. — 1.  We  may  be 
able  to  carry  the  cripple  when  we  are 
unable  to  heal  him.  Do  what  you  can. 
Human  helplessness  is  a  continual 
appeal  to  human  power.  There  are 
secondary  services  in  life.  We  cannot 
always  do  the  great  deed.  2.  The 
commonest  minds,  as  well  as  the 
highest,  have  always  associated  the 
idea  of  charity  with  the  idea  of  religion. 
This  is  right.  This  is  a  high  compli- 
ment to  any  form  of  religion.  The 
theology  that  has  no  philanthropy 
is  its  own  vain  god.  3.  Look 
at  the  compensations  of  the  poorest  life. 
The  man  was  carried  daily  by  friendly 
hands.  The  man  had  the  temple  as  his 
daily  hope.  The  sun  shines  even  on 
the  poorest  lot. 

II.  The  apostolic  side.  —  1.  The 
apostles  never  attempted  to  do  without 
public  worship.  Such  worship  has  dis- 
tinct advantages — (1)    Provocation  of 

82 


thought ;  (2)  Development  of  sympathy. 

2.  The  apostles  never  neglected  human 
want  in  their  anxiety  to  render  divine 
worship.  Some  people  are  one-sidedly 
religious.  3.  The  apostles  never  at- 
tended even  to  physical  necessities  in 
their  own  name.  The  incident  as 
thus  regarded  suggests  two  questions  : 
(1)  Are  we  too  pious  to  be  philan- 
thropic? (2)  Has  the  name  of  Jesus 
lost  its  power? — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Vers.  1-7.     Christian  Work. 

I.  The  need  for  it.  To  heal  the 
bodies  and  save  the  souls  of  men. 

II.  The  power  for  it.  That  which 
comes  from  Jesus  Christ,  through  His 
Spirit. 

III.  The  method  for  it.  Faith  in 
Christ,  sympathy  for  the  sufferers,  and 
personal  service. 

IV.  The  encouragement  for  it.  The 
certain  hope  of  success. 

Vers.  6-8.  A  State  of  Sin,  a  State  of 
Impotence. 

I.  The  case  of  this  sufferer  as  illus- 
trating the  state  of  fallen  man. — 1.  His 
infirmity  was  natural.  Congenital. 
Birth- sin.  2.  It  caused  total  inability 
to  walk.  Moral  inability  is  as  total  as 
natural  inability.  3.  It  was  long  con- 
tinued. Forty  years  and  more.  4.  It 
was  accompanied  with  poverty.  The 
sinner  a  beggar. 

II.  The  nature  of  his  cure  as  illus- 
trating the  plan  of  salvation. — 1.  It 
was  miraculous.     2.  It  was  unsolicited. 

3.  It  was  instantaneous.  4.  It  was 
real  and  permanent. 

III.  The  effects  of  the  cure  as  illus- 
trating the  effects  of  faith  in  Christ. — 
1.  Joy.  2.  Devotion.  3.  Gratitude 
to  the  instruments  of  the  cure. — G. 
Brooks. 

Ver.  10.  The  Miracle  at  the  Temple 
Gate. 

I.  As  a  manifestation  of  power. — 
Swd/jiLs.  1.  Not  the  power  of  nature. 
The  healing  of  the  lame  man  could  not 
be  explained  by  what  is  called  the  vis 
medicatrix  naturae.  The  long-stand- 
ing  character   of    the    man's    trouble 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;    THE  ACTS.  chap.  in. 


was  against  this  (iv.  22).     2.  Not  the  ercised,  if  not  by  the  man,  at  least  by 

•power  of  man.     Either  of  superior  will  the  apostles — an  instrumentality  that 

(animal  magnetism)  or  of  moral  good-  seemed   altogether   inadequate  to   the 

ness,  or  even  of  exalted  faith.     3.  But  effect  produced. 

the  power  of  God,  or  of  Jesus  Christ,  III.  As  the  exhibition  of  a  sign. — 
the  risen  and  glorified  servant  and  Son  o-^ftetov.  1.  Of  the  reality  of  Christ's 
of  God.  resurrection  and  ascension,  since  it  was 
II.  As  a  phenomenon  of  wonder. —  manifestly  impossible  that  any  such 
repas.  Three  things  removed  this  act  work  of  power  could  be  performed  by 
of  healing  outside  the  category  of  ordi-  a  dead  Christ.  2.  Of  the  certain  de- 
nary occurrences.  1.  The  instantaneous-  scent  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  since  it  is 
ness  of  the  cure,  which  was  effected,  not  clear  that  something  must  have  hap- 
by  any  slow  and  laborious  process  of  pened  to  make  two  men  like  Peter  and 
pharmacy,  but  suddenly,  in  a  moment,  John,  to  all  appearance,  depositaries 
and  at  a  word.  2.  The  completeness  of  of  a  supernatural  influence.  3.  Of  the 
the  cure,  which  was  patent  to  all,  and  wonders  that  might  be  expected  from 
could  not  be  denied  (iv.  16),  nay,  faith  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  wonders 
which  was  permanent,  and  showed  no  not  alone  of  a  physical  kind,  but  of 
symptom  of  tending  to  a  relapse.  a  moral  and  spiritual  sort,  the  healing 
3.  The  means  of  the  cure,  which  was  of  the  cripple  being  typical  of  the  sal- 
faith  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  ex-  vation  of  a  soul. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  11—16. 

Solomon's  Porch;  or,  Peter's  Second  Sermon.  1.  The  Secret  of  the  Miracle 
explained. 

I.  The  people's  excitement  calmed. — The  effect  produced  upon  the  healed  man 

was  scarcely  greater  than  that  wrought  upon  the  multitude  who  saw  him  in  the 

Temple.     Filled  with  wonder  and  amazement  at  what  had  taken  place,  the  crowd 

swarmed  round  the  two  apostles,  to  whom  the  cured  cripple  was  eagerly  clinging 

in  Solomon's  porch  as  if  unwilling  to  permit  them  to  depart.      Taking  speech  in 

hand,  Peter,  with  his  customary  readiness,  proceeded  to  address  them  with  a  view 

to  quieting  their  agitation.      Their  wonder  and  amazement  he — 1.    Admitted 

as  not  unnatural.     It  would  have  been  surprising  if  they  had  not  marvelled  on 

seeing  a  forty  years'  old  cripple  restored  to  perfect  health.     When  in  Capernaum 

a  similar  miracle  had  been  wrought  by  Christ  (Luke  v.   18-26),  "  amazement 

took  hold  on  all    .  .  .    and  they  were  rilled  with  fear,  saying,  We  have  seen 

strange  things  to-day."    So  wherever  Christ's  religion  operates  it  performs  moral 

miracles,  at  which  men  gaze  sometimes  with  incredulity  and  even  with  hostility, 

but  always  with  astonishment  (see  xvii.  6).     2.   Rebuked  as  wrongly  directed. 

The  multitude  imagined  that  Peter  and  John  had  healed  the  cripple  by  their 

own  power  and   in   virtue  of   their  own  goodness.     Hence  their  wonder  and 

admiration  were  turned  rather  upon  the  instruments  than  towards  the  agent. 

The  sole  connection  John  and  Peter  had  with  the  miracle  was  that  a  higher 

power  had  used  them  as  a  means  of  effecting  His  gracious  will.     It  does  not 

appear  that  the  apostles  ever  had  the  power  of  working  miracles  at  their  own 

discretion,  but  only  at  a  signal  given  by  the  Holy  Spirit.     Significant  as  proof 

of  this  is  the  circumstance  that  Paul,  though  he  wrought  miracles,  could  not 

cure  Epaphroditus  when  he  was  sick  nigh  unto  death  (Phil.  ii.  27),  or  Trophimus, 

whom  he  left  at  Miletus  sick  (2  Tim.  iv.  20).     So  the  moral  miracles  performed 

by  the  Gospel  in  changing  men's  hearts  and  lives  are  due  to  neither  the  ability 

nor  the  piety  of  those  who  preach  the  Gospel  but  solely  to  Him  of  whom  the 

Gospel  speaks.     The  right  to  say  "lam  He  who  healeth  thee  "  belongs  to  God 

alone  (Exod.  xv.  26  ;  Psalm  ciii.  3,  cxlvii.  3).     3.  Instructed  as  ill  infm*med.    The 

83 


chap,  til  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


miracle  had  been  done  (1)  instrumentally  by  the  apostles,  which  they  did  not 
deny :  they  had  made  the  lame  man  to  walk  (ver.  12) ;  and  (2)  mediately  by  the 
man's  own  faith,  or  at  least  by  the  apostles'  faith — a  point  which  is  duly  em- 
phasised (ver.  16;  compare  xiv.  9);  but  nevertheless  (3)  causally,  or  efficiently 
by  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  or  by  the  power  which  that  name  repre- 
sented, and  which  accompanied  the  utterance  of  and  belief  in  that  name.  So 
the  healings  of  a  spiritual  sort  which  are  effected  by  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
are  to  be  ascribed  neither  to  the  human  agents  by  whom  it  is  preached  nor  to 
the  words  in  which  it  is  set  forth,  but  to  the  spirit  and  power  alone  of  the  exalted 
Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.  6,  7  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  6  ;  Eph.  ii.  1  ;  Phil.  i.  6). 

II.  The  people's  guilt  rehearsed.— This  is  done  indirectly  and,  as  it  were, 
by  way  of  parenthesis,  while  introducing  to  their  notice  the  real  author  of  the 
miracle.  The  extent  of  their  guilt  lay  in  four  things :  1.  Treachery.  By 
acquiescing  in  the  wickedness  of  Caiaphas  and  Judas  they  had  been  practically 
guilty  of  delivering  up  Jesus  into  the  hands  of  His  enemies — they  had,  in  fact, 
endorsed  the  crimes  of  their  leaders  and  rulers.  The  solidarity  of  nations  which 
renders  the  individual  members  thereof  responsible,  in  a  certain  measure  at  least, 
for  the  deeds  of  their  representatives,  is  apt  to  be  forgotten.  2.  Denial.  When 
He  stood  before  Pilate,  and  was  by  that  Roman  Governor  pronounced  "  innocent," 
and  offered  to  be  released  as  a  compliment  to  their  nation,  they  had  cried  "  Away 
with  Him  !  Crucify  Him  !  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  22  ;  John  xix.  4,  15.)  In  the  most 
deliberate  manner  possible  they  had  disowned  Him  who  was  really  God's  holy 
and  righteous  One.  3.  Rejection.  Nor  was  that  the  worst  that  could  be  charged 
against  them,  but  when  Pilate  gave  them  an  opportunity  of  choosing  between 
Jehovah's  Servant,  the  Prince  of  Life,  and  Barabbas,  who  for  a  certain  sedition 
had  been  cast  into  prison,  they  actually  chose  the  murderer  to  be  granted  to 
them  (John  xviii.  39,  40).  To  such  a  depth  of  moral  depravity  had  they  sunk  in 
their  hostility  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  4.  Crucifixion.  They  paused  not  in  their 
hate  till  they  had  killed  the  Prince  of  Life,  who  not  only  had  life  in  Himself  but 
on  more  occasions  than  one  had  given  life  to  others  (Matt.  ix.  25  ;  Luke  vii.  15  ; 
John  xi.  44) — killed  Him  by  adjudging  Him  to  the  shameful  and  painful  death 
of  the  cross  (John  xix.  17,  18).  Here  it  should  be  noted  that,  heinous  as  these 
sins  were,  as  great  may  still  be  committed  against  Christ  (Heb.  vi.  6). 

Learn. — 1.  The  mistakes  men  make  in  judging  of  Christianity  and  its  preachers. 
2.  The  humility  that  ought  to  characterise  every  true  servant  of  Christ.  3.  The 
covenant-keeping  character  of  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  4.  The 
possibility  of  repeating  the  crimes  of  the  Jews  who  crucified  the  Prince  of  Life. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  13.  The  God  of  our  Fathers.  Christ,-  in     His     incarnation,    death, 

I.  Our  fathers  had  a  God. — They  resurrection,  exaltation,  and  coming 
were  not  atheists  or  agnostics.  Descent  again  in  the  spirit,  a  carrying  out  of 
from  a  pious  ancestry  a  great  privilege,  the  divine  idea  and  purpose  of  salva- 
ent ailing  large  responsibilities.  tion  to  which  in  a  manner  God  had 

II.  The  God  of  our  Fathers  cove-  pledged  Himself  by  His  gracious  pro- 
nanted  with  them  to  bless  their  mises  to  the  fathers  of  Israel  and  the 
children. — The   promise  was   made  to      father  of  the  faithful. 

them   and  to   their  children   (ii.    39).  IV.  Have  we,  the  children  of  those 

And  He  is  faithful  who  hath  promised  fathers  and  the  heirs  of  these  promises, 

(Heb.  x.  23,  xi.  11).  risen  to  the  height  of  our  privileges  ? 

III.  For  this  purpose  the  God  of  our  — Have  we  taken  our  fathers'  God  as 
fathers  raised  up  Jesus  and  sent  Him  our  God  1  And  the  Saviour  promised 
to   bless   us. — The   whole    mission   of  to  the  fathers  as  our  Bedeemer  ? 

84 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  III. 


The  Glory  of  Christ. 

I.  Essential. — 1.  That  which  He 
had  with  the  Father  before  the  world 
was  (John  xvii.  5).  2.  That  which 
belonged  to  His  own  person  when  on 
earth — the  glory  of  an  only  begotten 
from  a  Father  full  of  grace  and  truth 
(John  i.  14). 

II.  Delegated. — 1.  When  appointed 
by  His  Father  to  be  the  High  Priest 
of  humanity  (Heb.  v.  5).  2.  When  in 
answer  to  prayer  His  Father  showed 
Him  to  be  the  conqueror  of  death 
(John  xi.  4).  3.  When  by  His  own 
death  upon  the  cross  He  triumphed  over 
the  principalities  of  evil  (John  xii.  23, 
xvii.  1).  4.  When  raised  from  the 
dead  by  the  glory  of  His  father  (ver.  15 ; 
Rom.  vi.  4).  5.  When  the  Spirit  re- 
veals Him  to  the  soul  of  man  (John 
xvi.  14). 

III.  Acquired. — 1.  The  glory  of 
sitting  on  the  mediatorial  throne 
(1  Cor.  xv.  25).  2.  The  glory  of  being 
worshipped  by  the  Church  universal 
(Rev.  v.  8-14).  3.  The  glory  of  being 
the  heir  of  all  things  (Heb.  i.  2). 
4.  The  glory  of  being  the  final  judge  of 
mankind  (John  v.  27;  Acts  xvii.  31). 


Vers.  11-16.  A  Model  for  the  Christian 
Preacher. — Found  in  Peter  and  his 
sermon,  which  reveal — 

I.  The  spirit  which  should  animate 
the  preacher. — A  spirit  of  self-abnega- 
tion and  humility,  which  turns  away 
the  attention  of  his  hearers  from  him- 
self, as  did  John  the  Baptist  (John  i. 
23,  iii.  30). 

II.  The  object  at  which  the  preacher 
should  aim.  —To  exalt  Christ  and  bring 
His  glory  and  claims  before  the  minds 
of  his  hearers,  as  again  did  the  Baptist 
and  Paul  (1  Cor.  ii.  2). 

III.  The  manner  in  which  the 
preacher  should  address  his  hearers. 
— With  much  plainness  of  speech,  and 
even  with  personal  directness,  but  yet 
with  tenderness  and  sympathy,  as  once 
more  did  Paul  (Phil.  iii.  18 ;  2  Cor. 
iii.  12). 

IV.  The  theme  on  which  the 
preacher  should  descant.  —  Not  on 
himself,  his  own  virtues  and  achieve- 
ments, but  on  the  name  of  Jesus,  its 
glorious  excellence  and  its  power  to 
heal  and  save,  with  the  terms  and  con- 
ditions on  which  alone  it  can  operate, 
as  again  did  Paul  (1  Cor.  ii.  2). 


HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  17—26. 

Solomon's  Porch  ;  Peter's  Second  Sermon.  2.  The  People  comforted  and,  counselled' 
I.  The  people's  alarm  soothed. — That  such  an  appalling  charge,  pressed  home 
upon  the  consciences  of  the  auditors,  awakened  in  their  bosoms  guilty  fears  is 
what  one  would  naturally  suppose.  Possibly  this  is  why  Peter  so  dexterously 
wove  into  his  discourse  words  that  were  fitted  to  administer  comfort  to  those 
among  them  who  might  be  troubled.  1.  The  disastrous  results  of  their  wicked- 
ness had  been  undone.  The  God  of  Abraham  and  of  Isaac  and  of  Jacob,  the  God 
of  their  fathers,  had  glorified  His  servant  Jesus,  whom  they  had  delivered  up 
(ver.  13).  Observe  the  tenderness  with  which  he  leads  back  their  thoughts  to 
their  glorious  ancestry  and  up  to  their  covenant  God,  as  if  he  meant  to  suggest 
to  their  troubled  hearts  that  the  merciful  Jehovah  had  not  yet  cast  them  off. 
Then  note  the  kindness  with  which  he  places  in  the  foreground  the  fact  that 
their  appalling  crimes  had  been,  as  it  were,  renderecLh armless  before  he  mentions 
the  crimes  themselves.  It  was  not  without  a  purpose  of  love  that,  both  before 
and  after  the  recital  of  these,  Peter  speaks  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Crucified 
One.  2.  Their  wickedness  had  been  the  result  of  ignorance.  If  not  total,  yet 
partial ;  which,  though  not  an  excuse,  was  still  an  extenuation  of  their  fault 
(ver.  21).  Peter's  verdict  as  to  the  knowledge  concerning  Christ  which  was 
possessed  by  the  rulers  and  the  people  is  confirmed  by  the  opinion  of  Paul 
(1  Cor.  ii.  8).  Both  apostles  seem  to  imply  that  neither  the  people  nor  their 
rulers  had  an  adequate  idea  of  the  divinity  of  the  Saviour  when  they  demanded 
His  crucifixion.     Nor  need  this  be  wondered  at,  when  it  is  remembered  that 

85 


chap.  in.  BO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


the  crowning  demonstration  of  Christ's  Godhead  was  only  furnished  by  the 
Resurrection,  and  that  before  this  event  occurred  the  conceptions  of  the  apostles 
themselves  as  to  Christ's  true  personality  were  but  dim.  3.  Their  wickedness  had 
been  the  means  of  fulfilling  the  Divine  predictions  concerning  Christ  recorded  in 
Swipture.  "  The  things  which  God  foreshowed  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  prophets, 
that  His  Christ  should  suffer,  He  thus  fulfilled"  (ver.  18).  Though  this  did  not 
relieve  them  from  blame,  it  nevertheless  tended  to  mitigate  their  grief,  by 
showing  that  Christ  suffered  in  accordance  with  the  Eternal  purpose  of  God 
Himself  (ii.  23).  The  like  comforts  belong  to  sinners  of  to-day  who,  through 
their  connection  with  the  first  Adam,  are  more  or  less  responsible  for  the  death 
of  Jesus  ;  and  yet  because  of  their  ignorance  and  want  of  actual  participation 
in  the  crime  of  Christ's  death  are  not  left  in  a  condition  of  despair  (1  Thess.  v.  9). 
II.  The  people's  duty  set  forth.  In  two  particulars.  1.  To  repent  and  be 
converted  (or  turn  again).  Always  insisted  on  in  Scripture  as  a  condition  of 
forgiveness  and  salvation  (Isa.  lv.  7;  Jer.  iii.  12-14;  Ezek.  xiv.  6;  Joel  ii.  12; 
Zech.  xii.  10;  Matt.  iv.  17;  Mark  vi.  12;  Luke  xiii.  3,  xxiv.  47),  repentance 
signifies  a  change  of  mind,  heart,  and  conduct  (see  on  ii.  38).  For  this  four 
reasons  are  assigned  by  the  Apostle  :  (1)  That  their  sins  might  be  blotted  out 
and  their  guilt  removed;  since  without  heartfelt  repentance,  meaning  sincere 
godly  sorrow  on  account  of  sin,  acknowledgment  of  guilt  and  desire  as  well 
as  resolution  after  new  obedience,  pardon  is  impossible.  (2)  That  times  of 
refreshing  might  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  seasons  of  gracious 
quickening  for  them,  Israel,  and  through  them  for  the  world  at  large — eras 
of  spiritual  awakening,  epochs  of  revival,  when  men's  souls  being  refreshed 
and  stirred  would  manifest  an  interest  in  heavenly  things,  as  parched 
ground,  when  moistened  with  showers  of  rain,  puts  forth  herbs  and  flowers. 
Moreover,  every  such  season  of  refreshing  would  prove  a  prelude  of,  and 
preparation  for,  the  grand  culmination  of  the  future,  "  the  times  of  the 
restitution  of  all  things."  (3)  That  Jesus  Christ  (or  the  Christ)  might  be 
sent  unto  them,  that  same  Christ  who  had  been  appointed  for  (R.V.),  and  in 
the  days  of  His  flesh  preached  unto  (A.Y.)  them,  but  whom  they  had  rejected 
and  the  heavens  had  received,  no  more  to  be  manifested  till  the  close  of  time 
(1  Tim.  vi.  14,  15).  It  is  clear  that  Peter  meant  by  this  that  in  answer  to  every 
such  "season  of  refreshing"  in  which  longings  after  heavenly  gifts  would  be 
awakened  in  renewed  hearts,  there  would  be  a  sending  forth  of  the  Christ,  the 
Risen  and  Ascended  Lord,  not  visibly,  but  spiritually,  in  the  plenitude  of  His 
power  and  grace  to  bless  men's  souls  by  deepening  in  them  the  feeling  of 
repentance  and  turning  them  away  from  their  iniquities  (ver.  26 ;  compare 
Heb.  vi.  7).  (4)  That  finally  the  times  of  the  restitution  of  all  things  might 
come.  This  should  be  the  goal  of  that  stupendous  restoration  movement  which 
was  heralded  by  John  the  Baptist  (Matt.  xvii.  11),  and  initiated  by  Jesus  in  the 
days  of  His  flesh.  Of  which  so  far  as  they  were  concerned  their  repentance 
would  be  the  first  step  (2  Cor.  v.  17),  and  the  revelation  of  the  new  heavens  and 
the  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness  (2  Peter  iii.  13)  the  last — the 
summing  up  of  all  things  in  one  under  Christ  (Eph.  i.  10),  the  subjection  of  all 
powers  and  things  to  His  authority  and  rule  (1  Cor.  xv.  27,  28) — not  necessarily 
the  salvation  of  all  intelligent  beings,  but  the  subordination  of  the  universe,  each 
part  in  its  place,  beneath  His  sway.  2.  To  hearken  in  all  things  to  Christ. 
And  that  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  (1)  That  Christ  was  a  prophet  whom  the 
Lord  God,  their  own  covenant  Jehovah,  had  raised  up,  and  was  therefore  as 
much  entitled  to  their  obedience  as  had  been  Moses  himself  or  any  of  the 
prophets  from  Samuel  downwards.  (2)  That  Christ  was  a  prophet  raised  up 
from  among  themselves,  again  as  Moses  and  Samuel  had  been — one  of  their  own 
flesh  and  blood  (Heb.  ii.  14,  17),  and  therefore  one  who  might  be  supposed  to 

8G 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  Hi. 


have  their  best  interests  at  heart — their  emancipation  from  the  guilt  and  power 
of  sin — and  therefore  as  much  entitled  as  Moses  had  been  to  receive  their 
confidence.  (3)  That  Christ  was  a  prophet  like  unto  Moses,  their  renowned  law- 
giver, in  respect  of  the  authority  He  bore  ;  yea,  better  than  he  in  respect  of  the 
announcements  He  made  (John  i.  17),  and  on  this  account  more  entitled  than 
even  he  to  their  respectful  attention.  (4)  That  the  soul  which  would  not 
hearken  to  Christ  would  be  cut  off  from  amongst  the  people,  exactly  as 
the  disobedient  Israelite  who  refused  to  obey  Moses  was  excluded  from  the 
congregation.  (5)  That  Christ  had  been  fore-announced  as  their  Messiah  by 
the  whole  race  of  prophets  from  Samuel  downwards,  so  that  in  refusing  to 
hear  Christ  they  were  rejecting  the  voices  of  the  prophets  (compare  vii.  51, 
xiii.  27,  40).  (6)  That  Christ  had  a  claim  on  their  submission  because  of  their 
covenant  relation  to  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Abraham  their  father,  to  whom  He, 
Christ,  had  been  promised  (ver.  25).  If  Christ  was  the  seed  of  Abraham 
(compare  Gal.  iii.  16),  they  could  not  reject  Him  without  sin.  (7)  That  Christ 
had  been  offered  to  them  first,  so  that  their  responsibility  for  accepting  Him  was 
greater  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been,  while  their  guilt  would  be  more 
heinous  if  they  declined  to  receive  Him  (ver.  26). 

Learn. — 1.  That  it  is  dangerous  to  sin  against  the  light.  2.  That  all  true 
preaching  aims  at  convicting  of  sin.  3.  That  the  prime  blessing  of  the  gospel 
is  the  blotting  out  of  sin.  4.  That  unforgiven  sin  blocks  the  way  to  higher  gifts 
of  grace.  5.  That  disobedience  to  Christ  is  pre-eminently  inexcusable.  6.  That 
Christ's  supreme  desire  is  to  turn  men  away  from  their  iniquities.  7.  That 
Christ's  triumph,  though  long  delayed,  is  absolutely  sure. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  17.  Sins  of  Ignorance.  xvii.  1).    2.  To  save  sinners  (Isa.  liii.  5  ; 

I.  A  man  may  sin  through  ignor-      John  iii.  16). 
ance. 

II.  Ignorance  is  not  a  valid  plea  in  I.  Foreordained  by  the  Father. 
extenuation  of  sin.                                                  II.  Foretold  by  prophets. 

III.  Sins  of  ignorance  require   an  III.  Inflicted  by  men. 
atonement  quite  as  much  as  sins  of  IV.  Endured  with  patience. 
knowledge.  V.  Rewarded  with  glory. 

IV.  Sins  of  ignorance  require  to  be  VI.  Recorded  in  Scripture, 
repented  of  as  sincerely    as    sins  of           VII.  Proclaimed  by  evangelists, 
presumption.  VIII.  Believed  on  by  sinful  men. 

IX.  Studied  by  angels  (1  Peter 
Ver.   18.  The  Sufferings  of  Christ.  i.   11). 

I.  The  character  and  dignity  of  the 

Sufferer.— 1.  The  Son  of  God  (ver.  13).  Ver.  19.  The  Blotting  out  of  Sin. 

2.  The  Holy  and  Righteous  one  (ver.  I.  What  it  implies. — 1.  The  liability 

14).     3.  The  Prince  of  Life  (ver.  15).  of  men  to  condemnation  on  account  of 

II.  The  form  and  severity  of  His  sin.  2.  The  exercise  of  grace  on  God's 
sufferings. — 1.  As  to  form.  He  suffered  part  towards  the  condemned.  3.  The 
(1)  in  His  reputation  (ver.  14),  (2)  in  complete  release  from  condemnation  of 
His  soul  (Matt.  xxvi.  37,  38),  and  (3)  all  who  experience  such  grace. 

in  His  body  (John  xvii.  12).     2.  As  to  II.   What    it    presupposes. — 1.    On 

severity.      They   were   aggravated   by  God's  part  that  no  obstacle  exists  to 

the  fact  that  they  were  all  foretold  and  the  outflow  of  grace  and  exercise  of  for- 

so  known  to  Him  beforehand.  giveness ;  in  other  words,  the  removal 

III.  The  reason  and  purpose  of  His  of  antecedent  obstacles  by  the  work  of 
sufferings.— 1.  To   glorify   God  (John  Christ.     2.  On  man's  part  the  frank 

87 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


acknowledgment  of  guilt  conjoined  with 
repentance  of  sin. 

III.  What  it  secures. — 1.  Times  of 
refreshing,  or  the  joy  of  forgiveness. 
2.  Times  of  restoration,  or  the  ultimate 
attainment  of  perfect  holiness,  felicity, 
and  glory. 

Times  of  Refreshing. 

I.  What  they  mean. — Seasons  of  soul 
quickening,  when,  the  inward  life  re- 
viving, the  soul  begins  to  manifest 
desires  after  heavenly  things. 

II.  Whence  they  come. — From  the 
Presence  of  the  Lord.  Such  seasons 
can  never  be  got  up,  but  must  always 
be  fetched  down. 

III.  What  must  precede. — 1.  Par- 
don. Spiritual  quickening  can  belong 
only  to  those  whose  sins  have  been 
forgiven;  though  all  may  enjoy  this 
heavenly  gift  who  will  comply  with 
the  second  condition.  2.  Repentance. 
Change  of  mind,  heart,  will,  concerning 
Jesus  Christ  and  the  things  of  salvation. 

IY.  What  will  follow.— Christ  with 
the  fulness  of  His  joy  and  salvation 
will  be  sent  into  the  soul  that  repents 
and  is  forgiven. 

Yer.  21.  Times  of  Restoration. 

I.  When  they  shall  arrive. — 1.  At 
the  end  of  Time.  2.  With  the  glorious 
appearing  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  On  the 
completion  of  the  present  world  plan. 

II.  What  they  shall  introduce. — 1. 
Not  the  re-erection  of  the  monarchy  of 
Israel,  and  far  less  the  bringing  about 
of  universal  salvation.  But  2.  The 
delivering  up  of  all  things,  now  in  the 
Mediator's  hand,  to  God  that  He  may 
be  all  and  in  all  (1  Cor.  xv.  28). 
Which  will  imply — 3.  The  glorification 
of  the  Church.  And  4.  The  subjection 
also  of  the  wicked  to  the  rule  of  God. 

III.  How  they  should  be  waited 
for. — 1.  By  the  children  of  God,  with 
faith,  patience,  holy  living,  and  eager 
expectation.  2.  By  the  unbelieving 
world,  with  assurance  of  their  certain 
coming,  with  apprehension  of  the  peril 
they  will  bring  with  repentance  and 
turning  to  God  and  Jesus  Christ. 

88 


Vers.  12-21.  The  Prince  of  Life. 

I.  Jesus  presented.— Jesus  did  not 
need  to  be  brought  forward.  There 
was  no  necessity  of  going  up  to  heaven 
to  bring  Christ  down.  He  was  there 
— there  in  their  midst,  there  in  all  the 
perfection  of  the  God-man,  in  all  the 
majesty  of  the  Godhead,  in  all  the 
plenitude  of  His  Messiahship.  and  in  all 
the  kindness  and  helpfulness  of  the 
Friend.  He  was  there,  but  unseen  by 
the  multitude.  Two  obstacles  stand  in 
the  way  of  His  being  seen.  First,  the 
disciples,  Peter  and  John.  They  per- 
ceived this.  The  miracle  was  being 
ascribed  to  them.  How  promptly  they 
remove  this  obstacle  !  how  promptly 
and  emphatically  they  step  aside  !  "Ye 
men  of  Israel,  why  marvel  ye  at  this  1 
or  why  look  ye  so  earnestly  on  us,  as 
though  by  our  own  power  and  holiness 
we  had  made  this  man  to  walk  ?  "  Thus 
they  stand  aside  that  Jesus  may  be 
seen.  But  blind  men  cannot  see  the 
most  conspicuous  object.  Those  whose 
eyes  are  thickly  veiled  are  the  same  as 
blind.  This  was  the  condition  of  these 
Jews.  Hence  the  second  thing  neces- 
sary that  Jesus  might  be  seen  was  to 
remove  the  veil,  to  snatch  the  thick 
covering  of  moral  and  intellectual 
ignorance  and  prejudice  from  their 
eyes.  This  the  disciples  proceed  to  do 
with  characteristic  promptness  and 
energy,  "  The  God  of  Abraham,  and  of 
Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,  the  God  of  our 
fathers  " — thus  they  seize  the  veil  at  its 
farthest  extremes  ;  there  the  lift  must 
begin  if  the  uncovering  would  be  suc- 
cessful and  complete — "  You  believe  in 
God,  the  God  of  our  fathers ;  this  mir- 
acle was  wrought  by  His  power  ;  it  was 
performed  in  honour  of  His  Servant, 
His  Messiah.  That  Messiah,  that  Ser- 
vant, is  Jesus.  He  is  the  Prince  of 
life.  He  is  the  Messiah  of  prophecy. 
He  was  crucified  in  exact  fulfilment  of 
the  writings  of  all  the  holy  prophets. 
He  is  exalted,  has  passed  into  the 
heavens,  has  there  His  dwelling-place 
— there  for  a  purpose,  a  purpose  sub- 
lime and  eternal,  to  bring  in  the  final, 
complete,  and  glorious  restoration  of  all 
things.     Behold,  then,  in  the  miracle 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  III. 


that  fills  you  all  with  amazement  so 
profound,  behold,  not  the  power  of 
men,  but  of  God.  Ascribe  the  glory  of 
this  miracle  not  to  us,  but  to  Jesus, 
your  Messiah."  Thus  Peter  presented 
Jesus  to  the  multitude.  This  is  preach- 
ing Christ,  and  Him  crucified. 

II.  Sinners  condemned. — The  Spirit 
by  which  the  disciples  witnessed  made 
no  mistakes ;  a  different  spirit,  I  fear, 
guides  not  a  little  of  the  witness-bear- 
ing of  the  present.  That  Spirit  did  not 
allow  the  disciples  to  make  the  miser- 
able mistake  of  preaching  Christ  to 
those  who  could  get  along  very  well 
without  him.  And  what  a  condemna- 
tion !  How  the  astonished  thousands 
must  have  shuddered  as  Peter  passed 
from  one  count  to  another  of  his  fear- 
ful indictment  !  Note  these  terrible 
counts  :    First,  he  charges  upon  them 

r  the  infamy  of  betrayal  :  "  Whom  ye 
V  delivered  upr'  ~!But,  second,  betrayal, 
/infamous  as  it  is,  was  not  the  extent — 
(  nay,  it  was  but  the  first  act — of  your 
wickedness,  for  after  ye  had  betrayed 
Him,  when  natural  justice  demanded 
His  release,  when  Pilate,  the  Roman 
governor,  who  was  neither  scrupulous 
nor  tender-hearted,  was  about  to  let 
Him  go,  ye  denied  the  Holy  One  and 
the  Just.  Third,  but  betrayal,  denial, 
and  rejection,  damning  as  these  charges 
are  when  in  the  rejection  ye  must  take 
a  murderer  to  your  bosoms,  are  not  the 
weightiest  counts  of  this  indictment 
nor  the  extent  of  your  infamy  and 
wickedness.  Ye  are  guilty  of  the 
awful  crime  of  killing  the  Prince  of 
life.  There  is  no  shifting  the  guilt  and 
responsibility  of  that  death.  Thus 
with  firm  and  steady  hand  does  Peter 
thrust  the  iron  of  a  terrible  accusation 
into  their  guilty  breasts. 

III.  Pardon  proclaimed. — Peter  was 
severe  in  his  indictment,  but  he  was 
wounding  to  heal.  He  thrust  the  keen 
lance  of  conviction  into  their  souls, 
that  he  might  open  the  way  to  pour 
into  their  hearts  the  grace  of  pardon 
and  peace.  Hence,  the  moment  he  saw 
that  the  truth  had  done  its  work  of 
conviction,  he  hastened  to  apply  the 
balm  of  Gilead.     1.  He  softens  the  in- 


dictment by  referring  their  murderous 
deed  partly  to  their  ignorance  :  "  I 
know  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it." 
Ignorance  is  no  excuse  for  wrongdoing, 
especially  such  criminal  ignorance  as 
theirs ;  still,  there  is  a  distinction 
between  a  crime  committed  by  one 
fully  informed  and  the  same  crime  by 
one  largely  ignorant  of  the  real  cha- 
racter of  the  act.  "  Father,  forgive 
them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do," 
said  Jesus.  "  But  I  obtained  mercy, 
because  I  did  it  ignorantly  in  unbelief," 
wrote  Paul.  2.  He  urges  upon  them 
the  consideration  that  God  had  over- 
ruled their  murderous  work  to  the  ac- 
complishment of  His  eternal  purpose. 
All  the  suffering  which,  through  their 
cruelty,  Jesus  had  endured  was,  in  the 
wise  ordering  of  God,  endured  on  their 
behalf.  While  this  did  not  lessen  their 
guilt,  it  did  hold  out  to  them  a  good 
hope  of  mercy  and  pardon.  3.  He 
calls  them  to  repentance  and  a  different 
life  :  "  Ye  are  guilty  of  the  blackest 
crime,  but  it  is  mitigated  by  your 
ignorance  of  what  ye  were  doing,  and 
it  has  been  overruled  to  the  fulfilment 
of  God's  purposes  ;  and  the  very  suffer- 
ings that  ye  caused  Messiah  prepared 
the  way,  in  the  eternal  purpose  of  God, 
for  the  pardon  of  your  sin  in  crucifying 
Him.  Now,  if  ye  are  truly  sorry  for 
your  sin,  and  will  but  turn  from  it 
unto  God  with  all  your  heart,  God  will 
blot  out  your  transgressions."  He 
urges  all  this  upon  them  by  a  glorious 
consideration.  This  consideration  was 
the  fact  that  the  times  spoken  of  by 
all  the  holy  prophets,  the  glorious 
times  of  deliverance,  rest,  refreshment, 
and  joy  which  Messiah  was  to  intro- 
duce, had  come.  Let  us  now  attend  to 
a  few  of  the  important  lessons  sug- 
gested. 1.  We  are  reminded  that  it  is 
strong  faith,  on  the  part  of  the  disciples, 
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  that  works  won- 
ders. No  one  engaged  in  any  way  in 
the  Master's  service  can  afford  to  be 
unmindful  of  this  fact.  To  be  faithless 
is  to  be  helpless  and  useless,  so  far  as 
spiritual  matters  are  concerned.  You 
can  do  nothing  for  your  own  or 
another's  welfare  without  faith.     The 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


faith  of  the  humblest  disciple  may  yet 
work  wonders  that  will  startle  and 
amaze  the  world.  Let  this  be  the  first 
inquiry  in  every  work  we  undertake, 
"  In  whose  name  ?  "  2.  The  wise  and 
true  teacher  always  puts  Jesus  forward 
and  hides  self.  How  easy  would  it  have 
been  for  these  disciples  to  have  secured 
for  themselves  the  fame  of  that  miracle  ! 
Is  there  not  a  profound  lesson  here  for 
us  all?  Are  we  always  careful  to 
bring  Jesus  forward  when  our  works 
of  kindness  and  acts  of  faith  turn  the 
eyes  of  unbelievers  toward  us  ?  3.  The 
true  gospel-teacher  tells  men  the  truth, 
however  severe  or  distasteful  it  may  be. 
What  a  contrast  between  Peter's 
method  and  that  of  not  a  few  so-called 
teachers  in  our  day  ! — men  standing 
before  the  godless  and  guilty  with 
cringing,  shuffling,  apologetic  words  and 
manner,  aiming  to  excuse  Moses  and 
David  and  Isaiah,  and  all  the  inspired 
teachers,  and  prophets,  and  apostles,  for 
their  hard  sayings  against  sin  and 
sinners,  "  Oh,  you  know  the  race  was 
not  enlightened  in  the  time  of  David  "  ; 
or  "  Paul,  being  a  Jew,  could  not,  of 
course,  get  entirely  rid  of  his  Jewish 
ideas  and  prejudices."  Miserable 
gospel-tinkers !  4.  The  true  gospel- 
teacher  calls  to  repentance  and  faith, 
and  otters  pardon  to  the  worst  of 
sinners.  5.  We  learn  to  encourage,  in 
every  legitimate  way,  those  to  whom 
we  preach  the  gospel. — T.  J.  McCrory. 

Ver.   22.  A  Prophet  like  unto  Moms. 

I.  Moses  a  prophetic  type  of  Christ. 
— 1.  In  being  of  the  same  race  with 
those  he  delivered.  2.  In  delivering 
his  brethren  from  a  state  of  captivity. 
3.  In  acting  as  mediator  between  his 
brethren  and  Jehovah.  4.  In  promul- 
gating a  system  of  divine  laws  to  his 
brethren.  5.  In  leading  them  through 
the  wilderness  towards  the  borders  of 
Canaan. 

II.  Christ  though  an  antitype  of, 
yet  greater  than  Moses. — 1.  In  being 
one  with  his  brethren,  yet  of  superior 
niture  to  them.  2.  In  delivering  His 
brethren  from  a  sadder  than  temporal 
bondage,  and  at  a  greater  cost  to  him- 

90 


self  than  Moses  incurred.  3.  In  being 
the  mediator  of  a  better  covenant 
than  that  formed  at  Sinai.  4.  In  re- 
vealing to  men  not  the  laws  only,  but 
the  grace  and  truth  of  Jehovah.  5. 
In  conducting  all  who  obey  Him,  not 
to  the  borders  merely,  but  to  the  in- 
terior also  of  the  Promised  Land. 

Moses  and  Christ.  Related  to  each 
other  as — 

I.  Prophecy  and  fulfilment. 
II.  Law  and  gospel. 
III.  Servant    and    Son. — Leonhard 
and  Spiegel. 

The  World's  True  Prophet.  —The 
world  needs  a  prophet — 1.  Perfect,  well- 
instructed,  filled  with  true  wisdom. 
2.  Authoritative,  one  who  speaks,  not 
from  conjecture  or  in  virtue  of  superior 
talent  or  position,  but  from  authority, 
"  as  one  having  authority."  3.  Divine, 
a  teacher  sent  direct  from  God. 
So  must  be  the  world's  true  teacher. 
God  has  given  us  such  an  one ;  not  for 
Israel  only,  but  for  the  world.  He 
has  sent  His  Son  as  the  world's 
Prophet.  He  is  all  that  is  described 
in  the  passage  before  us. 
I.  He  is  of  our  brethren. 
II.  He  is  raised  up  to  God. — Not 
self-called,  nor  man-called. 

III.  He  is  like  unto  Moses.  1.  Be- 
cause God  speaks  with  Him  face  to  face 
(Numb.  xii.  8  ;  Deut.  xxxiv.  10).  2.  Be- 
cause He  is  Mediator  and  Intercessor.  3. 
He  is  like  unto  Moses,  because  He  is  Israel's 
King.  Moses  was  the  only  prophet 
who  was  also  king, — "  he  was  king  in 
Jeshurun,"  he  was  Israel's  captain. 
4.  He  is  like  unto  Moses  because  He  is 
a  worker  of  miracles.  5.  He  is  like 
Moses  because  He  is  Israel's  great 
Teacher.  6.  He  is  like  Moses  because 
of  His  'meekness .  7.  He  is  like  Moses 
because  rejected  of  men.  As  Moses  was 
rejected  of  his  brethren  (vii.  35),  so 
was  Jesus  despised  and  rejected  of 
men. — H.  Bonar,  D.D. 

Ver.  24.   Christ  in  the  Prophets. 
I.  His  incarnation    (Gen.   iii.    15; 
Isa.  ix.  6). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  III. 


II.  His  humanity  (Gen.  iii.  15; 
Psalm  lxxxix.  19  ;  Isa.  xi.  1,  xxxii.  2). 

III.  His  divinity  (Psalm  ii.  6, 
ex.  1). 

IVr.  His  sufferings  (Gen.  iii.  15; 
Psalm  xx.  6-21,  lxix.  7-9,  20-26  ;  Isa. 

1.  6,  Iii.  14,  liii.  2-10;  Zech.  xiii.  7). 

V.  His  death  (Isa.  liii.  8 ;  Dan.  ix. 
26  ;  Zech.  xiii.  1). 

VI.  His  resurrection  (Psalm  ii.  7, 
(xvi.  9,  10). 

VII.  His  ascension  (Psalm  xxiv.  7, 
lxviii.  18). 

Ver.  25.  The  Abrahamic  Covenant. 

I.  The  parties. — God  and  Abraham. 

II.  The  promise. — "In  Thee  and 
in  Thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of 
the  earth  be  blessed."  1.  A  promise 
of  salvation.  2.  To  all  the  families  of 
the  earth.  3.  Through  a  descendant 
of  Abraham. 

III.  The  performance. — Seen  in 
Christ.     1.  A  descendant  of  Abraham. 

2.  The  Author  of  Salvation.     3.  To  as 
many  as  obey  Him. 

Lessons. — 1.  That  salvation  is  all  of 
grace.  2.  That  it  should  be  offered 
to  all.  3.  That  the  New  Testament 
Church  is  a  continuation  and  develop- 
ment of  the  Old. 

Ver.  26.  The  Mission  of  Christ. 

I.  By  whom  He  was  sent. — God. 
1.  To  whom  He  stood  in  the  twofold 
relation  of  son  and  servant ;  and  2. 
By  whom  He  was  raised  up  first,  by 
His  incarnation,  and  secondly,  at  His 
Resurrection. 

II.  To  whom  He  was  sent. — 1.  To 
the  Jews,  who  were  God's  ancient 
people,  to  whom  pertained  the  adoption 
and  the  glory,  etc.  (Rom.  ix.  4,  5).  2. 
To  the  Gentiles,  who,  no  less  than  the 
Jews,  were  included  in  the  Abiabamic 
covenant. 

III.  For  what  He  was  sent. — For 
blessing.  J.  Of  a  spiritual  sort,  the 
turning  away  of  sinful  men  from  their 
iniquities,  which  meant  more  than  the 
turning  away  from  them  of  (the  con- 
sequences of)  their  iniquities.  2.  To 
every  one — i.e.,  who  was  willing  to  be 
blessed — this  condition,  though  not  ex- 


pressed, being  manifestly  and  necessarily 
implied,  since  no  one  can  be  turned 
from  his  iniquities  without  the  con- 
currence of  his  will. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  grace  of  God.  2. 
The  power  of  Christ.  3.  The  respon- 
sibility of  Man. 

The  Names  of  Christ. 

I.  Jesus,  Joshua  or  Saviour,  the 
personal  name  of  Our  Lord. 

II.  Christ,  Messiah,  His  prophetic 
designation. 

III.  The  son  of  God,  indicating  His 
relation  to  the  first  person  in  the  God- 
head. 

IV.  The  servant  of  Jehovah,  an 
official  title  expressive  of  His  economi- 
cal subordination  to  the  Father. 

V.  The  Holy  and  Righteous  One, 
descriptive  of  His  character  as  a  man, 
and  as  servant  of  Jehovah. 

VI.  The  Prince  of  Life,  depicting 
Him  as  either  the  possessor  or  giver  of 
life  or  as  both. 

VII.  A  prophet  like  unto  Mos< 
setting  forth  the  character  of  His  work 
as  mediatorial  and  legislative. 

Vers.  12-26.  Peter's  Threefold  Testi- 
mony concerning  Christ.     As — 

I.  The  substance  of  all  miracles 
(vers.  12-17). 

II.  The  Redeemer  of  all  souls  (vers. 
18-21). 

III.  The  accomplisher  of  all  pro- 
phecies (vers.  22-26). — Lisco. 

The  Speech  of  Peter  may  be  regarded 
in  four  aspects  : — 

I.  As  showing  the  false  method  of 
looking  at  human  affairs. — "  As 
though  by  our  own  power  or  holiness 
we  had  made  this  man  to  walk." 
1.  The  visible  is  not  the  final.  2. 
Second  causes  do  not  explain  life.  There 
is  a  false  method  of  looking  at  the 
results  (1)  of  preaching  ;  (2)  of  business ; 
(3)  of  thinking.  The  man  who  does 
not  look  beyond  second  causes  lives  in 
distraction — in  chaos  ! 

II.  As  showing  the  true  method  of 
regarding  the  most  extraordinary 
events. — "  God  hath  glorified  His  Son 

91 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Jesus."  "  Faith  in  His  name  hath 
made  this  man  strong."  That  is  the 
sublime  explanation  of  all  recovery, 
all  progress,  all  abiding  strength  and 
comfort.  Forget  God,  and  society  in 
every  phase  and  movement  becomes  a 
riddle  without  an  answer ;  its  happi- 
ness is  but  a  lucky  chance,  its  misery 
an  unexpected  cloud.  Regard  human 
life  as  controlled  and  blessed  by  the 
mediation    of    Jesus      Christ,     then  : 

1.  There  is  discipline  in  every  event, — 
design,  meaning,  however  untoward 
and  unmanageable  the  event.  2.  A 
purpose  of  restoration  runs  through  all 
human  training. 

III.  As  showing  the  only  method 
of  setting  man  right  with  God. — 
"  Repent  ye,  therefore,  and  be  con- 
verted, that  your  sins  may  be  blotted 
out."  The  men  who  worked  Christian 
miracles  spoke  plain  words  about  men's 
souls.  There  is  no  ambiguity  here  ! 
Are  the  old  rousing  words  "  repent," 
"  be  converted,"  being  allowed  to  slip 
out  of  Christian  teaching,  and  are  we 
now  trifling  with  the  character  and 
destiny  of  men?  1.  Everyman  must 
repent,  because  every  man  has  sinned. 

2.  Every  man  must  be  converted, 
because  every  man  is  in  a  false  moral 
condition. 

IV.  As  showing  the  sublime  object 
of  Jesus  Christ's  Incarnation. — "To 
bless  you,  in  turning  away  every  one 
of  you  from  his  iniquities."  1.  Where 
iniquity  is,  there  is  no  blessing.  % 
Physical  restoration  is  but  the  type  of 
spiritual  completeness.  Two  practical 
lessons  arise  out  of  the  subject.  (1)  It 
is  not  enough  to  wonder  at  the  mighty 
viorks  of  God.  (2)  God's  glory  is  ever 
identified  with  the  well-being  of  man. 
"  Restitution,"  "  refreshing,"  "  bless- 
ing." Peter's  appeal  rested  upon  a 
solid  biblical  basis — Moses,  Samuel,  all 
the  prophets.  God's  message  is  the 
summing  up  of  all  the  voices  of  holy 
history. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Ver.  25.  Prophets  and  Sons  of  the 
Prophets. — Therefore  whatsoever  the 
prophets  did  you  may  do.  God  is  as 
near  to  you  as  He  ever  was  to  them. 

92 


He  may  inspire  you  for  the  work  of 
the  hour — to  understand  its  problems 
and  to  fight  its  battles — just  as  He 
inspired  them  for  the  problems  and 
battles  of  their  day.  God  did  not 
speak  to  men  for  the  last  time  nineteen 
hundred  years  ago.  Poetry  was  not 
buried  in  Tennyson's  grave,  and,  given 
the  "  eye  to  see,"  we  may  have  Raphaels 
and  Murillos  yet,  who  shall  find  their 
subjects  in  the  romance  of  these  com- 
monplace days.  Romance !  Ay,  life 
still  teems  with  romance.  And  so  here. 
We  may  be  sons  not  only  of  the 
scientists  and  poets,  of  the  critics  and 
painters :  we  may  be  "  sons  of  the 
prophets " ;  we  may  receive  messages 
as  direct  as  any  message  they  ever 
received,  and  do  work  as  distinctly 
divine  as  they  ever  did.  That,  then, 
is  my  subject — the  prophet,  the  prophet 
of  the  present  hour,  of  to-day. 

I.  England  as  well  as  Judaea  has 
had  its  prophets;  and  it  is  of  the 
English  prophet  I  want  to  speak. 
The  prophet  has  always  been  the  same 
man,  whether  in  England  or  in  Judaea. 
The  form  which  his  work  has  taken 
may  be  different  in  England  from  what 
it  was.  in  Judsea,  but  it  has  been 
essentially  the  same  work.  And,  to 
start  with — 1.  The  prophet  is,  first  of 
all,  the  good  man ;  the  witness  for 
truth  and  righteousness;  the  witness, 
not  by  his  genius,  not  by  the  work  he 
is  able  to  do,  but  by  what  he  is.  That 
in  the  Old  Testament  is  always  the 
sign  that  a  man  is  a  genuine  prophet 
— his  soul  burnt  with  a  passion  for 
goodness,  for  purity,  for  religion.  The 
prophet  would  sometimes  be  a  herds- 
man, sometimes  a  statesman  ;  but  he 
was  always  a  noble  man.  You  have 
noticed  that  in  the  Old  Testament 
story  there  were  "  schools  of  the 
prophets,"  what  we  to-day  would  call 
theological  colleges ;  but  it  did  not 
follow  that  because  a  man  had  had  a 
theological  education  he  was  a  prophet. 
To-day  there  are  "  schools  "  of  art,  but 
every  one  who  has  been  trained  in  the 
school  is  not  an  artist.  The  first  thing 
the  artist  has  often  to  do  is  to  emanci- 
pate his  own  soul,  and  shake  off  every 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  III. 


sign  of  the  school.     If  a  man  have  the 
soul  of  music  in  him  the  school  may  do 
him  good  ;  but  the  school  cannot  make 
him     a     musician.       So     there     were 
"  schools  of  the  prophets,"  which  turned 
out   a   prophet    now    and    then,    but 
turned     out     many     who     were     not 
prophets.     They  had  gone  through  all 
the  drill,  were  perfect  masters  of  the 
technicalities   of    their    calling ;    they 
had  a  high  sense,  I  have  no  doubt,  of 
what  was  due  to  their  order,   of   the 
respect  that  ought  to  be  paid  to  them  ; 
but  the  fire  that  burns  in  the  prophet's 
soul — the  passion  for  truth,  for  good- 
ness, for  purity,  the  courage  that  would 
fight  any  battle  for  God — that  burnt 
but  feebly   in   them.      They   were   no 
prophets.     The  prophet  before  every- 
thing was  a  good  man,  consumed  with 
a  passion  for  righteousness.     2.  Then, 
secondly,    the   prophet   was   the    man 
moved  by  what  he  saw  and  felt  to  act ; 
to  whom  to  do  was  the  first  necessity. 
Not  only  a  man  who  understood  the 
times,    but    who   rose   up   to   do    the 
things  which  the  times  demanded  ;  who 
not   only  saw,  but  who  dared  not  be 
silent.     Elijah   the   Tishbite   was   not 
the  only  man  in  Israel  who  saw  the 
curse    that   Ahab    was   to    the    land. 
There  were   "  seven   thousand,"  so  we 
read,  "  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to 
Baal  "  ;  but  he  was  the  only  man  who 
dared   to  confront  the  man  who  had 
really   troubled  Israel.     Three   things 
in  this  respect  make  the  prophet,  and 
the  man  is  never  a  prophet  unless  the 
three   be   in  him.      First,  he  has  the 
"eye    to    see."     Nothing  tortures  you 
more  than  a  man  who  tries  to  console 
you,  but  does  not  understand  you ;  who 
imagines    he    is    soothing   you,    when 
every   word    he  utters  cuts  your   soul 
until    it    bleeds.       How    many    good 
people  you  have  known  who  have  been 
a  terror  to  you  !     They  wanted  to  help, 
but    they   did    not    know   where    the 
problems  of  life  hurt  you — good,  tender- 
hearted   souls,    brimming    over    with 
concern  and  sympathy ;  but  your  soul 
shuts   itself    up,    and    you   could    die 
rather  than  talk  of  your  difficulties  to 
them.     Others  read  you  at  their  first 


glance ;  their  first  word  proves  that 
they  have  plumbed  your  soul's  deepest 
depths.  Like  the  physician  who  has 
the  "  eye  to  see,"  they  lay  their  finger 
upon  your  soul  and  say,  "  Thou  ail  est 
here,  and  here."  Then,  secondly,  the 
prophet  feels.  What  he  sees  moves 
him,  haunts  him,  draws  a  veil  of  sad- 
ness over  his  face.  Many  who  imagine 
they  are  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus 
are  calmly  inelifferent  to  the  sorrows 
and  woes  of  the  world.  What  do  hosts 
who  "  sit  down  to  the  feast "  in  our 
churches  every  Sunday  care  for  the 
heathen  London  over  which  you  fret  1 
The  prophet  is  the  moved  man,  the 
man  who  has  made  the  sorrows  anel 
problems  of  his  generation  his  own ; 
the  throes  of  his  hour  beat  in  him. 
Every  shock  of  the  French  Revolution 
broke  through  Carlyle's  heart.  Carlyle 
was  not  a  spectator,  but  he  tasted  the 
bliss  and  the  horrors  of  it.  Carlyle  in 
this  also  was  a  prophet.  Once  again  : 
The  prophet  descries  the  remedy.  He  is 
the  "  seer."  But  even  that  is  not  all. 
He  is  not  prophet  merely  because  he 
is  "  seer."  The  prophet  embodies  his 
vision — works  out  what  he  sees. 

3.  The  prophets  are  of  many  orders. 
I  will  mention  a  few.  The  great 
preachers.  That  goes  without  saying. 
England  has  had  a  noble  line  of  them. 
No  truth  is  established  until  it  comes 
into  the  pulpit ;  the  man  who  sets  the 
hall-mark  upon  it  and  gives  it  currency 
is  always  the  preacher.  The  great  poets; 
and  England  has  had  a  grand  suc- 
cession of  them.  We  are  only  slowly 
getting  to  understand  the  poet's  mis- 
sion. The  poet  is  not  the  mere  reciter 
of  the  deeds  of  the  past,  the  mere 
romancist  or  troubaelour,  though  we  do 
not  despise  him.  The  world  will  never 
grow  weary  of  Homer.  Shakespeare 
has  brighteneel  hosts  in  every  genera- 
tion for  three  hundred  years ;  broken 
the  clouds  of  their  despair  and  moodi- 
ness. Spring  breaks  wherever  he 
comes.  The  great  reformers — creators 
of  new  eras.  And  these  are  always  the 
world's  great  saints.  Tyranny  was 
buried  in  the  grave  of  Charles.  And 
the  men  that  did  it — Cromwell,  Milton, 

93 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Pym — did  they  no  hard  things  1  Nay, 
we  cannot  say  that;  stern  times  demand 
stern  deeds,  stern  weapons.  But  these 
men  were  made  out  of  the  stuff  of 
which  prophets  are  made.  And  now — 
II.  You  are  in  the  succession  of 
these  prophets. — "  Ye  are  the  sons  of 
the  prophets."  1.  That  is  your  in- 
calculable advantage.  There  are  truths 
which  the  prophets  have  established 
that  will  never  need  to  be  opened  up 
again.  That  is  a  great  gain.  The 
law  of  gravitation  has  been  settled  for 
ever.  We  shall  not  need  to  discuss 
that  again.  So  there  are  social, 
political,  and  religious  battles  that  will 
never  have  to  be  fought  again.  We 
shall  never  need  another  Magna  Charta. 
So  also  of  the  great  questions  of 
theology.  The  hideous  doctrines  which 
tortured  our  fathers,. once  swept  out  of 
the  Church,  will  never  re-invade  it. 
And  now  you  stand  upon  the  threshold 
of  life — "  sons  of  the  prophets."  What 
will  you  make  of  it  ?  Solomon,  when 
he  came  to  build  the  temple,  found  all 
but  everything  ready  to  his  hand.  It 
was  for  Solomon  to  see  that  the 
temple  should  be  worthy  of  the  pre- 
paration that  had  been  made  for  it. 
So  you,  who  are  just  stepping  out  into 
life.  The  generations  that  have  pre- 
ceded you — I  will  venture  to  say,  the 
generation  that  has  immediately  preceded 
you — has  been  hard  at  work ;  but  we 
sometimes  feel  that  we  have  been 
doing  nothing  but  preparing  material, 
making  ready  for  you.  And  now  it 
is  for  you  to  build.  It  is  for  you  to 
determine  the  design  into  which  the 
temple  is  to  grow.  Christian  en- 
thusiasm shall  express  itself.  Will 
you  remember  this?  "  Ye  are  the  sons 
of  the  prophets"  2.  It  is  more  than 
an  advantage — it  is  an  inspiration.  I 
know  a  man  at  the  present  moment 
whom  I  revere — a  noble  specimen  of 
an  English  man  of  business.  I  have 
often  found  him  busy  studying  the 
story  of  his  own  family,  tracing  the 
line  back  through  father,  grandfather, 
great-grandfather — honourable  men  of 


business  every  one  of  them.  And 
when  I  have  come  upon  him  so  en- 
gaged, he  has  said,  "  I  often  go  over 
the  story  of  my  forefathers'  lives  ;  I 
remind  myself  of  what  they  were,  for 
I  must  live  to  be  worthy  of  them." 
Young  men  and  women,  ministers' 
children  many  of  you,  listen.  I  remind 
you  of  the  homes  in  which  you  were 
nurtured.  I  would  not  be  a  rake,  or 
an  idler,  or  a  spendthrift ;  I  would  be 
a  man.  I  would  not  be  frivolous,  or 
shallow-souled  and  empty-headed,  if  I 
were  you  ;  I  would  be  a  godly  woman. 
"  Ye  are  the  sons  "  and  daughters  "  of 
the  prophets."  3.  Once  again :  That 
you  inherit  these  memories  is  a  great 
responsibility.  Will  you  forget  who 
you  are  1  You  are  Englishmen.  The 
blood  of  Shakespeare,  Milton,  Bacon, 
is  in  you.  You  are  Protestants.  The 
hand  of  Cranmer,  Ridley,  Latimer, 
John  Rogers,  is  upon  you.  You  are 
Puritans.  Greenwood,  Barrow,  Penry, 
were  your  forefathers.  That  is  the 
succession  in  which  you  stand.  Shall 
your  lives  be  small,  narrow,  wicked, 
mean  ?  I  leave  you  with  one  sentence  : 
"  Ye  are  the  sons  of  the  prophets," — 
J.  M(yrlais  Jones. 

Vers.  25,  26.  Israel  beloved  of  God. — 
"  To  the  Jew  first " ;  "  beginning  at 
Jerusalem."  This  was  God's  order,  and 
it  is  so  still.  The  designations  of 
honour,  and  the  intimations  of  privilege 
as  still  possessed  by  the  sons  of 
Abraham  (as  given  in  these  two  verses), 
are  worthy  of  notice. 

I.  They  are  the  children  of  the 
prophets. 

II.  They  are  the  children  of  the 
covenant. 

III.  They  are  they  to  whom  God 
first  sends  His  risen  Son. — 1.  God's 
love  to  Israel.  He  looks  down  on  them, 
yearns  over  them,  pities  them,  says, 
"  How  shall  I  give  thee  up  ?  "  2.  God's 
purpose  concerning  Israel.  God's  desire 
that  we  should  feel  towards  Israel  as 
He  does. — H.  Bonar,  D.D. 


94 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  iv. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

The  Church's  First  Conflict  with  Judaism — Opposition  from  the 

Sanhedrim. 

§  1.  The  Apostles  (Peter  and  John)  in  Gaol ;  or,  the  First  Taste  of  Persecution 
(vers.  1-4). 

§  2.  The  Apostles  before  the  Sanhedrim  ;  or,  the  Sheep  among  Wolves  (vers.  5-12). 

§  3.  The  Apostles  removed  from  Court;  or,  the  Conspirators  in  Conclave  (vers. 
13-22). 

§  4.  The  Apostles  with  their  own  Company ;  or,  the  Welcome  of  the  First  Con- 
fessors (vers.  23-31). 

§  5.  The  Apostles  and  the  First  Christians ;  or,  the  Effect  of  the  First  Perse- 
cution (ver.  32-37). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  As  they  spake. — Lit.,  they,  the  apostles,  either  Peter  for  John  or  John  with  Peter? 
speakhig.  The  discourse  was  probably  interrupted  after  the  utterance  of  the  preceding 
words.  The  priests. — I.e.,  those  who  had  been  at  the  time  officiating  in  the  temple.  The 
captain  of  the  temple. — The  priestly  commandant  of  the  Levitical  troops,  whose  business  it 
was  to  preserve  order  in  the  sacred  edifice  (Luke  xxii.  4).  The  Sadducees. — The  rival  sect  to 
the  Pharisees  had  taken  a  foremost  part  in  persecuting  Christ  (Matt.  xvi.  1,  xxii.  23,  34), 
and  were  now  most  probably  the  instigators  of  this  movement  against  the  apostles,  as  they 
were  of  a  later  (v.  17). 

Ver.  2.  Through,  or  in,  Jesus. — I.e.,  in  the  fact  of  His  resurrection,  in  His  personal  example. 
The  resurrection  from  the  dead. — A  tenet  denied  by  the  Sadducees  (xxiii.  8). 

Ver.  3.  It  was  now  eventide. — When  no  judicial  examination  could  take  place. 

Ver.  4.  Men. — Most  likely  including  (Hackett,  Spence),  though,  according  to  others 
(Meyer,  Stier,  Plumptre),  excluding  women.  About  five  thousand. — The  number  of  the  new 
converts  (Stier),  or  better,  of  disciples  altogether  in  Jerusalem  (Alford,  Hackett,  Holtzmann, 
Plumptre). 

Ver.  5.  Their  rulers. — Not  of  the  new  converts  or  of  the  apostles,  but  of  the  people ;  hence 
the  Sanhedrists.  Elders, — Heads  of  families,  Scribes, —Teachers  of  the  law,  and  chief 
priests  composed  the  Sanhedrin. 

Ver.  6.  Annas  the  high  priest  and  Caiaphas. — Exactly  as  in  the  gospels  (Luke  iii.  2  ;  John 
xviii.  13),  which  accord  to  the  former  the  first  place  in  the  high  priesthood,  "  although  his 
proper  term  of  office  (6 — 15  A  D.)  had  long  since  expired"  (Zockler),  while  the  active  duties 
of  the  high  priest  were  performed  by  Caiaphas,  his  son-in-law  (18 — 36  A.D.).  At  or  in 
Jerusalem  should  form  part  of  ver.  5,  as  in  the  R.V.  "  In  "  may  imply  that  the  court  met  not 
in  the  temple,  but  in  the  city  (Alford),  but  this  is  only  a  conjecture.  Some  MSS.  read  into 
Jerusalem,  as  if  several  of  the  members  had  resided  beyond  the  precincts  of  the  city,  and 
on  being  summoned  had  hastened  in  overnight  (Holtzmann). 

Ver.  7.  In  the  midst. — I.e.,  in  full  view,  in  the  centre  of  the  Sanhedrists,  if,  as  tradition 
reports,  these  were  accustomed  to  sit  in  a  circle.  By  what  power,  or  in  what  name,  etc. — 
Compare  Luke  xx.  2,  of  which  the  question  here  addressed  to  the  apostles  is  supposed  to  be 
a  legendary  echo  (Gfrorer,  Zeller,  and  others) ;  but  why  the  same  inquiry  should  not  have 
been  twice  put,  on  different  occasions,  and  to  different  individuals,  is  not  easy  to  understand. 

Ver.  8.  Filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost. — Specially  bestowed  upon  him  for  the  crisis  which 
had  arisen  (compare  ver.  31,  ii.  4,  xiii.  9  ;  Matt.  x.  19,  20). 

Ver.  9.  By  what  means. — Or  in  whom.  Is  made  whole. — Lit.,  has  been  saved,  not  merely 
from  the  power  of  disease,  but  from  that  of  sin,  of  which  the  physical  malady  was  a  fruit 
and  sign  (compare  ver.  12). 

Ver.  10.  Of  Nazareth. — Frequently  applied  to  Jesus  (ii.  22,  vi.  14,  x.  38,  xxii.  8 ;  Matt.  xxi. 
11 ;  John  i.  45).  Here  connected  with  Jesus  Christ  (compare  iii.  G),  and  used  to  identify  the 
Jesus  of  whom  Peter  spoke  with  the  Jesus  whom  the  rulers  had  crucified  (John  xix.  19). 
Whom  ye  crucified  ;  whom  God  raised. — Peter  seldom  oirUs  to  exhibit  the  antithesis  between 

95 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


man's  treatment  of  Jesus  and  God's.  The  death  and  the  resurrection  of  Christ  formed  the 
two  poles  of  Peter's  teaching.  The  one  without  the  other  would  have  been  defective  and 
powerless  for  salvation. 

Ver.  11.  The  stone  which  was  set  at  nought,  etc. — Quoted  from  Psalm  cxviii.  22,  and  applied 
to  Christ  as  already  it  had  been  by  Christ  Himself  (Matt.  xxi.  42 ;  Luke  xx.  17  ;  compare 
1  Peter  ii.  4,  7). 

Ver.  12.  Salvation. — Should  be  the  salvation,  the  Messianic  deliverance  and  blessing, 
which  men  were  needing  and  the  apostles  were  preaching  (ii.  21).  Given  among  men. — 
Better,  which  is  or  has  been  given — i.e.,  provided.  Hence  the  use  of  must,  because  no  other 
has  been  given  or  provided. 

Ver.  13.  Perceived.— Lit.,  having  perceived  from  what  they  saw  and  heard  at  the  time, 
or  from  previous  inquiry.  It  would  certainly  have  been  strange  if  the  Sanhedrists,  and 
in  particular  Annas  and  Caiaphas  (see  John  xviii.  16),  had  not  been  acquainted  with  Peter 
and  John  (Zeller,  Holtzmann)  ;  but  this  is  not  necessarily  implied  in  the  language,  which 
rather  suggests  that  they  recognised  the  apostles  as  having  been  formerly  among  Christ's 
disciples.  Unlearned. — I.e.,  illiterate,  untaught  in  the  learning  of  the  Jewish  schools  (see 
John  vii.  15),  and  Ignorant. — I.e.,  private  or  obscure  persons,  plebeian  as  distinguished  from 
persons  in  the  higher  walks  of  life  (1  Cor.  xiv.  16). 

Ver.  15.  Out  of  the  council. — = Which  was  open  to  others,  so  that  Luke  could  easily  have 
ascertained  from  parties  who  had  been  present  what  was  said  and  done  during  the  absence 
of  the  apostles.  It  has  been  thought  not  improbable  that  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  there 
(Hackett). 

Ver.  16.  That  indeed  a  notable  miracle  hath  been  wrought  by  them  is  manifest. — This 
confession  on  the  part  of  the  Sanhedrin  has  been  pronounced  incredible,  and  inconsistent 
with  the  instruction  given  in  ver.  17  (Gfrorer,  Zeller)  ;  but  their  conduct  in  this  instance 
is  no  more  difficult  to  understand  than  their  behaviour  in  the  case  of  the  man  who  was  born 
blind  (John  ix. ),  with  which  it  is  pretty  much  of  a  piece. 

Ver.  17.  Let  ns  straitly  threaten. — Lit.,  with  a  threat  let  us  threaten  them.  For  a  similar 
construction  see  Luke  xxii.  15.     The  R.V.  omits  "  with  a  threat." 

Ver.  18.  Nor  teach  in  or  upon  (iiri)  the  name  of  Jesus. — So  as  to  make  it  a  theme  of 
discourse. 

Ver.  19.  Whether  it  be  right,  etc. — See  on  v.  29 ;  and  compare  Amos  iii.  8  ;  1  John  i.  1-3. 
This  remarkable  utterance  is  not  without  Greek,  Roman,  and  Rabbinical  parallels. 

Ver.  21.  Glorified  God  for  that  which  was  done. — Compare  Luke  v.  26 ;  Gal.  i.  24. 

Ver.  22.  Forty  years  old. — A  note  characteristic  of  Luke  (compare  ix.  33,  xiv.  8 ;  Luke  viii. 
43). 

Ver.  23.  Their  own  company. — Not  the  apostles  merely,  but  their  friends  in  the  faith 
generally. 

Ver.  24.  0  Lord  ! — Addressed  not  t©  Christ,  as  in  i.  24,  who,  however,  is  also  called 
<^<77tot7;s  (2  Peter  ii.  1  ;  Jude  4),  but  to  God  as  the  absolute  Master  of  the  universe  which  He 
has  made  (xiv.  15 ;  Neh.  ix.  6  ;  Isa.  xlii.  5  ;  Rev.  iv.  11). 

Ver.  25.  By  the  mouth  of  Thy  servant  David  should  be  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  mouth  of 
our  father,  David  Thy  servant — the  mouth  of  David  being  regarded  as  the  mouth  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  The  text  in  this  verse  is  confessedly  difficult,  and  "  doubtless  contains  a 
primitive  error"  (Westcott  and  Hort).  The  citation  is  from  the  second  Psalm  (LXX.)  ; 
which  is  undoubtedly  ascribed  to  David. 

Ver.  26.  For  Christ  read  Anointed,  which  term,  however,  applied  by  pre-eminence  to 
Christ. 

Ver.  27.  The  best  texts  insert  in  this  city,  iv  rrj  rdXei  ra^r^,  after  of  a  truth  (compare  x.  34), 
which  certifies  the  fulfilment  of  the  divine  oracle  in  the  proceedings  which  were  taken 
against  Christ  by  both  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate  (Luke  xxiii.  1-12). 

Ver.  28.  To  do  whatsoever,  etc. — Compare  ii.  23. 

Ver.  29.  Lord. — As  in  ver.  24.     Here  distinguished  from  Jesus. 

Ver.  31.  The  place  was  shaken.— In  answer  to  the  prayer  of  the  disciples,  not  by  an  earth- 
quake (Kuinoel),  which,  according  to  the  notions  of  the  time, 'gave  intimation  of  the  presence 
of  the  Deity  (see  Virgil,  jEneid,  iii.  89,  90:  Da  pater  augurium,  atqne  animis  illabere  nostris; 
vix  ea  fatus  eram,  tremere  omnia  visa  repented),  but  by  a  supernatural  movement  of  the 
chamber  according  to  the  promise  of  "  signs  on  the  earth  "  in  ii.  19. 

Ver.  32.  The  multitude  of  them  that  believed  were  not  the  new  converts  merely,  but  the 
general  body  of  the  disciples. 

Ver.  33.  Grace. — Not  favour  with  the  people,  as  in  ii.  47  (Grotius,  Olshausen,  Holtzmann), 
but  divine  favour,  as  in  xi.  23;  John  i.  14  (Meyer,  Alford,  Zockler,  Hackett),  of  which  vers.  34 
and  35  furnish  proof. 

Ver.  3G.  For  Joses  read  Joseph.  Barnabas,  the  son  of  consolation,  or  son  of  exhortation 
(Holtzmann,  Zockler)— /.#.,  of  consolatory  discourse.  A  title  given  to  Joseph  from  the 
sympathetic  character  of  his  preaching  (xi.  23).     Barnabas  afterwards  became  Paul's  com- 

96 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  iv. 


pardon  on  his  missionary  travels  (xiii.  2).  A  Levite  — A  descendant  of  Levi,  but  not  a  priest. 
Of  the  country  of  Cyprus. — Kather,  a  Cyprian  by  birth — i.e.,  a  Jew  who  had  been  born  in 
Cyprus. 

Ver.  37.  Having  land,  or  a  farm  belonging  to  him.  Whether  in  Palestine  (Holtzmann, 
Zockler)  or  in  Cyprus  (Hackett)  is  not  said,  but  most  likely  in  the  former.  Though  the 
Levites  had  no  share  in  the  soil  of  Canaan,  that  destroyed  not  their  right  of  private  ownership 
within  the  forty-eight  cities  assigned  them,  or  in  the  territory  adjacent  to  these  (see  Jer. 
xxxii.  7).  The  money. — The  price  realised  by  the  sale  of  his  farm.  At  the  apostles'  feet. 
— As  a  voluntary  contribution  to  the  common  fund,  for  distribution  among  the  poorer 
brethren.  The  case  of  Ananias  (v.  1)  shows  that  Barnabas  was  under  no  compulsion  to 
either  sell  his  farm  or  donate  his  money. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—4. 

The  Apostles  in  Gaol ;  or,  the  First  Taste  of  Persecution. 

I.  The  time. — 1.  While  exhorting  the  people.  At  the  very  moment  when  their 
usefulness  appeared  to  be  at  its  height,  when  their  words  seemed  to  he  effecting 
an  entrance  into  the  hearts  of  their  hearers,  they  were  apprehended.  Verily, 
"  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way,  His  wonders  to  perform."  One  would  have 
expected  that  the  hand  of  Providence  would  have  kept  the  adversaries'  movements 
in  check,  at  least  till  Peter's  sermon  was  closed ;  but  no ;  Peter's  enemies  were 
allowed  the  freest  scope  to  carry  out  their  malignant  designs.  Divine  wisdom 
is  perfectly  able  to  outwit  the  cleverest  of  man's  machinations,  and  cause  man's 
wrath  to  praise  Him,  and  therefore  never  needs  to  be  in  a  hurry  either  to  hinder 
man's  projects  or  thwart  his  purposes.  2.  At  eventide.  When  Peter's  sermon 
must  in  any  case  have  before  long  been  brought  to  a  termination,  and  when  it 
was  too  late  for  him  and  John  to  be  put  on  trial  before  the  Sanhedrim ;  so  that, 
on  the  one  hand,  Peter's  hearers  had  received  the  most  of  what  he  purposed 
saying,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  Peter  himself,  with  John,  had  leisure  to  reflect 
upon  the  situation  before  being  called  into  court  to  answer  for  their  misdemeanour. 
There  is  always  some  mitigation,  even  in  the  worst  lot. 

II.  The  agents. — 1.  The  priests.  Those  engaged  at  the  time  in  the  Temple, 
the  division  into  twenty-four  orders  originally  made  by  David  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  3  ; 
2  Chron.  viii.  14)  having  been  revived  after  the  exile.  If  the  Feast  of  Pentecost 
had  not  yet  terminated,  a  larger  number  than  usual  of  these  religious  officers  may 
have  been  present  on  this  occasion.  A  pitiful  mistake  it  is  when  ministers  of 
religion  leave  their  proper  work  to  become  instigators  of  persecution.  This 
unfortunately  they  have  often  done.  2.  TJie  captain  of  the  Temple.  Not  the 
Pom  an  officer  who  kept  guard  at  the  Tower  of  Antonia,  near  by,  but  the  priestly 
commandant  of  the  Levitical  troops,  whose  business  it  was  to  preserve  order  about 
the  sacred  edifice  (compare  Jos.,  Wars,  VI.  v.  3).  Though  the  captain  little 
thought  of  it,  what  looked  to  him  like  disorder  was  in  accordance  with  the 
highest  order  of  the  Temple.  It  is  not  safe  to  judge  according  to  appearances. 
3.  The  Sadducees.  The  rivals  of  the  Pharisees,  properly  the  rationalists  of  the 
day  (xxiii.  8).  From  the  first  bitter  enemies  of  Jesus  (Matt.  xvi.  1,  6,  12, 
xxii.  23),  these  were  most  likely  the  prime  movers  in  this  hostile  action  against 
the  two  apostles.  The  men  who  killed  Christ  were  not  likely  to  be  scrupulous  in 
consigning  His  disciples  to  gaol. 

III.  The  motives. — Twofold.  Indignation  at  the  apostles  for — 1.  Teaching 
the  people.  Strange  that  the  priests  should  have  been  sore  troubled  at  the 
apostles  for  doing  what  they  themselves  should  have  done — "  the  priests'  lips 
should  keep  knowledge  "  (Mai.  ii.  7) — but  possibly  the  consciousness  of  neglected 
duty  had  rendered  them  uneasy.  That  the  Sadducees  should  have  objected  to 
the  education  of  the  vulgar  crowd,  whom  they  despised  as  the  "  scum "  of  the 
world's  population,  was  not  surprising.     The  Temple  commandant  presumably 

h  97 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


shared  the  prejudices  of  the  official  class  to  which  he  belonged.  2.  Promulgating 
the  doctrine  of  a  resurrection. — This  was  the  head  and  front  of  the  apostles' 
offence  in  the  eyes  of  the  Sadducees.  To  preach  that  Jesus,  whom  they  had 
hunted  to  death,  was  risen,  and  that  all  who  believed  on  Him  should  eventually 
rise  like  Him  and  by  virtue  of  His  power,  was  to  lay  the  axe  at  the  root  of  their 
favourite  dogma,  that  this  life  was  the  whole  of  man's  existence.  Such  preaching 
was  of  course  an  outrage  upon  their  superior  wisdom. 

IV.  The  consequence. — 1.  The  apostles  were  imprisoned.  Their  liberty  was 
for  the  first  time  abridged.  No  such  experience  had  befallen  them  prior  to  the 
crucifixion.  They  had  seen  their  Master's  forerunner  (Luke  iii.  20)  consigned 
to  a  dungeon,  and  Peter  at  least  had  professed  his  readiness  to  follow  Christ  to 
prison  and  to  death  (Luke  xxii.  33).  Now,  for  the  first  time,  they  knew  what 
it  signified  to  languish  within  prison  walls.  How  they  spent  their  first  night  in 
gaol  is  not  recorded.  Perhaps,  like  Paul  and  Silas,  they  prayed  and  sang  hymns 
to  God,  "  who  giveth  songs  in  the  night "  (Job  xxxv.  10),  and  of  whom  it  is 
written,  "  He  hath  looked  down  from  the  height  of  His  sanctuary  ...  to  hear 
the  groaning  of  the  prisoner,"  etc.  (Psalm  cii.  19,  20).  2.  The  people  believed.  The 
most  foolish  thing  in  the  world  is  to  expect  to  hinder  any  cause,  and  least  of  all 
a  good  one,  by  means  of  persecution.  So  many  received  the  word  that  after- 
noon that  the  number  of  believers  (men  and  women)  swelled  to  five  thousand 
souls.  The  experience  of  Israel  in  Egypt  was  repeated  in  the  history  of  the 
Christian  Church  (Exod.  i.  12). 

Learn. — 1.  That  what  seems  a  hindrance  often  turns  out  a  help  to  the  gospel. 

2.  That  that  religion  condemns  itself  which  opposes  the  education  of  the  people. 

3.  That  that  religion  is  worthless  as  well  as  false  which  has  nothing  to  say  about 
a  resurrection.  4.  That  rationalism  never  will  satisfy  the  deepest  instincts  of 
the  heart.     5.  That  Christ's  enemies  are  always  clever  at  outwitting  themselves. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.    2.    Troubles   of   Unbelievers. —  who   were    only   committed  to   prison 

Like  the  priests,  the  captain,  and  the  and    afterwards    liberated,    He     was 

Sadducees,    many    moderns    are    sore  hurried    from  the    garden   to  the  hall 

grieved —  of  judgment,  and  thence  to  the  place 

I.  At  the  exaltation   of   Jesus. —  of  doom. 

They  would  be  much  more  comfortable  II.    Undeserved,    but   not   more  so 

were  they  sure  that  He  was  only  a  man  than   those   of  Christ.      The   apostles 

crucified  and  buried.  were    put  in    prison    for  doing    good  ; 

II.  At  the  preaching  of  a  resurrec-  Christ  was  nailed  to  the  cross  for  seek- 
tion. — They  can  see  well  that  if  Christ  ing  the  salvation  of  a  lost  world.  The 
is  risen  they  are  wrong  in  their  apostles  suffered  while  innocent  of  any 
opinions,  and  in  danger  of  the  judg-  crime ;  Christ  was  numbered  with 
ment.  transgressors,  though  without  sin. 

III.  At  the  progress  of  Christianity.  III.  Expected,  but  not  more  so  than 
— Having  so  often  and  so  confidently  were  those  of  Christ.  The  apostles 
affirmed  that  Christianity  was  a  decay-  must  have  known  that  opposition  and 
ing  religion,  if  not  already  obsolete,  persecution  would  await  them  the 
it  annoys  them  to  see  their  predictions  moment  they  stepped  forth  to  advocate 
turned  to  foolishness.  the  cause  of  their  Crucified  and  Risen 

Lord  (John  xvi.  2) ;  but  Christ's 
Ver.  3.  Troubles  of  Christ's  Servants.  sufferings  and  death  were  foreseen 
I.  Severe,    but   not   more   so    than      by  Him  from  the  first  (Matt.  ix.  15, 

were  those  of  Christ.    Like  the  apostles,      xvi.  21). 

Christ  was  arrested  ;  but,  unlike  them,  IV.  Futile,   but  not  more  so  than 

98 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap,  i v. 


were  those  of  Christ.     They  came  too  place   at   Pentecost.     3.    They    feared 

late   to   impede   the   triumph    of   the  that  the   miracle    might   authenticate 

gospel;    and   Christ's   sufferings   were  the  story  of  Christ's  resurrection, 
too  late  to  hinder  the  successful  accom-  III.  Why  it  took  the  form  that  it 

plishment  of  His  design — the  salvation  did. — Why,  instead  of  offering  violence 

of  the  world.  to  the  apostles,  they  did  not  expose  the 

deception    contained    in   the   so-called 

The  Opposition  of  the  JewishLeaders.  miracle,    and   refute   the    errors    pro- 

— I.  Why  it  began  when  it  did.     Why  pounded  in  the  teaching  of  the  apostles  ? 

commenced    it    not    on    the    Day   of  Answer — 1.  Because   they   knew  well 

Pentecost  ?    Perhaps — 1.  Because  they  that  they  could  do  neither  the  one  thing 

were  then  too  much  occupied  with  the  nor  the  other.     2.  Because  they  under  - 

festivities   of   the   time.      2.    Because  stood  that  force  was  more  convincing 

the  popular  enthusiasm  aroused  by  the  than  argument.     3.  Because  the  isola- 

apostles  was  too  great.     3.  Because  the  tion  of  the  two  apostles  afforded  them 

task  of  apprehending  one  hundred  and  an  excellent  opportunity  for  using  the 

twenty  people  without   previous  pre-  strong  hand, 
paration  would  have  been  a  somewhat 
formidable  task.  Ver  4.  Hearing  and  Believing. 

II.  Why  it  was  prompted  as  it  was.  I.  Hearing  must  precede  believing, 

— By  the  healing  of   the   lame  man,  otherwise    believing  will   be    (1)    un- 

and  not  by  the  preaching  at  Pentecost.  enlightened  and  (2)  unavailing,  if  not 

Probably    because — 1.    They    realised  (3)  impossible. 

that   the  miracle  would    be  more   in-  II.  Believing  ought  to  follow  hear- 

fluential  among  the  populace  than  the  ing,  else  hearing  (1)  will  not  save,  but 

sermon.     2.  They  saw  that  the  miracle  (2)  will  increase  guilt,  and  (3)  result  in 

confirmed  what  report  said  had  taken  hardening. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— VERSES  5—12.. 

The  Apostles  before  the  Sanhedrim  ;  or,  the  Sheep  among  Wolves. 

I.  The  mustering  of  the  court. —  1.  The  time.  On  the  morrow,  probably  with 
the  dawning  of  the  day,  say  between  six  and  seven  a.m.  As  in  Christ's  case 
(John  xviii.  28),  no  time  was  lost  in  bringing  the  apostolic  offenders  to  book. 
Wickedness  can  seldom  afford  to  proceed  at  leisure  (Prov.  vi.  18);  it  is  the  good 
man  who  never  requires  to  make  haste  (Isa.  xxviii.  16).  2.  The  place.  Jeru- 
salem, in  a  chamber  connected  with  the  Temple.  If  any  of  the  Sanhedrists  lived 
beyond  the  city  limits — quite  a  probable  supposition — they  were  duly  summoned 
for  the  work  on  hand.  3.  The  members.  Seventy  one  persons  in  all,  chosen  from 
(1)  the  elders,  or  heads  of  families,  among  whom  were  included  both  priests  and 
laymen ;  (2)  the  scribes,  or  teachers  of  the  law,  professional  jurists  who  mostly 
adhered  to  the  party  of  the  Pharisees,  as  the  priestly  members  commonly  be- 
longed to  the  Sadducees ;  and  (3)  the  chief  priests  and  their  families.  Of  these 
the  first  mentioned  is  Annas,  or  Hanan — "  gracious  " — the  aged  head  of  the  high 
priestly  house  before  whom  Christ  had  been  set  for  examination  (John  xviii.  13), 
whom  Josephus  pronounced  "the  most  fortunate  man  of  his  time,"  because  for 
upwards  of  half  a  century  he  and  five  of  his  sons  had  occupied  the  highest 
ecclesiastical  position  in  the  country,  but  whom  "  the  most  unsuspected  sources  " 
compel  us  to  recognise  as  "  nothing  better  than  an  absolute,  tyrannous,  worldly 
Sadducee,  unvenerable  for  all  his  seventy  years,  full  of  serpentine  malice  and 
meanness  which  utterly  belied  his  name"  (Farrar,  The  Life  of  Christ,  chap,  lviii., 
p.  639).  Associated  with  him  was  Caiaphas,  of  evil  fame,  his  bold  and  un- 
scrupulous son-in-law,  who  first  suggested  the  expediency  of  Christ's  removal  by 
death  (John  xi.  49,  50),  and  eventually  put  the  crown  upon  his  criminality  by 

99 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


pronouncing  Christ  guilty  of  blasphemy  (Matt.  xxvi.  65),  and  handing  Him  over 
to  Pilate  for  crucifixion  (John  xviii.  28).  Other  members  of  the  court  were  John 
and  Alexander,  about  neither  of  whom  is  anything  known,  and  "  as  many  as 
were  of  the  high  priest's  family,"  from  which  perhaps  it  may  be  inferred  that  not 
only  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  of  Arimathea  were  absent,  but  also  Gamaliel,  Paul's 
celebrated  teacher,  who  honourably  figured  at  a  later  meeting  (v.  34).  In  short, 
it  was  a  packed  assembly,  and  one  not  calculated  to  reassure  the  apostles,  or  even 
promise  them  an  honest  trial. 

II.  The  examination  of  the  prisoners. — Placed  in  the  centre  of  the  circle 
which  according  to  tradition  the  Sanhedrists  formed,  the  apostles  were  asked  two 
questions.  1.  By  what  power  they  had  wrought  the  miracle  on  the  lame  man  ? 
This  amounted  to  a  practical  admission  that  the  miracle  had  been  wrought 
(compare  ver.  16),  a  serious  difficulty  in  the  way  of  those  who  deny  the  possibility 
of  miracles.  Had  the  Sanhedrists  been  able  to  show  that  no  miracle  had  been 
wrought,  who  can  doubt  that  they  would  cheerfully  have  done  so  1  The  fact  that 
they  did  not  so  much  as  attempt  this  proves  that  in  their  judgment  the  miracle 
was  undeniable.  Even  so  the  higher  miracles  of  the  gospel  can  as  little  be 
challenged.  2.  In  what  name  they  had  performed  the  ujonder  ?  The  Sanhedrists 
w^ere  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  name,  but  "  wanted  to  convict  Peter  and  John 
of  sorcery,  by  having  worked  a  miracle  not  in  the  name  of  God,  but  in  that  of 
a  crucified  malefactor "  (Spence).  One  marvels  how  they  did  not  perceive  that 
if  a  crucified  malefactor's  name  could  work  miracles,  the  so-called  malefactor 
must  have  been  other  than  they  deemed  Him.  It  is  noticeable  that  the  Sanhe- 
drists avoid  saying  anything  about  what  grieved  them  most,  the  apostles' 
teaching  the  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection.  Was  this  due  to  the  mixed  composition 
of  the  tribunal,  as  afterwards  in  Paul's  case  (xxiii.  7)  ?     Possibly. 

III.  The  reply  of  the  apostles. — Given  in  John's  name  as  well  as  his  own,  and 
delivered  by  Peter,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit.  This  consisted  of  three 
propositions.  1 .  That  the  miracle  in  question  had  been  done  in  the  name  and  by 
the  power  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  whom  they  had  crucified  but  God  had  raised.  The 
apostles  themselves  had  been  nothing  but  instruments  in  the  hands  of  the  exalted 
Redeemer,  whose  existence  and  power  were  certified  by  the  miracle  they  had 
wrought  and  none  could  deny.  The  utter  absence  of  self-glorification  on  the  part 
of  Peter  and  John  is  remarkable,  only  surpassed  by  their  splendid  confidence  in 
and  absolute  surrender  to  Jesus.  2.  That  they,  the  Sanhedrists,  who  were  supposed 
to  be  temple  builders  for  Jehovah,  in  crucifying  Christ,  had  really  rejected  Him  whom 
Jehovah  had  chosen  to  be  the  Head  Stone  of  the  Corner.  Their  mistake  had  been 
the  most  appalling  that  persons  in  their  position  could  commit.  God  by  raising 
up  Christ  had  demonstrated  Him  to  be  the  true  Messiah,  whom  they  should  have 
been  the  first  to  recognise  and  welcome,  but  whom  nevertheless  they  had  despised 
and  rejected  (John  i.  11).  Man's  judgment  and  God's  do  not  always  coincide  in 
spiritual  things,  so  much  the  worse  of  course  for  man's  judgment.  Even  those 
who  from  their  privileges  and  training  might  be  expected  to  be  men  of  "  light 
and  leading  "  sometimes  turn  out  "  blind  leaders  of  the  blind."  As  in  the  former 
proposition  the  humility  of  the  apostles  was  conspicuous,  so  in  this  stands  out 
strikingly  their  boldness.  3.  That  in  no  other  name  than  Christ's  could  salvation 
be  found.  The  salvation  of  which  Peter  spoke  was  not  temporal  and  corporeal 
healing  merely — although  Christ's  name  could  effect  that  also — but  spiritual  and 
eternal  healing  for  the  soul,  the  Messianic  deliverance  and  blessing ;  and  of  this 
as  of  that,  the  Risen  Christ  was  the  sole  fountain  and  source.  His  was  the  only 
name  given  under  heaven  among  men  whereby  the  soul  could  be  saved.  This  was 
sufficient  proof  of  "  the  completely  certain  knowledge  "  which  the  apostles  possessed 
of  the  nothingness  of  all  other  pretended  ways  of  salvation  "  (Harless,  System  of 
Christian  Ethics,  p.  159,  E.  T.).     N.B. — A  statement  like  this  pronounces  no 

100 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


judgment  on  the  question  whether  one  who  has  never  heard  Christ's  name,  like 
the  heathen,  or  having  heard  it  has  not  understood  it  like  infants  and  imbeciles, 
can  be  saved ;  it  simply  asserts  that  Christ's  is  the  one  saving  name,  and  that  all 
who  are  saved  must  be  saved  through  Him.  Equally  arresting  in  this  third 
proposition  is  the  Apostle's  insight. 

Learn. — 1.  The  impotence  of  man  when  he  conspires  against  God.  2.  The 
fortitude  of  those  the  Holy  Ghost  inspires.  3.  The  all- sufficiency  of  Christ's 
name  for  salvation. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  11.  The  Builders  and  the  Stone. 

I.  The  Church  as  a  building  or 
house. — 1.  A  spiritual  house  (1  Peter 
ii.  5).    2.  Divinely  planned  (Heb.iii.  1-6). 

3.  Erected  by  human  instrumentality. 

4.  Variously  used.  As  (1)  a  dwelling 
house  (Psalm  lxxvi.  2 ;  Eph.  ii.  22) ;  (2) 
a  treasure  house  (Mai.  iii.  17  ;  (3)  a 
banqueting  house  (Song  ii.  4). 

II.  Christ  as  the  corner  stone. — 

1.  Of   God's  choosing  (1   Peter  ii.   4). 

2.  Of  God's  approving  (Matt.  iii.  17). 

3.  Of   God's   trying  (Isa.  xxviii.   16). 

4.  Of  God's  laying  (Isa.  xxviii.  16; 
1  Cor.  iii.  11). 

III.  The  rejection  of  the  stone  by 
the  builders. — This  proceeded  from  : 
1.  Blindness  as  to  the  excellency  of 
Christ's  person.  2.  Ignorance  of  the 
mystery  of  redemption  and  salvation 
through  Him.  3.  Mistaken  views  of 
the  nature  of  Messiah's  kingdom. 

IY.  The  exaltation  of  the  stone  by 
God. — Implying  :  1.  Christ's  victory 
over  all  His  enemies.  2.  His  institu- 
tion as  King  and  Head  of  His  Church. 
3.  The  resting  on  Him  of  the  whole 
fabric  of  the  Church.  4.  His  distinc- 
tion as  the  centre  of  unity  for  and 
chief  ornament  of  the  Church. — Com- 
viledfrom  Ebenezer  Er shine. 

The  Rejected  Comer  Stone. 

I.  The  sin  of  the  builders. — 1.  The 
Builders.  The  ecclesiastical  leaders  of 
the  Jewish  people.  The  place  occupied 
and  the  function  performed  by  them 
have  now  passed  into  the  hands  of  the 
pastors  and  teachers  of  the  Christian 
Church.  2.  The  building.  The  temple 
of  God's  kingdom  on  the  earth,  sym- 
bolised in  ancient  times  by  the  Hebrew 
nation,  in  modern  days  by  the  Christian 


Church.  3.  The  stone  which  the  builders 
rejected.  Christ,  who  was  despised  by 
the  Jewish  authorities  because  of  His 
obscure  personality  and  lowly  condition, 
and  who  is  sometimes  slighted  and 
passed  over  still  by  Church  teachers, 
who  corrupt  the  true  doctrine  of  a 
crucified  Saviour,  or  attempt  to  build 
on  another  foundation  than  that  of  His 
person  and  work. 

II.  The  glory  of  the  rejected  stone. 
— 1.  It  had  been  prepared  by  God.  The 
Hebrew  builders  had  not  perceived,  and 
Christian  builders  occasionally  forget 
this.  The  incarnation,  death,  resur- 
rection, and  exaltation  of  Jesus  were 
successive  steps  by  which  God  fitted 
Him  to  be  a  sure  and  tried  foundation 
for  His  Church.  2.  The  supposed  de- 
fects about  the  stone  were  its  best  quali- 
fications, for  the  place  it  was  intended  to 
fill.  The  Jewish  leaders  could  not  away 
with  a  Messiah  who  was  meek  and  lowly 
in  His  character,  as  well  as  spiritual 
and  heavenly  in  His  mission,  who  was 
to  suffer,  die,  and  rise  again ;  but 
these  were  the  very  facts  about  Christ 
that  fitted  Him  to  be  the  Saviour  and 
Head  of  His  believing  Church.  Modern 
teachers  who  feel  offended  at  a  crucified 
and  risen  Redeemer  should  ponder  this. 
3.  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected 
has  become  the  headstone  of  the  corner. 
Christ  crucified,  dead,  risen,  and  exalted, 
is  the  sole  source  and  author  of  salva- 
tion to  a  perishing  world,  and  the  sole 
foundation  and  support  of  His  Church. 

Ver.  12.  Salvation  in  Christ  alone. 

I.  There  is  no  salvation  out  of  Christ. 
— 1.  No  other  name  but  that  of  Christ 
has  been  given  among  men  for  this 
purpose.     2.  If  any  are  saved,  whether 

101 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


in  gospel  or  heathen  lands,  it  is  through 
the  name  of  Christ. 

II.  There  is  salvation  in  Christ. — 
1.  Salvation  in  fullest  measure.  2. 
Salvation  on  the  easiest  terms.  3. 
Salvation  with  the  greatest  certainty. 

None  other  Name. 

I.  No  higher  name  than  that  of 
Christ,  the  glorified  Son  of  God. 

II.  No  abler  name  than  that  of 
Him  who  can  save  to  the  uttermost. 

III.  No  surer  name  than  that  of  Him 
who  has  been  given  for  the  purpose. 

IV.  No  sweeter  name  than  that  of 
Him  who  is  nob  ashamed  to  call  men 
brethren. 

Y.  No  easier  name  than  that  which 
asks  only  faith  to  be  exercised  in  it. 

No  Salvation  out  of  Christ. 

I.  No  other  system  of  salvation 
maintains  the  glory  of  God's  character 
as  moral  Governor. — Two  principles 
in  the  character  of  God  that  can  never 
be  disjoined  in  their  exercise  are  Justice 
and  Mercy.  In  their  manifestation 
these  principles  are  naturally  sympa- 
thetic and  invariably  coincident.  Just 
at  this  po  nt  every  other  system  breaks 
down,  whereas  in  the  gospel  scheme 
both  are  harmonised. 

II.  No  other  system  of  salvation  up- 
holds the  honour  of  God's  law  as  the 
rule  of  moral  government — The  law 
of  God,  being  the  counterpart  of  God's 
nature,  can  never  change.  It  must 
therefore  be  upheld  in  its  exercise  of 
justice,  before  mercy  can  be  shown  to 
the  sinner.  The  gospel  scheme  alone 
magnifies  the  law  and  makes  it  honour- 
able. 

III.  No  other  system  of  salvation 
bears  the  stamp  of  God's  sanction  as 
a  Divine  Revelation. — An  axiomatic 
truth  that  no  system  of  salvation  is 
worthy  of  acceptation  which  does  not 
bear  as  its  credential  the  imprimatur 
of  God.  This  the  gospel  scheme  alone 
has.  "  Whatever  may  be  the  pre- 
tentiousness and  plausibility  of  other 
systems,  they  have  no  force  or  validity, 
for  they  cannot  put  into  their  preamble, 
1  Thus  saith  the  Lord.'  " 

102 


IV.  No  other  system  of  salvation 
meets  man's  exigencies  as  a  sinner 
under    the    Divine    condemnation. — 

"  The  salvation  man  needs "  is  one 
which  shall,  1.  Cancel  the  guilt  which 
has  necessitated  his  condemnation. 
"  Whence  then  is  this  salvation  to 
come?  Not  certainly  by  the  law." 
2.  Make  provision  for  the  renewal  of  his 
whole  nature  after  the  image  of  God. 
"  And  where  is  the  earthly  alembic 
that  can  transmute  its  character  from 
pollution  to  purity  ?  "  Every  other 
system,  save  that  of  the  gospel,  seems 
to  contemplate  a  salvation  in  sin  and 
not  a  salvation  from  sin." — B.  T. 
Jeffrey,  M.D. 

The  Only  Salvation.  — That  in  Christ. 
Because — 

I.  Glorifies  the  divine  character. — 
By  securing  the  salvation  of  the  sinner 
"  without  any  rent  in  the  divine  cha- 
racter, or  collision  of  the  divine  attri- 
butes. 

II.  Magnifies    the    divine    law. — 

1.  Vindicates  it  by  the  vicarious  sacri- 
fice of  Christ.  2.  Amplifies  it  by  an 
actual  addition  to  its  attributes,  by  the 
introduction  of  mercy  as  an  element  of 
its  jurisprudence. 

III.  Verifies  the  divine  word. — 
Gives  truth,  substance,  and  significance 
to  all  the  divine  disclosures  contained 
in  scripture. 

IV.  Qualifies  for  the  divine  glory.— 
By  imparting  1.  A  right  and  title,  and 

2.  A  meetness  for  heaven. — B.  T.  Jeffrey, 
M.D. 

Vers.  8-12.  The  Characteristics  of  a 
Good  Preacher. — As  exhibited  by 
Peter. 

I.  Undaunted  courage. — He  ad- 
dresses "  the  rulers  of  the  people  and 
the  elders  of  Israel "  without  trepida- 
tion. Preachers  should  fear  the  face 
of  no  man  (Ezek.  ii.  6). 

II.  Genuine  candour. — He  is  willing 
to  be  "  examined  of  the  good  deed  done 
to  the  impotent  man."  Preachers 
should  never  shun  investigation  into 
either  themselves,  their  doctrines,  or 
their  deeds  (1  Cor.  x.  15). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


III.  Clear  exposition. — "  Be  it 
known  unto  you  all,"  etc.  Preachers 
should  have  nothing  to  hide,  and  ought 
to  leave  nothing  obscure  (2  Cor.  iv.  2). 

IV.  Profound  humility. — Peter  gave 
the  glory  of  the  miracle  entirely  to 
Christ,  reserving  none  for  himself. 
Preachers  should  always  say,  "Not 
unto  us,  0  Lord,  but  unto  Thy  name 
be  the  glory  ! "  (Psalm  cxv.  1). 

V.  Immovable    conviction, — Peter 


had  no  doubt  as  to  the  place  occupied 
and  the  part  played  by  Christ  in  the 
scheme  of  salvation.  Pieachers  should 
not  instruct  others  before  they  know 
the  truth  themselves  (John  iii.  11  ; 
2  Cor.iv.  13). 

VI.  Evangelical  fervour. — The  sum 
of  Peter's  preaching  was  Christ. 
Preachers  that  have  no  room  for  Christ 
in  their  sermons  should  seek  some 
other  calling  (1  Cor.  ii.  2). 


HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  13—22. 

The  Apostles  removed  from  the  Court  ;  or,  the  Conspirators  in  Conclave. 

I.  The  perplexity  of  the  Sanhedrists. — These  holy  inquisitors  before  whom 
John  and  Peter  were  arraigned  were  1.  Staggered  at  the  boldness  of  their  prisoners. 
These  behaved  not  like  criminals  who  had  been  apprehended  in  acts  of  wicked- 
ness, taken,  as  it  were,  red-handed,  but  like  persons  who  felt  conscious  not  of 
having  done  wrong,  but  of  having  performed  a  great  good.  Peter  could  have 
replied  to  Annas  or  Caiaphas — 

"  Thou  shalt  not  see  me  blush 
Nor  change  my  countenance  for  this  arrest ; 
A  heart  unspotted  is  not  easily  daunted. 
The  purest  spring  is  not  so  free  from  mud 
As  I  am  clear  from  (wrong  doing)." — Shakespeare. 

Neither  Peter  nor  John  resembled  their  old  selves  who  ran  away  when  they 
beheld  their  Master  bound  with  cords,  and  hurried  off  to  face  that  awful  tribunal. 
Things  had  changed  since  the  Gethsemane  transaction,  both  with  their  Master 
and  with  themselves.     He  had  risen  from  the  tomb  into  which  His  enemies  had 
thought  to  shut  Him  down,  and  had  ascended  to  His  throne ;  they  were  being 
assisted  and  upheld  by  His  Almighty  Spirit.     2.  Confounded  by  their  prisoners1 
eloquence.     Peter  and  John,  though  neither  learned  nor  distinguished  persons  like 
their  judges,  but  ignorant  and  obscure  fishermen,  nevertheless  spoke  with  such 
fluent  and  cogent  utterance  as  the  most  gifted  of  their  Rabbis  could  not  equal  or 
even  imitate.     The  only  possible  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  which  presented 
itself  to  the  Sanhedrists  was  one  they  did  not  like — viz.,  that  their  prisoners  had 
been  companions  of  Jesus.     It  was  a  virtual  admission  that  Christ  had  impressed 
even  those  who  rejected  Him  with  a  secret  conviction  of  His  superhuman  dignity. 
3.   Unable  to  deny  the  miracle.     The  evidence  of  its  reality  stood  before  them. 
The  man  who  had  been  healed  was  in  court.      The  whole  town  besides  was 
ringing  with  excitement  at  what  had  happened,  and  had  pronounced  it  a  miracle. 
The  theory  of  imposture  would  impose  on  no  one.     Just  as  little  would  the 
hypothesis  'of    illusion    or    delusion.     The    man    himself   might   have   been   a 
hypochondriac,  and  the  apostles  might  be  counted  jugglers,  but  a  whole  town 
could  not  be  cheated  into  believing  that  a  miracle  had  been  wrought,  if  no  such 
thing  had  occurred.     4.  At  a-loss  what  to  do  with  their  prisoners.     To  punish  them 
for  healing  a  lame  man  would  look  ridiculous ;  common  sense  would  say  they 
should  rather  be  rewarded  with  the -freedom  of  the  city.     Besides,  in  the  present 
temper  of  the  people,  it  would  be  dangerous  to  proceed  to  violence,  the  people 
being  manifestly  on  the  side  of  the  apostles.     Then  to  debar  them  from  working 
similar  miracles  upon  other  lame  persons  would  be  hard  upon  the  invalids.      To 
drive  them  from  the  metropolis  would  only  be  to  send  them  with  their  philan- 
thropies to  other  towns.     When  men  will  not  do  the  obviously  right  thing,  it  is 

103 


chap.  iv.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


no  wonder  they  become  perplexed  in  choosing  the  best  of  the  wrong  things. 
Wrong  things  are  never  best. 

II.  The  resolution  of  the  Sanhedrists. — How  Luke  ascertained  what  was 
talked  in  the  council  chamber,  after  Peter  and  John  had  been  removed,  may  be 
difficult  to  tell.  If  the  court  was  opened  to  the  public  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ") 
some  of  the  apostles'  friends  may  have  been  present ;  if  it  was  closed  against  the 
public  some  of  the  Sanhedrists  themselves,  on  becoming  converted,  may  have  re- 
vealed the  secrets  of  the  court.  In  any  case,  what  the  Sanhedrists  resolved  upon 
was  this — 1.  To  prevent,  if  possible,  the  spread  of  the  report  about  the  miracle. 
They  felt  that  if  the  story  was  repeated  it  would  be  believed,  which  shows  that 
they  regarded  it  as  true.  So  will  Christ's  gospel,  wherever  told,  commend  itself 
to  men's  consciences  in  the  sight  of  God.  Hence,  the  chief  aim  of  its  enemies  is 
to  prevent  its  diffusion  among  the  people.  2.  To  forbid  the  apostles  any  more  to 
speak  or  teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Still  avoiding  the  explosive  topic  of  the 
resurrection,  they  limit  their  prohibition  to  a  general  order  not  to  speak  in 
Christ's  name.  What  they  wanted  was,  if  possible,  to  suppress  the  name  alto- 
gether. But  as  Christ  could  not  be  hid  when  on  earth  (Mark  vii.  24),  so  now 
that  He  is  risen  can  He  not  be  suppressed.  "  He  must  reign  till  all  His 
enemies  have  been  placed  beneath  His  feet "  (1  Cor.  xv.  25). 

III.  The  action  of  the  Sanhedrists. — Having  concluded  their  deliberations,  and 
recalled  the  apostles,  they  did  three  things.  1.  Charged  them.  Not  to  speak  at 
all,  nor  to  teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  But  such  an  order  neither  John  nor  Peter 
could  obey.  It  invaded  the  domain  of  conscience,  which  was  God's  peculiar 
territory.  It  traversed  the  commandment  of  Jesus,  which  had  already  bound 
them  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  (Matt,  xxviii.  19  ;  Mark  xvi.  15).  It 
sought  to  silence  the  convictions  of  their  souls  that  what  they  had  seen  and  heard 
was  true.  It  collided  with  that  three-fold  necessity  which  urged  them  on. 
Hence  Peter  told  the  Sanhedrists,  that  where  the  alternative  lay  between  obeying 
them  and  obeying  God,  the  choice  could  only  be  the  latter.  So  affirmed  he 
afterwards  to  the  same  judicial  body  for  himself  and  his  brethren.  "  We  ought 
to  obey  God  rather  than  man  "  (v.  29).  So  replied  Socrates  to  his  Athenian 
judges  :  "  Athenians,  I  will  obey  God  rather  than  you ;  and  if  you  would  let 
me  go  and  give  me  my  life  on  condition  that  I  should  no  more  teach  my  fellow - 
citizens,  sooner  than  agree  to  your  proposal  I  would  prefer  to  die  a  thousand 
times  "  {Apology,  23,  B.).  "In  this  first  conflict  between  conscience  and  force," 
says  Pressense,  "  victory  remains  with  the  former.  This  day  is  liberty  born  into 
the  world  never  to  be  destroyed."  2.  Threatened  them.  With  pains  and  penalties 
endeavoured  to  deter  them  from  following  the  path  of  duty.  "  Had  the  judges 
of  Peter  and  John  gone  no  further  than  this  prohibition  and  threatening,  they 
would  have  been  entitled  to  be  called  persecutors  (Pressense).  The  essence 
of  persecution  is  the  application  of  physical  force  to  religion,  in  which  the  only 
forces  admissible  are  those  of  truth  for  the  understanding  and  love  for  the  heart. 

3.  Dismissed  them.  The  Sanhedrists  lacked  the  courage  to  inflict  punishment 
upon  their  prisoners.  As  yet  they  feared  the  people,  who,  siding  with  the 
apostles,  and  glorifying  God  for  what  had  been  done,  would  not  have  tolerated 
either  imprisonment  or  scourging.  Hence  they  felt  compelled  to  let  their 
prisoners  go. 

Learn. — 1.  The  transformations  Christ  through  His  grace  can  effect  on  human 
character  and  life,  exemplified  in  Peter  and  John.  2.  The  best  sort  of  evidence 
in  support  of  Christ's  religion — such  miracles  as  are  wrought  upon  men's  char- 
acters and  lives  through  its  influence.  3.  The  holy  courage  that  should  at  all 
times  be  displayed  by  Christ's  servants — to  obey  God  and  Christ  rather  than  man. 

4.  The  confidence  with  which  Christ  and  His  servants  can  appeal  to  the 
consciences  even  of  their  enemies. 

104 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


HINTS  AND    SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  13.  Companionship  with  Jesus. 

I.  A  distinguished  privilege. 
II.  A  transforming  power. 

III.  A  perilous  distinction. 

IV.  A  high  responsibility. 

Vers.  1-14.  The  Courage  ofth  e  Apostles. 

I.  The  occasion  of  the  courage. — It 
was  an  imposing  assembly,  made  up 
of  the  intelligence  and  authority  and 
ecclesiastical  power  of  the  Jewish 
nation.  The  court  demanded  by  what 
power  or  efficacy,  and  in  the  use  of 
what  name,  they  had  done  this  now 
notable  miracle.  Peter  stood  in  view 
of  them  all,  calm  and  confident,  a 
splendid  illustration  of  the  truth  that 
"  the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion " 
(Prov.  xxviii.  1),  and  made  his  reply. 

II.  The  secret  of  the  courage. — 
"Filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  This 
was  the  secret  of  Peter's  boldness. 
This  made  the  difference  between  Peter 
before  the  Ascension  and  Peter  after  it. 
It  was  not  natural  courage,  "  to  the 
manner  born."  Peter  was  impulsive 
and  forward,  quick  and  stout  in  asser- 
tion, but  by  nature  a  coward.  The 
coward  is  become  a  hero.  The  bank 
of  sand  is  transformed  into  a  rock 
of  firmness.  Impulse  has  given  way 
to  principle.  Fear  of  man  is  exchanged 
for  fear  of  God.  His  being  "  filled  with 
the  Holy  Spirit "  accounts  for  the 
difference.  That  Spirit  has  given  him 
a  sense  of  things  invisible,  has  opened 
to  his  faith's  sight  invisible  troops  of 
God,  has  lifted  him  to  a  level  where  he 
can  look  with  something  of  the  calm- 
ness and  fearlessness  of  his  Lord  upon 
those  who  can  only  "  kill  the  body." 
He  knows  now,  even  better  than  he 
knew  before,  his  own  weakness  and  his 
own  need,  but  he  has  been  taught  of 
the  Spirit  the  illimitable  sufficiency  of 
God.  "  Filled  with  the  Spirit "  means 
assurance  of  sonship.  "Filled  with 
the  Spirit "  is  proof  that  "  God  is  for 
us  and  in  us,"  and  that  therefore  they 
that  be  for  us  are  more  than  they  that 
be  against  us.  It  can  easily  be  under- 
stood how  this  would  arm  the  timid 


soul  with  a  dauntless  and  deathless 
courage.  One,  with  God,  is  a  majority 
always.  Weakness,  with  God,  is 
omnipotence. 

III.  Characteristics  of  the  courage. 
— But  a  courage  of  this  sort,  born  of 
the  presence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  true 
Christian  courage,  will  be  marked  by 
certain  characteristics.  Let  us  look 
at  them  as  they  appear  in  the  record 
of  Peter's  speech  before  the  court. 
1.  Courtesy  marks  the  first  words  of 
this  brave  soul.  Peter  gives  the  men 
of  the  court  their  appropriate  titles, 
recognises  their  office  and  authority, 
and  addresses  them  with  deference  and 
respect :  u  Ye  rulers  of  the  people  and 
elders  of  Israel."  Bravery  does  not 
consist  in  brusqueness  and  bravado  and 
bluster.  To  speak  the  truth  boldly  one 
need  not  be  a  boar  or  a  bear.  The 
bully  is  not  the  ideal  hero.  The  king- 
dom and  patience  of  Jesus  go  hand  in 
hand.  There  is  a  so-called  maintaining 
one's  self-respect  which  is  simply  a 
manifesting  one's  impudence.  2. 
Prudence  is  another  characteristic  of 
Christian  courage,  as  shown  by  Peter 
in  this  defence.  His  courteous  recogni- 
tion of  the  position  and  office  of  the 
men  composing  the  tribunal  is 
immediately  followed  by  a  reference 
to  the  character  of  the  deed  for  which 
he  was  arraigned :  "  If  we  this  day  be 
examined  of  the  good  deed  clone  to  the 
impotent  man."  The  deed  was  "  good," 
and  Peter  reminds  them  of  it.  An 
impotent  man  has  been  made  whole. 
Mark  the  prudent  wisdom  of  this 
answer.  Peter  first  turns  attention 
from  the  method  of  the  doing  to  the 
thing  done.  The  wrork  itself  could 
challenge  only  gratitude  and  joy.  Of 
itself  it  could  provoke  no  opposition. 
He  thus  by  a  wise  tact  sought  to  pave 
the  way  for  a  favourable  hearing.  He 
made  the  most  of  his  circumstances. 
So  will  the  highest  courage  always.  It 
does  not  disdain  the  use  of  every 
justifiable  means  to  conciliate  opposi- 
tion. While  scorning  compromise  of 
principle,  it  presses  into  service  every 

105 


CHAP.  IV. 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


alleviating  circumstance.  It  does  not 
court     a     tilt     or    invite    a    conflict. 

3.  Frankness  is  another  characteristic, 
as  exhibited  by  Peter.  The  council 
demanded  by  what  authority  or  by 
what  name  they  had  done  this.  They 
got  for  instant  answer,  "  By  the  name 
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth."  Here 
Peter  might  have  stopped.  But  this 
was  not  the  truth  that  put  Peter  in 
bonds.  Peter  could  answer  the  court's 
questions  without  any  allusion  to  the 
crucifixion  and  resurrection.  But  it 
was  this  that  got  him  into  trouble,  and 
he  must  not  withhold  it  now  to  get  out 
of  trouble.  Christian  courage  is  always 
the  very  soul  of  frankness.  It  will 
wear  no  masks — tell  the  whole  truth, 
as  well  as  nothing  but  the  truth.  The 
temptation  to  be  compromisingly  politic 
at  the  point  of  real  danger  is  most 
plausibly  insidious  and  subtle,  and  a 
brave   spirit   gets  here  its  sorest  test. 

4.  Fidelity  is  one  more  mark  of  Chris- 
tian   courage    that    shone     out    con- 
spicuously    m     this     court-scene      at 
Jerusalem.     This  pushed  Peter  beyond 
the  mere  claims  of  frankness.    He  had 
fully  stated  the  facts.     The  Jews  had 
crucified   Jesus,    and   God   had  raised 
Him  from  the  dead.     These  two  facts 
Peter  had  put  in  the  plainest  terms. 
They  were  offensive  to   the   tribunal. 
They  implicated  his   hearers   both  in 
crime  and  folly.     Yet  out  they  came 
with  courageous  frankness.     This  was 
the  top  and  crown  of  Christian  courage. 
It  was  transforming  the  prisoner's  bar 
into  a  pulpit  from  which  to  preach  a 
gospel  sermon  to  men,  some  of  whom 
probably  had  never  heard   it   before, 
and  whose  ear  the  preacher  might  never 
have  again. 

IV.  Effect  of  the  courage.— It  only 
remains  to  speak  briefly  of  the  effect 
of  this  righteous  boldness.  These 
effects  are  common  where  Christian 
courage  gets  anything  like  such  public 
exhibition  in  such  hostile  circumstances. 
1.  Men  wonder  first  at  the  boldness. 
They  see  nothing  behind  it,  nothing  to 
support  it — no  arms,  no  government, 
no  material  resource — and  they  are 
astounded.    They  marvel  where  it  gets 

106 


its  spring  and  inspiration.  The  world 
knows  not  its  secret.  It  is  born  of  the 
invisible  Spirit  of  God.  2.  Then  they 
have  nothing  to  speak  against.  Chris- 
tian courage  has  a  wonderful  way  of 
disarming  opposition. 

Christians,  there  are  some  things 
taught  here  that  ought  to  be  to  our 
spiritual  profit.  1.  The  Spirit  of  God 
can    make    the    weakest    saint    bold. 

2.  We    can    afford    to    trust    Christ. 

3.  Truth  will  sometimes  smite  to  silence 
when  it  does  not  smite  to  heal. — H. 
Johnson,  D.D. 

Ver.  1 6.  What  shall  ive  do  with  these 
men  ? — The  world's  question  concerning 
Christians. 

I.  To  this  the  world  has  usually 
answered. — Let  us  1.  Suspect  them  as 
hypocrites.  2.  Disbelieve  them  as 
liars.      3.    Oppose   them   as    enemies. 

4.  Punish  them  as  evildoers;  and, 
generally,  5.  Persecute  them  as  sec- 
taries, separatists,  and  heretics. 

II.  To  this  the  world  ought  to 
answer. — Let  us  1.  Listen  to  them  as 
bringers  of  good  tidings.  2.  Honour 
them    as  self-denying  philanthropists. 

3.  Credit   them  as  sincere  preachers. 

4.  Reward  them  as  benefactors  of  their 
race ;  and,  generally,  5.  Imitate  them 
as  noble  exemplars  of  virtue. 

Ver.  19.  Liberty  of  Conscience. 

I.  The  principle  stated.  —  To 
hearken  unto  God  rather  than  unto 
man. 

II.  The  principle  exemplified. — By 
the  behaviour  of  the  Apostles. 

III.  The  principle  justified. — By  an 
appeal  to  the  moral  and  religious 
instincts  of  the  Panhedrists. 

IV.  The  principle  recognised. — In 
part,  at  least,  by  the  dismissal  of  the 
apostles  from  the  council  chamber. 
(See  further  on,  v.  29.) 

Ver.  20.  The  Preacher's  Motto. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  preacher's 
function. — To  speak,  to  address  his 
fellow-men  by  the  living  voice.  This 
function  can  never  be  superseded  by 
the  press.     There  is  that  in  the  contact 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


of  soul  with  soul,  through  the  medium 
of  the  living  voice,  which  no  printed 
page  can  supply. 

II.  The  extent  of  the  preacher's 
commission. — To  speak  what  he  has 
seen  and  heard.  This  what  the 
apostles  were  called  to  do  when  they 
were  made  witnesses  of  Christ's  resur- 
rection. In  like  manner  the  proper 
business  of  the  Christian  preacher  is 
to  lay  before  his  fellow-men  the  truth 
of  sacred  Scripture  as  that  is  revealed 
to  and  appropriated  by  his  own 
understanding,   heart,  and  conscience. 

III.  The  constraint  of  the  preacher's 
action. — "  We  cannot  but  speak " 
showed  that  the  apostles  had  not 
taken  up  their  calling  as  a  matter  of 
self-directed  choice,  but  in  obedience 
to  the  impulse  of  conscience,  and  not 
from  interested  motives  as  a  means  of 
procuring  a  livelihood  or  acquiring 
fame,  but  from  an  irresistible  sense 
of  duty,  or,  as  Paul  afterwards  ex- 
pressed it,  "  because  necessity  had  been 
laid  upon  them"  (1  Cor.  ix.  16).  So 
should  none  assume  the  preacher's 
office  except  under  a  similar  constraint. 
To  exercise  the  preacher's  office  for  a 
piece  of  bread  (1  Sam.  ii.  36)  is  to 
desecrate  the  office  and  be  guilty  of 
sacrilege. 

Ver.  21.  God  glorified  by  the  People 
for  the  Healing  of  the  Lame  Man. 

I.  For  the  exhibition  of  divine 
power  which  they  had  witnessed, 

II.  For  the  rich  grace  which  had 
been  shown  to  the  cripple. 

III.  For  the  signal  honour  which 
had  been  put  upon  the  apostles  in 
making  them  the  instruments  of  this 
miracle. 

IV.  For  the  glorious  hope  of 
heavenly  succour  which  was  brought 
to  themselves,  the  people,  through 
this  wondrous  deed. 

Vers.  1-22.  The  Jewish  Leaders  and 
the  Apostles. 

I.  On  the  side  of  the  Jewish  leaders 
there  was — 1.  Illiberality.  "Being 
grieved  that  they  taught  the  people." 
The     highest     pre-christian     culture ! 


Christ  alone  has  shown  Himself  the 
friend  of  universal  man — slave  or 
king.  Christianity  is  a  universal 
appeal.     It  is  not  a  taper,  it  is  the  sun. 

2.  Shortsightedness.  They  put  the 
apostles  in  prison  !  Fools  !  They 
could  not  put  God  in  prison  !  Had 
the  apostles  been  original  workers, 
had  the  cause  of  their  actions  lain  with- 
in themselves,  imprisonment  might 
have  met  the  case.  But  God !  etc. 
Why  were  the  apostles  put  in  prison  1 
For  two  reasons  :  (1)  They  did  good 
to  the  diseased ;  (2)  They  instructed 
the  ignorant.  Christianity  is  still  the 
great  physical  and  mental  regenerator 
of  the  world.  The  only  charge  which 
can  be  brought  against  Christianity  is 
that   it   continually   seeks   to  do  good. 

3.  Lmpotence.  "  What  shall  we  do  to 
these  men  ?  For  that  indeed  a  rotable 
miracle  hath  been  done  by  them  is 
manifest  to  all  them  that  dwell  in 
Jerusalem ;  and  we  cannot  deny  it." 
They  "  threatened  "  the  apostles.  That 
is,  they  shook  their  fists  in  the  face  of 
the  sun  in  order  to  darken  the  world  ! 
They  stamped  a  foot  angrily  on  the 
sea-shore  in  order  to  repel  the  advanc- 
ing tide  !  They  sent  a  message  to  the 
wind  stating  that  they  would  hence- 
forth be  independent  of  the  living  air  ! 
We  see  how  small  men  are  when  they 
set  themselves  against  Truth.  They 
know  not  what  they  do  !  Truth  is  to 
them  an  unknown  quantity ;  at  any 
moment  it  may  smite  them ;  it  is 
subtle ,  mysterious ,  intractable.  Terrible 
is  the  hand  of  the  Lord  upon  all  them 
that  oppose  the  truth. 

II.  On  the  side  of  the  apostles  there 
was — 1.  Complete  intelligence  within  the 
sphere  of  their  ministry.  Though  the 
apostles  "  were  unlearned  and  ignorant 
men,"  yet  within  the  compass  of  the 
work  which  they  were  called  to  do 
they  were  wise  and  efficient.  This  is 
the  secret  of  success.  Know  what  you 
do  know.  Do  not  venture  beyond 
the  line  of  your  vocation.  Every 
preacher  is  strong  when  he  stands  upon 
fact  and  experience.  Christians  must 
not  accept  the  bait  which  would  draw 
them    upon    unknown    or     forbidden 

107 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


ground.      2.  Inconquerable  courage  in  under  heaven  given  among  men,  where- 

narrating    and    applying  facts.       (1)  by   we   must   be    saved."      Thus   was 

Look   at  the  dignity   of   the  address;  the  Gospel  preached  to  the  murderers 

(2)  Look  at  the   calm  and   emphatic  of  God's   Holy   One.     "Beginning   at 

assertion    of   the   name  of  Christ ;  (3)  Jerusalem."       In    this    brief    sermon 

Look  at  the  direct  and  special  impeach-  Peter  proceeds  upon  two  assumptions  : 

ment  of  the  hearers  ;  "  whom  ye  cruci-  (1)  That  men   need   saving;  (2)  That 

fied";  "  set  at  nought  of  you  builders."  there   is  but  one  true  way  of  saving 

Dignity  is  proper  in  the  preachers  of  them.     These   assumptions  have  been 

truth ;  Christ  is  the  life  of  Christianity  proved   to   be   true.      4.  Incorruptible 

— beware  of  lauding  the  system,  and  loyalty    to     God    and    to    His    truth. 

forgetting  the  Man.     Accusation  is  the  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of 

first  work  of  every  Christian  evangelist.  God,"  etc.  (ver.    19).     "Things  which 

Prove  the  world's  crime  !     3.   Christian  we  have  seen  and  heard  !  "     What  a 

magnanimity  in  preaching  the  Gospel.  field  !     Missions  at  home  and  abroad, 

"  Neither   is    there   salvation    in   any  —  Schools,  —  Labours,  —  Sacrifices,  — 

other;  for  there  is   none  other  name  Death-beds  ! — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.—  Verses  23-31. 

The  Apostles  with  their  own  Company  ;  or,  the  Welcome  of  the  First  Confessors. 

I.  The  report  of  the  apostles. — 1.  To  whom  it  was  delivered.  To  their  own 
company — i.e.,  to  their  own  colleagues  in  the  apostleship,  or,  more  accurately,  to 
their  friends  in  the  faith,  who  doubtless  had  convened  at  their  usual  resort,  the 
upper  room  (i.  13),  on  learning  of  the  arrest  and  imprisonment  of  their  two 
principal  leaders.  Christ's  people,  as  brethren,  should  cultivate  between  each 
other  a  spirit  of  mutual  confidence  and  sympathy  (1  Peter  iii.  8),  bearing  each 
other's  burdens,  and  so  fulfilling  the  law  of  Christ  (Gal.  vi.  2),  and  remembering 
that  when  one  member  suffers  all  the  other  members  suffer  with  it  (1  Cor. 
xii.  26).  2.  Of  what  it  was  composed.  "  Of  all  that  the  chief  priests  and  elders 
had  said  unto  them."  Most  likely  of  nothing  they  themselves  had  said  in  reply 
to  the  chief  priests  and  elders  (Chrysostom).  If  so,  the  report  must  have  been 
as  remarkable  for  its  omissions  as  for  its  inclusions.  For  Christ's  servants  there 
is  a  time  to  be  silent  as  well  as  a  time  to  speak  (Eccles.  iii.  7) ;  the  former,  when 
the  glory  of  self  is  concerned  (Prov.  xxvii.  2),  the  latter  when  the  honour  of 
Christ  or  the  safety  of  His  cause  is  endangered  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13).  If  "  all  the 
words  of  the  chief  priests  and  elders "  were  faithfully  reported,  it  may  be 
confidently  assumed  that  none  were  added  to  them  ;  "  if  nothing  was  extenu- 
ated "  it  may  equally  be  assumed  that  "  naught  was  set  down  in  malice." 

II.  The  prayer  of  the  congregation. — 1.  By  what  it  was  prompted.  By  the 
dark  outlook  which,  according  to  Peter's  and  John's  report,  loomed  before  the 
friends  of  Jesus — the  highest  ecclesiastical  tribunal  of  the  land  having  pro- 
nounced against  them.  As  yet  the  adherents  of  the  New  Cause  were  a  feeble 
folk,  poor  in  wealth  and  obscure  in  station,  and  therefore  ill  fitted  to  contend 
against  the  "powers  that  be"  either  in  Church  or  State;  and  though  for  the 
present  the  hostility  of  the  Sanhedrim  was  held  in  check  by  the  popularity  of 
the  New  Cause,  no  one  could  predict  how  speedily  the  favour  of  the  crowd  might 
change  and  the  aspect  of  affairs  be  completely  altered, 

"  An  habitation  giddy  and  unsure 
Hath  he  that  buildeth  on  the  vulgar  heart." — Shakespeare. 

And  well  the  Church  in  Jerusalem  knew,  or  might  have  known  from  the  case  of 
its  Master  (compare  Matt.  xxi.  9  with  xxvii.  22),  that  the  present  popularity  of 
the  apostles  might  not  long  continue. 

108 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  iv. 


"  The  noisy  praise 
Of  giddy  crowds  is  changeable  as  winds." — Dry  den. 

Hence,  in  circumstances   so  depressing,  the  Church  betook  itself  to  prayer — 
invoked  the  aid  of  Him  who   is   without   variableness  or  shadow   of  turning 
(James  i.  17).    An  example  deserving  imitation  by  all  (Psalm  1.  15,  xci.  15  ;  Phil, 
iv.  6).     2.  To  whom  it  was  directed.     To  God,  the  only  hearer  of  prayer  (Psalm 
lxv.  2),  addressing  Him  (1)  As  Lord,  or  Master — i.e.,  as  the  possessor  of  absolute 
authority  and  power  (Deut.  iii.  24  ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  11,  12  ;  Psalm  lxii.  11),  this 
being  the.  import  of  the  term  used  by  Peter — a  term  which  he  also  applies  to 
Christ  (i.  24 ;  1  Peter  ii.  3  ;  2  Peter  ii.   1),  as  Paul  likewise  does  (2  Cor.  iii.  17  ; 
Phil.  iv.  5).     (2)  As  Maker  of  the  universe  in  its  three  parts — heaven,  earth, 
and  sea,  with  all  that  in  them  is  ;  and  therefore  as  mightier  than  the  Sanhedrim 
or  all  Christ's  foes  combined.       (3)  As  Inspirer  of  sacred    Scripture,  who  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  speaking  through  David,  predicted  beforehand  the  opposition 
of   earth's  kings  and  rulers  to  Christ's   cause  and  the  utter  folly  of   it,   and 
therefore  as  one  in  a  manner  obliged  by  fidelity  to  His  own  word  to  defend 
them  in  the  crisis  which  had  arisen.     (4)    As  Lord  and  Father  of  Jesus,  His 
holy  Child  and  Servant,  for  both  renderings  may  be  adopted ;  and  consequently 
as  one  who  must  necessarily  be  constrained  by  love  and  faithfulness  to  champion 
Christ's  cause.     N.B. — Petitioners  at  God's  throne  should  have  a  clear  grasp  of 
the  greatness,  majesty,  and  power  of  Him  whose  favour  they  bespeak.     3.  In 
what  manner  it  was  presented.    (1)  With  one  heart.     "  One  heart,"  says  Delitzsch 
(Bib.  Psych.,  p.  295,  E.  T.),  "  is  the  conscious  perfect  agreement  of  will,  thought, 
and  feeling  "  ;  and  such  oneness!  of  heart  existed  in  the  present  instance.     All 
realised  the  danger,  discerned  the  only  quarter  whence  help  could  be  procured, 
and  bestirred    themselves    to    act  in  concert    in  a   fervent    approach    to    the 
Heavenly  Throne.     Prayer,  of  course,  is  only  then  united  when  the  hearts  from 
which  it  issues  are  united,  and  to  such,  prayer  special  hope  of  success  has  been 
given  (Matt,  xviii.  19,  20).     (2)  With  a  loud  voice.     Whether  all  recited  the 
prayer   together    cannot   be   concluded   from   the   writer's   words.      "Verses   25 
and    26,  culled   from   the   second  Psalm,  would   doubtless   be  familiar  to  the 
audience,  and  if  the  whole  passage  (vers.   24-30)  was  an  early  Christian  liturgy 
composed   shortly   after   the  crucifixion  (which   is  only  conjecture)  the  whole 
congregation  may  have  simultaneously  and  vocally  joined  in  the  supplication, 
though  it  is  more  likely  one  led  the  devotions  with  his  voice  while  the  rest 
followed  with  their  hearts  and  voices  also  as  they  felt  inclined.     Baumgarten's 
view  may  approach  the  truth  that  all  sang  the  second  Psalm,  while  Peter,  or 
some  other,  applied  the  contents  to  their  situation  in  the  terms  here  recorded. 
4.  For  what  it  entreated.     (1)  That  God  would  look  upon  the  threatenings  of 
Christ's  adversaries,  and  consider  the  situation  of  His  praying  servants.     The 
peril  then  impending  they  regarded  as  of  a  piece  with,  in  fact  as  a  continuation 
of,  the  machinations  which  in  that  very  city  had  been  formed  against  Jesus  by 
Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  and  along  with  the  Gentiles  and  the  peoples  of  Israel 
who  had  then  come  together  out  of  every  tribe,  to  do  whatsoever  God's  hand  and 
counsel  had  foreordained  to  come  to  pass.      Here  again  in  the  prayer  of  the 
congregation,   as  in   Peter's  sermon  (ii.   23),  the  sovereignty   of  God  and  the 
freedom  of  man  are  recognised,  without  the  feeling  that  these  were  incompatible 
the  one  with  the  other.       (2)    That  God  would  embolden  His  servants,   the 
apostles,  and  the  disciples  generally,  to  speak  His  word — of  grace  and  mercy, 
salvation   and   eternal  life — without  shrinking  through  fear  of  man.      Not  a 
whisper  escapes  their  lips  about  calling  down  vengeance  upon  the  heads  of  their 
persecutors.     (Contrast  Luke  ix.  54,  xxii.  49  ;  John  xviii.   10.)     The  spirit  of 
their  dying  Master  having  taken  possession  of  their  hearts,  they  only  ask  for 
themselves  courage  and  constancy,  that  they  might  stand  fast  and  not  grow 

109 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


weary  and  faint  in  their  minds  (Heb.  xii.  8).  (3)  That  God  would  continue  to 
stretch  forth  His  hand  in  works  of  healing  such  as  had  been  performed  upon  the 
lame  man,  doing  signs  and  wonders  through  His  holy  Servant  Jesus.  This 
alone,  the  special  manifestation  of  Al  mightiness,  they  craved.  It  was  a 
prayer  remarkable  for  its  comprehensiveness  and  its  brevity,  its  sublimity  and 
its  humility,  its  intelligence  and  its  faith. 

III.  The  answer  of  God. — Given  in  three  ways.  1.  A  shaken  chamber. 
Scarcely  had  their  supplication  subsided  than  the  walls  of  the  house  trembled, 
"  as  if  they  had  been  touched  by  the  wings  of  the  descending  Spirit "  (Spence). 
This  supernatural  vibration  of  the  edifice,  like  the  sound  of  the  mighty  rushing 
wind  on  Peutecost  (ii.  2),  betokened  the  Divine  Presence.  (See  "  Critical  Re- 
marks.") 2.  The  descending  Spirit.  "They  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost."  As  on  Pentecost,  they  were  again  taken  possession  of  by  an  inward 
spiritual  influence,  which  abode  not  with  them  always,  but  seized  them  at 
intervals.  This  to  be  distinguished  from  the  permanent  inhabitation  of 
believers  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  Courageous  preaching.  "  They  spake  the 
word  with  boldness."  Not  within  the  chamber  merely,  but  outside,  in  the 
temple  courts  and  on  the  streets  (ver.  33;  v.  12,  21,  25).  What  they 
prayed  for  had  been  granted,  instantaneously  (Isa.  lxv.  24)  and  literally  (Matt, 
xxi.  22). 

Learn. — 1.  That  the  best  refuge  in  time  of  danger  is  God.  2.  The  best 
prayer   is  that  which    directly  tells  God    the    soul's    or    the    Church's    need. 

3.  That  the  best  way  of  overcoming  enemies  is  to  pray  for  their  highest  good. 

4.  That  the  best  evidence  of  being  filled  with  the  Spirit,  is  to  speak  the  word 
with  boldness. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  24.  A  Congregation  at  Prayer.  The    World's     Treason     against     its 

— A  model  for  the  times.  King. 

I.  United. — "  With  one  accord."  I.  The  fact. 

II.  Fervent. — "  They  lifted  up  their  II.  The  impotence  of  their  rage. — 
voice  to  God."  It  is  very  useless  anger.    It  accomplishes 

III.  Reverent. — "  Lord,  Thou  art  nothing.  1.  It  won't  alter  the  purpose 
God,"  etc.  of  God.     2.  It  won't  make  Him  afraid. 

IV.  Believing. — "Who  by  the  mouth  "  Are  we  stronger  than  He  1"  asks  the 
of  Thy  servant  David,"  etc.  apostle.       "  Hast   thou    an    arm   like 

V.  Intelligent. — They  knew  whom  God  ?"  asked  Job.  3.  It  won't  shake  the 
they  addressed  and  what  they  wanted.        eternal  throne.     4.  It  won't  change  truth 

VI.  Merciful. — They  asked  not  for  into  error,  or  error  into  truth.  It  tries 
vengeance  on  their  enemies.  to  do  this.     But  in  vain. 

VII.  Hopeful. — They  had  large  ex-  III.  The  reason  of  their  rage. — 
pectations  as  to  the  future  of  Christ's  1.  Because  they  hate  God  Himself.  2. 
cause — "  that  signs  and  wonders,"  etc.  They  hate  His  government.  3.  They 
(ver.  30).  hate  His  Son.     4.  They  hate  His  Bible. 

IV.  God's  reasons  for  allowing  this. 
Ver.  25.   Vain  Imaginings.  — Why    not    arrest   the    blasphemy  ? 

I.  That  God's  purpose  of  salvation  1.  To  show  what  the  evil  of  sin  is. 
can  be  defeated  by  man's  opposition.  2.  To  show  the  abysses  of  the   human 

II.  That  Christ's  cause  can  be  de-  heart.  3.  To  show  His  power  and 
stroyed  even  by  the  fiercest  persecution,      grace. 

III.  That  the  Spirit's  work  upon  the  V.  God's  time  for  interposing.^The 
earth  can  be  arrested  by  the  most  close  of  the  Psalm  shows  that  He  will 
powerful  combinations  against  it.  interfere  at  length.     He  is  not  slack 

110 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


concerning  His  promises  and  threats. — 
H.  Bonar,  D.D. 

Yers.  24-31.  The  Christian  Concep- 
tion of  God. 

I.  A  triune  personality. — Father 
(Lord),  Son  (Christ),  and  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  The  Maker  of  the  Universe. — 
Of  "heaven  and  earth,  and  the  sea, 
and  all  that  in  them  is." 

III.  The  hearer  of  prayer. — Im- 
plied in  the  Church's  supplication  of 
His  aid. 

IV.  The  inspirer  of  Scripture. — 
"  Who  by  the  mouth  of  Thy  servant 
David  hath  said." 

V.  The  providential  ruler  of  the 
world. — "  To  do  whatsoever  Thy  hand 
and  counsel  determined  before  to  be 
done." 

VI.  The  omniscient  observer  of  all 
men  and  things. — "  And  now,  Lord, 
behold  their  threatenings." 

VII.  The  author  of  salvation. — The 
Father  of  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by 
whose  name  signs  and  wonders,  moral 
and  spiritual,  as  well  as  physical  and 
temporal,  were  done. 

Ver.  29.  Boldness  in  Preaching. 

I.  Because  the  preacher's  commission 
is  from  heaven. 

II.  Because  the  preacher's  message 
is  the  Word  of  God.  Which  is  1. 
True ;  2.  Life-giving  ;  3.  Much  needed  ; 
4.  Indestructible. 

III.  Because  the  preacher's  foes  are 
feeble. — In  comparison  with  those  who 
are  on  his  side. 

IV.  Because  the  preacher's  helpers 
are  divine. — Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost. 

Vers.  18-31.  Christian  Courage. — 
11  And  they  called  them,  and  com- 
manded them  not  to  speak  at  all  nor 
teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus,"  etc.  It  is 
always  an  impressive  moment  when  a 
jury,  or  an  important  deliberative  body, 
is  about  to  render  a  decision.  This  is 
especially  true  if  the  question  at  issue 
involves  vital  interests,  and  the  deter- 
mining body  speaks  with  authority. 
To  such  a  decision  from  such  a  body 


the  text  relates.  The  scene  is  in 
Jerusalem,  soon  after  Pentecost.  In 
considering  the  conduct  of  these  men, 
thus  arraigned,  threatened,  and  com- 
manded, we  notice — 

I.  The  test  of  the  apostles'  courage. 
— It  is  evident  that  the  early  followers 
of  Christ  did  not  design  or  wish  to 
separate  themselves  from  the  Jewish 
Church.  They  differed  from  other  Jews 
in  believing  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
was  the  Messiah ;  but  they  still 
supposed  that  the  way  into  the 
Messianic  kingdom  was  through  the 
portal  of  the  Jews'  religion.  Hence, 
although  those  of  kindred  spirit  met 
privately  for  worship  in  each  other's 
houses  and  in  upper  rooms,  the  disciples 
of  Jesus  kept  up  their  observance  of 
the  Mosaic  ritual,  and  were  constant 
attendants  upon  the  temple  service. 
See  now  these  men,  Peter  and  John, 
confronted  by  a  positive  command  from 
the  nation's  highest  tribunal  to  be 
silent.  This  is  the  first  utterance  of 
the  Sanhedrim  concerning  the  new 
religion  since  Christ's  resurrection. 
These  men  remember  how  determined 
this  same  court  had  been  upon  the 
crucifixion  of  Him  in  whose  name  they 
have  been  teaching.  If  they  persist, 
can  they  expect  a  better  fate  than 
befell  their  Master?  We  can  have 
little  conception  of  the  severity  of  the 
ordeal.  National  love,  respect  for  law, 
pride  of  race,  reverence  for  institutions 
hoary  with  age,  strength  of  social  ties, 
personal  friendships,  a  shrinking  from 
becoming  disturbers  of  the  peace,  fear 
for  personal  safety — all  these  conspired 
to  intensify  the  command  "  not  to  speak 
at  all  nor  teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus." 
What  enables  them  to  oppose  the 
Sanhedrim's  command?  It  is  their 
personal  love  for  Jesus.  In  their 
hearts  a  fire  has  been  kindled,  and 
their  breasts  are  aglow  with  flame. 
To  be  silent  is  impossible.  "  We  can- 
not but  speak  the  things  which  we 
have  seen  and  heard."  Instead  of 
being  silent,  they  proclaimed  Christ 
with  added  boldness.  There  are  currents 
in  the  sea  which,  despite  opposing  winds 
and  storms  and  tides,  move  on  their 

111 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


way  unhindered,  impelled  by  a  mighty 
force  hidden  far  in  the  ocean's  depths. 
Such  a  force  in  the  hearts  of  these 
disciples  was  love  for  Christ.  This 
caused  them  to  listen  to  the  Sanhedrim's 
decree  unmoved.  Love  had  cast  out 
fear.  Such  courage,  resulting  from 
such  love,  could  then,  and  can  always, 
bear  the  severest  test. 

II.  The  manifestations  of  the 
apostles'  courage. — Men  are  sometimes 
called  courageous  when  they  are  only 
reckless.  The  man  of  real  courage 
will  be  bold  enough,  and  calm  enough, 
to  act  wisely.  His  bravery  will  be 
something  more  than  bravado.  In  the 
conduct  of  the  apostles— commanded 
by  the  Sanhedrim  to  be  silent,  and 
they  resolved  meanwhile  to  speak — 
every  mark  of  true  courage  is  manifest. 
They  show  that  their  course  is  not 
prompted  by  impulse  or  passion. 
They  are  moved  by  deep  convictions. 
"  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of 
God  to  hearken  unto  you  more  than 
unto  God,  judge  ye."  They  plant 
themselves  on  the  highest  conceivable 
ground,  the  sense  of  right.  They  have 
no  ambitious  ends  to  seek,  no  revenge 
to  gratify,  no  popular  applause  to  gain. 
There  is  no  other  courage  so  lofty  or 
so  enduring  as  this.  It  keeps  the 
nerves  steady  and  the  head  cool  and 
the  heart  brave.  Note,  as  an  evidence 
of  wisdom,  how  sagaciously  the  apostles 
appeal  to  this  self -same  principle  of 
right  in  the  minds  of  their  accusers. 
The  idea  of  unquestioning  allegiance 
to  God  was  deeply  implanted  in  the 
Jews'  religion,  and  the  Sanhedrim  was 
set  for  its  defence  and  inculcation. 
Who,  then,  better  prepared  than  the 
Sanhedrim  to  decide  whether  it  be 
right  to  ' '  hearken  more  unto  men  than 
unto  God  "  %  "  Judge  ye."  This  sense 
that  it  is  right  to  hearken  more  unto 
God  than  unto  men  enters  into  the 
universal  consciousness.  Whether  this 
principle  is  adopted  in  one's  practical 
life  or  rejected,  it  must  and  does  com- 
mend itself  to  every  man's  conscience. 
Those  who  adhere  to  it  gain  the  con- 
fidence of  all.     It  is  the  right  rule  for 


the  young  to  select.  Another  mani- 
festation of  the  apostles'  courage  is 
seen  in  the  company  they  keep.  ' '  Being 
let  go,  they  went  to  their  own  company, 
and  reported  all  that  the  chief  priests 
and  elders  had  said  unto  them."  The 
scene  now  changes  from  the  council 
chamber  of  the  Sanhedrim  to  the  midst 
of  the  Christian  brotherhood.  Those 
to  whom  they  are  come  have  doubtless 
been  praying  for  their  imperilled 
brethren.  How  changed  the  aspect ! 
In  the  Sanhedrim  the  air  was  dense 
with  suspicion  and  malice — here  is  love, 
purity,  and  the  peace  of  heaven. 
Courage  is  of  the  right  kind  when  it 
seeks  to  sustain  itself  by  breathing  an 
atmosphere  like  this.  It  is  a  praying 
circle  into  which  these  apostles  come. 
"  They  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God  with 
one  accord,  and  said,  Lord,  Thou  art 
God." 

III.  The  source  of  the  apostles' 
courage. — What  has  transformed  the 
timorous  Simon  to  the  undaunted 
Peter?  The  answer  is  not  far  to  find. 
A  heavenly  influence  has  fallen  upon 
him.  This  new-born  courage  of  the 
apostles,  although  in  them,  was  not  of 
them.  Its  source  was  above  :  it  was  a 
divine  energy  infused  within  them ;  the 
breath  of  God's  Spirit  upon  their  spirits. 
Christ  did  not  send  the  apostles  into 
the  trials  and  persecutions  incident  to 
their  day  without  providing  them  with 
a  power  adequate  to  every  want. 
What  Christ  did  for  His  early  disciples 
He  does  to-day.  Often  to-day  the  need 
of  Christians  is  courage.  Now  the 
opposition  to  be  encountered  is  not, 
usually,  persecution  or  prison  doors. 
It  may,  however,  be  something  requir- 
ing as  true  a  heroism  to  withstand. 
So  long  as  the  world  remains  as  it  is, 
no  Christian,  and  especially  no  one 
just  becoming  such,  will  find  himself 
where  to  stand  by  his  principles  will 
not  often  be  at  cost,  and  require  an 
effort  for  which  he  is  inadequate  only 
as  God  shall  help  him.  To  this  end 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  given. — Monday 
Club  Sermons. 


112 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  iv. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  32-37. 

The  Apostles  and  the  First  Christians  ;  or,  the  Effect  of  the  First  Persecution. 

I.  It  united  the  congregation. — Contrary  to  the  expectations  of  its  instigators, 
the  hostility  directed  against  the  followers  of  the  Nazarene  resulted  in  banding 
them  more  closely  together.  1.  In  amity  and  concoi'd.  The  multitude,  by  this 
time,  numbering  at  least  five  thousand  persons,  were  of  one  heart  and  soul — 
"  heart  "  representing  the  intellectual  (Markii.  6,  8,  xi.  23  ;  Luke  ii.  35,  iii.  15,  vi. 
45),  and  "  soul "  the  emotional  (Luke  ii.  35,  xii.  22  ;  John  xii.  27)  side  of  human 
nature.  In  their  views  of  divine  truth  had  emerged  no  divergence,  in  their 
regards  for  one  another  no  estrangement,  in  their  plans  no  division.  As 
brethren  they  were  of  one  mind  (1  Peter  iii.  8),  walked  by  the  same  rule  (Phil, 
iii.  16),  and  cherished  the  same  love,  being  of  one  accord  and  of  one  mind 
(Phil.  ii.  2).  "  All  wished  the  one  thing,  to  be  blessed ;  all  thought  the  one 
thing,  to  remain  true  to  the  Lord  Jesus ;  all  felt  the  one  thing,  the  comfort  of 
the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  this  oneness  of  heart  in  willing,  thinking,  and  feeling  was 
the  moving  soul  in  the  action  of  the  whole  body  "  (Besser).  "  At  the  time  of 
Constantine  Eusebius  was  able  still  to  write  of  Christians,  *  One  and  the  same 
power  of  the  divine  spirit  goes  through  all  members,  in  all  is  one  soul  and  one 
liveliness  of  faith'  '  {Ibid.).  Alas!  that  such  cannot  now  be  affirmed  of  the 
Christian  community  as  a  whole,  or  of  Christian  individuals,  who  are  not  only 
gathered  into  rival  communities,  but  often  filled  with  mutual  jealousies  and 
engaged  in  mutual  strifes.  2.  In  self-sacrifice  and  beneficence.  "  Not  one  of 
them  said  that  aught  of  the  things  which  he  possessed  was  his  own,  but  they 
had  all  things  common."  Thus  "  they  abolished  property,  as  it  were,  without 
abolishing  it,  and  possessed  it  as  though  they  possessed  it  not.  Everything, 
both  heart,  soul,  and  spiritual  life,  and  also  all  property  and  worldly  enjoyments 
were  in  common,  so  far  as  was  lawful  and  expedient  "  (Stier).  They  so  con- 
sidered each  other's  needs  that  none  were  allowed  to  want.  There  were  no  beggars 
among  the  Christians.  Owners  of  houses  and  lands,  like  Barnabas  the  Cypriote, 
sold  these  and  cast  the  proceeds  into  a  common  treasury,  out  of  which  distribu- 
tion was  made  to  each  disciple  according  to  his  need.  That  this  was  an  attempt 
to  establish  communism  as  a  rule  of  the  Christian  society  cannot  be  made  out 
(see  on  ver.  32).  Most  likely  it  was  prompted  by  a  desire  to  relieve  the 
necessities  of  those  who,  in  becoming  believers,  had  been  obliged  to  renounce 
their  worldly  goods. 

II.  It  inspired  the  apostles. — Instead  of  intimidating  the  leaders  of  the  new 
society,  the  opposition  of  the  Sanhedrim  fired  them  with  increased  zeal.  1.  To 
continue  their  work  of  preaching.  Changing  not  their  theme,  manner,  or 
place  of  preaching,  they  kept  on  repeating  the  old  story  of  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus,  knowing  it  to  be  true,  and  to  contain  the  one  Gospel  for  sinful  men.  The 
Church  had  prayed  that  they  might  be  enabled  to  speak  the  word  with  boldness 
(ver.  29),  and  so  abating  nothing  of  either  their  confidence  in  the  message  they 
proclaimed,  or  the  courage  with  which  they  set  it  forth,  undaunted  by  fears  or 
frowns,  they  gave  witness  of  what  they  had  seen  and  heard.  As  a  consequence, 
their  preaching  was  accompanied  by  great  power — i.e.,  with  deeply  convincing 
effect ;  and  no  preaching  will  tell  that  lacks  this  element  of  boldness.  2.  To  under- 
take additional  toil.  Naturally,  at  first,  the  labour  of  distributing  the  common 
funds  fell  to  the  apostles  as  the  heads  of  the  community,  and  as  persons  in  whom 
the  community  had  confidence.  Before  long,  however,  it  was  seen  that  even 
apostles  might  be  overburdened  with  work.  Besides,  the  work  in  question  was 
of  a  sort  for  which  less  than  apostolic  talent  might  suffice.  Accordingly, 
another  order  of  officers,  the  diaconate,  was  soon  after  called  into  existence  to 
superintend  this  department  of  Christian  activity  (vi.  1-6). 

i  113 


CHAP.  IV.  HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


III.  It  enriched  both. — Designed  to  dispirit  them  in  their  religious  ardour 
and  discredit  them  in  public  estimation,  the  persecution  of  the  Jewish  rulers  had 
the  contrary  effect.  It  enriched  them.  1.  With  divine  favour.  "And  great 
grace  was  upon  them  all," — upon  apostles  and  believers  alike.  There  is  no  reason 
to  depart  from  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term  grace,  though  some  (Grotius, 
Kuinoel,  Olshausen,  and  Holtzmann)  understand  by  it  the  favour  of  the  people 
(compare  ii.  47).  That  the  apostles  were  recipients  of  this  grace  from  Heaven 
was  evidenced  by  "the  great  power,"  or  convincing  effect  with  which  "they 
witnessed  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  " ;  that  the  disciples  generally 
were  not  without  experience  of  the  same  was  attested  by  the  munific\nt 
liberality  which  they  displayed.  2.  With  popular  acceptance.  Though  not  the 
best  meaning  of  the  term  "  grace,"  it  need  not  be  excluded.  Instead  of  damping 
the  cordiality  of  the  people  towards  the  apostles  and  disciples,  the  persecution  of 
them  and  their  cause  on  which  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  had  entered  rather 
helped  to  augment  the  same.  In  this  respect  persecution  is  always  a  failure — 
never  killing,  but  rather  strengthening  the  cause  against  which  it  is  directed. 

Learn. — 1.  The  excellence  of  Christian  unity.  2.  The  beauty  of  Christian 
charity.     3.  The  power  of  Christian  truth. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  32.  All  Things  Common ;  or,  a  experiment.     1.  The  sale  of  goods  and 

Sermon  on  Christian  Socialism.  lands  was  not  compulsory,  or  binding 

I.  How  the  early  Christians  were  on  believers  as  a  term  of  communion. 
led  to  this  experiment.  1.  They  were  The  language  of  Peter  to  Ananias  and 
not  in  any  way  commanded  or  counselled  Sapphira  (v.  4),  and  the  case  of  John 
so  to  act  by  the  apostles.  At  least  it  Mark's  mother  who  had  a  house  in 
does  not  appear  from  the  narrative  that  Jerusalem  (xii.  12),  show  this.  It  is 
they  were.  Who  originated  the  pro-  not  needful  to  add  that  it  was  their 
posal  is  not  told.  2.  Most  likely  the  own  goods  and  not  other  people's  that 
plan  adopted  was  suggested  by  the  neces-  these  early  Christians  cast  into  the 
sities  of  the  situation.  In  the  course  of  treasury.  2.  It  is  not  clear  that  all  the 
a  few  weeks  as  many  as  five  thousand  Jerusalem  Christians  were  placed  upon 
men  (possibly  not  including  women  and  this  common  fund.  Possibly  only  those 
children)  had  passed  over  from  Judaism  were  who  from  age,  infirmity,  lack  of 
into  the  Christian  Church,  in  many  employment,  or  want  of  friends  were 
instances,  doubtless,  not  only  snapping  destitute  of  support  (the  mention  of 
the  ties  that  bound  them  to  their  kins-  "  widows,"  vi.  1,  points  to  this)  ;  and 
men  and  relatives,  but  also  throwing  even  of  those  it  does  not  appear  that  all 
themselves  out  of  their  accustomed  em-  received  an  equal  aliment  ("  according 
ployments.  3.  The  plan  ivould  pro-  as  he  had  need,"  iv.  35,  favours  this). 
bably  commend  itself  to  them  as  desirable.  3.  Hence  what  wears  the  aspect  of  a 
As  being  in  accordance  with  (1)  the  universal  sustentation  fund  was  pro- 
precepts  (Matt.  vi.  19,  20,  xix.  21  ;  bably  nothing  more  than  a  voluntary 
Luke  xii.  33),  and  (2)  the  practice  relief  fund,  to  which  those  contributed 
(John  xiii.  29)  of  Christ,  who  not  only  who  felt  themselves  able  and  were 
enjoined  the  renunciation  of  earthly  moved  thereto  by  love  to  Christ  and 
goods  but  shared  a  common  purse  with  sympathy  for  their  needy  brethren,  and 
the  Twelve.  4.  The  movement  may  out  of  which  those  were  supported  who 
have  sprung  from  the  warm  hearts  of  the  were  unable  to  maintain  themselves. 
richer  members  of  the  Church  who  com-  III.  Indications  that  this  early  ex- 
passionately  regarded  the  destitution  of  periment  was  not  designed  to  be  per- 
their  Christian  brethren.  manent. — Even   should  it  be  conceded 

II.  The  exact  character  of  this  early      that  the  experiment  in  question  was  of 

114 


MO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


a  strictly  communistic   character,  and 
that  the  apostles  originally  meant  it  to 
become  a  fixed  practice,  there  is  ground 
for   thinking    that    they    pretty    soon 
changed  their  minds   in   this   respect. 
1.  It  was   not  mentioned   at   the  First 
Council    in   Jerusalem  as  a  method  of 
living  which  might  be  imitated  by  the 
Gentile     Churches.     On    the    contrary, 
Paul  and   Barnabas  were  directed  to 
remember  the  poor  (Gal.  ii.  10) — i.e.,  to 
lift    collections  from  the  rich  Gentile 
congregations  for  the  support  of  the 
poor    disciples  in  the   Judsean  metro- 
polis.     2.  It  was  probably  found  that 
the   experiment  had  not  been  successful 
in  Jerusalem,  but  rather  hurtful.     If  it 
met  an  emergency,  it  appears  to  have 
been  followed  by  the  usual  results  which 
flow  from  common  funds.     It  destroyed 
the    independence   of    the    Jerusalem 
Church,  which  became  practically  filled 
with    lazy  paupers,   who   sorned  upon 
their  wealthier  brethren.    "  The  system 
of  common  property  "  (among  the  New 
England    Pilgrims),   writes    Bancroft, 
"  had  occasioned  grievous  discontents ; 
the  influence  of  law  could  not  compel 
regular   labour   like  the  uniform  im- 
pulse of  personal  interest ;    and  even 
the   threat    of    '  keeping    back    their 
bread '  could  not  change  the  character 
of  the  idle  "  (History  of  America,  i.,  238). 

Christianity  and  Socialism. — "  As  a 
movement  for  the  deliverance  of  the 
poor  and  their  introduction  to  a  good 
and  happy  life,  the  gospel  of  God's 
love  in  Christ  thoroughly  agrees  with 
socialism."  Yet  "  there  is  a  broad  line 
of  distinction  between  the  two." 

I.  Socialism  insists  on  external  and 
economic  conditions  for  good ;  Chris- 
tianity insists  on  the  inward  and  moral, 
because  all  social  disorders  are  spiritual 
at  heart,  and  the  spiritual  is  the  ulti- 
mate root  of  all  life. 

II.  Socialism  makes  the  community 
the  final  and  absolute  proprietor  of  all 
wealth ;  Christianity  makes  God  the 
proprietor  and  us  His  stewards  for 
others. 

III.  Socialism  too  much  seeks  to 
enforce  its  doctrine  of  property  by  brute 


force ;  Christianity  by  the  moral  leaven 
of  love  in  the  soul  of  man. 

IV.  Socialism  thinks  by  equalising 
human  conditions  to  secure  the  greatest 
amount  of  comfort  and  happiness ; 
Christianity,  or  Jesus  Christ,  teaches 
that  all  vital  development  must  be 
spontaneous,  and  from  within,  that  a 
change  of  character  is  to  be  sought 
rather  than  a  change  of  conditions." 
Yet  "  Christianity  and  socialism  need 
not  be  spoken  of  as  rivals ;  they  are 
compatible,  and  should  not  be  made 
parties  in  a  quarrel.  The  fact  is  that 
socialism  needs  to  be  christianised, 
and  that  Christianity  needs  to  be 
socialised." — A.  Scott  Matheson. 

Yer.  33.  The  Christian  Ministry. 

I.  Its  personnel. — No  longer  the 
apostles,  but  the  pastors  and  teachers  of 
the  New  Testament  Church. 

II.  Its  function. — Witness-bearing. 
Not  arguing  or  philosophising. 

III.  Its  theme. — The  resurrection  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — including,  of 
course,  all  the  connected  facts  and 
doctrines. 

IY.  Its  influence. — When  rightly 
exercised  it  wields  great  dynamic  force 
of  a  moral  and  spiritual  kind. 

Y.  Its  reward. — It  attracts  towards 
itself  "  great  grace  "  both  from  God  and 
man. 

The  Best  Graces  for  a  Church. 
I.  The  grace  of  unity. 
II.  The  grace  of  witness-bearing. 
III.  The  grace  of  liberality. 

Yer.  33.  The  Risen  Christ  and  the 
Power  of  the  Gospel. 

I.  The  resurrection. — It  is  not  so 
much  with  death  as  with  resurrection 
that  the  apostles  had  to  do,  at  least  in 
Jerusalem  and  Judsea.  The  death  was 
a  believed  fact  there,  not  needing 
witnesses. 

II.  The  testimony. — It  was  the 
testimony  of  apostles ;  and  yet  it  was 
not  as  apostles,  or  with  official  authority 
that  they  testified,  but  as  men  of  in- 
tegrity and  good  sense,  who  saw  with 
their  eyes,  and  heard  with  their  ears. 

115 


CHAP.  IV. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


III.  The  power. — "  With  great 
power  gave  the  apostles  witness."  The 
word  which  they  spoke  was  in  itself  a 
word  of  power.  But  apart  from  this, 
the  "  great  power  "  here  spoken  of  was 
exhibited.  1.  In  the  accompanying 
miracles,  by  which  God  identified  Him- 
self with  the  apostolic  testimony,  de- 
claring that  their  testimony  was  His 
truth ;  for  of  this  the  miracles  were 
the  seal.  2.  In  the  accompanying 
power  exercised  over,  and  in,  men's 
souls. 

IV.  The  grace. — It  is  "great  grace"  ; 
free  love  in  no  ordinary  measure. — 
H.  Bonar,  D.D. 

Ver.  36.  Joses  sumamed  Barnabas. 

I.  The  possessor  of  a  good  pedigree. 
— He  was  a  Levite,  a  member  of  the 
priestly  tribe,  though  not  himself  a 
priest. 

II.  The  owner  of  a  good  name. — 
The  son  of  exhortation,  or  the  son  of 
consolation,  with  reference  to  either  his 
eloquence  or  his  sympathy. 

III.  The  author  of  a  good  deed. — 
"  Having  land  he  sold  it,  and  laid  the 
money  at  the  apostles'  feet." 

Joses  Barnabas  ;  or,  the  Consecration 
of  Wealth. 

I.  The  pious  landowner. — 1.  His 
name  and  surname.  Joses,  or  Joseph 
—an  honourable  name  in  Israel.  Bar- 
nabas, the  son  of  exhortation  or  conso- 
lation— a  more  honoured  surname  in 
the  Christian  Church.  2.  His  charac- 
ter and  ability.  A  good  man  and  full 
of  the  Holy  Ghost;  also  a  talented 
man,  as  may  be  concluded  from  his 
rank  alongside  of  the  apostles,  his 
power  of  eloquent  speech,  and  his  use- 
fulness as  a  colleague  of  Paul.  3.  His 
land  and  property. — A  native  of  Cyprus, 
and  the  possessor  of  a  piece  of  ground 
in  that  island. 

II.  The    great  renunciation. — He 


sold  his  land,  that  which  men  highly 
value,  probably  his  patrimonial  inherit- 
ance, and  cast  the  proceeds  into  the 
common  fund.  1.  Out  of  love  to  Christ, 
whose  disciple  he  was.  2.  Under  the 
impulse  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  whom  his 
heart  was  filled.  3.  From  considera- 
tion of  his  fellow-Christians'  needs,  whom 
he  regarded  as  Christ's  brethren  and 
his  own. 

III.  The  cheerful  consecration. — He 
laid  it  at  the  apostles'  feet.  1.  No 
doubt  without  reluctance,  as  a  cheerful 
giver.  2.  Without  reservation,  keeping 
back  no  part  of  the  price.  3.  Without 
stipulation,  leaving  it  for  distribution 
entirely  under  the  apostles'  control. 

Vers.  36,  37.  A  Sermon  on  Wealth. — 
Its  right  use  exemplified  by  Barnabas. 

I.  Wealth  possessed. — No  sin,  at 
least  not  necessarily,  but  a  great  talent. 

II.  Wealth  surrendered. — Not  an 
obligation  imposed  upon  Christians,  yet 
a  sacrifice  that  may  be  freely  offered. 

III.  Wealth  consecrated. — Whether 
retained  or  renounced  it  should  be 
devoted  to  the  service  of  God  and  Jesus 
Christ. 

IV.  Wealth  distributed. — One  way 
of  devoting  wealth  to  God  and  Christ  is 
to  disperse  it  abroad  and  give  to  the 
poor  (Psalm  cxii.  9),  to  do  good  with  it 
and  to  communicate  (Heb.  xiii.  16  ; 
1  Tim.  vi.  18). 

Vers.  31-37.  The  True  Blossoms  of  a 
Christian  Congregation. 

I.  Where  the  preaching  of  Christ 
flourishes  there  living  faith  flourishes. 
"  The  multitude  believed." 

II.  Where  living  faith  flourishes 
there  genuine  love  flourishes.  "  One 
heart  and  one  soul." 

III.  Where  genuine  love  flourishes, 
there  true  prosperity  flourishes.  •'  No 
one  lacked." — Gerok. 


116 


H0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  v. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Dangers  both  Within  and  Without  the  Church — False  Friends  and 

Open  Foes. 

§  1.  The  Story  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  ;  or,  Hypocrisy  unveiled  (vers.  1-11). 
§  2.  A  Page  from  the  Church's  Life  History  ;   or,   the   Calm  before  a  Storm 

(vers.  12-16). 
§  3.  Annas  on  the  Move ;  or,  the  Bursting  of  the  Storm  (vers.  17-32). 
§  4.  Gamaliel  and  his  Colleagues;  or,  a  Friend  at  Court  (vers.  33-42). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Ananias. — Perhaps  the  same  name  as  Ananiah  (Neh.  iii.  23)  or  Hananiah  (1  Chron. 
iii.  21 ;  Jer.  xxviii.  1  ;  Dan.  i.  6),  translated  in  the  LXX.  'AvavLas,  and  signifying  the  cloud  or 
mercy  of  God.  Sapphira. — Possibly  from  the  Greek  <j utt <peipos,  sapphire,  or  from  the  Syriac 
ntd^,  beautiful. 

Ver.  2.  Kept  back  part  of  the  price. — Lit.  took  away  for  himself  from  the  price,  as  Achan 
did  of  the  accursed  thing  (Josh.  vii.  1);  compare  Titus  ii.  10.  Privy  to  it. —  Conscious  of  it 
to  herself — i.e.,  aware  of  the  reservation. 

Ver.  3.  Why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  heart  \ — Compare  the  influence  exerted  by  this  father 
of  lies  (John  viii.  44)  upon  Judas  (Luke  xxii.  3  ;  John  xiii.  27).  To  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost. — 
lit.  that  thou  shouldst  lie,  as  regards  the  Holy  Ghost — i.e.,  with  intent  to  deceive  Him, 
\pevdeadai,  with  the  accusative  of  the  person  deceived,  as  in  Deut.  xxxiii.  29  ;  Isa.  lvii.  11  (LXX.). 
Though  the  purpose  was  rather  that  of  Satan  who  had  filled  Ananias's  heart,  than  of 
Ananias  himself,  yet  Ananias's  freedom  of  will  and  power  of  resistance  to  the  tempter 
is  recognised  in  the  question  "  Why  ? " 

Ver.  4.  Was  it — i.e.,  the  possession — not  thine  own  ?  should  be,  remaining  (unsold)  did  it  not 
remain  to  thee  (as  thy  possession)  ?  The  language  shows  that  the  practice  of  selling  private 
property  and  casting  the  proceeds  into  a  common  fund  was  not  obligatory  on  the  first 
Christians  as  a  term  of  communion.  Why  ?—  ri  otl  =  tL  iarip  on  =  quid  est  quod  =  cur? 
Hast  thou  conceived. — Lit.  placed  in  thy  heart;  compare  Dan.  i.  8;  Mai.  ii.  2.  "Satan 
suggested  the  lie,  which  Ananias  ought  to  have  repelled  ;  instead  of  that  he  put  it  in  his 
heart'''  (Alford).  Not  unto  men,  but  unto  God.— (Compare  1  Thess.  iv.  8.)  A  weighty 
testimony  to  the  divinity,  as  well  as  personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (compare  Matt,  xxviii.  19). 

Ver.  5.  Gave  up  the  ghost. — Expired,,  breathed  out  his  life  ;  used  again  only  of  Herod 
Agrippa  (xii.  23).  The  phrase  occurs  frequently  in  the  LXX.  Great  fear  came  on  all  them 
that  heard  these  things. — Not  merely  upon  all  present  (De  Wette),  but  upon  all  to  whom  the 
report  came. 

Ver.  6.  The  young,  or  younger  men,  were  the  more  youthful  members  of  the  assembly 
(Neander,  De  Wette,  Alford,  Hackett,  Zockler,  and  others)  in  distinction  from  the  older. 
There  is  no  need  to  suppose  them  a  special  class  of  assistants  (Kuinoel,  Meyer),  or  that 
presbyters  had  already  been  appointed  (Olshausen),  although  on  the  ground  of  this  natural 
distribution  of  work  between  the  young  and  old  in  the  common  life  of  the  Church,  the  later 
official  distinction  may  have  arisen  (Holtzmann).  Wound  him  up. — awearetXav.  I.e.,  taking 
ovartWa)  to  be  =  7reptcrr^XXw  (Ezek.  xxix.  5,  LXX. ;  Jos.,  A?it.,X.YlI.  iii.  3),  wrapping  the  body 
tip — e.g.,  in  their  own  mantles  (Alford.  De  Wette) ;  or,  perhaps  better,  adhering  to  the  literal 
sense  of  the  word,  to  place  together,  laying  the  body  out,  composing  its  limbs  (Zockler, 
Holtzmann),  and  so  making  ready  for  burial.  "  The  speedy  burial  of  the  dead  practised 
among  the  later  Jews  was  unknown  in  earlier  times.  See  Gen.  xxiii.  It  was  grounded  on 
Numb.  xix.  11  ff.     The  practice  was  to  bury  before  sunset  of  the  same  day  "  (Alford). 

Ver.  7.  Three  hours  after  allowed  sufficient  time  for  interment. 

Ver.  8.  So  much — Perhaps  pointing  to  the  gold  still  lying  where  it  had  been  laid  by 
Ananias. 

Ver.  9.  To  tempt  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.— Compare  1  Cor.  x.  9.  Behold  draws  attention  to 
the  sound  of  approaching  footsteps  (Olshausen,  Hackett,  Holtzmann)  although  the  whole 
clause  may  be  only  a  lively  or  poetic  manner  of  speech  (Alford,  Zockler). 

Ver.  10.  Fell  down  straightway.— That  the  deaths  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  were  designed 

117 


chap.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


by  the  writer  as  supernatural  occurrences  cannot  be  doubted ;  and  that  they  were  so  is  shown 
by  the  impossibility  of  accounting  for  them  by  natural  means,  such  as  horror  at  detection 
and  fear  superinduced  by  Peter's  words.  The  idea  that  the  story  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira, 
though  having  a  basis  in  fact,  is  only  a  legend,  corresponding  to  the  Old  Testament  narratives 
of  Achan  (Josh,  vii.)  and  Nadab  and  Abihu  (Lev.  x.  1-8),  and  framed  for  the  purpose  of  sup- 
porting the  notion  that  he  who  is  excommunicated  must  perish  bodily  (Weizsacker)  may  be 
dismissed  as  without  plausibility. 

Ver.  11.  The  Church,  eKKXrjcria.  Here  used  for  the  first  time  in  the  Acts  to  signify  the 
body  of  believers  who  had  been  called  out  of  the  world. 

Vers.  12,  13.  Among  the  people.— I.e.,  the  population  of  Jerusalem.  All.— Either  all  the 
apostles,  the  rest  being  believers  and  unbelievers  (Alford,  Olshausen,  Hackett),  or  more 
likely  all  the  believers,  the  rest  being  the  people,  or  those  not  believing  (Bengel,  De  Wette, 
Meyer,  Holtzmann,  Zockler,  Spence,  and  others). 

Ver.  15.  Into  the  streets.— So  the  best  MSS.  (N,  A,B,  D2).  Codex  D  reads  Kara,  along  or 
down,  as  if  whole  streets  were  occupied  with  sick  people.  That  couches  were  cheap  articles 
(Kuinoel)  used  by  the  common  people,  whereas  the  rich  employed  beds,  is  an  unfounded 
distinction.  The  shadow  of  Peter,  etc.,  should  read,  that,  Peter  coining  along,  at  least  his 
shadow,  etc.  Compare  the  miracles  wrought  by  Paul's  handkerchiefs  (xix.  12).  It  is  not 
expressly  said  that  Peter's  shadow  worked  cures,  but  this  is  thought  by  some  (Zeller, 
Holtzmann,  Besser)  to  be  implied  by  the  narrator  in  the  statement  of. 

Ver.  16.  And  they  were  healed  every  one. — Yet  the  clause  does  not  say  they  were  healed  by 
Peter's  shadow.  "  If  however  this  really  took  place  with  respect  to  some  of  them,  it  was, 
done  through  faith  "  (Stier).     (See  further  in  "  Hints.") 

Ver.  17.  The  high  priest. — Annas,  as  in  iv.  6.  Indignation. — Not  envy  or  jealousy  (R.V.), 
but  hot,  angry  zeal. 

Ver.  19.  Not  the  but  an  Angel  of  the  Lord;  i.e.  sent  by  the  Lord,  or  the  Exalted 
Christ. 

Ver.. 20.  All  the  words  of  this  life. — I.e.,  of  this  resurrection  life  which  the  Sadducees 
denied,  or  of  this  eternal  life  which  the  apostles  preached,  or  of  this  blessed  life  which  the 
angel  himself  enjoyed,  or  all  of  these  together. 

Ver.  21.  All  the  senate,  or  eldership.  Whether  a  special  meeting  of  the  presbyters  (a 
wider  conception  than  the  Sanhedrim)  was  summoned  to  assist  the  Sanhedrim  (Meyer, 
Wendt,  Holtzmann),  or  only  the  Sanhedrim,  called  in  the  Old  Testament  Apocrypha,  the 
senate  (Schiirer,  ii.  149)  was  convened  (Zockler,  Hackett),  cannot  be  determined. 

Ver.  24.  They  douhted  of  them. — Better,  were  much  perplexed  concerning  them — i.e.,  the 
apostles  (Alford),  or  the  words  reported  about  the  apostles  (Hackett).  Whereunto  this 
would  grow. —  What  this  mould  become,  this  incident  of  their  escape  from  prison  and  this 
movement  of  which  they  were  the  leaders. 

Ver.  26.  Lest  they  should  he  stoned  depends  upon  "  not  with  violence  "  (Alford,  Hackett), 
rather  than  upon  "  they  feared"  (Holtzmann). 

Ver.  28.  This  man's  Wood  upon  us  recalls  Matt,  xxvii.  25. 

Ver.  29.  We  ought  to  ohey  (-rreidapx^,  to  obey  or  acknowledge  as  ruler,  stronger  than  anovecp, 
iv.  19)  God  rather  than  man. — Compare  Socrates  to  his  judges,  trdao^a.i  5£  fiaWov  t$  6e<£  ^ 
v/juv  (Plato,  Apologia,  xvii.  D). 

Ver.  31.  With,  or  by,  rather  than  "  to."  See  ii.  33.  Not  to  be,  but  (as)  a  prince  (as  in 
iii.  15) — i.e.,  as  theocratic  Lord  and  King  of  His  people,  and  a  Saviour — i.e.,  as  the  originator 
of  the  Messianic  salvation  (Holtzmann). 

Ver.  33.  Cut  to  the  heart. — Lit.  sawn  asunder,  torn  in  pieces,  sc.  in  their  hearts.  Compare 
vii.  54 — a  much  stronger  expression  than  that  used  in  iv.  2  or  xvi.  18,  and  closely  resembling 
that  employed  in  ii.  37. 

Ver.  34.  A  Pharisee. — A  member  of  one  of  the  principal  religious  sects  in  Jerusalem,  the 
others  being  Sadducees  and  Essenes.  See  further  on  xv.  5.  Gamaliel  =  "Benefit  of  God" 
(see  Numb.  i.  10,  ii.  20).  Probably  Gamaliel  the  elder,  one  of  the  seven  to  whom  the  Jews 
gave  the  title  Rabbi.  In  the  Talmud  he  appears  as  a  zealous  Pharisee  and  distinguished 
teacher  of  the  law. 

Ver.  35.  Take  heed  to  yourselves. — Either  with  respect  to  these  men,  what  ye  intend  to  do 
(Hackett),  or  what  ye  intend  to  do  with  respect  to  these  men  (Holtzmann). 

Vers.  36,  37.  Theudas  and  Judas. — Concerning  the  supposed  chronological  difficulty  con- 
nected with  these  names  see  "  Homiletical  Analysis." 

Ver.  39.  In  ye  cannot  overthrow  it  read  for  "  it "  them.  Lest  haply,  etc.,  may  be  connected 
either  with  •'  let  them  alone,"  or  with  a  supplied  thought  such  as  "  and  ye  ought  not  to 
attempt  to  overthrow  them,"  or  "  take  heed  to  yourselves." 

Ver.  40.  And  when  they  had  called  the  apostles,  sc.  unto  them,  so  as  to  preserve  the  force 
of  the  preposition  irpos — the  apostles  having  been  removed  a  little  space  apart  from  the 
council  during  the  progress  of  the  deliberations  (ver.  34). 

Ver.  41.  Worthy  to  suffer  shame.— Or,  worthy  to  be  disgraced  ;  a  bold  oxymoron.    For  His 

118 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY  :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  v. 


name  should  be  for  the  name — i.e.,  of  Jesus,  which  is  here  omitted,  either  because  it  had  just 
been  mentioned  (ver.  40),  or  because  "  the  name"  had  already  come  to  be  a  term  in  familiar 
use  among  the  disciples.     (Compare  ix.  16.) 
Ver.  42.  In  every  house. — Better,  at  home,  ox  from  house  to  house,  as  in  ii.  46. 


HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—11. 

The  Story  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  ;  or,  Hypocrisy  unveiled. 

I.  The  character  and  standing  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira. — 1.  Husband  and 
loife.  They  stood  towards  one  another  in  the  holiest  of  natural  relations. 
"  Marriage  is  honourable  in  all  "  (Heb.  xiii.  4).  Happy  they  in  whom  the  sacred 
bond  of  wedlock  is  cemented  by  love  and  religion  (Eph.  v.  25).  Had  Ananias 
and  Sapphira  been  like  their  names,  "  finer  names  than  Barnabas  "  (Stier) — he 
a  vessel  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  she  clear  and  transparent  like  the  sapphire 
(see  "  Critical  Remarks  ") — all  had  been  well.  But,  alas  !  "  their  souls  were  not 
like  their  names  "  (Stier),  and  in  them  the  marriage  union,  having  been  perverted 
to  unholy  ends,  what  was  meant  for  a  blessing  turned  out  to  be  a  curse.  Instead 
of  being  helpers  of  each  other's  faith  and  joy  (2  Cor.  i.  24),  and  provoking  one 
another  to  love  and  good  works  (Heb.  x.  24),  they  became  mutual  tempters  and 
confederates  in  sin.  Adam  and  Eve,  if  they  were  the  first  married  couple  who 
conjointly  went  astray  (Gen.  iii),  have,  unhappily,  not  been  the  last  :  witness 
Abraham  and  Sarah  (Gen.  xii.,  xvi.) ;  Ahab  and  Jezebel  (1  Kings  xvi.  29-33); 
Herod  and  Herodias  (Matt.  xiv.  3).  2.  Of  good  social  standing.  This  was 
obvious  from  the  circumstance  that  they  possessed  a  bit  of  land.  Ownership  of 
the  soil — whether  right  or  wrong — has  always  been  esteemed  a  mark  of  superior 
position  (see  Job  xxii.  8,  9).  The  landless  have  ever  been  accounted  mean,  and 
not  unfrequently  treated  as  slaves  and  chattels.  Nor  have  such  ideas  been  con- 
fined to  men  of  the  world,  but  they  have  been  suffered  to  penetrate  even  within  the 
precincts  of  the  Christian  Church.  2.  Of  fair  Christian  profession.  "  Without 
doubt,"  says  Besser,  "  the  Holy  Spirit  had  had  His  work  upon  them  both.  They 
were  both  believers,  and  embraced  in  the  precious  word  spoken  of  the  multitude 
of  the  faithful  (iv.  32).  Probably  they  had  made  themselves  prominent  above 
others  through  their  beautiful  gifts  (of  grace),  had  prayed  with  power,  and 
been  able  boldly  to  despise  the  threatening^  of  the  enemy."  Whether  this  was 
so  or  not,  unquestionably  they  belonged  to  the  number  of  disciples.  Having 
publicly  professed  their  faith  in  Christ,  they  had  been  baptised  and  received  into 
the  Christian  community.  Whether  their  so-called  conversion  dated  from  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  or  the  healing  of  the  lame  man,  cannot  be  ascertained.  But 
manifestly  they  were  persons  of  repute  in  the  congregation.  "  They  had  a  name 
to  live"  (Rev.  iii.  1),  whether  it  was  deserved  or  not. 

II.  The  project  and  sin  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira. — 1.  Their  project.  (1)  Its 
substance  was  good — to  sell  their  property,  retain  part  of  the  purchase  money, 
bring  the  remainder  into  the  Church,  and  lay  it  down  at  the  apostles'  feet  exactly 
as  Joses  had  done.  If  they  had  a  wish  to  emulate  the  man  of  Cyprus,  there 
would  still  have  been  nothing  reprehensible  in  what  they  proposed  to  do  had 
they  only  let  the  truth  be  understood  that  they  were  contributing  not  the  whole 
but  only  a  part  of  their  estate.  (2)  Its  motive  was  bad — to  obtain  credit  for 
doing  a  handsome,  generous,  self-sacrificing  deed  of  kindness  without  inflicting  on 
themselves  a  total  loss,  to  secure  for  themselves  praise  to  which  they  were  not 
entitled — viz.,  for  giving  all,  whereas  they  were  only  giving  part  of  their  patri- 
mony. In  other  words,  vanity  and  greed  lay  at  the  root  of  their  procedure. 
(3)  Its  execution  was  clever — the  scheme  was  carried  out  promptly,  soon  after  it 
had  been  conceived,  so  that  no  space  was  left  for  hesitation  which  might  lead  to 
an  alteration  in  their  plans  ;  faithfully,  in  exact  accordance  with  the  prearranged 

119 


chap.  v.  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


programme,  so  that  little  chance  was  left  for  miscarrying ;  conjointly,  with  the 
full  concurrence  of  both  partners,  so  that  neither  could  cast  the  blame  of  failure 
upon  the  other ;  and  publicly,  with  the  knowledge  and  approbation  of  the  Church, 
so  that  all  might  appear  open  and  above  board.  2.  Their  sin.  (1)  In  what  it 
consisted.  Not  in  selling  the  land  or  in  contributing  only  a  portion  of  the  price 
to  the  common  fund.  They  need  not  have  sold  the  land  unless  they  pleased. 
Nor  were  they  obliged  to  surrender  the  whole  or  any  portion  of  the  realised 
price,  if  they  chose  to  do  otherwise.  "  There  was  no  law  imposing  payment  and 
specifying  amount "  (Binney).  All  was  voluntary.  Their  transgression  lay  in 
pretending  to  contribute  the  whole  when  they  were  only  devoting  a  part. 
Deception  and  hypocrisy  were  the  faults  with  which  they  were  chargeable. 
(2)  By  whom  it  was  instigated.  The  nearer  motives  have  been  explained. 
The  power  behind  these  was  the  Devil.  Satan  had  filled  their  hearts  with  the 
desire  of  gaining  imputation  as  generous  and  self-sacrificing  givers  without  parting 
with  too  much  of  their  property.  To  the  promptings  of  the  arch  deceiver  they 
had  yielded.  Having  opened  the  gateways  of  their  souls  at  his  suggestion,  they 
had  soon  sunk  beneath  his  sway.  (3)  Against  whom  it  was  directed.  It  was  a 
sin  against  their  own  souls,  against  the  apostles,  against  the  Church,  and  even 
against  Christ ;  but  it  was  chiefly  a  sin  against  God  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  This, 
according  to  Peter,  formed  its  main  aggravation.  Yet  it  must  not  be  confounded 
with  what  is  specifically  called  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  (Matt.  xii.  32). 

III.  The  detection  and  punishment  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira. — 1.  The  detection. 
— This  was  (1)  unexpected.  By  Ananias  and  Sapphira  themselves,  who,  no  doubt, 
never  dreamt  that  any  one,  and  least  of  all  Peter,  would  get  to  know  of  their 
little  plot ;  but  hardly  less  by  the  congregation  who,  it  may  be  imagined,  never 
anticipated  that  any  of  their  number  would  be  guilty  of  such  a  miserable  crime. 
The  unexpected,  however,  is  that  which  mostly  happens  ;  nor  can  evil  doers  count  on 
a  moment  of  security.  (2)  Instantaneous.  No  preliminary  suspicions,  or  strange 
surmises,  or  precognoscing  of  witnesses,  or  leading  of  evidence,  was  required.  At 
once  and  on  the  spot,  with  the  suddenness  of  a  flash  of  lightning,  the  secret  offence 
was  laid  bare.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  were  hypocrites,  and  had  lied  unto  the 
Holy  Ghost.  (3)  Complete.  The  whole  story  was  divulged, — the  selling  of  the 
land,  the  keeping  back  part  of  the  price,  the  concert  between  the  two.  Nothing 
remained  concealed  from  the  searching  gaze  of  Peter,  whose  eyes  had  been 
inwardly  illumined  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (4)  Public.  The  sin  had  been  conceived 
in  secret,  but  its  exposure  occurred  in  public,  according  to  the  saying  of  our 
Lord  :  "  There  is  nothing  hid  which  shall  not  be  manifested,"  etc.  (Mark  iv.  22). 
2.  The  punishment.  (1)  Sudden.  Swift  upon  the  heels  of  dection  followed 
the  infliction  of  retribution,  as  it  did  with  our  first  parents  (Gen.  iii.  8),  with 
Cain  (Gen.  iv.  9-12),  with  Judas,  i.  18),  with  Herod  (xii.  23),  and  as  it  often 
does  in  Providence  still.  (2)  Severe.  "  Ananias,  hearing  Peter's  words,  fell 
down  and  gave  up  the  ghost  "  and  three  hours  after,  "  Sapphira,"  entering 
the  congregation,  and  learning  what  had  happened  to  her  husband,  also  "fell 
down  immediately  at  Peter's  feet."  Ona  after  the  other  their  bodies  were 
composed  for  intsrment,  wrapped  up  in  linen,  or  perhaps  in  the  young  men's 
mantles,  carried  forth,  and  buried.  Whether  their  souls  perished  with  the 
dissolution  of  their  bodies  cannot  be  told.  Charity  would  incline  one  to  the  belief  of 
Augustine  that  this  terrible  doom  was  inflicted  on  their  bodies  that  their  spirits 
might  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (1  Cor.  v.  5).  (3)  Supernatural. 
The  suggestion  that  Ananias  and  Sapphira  died  through  shame  and  the  detection 
of  their  crime,  and  fear  of  the  consequences  that  might  ensue  to  them  on  its 
getting  known  to  the  community,  will  not  explain  the  double  death  in  manner 
and  circumstances  so  exactly  alike.  Besides,  Peter's  language  (ver.  9)  shows  that 
both  of  the  deaths  were  miraculous.     To  dismiss  the  whole  story  as  a  legendary 

120 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  v. 


working  up  of  some  simple  occurrence  connected  with  Ananias  and  Sapphira  is 
inadmissible.  (4)  Solemnising.  It  profoundly  impressed  the  whole  Church  and 
the  outside  public,  so  far  as  it  became  known.  And  no  wonder.  "  When  God's 
judgments  are  abroad  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  righteousness  " 
(Isa.  xx vi.  9).  (5)  Sanctioned.  By  right  and  justice.  Though  severe,  it  was 
not  more  severe  than  the  sin  deserved  (Rom.  vi.  23),  or  the  circumstances  of  the 
case  demanded.  It  was  needful  to  check  hypocrisy  on  the  threshold  of  the 
Church ;  and  if  the  rigour  of  Divine  vengeance  has  since  then  been  relaxed,  that 
is  not  because  the  sin  of  hypocrisy  has  become  less  hateful  in  God's  sight 
(Job  xiii.  13,  16;  Luke  xi.  44),  but  because  " mercy"  has  began  to  "rejoice 
against  judgment  "  (James  ii.  13). 

Learn. — 1.  That  two  actions  may  be  similar  in  men's  eyes,  and  yet  intrinsically 
different  in  God's.  Example  :  the  actions  of  Barnabas  and  Ananias.  2.  That 
God  will  accept  no  gift  for  either  His  Church  or  His  poor  of  that  which  hypocrisy 
and  greed  leave  over.  God's  proper  portion  is  the  firstfruits.  3.  That  God  still 
sits  over  against  the  treasury  of  the  Church  and  jealously  ^guards  His  honour 
from  all  reproach  that  may  be  cast  upon  it  by  His  people's  gifts.  4.  That  no 
plot  can  be  too  secret  to  escape  the  all-seeing  eye  of  God.  5.  That,  though  hand 
join  in  hand,  yet  will  not  the  sinner  go  unpunished.  6.  That  "not  a  great  and 
mixed  multitude,  but  the  holiness  of  His  people,  is  pleasing  to  the  Lord  of  His 
Church  "  (Lechler).  7.  That  Christ's  people  should  guard  themselves  carefully 
against  temptations  to  sin. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  ;  or,  that  of  Ananias  being  inspired  by  envy 

the  Fearful  Perversion  of  the  Marriage  and  selfishness  as  well  as  impaired  in 

State. — This     occurs    when    marriage  its  extent,  and  deceitful  in  its  mode  of 

is —  presentation.     3.  Rewards.     Barnabas 

I.  A  fellowship  of  goods  and  a  busi-  being  set  upon  a  pedestal  of  immortal 
ness  transaction,  instead  of  a  union  of  renown  ;  Ananias  being  fixed  on  a 
hearts  in  the  Lord.  pillory  of  undying  shame.     Barnabas 

II.  A  union  to  the  service  of  the  being  promoted  to  a  position  of  useful- 
flesh,  the  world,  and  the  devil,  instead  ness  in  the  Church  ;  Ananias  being 
of  a  pious  resolution,  "  As  for  me  and  punished  with  instantaneous  destruc- 
my  house."  tion,  and  so  held  up  as  a  warning  to 

III.  A  walking    together  to  hell,      future  ages. 

instead  of  being  helpers  together  of  one  III.  Suggest. — 1.  That  all  who  pro- 

another's  joy,    and    pilgrims    towards  f ess  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  are  not  sincere 

heaven.     Contrast  Ananias  and    Sap-  disciples.     2.  That  all  gifts  to  Christ's 

phira  with  Zacharias  and  Elizabeth. —  treasury  are  not  equally  acceptable  to 

Gerok.  Christ.      3.    That    different    destinies 

await  the  true  and  the  false  professor 

Ver.  1,  with  iv.   3-6.    Barnabas  and  of  religion. 
Ananias. 

I.  Compare. — In  being — 1.  Men;  Ver.  3.  Man's  Partnership  with  Satan 
2.  Professors  of  Christianity  ;  3.  Givers.  in  his  Sins. 

II.  Contrast.  —  In  their — 1.  Cha-  I.  In  connection  with  lies. — He  is  a 
racters.  Barnabas,  a  good  man  and  liar,  and  the  forger  of  lies  ;  the  hater 
sincere  Christian ;  Ananias,  an  insin-      of  truth  and  uprightness. 

cere    disciple    and    flagrant    deceiver.  II.  In  connection  with  errors. 

2.  (rifts.     That  of  Barnabas  proceeding  III.  In  connection  with  forms, 

from  Christian  love  and  sympathy,  and  IV.  In  connection  with  unbelief, 

being    complete    as    well    as  honest;  V.  In   connection   with  his    own 

121 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


original  falsehood    in   Paradise. — H. 
Bonar,  D.D. 

Ver.  3-10.  Satan  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I.  Satan. — 1.  The  existence  and  per- 
sonality of  Satan.  Peter  did  not  speak 
in  allegory  when  he  said,  "Why  hath 
Satan  filled  thy  heart?"  2.  The 
reality  of  Satanic  influence  on  the  human 
heart.  The  sin  of  Ananias  and  Sap- 
phira  was  traced  back  to  the  direct 
agency  of  the  devil.  3.  Satanic  influ- 
ence, though  undeniable,  does  not  destroy 
the  responsibility  of  man.  Satan  can 
fill  no  man's  heart  against  his  will. 

II.  The  Holy  Ghost.— 1.  The  divinity 
and  personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  former  implied  in  the  fact  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  could  be  lied  against  and 
tempted ;  the  latter  in  the  title  God 
ascribed  to  Him  (ver.  4).  2.  The 
access  the  Holy  Spirit  has  to  the  human 
heart.  Proved  by  the  inward  illumina- 
tion of  Peter  as  to  the  conduct  of  the 
guilty  pair.  3.  The  perpetual  inhabita- 
tion of  the  Church  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  imagined  they 
had  only  their  fellow -Christians  to 
hoodwink.  Peter  explained  the  aggra- 
vation of  their  sin  to  lie  in  this,  that 
it  had  been  committed  against  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

Vers.  5-10    Sudden  Deaths. 

I.  Possible  occurreaces. — And  may 
be  either  natural  events  or  supernatural 
judgments. 

II.  Impressive  spectacles. — Calcu- 
lated to  arrest  the  careless  and  render 
the  wicked  thoughtful. 

III.  Solemn  lessons. — Teaching  all 
(1)  the  nearness  of  the  end,  and  (2)  the 
wisdom  of  being  ready. 

Vers.  5-11.  Church  Discipline. 

I.  Its  necessity. — Shown  then  by 
the  case  of  A  nanias  and  Sapphira ; 
shown  now  by  the  admitted  presence 
in  the  Church  of  those  who  "  walk 
disorderly." 

II.  Its  authority. — The  example  of 
Peter,  supported  by  the  teaching  of 
Christ  (Matt,  xviii.  15-18),  Paul(l  Cor. 
v.  2-7  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  6  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  6  ; 
Tit.  iii.  10),  and  John  (2  John  10). 

122 


III.  Its  effect.— When  faithfully 
and  lovingly  administered  mostly  good  ; 
if  not  to  the  offending  party  salutary, 
to  the  Church  and  the  world  mostly 
impressive  and  instructive. 

Vers.  1-11.  The  Sevenfold  Union  of 
Ananias  and  Sapphira. 

I.  United  in  marriage. — Husband 
and  wife. 

II.  United  in  profession.  —  Both 
members  of  the  Church. 

III.  United  in  liberality.  —  Both 
agreed  to  give  a  contribution  to  the 
Church  fund. 

IV.  United  in  sin. — Their  plot  was 
devised  and  acted  on  in  concert  with 
each  other. 

V.  United  in  detection. — Both  were 
found  out  at  the  same  time  and  by  the 
same  apostle. 

VI.  United  in  punishment. — Both 
were  visited  with  death. 

VII.  United  in  infamy. — Both  serve 
as  a  memorial  and  warning  to  future 
ages. 

The  Love  of  Money,  as  exemplified  in 
Ananias  and  Sapphira. 

I.  It  impaired  their  Christian  cha- 
racters.— Assuming  them  to  have  been 
genuine  disciples,  it  certainly  prevented 
them  from  rising  to  any  height  in  the 
religious  life,  if  it  did  not  utterly 
extinguish  grace  within  their  hearts. 
Alongside  of  the  love  of  Mammon  the 
love  of  God  cannot  thrive  (Matt.  vi.  24). 

II.  It  maintained  its  hold  upon  them, 
notwithstanding  their  privileges. — 
They  had  probably  witnessed  the 
wonders  of  Pentecost,  beheld  the  heal- 
ing of  the  lame  man,  listened  to  Peter's 
sermons,  enjoyed  the  fellowship  of  the 
disciples,  perhaps  themselves  led  the 
prayers  of  the  congregation  ;  and  yet 
this  deeply  seated  vice,  the  passion  for 
money,  kept  its  ground. 

III.  It  impelled  them  to  a  course  of 
heinous  sin. — To  avarice,  to  deception, 
to  hypocrisy,  to  vainglory,  to  lies,  to 
pretence  and  ostentation — a  pitiable 
crop  of  evil  to  come  to  harvest  in 
Christian  souls.  "  The  love  of  money 
is  the  root  of  every  kind  of  evil " 
(1  Tim.  vi.  10). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  V. 


IV.  It  involved  them  in  an  awful 
doom.  —  Detection,  exposure,  death, 
infamy.  "They  that  will  be  rich," 
etc.  (1  Tim.  vi.  9).  For  other  examples 
of  the  love  of  money  see  Simon  Magus 
(viii.  18-23),  the  Sorcerers  (xvi.  19), 
Demetrius  (xix.  24-27),  Felix  xxiv.  26). 

The  sin  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira. 

I.  The  character  of  the  sin. — It  was 
not  simple  falsehood.  The  common 
practice  of  holding  it  up  before 
children,  as  an  illustration  of  the  guilt 
and  danger  of  lying,  has  no  warrant  to 
justify  it.  Their  sin  was  the  attempt 
to  deceive  and  defraud  God.  Many  a 
man  since  has  ventured  upon  the  same 
experiment.  In  every  community 
there  are  some  who  are  so  convinced  of 
the  worth  of  religion  that  they  desire 
to  share  in  its  blessings.  They  out- 
wardly embrace  the  Christian  faith; 
they  unite  with  the  Church ;  they  are 
measurably  careful  in  the  discharge  of 
routine  duties.  Neither  their  conduct 
nor  their  neglect  is  such  as  to  subject 
them  to  discipline ;  and  yet,  while 
conceding  so  much,  they  are  far  from 
having  made  a  complete  surrender  of 
themselves  to  God.  Their  religious 
life  is  a  perpetual  attempt  at  con- 
promise.  The  bulk  of  their  time  and 
energy  is  devoted  to  self  and  the  world  ; 
the  dust  and  sweepings  are  offered 
to  God.  Ananias  in  broadcloth  and 
Sapphira  in  silk  sit  in  the  churches 
every  Sabbath.  They  call  themselves 
disciples,  and  pride  themselves  on  their 
consistency ;  but  both  the  name  they 
assume  and  the  boast  they  make  is 
a  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  keep 
back  a  part,  and  the  greater  part,  of 
the  price  of  discipleship. 

II.  The  origin  of  the  sin. — In 
general  phrase,  we  may  say  that  it 
was  due  to  an  evil  heart,  but  its  specific 
root  was  the  love  of  money.  In  our 
day,  when  men  are  called  to  choose 
between  piety  and  property,  there  are 
many  who  hesitate,  prevaricate,  and 
end  with  a  compromise.  Multitudes 
of  avowed  believers  withhold  as  much 
as  possible  of  their  wealth  from  God. 
They  are  prodigal  in  their  prayers  and 


hymns  and  exhortations,  but  close- 
handed  with  their  money.  Like  the 
tree  in  the  ancient  legend,  which 
uttered  a  moan  and  bled  whenever  a 
twig  was  broken  off,  those  who  call 
themselves  Christian  men  writhe  and 
suffer  when  forced  to  anything  like  a 
liberal  surrender  of  their  worldly 
substance  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
salvation  of  men.  The  old  poison  of 
avarice  is  still  in  the  veins  of  the 
Church. 

III.  The  discovery  of  the  sin. — It 
seemed  unlikely  that  the  transaction 
would  be  made  public.  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  would  not  circulate  the  story 
of  what  they  had  done.  There  was 
apparently  no  way  in  which  the  affair 
could  become  known.  So,  doubtless, 
these  deceivers  reasoned.  But  there 
was  an  uncalculated  factor  in  the 
equation.  There  was  a  spiritual  side 
to  the  matter  which  was  unreckoned. 
It  affected  the  kingdom  of  God  as  well 
as  the  real  estate  market.  It  is  a 
truth  which  men  are  slow  to  learn, 
that  there  is  a  Divine  detective  system 
in  the  universe,  by  whose  workings 
"  all  things  are  naked  and  open  to  the 
eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to 
do."  It  is  easy  to  deceive  the  world. 
Men  may  consider  us  generous,  when 
in  reality  we  are  pinched  and  small  in 
our  charities.  To  God,  this  world  is 
one  vast  whispering-gallery,  and  every 
sin  which  men  commit  reports  itself  to 
Him  ;  and  "  there  is  nothing  covered 
that  shall  not  be  revealed,  and  hid  that 
shall  not  be  known."  Men  cannot 
measure  our  consecration  to  God. 

IV.  The  punishment  of  the  sin. — 
It  was  startling  and  severe.  One 
moment  Ananias  and  Sapphira  stood 
before  the  apostle  in  the  flush  of  life 
and  health,  with  the  lie  upon  their 
lips ;  the  next  they  were  in  eternity, 
beginning  the  experience  of  its  un- 
changing awards.  The  penalty  might 
be  judged  extreme  for  a  single  sin ; 
but,  at  the  outset  of  the  Christian 
Church,  it  was  important  to  emphasise 
the  fact  that  the  liberty  of  the  Gospel 
was  not  license.  More  than  that,  the 
sin  itself  was  significant.    As  the  single 

123 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    TEE  ACTS. 


blossom  is  evidence  whether  the  stock 
from  which  it  comes  is  noxious  weed 
or  fragrant  flower,  so  this  action  was 
proof  of  a  heart  alienated  from  God  in 
its  deepest  life  and  purposes.  Such 
feeling  and  intention  was  a  hindrance 
to  the  kingdom  of  righteousness.  And 
this  punishment  was  anticipated  and 
representative.  The  judgment  con- 
tinues to  be  executed.  Men  now  who 
attempt  to  defraud  God  by  their  partial 
consecration,  by  the  much  they  spend 
on  themselves  and  the  little  they 
devote  to  Him,  are  not  beaten  down  as 
with  a  lightning-stroke ;  but,  all  the 
same  and  just  as  really,  they  die 
spiritually.  They  are  dying  at  the 
root.  The  complete  loss  of  spiritual 
life  is  only  a  question  of  time.  Atom 
by  atom  their  interest  in  Divine  things 
dissipates  ;  headland  after  headland  of 
faith  sinks  into  indistinctness  in  their 
drift  away  from  them ;  doctrine  and 
duty  lose  their  hold  on  their  acceptance 
and  conduct ;  and  at  last  they  have  a 
name  to  live  and  are  dead. — Monday 
Club  Sermons. 

Ananias  and  Sapphira. 

I.  The  sin  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira. 
— It  is  expressly  stated  to  have  been 
"  lying  unto  the  Holy  Ghost  "  (v.  3). 
It  will  be  observed  that  in  vers.  3  and 
4  the  personality  and  Deity  of  the 
Spirit  are  asserted  in  an  incidental 
way.  Peter  varies  the  charge  of  lying 
to  the  Spirit  in  the  third  verse  to  lying 
to  God  in  the  fourth.  1.  Their  act 
was  gratuitous. — In  the  community  of 
goods  which  prevailed  in  the  infant 
Church  the  rights  of  property  were 
not  obliterated ;  there  was  no  com- 
pulsory communism.  2.  It  was  marked 
by  covetousness.  There  is  a  strange 
mingling  of  discordant  elements  in 
their  act.  They  loved  the  praise  of 
men.  and  were  unwilling  to  be  held  in 
less  consideration  than  Barnabas.  But 
they  loved  money  quite  as  well,  even 
better.  Zeal  and  faith  of  some  sort 
led  them  to  profess  the  name  of  Christ, 
but  beneath  their  profession  lurked  a 
hateful  lust  for  influence  and  greed  of 
money.     3.   Unbelief  also  entered  into 

124 


and  aggravated  their  guilt.  This  had 
a  twofold  aspect.  Obviously,  they 
distrusted  God.  We  can  imagine  that 
the  failure  of  the  sustentation-fund 
was  the  subject  of  anxious  debate 
between  them.  "  Suppose  this  com- 
munity of  goods  should  become  ex- 
hausted, what  then  ?  Is  it  not  our 
duty  to  retain  some  security  against 
the  contingencies  of  the  future  ? " 
They  feared  to  endanger  their  comforts 
beyond  recall ;  a  portion  of  their 
property  would  be  safest  in  their  own 
hands.  Moreover,  there  appears  to 
have  been  a  worse  feature  than  distrust 
of  God  in  their  act.  There  was  the 
feeling,  latent,  unconfessed  mayhap, 
that  they  would  not  and  could  not  be 
detected  in  their  deed.  4.  The  sin 
was  preconcerted.  They  "  agreed  to- 
gether "  to  deceive  the  Church  and  the 
Spirit  in  the  Church.  The  plan  was 
concocted  deliberately  and  dispassion- 
ately. No  doubt  they  spent  much  time 
and  thought  in  working  out  a  device 
which  should  save  appearances  with 
the  Church  and  gratify  their  avarice. 
Together  they  contrived  the  pious 
fraud,  and  they  executed  it  together. 
This  fact  intensifies  the  criminality  of 
their  conduct.  5.  The  devil's  agency  in 
the  sin.  "Ananias,  why  hath  Satan 
filled  thine  heart  to  lie  unto  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  to  keep  back  part  of  the 
price  of  the  land  1  "  Covetousness  and 
unbelief  prompted  the  deceit,  we  might 
be  disposed  to  say.  But  the  apostle 
saw  deeper.  He  saw  that  the  devil 
had  been  joined  by  this  guilty  couple. 
Whether  consciously  or  unconsciously, 
this  wretched  pair  was  assisted  by  the 
devil  in  the  attempt  to  impose  upon 
the  Spirit  of  God.  The  device  which 
they  adopted  exposed  them  to  his 
assaults.  Had  they  been  honest  with 
themselves,  with  the  Church,  and, 
above  all,  with  God,  they  had  been 
kept  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler. 
Instead,  they  helped  him  weave  and 
spread  the  net  in  which  themselves 
were  taken.     Poor  victims  ! 

II.  Their  Punishment — it  was  in- 
stantaneous. As  their  sin  challenged 
both   the   omniscience   and  justice  of 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  V. 


God,  He  at  once  vindicated  the  holiness 
and  majesty  of  His  character.  In- 
stantly His  wrath  streamed  forth  and 
consumed  the  guilty  couple. 

III.  The  lessons  taught  by  this 
solemn  incident  are  many — a  few  of 
which  only  may  be  designated.  1 .  And 
mark   well  the  Divine  abhorrence  of 


prevarication.  2.  The  certainty  of  the 
exposure  of  hypocrisy.  God  will  un- 
mask the  hypocrite.  3.  Religious 
enthusiasm  without  grace  is  dangerous. 
People  run  fearful  risks  when  they 
profess  more  than  their  spiritual 
strength  can  carry. — W.  G.  Moorehead, 
D.D. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  12—16. 

A  Page  from  the  Church's  Life  ;  or,  the  Calm  before  a  Storm. 

I.  The  miraculous  activity  of  the  apostles. — I.  Its  scene.  (1)  Solomon's  porch, 
in  the  Temple  (see  on  iii,  11).  In  spite  of  the  Sanhedrim's  prohibitory 
menaces  the  apostles  had  returned  to  their  accustomed  post,  thus  carrying  out 
their  own  intimation  (iv.  19,  20),  and  exhibiting  praiseworthy  faith  and 
fortitude.  (2)  The  streets.  Wherever  the  apostles  were  expected  to  come  the 
sick  were  by  friends  carried  out  in  couches  and  laid  in  the  way,  that  at  least 
Peter's  shadow  might  fall  upon  them.  2.  Its  form.  (1)  Generally,  signs  and 
wonders  (see  ii.  22).  (2)  Particularly,  works  of  healing,  wonders  of  mercy 
as  distinguished  from  miracles  of  judgment  like  those  performed  on  Ananias  and 
Sapphira.  This  special  activity  in  healing  shown  by  the  apostles  was  a  manifest 
answer  to  the  Church's  prayer  (iv.  30).  3.  Its  subjects.  The  people — the 
outside  public  as  opposed  to  the  inside  brethren.  The  miracle  of  judgment  took 
place  within  the  Church ;  the  deeds  of  mercy  were  performed  among  the  un- 
believers. 4.  Its  result.  It  impressed  the  people  towards  the  new  cause,  and 
gained  accessions  from  their  ranks  to  the  Church  community. 

II.  The  rapid  growth  of  the  Church. — 1.  Multitudes  were  added  to  the  Lord. 
This  was  not  what  the  Sanhedrrsts  expected.  Doubtless  Annas  and  his 
colleagues  supposed  the  apostles,  with  their  followers,,  would  be  overawed  by  the 
display  or  authority  which  had  been  made.  Little  knew  they  that  the  apostles 
had  on  their  sides,  at  their  backs,  and  within  their  souls  a  higher  authority  and 
stronger  power  than  that  of  the  Sanhedrim  (Rom.  viii.  31).  ISTor  were  the 
Church's  accessions  flowing  in  in  smaller,  but  larger  numbers  than  before ; 
and  these  composed  not  of  women  merely,  who  might  be  regarded  as  sentimental 
and  impulsive,  but  of  men  also,  who  were  less  easily  moved  by  feeling  than  by 
judgment.  "  Men  and  women  to  make  amends  for  Ananias  and  Sapphira,"  writes 
Stier,  who  likewise  adds,  "  it  must,  of  course,  be  understood  that  when  married 
couples  were  among  these  believers,  their  children  were  included  in  the  bond  of 
union  and  were  looked  upon  as  hallowed."  2.  Through  the  preaching  of  the  word. 
It  cannot  be  inferred  that  the  apostles  only  worked  miracles,  and  did  not  teach. 
Nor  is  it  reasonable  to  hold  that  what  attracted  the  multitudes  was  the  exhibition 
of  supernatural  power  rather  than  the  unfolding  of  Christian  wisdom.  It  is  not 
the  sign  that  converts,  but  the  thing  signified.  The  Holy  Ghost  applies  not  miracles 
but  truth  to  the  heart  and  conscience  (see  John  xvi.  13,  14).  3.  In  spite  of  the 
judgment  pronounced  on  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  At  first  this  appeared  to  exercise 
a  deterrent  influence  upon  the  crowds.  Ultimately  the  word  of  God  prevailed,  and 
drew  them  over  to  the  apostles  and  to  the  Lord  in  large  companies. 

Learn. — 1.  That  no  opposition  will  hinder  a  true  minister  from  his  sacred 
calling.  2.  That  nothing  should  be  allowed  to  break  the  unity  of  a  Christian 
congregation.  3.  That  faithful  ministers  and  united  Churches  will  always  command 
the  respect  of  outside  beholders.  4.  That  so  long  as  a  Church  is  alive  with  the 
life  of  the  Holy  Spirit  it  will  grow.  5.  That  it  is  a  mistake  to  fancy  Christian 
discipline  will  frighten  people  from  joining  a  Church. 

125 


CHAP   V. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Yers.  12-14.  The  Palmy  Days  of  the 
Primitive  Church. — Then  the  Christian 
disciples  were — 

I.  United  among  themselves,  which 
they  have  never  been  since. 

II.  Magnified  by  the  people.  — 
Whereas,  alas  !  now  they  are  too  often 
despised. 

III.  Increased  from  without. — In- 
stead of  which  there  has  often  been  a 
falling  away  from  within. 

Ver.  14.  Four  Causes  of  Joy  in  a 
Christian  Church. 

I.  When  the  preaching  of  the  gospel 
results  in  making  believers. — That 
shows  the  truth  is  being  preached  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven. 

II.  When  those  who  believe  do  not 
stand  aloof  in  isolation  from  their 
Christian  brethren,  but  connect  them- 
selves with  the  fellowship  of  the  saints. 
This  is  what  is  meant  by  being  added 
to  the  Lord. 

III.  When  the  number  of  the 
Church's  converts  is  large. — No  doubt 
one  soul  is  infinitely  valuable ;  but 
special  gladness  attends  the  ingathering 
of  multitudes. 

IV.  When  the  Church's  converts 
include  persons  of  both  sexes. — Within 
the  Church  there  is  a  place  for  both 
men  and  women.  Each  has  services 
to  render  which  the  other  cannot  per- 
form. A  cause  of  regret  it  is  when 
either  of  them  stand  aloof  in  hostility 
or  indifference  towards  Christianity. 

Ver.  15.  Peter's  Shadow. 
•  I.  It  is  not  affirmed  in  the  narrative 
that  Peter's  shadow  wrought  miracles, 
though  Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons 
did  (xix.  12). — That  Peter's  shadow 
could  effect  cures  may  have  been  only 
a  notion  of  the  people,  not  of  Peter  or 
of  Luke. 

•II.  If  Peter's  shadow  wrought 
miracles,  it  was  only  instrumentally, 


wrought 


as  was  the  case  with  the  hem  of 
Christ's  garment  (Matt.  xx.  21)  and  the 
handkerchiefs  and  aprons  of  Paul. — 
Any  instrument  will  do  to  work  a 
miracle  with  when  it  is  used  by  Him 
who  can  work  equally  well  with  or 
without  an  instrument. 

III.  If  Peter's  shadow  wrought 
miracles,  the  credit  was  due  neither 
to  the  shadow  nor  to  Peter,  but  to  God, 
"  who  alone  doeth  great  wonders " 
(Psalm  cxxxvi.  4),  and  to  Christ,  from 
whom  the  healing  virtue  proceeded. 

IV.  If    Peter's    shadow 
miracles,  how  much  more  could  Peter's 
Master,    the     Risen    Christ,     do    the 
same  ! 

Note  on  Peter's  Shadow. — "  We  need 
find  no  stumbling-block  in  the  fact  of 
Peter's  shadow  having  been  believed  to 
be  (or,  as  is  surely  implied,  having 
been)  the  medium  of  working  miracles. 
Cannot  the  '  Creator  Spirit'  work  with 
any  instruments  or  with  none,  as  pleases 
Him  1  And  what  is  a  hand  or  a  voice 
more  than  a  shadow,  except  that  the 
analogy  of  the  ordinary  instrument  is 
a  greater  help  to  faith  in  the  recipient  ? 
Where  faith,  as  apparently  here,  did 
not  need  this  help,  the  less  likely 
medium  was  adopted "  ( Alford).  "Those 
who  take  offence  at  the  healing  virtue 
of  Peter's  shadow  and  of  Paul's  sweat- 
band  (xix.  12)  understand  not  the 
humane  and  condescending  gentleness 
of  God,  who  deals  with  all  who  seek 
His  help  according  to  each  one's  under- 
standing. The  shadow,  indeed,  wrought 
not  the  healing,  and  had  any  one  trusted 
in  the  overshadowing  of  a  mere  man  he 
would  assuredly  have  been  punished  by 
the  spirit -trying  apostle ;  but  the  heal- 
ing was  wrought  by  the  power  of  God, 
which  the  sick  sought  in  Peter,  who 
looked  upon  them  as  he  did  upon  the 
lame  man  (iii.  4),  and  gave  them  what 
he  had,  according  to  their  faith " 
(Besser). 


126 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  v. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS. —Verses   17-32. 

Annas  upon  the  Move  ;  01%  the  Bursting  of  the  Storm. 

I.  The  high  priest  and  the  angel  of  the  Lord. — The  high  priest's  action 
against  the  apostles  was  :  1.  Dictated  by  evil  motives.  (1)  Indignation.  If  not 
grieved  at  the  miraculous  activity  of  the  apostles  in  healing  (which  they  probably 
were)  he  and  his  associates  felt  annoyed  at  the  persistence  of  the  apostles  in 
teaching  doctrines  which  they,  the  high  priest  and  his  colleagues,  did  not  believe. 
Most  men  are  intolerant  of  beliefs  to  which  they  cannot  themselves  subscribe. 
No  matter  how  excellent  in  character  and  beneficent  in  action  other  people  may 
be,  unless  these  swear  by  their  superiors'  Shibboleths,  they  are  disliked,  if  not 
oppressed,  for  their  non-conformity.  The  Christian  Church,  to  the  amazement 
of  the  world,  has  often  followed  in  the  steps  of  the  Jewish  Sanhedrim ! 
(2)  Jealousy.  The  high  priest  and  his  associates  were  offended  at  the  growing 
influence  of  the  apostles  and  the  cause  they  represented.  Few  things  are 
harder  to  bear  with  equanimity  than  the  popularity  of  rivals  and  much  more  of 
opponents.  The  increase  of  the  apostles  in  public  esteem  meant  the  decline  of 
the  Sanhedrists  in  national  favour.  2.  Concurred  in  by  his  associates.  "  Those 
that  were  with  him  "  were  not  his  colleagues  in  the  Sanhedrim  afterwards  men- 
tioned as  the  council  (ver.  21),  but  his  co-religionists,  belonging  to  the  sect  of 
the  Sadducees.  Evil-doers  never  want  allies.  The  difficulty  has  ever  been  to 
find  fellow-helpers  in  good.  3.  Observed  by  an  unseen  eye.  The  Lord  noticed  the 
angry  feelings  of  the  high  priest,  his  rising  indignation  and  jealousy,  the  secret 
confabulations  between  him  and  his  associates,  the  order  issued  for  the  arrest  of 
the  apostles,  the  execution  of  that  order  by  the  officers  of  the  Sanhedrim,  and  the 
consignment  of  the  servants  of  Jesus  to  the  public  ward.  "  All  things  are  naked 
and  manifest  unto  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do"  (Heb.  iv.  13; 
compare  i.  24  ;  Rev.  ii.  18,  23).  4.  Counterworked  by  an  invisible  agent.  "  An 
angel  of  the  Lord,"  celestial  intelligences  being  all  subject  to  the  exalted  Christ 
(1  Peter  hi.  22  ;  Rev.  xxii.  16),  visited  the  prison  by  night  at  his  King's  command 
(Heb.  i.  14),  opened  its  doors,  as  he  or  another  (xii.  7)  afterwards  did  to  Peter, 
and  having  fetched  them  out  commanded  them  to  resume  teaching  in  the  temple. 
When  Christ  and  His  battalions  take  the  field  against  confederacies  of  evil, 
whether  human  or  angelic,  these  are  sure  to  be  overthrown  and  their  projects 
scattered  to  the  winds  (Psalm  ii.  4,  5). 

II.  The  high  priest  and  the  senate  of  Israel. — Having  effected  the  arrest  of 
the  apostles,  the  high  priest  and  his  confederates  convened  a  meeting  of  the 
Sanhedrim  or  High  Ecclesiastical  Council.  1.  WJien?  At  daybreak,  about 
6  a.m.,  before  which  hour  a  meeting  of  the  court  could  not  be  held, — about  the 
time  when  the  apostles  had  resumed  their  public  exhortations  in  the  temple. 

2.  Why  ?  To  try  the  prisoners  who  on  the  preceding  night  had  been  committed 
to  the  cells,  and  were  now  to  be  fetched  from  confinement  and  placed  at  the  bar. 
3.  In  what  spirit  ?  With  a  firm  determination  to  put  down  the  nuisance  of  teaching 
in  the  temple  porch  about  Jesus  and  the  resurrection.  Thousands  of  civic  and 
ecclesiastical  rulers  since  then  have  attempted  to  do  the  like,  and  with  as  little 
success.  Upon  the  whole  the  world's  potentates  (and  sometimes  also  the  Church's 
rulers)  do  not  relish  preaching  that  talks  about  Jesus  and  the  resurrection. 

III.  The  high  priest  and  his  apparitors.  —1.  The  bootless  errand.  Commissioned 
to  fetch  the  apostles,  the  officers  of  the  Sanhedrim  repaired  to  the  prison  house 
and  found  it  shut,  with  the  warders  at  their  posts.  Having  opened  its  massive 
gates  and  penetrated  to  the  interior,  to  their  astonishment  they  discovered  no 
man  within.  However  they  had  escaped  the  prisoners  were  gone.  2.  The 
perplexed  judges.     When  the  officers  returned  with  their  tale,  the  high  priest,  the 

127 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


captain  of  the  temple,  and  the  chief  priests  were  filled  with  terror.  "  Thus  con- 
science doth  make  cowards  of  us  all."  They  could  not  tell  what  to  make  of  it. 
What  the  upshot  of  this  incident  might  be  they  could  not  predict.  Not  for  an 
instant  dreamt  they  of  treachery  on  the  part  of  the  gaolers  ;  they  discerned  that 
it  was  a  miracle  by  which  they  were  confronted,  and  they  feared.  3.  The 
startling  announcement.  Whilst  pondering  the  situation,  they  became  further 
dismayed  by  the  exciting  news,  reported  by  a  messenger,  that  the  men  wanted 
had  resumed  their  old  work  of  preaching  in  the  temple.  This  must  have  strongly 
confirmed  the  Sanhedrists'  suspicion  that  the  escape  from  prison  had  been  effected 
by  supernatural  means.  Prisoners  who  had  attained  liberty  by  treachery  would 
hardly  have  returned  to  their  accustomed  haunts.  The  fact  that  the  apostles 
were  again  preaching  in  the  temple  indicated  they  had  some  superior  authority 
at  their  backs.  4.  The  second  apprehension.  The  captain  of  the  temple  and  the 
officers  of  the  Sanhedrim,  having  renewed  endeavours  to  arrest  the  preachers, 
used  no  violence  on  this  occasion  because  of  secret  alarms  for  their  own  safety, 
the  people  being  on  the  side  of  the  apostles.  Nor  was  violence  required,  since  the 
apostles  offered  no  resistance — in  this  following  both  the  teaching  (Matt.  v.  39) 
and  example  (John  xviii.  8)  of  their  Master. 

IV.  The  high  priest  and  the  apostles. — 1  The  accusation.  Set  before  the 
council,  the  apostles  were  charged  by  the  president,  in  the  name  of  his  colleagues, 
with  three  crimes:  (1)  With  having  disobeyed  the  instructions  given  by  the 
court  at  a  previous  sederunt.  A  grave  offence  had  the  court's  orders  been  just, 
and  dangerous  considering  the  men  who  composed  (iv.  5,  6)  the  court,  and  the 
temper  in  which  these  then  were  (ver.17).  (2)  With  having  filled  Jerusalem  with 
their  teaching,  an  indirect  admission  of,  and  unwilling  testimony  to,  the  growing 
popularity  of  the  new  religion,  as  well  as  of  the  unwearied  assiduity  of  its 
teachers  in  promulgating  their  tenets.  (3)  With  seeking  to  fix  on  them,  the 
Sanhedrists,  the  guilt  of  their  Master's  murder.  This  was  putting  into  words 
what  the  councillors'  own  hearts  kept  whispering.  Conscience  is  ill  to  silence 
even  in  the  worst  and  most  ignorant  of  men ;  how  much  more  in  men  who  are 
good  (after  a  fashion)  and  enlightened  1  2.  The  defence.  Offered  by  Peter  and 
the  apostles,  or  by  him  on  their  behalf  and  with  their  concurrence.  (1)  A  great 
principle  restated.  That  it  was  their  (the  apostles'  and  every  one's)  duty  to  obey 
God  rather  than  man.  Of  this  principle  they  had  reminded  the  court  on  a  former 
occasion  (iv.  19),  and  now  satisfy  themselves  with  its  repetition.  About  the  secord 
and  third  charges,  which,  being  true,  needed  no  defence,  they  are  silent,  confining 
their  remarks  to  the  one  which,  though  also  true,  required  justification.  And  the 
justification  they  offered  was  short,  simple,  sufficient,  and  unanswerable.  (2)  A 
great  story  rehearsed,  in  four  parts.  First,  that  they  had  slain  Jesus  by  hanging 
Him  on  a  tree — they,  the  Jewish  nation  in  general,  and  the  Sanhedrists  in  parti- 
cular. Peter  and  his  fellow-apostles  had  manifestly  lost  nothing  of  their  boldness 
and  plain-speaking  since  last  they  stood  before  their  accusers.  Second,  that  the 
God  of  their  fathers  had  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  (once  more  the  obnoxious 
doctrine  !),  and  exalted  Him  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high  (a  claim 
for  divine  dignity  to  the  man  they  had  slain  !).  Third,  that  Christ  had  been 
exalted  as  Prince  and  Saviour,  from  which  it  could  be  gathered  that  they  had 
totally  misconceived  His  character  and  mistaken  His  person.  Fourth,  that  the 
grand  object  contemplated  by  His  exaltation  was  that  He  might  give  repentance 
unto  Israel  (them  and  the  people)  and  remission  of  sins.  A  strong  pressing 
home  of  guilt  on  His  accusers.  (3)  A  great  claim  reasserted.  That  they,  the 
accused,  were  witnesses  of  these  facts  and  doctrines  complained  of — witnesses 
appointed  and  put  forth  by  Him,  and  for  Him,  and  therefore  His  witnesses 
responsible  to  Him  alone.  Yea,  going  beyond  this,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  jointly 
witnessed  with  them,  since,  having  been  given  to  them  by  God  and  dwelling  in 

128 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  V. 


through 


them  in  the  words  they  uttered  and  the 


them,  He  spoke  and  acted 
miracles  they  wrought. 

Learn. — 1.  That  "  the  angel  of  the  Lord  encampsth  round  about  them  that  fear 
Him,  and  delivereth  them  "  (Psalm  xxxiv.  7).  2.  That  "  He  who  sitteth  in  the 
heavens  "  laughs  at  His  enemies  and  has  them  "  in  derision  "  (Psalm  ii.  4).  3.  That 
the  doubts  of  the  chief  priests  as  to  whereunto  this  (Christianity)  would  grow 
have  been  largely  answered — the  faith  planted  by  the  apostles  intends  to  grow 
till  it  fills  the  whole  earth  (Luke  xiii.  21).  4.  That  nothing  can  release  from 
responsibility  to  God  (Eccl.  xii.  13).  5.  That  Christ  will  pardon  even  His 
greatest  enemies  if  they  repent. 


HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  17.  Misdirected  Indignation. 

I.  Against  the  publication  of  the 
truth,  rather  than  against  the  dis- 
semination of  error. 

II.  Against  well  doing,  instead  of 
against  evil  doing. 

III.  Against  good  men,  and  not 
against  bad. 

IV.  Against  other  people's  supposed 
wickedness,  and  not  against  one's  own 
real  sins. 

Ver.  19.  Ministering  Spirits. — The 
angels  of  God  are  represented  in  Scrip- 
ture, and  in  this  instance  appear — 

I.  As  the  friends  of  the  righteous. 
— Shown  by  the  service  rendered  to 
the  apostles. 

II.  As  watchers  in  the  night. — 
Proved  by  the  observation  taken  of 
the  apostles'  incarceration. 

III.  As  rescuers  from  trouble. — 
Seen  in  the  opening  of  the  prison  doors, 
and  liberation  of  the  prisoners. 

IV.  As  directors  in  the  way  of 
duty. — Exemplified  by  the  order  given 
to  the  liberated  apostles. 

V.  As  messengers  of  the  heavenly 
life  to  the  world. — Suggested  by  the 
commission  put  into  the  hands  of  the 
apostles. 

VI.  As  conveyers  to  the  heavenly 
life  and  eternal  joy. — Evinced  by  the 
interest  taken  in  the  gospel  of  life. — 
Compiled  from  Lange. 

Ver.  20.  The  Preacher's  Commission. 

I.  His  authority. — The  divine  com- 
mandment— "  Go  ye  ! " 

II.  His  vocation. — To  "  speak,"  not 
to  write,  but  to  proclaim  with  the  voice. 


III.  His  sphere. — The  temple;  or, 
in  New  Testament  times  the  Christian 
Church. 

IV.  His  theme. — All  the  words  of 
this  life — the  gospel,  the  whole  gospel, 
and  nothing  but  the  gospel. 

V.  His  audience. — "  The  people,"  to 
believers  and  unbelievers ;  to  the  former 
for  edification,  to  the  latter  for  con- 
version. 

Ver.  23.  The  World's  Veto  upon 
Preaching. 

I.  Unreasonable. — To  expect  men  to 
keep  silence  who  have  been  commanded 
by  Christ  to  speak,  who  know  what 
they  speak  to  be  true,  and  who  feel 
themselves  impelled  to  speak  by  the 
inner  voice  of  conscience. 

II.  Unjust. — To  command  men  to 
desist  from  poaching  is  to  invade  the 
domain  of  conscience  which  belongs 
alone  to  Christ,  and  is  therefore  in  the 
highest  degree  culpable  and  repre- 
hensible. 

III.  Unkind. — To  impose  silence  upon 
men  who  offer  mankind  the  highest 
conceivable  blessing  (repentance  and 
remission  of  sins)  on  the  easiest  possible 
terms  (faith  in  and  obedience  to  Jesus 
Christ)  is  surely  the  opposite  of  bene- 
volent. 

IV.  Unsuccessful. — Those  who  at- 
tempt to  put  down  preaching  never 
really  succeed.  So  long  as  Christ 
lives  and  reigns  they  never  will  suc- 
ceed. All  interdicts  upon  the  gospel 
break  down.  The  more  men  are 
punished  for  preaching,  the  hotter 
grows  their  zeal  to  persist  in  the 
forbidden  work. 

t  129 


CHAP.  V. 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   THE  ACTS. 


Ver.  29.   Obedience  to  God  and  Man. 

I.  It  is  possible  to  obey  man  rather 
than  God — which  is  sin.  Unfortunately 
this  is  often  done,  when  inclination  and 
supposed  self-interest  side  with  man's 
orders  rather  than  with  God's. 

II.  It  is  proper  to  obey  God  rather 
than  man — which  is  duty.  Proper  in 
the  sense  of  right,  when  God's  orders 
and  man's  come  into  collision,  man 
being  a  creature  who  is  himself  under 
authority  to  God. 

III.  It  is  practicable  to  obey  man 
as  well  as  God — which  is  both  desirable 
and  dutiful,  when  man's  orders  are  not 
countermanded  by  God's. 

The  Power  of  the  Civil  Magistrate. 

I.  Its  source. — God  (Rom.  xiii.  1). 
Civil  government  a  natural  institution 
and  divine  ordinance. 

II.  Its  sphere. — Civil  affairs,  or  men 
considered  solely  as  citizens.  Things 
temporal  and  material,  social  and 
political. 

III.  Its  limitations. — 1.  Into  the 
domain  of  conscience,  and  that  signifies 
into  the  realm  of  religion  it  dare  not 
intrude.  2.  Even  in  its  own  sphere 
it  is  forbidden  to  enjoin  anything 
which  contravenes  the  law  of  God. 
3.  The  power  of  the  sword,  or  the 
infliction  of  pains  and  penalties,  is 
permissible  solely  within  its  own  specific 
province. 

IV.  Its  guide.— 1.  The  light  of  the 
natural  conscience.  2.  The  teachings 
of  revelation  so  far  as  these  bear  on 
the  duties  of  magistrates  and  citizens. 

Yer.  32.  The  Witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I.  The  subject  of  His  witness. — 
"These  things."  The  facts  of  Christ's 
death,  resurrection,  and  exaltation,  and 
the  doctrines  founded  on  and  connected 
with  them. 

II.  The  medium  of  His  witness. — 
"  Those  who  obey  Him,"  the  Holy 
Ghost,  by  believing  the  gospel ;  whom 
He  thereupon  inhabits,  and  through 
whom  He  delivers  His  testimony. 

III.  The  object  of  His  witness. — 
The  unbelieving  world  who,  by  be- 
holding  the   faith   of   Christians   and 

130 


listening  to  their  testimony,  are  fre- 
quently brought  to  believe. 

The  Gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I.  The  Author  of  this  gift.— God, 
the  Father,  from  whom  the  Holy 
Ghost  proceedeth.  No  contradiction 
to  ii.  33. 

II.  The  recipients  of  this  gift. — 
Those  who  obey  God,  who  commands 
men  to  repent  and  believe  upon  His 
Son. 

III.  The  nature  of  this  gift. — An 
inhabitation  of  the  repenting  and  be- 
lieving heart  by  the  gracious  influences 
of  the  Divine  Spirit. 

IV.  The  object  of  this  gift.— To 
enable  those  who  receive  it  to  witness 
for  Jesus  Christ. 

Vers.  17-32.  The  Fortunes  of  the 
Twelve. 

I.  Incarcerated  by  the  Sanhedrim. 
— A  signal  honour  to  suffer  affliction 
for  Christ's  sake. 

II.  Delivered  by  an  angel. — "  Are 
they  not  all  ministering  spirits  ?  "  etc. 

III.  Honoured  by  the  people. — 
These  at  this  time  heard  the  apostles 
gladly.  Popular  favour  not  always  a 
good  sign.     Here,  however,  it  was. 

IV.  Supported  by  the  Holy  Spirit. — 
A  proof  that  they  were  obeying  His 
directions. 

Vers.  17-32.  The  Sanhedrim  and  the 
College  of  the  Apostles. 

In  considering  the  lessons  to  be 
drawn  from  this  history  we  see — 

I.  How  God  overrules  persecution 
and  opposition  for  the  good  of  His 
Church. — It  seemed  indeed  a  dark  hour 
for  the  cause  of  Christ  when  all  of  the 
apostles  were  shut  up  in  the  common 
prison,  and  left,  apparently,  in  the 
power  of  their  bitterest  enemies. 

II.  This  history  shows  us  rational- 
ism confounded. — Just  when  rational- 
ism thought  to  put  down  the  super- 
natural, lo !  it  appears  in  a  new 
manifestation  before  them.  There 
was  evidently  a  power  working  for 
these  apostles  which  prison-walls, 
bolts,  bars,  and  guards  of  soldiers  could 
not   restrain.      The  perplexity  of  the 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  v. 


council  is  further  increased  when  one  of  Jesus  upon  the  Sanhedrim.  To  the 
came  saying,  "  Behold,  the  men  whom  first  Peter  replies,  "  We  ought  to 
ye  put  in  prison  are  standing  in  the  obey  God  rather  than  men."  This  was 
temple,  and  teaching  the  people."  It  their  justification  for  the  disobedience 
was  this  conduct,  as  much  as  the  charged.  In  answer  to  the  second  he 
strangeness  of  their  deliverance,  that  fearlessly  tells  the  Sanhedrim  their 
impressed  the  senate.  Then,  as  often  guilt,  and  charges  upon  them  the  death 
since,  men  were  made  to  see  that  there  of  Jesus.  It  is  most  significant  that 
is  a  hidden,  spiritual  force  about  the  in  the  defence  which  Peter  makes,  as 
gospel  which  cannot  be  accounted  for,  indeed  in  all  apostolic  preaching, 
save  on  the  ground  that  the  life  of  special  prominence  is  given  to  the  re- 
Christ  is  in  it.  surrection   of   the    Lord   Jesus.      The 

III.  We  can  also  learn  from  this  apostle  well  knew  that  the  larger 
that  the  enemies  of  the  gospel  are  portion  of  the  Sanhedrim  was  of  the 
made  to  fear  and  respect  those  who  are  sect  of  the  Sadducees,  yet  he  does  not 
fearless  in  proclaiming  it.  hesitate  in  his  testimony.     There  are 

IV.  Finally,  we  have  in  this  history  three  great  indestructible  facts  that 
Peter's  address  to  the  Sanhedrim. — It  have  remained  all  through  the  ages 
is  the  jewel  of  which  all  the  rest  is  as  witnesses  to  the  reality  of  the  re- 
only  the  casket.  As  a  defence  nothing  surrection.  The  first  is  the  testimony  of 
could  be  more  admirable  and  to  the  the  apostles  ;  the  second  is  the  Christian 
point  than  the  words  of  Peter.  The  Church ;  the  third  is  the  ministry  of 
specifications  in  the  indictment  against  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  proof  which  they 
the  apostles  were  two  :  first,  that  they  furnish  is  conclusive,  and  we  may  rest 
had  disobeyed  the  lawful  authority  in  assured  that  our  holy  faith,  so  glorious 
continuing  to  preach  after  they  had  in  the  hopes  which  it  inspires  and  so 
been  strictly  charged  to  speak  no  more  wonderful  in  the  destiny  which  it  opens 
in  the  name  of  Jesus ;  second,  that  for  sinful  men,  is  founded  upon  the 
by  their  preaching  they  were  stirring  ROCK. — S.  J.  Niccolls,  D.D. 

up  the  people  to  avenge  the  crucifixion 

HOMILETICAL    ANALYSIS.— Verses   33-42. 

Gamaliel  and  his  Colleagues  ;  or,  a  Friend  at  Court. 

I.  The  person  of  Gamaliel. — 1.  His  name.  Borne  by  more  than  one  celebrated 
scribe  of  the  first  and  second  centuries  after  Christ,  this  name — meaning 
"Benefit  of  God"  (Numb.  i.  10,  ii.  20,  vii.  54)— belonged  first  to  Rabbi 
Gamaliel,  the  elder  Hillel's  grandson;  Gamaliel  the  younger  flourished  about 
80-118  a.d.  The  former,  in  all  probability,  the  individual  referred  to  by  Luke. 
2.  His  profession.  (1)  A  member  of  the  Sanhedrim — "  one  in  the  council  "  ; 
hardly  its  president  (the  Talmud).  (2)  A  Pharisee,  one  of  the  straitest  sects  of 
religionists  in  Jerusalem,  who  differed  from  the  Sadducees  in  holding  the  doctrine 
of  a  resurrection,  and  outdid  these  in  extravagant  adherence  to  the  letter  of  the 
Mosaic  Law.  (3)  A  scribe  or  doctor  of  the  law,  virtually  a  professor  of  theology 
like  his  grandfather  Hillel  and  his  father  Simon  (said  to  be,  but  hardly  likely, 
the  Simeon  of  Luke  ii.  25),  whom  he  succeeded.  He  is  reported  to  have  had 
one  thousand  scholars,  of  whom  five  hundred  studied  the  law,  and  five  hundred 
Greek  wisdom  (Talmud) — a  statement  which,  if  it  could  be  depended  on,  would 
shed  an  interesting  light  on  Paul's  knowledge  of  the  Greek  poets.  (See  Riehm's 
Handwbrterbuch  des  Biblischen  Altertums,  art.  Gamaliel).  3.  His  renown. 
"  Had  in  reputation  among  all  the  people,"  also  among  his  colleagues,  for  his  zeal 
as  a  Pharisee,  his  learning  as  a  teacher,  and  his  charity  as  a  man.  In  corrobo- 
ration of  the  first  may  be  mentioned  that  when  he  died  men  said  reverence  for 
the  law,  purity,  and  continence  had  perished  ;  the  best  certificates  of  the  second 

131 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


were  his  brilliant  scholars,  Onkelos  the  Targumist  and  Saul  of  Tarsus  (xxii.  3) ; 
the  third  his  counsel  to  the  Sanhedrists  attested.  4.  His  history.  According  to 
Christian  tradition  he  embraced  Christianity,  and,  along  with  his  son  Ahib  and 
Nicoclemus,  was  baptised  by  Peter  and  John,  the  Clementine  Recognitions  even 
affirming  that  at  this  time  he  was  a  secret  disciple.  This  statement,  however, 
Jewish  tradition  declines  to  verify,  making  him  die  a  Pharisee  eighteen  years 
before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem. 

II.  The  advice  of  Gamaliel. — 1.  His  recommendations.  Two  things  he  urged 
upon  his  colleagues.  (1)  Caution.  To  "take  heed  to  themselves  with  regard  to 
the  apostles  what  they  intended  to  do."  Always  commendable,  even  in  a  right 
course,  circumspection  and  prudence  are  specially  desirable  when  the  path 
inviting  entrance  is  dubious  and  dangerous,  not  to  say  wrong.  To  look  well 
before  one  leaps  is  a  safe  maxim.  (2)  Tolerance.  To  hold  their  hands  and  let 
the  apostles  alone.  If  they  could  not  help  their  prisoners'  cause,  at  least 
they  should  not  hinder  it.  "  Neither  punish  them  for  what  they  have  done  nor 
restrain  them  for  the  future.  Connive  at  them-^let  them  take  their  course — let 
not  our  hand  be  upon  them  "  (Henry).  This,  the  least  the  truth  has  a  right  to 
expect  and  receive  at  the  hands  of  men.  2.  His  arguments.  Also  two  :  one  for 
each  recommendation.  (1)  One  for  the  caution,  this,  drawn  from  past  experience, 
that  possibly  need  would  not  arise  for  action  in  the  matter,  as  the  present  move- 
ment would  most  likely  run  the  course  of  other  popular  agitations  which  in  former 
times  had  suddenly  sprung  up,  flourished  for  a  season,  and  eventually  subsided. 
One  such  had  been  the  insurrection  of  Theudas.  {Note.  This  Theudas  was 
not  the  revolutionary  of  that  name  in  the  reign  of  Claudius,  and  under  the 
procuratorship  of  Cuspius  Fadus  a.d.  44,  ten  or  twelve  years  after  this  speech 
of  Gamaliel  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XX.  v.  1),  but  either  another  of  the  same  name,  which 
was  common,  who  had  figured  in  the  public  gaze  shortly  before ;  or  the  Judas, 
who,  after  Herod's  death,  led  a  robber  band  against  the  palace  of  Sepphoris 
in  Galilee  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XVII.  x.  5),  Judas,  according  to  Matt.  x.  3  ;  Luke  vi.  16, 
being  interchangeable  with  Thaddeus  or  Theudas ;  or  the  Simon  (Jos.,  Ant., 
XVII.  x.  6),  one  of  Herod's  slaves,  who  got  himself  proclaimed  king,  burnt 
down  the  royal  palace  at  Jericho,  with  others  of  the  king's  houses  throughout 
the  land,  but  eventually  was  captured  and  beheaded — it  being  supposed 
(Sonntag,  see  Hackett)  that  Theudas  was  a  title  Simon  had  assumed  on 
pretending  to  royal  dignity).  Another  of  these  abortive  insurrections  was  that 
headed  by  Judas  of  Galilee  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XX.  v.  2;  Wars,  II.  viii.  1),  called  also 
a  Gaulonite — i.e.,  an  inhabitant  of  the  district  east  of  Galilee  (Jos.,  Ant,  XVIII. 
i.  1),  who,  in  the  days  of  the  taxing,  or  enrolment — i.e.,  registration  of  persons 
and  property  with  a  view  to  taxation,  conducted  under  Cyrenius  (Luke  ii.  2), 
raised  a  revolt  against  Rome  which  attracted  numerous  supporters,  but  terminated 
in  failure,  he  himself  getting  killed  and  his  followers  dispersed.  One  of  these 
followers  is  believed  (but  without  foundation)  to  have  been  Simon  the  Canaanite, 
or  Simon  Zelotes,  the  apostle.  (2)  For  the  tolerance  this,  derived  from  reflection, 
that  "  resistance  was  either  needless  or  hopeless  "  (Plumptre),  that  the  movement, 
if  of  men,  would  sooner  or  later  collapse,  while  if  of  God,  it  would  defy  all 
attempts  at  overthrow,  while  those  who  opposed  it  would  be  guilty  of  fighting 
against  God.  If  the  first  jJart  of  this  argument  sprang  from  timidity,  the  second 
was  the  outcome  of  sober  judgment.  If  God  was  behind  the  apostles  it  would  be 
fruitless  and  dangerous  to  stand  before  them.  3.  His  motives.  Various  have 
been  suggested.  (1)  A  secret  conviction  that  the  movement  was  of  God,  though 
as  yet  not  prepared  to  act  on  this  conviction  and  espouse  it  boldly.  According  to 
this  view  (which,  however,  is  pure  conjecture),  Gamaliel  was  a  secret  disciple 
like  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  probably  one  of  "  the  great  company 
of  priests  "  who  soon  after  "  became  obedient  to  the  faith  "  (vi.  7).     (2)  A  latent 

132 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  v. 


sympathy  with  the  apostle's  doctrine  concerning  Jesus,  arising  from  the  fact  of 
his  being  a  Pharisee,  and  therefore  a  believer  in  the  resurrection,  and  from  the 
probable  circumstance  of  His  having  sat  among  the  doctors  whom  Jesus,  when 
a  boy,  questioned  in  the  temple  (Luke  ii.  46).  (3)  A  perceptible  leaning  to  the 
sentiments  of  his  two  colleagues,  JSTicodemus  who  once  advised  that  Christ  should 
be  let  alone  (John  vii.  50,  51),  and  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  who  consented  not  to 
the  counsel  and  deed  of  Oaiaphas  (Luke  xxiii.  51).  (4)  Discernment  to  perceive 
that  if  the  movement  was  purely  fanatical,  it  would  not  be  suppressed  but  only 
rendered  more  violent  by  opposition. 

III.  The  success  of  Gamaliel. — His  advice  prevailed.  1.  To  all  appearance 
unanimously.  At  least  no  opposition  was  offered  to  his  cautious  counsel. 
Having  a  majority  in  their  favour,  his  sentiments  were  accepted  without  a  division, 
and  became  the  finding  of  the  court.  Yet  2.  Not  altogether  wholly.  Though 
persuaded  to  depart  from  their  murderous  intention  (ver.  33)  and  to  spare  their 
prisoners'  lives,  his  colleagues  could  not  appease  their  rage  without  inflicting  on 
the  apostles  some  punishment.  Perhaps,  also,  they  felt  that  something  must  be 
done  on  the  one  hand  to  justify  their  interference  with  the  apostles'  liberty,  and  on 
the  other  hand  to  express  their  displeasure  at  the  apostles'  disobedience.  Accord- 
ingly they  beat  or  scourged  the  apostles  as  Christ  had  been  (John  xix.  1),  and  as 
Paul  afterwards  was  scourged  on  five  occasions  (2  Cor.  xi.  24).  The  scourge  was 
a  whip  of  two  lashes,  "  knotted  with  bones  or  heavy  indented  circles  of  bronze, 
or  terminated  by  hooks,  in  which  case  it  was  aptly  denominated  a  scorpion  " 
(quoted  by  Hackett).  Still,  3.  To  all  intents  effectually.  Charged  not  to  speak 
in  the  name  of  Jesus — a  useless  rehearsal  of  a  useless  interdict  which  they  could 
not  obey  (iv.  20),  the  apostles  were  forthwith  dismissed,  no  doubt  reluctantly,  their 
judges  inwardly  feeling  they  would  rather  have  incarcerated  permanently,  or 
killed  off  finally  such  obnoxious  persons  as  the  apostles  were  supposed  to  be,  but 
yet  really  so  that  they  "  departed  from  the  presence  of  the  council,"  and  on  their 
part  triumphantly,  rejoicing  they  had  been  counted  worthy  to  suffer  dishonour 
for  the  name  of  Him  whom  they  served,  in  whom  they  believed,  and  of  whom 
they  witnessed,  and  permanently  so  that  "  every  day  in  the  temple  and  at  home 
they  ceased  not  to  teach  and  to  preach  Jesus  as  the  Christ." 

Learn. — 1.  That  God  can  raise  up  champions  to  speak  for  His  people  and  de- 
fend His  cause  in  the  most  unlikely  places  and  at  the  most  unlikely  times. 
Examples  :  Moses  at  the  court  of  Pharaoh ;  Elijah  in  the  days  of  Ahab  ;  John 
the  Baptist  in  the  reign  of  Herod.  Luther,  Latimer,  Knox.  2.  That  good  men 
generally  carry  with  them  an  influence  for  good  which  weighs  with  and  tells  upon 
their  contemporaries.  Witness  Samuel  and  Daniel  in  Old  Testament  times ; 
Nicodemus  and  Gamaliel  in  the  Sanhedrim.  3.  That  God's  servants  may 
always  comfort  themselves  with  the  reflection  that  His  cause  is  invincible. 
Emblem  :  the  bush  burning  yet  not  consumed.  4.  That  those  who  fight  against 
God  are  engaged  in  a  losing  battle  (Isa.  xxvii.  4).  5.  That  God's  servants  and 
Christ's  followers  may  suffer  wrong,  and  yet  the  cause  for  which  they  suffer  win 
'the  day.  6.  That  to  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake  is  the  highest  honour  a 
Christian  can  enjoy  on  earth  (Matt.  v.  10 ;  1  Peter  iv.  16).  7.  That  always  and 
'everywhere  Christians  should  publish  the  name  of  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  or 
;  Anointed  King  and  Saviour  of  mankind. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  36.    The  World's  Somebodies. —  Vers.  38,  39.  Gamaliel 's  counsel. 

Are  not  unfrequently. — 1.  Pretentious  I.  The   good   advice    it    contained, 

nobodies.  2.  Worthless  impostors.  3.  Ar-  ] .    To     abstain     from     injuring     the 

rogant  deceivers.    4.  Disastrous  leaders,  apostles  or  hindering  the   cause  they 

133 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


advocated.  This  was  practically  a 
dissuasive  against  persecution.  2.  To 
wait  with  patience  for  the  decision 
which  Providence  would  ultimately 
give  on  this  as  on  every  other  move- 
ment. "Time  tries  all."  3.  To  be- 
ware of  doing  anything  that  might 
seem  like  fighting  against  God. 

IT.  The  doubtful  doctrine  it 
preached.  1.  That  the  goodness  of  a 
cause  may  always  be  judged  by  its 
success.  2.  That  men  should  regulate 
their  conduct  by  the  bearing  it  will 
have  upon  their  own  interests.  3.  That 
man's  responsibilities  towards  the 
cause  of  God  and  Christ  are  discharged 
by  simply  letting  it  alone. 

Yer.  39.  Fighting  against  God. 
I.  An  old  sin. 
II.  A  common  practice. 

III.  A  hopeless  enterprise. 

IV.  A  perilous  warfare. 
Y.  A  heinous  wickedness. 

Yer?.  35-39.  Gamaliel's  Counsel. 

I.  A  convenient  counsel  for  the 
spiritually  idle  and  for  the  politicians 
of  the  world. 

II.  A  true  counsel  in  opposition  to 
senseless  zeal. 

III.  A  half  counsel,  when  it  con- 
cerns us  to  recognise,  decide,  and  act  at 
once. — Beck  in  Lange. 

Yers.  38,  39.  Of  men  or  of  God  ;  or, 
the  Origin  of  Christianity . 

I.  Christianity  must  be  either  of 
men  or  of  God. — Either  it  is  a  creation 
or  evolution  of  the  human  mind  or  a 
production  and  revelation  of  the  divine 
Spii  it.  Either  one,  it  may  be  the  best, 
of  ordinary  nature  religions,  like  those 
of  paganism  which  it  supplanted,  like 
Buddhism,  Confucianism,  and  Moham- 
medanism, or  a  distinctly  supernatural 
religion,  as  Christ  (John  vii.  16)  and 
His  apostles  affirmed  that  it  was,  and 
as  its  adherents  believed  it  to  be.  No 
middle  alternative  is  possible. 

II.  If  Christianity  be  of  men  it  will 
assuredly  come  to  nought. — It  may 
seem    for   a   time   to   be   possessed  of 

134 


vitality,  to  manifest  growth  and  to  be 
productive  of  beneficial  results,  but 
these  appearances  will  only  be  tem- 
porary. It  will  not  succeed  in  lifting 
men  much  higher  than  other  nature 
religions ;  it  will  not  extend  its 
dominion  over  a  much  greater  territory 
than  these  ;  it  will  not  exhibit  qualities 
of  permanence  beyond  what  are  dis- 
played by  these. 

III.  Thus  far  Christianity  has  not 
come  to  nought. — It  has  survived  the 
assaults  of  paganism,  and  even  over- 
thrown paganism  wherever  it  has 
spread.  It  has  resisted  the  still  more 
dangerous  onsets  of  philosophy  and 
science,  and  in  a  large  measure  Chris- 
tianised these.  It  has  stood  up  against 
the  combinations  of  world  empires,  and 
reduced  these,  in  name  at  least,  to  sub- 
jection beneath  the  sceptre  of  Christ. 
It  has  maintained  its  vitality  and  in- 
fluence notwithstanding  the  corruptions 
of  its  purity  that  have  arisen  within  its 
own  burdens  and  from  the  midst  of  its 
own  adherents.  It  has  met  the  deepest 
spiritual  wants  of  the  individual  soul 
and  of  the  world  in  a  way  that  no  other 
religion  has  done.  It  has  extended  its 
sway  to  almost  every  country  under 
heaven.  After  nineteen  centuries  it 
evinces  no  sign  of  decrepitude  and 
decay.  Other  religions  are  waxing  old 
and  vanishing  away;  it  is  with  the 
passing  years  increasing  in  vigour  and 
acceptance. 

IY.  Hence  Christianity  can  only  be 
of  heavenly  origin. — This  a  necessary 
inference  from  the  propositions  laid 
down  by  Gamaliel.  "  By  its  fruits  ye 
shall  know  it."  These  are  such  as  can 
be  explained  only  on  the  hypothesis  of 
its  divine  origin.  This  renders  it  cer- 
tain that  Christianity  will  prove  itself 
to  be  successful — i.e.,  serving  the  ends 
of  a  religion — i.e.,  saving;  universal, 
ultimately  embracing  the  globe ;  and 
permanent,  enduring  till  the  close  of 
time. 

Y.  No  combination  of  forces  can 
hinder  Christianity  from  eventually 
accomplishing  its  mission. — "Ye  will 
not  be  able  to  overthrow  it,"  said 
Gamaliel.      Gamaliel   was   right.      If 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


God  be  for  it  who  can  be  against  it  ? 
Who  can  fight  successfully  against 
God  ?  "  No  weapon  that  is  formed 
against  it  shall  prosper  "  ;  "the  gates 
of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it." 

Lessons. — 1 .  The  claims  which  Chris- 
tianity as  a  supernatural  religion  has 
on  the  minds  and  hearts  of  men. 
2.  The  duty  of  Christians  doing  every- 
thing to  further  its  triumph.  3.  The 
folly  of  attempting  to  overthrow  or 
even  hinder  it. 

Ver.  40.  The  Way  of  the  Holy 
Cross. 

I.  Threatening  (iv.  21). 
II.  Imprisonment  (v.  18). 

III.  Scourging  (v.  40). 

IV.  Martyrdom  (vii.  60). 


Yer.  41.  Suffering  Shame  for  the 
Name. 

I.  Comfort  in  it.  That  what  one 
suffers  for  is  Christ's  name  (1  Peter 
iv.  14). 

II.  Honour  in  it.  That  by  means  of 
suffering  one  can  help  on  the  triumph 
of  that  name. 

III.  Glory  in  it.  Since  if  one  suffers 
with  Christ  here,  he  shall  reign  with 
Christ  hereafter  (2  Tim.  ii.  12). 

Four  Classes  in  the  School  of  Suffer- 
ing. 

I.  Obliged  to  suffer. 
II.  Willing  to  suffer. 
III.  Able  to  suffer. 
IY.  Permitted     to    suffer. — Hart- 
man  in  Lange. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Dissension  in  the  Church — the  Rise  op  a  New  Order  of  Church 

Officials. 

§  1.  The  Church's  first  Strife  allayed ;  or,  the  Institution  of  the  Diaconate  (vers. 

1-7). 
§  2.  The  Ministry  of  Stephen  ;  or,  the  rising  of  a  Bright  Particular  Star  in  the 

Church's  Firmament  (vers.  8-15). 

CRITICAL    REMARKS. 


Ver.  1.  In  those  days  should  be  in  these  days, — i.e.,  shortly  before  Stephen's  martyrdom 
which  did  not  long  antedate  Saul's  conversion  in  A.D.  37.  Hence  the  events  recorded  in  the 
present  chapter  may  be  set  down  as  having  taken  place  in  A.D.  35  or  36.  It  is  satisfactory 
to  know  that  while  Baur  denies,  Zeller,  and  Weizsacker  admit  that  the  ensuing  narrative 
concerning  Stephen  proceeds  upon  undeniably  historical  ground.  Was  multiplied. — Better, 
was  multiplying,  or  becoming  numerous,  through  the  teaching  and  preaching  spoken  of  in 
ver.  42.  Grecians. — Not  Greeks,  but  Hellenists  or  Greek-speaking  Jews  of  the  Diaspora 
(ix.  29,  xi.  20),  as  distinguished  from  the  Hebrews  or  Palestinian  Jews  (Phil.  iii.  5),  who 
talked  in  Syro-Chaldaic  or  Aramaean.  Were  (habitually)  neglected. — Or  overlooked,  the 
imperfect  hinting  at  the  frequency  of  the  occurrence,  though  it  is  not  clear  whether  the 
complaint  was  well  founded  or  only  imaginary.  The  daily  ministrations  were  not  of  private 
benefactions  (Wendt)  but  of  public  alms  from  the  funds  already  mentioned  (ii.  45,  iv.  35), 
either  of  food  or  of  money. 

Ver.  2.  The  twelve  must  have  included  Matthias  (i.  26),  whose  apostleship  is  thus  placed 
beyond  dispute  as  valid,  at  least  in  the  judgment  of  both  his  colleagues  and  the  Church. 
The  multitude  of  the  disciples. — Of  those  resident  in  Jerusalem,  since  many  must  by  this 
time  have  left  the  city.  Not  reason. — ouk  &pe<rTov,  properly  =  non  placet,  not  pleasing,  or  not 
fit,  becoming,  suitable.  Leave.— In  the  sense  of  "forsaking,"  "deserting,"  "  discontinuing." 
Serve  or  minister  to  tables. — The  apostles  had  seemingly  at  first  undertaken  this  work, 
acting  "  not  merely  as  a  teaching  college,  judicial  bench,  court  of  representatives,  but  also 
as  an  administrative  authority;  specially  arranging,  distributing,  and  superintending  the 
feedings  "  (Holtzmann). 

135 


chap.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Ver.  3.  Wherefore,  brethren,  or  according  to  some  MSS.,  but,  brethren,  look  ye  out. — If  the 
selection  was  made  by  the  congregation,  the  appointment  proceeded  from  the  apostles.  Of 
honest  report. — Lit.  attested  persons — i.e.,  of  good  report  (compare  Luke  iv.  22  ;  1  Tim.  v.  10). 
For  Holy  Ghost  read  Spirit. 

Ver.  4.  But  we  will  give  ourselves  continually  to  prayer. — The  idea  is  that  of  steadfast 
perseverance. 

Ver.  5.  On  the  names  of  the  deacons  see  "  Homiletical  Analysis."  That  all  the  seven  were 
Hellenists  arose  not  from  the  circumstance  that  they  were  intended  solely  to  look  after  the 
Hellenist  widows'  interests — of  which  there  is  no  hint  in  the  narrative  ;  but  probably  from 
a  desire  to  avoid  anything  that  might  look  like  favouring  the  Hebrew  widows  (Holtzmann). 
The  statement  that  Nicolas  was  a  proselyte  suggests  that  all  the  others  were  Jews. 

Ver.  6.  They,  the  apostles  laid  their  hands  on  them,  the  deacons. — The  first  mention  in 
Acts,  but  not  the  last  (xiii.  3),  of  this  ceremony  which  occurred  in  the  Old  Testament ;  in 
the  consecration  of  the  Levites  (Numb.  viii.  10),  and  in  the  appointment  of  Joshua  (Numb, 
xxvii.  23)  and  afterwards  in  the  New  in  the  ordination  of  ministers  (1  Tim.  iv.  14  ;  Heb.* 
vi.  2). 

Ver.  7.  Increased  and  multiplied. — The  tenses  (imperfect)  indicating  gradual  and  continuous 
growth,  might  be  rendered  kept  on  increasing  and  multiplying.  A  great  company  of  the  priests. 
— Not  merely  persons  of  Levitical  descent  (Zockler),  but  real  sacerdotal  persons,  priests 
proper,  who  must  then  have  been  numerous,  considering  the  number,  4,289,  that  returned 
from  Babylon  (Ezra  ii.  36,  38).  Obedient  to  the  faith. — A  genuine  Pauline  expression  (see 
Rom.  i.  5). 

Ver.  8.  Faith. — According  to  the  best  texts  should  be  grace  (iv.  33)  ;  the  change  having 
probably  been  made  to  correspond  with  ver.  5. 

Ver.  9.  The  synagogue  which  is  called,  etc.,  should  be  of  the  Libertines  and  of  the  Cyrenians 
and  of,  etc.  The  Rabbis  credited  Jerusalem  with  480  synagogues,  but  Talmudic  information 
is  not  perfectly  reliable.  The  Libertines,  Cyrenians,  and  Alexandrians  may  have  attended 
one  synagogue  (Holtzmann,  Hausrath,  Zockler,  Plumptre),  and  the  Cilicians  along  with 
the  Asians  another ;  but  the  simplest  view  is  to  repeat  "  some  of,"  etc.,  before  each  proper 
name,  and  to  count  as  many  synagogues  as  there  are  names  (Meyer,  De  Wette,  Hackett). 
The  Libertini  were  Jews  who  had  been  slaves  at  Rome,  having  been  deported  thither  after 
Pompey's  war,  but  on  obtaining  their  freedom  had  returned  to  Jerusalem.  Tacitus 
(Ann.,  ii.  85)  speaks  of  4,000  of  such  Jewish  freedmen  as  having  been  banished  to 
Sardinia.  From  this  class  Stephen  may  have  sprung.  The  Cyrenians  were  Jews  from 
Gyrene  (ii.  10),  of  the  population  of  which  island  the  fourth  part  were  Jews.  The  Alexandrians. 
— From  the  city  of  that  name,  of  which  the  fifth  part  was  Jewish.  To  the  synagogue  of 
Cilicia  Saul  of  Tarsus  may  have  belonged  (vii.  58).  Asia,  being  distinguished  from  Cilicia, 
cannot  mean  the  whole  of  Asia  Minor,  but  must  be  restricted  to  Proconsular  Asia,  as  in 
ii.  9,  xvi.  6,  xix.  10,  22,  26,  27,  etc.  (Holtzmann) ;  though  Ramsay  (The  Church  in  the  Roman 
Empire,  p.  1 50)  thinks  the  use  of  the  term  here  "  is  quite  consistent  with  either  the  Roman 
(the  narrower)  or  the  popular  (the  wider)  sense." 

Ver.  11.  Suborned. — I.e.,  secretly  instructed,  putting  the  charge  into  their  mouths  (com- 
pare Matt.  xxvi.  59,  60).    Blasphemous  words. — Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  65. 

Ver.  12.  The  elders  and  the  Scribes. — The  classes  from  which  the  Sanhedrim  was  taken. 

Ver.  13.  Set  up. — Introduced  and  placed  before  the  council  (Hackett).  False  witnesses.— 
No  extravagant  exaggeration  of  Luke,  contradicted  by  the  actual  facts  of  the  case  (Baur, 
Zeller,  Over  beck),  since,  according  to  chap.  vii.  Stephen  had  made  no  such  assault  upon  the 
Law  and  the  Temple  as  that  with  which  he  was  charged  (Zockler).  It  is  noticeable  that  the 
adjective  blasphemous  is  now  in  the  best  texts  omitted  as  an  insertion  from  ver.  11. 

Ver,  14.  This  Jesus  of  Nazareth. — In  the  witnesses'  mouths  an  expression  of  contempt. 
Shall  destroy  this  place. — The  temple,  in  a  room  or  chamber  of  which  the  court  may  have 
been  sitting.  Based  probably  on  a  reminiscence  of  Christ's  words  in  John  ii.  19,  which 
Stephen  may  have  quoted.  The  customs  which  Moses  delivered  us. — Compare  xvi.  21, 
xxi.  21 ;  meaning  the  ceremonial  ordinances. 

Ver.  15.  All  that  sat  in  the  council.  Baur  finds  in  the  statement  that  the  scene  with 
reference  to  Stephen  was  laid  before  the  council  a  desire  to  institute  a  parallel  between 
Stephen's  trial  and  that  of  Christ ;  but  no  sufficient  reason  can  be  given  why  the  accuracy  of 
Luke's  narrative  should  be  challenged.  Weizsacker  admits  that  Stephen  was  put  upon  his 
trial,  and,  as  the  result,  stoned  to  death  (see  on  vii.  59).  The  face  of  an  angel. — Signifying 
more  than  that  Stephen's  countenance  was  illumined  by  a  radiant  serenity  produced  by  the 
fulness  of  the  Spirit  which  dwelt  within  him  (Holtzmann).  At  the  least  the  expression 
points  to  a  supernatural  lustre  like  that  with  which  the  face  of  Moses  shone  on  descending 
from  Sinai  (Exod.  xxxiv.  29-35  ;  *2  Cor.  iii.  13).  According  to  Old  Testament  conceptions 
angels  were  superterrestrial  beings,  who,  in  order  to  be  seen  by  men,  were  able  to  assume 
bodily  forms  corresponding  to  their  rank.  Since  all  in  the  council  beheld  Stephen's  face,  it  is 
clear  that  the  historian  is  not  dealing  with  a  vision,  but  depicting  an  external  phenomenon. 

136 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  vi. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses   1—7. 

The  Institution  of  the  Diaconate  ;  or,  the  Church's  First  Strife  allayed. 

I.  The  occasion  of  its  institution. — 1.  The  rapid  increase  of  the  Church's 
members.  It  was  certainly  gratifying  that,  notwithstanding  the  persecutions 
directed  against  the  apostles,  their  labours  in  propagating  the  gospel  were 
attended  by  conspicuous  success.  The  remarkable  influx  of  disciples  which  took 
place  under  their  preaching  would  most  likely  have  called  for  assistance  of  some 
sort  in  the  organisation  of  the  Christian  community.  The  special  form  of 
assistance  they  did  solicit  was  dictated  by  the  state  of  matters  now  to  be 
mentioned.  2.  The  unexpected  rise  of  dissension  among  the  Church's  members. 
(1)  The  opposing  parties  in  the  Church  were  the  Palestinian,  or  Hebrew  (i.e., 
Syro-Chaldaic,  or  Aramaic)  speaking,  and  the  Grecian,  or  Greek-speaking  Jews. 
Though  both  of  one  blood,  they  were  nevertheless  divided  by  speech,  and  as  a 
consequence  by  habits  of  thought  and  social  customs.  The  rivalry,  and  even 
jealousy  between  them,  the  Hebrew  or  Conservative  party,  who  adhered  with 
greater  closeness  and  tenacity  to  the  law  and  traditions  of  Mosaism,  and  the 
Grecian  (Hellenists)  or  Liberal  party,  who  had  been  influenced  by  the  broader 
culture  and  laxer  notions  of  the  empire  generally,  perpetuated  itself  for  long 
years  in  the  Christian  Church,  and  was  a  source  of  much  strife  during  the  early 
centuries  of  our  era.  (2)  The  cause  of  their  dissension  was  the  habitual  neglect 
(whether  studied  or  accidental,  real  or  imaginary,  is  not  stated)  of  the  Grecian 
widows  in  the  daily  distribution  of  food  or  money.  It  is  not  likely  that  the 
apostles  or  their  helpers  deliberately  arranged  thus  to  set  a  mark  of  inferiority 
upon  the  Greek-speaking  Christians  ;  but  one  can  readily  perceive  how  widows  of 
foreign  origin  might  not  be  so  well  known  as  those  who  resided  in  Palestine  and 
Jerusalem,  and  how,  being  foreigners,  they  might  have  greater  difficulty  in  making 
their  wants  known  and  getting  them  attended  to.  In  any  case  it  is  not  hard  to 
understand  how  the  Grecian  Christians  should  feel  somewhat  sensitive  over  what 
had  the  appearance  of  a  studied  neglect. 

II.  The  mode  of  its  institution. — 1.  The  apostolic  decision  concerning  themselves. 
(1)  To  withdraw  from  the  business  of  dispensing  the  Church's  alms.  Not 
because  they  resented  the  suspicion  of  unfairness  implied  in  the  complaints  of 
the  Greek -speaking  Jews  (or  Christians).  The  complaint  may  have  been 
just,  anel  (whether  it  was  just  or  not)  the  apostles  may  have  seen  that  some 
different  arrangement,  as,  e.g.,  the  distribution  of  the  Church's  alms  by  responsible 
officials — would  be  required  in  order  to  restore  confidence  and  prevent  the  recur- 
rence of  similar  mistakes  or  complaints.  Not  because  they  deemed  the  service  of 
tables  too  mean  an  occupation  for  persons  of  their  capacity  and  dignity.  It  may 
be  taken  for  granted  that  the  apostles  were  not  actuated  in  their  procedure  by 
personal  vanity  or  self-esteem,  but  because  they  considered  themselves  to  have 
been  called  to  a  higher  form  of  ministry  with  which  this  lower  interfered,  to  the 
extent  of  threatening  to  withdraw  them  altogether  from  it.  In  their  estimation 
preaching  was  a  more  exalted  form  of  work  than  acting  as  Church  almoners,  dis- 
tributing the  bread  of  life,  a  more  urgent  labour  than  doling  out,  even  to  poor 
widows,  loaves  and  fishes  or  the  wherewithal  to  purchase  them.  And  because 
this  latter  was  work  for  which  the  Church  had  an  ample  supply  of  competent 
workers  within  her  ranks.  (2)  To  reserve  themselves  for  the  more  spiritual 
labours  of  the  apostolate — praying  and  preaching.  By-and-by  they  would  need 
assistants  in  these  duties  also ;  but  in  the  meantime  these  claimed  their  whole 
time  and  attention.  N.B. — The  position  of  pre-eminence  among  ministerial  duties 
here  assigned  to  praying  and  preaching  should  be  noted  by  those  who  think  that 
in  modern  times  these  should  be  reduced  to  a  minimum.     Praying  and  preaching 

137 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


are  twin  gospel  ministries  that  never  should,  and  cannot  be  dissociated  except  to 
the  detriment  of  both.  2.  The  apostolic  direction  to  the  Church  members. 
(1)  What  it  was.  To  "look  out  from  among  themselves  seven  men  of  good 
report,  full  of  the  Spirit  and  of  wisdom,"  whom  the  apostles  might  appoint  over 
the  business  of  serving  the  Church's  tables.  In  which  direction  should  be  noted  : 
First,  the  proper  work  of  the  diaconate.  "  To  serve  tables,"  to  distribute  the 
Church's  alms,  and  care  generally  for  the  poor.  This,  as  the  cases  of  Stephen  and 
Philip  showed,  excluded  not  the  exercise,  where  possessed,  of  the  gift  of  preach- 
ing, praying,  or  working  miracles.  Secondly,  the  requisite  qualifications  for  the 
diaconate.  Approved  character.  The  deacons  (seven  in  number,  most  likely 
because  no  more  were  required ;  but  see  "  Hints  on  ver.  5  ")  were  to  be  of  "  good 
report " — i.e.,  of  recognised  Christian  standing  and  worth  (compare  1  Tim.  iii.  8-10). 
Eminent  piety.  "Full  of  the  Spirit" — i.e.,  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  would  be 
known  by  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  appearing  in  their  lives  (Matt.  vii.  20). 
Practical  sagacity.  "  Full  of  wisdom,"  which  probably  meant  that  insight  into 
truth,  discernment  of  character,  and  knowledge  of  how  to  act,  which  resulted 
from  being  inspired  and  led  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Thirdly,  the  body  to  elect  the 
diaconate.  The  congregation  of  believers.  Neither  their  leaders,  the  apostles, 
nor  a  committee  of  their  number,  but  the  whole  assembly  of  the  Church  members 
— all  who  chose  to  take  part  in  the  proceedings,  which  would  likely  be  the 
majority  of  those  residing  in  Jerusalem.  The  apostles'  language  expressly 
recognises  the  Church  as  the  elective  board.  Fourthly,  the  source  of  authority 
for  the  diaconate.  This  the  apostles  as  distinctly  reserved  for  themselves.  If 
the  congregation  selected,  they  appointed ;  if  the  congregation  called,  they 
ordained.  (2)  How  it  was  received.  "  The  saying  pleased  the  whole  multitude." 
This  showed  the  wisdom  by  which  the  apostles  had  be?n  guided  in  proposing  their 
motion  ;  the  confidence  with  which  they  were  regarded  by  the  believing  com- 
munity, no  one  attempting  or  desiring  to  dissent ;  and  the  spirit  of  unity  which 
still  prevailed  and  could  triumph  over  the  incipient  stirrings  of  discord.  Happy 
the  Church  whose  pastors  are  guided  by  the  Chief  Shepherd,  whose  counsels  are 
accepted  by  their  congregations,  and  whose  people  are  actuated  by  a  spirit  of  love 
and  concord  !  (3)  How  it  was  carried  out.  First,  the  election  of  the  seven. 
"  They  chose  Stephen,"  etc.  (see  "Hints  ").  Secondly,  the  presentation  of  the  seven. 
To  infer  that  the  election  was  conducted  in  the  absence  of  the  apostles  would  not 
be  safe.  Thirdly,  the  ordination  of  the  seven.  The  apostles,  having  prayed,  "  laid 
their  hands  upon  them."  In  this  act  the  brethren  did  not  join,  showing  that 
the  authorisation  of  the  new  officers  proceeded  not  from  them.  The  laying  on  of 
hands — first  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  blessing  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh 
(Geo.  xlviii.  10-14),  of  frequent  occurrence  in  Mosaic  ritual  (Lev.  iii.  2,  xvi.  21  ; 
Numb.  vih.  1 2),  and  used  in  appointing  Joshua  to  succeed  Moses  (Numb,  xxvii.  18) 
— became  the  customary  form  in  the  New  Testament  Church  of  Dedication  to  a 
sacred  office  (xiii.  3,  1  Tim.  iv.  14).  "  It  was  a  symbol  of  the  impartation  of 
the  gifts  and  graces  "  which  those  dedicated  "  needed  to  qualify  them  for  the 
office,"  and  was  "  of  the  nature  of  a  prayer  that  Gocl  would  bestow  the  necessary 
gifts  rather  than  a  pledge  that  v-hese  were  actually  conferred  "  (Hackett). 

III.  The  result  of  its  institution. — By  setting  free  the  apostles  to  attend  to 
higher  duties  important  consequences  followed.  1.  A  wide  extension  of  the 
gospel.  "The  word  of  God  increased."  The  area  over  which  it  spread  enlarged. 
The  influence  it  wielded  deepened.  2.  A  large  increase  of  disciples.  Their 
number  multiplied  in  Jerusalem  greatly.  Christ  promised,  if  He  were  lifted  up, 
to  draw  all  men  unto  Himself  (John  xii.  32) ;  and  wherever  the  gospel  is  openly, 
courageously,  affectionately,  and  faithfully  proclaimed,  it  seldom  fails  to  secure 
adherents.  3.  A  great  accession  from  the  priesthood.  This  must  have  been  a 
numerous  body  at  the  time  to  which  this  chapter  refers,  since,  according  to  Ezra 

138 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


(ii.  36-38),  it  was  4,289  strong  on  returning  from  Babylon.  The  coming  over  to 
Christianity  of  so  considerable  a  company  of  priests,  of  whom  none  had  ever 
followed  Christ,  marked  a  signal  advance  in  Christianity.  Plumptre  suggests 
that  their  conversion  may  have  been  due  to  the  preaching  of  Stephen,  who 
anticipated  Paul  in  announcing  the  passing  away  of  the  temple  worship,  which 
had  probably  become  a  weariness  to  the  flesh  and  an  intolerable  burden  to  the 
spirit  of  the  more  earnest,  at  least  of  the  priests,  who,  accordingly,  responded 
to  the  fascination  of  a  simpler  and  more  spiritual  worship. 

Learn. — 1.  That  Christians  ought  to  be,  but  are  not  always,  attove  quarrelling 
(1  Cor.  iii.  3  ;  Gal.  v.  20 ;  Phil.  ii.  3).  2.  That  oversight  may  occur  in  the  best- 
regulated  congregations.  3.  That  Christian  ministers  and  people  should  ever 
study  the  things  that  make  for  peace  (Pom.  xiv.  19).  4.  That  nothing  should 
be  allowed  to  hinder  a  Christian  minister  from  his  specific  work  of  preaching  and 
praying.  5.  That  Christian  congregations  have  a  right  to  elect  their  own  office- 
bearers. 6.  That  those  who  hold  office  in  the  Christian  Church  should  be  above 
suspicion.     7.  That  the  word  of  God  cannot  be  bound  (2  Tim.  ii.  9). 

HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  1.  Murmuring  in  the  Primitive 
Church. 

I.  The  occasion  of  it. — It  sprang  out 
of  the  multiplying  of  the  disciples. 
This  teaches — 1.  That  increase  of  num- 
bers does  not  always  mean  increase  of 
happiness,  increase  of  devotion,  increase 
of  spiritual  life,  but  has  often  brought 
increase  of  trouble  and  discontent 
alone.  Undiluted  joy,  uninterrupted 
success,  is  not  to  be  the  portion  of  God's 
people  while  tabernacling  here  below. 
2.  That  the  presence  of  supernatural 
gifts,  the  power  of  working  miracles 
and  speaking  with  tongues,  did  not 
raise  the  spiritual  level  of  individual 
believers  above  that  we  find  in  the 
Church  of  the  present  day.  What  a 
comfort  to  God's  servant  striving  to  do 
his  duty  is  the  study  of  this  sixth 
chapter  of  the  Acts !  The  apostles 
themselves  did  not  escape  the  accusa- 
tion of  favouritism.  3.  That  the 
primitive  Church  was  no  ideal  com- 
munion but  a  society  with  failings  and 
weaknesses  and  discontent,  exactly  like 
those  which  exist  in  the  Church  of  our 
own  times. 

II.  The  ground  of  it. — That  which 
lay  at  the  basis  of  this  murmuring  was 
"  a  racial  question,"  or  perhaps  it  should 
be  said  those  "  social  and  linguistic  dif- 
ferences "  which  "  had  found  place  in 
the  Church."     "  The  bitter  dissensions 


which  racial  and  linguistic  differences 
have  made  in  the  Church  of  every  age 
are  here  depicted  in  miniature.  The 
quarrels  between  the  East  and  West, 
between  Greeks  and  Latins,  between 
Latins  and  Teutons,  between  Teuton 
and  Celt,  between  Poman  Catholic  and 
Protestant,  between  the  whites  and  ne- 
groes, between  European  Christians  and 
Hindoo  converts — the  scandalous  scents 
still  enacted  round  the  Holy  Place  at 
Jerusalem,  where  peace  is  kept  between 
nominal  Christians  only  by  the  inter- 
vention of  Mahometan  soldiers — all 
turn  upon  the  same  points  and  em- 
body the  same  principles. 

III.  The  removal  of  it.— The  diffi- 
culty which  had  arisen  was  solved  .by 
laying  down  the  following  principles  : 
1.  That  there  are  diversities  of  functions 
and  of  woi*k  in  the  Christian  Church. 
There  is  a  ministry  of  the  word  and 
there  is  a  serving  of  tables.  2.  That 
one  class  should  not  absorb  every  func- 
tion ;  for  if  it  does,  the  highest  function 
of  all,  the  ministry  of  the  word  and 
prayer,  will  inevitably  suffer.  3.  That 
the  Church  of  Christ  should  ever  have 
the  poiver  to  organise  herself  in  the  face 
of  new  departures,  while  at  the  same 
time  she  proclaims  the  absolute  neces- 
sity and  the  perpetual  obligation  of  the 
Christian  ministry  in  her  midst. — 
G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D. 

139 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Dissension  in  the  Church. — 1.  Old. 
Dating  from  Apostolic,  yea,  even  from 
Pentecostal  times.  2.  Common.  Hav- 
ing shown  itself  in  almost  every 
Christian  community  since.  3.  Unbe- 
coming. All  sin  is ;  this  especially  so 
as  breaking  out  among  those  who 
should  love  as  brethren.  4.  Hurtful. 
As  again  all  sin  is,  but  this  in  par- 
ticular as  marring  the  beauty,  destroy- 
ing the  peace,  and  hindering  the  use- 
fulness of  the  Church. 

Yer.  2.  Serving  Tables;  or,  the 
Church's  Care  of  the  Poor. — Of  Christian 
service  this  is 

I.  A  necessary  form. — Considering 
that  God  hath  chosen  the  poor  of  this 
world  to  be  rich  in  faith  (James  ii.  5), 
that  Christ  esteems  them  as  His 
brethren  (Matt.  xxv.  40),  and  that 
kindness  to  the  poor  has  been  specially 
enjoined  on  Christ's  disciples  (xx.  35, 
Gal.  vi.  10;  Eph.  iv.  28). 

II.  An  honourable  form. — Though 
not  to  be  placed  on  a  level  with  preach- 
ing, yet  to  be  highly  esteemed  as  one 
requiring  the  most  exalted  gifts  and 
conferring  the  most  enduring  benefits 
(1  Tim.  v.  10). 

III.  A  difficult  form. — Calling  for 
much  wisdom  and  tenderness,  so  as  to 
avoid  giving  offence  by  either  neglect- 
ing or  hurting  the  sensibilities  of  the 
recipients  of  the  Church's  bounty  (Horn. 
xii.  8). 

IY.  A  profitable  form. — Since  Christ 
will  reward  all  such  service  as  done  to 
Himself  (Matt.  xxv.  40). 

Yers.  1,  2.  Blots  in  a  Church. 

I.  When  nominal  adherents  multiply 
faster  than  true  disciples. 

II.  When  a  spirit  of  discord  and 
division  breaks  out  among  its  members. 

III.  When  the  poor  are  neglected 
and  the  rich  only  attended  to. 

IY.  WThen  ministers  have  no  time 
to  preach  because  of  being  absorbed  in 
secular  business. 

Y.  When  the  spirit  of  prayer  dies 
out  of  both  pulpit  and  pew. 

Yer.  4.  Praying  and  preaching. 
I.  Praying    without    preaching. — 

140 


An  imperfect  if  not  a  presumptuous 
ministry.  Christ  having  ordained  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  as  a  means  of 
its  propagation  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20  ; 
Luke  xxiv.  47).  This  form  of  worship 
cannot  be  discontinued  without  sin. 
A  word  for  those  who  would  dispense 
with  the  sermon  in  church  services  or 
reduce  it  to  the  smallest  dimensions. 

II.  Preaching  without  praying.— An 
unprofitable  exercise.  The  same  Lord 
who  commanded  His  disciples  to  preach 
also  taught  them  to  pray  (Matt.  vi.  9  ; 
Luke  xi.  1),  and  said,  "  Without  Me  ye 
can  do  nothing  "  (John  xv.  5).  A  hint 
to  those  who  forget  that  the  ends  of 
the  ministry  cannot  be  reached  by 
human  wisdom  or  eloquence  alone. 

III.  Praying  and  preaching. — The 
true  ideal  of  an  acceptable  ministry. 
What  Christ  hath  joined  let  none  of  His 
followers  put  asunder  (1  Tim.  ii.  1-8). 

Yer.  5.  The  First  Christian  Deacons. 

I.  Their  number.  —  Seven.  Not 
likely  either  :  1 .  Because  the  congrega- 
tions in  Jerusalem  were  seven  in 
number,  and  each  selected  a  man  ;  pr 
2.  Because  the  number  of  believers  was 
now  seven  thousand,  and  one  was  chosen 
for  each  thousand;  or  3.  Because  of 
the  sacredness  of  the  number  seven ; 
or  4.  Because  there  were  already  dif- 
ferent elements  in  the  Church,  Hebrews 
(3),  Hellenists  (3),  Proselytes  .(1),  that 
required  to  be  provided  for  \  or  5.  Be- 
cause Jerusalem  was  divided  into  seven 
districts ;  or  6.  Because  there  were 
seven  archangels ;  or  7.  Because  the 
gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  were  sevenfold  ; 
or  8.  Because  among  the  Libertini  of 
Borne  "  there  was  a  distinct  guild  or 
collegium  known  as  the  Septemviri 
Epulones  or  Seven  Stewards,  whose 
business  it  was  to  arrange  for  the 
banquets  held  in  honour  of  the  gods 
which  were  more  or  less  analogous  to 
the  Christian  agapw,  on  certain  set 
days "  (Plumptre) ;  but  9.  Probably 
because,  for  some  reason  not  stated, 
seven  was  considered  by  the  apostles 
the  number  required  for  the  work. 

II.  Their  names. — All  Greek.  But 
not  therefore  all  belonging  to  Hellenistic 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  vi. 


Jews,    since    Palestinian    Jews    with  III.  Their    duties. — 1.    Principally 

foreign  names  were  not  rare  (see  i.  23).  to  attend  to  the  administration  of  the 

1.  Stephen.     An  uncommon  name  ap-  Church's  benevolence,  and  generally  to 

pearing  in  few  inscriptions,  but  found  care  for  the  poor.     2.  In  addition  to 

in  the   burial   place   of   the    Empress  evangelise,  if  they  possessed  the  gifts 

Livia  as  the  designation  of  a  libertinus  for  such  work — as  was  shown  by  both 

or  freedman,  a  goldsmith,  and  an  im-  Stephen  and  Philip. 
munis — i.e.,   one    exempted   from   the 

religious  obligations  of  his  trade  guild.  Note. — That  the  seven  men,  though 

In  addition  the  name  is  found  "  on  a  not  expressly  named  "  deacons,"  were 

tablet  in  the  museum  of  the  Collegio  the    forerunners   of   the   ecclesiastical 

Komano."    Wherefore  it  has  been  con-  officers  who  afterwards  bore  that  title 

jectured  that  "  in  the  proto-martyr  of  (1  Tim.  iii.   8),  is  apparent.     Though 

the  Church  ...  we  have  one  of  the  nothing  is  said  by  Peter  about  their 

earliest     representatives     of      Roman  being  constituted  a  new  order  of  Church 

Christianity  "    (Plumptre).      His    cha-  rulers,  it  need  not  be  doubted  that  the 

racter  is   given   in   words   afterwards  Church  came  to  recognise  them  as  such 

used  of  Barnabas  (xi.  24).     2.  Philip.  on   the    ground   of    this    transaction. 

Subsequently     styled    an     Evangelist  Since  the  days  of  Cyprian  this  opinion 

(xxi.  8),  and  employed  to  preach  the  has   prevailed.      That    the   seven    are 

gospel  to  the  city  of  Samaria  (viii.  5)  not  like  the  later  deacons  subordinated 

and  to  the  eunuch  (viii.  26).    A  tradi-  to  the  presbyters  is  no  valid  objection 

tion,  preserved  by  Epiphanius,  places  (Holtzmann),  because  the  organisation 

Philip  as  well  as   Stephen  among  the  of  the  Church  at  this  time  may  not 

Seventy.      The  fact  that,  when  Paul  have  been  complete.     That  the  seven 

arrived  at  Csesarea  (xx.  8),  Philip  had  formed  a  special  order  of  officials  created 

four  fully  grown  daughters  renders  it  for  a  special  purpose  (Weizsacker)  may 

probable  that  at  the  date  of  his  elec-  be  true  without   the   inference   being 

tion    he   was    married.       3.  Procorus.  correct  that  the  order  was  not  designed 

4.  Nicanor.     5.  Simon.     6.  Parmenas.  to  be  permanent.     That  funds  for  the 

Of  these  four,   nothing  being  known,  poor  were  at  a  later  period  entrusted 

nothing  need  be  surmised.     Christ  can  to  the  hands  of  the  elders  (xi.  30)  does 

be   as  well    served   by  obscure  as  by  not  prove  that  the  diaconate  gradually 

famous    men.       If    Stephen    acquired  developed   into  the  presbyterate    (Yi- 

the   glory   of   being   the  first   martyr  tringa,  Bohmer,  Lange,  Ritschl,  Wendt, 

perhaps    they,    like    Philip,    had   the  Lechler),  but  merely  that  the  elders, 

honour  of  long  service,  and  unlike  him  as  the  spiritual  rulers  of  the  Church, 

had  the  merit  of  serving  without  dis-  received     the     money     from      those 

Unction.     7.  Nicolas.     "What  Luke  re-  who  brought  it.     The  actual  distribu- 

cords  of  him  is  that  he  was  a  proselyte  tion  may  have    been   carried   out   by 

of    Antioch,    and   therefore    the    first  deacons.     The  notion  that   the   seven 

Gentile  named  as  having  been  admitted  were  the  predecessors  of  both  bishops 

to  the  Christian  Church ;  what  Luke  (Ittlo-koitol)  and  deacons  (SiaKovot),  and 

does   not   record   is   that  he  was  the  that   neither    of   these    constituted   a 

founder  of  the  sect  of  the  Nicolaitanes  preaching  or  teaching  order,  but  were 

(Pev.    ii.     6,    15) — a    supposition   not  merely  finance   officers    (Hatch,    Har- 

hastily  to  be  credited,  though  attested  nack),  is  not  in  accordance  with  Scrip- 

by  Irenaeus  (I.   xxvi.  3;  III.  xi.   1),  ture  (1  Tim.  iii.  1-12  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  24). 
Clement  of  Alexandria  (Strom.  II.  xx. 

118  ;  III.  4),  and  Hippolytus  (vii.  36),  Vers.  1-5.  The  Seven  Chosen. 

and  accepted  by  some  moderns  (Zockler  I.  The     unique    functions    of    the 

and  others).  The  statement  that  Nicolas  Church. — It  must  be  assumed  that,  in 

was  a  proselyte  may  imply  that  the  the  rise  of  the  Christian  Church,  a  new 

others  were  of  Jewish  birth.  power  obtained  among  men.     Baptised 

141 


CHAP.  VI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


with  this  new  "  power,"  the  Church 
confronted  the  world  with  the  fact  of 
the  unity  of  the  race.  The  wonderful 
works  of  God  were  confined  to  no 
peculiar  peoples;  they  meant  the  Church 
lor  the  world.  In  addition  to  this  was 
the  new  principle  as  to  social  life. 
The  poor  should  share,  equally  with 
the  rich,  the  gospel  benefits.  Says 
Mr.  Lecky  :  "  No  achievements  of  the 
Christian  Church  are  more  truly  great 
than  those  which  it  has  effected  in  the 
sphere  of  charity." 

II.  The  choice  of  "the  seven." — 
That  the  best  men  cannot  always 
please  is  evidenced  by  the  text.  In 
their  distribution  of  charity  the  apostles 
failed.  They  were  accused  of  neg- 
lecting the  Grecians  in  their  zeal  for 
the  Hebrew  converts.  There  are  two 
important  truths  involved  in  that 
election,  claiming  special  notice.  Thus, 
firstly,  the  responsibilities  inhering  in 
the  Church -membership.  It  was  not 
an  apostolic  appointment.  Not  even 
Peter  could  choose ;  the  election  was  the 
act  of  the  multitude.  Secondly,  the 
wisdom  of  the  Church  is  evidenced  in 
their  choice.  Instead  of  further  mur- 
muring there  had  come  a  profound 
peace — a  peace  built  on  no  compromise. 

III.  The  characteristics  of  "the 
seven." — They  must  be  men  of  "  good 
report."  There  is  no  disputing  the 
fact  that,  in  the  apostolic  estimate,  the 
truest  religion  makes  men  of  the  best 


and  most  honest  report.  No  office — 
of  bishop  or  evangelist  or  deacon — can 
give  a  good  report  to  a  dishonest  man. 
Character  is  greater  than  office-bearing. 
Again,  "  the  seven  "  must  be  "  full  of 
the  Spirit  and  of  wisdom."  In  this 
demand  lay  hidden  the  secret  of  their 
spiritual  power. 

IY.  The  model  character  of  the 
diaconate. — It  is  a  natural  sequence 
of  the  choice  of  "  the  seven  "  that  it 
should  be  supplemented  by  a  character 
equal  to  the  highest  ideal.  Stephen 
met  the  fullest  requirements. — Monday 
Club  Sermons. 

Ver.  7.  The  Progress  of  the  Church. 

I.  How  it  is  effected.  —  By  the 
preaching  of  the  word.  1.  In  ever- 
enlarging  fulness.  2.  In  ever-widening 
circles.  3.  By  ever-increasing  agents. 
4.  With  ever-deepening  earnestness. 

II.  How  it  is  revealed. — By  the 
multiplication  of  disciples.  1.  Not  of 
merely  nominal  adherents,  which  are 
not  always  a  source  of  strength. 
2.  But  of  genuine  believers,  whose 
hearts  have  been  touched  by  grace. 

III.  How  it  is  consolidated. — By 
obedience  to  the  faith.  1.  By  the 
submission  of  the  whole  being  to  the 
Lord  of  faith,  Christ.  2.  By  the  con- 
secration of  every  power  to  the  life  and 
work  of  faith.  3.  By  regulating  every 
step  in  accordance  with  the  principle 
of  faith. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  8—15. 

The  Ministry  of  Stephen  ;  or,  the  Rising  of  a  Bright  Particular  Star. 

I.  The  miracles  and  preaching  of  Stephen. — 1.  His  miracles  were  great. 
(1)  In  origin,  proceeding  from  the  grace  (rather  than  faith)  of  which  he  was  full 
— grace  here  being  the  supernatural  endowment  conferred  on  him  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  (2)  In  efficiency,  being  remarkable  for  the  indications  they  gave  of 
divine  power.  (3)  In  number,  it  being  most  likely  they  were  neither  few  nor 
small,  but  numerous  and  striking.  (4)  In  ioipressiveness,  having  in  all  probabi- 
lity arrested  the  attention  and  awed  the  hearts  of  those  in  whose  presence  they 
were  done.  What  they  were  is  not  told — an  indication  that  Luke  was  not  com- 
posing a  romance  but  writing  a  history.     2.    His   preaching    was    irresistible. 

(1)  For  the  wisdom  (knowledge  of  divine  truth)  and  spiritual  insight  (discernment 
of  its  applicability  to  souls)  which  it  displayed,  and  (compare  Luke  xxi.   15), 

(2)  for  the  Holy  Spirit  who  was  behind  that  wisdom  and  that  insight  as  their 
source,  inspiration,    and   power   (compare   Mark  xiii.    11).     No  interpreter  of 

142 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  vi. 


Scripture  can  be  placed  alongside  of  the   Holy  Ghost   for   either  clearness  or 
force  of  exposition  (1  Cor.  ii.  13). 

II.  The  opponents  and  revilers  of  Stephen. — 1.  His  opponents.  Certain  parties 
from  the  various   synagogues   in   the  metropolis,  of   which,  according   to   the 
Rabbis,    there   were   then    480.      ( 1 )    Their   designations.       Libertines :    freed 
men   who   had   been    slaves,  their    fathers  having    been    sold    as    bondmen  to 
Rome  after  Pompey's  expedition  against  Judsea  in  B.C.  53.     Cyrenians  :  belong- 
ing to  the  city  of  Cyrene  in  Lybia,  North  Africa,  of  whose  population  a  fourth 
part  were  Jews  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XIV.  vii.,  2),  the  rest  being  derived  from  the  Lacede- 
monians (Wars,  II.  xvi.,  4).     From  this  class  came  Simon  the  Cyrenian  (Luke 
xxiii.  26),  with  his  two  sons,  Alexander  and  Rufus  (Mark  xv.  21).     Cyrenians 
attended  Pentecost  (ii.  10),  and  preached  to  the  Greek-speaking  Jews  at  Antioch 
(xi.  20),  while  Lucius  of  Cyrene  was  among  the  prophets  and  teachers  associated 
with  the  Church  in  that  city  (xiii.  1).     Alexandrians:  Jews  from  Alexandria  in 
Egypt,  the  second  city  in  the  empire,  and  a  principal  seat  of  Hellenic  learning 
and  culture.     Numbering  one  hundred  thousand,  they  occupied  a  quarter  of  the 
city  by  themselves,  were  governed  by  an  ethnarch  of  their  own  (i.e.,  enjoyed 
Home  Rule),  and  had  high  privileges  conferred  upon  them  by  Ptolemy  Phila- 
delphia.    There  Philo  at  that  time  resided.     From  Alexandria  in  former  times 
(b.c.   280)  had  come  the  Septuagint  or  Greek  translation  of  the  Hebrew  Scrip- 
tures.   Cilicians  :  from  the  south-east  of  Asia  Minor,  where  many  Jews  were 
settled,    Antiochus    the   Great    having   established    a    colony  there.      Among 
those  attached  to  their  synagogue  would  no  doubt  be  Saul  of  Tarsus  (ix.  11). 
Asians  :  from  the  pro-consular  province  or  geographical  division  of  Asia  Minor, 
which  'included  Mysia,  Lydia,  and  Caria,  and  had  Ephesus  as  its  capital.     Asian 
Jews  appear  at  a  later  stage  in  the  history  of  Paul  (xxi.  27).     (2)  Their  dispu- 
tation.    They  discussed  with  Stephen  the  teaching  he  promulgated,  which,  in 
addition  to  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  and   the  resurrection,  embraced  that  of  the 
passing  away  of  the  Old  Testament  temple- worship,  for  the  permanence  of  which 
they  as  patriots  and  disciples  of  Moses  jealously  contended.     (3)  Their  defeat. 
They  could  not  resist  the  wisdom  and  spirit  with  which  he  spoke.     Not  his  equals 
in  either  Biblical  learning  or  sacred  eloquence,  they  could  not  reply  to  his  argu- 
ments, or  deny  his  conclusions,  being  inwardly  convinced  of  the  truth  of  both. 
(4)  Their  duplicity.     To  avenge  themselves  of  their  victorious  adversary  they 
secretly  instructed  witnesses  to  appear  against  him  with  a  trumped-up  accusation, 
the  terms  of  which  they  had  previously  concerted.      2.  His  revilers.      These 
wretched  instrumei  t>  of  his  opponents'  treachery,  were  without  question,  "  lewd 
fellows  of  the  baser  sort,"  creatures  without  consciences — 

11  Fellows  by  the  hand  of  nature  mark'd 
Quoted  and  sign'd  to  do  a  deed  of  shame  " — 

Shakespeare,  King  John,  Act  IV.,  Sc.  2. 

who  for  a  consideration  would  lend  themselves  to  any  "  bloody  villainy,"  and 
would  not  hesitate  to  swear  away  the  lives  of  the  innocent.  Such  monsters  of 
wickedness  had  appeared  against  the  Saviour  (Matt.  xxvi.  59). 

III.  The  arrest  and  indictment  of  Stephen. — 1.  His  arrest.  (1)  Moved  by 
his  defeated  opponents.  A  poor  answer  to  give  another's  arguments  to  shut 
him  up  in  prison  or  charge  him  with  a  crime  he  has  not  committed.  But 
people  who  fail  in  logic  frequently  resort  to  law,  endeavouring  to  reach  by  force 
or  fraud  what  they  have  not  been  able  to  gain  by  honesty  and  reason.  (2)  Effected 
by  the  populace,  the  elders,  and  the  Scribes.  It  is  never  difficult  to  inflame  the 
mob,  whose  inconstancy  is  as  proverbial  as  that  of  the  wind.  If  the  elders  and 
the  Scribes  were  ablaze  already  against  the  new  sect  and  its  leaders,  hitherto  the 
people  had  sided  with  the  Christians  (v.  22).     Now,  however,  their  patriotic  fears 

143 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


had  been  stirred  by  the  slanders  poured  into  their  ears.  (3)  Followed  by  a  speedy 
trial.  Having  seized  him  either  in  his  house  or  most  likely  in  the  temple  while 
teaching  they  hurried  him  off,  as  they  had  hurried  Christ,  not  to  prison  but  to 
judgment — haling  him  before  the  council  or  Sanhedrim  which  probably  had 
arranged  to  meet  for  despatch  of  business,  so  important  was  the  occasion  that 
had  arisen.  2.  His  indictment.  (1)  Technically  correct.  Consisting  of  two  counts 
which  were  really  one.  First,  that  he  had  spoken  blasphemous  words  against 
Moses  and  against  God.  Secondly,  and  in  this  lay  the  blasphemy,  that  he  had 
uttered  words  against  the  temple  and  the  law,  saying  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
would  destroy  the  temple  and  change  the  customs  which  Moses  had  delivered  to 
the  nations.  Like  the  similar  impeachment  preferred  against  Christ  (Matt. 
xxvi.  61,  63  ;  John  v.  18)  which  had  rested  on  words  actually  used  by  Him* 
these  accusations  against  Stephen  may  have  been  based  on  sentences  which  had 
escaped  his  lips.  Yet  were  they  (2)  Essentially  incorrect.  Stephen  indeed 
had,  ostensibly,  and  in  the  letter,  spoken  against  the  Hebrew  Lawgiver  and  the 
Jewish  temple  in  so  far  as  he  had  taught,  that  the  Christian  was  superior  to  the 
Mosaic  dispensation,  that  the  days  of  sacrificial  worship  were  numbered,  that  the 
gospel  was  designed  to  supersede  the  law,  that  observance  of  the  Levitical  ritual 
was  henceforth  to  be  no  condition  of  justification,  and  that  worship  was  no  more 
to  be  limited  to  Jerusalem,  but  might  be  freely,  if  spiritually,  offered  anywhere. 
Yet  in  so  teaching  Stephen  had  neither  blasphemed  God  nor  contemned  Moses, 
inasmuch  as  Christ  was  the  prophet  like  unto  himself  (Moses),  whom  the  Law- 
giver foretold,  and  the  system  of  worship  inaugurated  by  Christ  was  in  reality  a 
carrying  forward  into  fulfilment  of  all  that  had  been  prefigured  and  pre-signified 
by  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  That  Stephen's  accusers  felt  secretly  conscious  of 
distorting  his  words  has  been  argued  from  the  anti- climax  which  reveals  itself 
in  their  indictment.  First,  before  his  arrest  they  accuse  the  eloquent  deacon 
of  blaspheming  Moses  and  God — a  palpable  exaggeration.  Next,  in  the 
council  they  drop  the  term  of  blasphemy  and  limit  their  charge  to  speaking 
against  the  temple  and  the  law.  Lastly,  confronted  with  the  accused,  they 
water  down  their  language  to  this,  that  they  had  heard  him  repeat  some 
statement  about  Jesus  of  Nazareth's  intention  to  destroy  the  temple  and  change 
its  customs. 

IV.  The  attitude  and  appearance  of  Stephen.— 1.  His  attitude.  One  of  un- 
resisting meekness.  With  perfect  calmness  he  listened  to  the  charges  preferred 
against  him.  Like  his  master,  he  opened  not  his  mouth,  answered  not  a  word 
till  invited  to  speak.  Conscious  of  no  crime,  he  was  in  no  haste  to  defend  him- 
self. 2.  His  appearance.  One  of  unearthly  beauty.  M  All  who  sat  in  the 
council,"  his  accusers  and  his  judges,  "  fastening  their  eyes  upon  him,"  in  expecta- 
tion of  what  he  would  reply  to  the  grave  indictment  to  which  he  had  listened, 
"saw  his  face  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an  angel."  The  radiance  was  one  which 
never  shone  on  sea  or  land,  was  more  than  the  serene  and  dignified  lustre,  solar 
light  it  has  been  named,  wherewith  the  soul  in  moments  of  crisis,  when  conscious 
of  innocence,  illuminates  the  countenance  ;  it  was  the  shine  of  supernatural 
glory,  reflected  back  from  the  face  of  the  Risen  Christ  on  whom  he  gazed 
(vii.  55) — like  the  light  which  rayed  forth  from  the  countenance  of  Moses  when 
he  descended  from  the  Mount  (Exod.  xxxiv.  29,  30,  35) — attesting  to  those  who 
beheld  it,  his  innocence. 

Learn. — 1.  The  secret  of  true  ministerial  influence — being  filled  with  grace  and 
power,  with  wisdom  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  The  triumphant  career  which  lies 
before  the  gospel — its  enemies  will  not  be  able  for  ever  to  resist  its  progress^  dis- 
pute its  truth,  or  prevent  its  sway.  3.  The  certainty  that  all  faithful  preachers 
of  the  gospel  will  excite  against  themselves  hostility, — all  whose  interests  the 
gospel  threatens  will  array  themselves  against  it.     4.  The  falsehood  of  all  such 

144 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


charges  against  the  gospel  as  that  it  is  revolutionary  and  destructive,  whereas  it 
works  its  changes  by  slow  degrees  and  destroys  nothing  but  sin.  5.  The  glory 
that  will  even  here  irradiate  and  hereafter  crown  every  faithful  servant  of 
Christ. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Yer.  8.  The  Biography  of  Stephen. 

I.  A  devout  Christian. — Full  of  faith 
and  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

II.  A  trusted  Deacon. — The  first 
elected  to  the  office. 

III.  An  eloquent  Preacher. — His 
opponents  could  not  resist  the  wisdom 
with  which  he  spake, 

IY.  A  glorified  Prisoner. — His  face 
shone  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an 
angel. 

Y.  A  blessed  Martyr. — "They  stoned 
Stephen,"  etc.  (vii.  59). 

Yer.  15.  The  Face  of  an  Angel. — 
"Dante,  describing  the  angels  whom 
he  met  in  the  Paradiso,  impresses  us 
with  their  external  glory  and  their 
spiritual  effulgence.  Invariably  he 
makes  the  former  a  result  of  the  latter. 
With  closer  faithfulness  to  physical 
science  than  he  dreamed,  and  building 
better  than  he  knew  he  sings  (Paradiso, 
Canto  ix.,  13-19). 

'  Another  of  those  splendours 
Approach  me,  and  its  will  to  pleasure  me 
It  signifies  by  brightening  outwardly, 
As  one  delighted  to  do  good  ; 
Became  a  thing  transplendent  in  my  sight, 
As  a  fine  ruby  smitten  by  the  sun.'  " 

Joseph  Cook's  Monday  Lectures,  Second 
Series,  p.  148. 

Stephen's  illuminated  Face. — "  He 
had  been  accused  of  blaspheming 
Moses,  and  lo !  the  clearness  of  the 
face  of  Moses,  a  reflection  of  God's 
glory  (vii.  2),  was  to  be  seen  on  him 
and  vindicated  him.     A  morning  beam 

/  of  the  heavenly  splendour,  in  which  the 
teachers  of  righteousness  will  eternally 

I    shine   (Dan.   xii.  3),  surrounded  him; 

F  and  well  might  he  have  been  regarded 

as  an  angel,  since.,  as  the  angels  always 

y^behold  the  face  of  God,  and_reflect  His 
glorypsb'was  it  granteoTtohim  in  this 
hour  of  witness  for  encouragement  to 


look,  first  into  the  opened  mystery  of 
God's  historical  glory  upon  the  earth, 
and  then  into  the  opened  heaven,  and 
to  see  Jesus  standing  at  the  right  hand 
of  God  (vii.  55)." — Besser. 

Yer.  8-15.  The  Opponents  of  Stephen. 

I.  Devout  Jews.  —  They  were 
Stephen's  countrymen  and  fellow-wor- 
shippers, believers  in  the  same  God, 
disciples  of  the  same  lawgiver,  probably 
members  of  the  same  synagogue. 
Three  arguments  which  should  have 
caused  them  to  befriend  rather  than 
hate  Stephen. 

II.  Defeated  controversialists. — They 
could  not  resist  the  wisdom  and  the 
Spirit  by  which  Stephen  spake.  This 
should  have  cautioned  them  against 
opposing  one  who  obviously  possessed 
clearer  insight  than  themselves,  and  one 
with  whom  their  inmost  convictions 
sided. 

III.  Unscrupulous  calumniators. — 
They  suborned  men  who  said  (no  doubt 
what  Stephen's  adversaries  told  them) 
that  Stephen  had  spoken  blasphemous 
words  against  Moses  and  against  God 
— Moses  first  and  God  second — which 
was  not  true. 

IY.  Murderous  conspirators. — Their 
object  in  moving  the  elders  and  the 
Scribes  was  to  bring  upon  their  foe  the 
wrath  of  the  Sanhedrim,  which  they 
knew  would  mean  arrestment,  im- 
prisonment, and  perhaps  death. 

Stephen  the  Deacon. 

I.  The  central  figure  of  this  whole 
section  is  St.  Stephen.  He  is  intro- 
duced into  the  narrative  with  the  same 
startling  suddenness  which  we  may 
note  in  the  cases  of  Barnabas  and  Eli- 
jah. He  runs  a  rapid  course,  flings 
all,  apostles  and  every  one  else,  into  the 
shade  for  a  time,  and  then  disappears," 
exemplifying  the  saying  of  inspiration, 

145 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


"The  first  shall  be  last,  and  the  last 
first." 

II.  The  union  of  the  words  grace 
and  power  is  significant.  "  It  was  not 
the  intellect,  or  the  eloquence,  or  the 
activity  of  St.  Stephen  which  made 
him  powerful  among  the  people  and 
crowned  his  labours  with  success.  It 
was  his  abundant  grace.  Eloquence 
and  learning,  active  days  and  laborious 
nights,  are  good  and  necessary  things. 
But  these  will  be  utterly  useless  and 
ineffective  apart  from  Christ  and  the 
power  of  His  grace.  To  this  busy  age 
these  words  convey  a  useful  warning 
that  the  best  organisations  and  schemes 
will  be  useless  to  produce  Stephen's 
power,  unless  Stephen's  grace  be  found 
there  as  well." 

III.  "This  passage  is  a  prophecy 
and  picture  of  the  future  in  another 
aspect.  The  fulness  of  grace  in  Stephen 
wrought  powerfully  amongst  the  people. 
It  was  the  savour  of  life  unto  life  in 
some.  But  in  others  it  was  a  savour 
of  death  unto  death,  and  provoked 
them  to  evil  deeds,  for  they  suborned 
men  who  said,  "  We  have  heard  him 
speak  blasphemous  words  against  Moses 
and  against  God." 


IV.  These  words,  even  through  their 
falsehood,  afford  "  a  glimpse  into  the 
character  of  St.  Stephen's  preaching'. 
A  false  accusation  need  not  be  neces- 
sarily altogether  false."  "  In  order  to 
be  effective  "  it  must  have  "  some  basis 
of  truth.  St.  Stephen  was  ripening  for 
heaven  more  rapidly  than  the  apostles 
themselves.  He  was  learning  more 
rapidly  than  St.  Peter  himself  the  true 
spiritual  meaning  of  the  Christian 
scheme.  He  had  taught,  in  no  un- 
ambiguous language,  the  universal 
character  of  the  gospel  and  the  catholic 
mission  of  the  Church." 

V.  "We  learn  how  religious  zeal 
can  overthrow  religion  and  work  out 
the  purpose  of  evil.  Religious  zeal, 
mere  party  spirit  taking  the  place  of 
real  religion,  led  the  Hellenists  to 
suborn  men  and  falsely  accuse  St. 
Stephen.  They  made  an  idol  of  the 
system  of  Judaism,  and  forgot  its 
spirit.  They  worshipped  their  idol  so 
much  that  they  were  ready  to  break 
the  commandments  of  God  for  its  sake. 
How  true  to  life  has  our  own  age  found 
this  prophetic  picture  ! " — G.  T.  Stokes, 
D.D. 


146 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  vii. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

The  Church  begins  her  Martyr  Roll — The  Murder  of  Stephen. 

§  1.  The  Apology  of  Stephen  j  or,  a  Vindication  of  Christianity  (vers.  1-53). 

§  2.  The  Progenitor  of  Israel ;  or,  the  History  of  Abraham  (vers.  2-8). 

§  3.  The  Last  of  the  Patriarchs ;  or,  Joseph  a  Type  of  Christ  (vers.  9-16). 

§  4.  The  Founder  of  the  Nation ;  or,  the  Biography  of  Moses — in  three  chapters 

(vers.  17-44). 
§  5.  From  Joshua  to  Jesus  ;  or,  the  Downward  Course  of  Israel  (vers.  45-53). 
§  6.  The  Martyrdom  of  Stephen  ;  or,  the  First  Taste  of  Blood  (vers.  54-60). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  The  high  priest's  question,  Are  these  things  so  ?  analogous  to  that  put  to  Christ 
(Matt.  xxvi.  62),  was  equivalent  to  a  modern  "  Guilty  or  not  guilty  ?  " 

Ver.  2.  Concerning  what  Stephen  said  in  reply,  Luke's  information  may  have  been  derived 
either  from  Paul,  who  probably  was  present  on  the  occasion  (xxvi.  10),  and  afterwards  in  his 
own  speeches  and  writings  reproduced  the  martyr's  language  (compare  ver.  48  with  xvi.  24, 
and  ver.  53  with  Gal.  iii.  19),  or  from  records  of  it  preserved  by  the  Church  at  Jerusalem. 
The  God  of  glory. — I.e.,  who  manifested  His  presence  by  means  of  the  glory  (Exod.  xvi.  7, 10, 
xxiv.  16,  17,  xxxiii.  18,  22,  xl.  34,  35;  Lev.  ix.  6,  23;  Numb.  xiv.  10,  21,  22)— i.e.,  of  the 
Shechinah  or  luminous  appearance  which  shone  between  the  Cherubim  (Psalm  lxxx.  1).  Before 
he  dwelt  in  Charran,  or  Haran. — Carrae  in  North-West  Mesopotamia,  about  twenty-five  miles 
from  Edessa,  one  of  the  supposed  sites  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  which,  however,  is  now  almost 
unanimously  found  in  Hur,  the  most  important  of  the  early  capitals  of  Chaldgea,  the  present- 
day  Mugheir,  at  no  great  distance  from  the  mouth  and  six  miles  to  the  west  of  the  Euphrates. 
That  Stephen's  statement  does  not  contradict  Genesis  (xii.  1),  which  places  the  call  of 
Abraham  at  Haran  (Holtzmann)  may  be  inferred  from  these  facts — (1)  that  Gen.  xv.  7  and 
Neh.  ix.  7  both  represent  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  as  the  locality  in  which  Abraham  received 
Jehovah's  call,  and  (2)  that  with  these  both  Josephus  and  Philo  agree.  There  is  nothing 
unreasonable  in  supposing  the  call  to  have  been  given  twice,  first  in  Ur  and  again  in  Haran. 

Ver.  4.  When  his  father  was  dead. — If  Abraham  was  Terah's  firstborn  (Gen.  xi.  26),  and 
seventy-five  when  he  departed  from  Haran  (Gen.  xii.  4),  then  Terah  could  only  have  been 
one  hundred  and  forty-five  years  old  at  his  death,  whereas,  according  to  Gen.  xi.  32,  Terah 
was  two  hundred  and  five  when  he  died,  and  must  have  survived  Abraham's  departure  from 
Haran  by  sixty  years  ;  but  if  Abraham  was  Terah's  youngest  son,  and  born  in  Terah's  one 
hundred  and  thirtieth  year,  which,  according  to  the  Hebrew  narrative,  is  not  impossible,  then 
as  Abraham  was  seventy-five  years  old  when  he  migrated  from  Haran,  Terah  must  have  been 
two  hundred  and  five  when  he  died — which  agrees  with  Stephen's  narrative.  For  he  removed 
the  best  texts  read  (  God)  removed  him. 

Ver.  5.  None  inheritance  in  it. — Not  contradicted  by  Abraham's  purchase  of  the  field  and 
cave  at  Machpelah  (Gen.  xxiii.  9-11),  which  were  meant  for  "a  possession"  of  a  burying  place 
but  not  for  an  inheritance  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term. 

Ver.  6.  Four  hundred  years. — If  Stephen  included  in  these  four  centuries  the  whole  period 
of  sojourning,  bondage,  and  oppression,  exactly  as  Jehovah  did  in  Genesis  (xv.  13),  this  seems 
to  be  at  variance  with  Paul's  reckoning  of  the  interval  between  the  Abrahamic  promise  and 
the  Mosaic  law  as  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  (Gal.  iii.  17),  which  interval  again  is  repre- 
sented in  Exodus  (xii.  40)  as  "  the  sojourning  of  Israel  who  dwelt  in  Egypt."  Assuming 
that  four  hundred  may  have  been  a  round  number  for  four  hundred  and  thirty,  the  difficulty 
remains  how  to  harmonise  the  statements  of  Stephen  and  Paul.  If,  according  to  Paul,  the 
interval  from  Abraham  to  Moses  was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years,  then,  inasmuch  as 
Isaac  was  born  twenty-five  years  after  the  promise  was  first  given,  and  was  sixty  years 
old  at  the  birth  of  Jacob,  who  was  one  hundred  and  thirty  years  of  age  when  he  stood  before 
Pharaoh,  then  430  -  (25  +  60  -f  130)  =  215,  which  leaves  only  two  hundred  and  fifteen 
for  the  years  of  exile,  bondage,  and  oppression.  Either,  therefore,  Stephen,  following  the 
LXX.  version  of  Exod.  xii.  40,  which  inserts  "  in  the  land  of  Canaan  "  after  "  in  the  land  of 
Egypt,  designed  his  four  hundred  years  to  embrace  the  same  period  as  Paul's  four  hundred 
and  thirty  indicate — a  view  supported  by  Josephus  (Ant.,  II.  xv.  2),  or  he  followed  Gen. 

147 


chap.  vii.  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


xv.  13,  and  understood  the  four  hundred  to  refer  to  the  Egyptian  sojourn,  bondage,  and 
oppression,  in  which  case  he  is  again  supported  by  Josephus  {Ant.,  II.  ix.  1 ;  Wars,  V.  ix.  4), 
who  gives  both  views,  but  not  by  Paul.  It  would  remove  all  appearance  of  contrariety  if 
Gen.  xv.  13  signified  by  "  a  land  not  theirs,"  Canaan  as  well  as  Egypt ;  if  this  cannot  be  done, 
then  at  the  worst  Paul  and  Stephen  must  be  held  to  have  followed  different  traditions. 

Ver.  7.  They  shall  come  forth  and  serve  Me  in  this  place. — "  They  shall  come  hither  again  " 
of  Gen.  xv.  16  is  replaced  by  "  and  serve  Me  in  this  place,"  suggested  by  rather  than  borrowed 
from  Exod.  iii.  12,  in  which  the  words  are  "  ye  shall  serve  God  upon  this  mountain." 
Stephen,  unintentionally  mixing  up  the  passages  in  Genesis  and  Exodus,  may  not  have  been 
hindered  by  the  Spirit,  because  the  sentiment  he  expressed  was  correct ;  or  under  the  Spirit's 
guidance  he  may  have  selected  the  new  clause  suggested  by  Exodus  to  explain  the  import  of 
the  one  in  Genesis. 

Ver.  8.  The  covenant  of  circumcision. — I.e.,  of  which  circumcision  was  the  sign.  See 
Rom.  iv.  11.  The  twelve  patriarchs. — I.e.,  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob  as  the  founders  of  the 
tribes  or  heads  of  the  families  of  Israel.  The  term  also  applied  to  Abraham  (Heb.  vii.  4) 
and  to  David  (ii.  29). 

Ver.  9.  Moved  with  envy,  ox  jealousy,  they,  the  patriarchs,  sold  Joseph  into  Egypt— i.e..  to 
be  carried  thither.     Stephen  condenses  the  Genesis  narrative. 

Ver.  10.  The  Pharaoh  under  whom  Joseph  rose  to  power  was  the  last  of  the  Hyksos  or 
Shepherd  kings,  Apophis,  who,  not  being  himself  a  native  Egyptian,  might  feel  disposed  to 
favour  the  Hebrew  stranger  who  had  in  so  remarkable  a  manner  interpreted  his  dreams  and 
saved  the  country. 

Ver.  11.  A  dearth  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt  and  Canaan. — Brugsch,  Sayce,  and  others 
find  this  dearth  in  a  famine,  which,  according  to  an  inscription  from  a  nobleman's  tomb  at 
Eileythia  in  Southern  Egypt,  prevailed  in  the  land  for  several  years,  and  during  which  the 
dead  man  (Baba),  according  to  the  inscription,  "  distributed  corn  to  the  city  each  year  of 
famine."  Baba,  the  nobleman  in  question,  is  supposed  to  have  lived  shortly  before  the 
establishment  of  the  eighteenth  dynasty.  Counting  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  back 
from  B.C.  1325,  when  Menephtah  II.  ascended  the  Egyptian  throne,  gives  the  reign  of 
Apophis  as  the  commencement  of  the  exile  according  to  Stephen,  as  the  date  of  the  promise 
according  to  Paul.     (But  see  above  on  ver.  6.) 

Ver.  14.  Threescore  and  fifteen  souls.— So  the  LXX.  in  Gen.  xlvi.  27  ;  but  the  Hebrew  text 
of  Gen.  xlvi.  27 ;  Exod.  i.  5,  and  Deut.  x.  22  gives  threescore  and  ten  as  the  number  of  souls 
that  went  down  into  Egypt — i.e.,  the  sixty-six  of  Gen.  xlvi.  26  with  four  (Jacob,  Joseph, 
Ephraim,  and  Manasseh)  added.  The  additional  five  were  probably  Joseph's  grandsons, 
counted  by  the  LXX.  as  among  his  sons.  Stephen,  a  Hellenist,  most  likely  followed  the 
LXX.  without  deeming  it  necessary  to  correct  what  after  all  was  no  mis-statement,  if  "  sons  " 
be  taken  in  the  wider  sense  of  descendants. 

Ver.  16.  Carried  over  into  Sychem,  and  laid  in  the  sepulchre  that  Abraham  bought  for  a 
sum  of  money. — Two  historical  inaccuracies  are  commonly  discovered  here  :  1.  That  Jacob 
and  the  fathers  were  all  buried  at  Sychem,  or  Shechem,  Abraham's  earliest  settlement  in 
Canaan  (Gen.  xii.  6,  7) ;  whereas  Jacob  was  interred  at  Hebron  (Gen.  1.  13),  and  only 
Joseph's  bones  were  laid  in  Sychem  (Josh.  xxiv.  32),  Scripture  being  silent  as  to  where  those 
of  the  other  fathers  were  deposited.  2.  That  Abraham  purchased  a  sepulchre  at  Shechem 
from  the  sons  of  Emmor,  or  Hamor,  for  a  sum  of  money,  or  for  a  price  in  silver ;  whereas  the 
tomb  Abraham  bought  was  at  Hebron,  while  the  seller  was  Ephron  the  Hittite  (Gen.  xxiii.  16), 
and  Jacob's  purchase  was  of  a  field  at  Shechem  (Gen.  xxxiii.  19),  in  which  afterwards 
Joseph's  bones  were  interred  (Josh.  xxiv.  32).  As  to  the  first  part  of  Stephen's  statement 
that  Jacob  and  the  fathers  wrere  all  carried  over  into  Shechem  and  laid  in  a  tomb,  nothing 
can  invalidate  that.  If  Stephen  must  be  understood  as  asserting  that  all  were  laid  in  the 
same  tomb,  that  was  not  so,  since  Jacob  was  buried  at  Hebron  and  Joseph  at  Sychem,  unless 
it  can  be  shown  that  Joseph's  bones  were  subsequently  reinterred  in  the  patriarchal  vault  at 
Hebron — a  hypothesis  not  impossible,  certainly,  but  still  not  capable  of  proof.  If,  further, 
Stephen  purposed  to  afhrm  that  Abraham  bought  a  tomb  at  Shechem,  this  can  only  be 
harmonised  with  Genesis  by  maintaining  that  the  tomb  at  Shechem  was  purchased  twice — 
once  by  Abraham  and  afterwards  by  Jacob,  which  is  not  a  likely  supposition.  The  suggestion 
that  Abraham  has  been  either  substituted  in  the  text  for  Jacob,  or  inserted  in  the  text  which 
originally  had  no  nominative  to  the  verb  "  purchased,"  is  rendered  inadmissible  by  all  exist- 
ing MSS.  having  Abraham.  Yet  if  Jacob  were  inserted  every  difficulty  would  not  vanish. 
It  would  still  remain  impossible  to  maintain  that  Jacob  was  interred  at  Shechem.  Could 
Stephen  himself  be  recalled,  it  might  be  possible  to  solve  this  problem ;  in  his  absence  it 
must  be  given  up,  at  least  till  additional  data  be  forthcoming.  On  the  ground  of  this 
unsolved  problem  it  would  be  rash  to  challenge  the  inspiration  of  either  Stephen  or  Luke. 

Ver.  18.  Another  king  which  knew  not  Joseph. — This  was  Aahmes,  the  first  monarch  of  the 
eighteenth  dynasty,  "  a  prince  of  great  force  of  character,  brave,  active,  energetic,  liberal, 
beloved  by  his  subjects  "  (Rawlinson,  The  Story  of  the  Nations— Egypt,  p.  152). 

148 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  VII. 


Ver.  19.  Dealt  subtilly  with  our  kindred,  or  race. — With  Aahmes  the  new  policy  towards 
the  Israelites  may  have  begun,  but  the  author  of  the  cruel  decree  appears  to  have  been 
Seti  L,  while  Kameses  II.  was  the  Pharaoh  of  the  Oppression,  and  Menepntah  II.  the  Pharaoh 
of  the  Exodus.  They  cast  out. — Pharaoh's  object  in  the  oppression  appears  to  have  been  to 
render  the  lives  of  the  Israelites  so  miserable  that  they  would  rather  cast  out  their  offspring 
than  see  them  grow  up  to  experience  such  woe  as  themselves  endured.  If  he  be  read  instead 
of  they,  then  the  well-known  decree  (Exod.  i.  16-22)  is  that  to  which  Stephen  alludes. 

Ver.  22.  Learned. — Better,  trained  or  instructed. 

Ver.  24.  Suffer  wrong,  injured,  by  beating  (Exod.  ii.  11).  The  wrongdoer  may  have  been 
one  of  Pharaoh's  taskmasters.  A  bas-relief  recovered  from  the  Nile  Valley  exhibits  one  of 
these  standing  over  a  gang  of  slaves,  whip  in  hand,  and  saying  as  he  lashes  them,  "  To  your 
wrork.  0  slaves  :  ye  are  idle  !  " 

Ver.  25.  He  supposed  should  be  he  ?vas  supposing,  meaning  that  was  his  habitual  mcod  of 
mind  at  this  period.  Would  deliver  them  should  be  gives  them  deliverance  or  salvation  ;  the 
present  tense  signifying  either  that  the  deliverance  was  at  hand  or  was  beginning  with  the 
blow  then  struck. 

Ver.  29.  Madian,  or  Midian. — In  the  south-east  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula. 

Ver.  30.  Mount  Sinai. — Exodus  (iii.  1)  gives,  as  the  scene  of  this  Divine  manifestation, 
Horeb,  which  was  probably  the  name  of  the  range,  Sinai  being  the  designation  of  the 
particular  peak  (Robinson,  Eadie),  though  others  regard  Sinai  as  the  range  and  Horeb  as 
the  peak.  Whether  Sinai,  the  mountain  of  the  Law,  was  Jebel  Serbal  (Burckhardt,  Lepsius, 
and  Ebers),  or  Ras-es-Sufsafeh  (Robinson,  Stanley,  Porter),  or  Jebel  Musa  (Wilson,  Sandie), 
travellers  are  not  decided.  Josephus  {Ant.,  II.  xi.  1)  and  Paul  (Gal.  iv.  25)  locate  it  in 
Arabia,  which  Sayce  thinks  to  a  writer  of  the  first  century  would  mean  Arabia  Petraea. 
Wherefore  he  looks  for  Sinai  not  in  the  peninsula,  but  among  the  ranges  of  Mount  Seir  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Kadesh  Barnea  (see  The  Higher  Criticism  and  the  Monuments, 
pp.  263-373). 

In  vers.  32  and  33  the  order  of  the  Hebrew  text  is  transposed. 

Ver.  35.  A  deliverer,  or  redeemer,  Xvtpojttjp. — A  latent  allusion  to  the  work  of  Christ. 

Ver.  36.  After  that  he  had  showed  should  be  having  done  or  wrought. 

Ver.  37.  The  Lord  your  are  omitted  in  best  MSS.  Like  unto  me  might  be  rendered  as  he 
raised  up  me. 

Ver.  38.  The  Church. — The  use  of  eKKk-qvia — a  term  employed  by  the  LXX.  (Deut.  xviii.  16, 
xxiii.  1 ;  Psalm  xxvi.  12)— for  the  congregation  of  Israel  warrants  the  inference  that  Stephen 
at  least  regarded  the  Hebrew  nation  as  a  church  and  the  new  assembly  of  believers  as  its 
representative  under  the  Christian  dispensation. 

Ver.  41.  They  made  a  calf  is  one  word  in  the  original.  The  calf,  or  bullock,  was  selected 
in  imitation  of  the  Egyptians,  who  worshipped  an  ox,  Apis  at  Memphis  and  Mnevis  at 
Heliopolis. 

Ver.  42.  In  the  book  of  the  prophets. — The  quotation  is  from  Amos  v.  25-27.  The  interro- 
gation, Have  ye  offered  unto  Me  ?  etc.,  is  much  used  by  the  higher  criticism  to  prove  that  the 
sacrificial  system  of  the  so-styled  priest  code  had  no  existence  in  the  time  of  Moses ;  but  the 
prophet's  meaning  is  not  that  the  Israelites  did  not  offer  sacrifices  to  Jehovah  in  the  wilder- 
ness, but  that,  though  they  did,  their  hearts  ran  after  their  idolatries — the  worship  of  Moloch 
and  the  Star  Rephan— so  that  Jehovah  rejected  their  insincere  service. 

Ver.  43.  The  tabernacle  of  Moloch  and  the  star  of  your  god  Remphan. — The  Hebrew  might 
be  rendered  Siccuth  your  king  and  Chiun  (or  the  shrine  of)  your  images,  the  star  of  your  god 
(R.V.),  Siccuth  being  in  this  case  the  name  of  one  idol  which  the  Hebrews  worshipped  as 
their  king,  and  Chiun  the  name  of  another,  believed  to  have  been  the  planet  Saturn,  of  which 
the  name  among  the  Syrians  and  Arabians  was  Kewan.  Stephen,  however,  followed  the 
LXX.,  who  understood  Siccuth  as  equivalent  to  "tabernacle" — i.e., the  portable  tent  in  which 
the  idol's  image  was  carried — and  for  "  your  king  "  substituted,  with  some  ancient  MSS., 
Moloch,  the  idol  meant ;  while  for  "  Chiun  your  images  "  they  read  "  the  star  of  your  god 
Rephan,"  which  Kircher  believes  to  be  Koptic  for  Saturn,  and  Schrader  regards  as  a  corrup- 
tion from  Kewan.  That  the  LXX.  failed  to  intelligibly  translate  the  second  Hebrew  clause 
was  of  small  moment  to  Stephen.  The  words,  "  the  star  of  the  god,"  showed  that  God  had 
given  the  Israelites  up  to  worship  the  host  of  heaven.  The  substitution  of  Babylon  for 
Damascus  in  the  Hebrew  and  the  LXX.  is  explainable  by  the  fact  that  Babylon  had  long 
been  associated  in  Jewish  history  with  the  exile. 

Ver.  44.  The  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  in  the  wilderness  was  so  called  because  it  con- 
tained the  Ark  in  which  the  two  tables  of  the  Decalogue  were  kept  (Numb.  ix.  15,  xvii.  23). 

Ver.  45.  Our  fathers  that  came  after  should  be  simply  our  fathers.  Jesus  is  Joshua,  as  in 
Heb.  iv.  8.  Into  (lit.  in)  the  possession  of  the  Gentiles.— Meaning  that  the  Ark  was  brought 
in  to  remain  in  the  piosscssion  of  the  nations — i.e.,  in  their  land.  The  R.V.  reads,  "  When  they 
entered  on  the  possession  of  the  nations  "  ;  lit.  "  at  "  or  "  in  "  their  taking  possession  of  (the 
land  of)  the  nations. 

149 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Ver.  46.  Tabernacle  should  be  ''habitation,"  permanent  abode,  like  "house"  in  ver.  47. 

Ver.  48.  The  prophet  was  Isaiah  (Ixvi.  1,  2). 

Ver.  52.  Which  of  the  prophets,  etc.,  echoed  the  words  of  Christ  (Matt.  v.  12,  xxiii.  31 ; 
Luke  xiii.  34). 

Ver.  53.  By  the  disposition  of  the  angels  is  better  rendered  in  the  R.V.,  as  it  was  ordained 
by  angels,  or  as  ordinances  of  angels;  lit.  unto  ordinances  of  angels.  Compare  Gal.  iii.  19 
and  Heb.  ii.  2. 

Ver.  54.  Cut  to  the  heart.— See  on  ver.  33.  The  word  describes  a  keener  pang  than 
"  pricked  "  in  ii.  37.  Gnashed  on  him  with  their  teeth. — Lit.  snapped  their  teeth  against 
him,  like  ferocious  animals.  The  phrase  only  occurs  here.  The  Sanhedrists  "  had  passed 
beyond  articulate  speech  into  the  inarticulate  utterances  of  animal  ferocity"  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  58.  They  stoned  Stephen. — An  illegal  and  tumultuous  proceeding,  as  the  Jews  at  this 
time  had  not  the  power  of  inflicting  capital  punishment  without  the  authority  of  the  Romans 
(John  xviii.  31) ;  most  probably  to  be  explained,  like  the  murder  of  James  (xii.  2),  by  sup- 
posing that  it  took  place  in  an  interregnum,  perhaps  about  A.D.  37,  after  the  removal  of 
Pilate,  and  before  the  arrival  of  his  successor  (Renan,  Hausrath). 

Ver.  60.  The  words  fell  asleep  suggest  the  Christian  view  of  death  (xiii.  36;  1  Cor.  xv.  18, 
etc.). 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.—  Veeses  1—53. 

The  Apology  of  Stephen  ;  or,  a  Vindication  of  Christianity. 

I.  To  whom  it  was  addressed. — 1.  The  Jewish  Sanhedrim,  consisting  of  Annas, 
Caiaphas,  John,  Alexander,  and  perhaps  also  Gamaliel,  Nicodemus,  and  Joseph  of 
Arimathea,  if  the  last  two  had  not  by  this  time  withdrawn  from  the  conclave. 
The  court  that  had  already  condemned  the  apostles  (v.  27)  was  little  likely  to 
give  a  fair  hearing  to  the  eloquent  deacon.  2.  The  Jewish  people  generally. 
Through  their  official  representatives,  with  whom  at  this  moment  they  were 
acting  in  sympathy  and  concert.  3.  All  whom  in  after  ages  it  might  concern. 
Though  this  presumably  entered  not  into  Stephen's,  it  without  doubt  formed 
part  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  mind. 

II.  In  what  spirit  it  was  spoken.— 1.  With  affection.  Hinted  at  by  the  term 
"  brethren  "  with  which  Stephen  saluted  his  judges  and  accusers.  A  sign  of 
goodness  as  well  as  greatness  on  the  part  of  Stephen  that  he  disowned  not 
kinship  with  the  truculent  adversaries  who  were  then  thirsting  for  his  blood. 
2.  With  reverence.  Not  forgetting  the  respect  due  to  the  elders  of  his  people, 
he  courteously  addressed  them  as  "  fathers."  No  man  ever  injures  his  cause  by 
rendering  honour  to  whom  honour  is  due. 

III.  Of  what  statements  it  was  composed.— 1.  A  historical  retrospect.  The 
drama  of  Israel's  career  was  opened  out  in  three  successive  acts.  (1)  The  age  of 
the  Patriarchs  before  Moses  (vers.  2-16) ;  or  the  age  of  the  promise,  rehearsing 
the  story  of  Abraham's  call  by  the  God  of  Glory  first  from  Mesopotamia  (Ur  of 
the  Chaldees)  and  afterwards  from  Haran,  to  go  into  the  Land  of  Canaan.  This 
call  the  patriarch  obeyed,  only  to  find  that  God,  who  had  promised  to  bestow 
Canaan  for  possession,  on  himself  and  on  his  seed  after  him,  when  as  yet  he  had 
no  child,  actually  gave  him  in  it  none  inheritance.  Rather  God  predicted  that 
before  his  descendants  should  come  into  their  heritage  they  should  be  bondmen  in 
a  strange  land  for  four  hundred  years.  At  the  same  time,  in  pledge  that  the 
promise  would  be  fulfilled  and  the  land  kept  for  its  appointed  heirs,  the  God  of 
glory  gave  to  the  patriarch  the  covenant  of  circumcision,  which  was  handed  on  from 
sire  to  son,  till  in  Jacob's  days  events  began  to  move  in  the  direction  of  bringing 
together  the  heirs  and  the  inheritance.  Joseph,  his  father's  favourite  son,  was  sold 
into  Egypt  by  his  envious  brethren,  who  also  by  a  singular  combination  of  cir- 
cumstances some  time  later,  in  a  season  of  famine,  repaired  thither  to  find  the 
brother  they  had  evil  entreated  governor  over  all  the  land.  At  his  invitation 
Jacob,  with  his  kindred,  numbering  threescore  and  fifteen  souls,  went  down  into 
Egypt,  where  they  died  and  left  behind  them  children,  in  what  was  soon  to 

150 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  vii. 


become  for  them  a  house  of  bondage.  With  that  closed  the  first  act  in  the 
drama.  (2)  The  age  of  Moses  (vers.  17-46);  or,  the  age  of  the  law,  sketching 
the  career  of  Moses  in  three  periods  of  forty  years.  "  Three  generations  rolled 
over  him,"  writes  Emil  Zittel  (Die  Entstehung  der  Bibel,  p.  40).  "  Three  times 
he  lived  through  the  holy  number  of  forty  years ;  as  son  of  Egyptian  wisdom,  as 
shepherd  of  the  wilderness,  as  emancipator  of  his  people."  Of  these  periods  the 
first  began  during  the  currency  of  Israel's  oppression,  and,  embracing  the  lawgiver's 
birth  and  education  in  the  house  of  Pharaoh,  ended  with  his  flightvinto  Midian 
(vers.  17-29).  The  second  closed  with  the  appearance  to  him  in  the  Wilderness 
of  Sinai,  of  an  angel  of  God,  and  his  subsequent  departure  into  Egypt  to  lead 
forth  his  people  from  captivity,  which  he  successfully  accomplished  (veis.  30-36). 
The  third  opened  with  the  Exodus,  included  the  wilderness  wanderings,  and 
terminated  with  the  entrance  into  Canaan  under  Joshua  (vers.  37-45).  (3)  The 
Age  of  the  Prophets;  or,  the  Age  of  the  Temple  (vers.  46-53),  telling  the  brief 
but  simple  tale  of  David's  proposal  to  find  a  habitation  for  the  God  of  Jacob,  and 
of  Solomon's  building  Him  a  house,  in  which  indeed  Jehovah  was  formally 
worshipped,  while  outside  His  prophets  were  disobeyed  and  persecuted.  2.  An 
implied  representation.  Of  the  history  of  Jesus,  which  had  its  obvious  paralh  1 
and  prefigurement  in  the  just  recited  career  of  the  nation.  (1)  Like  Joseph 
whom  his  brethren  sold  for  envy,  but  whom  Jehovah  delivered  and  appointed  to 
be  their  preserver,  Christ — though  Stephen  leaves  this  unexpressed — had  been 
rejected  by  them,  yea  even  sold  into  the  hands  of  His  enemies  and  put  to  death, 
raised  up  by  God,  exalted  to  the  highest  throne  in  heaven,  made  Lord  of  all  and 
sent  to  be  their  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  unto  Israel  and  remission  of  sins. 
(2)  Like  Moses,  whom  his  countrymen  understood  not  and  resisted,  but  who 
afterwards  led  them  forthto  liberty,  Christ  had  come  unto  His  own,  who  likewise 
knew  Him  not,  but  thrust  Him  from  them,  and  was  coming  again  to  offer  them 
emancipation  from  sin  and  death.  (3)  Like  the  men  who  in  the  wilderness  pre- 
ferred the  tabernacle  of  Moloch  to  that  Jehovah  had  caused  to  be  constructed 
for  them,  and  like  their  descendants  who  desecrated  the  temple  by  carrying  on 
within  its  sacred  precincts,  in  defiance  of  the  warnings  of  Jehovah's  prophets, 
heathen  orgies  instead  of  the  legitimate  Jehovah  worship,  so  had  they  defiled, 
desecrated,  and  despised  the  true  tabernacle  and  temple  of  Jehovah,  even  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  and  preferred  to  Him  the  lifeless  stones  of  the  material  edifice,  and 
the  meaningless  service  of  an  effete  ritual. 

IV.  With  what  arguments  it  was  charged. — 1.  Against  supposing  that  the  true 
worship  of  Jehovah  was  bound  up  with  the  law.  This  could  not  be  :  ( 1 )  Because 
the  God  of  Glory  had  appeared  unto  the  father  of  the  nation  in  Mesopotamia, 
before  he  dwelt  in  Haran  (ver.  2).  If  a  theophany  or  Divine  manifestation  be 
the  basis  of  all  acceptable  worship,  as  the  law  itself  says  (Exod.  xxii.  24),  then 
clearly  such  worship  did  not  originate  at  Sinai  but  at  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  and 
not  with  Moses  but  with  Abraham.  (2)  Because  the  promise  of  a  Messiah, 
admittedly  the  kernel  of  Mosaism,  was  given  to  Abraham  when  as  yet  he  had  no 
child  and  therefore  no  descendants  on  whom  to  enjoin  the  law  (ver.  5).  (3)  Be- 
cause the  covenant  of  circumcision  in  which  all  Israelites  gloried  as  of  the  essence 
of  their  law  was  not  of  Moses  but  of  Abraham  (ver.  8  ;  compare  John  vii.  22). 
(4)  Because  the  presence  of  God  with  His  people  to  protect  and  deliver  them, 
which  was  what  pious  Jews  understood  by  salvation,  did  not  begin  with  LTis 
coming  down  to  talk  with  them  at  Sinai,  but  had  been  enjoyed  by  Joseph  in 
Egypt  (ver.  10),  and  by  Joseph's  father  and  brethren  through  him  (vers.  14,  15). 
2.  Against  supposing  that  the  true  worship  of  Jehovah  was  bound  up  with  Moses. 
This  it  could  not  be:  (1)  Because  when  Moses  first  offered  himself  to  his 
countrymen,  in  Jehovah's  name,  as  a  deliverer,  they  would  not  receive  him  but 
thrust  him  from  them  (vers.  23-29).     (2)  Because  Moses  himself,  who  had  been 

151 


chap.  vii.  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  THE  ACTS. 


miraculously  called  and  strengthened  to  effect  their  temporal  deliverance,  had 
distinctly  pointed  them  to  a  greater  prophet  than  himself,  even  to  Jesus,  though 
Stephen  leaves  this  supplementary  thought  unspoken  (vers.  30-37).  (3)  Because 
though  Moses  had  been  the  medium  of  conveying  to  Israel  the  "  living  oracles," 
or  oracles  of  life  received  from  Jehovah,  he  could  not  secure  Israel's  obedience  to 
these,  even  at  the  moment  when  Israel  was  encamped  in  Jehovah's  presence 
(vers.  38-41).  3.  Against  supposing  that  the  true  worship  of  Jehovah  was  bound 
up  with  the  temple.  This  once  more  was  impossible  :  (1)  Because  in  the  wilderness 
the  tabernacle,  which  was  the  shadow  of  the  temple,  could  not  retain  the  allegi- 
ance of  the  people  to  Jehovah.  Instead  of  offering  to  Jehovah  slain  beasts  and 
sacrifices  at  the  tabernacle  door,  they  took  up  the  tent  of  Moloch  and  carried 
about  the  star  of  the  god  Remphan  (vers.  42,  43).  (2)  Because  the  temple  was 
never  meant  to  be  anything  more  than  an  emblem  of  Jehovah's  true  habitation, 
as  saith  the  prophet,  "  The  heaven  is  My  throne,"  etc.  (vers.  46-50).  (3)  Because 
the  existence  of  the  temple  could  not  keep  Israel's  fathers  from  resisting  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  murdering  Jehovah's  prophets  (vers.  51,  52).  4.  Against  sup- 
posing that  the  true  worship  of  Jehovah  was  bound  up  with  them.  They  had 
certainly  been  honoured  above  all  peoples,  had  received  the  law  as  ordained  by — 
i.e.,  as  it  were,  at  the  hands  of  angels,  had  listened  to  the  voices  of  Jehovah's 
prophets  showing  before  the  coming  of  the  Righteous  One — i.e.,  of  Messiah — and 
had  enjoyed  the  gracious  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  their  hearts,  and  yet 
to  what  had  all  these  gracious  privileges  led  ?  They  had  not  kept  the  law 
except  in  the  letter,  and  not  always  that ;  they  had  not  believed  in  Jehovah's 
prophets  but  persecuted  and  killed  them,  the  last  and  greatest  of  them  having 
been  the  righteous  One  of  whom  they  had  just  been  the  betrayers  and  murderers ; 
and  they  had  not  yielded  to  but  resisted  the  Holy  Ghost.  Was  it  not  then  idle 
to  assert  or  suppose  that  they  were  the  representatives  of  the  true  Jehovah- 
worship  ?     Such  was  the  spirit  of  Stephen's  address. 

V.  To  what  results  it  conducted. — 1.  For  his  hearers.  (1)  Conviction  of  guilt. 
They  were  cut  to  the  heart,  pierced  to  the  quick,  sawn  asunder  with  inward 
pain  because  of  inability  to  deny  the  truth  of  Stephen's  charges.  (2)  Rage 
against  their  prisoner,  at  whom  they  snarled  and  snapped  with  their  teeth  like 
angry  wolves,  impatient  to  devour  their  prey,  because  his  cutting  invective, 
penetrating  to  their  consciences,  had  brought  their  guilt  to  remembrance. 
2.  For  himself.  A  violent  death  and  a  martyr's  crown — a  large  recompense  for 
a  short  service  ;  a  brief  shame  followed  by  a  long  fame ;  a  little  loss  and  then 
an  eternal  gain  (see  on  vers.  54-60). 

Learn. — 1.  That  an  eloquent  and  able  defence  is  not  always  followed  by  a 
verdict  of  acquital.  2.  That  it  does  not  always  conduce  to  one's  personal  safety 
to  tell  the  truth.  3.  That  judges  are  not  always  open  to  the  force  of  sound 
reasoning.  4.  That  opponents  defeated  in  argument  are  seldom  merciful. 
5.  That  the  sins  of  one  age  are  often  repeated  in  the  next. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1-53.  The  Speech  of  Stephen.  V.  A    noble  vindication   of    Jesus 

I.  A  masterpiece    of    sacred    elo-      Christ. 

quence.  YI.  A  striking  anticipation  of  Paul- 

II.  A  witness  to  the  truth  of  Old     ine  universalism. 
Testament  history.  . 

III.  A  testimony  to  the  sustaining  ISTote. — On  the  Historical  Credibility 
power  of  religion.                                         of  this  Speech. — That  this  speech  was 

IY.  A  proof  of  the  reality  of  divine  not  really  uttered  by  Stephen,  but 
inspiration.  freely  composed  by  a  late  author  (Baur, 

152. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  vn. 


Zeller    Weizs*acker,    Holtzmann,    and  the  standpoint  of  Paul  in  teaching  the 

others)  has  been  argued  on  the  follow-  spirituality  of  worship  (vers.   38,  48), 

ing   grounds :    1.    "  That   it   takes   so  and   seems   rather   to  belong  to  later 

little  notice  of  the   special  accusation  Christian  Alexandrinism  (Holtzmann) ; 

against   which    Stephen   defends  him-  but  this  is  an  altogether  unwarranted 

self "  (Baur,  Paul,  his  Life  and  Work,  assertion,  since  Paul  quite  as  clearly 

vol.  i.,  p.  44).     But   in  this  Stephen  teaches  that  God  can  be  rightly  wor- 

only  showed  how  entirely  absorbed  he  shipped    only     in     the     Spirit    (xvii. 

was  in  vindicating  his  Master  rather  24 ;    Eph.    ii.    21,    22 ;    Phil.    iii.    3). 

than   in   excusing    himself.       Besides,  5.  That  the  riotous  proceeding  against 

that  his  speech  should  have  this  appear-  Stephen   lenders    it   "improbable   there 

ance  is  a  powerful  indirect  testimony  was  any  transaction  at    all  before  the 

to  its  genuineness,  since  its  composer,  Sanhedrim  "  (Baur,  i.  56).    This,  how- 

had  it  not  been  Stephen,  would  have  ever,  is  simply  turning   criticism  into 

been  sure  to  have  avoided  this  appear-  ridicule ;  as  if  the  Jewish  Sanhedrim 

ance  of  incongruity.     2.  That  it  con-  never  overstepped  its  legitimate  powers, 

tains   historical   inaccuracies,  as,    e.g.,  and  was  always  a  law-abiding  court, 

about  the  call  of  Abraham  (ver.  2),  the  Credat    Judaeus  !       6.    That    there    is 

burial  of  the  patriarchs  (ver.  16),  and  nothing   to  prevent  the  supposition  that 

the  duration  of  the  Egyptian  bondage  the    historian     put     this     speech    into 

(ver.  6).    But  the  so-called  inaccuracies  Stephen's  mouth   (Baur,  i.    56).      But 

are  susceptible  of  reasonable  explana-  inasmuch   as   the   speech    is   admitted 

tion  ;  and,  even  if  they  were  not,  could  to  have  "well  suited  the  character  of 

only  be  urged  against  the  inspiration  Stephen,"  and  to  be  "  correctly  stamped 

of    the    speech,    and   not    against   its  with  his  declared  religious  views,"  it  is 

genuineness.      If  the  composer  of  the  much  easier  to  suppose  that   Stephen 

speech  could  err,  so  also  might  Stephen,  himself  delivered  it  than  that  Luke  or 

assuming   that   he   was   not   inspired.  another  composed  it.     7.  That  there  is 

3.  That  it  discovers  verbal  and  material  difficulty    in    understanding    how    the 

points  of  contact  ivith  the  discourses  of  speech  would  or  could  be  taken  down  in 

Peter  and  Paul  (Overbeck,  Weizsacker,  court.     But  even  if  Paul  did  not  make 

Supernatural  Religion,  iii.,    145-178) ;  notes  of  it  at  the  time  (Baumgarten), 

but  exactly  this  is   what    one   should  the  memories  of  some  who  heard  of  it 

have  expected  from  Stephen,  who  was  might  not  be  unequal  to  the  task  of  its 

the  contemporary  of  these  men,   and  preservation.    Examples  of  remarkable 

believed  the  same  facts  and  doctrines  memories    are    not  wanting  either  in 

as  they  did.     4.  That  it  goes  far  beyond  ancient  or  in  modern  times. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  2—8. 

The  Progenitor  of  Israel ;  or,  the  History  of  A  braham. 

I.  The  honours  he  received. — 1.  An  overpowering  revelation.  (1)  Of  what? 
Of  the  glory  of  God.  "  The  God  of  glory  appeared  unto  our  father  Abraham." 
This  remarkable  expression,  "  the  God  of  glory,"  which  occurs  only  here  in  the 
New  and  but  once  in  the  Old  Testament  (Psalm  xxix.  3),  nevertheless  has  its  roots 
in  and  receives  explanation  from  the  latter.  Without  question  it  points  back  to 
the  transaction  at  Sinai  (Exod.  xvi.  7,  10,  xxiv.  16),  and  identifies  the  divine 
Being  whose  external  and  symbolic  form,  an  ethereal  luminous  essence,  appeared 
in  the  cloud  upon  the  mountain  summit  (Exod.  xxiv.  17),  and  afterwards  filled 
the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xl.  34),  as  the  same  who  had  revealed  Himself  to  the  son 
of  Terah.  Whether  He  appeared  in  a  similar  fashion  as  at  Sinai  cannot  be 
decided,  although  Stephen's  language  and  sundry  notices  in  Genesis  (xv.  17,  xvii.  22) 
almost  warrant  an  affirmative  answer.  In  any  case,  it  does  not  seem  possible  to 
reduce  this  theophany  to  a  mere  subjective  impression  on  the  patriarch's  mind. 

153 


chap.  vil.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


(2)  Where?  In  Mesopotamia,  or  the  region  between  the  two  rivers  Tigris  and 
Euphrates;  not,  however,  in  the  northern  district,  but  in  the  south,  "in  the 
land  of  the  Chaldeans  "• — i.e.,  in  Ur  (Gen.  xv.  7),  now  identified  as  Mugheir  (see 
"  Critical  .Remarks  ").  (3)  When  1  "  Before  he  dwelt  in  Haran,"  and  whilst  his 
father  was  yet  alive.  The  statement  of  Stephen  does  not  contradict  but  supple- 
ments that  of  Genesis  (xii.  1),  which  appears  to  say,  but  does  not  necessarily 
mean,  that  the  order  to  depart  from  his  father's  house  was  only  given  to  the 
patriarch  iu  Haran.  Haran  was  not  Abraham's  country  or  land  of  his  nativity, 
but  the  land  of  the    Chaldees   was   (Gen.  xi.  28).     2.  An  imperative  command. 

(1)  To  get  out  from  his  land  and  from  his  kindred,  or,  in  other  words,  to  become 
a  pilgrim.  Hard  as  the  summons  was,  it  was  obediently  complied  with. 
Abraham's  pilgrimage  commenced  at  Ur,  and  reached  its  first  stage  at  Haran. 
Five  years  later,  on  his  father's  (Terah 's)  death,  it  entered  on  its  second  and  final 
stage.  (2)  To  betake  himself  to  a  new  country,  the  land  of  Canaan,  wherein 
they,  his  descendants,  were  then  dwelling ;  a  land  which  God  would  show  him, 
a  mitigation  of  the  preceding  hardship,  since  a  pilgrim  under  God's  leading  must 
always  be  safe,  and  can  never  come  to  grief.  That  Abraham  yielded  obedience 
to  this  command  was  a  signal  proof  of  faith  (Heb.  xi.  8).  3.  A  gracious  promise. 
— (1)  Of  a  land  for  a  possession,  the  land  of  Canaan  above-mentioned.  Broad 
acres  have  ever  been  a  coveted  and  cherished  inheritance.  But  God,  the  supreme 
owner  of  the  soil,  distributes  them  to  whomsoever  He  will.  If  this  promise  was 
broken  to  the  hand  and  foot,  it  was  kept  to  the  heart  and  spirit  (see  below). 

(2)  Of  a  son  for  an  heir.  Offspring,  especially  among  the  Hebrews,  has  ever 
been  a  much-prized  blessing.  No  one  man  likes  to  be  succeeded  by  a  stranger, 
and  far  less  to  leave  his  wealth  to  a  servant.  Yet  just  this  was  the  prospect  which 
Abraham  at  the  moment  had  before  him  (Gen.  xv.  2).  Like  land,  children  are 
the  gift  of  God  (Psalm  cxxvii.  3).  (3)  Of  a  nation  for  descendants.  Most  men 
count  themselves  happy  when  they  can  found  a  family  ;  but  God  promised 
Abraham  that  his  offspring  should  ultimately  develop  into  a  people  (Gen.  xiii.  16), 
which,  after  sojourning  in  a  strange  land  (Egypt)  in  a  state  of  bondage  for  four 
hundred  years,  should  be  emancipated  from  their  thraldom  and  conducted  to  their 
inheritance.  4.  A  solemn  covenant.  One  would  have  thought  a  promise  from 
God's  lips  would  have  been  sufficient  guarantee  for  the  bestowment  of  the  above- 
named  blessings  :  and,  so  far  as  God  s  creature  is  concerned,  that  is  all  he  can  at 
any  time  expect  to  receive ;  but,  marvellous  condescension  !  God  has  frequently 
been  pleased  to  add  to  His  spoken  word  a  visible  pledge  or  seal — in  Noah's  case 
the  rainbow  (Gen.  ix.  12-17),  in  Abraham's  circumcision  (Gen.  xvii.  10-14),  the 
import  of  which  was  that  Israel  after  the  flesh  should  be  a  separated,  purged, 
and  consecrated  people. 

II.  The  virtues  he  displayed. — 1.  Faith.  He  believed  in  God,  credited  the 
revelation  which  had  been  given  him,  accepted  the  invitation  proffered  him, 
relied  on  the  promise  made  to  him,  and  assented  to  the  covenant  which  had  been 
struck  with  him.  Had  faith  been  awanting — such  faith  as  is  the  substance  of 
things  hoped  for  (Heb.  xi.  1)  and  reposes  on  God's  word  (John  iii.  33) — nothing 
of  a  spiritual  sort  could  have  followed.  2.  Obedience.  He  promptly,  cheerfully, 
and  faithfully  performed  that  which  God  had  commanded.  First,  he  went  out 
from  Ur  along  with  Terah  his  father,  Sarah  his  sister-wife,  and  Lot  his  nephew 
(Gen.  xi.  31) ;  and  afterwards,  when  Terah  was  dead,  removing  from  Haran,  he 
migrated  southwards  to  Canaan.  3.  Patience.  Though  on  arriving  in  Canaan 
it  looked  as  if  the  promise  were  about  to  fail,  as  if  he  were  to  obtain  neither  the 
inheritance  nor  the  heir,  yet  he  quietly  adhered  to  the  word  which  had  been 
spoken  (Rom.  iv.  20;  Heb.  vi.  15).  Nor  did  he  abandon  hope  when  God  talked 
about  four  hundred  years  of  servitude  for  his  posterity,  but  calmly  rested  in 
God    and   waited   for   the   fulfilment  of  what  had  been  promised.     4.  Insight, 

154 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  VII. 


He  could  see  that  Jehovah's  promise  was  larger  than  any  immediate  or  earthly 
fulfilment  could  realise — that  the  seed  was  One  higher  than  a  child  of  his  loins, 
even  One  in  whom  all  the  families  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed  (John  viii.  56), 
and  that  the  land  was  something  more  desirable  than  an  earthly  inheritance  like 
Canaan,  was  a  better  country,  even  an  heavenly  (Heb.  xi.  10). 

III.  The  rewards  he  obtained. —  1.  God's  promise  was  fulfilled.  He  got  his 
son  and  heir — "  Abraham  begat  Isaac."  His  son's  descendants  grew  into  a 
family — "  Isaac  begat  Jacob,  and  Jacob  the  twelve  patriarchs."  Their  households 
(threescore  and  fifteen  souls,  ver.  14)  multiplied  into  a  nation.  The  nation 
eventually  entered  on  the  occupation  of  the  land  (ver.  45).  2.  His  own  horn  ivas 
exalted.  He  became  the  ancestor  of  the  Jewish  people,  the  progenitor  of  the 
Messiah,  the  father  of  the  faithful,  the  world-renowned  pattern  of  believers. 

Learn. — 1.  The  sovereignty  of  God  in  dispensing  His  favours.  2.  The  wisdom 
of  man  in  walking  by  faith.  3.  The  certainty  that  believers  will,  ultimately, 
inherit  the  promises. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  2.  The  God  of  Glory.— The 
fitness  of  this  designation  will  appear 
when  it  is  considered  that — 

I.  God's  dwelling-place  is  glorious. 
Heaven  (Deut.  xxvi.  15);  eternity 
(Isa.  lvii.  15) ;  both  of  which  are  the 
habitation  of  His  holiness  and  His  glory 
(Isa.  Ixiii.  15) ;  and  in  both  of  which 
are  glory  and  honour  (1  Chron.  xvi.  27. 

II.  His  character  is  glorious.  In 
holiness  (Exod.  xv.  11) ;  in  power  (Exod. 
xv.  6;  Isa.  Ixiii.  12;  2  Thess.  i.  9); 
in  grace  (Eph.  i.  6).  Or,  summing  up 
all  His  attributes  His  Name  is  glorious 
(1  Chron.  xxix.  13;  Psalm  lxxii.  19). 

III.  His  works  are  glorious.  The 
creation  of  the  material  universe 
(Psalm  xix.l).  His  providential  govern- 
ment of  earth  (Isa.  Ixiii.  14;  Psalm 
cxx.  3,  cxlv.  11;  Matt.  vi.  13)  His 
redemption  of  a  lost  world  (Psalm  xcviii. 
2 ;  Isa.  lii.  10  ;  Eph.  i.  3  ;  2  Tim.  i.  9). 

IV.  His  word  is  glorious.  Twice  at 
least  is  the  gospel  so  designated  (2  Cor. 
iv.  4;  1  Tim.  i.  11). 

V.  His  Church  is  glorious.  The 
company  of  redeemed  ones  will  yet  be 
presented  before  Him  as  a  glorious 
Church  without  spot  or  wrinkle  (Eph. 
v.  27). 

VI.  His  final  appearing  will  be 
glorious.  Christ,  the  image  of  God, 
will  one  day  be  manifested  in  glory 
(Col.  hi.  4;  Titus  ii.  13). 

Ver.  5.  God's  Promises  to  His  People. 
I.  Often  broken  in  the  letter  but 


kept  in  the  spirit. — As  it  was  with  the 
promise  of  Canaan  to  Abraham. 

II.  Though  long  delayed  in  fulfil- 
ment, never  cancelled. — As  it  was 
with  the  promise  of  a  son  to  Abraham. 

III.  Sometimes  denied  to  the  pro- 
misees but  granted  to  their  children. 
— As  it  was  with  the  inheritance  which 
Abraham  obtained  not,  though  his  seed 
did. 

Vers.  2-5.  The  History  of  a  Called 
Sinner. 

I.  The  divine. — In  Abraham's  case 
this  consists  of  two  parts  :  first,  the 
vision ;  and,  secondly,  the  command. 
1.  The  vision.  The  God  of  glory 
appeared.  Here  was  (1)  the  divine 
suddenly  appearing  in  the  midst  of  the 
human,  (2)  the  frue  in  the  midst  of  the 
untrue ;  (3)  the  heavenly  in  the  midst 
of  the  earthly ;  (4)  the  real  in  the 
midst  of  the  unreal.  So  is  it  with 
every  genuine  conversion  ;  there  may 
not  be  the  actual  vision  ;  there  may 
not  be  the  glory  which  appeared  to 
Abraham  in  Ur,  and  to  Saul  on  his 
way  to  Damascus;  but  in  all  cases  it 
is  God  breaking  in  upon  man  and 
man's  idolatry  ;  the  light  of  the  know- 
ledge of  the  glory  flashing  into  a 
soul ;  the  light  dispelling  the  darkness  ; 
the  true  dispersing  the  untrue;  the 
heavenly  supplanting  the  earthly. 
This  is  conversion.  It  is  God  coming 
near ;  coming  in  !  2.  The  command. 
Get  thee  out, — go  to  the  land  I  si  all 

155 


CHAP.  VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


point  to.  It  thus  consists  of  two 
parts :  calling  out  from,  and  calling 
in  to.  It  is  a  Divine  command,  urgent 
and  explicit. 

II.  The  human. — This  consists  of 
four  parts.  1.  The  obedience.  "  He 
came  out  of  the  land  of  the  Chal- 
deans." He  hesitated  not,  but  rose  up 
and  obeyed.  2.  The  pilgrimage.  He 
is  not  led  into  Canaan  at  once.  3.  The 
tribulation.  In  Abraham's  case  it  was 
considerable.  Lot's  worldliness,  that 
was  a  trial ;  the  destruction  of  Lot's 
family,  and  of  Sodom,  that  was  a 
trial ;  the  death  of  Sarah,  that  was  a 
trial.  He  had  many  a  sorrow.  4.  The 
inheritance  at  last.  Not  Babylon,  nor 
Egypt,  but  the  land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey.  Thus  our  whole  life  here 
is  one  of  faith,  from  first  to  last.  Get 
thee  out,  is  God's  message  to  each 
worldling. — H.  JBonar,  D.D. 

Yer.  6.  A  great  Prophecy  and  its 
Fulfilment. 

I.  The  prophecy. — 1.  That  Abraham 
should  have  a  seed,  when  as  yet  he  had 
no  child.  2.  That  that  seed  should 
grow  into  a  people,  of  which  no  reason- 
able prospect  existed.  3.  That  that 
people  should  be  enslaved  for  a  period 
of  four  hundred  years.  4.  That  the 
nation  which  enslaved  them  should  be 
visited  with  severe  punishment.  5.  That 
this  punishment  should  result  in  their 
emancipation.  6.  That  when  eman- 
cipated they  should  serve  God  in  the 
land  of  Canaan. 

II.  The  fulfilment.— 1.  The  seed 
predicted  appeared  when  Isaac  was 
born.  2.  The  people  arose  when  the 
patriarchs  began  to  multiply  in  the 
days  of  Jacob.  3.  The  captivity  com- 
menced to  realise  itself  when  the  seventy 
souls  comprising  Jacob's  family  went 
down  into  Egypt.  4.  The  punishment 
threatened  against  their  oppressors  took 
the  form  of  a  series  of  plagues  upon 
the  land  of  Egypt.  5.  The  emancipa- 
tion came  to  pass  when  Moses  led  his 
brethren  from  the  house  of  bondage. 
6.  The  foretold  service  of  Jehovah  was 
set  up  when  Israel  was  established  in 
Canaan. 

156 


Lessons. — 1.  The  ability  of  God  to 
predict  and  to  fulfil.  2.  The  argument 
from  fulfilled  prophecy  in  support  of 
inspiration. 

Ver.  8.  The  Twelve  Patriarchs. 

I.  Descendants  of  distinguished 
men. 

II.  Not  above  cherishing  sinful 
feelings. 

III.  Perpetrators  of  a  hideous 
crime. 

IV.  Subjects  of  a  great  mercy 
(ver.    13): 

Ver.  2-8.  The  experiences  of  a  soul 
— illustrated  in  the  case  of  Abraham. 

I.  A  glorious  vision. — God.  Not 
impossible  to  see  God  by  the  eye  of 
faith.  God  still,  by  His  Spirit  and 
through  His  gospel,  reveals  Himself  to 
men's  souls.  In  this  inshining  of  the 
glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ  lies  the  beginning  of  the  soul's 
new  life. 

II.  A  hard  precept. — "  Get  thee  out 
of  thy  country,"  etc.  When  God 
makes  Himself  known  to  a  human 
soul  in  the  manner  above  described, 
it  is  for  the  purpose  of  detaching  that 
soul  from  its  earthly  surroundings, 
separating  it  from  its  mundane  at- 
tachments, leading  it  forth  from  its 
terrestrial  relationships,  and  causing  it 
to  start  upon  a  nobler  spiritual  career 

III.  A  magnificent  promise.  That 
God  would  conduct  him  (Abraham)  to 
another  and  better  land,  and  bestow 
it  on  himself  and  his  posterity.  Simi- 
larly, God  never  enjoins  a  soul  to 
enter  on  a  heavenward  career  without 
extending  to  that  soul  a  like  assurance 
of  help  and  guidance  towards  that 
ideal  state  after  which  it  aspires.  To 
the  soul  that  "  comes  "  God  will 
"  shew." 

IV.  A  splendid  faith. — "Then  came 
he  out  of  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans." 
Without  that  response  to  the  divine 
precept  and  promise  Abraham  had 
never  set  his  foot  upon  the  upward 
way.  Spiritual  life  on  the  soul's  side 
begins  with  personal  acts  of  trust  and 
obedience.     The  soul  that  cannot  sur- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  vn. 


render  to  God  in  hearty  confidence  and 
prompt  submission  lacks  the  capability 
of  being  redeemed. 

V.  A  sore  disappointment. — Though 
Abraham  obeyed,  God  gave  him  none 
inheritance  in  the  land.  The  reason 
was,  that  God  had  provided  for  him 
something  better.  God  never  intended 
to  put  him  off  with  a  few  acres  of 
material  soil,  but  had  prepared  for 
him  a  city  in  a  better  country,  even 
an  heavenly.  The  disappointment 
was  required  to  prepare  him  for  this 
city.  Neither  does  God  engage  that 
gracious  souls  shall  not  be  disappointed 
if  they  seek  their  inheritance  on  earth; 


but  he  does  engage  that  "  all  things 
shall  work  together  for  their  good,"  and 
that  they  shall  have  an  inheritance 
among  the  saints  in  light  (Col.  i.  12). 

VI.  A  sufficient  consolation.  — The 
covenant  of  circumcision  which  formed 
Abraham's  descendants  into  a  people 
was  a  pledge  that  the  land  for  the 
people  would  not  be  wanting,  but 
would  arrive  in  due  time.  So  to 
Christian  souls  is  God's  covenant  of 
grace,  signed  and  sealed  by  the  sacra- 
ments of  Baptism  and  the  Lord's 
Supper,  ample  guarantee  that  the 
heavenly  inheritance  will  not  fail. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  9—16. 

The  Last  of  the  Patriarchs  ;  or,  Joseph  a  type  of  Christ. 

I.  The  victim  of  a  terrible  crime. — Joseph  was  sold  into  Egypt,  for  twenty 
pieces  of  silver  (Gen.  xxxvii.  28).  So  was  Christ  betrayed  to  the  chief  priests  for 
thirty  pieces -of  silver  (Matt.  xxvi.  15).  The  former  crime  was — 1.  Perpetrated 
by  Joseph's  brethren.  And  so  was  Christ's  betrayal  by  those  who  were  His  own 
kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh  (John  i.  11),  and  in  particular  by  one  of  His  own 
disciples  (Matt.  xxvi.  14).  2.  Instigated  by  fraternal  jealousy.  Joseph's  brethren 
were  envious  of  the  place  which  Joseph  had  in  their  father's  affection,  and  of  the 
greatness  which  Joseph's  dreams  foreshadowed  (Gen.  xxxvii.  4,  5).  So  the  real 
root  of  men's  opposition  to  Christ  was  His  essential  goodness  and  greatness, 
which  they  hated.  3.  Followed  by  unmerited  afflictions.  These,  in  excruciating 
forms  of  slander,  accusation  and  imprisoment  were  all  without  being  deserved, 
experienced  by  Joseph  in  Egypt  (Gen.  xxxix.).  The  like  and  worse  were 
without  cause,  in  after  years,  meted  out  to  Joseph's  antitype  Jesus  (Matt,  xxvi., 
xxvii.). 

II.  The  subject  of  a  marvellous  interposition. — God  worked  in  his  behalf,  and 
gave  him  three  things  which  again  had  their  counterpart  in  the  experience  of 
Christ.  1.  Consolation  in  his  troubles.  Such  as  arises  to  a  good  man  from  the 
enjoyment  of  God's  favour  and  fellowship  (Psalm  xci.  15)  :  "  God  was  with  him  " 
(compare  Gen.  xxxix.  21).  The  same  support  was  extended  to  Christ  in  His 
tribulation  (John  xvi.  32).  2.  Deliverance  from  his  troubles.  "  God  delivered 
him  out  of  all  his  afflictions."  So  Christ  was  delivered  from  death  and  the 
grave.  A  like  favour  promised  to  the  righteous  (Psalm  xxxiv.  19).  As  Joseph 
escaped  out  of  his  afflictions  in  Egypt,  so  will  the  Christian  be  released  from  his, 
if  not  here,  at  least  hereafter  (Rev.  vii.  16,  17).  3.  Promotion  after  his  troubles. 
God  "  gave  him  favour  and  wisdom  before  Pharaoh,  king  of  Egypt,  and  made 
him  governor  over  Egypt  and  all  his  house  (Gen.  xli.  40,  41).  In  like  manner 
Christ  was  exalted  after  His  humiliation  (ii.  33,  v.  31 ;  Phil.  ii.  9) ;  and  so  to 
Christians  is  promised  after  life's  trials  a  share  in  Christ's  throne  (2  Tim.  ii.  12  ; 
Rev.  iiii.  21),  a  crown  of  life  (James  i.  12),  an  exceeding  even  an  eternal  weight 
of  glory  (2  Cor.  iv.  1 7). 

III.  The  instrument  of  a  wondrous  deliverance. — 1.  The  subjects  of  this 
deliverance  were  Joseph's  brethren,  who  had  sold  him  into  bondage,  with  their 
families  ;  and  so  is  Christ's  salvation  intended  for  those  who  sold  Him  to  death, 
and  for  their  children  (ii.  39).     2.  The  nature  of  this  deliverance  was  a  rescue 

157 


CHAP.  VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


from  famine  which  entailed  sore  affliction,  and  might  have  ended  in  death — a 
type  of  the  peril,  spiritual  hunger,  from  which  Christ  proposed  and  still  proposes 
to  save  men.  3.  The  terms  of  this  deliverance  were  free.  Joseph  exacted  no 
conditions  from  his  brethren  or  father  beyond  this,  that  they  should  accept  his 
kindness  and  live  upon  his  bounty ;  and  no  conditions  different  does  Christ 
impose  on  sinful  men. 

Learn. — 1.  That  a  man's  foes  are  often  those  of  his  own  household  (Matt. 
x.  36).  2.  That  God  never  forsakes  them  that  trust  in  Him  (Josh.  i.  5 ;  1  Sam. 
xii.  22  ;  Heb.  xiii.  5).  3.  That  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that 
love  God  (Rom.  viii.  28).  4.  That  sinful  men  are  seldom  requited  according  to 
their  deserts  (Psalm  ciii.  10).  5.  That  Old  Testament  history  was  full  of  God 
and  Christ  (ver.  38,  x.  43 ;  1  Cor.  x.  4  ;  1  Peter  i.  11). 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  9-14.  The  Portion  of  God's 
People. 

I.  Affliction. — Of  various  sorts  and 
sizes,  of  differing  severity  and  con- 
tinuance (John  xvi.  33). 

II.  Consolation.— From  God  and 
Christ,  whose  companionship  the  saints 
will  or  may  always  enjoy  (Matt,  xxviii. 
30  ;  Heb.  xiii.  5). 

III.  Promotion. — Out  of  their  afflic- 
tions (Psalm  xxxiv.  19)  and  into  places 
of  honour  (1  Sam.  ii.  30). 

IV.  Usefulness. — In  their  day  and 
generation,  to  the  Church  and  to  the 
world  (Matt.  v.  14-16). 

V.  Renown. — Their  names  being 
often  held  in  remembrance  by  posterity 
(Psalm  cxii.  6). 

Ver.  9.  Egypt  a  Type  of  the  World. 

I.  In  its  attractions. — 1.  A  land  of 
luxury.  "  '  Take  thy  fill,  eat  the  fat, 
and  drink  the  sweet,'  was  her  seductive 
song.  The  means  of  subsistence  were 
inconceivably  abundant.  The  very 
soil  teemed  with  life"  (Baldwin 
Brown).  2.  A  land  of  civilisation. 
Egypt  "  was  full  of  the  wisdom  of  this 
world,  the  wisdom  of  the  understand- 
ing, which  prostitutes  itself  eagerly  to 
the  uses  of  a  sensual  and  earthly  life  " 
{Ibid.).  Such  the  world  is  still  to  them 
whose  main  ambition  is  learning.  3.  A 
land  of  promise.  It  promised  food, 
learning,  safety,  comfort,  honour  to 
Joseph's  brethren  ;  and  the  like  attrac- 
tions does  the  world  hold  out  to  its 
devotees. 

II.  In  its  deceptions. — 1.  A  land  oj 
spiritual  barrenness.     In  all  its  multi- 

158 


tudes  of  gods  there  was  none  that 
Joseph's  brethren  could  worship ;  in 
its  elaborate  ritual  nothing  to  feed  the 
faith  of  the  chosen  family.  With  a 
similar  soul  dearth  is  the  world  struck, 
as  they  who  live  in  it  find.  2.  A  land 
of  moral  deterioration.  As  all  Egypt's 
civilisation  could  not  keep  her  people 
from  sinking  down  to  lower  depths  of 
sensuality  and  vice,  in  which  Israel 
must  have  shared,  so  neither  can  the 
culture  of  the  present-day  world  pre- 
vent those  who  have  nothing  else  to 
live  upon  from  undergoing  a  similar 
experience.  3.  A  land  of  intolerable 
bondage.  Whereas  Joseph's  brethren 
expected  to  find  in  Egypt  shelter, 
comfort,  and  honour,  they  were  not 
long  settled  on  its  fat  soil  before 
they  discovered  it  to  be  a  house 
of  galling  oppression.  A  true  type 
of  what  the  world  always  proves  to 
them  who  try  to  live  for  it  as  well 
as  in  it. 

III.  In  its  fortunes. — As  old  Egypt 
was  invaded,  broken  up,  and  its  power 
destroyed,  and  God's  Israel  rescued 
from  its  grasp,  so  will  it  be  with  the 
present  evil  world,  whose  power  indeed 
has  been  already  broken,  and  from 
whose  servitude  the  children  of  God 
will  be  eventually  delivered  (Gal.  i.  4). 

Ver.  10.  God's  Presence  with  His 
People. 

I.  Real,  though  unseen. 
II.  Constant,  though  not  always  felt. 
III.  Beneficent,   though  not   always 
believed  to  be  so. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  VII. 


IV.  Efficient,  though  this  is  often 
doubted. 

The  Pharaohs  mentioned  in  Scripture. 

I.  Abraham's  Pharaoh  (Gen.  xii. 
14-20). — Probably  Amenemhat  III.  of 
the  twelfth  dynasty,  B.C.  2300. 

II.  Joseph's  Pharaoh  (Gen.  xl.). — 
Most  likely  Apophis,  the  last  of  the 
shepherd  kings,  who  reigned  B.C.  2266- 
1700. 

III.  The  Pharaoh  who  knew  not 
Joseph  (Exod.  i.  8). — Aahnies  of  the 
eighteenth  dynasty,  B.C.  1700. 

IV.  The  Pharaoh  who  commanded 
the  first-born  to  be  cast  into  the  river 
(Exod.  i.  22).  —  Seti  I.  of  the  nineteenth 
dynasty,  B.C.  1366. 

V.  The  Pharaoh  of  the  oppression, 
who  sought  to  slay  Moses  (Exod.  ii.  23). 
— Rameses  II.,  b.c.  1350. 

VI.  The  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus 
(Exod.  xiv.  5-31).— Menephtah  II., 
B.C.  1300. 

VII.  The  Pharaoh  whose  daughter 
Solomon  married  (1  Kings  iii.  1).— 
Pinetem  II.,  the  last  of  the  twenty- 
first  dynasty,  b.c.  1033. 

VIII.  The  Pharaoh  who  invaded 
Judah  in  the  reign  of  Rehoboam  (2 
Chron.  xii.  2). — Shishak,  Sheshank  I., 
of  the  twenty-second  dynasty,  b.c.  966. 

IX.  The  Pharaoh  of  Hezekiah's  time 
(2  Kings  xviii.  21,  xix.  9). — Tirhakah, 
the  Ethiopian,  of  the  twenty-first 
dynasty,  B.C.  693. 

X.  The  Pharaoh  against  whom 
Josiah  warred  (2  Kings  xxiii.  29,  30  ; 
2  Chron.  xxxv.  20-24). — ISTecho,  Naki, 
of  the  twenty-sixth  dynasty,  B.C.  612. 

XI.  Pharaoh,  the  ally  of  Jehoiakim 
and  Zedekiah  (Jer.  xxxvii.  4  7  ;  Ezek. 
xvii.  15-17). — Hophra,  the  second  suc- 
cessor of  Necho  ;  Uahabra,  or  Apries, 
b.c.  591. 

Ver.  12.  Corn  in  Egypt;  or,  Good 
News  from  a  Far  Country. — The 
tidings  brought  to  Jacob  may  be  used 
to  illustrate  the  good  news  of  the 
Gospel.     Jacob's  tidings  were — 

I.  Timely.— Corn  in  Egypt !  This 
was  heard  of  when  Jacob's  household 
was   famishing   (ver.  11).     So  Christ, 


the  Bread  of  Life,  came  when  the 
world  was  on  the  eve  of  perishing.  So 
the  gospel  comes  to  sinners  in  a  desti- 
tute and  lost  condition. 

II.  Unexpected. — Corn  in  Egypt ! 
Though  the  famine  was  there  as  well 
as  in  Canaan.  So  the  salvation  of  the 
gospel  arose  in  a  quarter  the  most  un- 
looked  for,  and  proceeded  forth,  as  it 
were,  from  the  very  humanity  which 
required  to  be  redeemed.  So  often  the 
good  news  reaches  sinners  in  places  and 
at  times  where  and  when  they  least 
anticipate. 

III.  Joyful.— Corn  in  Egypt!  1.  Not 
in  a  distant  country,  but  close  at  hand. 
So  the  gospel  is  nigh  to  men,  the 
word  of  faith  which  the  apostles 
preached,  requiring  no  painful  journey 
to  obtain  its  provisions  but  only  the 
exercise  of  faith.  2.  Not  a  small  supply 
but  an  abundant  store.  All  countries 
sought  to  Egypt  for  corn.  So  the 
gospel  contains  "  enough  for  each, 
enough  for  all,  enough  for  evermore." 
3.  Not  on  hard  conditions  but  on 'easy 
terms.  At  least  for  Joseph's  brethren. 
So  the  gospel's  heavenly  corn  is  with- 
out money  and  without  price. 

IV.  Certain. — Corn  in  Egypt.  If 
before  they  started  from  Hebron 
Joseph's  brethren  had  doubts,  when 
they  arrived  in  Joseph's  presence 
they  had  none.  So  will*  no  one  ques- 
tion the  truthfulness  of  the  gospel  news 
who  will  repair  to  Christ's  presence 
in  search  of  a  supply  for  his  soul's 
needs. 

Ver.  16.  Buried  in  Canaan. — Jacob 
in  the  field  of  Machpelah  (Gen.  1.  13) 
and  Joseph  at  Shechem  (Josh.  xxiv. 
32),  or  the  dead  hand  grasping  its 
inheritance. 

I.  An  act  of  filial  piety. — 1.  On  the 
part  of  Joseph  towards  his  father 
Jacob  in  fulfilling  his  dying  request. 
2.  On  the  part  of  the  children  of  Israel 
in  remembering  Joseph's  last  injunc- 
tion. 

II.  An  act  of  lively  faith.— On  the 
part  of  both  Jacob  and  Joseph.  1.  In 
clinging  to  the  inheritance  God  had 
promised  them.     2.  In  predicting  the 

159 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS, 


return    of   Israel   to   Canaan.      3.    In  soon   overtakes    evil    doers   as   it    did 

wishing  to  have  their  dust  laid  in  its  them.     Hardly  had  they  returned  to 

sacred  soil.  their   homes  than   they  began    to   be 

III.  An  act  of  prophetic  meaning. —  pressed  by  the  straits  of  famine,  which 

It  seemed  to  say  that  those  whose  dust  Scripture  constantly  represents  as  one 

was  laid  in  Canaan's  soil  at  their  own  re-  of    God's   ministers   of    judgment    on 

quest  anticipated  a  time  when  not  only  rebellious  lands  and  peoples   (2  Sam. 

their  descendants  should  come  over  but  xxiv.  13;  Jer.  xxix.  18;  Ezek.  v.  16). 

themselves  should  arise  to  take  posses-  On  visiting  Egypt  in  search  of  corn 

sion  of  its  acres.     It  was  their  way  of  they  saw  their  wicked  plans  defeated. 

hinting  at  a  future  resurrection.  The  dismay  which  seized  their  spirits 

when    they    beheld    their    long   dead 

Ver.  9-19.    Joseph's  brethren.    These  brother,  as  they  supposed,  seated  on 

ancient  patriarchs  are  here  presented  the  throne  and  clothed  with  imperial 

in  three  aspects.  power,  is  aptly  pictured  in  the  Hebrew 

I.  As  perpetrators  of  a  hideous  narrative  which  says,  that  "  they  were 
crime. — The  sale  of  their  brother  into  troubled  at  his  presence."  Nor  did 
bondage  in  Egypt.  The  feeling  which  vengeance  close  with  them,  but  was 
gave  rise  to  this  unnatural  deed  was  entailed  on  their  descendants,  who,  in 
the  seemingly  small  and  harmless  one  after  years,  were  subtilly  dealt  with, 
of  envy  at  their  brother's  foreshadowed  evil  entreated,  and  finally  enslaved  in 
greatness,  combined,  as  the  Genesis  the  land  into  which  their  fathers  had 
story  shows,  with  jealousy  on  account  sold  Joseph. 

of    the  paternal  favour  he    enjoyed.  III.    As  recipients   of  undeserved 

From   this   they   passed   to   hatred  of  mercies. — There  are  few  instances  in 

their    brother's     conspicuous    goodness,  which  mercy  is  not  mixed  with  judg- 

which   silently   rebuked   their   wicked  ment.     Joseph's   brethren   experienced 

lives,  and  constrained   him   to  report  kindnesses   beyond   their  merits.      At 

at  home  their  ill  behaviour.     The  next  the  hand  of  God  who  preserved  them 

and    final    step    was    easy    for    those  alive,  when  He  might  have  justly  left 

who  were  already  murderers  at  heart  them   to  starve  for  their  inhumanity 

(1  John  iii.    15).      At   the   first  con-  to   their    brother.      At    the    hand    of 

venient  opportunity  the  object  of  their  Joseph  who  treated  them  with  clemency 

envy  and  hatred  was   deprived  of  his  and  rewarded  them  with  love,  inviting 

liberty    and    sold    to    a    company    of  them   to   Egypt    and  caring  for  their 

Midianite  merchants  who  carried  him  wants  throughout  the  years  of  famine, 

clown    to    Egypt.      The   lesson   is   to  when  he  might  have  exacted  vengeance 

guard   against   the   entrance  of   envy  for  their  former  crue/lty  to  him.     At 

into  the  heart,  since  once  admitted  to  the  hand  of  their  descendants  who  car- 

the  bosom  none  can  predict  to  what  ried   their    dead    bodies    into   Canaan 

enormities  it  may  impel  its  victims.  and  buried  them  in  Abraham's  tomb, 

II.  As  sufferers  of  severe  retribu-  when  they  might  have  been  left  to  rot 
tion. — It  is  not  often  that  Nemesis  so  in  the  sepulchres  of  Egypt. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  17—44. 

The  Founder  of  the  Nation  ;  or,  the  Biography  of  Moses  in  Three  Chapters. 

I.  From  one  to  forty  (ver.  20-22). — 1.  Born  in  an  evil  time.  When  the 
oppression  of  his  countrymen  was  so  cruel  that  either  Hebrew  parents  cast  out 
their  children  to  perish  rather  than  see  them  live  to  experience  the  bitter  servitude 
under  which  themselves  had  groaned,  or  Hebrew  children  were  cast  out  by 
Pharaoh's  order  to  the  end  that  they  might  not  live.  This  latter  interpretation 
accords  best  with  the  Old  Testament  narrative  (Exod.  i.  22).  2.  Exposed  to  a 
cruel  fate.  Brought  forth  in  an  hour  of  sorrow,  with  no  better  prospect  before 
him  than  either  to  be  strangled  by  a  midwife's  cord  or  thrown  into  the  river, 

160 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.         chap.  vii. 


Moses  was  for  three  months,  on  account  of  his  extreme  beauty,  secretly  nourished 
in  the  house  of  his  father  Amram  ;  but  at  length,  when  concealment  was  no 
longer  possible,  in  an  ark  of  bulrushes,  daubed  with  slime  and  pitch,  he  was  laid 
by  his  mother  in  the  flags  by  the  Nile  side  (Exod.  ii.  3).  The  writer  to  the 
Hebrews  cites  the  conduct  of  Moses'  parents  as  an  instance  of  faith  (Heb.  xi.  23). 
3.  Rescued  by  a  strange  providence.  By  accident  it  seemed,  though  in  fact  by  the 
overruling  hand  of  God,  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh — the  very  king  whose  decree 
had  caused  his  exposure — having  with  her  maidens  come  to  the  river  side  to  wash, 
found  him,  "  took  him  up  "  out  of  the  water,  and  "  nourished  him  as  her  own 
son" — i.e.,  adopted  him.  (See  Exod.  ii.  5-10.)  Josephus  says  this  daughter  of 
Pharaoh  was  named  Thermuthis.  She  was  the  sister  of  Rameses  II.  or  daughter 
of  Seti  I.  (See  "  Critical  Remarks.")  4.  Educated  in  a  king's  court.  Probably 
like  Rameses  himself,  Moses  was  for  some  years  "  left  in  the  house  of  the  women 
and  of  the  royal  concubines,  after  the  manner  of  the  maidens  of  the  palace" 
(Brugsch,  Egypt  under  the  Pharaohs,  ii.  39),  where  he  received  the  nurture  and 
training  requisite  to  fit  him  for  the  higher  studies  and  more  arduous  exercises  of 
youth  and  manhood.  Tradition  speaks  of  him  as  having  studied  "  mathematics, 
natural  philosophy,  engineering,  warfare,  grammar,  and  medicine,"  while  J  osephus 
{Ant.,  II.  x.  1)  places  to  his  credit  a  successfully  conducted  campaign  against  the 
Ethiopians.  With  this  accords  Stephen's  statement  that  Moses  "  was  instructed 
in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,  and  was  mighty  in  his  words  and  works " 
(ver.  22). 

II.  From  forty  to  eighty  (vers.  23-29). — 1.  A  patriotic  inspiration.  "To  visit 
his  brethren,  the  children  of  Israel  " — to  visit  in  the  sense  of  sympathising  with 
and  succouring  them  (compare  Luke  i.  68,  vii.  16  ;  Acts  xv.  14).  Whether  special 
means  were  taken  under  God  by  Moses  or  his  mother  to  keep  alive  the  knowledge 
of  his  kinship  with  the  down-trodden  Hebrews  is  not  recorded,  but,  on  reaching 
man's  estate,  the  sense  of  that  kinship  having  asserted  itself,  he  refused  any 
longer  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter  (Heb.  xi.  24).  2.  A  chivalrous 
interference.  Having  paid  a  visit  to  the  brickfields,  with  which  up  to  this  time 
he  may  have  been  comparatively  unacquainted,  he  beheld  what  the  monuments 
tell  us  was  a  frequent  scene — one  of  his  brethren  suffering  wrong  or  enduring 
blows  at  the  taskmaster's  hand ;  and,  his  patriotic  blood  leaping  within  his  veins, 
he  warded  off  the  blows,  laid  the  ruthless  slave-driver  lifeless  at  his  feet,  and, 
thinking  that  nobody  saw,  buried  him  in  the  sand  (Exod.  ii.  12).  3.  A  mistaken 
supposition.  He  imagined  his  countrymen  would  have  understood  how  God  had 
called  him  to  deliver  them,  but  they  did  not.  The  blow  that  day  struck  was 
premature.  The  people  were  not  ready  to  rise,  and  he  was  not  yet  qualified  to 
lead.  Forty  years  more  of  suffering  for  them,  and  of  discipline  for  him,  were 
needed  before  the  great  bell  of  liberty  would  ring  in  Egypt's  land.  Men  are 
often  in  a  hurry ;  God  never  is.  Men  often  strike  before  the  iron  is  hot ;  God 
never  does.  4.  An  angry  response.  The  day  after,  when  he  would  have  parted  two 
of  his  quarrelling  countrymen,  saying,  "  Sirs,  ye  are  brethren ;  why  do  ye  wrong 
one  to  another  1 "  (compare  Gen.  xiii.  8),  he  that  did  the  wrong  thrust  him  away, 
saying,  "Who  made  thee  a  ruler  and  a  judge  over  us?  wouldst  thou  kill  me  as 
thou  didst  the  Egyptian  yesterday? "  Wrongdoers  always  resent  the  interference 
of  third  parties — a  clear  proof  they  are  in  the  wrong.  5.  A  precipitate  flight. 
Having  discovered  through  the  choleric  questions  of  his  countrymen  that  his 
offer  of  himself  as  a  deliverer  was  premature,  and  that  his  deed  of  yesterday 
was  known,  he  saw  that  thenceforward  Egypt  would  be  no  place  of  safety  for 
him,  and  accordingly  betook  himself  to  Midian  (see  "  Critical  Remarks").  6.  An 
obscure  life.  There,  having  met  with  Jethro  the  shepherd  priest  of  the  land,  who 
granted  him  Zipporah  to  wife,  he  forgot  his  early  patriotic  ambitions  in  the 
humdrum  occupation  of  feeding  sheep,  and  in  conjugal  felicity  (Exod.  ii.  16-22). 

it  161 


chap.  vii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


III.  From  eighty  to  one  hundred  and  twenty  (vers.  30-44). — 1.  A  great  sight. 
(1)  When  ?  At  the  close  of  the  second  period  of  forty  years,  on  the  death  of 
Rameses  II.  (Exod.  ii.  23).  At  the  opening  of  the  third.  At  the  beginning  of 
the  reign  of  Menephtah  II.  When  the  oppression  of  the  people  had  become 
intolerable  (Exod.  ii.  23).  When  God's  time,  as  distinguished  from  Moses',  had 
arrived.  (2)  Where  ?  In  the  wilderness  of  Mount  Sinai  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  "), 
at  the  back  side  of  the  desert,  at  the  mountain  of  God,  even  Horeb  (Exod.  iii.  1). 
God  delights  to  reveal  Himself  to  His  people  in  solitudes.  (3)  What  ?  "  An 
angel  " — the  angel  of  the  Lord,  or  Jehovah  w  (Exod.  iii.  2) — "  appeared  to  him  in 
a  flame  of  fire  in  a  bush,"  which  burned  and  yet  was  not  consumed.  (4)  How  ? 
Wherein  lay  the  greatness  of  the  sight  1  In  its  unexpectedness,  in  its  super- 
naturalness,  in  its  impressiveness.  2.  A  heavenly  voice.  That  of  Jehovah,  who 
(1)  revealed  His  own  character  as  the  covenant  God  of  the  Hebrew  fathers, 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  (ver.  32);  (2)  cautioned  Moses  against  irreverence 
before  the  Holy  One,  whose  presence  consecrated  the  very  ground  whereon  He 
stood  (ver.  33) ;  (3)  announced  that  He  (Jehovah)  had  beheld  and  sympathised 
with  the  sufferings  and  heard  the  groanings  of  His  people  in  Egypt  (ver.  34) ; 
and  (4)  intimated  His  intention  to  deliver  them  and  to  despatch  Moses  into 
Egypt  for  that  purpose  (ver.  34).  3.  An  exalted  commission.  Considering 
(1)  by  whom  it  was  issued — God,  the  God  of  glory  (ver.  2)  and  the  God  of  the 
fathers  (ver.  32) ;  (2)  to  whom  it  was  entrusted — the  man  whom  his  countrymen 
had  refused,  but  whom  God  had  chosen  ■  (3)  through  whose  hand  it  was  to  be 
executed,  that  of  the  angel  who  had  appeared  to  him ;  and  (4)  for  what  it  was 
appointed — that  Moses  should  be  to  Israel,  who  had  rejected  him,  both  a  ruler 
and  a  deliverer,  or  redeemer,  and  in  both  (according  to  Stephen)  a  type  of  Christ. 
4.  A  splendid  achievement.  (1)  As  a  liberator  he  (Moses)  brought  out  the 
children  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  having  wrought,  in  his  work  of  emancipation, 
which  began  with  the  Exodus  and  ended  (so  far  as  Moses  was  concerned)  with 
the  forty  years  of  wandering,  signs,  and  wonders  (compare  ii.  22),  first  in  Egypt 
(Exod.  vii. — xii.),  next  at  the  Red  Sea  (Exod.  xiv.),  and  after  that  in  the 
wilderness  (Exod.  xv.,  xvi.,  xvii.,  etc.).  (2)  As  a  prophet  he  foretold  to  them  the 
coming,  in  after  years,  of  a  prophet  like  unto,  but  greater  than,  himself,  even 
their  Messiah,  whom  in  the  person  of  Jesus  they  had  refused  to  hear.  (3)  As  a 
lawgiver  he  conferred  upon  them  "  living  oracles  "  received  by  himself  from 
Jehovah — viz.,  the  whole  system  of  moral  and  ceremonial  precepts  composing  the 
law  of  Moses,  here  characterised  as  "  living  "  to  describe  not  their  effect,  which 
was  not  always  life-giving  because  of  the  corruption  of  men's  hearts  (Rom.  viii.  3), 
but  their  design,  which  was  to  impart  life  to  all  by  whom  they  should  be  obeyed 
(Lev.  xviii.  5  ;  Rom.  vii.  10).  (4)  As  an  architect  he  gave  them  the  tabernacle 
of  the  testimony  in  the  wilderness,  which  he  made  according  to  the  pattern  he 
had  seen — in  the  mount  of  Sinai  (Exod.  xxv.  9,  40).  5.  A  disgraceful  requital. 
As  at  the  commencement  of  his  illustrious  career,  so  at  its  close,  his  country- 
men "  thrust  him  from  them,"  declined  to  obey  his  instructions,  but  turned  back 
into  Egypt,  and  (ver.  39)  yet  Moses,  towards  the  termination  of  his  leadership, 
thought  less  of  his  people's  thankfulness  to  himself  than  of  their  deplorable  in- 
gratitude to  God  (Deut.  xxxii.  6). 

See  in  Moses  :  1.  A  pattern  of  true  greatness.  2.  An  example  of  life's 
vicissitudes.     3.  A  type  of  Jesus  Christ. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 

Ver.  1 7.  The  Time  of  the  Promise.  none   of   His   sovereign   and   gracious 

I.  Fixed  by  God,  as  all  times  are.         appointments. 
II.  Remembered  by  God,  who  forgets         III.  Honoured  by  God,  who  never 

162 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  VII. 


fails  to  implement  a  promise  He  has 
made,  when  the  time  for  its  fulfilment 
has  arrived. 

The  Increase  of  Nations. — Occurs  as 
in  Israel. 

I.  Always  in  accordance  with  Divine 
providential  arrangements  (Job  xii.  23 ; 
Psalm  cvii.  38). 

II.  Often  in  spite  of  the  most  adverse 
circumstances  (Exod.  i.  12). 

III.  Never  beyond  the  limits  pre- 
scribed by  God  (Acts  xvii.  26). 

Vers.  20-39.  The  Story  of  Moses. 

I.  The  son  of  a  Hebrew  mother. — 
No  imaginary  or  legendary  character 
but  a  real  historical  personage.  Dis- 
tinguished in  infancy  by  remarkable 
beauty,  which  His  parents  regarded  as 
an  omen  of  future  greatness  (Exod.  ii. 
2  ;  Heb.  xi.  23).  Exposed  to  a  cruel 
fate — cast  out  into  the  Nile,  placed  in 
an  ark  of  bulrushes  by  the  river's  brink. 
Compare  the  story  of  Sargina  I.  of 
Babylon.     See  below. 

II.  The  foundling  of  an  Egyptian 
princess. — In  the  providence  of  God 
this  led  to  the  preservation  of  Moses' 
life  and  his  education  in  such  a  ^  ay  as 
to  fit  him  for  his  subsequent  calling 
and  career.  The  All -wise  knows  the 
best  schools  in  which  to  train  those 
whom  He  intends  afterwards  to  employ 
as  His  instruments. 

III.  The  kinsman  of  slaves. — The 
feeling  of  nationality  cannot  easily  be 
eradicated  from  the  human  heart.  Out 
of  this  rises  love  of  country,  patriotism, 
sense  of  brotherhood.  When  it  first 
began  to  stir  in  Moses  cannot  be  told  ; 
at  the  age  of  forty  it  was  too  strong  to 
be  suppressed  (Heb.  xi.  24). 

IY.  The  liberator  of  his  people. — 
Though  not  exactly  in  his  time,  yet 
in  God's  time,  he  was  honoured  to  lead 
his  down -trodden  countrymen  from  the 
house  of  bondage  (Heb.  xi.  27). 

V.  The  founder  of  a  nation.  —  Having 
conducted  his  followers  to  Sinai,  he 
there  formed  them  into  a  people,  with 
a  regularly  organised  community,  with 
laws  and  statutes  for  the  regulation  of 
their  civil  and  religious  affairs. 


VI.  The  prophet  of  a  new  religion. 

— He  imparted  to  them  the  terms  on 
which  alone  they  could  be  regarded  as 
Jehovah's  people,  or  Jehovah  could 
consider  Himself  their  God — gave  them 
the  ten  commandments  and  the 
multifarious  ordinances  of  the  cere- 
monial or  Levitical  law. 

Note — Legend  of  the  infancy  of 
Sargina  I ,  of  Babylon,  who  lived  about 
fifteen  or  sixteen  centuries  before  the 
Christian  era — i.e.,  not  long  before  the 
birth  of  Moses.  1.  I  am  Sargina,  the 
great  king;  the  king  of  Agani.  2. 
My  mother  knew  not  my  father  :  my 
family  were  the  rulers  of  the  land. 
3.  My  city  was  the  city  of  Atzu-pirani, 
which  is  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Euphrates.  4.  My  mother  conceived 
me  :  in  a  secret  place  she  brought  me 
forth.  5.  She  placed  me  in  an  ark  of 
bulrushes  :  with  bitumen  she  closed  me 
up.  6.  She  threw  me  into  the  river, 
which  did  not  enter  into  the  ark  to 
me.  7.  The  river  carried  me  :  to  the 
dwelling  of  Akki,  the  water-carrier,  it 
brought  me.  8.  Akki,  the  water- 
carrier,  in  his  goodness  of  heart  lifted 
me  up  from  the  river.  9.  Akki,  the 
water-carrier,  brought  me  up  as  his 
own  son.  10.  Akki,  the  water-carrier, 
placed  me  with  a  tribe  of  Foresters. 
11.  Of  this  tribe  of  Foresters,  Ishtar 
made  me  king.  1 2.  And  for  .  .  .  years 
I  reigned  over  them. — Records  of  the 
Past,  v.  3,  first  series. 

Ver.  31.  The  Burning  Bush  (Exod. 
iii.  2). 

I.  A  supernatural  phenomenon. — 
Revealed  by  two  things  :  (1)  the  fact 
that  the  bush,  though  burning,  was 
not  consumed ;  and  (2)  the  voice  which 
proceeded  from  its  midst. 

II.  An  impressive  spectacle. — It 
caused  Moses  to  tremble.  Chiefly 
(1)  Before  the  Divine  presence  (ver. 
32)  and  (2)  At  the  Divine  communica- 
tions (ver.  33). 

III.  A  suggestive  symbol. — (1)  Of 
the  holiness  of  God,  which  burns 
against  every  manifestation  of  sin  ; 
(Heb.  xii.  29)  (the  flame).  (2)  Of  the 
imperishability  of  the  Church  of  Gcd 

163 


<5HAP.  VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


which  may  be  cast  into  the  fire  but 
cannot  be  destroyed  (Isa.  xliii.  2)  (the 
bush). 


Ver.  33.  Holy  Ground. 
I.  Where      God      manifests 


His 


presence. 

II.  Where  God  reveals  His  character. 

III.  Where  God  makes   known    His 
will. 

IV.  Where  God  communes  with  His 
people. 

V.  Where  God  is  worshipped  by 
believing  hearts. 

Ver.  35.  The  Angel  in  the  Bush. — 
That  this  was  no  created  spirit  but  the 
angel  of  Jehovah,  or  Jehovah  Himself, 
is  clearly  taught  by  Stephen,  who 
besides  calling  Him  the  Lord  (ver.  31) 
represents  Him  as — 

I.  Assuming  the  Divine  name. — "  I 
am  the  God  of  thy  fathers"  (ver.  32). 

II.  Claiming  Divine  worship. — 
"  Loose  the  shoes  from  thy  feet " 
(ver.  33). 

III.  Exercising  Divine  attributes. — 
"  I  have  seen,"  u  I  have  heard " 
(Omniscience) ;  "I  have  come  down," 
"  I  will  send"  (Omnipotence)  (ver.  34). 

IV.  Speaking  Divine  words. — Im- 
parting living  oracles  unto  Moses 
(ver.  38). 

Ver.  37.  A  Prophet  like  unto  Moses. 
— See  on  iii.  22. 

Ver.  38.  The  Church  in  the  Wilder- 
ness :  a  Type  of  The  Christian  Church  on 
Earth. — In  respect  of — 

I.  Its  origin. — Called  out  of  Egypt, 
the  then  symbol  of  the  world  ;  redeemed 
from  the  house  of  bondage .  which  was 
emblematical  of  man's  natural  condi- 
tion. 

II.  Its  position. — In  the  wilderness  ; 
a  fitting  picture  of  the  spiritually 
barren  world  through  which  the  Church 
of  Christ  has  to  journey. 

III.  In  its  privileges. — Manifold 
and  high.  1 .  The  divine  presence.  The 
angel  of  the  Lord — which  also  the 
Church  of  the  New  Testament  enjoys 
(Matt,  xviii.  20,  xxviii.  20).  2.  A 
divinely  qualified  teacher.     Moses  with 

164 


whom  the  angel  spake  at  Mount 
Sinai — which,  too,  the  Christian  Church 
has  in  the  indwelling  Holy  Spirit  (John 
xvi.  13 ;  1  John  ii.  20,  27),  and  in  the 
apostles  and  prophets,  pastors  and 
teachers  (1  Cor.  xii.  28;  Eph.  iv.  11), 
bestowed  upon  it  by  its  exalted  Head. 
3.  A  divine  revelation.  The  "  living 
oracles "  delivered  to  Moses — which 
again  the  gospel  Church  possesses  in 
the  words  of  Christ  and  His  apostles 
preserved  in  the  New  Testament  records 
(Heb.  v.  12).  4.  A  divine  institution. 
— The  tabernacle — which  once  more 
has  its  counterpart  in  the  Christian 
sanctuary,  congregation,  or  Church. 

IV.  In  its  business. — Which  was 
twofold.  1.  To  witness  for  Jehovah 
in  the  then  world.  Israel  Jehovah's 
witnesses  (Isa.  xliii.  10)  ;  the  apostles 
Christ's  witnesses  (v.  32) ;  and  Chris- 
tians generally  expected  to  be  living 
epistles  of  Christ  (2  Cor.  iii.  3).  2.  To 
overcome  its  adversaries  on  the  way  to 
Canaan.  So  Christians  have  a  con- 
stant warfare  to  maintain  against 
innumerable  foes  (Eph.  vi.  10-17; 
1  Tim.  vi.  12;     2  Tim.  ii.  3). 

V.  In  its  imperfection. — The  Church 
in  the  wilderness  was  guilty  of  not  a 
few  heinous  sins — disobedience  to  its 
leader,  Moses,  hankering  after  Egypt, 
apostasy  from  Jehovah  ;  all  which  have 
their  equivalents  in  the  faults  of  the 
people  of  Christ. 

VI.  In  its  discipline.— The  Church 
in  the  wilderness  was  chastised  for  its 
sins,  first  by  judicial  visitations,  such 
as  the  fiery  serpents,  next  by  powerful 
adversaries  like  the  Moabites  and 
Midianites,  which  were  raised  up  against 
them,  after  that  by  spiritual  hardening, 
so  that  they  plunged  into  deeper 
idolatry,  and  lastly  by  exile  and 
captivity  in  Babylon.  So  the  Church 
of  to-day,  either  as  a  whole  or  in  its 
individual  members,  is  not  left  without 
chastisement  for  its  shortcomings  and 
backslidings,  its  transgressions  and 
iniquities.  It,  too,  has  its  providential 
visitations  by  which  its  numbers  are 
reduced,  its  open  and  secret  opponents 
by  which  its  progress  is  hindered,  its 
seasons  of  spiritual  decline,  in  which  it 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  VII. 


lapses  from  the  faith,  its  removals  into 
exile  and  captivity,  where  it  sighs  and 
cries  for  the  liberty  it  once  enjoyed. 

VII.  In  its  goal. — Canaan,  which 
in  a  heavenly  form  is  the  destination 
of  the  New  Testament  Church. 

Vers.  39-43.  The  Apostasy  of  Israel. 

I.  Its  occasion. — The  absence  of 
Moses.  When  the  Christian  Church 
reposes  with  too  much  dependence  on 
its  visible  leaders  it  is  prone  to  with- 
draw its  confidence  from  its  invisible 
Head. 

II.  Its  form. — A  lapsing  into  the 
idolatry  of  Egypt,  which  led  to  the 
people's  making,  or  Aaron  making  at 
their  request,  an  image  of  the  famous 
calf  or  bull  worshipped  in  Egypt,  either 
the  bull  Apis  at  Memphis,  or  the  bull 
Mnevis  at  Heliopolis.  How  deeply 
ingrained  in  them  this  calf  or  bull 
worship  had  been  appears  from  the 
circumstance  that  centuries  after  their 
settlement  in  Canaan  they,  in  times 
of  spiritual  declension,  reverted  to  it 
(1  Kings  xii.  28  ;  2  Kings  xi.  29).  So 
when  the  New  Testament  Israel  loses 
sight  of  its  invisible  Head  it  is  prone 
to  revert  to  its  old  sins  (2  Peter  i.  9). 

III.  Its  punishment. — 1.  Withdrawal 
of  Divine  restraint.  Joined  to  their 
idols  they  were  left  alone  (Hosea  iv.  17). 
Forsaken  by  them,  God  in  turn  for- 
sook them  (2  Chron.  xv.  2).  Having 
given  up  Jehovah  He  gave  up  them,  so 
that  they  sank  into  deeper  and  more 
shameless  idolatries.  Instead  of  offering 
unto  Jehovah  slain  beasts  and  sacrifi- 
ces during  the  forty  years  of  wilder- 
ness wandering  as  they  should  have 
done,  they  carried  about  the  tabernacle 
of  Moloch,  a  small  portable  tent  in 
which  was  enshrined  the  image  of  the 
idol  and  a  model  of  the  planet  Saturn, 
to  which,  according  to  Diodorus  Siculus, 
horrid  child  sacrifices  were  offered  at 
Carthage.  So  when  God,  in  punish- 
ment for  sin,  withdraws  restraining 
grace  from  His  people,  they  commonly 
plunge  into  viler  and  more  heinous 
wickedness  than  they  had  before  com- 
mitted, sin  being  thus  avenged  by 
liberty  to  sin.     2.  Infliction  of  positive 


pains.  The  Israelites,  through  that 
very  tendency  to  apostatise  so  early 
manifested  by  them,  were  ultimately 
driven  into  exile  beyond  Babylon ; 
and  so  will  they  who  persevere  in 
forsaking  the  living  God  be  eventually 
punished  with  perpetual  banishment 
from  His  holy  presence  (Rom.  ii.  8; 
2  Thess.  i.  9). 

Ver.  44.  The  Tabernacle  of  the  Testi- 
mony in  the  Wilderness. 

I.  An  actual  historic  building. — 
Necessary  now  to  insist  on  this  since 
the  higher  critics  have  imagined  and 
keep  on  asserting  that  the  Mosaic 
tabernacle  never  had  a  veritable  exist- 
ence at  all,  but  was  only  a  fictional 
structure,  fashioned  after  the  model  of 
the  temple  but  on  a  smaller  scale,  and 
projected  into  the  prehistoric  wilder- 
ness as  a  convenient  free  space  on 
which  it  might  be  fictionally  erected 
without  risk  of  colliding  with  historical 
and  well-authenticated  facts — which 
might  be  troublesome.  But  in  addition 
to  the  theory  of  a  fictional  tabernacle 
being  attended  with  numberless  in- 
superable difficulties — such  as,  the 
unlikelihood  of  a  post-exilic  fiction- 
monger  entering  into  minute  details 
of  construction  like  those  given  in 
Exodus  ;  the  improbability  of  a  late 
author,  who  had  never  himself  been 
in  the  wilderness,  furnishing  so  ac- 
curate a  representation  of  the  geo- 
graphical situation  as  archaeological 
research  shows  the  Mosaic  account  to 
be  ;  the  inconceivability  of  any  honest 
writer  stating  that  the  tabernacle  had 
been  made  by  Moses  after  a  pattern 
shown  to  him  by  Jehovah  in  the 
Mount,  when  in  point  of  fact  it  was 
never  made  at  all,  but  only  imagined 
by  the  writer  himself,  who  took  the 
first  or  second  temple  for  his  model; 
the  falsification  of  Pentateuchal  history 
which  must  ensue  if  the  tabernacle  of 
Moses  never  was  an  actual  building ;  the 
contradiction  to  statements  in  the 
historical  and  prophetical  books  which 
must  be  made  if  the  fiction  theory  is 
correct ;  in  addition  to  these  the  actual 
historic  character  of  the  tabernacle  is 

105 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


vouched  for  by  both  Stephen  and  the  IV.  A  symbolic  building. — 1.  Of  the 

writer    to    the    Hebrews    (viii.    2,    5,  Divine  fellowship  with  Israel.     (1)  The 

ix.  2,  3,  6,  8,  11,  21,  xiii.   10).      See  Holy  of  Holies  with   its  Ark   of  the 

an  article  by  the  present  writer,  en-  Covenant,   its  Glory  burning  between 

titled      "  The     Tabernacle     and     the  the  cherubim,  its  mercy  seat,  its  tables 

Temple "   in   The  Theological  Monthly,  of  testimony,  etc.   (Heb.  ix.  2-5),  was 

April  1891.  an  emblem  of  the  divine  presence,  the 

II.  A  divinely  sketched  building. —  divine  majesty,  the  divine  character, 
If  Moses  was  the  constructor  of  the  and  the  divine  conditions  of  fellowship 
tabernacle  (and  in  this  sense  may  be  between  Jehovah  and  Israel.  (2)  The 
styled  its  architect)  its  true  designer  holy  place,  with  its  altar  of  incense, 
was  God.  This  introduces  into  the  its  seven-branched  candlestick,  and  its 
religion  of  ancient  Israel  that  which  tables  of  shew  bread,  was  an  emblem 
is  so  keenly  objected  to,  but  without  of  what  that  fellowship  consisted  in — 
which  no  religion  can  be  of  permanent  spiritual  acceptance,  spiritual  illumin- 
value  or  saving  pover — viz.,  the  super-  ation,  and  spiritual  nourishment  of  the 
natural  element.  If  Christianity  is  believing  worshipper  by  Jehovah  on 
not  "  of  God  "  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  one  side,  and  on  the  other  spiritual 
that  expression,  it  will  not  succeed  adoration  of  God  (the  incense),  spiritual 
permanently  in  binding  the  consciences  shining  for  God  (the  lamps),  and  spirit- 
of  men.  ual  consecration   to  God  (the   loaves). 

III.  A  provisional  building. — It  was  (3)  The  outer  court,  with  its  altar  of 
intended  for  the  temporary  accommo-  burnt  offering  and  la ver,  was  an  emblem 
dation  of  the  Ark  during  the  period  of  of  the  only  way  in  which  such  fellow- 
the  wilderness  wanderings,  and  until  a  ship  with  Jehovah  could  be  reached — 
permanent  habitation  could  be  secured  viz.,  by  atonement  (the  altar)  and 
for  it  in  the  place  which  Jehovah  should  regeneration  (the  laver).  2.  Of  the 
choose.  Hence  it  was  in  due  course  Divine  fellowship  with  believers  in  the 
superseded  by  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  Christian  Church.  This  thought  is 
which  in  turn  has  been  displaced  by  elaborated  and  fully  wrought  out  in 
the  Christian  Church.  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (ix.  x). 

HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  45—53. 

From  Joshua  to  Jesus  ;  or,  the  Downward  Course  of  Israel. 

I.  Joshua  and  the  conquest. — 1.  The  clearing  out  of  the  nations  from  Canaan. 
(1)  Effected  instrumentally  by  the  swords  of  Joshua  and  his  warriors.  Stephen 
does  not  hint  that  the  extermination  of  the  Canaanites  was  a  horrible  impiety ; 
this  is  mostly  done  by  tender-hearted  "  moderns  "  who  see  nothing  wrong  in 
shooting  down  "  inferior  races  "  when  they  happen  to  be  possessed  of  desirable 
lands.  (2)  Sanctioned  providentially  and  even  commanded  verbally  by  God 
Himself  (Deut.  vii.  1,  2,  xxxii.  49),  so  that  Stephen  represents  the  nations  as 
having  been  thrust  out  by  God  before  the  face  of  the  fathers  of  Israel.  That  God 
had  a  perfect  right  to  eject  the  degraded  Canaanites  from  their  land,  and  to  do 
so  in  whatever  way  He  chose,  no  one  can  dispute.  That  He  selected  Joshua  and 
his  warriors  for  this  purpose  could  not  render  the  action  wrong  on  God's  part, 
and  was  ample  justification  for  Joshua.  2.  The  entering  in  of  Israel  into  their 
possession.  This  took  place  under  the  leadership  of  Joshua,  who  in  conducting 
Israel  to  Canaan  served  as  an  eminent  type  of  Christ.  In  taking  over  the  soil 
the  Israelites  did  nothing  different  from  what  has  been  going  on  ever  since  in 
the  providence  of  God.  Degenerate  nations  retire,  go  down,  and  become  extinct 
before  or  are  absorbed  in  superior  peoples  who  are  better  able  to  occupy  the  land. 
3.  The  establishment  in  Canaan  of  Jehovah's  worship.  Stephen  clearly  believed 
that  Moses  had  made  a  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  and  that  Joshua  had  fetched 

166 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  vii. 


it  into  Canaan,  setting  it  up  first  at  Gilgal  (Josh.  iv.  18,  19),  and  latterly  at  Shiloh 
(Josh,  xviii.  1,  xix.  51).  In  so  doing  Israel  under  Joshua  began  her  national 
history  well.  Had  she  adhered  to  Jehovah  and  His  tabernacle  her  subsequent 
fortunes,  and  perhaps  the  history  of  the  world,  would  have  been  different. 

II.  David  and  the  monarchy. — Two  things  noted.  1.  Concerning  David's 
character.  That  he  found  favour  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  was  a  man  after  God's 
own  heart  (xiii.  22;  1  Sam.  xiii.  14),  who  delighted  to  do  Jehovah's  will 
(Psalm  xl.  8).  This  does  not  imply  that  David  never  fell  into  sin.  2.  Con- 
cerning David's  request.  To  be  allowed  to  find  a  habitation  for  the  God  of 
Jacob.  This  requeet,  though  denied  him,  was  pronounced  good  and  accepted 
as  an  evidence  of  his  piety  (1  Ohron.  xxii.  7,  8).  In  David's  days  Israel's 
national  glory  reached  its  zenith.     In  the  next  reign  it  began  to  decline. 

III.  Solomon  and  the  temple. — 1.  The  honour  conferred  upon  David's  son.  He 
was  permitted  to  carry  out  his  father's  project  and  erect  a  house  for  the  worship 
of  Jehovah  (1  Kings  vi.,  viii.).  A  signal  honour  of  which  in  his  latter  days  he 
became  unmindful  (1  Kings  xi.  1-13).  Eminent  service  in  and  to  the  Church  is 
no  certain  guarantee  against  apostasy.  For  the  notion  that  Stephen  intended 
"to  declare  that  Solomon  built  the  temple  without  warrant,  in  place  of  the 
tabernacle  "  (Weizsacker),  there  is  not  the  shadow  of  foundation.  2.  The  silence 
preserved  about  his  reign.  It  is  significant  that  Stephen  adds  nothing  more  about 
David's  son;  as  if  he  desired  to  convey  the  impression  that  nothing  more  to 
Solomon's  advantage  or  Israel's  could  be  said.  Possibly  this  was  so.  Never- 
theless, Nihil  nisi  bonnm  de  mortuis  is  an  excellent  maxim. 

IV.  Isaiah  and  Jehovah. — 1.  The  decline  in  religion  after  Solomon.  Notwith- 
standing the  magnificence  of  the  temple  worship,  and  perhaps  partly  because  of 
its  magnificence,  it  began  to  degenerate — drifting  first  into  mere  external  ritual, 
and  latterly  terminating  in  shameful  and  shameless  idolatry  (see  Isa.  i.  11-15, 
ii.  8).  2.  The  lofty  doctrine  of  the  prophets.  That  Jehovah  was  not  a  local 
divinity,  but  the  sovereign  of  the  universe ;  that  He  could  not  be  confined  to 
any  material  edifice,  however  imposing,  since  heaven  was  His  throne  and  the 
earth  His  footstool ;  and  that  He  could  not  be  served  by  any  mere  bodily  per- 
formance or  visible  ceremonial,  but  only  by  the  true  homage  of  the  heart. 
3.  The  evil  fortunes  of  the  prophets.  The  people,  stiff-necked  and  uncircumcised 
in  heart,  resisted  the  Holy  Ghost  who  spake  in  them  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  2  ;  2  Peter 
i.  21),  and  persecuted  them,  sometimes  even  unto  death  (Matt,  xxiii.  29-35). 

V.  Jesus  and  His  contemporaries. — 1.  Their  exalted  privileges.  (1)  They  had 
received  the  law,  as  it  was  ordained  by  angels,  or  as  the  ordinance  of  angels 
(Psalm  lxviii.  17).  (2)  They  had  been  honoured  by  the  coming  to  them  of  the 
righteous  One  (John  i.  11).  2.  Their  heinous  sins.  (1)  They  had  not  kept  the 
law  (John  vii.  19).  (2)  They  had  betrayed  and  murdered  the  righteous  One 
(ii.  23). 

Learn. — 1.  The  powerlessness  of  mere  external  privilege  to  save.  2.  The 
heredity  that  shows  itself  in  sin  as  well  as  in  piety.  3.  The  criminality  of  those 
who  know  the  truth,  and  do  not  walk  in  accordance  therewith. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.    44-47.    Four   Old    Testament  IV.  Solomon. — As  1.  Builder  of  the 

Typical  Persons.  Temple.     2.  As  Prince  of  Peace. 

I.  Moses. — As  1.  Deliverer.     2.  Me- 
diator.    3.  Lawgiver.  Ver.  47.  The  House  and  its  Dwellers. 

II.  Joshua. — As  1.  Captain.  2.  Con-  I.  The  house. — There  was  on  earth 
queror.     3.  Consolidator.                               once  a  house  which  Jehovah  called  His 

III.  David. — As  1.  Shepherd.  2.  own.  Though  the  Most  High  dwelleth 
King.  not  in  temples  made  with  hands,  yet 

167 


CHAP.  VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


He  chose  for  Himself  a  local  habita- 
tion, and  built  for  Himself  a  place  of 
special  abode.  For  many  an  age  it 
was  simply  a  tent,  of  stakes,  and 
boards,  and  curtains ;  in  after  ages  it 
was  a  palace,  of  marble,  and  gold,  and 
cedar,  and  brass  ;  but  whether  it  was 
named  Jehovah's  tent  or  Jehovah's 
temple,  it  was  still  the  place  of  His 
habitation. 

II.  The  dwellers. — They  of  old  were 
Israel.  To  them  pertained  the  house, 
and  the  altar,  and  the  mercy  seat,  and 
the  glory. 

III.  The  blessedness. — "  Blessed  are 
they  that  dwell  in  Thy  house."  This 
blessedness  is  both  negative  and  posi- 
tive. It  arises  out  of  that  which  we 
are  freed  from,  and  that  which  we 
gain.  1.  The  negative.  On  entering 
the  house  of  God,  we  are  delivered 
from  the  dangers  which  beset  all  who 
remain  outside.  2.  The  positive. 
(1)  Love.  Jehovah's  house  is  specially 
the  abode  of  love.  It  was  love  that 
thought  of  such  a  house  for  us ;  it  was 
love  that  planned  it,  and  love  that 
built  it.  It  is  love  too  that  fills  it,  and 
provides  all  its  excellences.  (2)  Com- 
panionship. It  is  not  into  a  cell  we 
enter — a  prison,  a  desert,  a  place  of 
isolation.  It  is  into  a  home,  a  well- 
replenished  habitation,  a  well-peopled 
city.  Israel's  temple  was  such,  to 
which  the  tribes  went  up.  Much  of 
life's  happiness  is  derived  from  the 
fellowship  of  heart  with  heart,  and  the 
communion  of  saints  is  no  small  portion 
of  our  joy,  even  here.  Here,  on  earth, 
companionship  is  imperfect,  and  is 
sometimes  a  hindrance,  a  vexation. 
Not  so  hereafter,  in  the  "  house  not 
made  with  hands,"  the  city  of  habita- 
tion, the  eternal  tabernacle.  (3)  Ser- 
vice.    "  They  serve  Him  day  and  night 


in  His  temple."  "  His  servants  shall 
serve  Him."  It  is  to  serve,  as  well  as 
to  reign,  that  we  are  called.  Such 
service  is,  in  all  its  parts,  blessedness. 
David  knew  the  blessedness  of  service 
in  his  day.  (4)  Glory.  At  present  it 
is  not  glory,  save  in  anticipation. — 
H.  Bonar,  D.D. 

Vers.  48-50.  The  Greatness  and 
Majesty  of  God. 

I.  The  throne  of  His  glory. — 
Heaven.  A  throne.  1.  Resplendent.— 
Filled  with  His  presence.  2.  Exalted. — 
High  above  this  world  (Psalm  ciii.  19). 
3.  Powerful. — Wielding  authority  over 
all  created  things. 

II.  The  footstool  of  His  feet.— The 
earth.  As  such  :  1.  The  work  of  His 
hands  (Isa.  }xlviii.  13).  2.  Under  His 
rule  (Psalm  ex.  1).  3.  Destined  to 
share  His  glory  (Isa.   lx.   13). 

III.  The  place  of  His  rest.— 1.  The 
temple  which  Solomon  built,  symbolically 
(Psalm  exxxii.  14).  2.  The  universe, 
which  He  himself  built,  really. 

Learn. — 1.  The  reverence  due  to  God 
(Eccl.  v.  2).  2.  The  hopefulness  of 
earth's  future  (Isa.  lx.  13).  3.  The 
spirituality  of  divine  worship  (John 
iv.  21-24). 

Yers.  51-53.  A  Terrible  Indictment. 

I.  Jehovah's  law  broken. — And  that 
by  men  who  had  received  it  at  the 
hands  of  angels. 

II.  Jehovah's  prophets  murdered. — 
And  that  by  the  men  they  had  come  to 
instruct. 

III.  Jehovah's  Son  slain. — And 
that  by  those  who  should  have  been 
His  protectors. 

IV.  Jehovah's  Spirit  resisted. — 
And  that  by  the  men  who  had  been 
pledged  to  obey. 


HOMILETICAL  AN  A  LYSIS. —Verses  54—60. 

The  Martyrdom  of  Stephen  ;  or,  the  First  Taste  of  Blood. 

I.  Stephen's  last  look  into  heaven  (ver.  55). — 1.  Where  he  stood.  (1)  In  the 
council  chamber.  Baur  was  greatly  exercised  to  understand  "how  Stephen  could 
have  seen  the  heavens  opened  in  the  room  in  which,  doubtless,  the  sitting  of  the 
Sanhedrim  was  1  eld;"  but  the  eye  of  faith  can  see  heaven  from  any  spot  on  earth. 
Moses  beheld  it  from  the  land  of  Egypt  (Heb.  xi.  27),  Isaiah  from  the  temple 

1G8 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  vn. 


(Isa.  vi.  1),  Ezekiel  from  the  banks  of  the  Ohebar  (Ezek.  i.  1),  Peter  from  the  house 
top  (Acts  x.  11),  John  from  Patmos  (Pev.  iv.  1).  (2)  Confronted  by  infuriated 
foes  who  gnashed  upon  him  with  their  teeth.  No  external  circumstances  can 
dim  faith's  eye,  or  prevent  it  from  looking  within  the  veil.  Varied  as  were 
the  situations  of  those  just  mentioned,  all  alike  gazed  on  things  unseen 
(Heb.  xi.  1).  2.  How  he  looked.  (1)  His  internal  condition.  Filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost.  As  water  rises  to  its  level,  so  does  the  Holy  Spirit  of  which  water 
is  an  emblem.  As  fire  and  flame  ascend  to  the  skies,  so  does  the  Holy  Spirit,  of 
which  these  are  symbols,  ever  soar  heavenward.  The  Spirit,  which  is  "  God's 
breath  in  man,"  habitually  "  returns  to  its  (place  of)  birth  "  (George  Herbert). 
The  Holy  Ghost,  descending  from  above  and  entering  the  human  soul,  in- 
stinctively impels  it  to  look  above.  (2)  His  external  manner.  With  steadfast 
gaze,  like  that  with  which  the  apostles  followed  the  departing  Christ  (i.  10),  he 
fixed  his  eyes  upon  the  scene  which  unfolded  itself  before  his  mental  vision. 
There  is  no  need  to  ask  whether  he  saw  the  sky  through  the  chamber  window. 
The  upward  glance  was  only  a  symbol  of  the  inward  look.     3.   What  he  saw., 

(1)  The  glory  of  God.  The  luminous  symbol  of  the  divine  presence  which 
Abraham  beheld  in  Ur  (ver.  2),  Moses  upon  Sinai  (Exod.  xxxiii.  23),  and 
Ezekiel  at  Chebar  (Ezek.  i.  28),  which  filled  first  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xl.  34), 
and  afterwards  the  temple  (1  Kings  viii.  11),  which  shone  round  the  shepherds 
(Lnke   ii.    9),    and   appeared   upon   the   transfiguration  mount  (Luke  ix.   32). 

(2)  Jesus  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  As  if  He  had  risen  to  protect 
or  receive  His  servant,  say  some,  though  it  is  doubtful  whether  any  special 
significance  should  be  attached  to  Christ's  attitude.  The  point  of  importance 
is  that  Stephen,  on  the  eve  of  martyrdom,  enjoyed  a  vision  of  the  glorified 
Christ.  Saul  (ix.  17),  and  John  (Pev.  i.  13),  had  similar  visions,  though  neither 
of  these  occurred  at  death  (see  "  Hints  on  ver.  55  "). 

II.  Stephen's  last  testimony  for  Christ  (ver.  56). — 1.  Introduced  by  a  note  of 
exclamation.  "Behold!"  as  if  he  meant  to  say:  "This  from  a  dying  man 
receive  as  certain,"  or  to  call  attention  to  its  supreme  importance  as  his  last  word 
of  testimony  that  would  fall  upon  their  ears.  2.  Continued  by  a  startling 
declaration.  (1)  That  he  was  looking  into  heaven — "  I  see  the  heavens  opened," 
those  heavens  out  of  which  Christ  affirmed  He  had  come  (John  iii.  13  ;  vi.  38), 
and  into  which  His  disciples  had  beheld  Him  depart  (i.  11);  which  heavens, 
therefore,  were  a  reality,  and  not  merely  a  fiction  of  the  mind  (John  xiv.  2),  and 
nearer  to  them  than  they  had  ever  imagined.  (2)  That  in  heaven  He  beheld 
Jesus — I  see  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  referring  to  Him  by  this  name  that  there  might 
be  no  mistake  as  to  whom  he  meant — the  personage  they  knew  so  well,  who, 
when  He  stood  where  Stephen  then  stood,  had  called  Himself  by  this  designation 
(Matt.  xxvi.  64) — no  mistake  as  to  His  identity,  and  none  as  to  His  continued 
existence  in  a  bodily  form,  and  therefore  none  as  to  His  resurrection.  (3)  That 
the  Jesus  whom  he  saw  was  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  Perhaps  a  cir- 
cumstance full  of  comfort  for  the  dying  deacon,  as  if  it  indicated  that  Christ  had 
risen  from  His  throne  in  holy  eagerness,  either  to  support  and  protect,  or  to 
receive  and  welcome  His  courageous  servant  (but  see  above),  certainly  a  state- 
ment fitted  to  alarm  those  who  remembered  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  had  used 
similar  speech  concerning  Himself  (Mark  xiv.  62),  and  had  even  spoken  about 
coming  with  great  power  and  glory  (Mark  xiii.  26),  fitted  to  suggest  that  the  Son 
of  man,  whom  they  had  crucified,  had  already  started  up,  and  was  on  the  move 
to  avenge  His  death.  3.  Interrupted  by  a  fierce  demonstration.  (1)  By  an 
angry  shout,  crying  out,  most  likely,  that  he  should  be  silenced  and  put  to  death, 
as  the  people  had  before  cried  out  against  his  Master  (Matt,  xxvii.  23 ; 
John  xix.  12),  and  afterwards  against  Paul  (xxii.  22,  23).  (2)  By  a  suggestive 
action,  stopping  their  ears,  as  if  they  could  not  listen  without  holy  horror  to  what 

169 


chap.'  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


they  regarded  as  blasphemy.  (Compare  Zech.  vii.  11.)  4.  Followed  by  a 
murderous  infliction.  The  assault  which  ensued  was — (1)  Sudden.  "  They  rushed 
upon  him,"  under  the  impulse  of  blind  and  unreflecting  fury,  feeling,  perhaps, 
with  regard,  to  the  thought  that  was  in  their  hearts,  that  "  'twere  well  it  were 
done  quickly  "  {Macbeth,  i.  7).  (2)  Unanimous — "  with  one  accord  " — a  striking 
contrast  to  the  "one  accord"  of  the  disciples  (ii.  46),  a  unity  of  hate  and  sin 
rather  than  of  love  and  grace.  (3)  Violent.  "  They  cast  him  out  of  the  city,"  as  the 
inhabitants  of  Nazareth  had  once  done  to  Christ  (Luke  iv.  29),  "and  they  stoned 
him/'  as  the  men  of  Jerusalem  had  more  than  once  threatened  to  do  to  Christ 
(John  x.  31,  xi.  8).  (4)  Illegal.  At  this  time  the  Jews  possessed  not  the  power 
of  inflicting  capital  punishment.  (See  "  Critical  Remarks.")  Yet  (5)  Deliberate. 
"  The  witnesses  laid  down  their  garments  at  the  feet  of  a  young  man  named 
Saul."  This  accorded  with  the  Hebrew  law,  which  required  the  accusers  to  begin 
the  work  of  lapidation  (Deut.  xiii.  10,  xvii.  7).  Many  who  shudder  at  breaking 
the  letter  of  the  law  have  no  scruples  at  violating  its  spirit. 

III.  Stephen's  last  cry  for  himself  (ver.  59). — Uttered — 1.  With  perfect  calm- 
ness of  spirit.  Recognising  that  his  end  was  come  he  quietly  prepared  to 
receive  the  lethal  missiles.  No  cry  for  mercy  from  his  enemies  escaped  his  lips, 
no  fluster  or  fear  appeared  in  his  countenance,  speech,  or  manner.  With  absolute 
composure  he  resigned  himself  to  die — in  this  furnishing  a  bright  example  to 
Christians.  (Compare  the  fortitude  of  Paul,  xxi.  13,  xxv.  11.)  2.  With  un- 
faltering trust  in  Christ.  Addressing  Him  as  Lord  Jesus,  Stephen  intimated  in 
the  hearing  of  his  executioners  his  faith  in  Christ's  divinity  (Lord)  and  ability  to 
save  (Jesus).  Such  faith  has  enabled  multitudes  since  Stephen's  day  to  die  in 
peace.  Nothing  else  will  impart  the  calm  which  Stephen  displayed.  3.  With 
certain  hope  of  felicity.  As  Christ,  following  the  example  of  the  Psalmist  (Psalm 
xxxi.  5),  had  commended  His  spirit  to  the  Father's  hand  (Luke  xxiii.  46),  so 
Stephen  now  commends  his  spirit  to  the  hands  of  Christ.  A  proper  model  for 
the  dying  Christian.  So  the  dying  Huss  was  often  heard  to  repeat  the  words : 
"Into  Thy  hands,  O  Lord,  I  commend  my  spirit";  and  was  followed  by  his 
fellow-martyr  Jerome  of  Prague  (Neander's  Church  History,  vol.  ix.,  pp.  536,  549, 
Bonn's  Edition).  Since  Christ  is  in  glory,  the  soul  that  His  hands  receive  must 
be  blessed  indeed. 

IV.  Stephen's  last  prayer  for  his  enemies  (ver.  60). — 1.  Its  manner.  (1) 
With  reverent  humility — '■*  he  kneeled  down."  As  Solomon  did  when  invoking 
Jehovah's  presence  to  come  into  the  temple  (2  Chron.  vi.  13);  as  Daniel  when 
he  prayed  towards  Jerusalem  (Dan.  vi.  10)  ;  as  Christ  in  Gethsemane  (Luke 
xxii.  41) ;  as  Peter  when  raising  Dorcas  (ix.  40)  ;  as  Paul  at  Miletus  (xx.  36) 
and  at  Tyre  (xxi.  5).  Kneeling  most  suitable  when  the  soul  is  charged  with 
deep  emotion.  Stephen  "  stood  when  he  prayed  for  himself :  he  kneeled  when 
he  prayed  for  his  enemies  "  (Trapp).  (2)  With  fervent  supplication — u  he  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,"  thus  marking  the  intensity  of  his  desire.  Although  noise 
in  devotion  is  not  always  to  be  mistaken  for  spiritual  ardour  (1  Kings  xix.  28), 
and  although  feeling  may  sometimes  be  too  deep  for  utterance  (1  Sam.  i.  13), 
yet  as  a  rule  suppliants,  who  are  in  earnest,  cry  aloud  and  spare  not  (Psalm  cxlii. 
1  ;  Matt.  xx.  31).  2.  Its  burden.  That  the  sin  of  his  executioners  and 
murderers  might  not  be  laid  to  their  charge.  A  prayer  modelled  after  Christ's 
on  the  Cross  (Luke  xxiii.  34).  Such  a  prayer  as  had  never  been  offered  till 
Christ  set  the  example  (contrast  the  prayer  of  Zechariah,  2  Chron.  xxiv.  21),  and 
such  a  prayer  as  has  no  parallel  outside  the  Christian  Church,  though  within 
such  parallels  are  not  wanting.  John  Huss,  the  Bohemian  Reformer,  when  the 
order  was  given  to  kindle  the  flames  around  him,  only  uttered  these  words  : 
"  Lord  Jesus  !  I  endure  with  humility  this  cruel  death  for  Thy  sake  ;  and  I 
pray  Thee  to  pardon  all  my  enemies  "  (Waddington's  Church  History,  p.  595). 

170 


HOAft'LETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  vn. 


3.  Its  effect.  What  impression  Stephen's  prayer  produced  upon  his  enemies 
cannot  be  told,  though,  it  may  be  surmised,  that  one  at  least  never  forgot  it, 
and  that  Augustine's  remark  is  true,  "  If  Stephen  had  not  prayed  the  Church 
would  not  have  possessed  Paul."  As  to  Stephen  himself,  his  devotions  calmed 
his  spirit  and  enabled  him  to  fall  asleep.  And  what  a  falling  asleep  it  was  ! 
"  He  fell  asleep  among  flints  and  awoke  among  jewels  "  (Besser).  The  same 
writer  adds  :  "  Stephen  means  a  garland  or  crown.  When  his  mother  named 
her  child  so  she  little  thought  of  an  imperishable  crown  of  honour ;  but 
Stephen's  spiritual  mother,  the  Holy  Church,  honours  the  first  bearer  of  her 
martyr  crown  by  celebrating  his  memory  on  the  day  after  Christmas,  accord- 
ing to  the  motto  '  yesterday  was  Christ  born  upon  the  earth,  that  to-day  Stephen 
might  be  born  in  heaven '  "  (Besser). 

"  Foremost  and  nearest  to  His  throne, 
By  perfect  robes  of  triumph  known, 
And  likest  Him  in  look  and  tone 

The  holy  Stephen  kneels, 
With  steadfast  gaze,  as  when  the  sky 
Flew  open  to  his  fainting  eye, 
Which,  like  a  fading  lamp  flash'd  high 

Seeing  what  death  conceals." — Keble. 

Conclusion. — They  who  would  share  with  Stephen  the  glory  of  wearing  that 
immortal  crown  must  1.  Look  by  faith  into  that  opened  heaven  into  which  he 
gazed  ;  2.  Contemplate  with  believing  adoration  that  exalted  Christ  whom  he 
beheld  ;  3.  Testify  by  their  lives,  as  he  did  by  his,  to  the  Saviour  in  whom  they 
trust ;  4.  Commit  themselves  to  Christ  as  he  did  when  they  come  to  die ;  and 
5.  Fall  asleep  as  he  did,  breathing  forth  forgiveness  upon  all. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  56.  The  opened  Heavens.  The  son  of  a  tent-maker,  or  worker  in 

I.  For  the  glory  of  God  to  shine  hair  cloth  (xviii.  3).  That  Paul  had  a 
through.  sister  is  mentioned  by  Luke  (xxiii.  16) ; 

II.  For  the  grace  of  God  to  come  that  he  had  a  brother  (2  Cor.  viii. 
through.  16-24)  whom  he  afterwards  converted 

III.  For  the  spirit  of  man  to  pass  to  Christianity  (Hausrath)  is,  to  say 
through. — 1.  By  the  exercise  of  faith,  the  least,  doubtful.  3.  His  citizenship. 
2.  In  the  offering  up  of  prayer.  3.  Roman,  obtained  by  birth  (xvi.  37, 
At  the  hour  of  dissolution.  xxii.  28).     4.  His  education.     Brought 

up   at   the   feet  of  Gamaliel  (xxii.  3, 

Ver.  58.  Changed Stones.-The  stones  ^  *}     5"  H*  "*»*>»•.    A  pharisee 

cast   by  the    world    against    Christ's  anl  tb.e   son.  °{  fcj*"™8"   <™;   °.' 

witnesses  are  changed.  ™»"  £  *xvl'  5J  Ph,1.1;  m-  ^'J?*}  "• 

I.  Into  monuments  of  shame  for  the  lJh  6„",s  ""*""**  AP&T 
enemies  of  the  truth.  £  *be  H/bfT  J3  9°E  ^  22  '  IJ* 

II.  Into  jewels  in  the  crowns  of  the  £•  J{ ;  of  the  tnbe  of  BenJamln  (Phl!- 
glorified  martyrs.  'J J'  TT.    n  ,  .  . 

III.  Into  the  seed  of  new  life  for         "■  ,Hls  first  appearance  in  history. 

the  Church  of  Christ.— ©wo*.  ~ }'  An  "f™  ™  mu\^-        ^» 

witnesses  laid  down  their  clothes  at  his 

feet."     2.  A  ferocious  persecutor.     "  He 

The  young  Man  named  Sa{y.l  laid  waste  the  Church,"  etc.   (viii.  3). 

I.  His     early    biography. — 1.     His      3.  A  commissioned  assassin.    Breathing 

birthplace.     Tarsus   in  Cilicia  (ix.   11,      out  tbreatenings  and  slaughter  against 

xxi.    39,    xxii.    3).     2.  His  parentage.      the  disciples  of  the  Lord,  he  asked  and 

171 


CHAP.  VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


obtained  letters  from  the  high  priest 
empowering  him  to  hunt  them  down 
at  Damascus  (ix.  1). 

III."  His  remarkable  conversion  (see 
"  Homiletical  Analysis  on  ix.  1-9  "). — 
1.  His  journey  to  Damascus.  2.  His 
sudden  arrestment.  3.  His  vision  of 
the  exalted  Christ.  4.  His  complete 
and  instantaneous  surrender. 

IV.  His  subsequent  career. — 1.  As 
a  missionary  of  the  cross.  His  three 
journeys,  the  first  with  Barnabas 
(xiii.,  xiv.),  the  second  with  Silas  (xvi. 
— xviii.  22),  the  third  with  Timothy 
(xviii.  23-xxi.  17).  2.  As  a  founder  of 
churches.  In  Asia  Minor  and  on  the 
shores  of  Europe.  3.  As  a  writer  of 
epistles.  Certainly  four — Romans,  1 
and  2  Corinthians  and  Galatians — 
proceeded  from  his  pen;  most  likely 
other  eight — Ephesians,  Philippians, 
Colossians,  1  and  2  Thessalonians, 
1  and  2  Timothy,  and  Titus — possibly 
also  Hebrews. 

V.  His  martyr  death. — His  career. 
1.  Opened  by  assisting  at  the  murder 
of  Stephen,  and  2.  Closed  by  himself 
being  slain. 

Ver.  59.  Stephen's  Three  Crowns. 

I.  The  fair  crown  of  grace  with 
which  the  Lord  adorned  him  in  his 
life  and  work. 

II.  The  bloody  crown  of  thorns 
which  he  wore  after  his  Saviour  in 
suffering  and  death. 

III.  The  heavenly  crown  of  glory 
which  was  reserved  in  eternity  for  the 
faithful  martyr. 

Stephen's  Prayer  for  Himself. 

I.  The  doctrines  it  contained. — 
1.  The  divinity  of  Christ.  2.  The 
existence  of  man's  spirit.  3.  Future 
immortality.     4.  The  efficacy  of  prayer. 

II.  The  spirit  it  exemplified. — 1. 
Devout  adoration.  2.  Humble  resig- 
nation.    3.  Hopeful  expectation. 

III.  The  lessons  it  taught. — 1.  How 
to  pray.     2.  How  to  die. 

Yer.  60.  Stephen's  Prayer  for  his 
Enemies. 

I.  Sin  is  always,  in  the  first  instance 

172 


at  least,  charged  to  or  laid  to  the 
account  of  its  perpetrators. — God  can 
by  no  means  clear  the  guilty  (Exod. 
xxxiv.  7). 

II.  Sin,  however,  may  in  certain 
instances  not  be  charged  to  its  per- 
petrators. Forgiveness  is  not  im- 
possible (Psalm  cxxx.  4). 

III.  If  sin  is  not  to  be  charged  to  its 
perpetrator's  account,  it  is  the  Lord  who 
must  grant  the  requisite  discharge. — 
God  alone  can  forgive  sins  (Mark  ii.  7), 
but  Christ  is  God,  and  Christ  by  His 
death  and  resurrection  has  rendered  it 
possible  for  sin  to  be  forgiven  (Rom. 
iii.  25,  26). 

IV.  The  followers  of  Jesus  Christ 
may  and  should  pray  for  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins  to  others  than  themselves, 
even  for  their  enemies.  Christ  com- 
manded them  to  do  so  (Matt.  v.  44 ; 
Luke  vi.  28),  and  exemplified  His  own 
command  (Luke  xxiii.  34). 

The  Sleep  of  Stephen. 

I.  Rested  him  from  his  labours 
(Rev.  xiv.  13). 

II.  Released  him  from  his  suffer- 
ings (Rev.  vii.  14). 

III.  Introduced  him  to  heaven  (2 
Cor.  v.  1). 

IV.  Crowned  him  with  glory  (Rev. 
ii.  10). 

Vers.  54-60.  The  First  Christian 
Martyr. 

I.  The  call  of  Stephen  was  to 
martyrdom. — Neither  he  nor  the 
Church  knew  the  honour  which 
awaited  him.  The  office  of  the  first 
deacons  was  humble.  They  were  to 
"serve  tables,"  a  labour  too  secular 
and  secondary  for  apostles.  Stephen 
illustrates  the  truth  that  the  humblest 
service  leads  to  the  highest.  We  do 
not  want  so  much  men  for  large 
places  as  men  to  enlarge  small  places. 
What  God  wanted  of  Stephen  did  not 
fully  appear  at  the  first. 

II.  Stephen  was  called  because  he 
was  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost.— The 
power  of  the  Pentecostal  baptism  was 
upon  him  to  a  degree  so  extraordinary 
as  to  have  drawn  the  attention  of  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.         chap.  vii. 


Church.     In  the  brief   description  of  power,  the  ineffable,  Divine  light.     It 
his  gift,  the  Greek  verb  expresses  a  riveted    them ;    it   awed   them.      The 
spiritual  state.     The  gift  in  him  was  baptism  of  the  Spirit  is  an  illumination, 
not  occasional  or  transient.     He  was  The  face  of  every  new-born  soul  begins 
habitually  a  man  of  spiritual  power.  to  shine  with  the  light  that  was  never 
The  presence  of  this  power  in  him  was  on  sea  or   land.     He  is    transfigured, 
recognised  as  a   qualification   for   his  Through  the  Holy  Spirit  (3)  Stephen 
official   duties.      Through    the    Spirit  displayed  the  Divine  union  of  severity 
(1)  he  had  a  message.     The  character-  and    gentleness.       His   outbreak    was 
istic   of   his   preaching,   in  distinction  terrible  :    "  Ye    stiff-necked    and   un- 
from  that  of  all  others  of   his  time,  circumcised     in     heart      and     ears ! " 
was,    that    he    carried   the   Christian  uttered  with  that    angelic  face.     The 
doctrine  to  a  new  development.     He  words  might  be  hastily  taken  as  the 
went  beyond  the  apostles.     They  con-  utterance  of  passion.     The  expression 
tinued  to  worship  in  the  temple.     They  of  righteous  wrath  resembles  passion  ; 
honoured  the  ceremonial   law.       They  but,  as  Jesus  never  had  more  absolute 
did  not  break  with  the  religious  class  control  of  Himself  than  when  He  pro- 
in  the  nation.     It  had  not  begun  fully  nounced  His  great  indictments,  so  at 
to  appear  how  revolutionary  the  gospel  no  point  in  his  argument  had  Stephen 
was.     Stephen  made  the  break.     He  more  absolute  control  of  his  soul  than 
taught  that    Christianity  was  a    uni-  in   his   final   denunciation.      This   re- 
versal  religion.     As   sin  is  universal,  markable  association  of  wrath  and  love, 
redeeming  grace  is  for  mankind.     This  as  elements  of  the   same   emotion,  is 
is  biblical  universalism — the  universal-  superhuman  ;  it  is  Divine ;  it   is   the 
ity  of  guilt  and  of  grace.     In  his  so-  manifestation   of    the   fulness   of    the 
called  defence  we  see  the  character  of  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Through 
his  preaching.     He  had  nothing  to  say  the  Spirit  (4)   Stephen  had  a  vision, 
for  himself  :  he  preached  Christ.     God  He  seemed  to  have  a  spiritual  intima- 
knows   his  theologians.       He  chose   a  tion.     Ho  looked  up.     The  earnestness 
deacon.     The  reason  suggested  is,  that  of  his  gaze  was  intense.     "  He,  being 
to  so  pre-eminent  a  degree  he  was  filled  full   of    the   Holy   Ghost,    looked    up 
with  the  Spirit.     All  true  advances  of  steadfastly  into   heaven,  and  saw  the 
Christian  doctrine  have  been  entrusted  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing  on 
to   spiritual   men.      The   qualification  the  right  hand  of   God."     The  vision 
for    great    teachers,    the    leaders    of  was  inward.     No  eye  but  his  saw  it. 
revolutions,   the  qualifications   for  all  Through  the   Spirit   (5)   Stephen  was 
teachers  sent  from  God,  is  the  gift  of  sustained.     He  triumphed   over  pain, 
the  Holy  Ghost.     Through  the  Spirit  This  power  the  Spirit  gives.     Christian 
(2)  Stephen  had  the  power  of  a  holy  martyrs  have  sung  in  the  flames,  and 
face.     Those   in   the   council,    looking  called  them  beds  of  roses. 
steadfastly  on  him,  saw  his  face  as  it  III.  The  effects  of  the  martyrdom, 
had  been  the  face  of  an  angel.     What  — Stephen's  death  seemed  a  calamity, 
is  the  characteristic  of  an  angel's  face  1  Time  alone  could  show  the  wisdom  of 
The    word   suggests   softness,    purity,  God's  large  plan.     But  He  makes  no 
spirituality.      We  apply  the  adjective  mistakes.     Notice  (1)  the  effect  on  the 
"  angelic  "  to  womanly  sweetness  and  world.      He  showed  the  wcrlcl  how  a 
grace,  but  the  angels  of  the  Bible  are  Christian  could  die.     Observe  (2)  the 
masculine.     Sweetness  there  may  have  effect  upon  the  Church.     In  all  ages, 
been  in   Stephen,  purity   there   must  persecution  has  been  one  of  the  great- 
have  been  ;   but  more  than  these  the  est  providential  agencies  for  the  spread 
council  saw,  what  they  associated  with  of  the  gospel.     Again,  notice   (3)  the 
the  heavenly  messengers  who  appeared  effect  on  the  apostles.     They  remained 
to   Adam    and    Eve,    to    Manoah,    to  in    Jerusalem.      Their   position    must 
David,  to  the  Prophets — glory,  spiritual  have  been  of   great  danger,  responsi- 

173 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


bilility,  distress.  They  did  not  flee; 
they  stayed  at  their  posts.  The  in- 
fluence of  their  constancy  upon  the 
Christians,  and  also  upon  their  enemies, 
must  have  been  very  great.  Observe 
(4)  the  effect  upon  the  devout  Jews. 
Of  this  class  were  the  men  who  bore 
Stephen  to  his  burial.  They  were  not 
Christians,  but  favourably  disposed 
toward  Christianity.  The  persecution 
tested  them.  At  the  peril  of  their  lives 
they  paid  the  murdered  man  the  rever- 
ence of  burial.  They  were  led  to  take 
an  open  stand.  We  see,  finally  (5), 
the  effect  on  Saul.  Upon  him  the 
impression  was  deep.  His  reference  to 
the  part  he  had  had  in  the  murder, 
when  he  was  in  his  trance  at  Damascus, 
shows  it.  One  of  the  goads  against 
which,  from  that  time,  he  kicked  in 
vain,  was  then  buried  in  his  heart. 
The  immediate  result  was  to  infuriate 
him.  He  became  exceeding  mad.  Our 
great  intellectual  changes  are  uncon- 
scious. They  are  parts  of  a  larger 
movement,  which  is  vital.  The  move- 
ment of  the  life  is  secret,  involuntary, 
slow,  like  the  growth  of  trees,  like  the 
coming  on  of  summer.  We  argue 
against  the  truth.  We  triumph  in 
the  debate.  But  an  influence  has  been 
let  into  our  lives  which  gently  lifts  us, 
loosens  us  from  our  old  moorings,  and 
shifts  us  unconsciously  to  the  opposite 
side  of  the  stream.  We  find  ourselves 
there.  This  process  of  vital  movement, 
this  set  of  the  soul,  may  have  taken 
place  with  Saul.  Stephen  may  have 
been,  probably  he  was,  his  spiritual 
father.  The  truth,  which  could  only 
be  answered  by  stones,  lived  on  in- 
vulnerable. It  took  root  in  him. — 
Monday  Club  Sermons. 

The  First  Christian  Martyr. — Stephen 
had  grown  up  into  Christ  in  all  things. 
His  energy  had  been  prodigiously 
effective.  The  whole  city  had  been 
put  into  commotion.  Bad  men  were 
passionately  agreed.  This  deacon  stood 
straight  across  their  path.  How  might 
they  be  rid  of  him  ?  When  it  came 
to  speaking,  there  was  really  little 
to  be  said — to  them.     Need  we  talk 

174 


to  a  storm  ?  Do  we  choose  words 
for  wolves  ?  It  does  not  appear  that 
Stephen  even  hoped  to  move  that 
high-priest.  As  to  what  he  really  did 
intend,  there  has  been  a  long  debate. 
But  he  was  probably  speaking  to  the 
future,  thinking  aloud,  building  better 
than  he  knew.  Providence  was  taking 
care  of  his  speech.  It  was  given  him 
in  that  same  hour.  So  the  ideas  have 
no  shackles  on.  The  truth  has  made 
him  free.  With  a  Gentile  largeness 
and  liberty  of  interpretation  he  ex- 
pounds the  Scriptures.  What  would 
be  the  effect  of  such  discourse  upon 
priests  and  scribes  and  elders  may 
readily  be  anticipated.  He  has  only 
to  look  into  their  angry  eyes.  But 
while  this  tempest  rages,  and  in  the 
midst  of  it  all,  there  is  one  still  place. 
It  is  the  martyr's  own  heart.  He  is 
not  disturbed.  He  has  no  resentments 
and  no  fears.  It  does  not  seem  far  to 
heaven,  and  it  was  not  far.  Jesus, 
"  standing,"  risen  from  the  throne,  is 
ready  to  aid  His  friend,  to  hear  his  last 
words,  andto  "  receive  "  his  spirit.  So 
the  sufferer  "  fell  asleep."  One  witness 
at  least  there  was  of  these  events  whose 
dreams  for  many  a  night  they  dis- 
turbed. Like  serpents'  fangs  they 
stung  his  conscience.  It  is  probable 
that  he  had  already  been  prominent 
among  "  them  of  Cilicia  "  "  disputing 
with  Stephen."  Perhaps  to  his  hear- 
ing of  the  address  before  the  council 
we  may  owe  the  extended  report  pre- 
served for  us.  At  any  rate,  with  the 
mob  he  strode  from  the  "  stone 
chamber  "  to  the  city -walls.  He  was 
close  enough  to  the  actual  violence  to 
see  the  face  and  hear  the  voice  of  the 
expiring  Christian. 

I.  We  can  see  how  bad  men  are 
made  to  serve  the  good  cause. — A  wise 
prayer  for  the  devil  would  be,  "  Save 
me  from  my  friends."  It  was  the 
design  of  these  conspirators  to  cripple, 
and  if  possible  to  destroy,  the  infant 
Church.  But  it  is  manifest  how  they 
only  strengthened  and  enlarged  it. 
The  people  had  again  seen  the  contrast 
between  piety  and  pretence.  In  such 
a  case  the  charm  of  real  goodness  could 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  VII. 


not  but  win  friends.  It  is  not  safe, 
indeed,  in  any  case  to  despise  even  the 
humblest  virtue.  "  Except  a  corn  of 
wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it 
abideth  alone ;  but  if  it  die  it  bringeth 
forth  much  fruit."  So  it  proved  here. 
There  were  men  and  women  who  night 
and  day  could  only  think  with  tears 
how  this  brave  servant  of  the  truth 
had  been  struck  down.  See,  too,  how 
this  crime  wrought  upon  the  young 
man  Saul.  So  does  a  bad  purpose 
blunder  and  defeat  itself.  It  is  like 
Pharaoh  kindling  Moses,  like  Goliath 
summoning  David.  A  pope  makes 
Luther  necessary,  and  finds  Him  j 
King  Charles  brings  Cromwell  out ; 
the  Georges  develop  Washington ;  and 
a  prison  gives  to  the  world  John 
Bunyan  and  his  book.  At  every  point, 
therefore,  were  the  enemies  of  the 
gospel  made  to  aid  the  gospel.  They 
excited  popular  indignation  against 
their  own  cruelty.  They  secured-  the 
planting  in  the  mind  of  Saul  of  germs 
of  truth  a  which,  under  the  influence  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  afterwards  developed 
into  the  Epistles  with  which  we  are  now 
so  familiar."  "And  the  more  havoc  " 
they  made  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem 
the  more  quickly  was  the  Church 
established  in  many  distant  localities. 

II.  We  seldom  know  at  the  time 
how  much  good  we  may  be  doing. — 
Our  opportunity  often  comes  when  we 
are  least  aware  of  it.  Stephen  could 
not  have  failed  to  see  that  he  was 
fighting  a  "  good  fight."  It  perhaps 
occurred  to  him  that  his  death  might 
aid  the  truth  more  than  his  life  could 
have  done.  But  how  little  he  suspected 
the  real  culmination  of  his  power ! 
"  If  Stephen  had  not  prayed,  the 
Church  would  not  have  had  Paul," 
Augustine  said.  There  was  the  tre- 
mendous circumstance.  Such  oppor- 
tunities we  easily  fail  to  meet.     They 


are  not  likely  to  be  repeated.  If  we 
have  no  mind  for  them,  no  heart  for 
them,  life  creeps  on,  commonplace, 
feeble,  small.  Stephen  made  no  such 
failure.  Though  quite  unconscious  of 
the  sublimity  of  the  hour,  he  kept  on 
in  duty.  That  once  more  proved  to  be 
the  path  of  glory. 

III.  We  may  also  learn  that  our 
visions  come  when  we  need  them. — 
"  He  saw  heaven  opened,  and  Jesus 
standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God." 
To  troubled,  weary  Christians  the  fear 
will  sometimes  arise  that  the  Re- 
deemer has  forgotten  them.  "  Carest 
Thou  not  that  we  perish  I  "  is  apt  to  be 
the  cry  of  unbelief  in  storms  and  perils. 
But  in  the  nick  of  time  comfort  comes. 
There  is  "  grace  to  help  in  time  of 
need."  Jacob,  solitary,  absent  from 
home,  laying  his  head  upon  a  stone 
at  Jabbok,  has  a  vision  of  God  and 
receives  the  promise. 

IV.  It  is  clear  that  such  dying  as 
Stephen's  is  possible  only  as  the  fruit 
of  such  living  as  his. — Thus  far  in  the 
brief  Christian  history  death  had  often 
served  as  a  dreadful  warning.  In  utter 
darkness  Judas,  an  apostle,  had  gone 
to  "  his  own  place."  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  had  met  their  sudden  doom. 
Now,  however,  in  contrast  with  such 
dismal  dying,  comes  this  martyr's 
victory.  If  we  would  "  die  the  death 
of  the  righteous,"  we  must  be  careful 
to  live  the  righteous  life.  We  need 
envy  no  man's  triumph,  whether  in 
death  or  in  life,  as  if  it  were  luck 
instead  of  labour.  "  Do  men  gather 
grapes  of  thorns  1 "  Whoever  meets 
occasions,  furnishing  what  is  needed, 
only  discloses  the  completeness  of  former 
preparations  of  mind  and  heart.  For 
those  who  have  a  little  of  Stephen's 
grace,  Stephen's  Lord  will  lead  the  way 
to  Stephen's  victory. — H.  A  Edson, 
D.D. 


175 


chap.  viii.        HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

The  Church  passes  beyond  the  Bounds  of  Judaea — Moving  towards 

the  Gentiles. 

§  1.  The  Fires  of  Persecution  rekindled ;  or,  Evil  overruled  for  Good  (vers.  1-4). 

§  2.  Philip  the  Deacon  in  Samaria ;  or,  the  Gospel  spreading  (vers.  5-8). 

§  3.  The  Accession  of  Simon  Magus ;  or,  the  Reception  of  a  doubtful  convert 

(vers.  9-13). 
§  4.  The  Mission  of  Peter  and  John ;  or,  the  Confirmation  of  the  Saints  (vers. 

14-17,  25?). 
§  5.  The  Two  Simons  ;  or,  the  Detection  of  a  Hypocrite  (vers.  18-24). 
§  6.  The  Conversion  of  the  Eunuch ;  or,  the  Gospel  carried  into  Ethiopia  (vers. 

26-40). 

CRITICAL    REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Consenting. — Compare  xxii.  20;  Luke  xi.  48  ;  Rom.  i.  32.  Luke  had  probably  often 
heard  this  remark  from  Paul.  At  that  time. — Lit.,  on  that  day — viz.,  of  Stephen's  murder, 
which  had  been  the  signal  for  an  outbreak  of  hostility  against  the  Christians.  All. — Not 
to  be  taken  as  if  none  but  the  Twelve  remained  in  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  2.  Devout  men. — Pious  Jews  (compare  John  xix.  38,  39),  not  Christians,  who  would 
have  been  designated  "  disciples"  or  "  brethren  "  (see  on  ii.  5). 

Ver.  3.  Made  havoc  of. — Or,  kept  on  laying  waste ;  the  imperfect  denoting  continuous 
action. 

Ver.  4.  Went  everywhere. — Should  be  "  went  about  " — i.e.,  from  place  to  place  (compare 
xi.  19). 

Ver.  5.  Philip. — Not  the  apostle,  but  the  deacon  (vi.  4).  The  city  of  Samaria— according 
to  the  best  MSS.— signifies  that  the  capital  built  by  Omri  (1  Kings  xvi.  24),  and  renamed 
Sebaste  by  Herod  the  Great  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XX.  vi.  2),  was  the  place  to  which  Philip  went ;  if 
with  some  MSS.  the  article  before  city  be  omitted,  then  Samaria  would  mean  the  province 
of  that  name,  and  the  city  might  be  Sychar,  the  Sichem  of  the  Old  Testament  (John  iv.  5). 

Ver.  6.  The  people. — Better,  the  multitudes — i.e.,  of  the  city. 

Ver.  7.  For  unclean  spirits,  etc. — Should  be  rendered  either  "For from  many  of  those  who 
had  unclean  spirits,  they — i.e.,  the  spirits— went  forth  crying  with  a  loud  voice,"  the  genitive 
7ro\\Qv  being  dependent  on  the  e£  in  the  verb  compare  xvi.  39;  Matt.  x.  14  (De  Wette, 
Meyer) ;  or  "  For  from'many  of  those  having  (so.  them — i.e.,  unclean  spirits)  unclean  spirits 
crying  with  a  loud  voice  went  forth  (Bengei,  Kuinoel).  But  the  best  texts  (X  A  B  C)  read 
iroWol  e^rjpxovro;  in  which  case  the  verse  should  be  translated  ;  "for  many  of  those  who  had 
unclean  spirits  crying  with  a  loud  voice  went  forth  "  ;  the  writer  having  probably,  when  he 
commenced  the  sentence,  intended  to  say  "  were  healed,"  instead  of  which  he  changes  the 
construction,  and  sets  down  "went  forth,"  as  if  the  "  unclean  spirits  "  were  the  nominative 
(Alford,  Holtzmarm).  It  has  been  remarked  (Bengei)  that  in  the  Acts  the  term  "  demons" 
is  never  used  of  "  the  possessed,"  although  in  Luke  it  occurs  more  frequently  than  in  the 
other  gospels;  and  the  inference  drawn  that  after  the  death  of  Christ  the  malady  of  possession 
was  weaker  (compare  1  John  hi.  8;  Col.  ii.  15;  Heb.  ii.  14). 

Ver.  9.  Simon.— Not  the  Cyprian  Jew  of  that  name  whom,  according  to  Josephus  {Ant., 
XX.  vii.  2),  Felix  afterwards  employed  to  persuade  Drusilla  to  leave  for  him  her  husband.  King 
Azizus  of  Emesa  (De  Wette,  Neander,  Hilgenfeld,  Alford),  but,  according  to  Justin  Martyr 
(Apol.,  i.  56 ;  Dial.,  120),  a  Samaritan  magician  out  of  Gitthon  (Zeller,  Holtzmann,  Zockler). 
The  people. — Should  be,  the  nation,  to  tdvos,  because  Simon's  bewitchery  was  not  confined  to 
the  city  population. 

Ver.  10.  The  great  power  of  God,  in  the  best  MSS.,  is  the  power  of  God  which  is  called 
great — i.e.,  because  it  is  so  (Hackett),  rather  than  because  it  is  not  so  (De  Wette).  Noticeable 
that  this  was  the  people's  estimate  of  Simon.  In  the  term  "  Great  "  has  been  found  either 
Gnostic  emanation  doctrine  (Overbeck),  or  a  transliteration  of  the  Samaritan  word  Magala, 
Bevealer  (Klostermann,  Wendt). 

Ver.  11.  Of  long  time. — The  dative  for  the  ordinary  accusative  as  in  xiii.  20 ;  John  ii.  20 ; 
Rom.  xvi.  25.  Simon's  influence  may  have  reached  back  to  a  period  shortly  after  our  Lord's 
visit  to  Samaria  (John  iv.  39-42). 

176 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.         chap.  viii. 


Ver.  13.  Wondered,  or  ivas  amazed  at  Philip's  miracles  and  signs. — Rather,  signs  and  great 
powers — i.e.,  deeds  of  power,  as  previously  the  crowd  had  been  amazed  at  his  (Simon's) 
sorceries  (ver.  9). 

Ver.  14.  Sent. — The  mission  of  the  two  apostles,  Peter  and  John,  is  not  said  to  have  had 
as  its  motive  the  imparting  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  Samaritans  (Holtzmann),  although  this 
was  undoubtedly  a  consequence  which  flowed  from  their  mission. 

Ver.  15.  Prayed  for  them  that  they  might  receive  the  Holy  Ghost. — Not  the  ordinary 
converting  influences  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  must  already  have  received,  since  they  had 
believed,  but  those  miraculous  endowments  which  had  been  conferred  upon  the  Pentecostal 
believers  (ii.  4). 

Ver.  16.  As  yet  He  was  fallen  upon  none  of  them. — Contrast  the  case  of  Cornelius  and  his 
household,  upon  whom  the  Spirit  fell  before  baptism  (x.  44 — 48)  ;  and  compare  that  of  John's 
disciples  in  Ephesus,  who  were  first  baptised,  and  afterwards  endowed  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
(xix.  1-6). 

Ver.  17.  Then  laid  they,  the  apostles,  their  hands  on  them,  and  they,  the  Samaritans, 
received  the  Holy  Ghost. — That  none  but  the  apostles  had  the  power  of  imparting  the 
Spirit,  and  that  this  was  the  reason  why  the  preaching  of  Philip  did  not  secure  this  endow- 
ment for  the  Samaritans  (Hofmann),  cannot  be  maintained  in  face  of  ix.  17  and  1  Tim. 
iv.  14.  Still  less  can  the  non-descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  this  case  be  ascribed  to  a 
difference  between  Philip's  preaching  and  that  of  the  apostles  (Neander).  Possibly  the 
reason  lay  in  this,  that  as  the  Samaritans  were  half -heathen,  it  was  the  purpose  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  mark  their  reception  into  the  Church  (which  their  endowment  with  His  miraculous 
gifts  attested)  by  a  formal  act  through  the  hands  of  the  apostles,  which  would  carry  with 
it  all  the  weight  of  authorisation.  There  is  no  ground  for  thinking  that  the  Spirit  intended 
here  to  institute  a  new  rite  corresponding  to  Confirmation. 

Ver.  18.  And  when  Simon  saw. — Most  likely  through  hearing  the  baptised  speak  with 
tongues.  He  offered  them  money.—  From  Simon's  name  and  proposal  arose  the  expression 
"  Simony  "  for  the  purchase  of  spiritual  offices.     Inde  Simonies  vocabulum  (Bengel). 

Ver.  19.  To  me  also. — I.e.,  "  as  well  as  to  you  " ;  not  "  as  well  as  to  others,"  "  since  no 
example  of  such  transfer  was  known  to  him  "  (Hackett). 

Ver.  20.  Thy  money  perish  with  thee.— Lit.,  thy  silver  with  thyself  be  for  destruction. 
Neither  an  implication  nor  a  prediction,  but  a  strongly  expressed  negation.  May  be  pur- 
chased.— The  verb  in  Greek  being  active,  the  clause  should  be  translated,  "  because  thou 
didst  think  to  acquire,"  etc. 

Ver.  21.  In  this  matter. — Or,  in  this  word — i.e.,  doctrine  or  gospel  which  we  preach 
(Olshausen,  Neander,  Lange,  Zockler,  Hackett). 

Ver.  22.  For  God  the  best  authorities  read  Lord,  as  in  ver.  24,  signifying  the  exalted  Christ. 
If  perhaps.— Taken  in  connection  with  John  xx.  23,  these  words  show  "  how  completely  the 
apostles  themselves  referred  the  forgiveness  of  sins  to,  and  left  it  in  the  sovereign  power  of 
God,  and  not  to  their  own  delegated  power  of  absolution  "  (Alford). 

Ver.  23.  Art  in  the  or  wilt  become  gall  or  a  gall  root  of  bitterness. — As  in  Eom.  iii.  14  ; 
Eph.  iv.  31 ;  and  Heb.  xii.  15.     And  in  the  bond  or  a  bond  of  iniquity. — As  in  Isa.  lviii.  6. 

Ver.  24.  Pray  ye  to  the  Lord  for  me. — Compare  the  language  of  Pharaoh  to  Moses  (Exod. 
viii.  28,  ix.  28,  x.  17). 

Ver.  25.  The  imperfects  returned  or  kept  returning,  and  preached  or  kept  preaching,  show 
that  the  evangelistic  activity  of  the  home-returning  apostles  was  not  confined  to  isolated 
acts  of  preaching  but  was  continued  all  along  the  route. 

Ver  26.  For  the  read  an  before  angel.  Towards  the  south. — Kara  txeari^&piav  might  be 
rendered,  but  not  so  well,  at  noon  (compare  xxii.  6).  Gaza,  the  modern  Guzzeh,  was  one 
of  the  five  cities  of  the  Philistines  at  the  southern  boundary  of  Canaan  (Gen.  x.  19),  about 
an  hour's  journey  from  the  Mediterranean.  Originally  belonging  to  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  47) 
it  was  subsequently  captured  by  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  vi.  17  ;  Judges  xvi.  1).  Gaza  "is  an 
important  place  still,  though  no  vestige  of  the  ancient  city  remains.  It  stands  on  an  isolated 
mound  one  hundred  and  eighty  feet  above  the  sea,  from  which  it  is  about  two  miles  distant, 
and  is  surrounded  by  gardens ;  it  is  said  to  have  still  a  population  of  eighteen  thousand  " 
(Palestine,  by  Rev.  A.  Henderson,  M.A.,  p.  167).  Which,  better  this  or  it  or  the  same,  is 
desert ;  but  whether  Gaza  (Lekebush)  or  the  road  is  meant,  and  whether  the  clause  was 
spoken  by  the  angel  (Holtzmann,  Zockler,  Alford,  Hackett,  and  others),  or  by  Luke  (Bengel 
Olshausen,  Winer,  De  Wette,  and  others),  is  doubtful,  though  perhaps  it  is  more  correct  to 
regard  the  clause  as  the  angel's  direction  to  follow  the  desert  or  unfrequented  road  to  Gaza. 
Robinson  {Biblical  Researches,  ii.  514)  mentions  several  routes  from  Jerusalem  to  Gaza,  the 
most  frequented  being  by  Ramleh,  another  by  Bethshemesh,  and  a  third  by  Eleutheropolis. 
A  fourth  went  by  Hebron  and  across  the  plain,  passing  through  the  southern  part  of  Judasa, 
which  in  Luke  (i.  80)  is  called  "the  desert." 

Ver.  27.  A  man  of  Ethiopia. — Or  an  Ethiopian,  but  whether  a  native  or  only  a  resident 
cannot  be  inferred  from  this  clause,  though  the  former  is  the  more  probable.     An  eunuch. — 

n  177 


chap.  vm.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Not  a  term  of  office,  but  a  description  of  bodily  condition  (see  Tacit.,  Ann.,  vi.  31  :  ademptce 
vii-ilitatis.  Of  great  authority. — An  official  or  ruler ;  in  this  case  a  courtier  and  statesman. 
According  to  Oriental  custom  to  employ  such  persons  in  high  offices  of  state.  Candace. — 
Not  a  pergonal,  but  a  dynastic  name,  like  Pharaoh  and  Caesar.  iStrabo  and  Dio  mention  a 
queen  of  Etuiopia  of  this  name  in  the  twenty-second  or  twenty-third  year  of  the  reign  of 
Augustus  Cresar;  while  Pliny  {Nat.  Hist.,  vi.  35),  states  that  a  Candace  ruled  in  Ethiopia 
in  his  day.  The  Ethiopians  inhabited  the  region  in  the  Nile  Valley  south  of  Egypt — 
Meroe,  a  fertile  island,  formed  by  two  branches  of  the  Nile,  being  a  portion  of  their  territory, 
The  word  for  treasure,  y&fa,  is  Persian,  and.  occurs  in  the  LXX.  (Ezra  v.  17,  vi.  1  ;  Esther 
iv.  7).  To  worship.— Heathen  proselytes  (John  xii.  20)  as  well  as  foreign  Jews  were 
accustomed  to  perform  pilgrimages  to  Jerusalem  for  this  purpose. 

Ver.  32.  The  place,  or  passage,  of  the  Scripture— i.e.,  of  the  Old  Testament— which  he  read, 
or  was  reading,  the  verb  being  imperfect,  was  this. — The  citation,  from  Isa.  liii.  7,  8, 
follows  the  LXX.,  and  differs  from  the  Hebrew  which  gives  in  the  8th  verse — "  By  (or,  from) 
oppression  and  judgment  he  was  taken  away ;  and  as  for  his  generation  who  among  them 
considered  that  he  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living  ? "  or  "  and  his  life  who  shall 
recount?"  etc.  (R.V.). 

Ver.  37.  Of  the  A.V.  is  omitted  from  the  R.V.  in  accordance  with  the  best  authorities, 
KA.B. 

Ver.  39. — The  Alexandrian  MS.  (A)  reads  "  The  Holy  Spirit  of  the  Lord  fell  on  the  eunuch 
but  an  angel  of  the  Lord  caught  away  Philip."  Tii3  other  codices  read  as  in  the  text. 
That  Philip's  disappearance  was  not  a  natural  occurrence,  such  as  an  impulsive  and  hasty 
withdrawal,  but  a  supernatural  removal  (compare  1  Kings  xviii.  12 ;  2  Kings  ii.  16),  effected 
by  the  Spirit,  was  obviously  the  view  of  the  historian. 

Ver.  40.  Azotus. — Or,  Ashdod,  originally  a  seat  of  the  Anakim  (Josh.  xi.  22),  became  one 
of  the  five  chief  cities  of  the  Philistines  (Josh.  xiii.  4  ;  1  Sam.  vi.  17),  and  the  principal 
seat  of  the  Dagon  worship  (1  Sam.  v.  1  ;  Mace.  x.  83,  xi.  4).  It  was  handed  over  to  the 
tribe  of  Judah  at  the  conquest  (Josb.  xv.  46),  but  did  not  continue  long  in  their  possession, 
and  after  the  exile  appeared  among  Israel's  foes  (>Teh.  iv.  7).  It  is  represented  by  the 
present  day  Esiud,  a  miserable  Mohammedan  village,  two  miles  south  of  Jamnia,  and  half 
an  hour's  journey  from  the  sea.  Philostratus  mentions  that  Apollonius  of  Tyana  was  found 
one  day  at  noon  in  Rome  before  the  tribunal  of  Domitian  and  at  evening  in  Puteoli. 
Caesarea. — Six  hundred  furlongs  distant  from  Jerusalem,  built  by  Herod  the  Great  on  a  site 
before  called  Strato's  Tower,  named  Caesarea  Sebaste,  and  inaugurated  with  great  pomp  and 
splendour  in  the  twenty-eighth  year  of  his  reign,  B.C.  12  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XV.  ix.  6).  As  the 
official  residence  of  the  Herodian  kings  and  Roman  governors,  it  soon  became  the  most 
important  city  in  Palestine,  as  well  as  its  chief  port.  Paul  visited  Cassarea  more  than  once 
(ix.  30,  xviii.  22,  xxi.  8-16,  xxii.  23-35,  xxiv. — xxvi.).  In  the  third  century  it  became  the 
seat  of  a  bishopric  and  of  a  public  school  in  which  afterwards  Origen  taught.  Eusebius 
was  born  in  Ctesarea  in  the  fourth  century.  At  the  present  time  "  by  the  sea  shore,  midway 
between  the  Nahr-er-Zerka  and  the  Nahr-Mef-jir,  a  vast  expanse  of  ground  is  covered  with 
the  almost  indistinguishable  debris  of  Herod's  once  splendid  city." — Picturesque  Palestine, 
iii.,  126). 

HOMILETIC AL    ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—4. 

The  Fires  of  Persecution  rekindled  ;  or,  Evil  overruled  for  Good. 

I.  The  torch  that  lighted  the  flame. — This  was  undoubtedly  Stephen's  murder. 
Like  a  spark  falling  into  a  powder  magazine  it  kindled  a  fierce  conflagration. 
Like  the  first  taste  of  blood  to  a  tiger,  it  awoke  the  dormant  appetite  for  perse- 
cution which  until  now  had  slumbered  in  the  bosoms  of  the  high-priest  and  his 
confederates.  The  words  "on  that  day"  indicate  that  Stephen's  executioners 
proceeded  straight  from  the  scene  of  his  martyrdom  and  commenced  their 
diabolical  work  of  persecuting  Stephen's  friends. 

II.  The  miscreant  who  carried  the  torch. — There  can  be  little  room  for 
question  that  the  person  to  whom  this  notoriety  belonged  was  Saul,  who  at  that 
time  was  consenting  unto  Stephen's  death  (ver.  1  ;  compare  xxii.  20),  who,  in 
fact,  had  been  a  prominent  actor  in  carrying  out  the  murder  of  the  good  deacon 
(vii.  58),  and  who,  though  not  acting  without  the  authority,  or,  at  least,  con- 
nivance, of  the  Sanhedrim,  was,  on  his  own  confession  afterwards  made 
(xxvi.   9,    10),  the  moving  spirit  in  this  anti-Christian  crusade. 

III.  The  fury  with  which  the  flame  blazed. — It  entered  into  every  house 
where  a  "  disciple  "  or  "brother"  resided.     It  spared  neither  man  nor  woman 

178 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  vm. 


who  bore  the  hated  name  of  Christian.  It  stopped  not  at  the  spoiling  of  their 
goods,  when  they  had  any,  but  attacked  their  persons,  violently  dragging  them 
from  their  homes  and  consigning  them  to  prison  (ver.  3,  xxvi.  10  ;  compare 
Heb.  x.  33,  34  ;  James  ii.  6,  7).  How  it  happened  that  the  apostles  were  excepted 
from  this  persecution  is  not  explained,  and  this  has  been  regarded  by  some 
expositors  (Zeller,  Schneckenburger,  and  others)  as  a  difficulty  ;  but  it  need  not 
be  assumed  either  that  they  had  dropped  into  temporary  obscurity  through 
having  been  eclipsed  by  the  brilliant  deacon,  or  that  they  were  not  harassed  like 
their  humbler  brethren,  though  probably  the  veneration  in  which  they  were  still 
held  by  the  populace  in  general  prevented  the  Sanhedrim  from  resorting  to 
extreme  measures  against  them. 

IV.  The  alarm  which  the  fire  created.— It  scattered  the  disciples  from  the 
city ;  caused,  if  not  all  at  least  a  considerable  number,  perhaps  the  majority  of 
those  against  whom  the  persecution  was  directed,  to  flee  for  safety  beyond  the 
bounds  of  Jerusalem  and  even  of  Judaea  (see  xi.  19).  This  statement,  however, 
has,  like  the  former,  been  challenged  as  improbable  (Zeller)  on  the  ground  that 
so  long  as  the  apostles  remained  in  the  city  it  is  not  likely  that  all  their  followers 
would  flee.  And  assuredly  if  all  fled,  what  is  stated  in  ver.  3  about  Saul  would 
be  impossible.  The  probability,  therefore,  is  that  "  all "  in  ver.  1  refers  princi- 
pally to  the  leading  personages  in  the  Christian  community  like  Philip  (ver.  5), 
or  to  the  breaking  up  of  the  Christian  congregations  and  the  dispersion  of  their 
members.  That  the  apostles  did  not  retire  from  their  posts  in  the  metropolis, 
though  they  might  have  done  so  without  sin  (Matt.  x.  23),  was  only  what  might 
have  been  expected.  They  were  men  of  a  different  make  from  what  they  had 
been  w7hen  they  all  forsook  the  Master  and  fled  (Matt.  xxvi.  56).  That  the 
Spirit  directed  them  to  remain  in  the  city  and  comfort  the  persecuted  Christians 
who  were  left  (Stier)  is  not  improbable,  but  cannot  be  proved.  That  our  Lord 
before  His  ascension  had  commanded  them  to  remain  in  Jerusalem  twelve  years, 
though  supported  by  ancient  tradition  (Clem.  Alex.,  Strom.  VI.  v.  43),  is  most 
likely  imagination. 

V.  The  unexpected  good  in  which  it  resulted. — It  led  to  the  extension  of  the 
Church.  "  They  that  were  scattered  abroad  went  about  preaching  the  word." 
Thus  it  paved  the  way  for  the  transition  of  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles.  As  it 
were  the  missionary  activity  that  was  carried  on  in  the  Judsean  provinces  and  in 
Samaria  formed  a  bridge  for  the  passage  of  the  heralds  of  salvation  to  cross  over 
into  regions  beyond.  So  the  highest  good  is  oftentimes  evolved  out  of  the 
greatest  evil.  God  can  make  man's  wrath  to  praise  Him  (Psalm  lxxvi.  10)  and 
cause  "  all  things  to  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  Him  (Pom.  viii.  28). 

Learn. — 1.  That  one  sin  commonly  leads  to  another.  The  murder  of  Stephen 
to  the  persecution  of  the  Church.  2.  That  they  who  will  live  godly  must  suffer 
persecution.  "  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  master."  3.  That  it  is  not 
always  wrong  to  flee  from  persecution.  Otherwise  Christ  would  not  have  coun- 
selled His  disciples,  "When  persecuted  in  one  city  to  flee  into  another  "  (Matt.  x. 
23).  4.  That  more  is  expected  of  the  Church's  leaders  than  of  their  followers. 
A  higher  degree  of  Christian  virtue  should  be  exhibited  by  them  who  are  set  to 
rule  in  the  Church.  5.  That  persecution  cannot  kill  religion.  It  may  destroy 
those  who  are  religious,  but  others  will  arise  in  their  stead.  "  The  blood  of  the 
martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church  "  (Tertullian). 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1.    The   Church   which   was  in  II.     Growing. — Wherever     life     is 

Jerusalem.  there  must  be  progress. 

I.  Living. — A  dead  Church  a  mis  III.    Organised. — It    had    apostles, 

nomer.  deacons,  and  private  members. 

179 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


IV.  Persecuted. — This  inevitable 
if  a  Church  is  alive  and  active. 

V.  Missionary. — The  Church  that 
does  not  propagate  the  faith  is  dead. 

Ver.  2.  The  Burial  of  Stephen. 

I.  The  lifeless  body.— That  of 
Stephen.  1.  A  good  man.  2.  An 
eloquent  preacher.  3.  A  faithful  wit- 
ness.    4.  A  noble  martyr. 

II.  The  devout  pall-bearers.— Pious 
Jews,  perhaps,  rather  than  Christians, 
who  would  probably  have  been  called 
"brethren"  or  "disciples,"  and  would 
not  have  been  permitted  to  inter  their 
fallen  leader.  That  devout  men  buried 
Stephen  testified  to :  1.  Their  own 
goodness.  2.  Stephen's  innocence. 
3.  The  Sanhedrim's  guilt. 

III.  The  solemn  interment. — No 
doubt.  1.  Hastily,  without  unnecessary 
delay ;  and  2.  Plainly,  without  osten- 
tation or  display ;  but  also  3.  Reve- 
rentially, as  was  due  to  the  dust  of  a 
saint ;  and  4.  Hopefully,  in  anticipation 
of  a  glorious  resurrection. 

IV.  The  sorrowful  lamentation. — 
"Great."  Because  of,  either:  1.  Its 
outward  vehemence ;  2.  Its  inward 
intensity  ;  or  3.  Its  wide  prevalence. 

Vers.  2,  3.  Stephen  and  Saul. 

I.  The  end  of  Stephen. — 1.  In  the 
world's  eyes  sad.  2.  In  God's  eyes 
glorious. 

II.  The  beginning  of  Saul. — 1.  In 
the  world's  eyes  glorious.  2.  In  God's 
eyes  sad. 

Lesson. — God  seeth  not  as  man 
seeth. 

Ver.  3.  The  Wolf  and  his  Prey. 

I.  The  wolf. — 1.  His  name,  Saul. 
2.  His  race,  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin 
(Gen.  xlix.  27).  3.  His  ferocity, 
"  Haling  men  and  women  he  com- 
mitted them  to  prison."  4.  His  dili- 
gence, "  entering  into  every  house." 

II.  His  prey. — Christ's  sheep,  "the 
Church"  (xx.  28).  1.  A  little  flock 
(Luke  xii.  32).  2.  A  feeble  flock 
(1  Peter  v.  10).  3.  A  purchased  flock 
(xx.  28). 

180 


Saul  and  Paul. — The  Saul  who 
made  havoc  of  the  Church  became  the 
Paul  who  said,  "  Feed  the  Church 
of  God."  Bemember  well  the  identity 
of  the  man,  if  you  would  understand 
fully  the  import  of  the  doctrine.  This 
change  in  the  heart  and  life  of  Paul 
shows — 

I.  The  marvellous  power  of  the 
grace  of  God. — The  marvellousness  of 
this  power  is  not  always  so  conspicuous. 
Every  operation  of  grace  is  beautiful, 
but  in  some  cases  it  is  startling  and 
most  sublime.  Herein  let  us  magnify 
the  grace  of  God.  "  By  grace  are  ye 
saved  through  faith  ;  and  that  not  of 
yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God." 
"  Ye  who  sometime  were  afar  off  are 
made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ." 
"  You  that  were  sometimes  alienated 
and  enemies  in  your  mind  by  wicked 
works,  yet  now  hath  He  reconciled." 
This  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is 
marvellous  in  our  eyes.  The  occur- 
rence of  such  marvellous  instances  is 
most  valuable  on  two  grounds  \  \.  It 
inspires  hope  even  for  the  woo*st.  Pray 
on  !  Hope  on  !  The  hardest  rocks 
have  been  broken.  2.  It  renews  our 
sense  of  the  sufficiency  of  Divine  grace. 
Great  victories  gladden  nations.  Great 
conversions  make  the  Church  joyful. 
This  change  in  the  heart  and  life  of 
Paul  shows — 

II.  The  difference  between  sancti- 
fying human  energies  and  destroying 
them. — Saul  was  undoubtedly  cha- 
racterised by  peculiar  energy ;  what 
will  Paul  be  ?  You  will  find  that  the 
Christian  apostle  retained  every  natural 
characteristic  of  the  anti-Christian 
persecutor.  Who  so  ardent  in  love, 
who  so  unswerving  in  service,  as  the 
apostle  Paul  ?  Was  he  an  active 
sinner,  but  an  indolent  saint?  How 
did  he  himself  bear  the  treatment 
which  he  had  inflicted  upon  others  ? 
Hear  his  words,  and  feel  if  they  do  not 
quicken  the  flow  of  your  blood  :  "  Are 
they  ministers  of  Christ  ?  I  am  more  ; 
in  labours  more  abundant,  in  stripes 
above  measure,  in  prisons  more  frequent, 
in  deaths  oft,"  etc.  How  a  man's  sins 
come  back  upon  him  !    How  sure  is  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  Viii. 


discipline,  and  how  terrible  is  the  judg- 
ment of  God  !  Can  a  man  step  easily 
from  the  rank  of  persecutor  to  the 
honour  of  apostle  ?  Never  !  Hear 
Paul :  "  Even  this  present  hour  we  both 
hunger  and  thirst,  and  are  naked,  and 
are  buffeted,  and  have  no  certain 
dwelling-place ;  being  reviled,  we  bless  ; 
being  persecuted,  we  suffer  it ;  being 
defamed,  we  inti  eat :  we  are  made  as 
the  filth  of  the  world,  and  are  the  off- 
scouring  of  all  things,"  etc.  We  feel 
in  reading  such  words  how  inexorable 
is  the  law — "  With  what  measure  ye 
mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  you 
again."  But  notice  the  energy  of  the 
apostle  as  being  the  same  as  the  energy 
of  the  persecutor.  Christianity  does 
not  destroy  our  natural  temperament. 
We  become  sanctified,  not  deadened. 
1.  Christians  will  differ  in  the  tone  and 
measure  of  their  service.  He  who  has 
had  much  forgiven  will  love  much. 
How  does  an  escaped  slave  talk  about 


liberty  %  So  with  preachers.  The 
memory  of  their  past  lives  will  deter- 
mine their  preaching.  Do  not  bind  down 
all  men  to  the  same  style.  2.  Is  our 
Christian  energy  equal  to  the  energy 
with  which  we  entered  upon  the  service 
of  the  world  ?  When  were  you  kept 
back  from  gay  engagements  by  wet, 
damp,  or  foggy  nights?  When  did 
you  complain  that  you  could  never  go 
to  the  theatre  without  paying,  or  tell 
the  devil  that  his  service  was  costly  1 
In  the  light  of  such  inquiries  let  us 
examine  our  Christian  temper  and 
service.  This  change  in  the  heart  and 
life  of  Paul  suggests — 

III.  The  possible  greatness  of  the 
change  which  awaits  even  those  who 
are  now  in  Christ. — The  moral  distance 
between  Saul  and  Paul  is  immense,  but 
what  of  the  spiritual  distance  between 
Paul  the  warrior  and  Paul  the  crowned 
saint  ?  It  is  the  distance  between 
earth  and  heaven. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 


HOMILETIC AL  ANAYSIS.—Verses5—8. 

Philip  in  Samaria ;  or,  The  Gospel  Spreading, 

I.  The  preacher. — Philip.  Not  the  apostle,  as  a  late  Christian  tradition, 
mentioned  by  Polycrates,  Bishop  of  Ephesus,  in  a.d.  198  (Eusebius,  III.  xxxi.  2, 
V.  xxiv.  1),  affirms,  since  he  remained  in  Jerusalem  (ver.  1),  but  the  deacon  (vi.  5) 
and  evangelist  (xxi.  8),  who  by  going  down  to  Samaria — 1.  Supplied  the  place 
and  took  up  the  work  of  Stephen,  his  martyred  colleague.  Christ's  servants  dying 
never  want  successors.  2.  Counteracted  the  evil  machinations  of  Stephen's 
murderers,  and  of  Saul  in  particular,  who  hoped  to  extinguish  the  faith  to 
which  as  yet  he  was  a  stranger  and  of  which  he  knew  not  the  vitality ;  and 
3.  Evidenced  his  own  confidence  in  the  indestructibility  of  the  gospel,  whose 
preachers  and  professors  might  be  imprisoned  or  slain,  but  whose  glorious 
tidings  could  not  be  hindered  from  flying  abroad  and  one  day  encircling  the 
earth. 

II.  The  audience. — The  inhabitants  of  the  city  of  Samaria  or  of  Sychar,  who 
were — 1.  Numerous,  being  described  as  a  multitude.  2.  Afflicted,  containing 
many  diseased  and  demonised  persons.  3.  Deluded,  being  at  the  time  bewitched 
by  or  amazed  at  Simon's  sorceries;  and  still  4.  Eager,  with  one  accord  giving 
heed  to  Philip,  perhaps  because  of  having,  in  a  measure,  through  Christ's 
preaching  ten  years  before  (John  iv.  30,  40),  been  prepared  for  the  reception  of 
the  word. 

III.  The  message. — 1.  Its  subject.  The  Christ.  Philip  entertained  his  hearers 
neither  with  diatribes  against  the  magician  who  had  so  long  bewitched  them, 
nor  with  denunciations  of  the  Sanhedrim  who  had  opened  against  the  followers 
of  the  new  faith  the  fires  of  persecution,  nor  with  commiserations  of  themselves 
who  had  so  much  sickness  bodily  and  mental,  in  their  midst,  but  with  what 
should  ever  be  the  preacher's  theme  (1  Cor.  ii.  2),  proclamations  of  the  Christ — 
viz.,  Jesus — who  had  suffered  on  the  cross,  risen  from  the  grave,  and  ascended 

181 


chap.  viii.        HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


into  heaven.  2.  Its  confirmation.  The  signs  which  he  did — (1)  the  works  of 
healing  which  he  performed  on  the  demonised,  the  palsied,  and  the  lame,  attested 
him  a  teacher  come  from  God  (compare  John  iii.  2) ;  and  (2)  the  cries  of  the 
unclean  spirits  in  coming  forth  from  their  victims,  not  shouts  of  indignation  at 
being  ejected  from  their  human  lodging,  but  vociferous  declarations  of  the 
Messiahship  of  Jesus  or  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  (compare  Mark  iii.  11  ;  Luke 
iv.  41),  were  a  practical  endorsement  of  his  words. 

IV.  The  result. — Great  joy.  On  account  of — 1.  The  glad  tidings  come  to  the 
city.  The  introduction  of  the  gospel  with  its  glorious  announcements  of  a 
crucified  and  risen  Lord  (xiii.  32,  33),  of  a  finished  redemption  work  (John 
xvii.  4),  and  of  a  peace  established  between  God  and  man  on  the  basis  of  that 
work  (Eph.  ii.  14-18),  as  well  as  with  its  sublime  possibilities  of  salvation 
(Rom.  i.  16),  to  a  heart,  to  a  city,  to  a  country,  a  cause  of  rejoicing  than  which 
better  can  not  be  imagined  (Psalm  lxxxix.  15).  2.  The  wonderful  deliverances 
wrought  on  its  inhabitants.  The  healings  done  upon  the  bodies  of  the  citizens  of 
Samaria  or  Sychar  were  emblematic  of  the  higher  healings  the  gospel  could,  and 
in  numberless  instances  did,  effect  upm  their  souls.  To-day,  as  in  Philip's  time, 
the  gospel  heals  all  manner  of  spiritual  disease  and  emancipates  souls  from  the 
power  of  sin  and  Satan  (Col.  i.  13),  besides  indirectly  promoting  the  health  of 
bodies. 

Learn. — 1.  The  true  work  of  a  preacher — to  proclaim  Christ.  2.  The  true 
prosperity  of  a  city — the  prevalence  in  it  of  the  Gospel. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 
Yer,  5.  The  Inhabitants  of  Samaria.         Vers. 5 -8.  Philip 's Mission  to  Samaria. 

claLe'd11^  th6y  heard'     ChriSt   P1'°"         L    The   COndttCt    0f    HuliP— He- 

'  tLVhat  they  saw.     Miracles  per-      Ji™f*  d°wn  t0  %*"?%,  %  ^f  ched 

p  t  J  L  Christ  to  the  people.     6.  Wrought  mira- 

lormed.  -.      .     ,,       .f    r  ° 

III.   What   they  did.      1.  Listened      ^s  m  the  city. 

to  the  word.     2.  Studied  the  miracles.  II.  The  attention  of  the  Samaritans. 

3.  Rejoiced  in  the  work  of  Philip.  — They  :      1.    Heard     Philip    preach. 

■xt      o    t      -     a  •        r\  j  2.  Were  seriously  affected.  3.   Gave 

Ver.  8.  Joy  m  Samaria. — Occasioned  ,      ,  ,       ,    ,  , ,  J  ,        ,       .  ^  ,.       , 

,     £        ,  i  •  heed  to  what  they  heard.     4.  .Believed 

bv  lour  things.  ,     ,  -,  J, 

'  I.  The  Gospel  preached  in  its  streets.      wbafc  was  Preac^d- 

II.  Healing  brought  to  its  inhabit-  III.  The  effect  in  the  city. — Great 
ants.  joy.      Because   of :     1.   Joyful   tidings 

III.  Delusions  dispelled  from  their  heard.  2.  Wondrous  healings  ex- 
minds,  perienced.      3.   Numerous  conversions 

IV.  Souls  saved  from  the  power  of  made, 
sin  and  death. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  9—13. 

The  Accession  of  Simon  Magus  ;  or,  the  Reception  of  a  Doubtful  Convert. 

I.  The  previous  history  of  Simon  Magus. — 1.  His  profession.  A  sorcerer. 
According  to  Justin  Martyr  (Apol.,  I.  xxvi.  56)  belonging  to  the  Samaritan  village 
of  Gitton.  One  of  those  unscrupulous  adventurers  who  by  "  an  advanced  know- 
ledge of  natural  philosophy,  especially  of  chemistry,"  acquired  "a  strange  power 
and  influence  over  men's  minds,"  which  they  "  constantly  used  to  further  their 
own  selfish  ends"  (Spence).  Others  of  the  same  kidney  were  Elymas,  whom 
Paul  encountered  at  the  court  of  Sergius  Paulus  in  Paphos  (xiii.  6),  and  the 
vagabond  Jews,  exorcists,  whom  he  met  at  Ephesus  (xix.  13).     To  this  fraternity 

182 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  vm. 


belonged  Apollonius,  of  Tyana,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Christ.  A  zealous 
champion  of  the  doctrines  of  Pythagoras,  he  was  regarded  by  his  contemporaries 
as  a  worker  of  miracles,  and  claimed  for  himself  insight  into  futurity.  Josephus 
(Ant.,  XX.  vii.  2)  mentions  another  Simon,  also  of  Cyprus,  unless  he  was  identical 
with  the  Simon  of  Samaria,  as  a  magician  who  persuaded  Drusilla  to  desert  her 
husband  and  marry  Felix  (xxiv.  24).  That  Simon  pitched  on  Samaria  as  the 
field  of  his  operations  may  have  been  due  to  the  circumstance  that  it  contained  a 
grand  heathen  temple,  which  he  probably  thought  would  make  the  city  so  much 
the  fitter  a  scene  for  his  magical  incantations  (see  Stokes  on  Acts,  i.  360,  note). 
2.  His  practice.  He  bewitched  or  amazed  the  people  with  his  sorceries,  either 
imposed  on  their  credulity  by  sleight  of  hand,  or  dazzled  their  judgment  by  feats 
performed  through  superior  knowledge.  What  the  arts  practised  by  him  were 
is  not  related.  Later  tradition  represents  him  as  having  offered  to  demonstrate 
his  divinity  by  flying  in  the  air  (Constt.  Apost.,  ii.  14,  vi.  9),  and  as  having 
boasted  that  he  could  turn  himself  and  others  into  brute  beasts,  and  even 
cause  statues  to  speak  (Clem.  Horn.,  iv.  c.  4 ;  Recog.,  ii.  9,  iii.  6).  Whether  he 
had  attempted  any  such  legerdemain  in  Samaria  or  not  is  uncertain  ;  but  for 
a  long  time  (most  likely  for  a  number  of  years)  he  had  cast  a  spell  over 
their  minds  and  secured  their  attention  to  his  superstitious  and  hurtful  doctrines. 
He  is  said  to  have  denied  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  only  pretended 
to  believe  in  a  future  judgment,  to  have  desired  to  set  Gerizim  in  place  of 
Jerus-alem,  and  to  have  allegorically  expounded  the  Old  Testament  so  as  to 
support  his  own  views.  3.  His  pretension.  He  gave  out  "that  himself 
was  some  great  one."  Like  Theudas,  he  boasted  that  he  was  somebody 
(v.  36).  According  to  the  Clementine  Homilies  (ii.  22  ff.)  he  gave  himself 
out  for  the  Highest  Power,  from  which  he  distinguished  the  Creator  of  the 
world  as  an  inferior  being,  and  also  claimed  to  be  the  Messiah.  In  this  he 
showed  himself  a  precursor  of  Antichrist  (2  Thess.  ii.  4).  Exaltation  of  self  is 
both  an  old  (Gen.  iii.  5)  and  a  common  (Luke  xiv.  11)  sin,  against  which  men  in 
general  (Jer.  ix.  23  ;  Dan.  iv.  37),  and  Christians  in  particular  (Gal.  vi.  3),  are 
earnestly  warned.  4.  His  popularity.  To  him  the  whole  population  "  gave  heed 
from  the  least  to  the  greatest,  saying,  '  This  man  is  that  power  of  God  which  is 
called  great.' "  Few  things  are  more  incontestable  or  sad  than  the  gullibility 
of  mankind.  "Gullible,  however,  by  fit  apparatus,  all  publics  are,  and  gulled 
with  the  most  surprising  profit  "  (Carlyle,  Sartor  Resartus,  p.  68).  The  remark- 
able thing  is  that  almost  any  sort  of  tomfoolery,  mountebankism,  and  charlatanry 
will  do  to  cheat  men.  No  imposture  is  too  ridiculous  to  find  adherents.  No 
quack  is  so  vulgar  that  he  cannot  draw  around  him  admiring  fools.  Simon 
is  reported  to  have  visited  Home  in  the  time  of  Claudius,  and  by  means  of 
his  jugglery  to  have  established  himself  so  highly  in  popular  favour  that  the 
Senate  decreed  him  divine  honours,  and  a  statue  on  the  island  of  the  Tiber 
(Justin  Martyr,  Apol.,  I.  xxvi,  56) ;  and  it  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  in  the 
exact  spot  indicated  by  Justin,  in  1574,  there  was  dug  up  a  statue  with  the 
inscription  "  Semoni  Sanco  Deo  Fidio,"  though  whether  this  statue  was  the  ono 
referred  to  by  Justin,  or  another  to  a  Sabine  deity,  critics  are  not  agreed. 

II.  The  circumstances  which  led  to  Simon's  conversion. — 1.  The  preaching  of 
Philip.  It  is  clear  from  the  narrative  that  Simon  himself  must  have  been 
amongst  Philip's  listeners,  since  it  is  stated  that  he  himself  also  "  believed  Philip 
preaching  good  tidings,"  etc.  (vers.  12,  13).  "Faith  cometh  by  hearing" 
(Rom.  x.  17).  Faith  that  is  not  based  upon  the  word  of  God  either  read  or 
preached  lacks  a  solid  foundation,  and  will  ultimately  prove  unstable  and  unreal. 
2.  The  faith  of  the  people.  The  example  of  the  Samaritans  operated  contagiously 
on  Simon.  Observing  them  falling  away  from  himself  and  rallying  round  Philip, 
he  followed  in  their  wake.     The  event  snowed  he  had  not  been  savingly  impressed 

183 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


by  what  he  saw  and  heard,  but  only  superficially  stirred.  Nevertheless  the 
popular  attitude  towards  Philip  appears  to  have  awakened  in  him  something 
that  resembled  faith.  A  similar  phenomenon  is  not  unknown  in  modern 
religious  movements,  which  draw  in  and  sweep  along  with  them  many  who  are 
only  superficially  stirred,  not  permanently  converted.  3.  The  baptism  of  the 
believers.  Both  men  and  women  avowed  the  sincerity  of  their  conversion  by 
submitting  to  the  initiatory  rite  of  the  Christian  religion ;  and  this  also  must 
have  had  its  effect  upon  Simon,  and  led  him  to  reflect  that  a  greater  power  than 
that  wielded  by  himself  had  arrived  upon  the  scene. 

III.  The  evidence  of  Simon's  (supposed)  conversion. — 1.  His  profession  of 
faith.  He  "  believed."  This  the  first  requirement  in  a  disciple.  Whatever  else 
may  be  demanded  of  Christians,  they  must  repose  personal  credit  in  the  testimony 
concerning  Christ,  and  personal  trust  in  Christ  Himself.  2.  His  submission  to 
baptism.  In  the  case  of  an  adult  who  believes  for  the  first  time,  this  also  is 
indispensable  (Mark  xvi.  16  ;  Acts  ii.  38),  though  it  does  not  show  Infant 
Baptism  to  be  either  unscriptural  or  unreasonable  (see  onii.  39).  3.  His  adher- 
ence to  Philip.  "  He  continued  with  "the  deacon  and  those  associated  with  him  ; 
in  modern  phraseology,  he  joined  the  Church,  or  connected  himself  with  the  main 
body  of  believers.  This  a  third  mark  of  conversion.  "  The  fellowship  of 
saints  "  all  Christ's  followers  are  expacted  to  cultivate.  The  Christian  life  (under 
certain  circumstances)  may  be  successfully  maintained  in  isolation ;  but  in  no 
case  without  difficulty.  4.  His  admiration  of  Philip's  miracles.  The  works  of 
healing  wrought  by  Philip  appeared  to  convince  him  that  what  he  only  pretended 
to  wield,  and  what  the  people  imagined  he  wielded,  was  wielded  by  Philip  in 
reality — viz.,  the  great  power  of  God.  Whether  Simon's  conversion  was  genuine 
or  not,  it  had  many  of  the  marks  of  a  true  work  of  grace.  Note  in  illustration. 
— Philetus,  a  disciple  of  Hermogenes  the  conjurer,  coming  to  a  dispute  with 
St.  James  the  elder,  relied  much  upon  his  sophistry;  but  the  apostle  preached 
Christ  to  him  with  such  powerfulness  that  Philetus,  returning  back  to  his  master, 
told  him,  "  I  went  forth  a  conjurer,  but  am  returned  a  Christian." 

Learn. — 1.  That  all  professors  of  religion  are  not  true  converts.  2.  That  the 
gospel  has  in  it  something  which  attracts  even  bad  men.  3.  That  nothing  can 
so  effectually  deliver  men  from  this  present  evil  world,  with  its  snares  and 
delusions,  as  the  gospel  of  Christ.  4.  That  faith  in  Christ  should  ever  be  accom- 
panied by  public  confession.  5.  That  the  best  arguments  in  proof  of  Christianity 
are  the  moral  and  spiritual  miracles  it  performs. 


HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 


Yer.  12.  A  Reformed  City. 
The  conversion  of   the    Samaritans 
was  brought  about — 

I.  By  the  preaching  of  the  gospel, 
the  good  news  of  salvation. 

II.  With  the  concurrence  of  the 
people,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest. 

III.  In  spite  of  the  greatest  opposi- 
tion from  the  powers  of  darkness. 

IV.  With  the  most  satisfactory 
results :  numerous  baptisms  of  men 
and  women. 


Good  Tidings. 
I.     Concerning 
1.    That    it   had 

184 


God's   kingdom.  — 
come  (Matt.  hi.  2 ; 


Mark  i.  13).  2.  That  it  might  be 
entered  (Matt.  v.  20,  vii  13).  3.  That 
all  who  entered  it  should  be  saved 
(John  x.  9). 

II.  Concerning  God's  Son. — 1.  That 
He  had  been  the  bringer-in  of  the  king- 
dom by  His  death  and  resurrection 
(i.  3).  2.  That  to  Him  alone  belong 
the  keys  of  the  kingdom  (Rev.  iii.  7). 
3.  That  in  His  hand  are  all  the  bless- 
ings of  the  kingdom  (2  Peter  i.  3). 

Vers.  9-13.  The  Awakening  in 
Samaria. 

I.  The  obstacles  which  required  to 
be  overcome. — 1.  The  natural  indiffer- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  vm. 


ence  of  the  human  heart  to  religion. 
This  formed  the  deepest  and  least 
movable  barrier.  2.  The  character  of 
the  people.  Half-heathen,  ignorant, 
diseased,  demonised,  the  population  was 
hardly  likely  to  be  taken  up  with  the 
interests  of  the  soul.  3.  The  presence 
in  the  city  of  Simon  the  sorcerer,  who 
in  a  manner  had  pre-engaged  their 
attention  and  even  captivated  their 
hearts,  from  the  least  of  them  to  the 
greatest. 

II.  The  means  which  led  to  its 
arising. — 1.  The  miracles  and  signs 
which  Philip  did,  which  convinced  the 
people  that  a  greater  power  than  that 
of  Simon  had  arrived  upon  the  field. 
2.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel  of  the 
kingdom  and  of  Jesus  Christ.  While 
these  were  the  means,  the  Holy  Spirit 
was  the  agent. 

III.  The  characteristics  which  at- 
tended it. — 1.  Great  excitement.  This 
was  inevitable.  2.  Widespread  convic- 
tion. The  whole  town  seemed  to  be 
turned.  3.  Numerous  bajrtisms.  The 
magician  himself  owned  the  power  of 
the  truth,  and  was  baptised.  4.  Uni- 
versal joy.  The  whole  city  was  in 
raptures  of  delight. 

The  Kingdom  of  Darkness  and  the 
Kingdom  of  Light  in  Conflict. 

I.  The  two  champions. — 1.  Of  the 
kingdom  of  darkness,  Simon,  the  sor- 
cerer, an  old  and  experienced  warrior 
from   the    army   of   Satan    (ver.    11). 


2.  Of  the  kingdom  of  light,  Philip,  the 
Christian  deacon,  a  new  and  untried 
soldier  from  the  ranks  of  the  faithful 
(vi.  5). 

II.  The     selected    battle-field.  — 

1.  Locally,     the     city    of     Samaria. 

2.  Spiritually,  the  souls  of  its  in- 
habitants. As  the  kingdom  of  light, 
so  the  kingdom  of  darkness  is  within 
a  man. 

III.  The  trusted  weapons.— 1.  Those 
of  Simon,  sorcery,  witchcraft,  magic, 
legerdemain,  sleight-of-hand,  and  gene- 
rally the  arts  of  the  conjurer  and 
wizard.  2.  Those  of  Philip,  the  gospel 
or  the  good  tidings  concerning  the 
kingdom  of  Gcd  and  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

IV.  The  varying  methods. — 1.  Simon 
relied  on  the  power  of  delusion,  or  his 
ability  to  take  advantage  of  human 
ignorance  and  credulity.  2.  Philip 
reposed  his  confidence  alone  in  enlighten- 
ment and  conviction  by  the  pure  force 
of  truth  addressed  to  heart  and  con- 
science. 

V.  The  decisive  result. — 1.  Simon 
succeeded  for  a  time  in  deceiving  the 
people.  2.  Philip  in  the  end  won  them 
for  Christ,  and  even  carried  captive  (to 
appearance  at  least)  Simon  himself. 

Vers.  9,  13,  23.  Simon  Magus. 
I.  A  successful  sorcerer. 
II.  An  insincere  professor. 

III.  A  baptised  hypocrite. 

IV.  A  detected  deceiver. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  14—17. 

The  Mission  of  Peter  and  John  ;  or,  the  Confirmation  of  the  Saints. 

I.  The  occasion  of  this  mission. — The  report  about  Samaria.  The  good  news 
could  not  be  kept  from  spreading.  The  apostles  at  headquarters  took  deep 
interest  in  the  progress  of  the  cause  which  for  a  moment  the  persecution  had 
seemed  to  overwhelm.  When  perhaps  the  outlook  appeared  blackest,  this 
information  which  came  to  them  from  Samaria  would  seem  like  the  breaking 
forth  of  a  star  upon  the  dark  firmament  overhead. 

II.  The  authors  of  this  mission. — The  Apostles.  These  had  not  left  Jerusalem, 
but  remained  at  their  post.  Not,  as  some  think,  because  through  Stephen's 
superior  brilliancy  they  had  dropped  into  obscurity,  and  so  in  a  manner  had 
become  safe  from  persecution  (Stokes),  but  because,  like  brave  men,  they  felt  it 
incumbent  on  them  rather  to  face  the  peril  than  to  flee.     (See  on  ver.  1.) 

III.  The  agents  of  this  mission. — Peter  and  John,  who  appear  to  have  been 
drawn  to  one  another  by  common  affinities  and  by  perceiving  each  in  the  other 

185 


chap.  VIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


the  complement  of  himself,  and  to  have  acted  in  concert  after  the  resurrection 
(iii.  1  ;  John  xx.  4)  as  well  as  before  (Matt,  xxvii.  1  ;  Luke  viii.  51). 

IV.  The  fulfilment  of  this  mission. — 1.  They  went  down  to  Samaria.  Ever 
ready  to  "  doe  the  next  thing,"  and  to  execute  whatever  task  was  laid  upon  them, 
they  proceeded  to  Samaria.  Regarding  the  instructions  of  their  colleagues  as  an 
expression  of  the  Spirit's  mind,  they  obeyed.  At  the  same  time,  their  own 
wisdom  and  zeal  would  without  doubt  concur  in  the  expediency  of  the  journey. 

2.  They  prayed  for  the  converts.  These  had  not  yet  received  the  seal  of  the  Holy 
Ghost — i.e.,  in  His  miracle-working  endowments — though  it  need  not  be  questioned 
they  had  received  the  Spirit  in  His  ordinary  gracious  operations.  Accordingly 
the  two  apostles  prayed  that  this  further  seal  of  conversion  might  be  given  them. 

3.  They  laid  their  hands  upon  the  converts.  The  result  they  expected  followed. 
The  converts  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  doubtless  (though  it  is  not  so  stated) 
began  to  speak  with  tongues  and  perhaps  work  miracles  of  healing,  as  afterwards 
the  Spirit-endowed  believers  in  the  Christian  Church  did  (1  Cor.  xii.  9,  10).  The 
communication  of  such  gifts  was  of  course  only  symbolically  brought  about  by 
the  imposition  of  the  apostles'  hands.  Their  unseen  but  real  bestower  was  the 
glorified  Christ.     (See  "  Critical  Remarks.") 

V.  The  termination  of  this  mission — 1.  When  ?  After  they  (the  apostles)  had 
testified  and  spoken  the  word  of  the  Lord,  Peter  and  John  neglected  no  oppor- 
tunity of  either  confirming  the  disciples  or  making  new  converts.  Neither  should 
their  successors  in  the  ministry.  2.  How  ?  They  returned  to  Jerusalem.  Not 
directly,  but  preaching  by  the  way  to  many  villages  of  the  Samaritans — thus 
bringing  on  themselves  the  blessedness  of  them  who  sow  beside  all  waters 
(Isa.  xxxii.  20). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  interest  which  all  should  take  in  the  spread  of  the  gospel. 
2.  The  true  source  of  spiritual  endowments — the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  The  unwearied 
diligence  which  Christian  preachers  should  ever  show. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  14.     Peter  and  John;    or,   the  — Why  these  and  not  a  different  pair — 

First  Apostolic  Delegates.  say  Andrew  and  James — were  deputed 

I.  Their  relation  to  the  apostolic  to  execute  this  work  may  with  some 
college. — 1.  Not  the  heads,  but  ordi-  degree  of  probability  be  surmised, 
nary  members.  If  in  the  Church  they  1.  Their  personal  capabilities  were  most 
were  reputed  to  be  pillars  (Gal.  ii.  9),  likely  such  as  to  mark  them  out  as 
they  yet  claimed  no  supremacy  over  leaders ;  and  this  inference  receives 
their  colleagues  in  the  apostleship  ;  not  ample  confirmation  from  their  writings 
even  though  they  had  received  dis-  which  have  been  preserved  in  the  New 
tinctions  above  their  brethren  in  the  Testament.  2.  Their  spiritual  experi- 
diys  before  the  crucifixion  (Mark  v.  37,  ence  through  their  close  and  intimate 
ix.  2,  xiv.  33),  and  after  the  resurrec-  fellowship  with  the  Master  was  inani- 
tion (John  xxi.  15-23).  2.  Not  the  festly  such  as  to  qualify  them  beyond 
senders,  but  the  sent.  They  manifestly  others  for  the  execution  of  a  delicate 
did  not  regard  themselves  as  invested  and  responsible  task  like  that  of  visit- 
with  authority  to  command  their  ing  and  reporting  on  the  great  revival 
brethren,  but  viewed  the  whole  body  in  Samaria.  3.  Their  close  friendship 
of  the  Twelve  as  of  co-ordinate  rank.  of  many  years'  standing  fitted  them 
They  did  not  even  think  of  disputing  to  act  as  colleagues  on  this  important 
the  right  of  the  Twelve  to  appoint  mission.  They  had  long  been  accus- 
them  to  such  a  work  as  the  mission  to  tomed  to  act  in  concert.  4.  Their 
Samaria.  individual  temperaments,   on  the   one 

II.  The  reasons  for  their  selection,      hand,  of  energy  and  impulse,  fortitude 

186 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  viii. 


and   decision ;    on  the  other  hand,  of  tolic   earnestness  and  zeal.     2.  John : 

love  and  gentleness,  thoughtfulnessand  evangelical  tenderness  and  mildness, 
sympathy,  supplied  the  two    elements  III.  The   functions. — 1.    Prayer   in 

that  were  specially  demanded  for  the  the   name   of    the    Church    (ver.    15). 

contemplated  visitation.  2.  Imposition  of  hands  in  the  name  of 

III.    The    special   object    of  their  God  (ver.  17). 
mission. — This  may  be  gathered  from  IV.  The  effects. — 1.  The  strengthen- 

the  context.     1.  To  inspect  and  report  ing  of  the  Church  (ver.  17).     2.  The 

upon  the  awakening  in  Samaria.     To  sifting    of    the    Church    (ver.    18). — 

judge  whether  it  was  a  genuine  work  Gerok. 
of  grace,  or  only  a  temporary  excite- 
ment.    2.  If  found  genuine,  to  complete  Ver.  17.  Receiving  the  Holy  Ghost, 
it  by  receiving  the  baptised  into  Church  I.  A    possibility. — Otherwise    Peter 

fellowship,  by  laying  hands  upon  them  would  not  have  promised  it  (ii.  38). 
and  praying  for  their  endowment  with  II.  A   necessity. — Otherwise    Peter 

the  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  would  not  have  gone  to  pray  for  it. 

III.  A  certainty. — Otherwise  God's 

Vers.  14-18.  The  First  Church  Visita-  promise  would  be  falsified  and  Christ's 

tion.  prayer   for  His  people  would   be  un- 

I.  The  occasion. — I.  There  is  Chris-  answered,    and   the  lives  of   believers 
tian    life    to    be    fostered    (ver.    14).  would  be  incomplete. 

2.  There  is  a  want  in  the  Church  to  be  IV.  A    mystery.  —  Otherwise    we 

supplied  (ver.  16).  should  be  able  to  comprehend  it,  which 

II.  The    visitors. — 1.    Peter  :  apos-  we  are  not. 

HOMILETIC AL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  18—24. 

The  Two  Simons  ;  or,  the  Detection  of  a  Hypocrite. 

I.  Simon  Magus's  proposal. — 1.  What  suggested  it.  The  sight  which  he  beheld. 
The  coming  down  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  those  on  whom  the  Apostle's  hands  were 
laid.  This  shows  that  the  recipients  of  the  Holy  Ghost  must  in  some  external 
fashion — probably  through  speaking  with  tongues  or  working  miracles — have  indi- 
cated their  possession  of  the  heavenly  gift.  2.  What  accompanied  it.  An  offer  of 
money.  This  revealed  that  Simon  had  no  right  conception  either  of  the  natuie 
of  the  miraculous  endowment  which  had  been  conferred  upon  the  Samaritan 
believers  (and  perhaps  also  upon  himself)  or  of  the  means  which  had  been  used 
in  its  bestowment.  3.  What  composed  it.  A  request  that  the  apostles  should 
impart  to  him,  not  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  possibly  along  with  others  he  may  have 
received,  but  the  power  of  conferring  the  Holy  Ghost  with  His  supernatural  gifts 
upon  others.  Simon  recognised  in  what  Peter  and  John  had  effected  a  power 
that  transcended  his  own,  and  wished  to  secure  it  for  himself,  that  by  its  means 
he  might  stand  on  a  level  with  the  apostles  as  a  thaumaturge  and  be  able  to 
recover  his  lost  influence  with  the  people. 

II.  Simon  Peter's  Refusal.  1.  A  terrible  denunciation.  "  Thy  money  perish 
with  thee  !"  Literally,  may  thy  silver  with  thee  be  for  destruction!  (1)  The 
meaning.  Hardly  an  imprecation,  which  would  not  have  been  becoming  in  a 
follower  of  Him  who  said,  "  Let  your  communication  be  '  Yea,  yea  ;  Nay,  nay,' 
for  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  cometh  of  evil  "  (Matt.  v.  37),  and  who  taught 
His  disciples  to  bless  and  curse  not  (Matt.  v.  44  ;  Luke  vi.  28  ;  Rom.  xii.  14). 
Scarcely  even  a  prediction  that  Simon  was  destined  to  perdition,  since  he  after- 
wards directs  Simon  how  that  awful  doom  might  be  averted  (ver.  22).  Butmoht 
likely  and  best,  a  strong  and  solemn  asseveration  that  he,  Simon,  being  in  such  a 
state  of  mind  would  certainly  share  that  destruction  which  would  eventually 
overtake  his  money,  as  all  other  earthly  goods,  which  in  their  nature  are  peiish- 
able  (Col.  ii.  22).     "  Gold  and  silver  would  perish  in  the  end.     Equally  valueless 

187 


CHAP.  viii.        HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


and  perishable  would  be  the  life  of  an  unrighteous  man.  The  corruptible  nature  j 
of  that  gold  and  silver  which  man  prizes  so  dearly  seems  to  have  been  ever  in 
Peter's  mind,  and  to  have  entered  continually  into  his  arguments "  (Spence).  s 
Compare  1  Peter  i.  7,  18.  (2)  The  reason.  "  Because  thou  hast  thought  that 
the  gift  of  God  might  be  purchased,"  or  "  to  obtain  the  gift  of  God  with 
money."  The  proposal  revealed  that  Simon  had  not  apprehended  the  true  nature 
of  what  had  taken  place.  Neither  the  character  of  the  blessing  bestowed — which 
was  a  spiritual  influence ;  nor  the  author  of  its  bestowment — Gocl,  and  neither 
Peter  nor  other  man  ;  nor  the  terms  of  its  bestowment — as  a  free  gift,  so  that  no 
quantity  of  gold  or  silver  could  purchase  it.  Compare  what  is  said  of  wisdom 
(Job  xx viii.  15-19).  2,  An  aiming  declaration.  "Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  \ 
lot  in  this  matter."  Concerning  which  also  must  be  noted  :  (1)  The  import  of  it 
— viz.,  that  Simon  had  no  share  either  in  the  word  or  doctrine  of  the  Gospel 
which  Peter  preached,  or  in  the  Holy  Ghost  which  God  imparted  to  believers,  so 
that  even  if  apostolic  hands  had  been  laid  upon  him  it  was  wholly  in  vain,  or  in 
the  Christian  community  to  which  all  Spirit-endowed  believers  belong.  This  was 
practically  a  sentence  of  excommunication  on  Simon.  It  excluded  him  from  the 
congregation  of  believing  and  regenerated  men,  because  his  speech  disclosed  he 
should  never  have  been  reckoned  with  these.  (2)  The  ground  of  it.  "  Thy  heart  is  ! 
not  right  in  the  sight  of  of  God  "  or  "  before  God."  There  was  more  at  fault  with 
Simon  than  defective  understanding.  His  heart  was  not  straight  (compare 
2  Kings  x.  15,  LXX. ;  2  Peter  ii.  15),  not  sincere  and  upright.  Crooked,  perverse, 
ana  corrupt,  it  was  directed  towards  not  spiritual,  but  earthly  things.  It  thirsted 
not  for  eternal  life  but  for  temporal  power,  sought  not  God's  glory,  but  its  own 
fame.  Though  it  might  seem  otherwise  in  men's  sight,  such  was  its  character 
in  the  eyes  of  God.  3.  A  solemn  exhortation.  "  Pepent  therefore  of  this  thy 
wickedness,',  etc.  Setting  forth  (1)  An  urgent  duty.  To  repent  of  his  wicked- 
ness, since  without  godly  sorrow  for  past  sin  moral  improvement  was  impossible. 
To  turn  from  his  wickedness.  This  also  was  implied,  inasmuch  as  no  repentance 
could  be  sincere  that  did  not  lead  to  a  changed  life.  To  pray  God  or  the  Lord 
for  forgiveness,  because  even  repentance  and  reformation  cannot  cancel  or  atone 
for  past  guilt.  And  such  guilt  attached  to  the  wicked  thought  of  the  heart  quite 
as  much  as  to"  the  evil  deed  of  the  hand  or  sinful  word  of  the  mouth  (Matt. 
xv.  19).  (2)  A  fearful  uncertainty.  "  If  perhaps  the  thought  of  thy  heart  shall 
be  forgiven  thee."  Peter  could  have  no  doubt  that  "  all  manner  of  sin  could  " 
and  would  be  "  forgiven  unto  men  "  if  they  repented  and  believed  (Matt.  xii.  31), 
but  in  this  case  he  appeared  uncertain  whether  the  special  sin  committed  did  not 
fall  within  the  category  of  sins  for  which  no  forgiveness  can  be  found  either  in 
this  life  or  in  that  which  is  to  come  (Matt.  xii.  31,  32  ;  1  John  v.  16).  Peter's 
language  shows  that  the  power  of  absolution  conferred  on  the  apostles  by  Christ 
(John  xx.  23)  was  not  absolute,  and  could  not  be  exercised  in  every  or  any  case 
except  conditionally  on  the  repentance  and  faith  of  the  individual  absolved. 
(3)  An  appalling  argument.  Peter  justifies  his  uncertainty  as  to  the  possibility 
of  Simon's  forgiveness  by  stating  that  Simon  was  "  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  " — i.e., 
in  bitterness,  wickedness,  hostility,  as  in  gall,  "  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity  " — i.e., 
in  unrighteousness  as  in  a  chain.  Not  that  he  would  lapse  into  such  a  condition 
if  he  did  not  repent  (Stier),  but  that  already  he  had  fallen  into  and  was  abiding 
in  it.  The  gall  of  noxious  reptiles  having  been  considered  by  the  ancients  as  the 
seat  of  their  venom,  Peter,  by  the  selection  of  this  metaphor,  virtually  said  that 
Simon  was  actuated  by  a  spirit  of  bitter  hostility  against  the  Gospel,  that  the 
seat  of  this  bitterness  was  in  his  corrupt  heart,  and  that  this  malignity  which  bi& 
evil  nature  cherished  held  him  fast  like  a  chain,  or  bond. 

III.  Simon  Magus's  entreaty.     1.   What  ivas  right  about  it.     (1)  It  was  good 
that  Simon  felt  alarmed  and  thought  of  prayer,  rather  than  magic,  as  a  means  of 

188 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  viii. 


averting  his  peril.  (2)  It  was  better  that  he  sought  the  friendly  mediation  of 
Peter  to  make  supplication  on  his  behalf,  whereas  he  might  have  turned  upon 
Peter  with  cursing  and  violence.  (3)  It  was  best  that  he  directed  Peter  to  lay 
his  prayer  before  the  Lord  against  whom  he  had  sinned.  Even  of  bad  men  it  is 
right  to  take  the  most  charitable  view,  and  these  thoughts  suggest  hope  for 
Simon  the  Magician.  2.  What  was  turong  about  it.  (1)  That  he  prayed  not 
himself  but  merely  asked  (perhaps  mockingly)  Peter  to  pray  for  him.  (2)  That 
he  only  wished  to  elude  the  threatened  punishment  of  his  wickedness,  and  had  no 
concern  about  escaping  from  the  wickedness  itself.  (3)  That  he  made  no  men- 
tion of  feeling  sorry  for  his  sin,  but  only  "confessed  his  fear  of  punishment,  not 
horror  of  guilt "  (Bengel).  In  all  which  he  resembled  Pharaoh,  who  entreated 
Moses  to  intercede  with  Jehovah  for  him  (Exod.  viii.  29,  ix.  28,  x.  17),  and  yet 
afterwards  hardened  his  heart. 

TV.  Simon  Peter's  silence.  It  is  not  said  that  the  apostle  complied  with  the 
magician's  request.  The  inference  is  that  he  did  not.  1.  Not  because  it  would 
have  been  wrong  to  pray  for  another.  Intercessory  prayer  was  practised  by  Old 
Testament  saints,  as  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  18,  20,  xviii.  23-32),  Moses  (Exod. 
viii.  12,  13,  30,  31),  Samuel  (1  Sam.  vii.  5-12),  and  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii.  20-23)  ; 
was  enjoined  upon  New  Testament  disciples  by  Christ  (Matt.  v.  44),  and  is  still 
enforced  upon  believers  as  a  duty  (Eph.  vi.  18;  1  Tim.  ii.  1,  2  ;  James  v.  16; 
1  John  v.  16).  2.  Not  because  the  forgiveness  of  heinous  sin  ivas  impossible.  If 
Simon  Magus's  wickedness  was  outside  the  reach  of  pardon  Peter  did  not  know 
this,  else  he  would  not  have  urged  on  Magus  to  pray  for  forgiveness.  But  3.  Be- 
cause the  conditions  of  true  prayer  were  wanting.  Simon  was  not  in  a  proper 
state  of  mind  to  be  interceded  for,  being  destitute  of  both  repentance  and  faith. 
Peter  may  have  supplicated  heaven  for  his  awakening,  and  perhaps  did  so  in 
secret ;  while  Simon  continued  as  he  was,  Peter  could  not  beseech  God  for  the 
granting  of  his  request.  Whether  the  magician  ever  repented  and  reformed 
cannot  be  told.  Ecclesiastical  tradition  reports  that  after  his  interview  with 
Peter  he  went  back  to  his  old  courses  like  a  dog  to  his  vomit,  etc.  (2  Peter  ii.  22), 
and  became  a  bitter  opponent  of  Christianity. 

Learn — 1.  That  many  who  profess  to  be  converted  are  still  in  the  gall  of  bitter- 
ness and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity.  2.  That  heaven's  gifts — whether  in  providence 
or  in  grace — cannot  be  purchased  for  money,  but  must  always  be  accepted  free. 
3.  That  the  purchase  and  sale  of  spiritualities  (usually  called  Simony)  is  a  hein- 
ous sin.  4.  That  "  the  heart  aye's  the  past  aye,  that  makes  us  right  or  wrong  " 
(Burns).  5.  That  the  first  thing  to  be  done  with  sin  is  to  repent  of  it,  and  the 
second  thing  to  seek  its  forgiveness.  6.  That  sinful  thoughts  and  feelings  as 
much  require  repentance  and  forgiveness  as  sinful  words  and  acts.  7.  That  if 
Peter  could  read  the  heart  of  Magus,  much  more  can  God  read  the  hearts  of  all. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  18.  Money.  tion.     1.  Because  the  Holy  Ghost,  a 

I.  Rightly  viewed. — God's  gift  to  spiritual  gift,  cannot  be  purchased  by 
man.  1.  Because  the  silver  and  the  carnal  things.  2.  Because  the  Holy 
gold  are  Mine  saith  the  Lord  (Hag.  Ghost,  a  heavenly  gift,  cannot  be  pur- 
ii.  8).  2.  Because  no  man  can  possess  chased  by  earthly  things.  3.  Because 
it  except  it  be  given  him  from  above  the  Holy  Ghost,  a  free  gift,  cannot  be 
(John  hi.  27  ;  James  i.  17).     3.  Because  purchased  by  anything. 

the  ability  to  earn  money  comes  from 

God  (Deut.  viii.   18).     3.   Because  God  Yer.  21.   A    Heart   not   Right   with 

can  recall  it  at  any  moment  (Job  i.  21).  God. 

II.  Wrongly  used.— When  employed  I.  When  destitute  of  true  faith 
to  purchase  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  salva-  (Heb.  xi.  6). 

189 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


IT.  When  anxious  to  make  gain  of 
godliness  (1  Tim.  vi.  5). 

III.  When  desirous  of  purchasing 
salvation. 

IV.  When  secretly  in  love  with 
sin  (Psalm  lxvi.  18). 

Y.  When  a  veiled  enemy  of  Jesus 
Christ  (xiii.  10). 

Ver.  22.  The  Thoughts  of  the  Heart. 
I.  Naturally  wicked  (Gen.  vi.  5). 

II.  Thoroughly  understood  (Prov. 
xv.  11). 

III.  All  forgivable  (Matt.  xii.  31). 

IY.  Certainly  damnable,  if  not 
repented  of  (Luke  xiii.  3). 

Yer.  24.  Intercessory  Prayer. 

I.  Commanded  (Matt.  v.  44;  Eph. 
vi.  18 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  1  ;  James  v.  16). 

II.  Exemplified.  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii. 
18,  xix.  23) ;  Moses  (Exod.  xxxii.  31, 
32);  David  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  17);  Paul 
(Rom.  i.  9). 

III.  Solicited. — By  Pharaoh  (Exod. 
viii.  8,  28) ;  Israelites  (Numb.  xxi.  7) ; 
Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xiii.  6) ;  Hezekiah 
(2  Kings  xix.  1-4) ;  Zedekiah  (Jer. 
xxxvii.  3). 

IY.  Answered. — For  Ishmael  (Gen. 
xvii.  20);  Pharaoh  (Exod.  viii.  12,  13, 
30,  31);  Miriam  (Numb.  xii.  13); 
Aaron  (Deut.  ix.  20) ;  Peter  (xii.  5-12) ; 
etc. 

Y.  Refused. — To  Judah  (Jer.  vii. 
16,  xi.  14,  xiv.  11)  and  Simon  Magus. 

Yers.  14-25.  The  Mistakes  of  Simon. 

I.  He  sought  to  purchase  spiritual 
gifts  with  money. — Eich  men  try  to 
buy  the  favour  of  Him  whom  they  have 
neglected  all  their  lives  by  great  gifts 
to  His  cause.  Poor  men  try  to  do  it 
by  some  outward  service  which  is  not 
loving  sonship.  It  is  the  mistake  of 
all  who  cannot  understand  that  God's 
offer  is  so  free.  So  for  penitence, 
which  is  only  a  motive  to  return  to 
God  and  to  receive  His  pardon,  they 
substitute  some  penance  which  is  the 
offering  of  our  pains  of  mind  or  body 
to  Him  as  the  condition  on  which  we 
ask    His   grace.     It   makes  but  little 

190 


difference  whether  it  is  in  a  grosser  or 
more  spiritual  form,  whether  it  by  the 
flagellation  of  our  bodies  or  the  tor- 
turing of  our  souls.  God  gives  pardon  ; 
He  does  not  sell  it.  Sin  can  earn 
wages,  such  as  they  are,  but  eternal 
life  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  gift  of  God's  free  grace. 

II.  He  sought  spiritual  gifts  that 
he  might  use  them  for  selfish  ends. — 
For  it  is  impossible  not  to  suppose  that 
he  offered  money  for  money's  worth. 
He  had  been  a  magician,  and  accus- 
tomed to  receive  the  pay  as  well  as  the 
praises  of  the  Samaritans.  He  desired 
this  apostolic  power  that  by  its  aid  he 
might  be  both  exalted  and  enriched. 
Here  again,  although  the  form  of  Simon's 
sin  is  exceptionally  gross,  the  spirit  of 
it  is  not  unknown  even  to  our  modern 
world.  Simon's  sin  is  that  of  those 
who  look  upon  the  places  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church  rather  as  means  of  support 
than  as  opportunities  of  ministry.  But 
there  is  a  subtler  form  of  this  same  sin 
not  so  easily  recognised,  nor  so  easily 
brought  to  condemnation.  Conceit 
may  move  men  as  well  as  covetousness. 
Ambition  may  be  a  motive  as  strong 
as  avarice.  They  make  this  same 
mistake,  commit  this  same  sin,  who 
desire  to  enjoy  the  dignities  of  Chris- 
tian leadership  in  distinction  from 
simply  desiring  to  do  Christian  work. 
But  there  is  a  broader  application  of 
the  principle,  to  those  who  desire  the 
benefits  of  religion  without  the  religion 
itself.  The  world  is  full  of  men  who 
wish  to  have  the  advantage  but  not 
the  responsibility  of  spiritual  gifts. 
They  would  like  the  peace  and  joy  of 
believing,  but  are  not  willing  to  accept 
its  restraint  and  control.  Above  all,  they 
are  willing  to  be  saved  from  the  punish- 
ments of  sin,  but  unwilling  to  be  saved 
from  the  sin  itself.  They  will  join  the 
disciple  and  be  baptised  and  give  their 
money,  as  Simon  did,  and  would  like  all 
that  God  has  to  give  them  except  a  new 
heart ;  and  the  old  heart  is  not  right  in 
His  sight. 

III.  He  sought  to  substitute  the 
spiritual  gifts  of  others  for  his  own 
repentance  and  prayer. — And  this  was 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  viii. 


his  last  mistake,  after  he  had  been  the  prayers  of  God's  people  without 
rebuked  for  the  first  two,  and  so  was  emphasising  the  need  that  their  own 
perhaps  the  worst  and  most  harmful  of  prayers  should  first  be  offered  up.  !STo 
all.  Peter  had  turned  on  this  baptised  Peter  by  his  prayers,  devout  and 
sorcerer  with  sharp  rebuke.  God's  gift  apostolic  though  they  be,  can  save  a 
cannot  be  purchased.  Simon's  money  Simon  who  does  not  repent  of  his  sin 
can  find  no  investment  in  these  spiritual  and  pray  for  his  own  pardon  and  puri- 
gifts.  Worst  of  all,  he  has  shown  that  fying.  No  Monica  can  save  an  Augus- 
tus heart  is  not  right  in  God's  sight ;  tine  by  her  prayers  till  God  shall  teach 
that  it  is  full  of  wicked  thoughts.  the  wayward  son  himself  to  cry  to 
"  Repent  of  this  thy  wickedness,"  he  Him  for  help.  There  is  but  one 
cries  to  him,  "  and  pray  God  if  perhaps  Mediator  between  God  and  man — the 
the  thought  of  thy  heart  may  be  for-  man  Christ  Jesus ;  and  not  even  He 
given  thee."  There  is  no  sin  so  great  makes  repentance  unnecessary  on  the 
that  true  repentance  and  turning  to  sinner's  p^rt.  After  all,  the  mistakes 
God  may  not  cover  it.  But  still  the  of  Simon  were  only  the  outcome  of  his 
mind  of  the  disappointed  magician  does  mistaken  heart.  The  heart  which  is 
not  take  in  the  remedy  proposed  and  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God  cannot 
its  necessity.  He  would  rather  pray  see  anything  rightly  which  relates  to 
them  to  pray  God  for  him  than  do  it  God.  It  does  not  see  itself  or  Him,  or. 
himself.  He  would  rather  depend  on  its  relation  to  Him,  as  it  is.  The 
them  than  on  the  Lord.  "Pray  for  right  heart  feels  its  need  of  that  which 
me,"  he  begs.  If  they  would  only  cannot  be  procured  by  money  or  by  its 
pray  for  him,  he  might  be  delivered  own  good  works,  but  only  as  the  gift 
from  these  threatened  evils.  Nor  is  of  God.  The  right  heart  recognises 
this  a  mistake  confined  to  the  Samari-  that  it  has  no  claim  upon  God's  spiritual 
tan  sorcerer.  How  many  people  are  gifts  for  its  own  sake,  but  only  that  it 
to-day  depending  on  some  other  person's  may  use  them  in  the  new  spirit  it  has 
goodness  to  save  them,  or  some  other  received  of  love  to  God  and  love  to 
person's  prayers  to  procure  their  man.  The  right  heart  will  not  depend 
pardon? — how  many  who  practically  on  any  other  to  make  needless  for  it 
-hope  for  some  miraculous  saving  power  sincere  repentance  and  humble  prayer, 
from  the  intercessions  of  others,  with-  — Monday  Club  Sermons. 
out  their    own    self-abasement   before 

God,  or  without  making  supplication  The  Natural  Heart. — In  meditating 

for   themselves.     There  are  husbands  upon  the  story  of  the  Samaritan  im- 

by  scores   who,  having   some    general  postor,  and  studying  our  own  depraved 

knowledge  of  the  gospel,   hope  to  be  nature  in  it,  we  may  remark — 

saved  somehow  by  the  godly  living  and  I.  That  the  natural  heart   has  no 

praying  of  their  wives ;  children,  grown  knowledge  of  Divine  things.  — We  hear 

up  to  manhood  and  to  womanhood  in  a  great  deal  nowadays  of  the  "religious 

Christian    homes,    who    are     relying  instinct."     It  is  one  of  the  catchwords 

blindly  on  the  power  of  their,  parents  by  which  men  would  do  away  with  the 

with  God  to  secure  for  them  deliver-  notions  of  revelation  and  a  new  heart, 

ance  from  sin  and  a  part  in  his  salva-  According  to  some  modern  teachings,  all 

tion  ;  •  unrenewed    and     unrepentant  men  have  a  religious  instinct,  all  have 

persons  in  all  our  congregations  who  a  desire  to  worship  God — nay,  all  do 

hope  that  the  Church  will   somehow  worship  God  in  some  honest  way,  which, 

pray  them  into  heaven,  if  only  at  the  as  he  is  a  kind  God,  must  be  acceptable 

eleventh  hour.     Perhaps  the  Church,  to   him.     On   analysis,    we   shall   find 

in  some  of  its  branches  at  least,  is  not  that  this,   which  is  called  a  religious 

altogether  blameless  for  this  attitude  instinct,  is  either  the  action  of  a  guilty 

on    the  part  of   many.       Has  it   not  conscience  or  of  a  poetic  fancy.     But 

sometimes  encouraged  them  to  ask  for  is  this  religion  ?     Is  this  knowing  and 

191 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


serving  God  ?  Is  this  intelligent  action 
towards  a  revealed  Maker?  Is  it  a 
movement  of  will  and  affections  toward 
a  personal  Ruler  of  the  universe  ?  Can 
such  a  religion  as  is  found  in  the 
"  religious  instinct,"  as  it  is  called, 
satisfy  the  heart  and  purify  the  life  ? 
Has  it  ever  done  so  ?  Do  we  find 
people  and  nations  growing  stronger 
on  such  diet,  more  civilised,  more 
attractive  ?  The  religious  instinct  is 
of  no  higher  character  than  the  eating 
and  drinking  instinct,  as  far  as  true 
religion  is  concerned.  One  will  lead  to 
God  as  readily  as  the  other.  They  are 
both  of  the  earth,  earthy.  Men  are 
cut  off  from  God  by  sin,  and  they  can 
return  only  by  the  use  of  Divine  means. 
Nothing  in  themselves  can  be  of  any 
avail.  The  chasm  must  be  bridged 
from  the  Divine  side.  Acceptance  of 
what  God  has  done  is  salvation.  What 
we  do  only  helps  us  downward  in  sin. 
That  which  Simon  brought  out  into 
full  relief  by  reason  of  his  position  and 
boldness  was  simply  the  common 
character  of  the  natural  man.  Divine 
things  are  treated  with  low,  earthly 
affections,  and,  of  course,  as  low,  earthly 
things.  Simon  in  trying  to  buy  God's 
power  was  no  worse  than  the  many 
who  try  to  appease  God's  anger  with  a 
penance  or  a  gift.  The  one  tries  to 
buy  God's  power,  the  other  tries  to 
buy  God's  pardon. 

II.  Note,  in  the  second  place,  that 
man's  wickedness  before  God  is  in  the 
condition  of  his  heart. — Look  at  the 
words  used  in  Simon's  case :  "  Thy 
heart  is  not  right  before  God."  And 
then  again,  "  Repent  of  this  thy 
wickedness,  and  pray  the  Lord  if  per- 
haps the  thought  of  thy  heart  shall  be 
forgiven  thee."  Men  have  accustomed 
themselves  to  posit  sin  in  overt  acts, 
and  have  failed  to  explore  the  pollution 
of  their  hearts.  Our  Lord  in  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  endeavours  to 
correct  this  fatal  error,  and  shows  that 
the  seat  of  murder  and  other  gross 
offences  is  in  the  heart.  He,  as  a  holy 
God,  can  receive  none  to  Himself  except 
as  the  unholy  heart  is  renewed.  This 
fundamental  truth  is  what  the  poets 

192 


and  philosophers  ignore.  They  would 
reform  man  on  the  basis  of  the  old 
evil  heart.  They  would  make  the  outer 
circles  of  life  pure,  and  leave  the  core 
rotten.  If,  however,  they  say  that  the 
heart  of  man  is  pure,  how  then  did  it 
ever  produce  such  universal  impurity 
in  life  ?  For  surely  the  life  must  come 
from  the  heart.  But  some  will  say, 
"  We  believe  the  heart  must  be  re- 
newed, but  why  cannot  man  renew  it 
himself?  What  is  renewal  except 
turning  the  heart  from  one  object  of 
affection  to  another,  from  wrong  to 
right,  from  the  false  to  the  true  ? " 
In  reply,  we  make  our  third  remark 
on  our  text — 

III.  That  only  God's  power  can  re- 
new the  heart. — We  accept  the  defini- 
tion that  renewal  is  a  turning  from 
wrong  to  right,  from  the  false  to  the 
true.  But  when  the  affections  are  in 
the  wrong  and  the  false,  how  can 
their  own  influence  take  them  out? 
How  can  love  destroy  itself  ?  Now, 
the  heart  is  this  love,  this  love  for  evil. 
How  can  it  change  itself  to  love  for 
good?  Where  is  the  first  impetus  to 
come  from  when  that  which  forms  the 
force  of  the  life  is  fixed  upon  evil  ? 
Do  you  take  refuge  in  the  thought 
that  there  is  some  element  of  good  in 
the  heart,  and  that  this  at  last  accom- 
plishes the  renewal?  Then  why  does 
it  not  always  accomplish  it  ?  What  is 
there  to  make  exceptional  cases  ?  Any 
exceptional  case  destroys  your  theory, 
for  Nature  always  works  in  the  same 
way,  and  if  the  good  element  would 
produce  renewal  in  one  heart,  it 
certainly  would  in  all.  But,  besides 
that,  how  could  the  good  element  in 
the  heart  overcome  the  bad  unless  it 
had  a  majority  ?  And  if  it  had  a 
majority,  how  came  the  heart  ever  to 
go  wrong?  No;  the  theory  will  not 
bear  examination.  The  evil  heart 
cannot  renew  itself.  God  alone  can 
do  that. 

IV.  The  hope  of  man  is  in  prayer. 
— "  Pray  the  Lord,"  said  Peter,  3  if 
perhaps  the  thought  of  thy  heart  shall 
be  forgiven  thee."  Prayer  must  have 
penitence  as  its  spirit  ("  Repent  there- 


0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  vm. 


fore  of  this  thy  wickedness,  and  pray  road  to  pardon  and  to  God,  we  see  in 

the   Lord ").      It   must   have   a   deep  Peter's    injunction    what  the  road  is. 

conviction   of   personal   sin.      Though  It  is  prayer  to  God.     The  heart  needs 

Simon   apparently   did   not   take    the  His  forgiving  grace. — H.  Crosby,  D.D. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  26—40. 

Hie  Conversion  of  the  Eunuch  ;  or,  the  Gospel  carried  into  Ethiopia. 

I.  Occasioned  by  Providence. — The  preparatory  steps  which  led  to  this 
remarkable  occurrence  were  seven.  1.  The  Eunuch! s  adhesion  to  the  Hebrew 
faith.  An  Ethiopian  from  the  upper  valley  of  the  Nile,  a  eunuch  of  great 
authority  under  Candace,  Queen  of  the  Ethiopians  (Ethiopia  being  at  this  time 
ruled  by  female  sovereigns,  of  whom  Candace  was  the  official  title),  who  had 
charge  of  all  her  treasure,  who  was  her  Finance  Minister — five  clauses  descriptive 
of  his  extraction,  his  condition,  his  dignity,  his  time,  and  his  office — he  had  in 
measure  at  least  renounced  his  original  heathen  superstitions,  having,  like  so 
many  others  about  that  period,  come  to  realise  their  inability  to  satisfy  the 
wants  of  the  soul.  It  has  been  supposed  indeed  that  he  was  a  Jew  who  had 
risen  to  eminence  in  Ethiopia,  as  Moses  had  done  in  Egypt,  Daniel  in  Babylon, 
and  Mordecai  in  Shushan  (Stokes),  chiefly  on  the  ground  that  had  he  been  a 
heathen,  Cornelius  could  not  have  been  designated  the  first  Gentile  convert.  As 
an  argument,  however,  this  is  scarcely  convincing,  since  in  the  Eunuch's  case 
no  question  arose  about  terms  of  admission  to  the  Palestinian  Church,  while  if 
as  stated  he  was  a  circumcised  pagan,  his  case  was  sufficiently  distinguished  from 
that  of  Cornelius,  who  was  certainly  an  uncircumcised  Gentile.  The  probability, 
therefore,  is  that  he  was  an  African  who,  having  embraced  the  Jewish  faith,  was 
attached  to  the  temple  as  a  proselyte  (compare  x.  2,  xiii.  16),  but  whether  of  the 
gate  (Alford,  Renan)  or  of  righteousness  (Plumptre)  cannot  be  determined.  Neither 
can  it  be  ascertained  how  he  had  been  led  to  such  an  act  of  renunciation  and  ac- 
ceptance as  this  his  proselyte  relation  to  Judaism  implied.  Jews,  it  is  known,  had 
for  centuries  been  settled  in  Ethiopia ;  and  the  Greek  or  Septuagint  translation 
of  the  Scriptures  was  at  this  time  widely  diffused  throughout  the  world.  2.  The 
Eunuch's  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem  to  worship.  It  was  the  custom  for  proselytes 
as  well  as  for  foreign  Jews  to  undertake  such  pilgrimages  in  order  to  attend  the 
great  annual  religious  festivals  at  Jerusalem  (ii.  10  ;  John  xii.  20)  ;  and  the 
Treasurer  of  Meroe  had  manifestly  been  in  the  Jewish  capital,  observing  one  or 
other  of  these  feasts ;  most  likely  a  Pentecost,  which  was  usually  attended  by 
the  largest  numbers.  That  he  had  done  so  had  no  doubt  been  of  God's  ordering. 
3.  The  Eunuch's  homeward  journey  through  the  desert.  What  particular  motive 
the  African  statesman  had  for  selecting  the  desert  route  to  Gaza,  via  Bethlehem 
and  Hebron,  in  preference  to  any  of  the  other  roads,  as  for  instance  that  which 
led  through  Rarnleh  or  that  which  ran  by  Bethshemesh,  cannot  be  conjectured  ; 
but  it  need  not  be  questioned  that  God's  object  in  directing  him  to  the  choice  he 
made  was  to  secure  the  quietude  necessary  for  conversation  with  the  messenger 
of  heaven  who  was  about  to  be  despatched  to  join  him.  4.  The  Eunuch's  meet- 
ing with  Philip  at  the  moment  of  his  need.  According  to  the  story,  while  his 
chariot,  "  a  mode  of  locomotion  at  all  times  almost  unknown  to  Syria  and 
Palestine "  (Renan),  rolled  along  upon  its  homeward  way,  the  distinguished 
traveller,  following  a  custom  then  quite  common,  occupied  himself  in  reading. 
The  book  which  engaged  his  attention  was  that  of  Esaias  the  prophet.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  suppose  (Stier)  that  he  had  only  for  the  first  time  procured  a  copy 
of  the  Scriptures  when  in  the  Jewish  capital.  It  is  more  likely  that  he  had  long 
possessed  one,  but  that,  having  heard  in  Jerusalem  about  the  death  and  resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus,  he  may  have  been  examining  the  prophecies  to  ascertain  how  far 

o  193 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


these  had  been  fulfilled  in  Christ's  person  and  work  (Hackett).  Anyhow,  he  had 
just  arrived  at  a  passage  in  the  narrative  for  which  he  felt  the  need  of  an 
interpreter  when  he  encountered  Philip,  whom,  the  moment  before,  he  could 
hardly  have  expected  to  find  in  a  solitude  like  that  through  which  he  was 
passing.  But  this  also  was  of  the  Lord.  5.  The  Eunuch's  occupation  at  the 
moment  of  Philip's  appearance.  Not  merely  reading  but  reading  aloud,  which 
furnished  Philip  with  an  opportunity  and  an  excuse  for  striking  in  with  a  query 
— "  Understandest  thou  what  thou  readest  ?  " — which  perhaps  he  could  not 
otherwise  so  readily  have  done.  6.  The  Spirit's  direction  to  Philip  to  approach 
the  Eunuch.  Although  Philip  had  been  sent  to  the  desert  road  from  Samaria — 
not  from  Jerusalem  (Zeller) — by  an  angel,  he  had  not  been  instructed  by  the 
angel  as  to  what  was  the  object  of  his  journey.  Even  when  the  opulent  African 
appeared,  he  could  not  be  certain  that  his  mission  related  to  a  personage  so 
great  without  further  instructions.  These,  however,  were  conveyed  to  him  by 
a  special  inspiration  :  "  The  Spirit  said  to  him,  Go  near  and  join  thyself  to  this 
chariot "  ;  and  with  that,  of  course,  all  hesitation  vanished.  It  is  worth  observ- 
that  this  is  "  the  first  mention  in  the  Acts  of  that  inner  prompting  of  the  Spirit 
which  is  referred  to  again,  probably  in  xiii.  2,  but  certainly  in  x.  19,  xvi.  6,  7  " 
(Alford).  Such  inward  guidance  is  not  unknown  to  Christians  yet.  7.  The 
Eunuch's  request  to  Philip  to  ascend  his  chariot.  Had  the  Eunuch  resented 
Philip's  inquiry,  which  from  a  worldly  or  at  least  modern  point  of  view  was  not 
remarkably  polite,  there  had  been  no  conversation  and  no  conversion ;  but 
being  anxious  to  understand,  and  perhaps  solicitous  about  salvation,  and 
obviously  humble  withal,  the  distinguished  official  did  not  discern  any  lack  of 
courtesy  in  Philip's  question,  or,  if  he  did,  he  passed  it  over,  and,  like  one  willing 
to  be  taught,  invited  Philip  to  ascend  and  sit  beside  him.  And  so  the  providential 
chain  was  complete. 

II.  Effected  by  the  word. — If,  as  already  suggested,  the  Eunuch's  conversion 
from  heathenism  to  Judaism  was  brought  about  by  a  believing  study  of  the 
Old  Testament  Scriptures,  through  the  same  instrumentality  was  he  now  to  be 
led  over  from  Judaism  to  Christianity.  1.  By  the  word  read.  Or  heard.  Salva- 
tion is  not  a  magical  or  supernatural  transformation  to  be  effected  on  the  soul 
without  intelligent  co-operation  on  its  part,  but  an  inward  moral  and  spiritual 
renewal  which  can  be  carried  through  solely  by  means  of  the  truth.  In  accord- 
ance with  this  the  Eunuch  was  engaged  in  reading  the  fifty-third  chapter  of 
Isaiah  when  Philip  met  him.  Modern  critics,  on  what  seems  to  the  present 
writer  altogether  insufficient  grounds,  have  decided  that  the  passage  named  was 
not  penned  by  the  son  of  Amos  but  by  an  unknown  prophet  who  lived  towards 
the  close  of  the  exile ;  but  it  is  obvious  that  this  was  not  the  view  taken  either 
by  the  Ethiopian  treasurer  who  was  groping  his  way  out  of  heathen  darkness, 
or  by  Philip  the  Christian  deacon,  who  at  the  moment  was  under  the  special 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  by  Luke  the  evangelist,  whom  the  Holy  Ghost 
employed  to  record  the  incident.  2.  By  the  word  understood.  Mere  reading 
without  intelligent  apprehension  can  effect  nothing.  Hence  the  question  of  the 
deacon  was  directed  towards  ascertaining  whether  the  Eunuch  comprehended 
the  import  of  what  his  eye  followed  and  his  tongue  uttered ;  and  on  learning 
that  he  did  not,  immediately  the  deacon  undertook  the  office  of  expounding  to 
him  the  sense  of  the  sacred  text.  The  Eunuch  could  indeed  perceive  that  the 
prophet  spoke  of  a  suffering  servant  of  Jehovah ;  what  was  not  apparent  was 
whether  that  suffering  servant  should  be  identified  with  the  prophet  himself 
or  with  another.  That  he  was  neither,  but,  as  the  newer  critical  school  asserts, 
the  people  of  Israel,  did  not  occur  to  either  the  Eunuch  or  the  Deacon.  Both 
sought  him  in  an  individual,  and  that  individual  Philip  told  his  distinguished 
scholar  was  Jesus,  whose  death  was  foreshadowed  in  the  prophet's  language, 

194 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  vm. 


which  pointed  out — (1)  the  meekness  of  it  on  Christ's  part — "  He  was  led  as  a 
sheep  to  the  slaughter,"  etc. ;  (2)  the  iniquity  of  it  on  the  part  of  those  by 
whom  it  was  compassed — "  In  His  humiliation  His  judgmeut  was  taken  away," 
meaning  that  "  through  oppression  and  a  judicial  sentence  he  was  taken  away  " 
— i.e.,  the  rights  of  justice  and  humanity  were  denied  Him,  or  in  other  words  He 
was  judicially  murdered ;  (3)  the  fruitfulness  of  it  in  the  number  of  spiritual 
descendants  secured  by  means  of  it  to  Christ — "Who  shall  declare  His  generation1?" 
or  "  Who  shall  count  the  number  of  His  posterity  ?  "—  a  translation  which  the 
Hebrew  will  support,  though  another  rendering  makes  it  equivalent  to  the 
preceding  thought — "  who  shall  declare  the  wickedness  of  His  contemporaries  1  " 
and  (4)  the  triumph  of  it,  inasmuch  as  through  it  His  life  was  taken  away  from 
the  earth,  not  merely  by  a  violent  death,  but  by  exaltation  to  heaven — "  for  His 
life  is  taken  from  the  earth  "  (Luke's  translation  is  from  the  LXX.,  and  every 
clause  in  ver.  33  has  been  debated  by  interpreters ;  but  as  all  the  above  render- 
ings are  possible,  they  may  be  used  as  representing  the  course  of  evangelical 
instruction  through  which  Philip  put  the  Eunuch).  3.  By  the  word  believed. 
As  salvation  comes  not  by  reading  or  hearing  where  understanding  is  wanting, 
so  neither  does  it  result  from  understanding  where  faith  does  not  ensue.  The 
truth  concerning  Jesus  must  be  accepted  as  correct,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  testimony, 
and  relied  on  by  the  heart's  trust  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  means  of  salvation.  Faith 
in  Scripture  is  always  more  than  intellectual  assent.  It  involves  as  well  cordial 
reliance  on  Him  of  whom  the  testimony  speaks.  This  faith  was  unquestionably 
exhibited  by  the  Eunuch. 

III.  Accompanied  by  confession. — The  particular  mode  in  which  the  Eunuch 
avowed  his  acceptance  of  Christianity  was  by  submitting  to  the  rite  of  baptism, 
concerning  which  four  things  may  be  noticed.  1.  The  place  where  the  rite  was 
performed.  Not  otherwise  indicated  than  by  the  circumstance  that  in  its 
immediate  vicinity  was  "  a  certain  water,"  it  cannot  now  be  identified,  although 
Euseb,ius  and  Jerome  have. decided  for  Bethsur  (Josh.  xv.  58;  ISTeh.  iii.  16),  near 
Hebron,  about  twenty  miles  south  of  Jerusalem,  and  two  from  Hebron,  against 
which  stands  no  improbability  ;  but  rather  for  which  may  be  urged  that  a 
fountain  named  Ain-Edh-Dhirweh  rises  near  the  town,  which  still  retains  the 
old  name  in  a  slightly  altered  form,  Beit-Sur.  Other  sites  have  been  selected,  as 
Ain-Haniyeh,  about  five  miles  south  of  Jerusalem,  and  a  Wady  in  the  plain  near 
T ell-el- Hasy.  2.  The  talk  before  the  rite  was  performed.  Drawing  attention  to 
the  water  by  the  wayside,  the  Eunuch  expressed  a  wish  to  be  baptised,  from 
which  it  has  been  inferred  that  Philip  must  have  enlightened  him  concerning 
the  nature  and  necessity  of  baptism.  Of  this,  however,  he  may  have  learnt  in 
Jerusalem.  Philip's  reply  must  have  been  something  like  that  contained  in 
ver.  37,  though  by  the  best  MSS.  this  is  omitted.  Yet,  if  spurious,  the  insertion 
must  have  been  as  old  as  Irenaeus,  who  cites  the  words  without  misgiving. 
Meyer  thinks  they  have  been  culled  from  some  baptismal  liturgy,  to  show  that 
the  Eunuch  was  not  baptised  without  a  formal  profession  of  his  faith  (see  "  Hints 
on  ver.  37  ").  3.  The  mode  in  which  the  rite  was  'performed.  It  is  commonly 
asserted  that  the  words  "  and  they  went  down  both  into  the  water  "  imply  that 
the  Eunuch  was  immersed ;  but  if  "  into  the  water  "  signifies  that  the  Eunuch 
was  immersed  then  as  Philip  went  down  into  the  water,  in  company  with  the 
Eunuch,  Philip  also  must  have  been  immersed  ;  while  if  Philip  could  have  gone 
down  into  the  water  without  being  immersed,  it  is  obvious  that  the  Eunuch 
could  have  done  the  same.  The  impromptu  character  of  the  baptism  suggests 
something  simpler  than  immersion,  most  likely  sprinkling  or  pouring.  4.  What 
happened  after  the  rite  was  performed.  The  Alexandrian  text  reads,  "  And  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  the  Lord  fell  on  the  Eunuch,"  which  may  have  been  inserted  to 
harmonise  the  incident  with  theological  requirements  (see  i.  5),  or  with  what  was 

195 


chap.  vni.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


supposed  to  have  usually  occurred  after  baptism  (ii.  38) ;  but  the  Samaritans 
were  not  endowed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  immediately  after  baptism  (ver.  16),  and 
the  gracious  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  in  the  heart  of  a  believer  is  not  necessarily 
connected  with  baptism  (Eph.  i.  13).  What  did  occur  was  that  Philip  was 
miraculously  caught  away  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  from  the  Eunuch's  side,  as 
Old  Testament  prophets  had  often  been  supernaturally  rapt  from  the  eyes  of 
beholders  (1  Kings  xviii.  12  ;  2  Kings  ii.  16),  as  Paul  afterwards  was  caught  up 
into  the  third  heaven  (2  Cor.  xii.  2,  4),  and  as  the  then  living  believers  will  foe 
caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air  at  His  second  coming  (1  Thess.  iv.  17). 
By  that  (mysterious)  departure  the  Eunuch's  faith  could  scarcely  fail  to  be 
confirmed  (Bengel),  unless  indeed  it  was  a  purely  natural,  though  sudden  and 
impulsive  withdrawal  on  the  part  of  Philip  (Zeller,  Hackett,  Plumptre,  Olshausen, 
Meyer),  in  which  case  its  effect  upon  the  Eunuch  would  rather  seem  to  have  been 
disturbing.  But  the  appended  statement  that  Philip  was  found  at  Azotus,  or 
Ashdod,  one  of  the  principal  cities  of  the  Philistines  near  the  sea-coast,  rather 
points  to  a  miraculous  removal  (Bengel,  Alford,  Stier,  Spence,  Lechler,  Holtzmann, 
Zockler). 

IV.  Followed  by  joy. — Though  the  Eunuch  no  more  beheld  the  evangelist 
he  went  on  his  way  rejoicing,  thus  showing  that  the  change  which  had  passed 
upon  him  was  independent  of  the  agent  by  whose  mediation  it  had  been  effected. 
The  causes  of  the  chamberlain's  rejoicing  may  be  set  down  as  four,  1.  He  had 
found  the  true  object  of  worship.  This  in  a  manner  he  had  known  before, 
inasmuch  as  the  object  of  his  journey  to  Jerusalem  had  been  to  worship  Jehovah, 
but  since  meeting  with  Philip  he  had  learnt  that  Jehovah  had  revealed  Himself 
in  Jesus  Christ,  "  the  image  of  the  invisible  God  "  (Col.  i.  15),  "  the  brightness 
of  His  Father's  glory  and  the  express  image  of  His  person  "  (Heb.  i.  3),  as  the 
supreme  and  sole  object  of  adoration.  2.  He  had  found  the  key  to  the  Bible. 
Before  he  encountered  Philip  the  Bible  which  he  read  had  been  a  dark  book  to 
him  i  after  his  conversation  with  Philip  he  discovered  that  he  had  obtained  a 
light  which  enabled  him  to  peruse  its  prophecies  with  understanding.  "  The 
golden  key  to  the  Psalter "  says  Bishop  Alexander,  "  lies  in  the  pierced 
hand."  The  same  key  unlocks  the  mysteries  of  the  law  and  the  prophets. 
"  Moses  wrote  of  Me,"  said  Christ  (John  v.  46) ;  and  of  the  prophets  Peter 
affirms  "  The  Spirit  of  Christ  was  in  them  "  (1  Peter  i.  11).  3.  He  had  found  a 
personal  Saviour.  The  faith  professed  by  th,e  Eunuch  was  more  than  a  bare 
intellectual  assent  to  the  truths  propounded  by  Philip.  It  was  a  heart  reception 
of  Jesus  whom  Philip  had  set  forth  as  the  Redeemer.  It  was  a  trust  which 
reposed  on  His  death  as  a  true  atonement  for  sin,  and  looked  to  His  resurrection 
as  the  source  of  spiritual  life  for  his  soul.  It  was  a  faith  that  might  have  said 
"  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,"  etc.  (Gal.  ii.  20).  A  faith  which  enabled  him  to 
rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus  (Phil.  iii.  3)  as  his  Saviour  and  friend.  4.  He  had  found 
a  blessed  gospel  for  his  countrymen.  On  his  upward  journey  to  Jerusalem  he  was 
only  treasurer  of  Candace,  the  Queen  of  the  Ethiopians ;  on  his  downward  way 
he  had  become  a  treasurer  of  the  King  of  kings,  and  was  bearing  to  his 
benighted  countrymen,  in  the  name  of  that  King,  riches  more  precious  than  all 
the  wealth  of  Ethiopia,  the  joyful  tidings  that  for  them,  too,  had  arrived  a  day 
of  salvation,  and  a  heavenly  Saviour  who  could,  and  would,  rescue  them  from 
sin  and  misery,  if  only  they  put  their  trust  in  Him.  Tradition  preserves  the 
Eunuch's  name  as  Indich,  and  credits  him  with  being  the  first  to  preach  the 
gospel  in  Ethiopia,  even  converting  Queen  Candace,  after  which  he  departed  to 
India  and  taught  in  Ceylon. 

Learn. — 1.  That  earnest  seekers  after  God  will  eventually  be  guided  into  the 
truth  concerning  God.  2.  That  the  best  companion  for  an  anxious  inquirer 
after  God  and  salvation  is  the  Bible.     3.  That  nothing  is  so  effective  for  conver- 

196 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap,  viil 


sion  work  as  the  story  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ.  4.  That  Old 
Testament  Scripture  was  intended  to  point  the  way  to  Christ.  5.  That  the 
ordinance  of  baptism  should  not  be  neglected  by  professed  disciples  of  Jesus 
Christ.  6.  That  the  mode  of  Christian  baptism  may  be  by  sprinkling  or  pouring 
as  well  as  by  immersion.  7.  That  no  joy  can  be  compared  to  the  joy  of 
salvation. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  26.  Angels. 

I.  Their  nature. — Spiritual  intelli- 
gences (Psalm  civ.  4). 

II.  Their  number. — Practically  be- 
yond reckoning  '(Psalm  lxviii.  17 ; 
Heb.  xii.  22;  Rev.  v.  11). 

III.  Their  dignity. — Superior  to  man 
(Psalm  viii.  5;  2  Peter  ii.  11),  they 
stand  in  God's  presence  (Psalm  lxviii. 
7;  Zech.  vi.  5  ;  Rev.  v.  11 ;  Matt,  xviii. 
10). 

IV.  Their  character. — 1.  Holy  (Dan. 
iv.  13, 17  ;  Matt.  xxv.  31;  Rev.  xiv.  10). 
2.  Reverential  (Isa.  vi.  2).  3.  Obe- 
dient (Isa.  vi.  2;  Matt.  vi.  10). 
4.  Powerful  (Psalm  ciii.  20  ;  2  Thess. 
i.7). 

V.  Their  employment.  —  1.  Wor- 
shipping God  (Neh.  ix.  6) ;  Psalm 
cxlviii.  2;  Lukcii.  13  ;  Rev.  iv.  8).  2. 
Doing  God's  will  (Psalm  ciii.  21 ;  Matt, 
vi.  10).  3.  Studying  the  man  if  old  wisdom 
of  God  (Eph.  iii.  10;  1  Peter  i.  12). 
4.  Rejoicing  in  the  conversion  of  sinners 
(Luke  xv.  10).  5.  MinisteriDg  to  the 
heirs  of  salvation  (Heb.  i.  14),  as,  for 
instance  (to  mention  only  cases  that 
occur  in  the  Acts),  to  the  disciples  at 
Christ's  ascension  (i.  10,  11),  to  Peter 
and  John  (v.  19),  to  Philip  (viii.  26),  to 
Cornelius  (x.  7),  to  Peter  (xii.  8),  to 
the  Church  in  the  destruction  of  Herod 
(xii.  23),  to  Paul  on  ship  board 
(xxvii.  23). 

Ver.  27.  The  Heavenly  Treasure. 
L  Where    it    was    found.      On    a 
solitary  way  through  the  desert. 

II.  The  chest  that  contained  it. 
The  Scripture  with  its  dark  sayings 
and  seals. 

III.  The  key  which  opened  it.  The 
preaching  of  Philip. 

IV.  The  jewel  which  sparkled  to 
him.  Christ  who  died  for  our  sins  and 
rose  again  for  our  justification. 


V.  The  seal  of  possession.  Granted 
to  him  by  baptism. 

VI.  The  joy  which  it  occasioned. 
That  of  forgiveness  and  salvation. — 
Adapted  from  Gerok. 

Ver.  28.  Bible  Reading. — A  duty. 

I.  Divinely  commanded.  —  Even 
Christians  forget  this ;  but  see  Deut. 
vi.  6,  xvi.  19,  xxxi.  11;  Josh.  i.  8; 
John  v.  39;  2  Peter  i.  19. 

II.  Greatly  neglected. — Not  by  the 
unbelieving  world  only,  but  also  by  the 
professed  followers  of  Christ. 

III.  Highly  profitable. — Imparting 
light,  strength,  and  joy  to  such  as 
practise  it  (Psalm  xix.  11  ;  Prov.  vi. 
23  ;  Rom.  xv.  4  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  16). 

Ver.  30.  Three  Questions  about  the 
Bible. 

I.  Readest  thou  what  thou  hast  ? — 

1.  Thou  hast  the  Bible,  which  is  the 
word  of  God,  and  worthy  of  being  read. 

2.  It  was  given  thee  to  be  read,  and 
cannot  be  neglected  without  sin.  3.  If 
not  read  it  will  one  day  testify  against 
thee. 

II.  Understandest  thou  what  thou 
readest? — 1.  It  supposes  that  we  read 
the  Bible — which  is  good.  2.  It  dis- 
closes to  us  our  natural  blindness — 
which  is  better.  3.  It  excites  us  to  seek 
the  true  interpreter  and  guide — which 
is  best. 

III.  Obeyest  thou  what  thou  under- 
standest?— 1.  What  is  not  understood 
cannot  be  obeyed.  An  extenuation  of 
the  sins  of  the  heathen  and  the  ignorant. 
2.  What  is  understood  is  designed  to  be 
obeyed.  Hence  arises  the  responsibility 
of  the  enlightened.  3.  If  what  is 
understood  is  not  obeyed,  it  will  entail 
upon  the  disobedient  both  loss  and  guilt. 
No  duty  can  be  neglected  without 
inflicting  hurt  upon  the  disobedient  as 

197 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


well  as  exposing  him  to  punishment. — 
Adapted  from  Gerok. 

Vers.  28-31.  Four  Marvels. 

I.  A  courtier  reads. — Here  deplore 
the  sad  neglect  of  education  on  the 
part  of  many  and  the  little  attention 
paid  to  books  even  by  not  a  few  great 
men. 

II.  A  courtier  reads  the  Bible. — 
Comment  upon  the  melancholy  want 
of  religious  sentiments  in  mankind  and 
the  inattention  paid  to  the  Bible. 

III.  A  courtier  owns  himself 
ignorant  of  his  subject. — A  good  sign 
and  a  happy  omen  of  coming  enlighten- 
ment and  progress  wherever  it  appears, 
but  one  seldom  present  in  those  who 
fill  exalted  stations  in  life. 

IV.  A  courtier  applies  to  a  minister 
of  Christ  for  information  and  follows 
his  counsel.  The  right  thing  to  be 
done  by  such  as  require  instruction, 
but  an  example  too  seldom  followed. — 
Adapted  from  a  well-known  incident. 

Vers.  32,  33.   The  Sufferings  of  Jesus. 

I.  Foretold  in  Scripture. — The  hope 
and  consolation  of  Israel. 

II.  Realised  in  history.— The  atone- 
ment for  a  world's  sin. 

III.  Preached  in  the  Gospel.— The 
greatest  moral  force  on  earth. 

IV.  Believed  in  by  a  sinner. — The 
source  of  his  individual  salvation. 

Ver.  39.  The  Ethiopian  Eunuch. 

I.  The  character  he  bore. — 1.  A 
professor  of  true  religion.  2.  A  man 
of  sincere  devotion.  3.  A  devout  lover 
of  the  Scriptures. 

II.  The  change  he  experienced. — 
1.  Ministerial  in  its  agent.  2.  Per- 
sonal in  its  principle.  3.  Practical  in 
its  influence. 

III.  The  happiness  he  obtained. — A 
joy  of — 1.  Heartfelt  gratitude.  2. 
Gracious  experience.  3.  Glorious  an- 
ticipation. 

Lessons. — 1.  Religion  not  confined 
to  any  class  or  condition.  2.  The 
insufficiency  of  a  form  of  godliness 
without  its  power.  3.  The  influence 
of  piety  upon  its  subjects. 

198 


The  Joyful  Traveller  on  his  way 
Home. 

I.  Where  did  his  joy  come  from  ?— 
He  had  not  brought  it  with  him.  It 
came  from  what  he  heard  from  Philip, 
or  rather  from  what  he  read  in  Isaiah. 
But  how  did  that  statement  bring  him 
joy  %  It  told  him  of  a  Sin-bearer, — 
long-predicted,  come  at  length.  What 
he  read  was  as  blessed  as  it  was  true. 

II.  Where  should  our  joy  come 
from? — From  the  same  testimony  to 
the  same  finished  work.  The  sinner 
is  not  happy.  His  sin  comes  between 
him  and  joy.  That  burden  must  be 
removed  ere  he  can  taste  of  joy ;  and 
it  can  only  be  removed  by  approaching 
the  cross.  Why  is  there  so  little  joy 
among  Christians?  1.  Not  because 
God  does  not  wish  them  to  have  it.  It 
is  not  forbidden  fruit.  2.  Not  because 
joy  dishonours  Him.  Gloom  dishonours 
God ;  joy  honours  Him.  3.  Not  be- 
cause joy  is  not  safe  for  us  to  have. 
True  joy  is  the  safest  of  all  things. 
It  makes  a  man  stedfast  and  earnest. 
4.  Not  because  God 's  sovereignty  inter- 
poses. 5.  Not  because  joy  was  not 
meant  for  these  days.  6.  Not  because 
it  unnerves  us  for  work.  "  The  joy  of 
the  Lord  is  our  strength."  It  is  joy 
from  God ;  joy  in  God ;  it  is  the  joy  of 
God.  To  all  this  we  are  called.  That 
which  we  possess  is  full  of  joy.  The 
present  favour  and  love  of  God.  That 
which  we  hope  for  is  full  of  joy. — H. 
Eonar,  D.D. 

Vers.  26-39.  The  Eunuch  from 
Ethiopia  ;  or.  Words  to  Seekers  after  God. 

I.  God  must  be  sought  where  He 
has  graciously  been  pleased  to  reveal 
Himself. — The  Eunuch  understood  this, 
and  sought  Jehovah.  L  In  the 
temple  at  Jerusalem,  and,  2.  In  the 
sacred  Scriptures.  And  in  like  man- 
ner seekers  after  God  to  day  must  seek 
Him  in  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of 
the  invisible  God  (2  Cor.  iv.  4 ;  Col.  i. 
15),  or,  first,  in  the  Scriptures  which 
testify  of  Christ  (John  v.  39),  and 
second,  in  the  Christian  sanctuary, 
where  believers  speak  of  Christ 
(1  Cor.  i.  2). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  VIII. 


II.  Seekers  after  God  are  never  un-  equal  number  are  undesigned,  like 
observed  by  Him  whom  they  seek.—  that  of  Elijah  and  Obadiah  (1  Kings 
As  Jehovah  saw  the  Eunuch  start  upon  xvi.  7),  that  of  Paul  and  Aquila 
his   journey   to   Jerusalem  and  again  (xviii.  2),  and  others. 

upon  his  homeward  track,  and  knew  II.    Frequently   at    most    unlikely 

exactly  all  that  was  in  his  heart  and  times  and  places. — Probably  the  last 

what  he    more    particularly    required,  place  in  the  world  that  either  Philip  or 

so  does   He  still  behold  from  heaven  the  Eunuch  would  have  expected  to  meet 

every  soul  that  is  inquiring  after  Him,  each  other  would  be  the  desert  road  to 

whether  within  or  without  the  pale  of  Gaza.      Had  intimation  been  conveyed 

Christendom  (Prov.  xv.  3;  Jer.  xxxii.  to  them  beforehand  that  they  were  to 

19;  Heb.  iv.  13).  cross   each   other's  paths,  it  is  barely 

III.  It  is  certain  tfyat  they  who  seek  likely  that  either  would  have  pitched 
God  with  their  whole  hearts  will  ulti-  upon  the  Judaea n  wilderness  for  the  spot, 
mately  find  Him. — That,  on  the  word  or  after  the  breaking  up  of  the  Jewish 
of  Jehovah  (Jer.  xxix.  13),  and  of  festival  for  the  time.  But  the  unex- 
Jesus  (Matt.  vii.  7).  As  Jehovah's  pected  is  that  which  mostly  hap- 
angel  (ver.  26),  servant  (ver.  26),  and  pens,  so  little  prescient  is  man  of  the 
Spirit  (ver.  29)  were  all  set  in  motion  to  future. 

secure  that  the  rich  treasurer  should  not  III.     Always     providentially     ar- 

fail  in  his  quest,  so  will  God  by  the  same  ranged. — "  It    is    not    in    man    that 

Spirit,  and  if  not  by  the  same  minister  walketh    to    direct    his    steps  "    (Jer. 

by  the  same  truth  which  he  taught,  x.    23).       "  Man's   goings   are   of   the 

and   if   not   by  visible  angels  by  the  Lord  "  (Prov.  xx.  24).     This  was  sig- 

same  providence  meet  the  earnest  soul  nally  illustrated  in  the  experiences  of 

who  is  longing  after  Him  (Isa.  Ixiv.  5 ;  both  Philip  and  the  Eunuch,  who  were 

Matt.  v.  4).  brought  together  not  by  chance  but  by 

TV.  When  seekers  have  found  God  heavenly  guidance. 
they  should  make  public  acknowledge  IV.  Sometimes  fraught  with  mo- 
ment of  the  same. — Not  hiding  their  mentous  consequences. — As  was  the 
joy  in  their  bosoms,  but  giving  it  free  meeting  of  Philip  and  the  Eunuch,  to 
expression,  letting  it  be  known,  not  the  former  of  whom  it  presented  a 
only  for  the  honour  of  God,  but  for  the  glorious  opportunity  of  preaching  the 
encouragement  of  souls  in  a  similar  gospel,  and  of  leading  a  soul  into  the 
seeking  condition.  light,    and  to   the   latter    an   equally 

glorious   opportunity   of    finding   that 

Vers.  27-29.  Philip  and  the  Eunuch ;  which  he  sought,  the  pearl  of   great 

or,  Meetings  on  the  Highway  of  Life.  price,  even  Jesus,  and  with  Him  the 

Such  meetings  are —  salvation  of  his  soul. 

I.    Often  accidental.— At   least    to  Lesson. — Be  on  the  outlook  for  life's 

appearance.     When   Philip  arose  and  chances,   study  their  significance,  and 

went  from  Samaria,  and  the  Eunuch  endeavour   to   use  them   for  heaven's 

se  this  face  toward  Ethiopia,  neither  purposes, 
had  the  least  idea  of  encountering  each 

other.     Many  meetings  are,  of  course,  Vers.  26-40.  Philip  the  Deacon;  or, 

purposed  at  least  by  one  of  the  parties,  the  Characteristics  of  a  good  Evangelist. 

as,  e.g.,  that    of  Melchisedek  and  the  — These  may   be   summed  up   in    the 

King  of  Sodom  with  Abraham  (Gen.  motto,     semper    paratus,    or,    always 

xiv.  17,  18),  that  of  Joseph  with  his  ready.     Ready — 

father  (Gen.  xlvi.  29),  that  of  Moses  I.  To  go  where  God  sends,  whether 

with  Jethro  (Exod.  xviii.  1-7),  that  of  the  order  comes  through  a  natural  or 

Saul  with  Samuel  (1  Sam.  xiii.  10),  and  a      supernatural      channel,     whether 

that   of   the   Roman    Christians  with  through  a  vision,  as  with  Paul  (xvi.  9), 

Paul   (xxviii.    15) ;    but   probably   an  or  through  an  angel,  as  with  Philip. 

199 


chap.  vm.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


"Here  am  I,   send  me"  (Isa.   vi.  8), 
should  be  his  constant  attitude. 

II.  To  listen  to  the  promptings  of 
God's  Spirit,  which  will  come  to  him 
as  they  came  to  Philip  and  again  to 
Paul  (xvi.  7),  if  only  he  train  himself 
to  recognise  them  and  discipline  himself 
to  follow  them.  It  is  the  Holy 
Spirit's  province  to  lead  the  people  of 
Gcd  (Pom.  viii.  14),  and  He  never 
fails  to  guide  them  who  hearken  to 
His  counsels. 

III.  To  take  advantage  of  every 
opportunity  of  preaching,  or  teaching, 
the  gospel  that  Providence  may  open, 
as  did  Philip  when  he  met  the 
Eunuch,  and  as  did  Paul  in  Ephesus 
(1  Cor.  xvi.  9).  The  good  evange- 
list will  lie  in  wait  for  such 
(2  Tim.  iv.  2). 

IV.  To  expound  whatever  portion 
of  Scripture  is  presented  to  him,  which 
will  require  him  to  be  a  diligent 
student  of  the  word  of  God,  as  Paul 
counselled  Timothy  to  be  (1  Tim.  iv. 
13-15).  Ignorance  of  Scripture  ab- 
solutely inexcusable  in  one  whose  office 
it  is  to  instruct  others. 

V.  To  direct  inquiring  souls  to 
Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  central  theme 
of  Scripture  and  to  bring  souls  to 
whom  is  the  end  of  all  preaching.  The 
minister  or  evangelist  that  does  not 
know  how  to  point  anxious  inquirers 
to  Christ  has  mistaken  his  calling. 

VI.  To  assist  young  converts  in 
making  public  confession  of  their  faith, 
as  Philip  did,  when  he  administered 
the  rite  of  baptism  to  the  Eunuch, 
whose  faith  might  otherwise  have 
wanted  confirmation  and  eventually 
declined. 

VII.  To  hide  himself  behind  his 
Master,  as  Philip  was  taught  to  do, 
when  he  was  suddenly  caught  away  by 
the  Spirit  so  that  the  Eunuch  saw  him 
no  more.  Evangelists  are  only  instru- 
ments in  conversion ;  the  sole  agent  is 
the  Spirit.  Hence  the  glory  of  any 
conversion  belongs  not  to  the  evangelist 
but  to  the  Spirit.  Nor  does  the 
convert  longer  need  the  instrument, 
while  he  must  never  be  parted  from 
the  Spirit. 

200 


Philip  and  the  Ethiopian. 

I.  Certain  characteristics  of  his 
work. — 1.  His  implicit  obedience  to 
the  Spirit.  The  angel  said,  "  Arise  and 
go."  He  arose  and  went.  His  faith 
must  have  been  severely  tested.  He 
was  preaching  in  a  city  already  deeply 
roused.  A  revival  was  in  progress. 
The  joy  of  the  new  converts  was  spread- 
ing the  spiritual  fire.  The  people  of 
Samaria  were  in  just  the  condition  to 
receive  the  gospel,  and  it  seemed  as  if 
he  was  the  one  appointed  messenger  to 
proclaim  it  to  them.  The  angel  that 
commanded  him  to  go  from  the  revived 
city  into  the  desert  did  not  disclose  the 
object  of  his  journey.  But  Philip  knew 
whence  the  message  came,  and  without 
question  into  the  desert  he  went.  But 
some  things  concerning  that  guidance 
may  be  noted.  It  is  always  in  perfect 
accord  with  the  Scriptures.  Philip 
might  well  be  prompt.  His  work  was 
greater  than  that  of  the  angel.  2.  His 
eagerness  to  impart  the  gospel.  Those 
who  love  souls  as  Christ  did,  find 
opportunities  to  tell  them  of  Christ's 
salvation.  Whatever  openings  we  see, 
we  must  press  into.  They  are  abun- 
dant. No  one  lives  where  souls  are 
still  unsaved,  where  God  does  not  open 
a  way  for  him  to  cany  the  gospel. 
Take  the  first  step,  and  God  will  point 
out  the  next.  3.  His  usable  know- 
ledge of  the  Scriptures.  Philip  had 
made  no  immediate  preparation  for 
that  lesson,  but  he  knew  what  was  in 
it.  He  had  prepared  himself  for  such 
emergencies,  both  by  experience  and 
study.  He  seized  the  heart  of  it,  and 
opened  its  meaning  to  his  hearer. 
This  scholar  felt  that  his  teacher  was 
in  earnest,  and  in  earnest  for  him. 
The  teacher's  heart  was  kindled  with 
the  presence  of  the  Lord.  This  is  living, 
potent  teaching.  The  great  central 
theme  of  it  is  Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour 
of  sinners.  It  is  most  effective,  even 
with  the  indifferent  and  unbelieving. 
There  are  many  graces  and  virtues  and 
duties  taught  in  the  Bible  as  essential 
to  Christian  character,  but  the  entire 
revelation  of  God  is  pervaded  by  one 
life.     As  the  human  body  has  arteries, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  vm. 


veins,  muscles,  and  other  organs,  but 
all  dependent  on  the  heart's  blood, 
which  supplies  the  life,  so  the  mighty 
complex  system  of  revealed  truth  has 
for  its  centre  Christ. 

II.  Some  of  the  Christian  labourer's 
rewards  as  illustrated  in  this  lesson. 
— 1.  He  finds  a  heart  prepared  to 
receive  the  truth.  He  hungered  for  a 
new  convert.  We  cannot  always  judge 
who  are  most  likely  to  receive  the 
truth.  Sometimes  the  message  is  new 
to  an  old  man  who  has  heard  preaching 
all  his  life,  and  to  the  earnest  teacher 
on  the  watch  for  all  opportunities  is 
given  the  inestimable  privilege  of  lead- 
ing him  to  Christ.  Philip  expected 
immediate  results.  It  was  not  his 
purpose  to  sow  the  seed  and  be  content 
to  leave  it.  He  led  the  Eunuch  on  from 
willingness  to  learn  to  eagerness  to  be 
a  recognised  disciple  of  Jesus.  He 
found  the  way  to  his  pupil's  conscience 
and  heart.  Such  a  reward  is  Divine. 
We  never  forget  the  triumphs  of  such 
moments.  The  pathway  of  those  who 
turn  many  to  righteousness  will  be  as 
the  shining  light  in  their  memories. 
2.  He  found  new  evidence  of  being  a 
co-worker  with  God.  His  interest  was 
quickening  in  one  soul ;  but  he  was 
only  one  link  in  the  chain  of  God's 
mighty  purpose  to  save  that  soul.  The 
angel,  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  messenger 
called  aside  from  a  great  work,  were 
all  intent  on  one  individual.  Only 
occasionally  is  the  curtain  lifted  for  us 
to  view  the  operations  of  God's  provi- 
dence to  save  men ;  but  He  has 
provided  for  every  inquirer  complete 
satisfaction,  and  for  every  faithful 
worker  sufficient  help.  What  a  reward 
is  the  evidence  that  God  makes  the 
efforts  of  His  faithful  servant  effective  ! 
What  a  fact  is  always  revealed  to  the 
unconverted  soul  in  this  lesson  !  God 
is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish. 
He  has  here  for  once  shown  His  work- 
ing while  the  sinner  is  seeking.  His 
angel  is  sent  on  an  errand  to  earth  for 
the  sake  of  one  man.  His  minister  is 
called  away  from  a  revival  into  the 
desert.  A  special  word  from  the  Holy 
Spirit   directs   that    minister    on    his 


errand.  All  this  is  to  show  to  one 
soul  that  Jesus  has  already  died  to 
save  him.  3.  Philip  secured  a  witness 
for  the  gospel.  That  which  he  was  so 
eager  to  make  known  would  now  be 
proclaimed  by  another  also  ;  for,  when 
a  miracle  of  healing  had  been  wrought 
in  the  Eunuch,  of  course  he  wanted  to 
confess  who  had  healed  him.  He  who 
believes  he  is  accepted  by  Christ,  will, 
of  course,  want  to  receive  baptism  and 
unite  with  the  followers  of  Christ. 
There  was  no  presumption  in  this.  It 
was  not  a  profession  of  his  religion, 
but  a  confession  of  his  faith.  To  lead 
another  soul  into  real  fellowship  with 
this  great  company  is  a  heavenly  re- 
ward. They  who  strive  for  it  prize  it 
above  earthly  joys.  4.  Philip  filled  a 
life  with  joy.  The  Eunuch  went  on  his 
way  rejoicing.  That  great  desire  of  his 
heart  was  satisfied.  But,  wherever 
Philip  goes,  he  leaves  a  trail  of  joy 
behind  him.  Samaria  rejoices  in  his 
presence :  so  did  also  the  desert.  He 
left  happy  hearts,  at  peace  with  God, 
wherever  he  went.  Could  there  be  a 
higher  reward  than  this? — Monday 
Club  Sermons. 

Vers.  27-40.  Philip  and  the  Ethio- 
pian. 

I.  Philip's  ready  response. — We 
know  not  the  exact  kind  of  call  which 
brought  him  from  Samaria  way — 
possibly  angelic  and  supernatural ;  but 
as  the  word  may  mean  any  messenger, 
the  message  may  have  come  from  a 
vision  of  the  night,  or  by  the  voice  of 
a  friend,  or  by  the  inward  and  yet 
real  compulsion  of  a  spiritual  convic- 
tion. At  any  rate  Philip  knows,  as  any 
level-headed  Christian  man  may  know, 
what  duty  is  and  where  it  lies.  And 
he  had,  what  many  of  us  lack,  the 
grace  of  promptitude  in  Christian 
service.  Why  go  to  Africa?  1.  Be- 
cause the  marching  orders  say  "Go." 
2.  And  secondarily,  because  it  pays 
to  obey  orders — scientifically,  archaeo- 
logically,  commercially,  socially,  histori- 
cally, and  spiritually.  Such  spon- 
taneous, willing  response  as  Philip's  to 
this  call  into  desolate  Gaza  is  an  index 

201 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


of  the  healthy,  unselfish  character  of  desert.  We  never  know  along  what 
his  Christian  life.  This  promptitude  road  God's  providences  are  coming,  the 
of  response  is  not  only  self -registering  way  of  the  desert  or  the  way  of  the 
as  to  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the  cross,  in  the  desolate  border  town  or  in 
obedience  that  is  in  us,  but  it  is  a  "  Jerusalem  the  Golden,"  and  therefore 
tremendous  advertisement  to  all  we  must  travel  all  roads, 
lookers-on  of  the  vitality  and  joy  of  III.  This  scene  illustrates  also  the 
the  gospel  itself.  To  move  towards  part  which  the  incidental  experiences 
duty-doing  with  halting  steps,  as  of  life  play  in  the  interpretation  of 
children  drag  themselves  to  school  in  the  truth. — We  dwell  much  upon  the 
June  days,  is  to  lose  the  zest  of  service  light  which,  in  the  Leyden  pastor's 
and  its  reflex  influence  of  soul  cheer.  phrase,  shall  break  forth  from  the 
II.  God  always  matches  an  obe-  word  itself.  The  truth  does  grow 
dience  with  an  opportunity. — This  clearer  the  longer  we  look,  and  multi- 
incident  is  a  concrete  illustration  of  plies  itself  as  the  stars  do  in  the  night 
the  Divine  oversight  which  is  constantly  sky,  as  every  student  of  God's  Book 
mating  wings  and  air,  fins  and  water,  may  testify ;  but  to  the  rank  and  file 
in  a  world  of  providence  and  design,  of  Christian  disciples  the  sidelights  of 
and  teaches  us  that  when  God  sends  others'  experiences  are  more  ilium  i- 
a  call  he  also  blazes  a  path  for  our  nating  than  their  own  insight.  The 
feet — a  fact  of  Christian  philosophy  Ethiopian  was  in  darkness  with  the 
which  the  acts  of  all  Christian  apostles,  roll  of  prophecy  open  before  him,  until 
ancient  and  modern,  have  verified  for  Philip  poured  the  light  of  his  own 
nineteen  centuries.  You  speak,  after  eyes,  and  the  hopes  of  his  own  heart, 
long  hesitation  and  fear,  to  a  friend  upon  this  strange  vision  of  Isaiah, 
upon  the  theme  of  personal  religion,  when  suddenly  a  meaningless  chapter 
and  lo  !  you  find  him  waiting  for  your  in  a  familiar  prophet  glows  with  "  the 
word  and  ripe  for  your  wish.  You  light,  which  lighteth  every  man  that 
walk  out  upon  an  unfrequented  path  cometh  into  the  world."  Thus  we  all 
of  Christian  endeavour,  and  discover  grow  in  knowledge  and  in  grace,  more 
that  the  way  was  already  trodden  by  than  we  think,  through  the  experiences 
unseen  feet  before  you.  Philip  is  of  our  neighbours  and  the  insights  of 
called  into  the  desert  with  no  apparent  our  friends.  The  chance  conversations, 
purpose.  The  way  is  lonely  and  the  the  familiar  conference  and  prayer 
country  is  desolate — when  behold  !  a  meeting,  the  Bible  class,  the  passing 
royal  traveller  approaches,  troubled  comment,  the  public  providence  and 
over  the  great  question  of  the  ages —  the  personal  sorrow,  are  all  commen- 
what  to  do  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  tators  upon  the  eternal  truths.  Be- 
Here  is  Philip's  opportunity.  He  sides,  these  incidental  helps  are 
takes  it,  and  an  arrow  of  light  is  sent  unexpected  and  therefore  the  most 
into  upper  Egypt  from  this  bow,  drawn,  winsome  and  abiding.  We  venture  to 
as  we  say,  at  a  venture.  Obedience  is  think  that  Philip  here  on  the  highway 
the  pivotal  thing  ;  God  takes  care  of  was  more  influential  with  this  stranger 
the  rest.  This  factor  of  providence  than  he  would  have  been  the  preceding 
in  Christian  service  must  not  be  over-  Sabbath  in  the  synagogue  at  Jerusalem . 
looked,  for  it  will  inspire  us  with  He  found  his  man  off  guard  and  natural, 
courage  and  a  sense  of  companionship  as  a  pastor  may  find  his  people  in 
as  we  go  upon  out-of-the-way  pilgrim-  their  daily  perplexities,  or  the  teacher 
ages  and  take  up  heavy  burdens,  her  scholar  in  his  out-of-door  natural- 
With  this  lesson  of  Divine  plan  in  life  ness. 

and  all  its  ministries,  every  Divine  call  IV.  The    teachable    temper     with 

will  have  such  large  possibility  as  to  which  this  Ethiopian  faces  new  truth, 

warrant  no  delay  or  selfish  balancing  — He  hears  strange  news  in  Jerusalem, 

of   accounts   for  the  triumphs  of  the  news  which  blights  the  most  cherished 

202 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  vm. 


hopes  of  an  ancient  race.  Suspension 
of  judgment,  a  patient  waiting  for 
light,  and  an  earnest  spirit  of  search, 
these  are  the  characteristics  of  this 
treasurer  of  Candace — characteristics 
which  we  need  in  the  nineteenth 
century  as  in  the  first :  for  each 
generation  has  to  travel  a  new  path 
and  solve  a  new  problem,  and  the 
Ethiopian,  rather  than  the  Pharisee, 
is  the  type  of  the  world's  hope. — 
William  H.  Davis. 

Vers.  26-46.  The  Conversion  of  the 
Ethiopian  Eunuch. 

I.  Notice  the  method  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  with  the  evangelist  Philip. 

II.  We  turn  now  to  the  Spirit's 
method  with  the  Ethiopian  Eunuch, 
for  further  illustration  of  our  subject. 
— Here,  then,  you  see  the  first  step  in 
the  dealing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  with  the 
Ethiopian  Eunuch.  It  was  to  reveal 
to  him  the  vanity  of  earthly  good  as  a 
means  of  support  for  the  soul ;  it  was 
to  bring  the  conviction  of  need,  guilt 
and  peril ;  it  was  to  make  him  dis- 
contented with  himself  and  the  world, 
and  to  fill  his  heart  with  longings  for 
the  favour  of  God  and  the  forgiveness 
of  sin.  To  this  vague  yearning  for 
goqd  God  has  added  a  deep  sense  of 
personal  sin,  and  has  led  him  to  the 
sincere  use  of  means  in  prayer  and  the 
study  of  His  revealed  word.  In  the 
same  way  does  the  Spirit  of  God  now 
and  ever  incline  sinners  to  act. 

III.  Consider  the  harmony  of  these 
two  methods  of  influence  in  their  final 


adjustment. — As  the  obedient  Christian 
stands  waiting  on  the  highway,  and  as 
the  anxious  heathen  comes  on  in  his 
chariot  reading  the  prophet  Isaiah,  the 
well-timed  plan  of  God  approaches  its 
consummation.  The  preacher  had 
been  brought  there  to  find  his  audience, 
the  convicted  sinner  had  been  brought 
there  to  hear.  This  subject  of  the 
conversion  of  the  Ethiopian  eunuch 
imparts  several  practical  lessons. 
1.  We  see  by  it  how  important  it  is 
that  Christians  should  yield  prompt 
obedience  to  the  impulses  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  and  especially  to  those  which 
impel  them  to  present  Christ  to  the 
impenitent.  2.  This  lesson  shows  us 
the  importance  of  personal  guidance  for 
the  inquiring  and  anxious  mind. — Had 
the  eunuch  turned  from  Philip  or 
failed  to  hear  the  word  of  counsel  from 
his  lips,  he  would  have  lost  the  saving 
grace  of  God.  3.  Our  subject  also  shows 
us  the  simplicity  of  saving  faith. 
"  Believe  with  thy  whole  heart,"  was 
Philip's  word,  and  the  Eunuch  answered, 
"  I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
Son  of  God."  Here  is  the  touchstone 
of  all  sincere  desire.  What  doth  hinder  ? 
Nothing  but  your  will  stands  in  the 
way,  and  it  is  your  duty  to  bend  that 
will  in  an  instant  submission  before 
God.  Mark  the  blessedness  of  faith 
and  the  joy  of  pardoned  sins  as  here 
displayed  !  See  the  Eunuch  on  his 
way  rejoicing  with  a  joy  that  just 
begins,  and  that  will  go  on  increasing 
through  eternal  ages  ! — R.  R*  Booth, 
D.D. 


203 


CHAP.  IX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Preparations  for  a  Gentile  Mission — the  Calling  of  a  New  Apostle. 

A.  The  Conversion  of  Saul. 

§  1.  The  Miracle  near  Damascus;  or,  the  Arrest  of  the  Persecutor  (vers.  1-9), 

§  2.  The  Mission  of  Ananias ;  or,  the  Baptism  of  Saul  (vers.  10  J 9). 

§  3.  Saul  at  Damascus ;  or,  the  Persecutor  turned  Preacher  (vers.  20-25). 

§  4.  Saul's  First  Visit  to  Jerusalem;  or,  his  Discipleship  confirmed  (vers.  26-31). 

B.  The  Wanderings  of  Peter. 

§  5.  With  the  Saints  at  Lydda ;  or,  the  Healing  of  Eneas  (vers.  32-35). 

§  6.  Among  the  Disciples  at  Joppa ;  or,  the  Raising  of  Dorcas  (vers.  36-43). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  And  should  be  hut  directing  attention  once  more  to  Saul.  Breathing  out. — 
Breathing  in  better  renders  the  verb  eixirveoov,  threatening  and  slaughter  describing:  the 
atmosphere  inhaled.  That  Saul,  a  Pharisee  of  the  straitest  sect  (xxvi.  5),  went  unto  the  high- 
priest,  a  Sadducee,  revealed  the  intensity  of  his  rage.  Whether  the  high-priest  in  question 
was  Annas  or  Caiaphas,  deposed  in  a.d.  35  (Meyer)  or  36  (Olshausen),  Jonathan  a.d.  36-37, 
Ananus's  son,  his  successor,  or  Theophilus,  who  followed  his  brother  in  A.D.  37-38,  depends 
on  the  year  of  Saul's  conversion,  which  is  uncertain. 

Ver.  2.  The  letters  asked  were  not  commendatory  epistles  merely,  but  legal  warrants  for 
search  and  apprehension.  Damascus. — In  Hebrew,  Dammeseh  ;  in  Assyrian,  Dimaski  and 
Dimaska  ;  in  Arabic,  Dimeschk-esch-Sehdm,  or  shortly,  esch-Scham.  The  oldest  existing  city 
in  the  world,  the  ancient  capital  of  Syria,  145  miles  north-east  of  Jerusalem,  then  contained 
a  large  number  of  Jews,  many  of  whom  were  fugitives  from  persecution  (viii.  1-4).  Paul's 
route  uncertain  (see  "  Homiletical  Analysis").  To  or  unto  the  synagogues  meant,  of  course, 
their  presiding  officers  (Luke  viii.  49),  and  perhaps  the  elders  or  presbyters  associated  with 
them  (Luke  vii.  3).  Of  this,  rather  the  way. — I.e.,  of  the  Christian  profession,  faith,  manner 
of  life,  etc.  Compare  xvi.  17,  xviii.  25,  xix.  0-23,  xxii.  4,  xxiv.  14-22.  This  name  given  by 
the  early  Christians  to  themselves,  in  remembrance,  doubtless,  of  Christ's  words,  "  I  am  the 
Way." 

Ver.  3.  He  came  near  should  be  it  came  to  pass,  about  noon  (xxii.  6),  that  he  drew  nigh,  a 
Hebraistic  form  of  expression.  A  light  from  (awb)  should  be  a  light  out  of  (e/c)  heaven. — 
This  was  the  "glory  "  of  Jesus  (xxii.  6). 

Ver.  4.  He  fell. — Probably  from  the  animal  on  which  he  rode.  Compare  xxii.  7.  xxvi.  14 
represents  his  companions  as  having  all  fallen  at  the  same  time. 

Ver.  5.  Lord. — Could  not  as  yet  have  had  in  Paul's  lips  its  full  significance.  Some  MSS. 
write,  "of  Nazareth,"  or  "the  Nazarene,"  after  Jesus.  The  clause,  it  is  hard  for  thee,  etc., 
has  been  inserted  here  from  xxvi.  14. 

Ver.  6.  All  codices  begin  this  verse  with  But  rise,  as  in  xxvi.  16.  The  preceding  words, 
"and  he  trembliDg  and  astonished,"  etc.,  have  also  found  their  way  into  the  text  from  the 
later  accounts. 

Ver.  7.  Stood  speechless,  dumb  through  terror,  contradicts  not  the  statement  (xxvi.  14) 
that  Saul's  companions'  all  fell  to  the  ground,  nor  is  the  phrase  hearing  a,  or  the  voice  or 
sound,  inconsistent  with  the  declaration  (xxii.  9)  that  they  heard  (in  the  sense  of  understood) 
not  the  voice  of  Him  that  spake  unto  him. 

Ver.  8.  And  when  his  eyes  were  opened,  by  the  lifting  up  of  his  eyelids  which  had  shut 
themselves  before  the  dazzling  light,  he  saw  no  man,  not  "  from  whom  the  voice  came  " 
(Bengel),  but  none  of  his  companions,  or  nothing  (Pt.V.),  he  was  blind.  This  blindness,  while 
not  like  that  of  Elymas  (xlii.  11),  a  punishment,  and  not  intended  to  symbolise  his  ante- 
cedent spiritual  blindness  (Calvin,  Grotius,  Bengel),  nevertheless  reminds  one  of  the  dumb- 
ness inflicted  on  Zach arias  (Luke  i.  20,  22). 

Ver.  10.  That  Ananias  (see  on  v.  1)  was  one  of  the  Seventy  is  an  unsupported  conjecture  ; 
that  he  was  a  "devout"  man  Saul  afterwards  asserts  (xxii.  12)  ;  that  he  had  previously  heard 
of  Saul  he  himself  declares  (ver  13).  Luke  styles  him  a  disciple,  but  leaves  unrecorded  whether 
his  conversion  occurred  before  or  after  Pentecost.     Not  the  Ananias  mentioned  by  Josephus 

204 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  ix. 


{Ant.,  XX.  ii.  4)  as  a  Jewish  merchant,  who  converted  Izates,  King  of  Adiabene,  to  the 
faith  of  Israel. 

Ver.  11.  The  street  which  is  called  Straight. — This  name  is  still  borne  by  a  street  in 
Damascus,  which  runs  westward  from  the  East  gate,  dividing  the  Christian  from  the  Jewish 
quarter.  (See  Picturesque  Palestine,  vol.  ii.,  p.  175.)  "  The  houses  of  Ananias  and  of  Judas 
are  still  shown "  (Ibid.,  p.  179).  "  The  '  street  that  is  called  Straight,'  near  the  Jewish 
quarter,  still  merits  its  ancient  name,  as  it  traverses  the  entire  city  in  a  right  line " 
(  Wanderings  in  the  Holy  Land,  by  Adelia  Gates,  chap.  xv.).  Tarsus. — First  mention  of  Saul's 
birthplace.     See  on  ver.  30. 

Ver.  12.  In  a  vision  is  omitted  in  the  best  MSS.  Putting  his  hand  on  him  should  be  laying 
the  hand,  or  hands,  on  him,  in  token  of  the  benefit  about  to  be  conferred.  Compare  vi.  6,  and 
contrast  xii.  1,  where  a  similar  phrase  denotes  the  infliction  of  injury. 

Ver.  13.  I  have  heard. — Perhaps  through  letters  received  from  Christians  at  Jerusalem,  or 
through  statements  made  by  Saul's  companions. 

Ver.  15.  A  chosen  vessel. — Lit.  a  vessel  of  choice.    A  common  Hebrew  idiom.     Kings. — 
Paul  witnessed  before  the  governors  of  Cyprus   (xiii.  7),  Achaia  (xviii.  12),  and   Judaea 
(xxiv.  10,  xxv.  6) ;  before  Herod  Agrippa  (xxvi.  12),  and  probably  before  Nero  (2  Tim.  i.  16). 
Ver.  16.  I  will  show  him  may  signify  either  by  revelation  (De  Wette),  or  more  likely  by 
experience  (Bengel). 

Ver.  17.  And  Ananias  .  .  .  said. — Ananias's  address  is  more  fully  reported  in  xxii.  12-16. 
Brother. — Not  by  nationality  merely  (ii.  29,  xxi.  1,  xxviii.  17),  but  by  grace. 

Ver.  18.  As  it  had  been,  but  not  in  reality.     Scales. — Compare  ii.  3,  vi.  15.     Luke  would  no 
doubt  derive  this  information  about  the  sensation  Saul  experienced  from  the  apostle  himself. 
Ver.  19.  Certain  days. — Those  which  followed  immediately  on  his  recovery  of  sight  were 
spent  in  intercourse  with  the  disciples,  but  not  in  learning  from  them  the  gospel  he  after- 
wards preached  (Gal.  i.  12). 

Ver.  20.  And  straightway  he  preached  Christ. — Not  after  his  return  from  Arabia 
(Plumptre),  but  after  his  conversion  and  during  or  at  the  end  of  the  certain  days.  Paul's 
preaching  at  this  stage  was  not  of  an  apostolic  or  missionary  character,  but  merely  an  argu- 
mentative setting  forth  of  the  Divinity  and  Messiahship  of  Christ. 

Ver.  22.  The  visit  to  Arabia  (Gal.  i.  17)  is  best  inserted  here  (Holtzmann,  Zockler) 
During  it  Saul  increased  the  more  in  strength,  and  on  returning  to  Damascus  confounded  the 
Jews  there  by  his  preaching. 

Ver.  23.  Some  interpreters  (Neander,  Meyer,  Hackett)  find  room  for  the  Arabian  visit  in 
the  many  days  of  this  verse. 

Ver.  24.  The  gates  were  watched  by  means  of  a  garrison  of  soldiers  (2  Cor.  xi.  32).  The 
impression  made  upon  Paul's  mind  by  this,  the  earliest  of  his  persecutions,  may  be  gathered 
from  his  allusion  to  it  long  after  in  his  letter  to  the  Corinthians. 

Ver.  25.  The  should  be  his  disciples,  Saul  having  already  drawn  around  himself  a  body  of 
converts.  Let  him  down  by  a  wall  in  a  basket  should  be  let  him  down  through  the  wall — i.e., 
through  the  window  of  a  house  upon  or  overhanging  the  wall  (2  Cor.  xi.  33),  lowering  him  in 
a  basket.  That  Saul's  friends  used  a  basket  accorded  with  the  present  customs  of  the 
country.  "  It  is  the  sort  of  vehicle  which  people  employ  there  now,  if  they  would  lower  a 
man  into  a  well  or  raise  him  into  the  upper  story  of  a  house  "  (Hackett). 

Ver.  27.  Barnabas  (iv.  36)  appears  here  as  the  patron  of  Saul,  whom  he  takes  by  the  hand 
(not  literally,  but  metaphorically),  and  introduces  to  the  apostles. 

Vers.  28,  29,  should  read  :  And  he  was  with  them  going  in  and  going  out — i.e.,  publicly  and 
privately, — at  Jerusalem  preaching  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Saul  stayed  in  Jerusalem 
not  more  than  fifteen  days  (Gal.  i.  18). 

Ver.  29.  Grecians,  or  Greek-speaking  Jews. — These  were  addressed  by  Saul  probably  because 
he  himself  was  a  foreign  Jew,  or  because  they  may  have  been  present  in  large  numbers  in 
the  metropolis  attending  a  feast,  but  chiefly  (might  it  not  be  ?)  because  they  belonged  to  the 
synagogues  or  synagogue  which  murdered  Stephen  (vi.  9).  They  went  about  to  kill  him. — 
Compare  xxii.  17-21,  in  which  the  motive  for  his  withdrawing  from  Jerusalem  is  represented 
not  as  the  murderous  designs  of  the  Jews,  but  a  vision  in  the  temple.  But  the  two  accounts 
are  by  no  means  inconsistent. 

Ver.  30.  Caesarea. — See  on  viii.  40.  Tarsus. — Upon  the  monuments  of  Shalmanezer  II., 
about  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century  B.C.,  Tarzi  (Schrader).  The  capital  of  Cilicia 
(xxi.  39).  Founded,  according  to  tradition,  by  Sennacherib  (705-681  B.C.).  After  the  fall  of 
the  Assyrian  empire  it  became,  under  Persian  supremacy,  the  seat  of  the  Syennesian  princes 
of  Cilicia.  In  Alexander's  time  it  was  the  residence  of  a  Persian  satrap,  and  in  that  of  the 
Diadochi,  an  important  place  of  the  Seleucidse.  Under  the  old  Caesars  Cilicia  was  conjoined 
with  Syria  ;  but  Hadrian  restored  it  to  the  dignity  of  an  independent  province  with  Tarsus 
as  its  chief  town.  In  the  time  of  Saul  Tarsus  was  the  seat  of  one  of  the  most  celebrated 
schools  of  philosophy  and  philology.  "  Strabo,  a  contemporary  of  Saul's,  names  a  whole 
series  of  famous  teachers  out  of  Tarsus,  who  all  belonged  to  the  first  half  of  the  first  Christian 

205 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


century,  and  says  :  '  So  great  zeal  for  philosophy,  and  for  the  circle  of  all  other  sciences,  have 
the  inhabitants  of  this  town  that  they  have  surpassed  even  Athens  and  Alexandria,  and, 
indeed,  every  other  place  where  schools  of  philosophy  and  learning  exist ' "  (Langhans, 
Biblisclie  Geschichte  und  Liter  atur,  ii.  704). 

Yer.  32.  Lydda.— The  Old  Testament  Lod  (Neh.  vii.  37,  xi.  35  ;  1  Chron.  viii.  12),  now  called 
Lucid.  Described  by  Josephus  {Ant.,  XX.  vi.  2)  as  a  village  "  not  less  than  a  city  in  largeness." 
Named  Lydda  in  1  Mace.  xi.  34.  After  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  it  is  often  mentioned. 
Besides  being  the  seat  of  a  Christian  community,  it  possessed  for  some  time,  like  Jabne  close 
by,  a  Rabbinical  school.  (See  Riehm's  Handworterbueh  des  Biblischen  Allertums :  art. 
Lod.) 

Ver.  35.  Saron,  or  Sharon,  the  Plain,  meant  the  north  half  of  the  flat  end  lying  along  the 
Mediterranean  shore,  from  Lydda  in  the  south  to  Carmel  in  the  north.  "  The  whole  goodly 
plain  of  Sharon  is  visible — from  Mount  Carmel  on  the  north  down  to  Lydda,  from  the  eastern 
hills  to  the  blue  sea,  now  bathed  in  gold — a  wilderness  of  weeds  and  thorn  brakes,  and  yet 
a  very  paradise  of  colour  and  ever  varying  beauty  "  {Picturesque  Palestine,  iii.,  146). 

Ver.  36.  Joppa,  or  Japho  (Jon.  i.  3),  in  Assyrian  inscriptions  Ja-ap-pu ;  at  the  present  day, 
Jaffa  or  Jafa,  meaning  "the  beautiful,"  or,  according  to  another  derivation,  "the  height." 
A  seaport  of  great  antiquity,  twelve  miles  north-west  of  Lydda,  originally  allotted  to  Dan 
(Josh.  xix.  46).  Here  was  landed  the  timber  for  the  temple  in  Solomon's  time  (2  Chron. 
ii.  16),  and  in  Ezra's  (iii.  7).  Here  Jonah  embarked  to  go  to  Tarshish  (Jon.  i.  3),  and  here 
Peter  received  the  messengers  of  Cornelius  (x.  5).  Tabitha's  tomb  is  still  shown.  It  is 
popularly  identified  with  the  Sebil  of  Abu  Nabut,  who  was  governor  of  Joppa  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  present  century.  Close  to  it  was  discovered,  by  M.  C.  Clermont  Ganneau, 
in  1874,  the  ancient  cemetery  of  Jaffa,  containing  many  rock-cut  tombs,  the  circle  of  earth 
including  them  being  known  as  Ard  Dabitha.  the  land  of  Dabitha  {Picturesque  Palestine, 
iii.,  143).  Herr  Schick  thinks  Tabitha  was  most  likely  buried  in  this  cemetery  (Palestine 
Exploration  Fund,  Quarterly  Statement,  January  1894,  p.  14).  Tabitha. — A  Chaldee  term 
signifying  "  Gazelle."  Its  Greek  equivalent,  Dorcas,  occurs  in  Xen.,  Anab.,  I.  v.  2.  Whether 
this  amiable  lady  was  a  widow  or  a  virgin  does  not  appear  from  the  context.  The  exact 
site  of  her  house  is  now  lost  (Herr  Schick,  as  above,  p.  14). 

Ver.  43.  Simon  a  tanner. — "  The  Latin  monastery  in  Joppa  is  said  to  occupy  the  site  of 
Simon's  house,  but  a  little  Mohammedan  mosque  or  sanctuary  by  the  seaside  claims  to  be 
the  house  itself"  {Picturesque  Palestine,  iii.,  142s).  "The  house  itself  is  a  comparatively 
modern  building,  with  no  pretensions  to  interest  or  antiquity."  "  It  is  close  on  the  seashore, 
the  waves  beating  against  the  low  wall  of  its  courtyard"  (Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine, 
p.  274).  Herr  Schick  thinks  the  modern  building  may  stand  not  far  from  the  real  site 
(Palestine  Exploration  Fund,  Quarterly  Statement,  January  1894,  p.  14).  Peter,  by  taking 
up  his  abode  with  a  brother  Christian  who  was  a  tanner — the  trade  being  commonly  regarded 
as  unclean — took  a  long  step  towards  ceremonial  freedom.  The  Tubingen  critics  find  one 
proof  for  their  tendency  theory  in  the  name  Simon,  which  was  borne  both  by  the  apostle  and 
the  tanner,  as  if  such  a  coincidence  could  not  be  historical,  and  another  in  the  correspondence 
between  the  story  of  Dorcas,  on  the  one  hand,  and  those  of  Lydia  (xvi.  15)  and  Eutychus 
(xx.  9-12),  on  the  other,  for  these  two  require  to  be  combined  to  constitute  an  exact  Pauline 
parallel  to  the  Petrine  episode. 

HOMILETIC 1AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—9. 

The  Miracle  near  Damascus  ;   or,  the  Conversion  of  Saul. 

I.  Saul's  journey  to  Damascus. — 1.  The  object  of  it.  To  persecute  the  followers 
of  Christ,  to  harry  the  disciples  of  the  Crucified  not  out  of  Palestine  merely,  but 
out  of  the  world  as  well,  and  with  this  end  in  view  to  bring  any  of  "  the  way," 
i.e.,  of  the  New  Religion  (see  "Critical  Remarks"),  he  might  find,  whether  men 
or  women,  bound  to  Jerusalem.  2.  The  spirit  of  it.  More  than  breathing  out, 
Saul  was  breathing  in  threatenings  and  slaughter,  inhaling  persecution  and 
murder  as  his  soul's  and  body's  atmosphere,  feeding  upon  blood  and  carnage, 
stuffing  himself  full  of  rage  and  violence,  which  might  be  ready  for  disgorging 
upon  the  unhappy  victims  of  his  diabolical  crusade,  which  was  meant  to  be 
thoroughgoing,  sparing  neither  sex  nor  age,  and  sticking  at  nothing  short  of 
imprisonment  and  death.  3.  The  authorisation  of  it.  Saul  carried  with  him 
letters  from  the  Jewish  high-priest  (Annas,  or  Caiaphas,  Jonathan,  or  Theo- 
philus ;  see  "  Critical  Remarks  "),  commending  him  to  the  rulers  of  the  various 
synagogues  in  Damascus,  and  empowering  him  (with  their  help)  to  search  out 

206 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  ix. 


and  seize  any  Nazarenes  who  might  have  attached  themselves  to  these  places  of 
worship,  and  to  fetch  them  bound  to  Jerusalem.  The  historic  credibility  of  this 
statement  has  been  vindicated  by  recalling  the  circumstance  that  on  the  death 
of  Tiberius,  in  a.d.  37,  Damascus  passed  from  the  hands  of  the  Romans  into  those 
of  Hareth,  of  Petra,  who,  in  order  to  keep  the  Jews  quiet,  made  concessions  to 
their  autonomy,  and  every  concession  was  simply  a  permission  to  commit  further 
religious  violences  (Penan,  The  Apostles,  p.  155).  4.  The  prospect  of  it.  No 
emissary  of  the  Inquisition — -no  Thomas  de  Torquemada  of  Spain — ever  had  a 
better  chance  of  success.  If  brilliant  reputation,  ardent  zeal,  absolute  power, 
best  wishes  of  friends  and  contemporaries  who  were  all  seized  with  a  passion  of 
hatred  against  the  Christians,  could  have  furthered  Saul's  expedition,  these 
without  exception  stood  upon  his  side.  5.  The  prosecution  of  it.  Imagination 
can  easily  picture  the  setting  forth  from  Jerusalem  of  the  Hebrew  Claverhouse 
and  his  companions,  all  of  them  mounted,  as  the  old  masters  have  represented, 
upon  high-mettled  and  richly  caparisoned  steeds.  The  route  pursued  may  have 
led  either  by  Bethel  to  Neapolis,  then  across  the  Jordan  near  Scythopolis,  thence 
to  Gadara,  and  on  through  the  Hauran  to  Damascus ;  or  along  the  base  of 
Tabor,  through  the  Jordan  a  few  miles  above  Tiberias,  then  up  by  Csesarea 
Philippi,  and  on  to  Damascus  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  vol.  i.,  81). 

II.  Saul's  experience  near  Damascus. — 1.  His  inward  cogitations.  Though 
not  recorded  by  Luke,  nor  afterwards  mentioned  by  Saul  himself,  these,  it  has 
been  supposed,  were  of  such  sort  as  unconsciously  to  prepare  for  the  sudden  and 
unexpected  transformation  that  took  place  within  the  persecutor's  soul.  Stephen's 
earnest  discourse,  to  which  he  most  likely  listened,  setting  forth  the  transitory 
character  of  the  temple  worship  and  its  true  fulfilment  in  the  person  and  work 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  must,  it  is  said,  have  secretly  poured  a  flood  of  light  upon 
his  understanding,  from  which  he  could  never  again  escape,  and  upon  which  he 
probably  often,  and  almost  unconsciously  to  himself,  pondered  ;  while  Stephen's 
death  which  he  witnessed,  and  Stephen's  prayers  which  he  heard,  more  than 
probably  helped  to  drive  his  half -formed  intellectual  convictions  inward  upon  his 
heart  and  conscience.  Indeed,  proceed  those  who  hold  this  view,  it  is  hardly  too 
much  to  say,  that  already  in  the  interior  of  Saul's  soul  the  spiritual  revolution 
had  begun,  in  the  shape  of  acute  intellectual  and  heart  impulses  which  almost 
unconsciously  urged  him  to  recognise  that  truth  and  right  were  on  the  side  of 
the  followers  of  Jesus,  and  which  he  could  not  resist  without  a  painful  sense  of 
doing  violence  to  conscience.  A  certain  countenance  is  given  to  this  representa- 
tion by  the  words  addressed  to  Saul  by  Christ :  "  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick 
against  the  goads  "  ;  and  there  seems  no  good  reason  for  refusing  to  recognise  in 
it  a  measure  of  truth,  provided  it  is  not  pressed  so  far  as  to  deny  the  objective 
reality  of  Christ's  appearance  to  the  persecutor ;  but  after  all  it  is  doubtful  if 
this  was  the  view  taken  by  Saul  himself  of  the  mode  of  his  conversion  (compare 
Weizs'acker,  i.  90).  2.  His  outward  arrestment.  (1)  The  locality  where  this 
occurred  was  the  vicinity  of  the  city.  The  view  of  Damascus  as  seen  by  one 
approaching  it  from  the  south  is  described  by  travellers  as  of  surpassing  beauty. 
"  It  is  true  that  in  the  apostle's  clay  there  were  no  cupolas  and  no  minarets. 
Justinian  had  not  built  St.  Sophia,  and  the  caliphs  had  erected  no  mosques  ;  but 
the  white  buildings  of  the  city  gleamed  then,  as  they  do  now,  in  the  centre 
of  a  verdant  inexhaustible  paradise.  The  Syrian  gardens,  with  their  low  walls 
and  waterwheels,  and  careless  mixture  of  fruits  and  flowers,  were  the  same  then 
as  they  are  now.  The  same  figures  would  be  seen  in  the  green  approaches  to  the 
town,  camels  and  mules,  horses  and  asses,  with  Syrian  peasants,  and  Arabs  from 
beyond  Palmyra  "  {The  Life  and  Epistles  of  Paul,  by  Conybeare  and  Howson, 
i.,  85,  86).  (2)  The  time  of  this  arrestment  was  midday  (xxii.  6,  xxvi.  13). 
"The  birds  were  silent  in  the  trees,,  the  hush  of  noon  was  in  the  city,  the 

207 


chap.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


sun  was  burning  fiercely  in  the  sky,  the  persecutor's  companions  were 
enjoying  the  cool  refreshment  of  the  shade  after  their  journey ;  and 
his  eyes  rested  with  satisfaction  on  those  walls  which  were  the  end 
of  his  mission,  and  contained  the  victims  of  his  righteous  zeal "  (Conybeare 
and  Howson,  i.,  86).  (3)  The  manner  of  his  arrestment  was  sudden  as  a 
flash  of  lightning.  So  shall  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  be  (Luke  xvii.  24). 
(4)  The  instrument  was  "a  light  out  of  heaven"  (ver  3),  "from  heaven  a  great 
light  "  (xxii.  6),  "  a  light  from  heaven  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun  "  (xxvi.  13) 
— no  mere  flash  of  lightning,  but  a  shining  forth  of  the  Divine  glory  which  en- 
compassed the  exalted  Saviour  (ver.  17).  (5)  The  agent  was  Christ.  Saul 
himself  believed  this.  3.  His  interview  with  Christ.  (1)  That  Saul  actually 
beheld  the  glorified  Redeemer  may  be  inferred  from  Luke's  statement  that  Saul's 
companions  saw  no  man  (ver.  7),  and  is  expressly  declared  by  Ananias  (ver.  17, 
xxii.  14),  Barnabas  (ver.  27),  and  Saul  himself  (1  Cor.  ix.  1,  xv.  8).  It  is  quite 
conceivable  also  that  while  the  dazzling  radiance  of  supernal  glory  struck  Saul's 
companions  at  once  to  the  earth,  Saul  himself  may  have  looked  into  the  light 
and  seen  the  form  of  the  Redeemer  before  he  fell  prostrate  on  the  ground 
(compare  Rev.  i.  17).  A  certain  measure  of  support  is  obtained  for  this  view 
from  the  circumstance  that  Saul  appears  in  after  life  to  have  suffered  from 
weakness  or  dimness  of  eyesight  (see  xiii.  9,  xxiii.  1;  Gal.  iv.  13-35,  vi.  11). 
(2)  That  Saul  heard  Christ's  voice  addressing  him  in  articulate  speech  is  with 
equal  emphasis  contained  in  Luke's  narrative,  and  in  Paul's  after  recitals,  and  is 
not  inconsistent  with  the  fact  that  Saul's  companions  only  heard  a  sound  but 
could  not  distinguish  words  (compare  John  xii.  29).  (3)  That  Saul  carried  on  a 
conversation  with  the  Risen  Redeemer  all  the  accounts  affirm.  Addressed  with  a 
twice  repeated  "  Saul  !  Saul  ! "  expressive  of  earnestness,  and  a  penetrating 
question,  indicative  of  solicitude,  "  Why  persecutest  thou  Me  ? "  he  responded 
with  an  inquiry,  "  Who  art  Thou,  Lord  1"  which  half  revealed  his  suspicion  that 
his  interlocutor  was  Stephen's  Lord  (vii.  59,  60);  and  was  in  turn  assured  that 
his  suspicion  was  correct,  that  the  speaker  who  interrogated  him  was  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  whom  he  persecuted,  after  which  he  was  directed  to  rise  and  go  into 
the  city,  where  it  would  be  told  him  what  he  should  do.  4.  His  actual  conversion. 
Indicated  in  the  narrative  by  his  rising  from  the  earth  and  entering  into  the  city 
in  obedience  to  Christ's  command  (ver.  8),  it  is  more  distinctly  set  forth  by  the 
question,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?"  (borrowed  from  chap.  xxii.  10), 
which  signalised  his  surrender — instantaneous,  swift,  clear,  decided,  complete, 
final — to  Jesus  as  his  Lord.  It  meant  the  shattering  of  all  his  former  views  as  a 
Pharisee,  concerning  not  worldly  ambition  alone,  but  the  grounds  of  acceptance 
and  justification  before  God.  It  lifted  self  out  of  the  seat  and  centre  of  authority 
in  all  his  after  life,  and  substituted  Christ  instead.  In  this  experience  lies  the 
essence  of  conversion. 

III.  Saul's  entrance  into  Damascus. — 1.  Helpless.  Different  from  the  fashion 
in  which  he  had  expected  to  pass  beneath  the  gateway  of  the  city,  he  was  led  by 
the  hands  of  his  companions,  who  must  have  been  astonished  at,  and  perplexed  by 
the  change  which  had  come  upon  their  leader.  2.  Blind.  Whereas  he  had 
purposed  to  ferret  out  with  searching  glance  the  hated  followers  of  Jesus  he  had 
been  so  dazzled  by  the  glory  that  his  eyesight  was  gone,  he  saw  neither  man  nor 
thing.  3.  Humbled.  He  had  intended  to  root  out  the  Christians  from  the  city, 
now  he  must  obtain  a  lodging  with  one  of  these  (ver.  11).  No  thoughts  now  of 
letters  for  the  high -priest.  4.  Saddened.  The  three  days  of  sightless  existence 
in  which  he  neither  ate  nor  drank  were  emblematic  of  his  spiritual^  condition. 
'*  Only  one  other  space  of  three  days'  duration  can  be  mentioned  of  equal  im- 
portance in  the  history  of  the  world."  .  .   .    (Conybeare  and  Howson,  i.,  90). 

Learn. — 1.  That  no  soul  is  beyond  the  reach  of  converting  grace.     2.  That 

208 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  IX. 


Christ  is  often  found  of  them  who  seek  Him  not.  3.  That  Christ  observes 
everything  that  transpires  on  the  earth.  4.  That  Christ  regards  persecution 
of  His  followers  as  equivalent  to  persecution  of  Himself.  5.  That  no  conversion 
is  complete  which  does  not  place  the  soul  entirely  at  Christ's  command.  6.  That 
the  things  of  the  Spirit  are  not  discernible  by  natural  men.  7.  That  Divine 
grace  is  sovereign  in  the  selection  of  its  objects. 

Note. — On  the  Credibility  of  the  Story  of  Paul's  Conversion. 

I.  It  is  not  denied  by  any  school  of  critics  that  such  a  man  as  Paul  lived  in 

the  opening  years  of  the  Christian  era,  or  that  he  was  converted,  meaning  by  this 
that  from  being  a  furious  and  fanatical  Pharisee  he  suddenly  became  a  follower 
of  Christ  and  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel  he  had  previously  opposed. 

II.  There  is  nothing  a  priori  impossible,  except  on  the  assumption  that  the 
supernatural  is  impossible,  in  the  account  given  by  Luke  in  the  present  narra- 
tive, that  what  converted  Paul  was  a  manifestation  to  him  on  the  Damascus  road 
of  the  risen  and  glorified  Christ — a  manifestation  not  internal  but  external,  not 
to  his  mind's  eye  but  to  his  bodily  sight. 

III.  The  account  given  by  Luke  is  confirmed,  first,  by  two  statements  that  are 
represented  as  having  fallen  from  Paul's  own  lips  in  public  addresses  given  by 
him  to  his  countrymen  in  Jerusalem  (xxii.  6-11),  and  to  Festus  and  Agrippa  in 
Csesarea  (xxvi.  12-18) ;  and  secondly,  by  three  shorter  but  substantially  equivalent 
statements  that  occur  in  two  of  his  acknowledged  epistles  (1  Cor.  ix.  1,  xv.  8  ; 
Gal.  i.  16).  Even  if  the  speeches  in  the  Acts  should  be  ascribed  to  Luke,  no  one 
can  doubt  that  the  allusions  in  the  letters  are  to  the  Damascus  miracle. 

IV.  The  alleged  contradictions  in  the  various  accounts  are  not  sufficient  to 
invalidate  their  united  testimony. — Accepting  these  contradictions  in  their 
strongest  form,  allowing  them  to  be  wholly  irreconcilable — which,  however,  they 
are  not — what  do  they  amount  to  ?  These — 1.  That  ix.  4  represents  Saul  as  the 
only  one  that  fell  to  the  earth,  with  which  xxii.  7  agrees,  whereas  xxvi.  14  says 
that  all  fell — i.e.,  Saul's  companions  as  well  as  himself.  2.  That  according  to  ix.  7 
the  men  who  journeyed  with  Saul  heard  a  voice,  which  according  to  xxii.  9  they 
heard  not.  3.  That  in  ix.  15,  17,  Saul's  call  to  be  an  apostle  is  made  known 
first  by  Christ  to  Ananias,  and  then  by  Ananias  to  Saul,  while  in  xxvi.  16-18  it  is 
communicated  directly  to  Saul  by  Christ  Himself.  For  the  solution  of  these 
tremendous  (!)  difficulties  the  Critical  Remarks  and  Homiletical  Analysis  maybe 
consulted.  But,  conceding  for  a  moment  that  they  could  not  be  satisfactorily 
removed,  is  it  not  simply  ridiculous  to  assert  that  unimportant  variations  such  as 
these,  which  do  not  in  the  smallest  degree  affect  the  central  fact  which  is 
affirmed  in  every  one  of  the  narratives,  are  sufficient  to  relegate  the  whole  story 
to  the  category  of  legend  ?  On  similar  principles  every  history  book  on  earth 
might  be  reduced  to  .a  collection  of  fables. 

V.  The  explanations  of  the  Damascus  occurrence  which  have  been  offered  are 
so  palpably  inadequate  that  it  may  be  seriously  questioned  if  those  who  put  them 
forth  believe  them.  1.  The  natural  explanations  of  the  older  rationalists  and  of 
their  present-day  followers  need  only  to  be  mentioned  to  be  set  aside.  That 
Christ  never  died  at  all  but  only  swooned  away  on  the  cross  and  revived  in  the 
sepulchre  (Paulus),  or  if  He  died  continued  twenty-seven  years  on  the  earth  after 
His  resurrection  (Bahrdt),  and  afterwards  appeared  to  Saul,  is  an  interesting 
speculation  of  no  value  whatever  as  a  contribution  to  theology  or  Biblical  exposi- 
tion. Scarcely  more  worthy  of  consideration  is  the  modern  hallucination  (Penan), 
that  Saul,  when  "in  a  state  of  great  excitement,"  partly  "  through  the  fatigue  of 
his  journey,"  partly  through  "  dangerous  fever  accompanied  by  delirium,"  partly 
through  "  remorse  as  he  approached  the  city  where  he  was  to  commit  the  most 
signal  of  his  misdeeds,"  was  suddenly   overtaken   by  a   thunderstorm    which 

p  209 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  THE  ACTS. 


frightened  and  converted  him.  2.  The  vision  theory  of  modem  critics,  more 
especially  of  the  Tubingen  School  (Baur,  Zeller,  Overbeck,  Pfleiderer,  Hausrath, 
Weizsacker,  and  others),  that  Saul's  mental  conflict  with  himself  concerning  the 
truth  of  Christianity,  his  growing  conviction  that  his  pharisaic  views  of  religion 
were  wrong,  and  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Christians  he  was  persecuting  were 
right,  combined  perhaps  with  the  remembrance  of  Stephen's  dying  utterances  and 
the  impressions  made  upon  him  by  the  martyr's  apology — that  all  these  things  so 
wrought  upon  Saul's  mind  as  to  raise  it  into  an  ecstatic  condition  which  caused 
it  to  project  its  own  subjective  conceptions  outside  of  itself,  so  as  to  make  them 
appear  objective  realities,  when  in  point  of  fact  they  were  only  images  of  the 
mind — this  theory  is  open  to  serious  objection.  (1)  It  is  difficult  to  perceive  how 
a  mental  vision  should  have  struck  the  Apostle  with  bodily  blindness.  (2)  It  is 
more  difficult  to  understand  how  a  vision  projected  from  within  could  have 
effected  the  complete  revolution  of  Paul's  character  and  life  implied  in  his  con- 
version, or  how  this  vision  could  be  said  to  have  caused  his  conversion,  and  not 
rather  his  conversion  to  have  caused  the  vision.  (3)  It  is  most  difficult  to 
realise  how  a  clear-headed  man  like  Paul  should  have  continued,  after  the  excite- 
ment had  passed,  to  represent  as  an  outward  objective  reality  what  he  must  have 
known,  on  reflection,  to  be  only  an  inward  imagination,  or  how  he  could  have 
placed  this  experience  on  a  level  with  the  "  seeings"  of  the  other  apostles,  and  of 
the  five  hundred  brethren,  unless  indeed  he  was  sure  that  they  also  had  seen 
Christ  only  in  vision. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Yer.  2.  Damascus. 

I.  The  oldest  city  in  the  world. — Its 

origin  lost  in  remote  antiquity.  Known 
to  have  been  in  existence  in  the  days  of 
Abraham.  "  In  the  midst  of  an  oasis 
of  verdure  rise  the  shining  crenellated 
walls  of  a  city  that  was  old  in  the  time 
of  Abraham,  the  steward  of  whose 
house  was  one  of  its  citizens  ;  old  when 
the  pyramids  were  young,  old  in  the 
dawn  of  history,  and  whose  beginning 
no  man  knoweth  with  certainty." — 
Wanderings  in  the  Holy  Land,  by 
Adelia  Gates,  chap.  xvi. 

II.  A  city  of  surpassing  beauty. — 
"  It  is  one  of  the  few  towns  of  antiquity 
that  have  never  lost  their  own  splen- 
dour and  renown.  By  Oriental  writers 
it  is  named  "  The  pearl  of  the  Orient, 
the  beautiful  as  Eden,  the  fragrant 
Paradise,  the  plumage  of  the  Paradise 
cock,  the  coloured  neck  of  the  ring 
dove,  the  neck  band  of  beauty,  the  gate 
of  the  Caaba,  the  eye  of  the  East,  the 
Eden  of  the  Moslem"  (Dr.  Wolff  in 
fiiehm's  Handivbrterbuch  des  Biblischen 
A  Itertums,  art.  Damascus).  "It  bursts 
upon  the  view  of  a  traveller  like  a 
vision  of  Paradise."    ''The  Damascenes 

210 


believe  that  the  Garden  of  Eden  was 
located  there,  and  that  the  clay  of 
which  Adam  was  formed  was  taken 
from  the  banks  of  the  Abana."  When 
Mohammed  saw  the  city  and  gardens 
below  in  all  their  enchanting  beauty, 
he  turned  away  saying,  "  Man  can  have 
but  one  Paradise,  my  Paradise  is  fixed 
above."  Buckle,  the  historian,  who 
"  beheld  the  city  from  the  same  place 
only  a  fortnight  before  his  death  in 
1862,  exclaimed,  "This  is  indeed 
worth  all  the  toil  and  danger  it  has 
cost  me  to  come  here "  [Picturesque 
Palestine,  ii.,  143,  144).  "  There  may 
be  other  views  in  the  world  more 
beautiful ;  there  can  hardly  be  another 
at  once  so  beautiful  and  instructive" 
(Stanley's  Sinai  and  Palestine,  p.  414i). 
"  Damascus  occupies  one  of  those  sites 
which  nature  seems  to  have  intended 
for  a  perennial  city  ;  its  beauty  stands 
unrivalled,  its  richness  has  passed  into 
a  proverb,  and  its  supply  of  water  is 
unlimited,  making  fountains  sparkle  in 
every  dwelling." — Dr.  J.  L.  Porter. 

III.  A  historically  interesting  city. 
—  1.  The  probable  birthplace  of  Abra- 
ham's  servant    (Gen.   xv.   2).     2.  The 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  IX. 


limit  of  Abraham's  pursuit  of  the 
Eustern  Kings  (Gen.  xiv.  15).  3.  A 
city  visited  by  Elisha  (2  Kings  viii.  7). 

4.  Paul's  journey  to  Damascus  and  the 
incidents     connected    therewith    (ix.). 

5.  Paul's  subsequent  visit  to  the  city 
(Gal.  i.  17). 

Ver.  2.  The  Way. — This  designation 
of  the  Christian  religion  appropriate, 
because  tKe  Christian  religion — 

I.  Originated  with  Him  who  called 
Himself  "  the  Way  "  (John  xiv.  6). 

II.  Describes  the  way  of  truth,  duty, 
life,  and  salvation  for  all  who  embrace 
it. 

III.  Is  the  only  religion  whose 
claim  to  do  so  infallibly  can  be  esta- 
blished. 

Ver.  4.   Christ's  Question  to  Paul. 

I.  Revealed  to  Saul  Christ's  intimate 
knowledge  of  Himself. — Of  His  name, 
and  doings,  and  intentions.  The  doc- 
trine of  Christ's  Omniscience. 

II.  Intimated  to  Saul  Christ's  per- 
sonal existence  in  heaven. — The  doc- 
trine of  Christ's  resurrection. 

III.  Announced  to  Saul  Christ's 
sympathy  with  His  persecuted 
followers. — The  doctrine  of  Christ's 
union  with  His  people. 

Vers.  5,  6.  The  Soul's  Questions  and 
Christ's  Answers. 

I.  The  soul's  questions. — 1.  Who  art 
Thou,  Lord?  (1)  Necessary.  Impossi- 
ble to  be  evaded  by  any  to  whom  Christ 
presents  Himself.  (2)  Important. 
More  momentous  inquiry  cannot  be 
imagined  than  whether  Christ  is  what 
He  claims  to  be.  (3)  Urgent.  Can- 
not be  settled  too  soon.  Danger  in 
delay ;  advantage  in  an  early  decision, 
provided  that  be  right.  (4)  Vital. 
Carrying  with  it  eternal  issues  of  good 
or  evil,  life  or  death.  2.  Lord  !  what 
wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  %  The  question 
of  one  who  has  decided  (1)  That  Christ 
is  in  His  person  divine,  and  in  His 
office  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Both 
implied  in  addressing  Christ  as  "  Lord." 
(2)  That  religion  is  for  him  a  personal 


matter  ,of  highest  interest  and  imme- 
diate concern.  This  thought  conveyed 
by  the  pronoun  me.  (3)  That  salva- 
tion can  only  be  found  by  placing  the 
soul  under  Christ's  direction.  Sug- 
gested by  Saul's  asking  Christ  what  he 
should  do  to  obtain  forgiveness  for  the 
past  and  hope  for  the  future. 

II.  Christ's  answers. — 1.  /  am  Jesus 
whom  thou  persecutest :  it  is  hard  for 
thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks.  That  is 
to  say,  to  the  sincere  seeker  Christ 
reveals  (1)  His  name,  office,  and  work — 
all  expressed  in  the  designation  Jesus, 
or  Saviour.  (2)  His  evil  treatment  at 
the  hands  of  unbelieving  and  sinful 
men,  who  in  opposing  His  cause  and 
harassing  His  people  are  guilty  of  per- 
secuting Himself.  (3)  His  secret  ally 
in  every  honest  heart  that  will  con- 
sider His  claims,  the  existence  (.  f  which 
inward  advocate  makes  it  difficult  and 
dangerous  for  earnest  souls  to  stand 
aloof  and  refuse  to  yield  submission  to 
His  grace.  2.  Arise  and  go  into  the 
city,  and  it  shall  be  told  thee  what  thou 
must  do.  Which  signifies— (1)  That  no 
truly  awakened  soul  will  be  left  with- 
out Divine  direction  as  to  the  way  of 
peace.  (2)  That  such  direction  has 
in  every  instance  been  beforehand 
provided.  The  office  performed  by 
Ananias  is  now  discharged  by  ministers 
or  the  word.  (3)  That  the  direction  of 
the  word — which  is,  repent,  believe, 
and  be  baptised  (ii.  38) — if  humbly 
followed  will  infallibly  conduct  to 
peace. 

Ver.  6.  Conversion  as  illustrated  by 
that  of  Paul. 

I.  Its  nature. — 1.  There  is  deep 
contrition.  Knows  that  he  has  sinned, 
and  that  his  sin  is  aggravated.  His 
conscience  is  awakened.  2.  There  is 
spiritual  illumination.  With  regard  to 
himself  and  to  the  Saviour.  3.  There 
is  earnest  self -surrender.  Would  go 
anywhere,  would  do  anything.  4.  The  re 
is  a  singular  transformation.  A  new 
creature. 

II.  Its  causes. — 1.  The  agent  is  God. 
An  act  of  His  omnipotence.  2.  The 
instrument  is  truth.     The  truth  in  the 

211 


chap.  IX.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Bible    somehow  becomes  the  truth  in  proud,  intolerant,  persecuting  Jew,  he 

the   heart.     3.  The  influence  of  love.  rose  a  humble,  broken-hearted,   peni- 

Faith  working  by  love.  tent  Christian." — Farrar,  The  Life  and 

III.  Its  rules.— 1.  As  to  its  subjects  Work  of  St.  Paul,  p.  199. 
it  is  sovereign.     There  must  be  reasons 

for  the  selection,  but  we  do  not  know  The  Conversion  of  Paul. 

them.     2.  As  to  its  mode  it  is  invin-  I.  Remarkable  as  the  conversion — 

cible.     The   power  of  the  Spirit  may  1.  Of  a  young  man  (vii.  56).     2.  Of  a 

be  resisted,  but   cannot  be  overcome.  self-righteous  Pharisee  (xxiii.  6,  xxvi. 

3.  As  to  its  time  it  may  be  sudden.  5.  3.  Of  a  brilliant  scholar  (Gal.  i.  11). 
In  one  sense  it  is  always  sudden;  in  4.  Of  a  blood-thirsty  persecutor  (1  Tim. 
some   cases   it   is  remarkably  sudden.  i.  13). 

4.  As  to  its  circumstances  it  is  variable.  II.  More  remarkable,  as  the  bringing 
Sometimes   violent,   sometimes    gentle.  over  to  Christianity  of  one  who  proved 

5.  There  is  no  need  for  despair  of  the  himself — 1.  An  incomparable  type  of 
conversion  of  any. — G.  Brooks.  Christian  character.  *  "  Christianity  got 

the  opportunity  in  him  of  showing  the 

Ver.    8.  And  Saul  arose  from    the  world  the  whole  force  that  was  in  it " 

Earth. — "  Saul   rose  another  man :  he  (Stalker).     2.    A   great    thinker    which 

had  fallen  in  death,  he  rose  in  life;  he  Christianity    "specially  needed   at  the 

had  fallen  in  the  midst  of  things  tern-  moment  "    {Ibid.).     3.    The  most  illus- 

poral,  he  rose  in  the  awful  conscious-  trious  missionary  the  Church  has  ever 

ness  of  things  eternal ;  he  had  fallen  a  produced  or  the  world  has  ever  seen. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  10—19. 

The  Mission  of  Ananias  ;  or,  the  Baptism  of  Saul. 

The  missioner. — 1.  His  name.  Ananias,  like  Annas,  the  Greek  form  of 
Hananiah,  or  "  Gracious  is  Jehovah,"  borne  by  the  high-priest  (iv.  6)  and  the 
false  disciple  (ver.  1),  as  well  as  by  himself.  In  his  case  only  did  the  character 
of  its  bearer  correspond  with  its  import.  2.  His  residence.  Damascus  (see  on 
ver.  2,  "Hints") ;  but  whether  a  native  or  a  fugitive  who  had  found  shelter  there 
cannot  be  determined.  3.  His  standing.  Not  one  of  the  Seventy.  A  devout 
man — i.e.,  a  pious  Jew  (xxii.  12),  who  waited  for  the  consolation  of  Israel,  he  was 
also  a  Christian  disciple  who  had  found  the  Messias,  the  date  of  his  conversion 
being  unknown,  though  tradition  reports  that  he  afterwards  became  bishop  of 
Damascus  and  a  martyr.  4.  His  character.  (1)  Of  good  report  among  the 
Jews  (xxii.  12).  "A  good  name  is  rather  to  be  chosen  than  great  riches"  (Pro v. 
xxii.  1).  (2)  Intelligent,  not  only  wise  unto  salvation,  but  keeping  himself  ac- 
quainted with  all  that  concerned  the  welfare  of  the  Church  (ver.  13).  (3)  Timid, 
disposed  to  shrink  from  meeting  such  a  ravening  wolf  as  rumour  affirmed  Saul  to 
be  (ver.  14).  Brave  men  often  shrink  from  danger.  Yet  (4)  Courageous,  and 
ready  to  obey  when  he  clearly  understood  the  Lord's  will  (ver.  17).  Veniat, 
veniat  verbum  Domini,  said  one,  et  submittemus  ei  sexcenta  si  nobis  essent  colla  ; 
let  but  the  Lord's  word  come,  and  we  will  submit  to  him  six  hundred  necks  if 
we  had  them  (Trapp).  And  (5)  Sympathetic,  uttering  words  of  kindly  cheer  the 
moment  he  entered  Saul's  presence  (ver.  17).  5.  His  calling.  Having  in  a 
vision  been  summoned  by  Christ,  as  Samuel  formerly  had  been  by  Jehovah 
(1  Sam.  iii.  4),  and  having  answered  as  Samuel  did,  "  Here  am  I,  Lord,"  he  was 
further  instructed  about  the  mission  on  which  he  was  forthwith  to  be  sent. 
Pure  romance  is  Kenan's  idea  that  Paul,  having  often  heard  of  Ananias,  and  "  of 
the  miraculous  powers  of  new  believers  over  maladies,"  sent  for  him,  under  the 
conviction  that  the  imposition  of  his  hands  would  cure  him  of  his  disease  (The 
Apostles,  p.  161). 

212 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  IX. 


II.  The  mission. — 1.  Its  purport.  1.  To  repair  to  Saul's  presence  without 
delay.  A  formidable  task  for  a  Damascus  Christian ;  like  thrusting  one's  head 
into  a  lions'  den  or  a  wolves'  lair.  Yet  that  Christ  intended  this  commission 
to  be  carried  out  Ananias  must  have  gathered  from  the  particularity  of  the 
instructions  given,  in  which  were,  first,  an  order  to  be  prompt,  Arise ;  next,  a 
specification  of  the  street  in  which  Saul  would  be  found,  the  street  called 
Straight,  and  of  the  house  in  which  he  lodged,  that  of  Judas ;  and  lastly,  the 
condition  of  mind  and  body  in  which  he  would  be  found,  as  to  his  mind  in  the 
act  of  prayer  and  in  a  state  of  expectancy,  as  to  his  body  enfeebled  and  blind. 
2.  To  put  hands  upon  Saul's  eyes,  and  so  restore  his  sight.  Such  an  act,  if  not 
required  for  the  strengthening  of  Ananias's  faith,  would  serve  to  deepen  Saul's 
humility  in  that  he  should  be  ministered  to  by  one  of  the  very  Christians  he  had 
purposed  to  murder,  while  it  would  help  him  to  connect  the  restoration  of  his 
sight  with  Christ,  whose  ambassador  Ananias  was  (ver.  12),  and  thus  be  an 
assurance  to  him  that  Christ  had  put  away  his  sin  and  received  him  into  favour. 
2.  Its  occasion.  (1)  Saul's  need  of  such  assurance  of  Christ's  grace  and  mercy, 
which  was  the  need  that  every  darkened  understanding  has  to  be  illumined, 
every  troubled  heart  has  to  be  appeased,  and  every  unpardoned  soul  has  to  be 
forgiven ;  while  over  and  above  it  was  the  need  which  arises  from  the  pressure 
of  all  these  unappeased  wants  upon  an  anguish-laden  spirit.  (2)  Saul's  prepared- 
ness for  the  reception  of  these  heavenly  blessings,  which  was  shown  by  two 
things — the  prayers  he  was  pouring  forth  (ver.  11)  and  the  vision  he  had  seen 
(ver.  12).  (3)  Saul's  selection  by  Christ  to  be  a  chosen  vessel  to  bear  His  name 
before  the  Gentiles,  and  kings,  and  the  children  of  Israel  (ver.  15).  This  Christ 
told  Ananias  was  the  crowning  reason  why  his  mission  could  not  be  a?t  aside  or 
even  delayed.  3.  Its  execution.  At  first  timidly  reluctant,  as  Moses  of  old  had 
been  reluctant  to  undertake  the  task  of  bearding  Pharaoh  in  his  -palace 
(Exod.  iii.  11),  Ananias  at  last  carried  through  the  business  entrusted  to 
him,  (1)  promptly,  hesitating  nothing  after  Christ  had  removed  his  fears; 
(2)  faithfully,  implementing  it  to  the  letter ;  (3)  tenderly,  saluting  the  quondam 
persecutor  as  Brother  Saul ;  and  (4)  successfully,  laying  his  hands  upon  Saul's 
sightless  orbs,  so  that  immediately  "  there  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it  had  been 
scales,"  "  he  received  sight  " — it  is  preposterous  to  say  that  Saul's  blindness  was 
only  nervous,  and  that  on  hearing  Ananias's  words  Saul  believed  himself  cured 
(Renan:  The  Apostles,  p.  161) — his  soul  was  "filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,"  "he 
arose  "  from  the  dust  of  despair,  "  he  was  baptised,"  he  partook  of  food,  and 
recovered  strength. 

Learn. — 1.  That  souls  once  truly  awakened  are  sooner  or  later  conducted  into 
spiritual  peace.  2.  That  the  best  occupation  for  an  awakened  soul  is  to  keep 
calling  upon  God  and  Christ  in  prayer.  3.  That  Christ  can  always  find  suitable 
agents  to  execute  His  commissions  on  earth.  4.  That  the  highest  honour  Christ 
can  put  upon  a  person  is  to  make  him  a  bearer  of  Christ's  name  before  his 
fellow-men.  5.  That  those  who  run  on  Christ's  errands  should  cultivate  a  spirit 
of  love.  6.  That  Christ's  people  should  rejoice  when  they  have  an  opportunity 
of  returning  good  for  evil.  7.  That  those  who  come  to  Jesus  Christ  enter  into 
light.     8.  That  the  greatest  of  men  may  be  helped  to  salvation  by  the  least. 

HINTS  AND    SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  10.  The  Two  Ananiases.  II.   Ananias   of  Damascus. — 1.    A 

I.    Ananias   of  Jerusalem. — 1.    An  sincere   disciple.     2.    A   messenger   of 

insincere  disciple.     2.  A  tool  of  Satan.  Christ.      3.  A    servant    of    righteous- 

3.  A  minister  of  unrighteousness.    4.  A  ness.     4.  An  example  to  Christ's  fol- 

warning  to  evil-doers.  lowers. 

213 


chap.  ix.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Vers.  10-17.  The  Two  Visions  of 
Christ. 

I.  Ananias's  vision  resembled  Saul's 
in  being — 1.  A  supernatural  presenta- 
tion to  the  soul's  eye  of  the  glorified 
Son  of  man.  2.  Such  a  presentation 
that  Ananias  could  recognise  and 
answer  the  voice  of  Christ  when  it 
addressed  him.  3.  Such  a  presentation 
that  when  the  vision  passed  the  soul's 
ordinary  conciousness  retained  a  re- 
collection of  what  had  transpired  in 
the  vision. 

II.  Saul's  vision  differed  from  that 
of  Ananias  in  this  respect,  that  over 
and  above  the  revelation  of  Christ  to 
the  soul's  eye,  there  was  a  distinct 
manifestation  of  the  Saviour's  glorified 
form  to  the  bodily  eye  (compare  xxii. 
14).  That  Saul  afterwards  regarded 
Christ's  appearance  to  him  on  the 
Damascus  road  as  something  more  and 
higher  than,  and  essentially  distinct 
from  the  "  visions  and  revelations  of 
the  Lord "  subsequently  enjoyed  by 
him,  as  a  phenomenon  the  same  in 
kind  with  the  appearances  of  the  Forty 
Days,  he  showed  by — 1.  Claiming,  on 
the  ground  of  it,  an  apostleship  equal  in 
validity  with  that  of  the  Twelve  (1  Cor. 
ix.  1,  xv.  8,  9),— a  "  sight  of  Christ  " 
being  the  specific  warranty  of  apostle- 
ship, as  distinguished  from  prophethood, 
of  which  "  receiving  visions  "  was  the 
seal.  2.  Basing  on  the  reality  of  it  the 
doctrine  of  a  resurrection  of  the  body 
(1  Cor.  xv.  14),  which  he  could  not 
have  done  on  a  mere  vision,  since 
persons  who  have  not  risen  might 
appear  in  vision  (Mark  ix.  4  \  Acts 
xvi.  9). 

Ver.  11.  Behold!  he  prayeth. — Note 
four  points : — 

I.  Prayer  addressed  to  Jesus  Christ 
is  one  of  the  first  indications  of  a  new 
life. 

II.  Prayer,  as  a  first  symptom  of 
the  religious  life,  is  always  the  result 
of  a  spiritual  vision  of  the  Son  of 
man. 

III.  Prayer  which  is  the  first  utter- 
ance of  a  new-born  soul  is  never  un- 
observed by  Christ. 

214 


IV.  Neither    is    it    ever    left  un- 
answered by  Him. 

A    Strange   Sight. — Saul   of   Tarsus 
praying  ! 

I.  A   persecutor   of   the   Christians 
calling  on  the  Lord  of  Christians. 

II.  A  self-righteous  Pharisee  sup- 
plicating Heaven's  mercy. 

III.  A  learned  Rabbi  confessing  his 
ideas  of  religion  had  been  wrong. 

Vers.  13,14,  17.  Ananias's  Theology. 
I.  The  divinity  of  Jesus. — Lord. 
II.  The  personality  of  the  Spirit. 

III.  The  brotherhood  of  believers. 

IV.  The  Sanctity  of  Christians.— 
Saints. 

V.  The  essence  of  religion. — Call- 
ing on  the  name  of  Christ. 

The  Ideal  Minister  or  Missionary. 

I.  His  fundamental  qualification. — 
He  must  be  "  a  chosen  vessel."  Chosen  : 

1.  To  be  a  vessel  of  Divine  grace,  to  be 
a  recipient  of  heavenly  mercy  (Rom. 
ix.  23) — i.e.,  he  must  be  a  sincere  con- 
vert to  the  faith  he  seeks  to  preach. 

2.  To  be  a  vessel  of  heavenly  truth 
(2  Cor.  iv.  7),  since  many  sincere  con- 
verts have  small  knowledge  of  the 
Glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

II.  His  lofty  commission. — To  bear 
— 1.  The  grandest  theme.  Christ's 
name.  2.  Before  the  widest  audience. 
Jews  and  Gentles,  kings  and  sub- 
jects, princes  and  peasants — i.e.,  before 
humanity. 

III.  His  severe  trials. — "  I  will 
show  him  how  great  things  he  must 
suffer."  Few  ministers  or  missionaries 
have  been  or  are  called  upon  to  endure 
such  hardships  as  the  Apostle  (2  Cor. 
xi.  23-27) ;  yet  should  none  enter  on 
the  office  who  are  not  prepared  (with 
Christ's  aid)  to  endure  hardness  as 
good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  His  strong  encouragement. — 
"For  My  Name's  sake."  1.  The 
highest  name  (Phil.  ii.  9).  2.  The 
worthiest  name  (Rev.  v.  9,  12). 
3.  The  most  powerful  name  (Phil, 
iv.  13).  The  most  enduring  name 
(Psalm  lxxii.    17). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:     THE  ACTS.         chap.  IX. 


Vers.  1-18.  Doctrinal  and  Practical  a  complete  and  perfect  design  on  the 

Lessons.     1.  Jesus  is  supreme  Lord  and  part  of  the  Lord.     Ananias,  quite  un- 

King  in   His  own    right    and    in    the  expectedly   to    himself,    is    made    an 

majesty  of  His  power  and  the  glory  of  instrument  in  the  scheme   of  infinite 

His  grace,  while  His  enemies  indulge  wisdom,   powrer,    and   love.     The  very 

their  hatred  and  devise  wicked  schemes  house    and    street    where    Saul    was 

against  Him.     2.   In  the  conversion  of  fasting,  meditating,  and  praying,  and 

Saul  we  have  a  striking  illustration  of  >•  also  all  his  exercises  of  mind  and  heart, 

the  sovereignty  of  Divine  grace  in  the  were  accurately  and  exactly  known  to 

salvation  of  the  chief  of  sinners,  saving  the   sovereign    and    governing    Jesus, 

them     sometimes    in    the     heat    and  4.  The  resources  of  Jesus  the  Lord  are 

fanaticism    of   their   folly   and    guilt.  infinitely    abundant    for    every    emer- 

How  different  the   entrance   of    Saul  gency.     He  is  the  same  yesterday,  and 

into  Damascus  from  his  intentions  and  to-day,  and  for  ever.     He  can  at  any 

expectations  !     How  was  he  humbled,  moment  turn  the  wrath  of  men  to  His 

and   yet    exalted    in    moral    quality !  own  praise.      He  is  mighty  to  save. — 

3.  All  the  features  of  the  scene  show  C.  H.  Read,  D.D. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  19—25. 

Saul  at  Damascus  ;  or,  the  Persecutor  turned  Preacher. 

I.  The  preaching  of  the  preacher. — 1.  When  it  began.  After  "  certain  days  " 
spent  with  the  disciples  at  Damascus,  but  whether  immediately  after  these  days 
(Conybeare  and  Howson,  Hackett,  Neander,  Meyer,  Spence),  or  after  his  three 
years'  retirement  in  Arabia  from  which  he  returned  to  Damascus  (Plumptre, 
Farrar),  is  uncertain.  "Straightway"  (ver.  20)  appears  to  favour  the  former 
supposition.  2.  How  long  it  continued.  First,  till  he  departed  for  Arabia  (Gal. 
i.  17),  which  journey  is  variously  located  in  Luke's  narrative  :  before  the  middle  of 
ver.  19  (Pearson);  before  ver.  20  (Michaelis,  Plumptre,  Farrar);  in  the  middle 
of  ver.  22  or  before  it  (Alford,  Zockler) ;  at  ver.  23,  during  the  "  many  days  " 
(Neander,  Meyer,  Lechler,  Hackett) ;  between  ver.  25  and  ver.  26  (Olshausen, 
Ebrard).  Next  after  he  returned  from  Arabia  and  before  he  fled  to  Jerusalem 
(ver.  26).  3.  Where  it  was  conducted.  In  the  Damascus  synagogues  which  his 
unbelieving  countrymen  frequented,  and  with  which  the  disciples  had  not  yet 
entirely  broken.  His  zeal  for  the  salvation  of  his  kinsmen  according  to  the 
flesh  led  him,  in  the  first  instance,  to  seek  a  hearing  from  them  (compare  John 
i.  41).  Besides,  it  was  indispensable  that  they  who  knew  him  best  should  be 
able  to  judge  of  his  conversion.  Saul  had  no  idea  of  being  "  a  disciple  secretly 
for  fear  of  the  Jewrs  "  (John  xix.  38).  4.  The  thesis  it  maintained.  That  Christ 
or  Jesus  whom  their  rulers  had  crucified  was  the  Son  of  God.  Probably  his 
preaching  at  this  stage  (i.e.,  before  his  Arabian  sojourn)  consisted  of  little  more 
than  a  proclamation  of  the  new-found  truth  which  God  had  revealed  in  his  soul 
(Gal.  i.  16),  and  the  Damascus  vision  had  burnt  in  upon  his  understanding. 
Afterwards,  on  returning  from  Arabia  with  matured  and  arranged  thoughts,  he 
advanced  beyond  proclamation  to  demonstration  (ver.  22).  5.  The  vigour  it 
displayed.  If  it  began  timidly,  mildly,  and  half  apologetically,  it  gradually 
waxed  bold,  fervid,  and  confident.  The  more  he  attained  himself  to  a  clear 
understanding  and  firm  grasp  of  the  new  doctrine  of  Jesus  which  had  been 
flashed  in  upon  his  intellect,  heart,  and  conscience,  of  the  ground  on  which  it 
rested,  and  the  significance  it  imported,  the  more  courageously  did  he  push  his 
way  into  the  citadel  of  his  hearers'  souls.  6.  The  effect  it  produced.  (])  It  filled 
all  who  heard  him  with  amazement.  And  no  wonder  !  Who  ever  heard  before 
of  a  conversion  so  sudden,  violent,  and  unlikely  ?  A  Pharisee  become  a  Nazarene  ! 
A  persecutor  turned  preacher  !     And  that,  too,  like  a  clap  of  thunder  !     And  for 

215 


chap.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


so  little  cause — because,  as  he  alleged,  he  had  seen  a  vision,  or  (as  his  opponents 
would  say)  he  had  been  dazzled  and  frightened  by  a  flash  of  lightning.  No  doubt 
the  wiseacres  laughed,  ridiculed,  shook  their  solemn  heads,  and  called  him 
Fanatic  !  (2)  It  confounded  all  their  previous  notions  about  both  the  Scriptures 
and  Jesus.  If  this  new  doctrine  of  the  hare-brained  Rabbi  was  correct,  then  they 
had  completely  misunderstood  the  teaching  of  their  sacred  books,  and  been  guilty  of 
a  hideous  crime — two  charges  (ignorance  of  God's  word  and  murder  of  God's  Son) 
under  which  the  Jews  could  hardly  be  expected  to  sit  with  comfort.  (3)  It 
kindled  in  their  hearts  hostile  and  even  murderous  designs  (ver.  23).  It  woke 
up  against  him  the  same  demon  of  persecution  that  had  sent  Stephen  to  his  death. 
Possibly  Saul  was  not  surprised  at  this.  It  was  what  his  new  Master  had 
suffered,  and  what  he  himself  had  been  preparing  for  his  new  Master's  friends. 

II.  The  peril  of  the  preacher. — 1.  The  plot  of  his  enemies.  (1)  Its  deadly 
purpose — to  kill  him.  Nothing  short  of  his  blood  would  satisfy  them.  They 
must  have  been  convinced  that  Saul  was  lost  to  them  for  ever,  that  he  was  no 
insincere  convert,  but  a  recruit  to  the  side  of  Christianity  who  would  never  come 
back ;  they  must  have  had  a  high  appreciation  of  his  ability  and  worth  as  a 
religious  controversialist  and  propagandist  when  they  could  not  afford  to  permit 
him  to  transfer  his  services  to  the  other  side ;  they  must  have  been  poorly  off  for 
arguments  to  answer  his  preaching  when  they  felt  themselves  obliged  so  soon  to 
resort  to  the  persuasive  weapons  of  fire  and  steel.  (2)  Its  unsleeping  vigilance. 
Night  and  day  they  watched  the  city  gates,  with  the  help  of  a  Roman  garrison 
(2  Cor.  xi.  32),  to  apprehend  him  (compare  xxiii.  21).  So  the  wicked  sleep  not 
except  they  have  done  mischief  (Prov.  iv.  16),  while  "  their  feet  are  swift  to  shed 
blood"  (Rom.  iii.  15).  2.  The  observation  of  Paul.  He  was  not  so  absorbed  in 
preaching  as  not  to  become  aware  of  what  was  going  on.  Saul,  from  the  first  to 
the  last  of  his  career,  was  a  remarkably  wide-awake  person,  who  always  knew 
the  machinations  of  his  adversaries,  and  understood  the  right  thing  to  do.  In 
this  case  he  got  to  hear  about  the  wicked  devices  of  his  foes.  3.  The  stratagem  of 
his  friends.  Who  says  that  Christians  are  incapable  imbeciles  ?  Undercover 
of  the  darkness  (having  taken  him  into  one  of  their  houses  on  the  city  wall),  his 
disciples  let  him  down  from  the  window  in  a  basket  (see  2  Cor.  xi.  33).  "  This 
nightly  journey  in  a  basket  down  over  the  town  wall,  whilst  underneath  perhaps 
the  Jewish  spies  were  waiting  to  apprehend  him  and  drag  him  off  to  be  stoned," 
says  Hausrath  (Der  Apostel  Paulus,  p.  139),  "  remained  with  him  constantly  as 
a  frightful  recollection  which  twenty  years  after  he  depicted  in  a  more  lively 
manner  than  all  the  other  sufferings  recounted  by  him,  more  especially  even  than 
the  stoning  which  he  once  endured,  or  than  the  shipwreck  in  which  he  was  tossed 
about  a  night  and  a  day  upon  the  deep."  Having  eluded  the  lines  of  his  would- 
be  captors,  he  escaped  not  to  Arabia  (see  Hausrath),  but  towards  Jerusalem, 
where  he  abode  fifteen  days  with  Peter  (Gal.  i.  18). 

Lessons. — 1.  When  a  man  preaches  or  seeks  to  propagate  the  faith  he  once 
sought  to  destroy,  there  is  good  reason  to  conclude  he  is  converted.  2.  Sudden 
conversions,  though  not  impossible,  are  often  difficult  to  understand.  3.  If  the 
Scriptures  be  authority,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  both  Israel's  Messiah  and  the 
world's  Redeemer.  4.  Zealous  preachers  of  Jesus  Christ,  if  not  now  murdered, 
are  commonly  disliked  by  the  world.  5.  God's  eye  is  always  upon  His  faithful 
servants  to  watch  over  them,  especially  when  the  eyes  of  their  enemies  are 
watching  against  them. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  22.  Paul's  increase  in  strength.       acquaintance     with     the      Scriptures 
I.  Whence  it  came. — 1.  From  the      (1  John  ii.  14).     3.  From  practice  in 
indwelling  Spirit  (Eph.  iii.  16).  2.  From      preaching. 

216 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  ix. 


II.  In  what  it  resulted. — In  more  III.  Spiritual  pride  of  one's  own 
efficient  service.  heart. 

III.  What  it  proved.— The  reality  IV.  Contempt  of  the  Church  and 
of  his  conversion.  the  ordinary  means  of  Grace. — Gerok. 

Yer.  25,  PauVs  Escape  from  Damascus. 
Ver.  23.  A  New  Converts  Banger.  I.  A  disappointment  to  his  foes. 

I.  Hatred   and    persecution   of   the  II.  A  kindness  to  his  friends, 
world  (ver.  23).                                                  III.  A  mercy  to  himself. 

II.  Distrust  on  the  part  of  believers  IV.  A  blessing  to  the  Church  and 
(ver.  26).                                                         the  world. 

HOMILETIC AL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  26-30. 

SauVs  First  Visit  to  Jerusalem  ;  or,  his  Discipleship  confirmed. 

I.  Saul's  object  in  visiting  Jerusalem  (ver.  26). — 1.  To  associate  himself  with 
the  disciples  there,  and  thus  obtain  recognition  of  his  standing  as  a  member  of  the 
Church.  The  instinct  which  impels  a  disciple  to  seek  after  the  communion  of 
saints  is  healthy  as  well  as  right ;  that  which  leads  a  believer  to  dissociate  him- 
self from  other  believers,  and  to  cultivate  piety  apart,  is  as  unsound  as  it  is  wrong, 
and  as  hurtful  to  the  individual  himself  as  it  is  contrary  to  the  mind  of  Christ 
(Luke  xxii.  32)  and  the  teaching  of  Christ's  apostles  (Col.  iii.  16;  Heb.  x.  25; 
James  v.  16  ;  1  John  i.  7).  2.  To  make  the  acquaintance  of  Peter  (Gal.  i.  18). 
Though  implying  a  recognition  of  Peter's  tacitly  allowed  supremacy  in  the 
Church  at  Jerusalem,  this  cannot  be  cited  as  an  acknowledgment  of  his  primacy, 
since  on  a  second  visit  fourteen  years  later  (Gal,  ii.  1)  Saul  (then  called  Paul) 
recognises  James  (the  Lord's  brother),  Cephas,  and  John  equally  with  Peter  as 
pillars  in  the  Church  (Gal  ii.  9). 

II.  Saul's  reception  by  the  disciples  at  Jerusalem. — 1.  His  sincerity  was  sus- 
pected. Not  by  one  or  two  of  the  more  timid  of  the  community,  but  by  all.  Not 
by  the  ordinary  membership,  but  by  its  leaders,  or  at  least  by  Peter  and  James, 
since  the  rest  of  the  apostles  appear  to  have  at  this  time  been  absent  from  Jerusalem 
(Gal.  i.  19).  Nor  was  their  suspicion  of  him  unreasonable.  His  conversion,  of 
which  they  had  doubtless  heard,  must  have  seemed  to  them  beforehand  unlikely. 
Then  its  miraculous  and  sudden  character  must  have  struck  them  at  least  as  a 
reason  for  caution  in  accepting  it  as  genuine.  And  if  the  larger  portion  of  the 
three  years  passed  since  that  occurrence  had  been  spent  in  retirement  in  Arabia, 
their  lack  of  trustworthy  information  about  his  manner  of  life  in  the  interval 
must  be  held  as  having  justified  their  want  of  forwardness  in  taking  him  to  their 
bosoms.  "  The  sudden  appearance  of  Voltaire  in  a  circle  of  Christians,  claiming 
to  be  one  cf  them,  would  have  been  something  like  this  return  of  Saul  to 
Jerusalem  as  a  professed  disciple  "  (Hackett).  2.  His  conversion  was  attested. 
(1)  To  whom  ?  To  the  apostles,  or  rather  to  Peter  and  James,  the  latter  of 
whom  Luke  includes  among  the  apostles,  using  the  term  in  a  less  strict  way  than 
that  in  which  it  is  commonly  employed.  Either,  as  above  suggested,  the  other 
apostles  were  absent  from  Jerusalem,  or  Saul  attended  no  public  meeting  of  the 
disciples.  (2)  By  whom  1  Barnabas,  the  Levite  of  Cyprus,  who  may  have  been 
a  former  acquaintance  of  Saul's — a  not  unlikely  supposition,  since  Saul's  early 
occupation  as  a  tent-maker  may  have  brought  him  into  trade  relations  with  the 
Cyprus  farmer,  and  who  apparently  had  personal  knowledge  obtained  in  some 
way  not  stated,  both  of  Saul's  conversion  and  of  his  evangelistic  labours  at 
Damascus.  (3)  How  1  By  declaring  how  Christ  had  appeared  to  him  in  the 
way  to  Damascus,  and  by  certifying  that  he  had  preached  boldly  in  Christ's 
name  at  Damascus.     No  one  in  Jerusalem  could  have  spoken  a  more  powerful 

217 


chap.  ix.  HOMILETlV  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


word  for  Saul  than  the  Brother  of  Consolation,  and  none  could  have  spoken  a 
better  word  than  that  uttered  by  him. 

III.  Saul's  evangelistic  activity  in  Jerusalem. — 1.  The  nature  of  it. 
(1)  Preaching  boldly — not  defiantly  or  vehemently,  but  confidently  and 
courageously — in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus;  and  all  who  preach  in  or  about 
Christ's  name  should,  and  might,  exhibit  the  same  mental  and  spiritual 
characteristics.  (2)  Disputing  against  the  Grecian  Jews,  the  party  with  whom 
Stephen  had  argued,  and  at  whose  hands  he  met  his  death  (vi.  9-12),  and  who 
were  probably  most  zealous  in  opposing  him.  2.  The  continuance  of  it.  Only 
fifteen  days  (Gal.  i.  18),  the  exercise  of  his  ministry  having  been — not  abandoned 
for  want  of  success  or  forsaken  through  weariness,  or  love  of  novelty,  but — cut 
short  by  the  murderous  designs  of  his  hearers.  Whether  these  listened  to  him 
longer  than  they  did  to  Stephen  cannot  be  told. 

IV.  Saul's  precipitate  flight  from  Jerusalem. — 1.  Dictated  by  prudence.  "  A 
prudent  man  foreseeth  the  evil  and  hideth  himself  "  (Prov.  xxii.  3).  No  man  is 
required  to  make  a  martyr  of  himself  even  for  religion,  unless  he  cannot  avoid 
doing  so  without  sin.  2.  Approved  by  Christ.  This  must  be  inferred  from 
Christ's  own  dictum  (Matt.  x.  23).  What  applied  to  the  Twelve  held  good  of 
the  thirteenth  apostle.  3.  Assisted  by  his  friends.  His  brethren  in  the  faith, 
realising  how  valuable  a  coadjutor  had  been  sent  them,  "  took  steps  "  to  have  him 
conveyed  to  Csesarea  (see  on  viii.  40  "  Critical  Remarks  "),  and  sent  forth  to  Tarsus, 
his  native  city  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  4.  Rejoiced  in  by  the  whole  Church  of 
Christ  since.  What  would  the  Church  not  have  lost  had  Saul  been  cut  off  in  the 
beginning  of  his  glorious  career  ?  A  heavier  blow  to  Christianity  would  his  fall 
then  have  been  than  his  conversion  was  to  Judaism  ! 

Learn. — 1.  That  sudden  and  more  especially  violent  conversions  are  always 
more  or  less  open  to  suspicion.  2.  That  there  are  times  when  the  services  of  a 
Christian  brother  are  invaluable.  3.  That  the  soundest  evidence  of  sincerity 
in  religion  is  patient  and  courageous  perseverance  in  well  doing.  4.  That 
Christianity  can  hold  the  field  against  all  opponents.  5.  That  Christ's  servants 
can  hardly  expect  to  be  better  treated  than  their  Master. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  8-23.  The  Progress  of  SauVs 
Conversion. 

I.  The  first  impression. — The  deep 
feeling  of  spiritual  inability  (ver.  8). 

II.  The  first  signs  of  life.—"  Behold 
he  prayeth  "  (ver.  11). 

III.  The  first  testimony.  —  That 
Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  (ver.  20). 

IY.  The  first  experience. — The  cross 
for  the  sake  of  Christ  (ver.  23). — 
Jasper  in  Lange. 

Yer.  27.  What  the  Name  of  Jesus  is 
to  a  Preacher. 

I.  His  theme. 
II.  His  authority. 
III.  His  power. 
IY.  His  aim. 
V.  His  protection. 
VI.  His  reward. 

218 


Yer.  29.  "  They  went  about  to  slay 
him." — What  the  Church  and  the 
world  woulel  have  lost  had  this  plot  suc- 
ceeded. 

I.  The  Church  would  have  lost— 

1.  The  brightest  example  of  Christianity. 

2.  The  greatest  missionary.  3.  The 
most  eloquent  preacher.  And — 4.  The 
most  influential  writer  that  has  ever 
appeared  within  her  borders. 

II.  The   world  would  have  lost — 

1.  Its  foremost  pioneer  of  civilisation. 

2.  Its  noblest  philanthropist.  3.  Its 
most  gifted  teacher.  4.  Its  most  in- 
fluential personality. 

Vers.  20-30.  The  Marks  of  True 
Conversion. 

I.  Joyful  confession  of  Christ  (ver. 
20). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  IX. 


II.  Willing  endurance  of  the  world's 
enmity  (ver.  23). 

III.  Humble  intercourse  with  be- 
lievers (ver.  26). 

IV.  Godly  conduct  in  the  service 
of  the  Lord  (ver.  28) — Leonhard  and 
Spiegel  in  Lange). 

Vers.  26-30.  The  Qualifications, 
Work,  and  Reward  of  a  True  Minister,^ 
exemplified  in  the  case  of  Paul. 

I.  His  qualifications. — Declared  not 
by  Paul  himself,  but  by  Barnabas. 
1.  A  personal  interview  with  Christ. 
Paul  had  seen  the  Lord  in  the  way ; 
and  the  man  who  has  not  had  personal 
dealings  in  his  own  soul  with  Jesus 
Christ  may  be  an  eloquent  and  even 
thoughtful  lecturer  on  religion  as  he 
understands  it,  but  is  not  a  true 
minister.  2.  A  direct  message  from 
Christ.  Christ  had  spoken  to  Paul,  and 
therefore  Paul  had  somewhat  to  com- 
municate to  the  world.  The  true 
business  of  the  preacher  is  to  communi- 
cate not  his  own  but  Christ's  thoughts 
to  his  fellow-men.  3.  A  proved  fitness 
to  speak  for  Christ.  Paul  had  shown 
himself  to  possess  this  by  his  experi- 
ment at  Damascus ;  and  Christian 
Churches  are  specially  cautioned  against 
making  those  bishops,  presbyters,  or 
preachers  who  are  not  "  apt  to  teach  " 
(1  Tim.  iii.  2). 

II.  His  work. — 1.  Generally  and 
chiefly  to  preach,  to  proclaim  the  main 
facts  and  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  of 
Christ.  2.  Particularly  and  specially 
to  confirm  and  defend  the  Gospel  against 
all  objectors  and  objections.  In  other 
words,  he  should  be  both  an  evangelist 
and  an  apologist. 

III.  His  reward. — Not  his  ultimate 
and  final,  but  his  present  and  im- 
mediate recompense.  1.  The  opposition 
of  the  woi*ld.  Here  typified  by  the 
hostility  of  the  Jews,  who  first  at- 
tempted to  silence  and  then  to  murder 
Paul.  2.  The  sympathy  of  his  brethren. 
If  at  first  regarded  with  suspicion,  the 
true  minister  will  eventually  secure 
the  kindly  regards  and  hearty  co-oper- 
ation first  of  the  Barnabases  and  then 
of  the  Peters,  and  lastly,  of  the  Johns 


and  Jameses,  etc.,  among  the  brethren. 
3.  The  protection  of  God.  The  Almighty 
arm  will  be  his  shield  and  buckler  till 
his  work  is  done.  No  weapon  forged 
against  him  will  prosper.  The  devices 
of  his  enemies  will  be  outwitted  and 
their  counsels  turned  to  folly. 

Vers.  19-30.  Saul  Preaching  Christ. 

I.  For  this  work  he  had  long 
preparation. — Were  the  Book  of  Acts 
our  only  source  of  information,  we 
should  conclude  that  the  beginning  of 
Paul's  work  as  a  preacher  followed 
close  upon  the  end  of  his  career  as  a 
persecutor.  The  interval  between  his 
persecuting  and  his  preaching  would 
seem  to  have  been  only  the  three  days 
of  bis  blindness  at  Damascus.  We 
should  then  be  obliged  to  explain,  as 
best  we  might,  how  he  so  suddenly 
gained  his  wonderful  insight  into 
Christian  truth  in  its  relations  to 
Judaism.  We  should  have  to  seek, 
and  should  seek  in  vain,  a  reasonable 
explanation  of  the  great  revolution  in 
his  moral  sentiments.  The  work  of 
the  Spirit  in  regeneration  may  be 
instantaneous,  but  the  readjustments 
of  character  and  convictions  are  always 
slow  and  progressive.  Happily,  we 
have  another  resource.  In  the  Epistle 
to  the  Galatians  Paul  wrote :  "  But 
when  it  pleased  God  to  reveal  His  Son 
in  me  that  I  might  preach  Him  among 
the  heathen,  immediately  I  conferred 
not  with  flesh  and  blood  .  .  .  but  I 
went  into  Arabia,  and  returned  again 
to  Damascus."  His  preaching  was 
preceded,  we  may  believe,  by  three 
years  of  study  and  reflection  in  the 
solitude  of  Arabia.  St.  Paul  is  not, 
therefore,  to  be  cited  as  an  instance  of 
a  man  one  day  ignorant  of  Christian 
truth,  and  the  next  day,  by  means 
entirely  supernatural,  the  wisest  ex- 
ponent of  it.  The  world,  in  its  love  of 
the  wonderful,  is  too  ready  to  believe 
in  such  men.  His  knowledge  of  Christ 
and  of  Christian  truth  was  in  part  a 
revelation,  but  in  part  also  the  result 
of  patient  thought  and  of  piety  pro- 
longed through  studious  years.  God 
never  works  needless  miracles.     Every 

219 


CHAP.  IX. 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


view  of  Christian  truth  and  duty 
which  Paul  attained  had  a  long 
history  behind  it,  stretching  back 
through  those  years  of  meditation  in 
Arabia. 

II.  His  conviction  that  Jesus  is  the 
Son  of  God  was  reached  in  the  face 
of  the  greatest  obstacles. — As  a 
Pharisee  burning  with  zeal  for  the  law 
and  its  traditions,  he  looked  upon 
Christ  as  a  dangerous  innovator,  and 
upon  Christian  doctrine  as  heretical 
and  revolutionary.  Salvation  by  the 
law-method  he  advocated  with  all  his 
heart.  That  there  was  any  other 
righteousness  than  obedience  to  a 
ceremonial  law  he  did  not  for  a 
moment  imagine  or  allow.  The  sin 
cerity  of  his  intensely  religious  nature 
made  it  the  more  improbable  that  his 
convictions  would  ever  be  changed. 
The  sect  of  the  Nazarenes  was  un- 
noticed or  despised.  To  him,  as  to 
them,  the  cross  was  a  stumbling-block. 
No  natural  bias  in  favour  of  Christian 
truth,  then,  no  motive  of  self-interest, 
no  social  influence,  drew  him  into  the 
number  of  Christ's  disciples.  No 
greater  or  more  improbable  change  in 
character  and  purpose  is  conceivable 
than  that  by  which  Saul  the  inquisitor, 
hurrying  men  and  women  to  prison 
and  persecuting  to  the  death  believers 
in  the  Christian  way,  became  the 
apostle  of  the  cross,  "  determined  to 
know  nothing  save  Jesus  Christ  and 
Him  crucified."  How,  then,  were 
these  obstacles  removed  1  His  own 
explanation  always  was,  "  Christ  was 
seen  by  me  also.  ...  It  pleased  God 
to  reveal  His  Son  in  me."  In  this 
glorious  revelation  lay  the  power  which 
revolutionised  his  moral  sentiments, 
levelled  all  obstacles,  and  brought  him 
to  an  undying  faith  in  the  crucified 
and  risen  Son  of  God. 

III.  The  value  of  Paul's  testimony 
that  Jesus  is  the  son  of  God  is  further  en- 
hanced by  the  motive  which  prompted 
him  to  give  it. — Human  testimony  is  to 
be  measured  by  the  motive  to  its  utter- 
ance. And  it  might  be  said  that  he  was 
an  impostor,  bearing  witness  to  a  lie, 
and  setting  up  claims  which  he  knew 

220 


to  be  false.  But,  whenever  men  have 
reflected  that  imposture  always  reacts 
upon  him  who  tries  it,  that  false  claims 
demoralise  him  who  makes  them,  and 
have  seen  in  St.  Paul's  life,  not  a 
spiritual  declension,  but  a  steady  pro- 
gress in  holiness,  they  have  been  both 
unable  and  unwilling  to  call  him  an 
impostor.  Besides,  the  motive  to  im- 
posture is  wanting.  Beview  the  list 
of  selfish  motives  which  impel  men  to 
make  false  claims,  and  not  one  of  them 
can  be  applied  to  him.  It  was  not 
pride  of  intellect ;  for,  with  supreme 
self-denial,  Paul  resolved  to  count  as 
nothing  all  other  learning  than  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  and  of  His  cross. 
The  love  of  Christ  constrained  Him. 
This  was  the  motive.  The  grateful 
desire  to  make  some  return  for  Christ's 
love  to  him  impelled  Paul  to  labour,  to 
preach,  to  suffer,  "in  His  name." 

IV.  The  spiritual  power  of  St. 
Paul's  life  greatly  augments  the  value 
of  his  testimony. — Never  was  there  a 
more  powerful  life.  Or,  if  we  were 
to  admit  that  St.  Paul's  power  rested 
in  his  natural  gifts  ;  if  we  were  to 
enumerate  the  elements  of  a  strong 
character — sobriety,  sagacity,  impartial 
judgment,  courage,  hopefulness,  and 
whatever  things  enter  into  a  powerful 
personality — and  were  to  find  in  these 
a  sufficient  cause  for  his  pre-eminence 
as  a  religious  leader — we  might  then 
attach  no  greater  value  to  his  testi- 
mony than  to  that  of  any  other  wise 
and  truthful  man.  But  the  fact  is 
otherwise.  Exalt  his  natural  gifts  as 
we  will;  pay  that  his  own  personal 
powers  made  him  "  a  greater  preacher 
than  Chrysostom,  a  greater  reformer 
than  Luther,  a  greater  theologian  than 
Thomas  Aquinas " — it  yet  remains 
entirely  true  that  the  imperishable 
power  of  St.  Paul's  life  was  derived 
from  Christ.  He  was  consciously 
dependent.  1 1 1  can  do  all  things 
through  Christ  which  strengtheneth 
me." 

V.  His  testimony  is  comprehensive. 
— "  In  the  synagogues  he  proclaimed 
Jesus,  that  He  is  the  Son  of  God."  A 
review  of  the  ministry  of  St.  Paul  is 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  IX. 


fruitful  of  practical  lessons.  1.  He 
has  set  before  us  the  superiority  of  the 
Ch/istian  religion  to  morality.  2.  He 
has  shown  us  that  men  may  exalt  the 
character  of  Christ.  3.  His  ministry 
rebukes  all  half-hearted  service  of  the 
Master. — Monday  Club  Sermons. 

Saul  Preaching  Christ. 

I.  There  is  a  public  confession  of 
Christ,  an  unofficial  preaching  of  Him, 
incumbent  upon  every  one  who  is  con- 
verted by  His  grace.— Saul  is  a  noble 
example  of  this  generous  testimony  for 
Christ.  "  Immediately  "  (RV.)  '  "  he 
proclaimed  Jesus  in  the  synagogues 
that  He  is  the  Son  of  God."  Notice 
in  reference  to  this  confession — 
First,  it  was  prompt.  "  Immediately  " 
he  entered  upon  it.  There  was  no 
unnecessary  hesitation,  no  dalliance 
with  duty,  no  waiting  upon  frames  and 
feelings.  Love,  gratitude,  joy,  a  desire 
to  retrieve  the  wrongs  of  the  past,  a 
yearning  to  direct  others  to  the 
fountain  at  which  his  thirst  had  been 
assuaged.  Second,  it  was  brave.  He 
did  not  simply  enter  his  name  upon  the 
roll  of  the  disciples.  He  did  not  con- 
tent himself  with  speaking  privately 
to  such  of  his  former  acquaintances  or 
associates  as  he  might  chance  to  meet. 
In  the  face  of  friend  and  foe  he 
made  public  confession  of  Jesus  his 
Lord.  Third,  it  was  uncompromising. 
He  did  not  undertake  to  strike  a 
balance  between  his  own  convictions 
and  the  prejudices  of  his  hearers,  as  so 
many  faint-hearted  confessors  now  do. 
He  "  proclaimed  Jesus  that  He  is  the 
Son  of  God." 

II.  A  higher  and  official  preaching 
of  Christ  is  incumbent  upon  those,  and 
those  only,  who  are  duly  called,  quali- 
fied, and  commissioned  to  enter  upon 
it. — This  is  the  preaching  which  Saul 
did  after  his  return  from  Arabia  to 
Damascus.  A  study  of  his  course  in 
reference  to  it  throws  much  light  upon 
the  prerequisites  to  the  gospel  ministry. 
1.  It  must  be  preceded  by  a  Divine 
call.     None  may  enter  upon  it  without 


such  vocation.  The  call  of  Saul  of 
Tarsus  was  in  many  respects  extra- 
ordinary. 2.  It  must  be  preceded  by 
thorough  preparation.  3.  It  must 
be  preceded  by  orderly  commission. 
Saul  was  commissioned  of  God  to 
preach. 

III.  The  matter,  the  manner,  and 
the  effects  of  preaching  Christ  are  the 
same  in  all  ages. — They  are  strikingly 
illustrated  in  the  passage  which  we 
study  to-day.  1.  The  matter  or  sub- 
stance of  all  gospel  preaching  is  the 
same.  Saul  sounds  here  the  key-note  of 
his  whole  after-ministry.  2.  The  man- 
ner of  all  true  gospel  preaching  is  the 
same.  Saul's  ministry  at  Damascus  and 
in  Jerusalem  affords,  in  these  respects,  a 
faithful  representation  of  his  methods 
everywhere,  and  an  instructive  example 
of  the  manner  in  which  the  minister 
or  teacher  should  hold  forth  Christ  as 
the  Son  of  God  and  the  Saviour  of  the 
world.  Saul's  preaching  was  scriptural. 
He  confounded  the  Jews  by  proving 
from  the  Old-Testament  Set  iptures  that 
Jesus  was  Christ.  Saul's  preaching 
was  fearless.  He  preached  "  boldly  " 
both  in  Damascus  and  in  Jerusalem. 
He  did  not  shun  to  declare  the  whole 
counsel  of  God.  Saul's  preaching  was 
humble.  He  "  preached  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus."  He  assumed  no  author- 
ity and  asserted  no  superiority  of  his 
own.  3.  The  effects  of  all  gospel  preach- 
ing are  the  same.  ■  The  Apostle  found 
in  Damascus  and  at  Jerusalem  what  he 
did  everywhere  else  :  "  To  the  one  we 
are  the  savour  of  death  unto  death,  and 
to  the  other  the  savour  of  life  unto  life." 
Finally,  the  fruits  of  faithful  teaching 
are  gathered  after  the  teacher  is  gone. 
Saul  has  been  "  brought  down  to 
Csesarea,  and  sent  aw"ay  to  Tarsus," 
but  the  Church  of  God  remains;  and 
this  Church,  for  which  he  has  laboured 
and  prayed,  and  which  sorely  misses 
him  now  that  he  has  gone,  nevertheless 
"  has  peace,  being  edified,  and  walking 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  in  the  com- 
fort of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  multiplied." 
—T.  D.  Witherspoon,  D.D. 


221 


chap.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  31—35. 

The  Miracle  at  Lydda  ;  or,  the  Healing  of  JEneas. 

I.  The  time. — 1.  At  the  close  of  the  persecution  which  arose  on  the  death  of 
Stephen.  This  must  have  continued  three  years,  if  the  present  paragraph 
chionologically  succeeds  the  preceding.  What  occasioned  the  cessation  of 
hostilities  against  the  Christians  can  only  be  conjectured.  The  excitement  raised 
by  Gaius's  (Caligula's)  order  to  have  his  image  erected  in  the  temple,  about  a.d. 
39  and  40  (Lardner,  De  Wette),  may  have  diverted  the  attention  of  the  Jews  for 
a  season  from  the  apostles  and  disciples  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XVIII.  viii.  2-9).  2.  During 
a  period  of  Church  rest  and  prosperity.  This  inevitably  followed  on  the  cessation 
of  active  measures  of  hostility  against  the  Christians,  and  continued  for  a 
number  of  years,  say  from  a.d.  39  to  a.d.  44,  when  a  fresh  persecution  was 
initiated  against  the  Church  by  Herod  Aprippa  (xii.  1).  During  this  interreg- 
num, the  work  of  preaching,  going  forward  in  uninterrupted  quiet,  caused  the 
ranks  of  believers  to  be  largely  augmented — the  Holy  Ghost  constantly  bearing 
witness  to  the  truth.  3.  While  Peter  was  on  a  visitation  tour  among  the  saints. 
Whether  "  quarters "  (Kuinoel)  or  "  saints "  (Bengel,  Meyer,  Hackett)  be 
supplied  after  "all"  the  sense  is  the  same,  that  Peter,  encouraged  presumably 
by  the  peace  which  prevailed,  had  undertaken  a  pilgrimage  among  the  Christians 
in  all  the  districts  round  about  for  the  purpose  of  confirming  them  in  the  faith, 
and  by  evangelising  of  increasing  their  number.  4.  When  he  had  come  to  the 
town  of  Lydda.  The  Lud  of  the  Old  Testament  (1  Chron.  viii.  12  ;  Ezra  ii.  33  ; 
Neh.  vii.  37,  xi.  35)  was  a  village  lying  between  Joppa  and  Ramleh,  on  the 
ancient  line  of  travel  between  Jerusalem  and  Csesarea.  It  was  at  the  time  of 
Peter's  visit  the  seat  of  a  Rabbinic  School,  and  of  a  Christian  community,  estab- 
lished there  probably  as  the  result  of  Philip's  labours  (viii.  40). 

II.  The  miracle. — 1.  The  patient.  iEneas,  probably  a  Hellenistic  Jew,  and 
most  likely  a  disciple.  His  name  has  suggested  the  question  whether  the  fame 
of  Virgil's  poem  had  made  the  Trojan  hero  known  even  in  the  plains  of  Palestine 
(Plumptre).  Besser,  interpreting  his  name  as  "  Man  of  Praise,"  finds  in  it  a 
beautiful  suggestion  of  the  joyous  singer  of  God's  grace  who  was  healed  at  the 
Beautiful  Gate  of  the  temple  (iii.  9).  2.  The  malady.  Palsy.  A  paralysis  in 
the  limbs,  which  had  rendered  the  patient  bedridden  for  eight  years.  A 
minuteness  of  detarl  characteristic  of  Luke  as  a  physician  (compare  iii.  7,  ix.  18, 
xxviii.  8).  3.  Hie  cure.  Made  whole.  (1)  Easily;  by  a  word.  (2)  Instantly ; 
without  delay  or  lengthened  process.  (3)  Completely.  He  arose  (compare 
iii.  9)  and  made  his  bed  (compare  John  v.  9),  doing  for  himself  what  others  for 
eight  years  had  been  doing  for  him.  (4)  Really.  Though  Renan  says  that 
"  Peter"  only  " passed  for  having  cured  a  paralytic,"  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  he  actually  did  so.  4.  The  physician.  Not  Peter  but  Jesus  Christ.  "  In 
the  assonance  of  the  Greek  words  ( 'I^o-ovs  larai  o-e)  we  may  perhaps  trace  a 
desire  to  impress  the  thought  that  the  very  name  of  Jesus  testified  that  He  was 
the  Great  Healer.  Such  a  paronomasia  has  its  parallel  in  the  later  play  upon 
Christian  and  Ckrestiani  =  the  good  or  gracious' people  (Tertull.,  Apoc,  c.  3), 
perhaps  also  in  Peter's  own  language  that  the  Lord  is  not  Christos  only  but 
Chrestos  =  gracious  (1  Peter  ii.  3)  "  (Plumptre).  5.  The  prescription.  "  Arise 
and  make  thy  bed."  Probably  a  reminiscence  of  the  way  in  which  Christ  was 
accustomed  to  proceed  in  similar  cures  (Matt.  ix.  6  ;  John  v.  8). 

III.  The  result. — 1.  The  countryside  was  affected  by  the  miracle.  "  All  that 
dwelt  at  Lydda  and  in  Sharon  " — i.e.,  the  plain  extending  along  the  coast  from 
Joppa  to  Csesarea,  a  distance  of  thirty  miles,  "saw"  the  man  that  had  been 
cured,  and  were  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  miracle  (compare  iii.  9).     2.  Most 

222 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   THE  ACTS.  chap.  ix. 


of  those  who  saw  were  by  the  sight  converted.  They  believed  the  gospel  Peter 
preached  and  turned  to  the  Lord.  The  evidence  of  their  eyesight  was  too  strong 
to  be  gainsaid. 

Learn. — 1.  That  the  edification  of  the  Church  proceeds  best  in  the  time  of 
peace.  2.  That  the  best  propagandists  of  Christianity  are  devout  Christians. 
3.  That  Christian  ministers  should  avail  themselves  of  every  opportunity  opened 
in  providence  for  the  prosecution  of  their  sacred  calling.  4.  That  the  miracles  of 
moral  healing  performed  by  Christianity  are  a  powerful  means  of  attracting  men 
to  faith. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  31.  The  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.    His    presence — in    the    immediate 

I.  Independent  of  territorial  limita-  vicinity  of  every  sick  soul,  so  that  He 
tions. — "  The  Church  throughout  all  can  operate  at  once.  3.  His  power— 
Judsea  and  Galilee  and  Samaria."  able  to  make  the  soul  whole,  to  heal 

II.  Possessed  of  spiritual  unity. —  its  destroying  malady  of  sin,  to  cancel 
"  The  Church,"  though  existing  in  the  guilt  and  break  the  power  of  it — 
different  localities.  and  to  do  this  completely. 

III.  Susceptible  of  growth.— Out-  "III.  An  authoritative  declaration  of 
wardly  its  number  "was  multiplied  "  ;  the  soul's  duty. — 1.  To  believe.  In  the 
inwardly  its  religious  life  "  was  revealed  physician.  In  His  name  and 
edified."  character,    His   presence    and    power. 

IV.  Distinguished  by  its  walk  and      2.  To  appropriate  by  an  act  of  faith  the 
conversation. — "  Walking  in  the  fear      healing  offered.     Without  this  the  soul 
of  God  and  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy      could  not  arise.     3.  To  arise  from  its 
Spirit."  sinful — i.e.,   guilty  and  helpless — con- 
dition.   Practically  it  is  the  soul's  duty, 

Yer.  33.   The  Healing  of  jEneas.  instantly  on  believing,  to  begin  to  lead 

I.  An  affecting  emblem  of  the  sinful      a  new  life. 

soul. — 1.     Afflicted    with   a    grievous  IV.    A    simple  illustration  of  the 

malady.       Sin,    which,    like    a  palsy,  power    of    faith. — The     moment     he 

paralyses   the    soul's    powers.      2.    Of  believed, appropriated,  and  endeavoured, 

long  standing — not  for  eight  years  only,  he  arose  a  cured  man.     So  is  it  always 

but  from  birth.     3.  Incurable  by  human  with  them  who  believe  and  obey  the 

means.    Even  if  iEneas's  malady  might  prescription   of    the   soul's    physician, 

have  been  remedied  by  ordinary  thera-  They  arise  from  their  guilty  and  con- 

peutics,  the  soul's  cannot  be  removed  demnecl    condition — no    condemnation 

by  any  known  power  or  wisdom  of  man.  (Rom.    viii.    1).      They   shake    off  the 

II.  A  cheering  proclamation  of  the  fetters  of  sin's  bondage  and  enter  into 
soul's  physician. —  1.  His  name,  Jesus  spiritual  liberty. 

Christ — i.e.,  the  Heaven-sent  Saviour. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  36—43. 

Among  the  Disciples  at  Joppa  ;  or,  the  Raising  of  Dorcas. 

I.  Dorcas  living. — 1.  Her  name  was  beautiful.  Dorcas,  in  Chaldee  Tabitha, 
signifying  "  Gazelle."  The  gazelle,  or  antelope  of  Judah,  celebrated  for  its 
slender  and  agreeable  form,  its  graceful  motions,  its  fiery  and  beautiful  eyes,  was 
not  infrequently  employed  by  Hebrews  and  other  Orientals  as  a  type  of  female 
loveliness.  To  Dorcas  the  name  "  Gazelle  "  may  have  been  originally  ascribed 
on  account  of  her  personal  attractions,  though  more  probably  because  of  the 
grace  and  beauty  of  her  character ;  and  pre-eminently  beautiful  it  is  when  the 
lovely  name  is  but  an  index  to  the  lovely  soul  within,  and  the  beauty  of  the 

223 


chap.  ix.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


person  a  reflection  of  that  beauty  of  holiness  in  which  the  spirit  should  aspire 
continually  to  be  arrayed.     2.  Her  character  was  beautiful. 

"  What  is  beauty  ?     Not  the  show  JO^f 

Of  shapely  limbs  and  features.     No  ; 
These  are  but  flowers 
That  have  their  dated  hours 

To  breathe  their  momentary  sweets  and  go. 
'Tis  the  stainless  soul  within 
That  outshines  the  fairest  skin." 

Crown  the  female  figure  with  every  conceivable  excellence,  till  in  perfection  of  ex- 
ternal loveliness  it  may  be  said  of  her  whose  that  figure  is,  as  Milton  said  of  Eve — 

"  Grace  was  in  all  her  steps,  heaven  in  her  eye  ; 
In  every  gesture  dignity  and  love  "  ; 

or  as  Shakespeare  wrote  of  one  of  his  heroines : — ■ 

"  She  looks  as  clear 
As  morning  roses  newly  washed  with  dew  ; " 

yet,  devoid  of  the  inner  principle  of  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  of  the 
unseen  graces  that  cluster  round  and,  in  fact,  spring  from  that,  she  is  destitute 
of  the  one  thing  needful  to  consummate  her  -perfections  and  constitute  her 
brightest  lustre  in  the  sight  of  God ;  while  with  these,  on  the  other  hand,  she 
possesses  what  lends  an  additional  charm  to  all  her  other  loveliness.  So  was  it 
with  the  holy  women  of  old  time  (1  Peter  iii.  5,  6)  and  with  Dorcas  of  Joppa, 
who  was  "  a  disciple  "  possessed  of  that  faith  which  is  the  root  and  vital  sap  of 
all  other  Christian  virtues  and  graces.  3.  Her  life  was  beautiful.  As  nearly  as 
possible  Dorcas  realised  the  primitive  idea  of  feminine  loveliness  as  sketched  by 
both  Peter  (Eph.  iii.  1-4)  and  Paul  (1  Tim.  ii.  9,  10).  She  was  "  full  of  good 
works  and  alms  deeds  which  she  did."  Her  Christian  activity  displayed  itself 
specially  in  the  making  of  coats  and  garments  for  poor  widows  in  connection  with 
the  Church.  Probably  purchasing  the  material  with  her  own  savings,  she  wove 
it  with  her  own  labour,  and  fashioned  it  into  articles  of  apparel  with  her  own 
hands ;  so  that  the  coats  and  garments  she  distributed,  besides  being  valuable 
gifts  of  her  charity,  were  substantial  tokens  of  her  industry  as  well.  And  here 
arises  a  hint  of  what  is  pre-eminently  woman's  sphere  within  the  Christian 
Church,  which  is  hardly  that  of  preaching  or  ruling,  but  of  teaching  the  young, 
ministering  to  the  sick,  and  caring  for  the  poor. 

II.  Dorcas  dying. — 1.  Notwithstanding  her  piety,  Dorcas  died.  Her  beautiful 
name,  lovely  character,  and  useful  life  proved  unable  to  ward  off  the  attack  of 
the  last  enemy.  Having  fallen  sick,  though  Scripture  maintains  a  holy  reticence 
concerning  the  nature  of  her  ailment,  she  passed  from  this  mortal  scene,  most 
likely  leaving  behind  her  no  death-bed  testimony,  but  only  the  memory  of  her 
saintly  character  and  life  to  suggest  whither  she  had  gone.  2.  In  consequence  of 
her  piety  Dorcas  was  much  lamented.  Truth  in  the  familiar  phrase  that  one  is 
never  missed  and  one's  worth  never  appreciated  till  one  dies.  Whether  Dorcas's 
character  and  philanthropic  labour  were  known  beyond  or  even  throughout  the 
little  circle  of  the  Christian  community  in  Joppa  before  her  death  cannot  be  told ; 
but  hardly  had  the  vital  spark  become  extinct  within  her  frame  than  the  whole 
truth  concerning  her  was  disclosed.  First  came  the  Church  members,  her  fellow- 
disciples,  to  mourn  for  her  death,  and  condole  with  her  bereaved  relatives,  so 
proving  that  human  hearts  may  be  bound  together  by  other  ties  than  those  of 
mere  earthly  relationship ;  and  then  arrived  the  weeping  widows,  the  recipients 
of  her  benevolence,  who  exhibited  the  coats  and  garments  she  had  made  as  a 
testimony  at  once  to  the  piety  of  the  deceased  and  to  the  gratitude  of  the  living. 

224 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  ix. 


III.  Dorcas  rising. — 1.  Unexpected  on  the  part  of  the  disciples.  Difficult  to 
think  these  had  any  other  idea  in  sending  for  Peter  than  simply  to  receive  from 
him  comfort  and  consolation.  As  yet  the  apostles  had  never  restored  a  dead 
body  to  life.  Then  the  attentions  bestowed  upon  the  corpse  showed  it  was 
being  prepared  for  burial.  Certainly  the  early  Christians  believed  in  the  possi- 
bility of  a  resurrection ;  but  ground  scarcely  exists  for  supposing  the  friends  of 
Dorcas  expected  her  revival.  "  Perhaps  something  whispered  in  the  troubled 
hearts  of  the  disciples,  '  If  Peter  had  been  here  our  sister  would  not  have  died ' 
.  .  .  but  the  surpassing  consolation  with  which  the  Lord  intended  presently  to  fill 
them  went  beyond  their  prayers  and  thoughts  "  (Besser).  2.  Effected  by  the  apostle. 
(1)  In  solitude.  Having  entered  the  death-chamber,  Peter  put  out  all  whom  he 
found  there ;  in  this  following  the  example  of  Christ  in  the  house  of  Jairus 
(Luke  viii.  54).  (2)  By  means  of  prayer.  Christ  raised  the  daughter  of  Jairus 
by  His  own  power  ;  Peter  invoked  Christ's  aid.  (3)  With  appropriate  actions. 
With  a  word  of  command — "Tabitha,  arise  !"  (compare  Luke  vii.  14,  viii.  54  ; 
John  xi.  43).  With  a  helping  hand  :  "  He  gave  her  his  hand  and  lifted  her  up." 
3.  Authenticated  in  the  eyes  of  the  Church.  When  she  had  been  recalled  to  life 
Peter  presented  her  to  the  saints  and  widows  waiting  without ;  to  those  most 
anxious  to  believe  in  her  restoration,  it  may  be  said,  but  also  to  those  best 
qualified  to  attest  its  reality  and  least  likely  to  be  imposed  upon — to  those  who 
had  seen  her  die,  washed  her  corpse,  and  prepared  it  for  the  tomb;  and  these 
having  seen  her,  distinctly  realised  she  was  alive.  4.  Followed  by  the  happiest 
results  in  the  general  community.  The  miracle  became  "  known  throughout  all 
Joppa,  and  many  believed  in  the  Lord." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  great  poor  law  of  the  Christian  Church.  The  strong  should 
help  the  weak  (Pom.  xvi.).  2.  The  proper  sphere  of  work  for  woman. 
Ministries  of  love.  3.  The  value  of  a  good  name.  Better  than  great  riches 
(Prov.  xxii.  1).  4.  The  mutual  sympathy  which  ought  to  bind  together  the 
various  members  of  the  Church  (Gal.  vi.  2).  5.  Tabitha' s  resurrection  a  picture 
of  the  resurrection  of  the  saints. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  36.  Joppa,  a  City  of —  in  the  seventh  century  to  his  Poyal 

I.  High  antiquity. — Reported  by  Highness  the  Prince  of  Wales  in  the 
ancient  geographers  to  have  been  built  nineteenth  "  (J.  L.  Porter).  (2)  The 
before  the  Flood.  It  certainly  existed  object  of  many  sieges,  from  the  days  of 
in  the  days  of  the  conquest  of  Canaan  Pompey  (b.c.  63)  to  those  of  Napoleon  I. 
under  Joshua  (xix.  46).  III.    Natural    beauty.  —  "  It    is," 

II.  Historical  renown. — 1.  In  pre-  writes  a  distinguished  traveller,  "  beau- 
Christian  times.  (1)  Solomon's  ships  tifully  situated  on  a  little  rounded  hill, 
sailed  from  its  harbour  to  go  to  Tarshish  dipping  on  the  west  side  into  the  waves 
(1  Kings  x.  22).  (2)  Hiram's  timber  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  on  the  land 
floats  landed  at  its  quay  (2  Chron.  side  encompassed  by  orchards  of  orange, 
ii.  16).  (3)  Ezra's  cedar  trees  received  lemon,  apricot,  and  other  trees,  which 
at  its  port  (iii.  7).  (4)  Jonah  em-  for  luxuriance  and  beauty  are  not  sur- 
barked     at    its    wharf    for    Tarshish  passed  in  the  world." 

(Jonah   i.  3).      2.    In   apostolic   times. 

(1)    The   scene   of  Peter's  miracle   in  Full  of  Good  Works.     Good  works — 

raising  Dorcas.  (2)  The  place  of  Peter's         I.  Flow  from  a  right  principle — the 

vision  concerning  Cornelius  (x.  1).     In  love  of  God   (John  xiv.    15-23  ;  Pom. 

modern  times.     (1)  "  The  landing-place  xiii.  10;  1  John  v.  3). 

of  pilgrims  going  to  Jerusalem  for  more  II.    Proceed  according   to   a   right 

than  a  thousand  years — from  Arculf  rule — the  word  of  God,  the  only  rule 

Q  225 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TEE  ACTS. 


of  faith  and  practice  (2  Tim.  iii.  16,  17).  of    the   inward   life   whose   vocation  is 

III.  Tend  towards  a  right  end— the  sympathy,  and  who  by  a  single  word, 
glory  of  God  (Rom.  xiv.  7,  8 ;  Col.  iii.  "  Brother,"  restore  light  to  those  that 
17-23).  sit  in  darkness  and  loneliness. 

IV.  Should  be  constantly  maintained  IV.  Dorcas,  in  a  humbler,  but  not 
(Titus  iii.  8).  less   true   sphere   of  Divine   goodness, 

V.  Will  certainly  be  rewarded  clothing  the  poor  with  her  own  hands. 
(Rom.  ii.  7).  practically    loving    and   benevolent. — 

Robertson,  of  Brighton. 
The  Variety  of  Gifts   bestowed  upon 

the  Christian  Church.    Four  characters,  Vers.  36-42.  Dorcas  and  Peter. 

exce(  dingly  diverse.  I.  The  character  of  Dorcas  illustrates 

I.  Paul,  a   man  singularly  gifted,  the  amiableness  of  female  piety, 
morally  and  intellectually,  with  quali-  II.   The     conduct     of    the    widows 
ties  more  brilliant  than   almost    ever  supplies  a  beautiful  instance  of  grati- 
fell  to  the  lot  of  man.  tude. 

II.  Peter,  full  of  love,  a  champion  III.  The  behaviour  of  Peter  exem- 
of  the  truth.  plifies  that  promptitude  in  doing  good 

III.  Ananias,  one  of  those  disciples  which  ought  to  characterise  Christians. 


CHAPTER  X. 

The  Church's  Door  opened  for  the  Gentiles — Accession  op  Converts 

from  Heathendom. 

§  1.  Cornelius's  Vision;  or,  a  Gentile  Inquirer  directed  (vers.  1-8). 

§  2.  Peter's  Trance;  or,  the  Apostolic  Agent  instructed  (vers.  9-16). 

§  3.  Cornelius's  Messengers  at  Joppa  ;    or,  the  Gentile  Proselyte  knocking  for 

Admission  (vers.  17-23). 
§  4.  Peter's  Journey  to  Csesarea  ;  or,  the  Candidate's  Examination  (vers.  24-33). 
§  5.  Peter's  Sermon  to  Cornelius ;  or,  the  Gospel  preached  to  a  Gentile  (vers. 

34-43). 
§  6.  The  Descent  of  the  Spirit  on  Cornelius ;  or,  a  Gentile's  Reception  into  the 

Church  (vers.  44-48). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  There  was. — Omitted  in  best  MSS.  Centurion. — eKaroviapxns  (xxvii.  1)  = 
eicaTovT&pxos  (xxi.  32 ;  compare  Luke  vii.  2-6,  xxiii.  47).  Italian  band,  or  cohort. — The  leqio 
Italica  of  Tacitus  {Hist ,  i.  59,  64),  raised  by  Nero  (Dion.  Cass  ,  lv.  24),  was  not  at  this  time 
in  existence.  "  An  inscription  in  Gruter  informs  us  that  volunteer  Italian  cohorts  served  in 
Syria — i.e.,  Italian  or  Roman  cohorts  who  enlisted  of  their  own  accord  instead  of  being 
obliged  to  perform  military  service  "  (Hackett).  The  number  of  soldiers  in  a  cohort  was 
usually  six  hundred,  though  the  term  was  frequently  used  for  a  maniple,  which  was  a  third 
of  a  cohort  (Holtzmann). 

Ver.  2.  Devout. — eva-e^fy,  different  from  evXaftets  in  ii.  5,  viii.  2,  describes  "  the  special  type 
of  devotion  that  belonged  to  Gentile  converts  "  (Plumptre),  though  there  is  no  ground  for 
believing  that  Cornelius  was  a  proselyte  (Olshausen,  Neander,  Wendt).  Against  this  stand 
(Zockler) :  (1)  the  word  a\\6<pv\os  of  another  nation,  applied  by  Peter  to  Cornelius  (ver.  28)  ; 

226 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  x. 


(2)  the  characterisation  of  Cornelius  and  his  family  as  belonging  to  the  Gentiles  (ver.  34)  ; 

(3)  the  great  excitement  kindled  by  their  reception  of  the  Spirit,  and  their  baptism  by  Peter 
(ver.  45,  xi.  Iff). 

Ver.  3.  Evidently  =  openly,  so  that  the  vision  was  not  purely  subjective  (Neander). 
Ver.  4.  For  a  memorial  before  God. — Alluding  to  "  that  part  of  the  meat  offering  which  is 
burnt,  and  whose  savour  was  intended  to  remind  God  of  the  worshipper  "  (Ewald).     It  is 
doubtful,  however,  if  this  is  not  somewhat  fanciful. 

Ver.  5.  Send  men  to  Joppa,  etc. — Zeller  correctly  observes  {Die  Apostelgeschi  elite,  p.  181) 
that  this  minute  acquaintance  of  the  angel  with  Peter's  name  and  residence  with  Simon  the 
Tanner  shows  that  Cornelius's  vision  was  not  a  mere  fancy,  ein  blesses  Pliant  asiegebilde  des 
Betenders,  but  an  objective  appearance. 

Ver.  6.  The  best  MSS.  omit  the  words,  he  shall  tell  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to  do,  as  an 
insertion  in  accordance  with  ix.  6  and  xi.  14. 

Ver.  7.  For  nnto  Cornelius  read  unto  him.  Of  thorn  that  waited  on  him  continually  may 
point  to  similarity  of  disposition,  as  in  viii.  13  (Zockler,  Holtzmann),  as  well  as  to  menial 
service  (De  Wette,  Overbeck). 

Ver.  9.  The  house-top  was  frequently  employed  for  devotion.  The  roof,  almost  flat,  only 
sloping  enough  to  let  the  rain  run  off,  was  surrounded  by  a  balustrade  as  directed  by  the  law 
(Deut.  xxii.  8),  and  formed  thus  a  terrace  which  served  as  a  place  of  retirement  (Stapfer's 
Palestine  in  the  Time  of  Christ,  p.  175). 

Ver.  10.  Would  have  eaten  should  be  desired  to  eat,  felt  the  demands  of  appetite  conse- 
quent upon  long  fasting. 

Ver.  11.  And  saw  should  be  and  seeth.  Omit  unto  him  after  descending.  As  it  had  been 
a  great  sheet  knit  at  the  four  corners  and  let  down  to  the  earth,  according  to  the  E.V. 
should  be  as  it  were  a  great  sheet  let  down  by  four  corners  upon  the  earth — bebefxiuov  kcu 
being  wanting  in  the  best  MSS.  In  the  former  case  the  sheet  was  tied  at  its  four  corners 
with  ropes  which  let  it  down  towards  the  earth  ;  in  the  other  it  was  let  down  by  its  four 
corners  or  ends  (to  which,  however,  ropes  may  have  been  attached,  though  this  is  not  stated). 
The  sense  is  not  materially  different.  Afford,  Hackett,  Lechler,  Plumptre,  and  others,  prefer 
the  first  reading;  Lachmann,  Zockler,  Holtzmann,  with  Westcott  and  Hort,  whom  the  R.V. 
here  follows,  decide  for  the  second. 

Ver.  12.  Should  read  all  manner  of,  or  simply  all  the  fourfooted  beasts  (omitting  and  wild 
beasts,  a  clause  introduced  from  xi.  6)  and  creeping  things  of  the  earth,  with  the  sanction  of 
the  best  texts  (Tischendorf,  Lachmann,  Meyer,  Westcott  and  Hort). 

Ver.  14.  Common  or  should  be  common  and  unclean. — "  Common"  is  the  opposite  of  "  holy," 
hence  unholy. 

Ver.  16.  Substitute  straightway,  evdvs,  for  again,  7rdXti'.  Thrice. — For  the  sake  of  emphasis. 
(Compare  Dan.  vi.  10,  13  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  8.) 

Ver.  17.  iv  eaury  h-qirbpei,  doubted  in  himself,  or  was  much  p>erplexed  in  himself  (as  in  ii.  12, 
v.  24),  seems  to  intimate  that  Peter's  trance  was  over  and  Peter  himself  returned  to  his 
ordinary  consciousness. 

Ver.  19.  The  Spirit  said  unto  him. — Neander  thinks  that  Peter's  attention  was  first  arrested 
by  the  sound  of  the  men's  voices  in  the  court  below,  and  that  the  Spirit  only  explained  to 
him  the  connection  between  their  visit  and  his  meditations.  This,  however,  is  incoirect. 
The  numeral  three  is  by  some  codices  omitted,  while  others  have  two ;  and  instead  of  the 
present  seek  the  participle  seeking.  Westcott  and  Hort  read  men  seeking  ;  Alford,  Hackett, 
and  Zockler  men  seek. 

Ver.  21.  Which  were  sent  unto  him  from  Cornelius  should  be  omitted  on  the  authority  of 
the  best  MRS. 

Ver.  22.  Warned  from  God,  one  word  expfl^oLTiad-q,  signifies  was  divinely  instructed.  (Com- 
pare Matt,  ii.  12,  22.) 

Ver.  23.  For  Peter  went  away,  the  best  authorities  read,  he  arose  and  went  away.  The 
brethren  from  Joppa  were  six  in  number  (xi.  12),  the  whole  company  ten. 

Ver.  25.  And  worshipped. — Not  Peter  (Adoravit :  non  addidit  Lucas  "eum,"  Bengel),  but 
God  in  him,  or  who  sent  bim.     (Compare  Gal.  iv.  14.) 

Ver.  30.  Four  days  ago  I  was  fasting  until  this  hour ;  and  at  the  ninth  hour  I  prayed  in 
my  house. — This  seems  to  say  that  Cornelius  had  four  days  previous  to  Peter's  arrival  been 
fasting  until  a  certain  hour,  probably  the  sixth,  and  that  thereafter,  when  engaged  in  prayer 
about  the  ninth  hour,  he  beheld  a  vision  (Alford,  Spence,  Zockler,  Holtzmann).  The  best 
authorities,  however,  omit  the  clausule  I  was  fasting — but  wrongly,  as  many  think  (Alford, 
Meyer,  Wendt,  Zockler) — and  translate  "  Four  days  ago  until  this  hour  I  was  at  the  ninth 
hour  praying,"  or  literally,  from  the  fourth  day  until  this  hour,  etc.,  which  cannot  mean  that 
Cornelius  had  been  praying  four  days  consecutively  up  to  the  moment  in  question,  the  ninth 
hour  (Neander,  De  Wette),  but  must  be  understood  as  signifying  that  on  the  fourth  day  pre- 
ceding he  had  commenced  his  devotions  (or  his  fasting),  and  had  continued  on  that  day  till 
the  ninth  hour. 

227 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Ver.  31.  Is  should  be  was  heard,  ela-rjKouadT],  and  are  should  be  were  had  in  remembrance, 
ifAvrjadrjacus.     So  also  in  ver.  4  the  present  tenses  should  be  past. 

Ver.  32.  Who  when  he  cometh  shall  speak  unto  thee,  as  an  insertion  similar  to  that  in 
ver.  6,  is  wanting  in  the  best  MiSS. 

Ver.  33.  Substitute  of  the  Lord — i.e.,  Christ —  for  of  God. 

Ver.  34.  The  word  for  respecter  of  persons,  7rpoauTro\r)irT7)$,  is  found  only  here  in  the  N.T., 
though  7rpo<TW7ro\r)\pla  occurs  in  Rom.  ii.  11. 

Ver.  35.  Accepted  with  Him. — Better,  acceptable  to  him.  Though  applied  to  Cornelius 
prior  to  his  hearing  the  gospel,  this  did  not  imply  that  before  and  without  a  believing  recep- 
tion of  that  gospel  Cornelius  was  in  an  absolute  sense  justified,  forgiven,  and  accepted  (see 
ver.  43).  What  is  here  taught  is  not  iiidifferentismus  religionum,  but  indifferentia  nationum 
(Bengel). 

Ver.  36.  The  construction  of  the  next  three  verses  is  uncertain.  Either  (1)  the  word 
rbv  \6you  (ver.  36)  should  be  connected  with  "  I  perceive,"  KaTaXa/x^dvojuaL  (ver.  34)  and  ver.  46 
taken  as  in  apposition  to  vers.  34,  35  (De  Wette,  Ebrard,  Lange,  Alford) ;  or  (2)  rbv  \6yov 
should  be  regarded  as  in  apposition  to  da«xio<jvv7]v  (Ewald,  Buttmann,  Nosgen,  Zockler)  ; 
or  (3),  and  perhaps  the  best  way  (Kuinoel,  Mej'er,  Wendt,  Winer,  Overbeck,  Lechler, 
Holtzmann,  and  others),  the  word  (ver.  36)  should  be  construed  with  ye  know  (ver.  37),  the 
word  being  described  by  the  three  clauses  standing  in  apposition — (a)  which  God  (or  He) 
sent  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  etc.  (ver.  36)  ;  (#)  that  word  (or,  that  saying)  which  was 
published,  or  (as  in  Luke  ii.  15)  that  affair  which  took  place  (ver.  37)  ;  and  (<?)  (the  subject 
of  that  saying,  also  in  the  accusative)  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  etc.  (ver.  38). 

Ver.  39.  Whom  also  they  (indefinite)  slew  and  hanged  (rather,  having  hanged  him)  on  a 
tree. — Speaking  to  the  Gentiles,  Peter  does  not  specify  the  agents  as  when  addressing  the 
Jews  (ii.  23,  iii.  14,  iv.  10,  v.  30). 

Ver.  41.  Bengel,  placing  the  clause  "who  did  eat  and  drink  with  Him"  in  a  parenthesis, 
explains  it  as  pointing  to  the  intercourse  of  the  apostles  with  Christ  before  His  death  ;  it 
obviously,  however,  alludes  to  their  fellowship  with  Him  after  His  resurrection  (Luke  xxiv.  43 ; 
John  xxi.  13). 

Ver.  42.  Judge  of  quick  and  dead. — Not  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  merely  (Olshausen), 
but  of  those  who  shall  be  alive  at  His  coming,  and  of  those  who  shall  have  fallen  asleep 
(xvii.  31 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  1 ;  1  Peter  iv.  5). 

Ver.  47.  Can  any  man  forbid  the  water  ? — The  question  suggests  what  was  probably  the 
case,  that  the  primitive  practice  was  to  bring  the  water  to  the  candidate  rather  than  the 
candidate  to  the  water. 

Ver.  48.  He  commanded  them  to  be  baptised. — Most  likely  by  another  than  himself,  a 
practice  afterwards  followed  by  Paul  (1  Cor.  i.  14).  Peter  only  completes  by  outward  form 
what  God  has  already  in  inward  essence,  by  communicating  the  Holy  Ghost,  effected — viz., 
the  admission  of  Cornelius  and  his  company  to  the  Christian  Church. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses   1—8. 

Cornelius's  Vision  ;  or,  a  Gentile  Inquirer  directed. 

I.  Cornelius's  person. — 1.  His  name.  This  "  may  indicate  a  connection  with 
the  great  Cornelian  gens  which  had  been  made  famous  by  the  Gracchi  and  by 
Sylla "  (Plumptre).  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  he  was  the  individual 
mentioned  in  Luke  vii.  5.  2.  His  profession.  A  soldier.  "  A  centurion  of  the 
band  called  the  Italian."  The  military  profession  not  incompatible  with 
Christianity.  Christianity  has  won  numerous  converts  from  the  army.  Yet 
modern  soldiers  too  seldom  resemble  Cornelius.  The  special  cohort  commanded 
by  Cornelius  may  have  derived  its  name  from  having  been  either  composed  of 
native  Italian  soldiers,  or  at  least  commanded  by  Italian  officers.  Another 
cohort,  called  the  Augustan,  is  mentioned  later  (xxvii.  1).  The  ordinary  cohorts 
stationed  at  Csesarea,  which  consisted  of  levies  from  the  provinces,  were  not 
always  reliable  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XIV;  xv.  10;  Wars,  I.  xvii.  1).  3.  His  rank.  A 
centurion  or  captain  of  a  hundred,  the  sixth  part  of  a  cohort  and  the  sixtieth  of 
a  legion.  4.  His  residence.  Csesarea,  situated  on  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  was 
the  headquarters  of  the  Roman  procurator,  and  the  seat  of  a  Roman  garrison. 
Built  by  Herod  the  Great,  it  was  inhabited  mostly  by  Gentiles,  though  it  con- 
tained a  considerable  sprinkling  of  Jews  (see  on  viii.  40). 

II.  Cornelius's  character. — A  devout — i.e.}  pious  man,  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah, 
not  necessarily  a  proselyte.     The  word  here  used  differs  from  that  employed  to 

228 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  x. 


describe  serious  and  religious-minded  Jews  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  His  piety 
exhibited  itself  in  four  ways.  1.  In  cherishing  the  fear  of  God  in  his  own  soul 
As  the  absence  of  such  fear  is  characteristic  of  the  wicked  (Psalm  xxxvi.  1  ; 
Rom.  iii.  18),  so  does  its  presence  mark  the  good  or  righteous  man  (Psalm  ii.  11, 
ciii.  11;  Prov.  i.  7 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  1;  Eph.  v.  21).  That  Cornelius's  fear  of  God 
was  sincere,  was  attested  by  his  own  domestics  (ver.  22).  2.  In  seeking  the 
spiritual  welfare  of  his  household.  In  caring  for  the  religious  training  of  all 
committed  by  providence  to  his  care,  his  family,  his  slaves,  his  soldiers  ;  like 
Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.  19),  Job  (i.  5),  and  "David  (2  Sam.  vi.  20).  A  proper 
exemplar  in  this  respect  to  Christian  husbands,  fathers,  masters,  and  superiors 
(Eph.  vi.  4,  9).  "It  is  the  highest  ornament  of  a  house  when  both  the  master 
and  the  dependants  acknowledge  and  fear  God"  (Starke).  3.  In  practising 
benevolence  towards  the  poor.  In  distributing  much  alms  among  the  people — i.e., 
of  the  Jews  (see  ver.  42,  xxvi.  17,  23,  xxviii,  17),  though  not  necessarily  to 
them  exclusively.  Kindness  to  the  needy  (Psalm  cxii.  9),  a  grace  enjoined  upon 
Christians  (Luke  x.  37  ;  John  xv.  17  ;  Rom.  xii.  10  ;  Gal.  v.  13  ;  1  John  iii.  17), 
as  well  as  a  dictate  of  ordinary  humanity.  There  may  have  been  in  Cornelius's 
philanthropy  "  something  of  the  service  of  works,"  yet  was  it  not  on  that 
account  to  be  adjudged  as  hypocritical.  4.  In  habitually  maintaining  the 
exercise  of  prayer.  This  was  another  mark  of  indwelling  grace.  A  religion 
that  does  not  prompt  men  to  pray,  is  not  a  true  religion  (Rom.  xii.  12  ;  Eph.  vi. 
18  ;  Phil.  iv.  6  ;  Col.  iv.  2  ;  1  Thess.  v.  17,  etc.,  etc.).  Among  other  matters 
carried  by  Cornelius  to  the  throne  of  grace,  it  may  be  assumed,  was  the  new 
religion  which  had  been  brought  by  Philip  to  Csesarea  (viii.  40),  and  concerning 
which  he  most  likely  desired  to  be  guided.  N.B. — All  the  centurions  of  scripture 
(xxvii.  3  ;  Matt.  viii.  5  ;  Luke  vii.  2)  are  presented  in  a  favourable  light. 

III.  Cornelius's  vision. — 1.  The  time.  "  About  the  ninth  hour  of  the  day  " — i.e. 
somewhere  in  the  course  of  it  (the  force  of  dxrei).  As  this  was  3  p.m.,  one  of 
the  hours  for  temple  worship  (iii.  1),  it  has  been  suggested  that  Cornelius  may 
have  been  a  proselyte,  but  this  hardly  harmonises  with  subsequent  statements 
(vers.  28,  34,  xi.  1,  8,  xv.  7  ;  see  "  Critical  Remarks  on  ver.  2  ").  The  most  that 
can  be  inferred  is  that  along  with  his  family  he  had  adopted  some  of  the  forms  of 
Hebrew  worship.  2.  The  manner.  Evidently,  or  openly ;  meaning  clearly  and 
distinctly,  not  obscurely  and  faintly,  neither  in  a  dream  (compare  Matt.  i.  20,  ii. 
13),  nor  in  a  trance  (compare  ver.  10,  xxii.  17),  but  with  his  bodily  eyes,  "thus 
asserting  the  objective  truth  of  the  appearance  "  (Alford).  3.  The  appearance. 
"An  angel  of  God"  (as  in  viii.  26,  xxvii.  23).  Cornelius,  it  should  be  observed, 
did  not  call  him  an  angel  of  God,  but  described  him  as  "  a  man  in  bright 
apparel"  (ver.  30).  Yet  Cornelius  must  have  recognised  the  apparition  as  an 
angel,  since  his  messengers  used  this  appellation  (ver.  22)  ;  which  suggests  that 
Cornelius  was  accustomed  to  read  the  Scriptures  in  his  household  (Ezek.  i.  13,  14  ; 
Dan.  x.  6).  In  any  case  Peter,  who  had  witnessed  the  Ascension  and  seen  the 
two  men  in  white  apparel  (i.  10),  had  no  difficulty  in  identifying  the  "  man  in 
bright  apparel"  as  a  celestial  intelligence  (xi.  13);  and  this  fact  that  Cornelius's 
visitor  was  from  heaven  presumably  weighed  with  him  and  his  fellow-apostles  in 
deciding  whether  right  had  been  done  in  admitting  an  uncircumcised  Gentile 
into  the  Christian  Church.  That  Cornelius  saw  the  angel  coming  in,  and  heard 
him  speak,  accords  with  the  Biblical  representation  of  these  heavenly  messengers 
(v.  19,  xii.  8,  xxvii.  23).  4.  The  impression.  (1)  Cornelius  having  fastened  his 
eyes  upon  the  angel,  was  afraid,  no  doubt,  at  his  dazzling  appearance.  That 
men  should  be  alarmed  at  unusual  phenomena,  and  in  particular  at  the  presence 
of  the  supernatural  (Job  iv.  15),  is  an  indirect  witness  to  the  fall.  (2)  Having 
recovered  from  his  fright  he  inquired  the  reason  of  the  angel's  coming — "  What 
is  it,  Lord  ?  " 

229 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


IV.  Cornelius's  commendation. — His  prayers  and  his  alms,  said  the  angel, 
reversing  Luke's  order,  perhaps  to  show  that  God  regarded  chiefly  the  heart 
(Lechler),  had  been — 1.  Noticed  by  God.  The  Supreme  is  an  indifferent 
spectator  of  nothing,  least  of  all  of  what  is  done  by  them  that  fear  Him  (Job 
xxxiv.  21;  Prov.  xv.  3;  Mai.  iii.  16;  Heb.  iv.  13).  2.  Remembered  by  God. 
Gone  up  "  for  a  memorial  before  God ;  "  before  God  not  as  a  plea  in  justification 
but  as  requests  to  be  kept  in  mind  and  answered  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  God 
forgets  nothing  but  pardoned  sin.  Never  in  any  instance  the  supplication  of  a 
humble  heart  (Psalm  lxv.  2  ;  Isa.  Ixv.  24 ;  Matt.  vii.  8.) 

V.  Cornelius's  instruction. — Given  by  the  angel.  1.  Whom  to  send  for. 
"  One  Simon,  who  is  surnamed  Peter."  The  angel  did  not  attempt  to  convert 
Cornelius.  Neither  had  he  been  sent  for  that  purpose.  His  mission  was  to 
direct  Cornelius  to  send  for  Peter.  2.  Where  to  find  him.  "  He  lodgeth  with 
one  Simon  a  tanner  in  Joppa  "  (see  ix.  43),  "  whose  house  is  by  the  seaside." 
N.B. — God's  knowledge  of  men  extends  to  their  names,  surnames,  residences, 
trades,  etc.  3.  What  to  do.  "  He  shall  tell  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to  do." 
(But  see  "  Critical  Remarks.") 

VI.  Cornelius's  obedience. — 1.  Prompt.  Immediately  the  angel  had  departed 
he  took  steps  to  carry  out  the  injunctions  received.  Faith  commonly  brooks  no 
delay.  "  Straightway  "  a  familiar  word  in  Faith's  vocabulary.  2.  Exact.  He 
did  precisely  as  the  angel  had  commanded.  He  sent  men  to  Joppa.  Faith 
never  attempts  to  improve  on  Divine  instructions.  As  the  Lord  commands  so 
does  faith  (Gen.  vi.  22).  3.  Prudent.  The  messengers  were  carefully  selected — 
two  of  his  household  servants,  who,  no  doubt,  like  himself,  were  God-fearing, 
and  a  pious  soldier  who  usually  waited  on  himself.  Faith  never  abandons 
prudence,  but  looks  well  to  her  goings. 

Learn. — 1.  That  piety  may  exist  and  flourish  in  any  rank  and  station  in  life. 
2.  That  God's  salvation  is  nigh  them  that  fear  Him.  3.  That  "more  servants 
wait  on  man  than  he'll  take  knowledge  of."  4.  That  prayers  and  alms  are  twin 
advocates  of  great  influence  with  God.  5.  That  God  never  leaves  the  meek 
without  guidance.  6,  That  good  men  should  study  to  have  pious  servants  about 
them.     7.  That  pious  households  are  often  visited  by  angels. 

HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1.  The  Centurion  of  Ccesarea.  I.  Goodness    in    high    station. — A 

— A     Roman     from     head     to     foot,  Roman   soldier  of   exalted   rank,   and 

Cornelius   had   still  no  heart  for  the  yet  obviously  kind  to  and  considerate 

Roman  gods;  he  was  one  of  Japhet's  of   his   dependants   as  well  as  of  the 

children,  who  in  the  conquered  tents  of  poor;  two  marks  of  moral  excellence 

Shem  had  himself  been  conquered  by  not   always   found   among   Christians, 

the  God  of  Shem.     Certainly  he  was  though  they  should  be  (Rom.  xii.  13,  16). 

still  a   heathen  ;  Jerusalem's   desolate  II.  Piety   outside   the  pale  of  the 

temple  had  not  had  for  him  attraction  Church. — A  devout  man  who  prayed 

enough    to    cause    him   to   become   a  to  God  always  and  gave  much  alms  to 

proselyte  ;  had  he  sought  to  find  peace  the  poor,  though  by  birth  and  education 

there,  he  would    have   returned   from  he  was  a  Gentile.     God  has  other  sons 

Jerusalem  just  as   unsatisfied   as   the  bt sides  those  who   are  called   by  His 

Treasurer    from     the     East. — Besser,  name  (Hosea  ii.  23  ;  Rom.  ix.  25,  26), 

Bibelstunden :  Apostelgeschichte,  III.   i.  and    Christ    other    sheep   than   those 

514).  who    belong    to    the    recognised    fold 

(John  x.  16). 

Cornelius  the  Centurion. — An  example  III.  An  earnest  soul  seeking  after 

of — ^  God. — Though  pious,  he  was  yet  con- 

230 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  x. 


scious  of   a  want.     Though  no  longer  IV.  Never  unprofitable. — The    soul 

in   heathen    darkness,    he  realised    he  that  communes  much   with   God  will 

had  not  yet  attained  to  perfect  light,  not    only    receive     much     from    God 

Though   delivered  in  a  measure  from  (Matt.    vii.    8),     but    will    gradually 

fear,  he  was  not  at  rest.     For  more  become  like  God. 

light,  fuller  knowledge,  deeper  peace, 

his  prayers  were  doubtless  directed.  Vers.  5,  6.    Simon  the  Apostle    and 

IV.  Meekness  instructed  by  God. —  Simon     the     Tanner ;     or,     Christian 
"  The  meek  will  He  guide  in  judgment,  Preachers  and  Christian  Tradesmen. 
and  the  meek  will  He  teach  His  way  "  I.  Both     known      to      God. — Their 
(Psalm   xxv.    9).       This   promise   was  names,  callings,  and  residences, 
signally    illustrated     in    the    case    of  II.  Both  serve  God. — Their  callings 
Cornelius.  may  be  different  ;  their  Master  is  one. 

V.  Faith  proving  itself  by  obe-  III.  Both  advance  Christ's  kingdom. 
dience. — No  sooner  did  the  angel  The  preacher  (the  apostle)  directly  by 
command  than  with  military  prompti-  publishing  the  gospel ;  the  tradesman 
tude  he  obeyed.    (Compare  Luke  vii.  8.)  (the  tanner)  indirectly  by  lodging  the 

preacher. 

Ver.  2.  Praying  Always.  IV.  Both  honoured  by  God. — Their 

I.  Enjoined  in  Scripture.  —  By  names  stand  together  in  the  annals  of 
Christ  (Luke  xviii.  1)  and  by  Paul  the  Church  and  on  the  page  of  in- 
(1  Thess.  v.  17).  spiration. 

II.  Not   impossible. — Except   as    a 

mere  external   performance   or  bodily  Ver.  7.  A  Model  House. 

service  (Matt.  xxvi.  41).    As  a  spiritual  I.  Religious. — Characterised  by  the 

exercise  (1  Cor.  xiv.  15)  by  no  means  fear  of  God  and  sanctified  by  prayer, 

unattainable,  as  the  cases  of  the  Twelve  II.  Harmonious. — Master   and   ser- 

(vi.    4),    of    Cornelius,    and    of    Paul  vants,     doubtless     also    parents     and 

(Col.  i.  9)  prove.     The  heart  may  be  children,  living  in  concord  and  love, 

always  in  an  attitude  of  prayer,  though  III.  Benevolent. — Mindful    of     the 

not  every  instant  conscious  of  desire.  wants   of   others  ;  distributing  to  the 

III.  Eminently     reasonable.  —  The  necessities  of  the  saints. 

man  who  prays  always  shows  himself  IV.  Blessed.  —  Visited    by    angels, 

to  be  good — i.e.,  humble  and  wise.  God's  ministers  of  salvation. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—16. 

Peter's  Trance ;  or,  the  Apostolic  Agent  prepared. 

I.  The  circumstances. — 1.  Where?  (1)  In  Joppa  (see  ix.  36-43).  How  Peter 
came  to  be  in  that  seaside  city  has  already  been  related.  (2)  In  the  house  of 
Simon  the  tanner  (ver.  6).  A  good  man  is  near  to  heaven  anywhere  and 
everywhere.  (3)  On  the  flat  roof  of  Simon's  mansion,  whither  he  had  retired 
for  devotion.  Since  Christ  came  every  place  is  holy  ground.  Oriental  houses 
were  commonly  constructed  like  Simon's  (Mark  ii.  4).  2.  When  ?  (1)  On  the 
morrow  after  Cornelius's  vision,  after  the  departure  of  his  messengers  and  as 
they  were  approaching  the  city.  (2)  About  the  sixth  hour — i.e.,  about  noon. 
This  also  was  a  favourite  hour  for  prayer  with  devout  Jews  (Psalm  Iv.  17). 
(3)  While  Simon's  domestics  were  making  ready  (ver.  10) — i.e.,  while  they  were 
preparing  the  midday  meal,  which  in  all  probability  would  consist  of  "  fish, 
locusts  baked  in  flour  or  honey,  onions,  and  (perhaps)  butcher's  meat "  (Stapfer's 
Palestine  in  the  Time  of  Christ,  p.  189).  3.  How  engaged?  In  prayer,  for 
which  roofs  of  houses  were  often  used  (Matt.  x.  27,  xxiv.  17  ;  Luke  xvii.  31),  as 
being  both  secluded  and  safe,  in  consequence  of  ordinarily  having  a  balustrade 

231 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


of  three  or  four  feet  high  running  round  them  (Deut.  xxii.  8).  It  was  not 
surprising  that  Peter  should  have  a  heavenly  vision  while  engaged  in  prayer 
(see  "Hints  on  ver.  11").  Glimpses  within  the  veil  are  most  likely  to  be 
enjoyed  by  them  who  live  nearest  it.  4.  In  what  condition  ?  "  Hungry," 
very  (Hackett),  and  desirous  of  eating.  He  had  probably  partaken  of  no  food 
since  the  morning,  more  especially  if  the  day  was  one  of  those  (the  second  and 
fifth  of  the  week,  Monday  and  Thursday)  which  were  habitually  observed  as 
fasts  by  pious  Jews  (Stapfer's  Palestine  in  the  Time  of  Christ,  p.  381).  Although 
Jews  often  fasted  from  strange  motives,  as,  e.g.,  "to  secure  pleasant  dreams,  to 
find  the  explanation  of  a  dream,  or  to  avert  some  evil  omen"  (Stapfer,  p.  381), 
it  cannot  be  supposed  that  either  Cornelius  (ver.  30,  A.Y.),  or  Peter  was 
similarly  actuated.  By  them,  doubtless,  abstinence  from  food,  either  wholly 
or  in  part,  was  regarded  as  a  valuable,  if  not  necessary,  preparation  for  high 
spiritual  exercises  (Psalm  xxxv.  13,  lxix.  10;  Dan.  ix.  3 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  5; 
Acts  xiv.  23). 

II.  The  occurrences. — 1.  The  trance.  "He  fell  into  a  trance;  or  there  came 
upon  him  an  ecstasy  or  rapture  (=  being  in  the  Spirit,  Rev.  i.  10),  by  which,  as  it 
were,  he  was  carried  out  of  himself  and  put  into  a  mental  state  in  which  he 
could  discern  objects  beyond  the  apprehension  of  man's  natural  powers  (Hackett). 
Compare  xi.  5,  xxii.  17;  2  Cor.  xii.  3;  perhaps  also  Numb.  xxiv.  4  and  Ezek. 
viii.  3.  2.  The  sights.  (1)  Heaven  opened.  So  it  happened  to  Christ  on  the 
occasion  of  His  baptism  (Luke  iii.  21) ;  to  the  beloved  disciple  in  Patmos 
(Rev.  iv.  1,  xix,  11) ;  and  to  Stephen  in  the  council  chamber  (vii.  56).  Compare 
also  in  the  Old  Testament  the  cases  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxviii.  17),  Isaiah  (vi.  1), 
Ezekiel  (i.  1),  and  Daniel  (iv.  13).  (2)  A  great  sheet  descending  out  of  it,  let  down 
by  the  four  corners  upon  the  earth — i.e.,  either  the  sheet,  which  in  form  resembled 
a  vessel  or  receptacle,  was  fastened  to  the  four  corners  east,  west,  south,  and 
north  of  heaven  (Meyer),  or  the  ends  of  the  sheet  were  fastened  to  and  upheld 
by  ropes  let  down  from  heaven  (see  "  Critical  Remarks").  (3)  The  cavity  in  the 
sheet  filled  with  "  all  manner  of  four-footed  beasts  and  creeping  things  of  the 
earth  and  fowls  of  the  heaven."  (4)  The  sheet  swaying  and  moving  towards  Peter. 
The  words  "  unto  him,"  though  omitted  by  the  best  MSS.  (see  "  Critical 
Remarks  "),  probably  express  what  Peter  beheld  (compare  xi.  5).  (5)  The  drawing 
up  of  the  sheet  into  heaven  after  a  threefold  repetition  of  the  scene.  (6)  Whether 
Peter  saw  any  personal  form  or  figure  is  not  stated,  but  seems  almost  implied 
in  what  follows.  3.  The  sounds.  (1)  Rise,  Peter.  The  apostle  may  at  this 
moment  have  been  kneeling  in  prayer,  or  most  likely  prostrate  in  awe  and 
wonder  before  the  vision  (compare  Rev.  i.  17).  The  mysterious  voice,  recognised 
by  Peter  as  that  of  a  heavenly  being  (compare  ver.  4),  addressed  him  by  name. 
Compare  the  cases  of  Moses  (Exod.  iii.  4) ;  Samuel  (1  Sam.  iii.  10);  Saul  (ix.  4) ; 
and  Cornelius  (x.  3).  (2)  Kill  and  eat.  "  Any  of  the  creatures,  without  regard 
to  the  distinction  of  clean  or  unclean,  was  what  the  voice  intended.  That  Peter 
understood  this  his  answer  showed:  "Not  so,  Lord;  for  I  have  never  eaten 
anything  that  is  common  (unholy)  and  unclean,"  or,  according  to  Peter's  own  version, 
"  Nothing  common  or  unclean  hath  ever  entered  into  my  mouth "  (xi.  8). 
Peter's  scrupulous  conscientiousness  as  a  Jew  caused  the  commandment  to  come 
upon  him  with  a  shock  of  surprise.  In  the  times  of  the  Maccabees  (Mace.  vi.  18, 
vii.  1)  the  Jews  suffered  death  rather  than  submit  to  the  seeming  indignity  here 
proposed.  Peter's  refusal  accorded  with  his  well-known  character  for  impulsive- 
ness (compare  John  xiii.  8).  3.  "  What  God  hath  cleansed  call,  or  make,  not 
thou  common."  Like  the  former  voice  this  came  from  heaven,  and  implied  that 
all  meats  were  originally  alike  clean,  that  the  distinction  of  clean  and  unclean 
had' been  of  God's  making,  that  henceforth  God  had  abolished  all  such  distinctions, 
and  that  the  perpetuation  or  institution  of  such  distinctions  was  an  express 

232 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  x. 


violation  of  the  Divine  ordinance.  Compare  Christ's  teaching  on  defilement 
(Mark  vii.  14-23). 

III.  The  teachings. — These  were  all  such  as  concerned  the  Church,  and  in 
particular — 1.  Its  universal  character.  It  was  henceforth  to  embrace  all 
nationalities,  not  Jews  only,  but  also  Gentiles.  Ceremonial  distinctions  were  no 
more  to  operate  as  dividing  lines  between  the  peoples  of  the  earth.  The  Church's 
gates  were  to  stand  open  continually  for  the  admission  of  all  comers.  All  souls 
were  in  future  to  be  equally  precious  in  God's  sight  (Rom.  i.  14-16,  iii.  22,  29,  30  ; 
Gal.  iii.  28  ;  Eph.  ii.  14-22).  2.  Its  absolute  permanence.  Not  even  an  apostle 
— and  far  less  a  Church  council,  and  least  of  all  a  private  member — should  be  at 
liberty  to  change  its  constitution,  restrict  its  freedom,  or  impose  conditions  which 
would  deny  entrance  therein  to  a  heathen.  "  What  God  hath  cleansed  make 
not  thou  common."  "  Three  times  had  the  Lord  formerly  commanded  Peter  to 
feed  His  sheep  and  lambs  :  three  times  He  here  admonishes  Peter  to  make  the 
door  into  the  sheep  fold  no  narrower  tlian  God  will  have  it  "  (Besser).  The 
Church  of  Christ  in  all  ages  has  suffered  from  the  illegal  intrusion  of  man's 
power  into  her  sacred  domain.  3.  Its  sole  sovereign.  God  or  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  to  whom  alone  pertains  the  right  of  making  laws  for  His  kingdom — of 
admitting  to  or  excluding  from  the  fellowship  of  His  Church  (Eph.  i.  22). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  reality  of  a  supersensible  world.  2.  The  possibility  of 
revelation.  3.  The  world-wide  destiny  of  the  Church.  4.  The  dignity  of  human 
nature.     5.  The  headship  of  Christ  within  and  over  His  own  Church. 

HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS.  L 

Ver.  11.  Heaven  opened.  spects,   various  ranks  and  differences; 

I.  Heaven  may  open  to  any  man. —  national,  personal,  intellectual,  educa- 
To  a  Jacob  (Gen.  xxviii.  12),  an  tional ;  but  here,  in  connection  with 
Ezekiel  (i.  1),  a  Stephen  (vii.  56),  a  spiritual  blessing, — acceptance,  favour, 
Paul  (ix.  3),  as  well  as  to  a  Peter —  and  the  like,  all  these  disappear. 

and  in  any  place,  on  a  hillside,  a  river  II.    The     rebuke     here     given    to 

bank,  a  council  chamber,  a  public  high-  national  pride.  — The  Jew  despised  the 

way,  or  a  housetop.  Samaritan,    and    the    Samaritan    the 

II.  Heaven  mostly  opens  to  them  Jew,  both  despising  the  Gentile. 
who  have  prepared  themselves  for  it  There  was  the  pride  of  birth,  the  pride 
— By  prayer,  meditation,  or  other  of  descent,  the  pride  of  race.  Here 
suitable  exercise.     God  is  mostly  found  was  God's  rebuke  to  all  such  pride. 

of  them  who  seek  Him.  III.  The  rebuke  given  to  spiritual 

III.  Heaven  seldom  opens  without  pride. — This  spiritual  reward  is  two- 
imparting  new  revelations — Either  of  fold— the  personal  and  the  ecclesi- 
truth  or  duty.     God  has  promised  to  astical. 

instruct  and  guide  those  who  wait  upon  IV.  The  open  door  for  all. — There 

Him  in  humility  and  faith.  is  no  restriction  now.     God's  free  love 

IV.  Heaven  never  opens  to  the  goes  out  unconditionally — without  re- 
spiritually  blind. — "The  natural  man  striction  or  qualification — to  the  lost. — 
receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  H.  Bonar,  D.D. 

of   God."      The   eye   must   be  opened 

before   it   can    discern   visions.      "  He  Ver.  16.  The  Number  Three  in  the  New 

that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  Him  who  Testament. — That  some  special  signifi- 

is  the  truth."  cance,  most  likely  that  of  solemn  em- 

Ver.  15.  No  Difference.  phasis,  was  designed  by  the  threefold 

I.  The  one  broad  level  of  humanity,  repetition  of  an  event  becomes  apparent 

in   the   sight  of  God,  for  blessing. —  from  a  study  of  the  instances  in  which 

There  are  various  levels  in  other  re-  this  occurs. 

233 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


I.  In  the  history  of  Christ. — 1.  The  Peter  prayed  from  the  housetop  of  a 
three  temptations  in  the  wilderness  tanner ;  was  there  anything  strange  in 
(Matt.  iv.  1-11).  2.  The  three  raisings  that?  Undoubtedly.  Tanners  were 
of  the  dead  (Matt.  ix.  25 ;  Luke  looked  down  upon  as  the  pariahs,  the 
vii.  14-16  ;  John  xi.  43,  44).  3.  The  outcasts  of  Jewish  society.  For  Peter, 
three  pi*ayers  in  Gethsemane  (Matt,  the  orthodox  Hebrew,  to  lodge  with  a 
xxvi.  44).  tanner,  an  outlaw,  was  the  first  step 

II.  In  the  history  of  Peter. — 1.  The  out  of  his  miserable  narrowness;  and 
three  denials  of  Christ  (Matt.  xxvi.  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  the  tanner's 
69-75).  2.  The  three  questions  of  the  lodger  entering  the  Gentile  centurion's 
Saviour  (John  xxi.  15-17).  3.  The  house  a  little  later.  How  striking 
three  voices  in  the  vision.  these  coincidences  of  history  !     There 

III.  In  the  history  of  Paul. — 1.  The  is  as  much  Divine  design  in  the  move- 
three  requests  about  the  thorn  (2  Cor.  ments  of  the  centuries  as  in  the  forma- 
xii.  8).  2.  The  three  scourgings  (2  Cor.  tion  of  the  rocks  or  the  clustering  of 
xi.  25).  3.  The  three  shipwrecks  (2  the  stars.  Cornelius  prayed  in  Csesarea, 
Cor.  xi.  25).  and  Peter  prayed  in  Joppa.  How  ex- 
quisite these  dovetails,  these  morticings 

Vers.    9-16.    Peter's     Vision    on    the  of  history,  and  how  marvellously  well 

Housetop ;   a  Mirror  for   the   Heathen  timed  the  correspondence !     Surely  the 

Mission.     To  show —  world  is  not  governed  by  a  fortuitous 

I.  Its  heavenly  origin. — Appointed  concourse  of  blind  atoms,  but  by  in- 
by  God.  telligence   and   unity   of  design.     The 

II.  Its  immense  field. — The  whole  first  lesson  of  this  vision  of  the  great 
world,  Jew  and  Gentile.  sheet  is  : — 

III.  Its  severe  work. — To  make  all  I.  The  Divine  origin  of  the  Christian 
nations  obedient  to  the  faith.  gospel. — Peter   "  saw  heaven   opened, 

IV.  Its  doubts  and  difficulties. —  and  a  certain  vessel  descending  unto 
The  first  from  within,  in  the  prejudices,  him,  as  it  had  been  a  great  sheet  knit 
fears,  and  unbelief  of  Christ's  people;  at  the  four  corners,  and  let  down  to 
the  second  in  the  hardness  and  hostility  the  earth."  The  gospel  did  not  spring 
of  the  natural  heart.  up   from   the   ground ;  it  came  down 

V.  Its  Divine  promise. — Of  continual  from  the  upper  skies,  and  it  bears  in- 
assistance  and  ultimate  success. —  numerable  evidences  of  its  Divine 
Adapted  from  Gerok  in  Lange.  origin.     If  God  be  not  its  parent,  who 

is  ?    The  angels  could  not  have  invented 

Lessons  from  Peter  s  Vision. — In  this  it,  for  in  inventing  a  false  system  and 

vision  we  see  the  beginning  of  a  great  labelling  it  with  the  Divine  name  they 

era — the    first    important    breach    in  would  have  become  demons  instantly, 

the   iron   partition   wall   that   divided  Demons  could  not  have  invented  this 

the     human    race    into     two    hostile  system,    whose    main    purpose    is    to 

ranks.     We  have  here  the  annexation  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.     The 

of  the  whole   Gentile    world,    without  science  of  comparative  religion  proves 

shedding    a    single    drop   of    blood    or  that    Christianity    is   as    much    loftier 

wasting  a  single  pennyweight  of  gun-  than  all  other  systems  as  the  heavens 

powder.     Peter   saw  the  vision  when  are  loftier  than  the  earth.     A  religion 

engaged  in  prayer  on  the  housetop  of  well  adapted  for  the  whole  race  must 

Simon  the  tanner,  at  Joppa.     Prayer  have  the  following  elements  :    1.    An 

is  a  great  revelation,  and  the  stronger  adequate  revelation  of  God.     2.  A  pro- 

the  prayer  the  grander  the  vision.    He  vision  of  mercy  for  the  guilty   which 

who   would    see   the    heavens   opened  satisfies  the  conscience.    3.  Power  given 

must  first  open  the  heavens  with  the  to  lead  a  new  life  of  virtue  and  holi- 

key  of  prayer.     Ecstasies  and  visions  ness.    4.  An  ideal  pattern  of  life  which 

are   rewards   of   importunate    prayer.  men   may   imitate.     5.  A    refuge   for 

234 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS, 


CHAP.  X. 


man  in  sorrow  and  bereavement.  6. 
Such  a  revelation  of  the  future  life 
as  shall  help  man  to  prepare  for  his 
duties  and  destinies.  All  these  im- 
portant elements  are  in  the  Christian 
gospel,  and  are  not  in  any  other  system 
under  heaven.  Does  not  this  one 
fact  establish  its  unquestionable  pre- 
eminence ? 

II.  The  Divine  origin  of  the  human 
race. — The  sheet,  with  its  miscellaneous 
contents,  came  down  from  the  heavens, 
and  this  suggests  the  Divine  origin  of 
all  men.  The  contents  of  the  sheet,  as 
well  as  the  sheet  itself,  came  down 
from  above.  The  gospel  that  gave  the 
world  a  new  conception  of  God  has 
also  given  it  a  better  conception  of 
man.  It  teaches  us  to  say  "  Our 
Father,''  that  we  may  the  better  be 
able  to  say  "  My  brother."  In  this 
respect  for  man  as  man  the  gospel 
stands  alone  among  the  great  religious 
systems  of  the  world.  Look  at  man 
through  the  eyes  of  Jesus,  and  if  the 
man  be  only  a  London  dock  labourer 
or  a  Dorset  farm  labourer,  you  will  be 
able  to  see  something  of  the  Divine  in 
him.  Positivism  boasts  of  its  love  for 
the  race,  and  talks  of  "  the  parliament 
of  man,  the  federation  of  the  world." 
Where  has  Positivism  found  its  funda- 


mental doctrines  ?  I  charge  it  with 
being  a  plagiarist.  The  doctrines  of 
the  brotherhood  of  man  and  the  one- 
ness of  the  race  are  stolen  from  Christ. 
III.  The  universality  of  the  gospel. 
— Man  is  the  heaven-sent  ambassador 
to  man.  Cornelius  sent  for  Peter. 
Why  not  send  an  angel  to  preach  to 
him  ?  The  angel  would  have  been 
the  very  first  to  object.  Indeed,  it  was 
the  angel  who  suggested  Peter's  name. 
Methinks  the  angels  know  a  great  deal 
about  us.  The  angels  seek  for  a  man 
to  preach  to  men.  A  preacher  is  never 
so  effective  as  when  he  speaks  to  us  in 
the  first  person.  Cornelius  must  have 
a  man  named  Peter  to  preach  the 
sermon.  Why  not  send  troops  of 
angels  into  the  heart  of  Africa,  or  to 
the  isles  of  Polynesia  to  evangelise 
those  blacks  ?  Thank  God  He  has 
dignified  man  by  making  of  him  a 
minister  to  men.  He  sent  a  Divine 
Man  to  reveal  the  gospel,  and  he  com- 
missions man  to  preach  it.  When 
Cornelius  fell  down  at  Peter's  feet  and 
worshipped  him,  the  apostle  instantly 
cried  out,  "  Stand  up  ;  I  myself  also 
am  a  man."  Man  must  neither  be 
worshipped  on  the  one  hand  nor 
maligned  on  the  other. — J.  Ossian 
Davies. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  17—23. 

Cornelius's  Messengers  at  Joppa  ;  or,  the  Gentile  knocking  for  Admission. 

I.  The  arrival  of  the  messengers  at  Joppa. — 1.  The  time  of  their  arrival. 
"  While  Peter  doubted  in  himself  what  the  vision  he  had  seen  should  mean."  A 
reminder  that  inspired  men  often  saw  and  heard,  thought  and  spoke,  more  than 
they  could  immediately  understand.  As  Joppa  was  thirty  Roman,  or  twenty- 
seven  and  a  half  English  miles,  from  Csesarea,  Cornelius's  servants  would  not 
require  to  leave  their  master's  house  till  the  morning  after  the  vision  (ver.  9)  in 
order  to  reach  Simon's  dwelling  about,  or  shortly  after,  noon ;  although  it  is 
quite  probable  that  they  started  the  night  before  the  day  of  their  arrival. 
2.  Their  conduct  on  arrival.  Like  good  servants,  they  carried  out  their  master's 
instructions  with  exactness.  Having  inquired  for  Simon's  house  and  been 
directed  thither,  they  stood  before  the  gate,  which  opened  directly  into  the  house 
or  court,  where,  having  called  on  some  one  to  come  out,  they  respectfully  asked 
if  Simon,  surnamed  Peter,  lodged  within.  How  many  blunders  might  be 
avoided  were  all  messengers  equally  faithful  and  minute  ! 

II.  The  direction  of  Peter  by  the  Spirit. — 1.  The  announcement.  "  Behold 
(three),  men  seek  thee!"  The  numeral,  omitted  by  the  best  codices,  was 
probably  inserted  from  ver.  7  or  xi.  11.  If,  however,  it  formed  part  of  the 
communication  inwardly  whispered  to  Peter,  it  sufficiently  proved  that  com  muni- 

235 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


cation  to  be  supernatural.  The  notion  that  Peter  came  to  know  about  the 
presence  of  the  men  by  hearing  their  footsteps  and  voices  in  the  court  below 
(Neander)  is  contemptuously  rejected  by  critics  of  the  Baur  and  Zeller  school. 
2.  The  commandment.  "  Arise  and  get  thee  down,  and  go  with  them  nothing 
doubting  " — i.e.,  making  no  scruples  on  the  ground  that  they  are  heathen.  This 
again  confirms  the  supernatural  character  of  the  prompting  of  which  Peter  was 
conscious,  since,  though  from  the  housetop,  he  might  have  heard  the  men  calling 
for  him,  it  is  little  likely  he  could  either  have  known  them  to  be  three,  or  guessed 
what  they  wanted.  3.  The  incitement.  "  For  I  have  sent  them."  Peter  having 
recognised  the  voice  that  spake  within  him  to  be  Christ's  or  the  Spirit's,  and 
having  learnt  that  Christ  had  sent  the  messengers,  immediately  proceeded  to 
grant  them  an  interview. 

III.  The  conversation  of  Peter  with  the  messengers. — 1.  Peter's  introduction 
of  himself  and  inquiry  at  the  messengers.  ''Behold,  I  am  he  whom  ye  seek" 
(compare  John  xviii.  4-8) — an  example  of  frank  courtesy  ;  "  What  is  the  cause 
wherefore  ye  are  come  1  " — a  pattern  of  direct  speech  (Matt.  v.  37).  2.  The  reply 
of  the  messengers  concerning  their  master.  Announcing  (1)  his  name — Cornelius; 
(2)  his  rank — a  centurion ;  (3)  his  character — a  righteous  man,  a  person  of 
rectitude  (SiKaios),  one  that  feareth  God  (<£o/2oi;/>ievos  rov  6e6v),  and  of  good 
report,  or  well  reported  of  by  all  the  nation  of  the  Jews  (compare  on  vers.  1,2), 
like  Ananias  (xxii.  12)  and  Demetrius  (3  John  12).  That  man  must  be  good 
who  is  well  reported  of  by  his  own  domestics  or  servants.  (4)  His  vision — 
"warned  of  God"  or  divinely  instructed  (compare  Matt.  ii.  12),  "by  a  holy 
angel " — i.e.,  through  his  agency  (Peter  was  instructed  by  the  Spirit),  "  to  send 
for  thee  into  his  house,  and  to  hear  words  from  thee."  With  this  the  last  vestige 
of  doubt  disappeared  from  Peter's  mind.  "  He  called  them  in  and  lodged  them," 
as  La  ban  did  the  messengers  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xxiv.  31). 

IV.  The  journey  of  Peter  to  Caesarea. — 1.  After  providing  the  messengers  with 
hospitable  entertainment.  i '  He  called  them  in  and  lodged  them  "  over  night. 
Hospitality  to  strangers  a  duty  practised  in  Old  Testament  times  (Gen.  xviii.  3, 
xix.  1,  xxiv.  31;  Exod.  ii.  20),  and  enjoined  upon  Christians  (Pom.  xii.  13; 
1  Tim.  iii.  2,  v.  10;  Heb.  xiii.  2).  2.  Yiith  cheerful  alacrity.  "  On  the  morrow 
he  arose  and  went  with  them,"  in  obedience  to  God's  command,  and  in  ac- 
cordance with  their  invitation.  3.  Accompanied  by  certain  brethren  from  Joppa. 
Six  in  number  (xi.  12),  they  may  have  escorted  the  Apostle  as  his  personal 
friends,  or  out  of  a  natural  desire  to  see  the  issue  of  so  remarkable  an 
occurrence. 

Learn. — 1.  The  duty  of  looking  for  and  following  the  Spirit's  guidance. 
2.  The  beauty  of  Christian  courtesy.  3.  The  excellence  of  household  piety. 
4.  The  value  of  fidelity  in  service. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  17.  The  Embassy  from  Ccesarea  I.  To  inform  their  minds. — "  Behold 

to  Joppa. — A  testimony  to —  three  men  seek  thee  !  " 

I.  The  poverty  of  heathenism,  which  II.  To  direct  their  steps. — "  Arise 
has  nothing  that  can  satisfy  the  soul.  and  go  with  them  !  " 

II.  The  power  of  the  gospel,  which  III.  To  find  them  work. — "  I  have 
can    draw    towards   itself   men   of  all      sent  them ! " 

ranks  and  characters. 

III.  The  love  of  God,  who  will  have  Ver.  22.  Cornelius's  Certificates  of 
all  men  to  be  saved.                                        Character  were  three. 

I.  That  of  the   angel,   which  was 

Vers.  19,  20.  The  Offices  of  the  Spirit      practically  that  of  God  (ver.  4). — Com- 

towards  Christ's  Servants.  pare  the  cases  of  Daniel  (x.   11)  and 

236 


/ 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  x. 


Nathanael  (John  i.  47).     Who  would  are    known    to    be    the    opposite    at 

not   wish   to   be   possessed   of   such  a  home. 

testimonial  to  the  genuineness  of  one's  III.  That  of  the  nation  of  the  Jews, 
piety  ?  The  nearest  approach  to  this  who  might  almost  be  considered  his 
is  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  through  the  enemies.  When  a  man's  foes  are  corn- 
word  (Rom.  viii.  16).  pelled  to  acknowledge  his  goodness,  he 
II.  That  of  his  messengers,  who  must  have  reached  a  high  point  of 
were  members  of  his  own  household  excellence.  Compare  the  case  of  the 
(ver.  7).  He  whose  piety  can  stand  centurion  of  Capernaum  (Luke  vii.  4) 
tne  inspection  of  those  whose  eyes  are  Even  the  testimony  of  one's  neighbours 
constantly  upon  him  is  beyond  all  is  no  small  guarantee  of  substantial 
question  a  sincere  disciple.  Many  worth.  Compare  the  cases  of  Timothy 
who  are  supposed   to  be  saints  abroad  (xvi.  2)  and  of  Demetrius  (3  John  12). 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  24—33. 

Peter's  Arrival  at  Cazsarea  ;  or,  the  Gentile  Candidate's  Examination. 

T.  Peter's  reception  by  Cornelius. — 1.  With  eager  expectancy.  Having  enter- 
tained no  doubt  as  to  the  success  of  his  embassy — a  remarkable  instance  of  faith 
— Cornelius  had  collected  his  kinsmen  and  near  friends  to  await  the  apostle's 
arrival.  Yet  so  impatient  did  he  feel  to  look  upon  the  messenger  of  heaven  that 
he  hastened  out  to  meet  Peter  at  the  door,  as  Laban  did  with  Eliezer  (Gen. 
xxiv.  31).  2.  With  demonstrations  of  religious  homage.  How  much  Cornelius 
designed  to  express  by  prostrating  himself,  QrientaJL.fesbion,  at  Peter's  feet 
(compare  1  Sam.  xxv.  24  •  2  Kings  iv.  37  ;  Esther  viii.  3 ;  Mark  v.  22  \ 
Matt,  xxviii.  9)  cannot  be  ascertained.  Luke  does  not  say  that  Cornelius 
worshipped  Peter.  Yet  Peter  obviously  regarded  this  action  as  at  least 
approaching  such  reverence  as  was  due  to  God  alone,  and  rejected  it  accordingly 
(ver.  26),  as  Paul  afterwards  refused  similar  worship  from  the  Lystrans  (xiv.  15), 
and  as  the  angel  put  away  from  him  that  of  John  (Pev.  xix.  10).  Of  course 
Peter  may  have  attributed  more  to  Cornelius's  action  than  it  was  meant  to 
convey,  and  some  (Hackett,  Stier)  prefer  to  hold  this  rather  than  believe  that 
Cornelius,  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah,  should  have  been  guilty  of  rendering  Divine 
homage  to  a  man.  That  he  was  still  under  the  dominion  of  his  old  superstitious 
ideas  about  heroes  who  had  been  deified,  and  saw  in  Peter  a  superhuman  being 
(Zockler),  is  scarcely  credible  after  the  plain  intimation  by  the  angel  that  Peter 
was  a  man. 

II.  Peter's  explanation  to  Cornelius. — Addressed  to  the  assembled  company, 
but  intended  principally  for  the  centurion.  1.  The  old  principle — that  inter- 
course with  Gentiles  was  regarded  by  the  Jew  as  unlawful  (ver.  28) — was  of  long 
standing  and  widely  known.  Though  professedly  grounded  on  Mosaic  law,  it 
had  no  such  foundation  in  fact.  The  practice  rested  on  traditional  Pharisaism, 
according  to  which  a  Jew  must  have  no  relations  with  a  foreigner,  and  must  not 
enter  his  house  (John  xviii.  28).  "  He  was  not  allowed  to  sit  down  at  the  table 
of  a  Gentile ;  the  very  sight  of  the  Gentile  world  was  repulsive  to  a  Jew " 
(Stapfer,  Palestine  in  the  Time  of  Christ,  p.  128).  Compare  Josephus  {contra 
Apion,  ii.  28).  "  Those  foreigners  who  come  to  us  without  submitting  to  our  laws 
Moses  permitted  not  to  have  any  intimate  connections  with  us."  Juvenal 
(Satires,  xiv.  103)  says  of  the  Jews  it  was  their  custom,  non  monstrare  mas 
eadem  nisi  sacra  colenti,  not  to  show  the  way  except  to  those  observing  the  same 
sacred  rites;  while  Tacitus  (Hist.,  v.  8)  affirms  that  they  cherished  against  all  a 
hostile  hatred,  and  kept  themselves  apart  in  their  feasts  and  couches :  adversus 
omnes  hostile  odium,  separati  epulis  discreti  cubilibus.  2.  The  new  light — that  r.o 
man  should  be  called  common  or  unclean — was  to  a  Jew  a  marvellous  discovery, 

237 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


which  probably  nothing  but  a  Divine  revelation  would  have  enabled  him  to 
accept.  Hence  Peter  distinctly  traced  his  acquaintance  with  it  to  God's  showing, 
though  he  did  not  at  the  time  mention  the  way  in  which  such  showing  had  taken 
place.  3.  The  explicit  declaration  that  he  had  come  to  Caasarea  immediately  on 
being  sent  for,  "  without  gainsaying,"  not  because  he  had  forgotten  or  resolved 
to  ignore,  or  through  his  own  charity  or  wisdom  had  overstepped  the  bounds  of 
traditional  exclusiveness,  but  solely  in  consequence  of  that  new  light  which  had 
been  imparted  to  him — in  other  words,  that  his  appearance  before  Cornelius  was 
at  once  an  expression  of  his  faith  in  God  and  of  his  obedience  to  the  heavenly 
vision  (compare  xxvi.  19).  4.  The  direct  question — for  what  intent  had  he  been 
sent  for  ?  Peter  knew  he  had  been  sent  for  in  accordance  with  instructions  given 
by  Jehovah  to  Cornelius  (vers.  20,  22) ;  but  as  yet  Cornelius  had  offered  no 
explanation  of  his  mission. 

III.  Peter's  answer  from  Cornelius. — In  this  Cornelius  rehearsed  the  story  of 
how  he  had  been  led  to  send  for  Peter,  mentioning — 1 .  The  time  when  his  vision 
had  appeared  to  him.  "  Fonr  days  ago,"  about  "  this  hour,"  which  was  probably 
about  the  ninth  (ver.  3).  The  fasting  had  continued  till  noon,  when  during  his 
subsequent  devotions  the  vision  burst  upon  his  view,  "as  it  were  about  the  ninth 
hour."  (See  "  Critical  Remarks.")  2.  The  condition  of  his  body  and  mind  when  the 
vision  came.  "Fasting"  and  "praying."  Even  should  "fasting"  be  omitted 
from  the  text  (see  "Critical  Remarks"),  it  was  probably  included  in  Cornelius's 
devotions.  Pasting  and  prayer  go  well  together,  bodily  abstinence  being  a 
suitable  preparation  for  high  spiritual  exercises  (compare  ver.  9).  Fasting  was 
frequently  conjoined  with  praying  by  the  apostolic  Church  on  occasions  of 
special  solemnity  and  high  responsibility  (xiii.  2,  3,  xiv.  23).  3.  The  form  which 
appeared  in  his  vision.  A  man,  standing  before  him  in  bright  apparel.  A 
description  shown  by  its  liveliness  and  minuteness  to  be  that  of  an  eyewitness. 
Compare  with  this  Luke's  account  (ver.  3),  which  omits  the  "  Behold  ! "  and  says 
nothing  about  the  angel  "  standing  before  "  Cornelius.  4.  The  address  which  the 
man  in  bright  apparel  made  to  him.  (1)  Calling  him  by  name,  Cornelius  !  the 
heavenly  visitor ;  (2)  assured  him  that  his  prayer  had  been  heard  and  his  alms 
remembered  (see  on  ver.  4) ;  and  (3)  directed  him  to  send  to  Joppa  for  Simon 
Peter;  at  the  same  time  (4)  mentioning  the  house  in  which  Peter  lodged  (see  on 
vers.  5,  6).  5.  The  action  ivhich  he  (Cornelius)  had  then  taken.  He  had  sent  for 
the  apostle  forthwith,  as  the  business  to  be  done  was  too  important  for  delay 
(Eccles.  ix.  10).  6.  The  gratification  with  which  he  welcomed  the  apostle's  arrival. 
"  Thou  hast  well  done  that  thou  art  come "  (compare  3  John  6).  Peter's 
arrival  gave  an  indirect  guarantee  that  he  should  learn  more  about  the  mind  of 
God  with  reference  to  his  salvation  (ver.  32,  xi.  14).  7.  The  readiness  of  himself 
and  all  present  to  hear  vjhat  he  (Peter)  had  to  impart.  "  Now  then  we  are  all 
here  present,"  etc.  (ver.  33.) 

Learn. — That  God's  messengers — 1.  Should  be  prepared  for  by  private  and 
(where  practicable)  social  prayer.  2.  Should  never  intercept  for  themselves  any 
of  the  glory  that  belongs  to  God.  3.  May  sometimes  learn  profitable  teaching 
from  those  to  whom  they  are  sent.  4.  Should  always  be  respectfully  heard  by 
those  to  whom  they  are  sent. 

HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  25.  Mistaken  Worship.  the  sender.       2.    With   wrong  feelings. 

I.  Is  that  which  is  offered. — 1.  To  Of    humility    and    reverence,     which 

the  wrong  object.     The  creature  instead  would  have  been  proper  and  in  place 

of  the  creator,  the  servant  rather  than  had    they   been   directed  to  the  right 

the  master,  the  messenger  in  place  of  object,  but,  being  directed  to  the  wrong 

238 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  X. 


object,  were  improper  and  out  of  place. 
3.  In  ignorance,  though  pardonable. 
Cornelius  having  been  as  yet  only  im- 
perfectly enlightened,  may  not  have 
understood  that  religious  -  homage  be- 
longed to  God  alone. 

II.  Should  be  rejected. — 1.  Promptly. 
Peter  trifled  not  a  moment  with  what 
he  saw,  but  declined  the  proferred 
worship.  Had  he  hesitated,  or  for  an 
instant  seemed  to  appropriate  to  him- 
self what  belonged  to  God,  he  would 
have  heen  guilty  of  lese-majeste 
against  the  God  of  heaven  whose 
creature,  servant,  and  messenger  he  was. 

2.  Kindly.  With  no  rebuke  upon  his 
lips  he  simply  bids  the  prostrate  wor- 
shipper arise,  at  the  same  time  assist- 
ing him  to  regain  an  upright  position. 

3.  Reasonably.  Peter  explained  what 
was  wrong  in  Cornelius's  action  and 
what  was  right  in  his  own  by  adding, 
"  I  myself  also  am  a  man  !  " 

Yer.  26.  u  I  myself  also  am  a 
man." 

I.  A  man  and  therefore  a  creature. 
— Hence  not  a  proper  object  to  re- 
ceive religious  homage,  which  belongs 
to  God  alone  (Exod.  xx.  3  ;  Isa.  xlii.  8  ; 
Rom.  i.  25). 

II.  A  man  and  therefore  a  sinner. 
— Hence  as  much  needing  forgiveness 
and  salvation  as  the  most  benighted 
and  degraded  of  Adam's  race  (Rom.  iii. 
22,  x.  12). 

III.  A  man  and  therefore  a  brother. 
— Hence  such  distinctions  as  divide  me 
from  my  fellows,  putting  me  above 
them  or  them  above  me  in  an  essen- 
tially superior  class,  are  against  nature 
as  well  as  grace  (Pro v.  xxii.  2 ;  Mai. 
ii.  10;  Actsxvii.  26,  29). 

IV.  A  man  and  therefore  a  son  of 
God. — Having  been  made  in  Gods 
image  (Gen.  i.  27;  Acts  xvii.  28). 
Hence  in  all  I  do  I  should  remember 
my  exalted  origin  (Col.  i.  10),  and  do 
nothing  to  disgrace  my  rank. 

Y.  A  man  and  therefore  a  possible 
heir  of  glory. — Having  been  redeemed 
by  Jesus  Christ.  Hence  in  all  things 
I  should  comport  myself  as  one  with  a 
high  destiny  (Eph.  iv.  1), 


Yer.  29.  A  Minister  and  his  Congre- 
gation. (Suitable  for  entering  on  a 
charge.) 

I.  No  minister  should  undertake  the 
care  of  a  congregation  without  being 
called. — 1.  Invited  by  the  people. 
Peter  came  not  before  he  had  been  sent 
for.  It  is  against  all  Scripture  that 
preachers  should  thrust  themselves 
upon  unwilling  people.  Under  such 
conditions  the  most  talented  ministry 
can  only  prove  a  failure.  2.  Sent  by 
God.  It  is  doubtful  if  Cornelius's 
invitation  would  have  sufficed  to  carry 
Peter  to  Csesarea  had  he  not  already 
been  directed  by  the  Spirit  to  accom- 
pany the  messengers  (ver.  20).  So 
the  true  minister  will  always  be  care- 
ful not  to  run  without  being  sent,  will 
strive  to  ascertain  whether  the  out- 
ward call  of  the  people  concurs  with 
the  inward  prompting  of  the  Spirit. 

II.  To  such  a  combined  call  every 
minister  should  respond. — 1.  Imme- 
diately. As  Peter  did,  without  un- 
necessary delay,  considering  that  the 
king's  business  requires  haste,  and 
that  especially  in  matters  of  the 
soul  delays  are  dangerous.  The  cry 
"  Come  over  and  help  us "  (xvi.  9) 
should  always  be  regarded  as  urgent. 
2.  Cheerfully.  Again  like  Peter,  with- 
out offering  any  objections  or  express- 
ing any  reluctance,  or  putting  any 
obstacles  in  the  way.  The  minister 
who  enters  on  his  sacred  calling  with  a 
grudge  or  without  enthusiasm  cannot 
possibly  succeed,  and  had  better 
change  his  mind  or  abandon  his 
calling. 

III.  The  true  business  of  a  minister 
is  not  to  push  his  own  but  his  people's 
interests. — It  goes  without  saying  that 
these  interests  must  be  spiritual. 
Otherwise  the  congregation  is  not  a 
Church  of  Christ.  Hence,  every 
minister  should  have  it  clearly  under- 
stood that  those  are  the  interests  at 
which  he  is  to  aim — the  advancement, 
not  of  his  hearers'  intellectual  culture, 
or  of  their  social  status,  or  of  their 
material  enrichment,  or  of  their 
amusement,  but  of  their  spiritual  and 
religious  welfare. 

239 


CHAP.  X. 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


IV.  When  minister  and  congre- 
gation conjointly  recognise  and  work 
for  this  the  trne  ideal  of  a  Christian 
pastorate  is  reached. — But  the  two 
must  be  of  one  mind.  A  spiritually 
minded  pastor  and  an  unspiritual  con- 
gregation, or  vice  versa,  cannot  long 
remain  together.  One  or  other  must 
attain  superiority.  If  victory  inclines 
to  the  spiritual  element  then  prosperity 
of  the  highest  kind  ensues ;  if  to  the 
unspiritual,  then  decay  of  the  worst 
sort  follows. 

Ver.  33.  A  Fortunate  Journey. 
"Thou  hast  well  done  that  thou  art 
come."  That  Peter  undertook  that 
journey  to  Csesarea  was — 

I.  Well  for  Peter. — 1.  It  proved  the 
reality  of  his  own  faith,  which  would 
certainly  have  been  open  to  suspicion 
had  he  not  gone  to  Csesarea  as  directed. 
2.  It  brought  him  into  contact  with  a 
pious  Gentile,  of  the  existence  of  which 
he  might  otherwise  have  remained  in 
doubt.  3.  It  helped  him  to  understand 
the  significance  of  the  vision  he  had  re- 
ceived, which,  though  explained  by  the 
heavenly  voice  (ver  15),  was  not  all  at 
once  apprehended  by  the  Apostle  (ver. 
17),  and  was  none  the  worse  of  the 
commentary  furnished  by  his  inter- 
view with  Cornelius.  4.  It  secured  for 
him  a  special  mark  of  honour  in  being 
permitted  to  open  the  door  to  the 
Gentiles,  which,  but  for  this  journey, 
he  might  have  missed. 

II.  Well  for  Cornelins. — 1.  It  assured 
him  of  the  truth  of  his  own  vision,  of 
which  he  might  in  course  of  time  have 
become  sceptical  had  Peter  not  ap- 
peared upon  the  scene.  2.  It  afforded 
him  an  opportunity  of  hearing  the  gospel 
preached  by  an  apostle,  though  probably 
before  this  he  had  listened  to  it  from 
the  lips  of  Philip  (viii.  40).  3.  It  led 
to  the  salvation  of  himself  and  his  house, 
seeing  that  they  all  believed  and  were 
endowed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  (ver.  47). 
4.  It  ended  in  their  formal  reception  into 
the  Church,  through  their  being  baptised 
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  (ver.  48). 

III.  Well  for  the  Church.— Which 
was  thereby — 1.  Prevented  from  sink- 

240 


ing  back  into  a  narrow-minded  and 
exclusive  Jewish  sect,  whereas  it  was 
intended  to  be  a  large  and  liberal - 
hearted  community,  knowing  no  dis- 
tinctions of  age,  sex,  culture,  or  nation- 
ality, but  embracing  mankind  in  all 
ages  and  countries,  ranks  and  con- 
ditions of  society.  2.  Enabled  to  over- 
come a  danger  which  threatened  the 
realisation  of  this  idea,  as  was  soon 
shown  by  the  part  played  by  the 
Cornelius  incident  in  the  apostolic 
council  (xv.  7-11).  Had  Peter  not 
been  able  to  speak  as  he  did  in  that 
assembly,  the  issue  of  the  conference 
might  have  been  different.  3.  En- 
lightened as  to  its  true  character  as  a 
world-embracing  institution,  and  so  in 
a  manner  fitted  for  the  more  success- 
ful prosecution  of  its  work. 

IV.  Well  for  the  world.— Which 
1.  Would  hardly  have  been  attracted — 
at  least  in  great  numbers — to  Chris- 
tianity, had  it  been  presented  to  them 
as  a  Jewish  sect.  And  2.  Would  have 
missed  the  hopes  and  consolations  which 
the  gospel  brings.  The  world  has  much 
reason  to  thank  God  for  Peter's  journey 
to  Caesarea. 

The  Picture  of  a  Model  (Christia7i) 
Congregation. 

I.  All  present. — None  absent  from 
the  stated  place  of  assembly. 

II.  All  reverent. — Realising  they 
stand  in  God's  sight — which  they  do  in 
a  special  manner  when  they  enter  God's 
house. 

III.  All  attentive. — Ready  to  hear 
what  may  be  said  by  the  preacher, 
who,  if  a  true  minister,  is  God's  servant 
and  Christ's  ambassador. 

IV.  All  obedient. — Prepared  sub- 
missively to  accept  whatever  God 
might  command  through  His  servant. 

V.  All  believing. — None  professing 
obedience  merely  in  word  or  form,  but 
all  obeying  in  reality,  receiving  the 
truth  into  honest  hearts  and  minds. 

VI.  All  saved. — All  baptised  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  all  sealed  with  the  Spirit. 

Vers.  24-33.  Cornelius  and  Peter. 
Cornelius  appears  here  in  various 
aspects. 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  x. 

I.  Waiting  for  Peter,  as  God's  am-  III.  Talking  to  Peter,  explaining  his 
bassador.  desires. 

II.  Reverencing    Peter,    as    God's         IV.  Listening  to  Peter,   as    God's 

representative.  mouthpiece. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  34—48. 

Peter's  Sermon  in  Cornelius's  House ;  or,  The  Gospel  preached  to  the  Gentiles. 

I.  The  audience. — Cornelius  and  those  assembled  with  him  (vers.  27,  33). 
1.  Devout.  Cornelius  was  so,  and  so  most  likely  were  his  kinsmen  and  his  friends 
around  him  (ver.  2).  2.  Intelligent.  Already  they  possessed  some  acquaintance 
with  the  main  facts  of  gospel  history  (ver.  37).  3.  Serious.  A  solemn  sense  of 
the  Divine  presence  rested  on  their  spirits  (ver.  33).  4.  Humble.  Prepared  for 
the  reception  of  the  message,  they  were  ready  to  accord  it  obedience.  A  good 
model  for  every  congregation  when  it  comes  together  to  listen  to  the  preaching 
of  the  Word.     (See  "  Hints  on  ver.  33.") 

II.  The  preacher. — Peter.  Having  already  been  honoured  to  preach  the 
gospel  to  his  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh,  homeborn  and  foreign  Jews  (ii.  14), 
he  now  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  publishing  the  truth  in  the  hearing  of  a  company 
of  Gentiles.  This  he  did — 1.  With  much  solemnity,  as  if  realising  the  importance 
of  the  occasion— an  idea  conveyed  in  the  words  "Then  Peter  opened  his  mouth  " 
(compare  viii.  35).  2.  With  peculiar  tact.  Not  reminding  them  of  their  heathen 
origin,  or  saying  aught  to  impress  them  with  a  sense  of  their  inferiority,  but 
crediting  them  with  deep  religiousness  and  even  Christian  intelligence  (compare 
Paul's  treatment  of  the  Athenians  :  xvii.  22).  3.  With  great  fulness,  setting 
forth  in  an  address,  of  which,  doubtless,  only  an  outline  has  been  preserved,  the 
main  facts  and  doctrines  of  gospel  history  and  teaching  (vers.  36-43).  4.  With 
spiritual  power.  Which  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  all  who  heard  the 
Word  believed  and  were  baptised  (ver.  44). 

III.  The  sermon. — 1.  Its  exordium.  A  statement  which  showed  the  preacher 
to  be  no  narrow-minded  bigot,  but  possessed  of  a  mind  open  to  receive  "  light  from 
heaven  "  whensoever  it  was  graciously  vouchsafed ;  as  well  as  tended  to  disarm 
the  prejudice  of  his  hearers  and  ingratiate  himself  with  them.  In  this  respect  the 
fisherman  apostle  might  be  profitably  followed  by  preachers  of  to-day.  The  truths 
contained  in  the  statement  were  two  :  (1)  That  God  was  no  respecter  of  persons. 
A  truth  known  to  holy  men  of  God  before  Peter's  day  (2  Sam.  xiv.  14 ;  2  Chron. 
xix.  7  ;  Job  xxxvii.  24),  but  not  understood  by  Peter  till  revealed  by  God  through 
the  vision  lately  given  (ver.  28),  which  reminds  us  that  many  truths  which  have 
been  revealed  are  not  yet  fully  understood.  A  truth  afterwards  insisted  on  by 
the  apostle  (1  Peter  i.  17),  and  by  Paul  (Rom.  ii.  11  ;  Eph.  vi.  9  ;  Col.  hi.  25), 
and  signifying  that  God  in  dealing  with  men,  whether  in  providence  or  in  grace, 
in  judgment  or  in  mercy,  takes  no  account  of  such  accidents  as  nationality, 
birth,  rank,  wealth,  power,  or  other  temporal  or  material  circumstance,  but  has 
regard  solely  to  manhood  and  character.  (2)  That  in  every  nation  piety  and 
goodness  were  equally  acceptable  in  His  sight.  What  Peter  meant  by  piety  and 
what  by  goodness  he  explained.  The  root  of  all  piety  he  discovered  in  the  fear 
of  God  (Psalm  cxi.  10),  and  the  essence  of  all  goodness  in  working  righteousness 
(1  John  iii.  7).  Wherever  these  existed,  the  individual  possessing  them,  though 
not  justified  on  their  account  (ver.  43  ;  Pom.  iii.  20),  was  acceptable  in  God's 
sight  as  one  to  whom  belonged  the  qualification  necessary  for  admission  into  the 
Church  of  Christ  (see  "  Hints  on  ver.  35  ").  2.  Its  contents.  A  brief  summary  of 
the  facts  and  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  embracing — (1)  The  earthly  ministry  of 
Jesus,  which  began  in  its  complete  independence  and  unrestrained  activity  after 
John's  ministry  had  closed  ;  which  had  been  divinely  raised  up  and  directed  to 

b  241 


chap.  x.  I10MILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


the  children  of  Israel,  of  which  the  burden  had  been  peace  (Eph.  ii.  17),  and 
which,  commencing  in  Galilee,  had  been  published  throughout  all  Judea ;  for  which 
Jesus  had  been  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power  (Luke  iv.  18),  and 
which  had  been  exercised  in  going  about  and,  through  the  power  of  God  who 
was  with  Him,  doing  good  and  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil  (Matt, 
iv.  23  ;  Luke  iv.  36) ;  the  character  of  which  had  been  witnessed  by  Peter  and 
his  colleagues  in  the  apostleship,  and  the  end  of  which  had  been  a  violent  death 
and  hanging  on  a  tree  (vers.  36-39).  (2)  The  resurrection  of  Jesus,  which  was 
effected  by  the  power  of  God  on  the  third  day  after  His  crucifixion,  and  attested 
by  His  being  openly  shown  or  made  manifest,  not  to  all  the  people,  but  unto 
witnesses  chosen  before  of  God — viz.,  to  the  apostles  and  others  of  the  brethren, 
"  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  Him  after  He  rose  from  the  dead  "  (vers.  40,  41). 
(3)  The  second  coming  of  Jesus  to  judge  the  quick  and  dead  (Rom.  xiv.  9  ; 
2  Cor.  v.  10),  to  which  office  He  had  been  ordained  of  God  (xvii.  31  ;  John  v.  22), 
and  about  which  He  had  Himself  commanded  them,  the  apostles,  to  testify  unto 
the  people,  the  Jews  (ver.  42).  That  the  summary  of  Christian  truth  here  put 
into  Peter's  mouth  was  not  a  second  century  embellishment  has  received  most 
remarkable  confirmation,  not  only  from  Pliny's  letter  (a.d.  112),  but  also  from 
the  recently  discovered  apology  of  Aristides  (a.d.  125),  both  of  which  show  that 
Christian  Churches  so  widely  apart  as  Bithynia  and  Athens  accepted  the  very 
tenets  here  set  forth.  3.  Its  application.  Contained  in  the  statement  that, 
according  to  the  unanimous  testimony  of  Old  Testament  prophecy,  through  His 
name  whosoever  believed  should  receive  remission  of  sins  (Isa.  liii.  11  ;  Zech. 
xiii.  1). 

IV.  The  Result. — 1.  All  those  who  heard  the  word  believed.  Though  not  stated, 
implied.  Cornelius  and  his  companions,  without  exception,  received  the  wTord 
into  honest  and  good  hearts  (Luke  viii.  15).  It  is  certainly  a  great  sermon 
— great  in  the  best  sense — which  converts  all  who  hear  it.  2.  The  Holy  Ghost 
fell  on  all  them  who  believed.  Upon  all  Cornelius's  household.  The  supernatural 
endowment,  which  descended  on  them  while  the  apostle  was  yet  speaking, 
revealed  itself  in  the  usual  way,  exactly  as  it  had  done  at  Pentecost,  through 
speaking  with  tongues  (ver.  46).  3.  Those  who  received  the  Holy  Ghost  were 
baptised.  Those  believers  of  the  circumcision  who  had  come  with  Peter  were 
profoundly  astonished  to  hear  Gentiles  speaking  with  tongues  ;  but  they 
could  not  resist  the  apostle's  argument  when  he  asked,  "  Can  any  man  forbid 
water?"  etc. 

Learn. — 1.  The  heaven-sent  preacher  should  always  speak  his  Master's 
message  with  boldness.  2.  The  best  sermon  is  that  which  has  most  of  Christ 
in  it.  3.  The  Holy  Ghost  knows  no  distinction  between  Jew  and  Gentile. 
4.  Those  who  have  received  the  essence  should  not  be  denied  the  sign  of 
salvation. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.  34.  God  no  Respecter  of  Persons.  ligious   privileges,    spiritual    blessings. 

I.  Expose  some  false  constructions  3.  It  is  not  true  that  God  does  not 
of  the  text. — 1.  It  is  not  true  that  God  admit  one  man  to  heaven  while  He 
does  not  love  one  man  more  than  an-  excludes  another.  Some  are  cast  out. 
other.  He  loves  with  a  special  affection  II.  Explain  the  real  meaning  of  our 
all  who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  text. — 1.  God  does  not  respect  persons 
Christ.  Cain  and  Abel.  2.  It  is  not  on  the  grounds  on  which  men  are 
true  that  God  does  not  bestow  on  one  treated  with  partiality  by  their  fellow- 
man  what  He  withholds  from  another.  men — wealth,  birth,  genius.  His  pre- 
Natural   gifts,    social    advantages,  re-  ferences     are     determined     by    other 

242 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  X. 


considerations,  although  these  cannot 
always  be  ascertained.  2.  God  does 
not  respect  persons  as  He  Himself  did 
under  the  former  dispensation.  The 
Jew  has  no  monopoly  of  the  blessings 
of  the  gospel.  As  Christ  died  for  all 
men  without  distinction,  so  salvation 
through  Him  is  to  be  offered  to  all, 
and  shall  be  bestowed  on  all  who 
believe  in  Him.  (1)  Rejoice  in  the 
impartiality  of  God.  (2)  Avail  your- 
selves of  the  impartiality  of  God  by 
embracing  the  common  salvation.  (3) 
Imitate  the  impartiality  of  God. — 
G.  Brooks. 

Yers.  34,  35.  God  no  Respecter  of 
Persons. 

I.  What  the  proposition  does  not 
mean. — 1.  That  God  is  indifferent  to 
diversities  in  human  character.  2. 
That  all  religions  are  equally  accept- 
able in  God's  sight.  3.  That  belief  in 
Christ  is  not  required  for  salvation. 
4.  That  all  men  will  eventually  be 
saved. 

II.  What  the  proposition  does  mean. 
— 1.  That  the  essence  of  religion 
consists  in  fearing  God  and  working 
righteousness.  2.  That  God  is  in- 
different to  external  distinctions 
between  man  and  man.  3.  That  all 
who  possess  the  inward  characteristics 
of  religion  are  equally  well  pleasing 
in  God's  sight.  4.  That  all  men  who 
are  thus  religious  belong  to  His  Church, 
irrespective  of  nationality  or  other 
accidental  circumstance. 

On  the  Reception  of  JVeiv  Truth. — 
Here  is  Peter,  with  the  traditional 
spirit  of  an  Oriental,  violating  the 
apparently  natural  order,  and  passing 
at  once  under  a  new  set  of  ideas. 
What  is  the  explanation  ? 

I.  It  seems  to  be  in  the  Nature  of 
religious  changes  that  they  shall  take 
place  suddenly. — There  may  be,  there 
must  be,  long  seasons  of  preparation 
for  any  moral  change,  but  the  transi- 
tion is  instantaneous.  It  is  the  law 
of  revelation. 

II.  His  change  was  due  to  the  fact 
that  he  had  got  sight  of  larger  and 


more  spiritual  truths  than  he  had 
been  holding. — Peter  had  been  used 
to  believing  that  God  was  a  respecter 
of  persons,  but  when  he  caught  sight 
of  the  fact  that  God  has  no  partialities, 
but  accepts  all  men  who  work  righteous- 
ness, his  truth-loving  nature  rushed  at 
once  toward  the  greater  truth. — 
Theodore  Munger. 

Yer.  36.  The  Lordship  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

I.  Its  basis. — His  redeeming  work. 

II.  Its  extent.  —  All  things  and 
persons. 

III.  Its      purpose.  —  Salvation      or 
peace. 

IY.  Its   perpetuity. — Till   the  time 
of  the  end. 

Y.  Its  authority. — Derived  from 
the  Father. 

Preaching  Peace ;  or>  Publishing 
Good  Tidings  of  Peace. 

I.  The  Messenger  of  peace. — Jesus 
Christ. 

II.  The  basis  of  peace. — His  atoning 
work. 

III.  The  terms  of  peace. — Faith. 
IY.  The  blessing  of  peace. — Remis- 
sion of  sin. 

Y.  The  fruit  of  peace. — Holiness. 

Peace  to  the  Far  Off  and  the  Near, 

I.  What  it  is. — It  means  sometimes 
friendship  or  reconciliation  ;  and  some- 
times the  state  of  soul  resulting  from 
these.  O  man  of  earth,  is  this  peace 
yours  ? 

II.  What  it  is  not. — It  is  not  mere 
indifference.  The  frozen  lake  is  calm  ; 
but  that  is  not  the  calm  we  desire.  It 
is  not  the  security  of  self-righteousness. 
That  a  hollow  security.  It  is  not  the 
peace  of  prosperity,  or  pleasure,  or 
earthly  ease.  There  is  the  world's 
peace. 

III.  Where  it  comes  from. — It  does 
not  come  from  self,  or  sin,  or  the  flesh 
or  the  world.  Nor  does  it  come  from 
the  law,  or  our  own  goodness,  or  our 
prayers  or  religiousness.  It  comes 
directly  and  solely  from  Jesus  Christ; 
from   Himself,    and   from    His   cross; 

243 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


from  Him  as  Jesus,  from  Him  as  the 
Christ. 

IV.  How  we  get  it. — Our  text  says 
it  is  "  preached  "  to  us ;  or  more  ex- 
actly, "the  good  news  of  it  are  brought 
to  us."  The  pacifying,  conscience- 
purging  work  is  done ;  and  God  has 
sent  us  His  account  of  it. 

V.  What  it  does  for  us. — 1.  It 
purifies.  No  peace,  no  purity.  2.  It 
liberates.  The  possession  of  this  peace 
is  the  liberty  of  the  soul.  Without 
peace  we  are  in  bondage  and  darkness. 
3.  It  satisfies ;  it  fills  the  soul ;  it  takes 
away  weariness  and  emptiness.  4.  It 
animates.  Till  peace  takes  possession 
of  us  we  are  sluggish  in  the  cause  of 
God.  Peace  makes  us  zealous,  brave, 
self-denied  ;  willing  to  spend  and  be 
spent,  to  do  and  suffer. — H.  Bonar,  D.D. 

Ver.  38.  "  Who  went  about  doing 
good." 

I.  A  significant  testimony. — Spoken 
by  an  eyewitness,  authenticating  the 
gospel  records  of  the  life  of  Christ. 

II.  A  deserved  eulogy. — History 
has  preserved  the  names  of  individual 
princes,  to  whom  she  gives  the  title  of 
benefactors  :  thus  are  held  in  memory 
a  Ptolemseus  Euergetes,  a  Titus,  "  the 
joy  and  delight  of  all  mankind  "  ;  but 
of  what  "benefactors"  (Luke  xxii.  25), 
must  not  the  name  and  reputation  dim 
and  pale  before  that  of  the  Sovereign 
of  God's  kingdom  ? 

III.  A  loud  call. — To  unswerving 
faith  in  Christ  as  the  promised 
Saviour,  the  crown  and  ornament  of 
humanity,  God's  highest  revelation. 

IV.  A  constant  spur. — To  a  love 
which  yields  itself  without  condition 
to  such  a  loving  Saviour,  and  hence- 
forth knows  no  greater  joy  than, 
though  at  a  distance  infinite,  to  follow 
in  his  footsteps. — Oosterzee. 

"  God  was  with  Him? 
I.  Providentially. — As  with  all. 

II.  Spiritually.  —As  with  those  who 
fear  Him. 

III.  Efficiently. — As  with  prophets 
and  apostles  working  through  Him. 

IV.  Essentially. — As  with  none  else, 

244 


being  one  with  Him  in  substance  and 
in  power,  holiness,  goodness,  and  truth. 

The  History  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

I.  His  Divine  mission. — Sent  by 
God. 

II.  His     personal    qualification. — 

1.  Anointed    with    the    Holy    Ghost. 

2.  Clothed  with    supernatural    power. 

3.  Attended  by  the  Divine  presence. 

III.  His  philanthropic  career. — 
1.  Its  benevolent  character.  Doing 
good,  and  healing  all  that  were 
oppressed  of  the  devil.  2.  Its  extensive 
circuit.  He  went  about ;  not  restricting 
Himself  to  one  town  or  province. 
3.  Its  unwearied  continuance.  He 
went  about  manifestly  without  cessa- 
tion. 

IV.  His  tragic  end. — "  Whom  they 
slew  and  hanged  on  a  tree."  A  violent, 
undeserved,  substitutionary  death. 

V.  His  triumphant  resurrection. — 
"  Him  God  raised  up."  The  proofs  of 
His  resurrection  :  eating  and  drinking 
with  the  apostles. 

VI.  His  sublime  exaltation. — "  Or- 
dained to  be  Judge  of  quick  and  dead." 

VII.  His  .  culminating  glory.— 
"  Through  His  name  whosever  believeth 
in    Him    shall    receive    remission    of 


sins. 


A 


Ver.  39.  The  Death    of  Christ. 
study  in  apologetics. 

I.  Its  early  occurrence. — After  a 
brief  ministry  of  three  (or  two)  and  a 
half  years.  Out  of  a  life  so  short, 
followed  by  a  death  so  soon,  what  great 
results  could  be  expected  to  flow  1  Yet 
no  life  or  death  has  moved  the  world 
like  that  of  Christ. 

II.  Its  shameful  form. — Slain  and 
hanged  upon  a  tree,  like  the  vilest  of 
malefactors.  Out  of  an  end  so  igno- 
minious, what  hope  of  posthumous 
fame  could  spring  1  Vet  Christ's 
death  has  attracted  more  attention  and 
been  more  widely  and  permanently 
remembered  than  any  other  that  has 
occurred. 

III.  Its  undeserved  character. — 
For  no  crime  or  sin  of  His  own,  proved 
or  unproved,  but  for  a  life  spent  in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  X. 


holy  fellowship  with  God,  and  in 
benevolent  ministries  among  men.  In 
this  respect  standing  apart  from  that 
of  any  son  of  man  who  has  ever  died 
either  before  or  since.  Impossible  that 
in  such  a  death  no  greater  significance 
could  be  than  in  that  of  ordinary 
mortals. 

IY.  Its  age-long  remembrance. — 
When  Peter  spoke  of  it  to  Cornelius 
it  was  little  more  than  ten  years  old. 
The  world  had  scarcely  had  time  to 
forget  it.  But  nineteen  centuries  have 
rolled  away  since  then,  and  its  memory 
is  still  green.  In  all  countries  men 
are  thinking  and  speaking  of  the 
decease  which  was  accomplished  at 
Jerusalem.  The  question  therefore 
rises,  what  was  there  about  this  death 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  that  makes  the 
world  unable  or  unwilling  to  forget 
it? 

Y.  Its  extraordinary  influence. — 
Christ  Himself  predicted  that  if  He 
were  lifted  up  from  the  earth  He 
would  draw  all  men  unto  Him 
(John  xii.  32),  and  let  it  be  accounted 
for  as  one  will,  the  fact  is  true  that  the 
death  of  Christ  has  ever  since  it 
occurred  been  one  of  the  most  potent 
— conjoined  with  the  resurrection,  the 
most  potent — factor  in  the  onward 
development  of  human  history. 

YI.  Its  amazing  significance. — In 
this  alone  lies  the  explanation  that 
a  death  so  early,  so  shameful,  so 
undeserved,  so  long  remembered,  so 
profoundly  influential,  could  have  taken 
place,  that  it  was  the  death :  1 .  Of 
an  Incarnate  God.  2.  In  the  room  of 
sinful  men.  3.  As  an  atonement  for 
their  sin.  4.  As  a  means  of  effecting 
their  sanctification  ;  and  5.  In  order  to 
secure  for  them  eternal  life.  It  is 
these  considerations  which  give  to 
Christ's  death  its  unique  position  and 
power. 

Yer.  41.  Eating  and  Drinking  with 
the  Risen  Christ. 

I.  A  proof  of  Christ's  resurrection. 

II.  An  evidence  of  believers'  salva- 
tion. 

III.  A  foretaste  of  the  saints'  glory. 


Yers.  36,  43.  The  Threefold  Office  of 
Christ. 

I.  Prophetical. — Preaching  peace. 
II.  Priestly. — Remitting  sin. 
III.  Kingly.— Ruling  all. 

Yer.  43.  His  (i.e.,  Christ's)  Name. 

I.  Divinely  attested. — "  To  Him  give 
all  the  prophets  witness." 

II.  Widely  published. — "He  com- 
manded us  to  preach  unto  the  people 
and  to  testify." 

III.  Highly  exalted. — Raised  up 
and  established  above  every  name. 

IY.  Certainly  saving.  —  Procuring 
forgiveness  for  all  who  believe. 

Y.  Constantly  enduring. — Since  the 
gospel  was  designed  not  for  one  age  but 
for  all  the  ages. 

Yer.  43.  The  Great  Blessing  of  the 
Gospel. 

I.  Its  nature. — Remission  of  sins. 

II.  Its  channel. — Through  Jesus 
Christ. 

III.  Its  recipients. — All  who  believe 
in  Him. 

IY.  Its  condition. — Faith  in  Him. 
Y.  Its  certainty. — Witnessed  by  the 
prophets. 

Yer.  45.  The  Gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I.  Its  nature. — The  inhabitation  of 
the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

II.  Its  effect. — In  some,  divers 
gifts ;  in  all,  holiness  and  eternal  life. 

III.  Its  recipients.  —  Those  who 
believe  and  obey  the  word. 

IY.  Its  sign. — Baptism. 

Yers.  44-48.  The  Conversion  of  Cor- 
nelius. 

I.  Prepared  for  by  his  religious 
condition.  —  1.  His  character  before 
conversion.  (1)  A  devout  man,  who 
(2)  feared  God,  (3)  cared  for  the  godly 
training  of  his  house,  (4)  practised 
philanthropy,  and  (5)  prayed  to  God 
always.  2.  His  need  notwithstanding 
of  conversion.  This  may  seem  to  be 
contradicted  by  Peter's  statement  in 
ver.  34.  Explain  (1)  what  ver.  34 
does  not  and  (2)  what  it  does  mean 
(see  "  Hints  "). 

II.  Brought  about   by   a  threefold 

245 


chap.  xi. 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


instrumentality. — 1.  By  the  providence 
of  God.  Who  had  (1)  brought  Cornelius 
into  contact  with  the  Jewish  people 
and  their  worship  ;  (2)  awakened  in  his 
heart  dissatisfaction  with  the  gods  of 
Rome  and  eager  longing  for  a  purer 
religion  ;  (3)  led  him  to  Csesarea  where 
he  heard  the  gospel ;  and  (4)  sent  Peter 
to  Joppa,  where  he  was  easily  found 
by  Cornelius.  2.  By  the  ministry  of 
angels.  In  his  own  and  Peter's  visions. 
3.  By  the  preaching  of  the  word. 

III.  Sealed  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. — 1.  The  signs.  Tongues.  2.  The 
significance.  An  earnest  of  the  inherit- 
ance. 

IV.  Attested  by  baptism.  —  The 
ordinance  of  Christ  to  be  observed  by 
believers. 

Vers.  47,  48.  The  Administration  of 
Christian  Baptism. 

I.  Hindrances  to  its  reception. — 
1.  The  absence  of  faith.     The  individual 


who  is  not  prepared  to  profess  faith 
in  Jesus  Christ  has  no  claim  whatever 
to  be  admitted  to  baptism.  2.  The 
presence  of  open  sin.  Though  a  pro- 
fessed believer,  the  individual  who  lives 
in  scandalous  sin  is  in  an  unfit  state 
for  partaking  of  this  holy  ordinance. 
3.  The  want  of  adequate  knowledge. 
The  person  who  has  not  yet  attained 
to  a  clear  understanding  of  the  nature 
and  significance  of  baptism  is  not  a 
pi'oper  subject  for  its  reception. 

II.  Qualifications  for  its  reception. 
— 1.  The  qualification  in  God's  sight. 
Endowment  with  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Baptism  ideally  considered  is  not  a 
means  of  imparting  the  Holy  Ghost, 
but  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  Holy  Ghost's 
presence.  2.  The  qualification  in  man's 
sight.  An  outward  profession  of  faith, 
attested  by  visible  saintship  or  a 
corresponding  walk  and  conversation, 
accompanied,  as  above  stated,  with 
adequate  knowledge. 


CHAPTER    XI. 

The  Church  at  Jerusalem  and  Gentile  Converts — The  Liberty 

of  Grace. 

§  1.  Peter's  Report  to  the  Church  at  Jerusalem;    or,  the   Admission  of  the 

Gentiles  vindicated  (vers.  1-18). 
§  2.  The  Origin  of  the  Church  at  Antioch  ;  or,  the  Preparation  of  a  Centre  for 

the  Gentile  Mission  (vers.  19-30). 


CRITICAL    REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  The  apostles.— Peter  and  John  (viii.  14),  with  James  (xii.  2),  and  possibly  the  rest 
of  the  Twelve.     The  brethren. — The  body  of  disciples. 

Ver.  2.  They  that  were  of  the  circumcision. — In  the  first  instance  all  the  Judasan  disciples 
who  were  Jews,  afterwards  a  party  in  the  Church  who  contended  for  circumcision  as  a 
term  of  Christian  communion  (Phil.  iii.  3;  Col.  iv.  11  ;  Titus  i.  10). 

Ver.  3.  Didst  eat  with  them.— See  on  x.  28. 

Ver.  4.  Rehearsed  the^  matter  from  the  beginning  and  expounded  it  by  order.— Better, 
having  begun,  expounded  the  matter  unto  them  in  order. 

Vers.  5-10.— Peter's  account  differs  from  Luke's  in  only  minor  details.  (See  "  Homiletioal 
Analysis.") 

Ver.  11. — Mentions  that  Cornelius's  ambassadors  were  three  in  number  (x.  19),  and  ver.  12 
that  Peter's  companions  were  six  (x.  33). 

Ver.  13. — Represents  Cornelius  as  calling. his  mysterious  visitor  an  angel,  whereas  Luke's 

246 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  xi. 


account  makes  the  centurion  speak  of  him  as  a  man  (x.  30).  The  word  men,  an  insertion 
from  x.  5,  should  be  omitted. 

Ver.  14. — Adds  an  item  of  the  angel's  message  not  before  mentioned. 

Ver.  15. — The  clausule  as  I  began  to  speak  contradicts  not  that  in  Luke's  account  "while 
Peter  yet  spake  "  (x.  44),  but  draws  attention  to  the  shortness  of  the  interval  which  passed 
before  the  Holy  Ghost  descended.  In  the  beginning  =  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  about  ten 
years  before  :  see  on  ver.  26. 

Ver.  17.  Whether  the  antecedent  to  who  believed  maT^vaacTLv  is  us  (A.  and  R.V.,  Bengel, 
Meyer),  or  them  and  us  (Alford,  Hackett),  or  them  only  (Plumptre),  cannot  be  decided  ;  but 
in  each  case  the  sense  is  the  same. 

Ver.  18.  Glorified  God. — Correct  if  the  reading  is  i56£aaav  (Westcott  and  Hort,  R.V.)  ;  if 
e86^ov  be  preferred  (A.V.,  Alford,  Hackett),  then  the  rendering  should  be  kept  glorifying 
God,  a  continuous  act. 

Ver.  19.  Upon  the  persecution. — Or,  tribulation,  drrb  71-775  6Xi\peojs:  better,  from  (as  an  effect 
of)  the persecutio7i,  that  arose  about  Stephen,  tirl  2re0di/aj — i.e.,  on  account  of,  rather  than  in 
the  time  of  Stephen,  which  would  have  required  eVi  'Zrecpa.vov.  Phenice. — "  The  region  of 
palms,"  a  narrow  strip  of  territory  about  two  hundred  miles  in  length,  with  a  varying 
breadth,  never  more  than  thirty-five  miles,  looking  out  upon  the  Mediterranean,  having 
Syria  upon  the  north,  the  country  of  the  Philistines  upon  the  south,  and  the  range  of  Lebanon 
in  its  rear  on  the  East.  Its  chief  cities  were  Tyre  and  Sidon.  Cyprus. — See  on  iv.  3-6. 
Antioch. — The  capital  of  the  Seleucidse,  situated  on  the  Orontes,  sixteen  miles  from  the  sea 
and  forty-one  from  the  river's  mouth.  "  The  queen  of  the  East,  the  third  metropolis  of  the 
world,  the  residence  of  the  imperial  legate  of  Syria,  this  vast  city  of  perhaps  500,000  souls 
.  .  .  was  no  mere  Oriental  town  with  low,  flat  roofs,  and  dingy,  narrow  streets,  but  a  Greek 
capital,  enriched  and  enlarged  by  Roman  munificence,  .  .  .  situated  at  the  point  of  junction 
between  the  chains  of  Lebanon  and  Taurus, .and  containing  an  immense  colony  of  Jews  " 
(Farrar,  The  Life  and  Work  of  St.  Paul,  p.  -288).  "  In  this  splendid  world-city,  where  all 
nationalities  of  the  East  and  West  flowed  together,  and  every  stranger  instantly  was  received 
into  citizenship,  washed  itself  out  more  than  anywhere  else  the  strong  exclusiveness  of  the 
Jewish  character.  If  the  synagogues  as  a  whole  adhered  closely  to  the  law,  yet  were  there 
many  Jews  who  held  friendly  intercourse  with  the  heathen,  and  were  even  susceptible 
towards  the  preaching  of  Christianity  "  (Langhans's  Biblische  Geschichte  und  Literatur,  ii. 
726). 

Ver.  20.  Cyrene. — See  on  ii.  10.  Grecians. — I.e.,  Greek-speaking  Jews  ;  Greeks  (R.V.). 
1.  The  testimony  of  the  best  documents  countenances  the  text,  Grecians.  2.  Internal 
harmony  appears  to  favour  Greeks.  3.  Some  of  the  oldest  versions  and  a  few  MSS.  support 
Greeks.  4.  The  majority  of  critics  decide  for  Greeks  (Griesbach,  Lachmann,  Teschendorf, 
De  Wette,  Holtzmann,  Zockler,  Meyer,  Alford).  5.  On  the  other  hand,  scholars  of  ability 
incline  to  Grecians  (Westcott  and  Hort,  Wordsworth,  Alexander,  Spence).  6.  The  Sinaitic 
MSS.  affords  no  certain  light,  since  it  reads  evayyeXiaTas,  which  is  clearly  wrong,  although 
it  points  in  the  direction  of  'EXA^to-rds,  Grecians. 

Ver.  22.  Barnabas. — See  on  iv.  36. 

Ver.  2.5.  On  Tarsus. — See  ix.  30.  To  seek  Saul. — They  had  met  last  in  Jerusalem  (ix.  27), 
where  Saul  had  preached  till  compelled  to  flee-for  his  life  (ix.  30).  How  long  an  interval 
had  passed  cannot  be  exactly  computed  ;  but  as  Paul's  second  visit  to  Jerusalem  occurred  a 
year  after  he  had  come  to  Antioch  (ver.  26) — i.e.,  in  A.D.  44—  several  (perhaps  five ;  Ramsay 
thinks  ten)  years  may  have  elapsed  since  they  had  beheld  each  other  in  the  flesh.  During 
these  years  the  incidents  connected  with  the  evangelistic  wanderings  of  Peter  (ix.  31-43), 
the  conversion  of  Cornelius  (x.,  xi.  1-18),  and  the  founding  of  the  Church  at  Antioch 
(xi.  19-26),  as  well  as  in  Syria  and  Cilicia  (xv.  23),  may  have  taken  place. 

Ver.  26.  Christians. — Xpiartavot,  the  name  given  to  the  disciples  first  in  Antioch  about  ten 
years  after  the  Ascension.  Hardly  by  the  disciples  themselves,  for  whom  such  titles  as 
"  the  brethren,"  "  the  saints,"  were  enough,  or  by  the  Jews,  who  would  scarcely  have  admitted 
what  the  name  seemed  to  imply  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  had  been  the  Messiah  ;  but  most 
likely  by  the  pagans,  though  whether  by  the  Romans  (compare  Tacitus,  Ami.,  xv.  44),  or 
by  the  Greeks  (Lepsius,  Holtzmann),  or  by  the  Syrians  cannot  be  ascertained.  It  may  have 
been  given  by  the  populace  or  by  the  civic  authorities  (Renan),  and  intended  as  a  nickname 
(Zockler),  since  Antioch  was  fond  of  nicknames,  or  simply  as  a  title  of  distinction,  "  derived 
from  the  watchword  of  their  faith  "  (Weizsacker).  "In  any  case  the  name  belongs  to 
popular  slang  "  (Ramsay). 

Ver.  27.  Prophets. — Men  endowed  with  the  gift  of  prophecy  (Rom.  xii.  6;  1  Cor.  xii.  10), 
who  occupied  a  sort  of  teaching  office  in  the  Church,  and  were  often  associated  with  the 
regular  teaching  order  (xiii.  1  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  28  ;  Eph.  iv.  11). 

Ver.  28.  Claudius  Caesar.— Succeeded  Caligula  from  A.D.  41-54.  Schurer  (Jud.  Volk.,  i.  474) 
regards  Luke's  statement  about  the  famine  as  unhistorical ;  but  Claudius's  reign  throughout 
was  remarkable  for  the  frequent  famines  which  occurred  in  it  (Suetonius,    Claudius,  18 ; 

247 


chap.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Tacitus,  Ann.,  xii.  43).  One  of  these  Josephus  {Ant.,  XX.  v.  2)  mentions  as  specially  affecting 
Judaea  and  Syria  under  the  procuratorship  of  Cuspius  Fadus,  a.d.  45.  This  date  important 
for  arranging  the  chronology  of  the  Acts.     Eamsay  dates  the  famine  in  A.D.  46. 

Ver.  29.  Relief. — Lit.  for  ministry  or  service,  in  anticipation  of  the  impending  famine. 

Ver.  30.  Eldeis. — The  first  mention  of  these  office  bearers  in  the  New  Testament.  That 
these  office  bearers  afterwards  existed  in  Jerusalem  is  subsequently  stated  (xiv.  23,  xv.  2,  4, 
G,  xxi.  18).  That  they  existed  already  may  be  inferred  (xv.  2,  4,  6).  That  Paul's  Epistles 
do  not  mention  elders  in  Jerusalem  (Weizsacker)  is  no  argument  against  the  truthfulness 
of  the  narrative.  The  complete  identity  of  elders  and  bishops  in  the  apostolic  time  follows 
from  such  texts  as  xx.  17  ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Titus  i.  5,  7  ;  1  Peter  v.  1. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses   1—18. 

Peters  Report  to  the  Church  at  Jerusalem;  or,  the  Admission  of  the  Gentiles 
vindicated. 

I.  The  serious  indictment  preferred  against  Peter.— 1.  The  occasion.  (1)  The 
tidings  that  had  reached  the  apostles  and  brethren  in  Judsea  that  the  Gentiles 
also  had  received  the  word  of  God  (ver.  1).  So  remarkable  a  phenomenon  was 
not  likely  to  remain  unknown  to  the  Church  leaders  in  Jerusalem.  Nor  is  it 
readily  conceivable  that  tidings  so  glorious  should  have  given  rise  to  dissatisfac- 
tion in  any  right-thinking  bosom.  Yet  such  actually  appears  to  have  been  the 
case.  (2)  The  return  of  Peter  to  the  metropolis,  which  was  dictated  not  by  any 
peremptory  summons  issued  to  him  by  his  colleagues  to  defend  before  them  the 
action  he  had  taken — an  assertion  destitute  of  even  the  slightest  evidence — but 
by  a  natural  desire  to  explain  what  had  taken  place  and  his  relation  thereto 
(ver.  2).  2.  The  movers.  u  They  that  were  of  the  circumcision " — i.e.,  the 
Jewish  Christians  as  distinguished  from  the  Gentile  (see  x.  45) — the  party  in 
general  and  not  an  inner  circle  of  them  more  zealous  for  the  rite  than  their 
fellows  (Lechler).  Such  a  party  afterwards  arose  (Col.  iv.  11  ;  Titus  i.  10) ;  here 
its  first  indications  are  observed.  At  this  stage  the  whole  Jerusalem  Church, 
being  composed  of  Jews,  felt  disposed  to  emphasise  the  importance  and  obligation 
of  circumcision.  3.  The  gravamen.  Not  that  the  apostle  had  preached  the 
gospel  to  the  Gentiles — which,  in  face  of  Christ's  command,  could  hardly  have 
been  pronounced  a  fault  (Matt,  xxvii.  19) — or  that  he  had  baptised  them,  and 
so  received  them  into  the  Christian  Church,  but  that  he  had  done  so  without 
subjecting  them  to  circumcision.  As  yet  the  apostles  and  brethren  do  not  "so 
express  their  thoughts,  but  merely  charge  Peter  with  having  violated  (traditional) 
Mosaism  by  entering  into  friendly  intercourse,  and  holding  house  and  table 
fellowship  with  the  Gentiles  (ver.  3). 

II.  The  triumphant  vindication  offered  by  Peter. — 1.  The  frankness  with 
which  it  was  given.  Not  standing  upon  his  dignity  as  chief  among  the  apostles 
(primus  inter  pares),  or  resenting  their  interference  with  what  was  so  un- 
mistakably a  work  of  God,  but  recognising  their  right  to  have  their  difficulties 
stated  and,  if  possible,  removed,  doubtless  also  appreciating  their  perplexity 
concernirg  what  conflicted  so  strangely  with  their  traditional  beliefs,  Peter  began 
and  expounded  the  matter  in  order  to  them.  A  Christian  of  the  right  spirit — 
whether  a  public  official  or  a  private  member  in  the  Church — will  not  fail  to 
exhibit  the  like  anxiety,  by  means  of  a  frank  explanation,  to  remove  any  offence 
or  stumbling  block  which  his  personal  behaviour  may  have  placed  in  the  way  of 
his  weaker  brethren  (Pom.  xiv.,  xv).  2.  The  fulness  with  which  it  was  given. 
The  main  particulars  of  the  story  were  related.  (1)  The  vision  he  had  himself 
beheld  in  Joppa  (5-10),  his  own  account  differing  from  Luke's  only  in  minor 
details,  such  as  the  omission  of  all  mention  of  the  time  when  the  vision  occurred 
and  of  the  hunger  which  preceded  it,  saying  nothing  about  seeing  heaven  opened, 
and  adding  that  the  sheet  appeared  to  come  even  unto  him,  and  that  it  con- 
tained "  wild  beasts "   (ver.  6)  as  well  as  other  animals.     (2)  The  arrival  of 

248 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  xi. 


Cornelius's  messengers,  though  he  did  not  at  all  mention  the  centurion's  name, 
or  at  that  stage  in  his  tale  allude  to  the  vision  which  had  prompted  the 
centurion  to  despatch  his  embassy  (ver.  11).  (3)  The  inward  whispering  of  the 
Spirit  which  had  directed  him  to  accompany  the  strange  men  from  Csesarea 
(ver.  12),  which  prompting  he  obeyed,  taking  with  him  six  brethren  who  were 
then  present,  having  apparently  come  up  to  Jerusalem  along  with  him,  and  to 
whom  he  may  be  pictured  as  having  pointed — "  these  six  brethren  also  accom- 
panied me."  (4)  The  account  Cornelius  gave  of  the  angel's  appearance  in  his 
house  with  instructions  to  send  men  to  Joppa  for  him,  Simon,  whose  surname 
was  Peter,  who,  the  angel  said,  should  tell  him  words  whereby  he  and  all  his 
house  should  be  saved  (vers.  13,  14).  (5)  The  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon 
Cornelius  and  his  household  almost  immediately  after  he  had  commenced  to 
speak  (the  interval  between  his  beginning  to  preach  and  the  Spirit's  coming 
down  seemed  so  short),  and  in  exactly  the  same  fashion  as  it  had  done  upon 
Jewish  believers  at  Pentecost — i.e.,  with  the  same  manifestations  in  the  form  of 
tongues  (ver.  15).  (6)  The  impression  the  phenomenon  had  made  upon  himself. 
It  caused  him  to  remember  the  word  of  the  Lord  (see  i.  5)  about  the  difference 
between  John's  baptism  with  water  and  the  Lord's  baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
(ver.  16).  (7)  The  process  of  reasoning  he  then  followed — which  was  that,  if 
God  had  bestowed  on  them,  the  Gentiles,  the  same  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  He 
had  conferred  on  Jewish  believers,  it  was  manifest  God  had  received  them,  the 
Gentiles,  into  His  Church ;  and  that  being  the  case  who  was  he,  Peter,  that  he 
should  withstand  God  and  keep  them  put  by  withholding  from  them  the  rite  of 
baptism,  which  was  the  sign  of  their  being  let  in  (ver.  17)  1  3.  The  success  ivith 
which  it  ivas  given.  (1)  The  apostles  and  brethren  held  their  peace.  They  could 
say  nothing  against  it.  It  was  as  clearly  the  doing  of  God  as  the  healing  of  the 
lame  man  at  the  Beautiful  Gate  of  the  Temple  had  been  (iv.  14).  (2)  They 
glorified  God,  saying,  "  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  granted  repentance 
unto  life."     What  a  pity  they  did  not  ever  after  remain  in  this  mind  ! 

Learn. — 1.  That  misunderstandings  will  arise  among  Christian  brethren. 
2.  That  all  Christian  believers  are  not  equally  enlightened,  or  equally  free  from 
prejudice,  narrow-mindedness  and  bigotry.  3.  That  the  best  way  to  remove 
misunderstandings  and  overcome  prejudices  among  Christians  is  to  come  together 
in  friendly  conference.  4.  That  the  same  story  is  seldom  twice  told  in  the  same 
way  and  without  variation  in  details.  5.  That  whom  God  admits  into  the 
Church  none  have  a  right  to  exclude. 

Note  A. — The  historical  credibility  of  Cornelius's  conversion  has  been  objected  to 
principally  on  the  following  grounds:  1.  That  it  had  no  practical  effect  on  the 
settlement  of  the  Gentile  question.  2.  That  Paul  did  not  cite  it  as  an  argument 
in  the  Jerusalem  council.  3.  That  in  spite  of  the  silence  and  glorification  of 
God  which  followed  Peter's  explanation  (xi.  18)  the  Jerusalem  Christians  were 
not  long  in  reasserting  their  old  demand  for  the  circumcision  of  non-Jewish 
believers  (xv.  5).  4.  That  the  council  jfelt  itself  wholly  undecided  as  to  the 
position  it  ought  to  maintain  on  this  question  of  the  terms  of  communion  for 
Gentile  members.  5.  That  Peter's  subsequent  behaviour  at  Antioch  showed  he 
had  never  really  known  of  such  a  conversion  as  is  here  reported.  (See  Baur's 
Life  and  Work  of  Paul,  i.  81-92;  Zeller,  Die  Apostelgeschichte,  pp.  183-190; 
Holtzmann,  Hand  Commentar  zum  Neuen  Testament,  Erster  Band,  p.  366). 
But — 1.  Cornelius's  conversion  was  distinctly  referred  to  by  Peter,  if  not  by 
Paul,  in  his  speech  at  the  apostolic  council  (xv.  7),  so  that  it  cannot  be  truth- 
fully affirmed.  Cornelius's  conversion  was  wholly  without  effect  in  determining 
the  Gentile  question.  2.  If  Paul  did  not  cite  that  conversion  when  addressing 
the  council,  he  may  have  deemed  it  unnecessary  to  do  so  after  Peter's  reference 
to  the  same  event.     Along  with  this  it  should  be  noted  that  as  Paul's  address 

—     249 


chap.  XL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


has  not  been  reported,  one  cannot  be  certain  that  he  made  no  allusion  to  Peter's" 
action  in  receiving  Cornelius.  3.  If  circumcision  for  the  Gentiles  was  again 
mooted  in  Jerusalem,  that  was  not  surprising  considering  it  was  the  Pharisees 
who  mooted  it  (xv.  5).  4.  The  allegation  that  the  council  did  not  know  how  to 
act  upon  the  question  is  incorrect,  since  they  answered  the  question  to  Paul's 
satisfaction.  5.  The  wavering  of  Peter  at  Antioch  (Gal.  ii.  12)  only  showed 
that  he,  like  many  another  good  man  before  and  since,  was  inconsistent — not 
that  he  had  not  baptised  Cornelius.  Lesser  difficulties — such  as  the  number  of 
visions  connected  with  the  story,  the  uselessness  of  sending  Cornelius  to  Peter 
to  hear  about  the  gospel,  when  he  could  have  learnt  all  he  wanted  to  know 
from  Philip,  and  the  obvious  inaccuracy  of  the  statement  (x.  28),  since  how 
otherwise  could  a  Gentile  be  transformed  into  a  Jewish  proselyte — scarcely 
require  an  answer.  The  notion  that  the  Cornelius  history  is  a  free  composition 
intended  to  legitimate  Paul's  Gentile  mission  by  showing  that  Peter  had  opened 
the  door  to  the  heathen  before  him  contains  this  element  of  truth,  that  Peter's 
action  in  baptising  Cornelius  without  circumcision  because  the  Holy  Ghost  had, 
on  the  same  terms,  granted  the  gift  of  tongues,  proved  that  Paul's  procedure  in 
the  Gentile  Churches  was  not  unauthorised  and  self-invented,  but  had  the 
highest  possible  sanction,  that  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  Peter.  The  remainder 
of  the  Tubingen  theory  is  an  exploded  delusion. 

Note  B. — The  Theology  of  Peter,  as  set  forth  in  the  various  addresses  given  by 
him  in  the  Acts  : — 

1.  In  the  Upper  Poom  (i.  15-22)  ;  2.  On  the  Day  of  Pentecost  (ii.  14-36) ; 
3.  In  Solomon's  Porch  (hi.  12-26)  ;  4.  Before  the  Sanhedrim  (iv.  8-12) ;  5.  In  the 
Christian  Meeting  (v.  3,  4,  8,  9);  6.  Before  the  Sanhedrim  (v.  29-32);  7.  In 
Samaria  (viii.  20-23) ;  8.  At  Lydda  (ix.  34) ;  9.  At  Joppa  (ix.  40) ;  10.  At 
Csesarea  (x.  24-43). 

I.  Peter's  doctrine  of  God. — 1.  The  personality  of  God  is  everywhere  assumed 
(i.  24,  ii.  29,  hi.  13,  etc.).  His  wisdom,  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth. 
2.  The  sovereignty  of  God,  both  in  providence  (ii.  23)  and  in  grace  (hi.  26),  is 
fearlessly  asserted.  3.  The  unity  of  the  Godhead  is  everywhere  clearly  taught, 
as,  for  instance,  when  the  term  God  is  used  absolutely  (hi.  18,  iv.  10,  v.  4,  x.  34, 
etc.).  4.  The  trinity  of  persons  in  the  Godhead,  if  not  distinctly  expressed, 
is  fairly  implied  in  such  passages  as  teach  the  divinity  of  Christ  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

II.  Peter's  doctrine  of  Christ. — 1.  His  person.  (1)  That  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
was  an  actual  historical  personage,  a  true  man,  a  genuine  partaker  of  flesh  and 
blood  humanity,  and  not  a  mere  semblance  thereof,  as  the  later  Docetce  taught, 
Peter  presupposes  throughout — taking  for  granted  all  the  details  of  His  earthly 
history  as  these  have  been  recorded  in  the  gospel  records,  if  not  mentioning  His 
Incarnation  implying  it  when  affirming  His  divinity  (see  below),  alluding  to  His 
baptism  (x.  38),  His  philanthropic  ministry  (x.  38),  His  sinless  character  calling 
Him  God's  holy  and  righteous  One  (hi.  14),  affirming  His  crucifixion  (ii.  23, 
x.  39),  His  resurrection  (ii.  23,  31,  iii.  15,  v.  40,  41),  and  His  ascension  (ii.  33, 
iii.  21,  v.  31),  and  predicting  His  future  coming  as  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead 
(x.  42).  (2)  That  Peter  regarded  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  a  pre -existent  Divine 
being,  who  had  been  sent  and  who  had  come  into  the  world,  may  be  reasonably 
inferred  from  such  statements  as  these — "  He  is  Lord  of  all"  (x.  36),  "  David 
saith  concerning  Him,  I  beheld  the  Lord  always  before  my  face"  (ii.  25),  and 
"  The  Lord  saith  unto  my  Lord"  (ii.  34),  since,  even  if  they  refer  to  the  exalted 
Christ,  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  Christ  could  have  been  made  a  Divine  being 
by  the  process  of  resurrection  and  exaltation  if  He  had  not  been  so  before.  (3) 
That  Peter  considered  this  exalted  Divine  human  personality  as  the  Messiah  of 
Israel  (ii.  36)  and  the  Saviour  of  the  world  (iii.  25),  is  expressly  stated.     2.  His 

250       "  -— 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  xi. 


work.  That  Peter  regarded  Christ  as  Jehovah's  servant  (iii.  13,  26,  iv.  27,  30) 
who  had  been  commissioned  to  perform  upon  the  earth  a  work  through  which 
men  might  receive  remission  of  sins  (iii.  19,  x.  43),  is  hardly  less  apparent 
than  that  Peter  connected  that  work  with  His  death  upon  the  cross  (ii.  32,  38, 
iii.  26,  iv.  10-12,  ix.  43). 

III.  Peter's  doctrine  of  the  Spirit. — 1.  The  personality  (v.  3),  and  2.  The 
divinity  (v.  4),  are  unambiguously  asserted. 

IV.  Peter's  doctrine  of  Providence. — Includes  the  following  points:  1.  The 
sovereignty  of  God  in  foreordaining  whatsoever  comes  to  pass  (iv.  28).  2.  The 
freedom  of  man  in  accomplishing  his  own  will  while  all  the  time  he  executes  the 
purpose  of  God  (ii.  23,  iv.  27).  3.  The  present  and  immediate  knowledge  of  all 
that  man  thinks  and  does  upon  the  earth  (i.  24,  iv.  29).  4.  The  possibility  of 
interposing,  either  naturally  or  supernaturally,  in  the  course  of  mundane  history 
(iv.  29). 

V.  Peter's  doctrine  of  sin. — On  this  momentous  subject  the  Apostle  taught : 
1.  That  sin  in  its  essence  was  disobedience  to  God  (iv.  19,  v.  29).  2.  That 
thoughts  of  the  heart  as  well  as  overt  actions  or  words  were  included  in  the 
category  of  sin  (v.  3,  viii.  27).  3.  That  sin  until  it  was  forgiven  held  men's  souls 
in  spiritual  bondage  (viii.  23).  4.  That  the  sins  of  men  might  work  out  the 
purposes  of  God  (ii.  23).  5.  That  sins  of  the  most  heinous  character  were 
pardonable  through  Christ's  blood  (ii.  38,  iii.  19,  viii.  22,  x.  43). 

VI.  Peter's  doctrine  of  salvation. — -Contained  these  tenets :  1.  That  all 
men  needed  salvation,  Jew  and  Gentile  alike  (ii.  39).  2.  That  this  salvation  was 
attainable  only  through  Jesus  Christ  (iii.  12).  3.  That  the  only  condition  of 
salvation  was  faith  in  Christ's  name  (x.  43). 

VII.  Peter's  doctrine  of  the  last  things. — This  included — 1.  A  second  advent 
of  Jesus  Christ  to  be  preceded  by  times  of  refreshing,  and  ushering  in  the  times  of 
the  restoration  of  all  things  (iii.  21).  2.  A  future  resurrection  for  all  men 
(iv.  2).     3.  A  solemn  assize  for  quick  and  dead  (x.  42). 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  2.  Ecclesiastical  Controversy.  II.  Is  seldom  settled  without  strife 
I.  Frequently  arises  concerning  and  angry  feeling. — To  the  credit  of 
points  of  small  moment. — About  non-  the  brethren  and  of  Peter  in  this 
essentials  rather  than  about  essentials,  instance  it  was.  Peter,  by  his  frank 
about  external  forms  and  ceremonies  and  unvarnished  recital  of  what  he 
rather  than  about  internal  thoughts  had  done,  and  how  he  had  been  led  to 
and  dispositions,  about  the  tithing  of  do  it,  cleared  away  the  misconceptions 
mint,  anise,  and  cummin,  rather  than  and  disarmed  the  suspicions  of  his 
about  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  brethren  ;  they,  on  the  other  hand,  by 
judgment,  and  mercy,  and  faith  (Matt.  their  amiable  tempers  and  ready  dis- 
xxiii.  23).  Such  was  the  case  here.  position  to  have  their  difficulties  re- 
The  contention  which  arose  between  the  moved,  contributed  to  a  speedy  settle- 
circumcision  party  and  Peter  was  not  ment  of  what  might  have  developed 
about  spiritual  religion  but  only  about  into  a  prolonged  and  bitter  agitation, 
bodily  ritual,  was  not  whether  Cornelius  A  pattern  which  might  be  profitably 
had  been  converted,  but  whether  he  studied  by  disputants  of  all  sorts. 
had  been  circumcised,  was  not  whether  III.  Would  be  easily  disposed  of 
Peter  had  received  him  into  the  Church  were  both  parties  always  anxious  to 
without  the  exercise  of  faith,  but  find  out  and  follow  the  mind  of  God. — 
whether  Peter  had  dispensed  with  the  It  was  thus  the  threatened  rupture  in 
corporeal  mark  of  Mosaism.  A  small  Jerusalem  was  averted.  Peter  did  not 
affair  to  make  a  noise  about.  oppose  his  own  authority  to  that  of  his 

251 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


brethren,  or  lecture  them  on  their 
narrow-mindedness  in  seeking  to  im- 
pose their  antiquated  ceremonial  on 
the  Gentiles,  or  plume  himself  on  his 
superior  enlightenment  in  dispensing 
with  the  Mosaic  rite,  but  simply 
assisted  his  brethren  to  see  how  God 
in  His  providence  and  by  His  grace 
had  already  decided  the  controversy. 
His  brethren  when  they  perceived  this 
could  no  longer  maintain  their  favourite 
views,  but  humbly  and  submissively 
accepted  the  verdict  of  heaven,  feeling 
that  when  God  interposed  with  a 
decision  there  was,  and  ought  to  be,  an 
end  of  all  controversy. 

Ver.  4.  Expository  Preaching. 
Should  be  like  Peter's  discourse  to  his 
brethren. 

I.  Regular  and  systematic. — Going 
over  the  contents  of  revelation  in  order, 
so  as  to  present  Divine  truth  in  its 
inherent  connection,  logical  succession, 
and  due  proportion. 

II.  Clear  and  emphatic. — Showing 
that  the  speaker  has  an  adequate  grasp 
of  his  theme,  is  master  of  his  own 
thoughts,  and  can  express  both  with 
perspicuity  and  power. 

III.  Comprehensive  and  detailed. — 
Neither  fragmentary  nor  trivial.  Not 
leaving  great  lacunae,  or  condescending 
to  over-minute  particulars  ;  but  pre- 
senting a  broad  view  of  the  truth  in  all 
its  parts,  and  with  such  parts  as  are 
more  important  set  forth  in  promi- 
nence. 

IV.  Experimental  and  emotional. — 
Not  discoursing  on  the  contents  of 
revelation  as  if  these  were  mere  ob- 
jective truths  which  had  no  bearing 
on  either  speaker  or  hearer ;  but  talk- 
ing of  them  as  if  conscious  of  their  vast 
importance  for  the  inner  life  of  both. 

V.  Personal  and  practical. — Aimed 
at  the  conviction  as  well  as  enlighten- 
ment of  them  that  hear,  at  converting 
their  hearts  as  well  as  gaining  over 
their  judgments. 

Ver.  9.  Divine  Warnings ;  or, 
"  What  God  hath  cleansed  make  not 
thou  common." 

252 


I.  To  men  in  general. — In  par- 
ticular to  philosophers,  scientists, 
statesmen,  rulers — not  to  introduce 
distinctions  of  class,  rank,  wealth, 
power,  etc.,  between  man  and  man, 
seeing  that  God  hath  made  all  men 
of  one  blood,  and  therefore  equal.  The 
brotherhood  of  man  stands  to  day  in 
need  of  emphasis  and  exposition. 

II.  To  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ. — 
In  particular  to  its  office-bearers  and 
spiritual  leaders — not  to  make  the 
household  of  faith  narrower  than 
Christ  has  made  it,  not  to  erect  around 
it  fences  which  Christ  has  not  com- 
manded, not  to  excommunicate  those 
whom  Christ  has  admitted,  not  to  im- 
pose burdens  on  the  consciences  of 
men  which  Christ  has  not  directed. 

III.  To  the  individual  believer. — 
In  particular  to  him  who  is  conscious 
of  being  a  child  of  God — not  to  defile 
with  sin  and  guilt  the  heart  and  con- 
science which  Christ  by  His  blood  and 
word  has  cleansed,  not  to  let  down  to 
low  and  common  levels  the  life  which 
should  be  lived  in  the  high  and  pure 
atmosphere  of  fellowship  with  God  and 
Christ. 

Ver.  14.  Words  of  Salvation.  Words 
setting  forth — 

I.  The  nature  and  necessity  of  sal- 
vation.— 1.  Its  nature.  Deliverance 
from  the  curse,  power,  and  pollution 
of  sin.  2.  Its  necessity.  All  are  under 
condemnation,  on  account  of  sin,  en- 
thralled by  the  power  of  sin,  and 
tainted  by  the  moral  pollution  of  sin. 

II.  The  source  and  the  means  of 
salvation. — 1.  The  source.  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Incarnate  Son  of  God.  2.  The 
means.  Faith  in  His  blood,  which 
signifies  reliance  on  His  propitiatory 
sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world. 

III.  The  recipients  and  subjects  of 
salvation. — 1.  Believers — i.e.,  such  as  by 
faith  have  put  their  trust  in  Him.  2. 
Their  houses — i.e.,  on  their  complying 
with  the  same  condition. 

Ver.  16.  Remembering    the    Word  of 
the  Lord. 
I.  A  much-neglected  duty. — Not  by 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


the  world  alone,  but  also  by  the  Lord's 
people,  who  not  only  know  and  profess 
to  believe  that  word,  but  who  have 
themselves  been  saved  by  it,  and  have 
been  commanded  to  keep  it  in  remem- 
brance (John  xv.  20  ;  Col.  iii.  16). 

II.  An  exceedingly  delightful 
exercise. — Not  for  the  unbelieving  and 
unspiritual,  but  for  the  religious  and 
devout,  to  whom  that  word  is  more 
precious  than  thousands  of  silver  and 
gold  (Psalm  cxix.  72),  and  who  can 
truly  say,  "  Thy  testimonies  also  are 
my  delight  "  (Psalm  cxix.  24). 

III.  A  highly  profitable  employ- 
ment.— Were  Christ's  words  more 
frequently  remembered,  they  would — 
1.  Save  Christ's  people  from  falling 
into  error  and  sin  (Matt.  xxvi.  75  ; 
Mark  xiv.  72  ;  John  ii.  22).  2.  Com- 
fort them  in  seasons  of  despondency 
and  trouble  (Luke  xxiv.  8).  3.  Stimu- 
late them  to  works  of  faith  and  labours 
of  love  (xx.  35).  4.  Secure  for  them 
answers  to  prayer  (John  xv.  7). 
5.  Evidence  the  sincerity  of  their 
discipleship  (John  viii.  31). 

Yer.  17.  Who  was  I?  oi%  the  Im- 
possibility of  withstanding  God. — Peter 
felt  that  he  could  not  oppose  the 
introduction  of  Cornelius  on  four 
grounds. 

I.  He  was  only  a  feeble  creature, 
whereas  God  was  the  Almighty  Creator, 
and  therefore  had  a  right  to  do  accord- 
ing to  the  counsel  of  His  own  will 
(Dan.  iv.  35  ;  Job  ix.  12  ;  Isa.  xlv.  9 ; 
Rom.  ix.  20;  Eph.  i.  11). 

II.  He  was  only  a  commissioned 
servant,  whereas  God  was  the  com- 
missioning Sovereign,  and  was  entitled 


to  expect  that  His  purpose  should 
prevail  over  the  wish  of  His 
ambassador. 

III.  He  was  only  a  recipient  of 
grace,  whereas  God  was  the  dispenser  of 
grace,  and  possessed  exclusively  the 
right  of  saying  on  whom  that  grace 
should  be  bestowed. 

IY.  He  was  only  a  member  of  the 
Church,  whereas  God  was  the  Church's 
Head,  and  reserved  to  Himself  alone 
the  right  of  denning  the  terms  on 
which  admission  to  that  Church  might 
be  secured. 

Yer.  18.  Repentance  unto  Life. 

I.  Its  nature. — A  turning  of  the 
soul  from  self  and  sin  towards  Christ 
and  holiness — implying  a  genuine  heart 
renunciation  of  the  soul's  old  life  of 
selfishness,  worldliness,  irreligion,  im- 
morality, and  idolatry,  and  an  equally 
sincere  embracing  of  the  new  life  of 
faith,  godliness,  obedience,  and  love, 
which  is  enjoined  by  Jesus  Christ  in 
the  gospel. 

II.  Its  origin. — Repentance  unto 
life  is  a  grace — i.e.,  a  heavenly  gift,  such 
a  quality  and  disposition  of  soul  as  can 
be  inwrought  by  no  natural  process, 
but  must  be  created  by  the  action  of 
the  Holy  Spirit. 

III.  Its  necessity. — Required  by  all 
men  equally,  by  Jews  as  well  as 
Gentiles,  and  required  in  the  same  way 
as  a  free  gift  of  grace.  None  exempt 
from  its  obligations. 

IY.  Its  end. — Salvation  and  eternal 
life.  Hence  called  a  saving  grace. 
Wherever  it  truly  exists  the  soul  is 
passed  from  condemnation  and  become 
an  heir  of  glory. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  19—26. 

The  Origin  of  the  Church  at  Antioch  ;  or,  the  Preparation  of  a  Centre  for  the 
approaching  Gentile  Mission. 

I.  The  first  gospel  preachers  at  Antioch.  1.  Who  they  were.  Jewish  Chris- 
tians who  had  been  scattered  abroad  in  consequence  of  the  persecution  (or 
tribulation)  that  arose  on  the  death  of  Stephen,  a.d.  38.  Some  of  these  were 
foreign  Jews,  men  of  Cyprus  (see  on  iv.  36)  and  Cyrene  (see  on  ii.  10).  That 
Barnabas  was  among  them  is  not  favoured  by  the  narrative  (ver.  22),  though 
his  connection  with  Cyprus  may  have  led  him  to  direct  the  fugitives  to  carry  the 
glad  tidings  to  his  native  island.     That  Mnason  of  Cyprus  (xxi.  16),  and  Lucius 

253 


chap.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


of  Oyrene  (xiii.  1),  formed  two  of  these  pioneer  missionaries,  though  not  certain, 
is  by  no  means  improbable.     2.  How  they  came  to  Antioch.     (1)  The  road  they 
pursued  was  most  likely  that  which  ran  up  the  coast  of  Phoenicia  (xv.  3,  xxi.  2), 
passing,  doubtless,  through  its  historic  towns,  Tyre  and  Sidon,  where  some  years 
afterwards  Christian  communities  were  found  by  Paul  (xxi.  3,  xxvii.  3).     (2)  As 
to  why  they  betook  themselves  to  Antioch,  the  importance  of  that  city  as  the 
largest  in  Asia  Minor  and  the  third  in  rank  in  the  Roman  Empire — Pome  and 
Alexandria  only    being    larger — would    naturally  have   something   to  do  with 
attracting  them  thither.     Besides,  as  the  capital  of  Syria  and  the  residence  of 
the  Poman  Governors  of  that  province,  it  had  gathered  into  it  people  of  many 
nationalities,  including  a  large  colony  of  Jews.      Nor  is  it  unlikely  that  they 
were  influenced  by  the  number  of  Jewish  proselytes  who  were  attached  to  its 
synagogues,  as  well  as  by  the  circumstance  that  already  "  Antioch  had  furnished 
to  the  Church  of  Jerusalem  one  of  its  most  influential  members — viz.,  Nicolas, 
one  of  the  deacons "    (Penan).      3.   When  they  arrived  in  the  city.     Whether 
before  or  after  the  conversion  of  Cornelius  cannot  be  deduced  from  the  narrative. 
The  decision  depends  chiefly  on  whether  xv.  7  teaches,  as  it  appears  to  do,  that 
Peter  was  the  first  to  preach  to  the  Gentiles.     If  so,  then  the  missionaries  must 
have  heard  before  reaching  Antioch  of  Peter's  reception  of  Cornelius  into  the 
Church,  which  would  explain  their  subsequent  procedure  in  that  city.     4.  The 
'persons  to  whom  they  preached.     (1)  On  the  way  to  Antioch,  to  none  save  only  to 
Jews  (ver.  19),  whether  Hebrew  or  Greek  speaking.     This  was  natural  if  either 
Cornelius's  conversion  had  not  yet  taken  place  or  they  had  not  yet  heard  of  it. 
(2)  On   reaching   Antioch,    to   the   Greeks  or  Grecians — it  is  uncertain  which. 
The  reading  "  Greeks  "  suggests  that  either  an  unauthorised  Gentile  mission  had 
been  undertaken  by  the  missionaries  before  Cornelius's  conversion,  if  that  had 
not  yet  taken  place,  or  they  had  not  yet  heard  of  it,  or,  what  is  more  probable, 
that  having  heard  of  it  on  reaching  Antioch  they  forthwith  began   to  extend 
their  mission,  and  that  the  more  gladly  since  "  in  a  city  where  pure  Jews — Jews, 
who  were  proselytes,  etc.,  people  fearing  God — or  half- Jewish  Pagans,  and  pure 
pagans,  lived  together,   confined  preachings,  restricted  to  a  group  of    houses, 
became  impossible  "  (Penan).     The  reading  "  Grecians  "  leaves  the  time  of  the 
missionaries'  arrival  in  Antioch  undecided,  and  harmonises  with  the  idea  that 
Peter  was  the  opener  of  the  Church's  door  to  the  Gentiles — which  however  he 
still  was  on  the  preceding  hypothesis  (see  Critical  Pemarks).     5.  The  burden  of 
their  preaching.     The  Lord  Jesus — i.e.,  the  facts  and  doctrines  concerning  His 
life,  death,  resurrection,  ascension,  and  future  coming.     As  much  as  this  seems 
implied  in  the  use  of  the  term  "  Lord"  along  with  "  Jesus  "  in  defining  the  sub- 
ject of  their  ministry.     There  can  be  no  ground  for  thinking  that  they  preached 
another  gospel  than  that  which  was   preached  in  Jerusalem    and   at  Csesarea 
by   Peter,  and  afterwards  at  Antioch  and  throughout  Asia  Minor    by   Paul. 
6.  The  success  of  their  labours.     Not  through  superior  ability,  eloquence,  industry, 
or  persuasiveness  of  their  own,  but  solely  through  the  power  of  the  truth,  accom- 
panied by  the  power  of  Christ  operating  through  His  Spirit,  "  a  great  number 
believed  and  "  or,  having  believed,  "  turned  to  the  Lord  " — i.e.,  avowed  themselves 
to  be  His  disciples.     It  is  not  necessary,  in  order  to  account  for  this  remarkable 
awakening,  to  call  in  the  aid  of  extraneous  circumstances  such  as  the  excitement 
caused  in  the  city  by  an  earthquake  which  occurred  on  March  23rd,  of  the  year 
37,  or  the  disposition  to  believe  in  supernatural  matters  which  had  been  produced 
in  the  people's  minds  by  the  pretensions  of  an  impostor,  Debborius,  who  claimed 
that  by  means  of  ridiculous  talismans  he  could  prevent  the  recurrence  of  such 
catastrophes  (Penan,  The  Apostles,  xii.).     A  faithfully  preached  gospel  in  the 
hands  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  sufficient  to  explain  the  entire  phenomenon  which 
appeared  at  Antioch,  the  gospel's  acknowledged  adaptation  to  the  soul's  needs 

254 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   TEE  ACTS.  chap.  xi. 


ensuring   that  it  will  sooner  or  later  win  its  way  to  the  hearts  of  some  who 
hear. 

II.  The  mission  of  Barnabas  to  Antioch.  1.  The  occasion  of  his  mission. 
This  was  the  report  which  had  reached  Jerusalem  concerning  the  progress  of  the 
gospel  in  that  heathen  city.  If  this  occurred  before  Cornelius's  conversion,  it 
would  doubtless  startle  the  Church  leaders,  though  the  statements  are  quite 
unwarranted  that  "  notwithstanding  the  kindly  wishes  of  some  of  the  principal 
members  of  the  Church  in  Jerusalem,  Peter  in  particular,  the  apostolic  college 
continued  to  be  influenced  by  the  meanest  ideas,"  and  that  "  on  every  occasion 
when  they  heard  that  the  good  news  had  been  announced  to  the  heathen  some 
of  the  elders  manifested  signs  of  disappointment  "  (Kenan,  The  Apostles,  xiii.). 
If  the  tidings  came  to  the  Church  leaders  after  Cornelius's  conversion,  as  may 
reasonably  be  inferred  from  the  narrative,  then  they  would  not  be  taken 
unawares  or  at  a  loss  how  to  act  in  the  crisis  that  had  arisen.  2.  The  object  of 
the  mission.  It  is  not  supposable  that  Barnabas  was  sent  to  frown  upon,  or 
even  suspiciously  regard,  the  new  movement,  but  presumably  (1)  to  reconnoitre 
the  situation,  and  observe  the  facts,  as  became  prudent  Church  leaders  whose 
duty  it  was  to  do  nothing  rashly ;  (2)  on  ascertaining  the  genuineness  of  the 
awakening,  to  confirm  with  suitable  counsels  and  exhortations  the  young  con- 
verts, for  which  by  his  sincere  piety  and  sympathetic  nature  he  was  eminently 
fitted ;  and  (3)  if  need  were,  to  assist  the  evangelists  in  gathering  in  the  fruits 
and  widening  the  circuit  of  their  labours,  for  which  task  again  he  was  signally 
qualified,  though  it  does  seem  going  too  far  to  say  he  was  "  the  most  enlightened 
member  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem,"  and  "the  chief  of  the  liberal  party  which 
desired  progress  and  wished  the  Church  to  be  open  to  all "  (Kenan).  3.  The 
reason  of  his  mission.  That  is,  the  reason  of  his  selection  by  the  apostles  as 
their  delegate  ;  which  was  most  likely  :  (1)  because  of  his  being  an  eminent 
disciple  of  undoubted  Christian  character,  and  almost  apostolic  rank  (iv.  36)  ; 
(2)  because,  as  above  stated,  he  was  personally  fitted  for  the  work  which 
required  to  be  done  at  Antioch  ;  and  (3)  because  he  was  a  native  of  Cyprus,  and 
in  all  probability  known  to  some  of  the  evangelists  who  were  labouring  in 
Antioch.  4.  The  execution  of  his  mission.  On  reaching  Antioch  Barnabas  did 
the  business  for  which  he  had  been  commissioned.  (1)  He  investigated  the 
work  of  grace  that  had  been  reported  as  going  on  in  that  city,  found  it  to  be 
genuine,  and,  like  the  good  man  that  he  was  (ver.  24),  was  glad,  though  it  was 
a  work  which  he  himself  had  no  hand  in  bringing  about.  (2)  He  exhorted  the 
converts,  that  with  full  purpose  of  heart  they  should  cleave  unto  the  Lord — 
not  unto  their  leaders  merely,  or  to  one  another,  but  to  the  Lord,  which  would 
certainly  prove  the  speediest  and  most  efficacious  way  to  secure  their  growth  in 
grace,  their  perseverance  in  religion,  and  their  final  salvation.  (3)  Though  not 
stated,  it  may  be  assumed  that  he  aided  the  brethren  in  preaching  the  gospel, 
it  being  barely  conceivable  that  Barnabas,  through  jealousy,  or  indolence,  or 
indifference,  would  stand  aloof.  5.  The  success  of  his  mission.  "  Much  people 
was  added  unto  the  Lord,"  by  repentance,  faith,  and  baptism.  Though,  perhaps, 
the  numerous  conversions  that  were  effected  cannot  all  be  ascribed  to  him,  it 
need  not  be  doubted  that  he  exercised  a  powerful  influence  for  good  upon  those 
who  listened  to  his  preaching ;  and,  without  endorsing  the  verdict  that 
"  Christianity  has  always  done  injustice  to  that  great  man  in  not  placing  him 
in  the  front  rank  of  her  founders  "  (Kenan),  it  may  cheerfully  be  granted  that 
his  name  will  for  ever  remain  associated  with  that  Church,  which,  if  he  did  not 
originate,  he  at  least  did  much  to  consolidate  and  extend. 

III.  The  appearance  of  Saul  at  Antioch. — 1.  How  it  was  brought  about.  By 
Barnabas,  who  conceived  in  his  noble  heart  the  magnificent  idea  (Kenan)  of 
fetching  Saul  from  Tarsus,  and  for  this  purpose  went  forth  to  seek  him.     On 

255, 


chap.  xi.  HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


escaping  from  Jerusalem  Saul  had  betaken  himself  to  his  native  city  (see  ix.  30), 
where  he  had  been  living,  and  without  doubt  labouring  in  the  gospel  ever  since. 
It  is  to  this  period  that  the  founding  of  the  Syrian  and  Cilician  Churches  (xv.  41 ; 
Gal.  i.  21)  can  with  most  plausibility  be  ascribed.  For  the  notions  that  Saul  at 
this  time  in  Tarsus  was  fretting  out  his  soul  in  enforced  indolence,  and  that  "  his 
false  position,  his  haughtiness,  and  his  exaggerated  pretensions  were  neutralising 
many  of  his  other  and  better  qualities  "  (Kenan),  there  is  absolutely  no  foundation. 

2.  How  long  it  continued.  "A  whole  year" — i.e.,  during  a.d  44 — the  year 
immediately  preceding  that  of  Paul's  second  journey  to  Jerusalem,  at  the  time 
of  the  famine  (ver.  30).  "  This  was,"  says  Renan,  "  a  most  brilliant  and  without 
doubt  the  most  happy  year  in  the  life  of  Paul,"  adding  that  "  the  prolific 
originality  of  these  two  great  men  raised  the  Church  of  Antioch  to  a  degree  of 
grandeur  to  which  no  Christian  Church  had  previously  attained."  In  any  case, 
the  spiritual  results  of  that  year's  evangelism  were  in  some  measure  traceable  in 
the   vigorous   missionary    Church    that  was   gathered   in  that   city   (xiii.    1-3). 

3.  How  it  was  used.  As  above  stated,  in  helping  on  the  Christrs,n  cause  in 
Antioch,  in  evangelising  along  with  Barnabas  and  the  missionaries  already  there. 
No  doubt  the  felt  need  of  additional  labourers  constituted  the  motive  which 
impelled  Barnabas  to  think  of  the  Great  Tarser ;  and  though  once  more  the 
imaginative  Frenchman's  statement  is  by  no  means  to  be  hastily  subscribed,  that 
u  most  of  the  glory  which  has  accrued  to  the  latter  is  really  due  to  the  modest 
man  who  excelled  him  in  everything,  brought  his  merits  to  light,  prevented  more 
than  once  his  faults  from  resulting  deplorably  to  himself  and  his  cause,  and  the 
illiberal  views  of  others  from  exciting  him  to  revolt,  and  also  prevented  mean 
personalities  from  interfering  with  the  work  of  God"  (Renan,  The  Apostles,  xiii.), 
it  may  frankly  be  conceded  that  no  more  important  service  was  ever  done  by 
Barnabas  to  the  Church  of  Christ  than  when  recalling  the  brilliant  ability  and 
fervid  zeal  of  Saul  he  fetched  that  distinguished  man  to  Antioch.  It  was  one  of 
those  small  and  seemingly  unimportant  actions  which  bring  large  and  far- 
reaching  results  in  their  train.  Saul's  appearance  in  Antioch  made  Antioch  a 
missionary  centre,  and  himself  the  greatest  missionary  the  world  has  ever  seen. 

IV.  The  coming  of  Jerusalem  prophets  to  Antioch. — 1.  The  alarming  prediction. 

(1)  What  it  was.  That  there  should  be  great  dearth  throughout  all  the  world — 
literally,  over  all  the  inhabited  land,  meaning  Judsea  and  the  surrounding 
countries,  or  perhaps  the  Roman  empire.  The  communication  would  have  been 
sufficiently  distressing  at  any  time  and  to  any  people,  the  horrors  of  famine, 
especially  when  long  continued,  being  well  nigh  indescribable  (compare  Deut. 
xxviii.  53-57;  Lev.  xxvi.  19-29;  1  Kings  xvii.  1-16;  2  Kings  vi.  24-29).  To  the 
Church  at  Jerusalem,  consisting  as  it  did  mostly  of  poor  people,  and  impoverished 
as  it  had  been  by  its  communistic  experiments,  the  contemplation  of  such  a 
visitation  was  simply  alarming  ;  and  the  suggestion  is  not  without  likelihood 
that  the  apprehension  of  this  appalling  calamity  was  the  cause  of  the  prophetic 
embassy  to  the  Church  at  Antioch — "the  elders  of  Jerusalem"  had  "decided  to 
seek  succour  from    the    members  of   the   richer  Churches  of    Syria"  (Renan). 

(2)  By  whom  it  was  spoken.  Agabus,  of  whom  nothing  is  known  beyond  the 
fact  here  recorded  that  he  was  one  of  the  prophetic  or  inspired  teachers  who  were 
attached  to  the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  and  the  subsequent  statement  that  in  after 
years  he  went  down  to  Csesarea  and  foretold  Paul's  impending  imprisonment 
(xxi.  10).  Such  prophets  were  also  found  in  the  Churches  of  Antioch  (xiii.  I, 
xv.  32)  and  Corinth  (1  Cor.  xii.  28,  29,  xiv.  29).  That  Agabus  was  a  compara- 
tively obscure  individual — like  Ananias  of  Damascus  (ix.  10) — shows  that  great 
services  to  the  Church  of  God  may  be  rendered  by  exceedingly  humble  instru- 
ments. (3)  On  whose  authority  published.  Not  that  of  Agabus  himself,  but  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  who  spoke  through  him.     Not  every  word  uttered  by  an  inspired 

256 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  xi. 


teacher  was  inspired  (1  Cor.  vii.  6,  12),  though  this  was.  Those  who  speak  in 
God's  name  should  be  careful  not  to  mistake  their  own  thoughts*  for  God's,  and 
should  never  claim  for  their  own  pronouncements  an  authority  which  bek  ngs 
only  to  God.  (4)  When  it  came  to  pass.  "  In  the  days  of  Claudius."  No 
universal  dearth  is,  though  several  local  dearths  are,  reported  as  having  prevailed 
during  the  reign  of  that  Caesar.  Indeed,  "  the  reign  of  Claudius  was  afflicted 
almost  every  year  by  partial  famines"  (Renan).  According  to  Josephus 
(Ant.,  XX.  ii.  5,  v.  2)  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  Judsea  were  about  his  time 
swept  away  by  a  famine,  which  Helena,  Queen  of  Adiabene,  a  Jewish  proselyte 
then  at  Jerusalem,  relieved  by  importing  corn  from  Egypt  and  Cyprus, 
distributing  it  among  the  starving  population.  If  this  was  the  famine  referred 
to  by  Luke,  it  occurred  in  the  year  44  a.d.  (see  "Critical  Remarks").  2.  The 
generous  resolution  "  To  send  relief  unto  the  brethren  which  dwelt  in  Juda3a." 
Generous  this  proposal  was — (1)  In  the  kindness  it  displayed  toward  the  Mother 
Church,  which  was  certain,  for  reasons  already  explained,  to  suffer  more  than 
Churches  in  other  cities  when  the  famine  came  (Rom.  xv.  1).  (2)  In  the 
unselfishness  it  manifested,  since,  although  they  themselves  would  assuredly 
suffer  from  the  dearth,  they  thought  first  of  the  wants  of  the  poor  disciples  at 
Jerusalem  (1  Cor.  x.  24).  (3)  In  the  forethought  it  evinced — not  waiting  till 
the  need  arose,  but  taking  time  by  the  forelock,  and  providing  beforehand  for 
the  coming  pressure  (2  Cor.  viii.  11).  (4)  In  the  unanimity  with  which  it  was 
adopted,  every  member  of  the  Church  agreeing  with  and  entering  heartily  into 
the  proposal  (1  Peter  iii.  8).  (5)  In  the  liberality  which  it  contemplated,  each 
man  determining  to  contribute  according  to  his  ability  (see  1  Cor.  xvi.  2  ;  2  Cor. 
viii.  12).  3.  The  benevolent  donation.  When  their  generous  gift  had  been 
collected  they  despatched  it  to  Jerusalem.  (1)  Without  delay.  Bis  dat  qui  cito 
dat.  Many  acts  of  kindness  lose  their  fragrance  by  being  too  late.  (2)  By  the 
hands  of  trusted  messengers — Barnabas  and  Saul.  This  showed  the  importance 
the  Church  at  Antioch  attached  to  their  gift  and  the  confidence  they  reposed  in 
these  honoured  brethren.  (3)  To  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  elders  of  the 
Church  at  Jerusalem  for  judicious  distribution  among  the  poor  saints. 

Learn. — 1.  The  Church's  duty  to  travel  abroad  with  the  gospel,  to  confirm 
young  converts,  to  evangelise  the  community  in  which  she  is  placed,  to  listen  to 
whatever  teaching  God  may  send  her  from  time  to  time,  and  to  relieve  the  wants 
of  her  poorer  members.  2.  The  Church's  strength — the  gospel  she  preaches, 
"  the  Lord  Jesus,"  the  presence  with  her  of  the  Lord's  hand,  the  devotion  ox 
talented  and  faithful  ministers,  the  constancy  and  mutual  love  of  her  members. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.    20,    21.    The    Awakening    at  of  the  period.  .  .  .     Antioch  not  only 

Antioch.  possessed   immense   edifices   of    public 

I.  The  clamant  need  which  existed  utility  j  it  had  that  also  which  few  of 

at   Antioch   for   such   an   awakening,  the  Syrian  cities  possessed — the  noblest 

Antioch  was  a  heathen  city.     1 .  Large,  specimens  of  Grecian  art,  wonderfully 

Crowded  with  human  beings,  every  one  beautiful  statues,  classical  works  of  a 

possessed  of  a  nature  which  had  been  delicacy  of  detail  wbich  the  age  was  no 

made     for      God     and      Immortality.  longer  capable  of  imitating "  (Renan). 

2.   Wealthy.    And,  therefore,  filled  with  Wealth  seldom  favourable  to  religion 

temptations     for     its     inhabitants    to  (Matt.  xix.  24).    3.  Degraded.   In  spite 

serve     mammon     rather     than     God.  of   its    picturesque    site  Antioch    was 

"  Temples,  aqueducts,  baths,  basilicas,  little    better     than     another     Sodom, 

nothing  was  wanting  at    Antioch    in  "  The  depravity  of  certain  Levantine 

what  constituted  a  grand  Syrian  city  cities,   dominated  by  the  spirit  of  in- 

s  257 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;    THE  ACTS. 


trigue,  delivered  up  entirely  to  low 
cunning,  can  scarcely  give  us  a 
conception  of  the  degree  of  corruption 
reached  by  the  human  race  at  Antioch." 
"  It  was  an  inconceivable  medley 
of  mountebanks,  quacks,  buffoons, 
magicians,  miracle  mongers,  sorcerers, 
false  priests ;  a  city  of  races,  games, 
dances,  processions,  fetes,  revels  of 
unbridled  luxury,  of  all  the  follies  of 
the  East,  of  the  most  unhealthy  super- 
stitions, and  of  the  fanaticism  of  the 
orgy"  (Renan,  The  Apostles,  xii.). 
4.  Benighted.  Notwithstanding  the 
Jewish  element  in  its  population,  it 
was  practically  shrouded  in  spiritual 
darkness — "  having  no  hope  and  with- 
out God  in  the  world"  (Ephes.  ii.  12). 
Devoted  to  debasing  superstitions,  "  full 
of  the  worship  of  Apollo  and  the 
nymphs,"  it  possessed  no  true  light. 
"  Syrian  levity,  Babylonian  charlatan- 
ism, and  all  the  impost-ires  of  Asia  had 
made  it  the  capital  of  all  lies  and  the 
sink  of  every  description  of  infamy." 
If  ever  city  needed  an  awakening, 
Antioch  did. 

II.  The  simple  instrumentality  by 
which  its  awakening  was  brought 
about.  1.  The  arrival  in  the  city  of 
a  few  wandering  preachers,  men  of 
Cyprus  and  Oyrene,  foreign  mission- 
aries from  the  Mediterranean  and  the 
North  of  Africa.  It  was  a  mo- 
mentous day  for  Antioch  when  these 
men  presented  themselves  before  its 
gates.  Neither  the  civic  authorities 
nor  the  pleasure -loving  citizens  had  the 
smallest  conception  of  the  spiritual 
dynamite  which  these  men  had  con- 
cealed about  their  persons.  Compare 
Paul's  landing  on  the  shores  of  Europe 
and  entering  Philippi.  2.  The  procla- 
mation of  a  strange  doctrine  to  the 
people.  For  strange  it  must  have  been 
to  Jew  and  Greek  to  learn  that  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  who  had  been  crucified  by 
the  Romans,  was  risen  from  the  dead 
and  exalted  to  the  highest  seat  of 
authority  in  heaven — was  Israel's 
Messiah  and  the  world's  Saviour.  Yet 
just  this  simple  announcement  was  the 
force  that  awakened  Antioch  from  its 
spiritual  slumber.     And  just   this  to- 

258 


day  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation 
to  every  one  that  believeth,  to  the  Jew 
first  and  also  to  the  Greek  (Rom.  i.  16). 
3.  The  invisible  working  of  Divine  power 
upon  the  people's  hearts.  For  this  must 
be  assumed  as  what  is  meant  by  the 
statement  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
was  with  the  preachers.  Without  the 
Spirit's  help  the  most  learned  and 
eloquent,  even  the  most  scriptural 
preaching,  must  prove  ineffective  so  far 
as  the  production  of  spiritual  results  is 
concerned. 

III.  The  glorious  result   in   which 
this    awakening    at    Antioch    issued. 

1.  In  the  salvation  of  many  souls. 
Both  Jews  and  Greeks  became  con- 
verts. This  the  immediate  and  grand 
end  of  all  preaching.  It  may  instruct 
the  understanding,  interest  the  fancy, 
gratify  the  taste,  stir  the  emotions,  if 
it  does  not  lead  to  personal  decision  for 
Christ,  it  is  useless.  Modern  preachers 
should  remember  that  saved  souls, 
besides  being  valuable  to  their  indi- 
vidual possessors,  constitute  a  Church's 
and  a  city's  truest   and    best  wealth. 

2.  In  the  establishment  within  its  walls 
of  a  Christian  Church.  How  much 
that  Christian  Church  did  for  Antioch 
with  its  teeming  population — what 
light  streamed  forth  from  its  teachers, 
what  gracious  influences  were  exerted 
by  its  members — has  not  been  tabu- 
lated in  the  form  of  statistics  ;  but  the 
day  will  declare.  Conceive  what 
present-day  cities  are  where  no 
churches  have  been  planted;  imagine 
what  Christian  cities  would  become 
were  their  churches  to  be  extinguished. 
Such  mental  efforts  will  enable  one  to 
understand  the  power  for  good  which 
the  Church  at  Antioch  exerted  on  the 
heathen  populace  amongst  whom  it 
was  planted.  3.  In  the  subsequent 
origination  of  a  heathen  mission.  To 
assert  that  had  the  Church  at  Antioch 
not  been  founded  Europe  might  not 
have  been  evangelised,  would  perhaps 
be  going  too  far.  But  certainly  if  in 
Antioch  a  Church  had  not  arisen,  it 
might  have  been  a  considerable  time 
longer  before  the  thought  of  a  heathen 
mission    had    occurred    to    the     poor 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  XL 


Christians  at  Jerusalem.  Antioch  had 
the  fresh  zeal,  the  liberal  outlook,  the 
enterprising  spirit,  and  the  pecuniary 
resources  which  were  necessary  for 
originating  such  a  movement  as  that 
of  attempting  to  evangelise  the  Gentile 
world ;  and  one  has  reason  to  bless 
God  that  the  gospel  was  preached  and 
a  Church  planted  in  Antioch  at  so  early 
a  stage  in  the  history  of  Christianity. 

Ver.  23.  Barnabas  at  Antioch. 

I.  What  he  saw. — The  grace  of  God 
manifested  :  1.  In  the  spiritual  awak- 
ening which  had  taken  place ;  and 
2.  In  the  number  of  conversions  that 
had  been  registered. 

II.  How  he  felt. — He  was  glad. 
Because  :  1.  The  gospel  was  spreading. 

2.  His    countrymen    were    believing. 

3.  Souls  were  being  saved.  4.  Christ 
was  being  glorified. 

III.  What  he  said. — "  He  exhorted 
them  all  that  with  full  purpose  of 
heart,"  etc.  A  counsel  which  was — 
1.  Timely,  suited  to  their  condition  as 
young  disciples.  2.  Wise,  since  their 
onward  progress  in  religion  depended 
on  this.  3.  Necessary,  since  if  they 
fell  away  they  could  not  be  saved. 

Cleaving  to  the  Lord,  an  Address  for 
Present-Day  Christians. 

I.  Cleave  to  the  Lord's  work  as  the 
only  and  the  all-sufficient  ground  of 
acceptance  and  salvation.  The  Lord's 
work  twofold  :  external,  that  accom- 
plished by  Himself  in  the  days  of  His 
flesh  and  finished  on  the  cross — a  work 
for  man  ;  internal,  that  wrought  in  the 
heart  by  His  Holy  Spirit — a  work  in 
man.  Both  of  these,  the  Atoning 
Blood  ajid  the  Quickening  Spirit,  are 
much  in  danger  of  being  sacrificed 
even  by  Christians  under  the  fascina- 
tions of  the  new  or  anti-supernatural 
theology,  while  by  the  unbelieving 
world  they  are  utterly  rejected.  But 
without  these  and  a  steadfast  ad- 
herence to  these  both  forgiveness  and 
holiness  are  unattainable. 

II.  Cleave  to  the  Lord's  person  as 
the  exclusive  source  of  spiritual  life 
and  the   supreme  object  of   affection. 


For  religion  after  all  does  not  consist 
in  adherence  to  any  system  of  beliefs, 
even  though  these  should  be  right,  but 
in  allowing  these  beliefs  to  influence 
the  heart  and  life.  In  other  words, 
conduct,  rather  than  creed,  is  the  ulti- 
mate test  of  piety,  adherence  to  Christ's 
person  rather  than  to  Christ's  truth  (if 
this  be  all)  is  the  surest  token  of  dis- 
cipleship.  Only  the  Lord  to  whose 
person  this  adherence  must  be  is  not 
the  historical  Christ,  as  He  is  called, 
the  man  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  but  the 
crucified  risen  and  exalted  Lord  of 
glory,  who  alone  is  the  source  of  life 
and  object  of  love  for  the  believing 
soul. 

III.  Cleave  to  the  Lord's  book  as  the 
best  directory  for  faith  and  practice. 
Notwithstanding  present-day  contro- 
versies about  the  inspiration  and  in- 
errancy of  Scripture,  the  divinity  of 
the  sacred  volume  has  never  been 
successfully  assailed.  After  all  that 
criticism,  higher  or  lower,  has  said,  or 
can  say,  it  remains  that  the  Bible 
stands  out  pre-eminent  over  all  the 
writings  of  men  as  the  loftiest  com- 
pendium of  truth  and  the  safest  guide 
for  duty.  No  book  like  it  can  so 
satisfactorily  reply  to  the  questions — 
What  should  one  believe  1  and  What 
must  one  do  1  in  order  to  properly 
fulfil  his  heaven-appointed  mission  on 
the  earth. 

IY.  Cleave  to  the  Lord's  people  as 
the  best  companions  for  the  heaven- 
ward journey.  If  not  possessed  of 
wisdom,  or  wealth,  or  power,  or  social 
prestige — though  even  these  are  not 
wanting  among  Christ's  followers — 
they  have  holiness  which  always 
carries  about  with  it  a  contagion  of 
goodness,  and  they  have  spiritual 
insight,  an  acquaintance  with  the 
secret  of  the  Lord  which  is  invaluable 
for  such  as  would  live  well,  and  they 
know  where  they  are  going,  which  is 
more  than  the  men  of  the  world  know. 

V.  Cleave  to  the  Lord's  heaven  as 
the  future  and  final  home.  Of  this 
also  there  are  those  who  would  fain 
deprive  the  Christian,  saying  there  is 
no  hereafter,  nothing  beyond  the  tomb, 

259 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


K 


no  resurrection,  and  no  eternal  life. 
But  to  him  who  believes  that  Jesus 
died  and  rose  again,  and  that  Jesus 
lives  and  reigns  to-day  upon  the  throne 
of  the  Universe,  all  these  are  guaran- 
teed and  made  sure  for  evermore. 

Ver.  24.  The  Piety  of  Barnabas. 

I.  Its  visible  flower   and  fruit. — 

Goodness.  "  Barnabas  was  a  good 
man."  A  rare  commodity  in  the  world 
or  even  in  the  Church.  In  Barnabas 
it  was  conspicuous  and  recognised  by 
all.  The  form  it  assumed  in  him  was 
that  it  must  take  in  all  to  be  genuine 
— viz.,  love  to  the  neighbour  (Matt. 
v.  43,  xix.  19,  xxii.  39  ;  Bom.  xiii.  9; 
Gal.  v.  1 4).  Kindly  consideration  for  and 
tender  sympathy  with  others  appear  in 
all  that  is  recorded  of  this  distinguished 
man — in  his  cheerful  surrender  and  sale 
of  his  property  to  relieve  the  necessities 
of  his  poorer  brethren  (iv.  36,  37),  in 
his  fraternal  mediation  between  Saul 
and  the  apostles  (ix.  27),  in  his  kindly 
counsels  to  the  young  converts  at 
Antioch  (ver.  23),  in  his  journey  to 
Tarsus  to  fetch  Saul  (ver.  25),  in  his 
modestly  according  the  first  place  to 
his  brilliant  colleague  (xiii.  7,  13,  46), 
in  desiring  to  cover  up  the  failings  of 
his  sister's  son,  John  Mark  (xv.  37). 
In  all  he  appears  as  a  man  in  whose 
eyes  the  claims  of  others  stand  first, 
and  those  of  self  second. 

II.  Its  hidden  source  and  root. — 
Faith.  "  Barnabas  was  full  of  faith  " 
— i.e.,  faith  in  God  and  Jesus  Christ, 
in  things  spiritual  and  Divine,  in 
heaven  and  immortality.  And  with- 
out this  no  man  can  be  good  in  the 
highest  sense  of  that  term.  It  is 
doubtful  whether  real  love  to  man  is 
possible  to  him  who  has  not  begun  to 
love  God,  or  rather  it  is  not  doubtful. 
Only  he  who  regards  man  as  God's 
child  can  attain  to  that  spiritual  affec- 
tion which  constitutes  true  neighbour 
love  (1  John  iv.  7-21,  v.  1,  2). 

III.  Its  vital  sap  and  nutriment. — 
The  Spirit.  "  Barnabas  was  full  of 
the  Holy  Ghost."  Such  goodness  as 
Barnabas  displayed  can  only  spring 
from   a   renewed  heart   (Gal.   v.    22 ; 

260 


Eph.  v.  9),  in  which  the  principle  of 
faith  has  found  a  lodgment  and  room 
to  operate  (Gal.  v.  6).  Practical,  self- 
forgetful,  philanthropical  love  is  at  once 
the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  and  the  work  of 
faith,  and  the  one  because  the  other. 

Yer.  26.  A  Remarkable  Year. — That 
of  Barnabas  and  Saul  at  Antioch.  A 
year  of — 

I.  Brotherly  communion  with  each 
other. — One  would  like  to  have  over- 
heard the  talks  those  two  eminent  men 
of  God  and  servants  of  Jesus  Christ  had 
with  one  another — the  one  all  aglow 
with  tender  human  sympathy,  the 
other  all  ablaze  with  spiritual  en- 
thusiasm ;  the  one  with  a  presence  that 
felt  like  a  soft  summer  wind,  the  other 
with  a  soul  that  heaved  and  throbbed 
like  a  burning  volcano. 

II.  Spiritual  fellowship  with  the 
Church. — While  appreciating  the  rare 
privilege  of  each  other's  society,  it 
is  obvious  these  noble  men  did  not 
disdain  communion  with  ordinary 
saints.  For  a  whole  year  they  were 
gathered  together  with  or  in  the 
Church.  They  forsook  not  the  as- 
sembling of  themselves  with  Christ's 
people  as  the  manner  of  many  is. 
Social  worship  in  the  Christian  sanc- 
tuary is  an  invaluable  privilege  which 
cannot  be  neglected  without  suffering 
spiritual  loss. 

III.  Ministerial  labour  for  Christ. — 
It  was  a  year  of  unwearied  evangelical 
activity.  They  taught  much  people. 
They  relied,  it  is  apparent,  more  upon 
the  self -evidencing  power  of  the  gospel 
they  proclaimed  than  upon  their  own 
eloquence  or  argument.  Their  ad- 
dresses were  more  didactic  than  horta- 
tory. They  taught  the  people — im- 
parted to  them  instruction  rather  than 
stirred  them  with  moving  appeals.  A 
good  model  for  modern  evangelists. 

Ver.  26.  The  Name  "  Christian" 
I.  Its  origin. — 1.  As  to  place — 
Antioch.  2.  With  whom — most  likely 
the  heathen  population.  3.  In  what 
spirit.  Probably  a  spirit  of  mockery. 
(See  "  Critical  Remarks. ") 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap,  xii. 


II.  Its  import. — 1.  It  was  meant  to  tianity  (Horn.  xii.  13;  Gal.  vi.  10; 
pour  contempt   upon   believers  in  the  James  i.  27). 

Saviour,  by  designating  them  Christians  II.  Its    character    was     voluntary. 

or  followers  of  Christ  who  had  been  As  all  charity  and  almsgiving  should 

crucified.     2.  It  is  meant  to-day  to  dis-  be  (Rom.  xii.  8 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  12).     En- 

tinguish   believers   in   the    Saviour  as  forced  contributions  have  no  religious 

Christ's  people  and  friends.  value  whatever.      They  may  do  good, 

III.  Its     distinction.  —  Originally  but  they  are  not  Christian  alms, 
given  as  a  mark  of  dishonour,  it  is  now  III.  Its  universality  was  undoubted, 
a  badge  of  glorious  renown  for  all  who  Every  man  determined  to  have  a  share 
wear  it,  the  name  of  Christ  being  the  in  the  collection.    When  will  all  Christ's 
highest  either  in  heaven  or  on  earth.  people  be  voluntary  givers  ?     How  the 

IY.  Its    obligations, — Now,    as    at  Church's  exchequer  would  overflow  ! 

first,  it  imposes  on  its  bearers  certain  IV.  Its  liberality  was  great. — Each 

high  responsibilities,  which  may  all  be  man  contributed  according  to  his  ability, 

summed  up  in  this  that  they  shall  walk  as  God  had  prospered  him  (1  Cor.  xvi. 

worthy  of  that  name  by — 1.  Treading  2  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  7). 

in   Christ's  footsteps  (1   Peter  ii.  21 ;  V.  Its     promptness     was     decided. 

1    John  ii.  6).     2.  Breathing  Christ's  They  acted  on  their  generous  impulse 

Spirit  (Eph.  v.  2 ;   1  John  iii.  16;  and  at  once,   without    delay  or  hesitation 

3.  Maintaining  and  extending  Christ's  (2  Cor.  viii.  11). 

cause  (Matt,  xxviii.  18-20).  VI.  Its  despatch  was  quick. — It  was 

no   sooner   collected   than  it  was  for- 

Vers.  29, 30.  Concerning  the  Collection.  warded  to  its  destination. 

I.  Its  object  was  praiseworthy. — To  VII.  Its  application  was  sure. — Corn- 
assist  the  poor  saints  at  Jerusalem.  mitted  to  the  hands  of  the  Jerusalem 
Kindness  to  the  poor  frequently  en-  elders,  it  was  certain  to  reach  the 
joined  upon  Christ's  followers  (Matt.  v.  persons  for  whom  it  was  intended. 
42 ;  Luke  xii.  33,  xviii.  22 ;  Eph.  iv.  All  points  worthy  of  imitation  by 
28)  as  an  essential  ingredient  of  Chris-  Christian  Churches. 


CHAPTER    XII. 


Divine  Interpositions  on  the  Church's  Behalf — Experiences  op  Mercy 

and  Judgment. 

§  1.  The  Days  of  Unleavened  Bread;  or,  the  Persecution  of  the  Church  (vers. 

1-19). 
§  2.  The  Death  of  Herod ;  or,  the  Church's  Persecutor  Punished  (vers.  20-25). 

CRITICAL   REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  About  that  time  (compare  xix.  23). — I.e.,  before,  or  about  the  time  of,  the  arrival 
of  Barnabas  and  Saul  at  Jerusalem  (xi.  30).  The  incidents  recorded  in  this  chapter  seem  to 
have  occurred  during  the  stay  of  these  brethren  in  Jerusalem  (ver.  25).  As  the  predicted 
famine  broke  out  under  Cuspius  Fadus,  who  was  sent  to  Judaea  after  the  death  of  Agrippa 
— i.e.,  after  August  6th,  A.D.  44— the  visit  of  Barnabas  and  Saul  most  likely  took  place  before 
Agrippa's  death.  Herod  the  king. — Herod  Agrippa  I.  was  the  son  of  Aristobulus  and 
Bernice  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XVII.  i.  2  ;  Wars,  I.  xxviii.  1),  a  nephew  of  Herod  Antipas  and  grandson  of 
Herod  the  Great  (see  further  in  "  Homiletical  Analysis  ").  To  vex  certain  of  the  Church. — 
Better,  "  to  maltreat  certain  of  (lit.,  from)  the  Church,"  curd  conveying  the  idea  of  proceeding 

261 


chap.  xii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


from,  and  hence  belonging  to.  James  the  brother  of  John. — The  elder  of  the  two  sons  of 
Zebedee  (Matt.  iv.  21,  x.  2),  and  to  be  distinguished  from  James  the  Less  (i.  13),  as  also 
from  James  the  brother  of  our  Lord  (ver.  17,  xv.  13,  xxi.  18;  Gal.  i.  19).  James's  martyrdom 
f  alfilled  our  Lord's  words  in  Matt.  xx.  23.  "  It  was  wonder  Herod  killed  no  more,  seeing 
this  took  so  well  with  the  people"  (Trapp).  That  so  little  is  said  about  this  apostle's 
martyrdom  has  been  explained  (Weizsacker),  though  wrongly,  on  the  grounds  partly  of 
Luke's  want  of  knowledge  concerning  the  incident  (which  is  hardly  likely,  since  he  knew 
both  John  and  Paul),  and  partly  of  the  unhistorical  character  of  the  narrative  which,  it  is 
said,  was  composed  mainly  for  the  glorification  of  Peter. 

Ver.  3.  It  pleased  the  Jews. — This  remark  is  assigned,  though  without  cause,  to  Luke's 
pragmatism,  and  pronounced  inaccurate  (Hausrath,  Holtzmann),  on  the  ground  that  some- 
what later  the  Pharisees  in  a  particular  instance  sided  with  the  Jewish  Christians  against 
the  Sadducees  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XX.  ix.  1),  as  if  popular  bodies  were  not  proverbially  variable  in 
their  judgments  and  actions  !  The  opinion  is  as  likely  to  be  correct  (Zeller)  that  Herod 
found  the  murder  of  James  to  be  not  so  popular  as  he  at  first  imagined,  and  accordingly 
winked  at  Peter's  liberation  from  prison ! !  The  days  of  unleavened  bread. — The  festival  of 
the  Passover,  so  named  because  of  the  injunction  to  remove  leaven  from  the  house  during  its 
continuance  (Exod.  xii.  15,  xiii.  7). 

Ver.  4.  For  Easter  read  the  Passover,  meaning  not  the  paschal  supper  (Wieseler),  but  the 
whole  period  of  the  festival.  To  the  people.  —To  gratify  them  by  the  spectacle  of  his 
execution. 

Ver.  5  The  Church. — (See  on  ii.  47,  v.  11,  viii.  1,  xi.  26.)  Now  a  large  community  which 
must  have  assembled  in  different  buildings  throughout  the  city.  Without  ceasing. — 
Rather,  earnestly,  e/crev-^j,  a  word  of  later  Greek,  signifying  "  that  which  is  stretched," 
hence  "  intent  "  or  "  fervent." 

Ver.  6.  The  same  night. — Emphatic,  the  night  before  the  day  on  which  Herod  contemplated 
making  his  exhibition  of  the  Apostle.  Sleeping  between  two  soldiers. — Two  of  the  quaternion 
entrusted  with  his  keeping  (ver.  4).  Bound  with  two  chains. — I.e.,  by  one  to  each  soldier. 
The  keepers  or  guards  before  the  door  were  the  other  two  soldiers  of  the  company  of  four. 
This,  the  Roman  method  of  imprisonment,  custodia  uiilitaris  (which,  however,  usually 
fastened  the  prisoner  to  only  one  soldier),  as  indeed  imprisonment  of  any  kind,  was  unknown 
to  the  Mosaic  law.  The  kings  were  the  first  to  introduce  this  form  of  punishment,  especially 
for  the  chastisement  of  free-speaking  prophets  (2  Chron.  xvi.  10 ;  Jer.  xx.  2,  xxxii.  2). 

Ver.  7.  The  or  an  angel  of  the  Lord. — The  various  attempts  to  explain  Peter's  deliverance 
on  natural  grounds  are  all  unsatisfactory  (see  "  Homiletical  Analysis).  The  light  which 
shined  in  the  prison,  lit.,  house  (a  euphemism),  was  the  usual  supernatural  radiance  or 
11  glory  of  the  Lord  "  that  encompassed  angelic  visitors  to  earth  (Luke  ii.  9,  xxiv.  4 ;  Matt, 
xxviii.  3). 

Ver.  8.  Gird  thyself,  etc. — Shows  Peter  had  divested  himself  of  his  outer  coat  or  tunic 
and  shoes  before  lying  down  to  sleep. 

Ver.  10.  The  first  and  the  second  ward,  or  watch. — I.e.,  the  two  soldiers  stationed  at  the 
door  of  Peter's  cell,  and  two  others  posted  near  the  iron  gate  which  led  out  to  the  city. 
The  situation  of  the  prison  is  unknown. 

Ver.  11. — Suggests  that  until  the  angel  had  left  him  Peter  had  not  come  to  himself,  or 
recovered  his  ordinary  consciousness,  lit.,  become  in  himself.  The  expectation  of  the  people 
of  the  Jews  reveals  that  the  populace  were  now  against  the  apostles,  and  eagerly  looking 
forward  to  Peter's  execution  ;  changed  times  since  iv.  21. 

Ver.  12.  Considered  the  thing. — Better,  having  become  aware  of  t<x  yevSfiepa,  what  had 
happened.  Whether  John  whose  surname  was  Mark  was  the  second  evangelist  is  uncertain, 
though  he  is  commonly  supposed  to  have  been  the  Mark  whom  Peter  terms  his  son  (1  Peter 
v.  13),  i.e.,  spiritually,  as  having  been  converted  through  his  instrumentality.  He  was  sister's 
son  (rather,  cousin)  to  Barnabas  (Col.  iv.  10),  whom  he  accompanied  on  an  cvcngelising 
tour,  after  Barnabas  had  separated  from  Paul  on  his  account  (xv.  37,  39).  He  had  formerly 
attended  these  two  missionaries  as  far  as  Perga,  and  there  deserted  them  (xiii.  13). 

Ver.  13.  The  Greek  name,  Rhoda,  Hose,  does  not  prove  that  the  maid  who  acted  as  portress 
was  not  a  Jewess  (see  on  i.  23).  The  office  of  doorkeeper  among  the  Jews  was  commonly 
assigned  to  a  female  (John  xviii.  16). 

Ver.  14. — Peter  must  have  spoken,  perhaps  told  his  name,  to  cause  his  voice  to  be  re- 
cognised. 

Ver.  15. — The  doctrine  of  tutelary  angels  (see  "  Homiletical  Analysis  ")  is  neither  affirmed 
nor  denied,  but  simply  cited  as  a  popular  opinion  (compare  Matt,  xviii.  10). 

Ver.  17.  Went  to  another  place. — Hardly  in  the  city  (Meyer),  but  outside  of  it,  though 
not  to  Rome  (Catholic  expositors),  or  Antioch  (Kuinoel) — perhaps  to  Babylonia  (Nosgen), 
or  some  one  of  the  cities  of  the  Diaspora  named  in  his  first  epistle  (i.  1)  (Zockler).  The 
place  of  Peter's  concealment  would  no  doubt,  for  prudential  reasons,  at  first  be  kept  secret, 
and  might  easily  have  been  unknown  to  Luke's  informant.  v_..,- 

262 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  xii. 


Ver.  19.  Put  to  death. — Should  be  led  away — i.e.,  to  execution. 

Ver.  20.  For  And  Herod  read  And,  or  but,  he— i.e.,  Herod.  Highly  displeased. — Ovpofxaxuv, 
in  a  hostile  state  of  mind,  in  modern  phrase,  "  contemplating  hostilities"  (Plumptre),  though 
it  is  doubtful  whether  open  war  against  Phoenicia  would  have  been  permitted  by  Rome. 
Perhaps  prohibitory  tariffs  with  shutting  of  ports  and  markets  were  what  Agrippa  had  in 
view.  Tyre  and  Sidon. — The  first  mention  of  these  Phoenician  cities  in  the  Acts.  For  their 
antiquity  and  splendour  see  Isa.  xxiii.  7,  8  ;  Ezek.  xxvii.,  xxviii.  Blastus. — Judging  from  his 
name  may  have  been  a  Roman,  and  from  the  epithet,  6  eirl  rod  koltwvos,  praefectus  cubiculi, 
cubicularis,  was  a  chamberlain  like  Candace's  minister  (viii.  27),  though  not  like  him  a 
eunuch. 

Ver.  21.  The  set  day. — According  to  Josephus  was  August  1st,  and  the  second  day  of  the 
public  games  celebrated  by  Agrippa  in  honour  of  Claudius  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XIX.  viii.  2).  The 
royal  apparel. — Was  wholly  of  silver  and  of  a  contexture  truly  wonderful.  The  throne,  or 
judgment  seat,  had  been  prepared  for  him  in  the  theatre. 

Ver.  23.  For  the  read  an  angel  of  the  Lord.  Smote  him  .  .  .  eaten  of  worms  .  .  .  gave 
up  the  ghost. — According  to  Josephus  {Ant.,  XIX.  viii.  2),  the  disease,  which  was  acute 
disorder  of  the  bowels,  smote  the  king  with  sudden  and  violent  pain.  Forthwith  he  was 
carried  out  of  the  theatre  a  dying  man ;  and  in  five  days — i.e.,  on  August  6th,  he  was  dead. 
Compare  the  deaths  of  Joram  (2  Chron.  xxi.  19),  Antiochus  Epiphanes  (2  Mace.  ix.  5-10), 
and  of  Herod  the  Great  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XVII.  vi.  5).  As  to  the  nature  of  this  disease  by  which 
Agrippa  was  cut  off  see  "  Homiletical  Analysis."  The  suggestion  that  Herod  was  poisoned 
by  Blastus,  the  king's  valet,  whom  the  Phoenicians  had  gained  over  for  this  purpose  (Renan), 
is  scarcely  worthy  of  consideration,  having  no  plausible  support  either  from  Josephus  or 
Luke. 

Ver.  24.  But  the  word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied. — An  antithesis  to  the  horrible  end 
of  the  persecuting  king.     (Compare  v.  12  ff.,  vi.  7,  ix.  31.) 

Ver.  25.  And  Barnabas  and  Saul  returned. — Not  to,  as  some  authorities  read,  but  from 
Jerusalem. — Shortly  after  Herod's  death.  How  long  they  remained  in  the  metropolis  is  not 
stated,  but  it  is  not  likely  to  have  been  long.  Alford  thinks  their  arrival  should  be  placed 
after  Herod's  death,  as  "  of  all  the  persons  whose  execution  would  be  pleasing  to  the  Jews 
Saul  would  hold  the  foremost  place."  Took  with  them  John,  whose  surname  was  Mark. — 
See  ver.  12,  whence  the  inference  has  been  drawn  that  Barnabas  and  Saul,  while  in  the  city, 
belonged  to  the  congregation  that  assembled  in  John's  mother's  house. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—19. 

The  Days  of  Unleavened  Bread  ;  or,  the  Persecution  of  the  Church. 

I.  The  imprisonment  of  Peter. — 1.  When  it  happened.  (1)  "About  that 
time" — i.e.,  about  the  time  when  Barnabas  and  Saul  went  up  to  Jerusalem. 
(2)  In  "  the  days  of  unleavened  bread  " — i.e.,  during  the  Passover  festival,  which 
continued  seven  days,  and  was  so  named  because  during  its  currency  no  leaven 
was  allowed  in  Jewish  houses.  (3)  Shortly  before  or  after  the  death  of  Herod. 
(4)  Hence  about  the  spring,  end  of  March,  or  beginning  of  April,  a.d.  44. 
2.  To  whom  it  was  due.  Herod  Agrippa  the  First,  that  "vile  Oriental,"  as 
Renan  styles  him  (The  Apostles,  p.  199),  Aristobulus's  son,  and  Herod  the  Great's 
grandson,  who  on  the  accession  of  Caligula,  a.d.  37,  received  the  title  of  king 
with  the  former  possessions  of  Philip  and  Lysanias  (Luke  hi.  1),  at  a  later  period 
the  tetrarchy  of  Antipas,  and  later  still,  in  a.d.  41,  from  Claudius,  Samaria,  and 
Judsea ;  so  that,  like  his  grandfather,  he  swayed  the  sceptre  of  kingly  authority 
all  over  Palestine,  besides  possessing  a  royal  residence  in  Jerusalem  with  an 
income  of  twelve  million  drachmae  (see  "  Hints"  on  ver.  1).  3.  By  what  motive 
inspired.  A  desire  to  please  the  Jews.  Anxiety  to  win  the  favour  of  his  Jewish 
subjects  had  already  caused  Agrippa  I.  to  unsheath  the  sword  against  the 
Christians,  and  even  to  behead  the  son  of  Zebedee,  James  the  Just,  whose 
execution  tradition  (Jerome)  places  on  the  15th  Nisan,  or  the  anniversary  of  the 
Crucifixion.  Combined  with  this  was  more  than  likely  a  fanatical  zeal  for  the 
Jewish  religion  which  he  personally  affected,  and  which,  it  has  been  well  said 
(Renan),  inevitably  led  a  weak  prince  like  him  to  become  a  persecutor.  4.  In 
what  manner  carried  out.  Having  been  arrested,  the  apostle  was  securely  lodged 
in  the  Tower  of.  Antonia  on  the  north-west  corner  of  the  Temple — a  fortress 

263 


chap.  xii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


originally  built  by  John  Hyrcanus  for  a  residence,  and  subsequently  enlarged 
by  Herod  the  Great  "  in  a  magnificent  manner."  Four  quaternions  of  soldiers — 
i.e.,  sixteen  warriors  were  told  off  to  guard  the  apostle  lest  an  escape  or  a  rescue 
should  be  attempted  and  perhaps  effected.  Clearly  Herod  was  afraid  of  the 
Christians  or  of  the  Christians'  God,  or  of  both.  "  Had  Peter's  captors  regarded 
him  as  a  common  every-day  criminal,  they  would  have  deemed  it  preposterous 
that  sixteen  soldiers  or  even  four  at  a  time  should  be  required  to  keep  him  safe. 
That  such  unusual  precautions  were  judged  necessary  is  one  of  those  indirect  and 
latent  marks  of  historic  truth  with  which  this  narrative  abounds,  and  which  are 
even  more  valuable  than  direct  proofs,  because  of  being  undesigned  "  (Whitelaw, 
The  Theological  Monthly,  No.  24,  p.  406).  5.  For  what  purpose  intended.  To  keep 
him  securely  till  the  feast  was  passed,  when  he  should  be  brought  forth  before 
the  people  and  despatched  into  the  other  world  after  James.  Agrippa,  being  a 
"pious"  sovereign  who  had  begun  to  "attend  to  his  devotions"  (Kenan,  The 
Apostles,  p.  200),  suffering  not  a  day  to  pass  over  his  head  without  its  appointed 
sacrifice  (Josephus,  Ant.,  XIX.  vii.  3),  would  not  profane  the  sanctity  of  the 
season  by  an  act  of  bloodshed.  Beautiful  piety  !  Besides,  the  spectacle  could  be 
performed  with  as  much  effect  when  the  festival  had  closed  and  before  the  con- 
gregated crowds  dispersed  to  their  homes.  Behold,  another  Solomon  arisen  in 
the  land  !  6.  To  v:hat  action  it  led.  It  set  the  Christian  community  a-praying 
for  their  incarcerated  leader.  Had  Agrippa  known,  that  calling  in  of  Heaven's 
aid  on  behalf  of  Peter  and  against  him  was  ominous.  Where  is  the  creature 
that  can  stand  when  God  Almighty  takes  the  field  against  him  ?  "  Judged  by 
ordinary  standards,  the  fate  of  Peter  was  sealed.  The  probability  of  his  escaping 
the  headsman's  axe  was  small,  if  not  absolutely  nil.  Nevertheless,  as  people  who 
had  not  been  initiated  into  '  modern  science,'  and  in  their  lack  of  nineteenth 
century  culture  saw  no  irreconcilable  contradiction  between  the  reign  of  law  and 
answers  to  prayer,  but  believed  that  '  all  things  were  possible  with  God,'  the 
Jerusalem  disciples  betook  themselves  to  besieging  Heaven  with  their  outcries 
and  their  supplications,  appealing  with  exquisite  naivete  to  Him  in  whose  hands 
were  all  men's  lives,  those  of  kings  as  well  as  common  men  "  {The  Theological 
Monthly,  No.  24,  p.  407).  7.  How  it  affected  the  prisoner.  "  Incarceration  was 
for  Peter  unfortunately  no  new  experience  (iv.  3,  v.  18) ;  and  although  in  the 
present  instance  grounds  existed  for  apprehending  that  he  would  never  leave  his 
cell  till  he  was  marched  forth  to  die,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  prospect  filled 
him  with  dismay  or  even  disturbed  his  nocturnal  slumbers."  "  That  Peter 
exhibited  such  quietness  of  spirit  when  on  the  verge  of  martyrdom  was  a  proof 
that  he  was  then  a  better  man  than  he  had  been  when,  after  having  boastfully 
exclaimed,  '  Lord,  I  will  lay  down  my  life  for  Thy  sake/  to  save  his  skin  he  first 
ran  away  and  then  denied  his  Master  with  oaths  and  curses  "  (Ibid.,  p.  406,  407). 
See  "Hints"  on  ver.  6. 

II.  The  deliverance  of  Peter  (ver.  7). — 1.  Brought  about  in  answer  to  prayer. 
Penan,  who  has  scruples  about  "  the  angel,"  and  is  silent  concerning  the  Church's 
prayers,  for  reasons  not  specified,  nevertheless  entertains  no  doubt  that  Peter 
was  lodged  in  the  Tower  of  Antonia  by  command  of  Agrippa  I.,  and  that  on  the 
night  before  the  morning  fixed  for  his  execution  he  escaped — in  this  agreeing 
with  such  critics  as  Zeller,  Weizsacker,  and  others,  who,  while  rejecting  what 
they  style  the  mythical  embellishments  of  the  story,  do  not  question  that  Peter 
was  both  imprisoned  and  made  his  escape  ;  but  if  between  these  two  occurrences, 
the  imprisonment  and  the  escape,  it  really  happened  that  the  Church  prayed  as 
above  described,  it  will  be  hard  to  convince  an  ingenuous  mind  that  Peter's 
deliverance  was  not  something  more  than  a  happy  coincidence,  was  not  a  con- 
spicuous fulfilment  of  that  Scripture  which  says,  "  Before  they  call  I  will  answer, 
and  while  they  are  yet  speaking  I  will  hear"  (Ibid.,  pp.  407,  408).    2.  Effected  by 

264 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xii. 


miraculous  intervention.  Exactly  this  was  Peter's  own  account  of  the  matter  to 
his  friends  assembled  in  the  house  of  John  Mark's  mother  (ver.  17).  Luke's 
report — of  the  descent  of  the  angel  into  Peter's  cell,  of  the  falling  off  from 
Peters  hands  of  the  chains  with  which  he  was  bound,  etc.,  etc.  (vers.  7-11),  was 
probably  derived  from  Peter  himself  or  from  John  Mark,  whom  he  subsequently 
met  in  Pome  (2  Tim.  iv.  10,  11);  and  unless  his  report  is  to  be  set  aside  as 
utterly  unhistorical — and  Penan  admits  "  it  is  so  lively  and  just  that  it  is 
difficult  to  find  in  it  any  place  for  prolonged  elaboration  " — it  will  need  to  be 
conceded  that  Peter's  rescue  was  brought  about  by  miracle.  Other  explanations 
of  a  naturalistic  sort— such  as  the  bursting  open  of  the  prison  by  a  flash  of 
lightning  or  an  earthquake  (Hegel),  as  at  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.  26),  the  bribing  of 
the  apostle's  guardians  by  the  apostle's  friends,  or  the  conniving  of  the  former  at 
Peter's  escape  through  sympathy  for  him  or  hatred  of  his  persecutor  (Eichhorn, 
Ewald),  or  finally  some  unknown  but  still  natural  cause  (Renan,  Zeller, 
Weizsacker,  Beyschlag),  are  insufficient  to  account  for  the  incident,  unless  first 
the  credibility  of  the  record  be  broken  down.  To  challenge  the  authenticity  of 
this  portion  of  the  Acts  on  the  ground  that  it  relates  what  is  supernatural  is  to 
beg  the  question  at  issue.  3.  Confirmed  by  the  trustworthy  character  of  the 
narrative.  In  addition  to  those  already  indicated,  the  following  signs  of  veri- 
similitude in  the  story  may  be  pointed  out.  (1)  The  return  of  Peter  to  the 
house  of  John  Mark's  mother  (ver.  12),  a  statement  which  receives  explanation 
from  the  circumstance  that  John  Mark  was  one  of  Peter's  spiritual  children 
(1  Peter  v.  13).  (2)  The  behaviour  of  Phoda  (ver.  13),  which  points  to  the  equal 
footing  upon  which  bond  and  free  had  by  this  time  begun  to  stand  in  the  early 
Christian  Church  (ii.  44,  iv.  32  ;  compare  Lechler,  Apostolische  Zeitalter,  p.  323). 

(3)  The  exclamation  concerning  Peter's  angel  (ver.  15),  which  harmonises  with 
the  well-known  belief,  then  current  among  the  Jews,  that  "  every  true  Israelite 
had  specially  assigned  to  him  a  guardian  angel,  who,  when  he  appeared  in  human 
form,    assumed    the   likeness   of   the   man    whom   he    protected "    (Plumptre). 

(4)  Peter's  instruction  to  report  what  had  happened,  unto  James  and  the 
brethren  (ver.  17),  which  is  exactly  what  one  would  have  expected  from  the 
prominent  position  in  the  Church  at  that  time  held,  according  to  both  Luke 
(Acts  xv.  13)  and  Paul  (Gal.  i.  19,  ii.  9),  by  the  brother  of  our  Lord.  (5)  The 
excitement  among  the  soldiers  when  it  was  discovered  that  Peter  had  escaped 
(ver.  18),  whieh  could  hardly  have  arisen  had  an  earthquake  happened  or  had 
they  themselves  been  privy  to  his  flight.  The  idea  of  their  pretending  an 
excitement  they  did  not  feel  is  out  of  the  question.  (6)  The  fruitless  search  of 
Herod  for  his  prisoner  (ver.  19),  which  shows  at  least  that  Peter  had  been 
delivered.  (7)  The  execution  of  the  guards  for  allowing  him  to  escape  (ver.  19), 
which  abundantly  attests  that  they  had  not  been  able  to  prevent  Peter's 
release. 

Learn. — That  Christ's  Church  and  people  will  certainly  suffer  persecution. 
2.  That  both  have  strong  encouragement  to  pray.  3.  That  it  is  better  to  have 
angels  on  one's  side  than  soldiers.  4.  That  Christ  is  as  able  as  ever  to  watch 
over  and  defend  His  Church  and  people.  5.  That  whatever  deliverances  are 
enjoyed  by  either  should  be  thankfully  acknowledged  by  both. 

HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver  1.  The  Persecution  of  the  Church  ties,  and   gladiatorial  combats.     2.  A 

by  Agrippa.  hypocrite.     If  he  practised  the  outward 

I.  The  persecutor  .—Herod  Agrippa  I.  forms  of  piety  it  was  not  because  he 

— His  character.      1.  A  heathen.     Ad-  loved    them.     Jost    (Geschichte   Juden- 

dicted  to  public  games,  musical  festivi-  thums,  i.  420)  relates  that  once  when 

265 


chap.  xii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


reading  in  a  public  service,  "  One  from 
among  thy  brethren  shalt  thou  set 
king  over  thee  ;  thou  mayest  not  set  a 
stranger  over  thee  which  is  not  thy 
brother"  (Deut.  xvii.  15),  Agrippa 
burst  into  tears,  and  that  the  people 
cried  out,  "  Be  not  distressed,  Agrippa, 
thou  art  our  brother."  This  incident 
Plumptre  cites  as  an  illustration  of 
Herod's  "  sensitiveness  to  praise  or 
blame  " ;  if  authentic,  it  may,  with  as 
much  reason,  be  interpreted  as  showing 
that  this  "pious  sovereign,"  like  other 
potentates  that  have  lived  since,  was  a 
skilful  actor  and  knew  how  to  play  a 
part.  3.  A  hater  of  Jesus.  He  had 
inherited  the  passion  of  hostility  against 
Jesus  from  his  fathers,  one  of  whom, 
Herod  the  Great,  had  persecuted  the 
child  Jesus,  and  another,  Herod 
Antipas,  had  beheaded  John  the 
Baptist  (Besser :  Bibel  Stunden,  III. 
i.  588). 

II.  The  persecuted. — The  Church 
in  Jerusalem — i.e.,  the  Church — 1.  At 
its  headquarters.  Paralysed  at  the 
centre,  Herod  doubtless  thought  it 
would  become  inactive  at  its  extremi- 
ties. 2.  In  its  leaders.  These  cut 
off,  the  king  may  have  reasoned,  the 
followers  would  be  dispersed. 

III.  The  persecution. — 1.  Its  motive. 
(1)  To  gratify  his  own  hatred  of  the 
new  faith.  (2)  To  ingratiate  himself 
with  his  Jewish  subjects.  2.  Its  time. 
(1)  When  the  Church  was  forming  for 
itself  a  new  centre  of  operations  at 
Antioch — which  showed  how  greatly 
Herod  had  miscalculated.  (2)  When 
the  Church  at  Jerusalem  was  becoming 
distressed  on  account  of  the  impending 
famine — which  shows  how  God  some- 
times allows  the  trials  of  His  people  to 
multiply  when  these  are  least  able  to 
bear  them.  3.  Its  form.  (1)  Violent 
death  for  James.  (2)  Unjust  im- 
prisonment for  Peter.  (3)  Cruel  harass- 
ment for  the  disciples. 

Ver.  2.  The  Death  of  James. 

I.  Early. — About  ten  years  after 
the  Ascension  ;  a  testimony  to  his  ripe- 
ness in  grace  (Matt.  xx.  23).  James 
died  first,  John  last,  of  the  Twelve. 

266 


II.  Violent. — Probably  by  decapita- 
tion ;  a  fulfilment  of  the  Saviour's 
promise. 

III.  Sudden. — No  reason  to  believe 
he  either  languished  long  in  prison  or 
was  put  to  the  trouble  of  a  trial, 
though  Clement  of  Alexandria  and 
Eusebius  of  Csesarea  say  there  were 
both  an  accusation  and  a  defence. 

IV.  Lonely. — Hardly  likely  he  had 
the  presence  of  any  friends  except  God 
and  Jesus  Christ  to  comfort  or  cheer 
him  at  the  fatal  moment.  Yet  these, 
one  need  not  question,  would  not  be 
absent. 

V.  Submissive. — Not  to  be  doubted 
that  James  met  his  doom  without  a 
murmur.  Tradition  speaks  of  the  for- 
titude exhibited  by  him  on  the  way  to 
excution  as  having  led  to  the  conver- 
sion of  the  officer  who  guarded  him 
(see  below). 

VI.  Triumphant. — If  the  Saviour 
manifested  not  His  glory  to  His  dying 
servant  as  He  did  to  Stephen,  He 
assuredly  left  not  that  servant  to 
meet  the  headsman's  axe  without  the 
inward  supports  of  His  grace  ;  and  if 
the  heavens  opened  not  to  James's 
mortal  vision  in  the  death  hour,  un- 
questionably they  would  roll  back  their 
pearly  gates  to  receive  his  departing 
spirit. 

VII.  Lamented.  —  If  uncertain 
whether  he  had  a  burial  at  the 
hands  of  devout  men  as  Stephen  had, 
little  question  may  be  entertained  that 
"  devout  men  made  great  lamentation 
over  him." 

VIII.  Remembered. — Where  the 
precious  dust  of  the  slaughtered  dis- 
ciple found  a  resting-place  has  not  been 
told.  No  reason  to  suppose  the 
Armenian  convent  within  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem  covers  the  spot.  Yet  the 
existence  of  such  a  shrine  witnesses  to 
the  affectionate  regard  with  which  the 
Christian  Church  has  preserved  the 
recollection  of  her  apostolic  martyr. 

Note. — Clement  and  Eusebius  report 
an  incident  connected  with  the  martyr- 
dom of  James,  which,  if  true,  lends  a 
pathetic  interest  to  the  tale.  Struck 
by  the  calm  fortitude  of  his  prisoner, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY.    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  XII. 


the  officer  who  guarded  the  apostle,  or, 
according  to  another  version,  the  false 
witness  who  had  testified  against  him, 
was  moved  to  repentance,  confessed 
Christ,  and  was  led  forth  along  with 
the  apostle  to  be  put  to  death.  On 
the  way  to  the  scene  of  judgment, 
having  asked  the  apostle  to  forgive 
him,  he  was  at  once  pardoned ;  the 
apostle,  having  paused,  looked  upon 
him  with  a  glance  of  love,  embraced 
him  and  kissed  him,  with  the  words, 
"  Peace  be  to  you  ! " 

James  the  Brother  of  John. 

I.  Honoured  in  the  family  to  which 
he  belonged. — 1.  His  father,  Zebeclee, 
a  well-to  -do  fisherman  on  the  sea  of 
Galilee  (Matt.  iv.  21).  2.  His  mother, 
Salome,  one  of  the  pious  women  who 
had  cast  in  their  lot  with  Christ  (Matt. 
xx.  20).  3.  His  brother,  John,  the 
beloved  disciple  who  leaned  on  Jesus's 
bosom  (John  xiii.  23). 

II.  More  honoured  in  the  office 
which  he  bore. — The  apostleship.  An 
office  which — 1.  Admitted  him  to 
closest  personal  intimacy  with  Christ 
(John  xv.  15).  2.  Opened  up  before 
him  a  wide  sphere  of  service  for  Christ 
(John  xv.  16).  3.  Conferred  on  him 
high  privileges  from  Christ  (Luke  v.  10  ; 
Mark  i.  29,  v.  37  ;  Matt.  xvii.  1, 
xxvi.  37). 

III.  Most  honoured  in  the  crown  of 
martyrdom  he  received. — 1.  After  a 
short  period  of  service.  He  was  called 
to  his  reward,  not  so  soon  as  Stephen, 
but  much  earlier  than  Peter  or  John. 
2.  Probably  without  mudb  pain.  Not 
like  Stephen  stoned  to  death,  but  most 
likely  beheaded  with  a  swift  and  sudden 
stroke.  3.  Certainly  with  great  glory. 
The  crown  of  martyrdom  was  for  him 
a  crown  of  life  (Rev.  ii.  10),  a  crown 
of  righteousness  (2  Tim.  iv.  8),  a  crown 
of  glory  (1  Peter  v.  4). 

Ver.  5,  12.  The  Prayers  of  the  Church 
should  be — 1.  Addressed  to  God.  A  not 
unnecessary  reminder.  2.  By  a  united 
congregation.  United,  if  not  in  place, 
in  purpose  and  heart.  3.  In  an  earnest 
spirit.     Not  formally,  but  sincerely,  as 


if  the  suppliants  meant  them,  which 
they  do  not  always.  4.  For  ministers 
of  the  Gospel.  Not  excluding  all  sorts 
and  conditions  of  men  (1  Tim.  ii.  1), 
but  specially  for  ambassadors  of  the 
Church's  King  and  Head  (Eph.  vi.  19). 
5.  That  they  may  be  delivered  from  un- 
reasonable and  wicked  men  (2  Thess. 
iii.  2).  If  in  any  measure  faithful  to 
their  calling,  ministers  will  be  exposed 
to  trouble  from  such.  6.  That  their 
lives  may  be  prolonged.  If  not  for 
their  sakes,  for  their  Master's  and  for 
the  sake  of  their  work.  If  any  lives 
are  valuable  to  a  community,  those  of 
good  ministers  of  Christ  are.  And 
7.  That  their  usefulness  may  be  in- 
creased. A  true  minister  desires  not 
personal  advantage,  fame,  or  wealth, 
but  growing  ability  to  serve  in  the 
Gospel  (2  Cor.  xii.  14). 

Yer.  6.  Sleeping  on  the  Eve  of 
Martyrdom. — Illustrations:  1.  In  the 
beginning  of  the  Marian  persecution, 
writes  Froucle  (History  of  England, 
v.  488),  "  Rogers  was  *  to  break  the 
ice,'  as  Bradford  described  it.  On 
the  morning  of  the  4th  of  February 
(a.d.  1555),  the  wife  of  the  keeper  of 
Newgate  came  to  his  bedside.  He  was 
sleeping  soundly,  and  she  woke  him. 
with  difficulty  to  let  him  know  that  he 
was  wanted.  2.  Those  acquainted  with 
Scottish  history  will  recall  the  last 
sleep  of  the  great  and  good  Argyll  in 
Edinburgh  prison  before  he  stooped  his 
honoured  head  to  the  loaded  axe  of  the 
maiden.  3.  A  tradesman  of  Lyons, 
of  the  name  of  Grivet,  was,  during  the 
reign  of  terror  in  France,  sentenced  to 
death,  and  brought  into  the  cave  of  the 
condemned,  where  were  several  others 
who  with  him  were  to  suffer  next 
morning,  and  who,  on  his  arrival, 
pressed  round  him  to  sympathise  in 
his  fate  and  fortify  him  for  the  stroke 
he  was  about  to  encounter.  '  Come 
and  sup  with  us,'  said  they,  '  this  is 
the  last  inn  in  the  journey  of  life ; 
to-morrow  we  shall  arrive  at  our  long 
home.'  Grivet,  who  was  calm  and 
composed,  accepted  the  invitation, 
supped  heartily,  and  then,  retiring  to 
the  remotest  corner  of  the  cave,  buried 

'267 


chap.  xii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


himself  in  the  straw  and  went  to 
sleep.  The  morning  dawned,  the  other 
prisoners,  tied  together,  were  led  away 
to  execution,  without  Grivet,  who  was 
fast  asleep,  not  perceiving  anything  or 
being  perceived.  The  door  of  the  cave 
was  locked.  On  awakening  he  felt 
astonished  to  find  himself  in  perfect 
solitude.  Four  days  passed  without 
any  new  prisoners  being  brought  in. 
During  these  days  he  subsisted  on 
provisions  which  he  found  scattered 
about  the  cave.  On  the  evening  of  the 
fourth  day  he  was  discovered  by  the 
turnkey,  who  reported  his  omission  to 
the  judges.  In  a  moment  of  leniency 
these  set  the  prisoner  at  liberty  "  (Percy 
Anecdotes). 

Yer.  12.  The  Church  in  Mary's 
house. — A  study  for  present-day  con- 
gregations. 

I.  Numerously  attended. — "  Many 
were  gathered  together."  A  healthful 
sign  of  piety  when  Christ's  disciples 
forsake  not  the  assembling  of  them- 
selves together  (Heb.  x.  25) — a  practice 
greatly  declining  at  the  present  day. 
The  advantages  of  social  worship  are 
too  obvious  to  require  detailed  rehearsal. 
The  worshipper  frequently  forgets  that 
even  though  he  may  not  himself  derive 
benefit  from  the  services  of  the  Chris- 
tian sanctuary,  he  may  by  his  presence 
impart  benefit  to  his  fellow-worshippers. 
Besides,  apart  from  benefit  either  given 
or  received,  it  is  the  duty  of  Christ's 
people  in  this  way  to  honour  their 
exalted  Lord. 

II.  Seriously  occupied.  —  The  as- 
sembled disciples  were  "  praying." 
Prayer,  though  not  the  sole,  yet  an 
important,  part  of  public  worship,  and 
should  be  conducted  with  intelligence, 
solemnity,  and  earnestness.  Amongst 
the  objects  of  a  Church's  supplications 
place  should  be  found  for  all  that  con- 
cerns the  welfare  of  the  Church  itself, 
its  pastors  and  teachers,  its  members 
and  adherents,  the  progress  of  the 
spiritual  life  among  believers,  the  ex- 
tension of  the  gospel  in  the  world. 

III.  Delightfully  surprised.  —  By 
Peter's  appearance  in  their  midst — no 

268 


doubt  an  answer  to  their  prayers.  So 
will  praying  congregations  and  praying 
individuals  experience  similar  surprises, 
if  only  their  prayers  be  united,  believ- 
ing, and  in  earnest  (Matt,  xviii.  19  ; 
John  xiv.  13  ;  James  i.  5). 

IV.  Wonderfully  instructed.  —  By 
Peter's  story  of  the  Lord's  dealings  with 
him  in  prison.  So  should  Christian 
pastors  edify  their  congregations  by 
occasionally  relating  their  own  ex- 
periences and  always  giving  their 
hearers  the  benefit  of  those  higher 
views  of  truth  and  duty  into  which 
they  themselves  have  been  led  ( 1  Peter 
iv.  11). 

V.  Suddenly  left.— Peter  departed 
and  went  into  another  place.  It  would 
certainly  be  wrong  to  derive  from  this 
an  argument  against  a  stationary  and 
in  favour  of  a  circulating  ministry  ;  but 
the  incident  may  be  used  to  recall 
the  thought  that  here  the  Church's 
ministers,  like  the  Hebrew  priests,  are 
not  suffered  to  continue  by  reason  of 
death  (Heb.  vii.  23). 

Yer.  13.  A  Maid  named  Rhoda. 

I.  A  slave  girl  and  yet  a  Christian. 
— Christianity  adapted  to  the  deepest 
wants  of  all  sorts  and  conditions  of 
men.  Believers  of  all  ranks  and  de- 
grees may  be  found  within  the  Church 
of  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  A  servant  and  yet  attending  a 
prayer  meeting. — Many  regard  the 
Church's  services  as  only  designed  for 
the  leisured  classes.  But  Christian  de- 
votion oils  the  wheels  of  all  forms  of 
industry. 

III.  A  humble  individual  and  yet 
the  bearer  of  a  joyful  message. — It  is 
not  the  medium  through  which  a  com- 
munication comes,  but  the  character  of 
the  communication  itself  that  imparts 
to  it  its  chief  value.  It  is  not  the 
preacher  that  saves,  but  the  gospel  he 
preaches.  Nor  is  great  talent  required 
for  telling  the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel. 
A  very  unimportant  person  may  blow 
the  trump  of  Jubilee. 

IY.  A  weak  woman,  and  yet  able 
to  do  important  service  in  the  Church. 
— Compare    the    service    rendered    to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xii. 


Naaman  the  Syrian  by  the  captive 
maid  (2  Kings  v.  2,  3).  No  one  too 
insignificant  to  work  in  the  Christian 
vineyard.  Many  of  the  noblest  deeds 
are  done  by  feeble  folk.  Women  and 
children  can  do  acts  of  high  renown 
when  inspired  by  love  for  Jesus  Christ 
(John  xii.  3  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  15). 

Ver.  17.  The  Three  Jameses  of  Scrip- 
ture ;  or,  Three  differing  Types  of  Chris- 
tian Service. 

I.  James  the  brother  of  John,  the  first 
apostolic  martyr. — A  representative  of 
the  Church's  confessors.  A  type  of 
those  who  serve  Christ  by  suffering — 
an  honour  reserved  for  the  few. 

II.  James  the  son  of  Alpheus,  or 
James  the  Little ;  also  one  of  the  Twelve, 
concerning  whose  life  and  labours 
nothing  is  known.  A  representative 
of  those  who  fill  humble  and  obscure 
stations  in  the  Church.  A  type  of 
those  who  serve  Christ  without  attract- 
ing, or  perhaps  even  seeking,  the  notice 
and  applause  of  men — an  honour  be- 
stowed on  the  many. 

III.  James  the  brother  of  our  Lord, 
the  president  of  the  Jerusalem  Church. 
— A  representative  of  those  who  are 
called  to  fill  public  positions  in  the 
Church.  A  type  of  those  who  serve 
Christ  by  acting  as  the  guides  and 
leaders  of  their  fellows — an  honour 
mostly  conferred  on  persons  of  special 
gifts.  All  sorts  of  servants  are  required 
by  Christ  to  do  His  work  in  the  Church 
and  in  the  world. 

Vers.  1-17.  Peter's  Deliverance. 

I.  We  obtain  a  pleasing  view  of  the 
deep  and  tender  sense  of  brotherhood 
which  pervaded  the  early  Christian 
Church. — This  sense  of  brotherhood  is 
one  of  the  best  gifts  which  the  gospel 
brought  to  men.  It  is  indeed  the 
primary,  unique  element  of  the  human 
race  as  a  special,  distinct  creation.  As 
a  variety  of  intelligent  creature,  in- 
tended to  carry  still  higher  the  proof  of 
God's  creative  wealth,  the  fact  of  its 
interlaced  brotherhood,  instinct  with  a 
common  life,   mutual  love,  and  fully- 


shared  joys,  was  its  distinguishing 
feature.  We  know  what  a  disastrous 
blow  sin  struck  this  distinguishing 
principle  of  human  nature — how  the 
members  of  the  one  family  fell  apart ; 
how.  dissociation  came  into  play,  with 
all  its  destructive  consequences.  If  re- 
clamation should  ever  come  for  the  race, 
if  it  should  ever  be  started  afresh  upon  a 
career  of  honour  and  blessedness,  this 
principle  must  be  called  into  life  again. 
It  must  become  the  regulative  power  of 
human  action.  Men  must  be  taught 
not  only  to  know  God  as  a  Father,  but 
each  other  as  brothers,  if  they  would 
attain  to  their  true  destiny.  How 
beautifully  did  the  early  Church  dis- 
play this  elevated,  this  transforming 
principle !  How  closely  were  they 
joined  together !  How  constantly 
they  assembled  for  mutual  instruction  ! 
How  tenderly  they  loved  one  another  ! 
Out  of  the  fruitful  soil  of  loving 
brotherhood  sprang  up  the  intense 
concern  of  the  whole  Church  of  Jerusa- 
lem for  Peter,  now  in  the  hands  of  a 
relentless  enemy.  It  is  the  true 
cement  which  binds  Christians  of  every 
name  and  country  together  in  an  in- 
dissoluble bond. 

II.  We  see  the  Church  of  Jerusalem 
in  the  attitude  of  prayer  for  an  im- 
perilled brother. — The  Christians  of 
Jerusalem  are  described  as  constituting 
one  Church.  1.  It  was  a  praying 
Church.  When  they  had  returned  to 
the  city  from  the  Mount  of  Olives  after 
witnessing  the  ascension  of  the  Lord 
into  heaven,  they  entered  into  an  upper 
room,  and  all  continued  with  one  accord 
in  prayer.  2.  By  the  habit  of  prayer 
the  Church  was  prepared  for  trying 
emergencies.  "  While  therefore  Peter 
was  being  kept  in  prison,  prayer  was 
being  made  of  the  Church  unto  God 
for  him."  Here  was  a  great  emergency. 
It  was  a  fair,  full  test  of  their  faith. 
They  had  no  carnal  weapons  with 
which  to  fight.  They  had  no  distin- 
guished friends  at  court  to  whom  they 
might  appeal.  They  had  no  treasures 
to  offer  as  a  ransom  for  the  valuable 
life.  3.  They  grayed  in  concert.  All 
hearts  were  touched,  all  minds  agreed ; 

269 


chap.  xii.        H0MILE1IC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


not  two  or  three,  but  the  entire  Church 
of  Jerusalem.  4.  They  prayed  un- 
ceasingly. There  was  no  relaxation  of 
energy,  no  manifestation  of  doubt,  no 
giving  over  of  entreaty.  5.  The  prayer 
was  not  only  unceasing  ;  it  was  instant, 
earnest— intense  perhaps  better  ex- 
presses the  meaning  of  the  word. 
They  prayed  not  coldly,  nor  over  the 
fields,  says  John  Calvin,  but  so  long  as 
Peter  was  in  the  conflict  the  faithful 
did  what  they  could  to  help  him,  and 
that  without  wearisomeness.  What  a 
power  is  this  intensity  in  the  field  of 
prayer  !  6.  They  prayed  to  the  point. 
It  was  all  for  Peter.  Self  was  for- 
gotten. 7.  And  to  God  direct  they  spoke. 
No  living  man  is  called  on  to  help  ;  no 
message  is  sent  to  Herod.  They  cast 
themselves  on  God  nakedly;  they  in- 
voke the  Divine  Power  only.  The  case 
is  urgent,  and  the  mighty  Presence 
alone  filled  the  scene.    ■ 

III.  The  appeal  has  been  made,  the 
Divine  Power  invoked  ;  let  us  see  the 
issue. — W.  C.  Craig,  D.D. 

Herod  and  Peter. 

I.  God  knows  all  about  His  children. 

— Beyond  the  bare  fact  of  Peter's 
arrest,  the  disciples  were  in  profound 
ignorance  concerning  him.  The  secrets 
of  the  Roman  prison-house  were  well 
kept.  But  there  was  One  whose  seeing 
and  knowing  could  not  be  hindered. 
God  kept  watch  over  Peter,  knew  in 
what  corridor  and  cell  he  was  confined, 
knew  the  names  of  the  guards  to  whom 
he  was  chained,  knew  just  where  and 
when  and  how  to  send  His  angel  to 
visit  him.  Peter  had  no  occasion  to 
feel  solitary  or  forsaken.  His  best 
friend  never  let  him  for  one  moment 
out  of  His  sight.  Our  recognised 
afflictions  are  not  the  hardest  to  bear. 
The  tears  we  shed  in  secret,  the  dis- 
appointments of  which  we  never  speak, 
the  sorrowful  hearts  which  we  hide 
under  smiling  faces — these  are  the 
things  that  test  and  strain  the  fibre  of 
manhood.  It  greatly  helps  us  to  bear 
troubles  like  these,  to  remember  that 
God  knows  all  about  them. 

II.  God   keeps    Himself   informed 

270 


about  His  children  in  order  to  help 
them. — His  knowledge  is  not  accidental, 
nor  the  result  of  mere  curiosity.  He 
has  it,  and  uses  it  to  succour  us  in  our 
times  of  extremity.  He  kept  watch  over 
Peter,  in  order  that,  when  the  right 
time  came,  He  might  deliver  him  from 
prison.  We  lose  a  part — and  the  best 
part — of  the  great  truth  of  Providence 
by  our  false  accentuation.  Providence 
is  Providence — the  foreseeing  and 
arranging  that  precedes  helpful  doing. 
No  small  part  of  the  anxiety  that 
disquiets  us  arises  from  our  failure 
to  apprehend  this  gracious  method  of 
the  Divine  working.  Men  have  too 
mechanical  an  idea  of  life.  They  have 
a  great  deal  to  say  about  "  cause  and 
effect."  Our  common  blessings  are 
supposed  to  come  in  what  we  call  the 
"  order  of  nature."  What  we  call 
11  nature  "  is  only  the  material  form  in 
which  God  embodies  His  will  and 
power.  The  results  of  physical  pro- 
cesses are  only  the  Divine  Word  "  made 
flesh  and  dwelling  amongst  us."  What 
we  call  "  law  "  is  only  God's  method  of 
working.  In  proportion  as  men 
realise  that  truth  they  get  towards  the 
heart  of  things.  "  The  Lord  of  Hosts 
is  with  us;  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our 
refuge." 

III.  When  God  helps  His  children 
He  expects  them  to  help  themselves. — 
It  was  easily  possible  for  God,  in  work- 
ing a  miracle  for  Peter's  deliverance,  to 
have  wrought  out  every  item  of  it. 
But  that  is  not  the  Divine  method. 
There  were  some  things  which  the 
apostle  could  do  for  himself.  He  could 
obey  the  command  to  "  rise  up 
quickly "  ;  he  could  gird  himself  and 
bind  on  his  sandals;  he  could  cast  his 
garment  about  him,  and  follow  the 
angel ;  he  could  find  his  own  way, 
when  the  angel  left  him,  through  the 
well-remembered  streets  to  the  house  of 
his  friends.  What  he  could  not  do  for 
himself  was  done  for  him ;  what  he 
could  do  he  must  do,  or  it  would  not  be 
done.  It  is  an  old  proverb,  but  a 
weighty  one,  that  "  God  helps  those 
who  help  themselves."  Men  have  a 
certain  range  of  natural  abilities,  inside 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  XII. 


of  which  God  does  not  step  to  interfere. 
We  come  into  life  equipped  for  its 
duties  and  responsibilities,  and  are  not 
expected  to  let  our  furnishings  rust 
from  disuse.  In  the  Divine  economy  of 
the  universe,  there  is  no  provision  for 
idle  blood.  Prayer  is  a  power,  but  not 
such  a  power  as  allows  men  to  fold 
their  hands,  and  expect  results  which 
they  might  secure  by  the  proper  use  of 
means  within  their  grasp.  We  are 
"^workers  together  with  God,"  and, 
so  long  as  we  are  idle,  the  heavens 
keep  silence.  God  will  never  do  any- 
thing for  man  that  man  can  do  for 
himself. 

IV.  When  God  moves  in  behalf  of 
His  children  no  obstacle  is  too  great 
for  Him. — Humanly  judging,  how  many 
and  what  insuperable  difficulties  stood  in 
the  way  of  Peter's  deliverance  !  The 
prison  was  secure  against  assault;  no 
mob  could  force  its  massive  gates.  The 
guards  were  deaf  to  either  bribes  or 
threats.  Each  one  must  answer  with 
his  life  for  the  safe-keeping  of  the 
prisoner.  The  shrewdest  strategist 
could  contrive  no  plan  of  escape  or 
rescue  that  held  out  the  least  promise 
of  success.  But  how  easy  for  God  to 
do  that  which  was  impossible  for  man  ! 
He  had  but  to  will  it,  and  the  keepers 
were  helpless  and  asleep.  And  yet  how 
apt  men  always  are  to  magnify  what 
they  call  the  impossibilities  in  the  way 
of  answers  to  prayer  !  They  limit  the 
range  of  their  petitions  to  the  things 
which  it  seems  to  them  can  be  done, 
and  have  no  heart  to  ask  God  for  what 
seems  too  hard  for  them.  Our  philoso- 
phies of  prayer  often  ignore  the  fact 
that  Omnipotence  is  at  the  head  of  the 
universe.  We  try  with  the  measuring 
line  of  human  probabilities  to  deter- 
mine the  sweep  of  Almightiness.  We 
have  nothing  to  do  with  probabilities. 
The  hand  that  holds  all  worlds  is  able 
to  work  beyond  our  thought.  We  must 
trust  God  fully.  Herod  and  Peter 
stand  as  representatives  of  two  distinct 
types  of  humanity.  The  one,  in  the 
world's  estimate,  was  rich,  strong,  and 
sovereign;  the  other  was  poor,  weak, 
and  a  prisoner.     The  contest  between 


them  seemed  most  unequal.  But  God 
was  on  what  men  called  the  losing  side, 
and  that  determined  the  issue.  It  is 
a  truth  to  be  remembered.  In  our 
schemes  of  life  we  give  overweight  to 
merely  human  advantages.  Social 
position,  wealth,  natural  capacity— if 
we  have  these,  we  think  that  we  are 
equipped  for  success.  We  are  too  hasty 
in  our  conclusion.  The  real  question  is 
Is  God  for  us  or  against  us  ?  In  Him 
are  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
righteousness.  With  Him  nothing  is 
too  hard  for  us  to  compass  or  attain. 
Apart  from  Him,  our  brightest  pro- 
spects are  only  dreams,  without  sub- 
stance or  warrant. — Monday  Club 
Sermons. 

Vers.  1-19.  The  Great  Struggle;  or, 
the  powers  of  light  and  darkness  in 
conflict. 

I.  The  contending  forces. — 1.  The 
powers  of  darkness.  Represented  by 
(1)  Herod  the  King.  (2)  The  Jewish 
people.  (3)  The  quaternions  of  soldiers. 
2.  The  armies  of  light;  represented 
by  (1)  The  angel  of  the  Lord.  (2)  The 
praying  Church.  (3)  The  servant 
Rhoda. 

II.  The    invisible    commanders.— 

1.  Of  the  powers  of  darkness,  Satan, 
the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the 
children  of  disobedience  (Eph.  ii.    2). 

2.  Of  the  armies  of  light,  the  Lord,  the 
exalted  Christ,  who  walketh  in  the 
midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks 
(Rev.  ii.  1),  and  who  is  a  constant 
presence  with  His  people  (Matt,  xxiii. 
20). 

III.  The  important  prize.— The  life 
of  Peter.— 1.  That  of  his  body,  which  was 
now  imprisoned,  which  the  arch  enemy 
desired  to  cut  off,  but  which  the  Lord 
of  Glory  determined  to  preserve. 
2.  That  of  his  soul,  which,  on  the  one 
hand,  was  seriously  threatened  by  the 
persecutions  so  thickly  directed  against 
him,  but  on  the  other  hand  was 
efficiently  supported  by  the  grace  so 
richly  manifested  toward  him. 

IV.  The  ultimate  victory. —This  lay 
completely  on  the  side  of  Christ  and 
His  heavenly  army.     1.  Peter's  body 

271 


chap.  xii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


was    delivered  from    the  prison.     The  also  rescued  from   peril.     Peter,   it   is 

purpose  of  Herod,  the  expectation  of  known,  continued  faithful  to  the  end, 

the  Jews,  the  vigilance  of  the  soldiers,  and  eventually  obtained  the  crown  of 

were  all  outwitted.     2.  Peter's  soul  was  life. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  20—25. 

The  Death  of  Herod  ;  or,  the  Church's  Persecutor  punished. 

I.  The    occasion    of,    and   circumstances    connected    with,   Herod's    death 

(vers.  20-22). — 1.  The  place  where  it  occurred — Cmsarea  (see  on  viii.  40).  If 
Luke  suggests  that  Herod's  motive  for  leaving  Jerusalem  and  taking  up  his 
quarters  in  that  "  city  of  sumptuous  palaces "  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  The 
Life  and  Epistles  of  Paul,  ii.  306)  was  the  disgust  felt  in  consequence  of  failing  in 
his  project  to  remove  Peter,  Josephus  (Ant.,  XIX.  vii.  3,  viii.  2)  so  far  confirms 
this  as  to  state  that  while  Agrippa  "  loved  to  live  at  Jerusalem,"  he  suddenly, 
after  reigning  three  years  over  all  Judaea,  "  came  to  the  city  of  Cassarea  "  with 
the  obvious  intention  of  residing  there  for  a  season.  2.  The  time  when  it 
happened.  Manifestly  within  a  month  or  two  after  Peter's  deliverance,  though 
the  precise  date  is  not  specified.  The  interval  between  Herod's  murder  of  James, 
shortly  before  the  Passover  of  a.d.  44,  and  God's  judgment  on  Herod,  in 
August  a.d.  44,  was  sufficiently  short  to  show  that  in  the  monarch's  overthrow 
the  martyr's  death  was  divinely  avenged.  3.  The  occasion  on  which  it  took  place. 
According  to  Luke  that  was  the  reception  of  an  embassy  from  the  cities  of  Tyre 
and  Sidon,  with  which  at  the  time  Herod  was  displeased.  The  ground  of  this 
displeasure,  though  not  stated,  may  be  assumed  to  have  been  the  commercial 
rivalry  existing  between  those  ancient  ports  and  the  newly  founded  harbour  of 
Caesarea.  In  consequence  of  this  the  Phoenicians,  it  may  be  supposed,  had  been 
subjected  to  prohibitory  measures  which  prevented  them  from  obtaining  supplies 
of  corn  out  of  Palestine,  and  accordingly  were  aroused  to  embrace  the  opportunity 
afforded  them  by  Agrippa's  presence  in  Caesarea  to  approach  him  with  overtures 
for  peace,  which  were  laid  before  him  by  a  friend  of  theirs  at  court — viz.,  Blastus, 
the  king's  chamberlain.  According  to  the  story  in  the  Acts  Herod  died,  or  at 
least  received  his  death  stroke,  on  the  day  when  the  Phoenician  ambassadors 
were  admitted  to  his  presence,  and  while  he  himself,  arrayed  in  royal  apparel 
and  seated  upon  his  throne,  was  making  to  them  a  bombastical  harangue. 
Josephus  agrees  with  Luke  in  mentioning  that  Herod's  mortal  malady  seized 
him  in  a  crowded  assembly ;  and  though  the  Jewish  historian  does  not  mention 
Herod's  quarrel  with  the  Phoenicians  or  the  presence  of  their  ambassadors  in  the 
meeting,  but  ascribes  the  vast  gatherings  to  a  festival  which  at  the  time  was 
being  held  in  the  city  "to  make  vows  for  his  safety,"  possibly  in  honour  of  his 
return  from  Britain  which  took  place  that  year,  a.d.  44,  nevertheless  he 
(Josephus)  says  nothing  to  contradict  Luke's  account,  while  he  concurs  with 
the  sacred  writer  in  affirming  that  the  special  flattery  offered  to  Agrippa  was 
that  of  calling  him  a  god.  According  to  Luke  the  people  shouted — "  The  voice 
of  a  god  and  not  of  a  man  !  "  According  to  Josephus,  "  his  flatterers  cried  out, 
one  from  one  place  and  another  from  another,  though  not  for  his  good,  that  he 
was  a  god,"  adding,  "  Be  thou  merciful  to  us,  for  although  we  have  hitherto 
reverenced  thee  only  as  a  man,  yet  shall  we  henceforth  own  thee  as  superior 
to  mortal  nature."  Both  forms  of  utterance  may  have  been  used,  though 
Josephus's  appears  like  a  paraphrase  of  Luke's.  The  result,  however,  will 
remain  unaffected,  even  if  Luke  should  be  held  as  having  abbreviated  the 
exclamations  of  the  people. 

II.  The  cause  and  the  reason  of  Herod's  death  (ver.  23).      1.  The  cause  was 

272 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xn. 


twofold.    (1)  The  natural,  material,  instrumental,  and  visible  cause  was  a  violent 
distemper  of  the  bowels,  which  the  sacred  writer  describes  more  particularly  by 
saying  "  He  was  eaten  of  worms."     According  to  Josephus  "  a  severe  pain  arose 
in  his  belly,  and  began  in  a  most  violent  manner."      "  The  two  accounts  con- 
sidered together,"  writes  Sir  Bisdon  Bennett  (The  Diseases  of  the  Bible,  p.  101), 
"  leave  scarcely  any  room  for  doubt  that  the  cause  of  death  was  perforation  of  the 
bowels  by  intestinal  worms,  inducing  ulceration  and  acute  peritonitis,"  instances 
of  which,  he  adds,  are  well  known  to  medical  science.     "  Without  doubt,"  says 
Leyrer,  "  one  must  think  of  abscesses  and  worm  ulcers  (ulcera  verminosa),  out 
of  which,  when  they  break  up,  maggots  creep  forth  "  (quoted  by  Keil,  Biblische 
Archceologie,    p.    564).     To    the   same   effect   speaks    Kamphausen   in  Biehm's 
Uandworterbuch,  art.  Krankheiten)  : — "  It  is  well  known  that  masses  of  round 
worms  can  break  through  a  place  in  the  bowels  which  has  been  rendered  thin  by 
suppuration,  or  even  through  stoppage  of  the  bowels  lead  to  a  horrible  death  ; 
nor  is  it  less  certain  that  through  ulcer  holes  worms  can  empty  themselves  out." 
(2)  The  supernatural,  immaterial,  direct,  and  invisible  cause  was  the  hand  of  God 
to  which  Luke  points  by  writing,  "  An  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him."    If  Josephus 
does  not  introduce  an  angel  into  his  report,  it  would  almost  seem  as  if  by  his 
story  of  the  ill-omened  bird,  the  owl,  which  Herod  saw  in  the  theatre  (see  Ant., 
XIX.  viii.  2),  he  intended  to  suggest  the  direct  interposition  of  Heaven  in  bring- 
ing about  Agrippa's  death  ;  and,  indeed,  according  to  Josephus,  Agrippa  himself 
regarded  it  in  this  light,  and  exclaimed  when  he  saw  the  bird,  "  I,  whom  you 
call  a  god,  am  commanded  presently  to  depart  this  life  ;  while  Providence  thus 
reproves  the  lying  words  you   just  now  said  to  me;    and   I,  who  was  called 
immortal,    am    immediately   to   be   carried   away   by    death."      2.  The  reason: 
"Because  he  gave  not  God  the  glory,"  writes  Luke  ;  which  Josephus  confirms  by 
saying,  "  Upon  this  the  king  did  neither  rebuke  them  nor  reject  their  impious 
flattery."     He,  a  Jew,  to  whom  it  was  a  foremost  article  in  religion  that  Jehovah 
alone  was  God,  and  that  to  set  up  a  creature  alongside  of  Him  was  blasphemy  and 
worthy  of  death  (Matt.  xxvi.  6Q),  had  allowed  himself  to  suck  in  and  drink  down 
the  adulation  of  puny  mortals,  and  had  actually  began  to  consider  himself  a 
superior  being,  if  not  a  veritable  God ;  and  so  Jehovah,  who  is  a  jealous  God 
(Exod.  xx.  5),  smote  him  till  he  died. 

III.  The  effect  and  consequence  of  Herod's  death. — 1.  The  people  rejoiced. 
"  When  it  was  known  that  Agrippa  was  departed  this  life,  the  inhabitants  of 
Csesarea  and  Sebaste  forgot  the  kindnesses  he  had  bestowed  upon  them,  and 
acted  the  part  of  his  bitterest  enemies.  .  .  .  They  also  laid  themselves  down  in 
public  places  and  celebrated  general  feastings,  with  garlands  on  their  heads,  and 
with  ointments  and  libations  to  Charon,  and  drinking  to  one  another  for  joy 
that  the  king  was  dead"  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XIX.  ix.  1).  What  a  commentary — and 
not  selected  from  the  Bible — on  the  vanity  of  popular  applause,  and  the  insin- 
cerity of  popular  adulation  !  2.  The  word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied.  Grew 
in  weight  and  influence  upon  the  hearts  of  those  who  listened  to  it ;  grew  in  the 
extent  and  circumference  over  which  it  travelled  ;  grew  in  its  power  of  over- 
coming difficulties  and  in  making  friends.  Multiplied  itself  by  multiplying  the 
number  of  believers,  by  drawing  towards  the  young  Church  crowds  of  men  and 
women  who  believed  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  cast  in  their  lot  with  His 
cause. 

Learn. — 1.  The  certainty  that  God  will  avenge  the  blood  of  His  martyrs 
(Deut.  xxxii.  43  ;  Luke  xviii.  7).  2.  The  vanity  of  attempting  to  war  with  God 
(Isa.  xxvii.  4  ;  compare  Iliad,  V.  407,  "  By  no  means  is  he  long  lived  who  fights 
with  the  immortals  ").  3.  The  wickedness  of  doing  anything  to  rob  God  of 
His  glory  (Isa.  xlii.  8,  xlviii.  11).  4.  The  ultimate  triumph  of  the  gospel  over 
all  obstacles  (Isa.  xi.  9  ;  Mark  xiii.  10). 

t  273 


chap.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 


Yers.  20-23.  The  Sin  and  Punishment 
of  Herod. 

I.  How  the  measure  of  his  iniquity 
was  filled  up. — It  was  pride  that  did  it. 

1.  He  picked  a  quarrel  with  his  neigh- 
bours, the   men   of   Tyre   and    Sidon. 

2.  He  displayed  before  them  his  royal 
grandeur.  3.  He  accepted  from  them 
their  senseless  flattery.  4.  He  glorified 
himself  above  them  as  a  god. 

II.  How  the  wickedness  of  his  con- 
duet  was  punished. — He  who  had  killed 
James  and  would  have  slain  Peter  was 
himself  destroyed.  1.  The  agent  in 
his  destruction  was  no  less  than  an 
angel.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  who 
smote  Peter  on  the  side  for  life  now 
smote  the  guilty  Herod  in  the  heart  for 
death.  2.  The  instrument  of  Herod's 
destruction  was  no  more  than  a  worm. 
The  body  in  the  grave  is  destroyed  by 
worms,  but  Herod's  body  putrefied 
while  he  was  yet  alive,  and  bred  the 
worms  which  began  to  feed  on  it  be- 
times. See  (1)  what  weak  and  con- 
temptible creatures  God  can  make  the 
instruments  of  His  justice  when  He 
pleases;  and  (2)  howr  God  delights  to 
bring  down  proud  men  in  such  a  way 
as  is  most  mortifying,  and  pours  most 
contempt  upon  them. — After  M.  Henry. 

Herod's  Death. 

I.  A  proud  man  humbled. 
II.  A  wicked  man  punished. 

III.  A  powerful  man  weakened. 

Vers.  1-23.  God  alone  King. 
Proved  : — 

I.  In  the  early  death  of  James. 

II.  In  the  miraculous  deliverance 
of  Peter. 

III.  In  the  horrible  end  of  Herod. — 
Gerok. 

Vers.  2-23.  The  Deaths  of  James  and 
of  Herod. 

I.  (The  apostle  died)  by  the  violence 
of  man,  (the  king)  by  the  visitation  of 
God. 

II.  (The  apostle),  mature  in  grace; 
(the  king),  ripe  in  sin. 

274 


III.  (The  apostle,)  lamented  by  his 
brethren ;  (the  king)  execrated  by  his 
subjects. 

IV.  (The  apostle, )  to  ascend  to  glory ; 
(the  king)  to  go  to  his  own  place. 

Ver.  24.  The  Progress  of  the  Gospel 
in  Apostolic  Times. 

I.  The  opposition  it  encountered. — 
From — 1.  Jewish  prejudices.  2.  Hea- 
then superstitions.  3.  Human  learn- 
ing.    4.   Satanic  influence. 

II.  The  success  it  achieved. — 1.  It 
was  widely  published.  2.  Its  influence 
was  extensive.  3.  Its  converts  were 
multiplied. 

III.  The  causes  which  enabled  it  to 
overcome  opposition  and  attain  suc- 
cess.— 1.    The    power    of   the    Spirit. 

2.  The  zeal  of  its  preachers.  3.  The 
holy  lives  of  its  disciples.  4.  The 
unity  of  the  Church.  5.  The  perse- 
cutions it  suffered. 

Ver.  24.  The  Progress  of  the  King- 
dom of  God. 

I.  It  has  its  origin  in  a  seed. — 
"  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto 
a  grain  of  mustard  seed  "  (Matt.  xiii. 
31,  32).  That  seed  is  the  truth  of  the 
gospel,  which  is  :  1.  Divine.  Being  the 
word  of  God  (Luke  viii.  11  ;  1  Peter 
i.  23 ;  1  John  iii.  9).  2.  Vital.  Other- 
wise it  would  not  spring  up  (Mark 
iv.    27)    and    operate    (Heb.    iv.    12). 

3.  Small.  Only  a  word,  a  gospel,  a 
message  of  glad  tidings,  not  a  philo- 
sophy or  a  science,  or  elaborated  system 
of  truth. 

II.  It  advances  by  growth. — Like 
the  seed  which  extracts  nutriment  from 
the  soil,  the  kingdom  of  God  absorbs 
into  itself  that  which  makes  it 
expand  by  attracting  through  the 
power  of  the  gospel  souls  from  the 
outside  world. 

III.  It  lives  by  reproduction. — As 
the  seed  multiplies  according  to  its 
kind,  so  do  believers  who  constitute 
the  Church,  as  it  were,  reproduce 
themselves  in  other  believers  who  are 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  XII. 


added  to  the  congregation  of  the 
faithful. 

Ver.  25.  The  Home  Coming  of  the 
Messengers. 

I.  After  a  mission  well  executed. 

II.  With  a  fresh  recruit  to  their 
ranks. 

III.  In  readiness  for  further 
service. 

The  History  of  John  Mark. 

I.  His  family  connections. — 1.  The 

son  of  a  pious  mother.  Mary  was  a 
disciple.  In  this  respect  Mark  re- 
sembled Timothy  (xvi.  i.).  While  grace 
does  not  run  in  the  blood,  there  is  an 
antecedent  presumption  that  the  piety 
of  parents  will  reappear  in  their  off- 
spring. Mothers  especially  have  an 
innate  tendency  to  transmit  their 
characters  to  their  sons.  How  much 
pious  mothers  have  in  this  way  bene- 
fited both  the  Church  and  the  world 
may  be  inferred  from  the  annals  of 
both,  but  will  never  be  known  till  the 
day  reveals.  2.  The  cousin  of  Bar- 
nabas (Col.  iv.  10).  Not  sister's  son, 
in  which  case  his  father  may  have 
been  the  father  of  Barnabas ;  bat 
cousin,  so  that  his  father  and  Barnabas's 
may  have  been  brothers,  if  the  cousin- 
ship  did  not  come  through  his  mother. 
In  any  case,  it  was  to  Mark's  advantage 
that  he  stood  so  closely  related  to  the 
Son  of  Consolation. 

II.  His  excellent  character.  —  1. 
Fundamentally  good.  Like  his  mother 
he  was  a  Christian  disciple,  having 
probably  been  converted  by  Peter,  who 
afterwards  affectionately  regarded  him 
as  his  son  (1  Peter  v.  13),  though  of 
course  the  term  "  son,"  as  applied  by 
Peter  to  Mark,  may  have  referred  to 


the  service  rendered  by  Mark  to  Peter, 
and  this  Mark  may  not  have  been 
John  Mark,  but  either  an  actual  son 
of  the  apostle's  (Bengel),  or  Mark  the 
evangelist  (Eusebius).  2.  Constitu- 
tionally timid.  As  much  as  this  may 
be  feasibly  inferred  from  his  desertion 
of  Paul  and  Barnabas  at  Perga  (xiii.  13), 
on  account  probably  of  the  hardships 
and  dangers  of  the  way.  Grace  does 
not  all  at  once  revolutionise  a  man's 
natural  temperament.  Indeed,  many 
good  Christians  have  to  struggle  against 
constitutional  infirmities  all  their  lives. 
3.  Ultimately  steadfast.  This  shines 
out  conspicuously  in  his  subsequent 
career.  None  reading  of  his  after 
labours  can  doubt  that  Mark  overcame 
his  youthful  indecision  and  became  a 
splendid  soldier  of  the  cross.  Youthful 
faults  and  indiscretions  should  not  be 
allowed  to  hinder  future  usefulness  or 
progress.  Neither  should  they  be  used 
by  others  to  disparage  later  merit. 

III.  His  honourable  career. — 1.  An 
attendant  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  on 
their  first  missionary  journey  (xiii.  5). 
Decidedly  a  good  beginning,  though  it 
speedily  came  to  a  termination,  for  which 
he  should  not  now  be  too  severely 
judged.  A  colleague  of  Barnabas,  after 
he  and  Paul  had  parted  (xv.  37,  39). 
Barnabas  must  have  discerned  in  him 
elements  of  good  notwithstanding  his 
former  lack  of  fortitude.  3.  A  com- 
panion of  Paul  in  his  imprisonment  at 
Borne  (Col.  iv.  10,  11 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  11  ; 
Philemon  24) ;  so  that  even  Paul  had 
come  to  recognise  his  true  nobility  of 
soul  and  to  set  a  high  value  on  his 
ministerial  and  friendly  assistance.  A 
lesson  that  old  saints  should  not  be  too 
severe  in  judging  the  faults  of  young 
Christians. 


75 


chap.  xiii.       H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


PAET   II. 

THE    CHURCH   OF   CHRIST   AMONG   THE   GENTILES;    OR,   ITS   PRO 
GRESS  FROM  ANTIOCH  TO  ROME— THE  ACTS  OF  PAUL. 

Chapters  xiii.-xxviii. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 
The  First  Missionary  Journey  (Paul  and  Barnabas) — commenced." 

§  1.  Barnabas  and  Saul  at  Antioch;  or,  the  Departure  of  the  First  Gentile 

Missionaries  (vers.  1-3). 
§  2.  The  Conversion  of  Sergius  Paulus;  or,  the  Gospel  in  Cyprus  (vers.  4-12). 
§  3.  A  Sabbath  Day  in  Pisidian  Antioch ;  or,  Paul's  Sermon  in  the  Synagogue 

(vers.  13-43). 
§  4.  A   Second   Sabbath  in  Pisidian  Antioch;   or,  the   Gospel   carried   to   the 

Gentiles  (vers.  44-52). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  In  the  Church  that  was  at  Antioch. — Better  at  or  in  Antioch,  in  or  throughout,  or 
for  the  benefit  of  the  Church,  Kara  having  all  these  different  meanings.  Certain  should  be 
omitted.  Prophets  (see  on  ii.  17)  and  teachers  (1  Cor.  xii.  28). — Named  together  (Rom.  xii.  6  ; 
Eph.  iv.  11),  yet  not  the  same,  though  both  functions  might  be  united  in  one  person — as,  e.g., 
in  Paul  (Gal.  ii.  2;  2  Cor.  xii.  1)  and  John  (Rev.  i.  1,  9).  Barnabas,  named  first,  appears  to 
have  held  at  Antioch  a  position  corresponding  to  that  of  Peter  at  Jerusalem  (Holtzmann). 
Along  with  him  Simeon  and  Lucius  were  prophets.  Manaen  and  Saul.— Most  likely  teachers 
(Holtzmann).  Brought  up  with. — ovvrpo<pos.  Might  mean  educated  along  with  (2  Macs. 
ix.  29),  but  better  rendered  collactaneus,  nourished  at  the  same  breast  (Xen.,  Mem.,  ii.  3,  4). 

Ver.  2.  Ministered  refers  to  the  rites  of  Christian  worship,  as  prayer,  exhortation,  and 
fasting  (Rom.  xv.  27).  They  may  signify  the  prophets  and  teachers,  or  the  congregation  or 
church  in  general.  The  Holy  Ghost  said. — Perhaps,  as  in  xi.  28,  xx.  23,  through  the  lips  of 
the  prophets,  or  by  the  still  small  voice  whispering  to  each  of  the  leaders,  as  in  viii.  29.  The 
work  whereunto  I  have  called  them. — Though  not  stated,  doubtless  understood  by  all  to  be 
that  of  carrying  the  gospel  to  the  heathen  (xiv.  26,  xv.  38),  as  had  already  been  intimated  to 
Saul  at  his  conversion  (ix.  15). 

Ver.  3.  Fasted  and  prayed. —Compare  x.  30,  xiv.  23,  which  show  that  the  two  were 
frequently  practised  in  conjunction  by  both  individuals  and  the  Church.  This  fast  was 
special,  in  preparation  for  the  ordination  of  the  missionaries.  They — i.e.,  the  prophets  and 
teachers — laid  their  hands  on  them,  without  the  co-operation  of  the  Church  members  (against 
Overbeck).  They — i.e.,  the  Church — sent  them — the  missionaries — away — rather,  gave  them 
leave  to  depart,  i.e.,  "released  them  from  their  regular  duties  and  bade  them  *  God-speed  '  " 
(Ramsay).     In  ver.  4  they  are  represented  as  having  been  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Ver.  4.  Seleucia. — "  Civitas  potens,  ssepta  muris  neque  in  barbarum  corrupta  sed  conditoris 
Seleucia  retinens  "  (Tac,  An.,  vi.  42).  The  port  of  Antioch,  three  miles  west  of  the  city  and 
two  hours'  journey  from  the  mouth  of  the  Orontes,  was  founded  almost  contemporaneously 
with  Antioch,  B.C.  300,  by  King  Seleucus  I.  (Nicanor).  The  harbour  is  mentioned  according 
to  Luke's  custom,  xiv.  25,  xvi.  11,  xviii.  18  (Ramsay). 

Ver.  5.  Minister. — Attendant,  or  assistant ;  in  what  capacity  is  not  told. 

Ver.  6.  The  best  MSB.  read  the  whole  island.  They  probably  made  "  a  complete  tour  of 
the  Jewish  communities  in  the  island,  preaching  in  each  synagogue  "  (Ramsay). 

Ver.  7.  The  deputy  of  the  country  should  be  proconsul,  avdviraros.  Long  supposed  that 
Luke  had  here  erred  in  designating  the  governor  of  Cyprus  proconsul,  but  now  recognised 
that  Luke  is  correct  (see  explanation  in  "  Homiletical  Analysis  ").  Bar-jesus  =  son  of  Jesus, 
or  =  Barjesuvan,  son  of  readiness  (Klostermann,  Ramsay  who  for  Elymas  would  read  "Eroifxos). 

Ver.  8.  Elymas. — Arabic  for  "wise"  (like  Turkish  Ulemah),  and  interpreted  by  Luke  as 

276 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xiii. 


equivalent  to  sorcerer  or  magician.  Note.— The  above  story  of  Elymas  is  supposed  (Ba-ur, 
Zeller,  Holtzmann,  and  others)  to  have  been  influenced  by  the  parallel  narrations  about 
Simon  Magus  (viii.  20-24)  and  Ananias  and  Sapphira  (v.  1-10)  ;  but  see  "  Hints  "  on  ver.  8. 

Ver.  9.  Saul,  who  also  is  called  Paul. — That  from  this  point  onward  in  the  narrative  the 
apostle  ceases  to  be  designated  Saul,  and  is  always  called  Paul,  has  been  explained  by  the 
hypothesis  that  the  apostle,  either  from  Sergius  Paulus,  or  his  friends,  received,  or  himself 
adopted,  the  Roman  title  Paul  in  commemoration  of  the  proconsul's  conversion  (Jerome, 
Augustine,  Bengel,  Olshausen,  Meyer,  Ewald)  ;  but  against  this  stand  these  considerations: 
1.  That  Luke  introduces  the  change  of  name  before  the  conversion  is  recorded.  2.  That 
while  customary  for  a  pupil  to  adopt  the  name  of  a  teacher,  it  was  not  usual  for  a  teacher  to 
appropriate  the  name  of  a  pupil.  3.  That  if  Paul  actually  did  assume  the  governor's  name, 
it  might  at  least  look  as  if  he  attached  more  importance  to  the  conversion  of  a  distinguished 
than  to  that  of  an  obscure  person.  Wherefore  the  more  probable  theory  is  that  the  apostle 
originally  had  the  two  names — Saul  among  the  Jews,  and  Paul  among  the  Gentiles  (compare 
John  Mark,  xii.  25  ;  Jesus  Justus,  Col.  iv.  11)— and  that,  as  hitherto,  while  preaching  to  the 
Jews  his  Jewish  name  was  used,  so  henceforth,  when  evangelising  among  the  Gentiles,  his 
Gentile  designation  should  be  employed  (Weizsacker,  Holtzmann,  Wendt,  Lechler,  Hackett, 
Spence,  Ramsay).  The  notion  that  Saul  assumed  the  name  Paul  to  express  his  personal  humility 
is  unlikely  ;  the  suggestion  that  Luke  at  this  point  began  to  use  memoirs  in  which  the  apostle 
was  called  Paul  (Afford)  is  little  better.  Still  less  correct  is  the  hypothesis  that  Luke  only 
invented  the  name  from  Paul's  connection  with  Sergius  (Baur,  Zeller,  Hausrath).  The 
derivation  of  the  name  Paul  from  the  Hebrew  «bD  =  mirabilis,  wonderful,  in  allusion  to 
the  miracle  wrought  by  the  apostle  (Otto,  Zockler),  appears  somewhat  fanciful. 

Ver.  12.  Read  the  proconsul  instead  of  the  deputy  as  above.  Believed. — Baur,  entirely 
without  reason,  thinks  the  conversion  of  the  proconsul  has  "  only  a  very  slight  degree  of 
probability." 

Ver.  13.  Paul  and  his  company. — Note  the  two  changes— first  of  Saul's  name,  which  is 
henceforth  Paul,  and  next  of  Paul's  position  in  the  mission  as  leader  rather  than  as  follower, 
as  principal  rather  than  as  subordinate,  ol  irepi  IlaOA.oj'  (compare  ai  irepl  Ndpdav  /cat  Mapidfi, 
Textus  Receptus).  The  phrase  perhaps  hints  that  Paul  had  other  unnamed  companions 
besides  Barnabas  and  John.  Instead  of  loosed  from  read  having  set  sail  from ;  and  for 
departing  from  them,  having  withdrawn  from  them.  For  the  reasons  which  caused  John 
Mark  to  return  to  Jerusalem,  see  "  Homiletical  Analysis." 

Ver.  14.  They  now  signifies  Paul  and  Barnabas  without  John.  Antioch  of  Pisidia.  — So 
named  by  Strabo.  "The  chief  city  of  inner  Pisidia,  a  Roman  colony,  a  strong  fortress,  the 
centre  of  military  and  civil  administration  in  the  southern  parts  of  the  vast  province  called 
by  the  Romans  Galatia  "  (Ramsay). 

Ver.  15.  The  law  and  the  prophets. — The  higher  critics  say  this  should  have  been  the 
jnophets  and  the  law.  Christ  agrees  with  Luke  (Matt.  xxii.  40).  Men  and  Brethren,  Brethren 
(R.V.),  "Gentlemen,  Brethren"  (Ramsay). 

Ver.  16.  Then  Paul  stood  up. — Dr.  Murphy  thinks  Paul  found  the  occasion  for  his  chrono- 
logical exordium  in  the  lessons  which  he  heard  read  in  the  synagogue,  and  that  these  were — 
the  Parasha,  Exod.  x.  13-16,  xii.  40,  41,  xiii.  3-16,  and  the  Haphtara,  Jer.  xlvi.  13-28  (see  The 
Homiletical  Quarterly,  Oct.  1877,  pp.  490,  491).  Others  (Farrar,  Plumptre,  Ramsay), 
think  the  passages  read  were  Deut.  i.  and  Isa.  i.  Baur  {Paul,  His  Life  and  Works, 
i.,  pp.  104^)  objects  to  the  credibility  of  this  speech  on  the  grounds  (1)  of  its  resemblance 
to  the  speeches  of  Peter,  and  (2)  of  its  lack  of  a  truly  Pauline  character.  But  (1)  why  should 
Paul  not  have  been  as  well  acquainted  with  the  history  of  his  people  as  Peter — both  being 
Jews  ?  and  (2)  how  can  the  speech  be  un-Pauline  when  on  Baur's  own  admission  it  contains 
the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  ?  (vers.  38,  39). 

Ver.  18.  Suffered  He  their  manners  in  the  wilderness. — erpo-rrocpop-qcrev,  the  reading  of  the 
best  MSS.,  though  some  ancient  authorities  read  irpocpocpoprjaeu,  meaning  "  carried  them  as  a 
nurse" — i.e.,  sustained  them  and  cared  for  them.  "  Botli  readings  occur  in  the  LXX.  render- 
ing of  Deut.  i.  31,  to  which  passage  reference  is  evidently  made  here.  .  .  .  But  there  can  be 
no  reason  for  questioning  the  genuineness  of  the  reading  of  the  text "  (Westcott  and  Hort, 
The  New  Testament  in  Greek,  ii.,  Appendix,  94,  95). 

Ver.  19.  The  seven  nations  are  named  in  Deut.  vii.  1.  Divided  their  land  to  them  by  lot 
should  according  to  the  best  MSS.  be  gave  them  their  land  for  an  inheritance,  the  verb 
KaT€K\r)pov6/m.r)(X€v  being  substituted  for  KaTeKKyjpoboTrjaev .  The  former  verb  occurs  only  here, 
and  is  a  translation  of  Deut.  iii.  28  (see  Josh.  xiv.  1-5). 

Ver.  20.  After  that,  or  these  things,  signifies  after  the  conquest  and  occupation.  About  the 
space  of  four  hundred  and  fifty  years. — This  undoubtedly  implies  that  the  interval  of  the 
Judges  was  450  years,  which  agrees  with  the  chronology  of  Josephus  (Ant.,  VIII.  ii.  1, 
X.  viii.  5),  who  gives  592  years  as  the  time  that  elapsed  between  the  Exodus  and  the  build- 
ing of  Solomon's  temple.  Deducting  4  years  of  Solomon's  own  reign,  40  of  David's,  40  of 
Saul's,  25  for  the  leadership  of  Joshua,  and  40  in  the  wilderness—  i.e.,  4  +  40  +  40  +  25  + 

r.    '  277 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   THE  ACTS. 


40  =  149,  the  remainder  is  443  (592-149),  sufficiently  close  an  approximation  for  Paul  to 
put  450  years  as  the  period  of  the  Judges.  This,  however,  does  not  harmonise  with  the 
statement  (1  Kings  viii.)  that  the  building  of  the  Temple  began  in  the  480th  year  after  the 
Exodus,  which  would  give  only  480  -  149  =  331  years  for  the  era  of  the  Judges— a  dis- 
crepancy which  cannot  easily  be  removed.  A  better  reading,  which  connects  about  four 
hundred  and  fifty  years  with  the  preceding  verse  (R.V.),  appears  to  obviate  the  difficulty  by 
making  the  number  450  signify  the  space  of  time  between  the  giving  of  the  land  for  an 
inheritance  and  the  occupation  of  the  land  at  the  conquest — which  space  is  thus  made  up — 
from  the  birth  of  Isaac,  when  it  may  be  assumed  the  promise  was  given,  to  the  birth  of 
Jacob,  60  years  ;  from  Jacob's  birth  to  his  descent  into  Egypt,  130  years  ;  the  sojourn  in 
Egypt,  215  years  ;  from  the  Exodus  to  the  settlement  in  Canaan,  47  years  =  in  all  452  years. 
If  this  reading  (Westcott  and  Hort)  be  adopted,  the  next  clause  will  read,  "  And  after  these 
things  He  gave  them  judges  until  Samuel  the  prophet." 

Ver.  21.  A  man  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  to  which  Paul  also  belonged  (Phil.  iii.  5).  Forty 
years. — The  duration  of  Saul's  reign  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  which  only 
states  that  Ishbosheth,  his  youngest  son  (1  Chron.  viii.  33),  was  forty  years  at  the  time  of 
Saul's  death  (1  Sam.  ii.  10),  and  that  Saul  himself  was  a  young  man  when  he  ascended  the 
throne  (2  Sam.  ix.  2).  Josephus  (Ant*,  VI.  xiv.  9)  speaks  of  Saul  as  having  reigned  eighteen 
years  before  and  twenty-two  years  after  Samuel's  death. 

Ver.  22.  I  have  found  David  the  son  of  Jesse  a  man  after  Mine  own  heart,  which  shall  fulfil, 
or  who  shall  do,  all  My  will,  or  wills. — The  first  clause  is  cited  from  Psalm  lxxxix.  20,  which 
has  "  My  servant,"  and  omits  "the  son  of  Jesse  " ;  the  second  is  taken  from  1  Sara.  xiii.  14, 
where  David  in  comparison  with  Saul  is  described  as  one  who  was  faithful  to  Jehovah's  com- 
mandments and  ordinances.  The  third  clause  found  in  Tsa.  xliv.  28,  with  reference  to  Cyrus, 
may  be  held  as  included  in  the  words  "  My  servant,"  spoken  of  David.  Alford  thinks  these 
citations  form  "  a  strong  presumption  that  we  have  Paul's  speeches  verbatim  as  delivered  by 
him,  and  no  subsequent  general  statement  of  what  he  said,  in  which  case  the  citations  would 
have  been  corrected  by  the  sacred  text "  ;  though  Plumptre  arrives  at  the  opposite  conclusion, 
that  "it  is  possible  we  have,  as  it  were,  but  the  precis  of  a  fuller  statement."  Schwanbeck 
speaks  of  an  old  biography  of  Barnabas,  Olshausen  of  a  special  missionary  report  drawn  up 
by  Barnabas  and  Saul,  Bleek  of  an  independent  document,  Zockler  of  an  old  separate  account 
by  an  unknown  author  as  the  original  source  of  Luke's  information. 

Vers.  23,  24.  The  promise  was  made  not  to  David  only,  but  to  the  fathers  (ver.  32).  The 
names  of  Jesus  and  John  were  widely  known  among  the  Jews  of  tie  Dispersion.  His  coming 
meant  His  entrance  upon  His  public  ministry. 

Ver.  25.  Fulfilled  should  be  was  fulfilling.  Whom  think  ye  that  I  am  T — Better,  what 
suppose  ye  me  to  be  ?  The  question,  not  found  in  the  gospel  accounts  of  John's  ministry,  is  yet 
virtually  implied  in  Matt.  iii.  11  ;  John  i.  20,  21.  The  rendering,  He  whom  ye  suppose  me  to 
be  I  am  not  (Calvin,  Luther,  Grotius,  Kuinoel,  Holtzmann),  is  not  so  good.  But  behold,  etc. 
are  John's  words  in  Luke  iii.  16. 

Ver.  27.  Because  they  knew  Him  not,  nor  yet  the  voices  of  the  prophets.  —The  inhabitants 
of  Jerusalem  and  their  rulers  failed  to  recognise  who  Christ  was  because  they  misunderstood 
their  own  prophetic  Scriptures. 

Ver.  28.  No  cause  of  death  in  Him. — The  Sanhedrim  pronounced  Jesus  guilty  of  blasphemy, 
which  involved  a  capital  sentence  (Matt.  xxvi.  66),  but  they  were  unable  to  establish  the 
accusation  except  by  extorting  a  declaration  from  His  own  lips  (Matt.  xxvi.  60).  In  all  other 
respects  His  judges  were  constrained  to  acknowledge  His  innocence  (Matt,  xxvii.  24;  Luke 
xxiii.  22). 

Ver.  29.  They  laid  Him  in  a  tomb. — His  disciples — in  particular  Kicodemus  and  Joseph  of 
Arimathea  (John  xix.  30) — did.  Paul  did  not  deem  it  needful  to  discriminate  the  individuals 
by  whom  the  interment  of  Christ  was  carried  out ;  yet  the  statement  is  literally  accurate, 
since  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  were  both  rulers. 

Ver.  31.  Them  which  came  up  with  Him  from  Galilee  were  the  apostles. 

Ver.  33.  The  second  psalm  is  the  preferable  reading,  the  first  psalm,  found  in  Western 
MSS.,  having  been  probably  inserted  as  a  correction  by  a  Western  scribe  who  had  been 
accustomed  to  read  the  first  and  second  psalms  as  one  (Westcott  and  Hort,  The  New  Testa- 
ment in  Greek,  ii.  95,  Appendix),  or  who  regarded  the  first  psalm  merely  as  an  introduction 
to  the  rest.  The  allusion  in  the  psalm  is  (here  as  in  Heb.  i.  51)  not  to  the  incarnation,  but 
to  the  resurrection  and  exaltation  of  Jesus  (compare  Rom.  i.  4). 

Vers.  34-37.  The  sure  mercies  of  David  should  be  the  holy  things  of  David,  the  sure — i.e.,  I 
will  give  to  you  the  holy  things  of  David  (which  have  been  promised,  Isa.  lv.  3,  and) 
which  are  sure  ;  one  of  which  holy  and  sure  things  was  the  promise  that  God's  Holy  One 
should  not  see  corruption,  a  promise  which  could  not  apply  to  David,  who,  after  having 
served  his  own  generation  by  the  will  of  God,  or  after  having  in  his  own  generation  served 
the  will  of  God,  fell  on  sleep,  or  by  the  will  of  God  fell  on  sleep,  and  was  laid  unto  his  fathers 
— an  expression  generally  distinguished  from  burial,  and  implying  the  existence  of  the  soul 

278 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xnt. 


in  a  future  state  (Gen.  xxv.  8,  xxxv.  29  ;  2  Kings  xxii.  20)— and  saw  corruption.  Christ  who 
had  been  raised  from  the  dead  saw  no  corruption  (compare  ii.  25-33). 

Ver.  41.  Behold,  ye  despisers,  etc. — Taken  from  Hab.  i.  5,  where  it  is  used  with  reference 
to  an  approaching  Chaldean  invasion,  this  citation  follows  very  closely  the  LXX.,  but  agrees 
essentially  with  the  Hebrew.  For  "  among  the  nations  "  in  Hebrew  the  LXX.  read  "  des- 
pisers," and  for  "  wonder  marvellously,"  "  wonder  and  perish."  Paul  followed  the  Septuagint, 
either  because  it  was  best  known,  or  because  it  was  sufficiently  accurate  for  his  purpose,  or, 
because  he  believed  it  to  correctly  render  the  spirit  of  the  ancient  prediction. 

Ver.  42.  The  more  correct  reading  of  this  verse  is  given  in  the  E.V. :  "  And  as  they,  Paul 
and  Barnabas  (Hackett,  Lechler)  rather  than  the  congregation  (Alford),  went"  or  were  going, 
"  out,  they"  the  rulers  probably  (Hackett  and  Lechler),  rather  than  the  congregation  (Alford), 
"  besought  that  these  words  might  be  spoken  to  them  the  next  Sabbath  day"  eh  t6  fxera^d 
o-&j3(3aToi>,  not  during  the  middle  of  the  week,  but  on  (lit.  unto,  as  the  limit)  the  Sabbath 
between  the  days,  as  ver.  44  shows. 

Ver.  43.  For  congregation  read  synagogue.  The  Jews  and  religious  proselytes  represented 
two  distinct  classes. 

Ver.  45.  Contradicting  and  blaspheming. — The  best  MSS.  omit  u  contradicting  "  (Lachmann, 
Westcott  and  Hort) ;  but  as  it  is  neither  superfluous  nor  Hebraistic  (Hackett),  and  defines 
more  exactly  the  nature  of  the  opposition  (Zockler),  it  may  be  retained. 

Ver.  46.  It  was  necessary. — Compare  Luke  xxiv.  47  ;  Rom.  i.  16,  ii.  10. 

Ver.  47.  I  have  set  thee  to  be  a  light  of  the  Gentiles. — This  citation  from  Isa.  xlix.  6 
(LXX.)  represented  the  apostolic  mission  as  a  continuation  of  Christ's  (see  Luke  ii.  32). 

Ver.  48.  Ordained  to  eternal  life. — Terayfievoi  et's  fa>)v  aldbviov.  Cannot  be  rendered — those 
who  believed  were  appointed  to  eternal  life,  or  those  who  were  disposed,  i.e.,  inclined,  to 
eternal  life  believed.  The  words  mean  what  they  say — "  as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal 
life  believed  "  (Calvin,  Kuinoel,  Olshausen,  Meyer,  Winer,  De  Wette,  Hackett,  Spence,  and 
others) — the  "  ordained  to  eternal  life  "  being  those  who  are  "  chosen  "  (Eph.  i.  4),  and 
"  foreordained  "  (Rom.  viii.  29),  though  it  need  not  be  doubted  that  this  Divine  "  choosing," 
"  electing,"  "  foreordaining,"  does  not  destroy,  but  is  compatible  with  and  realises  itself 
through  the  complete  freedom  of  the  human  will. 

Ver.  49.  Implies  a  certain  lapse  of  time ;  how  long,  uncertain. 

Ver.  50.  The  devout  and  honourable  women,  or  devout,  honourable  women — i.e.,  devout 
women  of  honourable  estate  (R.V.) — were  Gentile  females  who  had  embraced  Judaism  (see 
on  xvii.  4).  The  influence  here  attributed  to  women  "is  in  perfect  accord  with  the  manners 
of  the  country.  In  Athens,  or  an  Ionian  city,  it  would  have  been  impossible  "  (Ramsay).  The 
chief  men  of  the  city  were  probably  their  husbands  or  kinsmen. 

Ver.  51.  Shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet  (compare  xviii.  6),  as  directed  by  Christ  (Matt. 
x.  14),  for  a  testimony  against  their  persecutors  (Luke  ix.  5). 

Ver.  52.  The  disciples — i.e.,  at  Antioch — were  filled  with  joy,  notwithstanding  the  persecu- 
tion which  raged  against  them  (xiv.  22). 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—3. 

The  Church  at  Antioch ;  or,  the  Designation  and  Dispatch  of  the  First 
Missionaries. 

I.  The  names  of  the  missionaries. — 1.  Barnabas.  Originally  called  Joses. 
Styled  Barnabas,  meaning  Son  of  Consolation  or  of  Exhortation,  either  from 
his  sympathy  or  from  his  eloquence,  or  perhaps  from  both.  A  native  of  Cyprus, 
a  Levite,  who  stood  high  in  the  esteem  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  on  account 
of  his  self-sacrificing  liberality,  and  who  had  lately  arrived  in  Antioch  on  a 
mission  from  the  mother  Church  in  the  metropolis  (iv.  36,  37,  xi.  22,  which  see). 
2.  Saul,  a  native  of  Tarsus,  a  scholar  of  Gamaliel,  a  participator  in  the  murder 
of  Stephen,  a  persecutor  of  Christians,  a  convert  of  Jesus,  a  powerful  evangelist, 
recently  introduced  to  the  Church  at  Antioch  by  Barnabas  (vii.  58,  viii.  1-3, 
ix.,  xi.  25,  26,  which  see). 

II.  Their  standing  in  the  Church  at  Antioch. — 1.  Their  offices.  Prophets  and 
teachers.  All  prophets  were  teachers,  though  all  teachers  were  not  prophets. 
A  prophet  was  one  who  authoritatively  uttered  Divine  communications,  whereas 
a  teacher  was  one  who  had  the  gift  of  teaching  and  explaining  what  the  prophet 
uttered  (see  1  Cor.  xii.  28;  Eph.  iv.  11).  Both  offices  were  held  by  Barnabas 
and  Saul,  though  Saul  and  Manaen  it  has  been  thought  (Besser)  were  designed 
to  be   regarded  as  teachers;    Barnabas,  Simeon,   and  Lucius  as  prophets  (see 

279 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


"Critical  Remarks").  2.  Their  colleagues.  (1)  Simeon,  called  Niger,  and  so 
distinguished  from  both  Simon  Peter  and  Simon  the  Canaanite.  Otherwise 
unknown,  though  probably  a  Jew  who  received  the  Roman  appellation  from  the 
Gentiles.  Whether  a  native  of  Africa  who  had  become  a  proselyte  (Alford) 
cannot  be  told.  (2)  Lucius  of  Cyrene.  Supposed  by  some  to  have  been  the 
writer  of  the  Acts  (see  i.  1),  and  by  others  with  greater  likelihood  Lucius, 
Paul's  kinsman  (Rom.  xvi.  21).  On  the  place  of  his  birth  see  ii.  10.  (3)  Manaen 
=  Menahem  (2  Kings  xv.  14)  occurs  only  here.  Whether  he  had  simply  been 
brought  up  with,  i.e.,  educated  along  with,  Herod  the  tetrarch,  a  son  of  Herod 
the  Great,  an  uncle  of  Herod  Agrippa,  the  murderer  of  John  the  Baptist 
(Matt.  xiv.  11),  and  the  derider  of  our  Lord  (Luke  xxiii.  11),  or  nursed  with 
him  at  the  same  breast,  cannot  be  decided  by  expositors.  The  former  notion 
(Calvin,  Grotius,  Baumgarten,  and  others)  derives  support  from  the  circumstance 
that  it  was  "  common  for  persons  of  rank  to  associate  other  children  with  their 
own  for  the  purpose  of  sharing  their  amusements  and  studies,  and  by  their 
example  serving  to  excite  them  to  greater  emulation"  (Hackett) ;  the  latter 
(Kuinoel,  Olshausen,  Tholuck,  and  others)  might  have  easily  occurred  if 
Manaen's  mother  had  been  Herod's  nurse.  And  this  is  not  unlikely  if  Manaen's 
father  or  grandfather  was  the  Essene  prophet  mentioned  by  Josephus  (Ant,  XT. 
x.  5),  who  in  the  early  youth  of  Herod  the  Great  foretold  his  future  elevation  to 
the  throne. 

III.  Their  call  to  be  missionaries. — 1.  To  whom  given.  (1)  Without  question 
inwardly  to  the  missionaries  themselves.  The  narrative  (ver.  2)  seems  to 
indicate  that  Barnabas  and  Saul  had  already  become  conscious  of  an  inward 
prompting  to  undertake  a  Gentile  mission.  Without  this  it  might  have  been 
difficult  to  persuade  them  to  undertake  so  arduous  an  enterprise  ;  with  this  their 
path  of  duty  would  be  immeasurably  clearer.  No  man  should  enter  on  the  office 
of  a  minister  or  missionary  without  an  inward  conviction  that  he  is  called  of 
God  (Heb.  v.  4).  (2)  As  certainly  in  outward  form  to  the  Church,  without 
whose  authorisation  the  evangelists  should  not  proceed.  The  work  of  carrying 
the  gospel  into  regions  beyond  may  be  executed  by  private  individuals,  but  the 
duty  of  sending  the  gospel  into  all  the  world  rests  with  the  Church  in  its  cor- 
porate capacity.  Hence  ambassadors  should  be  sent  abroad  in  its  name  and 
with  its  sanction.  Nor  should  private  individuals  readily  regard  themselves  as 
called  to  be  ministers  or  missionaries,  if  they  cannot  obtain  the  concurrence  of 
the  Church.  2.  When  given.  While  they,  the  prophets  and  teachers,  ministered 
to  the  Lord  and  fasted.  Whether  by  themselves  or  in  company  with  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Church  is  not  stated ;  but  this  may  be  inferred,  that  either  the 
whole  body  of  the  Church  or  its  leaders  were  at  this  time  seeking  heavenly 
light  and  guidance  on  this  very  point,  the  carrying  of  the  gospel  into  regions 
beyond.  When  God  desires  to  stir  His  people  up  to  enter  on  some  "  forward 
movement "  for  the  glory  of  His  name  and  the  extension  of  His  cause  and 
kingdom,  He  usually  pours  out  upon  them  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  supplication. 
3.  By  whom  given.  By  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  invisible  but  ever-present  and 
Divine  representative  of  Jesus  Christ,  whom  Christ  promised  to  send  as  His 
Church's  teacher  and  guide  after  He  Himself  had  withdrawn  His  bodily  presence 
(John  xiv.  16,  17,  xv.  26,  xvi.  7-14).  The  same  Spirit  still  must  call  forth  the 
Church's  ministers  and  missionaries.  4.  In  what  form  given.  (1)  To  the  mis- 
sionaries themselves,  probably,  in  a  clear  presentation  to  their  minds  of  the  claims 
of  the  heathen  world,  and  a  strong  conviction  wrought  within  their  hearts  that 
they  should  yield  to  those  claims  by  going  forth  as  messengers  of  the  cross.  {2)  To 
the  Church  by  a  still  small  voice,  probably,  which  simultaneously  spoke  in  each 
prophet's  and  teacher's  heart,  and  seemed  to  say,  "  Separate  now  for  Me 
Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the  work  whereunto  I  have  called  them  " — the  work  not 

280 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xiii. 


being  mentioned  because  it  was  understood,  either  as  having  formed  the  subject 
of  their  thoughts  and  the  object  of  their  prayers,  or  as  being  universally  recog- 
nised in  the  Church  that  the  Spirit's  office  was  to  organise  and  extend  the 
kingdom  of  Christ. 

IV.  Their  ordination  to  the  missionary  office. — 1.  By  whom  ordained.  (1)  By 
the  whole  body  of  the  Church.  Whoever  the  agent,  the  act  was  that  of  the 
entire  Christian  community.  (2)  By  the  prophets  and  teachers.  Whe.ther 
others  besides  these  participated  in  the  solemnities  of  the  occasion,  not  being 
stated,  will  be  differently  replied  to  by  different  readers  and  interpreters. 
2.  How  ordained.  (1)  By  fasting  and  prayer.  In  these  religious  services  the 
entire  body  of  Christian  people  may  have  taken,  and  probably  did  take,  part. 
(2)  By  laying  on  of  hands.  This  symbolical  rite  was  most  likely  performed  by 
the  Church's  leaders,  the  prophets  and  teachers  ;  but  whether  by  all  or  only  by 
representatives  cannot  be  decided.  3.  To  what  ordained.  Not  to  the  work  of 
the  ministry,  since  Paul  was  a  minister  already  (Gal.  i.  1),  nor  to  the  apostle- 
ship  (Lightfoot),  since  "  the  apostle  was  always  appointed  by  God,  not  by  the 
Church  "  (Ramsay),  but  to  the  special  business  of  carrying  the  gospel  to  the 
Gentiles.  The  mission-field,  the  high  place  of  honour  in  the  Christian  Church, 
calls  for  men  of  the  clearest  intellect,  the  largest  heart,  and  the  bravest  spirit — 
in  short,  for  men  of  the  type  of  Barnabas  and  Saul. 

V.  Their  departure  from  Antioch.—  Simply  told,  "  they,"  the  Christians  at 
Antioch,  "  sent  them,"  Barnabas  and  Saul,  away  (see  Critical  Remarks).  1.  On 
a  holy  errand.  To  carry  the  light  of  truth  and  life  into  darkened  understandings 
and  benighted  hearts,  to  proclaim  the  message  of  salvation  to  a  losfc  and  ruined 
world,  to  bring  all  nations  to  the  obedience  of  the  faith  (Rom.  i.  5).  An  errand 
more  sublime  imagination  cannot  well  conceive.  2.  With  fervent  prayers.  Com- 
mending them  to  heaven  for  protection  on  their  journeys,  for  assistance  in  their 
labours,  for  success  in  their  enterprise.  3.  In  hope  of  a  triumphant  return. 
Looking  forward  doubtless  to  the  time  when  those  who  were  setting  forth  would 
come  back  with  tidings  of  what  great  things  God  had  clone  by  their  hands 
(compare  Psalm  cxxvi.  6),  which  they  did  (xiv.  27). 

Learn. — 1.  That  a  Church  may  consist  of  different  congregations.  2.  That  in 
the  Church  exist  various  orders  of  office-bearers.  3.  That  the  presiding  person- 
ality in  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  That  no  one  can 
legitimately  exercise  office  in  the  Church  without  the  Spirit's  call.  5.  That 
fasting  and  prayer  prepare  the  human  soul  for  the  Spirit's  communications. 
6.  That  the  Church  of  Christ  should  ever  regard  itself  as  a  great  missionary 
society.  7.  That  the  Church  should  follow  with  its  prayers  those  who  represent 
it  in  mission-fields. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1-3.  The  Church  at  Antioch  a  IV.    Its   doctrine   was   evangelical, 

True  Church.  consisting  of  the  tenets  of  the  gospel. 

I.  Its  chief  president  was  the  Holy  V.  Its  worship  was  scriptural — 
Ghost.  fasting  and  prayer. 

II.  Its  ministers  were  various. —  VI.  Its  spirit  was  missionary — it 
Prophets,  teachers,  missionaries  (pos-  sent  forth  the  first  evangelists  to  the 
sibly  elders  had  not  yet  been  appointed,      heathen. 

though  already  they  existed  in  Jerusa- 
lem) (xi.  30).  Vers.    2,    3.    The   Indispensable   Re- 

III.  Its  membership  was  mixed —  quirements  of  a  True  Minister  or 
not  confined  to  one  class,  but  composed  Missionary. 

of  Jews  and  Gentiles.  I.   A  call  from  the  Holy  Ghost. 

281 


CHAP.    XIII. 


110  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY. •    THE  ACTS. 


II.  Ordination  from  his  brethren. 

III.  Recognition  by  the  Church. 

IV.  A  definite  sphere  of  labour. 

Ver.  3.  The  Best  Travelling  A  ttendance 
for  a  Missionary  on  his  Departure. 

I.  The  Divine  call  concerning  him. 
II.  The  Spirit's  impulse  within  him. 

III.  The  Church's  prayers  behind 
him. 

IV.  The  sighing  of  the  heathen 
world  before  him. — Geroh. 

Vers.  1-3.  The  Forward  Movement 
at  Antioch. 

I.  The  contemplated  character  of 
this  movement. — Not  the  consolidation 
of  the  Church's  own  membership,  the 
elaboration  of  the  Church's  worship, 
the  system atisation  of  the  Church's 
doctrine,  the  development  of  the 
Church's  resources,  the  completion  of 
the  Church's  order — all  of  which  were 
praiseworthy  objects  ;  but  the  exten- 
sion of  the  gospel  throughout  the 
heathen  world — the  greatest  movement 
that  can  occupy  the  thoughts  of 
Christ's  people. 

II.  The  felt  necessity  for  the  move- 
ment.— Hardly  remarkable  that  this 
wTas  first  recognised  not  in  Jerusalem, 
the  city  of  exclusive  theocratic  privi- 
lege, of  religious  conservatism,  of 
haughty  spiritual  pride,  of  compara- 
tive poverty,  but  in  Antioch,  a  city 
of  mixed  population,  of  intellectual 
liberality,  of  commercial  enterprise,  of 
large  wealth. 

III.  The  earnest  preparation  for  the 
movement. — In  proportion  to  its  vast 


importance  and  herculean  difficulty, 
it  required  to  be  gone  about  with 
caution.  Not  only  had  fitting  agents 
to  be  selected  and  proper  fields  to  be 
marked  out  for  their  labours,  but  the 
approbation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and 
the  concurrence  of  the  Church  had  to 
be  secured.  Accordingly  it  was  not 
surprising  that  the  Church's  leaders 
gave  the  whole  scheme  prolonged  and 
serious  consideration,  and  in  company 
with  the  Church's  members,  it  may  be 
supposed,  spread  the  matter  out  before 
the  Lord. 

IV.  The  actual  initiation  of  the 
movement. — This  was  done  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  whose  province  alone  it 
was  to  sanction  such  a  forward  step, 
and  without  whose  approbation  the 
Church  authorities  would  not  have  felt 
warranted  to  stir.  Only  when  they 
got  His  signal  could  they  see  their  way 
to  advance ;  when  that  came  they 
could  no  longer  hold  back. 

V.  The  practical  execution  of  the 
movement. — This  was  entrusted  to 
Barnabas  and  Saul,  than  whom  no 
better  evangelists  have  ever  unfurled 
the  banner  of  the  cross.  Were  all 
heathen  missions  conducted  by  two 
such  captains,  fewer  failures  and  more 
successes  would  be  recorded.  Barnabas 
and  Saul  present  the  types  of  men  the 
Church  should  seek  for  her  mis- 
sionaries. 

VI.  The  faithful  historian  of  the 
movement. — Not  Lucius  of  Cyrene,  but 
Luke,  the  beloved  physician,  who  in 
his  unadorned  and  artless  chronicles 
has  supplied  an  admirable  model  for 
missionaries'  reports. 


HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses   4—12. 

Barnabas  and  Saul  in  Cyprus  ;  or,  the  Commencement  of  the  First  Missionary 
Journey. 

I.  The  journey  to  Cyprus. — 1.  By  land  to  Seleucia.  This  town,  sixteen  miles 
distant  from  Antioch,  to  which  it  served  as  a  seaport,  stood  upon  the  coast  five 
miles  north  of  the  mouth  of  the  Orontes.  "  Seleucia  united  the  two  characters  of 
a  fortress  and  a  seaport.  It  was  situated  on  a  rocky  eminence,  which  is  the 
southern  extremity  of  a  range  of  hills  projecting  from  Mount  Amanus.  .  .  .  The 
harbour  and  mercantile  suburb  were  on  level  ground  towards  the  west,"  and 
were  protected  by  "  strong  artificial  defences  "  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  The  Life 
and  Epistles  of  Paul,  i.  132).      "In  addition  to  splendid  buildings  and  temples, 

282  ,  j 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xm. 


the  city  possessed  other  advantages.  The  climate  was  excellent,  and  the  soil 
around  uncommonly  fruitful.  Its  geographical  position,  before  the  gate  of 
Antioch,  between  Cyprus,  Cilicia,  Syria,  and  Phoenicia,  made  it  a  seat  of 
extraordinarily  lively  and  profitable  commerce"  (Hertzberg  in  Riehin,  art. 
"  Seleucia  ").  "A  village  called  Antakia  and  interesting  ruins  point  out  the 
ancient  site  "  (Hackett).  2.  By  sea  to  Cyprus.  Conybeare  and  Howson  offer 
four  reasons  why  the  missionaries  turned  in  the  first  instance  towards  this  island. 
It  was  separated  by  no  great  distance  from  the  mainland  of  Syria ;  a  vessel 
sailing  from  Seleucia  to  Salamis  was  not  difficult  to  procure,  especially  in  the 
summer  season ;  Cyprus  was  the  native  land  of  Barnabas,  a  consideration  which 
would  naturally  weigh  with  the  Son  of  Consolation  (compare  John  i.  41,  42, 
xi.  5) ;  and  some  of  the  Cypriotes  were  already  Christians  (xi.  20).  As  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  not  said  to  have  prescribed  the  route,  these  suggestions  may  serve  as  an 
explanation  of  the  missionaries'  movements,  at  least  till  better  can  be  found. 

II.  The  work  in  Salamis. — 1.  The  city  and  its  inhabitants.  Situated  near  the 
modern  town  of  Famagousta,  the  ancient  city  stood  "  on  a  bight  of  the  coast  to 
the  north  of  the  river  Pedia3iis."  "  A  large  city  by  the  sea  shore,  a  widespread 
plain  with  cornfields  and  orchards,  and  the  blue  distance  of  mountains  beyond, 
composed  the  view  on  which  the  eyes  of  Barnabas  and  Saul  rested  when  they 
came  to  anchor  in  the  bay  of  Salamis"  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  i.  135).  "When 
the  apostles  stepped  ashore  upon  one  of  the  ancient  piers,  of  which  the  ruins 
are  still  visible,  it  was  a  busy  and  important  place,  and  we  cannot  doubt  that 
Barnabas  would  find  many  to  greet  him  in  his  old  home  "  (Farrar,  The  Life  and 
Work  of  St.  Paul,  i.  347).  2.  The  synagogues  and  their  worshippers.  Since 
there  were  "  synagogues,"  the  Jewish  population  must  have  been  considerable  • 
and  one  can  easily  understand  how  "  the  unparalleled  productiveness  of  Cyprus, 
and  its  trade  in  fruit,  wine,  flax,  and  honey,  would  naturally  attract  them  to  the 
mercantile  port"  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  i.  135).  Hitherto  it  had  been  Saul's 
custom  to  begin  his  work  by  visiting  the  synagogues ;  and  from  this  practice, 
neither  he  nor  Barnabas  as  yet  departed.  3.  The  missionaries  and  their  occupa- 
tion. Whatever  else  they  did,  their  time  was  mainly  spent 'in  preaching  or 
proclaiming  the  word  of  God  to  their  fellow7 -worshippers  in  these  synagogues, 
who  would  of  course  be  Jews  with  a  mixture  perhaps  of  heathen  proselytes. 
(On  synagogue  worship,  see  ver.  15.)  What  measure  of  success  they  obtained  is 
not  reported.  4.  Their  attendant  and  his  duties.  By  name  John  Mark  (see  on 
xii.  25) ;  but  whether  he  assisted  Barnabas  and  Saul  in  preaching  and  baptising, 
or  confined  his  attention  to  secular  matters,  such  as  making  arrangements  for 
the  travel,  lodging,  and  sustenance  of  the  company,  cannot  be  determined.  That 
John  Mark  is  introduced  in  this  "curiously  incidental"  way,  was  probably 
designed,  in  view  of  what  was  to  happen  in  Pamphylia,  to  show  that  "  he  was 
not  essential  to  the  expedition,  had  not  been  selected  by  the  Spirit,  had  not 
been  formally  delegated  by  the  Church  of  Antioch,  but  was  an  extra  hand  taken 
by  Barnabas  and  Saul  on  their  own  responsibility." — Ramsay,  St.  Paul  the 
Traveller,  etc.,  p.  71. 

III.  The  arrival  at  Paphos. — 1.  The  town.  New  Paphos,  on  the  west  coast 
of  the  island,  a  hundred  miles  from  Salamis ;  then  a  bustling  haven,  the  city  of 
Aphrodite  (Venus),  whose  infamous  rites  long  continued  to  be  celebrated  in  its 
temple,  and  the  residence  of  the  Roman  proconsul ;  now  a  decayed  and 
mouldering  village,  the  modern  Bajfa.  2.  The  governor.  (1)  His  name— 
Sergius  Paulus,  of  whom  nothing  more  is  known.  Galen  mentions  a  Sergius 
Paulus  who  flourished  more  than  a  century  later,  and  was  distinguished 
for  philosophy ;  while  Pliny  (a.d.  90)  names  a  Sergius  Paulus  as  his  chief 
authority  for  some  facts  in  natural  history  which  he  relates,  and  in  particular 
for  two  connected  with  Cyprus.     "  A  Greek  inscription  of  Soloi,  on  the  north 

283 


CHAP.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


coast  of  Cyprus,  is  dated  in  the  proconsulship  of  Panlus,  who  probably  is  the 
same  governor  that  played  a  part  in  the  strange  and  interesting  scene  to  be 
described "  (Ramsay,  St.  Paul  the  Traveller  and  the  Roman  Citizen,  p.  74). 
(2)  His  character — " prudent,"  or  "a  man  of  understanding."  One  who  in- 
termeddled with  all  knowledge,  a  philosopher  like  his  namesake  above 
referred  to.  Out  of  this  thirst  for  learning  may  have  arisen  his  acquaintance 
with  Bar-jesus ;  it  was  a  better  proof  of  the  sincerity  of  his  desire  for  en- 
lightenment that  he  summoned  Barnabas  and  Saul  to  his  palace  to  hear  from 
them  the  word  of  God.  (3)  His  office — "deputy  of  the  country,"  or  rather, 
proconsul.  That  Sergius  Paulus  should  have  been  so  styled  was  formerly 
regarded  as  an  error  on  the  part  of  Luke,  but  is  now  proved  to  be  in  ac- 
cordance with  absolute  historical  accuracy  (see  "Critical  Remarks ").  3.  The 
sorcerer.  (1)  His  personal  designation.  Bar-jesus,  the  son  of  Jesus  (see 
"  Critical  Remarks ").  (2)  His  professional  title.  A  certain  magician. 
He  had  assumed  the  appellation  Elymas  (from  the  same  root  as  the  Turkish 
Ulemah),  meaning,  "the  wise  man"  or  wizard.  (3)  His  correct  description. 
A  false  prophet.  "  He  was  a  fortune-teller,  but  his  art  was  an  imposition  " 
(Hackett).  (4)  His  national  derivation.  A  Jew.  Hackett  thinks  he  may  have 
been  born  in  Arabia  or  lived  there  for  some  time. 

IV.  The  encounter  with  Bar-jesus. — 1.  The  conduct  of  the  sorcerer.  He  "with- 
stood Barnabas  and  Saul,  seeking  to  turn  away  the  deputy  or  proconsul  from 
the  faith."  A  statement  which  shows — (1)  That  the  governor's  reception  of 
the  apostles  took  place  not  in  private,  but  in  public,  at  least  to  the  extent  of 
being  in  presence  of  the  inmates  of  his  household,  including  Elymas,  who  was 
apparently  established  in  the  service  of  Sergius.  (2)  That  the  exposition  of  the 
gospel  given  by  the  apostles  had  made  a  manifest  impression  on  the  governor's 
heart,  which  promised  to  result  in  his  conversion.  (3)  That  the  false  prophet 
interposed  with  a  view  of  preventing  his  master  and  patron  from  yielding  to  the 
eloquence  of  the  missionaries.  How  Elymas  sought  to  weaken  the  force  of  the 
apostles'  preaching  and  deaden  its  influence  upon  Sergius  is  not  told,  but  it  is 
probable  "  he  spared  neither  argument  nor  insult  in  his  endeavour  to  persuade 
Sergius  of  the  absurdity  of  the  new  faith  "  (Farrar) — perhaps  reviling  Christ  as 
a  crucified  malefactor,  and  denouncing  Him  as  an  enemy  of  Moses.  2.  The  action 
of  Saul.  Significant  that  not  Barnabas  but  Saul  steps  into  the  arena  against 
Elymas  and  for  the  rescue  of  Sergius — a  heroic  deed  which,  by  its  success,  for 
ever  established  Saul's  precedence  over  Barnabas,  and,  as  some  conjecture,  won 
for  him  his  new  and  now  world-renowned  name  of  Paul  (see,  however,  "Critical 
Remarks").  (1)  The  secret  impulse  which  pushed  Saul  into  the  foreground  came 
from  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  then  presided  and  still  presides  in  the  Church,  who 
then  selected  and  still  selects  His  agents,  and  who  then  directed  as  He  still  directs 
their  steps.  "  Saul,  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  (2)  The  searching  glance  with 
which  Saul  transfixed  the  wizard  (compare  iii.  4)  showed  how  completely  the 
wizard's  character  and  motives  were  understood,  and  how  indignantly  the 
apostle's  soul  flamed  out  against  them.  Saul's  eyes  were  illumined  by  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord,  which  searcheth  all  things  (1  Cor.  ii.  10).  Ramsay  finds  in  the  power 
of  the  apostle's  eye  an  indirect  proof  that  the  apostle's  "  stake  in  the  flesh  " 
was  not  "  impaired  vision "  (Ibid.,  p.  97).  (3)  The  denunciation  uttered  by 
the  apostle  must  have  told  the  detected  impostor  that  his  career  of  wickedness 
was  at  an  end.  In  three  terrific  ejaculations  the  apostle  revealed  to  him  his 
depraved  character,  telling  him  first  that  he  was  "  full  of  all  guilt  and  of  all 
villainy,"  deceit  and  rascality,  cunning  and  criminality;  next,  that  instead  of 
being  a  Bar-jesus — i.e.,  a  son  of  the  salvation  of  Jehovah — he  was  a  veritable  son 
of  the  devil  (compare  John  viii.  44) ;  and  thirdly,  that  he  was  an  enemy  of  all 
righteousness,  thus  making  him  "equal  to  the  father  of  lies"  (Stier),  "pierced 

284 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.      chap,  xiii. 


through  with  hatred  against  the  good  "  (Besser).  In  a  short,  sharp  question  the 
apostle  unfolded  to  him  the  wickedness  of  his  present  behaviour  :  "Wilt  thou  not 
cease  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord  ?  "  "  The  ways  of  the  Lord  aim  directly 
and  rightly  at  the  salvation  of  all  men  (Deut.  xxxii.  4 ;  Hosea  xiv.  9),  and  the 
two  preachers  of  the  gospel  have  just  explained  to  the  Romish  governor  these 
ways  ;  .  .  .  and  Paul  sees  that  the  false  prophet  will  not  cease  to  crook  the 
straight  paths  of  the  Lord  and  to  turn  them  away  from  Sergius  Paulus  that  he 
may  not  believe  and  become  blessed "  (Besser).  (4)  The  appalling  judgment 
invoked  upon  the  sorcerer — "  Behold,  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  thee,"  etc. — 
was  a  richly  merited  retribution  for  his  heinous  wickedness  in  having  sought  to 
prevent  the  salvation  of  a  soul.  Yet  was  it  mingled  with  fourfold  mercy.  In 
the  first  place  it  was  a  bodily  infliction,  whereas  it  might  have  fallen  on  his  soul, 
as  with  Judas  (i.  25).  Secondly,  it  spared  his  life,  whereas  it  might  have  cut 
him  off,  as  it  did  Herod  (xii.  23).  Thirdly,  it  was  only  blindness,  whereas  it 
might  have  been  loss  of  reason,  as  in  the  case  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv.  34). 
And  fourthly,  it  might  have  been  for  the  whole  term  of  his  natural  life,  whereas, 
as  with  Zacharias  (Luke  i.  20),  it  was  only  for  a  season.  3.  The  impression  on 
Sergius.  (1)  What  he  saw.  The  judgment  taking  instant  effect.  "  Im- 
mediately there  fell  on  Elymas  a  mist  and  a  darkness,"  etc.  (2)  How  he  felt. 
He  was  astonished  at  such  a  display  of  spiritual  power.  (3)  What  he  did. 
"  He  believed."  "  How  far  his  belief  was  deep-seated  or  otherwise  we  have  no 
evidence  which  would  enable  us  to  judge.  But  the  silence  of  Luke  would  seem  to 
indicate  that  he  was  not  baptised,  and  we  can  hardly  look  upon  him  as  a  deep 
and  lifelong  convert,  since  otherwise  we  should,  in  the  rarity  of  great  men  in 
the  Christian  community,  have  as  certainly  heard  of  him  in  their  records,  as  we 
hear  of  the  very  few  who  at  this  period — like  Flavius  Clemens  or  Flavia 
Domitilla — joined  the  Church  from  the  ranks  of  the  noble  or  the  mighty  " 
(Farrar,  The  Life  and  Work  of  St.  Paul,  i.  355).  With  this  pronouncement  one 
may  reasonably  disagree.  It  is  too  much  to  expect  that  all  great  men  who  are 
converted  should  have  their  names  and  doings  paraded  in  Church  chronicles. 

Learn. — 1.  The  highest  sign  of  wisdom — desiring  to  hear  the  word  of  God. 
2.  The  grossest  act  of  wickedness — perverting  the  right  ways  of  God,  or 
opposing  the  salvation  of  others.  3.  The  sorest  of  all  earthly  calamities — the 
falling  on  one  of  God's  hand  for  judgment.  4.  The  noblest  trophy  of  a  preacher's 
power — the  conversion  of  a  soul. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  4-12.  The  First  Missionary  Ship. 

I.  Its  bold  crew. — 1.  The  great 
Paul.  2.  The  noble  Barnabas.  3. 
The  youthful  Mark. 

II.  Its  first  wind.— 1.  The  east 
wind  filling  its  sails.  2.  The  breath 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  inspiring  its  teachers. 

III.  Its  favourable  anchorage. — 
The  renowned  Cyprus  with  its  natural 
beauties  and  sinful  abominations. 

IV.  Its  great  prizes. — 1.  The  sorcerer 
vanquished.  2.  The  governor  con- 
verted.— Gerok. 

Ver.  6.  The  Story  of  Bar-jesus. 
I.  His  name— good. 


II.  His  character — bad. 

III.  His  profession — vile. 

IV.  His  sin — great. 

V.  His  punishment — severe. 

Vers.  6-12.  Elymas,  Sergius,  and 
Saul ;  or,  Three  Sorts  of  Wisdom. 

I.  Elymas,  the  representative  of 
false  wisdom,  the  subtilty  inspired  by 
the  devil  (ver.  10). 

II.  Sergius,  the  representative  of 
earthly  wisdom,  the  wisdom  which  the 
world  admires  (ver.  7). 

III.  Saul,  the  representative  of  true 
(as  opposed  to  false)  and  celestial  (as 
distinguished   from    earthly)    wisdom, 

285 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


the   wisdom   which    the    Holy   Ghost 
teaches  (ver.  9). 

Ver.  7.  Sergius  Paulus. 

I.  A  man  of  understanding,  and 
yet  the  dupe  of  a  sorcerer. 

II.  An  anxious  inquirer  opposed  by 
a  pretended  "  wise  one." 

III.  An  astonished  spectator  of  a 
suddenly  inflicted  judgment. 

IV.  A  promising  convert,  who  accepts 
the  teaching  of  the  Lord. 

Desiring  to  hear  the  Word  of  God. 
Might  proceed  out  of — 

I.  Curiosity,  as  in  the  case  of  Herod 
and  the  Athenians. 

II.  Thirst  for  knowledge,  as  with 
Sergius  Paulus. 

III.  Eagerness  to  believe,  as  was 
true  of  the  Gentiles  in  Antioch. 

IV.  Determination  to  oppose,  as  with 
the  unbelieving  Jews. 

Sergius  Paulus,  a  Prudent  Man. 

I.  The  nature  of  true  prudence. — It 
is  not  craft  or  cunning,  it  is  not  self- 
conceit  or  self-wisdom,  it  is  not  a 
cautious  avoidance  of  the  dangers  that 
lie  in  the  path  of  duty.  It  is  the 
adaptation  of  our  line  of  action  to  the 
proprieties  of  time,  and  place,  and 
persons.     It  is  practical  wisdom. 

II.  The  cases  to  which  it  applies. 
1.  To  the  preference  of  objects  accord- 
ing to  their  comparative  value.  2.  To 
the  due  improvement  of  all  oppor- 
tunities of  doing  good  and  getting 
good.  3.  To  the  foresight  of  all  future 
events  that  may  be  anticipated.  4.  To 
the  control  of  the  temper.  5.  To  the 
government  of  the  tongue. 

III.  Its  advantages.  1.  It  prevents 
many  evils.  2.  It  sweetens  all  the 
charities  of  social  life.  3.  It  increases 
the  means  of  doing  good.  (1)  Cherish 
a  deep  sense  of  its  inestimable  value  ; 
(2)  Cultivate  it  by  prayer,  and  an 
intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Bible. 
— G.  Brooks. 

Ver.  8  with  viii.  9.  The  Two 
Sorcerers  ;  or,  Simon  Magus  and  Elymas 
Bar-jesus. 

I.   Compare. — In  being — 1.  Men.    2. 

286 


Magicians.     3.  Hearers  of  the  gospel. 

4.  Guilty  of  heinous  sin — the  one  seek- 
ing to  purchase  the  gift  of  God  with 
money,  the  other  to  hinder  the  work 
of  God  in  others,  doubtless  for  the  sake 
of  money.  5.  Subjects  of  apostolic 
denunciation. 

II.  Contrast.— 1.  The  one  (Simon 
Magus)  an  Oriental,  the  other  (Elymas) 
a  Jew.  2.  The  one  a  willing,  the 
other  an  involuntary  hearer  of  the 
gospel.  3.  The  one  a  baptised  believer, 
the  other  a  malignant  opponent  of  the 
truth.  4.  The  one  an  adherent  of 
Philip,  the  other  an  enemy  of  Saul. 

5.  The  one  simply  denounced,  the  other 
signally  punished.  N.B. — These  points 
of  contrast  sufficiently  dispose  of  the 
allegation  of  the  Tubingen  critics  that 
Paul's  contest  with  Elymas  is  simply 
an  imitation,  without  any  historical 
foundation,  of  Peter's  struggle  with 
Simon  Magus. 

III.  Suggest.— 1.  That  there  is  not 
much  to  choose  between  an  insincere 
disciple  and  an  open  enemy  of  the  truth. 
2.  That  nothing  short  of  genuine 
conversion  will  secure  salvation.  3. 
That  the  punishments  of  sinners  are 
always  less  than  they  deserve.  4.  That 
it  is  dangerous  to  oppose  or  disbelieve 
the  gospel. 

The  Sorcerer,  the  Proconsul,  and  the 
Apostle  ;  or,  a  Triangular  Contest. 

I.  Elymas  and  Sergius,  the  sorcerer 
and  the  proconsul,  the  pretended  wise 
man  and  the  earthly  savant ;  or  the 
deceiver  and  his  dupe. 

II.  Sergius  and  Paul,  the  proconsul 
and  the  apostle,  the  vicegerent  of 
Caesar  and  the  ambassador  of  Christ, 
the  impersonation  of  human  prudence 
and  the  bearer  of  heavenly  wisdom; 
or  the  scholar  and  his  teacher. 

III.  Paul  and  Elymas,  the  true 
prophet  and  the  false,  the  servant  of 
Jesus  and  the  son  of  the  devil ;  or  the 
preacher  of  righteousness  and  his 
satanic  opponent. 

Ver.  10.  Perverting  the  Right  Ways 
of  the  Lord. 

I.  The  ways  of  the  Lord  are  right. 
— 1.  The  ways  of  the  Lord  Himself  are 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap,  xiil 


right. — always  in  accordance  with  holi- 
ness and  truth  (Hosea  xiv.  9).  2.  The 
ways  the  Lord  prescribes  to  men  are 
right — always  like  His  own,  conform- 
able to  law  and  justice  (Psalm  xix.  8, 
cxix.  75). 

II.  The  right  ways  of  the  Lord 
may  be  perverted. — 1.  Not  God's  ways 
for  Himself — which  never  can  be  other 
than  pure  and  upright  (Psalm  cxlv. 
17).  2.  But  God's  ways  for  man — 
which  may  be  turned  aside  (1)  by 
false  teaching  (2  Peter  ii.  1),  (2)  by  bad 
example  (2  Tim.  iii.  5,  6),  (3)  by  sin- 
ful temptation  (2  Peter  ii.  15). 


III.  To  pervert  the  right  ways  of 
the  Lord  is  offensive. — It  is — 1.  Pre- 
sumptuous on  the  part  of  a  creature. 

2.  Sinful,  being  contrary  to  Divine  law. 

3.  Dangerous,    as   incurring   the  just 
judgment  of  God. 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  Judgment  on  Ely- 
mas  and  its  Effect  on  Sergius  a  Type  of 
the  Double  Work  of  Christianity. 

I.  It  blinds  those  who  (like  Elymas 
think  they)  see  (John  ix.  39). 

II.  It  imparts  sight  to  those  who 
(like  Sergius  confess  they)  are  blind 
(John  ix.  39). 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  13—43. 

A  Sabbath  Day  in  Pisidian  Antioch  ;  or,  Paul's  Sermon  in  the  Synagogue. 

I.  The  missionaries  in  the  city. — 1.  Their  journey  thither.  It  is  apparent 
from  the  narrative  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  did  not  make  a  prolonged  stay  in 
any  of  the  places  which  they  visited  on  this  journey.  Having  completed  their 
visit  to  Cyprus,  which  probably  extended  over  two  months,  and  having  set  sail 
from  Paphos,  they  landed  at  Perga  in  Pamphylia,  situated  on  the  Oestrus  about 
seven  miles  from  its  mouth — a  city,  the  ruins  of  which  survive  to  this  day  in  the 
shape  of  "  walls  and  towers,  columns  and  cornices,  a  theatre  and  a  stadium,  a 
broken  aqueduct  encrusted  with  the  calcareous  deposit  of  the  Pamphylian 
streams,  and  tombs  scattered  on  both  sides  of  the  site  of  the  town  "  (Conybeare 
and  Howson,  i.  153).  In  Perga  they  did  not  linger  many  days — not  longer  than 
to  settle  the  dissension  caused  by  the  proposal  to  cress  the  Taurus  (Ramsay). 
The  natural  beauty  of  the  city  and  its  celebrated  temple  of  Artemis  (Diana) 
possessed  for  them  no  attractions.  Accordingly  they  hastened  on  to  Antioch  in 
Pisidia,  perhaps  because  the  season  of  the  year  rendered  it  expedient  to  prosecute 
their  journey  into  the  interior  then  rather  than  at  a  later  period.  "  Earlier  in 
the  spring  the  passes  would  have  been  filled  with  snow.  In  the  heat  of  summer 
the  weather  would  have  been  less  favourable  for  the  journey.  In  the  autumn 
the  disadvantages  would  have  been  still  greater  from  the  approaching  difficulties 
of  winter."  Besides,  "  at  the  beginning  of  the  hot  season  people  move  up  from 
the  plains  to  the  cool  basinlike  hollows  on  the  mountains  " ;  and  "  if  Paul  was 
at  Perga  in  May,  he  would  find  the  inhabitants  deserting  its  hot  and  silent 
streets"  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  i.  156,  157).  Hamsay  {The  Church  in  the 
Roman  Empire,  pp.  62,  63)  suggests  that  Paul  caught  fever  in  Perga,  and  was 
obliged,  for  health's  sake,  to  proceed  into  the  more  elevated  region  of  the 
interior  (see  "  Hints"  on  ver.  13),  selecting  Antioch  as  their  destination  because 
of  its  commercial  importance  and  numerous  Jewish  population  (Ibid.,  p.  19  ; 
compare  St.  Paul  the  Traveller,  etc.,  pp.  89  ff).  2.  What  occurred  upon  the  way. 
John  Mark,  departing  from  them  at  Perga,  returned  to  Jerusalem.  The 
reasons,  not  stated  and  not  approved  by  Paul  (xv.  38),  were  probably  mixed. 
(1)  Mark  was  young  and  not  inured  to  hardship,  and  may  have  shrunk 
from  the  perils  of  the  enterprise  (Grotius,  Holtzmann,  Zockler).  (2)  His  natural 
temperament  may  have  been  somewhat  unsteady  (Alford).  (3)  He  may  have 
resented  the  growing  ascendency  of  Paul,  which  was  thrusting  Barnabas, 
his  uncle,  into  a  second  place.     (4)  He  may  have  b  en  doubtful  of  the  liberal 

2837 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


theology  which  Paul  was  everywhere  preaching.  (5)  He  may  have  grown 
somewhat  apprehensive  about  the  safety  of  his  mother,  whom  he  had  left 
behind  at  Jerusalem  :  a  either  he  did  not  like  the  work  or  he  wanted  to  go 
and  see  his  mother  "  (Henry).  (6)  He  may  have  regarded  the  proposal  to 
cross  the  Taurus  as  an  unwarranted  deviation  from  the  original  plan  (Ramsay). 

3.  How  they  acted  on  arrived.  They  doubtless  made  themselves  acquainted  with 
the  aspect  of  the  city  and  the  character  of  its  inhabitants;  Antioch  was  a 
flourishing  commercial  city,  which  lay  about  a  week's  journey  north  of  Perga, 
up  the  valley  of  the  Oestrus,  on  the  central  table-land  of  Asia  Minor,  on  the 
confines  of  Pisidia  and  Phrygia.  It  had  been  built  by  Seleucus  I.,  the  founder 
of  the  Syrian  Antioch,  and  was  then  an  important  emporium  for  the  trade  of 
Asia  Minor  in  wood,  oil,  skins,  goat's-hair,  and  Angola  wool,  besides  being  a 
Roman  colony.  Its  true  position,  at  a  place  now  called  Yalobatch,  was  dis- 
covered by  Mr.  Arundell  in  1833,  its  identity  having  been  rendered  certain  by 
coins  and  inscriptions.  On  the  Sabbath  they  visited  the  synagogue,  which 
appears  to  have  been  the  only  one,  and  must  therefore  have  been  large. 

II.  Sabbath  worship  in  the  synagogue. — 1.  The  day.  It  said  a  good  deal  for 
the  missionaries  that  they  remembered  the  Sabbath  clay  to  keep  it  holy,  and 
more  for  their  good  sense  that  they  devoted  its  hours  to  worship.  The  Sabbath 
was  meant  by  its  Lord  for  the  double  purpose  of  resting  man's  body  from  the 
toils  of  the  other  six  days,  and  refreshing  man's  soul  through  communion  with 
heaven.  To  neglect  either  of  these  ends — to  devote  the  entire  day  to  physical 
repose  but  not  to  worship,  or  to  worship  in  such  a  fashion  as  to  fatigue  the  body 
— is  to  violate  the  day  and  misapprehend  its  use.  To  give  it  neither  to  worship 
nor  to  rest,  but  wholly  to  labour  in  business  or  in  pleasure,  is  to  turn  it  to  the 
worst  possible  account.  2.  The  synagogue. — "  A  low,  square,  unadorned  building, 
differing  from  Gentile  places  of  worship  by  its  total  absence  of  interior  sculp- 
ture " ;  "  on  one  side  a  lattice-work  partition,  behind  which  sat  a  crowd  of  veiled 
and  silent  women  "  ;  "  in  front  of  these  the  reader's  desk,  and  in  its  immediate 
neighbourhood,  facing  the  rest  of  the  congregation,  those  chief  seats  which 
Rabbis  and  Pharisees  were  so  eager  to  secure  "  (Farrar,  The  Life  and  Work  of 
St.  Paid,  i.  365,  366).  3.  The  worship.  "  Each  as  he  entered  covered  his  head 
with  the  Tallith,  and  the  prayers  began.  They  were  read  by  the  Sheliach,  or 
*  angel  of  the  synagogue,'  who  stood  among  the  standing  congregation.  .  .  . 
After  the  prayers  followed  the  first  lesson,  or  Parashah,"  which  was  "  read  in 
Hebrew,  but  translated  or  paraphrased  by  the  interpreter.  The  Chazzdn,  or 
clerk  of  the  synagogue,  then  took  the  Torah  roll  from  the  Ark  and  handed  it  to 
the  reader.  .  .  .  After  the  Parashah,  was  read  the  Haphtarah,  or  the  second 
lesson,  from  the  prophets,  the  translation  being  given  at  the  end  of  every  three 
verses.  After  this  followed  the  Midrash,  or  sermon,  which  was  not  delivered  by 
one  set  minister,"  but  might  be  given  by  any  distinguished  stranger  who  might 
happen  to  be  present  (Farrar,  i.  366,  367).  (See  an  excellent  account  of 
synagogue  worship  in  Stapfer's  Palestine  in  the  Time  of  Christ,   pp.  338-343.) 

4.  The  invitation.  In  accordance  with  this  custom  Paul  and  Barnabas,  who  had 
doubtless  not  selected  the  chief  seats  in  the  synagogue  (Matt,  xxiii.  6),  but  sat 
among  the  ordinary  worshippers  (1  Cor.  xiv.  16,  23,  24;  James  ii.  2-4),  were 
asked  if  they  had  any  word  of  exhortation  for  the  people,  in  which  case  they 
might  say  on.  Possibly  some  rumour  had  reached  the  synagogue  that  they 
were  preachers ;  but  whether  or  not,  Paul  and  not  Barnabas  responded  to  the 
invitation. 

III.  Paul's  sermon  to  the  congregation. — 1.  The  exordium.  In  manner  re- 
spectful— "  he  stood  up,"  and  serious — "  he  beckoned  with  his  hand  " ;  in  matter, 
brief,  consisting  solely  of  a  request  for  attention  :  three  characteristics  which 
improve  all  sermons  in  which  they  are  found.      2.  The  contents.      There  were 

288 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  XIII. 


three  main  divisions  in  his  discourse.  (1)  The  goodness  of  God  to  Israel,  which 
culminated  in  sending  them  a  Saviour  according  to  His  promise — a  kind  of 
"  captatio  benevolentise  "  (Holtzmann)  (vers.J16-25).  Beginning  with  their  earliest 
history,  he  rehearsed  Jehovah's  gracious  acts  towards  them — ten  in  number  :  the 
choice  of  their  fathers  ;  their  exaltation  in  Egypt,  meaning  thereby  their  multi- 
plication into  a  numerous  and  powerful  people  (ver.  17) ;  their  deliverance  from 
bondage  by  His  own  right  hand  (ver.  17)  ;  their  preservation  in  the  wilderness, 
notwithstanding  much  unbelief  and  disobedience  (ver.  18)  ;  their  settlement  in 
Canaan  after  destroying  seven  nations  therein  (ver.  19);  their  government  by  judges 
for  a  space  of  four  hundred  and  fifty  years  (ver.  20) ;  their  reception  from  God  of 
a  king  in  answer  to  their  request  (ver.  21)  ;  the  removal  of  Saul  and  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  throne  in  David  and  his  seed  (ver.  22) ;  the  appearance  of  Christ 
as  a  descendant  of  David,  and  in  fulfilment  of  ancient  promise  (ver.  23),  when 
the  Baptist,  His  distinguished  forerunner,  had  closed  his  career,  or  was  fulfilling 
his  course  (ver.  24).  Thus  the  history  of  Israel  in  its  three  chief  moments — the 
formation  of  the  covenant,  the  settlement  in  the  land,  and  the  institution  of 
the   theocracy — was  depicted  as  a  preparation  for  the  appearance  of  Christ. 

(2)  Jesus  of  Nazareth  proved  to  be  the  Saviour  by  His  death  and  resurrection 
(vers.  26-37).  The  condemnation  of  Jesus  by  the  Jewish  leaders  had  been  a 
literal  fulfilment  of  Old  Testament  prophecy  (ver.  27).  Besides  dying  an 
innocent  death,  He  was  actually  laid  in  a  sepulchre  (ver.  29).  Taken  down  from 
the  tree,  He  was  buried,  not  by  the  rulers,  it  is  true,  but  by  Joseph  of  Arimathea 
(John  xix.  30),  Paul  not  deeming  it  necessary  to  discriminate  as  to  the  agents, 
though  his  statement  was  literally  accurate  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  Yet  God 
raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead,  and  showed  Him  alive  to  His  disciples,  in 
particular  to  those  of  them  who  had  come  up  with  Him  from  Galilee  to 
Jerusalem  and  who  then  were  His  witnesses  to  the  people.  This  resurrection 
had  been  foretold  in  the  second  psalm  (ver.  33),  in  the  fifty-fifth  chapter  of 
Isaiah  (ver.  34),  and  again  in  the  sixteenth  psalm  (ver.  35),  which  could  not 
possibly  refer  to  David,  as  he  had  died  and  seen  corruption,  whereas  "  He  whom 
God  raised  again  saw  no  corruption  "  (ver.  37).  (3)  The  proclamation  of  free 
forgiveness  or  of  justification  by  faith  through  Jesus  Christ  (vers.  38,  39),  a 
blessing  which  had  not  been  attainable  through  the  law  of  Moses.  3.  The 
application.  In  the  form  of  a  solemn  warning  drawn  from  words  used  by 
Habbakuk,  he  cautioned  them  to  beware  of  rejecting  the  gospel  and  so 
involving  then  selves  first  in  the  guilt  and  then  in  the  doom  of  those  who  per- 
sistently refused  to  see  the  hand  of  God  in  the  events  which  were  taking  place 
around  them  (vers.  40,  41).  4.  The  result.  (1)  As  they,  Paul  and  Barnabas, 
were  leaving  the  synagogue,  the  rulers,  perhaps  interpreting  the  wish  of  the  con- 
gregation, requested  them  to  repeat  their  preaching  on  the  following  Sabbath 
(see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  (2)  When  the  synagogue  was  dispersed,  many  of  the 
Jews  and  of  the  devout  proselytes  followed  Paul  and  Barnabas,  no  doubt  express- 
ing their  desire  to  hear  more  of  the  good  tidings  to  which  they  had  listened. 

(3)  Speaking  to  them  Paul  and  Barnabas  urged  them  to  continue  in  the  grace 
of  God. 

Learn. — 1.  That  no  man  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough  in  connection 
with  Christ's  kingdom  should,  like  John  Mark,  draw  or  even  look  back.  2.  That 
Christ's  disciples,  like  Paul  and  Barnabas,  should  honour  the  Sabbath  and  the 
sanctuary.  3.  That  ministers  of  the  gospel,  like  Paul  and  Barnabas,  should 
embrace  every  opportunity  that  opens  to  them  of  publishing  their  good  news  of 
salvation.  4.  That  the  gospel  when  frankly,  fully,  and  fearlessly  preached  will 
seldom  fail  to  make  a  good  impression.  5.  That  a  chief  point  in  the  gospel  is 
the  doctrine  of  free  forgiveness,  or  of  justification  by  faith. 

a 

u  289 


chap.  Xin.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  13.  The  Incident  at  Perga  ;  or, 
John  Mark's  Departure.  A  Sermon  on 
Weariness  in  Well-doing  (but  see  "  Homi- 
letical  Analysis  "),  Weariness  in  well- 
doing. 

I.  A  common  occurrence. — Seldom 
justified  by  good  and  sufficient  reasons. 
Plausible  excuses  often  offered ;  but 
men  never  give  the  right  reason  for 
doing  a  wrong  thing. 

II.  An  unfortunate  example. — Dis- 
couraging to  fellow-workers,  deterrent 
to  those  who  might  become  workers, 
hurtful  to  the  individual  worker  him- 
self. Bad  examples  much  more  con- 
tagious and  much  more  easily  set  than 
good  ones. 

III.  An  irremediable  mistake.— 
Men  who  lay  down  a  good  work  cannot 
always  take  it  up  again  at  the  point 
where  they  laid  it  down  or  at  the  time 
when  they  wish.  Mark  found  this  to 
be  so  with  himself. 

IV.  An  irreparable  loss. — Those  who 
grow  weary  in  well-doing  miss  the 
reward  which  is  promised  to  and  laid 
up  for  them  who  labour  on  and  faint 
not. 

Ver.  14.  Passing  through  Perga; 
or,  Paul's  Supposed  Illness  at  Perga. — 
"  Every  one  who  has  travelled  in  Pam- 
phylia  knows  how  relaxing  and  ener- 
vating the  climate  is.  In  these  low- 
lying  plains  fever  is  endemic ;  the  land 
is  so  moist  as  to  be  extraordinarily 
fertile,  and  most  dangerous  to  strangers. 
Confined  by  the  vast  ridges  of  Taurus, 
five  thousand  to  nine  thousand  feet 
high,  the  atmosphere  is  like  the  steam 
of  a  kettle,  hot,  moist,  and  swept  by 
no  west  winds.  Coming  down  in  July 
1890  from  the  north  side  of  Taurus  for 
a  few  days  to  the  coast  of  Pamphylia, 
I  seemed  to  feel  my  physical  and 
mental  powers  melting  rapidly  away. 
I  might  spend  a  page  in  quoting 
examples,  but  the  following  fact  bears 
so  closely  on  our  present  purpose  that 
it  must  be  mentioned.  In  August 
1890  I  met  on   the  Cilician  coast  an 

290 


English  officer  on  his  way  home  from 
three  years'  duty  in  Cyprus  ;  previously 
he  had  spent  some  years  in  Eastern 
service.  He  said  that  the  climate  of 
the  Cilician  coast  (which  is  very  similar 
to  that  of  Pamphylia,  and  has  not  any 
worse  reputation  for  unhealthiness) 
reminded  him  of  Singapore  or  Hong- 
Kong,  while  that  of  Cyprus  was  infi- 
nitely fresher  and  more  invigorating.  . . . 
We  suppose  then  that  Paul  caught 
fever  on  reaching  Perga  (the  Rev. 
Mr.  Daniell,  who  travelled  with  Spratt 
and  Forbes,  the  author  states  in  a 
footnoot,  died  of  fever  at  Attalia,  a  few 
miles  from  Perga).  Here  it  may  be 
objected  .  .  .  that  Paul  was  used  to  the 
climate  of  Cilicia  and  Syria ;  why 
should  he  suffer  in  Pamphylia  %  In 
the  first  place,  no  one  can  count  on 
immunity  from  fever,  which  attacks 
people  in  the  most  capricious  way.  In 
the  second  place,  it  was  precisely  after 
fatigue  and  hardship,  travelling  on  foot 
through  Cyprus  amid  great  excitement 
and  mental  strain,  that  one  was  pecu- 
liarly liable  to  be  affected  by  the  sudden 
plunge  into  the  enervating  atmosphere 
of  Pamphylia.  The  circumstances  im- 
plied in  Galatians  iv.  13  are  therefore 
in  perfect  keeping  with  the  narrative 
in  the  Acts ;  each  of  the  authorities 
lends  additional  emphasis  and  meaning 
to  the  other  "  (Ramsay,  The  Church  in 
the  Roman  Empire,  pp.  62,  63).  Pro- 
fessor Ham  say  not  only  assigns  this 
malarial  fever  as  the  cause  of  Paul's 
passing  through  Perga,  but  afterwards 
uses  it  as  a  confirmatory  argument  in 
support  of  his  thesis  that  the  Galatian 
Churches  which  Paul  subsequently 
visited,  and  to  which  he  wrote  the 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  were  not  in 
North  but  in  Southern  Galatia — were, 
in  fact,  the  Churches  of  Antioch, 
Iconium,  Lystra,  and  Derbe  (see  on 
xvi.  6).  He  also  maintains  that  this 
malarial  fever  became  chronic  and  was 
regarded  by  Paul  as  his  "  stake  in  the 
flesh "  (St.  Paul  the  Traveller,  etc. 
p.  94). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xiii. 


Vers.  17-19.  The  Story  of  Israel ;  a 
Type  of  the  Church's  History. 

I.  Chosen. — As  Jehovah  selected 
Abraham's  descendants  to  be  a  people 
for  Himself  (Exod.  xix.  5,  6 ;  Deut. 
vii.  6;  Isa.  xliv.  1  ;  Psalm  xxxiii.  12), 
so  did  Christ  elect  His  apostles  the 
representatives  of  His  Church  (John 
xv.  16),  and  so  were  Christians  chosen 
by  Divine  grace  (Eph.  i.  4). 

II.  Exalted. — As  Jehovah  looked 
upon  the  low  estate  of  His  people  and 
exalted  their  horn  when  in  Egypt 
(Psalm  cxlviii.  14),  so  has  He  exalted 
or  lifted  up  His  believing  people  from 
their  sin  and  misery  because  of  His 
grace  and  mercy  (Luke  i.  52  ;  Eph. 
ii.  6). 

III.  Emancipated. — As  Israel  was 
led  forth  from  Egypt  by  the  mighty 
hand  of  God  (Exod.  xv.  13  ;  Isa. 
lxiii.  12),  so  has  the  Church  of  Christ 
been  redeemed  from  the  bondage  of  sin 
and  death  (John  iii.  16,  17 ;  Gal. 
iii.  13). 

IV.  Borne. — As  Israel  was  carried 
and  upheld  during  the  wilderness 
wanderings  (Deut.  i.  31,  xxxii.  10-12; 
Isa.  xlvi.  3),  so  has  the  Church  of 
Christ  and  so  have  individual  believers 
been  supported  during  their  earthly 
pilgrimage  (Matt.  xvi.  18;  Luke 
xxi.  18;  2  Thess.  iii.  3). 

V.  Endured.— Exactly  as  Jehovah 
had  to  exercise  much  long-suffering  in 
dealing  with  Israel  in  the  wilderness 
(Psalm  cvi.  43-46),  so  has  He  still  to 
bear  with  Christians  as  individuals 
and  with  the  Church  as  a  whole  (Pom. 
ii.  4  ;  2  Peter  iii.  9,  15). 

VI.  Protected. — As  Israel's  enemies 
were  destroyed  (Deut.  vii.  1),  so  have 
been  and  will  be  the  Church's  and  the 
saints'  foes  (1  Peter  iii.  13). 

VII.  Settled. — As  Israel  was  estab- 
lished in  the  earthly  (Josh,  xxiii.  4),  so 
will  the  whole  body  of  believers  be  in 
the  heavenly  Canaan  (John  xvii.  24). 

Vers.  20,  22.  Judges  and  Kings. 

I.  All  forms  of  government  are 
legitimate— i.e.,  are  of  God. 

II.  No  form  of  government  is  en- 
itled  to  count  on  permanency. — What 


suits    one    age   may   not   be   adapted 
to  another. 

III.  Jehovah  is  superior  to  all 
governments,  and  may  establish  or 
remove  them  at  pleasure. 

IV.  The  government  that  does  God's 
will  will  last  longest. — The  people  that 
refuse  to  serve  Him  will  be  destroyed. 

Ver.  21.  Old  Testament  Prophets. — 
These  were — 

I.  Religious  seers. 
II.  Foretellers  of  the  future. 

III.  Political  statesmen. 

IV.  Social  reformers. 

Ver.  23.  The  Saviour  Jesus. 
I.  Promised  to  the  fathers  (ver.  32). 
II.  Heralded  by  John  (ver.  24). 

III.  Manifested    to  the  Jews   (ver. 
27). 

IV.  Crucified  under  Pilate  (ver.  28). 

V.  Raised  from  the  dead  (ver.  30). 
VI.  Received  up  into  glory  (ver.  31). 

VII.  Preached  unto  the  world  (vers. 
26,  32). 

VIII.  Believed  on  by   the   Gentiles 
(ver.  48). 

Ver.  26.   This  Salvation. 

I.  What  it  is. — 1.  Forgiveness. 
2.  Eternal  life. 

II.  Whence  it  comes. — From  God, 
its  sole  author. 

III.  Through  whom  procured. — 
Jesus. 

IV.  To  whom  offered.— 1.  To  the 
Jews  first.     2.  Also  to  the  Gentiles. 

V.  On  what  condition. — As  a  free 
gift. 

Ver.  27.  The  Criminality  of  the 
Jewish  Rulers. 

I.  In  being  ignorant  of  their  own 
sacred  books. 

II.  In  not  recognising  Christ  when 
He  appeared. 

III.  In  condemning  Him  when  no 
cause  of  death  had  been  found  in  Him. 

IV.  In  rejecting  Him  after  He  had 
risen  from  the  dead. — Show  how  far 
the  criminality  of  the  Jewish  rulers 
may  be  reproduced  in  Christendom 
to-day. 

291 


chap.  xm.        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


The  Voices  of  the  Prophets. 

I.  An  important  question. — "  Upon 
what  grounds  are  we  to  rest  the 
authority  with  which  the  prophets 
spoke  —  an  authority  which  still 
breathes   in   their   writings  1  " 

II.  A  provisional  reply. — "  With 
one  consent  they  would  say  that  the 
thoughts  which  arose  in  their  hearts 
and  the  words  which  arose  to  their  lips 
were  put  there  by  God." 

III.  A  requisite  interrogation. — 
"  What  guarantees  have  we  that  they 
were  not  mistaken  ?  How  do  we  know 
that  they  are  not  projecting  their  own 
thoughts  outside  of  themselves,  and 
ascribing  them  to  an  external  cause  ?  " 

IY.  A  decisive  answer. — "  We 
believe  it  on  the  strength  (1)  of  the 
glimpses  which  the  prophets  give  us 
into  their  own  consciousness  on  the 
subject ;  (2)  of  the  universal  belief  of 
their  contemporaries ;  (3)  of  the  extra- 
ordinary unanimity  of  their  testimony ; 
(4)  of  the  difficulty  of  accounting  for 
it  in  any  other  way ;  and  (5)  of  the 
character  of  the  teaching  in  which  this 
Divine  prompting  and  suggestion  results 
— a  character  which  is  not  only  not  un- 
worthy, but  most  worthy  of  its  source  " 
(Sanday,  Inspiration,  pp.  145-147). 

Yer.  33.  The  Witness  of  the  Second 
Psalm  to  Christ. 

I.  A  proclamation  of  the  Divine  Son- 
ship  of  Christ. — Neither — 1.  Physical, 
with  special  reference  to  His  miracu- 
lous or  supernatural  birth  (the  Naza- 
renes,  Socinus,  Beyschlag).  Nor — 
2.  Ethical,  as  marking  the  excep- 
tional perfection  of  His  moral  nature 
(Theodorus,  Paul  of  Samosata,  Strauss, 
Baur,  Ewald).  Nor — 3.  Official, 
signalising  the  theanthropos  or  God- 
man  as  the  theanthropic  king  by 
pre-eminence,  the  Messiah  (Weiss). 
But,  without  denying  that  the  phrase 
may  sometimes  appear  to  bear  one  or 
more  of  these  significations,  4.  Meta- 
physical, as  descriptive  of  the  essential 
relationship  subsisting  between  Christ's 
higher  pre-existent  nature  and  the 
deity  (Gess,  Godet,  Luthardt,  Calvin, 
and  others). 

292 


II.  A  demonstration  of  the  Divine 
Sonship  of  Christ. — "This  day  have  I 
begotten  Thee."  Probably  signifying 
the  same  thing  as,  "  Thou  art  My  Son," 
these  words  may,  nevertheless,  be 
understood  as  having  received  illustra- 
tion and  confirmation  in — 1.  The 
incarnation  (Heb.  i.  5,  which  some 
interpreters  regard  as  alluding  to  the 
birth  in  Bethlehem).  2.  The  resurrec- 
tion, as  in  the  text.  3.  The  exaltation 
(Heb.  v.  5).  (See  Whitelaw's,  How  is 
the  Divinity  of  Jesus  depicted  ?  pp.  66. 
67.) 

Yer.  34.  The  Blessings  of  David 

I.  Promised. 
II.  Gracious. 

III.  Great. 
IY.  Holy. 

Y.  Sure. 
YI.  Divine. 

Yer.  35.    God's  Holy  One. — See  on 

ii.  27. 

Yer.  36.  The  Life,  Death,  and  Burial 
of  David. 

I.  His  life. — 1.  Useful.  He  served 
his  own  generation.  2.  Pious.  He 
served  the  counsel  of  God  (to  adopt 
the  reading  of  B.Y.).  3.  Planned 
and  determined  for  him  by  God.  He 
served  his  generation  by  the  will  of 
God,  or  in  accordance  with  the  Divine 
purpose  or  plan.  4.  Measured.  He 
served  his  generation,  and  then  passed 
away. 

II.  His  death. — 1.  Appointed.  He 
fell  on  sleep  by  the  will  or  counsel  of 
God,    according    to    a    third   reading. 

2.  Timely.  He  fell  on  sleep  after  he 
had  served  his  generation — i.e.,  after, 
not     before,     his     work     was    done. 

3.  Peaceful.     He  fell  on  sleep. 

III.  His  burial. — 1.  His  body  was 
deposited  in  the  tomb  and  saw  corrup- 
tion. 2.  His  spirit  was  gathered  to 
his  fathers,  and  continued  to  exist  in  a 
future  state  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  "). 

Ver.  36.  Our  Day. 
I.  The  words  suggest  the  thought, 
that  a  man's  earthly  history  is  a  very 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xm. 


limited  period. — u  His  own  generation."  upon  which  our  relations  centre  them- 
We  are  accustomed,  almost  reconciled,  selves,  and  to  which  they  stand  for 
to  the  brevity  of  our  earthly  career,  ever  •  intimate,  shall  be  the  period  in 
but  perhaps  this  attribute  of  it  is  more  whose  history  we  ourselves  took  part, 
remarkable  than  we  commonly  feel  it  It  was  that  generation  which  most  of 
to  be.  The  large  portion  of  past  all  put  its  impress  upon  us,  and  it  was 
human  history  which  a  man  must  needs  that  generation  which  most  of  all  bore 
miss  when  he  only  comes  into  it  in  the  away  the  marks  of  whatever  influence 
course  of  its  seventh  millennium, — this  our  own  personality  exerted  upon  men 
would  still  have  left  him  much  if  then  and  things  beneath  the  sky.  Many 
it  had  been  possible  for  him  to  abide  steamers  cross  the  Atlantic,  and  many 
in  the  midst  of  human  history  until  its  trains  wheel  their  way  across  the 
consummation.  The  period  of  earthly  American  continent ;  let  a  man  cross  the 
life  is  in  many  ways  an  inadequate  one  or  the  other  but  once  only — then, 
period — scanty,  even  to  unnaturalness,  as  long  as  he  lives,  that  steamer,  that 
from  the  merely  terrestrial  point  of  train,  by  which  he  himself  travelled, 
view.  Fifty  years  of  work  in  this  with  its  passengers  and  its  incidents, 
world,  then — that  is  the  utmost  we  can  is  "  his  own  "  steamer,  "  his  own  " 
reasonably  look  for,  after  we  are  equipped  train;  and  it  is  still  this  upon  the 
and  before  we  are  weary  unto  death.  lips  of  his  children  after  he  is  gone. 
There  is  not  much  time  to  lose;  our  So  our  experience  of  world-life  and 
own  generation  is  a  quantity  that  is  world-history,  brief  as  it  is,  and 
frugal  of  opportunity,  so  far  as  passing  rapidly  from  successor  to 
opportunity  consists  in  continuance,  successor  again,  is  for  ever  bound  up 
Yet  it  is  one  great  opportunity  from  with  the  circumstances  of  our  own  one 
first  to  last,  and  its  very  brevity  journey,  and  has  abidingly  gathered 
accentuates  its  greatness.  To  live  and  into  it  the  memories,  the  complexion, 
work  in  a  world  like  ours,  after  such  a  and  to  some  extent  the  type,  which 
manner  as  grace  can  empower  us  to  do ;  those  circumstances  determined.  All 
to  bear  and  battle  our  way  through  it,  this  takes  on  a  firmer  emphasis  accord- 
with  any  credit  and  any  success,  ere  ing  as  we  let  in  the  consideration  of 
we  look  back  upon  it  out  of  a  higher  duty  and  privilege,  both  of  them  having 
existence ;  to  stand  for  God  and  their  ultimate  source  in  Jesus  Christ, 
righteousness,  with  the  sterling  bravery  the  Sovereign  of  the  human  ages.  The 
of  a  good  conscience,  that  is  an  oppor-  true  man  is  the  Christian  man.  It  is 
tunity  which  must  be  in  many  ways  he  alone  who  is  the  genuine  unit  in 
unique,  and  has  elements  in  it  of  world-life,  the  authentic  link  in  the 
heroism,  with  touches  of  tragic  signifi-  continuity  of  true  world-history  within 
cance,  which  gather  upon  us  the  his  limits.  The  Christian  man  lives 
interest  of  multitudes  of  invisible  well-  his  life — more  wisely  indeed  for  himself 
wishers.  Perhaps  the  opportunity  is  than  any  unchristian  man,  yet  straight 
long  enough  if  it  be  strenuously  in  the  line  of  liberating  his  whole  feel- 
employed  ;  for  then,  with  all  its  ing  and  action  from  the  dominion  of 
wondrous  cheer,  it  is  not  a  little  self-seeking.  He  lives  his  life  for  God 
arduous.  in  Christ ;  he  lives  it  for  other  men  in 
II.  The  words  suggest  the  thought,  Christ's  name.  He  "  keeps  himself " — 
that  a  man  has  a  lasting  personal  in  spirit,  in  mind,  in  body — and  finds 
relation  to  the  time  upon  which  his  he  has  a  goodly  task  on  hand  in  so 
earthly  history  is  cast.  "  His  own  doing ;  but  it  is  not  for  himself  that 
generation."  All  generations  of  man-  he  keeps  himself ;  it  is  for  Christ,  and 
kind,  it  is  true,  belong  to  the  man  who  for  the  will  of  Christ.  The  will  of 
has  given  himself  to  God,  and  such  a  Christ  is  the  weal  of  men — my  own 
man  belongs  to  all  the  generations.  weal,  and  the  weal  of  all  around  me. 
But  the  period  of  the  world's  history  My   "  own    generation " — the    set    of 


o 


93 


chap.  xiii.        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


things  which  touches  me  on  all  sides, 
and  is  touched  by  me  at  many  points — 
is  the  element  within  which  I  may,  I 
must,  directly  fulfil  the  will  of  Christ 
as  a  will  for  this  world  in  which  He 
lived  and  died. 

III.  The  words  suggest  the  thought, 
that  a  man  is  called  to  note  and  to 
know  the  peculiar  character  of  his 
own  time. — "  His  own  generation." 
There  is  a  certain  individuality  about 
every  generation.  It  has  its  own 
disposition,  temperament,  moods, 
capabilities,  opportunities,  not  all  of 
which  are  shared  in  the  same  measure 
by  any  other  generation.  Each  genera- 
tion has  something  in  it  of  every 
generation  that  has  been;  but  it  has 
also  somewhat  in  it  which  is  original 
enough  to  give  a  special  tone  to  itself 
and  to  its  effect  upon  the  generations 
following.  Intelligence  about  the  past 
is  mostly  of  value  according  as  it  helps 
us  to  be  intelligent  about  the  present. 
He  will  not  fail  to  note,  that  his 
generation  is  one  of  unwonted  activity 
— activity  intense,  ingenious,  adventur- 
ous, daring — activity  of  hand,  of 
tongue,  of  pen,  of  thought ;  yet  a 
generation  of  special  thinking  rather 
than  of  general  thoughtfulness,  and 
eager  rather  than  earnest — having 
much  of  the  tug  and  bustle  of  strain, 
which  has  need  to  soothe  itself  into  a 
more  settled  and  self -controlling  energy. 
He  will  scarcely  overlook  that  His 
generation,  more  distinctly  still,  is  one 
of  scientific  progress  and  material 
advancement — of  rapid  secular  civilisa- 
tion. If  now  our  youthful  observer, 
all  but  ready  to  step  forth  into  the 
arena  of  his  generation,  turn  his  eye 
more  intently  upon  its  moral  and 
religious  aspects,  he  may  still  find  much 
that  ought  to  stir  his  interest.  He 
will  note,  that  Christian  truth,  as  truth 
which  holds  the  supernatural,  and  at 
its  centre  the  great  Biography  which 
means  all  that  is  supernatural,  is 
emerging  from  trials  that  have  been 
severe — emerging  from  them,  and  with 
only  new  clearness  in  her  eye  and  new 
stability  in  her  bearing.  He  will  mark, 
nevertheless,   that  Christian   truth   is 

294 


not  past  all  her  trials.  On  the  other 
hand,  he  will  be  free  to  mark,  that  in 
the  face  of  all  this  his  generation 
displays  not  a  little  of  evangelic  force 
and  evangelistic  fervour,  and  even  some 
willingness  to  devise  methods  for  over- 
taking the  multitudes  among  us  who 
are  virtually  beyond  the  contacts  of 
Christendom. 

IY.  The  words  suggest  the  conclud- 
ing thought,  that  a  man  is  summoned 
to  do  the  best  for  his  own  time. — There 
is  no  young  man  with  the  right  spirit 
in  him,  and  with  the  most  ordinary 
preparation  for  his  world-career,  who 
will  fail  to  recognise  that  this  genera- 
tion of  his  is  waiting  for  him,  and  gives 
some  occasion  for  his  best  work  on  its 
behalf.  As  he  is  getting  him  ready  to 
step  forth  into  the  thick  of  his  time,  he 
will  be  resolving  to  look  beyond  the 
legitimate  interests  of  self  and  of 
family,  and  onwards  to  the  wider 
interests  of  truth,  of  Church,  of 
country,  of  race.  It  may  look  more  of 
a  paradox  than  it  is,  if  we  say,  that 
in  order  to  be  anything  worth  while 
for  our  generation,  we  must  conserve 
our  own  individuality,  and  must  con- 
firm the  personal  independence  of  our 
own  conscience  and  will.  Among  the 
forces  of  the  time  we  must  get  in  good 
measure  to  be  masters  of  ourselves,  and 
must  refuse  to  let  any  of  them  be 
handling  us  very  much  without  our 
consent.  More  than  this  :  we  shall  do 
most  for  our  time  by  developing  all 
that  is  worthy  of  development  in  our 
own  type  of  character,  whether  moral 
or  intellectual,  social  or  religious  ;  so 
that  it  shall  still  be  our  very  selves, 
and  more  of  our  very  selves,  with  all 
the  advantage  of  natural  confluence  of 
power,  who  are  at  work  upon  the 
materials  of  the  time.  And  among 
the  multifarious  claims  of  a  complicated 
time  like  ours,  it  seems  in  place  to  say 
that  it  were  not  well  to  scatter  our 
energies  by  attempting  too  many  things, 
but  rather  to  make  our  energies  tell 
by  bringing  their  weight  to  bear  upon 
one  or  two  selected  points.  Your 
selection  will  be  determined  by  circum- 
stances, by  capabilities,  by   tempera- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xm. 


ment — that  is,  by  providence,  more  or 
less  fixed  and  cordially  accepted.  To 
some  of  us  will  fall  a  larger  share  of 
contest  and  demolition,  to  others  of  us 
a  larger  share  of  cherishing  and  con- 
struction :  in  the  issue,  none  the  less, 
it  is  all  of  it  construction  still.  But 
we  cannot,  perhaps,  look  abroad  upon 
our  own  generation,  in  the  light  of  the 
past,  without  a  feeling  that  combat 
with  untruth  and  evil,  hand  to  hand 
and  weapon  to  weapon,  is  more  and 
more  evidently  inadequate,  and  that 
something  other  and  further  must  be 
endeavoured  than  to  smite  uprising 
error  in  the  face,  or  to  meet  wrong- 
going  with  confronting  argument  and 
point-blank  effort  which  ought  to  com- 
pel it  into  rightness.  The  real  strength 
of  all  wrong  things  is  not  in  their 
front,  but  in  their  flank  and  rear : 
their  fronts  are  only  the  special  facings, 
ever  varying  and  ever  new,  which  are 
evolved  out  of  one  or  two  principles, 
steady  and  old,  that  are  lurking  strong 
and  vital  behind  the  fighting-line.  It 
is  these  that  we  ought  above  all  to 
spend  our  lives  in  striving  to  reach  and 
to  enfeeble.  It  is  ours  to  root  around 
us  as  we  can  the  living  love  of  God  in 
Christ.  It  is  ours  to  take  the  strength 
out  of  the  admiration  of  what  is 
material  by  promoting  a  sense  of  what 
is  spiritual.  It  is  ours  to  throw  our 
energies  upon  making  the  Church 
more  ready  of  heart  and  hand  for  all 
her  duty,  and  upon  ridding  her  from 
the  hesitancy  and  feebleness  and 
reservation  of  human  sympathy,  which 
still  so  greatly  limit  her  power. — J.  A. 
Kerr  Bain,  M.A. 

A  Model  of  Life. — There  is  a  bio- 
graphy in  this  brief  epitaph.  It  is  a 
"  Life "  flashed  into  vividness  by  a 
lightning  sketch.  The  text  conducts 
us  to  the  master-secret  of  a  great 
career.  There  is  no  time  wasted  over 
events  and  details.  We  are  introduced 
at  once  to  the  purpose,  the  method, 
the  spirit  of  the  man  commemorated. 
This  is  essentially  the  man's  life.  All 
other  matters — the  time  and  place  of 
his  birth,  the  character  of  his  educa- 


tion, his  social  environment,  his  plans 
and  difficulties,  his  conflicts  and  achieve- 
ments— are  but  incidents  and  episodes, 
the  arena  on  which  he  pursues  his  pur- 
pose, the  instruments  by  which  he  accom- 
plishes his  will.  Our  text  gives  us  the 
right  estimate.  It  is  not  the  pious 
fraud  of  a  charitable  epitaph-writer. 
It  is  essentially  just  when,  passing  over 
exceptional  episodes  and  penetrating 
to  the  normal  mood  of  the  life,  it 
depicts  this  man  as  one  who  served  his 
God  and  his  generation.  But  our  text 
is  of  more  than  historical  interest. 
While  it  embalms  a  memory,  it  indi- 
cates an  ideal.  It  is  a  philosophy  as 
well  as  a  biography.  It  presents  life 
and  death  in  their  higher  aspects ; 
one  as  an  unselfish  yet  self -rewarding 
energy,  the  other  as  in  no  sense  an 
accident  or  disaster,  but  an  ordered 
and  gracious  dispensation.  It  finks 
the  character  of  a  man's  death  to  the 
character  of  his  life,  and  both  to  the 
righteous  dominion  of  God. 

I.  A  good  model  of  life. — "He 
served  his  own  generation  by  the  will 
of  God."  1.  Now,  in  analysing  this 
account  of  a  great  career,  three  promi- 
nent characteristics  immediately  arrest 
our  attention.  The  first  is  that  it  was 
a  life  of  service.  It  was  not  one  of 
idleness,  whether  ornamental  or  fussy ; 
not  one  of  ease,  either  cultured  or 
coarsely  luxurious.  It  was  an  active 
life  of  service  whose  zeal  was  as  broadly 
unselfish  as  it  was  intelligent  and  in- 
cessant. The  full  significance  of  that 
fact  is  only  perceived  when  we  re- 
member that  this  serving-man  was  a 
king.  Girt  with  the  authority  of 
power,  gifted  with  the  self- delighting 
resources  of  genius,  housed  amid  the 
wealth  and  luxury  incident  to  regal 
station,  this  man  served.  That  is  a 
noteworthy  point.  It  emphasises  a 
truth  not  always  clearly  perceived,  that 
whatever  be  a  man's  station  or  resource 
he  does  not  escape  the  common  obliga- 
tion of  service.  To  whom  much  is 
given,  from  him  much  shall  be  re- 
quired. The  king  owes,  because  he 
can  render,  a  larger  loyalty  to  the 
subject  than  the  subject  owes  to  the 

295 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


king.     The  master  is  greater  debtor  to 
the  servant  than  the  servant  to  the 
master.     Among  rich   and  poor  alike 
it  is   a   common   sentiment   that    the 
higher  a  man  climbs  in  the  social  scale 
the  further  he  gets  from  the  thrall  and 
burden  of  work.     God's  law  expresses 
and  exacts  the  very  opposite  conclusion. 
God  looks  for   the   broadest  and  best 
servants  of  humanity  not  among  the 
necessitous  at  the  bottom,  but  among 
the  free  and  favoured  at  the  top.     This 
Divine  distribution  of  debt  finds  recog- 
nition,   theoretically    at     least,    even 
poetically,    it    may    be    said,   in    our 
English  titles  of  distinction.     Etymo- 
logically,  the  king  is  the  able  kinsman 
of  his  brethren,  called  to  loftiest  station 
because  most  fit  to  serve.     The  duke, 
as  the  word  indicates,   is    the   leader, 
the  man  who  can  see  furthest  ahead, 
with  courage  enough  to  stand  at  the 
front,    capable    not   only    of    showing 
the  way,  but  of  giving  and  taking  the 
first   blows   in  the  battle  of  progress, 
The  earl  is  the  elderman  or  alderman, 
the  man    of    funded    experience   and 
accumulated   wisdom,    as   eminent    in 
grace  as  in  vigour,  the  counsellor  and 
shield    of    the    people.      The   highest 
official  in  our  Executive  Government 
we  call  Prime  Minister,  which  means 
head  servant.     The  doctrine  of  Christ 
admits  of  no  doubt  on  this  subject.     It 
denies   to  any  man,   whether  rich  or 
poor,  the  right  to  be  an  idler  amid  the 
ceaseless  tasks  of  humanity.     It  aims 
at   sweeping   away   parasites  and  ex- 
crescences of   all    kinds  and    degrees. 
But  in  doing  this  it  is  careful  to  dis- 
tinguish itself  from  a  mere  gospel  of 
industry.     It   is   more  than  a  law  of 
labour.    It  is  a  law  of  service.    Labour 
may  be,  and  often  is,  utterly  selfish. 
It  is  careful  of  its  own  products.     It 
aims  at  its  own  aggrandisement.    What 
we  do  for  our  own  bread  and  comfort 
is  labour.     Service  is  the  unselfish  ex- 
penditure of  talent  in  behalf  of  others. 
And  Christ's  gospel  is  one  of  service, 
which  means  that  it  is  one  of  human 
brotherhood.       In    nothing,    perhaps, 
does   the  practical  beneficence  of  our 
Christian  gospel  shine   so  luminously 

296 


as  in  the  victory  it  has  won  for  this 
nobler  philosophy   of   life.      Men    are 
beginning,  as  never  before,  to  see  that 
nothing    in   life    is    held  in    absolute 
ownership,  that  time  and    talent    are 
possessed  under  a  stewardship  whose 
obligations    are    broad    and   ceaseless. 
2.  A  second  essential  of  noble  living, 
as   indicated   in  the  example  we   are 
considering,  is  the  element  of  contem- 
poraneousness— the  ability  to  see  and 
seize    the    opportunities   of    the   day. 
David  not  only  served;  he  served  his 
own  generation.     He  discovered,  that 
is   to   say,    in    the  circumstances   and 
claims  of  life  around  him,  an  ample 
field  for  all  his  energies,  a  primary  and 
sacred  call  upon  his  various  resource. 
Therein  lay  the  secret  of  his  greatness. 
The  sign  of  all  true  wisdom  and  heroism 
is  the  ability  to  take  occasion  by  the 
hand  and  translate  it  into  beneficent 
achievement ;  to  see  what  needs  doing, 
and  right  zealously  to  do  it.     That  is 
what  our  fathers  used  to  call  judicial 
wisdom,  the  highest  because  the  lowliest 
wisdom,   the   wisdom    most    profound 
because  most  perceptive  and  most  prac- 
tical.    To  be,  in  any  adequate  sense, 
a  leader  or  teacher  of  the  time,  one 
must  be  a  student  of  all  times — past, 
present,   future.      No   man  can  read 
the  lesson  of  to-day  who  did  not  learn 
his  alphabet  amid  the  events  of  yester- 
day.    He  will  make  sad  mistakes  in 
his  handling  of  current  opportunities 
who  casts  no  prescient  glance  towards 
the   indications    of    to-morrow.      The 
combined    genius    of    history    and    of 
prophecy  can  alone  interpret  and  guide 
the  spirit  of  the  time.     It  is  as  true  of 
humanity  as  it  is  of  the  physical  uni- 
verse ;  it  is  a  grand  and  vital  unit,  not 
a   kaleidoscope    of    broken  fragments. 
And  to  understand  where  we  are  and 
whither  we    ought   to   tend  we  must 
know   whence    we  have  come  and  to 
what    goal    the    growing     indications 
point.     A   pitiable    spectacle  of  noisy 
incompetence  is  the  man  who  imagines 
that   to  serve  his    own  generation  he 
must  cut  himself  adrift  from  all  con- 
sideration and  reverence  of  the  past. 
Of  no  use  to  his  age  is  the  fussy  experi- 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xiii. 


menter,  the  declared  opportunist,  who 
boasts  that  he  never  looks  more  than 
a  fortnight  ahead  in  his  manipulation 
of    affairs.       The    crown    of    all    true 
wisdom  is  service,  and  to  serve  the  age 
a  man  must  be  alive  to  its  evils  and 
possibilities,    to   its   laughter   and    its 
tears.     The  danger  of  judicial   blind- 
ness, however,  the  failure  to  see  and 
do  the  duty  of  the  day,  does  not  beset 
the  leaders  alone,   but   very   palpably 
surrounds    and    afflicts    the    humbler 
occupants  of  the  ranks.     In  one  man 
it   takes    the    form   of   regretful  and 
debilitating   reminiscence.     His   heart 
is  in  the  "  good  old  days."     Life  was 
worth  living  then.     There  was  some- 
thing to  be  done,  and  room  to  do  it. 
Things    are    different     now.      Life    is 
too  crowded,  too  vulgar,  too  complex. 
Poetry   is   gone.     Chivalry   is    out   of 
date.      Heroism   is   impossible.      This 
man  is  blinded  by  memory.     Another 
is   blinded   by  forecast.      He   believes 
there  is  work  to  be  done,  somewhere  ; 
he  believes  he  is  the  man  to  do  it,  some 
time;    but  he  waits    his   opportunity. 
His  dream  of  great  deeds  fills  him  with 
enthusiasm,  but  he  must  bide  his  time. 
Thus,  from  one  cause  or  another,  men 
are  apt  to  overlook  or  underrate  the 
present    task.       They    are    dreamers, 
idlers,  pessimists,  in  some  cases  pietists 
who  despise  the  world's  problems  even 
while  they  live  by  the  world's  problem- 
making  labour.     3.  The  third  element 
in  a    truly  noble  life    is    the   feature 
of  Divine  inspiration  and  submission. 
David   not   only  served — he  not  only 
served    his    own    generation — but    he 
served  it  according  to  the  will  of  God. 
That  means,  in  a  word,  that  while  he 
served  his  own  age  he  did  not  serve 
at  its  bidding,  by  its  direction,  for  its 
reward.     He  stood  above  its  prejudices 
and  passions,  above  its  noisy  voices  and 
its   alleged   interests.       While    in  the 
world  he  was  not  of  it.     He  was  God's 
servant,    working  out    in   God's  name 
and  by  His  direction  the  sacred  tasks 
of  the  day.     That  feature  of  his  life 
suggests  two  important  remarks.     In 
the  first  place,  it  helps  us  to  distinguish 
between   a   time-server   and   one  who 


serves  his  time.     Do  not  think,  then, 
that  in  order  to  serve  your  own  genera- 
tion you  must  needs  bow  down  to  all 
its  demands  and  favour  all  its  schemes. 
Not  the  age,  but  God,  is  your  Master ; 
only  as  you  make  Him  your  Inspiration 
and   Guide   can   you   win   liberty   for 
yourself    and  success    for   your    work. 
But  another  point  is  brought  into  pro- 
minence by  this   association  of  God's 
and  man's  service.     It  is  clearly  indi- 
cated that  the  true  service  of  God  is 
the  true  service  of  man.     This  identi- 
fication of  work  and  worship  as  twin 
elements  of  piety  is  suggested  by  the 
curiously  balanced    grammatical    con- 
struction of  the  text.      In   the  A.V. 
the  text  reads,  "After  he  had  served 
his    own    generation    by    the    will   of 
God  " ;  but  it  places  in  the  margin  an 
alternative   reading,     "  After    he    had 
in    his     own    age     served     the     will 
of  God."     The  R.V.  gives  us,  with  a 
slight    verbal    alteration,    both    these 
translations,      only     it      places      the 
text    of    the    A.Y.     in     its     margin, 
and  the  marginal  reading  in  its  text. 
The  sentence    can    be   construed  with 
equal  accuracy  either  way,  and  so  can 
its  sense.     For  when  we  ask,  What  is 
the     substantial     difference     between 
serving  our  generation  by  the  will  of 
God  and  serving  the  will  of  God  in  our 
generation  ?  we  cannot  discover  it.     We 
can  only  see  variously  accentuated  ex- 
pressions of  the  same  thought.     Do  not 
mistake  me.     I  am  not  saying  God  has 
no  delight  in  our  songs,  our  prayers, 
our    orderly    and   regular  occasions  of 
praise.     He  is  pleased  with  them,  and 
makes  them   means    of   grace    to   us. 
They  are  properly  described  as  Divine 
service.     But  should  I  not  be  right  if 
1  called  them  occasions  of  self-service 
as  well  as  of  Divine  praise  1     We  get 
a  great  deal  more  than  we  give  when 
we   enter   the   sanctuary.     We   get  a 
vision  of  God ;  a  renewal  of  grace.     I 
will   tell   you   when    the    real  Divine 
service  begins — when  the  preacher  has 
ceased  to   speak,   and   the  organ   has 
finished  its  noble  notes,  and  the  lights 
are  put  out,  and  the  doors  of  the  sanc- 
tuary are  closed,  and  you  are  out  yonder 

297 


CHAP.  Xiil.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


in  the  street,  and  you  turn  about  to 
find  an  outlet  for  the  inspiration  of  the 
house  of  prayer  in  the  feeding  of  the 
poor,  in  the  succouring  of  the  helpless, 
in  the  attacking  of  some  gaunt  wrong, 
in  the  advocacy  of  justice,  sobriety, 
truth.  That  is  God's  service,  Divine 
service,  and  it  makes  for  the  peace  and 
joy  of  His  kingdom !  Such  is  the 
model  life  set  before  us  in  the  text. 

II.  A  fine  conception  of  death. — 
"  He  fell  on  sleep."  1.  The  death  of 
the  godly  man  is  an  ordered  and 
gracious  dispensation.  For  it  was 
after  David  had  served  that  "  he  fell 
on  sleep";  not  before  nor  during  his 
submissive  fulfilment  of  the  work  God 
gave  him  to  do.  2.  The  death  of  the 
godly  man  is  a  peaceful  sinking  into 
rest.  What  a  beautiful  phrase  is  that, 
"  He  fell  on  sleep  "  !  There  is  nothing 
repulsive  or  fearsome  about  sleep. — 
C.  A.  Berry,  D.D. 

Ver.  38.  A  Sermon  on  Forgiveness. 

I.  The  burden  of  the  gospel 
message. 

II.  The  result  of  a  Divine  act  of 
justification. 

III.  A  blessing  secured  for  man 
through  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  Attainable  by  all  on  condition 
of  believing  on  Christ. 

Ver.  43.  Continuing  in  the  Grace  of 
God. 

I.  The  best  evidence  of  conversion. 
II.  The  requisite  condition  of  salva- 
tion. 
III.  The  essence  of  Christian  duty. 

Ver.  39.  PauVs  Doctrine  of  Justifica- 
tion. 

I.  The  meaning  attached  by  Paul  to 
the  term  justification. — 1.  Etymologi- 
cally  considered,  the  English  word 
"  justification  "  signifies  to  make  just  ; 
but  the  Greek  word,  being  strictly 
a  forensic  term,  does  not  mean  to 
make  just,  or  infuse  righteousness  into 
any  one,  but  to  declare  one  to  be  just 
or  righteous,  to  absolve  one  from  any 
charge  or  claim  which  the  law  might 

298 


have  against  him.  2.  Legally  viewed, 
justification  is  the  exact  opposite  of 
condemnation,  which  also  is  a  purely 
forensic  term,  and  does  not  make  or 
render  any  one  brought  before  it 
guilty,  but  simply  declares  or  pro- 
nounces such  a  one  to  be  guilty,  if 
so  be  the  evidence  supplied  has 
established  his  guilt.  3.  Theologically 
regarded,  justification  is  a  declara- 
tion or  pronouncement  on  the  part 
of  God,  not  that  the  sinner  is 
thenceforward  personally  innocent, 
holy,  blameless,  but  that,  so  far  as 
the  Divine  law  is  concerned,  the  sinner 
is  acquitted,  freed  from  liability  to 
punishment,  and  contemplated  as 
having  met  all  the  law's  just  and 
necessary  demands  upon  him. 

II.  The  ground  upon  which,  ac- 
cording to  Paul,  this  sentence  of 
justification  proceeds. — 1.  Not  the 
original  righteousness  or  faultlessness  of 
the  so-called  sinner,  who  has  been  im- 
peached, but  wrongly,  at  heaven's  bar. 
Paul's  doctrine  of  justification  rests 
upon  the  antecedent  doctrine  of  the 
universal  guiltiness  and  actual  con- 
demnation of  the  race  in  its  totality 
and  in  every  separate  member  (Rom. 
iii.  9-22).  2.  Not  the  acquired  right- 
eousness of  the  individual  sinner,  who 
by  personal  merit  has  undertaken  to 
wipe  out  his  original  and  actual  un- 
righteousness. The  Jews,  and  especially 
the  Pharisees,  imagined  that  this  could 
be  done  by  observance  of  the  law  of 
Moses.  Men  in  general  conceive  the 
same  thing  attainable  through  good 
works.  But  Paul  repudiated  and 
repudiates  all  sort  of  personal  merit 
based  upon  the  individual's  own 
performances  as  a  basis  for  the 
Divine  sentence  of  justification  (Horn. 
iv.  5  ;  Eph.  ii.  8 ;  Titus  iii.  5).  3.  But 
the  imputed  righteousness  of  Jesus 
Christ,  who,  according  to  the  view 
taken  by  Him  of  Christ's  person  and 
work,  occupied  the  room  of  sinful  men 
(2  Cor.  v.  21),  and  in  their  stead  ful- 
filled the  law's  requirements  by  His 
obedience  unto  death  (Phil.  ii.  8),  which 
obedience  unto  death,  having  been  pro- 
vided by  God's  free  grace,  constituted 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xiii. 


"  His  righteousness  "  (Rom.  iii.  25), 
which  He  wrought  out  for  man  by 
Jesus  Christ,  and  manifested  and  set 
forth  and  still  manifests  and  sets 
forth  as  an  adequate  and  all-sufficient 
ground,  yea,  as  the  only  ground  upon 
which  He  either  will  or  can  justify  the 
ungodly  (Rom.  iii.  19-31). 

III.  The  condition  upon  which, 
according  to  Paul,  this  real  act  of 
justification  proceeds. — 1.  Not  works, 
inasmuch  as  these  have  been  already 
excluded  (Gal.  ii.  11),  and  if  again 
admitted  would  not  only  tend  to  im- 
pair the  all -sufficiency  of  Christ's  right- 
eousness (2  Cor.  v.  21),  but  would 
inevitably  introduce  thoughts  of  per- 
sonal merit  into  the  individual's  mind 
(Rom.  iii.  27),  and  so  far  would  militate 
against  the  true  character  of  justifica- 
tion as  a  judicial  act  of  acquittal 
pronounced  upon  those  who  are  them- 
selves absolutely  without  righteousness 
or  merit  of  their  own  (Rom.  iv.  5). 
2.  But  faith,  and  faith  alone,  without 
works  (Rom.  iii.  28),  without  merit, 
without  righteousness  (Eph.  ii.  9  ;  Gal. 
ii.  16),  simply  by  believing  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  on  Him  who  for  Jesus' 
sake  justifies  the  ungodly  (Rom.  x. 
4-11;  Gal.  iii.  8;  Phil.  iii.  9). 


IV.  The  extent  to  which,  according 
to  Paul,  this  justification  prevails. — 

"  All  things  from  which  a  man  could 
not   (and  cannot)  be  justified  by  the 
law  of  Moses,"  whether  moral  or  cere- 
monial.    1.  It  discharges  the  sinner  who 
believes  from  all  responsibility  for  his 
sins,  past,   present,   and  to  come.     It 
relieves  him  of  the  sentence  of  condem- 
nation which  previously  overhung  him 
(Rom.  viii.  1).     It  blots  out  the  hand- 
writing which  stood  recorded  against 
him  (Col.  ii.  14).     It  places  him  in  a 
state    of    reconciliation    towards   God 
(2  Cor.  v.  18).     It  sets  him  in  a  con- 
dition of  peace  before  God  (Rom.  v.  1). 
It  practically  pardons  him  fully,  freely, 
and  for  ever.    2.  It  furnishes  the  sinner 
who  believes  with  a  righteousness  that 
can  perfectly  satisfy  the  law's  demands 
for   obedience.      It   not    only   releases 
him   from   the  law's    penalty,    but   it 
accepts  him  as  righteous  in  its  sight, 
not  on  account   of   any  righteousness 
infused  into  him,  but  on   account  of 
Christ's  righteousness  imputed  to  him 
(Rom.  iv.  22-25,  x.  4).     While  Christ's 
sacrificial  death  discharges  him    from 
the   guilt   of   his  sin,  Christ's  perfect 
obedience    constitutes     his      title     to 
eternal   life. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  45—52. 


A  Second  JSabbath  in  Pisidian  Antioch  ;  or,  the  Promising  Situation  changed. 

I.  Fierce  opposition  to  the  gospel  on  the  part  of  the  Jews. — Displayed  in 
ascending  stages.  1.  Indignation. — They  were  filled  with  "  envy  "  or  "  jealousy," 
•or  better,  boiling  wrath,  against  the  multitudes  of  Gentiles  who  on  this  second 
Sabbath  had  crowded  the  synagogue  and  perhaps  overflowed  into  the  street,  and 
who  everywhere  manifested  an  eager  desire  to  hear  the  word  of  God  (ver.  45). 
2.  Contradiction.  They  interrupted  the  apostles  while  preaching  by  declaring 
what  they  said  about  Jesus  to  be  contrary  to  fact  and  therefore  untrue,  possibly 
asserting  that  He  was  not  the  long-promised  Messiah,  was  not  God's  Holy 
One,  had  never  been  raised  from  the  dead,  and  could  not  be  the  author  of 
salvation  to  any.  3.  Blasphemy.  Either  reviling  Jesus  as  an  impostor  and  a 
malefactor,  or  declaring  Him  to  have  been  in  league  with  Satan  (compare 
John  x.  20).  Perhaps  also  hurling  opprobrious  epithets  and  railing  accusations 
against  the  apostles  (ver.  45).  4.  Rejection.  Rising  into  greater  heat,  they 
appear  to  have  openly  and  scornfully  intimated  their  determination  not  to 
believe  in  Christ  or  accept  of  salvation  through  His  name,  but  to  thrust  away 
from  themselves  the  offer  of  eternal  life  (ver.  46).  5.  Persecution.  They  stirred 
up  and  urged  on  the  devout  women  of  honourable  estate  who  were  proselytes, 
along  with  the  chief  men  of  the  city,  most  likely  their  husbands,  to  set  on  foot 

299 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


a  persecution  against  the  apostles — a  persecution  Paul  afterwards  alludes  to 
(2  Tim.  iii.  11).  6.  Expulsion.  So  successfully  did  they  work  that  the  apostles 
were  forcibly  ejected  from  their  "  coasts  "  or  "  cast  out  of  their  borders."  The 
persecution,  probably  a  tumultuous  outbreak,  obliged  the  apostles  to  retire 
beyond  the  precincts  of  the  city,  to  which,  however,  they  returned  on  their 
homeward  journey  (xiv.  21). 

II.  Solemn  decision  as  to  preaching  on  the  part  of  the  apostles.— 1.  Its 
purport.  Not  that  they  would  henceforth  discontinue  preaching  to  the  Jews, 
and  turn  exclusively  to  the  Gentiles,  since  they  do  not  appear  to  have  passed  by 
their  countrymen  in  their  subsequent  ministrations  (xiv.  1),  but  that  there  and 
then  they  would  leave  their  unbelieving  brethren  to  their  blind  infatuation  and 
self-elected  doom,  and  devote  their  attention  to  the  Gentile  inhabitants  of  the 
city.  2.  Its  reason.  It  was  necessary,  both  as  according  with  Christ's  command 
(i.  8  ;  Rom.  i.  16)  and  with  their  own  natural  instincts,  that  their  countrymen 
and  kinsmen  should  obtain  the  first  offer  of  the  gospel ;  but  these,  having  judged 
themselves  unworthy  of  the  everlasting  life,  having  shown  by  their  unbelief,  but 
more  especially  by  their  contradiction  and  blasphemy,  that  they  loved  the 
darkness  rather  than  the  light  (John  iii.  19),  had  thus  virtually  made  their 
choice  to  seek  no  part  or  lot  in  the  kingdom  of  God  or  the  salvation  of  Messiah. 
3.  Its  boldness.  It  was  uttered  in  no  half  apologetic  tone,  but  with  courageous 
manliness  as  became  those  who  were  conscious,  not  only  of  following  the  path 
of  duty,  but  of  being  guided  by  the  Spirit.  4.  Its  finality.  They  shook  off 
the  dust  of  their  feet,  as  Christ  had  directed  them  (Matt.  x.  14),  not  in  contempt 
for  (Meyer),  but  as  a  testimony  against,  the  unbelievers,  and  departed  into 
Iconium,  presently  called  Konieh,  a  city  variously  located — at  ninety  (Plumptre), 
sixty  (Lewin),  forty-five  miles  (Hackett)  south-east  of  Antioch,  the  capital  of 
Lycaonia,  and  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  Taurus  (see  on  xiv.  1). 

III.  Hearty  reception  of  the  gospel  by  the  Gentiles. — 1.  Eager  listening. 
Almost  the  whole  city — the  greater  part  of  the  congregation  being  the  native 
heathen  inhabitants — came  together  to  hear  the  word  of  God.  (1)  A  sublime 
spectacle,  a  whole  city  moved  by  a  common  impulse,  more  sublime  when  that 
common  impulse  is  to  hear  the  gospel,  most  sublime  when  that  common  impulse 
is  yielded  to.  Compare  the  situation  in  Samaria  (viii.  6).  (2)  A  hopeful 
attitude.  When  men  will  not  hear  their  conversion  is  impossible,  or  at  all  events 
improbable,  since  "faith  cometh  by  hearing"  (Rom.  >\  17).  Those  who  hear 
the  gospel,  if  not  yet  in,  are  at  least  near  the  kingdom.  The  word  of  the 
kingdom  received  into  the  understanding  may  find  its  way  to  the  heart  and 
conscience.  2.  Earnest  believing.  Those  among  the  listeners  who  were 
ordained  to  eternal  life  and  whose  hearts  the  Lord  opened  (xvi.  14),  believed, 
received  the  truth  in  the  simplicity  of  faith,  and  were  thereby  saved.  (1)  That 
any  believed  was  due  to  grace  Divine.  Whatever  else  is  signified  by  being 
"  ordained  to  eternal  life/'  this  is  implied,  that  their  faith  proceeded  not  from 
themselves,  but  was  the  gift  of  God  (Eph.  ii.  8;.  (2)  That  all  did  not  believe 
was  due  to  the  natural  disinclination  of  the  human  heart  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  If  it 
cannot  be  supposed  that  all  the  Antiochians  were  converted,  the  impression 
conveyed  by  the  narrative  is  that  many  were.  Had  the  majority  been  won 
over,  the  persecution  of  the  apostles  would  scarcely  have  been  successful. 
2.  Triumphant  rejoicing.  The  Gentiles  were  glad.  (1)  At  the  intimation  of 
the  apostles  that  they  were  about  to  bear  their  gospel  message  to  the  heathen. 
(2)  At  the  announcement  that  Christ  had  been  "  set  for  salvation  unto  the  ends 
of  the  earth."  (3)  At  their  own  personal  experience  of  the  blessing  of  the 
gospel,  "they  were  filled  with  joy,  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  4.  Adoring 
gratitude.  They  glorified  the  word  of  God,  or  of  the  Lord,  not  simply  by 
listening  to,  believing  in,  and  making  experience  of,  but  also  in  giving  thanks 

300 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap,  xiil 


for  it — u  for  the  mercy  which  had  embraced  them  in  the  plan  of  salvation  and 
had  given  them  this  opportunity  to  secure  its  benefits." 

Learn. — 1.  That  the  duty  of  every  one  to  whom  the  gospel  comes  is  to  accord 
it  a  hearing,  patient,  unprejudiced,  and  respectful.  2.  That  the  gospel  cannot 
be  killed  by  contradicting  and  blaspheming  either  it  or  its  messengers.  3.  That 
the  first  to  hear  the  gospel  are  often  the  last  to  accept  it.  4.  That  none  are 
lost  except  those  who  judge  themselves  unworthy  of  eternal  life.  5.  That  none 
believe  except  those  who  are  ordained  to  eternal  life.  6.  That  the  same  gospel 
which  fills  some  with  rage  fills  others  with  joy.  7.  That  joy  in  a  believer's  soul 
arises  from  the  inhabitation  of  that  soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  44.  A  Marvellous  Sight.  "Al-  I Y.  The  Jews  condemning  themselves 
most  a  whole  city  gathered  together  to  as  unworthy  of  eternal  life,  the  Gen- 
hear  the  word  of  God."  tiles  believing  to  justification  as  worthy 

I.  Unusual. — Cities  or  the  people  of  and  qualified  for  eternal  life. — 
in  them  have  so  much  else  to  engage  Stier. 

their  attention,  as,  e.g.,  business,  plea- 
sure,  social   duties,    political    engage-  yer  47>  Salvation. 
ments,  etc.  I.  Its  nature— light. 

II.  Wonderful.— Not  to  see  groups  n    its  medium— "  Thee,"  Christ, 
of  persons  assembled  to  hear  the  word  m    Itg  destination— the  Gentiles, 
of  God,  but  to  observe  a  whole  city  or  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth< 
nearly  so  gathered  for  such  a  purpose.            jy    j^s  source God 

III.  Sublime. — To  look  upon  a  vast 

multitude  all  absorbed  in  higher  things  ao    ^    i   -      i       n 

than  those  of  time  and  sense,  in  things  Ver-  »■  Ordained  to  Eternal  Life. 

pertaining   to   salvation    and    eternal  -J*  The  £oal>  eternal  life. 

j-£e  II.  The  way  thither,  through  faith. 

IV.  Desirable.  —  Few,  who  can  IIL  The  impelling  power,  Divine 
rightly    estimate     the    value    of    the      gra_ce-  . 

gospel  as  God's  word  in  contradistinc-  IV.  The   plan  in    accordance   with 

tion  to  man's,  will  deny  that  such  a  wmch  xt  works>  foreordination. 
spectacle  as   is   here  described   is  one 

greatly  to  be  longed  for.  Or  thus  : — 

V.  Hopeful. — What  consequences  of  A  Sermon  on  Foreordination. — Fore- 
good  might  be  expected  to  result  from  ordination.     An  act — 

a  whole  city  or  the  larger  portion  of  it  I.    Divine. — Of      necessity    whatso- 

turning  out  to  hear  the  word  of  God  !  ever  comes  to  pass  is  known  beforehand 

Surely  an  immediate  awakening  would  to   God.      Whether   foreordination    is 

follow  with  not  a  few,  perhaps  a  mul-  grounded  on  foreknowledge  (Arminius) 

titude  of  conversions.  or    foreknowledge     on    foreordination 

{Calvin),  makes   no   difference   to  the 

Vers.  45-48.  Jews  and  Gentiles;  or,  issue.     Whatever  comes  to  pass  is  and 

Gospel  Hearers  and  their  Different  Atti-  has  been  divinely  arranged,  reray/xei/oi/. 

tudes,  Characters,  and  Destinies.  II.    Sovereign. — This     arrangement 

I.  The  Jews  full  of  envy,  the  has  its  basis  in  the  good  pleasure  of 
Gentiles  full  of  gladness.  God,  or  the  counsel  of  His  own  will 

II.  The  Jews  contradicting,  the  Gen-  (Eph.  i.  5,  11).  This  so,  even  should 
tiles  listening.  it  be  that  God  in  arranging  has  had 

III.  The  Jews  thrusting  from  them  regard  to  foreseen  faith  and  good  works 
the  word  of  God,  the  Gentiles  glorify-      in  man. 

ing  the  word  of  God.  III.  Gracious. — It  is  ordination,  not 

301 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


to  condemnation,  but  to  eternal  life.  If 
men  are  lost,  it  is  because  they  judge 
themselves  unworthy  of  eternal  life  ;  if 
they  are  saved,  it  is  because  Divine 
grace  has  chosen  them  to  eternal  life 
(Eph.  i.  4). 

IV.  Rational.  —  Foreordination  is 
not  an  arbitrary  or  mechanical  force  or 
decree  that  overrides  the  human  will 
and  executes  itself  irrespective  of  the 
nature  of  man,  but  a  counsel  of  perfec- 
tion that  works  towards  its  end  by 
making  use  of  man's  free  will  and  re- 
sponsible intelligence. 

V.  Mysterious. — After  all  has  been 
said  that  can  be  said  by  metaphysical 
theologians,  it  remains  an  impenetrable 
secret  how  God  can  be  sovereign  and 
man  free.  Yet  Scripture,  providence, 
and  individual  consciousness  attest  that 
both  doctrines  are  true. 


Ver.  52.  Filled  with  Joy. 

I.  Desirable. — Cannot  be  desirable 
to  live  in  doubt,  sadness,  and  fear  aris- 
ing from  uncertainty  as  to  personal 
salvation. 

II.  Possible. — Proved  by  numerous 
instances  in  Scripture ;  as,  e.g.,  the 
Samaritans  (viii.  8),  the  Corinthians 
(2  Cor.  viii.  2),  the  Thessalonians 
(1  Thess.  i.  6),  the  Eunuch  (viii.  39), 
the  jailor  of  Philippi  (xvi.  34). 

III.  Attainable.— 1.  By  being  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  (Eom.  xv.  13; 
Gal.  v.  22).     2.  By  believing  on  Jesus. 

Vers.  48,  49.  How  to  glorify  the  Word 
of  God.     By— 

I.  Listening  to  it. 
II.  Believing  it. 

III.  Obeying  it. 

IV.  Spreading  it. 


CHAPTER    XIV. 


The   First    Missionary    Journey    (Paul    and    Barnabas) — continued    and 

concluded. 

§  1.  Paul  and  Barnabas  at  Iconium ;  or,  continued  Opposition  from  the  Jews 

(vers.  1-7). 
§  2.  Paul  and  Barnabas  at  Lystra ;    or,  the  Gospel  among  Barbarians  (vers. 

8-20). 
§  3.  The  Homeward  Journey  of  Paul  and  Barnabas ;  or,  Back  to  Antioch  in 

Syria  (vers.  20-28). 


CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Iconium. — Presently  styled  Konieh.  Situated  south-east  of  Pisidian  Antioch,  and 
according  to  apocryphal  legend  the  abode  of  the  virgin  martyr  Thecla,  who  is  said  to  have 
been  at  this  time  converted  by  Paul.  Whether  Iconium  was  a  Lycaonian  (Cicero,  Strabo, 
Pliny),  Phrygian  (Xenophon),  or  Pisidian  (Ammianus  Marcellinus)  city  is  debated  by  modern 
writers  (see  "  Homiletical  Analysis").  Together-. — Kara  to  avrb,  as  in  iii.  1,  rather  than  at 
the  same  time  (Holtzmann),  or  in  the  same  manner  (Wolf).  So. — Not  with  such  power,  but 
with  this  result.  The  Greeks. — Having  been  in  the  synagogue  these  were  most  likely 
proselytes  (compare  xiii.  43),  and  therefore  a  different  class  from  those  mentioned  in  xi.  20. 

Ver.  2.  But  the  unbelieving  Jews. — Lit.,  but  the  Jews  having  disbelieved,  when  the  others 
believed,  stirred  up  the  Gentiles,  etc.  Better,  stirred  up  the  souls  of  the  Gentiles  and  made 
them  evil  affected.  KaKow  occurs  in  the  New  Testament  onby  here.  Plow  the  Jews  incited 
the  Gentiles  is  not  told;  but  see  xiii.  45-50,  xviii.  5-9.  Only  two  of  the  persecutions 
recorded  in  the  Acts  (xvi.  19,  xix.  28)  proceeded  from  others  than  Jews.  The  Bezan  text 
adds,  "  But  the  Lord  gave  peace  quickly,"  wrhich  Professor  Kamsay  is  disposed  to  accept  as 
correct,  in  order  to  explain  the  "  long  time  "  of  next  verse. 

302 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xiv. 


Ver.  3. — The  best  authorities  omit  and  between  "  gave  testimony "  and  "  granted." 
Spitta  regards  this  verse  as  "  a  scrap  from  an  independent  and  complete  narrrative  ;  " 
Ramsay,  as  "  an  early  gloss  similar  to  the  many  which  have  crept  into  the  Bezan  text." 

Ver.  4.  Divided. — The  usual  result  of  the  gospel  (see  John  vii.  43,  x.  19  ;  Acts  xxiii.  7). 

Ver.  5.  An  assault. — Should  rather  be  an  onset  (R.V.),  or  better,  "  an  impulse,"  or 
inclination  towards  such  an  onset  (Meyer,  Alford),  a  hostile  agitation  (Zockler),  since  the 
words  "  they  were  ware  of  it "  seem  to  imply  that  the  assault  had  not  been  made.  Besides, 
Paul  was  only  once  stoned  (2  Cor.  xi.  25),  whereas  had  this  evil  intention  been  carried  out 
he  would  have  twice  suffered  that  indignity  (see  ver.  19). 

Ver.  6.  Lystra. — About  six  hours  south-south-west  from  Iconium,  at  Khatyn  Serai  (Sir  C. 
Wilson),  "  on  a  hill  in  the  centre  of  a  valley,"  "  3,777  feet  above  the  sea,  and  427  above 
Iconium  "  (Ramsay).  Derbe. — "  The  frontier  city  of  the  Roman  province  on  the  south-east  " 
(Ramsay).  The  site  uncertain,  placed  by  some  (Lewin,  Conybeare  and  Howson,  Farrar) 
twenty  miles,  by  others  (Sterrett)  two  miles  distant  from  Lystra.  Cities  of  Lycaonia. — ■ 
Ptolemseus  reckoned  these  as  belonging  to  Isauria.  "  Lystra  and  Derbe  were  cities  of 
Lycaonia  Galatica — i.e.,  that  part  of  Lycaonia  which  was  attached  to  the  province  Galatia, 
while  Iconium  reckoned  itself  as  a  city  of  Phrygia,  Galatia — i.e.,  the  part  of  Phrygia 
which  was  attached  to  the  province  Galatia"  (Ramsay). 

Ver.  7.  And  there  they  preached  the  gospel. — Codex  Bezce  adds:  "And  the  whole 
multitude  was  moved  at  their  teaching  ;  and  Paul  and  Barnabas  abode  in  Lj'stra  "•;  but  this 
cannot  be  accepted  as  original  (Ramsay). 

Ver.  8.  Sat. — No  doubt  in  some  public  place  begging  like  the  lame  man  in  Jerusalem 
(iii.  1).    Not  "  dwelt"  (Kuinoel). 

Ver.  9.  Steadfastly  beholding  him. — Or,  fastening  his  eyes  upon  him,  as  he  did  on  Elymas 
(xiii.  9),  and  as  Peter  did  upon  the  cripple  at  the  Gate  Beautiful  (iii.  4).  Faith  to  be 
healed. — Or,  faith  to  be  saved — i.e.,  from  his  lameness,  though  the  larger  and  higher  mean- 
ing need  not  be  excluded.  He  had,  no  doubt,  been  listening  to  Paul's  preaching,  and  given 
indication  by  his  countenance  that  he  believed  the  gospel  message. 

Ver.  10.  With  a  loud  voice. — Speaking  in  a  tone  higher  than  that  in  which  he  had  been 
preaching  (compare  iii.  6).  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet.— Christ's  name  not  mentioned  as  by 
Peter  (iii.  6),  because  probablyu  nnecessary.  And  he  leaped*(one  act)  and  walked. — Baur) 
(Paul,  his  Life  and  Works, \.  95)  finds  in  this  miracle  and  that  of  the  judgment  on  Elymas  (xiii.  1 1 
most  undoubted  tokens  of  an  apologetic  parallel  with  Peter,  who  healed  a  lame  man  at  the 
Gate  Beautiful  (iii.  1-8)  and  encountered  a  sorcerer  in  Samaria  (viii.  9-24) — i.e.,  on  first 
stepping  out  among  the  heathen.  But  as  lame  men  and  magicians  were  then  plentiful,  it  is 
not  surprising  that  both  apostles  should  have  met  such  characters ;  while,  if  both  apostles 
were  guided  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  why  should  it  be  wonderful  that  He  should  lead  Paul  to 
work  similar  miracles  with  those  of  Peter  ?  And  more  especially  if  (as  Baur  admits)  such 
miracles  were  necessary  to  legitimate  Paul's  apostleship  ?  The  Holy  Ghost,  one  would 
naturally  reason,  would  be  as  likely  as  a  second  century  writer  to  know  what  sort  of  works 
Paul  should  do  to  secure  his  recognition  as  a  Christian  apostle. 

Ver.  11.  The  speech  of  Lycaonia. — Supposed  by  some  to  have  been  an  Assyrian  dialect 
(Jablonski),  by  others  a  corrupt  form  of  Greek  (Guhling),  and  by  a  third  party  a  Galatian 
tongue,  has  completely  disappeared,  though  Stephen  of  Byzantium,  in  the  fifth  century, 
reports  it  as  then  existing,  and  gives  dt\/3eia  as  Lycaonian  for  "  a  juniper  "  (Farrar,  i.  381). 
For  the  chief  cities  of  Lycaonia  (ver.  6)  see  "  Homiletical  Analysis."  The  gods  are  come 
down  to  us  in  the  likeness  of  men.— Compare  Homer's  Odyssey,  xvii.  484  :  kol  re  deol  j-eivoiaiv 
eoiKores  aWodcnro'iat.i',  Travroioi  reXidovres,  iTncrTpuxpuxrc  ttoXtjcls,  etc.  "  And  the  gods,  like  to 
strangers  from  foreign  lands,  coming  forth  in  all  sorts  of  shapes,  visit  the  cities,  observing 
both  the  insolence  and  the  order  (or  good  behaviour)  of  men  "  ;  and  Ovid's  Metamorphosis, 
viii.  626:  Jupiter  hue,  specie  mortali  cumque  parente,  venit  Atlantiades  positis  caducifer 
alis.  "  Hither  comes  Jupiter  in  the  form  of  a  mortal,  and  with  his  parent  comes  herald 
Atlantiades  (Mercury)  his  wings  laid  aside."  Such  conceptions  were  common  in  New 
Testament  times  (Harnack).     See  further  on  ver.  11  "Hints." 

Ver.  12.  Barnabas  was  designated  Jupiter  or  Zeus,  probably  because  the  older  and  more 
dignified  in  appearance.  Paul  Mercurius. — Or  Hermes,  because  he  was  the  chief  speaker. — 
Lit.,  the  leader  of  the  discourse — i.e.,  because  of  his  eloquence.  "  Paul  is  here  the  messenger 
of  the  Supreme  God:  he  says  in  Gal.  iv.  14,  'Ye  received  me  as  a  Messenger  of  God"' 
(Ramsay). 

Ver.  13.  The  priest. — Most  likely  the  principal  or  high-priest  of  Jupiter  or  Zeus.  Professor 
Ramsay  regards  the  reading  "  priests  "  of  Codex  Bezce  as  preferable,  on  the  ground  that  the 
oxen  and  garlands  would  not  be  brought  by  the  priest  himself,  but  by  his  attendants, 
mlnistri.  Which,  rather,  ivho,  was. — I.e.,  had  a  statue  or  temple  consecrated  to  him,  before 
their,  or  the,  city.  "The  temple  of  the  tutelary  god  stood  often  outside  of  the  walls" 
(Hackett).  Unto  the  gates. — Of  the  house  where  the  apostles  lodged  (De  Wette,  Lewin, 
Olshausen,  Plumptre),  of  the  temple,  or  most  probably  of  the  city  (Meyer,  Alford,  Stier, 

303 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Holtzmann,  Hackett,  and  others).  According  to  the  Bezan  text  which  reads  eiridtiav,  the 
proposed  sacrifice  was  an  extra  beyond  the  ordinary  ritual — a  sense  which  though  not 
occurring  elsewhere  "  seems  to  lie  fairly  within  the  meaning  of  the  compound  "  (Ramsay). 

Ver.  14.  Bent  their  clothes. — From  the  neck  downwards;  the  ordinary  Jewish  mode  of 
expressing  horror  at  anything  seen  or  heard  (see  Ezra  ix.  3  ;  Job  i.  20,  ii.  12 ;  Matt,  xxvii. 
65).     Ran  in,  leaped  forth. — From  the  city  or  from  the  house  in  which  they  were. 

Ver.  15.  Men  of  like  passions,  or,  natural  properties  with  you. — Compare  Peter's  address 
to  Cornelius,  x.  26  ;  and  James  v.  17. 

Ver.  16.  Times  should  be  generations,  and  all  nations,  all  the  nations. 

Ver.  17. — The  best  authorities  read  your  instead  of  our. 

Ver.  18.  That  they  had  not  done  sacrifice. — Better,  from  doing  sacrifice  unto  them  :  rod  fir] 
Btiav  avrois.     Compare  x.  47. 

Ver.  19.  Who  persuaded,  etc. — Should  be  who  having  persuaded  the  multitudes  and  having 
stoned  Paul — i.e.,  they  persuaded  the  multitude  to  stone  the  apostle  (see  2  Cor.  xi.  25  ; 
2  Tim.  iii.  11).  This  is  the  only  occasion  on  which  Paul  was  stoned,  the  intention  in  Iconium 
(ver.  5)  not  having  been  carried  out.  Barnabas  appears  to  have  escaped  their  notice.  It  is 
those  who  advocate  their  opinions  who  have  to  suffer  for  them. 

Ver.  20.  The  disciples. — Among  these  probably  stood  Timothy,  the  apostle's  future  associate 
(see  xvi.  1  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  11). 

Ver.  21.  Taught  many  is  better  rendered  made  many  disciples  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  One  of 
these  was  probably  Gaius  of  Derbe  (xx.  4).  Gaius  of  xix.  29  was  a  Macedonian;  he  of  Rom. 
xvi.  23  and  1  Cor.  i.  14  a  Corinthian. 

Ver.  22.  We  must  through  much  tribulation  (many  tribulations,  R.V.)  enter,  etc.  "This 
is  one  of  the  few  personal  touches  of  the  Acts,"  which  can  in  no  way  be  accounted  for  "  than 
by  supposing  that  Luke  was  composing  his  history  during  the  time  of  special  persecution," 
viz.,  during  that  of  Domitian  (Ramsay,  St  Paul,  the  Traveller,  etc.,  p.  123).  An  interesting 
remark  but  by  no  means  a  conclusive  argument,  since  "  we  "  might  have  been  used  by  Paul 
and  only  quoted  by  Luke. 

Ver.  23.  Ordained. — x€LPOTOVe^v  (2  Cor.  viii.  10)  signifies  properly  to  stretch  out  or  hold  up 
the  hand,  as  in  voting,  hence  generally  to  appoint  (see  x.  41).  Whether  the  election  was 
made  by  the  apostles  (Olshausen,  Holtzmann,  Hackett,  Spence,  Plumptre),  or  by  the  Church 
(Alford,  Lechler,  Calvin,  Brown,  Ramsay),  is  debated;  though  the  example  of  vi.  2-6  would  seem 
to  indicate  that  the  apostles  admitted  into  office  by  ordination  those  whom  the  people  had 
chosen  by  show  of  hands.  Elders,  presbyters. — Those  appointed  in  each  Church  to  watch 
over  the  disciples,  and  thence  called  "  overseers "  (xx.  28).  In  Jewish  Churches  these 
officials  were  mostly  styled  " presbyters  "  or  "  elders,"  in  Gentile  Churches  "overseers"  or 
"  bishops";  but  that  the  two  were  exactly  synonymous  appears  from  their  interchangeability 
(xx.  17,  28 ;  Titus  i.  5,  7).  Elsewhere  (Eph.  iv.  11)  they  are  designated  pastors  or  shepherds 
and  teachers.  Prayed  with  fasting  does  not  point  to  later  liturgical  use  as  its  origin 
(Holtzmann),  but  later  liturgical  use  rests  on  apostolic  practice,  as  here  exemplified. 

Ver.  25.  When  they  had  preached  the  word  (some  MSS.  add  of  the  Lord)  in  Perga.— This 
they  did  not  do  on  their  outward  journey  (xiii.  13).  What  success,  if  any,  attended  Paul's 
labours  is  not  stated,  perhaps  because  it  was  not  encouraging  (Hackett).  Attalia  or  Attaleia 
(see  "  Homiletical  Analysis")  was  sixteen  miles  distant  from  Perga. 

Ver.  27.  A  door  of  faith. — A  favourite  metaphor  with  Paul  (compare  1  Cor.  xvi.  9  ;  2  Cor. 
ii.  12  ;  Col.  iv.  3)  which  Luke  may  have  derived  from  him  (Alford). 

Ver.  28.  Long  time. — Lit.,  no  little  time.  Calculations  show  this  period  to  have  embraced 
the  year  A.d.  48  and  49  (see  "  Homiletical  Analysis  "). 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—7. 

Paul  and  Barnabas  in  Iconium  ;  or,  continued  Opposition  from  the  Jews. 

I.  Their  occupation  in  Iconium.—  1.  The  town  and  its  population.  The  town. 
Compelled  to  retire  from  Antioch  in  consequence  of  the  threatening  attitude  of 
the  Jews,  who  stirred  up  against  them  the  principal  inhabitants  of  the  city  and 
their  wives — in  fact,  expelled  by  these  from  their  coasts,  the  apostles,  Paul  and 
Barnabas,  not  without  shaking  off  the  dust  from  their  feet  as  a  testimony 
against  their  co-religionists  (Matt.  x.  14),  directed  their  steps  towards  Iconium, 
now  called  Konieh,  a  city  lying  on  the  road  between  Antioch  and  Lystra,  at  a 
distance  of  ninety  (others  say  sixty)  miles  south-east  from  the  former  city 
and  forty  north-west  from  the  latter"  (Plumptre).  Whether  it  belonged 
to  the  province  of  Lycaonia,  or  of  Phrygia,  or  of  Pisidia,  appears  to  be  as 
much  disputed   by  modern   as   by  ancient  writers  (see  "  Critical   Kemarks "). 

304 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xiv. 


Perhaps  the  truth  is  that  Iconium  belonged  originally  to  Phrygia  but  afterwards 
became  a  city  of  Lycaonia.    Professor  Rainsay  thinks  it  may  have  been  in  63  B.C. 
that   according   to  Pliny  [Nat.   Hist.,    v.  25),   "a  tetiarchy  of    Lycaonia  con- 
taining fourteen  cities,  with  Iconium  as  capital,  was  formed,"  and  that  it  was 
''given to  King  Polemo  in  39  B.C.  by  Mark  Antony  "  (The  Church  in  the  Roman 
Empire,  p.  41).     If  so,   Luke's  statement  that  Paul  and  Barnabas,  on  leaving 
Iconium,  fled  to  Lystra  and  Derbe,  cities  of  Lycaonia,  will  require  explanation ; 
and  this  Professor  Ramsay  furnishes  by  saying  that,  while  between  100  B.C.  and 
100  a.d.  for  administrative  purposes  Iconium  was  reckoned  to  Lycaonia,  in  all 
probability  the  Iconians,  true  to  their  tribal  feelings,  and  adhering  to  their  old 
nationality,  "  continued  to  count  themselves  Phrygian  "  (Ibid.,  38).      In  any  case, 
Iconium  was  the  principal  city  of  that  district  which  was  called  by  the  Romans 
Lycaonia,  and  was  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  Taurus,  like  a  green  oasis  in  the 
middle  of  bleak  plains  that  were  "  scoured  by  wild  asses  and  grazed  by  countless 
herds  of  sheep."     The  modern  city  Konieh,  says  Captain  Kinneir,  <;  extends  to 
the  east  and  south  over  the  plain  far  beyond  the  walls,  which  is  about  two  miles 
in  circumference.  .  .  .  Mountains  covered  with  snow  rise  on  every  side,  except- 
ing towards  the  east,  where  a  plain  as  flat  as  the  desert  of  Arabia  extends  far 
beyond  the  reach   of   the  eye"  (quoted    by  Oonybeare  and  Howson,   i.   174). 
(2)  Its  population.     These,  according  to  the  writers  just  named,  were  a  mixed 
company  :    "A  large  number  of  trifling  and  frivolous  Greeks,  whose  principal 
place  of  resort  would  be  the  theatre  and  the  market-place  ;  some  remains  of  a 
still  older  population,  coming  in  occasionally  from  the  country,  or  residing  in  a 
separate  quarter  of  the  town  ;  some  few  Roman  officials,  civil  or  military,  holding 
themselves  proudly  aloof  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  subjugated  province  ;  and 
an  old  established  colony  of  Jews  who  exercised  their  trade  during  the  week  and 
met  on  the  Sabbath  to  read  law  in  the  synagogue  (Ibid.,  i.  174).    2.  The  apostles 
and  their  ministry.     (1)   The  place  where  this  was  exercised  was  in  the  first 
instance  at  least  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews  on  the  Sabbath  days  and  afterwards 
during   week    days,    probably   in    public   thoroughfares   and    other    places    of 
resort.       (2)  The  form  in  which  it  was  exercised  was   twofold — preaching    or 
speaking  in  the  Lord,  i.e.,  in  the  power  of  His  Spirit — the  theme  of  their  preach- 
ing being  as  elsewhere  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  as  Israel's  Messiah  and  God's  Son, 
proved  through  His  rising  from  the  dead ;  and  working  miracles,  though  none 
of  these  have  been  recorded — doing  signs  and  wonders  through  which  God  gave 
testimony  to  the  word  of  His  grace.     (3)  The  time  during  which  it  was  exercised 
cannot  be  determined,  though  the  words  "  long  time  "  point  to  a  considerable 
stay,  perhaps  of  some  months,  in  this  important  town.     (4)   The  manner  in 
which  it  was  exercised  is  described  as  "  boldly,"  their  confidence  increasing  as 
their  convictions  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  deepened  and  as  their  observation  of 
its  saving  power  widened.     (5)  The  efficiency  with  which  it  was  exercised  was 
revealed  by  the  success  which  attended  it.     The  apostles  so  spake,  in  such  a 
manner  and  with  such  a  result,  that  "  a  great  multitude  both  of  the  Jews  and 
also  of  the  Greeks  believed,"  so  great  a  multitude  indeed  that  the  city  seemed  to 
be  split  in  twain  (ver.  4). 

II.  Their  experience  in  Iconium. — 1.  The  minds  of  the  heathen  population 
were  turned  against  them.  Not  of  their  own  accord,  but  through  the  misrepre- 
sentations of  the  unbelieving  Jews,  who,  no  doubt,  employed  similar  tactics  to 
those  employed  by  their  co-religionists  at  Antioch  (xiii.  45),  perhaps  vilifying  the 
persons  of  the  apostles,  putting  a  false  colour  on  the  object  of  their  mission,  and, 
above  all,  traducing  the  character  and  name  of  Jesus  whom  they  preached. 
2.  A  threefold  combination  was  formed  against  them.  The  Gentiles,  the  Jews  (in 
both  cases  the  unbelieving  portion  of  them — "  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against 
God  "  (Rom.  viii.  7),  and  their  rulers — i.e.,  both  the  civic  and  the  ecclesiastic,  the 

x  305 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


magistrates  of  the  town  and  the  officers  of  the  synagogue  conceived  a  design  to 
set  on  foot  active  measures  of  hostility  against  the  apostles  even  to  the  length  of 
maltreating  and  stoning  them — measures,  however,  which  were  never  carried  out 
(see  "  Critical  Remarks  "). 

III.  Their  departure  from  Iconium. — 1.  Prompted  by  their  knowledge  of  what 
was  being  concerted  against  them.     How  they  became  acquainted  with  the  evil 
designs  of  their  adversaries,  though  not  related,  need  occasion  no  difficulty,  since 
fchey  had  numerous  friends  in  the  city  who  were  interested  in  their  safety,  and 
above  all  Him  upon  their  side  of  whom  it  had  been  written,  "  He  preserve th  the 
souls    of    His  saints,   and  delivereth  them  out   of  the  hands  of    the    wicked " 
(Psalm  xcvii.  10).    Advised  of  their  peril,  like  prudent  men  they  fled  (Prov.  xxii.  3), 
acting  on  the  counsel  Christ  had  given  to  His  disciples  (Matt.  x.  23).     2.  Effected 
with  complete  success.     In  this  case,  as  in  a  former  (ix.  25),  Paul's  enemies  had 
been  outwitted.     Whatever  annoyance  he  and  Barnabas  had  suffered,  they  were 
not  on  this  occasion  stoned.     Nor  did  they  deem  it  necessary  by  remaining 
longer  in  Iconium  to  become  martyrs  before  their  time.     3.  Directed  towards 
the  two  adjoining  cities  of  Lystra  and  Derbe.     The  exact  sites  of  these  cities  are 
unknown.     "Lystra,"  says  Lewin  (The  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  i.   163), 
"  lay  about  forty  miles  to  the  south  of  Iconium,  and  was  still  upon  the  highroad 
to  Syria.     It  was  situate  in  a  hollow  on  the  north  side  of  a  remarkable  isolated 
mountain  rising  out  of  the  great  plain,  and  now  called  Kara  Dagh,  or  Black 
Mountain.     Lofty  peaks  looked  down  upon  the  town  on  all  sides,  except  on  the 
north,   where  the  valley  opened  into  the  plain  of  Iconium.     The  ruins  of  it 
remain,  and  are  called  Bin-Bir-Kilisseh  or  the  Thousand  and  One  Churches,  from 
the  traces  still  visible  of  the  numerous  sacred  edifices  with  which  it  was  once 
adorned."     "Lystra,"  says  Hausrath  (Der  Apostel  Paidus,  p.  219),  "must  have 
lain    hard    upon   the   confines    of    Isaurica,    since    Ptolemaus  reckoned    it    to 
Isaurica,   and,    indeed,    according    to   him   it    was  eight    hours'   distant    from 
Iconium."     Professor  Bamsay  (The  Church  in  the  Rom,an  Empire,  pp.  47,  50) 
locates  Lystra  "  about  six  hours  south  -south  -west  of  Iconium,"  and  identifies  it 
with  the  village  of  Khatyn  Serai   or   '  The   Lady's  Mansion/  situated  "  about 
3777   feet  above  the   sea  and  427   feet   above   Iconium."      "  As  a  Lycaonian 
town   Lystra   had  been  quite  undistinguished ;  as  a  Boman  garrison  it  was  a 
bulwark  of  the  province  of  Galatia,  and  a  sister  city  to  the  great  Boman  centre 
at  Antioch."     Derbe,  according  to  Lewin,  was  "  about  twenty  miles  distant  from 
Lystra,  at  the  south-eastern  corner  of  the  great  Lycaonian  plain,  and  where 
commence  the  highlands  which  run  up  to  Mount  Taurus."    "  Near  by,  but  deeper 
in  the ;  mountain,   on  the  boundaries  of   Cappadocia,  find   we    Derbe,"   writes 
Hausrath.     "  Derbe  was  the  frontier  city  of  the  Boman  province  on  the  south- 
east," reports  Professor  Bamsay,  who  inclines  to  locate  it  at  Gudelissin,  three 
miles  north-north-west  from  Zosta,  adding,  "  Gudelissin  is  the  only  site  in  this 
district   where   a   city  of   the  style  of   Derbe,  the   stronghold  of  '  the   robber 
Anfcipater,'  could  be  situated." 

Learn. — 1.  The  unwearied  diligence  that  ought  to  be  manifested  by  a  faithful 
minister  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  unsleeping  hostility  with  which  the  gospel  and 
its  ministers,  when  these  are  faithful,  are  pursued  by  the  unbelieving  world. 
3.  The  watchful  providence  that  continually  guards  Christ's  servants  and  Christ's 
cause. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  3.  The  Gospel  the  Word  of  God  s  II.  Its  message,  grace. 

Grace.  III.  Its  fruit,  grace. 

I.  Its  origin,  grace.  IV.  Its  conditions,  grace. 

306 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xiv. 


Fellow -Workers  in  the  Gospel.     Christ  II.  In  the  Church. — Separating  true 

and  His  Apostles.  disciples  from  hypocrites. 

I.  The  work  of  the  apostles  (or  min-  III.  In  the  individual. — Separating 
isters). —  1.  Preaching  boldly  in  Christ's  the  soul  from  guilt  and  sin. 

name.       2.  Doing   signs  and  wonders 

(in  the  case  of  the  apostles  miracles,  Vers.    1-7.     The    Preacher   and   his 

both  physical  and   moral ;    in  that  of  Gospel. 

ministers  only  moral)  in  Christ's  name.  I.  What  the  preacher  has  to  do  with 

II.  The  work  of  Christ.— 1.  Giving  his  gospel. — 1.  Preach  it  to  those  who 
testimony  to  the  word  of  His  grace.  have  not  yet  heard  it.  2.  In  the  face 
By  His  Spirit.  2.  Granting  power  to  of  the  fiercest  opposition.  3.  So  long 
perform  signs  and  wonders.  Also  by  as  the  Lord  continues  bearing  witness 
His  Spirit.     3.  Watching  over  His  ser-  to  his  work. 

vants  while  at  their  work.     4.  Opening  II.  What  the  gospel  will  do  for  the 

up  escapes  for  them  when  in  danger.  preacher. — 1.    It   will  gain   him  con- 
verts.    2.    House   against   him    oppo- 

Ver.   4.  The  Dividing  Power  of  the  sition.     3.  Perhaps  endanger  his  life. 

Gospel.  4.   Secure  for  him  the  co-operation  and 

I.    In   the   world. — Separating    be-  commendation  of  the  Lord, 
lievers  from  unbelievers. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  8—20. 

Paul  and  Barnabas  at  Lystra  ;  or,  the  Gospel  among  Barbarians. 

I.  The  miracle  at  Lystra. — 1.  The  subject.  "A  certain  man,  impotent  in  his 
feet,  a  cripple  from  his  mother's  womb,  who  never  had  walked  "  (compare  iii.  2). 
"  The  three  phrases  are  like  three  beats  of  a  hammer ;  there  is  no  fine  literary 
style  in  this  device,  but  there  is  real  force  which  arrests  and  compels  the  reader's 
attention.  Luke  uses  the  triple  beat  in  other  places  for  the  same  purpose — 
e.g.,  xiii.  6,  '  Magian,  false  prophet,  Jew'  and  xvi.  6,  7,  according  to  the  true 
text"  (Ramsay,  St.  Paul,  etc.,  p.  115).  The  cripple,  who  was  obviously  no 
professional  mendicant  but  one  whose  sad  history  was  well  known,  was,  besides 
being  a  proper  subject  for  benevolent  assistance,  manifestly  one  whom  supernatural 
aid  alone  could  restore  to  health.  2.  The  place.  Most  likely  in  the  street  at 
some  public  resort,  as  Lystra  does  not  appear  to  have  had  a  synagogue,  the  Jews 
in  that  rude  and  uncultivated  region  being  probably  a  mere  handful.  3.  The 
time.  When  Paul  was  preaching  and  the  cripple  listening.  "  I,  being  in  the 
way,  the  Lord  led  me  "  (Gen.  xxiv.  27).  The  Bezan  text  suggests  that  the  lame 
man  had  been  a  proselyte  before  he  came  under  Paul's  influence.  4.  The  agent. 
Paul,  who  had  now  taken  complete  precedence  of  Barnabas,  who  had  already  per- 
formed a  miracle  of  judgment  on  the  sorcerer  (xiii.  11),  and  who  by  the  Lystrans 
was  recognised  as  the  chief  speaker.  5.  The  manner.  (1)  The  apostle  fastened 
his  eyes  upon  the  cripple  as  Peter  had  done  on  the  lame  man  at  the  Beautiful 
Gate  of  the  Temple  (hi.  4),  and  as  he  himself  had  done  on  Elymas  at  Paphos 
(xiii.  9).  He  had  probably  been  arrested  by  the  cripple's  eager  look,  and  in  turn  had 
searched  his  inner  soul  with  that  penetrating  glance  which  belongs  only  to  souls 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  (xiii.  9,  xxiii.  1).  (2)  Having  perceived  that  the  cripple 
had  faith  to  be  healed  (literally,  saved,  but  whether  more  than  from  his  physical 
malady  is  impossible  to  tell),  the  apostle  said  with  a  loud  voice,  "  Stand  upright  on 
thy  feet !  "  Compare  Peter's  address  to  the  lame  man  (iii.  6),  in  which  the  name 
of  Christ  is  invoked.  That  Paul  omitted  Christ's  name  may  be  explained  either 
by  the  brevity  of  the  record,  or  by  supposing  Paul's  discourse  had  so  clearly  indi- 
cated the  source  of  healing  that  this  required  no  further  mention.     (3)  At  once, 

307 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


without  delay,  the  cripple  "  leaped  and  walked."  I.e.,  thrilled  with  a  Divine 
power,  he  sprang  to  his  feet  (a  single  act  like  that  in  iii.  8),  and  began  to  step 
out  as  he  had  never  done  before. 

IT.  The  conduct  of  the  Lystrans.  1.  Their  exclamation.  Like  Welshmen 
who,  after  listening  to  an  address  in  English,  revert  to  their  mother  tongue  to 
find  an  outlet  to  their  emotions,  the  Lystrans  in  their  native  dialect,  the  speech 
of  Lycaonia  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  "),  shouted  forth,  "  The  gods  have  come  down 
to  us  in  the  likeness  of  men,"  and  proceeded  to  identify  Barnabas  with  Jupiter 
(Zeus)  presumably  on  account  of  his  combined  majestic  and  benignant  appearance, 
and  Paul  with  Mercury  (Hermes),  not  because  of  his  bodily  insignificance 
(2  Cor.  x.  1,  10),  but  because  of  his  eloquence — "  he  was  the  chief  speaker."  The 
belief  that  the  gods  were  accustomed  to  visit  the  earth  in  human  form  widely 
prevailed  among  the  ancients ;  that  such  a  belief,  especially  with  regard  to 
Jupiter  (Zeus),  should  have  existed  among  the  Lycaonians  is  not  surprising  con- 
sidering that  Lystra  had  a  temple  of  Jupiter  (Zeus)  at  its  gates,  and  was  thus,  as  it 
were,  placed  under  the  tutelage  of  the  "  Father  of  gods  and  men."  That  Jupiter 
(Zeus)  should  have  been  accompanied  by  Mercury  (Hermes)  accorded  also  with 
their  own  traditions,  one  of  which  told  of  a  visit  made  by  these  divinities  to  this 
very  region  (see  Ovid's  story  of  Baucis  and  Philemon,  Met.,  viii.  611,  etc.). 
2.  Their  action.  The  priest  of  Jupiter  (Zeus),  whether  by  himself  or  through  his 
attendants,  having  procured  oxen  and  garlands,  caused  them  to  be  fetched  "  unto 
the  gates" — i.e.,  to  the  temple,  and,  surrounded  by  the  excited  populace,  would 
have  offered  sacrifice  to  the  supposed  divinities.  Superstitious  as  the  proposition 
was,  it  rebuked,  and  still  rebukes,  the  lack  of  enthusiasm  on  the  part  of  those 
who,  though  they  know  God,  glorify  Him  not  as  God  (Rom.  i.  21). 

III.  The  protest  of  the  apostles. — 1.  The  horror  they  displayed.  Having 
learnt  what  the  priest  and  people  were  about,  Paul  and  Barnabas,  as  might  have 
been  expected  of  pious  Jews,  not  to  say  enlightened  Christians,  with  their  strong 
monotheism,  "  sensitive  conception  of  the  awful  majesty  of  the  One  True  God,"  and 
instinctive  shrinking  from  the  least  approach  to  idolatry,  "  rent  their  garments, 
according  to  Jewish  custom,"  from  the  neck  in  front  down  towards  the  girdle 
(see  "  Critical  Remarks  "),  and  sprang  forth — either  from  the  city  towards  the 
temple,  or  from  the  house  in  which  they  lodged  into  the  street,  if  the  procession 
had  not  yet  reached  the  temple — and  dashed  in  among  the  excited  and  fanatic 
crowd.  2.  The  words  they  uttered.  (1)  A  question  about  the  folly  of  the  priest 
and  people — "  Sirs  !  why  do  ye  these  things?  "  An  expostulation  that  might  be 
addressed  with  propriety  to  many  besides  the  Lystrans.  (2)  A  declaration  about 
themselves  and  their  mission,  that  they  were  ordinary  mortals  like  the  Lystrans, 
whom  besides  it  was  the  object  of  their  mission  to  turn  from  these  vanities  to 
serve  the  living  God.  These  thoughts  about  ministers  and  their  missions  should 
be  kept  in  mind  both  by  ministers  themselves  and  their  hearers.  (3)  A  procla- 
mation concerning  God.  His  nature,  as  the  living — i.e.,  self-existent  and  life- 
bestowing  God  (Deut.  v.  26 ;  Psalm  xlii.  2  ;  Jer.  x.  10 ;  Dan.  vi.  26).  His 
omnipotence,  as  the  maker  of  the  universe  (Gen.  i.  1 ;  Neh.  ix.  6 ;  Psalm  cii.  25). 
His  justice,  in  suffering  the  heathen  to  go  their  own  ways  seeing  they  had  first 
forsaken  Him  (compare  vii.  42 ;  Rom.  i.  24).  His  forbearance  (according  to  a 
different  interpretation  of  the  verse)  in  allowing  the  nations  to  walk  in  their 
own  ways  without  any  manifestation  of  righteous  indignation  against  them  (com- 
pare xvii.  30  ;  Rom.  iii.  25).  His  goodness,  in  giving  them  witness  of  Himself  by 
sending  them  "  rain  from  heaven  and  fruitful  seasons,  filling  their  hearts  with 
food  and  gladness  "  (compare  Matt.  v.  45).  On  the  course  of  the  apostle's  argu- 
ment, as  illustrating  his  manner  of  dealing  with  the  heathen,  a  remarkable  light 
is  shed  by  the  apology  of  Aristides  (see  "  Hints  on  Verses  15-17  ").  3.  The  success 
they  attained.     They  restrained,  though  with  difficulty,  the  people  from  carrying 

308 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xiv. 


out  their  design ;  that  they  obtained  no  deep  hold  on  their  hearts  subsequent 
movements  showed. 

IV.  The  interference  of  the  Jews. — 1.  Whence  these  came.  From  Antioch 
and  Iconium,  where  their  hostility  had  been  aroused  and  their  rage  baulked. 
Nearly  every  persecution  Paul  suffered  proceeded  from  the  Jews.  However 
wrong,  this  was  partly  natural.  No  man  likes  apostates,  and  from  the  stand- 
point of  the  Jews  Paul  was  an  apostate  of  the  first  water.  2.  How  they  pro- 
ceeded. They  stirred  up  the  crowds  who,  besides  being  fickle,  as  all  crowds  are 
(compare  Exod.  xvi.  2,  xvii.  4  ;  Lukexxhi.  21),  were  probably  in  a  sullen  and  half 
hostile  mood  in  consequence  of  having  discovered  that  their  visitors  were  not  gods 
but  ordinary  mortals,  and  therefore  most  likely  magicians  and  impostors.  3.  What 
they  effected.  They  so  raised  the  mob  that  these  "stoned  Paul,"  not  beyond  the 
precincts  of  the  town,  as  the  Jews  had  done  to  Stephen  (vii.  58),  but  in  the  streets, 
where  they  were,  "  and  dragged  him  out  of  the  city,  supposing  he  was  dead." 
See  Paul's  allusion  to  this  experience  (2  Cor.  xi.  25).  How  Barnabas  escaped 
does  not  appear.  4.  How  far  they  failed.  (1)  They  did  not  kill  him  as  they 
intended  and  supposed.  "  As  the  disciples  stood  round  him  he"  came  to,  "  rose 
up  and  entered  into  the  city."  (2)  They  did  not  detach  from  him  all  his  friends 
in  Lystra.  The  disciples  gained  there  stood  round  his  mangled  body,  when,  like 
the  carcase  of  a  dead  dog,  it  was  thrown  beyond  the  city,  and  received  him  into 
their  homes,  when,  having  revived,  he  returned  into  town.  (3)  They  did  not 
prevent  the  prosecution  of  his  missionary  work.  "  On  the  morrow  he  went  forth 
with  Barnabas  to  Derbe. 

Learn. — 1.  The  power  of  the  gospel  to  wTork  moral  miracles.  2.  The  credi- 
bility of  the  doctrine  of  the  incarnation.  3.  The  folly  of  idol  worship.  4.  The 
power,  majesty,  and  goodness  of  God.     5.  The  rewards  of  the  faithful. 


HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  9.  Faith  to  be  saved. 

I.  Possible  to  all  who  need  salva- 
tion. 

II.  Requisite  for  all  who  wish  sal- 
vation. 

III.  Observed  in  all  who  seek 
salvation. 

IV.  Rewarded  to  all  who  obtain 
salvation. 

Vers.  8-10.  The  Lystra  Cripple. 

I.  An  object  of  sincere  pity.  Born 
lame,  he  had  never  walked. 

II.  A  recipient  of  great  privilege. 
— He  heard  Paul  speak  concerning 
Christ  and  salvation. 

III.  A  subject  of  rich  mercy. — He 
was  healed  in  body  and  saved  in 
soul. 

IV.  A  monument  of  Divine  grace. — 
All  owing  to  grace  that  he  had  been 
privileged  to  hear  Paul,  that  his  heart 
had  been  touched,  that  faith  had  been 
awaked,  and  that  he  had  been  healed 
and  saved. 


Ver.  11.  The  gods  are  come  down  to 
us  in  the  likeness  of  man. 

I.  The  error  contained  in  this  de- 
claration. That  there  were  "  gods," 
heathen  divinities,  to  come  down  to  men. 

II.  The  truth  foreshadowed  in  this 
declaration.  The  incarnation  of  the 
Divine  Son  in  the  person  of  Jesus. 

III.  The  lessons  suggested  by  this 
declaration.  1.  That  the  human  heart 
instinctively  believes  in  a  gracious  God 
who  can  and  will  and  does  hold  fellow- 
ship with  His  creature  man.  2.  That 
the  doctrine  of  an  incarnation  is  by  no 
means  contrary  to  the  intuitive  con- 
ceptions of  the  human  mind.  3.  That 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  the  incarnate 
Son  can  find  a  point  of  contact  with 
man's  soul  in  the  most  benighted 
nations. 

Grecian  fables  on  the  Subject  of 
Lycaonia. — 1.  The  legend  of  Lycaon. 
See  Ovid,  Met.,  i.  6.  "  The  origin  of 
the  name    Lycaonia  is  unknown,  but 

309 


chap.  XIV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


as  there  happened  to  have  been  a  king 
of  Arcadia,  called  Lycaon,  Greek  in- 
vention soon  discovered  a  connection. 
It  was  said  that  Lycaon  had  been 
warned  by  an  oracle  to  found  a  city  in 
the  region  of  Lycaonia  (why,  it  does 
not  appear),  and  that  the  whole  country 
thence  derived  its  appellation.  But 
further,  Avkos,  or  Lycus,  a  wolf,  was 
so  near  in  sound  to  Lycaon,  that  the 
resemblance  was  to  be  accounted  for, 
and  the  ready-witted  Greeks  originated 
the  fable,  that  when  the  earth  was 
filled  with  wickedness  Jupiter  de- 
scended from  the  skies  to  satisfy  himself 
of  the  fact,  that  he  visited  the  house 
of  Lycaon,  and  that  the  people  around, 
when  the  god  was  recognised,  were 
for  paying  him  adoration ;  but  that 
Lycaon  mocked  the  servility  of  his 
subjects,  and  questioned  the  divinity 
of  his  inmate,  and  to  put  it  to  the  test, 
served  human  flesh  at  the  table  to  try 
the  deity's  discrimination  ;  that  Jupiter 
was  enraged  at  the  attempt,  and 
metamorphosed  Lycaon  into  a  wolf " 
(Lewin,  The  Life  and  Epistles  of 
St.  Paul,  i.  161).  2.  The  story  of 
Philemon  and  Baucis.  See  Ovid,  Met., 
viii.  631,  etc.  According  to  this  fable 
Baucis  and  Philemon  were  an  aged 
couple  who  lived  in  a  small  cottage 
in  a  penurious  manner  when  Zeus 
(Jupiter)  and  Hermes  (Mercury) 
travelled  in  disguise  over  Asia.  Having 
extended  to  the  wandering  divinities 
hospitable  shelter  which  the  wealthier 
inhabitants  refused,  they  had  their 
dwelling  changed  into  a  magnificent 
temple  of  which  they  were  constituted 
priests,  while  an  inundation  swept 
away  the  mansions  of  their  churlish 
neighbours.  In  addition  they  were 
permitted  to  live  happily  to  an  extreme 
old  age,  and  to  die  at  the  same  hour, 
in  accordance  with  their  united  request 
to  Zeus,  that  one  might  not  have  the 
sorrow  of  following  the  other  to  the 
grave.  After  death  their  bodies  were 
changed  into  trees  before  the  door  of 
the  temple. 

Yer.  13.  The  Temple  of  Jupiter  at 
Lystra.      Concerning    this,    Professor 

310 


Bamsay  writes  :  "  Much  may  yet  be 
discovered  at  Lystra.  We  should  be 
especially  glad  to  find  some  indepen- 
dent proof  that  a  temple  of  Jupiter 
before  the  city  (Ato?  TLpoTroXeux;)  ex- 
isted there.  From  the  many  examples 
of  such  temples  quoted  by  the  commen- 
tators on  Acts  (see  "  Critical  Bemarks''), 
it  seems  highly  probable  that  there 
was  one  at  Lystra.  The  nearest  and 
best  analogy,  which  is  still  unpublished, 
may  be  mentioned  here.  At  Claudio- 
polis  of  Isauria,  a  town  in  the  moun- 
tains south-east  from  Lystra,  an 
inscription  in  the  wall  of  the  mediaeval 
castle  records  a  dedication  to  Jupiter 
before  the  town  (Ait  Upoao-TLU)).  .  .  . 
"  There  is  every  probability  that  some 
great  building  once  stood  beside  the 
pedestal  in  Lystra,  dedicated  to  Augus- 
tus." ...  "  There  is  every  probability 
that  the  wrorship  of  the  Imperial 
Founder  was  connected  with  the  chief 
temple,  and  that  the  pedestal  was 
placed  in  the  sacred  precinct  of  Zeus, 
as  at  Ephesus  the  Augusteum  was 
built  within  the  sacred  precinct  of 
Artemis."  ...  "  Yery  little  excava- 
tion would  be  needed  to  verify  this 
identification,  and  probably  to  disclose 
the  remains  of  the  temple,  in  front  of 
whose  gates  the  sacrifice  was  prepared 
for  the  Apostles "  (The  Church  in  the 
Roman  Empire,  pp.  51,  52). 

Yer.  1 5.  Sirs  !  why  do  ye  these  things  ? 
Idolatry. 

I.  Indefensible  in  reason,  since  the 
gods  of  the  heathen  are  "  vanities." 

II.  Degrading  to  man,  since  man  is 
superior  to  the  object  of  his  worship, 
when  that  is  an  idol. 

III.  Insulting  to  God,  since  He 
alone  is,  1.  The  living  God.  2.  The 
creator  of  the  universe.  3.  The  pro- 
vidential ruler  of  the  world.  4.  The 
benefactor  of  His  creature  and  child 
man. 

All  men  alike. 

I.  In  their  origin. — 1.  From  God. 
2.  From  the  dust. 

II.  In  their  nature. — 1.  Soul.  2. 
Body. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xiv. 


III.  In  their  character. — 1.  Sinful. 
2.  Mortal. 

IV.  In  their    destiny. — I.  To  die. 
2.  To  live  for  ever. 

Ver.  17.  God's  Witness  of  Himself . 
I.  Beneficent  in  character. 
II.  Universal  in  extent. 

III.  Constant  in  duration. 

IV.  Despised  by  its  recipients. 

V.  Condemning  in  its  judgments. 

Vers.  15-17.   The  Light  of  Nature. 

I.  Its  excellences. — It  reveals — L 
The  existence  of  a  supreme  Being. 
2.  His  perfection  in  wisdom  and 
power.  3.  His  supreme  and  absolute 
dominion.  4.  His  moral  government. 
5.  His  universal  beneficence. 

II.  Its  uses. — Various.  1.  To  show 
men  their  duty.  2.  To  convince  them 
of  sin.  3.  To  encourage  them  in  re- 
pentance. 4.  To  vindicate  God's  cha- 
racter as  a  moral  governor.  5.  To 
prepare  for  the  gospel  of  His  grace. 

III.  Its  defects. — 1.  It  illuminates 
but  a  small  portion  of  the  things  of 
God.  2.  Is  but  dim  and  feeble.  3. 
Exercises  little  influence  on  men's 
hearts  and  lives.  4.  Can  discover  no 
effectual  relief  for  guilt  and  sin. 

Note. — The  lightshed  by  the  Apology 
of  Aristides,  a  document  composed  in 
the  second  century  (a.d.  120)  in  Athens, 
on  the  method  commonly  adopted  by 
sub-apostolic  writers  in  dealing  with 
the  heathen,  is  well  worthy  of  attentive 
study.  "  Aristides,"  says  Professor 
George  T.  Stokes,  D.D.,  "begins  his 
address  to  the  Emperor  (Hadrian)  by 
stating,  as  St.  Paul  often  does,  the  effect 
of  the  contemplation  of  nature  upon  his 
own  soul,  teaching  him  the  eternal 
power  and  godhead  of  the  Author 
thereof.  In  the  very  opening  of  his 
argument  he  attacks  that  subtle 
Pantheism,  with  its  belief  in  the 
eternity  of  the  material  universe, 
which   characterised   the    religions    of 


Greece  and  Pome.      '  O  King,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  I  came  into  this  world, 
and  having  contemplated  the  heavens 
and  the  earth  and  the  sea,  and  beheld 
the  sun  and  the  rest  of   the  orderly 
creation,  I  was  amazed  at  the  arrange- 
ment  of   the   world ;    and    I   compre- 
hended that  the  world  and  all  that  is 
therein  are  moved  by  the  impulse  of 
Another,    and    I   understood  that  He 
that   moveth   them    is    God,    who    is 
hidden  in   them    and   concealed   from 
them ;    and   this   is  well  known  that 
that   which  moveth  is  more  powerful 
than  that  which  is  moved.     And  that 
I   should   investigate   concerning   this 
Mover  of  All,  as  to  how  He  exists,  and 
that  I  should  dispute  concerning  the 
steadfastness  of  His  government,  so  as 
to  comprehend  it  fully,  is  not   profit- 
able for  me  ;  for  no  one  is  able  per- 
fectly to  comprehend  it.     But  I  say, 
concerning   the    Mover  of   the  world, 
that  He  is  God  of  all,  who  made  all 
for  the  sake  of  man  ;  and  it  is  evident 
to  me  that  this  is  expedient,  that  one 
should  fear  God  and  not  grieve  man.' 
The   argument    of    Aristides    in   this 
passage  is  just  the  same  as  St.  Paul's 
at  Lystra,  or  in  that  great  indictment 
of   paganism    contained   in   the    Pirst 
of     Pomans,     an    indictment     which 
Aristides    amply   confirms    in   all   its 
awful    details."  —  Modem    Discoveries 
and   the   Christian  Faith,   Sunday   at 
Home,  1891,  December,  p.  107. 

Ver.  19.  The  Stoning  of  Paul. 

I.  A  hideous  crime. — On  the  part  of 
the  Jews  who  stirred  up  the  Lystrans. 

II.  A  pitiful  spectacle. — For  the 
disciples  and  friends  of  the  apostle. 

III.  A  strange  experience.- — Which 
must  have  recalled  to  the  apostle's 
mind  the  stoning  of  Stephen. 

IV.  A  powerful  argument. — Per- 
haps impressing  the  heart  of  Timothy 
as  Stephen's  stoning  did  that  of  Saul. 


HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS. —Verses  20—28. 

The  Homeward  Journey  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  ;  or,  Back  to  Antioch  in  Syria. 
I.  The  turning  point. — Derbe  (see  on  verse  6).     1.  The  character  of  the  apostles' 
work  in  Derbe.     Preaching  the  gospel.     Thus  early  were  Paul's  mottoes,  "  This 

311 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


one  thing  I  do  "  (Phil.  hi.  13) ;  "  whom  we  preach  "  (Col.  i.  28) ;  "  Jesus  Christ 
and  Him  crucified  (1  Cor.  ii.  2).  2.  The  acceptance  of  the  apostles'  work  in  Derbe. 
No  persecutions  encountered  here  (see  2  Tim.  iii.  11).  The  omission  of  Derbe 
from  the  list  of  places  in  which  persecution  was  experienced  strikingly  confirms 
the  narrative  of  Luke  (Paley,  Horm  Paulinw,  iv.  9).  3.  The  success  of  the 
apostles'  work  in  Derbe.  They  made  many  disciples,  amongst  them  probably 
Gaius  of  Derbe  (xx.  4).  4.  The  duration  of  the  apostles'  work  at  Derbe.  Not 
stated,  but  may  be  inferred  to  have  been  some  weeks. 

II.  The  way  back.  1.  The  route  indicated.  First  to  Lystra,  twenty  miles  ;  next 
to  Iconium,  forty  miles ;  after  that  to  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  sixty  miles ;  then  to 
Perga  in  Pamphylia ;  then  across  the  plain  for  sixteen  miles  to  Attalia  (the 
modern  Satalia),  founded  by  Attalus  Philadelphus,  king  of  Pergamus,  a  seaport 
on  the  Pamphylian  Gulf  and  near  the  mouth  of  the  Catarrhactes  ;  and  finally 
thence  to  Antioch  in  Syria.  2.  The  work  done.  (1)  Confirming  the  souls  of  the 
disciples.  Not  by  outward  rites,  but  by  instruction  and  encouragement, 
"  exhorting  them  to  continue  in  the  faith,"  and  reminding  them  "  that  through 
many  tribulations  we  must  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  (2)  Appointing 
elders  in  every  Church.  These  elders  or  presbyters  were  not  modern  diocesan 
bishops,  but  presiding  overseers  of  different  Churches.  The  mode  of  their  election 
is  not  sufficiently  clear.  Whether  by  the  stretching  forth  of  the  hands  of  the 
congregation  or  of  the  apostles  is  disputed.  If  the  method  adopted  in  the 
election  of  deacons  (vi.  5,  6)  was  followed  here,  then  the  congregation  would 
elect  and  the  apostles  ordain,  the  service  being  accompanied  with  fasting  and 
prayer,  in  which  the  chosen  office-bearers  were  commended  to  God  for  their 
work.  (3)  Preaching  the  gospel.  This,  doubtless,  would  not  be  neglected  in  any 
of  the  towns  visited  on  the  homeward  route,  but  it  is  specially  mentioned  that 
they  spoke  the  word  in  Perga,  because  they  had  not  done  so  on  the  outward 
journey  (xiii.  13 ;  which  see  for  the  reason  of  this  omission). 

III.  Home  reached. — 1.  Their  arrival  in  the  city.  From  Attalia  they  sailed 
to  Seleucia,  "  saw  once  more  the  steep  cone  of  Mount  Casius,  climbed  the  slopes 
of  Coryphaeus,  and  made  their  way  under  the  pleasant  shade  of  ilex  and  myrtles 
and  arbutus,  on  the  banks  of  the  Orontes,  until  they  crossed  the  well-known 
bridge,  and  saw  the  grim  head  of  Charon,  staring  over  the  street  Singon,  in 
which  neighbourhood  the  little  Christian  community  were  prepared  to  welcome 
them  with  keen  interest  and  unbounded  love  (Farrar,  The  Life  and  Work  of 
St.  Paul,  i.  390).  2.  Their  meeting  with  the  Church.  (1)  This  was  proper, 
seeing  they  had  been  by  the  Church  recommended  (or  committed)  to  the  grace 
of  God  for  the  work  they  had  fulfilled  (xiii.  3).  Nothing  could  have  been  more 
becoming  than  that  they  should  report  to  the  Church  how  the  work  had  fared. 
(2)  Interesting,  since  they  rehearsed  all  that  God  had  done  with  them — i.e.,  their 
experiences,  and  in  particular  how  God  had  opened  a  door  of  faith  unto  the 
Gentiles — i.e.,  the  success  which  had  attended  their  labours.  (3)  Encouraging, 
as  showing  the  wisdom  of  the  step  which  had  been  taken  in  despatching  a  mission 
to  the  heathen.  3.  Their  stay  with  the  disciples.  "  A  long  "  or  "  no  little  time." 
The  exact  duration  of  the  first  missionary  journey  can  only  be  approximately 
calculated.  If  it  began  in  March  a.d.  45,  we  are  hardly  at  liberty  to  suppose 
that  it  occupied  much  more  than  a  year  (Farrar),  in  which  case  the  return  of 
Paul  and  Barnabas  to  Antioch  would  fall  in  all  probability  about  the  spring 
of  a.d.  46.  Professor  Ramsay  gives  April  45 — July  47  (or  46 — 48)  as  the 
period  over  which  the  first  journey  extended.  From  the  close  of  the  journey 
they  remained  in  Antioch  till  the  outbreak  of  controversy  concerning  the  terms 
on  which  the  Gentiles  should  be  admitted  to  the  Church  required  their  presence 
in  Jerusalem  (xv.  2). 

Learn. — 1.  The  duty  of  persevering  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.    2.  The  necessity 

312 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xiv. 


of  abiding  in  the  faith.  3.  The  only  way  of  entering  the  kingdom.  4.  The 
Script  uralness  of  Church  order.  5.  The  interest  Christians  should  take  in 
foreign  missions. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  21,  22.  The  Pastoral  Office— its 
True  Function. 

I.  To  preach  the  gospel. 
II.  To  make  disciples. 

III.  To  confirm  believers. 

IV.  To  comfort  the  suffering. 

Ver.  22.  Scriptural  Confirmation. 

I.  Not  an  external  (bodily)  rite,  but 
an  internal  (spiritual)  grace. 

II.  Not  performed  by  the  laying  on 
of  hands,  but  by  the  utterance  of 
exhortations  and  consolations. 

III.  Not  doing  a  work  of  establish- 
ment, for  others,  but  instructing  others 
to  do  this  for  themselves. 

Ver.  22.  The  Way  into  the  Kingdom. 

I.  Painful. — Through  much  tribula- 
tion or  many  tribulations. 

II.  Necessary. — We  must.  Un- 
avoidable by  any,  indispensable  for  all. 

III.  Certain. — It  leads  into  the 
kingdom.  No  question  about  whither 
it  conducts. 

IV.  Blessed.  —  The  terminus  to 
which  it  tends  is  the  kingdom  of  God. 

Entering  the  Kingdom. 

I.  Heaven      a      kingdom.  —  1.  Its 

sovereign,  God.  The  great  king  who 
built  it,  the  architect  of  the  universe, 
the  Lord  of  Hosts.  2.  Its  subjects. 
(1)  In  nature  diversified,  angels  and 
redeemed  men.  (2)  In  character,  holy 
and  without  blemish,  (3)  In  condition, 
free  from  every  defect  and  possessed 
of  every  felicity.  (4)  In  number,  a 
multitude  which  no  man  can  number 
and  constantly  increasing.  3.  Its 
permanence.  It  will  never  be  destroyed 
and  never  pass  away. 

II.  The  believer's  entrance  into  the 
kingdom.  —  Effected  —  1 .  In  time 
through  regeneration,  a  work  of  gra- 
cious renewal  upon  his  heart,  which  ipso 
facto  at  once  constitutes  him  a  subject 
of  the   kingdom.     2.  At  death,   when 


the  soul,  having  been  purified  and 
perfected  through  much  tribulation, 
taking  its  departure  from  the  body, 
passes  through  the  vale  and  joins  the 
company  of  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect.  This  entrance  certainly 
follows  on  the  first  after  an  interval, 
longer  or  shorter,  of  preparation. 

Continuing  in  the  Faith. 

I.  The  danger  of  declining  from  the 
faith. — Arising  from — 1.  Indwelling 
sin.  2.  The  fascinations  and  tempta- 
tions of  the  world.  3.  The  ills  and 
tribulations  of  life.  4.  False  teachers 
and  erroneous  teaching.  5.  The  self- 
righteousness  and  spiritual  pride  of 
even  converted  hearts. 

II.  The  necessity  of  abiding  in  the 
faith. — 1.  Christ's  express  command. 
2.  Continuance  in  the  faith  the  best 
evidence  of  having  ever  been  in  the 
faith.  3.  Without  this  the  prize  of 
eternal  life  cannot  be  won. 

Ver.  23.   The  Office  of  the  Eldership. 

I.  Its  authority. — Derived  from  the 
Head  of  the  Church  (Ephes.  iv.  11). 

II.  Its  function. — To  superintend 
the  membership  of  the  Church  (xx.  28). 

III.  Its  selection. — By  the  members 
of  the  Church.  Christian  people  should 
elect  their  own  office  bearers. 

IV.  Its  ordination.— By  the  apostles 
in  the  first  instance  (2  Tim.  i.  6), 
afterwards  by  the  laying  on  of  the 
hands  of  the  presbyters  (1  Tim.  iv.  14). 

V*  Its  efficiency. — Derived  from  the 
Lord,  on  whom  the  elder  has  believed. 

VI.  Its  sphere. — Within  the  Church. 
Purely  a  spiritual  office. 

VII.  Its  qualification. — The  elder 
must  himself  be  a  believer.  Other 
qualifications  are  set  forth  in  the 
pastoral  epistles. 

Vers.     26,    27.  The    First   Recorded 
Missionary  Meeting. 
I.  The  place  where  it  was  held.— 

313 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


In  Antioch  of  Syria,  which  had  sent  He  had  opened  a  door  of  faith   unto 

forth   the  first  pair  of  evangelists  to  the  Gentiles. 

proclaim    the  gospel   to   the    heathen. 

An  unperishable  renown  which  never  Ver.  27.  The  (or  a)  D 007'  of  Faith. 

can  be  taken  from  Antioch.  I.  Divinely  constructed. — Salvation 

II.  The  congregation  which  assem-  by  faith  a  scheme,   not   of   man's  in- 
bled. — The  company  of  believers  in  the  inventing,  but  of  God's  appointing, 
city,    or   the    Church.      That   all   the  II.  Widely   opened. — By  the  publi- 
Christians  who  could  be  were  present,  cation  of  the  gospel,  inviting  all  who 
that    all  were  interested  in  the   pro-  will  to  enter. 

ceedings,  and  that  all  were  eager  to  III.  Easily  reached. — Requiring  no 

see  the  men   who  had  hazarded  their  distant    or  difficult  pilgrimage  to  get 

lives    for   the   name   of    Jesus    Christ  near  it :  "  The  word  is  nigh  thee,"  etc. 

(xv.  26),  can  hardly  be  doubted.  (Rom.  x.  8). 

III.  The  story  told  by  the  mission-  IV.  Freely  entered. — By  all  who  come 
aries. — Paul  and  Barnabas  related  all  in  the  exercise  of  simple  faith,  trusting 
that  God  had  done  with  them,  and  how  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  Jesus'  sake. 


CHAPTER    XV. 


The  First  Christian  Council;   or,  the  Terms  of  Church  Membership  for 

the  Gentiles  Definitely  Settled. 

§  1.  Judaising  Teachers  at  Antioch;  or,  the  Circumcision  Controversy  Raised 

(vers.  1-5). 
§  2.  The  Council  at  Jerusalem  ;  or,  the  Controversy  Settled  (vers.  6-21). 
§  3.  The  Apostolic  Letter;  or,  the  Publication  of  the  Settlement  (vers.  22-35). 
§  4.  The  Second  Missionary  Journey  commenced ;  or,  the  Separation  of  Paul  and 

Barnabas  (vers.  36-41). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Certain  men  which  came  down  from  Judaea. — Lit.  having  come  down  from  Judcea. 
These  were  not  the  emissaries  who  came  from  James  (Gal.  ii.  12),  but  the  "false  brethren 
unawares  brought  in  "  (Gal.  ii.  4),  most  likely  Christianised  Pharisees  from  Jerusalem,  who, 
in  their  zeal  for  the  Law,  had  undertaken  a  mission  to  Antioch,  perhaps  on  the  invitation  of 
some  of  the  same  class  in  the  Syrian  capital.  According  to  Epiphanius  their  leaders  were 
Cerinthus  and  Ebion.  With  this  party  Paul  was  in  conflict  all  his  life.  Taught  the  brethren. 
— Their  teaching  consisted  mainly  in  an  assertion  of  the  necessity  of  circumcision  for  salva- 
tion. 

Ver.  2.  Dissension. — In  their  views.  The  word  ordcris  (compare  xxiii.  7,  10),  used  by 
Thucydides  (iii.  82)  and  Aristotle  (Polit.,  v.  2)  to  express  political  faction,  suggests  that 
parties,  in  accordance  with  those  views,  had  begun  to  be  formed  in  the  Church  at  Antioch. 
Discussion,  or  questioning,  about  the  points  in  dispute  (xxv.  20).  They,—  i.e.,  the  brethren,  or 
the  Church,  in  a  public  meeting,  and  by  formal  resolution,  determined,  appointed,  or  arranged. 
Certain  other  of  them. — Not  named,  but  see  "  Homiletical  Analysis."  Should  go  up  to  Jerusa- 
lem.— This,  the  apostle's  third  visit  to  Jerusalem  (Gal.  ii.  1),  took  place  fourteen  years  after 
his  first,  that  to  Cephas  and  the  other  apostles  to  whom  he  was  introduced  by  Barnabas 
(ix.  27 ;  Gal.  i.  IS).     His  second  visit  was  made  shortly  before  the  Gentile  mission  (xii.  25). 

Ver.  4.  The  Church,  the  apostles  and  elders. — The  reception  of  the  deputies  from  Antioch 
took  place  in  a  public  convocation  of  the  Christian  disciples  in  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  5.  The  sect  of  the  Pharisees. — First  mention  of  any  converts  from  this  body  and  of  the 
Pharisees  as  a  sect.     The  name  ("  Separated  Ones  "),  probably  bestowed  on  them  by  their 

314 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xv. 


opponents,  expressed  the  same  idea  as  their  self -chosen  designation,  Chasidim  ("  Holy  Ones") 
— viz.,  separation,  not  so  much  from  their  fellow  Jews  as  from  the  heathen  world.  Their 
practical  obligations,  were  to  observe  with  strictness  all  the  ceremonial  ordinances  of  the  Law 
of  Moses,  and  to  be  scrupulous  in  payment  of  tithes  as  well  as  in  discharge  of  all  religions 
duties.  Originating  in  a  genuine  impulse  towards  superior  sanctity,  Pharisaism  in  our  Lord's 
time  had  degenerated  into  dead  formalism,  and  become  little  better  than  a  cloak  for 
hypocrisy  (Matt,  xxiii. ;  Luke  xi.  37-52).  In  Josephus's  day  the  association  numbered  six 
thousand  members. 

Ver.  6.  The  apostles  and  elders  came  together. — Not  alone,  but  in  presence  of  and  with  the 
Church  (see  ver.  23).     How  many  were  present  cannot  be  conjectured. 

Ver.  7.  Much  disputing,  questioning,  or  debating,  concerning  the  point  of  controversy.  A 
good  while  ago. — Lit.,  from  early  days.  Comparatively  speaking  (compare  "  in  the  beginning," 
xi.  15) ;  not  an  exaggeration,  in  order  to  take  from  the  conversion  of  the  heathen  the  aspect 
of  novelty  (Wendt).  The  phrase  has  a  parallel  outside  of  Scripture  (Polyk.  ad  Phil.,  1,  2  ; 
e£  apxa-i-w  xpovoop).  Peter  referred  to  the  conversion  of  Cornelius,  which  had  taken  place 
while  Paul  was  at  Tarsus  (ix.  30),  probably  about  fourteen  years  previous.  Baur  (Paul,  his 
Life  and  Works,  i.,  130),  in  the  interest  of  his  tendency  theory,  considers  that  Peter  could  not 
have  appealed  to  what  took  place  with  Cornelius,  or  have  talked  in  so  Pauline  a  manner  as 
he  here  does  :  but  such  an  assertion  will  convince  none  except  those  who  have  decided, 
a  priori,  that  an  impassable  theological  gulf  separated  the  two  apostles.  Impelled  hy  a  like 
motive,  Weizsacker  (The  Apostolic  Age,  i.,  208),  asserts  that  "  Peter  was  not  the  pioneer  of 
the  mission  to  the  heathen,  but  entirely  and  solely  the  apostle  of  the  Jews,"  and  accordingly 
impeaches  the  credibility  of  the  whole  Cornelius  story,  By  my  mouth. — Peter  did  not  mean 
that  never  before  had  the  gospel  been  preached  to  a  Gentile  (see  viii.  35),  but  that  the  cir- 
cumstances under  which  he  preached  to  Cornelius  were  such  as  to  show  that  God  wished  the 
door  of  faith  to  be  opened  to  the  Gentiles. 

Ver.  8.  God  who  knoweth  the  hearts. — Therefore  looks  not  upon  merely  outward  and  acci- 
dental marks,  such  as  one's  nationality,  but  upon  the  inner  moral  and  spiritual  quality  of  the 
soul.     Compare  i.  24. 

Ver.  9.  Purifying  their  hearts  by  faith. — Therefore  not  by  circumcision  or  works  of  any 
kind.  "  The  thought  is  quite  as  much  Petrine  (compare  iii.  16,  19)  as  it  is  Pauline  (xiii.  38  ; 
Kom.  iii.  24  ff )  or  Johannine  (1  John  i.  8,  ii.  2 ;  Rev.  vii.  14)  "  (Zockler). 

Ver.  10.  To  put  a  yoke  upon  the  neck  of  the  disciples.— Compare  Gal.  v.  1.  Decidedly 
Gentile-Christian  and  universalist  sounds  this  statement  of  Peter ;  yet  is  it  not  on  that 
account  improbable.  "  Through  frequent  conversations  with  Paul  and  Barnabas,  which, 
according  to  ver.  4  and  Gal.  ii.  3,  must  have  taken  place,  Peter  was  unquestionably  once 
more  relieved  of  all  his  perhaps  temporarily  cherished  doubts,  and  completely  carried  back 
to  the  standpoint  of  apostolic  freedom  which  he  had  taken  after  Cornelius's  baptism,  and 
which  he  had  asserted  in  opposition  to  the  party  of  James  "  (Zockler). 

Ver.  11.  Even  as. — Better,  in  like  manner,  or  in  the  same  way,  even  as  they — viz.,  the 
Gentiles  ;  i.e.,  through  grace  alone,  by  faith  without  works.  Compare  Rom.  i.  7,  v.  15  ; 
1  Cor.  i.  3  ;  2  Cor.  i.  2,  xiii.  13 ;  Eph.  i.  2. 

Ver.  12.  The  multitude. — I.e.,  the  Church,  consisting,  no  doubt,  of  members  and  adherents, 
or  believers,  enjoying  full  ecclesiastical  status  and  catechumens.  Kept  silence. — Having 
been  tranquillised  by  Peter's  speech.  Out  of  this  statement,  and  the  similar  one  concerning 
James  (xii.  17),  Catholic  expositors  infer,  but  wrongly,  that  only  clergy  are  entitled  to  speak 
at  Church  councils. 

Ver.  13.  James.— Not  the  apostle,  but  our  Lord's  brother  (xii.  17),  who  was  "  a  pillar"  in 
the  Jerusalem  Church  (Gal.  ii.  9),  its  chief  elder,  and  probably  its  president. 

Ver.  14.  Simeon. — The  Hebrew  name  of  Peter  (2  Pet.  i.  1),  who  is  never  again  mentioned 
in  the  Acts,  though  he  is  found  later  at  Antioch  (Gal.  ii.  11),  and  perhaps  at  Babylon 
(1  Pet.  v.  13).     According  to  tradition,  not  well  founded,  he  ended  his  career  at  Rome. 

Ver.  15.  The  words  of  the  prophets  are  cited  from  Amos  ix.  12,  and  conform  closely  to  the 
LXX. — the  Hebrew  text  reading,  "  That  they  may  possess  the  remnant  of  Edom  and  of  all 
the  heathen  who  are  called  by  My  name,"  or  "upon  whom  My  name  is  called"  (compare 
James  ii.  7)  ;  so  that  they  are  also  in  the  highest  sense  God's  children.  If  James,  who  spoke 
in  Greek  (Alford),  or  in  Aramaic  (Holtzmann),  followed  the  LXX.,  it  may  be  reasonably 
supposed  that  he  regarded  it  as  expressing  with  sufficient  accuracy  the  essential  idea  of  the 
Hebrew. 

Ver.  16.  The  tabernacle  of  David  which  is  fallen  down  meant  the  divided  and  sunken  state 
into  which  the  theocracy  had  lapsed  since  the  days  of  Rehoboam. 

Ver.  18.  Known  unto  God  are  all  His  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world. — Taken  from 
A.  D.  Vulgate  and  Syriac.  The  original  words,  "  known  from  the  beginning,"  have  been 
enlarged  by  the  addition  of  "unto  God  are  all  His  works,"  in  order  to  make  a  complete 
sentence.  The  best  reading  (K  B  C)  may  be  thus  rendered :  Saith  God,  who  maheth  iheu 
things   known  from  the   beginning,  or  who  doeth  tliese  things  which  are  known  from  the 

315 


chap.  xv.  HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


"beginning.  In  either  case  the  sense  is  the  same.  Whether  James  found  these  words,  "  known 
from  eternity,"  in  another  text  of  the  Hebrew  prophet  which  was  circulating  in  Palestine,  or 
added  them  of  his  own  accord,  to  express  the  idea  that  nothing  could  take  place  in  the 
development  of  the  plan  of  salvation  without  the  Divine  foreknowledge  (Bengel,  De  Wette, 
Overbeck,  Wendt,  Holtzmann,  Zockler),  cannot  be  determined. 

Ver.  20.  Pollutions  of  idols. — I.e.,  Sacrificial  victims,  regarded  as  polluted  by  being  offered 
to  idols  rather  than  such  defilements  as  arose  from  unlawful  contact  with  idols  (Holtzmann). 
The  word  for  pollutions  (aKKyyrjfidrcjv  =  eldoXodurcov,  ver.  25),  occurring  only  here,  should  not  be 
viewed  as  governing  the  four  succeeding  genitives,  but  restricted  to  the  first.  "  The  James 
clauses  represent  no  arbitrary  selection  of  historical  material,  but  correspond  with  the  regu- 
lations for  Israel  as  these  at  the  time  existed  in  the  Old  Testament."  .  .  .  They  belong, 
therefore,  "  to  the  earliest  time  of  the  Church "  (Holtzmann).  Fornication.  — Has  been 
understood  here  of  "  forbidden  marriages,"  as  in  Lev.  xviii.  (Baur,  Zeller,  Ritschl,  Overbeck, 
Wendt,  Holtzmann,  Zockler),  but  should  probably  be  taken  in  the  wider  sense  of  uncleanness 
generally  (Bengel,  De  Wette,  Weiss,  Alford,  Hackett,  and  others). 

Ver.  22.  To  send  chosen  men  should  be,  having  chosen  men  from  among  themselves  to  send 
them. 

Ver.  23.  The  apostles  and  (lit.  the)  elders  and  (lit.  the)  brethren. — Signifying  three  separate 
bodies,  as  in  ver.  22.  The  best  MSS.,  however,  read,  "  The  apostles  and  the  elders,  brethren," 
which  may  signify,  "The  apostles  and  the  elder  brethren  "  (R.V.),  or  "The  apostles  and  the 
elders  (who  are)  brethren  "  (Holtzmann),  or  "  and  the  brethren  who  are  elders."  This  reading 
is  justified  by  Wordsworth  on  the  grounds  (1)  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  are  said  to  go  up  to 
the  apostles  and  elders  (ver.  2)  ;  (2)  that  the  apostles  and  elders  are  said  to  have  come 
together  to  consider  this  matter  (ver.  6)  ;  and  (3)  that  Paul  is  said  to  have  delivered  to  the 
Churches  the  decrees  determined  by  the  apostles  and  elders  (xvi.  4) ;  and  by  Alford,  who 
thinks  "  and  the  "  before  "  brethren  "  may  have  been  inserted  to  make  the  text  harmonise 
with  that  in  ver.  22.  On  the  other  hand  it  may  be  argued  (1)  that  the  whole  Church  was 
present  at  the  deliberations  of  the  apostles  and  elders  (vers.  4,  6,  12)  ;  (2)  that  the  whole 
Church  is  represented  as  having  at  least  acquiesced  in  the  finding  of  the  court  (ver.  22), 
which  certainly  implies  that  they  possessed  the  power  to  modify,  if  not  reject,  the  same, 
and  (3)  that  the  words  nai  ol  before  d5eA</>oi  might  just  as  easily  have  been  dropped  from  the 
text  at  a  subsequent  period  in  order  to  justify  the  exclusion  of  the  laity  from  all  share  in 
Church  Synods.  Upon  the  whole  it  seemed  reasonable  to  conclude  that  in  apostolic  times 
the  entire  membership,  either  directly  or  through  representatives,  enjoyed  the  right,  if  not 
of  initiating  measures,  at  least  of  voting  on  them.  Who  have  hazarded  their  lives. — Not 
"  dedicated  themselves  soul  and  body  to  the  service  of  our  Lord  the  Messiah  "  (Hess),  but 
exposed  themselves  to  the  perils  of  death,  as  at  Damascus  (ix.  24),  Antioch  (xiii.  50),  Iconium 
(xiv.  5),  and  Lystra  (xiv.  19). 

Ver.  27.  Who  shall  also  tell  you  the  same  things  by  mouth,  or  by  word  of  mouth. — Not  the 
same  things — i.e.,  truths  and  doctrines  that  Barnabas  and  Paul  have  taught,  as  if  the  teaching 
of  these  beloved  brethren  required  confirmation ;  but  the  same  things  that  we  now  write. 

Ver.  28.  It  seemed  good  unto  the  Holy  Ghost  and  to  us. — The  combination  of  the  Divine 
and  human  authors  of  the  ecclestical  decree  is  instructive.  The  expression  shows  that  the 
apostles  and  elders  claimed  for  themselves  that  they  had  been  guided  in  their  deliberations 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  for  their  conclusions  that  these  possessed  the  authority  of  an  inspired 
and  infallible  decision.  Necessary  things. — Not  demanding  abstinence  as  wrong  in  them- 
selves (except  the  last),  but  in  obedience  to  the  law  of  charity  (Rom.  xiv.  15),  which  required 
Christians  to  avoid  what  might  offend  weaker  brethren. 

Ver.  33.  Unto  the  apostles.— The  best  authorities  read,  unto  those  that  had  sent  them  forth. 

Ver.  34  is  omitted  by  the  best  texts.  It  was  probably  inserted  to  explain  ver.  40.  Ramsay 
(St  Paul,  etc.,  p.  175)  thinks  it  must  have  formed  part  of  the  original  text  and  been  "at 
some  period  omitted,  from  the  mistaken  idea  that  ver.  33  declared  the  actual  departure  of 
Judas  and  Silas,"  whereas,  he  continues,  "the  officials  of  the  Church  in  Antioch  simply 
informed  Judas  and  Silas  that  their  duties  were  concluded  and  that  they  were  free  to  return 
home,"  a  permission  of  which  Silas  did  not  avail  himself.  In  any  case,  if  Silas  did  depart, 
he  must  have  soon  after  returned,  on  receiving  Paul's  invitation  to  join  him  in  a  second 
missionary  tour. 

Ver.  36.  Some  days  (as  in  xvi.  12 ;  compare  i)/jLep<u  inwal,  ix.  23)  might  be  weeks  or  months. 
After.— Subsequent  to  the  departure  of  Judas  or  Judas  and  Silas  from  Antioch.  In  visit  our 
brethren  substitute  the  for  "our."  How  they  do?—  I.e.,  how  they  fare,  spiritually.  The 
clause  requires  an  antecedent  supplement,  and  see. 

Ver.  37.  Determined. — i^ovXevaaro.  The  oldest  MSS.  have  e/3ot/\ero,  wished,  which  some 
consider  a  correction,  with  a  view  of  softening  down  the  altercation  between  Barnabas  and 
Paul  (Alford  and  Hackett). 

Ver.  39.  The  contention  was  so  sharp  between  them. — Better,  there  arose  a  severe  conten- 
tion.   If  the  incident  described  in  Gal.  ii.  11  had  occurred  in  the  days  preceding  this 

316 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xv. 


contention  (Alford,  Lechler,  Conybeare  and  Howson)  that  incident  would  help  to  explain 
the  hotness  of  the  dispute  between  the  two  missionaries  ;  but  it  seems  improbable  that  such 
a  reaction  in  favour  of  Judaism  as  that  scene  at  Antioch  represents  could  have  taken  place 
so  soon  after  the  decision  at  Jerusalem  (Hackett).  They  departed  asunder  one  from  the 
other. — Not  in  friendship,  but  in  service.  Barnabas. — Not  named  again  in  Acts,  but  reported 
by  one  tradition  to  have  proceeded  to  Milan,  and  died  as  first  bishop  of  its  Church  ;  and  by 
another  to  have  spent  some  years  in  Rome  and  Athens.  Took  Mark,  who  afterwards  gaine  I 
Paul's  esteem  (Col.  iv.  10;  2  Tim.  iv.  11),  and  sailed  to  Cyprus,  his  native  city  (iv.  36),  where, 
according  to  the  second  of  the  above  traditions,  he  suffered  martyrdom.  The  authenticity 
of  the  well-known  Epistle  of  Barnabas  cannot  be  defended. 

Ver.  40.  That  Paul  and  Silas,  on  setting  forth,  were  commended  by  the  brethren  to  the  grace 
of  God  suggests  that  the  Church  at  Antioch  espoused  the  side  of  Paul,  as  no  similar  com- 
mendation appears  to  have  been  given  to  Barnabas  and  Mark. 

Ver.  41.  Confirming  the  churches. — Not  candidates  for  admission  to,  but  those  already  in, 
them  (xiv.  22).  Of  the  founding  of  these  churches  in  Syria  and  Cilicia  no  account  has  been 
preserved,  but  they  most  likely  dated  from  the  time  of  Paul's  visit  to  those  regions  (ix.  30 ; 
Gal.  i.  21).     One  of  these  churches  was  probably  located  at  Tarsus. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.—  Verses  1—5. 

Judaising  Teachers  at  Antioch  ;  or,  the  Circumcision  Controversy  Raised. 

I.  The  Judaising  teachers  and  their  doctrine. — 1.  The  teachers.  Certain  men 
from  Judsea.  Not  those  who  afterwards  came  from  James  (Gal.  ii.  12),  but 
those  who  were  brought  in  unawares  (Gal.  ii.  4).  Possibly  converts  from  the 
Pharisaic  party  in  Jerusalem  who  had  been  invited  by  their  co-religionists  within 
the  Church  at  Antioch.  2.  Their  doctrine.  That  salvation  was  impossible  with- 
out circumcision.  That  the  way  into  the  Church  of  Christ  led  through  the  door- 
way of  Judaism.  That  without  submission  to  this  carnal  ordinance  the  spiritual 
blessing  of  the  gospel  could  not  be  enjoyed.  3.  Their  activity.  They  taught  the 
brethren.  Not  content  with  merely  suggesting  the  doubt  as  to  whether  even 
Gentile  Christians  could  disregard  the  Mosaic  ritual — a  doubt  which  would,  at 
least,  have  been  not  unnatural  in  a  narrow-minded  and  bigoted  Pharisee— or 
with  expressing  their  opinion  that  the  Law  God  had  given  to  Moses  could  not 
safely  be  set  aside,  they  confidently  laid  down  the  dogma  that  circumcision  was 
imperative  :    "  Except  ye  be  circumcised,"  etc. 

II.  The  Christian  Church  and  its  resolution. — 1.  The  Church. — Was  (1)  divided 
into  factions.  "  There  was  no  small  dissension."  The  word  points  to  the  rise  of 
parties  in  the  Church.  Even  had  all  the  Gentile  Christians  remained  upon  the 
side  of  freedom,  there  remained  still  the  Jewish  Christians  (xi.  19),  who  espoused 
the  doctrine  of  the  false  teachers  ;  while  it  is  possible  that  not  a  few  of  the  Gentiles 
may  have  allowed  themselves  to  be  overawed  by  the  seeming  and  perhaps  assumed 
authority  of  the  Judsean  emissaries.  (2)  Rent  by  disputation.  Impossible  that  it 
could  have  been  otherwise.  To  have  admitted  the  tenet  of  the  Judaisers  would  have 
been  to  subvert  the  gospel  of  Christ  (Gal.  v.  2-4).  Hence  Paul  and  Barnabas  felt 
themselves  impelled  to  stand  forth  in  defence  of  Christian  liberty  against  those 
Pharisaic  legalists  who  desired  to  bring  the  Gentiles  into  bondage.  "  To  whom 
we  gave  place  by  subjection,"  do  you  say  ?  exclaims  Paul.  "  No  !  not  for  an 
hour  "  (Gal.  ii.  5).  2.  Its  resolution.  To  refer  the  controversy  for  decision  to 
the  Mother  Church  at  Jerusalem.  This  determination  was  not  necessary  in  the 
sense  that  the  Church  at  Antioch  possessed  no  authority  to  compose  the  quarrel 
had  it  been  able.  But  it  was  clearly  unable.  Hence  the  reference  to  Jerusalem 
was  a  wise  procedure,  partly  because  the  troublers  had  come  from  Jerusalem  and 
may  have  represented  that  they  spoke  with  the  authority  of  the  apostles  and 
elders  there,  and  partly  because  a  decision  by  the  mother  Church  would  un- 
doubtedly carry  greater  weight. 

III.  The  delegates  and  their  journey. — 1.  The  delegates.  Paul  and  Barnabas, 
with  certain  others,  not  named,  but  most  probably  chosen  from  among  the 
prophets  and  teachers  that  were  in  the  Antioch  Church  (xiii.  1),  and  the  men  of 

317 


chap.  xv.  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Cyprus  and  Cyrene,  whose  labours  had  founded  the  Church  (xi.  20).  Titus 
(Gal.  ii.  3),  most  likely  accompanied  Paul  as  a  representative  and  specimen  of  the 
sort  of  converts  that  had  been  made  among  the  Greeks.  2.  Their  journey. 
(1)  Its  object.  Whilst  the  delegates  had  in  view  the  execution  of  the  Church's 
commission  which  had  been  entrusted  to  them — viz.,  the  submission  of  the  dis- 
puted question  to  the  apostolic  tribunal — Paul  informs  us  (Gal.  ii.  2)  that  he 
went  up  by  revelation ;  which  may  be  harmonised  with  the  statement  of  Luke 
by  supposing  that  the  revelation  instructed  Paul  either  to  propose  or  to  agree  to 
the  reference  to  Jerusalem ;  and  indeed,  without  some  such  inward  intimation  of 
the  will  of  his  Divine  Lord  it  would  not  have  been  surprising  had  Paul  hesitated 
to  submit  the  decision  of  this  vital  question  to  the  mother  Church,  out  of  which 
the  very  parties  had  come  who  had  attempted  to  fetch  away  from  Gentile 
believers  the  liberty  they  enjoyed  in  Christ.  "  We  need  not  be  surprised  if  we 
find  that  Paul's  path  was  determined  by  two  different  causes :  that  he  went  up 
to  Jerusalem  partly  because  the  Church  deputed  him,  and  partly  because  he  was 
Divinely  admonished.  Such  a  combination  and  co-operation  of  the  natural  and 
supernatural  we  have  observed  in  the  case  of  that  vision  which  induced  Peter  to 
go  from  Joppa  to  Csesarea "  (Conybeare  and  Howson)  ;  and,  the  same  writers 
add,  in  Paul's  escape  from  Jerusalem  to  Tarsus,  which  was  urged  on  him  by  the 
brethren  (ix.  30),  and  at  the  same  time  commanded  by  Christ,  who  appeared  to 
him  in  a  trance  (xxii.  17,  18).  (2)  Its  commencement.  The  delegates  were 
accompanied  a  portion  of  their  way  by  the  Church,  as  a  mark  of  honour  to  them- 
selves and  as  an  indication  of  the  interest  the  Church  took  in  their  mission  (com- 
pare xx.  38,  xxi.  5  ;  3  John  6).  (3)  Its  progress.  They  passed  through  Phoenicia 
and  Samaria  (see  on  xi.  19,  and  viii.  5).  As  Galilee  is  not  mentioned,  it  may  ba 
concluded  that  they  travelled  along  the  coast  as  far  south  as  Ptolemais  (xxi.  7), 
and  then  crossed  the  plain  of  Esdrselon  into  Samaria.  (4)  Its  accompaniments. 
The  delegates,  wherever  they  appeared,  declared  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
caused  great  joy  unto  all  the  brethren.  (5)  Its  termination.  They  came  to 
Jerusalem,  within  whose  gates  seldom  had  a  more  important  embassy  arrived. 

IV.  The  mother  Church  and  its  procedure. — 1.  The  reception  given  to  the 
envoys.  (1)  By  the  whole  Church,  with  the  apostles  and  elders  at  its  head,  the 
various  congregations  having  come  together  for  this  purpose.  (2)  With  the  utmost 
cordiality  :  this  implied  in  the  verb  used  to  express  the  ceremonial.  (3)  In  patient 
hearing  of  their  story,  when  they  rehearsed  all  things  that  God  had  done  with 
them.  That  Paul  laid  not  before  the  collective  Church  the  gospel  which  he 
preached  among  the  Gentiles,  with  its  doctrine  of  salvation  without  "  the  works 
of  the  Law,"  but  reserved  this  for  a  private  interview  with  the  Church  leaders, 
one  naturally  infers  from  Gal.  ii.  2.  Had  he  done  so,  instead  of  confining  himself 
to  a  simple  narration  of  his  Gentile  mission,  he  would  most  likely  have  prema- 
turely kindled  a  conflagration.  As  it  was,  his  address  acted  like  a  spark  thrown 
into  a  heap  of  combustible  material.  It  awoke  the  slumbering  prejudices  of  his 
Judaising  hearers.  2.  The  opposition  developed  against  the  envoys.  (1)  This 
proceeded,  in  all  probability,  from  the  party  that  had  despatched  the  emissaries 
to  Antioch — viz.,  the  sect  of  the  Pharisees  who  believed,  and  who  may  have  felt 
their  doctrinal  position  to  be  in  danger  through  the  enthusiasm  aroused  by  the 
orations  of  the  missionaries.  (2)  The  form  it  assumed  was  a  reassertion  of  the 
false  and  pernicious  doctrine  which  had  brought  the  delegates  to  Jerusalem — 
"  that  it  was  needful  to  circumcise  the  Gentiles  and  to  command  them  to  keep 
the  Law  of  Moses." 

Learn — 1.  The  persistence  of  outworn  creeds.  2.  The  celerity  w7ith  which 
error  intrudes  itself  into  the  Church.  3.  The  duty  of  Christian  teachers  to  resist 
every  attempt  to  corrupt  the  simplicity  of  the  faith.  4.  The  function  of  the 
Church,  as  a  whole,  to  guard  the  truth. 

318 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xv. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.    1,    5.    No    Salvation   without  vealed   through   the   gospel   of    Jesus 

Circumcision.  Christ. 

I.  An  old-time  truth. — Under  the  IV.  An  exploded  heresy. — Nobody 
Mosaic  dispensation  it  was  true  that  now  within  the  Church  of  Christ  thinks 
no  Israelite  could  be  saved  who,  in  of  maintaining  the  necessity  of  circum- 
unbelief  and  disobedience,  repudiated  cision  ;  though  unfortunately  the  same 
circumcision,  though,  from  the  nature  error  survives  in  spirit  among  those 
of  the  case,  submission  to  the  rite  was  who  teach  the  doctrines  of  baptismal 
not  left  in  the  hands  of  the  individual.  regeneration  and  sacramental  grace,  or 
Hence  it  is  doubtful  if,  even  under  the  the  impossibility  of  being  saved  unless 
Old- Testament  economy,  circumcision  one  has  been  baptised  and  partaken  of 
was  of  universal  obligation  as  an  in-  the  Lord's  Supper. 

dispensable     condition     of     salvation. 

Certainly    submission    to    the    bodily  Ver.  2.  How  to  Deal  with  Heretics. 

ceremonial  was  no  absolute  guarantee  I.  Endeavour  to  convince  them  by 

of  the  soul's  forgiveness  and  renewal,  reasoning  (Titus  iii.  10). 

or  of  its  future  enjoyment  of  eternal  life.  II.  Lay  the  matter  in  dispute  before 

II.  A  plausible  doctrine.  —  Like  the  courts  of  the  Church  (Matt,  xviii. 
many  another  mistaken  theory,  it  had  17). 

some  considerations  to  advance  on  its  III.  Separate  from  such  as  refuse 

behalf.    It  was  by  no  means  surprising  to   obey   the   decision  of  the   Church 

that  a  Jew  should  have  argued  that  (1  Tim.  vi.  5 ;  2  John  10). 

circumcision  must  have  been  designed 

to  be  of  permanent  and  perhaps  also  Ver.  3.  The  Conversion  of  the  Heathen 

universal   obligation,  considering  that  a  Source  of  Joy  to  the  Chiwch  of  Christ. 

Jehovah    Himself   had  imposed  it  on  (A  Missionary  Sermon.) 

the  fathers  of  Israel,  that  it  had  de-  I.  As  a  solid  increase  to  the  sum  of 

scended   from    a    hoar  antiquity,    and  human  happiness. — Every  sinner  saved 

that  its  value  as  a  religious  ordinance  being  a  soul  rescued  from  the  guilt  and 

had  been  recognised  by  so  many  even  power  of  sin. 

of  the  Gentiles  themselves.  II.  As  an  irrefragable  proof  of  the 

III.  A  dangerous  error. — To  assert  saving  power  of  the  gospel. — The  pro- 
that  circumcision  was  indispensable  to  gress  of  foreign  missions  the  most 
salvation  was  (1)  directly  to  challenge  powerful  apologetic  of  to-day. 

the  sufficiency  of  Christ's  sacrifice  as  III.  As  a  valuable  extension  of  the 

an  atonement  for  sin  ;  (2)  virtually  to  Saviour's    kingdom.  —  Every  convert 

impair  the  fulness   of  salvation  as  a  won  from  heathenism  becomes  a  subject 

gift  of  grace,  by  imposing  an  external  of  the  empire  of   truth  and    love,  of 

condition   of   enjoying  the  same ;    (3)  salvation  and  eternal  life, 

practically   to   teach   the   doctrine  of  IV.  As  a  delightful  prophecy  of  the 

salvation  by  works,  against  which  the  millennial  era. — Each  tribe  and  nation 

gospel  is  a  vigorous  and  uncompromis-  brought  under  the  power  of  the  gospel 

ing   protest;    (4)  certainly  to  destroy  being  a  foreshadowing  of  that  happy 

all  hope  of  Christianity  ever  becoming  era  when  "the  kingdoms  of  the  world 

a    world-wide    religion  ;    (5)    absurdly  shall  have  become  the  kingdoms  of  our 

to  exalt  a  positive  enactment  to  the  Lord  and  of  His  Christ." 
same  level,  in  respect  of  saving  worth, 

as  a  spiritual  precept ;  (6)  foolishly  to  Yers.   3,   4.  Paul  and  Barnabas  on 

maintain    that   a   positive    institution  the   Way   to   Jerusalem ;   or,    what  all 

could  never  be  abrogated  or  set  aside  ministers  ought  to  be. 

by  its  founders ;  (7)  sinfully  to  corrupt  I.  Champions  of  orthodoxy. — I.e.,  of 

the  truth  of  God  which  had  been  re-  the  truth.     Certainly  men  who  claim 

319 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


to  be  Church  teachers  should  not  war 
against  the  faith  they  profess,  or  pro- 
pagate opinions  contrary  to  the  truth 
they  have  been  appointed  to  expound. 

II.  Messengers  of  peace. — Constantly 
directing  their  endeavours  towards 
maintaining  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  bonds  of  peace.  As  representa- 
tives of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  they 
should  themselves  be  lovers  of  peace. 

III.  Publishers  of  grace. — Heralds 
of  the  good  news  of  salvation  through 
the  free  grace  of  Gcd  in  Christ — a 
theme  so  great  and  glorious  that  none 
other  in  the  estimation  of  a  true 
preacher  should  for  a  moment  be  suf- 
fered to  dispute  its  claims  on  his  atten- 
tion. 

IY.  Dispensers  of  joy. — Such  those 
preachers  and  ministers  cannot  fail  to 
be  who  are  mindful  of  their  calling, 
and  unwearied  as  well  as  hearty  in  its 
exercise. 

Ver.  4.  Paul's  Third  Visit  to  Jeru- 
salem.— Was  this  the  visit  recorded  in 
Gal.  ii.  1  ?  An  affirmative  reply  seems 
justified  on  the  following  grounds  : — 

I.  The  impossibility  of  synchronising 
the  Galatian  visit  with  any  other  al- 
luded to  in  the  Acts. — Either  with 
that  recorded  in  xi.  30,  which  occurred 
before  the  famine  predicted  by  Agabus, 
or  that  reported  in  xviii.  22,  which 
happened  at  the  close  of  Paul's  second 
missionary  journey;  all  others  being 
practically  out  of  the  question.  De- 
cisive against  the  latter  of  the  above 
two  is  the  circumstance  that  Barnabas 
was  not  then  a  travelling  companion  of 
Paul,  as  he  was  on  the  occasion  of  the 
visit  spoken  of  in  Galatians;  while 
opposed  to  the  former  stand  a  number 
of  considerations,  as,  e.g. :  1.  The  dif- 
ferent object  of  the  xi.  30  visit,  which 
was  to  carry  a  benevolent  contribution 
to  Jerusalem ;  whereas  the  Galatian  visit 
contemplated    conversation    with    the 


Church  leaders  about  Paul's  gospel  to 
the  Gentiles.  2.  The  date  of  the  xi.  30 
visit  which  coincided  with  that  of 
Herod's  death,  not  more  than  ten  years 
after  Saul's  conversion,  whereas  the 
Galatian  visit  fell  at  least  seventeen 
years  after  that  event.  3.  The  unlikeli- 
hood of  an  ecclesiastical  council  being 
convened  in  Jerusalem  during,  or  so 
near,  the  time  of  the  Herodian  persecu- 
tion. 4.  The  improbability  of  Paul 
having  attained,  in  the  course  of  one 
year's  labour  at  Antioch,  to  such  pre- 
eminence over  Peter  as  he  appears 
in  Galatians  to  have  reached.  5.  The 
almost  certainty  that,  if  Paul's  mission 
to  the  heathen  had  already  been  re- 
cognised at  the  visit  of  xi.  30,  there 
would  have  been  no  need  to  undertake 
a  second  journey  to  Jerusalem  to  obtain 
another  decision  thereupon  ;  and  (6)  the 
difficulty  of  harmonising  this  supposed 
commission  of  Paul  to  the  Gentiles, 
received  at  the  visit  of  xi.  30,  with  the 
express  statement  of  xiii.  1 ,  that  Paul's 
mission  was  entrusted  to  him  after  that 
visit. 

II.  The  obvious  correspondence  be- 
tween the  Galatian  visit  and  this  to 
the  Jerusalem  council. — 1.  The  two 
narratives  assume  that  Paul  and 
Barnabas  had  already  conducted  a 
gospel  mission  among  the  Gentiles. 
2.  In  both  journeys  Paul  is  accom- 
panied by  Barnabas.  3.  Both  visits 
have  the  same  end  in  view — to  obtain 
a  judicial  settlement  of  the  controversy 
which  had  broken  out  at  Antioch,  con- 
cerning the  amount  of  liberty  to  be 
accorded  to  Gentile  converts.  4.  The 
settlement  reported  in  both  accounts  is 
practically  the  same — that  the  Gentiles 
were  not  to  be  subjected  to  the  yoke  of 
circumcision.  5.  In  both  narratives 
Peter  and  James  appear  as  principal 
parties  in  bringing  about  the  deliver- 
ance which  restored  peace  to  the 
Church. 


HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  6—21. 

The  Council  at  Jerusalem  ;  or,  the  Circumcision  Controversy  Settled. 
I.  The  composition  of  the  council. — 1.  The  apostles.     The  twelve;  Paul  not 
yet  included  in  their  number.     These,  as  having  been  chosen  by  Christ,  were 
naturally  regarded  as  the  heads  of  the  Christian  community,  which  accordingly 

320 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xv. 


looked  to  them  for  counsel  in  matters  of  Church  administration,  and  especially 
for  guidance  in  circumstances  of  difficulty.  2.  The  elders.  The  presidents, 
superintendents,  or  overseers,  of  the  different  Christian  synagogues,  or  Churches. 
How  large  a  body  the  eldership  formed  cannot  be  surmised ;  but  all  its  members, 
it  is  clear,  stood  on  an  equality  as  presbyters.  3.  The  brethren.  The  members 
of  the  Church  called  "  the  multitude"  (ver.  12) ;  "  the  whole  Church  "  (ver.  22). 
Whether  these  took  an  active  part  in  the  discussion  cannot  be  answered  without 
knowing  in  what  capacity  James  (ver.  13)  spoke;  that  they  were  associated  with 
the  apostles  and  elders  in  the  finding  of  the  court  the  narrative  distinctly  states 
(ver.  22).  "  The  three  bodies  stood  to  each  other  as  the  Boule  or  council, 
the  Gerusia  or  senate,  and  the  Ecclesia  or  assembly,  in  a  Greek  Republic  " 
(PJumptre). 

II.  The  deliberations  of  the  council. — 1.  Peter's  speech.  After  considerable 
discussion,  in  which  the  "  brethren "  may  have  taken  part,  the  Man  of  Rock, 
Cephas,  or  Peter,  asked  a  hearing  from  the  court.  (1)  He  reminded  those 
present  of  a  series  of  facts  with  which  all  were  familiar  (see  xi.)  :  first,  that 
about  fourteen  years  before  God  had  specially  selected  him  (Peter)  to  preach  the 
gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  under  such  circumstances  as  evinced  it  to  be  the  will  of 
Heaven,  that  they  (the  Gentiles)  should  be  invited  to  believe,  and  so  be  received 
into  the  Christian  Church  (see  x.  34)  ;  secondly,  that  God  Himself,  who,  from 
His  character  as  Heart  Searcher,  could  be  under  no  mistake  concerning  the 
inward  attitude  of  any  toward  the  gospel,  had  borne  witness  to  the  genuineness 
of  their  conversion,  by  granting  them  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  same  manner  as  He 
had  done  unto  the  Jews  (see  x.  44) ;  and  thirdly,  that  God  had  put  no  difference 
between  themselves  (the  Jews)  and  the  Gentiles  on  becoming  Christians — that  in 
the  case  of  both,  faith  had  operated  in  the  same  way,  and  produced  the  same 
results — viz.,  had  led  to  the  purification  of  the  heart  from  sin,  or,  in  other  words, 
had  made  the  nature  holy.  (2)  He  asked  them  a  question  which  contained  a 
very  powerful  argument.  Why  they  should  seek  to  impose  circumcision  on  the 
disciples?  First,  to  do  so  was  to  be  guilty  of  tempting  God — i.e.,  of  presumptuously 
putting  Him  to  the  proof  by  demanding  additional  evidences  of  His  will,  when 
those  already  furnished,  and  just  recited  by  Peter,  ought  to  be  enough.  Secondly, 
to  do  so  would  be  to  place  upon  the  necks  of  the  Gentile  disciples  a  yoke  which 
the  Jews  themselves  had  found  to  be  intolerable,  irksome,  burdensome,  oppressive, 
slavish  in  the  extreme,  as  it  could  not  fail  to  be  when  men  came  to  regard  it 
(as  the  Jews  unfortunately  did,  and  now  desired  to  teach  the  Gentiles  that  it 
was)  indispensable  for  salvation.  Thirdly,  to  do  so  was  to  insist  upon  a  ritual 
which  experience  had  shown  to  be  altogether  unnecessary.  The  Jews  themselves 
who  believed  had  practically  confessed  that  they  could  not  be  saved  by  the 
ceremonies  of  the  Law,  and  had  turned  to  seek  salvation  by  grace  ;  if  so,  how 
could  it  be  other  than  inconsistent  and  ridiculous  to  impose  upon  the  Gentiles 
that  in  which  the  Jews  themselves  had  lost  faith.  2.  Barnabas's  and  Paul's 
orations.  One  after  the  other  the  two  missionaries  addressed  the  House — 
Barnabas  preceding,  presumably  on  account  of  age,  and  because  the  council  had, 
as  yet,  greater  confidence  in  him.  The  subject  handled  by  both  was  their 
missionary  travels.  One  can  imagine  the  eloquence  with  which  the  "  chief 
speaker  "  would  dilate  upon  the  thrilling  tale  of  their  experiences  and  of  God's 
signs  and  wonders  among  the  heathen,  and  almost  see  the  bated  breath — "  all 
the  multitude  kept  silence " — with  which  the  thronged  assembly  would  listen 
to  the  story  "of  the  greatest  revolution  the  world  has  ever  seen."  The  speakers 
appear  to  have  confined  themselves  to  an  unvarnished  narrative  of  facts. 
3.  James's  advice.  The  James  who,  after  Barnabas  and  Paul  had  sat  down, 
claimed  the  attention  of  the  meeting  was  the  brother  of  the  Lord  (Gal.  ii.  9), 
"  who,  from  the  austere  sanctity  of  his  character,  was  commonly  called,  both  by 

y  321 


chap.  xv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Jews  and  Christians,  James  the  Just  "  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  i.  204).  From 
the  circumstance  that  he  spoke  last  it  has  been  quite  reasonably  inferred  that  he 
acted  as  president  of  the  council,  and  that  in  all  probability  he  was  chief  pastor 
in  the  Church  of  Jerusalem.  From  his  well-known  character  as  a  strong  legalist, 
his  decision  in  favour  of  freedom,  coming  after  Peter's,  could  not  fail  to  carry 
great  weight.  The  substance  of  what  he  said  was  (1)  that  the  conversion  of 
the  Gentiles,  as  rehearsed  by  Simeon  (Peter's  Hebrew  name),  was  an  exact 
fulfilment  of  Old-Testament  prophecy,  the  particular  prediction  cited  being  taken 
from  Amos  ix.  11,  12  j  and  (2)  that,  that  being  so,  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles 
manifestly  had  a  place  in  the  plan  and  purpose  of  God,  to  whom  all  His  works 
were  known  from  the  beginning,  so  that  nothing  could  occur  by  accident.  After 
this  he  proceeded  to  give  judgment  on  the  case,  which  judgment  the  court 
unanimously  adopted. 

III.  The  finding  of  the  council. — 1.  That  Gentile  Christians  should  not  be 
troubled  about  circumcision,  or  other  Jewish  ceremonies.  Neither  those  who 
already  had  turned,  nor  those  who  in  future  might  turn,  to  God,  by  believing  on 
Jesus,  should  be  molested,  worried,  or  harassed  about  these  beggarly  elements  ; 
but  all  should  be  left  alone  in  that  liberty  wherewith  Christ  had  made  His  people 
free  (Gal.  v.  1).  2.  That  Gentile  Christians  should  be  ashed  to  abstain  from 
certain  things.  (1)  Pollutions  of  idols.  I.e.,  parts  of  sacrificial  victims  which 
had  not  been  used  in  sacrifice,  and  which  the  heathen  sold  in  the  market  for 
ordinary  food,  but  which,  as  having  been  presented  to  an  idol,  the  Jew  regarded 
as  entailing  upon  him  who  ate  them  the  guilt  of  idolatry  (compare  Kom.  xiv.  15  ; 
1  Cor.  viii.  10).  (2)  Fornication.  The  heathen  mind  had  become  so  corrupt  as 
to  have  practically  lost  all  sense  of  chastity  as  a  virtue  ;  and  besides,  in  connection 
with  heathen  festivals  in  honour  of  their  deities,  the  most  shameless  licentiousness 
was  frequently  practised :  hence,  both  of  these  considerations  called  for  stringent 
prohibition  of  this  sin.  (3)  Things  strangled.  I.e.,  the  flesh  of  animals  not  put 
to  dfath  in  the  ordinary  way,  which  the  Jews  were  not  allowed  to  eat,  because 
it  was  not  properly  drained  of  blood  (Lev.  xvii.  13,  14;  Deut.  xii.  16,  23). 
(4)  Blood.  This  heathens  often  drank  at  their  idolatrous  feasts,  and  even  at 
other  times,  mingled  with  their  food.  3.  That  the  Gentile  Christians  should  be 
instructed  as  to  the  reason  for  this  partial  restriction  of  their  liberty.  "  For  Moses 
of  old  time  (or  from  generations  of  old),  hath  in  every  city  them  that  preach  him, 
being  read  in  the  synagogues  every  Sabbath."  Meaning  that  because  of  this 
constant  reading  of  the  Law  the  feelings  of  such  Jewish  Christians  as  had  not 
broken  with  the  synagogue  would  be  wounded  should  Gentile  Christians  be 
exempted,  not  only  from  circumcision,  but  from  such  restrictions  as  were  wont  to  be 
imposed  on  proselytes  coming  over  from  heathenism  to  Judaism.  Hence,  as  a 
compromise,  the  above-mentioned  prohibitions,  the  so-called  Noachian  precepts, 
were  enjoined  upon  Gentile  Christians. 

Learn — 1.  The  right  of  the  Christian  laity  to  take  part  in  Church  synods, 
assemblies,  and  councils.  2.  The  propriety  of  conducting  all  Church  deliberations 
with  decency  and  in  order.  3.  The  wisdom  of  the  Church  membership  giving 
heed  to  the  counsels  of  its  leaders.  4.  The  duty  of  Church  councils  to  depend  on 
nothing  but  moral  suasion  for  the  enforcement  of  their  decrees. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  6-21.  The  First  Ecclesiastical  III.  The  standard  recognised. — 
Assembly.  God's  testimony  in  the  Scriptures  and 

I.  The     question     discussed. — Con-      in  providence. 

cerning  the  conditions  of  salvation.  IV.  The   decision    given. — One    of 

II.  The  spirit  manifested. — A  spirit  Christian  wisdom,  calculated  to  concili- 
of  love  and  truth.  ate  and  promote  union  among  the  saved. 

322 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xv. 


Ver.  8.  God's  Knowledge  of  the  Heart. 
I.  Immediate. 
II.  Constant. 
III.  Thorough. 
IY.  Gracious. 

Ver.  9.  No  Difference  between  Us  and 
Them — i.e.,  between  Man  and  Man. — In 
respect  of — 

I.  The  need  of  salvation.  The 
hearts  of  all,  being  impure,  require 
cleansing. 

II.  The  provision  of  salvation. 
Christ's  atonement  and  the  Spirit's 
grace  designed  for  all. 

III.  The  condition  of  salvation. 
Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  The  possession  of  salvation. 
All  who  believe  receive  the  Holy  Spirit, 
which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance. 

Heart  Purification. 

I.  The  heart  is  by  nature  unclean, 
and  requires  cleansing. 

II.  This  cleansing  can  be  effected 
only  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

III.  The  Holy  Ghost  always  operates 
through  the  faith  of  the  individual. 

IV.  The  faith  of  the  individual  rests 
upon  the  truth  of  God. 

Ver.  11.  The  Apostle's  Creed. 

I.  That  Jews,  as  well  as  Gentiles, 
alike  need  salvation. — Both  being  alike 
under  sin  (Rom.  ii.  9). 

II.  That  for  Jews,  as  well  as  Gentiles, 
salvation  can  be  only  through  the 
grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  None 
other  name  (iv.  12) ;  only  one  Mediator 
(1  Tim.  ii.  5). 

III.  That  as  a  consequence,  Jews,  as 
well  as  Gentiles,  can  be  saved  in  no 
other  way  than  by  faith  without 
works. — By  the  works  of  the  Law  shall 
no  flesh  be  justified  (Gal.  ii.  16). 


IV.  That  Jews  and  Gentiles  alike 
are  sure  of  salvation,  if  they  do 
believe.  —  "  Whosoever  believeth  " 
(John  hi.  16). 

The  First  Confession  of  Faith. 

I.  The  error  against  which  it  guarded. 
Salvation  by  works. 

II.  The  ground  on  which  it  rested. 
God's  word  and  Christian  experience. 

III.  The  spirit  by  which  it  was  per- 
vaded. Courage  and  humility  ;  bold- 
ness and  love. 

IV.  The  gospel  which  it  proclaimed. 
Salvation  through  God's  grace  and 
man's  faith. 

V.  The  assent  which  it  received.  It 
was  embraced  by  all  the  office-bearers 
and  members  of  the  Church. 

Vers.  14-18.  The  Conversion  of  the 
Gentiles. 

I.  An  accomplished  fact.  —  God 
hath  visited  the  Gentiles  to  take  out  of 
them  a  people  for  His  name. 

II.  A  fulfilment  of  prophecy. — In 
addition  to  Amos  ix.  11,  12,  such 
passages  as  the  following  might  have 
been  quoted  :  Isa.  ii.  2,  ix.  2,  xi.  10, 
xxv.  6,  lii.  15;  Jer.  iv.  2,  xvi.  19; 
Dan.  vii.  14;  Joel  ii.  28;  Zech.  viii. 
23. 

III.  A  foreseen  event. — Having  had 
a  place  in  God's  eternal  counsel,  it  was 
known  unto  God  from  the  beginning. 

IV.  A  progressing  work. — The  re- 
sidue of  men  are  still  seeking  after 
God.     (See  Hints  on  ver.  3.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  Old- Testament  Views  of 
God. 

I.  The  Father  of  Men. 
II.  The  Lord  of  the  Nations. 

III.  The  Ruler  of  the  Universe. 

IV.  The  Omniscient  Worker. 

V.  The  Supreme  Good  of  Mankind. 


HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  22—35. 

The  Letter  from  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  ;   or,  the  Publication  of  the  Settlement. 

I.  The  resolution  of  the  Church. — 1.  To  prepare  an  encyclical  letter,  to  be  sent 
round  the  Gentile  Churches.  This  suggestion,  made  by  James  (ver.  20),  was 
formally  adopted  by  the  whole  Church,  under  the  visible  leadership  of  the  apostles 
and  elders  (ver.   22),  and  at  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  supreme 

323 


Chap.  xv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    THE  ACTS. 


president  of  the  assembly  (ver.  28).  2.  To  forward  it  to  Antioch,  the  missionary 
centre,  by  chosen  messengers,  along  with  Paul  and  Barnabas.  This  addition  to 
James's  motion,  by  whomsoever  proposed,  commended  itself  to  the  sanctified 
intelligence  of  the  community  as  at  once  respectful  to  the  brethren  at  Antioch 
and  expressive  of  their  own  high  sense  of  the  importance  of  the  occasion. 

II.  The  special  messengers. — 1.  Their  names.  (1)  Judas,  called  Barsabbas. 
That  he  was  not  the  apostle  Judas  Thaddeus  his  surname  shows.  That  he  was 
a  brother  of  Joseph  Barsabbas,  the  candidate  for  the  apostleship  (Grotius)  is  an 
unproved  conjecture.  It  is  enough  to  know  that  those  who  selected  and  sent 
him  were  acquainted  with  his  person  as  well  as  with  his  name.  (2)  Silas. 
Silvanus  in  the  Epistles.  Paul's  companion  on  the  second  missionary  journey 
(ver.  40).  Whether  the  bearer  of  the  first  epistle  of  Peter  to  the  Churches  of 
Asia  (1  Peter  v.  12)  cannot  be  decided.     Not  the  writer  of  the  Acts  (see  i.  1). 

2.  Their  character.  "  Chief  men  among  the  brethren,"  eminent  disciples,  had  in 
reputation  perhaps  both  for  piety  and  ability.  The  word  translated  "  chief," 
meaning  "  leading,"  may  point  to  the  fact  that  they  were  elders  (JELeb.  xiii.  17). 

3.  Their  standing.  Whether  they  had  been  among  the  seventy  (Luke  x.  1)  may 
be  doubtful  ;  no  uncertainty  exists  as  to  this :  that  they  ranked  as  prophets 
(ver.  32 ;  compare  xiii.  1).  4.  Their  companions.  Barnabas  and  Paul,  who 
returned  to  Antioch  bearing  the  affection  of  the  whole  Church  at  Jerusalem. 
"  Our  beloved  Barnabas  and  Paul "  the  letter  styles  them,  and — knowing  that 
their  splendid  services  in  the  cause  of  Christ  had  been  acknowledged — "  men 
that  have  hazarded  their  lives,"  etc.,  it  continues.  5.  Their  selection.  Rendered 
necessary  in  order  to  authenticate  the  letter  to  the  Churches,  and  to  free  Paul 
and  Barnabas  from  all  suspicion  of  having  tampered  with  the  letter,  or  imposed 
their  views  on  the  assembly. 

III.  The  encyclical  letter. — 1.  The  reason  for  its  sending  stated.  That  the 
Church  of  Jerusalem  had  heard  how  the  Gentiles  in  these  Churches  had  been 
troubled,  even  to  the  degree,  in  some  instances,  of  having  their  souls  subverted 
by  certain  unauthorised  teachers  who  had  gone  forth  from  their  midst  (and 
perhaps  pretending  to  their  authority).  2.  To  whom  it  was  addressed.  To  the 
brethren  in  Antioch  and  Syria  and  Cilicia,  which  shows  how  widely  these  false 
leaders  had  diffused  their  pernicious  doctrines.  That  it  was  designed  to  be  laid 
before  all  Gentile  Churches  cannot  be  inferred  (but  see  xxi.  25).  3.  In 
whose  names  it  was  despatched.  Those  of  the  apostles,  elders,  and  brethren 
(A. V.),  or  of  the  apostles  and  elder  brethren  (R.Y.) ;  ie.,  either  of  the 
Church's  office-bearers  alone  (Presbyterianism)  or  of  the  Church  member- 
ship as  well  (Congregationalism).  See  Critical  Remarks.  4.  The  writing  it 
contained.  (1)  After  the  opening  salutation  (ver.  23),  in  which  the  word 
used  for  greeting  points  to  James's  hand  as  that  which  drew  up  the  docu- 
ment (see  Critical  Bemarks),  and  (2)  the  insertion  of  the  above-stated  reasons 
(ver.  24),  there  follow  (3)  the  names  of  the  special  envoys  sent  with  Paul 
and  Barnabas  (ver.  27),  and  (4)  the  decision  of  the  council — its  authorship 
(the  Holy  Ghost,  with  the  apostles  and  elders),  and  its  contents  (vers.  28,  29) ; 
after  which  it  closes  with  (5)  a  word  of  farewell  (ver.  29).  5.  The  reception  it 
met  with.  Arrived  at  Antioch,  towards  which  they  had  been  solemnly  dis- 
missed, perhaps  with  religious  services  (see  ver.  33,  xiii.  3),  and  possibly  an 
escort  for  several  miles  of  the  way  (ver.  3),  Judas  and  Silas,  having  convened  a 
meeting  of  the  Church,  formally  delivered  into  their  hands  the  epistle,  which, 
when  they  had  read  (it  may  be,  had  heard  read  by  Barnabas,  the  son  of 
consolation),  they  rejoiced,  for  the  consolation  it  gave  them  by  the  happy  settle- 
ment of  a  hard  question,  which  most  likely,  had  it  not  been  settled,  would  have 
proved  troublesome,  and  even  dangerous  to  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  the 
Church. 

324 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xv. 


IV.  The  return  of  the  envoys. — 1.  After  a  period  of  happy  service  at  Antioch, 
in  which  they  (Judas  and  Silas),  themselves  prophets,  delighted  to  engage,  and 
in  which  they  attained  considerable  success  (ver.  32),  exhorting  the  disciples 
there  with  many  words  to  cleave  to  Christ  alone  for  salvation.  2.  With  a 
parting  salutation  of  peace,  or  with  best  wishes  for  their  happiness  and  safety 
(compare  xvi.  36  ;  Mark  v.  34 ;  Luke  vii.  50).  3.  To  those  who  had  sent  them 
forth — i.e.,  to  the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  leaving  Paul  and  Barnabas  behind  at 
Antioch,  to  continue  there  the  work  of  teaching  and  preaching  the  word  of  the 
Lord  ;  though  from  the  narrative  (ver.  40)  it  may  be  gathered  that  Silas  soon 
after  rejoined  Paul  at  Antioch. 

Learn — 1.  That  wisdom  and  love  combined  are  much  required  in  dealing 
with  the  difficulties  of  Christian  members.  2.  That  Church  courts  should  strive 
to  attain  unity  in  all  their  decisions.  3.  That  the  decisions  of  supreme  eccles- 
iastical courts  should  always  be  announced  with  tenderness.  4.  That  only 
persons  of  approved  piety  should  be  entrusted  with  special  missions  for  the 
Church:  5.  That  the  Holy  Ghost  requires  unity  among  Christians  only  in 
essentials.  6.  That  decisions  of  ecclesiastical  assemblies,  if  come  to  under  the 
Holy  Spirit's  presidency,  may  be  fitly  regarded  as  His  decisions. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  22.  "  Chief  men  among  the 
brethren ;  "  or  the  prominent  leaders  in 
the  first  Christian  council. 

I.  Two  apostles. — 1.  Peter.  One  of 
the  original  twelve :  who  opened  the 
door  of  the  Church  to  the  Gentiles  in 
the  person  of  Cornelius.  2.  James.  Of 
apostolic  rank,  though  not  included  in 
the  twelve ;  the  president  of  the  Jew- 
ish Christian  Church  at  Jerusalem. 

II.  Two  missionaries.  —  1.  Paul. 
The  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  par  excel- 
lence, the  pioneer  evangelist  who  car- 
ried the  gospel  beyond  the  bounds  of 
Palestine — first  into  Asia,  and  subse- 
quently into  Europe.  2.  Barnabas. 
The  son  of  consolation,  the  good 
Levite ;  the  modest  and  self-effacing 
companion  of  his  great  colleague. 

III.  Two  deputies. — 1.  Judas  Bars- 
abbas.  A  Jerusalem  Christian  of  good 
repute  among  his  brethren  ;  otherwise 
unknown.  2.  Silas.  iUso  a  recognised 
disciple  of  good  standing ;  afterwards 
Paul's  companion  on  the  second  mis- 
sionary tour. 

Ver.  23.  The  Jerusalem  Concordat. — 
1.  The  salutation — "Greeting."  "The 
actual  form  of  the  salutation  is  re- 
markable— xa^P€iV  :  Hail  !  The  secular 
traditional  Greek  salutation  is  used 
here,  and  not  yet,  as  in  the  subsequent 


epistles,  the  apostolic  greeting  :  *  Grace 
and  peace  from  God  and  Christ ' ;  but 
the  Israelitish  salutation  of  Jesus  and 
his  disciples  is  no  longer  adopted,  which 
ran,  '  Peace  be  with  you  !  '     We  find 
this     xatPe  llse(^    in  the   New    Testa- 
ment  by  Judas  with  the  kiss  of  be- 
trayal (Matt.  xxvi.  49),  by  the  mock- 
ing  soldiers  (Matt,   xxvii.    49 ;  Mark 
xv.    18;    John  xix.    3);   in  the  letter 
from  the  chief  captain   Lysias  to  the 
governor  Felix  (Acts  xxiii.  26) ;   it  is 
also   quoted  as  a   salutation  of  every- 
day   life  in  2  John  10,  11,  and  it  is 
made  use  of  in  the  Epistle  to  James 
(i.  1).  This* Greek  expression,  ^atpctv,  is 
certainly    spiritualised     by     Christian 
use,  and  raised  to  its  true  and  highest 
signification,  just  as  is  the  Israelitish 
1?   Dw  in   the  mouth  of   the  Lord ; 
here,  however,  it  is  a  friendly  mode  of 
address  to  the  Greek  brethren,  and  a 
greeting   highly    suited   to   the   case " 
(Stier).     2.  The  contents.     "As  an  in- 
dependent commandment  of  loving  wis- 
dom for  the  edification  of  the  Jewish  and 
Gentile  Church,  this  letter  formed  the 
remarkable      beginning      of      inspired 
writing  of  the  New-Testament  system, 
as  the  Decalogue  did  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. .  .  In  this   letter    we    find  the 
first  transition  from  oral    teaching  to 
the  principal  form  of  the  New  Testa - 

325 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


ment  Scripture"  (Stier).  3.  The 
authority.  "  It  seemed  good  unto  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  to  us."  "We  must 
neither  look  upon  this  expression  as  a 
mere  formula,  as  in  the  later  councils, 
nor  must  we  refine  upon  it,  as  if  the 
apostles  and  elders  said,  The  Holy 
Ghost  instructed  us  in  this  in  the 
house  of  Cornelius,  and  we  now  decide 
therefrom ;  as  if  they  had  been  taught 
by  that  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
that  these  four  items  were  to  be 
specially  imposed  on  the  Gentile  bre- 
thren. In  this  decretal  formula  now 
made  use  of  there  is,  of  course,  some 
allusive  reference  to  the  matters  of 
fact  which  had  been  set  forth  by 
Peter,  and  to  the  Scripture  that  had 
been  quoted  by  James,  both  being  alike 
testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  which 
testimony  the  assembly  had  been  in- 
duced to  come  to  a  conclusion."  .  .  . 
"But  the  I80&:  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
refers  as  much  to  the  four  requisitions 
of  abstinence  as  to  the  principal  reso- 
lution, which  declared  the  liberation  of 
the  Gentiles  ;  consequently,  it  is  always 
maintained  that  these  four  requisitions 
were  made  by  the  full  authority  of  the 
Holy  Ghost "  (Stier). 

Ver.  24.  Subverting  Souls. 

I.  An  easy  performance. — May  be 
done  by  (1)  promulgating  erroneous 
doctrine ;  (2)  setting  a  bad  example  ;  or 
(3)  unduly  exercising  liberty  (Rom. 
xiv.  15). 

II.  A  frequent  practice. — By  no 
means  seldom  occurring.  Sometimes 
ignorantly,  but  often  also  deliberately 
done  (2  Tim.  ii.  14,  iii.  6 ;  Titus  i. 
10,  11). 

HI.  A  dangerous  achievement. — 
1.  Imperilling  the  salvation  of  the 
subverted  soul.  2.  Involving  in  awful 
guilt — that  of  soul-murder — him  who 
subverts  (2  Peter  i.  1-3). 

Ver.  26.  Hazarding  One }s  Life  for 
the  Name  of  Christ. 

I.  To  decline  to  do  so  when  neces- 
sary is  sin. — To  save  one's  life  at  the 
expense  of  one's  fidelity  to  Christ,  or 

326 


to  deny  Christ  in  order  to  save  one's 
life,  is  to  be  guilty  of  apostasy. 

II.  To  do  so  when  called  on  by 
conscience  is  duty. — When  one  who  is 
called  to  serve  Christ  finds  that  he 
cannot  do  so  without  imperilling  his 
life,  it  becomes  his  duty  to  embrace  the 
risk. 

II.  To  do  so  voluntarily,  in  order  to 
serve  Christ,  is  heroism.  -  One  who 
would  not  hesitate  to  sacrifice  his  life 
when  serving  might  still  shrink  from 
deliberately  encountering  such  risk,  in 
order  to  find  opportunities  of  serving 
Christ.  This  latter  did  Barnabas  and 
Paul. 

Ver.  30.  The  Jerusalem  Epistle :  the 
Church }s  Charter  of  Liberty. 

I.  Its  urgent  occasion. — It  con- 
cerned the  question,  Moses  or  Christ. 

II.  Its  unassailable  origin. — Dic- 
tated by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

III.  Its  honourable  bearers. — The 
heralds  of  evangelical  grace,  accredited 
by  God  Himself. 

IV.  Its  incontestable  contents. — 
Freedom  from  the  ceremonial,  but  not 
from  the  moral,  law.  Deliverance  from 
the  yoke  of  slavish  obedience,  but  not 
from  the  service  of  self-denying  love. 

V.  Its  joyous  publication. — First  to 
the  Church  at  Antioch,  and  afterwards 
to  the  Churches  in  the  cities  visited  by 
Paul  and  Silas  (xvi.  4). 

Delivering  the  Epistle. — That  this 
encylical  was  never  composed  and  far 
less  delivered — at  least  in  the  way 
recorded  in  the  Acts — has  been  argued 
(Baur,  Zeller,  Weizs'acker,  Holtzmann, 
and  others)  on  various  grounds. 

I.  The  apparent  discrepancy  between 
the  narrative  in  Acts  and  the  account 
given  by  Paul,  who  was  an  eye- 
witness of  what  took  place  in  Jeru- 
salem, it  is  said,  shows  the  letter  to  be 
unhistorical. — It  is  urged — 1.  That 
the  conference  with  the  Jerusalem 
authorities,  according  to  Galatians,  was 
sought  for  by  Paul  alone ;  whereas, 
according  to  Acts,  it  originated  in  a 
Church  resolution.  2.  That  the  Gala- 
tian    story    bears    no    trace    of     the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xv. 


antecedent  disturbance  at  Antioch ; 
whereas  the  picture  drawn  by  Luke 
is  that  of  storm  and  dissension,  both 
at  Jerusalem  and  Antioch.  3.  That 
Acts  is  absolutely  silent  about  the 
Titus  episode,  which  forms  so  striking 
a  feature  in  the  Galatian  letter.  But, 
as  to  the  first,  why  may  not  both 
statements  be  true,  and  Paul  have 
resolved,  on  his  own  account,  while 
executing  the  Church's  commission,  to 
lay  before  the  Jerusalem  authorities  a 
full  and  clear  exposition  of  the  gospel 
which  he  preached  among  the  heathen, 
in  the  hope  and  belief  that  this  would 
put  an  end  to  all  further  controversy  1 
As  to  the  second,  may  not  Paul  have 
deemed  it  quite  unnecessary  to  inform 
the  Galatians  of  every  detail  concerning 
the  struggle  for  liberty  at  Antioch  and 
Jerusalem,  and  considered  it  enough  to 
emphasise  the  main  point,  that  his 
apostleship  to  the  Gentiles  had  been 
expressly  recognised  by  the  three  pillar 
apostles,  James,  Cephas,  and  John? 
The  third,  the  Titus  episode,  though 
not  particularised  in  Luke's  narrative, 
is  not  contradicted,  or  even  excluded, 
and  may  well  have  formed  an  item  in 
the  much  questioning  (xv.  7)  which 
preceded  Peter's  speech  ;  or  it  may 
have  been  deliberately  omitted  from 
Luke's  narrative  because  it  formed  no 
part  of  the  public  discussion.  In  any 
case  the  two  accounts,  when  im- 
partially viewed,  are  rather  supple- 
mentary than  contradictory  of  each 
other. 

II.  Had  the  letter  been  written  as 
reported,  it  is  held  Paul  could  not 
have  stated  in  Galatians,  as  he  does, 
that  those  who  were  of  repute  im- 
parted nothing  to  him. — "  There  is  no 
getting  beyond  this,"  says  Weizsacker. 
"  It  is  a  round  assertion,  and  perfectly 
clear.  .  .  .  All  possibility  of  an  ex- 
ception, of  anything  having  been  added 
by  the  apostles,  is  excluded.  .  .  .  Paul 
has  not  said  that  nothing  burdensome, 
but  that  nothing  at  all,  was  imposed 
upon  him."  But  surely  this  is  to 
misunderstand  the  meaning  of  the 
apostle,  who  is  not  writing  about 
ecclesiastical  decrees  for  the  observance 


of  Gentile  converts,  but  about  apostolic 
authorisation  for  himself,  and  who 
distinctly  asserts  that  the  three  pillar 
apostles  imparted  nothing  to  him — i.e., 
did  not  for  a  moment  ever  imagine 
that  he  required  to  be  authorised  by 
them,  and  certainly  did  not  arrogate 
to  themselves  the  right  to  authorise 
him  as  an  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  recognised  that  he  had 
already  been  authorised  as  such  by  God. 

III.  Had  the  letter  been  written, 
it  is  difficult,  we  are  told,  to  see  how 
either  Peter  could  have  acted  at 
Antioch  or  James  at  Jerusalem,  as 
they  are  represented  afterwards  to 
have    done    (Gal.   ii.    11,    12).     But 

(1)  with  reference  to  both  apostles  it 
should  be  borne  in  mind  that  it  is  by 
no  means  uncommon  for  even  the  best 
of  men  to  act  at  times  inconsistently 
and  in  flat  contradiction  to  their 
previously  expressed  opinions  and 
principles — even  Barnabas,  as  well  as 
Peter,  was  carried  away  with  the 
prevailing     spirit     of     dissimulation. 

(2)  As  regards  Peter,  had  the  letter 
not  been  written  it  is  doubtful  if  Paul 
would  have  been  justified  in  so  sharply 
censuring  Peter's  conduct.  Nor  (3)  is 
it  likely  that  Paul  would  have  so 
distinctly  charged  Peter  with  having 
acted  contrary  to  his  avowed  principles 
had  he  not  been  aware  how  Peter  had 
expressed  himself  at  the  Jerusalem 
conference.  While  (4)  as  to  James, 
it  is  not  certain  that  his  emissaries  did 
not  travel  beyond  their  instructions  ; 
or,  if  they  did  not,  it  is  by  no  means 
unintelligible  that,  while  James  may, 
at  the  conference,  have  recognised  the 
Church  membership  of  uncircumcised 
Gentiles,  he  may  also  have  desired 
that  Jewish  Christians  should  not  be 
too  free  in  social  intercourse  with  the 
Gentiles. 

IV.  Had  the  letter  been  written,  it 
is  further  contended,  it  would  hardly 
have  dropped  so  completely  as  it 
appears  to  have  done  out  of  the 
Pauline  epistles. — Though  referred  to 
again  in  Acts  (xvi.  4,  xxi.  15)  it  is  not 
alluded  to  again  by  Paul,  it  is  said,  in 
either  Romans,  Corinthians,  Galatians, 

327 


CHAI\  XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


or  Ephesians.  But — 1.  Paul  may 
have  deemed  it  unnecessary  to  cite  the 
apostolic  decrees  either  (1)  because 
they  were  sufficiently  well  known,  or 

(2)  because  they  were  more  or  less 
Palestinian  in  their  colouring,  and 
therefore  less  suitable  for  impressing 
Churches  in  Europe  and  Western  Asia ; 

(3)  because  the  purpose  of  his  letters 
did   not   call    for    their    citation ;    or 

(4)  because  he  chose  to  rely  rather 
on  fundamental  gospel  principles 
than  on  ecclesiastical  enactments. 
2.  Even  in  Galatians  Paul  may 
have  judged  it  better  to  make  no 
appeal  to  the  decrees,  in  case  of 
weakening  his  claim  to  apostolic  au- 
tonomy and  total  independence  of 
human  authority  in  the  exercise  of  his 
ministry.  3.  It  is  scarcely  accurate 
to  assert  that  all  trace  of  the  encyclical, 
if  it  ever  existed,  quickly  disappeared, 
since  each  of  the  above-named  epistles 
contains  manifest  allusions  to  its 
contents,  as,  e.g.,  (1)  to  abstinence  from 
flesh  and  wine  (offered  to  idols)  for  the 
sake  of  a  weak  brother  (Pom.  xiv.  21) ; 
(2)  to  the  practice  of  fornication 
(1  Cor.  v.  1,  vi.  13,  x.  8) ;  (3)  to  things 
offered  to  idols  (1  Cor.  viii.  1,  13,  x.  7, 
19,  20,  21,  28) ;  (4)  to  the  freedom  of 
the  Gentiles  from  circumcision  (Gal. 
ii.  3,  11,  14,  v.  2) ;  and  (5)  to  marriage 
(Eph.  vi.  25). 

V.  The  recognition  by  Paul  of  the 
mother  Church  in  Jerusalem  as  the 
supreme  court,  whose  decisions  were 
universally  binding  (it  is  added),  does 
not  harmonise  with  his  claim  for 
independence  of  all  human  authority 
in  the  gospel  which  he  preached 
(Gal.  i.  1). — But  while  Paul's  conviction 
that    he   had   received   his   gospel   by 


express  revelation  from  heaven  may 
have  been,  and  was,  for  himself  a 
sufficient  authorisation  of  the  same,  he 
may  also  have  felt  (or  been  taught  by 
the  special  revelation  that  sent  him  to 
Jerusalem)  that  a  decision  from  the 
mother  Church  would  not  be  without 
importance  as  a  means  of  securing  the 
acquiescence  of  Jewish  Christians,  who 
could  hardly  be  expected  to  remain 
satisfied  with  his  statement  about  the 
heavenly  source  of  his  views. 

VI.  Other  objections  to  the  histo- 
ricity of  this  decree,  such  as  that  it 
opens  and  closes  like  Claudius  Lysias' 
letter  to  Felix  (xxiii.  26-30),  and  that 
the  sentence  formations  of  vers.  24,  25, 
are  analogous  to  Luke  i.  1-3,  do  not 
strike  one  as  weighty.  Both  only 
show  that  there  were  customary  modes 
of  composition,  which  were  known  to 
Theophilus's  friend  and  to  Claudius 
Lysias,  as  well  as  to  the  apostles  and 
brethren  in  Jerusalem — surely  by  no 
means  an  impossible  or  even  violent 
supposition  ! 

VII.  The  suggestion  that,  neverthe- 
less, the  letter  has  a  historical  basis, 
and  that  a  concordat  of  similar  purport 
must  have  been  arranged  subsequent 
to  the  Antioch  dispute  (Weizsacker), 
shows  how  hard  put  to  it  objectors  feel 
themselves  in  their  attempts  to  get  rid 
of  the  document  as  it  stands,  and  how 
difficult  they  find  it  to  explain  the 
growth  of  Gentile  Churches  without 
some  such  deliverance  as  Acts  records. 

Ver.  33.  Let  Go  in  Peace. 
A  testimony  to — 

I.  The  success  of  their  mission. 
II.  The  unity  of  the  Church. 
III.  The  influence  of  the  letter. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  36—40. 

The  Second  Missionary  Journey  Commenced  ;  or,  the  Separation  of  Barnabas  and 
Paul. 

I.  Paul's  proposal  to  Barnabas. — 1.  To  what  it  referred.  The  initiation  of  a 
second  missionary  journey,  for  the  purpose  of  visiting  the  brethren — i.e.,  the 
young  converts  in  every  city  in  which,  on  their  previous  tour,  they  had  preached 
the  gospel — and  inquiring  into  their  spiritual  condition.  Not  only  must  the  work 
of  spreading  the  gospel  never  stop,  but  the  equally  important  business  of  edifying 
and  building  up  those  who  have  been  converted  must  never  be  neglected.     A  true 

328 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xv. 


pastor  will  not  only  labour  to  bring  souls  into  Christ's  fold,  but  will  watch 
with  assiduity  and  care  over  such  as  are  already  in.  2.  When  it  was  made. 
Some  days  after  the  return  to  Jerusalem  of  Judas  and  Silas  (ver.  33),  or  of 
Judas  alone  (see  ".  Critical  Remarks  "),  and  after  their  own  evangelistic  activity 
at  Antioch  had  continued  for  some  time,  though  how  long  remains  uncertain. 
Perhaps  the  commencement  of  this  second  journey  should  be  dated  a.d.  51. 
3.  How  it  was  received.  Obviously  Barnabas  assented  to  the  proposal,  though 
it  had  been  mooted  by  Paul  rather  than  by  himself.  Of  jealousy  on  Barnabas's 
part  not  a  trace  appears.  Though  probably  older  than  Paul  he  appears  to 
have  recognised,  with  equanimity  and  satisfaction,  Paul's  superior  genius  and 
greater  fitness  to  be  a  leader.  That  they  quarrelled  before  the  proposal  could 
be  carried  out  was,  doubtless,  to  be  regretted.  But  meanwhile  it  may  be  noted 
that  the  cause  of  that  quarrel  was  nothing  connected  with  the  subordinate 
position  of  Barnabas. 

II.  Paul's  contention  with  Barnabas. — 1.  Quite  simply  it  arose.  As  great  con- 
tentions often  do.  (1)  Barnabas  very  naturally  wished,  as  before,  to  take  along 
with  them  John  Mark,  his  kinsman  (Col.  iv.  10) — probably  for  his  own  sake, 
as  having  a  liking  for  his  relative  as  well  as  a  desire  for  his  society,  and 
probably  because  Mark,  having  got  over  his  home-sickness,  or,  having  laid 
aside  his  early  feeling  of  offence  (see  on  xiii.  13),  was  once  more  desirous  of 
resuming  active  service  in  the  cause  of  the  gospel.  (2)  Paul,  on  the  other 
hand,  demurred  to  the  proposal  of  Barnabas,  probably  because  he  had  not 
been  able  to  sympathise  with  Mark's  motives  for  going  back  on  the  previous 
occasion,  and  because  he  was  not  yet  assured  of  Mark's  stability  and  courage. 
It  is,  however,  pleasing  to  observe  that  Paul  susequently  took  a  kindlier  view  of 
the  young  man  (2  Tim.  iv.  11),  and  even  accepted  him  as  a  companion  in  travel 
(Col.  iv.  10).  2.  Very  hotly  it  blazed.  The  contention  became  so  sharp  that  the  two 
missionaries  felt  obliged  to  separate.  Barnabas's  kinship  with,  and  affection  for, 
the  young  man  would  not  allow  him  to  yield.  Paul's  judgment  as  to  the  unlike- 
lihood of  a  fickle  character  like  Mark  being  of  much  use  in  the  mission  field 
determined  him  to  hold  out.  Which  was  right  is  not  clear.  If  Barnabas  had 
Christian  feeling  on  his  side,  Paul  had  Christian  reason.  Most  likely  both  erred 
in  exhibiting  temper  and  in  not  trying  to  understand  each  other's  view  of  the 
case.  Had  they  done  this,  and  omitted  to  do  that,  they  would  surely  have  come 
to  some  amicable  arrangement.  3.  Exceeding  peacefully  it  ended.  As  they 
could  not  agree,  they  let  the  matter  drop,  and  took  each  his  own  independent 
course.  What  a  pity  they  had  not  done  this  before  the  quarrel  !  It  would 
have  saved  an  unpleasant  episode  in  the  history  of  both. 

III.  Paul's  separation  from  Barnabas.—"  They  parted  asunder  the  one  from 
the  other."  1.  JVot  in  perfect  friendship.  There  is  some  reason  to  suspect  that 
they  were  a  trifle  displeased  with  one  another.  All  the  more  likely  if  this 
occurred  shortly  after  the  rebuke  which  Paul  administered  to  Peter  for  conduct 
of  which  Barnabas  also  had  been  guilty.  Yet  that  the  present  rupture  did 
not  permanently  estrange  the  good  men  appears  from  the  way  in  which  Paul 
afterwards  alludes  to  Barnabas  as  a  Christian  teacher  worthy  of  the  fullest  con- 
fidence of  the  Churches  (1  Cor.  ix.  6).  2.  But  in  Christian  service.  Neither  of 
them  retired  from  his  work  as  a  Gentile  missionary,  as  modern  Christian  workers 
often  withdraw  from  service  altogether  when  they  quarrel  with  one  another. 
Both  continued  to  labour  in  the  cause  of  the  gospel,  but  each  pursued  his  own 
path.  Barnabas,  taking  with  him  Mark,  sailed  to  his  native  Cyprus  on  a 
missionary  tour,  thus  following  the  track  of  his  first  journey  with  Paul ;  Paul, 
choosing  as  a  companion  Silas,  who  must  by  this  time  have  returned  to  Antioch 
(ver.  33),  started  on  a  similar  journey  over  the  old  route,  only  approaching  it 
from  the  opposite  end,  travelling  to  Derbe  and  Lystra  through  the  Cilician  gates. 

329 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


3.  And  with  the  'prayers  of  their  "brethren.  Although  it  is  only  of  Paul  that  it  is 
written  that  he  was  "  commended  by  the  brethren  to  the  grace  of  the  Lord,"  it- 
is  hardly  to  be  supposed  that  Barnabas  would  be  allowed  to  depart  without  the 
prayers  of  his  fellow-Christians.  To  infer  that  he  was,  because  the  Church  had 
taken  sides  in  the  quarrel  and  decided  for  Paul  as  against  Barnabas,  is  to  ascribe 
to  the  Church  quite  an  unworthy  part.  Better  far  let  it  be  said  that  Luke  has 
omitted  to  record  anything  of  the  Church's  attitude  towards  Barnabas,  and  con- 
fined himself  to  what  was  done  in  the  case  of  Paul — not  because  Barnabas  was 
left  to  go  his  way  alone  and  unsympathised  with,  but  simply  because  Paul  was 
the  hero  whose  future  fortunes  it  was  Luke's  object  to  trace. 

Learn. — 1.  That  good  men  are,  unhappily,  not  above  quarrelling,  though  they 
should  be.  2.  That  when  good  men  do  quarrel,  they  should  study  to  go  asunder 
rather  than  come  to  blows.  3.  That  God  can  overrule  even  the  quarrels  of  good 
men,  for  good.  4.  That  Churches  should  never  send  forth  missionaries  without 
commending  them  to  God's  grace.  5.  That  ministers  and  missionaries  should  not 
neglect  the  work  of  confirming  young  converts. 


HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  36-40.  Four  Valuable  Lessons. 

I.  For  Christian  preachers. — Never 
to  desist  from  their  holy  work  of 
converting  sinners  and  edifying  saints. 

II.  For  Christian  friends. — Never 
to  contend  with  one  another,  except  in 
love  and  Christian  activity. 

III.  For  Christian  workers. — Never 
to  grow  weary  in  well-doing,  but  to  be 
steadfast  and  immovable,  always 
abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord. 

IV.  For  Christian  Churches. — Never 
to  omit  praying  for  both  ministers  and 
missionaries. 

Barnabas,  Paul,  and  the  Lord. 

I.  The  forbearing  love  of  Barnabas 
was  good. 

II.  The  holy  severity  of  Paul  was 
better. 

III.  The  wisdom  of  the  Lord,  con- 
verting all  things  into  good,  was  best. 
— Gerok. 

Ver.  36.  Pastoral  Visitation. 

I.  A  necessary  part  of  ministerial 
work. — Christ's  sheep  and  lambs  have 
not  merely  to  be  gathered  into  the  fold, 
but  also  to  be  carefully  fed  and  tended 
(Johnxxi.  15-17). 

II.  A  kindly  display  of  Christian 


sympathy. — If  it  betokens  an  amiable 
and  brotherly  disposition  to  ask  after 
each  other's  welfare  (Exod.  xviii.  7), 
much  more  does  it  do  so  to  inquire 
after  each  other's  spiritual  progress. 

III.  A  profitable  form  of  religious 
service. — Like  mercy,  "  it  blesses  him 
that  gives  and  him  that  takes."  It 
benefits  those  who  are  visited  and  them 
who  visit ;  it  contributes  to  the  spiritual 
upbuilding  of  both. 

Ver.  39.  The  Quarrel  between  Bar- 
nabas and  Paul  illustrates — 

I.  The  imperfection  of  good  men. z 
II.  The  danger  of  success,  even  for 
eminent  Christians. 

III.  The  grace  of  God  in  making  the 
wrath  of  men  to  praise  Him. 

The  Quarrels  of  Good  Men — 

I.  Are  of  more  frequent  occurrence 
than  they  ought  to  be. 

II.  Are  less  deeply  lamented  than 
they  should  be. 

III.  Are  seldom  healed  as  quickly 
as  they  might  be. 

IV.  Are  more  tenderly  dealt  with 
than  they  deserve  to  be. 

V.  Are  sometimes  productive  of 
more  good  than  they  promise  to  be. 


330 


H0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

The  Second  Missionary  Journey  (Paul  and  Silas) — continued. 

§  1.  Paul  and  Silas  in  Lycaonia ;  or,  Meeting  with  Timothy  (vers.  1-5). 
§  2.  Regions  Beyond  ;  or,  the  Vision  of  the  Man  of  Macedonia  (vers.  6-10). 
§  3.  Paul  and  Silas  in  Philippi;  or,  the  Gospel  carried  to  Europe  (vers.  11-13,  40). 
§  4.  A  Sabbath  in  Philippi ;  or,  the  Conversion  of  Lydia  (vers.  14,  15). 
§  5.  The  Cure  of  a  Pythoness  ;  or,  the  Slave-girl  and  the  Apostle  (vers.  16-18). 
§  6.  The  First  Pagan   Persecution ;    or,  the  Imprisonment  of  Paul  and  Silas 
(vers.  19-39). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1 .  Derbe  and  Lystra  (see  xiv.  6)  are  now  visited  by  Paul  and  Silas  in  reverse  order 
to  that  followed  in  the  first  journey.  There  meant  Lystra,  not  Derbe,  as  has  been  wrongly 
inferred  out  of  xx.  4.  The  son  of  a  certain  woman,  etc.,  should  be,  the  son  of  a  believing 
Jewish  woman,  whose  name  was  Eunice,  the  daughter  of  Lois  (2  Tim.  i.  5),  both  pious  females 
who  instructed  him  in  the  Scriptures  (2  Tim.  iii.  15),  but  of  a  Greek  father,  who  may  have 
been  a  proselyte,  and  was  certainly  uncircumcised. 

Ver.  2.  Weil  reported  of  by  the  brethren  that  were  at  Lystra  and  Iconium. — This  may  well 
have  been  if  Timothy  had  been  converted  on  the  occasion  of  Paul's  .first  visit  to  the  former 
city,  and  if  since  that  he  had  been  engaged  in  evangelistic  labours  both  there  and  in 
Iconium. 

Ver.  3.  Circumcised  him. — Whether  by  Paul's  own  hand  (Meyer,  De  Wette),  or  by  that 
of  another  (Neander)  is  immaterial.  Any  Israelite  might  perform  the  rite,  though  no 
heathen  could  (see  Riehm's  Handwbrterbueh  des  Biblisehen  Altertums,  art.  Beschneidung'). 
On  the  seeming  inconsistency  of  this  act  with  Paul's  refusal  to  circumcise  Titus  (Gal.  ii.  3), 
see  "  Homiletical  Analysis." 

Ver.  4.  The  mention  of  the  decrees  confirms  the  historic  credibility  of  chap.  xv. 

Ver.  6.  Phrygia  and  the  region  of  Galatia  should  probably  be,  the  Phrygian  and  Galatian 
region  ;  but  whether  one  or  two  distinct  districts  is  intended  is  presently  under  debate.  The 
commonly  accepted  interpretation  (Hackett,  Alford,  Plumptre,  Holtzmann,  Zockler,  and 
others)  holds  that  Paul  and  Silas,  having  visited  the  Churches  in  Derbe,  Lystra,  Iconium, 
and  Antioch,  directed  their  steps  first  in  a  north-easterly  direction  towards  Phrygia,  and 
then  turned  north-west  towards  Northern  Galatia,  which  was  bounded  "  on  the  north  by 
Paphlagonia  and  Bitbynia,  on  the  east  by  Pontus  and  Cappadocia,  on  the  south  by 
Cappadocia  and  Phrygia,  and  on  the  west  by  Phrygia  and  Bithynia "  (Hackett),  and 
inhabited  by  a  Celtic  population;  but  a  different  view  (Zeller,  Renan,  Hausrath,  Weizsacker, 
Wendt,  Ramsay,  and  others)  considers  the  Phrygian  and  Galatian  region  to  be  the  district 
alluded  to  in  vers.  1-4,  in  which  the  above-named  Churches  were  situated — viz.,  Southern,  as 
distinguished  from  Northern  Galatia.  (See  further  in  "  Homiletical  Analysis.")  That  Paul 
again  visited  the  Churches  in  this  district,  or  these  districts,  at  the  beginning  of  his  third 
journey  is  afterwards  mentioned  (xviii.  23).  Forbidden  of  the  Holy  Ghost. — Not  through  the 
exercise  of  ordinary  prudence  on  the  part  of  the  apostles  (De  Wette),  but  by  some  special 
Divine  intimation,  as  in  xiii.  2  (Alford),  but  whether  conveyed  by  the  Bath-Kol  (Renan),  or 
through  some  prophetic  voice,  as  in  xx.  23,  xxi.  11  (Holtzmann),  cannot  be  determined. 
That  this  prohibition  extended  to  preaching  in  Phrygia  and  Galatia  is  against  the  pre- 
supposition contained  in  xviii.  23.     Asia. — I.e.,  Proconsular  Asia,  or  the  western  coastland. 

Ver.  7.  Mysia  was  situated  in  the  north-east  corner  of  Asia  Minor,  Bithynia  in  the  north 
and  west  of  Mysia.  Why  they  were  prevented  from  preaching  in  Asia  and  Bithynia  cannot 
be  known,  though  Rom.  xv.  20  and  2  Cor.  x.  15,  16  may  shed  some  light  on  the  problem. 
Perhaps  it  should  suffice  to  say  that  in  this  way  the  Spirit  designed  to  turn  their  steps  and 
faces  westward  in  the  direction  of  Europe.  But  see  further  in  "  Hints."  The  Spirit. — The 
oldest  authorities  read,  The  Sjririt  of  Jesus.  As  in  the  Filioque  controversy  at  the  Synod  of 
Toledo,  a.d.  589  neither  party  quoted  this  phrase,  the  inference  is  that  by  that  time  the 
text  had  been  long  corrupted. 

Ver.  8.  Passing  or  having  passed,  by  Mysia. — Not  "  having  passed  along  "  the  border  of 
Mysia,  but  "  having  passed  it  by  "  so  far  as  their  work  was  concerned — i.e.,  having  not  stopped 
to  preach  in,  but  hastened  through  it.  Troas. — Called  Alexandria  Troas,  in  honour  of 
Alexander,  founded  by  Alexander's  successors,  and  situated  on  the  Hellespont.     Now  Eski- 

331 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILE 1IC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Stamboul.     Visited  twice  again  by  Paul  (xx.  5  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  12).     The  home  of  Carpus,  who 
perhaps  acted  as  his  host  (2  Tim.  iv.  13). 

Ver.  9.  Whether  Paul's  vision  in  the  night  (compare  xviii.  9,  xxiii.  11,  xxvii.  23;  2  Cor. 
xii.  1)  occurred  in  a  dream  or  in  an  ecstasy  cannot  be  decided.  A  man  of  Macedonia. — Paul 
would  know  this,  if  not  from  the  man's  appearance,  from  his  words--"  Come  over."  Eamsay 
(St.  Paul  the  Traveller,  etc.,  pp.  202,  203)  maintains  that  the  man  of  Macedonia  was  Luke. 

Ver.  10.  We. — The  commencement  of  the  "  We  "  passages  of  this  book  (xvi.  10-17,  xx. 
5-15,  xxi.  1-18,  xxvii.  1-xxviii.  16),  which  shows  that  the  writer  of  the  Acts  (Luke)  joined 
Paul's  company  at  Troas.     Tradition  makes  Luke  to  have  been  an  Antiuchian. 

Ver.  12.  The  chief  city  of  that  part  of  Macedonia,  and  a  colony. — Better,  a  city  of  Macedonia, 
the  first  of  the  district,  a  colony — i.e.,  of  Rome.  Macedonia  was  divided  into  four  ( parts; 
but  whether  "the  first"  meant  "the  first  arrived  at  "(Winer,  Zocklcr,  Lightfoot.  Alford), 
not  a  very  valuable  observation  ;  or  the  first  in  political  importance  (Farrar,  Ramsay), 
which  Philippi  was,  though  Thessalonica  was  the  capital  of  Macedonia,  and  Amphipolis  of 
the  province ;  or  "  the  first  to  be  made  a  colony "  (Grotius,  Meyer,  Wendt,  Overbeck), 
the  distinction  pointed  out  in  the  text  ;  or  "  the  first  city  on  the  frontier  "  (Wordsworth), 
is  debated,  and  is  not  clear.  Wordsworth's  idea  derives  support  from  the  occurrence  of  a 
similar  phrase  in  Xenophon  {An  ab.,  I.  iv.  1)  :  els  'Icrcous,  ttjs  KiXi/aas  eaxo-rrju  irokiv.  Dr.  Hort 
thinks  some  early  corruption  has  crept  into  the  text,  and  that  instead  of  fiepLdos  should  be 
read  HiepL8os  (M  for  II),  for  Philippi  belonged  to  the  Pieria  of  Mount  Paragon,  and  might 
well  be  called  "  a  chief  city  of  Pierian  Macedonia  "  (Westcott  and  Hort's  The  New  Testament 
in  Greek,  ii.  97,  Appendix.)  Ramsay  says  :  "The  term  'first'  was  commonly  assumed 
by  towns  which  were  or  claimed  to  be  chief  of  a  district  or  province." 

Ver.  13.  By  a  river  side. — Neither  the  Strymon  nor  the  Nestos,  which  are  both  distant 
from  Philippi,  but  the  smaller  stream  Gangas  close  by  the  town.  Where  prayer  was  wont  to 
be  made ;  or,  where  we  supposed  there  was  a  place  of  prayer  (R.V.).  The  received  reading 
corrected  thus,  where  a  place  of  prayer  was  wont  to  be,  has  the  support  of  good  authorities. 
Josephus  (Ant.,  XIV.  x.  23)  mentions  the  custom  of  making  "prayer  houses"  at  the 
seaside. 

Ver.  14.  Lydia. — "  Certainly  a  proper  name,  not  a  patronymic "  (Zockler).  "  She  had 
probably  become  addicted  to  Jewish  religious  practices  in  her  native  city "  (Ramsay). 
Thyatira. — A  town  in  Lydia,  famous  for  its  dyeing. 

Ver.  15.  Come  into  my  house,  and  abide  there.— Up  to  this  time  the  four  teachers  may  have 
supported  themselves  by  their  own  labours,  Paul  as  a  tent-maker,  Luke  as  a  physician, 
Silas  and  Timothy  in  ways  unknown.  That  Paul  was  reluctant  to  accept  Lydia's  invitation 
has  been  argued  from  the  words,  And  she  constrained  us  (compare  Luke  xxiv.  29)  ;  and  tLis 
he  may  well  have  been,  not  because  of  unwillingness  to  partake  of  the  hospitality  of  others 
(see  Rom.  xvi.  23),  or  to  receive  assistance  from  them  when  his  circumstances  required 
(xxiv.  23,  xxviii.  10 ;  Phil.  iv.  15),  but  because  he  wished  to  avoid  the  imputation  of  being 
actuated  by  mercenary  motives  (xx.  34  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  17,  19). 

Ver.  16.  A  certain  damsel  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  divination. — Better,  a  female  slave 
(Gal.  iv.  22)  having  the  spirit  of  a  pythoness,  or,  according  to  superior  authorities,  a  spirit,  a 
python.  "  The  python  was  the  serpent  worshipped  at  Dephi,  as  the  symbol  of  wisdom,  from 
which  the  Pythian  priestesses  and  Apollo  as  succeeding  to  the  oracular  power  of  the 
serpent  took  their  distinguishing  appellative  "  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  19.  The  rulers,  apxovres,  were  the  town  magistrates  (Luke  xii.  58). 

Ver.  20.  The  magistrates,  crpaTTiyoi,  were  the  two  chief  civic  authorities  (duumviri)  in  a 
Roman  colony  town,  and  were  usually  styled  prretors. 

Vers.  20,  21.  Being  Jews — i.e.,  belonging  to  the  despised  race,  whom  Claudius  had 
shortly  before  banished  from  Rome  (xviii.  2)  ;  and  being  Romans — i.e.,  in  proud  contrast  to 
the  hated  sons  of  Abraham.  "  The  distinction  between  virdpx^v  and  &v  seems  to  be  that 
the  former  is  used  of  something  which  the  speaker  or  narrator  wishes  to  put  forward  into 
notice,  either  as  unknown  to  his  hearer  or  reader,  or  in  some  way  to  be  marked  by  him  for 
praise  or  blame  ;  whereas  the  latter  refers  to  facts  known  and  recognised  and  taken  for 
granted  by  both  "  (Alford). 

Ver.  22.  Rent  off — by  ordering  the  lictors  to  remove — their  clothes.  The  customary 
mandate  was :  Summore,  lictor,  despolia,  verbera.  Commanded — lit.,  were  commanding — to 
beat  them,  the  imperfect  showing  that  the  whole  process  of  scourging  went  on  under  the 
narrator's  eye. 

Ver.  23.  The  inner  prison. — "In  a  Roman  prison  there  were  usually  three  distinct  parts  — (1) 
the  communiora,  where  the  prisoners  had  light  and  fresh  air,  (2)  the  interior  a,  shut  off  by 
strong  iron  gates,  with  bars  and  locks,  and  (3)  the  tullianum,  or  dungeon.  The  third  was  a 
place  rather  of  execution  or  for  one  condemned  to  die"  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  i.  280,  note  4). 

Ver.  27.  Would  have  killed  himself. — Because  he  would  certainly  have  been  put  to  death 
had  his  prisoners  escaped  (see  xii.  19,  xxvii.  42). 

Ver.  28.  Do  thyself  no  harm.— As  the  prison  was  dark  Paul  may  have  learnt  from  some 

332 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


exclamation  of  the  jailor  that  he  meditated  suicide,  or,  if  ordinary  means  sufficed  not  to 
acquaint  him  with  the  keeper's  purpose,  supernatural  revelation  may  have  discovered  it  to 
him. 

Ver.  29.  A  light  should  be  lights. 

Ver.  30.  Brought  them  out. — Not  into  his  house  (see  ver.  34),  but  into  the  outer  or  common 
prison  or  other  room  belonging  to  the  prison,  where  they  were  joined  by  the  jailor's  family. 

Ver.  34.  Believing  in  God  with  all  his  house,  should  be,  lie  rejoiced  with,  or  over,  all  his 
house,  having  believed  in,  or  having  believed,  God. 

Ver.  35.  The  Serjeants  were  the  rod  bearers  or  lictors. 

Ver.  37.  They  have  beaten  us  openly  uncondemned,  being  Romans,  etc. ;  or,  having  beaten 
us  publicly  uncondemned,  they  cast  us  into  prison. — It  was  against  the  Valerian  law  passed  A.U.C. 
254  to  inflict  stripes  or  torture  on  any  Roman  citizen  until  an  appeal  to  the  people  had  been 
decided.  The  Porcian  law,  passed  A.u.C.  506,  forbade  stripes  and  torture  absolutely.  From 
this  passage  it  appears  that  Silas  as  well  as  Paul  was  a  Roman  citizen.  That  they  did  not 
appeal  to  their  Roman  citizenship  may  have  been  due  to  the  haste  with  which  proceedings 
had  been  taken  against  them.  Of  the  three  times  Paul  was  beaten  with  rods  (2  Cor.  xi.  25) 
this  was  one  ;  the  other  two  are  not  recorded. 

Ver.  38.  They,  the  magistrates,  feared  when  they  heard  that  they,  the  apostles,  were 
Romans. — Because,  according  to  Roman  law,  "  Facinus  est  vinciri  civem  Romanum ;  scelus 
verberari ;  prope  parricidium,  necari  "  (Cicero,  In  Verrem,  v.  66). 

Ver.  40.  The  use  of  the  third  person  shows  that  Luke  remained  behind  in  Philippi,  where 
he  was  afterwards  rejoined  by  the  apostle  and  his  company  (xx.  5). 

Note.- -The  whole  critical  school  admits  the  credibility  of  everything  in  this  chapter 
except  the  transactions  represented  as  having  taken  place  in  the  prison.  The  earthquake, 
shaking  the  prison  doors  and  snapping  the  prisoners'  fetters,  the  jailor's  foolishness  in 
proposing  to  murder  himself  before  he  knew  what  had  actually  happened,  the  unlikelihood 
of  all  the  prisoners  remaining  in  their  cells  when  the  doors  stood  open  for  their  escape,  and 
the  hasty  dismissal  of  the  apostles,  are  all  set  down  as  "  holy  fable,"  which  received  a  colour- 
ing at  least  from  the  story  preserved  by  Lucian  of  an  innocent  prisoner  in  Alexandria 
(A.D.  100),  who  disdained  the  opportunity  of  flight  from  prison  which  was  offered  him, 
and  instead  demanded  the  formal  recognition  of  his  innocence  from  the  magistrates.  But 
the  story  is  not  incredible,  if  the  supernatural  is  not  impossible ;  while  in  Lucian's  tale,  com- 
pared with  Luke's  narrative,  is  nothing  more  wonderful  than  this,  that  an  innocent  man 
fell  upon  the  same  course  of  action,  as  another  did  half  a  century  before — which  is  surely 
not  impossible  or  even  uncommon. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS. 

Vers.  1-5.  Paul  and  Silas  in  Lycaonia  ;  or,  Meeting  with  Timothy. 

I.  The  missionaries  and  the  Churches. — 1.  The  Churches  visited  by  the  mis- 
sionaries. Derbe,  Lystra,  and  Iconium,  which  are  mentioned  in  reverse  order 
from  that  in  which  they  were  first  introduced  (xiv.),  because  on  this  occasion 
Paul  and  his  companion  approached  them  from  Tarsus  by  travelling,  mcst  likely, 
through  the  Oilician  gates.  "  And  if  indeed  Paul  and  Silas  took  this  route,  and 
passed  through  the  narrow  gorge,  under  its  frowning  cliffs  of  limestone,  clothed 
here  and  there  with  pine  and  cedar,  which  to  the  Crusaders  presented  an  appear- 
ance so  terrible  that  they  christened  it  the  Gates  of  Judas,  how  far  must  they 
have  been  from  imagining,  in  their  wildest  dreams,  that  their  footsteps — the  foot- 
steps of  two  obscure  and  persecuted  Jews — would  lead  to  the  traversing  of  that 
pass  centuries  afterwards  by  kings  and  their  armies  "  (Farrar,  The  Life  and  Work 
of  St.  Paul,  i.   456).     2.  The  special  work  done  by  the  missionaries.     Twofold. 

(1)  Confirming  the  Churches  (xv.  41),  doubtless  by  preaching  (see  xv.  32,  41). 

(2)  Delivering  them  the  apostolic  decrees  (ver.  4),  presumably  with  exposition 
and  enforcement  on  the  part  of  both  Paul  and  Silas.  3.  The  result  of  their  labours 
in  the  Churches.  (1)  Intensive  :  establishment  or  strengthening  in  the  faith,  in 
the  belief,  love,  and  practice  of  the  truth.  (2)  Extensive :  increase  in  number 
daily,  first  of  believers  and  next  of  Churches. 

II.  Paul  and  Timothy. — 1.  Details  of  Timothy's  history.  (1)  His  birthplace. 
Not  Derbe  (Neander),  but  Lystra  (see  xx.  4).  (2)  His  parentage.  His  father  a 
Greek ;  whether  living,  or  dead,  and,  if  living,  whether  a  proselyte,  or  a  heathen, 
cannot  be  told.     If  alive  and  a  proselyte,  he  was  most  likely  uncircumcised.    His 

333 


CHAP.  XVI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


mother  a  believing  Jewess,  by  name  Eunice,  the  daughter  of  Lois  (2  Tim.  i.  5), 
also  a  Christian  disciple.  Mixed  marriages,  condemned  by  Paul  (1  Cor.  vii.), 
"  were  far  less  strictly  forbidden  to  women  than  to  men  "  (Fa rear).  (3)  His 
character  "  well  reported  of  by  the  brethren  that  were  at  Lystra  and  Iconium." 
Supposing  him  to  have  been  converted  during  Paul's  first  visit  to  Lystra  (xiv.  8), 
he  would  at  the  time  of  Paul's  second  visit  be  a  disciple  of  three  or  four  years' 
standing,  and  during  the  interval  may  have  given  ample  proof  both  at  Lystra 
and  Iconium  of  his  interest  in  the  cause  of  the  gospel.  2.  Pauls  desire  to  have  him 
as  a  colleague  in  the  ministry  (compare  2  Tim.  iv.  5).  This  may  have  arisen  from 
a  variety  of  motives.  Paul  may  have  (1)  considered  him  from  his  talents  and 
graces  eminently  qualified  for  the  work  ;  or  (2)  felt  drawn  towards  him  from  the 
fact  that  he  (Paul)  had  been  the  means  of  his  conversion  (1  Cor.  iv.  17  ;  1  Tim. 
i.  2,  8 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  2) ;  or  (3)  recognised  in  his  mixed  Jewish  and  Greek  descent, 
a  circumstance  calculated  to  be  helpful  in  propagating  the  gospel  in  such  mixed 
communities  as  were  about  to  be  visited  ;  or  (4)  wished  to  have  a  thii  d  companion 
in  place  of  John  Mark,  as  already  he  had  Silas  in  room  of  Barnabas.  (See 
further  "Hints"  on  ver.  3.)  3.  Paul's  conduct  in  causing  him  to  be  circumcised. 
(1)  The  reason.  "  Because  of  the  Jews  that  were  in  those  parts  ;  for  they  all 
knew  that  his  father  was  a  Greek."  In  Paul's  estimation  it  would  have  hindered 
Timothy's  and  perhaps  his  own  usefulness  among  the  Jews  had  he  accepted  as  a 
colleague  one  of  Jewish  descent  who  was  not  circumcised.  In  other  words,  it 
would  have  looked  strange  that  Paul  should  ask  of  Timothy  (a  half  Jew)  less  of 
conformity  to  the  law  than  was  demanded  of  a  heathen  who  became  a  proselyte 
of  righteousness.  (2)  The  consistency.  Paul's  conduct  in  circumcising  Timothy 
— whether  with  his  own  hand  or  by  that  of  another  is  uncertain — has  been 
pronounced  irreconcilable  with  his  refusal  to  circumcise  Titus  (Gal.  ii.  3).  Of 
course,  if  Titus  was  circumcised  (Farrar,  Ihe  Life  and  Work  of  St.  Paul,  i.  412- 
420),  the  subjection  of  Timothy  to  the  same  ritual  requires  no  explanation ;  but 
if,  as  most  hold,  Titus  was  not  circumcised,  then  no  apology  is  needed  further 
than  to  say,  the  circumstances  were  entirely  different.  To  have  yielded  in  the 
case  of  Titus  would  have  been  to  concede  the  obligatory  character  of  circumcision 
for  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews  ;  to  have  left  Timothy  uncircumcised  would  simply 
have  prevented  him  from  finding  access  to  the  Jews.  Paul  acted  on  the  prin- 
ciple laid  down  in  1  Cor.  ix.  20.  4.  Timothys  ordination  to  the  work  of  the 
ministry.  Not  mentioned  in  the  Acts,  this  may  be  gathered  from  the  pastoral 
epistles  (1  Tim.  iv.  14 ;  2  Tim.  1,14). 

Learn. — 1.  The  value  of  a  pious  mother.  2.  The  advantage  of  early  conver- 
sion. 3.  The  influence  of  a  good  name.  4.  The  duty  of  becoming  all  things 
to  all  men  in  order  to  gain  some.  5.  The  benefit  that  flows  from  a  peaceful 
disposal  of  controversies. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.   1.  A    Certain  Disciple  named  III.  A   disciple  of  Jesus  Christ. — 

Timothy.  Circumstances  that  favoured  his  con- 

I.  The  son  of  a  pious  mother. —  version — his  birth  and  education  in  a 
The  advantage  of  being  descended  from  pious  home.  What  presumably  led  to 
godly  parents.  The  influence  of  good  his  decision  for  Christ — listening  to 
mothers.  The  power  of  heredity  in  Paul's  preaching,  possibly  witnessing 
religion.  Paul's  stoning  (xiv.   19).     Advantages 

II.  A  studentof  the  word  of  God. —  of  early  conversion — -greater  happiness, 
Instructed  in  the  Scriptures  from  his  longer  usefulness,  higher  advancement 
youth.       Value     of    Bible    education,      in  grace. 

The  profit  of  beginning  early.  IV.  A  preacher  of  the  gospel. — A 

334 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


^ 


fitting  termination  to  Timothy's  career. 
The  noblest  occupation  a  young  man 
can  follow. 

/    The  Pious  Mothers  of  the  Bible. 
I.  Jochebed,  the  mother  of  Moses. 
II.  Hannah,  the  mother  of  Samuel. 

III.  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus. 

IV.  Salome,  the  mother  of  Zebedee's 


j  children. 

\      V.  Eunice,  the  mother  of  Timothy. 

Mixed  Marriages. 

I.  Not  permissible  to  Christians 
(2  Cor.  vi.  14). 

II.  Seldom  beneficial  to  either  party. 

The   Christian  more  likely  to  become 
unchristian  than  vice  versd. 

III.  Not  to  be  dissolved,  if  formed 
before  the  conversion  of  either  (1  Cor. 
vii.  10). 

Yer.    3.  Paul's  Companions  on   the 
Second  Missionary  Journey. — 1.  Silas, 
or     "  Silvanus,     as    Paul     constantly 
names  him,  was  an  older  man  (than 
Paul),   who    had    already    made    his 
appearance  in  foreign  Churches  as    a 
prophet  and   teacher,    and    Paul  con- 
stantly speaks  of  him  as  an  associate 
of  equal  rank  with  himself.     A  prophet 
of   the    mother   Church,    who   in   the 
moment  of  general  falling  away  steps 
manfully    forward    upon    Paul's   side, 
must  also  have  been  an  energetic  and 
whole-souled  man,  of  stronger  tenacity 
than  Barnabas    and  the  others,    and 
that  Paul  always  speaks  of  him  as  a 
co-founder  with  himself  of  the  Churches 
established  in  this   period  shows  that 
he    was    to    the    apostle    even    more 
than  an  assistant.     Then,  if  Silas  was 
a  sufficient  compensation  for  Barnabas, 
who  had  departed  to  Cyprus,  on  the 
other  hand  Paul  contemplated  supply- 
ing the  lack  of  John  Mark  through 
the  taking  with  him  of  a  younger  man. 
For  whilst  the  disciples  of  Jesus  were 
accustomed  to  set  forth  two  and  two, 
Paul    preferred,    for    various   reasons 
suggested  by  the  aim  of  his  mission, 
that  his  travel  company  should  consist 
of   three.     As  he  formerly  journeyed 
with  Barnabas  and  .Mark,  and  on  the 
present  occasion   travelled   with   Silas 


and  Timothy,  so  worked  he  afterwards 
with  Titus  and  Timothy  in  Macedonia 
and  Achaia,  and  again  with  two,  Luke 
and    Aristarchus,    sailed    to     Pome." 
2.  Timothy.     "  The  fresh  young  com- 
rade whom  the  two   older   men   now 
took  with  them  was  even  then  famed 
among   the    Christian     Churches     in 
Derbe,  Lystra,   and  Iconium.     Of  no 
apostolic  scholar  is  so  concrete  a  pic- 
ture   handed    down    as    of    Timothy. 
.  .  .  Through  the  pastoral  epistles  to 
Timothy  we  possess  a  complete  tradition 
concerning  Timothy    which  neverthe- 
less may  perfectly  well  include  in  itself 
elements  of  true   history.  .  .  .  But    in 
any  case,  out  of  Paul's  own  letters  (i.e., 
his  acknowledged  epistles),  it  is  clear 
that  Paul  could  entrust  even  difficult 
commissions  to  '  the  son  of  his  heart, 
his  beloved  son  in  the  Lord.'     Fixing 
our  eyes  exclusively  on  Paul's  own  ex- 
pressions concerning  Timothy,  we  can 
see  that  modesty  and  even  shyness  were 
fundamental  features  in  his  character, 
so  that  Paul  occasionally  bespeaks  for 
him  a  friendly  reception  that  he  might 
be  able  to   appear  amongst   those   to 
whom  he  is  sent  without  fear  (1  Cor. 
xvi.  10).     Forceful  natures,  like  Paul, 
are  often  conscious  of  an  inward  attrac- 
tion towards    such    quiet    and    gentle 
helpers ;  and  just  for  this  reason  Paul 
rated  the  modest  Timothy  far  above  all 
his  other  fellow-labourers  (Phil.  ii.  20). 
Nor  was  he  deceived  in  him,  since  in 
persecution    and    bonds    the    younger 
disciple    remained  true   to  him   when 
stronger  natures  fell  away,  and  even 
after  the  apostle's  death  he  belonged  to 
the  best-known  travelling  preachers  of 
the  second  generation  (Heb.  xiii.  23). 
Tradition      has       endowed       Timothy 
like    another    Achilles     with    eternal 
youth,    so    that     in    the    epistles    to 
Timothy,  which,  according  to  tradition, 
were   composed    towards    the    end    of 
Paul's   activity,  he  appears  the  same 
youngling  as  he  had  been  when    first 
called  by  the  apostle  to  the  holy  work 
(1  Tim.  iv.  12  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  22).     Indeed, 
so  high  stood    his   reputation    in   the 
Church  at  this  time,   that  his  future 
career  was  said  to  have  been  pointed 

335 


chap.  xvi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


out  by  prophet  voices  (1  Tim.  i.  18)  j  I.  The  number  of  its  members, 

whilst  with  great  earnestness  tradition  n.  The     enlightenment     of    their 

asserted  he  had  been  a  genuine  scholar  faith. 

of  Paul  (1    Tim.   i.    2y—Hausrath,  m  The  cheerfulness  of  their  obedi- 

"  Her  Apostel  Paulus,    pp.  258-260.  ence. 

Yer.  5.  The  Strength  of  a    Church.         IV.  The    completeness  of  their   or- 
Consists  in —  ganisation. 

HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  6—10. 

Regions  Beyond  ;  or,  the  Vision  of  the  Man  of  Macedonia. 

I.  The  hindering  Spirit.— 1.  Who  this  was.  (1)  The  Holy  Ghost.  The  third 
person  of  the  Trinity,  who  proceedeth  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  (John 
xv.  26),  and  whom  Christ  promised  to  send  after  His  departure  from  the  earth 
(John  xvi.  7),  who  came  according  to  promise,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  (ii.  4), 
and  had  ever  since  been  guiding  the  development  of  the  Church  and  the  footsteps 
of  its  apostles  and  evangelists  (see  viii.  29,  x.  19,  xi.  12,  xiii.  2,  4).  (2)  The 
Spirit  of  Jesus — i.e.,  the  Spirit  whom  Jesus  had  sent.  A  valuable  statement, 
the  genuineness  of  which  must  be  concedtd  (see  "  Critical  Remarks"),  confirming 
the  well-known  dogma  of  the  Creed  that  the  Spirit  bears  the  same  relation  to 
the  Son  as  to  the  Father.  2.  When  He  interposed.  (1)  After  the  two  mission- 
aries Paul  and  Silas  had  gone  through  the  Phrygian  and  Galatian  region,  lying 
on  the  west  and  north  of  Lycaonia.  The  route  pursued  by  them  can  only  be 
conjectured.  Probably  from  Lystra  they  proceeded  to  Iconium,  and  from  that 
to  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  where  Paul  had  on  his  previous  journey  founded  a  Church, 
after  leaving  which  they  would  most  likely  cross  the  hills,  and,  merely  touching 
Phrygian  territory,  enter  the  district  of  Galatia  towards  the  north.  (See,  how- 
ever, "Critical  Remarks "  and  "Hints''  on  ver.  6.)  Whether  they  evangelised 
any  towns  in  Phrygia  cannot  be  determined.  Colossse,  situated  in  the  south  of 
Phrygia,  it  is  not  certain  the  apostle  ever  visited;  but  that  he  published  the 
gospel  to  the  Phrygians  and  made  disciples  seems  the  obvious  deduction  from 
xviii.  23.  That  he  preached  in  Galatia  and  founded  Churches  there  himself 
declares  (Gal.  i.  2,  iv.  19).  No  Galatian  cities  are  specially  mentioned  in  con- 
nection with  the  spread  of  Christianity  in  this  province;  hence  the  inference 
that  the  Christian  communities  were  scattered  about  the  rural  parts.  Paul's 
preaching  in  Galatia  was,  in  a  manner,  brought  about  against  his  will,  through 
an  attack  of  bodily  sickness  which  detained  him  in  that  province,  when  possibly 
he  intended  to  push  eastwards  to  Pontus.  What  this  sickness  was  is  not 
recorded,  though  most  likely  it  was  ophthalmia,  and  presumably  had  to  do  with 
his  "thorn"  or  "stake  in  the  flesh"  (compare  2  Cor.  xii.  7-10  with  Gal.  iv. 
13-15) ;  and  see  also  xiii.  14  ;  "  Homiletical  Analysis  "  and  "  Hints  ").  (2)  Again 
when  they  assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia.  This  they  did  when  they  had  come 
over  against  Mysia,  which  lay  north  of  Asia,  and,  like  it,  looked  out  on  the 
^Egean.  Arrived  thither,  they  contemplated  turning  north-east  to  Bithynia, 
a  province  located  between  Mount  Olympus  and  the  Euxine,  when  once  more 
they  were  mysteriously  arrested.  3.  How  He  signified  His  will.  This  also  can 
only  be  surmised.  It  may  have  been  by  an  outward  voice  (Renan),  such  as  pro- 
bably directed  Philip  (viii.  20),  or  by  an  inward  impression,  such  as  Paul  had 
already  experienced  (Gal.  ii.  2),  by  a  dream  or  by  a  vision,  by  the  voices  of 
prophets,  as  in  xx.  23,  xxi.  11  (Holtzmann,  Nosgen),  or  simply,  though 
less  likely,  by  some  natural  occurrence,  unrecorded,  which  rendered  it  impossu 
ble  to  carry  out  their  intentions  first  of  going  into  Asia  and  next  of  moving 
north  into  Bithynia.  Paul's  rule  (2  Cor.  x.  15,  16)  was  not  the  hindrance. 
(See  "  Hints  "  on  ver.  7.)     4.  What  course  He  appointed.     (1)  That  they  should  not 

336 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE    ACTS.      chap.  xvi. 


speak  the  word  in  Asia.  Politically  considered,  Asia  meant  the  western  portion 
of  Asia  Minor,  which  included  Mysia,  Lydia  and  Caria,  Galatia,  Phrygia, 
Bithynia,  Cilicia,  Pamphylia  and  Lycia,  but,  popularly  viewed,  it  signified  the 
territory  situated  west  of  Phrygia  and  south  of  Mysia.  Why  the  missionaries 
were  prevented  from  entering  it  can  only  have  been  that  the  hour  was  not  yet 
arrived  for  its  inhabitants  to  hear  the  gospel.  (2)  That  they  should  not  pass  into 
Bithynia.  This  seemed  the  natural  direction  for  them  to  take,  if  their  mission  was 
not  to  cross  the  iEgean.  But  the  Spirit,  unconsciously  to  them,  was  conducting 
their  steps  towards  Europe.  Accordingly,  once  more  stopped  (at  Mysia) and  turned 
westward,  they  passed  through  but  did  not  preach  in  (the  meaning  of  "  passing 
by  ")  the  country,  till  they  came  down  to  Troas  on  the  Hellespont,  about  four 
miles  from  the  site  of  ancient  Troy. 

II.  The  midnight  vision. — 1.  The  form  it  assumed.  "A  man  of  Macedonia" 
appeared  before  the  eye  of  the  apostle,  "  standing,  beseeching  him,  and  saying, 
Come  over  into  Macedonia  and  help  us."  The  apparition  and  the  voice  were 
both  supernatural  (compare  ix.  12,  x.  30).  Whether  Paul  recognised  the  man 
as  a  Macedonian  by  his  appearance,  dress,  or  speech  is  not  related ;  but  as  Paul's 
thoughts  the  day  before  had  probably  been  much  occupied  with  the  Macedonian 
land  which  lay  beyond  the  ^Egean,  and  as  the  vision,  though  not  created  by,  had 
been  fitted  to,  his  thoughts,  it  is  not  difficult  to  understand  how  his  soul,  lying 
in  the  hand  of  God,  quickly  leapt  to  the  interpretation  of  the  scene.  The  strange 
figure  wore  the  aspect  of  a  Macedonian  man — perhaps,  from  his  upright  posture, 
a  soldier  (Farrar) ;  the  outstretched  hands  evoked  a  mute  appeal  for  aid ;  the 
voice  sounded  like  a  summons  to  hurry  over  with  that  help  which  the  men 
across  the  water  greatly  needed,  not  alone  because  of  the  corrupt  and  decaying 
civilisations  in  the  midst  of  which  they  were  perishing,  but  because  of  the 
magnificent  potentialities  for  good  which  lay  within  them,  notwithstanding  their 
environment  as  members  of  the  most  advanced  and  active  races  on  the  face  of 
the  globe.  2.  The  inference  it  suggested.  The  apostles  at  once  perceived  the 
reason  of  that  mysterious  hindrance  they  had  twice  suffered,  and,  concluding 
that  God  had  called  them  to  preach  the  gospel  in  Europe,  at  once  took  steps  to 
obey.  "  Straightway,  we  sought  to  go  forth  into  Macedonia."  Like  the  good 
soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  that  he  was  (2  Tim.  ii.  3),  Paul  always  obeyed  his  marching 
orders  with  military  promptitude  and  precision. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  real,  though  unseen,  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
Church  and  with  the  true  servants  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  development  of  the 
Christian  Church  the  proper  care  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  The  duty  of  Christian 
people,  but  especially  of  Christian  ministers,  to  wait  upon  and  follow  the 
leading  of  the  Spirit.  4.  The  certainty  that  guidance  will  never  fail  those 
prepared  to  accept  it.  5.  The  loud  call  of  the  heathen  world  to  the  servants 
of  Jesus  Christ. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.  6.  The  Region  of  Galatia. — The  district,   the  land  or  territory  which 

view  that  this  was  not  Northern  but  is    both    Phrygian    and    Galatian — a 

Southern  Galatia,  the  district  in  which  description  which  the  professor  main- 

lay   the    Churches   of  Derbe,    Lystra,  tains  to  be  "  strictly  true,"  and  perfectly 

Iconium,  and  Antioch,  has  been  recently  inapplicable  to  Northern  Galatia,  which 

championed  by  Professor  Bamsay,  who  could  have  been  thought  of    had  the 

offers  in  its  support  the  following  con-  discarded  reading   of  the  Textus    Be- 

sideration  : —  ceptus,  tyjv   Qpvyiav  koI   Trjv   TaXarLKrjv 

I.  The     phrase,     tyjv     Qpvyiav    kcu  ^wpav,  been  retained. 
TaXaTiKrjv  x">Pav>    describes  a    single         II.  Roman  documents  of  the  first 

z  337 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


century    show    that    the   district  in 

which  the  above-named  Churches  were 
situated  might  be  accurately  described 
as  Phrygian-Galatic.  "  In  some  in- 
scriptions," writes  the  professor,  "the 
Governor  of  Galatia  (in  the  larger 
sense)  is  called  simply  the  Governor 
of  Galatia,  while  in  others  he  is  styled 
Governor  of  Galatia,  Pisidia,  Phrygia, 
Lycaonia,  Isauria,  Pontus  Galaticus, 
etc." 

III.  "No  traveller  from  North  Gala- 
tia to  Bithynia  could  come  to  a  point 
"  over  against  Mysia,"  still  less  "  to 
the  frontier  of  Mysia."  '"  A  glance  at 
a  map  (preferably  a  large  map)  will 
make  this  clear  to  all "  \  while  every- 
thing is  natural,  if,  after  leaving 
Phrygian  Galatia,  the  apostle  was 
making  for  Asia  when  his  course  was 
arrested,  and  again  was  heading  north- 
wards to  Bithynia,  when  he  was  a 
second  time  checked  and  turned  west- 
wards to  Mysia  and  Troas. 

I Y.  South  Galatia  is  favoured  by  the 
chronology  of  Acts. — "  The  process  of 
preaching  in  the  great  cities  of  Galatia 
needed  in  any  case  a  considerable  time  ; 
an  invalid,  as  St.  Paul  is  supposed  on 
the  North  Galatian  theory  to  have 
been,  would  require  a  long  time  in 
that  vast  and  bare  country.  But  the 
period  allotted  on  any  of  the  proposed 
systems  of  chronology  to  this  journey 
leaves  no  room  for  the  evangelisation 
of  Galatia.  We  may  safely  assume 
that  Paul  left  Antioch  on  his  second 
journey  in  the  spring.  No  one  who 
knows  the  Taurus  will  suppose  that 
he  crossed  it  before  the  middle  of  May  ; 
June  is  a  more  probable  time.  Say,  he 
passed  the  Cilician  Gates  on  the  1st  of 
June.  If  we  calculate  his  journey  by 
the  shortest  route,  allowing  no  deten- 
tion for  unforeseen  contingencies,  but 
making  him  rest  always  on  the  Sundays, 
and  supposing  a  stay  of  two  Sundays 
each  at  Derbe,  Iconinm,  and  Antioch, 
and  of  at  least  five  weeks  at  Lystra 
(which  is  required  to  select  Timothy 
as  comrade,  to  perform  the  operation 
on  him,  and  to  wait  his  recovery),  we 
find  that  even  if  he  did  not  touch 
North  Galatia,  October  would  be  begun 

338 


before  he  reached  Philippi.  Eleven 
months  may  be  fairly  allotted  to  the 
events  recorded  at  Philippi,  Thessa- 
lonica,  Beerea,  and  Athens;  and  then 
Paul  went  to  Corinth  where  he  resided 
a  year  and  a  half.  He  would  then 
sail  for  Jerusalem  in  spring.  Thus 
three  entire  years  are  required  as  the 
smallest  allowance  for  this  journey, 
even  if  it  was  done  in  the  way  our 
theory  supposes. 

Y.  Paul's  sickness  makes  for  the 
South  Galatian  theory. — "  It  is  re- 
quired by  the  North  Galatian  theory 
that  St.  Paul,  stricken  at  Ancyra  by 
the  severe  illness,"  referred  to  in 
Gal.  iv.  13,  "took  that  opportunity  to 
make  the  long,  fatiguing  journeys 
needed  in  order  to  preach  in  Tavium 
and  Pessinus.  Those  who  know  the 
bare,  black  uplands  of  Galatia,  hot  and 
dusty  in  summer,  covered  with  snow 
in  winter,  will  appreciate  the  im- 
probability and  want  of  truth  to  nature 
which  are  involved  in  the  words  '  be- 
cause of  an  infirmity  of  the  flesh  I 
preached  unto  you.'  "  Professor  Earn- 
say  thinks  Paul's  infirmity  was  the 
fever  which  he  caught  at  Perga,  and 
which  determined  him  to  visit  the  high- 
lands of  Pisidia  and  Lycaonia. — The 
Church  in  the  Roman  Empire,  chaps, 
iii.,  iv. 

Yers.  6,  7.  Forbidden  to  preach  in 
Asia  and  Bithynia. — The  reason  sug- 
gested for  this  by  Hausrath  is  that 
Paul's  visit  to  Galatia,  and  indeed  his 
entire  progress  hitherto,  had  been  one 
of  controversy  and  struggle.  "  Con- 
troversy in  Jerusalem,  controversy  at 
Antioch,  controversy  in  Galatia  :  that 
had  been  the  way  which  lay  behind 
him.  Perhaps  it  was  just  for  this 
reason  that  in  the  year  53-54  the 
Spirit  suffered  him  not  to  turn  either 
west  to  Proconsular  Asia;  where 
Ephesus  was  already  in  the  struggle 
with  Jewish  Christians,  or  to  Bithynia 
in  the  north,  where  in  the  days  of  Pliny 
at  least  a  strongly  coloured  Jewish 
Christianity  prevailed,  but  called  him 
by  a  vision  to  Europe,  where  a  freer 
development  of  his  own  peculiar  foun- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


dation  principle  was  possible  among 
the  Jews  of  the  Diaspora  who  were 
less  closely  bound  up  with  Jerusalem  " 
(Der  Apostel  Paulus,  p.  266). 

Ver.  7.  The  Spirit  of  Jesus. 

I.  The  personality  of  this  Spirit. — 
1.  Implied  in  the  actions  here  ascribed 
to  Him—"  suffering  not,"  "  hindering." 
Impossible  to  be  explained  as  a  merely 
human,  moral  spirit,  or  even  as  "  the 
power  of  the  true  religion  or  of  the 
fellowship  in  life  which  the  human 
spirit  has  with  God,  which  has  pro- 
ceded  from  Jesus  Christ  and  continues 
to  work  in  the  Christian  Church " 
(Pfleiderer,  Grundriss  der  Christlichen 
Glaubens-  und  Sittenlehre,  p.  163). 
Throughout  Acts  the  Spirit  is  a  Divine 
person.  2.  Confirmed  by  other  Scripture 
representations.  John  xiv.  26,  xv.  26, 
xvi.  7,  13-15  ;  Rom.  viii.  9  ;  1  Cor.  ii. 
10,  11  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  14,  etc.  "With 
Paul  the  Holy  Spirit  is  that  Spirit 
which,  according  to  its  origin,  is  Divine, 
but  in  Christians  is  Divine- human, 
as  becoming  the  peculiar  and  per- 
manent principle  of  the  new  man 
(Gal.  v.  22,  25;  Rom.  v.  5,  viii.  1-15; 
1  Cor.  ii.  10-15).  With  John  also 
the  Holy  Spirit,  corresponding  to  and 
in  consequence  of  the  Divine  Logos 
personality  in  Christ  is  definitely  con- 
ceived of  as  a  separate  Divine  being  " 
(Ibid.,  pp.  159,  160). 

II.  The  relation  of  this  Spirit  to 
Jesus. — 1.  Equal  in  essence  with  Christ. 
This  implied  in  His  association  with 
Christ  in  the  baptismal  formula  (Matt, 
xxviii.  19)  and  the  Christian  benedic- 
tion (2  Cor.  xiii.  14).  "As  the  prin- 
ciple of  man's  life  fellowship  with  God," 
says  Pfleiderer  (Grundriss,  p.  159), 
the  Holy  Spirit  with  Paul  "is  thought 
of  at  one  time  as  of  the  same  essence 
with  God  and  Christ,  at  another  time 
as  distinguished  from  both  as  the  gift 
of  God  intermediated  through  Christ." 
2.  Distinguished  in  personality  from 
Christ.  This  also  involved  in  the 
biblical  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Yet  the  distinction  in  personality  must 
not  be  so  held  as  to  contradict  the 
unity   of   essence.      The   existence   of 


such  relations  in  the  Godhead  may 
transcend  human  reason,  but  is  not  on 
that  account  to  be  denied.  3.  Pro- 
ceeding forth  from  Christ.  Not  merely 
from  the  Father  (John  xv.  26),  but 
also  from  the  Son.  Though  not  so 
stated  in  the  New  Testament,  this 
has  been  accepted  by  the  Christian 
Church  as  the  necessary  consequence 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  divinity  of  the 
Son,  and  therefore  of  the  Son's  essential 
equality  with  the  Father.  4.  Dis- 
pensed by  Christ.  In  the  days  of  His 
flesh  Christ  claimed  that  after  His 
glorification  He  would  send  forth  the 
Spirit  from  the  Father  (John  xv.  26, 
xvi.  7),  and  this  promise  He  fulfilled 
at  Pentecost  (ii.  33).  5.  Representative 
of  Christ.  That  the  Holy  Ghost  should 
be  the  personal  vicegerent  and  pleni- 
potentiary of  Jesus  after  His  departure 
from  the  world  was  likewise  distinctly 
taught  (John  xvi.  16). 

III.  The  functions  of  this  Spirit 
in  the  Church. — 1.  The  creator  a,nd 
sustainer  of  its  life.  The  new  moral 
and  spiritual  nature  which  belongs  to 
every  individual  member  of  the  Church 
is  a  direct  production  of  the  indwelling 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  soul  of  the 
believer  (John  iii.  5  ;  Eph.  ii.  1,  10  ; 
2  Cor.  v.  17).  2.  The  revealer  and 
interpreter  of  its  truth.  Whatever 
spiritual  understanding  the  believing 
soul  attains  to,  he  owes  to  the  inward 
illumination  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (John 
xvi.  13,  14;  1  Cor.  ii.  9-14;  Eph.  i. 
17 ;  1  John  ii.  20).  3.  The  inspirer 
and  guide  of  its  movements.  As  the 
footsteps  of  Paul  and  Silas  were 
directed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  are 
those  of  believers  superintended  by  the 
same  Divine  leader  (Rom.  viii.  14 ; 
Gal.  v.  16). 

Ver.  9.  The  Cry  of  the  Heathen — 
Come  over  and  help  us. 

I.  The  significance  of  the  cry. — 1. 
The  cry  of  a  perishing  humanity.  2. 
Which  has  begun  to  realise  its  danger. 
3.  For  that  succour  which  alone  can 
relieve  distress — viz.,  the  salvation  of 
the  gospel. 

II.  The    parties    to    whom    it    is 

339 


chap.  xvi.         B0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


directed. — To  the  Christian  Church — 
i.e.,  to  those  (1)  who  have  that  salva- 
tion in  their  possession  ;  (2)  who  them- 
selves received  it  as  a   free  gift ;  and 

(3)  who  also  have  been  commanded  to 
make  it  known  to  others. 

III.  Reasons  why  the  cry  should  be 
listened  to. — Because  (1)  it  is  urgent, 
and  has  been  long  sounding  in  the 
Church's  ear  ;  (2)  those  crying  are  the 
Church's  brethren,  who,  like  them- 
selves, belong  to  Jesus  Christ ;  (3) 
ordinary  gratitude  for  mercy  received, 
if  not  love  to  Jesus  Christ,  should 
impel  the  Christian  Church  to  respond 
to  it ;  and  (4)  without  the  Church's 
aid  the  heathen  world  cannot  be  re- 
covered for  Jesus  Christ. 

The  Cry  of  the  Nations. 

I.  All  nations  ignorant  of  the  gospel 
need  help. — Arising  from  :  1.  Their 
ignorance  (1)  of  God,  and  the  way  in 
which  He  is  to  be  worshipped  ;  (2)  of 
the  Saviour,  and  the  manner  in  which 
He  is  to  be  approached.  2.  Their 
condition,  represented  in  Scripture  as 
a  state  of  (1)  darkness  (Matt.  iv.  16  ; 
Eph.  v.  8);  (2)  disease  (Isa.  i.  6);  (3) 
bondage  (Rom.  vi.  17  ;  Eph.  ii.  2) ;  and 

(4)  death  (Eph.  ii.  1). 

II.  All  nations  needing  help  utter 
the  same  cry  as  the  men  of  Macedonia. 
— Evident  from  (1)  the  knowledge  we 
have  of  their  condition;  (2)  our  con- 
nection with  them  in  the  way  of 
commerce ;  and  (3)  the  political  re- 
lations in  which  we  stand  towards 
them. 

III.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  to  respond  to  this  cry. — 1.  God 
has  done  everything  to  facilitate  our 
exertions.  2.  He  has  committed  the 
care  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  world 
to  the  Christian  Church.  3.  Christ 
commands  us  to  "  love  our  neighbours 
as  ourselves  "  and  to  "  preach  the  gospel 
to  every  creature  "  imply  the  obliga- 
tion here  referred  to.  4.  Reason  and 
equity  say  we  should  send  to  others 
that  which  we  ourselves  received  from 
others. — Bogue. 


Ver.  10.  The  Call  to  Macedonia. — 
The  cause  which  led  to  the  apostle 
Paul's  crossing  from  Asia  into  Europe, 
and  the  object  which  he  had  in  view  in 
coming  here. 

I.  As  to  the  causes  which  led  to  his 
coming, — While  one  is  referred  to  in 
the  text,  you  will  find  others  mentioned 
in  the  verses  which  go  before  (ver.  6). 
Thus,  even  so  far,  Paul  might  have 
felt  himself  guided  to  this  continent. 
But  he  was  not  left  to  judge  of  it 
merely  in  that  way.  It  was  so  im- 
portant a  step,  and  such  great  conse- 
quences were  to  follow  on  it,  that  a 
vision  was  given  him. 

II.  And  for  what  object  did  they 
come?— They  drew  the  conclusion,  we 
are  told,  that  the  Lord  had  called  them 
to  preach  the  gospel  in  that  place.  This 
was  the  object  for  which  all  the 
journeys  of  the  apostle  Paul  were 
undertaken. 

What  are  the  lessons  which  we 
may  learn  for  ourselves  from  this 
history?  1.  From  the  way  in  which 
the  apostle  Paul  was  more  than 
once  kept  from  going  where  he  in- 
tended, kept  from  going  into  the 
province  of  Asia,  and  kept  from 
entering  into  Bithynia,  and  was  led  on 
where  he  seems  never  to  have  intended 
to  go,  to  accomplish  a  mighty  purpose, 
we  learn  how  God  may  disappoint  His 
people  now  in  regard  to  some  plan  of 
usefulness  which  they  have  in  view. 
2.  Another  truth  which  we  are  re- 
minded of  is,  that  as  this  vision  was 
given  to  Paul,  the  man  of  Macedonia 
calling  on  him  to  help  them,  so  there 
are  calls  of  the  same  kind  continually 
made  upon  all  Christian  people,  which 
we  need  no  vision  to  remind  us  of, 
because  they  are  a  reality  with  which 
we  are  acquainted.  3.  And  there 
is  one  other  lesson  closely  connected 
with  this,  which  we  may  learn  from 
what  we  have  been  considering  to-day 
— the  exceeding  value  of  the  gospel. 
This  was  shown  by  Paul's  object  in 
coming  over  to  Macedonia. — M.  F. 
Day. 


340 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  11—13. 

Paul  and  Silas  in  Philippi  ;  or,  the  Gospel  carried  to  Europe. 

I.  The  journey  to  Philippi. — 1.  From  Troas  to  Samothracia.  No  sooner  had 
Paul  and  his  companions,  Silas,  Timothy,  and  Luke,  the  beloved  physician,  who 
had  now  joined  the  apostle  (see  u  Critical  Remarks,"  ver.  10,  and  "  Hints  "  on 
ver.  11),  understood  the  significance  of  the  midnight  vision  than  they  proceeded 
to  comply  with  the  call  of  the  Macedonian  man.  With  the  early  dawn,  having 
turned  their  steps  towards  the  harbour,  and  found  a  ship  about  to  sail  for 
Europe,  they  engaged  berths.  As  the  vessel  weighed  anchor  and  shot  into  the 
deep  "the  sun  rose  and  spread  the  day  over  the  sea  and  the  islands  as  far  as  Athos 
and  Samothrace"  (Conybeare  and  Howson).  Running  in  a  straight  course,  or, 
in  modern  nautical  phrase,  sailing  before  the  (south)  wind  (see  xxi.  1,  and  compare 
xxvii.  16),  the  vessel  would  reach  the  island  of  Samothrace  that  day,  anchoring 
for  the  night  to  the  leeward  of  it.  Samothrace,  the  present-day  Samothraki, 
about  half-way  between  Troas  and  Neapolis,  contains  the  highest  land  in  this 
part  of  the  iEgean  except  Mount  Athos.  2.  From  Samothrace  to  Neapolis.  "  A 
run  of  seven  or  eight  hours  would  bring  the  vessel  under  the  lee  of  the  island  of 
Thasos,  and  within  a  few  miles  of  the  coast  of  Macedonia "  (Conybeare  and 
Howson),  which  accordingly  was  reached  next  day.  The  harbour  in  which  the 
four  passengers  disembarked  belonged  to  the  town  of  Neapolis,  the  modern 
Kavala,  in  Thrace,  on  the  Gulf  of  Strymon,  and  about  ten  miles  distant  from 
Philippi,  to  which  it  served  as  a  port.  Hence  the  missionaries  did  not  linger  in 
Neapolis,  but  pushed  on  towards  the  capital  of  the  district.  3.  From  Neapolis  to 
Philippi.  A  short  journey  of  not  more  than  three  hours  would  conduct  them  to 
"  the  chief  city  of  that  part  of  Macedonia,"  or  to  "  a  city  of  Macedonia,  the  first 
of  the  district  [see  "  Critical  Remarks "],  a  Roman  colony."  This  city  was 
Philippi,  once  an  obscure  place,  called  Krenides  from  its  streams  and  springs,  but 
erected  into  a  frontier  city  against  the  Thracian  mountaineers,  and  named  after 
himself  by  the  father  of  Alexander,  and  constituted  a  colonia  by  Augustus.  It 
was  "  a  fact  of  deep  significance  that  the  first  city  at  which  Paul  arrived  on  his 
entrance  into  Europe  was  that  colony  which  was  more  fit  than  any  other  in  the 
empire  to  be  considered  the  representative  of  Imperial  Rome  "  (Conybeare  and 
Howson,  i.  267). 

II.  The  stay  in  Philippi. — 1.  How  long  it  continued.  Impossible  to  tell. 
Clearly  two  Sabbaths  (vers.  13,  16),  and  most  likely  some  weeks  were  spent  in  the 
city  (ver.  20).  2.  What  incidents  occurred.  (1)  The  conversion  of  Lydia  on  the 
first  Sabbath  in  a  <prayer-house  by  the  river-side,  through  Paul's  preaching 
(vers.  13-15).  See  below.  (2)  The  cure  of  a  Pythoness,  or  damsel  possessing  a 
spirit  of  divination,  by  the  word  of  Paul  who,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  commanded 
the  spirit  to  come  out  of  her  (vers.  16-18).  (3)  The  imprisonment  of  Paul  and 
Silas  by  the  town  magistrates,  who  first  commanded  them  to  be  beaten  and  then 
handed  them  over  to  the  care  of  the  town  jailor  (vers.  19-24).  (4)  The  conver- 
sion of  the  jailor,  who  was  spiritually  awakened  by  an  earthquake  which  shook 
the  foundations  of  the  prison  at  midnight,  and  by  Paul  was  directed  how  to  find 
salvation  (vers.  25-34). 

III.  The  departure  from  Philippi. — 1.  After  liberation  from  jail.  This  took 
place  :  (1)  on  the  morning  after  the  earthquake — "when  it  was  day";  (2)  at 
the  request  of  the  magistrates,  who  had  become  alarmed  at  the  situation,  either 
in  consequence  of  the  earthquake  which  seemed  like  an  interposition  of  the  gods 
on  behalf  of  the  prisoners,  or  because  on  reflection  they  had  grown  convinced  of 
the  injustice  of  what  they  had  done  (vers.  35,  36) ;  (3)  after  the  remonstrance 
of  Paul,  who  declined  to  be  surreptitiously  thrust  out  of  bonds  after  having  been 

341 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


publicly  scourged,  and  that,  too,  while  they  were  Romans,  and  who  demanded 
that  they  should  be  honourably  and  openly  liberated  by  the  magistrates  them- 
selves (ver.  37) ;  and  (4)  by  the  hands  of  the  magistrates,  who,  on  learning  that 
their  prisoners  were  Roman  citizens,  feared  what  might  happen  to  themselves 
for  having  so  thoughtlessly  violated  the  sanctity  of  Roman  law,  and,  like  evil- 
doers generally  who  tremble  when  confronted  with  the  consequences  of  their 
crimes,  were  exceeding  glad  to  get  them  peacef  ully  despatched  beyond  the  city 
precincts  (ver.  39).  2.  After  visiting  the  house  of  Lydia.  Having  resided  there 
before  arrest  and  imprisonment  (ver.  15),  they  naturally  returned  thither  on 
release  from  confinement.  Not,  however,  to  stay,  but  to  exchange  Christian 
greetings  with,  and  address  words  of  comfort  to,  the  brethren  there  assembled,  who, 
having  been  converted  by  their  ministry,  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  Church  to 
which  afterwards  the  epistle  to  the  Philippians  was  directed.  This  done,  they 
departed,  but  not  for  ever  (see  xx.  6). 

Learn. — 1.  That  the  track  of  the  gospel  over  land  and  sea  has  always  been 
guided  by  God.  2.  That  Europeans  have  reasons  to  bless  God  for  having  so 
early  sent  the  gospel  to  their  shores.  3.  That  nothing  befalls  God's  people 
without  His  express  permission.  4.  That  events  which  seem  to  hinder  nay 
eventually  further  the  gospel.  5.  That  the  gospel  spreads  by  means  of 
preaching. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.  11.  The  Writer  of  the"  We"  Pas-  shipwreck,  and  it  has  even  been  con- 

sages ;  or,  Luke  the  Beloved  Physician  jectured  that  he   exercised   his  art  in 

(see Introduction). — "  Of  Luke  himself,  the  huge  and  crowded  merchant  vessels 

•beyond  what  we  learn  of  his  movements  which  were  incessantly  coasting  from 

and    of   his   character   from    his   own  point  to  point  of  the  Mediterranean. — 

writings,  we  know  but  little.     There  is  Farrar,   "  The   Life  and   Work   of  St. 

no   reason    to   reject    the    unanimous  Paul"  chap.  xxiv. 
tradition    that    he    was   by    birth    an 

Antiochene,  and  it  is  clear  (?)  from  St.  St.  Luke   and,  St.  Paul. — "  It  may 

Paul's  allusions  that  he  was  a  Gentile  be  well  to  note  the  phenomena  in  the 

convert,  and  that  he  had  not  been  cir-  writings     ascribed    to    the     physician 

cumcised  (Col.  iv.  10,   11,   14).     That  which,   though   they   do   not    directly 

he   was   a    close    observer,    a    careful  indicate   his  calling,    at   least   fall  in 

narrator,  a  man  of  cultivated  intellect,  with  it  and  are  best  explained  by  it. 

and  possessed  of  a  good  Greek  style  we  ...  Thus  we  find  him  noting    speci- 

see  from  his  two  books;  and  they  also  fically  the  special  combination  of  fevers 

reveal  to  us  a  character   gentle   and  (irvp^Toi,  asinHippoc,  Aph.,  vii.  63,  64 

manly,  sympathetic  and   self-denying.  — the  plural  is  obviously  technical  for 

The   incidental   allusion    of    St.    Paul  feverish  symptoms)  and  a  bloody  flux 

shows  us  that  he  was  a  physician,  and  (Svo-ei/repia)    from    which    the    father 

this  allusion  is  singularly  confirmed  by  of   Publius   suffered    at    Melita    (Acts 

his  own  turns  of  phrase.     The  rank  of  xxviii.  8),  and  using  in  relation  to  the 

a  physician  in  those  days  was  not  in  generous  gifts  which  it  called  forth  the 

any  respect  so  high  as  now  it  is,  and  special  word  "  honour  "  (tl/jltj),  which, 

does  not  at  all  exclude  the  possibility  like  our  "  honorarium,"  was  applied  to 

that  St.  Luke  may  have  been  a  freed-  the  payments  made  to  those  who  prac- 

man  ;  but  on  this,  and  all  else  which  tised  a  profession  and  not  a  trade  (?). 

concerns   him,  Scripture  and  tradition  So,  again,  in  the  healing  of  the  cripple  in 

leave  us   entirely   uninformed.      That  the  temple  (Acts  iii.  7),  he  records  with 

he  was  familiar  with  naval  matters  is  a  technical  precision  which  our  English 

strikingly  shown  in  his  account  of  the  Version  but  partially  represents  that 

342 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


"  his  feet "  (not  the  common  7ro5es, 
but  /3ao-et? — a  word  used  by  Hippo- 
crates, p.  637)  "  and  ankle-bones " 
(o-</>vpa)  "  were  strengthened,"  the  pre- 
vious crippled  state  being  due  to  the 
congenital  imperfect  development  of 
the  bones  and  tendons  of  the  feet.  .  .  . 
So  he  stated  that  the  paralysis  of 
.ZEneas  lasted  eight  years,  and  that  for 
the  whole  of  that  period  he  had  been 
bedridden  (Acts  ix.  33) ;  that  from 
Saul's  eyes  "  there  fell  as  it  had  been  the 
scales"  (uxrei  Ae7rt8cs)  of  the  incrus- 
tation incidental  to  ophthalmia  (Acts 
ix.  18) ;  and  that  the  damsel  at  Philippi 
had  "  a  spirit  of  Python,"  or  Apollo, 
"presenting  phenomena  identical  with 
the  convulsive  movements  and  wild 
cries  of  the  Pythian  priestess  at 
Delphi"  (Acts  xvi.  16);  while  as  one 
whose  previous  studies  had  made  him 
acquainted  with  the  recorded  cases  of 
phthiriasis,  such  as  those  of  Antiochus 
Epiphanes  (2  Mace.  ix.  9),  Pheretima 
(Herod.,  iv.  205),  and  Sylla,  and  perhaps 
Herod  the  Great  (Josephus,  Ant, 
xvii.  15),  he  would  note  with  a  special 
interest  the  addition  of  another  in- 
stance in  the  death  of  Herod  Agrippa 
as  "  eaten  by  worms,"  <TK(j)\r)Kol3pu)To<; 
(Acts  xii.  23). — Dean  Plumptre,  in  "  The 
Expositor"  (1876),  iv.,  pp.  137-139. 

Ver.  13.  An  Ancient  Prayer  Meeting . 

I.  The  place  of  worship. — 1.  Outside 
the  city.  Rendered  necessary  because 
of  the  character  of  the  city  which, 
being  large  and  heathen,  was  not  much 
suited  for  devotion.  Those  who  wish 
to  pray  should  withdraw  from  both  the 
world's  bustle  and  the  world's  super- 
stition and  sin  (Matt.  vi.  6).  2.  By  a 
river-side.  Jewish  prayer-houses  were 
usually  erected  on  river-banks,  or  at 
places  where  water  could  be  easily 
obtained  for  ceremonial  lustrations. 
Suggestive  of  that  inward  cleansing 
which  is  required  by  all  who  would 
approach  God  in  prayer  (Isa.  i.  15,  16; 
James  iv.  8).  3.  In  a  prayer -house. 
Not  an  ordinary  synagogue  (Schurer), 
there  being  few  Jews  in  the  town ; 
most  likely  an  open  space  consecrated 
to  Divine   worship.       Prayer   may  be 


offered  anywhere.  If  Christians,  for 
any  reason,  cannot  obtain  comfortable 
edifices  in  which  to  worship,  rather 
than  not  worship  at  all  they  should 
betake  themselves  to  river-banks,  hill- 
sides, district  moors,  dens,  and  caves  of 
the  earth. 

II.  The  time  of  worship. — The 
Sabbath.  Whether  on  other  days  is 
not  clear  (see  ver.  16) ;  but  in  any 
case  the  seventh-day  wcrship  was  not 
neglected.  Neither  should  the  Loid's- 
day  worship  be  omitted  by  Christians 
(xx.  7  ;  Heb.  x.  25). 

III.  The  congregation  of  wor- 
shippers.— A  few  women  ;  amoi  gst 
them  some  converts  to  Judaism,  like 
Lydia  (see  below).  If  no  men  were 
present  before  Paul  and  his  com- 
panions arrived  upon  the  scene,  the  in- 
trusion of  four  male  worshippers  must 
have  caused  a  sensation.  Women  have 
always  been  more  devout  than  men 
(i.  14,  xiii.  50). 

IY.  The  acts  of  worship. — 1.  Prayer. 
This  the  primary  object  of  such  gather- 
ings. 2.  Reading  of  the  Scriptures. 
Though  not  stated,  this  may  be  as- 
sumed. 3.  Exposition  of  the  word. 
As  in  the  synagogue  by  any  capable 
person  who  might  happen  to  be  present 
(xiii.  15). 

Ver.  13.  The  Opening  of  the  Mission. 

I.  When  was  it  that  they  had  an 
opportunity  of  preaching  1  It  was  on 
the  Sabbath  day.  The  Sabbath  was 
the  great  day  on  which  he  knew  that 
his  work  was  to  be  done. 

II.  Observe,  then,  the  place  at 
which  he  preached.  It  was  by  the 
river-side,  "  where  prayer  was  wont  to 
be  made."  There  appears  to  have  been 
no  synagogue  at  Philippi. 

III.  One  other  thing  to  be  observed 
is,  the  persons  to  whom  they  preached. 
They  "  sat  down  and  spake  unto  the 
women  which  resorted  thither." 

Now,  what  are  the  lessons  which  we 
are  to  learn  for  ourselves  from  this 
account  of  the  first  preaching  of  the 
gospel  at  Philippi  1  1 .  It  is  fitted  to 
remind  us  of  the  great  practical  value 
of   the    Sabbath.       2.   Another    lesson 

343 


chap.  xvi.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


which    we    learn    from    the    history,  which  we  have  been  considering  to-day, 

closely   connected    with    this,    is    the  and  that  is,  not  to  despise  any  means 

importance    of    meeting   together    for  of  doing  good,  however  small  it  may 

united   prayer  whenever  we  have  the  be,    which    is   put    within   our    reach, 

opportunity.      3.  One  other  thing  we  We  do  not  know  what  great  results 

are  taught  by  this  passage  of  history  may  follow  it. — M.  F.  Day. 

HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  14,  15. 

A  Sabbath  in  Philippi  ;  or,  the  Conversion  of  Lydia. 

I.  The  antecedents. — 1.  Lydia' s  settlement  in  Philippi.  A  native  of  Thyatira, 
on  the  confines  of  Lydia  and  Mysia,  afterwards  the  seat  of  a  Christian  Church 
(Rev.  ii.  18)  ;  a  seller  of  purple,  for  which  the  Lydians  were  celebrated,  the 
guild  of  dyers  at  Thyatira,  ol  /3a<£eis,  having  left  behind  them  an  inscription 
which  attests  the  accurac}7  of  the  sacred  historian ;  Lydia,  so  called  not  from 
her  native  district,  since  the  name  was  common  among  both  Greeks  and  Romans, 
in  prosecution  of  her  calling  had  crossed  the  iEgean  and  settled  in  Philippi. 
Had  she  not  done  so,  she  might  never  have  met  Paul.  But  a  good  man's  (and  also 
a  good  woman's)  footsteps  are  ordered  by  the  Lord  (Psalm  xxxvii.  23).  2.  Lydia  s 
conversion  to  Judaism.  That  like  the  Eunuch  (viii.  27)  and  Cornelius  (x.  2)  she 
had  become  an  adherent  of  the  Jewish  faith,  a  proselyte,  is  the  clear  sense 
of  the  clause,  "  one  that  worshipped  God."  Had  she  been  been  still  a  heathen 
she  would  not  have  been  found  in  the  proseuche,  or  place  of  prayer.  An 
illustration  of  how  God  leads  those  who  fear  Him  and  seek  the  truth  (Psalm 
xxv.  9).  3.  Lydia' s  presence  in  the  house  of  prayer.  Had  she  on  that  memorable 
day  when  Paul  visited  the  proseuche  been  absent  from  any  cause — ill-health, 
business,  pleasure,  or  indifference — -she  had  missed  the  blessing  that  was  that 
day  being  prepared  for  her.  A  lesson  for  irregular  attenders  of  the  sanctuary. 
Compare  the  case  of  Thomas  (John  xx.  24).  4.  Lydia  s  attention  to  Paul's  words 
in  the  meeting.  Lydia  listened — all  worshippers  do  not  this.  Listening  for  Lydia 
proved  the  way  to  faith  (Rom.  x.  17).     A  hint  for  careless  hearers  of  the  word. 

II.  The  accompaniments. — 1.  The  opening  of  India's  heart.  By  an  inward 
w7ork  of  grace  performed  thereupon  by  the  Lord,  i.e.,  Jesus  Christ,  through  His 
Spirit.  Man's  heart,  naturally  shut  against  the  truth  (1  Cor.  ii.  14;  Eph. 
iv.  18;  Rev.  iii.  20),  can  be  opened  only  by  heavenly  influence  (Matt.  xi.  25; 
Luke  xxiv.  45  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  6,  7).  2.  The  attention  of  Lydia's  spirit.  This  more 
than  such  hearing  as  the  understanding  gives.  The  language  points  to  such 
inward  marking  of  the  truth,  whether  heard  or  read,  as  an  awakened  or  opened 
spirit  supplies,  discerning  the  suitability  of  the  truth  to  its  needs  and  laying  hold 
of  the  truth  so  discerned  for  the  satisfaction  of  those  needs.  3.  The  decision  of 
Lydia 's  will.  Faith  a  voluntary  act  of  the  soul  appropriating  to  itself  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  as  presented  in  the  gospel  and  a  deliberate  resting  on  Him  for 
salvation  (Gal.  ii.  20  ;  2  Tim.  i.  12). 

III.  The  consequents. — Confession.  1.  By  baptism.  Necessary  after  faith  in 
the  case  of  adults  (ii.  38).  As  to  its  bearing  on  the  baptism  of  infants,  see 
below.  Whether  Lydia  was  baptised  at  once  or  afterwards  and  whether 
immersed  or  sprinkled  are  points  not  determined.  2.  By  good  works.  She 
desired  to  attest  the  sincerity  of  her  conversion  and  her  gratitude  to  those 
through  whose  instrumentality  it  had  been  brought  about  by  pressing  on  Paul 
and  his  companions  the  hospitalities  of  her  roof. 

Learn. — 1.  That  God's  hand  is  in  every  conversion.  2.  That  God's  grace 
alone  can  effect  any  conversion.  3.  That  without  God's  word  there  can  be  no 
conversion.  4.  That  obedience  to  God's  commandments,  ceremonial  and  moral, 
best  attests  conversion. 

344 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  14.  The   Church  of  Christ    in  of   Philippi,    nor   even   of  Macedonia. 

Europe.  She  was  from  Thyatira,  a  city  of  Asia 

I.  Commenced  in  the  important  town  Minor.  When  the  gospel  crossed  over 
of  Philippi. — The  keystone  of  Rome's  from  Asia  into  Europe,  we  would 
greatness  became  the  foundation-stone  expect  that  the  first  person  to  whom 
of  Christ's  kingdom.  its  preaching  should  be  blessed  should 

II.  Planted  by  Divine  direction. —  be  some  person  of  the  country.  Again, 
God  guided  the  steps  of  Paul  and  Silas  there  was  another  circumstance  con- 
to  Macedonia.  nected  with  this  woman  which  made  \t 

III.  Founded  by  the  apostle  of  the  unlikely  that  she  should  be  the  first 
Gentiles. — Paul's  preaching  the  instru-  convert  to  the  gospel.  She  was  not  a 
ment  used  to  convert  Lyclia.  Jewess    by   descent ;  she  was    only    a 

IV.  Originated  in  a  prayer  meeting.  Gentile  proselyte.  This  is  what  is  to 
The  kingdom  of  God  comoth  not  with  be  understood  by  the  expression  that 
observation.  she   "  worshipped  God."     It  is  almost 

V.  Rooted  among  the  humbler  the  same  as  that  made  use  of  about 
classes  of  society. — Not  many  wise,  Cornelius  (x.  2).  There  is  one  other 
not  many  mighty  are  called.  circumstance     mentioned      concerning 

VI.  Begun  with  the  conversion  of  a  Lydia,  which  might  also  have  made  it 
woman. — If  first  in  the  transgression,  unlikely  that  she  should  have  been  the 
woman  is  oftenest  first  in  repentance,  first  brought  under  the  saving  influence 
faith,  and  salvation.  "  In  Tinnevelly,  of  the  gospel.  It  was  the  busy  trade 
in  South  India,  where  are  now  120,000  in  which  she  was  engaged.  Others 
converts,  the  first  convert  was  a  woman.  there  may  have  been  in  the  group 
Clarinda  heard  Schwartz  preach,  re-  which  Paul  addressed,  the  mothers  of 
ceived  light  into  her  heart,  was  families  quietly  occupied  in  their  home 
baptised,  and  by  her  efforts  in  obtaining  duties,  with  such  influences  surrounding 
a  native  evangelist  and  in  building  a  them  as  would  draw  out  their  minds 
church  was  instrumental  in  giving  in  devotional  and  solemn  feeling.  It 
light  to  large  numbers  of  her  country-  is  not  those  whom  we  think  the  most 
men  and  countrywomen"  [Zenana  likely  or  the  most  promising  that  are 
Mission  Quarterly  of  the  United  always  brought  to  the  saving  know- 
Presbyterian  Church,  No.  I.,  p.  4).  ledge  of  the  gospel ;  but  it  is  sometimes 

VII.  Started  with  a  representative  those  whom  we  would  judge  the  most 
of  commerce. — Upon  the  bells  of  the  unlikely. 

horses  should  be  holiness  unto  the  Lord.  II.  And  now  we  are  to  look  at  the 

manner  in  which  she  was  converted. — 

The  First  Convert.  It  is  very  briefly,  but  at  the  same  time 

I.  Who  was  this  person  that  was  the  very  plainly  told — "  Whose  heart  the 

first    in    Philippi    to    experience    the  Lord  opened,  that  she  attended  unto 

saving  power  of  the  gospel? — We  are  the  things  which  were  spoken  of  Paul." 

told  that   it    was  "  a   certain   woman  I   think   it   means   first  that  she  felt 

named  Lydia,  a  seller  of  purple,  of  the  interested  in  them  as  a  matter  of  per- 

city   of    Thyatira,    which    worshipped  sonal  concern.     What  we  each  want, 

God."     In  the  account  which  is  here  what  makes  the  saving  difference   in 

given  of  her,  I  think  there  are  several  any   individual   case,  is  that  God  the 

things  which  made  it  unlikely,  before-  Holy  Ghost  should  open  the  heart  to 

hand,    that    she    should    be   the    first  receive  that  truth  which  is  heard  with 

person  converted  to  the  faith  of  Christ.  the  outward  hearing. 

In  the  first  place,  she  was  a  stranger  III.  I  can  only  just  refer  to  what 

in  the  country.      She  was  not  a  native  we   are    told   of   Lydia,   in    the   next 

345 


CHAP.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


verse,  after  her  conversion. — "  She  was 
baptised  and  her  household." — M.  F. 
Day. 

Lydias  Heart  Opened. — Look  at  this 
incident  in  the  light  which  it  casts  on 
personal  conversion. 

I.  We  have  the  central  faculty  on 
which  this  change  is  wrought :  the 
heart.  The  heart  is  the  generic  term 
in  which  primarily  we  include  the 
entire  phenomena  of  the  animal  and 
the  spiritual  man.  Metaphorically  it 
concentrates  whatever  distributively 
belongs  to  the  physical,  the  emotional, 
and  the  intellectual  nature.  In  popular 
speech  it  is  the  organ  of  vitality ;  the 
great  arterial  centre,  the  common 
ground  and  basis  on  which  all  the 
functions  of  life  are  dependent.  In 
its  Scriptural  import  the  heart  is  the 
normal  status  that  conditions  man's 
relations  to  God.  .  .  .  The  heart,  there- 
fore, is  the  power  in  man  that  most  of 
all  needs  to  be  changed.  Individual 
tendencies,  constitutional  idiosyncra- 
sies, even  moral  aberrations  and 
vicious  practices,  can  be  arrested  and 
are  frequently  mastered  by  culture. 
The  heart  never  outgrows  its  inherent 
depravity.  ...  To  change  the  heart 
in  man,  then,  whatever  else  it  may 
mean,  is  not  merely  to  amend  the  life  ; 
for  the  life  may  be  superficially  cor- 
rect, while  the  heart  is  utterly  false. 
For  the  same  reason,  it  cannot  be  any 
mere  intellectual  change,  such  as  a 
new  way  of  thinking  of  God,  of  His 
claims,  or  of  His  worship ;  nor  yet  does 
does  it  consist  in  any  quickened  sensi- 
bility of  the  conscience  in  its  outward 
reverence  for  the  truth ;  all  of  which 
are  perfectly  congruous  with  the  felt, 
ascendent  alienation  of  the  heart  from 
God  and  goodness.  .  .  .  The  new  birth, 
as  our  Lord's  language  implies,  is  the 
coming  into  life  of  that  which  did  not 
previously  exist.  .  .  .  Redemption 
through  Christ  is  potentially  the  re- 
creation of  the  lost  Divine  order  in  the 
soul.  Its  aim  is  not  to  awaken  or  to 
direct  merely  the  religious  instincts, 
but  to  renew  the  soul  after  the  image 
in  which  it  was  created. 

346 


II.  From  the  subject  we  pass  to  the 
method  of  this  change. — Let  us  mark 
— 1.  The  supernatural  source  in  which 
the  change  originates.  Regeneration 
is  a  supernatural  work  wrought  by  the 
exercise  of  a  Divine  power  upon  the 
soul.  It  is  always  this  where  it  is 
real.  It  may  not  be  miraculous,  it 
probably  is  not ;  it  would  not  be  more 
real  or  superhuman  for  being  miracu- 
lous ;  but  it  certainly  is  not  the  product 
of  human  nature.  It  may  be  simu- 
lated, but  it  cannot  be  fabricated  by 
any  art  or  device  of  man.  2.  A 
second  characteristic  of  this  Divine 
power  in  conversion  is  in  the  variety  of 
methods  in  which  it  operates.  In  the 
instance  before  us  the  work  was  done 
silently  as  the  young  spring  bud  is 
opened  by  the  morning  sun.  It  was 
the  sublime  serenity  of  a  translation 
out  of  darkness  into  light.  In  the 
history  of  the  jailor,  the  same  work 
is  done,  not  in  silence,  but  in  tumult ; 
not  in  a  translation,  but  in  a  resurrec- 
tion. Instead  of  the  gentleness  of  the 
budding  leaf  or  the  silence  of  the  fall- 
ing dew,  there  were  the  throes  of  the 
earthquake,  shaking  the  prison  walls, 
and  turning  into  a  storm  of  agony  the 
soul  of  the  man.  .  .  .  And  this  variety 
in  the  methods  of  the  Divine  working 
according  to  the  constitutional  differ- 
ences in  men  unfolds  to  us  in  perpetuity, 
the  mental  difficulties  with  which  the 
gospel  has  to  contend  and  the  different 
methods  in  which  it  proceeds  in  dealing 
with  them.  Uniform  in  its  effects,  it  is 
yet  multiform  in  its  modes  of  action. 

III.  The  reality  of  Lydia's  conver- 
sion was  seen  in  its  immediate  fruits. 
1.  She  attended  unto  the  things  which 
icere  spoken  by  Paul.  If  listless  before, 
if  curious  only,  if  speculative,  she  is 
awake  now.  2.  She  was  baptised,  and 
her  household.  She  took  upon  herself 
and  upon  her  home  the  profession  of 
the  Christian  faith.—  John  Burton. 

Vers.  14, 15,  The  Conversion  ofLydia. 
(Another  treatment.)  —  Remarkable 
as — 

I.  The  conversion  of  a  woman. — The 
first   instance   of    such   in    the    Acts. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


Others  occurred  afterwards  (xvii.  4,  12, 
34).  Eelation  of  woman  to  Christianity. 
What  the  gospel  has  done  for  woman, 
and  what  woman  can  do  for  the 
gospel. 

II.  The  conversion  of  a  merchantess. 
— Again  first  example  recorded  in  the 
Acts.  Trade  and  religion  not  in- 
compatible. Commerce  might  be  the 
handmaid  of  the  gospel.  The  gospel 
fitted  to  purify  and  ennoble  commerce. 

III.  The  conversion  of  a  European. 
Or,  at  least,  of  one  on  European  shores. 
Once  more  the  first  case  mentioned  in 
Luke's  narrative.  Whether  the  gospel 
had  before  this  found  its  way  to  Rome 
is  uncertain.  But  in  any  case  Lydia 
may  be  regarded  as  the  beginning  of 
the  Church  of  Christ  in  Europe. 

The  Conversion  of  Lydia.  (A  third 
treatment.) 

I.  How  occasioned. — 1.  By  attending 
a  prayer  meeting.  2.  By  listening  to 
a  sermon. 

II.  Through  what  effected. — 1.  By 
Divine  grace.  2.  Through  human 
faith. 

III.  By  what  followed. — 1.  Baptism. 
2.  Good  works. 

Ver.  15.  Household  Baptism. 

I.  The      apostolic      practice.  —  To 

baptise  the  entire  household  when  its 
head  became  a  believer,  as  in  the  cases 
of  the  jailor  (ver.  33),  Crispus  (xviii.  8), 
Stephanus  (1  Cor.  i.  16),  and  no 
doubt  others,  in  addition  to  that  iof 
Lydia. 

II.  The  probable  basis. — Not  the 
faith  of  each  individual  baptised.  If 
it  cannot  be  argued  that  any  of  the 
households  baptised  contained  children 
— though  children  in  a  household  are 
the  rule  rather  than  the  exception — it 
can  as  little  be  reasoned  that  all  who 
were  baptised,  assuming  them  to  be 
relatives,  servants,  grown-up  sons  or 
daughters,  believed.  In  the  case  of 
the  jailor  and  his  household,  it  is  not 
said  that  they,  but  only  that  he 
believed  on  God  (ver.  34).  Yet  they 
as  well  as  he  received   baptism,  and 


probably  on  the  following  grounds. 
1.  The  fact  was  recognised  that  children 
had  been  included  in  the  Abrahamic 
covenant,  and  through  circumcision 
were  admitted  into  the  Hebrew  Church. 
From  this  the  step  was  doubtless  easy 
to  argue  that  children  of  believing 
parents  should  be  received  into  the 
Christian  Church  through  baptism, 
which  like  circumcision  partook  of  the 
character  of  an  initiatory  rite,  and  all 
the  more  that  Christ  had  not  enjoined 
their  exclusion.  2.  The  language  of 
Christ  concerning  children  had  declared 
that  of  such  was  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
(Matt.  xix.  14) ;  and  from  this  the  in- 
ference was  not  difficult  to  draw  that,  if 
children  might  without  personal  faith 
receive  the  substance  of  salvation,  they 
might  also  on  the  same  terms  receive 
its  external  sign.  3.  The  instructions 
given  to  the  apostles  by  Christ  to  baptise 
all  nations,  "  teaching  them  to  observe 
all  things,"  etc.  (Matt,  xxviii.  20), 
might  appear  to  them  to  warrant  the 
deduction  that  "  discipleship  "  might 
in  certain  cases,  as  for  instance  cf 
children  of  believing  parents,  go  before 
instruction  and  therefore  before  faith. 
III.  The  warrantable  inference. — 
That  infant  baptism  accords  with  Scrip- 
ture. This  seems  borne  out  by  the  view 
the  apostle  takes  of  the  children  of 
believing  parents  or  of  parents  of 
whom  one  only  is  believing  (1  Cor.  vii. 
14).  "  What  would  Lydia  have  said" 
asks  Besser,  "  if  the  preachers  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  had  refused  to  baptise  the 
little  children  of  her  house?  She  must 
have  become  doubtful  of  her  own  faith 
—  the  free  gift  of  God." 

The  Characteristics  of  True  Faith. 

I.  Humble. — Submitting  itself  to 
the  judgment  of  advanced  Christians. 

II.  Learning. — Longing  after  further 
progress  in  knowledge. 

III.  Thankful.— Both  to  God,  the 
prime  author,  and  to  man,  the  instru- 
ment (when  he  is  so)  of  its  existence. 

IV.  Active. — Working  by  love — 
"  come  to  my  house." 

Y.  Obedient. — She  and  all  her  house 
were  baptised. 

347 


CHAP.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  16—18. 

The  Cure  of  a  Pythoness  ;  or,  the  Slave-girl  and  the  Apostle. 

I.  The  slave-girl. — 1.  Her  abject  condition.  A  bond-servant,  the  property  of 
several  masters,  who  may  have  received  her  by  inheritance  (Alford),  and  who 
had  an  interest  in  her  valuable  gift,  a  supposed  power  of  divination.  2.  Her 
reputed  power.  That  of  divining  or  prophesying,  which  caused  her  to  be  regarded 
by  the  people  of  Philippi  as  a  python — i.e.,  as  a  person  inspired  by  Apollo,  like 
the  priestess  at  Delphi.  3.  Her  real  character.  Not  a  ventriloquist  (Augustine, 
Holtzmann),  though  Plutarch  asserts  the  term  python  was  frequently  employed 
to  describe  such,  but  a  demoniac  whose  insane  ravings  were  palmed  off  by  her 
crafty  owners  as  inspired  utterances.  4.  Her  truthful  ejaculation.  "  These  men 
are  servants,"  etc.  Not  to  be  supposed  she  merely  uttered  words  of  the  apostles 
either  heard  by  herself  or  reported  to  her  by  others.  Her  cry  an  involuntary 
because  a  supernaturally  inspired  testimony  to  the  character  and  work  of  the 
apostles,  similar  to  that  borne  to  the  Saviour  by  the  demons  whom  He 
encountered  (Matt.  viii.  29;  Mark  hi.  11  •  Luke  iv.  41,  viii.  28). 

II.  The  apostle. — 1.  His  sore  trouble.  (1)  If  Paul's  grief  took  the  form  of  in- 
dignation, as  in  iv.  2,  then  its  object  was  not  the  woman,  who  was  an  in- 
voluntary victim  of  the  demon,  or  her  saying  which  was  true,  but  either  her 
inhuman  masters  who  made  gain  of  her  misery,  or  the  evil  spirit  which  had 
enthralled  her  and  maliciously  designed  by  her  utterance  to  hinder  the  work  of 
the  apostles.  (2)  If  of  sympathy,  then  it  was  directed  exclusively  towards  the 
suffering  girl  whose  sad  case  he  pitied.  2.  His  delivering  command.  (1)  To 
whom  spoken  ?  To  the  evil  spirit  in  the  girl.  Paul  unmistakably  recognised 
the  personal  existence  of  evil  powers.  (2)  In  whose  name  ?  That  of  Jesus 
Christ  (compare  iii.  6),  who  had  come  to  destroy  the  devil  and  his  works.  (3)  In 
what  terms  1  Come  out  of  her  :  in  imitation  of  his  Master's  language  (Mark  i.  25, 
v.  8  ;  Luke  iv.  35,  viii.  29).  (4)  With  what  effect?  Immediate  healing.  "It 
(the  evil  spirit)  came  out  that  very  hour." 

HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.   17.  The  Dignity  and  Duty  of  went  to  prayer — probably  in  the  same 

Christian  Ministers.  place    by   the    river-side    where   they 

I.  Their  dignity. — Servants  of  the  originally  met — a  young  woman,  a 
most  high  God.  1.  By  creation.  female  slave,  possessed  by  an  evil  spirit, 
Formed  by  His  grace.  2.  By  pur-  who  brought  her  master  much  gain  by 
chase.  Through  His  Son's  blood  (Isa.  fortune-telling,  met  them,  and  cried 
xliii.  21 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  20).  3.  By  dedica-  after  them  continually.  It  appears  by 
tion.  As  the  result  of  their  own  con-  this  that  the  power  which  evil  spirits 
secration  (Psalm  cxvi.  16).  were  permitted  at  that  time  to  exert 

II.  Their  duty. — To  proclaim  unto  over  men  was  not  confined  to  the  land 
men  the  way  of  salvation  as :  1.  of  Judaea,  but  was  known  in  other 
Divinely  provided.  2.  Clearly  revealed  countries  also.  It  shows  us  the  power 
in  Scripture.  3.  Humanly  easy.  By  of  the  devil  directly  in  connection  with 
faith  instead  of  works  (Bom.  iii.  28).  the  idolatry  of  the  ancient  world,  that 

4.  Positively   certain.     "  He   that   be-  he  was  working  in  this  way,  and  in 
lieveth  shall  be  saved  "  (John  vi.  47) ;  others,   to  keep  mankind  in  bondage, 

5.  Absolutely  exclusive — in  fact,  as  the  at  a  distance  from  the  living  God. 
only  way  (iv.  12).  II.  We  are  told  in  the  next  place 

after  what  way  this  woman,  under  the 
Ver.  18.  Satan's  Devices,  influence  of  the  evil  spirit,  acted  to- 

I.  We  are  told  here  that  as  they      wards   the  preachers  of  the  gospel — 

348 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


"  The  same  followed  Paul  and  us,  and 
cried,  saying,  These  men  are  the 
servants  of  the  most  high  God,  which 
show  unto  us  the  way  of  salvation." 
It  was  not,  we  may  be  sure,  with  any 
friendly  object  that  such  a  declaration 
was  made.  The  very  appearing  in 
this  way  to  praise  its  preachers  might 
be  in  itself  a  means  of  drawing  them 
into  disrepute. 

III.  We  have  related  to  us  finally 
in  the  text  the  way  in  which  St.  Paul 
dealt  with  this  interference  to  which 
he  was  exposed.  He  bore  with  it  for 
a  considerable  time — "  This  did  she 
many  days." 

And  now,  what  lessons  may  we  learn 
for  ourselves  from  this  history  ?  1 .  It 
teaches  us,  in  the  first  place,  to  re- 
cognise the  power  of  Satan  as  working 
in  the  various  false  religions  and  forms 
of  error  which  are  prevalent  in  the 
world.  But  Satan's  power  in  sup- 
porting false  religion  has  been  exerted 
not  only  in  heathenism,  but  in  the 
corruptions  of  Christianity.  When 
the  apostle  Paul  (2  Thess.  ii.)  is  fore- 
telling the  coming  of  the  man  of  sin, 
he  describes  him  (ver.  9)  as  one  "  whose 
coming  is  after  the  working  of  Satan, 
with  all  power,  and  signs,  and  lying 
wonders."  2.  We  learn  also,  from 
what   has   come   before   us    to-day,   a 


device  which  Satan,  through  his  agents, 
sometimes  employs  for  the  hindrance 
of  the  gospel,  and  that  is,  leading  them 
outwardly  to  join  with  it.  Men  would 
have  said,  "  There  is  one  of  Paul's 
converts,"  and  they  would  have  classed 
all  together  as  one  band  of  fanatics 
and  hypocrites.  But  that  was  not  one 
of  Paul's  converts  at  all.  That  was  a 
distinct  work  of  Satan,  stirred  up  to 
do  him  injury.  The  one  is  never  to  be 
confounded  with  the  other.  3.  There 
is  one  other  lesson  which  we  are  to 
learn,  and  it  is  a  most  happy  one,  from 
the  way  in  which  St.  Paul  is  described 
as  expelling  this  evil  spirit  in  the  text, 
saying,  "  I  command  thee  in  the  name 
of  Jesus  Christ  to  come  out  of  her. 
And  he  came  out  the  same  hour." 
We  learn  this  from  it,  that  the  name 
and  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  one  force  by  which  the  power  of 
the  devil  is  to  be  overcome.  It  is  said 
(Rev.  xii.)  concerning  the  contest 
which  Christians  carry  on  against  him 
— "  They  overcame  him  by  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb."  There  is  no  plea  but 
that  even  to  the  very  last ;  but  that  is 
all-sufficient.  Again,  to  meet  the 
temptations  of  the  devil,  when  he 
would  lead  us  into  sin,  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  effectual  defence. — 
M.  F.  Bay. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  19—34. 


The  First  Pagan  Persecution  ;  or,  the  Imprisonment  of  Paid  and  Silas. 

I.  Before  the  magistrates. — 1.  The  prosecutors.  (1)  Their  persons.  The 
masters  of  the  girl.  Their  hostility  formed  the  first  instance  of  persecution 
raised  against  the  apostles  by  pagans.  Hitherto  the  adversaries  of  the  apostles 
had  been  their  own  countrymen.  (2)  Their  motive.  Because  they  saw  that 
through  the  exorcism  of  the  evil  spirit  from  the  afflicted  maid  their  gains  were 
gone.  Their  conduct  as  well  as  that  of  Demetrius  of  Ephesus  (xix.  23-31)  show 
that  it  is  always  dangerous  to  touch  a  man's  pocket,  and  that  even  religion  has 
little  chance  when  it  comes  into  competition  with  love  of  gain.  "  The  first  way," 
says  Professor  Bamsay,  "  in  which  Christianity  excited  the  popular  enmity 
outside  the  Jewish  community  was  by  disturbing  the  existing  state  of  society 
and  trade,  and  not  by  making  innovations  in  religion "  {The  Church  in  the 
Roman  Empire,  p.  130).  (3)  Their  violence.  Having  arrested  Paul  and  Silas 
as  the  principal  persons  in  the  company,  or  perhaps  because  Luke  and  Timothy 
were  at  the  moment  out  of  the  way,  they  dragged  those  into  the  market-place 
where  the  magistrates — in  this  case  the  Roman  police-executive,  the  duumviri  or 
praetors,  as  distinguished  from  the  city  rulers  (see  " Critical  Remarks") — were 

349 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


sitting.  2.  The  accusation.  "  These  men,  being  Jews,  do  exceedingly  trouble  our 
city,  and  teach  customs,  which  are  not  lawful  for  us  to  receive,  being  Romans  " 
(vers.  20,  21).  That  is  to  say,  they  were  indicted,  not  for  the  crime  of  observing 
their  own  form  of  worship,  which  by  Roman  statute  was  a  religio  licita,  but  of 
doing  what  Roman  statute  did  not  permit,  endeavouring  to  persuade  Romans  to 
forsake  their  own  religious  customs  and  embrace  those  of  (as  it  seemed)  the 
Jews.  If  the  charge  was  in  appearance  true,  since  the  apostles'  preaching  was 
undoubtedly  being  attended  by  conversions,  and  the  Philippians  could  not  then 
distinguish  between  Judaism  and  Christianity,  it  was  still  in  reality  false,  since 
the  real  head  and  front  of  the  apostles'  offence  was  not  the  publication  of  a  new 
religion  about  which,  like  other  easy-going  tolerant  pagans,  the  girl's  masters 
"  did  not  care  two  straws  "  (Ramsay),  but  the  interference  of  his  preaching  with 
their  unholy  profits,  about  which  they  were  extremely  sensitive,  and  more 
especially  the  destruction  by  his  miracle  of  their  stock-in-trade,  for  which  they 
could  perceive  no  chance  of  compensation.  3.  The  multitude.  The  market- 
place mob,  composed  doubtless  for  the  most  part  of  idlers,  out-of-work  and  loungers 
(Matt.  xx.  3  ;  Acts  xvii.  17),  having  heard  the  accusation,  and  having  been 
incapable  of  understanding  a  defence,  even  had  it  been  offered,  like  other  eager 
and  tumultuous  rabbles,  raised  a  yell  of  indignation  against  the  apostles  and 
demanded  their  punishment  (compare  xix.  28,  34,  xxi.  30,  xxii.  22 ;  Luke  xxiii. 
18).  4.  The  magistrates.  Yielding  to  the  popular  cry,  without  hearing  from 
the  prisoners  a  word  of  explanation,  far  less  putting  them  on  trial,  the  two 
prsetors,  representatives  of  Roman  law  and  justice,  who  should  have  studied 
equity  and  afforded  their  prisoners  at  least  an  opportunity  of  speaking  in  self 
defence  (xxv.  16),  proceeded  to  act  in  flagrant  violation  of  Roman  law. 
(1)  Without  troubling  themselves  to  conduct  even  the  smallest  or  most  formal 
investigation,  they  commanded  the  apostles  to  be  scourged,  in  accordance  with 
the  customary  formula  ordering  the  lictor  to  remove  the  prisoners'  clothes,  if  not, 
in  blind  fury  doing  this  with  their  own  hands,  that  on  the  backs  of  the  apostles 
thus  bared  might  be  laid  ignominious  stripes  by  means  of  rods — though  some- 
times more  severe  instruments  such  as  whips,  loaded  with  lead,  were  employed 
for  the  infliction  of  this  degrading  punishment.  That  this  was  one  of  the  three 
occasions  on  which  Paul  tells  us  he  endured  this  indignity  (2  Cor.  xi.  25)  there 
can  be  no  doubt ;  and  should  it  be  inquired  why,  as  afterwards  in  the  castle  of 
Antonia,  he  did  not,  in  this  instance,  protect  himself  by  making  known  his 
Roman  citizenship  (xxii.  25),  it  may  be  answered  either  that  both  Paul  and 
Silas  may  have  done  so,  though  their  voices,  if  raised,  were  drowned  in  the 
general  din,  and  the  fast -falling  blows  of  the  rods  "  (Lewin),  or  that  in  the 
agitation  of  the  moment  caused  by  the  suddenness  of  the  inhuman  proposal 
it  did  not  occur  to  them  in  this  way  to  rescue  themselves,  or  that  if  it  did  they 
may  have  preferred  to  suffer,  thinking  that  by  so  doing  they  would  more 
effectively  promote  the  cause  they  had  at  heart.  (2)  Not  content  with  having 
publicly  beaten  the  apostles,  the  magistrates  cast  them  into  prison,  as  if  they 
had  been  convicted  of  a  heinous  crime,  handing  them  over  wounded  and  bleeding 
to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  town  jailor  with  instructions  to  keep  them  "  safely," 
either  in  case  further  proceedings  should  require  to  be  instituted  against  them, 
or  perhaps  lest  some  attempt  at  rescue  should  be  made  by  their  friends. 

II.  In  the  inner  prison. — 1.  Their  degradation.  The  town  jailor,  having 
perfectly  understood  what  his  master  wanted,  thrust  his  supposed  criminals 
into  the  inner  prison,  the  interior  ward  of  a  Roman  cell,  probably  a  damp,  cold 
chamber,  shut  off  with  bolts  and  bars,  iron  gates  and  locks,  and  totally  excluded 
from  fresh  air  and  light  (compare  xii.  6  ;  and  see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  In 
addition,  improving  most  likely  on  his  instructions,  he  made  their  feet  fast  in 
the  stocks,  which  were  pieces  of  wood  drilled  through  with  holes,  into  which 

350 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


the  feet  were  thrust,  and  sometimes  so  far  apart  as  to  cause  the  stocks  to  become 
an  instrument  of  acute  torture.  Compare  the  treatment  of  Joseph  in  the 
Hound  House  at  Heliopolis  (Psalm  cv.  18).  2.  Their  occupation.  So  far  as  can 
be  gathered  from  Scripture,  this  was  Paul's  and  Silas's  first  experience  of  a  jail, 
Yet  neither  of  them  yielded  to  despondent  thoughts.  Their  solitary  hours  were 
enlivened,  and  their  pains  alleviated  by  the  hallowed  exercises  of  religion,  in 
which  they  prayed  and  sang  praises  to  God,  doubtless  finding  appropriate 
expression  for  their  mingled  emotions  in  well-known  words  from  the  Hebrew 
Psalter  (compare  Luke  i.  46-55,  68-79,  ii.  29-32  ;  Col.  iv.  2).  That  they  could 
thus  pass  the  hours  of  their  incarceration,  forgetting  the  pains  of  their  lacerated 
bodies  and  tortured  limbs  in  the  inward  joyfulness  of  their  spirits,  was  a  signal 
testimony  both  to  the  sustaining  grace  of  Him  who  had  given  them  "  songs  in 
the  night "  (Job  xxxv.  10),  and  to  the  power  of  that  religion  they  professed 
and  proclaimed  to  elevate  the  soul  above  all  life's  ills,  as  Tertullian  finely  says, 
"  The  limbs  do  not  feel  the  stocks  when  the  heart  is  in  heaven."  Nor  were 
their  prison  devotions  without  eager  listeners  on  earth,  as  none  can  doubt  they 
found  delighted  hearers  in  heaven  (Psalm  cii.  19,  20).  The  inmates  of  the  outer 
or  common  cell  of  the  prison  had  never  before  heard  such  melodies  proceeding 
from  the  inner  or  from  any  ward  of  a  Roman  jail,  and  kept  listening,  it  can  well 
be  imagined,  with  wonder  and  amazement.  3.  Their  deliverance.  (1)  Effected 
by  an  earthquake,  which  cannot  be  successfully  explained  as  a  natural  occurrence 
(Baur,  Zeller),  which  might  indeed  have  shaken  the  prison's  foundations,  but 
could  hardly  have  unlocked  the  barred  doors  or  unloosed  the  prisoners'  fetters. 
That  the  writer  distinctly  intended  to  describe  a  supernatural  interposition  on 
behalf  of  Paul  and  Silas  can  hardly  be  questioned,  even  by  those  who  decline 
to  accept  the  narrative  as  true  history  ;  and  that  the  other  prisoners  partook  of 
the  same  gracious  visitation  was  as  obviously  designed  to  arrest,  impress,  and  if 
possible  save  them,  if  not  from  earthly,  at  all  events  from  spiritual  bondage  and 
condemnation.  "When  we  reflect,"  say  Oonybeare  and  Howson  (i.  282),  "on 
their  knowledge  of  the  apostles'  sufferings "  (for  they  were  doubtless  aware  of 
the  manner  in  which  they  had  been  brought  in  and  thrust  into  the  dungeon) ; 
"  and  on  the  wonder  they  must  have  experienced  on  hearing  sounds  of  joy  from 
those  who  were  in  pain,  and  on  the  awe  which  must  have  overpowered  them  when 
they  felt  the  prison  shaken  and  the  chains  fall  from  their  limbs ;  and  when  to 
all  this  we  add  the  effect  produced  on  their  minds  by  all  that  happened  on  the 
following  day,  and  especially  the  fact  that  the  jailor  himself  became  a  Christian, 
we  can  hardly  avoid  the  conclusion  that  the  hearts  of  many  of  those  unhappy 
bondmen  were  prepared  that  night  to  receive  the  gospel,  that  the  tidings  of 
spiritual  liberty  came  to  those  whom,  but  for  the  captivity  of  the  apostles,  it 
would  never  have  reached,  and  that  the  jailor  himself  was  their  evangelist  and 
teacher."  (2)  Accompanied  by  a  trophy  of  Divine  grace  in  the  person  of  the 
jailor  who,  through  the  earthquake,  was  awakened  to  more  than  a  sense  of  his 
temporal  danger,  even  to  a  realisation  of  his  spiritually  lost  condition.  For 
this  he  may  have  been  in  some  measure  prepared  by  his  acquaintance  with 
the  character  of  the  apostles'  preaching,  of  which  he  had  doubtless  heard ; 
though  he  could  hardly  have  been  affected  by  their  praying  and  singing,  since 
during  the  time  they  were  engaged  in  these  holy  exercises  he  was  sleeping. 
In  answer  to  his  cry  of  distress — "Sirs!  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved?" — an 
utterance  which  cannot  be  explained  as  signifying  less  than  genuine  soul  concern 
— he  was  first  directed  to  the  one  and  all-sufficient  method  of  salvation  by  faith 
in  Jesus  Christ :  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved  "  ; 
and  afterwards  along  with  the  inmates  of  his  household,  who  by  this  time  had 
appeared  upon  the  scene,  the  jailor's  house  being  not  necessarily  above  (Meyer), 
but  on  a  higher  level  than  the  prison  (ver.  34),  more  fully  instructed  in  the  way 

351 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


of  the  Lord,  with  the  happy  result  that  he  believed  and  was  baptised,  along  with 
all  his  house,  rejoicing  in  God. 

III.  In  the  jailor's  house. — 1.  Before  they  entered  it,  while  yet  in  the  prison 
court  underneath,  the  jailor  took  them,  his  lacerated  prisoners,  and  washed 
their  stripes.  A  beautiful  indication  that  sympathy,  repentance,  and  gratitude — 
three  emotions  to  which,  probably,  he  had  been  long  a  stranger — had  begun  to 
dawn  within  his  soul.  "  The  jailor,"  says  Chrysostom,  "  washed  them,  and  he 
was  washed  himself.  He  washed  them  from  their  stripes,  and  he  in  his  turn  was 
washed  from  his  sins."  2.  When  they  were  within  it,  he  set  meat  before  them. 
"  His  former  cruelty  was  changed  into  hospitality  and  love  "  (Conybeare  and 
Howson).  "  The  two  sufferers  may  well  have  needed  food.  .  .  .  They  were  not 
likely  to  have  made  a  meal,  when  they  were  thrust  into  the  dungeon  "  (Plumptre). 
Doubtless  by  such  hospitality  the  jailor  hoped  to  compensate  in  some  degree  for 
his  previous  unkindness,  and  to  evince  the  grateful  affection  he  now  entertained 
towards  his  benefactors.  3.  How  they  left  it.  With  a  triumphant  acknowledg- 
ment of  their  innocence  on  the  part  of  the  magistrates  (see  preceding  homily), 
who,  having  learnt  that  their  prisoners  were  Romans,  became  alarmed  for  their 
own  safety,  because  of  having  violated  the  sanctity  of  Roman  law  in  scourging 
two  uncondemned  citizens,  and  with  all  haste  caused  them  to  be  fetched  from 
the  prison,  entreating  them  at  the  same  time  to  leave  the  city.  This  they 
agreed  to  do,  but  not  before  they  had  visited  the  house  of  Lydia,  and  comforted 
the  brethren,  amongst  whom,  doubtless,  henceforth  the  jailor  took  an  honoured 
place. 

Learn. — 1.  That  natural  men  as  a  rule,  and  occasionally  spiritual  men,  as  an 
exception,  prefer  their  businesses  to  religion.  2.  That  Christ's  ambassadors 
need  hardly  expect  to  escape  persecution  of  some  sort.  3.  That  when  Christ's 
servants  suffer  God  their  maker  can  give  them  "  songs  in  the  night."  4.  That 
no  prison  doors  or  bars  can  keep  out  God  when  He  wants  to  be  in,  or  keep  in 
God's  servants  when  He  wants  them  out.  5.  That  conversions  can  occur  in  the 
most  unlikely  places,  and  pass  on  the  most  unlikely  persons. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.  20.  Preachers  of  the  Gospel,  City-  IY.    A   means   of    helping   on   the 

troublers.     Because  they —  cause  of  the  gospel. 

I.  Interfere  with  men's  sinful  gains         TT      rtK    „.     .      .     T  .7 
,    .  ,  £  ,-.,  °  Ver.  zo.  binqmq  m  Jail. 

— being  teachers  ot  morality.  T    XT  ,  „,       9    jL       .  , 

tT    S,  ,    •   ,  n  '/     *   j  t„  1.  .Not  easy. — Requires  great  grace. 

II.  Expose  men's  intellectual  delu-         TT    ^^  ,nitr  „noel,1n    8n      6 

,Tr  i  u        •       xi_    v  i-j.    c  II-   Perfectly  possible. — Grace  can 

Sions — the  gospel  bringing  the  light  or  -,         ^    .  , -      rn      n  ,,  . 

,,         ,ii      -j-  make  a  Christian  do  all  things, 
truth  to  the  understanding.  Eminently       comforting.-To 

III.  Change      mens      irreligious  .,  ,  .  J  ,    .      &     , , 
~„„4.~.~,.         i   x-i.   j.-       £      xi              i  •  those  who  are  imprisoned   innocently 
customs — substituting  tor  the  worship  £                       ,      ,  r  J 

,.•!!,,         « xi     j.        r«  j  lor  conscience  sake, 

ot  idols  that  ot  the  true  God.  T«r    «        .       11  c  ,       ^r       ,      ■* 

IV.  Turn   men's  thoughts  towards     ,  ^  0eoa,u?uiUf  ««M.— May  lead 

„_! +;^ ,  -xi.  to  the  conversion  ot  the  prison  inmates. 

salvation — men    not  caring  to  be  re-  r 

minded  of  their  lost  condition.  A  Strange  Religious  Service. 

I.  The  unusual  hour  of  prayer — 

Yer.  24.  Fast  in  the  Stocks.  midnight. 

I.  A  verification  of  Christ's  promise.  II.  The  singular  temple — a  prison. 

II.  A  testimony  to  the  efficiency  of  III.  The  remarkable  conductors — 

the  apostles'  work.  Paul  and  Silas  in  the  stocks. 

III.  A  trial  of  the  sincerity  of  their  IY.  The  strange  congregation — the 

faith.  prisoners  in  their  cells. — Gerok. 

352 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


Songs  in  the  Night. 

I.  The    singers. — Paul    and    Silas. 

1.  Their  character.  (1)  Servants  of 
the  most  high  God.  (2)  Missionaries 
of  the  cross.  (3)  Benefactors  of  their 
race.  2.  Their  condition.  In  the 
night.  (1)  In  the  darkness  of  a 
Roman  cell.  (2)  In  the  painfulness 
of  bodily  suffering.  (3)  In  the  sadness 
of  disappointed  hopes. 

II.  Their  songs. — 1.  The  giver  of 
them  :  God,  whose  servants  they  were 
(Psalm  xix.  8) ;  Christ,  for  whose  name 
they  had  been  cast  into  prison  (John 
xvi.  33,  xvii.  13) ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit, 
in  obedience  to  whose  leading  they  had 
come    to    Philippi    (Eph.    v.    18,     J  9). 

2.  The  burden  of  them.  (1)  Thank- 
fulness that  they  had  been  counted 
worthy  to  suffer  for  the  name  of  Christ 
(ver.  41).  (2)  Prayerfulness  for  grace 
to  sustain  them  while  sufferiDg,  and 
for  a  happy  issue  to  their  trial  in  the 
furtherance  of  their  mission.  3.  The 
hearers  of  them.  Doubtless  the  angels 
in  heaven,  but  also  the  prisoners  on 
earth.  Christians  when  at  their  devo- 
tions are  more  frequently  than  they 
suspect  observed  by  others.  4.  The 
effect  of  them.  If  they  comforted  the 
singers,  they  most  likely  helped  to  con- 
vert the  listeners. 

Ver.  25.  Singing  in  Jail. — "  His 
presence  turns  a  prison  into  a  palace, 
into  a  paradise."  "  From  the  delectable 
orchard  of  the  Leonine  prison  "  —  so  the 
Italian  martyr  Algerius  dated  his 
letter  to  a  friend.  "  I  was  carried  to 
the  coal  house,"  saith  Mr.  Philpot, 
"  where  I  with  my  fellows  do  rouse 
together  in  the  straw  as  cheerfully,  we 
thank  God,  as  others  do  in  their  beds 
of  down."  "  Philip,  Landgrave  of 
Hesse,  being  a  long  time  prisoner  under 
Charles  V.,  was  demanded  what  upheld 
him  at  that  time.  He  answered  that 
he  felt  the  Divine  consolations  of 
the  martyrs  "  {Trapp).  (See  on 
xxiii.  11,  "  Hints.") 

Ver.  26.  Opened  Doors  and  Loosened 
Bands. 

I.  A  miracle  of   power. — Even    if 


explainable  as  the  result  of  the  earth- 
quake, the  earthquake  itself  was  the 
work  of  God. 

II.  A  symbol  of  grace. — 1.  Of  the 
message  of  the  gospel,  which  proclaims 
liberty  to  the  captives  and  the  opening 
of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound. 

2.  Of  the  influence  of  the  Spirit,  which 
breaks  the  fetters  of  sin  from  the  soul 
and  opens  the  heart  to  receive  the 
truth.  3.  Of  the  icork  of  providence, 
which  opens  doors  of  usefulness  for 
Christ's  servants  and  gives  them 
ability  to  enter  in. 

III.  A  prophecy  of  glory.— Of  the 
opening  of  the  prison-house  of  the 
grave  and  the  unloosening  of  the  bands 
of  death. 

Vers.  30,  31.  The  Way  of  Salvation. 

I.  The  jailor's  question. — 1.  Im- 
portant. Concerning  the  salvation  of 
the  soul,  the  most  momentous  of  human 
concerns.  2.  Personal.  Concerning 
individual  salvation.  Salvation  a  per- 
sonal affair.  3.  Urgent.  No  time  for 
delay  in  this  concern  of  the  soul's 
salvation. 

II.  The  apostle's  answer. — 1.  The 
simplicity  of  it.  "  Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  Nothing  needful  but 
faith.  2.  The  certainty  of  it.  "  Thou 
shalt   be    saved."      No   perad venture. 

3.  The  sufficiency  of  it.  "  And  thy 
house." 

Vers.  23-34.  The  Story  of  the  Jailor  ; 
or,  the  Moral  and  Spiritual  History  of 
a  Soul. 

I.  A  spiritual  sleeper. — 1.  Uncon- 
scious of  his  moral  degradation  (ver.  24). 
2.  Insensible  to  his  danger  (ver.  27). 

II.  An  awakened  sinner. — Roused 
from  his  bodily  slumber  by  means  of 
the  earthquake,  he  instantly  realised, 
the  peril  in  which  he  stood — (1)  bodily 
and  temporarily  (ver.  27),  and  (2)  spirit- 
ually and  eternally  (ver.  30). 

III.  An  anxious  inquirer.— Mani- 
fested by  his  exclamation,  "  Sirs  !  what 
must  I  do  to  be  saved  1 "  (ver.  30), 
which  referred  exclusively  to  his  deliver- 
ance from  the  spiritual  alarm  which 
had  seized  upon  his  soul. 

A  a  353 


chap.  xvi.        II0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


IV.  An  eager  listener. — This  folio  wed 
of  necessity  from  his  soul  agitation 
and  the  sincerity  of  his  exclamation. 
Anxious  souls  always  hear  the  gospel 
with  avidity  (ver.  32). 

Y.  A  humble  penitent. — Evidenced 
by  his  gentle  and  affectionate  treat- 
ment of  the  apostles  (ver.  33). 

VI.  A  rejoicing  believer  (ver.  34). — 
As  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  so  does 
joy  spring  from  believing.  Not  joy  is 
the  source  of  faith,  but  faith  is  the 
source  of  joy. 

VII.  A  baptised  Christian.— "  He 
and  all  his  were  baptised"  (ver.  33), 
and  so  incorporated  in  the  Church  of 
Christ. 

Vers.  19-34.  The  Jailor  at  Philippi. 
I.  "  Do  you,  jail  keeper  of  Philippi, 
believe  in  being  scared  into  religion  ? 

An  earthquake — pardon  the  sug- 
gestion— is  a  shaky  foundation  for  a 
religious  resolve.  Now  do  you  believe 
in  religion  which  begins  in  fear  1 " 
"  The  question  is  stated  offensively, 
although  in  a  popular  form,"  such  is 
the  jailor's  reply;  "but  I  do  believe 
that  fear  is  a  proper  motive  to  religion 
and  in  religion.  In  my  case  it  worked 
well.  I  came  into  the  kingdom  moved 
by  fear,  as  the  history  plainly  tells  you. 
Other  motives  were  present,  but  fear 
was  foremost.  The  absence  of  fear 
would  have  been  stolidity.  It  is  the 
part  of  wisdom  to  be  taught  by  events. 
In  them  God  is  the  Teacher,  and  when 
events  are  fearful  we  ought  to  fear." 
It  is  worth  while  to  listen  to  the 
testimony  of  the  jailor  upon  this  point, 
because  current  religious  thought  of 
a  superficial  and  sentimental  sort 
hesitates  to  find  a  place  for  fear 
amongst  the  motives  to  religion.  Fear 
"  which  takes  counsel  of  the  reason 
and  not  of  the  imagination  "  is  a  proper 
motive  to  religion  and  in  religion. 
Noah  was  not  playing  the  part  of  a 
craven  in  a  truly  courageous  world 
when  he,  "  moved  with  fear,  prepared 
an  ark  to  the  saving  of  his  house." 
An  apostle  made  no  ill-judged  appeal 
to  fear  when  he  said  to  impenitent 
men,  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into 

354 


the  hands  of  the  living  God."  And  now 
let  us  give  to  fear  its  true  place  amongst 
religious  motives.  Do  the  great  hopes 
of  the  gospel  fill  and  sway  our  hearts  ? 
Then  away  with  fear  !  Does  the  love 
of  God,  like  a  summer's  atmosphere 
full  of  sweet  odours,  enfold  our  spirits 
in  its  warm  embrace?  Then  away 
with  fear !  Does  gratitude,  the  sense 
of  infinite  indebtedness  to  Him  who 
loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us,  stir 
our  hearts,  so  that  to  lay  our  powers 
and  possessions  at  his  feet  is  only  a 
graceful  and  easy  task?  Then  away 
with  fear.  Is  the  sense  of  duty  so 
dominant  in  our  hearts  that  we  are 
always  ready  to  make  payment  of  our 
dues  to  God  ?  Then  away  with  fear. 
But  if  none  of  these  higher  motives 
have  control,  then,  as  we  love  our 
souls,  we^ought  not  to  allay  our  fears 
in  any  other  way  than  by  seeking  the 
grace  of  God  to  save  us  from  the 
danger  which  occasions  fear.  It  is 
conceivable  that  the  jailor  might  have 
reasoned  with  his  fears  until  all  appre- 
hension vanished,  but  in  so  doing  he 
would  have  lost  his  soul. 

II.  If  we  were  permitted  to  make 
further  inquiries  of  the  jailor,  a  second 
query  would  arise.  We  should  be  dis- 
posed to  say :  "  You  were  upon  that 
night  of  the  earthquake  plunged  into 
the  greatest  excitement.  You  were  well- 
nigh  beside  yourself.  Of  a  sudden,  the 
record  tells  us,  you  whipped  out  your 
sword  to  take  your  own  life.  This 
therefore  is  our  question,  Do  you 
believe  in  emotional  religion  ? "  "  My 
own  religious  life  began  in  a  sudden 
and  tidal  sweep  of  the  emotions,"  is  the 
reply.  "  They  were  emotions  which  I 
did  not  stop  to  analyse  or  question, 
and  which  I  could  not  control.  Con- 
fused, tumultuous  feelings  rushed  and 
crowded  in  upon  me.  The  sudden 
manifestation  of  the  power  of  God, 
His  marvellous  interference  in  behalf 
of  the  prisoners,  His  no  less  wonderful 
interposition  to  prevent  the  escape  of 
the  prisoners ;  in  some  way  there  came 
to  me  suddenly  and  with  overwhelming 
power  the  feeling  that  I  was  a  lost 
soul ;    that   I   could   not   repress   this 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvi. 


feeling  was  my  salvation.  And  besides 
this,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  no 
life  is  unemotional."  If  a  fervent 
religious  experience  seems  to  any  one 
the  commitment  of  life  to  the  control 
of  the  emotions,  be  it  remembered  that 
irreligious  experience  has  its  controlling 
emotions  also.  The  publican  who  smote 
upon  his  breast  was  an  emotional  man 
no  doubt,  but  he  was  not  more  under 
the  power  of  emotion  in  his  penitence 
and  humility  than  the  Pharisee  was 
emotional  in  the  self-complacency 
which  prompted  his  useless  prayer ; 
only  a  Pharisee's  emotion  was  narrower 
and  meaner,  an  emotion  occasioned  by 
thought  of  self,  while  the  publican's 
higher  emotion  grew  out  of  his  thought 
of  God.  "  I  thank  Thee  that  I  don't 
believe  in  emotional  religion."  It  is 
wise  to  turn  over  the  pages  of  the 
Bible,  and  to  review  the  lives  of  God's 
chosen  ones,  the  master- workmen  of  all 
time,  to  see  whether  or  not  their  re- 
ligion was  emotional.  The  record  will 
tell  us  of  Elijah's  tempestuous  emotion 
in  the  wilderness  and  before  the  pro- 
phets of  Baal.  The  religion  which 
God  honours  and  loves  and  uses  is  one 
which  not  only  convinces  the  intellect, 
but  which  powerfully  sways  the  heart. 
In  thoughtful  communities  the  Church 
of  these  last  times  is  in  as  little  danger 
of  undue  emotion  as  the  North  Sea  is 
in  danger  from  the  blasts  of  the  sirocco, 
a  wind  which  never  blows  north  of 
Italy.  A  philosophic  calmness  in  re- 
ligion may  proceed  from  a  dim  appre- 
hension of  what  it  is  to  be  under 
condemnation  for  sin  and  a  feeble 
gratitude  to  our  Bedeemer.  God  is 
in  holy  emotions ;  cultivate  them  by 
increasing  your  knowledge  of  Him. 
Follow  them  loyally.  Do  not  think 
the  Christian  heart  that  never  sings  or 
weeps  is  the  better  therefor. 

III.  Were  we  permitted  further  to 
interrogate  the  jailor,  we  should  be 
interested  to  seek  answer  to  a  third 
question.  It  is  this  :  "  Do  you  believe 
in  sudden  conversion?  You  will 
pardon  us  of  these  last  times  whose 
habits  of  thought  are  evolutionary,  if 
we    look    upon   character   as    a    slow 


and  steady  growth.  It  results  from 
education  and  training  and  habit  and 
circumstances.  What  character  is 
to-day  is  the  result  of  what  it  was 
yesterday.  To-morrow  grows  up  out 
of  to-day.  Now,  can  any  man  be 
changed  at  once  in  the  spirit  and 
purpose  of  his  life  ?  "  "  That  such  a 
change  is  possible,"  such  is  the  jailor's 
reply,  "  my  own  experience  is  the 
sufficient  proof.  I  was  converted  sud- 
denly and  thoroughly  ;  within  an  hour's 
time  I  was  convicted  of  sin,  found 
peace  with  God,  and  did  the  first  works 
of  love.  In  that  hour  of  visitation 
from  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  I 
was  transformed.  That  midnight  hour 
was  the  pivot  upon  which  my  life 
turned,  the  hour  of  destiny  when  by 
faith  in  Christ  I  laid  fast  hold  upon 
the  grace  of  God." 

IY.  There  is  a  final  inquiry  which 
we  should  place  before  the  converted 
jailor,  if  he  were  present  and  willing 
to  entertain  our  interrogations.  "  Be- 
lieve on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved."  It  is  of  this 
answer  that  we  wish  to  ask :  "Is 
not  this  a  narrow  gospel  ?  Are  there 
not  broader  conceptions  of  the  way  of 
life  1  Is  nothing  to  be  said,  when  this 
great  question  is  answered,  of  civilisa- 
tion, of  orderly,  law-abiding  life,  of 
good  citizenship,  of  morality,  of 
neighbourly  kindness,  of  a  human 
endeavour  and  resolve  to  keep  the 
commandments  1  Surely  salvation  must 
mean  good  character.  Is  not  the 
command  too  narrow  for  the  diversified 
conditions  of  the  good  and  the  bad,  the 
wise  and  the  ignorant,  the  cultured 
and  the  uncouth  1 "  "  The  command  is 
narrow,"  is  the  courteous  answer,  "but 
not  narrower  than  the  way  of  life.  Its 
adaptation  to  the  diverse  conditions 
of  human  experience  each  man  must 
determine  for  himself.  I  can  only 
bear  testimony  that  it  was  marvellously 
fitted  to  my  needs.  I  needed  a  power 
within  to  calm  the  tumult  of  my  spirit, 
to  quiet  a  guilty  conscience,  and  that 
power  came  to  me  by  faith  in  Jesus. 
I  needed  to  learn  the  lesson  of  human 
pity  and  kindness,  and  having  received 

355 


chap.  xvi.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


faith  in  Jesus  I  arose  and  tenderly 
washed  the  stripes  of  Paul  and  Silas, 
and  set  before  them  the  choicest  food 
my  house  could  furnish.  Narrow  1  In 
my  case  it  turned  out  to  be  the  one 
duty  out  of  which  came  a  dutiful  life." 
If  the  command  seems  to  be  narrow, 
we  have  only  to  obey  it  to  find  it 
exceeding  broad.  It  touches  all  char- 
acter and  truth. — W.  G.  Sperry. 


Ver.  35.  Let  those  Men  go  / 

I.  An  order  of  fear. — The  Philippian 
magistrates  to  the  prison  Serjeants. 
Those  who  wrong  their  fellows  are 
commonly  delighted  to  be  relieved  of 
the  presence  of  their  victims ;  like 
Ammon,  who,  having  humbled  Tamar, 
hated  her  exceedingly,  and  said,  "Arise, 
be  gone  !  "  (2  Sam.  xiii.  15). 

II.  A  command  of  love. — Jesus  to 
His  captors  in  the  garden :  "  If  ye 
seek  Me,  let  these  go  their  way  "  (John 
xviii.  8).  A  signal  mark  of  Christ's 
affection  for  His  own,  in  whose  behalf 
He  was  going  forward  to  condemnation 
and  death. 

III.  A  sentence  of  justice. — God  to 
believers,  in  whose  room  and  stead 
Christ  has  suffered  the  penary  of  sin  : 
"  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them 
who  are  in  Christ  "  (Rom.  v.  1).  "  He 
that  believeth  is  passed  from  death 
unto  life"  (John  v.  24). 

IV.  A  proclamation  of  power. — The 
glorified  Christ  when  He  speaks  over 
the  graves  of  His  people,  as  He  did  at 
Lazarus's  tomb  (John  xi.  44) :  "  Loose 
them,  and  let  them  go  !"  "The  hour 
is  coming,"  etc.  (John  v.  28,  29). 

"Ver.  40.  The  Brethren  in  Lydia's 
House  ;  or,  the  Church  at  Philippi. 

I.  Its  original  members. — 1.  Lydia. 
That  this  lady  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
epistle  to  the  Philippians  may  have 
been  due  to  her  having  died  or  returned 
to  her  native  city  before  the  epistle  was 
written,  unless  the  unlikely  supposi- 
tion be  adopted  that  she  was  either 
Euodia  or  Syntyche.     Had  the  epistle 


been  a  forgery  she  would  most  probably 
have  been  named.  2.  The  jailor.  The 
same  difficulty  presents  itself  with 
regard  to  this  early  disciple,  who  also 
is  passed  over  in  silence,  which  shows 
how  dangerous  it  is  to  draw  conclu- 
sions from  the  omissions  of  a  composer. 

3.  Euodia  and  Syntyche.  Two  Chris- 
tian females  (Phil.  iv.  2),  who  appear 
to  have  been  somewhat  estranged  from 
one  another  at  the  time  when  Paul 
wrote  to  the  Church  in  Philippi,  unless 
the  suggestion  be  adopted  (Farrar) 
that  Paul  was  only  alluding  to  their 
"  joint    wrestlings     for     the    gospel." 

4.  Zyzygus  and  Clement.  The  former 
term,  meaning  "  yoke-fellow,"  has  been 
taken  as  designating  an  individual  of 
that  name  whom  the  apostle  playfully 
addresses  (Meyer,  Farrar,  and  others) — 
an  interpretation  in  support  of  which 
much  can  be  advanced ;  but  doubt 
remains  whether,  after  all,  it  is  not 
Epaphroditus  (Phil.  iv.  18),  to  whom 
the  apostle  refers  under  this  appellation 
(Hutchison).  Of  Clement,  whom  tra- 
dition reports  to  have  been  the  third 
bishop  of  Rome,  Paul's  letter  affords 
no  clue  to  the  identification,  resting 
satisfied  with  describing  him  as  a  fellow- 
worker,  whose  name,  along  with  those 
of  others,  was  written  in  the  Book  of 
Life. 

II.  Its  original  character. — What- 
ever it  may  have  become  in  later  years, 
when  Paul  wrote  to  it,  its  members 
were  distinguished  by  several  delightful 
features.  1.  Steadfast  faith.  Firm 
adherence  to  the  gospel  (Phil.  i.  5), 
even  in  the  face  of  persecution  (Phil. 
i.  28-30).  2.  Joyful  confidence.  Exult- 
ing in  Christ  (Phil.  ii.  17,  18),  and 
in  their  personal  experience  of  his 
salvation.  3.  Tender  sympathy  with 
the  apostle  in  his  labours  and  afflic- 
tions (Phil.  iv.  14).  4.  Generous  liber- 
ality in  contributing  to  the  apostle's 
needs  (Phil.  iv.  15).  5.  Laborious 
activity,  working  together  for  the  ad- 
vancement of  the  gospel  (Phil.  i.  27 ; 
iv.  3). 


356 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xvn. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

The  Second  Missionary  Journey  (Paul  and  Silas) — continued. 

§  1.  Paul  and  Silas  in  Thessalonica ;   or,  Mingled  Experiences  of  Success  and 

Persecution  (vers.  1-9). 
§  2.  Paul  and  Silas  at  Beroea ;  or,  another  Good  Work  interrupted  (vers.  10-14). 
§  3.  Paul  at  Athens ;  or,  Alone  in  a  Heathen  City  (vers.  15-21). 
§  4.  Paul  on  Areopagus ;  or,  Preaching  to  Philosophers  (vers.  22-34). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  They. — Paul,  Silas,  and  Timothy,  Luke  having  remained  behind  at  Philippi.  (See 
on  xvi.  40.)  Passed  through. — The  road  traversed  was  the  Via  Eqnatia,  a  great  military 
road,  the  Macedonian  continuation  of  the  Appian  Way.  Amphipolis. — Thirty  miles  south- 
west of  Philippi,  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Strymon,  "  which  flowed  almost  round  it  and 
gave  to  it  its  name  "  (Hackett).  Apollonia. — To  be  distinguished  from  a  town  of  the  same 
name  in  Galatia  (Ramsay).  Thirty  miles  south-west  of  Amphipolis.  At  each  of  these  towns 
the  travellers  most  likely  passed  a  night,  but  not  more,  "  as  it  appears  the  Jews  were  not  at 
either  town  in  sufficient  numbers  to  maintain  a  synagogue,  or  perhaps  even  an  oratory  " 
(Lewin).  Thessalonica. — Now  SaloniH.  The  capital  of  the  second  division  of  Macedonia ; 
a  rich  commercial  city  near  the  mouth  of  the  Ecedorus,  on  the  Thermaic  Gulf,  about  twenty- 
eight  miles  west  of  Apollonia.  Weizsacker,  badly  off  for  an  objection  to  the  historic 
credibility  of  the  Thessalonian  visit,  finds  it  strange  that  Paul  "  went,  of  all  places,  to  the 
capital  of  the  province  which  had  just  given  him  such  a  bad  reception";  from  which  it  may 
presumably  be  inferred  that  the  German  critic  would  not  have  proved  so  courageous  as  the 
Christian  apostle.  A  (according  to  the  best  MSS.  the  definite  article  is  wanting,  though 
Hackett  and  Alford  favour  its  retention)  synagogue  of  the  Jews. — Doubtless  the  only  one  in 
town. 

Ver.  2.  As  his  manner  was. — Compare  xiii.  5-14,  xiv.  1.  Out  of,  or  from  the  Scriptures. — 
The  source  whence  Paul  drew  his  teaching  (compare  xxviii.  23). 

Ver.  3.  Opening. — I.e.,  giving  the  sense  of  Scripture,  and  alleging — i.e.,  propounding,  main- 
taining, or  setting  forth  as  the  sum  of  their  teaching.  Christ  should  be  the  Christ.  That 
this  Jesus,  etc.,  should  be,  that  this  is  the  Christ — viz.,  the  Jesus  whom  I  preach  ox  proclaim 
unto  you. 

Ver.  4.  Believed. — Rather,  were  persuaded.  Consorted  with. — Attached  themselves  to 
(Olshausen,  Hackett),  though  the  more  correct  interpretation  is  were  added  by  lot  to  (Winer, 
De  Wette,  Meyer,  Alford,  Holtzmann,  Zockler) — viz.,  by  God  (compare  xiii.  48  ;  John  vi.  44, 
xvii.  6).  Of  the  devout  Greeks  reads  in  the  Alexandrine  Codex  of  the  devout  arid  of  Greeks, 
which,  however,  is  not  to  be  preferred  (see  xiii.  43).  Of  the  chief,  or  first  women. — See  on 
xiii.  50. 

Ver.  5.  The  Jews  who  believed  not. — The  best  MSS.  omit  the  relative  clause,  as  an  inser- 
tion from  xiv.  2.  Lewd  fellows  of  the  baser  sort. — Lit.,  certain  disreputable  men  of  the  market 
idlers — such  as  Cicero  calls  subrostrani,  Plautus  sub-basilicani,  Xenophon  the  market-place 
mob,  rbv  ayopcuov  oxKov,  and  Demosthenes  the  knaves  of  the  market,  neper pt [x/xa  ayopas. 
Jason  was  Paul's  host  (ver.  7),  as  Lydia  had  been  his  hostess  at  Philippi.  Whether  this  Jason 
was  Paul's  kinsman  (Rom.  xvi.  21)  cannot  be  determined. 

Ver.  6.  When  they  found  them  not. — Probably  because  Paul  and  Silas  were  then  absent 
from  their  lodging.  The  rulers  of  the  city,  politarchs  =  the  dpxovres  of  xvi.  19. — Not  in  this 
case,  as  in  that  of  Philippi,  prators,  because  Thessalonica  was  not  a  colony,  but  a  free  city, 
possessing  the  right  of  self-government  in  all  its  internal  affairs,  within  the  territory  that 
might  be  assigned  to  it,  and  having  magistrates  with  whose  jurisdiction  the  provincial 
governor  had  no  right  to  intermeddle.  An  inscription  found  on  an  arch  at  Thessalonica 
mentions  that  the  city  magistrates  were  called  politarchs,  and  gives  as  three  of  these 
individuals  bearing  the  names  of  three  of  Paul's  friends — Sosipater  (xx.  4),  Gaius  (xix.  29), 
andSecundus  (xx.  4). 

Ver.  7.  Another  King,  one  Jesus. — Virtually  a  charge  of  high  treason,  a  more  alarming 
charge  than  that  preferred  against  them  at  Philippi  (xvi.  21),  and  recalling  the  accusation  of 
the  Jerusalem  Jews  against  Christ  (John  xix.  15). 

Ver.  9.  When  they  had  taken  security. — Lit.,  having  taken  the  sufficient  (sum  or  pledge)  = 
satisdatione  accepta,  either  by  sureties  or  money.    They  let  them  go  atre'Xvoav  (compare  xiii.  3). 

357 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


— Paul's  language  in  1  Thess.  ii.  14-16  appears  to  contain  a  reminiscence  of  his  experience  in 
Thessalonica. 

Ver.  10.  Bcerea. — Presently  Plieria,  south-west  of  Thessalonica,  and  fifty-one  miles  distant. 

Ver.  12.  Many  of  them  believed. —  Codex  Bezce  adds,  "And  some  disbelieved."  The 
adjective  Greek  qualifies  men  as  well  as  women. 

Ver.  13.  They  came  thither  also  and  stirred  up  the  people  should  be  they  came,  stirring  up 
and  troubling  ("  and  troubling"  being  inserted  in  accordance  with  the  best  authorities)  the 
people  there  also. 

Ver.  14.  As  it  were  to  the  sea. — u?s  with  e-rri  may  signify  intention,  actual  or  pretended 
(Winer's  Grammar  of  the  New  Testament  Diction,  p.  640),  and  some  (Grotius,  Bengel, 
Olshausen)  suppose,  in  accordance  with  this  reading,  that  Paul's  companions  only  made  a 
feint  of  sending  him  off  by  sea,.while  in  reality  they  conducted  him  off  by  the  overland  route 
to  Athens— a  distance  of  251  Roman  miles ;  but  the  oldest  codices  (X  A  B  E)  read  ews  as  far 
as  to  the  sea,  and  this  avoids  even  the  suggestion  of  pretending  to  go  one  way  and  taking 
another. 

Ver.  15.  A  commandment  unto  Silas  and  Timothy  that  they  should  come  to  him  with  all 
speed. — According  to  Acts  xviii.  5  they  came  from  Macedonia  to  him  in  Corinth  ;  according 
to  1  Thess.  iii.  1  Timothy  was  sent  back  from  Athens  to  Macedonia.  The  statements  are 
not  inconsistent.  Silas  and  Timothy  may  have  followed  Paul  at  once  to  Athens,  (so  Ramsay) 
from  which  Timothy  may  have  been  recommissioned  to  the  Thessaloniansf  and  Silas  to  some 
other  church  in  Macedonia,  both  again  returning  to  him  in  Corinth. 

Ver.  16.  Athens. — Described  by  Milton  {Paradise  Regained, iv.  20)  as  "the  eye  of  Greece," 
and  "  the  mother  of  arts  and  eloquence."  The  capital  of  Attica  was  situated  about  five  miles 
from  the  harbour  of  Pirseus,  partly  on  a  group  of  rocky  hills,  and  partly  upon  the  low  land 
surrounding  these,  and  separating  them  one  from  the  other.  Of  these  rocky  eminences  the 
loftiest  was  the  Acropolis,  which  stood  almost  in  the  middle  of  the  town,  and  to  which  a 
magnificent  marble  staircase  led  up  through  the  Propylasum,  built  by  Pericles.  Here  were, 
besides  other  works  of  art,  the  colossal  statue  of  Athene  Promachus,  the  glorious  Parthenon, 
or  Virgins'  house,  replete  with  the  masterpieces  of  Phidias,  and  "  the  colossal  statue  (of 
Athens)  of  ivory  and  gold,  the  work  of  Phidias,  unrivalled  in  the  world,  save  only  by  the 
Jupiter  Olympius  of  the  same  artist "  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  i.  330). 

Ver.  17.  In  the  market. — The  Agora,  richly  decorated  with  statues,  lying  between  the  two 
hills,  Pnyx  on  the  west  and  Museum  on  the  south-west  of  the  Acropolis,  was  "  the  centre  of 
a  glorious  public  life,  when  the  orators  and  statesmen,  the  poets  and  artists,  of  Greece  found 
there  all  the  incentives  of  their  noblest  enthusiasm  "  {Ibid.,  i.  326). 

Ver.  18.  This  babbler. — 6  <nr€p/uo\6yos.  Lit.,  seed-picker,  properly  a  bird,  in  which  sense  it 
is  used  by  Aristophanes  {Birds,  232) ;  hence  one  who  prowls  about  the  market-place  picking 
up  and  retailing  gossip,  or  one  who  lives  by  his  wits;  hence,  again,  "a  contemptible  and 
worthless  person."  Or  the  allusion  may  be  to  the  chattering  of  such  birds,  whence  the  word 
may  denote  "a  babbler."  Zeno  called  by  this  name  one  of  his  disciples,  who  had  more 
words  than  wisdom  {Diog.  Laert.,  Zeno,  c.  19)  ;  and  Demosthenes  used  this  expression  of 
ready-tongued  opponents.  "  Many  an  Athenian  is  likely  to  have  babbled  all  the  week 
through  about  this  babbler  at  the  Areopagus  "  (Stier).  "  Probably  the  nearest  and  most 
instructive  parallel  in  modern  English  life  to  Spermologos  is  'Bounder'  allowing  for  the 
difference  between  England  and  Athens.  In  both  there  lies  the  idea  of  one  who  is  '  out  of 
the  swim,'  out  of  the  inner  circle,  one  who  lacks  that  thorough  knowledge  and  practice  in 
the  rules  of  the  game,  that  mould  the  whole  character  and  make  it  one's  nature  to  act  in  the 
proper  way  and  play  the  game  fair  "  (Ramsay,  St.  Paul,  p.  243). 

-  Ver.  19.  Areopagus. — This  ancient  college  of  justice  in  Athens,  whose  province  it  was  to 
pronounce  judgment  on  the  worst  criminal  cases,  had  its  name  from  the  elevation,  Mars'  Hill 
(ver.  22),  upon  the  east  end  of  which  it  had  its  sittings.  It  was  approached  from  the  market- 
place by  a  flight  of  steps  cut  in  the  rock,  and  on  its  summit  had,  also  cut  in  the  rock,  a  row 
of  seats,  in  which  the  judges  sat,  and  room  for  a  considerable  number  of  spectators  and 
listeners.  Ramsay  {St.  Paul,  etc.,  pp.  241^.),  thinks  Paul  was  brought  before  the  Council  of 
Areopagus,  neither  to  be  tried  by  the  city  judges,  nor  to  address  the  Athenian  people,  nor  to 
discuss  with  the  philosophers,  but  to  explain  to  the  university  court  the  nature  of  his 
doctrines.     (See  Hints  on  ver.  19.) 

Ver.  21.  Either  to  tell  or  to  hear  some  new  thing. — Compare  Demosthenes:  "Is  it  your 
sole  ambition  to  wander  through  the  public  places,  each  inquiring  of  the  other,  what  new 
advices  ?  "  {Philippic,  i.  11)  ;  and  Thucydides  (iii.  38) :  "  And  so  you  are  the  best  men  to  be 
imposed  upon  with  novelty  of  argument,"  etc.  "It  is  just  the  same  to-day  with  the  upper 
and  lower  classes  in  our  great  cities.  It  is  ever  Kouvbrepdv  ti  ;  or,  as  they  are  wont  to  say, 
One  new  thing  supplants  another  "  (Stier). 

Ver.  22.  Too  superstitious. — Somewhat  superstitious  (R.V.);  better,  more  god-fearing,  more 
religious  (56*.,  than  others) — i.e.,  unusually  religious ;  though  the  word  has  both  senses. 
Your  devotions  should  be  objects  of  devotion,  as  temples,  images,  altars,  and  the  like. 

358 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xvn. 


Ver.  23.  To  the  (or,  an)  unknown  God. — Not  a  singular  for  a  plural  as  Jerome  (ad.  Tit., 
i.  12)  asserts:  "Inscriptio  arse  non  ita  erat  ut  Paulus  asseruit:  ignoto  Deo;  sed  ita  :  Diis 
Asiae  et  Europae  et  Africae,  Diis  ignotis  et  peregrinis.  Verum  quia  Paulus  non  pluribus 
Diis  ignotis  indigebat  sed  uno  tanturn  ignoto  Deo,  singulari  verbo  usus  est."  The  accuracy 
of  Paul's  statement  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  Pausanias,  I.  i.  4,  and  Philostratus, 
Apoll.,  vi.  2,  who  both  report  the  existence  at  Athens  of  altars  to  unknown  divinities  Whom 
.  .  .  Him. — Rather,  what  .  .  .  this. 

Ver.  26.  Blood. — Omitted  by  the  best  authorities.  Times  before  appointed,  Trporerayixtvovs, 
should  be  times  appointed,  irpoareT ay ixevovs. 

Ver.  28.  The  quotation,  For  we  are  also  His  offspring,  is  verbally  taken  from  Aratus,  a 
native  of  Tarsus,  B.C.  270,  who  composed  astronomical  poems,  and  in  one  of  the  only  two 
extant,  the  Phenomena,  wrote  rod  yap  Kal  yevos  ea/nev ;  though  substantially,  also,  it  is  con- 
tained in  the  words  £k  gov  (Aids)  yap  yfros  £vp.iv  of  Cleanthes  of  Assos  in  Troas,  B.C.  300. 
Other  traces  of  Paul's  acquaintance  with  Greek  poetry  may  be  found  in  1  Cor.  xv.  33 ;  Titus 
i.  12. 

Ver.  31.  Because,  8i6ri.  Better,  inasmuch  as,  Kadori.  Giving  the  reason  why  the  heathen 
are  required  to  repent.  The  world  means  "  the  inhabited  earth."  That  man  should  be  "  the  " 
or  "  a  man" — viz.,  Jesus,  of  whose  appointment  to  the  office  of  judge  God  had  given  assur- 
ance, or  confirmation — lit.,  offered  faith,  or  a  sufficient  ground  for  faith  ("  Quia  res  erat  vix 
credibilis  argumentum  adfert  eximium  " — Grotius),  unto  all  men  by  raising  Him  from  the 
dead. 

Ver.  32.  Some  mocked.— Perhaps  Epicureans.  Others,  perhaps  Stoics  (Grotius)  or  Platonists 
(Zockler),  said— whether  seriously  (Calvin,  Grotius,  Alford)  or  only  courteously,  as  a  polite 
refusal  (De  Wette,  Meyer),  remains  uncertain— we  will  hear  thee  again  of  this  matter,  or 
less  happily  person. 

Ver.  34.  Dionysius,  the  Areopagite.—  Obviously  a  man  of  note,  though  nothing  further  in 
known  concerning  him— at  least  with  certainty.  According  to  tradition  he  became  the  first 
bishop  of  Athens  (Euseb,  H.  E.,  iii.  4,  iv.  23)  and  suffered  martyrdom  under  Domitian 
(Nicephorus,  H.  E.,  iii.  11).  Damaris. — Conjecturally  regarded  by  Chrysostom  to  have  been 
the  wife  of  Dionysius,  and  by  Stier  unnecessarily  supposed  to  have  been  a  courtesan. 

Note. — On  the  historic  credibility  of  Paul's  visit  to  Athens  and  oration  before  the 
Areopagus. 

I.  The  usual  objections  to  the  narrative  on  the  ground  of  miracle  narrations  are  in  this  case 
awanting,  as  the  apostle  is  not  credited  with  having  performed  so  much  as  one  wonder  in  the 
capital  of  Achaia.  y~ 

II.  The  special  difficulties  set  forth  by  the  Tubingen  critics  (Baur,  Zeller,  Overbeck, 
Hausrath,  and  others)  are  so  unreasonable  that  they  can  hardly  claim  a  refutation.  Weiz- 
sacker,  indeed,  without  offering  any  reasons,  dismisses  the  story  of  Paul  at  Athens,  as  of 
"no  historical  value,"  and  looks  upon  the  speech  before  the  Areopagus  as  simply  "the 
author's  conception  of  Paul's  manner  of  preaching  to  the  heathen."  By  those  who  give  reasons 
it  is  alleged  :  1.  That  the  narrative  is  so  obviously  full  of  purpose  and  reflection  that  it  must 
have  been  manufactured  in  order  to  bring  out  as  strongly  as  possible  the  contrast  between 
Christianity  and  Heathenism.  2.  That  the  apostle  could  not  have  introduced  his  mention  of 
the  resurrection  in  so  sudden  and  objectionable  a  manner  as  is  represented,  and  in  fact  in  a 
way  so  admirably  fitted  to  make  the  worst  possible  impression  upon  his  hearers.  3.  That 
the  apostle  should  have  alluded  to  the  Athenians'  characteristic  irony  as  well  as  to  their 
peculiar  curiosity.  4.  That  there  was  no  altar  to  an  unknown  God  in  Athens,  but  only  "  to 
the  gods  unknown."  5.  That  if  Paul  had  been  brought  before  the  Areopagus,  he  must  have 
undergone  a  judicial  trial — which  he  did  not.  6.  That  the  glory  of  Paul's  "  hearing  "  before 
the  Areopagus,  or  highest  Greek  tribunal,  was  simply  invented  as  a  parallel  to  the  account 
given  of  Stephen's  appearance  before  the  highest  Jewish  court.  7.  That  the  last  section  of 
the  oration  breaks  off  so  suddenly  as  to  show  that  the  composer  has  been  without  accurate 
information  about  what  actually  occurred.  So  far  as  these  and  other  similar  difficulties 
require  explanation,  that  is  furnished  either  in  the  "  Critical  Remarks "  or  under  the 
"  Homiletical  Analysis  " ;  but  their  purely  arbitrary  and  subjective  character  shows  the  straits 
to  which  the  opponents  of  the  credibility  are  reduced. 

III.  The  sufficient  answer  to  all  that  can  be  urged  against  Luke's  narrative  is  that  it  bears 
on  its  surface  evident  marks  of  its  truthfulness.  1.  The  Pauline  conceptions  and  expressions 
it  contains,  which  are  too  numerous  to  have  been  invented.  Compare,  e.g.,  ver.  27  with 
Rom.  i.  19,  20 ;  ver.  26  with  Rom.  v.  12  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  45  ;  ver.  30,  "  times  of  ignorance,"  with 
Rom.  iii.  25;  ver.  31,  "the  judgment  of  the  world  through  Christ,"  with  2  Cor.  v.  10.  2.  The 
exact  acquaintance  which  it  shores  with  the  thoughts  and  manners  of  the  Athenians,  as  these 
are  borne  witness  to  by  classical  writers — as,  e.g.,  with  (1)  the  habit  of  the  Athenians  to  ask 
after  new  things  ;  (2)  the  devotion  of  the  Athenians  to  idolatry ;  (3)  the  existence  in  Athens 
of  a  worship  of  unknown  gods ;  and  (4)  the  belief  which  prevailed  in  Athens  of  the  superior 
origin  of  their  progenitors  (see  on  these  points  the  "  Critical  Remarks  "  and  "  Homiletical 

359 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Analysis") — an  acquaintance  much  more  easily  explained  by  supposing  Luke's  narrative  to 
have  proceeded  from  an  eye  and  ear  witness  such  as  Paul,  than  from  a  second  century 
fabulist.  3.  The  possibility  of  Luke  obtaining  accurate  information  about  the  whole  Athenian 
visit,  either  from  Paul  himself  or  from  Dionysius  and  Damaris,  all  of  whom  may  have 
preserved  written  notes  of  what  took  place.  4.  The  difficulty  of  discovering  hoiv  a  second 
century  writer  could  have  manufactured  the  incident  and  far  less  the  discourse.  The 
suggestion  that  these  were  freely  constructed  out  of  Paul's  first  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians 
is  totally  inadequate  as  a  solution  of  the  problem. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—9. 

Paul  and  Silas  at  Thessalonica  ;  or,  Mixed  Experiences. 

I.  Their  arrival  in  the  city. — 1.  LToiv  they  reached  it.  By  passing  through 
Amphipolis  and  Apollonia,  towards  which  they  directed  their  steps  on  departing 
from  the  house  of  Lydia  (xvi.  40).  The  first  of  these  towns  lay  thirty-three 
miles  from  Philippi  in  a  south-westerly  direction,  the  second  thirty  from 
Amphipolis  and  thirty-seven  from  Thessalonica.  In  all  a  journey  of  a  hundred 
miles  was  undertaken,  which  might  easily  have  been  performed  in  three  or 
four  days.  The  first  town,  anciently  called  the  "  Nine  Ways,"  from  the 
number  of  Thracian  and  Macedonian  roads  which  converged  at  it,  stood 
back  three  miles  from  the  sea,  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Strymon,  which, 
flowing  round  it,  gave  it  its  name.  The  exact  site  of  the  second  town  has 
not  been  ascertained,  although  the  road  to  it  must  have  lain  through  scenes 
of  surpassing  loveliness.  2.  How  they  found  it.  In  those  days  Thessalonica 
— the  modern  Saloniki,  with  a  population  of  70,000,  of  whom  a  third  are 
Jews — was  a  rich  commercial  city,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Echedorus.  Originally 
called  Therm  a,  its  name  was  changed  by  Oassander,  the  son  of  Antipater,  and 
one  of  Alexander's  generals,  who  rebuilt  it,  into  Thessalonica,  after  his  wife,  who 
was  a  daughter  of  Philip.  For  the  historic  associations  connected  with  Thessa- 
lonica see  Oonybeare  and  Howson's  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  i.  298.  When 
Paul  and  Silas  for  the  first  time  entered  this  town  "  it  was  the  most  populous  of 
all  the  cities  of  Macedonia,  and  the  capital  of  the  whole  province,"  where  "  the 
Roman  Proconsul,  attended  by  six  lictors  and  their  fasces,  held  his  court,  attended 
by  his  privy  council,  or  Board  of  Advice,  composed  of  select  illustrious  Romans, 
with  whom  he  conferred  on  all  matters  of  state  "  (Lewin).  Its  dense  heathenism, 
moreover,  was  relieved  by  the  presence  of  only  one  Jewish  synagogue,  while  its 
streets  were  crowded  by  "  lewd  fellows  of  the  baser  sort,"  "  vile  fellows  of  the 
rabble,"  or  market-place  tramps.  3.  How  long  they  remained  in  it.  At  least 
three  Sabbaths  (ver.  2),  and  possibly  three  full  weeks,  during  which,  it  may  be 
safely  assumed,  the  four  missionaries  were  not  idle,  and  Paul  specially  kept 
working  night  and  day  (1  Thess.  ii.  9).  There  is  even  ground  for  thinking  Paul 
must  have  stayed  several  months  in  Thessalonica,  as  during  that  period  he  twice 
received  pecuniary  assistance  from  Philippi  (Phil.  iv.  15,  16). 

II.  Their  procedure  in  the  city. — 1.  Their  lodging.  This,  the  procuring  of 
which  naturally  formed  their  firsb  concern,  they  found  in  the  house  of  one  Jason, 
a  Grsecised  form  of  Jesus,  a  Jew,  to  whom  "  they  may  have  brought  letters  of 
introduction  from  the  disciples  at  Philippi"  (Lewin),  or  who  may  have  been  a 
kinsman  of  Paul's  (Rom.  xvi.  21),  though  too  much  significance  may  be  attached 
to  similarity  of  name.  If  the  individual  here  mentioned  was  a  relative  of  Paul's 
he  must  have  been  with  the  apostle  at  Corinth  when  he  wrote  the  epistle  to  the 
Romans.  2.  Their  living.  This  may  have  been  provided  gratuitously  by  Jason, 
though  that  is  unlikely.  The  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  (1  ii.  9)  rather  shows^ 
that  Paul  and  his  companions  laboured  night  and  day,  if  not  at  their  ordinary 
trades,  at  some  form  of  manual  labour,  to  furnish  for  themselves  such  scanty 
supplies  as  their  modest  wants  demanded.     The  Philippians,  indeed,  once  and 

360 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xvii. 


again  forwarded  money  contributions  (Phil.  iv.  15,  16)  to  the  apostle  while  in 
Thessalonica ;  but  if,  as  he  himself  states,  he  had  suffered  the  loss  of  his  whole 
worldly  property  in  Philippi  (Phil.  iii.  8),  and  if,  as  there  is  reason  to  believe, 
while  he  was  there,  wheat  stood  at  famine  prices  in  Thessalonica,  a  peck  of 
wheat  being  sold,  according  to  Eusebius,  for  six  drachmae,  or  four  shillings  and 
sixpence,  being  six  times  the  usual  price  (see  Lewin,  vol.  i.,  p.  258),  the  amounts 
received  from  his  grateful  converts  would  hardly  dispense  him  or  his  companions 
— Silas,  Timothy,  and  Luke — from  the  necessity  of  supporting  themselves  by 
their  own  hands.  3.  Their  preaching.  Here  the  narrative  loses  sight  of  Silas 
and  speaks  exclusively  of  Paul,  concerning  whose  ministrations  it  furnishes  the 
amplest  details.  (1)  The  place  in  which  they  were  held  was  the  synagogue,  the 
only  one  then,  though  now  Saloniki  can  boast  of  nearly  forty  Jewish  churches. 
(2)  The  time  was  the  Sabbath,  the  ordinary  season  for  worship,  in  selecting 
which  Paul  followed  his  usual  custom  of  seeking  the  earliest  hearing  for  his 
gospel  from  his  countrymen  (compare  xiii.  5,  14;  xiv.  1).  (3)  The  textbook 
from  which  his  expositions  and  exhortations  were  drawn  was  the  Scriptures  of 
the  Old  Testament,  which  he  regarded  as  the  word  of  God  and  the  New  Testa- 
ment Church's  manual  of  salvation.  (4)  The  thesis  in  support  of  which  he 
reasoned  said  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  Hebrew  Messiah  who  had  been 
promised  to  the  fathers,  obviously  a  suitable  starting-point  from  which  to  addret s 
a  Jewish  audience.  A  preacher's  success  with  his  hearers  depends,  to  no  small 
extent,  on  the  way  in  which  he  opens  his  discourse.  (5)  The  method  in  which 
he  sought  to  establish  this  proposition  was  not  by  noisy  declamation  or  dogmatic 
assertion,  least  of  all  by  vulgar  sensationalism,  but  by  calm  reasoning,  appealing 
to  the  Scriptures  for  the  evidence  on  which  he  based  his  proposition,  expounding 
the  meaning  of  the  prophecies  that  spoke  of  the  Messiah,  and  showing  how  they 
all  had  received  their  fulfilment  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  (6)  The  proof  which  he 
deduced  from  Scripture  consisted  in  this,  that  according  to  these  prophecies  "  Christ 
must  needs  have  suffered  and  risen  again  from  the  dead"  (compare  ii.  24 — 31, 
iii.  18,  xiii.  27 — 37 ;  Luke  xxiv.  44),  and  that,  according  to  actual  fact,  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  had  risen  from  the  grave.  (7)  The  effect  produced  by  his  disputations 
was  such  that  a  considerable  number  of  his  hearers  were  converted.  First,  some 
of  the  Jewish  worshippers  came  over  to  his  side,  among  them  Secundus  (xx.  4), 
Aristarchus  (xix.  29,  xx.  4  ;  Col.  iv.  10 ;  Philem.  24),  and  perhaps  Gaius  (xix.  29). 
Next,  a  great  multitude  of  the  Greek  proselytes  (according  to  another  reading 
"  of  the  devout  and  of  Greeks  ")  attached  themselves  to  the  new  faith.  Lastly, 
not  a  few  of  the  chief  (or  first)  women — i.e.,  occupying  a  leading  position  in  the 
town  (compare  xiii.  50),  espoused  the  new  cause.  N.B. — As  all  the  above,  unless 
the  other  reading  be  adopted,  were  practically  gathered  from  Judaism,  while 
Paul  speaks  of  the  Thessalonian  Christians  as  having  been  drawn  from  those 
who  worshipped  idols  (1  Thess.  i.  9;  ii.  14),  it  has  been  surmised  that  Acts 
preserves  the  result  only  of  Paul's  three  Sabbaths'  reasonings  in  the  synagogue, 
and  that  either  he  preached  to  the  Gentiles  during  the  week  (Neander)  or  spent 
a  longer  time  in  Thessalonica  preaching  to  the  Gentiles  after  he  had  been 
excluded  from  the  synagogue*,  and  before  the  incidents  next  recorded  (Paley). 
See  above,  I.  3. 

III.  Their  treatment  in  the  city. — 1.  Their  ivork  hindered.  Perceiving  the 
success  which  had  attended  the  apostle's  preaching  in  drawing  away  fix  m  the 
synagogue  so  large  a  body  of  converts,  "  a  greater  multitude  of  adherents  than 
they  had  won  during  many  years  to  the  doctrines  of  Moses"  (Farrar),  indignant 
at  seeing  the  strange  missionaries  teaching  the  Gentiles  (1  Thess.  ii.  16),  and 
perhaps  furious  at  their  losing  the  resources,  reverence,  and  adhesion  of  the 
leading  women  of  the  city  (Farrar),  the  unbelieving  Jews  followed  the  example 
of  their  co-religionists  at  Antioch  (xiii.  50),  Iconium  (xiv.  2),  and  Lystra  (xiv.  19), 

361 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


and  excited  against  the  evangelists  a  fresh  persecution,  calling  to  their  aid 
"  certain  lewd  fellows  of  the  baser  sort,"  the  roughs  and  scoundrels,  loafers  and 
loiterers  of  the  city,  the  men  of  the  market-place,  the  street-walkers,  and  raising 
a  hue  and  cry  against  the  objects  of  their  rage  (see  "Critical  Remarks").  2.  Their 
lodging  assaulted.  Jason's  house,  surrounded  by  the  mob,  was  broken  into  in 
hope  of  finding  his  hated  guests  (compare  Gen.  xix.  4-11).  The  ostensible 
ground  of  attack  was  that  Jason  had  granted  these  wandering  preachers  a 
lodging ;  the  real  purpose  was  to  fetch  these  out  before  the  people,  demos,  or 
popular  assembly,  in  which  their  condemnation  would  at  once  have  been  secured. 
Had  the  apostles,  at  the  moment,  been  within  Jason's  house,  they  would  certainly 
have  been  arrested.  As,  however,  they  were  absent,  Jason  and  certain  brethren — 
i.e.,  Thessalonian  converts  with  him  at  the  time — were  apprehended  and  forcibly 
dragged  before  the  city-rulers,  or  politarchs  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  3.  Their 
names  traduced.  The  absent  missionaries  were  charged — not  with  being  Chris- 
tians, which  had  not  yet  become  a  crime  in  the  Roman  empire — but  with  being 
(1)  revolutionaries,  men  who  were  aiming  at  turning,  and  who  in  some  measure 
actually  had,  "  turned  the  world  upside  down  "  ;  and  (2)  rebels — persons  who  acted 
contrary  to  the  decrees  of  Caesar,  saying,  "  There  is  another  king,  one  Jesus,"  and 
who  therefore  were,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  guilty  of  high  treason.  The 
decrees  of  Csesar  were  the  Julian  Laws,  which  enacted  that  whosoever  violated  the 
majesty  of  the  State,  or  insulted  the  emperor  by  casting  a  stone  at  his  image, 
would  be  counted  as  a  traitor.  As  intended  by  its  promoters,  the  accusation  was, 
of  course,  false  (compare  Luke  xxiii.  2;  John  xix.  12,  15),  though  it  found  a 
seeming  warrant  in  the  character  of  Paul's  preaching  at  Thes-alonica,  which  talked 
about  Christ's  kingdom  and  glory  (1  Thess.  i.  10,  ii.  19,  iii.  13,  iv.  13-18,  v.  1,  2 ; 
2  Thess.  i.  5,  7-10;  ii.  1-12);  in  another  sense  than  theirs  it  was  perfectly 
true  (see  below,  "Hints,"  etc.).  4.  Their  departure  rendered  necessary.  The 
magistrates,  alarmed  for  the  peace  of  the  city,  demanded  security — perhaps  by 
sureties  or  by  a  sum  of  money — from  Jason  and  his  brethren,  not  that  Paul  and 
Silas  would  appear  for  trial,  since  these  were  forthwith  sent  away  from  the 
town,  but  that  no  attempt  would  be  made  against  the  supremacy  of  Rome,  and 
that  the  quiet  of  the  town  would  not  be  disturbed.  As  this  could  hardly  be 
secured  while  Paul  continued  preaching  within  its  precincts,  it  was  necessary 
for  him  to  depart.  This,  accordingly,  he  did,  taking  with  him  Silas  and  Timothy, 
the  brethren  in  Thessalonica  sending  them  off  secretly,  under  cover  of  the 
darkness,  and,  no  doubt,  with  affectionate  farewells,  to  the  out-of-the-way  town 
of  Bercea. 

Learn — 1.  The  unwearied  diligence  which  Christ's  ambassadors  should  exhibit. 
2.  The  value  of  the  Old  Testament  as  a  storehouse  of  proofs  of  Christ's  Messiah- 
ship  and  divinity.  3.  The  proper  subject  of  Christian  preaching — that  Jesus  is 
the  Christ.  4.  The  most  effective  style  of  preaching — that  which  is  based  on 
Scripture  and  aims  at  the  heart,  through  the  understanding.  5.  The  success 
which  commonly  results  from  faithful  preaching.  6.  The  inveterate  hostility 
of  the  evil  heart  towards  the  gospel.  7.  The  slanders  which  are  often  hurled 
against  the  followers  of  Christ. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  3.  The  Death  and  Resurrection  accomplish  God's  counsel — which  had 

of  Christ  a  Necessity.  foreordained    that    Christ   should   die 

I.  His  death  necessary.— 1.  To  fulfil  (iv.  28  ;  1  Peter  i.  19,  20  ;  Gal.  iv.  4). 

Scripture — which  as  God's  word  could  3.  To  atone  for  the  sins  of  men — by 

not   be   broken    (John  x.  35).     2.  To  the  shedding  of  His  blood  (2  Cor.  v.  21 ; 

362 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvii. 


Col.  i.  14  ;  Heb.  ix.  12).  4.  To  perfect 
His  example  of  holiness — since  in  thus 
taking  the  sinner's  place  He  gave  to 
mankind  the  highest  demonstration  of 
self-sacrificing  love  (1  Peter  ii.  21  ; 
1  John  iii.  16). 

II.  His  resurrection  necessary. — 
1.  To  fulfil  Scripture,  which  had  fore- 
told His  rising  from  the  dead.  2.  To 
demonstrate  His  Divine  sonship,  with- 
out which  He  could  not  have  been  a 
Saviour  for  man.  3.  To  attest  the 
acceptance  of  His  atoning  work,  evi- 
dence of  which  would  have  been  a- 
wanting  had  He  not  risen.  4.  To 
perfect  Him  as  a  Saviour,  by  showing 
Him  to  have  life  in  Himself  and  all 
power  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  and 
therefore  to  be  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  etc. 

Ver.  6.  Turning  the  World  upside 
down. 

I.  A  malicious  calumny. — As  used 
by  the  Thessalonian  Jews  about  Paul 
and  Silas,  and  as  still  directed  by  the 
unbelieving  world  against  ministers, 
missionaries,  and  Christian  people 
generally,  who  are  not  either — 1.  politi- 
cal revolutionaries,  in  their  tenets  or 
their  actions,  Christianity  enjoining 
submission  for  conscience'  sake  and 
Christ's  sake  to  the  powers  that  be 
(Rom.  xiii.  1);  or  2.  social  agitators, 
their  religion  teaching  them  to  follow 
peace  with  all  men  (Heb.  xii.  14),  to 
lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life  (1  Tim. 
ii.  2),  and  to  study  the  things  that 
make  for  peace  (Pom.  xiv.  19). 

II.  A  glorious  truth. — In  a  sense 
not  intended  this  indictment  expressed 
the  truth  concerning  Paul  and  Silas,  as 
it  still  does  about  Christian  preachers 
and  professors.  It  is  the  aim  of  these, 
as  it  was  of  Paul  and  Silas,  to  turn  the 
world  upside  down.  1.  In  its  beliefs, 
leading  it  from  trust  in  idols  to  faith 
in  God  and  Jesus  Christ.  2.  In  its 
actions,  turning  them  from  sin  to  holi- 
ness, and  from  the  bondage  of  Satan  to 
serve  the  living  God.  3.  In  its  hopes, 
directing  it  to  seek  its  chief  good  above 
and  not  below,  in  heaven  rather  than 
on  earth. 


Yer.  7.  Another  King,  one  Jesus. 

I.  His  sovereignty. — Rests  on  1.  The 
appointment  of  Heaven.  Christ  is  a 
king  by  Divine  right  (Psalm  ii.  6 ;  Acts 
v.  31 ;  Phil.  ii.  9-11).  2.  The  affections 
of  His  subjects.  His  enemies  do  not 
wish  Him  to  reign  over  them,  but  His 
friends  do  (Luke  xix.  27). 

II.  His  empire.  1.  Its  extent.  The 
universe  (Matt,  xxviii.  18),  including 
the  nations  (Dan.  vii.  14),  and  the 
Church  (John  i.  49  ;  xviii.  36  ;  1  Cor. 
xv.  24  ;  Col.  i.  18),  as  well  as  angels, 
principalities,  and  powers  (1  Peter  iii. 
22).  2.  Its  character.  Spiritual,  not 
of  this  world,  a  kingdom  of  truth  and 
righteousness  (John  xviii.  36).  3.  Its 
duration.  Eternal.  It  shall  never 
pass  away  (Rev.  xi.  15)  till  the  end  of 
this  mediatorial  dispensation  (1  Cor. 
xv.  28). 

III.  His  rule.  A  rule  1.  Of  right- 
eousness (Psalm  xlv.  6;  Isa.  xxxii.  1). 
2.  Of  love  (Psalm  ex.  3).  3.  Of  salva- 
tion (Zech.  ix.  9). 

Illustration. — "  After  an  absence  of 
twenty  months  Andrew  Melville  re- 
turned to  Scotland  and  resumed  his 
office  at  St.  Andrew's.  He  was  re- 
peatedly elected  Moderator  of  the 
General  Assembly  and  Rector  of  the 
University.  A  remarkable  instance  of 
his  plain  speaking  took  place  at  Cupar, 
in  1596.  Melville  was  heading  a 
deputation  to  remonstrate  with  the 
king.  James  reminded  the  zealous 
remonstrant  that  he  was  his  vassal. 
'  Sirrah  ! '  retorted  Melville,  *  ye  are 
God's  silly  vassal ;  there  are  two  kings 
and  two  kingdoms  in  Scotland  ;  there 
is  King  James,  the  head  of  this  Com- 
monwealth, and  there  is  Christ  Jesus, 
the  King  of  the  Church,  whose  subject 
James  VI.  is,  and  of  whose  kingdom  he 
is  not  a  king,  nor  a  lord,  nor  a  head, 
but  a  member.'"  (Chambers1  Encyclo- 
pcedia,  art.  Melville,  Andrew). 

Vers.  1-9.  PauVs  Visit  to  Thessalo- 
nica. 

I.  A  time  of  uninterrupted  labour. 
1.  Providing  for  his  own  maintenance 

363 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


2.  Publishing  the  gospel.     3.  Arrang-  III.  A  season  of  spiritual  joy.     Be- 
ing for  the  welfare  of  his  converts.  cause  of — 1.  The  hearty  reception  which 

II.  A  period  of  growing  influence,  his  message  received ;  2.  The  numerous 

Extending  1.  Among  his  own  country-  converts  it  gained;  and  3.  The  practical 

men.      2.  Next   among   the   Gentiles.  influence   these    exerted    in   the   com- 

3.  Finally  among  the  leading  citizens.  munity. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  10—15. 

Paul  and  Silas  among  the  Beroeans  ;  or,  Another  Good  Work  interrupted. 

I.  The  Bercean  Jews  commended. — 1.  Their  noble  disposition.  Though  Beroea, 
now  Karra-Verriaj  to  which  secluded  town  the  three  missionaries  repaired  on 
quitting  the  Macedonian  capital,  lay  only  forty-five  miles  towards  the  south, 
yet  the  character  of  its  Jewish  colony  compared  favourably  with  that  of  the 
larger  city.  Indeed,  the  members  of  its  synagogue  were  "less  obstinate,  less 
sophisticated,"  than  any  Paul  had  elsewhere  •  found.  Their  minds  were  less 
contracted  by  prejudice,  and  their  hearts  less  inspired  by  malice.  Beady  to 
receive  the  word  the  moment  it  was  proved  to  be  true,  they  likewise  showed 
themselves  to  be  profoundly  interested  in  what  the  apostle  preached.  "  The 
nobler  conduct  of  the  Bercean  Jews  consisted  in  their  freedom  from  that 
jealousy,  which  made  the  Jews  in  Thessalonica  and  many  other  places,  en- 
raged when  the  offer  of  salvation  was  made  as  freely  to  others  as  to  them- 
selves" (Bamsay,  St.  Paul,  etc.,  p.  232).  2.  Their  ingenuous  conduct.  Instead 
of  angrily  rejecting  what  was  submitted  to  their  judgment,  they  dealt  with 
it  as  upright  and  honest  men.  (1)  They  accorded  it  a  candid  hearing,  which 
is  more  than  many  nominal  Christians  do;  they  shut  it  not  out  from  their 
understandings  by  preliminary  prejudice  against  or  indifference  towards  it, 
as  is  the  habit  of  many  mederns,  but  frankly  and  openly  allowed  it  to  fill 
their  minds  in  such  a  way  that  at  least  they  accurately  comprehended  its  im- 
port. (2)  They  searched  the  Scriptures  daily  whether  the  doctrines  propounded 
by  Paul  could  be  found  therein,  or  were  by  fair  and  legitimate  argument  deducible 
therefrom.  Instead  of  sitting  in  judgment  on  Paul's  preaching,  and  determining 
if  p.  credibility  hy  a  priori  considerations  suggested  by  the  natural  reason,  they 
humbly  and  respectfully  accepted  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  as  the  ultimate 
court  of  appeal.  If  Paul's  ideas  concerning  Jesus  Christ  could  be  sustained 
before  this  tribunal  then  all  controversy  concerning  them  was  at  an  end  ;  if 
they  could  not,  just  as  decidedly  and  promptly  must  they  be  rejected.  It  was  a 
clear  and  a  fair  issue  which  was  thus  raised.  Probably  Paul  had  the  Beroeans 
in  his  mind  when  he  afterwards  exhorted  the  Thessalonians  to  "prove  all  things 
and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good"  (1  Thess.  v.  21).  (3)  They  in  large  numbers 
believed,  their  example  being  followed  by  not  a  few  Greek  women  and  men, 
both  of  honourable  estate — i.e.,  belonging  to  the  first  families  in  the  town. 
Sopater  of  Beroea  (xx.  4),  it  may  be  presumed,  was  at  this  time  won  for 
Christianity.  In  all  respects  the  Beroeans  afforded  a  worthy  pattern  for  gospel 
hearers. 

II.  The  Thessalonian  Jews  discommended. — 1.  Their  persons  distinguished. 
The  parties  referred  to  are  expressly  stated  to  have  been  the  unbelieving  Jews, 
who  had  stirred  up  the  Thessalonian  populace  against  Paul  and  Silas  (ver.  5),  and 
to  whom,  through  some  secret  channel,  intelligence  had  been  conveyed  of  the 
extraordinary  success  of  these  evangelists  at  Beroea.  2.  Their  motive  specified. 
This  was,  on  the  one  hand,  to  hinder  the  progress  of  the  gospel  which  they  had 
learnt  was  being  preached  with  acceptance  among , the  Beroeans,  and  on  the 
other  hand  to  "  overwhelm  the  apostate  from  the  law  of  Moses  "  (Lewin).  Their 
proper  a  ncestors  were  the  Pharisees  of  Christ's  day,  who  would  neither  enter  into 

364 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xvn. 


the  kingdom  of  heaven  themselves,  nor  suffer  those  who  were  entering  to  go  in 
(Matt,  xxiii.  13),  and  who  ultimately  crucified  the  Prince  of  Life  and  Lord  of 
Glory.  3.  Their  behaviour  described.  Having  come  to  Bercea  they  stirred  up 
and  troubled  the  people  there  as  at  Thessalonica  (ver.  8),  by  circulating  the  same 
calumnies  and  organising  the  same  lewd  fellows  of  the  baser  sort  against  the 
missionaries.  Their  hatred  of  both  Paul  and  his  gospel  unsleepingly  pursued 
him  henceforth  from  city  to  city.  4.  Their  success  recorded.  Not  directly,  but 
indirectly,  by  the  circumstance  narrated  that  Paul's  friends  deemed  it  prudent  to 
hasten  his  departure  from  the  city,  as  the  brethren  in  Thessalonica  had  coun- 
selled his  withdrawal  from  that  city  (ver.  10),  and  as  formerly  other  friends  had 
hurried  him  from  Jerusalem  (ix.  30).  He  had  been  anxious^  to  return  to  his 
converts  in  Thessalonica  (1  Thess.  ii.  18),  but  Satan  in  the  person  of  these 
persecuting  Jews  from  Thessalonica  had  hindered.  The  path  of  providence  for 
him  lay  southwards  to  Athens.  Immediately  therefore  the  brethren  conveyed 
him  as  far  as  the  seaport  of  Dium,  sixteen  miles  from  Bercea,  and  shipped  him 
for  the  Greek  metropolis.  Some  of  them  even  accompanied  him  all  the  way  to 
the  Achaian  capital,  because  Silas  and  Timotheus  were  left  behind  in  Bercea  to 
continue  the  work  which  he  had  so  auspiciously  begun,  to  preach  the  gospel  and 
to  organise  the  Church,  while  he,  the  apostle,  owing  either  to  his  weak  eyesight 
or  to  some  other  bodily  infirmity,  was  not  fit  to  travel  alone. 

Learn. — 1.  The  duty  of  hearing  the  gospel  with  an  open  mind.  2.  The 
propriety  of  proving  all  things  and  holding  fast  that  which  is  good.  3.  The 
suitability  of  the  gospel  for  persons  of  the  highest  estate.  4.  The  inveterate 
hostility  of  the  carnal  heart  against  what  is  good.  5.  The  fickleness  of  crowds. 
6.  The  wisdom  of  attempting  to  preserve  useful  lives.  7.  The  dependence  of 
most  men  upon  the  services  of  others. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  11.  True  Nobility  of  Mind. 
Evinced  in  three  things. 

I.  Readiness  to  receive  the  word. 
II.  Diligence  in  searching  the  Scrip- 
tures. 

III.  Faith  in  the  person  of  Jesus  of 
whom  the  word  speaks. 

Ver.  11.  The  Elements  of  a  Tndy 
Noble  Spirit. — 1.  Attention  to  religion. 
It  is  the  highest  kind  of  truth  and  the 
grandest  object  of  pursuit.  2.  Can- 
dour in  religious  inquiry.  Prejudices 
are  bars  to  fair  dealing.  Idols.  Cob- 
webs. 3.  The  exercise  of  the  right  of 
private  judgment.  It  is  mean  to  sur- 
render this  right  to  a  Pope  or  a  priest. 
It  is  not  less  mean  to  surrender  it  to 
great  thinkers  and  great  dreamers. 
4.  Deference  to  the  authority  of  Scrip- 
ture. Man  never  occupies  a  more  noble 
position  than  when,  like  a  little  child,  he 
submits  his  own  feeble  faculties  to  the 
guidance  of  the  oracles  of  Him  that 
cannot  lie.     It  is  not  worship  of  the 


Book,  but  of  the  infallible  Author  of 
the  Book. — G.  Brooks. 

Searching  the  Scriptures. 

I.  A  blessed  right. — 1.  Conferred  by 
God.  2.  Due  to  man.  3.  Not  to  be 
withheld  by  either  State  or  Chinch. 

II.  A  holy  duty. — 1.  Commanded 
by  God.  2.  To  be  faithfully  per- 
formed. 3.  Not  to  be  neglected  with- 
out sin. 

III.  An  inestimable  privilege.— 
Considering,  1.  Whose  word  the  scrip- 
tures is.  2.  The  benefit  resulting 
therefrom.  3.  The  unworthiness  of  its 
recipients. 

IV.  A  rare  art. — To  be  practised — 
1.  Daily.  2.  With  intelligence.  3.  In 
faith.    4.  Diligently.    5.  With  prayer. 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  Noble  Berceans. 

I.  Heard  the  gospel.— 1.  With  de- 
vout attention.  2.  With  impartial 
candour.  3.  With  careful  investi- 
gation. 

365 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


II.  Experienced  its  effects. — l.They  finally,  to  draw  logically  their  own 
believed  its  statements.  2.  They  en-  conclusions  from  it.  2.  The  fearless 
joyed  its  privileges.  3.  They  obeyed  honesty  and  manly  independence  of 
its  precepts.  spirit  which    ought  to  mark    inquirers 

III.  Exhibited  their  own  nobility,  after  the  truth.  "The  great  question 
— 1 .  Adopted  a  noble  conduct.  2.  Dis-  with  which  the  Beroeans  charged 
played  a  noble  spirit.  3.  Presented  a  themselves  was,  whether  those  things 
noble  example.  were     true     as      the      apostle      put 

them,  whether  they  were  founded  on 

Docility  of  Temper  in  Relation  to  the  fact,  and  were  therefore  accessible  to 

Truth.  the   ordinary   methods   of   moral  con- 

I.  The  teaching,  the  recognition  of  viction.  It  was  not  whether  they 
which  the  writer  commends. — 1.  The  were  agreeable  or  in  harmony  with 
"  word"  more  fully  expounded  in  the  their  preconceptions,  or  with  their  be- 
opening  verses  of  the  chapter,  con-  liefs  and  customs  ;  whether  they  were 
tained  two  propositions — viz.,  (1)  that  ably  reasoned  by  the  apostle  or  ill;  but 
the  Messiah,  when  He  appeared  in  whether  they  were  true." 
accordance  with  the  Scriptures,  was  to  III.  The  result  which  followed  on 
appear  as  a  suffering  Messiah  ;  and  (2)  this  procedure — "Therefore  many  of 
that  the  Jesus  whose  history  and  cruci-  them  believed."  This  result  was — 
fixion  Paul  was  then  recounting,  was,  1.  The  logical  consequence  of  the  ante- 
in  fact,  that  Messiah.  This  a  position  cedent  procedure.  "  Faith,  waiting  on 
which  he  only  would  take,  who  was  the  light  of  evidence,  is  met  by  the 
sure  of  his  ground,  and  who  felt  that  he  evidence  of  light,  and  following  that, 
could  make  it  good  by  the  most  in-  is  led  into  the  liberty  of  truth ;  as  it 
dubi table  proofs.  2.  The  truth  of  always  will  be  in  the  things  of  God. 
this  word  the  apostle  established  "  If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall 
by  an  appeal  to  the  highest  authority —  know  of  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of 
viz.,  the  Scriptures,  "the  Old  Testa-  God."  Will  to  do  first;  know  after- 
ment  documents  in  whose  inspiration  wards.  Obedience  is  the  spirit  in 
he  and  his  Jewish  hearers  equally  be-  which  to  seek.  Knowledge  its  after 
lieved."  "  By  a  careful  comparison  of  product.  2.  The  outcome  of  a  mental 
your  inspired  Scriptures  with  the  process  in  which  several  things  were 
veritable  facts  of  which  our  whole  combined.  "  There  was,  in  the  case  of 
nation  is  cognisant,"  he  practically  these  Beroeans,  first  of  all  a  clear 
said,  "we  have  found,  beyond  all  presentation  of  the  truth  to  the  mind ; 
doubtful  disputation,  that  all  that  was  there  was  then  the  actual  personal 
foreshown,  typified,  and  promised,  con-  contact  of  the  mind,  of  the  individual 
cerning  the  Messiah  of  our  ancient  thought  of  the  hearer,  with  the  truth, 
hope,  has  met  its  fulfilment  in  the  and  a  process  of  reflection  upon  it. 
person  and  history  of  this  Jesus  whom  There  was  a  readiness  to  surrender  all 
I  preach  unto  you."  old    convictions   to   the   authority    of 

II.  The  spirit  in  which  this  teach-  evidence,  at  whatever  cost  of  personal 
ing  was  received. — "  With  all  readi-  state  or  attainment,  and  following 
ness  of  mind."  Here  is — 1.  The  directly  in  the  course  of  this  ingenuous- 
docility  of  temper  which  belongs  to  the  ness  of  intent  and  act,  the  light  came, 
right  reception  of  truth.    "  The  Beroeans  and  they  believed." 

were  in  that  balanced  equipoise  of  mind  Learn. — 1.  The  fitness  of  the  gospel 

which,  equally  removed  from  a  listless  to  deal  with  dissimilar  classes  of  men. 

indifference  on  the  one  hand  and  a  self-  2.   The  great  impediment  in  the  way 

complete  and  haughty  presumption  on  of  a  man's  salvation — which  is  not  in 

the  other,  left  them  at  liberty  to  listen  the  gospel  or  in  the  ministration  of  the 

with  attention  to  the  apostle's  reason-  gospel,  but  in  the  indifference  of  the 

ing,  to  think  dispassionately  on  it,  and,  human  heart  to  religion. — John  Burton. 

366 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xvii. 


"Ver.   13.  Stirring  up  the  Multitudes,  with  all  speed?     There  seems  at  first 

I.  Of  a  true  sort. — 1.  By  the  gospel.  sight  some  inconsistency  here.  But 
2.  Of  noble  minds.  3.  To  the  exercise  again  comparison  between  Acts  and 
of  faith.  4.  For  the  warfare  of  the  Thessalonians  solves  the  difficulty  : 
Spirit.  Paul  was    eager  '  once  and  again '  to 

II.  Of  a  false  sort. — 1.  By  wicked  return  to  Thessalonica,  and  was  wait- 
men.  2.  Of  lewd  fellows.  3.  To  re-  ing  for  news  that  the  impediment 
sist  the  truth.  4.  For  the  persecution  placed  in  his  way  was  removed.  Silas 
of  the  saints.  and  Timothy  remained  to  receive  the 

news  (perhaps    about  the  attitude  of 

Ver.  14.  Silas  and  Timothy  in  Beroea.  the  new  magistrates)  and  to  bring  it 

— "  The  question  naturally  occurs,  Why  on  to  Paul.     But  they  could  not  bring 

did    Paul    go   on   from    Beroea   alone,  it  on  to  him   until  they  received  his 

leaving  Silas  and  Timothy  behind,  and  message  from  Athens." — Bamsay,    St. 

yet  send  orders  immediately  on  reach-  Paul,  etc.,  p.  234. 
ing  Athens  that  they  were  to  join  him 

HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  16—21. 

Paul  at  A  thens  ;  or,  A  lone  in  a  Heathen  City. 

I.  Waiting  for  Silas  and  Timothy. — 1.  Alone.  These  two  friends  having  been 
left  behind  in  Macedonia,  Silas  in  Beroea,  and  perhaps  Timothy  in  Thessalonica, 
to  carry  forward  the  spiritual  movement  which  had  there  been  initiated  when  those 
who  had  brought  the  apostle  as  far  as  to  Athens  had  departed,  he  naturally 
began  to  realise  the  isolation  of  his  position  as  a  stranger  in  a  large  heathen 
city.  Nor  is  it  likely  that  the  brilliant  scenes  on  which  he  gazed  in  that  fair 
metropolis  of  the  ancient  world  did  much  to  relieve  his  depression.  Besides, 
2argely  on  account  of  bodily  weakness,  the  apostle  may  have  felt  himself  in  need 
of  friendly  sympathy  and  assistance  in  order  to  effective  working  in  Athens. 
Hence,  on  sending  back  his  conductors  to  Beroea,  he  deemed  it  prudent  to 
entrust  them  with  instructions  for  both  Silas  and  Timothy  to  rejoin  him  with  all 
speed.  Doubtless  he  expected  to  await  their  arrival  at  Athens ;  but  as  the  turn 
of  events  once  more  constrained  him  to  leave  the  Achaian  capital  sooner  than  he 
had  anticipated,  it  was  not  till  he  had  reached  Corinth  that  his  esteemed 
colleagues  overtook  him  (xviii.  5). — Silas  coming  from  Beroea,  and  Timothy  from 
Thessalonica,  to  which  city  (as  above  conjectured,  though  see  "  Critical 
Remarks,"  and  "  Hints  "  on  ver.  14)  he  had  been  despatched  from  Beroea,  instead 
of  Paul  (1  Thess.  ii.  18).  Meanwhile  the  apostle  found  himself  in  Athens 
alone  (1  Thess.  iii.  1).  Yet,  2.  Not  alone.  Like  his  glorified  Master,  who,  in 
the  days  of  His  flesh,  when  forsaken  by  His  disciples,  affirmed  that  though  alone 
He  was  yet  not  alone,  because  the  Father  was  with  Him  (John  xvi.  32),  the 
apostle  in  his  solitude  enjoyed  first  the  companionship  of  that  gracious  Lord  on 
whose  business  he  had  come  to  Athens,  who  had  said,  "  Lo  !  I  am  with  you 
always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world "  (Matt,  xxviii.  20),  and  whose 
"comforts,"  it  need  not  be  doubted,  in  that  season  of  " thoughtf ulness  "  de- 
lighted his  soul  (Psalm  xciv.  19).  Then,  like  him  who  said  he  was  "  never  less 
alone  than  when  alone,"  the  apostle  had  the  fellowship  of  his  own  thoughts, 
which,  if  they  had  much  to  depress,  were  fitted  also  in  no  small  measure  to 
cheer.  The  recollection  of  the  toils  and  sufferings  he  had  passed  through 
since  entering  on  his  lifework  of  preaching  the  gospel  to  the  heathen  could 
hardly  fail  at  times  to  cast  "the  pale  hue  of  sickly  thought "  upon  his  spirit, 
though  even  that  could  not  daunt  his  heroic  soul.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
remembrance  of  how  he  had  been  sustained  throughout  his  arduous  warfare, 
and  of  how  astonishingly   the   work   of  the  Lord  had  prospered  in  his  hand, 

367 


chap.  xvii.       IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


would  more  than  counterbalance  his  depressing  reminiscences.  Lastly,  he  might 
have  found,  though  it  is  doubtful  if  he  did,  in  the  fresh  scenes  upon  which  he 
gazed  in  that  brilliant  capital,  the  means  of  relieving  the  tedium  of  his  lonely 
hours.  "  It  was  at  Athens,"  writes  Farrar,  "  that  the  human  form,  sedulously  ^ 
trained,  attained  its  most  exquisite  and  winning  beauty ;  there  that  human 
freedom  put  forth  its  most  splendid  power  j  there  that  human  eloquence  displayed 
its  utmost  subtlety  and  grace  ;  there  that-  art  reached  to  its  most  consummate 
perfection ;  there  that  poetry  uttered  alike  its  sweetest  and  itssublimest  strains  ; 
there  that  philosophy  attained  to  the  most  perfect  music  of  human  expression, 
its  loftiest  and  deepest  thoughts  "  ;  but  it  may  be  questioned  if  these  considera- 
tions affected  Paul  with  the  like  enthusiasm  they  inspire  in  the  breast  of  modern 
travellers. 

II.  Surveying  the  Athenian  city. — 1.  The  spectacle  he  beheld.  That  which 
arrested  Paul's  attention,  presumably  from  the  moment  of  his  landing  at  the 
harbour  of  Piraeus,  as  he  walked  up  slowly  between  the  ruins  of  the  Long  Walls 
towards  the  shining  city,  and  while  he,  later  on,  sauntered  through  its  streets 
and  lingered  in  its  market-place,  was  not  its  geographical  situation,  or  its 
architectural  beauty,  or  its  air  of  culture  and  refinement,  but  its  religious 
condition.  Like  Babylon  of  old,  which  was  "  a  land  of  graven  images,"  and 
whose  people  were  "mad  upon  idols"  (Jer.  1.  38),  the  Athens  of  Paul's  day  was 
"  wholly  given  over  to  idolatry,"  literally  stuffed  full  of  idols.  "  A  person  could 
hardly  take  his  position  at  any  point  in  ancient  Athens  where  the  eye  did  not 
range  over  temples  and  statues  of  the  gods  almost  without  number"  (Hackett). 
Petronius  [Satires,  17)  was  wont  to  say  that  it  was  easier  to  find  a  god  at  Athens 
than  a  man  ;  while,  according  to  Pausamas,  Athens  had  more  images  than  all 
the  rest  of  Greece  put  together.  Some  of  the  streets  were  so  crowded  with  those 
who  sold  idols  that  it  was  almost  impossible  to  make  one's  way  through  them. 
"  Every  god  in  Olympus  found  a  place  in  the  Agora  ;  and  as  if  the  imagination 
of  the  Attic  mind  knew  no  bounds  in  this  direction}  abstractions  were  deified 
and  publicly  honoured.  Altars  were  erected  to  fame,  to  modesty,  to  energy,  to 
persuasion,  to  pity"  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  i.  328,  329).  Finally,  lest  any 
divinity  should  be  overlooked,  the  inhabitants  had  erected  an  altar  with  this 
inscription,  "  To  the  unknown  God."  It  is  of  course  objected  that  ancient 
writers,  such  as  Pausanias  and  Philostratus,  only  knew  of  altars  "  to  unknown 
gods  "  not  "  to  an,  or  the,  unknown  god  "  ;  but  neither  can  their  ignorance  be 
allowed  to  invalidate  the  testimony  of  Paul,  nor  can  it  be  incontrovertibly 
demonstrated  that  the  "  altars  of  unknown  gods  mentioned  by  the  above  writers 
referred  to  a  plurality  of  deities,  and  not  to  a  plurality  of  altars ;  while,  even 
if  the  former  supposition  be  accepted  as  correct^  it  does  not  follow  that  Paul  may 
not  have  observed  one  inscribed  as  Luke  reports.  There  is  even  a  "great 
probability  that  by  '  the  unknown  God  '  was  actually  m^ant  Jehovah  "  (Lewin). 
2.  The  feeling  it  aroused.  "  His  spirit  was  stirred  within  him,"  provoked  or 
filled  with  indignation ;  (1)  at  the  profanation  of  the  holy  name  of  God  implied, 
in  the  very  existence  of  an  idol ;  (2)  at  the  prostitution  of  manhood  exhibited  in 
the  worship  of  a  graven  image  ;  (3)  at  the  unspeakable  source  of  moral  corruption 
opened  in  the  degrading  rites  by  which  such  divinities  were  honoured ;  and 
(4)  at  the  terrible  display  of  Satanic  power  given  in  the  subjection  of  a  whole 
city  to  such  a  caricature  of  religion  as  idolatry  really  was.  Nor  would  the 
apostle's  indignation  be  lessened,  but  immensely  heightened,  by  the  fact  that  in 
Jerusalem  he  had  never  witnessed  an  idol. 

II.  Disputing  with  its  inhabitants. — 1.  Where,  and  when?  (1)  In  the 
synagogue  on  the  Sabbath.  Although  "no  trace  of  any  building  which  could 
have  been  a  synagogue  has  been  found  at  Athens  "  (Farrar),  there  is  no  ground 
for  calling  in  question  the  accuracy  of  Luke's  statement  that  one  existed  there  in 

368 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvn. 


Paul's  day,  and  that  Paul,  according  to  his  wont  (ver.  2),  entered  it  on  the 
Sabbath.  (2)  In  the  market-place  on  the  other  days  of  the  week.  Located  at 
the  foot  of  the  Acropolis  and  the  Areopagus,  the  market-place  of  Athens  was  a 
busy  scene.  "  Around  were  porticoes  fitted  up  as  bazaars  for  the  sale  of  a 
thousand  articles  of  commerce ;  here  and  there  were  circular  sheds,  one  for  the 
sale  of  slaves,  another  of  provisions.  In  one  place  was  the  flesh  market,  in 
another  the  horse  market ;  here  the  mart  of  books,  there  the  stalls  of  fruit  and 
flowers"  (Lewin).  2.  With  whom,  and  .about  what  ?  (1)  On  the  Sabbath  day 
or  days  in  the  synagogue  with  the  Jews  and  devout  persons  or  proselytes  there 
assembled ;  and  the  fact  that  there  were  Jews  and  proselytes  in  the  Greek 
capital  shows  that  even  in  that  idolatrous  city  the  name  of  Jehovah  could  not 
have  been  utterly  unknown.  On  the  week  days  in  the  market-place  with  those 
encountered  there,  amongst  whom  mingled  representatives  of  the  various  schools 
of  philosophy  for  which  Athens  was  celebrated  (see  below).  (2)  With  the  former 
his  theme  of  disputation  would  be  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus,  which,  as  on  other 
occasions,  he  would  endeavour  to  establish  from  the  Scriptures  (vers;  2,  3)  ;  with 
the  latter  he  would  reason  not  about  philosophy  or  science,  politics  or  trade,  but 
about  religion  and  theology,  and,  in  particular,  about  the  true  knowledge  of  God 
and  about  the  folly  of  idol  worship,  about  the  true  wisdom  which  descended  from 
heaven,  and  about  the  resurrection  and  eternal  life. 

IV.  Confronting  the  philosophers. — 1.  Their  designations.  (1)  Epcjiraans. 
The  founder  of  this  sect,  Epicurus,  born  342  B.C. — i.e.,  six  years  after  the  death 
of  Plato,  in  his  thirty-sixth  year — opened  at  Athens  a  philosophical  school,  over 
which  he  presided  till  his  death  in  B.C.  270.  The  principal  tenets  of  his 
philosophy  were,  that  the  summum  bonum  of  human  life  consisted  in  happiness 
or  pleasure ;  that  this  happiness  was  to  be  found  in  sobriety  and  temperance, 
contentment  with  little  and  a  life  generally  in  accord  with  nature ;  that  death 
was  not  an  evil  to  be  feared  ;  that  man  has  no  moral  destiny  ;  and  that  the  gods 
which  in  his  system  were  more  phantoms  than  gods,  took  no  manner  of  interest 
in  mundane  affairs  (Schwegler's  History  of  Philosophy,  pp.  131-134).  With 
his  followers  happiness  became  convertible  with  sensual  pleasures  (1  Cor.  xv.  32), 
belief  in  inert  and  shadowy  divinities  degenerated  into  practical  atheism,  and 
man's  soul,  if  he  had  one,  was  nothing  but  a  body  composed  of  finer  atoms  than 
the  fleshly  tabernacle  in  which  it  was  enshrined.  They  were  thus  the  Greek 
Saclducees  of  their  day.  (2)  The  Stoics.  Followers  of  Zeno,  who  was  born  in 
Citium,  a  town  of  Cyprus  about  340  B.C.,  and  opened  a  school  in  an  Athenian 
arcade  (Stoa,  whence  the  name  Stoic),  these  were  virtually  pantheists,  who 
believed  that  the  world  was  God's  body,  and  God  the  world's  soul,  that  the 
highest  law  of  human  action  was  to  live  in  accordance  with  nature,  and  that 
virtue,  apart  from  all  personal  ends,  was  man's  sole  good ;  but  in  point  of  fact 
they  were  commonly  nothing  better  than  fatalists,  who  boasted  of  their  indifference 
to  the  world,  and  affected  an  ideal  of  morals  which  in  practice  became  unreal 
(Schwegler,  pp.  123-131).  2.  Their  exclamations.  (1)  What  will  this  babbler 
say  ?  Better,  what  might  this  seed  picker,  this  idle  prater  mean?  I.e.,  if  he  has 
any  meaning.  These  depositaries  of  the  world's  wisdom  looked  upon  the  apostle 
as  only  another  specimen  of  those  market-place  loungers  and  gossips  who  pickeel 
up  scraps  of  information  and  retailed  them  to  others,  and  whom  the  quick-witted 
humorists  of  the  day  likened  to  a  sparrow,  rook,  or  other  bird  which  hopped  about 
the  streets  and  squares  of  the  city  picking  up  crumbs  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  " 
on  ver.  18).  (2)  He  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods  (or  daemons) — 
the  very  charge  preferred  against  Socrates  (Xen.,  Mem.,  i.  1,  §  1)— "  because," 
Luke  explains,  "he  preached  unto  them  Jesus  and  the  resurrection."  This, 
the  reason  advanced  by  the  philosophers  for  their  exclamation,  Luke  must  have 
learnt  from  Paul  himself.      The  philosophers,  it   has  been   thought,   mistook 

bb  369 


chap.  xvii.       HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Anastasis  for  the  name  of  a  second  divinity  in  addition  to  Jesus  (Chrysostom, 
Theophylact,  Spence,  Plumptre,  Holtzmann) ;  but  it  is  more  likely  that  the  gods 
referred  to  were  the  God  of  the  Hebrews,  the  true  God  and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ 
(Alford,  Haekett,  De  Wette).  3.  Their  interrogations.  (1)  Where  these  were 
put.  At  the  Areopagus  or  Mars'  Hill,  "  where  the  most  awful  court  of 
judicature  had  sat  from  time  immemorial,  to  pass  sentence  on  the  greatest 
criminals,  and  to  decide  the  most  solemn  questions  connected  with  religion.  The 
judges  sat  in  the  open  air  upon  seats  hewn  out  in  the  rock,  on  a  platform 
ascended  by  a  flight  of  stones  immediately  from  the  '  Agora '  "  (Oonybeare  and 
Howson,  i.  346).  (2)  How  these  were  put !  "  May  we  know  what  this  new 
doctrine  or  teaching  is  that  is  spoken  by  thee  ?  "  "  We  would  know  what  these 
things  mean."  The  questions  do  not  indicate  that  Paul  was  formally  arraigned, 
but  merely  that  he  was  called  upon  to  furnish  an  explanation  of  the  theological 
novelties  to  which  they  had  listened — which,  all  things  considered,  was  a  fair 
enough  demand.  The  words  in  which  their  demand  was  couched  do  not 
resemble  those  in  which  a  prisoner  at  the  bar  is  addressed  by  a  judge ;  nor  does 
the  speech,  made  by  Paul  in  reply,  in  the  least  degree  resemble  a  defence. 
(3)  Why  these  were  put.  Partly  out  of. a  desire  for  information — the  teaching 
sounded  strange  to  their  ears — but  chiefly  out  of  idle  curiosity,  which  was 
a  notorious  characteristic  of  the  Athenians  (see,  however,  "  Critical  Remarks " 
and  "  Hints  "  on  ver.  19). 

Learn. — 1.  The  essential  loneliness  of  God's  people  in  a  sinful  world.  2.  The 
earnest  activity  which  Christ's  servants  should  everywhere  exhibit.  3.  The 
natural  incapacity  of  the  human  heart  to  comprehend  the  gospel.  4.  The  two 
principal  obstacles  to  the  reception  of  the  truth,  pleasure  and  pride.  5.  The 
comparative  frivolity  of  all  earthly  engagements  in  comparison  with  the  business 
of  salvation. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.    16.  Athens  :  A  Mierocosmus. —  e.g.,  the  All,  the  Great  Unknown,  the 

A  city —  Power  behind  the  Visible,  etc. 

I.  Of  degraded  idolaters,  who  wor-  IV.  Material  possessions. — Such  as 
shipped  the  creature  more  than  the  are  worshipped  under  the  names  of 
Creator.  Mammon,     Wealth,    Riches,     by    all 

II.  Of  ignorant   philosophers,  who     classes  of  society, 
professed  themselves   to   be  wise,  but 

were  all  the  while  fools.  Jesus  and  the  Resurrection.     Jesus — 

III.  Of  arrant  triflers,  who  had  no  I.  The  efficient  cause  (John  v.  25). 
just   conception  of    the  seriousness  of          II.  The  personal  principle  (John  xi. 
life.  25). 

III.  The  archetypal  pattern  (Phil. 
Ver.  18.     Strange  Gods.  iii.  21). 

I.  Senseless  images. — Dumb  idols  IV.  The  first  fruits  of  the  Resurrec- 
such  as  were  and  are  worshipped  by      tion  (1  Cor.  xv.  23). 

the  heathen. 

II.  Local  divinities. — Such  deities  The  Athenian  Philosophers  and  their 
as  were  supposed    to  be   restricted  to      Relation  to  Christianity. 

particular  lands  and  peoples — e.g.,  the  I.  The  Epicureans. — "The  Epicurean 

gods  of   the   Egyptians,    Babylonians,  system    was   essentially    materialistic. 

Phoenicians,  etc.  The  senses  formed  the   only  source  of 

III.  Impersonal  abstractions. — Such  knowledge.  The  world  was  traced 
as  are  worshipped  by  philosophers  and  back  to  atoms,  out  of  whose  accidental 
others,   both  ancient  and  modern  ;„.  as  concurrence   all   things   were   formed. 

370  / 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xvii. 


Even  the  soul  was  said  to  be  only  a 
body  of  ethereal  and  fiery  substance 
fashioned  out  of  fine  atoms.  Hence  the 
immortality  of  the  soul  was  a  delusion, 
the  freedom  of  the  will  a  deception, 
and  the  gods  superfluous ;  only  quite 
illogically  Epicurus  allowed  them  to 
exist,  but  denied  them  all  world-govern- 
ment and  participation  in  the  fortunes 
of  men.  The  highest  good  of  man, 
placed  as  he  is  in  this  senseless  and 
heartless  existence,  is  pleasure ;  wis- 
dom to  attain  to  the  highest  measure 
of  this  in  life ;  and  virtue,  the  con- 
duct leading  to  this  aim." 

II.  The  Stoics.— "  The  Stoical  sys- 
tem, on  the  other  hand,  was  essentially 
pantheistic.  It  distinguished  in  the 
world — all,  matter  and  force.  It  named 
the  latter  in  relation  to  the  whole,  it 
is  true,  Reason,  Providence,  Godhead, 
but  thought  of  it  only  as  not  self- 
existent,  impersonal,  and  therefore  also 
not  truly  spiritual  essence,  as  an  all- 
forming  and  all-animating  fire  which 
brings  forth  the  creatures  and  the 
worlds  and  again  destroys  them.  The 
human  soul,  a  spark  of  this  imper- 
sonal godhead,  and  consequently  with- 
out immortality,  has,  according  to  the 
Stoics,  its  highest  good  in  virtue;  but 
virtue  is  a  life  in  accordance  with 
nature,  the  agreement  of  the  human 
will  with  the  law  of  the  world,  con- 
sequently above  all  resignation  in 
presence  of  world-governing  fate." 

III.  Their  relation  to  Christianity. 
; — "  According  to  these  doctrines  of  the 
Epicureans  and  Stoics,  which  present 
numerous  resemblances  to  modern  un- 
christian modes  of  thinking,  it  is 
conceivable  that  both,  notwithstand- 
ing their  different  views  of  the  world 
and  of  morals,  should  have  agreed, 
with  reference  to  the  gospel  of  the 
apostle,  to  see  in  it  a  new  Oriental 
enthusiasm  desirous  of  being  admitted 
to  Greek  philosophical  rank  and  es- 
pecially in  the  resurrection  message,  a 
fable  to  be  laughed  at." — Beyschlag. 

Ver.  19.  The  Teaching  of  Chris- 
tianity at  Once,  Old  and  New. 

I.    Old,  as  the    fall    of  man,  being 


contained  in  the  first  promise ;  New, 
as  the  latest  need  of  man,  being  able 
to  adapt  itself  to  the  ever-varying 
phases  of  human  civilisation. 

II.  Old,  as  the  outgrowth  of  the 
Hebrew  dispensation  ;  New,  as  the  sub- 
stance of  a  fresh  revelation. 

III.  Old,  as  being  the  subject  of 
prophetic  anticipation ;  New,  as  being 
the  burden  of  a  specially  sent  teacher, 
Christ. 

IV.  Old,  as  gathering  up  and  crown- 
ing all  God's  utterances  in  the  past  ; 
New,  as  exhibiting  all  that  is  required 
to  meet  the  exigencies  of  the  future. 

The  New  Doctrines  of  Christianity. 

I.  The  unity  of  God. — Though  not 
new  to  the  Jews  it  was  new  to  the 
Athenians. 

II.  The  brotherhood  of  man.  — 
Even  to  the  Jews  as  well  as  Greeks 
this  was  an  unheard-of  idea. 

III.  The  resurrection  of  Christ. — 
To  both  Jew  and  Greek  this  was  a 
stumbling  block  and  a  strange  thing. 

IV.  The  reality  of  a  judgment 
day. — The  conception  of  such  a  general 
assize  had  never  before  entered  into 
the  world's  mind. 

V.  The  duty  of  repentance. — Men 
may  previously  have  admitted  the 
necessity  in  certain  cases  of  reforma- 
tion. Repentance  in  the  sense  of 
godly  sorrow  for  sin  against  God  was 
a  novelty. 

Unto  the  Areopagus;  or,  In  the 
University  at  Athens. — "Two  ques- 
tions have  to  be  answered  in  regard  to 
the  scene  that  follows  :  Why  was  Paul 
taken  before  the  council  ?  and  what 
were  the  intentions  of  the  philosophers 
in  taking:  him  there?  1.  It  is  clear 
that  Paul  appeared  to  the  philosophers 
as  one  of  the  many  ambitious  teachers 
who  came  to  Athens  hoping  to  find 
fame  and  fortune  at  the  great  centre 
of  education.  Now,  certain  powers 
were  vested  in  the  council  of  Areopagus 
to  appoint  or  invite  lecturers  at  Athens, 
and  to  exercise  some  control  over  the 
lecturers   in    the   interests   of    public 

371 


chap.  xvii.       1I0MILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


order  and  morality.  There  is  an  almost 
complete  lack  of  evidence  what  were 
the  advantages  and  the  legal  rights  of 
a  lecturer  thus  appointed,  and  to  what 
extent  or  in  what  way  a  strange 
teacher  could  find  freedom  to  lecture 
in  Athens.  There  existed  something 
in  the  way  of  privileges  vested  in  the 
recognised  lecturers  ;  for  the  fact  that 
Cicero  induced  the  Areopagus  to  pass 
a  decree  inviting  Cratippus,  the  peri- 
patetic philosopher,  to  become  a  lec- 
turer in  Athens,  implies  that  some 
advantage  was  thereby  secured  to  him. 
There  certainly  also  existed  much  free- 
dom for  foreigners  to  become  lecturers 
in  Athens,  for  the  great  majority  of 
the  Athenian  professors  and  lecturers 
were  foreign.  The  scene  described  in 
vers.  18-34  seems  to  prove  that  the 
recognised  lecturers  could  take  a 
strange  lecturer  before  the  Areopagus, 
and  require  him  to  give  an  account  of 
his  teaching,  and  pass  a  test  as  to  its 
character.  2.  When  they  (the  philo- 
sophers) took  him  to  the  court  to 
satisfy  the  supreme  university  tribunal 
of  his  qualifications,  they  probably 
entertained  some  hope  that  he. would 
be  overawed  before  that  august  body, 
or  that  his  teaching  might  not  pass 
muster,  as  being  of  an  unsettling  ten- 
dency (for  no  body  is  so  conservative 
as  a  university  court)." — Ramsay, 
St.  Paul,  the  Traveller  and  the  Roman 
Citizen,  pp.  246,  247. 

Ver.  21,  with  Rev.  xxi.  5.  The  Idolatry 
of  Novelty. — It  cannot  be  denied  that 
there  is  in  all  lives — probably  not  least 
in  the  busiest  and  the  loftiest — an  ele- 
ment of  dulness.  This  is  only  to  say 
that  there  must  be  routine  in  every  life 
which  is  either  active  or  useful.  The 
Athenians  of  the  first  text  were  not  mere 
gossips  or  newsmongers.  The  first  sound 
of  the  words  does  them  some  injustice. 
Their  idolatry  of  novelty  by  no  means 
exhausted  itself  in  inventing  or  em- 
bellishing or  retailing  scandalous  or 
mischievous  stories  against  the  great 
men  of  their  city,  or  against  humbler 
neighbours  "  dwelling  securely  by 
them."     Their  treatment  of  St.  Paul 

372 


shows  this.  He  was  not  a  man  of 
sufficient  notoriety  or  sufficient  import- 
ance to  attract  the  attention  of  the 
mere  tattler  or  scandalmonger.  It 
was  because  he  raised  grave  ques- 
tions, going  to  the  very  root  of  the 
national  and  individual  life — questions 
of  "  Jesus  "  and  of  "  resurrection  " — 
that  these  idolaters  of  novelty  were 
attracted.  The  idolatry  of  novelty 
has  a  wide  range.  There  are  those 
amongst  us  whose  idolatry  of  novelty 
never  rises  to  the  level  of  the  Athenian. 
In  vain  for  them  the  preaching  in  ten 
thousand  churches  of  Jesus  and  the 
resurrection,  even  could  that  doctrine 
be  for  once  new.  Enough  for  them 
the  last  new  fashion  in  dress,  the  last 
new  horror  in  the  police-courts,  the  last 
new  tragedy  or  comedy  in  the  news- 
papers, the  last  new  mystery  or  the 
last  new  misadventure  in  society. 
This  sort  of  idolatry  of  novelty,  this 
base,  vulgar,  grovelling  curiosity,  is  of 
no  value  whatever  beyond  the  evidence 
which  it  affords,  more  than  half  by 
negatives,  to  the  instinct  which  is  in 
all  of  us  that  this  is  not  our  rest.  It 
may  be  enough  to  say  of  this  worship 
of  novelty,  that,  as  often  as  not,  per- 
haps (if  we  knew  all)  in  nine  cases  out 
of  ten,  it  is  but  another  name  for  the 
worship  of  falsehood.  ISTo  trouble 
whatever  is  taken  by  the  caterers  for 
this  table  to  make  sure  whether  its 
supply  has  anything  more  in  it 
than  a  germ,  if  even  a  germ,  of  fact 
however  worthless.  But  in  itself, 
even  where  "  news "  and  "  lies " 
are  not  synonyms,  how  paltry,  how 
unworthy  of  an  immortal  being  is 
this  form  of  the  idolatry  of  novelty ! 
Let  us  try  it  in  another  and  higher 
region — the  region  of  art  and  litera- 
ture. -  There  the  idolatry  of  novelty 
becomes  the  worship  of  originality. 
And  need  I  say  what  the  effort  to  be 
original  becomes  in  the  hands  of  the 
commonplace?  Need  I  speak  of  the 
exaggerations,  the  contortions,  the 
burlesques  of  the  would-be  originalities 
of  landscape  and  portrait-painting  1 
Alas  !  the  rage  for  novelty  does  not 
exhaust  itself  in  the  province  of  art. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xvii. 


It  is  the  condition  of  success  in  the 
historian,  to  invert  received  opinions  of 
character,  and  to  rewrite  history  itself 
into  contraries.  But  the  mischief 
stops  not  even  here.  The  preacher 
himself  is  tried  by  his  originality.  A 
cruel  trial  this  for  the  weak,  vain  man, 
who  is  miserable  without  an  audience, 
and  must  purchase  it  at  any  cost. 
Yet  how  preferable  any  dulness  to  this 
sort  of  brilliancy !  The  subject 
widens  before  us,  and  we  must  lose  no 
more  time  in  bringing  it  to  its  practical 
application  in  the  one  higher  province 
still.  The  Athenian  development  of 
the  worship  of  novelty  will  be  our  guide 
here.  We  can  scarcely  wonder  that 
the  fanciful  mythology  of  the  earlier 
days  of  that  wonderful  people  should 
have  sunk,  before  the  Christian  era, 
from  a  beautiful  though  insubstantial 
faith  into  a  cold  and  half-conscious 
hypocrisy — a  miserable  form  for  the 
many,  a  political  expedient  for  the  few. 
Philosophers  and  statesmen  had  long 
ceased  to  worship.  But  the  former 
dreamed  and  the  latter  acted  in  agree- 
ment thus  far — that  a  thorough  icono- 
clasm  would  be  dangerous,  if  not  to  the 
welfare  of  the  people,  at  least  to  the 
tranquillity  of  the  State.  That  altar  of 
which  St.  Paul  availed  himself  with 
such  skill  in  his  address  on  Mars'  Hill, 
"  To  the  Unknown  God,"  was  probably 
the  only  one  which  had  any  honest 
votary  in  the  then  population  of 
Athens.  Those  Athenians  might  well 
have  an  open  ear  for  the  preacher  of  a 
new  divinity.  This  was  but  to  confess, 
what  was  no  secret  by  this  time,  that 
iheir  anonymous  altar  was  still  stand- 
ing, and  that  they  waited  to  worship 
till  it  had  a  name.  For  them  the 
idolatry  of  novelty  was  their  hope  and 
their  religion.  Alas,  brethren,  that 
we  should  have  come  round  again  to 
those  days  !  After  all  these  centuries 
we  too  are  left  with  an  anonymous 
altar,  and  the  worship  of  English  hearts 
is  offered  once  again  at  the  shrine  of  an 
unknown,  an  avowedly  unknowable, 
God.  There  is  not  an  arrival  of  a 
so-called  new  apostle,  there  is  not  an 
importation  of  a  so-called  new  divinity, 


for  which  this  modern  Athens  has  not 
at  least  one  of  its  ears  open.  There  is 
no  pretence  and  no  burlesque  of  a  new 
commerce  with  the  invisible,  which 
cannot  hold  its  seances  in  darkened 
chambers  with  a  certainty  of  a  sufficient 
gathering  and  a  great  probability  of  a 
crowd  of  awe -struck  questioners  out- 
side. We  are  told  that  some  one  has 
dared  to  say,  within  the  Christian 
Church  of  London,  that  Buddha  him- 
self is  second  only  (if  second)  to  Jesus 
Christ  in  morals,  and  superior  to  Christ 
Himself  in  this,  that  he  never  claimed 
for  himself  divinity.  The  idolatry  of 
novelty  can  no  further  go — at  least  not 
while  "  he  who  now  letteth  will  let  " — 
but  soon  he  shall  be  taken  out  of  the 
way,  and  then  shall  "  the  lawless  one  " 
be  revealed — to  be  unmasked  and  con- 
sumed in  his  season  by  the  One 
mightier.  We  will  turn  now  to  the 
other  and  better  half  of  the  subject, 
and  try  to  show,  in  a  few  concluding 
sentences,  how  considerately,  how  mer- 
cifully, our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  His 
Heavenly  Father  our  Lord  God,  enters 
into  that  natural  want  of  something 
new,  which  lies  at  the  root  of  the 
worship  of  the  ugly  idol  which  we  have 
sought  to  characterise  in  this  sermon. 
Do  you  suppose  that  Jesus  Christ,  God 
in  Christ,  is  unaware,  as  of  the  many 
woes  and  crimes  of  earth,  so  of  this 
particular  feature  of  it,  and  specially 
of  this  earth  of  England  and  London 
— its  flatness,  its  staleness,  its  dulness, 
its  monotony,  as  it  is  felt  certainly  in 
all  but  its  ten  thousand  upper  lives — 
and  what  are  they  among  the  teeming 
multitudes  which  make  up  the  popula- 
tion of  either  1  What  is  the  second 
text  of  this  morning  ?  "  He  that 
sitteth  upon  the  throne  saith,  Behold, 
I  make  all  things  new."  The  very 
feeling,  the  very  sense  of  monotony 
which  has  made  impatient  man  set  up 
this  paltry  idol  of  novelty — is  here 
provided  for  by  God  Himself  saying, 
"  Behold  I  make  (not  a  few  things, 
but)  all  things  new."  Yes,  you  will 
say — somewhere  and  some  day,  in  that 
visionary  region,  in  that  far-off  un- 
realisable  world,  of  which  St.  John's 

373 


chap.  xvn.      H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Apocalypse  tells.      Well — despise   not  of  fulfilling  the  promise  of  renovation, 

the  world  to  come.     Think  not  scorn  One  is    by  the   renewal   of  the   thing 

of  that  pleasant  land.     But  let  me  tell  itself — the  other  is  by  the  renewal  of 

you  of  a  nearer  "  making  all  things  the  eye  that  views  it.     If  the  one  is 

new."     Let  me  tell  you  of  it  first  in  a  the  promise  of  the  text,  the  other  is  the 

word  of  St.  John,  and  then  finally  in  a  promise  elsewhere  alike  of  St.  John  and 

word  of  St.  Paul.     There  are  two  ways  St.  Paul. — Dean  Vaughan. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  22—34. 

Paul  on  Areopagus  ;  or,  Preaching  to  Philosophers. 

I.  The  courteous  exordium. — 1.  A  respectful  salutation.  "  Ye  men  of  Athens," 
die  style  of  address  with  which  their  renowned  orators  had  made  them  familiar. 
Had  Paul  been  defending  himself  before  judges  he  would  probably  have  said : 
avSpes  SiKao-rai  2.  A  complimentary  ascription.  Possible  that  he  characterised 
his  hearers  as  "  too  "  or  "  somewhat  superstitious  "  (R.V.),  but  more  likely  that 
he  called  them  more  religious — i.e.,  more  occupied  with  and  devoted  to  religion 
than  others  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  As  a  mere  matter  of  good  taste  he  could 
hardly  have  expected  to  gain  their  ears  by  reproaching  them  as  superstitious ; 
the  course  of  his  subsequent  remarks  shows  he  regarded  their  devotion  to  religion 
as  something  in  itself  good,  which  only  needed  to  be  instructed  and  guided  to 
become  better.  3.  A  pleasing  intimation.  That  he  had  been  wandering  through 
their  streets,  closely  observing,  not  their  devotions  (A.V.),  but  the  objects 
of  their  devotion,  such  as  their  temples,  images,  altars,  and  the  like,  and  in 
particular  that  he  had  noted  one  altar  more  remarkable  than  the  rest,  on 
account  of  its  inscription,  which  ran:  "To  the  (or  to  an)  unknown  God"  (see 
"  Critical  Remarks").  4.  A  startling  declaration.  That  he,  whom  they  had  ju.-t 
denounced  as  a  babbler,  was  prepared  to  acquaint  them  with  the  true  personality 
and  character  of  that  divinity  they  were  ignorantly  worshipping.  What  with 
all  their  wisdom  they  had  not  been  able  to  attain  to  (1  Cor.  i.  21),  a  just  know- 
ledge of  the  true  God,  he  was  ready  and  willing  to  impart.  By  no  means  a 
modest  pretension  ;  yet  splendidly  fulfilled. 

II.  The  weighty  sermon. — Three  main  divisions.  1.  The  relation  of  God  to  the 
vjorld  (vers.  24,  25).  The  Supreme  Being  was  exhibited  in  five  different  aspects. 
(1)  As  Creator  of  the  world.  A  truth  denied  by  both  sects  of  the  philosophers 
who  listened  to  the  apostle,  but  frequently  affirmed  by  the  apostle  (xiv.  15  ; 
Pom.  xi.  36  ;  2  Cor.  v.  18  ;  Eph.  iii.  9),  and  other  New-Testament  writers 
(Heb.  iii.  4;  Rev.  iv.  11).  (2)  As  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  (Matt.  xi.  25; 
compare  Gen.  xiii.  22) ;  the  absolute  ownership  of  the  universe  flowing  of 
necessity  from  God's  relationship  to  it  as  Creator  (Rom.  x.  12).  (3)  As 
filling  immensity  with  His  presence,  and  therefore  as  incapable  of  being 
confined  like  idols  in  temples  made  with  hands  (compare  vii.  49).  That 
the  heathen  failed  to  distinguish  between  the  Deity  and  His  image,  see 
xix.  26.  (4)  As  self -sufficient  and  therefore  as  independent  of  His  creatures. 
Incapable  of  being  profited  by  any  service  that  might  be  rendered  by  man's 
hands,  God  was  equally  removed  above  the  necessity  of  requiring  such  service 
(Psalm  1.  9-13).  In  both  respects  He  transcended  the  divinities  they  worshipped, 
who  not  only  inhabited  and  were  confined  to  their  shrines,  but  were  supposed 
to  be  in  need  of  and  to  be  benefited  by  the  sacrifices  laid  upon  their  altars 
(compare  Iliad,  i.  37).  (5)  As  the  source  of  life  and  blessing  to  His  dependent 
creatures.  "  Seeing  He  Himself  giveth  to  all  life  and  for  the  continuance  of  the 
same  breath,  and  all  things  they  require  (compare  xiv.  17;  Psalm  civ.  14,  15, 
27,  28,  cxlv.  15,  16;  Matt.  v.  45 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17).  2.  The  dignity  and  destiny 
of  man  (vers.  26-29).  (1)  As  forming  a  divinely  constituted  brotherhood,  all 
nations,  or  every  nation,  of  men  having  been  made  of  one  blood,  or  simply  of  one 

374 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xvii. 


(stock,  or  blood  must  be  supplied),  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth.  A 
magnificent  conception,  abundantly  asserted  in  Scripture  (Gen.  i.  26,  27 ; 
Deut.  iv.  32;  Psalm  lxxxvi.  9;  Mai.  ii.  10),  and  confirmed  by  the  best  science, 
which  must  have  struck  at  the  pride  of  Paul's  hearers,  who  regarded  themselves 
as  the  flower  and  cream  of  humanity,  while  all  others  were  designed  to  be  their 
slaves  (Aristotle,  Pol.,  I.  ii.  6) ;  which  still  opposes  itself  like  an  immovable  rock 
or  impregnable  fortress  to  all  modern  theories  which  deny  man's  descent  from 
a  common  stock,  and  on  the  ground  of  that  (supposed)  fact  to  establish  the 
original,  radical,  and  essential  superiority  of  civilised  to  savage,  or  of  white  to 
black  races ;  and  which  warrants  the  hope  and  expectation  that  a  day  is  yet 
coming  when  this  transcendent  truth  will  receive  universal  recognition,  and 
when  the  Scottish  poet's  dream  will  be  realised — 

"  When  man  to  man  the  world  o'er, 
Shall  brithers  be  and  a'  that." — Burns. 

(2)  As  guided  in  all  their  movements  by  an  invisible  hand.  That  of  Him  who 
had  called  them  into  existence,  and  who,  so  far  from  being  indifferent  to  and 
unobservant  of  their  fortunes,  had  "  determined  their  appointed  seasons  and  the 
bounds  of  their  habitations" — i.e.,  fixed  the  periods  of  their  rising,  flourishing,  and 
decaying,  "and  the  limits  of  their  territory"  (Deut.  xxxii.  8),  beyond  which  they 
could  no  more  pass  than  could  the  waves  of  the  sea  overstep  the  sand  barriers  by 
which  their  fury  was  restrained  (compare  Job  xii.  23).  The  truth  thus  announced 
was  well  adapted  to  humble  his  hearers,  whose  city's  greatness  had  already  passed 
its  meridian,  and  whose  territory  was  year  by  year  becoming  narrower,  and  to 
remind  them  of  the  wisdom  of  listening  to  a  message  from  Him  who  so  mani- 
festly held  them  in  His  hand  (Psalm  xxii.  28  ;  Dan.  iv.  25).  (3)  As  designed  to 
come  to  a  true  knowledge  of  God  and  of  their  obligations  to  Him.  That  they 
did  not  possess  such  a  knowledge  originally,  in  themselves  and  on  the  platform  of 
creation  (1  Thess.  iv.  5),  was  a  clear  testimony  to  their  fallen  and  sinful 
character  and  condition  (1  Cor.  i.  21).  Nevertheless  it  was  God's  will  and  desire 
that  they  should  grope  about  after  Him,  like  blind  men  feeling  their  way  in 
the  dark,  in  the  hope  of  finding  Him  who  was  not  beyond  their  reach  by  being 
at  a  distance  from  them,  but  was  near  to  every  individual  composing  them, 

11  Closer  is  He  than  breathing,  and  nearer  than  hands  and  feet." — Tennyson. 

for  "  in  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,"  or  live  and  move  (or  are 
moving),  and  are — i.e.,  every  moment  depend  on  Him  for  life,  activity,  and  being. 
And  that  this  was  no  self -invented  dogma,  but  an  old  and  acknowledged  truth 
which  their  own  gifted  seers  had  discerned,  he  demonstrated  to  them  by  citing  in 
its  support  the  similar  sentiment  of  one  of  their  own  poets  ( Aratus,  a,Cilician  poet, 
B.C.  270),  who  wrote  :  "  For  we  are  also  His  offspring,"  clearly  showing  he  re- 
garded man  as  dependent  on  the  Deity  for  life,  activity,  and  existence.  (4)  As 
convicted  vof  unreason  in  thinking  that  the  Godhead  could  be  like  to  gold,  or 
silver,  or  stone  graven  by  art  and  device  of  man.  The  argument  was  irresistible. 
Was  man  the  offspring  of  God  ?  Then  God  could  in  no  sense  be  the  handiwork  of 
man.  Was  man  God's  child  1  Then  God  must  at  least  be  possessed  of  a  nature 
resembling  man's,  and  if  like  man's  then  unlike  that  of  molten  or  graven  idols. 
3.  The  doctrine  of  Christ  and  His  salvation  (vers.  30,  31).  This  third  main 
division  of  discourse,  entered  upon,  was  not  finished.  So  far  as  it  had  proceeded  it 
had  announced  four  things.  (1)  A  new  dispensation  on  the  part  of  God.  Whereas 
God  had  winked  at  or  overlooked  the  past  ages  of  ignorance,  left  them  alone 
without  either  gracious  revelation  or  stern  rebuke,  suffering  men  to  go  their 
own  ways  (xiv.  16),  He  had  now  interposed  with  a  word  of  command  that  men 
everywhere  should  repent — i.e.,  change  their  minds,  about  God  and  His  holiness, 

375 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


about  themselves  and  their  sin,  about  the  present  world  and  the  next.  (2)  A 
new  duty  published  to  men,  not  in  one  nation,  but  in  all  nations  to  obey  this 
command  instantly,  thoroughly,  permanently,  honestly,  cheerfully.  (3)  A  new 
argument  for  the  enforcement  of  that  duty.  Binding  upon  men  everywhere 
and  at  all  times  without  further  reasoning,  this  duty  was  rendered  the  more 
imperative  and  urgent  by  the  fact  of  an  impending  judgment  day,  on  which  all 
would  be  arraigned  at  God's  tribunal  and  reckoned  with  for  their  performance  or 
neglect  of  that  duty,  the  judge  already  appointed  being  that  man  whom  he  had 
come  to  proclaim.  (4)  A  new  certificate  provided  both  for  the  fact  of  the 
judgment  day,  and  for  the  certainty  that  Christ  would  be  the  judge — viz.,  His 
resurrection  from  the  dead.  If  that  was  true,  as  Paul  was  prepared  to  show, 
then  Christ  could  be  no  other  than  God's  Son,  and  if  God's  Son  sent  into  the 
world  to  redeem  men,  it  was  inconceivable  that  there  should  not  be  a  day  of 
judgment,  at,  and  on  which,  He  would  adjudicate  upon  the  final  destinies  of 
men,  according  as  they  had  repented  and  believed  the  gospel,  or  died  in  unbelii  f 
and  sin. 

III.  The  disappointing  result.  1.  The  preacher  was  abruptly  interrupted. 
Never  before  had  either  Stoic  or  Epicurean  listened  to  sentiments  so  sublime,  or 
to  an  orator  more  worthy"  of  attention.  Yet  at  the  mention  of  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead — a  doctrine  which  both  denied — they  felt  it  impossible  to  longer 
remain  silent  or  allow  the  speaker  to  proceed.  Did  they  do  so,  they  might 
seem  to  grant  that  such  a  thing  as  a  resurrection  was  possible,  while  according 
to  their  philosophy  it  was  not ;  if,  however,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  possible, 
then  the  whole  contention  of  the  speaker  would  require  to  be  admitted.  2.  The 
teaching  of  the  sermon  was  variously  regarded.  (1)  Some  mocked.  At  the  resur- 
rection chiefly,  but  also  at  the  other  tenets  of  Paul's  gospel  concerning  God  and 
concerning  man.  "  The  Greek  was  more  irrational  than  the  savage,  when 
religion  was  philosophised  about.  He  laughed  when  he  heard  of  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead,  for  the  doctrine  was  not  a  fashionable  one;  but  when  he  was 
told  that  our  souls  would  one  day  pass  into  cows,  oxen,  donkeys,  etc.,  he 
was  less  opposed  to  it,  for  this  idea  did  not  seem  so  new  or  strange  to  him,  the 
Pythagoreans  having  taught  it "  (Michaelis).  (2)  Some  procrastinated — deferred 
coming  to  a  conclusion  on  the  momentous  themes  which  had  been  submitted  to 
their  judgment — saying  like  Felix  (xxiv.  25),  "  We  will  hear  thee  concerning 
this  yet  again."  (3)  Some  believed — credited  Paul's  teaching  as  true,  and 
embraced  with  their  hearts  the  gospel  it  contained.  Among  those  who  thus 
received  the  truth,  besides  others  unnamed,  were  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  and 
a  woman  named  Damaris,  of  neither  of  whom  is  anything  certain  known,  though 
Eusebius  (Hist.,  Hi.  4,  iv.  23),  and  other  writers  report  that  Dionysius  afterwards 
became  bishop  of  the  Church  at  Athens,  and  that  Damaris  was  his  wife 
(Chrysostom),  for  neither  of  which  statements  however  exist  solid  grounds  of 
belief.  3.  The  preacher  ivas  obliged  shortly  after  to  leave  the  city.  How  long  he 
stayed  within  its  precincts  after  the  incident  just  recorded  is  unknown;  only 
this  much  can  be  told  as  certain,  that  no  tidings  survive  of  his  having  ever  again 
preached  the  gospel  in  or  visited  the  brilliant  but  idol-loving  metropolis  of 
Greece.  That  none  of  his  epistles  speak  of  a  Christian  Church  at  Athens  does 
not  prove  that  his  work  there  was  absolutely  fruitless,  or  that  he  did  not  leave 
behind  him  a  believing  community. 

Learn. — 1.  That  advocates  of  Christianity  should  both  maintain  a  respectful 
bearing  towards  and  cherish  a  charitable  view  of  those  whose  confidence  and 
conversion  they  seek.  2.  That  preachers  of  the  gospel  cannot  take  too  compre-~ 
hensive  a  view  or  firm  a  grasp  of  the  truth  they  recommend  to  others.  3.  That 
the  ablest  and  most  eloquent  discourse  will  not  succeed  in  converting  all  who 
listen  to  it. 

376 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xvii. 


HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 

> 

Ver.    22.    Superstition. — Define  the  verse,    but   all  things   come   to    pass 

meaning  of  the  original  adjective,  and  either  by  necessity  or  chance.     5.  Poly- 

then  state  the  sense  in  which  the  word  theism,  or  the  fancy  that  there  are,  or 

"  superstition"  is  employed  now.     It  is  can  be,  many  gods.     6.  Ritualism,  or 

the   preponderance    of   terror    in    the  the    imagination    that    God    can     be 

religious  life.  honoured  by  purely  external  perform- 

I.  Its  causes. — 1.  Erroneous  views  ances.  7.  Evolutionism  (in  its  extreme 
of  the  attributes  of  God.  2.  Ignorance  form),  or  the  hypothesis  that  man 
©f  the  nature  of  personal  religion.  is  a  product  of  force  and  matter. 
3.  Crude  conceptions  of  the  works  and  8.  Indifferentism,  or  the  creed  that 
laws  of  nature.  4.  A  desire  to  have  man  should  seek  after  nothing  and  no 
systems  of  religion  and  worship  of  one  higher  than  himself.  9.  Optimism, 
human  invention.  or  the  delusion   that  this  is  the  best 

II.  Its  forms. — 1.  Idolatry.  2.  Cor-  possible  world,  and  man  has  no  sin  of 
runted  Christianity.  3.  Pietistic  which  to  repent.  10.  Unitarianism, 
errors.  4.  Popular  illusions.  Witch-  or  the  tenet  that  Christ  was  an  ordi- 
craft,  astrology,  fortune -telling,  warn-  nary  member  of  the  race.  11.  Anni- 
jngS#  hilationism,   or   the   belief   that   after 

III.  Its  evils. — 1.  It  degrades  human  death  is  nothing.  12.  Universcdism, 
nature.  2.  It  saps  the  foundations  of  or  the  sentiment  that  all  will  be  saved, 
morality.  3.  It  lessens  the  sum  of  III.  The  lessons  it  taught.— 1.  The 
human  enjoyment.  4.  It  hinders  the  duty  of  renouncing  idolatry  and  wor- 
progress  of  the  Gospel.— £.  Brooks.  shipping  only  God.     2.  The  obligation 

to  cultivate  a  spirit  of   love    towards 

Vers.  22-31.  The  Areopagus  Oration;  others.     3,  The  necessity  of  repentance 

or,  a  Sermon  for  Philosophers.  and  reformation.     4,    The   wisdom  of 

I.  The   doctrines    it  proclaimed. —  preparing  for  the  great  assize. 
1.  The  personality,  self-existence,  omni- 
potence,  and   unity   of   God.     2.  The  Yers.    22-34.   The  Great  Sermon  on 
reality,  universality,  and  efficiency  of  Mars'  Hill.  ^ 

Divine  providence.  3.    The  spirituality  I.  The  wise  men  (of  Athens)  charged 

and  non-externality  of  Divine  worship.  with  superstition  (vers.  22,  23). 

4.  The  unity  and  brotherhood  of  the  II.    The    nature   of    God    and    the 

human  race.     5.    The  possibility  of  a  method  of  His  worship  established  by 

true  natural  religion.     6.  The  dignity  natural  arguments  (vers.  24,  25). 

and  dependence  of  man.     7.  The  ab-  III.    The    stupidity    of    men    who, 

surdity     of     idols     and    idol-worship.  though  created  that  they  might  recog- 

8.  The  essential  gracionsness  of  God's  nise  their  Maker,  nevertheless  walk  in 

dealings  with  the  race  of  man.     9.  The  darkness  (vers.  26-28). 

duty   of  immediate   and   universal  re-  IV.  The  absurdity  of  supposing  that 

pentance.     10.  The  certainty  of  a  day  God  could  resemble  idols  (ver.  29). 

of   judgment.     11.    The  exaltation  of  V.  The  doctrine  of  Christ  and  the 

Jesus  Christ  to  the  office  of  supreme  resurrection  of  the  dead  (vers.  30,  31). 

judge.     12.  The  reality  of  a  future  life.  — From  Calvin. 

II.  The     errors    it    corrected.  — 

1.  Atheism,  or  the  dogma  that  there  is  Paul  at  Athens!     A   more   striking 

no  God.      2.  Pantheism,  or  the  theory  picture  than  Luther  in  Rome  or  Calvin 

that  the  all  is  God.     3.  Materialism,  in  Paris.     Note — 
or  the  notion  that  the  world  is  eternal.         I.  The  sensations   with  which  the 

4.  Fatalism,  or  the  superstition  that  apostle    tarries   in   the    city   of   the 

no  intelligence  presides  over  the  uni-  Athenians. — 1.  He  does  not  shut  his 

377 


chap.  xvii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


eyes  to  the  monuments  of  the  most 
ingenious  art.  2.  He  does  not  permit 
himself  to  be  captivated  by  their  sen- 
suous beauty.  3.  A  deep  feeling  of 
compassion  for  the  error  of  the  human 
spirit  remains  as  the  keynote  of  his 
innermost  feelings. 

II.  The  testimony  which  he  there 
bears.- — Three  great  truths  opposed  to 
three  great  falsehoods.  lt  Creation 
outof  nothing  as  opposed  to  Naturalism. 
2.  The  personality  of  God  as  opposed 
to  Pantheism.  3.  The  nature  of  sin 
as  opposed  to  Antinomianism  and 
Rationalism. 

III.  The  result. — 1.  Not  very  con- 
solatory. Prejudices  too  deeply  rooted 
thwarted  the  apostolic  word.  2.  Yet 
not  without  comfort.  A  single  convert 
already  weighs  heavily  in  the  balance 
of  the  kingdom  of  God. — From  Krum- 
macher. 


Ver.  23.  "To  the  {or  an)  un- 
known God." — The  Athenian  altar  a 
significant  testimony  to  three  things — 

I.  The  insufficiency  of  human 
wisdom. — If  any  people  under  heaven 
could  have  attained  to  a  knowledge  of 
God  by  philosophy  those  people  were 
the  Athenians. 

II.  The  unsearchableness  of  the 
Divine  nature. — After  all  man  can 
learn  from  creation,  providence,  and 
revelation  about  the  supreme  being,  he 
must  still  acknowledge  that  he  knows 
only  in  part,  and  exclaim  with  Zophar 
(Job  xi.  7)  and  with  Elihu  (Job  xxxvii. 
23)  that  the  infinite  and  eternal  One  can 
never  be  fully  understood  by  man. 

III.  The  incomparable  glory  of 
Christ. — "  That  which  can  be  known 
of  God  "  is  by  the  gospel  more  clearly 
and  fully  revealed  than  by  either 
creation  or  providence.  The  central 
figure  of  the  gospel  records  was  the 
image  of  the  invisible  God,  the  bright- 
ness of  His  Father's  glory,  and  the 
express  image  of  His  person. 

Ignorant  Worshippers  of  God. — 
Such  were  the  Athenians,  the  philo- 
sophers  amongst   them   no   less   than 

378 


the   vulgar   herd.       Both    alike   were 
ignorant — 

I.  Of  God's  exalted  nature. — As  a 
personal  intelligence  and  spiritual 
essence.  Epicureans  and  Stoics,  indeed, 
spoke  of  God  or  of  gods.  Yet  neither 
in  one  system  nor  the  other  was  there 
room  for  God,  the  Epicureans  being 
practically  Atheists  and  the  Stoics 
Pantheists.  Paul's  argument  that 
God  must  be  a  personal  intelligence 
rested  on  two  premises  :  (1)  that  molten 
or  carved  images  could  not  be  God, 
seeing  they  lacked  mind ;  and  (2)  that 
God  must  resemble  man,  if  man  is 
God's  offspring. 

II.  Of  God's  real  character. — As 
1.  The  maker  of  the  universe.  Accord- 
ing to  the  Epicureans  and  Stoics  matter 
existed  from  eternity.  The  Hebrews 
held  that  in  the  beginning  God  created 
the  heavens  and  the  earth.  2.  The 
governor  of  the  nations.  The  Greek 
philosophers  had  no  true  conception  of 
the  moral  and  spiritual  rule  of  the 
Divine  being.  This  idea,  which  was 
known  to  the  Hebrews,  received  its 
proper  and  complete  development  under 
Christianity.  5.  The  preserver  of  His 
creatures.  "  He  Himself  giveth  to 
all  life  and  breath  and  all  things." 
Opposed  to  the  Epicureans  and  Stoics, 
who  equally  believed  that  the  gods,  if 
any  existed,  were  indifferent  to  men. 
4.  The  judge  of  men.  Neither  of  the 
philosophic  schools  had  the  smallest 
idea  of  a  future  judgment.  Whatever 
evil  they  dreaded  was  present.  Immor- 
tality found  a  place  in  neither  of  their 
creeds.  Paul's  sermon  opened  up  to 
them  a  new  thought. 

III.  Of  God's  gracious  purpose. — 
That  men  should  seek  after  Him  and 
find  Him.  How  did  God  propose  to 
carry  out  this  ?  1.  By  His  providential 
goodness.  "  Giving  to  all  life,"  etc. 
(ver.  25).  "  Filling  their  mouths  with 
food  and  gladness"  (xiv.  17).  "The 
goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  re- 
pentance "  (Rom.  ii.  4).  2.  By  His 
governmental  restraints.  Leading  men 
and  nations  to  see  that  they  had  to  do 
with  a  higher  power  than  themselves, 
that  they   might  seek  after  and  find 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xvii. 


in 
2. 


Him  (ver.  27).  3.  By  His  long  suffer- 
ing treatment  of  them.  "  The  times 
of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at " 
(ver.  30).  "  Account  the  longsuffering 
of  our  God  salvation  "  (2  Peter  iii.  15). 

4.  By  His  announcement  of  a  new 
commandment.  That  men  should  re- 
pent. That  men  must  change  their 
minds.  That  men  can  no  longer  be 
allowed  to  go  on  in  sin.  Whatever 
doubt  may  have  existed  previously  as 
to  man's  duty,  now  there  can  be  none. 

5.  By  public  certification  of  a  future 
assize.  Through  Christ's  resurrection 
from  the  dead,  which  showed  both  who 
Christ  was  and  to  what  dignity  and 
power  He  had  been  exalted. 

Vers.  23-31.  God's  Three  Great  Books 
about  Himself. 

I.  The  book  of  the  world. — In  two 
parts.  1.  Nature  (vers.  24,  25). 
2.  History  (ver.   26). 

II.  The  book  of  the  heart. — Also 
two  parts.  1.  Reason  (ver.  27). 
Conscience  (ver.  28). 

III.  The  book  of  Scripture. — Again 
in  two  parts,  1.  Law  (ver.  30). 
2.  Gospel  (ver.  31). — Gerok. 

Ver.  26.  Made  of  One;  or,  the  Unity 
of  the  Race. 

I.  One  in  origin. — Created  by  God. 

II.  One  in  nature. — One  blood  and 
one  spirit. 

III.  One  in  character. — All  equally 
fallen,  sunk  in  sin,  and  under  con- 
demnation. 

IV.  One  in  salvability. — All  in- 
cluded in  the  offers  and  provisions  of 
the  gospel ;  none,  at  least,  while  alive, 
beyond  the  reach  of  grace. 

V.  One  in  responsibility. — All  alike 
will  be  held  accountable  to  God  not  only 
for  their  actions  and  words,  but  for  their 
treatment  of  His  gospel. 

Ver.  27.  Seeking  after  God. 

I.  It  is  God's  desire  that  men  should 
seek  after  Him. — He  had  so  constructed 
the  world  in  which  men  live,  and 
arranged  men's  environment  in  the 
same,  that  they  should  feel  themselves 
impelled  to  do  this. 

II.  Men's  interest  should  lead  them 


to  seek  after  God. — It  being  incon- 
ceivable that  men  should  be  capable  of 
attaining  happiness  apart  from  God, 
without  a  knowledge  of  His  character 
or  without  the  enjoyment  of  His 
favour. 

III.  Those  who  seek  after  God  have 
the  greatest  possible  encouragement. — 
1.  That  if  they  seek  in  earnest  they 
are  sure  to  find.  And  2.  That  God  is 
so  near  to  them  that  seeking  should 
be  easy. 

Ver.  29.  God's  Offspring;  or,  the 
Dignity  of  Man. 

I.  The  sublime  truth  announced. — 
That  man  is  God's  offspring.  1.  Anti- 
cipated by  heathen  poets.  The  best  pre- 
Christian  and  extra-Jewish  thought 
had  some  dim  apprehension  of  man's 
true  origin.  2.  Revealed  by  inspired 
Scripture.  In  the  Old  Testament 
(Gen.  i.  26;  Numb.  xvi.  22;  Mai.  ii. 
10).  In  the  New  Testament  (Matt, 
v.  '48 ;  Heb.  xii.  9).  3.  Confirmed  by 
modern  science.  Indirectly  at  least ; 
first,  through  its  failure  to  explain 
man's  mental  and  moral  nature  through 
evolution ;  and  second,  through  the 
circumstance  that,  however  eager  to 
establish  a  paternity  for  man  among 
the  lower  animals,  it  has  never  been 
able  to  more  than  set  forth  an  unproved 
hypothesis. 

II.  The  consoling  inferences  implied. 
— 1.  That  God  must  be  a  personal  intel- 
ligence. Neither  a  senseless  image,  nor 
a  blind  force,  nor  impersonal  matter, 
but  a  living  personality.  2.  That  God 
must  be  the  father  of  men.  Not  simply 
their  creator  and  Lord,  their  preserver 
and  judge,  but  their  all-wise  and  loving 
parent,  who  regards  them  with  pity 
and  affection.  3.  That  men,  as  God's 
children,  must  be  brethren.  Not  members 
of  different  races,  but  children  of  the 
same  parent,  and  therefore  members  of 
the  same  family. 

Ver.  30.  Repentance  of  Sin. 

I.  An  imperative  duty.  —  Com- 
manded by  God. 

II.  A  universal  necessity. — Required 
by  all. 

379 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


III.  An  immediate  obligation. — Ad- 
mitting of  no  delay, 

IV.  A  saving  grace.  —  Without 
which  none  can  stand  in  the  day  of 
judgment. 

Vers.  30,  31.  Past  and  Present.  The 
Cross  of  Christ,  the  dividing  line 
between  these. 

I.  The  past. — 1.  Times  of  ignorance. 
Before  the  meridian  light  of  gospel- 
day  had  come.  2.  Times  of  wicked- 
ness. Else  repentance  would  have 
been  unnecessary.  3.  Times  of  for- 
bearance. Otherwise  the  nations  must 
have  been  cut  off. 

II.  The  present. — 1.  Times  of  illu- 
mination. The  full  light  of  Divine 
revelation  now  shines.  2.  Times  of 
commandment.  Mankind  everywhere 
enjoined  to  repent — change  their  minds 
and  amend  their  sinful  lives.  3.  Times 
of  responsibility.  Whereas  the  paft 
dispensation  closed  with  a  transcendent 
discovery  of  Divine  mercy  in  the  in- 
carnation, death,  and  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ  (the  first  advent),  the 
present  age  will  terminate  in  a  sublime 
exercise  of  judgment,  at  the  glorious 
appearing  of  the  Son  of  man  (the 
second  coming). 

Ver.  31.  The  World's  Assize;  or,  the 
Great  Day  of  Judgment. 

I.  The  fact  announced. — God  will 
judge  the  world. 

II.  The  day  fixed. — He  hath  ap- 
pointed a  day. 

III.  The  judge  designated. — That 
man  whom  He  hath  ordained,  or  set 
apart  for  this  work. 

IV.  The  standard  indicated. — In 
righteousness.  Every  verdict  will 
accord  with  equity  and  truth. 

V.  The  proof  given. — The  resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ. 

Ver.  31.  The  Doctrine  of  a  Future 
Judgment  as  a  Doctrine  of  Reason. — 

1.  The  character  of  God  requires   it. 

2.  The  analogy  of  the  laws  of  nature 
indicates  it.     3.  There  are  facts  in  our 


own  experience  that  foreshadow  it. 
Incipient  strivings  toward  retribution 
in  the  present  state.  4.  There  is  a 
general  expectation  of  it  among  men. 
5.  Our  history  would  be  incomplete 
without  it.  Let  it  not  be  imagined 
that  by  rejecting  the  claims  of  revela- 
tion we  shall  escape  the  doctrine  of  a 
future  judgment. — G.  Brooks. 

Vers.  32-34.  Man's  Treatment  of  the 
Gospel. 

I.  Derision. — "  Some  mocked." 

II.  Delay. — "We  will  hear  thee 
again  of  this  matter." 

III.  Decision. — "  Certain  men  clave 
unto  him  and  believed." 

Chap.  vii.  2-58  with  vers.  22-34  ;  or, 
Stephen  and  Paul,  the  Two  Apologies 
of  Christianity  towards  Judaism  and 
towards  Heathenism. 

I.  Both  agree  in  some  of  their 
principal  expressions. 

II.  Stephen's  was  delivered  before 
the  Sanhedrim,  whose  office  it  was 
to  protect  customs  and  morals  in  Jeru- 
salem ;  Paul's  before  the  Areopagus, 
which  performed  the  like  service  in 
Athens. 

III.  Stephen  was  accused  of  destroy- 
ing the  old  religion,  Paul  of  introduc- 
ing a  new  one. 

IV.  Stephen  told  his  countrymen 
that  the  temple  worship  must  cease, 
Paul  the  Athenians  that  God  dwelt  not 
in  temples  made  with  hands. 

V.  Stephen  extolled  the  beneficence 
of  God  to  Israel  in  His  dealings  with 
them  as  a  people,  Paul  the  revelation 
given  by  God  to  men  in  nature. 

VI.  Stephen,  through  the  warmth 
of  his  eloquence,  called  forth  a  storm 
of  violence  against  him  ;  Paul's  oration 
took  a  turn  which,  in  an  unexpected 
fashion,  broke  up  the  assembly. — From 
Holtzmann,  who  looks  on  these  resem- 
blances as  unfavourable  to  the  his- 
toricity ;  whereas,  rightly  viewed,  they 
confirm  it,  being  fully  and  satisfactorily 
explained  by  remembering  that  most 
likely  Paul  heard  Stephen's  defence. 


380 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xvm. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

The  End  of  the  Second  and  Beginning  of  the.  Third  Missionary  Journey 

(Paul  and  Timothy). 

§  1.  Paul  at  Corinth;  or,  Meeting  with  New  Friends  (vers.  1-4). 
§  2.  A  Year  and  Six  Months  at  Corinth ;  or,  Three  Significant  Events  (vers.  5-11). 
§  3.  Paul  before  Gallio ;  or,  a  Case  of  Unsuccessful  Persecution  (vers.  12-17). 
§  4.  Paul's  Return  to  Antioch;  or,  the  Termination  of  the  Second  Missionary 

Journey  (vers.  18-22). 
§  5.  Paul's   Departure   from   Antioch ;   or,   the  Commencement   of  the   Third 

Missionary  Journey  (vers.  23-28). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Paul. — Omitted  in  the  best  texts.  How  long  the  Apostle  stayed  in  Athens — Weiseler 
suggests  fourteen  days ;  Kamsay,  three  or  four  weeks — and  how  he  came  to  Corinth,  whether 
by  land  or  sea,  cannot  be  determined. 

Ver.  2.  Aquila  born  in  Pontus. — Or,  a  man  of  Pontus  by  race.  Though  Pontius  Aquila 
was  a  noble  Roman  name  (compare  Pontius  Pilate),  there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that  Luke 
has  here  fallen  into  a  mistake.  Ramsay  suggests  that  Aquila  may  have  been  a  freedman, 
since  a  freedman  of  Msecenas  was  called  (C.  Cilnius)  Aquila.  That  Aquila  was  bcrn  in 
Pontus  ii.  9  and  1  Peter  i.  1  render  probable.  Possibly  his  real  name  was  Onkelos,  but  the 
Onkelos  who  translated  the  old  Testament  into  Greek  lived  half  a  century  later.  Priscilla. — 
Diminutive  for  Prisca  (Rom.  xvi.  3).  That  she  was  more  energetic  than  her  husband  has 
been  inferred  (Ewald,  Plumptre,  Farrar)  from  her  being  mentioned  first  in  several  places 
(xviii.  26;  Rom.  xvi.  3;  2  Tim.  iv.  19).  Claudius. — The  fourth  Cassar  of  Jewish  origin 
(41-54  A.D.),  a  son  of  the  elder  Drusus,  and  therefore  the  nephew. of  Tiberius  (see  xi.  28). 
During  the  last  years  of  his  reign  the  Jews  were  expelled  from  Rome — "  Judseos  impulsore 
Chresto  assidue  tumultuantes  Roma  expulit"  (Suetonius,  Claudius,  25).  Schiirer  thinks  the 
occasion  of  this  edict  was  the  violent  controversies  which  then  prevailed  among  Roman 
Christians  about  the  person  of  Christ  (Riehm's,  Hand  wort  erbuch  des  Biblischen  Altertums, 
art.  Claudius). 

Ver.  3.  Tentmakers. — I.e.,  not  weavers  of,  but  makers  of  tents  from  hair  cloth.  Most  of 
the  Rabbis  had  a  trade  by  which  they  could  earn  their  living.  Hillel  was  a  hewer  of  wood, 
Johanan  a  shoemaker,  Nanacha  a  blacksmith ;  Jesus  was  a  carpenter.  The  Jews  after  the 
exile  held  manual  labour  in  high  esteem.  The  man  who  neglected  to  teach  his  son  a  trade, 
said  Rabbi  Judas,  practically  taught  him  to  be  a  thief. 

Ver.  5.  Pressed  in  spirit. — According  to  the  oldest  authorities  this  should  be  mas  held 
together  by  the  ivord,  awelxero  toj  X67y — i.e.,  either  earnestly  occupied  with  the  business  of 
preaching  (Bengel,  Holtzmann,  and  others),  or  wholly  seized  upon  and  constrained  by  the 
word  within  him  (R.V.). 

Ver.  6.  Your  blood  be  upon  your  own  heads. — Compare  2  Sam.  i.  16 ;  1  Kings  ii.  33 ; 
Ezek.  iii.  18,  20,  xxxiii.  4,  6,  8. 

Ver.  7.  Justus. — The  oldest  MSS.  waver  between  Titus  Justus  (R.V.),  Titius  Justus,  and 
simply  Justus,  who,  however  named,  is  not  to  be  identified  with  Titus  (  Wieseler). 

Ver.  9.  By  a  vision.— Compare  xvi.  9,  xxiii.  11.  The  words  addressed  to  Paul  remind  one 
of  Isa.  lxii.  1. 

Ver.  11.  A  year  and  six  months. — Paul's  whole  sojourn  in  Corinth  was  three  years  (xix.  31). 

Ver.  12.  Gallio. — Gallio  became  proconsul  towards  the  end  of  Claudius's  reign,  about 
A.D.  53.  His  character,  as  depicted  by  ancient  writers,  corresponded  with  that  revealed  in 
Luke's  narrative.  "  He  was  the  very  flower  of  pagan  courtesy  and  pagan  culture — a  Roman 
with  all  a  Roman's  dignity  and  seriousness,  and  yet  with  all  the  grace  and  versatility  of  a 
polished  Greek  "  (Farrar).  Eusebius  asserts  that  he  committed  suicide  towards  the  end  of 
Nero's  reign,  before  the  death  of  his  brother  Seneca;  but  as  Tacitus  {Annals,  xv.  73)  reports 
him  alive  after  that  event,  Dion  Cassius  is  more  likely  to  be  correct  in  saying  that  he  was 
put  to  death  by  order  of  Nero.  .  Deputy,  or  proconsul  of  Achaia. — See  on  xiii.  7.  Acbaia, 
which  included  all  Greece  south  of  Macedonia,  was  a  proconsular  province  under  Augustus ; 
under  Tiberius  an  imperial  province  with  a  procurator  (Tacitus,  Annals,  i.  76);    under 

381 


chap,  xviii.     HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Claudius  after  a.d.  44  a  senatorial  province  with  a  proconsul  as  governor.     Another  instance 
of  Luke's  accuracy.     Made  insurrection. — "Rather,  rose  up. 

Ver.  13.  This  fellow. — The  expression  correctly  enough  states  the  feelings  of  disdain 
entertained  by  Paul's  prosecutors,  though  the  word  "  fellow  "  has  no  place  in  the  original. 

Ver.  17.  All  the  Greeks. — The  best  texts  have  simply  all,  though  "  the  Greeks,"  not  "  the 
Jews  "  (Ewald,  Hofmann,  Schiirer),  is  the  proper  supplement. 

Ver.  18.  Having  shorn  his  head  at  Cenchrea,  for  he  had  a  vow.— rThe  uncertainties 
connected  with  this  passage  are  three :  1.  Whether  Aquila  (Kuinoel,  Meyer,  Wendt, 
Zockler)  or  Paul  (Augustine  and  most  moderns)  is  here  referred  to.  2.  Whether  the  hair 
shaving  signified  the  assumption  of  or  releasing  from  a  vow.  3.  Whether  the  vow  was  a 
regular  Nazarite  or  simply  a  private  vow,  analogous  to  that.  Most  interpreters  hold  that 
Paul  was  the  person  who  shaved  his  head  ;  that  he  did  so  in  order  to  release  himself  from 
a  vow  he  had  taken  in  Corinth ;  that  the.  vow  was,  if  not  in  all  respects  a  Nazarite  vow,  at 
least  a  private  vow  analogous  to  that  which  bound  him  along  with  abstinence  to  let  his  hair 
grow  for  a  certain  period — in  this  case  till  he  left  Corinth ;  that  if  it  was  a  Nazarite  vow 
Paul  might  have  taken  it  without  compromising  his  Christian  liberty  (compare  xxi.  24),  and 
might  have  been  able  to  release  himself  from  it  without  waiting  till  he  reached  Jerusalem 
(see  further  in  "  Homiletical  Analysis ").  That  such  vows  were  practised  among  the 
heathen  numerous  instances  show.  Diodorus  (i.  18)  mentions  them  among  the  Egyptians  ; 
while  Homer  {Iliad,  xxiii.  140-153)  records  similar  acts  of  Peleiis  and  Achilles.  Josephus 
(  Wars,  II.  xv.  1)  notices  a  like  vow  which  Agrippa's  sister  Bernice  paid  in  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  19.  Ephesus. — On  the  Cayster,  which  falls  into  the  bay  of  Scala  Nova  on  the  western 
coast  of  Asia  Minor.  Dating  back  probably  to  B.C.  1044,  Ephesus  from  its  foundation 
"  increased  in  importance  till  it  became  the  chief  mart  of  Asia  Minor";  while  its  magnificent 
temple  of  Diana  "  never  ceased  to  attract  multitudes  from  all  parts."  It  ultimately  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  Romans  B.C.  41  {Modern  Discoveries  on  the  Site  of  Ancient  Ephesus,  pp. 
13-17). 

Ver.  21.  And  he  left  them  there. — Not  meaning  that  Paul  left  Aquila  and  Priscilla  in  the 
town  while  he  went  into  the  synagogue  (Alford),  or  that  he  henceforth  quitted  their  society 
and  devoted  himself  to  the  heathen  (Wendt,  Holtzmann),  but  signifying  that  he  left  them 
behind  in  Ephesus  when  he  set  sail  for  Cassarea.  The  best  MSS.  omit  the  words  I  must  by 
all  means  keep  this  feast  which  cometh  at  Jerusalem,  and  they  are  now  commonly  regarded 
as  an  insertion  modelled  after  xx.  16.  But  as  they  occur  in  some  important  texts,  and 
explain  the  phrase  "  having  gone  up  "  in  ver.  22,  it  will  do  no  harm  to  retain  them — the 
feast  being  in  this  case  either  Passover  (Ewald.  Renan)  or  Pentecost  (Wieseler). 

Ver.  22.  The  Church. — In  Jerusalem  is  meant,  not  in  Antioch  (Kuinoel,  Blass).  An  im- 
possible interpretation,  for  two  reasons:  1.  The  phrase  "went  down"  is  never  used  of  a 
journey  from  a  coast  town  to  an  inland  city  like  Antioch.  One  regularly  goes  down  to  a 
coast  town  (compare  xiii.  4,  xiv.  25,  xvi.  8,  etc.).  2.  The  terms  "going  up"  and  "going 
down"  are  used  so  frequently  of  the  journey  to  and  from  Jerusalem  as  to  establish  this 
usage  (Ramsay).  The  historic  credibility  of  this  journey  to  Jerusalem  is  challenged 
( Weizsacker,  Wendt,  Pfleiderer,  Holtzmann,  and  others)  because  it  does  not  appear  to  be 
mentioned  in  Galatians,  and  along  with  that  the  truthfulness  of  the  narrative  which  speaks 
of  a  first  brief  sojourn  in  Ephesus  (ver.  19)  and  a  second  longer  visit  at  a  later  date  (xix.  1). 
But  neither  does  Galatians  mention  the  journey  in  xi.  30,  unless  this  be  that  referred  to  in 
Gal.  ii.  1,  in  which  case  Galatians  omits  all  mention  of  the  visit  in  xv.  2.  Yet  both  of  these 
are  historical. 

Ver.  23.  The  region  of  Galatia  and  Phrygia.— See  on  xvi.  6. 

Ver.  24.  A  certain  Jew  named  Apollos— a  diminutive  or  pet  name  for  Apollonios,  which 
occurs  in  Codex  D.  (Ramsay).  Born  at  Alexandria,  or  an  Alexandrian  by  birth,  he  had 
probably  received  "  the  Jewish  Grecian  education  peculiar  to  the  learned  among  the  Jews 
of  that  city,  and  acquired  greakfacility  in  the  use  of  the  Greek  language  "  (Neander).  The 
success  of  his  labours  in  Corinth  is  attested  by  Paul  (1  Cor.  i.  12,  iii.  5,  6).  Luther's  conjecture 
that  Apollos  was  the  author  of  Hebrews  is  not  without  probability  (Beyschlag,  Plumptre). 
Alexandria. — The  chief  maritime  city,  aud  long  the  metropolis,  of  Lower  Egypt,  was  founded 
by  Alexander  the  Great,  B.C.  332,  and  built  under  the  superintendence  of  the  architect  who 
rebuilt  the  temple  of  Diana  at  Ephesus.  Under  Ptolemy  Soter  it  became  the  seat  not  only 
of  commerce,  but  also  of  learning  and  the  liberal  sciences.  The  LXX.  translation  of  the  Old 
Testament  Scriptures  was  made  in  Alexandria,  B.C.  280.  Philo  was  born  there,  B.C.  20.  In 
A.D.  39  the  Jews  in  Alexandria  were  subjected  to  horrible  persecutions  by  Ptolemy  Philopator, 
because  their  co-religionists  in  Jerusalem  had  resisted  his  attempt  to  enter  the  temple  there. 
Mark  is  said  to  have  introduced  Christianity  into  Alexandria. 

Ver.  25.  The  things  of  the  Lord  should  be  the  things  concerning  Jesus. 

Ver.  26.  Aquila  and  Priscilla. — The  names  should  be  reversed, as  in  ver.  18.  "The  unusual 
order,  the  wife  before  the  husband  must  be  accepted  as  original;  for  there  is  always  a 
tendency  among  scribes  to  change  the  unusual  into  the  usual"  (Ramsay). 

382 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xviii. 


Ver.  27.  The  brethren — i.e.,  of  Ephesus—  wrote  exhorting  the  disciples  in  Achaiato  receive 
him. — Better,  the  brethren  (at  Ephesus)  encouraged  (him)  and  wrote  to  the  (Corinthian) 
disciples  to  receive  him.  •  Holtzmann  finds  the  right  explanation  in  the  old  reading*  of 
Codex  D  :  "  But  some  Corinthians  residing  in  Ephesus  who  had  heard  Apollos  requested 
him  to  cross  with  them  to  their  native  city;  and  the  Ephesians  consenting  to  this  proposal, 
wrote  to  the  disciples  in  Corinth  to  receive  him." 

Ver.  28.  Helped  them  much  which  had  believed  through  grace. — According  to  another 
translation,  helped  much  through  grace  them  who  had  believed  (see  "  Hints  ").  And  that 
publicly  might  be  connected  with  the  participle  following,  as  thus  :  publicly  showing,  or  in 
public  showing — i.e.,  in  their  synagogues  as  distinguished  from  their  private  homes. 

HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—4. 

Paul  at  Corinth  ;  or,  Meeting  with  New  Friends. 

I.  His  arrival  in  the  city. — 1.  His  departure  from  Athens.  1.  When?  "After 
these  things" — i.e.,  after  the  incidents  recorded  in  the  preceding  chapter,  his  survey 
of  the  idolatrous  city,  and  his  address  to  its  leading  philosophers  and  counsellors, 
though  how  long  after  cannot  be  ascertained.  2.  Why  ?  Because  the  character 
of  his  mission  required  him  to  move  on,  but  chiefly  because  in  that  renowned 
capital  of  philosophic  triflers  and  superstitious  idol-worshippers  the  good  seed  of 
the  kingdom,  which  it  was  his  business  to  sow,  had  found  no  congenial  soil.  It 
may  be  that  Paul  felt  "  disappointed  and  disillusioned  by  his  experience  in 
Athens/'  and  recognised  that  he  had  gone  far  enough  in  the  way  of  "  presenting 
his  doctrine  in  a  form  suited  to  the  current  philosophy  ; "  it  may  even  be  that 
this  was  the  reason  why,  on  reaching  Corinth,  he  "  no  longer  spoke  in  the 
philosophic  style  "  (Ramsay)  \  it  would,  however,  be  an  error  to  conclude  that 
Paul  left  behind  him  in  Athens  no  converts  (see  xvii.  34),  as  undoubtedly 
a  Christian  Church  was  eventually  established  there.  3.  How  ?  Alone  as 
to  companionship,  Luke  having  remained  behind  at  Philippi,  and  Silas  and 
Timothy  at  Bercea,  or  Silas  at  Bercea  and  Timothy  at  Thessalonica ;  or,  if 
these  latter  had  previously  come  to  Athens,  they  were  again  on  the  way 
back  to  Macedonia  (1  Thess.  iii.  2),  or  had  not  yet  returned  from  it  (ver.  5). 
Sad  as  to  his  feelings,  since  he  could  not  fail  to  be  depressed  at  the  decidedly 
cold  reception  which  had  been  given  to  his  gospel  of  a  crucified  and  risen 
Saviour  by  "  the  Gentile  Pharisaism  of  a  pompous  philosophy "  (Farrar). 
2.  His  journey  towards  Corinth.  Whether  he  sailed  from  the  Piraeus  to 
Cenchrea,  a  voyage  of  five  hours  across  the  Saronic  bay,  or  travelled  on  foot  the 
forty  miles  which  separated  the  two  cities,  cannot  be  determined.  Farrar 
suggests  that  "the  poverty  of  the  apostle's  condition,  his  desire  to  waste  no  time, 
and  the  greatness  of  his  own  infirmities,  render  it  nearly  certain  "  that  the  sea 
route  was  that  selected ;  but  against  this  stands  the  circumstance  that  when  he 
sailed  from  Bercea  to  Athens  the  brethren  did  not  suffer  him  to  go  without  a 
convoy  (see  xvii.  14,  15),  whereas  he  was  now  alone.  3.  His  entrance  into  the 
city.  This,  which  took  place  in  a.d.  50,  say  Conybeare  and  Howson,  was  like 
passing  "  from  a  quiet  provincial  town  to  the  busy  metropolis  of  a  province,  and 
from  the  seclusion  of  an  ancient  university  to  the  seat  of  government  and 
trade"  {The  Life  and  Epistles  of  Paul,  i.  355).  Situated  on  the  isthmus  be- 
tween the  Ionian  and  ^Egean  seas,  Corinth  was  in  Paul's  day  the  political  capital 
of  Greece,  and  the  seat  of  the  Roman  proconsul.  "  It  wTas  not  the  ancient 
Corinth — the  Corinth  of  Periander,  or  of  Thucydides,  or  of  Timoleon — that  he 
was  now  entering,  but  Colonia  Julia  or  Laus  Juli  Corinthus,  which  had  risen  out 
of  the  desolate  ruins  of  the  older  city  "  (Farrar,  The  Life  and  Work  of  St.  Paid, 
i.  554).  The  older  city  had  been  destroyed  in  B.C.  146  by  the  Romans  under 
Mummins;  the  newer  town  was  in  B.C.  44  constructed  by  Julius  Caesar,  who 
"  sent  thither  a  Roman  colony,   consisting  principally  of   freedmen "    (Strabo, 

383 


chap,  xviii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


viii.  6),  "  amongst  whom  were  no  doubt  great  numbers  of  the  Jewish  race " 
(Lewin).  Distinguished  for  its  wealth,  the  Julian  city  was  no  less  renowned  for 
its  profligacy,  the  verb,  to  Corinthi 'anise — i.e.,  to  live  like  the  Corinthians,  having 
been  from  the  days  of  Aristophanes  used  to  describe  a  life  of  luxury  and  vice. 
Its  temple  of  Aphrodite  had  a  thousand  courtesans  for  its  priestesses.  Its 
Isthmian  games  periodically  attracted  towards  it,  if  all  the  athletes  and  geniuses, 
without  doubt  also  all  the  scoundrelism  of  the  empire.  In  short,  as  Farrar  well 
expresses  it,  "  Corinth  was  the  Yanity  Fair  of  the  Roman  empire,  at  once  the 
London  and  the  Paris  of  the  first  century  after  Christ." 

II.  His  lodging  in  the  city.— 1.  The  names  of  his  hosts.  Aquila  and  Priscilla, 
diminutive  for  Prisca  (Rom.  xvi.  3,  R.Y.).  "Probably  Prisca  was  of  higher 
rank  than  her  husband,  for  her  name  is  that  of  a  good  old  Roman  family  " 
(Ramsay).  (For  conjectures  as  to  who  Aquila  was,  see  "  Critical  Remarks.") 
The  historian  introduces  him  as  a  Jew,  born  in  Pontus  (see  on  ii.  9),  who 
had  lately  come  from  Rome  in  consequence  of  Claudius's  edict  (a.d.  50), 
which  had  banished  all  Jews  from  that  city  because,  according  to  Suetonius, 
they  were  continually  making  a  disturbance,  being  impelled  thereto  by  one 
Christ  (see  "  Critical  Remarks.")  2.  The  attractions  they  had  for  him. 
(1)  They  were  Jews,  and  Paul  never  ceased  to  cherish  a  warm  regard  for  his 
kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh.  Even  when  they  hated  him  the  most  fiercely  he 
loved  them  the  most  tenderly  (Rom.  ix.  3,  x.  1).  (2)  They  were  tent-makers — ■ 
i.e.  of  the  same  craft  as  himself.  Every  Jew  was  required  to  learn  a  trade,  and 
that  followed  by  Aquila  and  his  wife  was  not  the  weaving  of  goats'  hair  into 
cloth,  but  the  manufacturing  of  that  cloth  into  tents.  Such  cloth  was  woven  in 
both  Cilicia,  from  which  Paul  came,  and  Pontus,  to  which  Aquila  belonged. 
(3)  Whether  they  were  Christians  before  Paul  met  them  (Kuinoel,  Olshausen, 
Neander,  Hackett,  Spence,  Farrar),  or  were  converted  by  him  in  Corinth  (De 
Wette,  Meyer,  Alford,  Holtzmann),  is  debated.  The  former  opinion  is  certainly 
not  impossible,  since  the  gospel  may  have  been,  and  probably  was,  carried  to 
Italy  by  some  of  the  "  sojourners  from  Rome  "  who  had  been  converted  at 
Pentecost  (ii.  10).  Yet  as  Luke  does  not  represent  them  as  having  been  Chris- 
tians when  Paul  met  them,  the  latter  idea  is  quite  as  probable. 

III.  His  occupation  in  the  city. — 1.  He  worked  for  a  living  to  himself  (see 

1  Cor.  ix.  6  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  7).  This  (1)  of  necessity,  because,  to  begin  with  at  least, 
he  had  no  Christian  converts  to  whom  he  could  look  for  support,  and  because  he 
declined  to  live  by  charity  while  his  own  hands  could  minister  to  his  necessities ; 
and  (2)  of  choice,  because,  as  a  rule,  he  preferred  not  to  be  burdensome  to  those 
he  taught.     Already  he  had  observed  this  custom  in  Thessalonica  (1  Thess  ii.  9  ; 

2  Thess.  iii.  8),  and  afterwards  he  followed  it  in  Ephesus  (xx.  34).  Whether  he 
worked  for  a  wage  or  as  a  partner  is  left  unrecorded ;  but  in  either  case  the 
profits  were  probably  not  large  (2  Cor.  xi.  9).  "  It  was  a  time  of  general 
pressure,  and  though  the  apostle  toiled  night  and  day,  all  his  exertions  were 
unable  to  keep  the  wolf  from  the  door  "  (Farrar).  2.  He  preached  the  gospel  to 
others  free  of  charge.  (1)  In  the  customary  place — the  city  synagogue,  where  the 
Jews,  who  had  there  long  established  a  residence  or  recently  found  a  refuge,  were 
wont  to  assemble.  (2)  At  the  usual  times — on  the  Sabbaths,  Paul  probably 
requiring  the  weekdays  to  provide  for  himself  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  men. 
(3)  After  his  peculiar  fashion — with  skilful  argument  and  reasoning,  proving  out 
of  the  Scriptures  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.  (4)  To  his  ordinary  audience — a 
mixed  assembly  of  Jews  and  Greek  proselytes.  (5)  With  the  old  effect  —that  he 
persuaded — i.e.,  won  over  to  believe — a  number  of  both  classes  of  his  hearers. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  providence  of  God  in  fetching  Aquila  and  Paul  to  Corinth  at 
the  same  time — Aquila  to  lodge  Paul,  and  Paul  to  convert  or  establish  Aquila. 
2.  The  facility  with  which  God's  people  can  recognise  each  other  even  in  a  foreign 

384 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xviii. 


country.  3.  The  power  of  the  gospel  to  secure  converts  even  in  a  debauched  and 
drunken  city  like  Corinth  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).  4.  The  duty  of  all,  not  excepting 
ministers,  to  provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  men.  5.  The  dignity  of  labour. 
6.  The  glory  of  being  a  Christian. 


HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  2.  Aquila  and  Priscilla. 

I.  Husband  and  wife. — A  beautiful 
example  of  the  marriage  union. 

II.  Joint  workers  in  trade. — A 
happy  illustration  of  individual  inde- 
pendence and  family  co-operation 

III.  Willing  entertainers  of  Paul. 
— A  bright  specimen  of  hospitality  and 
kindness. 

IV.  Fellow-believers  in  Christ. — 
Whether  before  or  after  they  met  Paul, 
they  became  Christians.  A  sweet  in- 
stance of  the  marriage  union  being 
sanctified  by  grace. 

V.  Earnest  teachers  of  Apollos 
(ver.  26). — A  noble  pattern  of  Chris- 
tian zeal. 

Ver.  3.  Paul  in  Aquila' s  Workshop. 

I.  An  example  of  manly  inde- 
pendence.— Rather  than  depend  on 
others,  the  apostle  would  work  for  his 
living  (1  Thess.  iv.  11). 

II.  A  pattern  of  Christian  humility. 
— Though  an  apostle  he  did  not  disdain 
to  labour  with  his  hands  (2  Thess. 
iii.  12). 

III.  An  illustration  of  sincere  piety. 
— Providing  things  honest  in  the  sight 
of  men  (2  Cor.  viii.  21). 

IV.  An  instance  of  religious  zeal. — 
"  Diligent  in  business,  fervent  in  spirit, 
serving  the  Lord  "  (Rom.  xii.  11). 

Vers.  2,  3.  Aquila  and  Paul ;  or, 
Christian  Companions. 

I.  Are  always  desirable,  but  especi- 
ally in  strange  cities. 

II.  Are  often  providentially  brought 
together. — As  in  the  case  of  Aquila 
and  Paul. 

III.  Are  commonly  helpful  to  one 
another.     As  these  were. 

IV.  Are  mostly  parted  with  regret. 
As  doubtless  these  were  when  Paul 
left  Aquila  and  his  wife  at  Ephesus 
(ver.  19). 


Vers.  2-4.  Christian  Journeymen  on 
their  Travels. 

I.  The  dangers  in  the  foreign 
country. — The  temptations  in  luxurious 
Corinth. 

II.  The  acquaintance  by  the  way. — 
Aquila  meeting  with  Paul. 

III.  The  work  at  the  trade. — Honest 
toil  a  great  safeguard  against  tempta- 
tion. 

IV.  The  care  for  the  soul.— Sancti- 
fication  of  the  Sabbath  and  worship  of 
God. — From  Gerok. 

Vers.  3,  4.  Work  and  Worship  ;  or, 
Week-days  and  Sabbath-days. 

I.  Week-days  for  work  and  Sabbath- 
days  for  worship. — This  their  distinc- 
tive characters.  All  attempts  to  reduce 
both  to  one  platform  unscriptural,  and 
therefore  foredoomed  to  failure.  As 
the  work  of  week  days  must  not  be 
encroached  upon  by  worship,  so  the 
worship  of  Sabbath-days  must  not  be 
hindered  by  work. 

II.  As  the  work  of  week-days  does 
not  exclude  worship,  so  the  worship  of 
Sabbath-days  must  not  exclude  work. 
— If  week-day  work  prevents  worship, 
then  week-day  work  is  excessive.  If 
Sabbath  worship  leaves  no  room  for 
works  of  necessity  and  mercy,  then 
Sabbath  worship  is  in  danger  of  becom- 
ing burdensome  as  well  as  formal. 

III.  Week-day  work  should  prepare 
for  Sabbath  worship,  and  Sabbath 
worship  for  week-day  work. — The  man 
who  has  spent  his  week-days  in  un- 
lawful idleness  is  not  likely  to  employ 
his  Sabbath  in  worship.  He  who  de- 
votes Sabbath  to  the  duties  of  religion 
is  most  likely  to  prove  a  vigorous,  in- 
dustrious, and  faithful  worker  through- 
out the  week.  "  Weekly  labour  creates 
hunger  and  thirst  after  Sabbath-rest 
and  Sabbath-fare.  Sabbath  sanctifica- 
tion  imparts  strength  and  pleasure  to 
the  daily  work  of  the  week." — Gerok. 

c  385 


chap,  xviii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.—  Verses  5— -11. 

A  Year  and  Six  Months  in  Corinth  ;  or,  Three  Significant  Experiences. 

I.  Renewed  activity  in  preaching.— 1.  Brought  about  by  the  coming  of  old 
friends.  Though  Paul  was  of  more  heroic  mould  than  to  sink  beneath  the 
pressure  of  external  circumstances,  however  severe  (Phil.  iv.  13),  though  he  could 
testify  for  Christ  without  other  aid  than  that  Christ  extended,  whether  in  the 
Areopagus  before  Athenian  philosophers  (xvii.  22),  or  at  Csesarea  before  Festus 
and  Agrippa  (xxvi.  1),  or  at  Rome  before  Nero  (2  Tim.  iv.  16),  he  was  neverthe- 
less in  a  high  degree  dependent  on  the  sympathy  of  others.  During  the  absence 
of  Timothy  and  Silas  he  felt  lonely  both  in  Athens  and  in  Corinth,  while  there 
is  good  ground  for  thinking  that  his  strength  was  at  this  time  somewhat 
weakened  through  his  thorn  or  stake  in  the  flesh  (1  Cor.  ii.  3),  and  perhaps  also 
through  the  severe  privations  he  chose  to  endure  rather  than  accept  support  from 
his  friends  in  Corinth,  where  his  enemies  were  numerous  (2  Cor.  xi.  8,  xii.  13 
et  seq.  ;  1  Cor.  ix.  12).  Consequently,  though  he  never  for  a  moment  dreamt  of 
abandoning  his  holy  work  of  preaching,  he  nevertheless  toiled  along  as  if  a  heavy 
burden  lay  upon  his  spirit.  Accordingly  when,  after  the  lapse  probably  of  some 
weeks,  or  it  might  be  months,  Timothy  and  Silas  arrived  from  Macedonia,  the  former 
from  Thessalonica  bringing  cheering  tidings  of  the  faith  and  charity  of  his  dear 
friends  in  that  city  and  perhaps  also  such  material  assistance  from  them  as  helped 
to  relieve  him  from  the  necessity  of  manual  labour  (1  Thess.  iii.  6),  and  the  latter 
from  Bercea  (xvii.  14),  possibly  with  equally  cheering  intelligence  about  the 
Church  there,  and  with  gifts  of  lovo  from  Philippi  (Phil.  iv.  15  j  2  Cor.  xi.  9), 
the  load  lifted  from  his  heart  so  that  he  bounded  forward  in  his  work  with 
revived  alacrity  and  zeal,  as  if  the  word  had  seized  upon  him  (see  "  Critical 
Remarks  ")  and  constrained  him  with  a  holy  violence,  impelling  him  to  greater 
diligence,  fervour,  and  prayerfulness  than  before  (compare  1  Cor.  ix.  16). 
2.  Manifested  in  special  efforts  to  gain  his  countrymen.  Though  designated 
specially  as  the  minister  of  Christ  to  the  Gentiles,  Paul  never  could  forget  the 
fact  that  the  Jews  were  his  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh,  or  neglect  an 
opportunity  of  seeking  their  salvation.  Hence  this  fresh  outburst  of  missionary 
zeal  which  seized  upon  him  was  directed  specially  to  them.  With  redoubled 
energy  and  impassioned  earnestness  he  laid  before  them  the  proofs  from  Scripture 
that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.  (For  the  manner  of  his  preaching  see  1  Cor.  ii.  4 ; 
and  for  its  matter  1  Cor.  xv.  3.)  Not  that  he  neglected  others;  but  these  were 
his  first  care  (Luke  xxiv.  47  ;  Pom.  i.  16). 

II.  Renewed  opposition  by  the  Jews. — 1.  Its  secret  spring.  Nothing  local,  or 
accidental,  or  personal  to  Paul  such  as  his  "  contemptible  presence  or  speech  " 
(2  Cor.  x.  10) ;  but  the  innate  hostility  of  the  human  heart  to  a  gospel  of  salvation 
by  grace  and  through  faith  without  works  (1  Cor.  ii.  14),  and  the  irreconcilable 
antagonism  of  the  Jewish  heart  to  everything  and  every  one  that  challenged  the 
validity  of  Moses'  law,  as  understood  and  practised  by  them,  or  accused  them  of 
ignorance  and  sin  in  rejecting  Jesus  as  Messiah.  2.  Its  bitter'  violence.  Like 
defeated  controversialists  generally  when  they  cannot  answer  their  opponents, 
and  like  their  co-religionists  at  Antioch  (xiii.  45)  and  afterwards  at  Ephesus 
(xix.  9),  they  betook  themselves  to  abusive  language,  railing  against  the  apostle  and 
blaspheming  God  and  Christ  (compare  1  Cor.  xii.  3).  3.  Its  necessary  consequence. 
Paul  discontinued  his  efforts  to  persuade  them.  (1)  His  symbolic  action.  "He 
shook,"  or  shook  out,  "his  raiment " — i.e.,  shook  out  the  dust  from  its  folds,  as 
in  Antioch  of  Pisidia  he  had  shaken  the  dust  from  his  feet  (xiii.  51),  for  a 
testimony  against  them.  (2).  His  solemn  declaration.  "Your  blood  be  upon 
your  own  heads  ;  I  am  pure;  from  henceforth  I  will  go  unto  the  Gentiles."     By 

386 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xviii. 


this  he  gave  them  to  understand  that  the  responsibility  for  their  destruction, 
both  as  a  people  and  as  individuals,  would  rest  entirely  with  themselves,  that 
he  regarded  himself  as  in  no  way  involved  in  their  guilt,  and  that  henceforth  he 
would  preach  exclusively  to  the  Gentiles  (compare  xx.  6;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  5  9). 
(3)  His  public  withdrawal.  From  that  day  forward  he  no  more  frequented  their 
synagogue,  no  more  proclaimed  to  them  the  words  of  eternal  life,  no  more 
invited  them  to  believe.  Having  made  their  election,  they  were  now  by  him 
left  to  the  tender  mercies  of  Heaven.  So  far  from  being  again  pressed  to  accept 
salvation,  they  would  no  more  be  troubled.  Practically  by  Christ's  ambassador 
they  were  judicially  abandoned. 

III.  Renewed  consolation  from  God. — 1.  The  opening  of  a  new  door.  When 
the  synagogue  was  closed  against  the  apostle,  the  house  of  a  Greek  pi  oselyte, 
Justus,  or  Titus  Justus  (R.V.),  opened  to  give  him  welcome,  as  afterwards  at 
Ephesus  the  school  of  Tyrannus  was  placed  at  his  disposal,  when  exclude  d  from 
the  synagogue  (xix.  9).  There  does  not  appear  to  be  sufficient  ground  for 
identifying  this  individual  who  befriended  the  apostle  in  Corinth  with  Titus, 
or  supposing  that  Paul  left  Aquila's  house  and  went  to  lodge  with  Justus. 
What  Luke  designs  to  say  is  rather  this,  that  while  Paul  continued  lodging  and 
working  with  Aquila,  he  preached  on  the  Sabbaths  in  the  house  of  Justus, 
who  resided  hard  by  the  synagogue,  so  that  the  Jews  and  proselytes,  if  they 
chose,  might  still  come  to  hear  him.  In  the  action  of  Justus  Paul  would 
undoubtedly  delight  to  see  the  guiding  hand  of  his  glorified  Master  (Rev.  iii.  7). 
2.  The  accession  of  a  new  f?*iend.  Whether  Justus  was  at  this  time  a  believer 
or  not  cannot  with  certainty  be  inferred  from  Luke's  words.  If,  as  is  most 
likely,  he  was  not,  the  probability  is  that  he  ultimately  became  a  convert. 
But  the  withdrawal  or  exclusion  of  Paul  from  the  synagogue  led  to  the  decision 
of  Crispus  its  ruler  to  cast  in  his  lot  with  the  new  cause,  in  which  act  he  was 
followed  by  his  whole  house.  Already  Paul  had  gathered  converts  in  Corinth, 
;'  of  humble  and  most  probably  of  slavish  origin,"  the  first  of  these  being — not 
Epsenetus  (Rom.  xvi.  5),  where  the  true  reading  is  of  Asia — but  the  household  of 
Stephanas  (1  Cor.  xvi.  15).  The  conversion,  however,  of  one  so  prominent  as 
Crispus  and  of  his  family,  whom,  as  well  as  the  household  of  Stephanas,  Paul 
baptised  with  his  own  hand,  either  because  of  their  importance  or  because  of  the 
absence  of  his  assistants  (1  Cor.  i.  15,  16),  could  not  fail  to  exert  a  powerful 
and  happy  influence  on  the  side  of  the  gospel  and  on  the  heart  of  Paul.  Most 
likely  this  contributed  to  the  success  of  Paul's  ministry  in  Justus's  house,  many 
of  the  Corinthians  who  heard  him  there  having  believed  and  been  baptised,  which 
again  led  to  the  prolongation  of  his  ministry  in  Corinth  for  a  year  and  six 
months.  3.  The  enjoyment  of  a  new  vision.  In  some  respects  this  differed  from 
each  of  the  other  visions  granted  to  Paul.  The  vision  at  Damascus  (ix.  12), 
like  that  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  (xxii.  18),  occurred  at  midday  ;  this,  like 
the  vision  at  Troas  (xvi.  9),  took  place  at  night.  In  the  vision  at  Troas  a  man 
of  Macedonia  appeared ;  whereas  in  this,  as  in  the  Damascus  and  Jerusalem 
visions,  it  was  the  form  of  the  glorified  Redeemer  that  was  seen.  The  purpose 
of  the  Jerusalem  vision  was  to  counsel  Paul  to  flee  from  the  city ;  the  object  of 
this  was  to  make  him  stay  in  Corinth.  (1)  The  Lord  exhorted  him  to  banish 
fear  and  preach  the  gospel  with  all  boldness  :  "  Be  not  afraid,  but  speak,"  etc., 
a  suitable  word  for  one  whose  ministry  had  been  up  till  then  carried  on  "  in 
weakness  and  in  fear  and  in  much  trembling  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  3).  (2)  The  Lord 
assured  him  of  His  constant  presence  and  protection,  saying,  "  I  am  with  thee, 
and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee,"  or  if  they  do  their  purpose  shall 
be  defeated  (compare  vers.  12-17).  The  like  promise  had  Christ  given  to  the 
twelve  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  (3)  The  Lord  revealed  to  him  that  many  would  be 
converted   by  his  ministry;    "I  have  much  people  in  this  city,"  not  already, 

387 


chap,  xviii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


but  about  to  be  converted,  a  cheering  announcement  for  one  who  was  probably 
beginning  to  think  his  labours  in  the  gospel  might  be  in  vain. 

Learn. — 1 .  The  impassioned  earnestness  with  which  the  word  of  God  should 
be  preached.  2.  The  certainty  that  a  faithful  minister,  should  he  not  convert 
others,  will  at  least  clear  himself.  8.  The  fearful  retribution  that  will  eventually 
overtake  those  who  oppose  themselves  and  blaspheme.  4.  The  justification  of 
preachers  in  leaving  those  who  persistently  refuse  to  accept  the  gospel.  5.  The 
extreme  unlikelihood  of  faithful  preaching  having  no  saving  result.  6.  The 
consolation  God  can  give  His  discouraged  servants.  7.  The  assurance  that  such 
have  of  God's  presence  with,  and  assistance  of  them  in  their  work. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  6.  "  I  am  Clean "  ;  or  Thoughts  baptised    and    opening   his   house    to 

About    Ministerial    Responsibility. — A  Paul. 
minister  may  hold   himself   free  from 
responsibility  for  his  hearers.  Ver.  10.  God's  Hope  for  His  Workers. 

I.  When  he  has  faithfully  preached  — "For  I  have  much  people  in  this 
the  gospel  to  them. — 1.  Clearly,  so  city."  It  is  very  evident  that  the 
that  they  can  understand  it.  2.  Fully,  apostle  came  to  Corinth  in  a  state  of 
so  that  they  are  made  acquainted  with  great  depression.  TKs  work  had 
the  whole  counsel  of  God  contained  in  seemed  almost  a  failure  in  Athens ; 
it.  3.  Fervently,  so  that  they  are  and  should  he  fail  likewise  at  Corinth  ? 
impressed  with  a  sense  of  its  importance  He  says  afterwards,  writing  of  his 
and  urgency.  entrance  among   them,  "  I   was  with 

II.  When  lie  has  solemnly  warned  you  in  weakness,  and  in  fear,  and  in 
them  of  their  danger  in  rejecting  it. —  much  trembling"  (1  Cor.  ii.  3).  JSTor 
When  he  has  reminded  them — 1.  Of  was  his  early  experience  in  that  city 
their  guilt  in  refusing  to  believe.  2.  Of  calculated  to  dispel  his  fears;  for  the 
their  certain  condemnation  unless  they  Jews,  to  whom  first  he  preached  the 
do  believe.  3.  Of  the  possibility  of  gospel,  bitterly  opposed,  and  bias- 
being  abandoned  because  of  declining  phemed.  It  was,  therefore,  with  a 
to  believe.  heavy  heart   that   he   turned    to   the 

III.  When  he  has  exhausted  every  Gentiles — such  Gentiles  as  had  mocked 
available  means  for  securing  their  at  the  gospel  in  the  city  which  he  had 
acceptance  of  the  truth. — Though  Paul     just  left. 

turned  himself  to  the  Gentiles  he  did  I.  Both  human  instinct  and  Divine 

not    entirely   desert  the  Jews.     They  .  guidance  had  led  the  apostle  Paul  to 

were  still  at  liberty  to  visit  the  house  concentrate  his  efforts  on  the  popula- 

of   Justus.     Doubtless  many  of  them  tions     of      great     cities. — Damascus, 

did    this.^    So   ministers  should  never  Antioch,  Philippi,  Thessalonica,  Athens 

cease   to   labour   even   for   those  who  — these  had  already  been  his  spheres 

reject  and  oppose  the  truth.  of   labour ;   and    Ephesus,   Jerusalem, 

and   Rome   were   to   feel    his    power. 

"Ver.  8.  The  Conversion  of  Crispus.  Meanwhile,  the  great  city  of  Corinth 

I.  Unexpected. — Because  of  his  being  was  to  absorb  his  time  and  care  for  some 
a  Jew  and  its  occurring  after  Paul  had  eighteen  months.  Great  cities  have 
left  the  synagogue.  played  a  very  important  part  in  the 

II.  Scriptural.— Brought  about  by  history  of  the  world,  both  in  ancient 
the  preaching  of  the  word.  and  in  modern  times.      Nineveh  and 

III.  Influential. — Leading  to  the  Babylon,  Memphis  and  Thebes,  Athens, 
conversion  of  all  his  house  and  of  Carthage,  Pome — how  much  do  these 
many  of  his  neighbours.     -  names  stand  for,  as  representative  of 

IV.  Sincere.  —  Proved    by    being  the  changing  fortunes  of  the  world  in 

388 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xviii. 


the   ages   of   the   past !      And  to-day  merely  as  the  seat  of  government  in  its 

great   cities   are   of   more    and    more  different  departments ;  a  grazier,  as  a 

account,  as  affording  home  and  industry  vast  market  for  cattle  ;  a  mercantile 

and  power  to   the    thronging   popula-  man,  as   a  place  where   a   prodigious 

tions.    Great  cities  have  had,  and  have  deal  of  business  is  done  upon  'Change  ; 

still,  their  various  objects  of   interest  a   dramatic  enthusiast,   as  the   grand 

and  wonderment,  affording  almost  inex-  scene  of  theatrical  entertainments ;  a 

haustible  material  for  the  entertain-  man  of  pleasure,  as  an  assemblage  of 

ment  of  the  curious,  and  the  research  taverns.     But  the  intellectual  man  is 

and  study  of  more  serious  minds.     So  struck  with  it,  as  comprehending  the 

Corinth  had  its  Isthmus — called  "  the  whole  of  human  life  in  all  its  variety, 

bridge  of  the  sea,"  and  "  the  gate  of  the   contemplation   of   which   is  inex- 

the      Peloponnesus  " — across      which,  haustible."     So  it  was  the  quick,  busy, 

about  the  time  of    the  apostle's  visit,  eager,    multifarious    human     life     of 

the    Emperor  Nero  attempted  to  cut  Corinth   that   made  the  city  of  such 

the     canal     which,     left    incomplete  interest  to  the  apostle ;  that  made  it, 

through  all  the  centuries,  has  just  been  if  we  may  say  so,  of  such  interest  to 

opened   from   sea    to   sea  ;   the    great  Him  who  spoke  to  Paul  of  the  "  much 

rock  Acropolis,   rising  abruptly   from  people "  there. 

the  shore  to  the  height  of  two  thousand  III.  It  was  not,  however,  even  the 

feet ;  the  two  harbours,  of  Cenchrese  human  interest  of  Corinth,  under  such 

and  Lechseum  ;  the  temple  of  Neptune,  aspects  as  would  present  themselves  to 

hard  by ;  and  all  that  beauty  of  situa-  other  visitors,  that  made  the  supreme 

tion  and    structure  which    led  to  its  demand    on  the  apostle's  regard  and 

being  called  "  the  Star  of  Greece."  care  ;  nor,  vast  and  various   as   they 

II.   But  though  the    apostle  would  were,  did  these  more  secular  interests 

not  be  insensible  to  these  things,  the  of   the   city   call   forth   the   emphatic 

attraction  of  Corinth,  as  of  the  other  declaration  of  the  Lord  Christ.     But 

great  cities  that  he  visited,  was  not  in  there    was    one  interest   which  was 

any    way    external    or    adventitious  indeed  supreme,  in  the  regard  alike  of 

greatness  or  charm. — Nor  is  it  any  such  Christ  and  of  Paul ;  an  interest  which, 

attraction  that  makes  the  great  cities  wherever  men  do  congregate,  is  still  so 

of  to-day  of  so  absorbing  an   interest  paramount  in  the  eyes  of  all  who  have 

to   the   thoughtful    mind.       Said    Dr.  learned  anything  of  the  true  import  of 

Johnson,  of  the  London  of  a  hundred  human  history  and  human  destiny — 

and  thirty  years  ago,  "  If  you  wish  to  the  relation  of  men  to  duty,  to  God,  to 

have  a  just  notion  of  the  magnitude  of  eternity.     And  it  is  the  vision  of  these 

this  city,  you  must  not  be  satisfied  with  invisible  but  so  real  relations,   men's 

seeing  its  great  streets   and   squares,  relations  to  the  infinite,  that  invests 

but  must  survey  the  innumerable  little  with   so  thrilling  an  interest  all  the 

lanes   and   courts.     It   is   not   in   the  doings,   and  aims,  and  desires  of   the 

showy  evolutions  of  buildings,  but  in  multitudes  that  make  up  the  teeming 

the  multiplicity  of  human  habitations  life  of  our  great  cities, 
which  are  crowded  together,  that  the         IV.  This  brings  us  to  what  is  indeed 

wonderful  immensity  of  London  con-  God's  hope,  as  held  forth  in  gracious 

sists."    And  his  biographer,  comment-  encouragement  to   all  who   work  in 

ing  on  the  remark,  says,  wisely  enough,  behalf  of  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom 

"  I    have   often   amused   myself   with  for    their    fellow-men. — God's    hope  ? 

thinking  how  different  a  place  London  And  who  but  the  Divine  Christ  could 

is   to   different   people.      They   whose  have  had  hope  of  Corinth  1    So  busy,  so 

narrow  minds  are  contracted   to   the  wealthy,  so  gay — and  so  utterly  wicked, 

consideration    of   some   one  particular  in  its  unblushing  sensuality  of  sin,  that 

pursuit    view    it   only    through    that  "  to  Corinthianise  "  meant  to  give  one's 

medium.      A   politician   thinks   of   it  self  up  to  the  worst  abominations  of 

389 


chap,  xviii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


immorality  !  But,  "  I  have  much 
people  here,"  said  Christ ;  for,  through 
all  their  eager  alertness  of  industry 
and  commercial  enterprise,  and  beneath 
their  superficial  gaiety,  and  even  deep 
down  in  the  reeking  corruption  of  the 
people's  sin,  did  He  not  see  that  many 
hearts  were  weary  of  self-seeking,  and 
aching  despite  their  gaiety,  and  sick 
of  the  sin  to  which,  nevertheless,  they 
were  selling  themselves  body  arid  soul  ? 
Ah,  their  very  despair  of  any  good  was 
the  secret  of  Christ's  hope  for  that 
people.  For  over  against  their  utmost 
sin  and  shame  the  apostle  was  to  set 
forth  God's  utmost  and  most  holy  love, 
as  manifested  in  the  Cross.  Nor  could 
any  inferior  power  avail  to  move  them. 
"  Christ  for  England,  and  England  for 
Christ  " — this  must  be  our  watchword, 
and  we  shall  not  watch,  and  work  and 
wait  in  vain.  And  in  like  manner, 
when  we  look  out  upon  the  seething 
millions  of  the  great  cities  of  the  world, 
and  equally  when  we  regard  the  needs 
of  those  who  live  in  smaller  towns,  and 
in  villages,  and  in  remote,  solitary 
places,  we  must  listen,  as  Christ  says, 
"  I  have  much  people  here." — T.  F. 
Lockyer,  B.A. 

Vers.  5-10.   Great  Things  in  Corinth. 

I.  Fervent  preaching. — Constrained 
by  theword  Paul  testified. 

II.  Violent  unbelief. — On  the  part 
of  the  Jews. 

III.  Solemn  judgment — Pronounced 
against  the  opposers.  They  were  self- 
destroyed. 

IV.  Glorious  mercy. — The  gospel 
offered  to  the  Gentiles. 

V.  Unexpected  deliverance. — 
Justus's  house  opened. 

VI.  Marvellous  success. — "  Many 
hearing  believed,  and  were  baptised." 

VII.  Heavenly  consolation. — Paul's 
vision  of  the  Lord  by  night. 

Vers.  9,  10.  Thoughts  for  the  Night 
of  Ministerial  Despondency. 

I.  The  heavenly  master  from  whom 
the  faithful  minister  holds  his  com- 
mission. The  Lord  (compare  xxvii. 
23). 

390 


II.  The  holy  duty  which  that 
Master  has  imposed  on  His  servants. 
To  speak  and  hold  not  their  peace 
(compare  v.  20;  Isa.  lviii.  1). 

III.  The  encouraging  arguments 
against  fear  supplied  by  the  Master 
to  His  servants.  1.  His  presence  with 
them  (compare  Matt,  xxviii  20).  2. 
His  protection  of  them  (Matt.  xvi.  18). 

3.  His  preparation  for  them.     Having 
souls    waiting   to   receive    their   word. 

4.  His  prospering  of  them.     Promising 
their  labours  should  be  successful. 

Paul's  Midnight  Vision  at  Corinth; 
or,  The  Lord's  interview  with  His 
servant. 

I.  A  sublime  manifestation :  The 
Lord's  appearance  to  Paul. — 1.  The 
reality  of  this  appearance.  Unless  on 
a  priori  grounds  of  objection  to  the 
supernatural  the  historic  credibility  of 
what  is  here  narrated  cannot  be 
assailed.  2.  The  timeliness  of  this 
appearance.  It  came  when  Paul  was 
in  some  degree  depressed.  Man's  ex- 
tremity is  ever  God's  opportunity.  3. 
The  object  of  this  appearance — to 
cheer  the  heart  and  embolden  the 
spirit  of  the  apostle. 

II.  A  magnificent  exhortation  :  the 
Lord's  commandment  to  Paul. — 1.  Not 
to  be  afraid.  Either  of  himself  suffer- 
ing injury  or  of  his  cause  suffer- 
ing defeat.  Paul,  though  habitually 
courageous  and  hopeful,  obviously 
laboured  at  the  moment  under  some 
apprehension  as  to  both  of  these  con- 
tingencies. 2.  But  to  speak.  Manfully, 
openly,  continuously,  holding  not  his 
peace,  but,  like  an  old  Hebrew  prophet, 
crying  aloud  and  sparing  not,  lifting 
up  his  voice  like  a  trumpet,  showing 
the  Jews  their  transgression  and  the 
Gentiles  their  sins  (Isa.  lviii.  1). 

III.  A  cheering  consolation:  the 
Lord's  assurance  to  Paul. —  1.  Of  com- 
panionship. u  I  am  with  thee " :  a 
promise  which  had  been  given  of  old 
to  Abraham  (Gen.  xxvi.  3),  to  Isaac 
(Gen.  xxvi.  24),  to  Jacob  (xxviii.  15), 
to  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiii.  14),  to  Joshua 
(i.  5),  to  Israel  in  exile  (Isa.  xliii.  2) ; 
a  promise  which  had  been  renewed  to 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xviii. 


the  disciples  by  Christ  before  His 
ascension  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  2.  Of 
protection.  "  No  man  shall  set  on  thee 
to  harm  thee."  This  promise  also  had 
been  given  to  ancient  Israel  collectively 
(P^alm  xlvi.  1  ;  Prov.  ii.  7  ;  Isa.  xxxii. 
2,  18,  xxxiii.  16,  20  ;  Zech.  ii.  5,  8), 
was  renewed  to  the  Church  of  Christ 
(Luke  xxi.  18),  and  is  now  repeated  to 
the  apostle.  3.  Of  success.  "  I  have 
much  people  in  this  city."  As  Elijah 
of  old,  in  a  time  of  despondency,  had 
been  assured  that  Jehovah  had  seven 
thousand  faithful  adherents  who  had 
never  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal  (1  Kings 
xix.  18),  so  is  Paul  now  informed  that 
Jesus  had  many  souls  in  Corinth  who 
were  only  waiting  to  be  gathered  into 
His  kingdom  by  the  preaching  of  His 
gospel. 

Ver.  11.  The  Secret  of  Ministerial 
Success. 

I.  Much  prayer. 
II.  Much  patience. 

III.  Much  trust  in  God. 

IV.  Much  diligence  in  work. — 
Quesnel. 

The  Word  of  God. 

I.  "In  complete  sense  the  Word  of 
God  is  alone  the  living,  historical 
person,  Jesus  Christ,  understood  and 
explained  in  the  Divine  spirit,  and 
acsording  to  His  own  word  and  will. 
On  this  account  are  also  the  words 
and  discourses  of  Jesus,  since  these  are 
inseparable  from  His  person  and 
activity,  to  be  included  and  considered 
as  the  Word  of  God. 

II.  "  Whilst,  however,  Jesus  Him- 
self in  His  person,  in  His  works  and 
words,  as  in  His  sufferings  and  death, 
is  the  Word  of  God,  at  the  same  time 
also  in  a  derived  sense  is  the  proclama- 
tion of  Him  the  Word  of  God.  That 
is,  the  gospel  of  Christ  and  of  His 
kingdom  (xxviii;  31),  at  first  only  orally 
diffused,  later  also  laid  down  in  writing, 
becomes  recognised  in  Christendom  as 
the  Word  of  God  in  a  special  sense, 
in  distinction  from  all  preparatory,  pro- 
phetic words  of  God  as  from  all  sorts  of 
subordinate  revelation.  In  this  sense 
has  Jesus  Himself  often  and  clearly 


spoken,  and  the  whole  New  Testament 
agrees  therewith.  This  gospel  is,  in 
its  contents,  firm  and  unassailable, 
homogeneous  and  all-embracing  ;  in  its 
formulation  manifold  and  many-formed, 
as  every  really  living,  spiritual  great 
thing  is ;  and  exactly,  because  it  is 
homogeneous  and  living,  also  in  every 
individual  part  somehow  germinally 
contained.  Hence  it  can  be  shortly 
described  as  the  divine  and  gracious 
will  which  has  appeared  in  Christ,  as 
the  proclamation  of  God's  salvation 
work,  as  the  Word  of  Christ  the 
crucified  (1  Cor.  i.  23),  as  the  Word 
of  grace  (xiv.  3,  7,  xx.  24,  32),  as  the 
Gospel  of  grace  and  repentance  (xx. 
21),  as  the  Word  of  reconciliation 
(2  Cor.  v.  19),  or  as  the  Revelation  of 
the  divine  mystery  (1  Cor.  iv.  1  ;  Eph. 
vi.  19);  or  otherwise  designated  accord- 
ing to  some  one  particular  item  of  its 
contents.  According  to  its  peculiar 
contents,  therefore,  is  it  not  so  much 
a  theoretic  doctrine,  as  a  joyous  message 
adapted  to  the  actualities  of  life,  and 
consists  principally  of  promises  and 
assurances  of  heavenly  rights  and  pos- 
sessions, conjoined  with  admonitions 
and  serious  warnings  which  correspond 
to  those  gifts  and  promises." 

III.  "  Consequently  in  derived  sense 
is  every  oral  and  written  proclamation, 
which  teaches  men  to  understand  the 
person  and  work  of  Christ,  inasmuch 
as  it  prepares  them  for  this,  speaks  of 
it,  leads  to  it,  and  teaches  men  to  use 
it,  Revelation  or  the  Word  of  God. 
Hence  also  of  preaching  in  public 
worship,  as  of  every  written  or  printed 
exposition  of  the  gospel,  the  expression 
Word  of  God  can  be  used.  But  above 
all  does  the  title  Word  of  God  belong 
both  to  the  whole  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testament  Scriptures,  and,  according 
to  its  inner  sense  or  its  understanding 
in  graduated  fashion,  to  particular 
scriptures  or  to  their  particular  exposi- 
tions. This  meaning  of  the  Biblical 
canon  also  becomes  through  this  clear 
and  practical,  that  in  the  public  church 
doctrinal  preaching  the  Holy  Scriptures 
must  in  some  way  be  constantly 
assumed  as  its  basis." — Bornemann,  §47. 

391 


chap,  xviii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Vers.    5-11.     Paul's    preaching     at 
Coi'inth. 

I.  The  place  of  his  preaching. — 1. 
The  Jewish  synagogue.  According  to 
his  custom.  Dictated  probably  by  three 
motives.  (1)  To  find  a  proper  starting 
ground  for  his  work.  The  Jews  knew 
the  Scriptures,  and  were  looking  for 
the  Messiah.  (2)  To  secure  the  con- 
version o£  his  countrymen.  Paul  loved 
his  kinsmen,  and  longed  for  their  con- 
version. (3)  To  prevent  misunder- 
standing of  the  nature  of  Christianity. 
Christianity  not  antagonistic  to,  but 
development  and  completion  of  Old 
Testament  religion.  2.  The  house  of 
Justus.  To  this  Paul  withdrew  when 
expelled  from  synagogue.  In  so  doing 
Paul  (1)  followed  the  example  of 
Christ ;  (2)  showed  that  Christianity 
was  not  confined  to  special  places  (John 
XV.  21) ;  and  (3)  kept  within  earshot 
of  his  countrymen. 

IT.  The  subject  of  his  preaching. — 
That  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  Jesus 
Christ  and  Him  crucified  (1  Cor.  iii. 
2),  which  signified — 1.  That  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  had  been  the  Messiah  promised 
to  the  fathers — to  Abraham  as  a  seed, 
to  David  as  a  son,  to  Israel  as  the 
Lamb  of  God.  2.  That  salvation  was 
attainable  only  through  His  Ci'oss. 
Not  through  his  teaching  alone,  though 
"  Never    man   spake   like   this   man " 


(John  vii.  46),  or  through  His  example 
alone,  though  "  He  left  us  an  example 
that  we  should  walk  in  His  steps " 
(1  Peter  ii.  21),  but  through  His  blood 
(Ephes.  i.  7). 

III.  The  manner  of  his  preaching. 
— 1.  Biblical.  Out  of  the  Scriptures. 
The  proper  basis  of  all  right  preaching. 
2.  Reasoning.  Addressing  himself  to 
the  •  intellect.  Paul  knew  the  value 
of  great  ideas.  The  road  to  the  heart 
lies  through  the  understanding.  3. 
Fervent.  Paul  was  no  drone  or  dullard, 
no  merely  formal  talker  or  polite  essay 
reader,  but  a  speaker  aglow  with  holy 
enthusiasm.  4.  Fearless.  Resulting 
from  (1)  his  confidence  in  the  message 
he  delivered  j  (2)  his  reliance  upon  God's 
promise  of  protection  ;  and  (3)  his  hope 
of  ultimate  success. 

IV.  The  result  of  his  preaching. — 
Twofold.  1.  Opposition.  Jews  re- 
sisted. Not  difficult  to  see  why.  If 
Paul  was  right  then  Jesus  had  been 
their  Messiah,  and  they  had  been 
guilty  of  awful  sin  in  rejecting  Him. 
2.  Success.  (1)  He  gained  a  friend  in 
Justus.  (2)  He  secured  a  large  number 
of  converts,  amongst  whom  were  Aquila 
and  Priscilla,  Titus  Justus,  Crispus, 
the  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  Sosthenes, 
Crisp us's  successor,  Stephanas  and  his 
house,  Gaius,  Paul's  host,  Erastus, 
the  city  chamberlain. 


HOMILETIC AL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  12-17. 

Paul  before  Gallio  ;  or,  a  Case  of  Unsuccessful  Persecution. 

I.  Persecution  attempted. — 1.  The  prime  instigators  of  this  hostile  movement. 
These  were  the  Jews  whom  Paul  had  defeated  in  argument,  causing  them  to 
oppose  and  blaspheme  (ver.  6),  and  from  whom  he  had  separated  by  withdrawing 
from  their  synagogue  and  exercising  his  ministry  in  the  house  of  Justus  (ver.  7). 
To  this  antagonistic  course  they  were  doubtless  incited  by  a  variety  of  motives, 
as,  e.g.,  (1)  their  hatred  of  the  gospel;  (2)  their  dislike  of  Paul  the  apostate  Rabbi; 
(3)  their  chagrin  at  the  conversion  of  Crispus ;  and  (4)  their  annoyance  at  the 
favour  which  the  new  cause  was  finding  among  the  Greeks.  "  It  must  be 
acknowledged,"  says  Ramsay  (St.  Paul,  etc.,  p.  256),  "  that  Paul  had  not  a  very 
conciliatory  way  with  the  Jews  when  he  became  angry.  The  shaking  out  of  his 
garments  was  undoubtedly  a  very  exasperating  gesture  ;  and  the  occupying  of  a 
meeting-house  next  door  to  the  synagogue,  with  the  former  archisynagogos  as  a 
prominent  officer,  was  more  than  human  nature  could  stand.  ...  It  is  not  strange 
that  the  next  stage  of  proceedings  was  in  a  law  court."  Perhaps  not ;  but  this 
seems  hard  on  Paul,  who  would  have  been  almost  superhuman  if  he  had  not 
sometimes  lost  his  temper  with  his  much-beloved  countrymen.     2.  The  exact  date 

392 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xviii. 


of  this  hostile  movement.  "  When  Gallio  was  the  deputy,  or  proconsul,  of 
Achaia,"  a.d.  53  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  Under  Tiberius  an  imperial  province 
governed  by  a  procurator,  Achaia,  when  Claudius  assumed  the  purple  (a.d.  44), 
was  restored  to  the  Senate  and  ruled  by  a  proconsul.  Gallio's  predecessor  had 
ended  his  term  of  government,  and  Gallio  himself  had  just  entered  on  office, 
when  this  persecution  arose.  The  Jews  had  probably  been  tempted  to  try  this 
assault  upon  their  obnoxious  countryman  because  of  Gallio's  inexperience  and 
reputed  easiness  of  character,  the  first  of  which  might  make  him  willing  to  curry 
favour  with  the  Jews,  while  the  second  might  lead  him  to  believe  their  com- 
plaints without  investigating  whether  these  rested  on  any  good  foundation. 
Originally  called  Marcus  Annseus  Novatus,  and  afterwards  known  as  Lucius 
Junius  Annseus  Gallio  in  consequence  of  having  assumed  the  name  of  Lucius 
Junius  Gallio,  a  friendly  rhetorician  who  had  adopted  him,  Gallio  was  brother 
to  the  well-known  philosopher  Seneca,  who  wrote  of  him  :  "  No  mortal  man  is  so 
sweet  to  any  person  as  he  is  to  all  mankind,"  and  "even  those  who  love  my 
brother  Gallio  to  the  very  utmost  of  their  power  yet  do  not  love  him  enough  " 
— language  which,  if  it  could  scarcely  be  accepted  as  unimpeachable  evidence  of 
Gallio's  merit,  at  least  testified  to  the  strength  of  Seneca's  affection.  3.  The 
special  form  of  this  hostile  movement.  A  unanimous  "  insurrection,"  or  uprising 
of  the  Jewish  populace  against  the  apostle,  in  which,  having  arrested  him,  they 
fetched  him  before  the  governor's  tribunal,  as  their  kinsmen  in  Thessalonica  had 
dragged  him  before  the  city  rulers  (xvii.  6),  and  as  the  owners  of  the  divining 
maid  in  Philippi  had  brought  him  and  Silas  before  the  magistrates  (xvi.  20). 
The  accusation  in  this  case  ran  in  different  terms  from  the  indictments  in  those. 
At  Philippi  the  apostle  had  been  charged  with  subverting  Roman  customs  in 
religion  ;  in  Thessalonica  the  complainants  urged  that  he  had  acted  contrary  to 
the  decrees  of  Caesar;  here  at  Corinth  the  impeachment  alleged  that  he  per- 
suaded men  to  worship  God  contrary  to  law — not  of  the  empire  (Spence, 
Plumptre),  but  of  Moses  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  Farrar,  Alford,  Hackett, 
Holtzmann,  Lechler),  since  under  Roman  rule  Judaism  was  a  religio  licita,  and 
Paul's  teaching  in  his  countrymen's  eyes  constituted  a  violation  of  the  Hebrew 
Lawgiver's  precepts. 

II.  Persecution  foiled. — Arraigned  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Gallio — a 
chair  or  tribunal,  three  times  mentioned  in  the  story,  from  which  Roman 
justice  was  dispensed — Paul  was  about  to  open  his  mouth  in  self-defence,  when 
Gallio  interrupted  him,  quashed  the  proceedings,  and  so  protected  the  apostle, 
but  lost  to  the  world  and  the  Church  a  speech  which  the  latter  at  least  would 
willingly  have  heard.  1.  The  ground  of  his  procedure  he  made  clearly  known  to 
the  prosecutors.  (1)  The  case  they  had  brought  before  him  lay  not  within  his 
civil  jurisdiction.  Had  it  been  a  matter  of  wrong  or  wicked  lewdness,  an  act  of 
injustice  or  legal  injury,  such  as  fraud  or  dishonesty  or  wicked  crime — i.e.,  a  moral 
offence  or  deed  of  wickedness — he  would  have  felt  it  his  duty  to  bear  with  them 
and  investigate  their  charges.  (2)  The  case,  however,  was  altogether  outside  his 
functions.  So  far  as  he  could  see,  it  concerned  questionings  or  disputes  about  a 
word,  or  doctrine  (Hackett),  about  names,  as,  e.g.,  whether  Jesus  had  been  rightly 
or  wrongly  called  Messiah,  and*  about  their  own  law,  whether  it  was  correctly  ob- 
served or  not ;  and  these  were  affairs  they  could  look  to  themselves.  As  for  him, 
he  had  no  mind  to  be  a  judge  of  such  matters,  even  if  they  lay  within  his 
judicial  domain,  which  he  practically  acknowledged  they  did  not.  To  infer  that 
his  action  was  in  any  way  dictated  by  secret  sympathy  for  the  Christian  religion 
would  be,  to  say  the  least,  extremely  hazardous.  2.  The  end  of  his  procedure 
was  that  he  summarily  quashed  the  indictment,  announced  that  the  prosecutors 
had  no  case,  and  ordered  the  lictors  to  clear  the  court.  "  We  may  be  sure  they 
made  short  work  of  ejecting  the  frustrated,  but  muttering,  mob  on  whose  disap- 

393 


chap.  xvm.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


pointed  malignity,  if  his  countenance  at  all  reflected  the  feelings  expressed  by  his 
words,  he  must  have  looked  down  from  his  lofty  tribunal  with  undisguised 
contempt"  (Farrar,  The  Life  and  Work  of  St.  Paul,  i.  569). 

III.  Persecution  reversed. — Before  the  court  was  cleared  the  tables  were 
turned.  1.  The  ruler  of  the  synagogue  was  trounced.  The  Jews  who  had 
hastened  before  the  governors  tribunal  in  hope  of  seeing  Paul  scourged  reluct- 
antly beheld  their  own  leader  beat.  This  leader  was  Sosthenes,  who  had 
probably  succeeded  (ver.  8)  if  he  had  not  been  a  colleague  of  Crispus.  There  is 
no  solid  reason  for  supposing  (Theodoret,  Calvin,  Ewald,  Hofmann)  him  to  have 
been  the  Sosthenes  our  brother  mentioned  in  Paul's  First  Epistle  to  the  Corin- 
thians (i.  1).  2.  The  parties  ivho  trounced  him  were  the  mob.  Not  the  Jews 
(Ewald,  Hofmann),  who  suspected  their  champion  had  bungled  their  case  through 
secret  sympathy  with  Paul — which,  by  the  wTay,  forms  the  ground  for  supposing 
him  to  be  *'  Sosthenes  our  brother."  Certainly  not  the  Christians,  who,  had  it 
been  they,  would  have  behaved  most  unworthily  (Matt.  v.  44),  but  the  Gentiles 
or  Greeks,  who  may  have  been  impelled  to  such  a  violent  demonstration,  either 
because  Sosthenes  showed  himself  refractory  and  unwilling  to  depart  from  the 
basilica,  or  because  they  felt  indignant  at  the  Jews  for  having  trumped  up  a 
baseless  accusation  against  an  innocent  man,  whom  besides,  through  his  having 
withdrawn  from  the  synagogue,  they  regarded  as  in  a  manner  belonging  to  them- 
selves. 3.  The  governor  looked  on  with  indifference.  "  My  lord  Gallio,"  as  his 
brother  styled  him,  was  as  completely  unconcerned  about  the  whipping  which 
the  Greeks  gave  to  Sosthenes  as  he  had  been  about  the  charges  of  the  Jews 
preferred  against  Paul.  Perhaps  the  whipping  was,  after  all,  not  a  violent 
affair.  "  So  long  as  they  were  not  guilty  of  any  serious  infraction  of  the  peace, 
it  was  nothing  to  him  how  the  Greek  gamins  amused  themselves  "  (Fairar).  If, 
however,  it  amounted  to  bodily  injury,  then  Gallio's  supercilious  contempt  was 
not  only  wrong  in  itself  but  stood  in  flagrant  contradiction  to  his  pompous  speech 
(ver.  14). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  lies  told  against  Christianity  and  Christians  by  their 
enemies.  2.  The  true  province  of  the  civil  magistrate,  secular  affairs.  3.  The 
retribution  which  often  comes  on  those  who  devise  evil  against  others.  4.  The 
indifference  of  many  to  both  religion  and  morality. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  12-17.  A  Court  Scene  inCorinth.  The  Church's  dignitaries  no  less  than 

I.  The  place  of  judgment. — The  the  world's  great  men  have  sometimes 
agora  or  market-place.  J  ustice  should  been  found  in  the  ranks  of  persecutors. 
always  be  dispensed  in  public,  in  order  V.  The  character  »of  the  judge. — 
to  prevent  abuses.  Gallio,    an    indifferent    and    haughty 

II.  The   person   of  the  prisoner. —  cynic.     Rank  and  power  often  lead  to 
Paul,     a     preacher     of     the      gospel.  such  unbecoming  dispositions. 
Preachers  have  often  been  called  upon  VI.  The  issues  of  the  trial. — 1.  To 
to  answer  for  their  crimes  in  publish-  the    prisoner,    acquittal.       2.    To    the 
ing  the  good  news  of  salvation.  prosecutor,    a    beating.      3.    To    both, 

III.  The  terms  of  the  indictment —     perhaps,  the  unexpected. 
That  Paul  taught  men  to  worship  God 

contrary  to  law.     It  is  no  sin  either  A  Remarkable  Trio ;  or,  a  character 

to  worship  God  or  to  teach  men  so ;  study. 

yet  are  all  ways  of  worshipping  God  I.  Paul,    the   representative   of   re- 

not  equally  right.  ligious  zeal. 

IV.  The  rank  of  the  prosecutor.—  II.  Sosthenes,  the  incarnation  of 
Sosthenes,  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  religious  intolerance. 

394 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS,     chap  xviii. 


III.  Gallio,  the  type  of  religious 
indifference. 

Sosthenes  and  Gallio ;  or,  Paul's 
accuser  and  judge. 

I.  The  accuser. — Sosthenes.  1.  His 
person.  Successor  of  Crispus.  Perhaps 
afterwards  with  Paul  in  Ephesus  and 
Macedonia  (1  Cor.  i.  1).  2.  His  motives. 
Mixed.  (1)  Responsibility  for  the 
dignity  of  the  synagogue.  (2)  Anger  at 
Crispus's  defection.  (3)  Displeasure  at 
Paul's  success.  3.  His  action.  Having 
caused  Paul  to  be  arrested,  he  brought 
the  apostle  before  Gallio's  judgment 
seat.  Often  easier  to  defeat  a  man  at 
law  than  to  overcome  him  in  logic. 
4.  His  indictment.  He  accused  Paul 
of  persuading  men  to  worship  contrary 
to  the  law.  No  civil  crime  imputed  to 
Paul.  Charged  with  propagating  il- 
legal tenets  in  religion. 

II.  The  judge.— Gallio.  1.  A  re- 
markable man.  Brother  of  Seneca. 
2.  A  remarkable  character.  A  person 
of  talent  and  great  amiability.  3.  A 
remarkable  utterance.  "  If,  indeed,  it 
were  a  matter  of  wrong,"  etc.  Explain 
what  this  means  (see  "  Critical  Re- 
marks "  and  "  Homiletical  Analysis  "). 
4.  A  remarkable  blunder.  Looking  on 
with  indifference  while  Sosthenes  was 
being  maltreated. 

Gallio's  Action. — "  This  action  of  the 
Imperial  government  in  protecting 
Paul  from  the  Jews,  and  (if  we  are 
right)  declaring  freedom  in  religious 
matters,  seems  to  have  been  the 
crowning  fact  in  determining  Paul's 
conduct.  According  to  our  view,  the 
residence  at  Corinth  was  an  epoch  in 


Paul's  life.  As  regards  his  doctrine, 
he  became  more  clearly  conscious  of 
its  character,  as  well  as  more  precise 
and  definite  in  his  presentation  of  it ; 
and  as  regards  practical  work,  he 
became  more  clear  as  to  his  aim,  and 
the  means  of  attaining  the  aim — 
namely,  that  Christianity  should  be 
spread  through  the  civilised — i.e.,  the 
Roman — world  (not  as  excluding,  but 
as  preparatory  to,  the  entire  world, 
Col.  iii.  11),  using  the  freedom  of 
speech  which  the  Imperial  policy  as 
declared  by  Gallio  seemed  inclined  to 
permit.  The  action  of  Gallio,  as  we 
understand  it,  seems  to  pave  the  way 
for  Paul's  appeal  a  few  ye^rs  later 
from  the  petty,  outlying  court  of  the 
procurator  of  Judaea,  who  was  always 
much  under  the  influence  of  the  ruling 
party  in  Jerusalem,  to  the  supreme 
tribunal  of  the  empire." — Ramsay,  St. 
Paul,  etc.,  pp.  259,  260. 

Vers.  14-17.  Gallio's  Behaviour. 

I.  How  far  it  was  right. — 1.  In 
declining  to  interfere  in  the  settlement 
of  religious  questions.  2.  In  expressing 
his  readiness  to  investigate  civil  com- 
plaints. 

II.  How  far  it  was  wrong. — 1.  In 
not  troubling  himself  to  arrive  at  the 
truth  about  Paul.  2.  In  taking  no  cog- 
nisance of  injustice  towaids  Sosthenes. 

Gallio,  the  Civil  Magistrate. 

I.  His  judicial  equity  and  impar- 
tiality. 

II.  His  legal  intelligence  and  dis- 
crimination. 

III.  His  moral  and  religious  in- 
difference. 


HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verees  18—22. 

Paul's  Pet  urn  to  Antioch  ;  or,  the  Close  of  his  Second  Missionary  Journey. 

I.  Departure  from  Corinth. — 1 .  After  a  somewhat  prolonged  stay.  At  the  time  of 
Sosthenes's  attempt  to  persecute  Paul,  the  apostle,  according  to  one  view  (Meyer), 
had  been  eighteen  months  in  Corinth,  when  the  failure  of  that  attempt,  the  con- 
sequent notoriety  his  cause  obtained,  and  the  success  which  attended  his  labours, 
induced  him  to  "  remain  yet  many  days  "  with  his  converts.  According  to  the 
common  interpretation  (Alford,  Lechler,  Wendt,  Hackett,  Spence)  the  year  and 
six  months  of  ver.  1 1  embraced  the  whole  period  of  his  residence  in  tnat  city. 
In  either  case,  in  addition  to  preaching  and  founding  churches  in  the  town  anel 
neighbourhood  (2  Cor.  i.  1) — as,  e.g.,  in  Cenchrea  (see  Rom.  xvi.  1) — he  occupied 

395 


chap,  xviii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


a  part  of  his  time  in  writing  letters  to  the  Thessalonians  (the  First  and  Second 
Epistles).  2.  With  affectionate  leave  takings.  (1)  Of  his  colleagues,  Silas  and 
(most  likely  also)  Timothy,  though  the  latter  is  found  with  him  again  in  Ephesus 
on  his  third  missionary  journey  (xix.  22).  (2)  Of  his  new  friends — Stephanas 
and  Crispus,  with  their  households,  whom  he  had  baptised  with  his  own  hands 
(1  Cor.  i.  14) ;  Gaius,  whom  he  also  baptised  (1  Cor.  i.  14),  and  with  whom  he 
lodged  on  his  next  visit  (Rom.  xvi.  23);  Fortunatus,  Achaicus,  and  Chloe 
(1  Cor.  i.  11,  xvi.  17)  ;  with  Erastus,  the  city  chamberlain,  and  Quartus,  a 
brother  (Rom.  xvi.  23).  (3)  Of  the  general  body  of  converts,  among  whom  were 
not  many  wise,  or  mighty,  or  noble,  but  only  weak,  ignorant,  humble,  and  poor 
people  (1  Cor.  i.  26,  27),  whom  he  had  tended  as  babes  in  Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.  2), 
whom  he  regarded  as  his  spiritual  children  (2  Cor.  vi.  13),  and  for  whose  welfare 
he  continued  ever  after  to  be  solicitous.  3.  Accompanied  by  dear  friends.  What 
induced  Aquila  and  Priscilla  to  leave  Corinth  is  not  recorded.  Perhaps  they 
desired  to  enjoy  longer  the  society  of  Paul,  or  to  proceed  to  their  home  in 
Pontus,  though  circumstances,  guided  by  providence,  led  to  their  being  detained 
at  Ephesus  (ver.  26) ;  but  whatever  may  have  been  the  motive  which  prompted 
them,  their  company  would,  without  question,  be  helpful  to  Paul. 

II.  Embarkation  at  Cenchrea. — 1.  The  harbour  of  Corinth.  Cenchrea, 
Kichries,  ten  miles  distant  from  Corinth,  f ormed  its  eastern  port,  from  which  ships 
sailed  to  Asia ;  Lechaeum,  its  western,  for  vessels  bound  to  Italy,  lay  upon  the 
other  side  of  the  Isthmus.  At  Cenchrea  a  Christian  Church  was  early  planted, 
presumably  by  the  apostle's  labours  (I^om.  xvi.  1).  2.  An  incident  before  sailing. 
Either  Aquila  (Grotius,  Kuinoel,  Meyer,  Conybeare  and  How  son)  or  Paul 
(Augustine,  Calvin,  Bengel,  Olshausen,  Neander,  Alford,  Hackett,  Plumptre, 
Spence,  and  others)  shaved  his  head  in  consequence  of  having  a  vow.  The  only 
reasons  for  supposing  that  Aquila  was  the  person  who  thus  released  himself  from 
his  vow  are  that  the  name  Aquila  immediately  precedes  the  participle  "  having 
shorn,"  and  that  one  feels  a  difficulty  in  perceiving  why  Paul  should  have 
entangled  himself  with  such  a  worn-out  Jewish  custom  while  founding  a  Christian 
Church  in  Corinth.  But  (1)  There  does  not  appear  sufficient  cause  for  Luke 
recording  anything  about  Aquila's  vow,  the  principal  actor  in  the  story  being 
Paul.  (2)  If  Aquila  had  been  under  such  a  vow  as  is  here  referred  to  he  must 
have  proceeded  to  Jerusalem,  and  either  shaved  there  in  the  temple,  or,  if  the 
modification  of  the  law  permitted  him  to  shave  at  Cenchrea,  he  must  still  have 
carried  the  hair  to  the  temple  and  burnt  it  in  the  altar  fire  (Numb.  vi.).  *  (3)  If 
the  vow  spoken  lay  on  Paul,  it  need  only  be  remembered  that  Paul,  though  a 
Christian,"  was  still  a  Jew,  and  delighted,  when  able,  without  compromising  his 
evangelical  liberty,  to  observe  Jewish  customs — thus  to  the  Jew  becoming  a  Jew 
in  order  to  gain  the  Jews  (1  Cor.  ix.  20-22).  (4)  It  is  not  certain  that  Paul's  vow 
was  that  of  a  Nazarite ;  but  even  if  it  was,  the  act  performed  was  intended  not 
as  an  assumption,  but  as  a  discharge  of  the  vow.  (5)  More  than  likely  the  vow 
bound  him  to  a  modified  asceticism  as  a  sign  and  means  of  more  earnest  spiritual 
consecration,  and  was  assumed  as  a  visible  expression  of  gratitude  for  the  pro- 
tection and  success  he  had  experienced  at  Corinth.  3.  The  destination  of  the 
voyagers.     Immediately  Syria,  ultimately  for  Paul  Jerusalem  and  Antioch. 

III.  Sojourn  in  Ephesus. — 1 .  The  sail  across  the  archipelago.  With  a  favourable 
wind  this  may  have  been  accomplished  in  two  or  three  days,  though  Cicero  once 
spent  fifteen  on  a  voyage  from  Athens  to  Ephesus,  and  thirteen  on  the  return 
trip.  As  the  ship  threaded  its  way  among  "  the  Isles  of  Greece  "  many  ancient 
historical  associations  may  have  presented  themselves  to  the  mind  of  the  apostle ; 
but  if  they  did  (which  is  doubtful),  the  thoughts  they  occasioned  have  not  been 
recorded,  and  probably  were  not  expressed.  2.  The  landing  at  Ephesus.  The 
ship,  which  was  seemingly  bound  for  Syria,  would  not  stay  long  in  the  harbour  of 

396 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xviil 


Ephesus,  but  Paul  and  his  companions  disembarked,  and  made  their  first  ac- 
quaintance with  the  famous  ancient  capital  of  Ionia,  at  that  time  the  metropolis 
of  proconsular  Asia,  the  seat  of  a  flourishing  trade,  the  centre  of  the  worship  of 
Diana  (xix.  14,  which  see),  and  afterwards  the  Christian  metropolis  of  Asia 
Minor  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  3.  The  work  in  the  city.  Priscilla  and  Aquila 
no  doubt  followed  their  ordinary  calling  as  they  had  done  at  Corinth,  but  Paul 
betook  himself  to  preaching  in  the  synagogue  and  reasoning  with  the  Jews — 
according  to  his  work,  losing  no  opportunity  of  making  known  the  gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God  to  the  Jew  first  and  also  to  the  Gentile.  Though  not  stated  there 
would  doubtless  be  here,  as  elsewhere,  proselytes  attached  to  the  synagogue. 

IV.  Voyage  to  Caesarea. — 1.  After  a  brief  stay  in  Ephesus.  So  favourable  an 
impression  had  he  made  upon  his  countrymen  in  that  large  commercial  and  in- 
tellectual but  superstitious  city,  that  his  hearers  would  willingly  have  persuaded 
him  to  remain  amongst  them  some  time  longer.  This,  however,  they  were 
unable  to  do,  "  He  consented  not."  2.  With  kindly  farewells  to  his  countrymen. 
Amongst  these  he  had  presumably  made  numerous  friends  and  perhaps  not  a  few 
converts,  and  from  these  he  tore  himself  only  under  the  constraint  of  a  higher 
duty.  For  reasons  not  explained  he  deemed  it  incumbent  on  him  to  be  present 
at  the  approaching  festival  in  Jerusalem — either  the  Passover  (Ewald,  Penan), 
or  more  likely  Pentecost  (Wieseler),  rather  than  Tabernacles,  which  would  have 
made  the  voyage  too  late — and  so  he  told  his  kinsmen.  3.  Promising  to  return.  If 
God  should  permit  (compare  James  iv.  15).  A  promise  soon  after  fulfilled  (xix.  1). 
4.  Unattended  by  his  recent  companions.  That  Priscilla  and  Aquila  remained 
behind  in  Ephesus  appears  to  be  the  import  of  the  clause — "  and  he  left  them 
there "  (see  "  Critical  Remarks ") ;  and  that  they  stayed  behind  the  context 
shows. 

V.  Visit  to  Jerusalem. — 1.  The  certainty  of  this  visit.  Having  landed  at 
Caesarea  (see  viii.  40),  he  went  up,  not  from  the  harbour  to  the  town  (Kuinoel, 
Blass),  but  from  Caesarea  to  Jerusalem.  Compare  the  usual  mode  of  expression 
(xi.  2,  xv.  2,  xxi.  12,  15,  xxiv.  11,  xxv.  1,  9;  Gal.  ii.  1,  2;  Matt.  xx.  18; 
Mark  x.  32,  33;  Luke  ii.  42,  xxiii.  31,  xix.  28;  John  ii.  13,  v.  1,  vii.  8,  10, 
xi.  55,  xii.  20).  It  forms  no  valid  objection  to  this  visit  that  it  is  not  mentioned 
in  Galatians.  2.  The  number  of  this  visit.  The  fourth  ;  the  others  having  been 
— the  first  (ix.  26),  the  second  (xi.  30),  the  third  (xv.  2).  3.  The  object  of  this 
visit.  (1)  To  keep  the  feast  (see  "  Critical  Remarks").  Whether  he  arrived  in 
time  for  this  is  not  told.  (2)  Perhaps  to  complete  his  vow  by  burning  his  hair 
in  the  temple.     (3)  Possibly  to  salute  the  Church  there,  which  he  did. 

VI.  Return  to  Antiocn. — 1.  How  long  he  had  been  absent.  Uncertain. 
According  to  one  computation  (Wieseler)  about  three  years,  giving  six  months  for 
Paul's  journey  between  Antiocn  and  Troas,  six  months  for  his  work  in  Philippi, 
Thessalonica,  and  Bercea,  eighteen  months  for  his  stay  in  Corinth,  and  six  months 
for  the  voyage  from  Corinth  to  Ephesus  and  Caesarea,  and  the  travel  to  Jerusalem 
and  back  to  Antioch.  2.  Why  he  returned.  Because  Antioch  was  the  place 
from  which  he  had  been  sent  out,  and  was  now  practically  become  the  Church's 
missionary  centre.  3.  When  he  left.  After  a  brief  stay.  When  he  did  depart 
it  was  probably  for  ever.  No  intimation  is  preserved  of  his  having  ever  again 
visited  the  city.     Antioch  is  not  again  mentioned  by  Luke. 

Learn. — 1.  That  earthly  friendships  should  never  be  allowed  to  hinder  the 
onward  movements  of  God's  servants  and  Christ's  missionaries.  2.  That 
legitimate  vows  voluntarily  undertaken  should  be  religiously  paid.  3.  That 
promises  made  by  Christian  people  should  be  faithfully  kept.  4.  That  mission- 
aries ought  to  stir  up  the  home  Churches  by  frequent  rehearsals  of  missionary 
intelligence.  5.  That  for  the  true  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  there  can  be  no  rest 
so  long  as  it  is  day. 

397 


chap,  xviii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  18.  Vows  in  the  Religious  Ver.  21.  Keeping  the  Feast — a  Corn- 
Life.  TYiunion    Sermon.       "  I    must   by    all 

I.  Are  perfectly  legitimate  under  means  keep  this  feast "  (the  Lord's 
the  gospel. — Though  not  enjoined  in  Supper)  "  which  cometh  at  Jerusalem." 
the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament,  I.  Because  of  the  commandment  I 
Paul's  example  may  be  regarded  as  have  received. — "  This  do  in  remem- 
giving  them  a  quasi  sanction.  brance  of  Me"  (Luke  xxii.  19). 

II.  Concern  things  which  are,  in  II.  Because  of  the  company  I  shall 
themselves,      morally      indifferent. —  meet. — Christ  and  His  friends  who  are 
Whatever  is  already  commanded  lies  also  my  brethren  (John  xv.  14). 
outside  the  province,  within  which  a  III.  Because  of  the  benefit  I  shall 
vow  is  permissible.  receive. — Spiritual    nourishment    and 

III.  Should  never   be    undertaken  growth  in  grace  (John  vi.  55). 
rashly. — Otherwise    unnecessary    bur-  IV.  Because  of  the  good  I  shall  do. 
dens  may  be  laid  on  weak  consciences.  — By  1.  Confessing  Christ  before  His 

IV.  When  made  should  be  faithfully  Church  and  in  sight  of  the  world, 
performed. — Better  not  vow  than  2.  By  encouraging  my  fellow-disciples 
having  vowed  neglect  to  pay.  to  be  steadfast  in  the  faith. 

HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  23-28. 

Paul's  Departure  from  Antioch  ;  or,  the  Commencement  of  the  Third  Missionary 
Journey. 

I.  On  the  way  for  Ephesus. — 1.  The  time  of  starting.     After  Paul  had  spent 
some  time,  obviously  not  long,  in  Antioch  ;  either  because  of  his  impatience  to  be 
at  his  chosen  lifework,  carrying  the  gospel  into  regions  beyond,  or  because  he 
desired  to  get  back  as  soon  as  possible  to  Ephesus,  or  because  the  unpleasant 
encounter  with  Peter  (Gal.  ii.  11-14),  which  most  critics  insert  here,  rendered  it 
desirable  for  him  to  quit  Antioch.     It  was  now  about  the  end  of  54  a.d.,  or  the 
beginning  of  55  A. d.     2.  The  line  of  travel.     Through  the  country  of  Galatia  and 
Phrygia  (see  on  xvi.  6).    Probably  passing  north  from  Antioch  through  the  Cilician 
Gates,  visiting  Tarsus  on  the  way,  and  calling  in  upon  the  Churches  of  Lycaonia, 
Pisidia,  and  Pamphylia,  though  these  are  not  mentioned.     At  any  rate,  he  seems 
to  have  entered  Galatia  first  and  borne  down  on  Ephesus  through  Phrygia.     3.  The 
business  of  the  journey.     "  Strengthening  "  or  "  establishing  all  the  disciples,"  con- 
firming the  Churches  and  exhorting  the  believers  (compare  xiv.    22,  xv.   32), 
perhaps  also  counselling  them  to  "  remember  the  poor,"  and  instructing  them  how 
to  lift  contributions  for  this  purpose  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1,  2).     4.  The  names  of  his  com- 
panions.    Not  stated.     But  obviously  Silas  did  not  attend  him  on  this  occasion 
— possibly  having  stayed  behind  in  Jerusalem,  from  which  he  had  first  started 
out  with  Barnabas    (xv.    22),  and   where   he   originally   held  a    leading  place 
among  the  brethren ;  or  having  been  left  behind  by  Paul  at  Corinth  (see  ver. 
18).     Whether  Timothy  accompanied  him  at  the  outset  is  not  clear,  though  on 
reaching  Ephesus  the  two   are    again    together   (xix.   22).      In   Ephesus   also 
Erastus,  the  chamberlain  of  Corinth  (Pom.  xvi.  23),  shows  at  his  side  (xix.  22), 
having  probably  joined  the   apostle  in  that  city.     Probably  also  Titus,  though 
not  named  in  the  Acts,  travelled  with  Paul  on  this  third  missionary  tour  (see 
2  Cor.  viii.  6,  16-24). 

II.  What  occurred  at  Ephesus  in  the  meanwhile. — 1.  The  arrival  of  a  dis-, 
tinguished  stranger.  (1)  His  name.  Apollos,  an  abbreviation  of  Apollonius. 
(2)  His  nationality.  A  Jew.  (3)  His  birthplace.  Alexandria  in  Egypt,  "  the 
emporium  of  Greek  commerce  from  the  time  of  its  foundation,  where,  since  the 

398 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xviii. 


earliest  Ptolemies,  literature,  philosophy,  and  criticism  had  never  ceased  to  excite 
the  most  intellectual  activity  ;  where  the  Septuagint  translation  of  the  Scripture 
had  been  made,  and  where  a  Jewish  temple  and  ceremonial  worship  had  been 
established  in  rivalry  to  that  in  Jerusalem  "  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  The  Life 
and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  i.  36).  (See  "  Critical  Remarks.")    (4)  His  reputation.    A 
learned  or  eloquent  man,  especially  in  the  Scriptures,  in  the  understanding  and 
exposition  of  which  he  was  mighty.     He  had  "  probably  been  well  trained  in  the 
rhetorical  schools  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  "   (Conybeare  and  Howson,  ii.  7). 
(5)  His  knowledge.     He  was  "  instructed  or  taught  by  word  of  mouth  in  the  way 
of  the  Lord,"  perhaps  by  one  of  John's  disciples,  or  by  John  himself,  whose 
ministry  he  may  have  attended.     He  knew  the  things  of  the  Lord  or  concerning 
jesus — i.e.,  from  the  standpoint  of  John,  whose  baptism  alone  he  had  received. 
That  he  was  not  acquainted  with  the  later  facts  of  our  Lord's  history — as,  e.g.,  His 
death  and  resurrection,  with  all  the  doctrinal  significance  these  contained — seems 
hinted  in  the  narrative,  which,  however,  may  admit  of  his  acquaintance  with  the 
person  and  work  of  Jesus  as  taught  by  John.     (6)   His  piety.     He  was  fervent 
in  spirit  (compare  Rom.  xii.  11) ;  of  a  glowing  religious  disposition  and  ardent  zeal 
in  promoting  the  spread  of  the  gospel  as  understood  by  him.     (7)  His  activity.    He 
taught  carefully,  and  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  synagogue.     2.  His  meeting 
with  Priscilla  and  Aquila.     (1)  The  place  where  this  occurred  was  most  likely  the 
svnagogue.       "When  Priscilla    and    Aquila  heard  him."      (2)  The  impression 
made  upon  Priscilla  and  Aquila  by  his  eloquent  Scripture  expositions  was  that 
he  sincerely  believed  in  the  Messiah  whom  John  had  proclaimed,  but  had  not  a 
perfect  knowledge  of  the  facts  of  Christ's  history  or  an  accurate  understanding  of 
the  plan  of  salvation  which  was  grounded  on  them.     (3)  Accordingly  they  under- 
took to  expound,  and  in  point  of  fact  did  expound  to  him,  the  way  of  God  more 
carefully.     Whether  Priscilla  and  Aquila  had  first  learnt  the  story  of  the  Cross 
in  Rome  from  Pentecostal  pilgrims,  or  in  Ephesus  from  Paul,  cannot  be  decided 
(see  on  ver.  3),  neither  can  it  be  ascertained  whether  Apollos  had  been  baptised 
by  John  or  his  disciples,   or  whether,  if  he  had  been,  he  was  a  second  time 
baptised.     The  incident  in  xix.   1-7  would  suggest  rebaptism  in  the  name  of 
Christ  if  that  ordinance  had  previously  been  administered  to  him.     3.  His  de- 
parture from  the  city.     After  learning  the  way  of  God  more  accurately  he  con- 
ceived the  design  of  crossing  over  into  Achaia.     (1)  His  reasons  fordoing  so  may 
have  been  "  a  delicate  reserve  which  prevented  him  from  coming  forward  again 
in  Ephesus,  where  he  had  already  appeared  with  such  unripe  and  defective  know- 
ledge "  (Lechler),  or  a  desire  from  what  he  heard  of  the  Corinthian  Church  from 
Priscilla  and  Aquila  to  labour  there,  or  both.     (2)  His  way  was  smoothed  for 
him  by  the  brethren  at  Ephesus,  who,  willing  to  part  with  their  eloquent  teacher 
for  the  good  of  Corinth,  encouraged  him  (not  exhorted  the  Corinthians),  and  gave 
him  to  the  Church  there  "  letters  of  commendation  "  (2  Cor.  iii.   1).     (3)  His 
resolution  was  providentially  stamped  as  right  by  the  success  which  attended  his 
ministry  in  Achaia,  which  was  both  helpful  to  them  who  had  believed  through 
grace,  and  effective  in  defending  the  truth  against  the  Jews,  whom  "  he  power- 
fully confuted  and  that  publicly,  showing  by  the  Scriptures  that  Jesus  was 
Christ."' 

Learn. — 1.  That  an  imperfectly  enlightened  Christian  maybe  instrumental  in 
doing  much  good.  2.  That  persons  of  eminent  parts  may  be  greatly  helped  in  the 
religious  life  by  individuals  of  obscure  position  and  slender  gifts.  3.  That  private 
Christians  may  sometimes  do  the  work  of  theological  colleges  and  ecclesiastical 
boards.  4.  That  ministers  of  eminent  gifts,  grace  being  equal,  may  be  expected 
to  do  better  service  in  the  Church  than  ministers  of  lesser  endowments.  5.  That 
Christian  Churches  should  diligently  seek  out  and  train  those  among  them  who 
appear  best  fitted  for  the  ministry. 

399 


chap,  xviii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  24.  A  polios  :  a  Model  Preacher. 
I.  Eloquent  in  speech. 
II.  Mighty  in  the  Scriptures  (ver. 
24). 

III.  Fervent  in  spirit  (ver.  25). 

IV.  Courageous  in  heart  (ver.  26). 
V.  Humble  in  mind  (ver.  26). 

VI.  Unwearied  in  service  (ver.  27). 
VII.  Powerfulin  reasoning  (ver.  28). 

Ver.  25.  The  Way  of  the  Lord. 

I.  A  Divine  way.  The  same  as  the 
way  of  God.  The  two  expressions 
imply  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  divinity. 

II.  A  Prophetic  way.  Forean- 
nounced  by  prophets  and  teachers  of 
the  Old  Dispensation.  The  Messianic 
element  in  Old  Testament  prophecy. 

III.  A  Scriptural  way.  The  value 
of  Old  Testament  Scripture  as  a  testi- 
mony to  Christ.  The  Old  Testament 
the  basis  and  support  of  the  New. 

Ver.  26.  Growth  in  Christian  Know- 
ledge. 

I.  Necessary  for  all,  even  for  the 
gifted  (ver.  24). 

II.  Attainable  by  humble  desire  of 
learning  (ver.  26). 

III.  Fruitful,  by  blessed  working 
for  God  (vers.  27,  28). 

Ver.  27.  All  of  Grace. 

I.  The  faith  of  the  Christian  be- 
liever (compare  Eph.  ii.  8). 

II.  The  success  of  the  Christian 
minister  (compare  1  Cor.  iii.  7). 

Vers.  24-28.  The  Biography  of 
Apollos. 

I.  The  details  of  his  early  history. 
— 1.  By  descent  a  Jew.  The  honour 
and  privilege  of  having  been  descended 
from  Abraham  (John  viii.  39  ;  Rom. 
iii.  I,  ix.  4,  5).  2.  By  birth  an 
Alexandrian.  An  additional  privilege 
to  be  born  in  a  great  centre  of  light 
and  civilisation.  How  much  more  to 
be  cradled  in  a  Christian  land  !  3.  By 
talent    an    eloquent   or    learned    man. 


Neither  possible  without  a  combination 
of  remarkable  powers,  clearness  of 
perception,  retentiveness  of  memory, 
readiness  of  reproduction,  quickness  of 
emotion.  4.  By  religion  a  half  Chris- 
tian. Distinguished  at  this  stage  by 
three  things:  (1)  his  large  acquaintance 
with  Scripture;  (2)  his  position  as  a 
disciple  of  John ;  and  (3)  his  activity  as 
a  preacher. 

II.  The  story  of  his  conversion  to 
Christianity. — 1 .  How  providentially  it 
was  brought  about.  By  meeting  with 
Aquila  and  Priscilla  who,  on  their  way 
to  Pontus  probably,  had  stayed  at 
Ephesus.  So  the  hand  of  God  is  in 
every  man's  conversion,  though  not 
always  as  plainly  seen.  2.  How  humbly 
it  was  brought  about.  By  no  special 
manifestation  of  Christ,  such  as  Paul 
enjoyed.  By  no  angel  ministers  like 
those  who  were  commissioned  to  lead 
the  Eunuch  and  Cornelius  into  the 
light.  Not  even  by  an  apostle  like 
Paul  or  by  an  evangelist  like  Philip. 
But  by  two  private  and  comparatively 
obscure  Christians,  named  Aquila  and 
Priscilla.  3.  How  quietly  it  was 
brought  about.  No  vulgar  noise  or 
sensational  appeals.  Simply  quiet 
teaching.  Imparting  the  truth  and 
allowing  it  to  do  its  own  work. 

III.  His  subsequent  career  as  a 
Christian  preacher. — 1.  He  began  with 
his  own  people.  As  Christ  commanded 
His  disciples  to  begin  at  Jerusalem 
(Luke  xxiv.  47)  j  and  as  Andrew  first 
found  his  own  brother  (John  i.  41). 
2.  He  passed  over  into  Europe.  Visited 
the  Churches  in  Achaia,  and  specially 
that  of  Corinth,  where  he  laboured  in 
the  house  of  Justus  among  the  people 
Paul  had  gathered — and  laboured  so 
successfully  that  a  party  rallied  round 
him  as  if  he  had  been  a  rival  of  the 
apostle  (1  Cor.  i.  12),  which  he  was 
not.  Nor  was  Paul  ever  jealous  of 
him,  since  he  was  afterwards  in  Paul's 
company  when  the  First  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians  was  written  ( 1  Cor.  xvi.  1 2). 


400 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xix. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

The  Progress  of  the  Third  Missionary  Journey  (Paul  and  Timothy). 

§  1.  Paul's  Return  to  Ephesus;  or,  the  Re-Baptism  of  some  Disciples  of  John 

(vers.  1-7). 
§  2.  A  Three   Years'  Ministry  in  Ephesus;  or,  a  Great  Door  opened  for  the 

Gospel  (vers.  8-12). 
§  3.  An  Incident  in  Ephesus;  or,  the  Story  of  Scaeva's  Sons  (vers.  13-20). 
§  4.  Paul's  Last  Days  in  Ephesus;  or,  Contemplating  New  Plans  (vers.  21-22). 
§  5.  A  Popular  Tumult  in  Ephesus ;  or,  the  Temple  of  Diana  endangered  (vers. 

23-41). 

CRITICAL   REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  While  Apollos  was  at  Corinth. — A  note  of  time  for  the  incidents  narrated  in  the 
present  chapter.  The  upper  coasts,  or  the  upper  country. — The  district  mentioned  above 
(xviii.  23)  as  the  region  of  Galatia  and  Phrygia,  and  commonly  regarded  as  the  territory  of 
Northern  Galatia  (see  on  xvi.  6),  though  Prof.  Ramsay  explains  the  term  "  upper  coasts,"  or 
"  higher  districts,"  as  the  elevated  mountain  country  of  Phrygia  which  separates  the 
Sangarios  from  the  salt  lake  Anava,  both  of  which  were  situated  in  Low  Phrygia,  and  under- 
stands Luke  to  intimate  that  instead  of  pursuing  the  ordinary  caravan  route  to  Ephesus, 
which  "  passed  along  the  coast  of  Lake  Anava  as  it  descends  to  Laodicea,"  Paul  "traversed 
the  higher  districts — i.e.,  preferred  the  shorter  hill  road  practicable  for  foot  passengers,  but 
not  for  wheeled  traffic,  by  way  of  Seiblia"  (The  Church  in  the  Roman  Empire,  p.  94). 
Came  to  Ephesus,  and  finding,  should,  according  to  the  best  authorities,  be  read  came  to 
Ephesus,  and  found.  One  MS.  (Codex  D)  begins  the  verse  thus  :  "But  Paul,  desirous  accord- 
ing to  his  own  plan  to  proceed  to  Jerusalem,  the  Spirit  told  him  to  turn  aside  into  Asia." 
(See  "  Critical  Remarks  "  on  xviii.  19.)  Certain  disciples.— Baur  detects  a  contradiction,  and 
therefore  a  sign  of  untruthfulness,  in  these  men  being  called  disciples  when  they  had  not 
been  baptised. 

Ver.  2.  Whether  there  be  any  Holy  Ghost.— Better,  whether  a  Holy  Spirit  is  ;  probably  (as 
in  John  vii.  39)  whether  a  Holy  Spirit  is  given  at  baptism  or  on  profession  of  faith. 

Ver.  4.  Omit  verily  and  Christ.  The  verse  is  not  to  be  read  as  if  Paul  intended  to  say  that 
John  baptised  in  order  that  the  people  should  believe  (Meyer),  but  his  meaning  is  that  while 
John  baptised  he  spoke  to  the  people  that  they  should  believe. 

Ver.  7.  Twelve  men. — The  truthfulness  of  this  story  is  impeached  on  three  grounds: 
(1)  the  unlikelihood  of  Paul's  meeting  accidentally  with  these,  when  Aquila  could  have 
told  him  about  them  before ;  and  (2)  the  improbability  that  none  of  these  twelve  had  ever 
heard  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  and  of  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  some  one  of 
their  own  kind  who  had  been  converted  (Wendt)  ;  and  (3)  the  difficulty  of  seeing  why  they 
should  have  required  to  be  baptised  and  Apollos  not  (Holtzmann).  But,  perhaps  (1)  Paul 
knew  of  their  existence  before  he  met  them  ;  (2)  they  may  never  have  met  with  Apollos  or 
Aquila ;  and  (3)  Apollos  may  have  been  baptised. 

Ver.  9.  Believed  not  might  also  be  rendered  were  disobedient.  The  way. — See  on  ix.  2. 
Tyrannus. — Otherwise  unknown.  Hardly  the  possessor  of  a  private  synagogue  (Meyer) ;  may 
have  been  a  professor  of  philosophy  or  rhetoric,  who  rented  his  academy  to  Paul  (Zimmer- 
mann),  or,  if  converted,  gave  the  use  of  it  free.  From  the  circumstance  that  the  name  occurs 
in  the  Columbarium  of  the  household  of  Livia  on  the  Appian  Way,  and  as  belonging  to  one 
who  is  described  as  a  medians,  Plumptre  thinks  Tyrannus  may  have  been  a  physieian  whom 
Luke  knew,  if  not  also  a  Jew  who,  like  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  had  been  expelled  from  Rome 
by  Claudius's  decree,  and  who  also  shared  their  faith.  It  is  uncertain  whether  Tyrannus 
may  not  have  been  dead,  or  at  least  removed  from  Ephesus  (Overbeck),  though  his  name  still 
adhered  to  the  building  in  which  he  had  taught. 

Ver.  10.  All  they  who  dwelt  in  Asia  heard  the  word. — This  might  well  be,  considering  that 
Ephesus  constituted  the  commercial  centre  for  the  whole  of  Asia  Minor. 

Ver.  11.  Special  miracles. — Not  to  be  met  with  every  day  (compare  xxviii.  2),  uncommon, 
extraordinary  :  in  which  Paul  acted  as  an  instrument  in  God's  hand.  On  the  ground  that 
these  miracles  resembled  those  performed  by  Peter's  shadow  (v.  15),  their  historical 
credibility  has  been  assailed  (Baur,  Zeller,  Holtzmann).     But  if  Peter's  shadow  worked  a 

DD  401 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


miracle,  why  should  not  Paul's  aprons  have  done  the  same  ?  And  if  the  Holy  Spirit  found 
occasion  to  use  such  uncommon  methods  with  Peter,  why  not  also  with  Paul?  The  special 
circumstances  of  Paul  in  a  superstitious  city,  whose  population  believed  in  magic,  called  for 
special  exhibitions  of  Divine  power.     (Compare  on  v.  15.) 

Ver.  12.  Handkerchiefs. — Lit.,  sweat-cloths  (aovddpia,  a  translation  of  the  Latin  sudaria) — 
i.e.,  cloths  for  wiping  the  sweat  from  the  face  ;  made  of  white  linen  or  cotton,  and  used  alike 
by  kings  and  common  people.  Aprons  {ajjuKlvdia,  also  formed  from  the  Latin  semicincta) 
were  such  linen  garments  as  artizans  and  servants  were  accustomed  to  wear  at  work. 

Ver.  13.  Vagabond. — I.e.,  wandering  about,  or  strolling  Jews,  exorcists,  by  profession 
(compare  Matt.  xii.  28).  "  They  appear  to  have  regarded  Paul  as  one  of  their  own  class,  but 
of  a  higher  order  "  (Hackett).     For  we  read  7". 

Ver.  14.  Which  did  so  should  be  doing  this,  as  a  habit — i.e.,  pretending  to  do  so,  because  it 
cannot  be  assumed  that  they  did  so  in  reality.  Christ's  language  (Matt.  xii.  27)  does  not 
necessarily  imply  that  the  Jewish  exorcists  could  successfully  expel  demons. 

Ver.  16.  And  overcame  them.— The  best  MSS.  read  both  instead  of  "  them."  Naked  need  not 
signify  more  than  "  stripped  of  their  outer  garment."     Compare  Mark  xiv.  52 ;  John  xxi.  7. 

Ver.  17.  And  this  was  known  should  be  rendered  and  this  became  known.  Fear  fell.— 
irr^ireo-e  </>6j3os,  as  in  Luke  i.  12. 

Ver.  18.  Many  that  believed. — Bather,  of  those  who  had  believed — i.e.,  not  of  those  who 
were  newly  converted  by  this  occurrence  (Alford,  Meyer,  Holtzmann),  but  of  those  who  had 
believed  and  were  still  believers  (Lechler,  Zockler,  Plumptre,  Spence).  Confessed  and  shewed 
would  be  better  translated  confessing  and  declaring.  Their  deeds. — Not  their  sins  in  general 
(Kuinoel),  but  their  superstitious  practices  (Olshausen,  Meyer,  Holtzmann). 

Ver.  19.  Those  who  used  curious  arts.  —Lit., practised  things  over-wrought  —i.e.,  superfluous, 
curious  things — a  mild  expression  for  magical  arts.  Their  books. — Those  which  contained 
their  spells,  charms,  magical  formulas,  and  such  like.  The  so-called  "  Ephesian  letters," 
ypdfA[xaTa'~Ej<pe<na,  were  "  smalhslips  of  parchment  in  silk  bags,  on  which  were  written  strange 
cabalistic  words,  of  little  or  of  lost  meaning  "  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  20.  With  regard  to  the  preceding  verses  Ramsay  {St.  Paul,  etc.,  273)  says  : — "  In  this 
Ephesian  description  one  feels  the  character,  not  of  weighed  and  reasoned  history,  but  of 
popular  fancy  ;  and  I  cannot  explain  it  on  the  level  of  most  of  the  narrative.  ...  The  puzzle 
becomes  still  more  difficult  when  we  go  on  to  ver.  23  and  find  ourselves  again  on  the  same 
level  as  the  finest  part  of  Acts.  If  there  were  many  such  contrasts  in  the  book  as  between 
vers.  11-20  and  23-41,  I  should  be  a  believer  in  the  composite  character  of  Acts.  As  it  is,  I 
confess  the  difficulty  in  this  part ;  but  the  existence  of  some  unsolved  difficulties  is  not  a 
bar  to  the  view  maintained  in  the  present  treatise" — the  view,  namely,  of  the  historical 
credibility  of  Acts  as  a  whole.  The  literary  contrast  may  be  perfectly  explained  by  supposing 
that  Luke  compiled  this  chapter  from  papers  written  by  separate  authors. 

Ver.  22.  Timothy. — See  on  xvi.  1.  Erastus. — Whether  the  city  treasurer  of  Corinth  (Rom. 
xvi.  23)  or  Paul's  helper  in  Rome  (2  Tim.  iv.  20),  or  whether  both  were  the  same  individual 
is  debated.  For  the  nature  of  this  mission  of  Timothy  and  Erastus  see  1  Cor.  iv.  17-19,  and 
compare  "  Hints." 

Ver.  23.  The  way. — See  on  ix.  2. 

Ver.  24.  Demetrius. — The  name  has  been  found  in  an  inscription,  exhumed  in  Ephesus  and 
supposed  (Hicks)  to  belong  to  A.D.  50-60,  recording  a  public  honour  decreed  to  the  Neopoioi 
or  temple  wardens  of  Ephesus  in  the  year  of  Demetrius.  Silver  shrines  for  (rather  of) 
Diana.— Not  silver  coins  stamped  with  the  picture  of  the  temple  (Beza,  Scaliger,  Piscator), 
but  miniature  representations  in  silver  of  the  temple,  which  strangers  visiting  the  city  were 
accustomed  to  purchase.  No  small  gain  should  be  either  no  little  business  (R.V.),  or  no  small 
wages  (Hackett)  to  the  craftsmen. 

Ver.  27.  The  temple  of  the  great  goddess  Diana. — Reckoned  one  of  the  seven  wonders  of 
the  ancient  world.  This  was  in  1869,  after  having  for  centuries  been  buried,  rediscovered  by 
the  late  Mr.  J.  T.  Wood,  F.S.A.,  who  found  remains  of  three  separate  buildings  about  a  mile 
from  the  nearest  (or  N.E.)  city  gate.  The  earliest  of  the  three  temples  had  been  commenced 
B.C.  480,  by  Ctesiphon  and  his  son  Metagenes,  completed  by  Demetrius,  a  priest  of  Diana, 
and  Paeonius,  an  Ephesian,  and  destroyed  soon  after.  The  second  was  erected  on  the  same 
site  by  an  unknown  architect,  and  burnt  down  by  Erostratus  on  the  day  Alexander  was  born, 
B.C.  356.  The  third,  of  which  Dinocrates,  a  Macedonian,  was  the  designer,  was  in  course  of 
erection  when  Alexander,  having  visited  Ephesus,  offered  to  complete  it  at  his  own  expense 
if  the  people  would  allow  him  (which  they  would  not)  to  dedicate  it,  when  finished,  to 
Artemis  in  his  own  name.  This  building,  which  was  octostyle,  having  eight  columns  in 
front,  and  dipteral,  having  two  ranks  of  fluted  columns  in  the  peristyle,  was  163  feet 
9|  inches  in  width  from  face  to  face  of  columns,  and  342  feet  6f  inches  in  length.  The 
cella  or  naos  of  the  temple  was  70  feet  wide,  and  was  doubtless  hypaethral,  or  open  to  the 
sky.  (See  Modem  Discoveries  on  the  Site  of  Ancient  Ephesus:  Bypaths  of  Bible  Knowledge, 
pp.  73,  77,  81.) 

402 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xix. 


Ver.  29.  The  theatre. — Explored  in  1866,  this  was  found  to  have  been  built  against  the 
steep  western  side  of  Mount  Coressus,  to  have  been  495  feet  in  diameter,  to  have  had  a 
pulpitum  or  stage  22  feet  deep  and  110  feet  in  diameter,  and  to  have  been  capable  of  con- 
taining 24,500  persons  {Ibid.,  p.  33). 

Ver.  31.  Certain  of  the  chief  of  Asia. — ol ' Aaiapxai.  These  were  the  ten  presidents  of  the 
Sacred  Rites  and  public  games,  "  officials  "of  the  imperial  cultus  "  (Ramsay),  in  pro-consular 
Asia  (Enseb,  H.  E,  iv.  15).  In  the  same  way  other  districts  were  provided  with  similar 
officers ;  as,  e.g.,  Galatia  with  Galatiarchs,  Bithynia  with  Bithyniarchs,  Syria  with  Syriarchs. 
These  were  commonly  "  selected  chiefly  on  account  of  their  wealth,  and  sometimes  against 
their  will "  (Ramsay). 

Ver.  33.  Alexander. — His  identification  with  the  individual  named  in  2  Tim.  iv.  14  is  at 
least  doubtful.     (See  "  Homiletical  Analysis.") 

Ver.  34.  Great  is  Diana  (or  Artemis)*of  the  Ephesians. — MeYdAT?  77  "Apre/uis  'EQeolwv.  Codex 
D  reads,  M  6701X77  "Apre/jus,  Great  Diana  (Artemis),  which,  says  Professor  Ramsay,  formed  "a 
stock  phrase  of  Artemis-worship,"  in  which  it  was  usual  to  insist  upon  the  great  power  of  the 
goddess.  He  adduces  "  the  invocations  '  Great  Apollo '  at  Dionysopolis,  '  Great  Anaitis  '  in 
the  Katakekaumene, '  Great  Artemis '  in  Lesbos,"  as  affording  "complete  corroboration  of  the 
title  '  Great  Artemis  '  mentioned  in  Acts  "  (The  Church  in  the  Roman  Umpire,  pp.  135-139). 
He  further  cites  as  parallels  an  inscription  in  which  the  Cappadocian  god,  Zeus  of  Venasa,  is 
addressed  as  "Great  Zeus  in  heaven";  and  several  coins  found  at  Laodicea,  on  the  Lycus, 
which  bear  the  legend  Zeus  Aceic,  signifying,  with  probable  accuracy,  as  M.  Waddington 
has  suggested,  "  Mighty  Zeus."  Prof.  Ramsay  even  thinks  that  the  Baal  worshippers  on 
Mount  Carmel  (1  Kings  xviii.  26)  may  have  used  the  epithet  "  great "  (Ibid.,  p.  142). 

Ver. 35.  The  town-clerk. — Often  mentioned  in  Ephesian  inscriptions.  A  worshipper. — Lit., 
temple  keeper .  veuKopos,  a  term  founded  on  Ephesian  coins  struck  about  Paul's  time, 
originally  signified  a  temple  servant  whose  business  it  was  to  sweep  out  and  decorate  the 
temple,  and  ultimately  grew  to  be  an  epitheton  omans,  or  honorary  title  of  towns  in  Asia 
Minor  which  were  specially  devoted  to  the  service  of  any  divinity,  and  possessed  a  temple 
consecrated  to  that  divinity.  The  image  which  fell  down  from  Jupiter  was  the  celebrated 
statue  of  the  many-breasted  Artemis  (Diana  multimammia,  Jerome),  made,  according  to 
Vitruvius,  of  cedar  wood,  according  to  Pliny,  of  vine  wood,  according  to  Xenophon,  of  gold, 
and  covered  with  mystical  inscriptions  on  brow,  girdle,  and  feet.  The  tradition  of  its  origin 
— similar  to  that  which  prevailed  concerning  a  statue  of  Artemis  in  Tauris  (Eurip.,  Tph.  in 
T,  977),  and  one  of  Pallas  at  Athens  (Iph.  in  I.,  xxvi.  6) — suggests  that  it  was  probably 
"  a  large  aerolite,  such  as  are  found  in  Norway,  and  which,  shaped  by  a  sculptor  of  the  day, 
might  have  been  pieced  out  and  made  to  assume  a  form  similar  to  the  well-known  statues  of 
Diana  in  the  Museo  Reale  at  Naples,  and  in  the  museum  at  Monreale,  near  Palermo  "  (Modern 
Discoveries  on  the  Site  of  Ancient  Ephesus,  pp.  77,  78). 

Ver.  37.  These  men  were  Gaius  and  Aristarchus  (ver.  29).  Robbers  of  churches,  or  temples 
(R.V.).  "  The  temples  among  the  heathen  contained  votive  offerings  and  other  gifts,  and 
were  often  plundered"  (Hackett).     Compare  Jos.,  Ant.,  XVIII.  iii.  5. 

Ver.  38.  The  law  is  open.— Better,  the  courts  are  open,  or  court  days  are  being  held. 
Deputies  should  be  pro-consuls  (see  on  xiii.  7).  "The  coins  of  Ephesus  show  that  the  pro- 
consular authority  was  fully  established  there  in  the  reign  of  Nero"  (Hackett). 

Ver.  39.  A  lawful,  or,  the  regular  assembly. — The  ordinary  civil  tribunal,  or  popular  gather- 
ing, called  and  presided  over  by  the  chief  magistrate  of  the  city.  This  assembly  is  mentioned 
in  the  Ephesian  inscriptions  (Wood,  p.  38). 

Ver.  40.  To  be  called  in  question  for  this  day's  uproar;  or,  to  be  accused  of  riot  concerning 
this  day. — The  town  clerk  frightened  them  with  the  prospect  of  a  Roman  "  execution "  or 
investigation  into  the  tumult,  for  which  he  said  "there  was  no  cause,"  rather  than  "for 
which  no  one  was  the  cause  "  (  Vulgate). 

Note  on  the  Histoeic  Credibility  of  Acts  xix.  23-41. 

I.  Against. — "It  is  certainly  possible,  and  even  probable,  that  zeal  for  the  great  Artemis, 
the  boast  of  the  city,  and  the  interests  attached  to  her  cultus,  occasioned  Paul's  distress  in 
Ephesus ;  it  is  possible  that  the  name  of  Demetrius,  the  leader  of  the  movement  against  him, 
is  historical,  that  some  such  episode  as  that  associated  with  Alexander  took  place,  and  that 
Gaius  and  Aristarchus  were  menaced  with  Paul.  But  the  description  of  events  cannot  be 
correct — i.e.,  according  to  the  facts — and  its  separate  points  possess  merely  the  value  of  a 
faint  and  shadowy  outline  of  actual  reminiscences"  (Weizsacker,  The  Ajwstolic  Age  [E.  T.], 
i.  391). 

II.  For. — "It  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  invent  a  tale,  whose  scene  lies  in  a  foreign  land, 
without  betraying  in  slight  details  his  ignorance  of  the  scenery  and  circumstances  amid 
which  the  event  is  described  as  taking  place.  Unless  the  writer  studiously  avoids  details, 
and  confines  himself  to  names  and  generalities,  he  is  certain  to  commit  numerous  errors. 

403 


chap.  xix.       BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Even  the  most  laborious  and  minute  study  of  the  circumstances  of  the  country  in  which  he 
is  to  lay  his  scene  will  not  preserve  him  from  such  errors  .  .  ."  But  "the  more  closely  we 
are  able  to  test  the  story  in  Acts  (xix.  23-41),  the  more  vivid  and  true  to  the  situation  and 
surroundings  does  it  prove  to  be,  and  the  more  justified  are  we  in  pressing  closely  every 
inference  from  the  little  details  that  occur  in  it.  I  entertain  the  strong  hope  that  the 
demonstration  which  has  now  been  given  of  its  accuracy  in  disputed  points  will  do  away 
with  all  future  doubt  as  to  the  faithfulness  of  the  picture  that  it  gives  of  Ephesian  society  in 
A.D.  57  "  (Prof.  Ramsay,  The  Chwrch  in  the  Roman  JZmpire,  p.  141). 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS. 

Vers.    1-7.  Paul's  return  to  Ephesus ;  or,  the  Re-Baptism  of  some  of  John's 
Disciples. 

I.  The  Apostle's  meeting  with  these  disciples. — 1.  When  he  encountered  them. 
On  returning  to  Ephesus,  which  he  reached  (1)  by  way  of  the  upper  coasts  (or 
country),  meaning  probably  the  mountainous  regions  (as  distinguished  from  the 
lower  elevations  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ")  of  Phrygia  or  of  Asia  as  distinguished 
from  the  low  ground  on  which  Ephesus  was  situated,  and  (2)  after  Apollos  had 
departed  and  was  established  in  Corinth,  where  he  laboured  in  the  gospel  with 
such  acceptance  as  to  draw  around  himself  a  considerable  body  of  adherents  who 
recognised  him  as  their  spiritual  teacher  (1  Cor.  i.  12,  iii.  4,  5,  6).  2.  Who  they 
ivere.  Certain  disciples — i.e.,  believers  in  the  Christian  faith,  twelve  in  number, 
"  living,"  probably,  "  together  as  a  kind  of  ascetic  community,  attending  the 
meetings  of  the  Church,  yet  not  sharing  the  fulness  of  its  life"  (Plumptre) — 
who,  like  Apollos  (xviii.  25),  had  some  knowledge  of  the  way  of  the  Loid  as 
proclaimed  by  the  Baptist,  and  had  even  been  baptised  by  the  forerunner  or  one 
of  his  disciples— it  is  not  certain  that  Apollos  was  baptised  (but  see  "  Critical 
Remarks,"  ver.  7) — but  were  totally  unacquainted  with  the  later  facts  of  Christ's 
history,  and  with  the  Spirit  baptism  of  Pentecost.  3.  His  surprise  at  meeting  them. 
The  credibility  of  the  narrative  is  half  suspected  by  Holtzmann  on  the  ground 
that  Paul  should  not  have  felt  any  surprise  at  falling  in  with  the  twelve 
followers  of  the  Baptist,  since  Aquila  must  have  prepared  him  for  such  a 
meeting  by  relating  his  experience  with  Apollos ;  while  Wendt  is  half  inclined 
to  doubt  whether  the  disciples  spoken  of  could  have  been  so  ignorant  as  they 
are  represented,  if  they  were  really  converted  ;  and  Ramsay  cannot  understand 
how  these  men  could  have  "  escaped  the  knowledge  of  Aquila,  Priscilla,  and 
Apollos,  and  yet  attracted  Paul's  attention  before  he  went  to  the  synagogue." 
But  (1)  Paul  may  have  met  these  disciples  on  his  first  arrival  in  the  city  and 
before  he  had  resumed  acquaintance  with  his  old  friends  Aquila  and  Priscilla. 
(2)  The  disciples  in  question  may  easily  enough  have  accepted  the  Baptist's 
account  of  Christ  and  submitted  to  baptism  without  having  subsequently  learnt 
about  the  Resurrection  and  Ascension,  with  the  Pentecostal  effusion  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  And  (3)  it  is  gratuitous  to  assume  that  Paul  did  not  learn  of  the 
existence  of  John's  followers  from  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  while  his  knowledge  of 
the  state  of  imperfectly  developed  Christianity  in  which  Apollos  was,  may  have 
been  the  very  circumstance  which  led  him  to  suspect  that  the  disciples  now 
spoken  of  were  in  a  similar  condition. 

II.  The  Apostle's  conversation  with  these  disciples. — 1.  The  first  question 
addressed  to  them  by  Paul.  "  Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  since  ye 
believed?"  or  "Did  ye  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  when  ye  believed1?"  (1)  The 
import  of  this  question  was,  not  whether  they  wrere  acquainted  with  the  personality 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  whether  they  had  received  the  Holy  Spirit  at  any  period^ 
subsequent  to  their  believing,  but  whether  on  the  occasion  of  their  first  pro- 
fession of  faith  (by  baptism)  they  had  been  the  subjects  of  any  supernatural 
endowment  with  spiritual  gifts.     (2)  The  object  of  the  question  was  to  ascertain 

404 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xix. 


whether  they  had  been  baptised  after  a  full  and  distinct  profession  of  faith  in 
the  crucified  and  risen  Christ.  (3)  The  sufficiency  of  the  question  arose  from 
this,  that  had  they  been  baptised '  with  true  Christian  baptism,  then  undoubtedly 
they  must  have  received  some  spiritual  gift  (compare  x.  44,  45;  Rom.  i.  11), 
whereas  if  they  had  not  received  any  such  gift,  then  they  could  not  have  been 
baptised  with  Christian  baptism,  and  must  still  be  imperfectly  instiucted 
Christians.  2.  The  answer  returned  by  them  to  Paul.  u  We  have  not  so  much 
as  heard "  (or,  we  did  not  so  much  as  hear)  "  whether  there  be  any  Holy 
Ghost"  (or,  whether  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given).  Again  (1)  the  sense  of  this 
reply  can  hardly  have  been  that  they  had  never  heard  of  the  existence  of  a  Holy 
Spirit  (Hackett),  since,  as  Bengel  remarks,  they  could  scarcely  have  been 
followers  either  of  Moses  or  of  the  Baptist  without  attaining  to  such  knowledge 
(Exod.  xxxi.  3,  xxxv.  31  ;  Numb,  xxvii.  18;  Matt.  iii.  11)  ;  but  (2)  must  have 
been  that  when  received  into  the  faith  either  nothing  had  been  said  about  the 
Holy  Spirit  at  all  (Alford),  or  nothing  had  been  spoken  about  a  dispensation  of 
the  Spirit  being  connected  with  the  act  of  reception  into  the  Church  by  faith 
(Lechler).  3.  The  second  question  addressed  to  them  by  Paul.  "  Unto  "  or  into 
"  what  then  were  ye  baptised  1 "  What  was  the  object  of  your  faith  and  the 
subject  of  your  confession  when  ye  were  baptised?  The  questions  presuppose 
that  some  declaration  was  made  either  by  them  of  their  faith,  or  by  the 
administrant  of  the  baptismal  rite  of  the  significance  of  the  ordinance,  perhaps 
by  both.  4.  The  second  answer  returned  by  them.  "  They  said,  Unto  (or  into) 
John's  baptism."  Not  unto  John  as  the  Messiah,  or  unto  John  as  their  spiritual 
leaders  which  would  certainly  have  been  "  opposed  to  the  humility  and  the  entire 
character  of  the  Baptist  "  (Lechler) ;  but  into  that  repentance  and  faith  in  the 
coming  Messiah  which  John  preached,  and  to  the  exercise  of  which  he  took  those 
bound  who  submitted  to  the  rite  of  baptism.  5.  The  further  instruction  supplied 
them  by  Paul.  This  consisted  in  (1)  an  exposition  of  the  true  purport  of  John's 
baptism,  which  was  designed  to  point  his  hearers  to  a  Messiah  who  was  to  come 
and  commit  them  to  faith  in  that  Messiah  when  he  did  come,  and  (2)  an 
intimation  that  that  Messiah  had  come  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  on  whom  there- 
fore it  was  now  their  duty  to  believe.  G.  The  response  given  by  them  to  this 
instruction.  When  they  heard  it  they  did  not  dispute  the  correctness  of  the 
apostle's  teaching,  but  believed.     This,  though  not  stated,  must  be  assumed.  \ 

III.  The  Apostle's  re-baptism  of  these  disciples. — 1.  The  fact  of  it.  The  text 
cannot  be  read  ill  this  way — "  When  they  (John's  disciples)  heard  (what  their 
Master,  John,  said)  they  were  baptised  (by  John)  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,"  as  if  it  were  a  continuation  of  Paul's  remarks  (Beza  and  others), — even 
to  wrest  it  from  the  Anabaptists.  That  the  baptism  was  performed  by  Paul 
is  as  clear  as  it  is  true  that  John  never  baptised  into  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  2.  The  manner  of  it.  Most  likely,  as  was  Paul's  usual  practice 
(1  Cor.  i.  14),  by  the  hands  of  another  than  himself,  though  this  is  not 
absolutely  certain.  3.  The  accompaniment  of  it.  The  laying  on  of  hands  upon 
the  baptised  disciples.  This  was  performed  by  the  apostle,  and  was  instantly 
followed  by  the  descent  upon  them  of  the  Holy  Ghost  so  that  they  forthwith 
"spake  with  tongues  and  prophesied"  (compare  x.  44-46).  4.  The  inference 
from  it.  Not  that  re-baptism  is  always  necessary  when  conversion  intervenes 
after  the  first.  It  is  not  demonstrable  that  those  who  had  been  baptised  by 
John's  baptism  were  always  re-baptised  on  becoming  Christian  disciples.  Doubt- 
less among  the  thousands  baptised  at  Pentecost  were  many  who  had  been 
baptised  by  John ;  but  no  evidence  appears  that  the  apostles  who  had  only 
received  John's  baptism  were  re-baptised.  Possibly  in  their  case  the  baptism 
with  fire  at  Pentecost  rendered  the  repetition  of  the  water  rite  unnecessary. 
The  re-baptism  of  A  polios  is  also  problematical. 

405 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Learn. — 1.  That  genuine  faith  may  coexist  with  very  imperfect  knowledge  of 
Christian  truth.  2.  That  sincere  faith  will  always  be  ready  to  receive  further 
enlightenment.  3.  That  a  properly  instructed  faith  always  looks  towards  and 
rests  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  4.  That  true  faith  is  always  followed  by 
the  reception  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  5.  That  Christian  baptism  once  received  does 
not  need  to  be  repeated. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Yer.  2.   On  receiving  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I.  The  necessity  of  receiving  the 
Holy  Ghost. — That  one  who  has  be- 
lieved in  Jesus  must  also  receive  the 
Holy  Ghost  was  :  I.  The  express  declara- 
tion of  prophecy.  See  the  utterances  on 
this  subject  of  Isaiah,  Joel,  Ezekiel, 
Zechariah,  John  the  Baptist.  2.  The 
explicit  promise  of  Christ  Himself  As, 
for  instance,  to  the  woman  of  Samaria 
(John  iv.  14)  and  to  the  Jews  in  the 
temple  (John  vii.  38,  39) ;  to  the 
twelve  at  the  supper  table  (John  xiv. 
16,  17,  xv.  26,  xvi.  7),  and  again  to 
the  eleven  after  His  resurrection 
(Luke  xxiv.  49).  3.  The  unambiguous 
assertion  of  Christ's  apostles.  Examine 
the  language  of  Peter  (ii.  38,  v.  32), 
of  Paul  (Gal.  iv.  6  ;  Eph.  i.  13),  and 
of  John  (1  John  iii.  24). 

II.  Marks  by  which  the  Holy  Ghost's 
presence  in  the  heart  may  be  known. — 
In  the  early  apostolic  age  of  the  Church 
the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon 
a  believer  revealed  itself  in  certain 
miraculous  endowments  which  were 
thereby  communicated  to  him,  such  as 
the  gift  of  tongues  (ver.  6),  the  gift  of 
prophecy,  or  of  healing  or  of  discerning 
spirits,  or  of  interpretation  of  tongues 
(1  Cor.  xii.  9,  10).  Now  it  is  recog- 
nised by  such  signs  as :  1 .  Inward 
illumination,  the  Holy  Ghost  being  a 
spirit  of  truth  (John  xiv.  17),  whose 
office  it  is  to  guide  into  all  truth 
(John  xvi.  13) ;  compare  1  John  ii.  20. 
2.  Grouping  sanctity,  the  Holy  Ghost 
being  a  spirit  of  purity,  as  His  name 
implies,  and  bringing  holiness  into  the 
heart  as  He  imparts  light  to  the  under- 
standing (Eph.  v.  9).  3.  Habitual 
devotion,  the  Holy  Ghost  being  es- 
sentially a  spirit  of  grace  and  supplica- 
tion (Zech.  xii.  10). 

III.  Advantages  that  result  from 

406 


receiving  the  Holy  Ghost.— The  re- 
ception of  the  Holy  Spirit  by  a  believer 
constitutes  1.  A  true  bond  of  union 
between  the  believer's  soul  and  Christ. 
The  union  of  Christ  to  His  people  and 
of  believers  to  Christ  is  not  merely  ex- 
ternal, forensic,  legal,  but  also  internal, 
moral,  and  spiritual  (1  John  iv.    13). 

2.  A  seal  of  the  believer  as  Christ's  pur- 
chased possession.  By  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  Christ,  as  it  were,  claims 
the  believer  as  His  own  (Eph.  i.   13;. 

3.  An  earnest  of  the  believer's  in- 
heritance. The  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  foretaste  of  future  glory 
(Eph.  i.  14). 

Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost 
since  ye  believed^  The  influences  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  are  extraordinary  and 
ordinary.  His  ordinary  influences  are 
those  which  are  exerted  in  conver- 
sion and  after  conversion.  It  is  of  the 
Spirit's  work  in  believers  I  shall  now 
speak.  1.  Have  ye  received  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  a  teacher1?  Believers  need 
instruction.  They  do  not  receive  a 
new  revelation.  The  author  of  the 
Book  explains  it  to  them.  On  what 
subjects  ?  The  house  of  the  interpreter. 
2.  Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  as 
a  guide  1  Believers  need  guidance  as 
well  as  instruction.  Practical  religion. 
No  Urim  and  Thummim.  The  Bible  a 
guide-book.  Ministers  and  Christian 
friends  convey  information  about  the 
route.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  guide. 
Mentor.  3.  Have  ye  received  the 
Holy  Ghost  as  a  sanctifier  1  Believers 
do  not  learn  all  at  once  the  plagues  of 
their  own  heart.  They  are  led  from 
one  apartment  to  another  of  the 
chambers  of  imagery.  They  desire  to 
be  holy  as  the  miser  desires  gold, 
or     the     scholar    knowledge,    or    the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xix. 


statesman  power.  They  use  the  means, 
but  rely  on  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  Have 
ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  a  com- 
forter ?  He  is  a  comforter  because  He 
administers  consolation  to  believers  in 
seasons  of  affliction.  But  more.  He 
supplies  to  them  strength  adequate  to 
every  exigency.  And  more.  He 
bestows  on  them  true  and  lasting  hap- 
piness. 5.  Have  ye  received  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  an  intercessor  1  Distinguish 
between  the  intercession  of  the  Spirit 
and  that  of  Christ. — G.  Brooks. 

Ver.  3.  On  the  Import  of  Baptism. — 
"  Into  what  were  ye  baptised  1  "     Into 
I.  Repentance  of  sin. 
II.  Faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  Resolution  after  new  obedience. 

IV.  Submission  to  the  leading  of 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

Vers.  3,  5.  The  two  Masters,  John 
and  Christ. 

I.  Human  masters  may  transmit 
their  words ;  Christ  only  can  impart 
His  Spirit. 


II.  Human  masters  may  teach  the 
elements ;  Christ  only  can  conduct  to 
the  goal. 

II  I.  Human  masters  may  establish 
schools ;  Christ  only  can  found  a 
Church. — Gerok. 

Ver.  6.  The  Tongues  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  gives. 

I.  The  tongue  of  the  wise. — The 
tongue  of  truth,  the  tongue  of  know- 
ledge (Prov.  xv.  2 ;  Mai.  ii.  7  ;  Eph. 
iv.  25). 

II.  The  tongue  of  the  holy. — The 
tongue  of  righteousness,  the  tongue  of 
purity  (Psalm  xxxv.  28,  xxxix.  1  ; 
2  Pet.  i.  21). 

III.  The  tongue  of  the  loving. — The 
tongue  of  kindness,  the  tongue  of  soft 
speech  (Prov.  xxxi.  26  ;  Eph.  iv.  15). 

IV.  The  tongue  of  the  learned. — 
The  tongue  of  eloquence,  the  tongue  of 
persuasive  speech  (Isa.  1.  4 ;  Psalm 
xlv.  1). 

V.  The  tongue  of  the  earnest. — The 
tongue  of  fire,  the  tongue  of  zealous 
utterance  (Isa.  vi.  7  ;  Acts  ii.  3). 


HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  8—12. 

A  Three  Years'  Ministry  in  Ephesus ;  or,  a  Great  Door  opened  for  the  Gospel 
(1  Cor.  xvi.  8,  9). 

I.  Three  months  in  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews. — 1.  Paul's  unchanging  theme. 
1  'The  things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God."  "This  one  thing  I  do" 
(Phil.  iii.  13),  constituted  Paul's  motto  in  preaching.  "  Jesus  Christ  and  Him 
crucified  "  formed  his  unvarying  text,  whether  in  Corinth  or  Ephesus.  (1)  He 
knew  none  loftier  to  set  before  the  human  intellect,  or  (2)  better  suited  to  his 
hearers'  wants,  or  (3)  more  worthy  of  the  consecration  of  all  his  powers  to 
proclaim.  Besides  (4),  it  had  been  assigned  him  by  his  exalted  Master,  and 
(5)  possessed  for  him  exhaustless  fulness  of  meaning  as  well  as  of  perennial 
interest.  The  preacher  or  evangelist,  minister  or  missionary,  who  substitutes  for 
this  any  branch  of  secular  science  has  both  mistaken  his  calling  and  thrown 
away  his  best  weapon  for  combating  the  ills  of  life  and  saving  the  souls  of  men. 

2.  Paul's  customary  manner.  (1)  Reasoning  and  persuading,  addressing  himself 
to  the  intellects  and  hearts  of  his  hearers  (compare  xviii.  4).  (2)  And  doing  so 
not  apologetically,  which  is  apt  to  degenerate  into  apologisingly,  but  boldly,  as  one 
who  knew  that  what  he  spoke  was  true  and  understood  that  he  had  a  secret  ally 
in  the  bosom   of  every  man  and  woman  who  listened  to  him  (2  Cor.  iv.  2). 

3.  Paul's  usual  experience.  "  Divers  were  hardened  and  believed  not,  but  spake 
evil  of  that  [or  the]  way  "  (compare  xvii.  5,  13,  xviii.  6) ;  which  implies  that  some 
were  subdued  by  the  apostle's  preaching  and  led  to  believe.  The  same  gospel 
that  softens  some  hardens  others.  It  is  a  savour  either  of  life  or  of  death  to 
every  man  who  hears. 

II.  Two  years  in  the  school  ofTyrannus. — 1.  The  place  here  mentioned  was 

407 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 

t 

the  building  or  semicircle  in  which  one  Tyrannus,  otherwise  unknown,  but  pro- 
bably a  teacher  of  philosophy  or  rhetoric,  or  a  physician  {Plumptre) — perhaps  one 
of  Paul's  converts — was  accustomed  to  instruct  his  pupils  or  cure  his  patients. 
Whether  it  was  rented  by  the  apostle  and  his  friends,  or  freely  opened  to  them 
by  Tyrannus,  as  Justus's  house  had  been  (xviii.  7),  cannot  be  decided.  2.  The 
work  carried  on  in  this  school  was  the  old  business  that  had  occupied  the  apostle 
in  the  synagogue — viz.,  preaching,  "  disputing,"  or  reasoning.  Nor  was  it  only 
on  the  Sabbaths,  but  on  all  the  weekdays,  that  the  apostle  so  laboured.  3.  The 
result  of  his  efforts  was  that,  in  spite  of  the  exertions  of  his  enemies  to  hinder  the 
progress  of  the  gospel,  "  all  who  dwelt  in  Asia  heard  the  word  of  the  Lord,  both 
Jews  and  Greeks."  If  all  who  heard  were  not  converted,  many  were;  and  these 
in  turn  would  help  to  bear  the  truth  into  regions  beyond. 

III.  Three  years  with  the  people  of  the  city. — For  this  item  of  information 
we  are  indebted  to  Paul's  subsequent  address  to  the  Ephesian  elders  (xx.  31) 
His  occupation  during  this  period  was  varied.  1.  Preaching  in  the  synagogue  on 
Sabbaths  for  a  space  of  three  months,  as  above  stated.  2.  Teaching  in  the  school 
of  Tyrannus  for  two  years,  as  just  mentioned.  3.  For  nine  months  more,  or  for 
three  years  in  all,  visiting  from  house  to  house,  and  testifying  both  to  Jews  and 
Greeks  repentance  toward  God  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (i  20, 
21).  4.  Working,  or  God  working  through  him,  miracles  of  a  special  kind — i.e., 
greater  than  ordinary — lit.,  not  such  as  may  be  met  with  any  day  (compare 
xxviii.  2),  because  of  the  special  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed,  in  the 
midst  of  a  heathen  population  that  trusted  in  "charms,  amulets,  and  mystic 
letters."  Amongst  these  miracles  were  healings  of  diseased  and  demonised 
persons,  which  were  effected  by  the  apostle's  handkerchiefs  or  aprons  (lit., 
sweat-cloths,  for  wiping  the  sweat  from  the  brow  or  face,  or  girdles,  such  as  artizans 
and  servants  were  accustomed  to  wear  when  about  their  work)  being  seized  upon 
and  brought  into  contact  with  the  bodies  of  the  afflicted.  These  miracles  were 
obviously  like  those  wrought  by  the  hem  of  Christ's  garment  (Luke  viii.  43-46), 
and  by  Peter's  shadow  (v.  15).  (See  "  Critical  Remarks").  5.  Writing  an  epistle 
to  the  Corinthians — probably  a  letter  which  is  now  lost  (1  Cor.  v.  9),  but  certainly 
the  first  of  the  two  letters  which  have  been  preserved.  6.  Paying  a  brief  visit  to 
Corinth,  of  which  Luke  has  handed  down  no  account  (see  2  Cor.  xii.  14,  xiii.  1). 
7.  Working  at  his  trade.  An  additional  item  of  information  derived  from  the 
address  at  Miletus  (xx.  34).     Compare  xviii.  3. 

Learn. — 1.  That  Christ's  people  have  in  every  age  been  evil  spoken  of. 
2.  That  Christ's  ministers  and  people  should  not  resist  evil,  but  retire  from 
before  it.  3.  That  a  faithfully  preached  gospel  cannot  be  kept  from  spreading 
throughout  the  land.  4.  That  God  can  work  miracles  by  any  sort  of  means, 
and  even,  if  need  be,  without  means.  5.  That  Christ's  gospel  is  the  most 
powerful  remedial  agency  the  world  has  ever  seen. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.  9.  Speaking  Evil  of  the  Way. —  show  it  to  be  bad;  to  insinuate  against 

A  sin —  it  will  not  eventually  hinder  it. 

I.  Common. — Christianity  is  slan-  IV.  Mean. — Most  of  those  who  ad- 
dered  by  every  class  of  its  opponents.  vance    charges     against     Christianity 

II.  Old. — Christianity  has  been  ex-  know  these  charges  to  be  groundless, 
posed  to  such  treatment  ever  since  it  V.  Heinous. — To  speak  evil  of  the 
began  its  victorious  career.  way  is  to  speak  evil  of  Him  whose  way 

III.  Foolish. — To  tell  lies  about  it  is  ;  and  God  will  not  hold  him  guilt- 
Christianity  is  not  the  way  to  prove  it  less  who  slanders  His  son.  "  For  this 
untrue ;  to  call  it  bad  names  does  not      is   an   heinous   crime ;    yea,  it    is   an 

408 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xix. 


iniquity  to  be  punished  by  the  judges  "  (ver.     22),    the     Colossian     Epaphras 

(Job  xxxi.  11).  (Col.  i.   7,   iv.  12),  Laodicea  (Col.    iv. 

15,    16),  and  Hierapolis  (Col.  iv.  13). 

Ver.  9.  Separation  and  Schism.  Three  times  four  Churches  of  apostolic 

I.  The  separation  of  believers  from  planting  have  we  therefore  seen  bloom- 
unbelievers  a  duty. —  1.  For  a  testi-  ing  forth  (unnumbered  the  Churches 
mony  against  the  unbelievers.  2.  For  in  the  upper  lands),  twelve  trees  to  the 
the  protection  of  believers,  who  might  praise  of  the  Lord  sprouted  from  the 
otherwise  be  both  hindered  in  their  root  of  Jesse  (Horn.  xv.  12),  four  in 
work  and  tainted  in  their  characters.  Lycaonia    and  Pisidia,  four  in  Mace- 

II.  The  separation  of  believers  from  donia  and  Greece,  and  four  in  the  pro- 
each  other  a  sin. — 1.  Because  they  vince  of  Asia  "  (Besser,  Bibelstunden, 
are  commanded  by   Christ   to  remain  ii.,  343,  344). 

together.     2.    Because  they   need  the 

countenance  and  help  of   each  other.  Vers.   8-12.    How   Ministers    should 

3.     Because      by     withdrawing     into  Preach. 

separate   communities   they    mar   the  I.  Boldly. — Like  men  who  fear  God, 

unity  of   the  body  and  -weaken  each  know    the  truth   and   value   of   their 

other's  hands.  message,  and  tremble  not  before  their 

fellows. 
Ver.  10.  Hearing  the  Word  of  God.  II.  Daily. — Embracing  every  oppor- 

I.  A  glorious  privilege.  tunity,  allowing  no  day  to  pass  without 

II.  A  solemn  duty.  telling  the  good  news. 

III.  A  high  responsibility.  III.    Intelligently.  —  Like    leaders 

who  understand  their  lesson. 
Two  Years'  Work  in  Ephesus.     "  In  IV.    Persuasively.  — ■  Endeavouring 

these  two  successful  years,  when  Paul  not  to  coerce,  but  to  win  the  judgment, 
taught    in    Ephesus,    four     Churches  V.    Persistently. — Not    abandoning 

were  collected  in  the  province  of  Asia ;  the  sacred  work  after  a  short  while, 

besides  the   stem  Church  in  Ephesus,  but  continuing  steadfast  unto  the  end. 
the     branch     Churches     of     Colosse,  VI.  Effectively. — So  that  their  gospel 

planted  by  a  helper  of  Paul  in  Ephesus  may  gain  adherents,  and  spread. 

HOMILETIC 'AL  ANALYSIS— Verses  13—20. 

An  incident  in  Ephesus ;  or,  the  Story  of  Scevas  Sons. 

I.  Their  social  standing. — 1.  Their  father's  name.  Scseva,  or  Skeva,  ^kcvol, 
otherwise  unknown.  The  number  of  obscure  individuals  whose  names  have 
found  a  place  in  Holy  Writ  is  remarkable.  Fathers  of  no  celebrity  have 
frequently  had  sons  who  have  risen  to  celebrity  or  achieved  notoriety.  2.  Their 
father's  dignity.  A  Jewish  chief  priest.  Whether  an  actual  high  priest  who  had 
been  deposed,  or  an  individual  connected  with  the  high  priest's  family,  or  the 
head  of  one  of  the  twenty-four  courses  that  officiated  in  the  temple,  or  a  priest 
of  the  higher  class,  or  head  of  the  priests  attached  to  the  local  synagogue,  cannot 
be  determined.  "  There  is  no  warrant  in  the  text  for  the  view  sometimes 
advocated  that  Scseva  was  merely  an  impostor  who  pretended  to  be  a  chief 
priest "  (Ramsay). 

II.  Their  professional  character. — " Vagabond" — i.e.,  wandering  "exorcists." 
According  to  the  best  information,  the  whole  Orient  at  this  time  was  full  of  such 
worthies,  exorcists  of  demons,  interpreters  of  dreams,  fortune-tellers,  charmers, 
masters  of  the  black  art,  jugglers  ;  which  renders  the  presence  of  such  a  detach- 
ment of  this  fraternity  as  Scseva's  sons  formed  perfectly  credible. 

III.  Their  ill-advised  experiment.— 1.  The  nature  of  it  was  to  attempt  the 
expulsion  of  demons  by  calling  over  such  as  were  possessed  the  name  of  the  Lord 

409 


chap.  XIX.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Jesus,  and  saying,  "  I  adjure  you  by  Jesus  whom  Paul  preacheth."  2.  The 
motive  which  impelled  them  was  undoubtedly  a  consciousness  that  Paul,  by 
employing  the  name  of  Jesus,  could  do  in  reality  what  they  with  their  incanta- 
tions and  mystic  arts  only  pretended  to  do,  but  were  well  aware  they  did  not  and 
could  not  do  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  3.  The  number  of  those  who  took  part  in 
the  particular  attempt  recorded  is  not  clear.  According  to  one  view,  while  all 
the  seven  addicted  themselves  to  this  practice  of  imitating  Paul,  only  two  (after 
the  best  reading  in  ver.  16)  were  engaged  in  this  special  instance  (Lechler, 
Alford).  Another  explanation  runs  that  though  all  the  seven  employed  them- 
selves about  the  business,  only  two,  who  acted  as  ringleaders,  were  set  upon  by 
the  demon.  A  third  suggestion  (but*  not  so  good)  is  that  all  were  overcome  by 
the  demon  on  both  sides — i.e.  when  they  stood  before  and  afterwards  when  they 
fled  from  him  (Ewald). 

IY.  Their  richly-merited  punishment. — 1.  From  whom  it  proceeded.  The 
man  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was,  and  who  now  fiercely  turned  on  the  impostors. 
As,  however,  the  man  was  more  or  less  the  involuntary  instrument  of  the  demon, 
the  real  author  of  their  punishment  was  the  "  spirit "  rather  than  the  man. 
2.  To  what  extent  it  was  carried.  The  man  leaped  upon  them  with  wild  fury, 
and,  endowed  like  the  Gadarene  demoniac,  with  almost  preternatural  strength 
(Mark  v.  3,  4),  overcame  and  prevailed  against  them  both,  stripping  their  (outer) 
garments  from  them  and  inflicting  on  them  bodily  wounds,  so  that,  like  the 
cowards  they  were  (and  all  like  them  are),  they  were  glad  to  flee  from  the  house 
in  a  semi-nude  and,  perhaps,  bleeding  condition.  3.  By  what  argument  it  was 
justified.  This  was  contained  in  the  saying  of  the  man,  "  Jesus  I  know  (or 
recognise)  and  Paul  I  know  ;  but  who  are  ye  1  "  For  the  moment  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  man  was  taken  possession  of  by  the  demon,  who,  as  in  the  similar 
instance  mentioned  in  the  gospels  (Matt.  viii.  29 ;  Mark  v.  7  ;  Luke  viii.  28), 
acknowledged  the  authority  of  Christ,  and,  as  in  the  case  of  the  pythoness  at 
Philippi  (xvi.  17),  recognised  that  of  the  apostle  as  Christ's  servant;  but  had  no 
knowledge  whatever  of  the  sons  of  Scseva.  4.  To  what  good  results  it  led. 
(1)  To  the  impression  of  the  public  mind.  Becoming  known  it  caused  a  tremen- 
dous sensation  in  the  city  among  both  Jews  and  Greeks.  "  Fear  fell  upon  them 
all"  (compare  v.  11).  (2)  To  the  exaltation  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The 
occurrence  showed  that  Christ's  name,  which  Paul  preached  in  the  school  of 
Tyrannus,  stood  on  a  different  platform  from  that  of  any  of  the  names  which 
had  been  employed  by  the  exorcists  (see  Phil.  ii.  9).  (3)  To  the  repentance  of 
many  in  the  Church.  This  humiliating  admission  that  many  of  those  who  had 
professed  to  believe  under  Paul's  ministry  in  the  city  had  been  leading  lives 
wholly  inconsistent  with  the  holy  gospel,  to  the  extent  even  of  trafficking  with 
these  "  vagabond  exorcists,"  indirectly  proves  the  historic  faithfulness  of  Luke  ; 
while  the  confessions  of  the  converts  themselves  offered  no  small  testimony  to 
the  impression  created  by  the  incident  and  to  the  sense  of  the  unseen  felt  by  the 
Ephesian  Christians.  Whether  this  confession  was  made  to  Paul  in  private  or 
in  public  before  the  Church  is  not  stated.  The  Pomish  Church  accepting  the 
former  hypothesis  grounds  on  this  text  the  institution  of  the  confessional. 
(4)  To  the  conversion  of  not  a  few  of  the  exorcists  themselves.  The  practisers 
of  curious  or  magical  arts,  literally  of  things  over-wrought,  curious  and  recondite, 
were  so  struck  with  awe  that  they  renounced  their  superstitious  practices, 
collected  their  books  which  contained  their  magical  incantations,  charms, 
nostrums  and  such  like,  to  the  value  of  fifty  thousand  pieces  of  silver — nearly 
.£2000  of  English  money — and  burned  them  in  the  sight  of  all.  "  It  was  a  strong 
proof  of  honest  conviction  on  the  part  of  the  sorcerers,  and  a  striking  attestation 
of  the  triumph  of  Jesus  Christ  over  the  powers  of  darkness  "  (Conybeare  and 
Howson).     (5)  To  the  accelerated  progress  of  the  gospel.     "  The  word  of  the 

410 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xix. 


Lord  grew  mightily  and  prevailed,"  as  it  did  years  before  in  Jerusalem  on  the 
death  of  Herod  (xii.  24). 

Learn. — 1.  The  danger  of  using  Christ's  name  unlawfully.  2.  The  sin  of 
preaching  Christ's  gospel  without  knowing  Christ  Himself.  3.  The  involuntary 
testimony  Christ  can  extract  from  His  foes.  4.  The  certainty  that  all  who  oppose 
either  Christ  or  His  gospel  will  ultimately  suffer  loss.  5.  The  impossibility  of 
hindering  the  progress  of  the  gospel.  6.  The  duty  of  believers  acknowledging 
their  sins.  7.  The  power  of  the  truth  to  excite  to  repentance.  8.  The  great 
sacrifices  to  which  Christianity  sometimes  calls  its  adherents.  9.  The  absolute 
exclusiveness  of  Christianity  which  admits  of  no  compromise. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.    13.    The  Name    of  the    Lord  Ver.  15.  Jesus  and  Paul. 

Jesus.  I.  The  Saviour  and  the  saved. 

1    The  most  exalted  in  the  universe.  II.  The  Lord  and  the  servant. 

1.  In  heaven  higher  than  that  of  III.  The  agent  and  the  instrument, 
principalities  and  powers.  2.  On  earth  IV.  The  sovereign  and  the  ambas- 
more  widely  known  than  that  of  any  sador. 

other  teacher  or  founder  of  religion.  V.  The  subject  and  the  preacher. 
3.  In  the  Church,  more  trusted,  loved 

and  honoured  by  believers  than  any  Jesus  I  know,  and  Paul   I  know ; 

other.  but  who  are  ye  ?  " — A  sermon  by    an 

II.  The  most  powerful  in  the  uni-  evil  spirit ;  or  the  (sound)  doctrines  of 
verse. — 1.    The     Healer     of     disease,  devils. 

2.  The  conqueror  of  Satan.  3.  The  I.  That  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  and 
Saviour  from  sin.  4.  The  awakener  the  conqueror  of  the  devil  (Matt.  x.  29  ; 
from  death.  Luke  iv.  34  j  Heb.  ii.  14). 

III.  The  most  permanent  in  the  II.  That  the  gospel  is  a  message  of 
universe. — "  His  name  shall  endure  salvation  for  guilty  men,  or  of  deliver- 
for  ever."  ance   from  the  bondage  of   the  devil 

(Lukeiv.  18;  Heb.  ii.  15). 
Jesus  whom  Paul  preacheth.  III.  That  the  ministry  is  an  institu- 

I.  Jesus,  the  incarnate  Son  of  God,  tion  appointed  by  Jesus  Christ  for  the 
sent  forth  in  the  fulness  of  the  times  propagation  of  this  gospel  of  soul 
and  declared  to  be  God's  Son  by  His      emancipation. 

resurrection  from  the  dead.  IV.  That    those    who    preach    the 

II.  Jesus,  the  sinner's  substitute,  gospel  without  themselves  standing  in 
set  forth  to  be  a  great  propitiation  personal  relation  to  Jesus  Christ  or 
through  faith  in  His  blood.  having    been    appointed    by  Him    are 

III.  Jesus,  the  Messiah  of  Israel,  false  teachers  and  cannot  really  harm 
proved  to  be  so  by  the  meeting  in  Him  them,  the  devils  (2  Cor.  xi.  4  ;  Gal.  ii. 
of  Old  Testament  prophecies.  4;   1  Tim.  iv.  1). 

IV.  Jesus,  the  Saviour  of  believers,  V.  That  false  teachers  will  eventually 
who  accept  God's  testimony  concerning  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruc- 
Him,  and  trust  in  His  finished  work,  tion  (2  Peter  ii.  1). 

who  renounce  their  own  righteousness 

and  embrace  the  righteousness  which  Ver.  17.  The  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

is  of  God  by  faith.  magnified.     This  happens — 

V.  Jesus,    the    conqueror     of    the  I.  When   it   is   openly,  widely  and 
devil,  who  came  indeed  to  destroy  the  courageously  preached  as  by  Paul, 
works  of  the  devil,  and  who  triumphed  II.  When  it  is  explicitly,  extensively 
over  the  principalities  and  powers  of  and  firmly  believed  in. 

darkness  through  His  cross.  III.  When  it  is  seen  to  be  power- 

411 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


fully  influential  over  men's  hearts  and 
lives,  leading  the  unbelieving  to  faith, 
and  the  faithful  to  repentance  and  self- 
sacrifice. 

Magnifying  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus. — The  Ephesians  saw  in  this, 
and  so  should  Christians  to  day — 

I.  The  founder  of  God's  kingdom  on 
the  earth. 

II.  The  author  of  salvation  in  the 
individual  soul. 

III.  The  conqueror  of  the  devil  and 
his  emissaries. 

IV.  The  deliverer  of  the  captives  of 
Satan  and  sin. 

V.  The  ruler  of  His  people's  hearts 

Ver.  19.  The  Burning  of  the  Books. 

I.  Some  books  have  been  burnt 
which  should  have  been  preserved. — 
E.g.,  many  noble  volumes  of  science, 
philosophy  and  literature  in  the  library 
of  Alexandria. 

II.  Some  books  are  preserved  which 
should  be  tossed  into  the  flames. — E.g., 
"the  pernicious  fugitive  pieces  of  a 
frivolous  superficial  knowledge,  the 
seductive  works  of  an  impure  light 
literature,  and  the  arrogant  decrees  of 
an  unchristian  tyranny  of  the  con- 
science." 

III.  Some  books,  though  cast  into 
the  fire,  will  not  burn. — The  magical 
books  of  the  Ephesians  perished  ;  but 
the  sacred  books  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments  though  they  have  often  been 
committed  to  the  flames,  have  always 
come  forth  again  fresher,  livelier  and 
with  more  power  than  ever. 

Ver.  20.  The  Growth  and  Power  of  the 
Word  of  God. — Exemplified  in  Ephesus. 

I.  The  word  grew. — Mightily  :  1.  In 
clearness  of  exposition.  This  to  be  ex- 
pected considering  that  Paul  was  the 
preacher.  2.  In  intensity  of  impression. 
Also  natural,  remembering  what  was 
Paul's  theme — the  things  concerning 
Jesus  and  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
who  was  Paul's  keeper — the  Holy 
Ghost.  3.  In  extensiveness  of  reception. 
"  All  they  which  dwelt  in  Asia  "  heard 

412 


the  word,  while  "  many  believed." 
Scarcely  less  wonderful,  seeing  that 
Paul's  word  was  accompanied  by  special 
signs.  4.  In  productiveness  of  fruits. 
It  led  to  marvellous  deeds  of  self-re- 
nunciation as  well  as  to  the  manifesta- 
tion of  great  solemnity  and  joy. 

II.  The  word  prevailed.  —  Also 
mightily.  1.  Over  the  corruption  of  the 
natural  heart.  Leading  those  who 
heard  the  gospel  to  turn  from  dead 
idols  to  serve  the  living  God.  2.  Over 
the  opposition  of  the  powers  of  evil. 
Manifested  in  the  exposure  of  Scseva's 
sons  and  the  deliverance  of  the  man 
possessed.  3.  Over  the  besetting  sins  of 
believers.  Enabling  those  who  had 
received  the  word  to  shake  themselves 
free  from  the  love  of  magic  and  the 
fascinations  of  money. 

Vers.  8-20.  A  Three  Years'  Mission  in 
Ephesus. — During  this  period  the  cause 
of  the  gospel  as  represented  by  Paul 
was — 

I.  Energetically  pushed.  —  Paul's 
activity  was  remarkably  displayed  in 
three  directions.  1.  In  preaching  the 
word  of  God  (vers.  8,  10).  2.  In  working 
miracles,  or  signs  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
(ver.  11).  3.  In  founding  churches  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Though  not  stated,  it 
was  doubtless  during  this  period  that 
the  Churches  of  Ephesus,  Colossse, 
Lacdicea,  and  Hierapolis  were  founded. 

II.  Vehemently  opposed.— By  the 
attempted  imposture  of  Scseva's  sons. 
1.  The  form  it  took.  Attempting  to 
exorcise  an  evil  spirit  by  naming  over 
it  the  name  of  Jesus.  2.  The  motives 
inspiring  it.  Many.  Perhaps  (1)  On 
the  part  of  the  devil,  to  counterfeit 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  On 
the  part  of  the  Jews,  to  oppose  the 
work  of  Paul  as  a  preacher  of  the  cross. 
(3)  On  the  part  of  the  jugglers,  to 
make  money,  since  they  saw  that  Paul's 
charm  was  more  effective  than  theirs. 
3.  The  result  to  which  it  led.  Defeat, 
exposure,  and  damage.  So  will  every 
attempt  to  hinder  Christ's  cause  even- 
tually recoil  on  its  author's  head. 

III.  Wondrously  prospered. — The 
impression  made  upon  the  community 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xix. 


as  well  as  on  the  Church  was  deep  and  Church.      It  stirred  to  confession  and 

lasting.     1.  On  the  community.     It  led  reformation,    both    voluntary — "they 

to  fear  and  veneration,  if  not  to  con-  came" — and  real — they  burned  "their 

viction   and   conversion.      2.    On    the  books." 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  21—22. 

PauVs  Last  Days  in  Ephesus  ;  or,  Contemplating  New  Plans. 

I.  A  run  through  Macedonia  and  Achaia. — These  the  main  divisions,  northern 
and  southern,  into  which  Greece  under  Roman  rule  was  divided.  The  apostle's 
object  in  this  second  crossing  into  Europe  was  to  visit  the  Churches  which  had 
there  been  established,  as  e.g.,  in  the  towns  of  Philippi  (xvi.),  Thessalonica  and 
Bercea  (xvii.),  and  Corinth  (xviii.),  for  the  twofold  purpose  of  first  establishing 
them  in  the  faith,  and  correcting  such  disorders  as  he  knew  had  crept  in  among 
them,  and  secondly  of  bringing  to  a  close  the  collection  for  the  poor  saints  at 
Jerusalem,  which  had  for  upwards  of  a  year  been  going  on  among  the  Churches 
there.  This  part  of  the  apostle's  plan  was  subsequently  carried  out  (xx.  1,2); 
but  in  the  meanwhile  he  remained  in  Ephesus,  and  sent  over  Timothy  and 
Erastus  to  Macedonia. 

II.  A  visit  to  Jerusalem. — "As  the  Redeemer,  when  He  had  fulfilled  His 
course,  set  His  face  steadfastly  to  go  to  Jerusalem  (Luke  ix.  51),  so  Paul  also 
turns  back  to  that  city  where  the  Lord  was  crucified,  and  where  He  had 
founded  His  first  Church "  (Lechler).  Why  he  wished  again  to  journey  to 
Jerusalem  is  not  stated  by  Luke,  but  from  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans  (xv.  26) 
and  Corinthians  (1  xvi.  1-4,  2  viii.  1),  it  may  be  inferred  that  he  contemplated 
bearing  to  the  poor  saints  there  the  above  mentioned  munificent  contribution 
from  the  Churches  of  Macedonia  and  Achaia.  That  he  carried  out  this  his  fifth 
and  last  visit  to  Jerusalem  is  reported  by  Luke  (xx.  16,  xxi.  17). 

III.  A  journey  to  Rome. — The  first  notice  of  any  desire  on  the  apostle's  part 
to  visit  the  metropolis  of  the  Gentile  world.  That  he  actually  had  this  desire 
and  really  used  the  words  ascribed  to  him  by  Luke  is  confirmed  by  his  letters  to 
the  Romans  (i.  10-15,  xv.  23).  The  necessity  which  constrained  him  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  any  externally  revealed  intimation  of  the  divine  will,  but  a 
strong  inward  impulse  in  this  direction  which  had  been  imparted  to  his  spirit, 
doubtless  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  plan  projected  by  himself  was  after  visiting 
Jerusalem  to  start  upon  a  fourth  missionary  tour,  proceed  to  Rome  and  travel 
westward  as  far  as  Spain.  How  different  this  was  from  God's  plan  for  him  will 
afterwards  appear. 

Learn. — 1.  The  propriety  of  forming  purposes  always  in  subordination  to  the 
divine  will  (James  iv.  15).  2.  The  wisdom  of  avoiding  undue  haste  in  carrying 
out  our  plans.  3.  The  advantage  of  always  waiting  upon  God  to  direct  one's 
path. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  21.  "After  I  have  been  there,  I  in  the  apostle's  mind  ;  in  the  quotation 

must  also   see   Rome."     Compare   with  from   the   Acts   we   find   that    design 

Rom.    i.    13,    xv.    23-28.      "The   con-  expressed   a   considerable   time  before 

formity  between  the  history  and  the  the  Epistle  was  written.    In  the  history 

epistle  is  perfect.     In  the  first  quota-  we  find  that  the  plan  which  Paul  had 

tion  from  the  Epistle  we   find  that  a  formed  was  to  pass  through  Macedonia 

design  of  visiting  Rome  had  long  dwelt  and    Achaia  ;    after    that    to    go    to 

413 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Jerusalem ;  and  when  he  had  finished 
his  visit  there  to  sail  for  Rome.  When 
the  Epistle  was  written,  he  had  executed 
so  much  of  his  plan  as  to  have  passed 
through  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  and 
was  preparing  to  pursue  the  remainder 
of  it  by  speedily  setting  out  towards 
Jerusalem ;  and  in  this  point  of  his 
travels  he  tells  his  friends  at  Rome 
that  when  he  had  completed  the  busi- 
ness which  carried  him  to  Jerusalem 
he  would  come  to  them,  when  he  should 
make  his  journey  into  Spain."  Also 
"  the  very  inspection  of  the  passages 
will  satisfy  us  that  they  were  not  made 
up  from  one  another.  ...  If  the 
passage  in  the  Epistle  was  taken  from 
the  Acts,  why  was  Spain  put  in  ?  If  the 
passage  in  the  Acts  was  taken  from  the 
Epistle,  why  was  Spain  left  out  ?  If 
the  two  passages  were  unknown  to 
each  other,  nothing  can  account  for 
their  conformity  but  truth." — Paley, 
Horaz  Paulinas  ^  chap.  II.,  iii. 

Ver.  22.  The  Mission  of  Timothy 
and  Erastus  into  Macedonia. — "  Of 
Timothy's  special  mission  in  Macedonia 
we  know  nothing,  but  from  1  Cor.  iv. 
17-19,  we  learn  that  this  trusted  com- 
panion of  the  Gentile  apostle  was 
directed  to  pass  on  to  Corinth  to  pre- 
pare the  Church  there  for  the  approach- 
ing visit  of  the  apostle.  Erastus  was 
most  likely  the  same  as  the  person 
alluded  to  in  Rom.  xvi.  23,  as  the 
chamberlain  of  Corinth,  and  was  not 
improbably  chosen  as  the  companion 
of  Timothy  on  this  difficult  and  delicate 
mission  with  which  he  was  charged,  on 
the  supposition  that  his  rank  and 
station  among  the  citizens  would  be  a 
support  to  Timothy,  who  was  the 
bearer  of  Paul's  stern,  grave  message 
to  his  well-loved  Church." — Spence. 

Presumption  or  Piety — Which  ? — 
"  After  I  have  been  there  I  must  also 
see  Rome." 

I.  Presumption. — This  Paul's  utter- 
ance might  have  been  had  he  formed  the 
resolution  it  expresses  in  his  own  mind 


and  with  dependence  for  carrying  it  out 
in  his  own  strength.  In  this  case,  the 
signs  of  sinful  arrogance  would  have 
been — 1.  The  double  use  of  the  pro- 
noun "  I,"  whereas  he  should  have 
remembered  God  and  connected  his 
purpose  with  Him,  who  alone  orders 
and  guides  man's  ways.  2.  The  taking 
for  granted  that  he  would  ever  reach 
Jerusalem,  which  he  might  never  have 
done,  and  certainly  could  not  have  done 
without  the  divine  help  and  protection. 
3.  The  self-confident  assertion  that  he 
must  see  Rome,  whereas  again  he 
ought  to  have  said,  "  If  the  Lord  will  !  " 
remembering  that  there  can  be  no 
"  must "  in  any  plan  or  purpose  outside 
of  God's  arrangement  or  permission. 

II.  Piety. — This  Paul's  utterance  was 
because — 1.  The  purpose  to  which  it 
referred  was  (1)  Formed  under  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Though 
not  expressly  stated  this  may  be  in- 
ferred. 2.  Indicative  of  his  love  for 
the  brethren — at  least  if  his  motive  in 
desiring  to  visit  Jerusalem  was  to  carry 
gifts  to  the  poor  saints  residing  there. 
3.  Expressive  of  ardent  zeal  for  the 
extension  of  the  gospel.  In  this  way 
must  the  desire  and  resolution  to  visit 
Rome  be  regarded.  4.  Perhaps  also 
suggestive  of  the  loftiness  of  Paul's 
faith,  which  confided  in  the  divine 
assistance  and  support  until  these 
great  desires  of  his  heart  were 
accomplished. 

Timothy  and  Erastus. 

I.  Diverse. — 1.  In  race.  Timothy 
a  half  Jew  and  half  Greek :  Erastus 
either  a  whole  Jew  or  a  whole  Greek. 

2.  In  birthplace.  Timothy  a  native 
of  Lystra :  Erastus  most  likely  of 
Corinth  (Rom.  xvi.  23),  or  perhaps  of 
Ephesus.  3.  In  station.  Timothy  the 
son  of  an  obscure  father :  Erastus,  if 
of  Corinth,  the  treasurer  of  the  city. 

II.  United. — 1.  In  Christian  disciple- 
ship.  Both  believers  and  adherents  of 
the  way.  2.  In  relationship  to  Paul. 
Both   numbered    among    his    helpers. 

3.  In  missionary  service.  Both  sent 
into  Macedonia. 


414 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xix. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  23—41. 

A  Popular  Tumult  in  Ephesus ;  or,  The  Temple  of  Diana  Endangered. 

1.  The  speech  of  Demetrius,  the  silversmith. — 1.  Its  hearers.  The  masters 
and  workmen  of  the  guild  of  silversmiths,  with  others,  employers  and  employed, 
of  a  like  occupation;  Demetrius,  himself  one  of  those  master  silversmiths, 
employed  a  large  number  of  craftsmen,  or  skilled  artisans  with  high  wages,  and 
carried  on  an  extensive  trade  in  manufacturing  and  selling  silver  shrines  of 
Diana  (or  Artemis).  These  were  portable  miniature  temples  containing  a 
statue  of-  the  goddess,  which  were  purchased  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  as 
well  as  by  strangers  visiting  it,  and  either  dedicated  to  the  goddess  at  the 
temple,  or  set  up  on  returning  home  as  objects  of  worship,  and  sometimes  even 
carried  about  on  the  person  as  amulets  or  charms.  Having  collected  his  brother- 
tradesmen  in  some  convenient  building,  if  not  upon  the  street,  Demetrius, 
perhaps  the  chairman  of  the  guild,  directed  their  attention  to  a  danger  to  which 
their  business  was  growingly  exposed.  2.  Its  object.  To  stir  up  hostility  against 
Paul,  or  as  Demetrius  contemptuously  said,  "  this  (fellow)  Paul,"  who,  according 
to  Demetrius's  admission,  had  been  carrying  on  a  successful  work  of  evangelisa- 
tion in  the  city,  not  only  preaching  such  abominable  (!)  doctrine  as  that  "  they  be 
no  gods  which  are  made  with  hands  " — a  doctrine  of  which  the  Hebrew  Scriptures 
are  full  (Psalm  cxv.  4-8;  Isa.  xliv.  19,  xlvi.  6,  7  ;  Jer.  x.  5,  xvi.  19  ;  Hos.  viii.  6) 
— but  doing  this  with  such  persuasive  eloquence  as  "not  alone  at  Ephesus  but 
almost  throughout  all  Asia  "  to  turn  away  much  people  from  the  worship  of 
Diana.  A  splendid  testimony  to  the  success  of  the  gospel  in  Ephesus  !  3.  Its 
motive.  Fear  of  losing  his  trade.  "  The  most  sensitive  part  of  l  civilised  '  man 
is  his  pocket  "  (Ramsay).  Hence  one  may  fairly  be  doubtful  whether  Demetrius 
would  have  been  concerned  about  Diana's  honour,  if  his  business  had  not  been 
injured  and  his  profits  reduced  by  her  decline  in  popular  estimation.  It  may  even 
be  questioned  whether  Demetrius  would  have  been  distressed  about  the  "turn  over" 
of  his  brother-silversmiths  going  down,  if  his  own  had  increased,  or  even  kept  up. 
But  in  any  case  it  is  significant  that  Demetrius's  opposition  to  this  fellow  Paui 
had  its  origin  in  this,  that  Paul's  preaching  was  interfering  with  his  (Demetrius's) 
pocket.  The  like  phenomenon  is  not  unknown  to-day.  Men  frequently  oppose 
the  gospel  because  the  gospel  goes  against  their  trade.  Yet  the  converse 
phenomenon  is  not  unknown.  Men  profess  to  believe  the  gospel  so  long  as  the 
gospel,  or  their  profession  of  it,  favours  their  financial  prosperity.  Note. — The 
account  here  given  of  the  origin  of  Demetrius's  assault  has  been  challenged  as 
incorrect  by  Canon  Hicks  (Expositor,  June  1890,  pp.  401-422),  who  on  the1 
strength  of  the  inscription  already  referred  to  ("  Critical  Remarks  ")  holds  the 
hostile  action  against  Paul  to  have  been  due  to  the  priests  of  Artemis,  whose 
"  jealousy  only  waited  for  an  opportunity  of  attacking  the  apostle  ; "  but  Prof. 
Ramsay  (The  Church  in  the  Roman  Empire,  pp.  130,  200)  convincingly  shows 
that  "  the  first  way  in  which  Christianity  excited  the  popular  enmity  outside  the 
Jewish  community  was  by  disturbing  the  existing  state  of  society  and  trade,  and 
not  by  making  innovations  in  religion."  4.  Its  arguments.  (1)  From  self- 
interest.  This  the  most  persuasive  argument  that  can  be  addressed  to  the 
ordinary  human  mind.  The  wealth  of  Demetrius  and  his  guild,  in  fact, 
their  living  depended  on  the  making  and  selling  of  these  Diana  shrines, 
and  the  selling,  at  least,  of  them  was  absolutely  incompatible  with  Paul's 
further  preaching  in  the  city.  Already  their  trade  receipts  had  gone  down. 
The  market  for  their  wares  was  declining.  Unless  in  some  way  they  asserted 
themselves  they  would  be  ruined.  If  this  contemptible  little  Jew  were 
allowed  to  continue  denouncing  Diana  and   her   temple   nobody   would   want 

415 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


their  silver  shrines  and  such  like  articles  as  they  traded  in,  and  then  what 
would  become  of  themselves,  their  wives  and  families  1  A  modern  trades 
unionist  could  hardly  have  spoken  better.  (2)  From  religious  zeal.  "  Not  only," 
said  Demetrius,  "  will  our  trade  be  endangered,  but  what  is  of  vaster  moment 
(one  wonders  if  he  believed  this  !),  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess  Diana  will  be 
made  of  no  account,  and  she  whom  all  Asia  and  the  world  worshippeth  will  be 
deposed  from  her  magnificence."  The  language,  though  extravagant,  contained 
an  element  of  truth.  The  temple  at  Ephesus  had  been  built  at  the  common 
expense  of  all  the  Greek  cities  of  Asia  Minor,  and  was  visited  by  pilgrims  from 
all  nations  and  countries  (see  "Critical  Remarks").  5.  Its  results.  (1)  The 
populace  were  filled  with  indignation,  not  at  the  loss  of  Demetrius's  profits,  but 
at  the  dishonour  done  to  Diana.  Even  false  religions  exercise  a  wondrous 
fascination  over  men's  hearts,  and  are  capable  of  exciting  strong  enthusiasm  in 
their  behalf  (see  1  Kings  xviii.  26).  (2)  The  air  was  rent  with  shouts  in  praise  of 
their  patron  goddess — "  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians  !  "  This  cry,  which 
may  have  been  "  the  usual  chorus  of  the  festivals  of  Artemis  "  (Plumptre),  was 
kept  up  for  some  time — in  all  perhaps  "  about  the  space  of  two  hours  "  (ver.  34) 
— and  was  designed  to  vindicate  the  insulted  majesty  of  the  goddess,  to  whom 
the  epithet  "  great  "  was  considered  to  rightfully  belong  (Xenophon,  Ephes.,  i.  15). 
One  would  say  her  honour  had  not  been  much  hurt  if  the  hurt  was  repaired  by 
three  hours  of  hurrahing,  shouting,  and  yelling.  (3)  The  whole  city  was  plunged 
ii  to  confusion.  The  loud  shouts  of  Demetrius  and  his  workmen  attracted 
towards  them  the  mob,  who,  catching  up  the  idea  that  some  one  had  been 
attempting  to  overturn  their  accepted  worship,  naturally  broke  out  into  wild 
and  fanatical  excitement — all  the  wilder  and  more  fanatical  because  they 
properly  had  no  idea  what  it  was  all  about.  (4)  Two  of  Paul's  companions  were 
arrested.  Having  learnt  that  the  daring  assailants  of  Diana  were  the  Jewish 
strangers  who  had  for  some  time  past  been  residing  in  the  town,  and  in  particular 
that  fellow  Paul,  with  one  accord  they  rushed  to  the  apostle's  lodging,  or  to  the 
school  of  Tyrannus  where  he  taught,  in  the  hope  of  apprehending  him  ;  but  not 
finding  him,  he  having  been  absent,  as  had  been  the  case  at  Thessalonica  (xvii.  6), 
they  seized  on  Gaius  (see  1  Cor.  i.  14),  and  Aristarchus  (xx.  4,  xxvii.  2),  two  of 
his  companions,  men  of  Macedonia,  and  dragged  them  off  to  the  theatre,  an 
immense  building  capable  of  holding  twenty  thousand  persons,  where  it  was  the 
custom  to  bold  public  meetings  and  transact  public  business,  as  well  as  celebrate 
public  sports  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  What  object  they  had  in  view  in  making 
these  arrests  and  crowding  to  the  theatre  with  their  prisoners,  they  most  likely 
could  not  state  and  did  not  know.  The  whole  movement  was  a  tumultuous 
proceeding  for  which  they  could  offer  no  explanation  except  this,  that  somebody 
had  been  meddling  with  their  goddess,  and  they  had  apprehended  the  two 
Macedonians  on  suspicion. 

II.  The  proposal  of  Paul  the  Apostle. — 1.  Brave.  Having  come  to  know  what 
had  happened,  the  apostle,  with  that  courageous  chivalry  for  which  he  was 
distinguished,  wished  to  force  his  way  into  the  theatre  (1)  to  intercede  for  his 
two  companions  who  had  been  arrested  without  cause ;  (2)  to  take  upon  himself 
the  full  responsibility  for  any  dishonour  that  had  been  done  to  the  goddess ;  and 
(3)  to  explain  the  nature  of  his  gospel  to  the  multitude  there  and  then  assembled, 
in  the  hope,  doubtless,  that  in  this  way  the  uproar  would  be  stilled  and  the 
tumult  allayed.  2.  Imprudent.  At  least,  so  it  seemed  to  certain  of  the  chief 
officers  of  Asia,  literally,  Asiarchs.  These  were  public  functionaries,  ten  in 
number,  who  were  chosen  annually  from  the  chief  towns  of  proconsular  Asia, 
and  from  the  wealthier  citizens  in  those  towns,  whose  business  it  was  to  provide 
at  their  own  expense  and  superintend  in  their  own  persons  the  games  and 
festivals  held  every  year  in  honour  of  the  gods  and  Roman  emperor.     Being 

416 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xix. 


friendly  disposed  to  the  apostle,  and  knowing  their  countrymen  better  than  the 
apostle,  they  entreated  him  not  to  venture  into  the  theatre.  That  they 
succeeded,  though  not  without  a  struggle,  in  preventing  him  from  carrying  out 
his  expressed  intention  may  be  inferred ;  and  the  recollection  of  this  passage  in 
his  history  when,  had  his  friends  permitted  him  he  would  have  plunged  into  the 
heart  of  the  frantic  mob,  was  probably  the  inspiration  of  the  well-known  phrase 
about  his  fighting  with  wild  beasts  at  Ephesus  (1  Cor.  xv<  32). 

III.  The  interposition  of  Alexander  the   Jew. — 1.  The  personality  of  this 
individual.     That  he  was  a  Christian  Jew  or  an  adherent  of  the  new  faith  has 
been  supposed  by  not  a  few  expositors  (Calvin,  Baumgarten,  Meyer,  Alford,  and 
others),  but  the  greater  likelihood  is  that  the  name  belonged  to  an  unconverted 
Jew  (Kuinoel,  Neander,  Olshausen,  Lechler,  Hackett,  and  others)  who  formed 
one  of  Demetrius's  guild.     Whether  he  and  the  coppersmith  of  that  name,  whom 
Paul   afterward  mentioned  to  Timothy  (II.  iv.   14)  as  one   who  had  done  him 
much  evil    (Zockler),    were   one    and  the  same  person,  must  remain  undeter- 
mined,— though  the  supposition  is  by  no  means  impossible.     If  he  was,  and 
if  the  Alexander  who   made    shipwreck   of   his  faith   (1    Tim.  i.  20)   was  the 
same  person — both  of   which   points,  however,  are  doubtful — then  he  appears 
to   have   at  a  later  time  become   a  Christian,  though  only  in  name  and   of 
pronounced  Judaistic  proclivities.     2.  The  reason  of  his  conning  forward.     His 
countrymen,  having  detected  him  among  the  crowd  and  laid  hold  of  him,  thrust 
him  forward — if  a  Christian  Jew,  that  he  might  serve  as  a  victim  for  the  popular 
fury,  or  if  an  unbelieving  Jew,  that  he  might  shift  the  guilt  of  vilifying  Diana 
from  their  shoulders  to  those  of  the  Christians.     In  either  case  the  Jews  were 
apprehensive  lest  at  any  moment  the  senseless   rage  of  the  mob  might  swing 
round  and  direct  itself  against  them,  both  because  the  heathen  multitude  did  not 
as  yet  with  sufficient  clearness  distinguish  between  Jews  and  Christians,  and 
because  even  from  them  at  that  time  literary  assaults  upon  the  worship  of  the 
gods,  and  especially  of  the  Ephesian  Artemis,  were  not  unknown  (Zimmerman, 
quoted  by  Holtzmann).     (Compare  Hausrath's  Der  Apostel  Paulus,  p.  347  ;  see 
"  Hints  "  on  ver.  34).     3.  The  failure  of  his  attempt.     No  sooner  had  he  opened 
his  mouth  in  defence  of  his  countrymen,  having  first  beckoned  to  the  multitude 
with  his  hand  for  a  hearing,  than  "  with  a  divine  irony  of  fate  similar  to  that 
which  was  manifested  before  Gallio's  tribunal "  (Zockler),  they,  the  multitude, 
recognising  him  for  a  Jew,  drowned  his  words  in  a  volley  of  frenzied  exclamations, 
shouting,  "  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians  !  "  as  Demetrius  and  his  workmen 
had  done,   and  keeping  up  the  outcry  for  a  space  of  two  hours.     (Compare 
1  Kings  xviii.  26 ;  and  see  Matt.  vi.  7.)     "  The  Mahommedan  monks  in  India 
at   the  present  time  often  practise  such  repetitions  for  entire  days  together" 
(Hackett). 

IY.  The  address  of  the  town-clerk. — 1.  Ifys  official  designation.  The  state- 
scribe,  or  recorder ;  a  public  functionary  whose  business  it  was  to  register  the 
various  laws  and  preserve  the  legal  documents  of  the  city ;  who  was  authorised 
to  preside  over  public  assemblies,  and  who  is  mentioned  on  the  marbles  as  acting 
in  that  capacity.  Unlike  the  Asiarchs  who  were  appointed  annually,  the  town- 
clerk  was  probably  a  permanent  official.  2.  His  influential  character.  The 
instant  he  appeared  upon  the  rostrum  the  cries  of  the  multitude  were  hushed. 
Different  from  their  dealing  with  Alexander,  they  made  no  attempt  to  howl  him 
down,  but  listened  to  him  in  respectful  silence  ;  and  at  the  close  of  his  harangue 
allowed  themselves  to  be  quietly  dispersed.  "  He  was,  if  we  may  so  speak,  the 
Gamaliel  of  Ephesus,  not  without  parallels  among  the  princes  and  statesmen  and 
prelates  who  have  lived  in  the  critical  times  of  political  and  religious  changes, 
and  have  endeavoured  to  hold  the  balance  between  contending  parties  "  (Plumptre). 
3.  His  dexterous  oration.     (1)  He  humoured  their  vanity  by  reminding  them 

ee  417 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


of  their  religious  loyalty  to  the  great  goddess  Diana,  whose  magnificent  temple 
adorned  their  city ;  of  which  temple  also  and  of  the  image  it  contained — an  image 
which  had  fallen  from  heaven  or  from  Jupiter — their  city  was  known  throughout 
the  world  as  the  keeper  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  To  suppose  then  that  any- 
thing said  or  done  by  these  poor  infatuated  Jews  could  either  dim  the  majesty  of 
thtir  world-renowned  goddess  or  tarnish  their  loyalty  was  surely  the  height 
of  folly  and,  in  fact,  wholly  ridiculous.  (2)  He  set  before  them  the  legal 
bearing  of  the  then  situation.  The  men  they  had  arrested  had  been  guilty  of  no 
crime  against  either  Diana  or  her  temple — they  were  neither  "  robbers  of  temples 
nor  blasphemers  of  our  goddess" — and  accordingly  should  not  be  treated  as 
criminals.  If  the  cause  of  this  indignation  against  Paul  and  his  companions  was 
some  private  grievance,  as,  for  instance,  about  some  trade  law  or  civic  regulation 
which  had  been  infringed,  then  Demetrius  and  his  brother  craftsmen  should 
proceed  against  them  before  the  proconsuls  in  the  ordinary  law  courts  which 
were  at  that  moment  open,  Ephesus  being  an  Assize  town  and  the  proconsul  on 
circuit  having  arrived  thither  (vers.  37,  38) ;  if  the  cause  was  any  matter  that 
concerned  the  public,  then  it  should  be  dealt  with  in  a  lawful,  i.e.,  a  regularly 
called  and  constituted  assembly  (ver.  39),  and  not  before  a  disorderly  rabble  like 
that  then  collected  in  the  theatre.  (3)  He  played  upon  their  fears  by  suggesting 
that  they  might  be  brought  to  book  by  their  Roman  masters  and  asked  to 
explain  the  cause  of  such  a  riotous  proceeding  as  that  of  which  they  had  been 
guilty — an  explanation  they  would  not  find  it  easy  to  give. 

Note. — As  has  often  been  remarked,  this  speech  of  the  town -clerk  was  a 
complete  vindication  of  Christianity  and  Christians  in  apostolic  times,  with 
regard  to  the  groundless  charges  of  lawlessness  and  violence  which  were  so 
frequently  preferred  against  them  by  their  enemies.  "  This  address  is  so 
entirely  an  apologia  of  the  Christians,"  says  Ramsay  (St.  Paul,  etc.,  p.  282), 
"  that  we  might  almost  take  it  as  an  example  of  the  Thucydidean  type  of  speech, 
put  into  the  mouth  of  one  of  the  actors,  not  as  being  precisely  his  words,  but  as 
embodying  a  statesmanlike  conception  of  the  real  situation.  At  any  rate  it  is 
included  by  Luke  in  his  work,  not  for  its  mere  Ephesian  connection,  but  as 
bearing  on  the  universal  question  of  the  relations  in  which  the  Church  stood 
to  the  empire." 

Learn. — 1.  The  world-disturbing  character  of  the  religion  of  Christ.  2.  The 
power  of  self-interest  to  hinder  a  reception  of  the  truth.  3.  The  supremely 
foolish  behaviour  of  idol  worshippers.  4.  The  virtue  of  flattery  in  appeasing 
a  mob.  5.  The  unconscious  testimony  sometimes  given  by  the  world  to 
Christianity  and  Christians. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.    23.  No   small  Stir  about  that  II.  An  influential  citizen. 

Way;    or,    Reasons    why    Men    oppose  III.  A  blind  idolater. 

Themselves  to  Christianity. — Because  it  IV.  A  dexterous  orator. 

I.  Interferes    with    their    (sinful) 

gains.  Vers.    24-27.     Demetrius     and    his 

II.  Explodes  their  foolish  delusions.  Brother  Craftsmen  ;  or,  Ancient  Types 

III.  Disturbs  their  cherished  ease.  of  Modern  Men. 

IV.  Subverts     their    accustomed  I.  Of  the  abject  slaves  of  business 
practices.  who   in  the  pursuit  of  temporal  gain 

have  lost  all  regard  for  eternity. 

Ver.  24.  Demetrius  of  Ephesus.  II.  Of  the  blind  adherents  of  esta- 

I.  A  wealthy  tradesman.  blished  customs,  who,  from  every  fresh 

418 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xix. 


movement  of  the  Spirit  fear  the  dis- 
turbance of  their  ease,  indeed,  the 
destruction  of  the  world. 

III.  Of  the  self-satisfied  priests  of 
the  beautiful  who  in  idolatrous  venera- 
tion for  nature  and  art  acknowledge 
no  consciousness  of  sin  and  no  need  of 
grace. — Gerok. 

Yer.  26.  Hand-made  Gods. 

I.  Widely  worshipped. — All  nations 
outside  of  revelation  have  drifted  into 
idolatry. 

II.  Strongly  condemned. — 1.  By 
Scripture,  which  proclaims  them  to  be 
vanities.  2.  By  reason,  since  the  less 
cannot  make  the  greater  or  the  creature 
its  creator.  3.  By  experience,  which 
has  shown  them  to  be  useless,  gods 
that  neither  hear  nor  help,  neither 
see  nor  save. 

III.  Certainly  doomed. — 1.  To  ex- 
posure. Of  their  worthlessness.  2.  To 
desertion.  By  their  followers.  This 
process  Demetrius  observed  had  begun. 
3.  To  destruction.  "  The  idols  He  will 
utterly  abolish." 

Ver.  28.  Diana  and  Jesus. 

I.  Great  was  Diana  of  the  Ephesians 
in  her  (supposed)  divinity  ;  but  greater 
is  Jesus  of  the  Christians  in  His  (real) 
Godhead. — Diana  was  an  idol ;  Jesus 
is  the  true  God.  Diana  was  a  manu- 
factured goddess  ;  Jesus  is  the  Almighty 
Maker  of  the  universe.  Diana  was  a 
creation  of  the  degraded  and  benighted 
human  intellect  ;  Jesus  is  the  "  Word 
of  the  Father,  in  our  flesh  appearing." 

II.  Great  was  Diana  of  the  Ephesians 
in  the  magnificence  of  her  temple ;  but 
greater  is  Jesus  of  the  Christians  in 
the  shrines  which  He  inhabits. — The 
temple  of  Diana  was  a  structure  de- 
corated by  the  highest  art  of  the  day, 
but  at  the  best  was  only  a  limited  and 
mean  habitation  ;  the  temples  of  Jesus 
are  first  the  boundless  universe,  next 
the  Christian  Church,  and  lastly  the 
soul  of  the  believer — the  first  of  which 
has  lavished  on  it  all  the  wisdom  and 
power  of  an  infinite  mind,  and  the 
second  and  third  of  which  are  being 
beautified  by  all  the  glory  that  divine 
grace  can  impart  to  them. 


III.  Great  was  Diana  of  the 
Ephesians  in  the  number  of  her  wor- 
shippers ;  but  greater  is  Jesus  of  the 
Christians  in  the  multitude  of  His 
disciples. — All  Asia  and  the  world 
worshipped  Diana,  said  Demetrius; 
but  to  day  the  name  of  Jesus  is  adored 
by  more  millions  than  at  that  time 
inhabited  the  globe. 

IV.  Great  was  Diana  of  the  Ephe- 
sians in  the  enthusiasm  of  her  devotees ; 
but  greater  is  Jesus  of  the  Christians 
in  the  love  of  His  people. — Diana's 
admirers  spent  much  time  and  physical 
energy  in  their  insane  orgies,  and  if 
howling  and  shouting  could  do  her 
honour  she  was  a  highly  exalted 
divinity ;  but  the  homage  paid  to  Jesus 
is  of  a  more  spiritual,  rational  and 
beneficent  sort,  consisting  of  the  con- 
secration to  His  service  of  loving  hearts 
and  holy  lives. 

V.  Great  was  Diana  of  the  Ephe- 
sians in  the  duration  of  her  reign  j  but 
greater  is  Jesus  of  the  Christians  in 
the  permanence  of  His. — For  long 
centuries  the  superstition  of  Diana 
worship  sat  like  a  nightmare  upon 
the  souls  of  men,  though  it  is  now  for 
ever  perished  and  gone ;  but  the  name 
of  Jesus  shall  endure  for  ever.  "  Jesus 
shall  reign  where'er  the  sun,"  etc. 

Yer.  35.   The  Town-clerk  of  Ephesus. 

I.  His  fearless  courage. — In  facing 
the  frenzied  mob. 

II.  His  admirable  tact. — In  humour- 
ing the  crowd  by  endorsing  their 
estimate  of  Diana. 

III.  His  prudent  advice. — In  ex- 
horting the  people  to  do  nothing  rashly. 

IY.  His  impartial  justice. — In  ad- 
mitting the  innocence  of  Gaius  and 
Aristarchus. 

Y.  His  great  influence. — In  calming 
and  dismissing  the  assembly. 

Yer.  40.  The  Uproar  at  Ephesus. — A 
picture  of  rebellion  against  the  gospel. 

I.  In  the  dark  heathen  world ;  on 
the  part  of  brutal,  yea,  Satanic  heathen 
nature. — Pictures  of  persecution  from 
the  missionary  field. 

II.  In    unconverted    Christendom ; 

419 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


on  the  part  of  the  carnal  mind,  which 
will  not  suffer  itself  to  be  rebuked  by- 
God's  word,  and  of  the  materialistic 
spirit  of  the  age  which  will  know 
nothing  of  heavenly  things. 

III.  In  the  hearts  of  true  Christians ; 
on  the  part  of  proud  reason,  of  the 
self-righteous  heart,  and  of  the  flesh 
which  shuns  the  cross. — Gerok. 

Vers.  24-41.  A  Group  of  Typical 
Characters. 

I.  Paul. — A  type  of  1.  Evangelical 
zeal.  Preaching  in  Ephesus.  2. 
Christian  influence.  Persuading  much 
people.  3.  Heroic  self -sacrifice.  Will- 
ing to  rescue  his  companions  by  rush- 
ing into  the  theatre. 

II.  Demetrius. — A  type  of  1.  The 
successful  merchant,  who  makes  no 
small  gain  from  his  trade.  2.  The 
hypocritical  religionist,  who  worships 
because  it  pays.  3.  The  crafty  de- 
magogue, who  plays  upon  the  ignorance 
of  his  townsmen. 

III.  Gaius  and  Aristarchus. — 
Typical  of  those  who  1.  Suffer  on 
account  of  their  religion ;  2.  Bear  the 
consequences  of  other  people's  acts, 
and  3.  Come  safely  out  of  their  tribu- 
lations. 

IV.  Alexander. — Typical  of  the  man 
1.  Who  is  disliked  for  his  religion. 
The  Ephesians  refused  to  hear  him 
because  he  was  a  Jew.  2.  Who  is 
punished  by  mistake.  The  Ephesians 
confounded  him  with  the  Christians 
who  also  were  regarded  as  Jews.  3. 
Who  is  not  allowed  to  speak  in  his 
defence,  but  is  condemned  without 
being  heard. 

V.  The  Town-clerk.— Typical  of  1. 
The  influential  citizen.  2.  The  prudent 
counsellor.     3.  The  just  judge. 

Note. — The  Jews  and  the  Temple  of 
Diana.  It  has  been  suggested  that 
the  opposition  shown  to  Alexander  by 
the  Ephesian  mob  may  have  been 
occasioned  by  the  assaults  which  the 
the  Jews  were  known  to  have  made 
against  the  worship  of  Diana.  On 
this  subject  the  following  sentences 
may  be  read  with  interest : — "  Long 
before  the  days  of  Paul  and  Apollos 

420 


the  synagogue  of  Ephesus  had  waged 
war  against  the  prevailing  heathenism  \ 
and,  if  Paul  and  John  pitched  their 
tents  here,  that  was  only  because  others 
before  them  had  hewed  a  clearance  in 
this  primeval  forest  of  superstition. 
From  of  old  the  synagogue  at  Ephesus 
had  found  the  better  class  of  citizens 
actively  disaffected  towards  the  existing 
religion,  and  by  means  of  this  prepared 
the  way  for  Christianity.  For  a  long 
time  had  Jews  existed  in  Ephesus. 
Already  the  Diadochi  had  allowed 
them,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  the 
settled  citizens,  to  call  themselves 
Ephesians,  and  their  speedy  transition 
to  Home  (as  her  subjects)  bore  for 
them  here  also  good  fruits.  They 
knew  how  to  acquire  for  themselves, 
from  Dolabella  and  other  Roman 
authorities,  numerous  privileges  con- 
cerning which  Josephus  communicates 
information.  Their  religious  worship 
was  placed  under  the  protection  of  the 
Archons,  whilst  their  youth  were 
exempted  from  military  service.  From 
their  petitions  about  free  intercourse 
with  the  temple,  as  also  from  the 
fortunes  of  the  apostle  Paul,  one  may 
gather  in  how  lively  commerce  with 
Jerusalem  the  Jewish  quarter  in 
Ephesus  continued.  Even  the  narra- 
tives in  the  Acts  give  the  impression  of 
a  very  vigorous  religious  life.  So 
zealous  a  community  must  have  felt 
itself  doubly  called  forth  to  open  a 
propaganda  among  its  heathen  fellow- 
citizens,  seeing  that  all  the  intelligent 
among  these  were  weary  of  the  dis- 
order of  the  Diana  worship.  The 
apostolic  history  itself  points  to  this, 
that  only  the  material  interests  of 
Ephesus f  as  a  place  of  pilgrimage,  of 
the  vendors  of  images,  and  of  those 
who  were  entitled  to  the  rich  endow- 
ments of  the  Diana  temple  sufficed  to 
keep  up  the  wild  cultus.  Accordingly 
from  Jewish  circles  in  Ephesus  numer- 
ous attempts  were  made  to  waken  up 
against  this  condition  of  things  the 
moral  susceptibilities  of  their  Greek 
fellow-citizens.  Even  before  the  aboli- 
tion by  Domitian  of  the  Eunuch 
worship    (Suet.,    JDom.,    7 ;    Pseudo- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xix. 


Heraclit.,  Ep.  9),  and  therefore  in  the 
time  of  the  first  Caesar,  a  Jew  under- 
took a  bold  assault  against  the  temple 
of  Diana,  regardlessly  uncovering  all 
the  evils  of  the  holy  disorder,  and, 
through  keen  satire  generally  directed 
against  idolatry,  pressing  to  the  recog- 
nition of  the  One  God.  A  pretended 
letter  of  the  philosopher  Heraclitus 
suggested  to  this  Jewish  writer  the 
thought  to  avail  himself  for  the 
purpose  of  his  raillery  of  the  solemn 
mask  of  the  people-deriding  philosopher, 
of  whom  the  story  ran  that  he  had 
declared  the  entire  manhood  of  Ephesus 
to  be  deserving  of  strangulation.  He, 
as  no  other,  was  qualified  to  castigate 
the  Ephesians,  and  so,  like  one  well- 
versed  in  Scripture  and  well  read  in 
Aristotle's  ethic,  this  son  of  the 
synagogue  composed  some  fictitious 
letters  in  which  the  obscure  Heraclitus 
explained  to  the  Ephesians  why  he 
had  never  in  his  life  laughed.  En- 
tirely from  an  Old  Testament  stand- 
point Heraclitus  proposes  the  question 
why  it  goes  well  with  the  wicked,  and 
why  their  city  nourishes  in  spite  of  all 
its  vice,  and  arrives  at  the  Biblical 
solution  : — That '  God  punishes  not  by 
the  withdrawal  of  riches,  but  rather 
He  gives  these  to  the  evil  that  they, 
by  being  in  possession  of  means,  might 
sin  on  to  conviction;  adding  with  a 
grim  glance  upon  the  wealth  in  the 
haven  of  Panormus,  *  so  may  your 
good  fortune  never  fail  that  your 
wickedness  may  call  forth  chastise- 
ment.' Then,  proceeding  to  direct  his 
weapons  against  the  excesses  of  the 
Ephesian  idolatry,  with  the  com- 
placency of  hatred  he  dissects  all  its 
institutions,  in  order  to  abandon  every 
one  of  them  to  contempt.  Because  the 
cell  in  which  the  idol  image  is  accus- 
tomed to  stand  receives  its  light  for 
the  most  part  only  from  the  door,  and 
accordingly  is  half  dark,  he  makes  fun 
of  the  god  placed  in  the  darkness. 
Because  it  is  an  insult  (especially  to  a 
god)  to  say  that  it  '  is  of  stone ' 
(Odyss.,  xix.  163),  he  finds  every  stone 
god  blasphemous.  Even  the  narrow 
pedestal  of   the  idol  is  a  mockery  of 


Him  whom  heaven  and  earth  cannot 
contain.  Next  from  idolatry  generally 
the  author  turns  himself  to  the 
Artemis  (Diana)  worship  in  particular, 
which  he  finds  below  the  practices  of 
the  beasts.  Should  not  the  chief  priest 
in  the  first  instance  curse  the  wooden 
image,  since,  in  order  to  serve  it,  he 
requires  to  be  mutilated  ?  And  is  it 
not  foolish  to  charge  the  goddess  her- 
self with  unchastity  when  only  eunuchs 
are  allowed  to  approach  her  ?  But 
the  essence  of  all  wickedness  to  him 
are  the  orgies  of  the  worship  of  Cybele, 
the  nightly  torch  feasts,  and  all  the 
ancient  rites  which  exist  only  for  the 
purpose  of  covering  with  their  mantle 
abomination  and  crime.  *  On  this 
account,'  says  the  pretended  Heraclitus, 
1  have  I  given  over  laughing.  I  feel 
lonely  in  the  town.  To  a  wilderness 
have  you  made  me  through  your  wicked- 
ness. Should  I  laugh  when  you  go 
round  about  as  mendicant  priests  with 
the  kettle-drum,  each  one  filled  with 
a  separate  vice?  Should  it  move  me 
to  laughter  when  I  see  men  do  such 
like  things,  or  when  I  consider  your 
clothing  and  your  beards,  or  when  I 
see  what  useless  labour  is  expended  on 
your  head-gear;  when  I  see  how  a 
mother  seizes  her  child  for  poisoning ; 
how  the  substance  of  minors  is  de- 
voured, how  a  citizen  is  robbed  of  his 
wife ;  how  a  maid,  during  pious  night 
festivals,  is  forcibly  deprived  of  her 
virginity ;  how  a  girl  not  yet  arrived 
at  womanhood  is  the  victim  of  all 
woman's  troubles ;  how  one  who  is  only 
a  youth  is  the  lover  of  the  whole  town  ; 
or  when  I  see  the  squandering  of  oil 
or  of  ointment,  or  the  extravagance  of 
mirth  in  the  social  meals  got  up  by 
the  pledging  of  rings ;  or  the  assembled 
town  gatherings  at  which  truly  very 
important  judicial  decisions  in  matters 
of  the  plays  are  published  ?  On  account 
of  these  things  have  I  discontinued 
laughing.'  This  lively  representation 
of  the  domestic  and  public  life  at 
Ephesus  is  only  the  basis  from  which 
the  author  seeks  to  lead  to  faith  in  the 
true  God"  (Hausrath :  Der  Apostel 
Paulus,  pp.  346-349). 

421 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAPTER    XX. 

The  Third  Missionary  Journey  (Paul  and  Timothy) — Continued. 

§  1.  A  Second  Visit  to  Europe  ;  or,  Across  the  ^Egean  and  Back  (vers.  1-6). 
§  2.  A  Communion  Festival  at  Troas  ;  or,  the  Story  of  the  Young  Man  Eutychus 

(vers.  7-12). 
§  3.  Sailing  past  Ephesus  ;  or,  bound  for  Jerusalem  (vers.  13-16). 
§  4.  A  Halt  at  Miletus ;  or,  a  Farewell  Address  to  the  Elders  of  Ephesus  (vers. 

17-38). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  After  the  uproar  was  ceased. — Soon  after,  but  not  necessarily  because  of  the  uproar. 
The  best  authorities  insert  and  exhorted,  TapaKaXiaas,  before  and  embraced  or  took  leave  of 
them — i.e.,  the  disciples ;  the  word  ao-rracrafiei'os  referring  to  the  farewell  blessing  and  the 
farewell  kiss  (compare  xxi.  6).  Departed  for  to  go  into  Macedonia,  via  Troas  (see  2  Cor.  ii. 
12,  13),  where  he  awaited  for  some  time  the  coming  of  Titus,  whom,  however,  he  did  not 
meet  till  he  reached  Macedonia  (2  Cor.  vii.  6). 

Ver.  2.  The  word  for  Greece,  EXXds,  stands  for  Achaia  as  distinguished  from  Macedonia 
(xviii.  12,  xix.  21). 

Ver.  3.  And  there  abode  three  months. — Lit.,  having  acted  or  worked  there — viz.  in  Corinth 
(1  Cor.  xvi.  6),  three  months,  a  plot  having  been  laid  against  him  by  the  Jews,  etc.  iroirj&as, 
an  anakolouthon,  instead  of  voLrjcavTi.  During  this  stay  in  Corinth  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  was  written  (see  Rom.  xvi.  22,  23).  He  purposed  to  return  through  Macedonia. — 
Lit.,  there  icas  to  him  an  opinion,  or  intention — i.e.,  it  was  not  by  accident,  but  in  accordance 
with  deliberate  counsel  and  determination  that  he,  when  on  the  eve  of  embarking  for  Syria, 
changed  his  route  and  proceeded  northwards  through  Macedonia. 

Ver.  4.  As  far  as  Asia  is  omitted  by  many  ancient  authorities,  possibly  because  Trophimus, 
in  spite  of  2  Tim.  iv.  20,  appears  in  Paul's  company  in  Jerusalem  (xxi.  29),  and  Aristarchus 
sails  with  Paul  from  Csesarea  (xxvii.  2).  The  retention  of  the  clause,  however,  does  not 
necessarily  imply  that  the  persons  here  named  proceeded  with  the  Apostle  no  farther  than 
to  Asia.  The  best  MSS.  also  add  to  Sopater  of  Beroea  the  words  "  the  son  of  Pyrrhus," 
probably  to  distinguish  him  from  Sosipater,  Paul's  kinsman  (Rom.  xvi.  21). 

Ver.  5.  These  (the  seven)  going  before. — Rather,  having  gone  before,  most  likely  by  ship 
from  Corinth  (Lewin),  though  some  suppose  by  land  through  Macedonia  and  ship  from 
Philippi  (Alford,  Hackett),  tarried  for  us  at  Troas  (see  xvi.  8).  Why  Paul  stayed  behind  at 
Corinth  or  at  Philippi  is  not  recorded.  Either  he  had  work  to  do  in  Philippi  or  Corinth 
(Alford),  or  he  may  have  wished  to  keep  the  days  of  unleavened  bread  (Meyer).  The  use  of 
us  (ver.  5)  and  we  (ver.  6)  shows  that  Luke  rejoined  the  Apostle's  company  at  Philippi. 
Holtzmann  thinks  that  Paul,  accompanied  by  the  seven,  may  have  reached  Troas  by  the 
land  route,  crossing  over  the  Hellespont,  and  that  Luke  with  some  others  followed  after  by 
sea  from  Philippi. 

Ver.  6.  The  days  of  unleavened  bread  meant  the  Passover  week  (compare  xii.  3,  xxvii.  9). 
The  voyage  from  Philippi  to  Troas  was  accomplished  in  five  days  instead  of  three  (xvi.  11, 
12).     The  sojourn  in  the  city  extended  over  seven  days,  as  afterwards  at  Tyre  (xxi.  4). 

Ver.  7.  The  first  day  of  the  week. — Lit.,  the  first  of  the  Sabbaths,  as  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  2,  meaning 
not  on  one  of  the  Sabbaths  or  Jewish  festivals,  but  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  the  term 
"  Sabbaths  "  being  put  for  the  period  of  seven  days  (compare  Matt,  xxviii.  1). 

Ver.  8.  Many  lights. — Mentioned  that  all  suspicion  might  be  removed  from  the  assembly 
(Calvin,  Bengel)  ;  to  account  for  the  young  man's  drowsiness  (Alford);  to  show  how  his 
fall  was  observed  (Meyer) ;  but  most  likely  to  impart  liveliness  to  the  scene  (Hackett). 

Ver.  9.  In  a  window  should  be  in  the  window  of  the  upper  chamber — i.e.,  on  the  seat  of 
it.  "  The  windows  "  of  Oriental  houses  "  had  no  glass.  They  were  only  latticed,  and  thus 
gave  free  passage  to  the  air  and  admitted  light,  while  birds  and  bats  were  excluded  "  (Kitto's 
Cyclopaedia  :  art.  House').  The  third  loft. — Or  story.  The  middle  classes  usually  lived  in 
large  houses  in  flats — the  artizans  in  the  third  stories,  just  under  the  roofs — on  the  same 
plan  as  in  some  of  our  great  cities  (Stapfer,  Palestine  in  the  Time  of  Christ,  pp.  172,  173), 
Taken  up  dead. — Not  <b<rel  veKpbs  (Mark  ix.  26)  (Holtzmann),  but  veKpbs,  dead. 

Ver.  10.  Fell  on  him.-  -As  formerly  Elijah  and  Elisha  acted  in  performing  similar  awakenings 
(1  Kings  xvii.  17  ;  2  Kings  iv.  34).  Trouble  not  yourselves. — Make  ye  no  ado.  Compare 
Christ's  words  in  Jairus's  house  (Mark  v.  39). 

422 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xx. 


Ver.  11.  Broken  (se.  the)  bread. — Points  to  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

Ver.  12.  Brought  the  young  man  alive. — The  miracle  is  certainly  a  parallel  to  Tabitha's 
awakening  by  Peter  (ix.  36-40),  but  yet  not  on  that  account  an  invented  story.  According 
to  Kainsay,  who  in  this  follows  Blass,  this  verse  shows  "a  very  harsh  change  of  subject,"  the 
persons  who  brought  the  youth  alive,  not  being  those  who  were  comforted.  But  this  is  surely 
unmeaning  criticism.  One  would  naturally  conclude  that  they  who  brought  the  lad  alive 
were  Paul  and  those  who  assisted  him  ;  and  that  these  were  greatly  comforted  as  well  as  the 
other  Christians  present. 

Ver.  13.  To  go  afoot. — Or,  by  land.  "  A  paved  road  extended  from  Troas  to  Assos  ;  so 
that  starting  even  as  late  as  seven  or  eight  A.M.  Paul  could  have  reached  Assos,  twenty 
miles  distant,  in  the  afternoon  "  (Hackett). 

Ver.  14.  And  when  he  met  with  us.  Ramsay  thinks  the  imperfect  <rvv4j3a\\ev  (was  meeting) 
may  imply  that  Paul  did  not  actually  enter  Assos,  but  was  descried  and  taken  in  by  boat,  as 
he  was  nearing  the  city.  Mitylene. — On  the  east  coast  of  Lesbos,  of  which  island  it  was  the 
capital. 

Ver.  15.  Having  tarried  at  Trogyllium  is  omitted  in  the  R.V.  after  the  best  MSS.,  but  is 
supported  by  many  ancient  authorities. 

Ver.  16.  For  Paul  had  determined  to  sail  past  Ephesus.  Alford  thinks  these  words  show 
that  Paul  had  hired  the  ship  at  Philippi  for  the  voyage  to  Patara.  Ramsay  thinks  that  had 
the  ship  been  under  Paul's  command  he  would  have  stopped  at  Ephesus  instead  of  sending 
for  the  elders  to  Miletus.  Because  he  would  not  spend  the  time  in  Asia.  Lit.,  that  it  might 
not  come  to  pass  that  he  spent  time  in  Asia,  i.e.,  in  Ephesus.  The  next  clause  supplies  the 
reason. 

Ver.  17.  Miletus. — Thirty-six  miles  south  of  Ephesus,  and  on  the  south-west  of  the  Latmian 
Gulf.  "  Now  a  desolation :  then  an  emporium  of  trade  with  four  ports  or  docks  crowded 
with  shipping  "  (Lewin).     The  stay  at  Miletus  must  have  continued  over  three  or  four  days. 

Ver.  19.  Omit  many  before  tears,  and  for  lying  in  wait  read  plots. 

Ver.  22.  Bound  in  the  spirit. — I.e.,  his  own  spirit  (Kuinoel,  De  Wette,  Ewald,  Holtzmann, 
Wendt,  Hackett,  Spence,  and  others),  not  the  Holy  Spirit  (Calvin,  Beza,  Wordsworth, 
Zockler). 

Ver.  23.  The  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth. — Not  in  the  apostle's  own  spirit,  but  through  the 
voices  of  prophets. 

Ver.  24.  But  none  of  these  things  move  me. — Lit.,  I  make  account  of  nothing — i.e.,  which 

1  may  suffer,  neither  count  I  my  life  as  dear  unto  myself. — Or,  drawing  the  clauses  together, 
out  I  hold  not  my  life  of  any  account  as  dear  unto  me  (Tischendorf,  Meyer,  Holtzmann, 
Zockler,  R.V.).  So  that. — Is  sometimes  rendered,  though  wrongly,  as  a  comparative,  thus : 
"  neither  count  I  my  life  so  dear  to  me  as  the  finishing  of  my  course,"  etc.  (Bengel). 

Ver.  25.  Shall  see  my  face  no  more. — Literally  fulfilled,  though  perhaps  not  in  the  sense 
anticipated  by  the  Apostle,  who  appears  to  have  expected  an  early  death. 

Ver.  26.  Pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men. — As  in  xviii.  6. 

Ver.  28.  Overseers. — Translated  bishops  (R.V.),  were  the  same  as  "  elders  "  (ver.  17).  Not 
so  much  a  term  of  office  as  a  characterisation  of  function.  The  elder's  duty  was  to  oversee 
the  flock  (John  xxi.  15-17  ;  1  Peter  v.  2).  It  has  been  suggested  that  Gentile  Churches  were 
governed  by  "  bishops"  and  Jewish'Churches  by  "elders"  (Lindsay) ;  but  this  seems  a  doubtful 
distinction  in  face  of  Paul's  use  of  the  words  here.  The  Church  of  God. — Or,  according  to  many 
ancient  authorities,  of  the  Lord — i.e.,  Christ.  In  favour  of  the  former  reading,  iKkXrjala  rod 
deov,  stands  the  fact  that  this  expression  occurs  in  Paul's  epistles  eleven  times,  and  the  read- 
ing, £KK\r}<xia  tou  Kvpiov,  never  ;  in  favour  of  the  latter  witness  the  preponderance  of  external 
testimony,  the  circumstance  that  the  customary  reading  is  more  likely  to  have  been  substi- 
tuted for  an  unusual  one  than  vice  versa,  and  the  expression  "with  His  own  blood,"  which  is 
confessedly  more  appropriately  applied  to  Christ  than  to  God.  If  the  former  reading  be 
adopted  then  "  God  "  must  refer  to  Christ. 

Ver.  29.  After  my  departing. — An  ambiguous  phrase,  but  probably  signifying  here,  "  after 
my  death"  (Alford,  De  Wette),  rather  than  "after  my  leaving"  (Hackett),  or,  "after  my 
coming,"  Primum  venit  Paulus,  deinde  venient  lupi  (Bengel,  Hackett).  Baur  sees  in  the 
use  of  this  phrase  a  proof  the  whole  speech  was  a  vaticinium  post  eventum  put  into  the 
apostle's  mouth  by  the  writer  of  the  Acts  !  ! 

Ver.  31.  Watch. — That  the  apostle's  admonition  was  not  in  vain  see  Rev.  ii.  2,  3. 

Ver.  32.  The  best  MSS.  omit  brethren ;  and  some  read  the  Lord  instead  of  God.  Whether 
which  should  be  read  (Kuinoel)  or  who  (Calvin,  Bengel,  De  Wette,  Meyer,  Alford,  Hackett, 
Holtzmann,  and  others)  is  debated,  though  the  personal  reference  is  the  better.  An  should 
be  the  inheritance.     Compare  Eph.  i.  13. 

Ver.  33.  I  have  coveted,  better,  I  coveted  no  man's  silver,  etc.  (compare  1  Cor.  ix.  4-18 ; 

2  Cor.  xi.  7-12,  xii.  14-18 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  8,  9). 

Ver.  34.  These  hands. — Probably  holding  them  up  to  view.  Them  that  were  with  me 
meant  Timothy,  Erastus,  Luke,  and  others.     This  allusion  to  Paul's  manual  labour  in  Ephesus, 

423 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


though  not  mentioned  by  Luke  (xix.  1),  is  rendered  credible  by  what  is  recorded  of  his 
practice  while  in  Corinth  (xviii.  3  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  11,  12). 

Ver.  35.  The  weak  were  not  the  feeble  in  faith,  as  in  Eom.  xiv.  1  ;  1  Cor.  viii.  9  (Calvin, 
Bengel,  Neander,  Meyer,  Tholuck,  Lechler,  Holtzmann,  Zockler)  but  the  poor  in  worldly 
estate,  the  necessitous  in  temporal  means  (Chrysostom,  Kuinoel,  Olshausen,  De  Wette, 
Hackett,  Alford,  Plumptre,  and  others).  The  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  were  sayings,  alluded 
to  by  Paul  as  familiar,  which  had  not  found  a  place  in  the  gospel  records  but  had  been 
handed  down  by  tradition.  Many  such  must  have  been  in  existence  during  the  apostolic 
age.    See  "  Hints." 

HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses   1—6. 

A  Second  Visit  to  Europe  ;  or,  Across  the  Archipelago  and  Back. 

I.  The  point  of  departure. — Ephesus  (see  xix.  1).  1.  When  he  left  it.  "  After 
the  uproar  had  ceased."  Not  necessarily  immediately,  but  soon  after  the 
disturbance  recorded  in  the  preceding  chapter.  If  he  stayed  till  Pentecost 
(I  Cor.  xvi.  8),  then  he  probably  left  the  city  in  the  spring  or  summer  of  a.d. 
57  or  58.  2.  Why  he  left  it.  Not  because  of  the  just-mentioned  disturbance, 
at  least  not  wholly  on  its  account,  but  in  pursuance  of  a  plan,  already  formed, 
to  visit  Macedonia  (xix.  21).  3.  How  he  left  it.  Neither  hastily  nor  secretly, 
as  he  had  formerly  left  Bercea  (xvii.  14)  and  Damascus  (ix.  25),  but  deliberately 
and  openly,  after  having  convened,  exhorted,  and  embraced,  or  saluted  (with  a 
farewell  kiss)  the  disciples.  "  At  the  same  time  he  was  greatly  dispirited  by  the 
strong  opposition  which  had  driven  him  prematurely  from  the  city "  (2  Cor.  i. 
8/!)  (Ramsay). 

II.  The  place  of  destination. — Macedonia  (see  xix.  21,  xvi.  9,  10).  1.  How 
he  reached  it.  By  way  of  Troas  (2  Cor.  xii.  13),  where  he  expected  to  meet 
Titus,  whom  he  had  sent  to  Corinth  with  or  soon  after  his  First  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  where  he  stayed  some  considerable  time — long  enough  to  lay  the 
foundations  of  a  Christian  Church  (2  Cor.  ii.  12) — and  from  which  he  broke  up 
only  because  of  the  non-arrival  of  Titus.  2.  Who  accompanied  him.  Luke  omits 
to  mention  the  companions  of  his  voyage,  but  these  most  probably  were  Tychicus 
and  Trophimus  (xx.  4),  since  these  again  returned  with  him  from  Macedonia  to 
Asia.  3.  What  he  did  there.  He  went  through  those  parts,  visited  the  Churches 
which  had  been  established  in  them — the  Churches  of  Philippi,  Thessalonica,  and 
Bercea,  with  perhaps  others — and  gave  them  much  exhortation.  Here  also  he 
wrote  his  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  ix.  2,  4),  and  sent  it  by  the 
hands  of  Titus  (2  Cor.  viii.  18). 

III.  The.  course  of  travel. — This  led  him  into  Greece — i.e.,  into  Achaia 
(see  xix.  21),  and  more  particularly  to  Corinth  (1  Cor.  xvi.  6).  1.  The  route  by 
which  Corinth  was  approached.  Most  likely  "  round  about  by  Illyricum " 
(Rom.  xv.  19).  At  least  this  appears  the  only  place  in  Luke's  narrative  where 
Paul's  evangelising  tour  in  those  parts  can  be  inserted.  On  his  first  visit  to 
Macedonia  "he  moved  along  the  eastern  side  of  the  peninsula,  and  was  kept  at 
a  distance  from  Illyricum.  When  he  passed  through  Macedonia  next  (ver.  3) 
he  had  already  written  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans "  (Hackett).  2.  The  time 
spent  in  Corinth.  "  Three  months,"  which  probably  carried  him  through  the 
winter  of  a.d.  57  or  58  (see  1  Cor.  xvi.  6).  3.  The  work  done  in  Corinth. 
(1)  The  gospel  was  preached  as  before,  and  probably,  as  before,  in  the  house  of 
Justus,  if  by  this  time  another  place  of  meeting  had  not  been  obtained.  (2)  The 
disorders  of  the  Corinthian  Church  were  composed.  "  He  was  returning  to 
converts  who  had  cast  off  the  morality  of  the  gospel,  to  friends  who  had  forgotten 
his  love,  to  enemies  who  disputed  his  Divine  commission"  (Conybeare  and 
Howson),  and  with  all  these  he  doubtless  had  special  dealings  (see  2  Cor.  x.  2,  4, 
6,  8,  xiii.  2).  (3)  The  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  was  written  in  consequence  of 
bad  news  having  come  from  Galatia,  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  "  to  pave 

424 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xx. 


the  way  for  his "  contemplated  visit.  4.  The  date  of  leaving  Corinth.  When 
his  Jewish  adversaries  had  formed  another  plot  against  him.  There  is  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  Paul's  departure  was  hastened  by  the  discovery  of  this 
conspiracy,  yet  the  machinations  of  the  Jews  were  apparently  the  cause  of  his 
changing  his  route,  and  instead  of  sailing  direct  for  Syria,  journeying  northwards 
through  Macedonia,  and  embarking  at  ISTeapolis.  "  The  style  of  this  plot,"  says 
Ramsay,  (St.  Paul,  etc.,  p.  287)  "can  be  easily  imagined.  Paul's  intention  must 
have  been  to  take  a  pilgrim  ship  carrying  Achaian  and  Asian  Jews  to  the 
Passover.  With  a  ship  load  of  hostile  Jews  it  would  be  easy  to  find  opportunity 
to  murder  Paul.  He  therefore  abandoned  the  proposed  voyage  and  sailed  for 
Macedonia," — rather  as  already  suggested  travelling  to  Macedonia  by  land. 

IV.  The  journey  towards  home. — 1.  The  companions  of  the  Apostle.  Seven  in 
number.  (1)  Sopater  of  Beroea,  the  son  of  Pyrrhus — perhaps  characterised  so  to 
distinguish  him  from  Sosipater  (Rom.  xvi.  21),  and  named  first  because  Paul,  in 
travelling  vid  Macedonia,  would  pick  him  up  first  at  Beroea.  (2)  Aristarchus 
of  Thessalonica,  who  was  with  Paul  in  Ephesus  (see  xix.  29),  afterwards  accom- 
panied him  to  Rome  (xxvii.  2),  and  shared  his  imprisonment  in  that  city 
(Col.  iv.  10;  Philemon  24).  (3)  Secundns,  also  of  Thessalonica,  but  otherwise 
unknown.  (4)  Gaius  of  Derbe,  not  the  Gaius  who  attended  Paul  in  Ephesus 
(xix.  29),  but  probably  the  individual  of  this  name  to  whom  John  wrote  his 
Third  Epistle  (3  John  i.).  (5)  Timothy,  whose  birthplace,  Lystra  (xvi.  1),  is 
passed  over,  presumably  as  well  known.  (6)  Tychicus  of  Asia,  one  of  Paul's 
most  trusted  associates  (Eph.  vi.  21 ;  Col.  iv.  7 ;  Titus  iii.  12)  and  the  bearer  of 
Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Asiatic  Churches  (2  Tim.  iv.  12  ;  Titus  iii.  12).  (7)  Trophi- 
mus,  a  native  of  Ephesus  (xxi.  29),  whom  Paul  left  behind  at  Miletus  sick 
(2  Tim.  iv.  20),  but  who  subsequently  followed  the  apostle  to  Jerusalem,  where 
his  presence  in  the  temple  led  to  the  apostle's  apprehension.  That  they  were 
seven  in  number  has  (but  without  reason)  suggested  the  idea  that  they  were 
intended  to  represent  at  Jerusalem  the  converted  Gentile  world  (Baumgarten), 
or  the  seven  deacons  of  chapter  vi.  (Plumptre).  2.  The  course  they  pursued. 
Leaving  Corinth  they  travelled  northwards  through  Macedonia  to  Beroea,  Thessa- 
lonica, and  Philippi,  at  the  last  of  which  towns  they  picked  up  Luke,  the  beloved 
physician  (ver.  6).  From  Philippi  the  seven  above  named  proceeded  in  advance 
to  Troas,  where  they  announced  the  coming  and  awaited  the  arrival  of  Paul  and 
Luke,  who  did  not  leave  Philippi  till  after  the  days  of  unleavened  bread— i.e., 
the  passover  of  a.d.  58  or  59 — and,  after  a  stormy  passage  of  five  days — i.e.,  two 
days  longer  than  the  voyage  westward  (xvi.  11,  12) — anchored  in  Troas,  where 
they  tarried  seven  days,  obviously  waiting  for  another  vessel  in  which  to  prosecute 
their  voyage,  or,  if  the  same  vessel  proceeded  southwards,  passing  the  time  while 
it  discharged  and  took  in  cargo. 

Learn. — 1.  That  Christ's  servants  should  never  flee  from  the  post  of  duty 
simply  on  account  of  danger.  2.  That  faithful  pastors  should  bestow  much  care 
on  the  edification  and  consolidation  of  the  Church.  3.  That  so  long  as  earnest 
ministers  preach  the  gospel,  they  may  lay  their  accounts  with  plots  to  hinder 
their  work,  if  not  to  injure  their  persons.  4.  That  those  who  are  engaged  in 
the  Lord's  service  should  keep  themselves  in  life  as  long  as  they  can.  5.  That 
six  or  seven  pious  people  with  a  Paul  to  lead  them  are  "  a  formidable  enemy  to 
the  devil "  (Lindhammer,  quoted  by  Besser). 

HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.   2.     How  often  did  Paul  visit      is  commonly  urged :  1.  That  the  Acts 

Corinth  ?     Twice,  or  thrice  ?  speak    of    only    two    visits    (xviii.    1 , 

I.  Twice. — In  favour   of   this  view      xx.    2,    3).      2.   That   between   Paul's 

425 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


first  visit  and  his  first  imprisonment 
at  Rome  his  time  is  sufficiently  ac- 
counted for.  3.  That  2  Cor.  xiii.  1 
does  not  necessarily  imply  that  he  had 
already  been  twice  in  Corinth,  while 
2  Cor.  xiii.  2  seems  to  say  that  his  then 
contemplated  visit  would  be  his  second. 
4.  That  in  1  Cor.  i.  15  he  distinctly 
speaks  of  his  then  contemplated  visit 
as  his  second.  5.  That  2  Cor.  xii.  14 
proves  the  sense  of  2  Cor.  xiii.  1  to  be 
that  then  was  the  third  time  Paul  had 
been  in  readiness  to  visit  them.  6.  That 
the  Alexandrian  MS.  in  2  Cor.  xiii.  1 
reads,  "This  is  the  third  time  I  am 
ready  to  come  to  you "  (see  Paley, 
Horce  Paulince,  iv.  12). 

II.  Thrice. — This  view  is  based  on 
the  following  considerations :  1.  That 
2  Cor.  xiii.  1,  according  to  the  best 
texts,  refers,  not  to  a  third  intention, 
but  to  a  third  visit.  2.  That  2  Cor. 
i.  15,  16  speaks,  not  of  the  benefit  of 
a  second  visit,  but  of  the  advantage  of 
being  visited  twice  on  the  same  tour. 
3.  That  as  Paul  had  been  three  times 
shipwrecked  when  he  wrote  the  Second 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  (xi.  25),  and 
as  the  only  recorded  voyages  on  which 
he  could  have  been  wrecked  were  those 
from  Csesarea  to  Tarsus  (ix.  30)  and 
from  Ephesus  to  Macedonia  (xx.  1),  of 
both  of  which  absolutely  no  account  is 
given,  in  order  to  make  the  number 
three  he  must  have  undertaken  another 
voyage,  which  most  probably  was  from 
Ephesus  to  Corinth.  4.  There  were 
urgent  reasons  why  he  should  have 
visited  the  Corinthian  Church  while 
residing  at  Ephesus.  5.  Communication 
between  the  two  cities  was  easy  to  obtain 
at  any  time.  6.  Its  omission  by  Luke 
is  susceptible  of  explanation  by  remem- 
bering that  occasionally  long  journeys 


are  dismissed  in  a  few  words  (see  xv.  41, 
xvi.  6,  xviii.  23,  xix.  1,  xx.  2,  3),  while 
several  important  events,  such  as  the 
founding  of  the  Syrian  and  Cilician 
Churches  (Gal.  i.  21),  and  the  journey 
to  Arabia  (Gal.  i.  17),  are  not  men- 
tioned at  all,  and  by  supposing  that 
nothing  remarkable  occurred  during 
this  second  visit  to  the  commercial 
capital  of  Achaia. 

Vers.  1-6.  The  routine  of  a  mis- 
sionary s  life,  as  exemplified  in  that  of 
Paul. 

I.  Bidding  farewell  to  friends  ( ver.  1 ). 
— Earthly  ties  and  gracious  bonds  have 
often  to  be  broken  by  those  who  would 
follow  the  cross. 

II.  Exhorting  the  people  of  God 
(ver.  2). — Almost  as  hard  a  task  as 
that  of  winning  men  to,  is  that  of  keep- 
ing men  in  the  faith. 

III.  Evading  the  plots  of  enemies 
(ver.  3). — They  that  will  live  godly, 
and  much  more  they  that  will  propa- 
gate the  cause  of  Christ,  must  lay  their 
account  with  persecution. 

IV.  Enjoying  the  society  of  fellow- 
Christians  (ver.  4). — Communion  of 
kindred  souls  with  each  other  forms 
one  of  the  Christian's  sweetest  solaces. 

V.  Unfurling  the  banner  of  the 
cross  (ver.  6). — This  the  favourite  occu- 
pation of  a  true  minister  or  missionary. 

Ver.  4.  PauVs  friends  ;  or,  the  Sacred 
Circle  of  Seven. 

I.  Trophies  of  Paul's  gospel. 
II.  Companions  on  Paul's  Journey. 

III.  Helpers  in  Paul's  work. 

IV.  Sharers  in  Paul's  renown.  Having 
found  with  him  a  place  in  the  Inspired 
Record. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  7—12. 

A  Communion  Festival  at  Troas  ;  or,  the  Story  of  the  Young  Man  Eutychus. 

I.  The  crowded  congregation. — 1.  The  persons  composing  it.  (1)  The  disciples  at 
Troas  (xvi.  8),  who  must  have  been  present  in  considerable  numbers,  since  Eutychus 
could  only  obtain  a  seat  in  the  window.  The  Troas  Christians  forsook  not  the 
assembling  of  themselves  together  (Heb.  x.  25).  (2)  The  apostle  and  his  company 
(ver.  4).     These,  though  parted  at  Corinth  or  Philippi  had  rejoined  each  other 

426 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xx. 


in  Troas.  2.  The  time  of  meeting.  On  the  first  day  of  the  week,  the  Lord's  day 
(Rev.  i.  10),  an  intimation  that  thus  early  the  practice  of  meeting  for  worship  on 
Sunday  was  observed  by  the  followers  of  Christ.  In  the  evening,  as  is  indicated 
by  the  "  many  lights  "  or  lamps  that  are  said  to  have  been  burning.  The  cessation 
of  work  on  this  day,  though  it  may  have  been  the  custom  with  some,  was 
manifestly  not  as  yet  common.  3.  The  place  of  assembly.  Not  the  Jewish 
synagogue,  which  shows  that  a  separation  of  the  Christians  from  the  Jewish 
community  had  here  taken  place.  Not  a  public  academy  or  school  as  in  Ephesus 
(xix.  9),  scarcely  even  a  house  of  any  pretensions  like  that  of  Justus  at  Corinth 
(xviii.  7),  which  perhaps  reveals  that  not  many  mighty  or  wise  had  been  con- 
verted in  Troas,  but  an  upper  chamber,  doubtless  a  room  in  some  obscure  house, 
on  the  third  story  and  next  the  roof  (see  i.  18,  ix.  37).  4.  The  business  of  the 
hour.  Twofold.  (1)  To  break  bread — i.e.,  to  celebrate  the  Lord's  Supper,  which 
consisted  then,  as  now,  in  the  breaking  of  bread  and  drinking  of  wine  in  remem- 
brance of  Christ,  and  was  then,  though  not  now,  followed  or  accompanied  by  a 
lovefeast.  (2)  To  hear  Paul  preaching,  or  rather  to  hear  the  word  discoursed 
by  Paul,  who  doubtless  sat  at  table  while  he  talked,  since  the  modern  practice 
of  formally  orating  on  a  text  of  Scripture  had  not  then  been  introduced. 

II.    The    protracted    preaching. — Two  things   noticeable :    1.    The  preacher 
wearied  not  in  speaking.     (1)  A  remarkable  phenomenon.     Though  Paul  appears 
to  have  commenced  discoursing  in  the  early  hours  of  evening,  midnight  arrived, 
and  still  the  stream  of  holy  converse  flowed  on — yea,   when  the  interruption 
which  occurred  through  Eutychus's  death  and  resuscitation  had  passed,  the  talk 
was  resumed  and  sustained  through  a  sleepless  night  till  dawn.       As  a  mere 
physical  effort  it  would  have  taxed  the  energies  of  a  strong  man ;  how  much 
more  then  must  it  have  tested  the  powers  of  one  so  infirm  as  the  apostle  !     Be- 
sides, since  a  speaker  like  Paul  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  kept  on  repeating  the 
same  things  over  and  over,  what  a  demand  must  that  midnight  preaching  have 
made  on  his  mental  resources  !     And  if  to  this  be  added  the  tender  emotions 
which  constantly  uprose  within  his  bosom  when  he  either  spoke  or  wrote  to  his 
converts  about  his  Lord  and  theirs,  it  will  not  be  hard  to  see  that  the  strain  on  the 
apostle's  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  must  have  been  immense,  must,  in  fact,  have  been 
almost  unparalleled.    (2)  A  reasonable  explanation.    Three  things  must  have  con- 
tributed to  enable  Paul  to  undergo  such  a  laborious  performance.     First,  the 
circumstances  in  which  he  and  his  hearers  were  then  assembled.     It  was  a  flying 
visit  he  had  made  to  their  town ;  it  was  the  last  time,  probably,  they  would  look 
each  other  in  the  face,  it  was  a  farewell  sermon ;  and  it  was  the  most  solemn  of 
all  occasions  on  which  Christ's  people  could  meet.     Second,  the  theme  upon  which 
he   descanted  to  his  hearers  was  one  that  inspired  him  with   "  thoughts  that 
breathe  and  words  that  burn,"  that  drew  him  on  from  topic  to  topic  with  never- 
failing  enthusiasm,  that  so  lifted  him  out  of  himself  that  he  never  felt  his  weari- 
ness or  weakness,  and  probably  knew  not  whether  he  was  in  the  body  or  out  of 
the  body  (2  Cor.  xii.  2).     Thirdly,  the  grace  of  his  glorified  Master,  which  never 
failed  him,  would  no  doubt  strongly  support  him  that  night,  so  that  he  could 
achieve  what  to  common  men  would  seem  impossibilities  (2  Cor.  xii.  9  ;  Phil.  iv. 
13).     2.  The  audience  wearied  not  in  hearing.     How  different  from  modern  con- 
gregations of  Christ's  professed  followers,  who,  so  far   from   listening  to   the 
preached  gospel  from  evening  until  midnight,  and  from  midnight  until  dawn, 
cannot,  without  impatience,  endure  a  thirty  minutes'  sermon,  and  would  almost 
clap  their  hands  with  joy  if  the  preacher's  discourse  could  be  huddled  through  in 
ten  minutes,  or  perhaps  dispensed  with  altogether.      No  doubt  modern  congre- 
gations have  not  Pauls  for  preachers ;  but  if  they  had  it  is  to  be  questioned 
whether  their  behaviour  would  be  different.     The  present-day  outcry  against  long 
sermons — by  which  are  meant  discourses  of  half  an  hour — has  its  origin  not  in 

427 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


the  small  ability  of  the  preachers,  but  in  the  lack  of  religious  zeal  on  the  part  of 
the  hearers. 

III.  The  alarming  accident. — 1.  The  sleeper  in  the  window.  Eutychus  (con- 
cerning whose  antecedents  nothing  is  known)  has  often  been  held  up — unjustly 
and  unkindly — to  reproach  on  account  of  his  unseemly  conduct  (as  it  is  called) 
of  sleeping  in  the  church.  But  there  are  times  when  it  is  wholly  inexcusable  to 
yield  to  the  "  drowsy  god  "  when  engaged  in  Divine  worship  ;  on  the  other  hand, 
there  are  occasions  when  it  may  be  justified,  and  this  it  may  be  reasonably  main- 
tained was  one.  (1)  Eutychus  was  obviously  a  youth  to  whom  sleep,  especially 
at  midnight,  was  a  natural  right,  a  physical  necessity,  a  heaven -prepared  boon 
which  he  could  not  be  blamed  for  accepting.  (3)  The  upper  chamber  was  as 
manifestly  crowded,  and  the  hot  breaths  must  have  speedily  produced  such  an 
atmosphere  that  the  wonder  is  not  that  Eutychus  dropped  over  into  slumber,  but 
that  many  more  did  not  follow  his  example.  (3)  The  strain  of  listening  to  Paul's 
preaching — in  which  it  may  be  assumed  Eutychus  was  interested — could  not  fail 
to  exhaust  the  young  man's  nervous  energy,  and  cause  him  to  drop  off  through 
sheer  weariness  into  a  sound  sleep.  All  who  have  as  satisfactory  excuses  as 
Eutychus  may  sleep  in  church  with  easy  consciences.  2.  The  fall  into  the  court. 
How  it  happened  is  not  explained.  The  window,  after  the  manner  of  the 
eastern  houses,  opened  into  the  area  below.  Most  likely  the  shutter  was  closed 
when  the  young  man  ensconced  himself  in  the  recess.  Perhaps  the  fastening 
gave  way  while  he  leant  upon  the  shutter,  or  wakening  with  a  start  from  his 
deep  sleep  he  may  have  unwittingly  pressed  against  and  burst  it  open.  In  any 
case  he  fell  from  the  third  flat  to  the  ground,  a  distance  probably  of  twenty  feet, 
and  was  taken  up,  not  as,  but  really — dead. 

IV.  The  gracious  miracle. — 1.  The  young  man's  restoration.  (1)  By  whom 
it  was  effected.  Really,  of  course,  by  God,  but  instrumentally  by  Paul. 
(2)  How  it  was  effected.  Though  not  so  mentioned,  doubtless  by  prayer.  Paul 
went  down  and  fell  upon  the  young  man  as  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii.  21)  and  Elisha 
(2  Kings  iv.  34)  did,  using,  it  may  be  supposed,  words  borrowed  from  the  former, 
"  Lord  !  let  this  young  man's  soul  come  into  him  again."  2.  The  credibility  of  the 
story.  Baur  and  his  disciples  find  in  this  miracle  only  a  counterpart  of  the 
raising  of  Dorcas  by  Peter  (ix.  36-42),  and  accordingly  pronounce  it  unauthentic. 
But  the  reality  of  the  miracle  was  attested  by  those  who  saw  the  young  man 
after  he  had  been  restored  to  life  while  the  truthfulness  of  the  account  is 
vouched  for  by  the  extreme  likeliness  of  the  narration,  and  can  only  be  disputed 
by  those  who  are  unwilling  to  believe  in  the  supernatural. 

Learn. — 1.  The  duty  of  Christians  to  assemble  for  worship  on  the  Lord's  day. 
2.  The  place  assigned  to  both  the  preaching  of  the  word  and  the  administration 
of  the  sacraments  in  the  edification  of  believers.  3.  The  justification  accorded 
to  long  sermons,  at  least  on  special — e.g.,  sacramental  occasions.  4.  The  darg  r 
of  sleeping  in  church,  since  if  not  always  sinful  it  may  sometimes  be  hurtful. 
5.  The  inferiority  of  modern  preachers,  who,  if  they  excel  Paul  in  the  art  of 
setting  men  to  sleep,  fall  immeasurably  below  him  in  the  power  of  working 
miracles.  6.  The  reality  of  the  communion  of  saints.  7.  The  solemnity  and 
sadness  of  earth's  farewells. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  7.  Light  from  Early  Christian  rection  is  apparent,  though  it  is  more 

Practice.  than   likely  Jewish    Christians,  for  a 

I.  On  the  sanctity  of  the  Lord's  day.  considerable  time  after,  continued  also 

— That  they  kept  the  first  day  of  the  to  observe  the  seventh  clay  as  a  day 

week  as  a  memorial  of  Christ's  resur-  of  rest.      Gentile  Christians  may  not 

428 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xx. 


have  been  able  to  devote  the  first 
day  entirely  to  rest ;  the  narrative 
shows  they  consecrated  its  evening  hours 
to  worship. 

II.  On  the  nature  of  Christian  wor- 
ship.— This  consisted  :  1.  In  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  LoroVs  Supper — 
which  perhaps  has  not  so  high  a  place 
as  properly  belongs  to  it  in  modern 
Christian  worship.  2.  In  listening  to 
edifying  discourse  upon  the  gospel — 
which  also  in  some  modern  Churches  is 
not  accorded  the  place  to  which  it  is 
entitled.  3.  In  the  enjoyment  of  Chris- 
tian fellowship — which,  again,  is  largely 
overlooked  in  modern  congregations  of 
believers.  Without  reviving  the  love- 
feasts  of  those  early  times,  that  which 
they  pointed  to  and  promoted,  the 
spirit  of  love  and  the  sense  of  brother- 
hood, should  be  diligently  cultivated. 

III.  On  the  length  of  gospel  sermons. 
— These  should  be  :  1.  Neither  so  short 
as  to  admit  no  room  for  the  utterance 
of  any  valuable  doctrine,  or  the  ex- 
pression of  any  holy  feeling.  2.  Nor 
so  long  as  to  exhaust  the  physical, 
mental,  and  spiritual  energies  of  either 
preacher  or  hearer.  3.  But  always 
suited  to  the  audience  and  the  occasion. 
Some  audiences  and  occasions  require 
long,  and  others  short  discourses. 

The  First  Day  of  the  Week. 

I.  A  solemn  religious  assembly. — 
1.  The  time  was  the  first  day  of  the 
week.  2.  The  occasion  was  the  observ- 
ance of  the  Lord's  Supper.  3.  The 
place  was  an  upper  room  with  many 
lights — obscure,  but  not  secret. 

II.  The  preacher. — 1.  The  preacher 
was  Paul.  2.  He  preached  a  farewell 
sermon.  3.  He  preached  a  long 
sermon. 

III.  A  careless  hearer. — 1.  His  in- 
firmity. 2.  His  death.  3.  His  resto- 
ration to  life. — G.  Brooks. 

Vers.  7-12.  Communion  at  Troas. 

I.  The  congregation. — The  disciples 
at  Troas.  Who  were :  1.  Probably 
many.  May  be  inferred  from  the  fact 
that  Paul  had  previously  visited  and 
preached  in  Troas.     2.  Certainly  poor. 


Their  meeting  place,  an  upper  chamber 
or  room  in  a  top  story,  showed  this. 
3.  Obviously  eager.  Longed  to  hear 
the  word,  not  afraid  of  long  sermons. 
Not  a  good  sign  when  Christians  are 
impatient  of  preaching.  4.  Intensely 
sympathetic.  Their  hearts  beat  in  uni- 
son with  both  the  service  and  the 
preacher. 

II.  The  preacher. — Paul,  the  apostle 
of  the  Gentiles.  An  object  of  interest 
from  :  1.  His  personal  character  and 
history.  A  man  of  feeble  body  but  of 
tremendous  spiritual  power.  2.  His 
missionary  labours  and  travels.  No 
doubt  full  information  about  these 
would  have  been  imparted  during  the 
week,  if  not  by  Paul  himself,  at  least 
by  his  companions.  3.  His  previous 
visit  and  preaching.  Most  likely  all 
regarded  him  in  the  light  of  an  old 
friend,  while  many  would  behold  in 
him  their  spiritual  father. 

III.  The  sermon.  —  About  which 
many  things  were  worth  noting;  as, 
e.g.,  that  it  was  :  1.  A  spoken  sermon. 
Not  read,  but  delivered  face  to  face. 
Bead  discourses  neither  unlawful  nor 
unprofitable;  but  not  the  best  for 
either  preacher  or  hearer.  2.  A  fare- 
well sermon.  Therefore  without  doubt 
uttered  with  much  tender  and  solemn 
feeling,  and  listened  to  with  avidity. 
Compare  farewell  address  to  elders  at 
Miletus  (ver.  17).  3.  A  communion 
sermon.  Whence  the  subject  may  be 
guessed.  Not  the  story  of  his  travels, 
but  the  story  of  the  cross.  Not  him- 
self the  hero  but  Christ.  4.  A  long 
sermon.  Probably  three  hours  to  begin 
with.  And  yet  the  Troans  wearied 
not,  but  heard  for  three  hours  more. 
Short  sermons  may  be  often  best ;  but 
occasions  surely  arise  when  long  dis- 
courses are  befitting. 

IV.  The  miracle.— The  raising  of 
Eutychus.  1.  The  accident.  (1)  The 
subject  of  it — a  young  man,  Eutychus, 
otherwise  unknown.  (2)  The  manner 
of  it.  Falling  from  a  window  (see 
"  Critical  Remarks  ").  (3)  The  issue  of 
it.  Death.  Sad  that  he  should  have  met 
his  death  through  attending  Church  ; 
but  better  that  he   died  so  than  in  a 

429 


CHAP.  XX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


drunken  brawl.  (4)  The  effect  of  it. 
Produced  great  commotion  in  the  meet- 
ing. Many  lamentations  over  the 
poor  boy's  untimely  fate,  and  much 
sympathy  for  his  mother  if  she  was 
present.  2.  The  restoration.  (1)  Ef- 
fected by  Paul,  who,  in  recalling  the 
lad  to  life,  followed  the  example  of 
Elijah  and  Elisha.  (2)  Attested  by  the 
people,  who  witnessed  the  miracle,  saw 
the  young  man  alive  again,  and  were 
comforted. 

V.  The  communion. — 1,  The  solemn 
impressions  under  which  it  was  cele- 
brated. Those  who  took  part  in  it  had 
just  been  listening  to  a  discourse  about 
the  risen  Saviour,  and  had  just  wit- 
nessed a  display  of  that  Saviour's 
power.  What  must  have  been  their 
emotions  when  they  returned  to  the 
upper  room  to  celebrate  their  memorial 
feast  1  2.  The  sacramental  actions  were 
unquestionably  those  of  the  Lord's 
Supper.  "  Breaking  of  bread"  alone 
mentioned  ;  but  "  drinking  of  wine " 
implied.  The  narrative  affords  no 
countenance  to  the  idea  of  Communion 
in  one  kind.  3.  The  post  communion 
address  was  not  omitted.  Paul  talked 
with  his  hearers  a  long  while  till  break 
of  day,  about  the  significance  of  the 
meal,  and  its  foreshadowing  of  heaven, 
about  how  they  should  live  and  walk 
in  the  world,  and  about  their  impend- 
ing separation.  And  so  the  sacred 
service  ended.  With  the  dawning  of 
the  day  the  apostle  departed. 

Vers.  8-12.  The  Night  Service  at 
Troas. 

I.  An  admonitory  example  of  Chris- 
tian zeal  for  God's  word. — 1.  On  the 
part  of  the  apostle,  who  wearies  not  of 
preaching.  2.  On  the  part  of  the 
congregation,  who  grow  not  tired  of 
hearing. 

II.  A  warning  example  of  human 
weakness  and  sloth. — The  sleep  and 
the  fall  of  Eutychus.  "  Watch  and 
pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  tempta- 
tion." "  The  spirit  is  willing,  but  the 
flesh  is  weak." 

Ill  A  consolatory  example  of  Divine 
grace  and  faithfulness. — The  resusci- 

430 


tation  of  the  young  man,  the  comfort 
of  the  Church. — Gerok. 


Ver.  9.   On  sleeping  in  Church. 

I.  Pardonable  —  When  it  results 
from  physical  causes,  over  which  one 
has  no  control;  such  as:  1.  Exhaus- 
tion through  previous  labour.  2.  The 
imperative  demands  of  nature  which 
call   for   such    repose    as   sleep    gives. 

3.  The  soporific  atmosphere  of  the 
church   through  defective  ventilation. 

4.  The  weariness  induced  by  a  too 
constant  strain  upon  the  mental  facul- 
ties in  listening  to  the  preacher. 

II.  Inexcusable. — When  it  springs 
either :  1.  From  indifference  to  the 
truth  that  is  preached ;  or  2.  From 
dislike  to  the  preacher  by  whom  it  is 
spoken  ;  or  3.  From  lack  of  interest  in 
the  object  which  the  preacher  by  his 
preaching  seeks  to  attain. 

III.  Hurtful. — 1.  It  disconcerts  and 
discourages  the  preacher.  2.  It  infects 
and  contaminates  the  hearers.  Sleep- 
ing in  Church  is  contagious.  3.  It  in- 
flicts loss  and  sometimes  positive  hurt 
upon  the  sleeper. 

IV.  Preventable. — By  removing  its 
causes.  1.  Providing  comfortable  and 
well -ventilated  churches.  2.  Preach- 
ing interesting  and  not  too  long 
sermons.  3.  Preparing  the  heart  by 
previous  prayer  and  meditation,  for 
the  reception  of  the  truth. 

The  young  man  Eutychus ;  an  example 
to  all  the  unsteadfast  in  the  Church. 

I.  By  his  dangerous  sleep. — In  the 
midst  of  the  assembled  congregation, 
during  the  hearing  of  the  divine  word, 
the  heart  may  be  overpowered  by  the 
sleep  of  false  security. 

II.  By  his  terrible  fall. — From  the 
third  storey  to  the  street  pavement ; 
an  admonitory  representation  of  the 
great  fall  from  an  imaginary  height  of 
faith  to  sin  and  perdition. 

III.  By  his  miraculous  deliverance. 
— In  the  arms  of  a  Paul,  who  pene- 
trates him  with  his  power  of  life  and 
warmth  of  love,  even  the  deeply  fallen, 
he  who  is  thought  dead,  may  by  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xx. 


wonderful  grace  of  God  again  become  common  prudence  and  foresight  even 

living. — Gerok.  when   engaged    about    the    things   of 

religion  and  eternal  life. 

The  Accident  at  Troas.      Thoughts  III.  The  power  of  a  great  calamity 

suggested.  to  open  the  flood-gates  of  human  sym- 

I.  The  uncertainty  of  life. — Even  pathy. — How  deeply  the  congregation 
to  the  good,  and  the  consequent  neces-  was  moved  by  the  young  man's  death 
sity  of  preparing  for  death.  Eutychus,  is  revealed  by  the  comfort  they  ex- 
a  young  man,  full  of  life,  hope,  and  perienced  in  his  resuscitation  (ver.  12). 
promise,  employed  also  at  the  best  of  IV.  The  mission  and  the  power  of 
work,  and  yet  he  died  suddenly  as  the  the  gospel. — To  quicken  dead  souls  as 
result  of  an  accident.  Paul   restored    Eutychus   to  life.     As 

II.  The  moral  and  spiritual  uses  of  God's  power  flowing  through  Paul's 
accidents. — This  accident  at  Troas  was  body  reanimated  the  dead  youth,  so 
fitted  to  remind  the  Christians  there  the  might  of  God's  grace  streaming 
of  the  propriety  and  duty  of  exercising  through  the  gospel  can  revive  dead  souls. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  13—16. 

Sailing  past  Ephesus  ;  or,  bound  for  Jerusalem. 

I.  From  Troas  to  Assos. •— 1.  When  Paul  and  his  companions  left  Troas. 
Obviously  after  the  assembly  spoken  of  in  the  preceding  paragraph  had  broken 
up,  on  the  morning  of  the  tenth  day  of  April,  a  Monday.  Possibly  Paul's 
companions  may  have  departed  before  the  conclusion  of  the  service,  since  they 
are  said  to  have  preceded  him.  Paul  himself  not  only  closed  the  meeting,  but 
may  have  lingered  an  hour  or  two  before  setting  out.  2.  How  Paul  and  his 
companions  reached  Assos.  (1)  Paul's  companions  went  by  ship  from  the  harbour 
of  Troas.  Assos  lay  upon  the  Mysian  coast,  about  twenty-four  miles  south  of 
Troas  by  land,  and  forty  by  sea.  The  voyage  would  probably,  with  favourable 
winds,  occupy  four  or  five  hours.  (2)  Paul  himself  went  the  land  way  to  Assos, 
and  would  most  likely  meet  the  ship  on  arrival.  The  road  lay  "  through  the 
southern  gate,  past  the  hot  springs,  and  through  the  oak  woods — then  in  full 
foliage — which  cover  all  that  shore  with  greenness  and  shade,  and  across  the 
wild  water-courses  on  the  western  side  of  Ida  "  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  ii.  229). 
3.  Paul's  reasons  for  selecting  the  land  route.  These  can  only  be  conjectured. 
Perhaps  he  wished  (1)  to  visit  friends  on  the  way  (Meyer,  Wendt) ;  or  (2)  to 
enjoy  the  company  of  his  Troas  friends,  who  could  convey  him  on  the  road  but 
could  not  well  obtain  accommodation  on  the  ship ;  or  (3)  to  recruit  his  health 
(Calvin) ;  or  (4)  to  secure  a  brief  interval  of  quiet  for  meditation  and  communion 
with  heaven,  after  the  exciting  scenes  and  incidents  of  the  week  at  Troas 
(Baumgarten,  Ewald,  Lange),  though  after  all  it  is  doubtful  whether  he  would 
be  allowed  to  make  the  journey  alone  (Zockler). 

II.  From  Assos  to  Mitylene. — 1.  The  voyagers.  Paul,  on  reaching  Assos,  at 
once  stepped  on  board  the  ship,  which  was  probably  lying  to  and  waiting  his 
arrival.  The  missionary  company,  with  him  at  its  head,  was  complete.  2.  The 
voyage.  As  Mitylene  was  distant  from  Assos  thirty  miles,  the  entire  voyage  from 
Troas  to  Mitylene,  seventy  miles,  might  easily  be  accomplished  in  one  day. 
3.  The  port.  Mitylene  (the  modern  city  being  called  Castro),  where  the  ship 
appears  to  have  anchored  for  the  night  "  because  it  was  the  time  of  dark 
moon  "  (Conybeare  and  Howson),  was  the  chief  city  of  Lesbos  (now  Metilino  or 
Metelin).  "  The  beauty  of  the  capital  of  Sappho's  island  was  celebrated  by  the 
architects,  poets,  and  philosophers  of  Rome  "  (Conybeare  and  Howson). 

III.  From  Mitylene  to  Miletus. — 1.  First  day's  {Tuesday's)  journey.  From 
Mitylene  to  Chios,  the  modern  Scio,  one  of  the  largest  and  most  beautiful  islands 

431 


CHAP.  XX. 


HO  MILE TIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


on  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor.  Chios,  "  whose  green  fields  were  the  fabled  birth- 
place of  Homer  "  (Farrar),  was  celebrated  both  for  its  beauty  and  for  its  wines ; 
in  modern  times  the  levity  of  its  inhabitants  appears  to  have  passed  into  a 
proverb,  "  It  is  easier  to  find  a  green  horse  than  a  sober-minded  Sciot  "  (Cony- 
beare  and  Howson).  2.  Second  day's  (Wednesday's)  journey.  From  Chios  to 
Samos,  passing  by  Ephesus,  and  from  Samos  to  Trogyllium.  Samos,  the  island, 
was  separated  from  the  mainland  by  a  narrow  channel,  at  one  point  not  more 
than  a  mile  broad.  Samos,  the  town,  was  in  Paul's  day  a  free  city.  Here,  how- 
ever, the  vessel  did  not  anchor,  but  pushed  on  a  mile  further  south  to  Trogyllium, 
a  harbour  on  the  mainland  of  Ionia,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Mycale,  and  opposite 
the  island  where  it  is  nearest  the  shore.  In  Trogyllium  the  ship  lay  to  for  the 
night.  3.  Third  day's  (Thursday's)  journey.  From  Trogyllium  to  Miletus,  on 
the  confines  of  Caria,  and  twenty-eight  miles  south  of  Ephesus.  Why  the 
apostle  passed  by  Ephesus  is  stated  by  Luke.  It  was  not  because  he  had 
not  command  of  the  ship,  which  he  may  have  had  (Hackett  thinks  he  may 
have  chartered  it  for  himself  and  his  friends ;  but  see  "  Critical  Remarks  "), 
or  because  he  did  not  long  to  revisit  his  Ephesian  converts,  or  was  afraid  of  the 
enemies  he  might  encounter  there  (1  Cor.  xvi.  9)  ;  but  because  his  desire  to  reach 
Jerusalem  before  Pentecost  rendered  every  delay,  whether  voluntary  or  involun- 
tary, dangerous.  Why  if  he  anchored  at  Trogyllium  he  did  not  summon  the 
Ephesian  elders  thither  must  be  left  unanswered  (see  next  Homily). 

Learn. — 1.  That  persons  who  go  on  God's  business  may  travel  by  sea  or  land 
with  easy  minds.  2.  That  solitude  and  society  are  alike  helpful  to  the  religious 
life.  3.  That  the  geographical  accuracy  of  Luke's  narrative  is  an  indirect 
argument  in  favour  of  its  truthfulness.  4.  That  good  men  delight  in  the 
assemblies  of  the  saints. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  13.  Paul  alone  on  his  Way  to 
A  ssos  ;  or,  the  Quiet  Hours  of  a  Much- 
employed  Servant  of  God.     As  hours — 

I.  Of  testing  intercourse  with  him- 
self. 

II.  Of  holy  communion  with  the 
Lord. 

III.  Of  blessed  rest  from  the  tumult 
of  the  world. 

IV.  Of  earnest  collectedness  for  new 
conflicts. — Gerok. 

Ver.  16.  Paul's  desire  to  be  in  Jeru- 
salem at  Pentecost.  The  motives  for 
this  were  probably  various. 

I.  For  his  Jewish  brethren's  sake. — 
He  knew  that  his  presence  at  that  feast 
would  be  acceptable  to  his  stricter 
fellow-countrymen,  and  he  was  ready 
to  become  all  things  to  all  men  to  gain 
some. 

II.  For  his  own  sake. — The  feast  of 
Pentecost  would  revive  memories  of 
the  great  birthday  of  the  Christian 
Church,  and  so  might  perhaps  inspire 

432 


him  with  fresh  zeal,  since  even  he  could 
not  dispense  without  times  of  revival. 

III.  For  the  gospel's  sake. — The 
immense  gathering  of  foreign  Jews  in 
Jerusalem  at  that  feast  would  afford 
him  ample  opportunity  for  bringing 
the  claims  of  the  gospel  before  his 
countrymen;  and  Paul  was  not  the 
man  to  forget  to  enter  in  by  every  open 
door. 

IV.  For  the  Gentile  Churches'  sakes. 
— He  may  have  wished  to  present  the 
Gentile  contributions  for  the  poor  saints 
in  Jerusalem  to  the  Church  there,  at 
a  time  when  the  spectacle  of  their  libe- 
rality would  be  witnessed  by  vast 
numbers  of  his  Jewish  brethren,  who, 
he  may  have  hoped,  would  be  favour- 
ably impressed  thereby. 

V.  For  his  future  plan's  sake. — 
As  Paul  was  contemplating  a  journey 
to  Syria  and  Rome  after  he  had  visited 
Jerusalem,  he  may  have  deemed  it 
better  not  to  wait  till  Tabernacles,  but 
to  repair  to  the  metropolis  at  Pentecost. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


CHAP.  XX. 


Hastening  to  Jerusalem. 

I.  A  proof  of  Paul's  diligence. — 
The  apostle  was  no  idler,  who  had 
time  to  waste,  but  a  busy  worker,  who 
improved  every  moment. 

II.  An  evidence  of  Paul's  wisdom. — 
He  wished  to  reach  the  capital  at  the 
best  time  for  preaching  the  gospel — 


viz.,   when  he  could  meet  the  largest 
number  of  his  countrymen. 

III.  A  mark  of  Paul's  love. — If,  as 
there  is  reason  to  believe,  he  was  carry- 
ing the  Gentile  contributions  above 
referred  to,  he  desired  not  to  keep 
them  from  their  destined  recipients  a 
moment  longer  than  was  necessary. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  17—38. 

A  Halt  at  Miletus  ;  or,  a  Meeting  with  the  Elders  of  Ephesus. 

I.  Introductory  notes. — 1.  The  parties  summoned.  The  elders,  presbyters,  or 
overseers  (ver.  28)  of  the  Ephesian  Church.  That  these  were  not  bishops  in  the 
modern  Anglican  sense  of  diocesan  prelates,  but  only  in  the  ministerial  sense  of 
presiding  over  separate  congregations,  is  generally  conceded.  2.  The  place  of 
meeting.  Why  Paul  did  not  call  them  to  Trogyllium,  which  lay  considerably 
nearer  to  Ephesus  than  Miletus,  can  only  be  conjectured.  Possibly  the  ship's 
stay  at  Trogyllium  was  too  short  for  such  an  interview  as  Paul  contemplated. 
Perhaps  the  means  of  communication  between  Miletus  and  Ephesus  were  better 
than  those  between  Trogyllium  and  Ephesus.  Perhaps,  according  to  the  best 
text,  the  ship  did  not  call  at  Trogyllium  at  all.  But,  in  any  case,  Miletus,  to 
which  they  were  summoned,  was  in  Paul's  day  a  seaport  of  considerable  import- 
ance and  a  strong  rival  to  Ephesus,  being  the  political,  as  Ephesus  was  the 
religious,  metropolis  of  Western  Asia  (Zockler).  The  locality  where  they  assembled, 
though  not  stated  by  the  historian,  was  most  likely  "some  solitary  spot  upon  the 
shore."  3.  The  messenger  despatched.  This  also  is  left  unrecorded,  but  may  have 
been  Luke  himself,  who,  with  becoming  modesty,  says  nothing  of  any  services 
performed  by  himself.  4.  The  arrival  of  the  elders.  The  journey  to  Ephesus, 
a  distance  of  from  thirty  to  forty  miles,  would  easily  be  accomplished  in  a  day. 
If  the  messenger  set  out  immediately  on  the  ship's  arrival  at  Miletus,  which 
might  be  at  noon,  the  elders  might  reach  Miletus  on  the  second  day  after.  If 
they  hurried  off  at  once,  they  would  most  probably  come  alone.  If  time  were 
allowed  for  the  news  to  spread,  they  might  easily  be  attended  by  presbyters 
"  from  the  neighbouring  towns  where  churches  had  been  established  "  (Hackett). 
5.  The  person  of  the  speaker.  Paul,  who  had  laboured  for  three  years  in  the  city 
of  Ephesus  as  their  honoured  teacher  and  beloved  friend,  and  who  was  now  to 
look  upon  their  faces  for  the  last  time.  The  emotion  with  which  both  speaker 
and  hearers  confronted  each  other  can  be  better  imagined  than  described. 

II.  The  farewell  address. — 1.  An  outline  of  its  contents.  Two  main  divisions. 
(1)  Relative  to  Paul  himself.  First,  a  retrospect  of  his  past  labours  at  Ephesus 
(vers.  18-21),  setting  forth  the  character  of  his  ministry  in  that  city  as  one  that 
had  been  carried  on  (a)  with  whole-hearted  consecration  to  the  Lord — i.e.,  the 
glorified  Christ  (ver.  18)  ;  (/?)  with  profound  personal  humility  (ver.  18) — com- 
pare Eph.  iii.  8  ;  (y)  with  fervent  sympathy,  amounting  even  to  tears  (ver.  18) — 
compare  ver.  31 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  4;  Phil.  iii.  18;  (8)  with  great  bodily  risk,  arising 
from  the  "temptations"  or  "trials"  which  befell  him  from  the  plots  of  the  Jews 
(ver.  19) — compare  1  Cor.  xv.  31,  32,  xvi.  9  ;  2  Cor.  i.  8-10;  (e)  with  unreserved 
fulness,  which  kept  back  nothing  from  his  hearers  which  might  be  spiritually 
profitable  unto  them  (ver.  20),  not  shunning  to  declare  unto  them  the  whole 
counsel  of  God  (ver.  27) — compare  2  Cor.  iv.  2;  Gal.  i.  10;  1  Thess.  ii.  4; 
(£)  with  unwearied  diligence,  which  caused  him  to  teach  publicly  in  the  synagogue 
first  (xix.  8),  and  latterly  in  the  school  of  Tyrannus  (xix.  9),  and  privately  from 

ff  433 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


house  to  house  or  in  private  assemblies  (ver.  20)— compare  Rom.  xvi.  5  ;  1  Cor. 
xv  .  1 9  ;  {rj)  with  unambiguous  plainness,  insisting  on  repentance  toward  God 
and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  only  and  the  all-sufficient  way  of  salva- 
tion (ver.  21) — compare  xvii.  30,  xxvi.  20  ;  Gal.  ii.  20  ;  2  Tim.  i.  12.  Secondly,  an 
outlook  into  his  future  career  (vers.  22-27),  declaring  (a)  his  irrepressible  convic- 
tion that  trials  and  dangers,  he  knew  not  of  what  sorb,  perhaps  amounting  to 
death,  lay  before  him,  the  Holy  Ghost  witnessing  to  him  to  that  effect  in  every 
city  (ver.  23),  by  means  of  prophetic  communications  through  others,  which, 
though  not  specified,  may  have  been  made  to  him  at  Philippi,  Troas,  and  Assos, 
as  afterwards  they  were  at  Tyre  (xxi.  4)  and  at  Csesarea  (xxi.  11);  (/3)  his  firm 
determination,  notwithstanding,  to  proceed  in  the  path  of  duty  which  pointed 
towards  Jerusalem  (ver.  22) ;  (y)  his  absolute  willingness  to  lay  down  his  life 
rather  than  fail  in  accomplishing  the  ministry  he  had  received  from  the  Lord 
Jesus,  to  testify  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  (ver.  24) — compare  Phil.  ii.  17; 
2  Tim.  iv.  6-8  ;  (8)  his  perfect  knowledge  that  he  and  they  "  amongst  whom  he 
had  gone  preaching  the  kingdom  "  would  see  his  face  no  more  (ver.  25) — compare 
ver.  29,  and  see  "  Critical  Remarks  "  ;  (e)  his  clear  consciousness  of  having  faith- 
fully performed  his  duty  towards  them  as  a  minister,  so  that  with  unfaltering 
confidence  he  could  call  God  to  witness  he  had  declared  unto  them  the  whole 
counsel  of  God,  and  so  was  "pure  from  their  blood"  (vers.  26,  27) — compare 
xviii.  6;  Ezek.  iii.  18.  (2)  Relative  to  his  hearers,,  the  elders  of  Ephesus.  First, 
a  solemn  caution  (vers.  28-31),  in  which  are  expounded — (a)  the  exalted  character 
of  the  Church  to  which  they  belonged  and  in  which  they  were  office-bearers,  as  the 
Church  of  God — i.e.,  of  Jesus  Christ — who  was  thus  expressly  by  Paul  declared 
to  be  Divine  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  "),  as  a  Church  which  had  been  purchased 
for  Himself  as  a  possession  by  His  own  blood,  and  as  a  Church  which  was 
superintended  and  governed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (ver.  28) ;  (j3)  the  important 
relation  in  which  they  as  office-bearers  stood  towards  the  Church  and  its  members, 
being  bishops,  overseers,  or  (under)  shepherds  of  the  flock,  whose  great  (Heb. 
xiii.  20)  or  chief  (1  Peter  v.  4)  Shepherd  Christ  is  (John  x.  14,  16),  and  holding 
their  appointment  not  from  the  flock,  but  from  the  Holy  Ghost  or  Divine  personal 
representative  of  Christ ;  (y)  the  specific  duties  they  were  expected  to  perform 
towards  the  flock,  not  to  act  as  lords  over  it  (1  Peter  v.  3),  but  to  feed  it  with 
spiritual  nourishment  (John  xxi.  15-17  ;  1  Peter  v.  2),  the  tender  lambs  or  babes 
in  Christ  with  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word  (1  Peter  ii.  2;  Heb.  v.  13),  those  of 
mature  age  with  the  strong  meat  of  Christian  doctrine  (Heb.  v.  14);  (8)  the 
constant  watchfulness  they  would  require  to  exercise  over  both  themselves  and 
their  flock  (compare  1  Tim.  iv.  16),  lest  either  they  or  their  flock  should  grow 
remiss  in  Christian  duty,  and  so  decline  from  Christian  faith  ;  (e)  the  impending 
peril  which  would  render  necessary  such  faithful  superintendence  of  themselves 
and  those  committed  to  their  charge — viz.,  the  certainty  that  subsequent  to  his 
departure,  first  after  his  sailing  from  them,  and  next  after  his  decease,  which  he 
believed  to  be  not  distant,  false  teachers,  whom  he  designated  "grievous  wolves" 
(compare  Matt.  vii.  15),  would  intrude  themselves  from  without  into  the  fold, 
not  sparing  but  devouring  the  flock  (compare  2  Tim.  iii.  1-8),  and  would  even 
arise  from  within  (1  Tim.  i.  19,  20;  2  Tim.  i.  15,  ii.  17,  18),  speaking  perverse 
things  and  drawing  away  disciples  after  them  (vers.  29,  30) ;  (£)  the  touching 
argument  by  which  he  hoped  to  incite  them  to  watchfulness,  the  recollection  of 
his  own  anxious  ministry  among  them  for  three  years,  during  which  he  "  ceased 
not  to  admonish  every  one  night  and  day  with  tears"  (ver.  31).  Secondly,  & 
fervent  commendation,  in  which  the  elders  and  those  over  whom  they  presided 
were  (a)  committed  to  the  care  of  God  and  the  word  of  His  grace  (see  "  Critical 
Remarks  "),  which  (or  who)  was  able  to  build  them  up  (compare  Eph.  ii.  20,  21, 
iv.  12,  16,  29),  and  give  them  an  inheritance  among  them  who  were  sanctified 

434 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xx. 


(compare  xxvi.  18;  Eph.  i.  18);  and  (/3)  encouraged  to  eschew  the  sin  of 
covetousness  in  discharging  their  sacred  duties  (compare  1  Tim.  iii.  3,  vi.  11; 
Titus  i.  11  \  1  Peter  v.  2),  by  recalling  the  example  of  himself  (Paul),  who 
coveted  no  man's  silver  or  gold  or  apparel,  but  whose  own  hands  ministered  to  his 
necessities  and  those  of  his  fellow-labourers  (xviii.  3 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  12;  2  Thess. 
iii.  8),  and  to  practise  the  Christian  virtue  of  liberality,  the  strong  labouring  to 
help  the  weak  (Eph.  iv.  28),  by  remembering  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  of 
which  perhaps  he  (Paul)  had  been  wont  to  speak  (in  his  preachings),  how  He 
said  :  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  "  (compare  Matt.  v.  42  ;  Luke 
vi.  38).  2.  A  proof  of  its  genuineness.  That  this  address  to  the  elders  of  Miletus 
was  not  historical,  but  manufactured  by  the  writer  of  the  Acts  and  put  into  the 
mouth  of  Paul,  has  been  argued  (Baur,  Zeller,  Weizsacker,  and  others)  chiefly 
on  the  ground  that  it  closely  corresponds  in  thought  and  language  to  the  pastoral 
epistles,  which  it  is  assumed  (without  satisfactory  evidence)  were  of  a  later  date 
than  Paul.  But  if,  on  other  grounds,  the  Pauline  origin  of  this  speech  can  be 
established,  the  harmony  between  it  and  the  pastoral  epistles  will  contribute  an 
important  element  in  proof  of  the  authenticity  of  these.  Now,  that  this  speech 
was  actually  delivered  by  Paul  may  be  inferred  from  the  following  considerations  : 
its  perfect  agreement  with  the  situation  as  well  as  with  the  history,  character, 
doctrine,  and   style  of  Paul,  as  these  are  set  forth  in  the  Acts  and  Epistles. 

(1)  It  is  precisely  such  an  address  as  Paul  might  have  been  expected  to  deliver 
to  the  elders  of  a  Christian  Church  whom  he  had  summoned  to  a  farewell 
interview,  and  accordingly  is  different  from  all  his  previous  addresses  which  were 
spoken  in  the  hearing  either  of  Jews  (xiii.  16-41)  or  of  Greeks  (xvii.  22-31). 

(2)  It  agrees  with  the  history  of  Paul,  which  represents  him  as  having  laboured 
for  nearly  three  years  in  Ephesus,  teaching  in  the  synagogue  and  in  the  school 
of  Tyraimus,  and  working  with  his  own  hands  for  his  support  (xviii.  3,  xix.  8-10 ; 
1  Cor.  iv.  12;  2  Thess.  iii.  10-12).  (3)  It  harmonises  with  the  character  of  Paul, 
manifesting  the  same  tender  solicitude  as  he  was  ever  accustomed  to  show 
towards  his  converts  (2  Cor.  i.  14,  24,  vi.  11,  xi.  21 ;  Phil.  i.  8;  Gal.  iv.  19; 
Col.  i.  29)  and  the  same  care  to  give  no  offence  that  the  ministry  might  not  be 
blamed  (2  Cor.  vi.  3).  (4)  It  accords  with  the  Pauline  doctrines  of  salvation 
by  grace  through  faith  and  unto  holiness  (Eph.  i.  4-6,  ii.  8-10),  of  redemption 
by  the  blood  of  Christ  (Eph.  i.  7),  and  of  sanctification  through  the  truth 
(Eph.  v.  26 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  13,  iv.  6).  (5)  It  bears  the  stamp  of  Paul's  style,  as 
the  following  examples  show  :  "  Serving  the  Lord  "  (ver.  19),  found  six  times  in 
Paul,  occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Matt.  vi.  24  and  Luke  xvi.  13;  "  Lowliness  of 
mind"  (ver.  19),  five  times  in  Paul,  once  only  elsewhere,  in  1  Peter  v.  5; 
"  Kept  back"  in  vers.  20,  27,  and  again  in  Gal.  ii.  12  ;  "  That  was  profitable" 
(ver.  20),  once  in  Heb.  xii.  20,  and  three  times  in  1  Cor.  ;  "  I  take  you  to  record," 
or  "I  testify  "  (ver.  26),  also  in  Gal.  v.  3  and  Eph.  iv.  17  ;  "  Bemember  "  (ver.  31), 
seven  times  in  Paul ;  "Watch"  (ver.  31),  elsewhere  only  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  13. 

III.  The  closing  scene. — 1.  The  last  prayer.  Kneeling  down  upon  the  sea-beach 
(compare  xxi.  5),  he  prayed  with  them  all,  in  words  which  Luke  appears  to  have 
felt  too  sacred  to  report.  Kneeling  "  was  the  attitude  in  prayer  which  prevailed 
among  the  early  Christians,  except  on  the  Sabbath  and  during  the  seven  weeks 
before  Pentecost,  when  they  generally  stood  "  (Hackett).  2.  The  parting  em- 
brace. They  all  fell  upon  the  apostle's  neck,  as  Joseph  did  on  that  of  Benjamin  his 
brother  (Gen.  xlv.  14)  and  of  Jacob  his  father  (Gen.  xlvi.  29),  shedding  tears  of 
holy  grief  and  kissing  him  tenderly  again  and  again,  with  mingled  love  and 
anguish,  sorrowing  most  of  all  for  the  word  he  had  spoken  that  they  should  see 
his  face  no  more.  3.  The  final  separation.  Unwilling  to  be  parted  from  him 
till  the  last  moment,  they  accompanied  him  to  the  ship  (compare  xxi.  5),  which 
soon  after  weighed  anchor  and  bore  him  from  their  anxious  gaze. 

435 


CHAP.  XX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Learn. — 1.  The  care  which  a  true  shepherd  ever  takes  of  his  flock.  2.  The 
fidelity  with  which  a  true  preacher  should  declare  the  counsel  of  God.  3.  The 
affection  which  Christian  people  should  ever  manifest  towards  their  teachers. 
4.  The  grief  which  ever  arises  when  true  pastors  are  separated  from  their  flocks. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  17.  The  Elders  of  the  Church. 

I.  Their  designations. — Presbyters. 
So  called,  because  usually  selected  from 
the  elder  brethren. 

II.  Their  functions. — 1.  Primarily 
to  rule,  superintend  the  flock,  and 
generally  guard  the  spiritual  interests 
of  the  believing  community.  2.  Secon- 
darily, to  teach — more  especially  when 
and  where  the  services  of  the  apostles, 
prophets,  and  teachers  of  the  early 
Church  were  not  available. 

III.  Their  election. — By  the  people. 
In  this  respect  they  differed  essentially 
from  the  above-named  apostles,  pro- 
phets, and  teachers  who  were  both 
qualified  for  and  called  to  their  offices 
by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

IV.  Their  ordination. — By  the 
apostles  originally,  afterwards  by  the 
laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  Presby- 
tery (1  Tim.  iv.  14). 

"  Originally  there  were  in  the 
separate  communities  only  a  multi- 
plicity of  chosen  office-bearers,  who 
were  promiscuously  designated  as 
'E7rto-K07roi  (overseers)  and  irpeo-fivTtpoi 
(presbyters  or  elders),  as  bearers  of 
one  and  the  same  office.  This  office  is 
not  a  branch  of  the  apostolic  teaching 
office,  since  for  this  had  the  oldest 
communities  along  with  the  apostles 
other  teachers,  and  the  work  of  teach- 
ing was  free  to  all  believers  (later 
certainly  the  office  of  teaching  was 
combined  with  that  of  bishop  or  pres- 
byter), but  it  consisted  primarily  in 
the  disciplinary  oversight  of  the  com- 
munity (or 'congregation),  in  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  community's  goods, 
and  the  conducting  of  the  (community's) 
regular  worship.  This  community 
office,  but  not  a  Church  constitution, 
did  the  apostles  ordain."  (Sell.  For- 
schungen  der  Gegenivart  uber  Begriffund 
Entstehung  der  Kirche,  Zeitschrift  fur 

436 


Theologie  und  Kirche,  1894,  p.  357). 
"  Hatch  finds  that  the  later  Church 
constitution,  bishop,  college  of  pres- 
byters and  deacons,  as  distinguished 
from  the  people,  is  not  to  be  explained 
out  of  an  original  office  of  community 
superintendence  like  that  of  presbyter- 
bishop,  but  that  this  organisation 
arose  through  a  combination  of  a 
number  of  equally  original  institutions 
which  had  been  developed  according  to 
previously  existing  analogies.  Com- 
munities in  which  care  of  the  poor, 
public  Divine  worship,  and  mutual 
fellowship  of  the  brotherhood  played 
a  great  roll,  possessed  administration 
officers,  finance  officers,  who  along  with 
their  assistants,  after  the  analogy  of 
the  club  treasurers  of  antiquity,  looked 
after  the  important  business  of  ad- 
ministering the  society's  goods.  These 
officials  were  the  'E7rto-K07roi  (overseers) 
and  StaKovot  (deacons),  who  were  also 
divided  into  different  classes,  the  old, 
the  mature,  or  middle  aged,  and  the 
young  ;  while  for  the  determination  of 
questions  of  manners  and  customs,  for 
Church  discipline,  for  the  decision  of 
legal  controversies,  and  afterwards  for 
admonition,  a  special  order  in  the  com- 
munity— viz.,  tT;e  presbyters"  (Ibid., 
pp.  359,  360),  "  Harnack,  in  his 
edition  of  the  Teaching  of  the  Twelve,  has 
drawn  attention  to  this,  that  in  the 
oldest  believing  communities,  along 
with  the  bishops,  deacons,  and  presby- 
ters, there  were  other  charismatically 
endowed  persons — viz.,  apostles,  pro- 
phets, and  teachers, who,  as  servants,  be- 
longed not  to  individual  congregations, 
but  to  the  whole  Church  of  Christ,  and 
who  were  not  chosen,  but  ordained  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  "  (Ibid.,  p.  360). 

Vers.  18-35.  Paul's  Address  to  the 
Elders  at  Miletus.  "  This,  the  third 
long  speech  attributed  to  Paul  in  the 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  XX. 


Acts,  was  certainly  from  a  pastoral 
theological  point  of  view  the  most 
important,  as  that  in  Athens  was,  dog- 
matically and  apologetically  considered, 
and  that  in  Antioch  of  Pisidia  when 
regarded  in  an  evangelistic  or  mission- 
ary light.  It  divides  itself  into  four 
sections  of  almost  equal  length  : — 

I.  A  reminiscence  of  the  Apostle's 
long  -  continued  and  self-sacrificing 
labour  among  the  Ephesians  (vers.  18- 
21). 

II.  An  expression  of  prophetic  an- 
ticipation as  to  tribulation  and  danger 
awaiting  him  in  Jerusalem  (vers.  22- 
27). 

III.  An  admonition  to  the  elders  or 
overseers  to  faithful  shepherding  and 
courageous  protection  of  the  flock 
(vers.  28-31)  ;  and 

IV.  An  exhortation  to  unselfish 
exercise  of  their  office,  after  Paul's 
example  and  in  accordance  with  the 
Lord's  word  (vers.  32-35).  Zockler, 
Die  Apostelgeschichte,  p.  246.) 

Ver.  19.  Minister's  tears.  These  may 
be  either — 1.  Tears  of  love  (ver.  31) ; 

2.  Tears  of  sorrow  (Phil.  hi.    18) ;  or 

3.  Tears  of  joy ;  or  thus  ; 

Minister's  tears  :  1.  A  painful  tax  of 
human  weakness.  2.  A  precious  orna- 
ment of  holy  souls.  3.  A  fruitful  seed 
for  a  harvest  of  joy  (Gerok). 

Vers.  1 9-2 1 .  Marks  of  a  True  Minis- 
ter of  Jesus  Ch?*ist. 

I.  Devotion  to  Christ  whom  he  serves. 

II.  Humility  with  regard  to  himself. 

III.  Sympathy  with  those  he  desires 
to  teach. 

IV.  Fortitude  in  face  of  foes  from 
without. 

V.  Fidelity  to  the  truth  he  preaches. 

VI.  Diligence  in  the  work  he  under- 
takes. 

VII.  Authority  in  the  message  he 
proclaims. 

Ver.  20.  Precepts  for  Preachers. 

I.  The  theme  of  their  preaching. — 
1.  What  it  should  not  be.  It  should 
never  be  only  what  is  new,  or  learned, 


or  beautiful,  or  sublime,  or  rare. 
These  certainly,  if  they  can  be  made 
subservient  to  the  highest  ends  of  the 
ministry.  But  never  these  if  they 
interfere  with  this.  2.  What  it  should 
be.  Only  what  is  profitable  for  the 
hearers — for  their  conviction  and  con- 
version, for  their  edification  and 
instruction  in  righteousness,  for  their 
reproof  or  correction,  for  their  en- 
lightenment and  growth  in  grace. 

II.  The  manner  of  their  preaching. 
— 1.  With  personal  humility,  counting 
themselves  less  than  the  least  of  all 
saints  (Eph.  iii.  8).  2.  With  tenderness 
of  speech,  addressing  their  hearers  with 
melting  tones  and  moving  them  with 
tears  (Phil.  iii.  18).  3.  With  holy 
courage,  fearing  not  the  face  of  man  or 
the  opposition  of  the  world  (Ephes.  vi. 
19,  20).  4.  With  absolute  fidelity, 
keeping  back  nothing  (ver.  20)  but 
declaring  the  whole  counsel  of  God 
(ver.  27),  so  as  to  be  free  from  the 
blood  of  all  men  (ver.  26). 

III.  The  place  of  their  preaching. — 

1.  In  the  public  assembly,  wherever 
men  congregate,  in  the  church  from 
the  pulpit,  or  in  the  hall  from  the 
platform.  2.  In  private  houses,  by  a 
due  discharge  of  the  pastoral  office. 

Ver.  21.  The  Substance  of  the  Faith. 

I.  Repentance  toward  God. — Im- 
plies— 1.  Acknowledgment  of  sin 
against  God.  2  Humility  of  heart 
before  God.  3.  Submission  of  soul  to 
God.     4.  Hope  of  the  Spirit  in  God. 

II.  Faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. — Involves — 1.  Belief  in  the 
supreme      divinity    of      His      person. 

2.  Trust  in  the  atoning  efficacy  of  His 
work.  3.  Confidence  in  the  steadfast- 
ness of  His  promised  word. 

III.  The  relations  between  the  two. 
— 1.  Faith  without  repentance  is  like 
a  house  without  a  foundation,  and  like 
a  tree  without  either  root  or  fruit. 
Faith  of  a  saving  sort  springs  from  a 
sense  of  guilt  and  sin,  and  leads  to 
godly  sorrow  and  heart  contrition. 
"The  pupil  of  faith  is  a  broken  heart." 
2.  "  Repentance  without  faith  is  either 
inconsolable    and  ends   in    despair,  or 

437 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;    THE  ACTS. 


self-righteous  and  ends  in  making  re-      Christian  should  be  a  missionary. — G. 
demption  superfluous."  Brooks. 


Ver.  22.  Bound  in  the  Spirit;  or, 
the  True  Preachers  "Necessity"  (1  Cor. 
ix.  16). 

I.  To  go  wherever  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  directs  (ver.  22). 

II.  To  leave  the  future  in  the 
hands  of  his  heavenly  Master  (ver.  22). 

III.  To  confront  all  sorts  of  peril, 
even  death  itself,  in  the  discharge  of 
his  ministry  (ver.  23). 

IV.  To  be  faithful  unto  death,  in 
testifying  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of 
God  (ver.  24). 

Ver.  24.  The  Gospel  of  the  Grace  of 
God. — The  grace  of  God  is — 

I.  The  fountain  whence  the  gospel 
flows. 

II.  The  burden  of  the  gospel 
message. 

III.  The  blessing  which  the  gospel 
bestows. 

IV.  The  end  at  which  the  gospel 
aims.  All  for  the  glory  of  His  grace 
(Eph.  i.  6). 

The  Gospel  of  the  Grace  of  God. 

I.  The  gospel  as  the  gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God. — 1.  There  is  grace  in  the 
method  by  which  its  blessings  are 
secured.  The  substitution  and  sacri- 
fice of  Christ.  2.  There  is  grace  in  the 
influence  by  which  its  blessings  are 
applied.  The  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  principle  and  in  the  mode 
of  His  operation.  3.  There  is  grace  in 
the  nature  of  its  blessings.  The  pri- 
vileges of  the  righteous.  4.  There  is 
grace  in  the  extent  to  which  its  bless- 
ings are  diffused.  It  is  fitted  and 
designed  to  be  a  universal  religion. 

II.  Our  duty  in  reference  to  it. — 
1.  We  should  cordially  believe  it.  It 
is  revealed  not  for  speculation  but  for 
belief,  and  it  is  authenticated  by  the 
most  conclusive  evidence.  2.  We 
should  steadily  adhere  to  it.  Let  us 
strenuously  resist  all  who  deny,  or 
modify,  or  philosophise,  or  explain 
away  the  doctrines  of  grace.  3.  We 
should  zealously  propagate  it.     Every 

43.8 


The  Office  of  the  Ministry. 

I.  From  whom  it  is  received. — The 
Lord  Jesus.  Not  only  is  it  in  general 
of  Christ's  appointment  (1  Cor.  xii.  28 ; 
Eph.  iv.  11),  but  in  every  separate 
instance  it  is  of  His  bestowal.  No 
man  should  take  this  office  upon 
himself,  but  wait  until  He  receives  it 
from  Christ,  who  will  intimate  His 
will  by  (1)  the  inward  prompting  of 
the  Spirit  in  the  individual's  heart, 
(2)  by  imparting  the  requisite  qualifi- 
cations for  the  office,  and  (3)  by 
sending  him  the  call  of  his  brethen  to 
undertake  the  office.  "  No  one  should 
force  himself,  purchase  himself,  marry 
himself,  or  beg  himself  into  the 
ministry  and  thus  run  and  preach 
without  a  divine  mission  and  call,  but 
wait  until  he  receives  it  and  is  sent " 
(Starke,  quoted  in  Lange). 

II.  For  what  it  is  appointed. — To 
testify  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 
Not  to  teach  morals,  science,  or  philo- 
sophy, but  to  publish  to  sinful  men 
the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  from  sin 
and  death — salvation  proceeding  from 
the  grace  of  God,  through  the  obedience 
unto  death  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the 
sanctifying  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
"  Millions  of  moral  sermons,  and  folios 
of  moral  books  will  not,  in  a  thousand 
years,  bring  you  so  far  as  this  despised 
little  word  '  grace '  will  bring  you  in 
one  minute,  when  faith  understands  and 
the  heart  embraces  it "  (Gossner,  in 
Lange). 

III.  How  it  should  be  executed. — 
1.  With  self-sacrificing  devotion  that 
counts  not  life  itself  dear  in  order  to 
fulfil  it  faithfully  and  truly.  2.  With 
persevering  resolution  that  will  not 
slack  in  the  sacred  work  till  life  itself 
ends.  3.  With  solemn  earnestness,  as 
realising  the  immediate  neighbourhood 
of  death  (ver.  25). 

IV.  How  it  will  be  rewarded. — 
1.  With  a  sentence  of  acquittal,  declaring 
the  faithful  preacher  free  from  the 
blood  of  all  men  (ver.  26).  2.  With 
an  influx  of  heavenly  joy,   when   the 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.         chap.  xx. 


Master  says,   "Well  done!  good  and  v.  2) — i.e.,  nourishing  theni  up  in  sound 

faithful  servant:  enter  thou  into  the  doctrine  (ITim.  iv.  6),  instructing  them 

joy  of  thy  Lord."  with     "  wholesome     words,    even     the 

words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  and 

Ver.   28.    Take  heed ;    or,   Words  of  with  "  the  doctrine  which  is  according 

Warning  for  Christian  Ministers.  to  godliness"  (1  Tim.  vi.  3),  exhorting 

I.  The  minister's  relation  to  his  them  with  sound  speech  that  cannot 
people. — 1.  That  of  a  shepherd  towards  be  condemned"  (Titus  ii.  8) ;  (2)  tending 
his  master's  flock.  The  image  of  a  flock  the  flock,  or  taking  the  oversight  of  it 
which  had  been  employed  in  Old  (1  Peter  v.  2),  watching  over  the  cha- 
Testament  to  describe  Israel  was  racter  and  deportment  of  its  several 
selected  by  Christ  to  designate  His  members,  and  administering  such 
Church  (Matt.  xxvi.  31 ;  Luke  xii.  32;  discipline  as  may  serve  to  promote 
John  xxi.  15-17),  and  from  Him  their  religious  welfare  (1  Cor.  v.  4,  5  ; 
adopted  by  both  Peter  (1  Peter  v.  2)  2  Cor.  ii.  6 ;  Gal.  vi.  1  ;  2  Thess.  hi. 
and  by  Paul.  As  of  this  flock  Christ  6,  14,  15  ;  1  Tim.  v.  1  j  2  Tim.  iv.  2  ; 
was  the  good  (John  x.  14),  the  chief  Titus  i.  13,  iii.  10;  (3)  guarding  the 
(1  Peter  v.  4),  and  the  great  (Heb.  flock  against  the  entrance  of  "  grievous 
xi.  20)  Shepherd,  so  were  the  elders,  wolves  "  or  false  teachers  (ver.  29),  who 
or  bishops,  or  presbyters  undershep-  by  promulgating  erroneous  doctrine 
herds.  2.  That  of  an  overseer  over  his  should  subvert  the  faith  of  the  ignoi  ant 
master's  property.  Christ's  proprietor-  and  unwary  (1  Tim.  i.  3,  4,  6,  7,  19, 
ship  in  the  Church  rests  on  the  fact  iv.  1,  vi.  5;  2  Tim.  ii.  18,  iii.  6;  Titus 
that  He  has  purchased  it  with  His  i.  10;  2  Peter  ii.  1,  2,  3;  1  John  iv.  1). 
own  blood  (compare  Eph.  i.  14) ;  hence 

elders,  bishops,  presbyters,  and  minis-  "  Take  heed  to  yourselves.7' — A  ser- 

ters  generally  cannot  be  owners  of  the  mon  for  ministers, 

flock,  but  only  its  keepers  ;  or  lords  of  I.  How? — 1.    Lest    you   should    be 

the  congregation  (1  Peter  v.    3),   but  void  of  that  saving  grace  which  you 

only  its  overseers.  offor  to  others  and  be  strangers  to  the 

II.  The  minister's  duty  to  his  people,  effectual  workings  of  that  gospel  which 
— 1.  To  take  heed  unto  himself  (1  Tim.  you  preach.  2.  Lest  you  live  in  those 
iv.  16).  Since  otherwise  he  cannot  actual  sins  which  you  preach  against 
take  heed  unto  them.  In  order  to  in  others.  3.  Lest  you  be  unfit  for  the 
properly  discharge  his  duty  as  a  great  employment  you  have  under- 
shepherd  and  an  overseer,  the  minister  taken,  since  he  must  not  be  a  babe  in 
must  see  (1)  to  his  own  personal  re-  knowledge  that  will  teach  men  all 
lation  to  the  Master  whom  he  serves ;  those  mysterious  things  that  are  to  be 

(2)  to  the  liveliness  of  his  own  faith ;  known  in  order  to  salvation.     4.   Lest 

(3)  to  the  extent  and  correctness  of  his  your  example  contradict  your  doctrine 
own  knowledge  in  religion ;  (4)  to  the  and  you  lay  such  stumbling  blocks 
purity  of  his  own  heart  and  life,  (5)  to  before  the  blind  as  may  be  the  occasion 
the  sincerity  and    uprightness    of    his  of  their  ruin. 

own  motives.      A  true  minister  takes  II.  Why? — Because — 1.  "You  have 

heed  to  himself  when  he  nourishes  his  heaven  to  win  or  lose  for  yourselves, 

own  soul  by  sound    doctrine,   purifies  and    souls    that    must    be   happy   or 

his  own  heart  by  loving  obedience  to  miserable    for   ever.      2.  You   have  a 

the  truth,  strengthens    his  own  spirit  depraved  nature  and  sinful  inclinations 

by   habitual   devotion,    and    generally  as  well  as  others.     3.   Such  works  as 

lives  in  inward  communion  and  fellow-  yours  do  put  men  on  greater  use  and 

ship  with    Jesus    Christ.      2.  To  take  trial  of  their  graces,  and  have  greater 

heed  unto  his  flock — in  which  at  least  temptations    than    most    other    men. 

three  things  are  comprised  :  (1)  feeding  4.  The  tempter  will -make  his  first  and 

the  flock  (John  xxi.   J  5-17;    1   Peter  sharpest   onset   upon  you.      5.  There 

439 


CHAP.  XX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


are  many  eyes  upon  you,  and  therefore 
there  will  be  many  observers  of  your 
fall.  6.  Your  sins  have  more  heinous 
aggravations  than  those  of  other  men. 
7.  The"  honour  of  your  Lord  and 
Master,  and  of  His  holy  truth  and 
ways,  doth  lie  more  on  you  than  on 
other  men.  8.  The  souls  of  your 
hearers,  and  the  success  of  your  labours, 
do  very  much  depend  on  your  taking 
heed  unto  yourselves  "  (Baxter,  The  Re- 
formed Pastor,  chap.  I.). 

A  Pastor's  Duty  towards  his  Flock. 

I.  To  feed  the  flock  by  diligent 
preaching  of  the  word. — A  work  re- 
quiring— -1.  Spiritual  wisdom  and 
understanding  in  the  mysteries  of  the 
gospel  (1  Cor.  ii.  4-7;  Ephes.  hi.  8-11). 

2.  Experience  of  the  power  of  the 
truth    (John   iii.    11;  2    Cor.   iv.    13). 

3.  Skill  to  divide  the  word  aright 
(2  Tim.  ii.  15).  4.  A  prudent  con- 
sideration of  the  state  of  the  flock. 
5.  Zeal  for  the  glory  of  God  and 
compassion  for  the  souls  of  men. 

II.  To  continue  in  fervent  prayer 
for  the  flock  (vi.  4). — 1.  For  the  success 
of  the  word  among  its  members. 
2.  For  their  protection  against  those 
temptations  to  which  they  are  generally 
exposed.  3.  For  the  especial  state  and 
condition  of  individuals,  as  these  be- 
come known  to  him.  4.  For  the  presence 
of  Christ  in  the  assemblies  of  the 
Church. 

Til.  To  administer  the  seals  of  the 
covenant — i.e.,  the  sacraments.  1.  At 
suitable  times.  2.  According  to  Christ's 
appointment.  3.  Unto  those  only  who 
are  meet  and  worthy. 

IV.  To  preserve  the  truth  or  doctrine 
of  the  gospel  received  and  professed  in 
the  Church,  and  to  defend  it  against 
all  opposition  (Phil.  i.  17;  1  Tim. 
i.  3,  4,  iv.  6,  7,  16,  vi.  20;  2  Tim. 
i.  14,  ii.  25,  iii.  14-17). 

V.  To  labour  for  the  conversion  of 
souls  unto  God.— To  enlarge  the  king- 
dom of  Christ,  to  diffuse  the  light  and 
savour  of  the  gospel,  to  be  subservient 
unto  the  calling  of  the  elect,  or 
gathering  all  the  sheep  of  Christ  unto 
His  fold,  are  things  that  God  designs 

440 


by  His  Churches  in  the  world. — From 
Owen.,  vol.  xvi.,  chap.  v. 

Vers.  28-30.  Characteristics  of  the 
Church. 

I.  Owned  by  God. 
II.  Redeemed  by  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  Ruled  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

IV.  Served  by  Christian  elders. 
V.  Assailed  by  false  teachers. 

VI.  Betrayed  by  insincere  friends. 

Vers.  28,  29.  Three  Things  of  which 
Christian  Pastors  should  take  heed. 

I.  Of  themselves. — 1.  Lest  preaching 
to  others  they  should  themselves  be 
castaways  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  2.  Lest 
while  preaching  they  should  publish 
another  gospel  which  is  not  another 
(Gal.  i.  6-9). 

II.  Of  the  flock. — 1.  Lest  any  of  them 
should  be  lost.  2.  Lest  any  of  them 
should  be  sickly  or  weak  (1  Cor. 
xi.  30). 

III.  Of  the  wolves. — 1.  Lest  any 
should  arise  within  the  fold.  2.  Lest 
any  should  break  into  it  from  without. 

Yer.  32.  A  Pastor's  Fareivell. 

I.  His  affectionate  regard  for  his 
people. — Designating  them  as  his 
brethren,  which  they  are  in  a  double 
sense.  1.  By  nature,  as  being  par- 
takers of  the  same  flesh  and  blood 
(xvii.  29)  :  and  2.  By  grace,  as  being 
members  of  the  same  houshold  of  faith 
(Gal.  vi.  10). 

II.  His  fervent  desire  for  his  people. 
— 1.  That  they  should  be  edified  or 
built  up  in  faith,  love,  and  holiness 
(Eph.  iv.  16;  Jude  20).  2.  That  they 
should  at  last  obtain  an  inheritance 
among  the  sanctified,  i.e.,  among  the 
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect 
(Heb.  xii.  23). 

III.  His  solemn  commendation  of 
his  people. ;  or  1.  To  God.  (1)  To 
whom  they  rightly  belong,  being  His 
children  by  creation  and  regeneration  ; 
(2)  because  He  alone  is  able  to  build 
them  up  and  bring  them  to  the 
heavenly  inheritance ;  and  (3)  has 
graciously  promised  to  preserve  and 
perfect    all   that    trust   in   Him   and 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAI.  XX. 


believe  upon  His  Son.  2.  To  the  word 
of  His  grace.  Meaning  not  the  personal 
word,  but  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  and 
signifying  that  he,  Paul,  prayed  that 
his  brethren  might  be  enlightened  by, 
and  sanctified  through  that  truth, 
since  through  that  alone  does  God 
advance  His  gracious  work  in  the 
souls  of  His  people  (John  xvii.  17). 

Ver.  35.  The  Duty  of  the  Strong 
towards  the  Weak. 

I.  Its  nature. — To  extend  material 
aid  to  the  poor. 

II.  Its  imperativeness. — Ye  ought. 
The  relief  of  poorer  brethren  is  not 
optional,  but  obligatory  on  Christians. 

III.  Its  motive. — Obedience  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  Its  blessedness. — It  is  more 
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive. 

More  Blessed  to  Give  than  to  Receive. 

I.  Because  it  delivers  us  from  our-  \ 
selves. — 1.  From  the  bonds  of  selfish- 
ness.    2.  From  the  cares  of  superfluity. 
3.  From  the  burden  of  dependence. 

II.  Because  it  unites  us  to  the 
brethren. — 1 .  By  their  friendly  attach- 
ment. 2.  By  their  active  gratitude. 
3.  By  their  blessed  intercession. 

III.  Because  it  brings  us  nearer  to 
God.— Making  us  1.  Imitators  of  God, 
the  All  Good.  2.  Sharers  in  the  delight 
of  the  All  Loving.  3.  Expectants  of 
the  reward  of  the  Eternal  Re  warder. 
— From  "  Gerok." 

The  Unrecorded  Words  of  Jesus. 
— Of  these  Dr.  Westcott  (Intro- 
duction to  the  Gospels,  Appendix  C.) 
gives  the  following  list  :  1.  Remember 
the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  How  He 
said,  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to 
receive  (Acts  xx.  35 ;  compare  Luke 
vi.  30).  2.  On  the  same  day,  having 
seen  one  working  on  the  Sabbath,  He 
said  to  him,  0  man,  if  indeed  thou 
knowest  what  thou  doest,  thou  art 
blessed ;  but  if  thou  knowest  not,  thou 
art  cursed  and  art  a  transgressor  of  the 
law  (Cod.  D.  ;  after  Luke  vi.  4). 
3.  But  ye  seek  to  increase  from  little, 
and  from  greater  to  be  less  (Cod.   D.) 


4.  The  Son  of  God  says  :  Let  us  resist 
all  iniquity  and  hold  it  in  hatred 
(Epistle  of  Barnabas,  4).  5.  Thus 
He  (Christ)  saith,  They  who  wish  to  see 
Me  and  to  lay  hold  on  My  kingdom 
must  receive  Me  by  suffering  and 
affliction  (Epistle  of  Barnabas,  7). 
6.  Shew  yourselves  tried  money-changers 
(Origen  in  Joann.  xix).  7.  He  that 
wonders  shall  reign  ;  and  he  that  reigns 
shall  rest  (Ex.  Ev.  Hebr.  Ap.  Clem.  AL, 
Strom).  Look  with  wonder  at  that  which 
is  before  you  (Ap.  Clem.  AL,  Strom.,  ii.  9, 
45.  8.  /  came  to  put  an  end  to 
sacrifices,  and  unless  ye  cease  from 
sacrificing  (God's)  anger  will  not  cease 
from  you  (Ev.  Ebion.  Ap.  Epiph.  Hair., 
xxx.  16).  9.  Jesus  said  to  His  disciples, 
Ask  great  things  and  the  small  shall  be 
added  unto  you ;  and  ask  heavenly 
things  and  the  earthly  shall  be 
added  unto  you  (Origen,  de  Orat.,  2). 
10.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  said,  In 
whatsoever  I  may  find  you  in  this  I  also 
will  judge  you  (Clem.  AL,  Juisdives,  40). 
Such  as  I  may  find  thee,  I  will  judge 
thee,  saith  the  Lord  (ISTilus.,  Ap.  Anast. 
Sin.,  Qucest.,  3).  11.  The  Saviour  him- 
self says,  He  who  is  near  Me  is  near  the 
fire ;  he  who  is  far  from  Me  is  far 
from  the  kingdom  (Orig.,  Horn,  in 
Jerem.  iii.,  p.  778  ;  Didymus  in  Psalm 
lxxxviii.  8).  12.  The  Lord  says  in  the 
gospel,  If  ye  kept  not  that  which  is 
small,  who  will  give  you  that  vjhich  is 
great  ?  For  I  say  unto  you,  that  he 
that  is  faithful  in  very  little,  is  faithful 
also  in  much  (Clem.  Rom.,  Ep.,  ii.  8) 
13.  The  Lord  says,  Keep  the  flesh  pure, 
and  the  soul  unspotted,  that  we  (perhaps 
ye)  may  receive  eternal  life  (Clem.  Ron-., 
Cop.,  ii.  8).  14.  The  Lord  himself 
having  been  asked  by  some  one  when 
His  kingdom  will  come,  saith,  When 
the  two  shall  be  one,  and  that  which  is 
without  as  that  which  is  within,  and,  the 
male  with  the  female,  neither  male  nor 
female  (Clem.  Rom.,  Ep.,  ii.  12).  15. 
Jesus  says,  For  those  that  are  sick,  I 
was  sick,  and  for  those  that  hunger  I 
suffered  hunger,  and  for  those  that  thirst 
I  suffered  thirst  (Orig.  in  Matt.,  torn, 
xiii.  2).  16.  In  the  Hebrew  gospel, 
the  Lord  says  to  His  disciples,  Never  be 

441 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


joyful  except  when  ye  shall  look  on  your 
brother  in  love  (Hieron.  in  Ephes.,  v.  3). 

17.  After  the  Resurrection  Christ  said 
to  Peter  and  the  apostles,  Take  hold, 
handle  Me,  and  see  that  I  am  not  an 
incorporeal  spirit  (Ignat.,  ad  Smym.  3). 

18.  Christ  said,  Good  must  needs  come, 
but  blessed  is  he  through  whom  it  comes 
(Clem.,  Horn.,  xii.  29).  19.  It  was 
not  through  unwillingness  to  impart 
His  blessings  that  the  Lord  announced 
in  some  gospel  or  other,  My  mystery  is 
for  Me  and  for  the  sons  of  My  house. 
We  remember  our  Lord  and  Master, 
how  He  said  to  us,  Keep  My  mysteries 
for  Me  and  for  the  sons  of  My  house 
(Clem.  Alex.,  Strom.,  v.  10-64).  20.  / 
will  select  to  myself  these  things  :  very 
very  excellent  are  those  whom  My  Father 
who  is  in  heaven  has  given  to  Me 
(Eusebius,  Theophania,  iv.  13)  21. 
The  Lord  taught  of  those  days  (of  His 
future   kingdom   on  earth)   and   said, 


The  days  will  come  in  which  vines  shall 
spring  up,  each  having  ten  thousand 
stocks,  and  on  each  stock  ten  thousand 
branches,  and  on  each  branch  ten  thousand 
shoots,  and  on  each  shoot  ten  thousand 
bunches,  and  on  each  bunch  ten  thousand 
grapes,  and  each  grape  ivhen  pressed 
shall  give  five-and-twenty  measures  of 
wine.  And  when  any  saint  shall  have 
seized  one  bunch  another  shall  cry,  I  am 
a  better  bunch ;  take  me ;  through  me 
bless  the  Lord.  .  .  .  And  when  Judas 
the  traitor  believed  not  and  asked, 
How  then  shall  such  productions 
proceed  from  the  Lord  ?  The  Lord 
said,  They  shall  see  who  shall  come  to 
these  times  (Papias ;  compare  Irenaeus, 
v.  5,  33,  53).  Concerning  some  of 
these  it  is  practically  certain  that  they 
were  not  uttered  by  Christ ;  it  is 
extremely  doubtful  if  any  one  of  them 
was  except  the  first,  which  has  been 
recorded  by  Luke. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


Bound  for  Jerusalem. — The  Termination  of  the  Third  Missionary 

Journey. 

§  1.  Seven  Days  at  Tyre  ;  or,  Impending  Danger  announced  (vers.  1-6), 

§  2.  With    Philip     at    Csesarea ;    or,     Renewed    Foreannouncements    of    Evil 

(vers.  7-14). 
§  3.  With  James  and  the  Elders  at  Jerusalem  ;   or,  Mistaken  Counsel  (vers. 

15-25). 
§  4.  Arrested  in  the  Temple ;  or,  Long  Looked  for,  Come  at  Last  (vers.  26-40). 


CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  after  we  had  gotten  from  them  and  had  launched. — 

Better,  as  well  as  literally,  And  when  it  came  to  pass  that  we  had  weighed  anchor,  having 
departed  from  them.  The  "  we "  certainly  included  Luke  and,  most  probably,  Trophimus 
(xxi.  29)  and  Aristarchus  (xxvii.  2)  ;  the  others  (xx.  4)  presumably  proceeded  no  farther. 
Timothy  may  even  have  returned  with  the  elders  from  Miletus  to  Ephesus  (1  Tim.  i.  3). 
With  a  straight  course  shows  the  wind  to  have  been  favourable.  Compare  xvi.  11.  Coos 
should  be  Cos,  an  island  on  the  south-west  coast  of  Asia  Minor,  and  forty  miles  from  Miletus, 
a  distance  which  could  have  been  performed  in  six  hours.  Rhodes. — Another  island  lying 
upon  the  south  of  Asia  Minor,  on  the  coast  of  Caria.  Patara. — A  seaport  of  Lycia,  near  the 
left  bank  of  the  Xanthus,  celebrated  for  its  oracle  of  Apollo. 

Ver.  2.  Finding  a  ship  sailing  over. — Lit.,  having  found  a  vessel  crossing  over.     The  reason- 
for  thus  changing  vessels  may  have  been  either  that  the  one  they  left  was  not  proceeding 
further,  or  was  not  fit  for  venturing  far  from  the  coast,  or  that  the  one  they  boarded  was 
just  leaving  when  they  landed  at  Patara,  so  that  by  availing  themselves  of  it  they  lost  no 
time. 

442 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xxi. 


Ver.  3.  Discovered  Cyprus. — Better,  sighted  Cyprus.  Lit.,  having  had  it  brought  up  to  sight. 
or  made  visible.  A  nautical  expression,  the  opposite  of  which  is  to  lose  sight  of  land, 
diroKp\jTTT€iv  yT)v.  We  left  (or,  leaving)  it  on  the  left  hand. — This  shows  they  sailed  to  the 
southward  of  the  island.  Syria  in  those  days  included  Phoenicia  (ver.  2),  of  which  Tyre  (see 
xii.  20)  was  the  capital.  For  there,  etc. — Lit.,  for  thither  {i.e.,  having  come  thither),  the 
ship  was  unlading  her  burden. 

Ver.  4.  And  finding  disciples  should  be  and  having  found  out  (by  searching,  because  they 
were  strangers)  the  disciples  who  lived  there,  since  the  gospel  had  been  preached  in  Phoenicia 
at  an  early  period  (xi.  19),  and  the  Saviour  had  performed  some  of  His  miracles  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Tyre  and  Sidon  (Matt.  xv.  21 ;  Mark  vii.  24).  Seven  days  (compare  xx.  6). — 
The  time  occupied  in  unloading  the  ship;  during  which  time  Paul  would,  without  doubt, 
preach  the  gospel  and  consult  for  the  welfare  of  the  Syrian  Church.  Go  up,  avafiaivew,  as  in 
ver.  12. — The  best  text  reads  set  foot  upon,  i-jn(3alv€iv. 

Ver.  5.  And  when  we  should  be  and  when  it  came  to  pass  that  we  had  accomplished  those, 
or  the  days  named  in  ver.  4.  The  days  were  not  spent  in  refitting  the  ship  (Meyer),  but  in 
refreshing  the  disciples.  Wives  and  children. — Only  mention  of  wives  and  children  in  the 
Acts. 

Ver.  7.  And  when  he  had  finished  our  course  from  Tyre  might  be  read  but  we,  having 
finished  our  voyage,  came  down  from  Tyre  (Alford).  From  Tyre,  a  moderate  day's  journey  by 
land  and  a  few  hour's  by  sea.  Ptolemais. — The  ancient  Accho  (Judges  i.  31),  the  modern 
Akka  of  the  Arabians,  and  Acre  or  St.  Jean  d'Acre  of  Europeans.  With  arrival  at  this  port 
the  sea  voyage  from  Neapolis  to  Syria  ended. 

Ver.  8.  Csesarea. — The  third  visit  (see  ix.  30,  xviii.  22).  That  the  distance  from  Akka  to 
Caesarea,  about  forty  miles,  was  performed  on  foot  appears  (Holtzmann  and  others)  incom- 
patible with  the  haste  which  would  not  suffer  Paul  to  land  at  Ephesus  (xx.  16) ;  but  the  land 
route  may  have  been  rendered  necessary  because  of  inability  to  find  a  ship  without  waiting. 
Philip  the  Evangelist. — See  on  viii.  40.     Of  the  seven. — See  on  vi.  5. 

Ver.  9.  And  the  same  man. — Better  now  this  man. 

Ver.  10.  Agabus. — In  all  probability  the  person  already  known  (xi.  28).  Whether  he  hatl 
heard  of  Paul's  arrival  and  come  to  Caesarea  on  that  account  (Baumgarten)  must  be  left 
undecided.  It  is  worth  observing  that  Philip's  daughters  were  not  selected  as  the  medium 
through  which  Paul  was  warned. 

Ver.  11.  Compare  the  symbolical  actions  of  Old  Testament  prophets  (1  Kings  xxii.  11  ; 
Isa.  xx.  2 ;  Jer.  xiii.  1 ;  Ezek.  iv.  1,  etc.). 

Ver.  12.  They  of  that  place  were  the  Christians  there. 

Ver.  13.  What  mean  ye  ? — Better,  what  do  ye,  weeping  and  breaking  my  heart?  Compare 
Mark  xi.  5. 

Ver.  15.  We  took  up  our  carriages,  or  things  to  be  carried  (see  Judges  xviii.  21). — 
airocrKevaaaixevoL.  The  reading  of  the  Keceived  text  should  be  translated,  having  packed  away 
our  baggage — i.e.,  the  superfluous  part  of  it  (Olshausen) ;  or  having  discharged  our  baggage — 
i.e.,  unpacked  the  matters  necessary  for  our  journey  to  Jerusalem.  But  the  best  reading, 
inurKevaa&fjLepoi.,  signifies,  having  packed' up  our  baggage,  and  so  made  ourselves  ready  for  the 
journey  to  Jerusalem  (Hackett,  Alford,  Holtzmann,  and  others). 

Ver.  16.  An  old,  better,  an  early  disciple. — I.e.,  one  who  had  long  been  a  disciple,  having 
been  probably  converted  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Whether  the  Caesarean  brethren  brought 
Mnason  with  them  to  Jerusalem  (Calvin,  Beza,  Plumptre),  or  brought  Paul  to  Mnason  at 
Jerusalem  (Bengel,  Olshausen,  Meyer,  De  Wette,  Holtzmann)  is  uncertain.  Both  translations 
are  admissible.     Mnason  was  of  Cyprus,  and  therefore  a  countryman  of  Barnabas  (iv.  36). 

Ver.  17.  The  brethren  were  not  the  Church  or  the  apostles  (Kuinoel),  but  private  Christians, 
such  as  Mnason  and  others  (Wendt,  Holtzmann,  Hackett,  and  others). 

Ver.  18.  James. — See  on  xii.  17,  xv.  13.  The  apostles,  not  mentioned,  may  by  this  time 
have  been  dispersed  from  Jerusalem,  while  some  may  have  been  dead.  The  Jerusalem 
Church  was  manifestly  presided  over  by  James  and  the  elders. 

Ver.  19.  Particularly,  what  things,  or  one  by  one,  each  of  the  things  which. — Compare 
xv.  4,  12.  That  nothing  is  here  said  about  the  delivering  up  of  the  collections  for  the  poor 
saints  at  Jerusalem  has  been  explained  by  supposing  that  the  "we"  sources  were  no  more 
at  the  author's  command,  but  may  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for  by  assuming  that  Luke 
did  not  consider  this  necessary  to  be  stated.  It  is  perfectly  arbitrary  to  assert  that — in 
order,  shall  it  be  said,  to  guarantee  the  apostle's  good  faith  ? — information  should  have 
been  given  about  the  final  disposition  of  those  contributions  which  the  apostle  had  been 
collecting,  and  with  which  he  hoped  to  appease  the  irritated  minds  of  his  Jewish  brethren 
(Holtzmann). 

Ver.  20.  They  glorified  the  Lord — Rather,  God  (as  in  Gal.  i.  24),  on  Paul's  account,  and 
not  as  if  they  themselves  did  not  share  in  the  general  suspicion  or  anxiety  (Holtzmann),  but 
more  likely  as  if  they  were  somewhat  troubled  about  the  inferences  that  were  being  publicly 
drawn  from  Paul's  Gentile  mission— called  his  attention  to  the  many  thousands,  or  myriads, 

443 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


of  Jewish  Christians,  not  in  the  world  (Overbeck),  but  in  Jerusalem  and  Judaea  (Wendt, 
Zockler),  who  were  all  (not  "  some  "  as  in  xv.  1,  5)  zealous,  not  of,  but  for  the  law,  as  Paul 
himself  had  formerly  been  (Gal.  i.  14). 

Ver.  21.  That  thou  teachest  all  to  forsake  Moses.— Lit.,  that  thou  teachest  apostasy  from 
Muses.  The  allegation  contained  an  element  of  truth  in  so  far  as  it  was  undoubtedly  Paul's 
aim  to  persuade  his  countrymen  to  embrace  the  gospel,  and  in  so  far  as  their  reception  of 
the  gospel  would  in  due  course  emancipate  them  from  the  bondage  of  the  law ;  but  it  was 
not  Paul's  object  or  business  to  inculcate  on  Jewish  Christians  the  discontinuance  of  either 
circumcision  or  the  ritual  of  Moses.     (See  further  in  "  Homiletical  Analysis.") 

Ver.  22.  The  multitude  (or  a  crowd,  TrXrjdos,  without  the  article)  must  needs  come  together. 
— The  best  MSS.  omit  this  clause  along  with  yap,  for,  and  read,  they  will  certainly  hear  that 
thou  art  come. 

Ver.  23.  We  have  four  men. — The  clause  shows  how  closely  the  Jerusalem  Church  adhered 
to  the  ritual  of  Moses.  That  the  vow,  taken  by  the  men,  was  that  of  the  Nazarite  is  suggested 
by  the  reference  to  shaving  the  head. 

Ver.  24.  Purify  thyself  with  them  and  bear  charges  with,  rather,  for  them. — James,  who 
gave  this  advice,  was  himself  a  Nazarite — "  Drank  no  wine  nor  strong  drink,  neither  did  he 
eat  flesh.  No  razor  ever  touched  his  head  ;  he  did  not  anoint  himself  with  oil ;  he  did  not 
use  the  bath.  .  .  .  He  would  enter  into  the  temple  alone,  and  there  be  found  kneeling  on  his 
knees  and  asking  forgiveness  for  the  people ;  so  that  his  knees  grew  hard  like  a  camel's  knees, 
because  he  was  ever  upon  them  worshipping  God  and  asking  forgiveness  for  the  people  " 
(Euseb.  Hist.,  ii.  23).  The  term  for  a  Nazarite  vow,  though  not  prescribed  by  the  law,  was 
usually  thirty  days ;  but  Jewish  practice  had  rendered  it  possible  for  one  who  could  not 
undertake  a  vow  for  so  long  a  time  to  join  in  with  another  in  the  last  days  of  his  Nazaritic 
period  on  condition  of  bearing  all  the  temple  charges  for  offerings  for  himself  and  that  other. 
The  Jews  considered  it  a  specially  meritorious  act  to  assist  a  poor  Nazarite  in  this  manner. 
Agrippa  I.,  on  obtaining  the  sovereignty  of  Palestine,  paid  the  expense  of  numerous  indigent 
Nazarites  who  were  waiting  to  be  released  from  their  vows  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XIX.  vi.  1).  As  Paul 
was  a  poor  man,  it  is  supposed  he  paid,  or  proposed  to  pay,  the  charges  for  the  Nazarites  out 
of  the  Gentile  contributions  which  he  brought  for  the  poor  saints  in  Jerusalem.  Ramsay 
challenges  the  statement  that  Paul  was  a  poor  man,  and  suggests  that  the  charges  here 
specified,  as  well  as  the  cost  of  his  subsequent  trial,  were  borne  out  of  his  own  patrimonial 
estate,  or  hereditary  property  (St.  Paul  the  Traveller,  etc., -pp.  310  ^).  All  may  know  should 
be  all  shall  know. 

Ver.  25.  The  best  MSS.  omit  the  clause  that  they  observe  no  such  thing.  This  reference 
to  the  apostolic  decrees  confirms  the  credibility  of  the  account  in  chap.  xv. 

Ver.  26.  Paul  took  the  men,  and  the  next  day  purifying  himself,  might  read  took  the  men 
the  next  day,  and  having  purified  himself,  not  by  performing  the  ordinary  ablutions  required 
before  entering  the  temple  (Howson),  but  by  entering  with  them  upon  the  same  course  of 
dedication.  To  signify  (better,  declaring)  the  accomplishment  of  the  days  of  purification. — 
I.e.,  either  that  the  days  were  fulfilled  and  the  time  come  for  the  four  men  to  be  released 
from  their  vows  (Wieseler,  Conybeare  and  Howson),  or,  better,  announcing  his  intention  to 
fulfil  along  with  them  the  (seven)  days  which  by  the  law  must  precede  the  termination  of  the 
vow  (Alford,  Hackett,  Plumptre,  Spence,  Holtzmann  and  others). 

Ver.  27.  Seven  days  was  the  ordinary  period  for  the  most  solemn  purifications  (Exod. 
xxix.  37 ;  Lev.  xii.  2,  xiii.  6  ;  Numb.  xii.  14,  xix.  14).  Of  these  seven  days  Paul  observed 
only  two,  or  at  least  four,  as  appears  from  xxiv.  11  (see  "Critical  Remarks"),  which  shows 
the  interval  between  Paul's  arrival  in  Jerusalem  and  his  speech  before  Felix  was  only  twelve 
days.  When  his  arrest  took  place  the  seven  days  were  "almost  ended  " — i.e.,  they  were  not 
completed  when  he  was  apprehended.  In  the  temple  meant  most  likely  in  the  couit  of  the 
women,  afterwards  called  this  holy  place  (ver.  28),  into  which  no  foreigner  was  permitted  to 
enter  under  pain  of  death.  "  This  court  was  four  square,  and  had  a  wall  about  it  peculiar  to 
itself."  There  was  also  a  stone  partition  all  round,  three  cubits  high,  whose  construction 
was  very  elegant,.and  upon  which  stood  pillars  at  equal  distances  from  one  another,  declaring 
the  law  of  purity,  some  in  Greek  and  some  in  Roman  letters,  that  "  No  foreigner  should  go 
within  that  sanctuary  "  (Jos.,  Wars,  V.  v.  2,  VI.  ii.  4).  The  correctness  of  this  statement, 
which  was  long  disputed,  has  been  recently  confirmed  by  Monsieur  Clermont  Ganneau's 
discovery  of  one  of  those  prohibitory  notices,  with  an  inscription  in  Greek,  of  which  the 
following  is  a  translation  :  No  foreigner  to  proceed  within  the  partition  wall  and  enclosure 
around  the  sanctuary  ;  whoever  is  caught  in  the  same  will  on  that  account  he  liable  to  incur 
death  "  (Recent  Discoveries  on  the  Temple  Hill,  p.  134). 

Ver.  30.  They  took,  or  laid  hold  on  Paul. — Baur  and  Holtzmann  regard  it  as  improbable 
that  these  Jews,  among  whom  doubtless  were  many  zealots  for  the  Messiah's  faith  and  for 
the  law,  should  have  seized  Paul  when  engaged  in  the  performance  of  a  pious  work  of  the 
law,  and  accordingly  reject  this  story  as  unhistorical.  But  why  should  fanatical  Jews  always 
have  acted  in  logically  and  religiously  consistent  fashion,  when  enlightened  and  sober-minded 

444 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xxi. 


Christians  do  not  ?  The  doors  were  most  probably  the  gates  which  led  into  the  women's 
court. 

Ver.  31.  The  chief  captain  of  the  band. — The  chiliarch,  or  military  tribune  of  the  cohort, 
whose  name  was  Claudius  Lysias  (xxiii.  26),  resided  in  the  Castle  of  Antonia,  a  gigantic 
fortress  on  a  rock  or  hill,  about  eighty-five  feet  high,  at  the  north-west  angle  of  the  temple 
area,  which  communicated  with  its  northern  and  western  porticoes,  "  and  had  flights  of  stairs 
descending  into  both,  by  which  the  garrison  could  at  any  time  enter  the  court  of  the  temple 
and  prevent  tumults  "  (Robinson,  Biblical  Researches,  I.,  p.  432.  Compare  Josephus,  Wars, 
V.  v.  8). 

Ver.  33.  Two  chains. — I.e.,  bound  by  a  chain  to  a  soldier  on  each  side  (compare  xii.  6). 

Ver.  34.  Into  the  castle. — More  correctly,  into  the  camp  or  barracks  attached  to  the  tower. 

Ver.  36.  Away  with  him. — Compare  xxii.  22  ;  Luke  xxiii.  18  ;  John  xix.  15. 

Ver.  37.  Canst  thou  speak  Greek  ? — Lit.,  dost  tlwu  know  Greelt  ?  "EWtjvkttI  yivuaKas. 
Compare  Greece  nescire  in  Cicero  {Pro.  Flac,  4)  and  tovs  H/vpiarl  iiriaTafx^vovs  in  Xenophon 
{Cyrop.,  VII.  v.  31). 

"Ver.  38.  That  (or,  the)  Egyptian. — Josephus  (  Wars,  II.,  xiii.  5)  mentions  an  Egyptian,  a 
false  prophet,  who,  having  deluded  thirty  thousand  men,  led  them  round  about  from  the 
Wilderness  to  the  Mount  of  Olives  with  the  view  of  breaking  into  Jerusalem  from  that  place, 
and  states  that  Felix,  having  fallen  upon  them,  either  destroyed  or  captured  alive  the  greater 
portion  of  his  followers,  and  dispersed  the  rest,  while  he  himself  escaped  with  a  small  number. 
In  another  account  {Ant.,  XX.  viii.  6)  the  Jewish  historian  says  that  this  Egyptian  went  to 
Jerusalem  and  advised  the  common  people  to  go  along  with  him  to  the  Mount  of  Olives, 
which  they  did  in  vast  crowds,  he  promising  to  show  them  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  fall  down 
at  his  command ;  and  that  Felix  sallied  out  against  them  with  a  great  company  of  horsemen 
and  footmen,  slew  four  hundred,  and  made  two  hundred  prisoners,  but  did  not  capture  the 
Egyptian,  who  escaped.  Tholuck  {Glaubwurdigkeit,  p.  169)  has  shown  how  the  variations 
in  Josephus's  story  may  be  harmonised ;  but  even  if  they  could  not,  they  would  only  prove 
that  Josephus,  while  substantially  confirming  Luke's  account,  was  not  so  accurate  a  historian 
as  Paul's  friend. 

Ver.  39.  Of  no  mean  city. — Josephus  {Ant.,  I.  vi.  1)  calls  Tarsus  the  most  important  city 
in  all  Cilicia.  "Many  of  the  coins  of  Tarsus  bear  the  title  of  Autonomous  and  Metropolis" 
(Hackett). 

Ver.  40.  That  Lysias  should  have  given  Paul  licence  or  leave  to  address  the  people  need 
occasion  no  surprise.  Paul  had  satisfied  Lysias  that  he  was  no  wild  revolutionary,  but  a 
peaceful  Cilician  ;  and  besides,  Lysias  may  have  seen  in  Paul's  countenance  from  the  first 
what  convinced  him  his  prisoner  was  no  ordinary  man.  The  Hebrew  tongue,  or  dialect,  was 
the  Syro-Chaldaic  or  Aramean,  as  in  John  v.  2,  xix.  13,  the  mother  tongue  of  the  Jews  in 
Judaea  at  that  time. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—6. 

Seven  days  at  Tyre  ;  or,  Impending  Danger  announced. 

I.  The  voyage  from  Miletus  to  Tyre. — 1.  From  Miletus  to  Tatar  a.  (1)  The 
company  of  voyagers.  Paul  and  his  companions,  now  reduced  to  three, 
Trophimus,  Aristarchus,  and  Luke,  the  others  Sosipater,  Secundus,  Gaius, 
Timotheus,  and  Tychicus,  having  either  remained  behind  at  Miletus,  or  gone  to 
their  several  homes,  or  departed  to  various  fields  of  labour.  "  So  part  we  in  this 
world  of  care  to  meet  again  in  dear  Jerusalem."  (2)  The  sorrowful  farewell 
spoken  on  the  sea-beach,  with  hot.  tears  and  tender  embraces,  and  with  the 
feeling  present  in  every  heart  that  never  again  would  they  all  look  each  other  in 
the  face  on  earth.  A  presentiment  which  all  companies  may  feel  on  breaking 
up.  (3)  The  speedy  voyage.  The  first  night  the  vessel  anchored  at  Cos,  famous 
for  its  wines  and  fabrics,  for  its  temple  of  -ZEsculapius,  or  school  of  medicine,  and 
for  its  two  distinguished  natives,  Hippocrates  the  physician,  and  Apelles  the 
painter.  The  ship  had  made  a  run  of  six  or  seven  hours  from  Miletus,  which 
shows  it  must  have  sailed  from  the  latter  port  about  noon.  The  next  day, 
having  rounded  Cape  Crio,  it  headed  eastward,  a  distance  of  fifty  miles,  and  lay 
to  for  the  second  night  in  Rhodes,  then  celebrated  as  being  "  the  most  beautiful 
spot  in  this  perhaps  the  fairest  portion  of  the  world,"  a  current  proverb  saying 
that  "  the  sun  shone  every  day  in  Rhodes."  From  the  Greek  period  it  had  been 
renowned  for  its  Temple  cf  the  Sun  and  for  its  Colossus,  though  when  Paul's  ship 

445 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


visited  the  harbour  the  latter  was  in  ruins,  having  been  overthrown  by  an  earth- 
quake. The  day  following,  the  barque  landed  at  Patara,  a  coast  town  of  Lycia, 
and  a  place  of  some  importance  and  splendour,  possessing  a  convenient  harbour 
(now  an  inland  marsh)  and  a  celebrated  temple  and  oracle  of  Apollo,  which 
almost  rivalled  that  of  Delphi  [Herod.,  I.  182,  III.  4).  2.  From  Patara  to 
Tyre.  Scarcely  had  the  vessel  anchored  in  the  harbour  of  Patara  when  Paul 
and  his  companions  found  another  ship,  a  merchantman,  bound  for  Phoenicia,  in 
the  act  of  setting  sail,  and  having  taken  out  passages  in  it  once  more  confronted 
the  dangers  of  the  deep.  Whether  the  ship  they  left  was  not  proceeding 
farther,  or  they  were  unwilling  to  wait  for  it,  need  not  be  curiously  inquired 
after.  It  admirably  served  their  purpose  to  embark  on  the  one  they  found 
weighing  anchor,  and  hurry  to  their  destination.  Passing  by  the  island  of 
Cyprus  (iv.  36)  on  the  left  hand — i.e.,  keeping  to  its  south,  the  Phoenician 
merchantman  steered  her  course  for  Tyre  to  which  she  was  bound  with  a  cargo. 
(On  the  commercial  importance  of  Tyre  in  Old  Testament  times,  see  Ezek.  xxvii.) 
As  the  distance  between  Patara  and  Tyre  was  340  geographical  miles,  several 
days  would  most  likely  be  consumed  in  this  part  of  the  voyage. 

II.  The  seven  days'  stay  in  Tyre. — 1.  The  unlading  of  the  ship.  The  com- 
mercial greatness  of  Tyre.  Never  was  a  more  precious  cargo  discharged  at  her 
wharves  than  when  Paul  and  his  companions  disembarked,  carrying  with  them 
the  unsearchable  riches  of  salvation  to  proclaim  to  its  inhabitants.     2.  The  search 

for  the  disciples.  Paul  probably  knew  that  already  the  gospel  had  been  preached 
and  the  nucleus  of  a  Church  formed  there.  That  the  Christians  were,*  not 
numerous  in  Tyre  may  be  inferred  from  the  circumstance  that  they  required  to 
be  searched  out.  Paul's  inquiry  after  them  arose  no  doubt  partly  from  a  desire 
of  Christian  fellowship  in  a  heathen  city,  and  partly  from  a  wish  to  impart  unto 
them  some  benefit  by  preaching  among  them  (compare  Pom.  i.  11).  3.  The 
warning  of  Paul.  Given  by  the  disciples,  who,  in  speaking  as  they  did,  acted  as 
the  organs  and  mouthpiece  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  never  did,  and  does  not  yet 
restrict  His  influences  or  communications  to  official  persons,  but  imparts  them  to 
whomsoever  He  will  (John  hi.  8;  1  Cor.  xii.  11).  The  tenor  of  their  warning 
was  that  Paul  should  not  set  foot  in  Jerusalem,  obviously  because  of  the  danger 
they  saw  impending. 

If  we  ask,  Why  did  the  Spirit  through  these  men  warn  Paul?  It  could 
not  be  that  the  Spirit  did  not  wish  Paul  to  visit  Jerusalem,  because  it  must 
already  have  been  in  the  Spirit's  plan  that  Paul  should  go  to  Jerusalem,  be 
apprehended  there,  and  carried  thence  to  Pome.  The  only  answer  possible 
seems  to  be  that  in  this  way  the  Spirit  desired  to  confirm  the  impression  already 
made  upon  Paul's  heart,  that  "  bonds  and  afflictions  "  were  waiting  him  (xx.  23), 
and  to  test  if  not  the  sincerity,  at  least  the  strength  and  tenacity  of  his  faith. 

III.  The  pathetic  farewell  to  Tyre. — 1.  The  affectionate  convoy.  The  whole 
body  of  the  disciples  with  their  wives  and  children,  unwilling  to  be  parted  from 
the  apostle  and  his  companions,  repeated  the  scene  which  had  a  few  days 
before  been  witnessed  in  Miletus,  and  accompanied  them  on  their  way  till  they 
reached  the  outskirts  of  the  city.  A  scene  like  this  attests  the  strength  of  that 
spiritual  affection  which  a  true  minister  of  Christ  can  inspire  in  the  bosoms  of 
his  hearers.  2.  The  prayer  meeting  on  the  beach.  Recalling  the  similar  interview 
with  the  Ephesian  elders  (xx.  36),  and  the  fast  of  Ezra  and  his  fellow-travellers 
on  the  Ahava  (Ezra  viii.  21).  How  much  more  appropriate  for  Christians  to 
part  at  a  prayer  meeting  than  at  a  social  banquet,  with  supplications  and  tears 
and  solemn  commendations  of  each  other  to  God  than  with  songs  and  laughter, 
wine  and  wassail.  3.  The  final  separation.  Bidding  each  other  good-bye,  they 
went  their  several  ways,  Paul  and  his  companions  to  their  ship,  the  Christians  of 
Tyre  to  their  homes.     So  must  all  earthly  unions  and  communions  be  broken  up 

446 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xxi. 


and  interrupted  till  the  heavenly  union  and  communion  arrive  which  will  never 
end. 

Learn. — 1.  How  God  guides  His  people  on  their  journeys,  whether  these  be 
by  sea  or  land.  2.  How  Christ's  disciples  draw  to  one  another,  even  in  strange 
cities.  3.  How  the  Spirit  of  Christ  tries  and  tests  the  faith  and  patience  of 
those  He  leads.  4.  How  providence  assigns  to  each  man  his  own  particular 
sphere  and  work. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  1-7.  Helps  and  Hindrances. 

I.  Helps  for  Paul's  journey. — 
1.  Favourable  winds — a  straight  course 
(ver.  1).  2.  Opportune  events — the 
crossing  ship  (ver.  2).  3.  Christian 
companions — "we  came"  (ver.  1), 
"  we  sailed,"  "  we  landed "  (ver.  3). 
4.  Religious  fellowship  with  the  Tyrian 
disciples  (ver.  4). 

II.  Hindrances  to  Paul's  journey. — 
1.  The  prophecies  of  approaching  evil, 
(ver.  4).  2.  The  tearful  farewells  upon 
the  beach  (vers.  5,  6).  3.  The  separa- 
tion from  Christian  friends  which 
ensued. 

"Ver.  4.  Seven  days  in  Tyre.  "  This 
peculiar  period  of  time  mentioned  at 
Troas  (xx.  6),  and  again  at  Puteoli 
(xxviii.  14),  seems  to  tell  us  that  St. 
Paul  arranged  to  stay  at  each  of  these 
points  where  there  was  a  Christian 
Church — Troas,  Puteoli,  and  Tyre — for 
the  purpose  of  attending  one  solemn 
meeting  of  the  brethren  on  the  Lord's 
day,  and  partaking,  once  at  least, 
with  them  all  of  the  Lord's  Supper. — 
Spence. 

Ver.  5.  Husbands,  Wives,  and  Chil- 
dren. 

I.  All  belong  to  the  conception  of  an 
ideal  home. — All,  therefore,  should  be 
bound  together  by  ties  of  love.  All 
should  be  mutually  helpful  by  lovingly 
fulfilling  the  duties  which  each  owes  to 
the  other  two,  and  which  all  owe  to 
God,  to  the  Church,  to  the  world. 

II.  All  have  a  rightful  place  within 
the  Christian  Church. — All  belong  to 
its  communion.  The  Church  member- 
ship of  wives  and  children  no  less  than 
of  husbands  and  fathers  is  distinctly 
recognised  in  New  Testament  Scrip- 
tures (ii.  39  ;  1  Cor.  vii.  14). 


III.  All  should  take  part  together 
in  exercises  of  Christian  worship. — 

Whether  in  public  assemblies  or  in 
private  gatherings  of  the  disciples,  all 
should,  like  Cornelius's  household 
(x.  33),  be  present.  The  modern 
practice  of  establishing  separate 
Churches  for  children  cannot  be  too 
severely  condemned. 

Children.     Are — 

T.  The  heritage  of  the  Lord,  and 
should  be  thankfully  received  from, 
and  diligently  trained  for  Him. 

II.  The  ornament  of  home,  and 
should  be  sincerely  admired  and  ten- 
derly cherished. 

III.  The  hope  of  the  Church,  and 
should  be  carefully  instructed  and 
nourished  up  in  the  faith. 

IV.  The  promise  of  the  world,  and 
should  therefore  be  with  much  solici- 
tude prepared  for  their  future  places 
in  it. 

Vers.  1-5.  The  Power  of  Love  to  Jesus 
Christ. 

I.  It  brings  the  unacquainted  near 
(ver.  4). 

II.  It  forewarns  of  possible  danger 
(ver.  5). 

III.  It  gladly  cultivates  fellowship 
(ver.  5). 

IV.  It  humbles  itself  before  God  in 
mutual  prayer  (ver.  5),  (Lisco,  in 
Lange)> 

Ver.  6.   Christian  Farewells. 

I.  Often  take  place  under  sorrowful 
circumstances. 

II.  Should  always  be  accompanied 
with  prayers  as  well  as  tears. 

III.  Ought  not  to  hinder  the  prose- 
cution of  necessary  duties. 

IV.  Will  eventually  give  place  to 
joyous  reunions. 

447 


chap.  xxi.        EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS. 

Yers.  7-14.   With  Philip  at  Ccescwea;  or,  Renewed  Fore-announcements  of  evil. 

I.  The  journey  from  Tyre  to  Csesarea.— 1.  The  Voyage  from  Tyre  to  Ptolemais. 
Commenced  after  the  seven  day's  sojourn  in  Tyre  and  the  affecting  farewell  upon 
the  beach  ;  it  continued  probably  not  more  than  a  few  hours,  as  Ptolemais  was 
distant  from  Tyre  not  more  than  a  moderate  day's  journey  by  land.  2.  The  halt 
at  Ptolemais.  Not  to  examine  into  either  the  antiquities  or  the  splendours  of 
the  town,  though  in  respect  of  both  it  was  then  worthy  of  attention.  Given  to 
Asher  at  the  conquest  (Judges  i.  31,  32),  Acco,  the  original  name  of  Ptolemais, 
had  never  been  completely  cleared  of  the  Canaanites,  but  remained  in  possession 
of  the  Phoenicians,  till  taken  by  Shalmaneszer  of  Assyria.  In  B.C.  333  it  passed 
into  the  hands  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  from  his,  when  his  dominions  were 
divided  among  his  generals,  into  those  of  Ptolemy  in  B.C.  320,  who,  having  greatly 
enlarged  and  beautified  it,  called  it  Ptolemais.  Ultimately  it  fell  beneath  the 
yoke  of  the  Romans,  and  received  further  embellishment  at  the  hands  of  Herod. 
At  the  time  of  Paul's  visit  it  had  been  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  Roman  colony  and 
must  have  been  a  splendid  city  (see  Picturesque  Palestine,  hi.  87-89).  Yet  none 
of  these  things  attracted  the  apostle.  What  tempted  him  to  linger  a  day  within 
its  borders  was  a  desire  to  meet  with  the  Christian  disciples  who  were  to  be  found 
here  also  as  at  Tyre.  3.  The  walk  from  Ptolemais  to  Caism'ea.  The  distance 
extended  to  nearly  forty  miles ;  while  the  route  lay  along  the  coast  and  round 
the  head  of  Carmel.  Why  the  travellers  footed  this  instead  of  sailing  cannot 
with  certainty  be  said.  The  apostle  may  have  deemed  it  better  to  hurry  on  over- 
land than  wait  for  the  sailing  of  his  ship  (if  it  was  going  further)  or  (if  it  were 
not)  for  the  finding  of  another.  4.  The  arrival  at  Philip's  house.  This  Philip 
was  the  Jerusalem  deacon  (vi.  5),  who,  following  the  example  of  his  brilliant 
colleague  Stephen,  became  an  eloquent  preacher  of  the  gospel  in  Samaria  (viii.  5), 
and  after  being  used  by  the  Spirit  for  the  conversion  of  the  Eunuch  (viii.  26),  was 
last  heard  of  as  publishing  the  good  news  in  all  the  cities  on  the  coast  north- 
wards from  Azotus  (viii.  40),  till  he  came  to  Csesarea,  where  he  finally  settled, 
and  for  nearly  twenty-five  years  fulfilled  the  office  of  an  evangelist,  When  Paul 
in  a.d.  58,  paid  his  third  visit  to  the  town,  Philip  had  four  grown  up  and  un- 
married daughters  endowed  with  the  prophetic  spirit  (ii.  17) — i.e.,  who  gave 
inspired  utterances  and  expositions  of  Christian  truth,  and  also  foretold  future 
events.  Whether  they  joined  (Spence)  or  did  not  join  (Hackett)  Agabus  in  pre- 
dicting Paul's  approaching  captivity  is  unrecorded ;  but  Luke  represents  Paul 
and  his  companions  as  having  been  so  pleased  with  their  reception  and  entertain- 
ment in  Philip's  family  circle  that  they  "tarried  there  many  days,"  perhaps 
longer  than  they  at  first  intended.  Luke  himself  must  have  here  for  the  first 
time  met  Philip,  who  would  no  doubt  supply  him  with  much  of  the  information 
about  himself  and  others  which  appears  in  the  earlier  chapters  of  the  Acts. 

II.  The  warning  renewed  in  Philip's  house. — 1.  The  person  of  the  speaker. 
A  certain  prophet  from  Judea,  named  Agabus,  most  likely  the  same  who  fourteen 
years  before  in  Antioch  had  predicted  the  coming  of  a  famine  (xi.  28),  though 
otherwise  unknown.  God  often  sends  important  communications  through  obscure 
messengers.  2.  The  symbolic  action.  Having  found  his  way  into  Philip's  house, 
he  laid  hold  of  Paul's  girdle — i.e.,  the  sash  wherewith  in  Oriental  countries  the 
flowing  robes  were  tied  round  the  waist,  and  with  it  bound  in  succession  first  his 
own  hands  and  then  his  own  feet — after  the  manner  of  the  Old  Testament  seers 
(see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").  3.  The  prophetic  utterance.  "  Thus  saith  the  Holy 
Ghost,  So  shall  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem  bind  the  man  that  owneth  this  girdle,  and 
shall  deliver  him  into  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles."     Agabus  distinctly  claimed  to 

448 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xxi. 


speak  with  divine  authority,  and  Paul  accepted  his  announcement  as  such.  Be- 
sides solemnly  confirming  what  Paul  had  previously  heard  at  Tyre,  the  language 
of  Agabus  explained  the  exact  nature  of  the  peril  which  now  threatened  the 
apostle.  Under  some  grave  charge  not  revealed  he  would  be  delivered  over  by 
his  countrymen  into  the  hands  of  the  Roman  Government.  4.  The  friendly 
appeal.  When  Paul's  companions  and  the  inmates  of  Philip's  house,  with  pro- 
bably other  Christians  came  to  hear  of  Agabus's  prediction,  they  entreated 
their  beloved  teacher  not  to  proceed  to  Jerusalem.  Agabus,  it  will  be  observed, 
did  not  join  in  this  entreaty,  though  the  Tyrian  disciples  did  (ver.  4) — which 
shows  that  most  likely  these  last  overstepped  the  limits  of  what  the  Spirit  had 
revealed  to  them  (see  "  Critical  Remarks").  The  parallel  between  Christ  and  Paul, 
who  were  both  dissuaded — the  former  by  Peter  (Matt.  xvi.  22),  the  latter  by  his 
friends — from  going  to  Jerusalem  to  suffer,  is  too  apparent  to  escape  notice. 
5.  The  heroic  response.  "  What  are  ye  doing  ?  thus  weeping  and  breaking  mine 
heart,"  etc.  The  apostle,  with  a  fortitude  which  resembled  that  of  his  Master, 
gave  his  friends  to  understand  that  he  perfectly  realised  the  situation,  and 
accepted  it  with  unreserved  submission,  tnat  he  felt  ready  to  face  the  worst  at 
Jerusalem  for  his  Master's  sake,  that  death  itself  had  no  terrors  for  him,  and 
that  their  tearful  entreaties  would  have  no  effect  in  keeping  him  back  from  the 
fate  which  he  saw  impending.  The  course  he  was  pursuing  had  been  adopted 
under  the  Spirit's  guidance,  and  aimed  at  the  glory  of  Jesus  and  the  furtherance 
of  the  gospel,  by  publishing  once  more  the  tidings  in  the  Metropolis  at  the  most 
numerously  attended  of  all  the  feasts,  and  by  seeking  fresh  recognition  from  the 
mother  Church  for  iris  Gentile  mission.  Hence  he  could  not  flinch ;  their  tears 
and  entreaties,  therefore,  only  rendered  his  separation  from  them  the  more  acutely 
painful.  When  he  said  they  were  breaking  his  heart,  he  did  not  mean  that  they 
were  lacerating  his  soul  by  conjuring  up  before  him  the  bonds  and  afflictions  " 
that  awaited  him,  since  he  could  truthfully  affirm  none  of  these  things  moved 
him,  but  that  it  broke  his  heart  to  be  obliged  to  witness  their  grief  and  resist 
their  weeping  and  supplication.  6.  The  submissive  acquiescence.  When  his 
friends  perceived  that  he  could  not  be  persuaded  they  desisted,  saying :  "  The 
will  of  the  Lord  be  done  !  " — borrowing  their  expression,  it  has  been  conjectured, 
from  the  Master's  prayer,  which  by  this  time  had  attained  to  familiar  and  perhaps 
daily  use  among  Christians.  If  there  is  a  time  to  speak  there  is  also  a  time  to  be 
silent,  and  this  was  one. 

Learn. — 1.  The  variety  of  offices  in  the  Christian  Church — evangelists, 
prophets,  apostles.  2.  The  value  of  dramatic  action  in  preaching.  3.  The  calm 
heroism  of  him  who  walks  in  the  way  of  duty.  4.  The  preference  a  good  man 
should  give  to  duty  over  life  itself.  5.  The  necessity  laid  on  Christians  to 
acquiesce  in  their  Master's  will. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  8.  Philip  of  Ccesarea.  IV.  Not  a    wandering  missionary 

T.  Not  an  apostle  like  his  namesake  like  Paul,  but  a  preacher  of  the  gospel 

of  Bethsaida  (John  i.  44),  but  a  deacon  having  a  fixed  centre  from  which  to 

like  his  gifted  colleague  Stephen  (vi.  6).  evangelise, 

II.  Not  a  pastor  of  a  Church  like 

James  the  brother  of  Our  Lord  (Gal.  Ver.  9.    Virgins  which  did  prophesy  ; 

ii.  9),  but  an  evangelist  like  Timothy  or,  the  place  of  Woman  in  the  Chris- 

(2  Tim.  iv.  5).  tian    Church.      The    fact    here    stated 

III.  Not  a  celibate  like  Paul  (1  Cor.  proves — 

vii.    8  (?)),   but  a   married  man  like         I.  That  woman  has  an  equal  stand- 
Peter  (Mark  i.  30).  ing  in  the   Church    with    man. — In 

gg  449 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Christ  there  is  neither  male  nor  female 
(Gal.  iii.  28). 

II.  That  woman  equally  with  man 
is  susceptible  of  receiving  the  highest 
spiritual  endowments.— Examples  in 
Hebrew  Church — Miriam  (Exod.  xv. 
20),  Deborah  (Judges  iv.  4),  Huldah 
(2  Kings  xxii.  14),  Noadiah  (Neh. 
vi.  14),  Anna  (Luke  ii.  36).  In  the 
New  Testament  Church  Philip's  daugh- 
ters stand  alone. 

III.  That  though  woman  was  not 
intended  to  rule  in  the  Church  of  Christ 
(see  1  Cor.  xiv.  34,  35  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  12), 
nothing  hinders  her  from  exercising 
her  gifts  as  a  preacher  of  the  truth 
(see  xviii.  26  ;  and  1  Cor.  xi.  5).  As  a 
possessor  of  the  truth  she  is  equally 
with  man  under  obligation  to  dissemi- 
nate it ;  and  if  God  has  endowed  her 
with  the  gift  of  sweet  speech  there 
appears  no  sound  reason  why  that  gift 
should  not  be  utilised  for  such  a  holy 
purpose. 

IV.  That  the  number  of  women 
called  of  God  and  the  Spirit  to  this 
work  will  most  likely  always  be  few. 
— This  a  warrantable  deduction  from 
the  exceptional  character  of  the  present 
instance. 

V.  That  woman  may  be  equally 
helpful  to  the  cause  of  Christ  in  other 
ways  than  by  prophesying. — Like 
Dorcas  (ix.  39),  Phebe  (Rom.  xvi.  1), 
Mary  (Rom.  xvi.  6),  and  others. 

Ver.  10.  The  Prophet  A  gabies ;  or, 
comfort  for  obscure  men. 

I.  Obscure  men  are  all  known  to 
God. — Simon,  the  Joppa  tanner,  was  as 
well  known  as  Peter  the  apostle ;  and 
Ananias  of  Damascus  as  Saul  the 
emissary  of  the  Sanhedrim. 

II.  Obscure  men  may  become  vessels 
of  Divine  grace. — "  Not  many  mighty, 
not  many  wise,  not  many  noble,  but 
God  hath  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world 
rich  in  faith. 

III.  Obscure  men  may  be  employed 
on  great  missions. — Ahijah  the 
Shilonite  predicted  the  rending  of  the 
kingdom  from  Rehoboam  and  the  ele- 
vation of  Jeroboam  to  the  throne  of 
Israel  (1   Kings  xi.   29-31).     Humble 

450 


shepherds  were  made  the  first  preachers 
of  the  Incarnation  (Luke  ii.  17). 
Agabus  announced  to  Paul  his  impend- 
ing imprisonment. 

IV.  Obscure  men  may  eventually 
come  to  high  renown. — The  name  of 
Agabus  is  for  ever  associated  with  that 
of  Paul ;  the  names  of  the  humblest  be- 
lievers will  for  ever  be  connected  with 
that  of  Christ. 

Vers.  12,  13.  The  great  Modern 
Counterpart  of  Paul — Martin  Luther. 
"  When  he  entered  a  town  the  people 
flocked  together  to  see  the  wonderful 
man  who  was  so  brave  and  who  dared 
make  a  stand  against  the  Pope  and  all 
the  world  that  held  him  to  be  a  God 
in  opposition  to  Christ.  Some  gave 
him  poor  comfort,  telling  him  that, 
because  there  were  so  many  cardinals 
and  bishops  at  Worms  at  the  Diet,  he 
would  speedily  be  burned  to  powder,  as 
Huss  had  been  at  Constance.  But 
Luther  answered  such  men  as  follows  : 
"  And  if  they  should  build  a  fire  be- 
tween Wittenberg  and  Worms  that 
would  reach  to  heaven,  in  the  Lord's 
name  I  would  appear  and  step  into 
Behemoth's  mouth,  between  his  great 
teeth,  and  confess  Christ  and  let  Him  do 
His  pleasure."  (Frederick  Myconius : 
quoted  by  Hagenbach  :  History  of  the 
Reformation,  i.  133).  .  .  .  "  Spalatin 
also,  the  court  preacher  of  the  Elector 
of  Saxony,  and  the  intimate  friend  of 
Luther,  advised  him  by  a  post  messen- 
ger, that  he  must  not  go  immediately 
to  Worms.  It  was  then  that  Luther 
uttered  his  ever  memorable  speech  : 
"  And  if  there  were  as  many  devils  at 
Worms  as  there  are  tiles  upon  the 
roofs,  I  would  go  thither  "  (Hagenbach, 
Ibid,  pp.  133,  134). 

Ver.  13.  Paul's  Sacrifices  in  the  Cause 
of  Christ.  1.  Of  ease.  Recount  his 
labours.  Contrast  them  with  ours. 
2.  Of  friendship.  A  warm-hearted 
man  who  delighted  to  love  and  to  be 
be  loved.  Sacri6ced  his  affections  at 
the  shrine  of  duty.  We  must  not 
allow  the  influence  either  of  our  rela- 
tives or  of  our  friends  to  interfere  with 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xxi. 


our    supreme    devotion    to    the    cause  The  True  Bonds  of  a  Christian. 

of  Christ.      3.    Of  liberty.      Value  of  I.  Not  the  bonds  of  his  own  flesh 

liberty.     Paul  was  capable  of  appre-  and  blood,  which  he  has  torn  asunder 

dating  it,  and  did  appreciate  it  highly.  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit. 

Was  willing  to  forfeit  it,  and  did  for-  II.  Not  the  bonds  of  human  force 

feit  it.     His  imprisonment  was  over-  and  enmity,  which  cannot  injure  him 

ruled  for  good.     It  is  scarcely  possible  contrary  to  the  will  of  God. 

that  any  of  us  should  be,  in  our  own  III.  Not  the  bonds  of  brotherly  love 

country    at   least,  literally  a  prisoner  and  friendship,    for  whosoever   k>veth 

for   Christ      We   may   be  exposed   to  brethren  or  sisters  more  than  the  Lord 

social  and  political  disadvantages.     We  is  not  worthy  of  Him. 

ought    to    be    willing   to   bear    them.  IV.  But  only  the  bonds  of  love  to 

4.  Of  life.     The  highest  proof  of  devo-  his  Lord,  to  whom  he  is  bound  in  grate- 

tion  to  any  cause.     Paul  gave  it.     The  ful  love  and  childlike  fidelity,  even  unto 

fact  was  in  his  case  a  confirmation  of  death  (Gerok,  in  Lange). 
the  truth  of  the  religion  he  professed. 

It  was,  at  all  events,  a  proof  of  his  own  Vers.  13,  14.  The  Heroism  of  Paul ; 

sincerity.     A  willingness  to  die  for  the  A  study  for  the  followers  of  Christ, 

cause  of  Christ  is  the  best  preparation  I.  The  splendour  of  his  heroism. — 

for  all  minor  trials. — G.  Brooks.  Exhibited  in — 1.   The  calm  courage  he 

displayed  in  the  prospect  of  death. — "I 

Ver.   14.  "  The  Will  of  the  Lord  be  am  ready  not  to  be  bound  only,  but  to 

done  !  "  die  also  at  Jerusalem."     This  utterance 

I.  A  prayer  put  into  the  Christian's  was  not  made — (1)  In  ignorance  of 
mouth  by  Christ  (Matt.  vi.  10).  what  suffering  and  death  was.     Paul 

II.  A  precept  for  the  Christian,  and  misfortune  had  been  companions 
illustrated  by  Christ  (Matt.  xxvi.  42).  for  many  years.     For  twenty  years  he 

III.  A  pattern  of  Christ  that  should  had  been  an  object  of  unsleeping  perse- 
be  followed  by  His  servants.  cution,  had  experienced  every  sort  of 

Or  thus  :— -  calamity,  and  had  more  than  once  been 

I.  A  vow  of  becoming  obedience.  in  the  grips  of  death  (2  Cor.  xi.  23). 

II.  A  confession  of  believing  sub-  (2)  In  secret  expectation  that  both 
mission.  might  be  escaped.     Paul  had  no  such 

III.  A  declaration  of  holy  courage  hope  or  expectation.  Already  it  had 
(Leonhard  and  Spiegel,  from  Lange).  been  too  clearly  signified  to  him  that 

"  bonds    and     imprisonment    awaited 

Christian  Resignation.  him."  Agabus's  words,  too,  left  no  loop- 

I.  Enjoined  and  illustrated  by  Christ.  hole  for  escape.     (3)   In  a  feeling  of 

II.  Exemplified  and  recommended  by  despair,  because  he  saw  that  evasion 
Paul  and  his  friends.  was    impossible.      On    the    contrary, 

III.  Approved  and  rewarded  by  humanly  speaking,  Paul  perceived  that 
God.  the  only  thing  necessary  in   order  to 

escape  was  to  keep  away  from  Jerusa- 

Ver.  11.  Lessons  from  PauVs  Girdle.  lem,   renounce    his    mission,    cast    off 

I.  Apostolic  fidelity.  —  Christian  Christianity,  and  go  back  to  the  fold  he 
ministers,  like  Paul,  are  bound  to  be  had  left.  The  Jews  would  receive  him 
faithful  to  their  Lord.  with  open  arms.      (4)  In  a   spirit  of 

II.  Apostolic  trial. — Christian  minis-  braggadocio.  Like  Peter,  to  gain  for 
ters,  if  faithful,  may  expect,  like  Paul,  himself  a  reputation  for  valour,  with 
to  experience  the  hatred  of  the  world.  no  real  intention  of  ever  fulfilling  his 

III.  Apostolic  zeal.  —  Christian  words.  Paul  maintained  the  same  in- 
ministers,  like  Paul,  should  always  be  trepidity  before  Festus  (xxv.  11),  and 
ready  for  whatever  suffering  or  duty  in  writing  to  the  Philippians  from 
lies  before  them  (from  Gerok).  Csesarea  (Phil.  ii.   17).      Later  he  ex- 

451 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


hibitecl  the  same  spirit  when  sending  an 
epistle  to  Timothy  from  Eome  (2  Tim. 
iv.  6).  2.  The  triumphant  victory  over 
the  prospect  of  death  which  he  obtained. 
Not  only  was  he  calm  and  unmoved  in 
the  contemplation  of  his  arrest  and 
execution,  but  as  it  were  death  was  so 
overcome  that  it  could  not  hinder  him 
from  thinking  about  the  interests  of 
others.  One  would  naturally  have 
expected  that  with  the  prospect  of 
bonds  and  imprisonment  before  him, 
although  externally  unperturbed,  he 
would  be  inwardly  sad  and  occupied 
with  his  own  misfortunes.  But  he  was 
not.  The  grief  of  his  friends  even 
could  not  thrust  him  in  upon  himself. 
How  like  his  master  who,  when  in  the 
agonies  of  death,  prayed  for  His  mur- 
derers, pardoned  the  robber  and  cared 
for  His  mother  !  How  like  Stephen, 
who,  with  his  latest  breath,  interceded 
for  his  assassins  !  And  since  then  men 
have  sometimes  been  found  over  whose 
heroic  spirits  death  had  no  power. 

II.  The  secret  of  his  heroism. 
1.  Love  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Between  Paul  and  Jesus  Christ  existed 
such  a  bond  of  personal  love  and  devo- 


tion as  has  probably  never  since  existed. 
Paul's  individuality  was  almost  swal- 
lowed up  in  Christ.  "Not  I,  but 
Christ  liveth  in  me  !  "  "  To  me  to  live 
is  Christ !  "  Paul  had  such  a  concep- 
tion of  Christ's  love  to  him — "  He 
loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me  " — 
that  it  kindled  in  him  a  responsive 
flame  of  affection  that  wellnigh  con- 
sumed him.  "  The  love  of  Christ  con- 
straineth  us  ! "  And  there  is  no 
consideration  or  force  that  will  trans- 
form a  man  into  a  hero  sooner  than 
this.  2.  Love  for  the  souls  of  men. 
When  Paul  said  "  for  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  "  he  practically  meant  "for 
the  gospel's  sake,"  which  again  signi- 
fied, "for  the  souls  of  men."  He 
wanted  to  go  to  Jerusalem  to  preach  to 
his  countrymen  at  Pentecost,  and  was 
willing  to  face  bonds,  imprisonment, 
and  death  for  so  sacred  a  cause.  This 
the  next  strongest  force  to  the  love 
of  Christ.  Paul  was  willing  to  die 
for  the  gospel,  not  because  it  was  the 
highest  philosophy,  or  divinest  theo- 
logy, but  because  it  was  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  who 
believed. 


HOMILETLCAL  ANALYSTS.— Verses  15—25. 

With  James  and  the  Elders  at  Jerusalem  ;  or,  Mistaken  Counsels. 

I.  Paul's  journey  to  the  capital. — 1.  The  point  of  departure.  Caesarea;  the 
abode  of  Philip  the  evangelist  (ver.  8),  the  city  of  Cornelius  (x.  1),  the  scene  of 
Herod's  death  (xii.  19-23)  and  of  Paul's  subsequent  imprisonment  (xxiii.  31-35). 
The  apostle  little  dreamt,  on  leaving  Csesarea,  that  before  many  days  had  passed 
he  would  return  to  it  a  prisoner,  though,  had  he  foreseen  such,  the  knowledge  would 
hardly  have  discomposed  him  (ver.  13).  Paul  one  of  those  heroic  spirits  that 
rise  superior  to  external  circumstances,  and  when  confronted  by  extreirest 
danger  "  forget  they  ever  heard  the  name  of  death  "  (Shakespeare).  2.  The 
time  of  departure.  After  the  interview  with  Agabus.  The  pathetic  scene  with 
the  disciples  (vers.  12-14),  and  in  particular  the  courageous  declaration  of  Paul, 
not  to  mention  other  reasons,  clearly  rendered  it  impossible  for  him  to  remain 
longer  at  Caesarea.  Had  he  done  so,  even  the  disciples  might  have  begun  to 
think,  if  not  to  say,  when  they  recalled  his  spirited  utterance — "  These  be  brave 
words,  O  Paul !  but  where  is  thy  performance?"  And  Paul  was  not  the  man 
to  suffer  any  one  to  charge  him  with  either  timidity  or  inconsistency.  3.  The 
•manner  of  departure.  With  "  carriages  "  or  things  to  be  carried — i.e.,  baggage 
taken  up — this  including  both  articles  necessary  for  the  journey  and  the  gifts 
Paul  was  bearing  to  the  poor  saints  in  Jerusalem.  Paul's  anticipations  of 
sorrow  for  himself  had  no  power  to  make  him  forget  the  contributions  he  had 
gathered  for  the  needs  of  others.  Paul  was  ever  a  rare  example  of  self-forget- 
f  ulness. 

452  .  f 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xxi. 


II.  Paul's  travelling  companions.— 1.  Those  who  had  accompanied  him  from 
Asia.  Whether  all  the  seven  mentioned  in  xx.  4  (Besser),  or  only  Trophimns, 
Aristarchus,  and  Luke  is  debatable,  though  the  latter  opinion  is  the  more 
probable.  2.  Certain  disciples  from  Cossarea.  Most  likely  Gentile  converts, 
though  they  may  have  been  Jewish  Christians  travelling  to  Jerusalem  to  attend 
the  Feast  of  Pentecost.  Wherever  Paul  went  his  noble  personality,  rendered 
more  magnetic  by  the  grace  of  God  that  was  in  him,  drew  around  him  circles 
of  friends,  and  grappled  them  to  his  bosom  as  with  hooks  of  steel.  The  time 
had  not  yet  arrived  when  all  men  would  forsake  him  (2  Tim.  iv.  16)  as  they  had 
formerly  forsaken  his  Master  (Matt.  xxvi.  56).  3.  Mnason,  an  old  or  "  early  " 
disciple — i.e.,  one  who  had  long  been  a  Christian,  having  been  (it  may  be  supposed) 
one  of  the  first  converts,  gathered  into  the  Christian  fold  on  the  day  of  Pentecost. 
A  native  of  Cyprus  like  Barnabas,  he  may  also  have  been  one  of  those  "  men 
of  Cyprus  "  who  came  to  Antibch  and  were  among  the  first  to  preach  the  gospel 
to  the  Gentiles  (xi.  20).  Whether  he  lived  at  Cyprus  but  possessed  a  house  as 
well  in  Jerusalem,  or  usually  resided  in  Jerusalem  but  had  been  visiting  at 
Csesarea  and  was  now  returning  home,  or  had  not  been  to  Csesarea  at  all,  but 
was  still  in  Jerusalem,  and  Paul  (according  to  another  translation)  was  being 
conducted  to  him,  are  points  concerning  which  no  authoritative  decision  can  be 
given.  The  one  clear  fact  is  that  Paul  and  his  companions  obtained  a  lodging 
in  Mna son's  house,  presumably  because  in  the  state  of  public  feeling  among 
Jewish  Christians  concerning  Paul's  Gentile  mission,  it  might  have  been  difficult, 
if  not  dangerous,  to  seek  accommodation  for  him  with  one  of  these. 

III.  Paul's  arrival  in  the  city. — 1.  The  date.  That  he  reached  Jerusalem  in 
time  for  the  Feast  of  Pentecost  is  apparent.  His  departure  from  Philippi  took 
place  after  the  days  of  unleavened  bread,  since  then  he  had  been  occupied  in 
travelling  as  under  : — 

From  Philippi  to  Troas  (xx.  6)    .     .  5  days.  From  Tyre  to  Ptolemais  (xxi.  7) 

Where  he  abode 7  „  From  Ptolemais  to  Caesarea  (xxi.  8) 

From  Troas  to  Miletus  (xx.  13-15)  .  4  „  Where  he  halted  (xxi.  10,  say) 

Where  he  stayed  (say) 3  „  From  Csesarea  to  Jerusalem  . 

From  Miletus  to  Patara  (xxi.  1).     .  3  „ 

From  Patara  to  Tyre  (say)      .     .     .  4  „  In  all 44  days. 

Where  he  remained  (xxi.  4)  .     .     .  7  „ 

If  to  this  be  added  six  for  the  days  of  unleavened  bread  (xx.  6),  the  total  of  fifty 
will  be  obtained,  which  is  the  interval  between  Passover  and  Pentecost.  2.  His 
reception.  The  brethren — i.e.,  the  private  Christians  (among  them  Mnason  and 
his  friends)  to  whom  his  coming  was  made  known  welcomed  him  and  his  com- 
panions gladly — Mnason  to  his  house  and  all  of  them  to  their  hearts.  Sym- 
pathising fervently  with  Paul's  missionary  enterprise  they  rejoiced  to  see  him 
home  again  with  tidings  from  the  regions  beyond. 

IV.  Paul's  interview  with  the  Church  leaders. — 1.  Fraternal  greeting?.  As 
on  a  former  occasion  (xviii.  22),  Paul  saluted  or  embraced  the  recognised  heads 
of  the  Christian  community,  who  had  convened  to  accord  him  welcome.  These 
were  James  the  brother  of  Our  Lord — not  James  the  younger  (Hackett) — who, 
ten  or  eleven  years  later,  suffered  martyrdom  as  a  believer  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
by  being  hurled  from  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple  and  despatched  by  stoning 
(Euseb.,  H.  E.t  ii.  23)  ;  and  the  elders  or  spiritual  rulers,  overseers,  presbyters  of 
the  various  congregations  in  Jerusalem.  That  none  of  the  apostles  are  mentioned 
as  having  been  present  suggests  that  none  of  them  at  that  time  resided  in  the 
Holy  City.  Some  may  have  set  forth  on  missionary  tours,  while  others  may 
have  "  departed  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better."  2.  Glowing  recitals. 
Salutations  over,  the  apostle,  as  he  had  done  on  returning  from  his  first 
missionary  tour  (xiv.  27),  declared  particularly  or  rehearsed  one  by  one  the  things 

453 


1 

days. 

2 

» 

6 

»> 

2 

ii 

chap.  xxi.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


which  God  had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  by  his  ministry — noting  specially 
his  hearing  of  Apollos  (xviii.  24),  meeting  with  John's  disciples  (xix.  1),  and 
successful  preaching  (xix.  20)  in  Ephesus ;  his  journey  to  Macedonia  and 
Achaia  (xx.  1,  2)  ;  with  the  various  incidents  that  occurred  on  the  homeward 
route,  in  Troas  (xx.  9),  at  Miletus  (xx.  17),  in  Tyre  (ver.  4),  and  at  Csesarea 
(ver.  8).  More  might  be  done  to  deepen  the  home  Church's  interest  in  the 
missionary  enterprise  by  returned  missionaries,  were  they  to  lay  before  their 
Christian  brethren,  in  fitting  language,  the  story  of  what  God  is  at  present 
doing  among  the  heathen.  3.  Fervent  thanksgivings.  When  the  assembled 
elders  had  listened  to  the  thrilling  narrative,  they  glorified  God  for  having  raised 
up  such  a  veteran  missionary  within  the  Church,  and  for  having  performed, 
through  his  instrumentality,  such  wonders  of  grace  among  the  Gentiles  (compare 
iv.  21,  xi.  18).  Henceforth  they  could  entertain  no  doubt  or  suspicion,  more  of 
the  earnestness  of  the  man  or  of  the  Divine  authority  of  his  mission  ;  and 
whatever  friction  may  have  previously  existed  between  the  apostle  and  the 
Jerusalem  leaders,  at  this  moment  it  had  disappeared.  The  anti-Gentile  spirit, 
if  it  slumbered  in  the  Church  of  the  Metropolis,  which  is  doubtful,  was  not 
shared  in  by  its  rulers.  4.  Mistaken  counsels.  (1)  The  circumstances  out  of  which 
these  arose  were  two ;  the  multitudes  (myriads  or  tens  of  thousands)  of  Jewish 
Christians  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  who  were  then  present  in  the  Holy  City, 
and  the  misconception  under  which  they  laboured  of  Paul's  work,  which  they 
imagined  to  be  a  crusade  against  circumcision  and  the  customs  of  Moses,  when 
it  was  no  such  thing.  Certainly  Paul  taught  the  Gentiles  that  circum- 
cision and  the  customs  of  Moses  were  not  required  for  a  sinner's  justification  so 
that  the  Gentiles  had  no  need  to  embrace  these  with  a  view  to  salvation.  To 
the  Jews  among  the  Gentiles — i.e.,  to  the  Jewish  Christians  he  explained  that 
even  for  them  circumcision  and  the  customs  of  Moses  formed  no  ground  of 
acceptance  before  God  ;  but  he  never  insisted  on  the  discontinuance,  by  Jewish 
Christians,  of  either  circumcision  or  the  customs.  Doubtless  Jewish  Christians, 
who  came  to  understand  the  complete  religious  worthlessness  of  circumcision, 
and  the  customs  as  mere  external  performances,  would  gradually  lay  these  aside  ; 
and  so  the  notion  might  (and  probably  did)  diffuse  itself  that  Paul  directly 
aimed  at  this  result  by  means  of  his  gospel.  It  was  of  course  an  error  fitted  to 
be  hurtful.  (2)  The  motive  which  dictated  the  advice  given  by  James  and  the 
elders  was  unquestionably  good.  They  desired,  if  possible,  to  disabuse  the 
public  mind  of  the  unjust  suspicions  it  entertained  of  Paul's  Hebrew  orthodoxy, 
and  to  remove  every  stumbling  block  out  of  the  way  of  his  ministerial  usefulness 
among  his  countrymen.  On  this  principle  Paul  himself  was  always  prepared  to 
act  (1  Cor.  ix.  20).  (3)  The  advice  itself  ran  that  Paul  should  associate  himself 
with  four  poor  Christian  Jews  who  had  taken  on  themselves  Nazarite  vows, 
which  required  them  to  let  their  hair  grow,  to  abstain  from  intoxicating  liquor, 
and  generally  to  lead  ascetic  lives  for  a  period  usually  of  thirty  days,  from  which 
vows  they  could  not  be  released  without  the  presentation  in  the  temple  of 
certain  specified  offerings  (Numb.  vi.  1-21).  It  was  suggested  that  Paul  should, 
according  to  a  custom  then  prevailing,  join  himself  to  these  four  men  during  the 
last  seven  days  of  their  vow,  should  along  with  them  abstain  from  wine,  and 
let  his  hair  grow ;  and  that  at  the  end  of  these  days  he  and  they  should  shave 
their  heads,  while  he  paid  for  the  necessary  offerings  to  clear  himself  and  them — 
again  after  the  manner  of  pious  Jews  of  a  wealthier  sort,  who  were  accustomed 
thus  to  assist  their  poorer  brethren.  James  and  the  elders  believed  that  by  so 
doing  Paul  would  demonstrate  to  his  excited  countrymen  that  there  was  no 
truth  in  the  information  they  had  received,  and  that  he,  Paul,  was  as  good  and 
orderly  a  Jew  as  any  one  among  themselves.  To  the  suggestion  of  this  course 
they  may  have  felt  prompted  by  remembering  that  Paul  had  once  at  least  before 

454 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xxi. 


at  Cenchrea  undertaken  a  similar  vow  (xviii.  18).  (4)  The  consideration  by 
which  James  and  the  elders  hoped  to  urge  this  course  upon  the  apostle  was  that 
they  had  gone  a  long  way  in  making  concessions  to  the  Gentiles,  having  written 
and  concluded  or  given  judgment,  that  they,  the  Gentiles,  should  observe  no  such 
thing  as  circumcision  and  the  customs  of  Moses,  but  only  that  they  should  keep 
themselves  from  things  offered  to  idols  and  from  blood,  from  things  strangled, 
and  from  fornication.  (5)  Nevertheless  the  advice  was  a  mistake.  What  it 
recommended,  if  carried  out,  as  it  was,  might  not  have  been  sinful  in  itself  or 
unlawful  for  Paul  from  his  point  of  view  (1  Cor.  vi.  12,  x.  23),  but  it  was 
certainly  of  doubtful  policy  as  tending  to  confirm  Jewish  Christians  in  the  idea 
that  Paul  did  regard  the  law  as  in  some  fashion  indispensable  for  salvation, 
while  in  point  of  fact  he  did  not,  and  practically  worthless,  since  it  neither 
effected  what  they  hoped  for,  nor  averted  what  they  feared,  neither  allayed  the 
groundless  suspicions  against  Paul,  nor  prevented  an  outbreak  of  hostility  against 
him  (ver.  28). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  lawfulness  of  Christian  prudence — exemplified  in  lodging 
Paul  with  Mnason.  2.  The  duty  of  Christian  brotherly  kindness — illustrated  in 
Paul's  reception  by  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem  and  the  leaders  of  the  Church 
there.  3.  The  doubtfulness  even  of  Christian  compromises — as  seen  in  the 
course  recommended  by  James  and  followed  by  Paul. 

HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.    16.    An    Old    Disciple.  —  Ex-  II.    The    salutation   he   brought. — 

emplified  in  Mnason  of  Cyprus.  Peace. 

I.  A  striking  proof  of  Divine  faith-  III.  The  story  he  told. — The  triumphs 
fulness. — In  preserving  Mnason  to  be  a  of  the  cross. 

Christian  of  long  standing.  IV.  The  enthusiasm  he  enkindled — 

II.  A  satisfying    evidence    of  the     They  glorified  God. 
reality  and  power  of  religion. — Had 

Mnason  not  found  it  so,   he  had  not  Vers.    20-24.  Concessions    to     Weak 

adhered  to  it  so  long.  Brethren. 

III.  A  precious  storehouse  of  Chris-  I.  Legitimate. — 1.  When  they  can 
tian  experience. — One  who  has  long  be  made  without  violating  conscience  — 
been  a  disciple  must  have  learnt  much  i.e.,  when  they  refer  to  things  indifferent, 
of  the  secret  of  the  Lord.  2.  When  they  help  to  remove  stumbling- 

IY.  A  possible  instrument  of  valu-  blocks  out  of  the  weak  brother's  way. 

able  service. — To  the  Church  and  the  3.  When    they    assist    in    promoting 

world.     As  there  are  tasks  that  can  peace. 

better  be  performed  by  young  believers,  II.  Illegitimate. — 1.  When,  though 

so  there  are  offices  that  can  be  more  right  in  themselves,  they  tend  to  mis- 

efficiently  filled  by  aged  disciples.  lead  the  weak  brother  by  causing  him  to 

Y.  A  deserving  object  of  Christian  think  his  position  only  right.    2.  When 

honour  and  esteem. — If  the  hoary  head  adopted  more  from  a  desire  of   peace 

is  entitled  to  respect  and  veneration,  than  with  a  view  to  promote  what  is 

much  more  is  it  so  when  found  in  the  right.     3.  When   they  are   calculated 

way  of  righteousness.  to  offend  as  many  as  they  please. 

VI.  A  Christian  pilgrim  drawing 
near  the  better  land. — Heaven  may  be  Vers.  21-24.  The  World's  Misrepre- 

near  the  young  believer,  it  never  can  sentations  of  the  Followers  of  Christ. 
be  far  off  from  the  old  disciple.  I.  Are  frequently  wide-spread. 

II.  Mostly  have  nothing  in  them. 

Vers.  17-20.  A  Foreign  Missionary's  III.  Always  are  difficult  to  remove. 

Return.  IV.  Seldom  get  corrected  by  com- 

I.  The  welcome  he  received. — Joyful,  promise. 

455 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Ver.  26.  Doubtful  Actions  ;  or,  the  in- 
consistencies of  great  and  good  men. 

I.  State  the  case  referred  to. — Paul's 
arrival  in  Jerusalem ;  welcome  from 
the  brethren ;  meeting  with  the  elders 
and  James.  James's  proposal  and  the 
reason  of  it.  Danger  apprehended  from 
probable  suspicions  of  Jewish  Christians. 
Paul's  adoption  of  the  course  recom- 
mended, and  joining  of  himself  with 
the  four  men  who  had  a  vow. 

II.  Was  this  action  wrong? — Con- 
sider— 1.  How  it  may  have  looked  to 
James.  (1)  Unless  James  had  deemed 
the  course  recommended  legitimate  it 
may  be  assumed  he  would  not  have 
made  the  proposal.  (2)  James's 
motives  were  unquestionably  right — to 
ensure  Paul's  safety  by  disarming  the 
hostility  of  the  Jews  ;  to  gain  a  hear- 
ing from  his  co-religionists  for  Paul's 
gospel ;  to  set  the  apostle  right  with 
the  Jewish  Christians.  (3)  Yet  the 
course  recommended  may  have  been 
wrong,  though  the  course  itself  may 
have  appeared  right  and  the  motives 
prompting   it    may   have    been    good. 

2.  How  it  may  have  looked  to  Paul. 
(1)  Of  great  importance  to  allay  the 
wide-spread  suspicion  that  was  abroad 
concerning  him,  and  to  gain  a  hearing 
for  the  gospel.  (2)  No  small  matter 
to  disabuse  the  minds  of  his  weaker 
brethren  of  their  misconceptions  con- 
cerning himself  and  his  mission. 
(3)  Not  against  his  principles  to  take 
a  vow,  since  he  had  done  so  at  Cenchrea 
(xviii.  18).  (4)  In  harmony  with  his 
conduct  in  circumcising  Timothy  (xvi. 
3).  (5)  Not  inconsistent  with  his  re- 
fusal to  perform  the  same  rite  on  Titus 
(Gal.  ii.  3).  (6)  Not  the  same  as  Peter's 
eating  with  the  Gentiles  at  Antioch 
and  then  withdrawing  (Gal.  ii.  11,  12). 
(7)  It  was  only  a  carrying  out  of  Paul's 
principle  of  becoming  all  things  to  all 
men  to  gain  some  (1  Cor.  ix.  20,  etc.). 

3.  How  it  may  look  to  some  still. 
(1)  Of  doubtful  morality.      Not  that 


to  recommend  or  adopt  such  a  course 
of  action  was  wrong ;  but  that  being 
liable  to  misconstruction  it  should 
neither  have  been  recommended  nor 
adopted  without  serious  consideration. 
Neither  Paul  nor  James  believed  that 
observance  of  the  moral  law  was  indis- 
pensable for  salvation  ;  but  what  about 
the  multitude  of  Jews  ?  Would  they 
not  reason,  that  if  Paul  observed  the 
customs  they  must  be  absolutely  bind- 
ing on  the  conscience  ?  (2)  Of  doubt- 
ful expediency.  It  was  meant  to  save 
Paul,  but  did  not ;  intended  to  gain 
the  Jews,  but  did  not ;  designed  to 
recommend  Christianity ;  but  is  it 
certain  it  did  not  rather  confirm  the 
Jews,  both  Hebrew  and  Christian,  in 
the  notion  of  the  permanent  obligation 
of  the  law  of  Moses  ? 
III.   Lessons     from     the    story. — 

1.  Compromises  are  seldom  successful. 

2.  Good  men  may  give  bad  advice  and 
take  false  steps.  3.  The  short  road  to 
victory  is  ever  steadfast  adherence  to 
principle. 

Note. — "  Surely  these  records  of  the 
'Acts,'  with  their  unflinching  truth, 
speak  with  a  strange  mighty  power  to 
us  after  all  these  ages.  We  feel,  while 
we  read  of  the  awful  fall  and  miserable 
death  of  one  of  the  Twelve  (i.  16-20); 
of  the  sin  and  punishment  of  two  of 
the  most  notable  believers  of  the  first 
age  (v.  1-11);  of  the  jealous  murmur- 
ing and  discontent  of  the  poor  saints 
(vi.  1);  of  the  failure  in  courage  of 
Mark  and  the  bitter  quarrel  of  two  of 
the  most  prominent  Christian  leaders 
(xv.  38-40) ;  and  here  of  this  doubtful 
compromise  of  Paul  and  James  that 
we  have  before  us  a  real  picture, 
painted  from  life,  of  the  Church  of  the 
first  days,  by  one  who  never  shrinks  to 
paint  the  errors,  the  faults,  and  the 
grievous  mistakes  of  even  the  most 
distinguished  of  the  first  believers." — 
Spence. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.  —  Verses  26— 40. 

Arrested  in  the  Temple  ;   or,  Long  Looked  for,  Come  at  Last. 
I.  The  Apostle's  arrest. — 1.    Where   it  occurred.      In   the  temple — i.e.,   the 
temple  court,  into  which  Paul  had  entered,  and  in  one  of  the  cloisters  of  which 

456 


HOMILETIC.  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.        chap.  xxi. 


he  most  likely  stayed  during  the  period  of  his  purification.  Perhaps  at  the 
moment  he  was  in  the  court  of  the  women  (see  below).  2.  When  it  took  place. 
On  the  last  of  the  seven  days  (say  some)  when  the  necessary  offerings  were 
being  presented  for  himself  and  the  four  Nazarites,  but  better  as  the  seven  days 
were  running  on  and  nearing  completion,  so  that  the  offerings  were  not  presented. 

3.  By  whom  it  was  instigated.  By  certain  Jews  from  Asia  who  had  been 
acquainted  with  his  missionary  activity  in  Asia  Minor,  and  more  especially  in 
Ephesus,  who  had  observed  him  in  the  city  accompanied  by  Trophimus,  an 
Ephesian,  and  who  now  lighted  upon  him  in  the  temple  court.  Throughout  the 
whole  of  his  career  the  Jews  (unbelieving)  had  been  his  persistent,  unsleeping, 
and  remorseless  antagonists.  The  method  they  adopted  in  this  instance  to  raise 
a  tumult  against  him  was  effective.  (1)  They  laid  hands  on  him,  as  if  he  had 
been  an  evil  doer,  a  criminal  who  they  purposed  to  hand  over  to  the  tender 
mercies  of  the  law.  (2)  They  raised  a  shout  against  him  in  the  temple  court, 
which  inflamed  the  crowd  there  present,  and  spreading  abroad  throughout  the 
city,  threw  it  into  confusion,  much  as  Ephesus  had  been  thrown  into  a  turmoil 
by  the  cry  of  Demetrius  (xix.  29),  and  attracted  an  excited  mob  around  the 
temple  gates.  (3)  They  pointed  him  out  as  the  man — the  notorious  fellow 
— who  went  about  everywhere  teaching  all  (men  and  women)  against  the 
people — i.e.,  of  Israel— an  appeal  to  their  patriotism;  against  the  law — i.e.,  of 
Moses — an  appeal  to  their  orthodoxy  ;  and  against  this  place — i.e.,  the  temple, 
the  holy  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah — -an  appeal  to  their  religion.  (4)  They 
accused  him,  though  falsely,  of  sacrilege — i.e.,  of  having  violated  the  sanctity  of 
the  holy  place  by  bringing  (as  tLey  erroneously  supposed)  Trophimus,  the 
Ephesian,  into  not  the  court  of  the  Gentiles,  but  the  court  of  the  women,  into 
which  none  but  Jews  could  pass  under  penalty  of  death  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  "). 

4.  How  it  was  effected.  (1)  Tumultuously.  The  crowd  rushed  into  the  temple 
and  seized  the  apostle's  person.  (2)  Violently.  They  dragged  him  forcibly 
outside  the  sacred  precincts  in  order  that  these  might  not  be  stained  with  his 
blood  (compare  2  Ohron.  xxiii.  14),  which  they  clearly  intended  to  shed.  More 
than  likely  also  this  was  the  reason  why  the  temple  gates  were  so  expeditiously  shut 
behind  the  retreating  mob,  in  case  it  should  return  and  carry  out  its  murderous 
project  in  the  holy  place. 

II.  The  Apostle's  rescue. — 1.  Opportune.  The  mode  selected  for  the  carrying 
out  of  their  deadly  intention  was  the  slow  one  of  beating  (ver.  32),  which  allowed 
time  for  the  information  to  spread  and  be  carried  to  Claudius  Lysias  (xxiii.  26), 
the  chief  captain  of  the  band,  or  military  tribune  (chiliarch)  of  the  cohort,  in  the 
Tower  of  Antonia  near  by,  whose  business  it  was  to  quell  all  riots  which  might 
occur  (and  these  were  frequent)  in  connection  with  the  Jewish  festivals  (see 
Jos.,  Ant.,  XX.  v.  3 ;  and  Wars,  V.  v.  8).  The  moment,  therefore,  Lysias  under- 
stood the  situation,  he  ran  down  upon  the  crowd  with  a  company  of  soldiers  and 
centurions,  the  sight  of  which  at  once  checked  their  blood-thirsty  fury  and  caused 
them  to  leave  off  beating  the  apostle.  Magistrates  were  appointed  to  be  terrors 
to  evil-doers  (Rom.  xiii.  4),  and  crowds,  it  is  well  known,  have  a  salutary  fear  of 
the  ruler's  sword.  2.  Incomplete.  Rescued  from  the  hands  of  the  Jews  and 
from  the  jaws  of  death,  he  was  yet  not  set  at  liberty.  The  chiliarch  commanded 
him  (wrongfully,  as  he  afterwards  learnt,  xxii.  25),  to  be  bound  as  a  prisoner, 
with  two  chairs,  and  fetched  into  the  castle.  The  reason  for  this  procedure  was 
the  impossibility  of  learning  anything  correctly  from  the  infuriated  rabble  about 
either  who  the  apostle  was  or  what  he  had  done.  Those  who  composed  that 
rabble  could  only  follow  after  the  retreating  soldiers  as  they  bore  off  their 
prisoner,  and  cry,  "  Away  with  him,"  as  their  fathers  had  thirty  years  before 
shouted  in  front  of  Pilate's  prsetorium  (John  xix.  15).  Yea,  so  violent  did  they 
become,  that  Paul  might  have  been  snatched  from  the  soldier's  hands  and  lynched 

457 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


on  the  spot,  had  not  the  soldiers,  to  whom  he  was  bound,  lifted  him  into  their 
arms  or  upon  their  shoulders  and  borne  him  up  the  castle  stairs, 

III.  The  Apostle's  request. — 1.  The  preliminary  conversation.  When  the  top 
of  the  stairs  had  been  reached,  just  before  passing  into  the  castle,  the  apostle, 
addressing  the  chief  captain  in  Greek,  solicited  permission  to  "  say  something  " 
to  him.  Surprised  at  hearing  Greek  on  the  lips  of  (as  he  supposed)  a  foreign 
Jew  whom  he  did  not  expect  to  find  a  person  of  culture,  he  first  asked  the 
apostle  if  he  knew  Greek,  and  on  receiving  a  reply  in  the  affirmative,  inquired 
further  if  he  (the  apostle)  was  not  then  (as  the  captain  had  concluded  before  he 
heard  the  apostle  speak  Greek)  that  Egyptian  impostor — spoken  of  by  Josephus 
Ant.,  XX.  vii.  6  ;  Wars,  II.  xiii.  5  ;  see  "  Critical  Remarks  ") — who  shortly  before 
had  stirred  up  to  sedition  and  led  out  into  the  wilderness  four  thousand  men 
that  were  murderers,  literally,  the  four  thousand  men  of  the  Sicarii  or  Assassins. 
To  this,  of  course,  Paul  responded,  that  he  was  not  that  renowned  brigand  chief, 
but  a  Jew  of  Tarsus  in  Cilicia,  and  a  citizen  of  no  mean  city.  Honourable 
men  are  never  afraid  to  give  account  of  themselves  and  their  doings.  2.  The 
solicited  permission.  To  address  the  people — which  showed  Paul  had  not  parted 
with  his  courage,  and  was  still  as  ready  to  fight  with  wild  beasts  as  he  bad 
been  at  Ephesus  (xix.  30  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  32).  "  The  request  was  a  bold  one,"  write 
Conybeare  and  Howson,  "  and  we  are  almost  surprised  that  Lysias  should  have 
granted  it ;  but  there  seems  to  have  been  something  in  St.  Paul's  aspect  and 
manner  which  from  the  first  gained  an  influence  over  the  mind  of  the  Roman 
officer."  In  another  sense,  the  request  was  a  comparatively  harmless  one,  and 
on  its  being  granted  Paul  at  once  moved  to  the  stair  front,  and  looking  into  the 
faces  of  the  demoniac  crowd,  beckoned  to  them  with  his  chained  hand,  signalling 
that  he  wished  to  speak.  "  What  nobler  spectacle,"  exclaims  Chrysostom, 
"  than  that  of  Paul  at  this  moment  !  There  he  stands,  bound  with  two  chains, 
ready  to  make  his  defence  unto  the  people.  The  Roman  commander  sits  by,  to 
enforce  order  by  his  presence.  An  enraged  populace  look  up  to  him  from  below. 
Yet,  in  the  midst  of  so  many  dangers,  how  self-possessed  is  he,  how  tranquil  ! " 
(quoted  by  Hackett).  As  if  startled  by  the  heroism  of  the  man,  the  angry  crowd 
forget  to  shout.  A  great  silence  ensues  which  deepens  into  an  intenser  stillness 
as  the  accents  of  their  old  Hebrew  tongue  fall  upon  their  ear. 

Learn. — 1.  How  unexpectedly  evil  may  befall  one.  Paul,  doubtless,  never 
dreamt  of  being  apprehended  in  the  temple.  2.  How  difficult  it  is  to  quench 
the  passion  of  hate  in  unrenewed  hearts.  The  Jews  dogged  Paul's  steps  like 
sleuth-hounds.  3.  How  easily  a  misconception  may  arise.  Paul's  enemies  had 
seen  him  and  Trophimus  in  the  city,  and  at  once  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that 
Paul  had  fetched  his  Greek  friend  into  the  Holy  Place.  4.  How  quickly  a  lie 
can  spread.  In  a  few  moments  the  slander  was  in  possession  of  the  town. 
5.  How  nearly  one  may  come  to  being  killed  and  yet  be  rescued.  A  few  moments 
longer  before  Lysias  arrived  and  Paul  might  have  been  a  dead  man.  6.  How 
strangely  a  good  man  may  be  talked  of  behind  his  back.  The  governor  clearly 
had  heard  it  said  that  Paul  was  a  sort  of  bandit  chief.  7.  How  bravely  a 
Christian  can  comfort  himself  in  face  of  peril.  Not  many  men  could  have  faced 
the  mob  as  Paul  did  from  the  castle  stairs. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  26.  Paul  among  the  Nazarites.  things  that  promote   the   kingdom  oL 

I.  Not  as  a   slave  of  human  ordi-  God  (1  Cor.  vi.  12). 
nances,  but  in  the  might  of  evangelical         II.  Not  as  a  dissembler  before  the 

liberty,    which    has    power    over    all  people,  but  in  the  ministry  of  brotherly 

458 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE   ACTS.        chap.  xxi. 


love,  which  bears  the  infirmities  of  the 
weak  (Rom.  xv.  1). 

III.  Not  as  a  fugitive  from  the 
cross,  but  in  the  power  of  apostolic 
obedience,  which  knows  to  deny  itself 
from  love  to  the  Lord  (Luke  ix.  23). 

Ver.  27.  Unrealised  Aims ;  or,  man 
proposes  but  God  disposes. 

I.  Many  plans  that  promise  well 
turn  out  ill. — The  recommendation  of 
James  and  the  elders,  and  the  com- 
pliance of  Paul  were  intended  to  ensure 
Paul's  safety,  but  they  actually  led  to 
his  arrest. 

II.  When  a  plan  turns  out  badly  it 
cannot  be  safely  argued  that  the  plan 
was  not  good. — We  agree  with  the 
view  which  thinks  James's  counsel,  and 
Paul's  practice  were  not,  in  this  in- 
stance the  best — we  cannot  pronounce 
them  sinful  ;  but  even  had  they  been 
the  wisest  they  might  have  failed. 

II.  The  success  of  a  plan  does  not 
necessarily  demonstrate  that  the  plan 
was  good. — Nothing  more  common 
than  for  the  counsels  of  the  wicked  to 
prosper  on  earth  and  in  time,  though 
they  will  eventually  be  overthrown. 

Vers.  27-38.  The  Troubles  of  a  Good 
Man.     Paul. 

I.  Doubly  slandered. — 1.  Charged 
with  apostasy   in    religion    (ver.    28). 

2.  Blamed  for  committing  sacrilege 
(ver.  28). 

II.  Nearly  murdered. — I.  Violently 
dragged  from  the  court  of  the  women 
(ver.  30).  2.  Mercilessly  beaten  by 
the  angry  mob  (ver.  32). 

III.  Innocently  bound. — 1.  Like  a 
dangerous  criminal  (ver.  33).  2.  Though 
no  one  could  tell  for  what  (ver.  34). 

IV.  Ignorantly  suspected. — 1.  Of 
being  an  Egyptian  when  he  was  a 
Jew.  2.  Of  being  a  leader  of  assassins 
when  he  was  only  a  peaceful  citizen. 

3.  Of  having  stirred  up  sedition  when 
in  truth  he  was  a  preacher  of  peace 
(vers.  38,  39). 

Ver.  38.  "Art  not  thou  that  Egyptian?" 
"  A  remarkable  proof  of  the  erroneous 


and  absurd  thoughts  which  the  blind 
world  entertains  of  the  children  and 
servants  of  God.  They  regard  us  as 
idiots,  madmen,  seducers,  enemies  of 
mankind,  and  under  this  form  they 
hate  us.  Thus  was  Christ  also  num- 
bered among  transgressors  "  (Gerok  in 
Lange). 

"  Art  not  thou  that  Egyptian  ?  "  or, 
misconceptions  entertained  by  the  world 
concerning  the  followers  of  Christ,  who 
are  often  slandered  as 

I.  Disturbers  of  social  order. — Paul 
was  accused  of  being  a  brigand  chief. 
Had  often  been  reviled  as  a  revolution- 
ary. On  this  ground  the  early  Chris- 
tians were  persecuted  under  the  Roman 
emperors.  Usual  to  accuse  them  as 
evil  doers  (see  1  Peter  ii.  12).  In  the 
days  of  the  Stuart  ascendency  in  our 
own  country  Nonconformists  were 
treated  as  enemies  of  the  common- 
wealth, because  they  worshipped  God 
according  to  their  own  consciences. 
To-day  Christians  are  looked  upon  by 
many,  if  not  as  open  malefactors,  at 
least  as  impracticable  persons,  who, 
by  crying  out  against  social  evils,  such 
as  drink,  gambling,  licentiousness, 
trouble  society. 

II.  Self-interested  deceivers. — 
Lysias  obviously  thought  Paul  was  one 
of  this  class.  Christianity  has  often 
been  represented  as  a  huge  imposture, 
a  gigantic  system  of  deception,  invented 
by  priests  for  their  self-interest.  This 
accusation,  which  was  common  last 
century,  is  not  unknown  in  this. 
Believers  are  often  maligned  as  persons 
who  have  adopted  a  profession  of 
religion  simply  as  a  cloak  for  their 
covetousness.  No  doubt  such  abuses 
have  existed  and  such  individuals  have 
been  found  in  the  Church ;  but 
Christianity  is  no  invention  of  de- 
ceivers. 

III.  Hypocritical  pretenders. — 
Giving  themselves  out  to  be  "  saints  " 
when  they  are  as  wicked  as  other 
people.  No  doubt  of  some  professing 
Christians  this  is  true ;  but  it  is 
ignorant  calumny  to  represent  all  as 
such.     Still  Christians  should  study  to 

459 


chap.  xxii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


approve  their  sincerity  by  a  holy  walk 
and  conversation. 

IV.  Impracticable  visionaries. — 
Doubtless  the  captain  considered  Paul 
such  when  he  fancied  the  apostle  was 
that  Egyptian  who  had  been  aiming  at 
upsetting  the  supremacy  of  Borne  by 
means  of  a  handful  of  Sicarii.     So  the 


world  pronounces  Christians  visionaries, 
fools,  fanatics,  idiots,  dreamers,  and 
such  like  when  they  talk  of,  1.  Apply- 
ing the  principles  of  Christianity  to 
ordinary  life  ;  2.  Bringing  the  whole 
world  round  to  the  acceptance  of 
Christianity;  and,  3.  Living  for  the 
other  world  rather  than  for  this. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Paul's  Defence  from  the  Castle  Stairs  of  Antonia:   First  Apology. 

§  1.  A  Retrospective  Survey  of  his  Past  Career;  or,  what  he  Was  and  Did, 

prior  to  Conversion  (vers.  1-5). 
§  2.  The  Story  of  his  Conversion  to  Christianity ;  or,  before  and  in  Damascus 

(vers.  6-16). 
§  3.  The  Adoption  of  his  Gentile  Mission ;  or,  his  Interview  with  Christ  in  the 

Temple  at  Jerusalem  (vers.  17-21). 
§  4.  The  Effect  of  his  Oration  on  the  Audience ;  or,  Paul's  Narrow  Escape  from 

Scourging  (vers.  22-30). 


CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Men,  brethren  and  fathers. — Or,  brethren  and  fathers,  the  use  of  "men"  in  English 
being  unnecessary.  Compare  the  commencement  of  Stephen's  address  to  the  Sanhedrim 
(vii.  2).  Conybeare  and  Howson  (ii.  276)  "  account  for  this  peculiar  mode  of  address  "  by 
supposing  "  that  mixed  with  the  crowd  were  men  of  venerable  age  and  dignity,  perhaps 
members  of  the  Sanhedrim,  ancient  scribes  and  doctors  of  the  law,  who  were  stirring  up  the 
people  against  the  heretic."  More  likely  this  was  the  usual  way  of  addressing  an  assembly 
which  included  scribes  and  elders  of  the  people  (Spence).  Hear  my  defence The  con- 
struction is  not  a  double  genitive  of  the  thing  and  the  person — hear  me  and  hear  my  defence, 
but  a  genitive  of  the  thing ;  "  my  "  being  dependent,  not  on  "  hear,"  but  on  "  defence."  The 
defence  consists  of  three  parts. 

Ver.  2.  In  the  Hebrew  tongue  or  language. — See  on  xxi.  40. 

Ver.  3,  which  begins  the  first  part  (ver.  1-5),  takes  up  the  acknowledgment  as  to  his  own 
person  which  has  just  been  made  to  Lysias  (xxi.  39).  The  best  texts  omit  verily.  Brought 
up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel. — On  Gamaliel.  See  v.  34.  "  The  scholars  sat  upon  the  ground  or 
upon  benches,  the  teachers  upon  stools  (Matt,  xxiii.  2)"  (Holtzmann).  According  to  this 
punctuation,  which  is  commonly  adopted  (Calvin,  Meyer,  Alford,  Wendt,  Zockler,  Holtzmann, 
Westcott  and  Hort),  Paul  must  have  removed  from  Tarsus  to  Jerusalem  when  a  youth 
(compare  xxvi.  4);  according  to  a  different  punctuation  followed  by  other  exegetes  (Griesbach, 
Lachmann,  De  Wette,  Bethge,  Hackett,  Conybeare  and  Howson),  the  words  should  be 
rendered,  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel  taught — dvaredpain/xtuos,  having  regard  (it  is  said)  more  to 
physical  growth,  while  ireiraidev/nevos  refers  rather  to  mental  culture  or  professional  training. 
But  the  way  in  which  the  sentences  are  built,  the  participle. preceding  its  qualifying  clause, 
appears  to  speak  for  the  former  translation  as  the  more  probable.  Hausrath  considers  the 
story  of  Paul's  studying  under  Gamaliel  in  Jerusalem  as  apocryphal  (Der  Apostel  Paulus, 
pp.  34,  35).  The  perfect  should  be  the  strict  manner  of  the  law  of  the  fathers. — The  word 
aKpifieia,  which  occurs  only  here  (compare  xxvi.  5),  was  the  customary  catchword  for  Pharisaic 
legalism  (see  Wisd.  xii.  1;  Jos.,  Ant.,  IX.  x.  2;  Wars,  II.  viii.  14  ;  Life,  38).  For  Paul's 
legal  strictness  see  his  statements  elsewhere  (Gal.  i.  14 ;  Phil.  iii.  5).    Zealous  towards  God. 

460 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxii. 


Better,  for  God:  like  zealous  for  the  Law  (xxi.  20).  As  ye  all  are  this  day. — "A  conciliatory 
comparison  "  (Alford).  "  Must  not  that  have  constrained  the  Jews  to  the  admission  :  '  This 
man  understands  us,  but  we  understand  him  not '  "  (Besser). 

Ver.  4.  This  way. — See  on  ix.  2  :  "  He  would  willingly  have  struck  down  the  believers  in 
Messiah  with  a  stroke  "  (Holtzmann).  Unto  death. — Or,  as  far  as  death.  Not  the  aim 
merely  (Meyer),  but  the  actual  result  (Hackett),  of  his  persecution  (compare  ver.  20, 
xvi.  10). 

Ver.  5.  The  high  priest  of  the  time  (ix.  1),  Caiaphas,  seems  to  have  been  still  alive 
when  Paul  spoke.  He,  along  with  the  elders,  composed  the  Sanhedrim  (Luke  xxii.  66). 
Unto  the  brethren. — Not  against  the  Christiaris  (Bornemann),  but  to  the  Jews  in  Damascus 
(Holtzmann,  Zockler,  and  others);  specially  to  the  Jewish  rulers  in  the  synagogues  (ix.  2). 
Them  which  were  there  (e/cetcre)  meant  those  Jewish  believers  who,  having  fled  thither  (to 
Damascus)  in  consequence  of  the  persecution  (viii.  1),  had  settled  there.  To  be  punished. — 
For  apostatising  from  the  law  of  their  fathers. 

Ver.  6  begins  the  second  part  of  the  defence  (vers.  6-16).  Was  come  nigh  should  be  was 
drawing  near.  The  narration  is  the  same  as  in  ix.  3-17  and  xxvi.  13-18,  with  a  few  points 
of  difference.  One  of  these  is  the  note  of  time — about  noon — "  through  which  the  miracle  is 
more  realistically  expressed,  and  the  matter  of  fact  placed  beyond  suspicion  of  being  an 
evening  delusion  "  (Holtzmann).  Another  is  the  adjective  great  (Uavdu)  appended  to  the 
noun  light  (0<2s),  which  equally  excluded  the  idea  of  deception. 

Ver.  7.  The  use  of  the  word  ground  (tdcupos)  (occurring  only  here),  meaning  the  "  base  "  or 
"bottom"  of  a  thing, for  "the  earth"  (yijv)  (ix.  4)  may  suggest  the  idea  that  he  was  travelling 
in  a  caravan  or  riding  on  horseback. 
Ver.  8.  Of  Nazareth,  or,  the  Nazarene,  is  an  addition  to  Luke's  account  (ix.  5). 
Ver.  9.  And  were  afraid  (see  ix.  2)  is  omitted  by  the  best  MSS. 

Ver.  10.  What  shall  I  do,  Lord  ? — Does  not  occur  in  Luke's  narration,  according  to  best 
texts  (ix.  5),  or  in  Paul's  speech  before  Agrippa  (xxvi.  16).  Yet  this  need  occasion  no 
difficulty. 

Ver.  11.  The  cause  of  his  blindness,  not  stated  in  the  earlier  report,  is  here  set  down  as 
the  glory  of  that  light,  which  was  "above  the  brightness  of  the  sun"  (xxvi.  13),  a  point 
likely  to  be  noted  by  Paul  rather  than  by  Luke. 

Ver.  12.  Ananias  a  devout  man. — The  proper  reading  is  evXa^rjs  (Lachmann,  Westcott 
and  Hort),  rather  than  evae^rjs  (Griesbach,  Hackett),  the  former  signifying  "  cautious," 
"prudent,"  "circumspect,"  "according  to  the  Law,"  the  latter  "full  of  holy  fear  and 
reverence."  The  former  occurs  only  in  Luke's  writings  and  in  the  Hebrews ;  the  latter  is 
used  of  Cornelius  (x.  2,  7).  (See  Cremer's  Lexicon  of  New  Testament  Greek,  pp.  394,  548). 
Luke  calls  Ananias  a  disciple  (ix.  10). 

Ver.  13.  I  looked  up  upon  him. — The  verb  signifies  not  merely  to  look  up  (Meyer,  Wendt), 
but,  as  in  ix.  12,  17,  to  recover  sight  (Holtzmann).  The  clause  might  be  translated,  /  received 
sight  and  looked  up  on  or  unto  him. 

Ver.  14.  The  God  of  our  fathers. — Another  conciliatory  touch  !  That  just,  or,  the  righteous, 
One. — Compare  iii.  14,  vii.  52 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18 ;  1  John  ii.  1. 

Ver.  15  declares  the  reason  why  God  had  revealed  Himself  to  Paul.  Compare  ix.  15,  and 
see  Gal.  i.  16.  All  men  takes  the  place  of  "  the  Gentiles  and  kings  "  in  Luke's  account  (ix. 
15)— probably  dictated  by  caution.  A  touch  which  a  late  writer,  composing  an  imaginary 
speech,  would  most  likely  have  failed  to  insert. 

Ver.  16.  For  the  name  of  the  Lord  the  oldest  authorities  read  His  name. 
Ver.  17.  Begins  the  third  portion  of  the  defence.  When  I  was  come  again  to  Jerusalem. — 
This  visit  to  the  Metropolis,  which  occurred  at  least  three  years  after  his  conversion  (ix.  26), 
and  lasted  fifteen  days  (Gal.  i.  18),  is  connected  with  the  story  of  his  conversion  (overleaping 
all  that  happened  in  the  interval),  to  show  why  he  turned  to  the  Gentiles  with  his  gospel, 
rather  than  to  the  Jews.  The  trance  into  which  he  fell,  while  praying  in  the  temple,  resembles 
Peter's  in  the  house  of  the  Joppa  tanner  (x.  10). 

Ver.  18.  In  the  trance  he  saw  him — i.e.,  Christ,  the  righteous  One  (ver.  14).  This  vision 
not  the  same  as  that  referred  to  in  2  Cor.  xii.  2.  Quickly. —  Perhaps  accounts  for  the  fifteen 
days  of  Gal.  i.  18.  That  this  vision  is  not  mentioned  in  the  epistle  need  not  militate  against 
its  credibility.    Thy  testimony. — Better,  testimony  of  or  from  thee  concerning  me. 

Ver.  19.  The  reply  of  Paul  cannot  be  explained  after  the  analogy  of  Exod.  iii.  11,  but 
must  be  understood  as  stating  either  why  it  was  natural  that  the  Jews  should  not  listen  to 
him  (Ewald),  or  why  he  should  remain  in  Jerusalem — because  the  knowledge  his  countrymen 
had  of  his  previous  notorious  character  would  convince  them  of  the  sincerity  of  his  conversion 
(Lechler,  Wendt,  Bethge),  and  cause  his  words  to  carry  greater  weight  (Hackett,  Alford, 
Plumptre),  or  because  he  wished  to  undo  the  mischief  he  had  formerly  wrought  (Alford). 
Another  view  sees  in  the  reference  to  Paul's  earlier  career  a  reason  why  his  mission  should 
be  carried  on  at  a  distance  from  the  theatre  of  his  former  deeds  (Holtzmann).  Thy  martyr 
should  be  thy  witness. 

461 


chap.  xxii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Ver.  21.  I  will  send  thee  far  hence  to  the  Gentiles. — The  school  of  Baur  and  Holtzmann 
finds  in  this  supernatural  authorisation  of  Paul's  Gentile  mission  an  artificial  (but  why 
artificial  ?)  parallel  to  that  of  Peter  in  xi.  5-17.  That  both  were  divinely  authorised  presents 
no  difficulty  to  those  who  accept  the  historic  verity  of  the  narrative. 

Ver.  22.  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from  the  earth.— As  in  xxi.  36.  It  is  not  fit.  Better,  it 
was  not  Jit  that  he  should  live. — Meaning  that  he  bad  long  ago  forfeited  his  life. 

Ver.  23.  Cast  off  their  clothes. — Not  in  preparation  for  stoning  him,  as  in  vii.  58  (Meyer, 
Zockler),  which  would  have  been  futile,  seeing  he  was  now  in  the  custody  of  the  Romans 
(Alford),  but  for  the  same  reason  that  they  threw  dust  into  the  air— not  as  a  prelude  to 
stone-throwing,  but  as  an  expression  of  their  rage,  and  as  an  indication  of  what  they  would 
willingly  have  done  to  him,  had  they  been  able  (Lechler,  Holtzmann). 

Ver.  24.  That  ye  might  know.— Presumably  the  military  tribune  had  not  understood  the 
apostle's  speech,  and,  desirous  of  ascertaining  the  cause  of  such  an  ebullition  of  wrath 
against  his  prisoner,  commanded  him  to  be  fetched  into  the  castle  and  examined  by 
scourging. 

Ver.  25.  As  they. — I.e.,  the  soldiers  entrusted  with  this  duty.  Bound. — Or,  when  they  had 
tied  him  up  (R.V.),  with  thongs  (Luther,  Alford,  Wordsworth,  Plumptre).  A  different  trans- 
lation gives,  when  they  stretched  him  forth  and  so  made  him  ready  for  the  thongs  (De 
Wette,  Meyer,  Lechler,  Spence,  Zockler,  Holtzmann),  by  binding  him  or  tying  him  up  to  a 
post.  Is  it  lawful  ?— Two  wrongs  were  about  to  be  committed.  (1)  The  apostle  was  about 
to  be  scourged,  being  a  Roman — which  Roman  law  (Lex  Porcia ;  see  Livy,  x.  9 ;  Cicero, 
Verr.,  v.  63)  disallowed ;  and  (2)  to  be  punished  before  being  condemned — which  equally 
Roman  statute  forbade  (see  on  xvi.  37). 

Ver.  26.  Take  heed  (omitted  by  best  authorities)  what  thou  doest. — Or,  What  are  you  about 
to  do  ? 

Ver.  27.  Tell  me. — The  military  tribune  wished  to  know  whether  the  centurion's  report 
was  correct. 

Ver.  28.  With  a  great  sum  had  Lysias  obtained  Roman  citizenship.  Hence  he  is  supposed 
to  have  been  a  Greek.  "  Augustus  was  very  sparing  in  conferring  the  freedom  of  the 
city;  but  the  succeeding  emperors  were  more  liberal"  (Adam's  Roman  Antiquities,  p.  38). 
"  In  the  reign  of  Claudius  Messalina  used  to  sell  the  freedom  of  the  city,  and  at  various 
prices  at  different  times ';  (Alford).  How  Paul  came  to  be  free  (or  a  Roman)  born  can  only 
be  conjectured.  As  Tarsus  was  simply  an  urbs  libera  and  neither  a  Colonia  nor  a  Municipium, 
his  father  or  some  ancestor  may  have  obtained  his  citizenship  either  as  a  reward  for  dis- 
tinguished service  or  by  purchase. 

Ver.  29.  The  military  tribune  was  afraid  both  because  Paul  had  been  bound  (for  scourging) 
which  he  ought  not  to  have  been,  being  a  Roman,  and  because  he  had  been  bound  before 
being  condemned.  "Facinus  est- vinciri  civem  Romanum,  scelus  verberari,  parricidum 
necari "  (Cicero,  Verr.,  v.  66). 

Ver.  30.  The  best  authorities  omit  from  his  bands.  These  were  the  fetters  originally 
placed  upon  him  (xxi.  33).  Down  means  from  the  castle  to  the  chamber  where  the  Sanhedrim 
were  assembled.  This  chamber,  there  is  reason  to  believe,  was  not  their  accustomed 
place  of  meeting,  the  Hall  Gazith,  or  the  hall  of  hewn  stone,  an  apartment  in  the  inner 
temple,  since  Lysias'  soldiers  would  not  have  been  allowed  to  enter  so  sacred  a  place,  but 
a  room  in  the  city  near  the  Tyropgean  bridge  to  which  tradition  says  they  removed  their 
sittings  forty  years  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  or  about  twenty-six  before  the 
events  here  recorded. 

Note. — The  preceding  speech  to  the  Jewish  people  has  been  by  Baur  {Paul,  his  Life  and 
Works  A- 121,  E.  T.),  and  Zeller(Z)i<?  Apostelgeschichte,  pp.  280,  281)  pronounced  an  invention 
of  the  author  of  Acts  on  the  following  grounds:  1.  The  unlikelihood  of  Lysias  having  granted 
liberty  to  so  dangerous  a  character  as  he  imagined  Paul  to  be  to  address  the  fanatic  mob 
that  swarmed  round  the  castle  stairs.  2.  The  unlikelihood  of  the  crowd  having  listened 
so  long  in  silence  to  a  man  whom  already  they  had  adjudged  to  be  worthy  of  death ; 
and,  3.  The  unlikelihood  of  the  speech  having  been  interrupted,  like  that  of  Stephen,  before 
the  Sanhedrim,  and  like  that  of  Paul  before  the  Areopagus,  at  a  certain  point.  But  waiving 
the  obvious  answers  that  these  objections  are  too  subjective — are,  in  fact,  not  criticism,  but 
mere  arbitrary  suppositions — it  may  be  urged,  with  reference  to  the  first,  that  even  the  worst 
of  criminals  are  allowed  to  speak  in  their  own  defence  ;  that  Lysias  did  not  know  what  sort 
of  speech  Paul  intended  to  make,  and  may  have  imagined  that  Paul  would  only  utter  a  few 
words;  and  that  Paul  having  commenced  his  oration,  Lysias  may  have  been  too  deeply 
interested  in  what  he  heard  to  think  of  recalling  his  permission.  As  regards  the  second,  the 
silence  of  the  multitude  is  satisfactorily  explained  by  the  statement  that  Paul  addressed 
them  in  Hebrew,  and  by  the  tenor  of  Paul's  speech,  which  throughout,  until  the  mention  of 
the  Gentiles  was  reached,  contained  nothing  to  ruffle  their  tempers.  For  the  third  it  should 
suffice  to  reply  that,  if  the  speech  was  to  be  interrupted  at  all  it  could  not  fail  to  be 

462 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxn. 


interrupted  "  at  a  certain  point";  while  a  glance  at  the  three  speeches,  of  Stephen  before 
the  Sanhedrim,  of  Paul  before  the  Sanhedrim,  and  of  Paul  again  before  the  Jewish  people, 
will  show  that  the  cause  of  interruption  was  different  in  each :  in  Stephen's  the  accusation 
of  the  Sanhedrim  as  the  murderers  of  Jesus  (vii.  52)  ;  in  Paul's  Areopagus  oration,  the 
mention  of  Jesus  and  the  resurrection  (xvii.  32);  in  the  present  speech,  the  emphasising  of 
his  mission  to  the  Gentiles  (ver.  21,  22).  So  far  from  suggesting  systematic  invention,  these 
variations  confirm  the  genuineness  and  historicity  of  all  three  speeches. 

HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS. —Verses  1—5. 

PauVs  Survey  of  His  Past  Career  ;  or,  What  He  Was  and  Did  hefore  Conversion. 

I.  His  birth. — 1.  As  to  race.  He  was  not  an  Egyptian  (xxi.  38),  as  the  com- 
mander of  the  castle  supposed,  neither  a  Greek  nor  a  Roman,  but  a  Jew,  a  true 
son  of  Abraham  (Rom.  xi.  4),  "  of  the  stock  of  Israel,  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  an 
Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews  "  (Phil.  iii.  5).  Whatever  other  nations  thought  of  the 
Jews,  the  Jews  had  exalted  opinions  of  themselves,  as  the  very  salt  of  the  earth, 
the  flower  and  cream  of  humanity.  To  them  pertained  "  the  adoption,  and  the 
glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of  the  Law,  and  the  covenants  of  God 
and  the  promises  "  (Rom.  ix.  4).  If  race  is  not  everything  in  a  man's  make-up, 
still  less  is  it  nothing.  Heredity  goes  back  beyond  immediate  parentage  to  the 
family  stock,  and  has  its  roots  in  the  original  race.  The  Jewish  race  was 
physically  pure,  intellectually  high,  and  religiously  strong.  2.  As  to  place.  A 
native  of  Tarsus,  in  Oilicia  (see  on  ix.  30),  and  therefore  a  citizen  of  no  mean  city 
(xxi.  39).  This  circumstance  explained  his  knowledge  of  Greek  (xxi.  37),  his 
acquaintance  with  Greek  literature  (xvii.  28),  and  his  strong  sympathy  with  the 
Gentiles,  and  fitted  him  in  an  eminent  degree  for  his  life  vocation  as  a  missionary 
of  the  cross  to  the  Gentiles.  The  place  in  which  a  man  is  born,  no  less  than  other 
factors  in  his  terrestial  environment,  contributes  important  influences,  which  go 
to  shape  his  career  and  mould  his  character.  Most  men  owe  more  to  their  birth- 
places than  they  suppose.  The  spot  in  which  a  man  first  awakes  to  consciousness 
has  the  earliest  and  therefore  the  best  chance  of  making  an  impression — favour- 
able or  unfavourable — upon  his  susceptible  nature. 

II.  His  education. — 1.  His  university.  Jerusalem.  Though  doubtless  his 
training  commenced  at  home  in  Tarsus,  he  appears  to  have  at  an  early  period 
removed  to  the  metropolis  of  Judaea,  where  (this,  of  course,  is  pure  conjecture)  his 
sister  (xxiii.  16)  may  have  preceded  him  along  with  her  husband.  To  this  bis 
parents  may  have  assented,  both  because  of  the  hallowed  interest  which  to  every 
pious  Jew  gathered  round  the  Holy  City,  and  because  of  some  promise  of  brilliant 
talent  which  may  have  been  detected  in  his  opening  youth.  2.  His  teacher. 
Gamaliel  (see  on  ver.  34),  who  belonged  to  the  school  of  Hillel,  and  had  appa- 
rently great  influence  in  the  Sanhedrim  (ver.  40).  The  Hillelites,  who  had  been 
trained  by  their  master  to  be  both  tolerant  and  broad,  sometimes  verging  towards 
laxity,  were  supposed  to  be  more  favourably  disposed  towards  Christianity  than 
the  Shammaites.  3.  His  learning.  In  the  Law,  which  he  was  taught  to  regard 
with  (1)  religious  respect  as  the  Law  of  God,  and  therefore  charged  with  absolute 
authority;  (2)  profound  veneration,  as  the  Law  of  the  fathers — i.e.,  given  to  the 
fathers  of  Israel  (not  to  the  sons,  as  modern  criticism  teaches  !) ;  and  (3)  dutiful 
submission  as  the  law  of  righteousness,  which  called  for  the  strictest  obedience 
to  its  every  jot  and  tittle  as  the  only  means  of  attaining  to  salvation  and 
eternal  life. 

III.  His  zeal. — 1.  Its  nature.  It  was  zeal  for  the  Law,  for  its  outward 
observance,  for  the  external  performances  it  required,  "  the  meats  and  drinks, 
and  divers  washings,"  "the  sacrifices  and  offerings,"  "the  ordinances  and 
statutes,"  "  the  rites  and  ceremonies,"  it  prescribed.  In  regard  to  all  these  he 
was  a  Pharisee  by  descent  (xxiii.  6),  by  training  (xxvi.  5),   and  by  conviction 

463 


chap.  xxii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


(Phil.  iii.  6).  2.  Its  object.  To  secure  the  Divine  favour.  He  was  zealous  for  God 
— i.e.,  his  zeal  for  the  Law  rested  on  the  conviction  (1)  that  the  Law  was  of  Divine 
origin  and  therefore  binding  on  the  consciences  of  men,  and  especially  of  Jews, 
and  (2)  that  obedience  to  its  prescriptions  was  the  only  way  of  attaining  to 
Divine  favour.  3.  Its  degree.  He  was  as  intense  in  his  devotion  to  the  Law  and 
to  God  as  they  themselves  were  who  then  gnashed  their  teeth  against  him  and 
cried,  "  Away  with  him  !  "  Indeed,  as  touching  the  righteousness  of  the  Law,  he 
claimed  to  be,  like  themselves,  blameless  (Phil.  iii.  6) — a  fine  touch  of  conciliating 
speech  ! 

IV.  His  persecution. — 1.  Its  object.  Directed  against  the  Christians,  the 
people  of  "  this  way,"  both  men  and  women.  He  then  did  what  they  were  doing 
now.  2.  Its  character.  Ferocious,  bloodthirsty,  murderous.  Not  satisfied  with 
scattering  the  disciples  of  the  Crucified  from  the  Holy  City,  he  caused  them  to  be 
arrested  and  thrown  into  prison,  without  respect  to  age  or  sex ;  and  as  if  that 
were  not  enough,  he  pursued  them  even  unto  death.  Yerily  he  had  then  been  "  a 
ravening  wolf  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin."  3.  Its  notoriety.  This  thing  had  not 
been  done  in  a  corner.  The  high  priest  of  the  day  (probably  alive  when  Paul 
spoke)  and  "  all  the  estate  of  the  elders,"  or  "  the  whole  presbytery  " — i.e.,  the 
entire  body  of  the  eldership,  including  the  Sanhedrim  and  Senate — were 
cognisant  of  his  activity  and  eminence  in  this  respect.  He  had  then  been  "  a 
burning  and  a  shining  light,"  a  renowned  champion  of  the  faith,  a  kind  of 
Hebrew  Sir  Galahad,  who  could  have  boasted — 

"My  good  blade  carves  the  casques  of  men, 
My  tough  lance  thrusteth  sure ; 
My  strength  is  as  the  strength  of  ten, 
Because  my  heart  is  pure." 

4.  Its  extent.  Not  content  with  cleansing  Jerusalem,  or  even  the  Holy  Land,  of  the 
apostates,  as  he  believed  them  to  be,  he  had  swooped  down  upon  them  in  distant 
Damascus,  bearing  with  him  missives,  mandates,  warrants,  from  the  high  priest 
and  the  Sanhedrim,  empowering  him  to  arrest  them  in  the  synagogues  of  that 
city,  and  fetch  them,  bound,  to  Jerusalem  to  be  punished. 

Learn — 1.  The  accuracy  of  Paul's  life-story  as  narrated  by  Luke.  2.  The 
vividness  of  Paul's  recollection  of  his  early  years.  3.  The  courage  of  the  apostle 
in  making  known  to  his  countrymen  the  fact  of  his  renunciation  of  their  ancient 
faith.  4.  The  skill  of  the  apostle  in  speaking  so  as  to  disarm  the  suspicions  of 
his  enemies.  5.  The  mistaken  and  disastrous  course  to  which  one  may  be  led 
who  is  impelled  by  a  zeal  for  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge  (compare 
xxvi.  9  ;  Rom.  x.  2X 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  1,2.  The  Qualities  Requisite 
for  a  Christian  Orator. 

I.  A  spirit  of  courage. — Not  of  defi- 
ance or  arrogance,  but  of  calm  fortitude 
which  fears  not  man — neither  his  flat- 
teries nor  his  frowns,  neither  his 
threatenings  nor  his  bribes — but  rests 
on  God  as  its  support  in  the  wildest 
hurricanes  of  human  passion  and  in 
the  most  alarming  dangers.  Such 
fortitude  Paul  possessed  when  he  faced 
the  mob  from  the  castle  stairs. 

4  64 


II.  A  spirit  of  meekness.— Not  of 

cringing  servility  or  of  fawning  adula- 
tion— neither  of  mock  humility  nor 
of  affected  self-depreciation,  but  of 
genuine  self-forgetfulness,  which  over- 
looks all  the  faults  and  failings  of  its 
hearers,  and  makes  nothing  of  their 
want  of  consideration  for  or  even 
injustice  towards  itself.  Such  meek- 
ness Paul  exhibited  when,  "  though  he 
had  none  but  persecutors  and  mur- 
derers before  him,  he  yet  regarded  and 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxn. 


addressed  them  as  brethren  and  fathers, 
on  account  of  the  covenant  and  pro- 
mises of  God." 

III.  A  spirit  of  love. — Not  of  gush- 
ing sentimentality  or  of  sugared 
verbiage,  but  of  true,  manly,  and  reli- 
gious affection,  which  sees  in  those  it 
addresses  persons  who  are  men  and 
brethren,  of  the  same  flesh  and  blood, 
of  the  same  moral  and  religious  value 
in  the  eyes  of  heaven,  susceptible  of 
becoming  partakers  of  the  same  high 
blessings  of  salvation  and  eternal  life 
as  itself. 

IV.  A  spirit  of  simplicity. — Not  of 
triviality  or  frivolity,  but  of  holy  intelli 
gibility,  which  seeks  not  for  language 
that  will  dazzle  by  its  brilliance,  but 
for  speech  that  will  charm  by  its 
lucidity  and  easiness  of  comprehension. 

Vers.  3,  4.  True  Religion.  What  it 
is  not  and  what  it  is. 

I.  What  it  is  not. — 1.  Not  descert 
from  religious  ancestry.  Paul,  thou;  l 
the  son  of  a  Pharisee,  was  yet  not  po:  - 
sessed  of  true  religion.  Grace  does  not 
run  in  the  blood.  2.  Not  education  by 
pious  teachers.  Paul  sat  at  the  feet 
of  Gamaliel,  one  of  the  most 
learned  and  influential  rabbis  of  his 
day ;  yet  Paul  did  not  acquire  religion. 
Grace  is  not  the  product  of  culture  and 
training.  3.  Not  acquaintance  with  the 
letter  of  the  Scriptures.  Paul,  tho- 
roughly instructed  in  the  law  of 
Moses,  both  moral  and  ceremonial, 
was  yet  not  religious.  Grace  is  some- 
thing more  than  mental  illumination. 
4.  Not  zeal  in  the  performance  of  reli- 
gious duties.  Paul  was  so  devoted  to 
the  outward  rites  and  ceremonies  of 
religion,  and  so  absorbed  in  the  pursuit 
of  what  he  believed  to  be  "  righteous- 
ness," that  he  could  without  hesitation 
describe  his  conformity  to  the  law  as 
"  blameless  "  ;  and  yet  he  was  destitute 
of  religion,  Grace  is  not  a  matter  of 
mere  external  performance.  5.  Not 
activity  in  promoting  and  defending  the 
faith.  Paul  had  both,  and  yet  was 
without  religion.  Grace  is  not  of 
works. 

II.  What  it  is. — The  ex  ict  opposite 


of  all  these.  1.  It  is  conditioned  by 
a  new  or  second  birth — a  birth  from 
above  (John  iii.  3).  What  Paul  calls 
a  new  creation  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  2.  It  is 
promoted  by  being  taught  of  the  Spirit 
(John  xiv.  26),  or  taught  by  Jesus 
Christ  (Eph.  iv.  21).  3.  It  is  nourished 
by  a  spiritual  acquaintance  with  the 
Scriptures  (John  vi.  63).  4.  It  con- 
sists in  an  inward  conformity  of  the 
soul  to  the  requirements  of  God's  law 
(Rom.  vii.  22).  5.  It  shows  itself  in 
a  sincere  desire  to  extend  the  faith — 
not  by  force  of  arms,  but  by  the  power 
of  the  truth. 

Vers.  3-5.  The  Promising  but  Dis- 
appointing Youth  of  Paul. 

I.  The  magnificent  advantages  he 
enjoyed. — 1.  In  his  parentage.  Having 
been  born  of  Jewish  parents,  members 
of  the  noblest  and  most  religious  race 
then  on  earth.  2.  In  his  birthplace. 
In  Tarsus,  where  he  came  in  contact 
with  the  civilisation  and  culture  of  the 
most  intellectual  people  of  the  Old 
World.  3.  In  his  education.  Brought 
up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  the  most 
renowned  teacher  of  the  day.  4.  In 
his  religious  instincts.  Instructed  ac- 
cording to  the  strict  manner  of  the  law 
of  his  fathers,  he  was  inwardly  fired 
with  a  zeal  for  God  and  religion  which 
gave  promise  of  splendid  results  in  after 
years. 

II.  The  miserable  results  he  pro- 
duced.— 1.  In  the  blind  legalism  of 
his  religion.  One  would  almost  have 
expected  that  a  youth  of  culture 
and  ability  like  Paul  would  have 
soared  away  far  above  and  beyond  the 
dead  externalism  of  the  Pharisa'c 
circle  in  which  he  had  been  born  and 
brought  up.  2.  In  the  feline  cruelty 
of  his  disposition.  One  would  have 
thought  that  so  much  education  as 
Paul  had  received  would  have  mollified 
rather  than  intensified,  blunted  rather 
than  whetted,  the  natural  savageism 
of  his  soul.  3.  In  the  low  conception 
of  his  life-mission.  One  might  naturally 
have  anticipated  that  a  brilliant  youth 
like  that  of  Paul's  would  have  been 
devoted  to  the  purifying  and  refining 

ii  h  465 


chap.  xxii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


of  his  ancestral  religion,  and  to  the 
propagation  of  it  by  means  of  learned 
and  eloquent  expositions.  Alas  !  it  so 
degenerated  as  to  place  its  splendid 
faculties  at  the  service  of  the  Sanhe- 
drim, to  be  employed  in  the  work  of 
a  common  persecutor  and  assassin. 
To  what  base  uses  noblest  souls  may 
come  ! 

Vers.  4,  5.  Paul  the  Persecutor ;  or, 
the  Spirit  of  Intolerance  in  Religion. 

I.  Whence  it  springs. — 1.  From  a 
wrong  conception  of  religion,  which 
cannot  ,be  manufactured  by  force,  and 
does  not  consist  in  mere  external  con- 
formity to  law  or  ritual,  but  must  ever 
arise  as  a  free  product  of  the  soul,  and 
consist  of  true  inward  submission  of 
the  heart  and  life  to  the  will  of  God. 
2.  From  a  mistaken  idea  of  human 
nature,  which  cannot  be  coerced  into 
such  submission,  but  must  be  sweetly 
persuaded  and  lovingly  wooed  to  yield, 
to  the  will  of  God.  3.  From  a  false 
estimate  of  the  rights  of  man.  While 
every  man  has  a  God-given  right  to 
think  for  himself  in  religion,  and  to 
persuade  his  neighbour,  if  he  can,  to 
think  along  with  him,  no  man  is 
entitled  to  dictate  to  his  brother  in 
the  sphere  of  conscience  or  punish  his 
brother  because  he  exercises  that 
liberty  of  which  he  has  been  put  in 
possession  by  God.  4.  From  a  defective 
calculation  of  the  value  of  persecution, 
which  never  yet  made  a  true  convert, 
though  it  has  multiplied  hypocrites  as 
well  as  created  martyrs. 

IT.  To  what  it  leads. — 1.  Suppres- 
sion of  all  the  nobler  instincts  of 
humanity.  On  the  part  of  the  per- 
secutor, and  not  infrequently  also  on 


the  part  of  the  persecuted.  It  lets 
loose  all  the  bad  passions  of  the  human 
heart,  both  in  those  who  resort  to 
violence  and  in  those  who  resist  it. 
It  puts  the  persecutor  down  to  the 
same  level  as  the  conspirator  and 
brigand,  murderer  and  assassin.  It 
rouses  within  the  persecuted  feelings 
which  are  the  opposite  of  meekness, 
gentleness,  patience,  long-suffering. 
2.  Perpetration  of  indiscriminate  cruelty. 
It  comm-jnly  shows  itself,  as  in  Paul's 
case,  to  be  absolutely  devoid  of  one 
grain  of  mercy,  to  be  destitute  of  pity, 
to  be  fierce  and  bloodthirsty,  sparing 
neither  sex  nor  age,  but  involving  all 
against  whom  it  rages  in  common  and 
undistinguished  slaughter.  In  short, 
it  is  the  minister  of  hell,  rather  than 
the  messenger  of  heaven.  3.  Ignomi- 
nious defeat  of  its  own  aims.  The  more 
a  cause  is  persecuted  the  more  it  multi- 
plies and  grows.  "The  blood  of  the 
martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church."  The 
religion  that  requires  a  sword  for  its 
propagation  is  not  from  above,  but 
from  beneath.  Its  final  failure  is 
foredoomed.  "  All  they  that  take  the 
sword  shall  perish  by  the  sword  "  is 
true  of  the  institutions  for  which,  as 
well  as  of  the  persons  by  whom,  the 
sword  is  wielded. 

Ver.  5.  Mistaken  Missions. 

I.  To  persecute  the  cause  and  the 
people  of  God. 

II.  To  propagate  true  religion  by 
means  of  force. 

III.  To  disseminate  error,  whether 
by  lawful  or  unlawful  means. 

IV.  To  run  on  any  errand  without 
a  certainty  of  having  Heaven's  per- 
mission. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  6—16. 

The  Story  of  Raid's  Conversion  ;  or  before  and  in  Damascus. 

I.  Before  Damascus;  or,  the  interview  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth. — 1.  The  cir- 
cumstantiality of  the  narration.  Different  from  that  of  Luke  (ix.  1-9),  the 
account  given  by  Paul  himself  bears  the  stamp  of  having  proceeded  from  an  eye- 
witness. (1)  Points  of  resemblance  between  Paul's  account  and  Luke's  may  be 
noted,  such  as  these :  the  fact  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  appeared  to  the  apostle, 
who  recognised  Him  by  His  voice  (ver.  8,  ix.  4),  and  by  His  form  (ver.  14, 
ix.  7) ;  the  locality  in  which  this  interview  took  place — viz.,  nigh  unto  Damascus 

466 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xxn. 


(ver.  6,  ix.  3) ;  the  manner  in  which  this  manifestation  of  the  risen  Christ 
occurred — suddenly,  by  the  flashing  forth  of  a  light  from  heaven,  which  struck 
the  apostle  to  the  ground  and  filled  his  companions  with  terror  (vers.  7,  9, 
ix.  4,  7) ;  the  words  addressed  by  Christ  to  Paul,  with  those  of  Paul  to  Christ — 
"  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  Me  ?  "  "  Who  art  Thou,  Lord  1 "  "I  am 
Jesus,  whom  thou  persecutest.  .  .  .  Arise,  and  go  into  the  city,  and  it  shall  be 
told  thee  of  all  things  which  are  appointed  for  thee  to  do"  (vers.  7,  8,  10, 
ix.  4,  5,  6) ;  the  effect  of  the  interview  upon  Paul,  rendering  him  blind  and 
requiring  him  to  be  led  by  the  hands  of  his  companions  into  Damascus  (ver.  11, 
ix.  8).  (2)  Points  of  difference  between  the  two  accounts  are  observable,  such  as 
the  note  of  time — "  about  noon  "  (ver.  6) ;  the  splendour  of  the  light — "  great  " 
(ver.  6) ;  the  characterisation  of  Jesus  as  "of  Nazareth  "  (ver.  8) ;  the  statements 
that  while  the  companions  of  Paul  saw  the  light  they  heard  not  the  voice  (ver.  9), 
and  that  what  blinded  Paul  was  "the  glory  of  that  light"  (ver.  11);  with  the 
omission  of  Luke's  addendum  that  Paul  was  three  days  without  sight,  and  did 
neither  eat  nor  drink  (ix.  9).  The  differences — all  of  which  are  immaterial — are 
obviously  such — both  in  details  added  and  those  omitted — as  might  naturally 
arise  between  two  reports  of  which  one  was  given  by  an  eyewitness  and  the  other 
by  a  historian.  2.  The  credibility  of  the  narration.  (1)  The  only  conceivable 
grounds  on  which  this  can  be  challenged  are  :  the  supernatural  character  of  the 
incident  related ;  the  excitable  character  of  the  apostle,  which  caused  him,  it 
may  be  contended,  to  impose  upon  himself,  and  to  say  he  had  beheld  as  external 
objects  what  were  only  illusions  of  the  mind  ;  the  varying  accounts  of  the 
incidents  contained  in  the  Acts  ;  and  the  fact  (if  it  is  a  fact)  that  Paul  never 
mentions  this  incident  in  his  epistles.  But  the  first  of  these  reasons  is  irrelevant, 
as  it  begs  the  question  in  debate.  The  second  is  only  true  to  this  extent,  that 
Paul,  by  his  own  confession,  had  visions  and  revelations :  that  Paul  was  subject 
to  illusions  or  delusions  is  not  borne  out  by  anything  in  his  character  or  history. 
The  third  may  he  conceded  without  admitting  that  these  variations  invalidate 
the  substance  in  which  all  the  three  accounts  agree.  The  fourth  can  hardly  be 
maintained  in  the  face  of  1  Cor.  ix.  1,  xv.  8;  Gal.  i.  16,  24  ;  1  Tim.  i.  13;  but 
even  should  Paul  have  preserved  absolute  silence  in  his  epistles  as  to  the 
interview  writh  Christ  before  Damascus,  that  silence  would  not  justify  an  infer- 
ence that  no  such  interview  had  occurred.  (2)  The  arguments  which  serve  to 
uphold  the  credibility  of  the  narrative  are  such  as  these  :  the  certainty  that 
Paul  was  converted  from  Pharisaism  to  a  belief  in  Jesus  Christ,  as  was  attested 
by  the  ferocity  with  which  the  Jews  persecuted  him  to  the  end  of  his  career — 
which  conversion  must  have  been  brought  about  by  some  adequate  cause ;  the 
constancy  with  which  Paul  asserted  that  his  conversion  was  due  to  having  seen 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — which  constancy  is  inexplicable  on  the  hypothesis  that 
Paul  was  the  victim  of  a  diseased  imagination ;  the  belief  which  was  entertained 
by  Paul's  Christian  contemporaries  that  Christ  had  appeared  to  him  (ver.  14) ; 
and  the  difficulty  of  discovering  any  motive  for  Paul's  preaching  that  Christ  had 
risen  if  it  was  not  a  fact  that  Christ  had  appeared  to  him — the  more  so  as  his 
conversion  to  Christianity  involved  him  in  unparalleled  labours  and  sufferings. 

II.  In  Damascus ;  or,  the  interview  with  Ananias. — Here  also  Paul's  account 
differs  from  that  of  Luke  in  subordinate  details,  while  agreeing  with  that  of 
Luke  in  substance.  1.  The  omissions  from  the  previous  narrative.  (1)  The 
residence  of  Paul  in  Damascus — with  one  Judas  in  the  street  called  Straight 
(ix.  13).  (2)  The  occupation  of  Paul  while  in  Judas's  house — praying,  with  the 
vision  granted  him  of  Ananias  coming  to  him  and  placing  hands  upon  his  closed 
eyes  (ix.  11,  12).  (3)  The  designation  of  Ananias  as  a  certain  disciple  (ix.  10). 
(4)  The  appearance  of  the  Lord  to  Ananias  in  a  vision  (ix.  10).  (5)  The  com- 
mission given  to  Ananias  by  the  risen  Lord  (ver.  11),  with  the  answer  returned 

467 


chap.  xxii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


by  Ananias  (ix.  13,  14),  and  the  Lord's  response  to  him  (ix.  15,  16).  (6)  The 
statement  that  Ananias  put  his  hands  on  Saul's  eyes  (ix.  17).  (7)  The  mention 
of  scales  as  having  fallen  from  Paul's  eyes  when  his  sight  was  restored  (ix.  18). 
Not  one  of  these  points  was  of  special  interest  to  the  audience  Paul  addressed 
from  the  castle  stairs,  or  of  any  use  for  the  purpose  for  which  Paul  addressed 
them.  2.  The  additions  to  the  previous  narrative.  (1)  The  character  of  Ananias, 
as  a  devout  man  according  to  the  Law,  and  well  reported  of  by  all  the  Jews  who 
dwelt  in  Damascus  (ver.  12).  This  was  signally  calculated  to  conciliate  Paul's 
hearers.  (2)  The  invitation  to  Paul  to  arise  and  be  baptised  (ver.  16).  The 
fact  that  this  invitation  proceeded  from  Ananias  was  also  fitted  to  disarm  the 
hostility  of  Paul's  enraged  countrymen.  3.  The  variations  in  the  two  narratives. 
These  appear  chiefly  in  the  address  of  Ananias  to  Paul  (vers.  13,  14,  ix.  17). 
In  particular,  the  substitution  of  "  the  God  of  our  fathers  "  as  the  real  author  of  his 
conversion,  instead  of  "  the  Lord,  even  Jesus,"  was  a  highly  politic  stroke  in  the 
circumstances  in  which  Paul  then  stood.  So  also  was  the  supplanting  of  the  term 
"  Gentiles  "  by  that  of  "  all  men."  Otherwise  the  two  addresses  substantially 
agree.  In  none  of  these  omissions,  additions,  or  variations,  lie  sufficient  ground 
for  impeaching  the  veracity  of  Paul's  account. 

Learn — 1.  That  two  reports  of  the  same  event  may  differ  in  details,  and  yet 
be  both  correct.  2.  That  Paul's  conversion  indirectly  confirms  the  truth  of 
Christ's  resurrection.  3.  That  Paul  regarded  his  Gentile  mission  as  a  vocation 
specially  assigned  to  him  from  the  first.  4.  That  "  the  instruments  which  are 
to  be  specially  useful  in  the  Church  must  be  ordained  in  heaven." 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  6.  Great  Lights  which  Shone 
around  Paul. 

I.  Light  upon  the  person  of  Jesus. 
—Henceforth  Paul  knew  him  to  be  the 
Lord  of  Glory. 

II.  Light  upon  the  character  of  the 
disciples. — Henceforth  Paul  recognised 
them  as  intimately  bound  with  and 
under  the  protection  of  Jesus. 

III.  Light  upon  the  wickedness  of 
his  own  past  career. — Henceforth  Paul 
saw  that  in  persecuting  the  adherents 
of  that  way  he  had  been  persecuting 
the  risen  Redeemer. 

IV.  Light  upon  his  future  work  in 
the  world. — Henceforth  Paul  under- 
stood he  was  to  witness  for  Christ  unto 
all  men. 

Ver.  7.  Christ's  Question  to  Saul. — 
"  Saul,  Saul !  why  persecutest  thou 
Me?" 

I.  What  it  implied. — 1.  The  con- 
tinued existence  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The 
cognisance  by  Christ  of  what  was 
taking  place  upon  the  earth.  3.  The 
right  of  Jesus  Christ  to  interfere  with 

468 


men's  actions  and  bring  men  themselves 
to  His  bar. 

II.  What  it  suggested.— 1.  That 
Christ  was  one  with  His  followers  upon 
earth,  so  that  what  affected  them,  in 
the  same  manner  affected  Him.  2.  That 
the  infliction  of  pains  and  penalties  on 
men  for  their  religious  opinions  was 
persecution.  3.  That  such  persecution, 
as  directed  against  Christ's  followers,, 
was  without  justification  or  excuse. 

Ver.  9.  Fighting  Against  God. 

I.  The    fighting  described. — How? 

1.  By  resisting  His  will  and  persisting 
in  sin  contrary  to  better  knowledge 
and    inner    conviction    (Exod.    v.    2). 

2.  By  rejecting  His  word,  and  relying 
upon  good  works  or  some  other  human 
contrivance  for  peace  of  mind  and  rest 
of  soul  (Acts  iv.  2).  3.  By  refusing 
His  way,  and  by  murmuring  against 
the  dispensations  of  His  providence 
(Rom.  viii.  28).  Let  us  nevermore 
strive  against  God  in  this  way  (Isa. 
Iv.  8).  4.  By  renouncing  His  work; 
or,  backsliding  from  His  service  (Jer. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xxn. 


viii.  5).  5.  By  reviling  His  Spirit,  or 
sinning  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  Not 
only  resisting  His  pleadings  (Acts 
vii.  51),  but  actually  reviling  His 
works  or  strivings  within  (Matt.  xii. 
31,  32). 

II.  The  folly  denounced.— Why  ? 
Why  is  it  folly,  or  why  should  we  "not 
fight  against  God"?  1.  Because  of 
God's  relation  to  man.  Man  were 
"  nothing  at  all  "  if  God  were  not  his 
"all  and  in  all."  Therefore:  (1)  As 
his  Creator.  Can  it  be  wise  for  man  to 
strive  against  his  Master  and  Maker? 

(2)  As  his  Benf actor.  Shall  the  force 
of  an  army  be  spent  against  the  base  of 
its  supplies?  (James  i.  17).  (3)  As  his 
Redeemer.  How  can  a  redeemed  soul 
rebel  against  its  Redeemer  ?  2.  Because 
of  man's  relation  to  God.  (1)  As  a 
sinner.  It  is  rash  presumption,  for  it 
i  aises  still  higher  the  wall  of  separation 
from  God.  (2)  As  a  son.  It  is  rank 
ingratitute,  for  the  heavenly  Father  is 
the  best  friend  to  the  children  of  men. 

(3)  As.  a  servant.  It  is  infatuation ;  as 
well  might  tl.3  clay  expect  to  prevail 
against  the  potter,  the  moth  against 
the  mountain,  or  the  lamp  against  the 
sun.  (4)  As  a  subject.  It  is  ripe  de- 
struction (Job  ix.  4 ;  Isa.xlv.  9,  xxvii.  4). 
— J.  G.  Boughter. 

Ver.  10.  What  shall  I  do,  Lord?— A 
question  for  all. 

I.  For  the  sinner. — What  shall  I  do, 
Lord,  when  thou  risest  up  to  judgment 
and  callest  me  to  account  for  my  trans- 
gressions ?  Answer :  "  Only  acknow- 
ledge thine  iniquity  and  return  unto 
Me." 

II.  For  the  anxious. — What  shall  I 
do,  Lord,  when  my  soul  is  rent  and  torn 
by  a  consciousness  of  guilt  and  sin  ? 
Answer  :  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved." 

III.  For  the  pardoned. — What  shall 
I  do,  Lord,  seeing  Thou  in  Thy  mercy 
hast  redeemed  and  forgiven  me? 
Answer  :  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord 
thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with 
all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength, 
and  with  all  thy  mind."  Thou  shalt 
"  glorify   God    in   thy   body   and    thy 


spirit,  which  are  His."    Thou  shalt  "  go 
and  work  to-day  in  My  vineyard." 

IV.  For  the  afflicted.— What  shall  I 
do,  Lord,  when  tossed  about  and 
tempted  ?  Answer  :  Thou  shalt  "  flee 
unto  Me  to  hide  thee." 

V.  For  the  dying. — What  shall  I  do, 
Lord,  when  my  strength  faileth  ;  when 
my  "  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  " 
is  being  dissolved  ;  when  I  am  sum- 
moned to  appear  before  Thy  judgment- 
seat  ?  Answer  :  "  Thou  shalt  put  thy 
trust  in  Me." 

Ver.  11.   The  Blinding  Glory. 

I.  The  light. — It  is  not  common 
light,  nor  does  it  operate  in  a  common 
way.  1.  It  is  light.  A  light ;  the 
light.  2.  It  is  a  great  light.  It  was 
beyond  the  brightness  of  the  sun.  Noon 
was  to  it  as  midnight.  3.  It  was  a 
sudden  light.  It  did  not  slowly  dawn. 
It  blazed  suddenly,  but  it  remained  till 
God's  purpose  was  served.  4.  It  was  a 
spacious  light.  Not  like  a  star  or  sun, 
but  a  body  or  globe  of  light  compassing 
them  round  about,  as  on  the  transfigu- 
ration hill  (Acts  ix.  3,  xxii.  6,  xxvi.  13). 
5.  It  was  a  light  from  heaven.  It  was 
from  above,  not  from  beneath.  The 
history  of  that  light  is  the  Christology 
of  Scripture.  No  doubt  this  visible, 
physical  light  is  connected  with  a 
higher  and  more  spiritual  light.  The 
light  which  patriarchs  saw,  and  Paul 
saw,  was  but  a  symbol  of  somethirg 
more  glorious — the  light  of  the  know- 
ledge of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

II.  Its  effects. — The  narrative  pre- 
sents several  different  results  in  the 
case  of  Saul.  1.  It  blinds.  Paul  is 
struck  blind.  Blinded  by  light  !  The 
light  of  heaven  !  2.  It  illuminates.  It 
does  not  blind  in  order  to  destroy  the 
vision.  It  blinds  in  order  to  give 
clearer  eyesight.  3.  It  prostrates.  Saul 
is  stricken  to  the  ground.  The  vision 
is  overwhelming.  Man  cannot  stand 
before  it.  4.  It  bewilders.  It  was 
here  in  the  case  of  Saul  worse  than 
darkness,  in  the  bewilderment  pro- 
duced. He  needs  now  a  guide.  5.  It 
guides.     We  do  not  see  this  here,  but 

469 


chap.  xxii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


in  Saul's  after-history.  This  is  his 
lamp.  From  this  outward  operation  on 
men  we  learn  the  inward.  For,  doubt- 
less, there  were  both  these  co-operating 
in  the  case  of  Paul.  The  first  effect  of 
the  light  of  the  gospel  is  often  to  blind 
and  to  strike  down.  The  second  is  to 
enlighten,  and  to  lift  up,  and  to  heal. 
It  is  with  Divine  light  that  our  dark 
souls  must  come  into  contact.  Till 
this  takes  place  we  are  still  unrenewed  ; 
still  Sauls,  not  Pauls.  The  "  Lamb  " 
is  the  light  thereof. — H.  Bonar,  D.D. 

The  Glory  of  That  Light. 

I.  Its  supernatural  origin.  A  light 
from  heaven,  above  the  brightness  of 
the  sun. 

II.  Its  essential  character. — The 
dwelling  place  of  Jehovah,  the  material 
symbol  of  His  presence. 

III.  Its  mysterious  effects.  —  1. 
Eclipsing  all  natural  lights.  2.  Blind- 
ing all  ordinary  vision.  3.  Imparting 
inward  illumination. 

IV.  Its  permanent  duration. — Dis- 
appearing from  the  sky,  but  never 
withdrawing  from  the  soul — shining  in 
and  on  unto  eternal  day. 

Ver.  13.  The  Miracle  in  the  House  of 
Judas. — Or,  the  restoration  of  Paul's 
sight,  a  type  of  the  spiritual  miracle  of 
soul-illumination  which  takes  place  in 
the  hour  of  conversion. 

I.  It  proceeded  upon  one  who  was 
antecedently  blind. — This  goes  without 
saying.  So  does  the  inward  miracle  of 
soul-illumination.  Men's  souls  are 
naturally  darkened. 

II.  It  was  wrought  by  the  forth- 
putting  of  Divine  energy. — The  com- 
mand of  Ananias  was  really  the 
command  of  Christ.  Only  a  Divine 
power  can  illuminate  the  darkened 
souls  of  men. 

III.  It  came  upon  him  as  a  free  gift 
from  Jesus  Christ. — "  Brother  Saul ! 
receive  thy  sight."  So  is  inward  soul- 
illumination  all  of  grace. 

IV.  It  was  followed  by  instanta- 
neous results. — In  that  hour  Paul  re- 
ceived his  sight  and  looked  up.  So  when 
God  speaks  the  soul  sees — not  until. 

470 


Ver.  12,  13.  Soul-Ministry — 

I.  Should  be  entrusted  only  to  good 
men.     Like  Ananias. 

II.  Can  only  rightly  be  performed  by 
sympathetic  hearts,  who  address 
their  patients  as  "  brothers." 

III.  Should  always  aim  at  the  trans- 
lation" of  such  a  one  in  darkness  into 
God's  marvellous  light.  So  Ananias 
spoke  to  Saul :   "  Receive  thy  sight." 

IV.  Will  not  fail  if  undertaken  in 
humble  reliance  on  Christ's  grace. 
Paul  received  his  sight  and  looked  up. 

Ver.  14.  The  Qualifications  and  Work 
of  the  Christian  Minister. 

1.  His  qualifications. — 1.  A  know- 
ledge of  God's  will. — In  particular  so  far 
as  it  relates  to  the  salvation  of  sinful 
men.  2.  A  sight  of  the  Righteous  One 
I.e.,  a  personal  acquaintance  with  Jesus 
Christ,  in  His  character  and  saving 
offices.  3.  The  hearing  of  a  voice  from 
Christ's  mouth ;  i.e.,  the  consciousness 
of  an  inward  call  from  Christ  as  well  as 
a  distinct  message  put  into  his  mouth 
by  Him: 

IT.  His  work. — 1.  Its  nature — to  be 
a  witness  for  Christ.  2.  Its  limitation. 
"  Of  what  thou  hast  seen  and  heard." 
3.  Its  sphere.     "  Unto  all  men." 

The  Righteous  One. 

I.  Descriptive  of  the  character  of 
Christ. — See  iii.  14,  vii.  52;  1  Peter 
iii.  18  ;   1  John  ii.  1. 

II.  Suggestive  of  the  work  of  Christ. 
■ — Which  was  twofold.  1.  To  bring  in 
an  everlasting  righteousness  (Dan. 
ix.  24  ;  Bom.  iii.  22 ;  1  Cor.  i.  30 ; 
2  Cor.  v.  21).  2.  To  make  men  in- 
wardly righteous  (Bom.  viii.  4  ;  Eph. 
v.  9;'Phii:i.  11). 

III.  Prophetic  of  the  people  of 
Christ. — Who  shall  eventually  be  all 
righteous  (Isa.  Ix.  21 ;  1  Peter  iii.  12  ; 
1  John  iii.  7 ;  Bev.  xxii.  11). 

Voices  From  the  Mouth  of  Christ. 

I.  A  voice  for  the  unbelieving 
world. — "  Why  persecutest  thou  Me?  " 
(ver.  7)  All  unbelief  is  a  virtual  per- 
secution of  Christ. 

II.  A    voice    for    the    awakened 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.       CHAP.  XXII. 


sinner.  — "  Come  unto  Me  and  I   will  the  Lord. — Points  to — 1.  The  personal 

give  you  rest "  (Matt.  xi.  28).  existence   of    Jesus    Christ.      2.    The 

III.  A  voice  for  the    rejoicing  be-  character  of  Jesus  Christ  as  revealed  in 

liever. — "  Ye  shall  be  a    witness   for  the   gospel.      3.   The   work    of    J(  sus 

Me "  (i.  8).  Christ   as   expressed  in  His  names — 

Lord,  Jesus,  Christ. 

Ver.  16.  The  Washing  Away  of  Sin.         II.  The  import  of  calling  on  th.it 

I.  Effected  by  faith. — By  arising  and  name. — Implies — 1.  Belief  in  the  p  r- 
believing.  sonal      existence      of      Jesus      Christ. 

II.  Grounded  on  the  work  of  Christ.  2.  Trust  in  His  character  as  a  Divinely 
— Calling  on  His  name.  exalted  Saviour.     3.  Reliance  on   His 

III.  Symbolised  in  baptism. — "Be  redeeming    work  as    an   all-sufficient 
baptised,  and  wash  away  thy  sins."  ground  of  acceptance. 

III.  The  result   of  calling  on  the 

Calling  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  Lord's  name. — Salvation.     1.  Certain. 

I.  The  significance  of  the  name  of  2.  Full.     3.  Free.     4.  Final. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  17—21. 

Paul's  Adoption  of  a   Gentile   Mission ;  or,  His   Interview    with    Christ    in 
Jerusalem. 

I.  The  circumstances  connected  with  Christ's  appearing  to  the  apostle.  1.  The 
place  where  this  occurred.  (1)  Not  in  Damascus,  which  lay  outside  the  Holy 
Land,  but  in  Jerusalem,  its  metropolis  and  centre.  (2)  Not  in  some  obscure 
supper  room  while  associating  with  the  disciples,  but  in  the  temple  itself,  out  of 
which  they,  his  hearers  and  he,  had  just  come,  and  on  which  they  both  looked 
with  reverence.  (3)  Not  in  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  while  engaged  in  denounc- 
ing the  temple  worship,  in  which  they  supposed  he  was  now  constantly  occupied, 
but  in  the  court  of  the  women,  wThile  praying  like  themselves  in  accordance 
with  its  accustomed  ritual.  All  circumstances  calculated  to  gain  the  favour  of 
his  hearers,  or  at  least  disarm  their  hostility.  2.  The  time  when  this  occurre<  . 
After  his  return  to  Jerusalem,  which  took  place  three  years  subsequent  to  the 
day  of  his  leaving  it  for  Damascus  (ix.  26).  This  visit  is  that  referred  to  in 
Gal.  i.  18  as  having  continued  only  fifteen  days.  The  present  narrative  supplies 
the  reason  of  its  speedy  termination.  Thus  both  history  and  epistle  indirectly 
confirm  each  other.  3.  The  manner  in  which  this  occurred.  Paul  having  fallen 
into  a  trance  or  ecstasy,  as  Peter  in  similar  circumstances  had  done  in  Joppa 
(x.  10),  while  thus  withdrawn  from  the  contemplation  of  "  things  seen  and  tem- 
poral," with  his  soul's  eye  open  to  the  "  unseen  "  and  the  "  eternal,"  he  beheld 
again  the  same  glorified  form  which  he  had  seen  before  Damascus'  gate,  and 
recognised  it  as  that  of  his  exalted  Lord. 

II.  The  instruction  given  to  the  apostle  by  Christ,  whom  he  beheld.  1.  Tho 
tenor  of  it.  To  depart  from  Jerusalem  with  all  speed.  The  order,  which  wa  s 
clear,  short,  and  peremptory,  must  withal  have  been  surprising  and  painful  to 
Paul,  who  intensely  loved  his  countrymen  and  desired  their  salvation  (Rom. 
ix.  1-3,  x.  1),  and  who  doubtless  had  heard  that  Christ  Himself  once  commanded 
His  disciples  to  begin  at  Jerusalem  (Luke  xxiv.  47).  2.  The  reason  of  it. 
Because  his  countrymen  would  not  receive  from  him  testimony  concerning  Christ. 
This,  too,  must  have  sounded  sad  in  Paul's  ears  —  that  his  countrymen  would  not 
accept  testimony  concerning  Christ  from  any  one,  and  certainly  not  from  him. 
It  seemed  like  an  intimation  beforehand  that  Israel's  heart  was  hardened  and 
Israel's  doom  sealed.  Yet  his  experience  in  Jerusalem  (ix.  29)  must  have  begun 
to  prepare  him  for  some  such  announcement.  Only  love  is  slow  to  convince  that 
its  holy  purpose  to  bless  others  will  prove  ineffectual. 

471 


chap.  xxii.       HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


III.  The  objection  offered  by  Paul  to  Christ's  instruction.  The  exact  thought 
which  lay  in  the  apostle's  mind  is  difficult  to  determine  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ") ; 
but,  accepting  what  appears  the  more  probable  interpretation,  we  may  under- 
stand Paul  as  attempting  to  show  cause  why  he  should  be  allowed  to  remain  in 
Jerusalem.  1.  The  knowledge  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  Holy  City  possessed 
of  his  previous  character  as  a  persecutor  would  (he  believed)  dispose  them  to 
credit  the  sincerity  of  his  conversion,  and  lead  them  to  hear  what  he  had  to 
state  in  justification  of  his  tergiversation,  which  would  secure  him  the  opportunity 
of  testifying  concerning  the  transcendent  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection.  2.  The 
part  he  had  previously  taken  in  persecuting  the  disciples — as  witness  his  conduct 
in  connection  with  the  murder  of  Stephen — seemed  (in  his  eyes)  to  establish  a 
claim  for  Jerusalem  that  he  should  remain  within  its  precincts  and  endeavour  at 
least  to  undo  the  mischief  he  had  done. 

IV.  The  dismissal  intimated  by  Christ  to  the  apostle.  1.  Peremptory.  De- 
part !  Talk  no  more  of  remaining.  My  counsel  is  fixed.  Outside  Jerusalem  is 
henceforth  to  be  the  sphere  of  thy  labour.  Whether  My  grace  shall  ever  reach 
Jerusalem  or  not,  thou  art  not  to  be  the  channel  through  which  it  is  to  flow. 
2.  Deliberate.  Christ  had  other  work  prepared  for  His  servant.  "  I  will  send 
thee  far  hence  unto  the  Gentiles."  What  a  reminiscence  this  must  have  called 
up  in  Paul's  soul  (ver.  15,  ix.  15)  !  And  what  a  vista  it  must  have  opened  up 
before  his  spirit  ! — of  wanderings,  and  labours,  and  sufferings  ! 

Learn. — 1.  That  heaven  is  never  far  from  praying  souls.  Prayer  a  sort  of 
window  through  which  the  soul  looks  into  the  unseen,  and  the  unseen  shines  in 
upon  the  soul.  2.  That  Christ  knows  who  will  and  who  will  not  receive  God's 
testimony  concerning  Him.  3.  That  Christ's  ministers  are  not  so  good  judges  of 
the  spheres  of  labour  best  suited  for  them  as  Christ  is.  4.  That  the  evil  wrought 
by  Christ's  people  before  conversion  can  never  be  entirely  undone.  5.  That  men 
in  God's  sight  are  chargeable  with  the  evil  they  consent  to,  no  less  than  with  that 
they  commit. 


HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  1-21.  Pauls  Sketch  of  His  own 
Lije. — Or  how  a  servant  of  God  looks 
back  upon  the  course  of  his  own  life. 

I.  With  grateful  remembrance  of 
human  benefactors  (ver.  3). 

II.  With  penitent  confession  of  his 
own  erroneous  ways  (vers.  4,  5). 

III.  With  humble  praise  of  the 
Divine  gracious  dealings  (vers.  6-16). 

IV.  With  clear  consciousness  of  the 
life-call  allotted  to  him  (ver.  18-21.)  — 
Gerok. 

Paul's  First  Apology  ;  or,  his  speech 
to  his  countrymen  from  the  castle  stairs. 

I.  What  Paul  says  about  himself. — 
1.  Rehearses  the  character  of  his  early 
years.  (1)  Claims  to  have  been  a  good 
Jew,  by  birth,  education,  personal  be- 
lief, and  outward  devotion  (ver.  31  ; 
compare  Phil.  iii.  5).  (2)  Confesses  to 
have  been  a  zealous  persecutor.  Pe- 
minds   them   of    his   commission    and 

472 


mission  to  Damascus  (vers.  4,  5  ;  com- 
pare Phil.  iii.  6).  2.  Tells  the  story  of 
his  conversion.  (1)  Narrating  where  it 
happened,  near  Damascus;  when  it  hap- 
pened, "at  midday;"  how  it  happened 
— by  the  appearance  of  Jesus  Christ 
(vers.  6,  8).  (2)  Citing,  as  proof  that  it 
happened,  the  experience  of  his  fellow- 
travellers  (ver.  9)  and  the  action  of 
Ananias  (ver.  12) ;  and  (3)  mentioning, 
as  the  result  of  its  happening,  his  call 
to  be  an  apostle,  and  his  submission  to 
baptism  (vers.  15,  16).  3.  Explains 
the  origin  of  his  Gentile  mission. 
(1)  Stating  when,  where,  and  from 
whom,  that  mission  had  been  received 
(vers.  17,  18) ;  (2)  declaring  his  original 
reluctance  to  enter  upon  it  (vers.  19, 
20) ;  and  (3)  intimating  that  it  had 
been  practically  thrust  upon  him  by 
the  hand  of  Heaven  (ver.  21).  A  noble 
confession  :  that  his  whole  pre-Christian 
life,    though    learned,    religious,    and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxn. 


active,  had  been  wrong ;  that  it  had 
been  changed  by  a  higher  power  rather 
than  by  any  effort  of  his  own  ;  and 
that  his  Christian  life  had  begun  and 
was  being  directed  by  Jesus  Christ.  A 
difficult  confession  :  for  any  man,  but 
especially  for  an  intellectually  and  re- 
ligiously proud  Pharisee,  such  as  Paul 
was.  A  courageous  confession  :  to  be 
made  in  face  of  a  hostile  multitude  and 
by  a  man  who  was  at  the  moment 
under  arrest  for  a  supposed  crime.  A 
good  confession  ;  such  as  must  have 
brought  comfort  to  Paul's  own  heart 
and  secured  for  him  the  approbation 
and  support  of  his  Master. 

II.  What  Paul  testifies  about  Christ. 
— 1.  His  heavenly  glory  and  power. 
Paul's  hearers  imagined  that  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  was  dead  :  Paul  told  them 
He  was  alive.  They  fancied  Jesus  had 
been  overwhelmed  with  shame ;  he 
assured  them  Jesus  was  crowned  with 
celestial  glory.  They  conceived  Jesus 
had  been  rendered  for  ever  powerless ; 
he  reminded  them  that  Jesus  was  in- 
vested with  resistless  power.  They 
supposed  Jesus  had  been  only  a  man ; 
he  announced  to  them  that  Jesus  was 
God.  2.  His  felloivship  with  His  perse- 
cuted disciples  upon  the  earth.  How 
contemptuously  Paul's  hearers  looked 
upon  the  followers  of  that  way.  Paul 
had  formerly  done  the  same.  Now  he 
understood  and  intimated  to  his  hearers 
that  Christ  and  His  disciples  stood  in 
closest  intimacy  with  one  another — so 
much  so  that  what  was  done  to  them  He 
regarded  as  done  to  Himself.  3.  His 
grace  to  poor  sinners  of  the  human  race. 
Even  to  the  worst ;  to  himself,  for  ex- 
ample. Christ  showed  this  in  the  days 
of  His  flesh  by  pardoning  such  trans- 
gressors as  the  woman  of  the  city  and 
the  dying  robber;  after  His  resurrec- 
tion, by  commanding  the  eleven  to 
begin  at  Jerusalem ;  subsequent  to 
His  ascension  by  converting  Paul  and 
employing  him  as  an  apostle.  4.  His 
world-wide  plan  of  salvation.  Christ 
had  no  idea  of  restricting  His  gospel 
to  Palestine  or  the  Jews.  Nor  is  it 
His  mind  to-day  that  the  good  news  of 
Heaven's   mercy  should   be   published 


alone  in  Britain  or  in  Chiistendom. 
His  desire  is  that  the  gospel  should  be 
preached  among  all  nations  and  to 
every  creature  under  heaven. 

Ver.  17.  Paul  in  the  Temple  at 
Jerusalem. 

I.  What  he  did.  —  Prayed.  The 
temple  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  nations 
(Isa.  lvi.  7  ;  Matt.  xxi.  13  ;  Mark  xi.  1  ; 
Luke  xix.  46). 

IT.  What  he  saw. — Christ.  Who  is 
(1)  always  present  in  His  own  house 
(Psalm  cxxxii.  13,  14  ;  Matt,  xviii.  20), 
and  (2)  ever  near  to  the  praying  soul 
(Matt,  xxvhi.  20). 

III.  What  he  heard. — Voices  from 
the  risen  Christ  (1)  warning  him  of 
danger  (ver.  18);  (2)  instructing  him 
as  to  the  reasons  of  his  peril  (ver.  18) ; 
and  (3)  pointing  out  to  him  the  path  of 
duty. 

Vers.  19, 20.  GreatCrimesRemembered. 
I.  For  their  forgiveness. 
II.  For  self-humiliation. 

III.  For  a  stimulus  to  holy  living. 

IV.  For  attempts  at  their  undoing. 

Ver.  20.  Stephen  thy  Martyr  or 
Witness. — Christian  martyrs  are — • 

I.  Christ's  servants,  who  go  upon 
His  errands  to  the  world. 

II.  Christ's  witnesses,  who  proclaim 
His  gospel  to  mankind. 

III.  Christ's  friends,  in  whom  He 
takes  a  special  interest. 

IV.  Christ's  property,  whom  there- 
fore He  cannot  afford  to  lose.  Note  : 
"It  is  hardly  likely  that  the  sense  in 
which  we  understand  the  word  '  martyr' 
— viz.,  '  one  who  dies  for  his  religion,' 
belonged  as  yet  to  the  Greek  term 
ixdpTvs  or  fxaprvp.  It  would  there- 
fore be  more  strictly  accurate  to  render 
here  '  the  blood  of  thy  witness  Stephen.' 
But  there  is  little  doubt  that,  very 
early  indeed  in  the  Christian  story,  the 
to  us  well-known  sense  of  the  beauti- 
ful word  martyr  became  attached  to  it. 
Possibly  the  transition  from  the 
general  sense  of  witness  to  the  specific 
meaning  of  '  martyr  '  is  traceable  to 
its  use  in  such  passages  as  this  and 
Rev.  ii.  13,  xi.  3,  xvii.  6.,,—Spe?ice. 

473 


chap.  xxii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  22—29. 

The  Effect  of  Paul's  Oration  on  his  Audience;  or  his  Narrow  Escape  from 
Scourging. 

I.  The  impotent  rage  of  Paul's  hearers. — 1.  Their  sudden  interruption. 
From  the  beginning  of  this  speech  they  had  kept  on  listening  till  he  reached  the 
point  when  he  proceeded  to  talk  of  his  mission  to  the  Gentiles.  Then  their  sup- 
pressed wrath  could  no  longer  be  restrained  ;  they  stopped  his  defence  by  a 
simultaneous  yell.  2.  Their  fanatical  outcry.  "  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from 
the  earth,  for  it  is  not  fit  that  he  should  live."  What  let  loose  their  passion  was 
not  so  much  the  mention  of  the  word  "  Gentiles  "  as  the  idea  that  he  should  claim 
to  have  been  sent  by  Divine  authority  on  a  mission  to  the  Gentiles  rather  than 
to  the  Jews.  "  This,  to  the  fanatic  Jewish  mind,  was  a  startling  statement,  and, 
if  true,  would  at  once  remove  all  reason  for  their  jealousy  of  the  foreigner.  But 
could  it  be  true  that  the  long-expected  Messiah — the  peculiar  glory  of  the  chosen 
race — could,  in  their  own  proud  house  in  Jerusalem,  speak  to  this  man  from  His 
glory  thrcn3  in  heaven,  and  command  him  to  leave  his  own  city  and  people  and 
to  devote  himself  solely  to  the  uncircumcised  Gentiles  ?  Was  not  such  an 
assertion  of  itself  rank  blasphemy?  Could  King  Messiah  send  one — once  belong- 
ing to  their  own  strictest  sect  of  the  Pharisees — to  thesj  unconverted  heathen  to 
tell  them  that  the  Messiah,  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  was  equally  their  Messiah 
and  Redeemer  ?  One  who  could  say  such  things  was  surely  "  unworthy  to  live  " 
(Spence).  3.  Their  passionate  demonstration.  Shouting  with  still  more  vehement 
cries,  and  stripping  off  their  garments,  they  threw  dust  into  the  air — not  as  a 
preliminary  to  the  work  of  stoning,  since  Paul  now  was  in  the  hands  of  the 
Romans,  but  as  a  means  of  giving  vent,  in  Oriental  fashion,  to  their  uncontroll- 
able rage.     They  were  simply  beside  themselves  with  indignation  and  fury. 

II.  The  perilous  mistake  of  the  castle  captain.— 1.  In  commanding  Paid  to 
be  bound.  The  captain,  of  course,  was  not  aware  that  Paul  was  entitled  to  all 
the  privileges  of  a  Roman  citizen,  otherwise  he  would  have  hesitated  to  put 
bonds  on  him,  and  far  less  to  order  him  to  be  tied  up  for  scourging.  But  bound 
the  apostle  had  been  at  the  beginning  of  the  uproar  (xxi.  33),  and  now  he  was 
strapped  to  a  post  like  a  common  criminal  in  preparation  for  the  vilest  indignity 
that  can  be  put  upon  a  man  made  in  God's  image — for  being  whipped  like  a  dog 
(ver.  25).  2.  In  treating  Paul  like  a  prisoner  before  he  had  been  condemned.  Thii 
j'lso  offended  against  the  majesty  of  Roman  law,  which,  however,  regardless  of 
the  lives  of  slaves  and  evil-doers,  was  infinitely  jealous  of  the  liberties  and 
honours  of  those  who  had  attained  the  rank  of  citizens  in  the  great  com- 
monwealth.  No  wonder  the  centurion  grew  alarmed  when  he  learnt  that  his 
prisoner  was  a  civis  Pomanus,  and  as  little  that  this  alarm  communicated  itself 
to  the  captain  when  he  heard  the  exact  state  of  affairs  from  his  subordinate. 

III.  The  escape  of  Paul  from  the  indignity  of  scourging. — 1.  The  captain's 
conversation  with  Paid.  Astonished  at  the  report  brought  by  his  subordinate, 
the  commandant  of  the  castle  at  once  repaired  to  the  apostle's  presence  that  by 
asking  he  might  satisfy  himself  as  to  the  truth  of  Paul's  claim  to  be  a  Roman 
citizen.  Finding  that  Paul  adhered  to  the  assertion  of  his  citizenship,  the  captain 
expressed  surprise  that  one  in  apparently  so  destitute  circumstances  should  be 
possessed  of  a  privilege  which  he,  the  captain  himself,  had  procured  only  at  a 
great  price.  He  was  further  astonished  to  learn  that  Paul  had  been  free  born, 
although  nothing  escaped  Paul  as  to  how  this  had  come  to  pass.  If  some  sup- 
pose the  captain  rather  easily  and  quickly  accepted  the  apostle's  word,  it  needs 
only  to  be  remembered  that  Paul's  assertion  contained  nothing  in  itself  impro- 
bable, and  was  besides  of  such  a  sort — incurring  so  severe  penalties  if  found  to  be 

474 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xxil. 


false — that  no  one  would  readily  venture  to  make  it  unless  if  were  true  (see 
"  Critical  Remarks  ").  2.  The  captain's  order  to  the  centurion  and  his  guard*. 
Unstrap  the  apostle  from  the  whipping  post — which  they  did.  "  Straightway 
they  departed  from  him."  The  idea  of  examining  him  by  torture  they  aban- 
doned. That  the  fetters  with  which  Paul  had  been  first  bound  (xxi.  33)  were 
not  removed  is  apparent  from  the  statement  that  on  the  morrow  he  was  loosed 
(ver.  30). 

Learn. — 1.  The  fierce  hostility  with  which  men  always  and  everywhere  resent 
an  invasion  of  their  privileges.  The  Jews,  in  this  respect,  have  not  been  with- 
out successors,  even  among  Christians.  2.  The  fantastic  tricks  that  are  some- 
times played  by  men  "  dressed  in  a  little  brief  authority."  The  captain  was  not 
the  first  man  who  overrode  his  commission,  neither  has  he  been  the  last.  3.  The 
right  of  every  man  to  protect  himself,  by  all  lawful  means,  against  unnecessary 
and  unjust  suffering.  Paul's  sheltering  himself  behind  his  Roman  citizenship 
fell  under  this  category.  4.  The  value  of  Christian  citizenship,  which  can  be 
purchased  by  no  sum,  but  must  be  obtained  free,  and  which  can  shield  from 
clangers  greater  than  those  which  menaced  Paul.  5.  The  fear  which  all  men 
inwardly  have,  or  ought  to  have,  when  they  do  wrong. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.      22.     Some     Thoughts    about  in  the  time  of  Paul. — Both  men  of  the 

Preachers  and  their  Hearers.  world  (like  the  unbelieving  Jews)  and 

I.  Preachers  may  get  a  silent  hear-  members  of  the  Christian  Church  (like 

iug    from    their     audiences     without  many  Jewish  Christians)  are  opposed 

either  gaining  their  assent  or  making  to  sending  preachers  of  the  gospel  "  far 

on  them  any  deep  impression.    Preach-  hence  to  the  Gentiles." 
ers,  above  all  men,  should  guard  against  IT.  If  not  so  demonstrative  as   in 

judging  by  appearances.  Paul's   day,  perhaps   as  decided  and 

It.  Preachers   commonly   obtain   a  difficult  to  overcome. — The   cause   of 

respectful   hearing   from   their   audi-  missions   to    the   heathen    kindles    in 

ences  so  long  as  they  keep  on  prophe-  hearts   anger,    and  evokes  from  some 

sying   smooth    things.      The    moment  lips   words   of   hostile   denunciation — 

they  begin  to  touch  the  consciences,  or  exactly  now  as  then, 
challenge  the  privileges,  of  those  who  III.  As  unreasonable  in  our  day  as 

listen,  they  find  the  attitude  of  these  it  was  in  Paul's. — The  salvation  of  the 

change.  gospel  was  intended   for   all   nations, 

III.  Preachers  must  be  prepared  and  not  simply  for  those  presently 
for  hearing  themselves  denounced  by  within  the  pale  of  Christendom,  any 
their  hearers,  and  that  in  no  measured  more  than  it  was  exclusively  for  the 
terms.     Their  unpopularity  may  often  Jews. 

be  the  measure  of  their  fidelity.  IV,  As  culpable  in  our  day  as  it  was 

IV.  Preachers  may  warrantably  in-  in  Paul's,  if  not  more  so.  Consider- 
fer  they  are  doing  excellent  work,  and  ing  that  if  Paul,  being  a  Jew,  had 
speaking  true  words,  when  they  en-  acted  on  this  principle  Christianity 
counter  opposition  from  the  unbeliev-  had  never  reached  the  shores  of  Europe, 
ing,  worldly,  or  nominally  religious  and  far  less  of  Britain  ;  and  consider- 
among  their  hearers.  Preachers  ing  the  clearer  light  now  possessed  by 
should  beware  when  all  men  speak  the  Church,  as  to  the  world-wide  destiny 
well  of  them.  of  the  gospel,  and  of  its  fitness  to  bless 

mankind. 
Ver.     23.     Opposition     to    Foreign 
Missions.  Ver.  25.  "Is  it  laivful  to  scourge  a 

I.  As  much  a  fact  to-day  as  it  was      man    who    is   a   Roman    and    uncon- 

475 


chap.  xxii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


demned  ?  " — A  threefold  reminder — 

I.  Of  the  inalienable  rights  of 
men. 

II.  Of  the  sacred  honour  of  citizens. 

III.  Of  the  inviolable  dignity  of 
Christians. — Gerok. 

Ver.  27.  Roman  and  Heavenly 
Citizenship. — A  parallel  and  a  contrast. 

I.  The  parallel. — 1.  Both  might  be 
acquired  by  aliens.  2.  Both  might  be 
obtained  by  inheritance.  3.  Both 
conferred  great  privileges.  4.  Both 
ensured  complete  protection. 

II.  The  contrast. — 1.  Boman  citizen- 
ship now  a  thing  of  the  past ;  heavenly 
citizenship  a  thing  of  the  present. 
2.  Boman  citizenship,  at  the  best, 
temporal  and  earthly ;  heavenly  citizen- 
ship celestial  and  eternal.  3.  Boman 
citizenship  might  be  obtained  for 
money;  heavenly  citizenship  can  be 
purchased  by  no  price.  4.  Boman 
citizenship  conferred  social  and  political 
privileges;  heavenly  citizenship  privi- 
leges that  are  spiritual  and  religious. 
5.  Boman  citizenship  protected  the 
body  ;  heavenly  citizenship  protects  the 
soul. 

Ver.  28.  This  Citizenship  ;  conjoined 
with  Bhil.  hi.  20,  Our  Citizenship  ;  or, 
the  superiority  of  the  Christian  citizen- 
ship. 

I.  Its  dignity  is  greater. — No  need 
to  disparage  or  depreciate  Boman 
citizenship.  In  Paul's  day  Boman 
citizenship  was  undoubtedly  a  great 
thing,  an  object  worthy  of  being 
aspired  after  by  persons  of  highest 
rank.  Foreigners  counted  it  a  signal 
honour.  Just  as  to-day  to  be  a  citizen 
of  Great  Britain  is  reckoned  a  higher 
dignity  than  to  be  the  subject  of  any 
other  kingdom  or  empire  on  earth. 
Yet  even  this  is  nothing  when  com- 
pared with  being  a  citizen  of  heaven 
whose  sovereign  is  the  King  of  kings, 
whose  vicegerent  is  the  Lord  of  glory, 
whose  ministers  are  angels,  whose  laws 
are  righteousness  and  truth,  whose 
revenues  are  the  resources  of  the 
universe,  whose  mission  is  to  bless 
mankind,  whose  influence  is  always  on 

476 


the  side  of  peace  and  love,  whose 
subjects  are  in  one  sense  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth,  in  another  the  whole 
family  of  the  redeemed,  and  whose 
dominion  shall  be  one  day  universal. 

II.  Its  immunities  are  larger. — 
Writers  on  Boman  antiquities  report 
that  the  rights  and  privileges  of  Boman 
citizens  were  large  and  varied — in- 
cluding liberty,  family,  marriage, 
fatherhood,  property,  willing  and  in- 
heriting, tutelage  and  wardship  (see 
Adams'  Roman  Antiqiiities,  pp.  39  ff.). 
Yet  the  privileges  of  our  citizenship 
surpass  these.  1.  Sonship.  Not  merely 
subjects  or  servants,  but  children  of 
the  Great  King  (see  Gal.  hi.  26 ; 
Eph.  ii.  19;  1  John  hi.  2).  2.  Ac- 
ceptance. Not  regarded  as  enemies, 
but  considered  as  friends  (Eph.  i.  6 ; 
Bom.  viii.  1).  3.  Liberty,  Free  use 
of  all  our  powers  in  the  service  of 
God  (2  Cor.  hi.  17  ;  Gal.  v.  1  ;  James 
i.  25).  A  Boman  citizen  might  be 
sold  as  a  slave ;  not  so  a  citizen  of 
heaven.  4.  Protection.  Roman  citizen- 
ship did  not  shield  from  ordinary  ills ; 
nor  does  Christian  citizenship.  Yet 
this  defends  the  soul  lest  it  should  be 
hurt  by  these  (Bom.  viii.  28 ;  1  Peter 
iii.  13).  5.  Property.  Bomans  dis- 
tinguished between  common  and 
private  property.  So  are  certain 
things  common  to  Christian  citizens, 
as  the  common  salvation  and  the 
common  means  of  grace;  and  other 
things  private  possessions,  as  special 
gifts  and  graces.  6.  Family.  Boman 
citizens  (originally)  could  not 
abandon  the  family  to  which  they 
belonged,  a  restriction  which  has 
perpetuated  itself  in  the  modern  idea 
of  caste.  Corresponding  to  this, 
Christians  belong  to  God's  family,  and 
are  not  at  liberty  to  leave  it,  though 
others  may  pass  into  it.  7.  Heirship. 
A  Boman  citizen  could  will  and  in- 
herit. A  citizen  of  heaven  cannot 
will,  but  shall  inherit  (Bom.  viii.  17  ; 
Bev.  xxi.  7). 

III.  Its  terms  are  easier. — Boman 
citizenship  could  be  secured  in  two 
ways :  by  birth  or  by  purchase. 
Christian  citizenship  so  far  resembles 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chai\  xxm. 


that  of   Rome,  that  it  too  may,  and  3).     2.  By  purchase.      Only   it    must 

indeed,  must,   be  obtained  in  both  of  be  without  money  and  without  price, 

these   ways.     1.  By   birth.     Only  not  Citizenship  in  heaven  cannot  be  bought 

physical,    but    spiritual.     ISTo    man    a  and  sold  in  earth's  markets,  but  must 

child  of   God,   a  subject  of  grace,   an  be  accepted  by  all  who  would  make  it 

heir   of    heaven,   because   his   parents  theirs  as  a  free  gift, 

were     these     before     him  ;     heaven's  Lesson.  —Walk     worthy      of      this 

citizens  must  be  born  again  (John  iii.  citizenship. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Paul  before  the  Sanhedrim — An  Interrupted  Trial. 

§  1.  The  Scene  in  the  Council  Chamber;   or,  Paul's  Doubtful   Strategy  (vers. 

1-11). 
§  2.  The  Conspiracy  of  the  Forty;  or,  Paul's  Life  Endangered  (vers.  12-22). 
§  3.  Paul's  Midnight  Ride  to  Csesarea ;  or,  Paul's  Safety  Ensured  (vers.  23-35). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Earnestly  beholding,  or  looking  steadfastly  on,  describes  the  eager,  anxious  gaze 
with  which  the  apostle  was  accustomed  to  scan  those  to  whom  he  spoke — perhaps  arising 
from  his  infirmity  of  sight  (Alforcl),  but  more  from  the  intense  emotion  of  his  spirit  (see 
xiv.  9,  and  compare  vii.  55.)  Men  and  brethren.— Or  simply  brethren  (see  also  vers.  5,  6.) 
The  omission  of  "fathers  "  (xxii.  1)  was  probably  intended  to  suggest  that  he  felt  himself  on 
an  equality  with  the  council.  I  have  lived. — TreiroXiTevfjiai  properly  signifies  to  discharge  one's 
civil  and  political  duties,  but  as  used  here  and  elsewhere  (Phil.  i.  27)  by  Paul,  includes  his 
whole  moral  and  religious  conduct,  or  his  behaviour  in  every  respect.  In  all  good  conscience. 
— I.e.,  in  every  respect,  in  every  instance  with  a  good  conscience,  or  with  a  consciousness  of 
integrity  and  sincerity  (compare  2  Tim.  i.  3). 

Ver.  2.  The  high  priest  Ananias. — Not  the  individual  of  that  name  mentioned  earlier 
(iv.  6 ;  compare  Luke  iii.  2 ;  John  xviii.  13),  but  the  son  of  Nebedseus,  who  succeeded 
Camvdus,  or  Camithus,  was  nominated  to  the  office  by  Herod,  King  of  Chalcis,  in  a.d.  48, 
and  entered  on  his  duties  in  the  procuratorship  of  Tiberius  Alexander  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XX.  v.  2). 
He  was  deposed  from  his  office  not  long  before  the  departure  of  Felix  (Ant.,  XX.  viii.  8),  but 
still  retained  great  power,  which  he  used  violently  and  lawlessly  (Ibid.,  ix.  2).  He  was 
eventually  assassinated  by  the  Sicarii  (  Wars,  II.  xvii.  9).  Them  that  stood  by  him  were  not 
members  of  the  council  or  spectators,  but  most  likely  the  servants  in  attendance,  as  in 
Christ's  trial  (John  xviii.  22 ;  compare  Luke  xix.  24).  To  smite  him  on  the  mouth. — Compare 
John  xviii.  22 ;  Jer.  xx.  1,  2.  "  This  mode  of  enjoining  silence  is  practised  in  the  East  at  the 
present  day"  (Hackett).  "  For  a  Jew  to  order  a  Jew  to  be  struck  on  the  cheek  was  peculiarly 
offensive.  '  He  that  strikes  the  cheek  of  an  Israelite  strikes,  as  it  were,  the  cheek  of  the 
Shekinah,'  for  it  is  said  (Prov.  xx.  25),  '  He  that  strikes  a  man  (i.e.,  an  Israelite,  who  alone 
deserves  the  name)  strikes  the  Holy  One  ' "  (Farrar). 

Ver.  3.  Thou  whited  wall ! — Thou  hypocrite  !  Like  the  similar  phrase,  "  whited  sepulchre' ' 
(Matt,  xxiii.  27).  The  prophecy  here  uttered  against  Ananias — not  a  wish  (Kuinoel) — was 
fulfilled  (see  above). 

Ver.  4.  To  revile  God's  high  priest  was  certainly  forbidden  by  the  law  of  Moses  (Exod. 
xxii.  28). 

Ver.  5.  I  wist  not,  brethren,  that  he  was  the  high  priest. — These  words  have  been  inter- 
preted as  meaning  either:  1.  That  the  apostle  refused  to  acknowledge  Ananias  as  high  priest, 
either  because  he  had  procured  the  dignity  by  money  (Grotius)  or  by  usurpation  (Lightfoot), 
and  was  therefore  not  the  high  priest  in  reality.  2.  That  the  apostle  declined  to  recognise  as 
God's  high  priest  one  who  behaved  so  insolently  as  Ananias  (Calvin,  Baumgarten,  Stier,  Meyer, 
Besser,  Holtzmann),  in  which  case  his  language  would  be  ironical.  3.  That  he  spoke  without 
due  reflection,  and  therefore  rashly,  and  now  meant  to  recall  his  words  (Bengel,  Wetstein, 

477 


chap,  xxiii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Olshausen,  Ewald,  Wordsworth,  Hackett).  4.  That  at  the  moment  he  was  not  acquainted 
with  the  person  of  the  high  priest,  Ananias  having  been  installed  into  office  during  his 
absence  from  the  city  (Chrysostom,  Beza,  Lechler).  5.  That  when  he  spoke  he  did  not  really 
know  by  whom  the  order  to  smite  him  had  been  given  (Farrar) — which  might  well  have 
been  the  case  if  his  vision  was  as  defective  as  is  commonly  supposed  (Alford,  Plumptre),  or 
if  Ananias  was  not  presiding  (Zockler),  because  the  Sanhedrim  was  sitting  at  the  bidding  of 
the  Roman  captain  (Lechler),  or  if,  though  Ananias  did  preside,  Paul  did  not  know  he  was 
the  high  priest  (who  was  not  always  required  to  preside  :  compare  Schiirer's  Gesch.  des  Jud. 
Volks,  p.  156  Jf),  but  thought  him  an  ordinary  member  of  the  court  (Lechler,  Plumptre).  Of 
these,  the  first  and  second  may  be  set  aside  as  improbable,  if  not  unworthy  of  the  apostle. 
The  third  may  contain  an  element  of  truth,  to  this  extent,  that  the  apostle  ought,  perhaps,  to 
have  been  sure  who  the  person  was  against  whom  he  uttered  so  severe  a  prophecy.  That  he 
knew  and  spoke  in  anger,  "  in  an  outburst  of  natural  indignation  "  (Conybeare  and  Howson), 
we  think  unlikely  in  the  case  of  one  (1)  who  had  just  been  claiming  that  he  had  lived  before 
God  in  all  good  conscience  up  till  that  day  (ver.  1) ;  (2)  who  had  the  day  before  exhibited 
such  presence  of  mind ;  (3)  who  possessed,  along  with  his  brother  apostles,  the  promise  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  help  as  to  what  he  should  say  when  brought  before  kings  and  councils  ;  and 
(4)  who  afterwards,  when  confessing  his  wrong-doings  before  the  council,  made  no  mention 
of  this  supposed  ebullition  of  wrath  (xxiv.  20,  21).  In  our  judgment  this  last  consideration 
is  fatal  to  the  theory  that  Paul  spoke  unadvisedly  with  his  lips.  The  fourth  and  fifth 
explanations  appear  in  all  respects  the  most  satisfactory.  It  is  written. — The  passage 
(Exod.  xxii.  28)  applies  to  any  civil  magistrate  as  well  as  to  the  high  priest. 

Ver.  6.  Sadducess. — See  iv.  1,  v.  17.  Pharisees. — See  v.  34.  For  both  see  "  Homiletical 
Analysis."  Men  and  brethren. — Or,  simply  brethren.  The  son  of  a  Pharisee. — According  to 
best  codices,  a  son  of  Pharisees.  Of,  or  touching,  the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead. — I.e., 
touching  a  hope  (which  I  have),  even  that  there  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead  (compare 
xxiv.  15,  21 ;  and  see  xvii.  31).  Baur,  followed  by  Holtzmann,  objects  to  the  apostle's  state- 
ment as  untruthful,  since  he  must  have  known  that  the  matter  for  which  he  was  called  in 
question  was  not  his  preaching  of  a  resurrection  from  the  dead,  but  his  teaching  with  regard 
to  the  law,  that  it  was  not  binding  on  Gentile  Christians.  But  in  point  of  fact  the  apostle's 
statement  was  substantially  correct,  that  whatever  was  the  ostensible  ground  of  complaint 
against  him,  the  real  cause  of  his  apprehension  was  his  witness  concerning  Christ's  resurrec- 
tion— since  out  of  that  rose  the  altered  relations  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  toward  the  law. 
Besides,  had  the  apostle  here  deliberately  uttered  an  untruth,  or  been  guilty  of  an  evasion,  it 
is  hardly  likely  that  the  recollection  of  this  would  not  have  troubled  his  conscience  after- 
wards when  his  remembrance  of  having  set  his  judges  at  variance  did  (xxiv.  20,  21). 

Ver.  7.  A  dissension  between  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees. — Here  again  Baur  "  can  scarcely 
imagine  that  a  single  expression  undesignedly"  (Baur  himself  holds  it  was  deliberately)  "let 
fall  by  the  apostle  could  have  kindled  so  fierce  a  fire  "  as  to  blind  both  parties  to  their  own 
interests,  and  Weizsacker  thinks  it  "  far  from  being  in  the  least  probable  that  Paul  should 
have  attempted  to  set  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  against  each  other,  or  that  he  should  in 
point  of  fact  have  succeeded  in  doing  so  " ;  but  Josephus  (Life,  29)  relates  a  similar  pro- 
cedure of  himself  when  his  life  was  threatened  at  Tarichese,  which  was  followed  by  a  si  roil'? r 
result,  the  division  of  his  enemies,  which  ended  in  his  life  being  spared. 

Ver.  8.  The  Sadducees  denied  the  doctrine  of  a  resurrection  and  the  existence  of  euuer 
angel  or  spirit.  "  They  have  been  called  materialists.  .  .  .  But  there  is  no  proof  that  they 
denied  what  in  our  day  we  call  the  invisible  world.  They  were  only  opposed  to  new  specu- 
lations. They  believed  firmly  in  Mosaism,  and  adhered  to  the  letter  of  the  Scriptures.  The 
resurrection,  they  said,  was  not  supported  by  a  single  text  in  the  law.  The  Sadducees,  for 
the  same  reasons  (the  silence  of  Moses),  discouraged  Messianic  hopes.  .  .  .  The  Sadducees 
were  the  living  proof  that  the  Old  Dispensation  was  drawing  to  a  close  "  (Stapfer,  Palestine 
in  the  Time  of  Christ,  pp.  319,  320).  The  Pharisees  confessed  both.  They  "  had  formulated, 
under  the  Maccabees,  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,"  by  which  they  "  did  not 
intend  merely  the  survival  of  the  soul,  the  immaterial  part  of  man,  or  even  of  a  spiritual 
body,  as  St.  Paul  afterwards  teaches,  but  a  reunion  with  the  very  body  which  had  been  laid 
down"  {ibid.,  p.  318).  The  Pharisees  "believe  that  souls  have  an  immortal  vigour  in  them, 
and  that  under  the  earth  there  will  be  rewards  and  punishments  according  as  they  have  lived 
virtuously  or  viciously  in  this  life  " — the  vicious  being  "  detained  in  an  everlasting  prison," 
but  the  virtuous  having  "  power  to  revive  and  live  again."  The  Sadducees  hold  "  that  souls 
die  with  the  bodies  "  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XVIII.  i.  3,  4). 

Ver.  9.  The  scribes  should  probably  be  some  of  the  scribes.  But  if  a  spirit  or  an  angel 
hath  spoken  to  him. — Supply,  What  then  ?  The  allusion  obviously  is  to  Paul's  vision  in  the 
temple  (xxii.  17).  The  best  texts  omit  let  us  not  fight  against  God.  They  were  probably 
an  interpolation  from  Gamaliel's  speech  (v.  39). 

Ver.  10.  "  The  fear  of  the  chiliarch  was  naturally  heightened  by  his  knowledge  that  he  was 
responsible  for  the  life  of  a  Roman  citizen  "  (Plumptre). 

478 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.    chap,  xxiii. 


Ver.  11.  The  oldest  authorities  omit  Paul.  For  the  phrase  be  of  good  cheer,  in  which  the 
verb  is  ddpaei  (Christ's),  compare  Matt.  ix.  2,  xiv.  27 ;  Mark  vi.  50  ;  John  xvi.  33.  For  the 
same  phrase  with  a  different  verb,  evOvfieXre  (Paul's),  see  xxvii.  22,  25.  The  vision  announced 
the  close  of  the  first  and  the  beginning  of  the  second  of  Paul's  proposed  journeys  (xix.  21). 

Ver.  12.  The  Jews  (rather  than  certain  of  the  Jews)  who  banded  themselves  together 
under  a  curse  to  kill  Paul  were  not  the  members  of  the  Sanhedrim,  who  had  forgotten  their 
opinions  in  the  council  (vers.  6-9),  and  were  again  united  as  one  man  against  the  apostle 
(Holtzmann),  but  the  Jewish  populace,  or  at  least  forty  of  them  (ver.  13),  who  came  to  the 
chief  priests  and  the  elders  (ver.  11) — i.e.,  to  the  Sadducean  members  of  the  council 
(De  Wette,  Meyer),  who  were  hostile  to  Paul — with  the  information  that  they  had  bound 
themselves  under  a  great  curse  to  take  him  off.  Josephus  {Ant.,  XV.  viii.  3,  4)  mentions  a 
similar  conspiracy  of  ten  Jews,  who  bound  themselves  by  a  solemn  oath  to  assassinate  Hero  I 
the  Great,  and  relates  QAnt.,  XII.  vi.  2)  the  story  of  Matthias,  the  founder  of  the  Maccabean 
dynasty,  who  slew  an  apostate  Jew  who  offered  sacrifice  at  Modin. 

Ver.  15.  Ye  with  the  council  signify. — I.e.,  with  the  consent  of  the  council  or  Sanhedrim. 
As  though  ye  would  inquire  something  more  perfectly. — Better,  as  intending  to  investigate 
more  accurately  (than  on  the  former  trial)  the  things  concerning  him— i.e.,  the  charges 
against  him.     The  words  on  the  morrow  are  omitted  by  the  best  MSS. 

Ver.  16.  Whether  Paul's  sister's  son  resided  in  Jerusalem,  or  had  accompanied  him 
thither,  cannot  be  determined.  Against  the  former  supposition  stands  the  fact  that  Paul 
lodged  with  Mnason  (xxi.  16).  Plumptre  suggests  he  may  have  been  one  of  Paul's  Roman 
kinsmen  (Rom.  xvi.  7,  11)  who  had  come  to  Jerusalem  to  attend  the  feast,  and  had  heard 
the  plot  talked  of  in  the  caravanserai  where  he  and  the  other  pilgrims  lodged.  Alford  thinks 
he  may  have  been  a  young  man  domiciled  in  Jerusalem,  as  Paul  himself  had  formerly  been, 
for  the  purpose  of  attending  school. 

Ver.  17.  Bring  this  young  man  unto  the  chief  captain. — Though  Paul  had  a  promise  of 
Divine  protection,  he  did  not  neglect  the  use  of  ordinary  means. 

Ver.  18.  The  words  Paul  the  prisoner  show  that  the  apostle  was  still  chained  to  a  soldier. 

Ver.  21.  A,  or  the— i.e.,  the  expected  promise  rather  than  "order"  (Ptoseumiiller)  or 
41  message  "  (Grotius). 

Ver.  23.  Two. — Not  one  or  two  (Howson),  but  some  or  certain  two — i.e.,  two  or  three 
(Hackett)  of  the  centurions.  Compare  "  some  two  of  the  disciples"  (Luke  vii.  19).  Soldiers. — 
Heavy  armed,  as  distinguished  from  the  "  horsemen."  The  spearmen,  5e£toAd/?oi,  "  righjt  hand 
graspers" — an  obscure  word,  not  yet  satisfactorily  explained — have  been  interpreted  as 
meaning  military  lictors  who  guarded  prisoners,  and  were  so  called  from  taking  the  right 
side  (Kuinoel),  but  probably  signified  a  lightly  armed  Roman  cohort  of  slingers  and  javelin 
throwers  (Jos.,  Wars,  II.  xvii.  5;  III.  vii.  18;  IV.  i.  3),  hence  rightly  enough  named 
spearmen. 

Ver.  25.  A  letter  after  this  manner. — Lit.,  having  this  type,  as  to  verbal  form,  stamp,  and 
contents.  Such  a  writing  relative  to  a  prisoner,  called  an  elogium,  was  required  by  Roman  law 
to  be  sent  with  every  prisoner  forwarded  to  a  magistrate  for  trial.  That  this  was  not  the 
actual  missive  of  Claudius  Lysias,  but  only  a  free  reproduction  of  what  the  writer  of  the  Acts 
supposed  it  might  be,  has  been  argued  (1)  from  the  difficulty  of  understanding  how  the 
writer  of  the  Acts  would  get  to  know  what  Lysias  wrote,  and  (2)  from  its  similarity  to  the 
introduction  of  Luke  (i.  3),  which,  like  it,  uses  the  epithet  "  most  excellent,"  and  to  the  Jeru- 
salem letter,  which  employs  the  same  salutation,  "greeting"  (xv.  23).  But  as  to  (1),  the 
letter  of  Lysias  may  have  been  unsealed  and  shown  to  Paul,  if  not  also  to  Luke,  who  most 
likely  accompanied  him ;  while  as  to  (2),  it  need  only  be  supposed  that  Lysias,  Luke,  and 
James,  knew  the  art  of  polite  letter- writing.  It  is  a  gratuitous  assumption  to  assert  that  the 
composer  of  the  Acts  is  responsible  for  the  inaccuracy  which  occurs  in  Lysias'  letter 
(Holtzmann). 

Ver.  28.  I  brought  him  forth — better,  down — into  their  council. — This  clause  is  omitted  by 
some  authorities. 

Ver.  30.  From  the  Received  Text  the  word  /xtWeiv  should  be  struck  out,  according  to  the 
best  authorities;  but  even  then  two  constructions  are  combined :  (1)  /jLywdeiavs  im[3ov\r}s  rrjs 
iaofi^vTjs,  and  (2)  firjpvdfrros  eiri(3ov\7ip  ^aeadat.  The  sense,  however  is,  it  having  been  shown 
to  me  that  there  would  be  a  plot  against  the  man.  By  the  Jews  is  wanting  in  the  ohlest 
codices.  So  is  the  concluding  word,  farewell,  which  was  probably  inserted  from  xv.  29. 
Ver.  31.  By,  or  during  night  the  apostle  with  his  escort  travelled  to  Antipatris. 

Ver.  32.  On  the  morrow  after  their  arrival  at  Antipatris.  Returned  to  the  castle. — Possibly 
one  of  the  centurions  (ver.  23),  along  with  the  footmen  and  spearmen. 

Ver.  35.  I  will  hear  thee. — Perhaps  fully  should  be  added  to  convey  the  force  of  the 
preposition.  The  rule  of  Roman  law  was  :  Qui  cum  elogio  mittvntur  ex  integro  audiendi  sunt. 
"The  governor  of  a  province  was  not  to  give  implicit  credit  to  the  document  with  which  a 
prisoner  was  sent  to  him  ;  he  must  institute  an  independent  examination  of  the  case  for 
himself"  (Hackett). 

479 


chap,  xxiii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE   ACTS. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—10. 

The  Scene  in  the  Council  Chamber  ;  or,  Paul's  Doubtful  Strategy. 

I.  An  exalted  exordium. — 1.  Delivered  in  a  historic  place.  If  in  the  usual 
court  room  of  the  Sanhedrim,  the  Hall  Gazith,  in  one  of  the  temple  chambers, 
then  it  was  probably  the  spot  on  which  Stephen  had  stood  twenty-two  years 
before,  when  Paul  heard  him  deliver  his  great  apology  (vi.  12)  ;  on  which  the 
apostles  had  stood  when  Gamaliel,  a  Pharisee,  spoke  up  in  their  defence  (v.  34)  ; 
and  on  which  Christ  had  stood  when  Caiaphas  pronounced  him  worthy  of  death 
(Matt.  xxvi.  57).  If  in  some  apartment  in  the  city  to  which  their  meetings  had 
been  transferred  about  twenty-six  years  before  this  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  "  on 
xxii.  30),  it  was  still  the  spot  on  which  many  a  solemn  trial  had  taken  place. 
Men  in  general,  and  speakers  in  particular,  are  always  more  or  less  affected  by 
the  associations  which  cluster  round  the  spots  on  which  they  stand.  2.  Presented 
to  a  venerable  court.  The  highest  ecclesiastical  and  religious  tribunal  of  the 
country,  composed  of  priests  and  elders  and  scribes  (iv.  5,  6),  belonging  to  the 
two  principal  parties  of  the  day,  the  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees  (see  "  Critical 
Remarks,"  and  below),  and  presided  over  by  the  high  priest  of  the  time,  Ananias, 
the  son  of  Nebedaeus.  3.  Spoken  with  intense  earnestness.  Realising  at  once 
the  sanctity  of  the  place,  the  dignity  of  the  court,  and  the  solemnity  of  the 
occasion,  the  apostle  fixed  his  eyes  with  steadfast  gaze  upon  his  auditors  and 
began  to  pour  out  upon  them  the  transcendent  thoughts  with  which  his  soul  was 
laden.  4.  Begun  with  dignified  self-respect.  Not  cringing  before  them,  as  if  he 
either  acknowledged  himself  a  culprit  or  desired  to  fawn  upon  them  with  flattery, 
but  dropping  the  term  "  fathers  "  which  he  had  employed  on  the  castle  stairs 
(xxii.  1),  and  addressing  them  as  an  equal,  "  as  a  former  Sanhedrist  to  his  ancient 
colleagues  " — brothers  !  The  man  who  is  conscious  of  his  innocence  has  no  need  to 
hang  his  head  like  a  bulrush,  or  speak  with  bated  breath  and  whispered  humble- 
ness, or  forget  the  native  nobility  of  his  manhood.  5.  Summed  up  in  a  noble 
confession.  Not  prompted  by  self-esteem  or  rendered  possible  b}>'  a  self-indulgent 
criticism,  but  dictated  by  an  inward  consciousness  of  its  truth.  A  confession 
that  all  his  life  long — not  even  excluding  his  persecuting  days  (xxvi.  9) — 
he  had  studied,  and,  so  far  as  he  could  speak  for  himself,  with  a  considerable 
measure  of  success,  to  preserve  a  good  conscience,  which  could  only  have  been 
done  by  following  its  dictates,  in  all  his  relationships  in  life,  at  all  times,  and 
under  all  circumstances,  aiming  at  the  service  and  glory  of  God  (2  Tim.  i.  3  ; 
Heb.  xiii.  18). 

II.  An  unmannerly  interruption. — 1.  From  whom  it  proceeded.  From  the 
high  priest  who  presided  over  the  council,  Ananias,  the  son  of  Nebedseus,  who 
was  appointed  to  fill  this  ecclesiastical  office  by  Herod  of  Chalcis  and  whose 
tenure  continued  from  a.d.  47- — 59,  when  he  was  superseded  by  Ismael,  the  son 
of  Phabi.  Having  lived  after  his  deposition  till  the  outbreak  of  the  Jewish  war 
in  a.d.  66,  he  was  murdered  as  a  friend  of  the  Romans  by  the  revolutionaries. 
During  the  last  years  of  his  life,  even  after  the  demission  of  his  office,  he  ruled 
like  a  tyrant  in  Jerusalem.  His  haughty  disposition  revealed  itself  in  his 
behaviour  towards  Par" I  (see  Schurer  in  Riehm's  Handworterbuch  des  Biblischen 
Altertums,  ii.  62,  art.  Ananias).  "Ananias"  says  Besser  {Bibel  Stunden,  III. 
ii.  504),  "  was  the  third  high  priest  whom  the  Spirit,  poured  out  from  the  throne 
by  the  Great  High  Priest,  Jesus  Christ,  called  to  repentance.  But,  like  his 
predecessor  Joseph,  he  was  a  legitimate  successor  of  Caiaphas."  2.  How  it  was 
expressed.  By  commanding  the  officials  of  the  Sanhedrim  who  were  standing  by 
to  smite  Paul  upon  the  mouth.  To  the  arrogant  prelate  it  seemed  unendurable — 
in  fact,  an  intolerable  presumption  and  unspeakable  insolence — that  one  who  was 

480 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     ohap.  xxiii. 


arraigned    before  them  as  a  prisoner  should  either  call  them  "  brothers  ! "  or 
advance  for  himself  the  claim  of  innocence.     The  mouth  that  uttered  such  words 
should  be  stopped.     Whether  the  attendants  obeyed  or  not  is  uncertain.     If  they 
hesitated  for  a  moment  (Besser)  the  probability  is  that  they  ultimately  carried 
out  their  master's  command  and  inflicted  on  the  apostle  the  same  brutal  insult 
that  had  once  been  offered  to  his  Master  (John  xviii.  22),  and  long  before  to  the 
prophet  Jeremiah  (xx.   1,  2).     3.   What  response  it  evoked.     Unlike  his  Master 
who,  when  one  of  the  officers  standing  by  struck  him,  meekly  answered,  "  If  I 
have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of  the  evil ;  but  if  well,  why  smitest  thou  Me  ?  " 
(John  xviii.  22,  23),  Paul  replied  with  an  indignant  outburst — "  God  shall  smite 
thee,  thou  whited  wall ;  and  sittest  thou  to  judge  me  according  to  the  law,  and 
commandest  me  to  be  smitten  contrary  to  the  law."     (1)  So  far  as  Ananias  was 
concerned  the  language  was  both  strikingly  correct  and  richly  deserved.     Sitting 
there  as  Jehovah's  representative,  clothed,  perhaps,  in  his  white  priestly  raiment 
and  pretending  to  be  a  judge  of  offences  against  Heaven's  law,  he  was  little  better 
than  a  whited  wall,  beautiful  without,  but  coarse  within,  "  daubed  over  with 
untempered  mortar  " — an  expression  which  perhaps  had  been  borrowed  from  the 
similar  phrase  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  whited  sepulchre  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  27 ;  Luke  xi.  44), 
and  had  become  current  among  the  early   Christians  as  a  fit  designation  for 
hypocrites,  of  whom  Ananias  was  a  magnificent  specimen.     That  the  phrase 
did  not  express  a  malediction  or  imprecation  must  be  assumed,  since  such  would 
have  been  altogether  unbecoming  on  the  lips  of  one  who  professed  himself  a 
follower  of  Jesus,  and  who  had  claimed  to  have  lived  up  till  that  moment  in  all 
good  conscience  before  God.      The  terrible  utterance  is  best  understood  as  a 
prophetic  denunciation  (Zockler),  which,  according  to  Josephus  (Wars,  II.  xvii.  19), 
was  ultimately  fulfilled,  the  Sicarii  or  assassins  in  the  revolutionary  war  having 
entered  Jerusalem  and,  after  burning  Ananias's  palace,  dragged  him,  along  with 
his  brother  Hezekiah,  from  concealment  and  murdered  both.     The  rebuke  as  to 
his  judging  Paul  contrary  to  the  law  was  thoroughly  deserved.     (2)  So  far  as 
Paul  was  concerned,  there  was  nothing  wrong  in  either  of  the  statements,  unless 
it   was  wrong  to  denounce  a  scoundrel  like  Ananias,  and  foretell  his  fate.     If 
anything  was  wrong  about  the  utterance  it  was  the  passion  (if  there  was  such) 
with  which  it  was  accompanied.     "  It  was  certainly  some  disadvantage  to  Paul 
that  (although  provoked  and  unjustly  smitten)  he  called  the  high  priest  '  whited 
wall '  ;  he  was  glad  to  excuse  it  by  his  ignorance.     We  may  not  be  too  bold  or 
too  forward  to  speak  in  a  good  matter,  lest  we  overshoot"  (Trapp.)     But  is  it 
not  rather  easily  assumed  that  Paul  lost  his  temper  and  burst  into  a  rage  1 
Had  he  done  so,   it  seems  to  us  Paul  would  have  not  only  acknowledged  his 
offence   when  he   cooled   down — which    some  say  he  did   (but  see  below,   and 
"  Critical   Remarks "    on  verse    5) — but   when   recalling   this   scene  afterwards 
would  not  have  omitted  to  mention  this  unchristian  outburst  (if  it  was  such) 
as  one  of  the  mistakes  he  had  committed — which,  however,  he  did  not  (see  xxiv.  21). 
4.  How  it  ended.     Challenged  by  the  attendants  for  reviling,  as  they  called  his 
scathing  sentence,   God's  high  priest,  as  they  styled  the  painted  and  decorated 
hypocrite  who  presided  over  the  assembly,  Paul  replied  that  he  wist  not  that  the 
person  whom  he  addressed  was  the  high  priest.     This  statement  is  generally 
interpreted  as  an  acknowledgment  on  Paul's  jpart  of  having  spoken  unadvisedly 
with  his  lips.     It  ought,  however,  rather  Lo  be  accepted  in  its  plain  and  literal 
sense,  as  an  intimation   that,  from  some  cause  or  other — defective  sight,  or  an 
uncertainty  as  to  whether  the  president  of  the  court  was  the  high  priest — he  did 
not  know  the  exalted  dignity  of  the  person  he  addressed  (see  "  Critical  Remarks"). 
Had  he  known  that  Ananias  was  the  high  priest,  rather  than  seem  to  violate  the 
law  of  Moses — "  Thou  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  a  ruler  of  thy  people  " — he  would 
have  borne  the  indignity  in  silence.     This  does  not  appear  to  us  as  an  admission 

ii  481 


CHAP.  XXIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


that  he  had  spoken  rashly,  except  perhaps  in  so  far  as  he  ought  to  have  made 
sure  who  the  object  of  his  denunciation  was  before  launching  against  hi  in  such  a 
scathing  judgment  and  rebuke.  But  the  judgment  and  the  rebuke  fell  on  the 
right  head,  and  Paul,  if  he  erred,  only  showed  he  was  still  a  man  and  not  the 
equal  of  his  Divine  Master  (see  "  Hints  "). 

TTI.  A  dexterous  strategy. — 1.  The  occasion  of  it.  The  mixed  character  of 
the  council,  which  consisted  of  Pharisees  and  Sadducees.  (1)  The  Pharisees  at 
the  time  of  Christ  formed  a  compact,  important,  and  influential  party  inside  the 
Jewish  people — representing  that  tendency  which  was  generally  peculiar  to  post- 
exilic  Judaism,  and  which  in  them  (the  Pharisees)  received  its  sharpest  and  at 
the  same  time  its  most  correct  expression,  viz.,  the  tendency  to  transform  religion 
into  merely  external  legal  service.  That  tendency  drew  after  it  as  a  necessary 
consequence  this,  that  the  external  action  rather  than  the  moral  disposition 
became  the  decisive  factor  in  determining  the  quality  of  an  action.  Hence  the 
Pharisees  laid  great  stress  upon  oral  legal  tradition  as  supplementing  the  written 
law.  The  Pharisees  were  the  democratic,  popular  party  in  Palestine.  (2)  The 
Sadducees,  deriving  their  name  originally,  it  is  believed,  from  Zadok  the  high 
priest  in  David's  and  Solomon's  times,  consisted  principally  of  the  members  and 
adherents  of  the  high  priestly  family,  and  formed  in  consequence  the  aristocratic 
party  in  Jerusalem,  whose  chief  distinction  lay  in  this — that  they  rejected  the 
Pharisaic  principle  of  legalism  and  with  that  the  oral  tradition  which  their  rivals 
valued.  (3)  Their  dogmatic  differences  were  principally  these  :  that  the  Phari- 
sees believed  in  and  the  Sadducees  denied,  the  resurrection  of  the  body  and  future 
punishment,  the  existence  of  angels  and  spirits,  the  doctrine  of  an  overruling 
providence,  which  superintended  and  controlled  the  seemingly  free  actions  of 
men  (see  Schiirer  in  Riehm's  Handworterbuch,  arts.  Tharisaer  and  Sadduccaer ; 
and  Langhans's  Biblische  Geschichte  und  Literatur,  ii.  431-435).  2.  The  nature 
of  it.  A  sudden  exclamation  by  Paul  that  he  was  a  Pharisee  and  a  son  of 
Pharisees,  and  that  he  was  that  day  being  called  in  question  for  the  hope  and 
resurrection  of  the  dead  (see  "Critical  Remarks ").  Both  statements  were  true, 
although  the  latter  may  not  have  been  so  obvious  to  his  hearers  as  it  was  to 
himself.  It  was  undoubtedly  a  clever  stroke,  and  perhaps  illustrated  that 
serpentine  wisdom  combined  with  dovelike  harmlessness  which  Christ  recom- 
mended to  His  followers  (Matt.  x.  16).  "  Religion,"  says  Trapp,  "  doth  not  call 
us  to  a  weak  simplicity,  but  allows  us  as  much  of  the  serpent  as  of  the  dove. 
The  dove  without  the  serpent  is  easily  caught ;  the  serpent  without  the  dove 
stings  deadly.  Their  match  makes  themselves  secure  and  many  happy." 
3.  The  effect  of  it.  It  divided  the  circle  of  his  enemies  into  two  opposing  camps. 
Some  of  the  scribes  of  the  Pharisees'  party  immediately  protested  that  they 
found  no  evil  in  Paul.  If  a  spirit  or  an  angel  had  spoken  to  him,  what  then  ? 
That  was  by  no  means  impossible  or  incredible ;  and,  if  it  really  was  so,  it  might 
be  dangerous  to  meddle  with  the  prisoner.  Of  course  to  the  aristocratic 
Sadducean  party,  who  regarded  spirits  and  angels  as  nursery  legends,  creatures 
of  the  fancy,  such  a  suggestion  sounded  ridiculous.  The  deeply  seated  antagonism 
which  parted  the  two  sects  rose  to  the  surface  and  flamed  out  into  angry 
dissension.  In  their  violent  attempts,  on  the  one  hand  to  release,  and  on  the 
other  part  to  detain,  Paul,  he  was  like  to  be  torn  in  pieces  between  them.  4.  The 
end  of  it.  The  commandant  of  the  castle,  who  had  once  more  got  to  hear  of 
the  turmoil  and  feared  for  his  prisoner's  safety,  despatched  a  company  of  soldiers 
to  the  council  chamber  to  rescue  the  apostle  and  fetch  him  into  the  fortress. 
5.  The  Tightness  of  it.  That  the  apostle's  bold  stroke  terminated  in  his  release 
may  seem  to  many  to  be  justification  enough  of  the  course  adopted ;  but  on 
subsequent  reflection  Paul  himself  was  not  perfectly  sure  about  it  (xxiv.  21). 
At  least,  without  expressly  granting  that  he  had  done  wrong,  he  owned  hiin- 

482 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  Xxiii. 


self  ready  to  admit  that  his  action  might  wear  the  appearance  of  wrong. 
Possibly  he  was  not  himself  certain  that  he  had  not  erred  from  that  straight 
path  of  conscientious  duty  he  had  up  till  that  moment  endeavoured  to  tread. 
His  exclamation  was  perhaps  secretly  dictated  less  by  an  effort  to  vindicate 
himself  or  advance  his  Master's  cause,  than  by  an  endeavour  to  set  his  judges  at 
loggerheads.  If  so,  he  would  himself  pronounce  it  wrong.  What  a  sensitive 
conscience  the  apostle  must  have  had  ! 

IV.  A  sweet  consolation. — 1.  Its  opportune  arrival.  The  night  following 
that  exciting  scene  in  the  council,  which  again  had  ensued  on  a  day  of  equal 
agitation  in  the  temple  and  on  the  castle  stairs.  At  a  time  when  the  apostle's 
soul  and  body  both  were  exhausted  by  the  terrible  conflict  through  which  he  had 
passed,  and  when  perhaps  through  natural  reaction  he  might  have  been  disposed 
to  subside  into  deep  depression.  But  man's  extremity  is  ever  God's  opportunity 
(compare  xxvii.  24).  2.  Its  heavenly  origin.  It  came  direct  from  the  Lord— 
i.e.,  the  risen  and  exalted  Christ,  who  instead  of  sending  consolation  to  His 
wearied  servant  by  a  messenger,  either  human  (2  Kings  iv.  42),  or  angelic 
(1  Kings  xix.  5),  came  Himself,  stood  by  that  servant,  discovering  His  presence 
and  speaking  to  that  servant  with  His  own  lips.  This  circumstance  showed 
both  the  importance  of  the  occasion  and  the  need  of  Paul.  3.  Its  cheering 
burden.  It  was  pract'cally  an  assurance  that  neither  would  his  life  be  taken 
nor  his  career  ended  by  this  outrageous  assault  upon  his  person.  The  purpose  he 
had  formed  would  be  fulfilled.  As  he  had  testified  for  his  Master  in  Jerusalem, 
he  would  live  to  do  the  like  in  Pome  (see  "  Hints"  on  ver.  11). 

Learn — 1.  That  a  good  conscience  is  a  strong  support  in  time  of  trouble. 
2.  That  good  consciences  are  not  always  fully  enlightened.  3.  That  mistakes, 
when  discovered,  should  be  frankly  acknowledged.  4.  That  good  men  should 
study  not  to  let  their  good  be  evil  spoken  of.  5.  That  wicked  men  who  hate 
each  other  often  combine  against  the  good.  6.  That  materialism  is  an  old 
heresy.     7.  That  a  good  man  may  defend  himself  by  all  honest  means. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  1.  A  Good  Conscience. 

I.  From  what  it  proceeds. — 1.  True 
faith  in  Christ,  which  obtains  the  for- 
giveness of  sins.  2.  The  assurance  of 
Divine  grace  and  eternal  life.  3.  The 
renewal  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  a  new 
life,  and  conduct.  4.  The  faithful  per- 
formance of  our  calling. 

II.  To  what  it  contributes. — 1.  The 
possession  of  inward  peace  before  God. 
2.  The  establishment  of  the  heart  in 
the  hour  of  danger.  3.  The  strengthen- 
ing of  the  soul  for  the  performance  of 
duty. 

Note. — Those  who  attribute  to 
Christianity  a  gloomy  condemnation 
of,  and  a  certain  injustice  towards,  the 
natural  man,  and  that  which  is  good 
in  him,  or  even  those  real  devotees 
who,  going  beyond  the  truth,  think 
badly  of  and  inveigh  against  themselves 
and  their  former  life,  may  learn  here 


from  Paul's  example  that  a  regenerate 
man  may  rejoice  before  God  and  man 
even  in  his  former  relatively  good  con- 
science when  in  a  position  of  error  and 
sin,  if  his  present  conscience  in  Christ 
bears  him  witness  that  he  has  not 
belonged  to  the  class  of  gross 
hypocrites. — Stier. 

Ver.  2.  The  Three  Ananiases  in 
Acts. 

I.  Ananias  of  Jerusalem,  the  in- 
sincere disciple  (v.  1)  ;  or,  the  detection 
and  doom  of  false  professors.  A 
warning  to  Church  members. 

II.  Ananias  of  Damascus,  the  true 
disciple  (ix.  10,  xxii.  12) ;  or,  the 
ministry  and  reward  of  a  humble 
Christian.  An  encouragement  to 
Christian  workers. 

III.  Ananias  also  of  Jerusalem, 
the    Sadducean    high    priest ;    or,    the 

483 


chap,  xxiii.     1I0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY;    TEE  ACTS. 


criminality  and  judgment  of  those  who, 
acting  as  God's  vicegerents,  neverthe- 
less misrepresent  Him.  An  admonition 
to  Christian  ministers. 

Ananias  and  Paul.  A  parallel  and 
a  contrast. 

I.  Resemblances.  —  Both  were  — 
1.  Men.  Probably  both  were  (certainly 
one  was)  possessed  of  intellect  and 
education.  2.  Jews.  Members  of  the 
Hebrew  nation  and  of  the  covenanted 
people.  3.  Representatives.  The  one 
of  Jehovah,  whose  priest  he  was ;  the 
other  of  Jesus,  whose  apostle  he 
claimed  to  be. 

II.  Differences. — In  their — 1.  Offices. 
The  one  a  high  priest,  the  other  an 
apostle,  as  above  stated.  2.  Characters. 
The  one  a  hypocrite,  the  other  sincere. 
3.  Beliefs.  The  one  a  Sadducee,  the 
other  a  Pharisee.  4.  Positions.  The 
one  judge,  the  other  prisoner.  5.  Con- 
duct. The  one  violent,  the  other 
resentful. 

III.  Lessons. — 1.  The  differences 
between  men  are  commonly  more  than 
their  resemblances.  2.  The  best  men 
do  not  alwaj's  occupy  the  highest  social 
positions  in  life.  3.  The  providence 
that  makes  prisoners  of  moral  princes 
like  Paul,  and  judges  of  mean  reptiles 
like  Ananias,  though  not  wrong,  is 
nevertheless  mysterious.  4.  Well-nigh 
intolerable  are — 

"  The  insolence  of  office,  and  the  spurns 
That  patient  merit  of  the  unworthy  takes." 

Shakespeare. 

Ver.  3.  God's  Judgment  on  Whited 
Walls. 

I.  A  striking  characterisation  of 
hypocritical  professors. — Whited  walls. 
"  Holy  offices,  spiritual  titles,  priestly 
dignities,  are  nothing  else  than  white 
lime,  by  which  the  internal  impurity 
of  a  carnal  heart  is  covered." 

II.  A  solemn  prediction  of  Divine 
judgment  on  such  professors. — "God 
shall  smite "  them  !  If  not  by  tem- 
poral calamities,  by  eternal  punish- 
ments. In  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  the 
secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  exposed. 

III.  A  significant  instance  of  moral 

484 


retribution. — What  will  eventually 
happen  in  the  case  of  hypocritical 
professors  will  also  be  the  fate  of  other 
sinners.  Their  iniquity  will  be  recom- 
pensed. Their  wickedness  will  return 
upon  their  own  pate. 

Ver.  5.  Sins  of  Ignorance — 

I.  Are  not  permissible. — No  excuse 
for  a  violation  of  the  law  of  God  to 
plead  that  it  was  done  in  ignorance. 

II.  May  be  disastrous  in  their  con- 
sequences.— To  the  individual  who 
commits  them,  and  to  those  who  are 
affected  by  them. 

III.  Should  always  be  frankly  con- 
fessed when  discovered  by  him  who 
has  committed  them,  as  was  the  case 
with  Paul. 

IV.  May  be  forgiven. — As  was  the 
inadvertent  mistake  of  the  apostle. 

Ver.  6.  The  Hope  (of  Israel)  and  the 
Resurrection  of  the  Dead. 

I.  The  hope  of  Israel  involved  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead. — See  Psalm 
xvi.  9,  xvii.  15,  xlix.  15;  Isa.  xxv.  8, 
xxvi.  19;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  12;  Dan. 
xii.  2  ;  Hosea  xiii.  14. 

II.  The  hope  of  Israel  was  guaran- 
teed by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ. — This  proved  that  a  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead  was  possible,  and 
would  become  actual  in  the  case  of 
the  followers  of  Christ.  See  iv.  2 ; 
John  xi.  25,  xiv.  19;  Rom.  viii.  10; 
1  Cor.  xv.  23. 

III.  The  hope  of  Israel  and  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  form  the 
burden  of  the  gospel  message.— 
"  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory " 
(Col.  i.  28).  ' 

IV.  The  hope  of  Israel  and  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  will  reach 
their  culmination  at  the  last  day. — 
See  John  v.  25,  28,  vi.  39,  44,  54, 
xi.  23,  24 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14 ;  Phil.  iii.  21. 

Vers.  1-6  with  John  xviii.  19-24, 
Jesus  and  Paul  before  the  Sanhedrim  ; 
or,  the  Master  and  the  disciple  before 
unrighteous  judges. 

I.  Wherein  the  Master  and  the 
disciple  resembled  each  other. — 1.  The 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxm. 


same  unmerited  disgrace  was  inflicted 
on  both.  2.  Both  maintained  their 
Divinely  bestowed  dignity. 

II.  Wherein  the  Master  was  above 
the  disciple. — 1.  The  holy  self-con- 
sciousness of  Jesus  was  more  than  the 
good  conscience  of  Paul.  2.  The  calm 
answer  of  Jesus  was  more  heavenly 
than  Paul's  human  vehemence. — Gerok. 

Spots  in  the  Sun;  or,  some  things 
about  Paul's  character  that  call  for 
explanation. 

I.  Magnificent  self-conceit,  or 
spiritual  pride. — "  I  have  lived  in  all 
good  conscience  before  God  until  this 
day."  Does  not  this  seem  a  pretty 
high  claim  for  even  a  Paul  to  advance  ? 
Does  it  not  come  tolerably  near  the 
violation  of  one  of  his  own  precepts 
(Pom.  xii.  3)  1  Justifies  it  not  Paul's 
statement  that  he  was  a  Pharisee? 
What  was  it,  if  not  a  manifestation  of 
that  self -righteousness  so  vehemently 
condemned  in  them  1  Well — 1.  Paul 
could  not  have  meant  to  assert  that  he 
had  lived  a  sinless  or  blameless  life 
(see  Rom.  iii.  9,  10),  either  before  his 
conversion  (see  1  Tim.  i.  13)  or  after  it 
(Phil.  iii.  12).  2.  Paul  was  certainly 
not  conscious  at  the  time  that  he  was 
doing  wrong  in  making  such  an 
allegation,  as  afterwards  he  was  not  in 
the  least  degree  troubled  about  it 
(xxiv.  20).  3.  Paul  could  only  have 
signified  that  he  had,  throughout  his 
entire  career,  endeavoured  to  follow 
the  dictates  of  his  conscience,  as  he 
afterwards  explained  to  Timothy 
(2  Tim.  i.  3).  Possibly  in  so  saying 
Paul  may  have  been  mistaken;  but 
a  mistake  cannot  be  catalogued  as 
a  sin. 

II.  Unchristian  anger,  or  lack  of 
meekness. — "  God  shall  smite  thee, 
thou  whited  wall !  "  Was  this  like  obey- 
ing his  Master's  words — "  Whosoever 
smiteth  thee  on  the  right  cheek,  turn 
to  him  the  other  also"  (Matt.  v.  39). 
And  what  about  his  own  precepts  ? — 
"Be  ye  angry  and  sin  not :  let  not  the 
sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath  "  (Eph. 
iv.  26) ;  "  Dearly  beloved,  avenge  not 
yourselves,  but  give  place  unto  wrath  " 


(Rom.  xii.  19).  To  these  interrogations 
it  may  be  answered — 1.  That  anger  is 
not  always  sinful,  and,  if  ever  there 
was  an  instance  in  which  it  was 
justifiable,  it  surely  was  when  Ananias, 
God's  vicegerent,  commanded  Paul  to 
be  unjustly  smitten.  2.  That  even 
Christ  did  not  abstain  from  complaint 
when  unjustly  smitten  by  Annas 
(see  John  xviii.  23).  3.  That  as  Paul 
was  acting  under  the  Spirit's  guidance 
when  he  stood  before  the  Sanhedrim 
(Luke  xii.  12),  we  cannot  doubt  that 
his  language  about  the  high  priest 
was  justified,  and  was  intended  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  as  a  Divine  judgment, 
which,  ten  years  later,  was  fulfilled.  4. 
That  as  the  Lord,  when  He  appeared  to 
Paul  that  night,  did  not  find  fault  with 
His  servant,  so  neither  should  we. 

III.  Deliberate  untruth  or  unworthy 
equivocation. — "  I  wist  not  that  it  was 
the  high  priest."  How  could  Paul 
say  so  when  he  knew  that  he  was 
standing  before  the  Sanhedrim  ?  In 
addition  to  the  last  two  observations 
under  the  preceding  charge,  which 
apply  to  this  with  equal  force,  the 
various  explanations  offered  in  the 
"  Critical  Remarks  "  and  "  Homiletical 
Analysis  "  may  be  consulted. 

IY.  Worldly  policy,  or  cunning 
craft. — "  I  am  a  Pharisee  .  .  .  touching 
the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead 
I  am  called  in  question."  How,  it  is 
asked,  could  Paul  describe  himself  as  a 
Pharisee  when  he  knew  that  he  had 
utterly  and  permanently  broken  with 
them ;  and  how  could  he,  as  a  good 
man,  resort  to  the  device  and  trick  of 
a  vulgar  demagogue?  Well,  it  is 
noticeable  that  this  is  the  only  point 
about  Paul's  conduct  that  did  cause 
him  uneasiness.  Yet  (1)  it  was  per- 
fectly true  that  he  was  a  Pharisee  in 
so  far  as  he  held  with  them  the  doctrine 
of  a  resurrection ;  and  (2)  if  he  did 
throw  an  apple  of  discord  among  his 
enemies  it  is  not  quite  clear  that  this 
was  sinful. 

Yer.  7.  Divide  and  Conquer ;  or, 
Paul's  Happy  Stroke  !  —  Surely  no 
defence  of  Paul  for  adopting  this  course 

485 


chap,  xxiii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


is  required,  but  all  admiration  is  due 
to  his  skill  and  presence  of  mind.  Nor 
need  we  hesitate  to  regard  such  skill 
as  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  that 
in  such  an  hour  the  Spirit  of  wisdom 
should  suggest  words  to  the  accused 
which  the  accuser  should  not  be  able  to 
gainsay.  All  prospect  of  a  fair  trial 
was  hopeless ;  he  well  knew,  from  fact 
and  present  experience,  that  personal 
odium  would  bias  his  judges,  and  vio- 
lence prevail  over  justice ;  he,  therefore 
(Neander)  uses,  in  the  cause  of  truth, 
the  maxim  so  often  perverted  to  the 
cause  of  falsehood — Divide  et  impera. 
— A  l/ord. 

Ver.  8.  The  Creed  of  the  Sadducee. 
I.  A  hopeless  and  melancholy  creed. 

— 1.  No  resurrection.  Then  (1)  Christ 
is  not  raised  and  Christ's  people  will 
not  be  raised  hereafter.  If  Christ 
still  exists,  and  if  Christ's  people  do  not 
cease  to  be  at  death,  in  both  cases 
existence  is  apart  from  the  body. 
(2)  We  are  yet  in  our  sins,  and  Christ's 
death  has  not  been  an  atonement  for 
the  sins  of  men.  (3)  The  Christian 
gospel  is  a  fiction,  the  Christian's  hope 
a  delusion,  and  the  Christian  himself 
of  all  men  most  miserable  (1  Cor.  xv. 
13-19).  2.  No  angel.  Then  (1)  man 
is  the  highest  created  being  in  the 
universe,  which  may  say  much  for 
man,  but  does  not  speak  highly  for 
the  universe,  considering  what  man 
has  in  practice  shown  himself  to  be. 
(2)  Scripture,  both  old  and  new,  which 
talks  of  principalities  ar.d  powers  in 
the  heavenly  places  and  even  represents 
them  as  having  at  times  appeared  to 
men,  must  be  set  down  as  largely 
mythical,  a  conclusion  which  may  not 
disturb  rationalising  critics,  but  which 
will  unquestionably  disconcert  sincere 
Christians.  3.  No  spirit.  Then  (1) 
man  is  not  a  composite  being,  consisting 
of  soul  and  body,  but  a  simple  organism, 
consisting  of  body  only;  and  the 
materialists  of  to-day  and  yesterday 
are  right.  (2)  There  can  be  no  im- 
mortality for  man,  since  nothing 
remains  after  the  earthly  house  of  this 
tabernacle  has  been  dissolved.     (3)  It 

486 


is  doubtful  if  there  can  be  any  Holy 
Ghost  or  any  God  distinct  from  His 
works,  in  which  case  the  dogma  of 
pantheism  must  be  accepted  as  correct, 
a  result  which  philosophers  might  hail 
as  the  highest  expression  of  wisdom, 
but  which  ordinary  reasoners  would 
not  be  able  to  distinguish  from 
atheism. 

II.  An  unproved  and  unproveable 
creed — 1.  Unproved.  No  dialectician, 
whether  scientist  or  philosopher,  has 
ever  demonstrated  that  man  is  the 
most  exalted  being  in  the  universe, 
that  he  consists  only  of  material 
particles,  and  that  when  he  dies  he 
can  never  again  return  to  life.  Argu- 
ments to  that  effect  have  been 
frequently  advanced,  but  it  is  doubtful 
it  they  have  convinced  more  than  a 
few.  At  the  bar  of  impartial  reason 
the  verdict  sounds  that  the  Sadducean 
thesis  has  not  been  established.  2. 
Unproveable.  Except  on  the  hypothesis 
that  there  is  no  personal  God,  and 
before  one  could  convert  that  hypothesis 
into  a  truth  he  must  have  roamed  the 
universe  and  demonstrated  by  personal 
examination  that  no  such  being  as 
God  anywhere  existed — in  other  words, 
must  himself  be  God. 

III.  A  refuted  and  exploded  creed. 
— 1.  By  the  consciousness  of  man,  which 
attests  that  his  "  I  "  is  something  totally 
distinct  from  his  material  body,  that 
angels  are  at  least  conceivable  beings, 
and  that  the  doctrine  of  a  resurrection 
is  in  perfect  accord  with  the  deepest 
instincts  of  his  nature.  2.  By  the 
testimony  of  Scripture,  which  announces 
the  fact  of  a  resurrection  (1  Cor.  xv.  52), 
certifies  the  existence  of  angels  (Luke 
xv.  10;  Gal.  iii.  19)  and  pre-supposes 
the  reality  of  man's  spiritual  nature 
(Job  xxxii.  8  ;  Rom.  viii.  10).  3.  By 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  which 
places  the  doctrine  of  a  future  resur- 
rection beyond  dispute,  and  in  so  doing 
guarantees  the  existence  of  man's 
spirit  as  a  separate  entity  from  his 
body.  If  it  does  not  certainly  prove 
that  there  are  angels,  it  at  least  shows, 
by  what  occurred  in  connection  with 
the  rising   of   Christ,  that   there   are 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xxiii. 


intelligences  in  God's  world  superior  to 
man. 

Note. — The  inconsistency  of  the 
Sadducees,  in  denying  the  existence  of 
angels  and  spirits  and  yet  adhering  to 
the  Pentateuch,  which  contains  so 
many  narratives  of  angelophanies, 
and  practising  the  temple  ritual,  which 
certainly  proceeded  on  the  assumption 
that  for  man  there  was  a  future  life, 
has  been  thus  explained :  The  great 
body  of  the  higher  priestly  class  were 
mere  Sadducees  and  were  carried  along 
by  one  of  the  great  waves  of  thought 
which  were  then  passing  over  the 
ancient  world,  and  were  Epicureans 
and  materialists  without  knowing  it, 
just  as  the  Pharisees  were,  even  to  the 
eye  of  a  writer  like  Josephus  (Life,  iii.), 
the  counterpart  of  the  Stoics. — 
Plumptre. 

Ver.  11.  PauVs  Midnight  Visitor. — 
"  And  the  night  following  the  Lord 
stood  by  him."    What  did  this  signify  ? 

I.  Christ's  fidelity  towards  His 
servant. — When  Christ  called  the 
persecutor  Saul  to  be  an  apostle,  He 
did  not  send  him  forth  alone  and 
unprotected,  but  put  him  under  the 
same  promise  as  had  been  given  to 
the  eleven :  "  Lo  !  I  am  with  you 
alway  ! "  The  present  appearance  of 
Christ  to  Paul  in  the  castle  prison 
showed  that  Christ  intended  to  keep 
His  word. 

II.  Christ's  sympathy  with  His 
servant. — Even  had  Christ  not  ex- 
pressed His  sympathy  in  words,  His 
presence  could  not  have  failed  to 
indicate  it.  Perhaps  also  Paul  re- 
membered the  words  which  Christ 
formerly  spoke  to  him  upon  the  way 
to  Damascus—"  Saul !  Saul  !  why  per- 
secutest  thou  Me?"  If  he  did,  he 
must  have  felt  solaced  by  the  reflection 
that  as  Christ  had  sympathised  with 
His  persecuted  followers  when  they 
were  cast  into  prison  by  him,  Saul,  so 
now  did  his  Lord  sympathise  with  him, 
Paul,  in  his  bodily  sufferings  and 
mental  anxieties. 

III.  Christ's  approbation  of  His 
servant. — Remarkable  that  no  word  of 


fault-finding  or  rebuke  falls  from  the 
lips  of  Christ.  Rather,  the  absence  of 
any  such  word  signified  approbation. 
What  a  comfort  to  Paul  !  who  always 
affirmed  it  was  a  small  matter  for  him  to 
be  judged  of  his  fellow-men  so  long  as 
he  secured  a  favourable  judgment  from 
his  Master  (1  Cor.  iv.  3).  So  should 
Christians  labour  to  be  accepted  of 
Him  (2  Cor.  v.  9). 

IV.  Christ's  protection  of  His 
servant. — "  Thou  must  bear  witness 
also  at  Rome  !  "  Then  Paul  could  not 
be  left  for  ever  in  the  hands  of  his 
enemies.  Already  Paul  had  conceived 
the  idea  of  visiting  Rome  (xix.  21). 
Now  he  learns  that  his  Master  had 
included  that  in  His  plan  also.  Hence- 
forward Paul  knew  that  he  would  lead 
a  charmed  life  until  his  work  was 
done.     So  may  the  Christian  reason. 

V.  Christ's  use  for  His  servant.— 
Paul  was  not  to  be  cast  off,  but 
promoted  to  higher  service.  "Thou 
must  bear  witness  for  Me  at  Rome 
also."  All  Paul's  past  experiences  had 
only  been  training  him  for  his  last 
place  of  ministry — Rome.  So  Christ 
leads  His  people  and  educates  them 
for  higher  and  nobler  service.  Often 
true  on  earth  ;  certainly  true  of  all 
earth's  discipline,  which  is  a  preparation 
for  nobler  service  in  heaven. 

Illustrations.  —  Saints  in  Prison. 
1.  Paul.  Not  the  first  time  this  that 
the  apostle  had  been  imprisoned.  "  In 
prisons  more  abundant  "  (2  Cor.  xi.  23) 
formed  one  important  item  in  his  life- 
record.  A  memorable  instance  oc- 
cured  in  Philippi  (xvi.  23).  Nor  was 
this  the  first  experience  Paul  had  of 
being  visited  during  night  by  Christ  in 
a  season  of  dejection.  On  an  earlier 
occasion  in  Corinth  (xviii.  9)  Christ 
had  appeared  to  him  with  words  of 
cheer.  2.  Master  Philpot.  This  emi- 
nent martyr  under  Mary  wrote  to  his 
friends  that  his  loathsome  and 
horrible  prison  was  to  him  as  pleasant 
as  the  walk  in  the  garden  of  the  King's 
Bench,  because,  though  in  the  judgment 
of  the  world  he  was  in  hell,  he  never- 
theless felt  in  the  same  the  consolation 
of     heaven.      3.  Samuel    Rutherford. 

487 


chap,  xxiii.     H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Dating  his  letters  ijrom  Christ's  palace 
in  Aberdeen,  within  which  he  was 
detained  as  in  a  prison,  this  holy  man 
thus  wrote  to  a  friend :  "  The  Lord  is 
with  me ;  I  care  not  what  man  can  do. 
I  burden  no  man.  I  want  nothing. 
No  king  is  better  provided  than  I  am  : 
sweet,  sweet  and  easy  is  the  cross  of 
my  Lord.  .  .  .  My  well  beloved  is 
kinder  and  more  warm  than  ordinary, 
and  cometh  and  visiteth  my  soul.  My 
chains  are  over-gilded  with  gold.  4. 
Madame  Guyon.  This  illustrious  lady, 
imprisoned  in  the  castle  of  Vincennes 
in  1695,  not  only  sang  but  wrote  songs 
of  praise  to  her  God.  "  It  sometimes 
seemed  to  me,"  she  wrote,  "  as  if  I 
were  a  little  bird  whom  the  Lord  had 
placed  in  a  cage ;  and  that  1  had 
nothing  now  to  do  but  sing.  The  joy 
of  my  heart  gave  a  brightness  to  the 
objects  around  me.  The  stones  of  my 
prison  looked,  in  my  eyes,  like  rubies. 
I  esteemed  them  more  than  all  the 
gaudy  brilliancies  of  a  vain  world." 

The  Midnight  Vision  in  the  Castle; 
or  the  Master  speaking  words  of  cheer 
to  His  servant.  These  words  assured 
him  of  three  things  : — 

I.  Of  a  safe  issue  out  of  his  present 
troubles. — So  they  upheld  and  com- 
forted him  in  the  uncertainty  of  his 
life  from  the  Jews. 

IT.  Of  an  accomplishment  of  his 
intention  of  visiting  Rome. — So  they 
upheld  and  comforted  him  in  his  un- 
certainty as  to  liberation  from  prison 
at  Csesarea. 

III.  Of  the  certainty  that,  however 
he  might  be  sent  thither,  he  should 
preach  the  gospel  and  bear  testimony 
at  Rome. — So  he  was  upheld  and 
comforted  in  the  uncertainty  of  his 
surviving   the  storm  in    the  Mediter- 


ranean, and  in  that  of  his  fate  on 
arriving  at  Home.  So  may  one  crumb 
of  Divine  grace  and  help  be  multiplied 
to  feed  five  thousand  wants  and 
anxieties. — A  Iford. 

Comfort  for  Christ's  Suffering 
Servants. 

I.  Christ's  presence  with  them. — As 
Christ  appeared  to  Paul  in  the  castle, 
so  is  He  ever  beside  His  faithful 
servants  in  the  hour  of  their  tribulation. 
"  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against 
us? "  "If  He  undertake  our  protection, 
we  may  set  those  that  seek  our  ruin 
at  defiance  "  (Henry). 

II.  Christ's  words  to  them. — "  Be 
of  good  cheer."  Christ  desires  His 
people  to  be  happy  under  all  circum- 
stances. Because  (1)  He  is  ever  with 
them.  "  God  is  near  thee  ;  therefore 
cheer  thee,  sad  soul !  "  (2)  All  things 
work  together  for  good  to  them  that 
love  Him.  "  Who,  then,  is  he  that 
will  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of 
that  which  is  good  1  " 

III.  Christ's  plans  for  them, — 1.  That 
they  should  serve  as  His  witnesses, 
wherever  they  might  be.  2.  That 
their  lives  should  not  terminate  till 
their  work  was  finished.  3.  That  their 
own  purposes  for  Him,  if  for  His  glory, 
should  be  fulfilled. 

Vers.  1-11.  The  Best  Advocates  of  a 
Servant  of  God  before  the  Judgment- 
Seat  of  an  Unrighteous  World. 

I.  The  comfort  of  a  good  conscience 
in  his  breast. 

II.  The  curse  of  an  evil  thing  in 
the  ranks  of  the  enemy. 

III.  The  sympathy  of  the  honest 
and  unprejudiced  in  the  world. 

IV.  The  gracious  testimony  of  a 
righteous  judge  in  heaven. — Gerok. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  12—22. 

The  Conspiracy  of  the  (more  than)  Forty  ;  or,  Paul's  Life  Endangered. 

I.  The  plotters. — 1.  Their  persons.  Jews;  not  members  of  the  council,  but 
zealots  among  the  outside  crowd  who  had  been  disappointed  at  the  seeming 
failure  of  proceedings  against  Paul.  2.  Their  number.  Over  forty.  Nothing 
symbolic  in  the  number,  which  might  have  been  any  other.  The  conspirators 
having  been  so  many  were  a  formidable  band  as  to  strength,  but  a  weak  conclave 

488 


H0MILE1IC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xxiii. 


as  to  secrecy.  When  two  have  possession  of  a  secret  it  becomes  liable  to  escape 
into  publicity  ;  how  much  more  when  it  is  shared  in  by  nearly  half  a  hundred  ? 
3.  Their  aim.  To  kill  Paul — which  probably  they  considered  could  not  be 
compassed  in  any  other  way  than  by  secret  assassination,  since  the  Sanhedrim  had 
lost  the  power  of  inflicting  capital  punishment,  and  to  all  appearance  Rome 
had  thrown  her  shield  over  the  apostle's  person.  4.  Their  oath.  Not  to  eat  or 
drink  anything  until  they  had  accomplished  their  purpose.  To  this  course  they 
had  bound  themselves  by  a  solemn  imprecation  before  God.  A  rash  experiment 
it  might  have  turned  out  for  them  had  not  a  loophole  been  provided  for  escaping 
from  their  vow,  in  case  it  should  prove  unsuccessful  or  impossible  to  be  fulfilled. 
But,  according  to  the  Talmud,  one  who  had  taken  on  himself  a  rash  vow  might 
be  released  from  it  on  application  to  the  wise  men  of  the  time.  "  He  that  hath 
a  vow  not  to  eat,"  said  the  Jewish  doctors,  "  woe  to  him  if  he  eat,  and  woe  to 
him  if  he  eat  not ;  if  he  eat  he  sinneth  against  his  vow  j  if  he  eat  not,  he 
sinneth  against  his  life.  What  must  one  do  in  such  a  case  1  Let  him  approach 
the  wise  ones,  and  they  will  release  him  from  his  vow,  as  it  is  written,  '  The 
tongue  of  the  wise  is  health'  (Prov.  xii.  18)."  (From  the  Talmud ;  quoted  by 
Lightfoot,  Uora3  Hebraicce  et  Talmudicai). 

II.  The  plot. — 1.  Its  disclosure  to  the  chief  priests  and  the  elders.  These  were 
manifestly  the  Sadducean  members  of  the  Sanhedrim,  who  were  hostile  to  Paul. 
The  plan  discovered  to  these,  was  (1)  cleverly  contrived  by  the  would-be  assassins. 
It  possessed  at  least  one  mark  of  sagacity — it  was  simple  and  not  difficult  to 
understand.  The  chief  priests  and  elders  should  call  a  second  meeting  «of  the 
council,  propose  to  amicably  forget  their  yesterday's  bickerings,  lay  aside  their 
mutual  jealousies  and  recriminations,  unite  against  their  common  foe  and  request 
the  military  tribune  to  fetch  down  his  prisoner  a  second  time  into  their  council 
chamber,  when  they  would  promise  with  due  care  and  becoming  seriousness 
to  make  an  accurate  investigation  into  the  charges  which  had  been  preferred 
against  him.  If  they  did  this,  the  military  tribune  would  hardly  refuse  their 
request ;  and  then  they,  the  confederates,  the  "Invincibles  "  of  Jerusalem,  would 
be  in  readiness,  as  the  apostle  was  being  conducted  back  to  their  chamber,  most 
likely  under  a  small  escort,  to  fall  upon  him  by  the  way  and  despatch  him  with 
their  knives.  It  appears  to  have  been  told  out,  as  well  as  contrived,  in  cold 
blood.  The  conspirators  seemingly  were  not  troubled  with  qualms  of  conscience, 
or  secret  fears,  but  talked  about  their  infernal  project  like  a  matter  of  common 
business.  The  plan,  moreover,  appears  to  have  been  (2)  complacently  listened  to 
by  those  "  holy  scoundrels  "  into  whose  ears  it  was  poured.  Not  one  of  all  these 
venerable  priests  and  elders  expressed  themselves  as  shocked  at  the  proposal. 
Had  they  but  "shook  their  heads"  and  "made  a  pause"  when  those  villains 
told  their  tale,  or  "  turned  an  eye  of  doubt "  upon  their  faces,  "  deep  shame  had 
struck  "  them  "  dumb,"  wrought  in  them  fears,  and  caused  them  to  break  off  their 
purposed  deed  of  blood.  But  no  !  the  dark  communication  whispered  into  their 
ears  made  secret  joy  within  their  guilty  bosoms.  When,  having  assented  to  the 
project,  they  laid  it  before  the  full  council,  it  was  (3)  silently  accepted  by 
all,  probably  also  by  the  Pharisees,  who  may  have  felt  that  they  had  gone 
too  far  in  throwing  their  shield  over  a  prisoner  so  hateful  as  Paul.  "  The 
miserable  rulers,  who  scruple  neither  to  smile  nor  slay  contrary  to  the  law, 
accept  this  bold  proposal  just  as  willingly  as  they  embraced  Judas's  offer 
against  Jesus"  (Stier).  2.  Its  detection  by  Paul's  nephew.  How  he  came 
to  be  in  Jerusalem,  and  how  he  obtained  a  knowledge  of  the  conspiracy  against 
his  uncle,  are  points  that  have  not  been  reported  by  Luke.  But  he  may  have 
lived  in  Jerusalem  with  his  mother,  Paul's  sister,  or  been  a  student  at 
some  Rabbinical  school  in  the  city,  as  Paul  himself  had  formerly  been,  or 
arrived  in  the  Metropolis  from  Borne  as  a  feast  pilgrim;  while  it  is  scarcely 

489 


chap,  xxiii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


necessary  to  inquire  how  a  secret  got  out  which  was  first  shared  in  by  forty  un- 
principled ruffians  like  the  conspirators,  and  then  told  to  a  circle  of  bloodthirsty 
hypocrites  like  the  Sanhedrists  (see  "Critical  Remarks").  Anyhow,  the  diabolical 
project  having  come  to  his  ears,  he  carried  it  to  his  uncle  (to  whom  he  appears 
to  have  found  easy  access),  who,  calling  to  him  one  of  the  centurions,  requested 
that  the  youth  might  be  conducted  to  the  chief  captain,  for  whom  he  had 
a  communication  of  importance.  This  done,  the  chief  captain  having  taken  him 
aside,  listened  to  the  story — which  possibly  did  not  startle  him,  knowing,  as  he 
must  have  done,  the  characters  of  both  the  Sanhedrists  and  of  the  lawless 
zealots,  with  which  the  city  at  the  time  was  full,  but  which  he  cautioned  the 
young  man  to  keep  to  himself,  along  with  the  fact  that  he  had  discovered  it  to 
him,  the  chief  captain.  3.  Its  defeat  by  the  chief  captain.  With  a  promptitude 
which  showed  he  regarded  the  young  man's  story  as  antecedently  probable,  and 
intrinsically  credible,  and  the  situation  as  highly  critical  both  for  his  prisoner, 
who  might  lose  his  life,  and  for  himself  who  might  be  punished  for  neglect 
of  duty  in  allowing  a  prisoner  under  his  charge  to  be  assassinated,  he  issued 
instant  orders  for  the  preparation  of  an  escort  of  two  hundred  heavy  armed 
soldiers,  with  seventy  horsemen  and  two  hundred  spearmen  (see  "  Critical 
Remarks  "),  to  start  at  the  third  hour  of  the  night — i.e.,  about  9  p.m.,  to  convey 
Paul  to  Csesarea,  which  order  was  executed  and  by  which  Paul  was  rescued. 

Learn — 1.  The  depths  of  Satan  which  exist  in  the  hearts  of  men — not 
always  excepting  those  who  profess  to  be  religious  (Rev.  ii.  24).  2.  The  ease 
with  which  God  can  bring  secret  things  to  light,  and  disappoint  the  devices  of 
the  crafty.  3.  The  safety  of  those  whom  Christ  shields.  4.  The  duty  of  those 
whom  God  has  promised  to  protect  not  to  neglect  the  use  of  ordinary  means.  5. 
The  great  service — to  God,  Christ  and  men — which  may  be  rendered  by  a  youth. 

HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS 

Vers.    11,    12.   The  Two   Covenants  to   hear   of   the   plot.       2.    The    chief 

against  Paul  and  For  Him.  captain,  who  took  measures  for  Paul's 

I.  The  murderous  covenant  of  Paul's  transportation    to   Caesarea.      3.    The 
enemies. — Powerful.     1.  By  their  num-  soldiers — footmen,  horsemen,  and  spear- 
ber — forty  against  one.     2.  By   their  men — who  escorted  him  on  the  way. 
design — sworn   to   kill    him.       3.    By 

their  craft  and  dissimulation.  The  Hand  of  Providence,  as  seen  in 

II.  The  gracious  covenant  of  Paul's  the  circumstances  that  led  to  the  de- 
Lord. — More  powerful.  1.  He  dis-  feat  of  the  conspiracy  and  the  rescue 
closes  the  designs  of  the  conspirators.  of  Paul. 

2.  Against  powerful  enemies  He  stirs  I.  The  number  of  the  conspirators, 

up  yet  more  powerful  protectors.     3.  — This    made    its    secrecy   practically 

He  brings  Paul  uninjured  out  of  the  impossible. 

den  of  murderers. — Gerok.  II.  The    discovery  of  the   plot   al- 
most immediately  after  it  was  made. — 

Vers.  12-23.  The  Foes  and  the  Friends  This  gave  time  for  counterplans. 

of  Paid.  III.  The  presence  in  Jerusalem  of 

I.  The  foes  stirred  up  by  Satan. —  Paul's  sister's  son. — Had  he  not  got 
1.  The  forty,  and  more,  conspirators  to  hear  of  the  conspiracy,  access  might 
sworn  to  kill  Paul.  2.  The  chief  not  have  been  so  easily  found  to  the 
priests  and  elders  aiders  and  abetters  apostle's  presence. 

of  their  murderous  scheme.      3.   The  IV.    The    kindness    of    the    chief 

high   priest   and  the  Sanhedrim  who  captain. — Otherwise   he    might   either 

gave  it  their  co-operation.  not  have  listened  to  or  not  believed  in 

II.  The  friends  raised  up  by  God.  the  young  man's  story. 

— 1.  Paul's  sister's  son,  who  happened         V.  The  credence  given  to  the  tale. — 

490 


H0MILE1IC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xxiii. 


This  led  the  military  tribune  to  take  in- 
stant measures  for  the  apostle's  safety, 
probably  before  the  Sanhedrim  had  ap- 
proached him  with  a  request  for  the 
re-hearing  of  Paul's  case. 

VI.  The  strength  of  the  escort. — 
This  rendered  it  certain  that  no  sur- 
prise attack  upon  the  road  would 
succeed  in  doing  hurt  to  the  apostle. 

How  the  Lord  Laughed  at  Paul's 
Enemies. — By  delivering  Paul  — 

I.  From  the  heart  of  a  powerful, 
determined,  and  promising  conspiracy. 

II.  At  the  moment  when  his  des- 
truction seemed  imminent  and  inevit- 
able. 

III.  By  means  of  a  boy,  whose 
promptitude  of  action  did  more  for 
Paul  than  all  the  plotting  of  the 
zealots  and  Sanhedrists  did  against 
him. 

IV.  With  the  aid  of  the  instrument 
they  hoped  to  employ  for  his  destruc- 
tion— viz.,  the  chief  captain. 

Vers.  12-24.  A  Defeated  Plot. 

I.  The  formation  of  the  plot. — The 

depths  of  Satan.     1.   The  conspirators. 

(1)  The  Jews,  or  the  Jewish  party,  in 
particular  forty  of  them,  hot-headed 
zealots,  "  the  Orangemen  of  Judaism." 

(2)  The  chief  priests  and  the  elders, 
the  leaders  of  the  party  who  were  sup- 
posed to  have  influence  with  the  San- 
hedrim. (3)  The  council,  or  Sanhedrim, 
who,  without  question,  acquiesced  in 
the  diabolical  project.  2.  The  con- 
spiracy.  (1)  Its  object :  to  kill  Paul. 
So  ten  zealots  conspired  to  assassinate 
Herod  the  Great  because  he  had  built 
a  theatre  and  held  gladiatorial  shows 
in  the  Holy  City.  (2)  Its  motive. 
Partly  chagrin  at  being  defeated  in  the 
council  on  the  previous  day,  but  chiefly 
hatred  of  Paul  as  an  apostate.  So 
Matthias  slew  a  Jew  who  had  offered 
sacrifice  at  Modin  (See  "  Critical  Re- 
marks"). (3)  Its  bond.  An  oath 
neither  to  eat  nor  drink  until  their 
project  should  be  realised.  (4)  Its 
plan.  To  persuade  the  captain  to 
fetch  down  Paul  to  the  council,  so  that 
he  might  be  stabbed  on  the  road. 


II.  The  discovery  of  the  plot. — The 

folly  of  sin.  Clever  people  frequently 
outwit  themselves.  1.  The  conspirators 
were  too  many.  Moral :  when  you 
want  a  secret  to  be  kept,  tell  it  to  no 
one.  2.  The  plan  was  too  good.  The 
conspirators  were  so  captivated  with 
the  ingenuity  of  their  scheme  that  they 
could  not  refrain  from  talking  about  it. 
3.  The  result  was  too  sure.  So  certain 
were  the  plotters  of  success  that  they 
omitted  the  most  ordinary  precautions 
for  safety.  They  paid  no  attention  to 
who  was  listening  while  they  were 
talking  ;  and  so  it  came  to  pass  that 
Paul's  nephew  came  to  hear  of  it. 

III.  The  defeat  of  the  plot— the 
counsel  of  the  Most  High.— 1.  The 
young  man  conveyed  the  information  to 
his  uncle.  A  proper  and  courageous 
thing  to  do.  Indicated  presence  of 
mind  and  promptitude  of  action. 
2.  Paul  requested  a  centurion  to  take  the 
lad  to  the  captain.  A  mark  of  the  in- 
fluence which  Paul  had  acquired,  even 
over  his  keepers.  Superiority  of 
character  will  shine  forth,  even  in  a 
prison.  3.  The  captain  heard  the  story, 
and  charged  the  lad  to  hold  his  tongue. 
Remark  upon  the  captain's  courtesy 
and  prudence.  Even  heathens  may 
exhibit  some  virtues.  4.  Lysias  ar- 
ranges for  Paul's  t?'ansmission  te 
Cmsarea.  Thus  defeating  the  devices 
of  the  apostle's  foes. 

Ver.  18.  Paul  the  Prisoner. 

I.  In  the  mouth   of   the   centurion 
.  a  colourless  designation  of  condition. 

II.  In  the  lips  of  his  enemies  an 
angry  speech  of  degradation. 

III.  In  the  language  of  Paul  a 
boasted  title  of  honour. — Eph.  iii.  1, 
iv.  1  j  Phil.  i.  9  ;  2  Tim.  i.  8.  "  Paul 
the  prisoner ;  but  therein  happier  than 
any  potentate  with  all  his  chains  of 
gold.  Said  Ignatius,  '  My  chain  is  my 
honour,  my  links  pearls.'  One  hour 
changed  Joseph's  fetters  into  gold 
chains,  his  stocks  into  a  chariot,  his 
gaol  into  a  palace,  Potiphar's  captive 
into  his  master's  lord,  the  noise  of  his 
gyves  into  abrech.  So,  and  much  more 
than  so,   will   it   be  with  all  Christ's 

491 


CHAP,  xxill.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


prisoners  at  His  coming.  .  .  .  This 
made  Chrysostom  say  that  he  had 
rather  be  Paul,  the  prisoner  of  Jesus 
Christ,  than  Paul  rapt  up  into  the 
third  heaven  "  (Trapp). 

This  Young  Man;  or,  What  a  Youth 
may  Be  and  Do. — Discovered  in  the 
characteristics  and  conduct  of  Paul's 
sister's  son. 

I.  Characteristics. — Five  noble 
qualities  in  any,  but  specially  in  a 
youth.  1.  Intelligence.  Paul's  nephew 
walked  not  through  the  world  or  the 
city  of  Jerusalem  sleeping  or  dreaming, 
but  kept  his  eyes  and  ears  open,  and 
picked  up  the  plot  which  had  been 
formed  against  his  uncle.  2.  Affection. 
On  what  footing  religiously  he  stood 
with  his  uncle  cannot  be  told.  Perhaps, 
like  his  uncle,  he  was  a  Christian  dis- 
ciple, though  just  as  likely  he  was  not. 
Yet  in  the  sudden  peril  which  con- 
fronted his  mother's  brother,  he  forgot 
not  his  blood  relationship,  and  felt 
imperilled  to  make  a  bold  stroke  for 
his  rescue.  3.  Promptitude.  Much 
depended  on  the  swiftness  of  his  action. 
Had  he  delayed  in  making  known  his 
discovery,  his  uncle's  life  might  have 
been  lost.  But  the  instant  he  became 
acquainted  with  the  gruesome  plot 
he  took  measures  for  its  frustration. 
4.  Courage.  Had  he  been  timid  he 
would  have  shrunk  from  the  difficulties 
that  opposed  his  forward  movement. 
But  animated  by  a  holy  affection  he 
brought  to  the  execution  of  his  purpose 
a  lofty  and  undaunted  fortitude.  First, 
he  found  or  forced  his  way  into  the 
castle  to  see  his  uncle,  and  next  he 
boldly  proceeded  to  the  governor's  pre- 
sence ;  and  finally  he  told  out  his  story, 
seemingly  without  pausing  to  inquire 
whether  it  would  be  believed.  5.  Dis- 
cretion. Counselled  to  keep  his  secret 
to  himself  and  to  reveal  to  no  one  the 
communication  he  had  made  to  the 
governor,   he   did   so,   and    thus   both 


escaped  the  danger  to  which  his  own 
life  would  have  been  exposed,  had  it 
got  abroad  that  he  had  foiled  the  plans 
of  the  conspirators,  and  enabled  the 
governor  to  carry  out  his  scheme  for 
the  safety  of  Paul. 

II.  Conduct. — 1.  He  frustrated  a 
wicked  'plot.  Bendered  futile  and  vain 
the  murderous  designs  which  had  been 
formed  against  Paul.  By  being  shrewd 
and  wide-awake,  prompt  and  decisive, 
loving  and  considerate,  courageous  and 
fearless,  prudent  and  cautious,  he  de- 
feated forty  villains  who  had  plotted 
together,  and  bound  themselves  under 
a  curse,  to  commit  a  dark  deed  of  blood, 
and  delivered  the  Sanhedrim  from 
being  partakers  of  the  awful  crime. 
2.  He  saved  a  noble  life.  The  noblest 
life  that  that  day  existed  in  Jerusalem; 
the  life  of  the  greatest  man  that  had 
arisen  within  the  Christian  Church  ; 
the  life  of  one  who  under  God  had 
proved  himself  one  of  the  grandest 
benefactors  of  his  nation  and  of  the 
world.  3.  He  furthered  a  Divine 
purpose.  How  little  men  know  when 
they  serve  as  instruments  in  God's 
hands.  It  was  in  the  Divine  purpose 
and  plan  that  Paul  should  preach  at 
Borne,  and  consequently  that  he  should 
escape  from  this  peril.  Yet  neither  of 
these  facts  were  known  to  the  youth, 
who  simply  carried  out  his  own 
thoughts,  and  in  so  doing  advanced 
the  Divine  design.  4.  He  secured  for 
the  Church  and  the  world  a  rich  legacy 
of  religious  literature.  Had  Paul's  life 
been  taken  as  the  result  of  that  con- 
spiracy, both  the  Church  and  the 
world  would  have  been  poorer  to-day 
by  the  lack  of  those  immortal  letters 
which  were  written  from  Caesarea  and 
from  Borne. 

Learn — 1.  That  young  men  may  be 
used  by  God  for  the  loftiest  purposes  ; 
and  2.  That  in  order  to  be  so  used 
they  should  cultivate  for  themselves  the 
noblest  qualities  of  mind  and  heart. 

35. 


HOMILETIC  AL   AN  A  LYSIS. —Verses  23 

The  Midnight  Ride  to  Ccesarea  ;  or,  PauVs  Safety  Ensured. 
I.  The  departure  from  Jerusalem.  — 1.  The  time.     "The  third  hour  of  the 
night ;  "  i.e.,  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening.     The  military  tribune  obviously 

492 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xxiii. 


lost  no  time.  Neither  had  God.  The  conspiracy  had  been  hatched  in  the  early 
hours  of  the  morning.  In  the  course  of  the  forenoon  it  might  be  laid  before  the 
council.  In  the  afternoon  it  was  public  talk  in  the  inns.  In  the  evening  by 
nine  o'clock,  it  was  defeated.    Well  says  Russell  Lowell  in  his  "  Biglow  Papers  "  : 

"  And  you've  got  to  get  up  early 
If  you  want  to  take  in  God." 

2.  The  escort.  Two  hundred  footmen,  seventy  horsemen,  and  two  hundred  spear- 
men. A  large  guard  for  the  protection  of  one  man.  From  this  may  be  inferred 
the  military  tribune's  sense  of  the  danger  arising  from  the  reckless  daring  of  the 
Sicarii  which  infested  the  country.  Besides,  the  Roman  citizenship  of  Paul 
rendered  it  necessary  that  no  risk  should  be  run  of  harm  coming  to  him  while  in 
the  tribune's  care.  "  Or,  perhaps,  finding  Paul  to  be  a  very  extraordinary  man, 
the  chief  captain  was  proud  to  have  him  his  prisoner  and  under  his  protection  j 
and  the  mighty  parade  with  which  he  sent  him  off  intimates  as  much  "  (Henry). 

3.  The  destination.     The  soldiers  were  simply  told  they  were  to  go  to  Cassarea. 
Even   the  centurion  was  not  informed  at  first  of  the  reason  of  this  midnight 
march.  His  instructions  ran  to  provide  beasts  of  burden,  either  horses  or  mules — 
to  carry  packages  he  might  infer,  but,  as  Luke  indicates,  to  set  Paul  on  one  of 
them,  and  so  convey  him  safe  to  Felix.     4.  The  accompanying  letter.     (1)  Its 
writer.     Claudius  Lysias,  concerning  whom  nothing  is  known  beyond  what  is 
here  recorded.       (2)   Its  recipient.      Felix  (Antoninus),  at  that  time    Roman 
Procurator  of  Judsea,  to  which  office  he  had  been  appointed  a.d.  53.    A  freedman 
of  the  emperor  Claudius,  and  brother  of  Pallas  the  favourite  of  Nero,  he  "  ex- 
ercised his  power  as  a  prince  with  the  spirit  of  a  slave"  (Tacitus,  Hist.,  v.  9), 
while  Josephus  (Ant.,  XX.  viii.  5)  relates  that  under  this  rule    "  the  affairs 
of  the  Jews  grew  worse  and   worse  continnally."      Suetonius  affirms  that  he 
was  the  husband  of  three  queens :    (a)   Drusilla,  the  daughter  of  Juba,   king 
of  Mauritania  and  Selene,  the  daughter  of  Antony  and  Cleopatra ;  (b)  another 
Drusilla,  the  daughter  of  Herod  Agrippa  I.,  sister  of  Herod  Agrippa  II.,  and 
wife  of  Azizus,  King  of  Emesa,  whom  she  left  to  marry  Felix ;  and  (c)  a  royal 
lady,  whose  name  is  unknown.     This  immoral  governor  ruled  over  Judaea  for 
seven  or  eight  years,  was  recalled  by  Nero  in  the  year  a.d.   60  or    61,   and 
accused  by  the  Csesarean  Jews,  but  acquitted  on  the  intercession  of  his  brother 
Pallas   (Jos.,   Ant.    XX.,   viii.    9).      He   was  succeeded  by  Festus.      Tradition 
reports  that  along  with  Drusilla  and  their  son  he  perished  in  an  eruption  of 
Mount  Vesuvius,  in  the  days  of  Titus  Caesar.    (3)  Its  contents.    After  a  courteous 
salutation  (ver.  26),  it  explained  how  Paul  had  come  into  his  hands  (ver.  27), 
and  why  Paul  was  now  forwarded  to  him  (ver.  30).     The  apostle  had  been 
rescued  by  him  (Lysias)  when  in  danger  of  being  slain  in  the  temple  (ver.  27), 
because  he  (Lysias)  had  come  to  know  that  he  (Paul)  was  a  Roman — an  in- 
correct statement,  which  Lysias  makes  to  represent  his  own  conduct  in  the  most 
favourable  light,  and  which  indirectly  confirms  the  genuineness  of  the  letter 
(Meyer).     The  apostle  had  been  examined  before  the  council  of  his  countrymen, 
with  the  result  that  nothing  had  been  found  against  him  worthy  of  death  or  of 
bonds,  but  only  certain  charges  about  questions  of  their  law  had  been  advanced 
to  his  discredit  (vers.  28,  29).     The  apostle's  life  had  become  imperilled  in  conse- 
quence of  a  conspiracy  against  him,  which  had  come  to  his,  the  tribune's  ears, 
and  which  was  the  reason  why  Paul  had  been  forwarded  to  Cassarea,  that  if  his 
accusers  had  aught  to  urge  against  him  they  might  do  so  before  a  regular 
tribunal. 

II.  The  arrival  at  Caesarea. — 1.  The  halt  at  Antipatris.  This  town,  built  by 
Herod  the  Gieat,  on  a  site  called  Kaphar-saba  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XIII.  xv.  1 ;  XVI. 
v.  2) — the  modern  Kefr  Saba — and  named  Antipatris  in  honour  of  his  father, 
was  forty  miles  from  Jerusalem,  on  the  direct  road  to  Caesarea,  and  might  easily 

493 


chap,  xxiii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


be  reached,  by  a  forced  march  of  four  miles  an  hour,  by  seven  or  nine  o'clock 
a.m.  Here  the  cavalcade  halted  for  the  day,  and  on  the  morrow — i.e.,  the  day 
after  arriving  at  Antipatris — the  horsemen  and  spearmen  proceeded  on  their 
journey  to  complete  the  twenty-six  miles  that  remained  between  Antipatris  and 
Caesarea,  the  soldiers  returning  to  Jerusalem,  as  the  most  dangerous  part  of  the 
road  was  then  passed.  2.  The  presentation  of  the  letter  and  the  prisoner  to  Felix. 
This  was  done  on  reaching  Caesarea.  Felix,  on  perusing  the  document,  put  only 
one  question,  inquiring  to  what  province  the  prisoner  belonged.  "  Felix  was  not 
the  principal  Roman  official  in  that  part  of  the  empire.  The  proconsul  of  Syria 
bore  supreme  authority  over  Judaea.  Felix  was  proconsul,  or  deputy,  of  Judaea 
under  that  great  official.  .  .  .  Felix  deemed  it  expedient  to  inquiie  respecting  the 
nationality  of  the  prisoner,  as  it  might  have  been  desirable  to  have  him  sent  at 
once  to  the  seat  of  the  government  of  some  other  procurator  or  proconsul " 
(Spence).  Compare  Pilate's  action  in  sending  Christ,  a  Galilean,  to  be  judged  by 
Herod  (Luke  xxiii.  6,  7).  3.  The  decision  of  Felix  concerning  Paul.  Having 
learnt  that  Paul  belonged  to  Cilicia,  Felix  determined  to  investigate  his  cause 
himself.  "  The  political  motives  which  induced  him  to  retain  a  Cilician  in 
Judaea  are  to  us  now  unknown  "  (Spence).  When  Paul's  accusers  should  arrive 
the  trial  would  be  opened.  Meanwhile  the  apostle  was  commanded  to  be  kept 
in  Herod's  judgment-hall,  pretorium,  or  palace — originally  a  mansion,  erected 
by  Herod  for  his  accommodation,  but  then  used  as  an  official  residence  by  the 
Roman  governor.  Most  likely  a  part  of  this  edifice  was  set  apart  for  the  lodging 
of  state  prisoners,  and  in  any  case  it  is  apparent  that  in  Caesarea  Paul  was  not 
treated  like  a  common  criminal,  but  allowed  a  large  amount  of  liberty,  his  friends 
being  permitted  to  visit  him  (xxiv.  23),  during  the  two  years  of  his. confinement 
in  that  city. 

Learn — 1.  The  respect  which  Christians,  when  sincere,  exact,  even  from  men 
of  the  world.  This  shown  by  the  numerous  guard  provided  to  escort  Paul. 
2.  The  disrespect  to  truth  which  is  often  exhibited  by  men  of  the  world.  This 
instanced  by  Lysias'  inaccuracy  in  his  letter.  3.  The  possibility  of  finding  virtue 
in  the  hearts  of  those  who  have  not  been  renewed  by  Divine  grace.    As  in  Lysias. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  25-30.  Lysias'  Letter  to  Felix,  previous  knowledge  that  he  was  a 
"  This  epistle,  which  is  a  good  specimen  Roman  citizen,  though  it  is  evident 
of  the  Roman  method  of  writing  this  was  not  the  case.  In  other 
letters,  may  be  considered  as  a  model  respects,  the  account  w7as  fair  and 
of  brevity,  simplicity,  and  perspicuity.  candid  ;  and  we  cannot  wonder  that  a 
The  customary  title  of  respect  to  a  heathen  should  state  his  conduct  in 
superior,  and  expression  of  good-will,  that  light  which  was  most  favourable 
are  once  only  made  use  of  ;  and  in  this  to  his  own  reputation  and  advance- 
it  difters  exceedingly  from  modern  ment,  and  not  likely  to  injure  any 
epistles  to  persons  of  high  rank  and  man  "  (Scott).  "  This  letter  shows  us 
authority,  which  are  generally  en-  that  Claudius  Lysias  has  granted  pro- 
cumbered  with  multiplied  compliments  tection  to  the  Roman  citizen  without 
and  ascriptions  of  honour.  Lysias,  being  attracted  by  the  witness  of  the 
however,  was  careful  not  to  intimate  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  respect  of  a 
to  Felix  that  he  had  bound  Paul,  in  Roman,  which  he  demands  of  the  Jews, 
order  to  scourge  him ;  and  as  we  sup-  he  wilfully  emphasises,  by  so  repre- 
pose  this  to  have  been  an  exact  copy  sen  ting  the  matter  as  if  he  had  rescued 
of  the  letter,  it  appears  he  was  willing  Paul  from  the  Jews,  after  having 
Felix  should  conclude  that  his  inter-  learnt  of  his  Roman  citizenship, 
position  in  Paul's  favour  arose  from  a  Through  this  crafty  report  he  expected 

494 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap,  xxiii. 


to  receive  from  his  excellency  Felix  the 
governor  the  more  praise,  while  we 
see  that  Lysias  was  a  man  of  not  more 
than  heathen  virtue.  The  more 
powerfully  also  through  this  showed 
the  hand  of  the  Lord,  which  can 
deliver  from  the  wisdom  of  the  mighty 
and  can  make  all  things,  even  the 
ambition  of  a  heathen  officer,  work  for 
the  good  of  poor  Christians  "  (Besser). 

Ver.  31.  The  Apostle's  Ride  to  Anti- 
patris. — A  modern  counterpart  of  this 
has  been  found  in  Luther's  conveyance 
to  Wartburg  by  his  friends  after  the 
Diet  of  Worms.  "  He  was  enjoined 
not  to  preach  on  his  way  home. 
Declaring,  however,  that  the  word  of 
God  was  free,  he  preached,  despite 
the  injunction,  at  Hirschfeld  and 
Eisenach.  As  he  was  making  a  little 
detour  from  the  latter  place,  in  order 
to  visit  some  of  his  relatives  and 
friends  at  Mbhra,  near  Salzungen,  he 
was  suddenly  fallen  upon,  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Alten stein  and  Walters- 
hansen,  by  a  company  of  horsemen, 
lifted  out  of  the  waggon,  and  whilst 
his  companions,  Nicholas  Amsdorf  and 
James  Luther,  were  suffered  quietly 
to  go  on  their  way,  he  was  set  upon  a 
horse,  driven  about  for  some  hours  in 
the  forest,  and  finally,  at  eleven  o'clock 
at  night,  brought  to  the  castle  of 
Wartburg,  near  Eisenach,  which  had 
formerly  been  the  seat  of  the  old  land- 
graves of  Thuringia.  It  soon  became 
evident  that  this  sudden  capture, 
which,  in  all  probability,  was  ordered 
by  the  elector,  was  intended  to  secure 
the  well-being  and  personal  safety  of 
the  Reformer  "  (Hagenbach's  History 
of  the  Reformation,  i.  138,  139). 

Paul's  Midnight  Escapes. 

I.  From  Damascus. — By  being  let 
down  over  the  city  wall  in  a  basket 
(ix.  25). 

II.  From  Thessalonica. — After  the 
uproar  in  that  city,  by  being  sent  away 
to  Bercea  (xvii.  10). 

III.  From  Jerusalem. — To  Antipa- 
tris  and  Csesarea. 


PauVs  Last  Departure  from  Jeru- 
salem. 

I.  A  mournful  departure  of  a  wit- 
ness for  the  truth,  whose  message  of 
salvation  his  blinded  people  have  re- 
jected. 

II.  The  glorious,  triumphant  march 
of  an  anointed  servant  of  God,  whom 
the  Lord  leads  victoriously  through  the 
midst  of  enemies. 

III.  The  solemn  homeward  journey 
of  a  warrior  of  Christ,  who  goes  to 
meet  his  last  fight,  his  last  victory,  his 
last  reward. — Gerok. 

Vers.  33-35.  Paul's  First  Interview 
with  Felix. 

I.  Presented  to  the  governor. — The 
representative  of  the  Lord  of  the 
whole  earth  to  the  plenipotentiary  of 
Caasar,  the  minister  of  heaven  to  the 
servant  of  Home,  the  noblest  man  that 
ever  stood  in  Herod's  palace  to  one  of 
the  worst  that  ever  found  in  it  a 
home. 

II.  Questioned  by  the  governor. — 
As  to  what  province  he  was  of.  Per- 
haps out  of  mere  curiosity,  more  likely 
because  he  wished  if  possible  to  shirk 
an  unpleasant  duty  by  handing  him 
over  to  some  other  official.  The  least 
important  question  Felix  could  have 
asked. 

III.  Accepted  with  the  governor  — 
So  far,  at  least,  as  not  to  be  condemned 
by  him  without  a  hearing.  Even 
Felix  accorded  him  what  his  country- 
men so  often  denied  him — permission 
to  defend  himself.  He  should  not  be 
pronounced  a  criminal  without  a  fair 
trial.  Sometimes  heathens  may  teach 
their  more  enlightened  fellows  lessons 
in  morality  and  goodness. 

IV.  Lodged  beside  the  governor. — 
Kept  in  Herod's  palace.  "  Another 
trace  of  the  faithful  care  of  God  for 
His  servant,  as  He  granted  him  time 
and  rest  to  pray  and  strengthen  him- 
self in  the  Lord  ; "  but  also  an  uncon- 
scious tribute  of  respect  and  honour 
paid  by  Felix  to  the  illustrious  prisoner 
who  stood  before  him. 


495 


chap.  xxiv.      IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAPTER    XXIY. 

Paul  before  Felix — The  First  Trial  at  Cesarea. 

§  1.  The  Indictment  of   Tertullus;    or,   the  Vapid   Eloquence  of   a   Heathen 

Lawyer  (vers.  1-9). 
§  2.  The   Answer   of   Paul ;    or,   the   Lofty   Oration   of    a   Christian   Apostle 

(vers.  10-23). 
§  3.  The  Interview  with  Felix  and  Drusilla ;  or,  a  Notable  Discourse  and  its 

Effects  (vers.  24-27). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  After  five  days. — Reckoned  from  Paul's  departure  from  Jerusalem  (Kuinoel,  Meyer, 
De  Wette,  Hackett,  Alford,  Plumptre),  though  some  (Holtzmann,  Lechler,  Zockler,  Olshausen, 
and  others)  prefer  to  count  from  Paul's  arrival  at  Cassarea.  The  former  agrees  better  with 
the  statement  that  twelve  days  had  elapsed  since  his  arrival  in  Jerusalem  (ver.  11).  The 
elders. — I.e.,  the  Sanhedrists,  who  were  probably  represented  by  certain  of  their  number. 
The  oldest  authorities  read  "  some  of  the  elders  "  which,  however,  has  the  appearance  of 
being  a  correction  (Hackett,  Alford,  Lechler).  A  certain  orator,  rhetorician,  or  advocate, 
acquainted  with  the  forms  of  Roman  law,  which  were  not  understood  by  the  people  of  the 
provinces,  who  therefore  had  to  employ  such  barristers  or  rhetoricians  (=oratores  forenses 
or  causidici  publici)  to  plead  for  them  before  Roman  tribunals.  Tertullus. — A  diminutive 
from  Tertius.  Probably  a  Roman.  Had  the  trial  been  conducted  in  Latin,  which  cannot  be 
proved,  Luke  would  most  likely  have  noted  it  (compare  xxii.  2).  Who. — I.e.,  not  Tertullus, 
but  Ananias  and  the  elders  through  him.  Informed  the  governor  against  Paul. — I.e.,  lodged 
their  complaint  against  him. 

Ver.  2.  Called  forth. — Or,  simply  called.  After  the  charges  against  him  had  been  lodged,  and 
before  the  evidence  was  produced.  Roman  law  secured  that  no  prisoner  should  be  condemned 
without  hearing  and  having  an  opportunity  to  answer  the  indictment  preferred  against  him 
(see  xxv.  16).  Tertullus's  indictment,  which  consisted  of  three  charges — sedition,  heresy,  and 
sacrilege,  or  profanation  of  the  temple  (see  vers.  5,  6) — was  prefaced  by  the  most  undisguised 
flattery,  in  the  hope  of  inducing  Felix  to  condemn  Paul.  Great  quietness,  or  much  peace. — 
"  The  administration  of  Felix  did  not  present  much  opening  for  panegyric,  but  he  had  at  least 
taken  strong  measures  to  put  down  the  gangs  of  Sicarii  and  brigands  by  whom  Palestine 
was  infested  (Jos..  Ant.,  XX.  viii.  5 ;  Wars,  II.  xiii.  2),  and  Tertullus  shows  his  skill  in  the 
emphasis  which  he  lays  on  "  quietness."  By  a  somewhat  interesting  coincidence,  Tacitus 
(Ann.,  xii.  54),  after  narrating  the  circumstances  caused  by  a  quarrel  between  Felix,  backed 
by  the  Samaritans,  and  Ventidius  Cumanus,  who  had  been  appointed  as  governor  of 
Galilee,  ends  his  statement  by  relating  that  Felix  was  supported  by  Quadratus,  the  president 
of  Syria  "  et  qnies  provincias  reddita  "  (Plumptre).  For  very  worthy  deeds,  KaTopdco/ndroju — 
i.e.,  things  successfully  achieved,  the  best  MSS.  read  diopdcofidrcov,  improvements,  emendations, 
betterments— i.e.,  corrections  of  evil  (R.V.).  How  much  truth  there  was  in  this  the  state- 
ment of  Josephus  (Ant.,  XX.  viii.  9)  shows,  that  after  his  removal  from  office  "the  principal 
of  the  Jewish  inhabitants  of  Cassarea  went  up  to  Rome  to  accuse  Felix,"  and  that  "  he  had 
certainly  been  brought  to  punishment  unless  Nero  had  yielded  to  the  importunate  solicitation 
of  his  brother  Pallas,  who  was  at  that  time  had  in  the  greatest  honour  by  him."  By  thy 
providence. — "  Tud  providentid,  providentia  Ccesaris,  is  a  common  inscription  on  the  coins 
of  the  emperors  "  (Spence). 

Ver.  3.  Always  and  in  all  places  are  better  connected  with  "accept"  (Hackett,  Zockler) 
than  with  "done"  (Holtzmann,  Wendt,  Besser).  Most  noble  Felix,  Kpanare  <$r)\i£:  compare 
KpaTurre  Bed0iXe  (Luke  i.  3). 

Ver.  4.  A  few  words  refer  not  to  the  flattering  preamble  (Meyer),  but  to  the  subsequent 
plea. 

Ver.  5.  A  pestilent  fellow. — Better,  a  pest,  or  plague ;  used  as  in  English.  The  world 
meant  the  Roman  empire.  The  sect  of  the  Nazarenes. — A  contemptuous  expression,  for  the 
first  time  transferred  from  the  Master  to  the  disciples  (compare  ii.  22,  vi.  14  ;  John  i.  46). 
The  name  is  still  applied  to  Christians  by  Jews  and  Mohammedans.  During  the  Indian 
Mutiny  of  1855  the  Mohammedan  rebels,  it  is  said  (Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible :  art. 
JVazarene),  relied  on  a  supposed  ancient  prophecy  that  the  Nazarenes  would  be  expelled 
from  the  country  after  ruling  for  a  hundred  years. 

'  496 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.    chap.  xxiv. 


Ver.  6.  Who  also  hath  gone  about  or  assayed  to  profane  the  temple. — Shows  that  tie 
original  charge  had  been  modified  (see  xxi.  28).  Whom  we  took  or  laid  hold  of. — Through 
the  change  of  construction  at  "  whom"  the  preceding  participial  clause  (ver.  5)  becomes  an 
anakolouthon.  The  remaining  words  of  this  verse,  with  verse  7  and  first  part  of  verse  8,  are 
omitted  in  the  most  approved  texts.  It  is  difficult  to  perceive  why  they  should  either  have 
been  inserted  or  left  out.  If  genuine  they  show  that  Tertullus,  instructed  by  the  Sanhedrim, 
who  were  exceeding  bitter  against  Lysias,  wished  to  turn  the  tables  against  him  by  suggesting 
that  had  it  not  been  for  his  interference  the  whole  matter  would  have  been  disposed  of  without 
troubling  the  governor.  Would  have  judged  according  to  our  law. — Does  not  square  well 
with  the  facts  as  related  in  xxi.  31,  xxvi.  21. 

Ver.  7.  Represents  Lysias  as  having  rescued  Paul  with  great  violence,  which  also  scarcely 
comports  with  truth  (xxi.  32). 

Ver.  8.  Whom.— Has  for  antecedent  Paul,  if  the  intermediate  clauses  be  rejected  ;  but 
either  the  accusers  (as  the  A.V.  suggests),  or  more  probably  Lysias  (as  the  Greek  text 
indicates),  if  the  clauses  be  retained. 

Ver.  9.  A  better  reading  than  assented,  avvedeuro,  is  assailed  him  at  the  same  time,  or 
joined  in  assailing  him,  avveiredevTo,  by  asserting  that  the  charges  were  true. 

Ver.  10.  Many  years  meant  about  six  or  seven,  since  Felix  became  procurator  about  A.D. 
52  or  53  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XX.  vii.  1).  Before  his  elevation  to  the  procuratorship  of  Judaea  he  had 
governed  Samaria  under  his  predecessor  Cumanus. 

Ver.  11.  The  charges  against  him  might  be  the  more  easily  and  accurately  investigated 
since  they  were  not  of  long  standing,  but  of  recent' date.  The  twelve  days  were  thus 
accounted  for:  1.  The  day  of  arrival  in  Jerusalem  (xxi.  17).  2.  The  interview  with  James 
(xxi.  18).  3.  The  assumption  of  the  vow  (xxi.  26).  4,  5,  6,  7.  The  keeping  of  the  vow,  which 
was  interrupted  before  its  completion.  8.  The  appearance  of  Paul  before  the  Sanhedrim. 
9.  The  plot  of  the  Jews  and  the  journey  to  Antipatris  (xxiii.  12,  31).  10,  11,  12,  13.  The 
days  at  Csesarea,  on  the  last  of  which  the  trial  was  proceeding.  The  day  of  the  trial 
would  not  be  counted  among  the  twelve  (Hackett,  Meyer,  and  others). 

Ver.  12.  Raising  up  the  people. — Lit.,  making  or  causing  a  concourse  of  the  people, 
iiri(Tv<TTa<ris  5%^ou ;  though  the  more  approved  text  reads  ewio-Tao-ls  6~x\ov,  a  stopping  of  the 
people,  of  course  so  as  to  form  a  crowd. 

Ver.  13.  Some  texts  insert  to  thee  after  prove. 

Ver.  14.  For  heresy  translate  sect  as  in  ver.  5,  and  for  worship,  serve.  In,  according  to 
(R.V.),  but  better  "throughout"  (Hackett,  Holtzmann),  the  law — i.e.,  of  Moses. 

Ver.  15.  Which  they  themselves. — I.e.,  his  accusers,  who  appear  to  have  been  mostly 
Pharisees,  so  that  the  breach  between  them  and  the  Sadducees  (xxiii.  7)  must  have  been 
made  up.     Allow,  rather,  look  for,  expect,  or  entertain. 

Ver.  16.  Herein. — In  this,  as  in  John  xvi.  30.  Meaning  either  "  in  anticipation  of  such 
a  day  "  (Hackett),  or  "  since  such  is  my  religious  position  "  (Holtzmann),  or  "  in  this  belief  " 
(Plumptre). 

Ver.  17.  After  many  years. — Viz.,  of  absence  from  Jerusalem.  It  was  now  a.d.  58  or  59. 
My  nation  really  signified  the  believers  in  its  midst.  Alms. — Not  Paul's  usual  way  of 
referring  to  the  collections  he  had  taken  for  the  poor  saints  at  Jerusalem  (see  Rom.  xv.  25 ; 
1  Cor.  xvi.  1-4;  2  Cor.  viii.  and  ix);  but  the  auditors  to  whom  he  spoke  were  widely  different 
from  the  readers  for  whom  he  wrote.  To  bring  alms  and  offerings. — The  first  mention  in 
the  Acts  by  Paul  that  he  had  been  taking  up  contributions  from  the  Gentile  Churches  for 
the  relief  of  the  poor  Christians  in  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  18.  Whereupon.— Lit.,  "in  which" — i.e.,  while  presenting  which  offerings,  some  MSS. 
giving  ev  a?s  (to  agree  with  "  offerings  ")  instead  of  ev  oh.  The  translation  in  the  R.V.  is  more 
accurate.  "  They  " — i.e.,  the  Jews  of  course,  "  found  me  .  .  .  ;  but  there  wrere  certain  Jews 
from  Asia."  The  abrupt  manner  in  which  this  sentence  breaks  off  was  unquestionably 
designed  to  suggest  that  these  Jews  from  Asia,  and  not  he  had  been  the  true  authors  of 
the  tumult. 

Ver.  19.  "  These  also  should  have  been  present  in  court  to  object  or  (better)  to  make 
accusation,  as  they,  the  instigators  of  the  riot,  were  the  persons  to  testify  how  it  arose  " 
(Hackett). 

Ver.  20.  In  default  of  them  these  same  here,  or,  these  men  themselves — i.e.,  the  high  priest 
and  the  elders  should  say,  not  if  they  have  found  any  evil  doing,  since  el  "if"  is  unauthorised, 
but  what  wrong -doing  they  found  in  me. 

Ver.  21.  Except  it  be  for  this  one  voice. — The  sentence  is  framed  as  if  ri  &\\o  ddiKv/J-a  had 
preceded  (Meyer,  De  Wette,  Holtzmann). 

Ver.  22.  Having  more  perfect,  or  exact  knowledge  of  that,  rather  "  the  "  way. — This  Felix 
could  easily  have  got  during  the  six  or  seven  years  of  his  procuratorship.  Such  knowledge 
as  he  had  of  Christianity  enabled  him  to  perceive  that  the  Sanhedrists'  account  of  Paul  was 
not  to  be  accepted  without  more  minute  investigation.  Consequently  he  deferred  them — i.e., 
put  off  both  parties  till  Lysias  should  come  down  to  Caesarea. 

kk  497 


chap.  xxiv.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Ver.  23.  A,  better  the,  centurion  was  the  officer  who  had  charge  of  Paul — not  necessarily 
the  same  who  had  conducted  him  to  (Jaesarea.  Liberty  meant  indulgence,  such  as  the  next 
clause  indicates.  Imprisonment  among  the  Romans  was  of  three  kinds :  1.  Custodia 
publico,,  or  confinement  in  the  common  cells,  which  Paul  and  Silas  suffered  at  Philippi 
(xvi.  23).  2.  Custodia  militaris,  in  which  the  prisoner  was  bound  or  chained  to  the  soldier 
who  kept  him,  as  Paul  was  in  Rome  (Eph.  vi.  20 ;  Col.  iv.  3).  And  3.  Custodia  libera,  or  free 
custody,  such  as  was  frequently  practised  with  persons  of  high  rank.  Paul's  Caesarean 
imprisonment  was  obviously  of  the  second  sort. 

Ver.  24.  When  Felix  came,  or  Felix  having  come,  not  to  Cfesarea,  after  a  temporary  absence, 
but  into  the  place  of  audience  (Hac;kett),  rather  than  into  the  prison  (Holtzmann).  Drusilla. 
— Sea  "  Homiletical  Hints."  As  a  daughter  of  the  first  and  sister  of  second  Herod  Agrippa 
she  could  hardly  have  been  unacquainted  with  the  main  facts  of  the  history  of  the  new  society 
of  Christians.  "  She  must  have  known  of  the  death  of  James  and  of  the  imprisonment  of 
Peter  (xii.),  and  may  have  connected  her  father's  tragic  end  at  Caesarea  with  the  part  he 
had  taken  in  persecuting  the  preachers  of  the  faith  of  which  one  of  the  chief  preachers 
was  now  brought  before  her  "  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  25.  Righteousness. — Including  the  duties  man  owes  to  man,  as  well  as  those  man 
owes  to  God — i.e.,  the  obligations  of  both  tables  of  the  law.  Temperance. — In  its  widest 
sense  of  self-control. 

Ver.  26.  That  money  should  have  been  given  him. — Possibly  he  had  an  eye  to  some  of  the 
gold  referred  to  by  Paul  in  ver.  17.  .  Greed  of  gain  in  the  very  act  of  administering  justice 
was  the  root  of  evil  in  his  weak  and  wicked  character. 

Ver.  27.  After  two  years. — Lit.,  when  two  years  were  fulfilled.  Feli.v  received  as  successor 
Porcius  Festus  (a.d.  60  or  61),  who  suppressed  the  outrages  of  the  bandits  or  robbers,  and 
restored  tranquillity  to  the  province,  but  died  in  the  second  year  of  his  office  (Jos.,  Wars,  II. 
xiv.  1).  To  him  Felix,  with  characteristic  baseness,  willing  to  show  the  Jews  a  pleasure,  or 
desiring  to  gain  favour — lit.,  to  deposit  a  favour  with  the  Jews,  which  should  not  be  without 
return ;  "  an  investment  in  iniquity  "  (Plumptre)  which  did  not  turn  out  well  (see  on 
ver.  2)—  handed  over  Paul  as  a  prisoner.  How  these  two  years  in  Caesarea  were  spent  by 
the  apostle  can  only  be  conjectured  (see  "  Hints  "  on  ver.  27). 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS. 

Yers.  1-9.  The  Indictment  of  Tertullus  :  or,  the  Vapid,  Eloquence  of  a  Heathen 
Lawyer. 

I.  The  judge  upon  the  bench. — 1.  His  name.  Felix.  "  One  of  the  worst  of 
Roman  officials  "  (Ramsay).  See  on  xxiii.  24.  2.  His  dignity.  Governor  of  the 
province  of  Judaea.  Representative  of  Roman  law  and  justice.  Who  should 
therefore  have  treated  Paul  with  strictest  equity — which  he  did  not.  3.  His 
character.  Immoral,  tyrannical,  covetous,  unjust.  The  opposite  to  that  ascribed 
to  him  by  Tertullus  (see  "  Homiletical  Analysis"  on  xxiii.  23-35). 

II.  The  prisoner  at  the  bar. — Paul,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  who  had  just 
been  rescued  from  the  violent  hands  of  his  countrymen,  and  who  was  now  to  be 
impeached  in  their  name  on  three  serious  charges,  of  every  one  of  which  he  was 
innocent.  Had  his  countrymen  only  known  they  might  have  said,  with  perfect 
truthfulness,  "  This  is  the  noblest  Roman  of  them  all."  Looking  back  upon  his 
great  career,  impartial  posterity  can  testify — 

"  His  life  was  gentle,  and  the  elements 
So  mixed  in  him,  that  Nature  might  stand  up, 
And  say  to  all  the  world — This  was  a  man  !  " 

— Shakespeare,  Julius  Ccesar,  Act  v.,  Sc.  5. 

III.  The  prosecutors  and  their  indictment. — 1.  The  prosecutors  were  Ananias 
the  high  priest  (see  xxiii.  2),  and  the  elders  who  had  come  down  from  Jerusalem 
to  Csesarea  for  the  purpose  of  accusing  Paul  before  the  governor.  Their  state  of 
mind  may  be  imagined  from  the  circumstance  that  they  had,  five  days  before, 
conspired  with  forty  ruffians  to  assassinate  the  apostle,  who  only  escaped  their 
toils  by  a  specially  providential  deliverance.  2.  The  indictment  they  were 
prepared  to  move  against  him  consisted  of  three  counts.  (1)  Sedition.  They 
alleged  that  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  was  a  pestilent  fellow,  and  a  mover  of 

498 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxiv. 


seditions  among  all  the  Jews  throughout  the  world — an  old  charge,  which  had 
been  preferred  against  the  apostle  at  Thessalonica  (xvii.  6,  7),  which  had  never 
been  established,  and  which  was  absolutely  false.  (2)  Heresy.  They  accused 
the  prisoner  at  the  bar  of  being  a  ringleader  of  the  sect  of  the  ISTazarenes,  by 
which  phrase  they  sought  to  pour  contempt  upon  the  followers  of  Christ,  because 
of  His  supposed  birth  at  Nazareth,  which,  in  their  judgment,  stamped  Him 
as  a  false  Messiah.  This  charge  the  apostle  did  not  seek  to  deny  (ver.  14). 
(3)  Sacrilege.  They  accused  him  of  having  profaned  the  temple.  They  asserted, 
not  as  they  had  done  before  (xxi.  28),  that  Paul  had  desecrated  the  holy  place, 
but  that  he  had  attempted  to  do  so,  by  introducing  within  its  precincts  Trophimus, 
the  Ephesian — which  the  narrative  shows  he  had  not  done. 

IV.  The  advocate  and  his  oration. — 1.  The  advocate.  Tertullus  by  name,  a 
diminutive  from  Tertius,#was  a  Roman  lawyer  or  rhetorician,  whose  trade  it  was  to 
plead  in  courts  of  law  throughout  the  empire.  He  was  probably  (1)  a  person  of 
considerable  talent,  else  his  services  would  not  have  been  sought  by  the  Sanhedrim, 
though  if  he  was,  his  genius  and  eloquence  might  easily  have  been  employed  in  a 
better  cause  than  seeking  the  conviction  of  an  innocent  man.  He  was  certainly 
(2)  a  man  of  untruthful  character,  since  he  not  only  openly  and  unblushingly 
flattered  the  judge,  in  the  hope  of  carrying  his  suit,  but  most  likely  also  knowingly 
misrepresented  the  facts  of  the  case  he  had  in  hand  (if  the  clause  about  Lysias 
be  retained).  And  in  any  case  (3)  his  employment  by  the  Sanhedrim  was  a 
melancholy  proof  of  the  unspirituality  of  that  high  court,  that  it  called  in  a 
heathen  orator  to  help  their  bad  cause  by  his  crafty  speech  (Besser).  This, 
remarks  Bengel,  is  the  only  place  in  the  whole  of  sacred  Scripture  in  which  the 
name  of  the  orator  is  to  be  found.  "  The  preachers  of  God,"  adds  Besser,  "  are 
not  reciters  of  learned  words,  but  witnesses  of  revealed  things.  The  orator 
Tertullus  steps  forward  to  help  the  Godless  Jews  in  place  of  the  absent  Holy 
Spirit."  2.  The  oration  which  Tertullus  pronounced  consisted  of  three  parts — 
flattery,  falsehood,  and  misrepresentation.  (1)  The  flattery  was  offered  as 
fragrant  incense  to  the  judge,  to  intoxicate  his  senses,  becloud  his  understanding, 
pervert  his  judgment,  and  captivate  his  will.  Felix  was  actually  invited  to 
believe  that  in  the  estimation  of  his  admiring  and  devoted  subjects  he  had  been 
a  veritable  pacator  provincial — yea,  a  kind  of  little  god,  through  whose  benign 
providence  the  welfare  of  his  dependents  had  been  highly  advanced,  and  whose 
gracious  clemency  the  speaker  humbly  entreated  while  intruding  on  his  awful 
majesty  with  a  few  more  words.  It  showed  Tertullus  to  be  far  from  a  bungler 
at  his  trade  that  he  contrived  so  smoothly  to  slide  over  "  the  difficult  narration 
of  the  procurator's  misdeeds,"  and  to  convert  what  was  abominable  cruelty  into 
gracious  clemency  ;  and  considering  how  dearly  most  men  love  to  be  flattered, 
when  "  the  candied  tongue  "  is  not  too  apparent,  one  wonders  that  Tertullus  did 
not  meet  with  more  success.  Either  there  was  in  Felix,  after  all,  some  fragment 
of  a  noble  manhood  which  taught  him  to  despise  the  compliments  he  knew  to  be 
as  insincere  as  they  were  undeserved,  or  there  was  a  loftiness  of  thought  and 
speech  in  Paul's  defence  which  completely  neutralised  the  effect  of  the  heathen 
lawyer's  rhetoric.  (2)  The  falsehood  consisted  in  the  repetition  of  the  threefold 
charge  of  sedition,  heresy,  and  sacrilege,  which  had  been  put  into  his  mouth  by 
the  high  priest  and  his  unprincipled  confederates.  That  Paul,  who  preached  the 
gospel  of  peace  and  showed  to  men  the  way  of  salvation,  promoted  civil  tumults 
and  social  revolutions,  though  an  old  charge  (xvii.  7),  was  as  ridiculous  as  it  was 
untrue  (compare  Bom.  xiii.  1).  That  he  was  chargeable  with  heresy  or  schism 
could  only  be  maintained  by  those  who  knew  themselves  to  be  in  innermost 
accord  with  the  truth,  which  Ananias  and  Tertullus  were  not — else,  alas  !  for  the 
truth.  If  to  be  a  ringleader  among  the  Nazarenes,  as  the  Christians  were  then 
beginning  to  be  styled  (see  Critical  Bemarks)  was  to  be  a  heretic— which,  how- 

499 


chap.  xxiv.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


ever,  Paul  denied  (ver.  14) — then  undoubtedly  their  allegation  was  true,  and 
no  lie.  That  he  had  attempted  to  desecrate  the  holy  place  by  bringing 
Trophimus  within  its  precincts  strayed  as  widely  from  the  truth  as  the  assertion 
that  he  had  actually  committed  this  unholy  deed.  Well  might  Paul  have 
exclaimed  as  he  listened  to  the  glowing  periods  of  the  orator — 

"  0  hateful  error  .  .  . 
Why  dost  thou  show  to  the  apt  thoughts  of  men 
The  things  that  are  not !  " 

— Shakespeare,  Julius  Ctesar,  Act  v.,  Sc.  3. 

(3)  The  misrepresentation  lay  in  this,  that  Tertullus,  instructed  presumably  by 
his  employers,  endeavoured  to  lay  the  blame  of  this  intrusion  on  the  noble 
Felix's  leisure  on  Lysias,  the  commandant  of  the  Castle  of  Antonia,  who,  said 
the  orator,  stating  incorrectly  what  had  taken  place,  had  pounced  down  upon 
the  Sanhedrim  and  violently  torn  Paul  from  their  hands  when  they  were  peace- 
fully attempting  to  judge  him  according  to  their  law.  Whether  Tertullus 
believed  his  own  story  may  be  doubted  ;  that  Felix  did  not,  especially  after 
hearing  Paul's  defence,  is  almost  certain — even  though  it  was  backed  up  by 
the  strong  asseverations  of  the  high  priest  and  the  elders  that  the  charges 
preferred  against  Paul,  and  the  statements  relative  to  Lysias,  were  correct. 

Learn — 1.  The  badness  of  the  cause  that  cannot  establish  itself  without  the 
help  of  worldly  wisdom.  2.  The  weakness  of  the  indictment  that  needs  to  be 
prefaced  by  nattering  the  judge.  3.  The  exaggeration  which  characterises  the 
most  of  the  world's  charges  against  Christians.  4.  The  violence  which  accusers 
commonly  exhibit  when  they  feel  that  they  have  no  case. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1.  One  Tertullus.  tion,   like   those    applied   to   Christ — 

I.  An  obscure  man  providentially  "  The  Nazarene,"  "  Friend  of  Publicans 
lifted  into  doubtful  fame.  Better  for  and  Sinners,"  etc.,  def  a  e  its  own  end, 
his  reputation  and  character  it  would  which  was  to  overwhelm  the  early 
have  been  had  he  never  emerged  from  Christians  with  shame  and  contempt, 
the  oblivion  into  which  he  had  been  On  the  contrary,  it  was — 

born.  I.  The  confirmation  of  a  valuable 

II.  A  lawyer,  not  without  ability,  historical    truth. — Viz.,    that    Christ 
employed  in  a  bad  cause. — His  legal  was  brought  up  at  Nazareth, 
knowledge  and  forensic  eloquence  might  II.  The  recognition  of  what  to  them 
easily  have  been  consecrated  to  a  nobler  who   uttered   it   must    have    been   an 
task  than  prosecuting  Paul.  unpleasant  fact. — Viz.,  that  the  cause 

III.  An  undisguised  flatterer,  whose  which  Jesus  of  Nazareth  represented 
honeyed  words  were  seen  through. —  had  not  been  extinguished  by  the 
Most  men  who  use  this  contemptible  crucifixion,  but  had,  since  that  appalling 
weapon  expect  to  succeed  by  it.  So,  tragedy,  increased  its  hold  upon  the 
doubtless,   did  Tertullus  ;    but   he   did  minds  of  the  community. 

not.  III.  The  publication  of  what  those 

IV.  A  paid  advocate,  who  lost  his  against  whom  it  was  directed  counted 
cause. — From  whatever  motive,  Felix,  their  highest  honour. — Viz.,  that  they 
if  he  swallowed  the  flattery,  did  not  were  followers  of  the  Nazarene.  To 
condemn  the  apostle.  this   day  the  name  of   the  Nazarene 

stands  highest  among  the  sons  of  men, 

Ver.  5.  The  Sect  of  the  Nazarenes  ;      and  no  commendation  can  be  more  ac- 

or  the  value  of  'nicknames. — Thisappella-      ceptable  to   a  sincere  Christian  than 

500 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxiv. 


the  suggestion  that  he  is  worthy  of  the  for  evil  deeds  of  which  they  are  entirely 

name  he  bears.  innocent. — For  instance,  Paul,  who  was 

charged  by  Tertullus   with    being   "  a 

Ver.  2  5.  Mistaken  Judgments.  mover  of   insurrections,"  "  a  heretic  " 

I.  Bad  men  are  often  credited  with  and  "  a  profaner  of  the  temple." 

go  3d  deeds  they  never  do. — Witness  III.    These    mistaken    judgments, 

Felix,    whom   Tertullus    lauded    as    a  though  considered  just  at  man's  tri- 

peace-maker  and  social  reformer.  bunals,  are  all  wrong  at  God's,  and  will 

II.  Good  men  are  as  often  blamed  eventually  be  reversed. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  10—21 

The  Answer  of  Paul;  or,  the  Lofty  Oration  of  a  Christian  Apostle. 

I.  The  unvarnished  exordium. — 1.  A  frank  recognition.  Paul  declines  to 
imitate  the  heathen  orator  in  burning  incense  before  his  judge.  Neither  does  he 
rush  to  the  opposite  extreme,  and  denounce  Felix  as  one  utterly  unworthy  to  sit 
upon  the  bench  or  pronounce  a  verdict  upon  him.  Remembering  his  own 
doctrine  that  "  the  powers  which  be  are  ordained  of  God"  (Rom.  xiii.  1),  and 
following  his  own  precept  "  to  speak  evil  of  no  man  "  (Titus  iii.  2),  though 
doubtless  aware  of  the  personal  and  public  character  of  the  governor,  he 
passes  over  it  in  silence  and  contents  himself  with  frankly  acknowledging  that 
for  many — at  least  six — years  Felix  had  been  a  judge  unto  the  nation  and  could 
neither  be  ignorant  of  the  forms  of  judicial  process  nor  unqualified  to  sift  the 
merits  of  causes  when  these  were  brought  before  him.  In  this  sounded  neither 
flattery  nor  depreciation,  but  respectful  acceptance  of  his  fellow-man  at  his  best. 
2.  A  cheerful  assent.  Paul  might  easily  have  had,  and  probably  could  have 
wished,  a  better  man  than  Felix  to  try  his  cause ;  but  such  as  Felix  was,  Paul 
willingly  laid  before  him  a  plain  and  unadorned  statement  of  his  proceedings 
since  he  arrived  in  Jerusalem  till  that  moment  when  he  stood  on  his  defence. 
Out  of  these  proceedings  his  alleged  offences  were  said  to  have  arisen,  and  Felix 
could  understand  them  as  well  as  anybody  else.  Paul  had  nothing  to  conceal, 
and  required  no  arts  beyond  those  of  an  honest  mind  and  a  truth-loving  tongue. 

II.  The  simple  refutation. — 1.  To  the  charge  of  sedition  he  had  merely  to 
state  that,  so  far  as  his  accusers  were  concerned,  they  could  not  have  much  per- 
sonal or  direct  knowledge  of  his  revolutionary  procedure,  since  not  more  than 
twelve  days  had  elapsed  since  he  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  worship,  which  worship 
he  performed  with  so  much  quietness  and  order  that  neither  they  nor  others 
found  him  either  in  the  temple,  or  in  the  synagogues,  or  in  the  city,  creating  a 
disturbance — either  disputing  or  stirring  up  a  crowd.  As  for  the  allegation  that 
he  was  a  pestilent  fellow  and  a  mover  of  insurrections  among  the  Jews  through- 
out the  world,  that  lay  beyond  their  ability  to  prove,  for  the  reason  that  it  accorded 
not  with  fact.  That  his  preaching  had  aroused  excitement  among  the  Jews  he 
could  not  and  would  not  deny,  but  that  he  had  never  breathed  a  syllable  which 
could  be  construed  into  hostility  to  Caesar  he  would  with  equal  readiness  main- 
tain. 2.  To  the  charge  of  heresy  his  answer  was  that  he  certainly  adhered  to  the 
despised  sect  of  the  Nazarenes,  but  that  in  doing  so  he  had  not  departed  from 
the  ancestral  law  which  his  countrymen  observed.  These  might  scornfully 
denounce  him  as  a  heretic,  but  precisely  like  themselves  he  believed  "  all  things  " 
which  were  "according  to  the  law"  and  which  were  written  in  the  prophets, 
"  and  like  them  had  hope  toward  God,  that  there  should  be  and  would  be  a  resur- 
rection both  of  the  just  and  the  unjust."  The  gospel  preached  by  him  deviated 
not  from  that  true  Judaism  which  his  persecutors  (the  most  of  whom  must  have 
been  Pharisees)  professed,  but  fulfilled  its  innermost  spirit,  while  the  resurrection 
which  formed  its  culminating  theme  constituted  the  very  hope  for  which  they 

501 


chap.  xxiv.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


themselves  were  looking.  And  so  far  from  repudiating  this  hope,  or  deviating 
from  it,  he  made  it  his  constant  endeavour  with  regard  to  it  to  have  a  conscience 
void  of  offence  both  toward  God  and  toward  men.  3.  To  the  charge  of  sacrilege 
he  replied  that  the  thought  of  violating  the  sanctity  of  the  temple  had  never 
entered  his  mind.  His  presence  in  the  sacred  edifice  could  easily  be  explained. 
He  had  brought  with  him  to  Jerusalem  money  contributions  from  the  friends 
amongst  whom  he  had  laboured  for  many  years,  to  be  expended  in  relieving  his 
poor  brethren  in  the  city  and  in  the  presentation  of  offerings  in  the  temple. 
These  offerings  he  was  busily  engaged  in  presenting  in  the  temple,  with  no 
tumult  or  noise,  with  not  even  a  crowd  around  him,  when  certain  Jews  from 
Asia,  having  entered,  seized  him  and  gave  occasion  to  the  tumult.  Why  were 
these  Asiatic  Jews  not  present  1  These  could  have  told  better  than  he  the  cause 
of  the  uproar,  for  they  had  made  it ;  and  in  any  case  they  should  have  been  in 
court  to  accuse  him  if  they  had  aught  to  lay  to  his  charge.  Nothing  could  have 
been  more  noble,  manly,  straightforward,  or  convincing,  than  this  candid  and 
ingenuous  statement.     Conduct  like  Paul's  needed  no  apology. 

III.  The  noble  confession. — 1.  The  implied  assumjrtion.  That  no  one  had 
been  able  to  establish  any  charge  of  wrong-doing  against  him.  (1)  The  orator 
had  not  been  successful.  He  had  only  repeated,  parrot-like,  what  had  been  put 
into  his  month  by  his  employers,  the  high  priest  and  the  elders.  (2)  The  high 
priest  and  the  elders  had  not,  because  they  knew  nothing  about  Paul's  doings 
throughout  the  world,  and  had  not  come  upon  the  scene  in  Jerusalem  till  after 
he  had  been  rescued  by  Lysias.  (3)  The  Jews  from  Asia  had  manifestly  nothing 
they  could  prove  against  him,  else  they  would  not  have  been  conveniently  left 
behind  in  Jerusalem,  but  would  have  been  fetched  down  to  Caasarea  along  with 
Tertullus.  2.  The  courageous  challenge.  If  the  high  priest  and  elders  had  any- 
thing to  urge  against  him  with  reference  to  that  part  of  his  conduct  which  came 
under  their  inspection,  he  was  willing  they  should  not  keep  it  back,  but  openly 
advance  it.  Let  them  say  what  wrong-doing  they  found  in  him  when  he  stood 
before  the  council.  He  was  not  afraid  to  hear  the  worst  that  could  be  alleged 
against  him;  if  he  could  not  honestly  and  honourably  reply  to  it,  he  would 
promptly  and  humbly  acknowledge  his  offence.  3.  The  manly  avowal.  So  far 
from  putting  obstacles  in  their  way,  he  would  cheerfully  assist  them.  There 
was  one  part  in  his  behaviour  on  that  memorable  occasion  to  which  they  might 
wish  to  take  exception.  He  referred  to  the  voice  which  he  cried  among  them, 
"  Touching  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  I  am  called  in  question  before  you  this 
day."  That  voice  had  set  his  judges  at  variance  with  one  another,  and  had 
practically  resulted  in  his  release  for  the  moment  from  their  grasp.  He  did  not 
admit  that  it  was  only  and  wholly  wrong  for  him  to  have  so  acted.  But  possibly 
on  reflection  it  may  have  seemed  so  to  them.  To  them  perhaps  it  was  not  so 
clear  as  it  was  to  him  that  the  real  gravamen  of  his  offence  was  his  preaching 
the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  Then  he  was  ready  to  concede  that  it  may 
have  seemed  to  them  that  his  voice  about  the  resurrection  had  been  dictated  not 
so  much  by  a  desire  to  enlighten  them  as  by  a  perception  (which  suddenly  flashed 
upon  him)  that  the  mention  of  this  word  would  divide  their  counsels.  If  it  was 
so  (and  he  was  not  careful  to  deny  this  impeachment),  it  was  wrong.  A  man 
who  was  solicitous  about  keeping  a  conscience  void  of  offence  towards  both  God 
and  man  would  not  have  acted  so.  Beyond  this,  however,  he  was  conscious  of 
no  fault  on  that  trial-day  before  the  council. 

IV.  The  disappointing  result. — Felix  deferred  giving  judgment,  on  the  pretext 
that  he  wished  to  wait  for  the  coming  down  of  Lysias,  the  chief  captain,  and  re- 
committed Paul  to  confinement  in  Herod's  palace,  at  the  same  time  issuing  orders 
to  the  centurion  who  kept  him  to  grant  him  indulgence  and  not  forbid  any  of  his 
friends  to  minister  unto  him.     This  result  must  have  been  disappointing  to  all 

502 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxiv. 


concerned.  1.  To  Tertullus  the  hired  advocate,  who  had  lost  his  case,  whose 
eloquence,  though  sweetened  with  flattery,  had  not  carried  conviction  to  the 
judge's  judgment,  and  whose  plausible  invectives  had  all  been  swept  aside  by  the 
plain,  unvarnished  tale  of  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  2.  To  the  high  priest  and 
the  elders,  whose  designs  against  the  apostle  had  been  thwarted,  in,  to  them,  a  most 
unexpected  manner,  first  by  Claudius  Lysias  and  then  by  Felix,  both  of  whom, 
though  the  high  priest  and  the  elders  knew  it  not,  were  in  the  hands  of  a 
higher  than  themselves,  even  of  Him  who  holdeth  men's  hearts  in  the  hollow  of 
His  hand  and  turneth  them  whithersoever  He  will.  3.  To  Paul,  who  probably 
expected  to  be  set  at  liberty,  though  he  was  only  granted  a  mitigation  of  his 
imprisonment — which  was  something,  no  doubt,  to  be  thankful  for,  though  vastly 
less  than  what  he  was  entitled  to.  To  be  sure,  Paul  had  learnt  in  whatsoever 
state  he  was  to  be  content  (Phil.  iv.  11),  yet  must  he  have  been  more  than 
human  if  he  felt  no  pang  of  regret  that  his  trial  had  not  resulted  more  favour- 
ably for  himself.  4.  To  Felix.  Had  Paul  himself,  or  his  friends,  proposed  to 
purchase  his  freedom  by  means  of  a  bribe,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  Paul 
would  have  won  the  day  and  obtained  a  verdict  in  his  favour.  As  much  as  this 
may  almost  be  inferred  from  Felix's  well-known  covetous  disposition  (ver.  26). 
That  no  such  proposition  was  made  by  the  apostle  may  well  be  imagined  was  a 
grief  of  heart  to  the  money-loving  procurator. 

Learn. — 1.  That  truth  is  always  the  Christian's  best  defence.  Paul's  simple 
story  proved  more  successful  than  Tertullus's  polished  rhetoric.  2.  That  charges 
which  cannot  be  established  are  often  advanced  against  Christians.  Accusations 
are  not  the  same  things  as  convictions.  3.  That  doctrines  which  are  develop- 
ments of  recognised  truths  are  not  heresies.  A  proposition  is  only,  then,  heretical 
when  it  contradicts  accepted  truth.  4.  That  good  men  may  habitually  act  accord- 
ing to  conscience,  and  yet  go  astray.  Conscience  sometimes  requires  to  be 
enlightened,  and  its  voice  may  occasionally  fail  to  be  heard.  5.  That  Christians 
have  often  to  put  up  with  and  be  thankful  for  less  than  they  deserve.  Paul 
ought  to  have  been  set  at  liberty,  but  only  got  indulgence  in  his  captivity. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yers.    11-17.    Some   Thoughts  about  III.  The    form. — 1.    In   accordance 

Divine  Worship.  with    the    appointments    of  Scripture. 

I.  The  place. — This  should  always  For  Hebrew  worship  the  law  and  the 
be  that  which  God  Himself  has  pointed  prophets  constituted  the  sources  of 
out.  Under  the  Hebrew  economy,  authority  ;  for  Christian  worship  these 
Jerusalem  and  the  temple  were  the  give  place  to  the  gospels  and  epistles, 
chosen  spots  in  which  Jehovah  elected  to  Whatever  lies  outside  of  these  is  will 
be  honoured  (Psalm  cxxxii.  13,  14);  worship  (Col.  ii.  23).  2.  In  harmony 
under  the  Christian  economy  God  may  with  the  continuity  of  the  Church. 
be  worshipped  anywhere,  provided  the  Unless  'where  the  Church  has  for  a 
subjective  conditions  of  worship  are  time  gone  wrong.  The  probability, 
present  in  the  individual  heart  (John  however,  is  that  the  individual,  rather 
iv.  23,  24).  than   the   Church,    will    err.       Hence 

II.  The  manner. — Neither  noisily  any  form  of  worship  that  essentially 
nor  tumultuously,  but  ever  orderly,  deviates  from  that  observed  by  past 
quiet,  and  reverent.  "  Keep  thy  foot  ages  of  God's  people  is,  ipso  facto,  open 
when  thou  goest  to  the  house  of  God,  to  suspicion. 

and  be  more  ready  to   hear   than   to  IV.  The  spirit. — 1.  Faith.     Believ- 

give  the  sacrifice  of  fools  "  (Eccles.  v.  1).  ing  in  the  Scriptures — i.e.,  in  the  facts 

"  Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  and   doctrines   revealed   therein.      As 

in  order  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  40).  the   Hebrew   worshipper   believed   all 

503 


chap.  xxiv.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


things  which  were  according  to  the 
law  and  written  in  the  prophets,  so 
must  the  Christian  worshipper  credit 
all  things  that  accord  with  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ  and  that  are  contained 
in  the  writings  of  His  apostles.  2. 
Hope.  With  the  Christian  as  with 
the  Hebrew  all  true  worship  had  an 
outlook  towards  the  future  life,  and  in 
particular  towards  a  resurrection  of 
the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  of  the 
unjust.  Blot  out  this  hope  or  fear 
from  the  minds  of  men  and  it  will  be 
difficult  to  impel  either  good  men  or 
bad  to  worship.  3.  Charity.  A  spirit 
of  love  and  good-will  towards  all,  but 
especially  towards  the  household  of 
faith,  an  indispensable  characteristic  of 
acceptable  worship. 

Ver.  14.  PauVs  God  and  Paul's 
Religion. 

I.  Paul's  God. — 1.  Not  a  new,  but  an 
old  God.  The  god  of  his  fathers,  the 
god  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  of 
Moses,  Joshua,  and  Samuel,  of  David, 
Isaiah,  and  Jeremiah,  etc.  Christianity 
not  a  new  religion,  but  the  full  develop- 
ment of  that  which  was  first  revealed 
in  Eden.  2.  Not  a  false,  but  the  true 
God.  Not  always  an  advantage  to  have 
an  old  god  :  not  always  wrong  to  have 
a  new  god.  Depends  on  whether  the 
old  be  the  true  and  the  new  the  false 
god.  If  men's  old  gods  are  false,  they 
should  be  abandoned.  So  said  Elijah. 
If  men's  new  god  is  true  he  should 
be  embraced.  So  teach  Christian 
missionaries.  Paul's  God  was  old  and 
true.  3.  Not  a  manufactured,  but  an 
inherited  God.  Paul's  God  was  received 
by  him  from  his  fathers.  What  a 
tremendous  advantage  for  a  child  to 
receive  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God 
from  his  parents  !  What  a  responsi- 
bility for  parents  to  see  that  they  hand 
on  the  knowledge  of  God  to  their 
children  !  What  a  powerful  argument 
for  God  when  parents  so  live  as  to 
recommend  Him  to  their  children  ! 
What  a  grip  God  gets  upon  children 
to  whom  He  is  recommended  in  this 
way  !  4.  Not  a  blindly  accepted,  but 
a  deliberately   chosen   God.     Paul  had 

504 


made  his  father's  God  his  own  by  per- 
sonal choice.  This  was  indispensable. 
Many  have  no  higher  reason  for  be- 
lieving in  God  than  just  that  their 
parents  did  so  before  them.  Every 
one  is  responsible  for  making  an  in- 
telligent and  free  choice  of  his  own 
God. 

II.  Paul's  religion. — Contained  three 
things.  1.  Faith.  "  Believing  all 
things,"  etc.  Paul  accepted  all  that 
was  asserted  in  the  law  and  the 
prophets  about  the  ancient  history  of 
Israel.  So  must  the  Christian  accept 
all  that  is  written  in  the  gospels  and 
epistles  about  Jesus  Christ  and  His 
salvation.  Religion  rests  on  faith ; 
faith  on  revealed  truth.  2.  Hope. 
"  Having  hope  towards  God,"  etc. 
Paul  believed  in  a  future  resurrection 
of  just  and  unjust.  Believed  it  to  be 
taught  in  Scripture,  and  looked  forward 
to  it  as  the  goal  of  history.  A  terrible 
thought  for  sinners  (Heb.  x.  27),  but 
not  for  believers  (1  John  iii.  3).  3. 
Charity.  Paul's  religion  impelled  him 
to  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love 
(ver.  17).  4.  Holiness.  Paul  studied 
to  keep  a  conscience  void  of  offence 
(ver.  16). 

Ver.  15.  The  Doctrine  of  a  Resurrec- 
tion. 

I.  Involved  in  the  Mosaic  legisla- 
tion.— If  not  expressly  stated  therein, 
that  was  because  of  the  peculiar 
character  of  the  Hebrew  economy, 
which  regarded  the  nation  as  a  whole 
rather  than  its  component  parts  as 
individuals.  But  the  ideas  of  sin  and 
forgiveness  which  lay  at  the  founda- 
tion of  that  economy  must  have  been 
entirely  meaningless  if  the  individual 
had  no  other  existence  than  this 
terrestrial  and  temporal  one.  This, 
however,  it  may  be  urged,  only  proves 
a  doctrine  of  continued  existence  after 
death,  a  doctrine  of  immortality  with- 
out involving  the  notion  of  a  bodily 
resurrection.  But  as  it  is  certain  that 
this  latter  notion  was  not  unknown  to 
the  Egyptians,  it  is  at  least  highly 
probable  that  though  unexpressed  in 
the   Pentateuchal   Legislation,  it  was 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      CHAP.  XXIV. 


tacitly   assumed  to  lie  at  its  founda- 
tion. 

II.  Proclaimed  in  the  writings  of 
the  prophets. — As,  for  instance,  by 
David  (Psalm  xvii.  15) ;  by  Isaiah 
(xxvi.  19);  by  Ezekiel  (xxxvii.  1-14); 
by  Daniel  (xii.  2) ;  and  by  the  writer 
of  the  Book  of  Job  (xix.  26).  It  was 
far,  indeed,  from  being  either  clearly  or 
widely  apprehended  in  pre-Christian 
times ;  but  that  the  finer  and  more 
religious  spirits  of  the  nation  appre- 
hended it,  at  least  dimly,  can  hardly 
be  questioned. 

III.  Taught  by  Christ  and  His 
apostles. — By  Christ  in  such  state- 
ments as  these  (Matt.  xxii.  31  ;  Luke 
xiv.  14 ;  John  v.  28,  xi.  23)  ;  by  Peter 
(iv.  2;  2  Peter  i.  11);  by  Paul  (xvii. 
1 8,  xxvi.  8 ;  Bom.  vi.  5,  viii.  11;  1 
Cor.  xv.  20,  21  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  14;  Phil, 
iii.  20;  Col.  hi.  3;  1  Thess.  iv.  15,  v. 
23) ;  by  John  (I.,  iii.  2) ;  and  by  the 
writer  to  the  Hebrews  (vi.  2). 

IV.  Confirmed  by  the  resurrection  of 
Christ. — Which  not  only  demonstrated 
the  possibility  of  a  resurrection,  but 
guaranteed  at  least  the  rising  of  all 
His  people  (1  Cor.  xv.  20,  21 ;  1  Thess. 
iv.  14). 

Yer.  18.  Certain  Jews  from  Asia; 
or,  Men  who  Make  Reckless  Charges. 

I.  Such  men  never  stop  to  think 
whether  their  charges  are  true  before 
making  them. — The  Asiatic  Jews  in 
question,  having  seen  Paul  in  the  city 
along  with  Trophimus  (xxi.  28,  29), 
jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  Paul 
had  taken  his  Greek  friend  into  the 
holy  place,  or  women's  court,  and  so 
desecrated  Jehovah's  sanctuary.  Had 
they  inquired — and  this  they  probably 
would  have  done  had  they  not  been 
actuated  by  malice  against  Paul — they 
would  have  ascertained  that  their  con- 
clusions were  incorrect.  Yet  thousands 
of  persons,  not  excluding  Christians, 
unwarned  by  their  example,  have  done 
the  same  thing,  hurled  baseless  charges 
at  the  heads  of  their  fellow- men,  with 
regardless  indifference  as  to  their 
truth. 

II.  Such  men  never  reflect  before- 


hand upon  the  consequences  that  may 
result  from  their  reckless  procedure. — 

Had  these  Asiatic  Jews  foreseen  the 
complications  that  arose  from  their 
baseless  outcry,  they  would  probably 
have  paused.  No  doubt  they  were 
hostilely  disposed  towards  Paul,  and 
intended  to  do  him  hurt ;  but  they 
probably  never  imagined  it  would  in- 
volve such  troubles  as  had  been  set  in 
motion.  Perhaps  they  designed  no 
more  than  that  Paul  should  get  a  good 
beating;  but  no  sooner  had  they  un- 
leashed the  hounds  of  persecution  than 
Paul  came  near  to  losing  his  life,  and 
probably  would  have  lost  it  in  reality, 
either  by  open  or  secret  assassination, 
had  not  a  watchful  Providence  pro- 
tected him.  Even  so,  persons  who 
allow  their  tongues  to  run  faster  than 
their  judgments  seldom  consider  how 
great  a  fire  a  small  spark  may  kindle 
(James  iii.  5). 

III.  Such  men  are  seldom  at  hand 
when  wanted  to  undo  the  mischief 
they  have  raised. — The  Asiatic  Jews, 
had  they  been  present  at  Csesarea, 
could  easily  have  confirmed  Paul's 
story,  and  shown  that  they,  and  not 
he,  had  been  the  real  authors  of  the 
uproar  in  the  temple.  But,  like  most 
of  their  kidney  who  scatter  abroad 
firebrands  and  cry,  "Am  not  I  in 
sport  ?  "  they  took  good  care  to  save 
their  own  skins  by  keeping  out  of  the 
way  and  leaving  the  innocent  man  to 
suffer.  What  cared  they,  the  cowards  ? 
Unfortunately,  mean  cowards  of  their 
type  have  not  disappeared  from  among 
men. 

Yers.  22,  23.  Good  Points  in  Bad 
Men. — Few  persons  are  utterly  bad. 
Not  even  Felix,  who  surpassed  both 
Tertullus  and  his  employers,  Ananias 
and  the  elders,  in — 

I.  Knowledge. — He  knew  more 
exactly  than  they  did  the  truth  about 
the  Way.  He  had  probably  taken  more 
pains  than  they  to  ascertain  the 
doctrines  and  practices  of  the  Naza- 
renes. 

II.  Honesty. — They  wished  to  push 
the   trial   to   a   verdict   against    Paul 

505 


chap.  xxiv.     HO  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


without  troubling  either  Felix  or  them- 
selves about  evidence ;  he  declined  to 
proceed  to  an  issue  until  the  case  was 
more  investigated.  This  showed  that 
Felix  had  still  some  rag  of  conscience 
within  his  bosom. 

III.  Kindness. — They  would  have 
hurried  off  the  apostle  to  the  stake 
without  compunction,  or  at  least  would 
have  loaded  him  with  more  and  heavier 
chains.  Felix  commanded  the  centurion 
who  kept  Paul  to  grant  him  as  much 
indulgence — lighter  chains,  and  visits 
from  friends — as  was  consistent  with 
safety.  "  The  attribute  of  '  clemency  ' 
on  which  the  orator  had  complimented 
Felix  was  not  altogether  dead,  but  it 
was  shown  to  the  accused  and  not  to 
the  accusers  "  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  23.  PauVs  Imprisonment  at 
Ccesarea. 

I.  Its  occasion. — The  accusation 
preferred  against  him  by  the  Jews. 

II.  Its  reason.— Ostensibly  that  Felix 
might  be  able,  on  the  arrival  of  Lysias, 
to  determine  more  accurately  the  truth 
of  the  charges  preferred  against  the 
apostle ;  really,  that  Felix  might 
induce  either  Paul  or  his  friends  to 
purchase  his  liberty. ' 

III.  Its  continuance. — Two  years, 
which  meant  two  years'  endurance  of 
unjust  oppression,  and  two  years'  arrest 
of  his  missionary  labours — the  second 
a  greater  trial  to  the  apostle  than  the 
first. 

IV.  Its  mitigations — 1.  A  relaxa- 
tion of  the  customary  severities  in- 
flicted on  prisoners — such  a  relaxation 
of  his  chain  at  meal  times,  for  instance, 
as  Josephus  (Ant.,  XVIII.  vi.  10)  says 
was  granted  to  Agrippa  at  Rome ;  and 
2.  The  permission  of  friends  to  visit 
him. 

V.  Its  utilisation. — That  Paul 
allowed  this  period  of  enforced  retire- 
ment from  his  active  missionary  pro- 
pagandises to  pass  unimproved  cannot 
be  supposed.  How  he  employed  it  may 
even  be  conjectured  with  some  degree 
of  probability.  1.  In  meditation  and 
prayer.  Communing  with  his  own 
heart  (Psalm  lxxvii.  6),  searching  the 

5D6 


Scriptures  (xvii.  11  ;  John  v.  39),  and 
pouring  out  his  heart  before  the  Lord 
(Phil.  iv.  6;  1  Thess.  v.  17);  thus 
advancing  his  own  personal  sanctifica- 
tion  (Phil.  iii.  12-14),  and  preparing 
for  whatever  service  he  might  after- 
wards be  summoned  to  (compare  Rom. 
i.  15).  2.  In  holding  intercourse  with 
his  friends.  Who  these  friends  were 
are  not  named.  But  probably  his 
companions  who  had  been  with  him 
at  the  time  of  his  arrest  should 
be  reckoned  to  their  number — Silas, 
Trophimus,  Luke,  Mnason,  and  others, 
with  not  a  few  of  the  Christian  dis- 
ciples at  Csesarea.  Sympathy  from, 
and  converse  with,  these  would  alleviate 
the  apostle's  bonds.  3.  In  writing 
letters  to  the  Churches.  If  the  epistles 
to  the  Ephesians,  Colossians,  and 
Philemon  were  not,  as  some  suppose 
(Meyer,  Reuss,  Hausrath,  Hilgenfeld 
and  Weiss),  composed  duiing  this  period 
of  incarceration,  it  is  not  a  violent 
hypothesis  that  he  who  had  the  care 
of  all  the  Churches  on  his  heart  (2  Cor. 
xi.  28)  was  frequently  consulted  by  his 
spiritual  children,  the  infant  com- 
munities he  had  founded,  or  in  which 
he  had  laboured,  and  that  he  wrote  to 
them  letters  full  of  counsel  and  ad- 
monition, which,  though  they  have  not 
been  preserved  till  our  day,  were  then 
received  by  those  to  whom  they  were 
sent  as  messages  of  love  from  their 
spiritual  father  and  instructor.  4. 
In  instructing  Luke  about  the  details 
of  gospel  and  apostolic  history.  Which 
have  been  set  down — perhaps  under 
Paul's  immediate  superintendence — in 
the  gospel  of  Luke  and  in  the  Acts. 
"The  ideas  that  the  narrative  of  St. 
Paul's  journeys,  or  at  least  parts  of  it, 
had  an  independent  existence  before  it 
was  utilised  or  incorporated  in  the 
Acts,"  and  that  this,  "  Travel-Docu- 
ment," as  it  is  styled,  was  composed 
under  the  immediate  influence  of  Paul 
himself  (Ramsay,  The  Church  in  Asia 
Minor,  pp.  6,  7),  shed  light  on  a  part, 
at  least,  of  Paul's  occupation  during 
the  two  years  of  imprisonment  at 
Csesarea. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxiv. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  24—27. 

Paitfs  Interview  with  Felix  and  Drusilla  ;  or,  a  Great  Discourse  and  What 
Came  of  It. 

I.  The  magnificent  auditorium. — Herod's  palace  at  Caasarea,  which  the  great 
Idumean  had  constructed  for  himself  as  a  residence  when  at  the  height  of  his 
glory,  but  which  was  now  occupied  by  the  Eoman  procurator  as  a  mansion  for 
himself  and  a  barracks  for  his  troops.  "  A  wonderful  building,  with  bloody 
recollections.  '  Many  phantoms  glided  through  the  empty  rooms.'  Here  had 
Herod  uttered  the  death-sentence  upon  his  sons.  Here  was  their  betrayer,  the 
ruthless  Antipater,  imprisoned.  Before  these  gates,  for  five  days  and  five  nights, 
had  the  complaining  Jews  lain  and  besought  Pilate  not  to  desecrate  their  temple. 
Here  had  Herod  Agrippa  breathed  out  his  hypocritical  soul,  and  before  his 
windows  had  the  crowd,  howling  and  weeping  and  kneeling,  lain  in  the  dust  and 
prayed  for  the  soul  of  the  pious  (!)  king.  So  adhered  numerous  historical  images 
to  this  place,  and  from  the  days  of  Herod  downward  blood  stuck  to  every  stone." 
(Hausrath,  Der  Apostel  Paulus,  p.  458).  In  a  marble  hall  attached  to  this 
palace  was  a  sermon  about  to  be  preached  such  as  seldom  is  poured  into  the  ears 
of  men,  and  least  of  all  into  those  of  powerful  state  dignitaries.  No  doubt  the 
eloquence  of  the  preacher  was  stimulated  by  the  aforesaid  terrible  reminiscences, 
of  which  he  was  not  entirely  ignorant — rather  of  which  he  was  fully  cognisant. 

II.  The  distinguished  hearers. — 1.  Felix.  The  Eoman  governor,  whose 
character  on  its  worst  side  was  also  perfectly  understood  by  Paul  (see  on 
xxiii.  24).  Its  hideous  cruelty  and  rapacity,  which  caused  him  to  be  pronounced 
by  Josephus  the  worst  ruler  that  ever  swayed  the  destinies  of  Judaea,  and  even 
after  his  deposition  to  be  followed  by  his  quondam  subjects  to  Rome  with  bitter 
complaints  against  his  administration,  were  so  notorious  that  Tertullus  was 
obliged  to  hide  their  loathsomeness  by  fulsome  flattery  (ver.  2).  Its  shamefaced 
profligacy  had  intruded  into  the  palace  hall,  and  stared  on  the  apostle  with 
unblushing  countenance.  2.  Drusilla.  Felix's  wife,  whose  evil  reputation  was 
hardly  less  than  his  own.  The  daughter  of  the  first  Herod  and  the  sister  of  the 
second,  Drusilla — diminutive  of  Drusus — had  been  married  at  an  early  age  to 
Azizus,  King  of  Emesa,  who,  in  order  to  obtain  her  hand,  had  become  a  Jewish 
proselyte  and  accepted  circumcision ;  but  her  fascinating  beauty  having  inflamed 
the  libidinous  desires  of  the  Roman  procurator,  he  employed  the  services  of  a 
Jewish  magician  named  Simon,  to  proceed  to  Emesa  and  seduce  her  from  her 
husband.  In  this  unholy  errand  the  magician,  whom  some  have  endeavoured  to 
identify  with  the  sorcerer  of  Samaria  (viii.  9),  proved  lamentably  successful ;  and 
"  the  daughter  of  Herod  Agrippa,  who  had  much  to  endure  at  the  hands  of  her 
sister  Bernice  on  account  of  her  beauty  "  (Hausrath,  Der  Apostel  Paulus,  p.  459), 
having  deserted  her  lawful  husband,  became  the  third  wife  of  Eelix,  who  had 
formerly  been  a  slave,  but  was  then  the  governor  of  Palestine. 

III.  The  fearless  preacher. — Paul,  who  at  the  request  of  Drusilla  had  been 
fetched  up  from  his  place  of  confinement  into  the  judgment  hall.  As  a  Jewess 
she  could  not  have  been  entirely  ignorant  of  the  new  sect  of  Christians  that  had 
arisen  in  the  land.  As  a  daughter  of  Agrippa  I.  she  may  have  been  desirous  of 
hearing  one  of  the  chief  preachers  of  those  Christians  whom  her  father  had 
persecuted,  and  with  whom,  in  some  way,  she  may  have  connected  her  father's 
death.  But  from  whatever  motive  summoned,  Paul,  when  he  appeared,  evinced 
no  timidity.  Having  the  Lord  upon  his  right  hand  (Psalm  xvi.  8),  he  presented 
as  valiant  a  front  as  David  did  to  his  enemies,  or  as  Daniel  did  before  Nebu- 
chadnezzar (Dan.  iv.  19-27)  and  Belshazzar  (Dan.  v.  22-28),  or  as  afterwards 
John  Knox  of  Edinburgh  did  in  the  presence  of  Queen  Mary  of  Scotland.     The 

507 


chap.  xxiv.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


man  who  had  fought  with  wild  beasts  at  Ephesus  (1  Cor.  xv.  32),  who  had  con- 
fronted the  mob  from  the  castle  stairs  in  Jerusalem  (xxii.  1),  who  had  bearded 
the  Sanhedrists  in  their  Star-Chamber  (xxiii.  1),  and  who  had  already  appeared 
before  the  representative  of  Roman  law  and  majesty  (ver.  10),  was  not  likely  to 
quake  at  the  sight  of  a  beautiful  adulteress. 

IV.  The  alarming  sermon. — 1.  The  theme  of  it  was  generally  "the  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus,"  which  would  doubtless  lead  Paul  to  dilate  upon  the  main  facts  and 
doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and  in  particular  upon  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Christ,  pointing  out  how  in  both  the  truth  of  His  Messiahship  was  confirmed. 
In  this  the  apostle  furnished  a  noble  example  to  all  preachers  who,  whatever 
the  rank  or  character  of  their  hearers,  should  resolutely  determine  to  know 
nothing  among  them  save  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified  (1  Cor.  ii.  2).  The 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ  is  the  highest  need  of  the  human  soul,  in  whatever 
sort  of  body  that  soul  may  be  enshrined.  2.  The  application  of  it  brought  the 
noble  Christian  orator  to  closer  quarters  with  the  consciences  of  his  hearers. 
(1)  He  spoke  to  them  of  righteousness — that  awful  demand  for  upright  and  holy 
living,  both  toward  God  and  toward  man,  which  the  Divine  law,  familiar  at  all 
events  to  Drusilla,  demanded,  which  the  consciences  of  both  proclaimed  to  be 
just,  an'd  which  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  declared  to  be  indispensable  to  all  who 
would  partake  of  the  Messianic  salvation  Christ  had  come  to  introduce  among 
men ;  perhaps  pointing  them  to  the  gracious  provision  in  the  gospel,  by  and 
through  Jesus  Christ,  for  first  bestowing  upon  men  and  then  reproducing  within 
men  that  righteousness  of  the  law  which  no  man  could  furnish  of  himself  (Rom. 
iii.  24,  25,  viii.  1-4).  (2)  Next  he  reminded  them  of  temperance  or  self-control, 
that  sacred  chastity  or  mastery  of  the  lower  appetites  and  passions  which 
religion  in  .general,  but  especially  the  faith  that  is  in  Christ,  requires  of  its 
devotees  (Tit.  ii.  11),  but  of  which  the  illustrious  pair  before  him  were  sadly  wanting. 
That  the  apostle  had  a  powerful  ally  in  the  bosoms  of  his  hearers  need  not  be  ques- 
tioned. (3)  And  finally,  he  lifted  up  his  hearers  and  himself  to  the  judgment  to 
come,  that  overwhelmingly  awful  tribunal  before  which  all  men — kings  and 
princes  no  less  than  common  men,  judges  and  prisoners  alike — must  one  day 
stand  (Rev.  xx.  12,  13) — a  tribunal  over  which  that  Jesus  of  whom  he  spoke 
should  preside  (Matt.  xxv.  32 ;  Acts  xvii.  31  ;  2  Cor.  v.  10),  at  which  the  secrets 
of  all  hearts  should  be  laid  bare  (Rom.  ii.  16),  and  from  which  impartial  awards 
should  be  made  to  every  man  according  as  his  works  should  have  been  (Rom. 
ii.  6).  3.  The  effect  of  it.  What  impression  this  weird  sermon  from  a  weirder 
preacher  had  on  those  who  heard  it,  and  for  whom  specially  it  was  intended,  is 
only  recorded  in  part.  What  Drusilla  thought  of  it  the  pen  of  inspiration  has 
not  revealed.  Did  the  remembrance  of  her  first  husband  recur  to  her  ?  or  the 
revolting  character  of  her  present  wickedness  disturb  her  ?  Did  the  gleaming 
fires  of  the  impending  judgment-day  startle  her  half- dead  conscience  within  her, 
fast-bound  in  the  cords  of  lustful  sleep  ?  Or,  did  she  hear  as  though  she  heard 
not  ?  Did  she  steel  her  bosom  against  the  soul-piercing  words  of  the  Lord's 
servant  ?  Did  she  drown  the  still  small  voice  that  whispered  within  her  bosom 
and  wooed  her  to  better  things  1  These  are  questions  to  which  no  reply  can  be 
given.  So  far  as  Drusilla  is  concerned  an  unbroken  silence  will  encompass  her 
until  the  trumpet  of  the  great  day  shall  sound.  But  for  Felix  no  such  doom  has 
been  reserved.  How  he  felt,  as  the  weary,  weather-beaten  missionary  of  the 
Cross,  becoming  animated  as  he  warmed  to  his  theme,  and  fixing  on  his  listener 
that  intense  look  which  was  so  characteristic  of  the  apostle  (xxiii.  1) ;  how  Felix 
felt,  as  the  unearthly  words  echoed  through  his  spirit,  and  raised  up  before  his 
imagination  ideas  that  were  awe-inspiring  in  their  ghostly  grandeur  ; — how  he  felt, 
and  what  he  said,  has  been  set  down  in  burning  letters  that  he  who  runs  may 
read.     Felix  trembled  at  the  picture  which  this  strange  man — with  a  solemn 

508 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxiv. 


eloquence  which  held  him  spellbound — had  painted  on  the  canvas  of  his  soul. 
He  could  see  the  great  white  throne,  with  the  Judge  whose  eyes  were  like  a 
flame  of  fire  (Rev.  i.  14);  he  could  see  the  assembled  multitudes,  and  himself 
among  them,  undistinguished  by  any  earthly  greatness,  in  all  the  hideous  naked- 
ness of  his  guilty  soul;  he  could  hear  the  booming  of  the  thunders  and  the 
glancing  of  the  lightnings  which  proclaimed  the  commencement  of  the  business 
of  that  awful  assize ;  and  as  he  realised  the  wickedness  of  his  past  and  present 
life — its  utter  lack  of  righteousness,  and  horrible  defilement  through  lust — he  grew 
terrified  with  that  terror  which  ever  seizes  on  the  guilty  when  their  wickedness 
is  on  the  eve  of  detection,  and  said  "  Go  thy  way,  for  this  time  ;  and  when  I  have 
a  convenient  season  I  will  call  thee  unto  me." 

Y.  The  pitiful  conclusion. — It  ended  in  three  sad  things.  1.  Delay.  Felix 
had  some  shadow  of  excuse  for  procrastination  in  the  preceding  instance,  when 
Paul  defended  himself  before  his  bar — this,  namely  that  he  had  been  unexpectedly 
summoned  in  Providence  to  decide  between  Paul  and  his  accusers,  and  might 
naturally  plead  that  he  wished  to  be  better  informed  before  delivering  judgment. 
In  this  case  no  such  ground  for  putting  off  existed.  Felix  was  called  to  decide  in 
a  matter  which  affected  himself  alone,  and  for  which  the  materials  lay  at  hand. 
For  him  the  clear  duty  of  the  moment  was  to  repent  and  humble  himself  before 
God,  to  separate  himself  from  the  beautiful  but  wicked  woman  at  his  side,  to 
break  off  his  flagitious  courses  in  life,  and  turn  to  God  in  righteousness  and  holy 
obedience.  But,  alas  !  he  deferred  again,  as  he  had  deferred  before — he  put  off 
giving  judgment  between  himself  and  God,  as  he  had  previously  delayed  pro- 
nouncing a  verdict  between  Paul  and  his  prosecutors.  He  would  settle  his  own 
case,  as  he  had  promised  to  settle  Paul's — at  a  more  convenient  season.  In 
Paul's  that  more  convenient  season  would  arrive  when  Lysias  should  come  down  ; 
in  his  own,  when  he  should  have  more  inclination  or  leisure  to  turn  from  dalliance 
with  the  fair  creature  by  his  side  and  think  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and 
judgment  to  come.  Let  it  be  noted  that,  as  in  Paul's  case  no  reason  remains  for 
believing  that  Lysias  ever  came  down  to  Csesarea,  so  is  there  good  ground  for  hold- 
ing that  for  Felix's  own  case  the  convenient  moment  never  arrived.  2.  Resistance. 
Felix,  it  appears,  had  frequent  interviews  with  his  prisoner,  but  never  again 
allowed  his  peace  of  mind  to  be  disturbed,  or  his  better  nature  to  be  aroused. 
Bather,  he  strenuously  fought  his  convictions  down.  He  fell  back  upon  the  evil 
demon  of  cupidity  within  his  breast,  called  up  into  the  field  the  spirit  of  avarice 
to  do  battle  against  the  spirit  of  repentance  and  righteousness  that  had  been 
temporarily  awakened  in  him.  "  He  hoped  withal  that  money  would  be  given 
him  of  Paul."  He  never  proposed  to  Paul  the  question  of  the  Philippian  gaoler 
— "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  1 "  3.  Rejection.  Whatever  promise  of  good 
may  have  been  in  Felix's  soul,  when  he  trembled  under  Paul's  preaching,  it 
ultimately  died  away.  Felix  decided  neither  Paul's  case  nor  his  own,  but  left 
the  brave  apostle,  whom  he  knew  to  be  innocent,  to  languish  in  prison  for  two 
whole  years ;  and  when  at  length,  his  own  reign  of  iniquity  coming  to  an  end,  he 
was  recalled  by  his  imperial  master,  he  still  delayed  doing  justice  to  the  servant 
of  Jesus.  Thinking  to  ingratiate  himself  with  his  much-abused  subjects,  and 
hoping  to  shut  their  mouths  against  him  at  the  bar  of  Caesar — in  which,  however, 
he  was  deceived — he  left  Paul  in  bonds. 

Learn — 1.  The  possibility  of  hearing  the  gospel  without  being  saved.  2.  The 
danger  of  trifling  with  one's  convictions  of  sin.  3.  The  wisdom  of  deciding  for 
God  and  Christ  at  the  earliest  moment.  4.  The  probability  that  opportunities 
for  being  saved,  once  neglected,  will  not  return.  5.  The  almost  certainty  that  he 
who  deliberately  turns  from  the  light  will  stumble  on  and  down  into  deeper 
darkness. 

509 


chap.  xxiv.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  24.  The  Character  of  Felix. 
I.  An  unjust  ruler. 
II.  A  licentious  voluptuary. 

III.  An  inveterate  procrastinator. 

IV.  An  avaricious  money-hunter. 
V.  A  crafty  promoter  of  his  own 

interests. 

VI.  An  unprincipled  trampler  on 
the  rights  of  others. 

Drusilla,  the  Wife  of  Felix.  —  A 
woman — 

I.  Of  highly  exalted  birth.— The 
daughter  of  kings.  Noble  parentage, 
when  good,  is  an  incalculable  blessing, 
and  entails  great  responsibilities. 
Noblesse  oblige. 

II.  Of  ripe  personal  beauty. — Her 
loveliness  the  ruin  of  both  herself  and 
Felix.  Physical  grace  and  elegance — 
a  precious  gift  of  Heaven—  not  always 
prized  as  such,  but  often  bought  and 
sold,  like  meat  upon  the  shambles. 

III.  Of  deeply  depraved  character. 
— At  the  moment  when  she  heard  Paul 
living  in  open  sin,  being  the  runaway 
wife  of  one  man  and  the  adulterous 
paramour  of  another. 

IV.  Of  manifestly  trifling  disposi- 
tion.— No  reason  to  think  she  was  in 
earnest,  either  in  sending  for  or  listen- 
ing to  Paul ;  probably  actuated  by  no 
higher  motive  than  to  see  the  distin- 
guished preacher  (compare  Luke  xxiii. 
8),  or  to  gratify  her  curiosity  about  the 
new  faith,  or  to  while  away  a  few 
leisure  moments  in  her  frivolous  and 
wicked  life. 

V.  Of  palpably  seared  conscience. 
— Sitting  beside  her  husband,  whose 
innermost  soul  quaked  beneath  the 
searching  words  that  spake  of  righteous- 
ness, temperance,  and  judgment  to 
come,  she  heard  unmoved.  At  least, 
she  evinced  no  sign  that  the  arrow 
of  conviction  had  reached  her  womanly 
breast.  Fast  asleep  in  the  depths  of 
sin,  her  soul  heard  not  the  awakening 
voice  of  truth. 

Paul  before  Felix. — The  scene  intro- 
duces us  to  four  things  : — 

510 


I.  A  celebrated  preacher. — Paul. 
After  Jesus  Christ,  who  "spake  as 
never  man  spake  "  (John  vii.  47),  no 
nobler  representative  of  the  Christian 
ministry  has  ever  appeared  in  the 
world  or  the  Church.  When  he  stood 
before  Felix,  three  virtues  shone  forth 
conspicuously  in  him.  1.  Unwearied 
zeal  in  embracing  every  opportunity  to 
advance  the  cause  of  his  Master. 
Seldom  have  circumstances  been  less 
favourable  for  the  exercise  of  the 
preacher's  gift  than  were  his  that  day 
in  Csesarea — hardly  even  when  con- 
founding the  Jews  who  dwelt  at 
Damascus  (ix.  22),  fighting  with  wild 
beasts  at  Ephesus  (xix.  31  ;  1  Cor. 
xv.  32),  or  addressing  his  countrymen 
from  the  castle  stairs  in  Jerusalem 
(xxii.  1 ) ;  and  yet,  no  sooner  was  he 
invited  than  he  began  to  pour  forth 
the  wondrous  story  of  his  crucified  and 
risen  Lord.  2.  Unflinching  courage  in 
shaping  his  discourse  to  suit  his  hearers. 
Not  to  please,  but  to  profit ;  not  to 
flatter,  but  to  rebuke ;  not  to  lull  into 
drowsy  stupor,  but  to  awaken  from  the 
trance  of  spiritual  death.  And  yet  he 
flinched  not  an  instant  in  his  task. 
Not  a  quaver  of  fear,  though  possibly 
more  than  one  of  affection,  was  heard 
in  his  oration.  Like  Daniel  before 
Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv.  27),  he  told 
out  his  message  without  trepidation. 
3.  Irrepressible  hopefulness  in  despairing 
of  no  man.  Paul  not  ignorant  of  the 
characters  of  Felix  and  Drusilla,  yet, 
when  invited  to  discourse  to  them 
about  the  faith  of  Christ  he  declined 
not,  on  the  plea  that  such  sinners  were 
beyond  the  reach  of  mercy  or  inacces- 
sible to  the  power  of  grace. 

II.  A  pattern  discourse. — 1.  A 
sermon  on  the  right  theme — the  faith 
that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  This  held  the 
place  of  honour  in  all  Paul's  preaching, 
whose  unvarying  subject  was  Jesus 
Christ  and  Him  crucified.  2.  Intensely 
practical  in  its  contents.  With  such 
topics  did  it  deal  as  "righteousness, 
temperance,  judgment  to  come  " — 
topics  too  often   absent  from  modern 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxiv. 


ministrations.  3.  Directly  'personal. 
Shaped  so  as  to  meet  the  characters, 
rebuke  the  sins,  and  arouse  the  torpid 
spirits,  of  his  hearers.  4.  Eminently 
rational.  Paul  reasoned,  declaimed 
not,  but  pressed  home  upon  his 
listeners  arguments  which  flooded 
their  intellects  with  light,  touched 
their  hearts  with  emotion,  and  stirred 
within  their  conscience  the  voice  of 
truth  and  right. 

III.  Illustrious  hearers. — 1.  Persons 
of  high  rank.  No  better  or  more 
valuable  in  God's  sight  than  people  of 
obscure  position.  Equally  with  these 
in  need  of  salvation.     Often  more  so. 

2.  Notorious  sinners.  Less  heinous 
offenders  are  still  transgressors  in  the 
sight  of  Heaven  and  such  as  require  to 
be    called    to    repentance    and   faith. 

3.  Deplorably  indifferent.  So  are  mul- 
titudes of  those  to  whom  preachers  are 
called  to  present  the  gospel.  The 
number  of  those  who  truly  long  for 
salvation,  and  thirst  after  righteousness, 
is  few. 

IV.  Disappointing  results. — 1.  Only 
one  of  Paul's  hearers  impressed.  Only 
Felix — not  Drusilla;  and  yet  she,  having 
been  a  Jewess,  ought  to  have  possessed 
a  better  understanding  of  Paul's 
message  than  her  husband  had,  while, 
having  been  as  wicked  as  her  husband, 
she  had  as  much  cause  for  trembling 
as  he.  So  it  often  happens  under  the 
ministry  of  the  gospel.  One  is  taken, 
the  other  left ;  one  touched,  the  other 
unmoved.  2.  That  one  only  impressed, 
not  improved.  Felix  convicted,  not 
converted;  merely  trembled,  did  not 
turn.  This  also  a  not  unusual  pheno- 
menon under  a  faithful  ministry. 
Souls  are  alarmed  who  do  not  even- 
tually prove  to  be  saved.  3.  The 
impressed  one  ti'ifled  with,  but  did  not 
embrace,  the  gracious  opportunity  which 
came  before  him.  Felix,  had  he  fostered 
the  convictions  awakened  in  his  soul, 
might  have  been  recovered  from  his 
sinful  condition  ;  but  he  procrastinated, 
allowed  his  better  impulses  to  subside, 
and  was  lost.  So  thousands  permit 
their  day  of  merciful  visitation  to  pass, 
to  their  everlasting  hurt.     "  The  Holy 


Ghost  saith,  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  His 
voice,  harden  not  your  heart "  (Heb. 
iv.  7). 

The  Faith  in  Christ  Jesus. — Is — 

I.  Heavenly  in  its  object.— Direct- 
ing its  look,  not  to  the  historical,  but 
to  the  crucified  and  risen  Christ — 
the  Christ  whom  Paul  preached. 

II.  Reasonable  in  its  character.— 
Capable  of  being  set  forth  in  such 
terms  as  to  command  the  assent  of  the 
understanding  and  judgment.  So  Paul 
presented  it  to  Felix. 

III.  Holy  in  its  demands. — Though 
not  requiring  righteousness  and  tem- 
perance as  grounds  of  justification, 
insisting  upon  these  as  indispensable  to 
salvation. 

IV.  Alarming  in  its  operation. — 
Awaking  in  the  souls  of  them  to  whom 
it  is  presented  conviction  of  sin  and 
fear  of  judgment. 

V.  Saving  in  its  results. — When 
accepted  in  humility  and  penitence, 
trustfulness  and  obedience,  it  issues  in 
the  blessing  of  complete  redemption 
from  the  curse  and  power  of  sin. 

Vers.  24,  25.  A  Preacher  such  as 
Paul  (before  Felix)  should  be— 

I.  Ready  for  every  call  to  preach  that 
presents  itself  in  providence. — Paul 
interposed  no  objection  when  Felix  sent 
for  him,  declined  not  the  invitation 
proferred  him  to  expound  the  principles 
of  the  gospel,  but  heartily  embraced 
the  opportunity  to  advance  his  Master's 
cause.  Semper  paratus  should  be  the 
minister's  motto. 

II.  Courageous  in  facing  every 
audience  on  whom  he  looks.— This  he 
will  be  if  he  preserves  a  lowly  estimate 
of  himself,  conjoined  with  an  exalted 
idea  of  the  Master  he  serves  and  of  the 
message  he  bears,  as  well  as  a  lively 
sense  of  that  Master's  presence. 

III.  Evangelical  in  the  truths  he 
proclaims. — The  proper  business  of  the 
pulpit  is  neither  to  teach  science  or 
philosophy,  m  r  to  disseminate  the 
elements  of  ordinary  knowledge,  but  to 
publish  the  everlasting  gospel. 

IV.  Direct  in  the  manner  of  his 

Oil 


chap.  xxiv.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


teaching. — A  good  sermon,  besides 
having  a  good  text  and  good  matter, 
should  be  appropriate  and  personal — 
not  in  an  offensive  and  impertinent, 
but  in  a  heart-searching  and  conscience- 
touching,  sense.  Preaching  that  lacks 
point  in  front,  and  has  no  push  from 
behind,  is  not  likely  to  result  in  con- 
versions. 

Paul,  Felix,  and  Drusilla  \  or,  Three 
J    Phases  of  Conscience. 

I.  The  courage  of  a  good  conscience. 
— Exemplified  in  Paul,  who  reasoned  of 
righteousness,  temperance,  and  judg- 
ment to  come,  before  the  adulterous 
pair.  Compare  John  the  Baptist  before 
Herod  (Matt.  xiv.  4). 

II.  The  alarm  of  a  guilty  conscience. 
— Illustrated  in  Felix,  who  trembled  as 
the  vision  of  a  judgment-day  arose  upon 
his  mind's  horizon.  Compare  Herod, 
the  Baptist's  murderer  (Matt.  xiv.  2). 

III.  The  insensibility  of  a  hardened 
conscience.  — Exhibited  in  Drusilla,  who 
heard,  unmoved,  the  he  art -searching 
words  of  Paul.  Compare  the  behaviour 
of  her  sister  Bernice  (xxvi.  30).  Both 
instances  of  that  most  awful  psycho- 
logical phenomenon — a  conscience  past 
feeling  (Eph.  iv.  19). 

Yer.  25.  Convenient  Seasons — 

I.  Are  always  present  to  those  in 

earnest  about  religion. — To  such  as  are 

(1)  convinced  of  their  own  guilt  and 

sin ;    (2)   alive   to   the   necessity   and 


importance  of  salvation ;  (3)  aware  of 
the  uncertainty  and  shortness  of  life. 

II.  Never  come  to  those  indifferent 
about  religion. — To  those  who  are 
(1)  in  love  with  sin  and  its  pleasures 
(Tit.  iii.  3) ;  (2)  blinded  by  the  god  of 
this  world  (2  Cor.  iv.  4)  ;  (3)  uncon- 
scious of  their  perilous  condition. 

Ver.  26.  The  Love  of  Money,  as  Ex- 
emplified in  Felix. 

I.  Rooted,  presumably,  in  his 
corrupt  and  unprincipled  heart— 
Mammon,  the  god  of  this  world 
(Matt.  vi.  24). 

II.  Fostered  by  his  wicked  life. — 
For  his  personal  extravagance  and 
licentious  indulgence  he  needed  money, 
and  this  need  kept  the  demon  of 
avarice  awake. 

III.  Obstructive  of  higher  impulses. 
— It  stifled  his  conscience,  hardened 
his  heart,  destroyed  his  soul.  It 
prevented  the  entrance  into  his  soul  of 
the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory 
of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  Productive  of  other  sins. — In 
Felix's  case  it  led  to  procrastination  or 
trifling  with  his  own  highest  interests  ; 
to  the  infliction  of  injustice  on  Paul,  by 
continued  imprisonment ;  to  the  prac- 
tice of  hypocrisy,  in  pretending  to 
commune  often  with  Paul  about  the 
faith,  when  secretly  "  he  hoped  that 
money  would  be  given  him  of  Paul." 
"  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  every 
kind  of  evil"  (1  Tim.  vi.  10). 


512 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   THE  ACTS.       chap.  xxv. 

CHAPTEE  XXV. 

Paul  before  Festus — A  Second  Trial  at  Cesarea. 

§  1.  The  Succession  of  a  New  Governor;  or,  the  Revival  and  Defeat  of  an  Old 

Plot  (vers.  1-5). 
§  2.  Paul  before  Festus — an  Appeal  to  the  Emperor  (vers.  6-12). 
§  3.  Talked  about  by  State  Dignitaries ;  or,  Festus's  Conversation  with  Agrippa 

about  Paul  (ver.  13-22). 
§  4.  A  Third  Hearing   before  Agrippa   and  Bernice ;   or,  Festus's  Excuse  for 

calling  for  his  Prisoner  (vers.  23-27). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Having  come  into  the  province,  or  having  entered  upon  his  province — i.e.,  his 
procuratorship  (see  on  xxiii.  18) — Festus,  after  three  days,  ascended,  or  went  up  (contrast 
the  reverse,  "went  down,"  in  xxiv.  1),  from  Csesarea  to  Jerusalem,  the  metropolis  of  the 
dominion  over  which  he  had  been  appointed  ruler. 

Ver.  2.  The  renewal  of  the  complaints  against  Paul,  which  were  made  by  the  high  priest, 
or,  according  to  the  best  MSS.,  the  chief  priests  and  the  chief,  or  the  principal  (R.V.) — lit., 
"  the  first "  of  the  Jews,  showed  that  the  Sanhedrim  had  been  greatly  dissatisfied  with  the 
result  of  Paul's  trial  before  Felix.  Their  present  movement  was  probably  dictated  by  the 
hope  of  succeeding  better  with  a  new  procurator,  who,  knowing  their  power  as  it  had  been 
displayed  in  procuring  the  recall  of  his  predecessor,  might  naturally  be  disposed  to  exhibit 
towards  them  a  greater  degree  of  complaisance.  The  high  priest  at  this  time  was  Ismael, 
the  son  of  Phabi,  who  succeeded  Ananias  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XX.  viii.  8). 

Ver.  3.  Their  proposal  that  Festus  should  send  for  Paul  to  Jerusalem  was,  like  the  proposal 
of  the  forty  (xxiii.  15),  designed  to  afford  them  an  opportunity  of  cutting  him  off  by  secret 
assassination  on  the  road  from  Cassarea. 

Ver.  5.  Festus,  however,  whether  he  had  heard  from  Felix  or  Lysias,  or  others  of  the 
former  plot,  refused  their  request,  and  invited  those  amongst  them  who  were  able — i.e.,  not 
physically  able  (Bengel),  or  to  whom  it  was  convenient  (Grotius,  Calvin)  or  talented,  but 
powerful,  dvvarol,  clothed  with  official  authority,  i.e.,  their  rulers  (Meyer,  Alford,  Holtzmann, 
Zockler)  to  go  down  with  him  to  Caesarea,  whither  he  was  shortly  to  proceed,  and  accuse 
him  if  there  was  any  wickedness,  better  anything  amiss,  or  out  of  place,  in  his  behaviour. 
The  best  MSS.  omit  toijtu),  this. 

Ver.  6.  More  than  ten  days. — According  to  the  most  reliable  authorities  this  should  be  not 
more  than  eight  or  ten  days. 

Ver.  7.  The  many  and  grievous  complaints,  or  charges,  against  Paul,  which  his  accusers 
could  not  prove,  were  no  doubt  the  same  which  had  been  preferred  against  him  by  Tertullus 
(xxiv.  5,  6). 

Ver.  8.  Paul's  defence  shows  that  the  accusations  now  put  forward  were  the  srme  old 
charges  to  which  he  had  already  answered,  only  perhaps  in  a  different  order — heresy, 
sacrilege,  sedition. 

Ver.  9.  Wilt  thou  go  up  to  Jerusalem  and  there  be  judged  ?— The  proposal  of  Festus  not 
merely  to  shift  the  venue  or  place  of  trial  from  Caesarea  to  Jerusalem,  but  to  substitute  an 
ecclesiastical  for  a  civil  court,  with  himself  present  merely  as  a  spectator  (which  seems  to  be 
the  import  of  before  me),  was  perhaps  dictated  by  two  motives — a  desire  to  please  the  Jews 
(see  on  xxiv.  27),  and  a  wish  to  rid  himself  of  a  troublesome  responsibility.  It  had  also  an 
appearance  of  being  fair  to  Paul  in  that  it  offered  him  a  trial  before  a  court  of  his  own 
nation,  with  the  presence  of  the  procurator  to  see  that  no  injustice  was  done.  Only  as  Paul 
had  been  handed  over  as  a  Roman  citizen  to  a  Eoman  tribunal,  the  proposed  change  could 
not  take  place  without  the  prisoner's  consent. 

Ver.  10.  I  stand,  or  am  standing,  at  Caesar's  judgment  seat. — Paul  knew  that  his  doom  was 
sealed  should  his  case  be  remitted  back  to  Jerusalem,  and  hence  claimed  to  be  tried  as  a 
Eoman  citizen  before  a  Roman  court.  It  can  hardly  be  that  Paul  intended  to  say,  "  I  stand 
already  in  mind  and  purpose  before  the  Emperor's  court,  for  God  has  shown  me  by  a  special 
revelation  that  I  am  to  preach  the  gospel  at  Rome,  and  my  trial  there  is  accordingly  part  of 
the  divinely  ordered  course  of  things  which  cannot  be  altered"  (Wordsworth).  As  thou  very 
well  knowest. — This  complete  insight  into  the  worthlessness  of  the  charges  brought  against 
him,  which  Paul  ascribes  to  Festus,  may  appear  to  conflict  with  Festus's  own  statements  in 

LL  513 


chap.  xxv.        HOMLETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


vers.  18,  19,  20,  26  (Holtzmann)  ;  but  both  assertions  may  easily  enough  have  been  correct. 
Festus  may  not  have  perfectly  comprehended  the  precise  points  in  which  Paul  was  alleged  to 
have  violated  Jewish  law  ;  but  he  bad  discernment  enough  to  perceive  that  sufficient  to 
establish  anything  against  his  prisoner  had  not  been  advanced. 

Ver.  11.  I  refuse  not  to  die. — I  make  no  entreaty  against  dying,  I  beg  not  myself  off  by 
prayers.  "  Not  mercy,  but  only  justice,  asks  Paul  of  Caesar  "  (Besser).  "  We  make  no  request 
for  favour ;  if  any  one  can  convict  us  of  wrong,  be  it  little  or  great,  we  refuse  not  the  sharpest 
punishment"  (Athenagoras  in  his  Apology  for  the  Christians,  addressed  to  Marcus  Aurelius). 
No  man  may  deliver  me  unto  them,  or  give  me  up  to  them  as  a  favour. — "  Not  even  Festus,  if 
he  will  do  what  is  right"  (Besser).  I  appeal  unto  Caesar. — "  These  important  words  were 
spoken  by  Paul,"  says  Stier,  "  being  certainly  impelled  by  the  suggestion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  " 
(compare  xxiii.  11).  So  did  the  Christians  in  Bithynia  in  Pliny's  time  do.  "Paul  felt 
indeed  what  a  curse  his  people  had  brought  upon  themselves  by  compelling  him  to  appeal  to 
Caesar  "  (Besser). 

Ver.  12.  Conferred  with  the  council. — I.e.,  with  the  Roman  assessors  who  assisted  him  at 
the  trial.  The  subject  of  consultation  manifestly  was  as  to  whether  the  appeal  should  be 
admitted  or  refused.  Appeals  appear  not  to  have  been  admitted  in  every  case.  Chap,  xxviii. 
18, 19  shows  that  Festus  was  disposed  to  release  Paul,  and  probably  would  have  done  so  had 
not  the  Sanhedrists  objected.  Weizsacker  comments  upon  the  fact  that  Paul  was  thrice  in 
danger  of  his  life  (xxi.  31,  xxiii.  12,  xxv.  3),  thrice  accused  by  the  Jews  (xxiii.  28,  xxiv.  1, 
xxv.  2,  15),  and  thrice  rescued  by  the  Romans  (xxiii.  30,  xxiv.  22,  xxv.  12),  and  finds  in 
this  word  "  thrice"  a  proof  of  manufactured  history.     This  requires  no  refutation. 

Ver.  13.  After  certain  days,  or  certain  days  having  gone  by  ;  how  many  is  unknown. 
Agrippa  the  king  was  Herod  Agrippa  II.,  the  son  of  Agrippa  I.,  mentioned  in  xii.  1-6,  19-23, 
and  the  Jewish  vassal-prince  of  Rome,  who,  on  his  father's  death,  was  considered  too  young 
to  succeed  to  the  sovereignty  of  Judaea,  which  accordingly  was  placed  under  procurators, 
though  on  the  death  of  his  uncle  Herod,  King  of  Chalcis,  in  A.D.  48  or  50  (Hackett),  he 
received  the  sovereignty  of  that  region  from  Claudius,  along  with  the  superintendence  of  the 
temple  and  the  nomination  of  the  high  priests.  Four  years  later  "  he  received  the 
tetrarchies  of  his  great-uncles,  Philip  and  Lysanius,  with  the  title  of  king  "  (Plumptre).  In 
A.D.  55  some  Galilean  cities  were  added  to  his  kingdom  by  Nero  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XIX.  ix.  1, 
XX.  i.  3,  viii.  4).  He  died  under  Trajan  in  A.D.  100,  at  the  age  of  seventy-three.  Bernice, 
or  Berenice — perhaps  Macedonian  for  Pherenice — was  his  sister,  and  the  sister  of  Drusilla. 
The  eldest  daughter  of  Herod  Agrippa  I.,  she  had  been  married  while  a  young  girl  to  her 
uncle  Herod  of  Chalcis,  on  whose  death,  while  ostensibly  living  as  a  widow,  she  became, 
according  to  public  rumour,  the  incestuous  paramour  of  her  brother  Agrippa  II.  Afterwards 
Polemon,  the  King  of  Cilicia,  in  order  to  obtain  her  hand  in  marriage,  professed  himself  a 
convert  to  Judaism,  and,  as  Azizus  had  done  for  Drusilla,  accepted  circumcision.  The  union, 
however,  was  quickly  dissolved.  It  was  subsequent  to  this  that  she  accompanied  her  brother 
to  Caesarea.  Eventually  she  followed  Titus  to  Rome  as  his  mistress,  in  the  hope  of  marriage 
which  he  had  promised ;  but  this  was  more  than  the  Senate  could  tolerate,  and  he  was  forced 
reluctantly  to  part  with  her  (Sueton.,  Titus,  c.  7  ;  Tacit.,  Hist.,  ii.  81 ;  Jos.,  Ant.,  XX.  vii.  3). 
To  salute  Festus  probably  meant  to  formally  acknowledge  him  on  entering  on  his  procurator- 
ship,  as  the  representative  of  his  (Agrippa's)  overlord  (Caesar). 

Ver.  14.  Declared,  better,  laid  Paul's  case,  or  the  matters  concerning  Paul,  before  the  king. 
— Festus  might  naturally  conclude  that  Agrippa,  being  a  Jew,  would  understand  the  points  in 
dispute,  and  be  able  to  enlighten  him  about  them.  Weizsacker  sees  in  the  bringing  of  Paul 
before  Agrippa  an  exact  parallel  to  the  removing  of  Jesus  to  Herod  Antipas  by  Pilate 
(Luke  xxiii.  8-12),  and  pronounces  both  unhistorical,  but  without  reason. 

Ver.  16.  It  is  not  the  manner,  rather  custom,  of  the  Romans  (if  it  is  of  the  Jews  !),  to 
deliver  any  man  to  die,  should  read,  to  give  up  any  man,  the  words  to  die,  literally  "  unto 
destruction,"  being  a  gloss,  which  is  not  found  in  the  best  MSS.  "  The  use  of  the  same  verb 
(xapifc<70ai)  as  that  which  Paul  had  used  in  ver.  16  shows  that  the  arrow  shot  at  a  venture 
had  hit  the  mark.     Festus  is  eager  to  repel  the  charge  "  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  18.  Against. — Better,  either  concerning  (R.V.),  or  round  (Alford,  Hackett).  In  the 
former  case  the  clause  should  be  corrected  with  "  brought "  ;  in  the  latter  with  "stood  up." 

Ver.  19.  Superstition. — Better,  religion.  Festus  designedly,  perhaps,  using  a  word  which 
might  be  interpreted  either  in  a  good  or  bad  sense  as  Agrippa  pleased.  One  Jesus. — Hackett 
remarks  on  Luke's  candour  in  recording  this  contemptuous  remark. 

Ver.  20.  Doubted. — The  verb  describes  something  stronger  than  doubt  or  uncertainty,  and 
is  more  happily  rendered  "  perplexed  "  (R.V.).  This,  however,  was  hardly  the  motive  why 
Festus  asked  him  whether  he  would  go  to  Jerusalem  to  be  judged  (see  ver.  9).  Festus 
doubtless  wished  to  set  the  matter  in  the  best  light  for  himself. 

Ver.  21.  Augustus. — Sebastos.  A  title  first  conferred  on  Octavianus  by  the  Roman  Senate, 
and  afterwards  borne  by  all  succeeding  emperors.  The  emperor  in  question  was  Nero,  the 
stepson  of  Claudius,  who  married  his  mother  Agrippina,  the  wife  of  Ahenobarbus,  and  the 

514 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.       chap.  xxv. 


daughter  of  Germanicus.  Nero  succeeded  Claudius,  A.D.  54.  Nero's  inhuman  character  is 
too  well  known  to  require  detailed  mention. 

Ver.  22.  I  would  also  hear. — Meaning  not  that  he  had  formerly  cherished  such  a  desire 
(Calvin),  but  that  he  was  then  wishing  such  a  thing  had  been  possible  as  that  he  might  hear. 

Ver.  23.  The  chief  captains  were  the  chiliarchs  or  commanders  of  the  cohorts  stationed  at 
Cresarea — which  cohorts  were  five  in  number  (Jos.,  Wars,  III.  iv.  2). 

Ver.  24.  All  the  multitude  of  the  Jews,  the  procurator  says,  had  dealt  with  or  made  suit  to 
him  because  the  Jewish  rulers  in  their  action  had  only  interpreted  the  popular  outcry  against 
the  apostle  (Hackett),  or  because  a  crowd  may  have  gone  with  them  to  the  procurator's 
residence  in  order  to  enforce  their  application  by  clamouring  for  the  same  object  (Meyer). 

Ver.  25  supplies  a  valuable  attestation  of  the  governor's  conviction  that  Paul  had  committed 
nothing  worthy  of  death — i.e.,  was  practically  innocent  of  the  charges  preferred  against  him. 

Ver.  26.  No  certain  thing  to  write. — In  cases  of  appeal  "  it  was  necessary  to  transmit  to 
the  emperor  a  written  account  of  the  ofiEence  charged  as  having  been  committed,  aud  also  of 
all  the  judicial  proceedings  that  may  have  taken  place  in  relation  to  it.  Documents  of  this 
description  were  called  apostoli  or  literae  dimissoriae  "  (Hackett).  My  Lord,  icvpios,  Dominus, 
was  a  title  which  neither  Augustus  nor  Tiberius  would  accept  because  it  implied  the  relation 
of  master  and  slave,  and  because  properly  it  belonged  only  to  the  gods  (Tacit.,  Annals,  ii.  87 ; 
Suetonius,  Aug.,  53),  Caligula  and  all  the  emperors  who  followed  him  had  no  such  scruples. 
The  use  of  it  now  by  Luke,  when  a  few  years  earlier  it  would  have  been  inappropriate,  is 
another  mark  of  historical  veracity. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses   1—5. 

The  Succession  of  a  New  Governor  ;  or,  the  Revival  and  Defeat  oj  an  Old  Plot. 

I.  The  old  plot  revived. — 1.  What  the  plot  was.  To  effect  Paul's  removal  by 
assassination.  Nothing  could  more  convincingly  have  attested  the  success  of  the 
apostle  in  establishing  Christianity  among  his  countrymen  than  this  unappeas- 
able thirst  of  the  leaders  of  the  Jewish  people  for  his  removal.  So  long  as  he 
was  alive  and  at  liberty  to  continue  an  active  propaganda,  it  seemed  to  them 
there  could  be  no  security  against  the  overthrow  of  their  national  faith.  They 
had  the  sagacity  to  perceive  that  a  death-struggle  had  commenced  between  the 
Old  Faith  and  the  New,  in  which  one  or  other  must  go  down.  Their  implacable 
hostility  was  also  a  gruesome  revelation  of  the  malignity  of  their  hearts  as  well 
as  of  the  secret  conviction  they  entertained  that  victory  was  inclining  to  the  side 
of  "  the  Way."  2.  Why  the  plot  was  revived.  Because  of  tho  failure  of  the  first 
attempt  to  carry  it  out,  through  the  midnight  withdrawal  of  Paul  to  Osesarea  by 
Lysias's  soldiers  (xxiii.  31-35),  and  because  of  the  collapse  of  the  subsequent  pro- 
ceedings against  Paul  before  Felix  at  Csesarea  (xxiv.  22,  23).  The  enemies  of 
Paul  and  the  instigators  of  the  present  conspiracy  had  hoped  by  fair  means  or 
foul  to  effect  their  murderous  design,  but  thus  far  Providence  had  thwarted  its 
execution.  For  two  years  they  had  brooded  over  their  disappointment,  but  had 
not  departed  from  their  purpose.  "  Travailing  with  iniquity  and  conceiving 
mischief  "  (Psalm  vii.  14)  all  that  time,  they  lay  in  readiness  at  the  proper  moment 
to  bring  it  forth  anew.  3.  When  the  plot  was  resuscitated.  On  the  occasion  of 
Festus's  visit  to  Jerusalem.  Festus,  the  new  procurator,  had  just  entered  upon 
his  duties,  and  come  into  his  province  in  succession  to  Felix,  who  had  lately  been 
recalled.  Festus,  being  a  new  governor,  would  naturally  feel  disposed,  so  Paul's 
enemies  reasoned,  to  ingratiate  himself  with  his  Judsean  subjects,  and  all  the 
more  that  he  probably  knew  both  how  troublesome  these  were  to  rule,  and  how 
powerful  they  had  shown  themselves  in  being  able  to  bring  about  the  deposition 
of  his  predecessor.  Besides,  from  Festus's  inexperience  they  most  likely  antici- 
pated better  results,  than  they  had  obtained  from  Felix's  longer  and  wider 
knowledge  of  themselves  and  their  craft.  Accordingly,  no  sooner  had  Festus 
paid  his  inaugural  visit  to  the  capital,  than  the  Sanhedrists  embraced  the 
opportunity  of  reviving  the  old  charges  against  their  arch-enemy,  the  apostate 
Babbi  then  in  captivity  at  Caesarea.  4.  How  the  plot  was  designed  to  be  carried 
out.     Under  the  pretext  of  wishing  to  have  the  apostle  brought  to  a  fresh  trial, 

515 


ohap.  xxv.       HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


it  was  arranged  that  a  deputation  from  the  Sanhedrim  should  wait  upon  the 
governor  and  ask  him  to  send  for  Paul  from  Csesarea,  that  the  charges  standing 
against  him  might  be  re-examined  in  the  metropolis,  and,  in  the  event  of  this 
request  being  complied  with,  that  they  should  have  a  band  of  hired  assassins 
lying  in  wait  to  despatch  him  while  on  the  way.  By  no  means  a  clever  trick,  it 
was  merely  the  old  scheme  of  the  forty  Sicarii  revived.  It  was  another  proof 
that  villains  have  not  always  at  command  sagacity  or  genius  equal  to  their 
ferocity.  Neither  much  insight  nor  much  foresight  was  required  to  defeat  the 
plot.     How  it  prospered  the  next  paragraph  will  show. 

II.  The  old  plot  defeated. — 1.  By  a  simple  statement.  That  Paul  was  a 
prisoner  at  Csesarea,  whither  he  himself,  Festus,  was  about  to  depart ;  which 
meant  that  as  Paul  was  under  military  custody  there  was  no  danger  of  him 
escaping,  and  that  as  he  himself  (Festus)  was  about  to  proceed  northwards 
to  Csesarea,  there  was  no  need  to  be  at  either  the  trouble  or  expense  of  fetching 
Paul  to  Jerusalem.  Whether  Festus  had  got  an  inkling  from  Lysias,  the  com- 
mandant of  the  castle,  of  the  previous  conspiracy  against  Paul  by  these  venerable 
fathers  of  the  people,  and  stood  upon  his  guard  against  another  stratagem,  can 
only  be  conjectured  ;  but  his  answer  was  a  death-blow  to  their  device.  2.  By  a 
fair  proposal.  That  a  number  of  themselves,  the  rulers,  clothed  with  official 
power  should  return  with  him  to  Csesarea,  and  prefer  their  indictment  against 
the  apostle  there — if  indeed  there  was  anything  wrong  about  either  the  man 
or  his  conduct,  which  (one  almost  reads  between  the  lines)  he  hardly  believed 
there  was.  How  they  relished  the  new  governor's  proposal  can  only  be  imagined. 
Clearly  it  was  not  the  answer  they  expected  to  their  innocent  suggestion. 
Unless  they  were  either  fools  or  blind,  they  must  have  seen  that  their  secret 
machinations  were  understood.  Concealing  their  chagrin  as  best  they  could, 
they  retired  from  the  governor's  presence,  and  began  their  preparations  for  a 
second  journey  to  Csesarea  and  a  third  attack  upon  Paul. 

Learn. — 1.  How  hard  it  is  for  evil  thoughts  and  purposes  to  die  within  the 
heart.  2.  How  difficult  it  is  to  kill  those  whom  God  wants  to  keep  alive.  3.  How 
easy  it  is  to  see  through  and  thwart  the  designs  of  the  wicked  when  God  is 
against  them. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1.  Changes  in  Government.  poses  of  Heaven. — He  who  is  higher 

I.  Occur  mostly  at  unexpected  times,  than  the  highest,  whose  kingdom  ruleth 
— Felix  hardly  dreamed,  when  desiring  over  all,  and  who  holds  the  hearts  of 
to  gain  favour  with  the  Jews  he  left  kings  as  well  as  common  men  in  His 
Paul  bound,  that  within  two  years  his  hand,  worketh  out  the  counsel  of  His 
term  of  office  would  be  finished.  own  will  by  all  the  governments  that 

II.  Always  entail  new  responsibili-  rise  and  fall.  Festus's  accession  to  the 
ties  upon  the  new  governors. — Festus,  procuratorship,  and  coming  into  J  udsea, 
on  assuming  the  reins  of  government,  was  the  opening  of  a  new  chapter  in 
had  to  make  himself  acquainted  with  the  history  of  Paul. 

his  new  dominions  and  their  peoples. 

III.  Commonly  bring  new  experi-  Vers.  2,  3.  Wickedness  in  high 
ences  to  the  governed. — Hardly  any  places;  or,  the  horrible  iniquities  of 
rule  could  have  been  worse  than  that  those  who  were,  or  should  have  been, 
of  Felix ;  and  Festus's  was  for  the  good  men — exemplified  in  the  conduct 
Jews  a  happy  exchange.  But  some-  of  the  chief  priests  and  principal  men 
times  the  change  is  from  good  to  bad  of  the  Jews. 

or  from  bad  to  worse.  I.  Malignity. — For  two  whole  years 

TV.  Unconsciously  advance  the  pur-      they  had  nursed  their  wrath  against 

516 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxv. 


Paul.      Thus  showed  they  themselves  ceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately 

to   be  little   else  than   human   sleuth  wicked. 

hounds. 

II.  Deception. — They  pretended  to  Vers.  5,  6.  The  Lord  reigns  !  let  the 
Festus  that  they  only  wished  to  have  earth  be  glad  and  let  His  people  rejoice, 
the   apostle   brought   to  a  fresh  trial.  God  appears  here  : 

Thus  they  attested  themselves  to  be  I.  As  the  providential  governor  of 

double-dyed  hypocrites.  the  world. 

III.  Assassination.  —  Their  secret  II.  As  the  adversary  and  counter- 
purpose  was  not  to  try  the  apostle  but  worker  of  the  wicked. 

to  kill  him.     They  were  black-hearted  III.  As  the  friend  and  protector  of 

if  not  red-handed  murderers.  His  people. 
Lesson. — The  heart  of  man  is  de- 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  6—12. 

Paul  before  Festus — an  Appeal  to  the  Emperor. 

I.  The  court  constituted.  1.  Some  things  the  same  on  this  as  on  the  former 
occasion.  (1)  The  judgment 'hall — a  room  or  chamber  in  Herod's  palace  (see  on 
xxiv.  24,  "  Homiletical  Analysis  ").  (2)  The  prosecutors — the  Jews  who  had 
come  down  from  Jerusalem,  and  who  may  have  been  as  before  "  Ananias  with 
certain  of  the  elders"  (xxiv.  1),  including  "the  chief  priests  and  the  principal 
men  of  the  Jews"  (ver  2).  (3)  The  prisoner — Paul,  who  had  already  so 
triumphantly  vindicated  his  innocence,  and  been  so  wonderfully  protected  by 
God.  (4)  The  charges — many  and  grievous  things  which  could  not  be  established 
against  him  (ver.  7).  2.  Some  things  different  on  this  from  what  were  on  the 
former  occasion.  (1)  The  judge. — Felix  had  given  place  to  Porcius  Festus,  about 
whom  little  is  known — though,  like  Felix,  it  would  appear,  he  was  not  above 
pandering  to  the  wishes  of  the  Jews  in  the  hope  of  currying  favour  with  them 
(ver.  9).  (2)  The  mode  of  procedure.  On  this  occasion  Tertullus  was  con- 
spicuous by  his  absence.  The  prosecutors  believed  themselves  able  to  dispense 
with  the  services  of  a  hired  advocate.  Roman  flattery  and  eloquence  had  not 
done  much  for  them  at  the  previous  trial ;  perhaps  clamour  and  vehemence 
wTould  serve  them  better  at  this.  At  least  this  was  the  method  adopted.  "The 
Jews  who  had  come  down  from  Jerusalem  stood  round  about  Festus,  bringing 
against  Paul  many  and  grievous  charges."  (3)  The  order  of  the  charges. 
Though  in  substance  the  same,  the  presentation  of  them  appears  to  have  been 
somewhat  varied  (see  below). 

II.  The  indictment  preferred.  1.  The  old  charges  were  revived.  Sedition, 
schism,  sacrilege ;  treason  against  the  state,  against  the  faith,  against  the 
temple ;  revolt  against  Caesar,  against  Moses,  against  Jehovah ;  revolution — 
a  serious  civil  crime  ;  innovation — a  heinous  ecclesiastical  offence ;  irreligion  or 
impiety — a  deadly  sin.  Had  Paul  been  guilty  of  these  he  must  have  been  a 
monster  of  wickedness  indeed.  2.  The  new  order  in  which  the  charges  were 
presented.  Schism,  sacrilege,  sedition.  Not  without  craft  had  this  alteration 
been  made.  At  the  first  trial  the  high  priest  and  the  elders  had  hopes  of 
enlisting  the  jealousy  and  power  of  Rome  against  Paul,  and  with  this  end 
in  view  they  placed  in  the  forefront  of  their  indictment  the  charge  of  sedition. 
What  more  likely  to  gain  the  ear  of  a  representative  of  Caesar,  than  the 
allegation  that  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  had  been  "  a  pestilent  fellow  and  a 
mover  of  insurrections  among  all  the  Jews  throughout  the  world"  (xxiv.  5), 
saying  "  there  is  another  king,  one  Jesus "  (xvii.  7)  %  That  card,  however, 
had  been  tried  and  failed.  It  was  now,  therefore,  their  aim,  if  possible,  to 
withdraw  the  prisoner  from  beneath  the   shelter   of  the   Roman   ^Egis,   and 

517 


chap.  xxv.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


accordingly  they  shove  the  charge  of  sedition  into  the  background,  and  advance 
into  the  purview  of  the  procurator  those  of  schism  and  sacrilege.  They  hoped 
in  this  way  to  persuade  the  new  governor  that  the  case  was  one  which  fell  more 
within  their  jurisdiction  than  his,  that  it  belonged  to  an  ecclesiastical  and 
spiritual  rather  than  to  a  secular  tribunal.  The  distinction  between  things 
secular  and  sacred,  courts  spiritual  and  ecclesiastical,  and  courts  civil  and 
criminal,  was  a  sound  one,  but  in  their  mouths  it  was  being  used  not  to  secure 
right  and  justice,  but  to  perpetrate  cruelty  and  wrong. 

III.  The  defence  offered.  1.  On  every  count  in  the  indictment,  as  before,  Paul 
pleaded  not  guilty.  "  Neither  against  the  law  of  the  Jews,  nor  against  the 
temple,  nor  against  Caesar  "  had  he  offended.  He  was  no  schismatic  or  heretic 
in  the  proper  sense  of  that  expression ;  what  he  preached  was  only  a  legitimate 
development  and  necessary  fruit  of  the  Hebrew  faith.  He  had  not  violated  the 
sanctity  of  the  temple  ;  the  allegation  that  he  had  done  so  contradicted  fact. 
He  was  no  revolutionary  against  Caesar's  throne  ;  neither  by  word  nor  deed  had 
he  taught  men  to  rise  against  the  powers  that  be.  From  first  to  last  Paul 
had  been  consistent  in  maintaining  his  innocence.  2.  On  every  count  in  the 
indictment,  as  before,  evidence  in  its  support  was  wanting.  Paul  would  be  sure  to 
call  the  attention  of  his  judge  to  this,  and  Festus,  it  is  clear,  discerned  that  the 
charge  of  sedition  was  a  bogus  affair  altogether  (ver.  18),  while  about  the  heresy 
he  was  simply  at  sea — that  belonged  to  another  sphere  than  the  one  in  which  he 
moved  (vers.  19,  20).  The  sacrilege  allegation  he  probably  dropped  out  of 
view  entirely,  as  an  unfounded  assertion,  or  as  a  matter  too  insignificant  to  be 
noticed.  Nevertheless,  baseless  as  the  charges  were,  Festus  wanted  courage  to 
sweep  them  aside,  and  liberate  his  prisoner.  Precisely  as  Felix  failed,  so  did  he. 
Neither  had  the  fortitude  to  follow  conscience  and  do  what  was  right. 

IV.  The  proposition  made.  1.  A  specious  compromise.  (1)  To  drop  the 
charges  of  sacrilege  and  sedition  and  restrict  further  investigations  to  the  one 
point  of  divergence  from  the  laws  of  the  Jews.  This  would  practically  be  a 
decision  two- thirds  in  Paul's  favour.  (2)  To  proceed  to  Jerusalem,  that  the 
strictly  religious  question  might  be  examined  into  by  a  court  of  his  own  people. 
This  also,  while  it  had  the  appearance  of  being  fair  to  Paul,  would  be  a  virtual 
concession  to  what  Festus  understood  to  be  the  real  wishes  of  the  Jews.  (3)  To 
have  the  trial  conducted  in  the  procurator's  presence  as  a  guarantee  that  the 
prisoner  would  have  even-handed  justice.  2.  The  secret  motive.  (1)  The  motive 
stated  was  to  gain  favour  with  the  Jews.  This  was  probably  natural,  consider- 
ing that  he  was  a  new  governor,  and  that  they  were  a  troublesome  people,  who 
had  it  in  their  power  to  impeach  him,  as  they  had  impeached  Felix  his  predecessor, 
before  Caesar — if  not  for  real,  for  imaginary  crimes,  since,  as  he  could  see  from 
Paul's  case,  they  were  by  no  means  fastidious  as  to  the  character  of  the  weapons 
with  which  they  struck  a  man  down.  (2)  The  unrecorded  motives  probably 
were  to  shield  Paul,  if  possible,  and  in  any  case  to  shift  from  himself  all 
responsibility  for  his  condemnation. 

V.  The  appeal  taken.  1.  To  whoml  Caesar,  i.e.,  Nero.  Paul  demanded  to  be 
tried  by  the  emperor  himself.  "  Theoretically  the  emperor  was  but  the  imperator, 
or  commander-in-chief  of  the  armies  of  the  state,  appointed  by  the  Senate,  and 
acting  under  its  direction.  Consuls  were  still  elected  every  year,  and  went 
through  the  shadowy  functions  of  their  office.  Many  of  the  provinces  were 
directly  under  the  control  of  the  Senate,  and  were  accordingly  governed  by 
proconsuls.  But  Augustus  had  contrived  to  concentrate  in  himself  all  the 
powers  that  in  the  days  of  the  Republic  had  checked  and  balanced  the  exercise 
of  individual  authority.  He  was  supreme  pontiff,  and  as  such  regulated  the 
religion  of  the  state  ;  permanent  censor,  and  as  such  could  give  or  recall  the 
privileges  of  citizenship  at  His  pleasure.     The  tribunicia  potestas,  which  had 

518 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxv. 


originally  been  conferred  on  the  tribunes  of  the  plebs  so  that  they  might  protect 
members  of  their  order  who  appealed  to  them  against  the  injustice  of  patrician 
magistrates,  was  attached  to  his  office.  As  such  he  became  the  final  court  of 
appeal  from  all  subordinate  tribunals,  and  so  by  a  subtle  artifice,  what  had  been 
intended  as  a  safeguard  to  freedom,  became  the  instrument  of  a  centralised 
tyranny  "  (Plumptre).  2.  For  what  reason  ?  Because  he  was  already  standing 
before  Caesar's  judgment  seat — i.e.,  was  already  pleading  before  a  Roman 
tribunal,  and  no  one,  not  even  a  procurator,  had  a  right  to  withdraw  him 
therefrom  and  hand  him  over  to  the  Jews  without  his  consent — which,  of  course, 
Paul  was  unwilling  to  give,  for  the  following  reasons.  (1)  That  as  a  panel  at  a 
Roman  tribunal  he  was  entitled  to  receive  from  that  tribunal  a  verdict  on  his 
case.  (2)  That  he  was  perfectly  prepared  to  accept  that  verdict,  whatever  it 
might  be.  Should  he  be  found  to  have  done  wrong,  and  to  have  committed 
anything  worthy  of  death,  he  refused  not  to  die  ;  but  should,  on  the  other  hand, 
his  innocence  be  established,  he  was  entitled  to  be  acquitted.  (3)  That  he  was 
not  amenable  to  any  Jewish  tribunal,  since  he  had  not  violated  any  Jewish  law, 
as  Festus  himself  knew.  (4)  That  Paul  also  understood  his  doom  would  be 
sealed  the  moment  he  was  handed  over  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  Sanhedrim. 

3.  With  vihat  result  ?  That  his  appeal  was  allowed.  Having  conferred  privately 
with  his  own  council  of  Roman  assessors  (see  "  Critical  Remarks "),  Festus, 
"  with  something  like  a  sneer  "  in  his  words,  intimated  his  acceptance  of  Paul's 
decision.  "  He  knew,  it  may  be,  better  than  the  apostle  to  what  kind  of  judge 
the  latter  was  appealing,  what  long  delays  there  would  be  before  the  cause  was 
heard,  how  little  chance  there  was  of  a  righteous  judgment  at  last "  (Plumptre). 

Learn. — 1.  That  false  witnessing  against  good  men  and  good  causes  is  an  old 
and  common,  as  well  as  heinous  sin.  2.  That  the  desire  of  gaining  popular 
favour  often  leads  statesmen,  judges,  and  private  individuals  to  perpetrate  acts 
of  great  injustice.  3.  That  Christians  are  not  debarred  by  their  religion  from 
defending  themselves  against  persecution  and  oppression  by  all  lawful  means. 

4.  That  nothing  inspires  a  man  with  courage  in  presence  of  his  adversaries  like 
a  consciousness  of  innocence.  5.  That  God's  people  are  (or  should  be)  ever 
ready  to  render  due  satisfaction  for  whatever  evil  deeds  can  be  proved  against 
them. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  6-12.  A  Court  Scene  in  the 
Olden  Time. 

I.  Infuriate  and  reckless  pursuers. — 
1.  A  multitude  against  one.  2.  Men 
of  power  against  a  weak  prisoner. 
3.  Persons  regardless  of  truth  against 
an  individual  who  tried  to  keep  a  clean 
conscience. 

II.  A  friendless  but  unmoved  de- 
fender.—  Strong  in — 1.  The  conscious- 
ness of  his  innocence.  2.  The  justness 
of  his  claim — to  be  judged  where  he 
was.  3.  The  superiority  of  his  soul  to 
death. 

III.  A  discerning  but  unprincipled 
judge  —  1..  Faithless  to  conscience. 
Knowing  his  duty,  but  declining  to  act 
upon  it.    2.  Showing  respect  of  persons. 


Preferring  the  favour  of  the  powerful 
and  rich  wicked  to  the  rights  of  the 
humble  but  poor  good.  3.  Trampling 
on  the  weak.  Sending  Paul  to  Rome 
instead  of  granting  him  liberty. 

Ver.  8.  A  Model  Defence. 

I.  Short. — Consisting  of  one  sentence. 

II.  Simple. — Containing  no  intricate 
reasoning  or  doubtful  chicanery. 

III.  Direct. — Resting  satisfied  with 
a  plain  denial  of  the  charges  advanced. 

IV.  Exhaustive. — Leaving  none  of 
these  untouched,  but  repudiating  all 
alike. 

V.  Effective. — If  it  did  not  procure 
acquittal  it  at  least  showed  the  charges 
to  be  false. 

519 


chap.  xxv.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Vers.  8-10.  Christian  Fortitude. — As 
exemplified  in  Paul. 

I.  Unlike  the  effrontery  of  the 
hypocrite. — Paul  grounds  his  defence 
on  selid  fact  and  absolute  truth. 

II.  Different  from  the  defiance  of 
the  wicked. — Paul  declines  not  to  be 
examined  once  and  again,  having 
nothing  to  be  ashamed  of  or  conceal. 

III.  Having  no  resemblance  to  the 
obstinacy  of  the  litigious. — Paul  sub- 
mits to  every  just  decision,  being  will- 
ing even  to  die  if  he  had  done  anything 
for  which  capital  punishment  is  the 
only  expiation. 

Yer.  10.  C cesar's  Judgment  Seat  and 
Christ's. — A  contrast.     In  respect  of — 

I.  The  authorities  by  which  they 
have  been  appointed. — Caesar's  by  the 
kings  and  emperors  of  earth.  Christ's 
by  the  King  of  kings,  the  Lord  of 
eternity,  and  Sovereign  of  the  universe. 

II.  The  judges  who  have  been  en- 
trusted with  their  procedure. — In  the 
case  of  Caesar's  mortal,  fallible,  and 
sinful  men.;  in  that  of  Christ's,  the 
Divine  Son,  who  liveth  evermore,  whose 
eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire,  in  whom  are 
hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge,  and  with  whom  is  no  respect 
of  persons. 

III.  The  businesses  which  are  trans- 
acted thereupon.  In  the  case  of 
Caesar's  tribunal,  the  earthly  and 
temporal  affairs  of  men,  so  far  as  they 
affect  men's  mundane  interests;  at 
Christ's  the  concerns  of  the  soul  and 
the  transactions  of  the  life. 

IV.  The  verdicts  which  are  issued 
therefrom. — From  Caesar's  often  such 
as  are  false  and  oppressive ;  from 
Christ's  always  such  as  are  just  and 
true.  The  first  may  call  for  an  appeal : 
the  second  are  irreversible  and  final. 

V.  The  parties  who  appear  before 
them.  —  Some  may  never  stand  at 
Caesar's,  but  all  must  eventually  stand 
at  Christ's,  judgment-seat. 

Ver.  11.  PauVs  Appeal  to  Ccesar. 
I.  Evidenced  a  conscience  void  of 
offence  toward  God  and  man. — Had 

520 


the  apostle  not  been  conscious  of 
innocence  he  would  hardly  have  ven- 
tured on  this  step,  which  was  not  the 
last  stroke  for  liberty  on  the  part  of  a 
despairing  criminal,  but  the  sober  act 
of  a  good  man  who  knew  himself  to  be 
wronged. 

II.  Signalised  a  humble  submission 
to  divinely  ordained  authority. — Had 
the  apostle  not  regarded  Caesar's  tri- 
bunal as  in  some  respects  invested  with 
divine  authority,  he  would  scarcely 
have  proposed  to  lay  his  case  before  it. 

III.  Showed  a  laudable  desire  to 
avoid  unnecessary  martyrdom.— Had 
Paul  deemed  it  sinful  to  keep  himself 
alive  as  long  as  possible,  or  right  to 
throw  away  his  life  without  an  effort  to 
preserve  it,  it  is  doubtful  if  he  would 
have  resorted  to  this  tedious  method  of 
obtaining  justice. 

IV.  Proved  an  unwearied  zeal  for 
the  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  God. 
— Having  already  been  assured  by 
God  that  he  would  preach  the  gospel 
at  Rome  also,  Paul  probably  saw  in 
this  appeal  which  he  took  a  means  of 
attaining  to  what  was  already  a  burn- 
ing passion  in  his  soul. — From  Gerok  in 
Lange. 

Difficulties  connected  with  PauVs 
Appeal  to  Caesar. 

I.  How  does  this  harmonise  with 
Christ's  doctrine  of  non-resistance 
(Matt.  v.  39)?  Answer:  Paul,  in 
appealing  to  Caesar,  does  not  propose 
retaliation,  but  only  self-preservation, 
which  is  the  first  law  of  life,  and  is  not 
forbidden  to  a  Christian. 

II.  How  does  this  accord  with  Paul's 
exhortation  to  Christians  not  to  go  to 
law  before  the  unrighteous  but  only 
before  the  saints  (1  Cor.  vi.  1)? — 
Answer  :  Paul  does  not  propose  to  drag 
his  accusers  before  the  law,  but  only  to 
vindicate  his  own  character  in  the  eyes 
of  the  law — which  is  always  permis- 
sible to  a  Christian. 

III.  How  does  this  square  with 
Paul's  knowledge  that  Christ  was  with 
him  and  had  promised  to  protect  him  ? 
— How  does  his  conduct  compare  with 
that  of  Ezra — e.g.,  who,  in  a  time  of 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxv. 


difficulty  and  danger,  refused  fco  lean  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  judging 
upon  a  secular  arm  (Ezra  viii.  22)  ?  spiritual  matters  (1  Cor.  ii.  15)  ? — 
Answer  :  This  may  have  been  Christ's  Answer  :  Paul  does  not  propose  to  sub- 
way of  protecting  Paul.  mit  to  Caesar  the  question  of  his  religious 
IV.  How  dees  this  comport  with  opinions,  but  only  that  of  his  civil 
Pauls  doctrine  that    the    state    has  deportment. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  13—22. 

Talked  about  by  State  Dignitaries  ;  or,  Festus' s  Conversation  with  Agrippa  about 
Paul. 

I.  The  royal  visit  to  the  governor. — 1.  The  illustrious  pair.  (1)  Their  names  : 
Agrippa  and  Bernice.  II.  Herod  Agrippa,  the  royal  personage  here  referred  to 
was  the  son  of  Herod  Agrippa  I.,  who  had  perished  so  suddenly  (a.  d.  44,  45)  in 
Csesarea,  and  the  great-grandson  of  Herod  the  Great,  the  founder  of  the  Idumean 
princes,  "  vassals  of  Rome  who  played  so  distinguished  a  part  in  the  story  of 
Israel  during  the  last  fifty  years  of  the  existence  of  the  Jews  as  a  separate 
nationality  "  (Spence).  Bernice  was  his  sister  and  the  sister  of  Drusilla,  the 
wife  of  Felix  (xxiv.  24).  Like  Drusilla,  Bernice  was  a  woman  of  great  beauty, 
whose  story  reads  "  like  a  terrible  romance  or  a  page  from  the  chronicles  of  the 
Borgias  "  (Plumptre).  Agrippa  and  she  were  both  illustrious  for  their  rank,  if 
for  nothing  else,  though  history  reports  them  to  have  been  not  undistinguished 
for  intellectual  ability  as  well.  (2)  Their  characters.  Rather  infamous  than 
illustrious,  living  at  the  time,  as  was  currently  believed,  in  unholy  relations  with 
one  another  (see  "Critical  Remarks").  When  high  station  and  lofty  character 
go  together,  they  lend  a  glory  to  each  other,  which  makes  both  more  attractive  ; 
when  high  station  is  conjoined  with  gross  wickedness,  the  former  is  degraded  and 
the  latter  rendered  more  heinous  and  despicable.  2.  The  object  of  their  visit. 
To  exchange  courtesies  with  the  new  procurator  on  the  assumption  of  his  office. 
Whether  it  was  dictated  by  genuine  politeness  or  by  self-interest  which  suggested 
the  propriety  of  keeping  "  on  terms  of  intimacy  and  friendship  with  the  powerful 
Roman  lieutenant  commanding  in  the  provinces  of  which  he  was  nominally  the 
sovereign "  (Spence),  may  not  be  known ;  but  the  visit  itself  was  proper  and 
becoming  to  be  made.  Men,  simply  as  men — how  much  more  as  Christians 
(1  Peter  iii.  1) — owe  each  other  civilities  which,  when  sincerely  paid,  tend  to 
sweeten  social  intercourse. 

II.  The  governor's  communication  to  the  king. — 1.  Concerning  Paul.  No 
doubt  he  would  mention  Paul's  name  (see  ver.  19).  But  the  main  facts  reported 
with  respect  to  him  were  these  :  (1)  That  he  had  been  left  behind  in  Caesarea  as 
a  prisoner  by  Felix,  the  late  procurator,  without  any  statement  of  the  reason  of 
his  imprisonment  or  the  nature  of  his  offence.  (2)  That  he  had  been  bitterly 
accused  by  the  chief  priests  and  the  elders  of  the  Jews,  who  laid  before  Festus,  when 
at  Jerusalem,  a  criminal  indictment  against  Him  demanding  his  instantaneous 
surrender  to  punishment.  (3)  That  he  had  been  formerly  placed  upon  his  trial, 
and  opportunity  given  to  his  accusers  to  make  good  their  allegations  against  him, 
with  the  result  that  no  actual  crime  had  been  brought  home  to  him,  but  only  an 
assertion  of  his  had  been  proved — viz.,  that  one  Jesus,  whom  his  opponents 
affirmed  to  be  dead,  was  really  alive.  (4)  That  rather  than  accept  an  offer  which 
had  been  made  to  him  to  go  to  Jerusalem  to  be  judged  of  these  matters,  he  had 
appealed  to  be  kept  for  the  decision  of  the  emperor.  If — which  does  not  appear 
from  the  narrative — Festus  recited  to  Agrippa  Paul's  magnanimous  declaration 
about  refusing  not  to  die,  if  he  had  done  anything  worthy  of  death  (ver.  11),  one 
would  like  to  know  what  impression  such  a  display  of  moral  heroism  made  upon 

521 


OHAP.  xxv.       HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


the  royal  bosom  !  And  (5)  That  he  was  now  in  gaol  waiting  till  he  could  be 
conveniently  despatched  to  Home.  2.  Concerning  himself.  (1)  That  he  had 
rather  snubbed  the  ecclesiastical  dignitaries  of  Jerusalem,  when  these  had 
approached  him,  by  reminding  them  that  it  was  not  the  custom  of  the  Romans, 
if  it  was  of  the  Jews,  to  hand  over  any  man — "  to  destruction,"  though  a  gloss, 
correctly  interprets  the  sense  of  Festus's  words — until  he  should  have  had 
opportunity  to  meet  his  accusers  face  to  face  and  reply  to  the  charges  these 
preferred  against  them.  (Festus  may  really  have  said  this,  though  Luke  does 
not  incorporate  the  observation  in  his  preceding  paragraph  (vers.  4,  5)  ;  as 
Festus,  in  rehearsing  the  story  to  Agrippa,  omits  to  state  that  he  had  invited  the 
Sanhedrists  to  come  to  Csesarea).  (2)  That  he  had  nevertheless  given  them  the 
fullest  opportunity  to  establish  their  case  against  Paul,  but  that  they  had  failed 
to  bring  out  anything  more  tangible  than  this,  that  on  the  religious — hardly 
"  superstitious,"  since  courtesy  must  have  taught  him  better  manners  than  so  to 
insult  his  guest  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ") — questions  above  referred  to,  he,  Paul, 
took  a  different  side  from  them,  and  maintained  Jesus  was  alive,  while  they  as 
positively  alleged  He  was  dead.  (3)  That  he  had  been  altogether  at  a  loss  how 
to  deal  with  such  a  problem,  and  had  proposed  that  it  be  laid  before  the  High 
Ecclesiastical  Court  of  the  nation  at  Jerusalem,  which  might  discuss  the  question, 
if  not  under  his  presidency,  at  all  events  in  his  presence.  (4)  That,  as  Paul  had 
declined  this  offer,  and  had  appealed  to  Nero,  he  (Festus)  was  now  waiting  a 
convenient  opportunity  to  have  him  forwarded  to  the  imperial  court.  It  is 
obvious  that  Festus  would  rather  Paul  had  not  appealed  to  Augustus.  It  was  a 
step  the  exact  issue  of  which  for  himself  the  governor,  as  well  as  for  Paul  the 
prisoner,  no  one  could  foresee.  It  need  not  be  doubted  that  the  calmest  bosom  of 
all  connected  with  this  affair  was  that  of  Paul. 

III.  The  king's  reply  to  the  governor. — 1.  A  wish  expressed.  "  I  would  also 
hear  the  man  myself."  Better,  "  I  also  was  wishing,"  meaning,  as  some  suggest, 
that  he  had  not  for  the  first  time  heard  of  Paul,  and  had  even  before  this  been 
secretly  desirous  of  both  looking  on  and  listening  to  the  great  Nazarene  preacher, 
as  Herod  Antipas  had  formerly  been  with  regard  to  Christ  (Luke  xxiii.  8). 
Reports  of  the  apostle's  doings,  both  in  Palestine  and  iri  Asia  Minor,  could 
hardly  fail  to  have  reached  the  ear  of  Agrippa  II.  ;  and,  being  the  son  of 
Agrippa  I.  who  had  so  fiercely  persecuted  the  Jerusalem  Christians,  and  who 
had  so  soon  after  miserably  died  at  Csesarea,  it  was  not  surprising  that,  like 
Drusilla  his  sister  (xxiv.  .24),  he  should  have  inwardly  cherished  a  longing  to  see 
and  hear  the  wonderful  Jewish  Rabbi  who  had  so  suddenly  apostatised  from  the 
law  of  his  fathers,  and  so  powerfully  agitated  the  world  ever  since.  2.  The  wish 
granted.  Festus,  out  of  courtesy  towards  his  guest,  and  out  of  a  secret  hope,  it 
may  be  conjectured,  that  Agrippa  would  be  able  to  assist  him  in  his  perplexity, 
promised  that  next  day  an  opportunity  should  be  afforded  him  of  both  seeing 
and  hearing  the  distinguished  man  whom  Felix  had  left  in  bonds,  and  against 
whom  the  Sanhedrists  were  gnashing  their  teeth,  but  over  whom,  though  Festus 
knew  it  not,  a  watchful  Providence,  even  more  than  Augustus's  soldiers,  was 
keeping  guard. 

Learn. — 1.  That  courtesy  becomes  all  men,  but  especially  Christians.  2.  That 
Christ's  witnesses,  even  when  in  prison  for  their  Master's  sake,  do  not  cease  to 
be  men  talked  about  and  wondered  at.  3.  That  Christ's  people  are  not  always 
careful  to  avoid  condemning  others  unheard.  4.  That  when  other  people's 
interests  are  at  stake  no  delay  should  intervene  to  hinder  setting  things  to 
rights.  5.  That  the  world's  charges  against  Christians  are,  for  the  most*  part, 
untrue.  6.  That  the  unenlightened  understanding  has  a  difficulty  in  compre- 
hending questions  in  religion.  7.  That  the  grand  problem  of  all  the  Christian 
centuries  concerns  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.     8.  That  Christians  have  sometimes 

522 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxv. 


a  better  chance  of  getting  justice  at  a  civil  tribunal  than  in  an  ecclesiastical 
court.  9.  That  wicked  men  have  often  a  secret  respect  for  ministers  of  the 
gospel.  10.  That  to  hear  the  gospel  out  of  curiosity  alone  is  not  a  promising 
occupation. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  13.  Christian  Salutations. 

I.  Are  becoming  on  the  part  of 
Christ's  followers  towards  each  other 
(Rom.  xvi.  16). 

II.  Are  due  by  Christ's  followers 
even  to  such  as  are  unbelieving  (Matt. 
v.  47). 

III.  Are  regarded  by  Christ  as  a 
high  proof  of  sincerity  in  religion 
(Matt.  v.  48). 

IY.  Are  calculated  to  win  the 
favourable  regards  of  those  who  might 
otherwise  be  hostile  to  religion. 

Agrippa  and  Bernice. 
I.  Possessors  of  a  common  nature. 
II.  Descendants  of  a  common  parent- 
age. 

III.  Sharers  of  a  common  dignity. 

IV.  Partners  in  a  common  wicked- 
ness. 

V.  Actors  in  a  common  ceremony. 
VI.  Partakers  of  a  common  privi- 
lege (ver.  23). 

VII.  Rejectors  of  a  common  salva- 
tion (xxvi.  30). 

Ver.  14.  Paul's  Case. 

That  of  a  follower  of  Christ. — 

I.  Accused  of  crimes  he  had  not 
committed. 

II.  Suffering  persecution  for  con- 
science' sake. 

III.  Consigned  to  prison  against 
all  law  and  justice. 

IV.  Compelled  to  appeal  to  the 
world's  tribunals  for  protection. 

Ver.  16.  Not  the  Custom  of  the 
Romans !  Neither  should  it  be  of 
Christians. 

I.  To  punish  a  man  before  he  has 
been  found  guilty. 

II.  To  pronounce  a  man  guilty 
before  he  has  been  heard  in  his  defence. 

III.  To  ask  him  to  defend  himself 
before  he  knows  the  evidence  against 
him. 

IV.  To  refuse  a  man  the  right  of 


appeal  from  a  lower  court  to  a  higher. 
Yet  all  these  violations  of  natural 
right  have  been  perpetrated  in  times 
past  in  the  name  of  religion. 

Ver.  17.  No  delay  !     Cases  in  which 
there  should  never  be  procrastination. 

I.  In  doing  justice  to  one's  fellow- 
men. 

II.  In  relieving  the  cry  of  human 
distress. 

III.  In  listening  to  the  call  of  duty. 
IY.  In  accepting  the  invitation    of 

the  gospel. 

V.  In  making  known  Christ's  sal- 
vation to  others. 

VI.  In  fleeing  from  the  presence  of 
temptation. 

VII.  In  preparing  for  death  and 
judgment. 

Yer.  18.  "  As  I  supposed"  ;  or,  the 
World's  Misconceptions  about  Christi- 
anity. 

I.  About  its  founder. — The  world 
supposes  Him — (1)  to  have  been  "  one 
Jesus  "  .and  nothing  more,  whereas  He 
is  the  Son  of  God  and  one  with  the 
Father.  2.  To  have  been  merely  a 
good  man  and  wise  teacher,  whereas 
He  was  the  sinless  One  and  the  Truth. 

3.  To  have  died  as  a  martyr  to  His 
own  cause,  whereas  He  laid  down  His 
life   as   a   propitiation    for    our    sins. 

4.  To  be  dead,  whereas  He  is  alive 
again  for  evermore. 

II.  About  its  tenets. — The  world 
supposes — 1.  That  so  far  as  these  are 
intelligible  they  are  only  the  discoveries 
of  the  natural  reason,  whereas  they 
claim  to  be  the  revelations  of  eternal 
wisdom.  2.  That  they  may  be  better 
(though,  in  the  world's  judgment,  that 
is  questionable),  but  are  not  really 
different  from  the  tenets  of  other  re- 
ligions, whereas  they  claim  to  supersede 
those  of  all  other  religions.  3.  That 
they  will    have    their  day,  by-and-by 

523 


chap.  xxv.       H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


become  obsolete,  and  ultimately  be  for-  experience  goes,  the  occurrence  of  a 
gotten,  whereas  they  will  endure  while  supernatural  is  less  probable  than  that 
the  world  lasts.  4.  That  they  are  no  of  a  natural  phenomenon.  4.  That  no 
more  fitted  to  promote  the  happiness  one  is  reportedto  have  ever  seen  Jesus  after 
of  mankind  than  the  teachings  of  His  alleged  resurrection  except  those  who 
other  religions,  whereas  they  alone  were  interested  in  believing  He  had  risen 
have  power  to  permanently  enlighten  — such  as  Mary  Magdalene,  the  women 
the  understanding,  purify  the  heart,  who  went  to  the  sepulchre,  the  ten 
quicken  the  conscience,  and  redeem  the  disciples,  James  and  the  five  hundred 
will.  brethren.  5.  That  the  so-called  appear- 
Ill.  About  its  preachers. — The  ance  of  the  risen  One  are  all  explainable 
world  supposes — 1.  That  they  are  the  by  natural  means,  without  calling  in 
victims  of  an  intellectual  delusion,  the  aid  of  a  supernatural  occurrence, 
whereas  they  are  the  subjects  of  true  such  as  the  reanimation  of  a  dead  body, 
mental  illumination.  2.  That  they  Whatever  objections  may  be  urged 
are  the  teachers  of  an  idle  superstition,  against  the  swoon  theory  or  the  decep- 
whereas  they  are  the  bearers  to  man-  tion  hypothesis,  the  supposition  that 
kind  of  the  highest  saving  knowledge.  all  the  appearances  of  the  forty  days 
3.  That  they  are  troublers  of  society  were  of  the  same  sort  as  that  made 
and  disturbers  of  the  peace  of  com-  to  Paul — viz.,  visionary — is  quite 
mnnities,  whereas  they  are  real  re-  sufficient  to  account  for  the  rise  in  the 
storers  of  order,  and  promoters  of  social  early  Church  of  a  belief  in  the  resur- 
well-being.      4.  That   they  are   inter-  rection  of  Jesus. 

ested   self-seekers,    whereas   they  are,  II.  Alive. — This  alternative  is  based 

when  true  to  their  vocation,  disinter-  on      the      following      considerations : 

ested  apostles  of  goodwill  and  grace  to  1.  That,   if  Christ  rose  not  from  the 

men.  dead,  then  His  prediction  about  Himself 

was  falsified.      He  distinctly  claimed 

Ver.  19.  One  Jesus — Dead  or  Alive —  that  after  three  days   He  should  rise 

the  great  question  of  the  day.  again.     Of  course  an  ordinary  man's 

I.  Dead. — In   support   of  this  may  predictions   about   himself  might   fail 

be    urged — 1.     That     death — without  without   any   consequence   relative   to 

resurrection  following — is  the  ordinary  himself   being  deducible   beyond   this, 

lot  of  man,  and  that  Jesus,  whatever  that  he  must  have  been  in  error  ;  but 

else   He   was,    was   a   bond-fide    man.  with  the  failure  of  Christ's  predictions 

The  exceptions  to  this  law  recorded  in  about    Himself     collapses    the    entire 

the   Scriptures — such    as   the  raisings  superstructure     of     His     pretensions, 

mentioned  in  the  Gospels  (Matt.  ix.  25;  2.  That  if    Christ   rose  not  from  the 

Luke   vii.    15  ;    John    xi.    44) — must  dead,  then  He  could  not  have  been  what 

meanwhile  be  left  out  of  view.     2.  That  He  gave  Himself  out  to  be,  not  only  the 

since  the  so-called  resurrection  of  Jesus  Messiah  of  Israel  but  the  Son  of  God, 

no  one  else  of  the  human  race  has  been  and  therefore  must  have  been  an  im- 

recalled   to   life.     Here   again  the   in-  postor — an  inference  which  is  contra- 

stances  of  Dorcas  (ix.  40)  and  Eutychus  dieted  by  all  that  is  written  concerning 

(xx.  12)  must  be  meanwhile  withdrawn  'Him  in  Scripture.     3.  That  if  Christ 

from  consideration.      The  exceptional  rose  not  from  the  dead,  the  origin  of 

character  of  Christ's  resurrection  is  in  the  Christian  Church  is  perfectly  inex- 

one  aspect  of  it  a  difficulty  in  the  way  plicable.     Rationalists  may  hold    that 

of  assenting   to   its   truth.       3.   That  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 

Jesus,  if  He  died — and  of  this  by  the  is    sufficiently   accounted    for    by   the 

supposition  no  doubt  exists — could  not  illusion  or  delusion  of  Mary  Magdalene 

have   been  restored    to   life    without    a  and  of  the  enthusiasts  whom  her  con- 

miraculous  interference  with  the  uniform  tagious  ecstasy  affected  ;  but  the  per- 

order  of  nature,  and,  so  far  as  man's  sistence  for  nineteen  centuries   of  an 

524 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxv. 


idea  which  was  cradled  in  the  excited 
brain  of  a  female,  and  the  propagation 
by  means  thereof  of  the  Christian 
Church  throughout  these  centuries 
cannot  be  explained  without  assuming 
that  the  resurrection  of  Christ  was  a 
fact.  4.  That  if  Christ  rose  not  from 
the  dead,  then  the  apostles  who  staked 
their  lives  on  the  truth  of  this  assertion 
were  not  only  of  all  men  the  most  de- 
luded, but  were  besides  the  most  trans- 
cendent fanatics  the  world  has  ever  seen. 
That  one  man,  or  even  two,  should 
have  acted  in  the  fashion  in  which  the 
apostles  are  represented  as  having 
done  might  be  credible,  that  twelve 
men,  and  much  more,  that  five  hun- 
dred men  should  have  done  so,  is 
incredible.  5.  That  if  Christ  rose  not 
from  the  dead  then  all  the  experiences 
of  those  who  claim  to  have  become  con- 
scious of  a  spiritual  life  derived  from 
the  risen  Christ,  must  be  set  down  as 
pious  imaginations.  We  must  frankly 
admit  ourselves  not  prepared  for  this 
(see  "  Hints  "  on  i.  3). 

Ver.  20.  Perplexing  Things  about 
Christianity  to  Worldly  Men. 

I.  The  supernatural  character  of 
its  founder. — Attested  by  His  resur- 
rection from  the  dead. 

II.  The  spiritual  character  of  its 
doctrines. — Religious  questions  gener- 


ally are  in  great  part  beyond  the  grasp 
of  men  of  the  world  (1  Cor.  ii.  14). 

III.  The  lofty  character  of  its  ad- 
herents.— These,  whether  teachers  or 
professors,  when  true  to  its  spirit, 
appear  actuated  by  motives  which  are 
more  or  less  incomprehensible  to 
ordinary  minds. 

Ver.  22.  Agrippa!  s  Wish. — "I  also 
could  wish  to  hear  the  man"  may 
have  been  one  of  three  sorts. 

I.  The  wish  of  a  supercilious  curi- 
osity, which  seeks  nothing  more  than 
a  passing  entertainment.  Of  such 
sort  as  are  not  unfrequently  the 
motives  which  lead  men  to  attend 
Church,  hear  sermons,  and  read  good 
books. 

II.  The  wish  of  a  worldly  desire  of 
knowledge,  which  is  only  concerned 
about  interesting  information.  Occa- 
sionally also  this  ambition  leads  men 
to  wait  on  Christian  preachers,  fre- 
quent religious  assemblies,  and  study 
theological  works. 

III.  The  wish  of  a  pious  thirst  for 
salvation,  which  fills  the  need  of 
spiritual  instruction.  Happily  there 
are  not  wanting  those  who  are  actu- 
ated by  the  noblest  impulses  in  seeking 
to  hear  gospel  ministers  and  observe 
Christian  ordinances. — From  Gerok  in 
Lange. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  23—27. 

A  Third  Hearing  before  Agrippa  and  Bernice ;  or,  Festus's  Excuse  for  calling 
forth  his  Prisoner. 

I.  The  brilliant  assemblage. — The  persons  composing  it  were  the  most  illus- 
trious of  the  day,  the  elite  and  fashion  of  Csesarea.  1.  A  Roman  governor. 
Porcius  Festus,  Felix's  successor,  who  had  recently  entered  on  his  procuratorship 
over  Palestine  (a.d.  60-62),  nd  who  in  some  degree  succeeded  in  restoring  order 
to  the  country  which  had  b^sn  seriously  disquieted  during  his  predecessor's  reign 
(Jos.,  Ant.,  XX.  viii.  9,  10).  Of  these  Roman  governors  generally,  not  inaptly 
styled  "  a  splendid  series  of  provincial  administrators,"  it  has  been  said  "  we  can 
find  among  them  examples  occasionally  of  cruelty,  occasionally  of  rapacity,  but 
never  of  incompetence"  (Waddington,  Pastes  des  Provinces  Asiatiques,  p.  18  ; 
quoted  by  Ramsay  in  The  Church  in  the  Roman  Empire,  p.  174).  2.  A  royal  pair. 
Agrippa  II.,  the  last  of  the  Herods  (born  in  27  a.d.,  made  King  of  Chalcis  a.d.  50, 
died  a.d.  100,  in  the  third  year  of  Trajan),  accompanied  by  his  beautiful  sister 
Bernice,  who  had  once  been,  through  marriage  with  Polemon,  Queen  of  Cilicia, 
Paul's  native  province  (see  preceding  "  Homily  and  Critical  Remarks"  on  ver.  13). 
Kingly  dignity  and  queenly  loveliness  are  gifts  bestowed  on  few.     When  attended 

525 


chap.  xxv.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


by  moral  elevation  and  grace,  they  become  both  worthy  of  admiration  and  power- 
ful in  influence.  When  dissociated  from  these,  and  much  more  when  allied  with 
depravity,  as  was  the  case  in  Agrippa  and  Bernice,  they  attract  towards  them- 
selves the  scorn  and  contempt  of  all  good  men  and  women.  3.  A  company  of 
officers.  Five  in  number,  these  were  the  military  tribunes,  or  commanders  of  the 
imperial  forces  stationed  at  the  garrison,  who  waited  on  and  served  the  procura- 
tor, and  whose  presence  on  this  occasion  was,  no  doubt,  intended  to  put  honour 
on  Festus's  distinguished  guests,  if  not  to  overawe  the  lonely  prisoner  who  was 
about  to  be  summoned  forth  before  such  august  notabilities.  If  the  former,  it 
was  all  the  honour  the  sinful  pair  were  worth  receiving,  and  perhaps  all  they 
could  have  appreciated;  if  the  latter,  it  signally  failed  in  accomplishing  the  end 
for  which  it  was  designed.  4.  A  group  of  magistrates.  The  principal  men  of 
the  city,  the  civic  authorities  of  Csesarea,  were  probably  accustomed  to  receive 
invitations  from  the  governor  when  great  occasions  were  going  forward  in  the 
palace. 

II.  The  splendid  auditorium. — The  palace' of  Herod  (see  on  xxiii.  35).  1.  A 
scene  of  magnificent  displays.  It  was  within  this  gorgeous  chamber  that  the 
kings  and  governors  of  past  days  had  been  wont  to  hold  their  celebrations,  when, 
as  on  the  present  occasion  they  exhibited  all  the  pomp  and  paraphernalia  that 
were  supposed  to  lend  lustre  to  their  royal  and  imperial  majesties.  The  account 
of  what  took  place  on  this  memorable  day  reads  like  a  description  given  by  one 
who  had  been  an  eyewitness  of  the  scene  :  "  The  splendour  of  the  procession  and 
the  glittering  appearance  of  the  court,  crowded  with  those  royal  and  princely 
personages  and  their  retinue,  Roman  and  Jewish  guards,  the  Sanhedrim  officials, 
the  stately  garb  of  the  high  priest  and  his  fellows,  the  head  of  the  hierarchy  of 
Israel "  (it  is  doubtful,  however,  if  these  were  present),  "  must  have  been  very 
striking;  all  honour  on  this  occasion  was  evidently  shown  to  King  Agrippa  II., 
the  last  Jew  who  legally  bore  the  royal  title  "  (Spence).  2.  A  hall  of  bloody 
memories  (see  on  xxiii.  35).  It  would  hardly  be  possible  for  Agrippa  to  forget 
the  tragic  associations  which  adhered  to  the  place  in  which  they  were  then  assem- 
bled. The  blare  of  trumpets  might  dull,  but  would  not  be  able  to  altogether 
shut  out  the  cries  of  murdered  men  and  women  that  in  imagination  he  heard 
echoing  through  the  hall.  The  magnificence  of  the  scene  before  him  would  not 
prevent  him  from  seeing  on  its  marble  pavement  stains  of  blood,  which  to  other 
eyes  may  have  been  invisible.  3.  A  place  of  gracious  opportunities.  Such  an 
opportunity  had  been  given  to  Felix  and  Drusilla  when  Paul  reasoned  before 
them  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to  come  (xxiv.  24) ;  and  such 
another  was  about  to  be  afforded  to  the  gay  company  then  assembled  within  its 
walls. 

III.  The  noteworthy  prisoner. — Paul,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  now  the 
prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  (Eph.  iii.  1).  Remarkable  for  three  things  :  1.  The  evil 
reputation  he  enjoyed  at  the  hands  of  his  countrymen.  "  All  the  multitude  of  the 
Jews,"  both  at  Jerusalem  and  at  Caesarea,  cried  out  that  he  was  no  longer  worthy 
to  live.  Could  they  have  obtained  their  desire  he  should  instantly  have  been 
torn  to  pieces,  or  stoned  to  death.  And  yet  he  was  the  noblest  man  that 
Palestine  had  produced — whether  for  excellence  of  talent,  nobility  of  soul,  or 
beneficence  of  life  !  Verily  the  world  does  not  always  know  its  great  or  good 
men.  Paul  at  this  moment  might  have  taken  to  himself  for  consolation  the 
eighth  beatitude  (Matt.  v.  11).  2.  The  baseless  character  of  the  charges  preferred 
against  him.  Three  times  over  he  had  been  put  upon  his  trial — before  the 
council  (xxiii.  9,  29),  before  Felix  (xxiv.  22),  and  before  Festus  (xxv.  18) — 
and  each  time  the  verdict  had  been  practically  given  in  his  favour.  He  had 
committed  nothing  worthy  of  death,  or  of  imprisonment.  And  yet  he  was 
remanded  to  confinement !     "  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way,  His  wonders  to 

526 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxv. 


perform."  Paul  had  still  to  preach  the  gospel  to  Agrippa,  and  to  his  country- 
men at  Rome;  and  for  both  reasons  he  was  yet,  in  God's  providence,  detained 
as  a  prisoner.  3.  The  noble  courage  he  had  all  through  displayed.  Never 
quaking  through  fear  of  man,  never  shrinking  from  the  severest  ordeals, 
never  apologising  for  the  message  he  delivered,  never  pleading  with  his  per- 
secutors for  mercy,  but  always  only  for  justice,  never  hesitating  to  proclaim  the 
glorious  truths  of  Christ  crucified  and  risen,  of  which  he  had  been  appointed 
a  witness  and  herald  ;  but  always  calm,  heroic,  self -forgetful,  earnest,  tender,  and 
confident.  Probably  a  more  sublime  testimony  to  the  efficacy  of  Divine  grace  in 
supporting  a  faithful  minister  of  the  gospel  amid  weakness,  weariness,  pain, 
shame,  hardship,  and  oppression  has  never  been  furnished  to  the  Church  or  the 
world  ! 

IV.  The  trumpery  excuse. — After  a  pompous  harangue  the  governor  pretends 
to  give  an  explanation  to  his  guests  of  the  reason  why  he  had  commanded  the 
apostle  to  be  fetched  from  his  confinement.  The  excuse  was — 1.  Ostensibly 
good.  Having  determined  to  forward  Paul  to  Pome,  it  was  unreasonable  to  send 
on  a  prisoner  for  judgment  without  specifying  the  charges  that  had  been  brought 
against  him.  No  doubt ;  and  it  was  illegal  as  well,  since  Roman  law  demanded 
that  such  a  document  should  accompany  every  case  that  was  transmitted  to  the 
emperor.  Then  he  had  nothing  certain  to  write  about  the  case  and  hoped  that 
Agrippa,  being  a  Jew,  might  assist  him  to  the  better  understanding  of  its  intri- 
cacies. This,  too,  was  a  proper  course  to  follow,  if  it  really  was  so  that  he  felt  at  a 
loss  what  to  report  to  the  Emperor.  2.  Barely  true.  Festus  understood  perfectly 
that  Paul  had  committed  nothing  worthy  of  death — that  was  one  certain  thing 
he  could  have  written.  Festus  knew  that  Paul's  offence  was  neither  social  nor 
political,  but  only  ecclesiastical  and  religious,  and  that  as  yet  the  policy  of  Pome 
was  not  to  intermeddle  with  such  disputes — which  was  a  second  certain  thing  he 
could  have  reported  to  Augustus.  Besides,  Festus  knew  that  the  real  reason  for 
Paul's  production  was  to  afford  Agrippa  and  Bernice  an  opportunity  of  hearing 
that  remarkable  man.  Hence,  in  a  strict  sense,  Festus's  explanation  was  not  pre- 
cisely in  accordance  with  truth. 

Learn. — 1.  The  mystery  of  Divine  providence,  which  seats  an  Agrippa  upon 
the  throne  and  consigns  a  Paul  to  a  prison.  2.  The  insignificance  of  earthly 
pomp  when  compared  with  the  glory  of  moral  and  religious  worth,  as  seen  in  the 
external  decoration  of  Agrippa  and  Bernice,  when  set  alongside  of  the  inner 
graces  of  Paul.  3.  The  truth  of  Jesus  Christ's  predictions  that  His  servants 
should  suffer  persecution  (Matt.  x.  18  ;  Markxiii.  9;  Luke  xxi.  12),  and  in  par- 
ticular that  Paul  should  bear  His  name  before  kings  (ix.  15).  4.  The  infatuation 
which  sometimes  impels  communities  to  hate  and  even  slay  their  best  men.  Seen 
in  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  towards  Paul.  5.  The  involuntary  testimony  that 
the  world  is  often  compelled  to  bear  as  to  the  moral  excellence  of  Christians — 
illustrated  by  Festus's  declaration  concerning  Paul.  .  6.  The  disregard  for  strict 
truth  which  is  often  found  in  great  no  less  than  in  mean  men.  7.  The  unreason- 
ableness of  continuing  a  man  in  prison  against  whom  it  is  difficult  to  find  a  charge 
that  will  bear  writing  down. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.   23.  A    Christian  Service  in  a  hands,   had   been   often   stained   with 

Strange  Place.  blood,    had  frequently  echoed    to   the 

I.  The  cathedral,  church,  or  chapel.  cries  of  despair  and  the  shouts  of  bac- 

The  judgment  hall  in  Herod's  palace.  chanalian  revelry,  and  had  more  than 

This  hall  had    been    built    by  wicked  once  reverberated  to  the  sound  of  Paul. 

527 


chap.  xxv.       H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


But  any  place  will  do  to  preach  the 
gospel  in. 

II.  The  congregation. — 1.  Brilliant. 
Consisting  of  the  civic  and  military 
dignitaries  of  Csesarea,  the  aristocracy 
and  fashion  of  its  population.  2.  Mixed. 
Comprising  persons  of  royal  birth,  and 
persons  of  low  degree,  statesmen  and 
rulers  with  their  servants  and  subjects. 
3.  Sinful.  All  alike  needful  of  the 
gracious  blessings  of  the  gospel.  Of 
different  degrees  of  wickedness,  they 
were  one  in  this,  that  all  needed  salva- 
tion. 

III.  The  preacher. — 1.  A  shackled 
prisoner.  Paul,  when  he  stood  before 
that  gay  throng  which  crowded  Herod's 
judgment  hall,  was  chained  by  his 
right  hand  to  a  Roman  soldier.  2.  A 
spiritual  freeman.  In  all  that  com- 
pany Paul  alone  was  possessed  of  true 
liberty. 

"  He  is  the  freeman  whom  the  truth  makes 
free 
And  all  are  slaves  besides"  (Coroper). 

3.  A  fearless  prophet.  Conscious  of 
innocence,  and  depending  on  his  Lord, 
Paul  was  not  abashed  before  so  much 
material  splendour  and  earthly  glory. 

4.  An  eloquent  orator.  Sufficiently 
proved  by  the  oration  he  delivered 
when  called  upon  to  speak  in  his  de- 
fence (xxvi.). 

IV.  The  sermon. — The  apology  he 
uttered,  setting  forth  :  1.  The  ground- 
less character  of  the  charges  advanced 
against  him.  Thus  confirming  the 
conclusion  at  which  Festus  had  already 
arrived  (ver.  25).  2.  The  supernatural 
character  of  the  call  which  had  trans- 
formed him  into  a  Christian  apostle. 
Thus  explaining  that  his  countrymen, 
in  seeking  his  death,  were  practically 
fighting  against  God.  3.  The  necessary 
character  of  his  mission  to  the  Gentiles. 
Thus  showing  that  in  all  he  did  he  was 
acting  under  the  impulse  of  a  higher 
will  than  his  own  (see  chap.  xxvi). 

Ver.  24.  Behold  this  Man  !  (Compare 
John  xix.  5  :  Behold  the  Man  !) 

I.  An  Israelite  indeed,  and  yet 
hated  by  his  co-religionists. — They  had 

528 


lost  the  inner  kernel  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment religion,  and  were  trying  to  live 
upon  the  husk;  they  had  abandoned 
the  spirit,  and  were  become  slaves  of 
the  letter.  He,  on  the  other  hand,  had 
cast  aside  the  letter,  and  was  living  on 
the  spirit  of  it,  had  thrown  away  the 
husk,  and  was  retaining  the  kernel. 

II.  An  innocent  man,  and  yet  con- 
signed to  prison. — In  this  certainly  he 
was  not  worse  treated  than  his  Master 
had  been,  who,  though  He  did  no  sin, 
was  yet  put  to  death  as  a  common 
malefactor.  Though  the  law  was  not 
made  for  a  righteous  man  but  for  the 
unrighteous  (1  Tim.  i.  9),  yet  its  penal- 
ties and  prisons  often  fall  to  the 
righteous  rather  than  to  the  wicked. 

III.  A  friendless  prisoner,  and  yet  a 
fearless  confessor. — Though  Paul  had 
friends  in  Caesarea  whose  visits  cheered 
and  relieved  his  captivity  (xxiv.  23),  it 
is  not  certain  that  they  were  permitted 
to  stand  beside  him  in  Herod's  palace 
on  that  memorable  day.  Nevertheless, 
it  need  not  be  doubted  that  the  Lord 
stood  by  him  (Matt.  x.  19,  xxviii.  20), 
and  that  the  presence  of  this  heavenly 
friend  was  more  to  him  than  ten 
thousands  of  human  allies  and  sup- 
porters, enabling  him  to  say  with  the 
Hebrew  Psalmist :  "  The  Lord  is  my 
light  and  my  salvation,  whom  shall  I 
fear  ?  The  Lord  is  the  strength  of  my 
life,  of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid  ? " 
(Psalm  xxvii.  1) 

Ver.  26.  No  Certain  Thing  to  Write; 
or,  the  Uncertainties  of  Infidelity. 

I.  Whether  there  be  no  God. — The 
fool  may  say  in  his  heart  that  there  is 
no  God  (Psalm  xiv.  1).  The  transgressor 
may  wish  there  were  no  God.  The 
materialist  may  assert  and  imagine  he 
has  proved  there  is  no  God.  But 
neither  fool  nor  philosopher  can  be 
sure  that  their  conclusions  are  right. 

II.  Whether  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was 
only  a  man. — That  He  was  a  man  all — 
believers  and  unbelievers — are  agreed. 
That  He  was  only  a  man  has  been  ve- 
hemently and  persistently  affirmed  by 
rejectors  of  His  divinity.  But  they 
can  never  demonstrate  to  the  satisfac- 


E0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


tion  of  others  that  such  a  thing  as  an 
incarnation  is  impossible. 

III.  Whether  there  be  no  hereafter. 
— This  also  has  been  blatantly  pro- 
claimed by  the  champions  of  infidelity ; 
but  as  no  one  has  ever  returned  from 
the  grave  they  cannot  positively  know- 
that  there  is  no  conscious  existence 
beyond. 

IV.  Whether  there  be  no  hell. — By 
many  it  is  confidently  maintained  that 
eternal  punishment  is  only  an  imagina- 
tion of  mediaeval  theologians ;  but 
until  the  great  hereafter  comes  with 
its  awakening  experiences,  it  will  be 
impossible  with  regard  to  this  to 
cherish  more  than  a  hope.  N.B. — If 
Christians  were  uncertain  that  the 
things  most  surely  believed  among 
them  were  realities,  they  would  be  in 
no  worse  position  than  the  unbelievers 
are  who  reject  them ;  but  Christians 
can  say  with  reference  to  their  faith  in 
God,  Christ,  Immortality,  Heaven, 
"  We  have  not  followed  cunningly 
devised  fables"  (2  Peter  i.  16). 


Ver.  27.  Unreasonable  Things,  who- 
ever does  them. 

I.  To  commit  a  man  to  gaol  who  has 
done  no  wrong. 

II.  To  punish  a  man  on  account  of 
his  religion. 

III.  To  oppress  the  single  and  de- 
fenceless in  order  to  please  the  many 
and  the  strong. 

IV.  To  expect  to  crush  a  good  cause 
or  a  good  man  by  means  of  persecu- 
tion. 

Ver.  23-27.  Festus's  Audience  Cham- 
ber at  Ccesarea. 

I.  A  drawing-room  of  worldly  glory; 
constituted  such  by  the  splendour  of 
the  assembled  nobility  (ver.  23). 

II.  A  lecture  room  of  holy  doctrine ; 
constituted  such  by  the  testimony  of 
the  Apostle  (xxvi.  1-23). 

III.  A  judgment  hall  of  Divine 
majesty;  constituted  such  by  the  im- 
pression of  the  apostolic  discourse, 
which  discloses  the  secrets  of  all  hearts 
(xxvi.  24-32). — Gerok  in  Lange. 


CHAPTER    XXVI. 
Paul  before  King  Agrippa  II. — Third  Apology. 

§  1.  Paul's  Appeal  to  his  Past  Life  ;  or,  a  Vindication  of  his  Jewish  Orthodoxy 

(vers.  1-8). 
§  2.  Paul's  Rehearsal  of  an  Old  Story;  or,  the  Secret  of  his  Conversion  Explained 

(vers.  9-18). 
§  3.  Paul's  Subsequent  Career  as  a  Christian  ;  or,  How  He  Turned  to  the  Gentile 

Mission  (vers.  19-23). 
§  4.  Paul's  two  Distinguished  Listeners,  Festus  and  Agrippa;    or,  Two  Souls 

Struggling  Against  the  Truth  (vers.  24-32). 


CRITICAL   REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Agrippa  said  unto  Paul. — On  this  occasion  Agrippa,  not  Festus,  presided  over  the 
tribunal.  The  "  stretching  forth "  of  the  hand  was  the  gesture  of  an  orator  preparing 
himself  to  speak,  and  differed  from  the  act  of  "  beckoning  "  or  shaking  "  with  the  hand  " 
(xii.  17,  xiii.  16,  xxi.  40),  which  was  a  signal  demanding  silence.  The  act  is  thus  described : 
"  Porrigit  dextram  et  ad  instar  oratorum  conformat  articulum,  dubousque  infimis  conclusis 
digitis  ceteros  eminentes  porrigit  "  (Apuleius,  Met.,  ii.  54,  quoted  by  Meyer).     The  hand  which 


M  M 


529 


chap.  xxvi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Paul  raised  was  chained  (ver.  29).  Answered  for  himself.  Made  his  defence,  or  apology. 
This  was  the  third  occasion  on  which  Paul  had  vindicated  himself — the  first  having  been 
when  he  addressed  the  Jews  (xxii.  1),  and  the  second  when  he  stood  before  Felix  (xxiv.  10). 
The  present  speech  (vers.  2-23)  divides  itself  into  three  parts.  In  the  first  (vers.  2-8),  the 
apostle  sets  forth  the  solidarity  of  his  own  faith  with  that  of  his  countrymen,  in  so  far  as 
each  is  a  religion  of  hope ;  in  the  second  (vers.  9-18)  he  explains  the  origiu  of  his  call  to  the 
apostolate  ;  in  the  third  j(vers.  19-23)  he  shows  how  he  was  led  to  direct  his  apostolic  activity 
towards  the  Gentiles. 

Ver.  2.  The  best  MSS.  omit  "  the  "  before  Jews,  as  in  vers.  7,  21,  xxv.  10.  Paul  would 
represent  the  accusation  as  purely  Jewish  in  its  character,  and  indeed  as  proceeding  from 
some  only,  not  from  all,  of  the  Jews. 

Ver.  3.  Especially  gives  the  reason  why  Paul  counted  himself  fortunate,  not  the  quality 
or  quantity  of  Agrippa's  knowledge,  though  "  Kabbinic  writers  speak  of  Agrippa  as  having 
excelled  in  a  knowledge  of  the  law  "  (Hackett).  Thee  to  be  expert. — The  words  in  Greek 
are  anakolouthic.  Instead  of  an  accusative,  a  genitive  might  rather  have  been  expected. 
Patiently. — Paul  obviously  proposed  a  somewhat  extended  oration. 

Ver.  4.  My  manner  of  life  from  my  youth  up.  — This  appears  to  imply  that  Paul  had  been 
brought  to  Jerusalem  at  an  early  age  (compare  xxiii.  3),  though  he  was  seemingly  absent 
from  the  Metropolis  during  the  three  years  of  our  Lord's  ministry  (2  Cor.  v.  16). 

Ver.  5.  From  the  beginning. — The  same  idea  as  that  contained  in  "  from  my  youth  up."  I 
lived  a  Pharisee.— Observe  the  succession  of  the  clauses,  which  state  (1)  how  long  the  Jews 
had  known  Paul — from  his  youth  up,  or  from  the  beginning  ;  (2)  where  they  had  known  him 
—in  Jerusalem  ;  and  (3)  what  they  had  known  about  him — that  he  had  lived  a  Pharisee 
(compare  xxii.  3,  xxiii.  6). 

Ver.  6.  I  stand  here  and  am  judged. — Better,  I  stand  here,  being  judged.  Paul's  complaint 
was  that  he  was  being  tried,  not  for  heterodoxy,  but  for  "  orthodoxy" — for  the  hope,  etc. 

Ver.  7.  Our  twelve  tribes. — Paul,  like  James  (i.  1),  considered  the  then  existing  Jewish 
people  to  be  the  legitimate  representatives  of  the  Twelve  Tribes.  Like  James,  he  ignored 
"  the  legend,  so  often  repeated  and  revived,  that  the  ten  tribes  of  the  northern  kingdoms  of 
Israel,  after  they  had  been  carried  away  by  Shalmaneser,  had  wandered  far  away,  and  were 
to  be  found,  in  disguise,  in  far-off  regions  of  the  world.  The  earliest  appearance  of  the 
fable  is  in  the  apocryphal  2  Esdras  xiii.  40-46,  where  they  are  said  to  have  gone  to  '  a 
country  where  never  mankind  dwelt,  that  they  might  there  keep  the  statutes  which  they 
never  kept  in  their  own  land.'  The  apostle,  on  the  contrary,  represents  the  whole  body 
of  the  Twelve  Tribes  as  alike  serving  God  "  (Plumptre).  While  it  is  certainly  true  that  the 
main  body  of  the  home-returning  exiles  consisted  of  members  of  the  two  tribes,  Judah  and 
Benjamin,  it  is  equally  indubitable  that  amongst  them  were  members  of  other  tribes,  as,  e,g., 
of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  (1  Chron.  ix.  3). 

Ver.  8.  Why  should  it  be  thought  a  thing  incredible  with  you  ? — Another  interpretation 
gives  "  What  1  is  it  judged  incredible  with  you  ? "  (Griesbach,  Kuinoel,  De  Wette,  Conybeare 
and  Howson).  That  God  should  raise  the  dead? — Lit.,  if  God  raises;  el  presenting  the 
question  as  one  a  sceptic  might  controvert,  and  iyeipei  being  present,  because  the  resurrection 
of  Jesus  was  regarded  by  the  apostle  as  illustrating  "  a  permanent  attribute  or  power  on  the 
part  of  God  "  (Hackett).  The  precise  force  of  the  question  has  been  differently  explained. 
Connected  with  the  preceding  verses,  it  has  been  understood  as  giving  the  inner  kernel  of 
the  promise  made  unto  the  Jewish  fathers,  and  as  replying  to  a  look  of  incredulity  perhaps 
at  the  moment  visible  on  the  faces  of  his  hearers  (Holtzmann) ;  regarded  as  introductory 
to  the  ensuing  paragraph,  it  has  been  interpreted  as  signifying  either  that,  since  no  Jew 
could  hesitate  to  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  what  the  apostle  was  about  to 
rehearse  should  likewise  be  accepted  as  credible  (Overbeck),  or  that  the  apostle's  faith  in 
the  Messiah,  of  which  he  was  about  to  speak,  had  exactly  that  for  its  presupposition  which 
no  Jew  would  think  of  controverting — viz.,  that  God  was  able  to  raise  the  dead  (Wendt). 
Perhaps  the  first  connection  is  the  better. 

Ver.  9.  Commences  the  second  part  of  Paul's  apology.  Paul  would  not  despair  of  con- 
verting his  countrymen  from  doubt  to  belief,  since  he  himself  had  undergone  a  similar 
mental  revolution,  and  had  become  a  believer  in,  and  a  preacher  of,  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus.  I  ought. — Paul  acted  from  what  he  deemed  a  sense  of  duty  when  he  "  persecuted 
the  Church  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  9),  which  may  be  taken  as  his  interpretation  of  the  clause, 
doing  many  things  "  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth." 

Ver.  10.  The  saints. — This  designation,  intelligible  only  to  Christians  (see  ix.  13),  Paul  did 
not  use  when  addressing  the  Jews,  but  now  employs  before  Agrippa,  perhaps  because  he 
deemed  caution  no  longer  necessary,  and  wished  both  to  put  honour  on  the  followers  of  the 
Nazarene  and  to  aggravate  his  own  guilt  (compare  Birk's  Horce  Apostoliccs,  vii.  viii.).  The 
disciples  of  the  Crucified  were  "  the  '  holy  ones '  of  God's  people,  Israel — what  the  Chasidim, 
or  'devout  ones'  (the  'Assideans'  of  1  Mace.  vii.  13;  2  Mace.  xiv.  6),  had  been  in  an 
earlier  generation  "   (Plumptre).     I  gave  my  voice — lit.,  1  cast  my  voting  stone,  calculum 

530 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


adjeci,  against  them. — Whether  this  should  be  taken  literally,  as  signifying  that  Paul 
actually  voted  against  the  Christians  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  Alford,  Holtzmann,  Hausrath, 
Plumptre),  or  figuratively  (Bengel,  Kuinoel,  De  Wette,  Meyer,  Lechler,  Zockler,  Hackett, 
Stier),  that  he  assented  to  their  condemnation,  is  debated.  If  the  former  interpretation  be 
the  right  one,  then  the  probability  is  that  Paul  had  been  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim,  and 
over  thirty  years  of  age,  as  well  as  married  and  the  father  of  a  family.  As,  however,  Paul's 
age  at  the  time  of  Stephen's  murder  is  uncertain,  and  as  Scripture  does  not  mention  either 
wife  or  child  of  the  apostle  (but  see  Hints  on  ver.  10),  it  is  held  by  others  that  the 
latter  interpretation  should  be  preferred. 

Ver.  11.  I  .  .  .  compelled  them. — Lit.,  I  was  compelling  them— i.e.,  I  strove  to  make  them — 
blaspheme. — It  does  not  follow  that  he  succeeded,  though  "  that  among  the  many  who 
suffered  this  violence,  every  one  preserved  his  fidelity,  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  affirm  " 
(Hackett).  Pliuy  {Ep.,  n.  97)  speaks  of  ordering  the  Bithynian  Christians — maledicere 
Christo — but  adds  that  it  could  not  be  done — quorum  nihil  cogi  posse  dicuntur  qui  sunt  revera 
Christiani.     Strange  cities  were  foreign  cities,  outside  of  Palestine,  like  Damascus. 

Ver.  12.  "Whereupon. — Lit.,  in  which  (persecutions)  being  engaged.     Compare  xxiv.   18. 

Ver.  13.  At  midday. — A  note,  omitted  in  Luke's  narration  (ix.  3)  but  corresponding  to 
Paul's  previous  statement  "  about  noon  "  (xxii.  6).  A  light  from  heaven. — As  in  ix.  3;  spoken 
of  as  great  in  xxii.  6,  to  which  corresponds  the  next  clause,  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun. 
— This  light  is  now  said  to  have  encompassed,  not  Paul  alone  (ix.  3,  xxii.  6),  but  his  com- 
panions as  well 

Ver.  14.  Eemarks  that  these  companions,  as  well  as  the  apostle,  were  all  struck  to  the 
ground  in  terror,  though  they  appear  to  have  recovered  from  their  fright  earlier  than  he 
(ix.  7).  The  voice  which  Paul  heard,  Luke  says  they  also  heard  (ix.  7),  though  Paul  affirms 
they  heard  it  not  (xxii.  9),  as  conversely  Luke  reports  they  saw  no  man  (ix.  7),  while  Paul 
asserts  they  beheld  the  light  (xx.  9).  On  these  supposed  contradictions  see  ix.  7,  and  xxii.  G, 
and  compare  Dan.  x.  7,  3  Mace.  vi.  18,  and  John  xii.  29,  which  all  seem  to  imply  that 
heavenly  voices  and  visions  are  understood  and  seen  only  by  those  for  whom  they  are 
intended.  Paul  mentioned  that  the  voice  spoke  to  him  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  because  he 
was  then  himself  speaking  in  Greek,  not  in  Hebrew,  as  in  xxii.  (see  Hints  on  ver.  14). 
It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks. — Or,  goads.  The  meaning  was  that  his 
resistance  to  the  cause  and  will  of  Christ  would  be  foolish  and  unavailing,  as  well  as  painful 
to  himself.  The  ox-goad,  six  or  eight  feet  long,  and  pointed  with  iron,  was  held  by  the 
Oriental  ploughman  in  one  hand,  while  the  other  grasped  the  one-handled  plough.  The 
refractory  animal,  when  pierced  or  pricked  with  the  iron-pointed  goad,  would,  of  course,  kick 
against  it.  Examples  of  this  proverb  have  been  produced  from  Greek  and  Latin  writers 
(see  iEschylus,  Agam.,  1624  :  irpbs  Ktvrpa.  ph\  Xd/cnfe  ;  and  Terence,  Phormio,  I.  ii.  27 :  "  Nam 
qua  inscitia  est  advorsum  stimulum  calces  "). 

Ver.  16.  Which  thou  hast  seen. — According  to  the  best  authorities  this  should  be  wherein 
thou  hast  seen  Me. 

Ver.  18.  To  turn  them  should  be  that  they  may  turn  from  darkness  to  light,  the  verb  being 
intransitive  (see  ver.  20,  xiv.  15). 

Ver.  19. — Begins  the  third  part  of  Paul's  defence,  and  furnishes  the  reason  for  his  Gentile 
mission.     Whereupon.— Lit.,  whence,  wherefore,  accordingly — i.e.,  having  been  so  instructed. 

Ver.  20.  Showed  first  unto  them  of  Damascus. — (Compare  ix.  20.)  No  contradiction  to 
Gal.  i.  17,  which  does  not  assert  that  Paul's  evangelistic  work  did  not  commence  till  after 
his  return  from  Arabia  (Holtzmann). 

Ver.  21.  Works  meet  for  repentance. — I.e.,  such  works  as  proved  repentance  to  be  sincere. 
It  is  simply  ridiculous  to  find  in  this  an  evidence  of  non-historicity,  since  Paul's  doctrine 
was  that  of  justification  by  faith  alone  (Zeller). 

Ver.  22.  Witnessing. — If  /jLapTvpoti/uLevos  (Received  Text)  be  correct,  then  the  rendering 
should  be  '*  borne  witness  to  "  (see  vi.  3,  x.  22,  xxii.  12) ;  but,  as  Paul  was  not  witnessed  to, 
but  accused  by  small  and  great,  the  reading  fiaprypd/xevos  (Revised  Text)  is  to  be  preferred, 
in  which  case  "  witnessing,"  "testifying,"  is  an  accurate  translation. 

Ver.  23.  That  Christ  should  suffer. — Better,  how  that,  or  if,  or  whether—  tl  presenting  the 
points—  £r)Tr)/j.aTa  questions  (xxv.  19) — as  Paul  was  wont  to  discuss  them.  1.  Whether  the 
Messiah,  not  must  suffer,  but  is  capable  of  suffering — Tradrjrds, passibilis  (Vulgate);  i.e.,  not 
whether  He  should  have  a  nature  capable  of  suffering,  but  whether  the  idea  of  suffering  was 
possible  to  be  harmonised  with  the  conception  of  Messiah  laid  down  in  the  Old  Testament. 
And  2.  Whether  by  rising  from  the  dead  (1  Cor.  xv.  22  ;  Col.  i.  18)  He  should  be  the  first  to 
show  (or  proclaim)  light  unto  the  people  and  to  the  Gentiles  (Eph.  ii.  17).  As  the  revelation 
contained  in  the  law  and  the  prophets  had  been  called  (Isa.  ii.  5),  so  was  the  gospel  (2  Cor. 
iv.  4)  now  styled,  "  Light." 

Ver.  24.  As  he  thus  spake  for  himself. — Lit.,  he  speaking  these  things  in  his  defence — raura, 
these  things,  being  the  words  just  uttered  about  the  resurrection,  rather  than  the  entire 
speech.     The  notion  of  a  resurrection  appeared  as  absurd  to  Festus  as  it  had  done  to  the 

531 


chap.  xxvi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Athenians  (xvii.  32),  and  caused  him  to  think  Paul  "beside  himself,  raving,  or  mad,  and  to  say 
so,  not  in  jest'(Olshausen),  but  in  earnest,  at  the  same  time  ascribing  his  insanity  to  his  much 
learning — iroWa  ypafifxara,  which,  among  the  Jews,  meant  much  theology  (John  vii.  15  ; 
2  Tim.  iii.  15). 

Ver.  25.  Most  noble.— Powerful,  or  excellent  (Kpdriore),  as  in  xxiii.  26,  xxiv.  3  ;  Luke  i.  3. 

Ver.  26.  Before.— Better,  unto  whom.  Paul,  with  fearless  confidence,  appealed  to  Agrippa, 
who  knew  perfectly  that  the  doctrines  just  referred  to,  of  a  crucified  and  risen  Christ,  on 
which  his,  Paul's,  gospel  was  founded,  were  not  fancies,  illusions,  the  ravings  of  a  madman, 
but  words  of  truth  and  soberness,  because  relating  to  facts  which  had  been  done  and  events 
which  had  taken  place,  not  in  a  corner,  but  in  the  metropolis  of  Palestine,  and  therefore 
publicly. 

Ver.  28.  Almost  (iv  6\iyu)  =  propemodum,  a  meaning  of  which  no  other  example  can  be 
given)  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  or  become  (yevtadai)  a  Christian  (Cbrysostom,  Luther, 
Grotius,  Bengel,  Stier,  Spence)  ;  or,  with  hut  little  persuasion  thou  persuadest  me  to  become, 
or,  according  to  a  different  reading,  thou  believest  (thyself  able)  to  make  of  me  a  Christian  ; 
i.e.,  thou  wouldest  fain  make  me  a  Christion  (R.V.,  Teschendorf,  Meyer,  Alford,  Plumptre, 
Holtzmann,  and  others);  or,  in  a  little  time  {i.e.,  if  you  go  on  speaking  thus)  you  will 
persuade  me  to  become  a  Christian  (Calvin,  Olshausen,  Neander,  De  Wette,  Robinson, 
Hackett,  and  others).  The  third  is  admissible,  but  does  not  so  well  suit  the  apostle's 
answer  (see  below).  The  second  fits  best  if  the  alternative  reading,  iroirjo-ai.  for  yevtadai  be 
adopted.  The  first,  though  perhaps  grammatically  doubtful,  harmonises  best  with  the 
seriousness  which  Paul's  oration  was  calculated  to  inspire.  The  second  and  third  are  more 
or  less  ironical. 

Ver.  29.  Both  almost  and  altogether. — 'Ev  6\iyu>  koXJv  7toX\£  (the  best  texts  have  h  fxeydXy), 
in  little  and  in  much.  It  must  be  admitted  that  this  reply  does  not  fit  in  well  with  the  first 
of  the  above  renderings,  while  it  suits  admirably  the  second  and  third,  as  thus :  either,  I 
would  to  God  that  whether  with  little  or  with  much,  or  whether  in  a  little  time  or  in  a  great 
time,  not  thou  only,  etc.  In  spite,  therefore,  of  the  seemingly  ironical  character  of  the 
second  and  third,  one  or  other  of  these  should  be  preferred.  These  bonds.—  (See  xxiv. 
23,  27.) 

Ver.  30. — Unwilling  to  hear  more,  the  auditors  rose  up  in  order,  according  to  their  rank. 

Ver.  31. — After  conferring  with  one  another  Festus  and  Agrippa  came  to  the  same  con- 
clusion as  had  already  three  times  been  reached  concerning  Paul— first  by  the  Pharisees 
(xxiii.  9),  next  by  Lysias  (xxiii.  29),  and  lastly  by  Festus  (xxv.  25). 

Ver.  32. — Agrippa  adds  that  but  for  his  appeal  to  Caesar  the  apostle  might  have  been  set 
at  liberty. 

Note. — The  authenticity  of  this  and  the  two  preceding  chapters  relating  to  Paul's  imprison- 
ment at  Caesarea  has  been  questioned  on  the  following  grounds:  1.  That  the  two  trials — 
before  Felix  and  before  Festus — have  been  artificially  constructed  by  the  author,  and 
manifestly  on  the  same  plan,  according  to  which  in  each  the  same  incidents  recur — the 
same  motives  for  the  accusation,  the  same  murder-proposal  of  the  Jews,  the  same  appearing 
of  Paul's  enemies  before  the  Roman  tribunal  with  their  complaints,  the  same  hearing  before 
a  regularly  constituted  court,  the  same  failure  in  the  evidence  offered,  the  same  protection  and 
recognition  of  his  innocence  at  the  hands  of  the  Roman  procurator,  and  the  same  style  of 
defence — viz.,  that  Paul  was  an  orthodox  Jew,  and  indeed  a  Pharisee,  who  had  been  con- 
strained by  a  irresistible  Divine  impulse  to  enter  on  his  Gentile  mission  (Baur,  Zeller, 
Holtzmann).  2.  That  the  position  adopted  by  Paul,  was  more  in  accordance  with  that  taken 
by  the  second-century  apologists  (Holtzmann).  3.  That  everything  appears  directed  to  show 
how  Paul,  who  was  persecuted  by  the  fanaticism  of  the  Jews,  was  protected  through  the 
righteousness  of  the  Romans  (Pfleiderer)  ;  and  4.  That  so  completely  is  his  innocence  estab- 
lished, over  against  both  Roman  policy  and  Jewish  hate,  that  his  continued  imprisonment 
(Weizsacker)  and  deportation  to  Rome  (Holtzmann)  are  simply  inconceivable.  But  to  all  this 
it  suffices  to  reply — 1.  That  similarity  between  two  judicial  processes  does  not  necessarily 
establish  the  unreality  of  both  or  of  either — and  all  the  more  if  the  processes  were  conducted 
by  the  same  parties,  against  the  same  individual,  about  the  same  charge,  and  with  the  same 
evidence.  2.  That  second-century  apologists  may  well  have  learnt  how  to  defend  themselves, 
by  a  careful  studying  of  Paul's  defences.  3.  That  the  favour  shown  by  the  Roman  Governors 
to  Paul  accords  with  what  is  known  of  the  Roman  policy  towards  Christianity  in  the  first 
century,  and  not  with  what  is  known  of  her  policy  in  the  second  century  (Ramsay,  The 
Church  in  the  Roman  Empire,  p.  194) ;  and  4.  That  Paul's  continued  imprisonment  requires 
no  explanation  different  from  that  given  in  the  text — viz.,  the  unwillingness  of  the  Roman 
governors  either  to  please  the  Jews  by  punishing  Paul  or  to  displease  them  by  setting  him 
free  ;  while  after  his  appeal  to  Caesar  had  been  allowed,  it  would  probably  not  have  been 
safe  for  either  Festus  or  Agrippa  to  have  disregarded  it.  But,  even  if  they  did,  that  would 
only  show  they  had  failed  in  their  duty,  not  that  the  narrative  in  the  Acts  was  unhistorical. 

532 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses   1—8. 

Paul's  Appeal  to  His  Past  Life  ;  or,  a  Vindication  of  his  Jewish  Orthodoxy. 

I.  Paul's  happiness  in  entering  on  his  defence. — One  might  naturally  have 
supposed  that  Paul  by  this  time  would  have  felt  it  irksome  to  be  called  up  to 
speak  for  himself,  having  already  twice  attempted  to  vindicate  his  innocence, 
before  the  Sanhedrim  (xxii.  1)  and  before  Felix  (xxiv.  10),  but  with  no  good 
result — only  with  this,  that  for  two  long  years  he  had  been  detained  in  bonds. 
Spirits  of  less  noble  mould  than  Paul's  would  have  been  crushed — would  have 
renounced  both  faith  in  God  and  hope  for  themselves ;  but  he,  "  as  sorrowful  yet 
always  rejoicing  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  10),  as  "perplexed  but  not  in  despair,  persecuted 
but  not  forsaken,  cast  down  but  not  destroyed"  (2  Cor.  iv.  8,  9),  continued  bright 
and  cheerful,  never  losing  heart  or  hope,  constantly  confident  that  all  things 
were  working  together  for  his  good  (Rom.  viii.  28),  as  well  as  for  God's  purpose 
(Eph.  i.  11),  and  therefore  always  ready  to  enter  any  door  of  service  that  might 
be  opened,  not  so  much  for  the  vindication  of  himself  as  for  the  furtherance  of 
the  gospel  and  the  cause  of  his  Master.  In  particular,  he  welcomed  the  present 
opportunity  of  appearing  before  Agrippa  and  answering  the  charges  that  had  been 
brought  against  him.  1.  Because  Agrippa  was  a  king,  and  a  king,  it  was  written, 
should  ever  love  judgment  (Psalm  xcix.  4)  and  practise  righteousness  (Isa.  xxxii. 
1),  yea,  righteous  lips  should  be  his  delight  (Prov.  xvi.  13),  while  to  search  out  a 
matter  was  his  honour  (Prov.  xxv.  2),  and  to  do  wickedness  should  be  to  him  an 
abomination  (Prov.  xvi.  12).  2.  Because  Agrippa  was  an  expert  in  all  Jewish 
customs  and  questions,  and  would  be  able  to  comprehend  the  point  or  points  at 
issue  between  him,  Paul,  and  his  countrymen — points  which  had  somewhat 
disconcerted  the  Governor  (xxv.  20).  "  That  Paul  here  praises  the  king's 
eminent  knowledge  of  Jewish  religion  and  morals  is  no  empty  flattery,  but 
appears  to  rest  on  this,  that  Agrippa,  more  than  any  other  member  of  his  family, 
occupied  himself  with  the  people's  ecclesiastical  affairs,  although  nothing  definite 
concerning  this  has  been  handed  down  by  tradition"  (Zockler).  Rabbinic 
writers  speak  of  Agrippa  II.  as  having  excelled  in  a  knowledge  of  the  law ;  and 
"  as  the  traditions  which  these  Rabbinic  writers  follow  could  not  have  flowed 
from  this  passage,  they  confirm  the  representation  here  given  by  an  unexpected 
agreement "  (Hackett).  Possibly  Agrippa  II.  had  been  carefully  instructed  in 
them  by  his  father,  Agrippa  I.,  who  was  "  famous  for  his  rigid  observance  of  all 
Jewish  customs  and  rites "  (Spence).  3.  Because  Agrippa  was  acquainted  with 
the  Scriptures,  which  formed  the  ultimate  standard  of  judgment  for  all. contro- 
verted points  in  religion.  Though  Paul  made  no  mention  of  this  in  his  courteous 
exordium,  it  lay  clearly  in  the  background  of  his  consciousness  (see  ver.  27). 
Notice,  that  in  all  this  Paul  introduces  no  word  in  flattery  of  the  young 
sovereign.     Paul  doubtless  understood  that — 

"  They  do  abuse  the  king  that  flatter  him, 

Whereas  reproof,  obedient  and  in  order, 

Fits  kings  as  they  are  men,  for  they  may  err." — Shakespeare. 

II.  Paul's  request  for  a  patient  hearing  of  his  case. — 1.  Because  heretofore  he 
had  in  every  instance  been  interrupted  and  prevented  from  making  a  full  statement 
of  his  defence.  By  the  Jews,  when  he  spoke  from  the  castle  stairs  in  Jerusalem 
(xx.  22);  by  the  high  priest,  when  he  appeared  before  the  Sanhedrim  (xxiii.  2)  ; 
by  Felix,  when  he  stood  before  that  governor  (xxiv.  22) — though  not  stated,  this 
seems  to  have  been  the  exact  state  of  matters ;  by  Festus,  who  succeeded  Felix 
(xxv.  9).  And  now,  before  beginning,  he  bespeaks  a  different  treatment  from 
the  Jewish  sovereign.     2.  Because  he  desired  to  make  a  complete  presentation  of  his 

533 


chap.  xxvi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


cause,  without  which  justice  could  not  be  done  either  to  himself,  the  accused 
party,  or  by  Agrippa,  whose  opinion  on  his  case  was  sought.  If,  through  his 
imperfect  exposition  of  the  exact  situation,  Agrippa  failed  to  apprehend  the 
matter  requiring  judgnieot,  then  neither  would  Agrippa  be  able  to  return  nor 
himself  be  likely  to  receive  a  righteous  verdict.  To  a  fair  hearing  and  an  honest 
sentence  even  the  worst  of  criminals  is  entitled. 

III.  Paul's  appeal  to  the  knowledge  of  his  contemporaries.— "  All  the  Jews  " 
referred  to  were  obviously  all  the  Jews  of  Jerusalem  and  Judaea  ;  and  these,  the 
apostle  urged,  had  intimate  acquaintance  with  him.  1.  Where  they  had  known 
him.  In  Jerusalem,  and  therefore  at  first  hand ;  not  simply  by  report,  as  one 
living  at  a  distance,  say  in  Tarsus,  outside  the  limits  of  the  Holy  Land.  In  the 
very  Metropolis  of  Judaism,  and  therefore  in  the  place  where  those  lived  who 
were  most   capable  of  observing  and  judging  of  his  character  (see  on  xxii.  3). 

2.  How  long  they  had  known  him.  From  his  youth  up.  Not  merely  at  one  or 
two  brief  particular  times.  This  statement  implies  that  Paul  had  in  early  life, 
for  some  reason  unknown,  removed  from  Tarsus  and  settled  at  Jerusalem,  where 
he  was  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  "  on  xxii.  3). 

3.  As  what  they  had  known  him.  Not  as  a  heretic,  or  unbeliever,  but  as  one 
who  lived  after  the  straitest  sect  of  their  religion,  as  a  Pharisee,  as  a  member 
of  that  community  of  which  Josephus  writes :  °  The  Pharisees  are  a  Jewish  sect 
who  appear  to  be  more  religious  than  others,  and  who  appear  to  interpret  the 
law  more  strictly"  (Wars,  I.  v.  2),  and  again:  "they  are  supposed  to  excel 
others  in  the  accurate  knowledge  of  their  country"  (Life,  38).  All  this  the 
Jews  knew,  and,  were  they  willing — of  which  Paul  was  manifestly  not  sure — 
could  testify  concerning  him.  That  any  of  the  "  grave  and  dignified  members 
of  the  Sanhedrim"  were  "present  in  that  great  assembly  that  morning" 
(Spence)  cannot  be  gathered  from  the  narrative,  but  had  they  been,  they  could, 
had  they  chosen,  have  bowed  their  heads  in  acquiescence  to  what  Paul  was 
stating  to  Agrippa. 

IV.  Paul's  exposition  of  the  charge  preferred  against  himself. — 1.  An  explana- 
tion. The  offence  for  which  he,  a  chained  prisoner,  was  being  presently  examined 
and  judged  consisted,  not  in  his  having  committed  any  civil  crime,  political  mis- 
demeanour, or  religious  aberration,  but  in  his  having  cherished  the  hope  of  the 
promise  which  had  been  (1)  made  unto  the  fathers,  and  which  in  Paul's  judg- 
ment was  contained  in  the  sacred  Scriptures  as  well  as  embraced  more  than  the 
prediction  of  a  Divine  Messiah,  even  the  announcement  of  a  resurrection,  and 
of  a  future  glorified  life  (see  "  Hints"  on  ver  6);  and  (2)  was  cherished  at  that 
moment  by  all  the  Twelve  Tribes,  who  earnestly  served  God  day  and  night  with 
a  splendid  ritual  worship,  the  ultimate  end  and  aim  of  which  was  to  secure  for 
them  that  eternal  life,  through  the  advent  and  work  of  Messiah,  to  whom  their 
sacrificial  ceremonialism  and  symbolism  looked  forward.  He  was  therefore  in 
complete  harmony  with  the  faith  of  his  countrymen,  and  differed  from  them 
solely  in  this,  that  he  held  that  promise  to  have  been  fulfilled  in  the  historical 
appearing  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  that  hope  to  be  realised  through  His 
resurrection  from  the  dead.  2.  A  defence.  Did  they  question  what  he  now 
asserted  ?  Did  they  deem  what  he  now  preached  a  delusion  ?  If  he  took  for 
granted  that  God  could  raise  the  dead,  why  should  that  be  pronounced  by  them 
incredible  ?  Had  their  sacred  books  never  spoken  of  a  resurrection  ?  Was  so 
marvellous  a  phenomenon  as  the  resuscitation  of  a  dead  body  altogether  unknown 
to  them  1  It  ought  not  to  be,  if  they  had  read  that  sacred  volume  with  sufficient 
care  (see  1  Kings  xvii.  17-23;  2  Kings  iv.  18-37,  xiii.  21).  His  allegation,  then, 
that  he  had  seen  the  risen  Christ  ought  not  to  be  lightly  waived  aside,  or  the 
doctrine  of  a  resurrection  contemptuously  rejected  (see  "  Hints  "  on  ver.  8). 

Learn — 1.  The  cheerfulness  in  trial  which  Divine  grace  can  inspire.     2.  The 

534 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


value  of  a  wide  and  accurate  knowledge  in  religion.  3.  The  advantage  to  be 
derived  in  after  years  from  a  well-spent  youth.  4.  The  fundamental  basis  of  all 
acceptable  worship — the  promise  of  God.  5.  The  reasonableness  of  faith  in  the 
resurrection,  and  of  hope  of  eternal  life. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  1.  Permitted  to  Speak  for 
Himself. 

I.  A  dangerous  temptation. — Before 
which  all  ministers  require  to  be  on 
their  guard,  lest,  like  false  teachers, 
they  should  speak  merely  for  them- 
selves, for  their  own  glory,  or  their  own 
profit. 

II.  A  painful  duty. — Which  minis- 
ters sometimes  need  to  perform,  as 
when  their  ministerial  usefulness  is 
threatened  by  some  prevailing  calumny, 
or  they  are  charged  with  offences  they 
have  not  committed,  and  which,  if  not 
disproved,  would  bring  their  office  into 
disrepute  (2  Cor.  vi.  3). 

III.  A  blessed  privilege. — Which 
all  ministers  have,  and  true  ministers 
delight  to  avail  themselves  of,  when  it 
means  to  speak  for  their  Master,  Christ 
— for  His  glory,  for  the  advancement 
of  His  cause,  for  the  diffusion  of  His 
truth,  for  the  extension  of  His  kingdom. 

A  Chained  Prisoner  on  His  Defence. — 
A  series  of  marvels. 

I.  Speaks  before  the  great  ones  of 
the  earth  without  trepidation. — An 
example  of  holy  courage  (Psalm 
xxvii.   1  ;  Isa.  li.   12). 

II.  Descants  upon  a  lofty  theme 
without  faltering.  —A  proof  of  high  en- 
dowment (Psalm  xxx  vii.  30 ;  Pro  v. 
viii.  6). 

III.  Seeks  the  glory  of  God  without 
a  thought  of  self. — A  sign  of  great  grace 
(John  viii.  50). 

IY.  Enters  on  his  task  in  sublime 
cheerfulness,  without  a  symptom  of 
despondent  dulness. — An  instance  of 
exalted  faith. 

Y.  Rises  into  glowing  eloquence, 
without  a  taint  of  sordid  speech. — A 
mark  of  complete  self-control. 

Yer.  2.  The  Secret  of  Paul's  Joy  in 
Addressing  Agrippa. 

I.  What  it  was  not. — Neither  (1) 
gratification  at  being  honoured  to  speak 


before  a  king,  since  Paul  would  as 
cheerfully  have  spoken  before  a  common 
man ;  nor  (2)  satisfaction  at  being  able 
to  clear  his  character  from  the  charges 
brought  against  him,  though  Paul  of 
course  was  by  no  means  indifferent  to 
.  this ;  nor  (3)  delight  at  the  opportunity 
of  exposing  the  malice  of  his  foes, 
which  richly  merited  both  exposure 
and  rebuke,  not  to  say  punishment ; 
nor  (4)  expectation  of  thereby  obtaining 
his  release,  since  Paul  knew  that  he 
must  go  to  Pome. 

II.  What  it  was. — 1.  The  prospect 
of  being  able  to  testify  concerning  and 
far  Christ  before  one  "  to  whom  the 
circumstances  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
the  promises  made  to  the  fathers,  and 
the  history  of  Christ,  were  not  un- 
known " ;  and  2.  The  hope  of  gaining 
at  least  one  convert,  perhaps  more  than 
one,  to  the  faith  of  his  exalted  Lord. 
"  Paul,  stretching  forth  his  hand,  ap- 
proached the  king,  and  aimed  at  his 
heart"  (Besser). 

The  Character  of  Paul's  Defence. 
I.  Humble  without  servility. 
II.  Fearless  without  pride. 

III.  Powerful  without  passion  and 
rancour. 

IY.  Mild  without  laxity. 
Y.  Prudent  without  art. 
YI.  Simple,  yet  not  without  skill. 

Ver.  3.  A  Patient  Hearing. 

I.  Due  to  preachers  of  the  gospel — 
always  supposing  them  to  be  faithful 
and  earnest.  Because  of — 1.  The 
Master  they  serve — Christ.  2.  The 
message  they  bring — the  good  news  of 
reconciliation.  3.  The  end  at  which 
they  aim — the  salvation  of  their  hearers. 

II.  Frequently  denied  to  preachers. 
— Because  of — 1.  Dislike  of  both  the 
preacher  and  his  Master.  2.  Disincli- 
nation towards  both  the  subject  and 
the  aim  of  his  message.     3.  Dissatisfac- 

535 


chap.  xxvi.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


tion  with  the  manner  or  the  method  of 
the  preacher.  4.  Pre-occupation  with 
other  thoughts  or  things. 

Ver.  4.  My  Manner  of  Life  from 
My  Youth  Up  ;  or,  an  Aged  Christian's 
Retrospect  of  his  Past  Career. 

I.  Sometimes  necessary. — This  was 
the  case  w7ithPaul  when  before  Agrippa. 
It  was  needful  for  the  vindication  of 
himself  to  appeal  to  his  previous  his- 
tory, from  his  youth  upwards,  to  show 
that  he  had  never  really  been  out  of 
harmony  with  the  faith  or  practice  of 
his  people,  as  his  enemies  alleged.  So 
Christians  have  sometimes  to  establish 
their  own  consistency  by  calling  up 
their  manner  of  life  in  former  years. 

II.  Always  difficult. — Even  Christ- 
ians, like  other  people,  are  not  above 
the  temptation  of  dealing  gently  with 
themselves.  It  requires  great  grace 
to  enable  even  a  good  man  to  be  faith- 
ful in  appreciating  his  own  character, 
not  to  over-estimate  his  virtues  or 
under-estimate  his  defects.  Paul  was 
eminently  successful  in  this  work  of 
self-examination.  What  he  claimed 
before  Agrippa  was  not  that  his  past 
life  had  been  sinless  in  the  sight  of 
God,  but  merely  that  it  had  been 
externally  faultless  in  the  eyes  of  men. 

III.  Often  profitable.  —  When  it 
leads  to  self-humiliation  and  repent- 
ance before  God  on  account  of  short- 
comings ;  when  it  shows  that  the  past 
has  been  at  least  constantly  conscien- 
tious, if  not  completely  correct  ;  when 
it  enables  one  to  see  the  guiding  hand 
of  a  gracious  Providence  leading  on 
from  step  to  step  towards  the  goal  of 
conversion  and  salvation. 

IV.  Not  always  satisfactory. — It 
was  not  so  with  Paul.  He  recognised 
that  his  past  career  had  been  out- 
wardly correct  and  inwardly  conscien- 
tious; but  he  found  that  notwith- 
standing he  had  been  a  persecutor  and 
a  blasphemer — in  short,  the  chief  of 
sinners. 

Ver.  6.  The  Promise  Made  to  the 
Fathers. 

I.  Divine  in  its  origin. — Made  by 

536 


God.     Had  the  author  been  man,  the 
promise  would  have  been  worthless. 

II.  Ancient  in  its  date. — Going 
back  to  the  fathers  of  the  faithful, 
yea,  even  to  the  first  father  of  the 
human  family. 

III.  Gracious  in  its  character. — 
Prompted  by  the  spontaneous  love  and 
kindness  of  God. 

IV.  Great  in  its  contents. — A  pro- 
mise of  salvation. 

V.  Varied  in  its  form.  —  1.  To 
Adam,  the  promise  of  a  woman's  seed 
who  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head 
(Gen.  iii.  15).  2.  To  Abraham,  the 
promise  of  a  land  (Gen.  xii.  1),  of  a 
seed  (Gen.  xiii.  15),  of  a  son  (Gen. 
xv.  4).  3.  To  Israel  under  Moses, 
the  promise  of  a  law-giver  like  unto 
Moses  (Deut.  xviii.  18).  4.  To  David, 
the  promise  of  a  son  who  should  sit 
and  reign  upon  his  throne  for  ever 
(2  Sam.  vii.  12).  5.  To  Israel  in  the 
time  of  Isaiah,  the  promise  (1)  of  a 
virgin's  child,  whose  name  should  be 
called  Immanuel  (Isa.  vii.  14),  Wonder- 
ful Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God,  the 
Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of 
Peace  (Isa.  ix.  6) :  (2)  of  a  suffering 
servant  of  Jehovah,  who  should  bear 
the  sins  of  many  and  make  intercession 
for  the  transgressors  (Isa.  liii.  11,  12). 
6.  To  Israel,  in  the  days  of  Jeremiah, 
the  promise  of  one  who  should  be 
called  the  Lord  our  .Righteousness 
(Jer.  xxxiii.  15,  16).  7.  To  Israel,  in 
the  era  of  Ezekiel,  the  promise  of  a 
shepherd  king  like  David  to  rule  over 
his  people  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  24).  8.  To 
Israel,  after  the  return  from  captivity, 
the  promise  of  one  called  "  the  Branch" 
(Zech.  iii.  8). 

VI.  Sure  in  its  fulfilment. — This 
involved  in  the  fact  of  its  being  the 
promise  of  a  God  who  cannot  lie. 

VII.  Realised  in  the  person  and 
work  of  Christ. — This  the  burden  of 
the  gospel  message,  as  it  was  the  theme 
of  Paul's  preaching. 

Ver.  8.  Raising  the  Dead — credible 
or  incredible  ? 

I.  Incredible  only  on  one  or  other, 
or  all,  of  the  following  suppositions : 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


1.  That  the  dead  have  entirely  ceased  to  Scripture  throughout  asserts,  and  as 
be.  In  this  case  they  could  not  be  man's  own  nature  attests  there  is. 
raised,  though  other  beings  might  be  3.  If  God  has  distinctly  promised  that 
created  in  their  stead.  2.  That  there  He  will  raise  the  dead.  This  He  has 
is  no  power  adequate  to  effect  their  most  certainly  done.  Both  Old  and 
resurrection.  This  will  require  to  be  New  Testaments  supply  texts  in  con- 
admitted  if  there  is  no  God,  since  a  firmation.  4.  If  Christ  has  already 
power  less  than  Divine  will  not  suffice.  risen  from  the  dead.     That  He  has  is 

3.  That  it  is  impossible  for  a  Divine  what  Paul  asserted.  For  the  sake  of  the 
power,  should  there  be  such,  to  interfere  truth  of  this  his  fellow-apostles  as  well 
with  the  ordinary  laws  o+  nature*  This  as  himself  were  willing  to  stake,  and 
the  position  occupied  by  those  who  hold  actually  did  stake,  their  lives.  5.  If 
that  the  supernatural  must  never  in  the  idea  of  a  resurrection  nothing 
transcend  the  limits,  but  always  restrict  contrary  to  reason  exists.  Whatever 
itself  to  the  channels,  of  the  natural.  objections  may  be  taken  to  its  credi- 

4.  That  the  Divine  power,  assuming  biHty,  it  cannot  be  asserted  that  the 
such  exists,  has  distinctly  declined  to  notion  of  a  resurrection  is  either  incon- 
interfere  with  natural  law.  This,  how-  ceivable  or  irrational.  6.  If  a  resur- 
ever,  God  has  nowhere  done — certainly  rection  would  raise  man  to  a  higher 
not  in  Scripture.  5.  That  the  Divine  stage  of  being  than  before.  Were  it 
Being  has  expressly  asserted  no  such  certain  that  man's  future  rising  would 
event  as  a  resurrection  will  ever  take  be  a  backward  step,  it  might  be  difficult 
place.  This  also  He  has  nowhere  to  credit  the  occurrence  of  any  such 
affirmed.  event  in  the  future.     7.  If  a  resurrec- 

II.    Credible.— 1.    If  the   dead   are  tion  would  furnish  to  the  universe  an 

still   living,  though  they  have  passed  additional  proof  of  the   Divine  glory. 

beyond  this  mortal  scene  (Matt.  xxii.  This   assuredly  it    would.       It    would 

32).     2.  If  there  be  a  God,  as  all  nature  exhibit  at  once  the  glory  of  His  grace 

cries  aloud  through  all  her  works,  as  and  power. 

HOMILETICAL    ANALYSIS.— Verses  9—18. 

Paul's  Rehearsal  of  An  Old  Story  ;  or,  the  Secret  of  his  Conversion  Explained. 

I.  The  character  of  his  pre-Christian  life. — Briefly,  one  of  opposition  to  the 
name  of  Jesus,  and  to  all  who  bore  it.  1.  Conscientious.  Paul  distinctly 
claimed  that  at  that  time  he  was  as  truly  conscientious  as  he  had  been  since  his 
conversion.  He  imagined,  ignorantly  of  course  (1  Tim.  i.  13),  that  in  so 
opposing,  hindering,  persecuting,  and  destroying  Christians,  he  was  actually 
doing  God  service.  He  did  not  avow  that,  though  acting,  as  he  believed,  from 
conscientious  motives,  he  was  thereby  free  from  guilt ;  otherwise  he  could  not 
have  written,  "  Howbeit  I  obtained  mercy."  Paul  had  by  this  time  arrived  at 
the  perception  of  this  fundamental  principle  in  morals,  that  while  man  is 
responsible  for  acting  in  accordance  with  conscience,  he  is  no  less  accountable  for 
the  education  and  enlightenment  of  his  conscience.  It  is  only  conscience 
enlightened  by  the  word  of  God  which  is  an  absolutely  safe  guide  for  the 
Christian.  2.  Active.  His  hostility  towards  the  name  of  Jesus  and  its  bearers 
was  not  confined  to  the  region  of  sentiment  and  feeling,  but  was  no  sooner 
formed  than  translated  into  word  and  deed.  Having  concluded  in  the  court  of 
conscience  that  he  ought  to  harry  out  the  Christians  from  Jerusalem  and  Judaea, 
and  hunt  them,  if  that  were  possible,  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth,  he  adopted 
every  method  in  his  power  to  give  effect  to  his  ferocious  purpose.  Armed  with 
authority  from  the  chief  priests,  he  became  a  furious  inquisitor,  persecutor,  and 
oppressor — (1)  shutting  up  the  saints  in  prison  wherever  and  whenever  they  fell 
into  his  clutches ;  (2)  voting  against  them  when  they  were  put  to  death,  either 

537 


chap.  xxvi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


actually,  as  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim,  or  metaphorically,  by  mentally  assenting 
to  their  condemnation,  thus  constituting  himself  participem  criminis,  or  (to  use 
a  Scottish  law  phrase)  "  art  and  part,"  a  sharer  in  the  wickedness  of  shedding 
their  innocent  blood  ;  (3)  punishing  them  in  every  synagogue  in  which  they 
were  found,  in  order  to  make  them  blaspheme  that  holy  name  wherewith  they 
were  called  (Jas.  ii.  7) ;  and  even  (4)  following  them  to  strange  cities,  such  as 
Damascus,  in  order  to  arrest  them  and  fetch  them,  bound,  to  Jerusalem.  3. 
Passionate.  Nor  was  it  merely  as  an  unpleasant  task  that  this  ferocious  and 
bloody  occupation  was  undertaken  and  carried  through  by  him,  but  as  a 
business  into  which  he  had  enlisted  all  the  energy  and  enthusiasm  of  his  soul, 
and  from  which  he  derived  the  most  intoxicating  and  fiendish  delight.  He  was 
mad  exceedingly,  and,  as  Luke  reports,  breathed  out  threatenings  and  slaughter 
against  them.  4.  Extensive.  His  efforts  were  not  restricted  to  Jerusalem  or 
Judasa,  but  passed  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Holy  Land,  even  to  foreign  cities. 
From  Paul's  description  of  his  early  career  we  can  see  that  Luke's  account 
(ix.  1-18)  is  in  no  degree  exaggerated,  while  Agrippa  might  have  inferred,  had 
he  wished,  that  something  extraordinary  must  have  happened  to  produce  the 
change  in  Paul  which  he  and  all  men  beheld — a  something  hardly  less  super- 
natural than  that  which  Paul  next  proceeded  to  relate — viz.,  the  appearance  to 
him  of  the  risen  Christ. 

IT.  The  story  of  his  miraculous  conversion. — 1.  The  place  where  it  occurred. 
In  the  vicinity  of  that  very  Damascus  to  which  he  had  been  journeying  on  the 
unhallowed  errand  just  described.  Paul  was  not  likely  to  forget  a  spot  so 
sacred  as  that  on  which  he  passed  so  suddenly,  completely,  and  for  ever  from  the 
darkness  of  sin  and  Satan  into  God's  own  marvellous  light.  It  can  hardly  be 
supposed  that  the  Eunuch  would  ever  cease  to  remember  the  desert  road  to 
Gaza,  where  he  met  with  Philip  the  evangelist  and  found  the  key  to  the  Bible 
in  the  person  of  the  Saviour  (viii.  26)  ;  or  that  Lydia  would  ever  become  un- 
mindful of  the  place  of  prayer  by  the  river  side  in  Philippr,  where  the  Lord 
opened  her  heart  to  attend  unto  the  thirgs  that  were  spoken  by  Paul  (xvi.  13). 
2  The  time  when  it  happened.  "At  mid- day,  O  king."  This  also  was  engraven 
ineffaceably  on  the  tablets  of  his  memory,  as  was  the  tenth  hour  on  the  memory 
of  Andrew  (John  i.  39).  Many  who  have  undergone  the  same  spiritual  change 
as  Paul,  the  change  of  conversion,  find  it  difficult  to  state  precisely  the  moment 
when  the  blinding  scales  of  ignorance  and  unbelief  fell  from  their  eyes,  and  the 
light  of  saving  truth  flashed  in  upon  their  understandings.  But  no  such  un- 
certainty could  exist  with  Paul,  any  more  than  with  the  just  named  Lydia 
(xvi.  14),  or  with  the  Philippian  gaoler  (xvi.  34).  3.  The  instrumentality  that 
effected  it.  "  A  light  from  heaven."  (1)  That  this  was  no  mere  flash  of 
lightning  or  other  natural  phenomenon,  but  a  supernatural  illumination,  is 
proved  by  four  tilings  :  its  splendour,  which  was  above  the  brightness  of  the 
sun  ;  its  time,  which  was  mid-day,  when  the  sun  is  at  its  brightest,  and  lightning, 
should  it  occur  then,  is  scarcely  visible ;  its  locality,  which  was  not  the  broad 
expanse  of  the  firmament,  but  the  vicinity  of  the  apostle  and  his  companions — 
the  light  shone  round  about  them  ;  its  effect — it  hurled  the  apostle  and  his 
companions  to  the  ground,  probably  threw  them  from  the  beasts  on  which  they 
rode,  filling  the  apostle's  companions  with  terror,  and  striking  the  apostle  himself 
with  blindness  (ix.  7,  8),  though  the  apostle  does  not  now  deem  it  necessary  to 
introduce  these  details  into  his  speech.  (2)  That  the  light  was  the  glory  nimbus 
of  the  exalted  Saviour  is  apparent  from  the  circumstances  next  narrated  by  Paul 
— that  he  heard  a  voice  issuing  from  it  which  he  afterwards  recognised  to  be 
that  of  Jesus,  whom  he  had  been  persecuting,  and  that  he  carried  on  a  con- 
versation with  that  same  Jesus,  whose  glorified  form  he  discerned  in  the  midst 
of  the  light.     4.  The  power  that  wrought  it.     This  was  not  the  light,  which  was 

538 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.      chap.  xxvi. 


simply  the  radiant  symbol  of  Jesus  presence,  or  the  alarm  into  which  he, 
no  less  than  his  companions,  had  been  thrown,  since,  though  fear  may  awaken 
conviction,  it  cannot  convert  ;  but  the  grace  of  Him  who  had,  in  this  mysterious 
fashion,  appeared  to  him  on  the  way.  "It  is  the  Spirit  (of  Christ)  that 
quickeneth "  (John  vi.  63).  Souls  are  born  again,  "not  of  flesh  or  of  blood, 
or  by  the  will  of  man,  but  by  the  power  of  God"  (John  i.  13).  5.  The 
process  by  which  it  was  completed.  The  conversation  carried  on  by  Christ  with 
his  soul.  (1)  The  double  form  of  address — "  Saul  !  Saul  !  " — indicative  of 
earnestness  ;  the  pathetic  interrogation — "  Why  persecutest  thou  Me  ?  "  ;  and  the 
solemn  declaration,  "  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  goads  "  ;-=inade  it 
evident  that  he  was  standing  before  One  who  not  only  knew  his  name  and  the 
details  of  his  past  career,  but  was  acquainted  with  the  interior  history  of  his  soul, 
and  understood  the  moods  of  mind  through  which  he  had  been  passing  on  the 
road  to  Damascus,  and  probably  ever  since  he  had  witnessed  the  trial  and  execu- 
tion of  Stephen.  If  Paul  on  that  day  remembered  the  words  of  Scripture  at  all, 
it  is  far  from  unlikely  that  these  were  the  words  which  instinctively  leapt  into 
his  thoughts  :  "  O  Lord,  Thou  hast  searched  me  and  known  me  ..."  (Psalm 
cxxxix.  1-12).  (2)  The  answer  returned  by  Christ  to  his  question,  "Who  art 
Thou,  Lord  ?  " — "  I  am  Jesus,  whom  thou  persecutest" — must  have  discovered  to 
his  mind  three  things  of  which  he  had  been  previously  unaware,  and  up  to  that 
moment  had  presumably  not  imagined  could  be  true  :  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was 
no  longer  dead,  but  risen,  as  the  Christians  affirmed,  and  was  the  Messiah  ;  that 
his  conception  of  himself  and  his  past  career  as  highly  pleasing  to  God  was 
fundamentally  and  totally  wrong ;  and  that  in  persecuting  the  followers  of  the 
Way  he  was  practically  fighting  against  God.  All  which  must  have  humbled  him 
in  the  dust  of  penitence  and  self-abasement.  (3)  The  command  of  Jesus  that  he 
should  rise,  stand  upon  his  feet,  and  proceed  upon  a  different  mission — not  against, 
but  for,  the  cause  he  had  been  seeking  to  destroy — could  not  fail  to  inspire  within 
him  hopes  of  pardon  and  acceptance,  notwithstanding  his  heinous  wickedness 
•and  sin.  When  Paul  found  that  Jesus  did  not  strike  him  into  death,  confound 
him  with  terrors,  or  declare  against  him  bitter  and  relentless  enmity,  what  could 
he  conclude  but  that  Jesus  was  willing  to  forgive  the  past  ?  If  doubt  lingered 
in  his  soul,  it  must  have  been  for  ever  banished  when  Christ  proceeded  to  talk 
about  employing  him  as  a  preacher  of  the  faith  1 

III.  The  tenor  of  his  apostolical  commission. — This  was — 1.  Based  upon  the 
fact  that  Christ  had  now  appeared  to  him,  as  to  all  the  other  apostolic  persons. 
Paul  afterwards  relied  on  this  as  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  his  apostolical  authority 
(1  Cor.  ix.  1,  xv.  8).  2.  Defined  as  a  witness-bearing  about  the  things  in  which 
Christ  both  had  appeared  and  would  appear  to  him.  In  conformity  with  this  Paul 
constantly  claimed  that  his  gospel  had  not  been  derived  indirectly  from  man,  but 
had  been  communicated  to  him  directly  by  Christ  (Gal  i.  12).  3.  Directed  to  the 
Gentiles — not  exclusively,  but  ultimately  and  chiefly.  It  is  not  in  accordance 
with  fact  that  Paul  originally  did  not  contemplate  a  Gentile  mission  (Baur, 
Hausrath),  but  was  only  reluctantly  compelled  by  circumstances  to  adopt  this, 
because  of  the  refusal  of  his  countrymen,  the  Jew-s,  to  hear  the  gospel  (xiii.  47). 
That  Paul  did  not  start  at  once  with  a  Gentile  mission  constituted  no  proof  that 
that  formed  not  his  intention  from  the  first,  or  that  he  was  not  aware  of  his 
Divine  designation  for  such  an  enterprise,  but  only  attested  his  wisdom  in 
(1)  waiting  for  heavenly  leading  to  open  up  his  path,  and  (2)  seeking  a  point  of 
connection  for  himself  and  his  gospel  with  the  heathen,  through  the  synagogues, 
in  which  these  mingled  as  proselytes  with  the  Jews.  Besides,  had  Paul  not 
commenced  with  the  Jews  he  would  have  both  given  to  his  hearers  an  erroneous 
impression  of  his  gospel,  which  was  no  entirely  new  religion,  but  the  necessary, 
because  Divinely  arranged,  development  of  the  old  faith  of  the  Hebrews,  and 

539 


chap.  xxvi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


would  have  lacked  a  congenial  soil  for  it  to  fix  its  first  roots  in.  4.  Designed  for 
the  salvation  of  the  heathen :  by  (1)  opening  their  eyes — i.e.,  imparting  to  them 
spiritual  illumination  (Luke  i.  79  ;  Eph.  i.  18) ;  (2)  turning  them,  as  the  result 
of  such  enlightenment,  from  darkness  unto  light  (Eph.  v.  11  ;  Col.  i.  13  ;  1  Peter 
ii.  9),  and  from  the  power  of    Satan  unto  God    (Eph.  ii.  2 ;  Rom.  xvi.   20) ; 

(3)  bestowing  on  them  forgiveness — i.e.,  remission  of  sins  (Rom.  iii.  25)  ;  and 

(4)  securing  for  them  an  inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanctified  by  faith  in 
Christ  (xx.  22  ;  Eph.  i.  11,  14,  18  ;  Col.  i.  12  ;  1  Peter  i.  4).  "An  excellent 
description  of  St.  Paul's  commission  to  preach,  by  the  five  ends  or  effects  of  it, 
viz.,  conversion,  faith,  remission  of  sins,  sanctification,  salvation  "  (Trapp).  5. 
Accompanied  by  a  promise  of  protection  against  the  machinations  of  both  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  a  promise  which  his  past  history  and  present  position  showed  had 
been  marvellously  fulfilled. 

Learn — 1.  That  to  follow  conscience  (unless  it  is  enlightened)  is  no  guarantee 
that  one  will  not  commit  sin  and  incur  guilt.  2.  That  men  have  justified  the 
greatest  wickedness  by  appealing  to  the  dictates  of  conscience.  3.  That  men's 
judgments  on  their  characters  and  lives  differ  greatly  according  to  the  stand- 
points from  which  they  are  pronounced.  4.  That  Divine  grace  can  change  the 
worst  of  sinners.  5.  That  nothing  transpiring  on  earth  is  or  can  be  hid  from 
the  eyes  of  Jesus  Christ  (Heb.  iv.  13 ;  Rev.  i.  14).  6.  That  when  Christ 
appoints  a  messenger  He  gives  him  a  message.  7.  That  the  grand  end  of  the 
ministry  is  the  salvation  of  them  that  hear  (1  Cor.  i.  21  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  16). 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  9.  Paul's  Mistaken  Thoughts.  Ver.  10.   Was  Paul  a  Member  of  the 

I.  That  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  an  Sanhedrim  ? — The  answer  to  this  ques- 
imposter. — Not  a  few  regard  Christ  in  tion  largely  turns  on  the  other,  Was 
this  light  still.  Many  consider  Him  Paul  married  ?  That  he  was,  Luther 
to  have  been  a  mere  man,  and  Divine  and  the  Reformers  generally  inferred 
in  no  sense,  in  which  others  may  not  from  1  Cor.  vii.  8  :  "  But  I  say  to  the 
also  be  Divine.  unmarried  and  to  widows,  It  is  good 

II.  That  the  followers  of  Jesus  should  for  them,  if  they  abide  even  as  I." 
be  persecuted  and  put  to  death. — This  "  That  the  unmarried  are  widowers  is 
opinion  is  not  yet  extinct.  Many  who  clear  from  this,  that  Paul  has  already 
would  tolerate  Christianity  hold  that  spoken  to  the  unmarried  (ver.  1),  and 
other  religions  should  be  put  down  and  married  (ver.  7),  and  now  comes  to  the 
their  professors  suppressed  by  force,  widowed  (ver.  8).  Accordingly,  the 
To  punish  men  for  their  religious  views,  apostle  appears  to  reckon  himself  in 
besides  being  a  blunder,  is  a  sin.  the  category  of  widowers,  and  already 

III.  That  the  favour  of  Heaven  could  Luther's  sound  judgment  has  discerned 
be  secured  only  by  them  who  obeyed  that  directions  concerning  the  married 
the  law,  and  observed  the  ritual,  of  life,  such  as  are  given  immediately 
Moses. — Thousands  still  hold  that  none  before  ver.  8,  are  suitable  only  in  the 
can  be  saved  outside  of  their  sect,  and  mouth  of  a  man  who  is,  or  was,  married, 
thousands  more  that  salvation  is  pos-  and  who  knows  from  his  own  experience 
sible  only  to  them  who  seek  it  through  that  of  which  he  speaks.  An  impartial 
the  works  of  the  law — both  of  which  reading  of  1  Cor.  vi.  12,  vii.  10,  cannot 
opinions  are  delusions.  but  confirm  this  judgment  of  Luther's ; 

I V.  That  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  of  and  many  other  passages  in  the  Pauline 
Nazareth  was  a  fiction. — So  numerous  letters,  as,  e.g.,  1  Thess.  ii.  7,  v.  4  ; 
unbelievers  still  hold.  But  as  Paul  1  Cor.  iii.  2,  iv.  15,  vii.  14,  manifest  so 
was  undeceived  on  this  point,  so  will  deep  a  feeling  for  the  family  life,  and 
they  eventually  be.  so  rich  experiences  out   of  the  same, 

540  •  r 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


that  this  impression  is  only  confirmed  " 
(Hausrath,  Her  Apostel  Paulus,  p.  47). 

Yer.  13.  Memorable  Moments. — Paul 
never  forgot  the  hour  when  the  glori- 
fied Redeemer  first  appeared  to  him, 
shattered  with  a  glance  and  a  word 
the  entire  superstructure  of  his  past 
life,  and  transformed  him  into  a  new 
man. 

I.  Such  moments  occur  in  the  lives 
of  men. —  Such  are  those,  e.g.,  in  which 
Christ,  through  His  word  and  by  His 
Spirit,  for  the  first  time  looks  in  upon 
a  soul,  awakening  within  it  a  sense  of 
sin,  shining  into  it  with  His  gracious 
countenance,  translating  it  out  of  dark- 
ness into  light,  and  turning  it  from 
Satan  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God. 

II.  Such  moments  should  not  be  for- 
gotten.— Should  be  remembered  by  men 
rather — 1.  For  the  eternal  praise  of 
the  Lord  whose  grace  has  been  so 
signally  displayed  in  them.  2.  For  the 
continual  instruction  of  themselves, 
reminding  them  of  the  grace  they  have 
received  and  the  gratitude  they  should 
feel.  3.  For  a  permanent  memorial 
to  the  world,  to  rebuke  them  in  their 
sins  and  call  them  to  the  way  of  salva- 
tion. 

Yers.  14,  15.  Did  Christ  speak 
Hebrew  ? — Compare  Christ's  words  to 
Paul  in  ix.  4,  5.  That  on  this  occasion 
He  did,  Paul  distinctly  states.  Whether 
this  was  Christ's  language  on  earth  is 
debated.  The  probability  is  that  He 
could  use  both  Greek  and  Hebrew. 
Brought  up,  as  He  had  been,  in  a  Jewish 
household,  it  is  hardly  supposable  that 
He  could  not  think,  read,  write,  and 
speak,  in  Hebrew.  It  is  even  likely  that 
when  He  taught  in  the  synagogues,  the 
language  used  by  Him  was  Hebrew. 
Occasionally  when  working  miracles, 
as  the  Gospel  records  show,  He  used 
Aramaic  terms,  such  as  "Talitha  cumi," 
"  Ephatha  " ;  while  on  the  cross  He  cried: 
"  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabacthani."  At 
the  same  time,  as  Greek  was  at  this 
period  commonly  spoken  in  all  those 
countries  which  were  washed  by  the 
Mediterranean   waters,    it    is   just   as 


reasonable  to  conjecture  that  Christ 
could  speak  Greek.  Whether  He  em- 
ployed this  tongue  in  ordinary  inter- 
course with  His  countrymen  will  most 
likely  never  be  determined.  ISTor  is  it 
of  much  consequence.  The  instance 
here  given  of  Christ  speaking  from 
heaven  to  a  mortal  is  a  solitary  one, 
and  not  much  can  be  founded  on  it  in 
the  way  of  argument  for  one  conclusion 
or  another.  Some  think  that  John's 
revelations  were  given  to  him  in 
Hebrew.  But  this  is,  of  course,  con- 
jectural. 

Yers.  16-18.  True  Ministerial  Ordi- 
nation.— Illustrated  in  the  case  of  Paul. 

I.  Proceeds  from  Christ.  —  Prayer 
and  the  imposition  of  hands,  whether 
by  bishop  or  presbytery,  does  not  make 
an  unconverted  man  a  minister  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

II.  Appoints  to  personal  service. — 
Not  to  temporal  or  ecclesiastical  digni- 
ties, or  even  to  wealth  and  comfort, 
but  to  lowly  labour  in  witness-bearing 
for  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  Guarantees  spiritual  illumina- 
tion.— When  Christ  ordains  a  man  to 
be  His  witness  He  reveals  Himself  to 
that  man's  soul,  not  only  at  the  begin- 
ning, and  as  a  necessary  condition  of 
being  ordained  as  a  minister,  but  from 
time  to  time,  as  his  work  of  witness- 
bearing  requires. 

IY.  Promises  adequate  protection. 
— As  Christ  shielded  Paul  from  his 
adversaries,  so  can  and  will  He  guard 
His  faithful  minister  and  witness  so 
long  as  his  service  is  required. 

Y.  Contemplates  lofty  aims. — 1.  The 
enlightenment  of  souls — "  to  open  their 
eyes."  2.  The  conversion  of  sinners — 
"  that  they  may  turn  from  darkness  to 
light."  3.  The  bestowment  of  pardon — 
"  that  they  may  receive  remission  of 
sins."  4.  The  preparation  of  those 
who  are  enlightened,  converted,  par- 
doned for  glory — "that  they  may  receive 
an  inheritance  among  them  that  are 
sanctified."  5.  The  implantation  of 
faith — "  through  faith  that  is  in  Me." 

Yer.  18.  The  Way  to  The  Inheritance. 
I.  No  inheritance  without  sanctifica- 

541 


chap.  xxvi.      HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


tion. — (See  xx.  32,  and  compare  Heb. 
xii.  14).  "  Follow  holiness,"  or,  the 
sanctification  without  which  "  no  man 
shall  see  the  Lord." 

II.  No  sanctification  without  faith. 
— Since  justification  must  precede,  and 
justification  is  impossible  without  faith 
(Gal.  ii.  16),  while  Christ  can  be  made 
of  God  sanctification  only  to  them  who 
believe  (1  Cor.  i.  30). 

III.  No  faith  without  Christ. — I.e., 
without  the  crucified,  risen,  and  glorified 
Christ,  who  alone  is  the  proper,  personal 
object  of  faith  (xx.  21;  Col.  ii.  7; 
1  John  iii.  23). 

Faith  in  Christ. 

I.  The  object  of  faith. — Christ: 
Christianity  not  merely  a  system  of 
truths  about  God,  nor  a  code  of  morality 
deducible  from  these,  but  the  affiance 
of  the  whole  spirit  fixed  upon  the  re- 
deeming, revealing  Christ. 

II.  The  nature  and  the  essence  of 
the  act  of  faith. — Faith  is  not  merely 
the  assent  of  the  understanding  to 
certain  truths,  or  the  persuasion  of  the 
reality  of  unseen  things ;  it  is  not  even 
merely  the  confident  expectation  of 
future  good ;  it  is  the  personal  relation 
of  him  that  believes  to  the  living  person 
its  object ;  in  other  words,  faith  is  trust. 

III.  The  power  of  faith.— 1.  We 
are  saved — i.e.,  justified  and  sanctified — 
by  faith.  But  2.  The  power  that  saves 
comes,  not  from  the  faith,  but  from  the 
Christ  in  whom  faith  trusts.  It  is 
Christ's  blood,  Christ's  sacrifice,  Christ's 
life,  Christ's  intercession,  that  saves. 
Faith  is  the  channel  through  which 
the  Divine  fulness  flows  over  into  the 
soul's  emptiness. 

IV.  The  guilt  and  criminality  of 
unbelief. — 1.  Because,  assuming  that 
God  is  to  be  the  author  of  salvation, 
no  other  way  can  be  conceived  in  which 
the  Divine  fulness  should  pass  over 
into  the  soul  than  that  of  receiving  what 
God  has  provided.  2.  Because  the 
difficulties  in  the  way  of  exercising 
faith  are  not  intellectual,  but  moral, 
and  lie,  not  in  the  region  of  the  under- 
standing, but  in  that  of  the  heart.  3. 
Because  the  fact  that  a  man  will  not 

542 


believe  proves  his  nature  to  be  turned 
or  turning  away  from,  and  setting 
itself  in  rebellion  against,  God's  love. — 
Alexander  Maclaren,  D.D. 

A  Sermon  on  Conversion. 

I.  How  it  is  effected.— 1.  By  the 
grace  of  God.  2.  Through  the  instru- 
mentality of  the  Word.  3.  With  the 
active  concurrence  of  the  human  will. 

II.  What  it  implies. — A  turning. 
1.  From  darkness  to  light.  2.  From  the 
power  of  Satan  unto  God. 

III.  What  it  secures. — 1.  Remission 
of  sins.  2.  Inheritance  among  the 
sanctified. 

"  Faith  that  is  in  Me."    Saving  Faith 
is  Faith  in  Christ. — 1.   It  is  faith  in 
Christ  as  a  Person.     There  is  assent  to 
a   proposition,  an  acknowledgment   of 
its    truth.      There    is    reliance   on    a 
Person  as  able  and  willing  to  do  what 
He  has  undertaken.     Saving  faith  is 
such  a  belief  of  the  inspired  testimony 
concerning  the  Person  as  leads  to  sin- 
cere trust  in  Him  for  salvation.     2.  It 
is  faith  in  Christ  as  a  Person  who  has 
accomplished  a  work.     Christ  has  not 
only  delivered  a  system  of  theological 
and   ethical    doctrines.     He  has   done 
something.     It  is  what  He  has  done — 
His  sufferings  and  death — that  consti- 
tutes Him  the  proper  object  of  saving 
faith.     It  contemplates  Him,  not  as  a 
Teacher,   but  as  a  Saviour.     3.   It  is 
faith  in  Christ  as  a  Person  who  has 
accomplished  a  work  which  has  a  God- 
ward  aspect.     True  it  is  that  His  work 
has    a    man  ward   aspect — exercises   a 
moral    influence    on  men,  as  drawing 
them  to  God.     But  it  has  also  a  God- 
ward   aspect — has    a    legal   value,  as 
satisfying   the    claims    of   the   Divine 
government.     Take   away   the    latter, 
and  you  remove  the  basis  of  the  former. 
4.  It   is  faith  in   Christ  as   a  Person 
who,  after  having  accomplished  by  His 
death   a  work  which  has  a  Godward 
aspect,  is  now  alive.     There  may  be  a 
dead  faith  in  a  dead  Saviour.     There 
may  be  a  dead  faith  in  a  living  Saviour. 
There  ought  to  be  a  living  faith  in  a 
living  Saviour. — G.  B7'ooks. 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  19—23. 

Paul's  Subsequent  Career   as   a   Christian;    or,  how  he  turned  to  the  Gentile 
Mission. 

I.  The  hidden  impulse  of  his  ministry. — The  heavenly  vision  of  the  glorified 
Saviour  who  had  appeared  to  him,  pardoned,  called,  and  appointed  him  to  his 
special  life-work.  Captivated  by  that  u  vision  "  he  felt  himself  to  be  no  longer  a 
freeman,  but  the  bond-slave  of  Jesus  Christ  (Phil.  i.  1).  It  remained  in  and 
with  him,  a  memory  unfading,  which  cheered  him  in  solitude  and  depression, 
strengthened  him  in  weakness  and  weariness,  and  generally  rendered  it  an 
absolute  necessity  to  preach  the  gospel  and  keep  ever  moving  on  towards  regions 
beyond  (1  Cor.  ix.  16  ;  2  Cor.  x.  16).  It  accompanied  him  wherever  he  wandered, 
supplying  him  at  every  stage  and  in  every  time  of  need  with  fresh  inspiration, 
zeal,  and  courage.  Whatever  he  had  been  and  done  since  that  memorable  day, 
he  told  the  king,  had  been  due  to  that  "  heavenly  vision  "  to  which  he  had  not 
been  disobedient.  Did  Christ's  people  evince  the  like  joyful  submission  to,  and 
cheerful  following  of,  the  "heavenly  visions"  which  shine  in  upon  their  souls, 
they  might  emulate,  if  they  could  not  rival,  the  apostle  in  lofty  characters  and 
noble  deeds. 

II.  The  wide  extent  of  his  ministry. — 1.  It  commenced  in  Damascus.  There  he 
preached  in  the  synagogues  and  confounded  the  Jews,  proving  that  Jesus  was 
the  Christ  (ix.  20,  22).  2.  It  advanced  to  Jerusalem.  There  he  spake  boldly  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  disputed  against  the  Grecians  (ix.  29).  3.  It 
extended  throughout  Judaea.  Not  before  or  immediately  after  his  first  visit  to 
Jerusalem,  when  he  retired  to  Syria  and  Cilicia  (see  Gal.  i.  22).  Perhaps  when 
he  repaired  to  the  Metropolis  on  the  occasion  of  the  famine  (xi.  30),  or  when  he 
visited  the  capital  between  his  first  and  second  missionary  journej^s  (xviii.  22). 
4.  It  passed  to  the  Gentiles.  First  in  Antioch  of  Pisidia  (xiii.  46),  and  ever 
afterwards,  as  opportunity  presented,  in  Iconium  (xiv.  1),  in  Lystra  (xiv.  15),  in 
Philippi  (xvi.  17),  etc.  Note  tlie  ever-widening  circles  of  the  apostle's  useful- 
ness. First  in  Damascus,  where  he  had  been  converted  ;  next  in  Jerusalem, 
where  he  had  been  known  from  his  youth  up  (ver.  4) ;  then  in  Judaea,  among 
the  homes  and  haunts  of  his  countrymen,  for  whose  salvation  he  ardently 
longed  (Rom.  ix.  3,  x.  1) ;  and  lastly  in  the  heathen  world,  beyond  the  confines 
of  Palestine. 

III.  The  unvarying  burden  of  his  ministry. — 1.  That  the  Messiah  predicted  by 
Moses  and  the  prophets  had  come,  as  was  testified  by  the  correspondence  between 
their  writings  and  Christ's  sufferings,  death,  and  resurrection.  If  Paul 
attempted  to  establish  Christ's  Messiahship  by  finding  in  the  Old  Testament 
allusions  to  His  death  and  resurrection,  this  cannot,  with  reasonable  fairness,  be 
ascribed  to  the  apostle's  Pharisaic  Bible  studies  and  vivid  imagination,  but  must 
be  set  down  to  the  fact  that  such  allusions  are  really  in  the  Old  Testament, 
although  prior  to  the  illumination  shed  upon  these  by  the  events  in  Christ's 
history,  they  were  not  perceived  by  him  any  more  than  by  the  other  apostles 
(John  ii.  22).  2.  That  Christ  by  His  resurrection  had  brought  light  to  both  Jews 
and  Gentiles, — light  they  did  not  possess  and  could  not  have  possessed  until  after 
that  event,  as,  e.g.,  (1)  upon  the  personality  of  Christ  Himself,  showing  Him  to 
be  both  the  Messiah  and  the  Son  of  God  (Rom.  i.  4) ;  (2)  upon  the  purpose 
and  plan  of  salvation,  which  had  ever  been  through  grace  and  by  faith 
(Rom.  iii.  24-26)  ;  (3)  upon  the  character  and  value  of  Christ's  death,  which  was 
thereby  declared  to  have  been  an  atonement  for  sin  (Rom.  iv.  25)  ;  and  (4)  upon 
the  reality  of  a  resurrection  to  eternal  life  and  glory  (Rom.  viii.  11  ;  2  Tim.  i.  10). 
3.  That  Jews  and  Gentiles  both  shoidd  repent  and  turn  to  God,  doing  works  worthy 
of  repentance.    This  had  been  a  never-failing  theme  in  Ephesus  (xx.  21),  in  Athens 

543 


ohap   xxvi.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    THE  ACTS. 


(xvii.  20),  in  Thessalonica  (1  Thess.  i.  9),  and  elsewhere — as,  indeed,  it  could  not 
have  been  otherwise,  if  his  mission  were  to  be  executed  in  accordance  with  instruc- 
tions received  (ver.  18). 

IY.  The  enormous  difficulty  of  his  ministry. — This  arose  from — 1 .  The  severe 
labours  it  entailed  in  travelling  from  place  to  place,  on  long  and  arduous  journeys, 
amidst  severe  bodily  weakness  and  much  infirmity.  2.  The  manifold  dangers  it 
involved,  of  which  the  apostle  furnishes  an  affecting  enumeration  in  2  Cor.  xi. 
23-27.  But  chiefly  from  3.  The  ferocious  enemies  it  aroused,  who  were  princi- 
pally found  amongst  his  own  countrymen,  the  Jews,  the  Gentiles  having  seldom 
opposed  him  except  when  stirred  up  by  these.  Note. — "  There  are  three  chief 
points  in  the  writings  of  the  prophets.  Christ's  sufferings,  Christ's  resurrection, 
and  the  publication  of  them  among  all  nations.  And  it  was  precisely  these  three 
points  that  the  Jews  were  most  against ;  they  were  offended  at  the  first,  denied 
the  second,  and  grudged  the  third"  (Starke).  And  4.  The  deadly  persecutions  it 
raised  against  him,  from  the  period  of  his  first  evangelistic  labours  in  Damascus 
(ix.  23)  till  the  day  when  the  Jews  apprehended  him  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem, 
and  sought  to  kill  him  (ver.  21).  Only  a  man  of  heroic  spirit  could  have  under- 
gone the  fatigues,  hardships,  oppositions,  and  persecutions,  that  fell  to  the  lot  of 
Paul ;  and  not  even  he,  any  more  than  Paul,  could  have  done  it  in  his  own  strength. 

V.  The  secret  support  of  his  ministry. — The  help  of  God.  As  he  claimed  to 
be  what  he  was  solely  by  the  grace  of  God  (1  Cor.  xv.  10),  so  he  arrogated  to 
himself  no  credit  or  glory  for  what  he  had  done  in  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  but 
ascribed  all  to  God's  power,  which  had  been  graciously  vouchsafed  to  him 
(Phil.  iv.  13).  Never  before  had  the  nothingness  of  human  strength  in  the 
domain  of  religion  been  realised  as  it  was  by  Paul,  and  certainly  no  one  has  sur- 
passed, or  even  rivalled,  him  since  in  the  feeling  of  dependence  upon  God.  Paul, 
in  all  that  he  became,  all  the  soul-grandeur  which  he  exhibited,  was  like  plastic 
clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter ;  in  all  that  he  achieved  he  served  as  a  passive 
instrument  in  God's  hand.  "  Not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me," 
constituted  his  explanation  of  both  phenomena.  "  That  which  impels  him  is 
never  caprice  ;  egoistic,  subjective  interests  are  wholly  wanting  in  him.  What 
impels  him  is  to  him  always  something  higher  than  himself.  The  objective  rules 
over  him.  His  personality  is  only  the  '  vessel '  for  the  heavenly  contents " 
(Hausrath,  Der  Apostel  Paulus,  p.  51).  At  every  stage  in  his  life's  journey 
Paul  could  have  sung  : — 

"  Here  I  raise  my  Ebenezer, 

Hither  by  Thy  help  I'm  come  ; 
And  I  hope,  by  Thy  good  pleasure, 
Safely  to  arrive  at  home." 

Learn — 1.  That  the  first  act  of  a  converted  heart  is  faith,  2.  That  the  first 
sphere  of  labour  for  a  convert  should  be  amongst  his  own.  3.  That  the  first 
word  in  the  gospel  message  should  be  "  repent  and  turn  to  God."  4.  That  the 
first  sign  of  repentance  should  be  forsaking  old  sins  and  performing  new  works. 
5.  That  the  first  trial  which  a  convert  will  encounter  will  be  the  opposition  of  the 
unbelieving  world.  6.  That  the  first  qualification  requisite  to  constitute  Christ 
a  Saviour  was  His  resurrection  from  the  dead.  7.  That  the  first  thing 
demanded  by  a  Christian  for  the  successful  performance  of  his  duty  is  the  help 
of  God. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.  19.  The  Heavenly  Vision.  see  God  revealed  as  a  Saviour,  and  is 

I.  The  highest  privilege   that   can  therefore  the  beginning  of  new  life  to 

possibly  be  conferred  upon  a  soul. —  the  soul. 

To  see  Christ  by  the  eye  of  faith  is  to  II.  The   most  powerful   force   that 

544 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


can  operate  upon  a  soul. — The  soul 
that  beholds  that  vision  is  immediately 
changed  in  its  whole  inner  nature, 
lifted  out  of  its  old  grooves  of  thought, 
feeling,  and  action,  and  started  upon  a 
new  career,  which  will  terminate  in 
eternal  life  and  glory. 

III.  The  sublimest  message  that 
can  be  uttered  by  a  soul. — Nothing 
greater  can  be  told  by  human  lips  than 
what  such  a  vision  of  the  Divine  love, 
grace,  and  pity,  means  for  fallen  man. 

Was  Paul's  Vision  of  Christ  an 
Objective  Reality  ? — "  It  is  incontro- 
vertible that  Paul  felt  convinced  that 
Jesus  had  there  (i.e.,  before  Damascus) 
stepped  forth  to  meet  him  objectively, 
visibly,  and  audibly.  He  does  not  at 
all  compare  this  appearance  with  the 
visions  which,  according  to  his  own  and 
others'  faith,  continued  even  at  a  later 
time  to  be  possible,  and  which  he  him- 
self, along  with  others,  actually  shared 
— or  with  the  wonderful  subjective 
experiences  in  which,  when  in  a  con- 
dition of  ecstasy,  he  saw  and  heard 
the  Lord,  or  in  which,  without  knowing 
whether  he  was  in  the  body  or  out  of 
the  body,  he  found  himself  rapt  up  into 
the  heavenly  paradise  (2  Cor.  xii.  %ff ) 
— but  exactly  with  those  appearances 
of  which  the  Evangelists  have  reported 
to  us  the  details,  and  concerning  which 
Paul  clearly  supposes  and  presupposes 
as  generally  recognised,  that  they  are 
now  closed,  since  he  says  that  to  him 
as  the  last  of  all  (1  Cor.  xv.  8)  had 
Christ  become  visible.  And  just  this 
appearance  of  the  Risen  One  with  the 
word  addressed  to  him  by  that  Risen 
One  was  the  power  which  brought  him, 
the  persecutor  of  the  Christian  Church, 
to  faith  in  Christ." — Kostlin :  Der 
Glaube  und  seine  Bedeutung,  etc.,  p.  40. 

Visions  of  Heavenly  Things. — 
"  Wherefore,  O  King  Agrippa,  I  was 
not  disobedient  unto  the  heavenly 
vision"  (ver.  19).  "  For,  see,  saith 
He,  that  thou  make  all  things  accord- 
ing to  the  pattern  that  was  shewed 
thee  in  the  mount "  (Heb.  viii.  5). 
These  words  bring  before  our  minds 


the  work  of  two  of  the  very  greatest 
men  in  the  world's  history,  and  they 
suggest  an  important  analogy  of  ex- 
perience, as  fitting  them  for  their  work. 
The  work  of  Moses,  it  is  true,  might 
easily  be  under-estimated.  We  might 
think  of  him  as  the  lawgiver  of  but 
one  nation ;  that  nation,  moreover, 
being  very  restricted  in  its  domains, 
and  of  comparatively  small  numbers. 
We  have  rather  to  think  of  the  unique 
mission  of  Israel  as  a  people  that 
should  ultimately  pervade  the  world 
with  their  influence,  and  of  the  work 
of  their  lawgiver  as  fitting  them  to 
fulfil  this  mission  well.  It  is  impossible, 
however,  to  do  justice  to  the  work  of 
Moses  without  taking  into  considera- 
tion, along  with  it,  the  work  of  his 
great  successor,  Paul.  For  it  was  in 
the  mission  of  the  apostle  that  the 
mission  of  Moses  was  continued  and 
fulfilled.  The  Jews  were  already 
scattered  abroad  in  many  lands  ;  "  for 
Moses  from  generations  of  old  hath  in 
every  city  them  that  preach  him" 
(xv.  21).  Thus  was  his  law  more  or 
less  penetrating  the  nations  with  its 
influence.  And  in  that  day,  when 
"  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles "  shall 
have  "  come  in,  and  all  Israel  shall  be 
saved "  (Rom.  xi.  25,  26),  it  shall  be 
more  than  ever  manifest  how  great  is 
the  world's  debt  to  these  two  men  of 
God.  In  either  case,  the  work  was 
extremely  difficult.  Think  of  the  con- 
dition of  Israel  at  the  time  when 
Moses  was  entrusted  with  his  great 
responsibility.  Think,  again,  of  the 
condition  of  the  Roman  world  at  the 
time  when  Paul  received  his  commis- 
sion. In  such  work,  moreover,  there 
is  one  element  of  inspiration,  one  secret 
of  strength,  without  which  no  mere 
enthusiasm  of  feeling,  or  power  of  de^ 
votion,  can  be  effectual — viz.,  the  inspi- 
ration and  strength  of  a  Divine  Ideal. 
I.  Great  ideals  are  the  glory  of  man. 
— No  other  creatures  here  can  have 
them  ;  only  men  may  receive  an  inspi- 
ration that  shall  raise  them  above 
themselves.  This  being  so,  whence 
comes  the  ideal  ?  It  is  not  of  man 
himself,   obviously,    but   of   God.      So 

nn  545 


chap.  xxvi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Moses  could  have  no  inspiring  ideal  of 
what  Israel  might  be,  and  should  be 
one  day,  an  ideal  that  should  possess 
his  imagination  and  fill  his  soul  with 
a  holy  glow  of  hope,  abiding  with  him 
day  and  night,  and  making  him  strong 
to  endure  and  to  do,  unless  the  pattern 
had  been  shown  him  in  the  mount. 
Bat  there  God  unveiled  to  him  all  the 
possibilities  of  that  people  of  Israel, 
and  thenceforth  Moses  set  himself,  by 
God's  help,  to  make  the  vision  real. 
In  like  manner,  Paul  could  not  have 
portrayed  for  himself  the  glowing 
picture  of  a  regenerate  Roman  world, 
all  bowing  in  adoration  to  the  Cruci- 
fied, had  not  the  glory,  beyond  the 
brightness  of  the  sun,  shone  from  the 
heavens,  blinding,  for  a  while,  the 
natural  vision,  but  photographing  it- 
self indelibly  on  the  soul;  so  that 
thenceforth  only  "one  thing"  could  he 
do — traverse  city  and  country,  land 
and  sea,  toil  tired  but  untiringly,  and 
endure  infamy  and  death,  if  only  he 
might  reduce  vision  to  fact,  and  make 
his  high  imaginations  actual  realities. 
So  all  man's  true  ideals,  of  personal  life 
and  of  service  for  man's  sake,  are  of 
God.  They  may  come  to  us  mediately, 
indeed ;  for  they  shine  before  us  in  the 
lives  of  noble  men,  they  burn  with 
quenchless  fire  in  the  poems  of  the 
ages,  they  lift  their  fair  beauty  before 
our  view  in  the  manifold  Scriptures  of 
God,  and  they  show  themselves  as  at 
once  ideal  and  real  in  the  glory  of  the 
Only-Begotten,  "full  of  grace  and 
truth "  (John  i.  14).  But,  mediately 
as  these  ideals  may  thus  be  presented 
to  us,  they  must  take  immediate  hold 
of  our  imagination,  and  kindle  the 
fervours  of  our  own  soul — even  as 
though  we  ourselves  were  in  the  mount, 
alone  with  God,  or  were  struck  by  the 
sudden  glory  from  the  skies.  Other- 
wise their  Divine  purpose  will  be  un- 
fulfilled, and  our  life  largely  unblessed. 
II.  It  has  been  already  partly 
assumed,  but  must  now  be  more 
strongly  emphasised,  that  the  great 
ideals  which  are  intended  to  ennoble 
and  transfigure  human  life  are  not 
ideals  of  mere  happiness,  as  though 

546 


we  were  to  be  only  dreamers  dreaming 
of  oar  own  joy,  although  there  shall 
be  a  supreme  happiness  as  the  inevi- 
table result  of  making  our  life  accord- 
ing to  the  pattern  shown  us  in  the 
mount,  and  of  obeying  the  heavenly 
vision.  But  such  happiness  comes 
only  when  it  is  not  sought  for  its  own 
sake,  its  delicate  bloom  being  spoiled, 
and  its  very  essence  perishing,  if  we 
snatch  at  it  greedily.  The  ideal,  so  far 
as  it  pertains  to  ourselves,  is  an  ideal 
of  character,  a  revelation  to  ourselves 
of  what,  by  the  grace  of  God,  it  is 
possible  we  may  become.  And  just  in 
so  far  as  it  is  a  revelation  of  possibili- 
ties of  character,  it  is  a  command  to 
us  that  we  do  our  utmost  to  make  the 
possible  an  accomplished  fact,  saying 
to  us  ever,  with  a  more  august  and 
sacred  behest  than  that  of  mere  words, 
"  Thou  shalt !  "  Thus  the  true  ideal  of 
man's  life  is  the  law  of  life.  But 
human  character,  at  its  best,"  is  possible 
only  through  service,  loving  and  lo}7al 
service  rendered  to  man,  for  man's  own 
sake  and  for  God's.  For  even  charac- 
ter may  be  made  too  exclusively  an  end 
in  itself,  as  an  achievement  of  our  own, 
and  as  meaning  the  ennoblement 
merely  of  our  personal  manhood ;  in 
which  case  its  nobleness  is  tarnished, 
being  vitiated  by  the  selfishness  of  our 
motive  and  aim.  Our  own  character 
cannot  have  true  worth  save  in  so  far 
as  it  is  in  true  relation  to  the  charac- 
ters of  others,  and  to  the  one  perfect 
character  of  God.  And  such  relation 
implies  service — the  service  of  loyal 
love. 

III.  The  ideals  of  life  are  neces- 
sarily progressive,  partly  on  account 
of  the  material  which  has  to  te 
fashioned  by  them,  and  partly  through 
their  own  nature. — The  material  will 
not  always  allow  of  the  ideal  being  at 
first  so  perfect  as  it  shall  be  afterwaids. 
The  pattern  of  what  Israel  was  to  be- 
come, as  a  people,  did  not  show  all  the 
possibilities  of  ultimate  good ;  nor  did 
the  heavenly  vision,  perhaps,  reveal 
immediately  to  the  apostle  all  that  was 
in  God's  heart  for  the  world.  Enough, 
if,  for  the  present,  the  ideal  can  accom- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


plish  its  present  work.  King  Alfred's 
ideal  of  what  England  might  be  made, 
as  a  nation,  was  perhaps  not  such  as 
may  be  cherished  by  the  successors  of 
his  spirit,  discerning  the  needs  and 
the  possibilities  of  our  country  in  the 
light  of  later  history.  In  like  manner, 
the  ideal  of  our  personal  life  will  not 
be  so  full,  perhaps  not  so  imperious,  in 
the  immaturer  days  of  life ;  it  will 
rather  be  according  to  our  needs  and 
our  capabilities.  The  ideal  grows  in 
significance  as  the  material  which  is 
to  be  fashioned  by  it  becomes  more 
susceptible  more  responsive.  But  in 
its  own  nature  the  ideal  is  necessarily 
growing  and  progressive.  It  grows 
with  all  our  growth ;  but  it  grows  like- 
wise because  it  is  intrinsically  infinite, 
and  must  always  make  larger  demands 
on  our  faith  and  loyalty  the  more 
fully  we  yield  to  the  demands  already 
made.  Let  us  learn,  however,  the 
solemn  truth  that,  just  as  surely  as 
our  ideals  will  grow  and  live,  if  we 
believe  in  them  and  live  by  them,  so 
surely  will  they  dwindle  and  die,  if  we 
are  untrue  to  their  Divine  claims  and 
promises.  Yes ;  the  pattern  may  lose 
its  beauty,  the  vision  may  fade  ;  the 
inspirations  of  life  may  die  away. — 
T.  F.  Lockyer,  B.A. 

Ver.  20.  Works  Worthy  of  Repent- 
ance.— Are  works — 

I.  Springing  from  a  spirit  of  re- 
pentance. 

II.  Attesting  the  sincerity  of  re- 
pentance. 

III.  Accomplishing  the  purpose  of 
repentance. 

IV.  Disclosing  the  beauty  of  re- 
pentance. 

Ver.  21.  Men  WJtom  the  World  Some- 
times Seeks  to  Murder. 

I.  Those  who  would  lead  it  into 
higher  truths. — Too  often  verified  in 
other  spheres  than  that  of  religion. 
Prophets  and  preachers  with  new  ideas 
have  commonly  had  a  poor  reception 
from  the  world. 

IT.  Those  who  decline  to  be  partners 
in    its    wickedness. — When     a     man 


enters  upon  the  path  of  holiness,  all 
who  walk  in  sinful  ways  interpret  his 
behaviour  as  a  silent  protest  against, 
and  rebuke  of,  their  ungodliness  and 
dislike,  if  they  do  not  hate  and  per- 
secute him  accordingly  (1  Pet.  iv.  4). 

III.  Those  who  have  conferred  upon 
it  most  good. — The  world  has  never 
been  kind  to  its  philanthropists  and 
social  benefactors,  but  for  the  most 
part  has  killed  them,  if  not  by  open 
assassination  by  cold  and  cruel  neg- 
lect (see  Eccles.  ix.  15). 

Ver.  22.  Paul  a  Model  Witness  of 
Gospel  Truth. 

I.  Through  whom  does  he  witness  ? 
— Through  the  Lord,  whose  strength 
is  perfected  in  his  weakness. 

II.  Before  whom  does  he  witness? 
— Small  and  great,  the  people  and  the 
Gentiles — i.e.,  all  who  have  ears  to 
hear. 

III.  Of  whom  does  he  witness? — 
Of  Christ,  promised,  manifested,  cruci- 
fied, raised,  preached. — -Gerok. 

Vers.  22-23.  The  Glory  of  the  Gospel 
of  the  Grace  of  God. — This  consists  in 
the  following  facts,  that  the  Gospel  is — 

I.  Designed  for  all.— 1.  All  ranks 
and  conditions  of  men.  Small  and 
great — i.e.,  high  and  low,  rich  and 
poor,  young  and  old.  2.  All  times  and 
climes  on  earth.  For  pre-Christian  ages, 
since  it  was  substantially  contained  in 
the  Hebrew  prophets  and  in  Moses ; 
for  the  Christian  centuries,  since  it  was 
meant  to  be  published  among  the 
Gentiles. 

II.  Adapted  to  all. — Proclaiming  as 
it  does — 1.  An  atonement  for  sin,  which 
all  need.  This  involved  in  the  idea  of 
a  suffering  Messiah  (Isa.  liii.  5,  6,  10). 
2.  A  resurrection  from  the  grave,  which 
all  desire.  This  guaranteed  by  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  (1  Cor.  xv.  20). 

III.  Offered  to  all. — This  a  necessary 
consequence  of  the  public  proclamation 
of  the  gospel,  both  to  the  people  (the 
Jews)  and  the  Gentiles,  since  it  is  incon- 
ceivable that  men  should  be  called 
upon  to  accept,  and  punished  for  re- 

547 


chap.  xxvi.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 

fusing,  what  was  not  really  offered  IV.  Bestowed  on  all. — All  who 
to  them.  Compare  Mark  xvi.  15;  believe  without  distinction  become  par- 
Rom,  i.  16,  iii.  22.  takers  of  its  light  and  life. 

HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  24—32. 

PauVs  Two  Distinguished  Listeners,   Festus    and  Agrippa ;    or,   Two    Souls 
Struggling  against  the  Truth. 

I.  Paul  and  Festus  ;  or,  the  apostle  and  the  governor. — 1.  The  exclamation  of 
the  governor.      "  Paul,  thou  art  beside  thyself,"   or,  thou   art  mad  ! — "  much 
learning  doth  make  thee  mad,"  or,  doth  turn  thee  to  madness.     So  far  as  Festus 
was  concerned,  Paul,  by  his  lofty  oration,  had  effected  this  only,  that  Festus 
esteemed  him  a  lunatic.      Strange  perversity  of  the  world  !      When  Paul  of 
Tarsus  raved  against  God,  blasphemed  Christ,  and  breathed  out  threatenings  and 
slaughter  against  the  Christians,  his  contemporaries  counted  him  both  wise  and 
prudent ;  now  that,  as  Paul  the  aged,  he  talks  in  sublime  strains  of  a  crucified 
and  risen  Saviour,   the  world,  as  represented  by  the  Judsean  procurator,  sets 
him  down  for  a  madman,  or,  at  least,  for  one  whose  brain  had  been  touched  by 
overmuch  study.     Paul  !    much  learning  doth  turn  thee  to  madness.     To  the 
governor  it  seemed  incomprehensible  that  one  should  not  only  rave  about  such 
transcendental  delusions,  but  should  actually  risk  his  life  in  preaching  them. 
Doubtless  at  the  present  day  many  hold  with  the  governor  that  earnest  and 
enthusiastic  Christians,  who  base  their  prospects  of  present  happiness  and  future 
felicity  on  such  (as  the  world  thinks)  imaginary  facts  as  the  incarnation,  pro- 
pitiation, and  resurrection,  of  Jesus  Christ,  are  idle  dreamers,  foolish  visionaries, 
crack-brained  enthusiasts,  half -mad  fanatics  who  simply  mistake  the  vague  and 
shadowy  creations  of  a  disordered  or  diseased  fancy  for  solid  and  substantial 
truths,  and  who  accordingly  sacrifice  themselves  for  whims  and  crotchets.     But 
for  all  that  numbers  of  those  who  affect  to  regard  Christians  in  this  light  have 
their  secret  misgivings  that  the  Christians  are  right.     That  Festus  felt  un- 
comfortable beneath  the  glowing  utterances  of  Paul  is  a  plausible  deduction  from 
the  fact  that  he  rather  shouted  at  than  calmly  expostulated  with  the  apostle. 
Had  he  really  believed  the  apostle  to  be  beside  himself,  he  would  not  have  flamed 
forth  into  a  rage  against  him,  but  would  have  pitied  him,  and  perhaps  spoken 
gently  to  him,  or  at  least  would  have  not  troubled  himself  about  his  utterances. 
And  so  the  circumstance  that  men  of  the  world  habitually  become  vehement  and 
angry  when  denouncing  the  faith  of  Christians  is  a  proof  they  are  not  inwardly 
convinced  of  its  error.     2.  The  reply  of  the  apostle.     "I  am  not  mad,  most  noble 
Festus,  but  speak  forth  the  words  of  truth  and  soberness."     In  repudiating  the 
charge  of  the  governor,  Paul  fell  back  upon  two  defences.     (1)  The  testimony  of 
his  own  consciousness,  which  enabled  him  to  assure  Festus  that  he  was  neither 
"  beside"  nor  beneath  nor  outside  of  himself,  as  insinuated,  but  in  full  possession 
of  his  faculties — not  at  all  the  victim  of  an  ill-balanced  judgment,  an  exuberant 
fancy,  or  an  unbridled  imagination,  but  the  master  of  a  calm,  clear  intellect  and 
a  sober,  regulated  reason,  which  understood  well  the  thoughts  it  was  thinking 
and  the  words  it  was  uttering.      (2)  The  unchallengeable  truthfulness  of  his 
assertions,  in  support  of  which  he  confidently  appealed  to  the  wide  publicity 
which  had  been  gained   by  the  main   facts  of   gospel   history,  the   death  and 
resurrection  of  Christ,  which  had  not  taken  place  in  some  remote  corner  of  the 
country,  but  had  occurred  in  its  very  centre  and  heart,  the  Metropolis  itself, 
Jerusalem,  and  which  therefore  could  not  be  unknown  to  the  king,  to  whom 
accordingly  he  next  directed  his  address.     The  apostle  meant  that  if  the  story 
of  Christ's  death  and  resurrection  had  not  been  true,  it  could  easily  have  been 
demonstrated  false,  as  the  people  of  Jerusalem  were  well  aware  of  all  that  had 

548 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


transpired.  But  so  far  from  being  exposed  as  an  idle  fiction,  the  report  of  the 
resurrection — of  the  crucifixion  denial  was  impossible — had  kept  on  spreading 
and  gaining  adherents  during  the  last  quarter  of  a  century,  which  it  could  hardly 
have  done  had  it  been  false. 

II.  Paul  and  Agrippa;  or,  the  apostle  and  the  king. — 1.  The  fervent  appeal 
of  the  apostle.     "  King  Agrippa,  believest  thou  the  prophets  %     I  know  that  thou 
believest."     Whether  the  apostle,  "  who  had  studied  psychology  in  the  school 
of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Leonhard  and  Spiegel)  discerned  in  the  king's  heart  a 
secret  inclination  to  yield  to  the  truth  as  set  forth  in  the  apostle's  oration,  must 
be  left  undecided.     (1)  The  ground  on  which  Paul's  appeal  rested  appears  to 
have  been  the  assumption  that  Agrippa  II.,  as  a  Jew,  must  have  been  perfectly 
cognisant  of  the  fact  that  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  predicted  the  coming  of    a 
suffering,  dying,   and  rising   Messiah.     That  they  did  so  has  been  frequently 
pointed  out.     (2)  The  force  of  Paul's  appeal  lay  in  this,  that  Agrippa,  having 
been  possessed  of  such  knowledge,  ought  to  have  had  no  difficulty  in  recognising 
the  reasonableness  of  Paul's  words,  which  simply  declared  that  such  predictions 
as  were  contained  in  the  prophets  had  been  fulfilled  by  the  death  and  resur- 
rection of  Jesus.     Paul's  interpretation  of  the  connection  between  these  events  and 
the  Scripture  prophecies  might  be  at  fault — nay,  Paul's  assertion  about  the  resur- 
rection might  be  incorrect ;  but  in  the  statements  themselves  no  impartial  judge 
could  find  evidence  of  unreason  or  folly.     2.  The  ambiguous  answer  of  the  king. 
"  Almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian  " ;  or,  "  with  but  little  persuasion 
thou  wouldest  fain  make  me  a  Christian"  (R.V.);  or,  in  a  little  time  (at  this 
rate)  you  will  persuade  me  to  become  (or,  you  believe  you  can  make  of  me)  a 
Christian  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  ").      According  to  the  first  of  these  renderings, 
Agrippa  was  supposed  to  admit  that  Paul  had  almost  carried  the  citadel  of  his 
judgment,  and  that  only  a  little  more  was  wanting  to  gain  him  altogether  for 
the  Christian  cause.      According  to  the  second,  his  meaning  ran  that  Paul  must 
not  imagine  he  could  convert  a  Jewish  sovereign  like  him  with  so  little  show  of 
argument,  or  so  inconsiderable  effort.     According  to  the  third,  that  if  Paul  went 
on  as  he  was  doing  he  would  soon  make  of  him,  Agrippa  II.,  a  Christian.     The 
first  had  its  source  in  incipient  seriousness,  the  second  in  supercilious  contempt, 
the  third  in  superficial  levity.     Those  who  wish  to  think  the  best  of  Agrippa 
naturally   prefer   the   first   interpretation    of   his   words,    notwithstanding   the 
grammatical  difficulty  attaching  to  them ;  those  who  adhere  to  the  best  text 
select   the   second   or  third   interpretation  of    Agrippa's   words,   though   these 
charge  him  with  feelings — either  of  irony  or  of  jest — which  certainly  look  in- 
compatible with  a  situation  so  grave  and  solemn  as  that  in  which  they  were 
spoken.     3.  The  sublime  ejaculation  of  the  apostle.      "  1  would  to  God  that  not 
only  thou,  but  also  all  that  hear  me  this  day,  were  both  almost  and  altogether 
such  as  I  am,  except  these  bonds  "  ;  or,  "  I  would  to  God  that  whether  with 
little  or  with  much  ..."  (R.  V.) ;  or,  "  whether  in  a  little  time  or  in  much 
time  "  ;  or,  adopting  another  reading,  "  whether  with  a  little  effort  or  with  a  great 
effort,  not  only  thou,  but  also  all  that  hear  me  this  day,"  etc.  (see  "  Critical 
Remarks  ").      Taken  either  way,  the  sense  of  the  apostle's  utterance  practically 
amounted  to  this  :  (1)  that  he  wished,  not  only  Agrippa,  but  all  who  listened  to 
him  that  day,  to  be,  like  himself,  Christians ;  (2)  that,  could  he  only  hope  to  see 
that  wish  fulfilled,  he  would  willingly  spend  a  long  time  or  a  short,  and  put 
forth  a  great  effort  or  a  small,  as  the  case  might  be ;  and  (3)  that  the  sole  point 
in  which  he  did  not  ask  God  that  they  might  resemble  him  was  "  these  bonds," 
which  he  held  up  before  them.    The  magnanimity  of  this  reply  has  evoked  never- 
failing  admiration  from  all  hearts  capable  of  understanding  and  appreciating 
true  heroism.     4.  The  response  of  the  king.      Obviously  Agrippa's   was   not   a 
heart  of  the  order  just  depicted.      No  sooner  had  the  apostle's  words  died  away 

549 


chap.  xxvi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


in  the  hushed  atmosphere  of  the  marble  hall  than  Agrippa  II.  rose  from  his 
seat,  followed  by  the  governor,  Bernice,  and  all  that  sat  with  them.  Having 
withdrawn  from  the  audience-chamber  and  talked  amongst  themselves,  they 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  Paul  had  committed  no  offence  worthy  of  death. 
Most  likely  all  concurred  in  pronouncing  him  a  harmless  fanatic.  What  they 
said  to  one  another  about  his  last  words  is  not  recorded.  Possibly  all  were 
silent,  each  afraid  to  reveal  to  his  neighbour  the  thoughts  that  had  been  stirred 
within  his  bosom.  Only  one  more  item  of  the  conversation  has  been  preserved. 
Agrippa  II.  expressed  his  mind  to  the  governor,  that,  had  Paul  not  appealed  to 
Csesar,  he  might  forthwith  have  been  set  at  liberty.  The  result  of  this  "  may 
have  been  that  Festus  modified  his  report  and  commended  the  apostle  to  the 
clemency  of  the  court  at  Rome  "  (Hackett). 

Learn — 1.  The  outrageous  slanders  that  are  sometimes  propagated  against 
Christians.  2.  The  certainty  that  truth  and  soberness  lie  rather  with  the 
Christian  than  with  the  worldling.  3.  The  fearlessness  with  which  Christianity 
can  make  appeal  to  the  court  of  enlightened  reason.  4.  The  unwisdom  of  those 
who  decline  to  allow  themselves  to  be  persuaded  to  become  Christians.  5.  The 
fervent  desire  true  Christians  possess  that  others  should  share  the  salvation  of 
which  they  are  conscious. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  24-29.  Paul  and  His  Princely 
Hearers ;  or,  the  different  attitudes  of 
men  toward  the  gospel. 

I.  Festus,  who  turns  entirely  aside 
from  it — "  Paul,  thou  ravest !  " 

II.  Agrippa,  who  is  half  turned 
towards  it — "Almost  thou  persuadest 
me!" 

III.  Paul,  who  entirely  lives  in  it — 
"  I  would  to  God  that  all  who  hear 
me  were  such  as  I  am." — Gerok,  in 
Lange. 

Yer.  24.  Which  is  the  Madman  ? — 
Paul  or  Festus?  the  Christian  or  the 
non-Christian  1 

I.  The  Christian  who  believes  in  a 
personal  God — a  God  of  power,  who 
has  made  the  universe,  and  a  God  of 
love,  who  has  devised  a  way  of  salva- 
tion for  man?  Or  the  non-Christian 
who,  if  he  acknowledges  a  God  at  all, 
conceives  of  Him  as  either  hostile  to, 
or  indifferent  about,  man  ? 

II.  The  Christian  who  believes  that 
God  has  made  known  His  mind  and  will 
to  man  for  his  salvation  in  the  sacred 
Scriptures  ?  Or  the  non-Christian  who 
holds  that  God  has  never  placed  Him- 
self in  communication  with  the  human 
race  at  all  ? 

III.  The  Christian  who  believes  that 

550 


man,  even  in  his  sin,  is  a  child  of  God, 
and  a  possible  heir  of  immortality  ?  Or 
the  non-Christian  whose  creed  is  that 
man  is  nothing  more  than  an  animated 
clod  which  will  in  course  of  years 
mingle  with  the  other  (unanimated) 
clods  of  the  valley,  and  be  never  more 
heard  of,  in  this  or  any  other  world  ? 

IV.  The  Christian  who  believes  that 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  God's  Son 
incarnate,  who  died  and  rose  again, 
bringing  life  and  immortality  to  light  ? 
Or,  the  non-Christian  whose  faith  is 
that  Jesus  was  a  common  and  there- 
fore a  sinful  man,  who  never  rose  from 
the  dead,  and  that  the  grave  will  never 
open  to  restore  a  single  form  that  goes 
down  into  its  gloomy  chambers  ! 

V.  The  Christian  who  believes  in  a 
hereafter  and  lives  for  it  ?  Or,  the 
non-Christian  who  knows  of  no  world 
but  this,  and  lives  and  dies  as  if  there 
were  none  ? 

Ver.  25.  Words  of  Truth  and  Sober- 
ness. 

I.  Such  were  Paul's  words  to  all 
who  heard  his  gospel. — 1.  Proved  from 
the  past  history  of  the  Church.  For  the 
words  of  Paul  remain  to  this  day, 
whereas  the  wit  of  Festus  has  long 
since  died  away.    2.  Confirmed  by  Chris- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.     chap.  xxvi. 


tian  experience.  Since  honest  hearts 
in  all  ages  have  found  in  Paul's  words 
(written)  their  clearest  light,  best 
strength,  and  sweetest  comfort.  3.  They 
will  likewise  be  placed  in  the  light  at 
the  great  day  of  eternity.  Inasmuch  as 
heaven  and  earth  will  pass  away,  but 
the  word  of  God  endureth  for  ever. 

II.  Such  should  be  the  words  of 
preachers  still  to  all  who  listen  to 
their  teaching. — And  such  they  will 
be — 1.  If  they  discourse  upon  Paul's 
theme, — a  crucified  and  risen  Saviour. 
2.  If  they  speak  with  Paul's  earnest- 
ness,— which  all  can  imitate,  though 
all  cannot  equal.  What  is  wanted  in 
preaching  is  not  "  sound  and  fury, 
signifying  nothing,"  but  deep-toned 
and  full -hearted  fervour.  3.  If  they 
seek  Paul's  aims, — the  glory  of  Christ 
and  the  salvation  of  souls.  None  but 
words  of  truth  and  soberness  will 
accomplish  these. 

Ver.  27.  u  Believest  thou  the  prophets?" 
I.  A  great  question. — For  modern 
readers  of  the  Bible  no  less  than  for 
Agrippa.  1.  Believest  thou  the  Hebrew 
prophets  were  inspired  ?  This  question 
lies  at  the  foundation  of  Christianity. 
If  the  Hebrew  prophets  were  only 
statesmen,  somewhat  more  far-seeing 
than  their  contemporaries,  but  in  no 
sense  channels  of  Divine  communication 
for  their  age  and  generation,  then  it  is 
vain  to  attempt  to  derive  from  their 
utterances  any  evidence  in  suppoit 
of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus.  It  was 
clearly  in  the  faith  that  Old-Testament 
Scripture  prophesied  beforehand  of  the 
sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  that 
should  follow  that  Paul  appealed  to 
them  so  confidently  in  support  of  his 
gospel ;  and  those  who  think  the 
foundations  of  the  Christian  system 
will  remain  undisturbed  if  the  credi- 
bility of  Old -Testament  literature  is 
impaired,  have  not  reflected  deeply 
enough  on  this  momentous  problem. 
As  the  New-Testament  Scriptures  are 
the  flower  and  fruit,  the  crown  and 
apex,  of  the  Old,  so  are  the  Old- 
Testament  Scriptures  the  root  and 
support  of  the  New.     2.  Believest  thou 


what  the  Hebrew  prophets  teach  ?  Men 
might,  and  many  do,  believe  the 
Hebrew  prophets  to  have  been  inspired, 
who  nevertheless  disregard  the  testi- 
mony they  furnish  concerning  the 
person  and  work  of  Christ.  But  the 
Christological  argument  derived  from 
the  Messianic  prophecies  was,  in  Paul's 
judgment,  and  is  in  the  estimation  of 
many  Bible  scholars  of  to-day,  one  of 
the  most  powerful  factors  in  demon-, 
strating  the  truth  of  the  New-Testament 
declarations  with  reference  to  Christ's 
divinity,  atoning  work,  and  resurrec- 
tion. 3.  Believest  thou  that  what  the 
Hebrew  prophets  taught  concerning 
Christ  has  been  fulfilled  ?  This  prac- 
tically means,  Believest  thou  that 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  Messiah 
of  Israel  and  Saviour  of  the  world  ? 
Believest  thou  that  He  was  God's  Son 
incarnate,  that  He  died  for  our  sins 
according  to  the  Scriptures,  that  He 
was  buried,  and  that  He  rose  again 
according  to  the  Scriptures?  (1  Cor. 
xv.  1-4).  4.  Believest  thou  for  thyself , 
individually y  in  the  Christ  of  whom 
the  prophets  spoke  ?  All  believing  that 
stops  short  of  this  is  worthless  for 
saving. 

II.  A  powerful  argument.  —  Of 
which  the  following  are  the  several 
steps :  1.  He  who  believes  in  the 
prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  should 
also  believe  in  the  apostles  of  the  New. 
The  authors  of  the  New-Testament 
writings  can  produce  as  good  claims  to 
be  inspired  as  could  the  prophets  of  the 
Old.  2.  He  who  believes  in  the  Messiah, 
foreshadowed  by  the  prophets,  should 
likewise  believe  in  the  Christ  preached 
by  the  apostles.  The  first  was  the  type 
of  the  second ;  the  second  is  the  anti- 
type of  the  first.  If  the  prophets 
spoke  the  truth  when  they  said  Christ 
should  suffer  and  rise  again,  so  did  the 
apostles  teach  no  falsehood  when  they 
affirmed  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ, 
since  they  alleged  that  He  both 
suffered  and  rose.  3.  He  who  believes 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  should  likewise 
for  himself  believe  in  Him  for  salvation. 
This,  after  all,  is  the  great  question  : 
Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  ? 

551 


chap.  xxvi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


(John  ix.  35).  The  man  who  accepts 
the  testimony  of  both  prophets  and 
apostles  should  feel  himself  shut  up  to 
the  acceptance  of  Christ  as  his  personal 
Saviour. 

Ver.  28.  Almost  Persuaded. — A  con- 
dition of  soul — 

I.  Frequently  attained. — The  heart 
touched,  the  mind  enlightened,  the  will 
moved,  the  spirit  trembling  on  the 
verge  of  a  decision  for  Christ ;  nothing 
wanting  but — the  decision.  Many 
reach  this  position  as  well  as  Agrippa. 

II.  Highly  responsible.  —  Seeing 
that  only  a  little  is  lacking  to  carry 
the  spirit  over  into  faith,  the  obliga- 
tion to  supply  that  little  is  the  greater. 
What  guilt  will  they  incur  who  refuse 
or  omit  to  take  the  final  step  that  is 
necessary  for  salvation. 

III.  Extremely  perilous. — Besides 
being  in  itself  an  unsafe  condition,  it 
is  also  an  unstable  one.  No  soul  can 
remain  permanently  in  the  position 
these  words  describe.  Either  it  will 
move  on  and  become  fully  persuaded, 
or  it  will  drift  back  and  become  less 
persuaded. 

Almost  a  Christian. — A  position — 

I.  Of  gracious  privilege. — Implying 
that  one  has  been  brought  near  the 
kingdom,  and  enabled  to  understand 
somewhat  of  its  nature,  of  its  terms 
of  membership,  of  its  duties,  and  of  its 
blessings. 

II.  Of  hopeful  promise. — That  the 
"  almost  "  shall,  before  long,  be  con- 
verted into  an  "altogether."  That 
the  one  step  wanting  to  make  one  a 
Christian  shall  be  taken. 

III.  Of  solemn  responsibility. — 
That  the  one  "almost"  shall  become 


"  altogether "  a  Christian.  That  he 
shall  not  remain  on  the  borders  of  the 
kingdom,  but  cross  the  boundary  and 
enter  in. 

IV.  Of  great  danger. — Lest  one 
should  be  satisfied  with  being  "  almost  " 
without  becoming  "  altogether n  a 
Christian. 

Yers.  28,  29.  The  Shortcomings  of 
Agrippa. 

I.  What  they  were. — 1.  He  only 
says  "  almost"  not  yet  " altogether," 
and  thus  at  once  recalls  what  he 
appears  to  allow.  He  remains  standing 
without  the  doors  of  salvation,  and  will 
not  enter  in.  2.  He  only  says,  "  Thou 
persuadest  me " ;  but  a  persuasion  is 
much  less  than  faith  or  conviction, 
and  may,  as  in  this  case,  come  to  an 
end  with  the  words  which  called  it 
forth.  3.  He  only  says,  "  to  be  a 
Christian" meaning,  to  join  thy  party, 
in  an  external  way,  instead  of  saying, 
"  I  belie vingly  accept  thy  testimony 
about  Jesus." 

II.  How  they  were  answered. — 
1.  By  suggesting  that  much  more  than 
he  thought  was  still  deficient  in  him. 
Every  "  almost,"  like  Agrippa's,  implies 
that  much  is  still  wanting.  2.  By 
expressing  a  desire  that,  whether  much 
or  little  was  lacking,  all  might  be  fully 
persuaded.  At  whatever  stage  of 
nearness  or  distance  they  stood  from 
the  kingdom,  he  longed  for  the  salva- 
tion of  all.  3.  By  reminding  him,  and 
all  who  listened,  that'  becoming  a 
Christian  meant  more  than  joining 
the  party  of  the  Nazarenes,  meant 
becoming  like  him,  Paul,  in  everything 
except  his  bonds,  meant  becoming  a 
lowly  and  devoted  follower  of  Christ. 
— Compiled  from  Btier. 


552 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS,    CHAr.  xxvn. 


CHAPTER  XXYII. 
Paul's  Yoyage  to  Rome — Shipwreck  at  Malta. 

§  1.  Setting  Sail;  or,  from  Csesarea  to  Fair  Havens  (vers.  1-8). 

§  2.  Caught  in  a  Storm ;  or,  from  Fair  Havens  to  the  Coast  of  Crete  (vers.  9-14). 

§  3.  Drifting  on  the  Deep  ;  or,  Preparing  for  the  Worst  (vers.  15-26). 

§  4.  ISTearing  the  Breakers ;  or,  a  Night  of  Anxiety  (vers.  27-36). 

§  5.  Running  Aground ;  or,  Escaping  Safe  to  Land  (vers.  37-44). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  Determined. — By  Festus.  Not  as  to  purpose  (xxv.  12),  but  as  to  time,  which  was 
late  in  autumn,  A.D.  60,  and  manner,  which  was  by  sea.  "We. — Last  used  (xxi.  15-18).  Here 
including,  besides  Paul,  Luke  and  Aristarchus  of  Thessalonica  (ver.  2,  xix.  29,  xx.  4).  Luke's 
presence  on  shipboard  accounts  for  the  liveliness  of  the  ensuing  narration.  Certain  other — 
additional,  not  necessarily  different  in  character  (Meyer,  Zockler,  Plumptre) — prisoners. — 
This  shows  (Lardner,  Paley)  that  it  was  customary  to  forward  accused  persons  to  Rome  to 
be  tried  ;  an  inference  confirmed  by  Josephus  (life,  §  3).  Julius. — Tacitus  (Hist.,  ii.  92, 
iv.  11)  mentions  about  this  time  a  centurion  of  this  name,  Julius  Priscus,  one  of  the  praetor- 
ians, who,  seven  years  afterwards,  was  promoted  by  Caesar  Vitellius  to  be  Praetorian  Prefect, 
and  who,  when  his  royal  patron  died  a  miserable  and  dishonourable  death,  declined  to 
survive,  and  committed  suicide  by  falling  on  his  own  sword.  Hausrath  (JDer  Apostel  Paulus, 
p.  466)  conjectures  he  may  have  come  to  Palestine  on  some  important  mission,  and  been 
entrusted  with  command  of  the  prisoners  about  to  be  despatched  to  Eome.  Augustus',  or, 
the  Augustan  band  to  which  he  belonged  has  been  supposed  to  be  (1)  a  cohort  of  soldiers 
from  Sebaste  or  Samaria  (Kuinoel),  in  support  of  which  is  cited  the  mention  by  Josephus 
(Ant.,  XIX.  ix.  2;  XX.  vi.  1)  of  a  squadron  of  Sebastene  cavalry;  or  (2)  a  bodyguard 
organised  by  Nero,  and  called  by  him  Augustani  (Suet.,  Ner.,  xx.  25)  or  Augustiani  (Tacit., 
Ann.,  xiv.  15),  which  would  harmonise  with  the  preceding  statement  from  Tacitus  (Wieseler); 
or  (3)  an  auxiliary  cohort  belonging  to  Agrippa's  army,  and  bearing  the  name  Augustan  in 
honour  of  the  emperor,  as  many  other  cohorts  did  (Holtzmann,  Ramsay) ;  or  (4)  an  independent 
cohort  which  waited  on  the  procurator,  and  was  styled  the  Augustan  because  it  corresponded 
to  the  emperor's  life  guard  at  Rome  (Hackett).  That  it  was  identical  with  the  Italian  cohoit 
mentioned  in  x.  1  (Meyer,  Evvald)  is  doubtful  (Zockler). 

Ver.  2.  Adramyttium. — Not  Hadrumetum  in  North  Africa,  but  a  seaport  of  Mysia  in  Asia 
Minor,  situated  at  the  head  of  a  bay  of  the  same  name,  and  on  the  River  Kysos  ;  called  to-day 
Adramiti  or  Edramit.  To  this  port  the  ship  on  which  Paul  embarked  at  Sebaste,  the  harbour 
of  Caesarea,  belonged,  and  was  a  coaster  homeward  bound.  It  was  obviously  Julius's  inten- 
tion either  to  trans-ship  for  Italy  at  the  Asian  harbour,  or  from  that  point  to  take  the  land 
route  to  Rome  (see  "  Homiletical  Analysis  ").  Meaning  to  sail  by  the  coasts  of  Asia. — The  best 
authorities  for  fitWovres  read  fieWouTc,  which  was  about  to  sail,  not  along  the  coasts,  but 
for  the  places  on  the  coast  of  Asia. 

Ver.  3.  Sidon — Hebrew,  Sidon  (meaning,  perhaps,  fisher  town)  ;  on  Assyrian  monuments 
Sidicnu — was  situated  on  the  Mediterranean  coast,  not  far  from  Lebanon,  and  only  five  miles 
north  of  Tyre.  In  ancient  times  the  most  important  of  the  Phoenician  towns/it  named  itself 
upon  its  coins  "  The  Mother  of  Tyre."  The  modern  town  of  Sal  da  stands  upon  the  site  of  the 
ol  1,  from  which  numerous  relics  of  antiquity  have  been  recovered,  the  most  remarkable  being 
the  marble  coffin  of  the  Sidonian  king,  Eschmunazar,  B.C.  350-300.  (See  Riehm's  Hand- 
ivorterbuch  des  Biblischen  Altertums  ;  art.  Sidon.)  Refresh  himself. — Lit.,  to  meet  with,  or 
receive  attention  from  his  friends.  By  obtaining  from  them  that  outfit  for  the  voyage 
which,  on  account  of  the  official  precision  of  his  custody  at  Caesarea,  he  could  not  there  be 
provided  with  (Alford,  Holtzmann). 

Ver.  4.  Cyprus. — See  on  iv.  36. 

Ver.  5.  Sea  of  (better,  off,  or  along)  Cilicia  and  Pamphylia. — On  the  reverse  voyage  (xxi.  3) 
Cyprus  was  passed  upon  the  left  hand — i.e.,  the  ship  sailed  south  of  the  island.  The  neigh- 
bourhood of  Myra,  two  or  three  miles  from  the  coast,  is  full  of  magnificent  ruins.  Its  haven 
was  the  neighbouring  Andrahi.  In  later  times  it  became  celebrated  as  the  seat  of  the  sup- 
posed bishopric  of  Nicolaus  at  the  time  of  the  council  of  Nice,  A.D.  350. 

Ver.  6.  A  ship  of  Alexandria.     Probably  belonging  to  the  Alexandrian  fleet  in  the  Imperial 

553 


CHAP,  xxvii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


service,  (Ramsay). — See  "  Homiletical  Analysis."  That  part  of  her  cargo  was  wheat  is  obvious 
(ver.  38),  though  she  may  have  carried  other  goods  (ver.  18),  which  were  cast  overboard 
before  the  cereals  were  thrown  away. 

Ver.  7.  Scarce. — Better,  with  difficulty.  The  wind  not  suffering  us  may  mean  not  suffering 
the  ship  to  get  to  Cnidus  to  find  shelter  in  its  harbour  (Hackett,  Hausrath,  Holtzmann),  or 
not  suffering  it  to  get  any  quicker  over  against  Cnidus — explaining  the  preceding  clause 
(Alford,  Lechler),  or  not  suffering  it  to  proceed  farther  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  Kevised 
Version,  Spence). 

Ver.  8.  Hardly  passing  it  (Crete)  should  be  with  difficulty  coasting  along  it.  The  participle 
is  a  nautical  term.  The  harbour  of  Fair  Havens,  though  mentioned  by  no  ancient  writer, 
was  undoubtedly  that  still  known  by  the  same  name  (Kali)  on  the  south  of  Crete,  a  few  miles 
to  the  east  of  Cape  Matala,  beyond  which  the  land  suddenl}T  springs  towards  the  north. 
"  The  harbour  consists  of  an  open  roadstead,  or  rather  two  roadsteads  contiguous  to  each 
other,  which  may  account  for  the  plural  designation."  The  epithet  "  fair  "  may  have  been 
given  to  it  in  joke,  on  account  of  its  unfavourable  character,  ver.  12  (Zockler).  The  town  of 
Lasea,  probably  mentioned  as  better  known,  is  still  recognisable  by  "two  white  pillars, 
masses  of  masonry,  and  other  ruins,"  which  "  occur  on  the  spot "  (Hackett).  Its  discovery 
by  "  a  Scotch  yachting  party  may  be  classed  among  the  really  valuable  geographical 
evidences  of  the  truth  of  the  Bible  which  have  been  accumulating  of  late  years  "  (Spence). 

Ver.  9.  Sailing  meant  the  further  prosecution  of  the  voyage.  The  fast  signified  the  Great 
Day  of  Atonement  (Lev.  xvi.  29^.,  xxiii.  26  ff.  ;  Jos.,  Ant.,  XIV.  xvi.  4),  which  the  Jews 
celebrated  on  the  10th  Tisri — i.e.,  about  the  beginning  of  October,  after  which  season, 
according  to  Philo,  no  prudent  man  thought  of  putting  to  sea.  "  The  Greeks  and  Romans 
considered  the  period  of  safe  navigation  as  closing  in  October  and  recommencing  about  the 
middle  of  March"  (Hackett).  Accordingly  Paul  admonished,  or  exhorted  them — i.e.,  the 
shipmaster,  shipowner,  and  Julius  (ver.  11) — to  remain  in  "  The  Fair  Havens." 

Ver.  10.  Hurt.—  tf/3/)is,  not  to  be  taken  in  a  moral  sense  as  meaning  "  presumption"  (Ewald, 
Meyer),  a  meaning  unsuitable  for  ver.  21,  but  in  a  physical  sense,  as  signifying  violence — as, 
e.g.,  of  the  waves  (Zockler,  Holtzmann),  a  significance  the  word  has  in  Josephus  {Ant., 
III.  vi.  4,  airb  rdov  6/ui^pcou  vfipis)  and  in  2  Cor.  xii.  10.  Compare  nisi  ventis  debes  ludibrium 
(Hor.,  Odes,  I.  xiv.  15).     Loss  expressed  what  would  result  from  the  "  violence." 

Ver.  11.  The  master  of  the  ship  corresponded  to  our  steersman  or  captain  ;  the  owner  was 
the  person  to  whom  the  ship  belonged.  Ramsay  says  the  owners  of  private  merchant  ships 
were  called  Hfnropoi,  as  distinguished  from  vatiickiqpot,  who  were  captains  of  the  Imperial  fleet 
(St.  Paul,  etc.,  p.  324). 

Ver.  12.  The  more  part  showed  that  the  situation  had  become  critical,  and  that  a  general 
consultation  had  been  held.  Phenice,  rather  Phcenix,  was  a  haven  situated  on  the  south  of 
Crete,  a  little  to  the  west  of  Fair  Havens.  Strabo  (x.  475)  mentions  a  harbour  with  this 
name  on  the  south  of  Crete,  and  Ptolemy  (iii.  17),  a  town  called  Phoenix,  with  a  port  which 
he  names  Phcenicus.  Smith,  whom  Alford,  Conybeare  and  Howson,  and  Plumptre,  follow, 
Zockler,  and  Hertzberg  in  Riehm's  Handworterbnch,  identify  the  port  with  the  modern  Lutro, 
which,  as  seen  from  the  sea,  lieth  towards  the  south-west  (\L\p,  Latin  Africus)  and  the  north- 
west (xcDpos  =  Caurus),  lit.,  looking  down  the  south-west  and  the  north-west  winds — i.e.,  looking 
north-east  and  south-east  (R.V.).  Hackett,  Lechler,  Zockler,  and  Holtzmann,  regard  this 
interpretation  as  incorrect,  and  understand  Luke  to  say  that  the  haven  looked  towards  the 
south-west  and  the  north-west,  while  the  lands  encompassing  it  were  directed  towards  the 
north  and  the  south. 

Ver.  13.  Loosing  thence. — Better,  having  weighed  anchor.  Close  by  Crete  meant  close  in  to 
the  shore,  nearer  (dcraou)  than  usual. 

Ver.  14.  Euroclydon,  or  Euraquilo  (according  to  the  Sinai  tic  text),  was  an  east-north-east 
wind  of  great  violence — lit.,  a  ty phonic  wind — a  hurricane,  which  either  struck  against  it,  the 
ship  (A.V.,  Hackett,  Lechler,  Winer,  Zockler),  not  the  island  (Kuinoel,  De  Wette,  Meyer),  or 
hurled  itself  down  from  it — viz.,  Crete,  the  island  (Alford,  Howson,  Humphrey,  Wordsworth, 
Plumptre,  Spence,  Holtzmann). 

Ver.  15.  The  result  was  that  the  vessel  could  not  bear  up  into  the  wind — lit.,  could  not  look 
into,  or  face  the  wind — a  remarkably  expressive  phrase,  considering  that  in  ancient  ships  eyes 
were  painted  on  each  side  of  the  bow  ;  English  sailors  still  call  the  "bow"  the  eyes  of  a 
ship  (Conybeare  and  Howson) — so  that  the  sailors  let  her  drive  or  gave  way  to  her,  and  were 
driven  (R.V.) — lit.,  having  given  up  the  vessel  to  the  wind,  we  were  borne  along  at  its  mercy. 

Ver.  16.  Clauda,  or,  according  to  best  authorities,  Cauda  or  Gauda  ;  Claudos  (Ptolemy)  ; 
presently  named  Gaudo  by  the  Greeks,  and  Gozzo  by  the  Italians ;  an  island  twenty-three 
miles  south-west  of  Crete,  "  different  from  the  similarly-called  island  near  Malta"  (Holtz- 
mann). Much  work  to  come  by  the  boat. — Lit.,  we  were  able  with  difficulty  to  become  masters 
of  the  boat — i.e.,  to  get  possession  of  it ;  which,  however,  they  did,  hoisting  it  up  on  board  so 
that  it  might  not  be  dashed  to  pieces  in  the  storm,  and  might  serve  as  a  last  means  of  escape 
(ver.  30). 

554 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.    chap,  xxvii. 


Ver.  17.  Helps,  undergirding  the  ship. — I.e.,  ropes,  chains,  and  such  like,  for  putting  over 
the  gunwale  and  under  the  keel,  so  as,  by  drawing  them  together,  to  strengthen  the  hull  and 
keep  it  from  falling  to  pieces.  The  term  for  this  in  the  English  navy  is  "  trapping."  Oom- 
Hor.,  Od.,  I.  xiv.  6 :  "  Sine  funibus  vix  durare  carina  possint  iniperiosius  cequo?'."  The 
quicksands,  or  the  Syrtis,  were  the  Syrtis  Major,  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  south-west  of  Crete,  a 
dangerous  shoal  or  sandbank,  of  which  ancient  mariners  were  much  afraid  (Jos.,  Wars, 
11/  xvi.  4).  Here  Virgil  placed  the  shipwreck  of  iEneas  (JEneid,  i.  153).  Strake  sail. — Lit. 
lowered  the  gear,  the  verb  being  that  employed  to  describe  the  letting  down  of  the  boat  into 
the  sea  (ver.  30),  and  of  Paul  over  the  wall  of  Damascus  (ix.  25  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  33).  What  was 
lowered  was,  either  (i)  the  sails,  so  that  the  vessel  scudded  along  under  bare  poles  (Meyer, 
De  Wette,  Hackett,  Lechler,  Holtzmann)  ;  or  (2)  the  great  yard,  or  top  hamper,  leaving  only 
a  small  storm-sail  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  Smith,  Alford,  Plumptre)  ;  or  (3)  the  stern 
anchor,  so  as,  by  dragging,  to  retard  as  much  as  possible  the  ship's  progress  (Brensing). 
And  so  were  driven,  or  were  borne  along — i.e.,  they  drifted. 

Ver.  18.  They  lightened  the  ship. — By  casting  out  what  of  the  cargo  could  be  spared.  This 
occurred  during  the  second  day  of  the  storm.     The  ship  had  obviously  sprung  a  leak. 

Ver.  19.  On  the  third  day  the  tackling  followed.  This  was  either  (1)  the  yards,  masts,  and 
sails  of  the  ship  (Olshausen  Ewald,  Smith,  Conybeare  and  Howson) ;  or  (2)  the  tables,  chests, 
beds,  and  the  like,  the  ship's  furniture  (De  Wette,  Meyer,  Alford,  Lechler,  Hackett,  Holtz- 
mann) ;  or  (3)  the  baggage  of  the  passengers  (Wetstein,  Kuinoel,  Winer,  Plumptre).  The 
best  texts  read  they  instead  of  we  cast  out. 

Ver.  20.  When  neither  sun  nor  stars  in  many  days  appeared. — This,  the  overclouding  of 
the  sky,  "  a  circumstance  not  unusual  during  a  Levanter"  (Conybeare  and  Howson),  rendered 
ancient  navigation  perilous,  as  without  a  compass  they  had  no  other  means  of  determining 
their  position  than  by  observation  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 

Ver.  21.  Long  abstinence. — Not  necessarily  entire  (compare  ver.  33),  but  partial,  and 
occasioned  not  by  lack  of  provisions,  but  by  fear  and  the  difficulty  of  preparing  food  during 
the  continuance  of  the  gale.  Ye  should  have  hearkened  unto  me  was  said,  not  so  much  to 
rebuke  them  as  to  secure  their  attention  to  what  he  was  about  to  state. 

Ver.  22.  Be  of  good  cheer. — Compare  xxiii.  11.  "  Look  and  tone,  we  may  well  believe, 
helped  the  words.  It  was  something  in  that  scene  of  misery  and  dejection  to  see  one  man 
stand  forward  with  a  brave,  calm  confidence  "  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  24.  Fear  not,  Paul. — One  naturally  infers  from  this  that  the  apostle  was  not  entirely 
free  from  anxiety  (compare  xviii.  9).  Thou  must  be  brought,  or  stand  (R.V.),  before  Caesar. — 
Compare  xxiii.  11. 

Ver.  26.  This  whole  passage  (vers.  21-26)  has  been  pronounced  an  interpolation  by  the 
writer  of  the  Acts  (Zeller,  Overbeck,  Hilgenfeld,  Holtzmann),  on  the  ground  that  it  does  not 
harmonise  with  the  statements  in  vers.  10  and  31.  But  while  God's  purposes  are  certain  in 
fulfilment,  man  is  not,  on  that  account,  relieved  from  the  necessity  of  employing  means  for 
their  accomplishment.     See  "  Hints  "  on  vers.  21-26. 

Ver.  27.  The  fourteenth  night  dated  from  the  rising  of  the  gale,  which  occurred  soon  after 
leaving  the  Fair  Havens.  The  Sea  of  Adria. — See  "  Homiletical  Analysis."  Though  applied 
to  the  sea  between  Greece  and  Italy,  it  also  embraced  the  ocean  waters  around  Sicily  and  as 
far  south  as  the  coast  of  Africa.  The  country  towards  which  the  ship  drifted  was  not  the 
island  of  Meleda  near  the  Dalmatian  coast,  but  that  of  Malta,  south  of  Sicily,  so  that  the 
course  of  drifting  was  west-by-north. 

Ver.  29.  They  cast  four  anchors  out  of  the  stern. — One  advantage'of  doing  so  was  that  the 
ship  was  thus  ready  for  running  ashore.  Besides,  had  they  anchored  from  the  prow,  the  vessel 
might  have  swung  round  and  been  dashed  against  the  rocks.  Cassar  (Be  Bel.,  Civ.,  i.  25) 
secured  his  ships  by  means  of  four  anchors  :  naves  quaternis  anchoris  destinabat,  ne  fuctibus 
nwverentur ;  and  Nelson  is  said  to  have  anchored  his  ships  in  this  way  at  the  Battle  of  Copen- 
hagen, having  been  led  to  do  so  by  reading  on  the  morning  before  the  battle  the  twenty- 
seventh  chapter  of  the  Acts  (Conybeare  and  Howson). 

Ver.  30.  Cast  anchors  out  of  the  foreship  should  be,  stretch  or  lay  out  anchors  from  the 
foreshijjs.  The  idea  seems  to  have  been  to  pretend  to  sail  out  from  the  bows  in  the  boat  with 
one  or  two  anchors,  so  as  to  drop  them  into  the  sea  at  the  full  length  of  the  cables.  The 
intention  was  to  escape  and  leave  the  soldiers  and  prisoners  to  their  fate. 

Ver.  31.  On  the  seeming  inconsistency  of  this  verse  with  ver.  22  see  on  ver.  26.  Notwith- 
standing Paul's  previous  assurance  of  safety,  nothing  but  death  could  result  if  the  only 
persons  who  could  man  the  vessel  were  allowed  to  leave  it. 

Ver.  32.  The  soldiers  to  whom  Paul  gave  the  alarm  prevented  the  base  attempt  of  the 
sailors  to  desert  the  ship  from  being  successful. 

Ver.  33.  Paul  besought  them  all  to  take  meat,  or  food. — Because  of  their  long  fast,  and 
because  of  the  labours  which  the  dawning  day  might  bring  them.  Before  they  could  reach 
the  shore,  much  fatigue  would  require  to  be  endured,  and  for  this  they  would  need  to  recruit 
their  strength  by  means  of  food, 

555 


chap,  xxvii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Ver.  35.  He  took  bread  and  gave  thanks. — Neither  celebrating  a  love-feast  or  Eucharist 
(Olshausen,  Bwald),  nor  acting  as  a  father  of  a  family  (Meyer,  Hackett),  since  there  is  no 
mention  made  of  any  distribution  of  the  bread,  as  in  Luke  xxiv.  30  ;  but  simply  setting  them 
example  as  a  pious  Jew  or  Christian,  who  asks  a  blessing  on  his  food  (De  Wette,  Zbckler, 
Alford) — an  example  which  they  all  followed  (ver.  36). 

Ver.  37.  Two  hundred  threescore  and  sixteen  souls. — The  number  is  probably  correct, 
though  some  ancient  authorities  read  about  threescore  and  sixteen.  The  vessel  must  there- 
fore have  been  quite  equal  in  size  to  the  largest  class  of  modern  merchantmen.  Its  keel,  it 
has  been  estimated,  would  be  about  one  hundred  feet  in  length,  while  its  carrying  capacity 
would  be  about  eleven  and  twelve  hundred  tons. 

Ver.  38.  They  lightened  the  ship.— For  the  third  time  (see  vers.  18, 19).  Either  because  of 
its  sinking  condition,  or  because  they  wished  it  to  get  nearer  shore.  What  they  threw  out 
was  the  wheat,  top  <htov.  Either  (1)  the  ship's  provisions  (Alford,  Plumptre,  Holtzmann, 
Hausrath)  which  were  now  no  longer  needed — against  this  has  been  urged  that  by  this  time 
these  must  have  been  so  reduced  as  to  make  little  difference  to  the  load  (Smith),  though  it 
must  not  be  overlooked  that  for  the  past  fourteen  days  these  provisions  had  been  barely 
touched ;  or  (2)  the  remainder  of  the  ship's  cargo  (Smith,  Conybeare  and  Howson,  Zockler). 

Ver.  39.  A  certain  creek  with  a  shore,  or  bay  with  a  beach,  as  distinguished  from  the  island 
in  the  middle  of  the  sea  (ver,  16).  St.  Paul's  Bay,  supposed  to  be  here  referred  to,  "is 
situated  at  the  north-west  extremity  of  the  island  of  Malta,  and  is  formed  by  the  main  shore 
on  the  south  and  the  island  of  Salmonetta  on  the  north  "  (Hackett).  They  were  minded. — 
Better,  they  took  counsel. 

Ver.  40.  They  committed  themselves  should  be  the  anchors  unto  the  sea. — Having  no  time 
to  haul  in  the  anchors,  the  sailors  cut  the  ropes  and  abandoned  them.  The  mainsail, 
6  apre/Aw  is  considered  a  wrong  translation  by  nautical  authorities,  who  substitute  for  it  the 
foresail — i.e.,  the  sail  attached  to  the  mast  nearest  the  prow. 

Ver.  41.  A  place  where  two  seas  met  was  probably  the  channel  between  the  smaller 
Salmonetta  and  the  larger  Malta  (Smith).  The  sea  flowing  in  from  both  sides  would  create 
a  sand-  or  mud-bank,  upon  which  the  vessel  ran  aground  before  reaching  the  beach. 

Ver.  42.  The  inhuman  proposal  of  this  verse,  which  proceeded  from  the  soldiers,  because 
they  were,  in  a  measure,  answerable  for  the  safety  of  the  prisoners,  could  only  be  equalled  by 
its  base  ingratitude,  since  it  involved  the  killing  of  Paul,  to  whom  they  had  already  more 
than  once  owed  their  lives. 

Ver.  43.  Willing  should  be  wishing  to  save  Paul. — This  clause  shows  the  impression  made 
by  Paul  upon  his  keeper,  but  need  not,  on  that  account,  have  been  a  later  interpolation 
(Zeller).  Should  cast  themselves  first  into  the  sea  should  be  having  cast  themselves  overboard 
(from  the  ship,  and)  should  go  forth  first  (e/c,  from  the  sea)  upon  the  land. — This  would  enable 
them  to  assist  the  others,  and  prevent  the  escape  of  the  prisoners. 

Ver.  44.  It  is  a  comfort  to  know  that  Baur  and  Weizsacker  recognise  the  historical 
credibility  of  this  chapter.  "  Although  here  and  there  betraying  another  hand,"  says  the 
former,  "  it  is  for  the  most  part  authentic ;  "  the  latter  adds,  "  with  this  section  we  tread  the 
firm  ground  of  history  " ;  "  here  everything  is  fresh,  simple  and  natural,  and  reported  with 
a  skilful  pen." 

HOMILETICAL  AN  A  LYSIS. —  Verses  1—8. 

Setting  Sail ;  or,  from  Ccesarea  to  Fair  Havens. 

I.  The  passengers.  1.  The  prisoners.  (1)  Foremost  among  these  was  Paul,  the 
venerable  and  weather-beaten  missionary  of  the  Cross,  who  had  already,  by  sea 
and  land,  travelled  farther,  and  suffered  and  laboured  more  than  all  the  other 
apostles,  singly  or  together  (2  Cor.  xi.  23).  A  veritable  king  of  men,  his  moral 
majesty  will,  before  this  voyage  ends,  assert  itself,  and  place  him,  though  now  a 
prisoner,  high  in  rank  above  all  on  board  ship  beside  him.  The  finest  qualities 
of  good  men  are  evoked  by  situations  of  trial,  as  the  stars  shine  clearest  in  the 
darkest  nights.  (2)  Along  with  him  vojagcd  certain  other  prisoners  who,  for 
various  offences  laid  to  their  charge,  some  probably  as  imaginary  as  those 
advanced  against  the  apostle,  were  being  despatched  to  Rome  for  trial  before  the 
emperor's  tribunal.  That  it  was  customary  so  to  ship  accused  persons  to  the 
capital  Josephus  (Life,  3)  has  shown,  by  relating  how  he  himself,  when  a  young 
man,  was  wrecked  in  the  Adriatic  when  proceeding  to  Rome  for  the  purpose  of 
defending  "  certain  priests  of  his  acquaintance,  and  very  excellent  persons  they 
were,  whom  on  a  small  and  trifling  occasion  he  (Felix)  had  put  into  bonds  and 

556 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.    chap,  xxvii. 


sent  to  Rome  to  plead  their  cause  before  Caesar."  2.  The  centurion.  (1)  As 
to  his  identity,  he  was  probably  the  Julius  Priscus  mentioned  by  Tacitus  as  a 
Praetorian  officer,  who  may  have  been  despatched  on  some  imperial  errand  to 
Palestine,  and  to  whom  the  company  of  prisoners  was  entrusted.  (2)  As  to  the 
Augustan  cohort  or  "  troop  of  the  Emperor  "  (Ramsay)  to  which  he  belonged,  the 
different  views  stated  in  the  "  Critical  Remarks  "  are  all  worthy  of  consideration, 
though  the  likeliest  makes  him  a  commander  either  in  Nero's  or  the  procurator's 
body-guard.  Never  before  had  Julius  been  entrusted  with  so  remarkable  a 
prisoner  as  Paul — a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  rather  than  of  Caesar.  Had  he 
known  that  Paul  was  the  "servant  of  a  more  exalted  king  than  Nero,  an  officer 
in  a  more  distinguished  army  than  that  of  the  Augustan  band,  and  journeyed 
to  Rome  on  a  more  important  mission  than  that  which  had  brought  him  to 
Palestine,  he  would  have  hesitated  before  taking  up  such  a  charge  as  had  been 
thrust  upon  him.  Could  he  have  understood  the  gospel  of  which  Paul  was  the 
bearer,  he  would  have  learnt  that  not  Paul,  but  he,  was  the  real  prisoner. 
3.  The  fellow-voyagers.  These  were  certainly  two.  (1)  Luke,  the  writer  of  the 
Acts,  who,  in  resuming  the  first  person  at  this  point  in  his  narrative,  gives 
his  readers  to  understand  that  iu  all  that  relates  to  the  voyage  Romeward  he 
writes  as  u  an  eyewitness."  The  detailed  account  which  Luke  furnishes  of 
this  voyage  reveals  the  estimate  which  Luke  had  of  its  importance,  in  the 
providence  of  God,  as  a  link  in  the  chain  of  events  which  brought  Paul  to 
the  capital  of  the  world.  (2)  Aristarchus  of  Thessalonica  (ver.  2),  who  had 
probably  been  with,  or  near  Paul  during  his  two  years'  imprisonment  at  Caesarea 
and  may  have  been  now  returning  home  to  Macedonia,  though  the  subsequent 
alteration  of  plan  on  the  part  of  Julius  (ver.  6)  led  to  his  being  carried  on  to 
Rome.  It  would  not  be  difficult  for  either  Luke  or  Aristarchus  to  get  a  berth 
on  board  Paul's  ship.  Christ  can  raise  up  friends  for  His  people  in  the  darkest 
hour.  Note. — The  opinion  here  expressed  is  not  that  of  Professor  Ramsay 
(St.  Paul,  etc.,  p.  316),  who  thinks  that  Luke  and  Aristarchus  would  not  find 
it  easy  to  obtain  a  passage  in  the  corn-ship,  and  must  have  accompanied  Paul 
"  as  slaves,  not  merely  performing  the  duties  of  slaves,  but  actually  passing  as 
slaves,"  and  that  in  this  way  "  not  merely  had  Paul  faithful  friends  always  beside 
him,"  but  "  his  importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  centurion  would  be  much  enhanced." 
The  Professor,  however,  must  surely  have  a  different  conception  of  Paul's 
character  from  the  present  writer,  if  he  believes  that  Paul  would  assent  to  so 
much  deception  on  the  part  either  of  himself  or  others. 

II.  The  ships.  1.  A  ship  of  Adramyttium.  Adramyttium,  on  the  .coast  of 
Mysia,  and  opposite  Lesbos,  was  then  a  flourishing  city ;  though  no  antiquities 
have  been  found  on  its  site  except  a  few  coins.  The  selection  of  this  vessel, 
apparently  engaged  in  the  coasting  trade,  was  due  to  the  two  facts  (1)  that 
direct  communication  between  Caesarea  and  Rome  was  at  that  time  irregular, 
and  (2)  that  the  ship  of  Adramyttium  was  on  the  eve  of  sailing  (see  "  Critical 
Remarks  ").  At  Adramyttium,  should  they  reach  it — which  they  never  did — it 
would  most  likely  be  Julius'  purpose  to  tranship  himself  and  prisoners  into 
another  craft  going  west,  across  the  ^Egean,  or,  to  take  the  overland  route 
described  below.  How  frequently  in  life  are  man's  plans  overturned  !  Man 
proposes,  but  God  disposes.  2.  A  ship  of  Alexandria.  On  reaching  Myra,  in 
the  south  of  Lycia — or  rather,  since  Myra  stood  back  two  or  three  miles  from 
the  coast,  on  casting  anchor  in  the  port  of  Myra,  Andriace,  which  has  been 
identified  as  the  bay  of  Andraki — the  centurion,  no  doubt  counting  himself 
fortunate,  fell  in  with  a  larger  vessel,  an  Alexandrian  corn-ship,  in  those 
days  much  esteemed  for  its  size  and  sea-going  qualities,  on  her  way  to  Italy, 
to  which  he  forthwith  transferred  himself  and  party.  At  this  point  Besser 
well   remarks :    "  Had   not   another   tha«n   the    chief    officer    of    the   imperial 

557 


chap,  xxvii.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


troops  lifted  Paul  and  his  companions  into  the  ship,  the  whole  ship's  company 
would  have  come  to  grief."  By  this  trans-shipment  the  number  of  souls  on 
board,  including  crew  and  passengers,  was  brought  up  to  two  hundred  and 
seventy-six — not  an  unlikely  figure  when  it  is  remembered  that  the  ship  in 
which  Josephus  was  wrecked  contained  six  hundred  persons  (Life,  §  3).  The 
ship  must  thus  have  been  about  the  size  of  the  largest  merchant  vessels  of 
modern  times.  (See  "  Critical  Remarks.")  That  she  was  carrying  corn  from 
Alexandria  receives  explanation  from  the  well-known  fact  that  at  that  time 
Egypt  was  the  granary  of  the  world.  If  she  left  Alexandria  about  the  begin- 
ning of  August,  when  grain  cargoes  from  Upper  Egypt  were  usually  shipped  at 
that  port,  she  might  easily  have  reached  Myra  towards  the  end  of  the 
month,  or  beginning  of  September,  and  been  found  lying  in  the  harbour,  detained 
by  contrary  winds,  when  Paul's  ship  arrived.  The  west  wind  which  enabled  the 
Adramyttium  vessel  to  tack  along  from  Csesarea  to  Myra  might  have  forced 
the  Alexandrian  merchantman  to  hold  due  north  till  she  found  shelter  in  Myra 
(see  Conybeare  and  Howson,  The  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  ii.  337). 

III.  The  voyage.  1.  Its  destination.  Pome  (see  on  xxviii.  16).  Both 
Jehovah  and  Julius  concurred  in  this.  Both  were  conducting  the  apostle 
thitherward,  but  for  different  ends.  The  way  thither  also  God  had  arranged,  not 
Julius.  Julius'  plan  was  first  to  sail  to  Adramyttium,  and  then  proceed  to 
Pome — either  by  sailing  from  that  port,  or  by  "  the  overland  route,  the  great  Via 
Egnatia  from  Neapolis  through  Philippi,  Thessalonica,  and  the  Macedonian 
towns  to  Dyrrachium,  the  port  for  Brundusium"  (Lewin).  Jehovah,  however, 
altered  that  at  Myra,  and  put  the  centurion,  with  his  company,  on  board  the 
corn-ship  of  Alexandria.  Then,  Julius  expected,  it  may  well  be  assumed,  to  sail 
direct  to  the  port  of  Pome.  But  again  Jehovah  interfered.  Julius  and  his 
fellow -voyagers  had  to  drift  about  the  Mediterranean  and  be  wrecked  at  Malta 
before  the  voyage  ended.  Again,  "  Man  proposes  but  God  disposes,"  and  none 
but  God  can  count  on  working  out  the  counsel  of  his  own  will  (Dan.  iv.  35  ; 
Eph.  i.  11).  2.  Its  stages.  (1)  From  Csesarea,  or  Port  Sebastus,  which  was 
left  in  August,  a.d.  58,  to  Sidon.  On  Csesarea  see  xii.  19.  The  latter  city,  Sidon, 
upon  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  Sidunu,  "  had  anciently  one  of  the  finest  harbours 
in  the  East."  The  rival  of  Tyre  (xxi.  3),  it  was,  in  Paul's  day,  celebrated  for  its 
wealth  and  commerce.  The  present-day  Saida,  built  upon  the  site  of  the  old 
town,  is  pleasantly  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  snow-capped  Lebanon,  and  is 
surrounded  by  a  circle  of  orchards,  whose  fruit  is  far-famed  (Riehms  Ilandwdrter- 
buch  des  Biblischen  A  Iter  turns ;  art.  Sidon).  Its  distance  from  Csesarea,  sixty- 
seven  miles,  with  a  favourable  wind,  might  easily  have  been  accomplished  in  a 
day.  The  ship  having  cast  anchor  in  the  harbour  during  the  time  in  which 
the  captain  was  transacting  his  business,  either  putting  out  or  taking  in  cargo, 
an  operation  which  occupied  some  hours,  the  centurion  permitted  Paul  to  go 
ashore,  in  company,  of  course,  with  a  guard,  and  visit  such  friends  as  he  had  in 
the  town.  The  narrative,  it  has  been  pointed  out  (Hackett),  tacitly  assumes 
that  Paul  had  informed  the  centurion  he  had  Christian  brethren  in  Sidon,  which 
Luke's  narrative,  indeed,  in  its  earlier  parts  (xi.  19,  xxi.  4),  renders  highly 
probable.  Paul's  object  in  making  their  acquaintance  may  have  been  to  offer 
them  some  word  of  exhortation,  but  was  more  likely,  as  Luke  states,  to  refresh 
himself,  or  receive  attention  from  them — i.e.,  obtain  from  them  a  supply  of  such 
things  as  he  might  need  upon  the  journey  (Holtzmann).  (2)  From  Sidon  to 
Myra.  The  direct  course  would  have  run  to  the  southward  of  Cyprus,  but  as 
the  wind  continued  westerly,  the  ship  steered  in  a  northerly  direction,  passing 
Cyprus,  not  upon  the  right  (Meyer),  but  upon  the  left  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  "), 
sailing  under  the  lee  of  the  long  island,  from  Salamis  to  the  promontory  of 
Dinaretium,  rounding  which  it  headed  westward  before  a  land  breeze  usually 

558 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.    chap,  xxvii. 


prevailing  along  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor,  till  it  had  crossed  the  Sea  of  Cilicia 
and  Pamphylia,  and  landed  at  Myra  (see  above).  (3)  From  Myra  to  the  Fair 
Havens.  How  long  the  voyagers  stayed  in  the  Lycian  harbour  of  Andriace  is  not 
reported.  Probably  not  more  than  a  day.  Having  embarked  on  board  the 
Alexandrian  corn-ship  above  described,  Julius  and  his  company  proceeded  on 
their  voyage,  but  so  slowly  that  it  took  them  "  many  days  "  to  reach  Cnidns, 
distant  not  more  than  a  hundred  and  thirty  miles  from  Myra.  This  slow  pro- 
gress was,  doubtless,  owing  to  a  contrary  wind  from  the  north-west  which 
ordinarily  prevails  in  the  Archipelago  during  the  summer  months  (Pliny  says  it 
blows  for  forty  days  from  the  beginning  of  August),  and  which,  though  it  per- 
mitted the  ship  to  work  up  to  Onidus  with  difficulty,  nevertheless  rendered  it 
impossible  for  her  to  proceed  farther  in  that  direction.  Having,  therefore,  stood 
away  southward,  or  rather  south-south-west  to  the  easternmost  point  of  Crete,  she 
rounded  that  island  and  again  commenced  a  struggle  with  wind  and  wave  along 
its  southern  coast,  till  the  harbour  of  Fair  Havens,  near  the  city  of  Lasea,  was 
gained  (see  "  Critical  Remarks  "). 

Learn. — 1.  How  all  things  are  made  to  wait  upon  the  servants  of  God.  When 
God's  time  was  come  for  Paul  to  be  despatched  to  Pome,  ships  were  ready  to 
convey  him,  friends  and  companions  to  cheer  him,  winds  and  waves  to  bear  him 
along.  "  More  servants  wait  on  man  than  he'll  take  notice  of "  (Herbert). 
2.  How  God  transforms  men's  plans  to  suit  Himself.  His  own  plans  never 
change,  but  men's  are  often  changed  against  their  will.  Julius'  route  was 
altered,  that  Paul's  character  might  be  further  revealed,  that  Paul  might  have 
Aristarchus'  company  to  Pome,  that  a  great  ship-load  of  immortal  souls  might 
have  a  better  opportunity  of  hearing  the  gospel,  and  that  God's  grace  and 
glory  might  be  seen  in  all.  3.  How  God  conducts  His  people  by  devious  paths 
and  brings  them  into  port  by  contrary  winds.  To  few,  one  might  almost  say  to 
none,  is  the  voyage  of  life  all  smooth  and  pleasant  sailing. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1.  Pauls  Voyage  to  Italy.  other  than  that  of  the  good  physician 

I.    Determined  by   Festus. — As   to  who  accompanied  the  apostle  (see  "  In- 

time      and     manner — the    procurator  troduction "). 

being  probably  guided  in  his  judgment  V.  Endorsed  by  Paul. — The  second 
by  the   opinion   of   Agrippa    and   the  epistle  to  Timothy,  by  attesting  Paul's 
presence  of  Julius,  who  was  about  to  presence  in  Pome,  shows  the  likelihood 
return  to  Pome.  at   least   that   this   voyage    was   per- 
il.   Carried    out    by  Julius. — The  formed, 
shipmasters  were  his  servants  and  in- 
struments whom  he  used  for  the  exe-          Ver.  3.  Paul's  Friends — the  Sidonian 
cution  of  his  plans,  which  he  formed  believers, 
and  altered  at  will.                                         I.  The    ground    on     which     Paul 

III.  Over-ruled  by  God.— Along  the  claimed  them  as  friends.— Their  Christ- 
whole  course  of  the  voyage  the  hand  of  ian  discipleship,  which  meant  their 
God  can  be  seen  interposing  for  higher  common  relationship  to  Jesus  Christ, 
purposes  than  those  of  either  Festus  or  and  as  a  consequence  their  common 
Julius.     It    was   more    God   that   was  membership  in  God's  house. 

leading  Paul  to  Pome  than  Festus  that  II.  The    service    Paul   expected  to 

was  sending  him  or  Julius  that  was  con-  receive  at  their  hands. — Refreshment, 

ducting  him.  a  supply  of  such  things  as  might  be 

IV.  Reported  by  Luke.— The  liveli-  needful   for   the    voyage    (see   James 
ness  of  the  narration  indicates  the  pen  ii.  16,  and  compare  2  Tim.  iv.  13,  21). 
of  an    eyewitness,  which  could  be  no  III.  The  probability  that  Paul's  ex- 

559 


chap,  xxvii.    HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


pectations  were  fulfilled. — ISTofe  simply 
because  they  were  disciples,  to  whom  his 
name  would  be  well  known,  but  because 
in  all  likelihood  he  had  personal  ac- 
quaintances among  them,  having 
recently  been  at  Tyre  (xxi.  3)  and  at 
Ptolemais  (xxi.  7).  Besides,  he  may 
have  passed  through  Sidon  when 
travelling  with  Barnabas  from  Antioch 
to  Jerusalem  (xi.  30,  xv.  3). 

Ver.  4.  Contrary  Winds — 


I.  Frequently  occur  on  the  voyage 
of  life. 

II.  Are  seldom  agreeable    to  the 

voyagers. 

III.  Always   useful,  furthering  the 
designs  of  the  chief  shipmaster,  God. 

Ver.  8.  The  Fair  Havens. 

I.  Many   havens    counted   fair    by 
man  are  incommodious  to  winter  in. 

II.  One  haven  only  is  secure  against 
life's  storms — that  of  heaven. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  9—14. 

Caught  in  a  Storm  ;  or,  from  Fair  Havens  to  Crete. 

I.  The  advice  proffered  by  Paul. — 1.  The  purport  of  it.  Whether  "Julius 
the  centurion  and  the  captain  and  the  pilot  and  other  naval  officers,  met  in 
council,"  at  which  Paul,  through  the  courtesy  of  Julius,  was  invited  to  assist 
(Lewin),  can  only  be  conjectured.  In  any  case,  whether  asked  or  volunteered, 
Paul's  counsel  was,  not  to  quit  the  shelter  of  the  Pair  Havens,  incommodious 
though  it  was,  but  to  spend  the  winter  there.  Though  not  exactly  stated  in  the 
narrative,  from  the  considerations  urged  by  Paul  it  may  be  reasonably  inferred 
that  this  was  the  tenor  of  his  admonition.  2.  The  reason  of  it.  The  apostle 
apprehended,  not  from  supernatural  guidance,  but  from  the  exercise  of  his  own 
judgment,  looking  to  the  lateness  of  the  season — the  Past  or  Great  Day  of  Atone- 
ment, which  fell  about  the  beginning  of  October,  being  past — that  to  proceed 
further  with  the  voyage  would  only  result  in  disaster  to  the  vessel,  and  probably 
in  loss  of  life  to  the  crew  and  passengers.  It  is  noticeable  that  Paul  says  "  Our 
lives,"  since  no  angel  had  as  yet  given  him  assurance  of  his  personal  safety  (con- 
trast ver.  23).  3.  The  rejection  of  it.  Though  his  advice  was  disregarded,  the 
event  showed  that  he  was  right  at  least  in  recommending  the  voyage  to  be 
arrested  and  the  ship  laid  up  for  the  winter  months.  His  fear  lest  life  should  be 
lost  likewise  proved  so  far  correct  that  only  a  merciful  Providence  prevented  it 
from  being  realised. 

II.  The  mistake  committed  by  the  centurion. — He  "  gave  more  heed  to  the 
master  and  the  owner  of  the  ship  than  to  those  things  which  were  spoken  by 
Paul."  This  was — 1.  Perhaps  natural.  Considering  that  Paul  was  a  landsman, 
whereas  the  master  (pilot,  steersman,  or  captain)  was  an  experienced  mariner, 
and  the  owner  of  the  vessel  possessed  at  least  some  knowledge  of  nautical 
affairs,  humanly  speaking,  Julius  with  whom,  as  the  highest  officer  on  board,  the 
ultimate  decision  lay  (Bamsay),  could  hardly  be  blamed  for  listening  to  their 
words  rather  than  to  those  of  Paul.  Julius,  however,  overlooked  two  things — 
(1)  that  experts  are  not  always  correct  in  their  judgments,  while  non-experts  are 
not  always  wrong,  and  (2)  that  Paul,  besides  being  no  common  man,  had  had 
considerable  experience  in  sailing  on  Mediterranean  waters,  having  once  narrowly 
escaped  from  drowning,  after  shipwreck,  by  drifting  about  on  a  spar — haidly 
swimming  (Ramsay) — for  a  night  and  a  day  (2  Cor.  xi.  25,  26),  and  so  was  better 
qualified  than  most  people  to  pronounce  an  opinion  on  the  advisability  of 
risking  a  winter  voyage.  Yet  the  centurion's  mistake  was — 2.  Certainly  serious. 
It  led  to  all  the  future  misfortunes  that  befell  the  large  ship  and  its  crew.  To 
proceed  at  the  late  season  which  had  then  arrived  was  a  false  step,  and,  like  other 
false  steps,  when  once  taken  could  not  be  retrieved. 

560 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.    chap,  xxvil 


III.  The  course  recommended  by  the  crew  and  passengers. — 1.  The  tenor  of 
it.  To  put  to  sea  at  once  and  make  for  the  harbour  of  Phoenix,  on  the  south  of 
Crete.  If  the  Alexandrian  sailors  knew  of  the  existence  of  such  a  harbour, 
recent  geographical  discovery  has  shown  the  accuracy  of  their  information.  It 
was  long  held  that  no  spot  on  the  south  shore  of  Crete  answered  the  description 
of  Phoenix  furnished  by  Luke  ;  but  "  at  length  the  point  was  entirely  settled  and 
made  clear  by  the  publication  of  the  charts  of  our  British  surveying  officers. 
There  is  no  difficulty  now  in  identifying  Phoenix  with  Lutro  in  the  narrowest  part 
of  the  island  of  Crete.  It  is  a  place  of  admirable  shelter,  with  deep  water  close 
under  the  rocks  and  precisely  protected  from  south-west  and  north-west  winds  as 
was  said  in  the  discussion  at  Fair  Havens  "  (Spence).  2.  The  arguments  for  it. 
(1)  That  Fair  Havens  was  not  a  suitable  harbour  to  winter  in.  This  appears  to 
have  been  the  case.  The  anchorage  there,  while  affording  shelter  from  the  north- 
west gales,  was  open  to  those  from  other  points  of  the  compass.  (2)  That  Phoenix 
was  better  adapted  for  winter  quarters.  This  also  accorded  with  fact.  Accord- 
ing to  Luke's  narrative  Phoenix  looked  toward  the  south-west  and  the  north-west, 
which  the  best  expositors  explain  as  meaning  that  its  two  openings  looked  down 
the  directions  of  these  winds,  or,  in  other  words,  that  it  faced  the  north-east  and 
south-east  (see  "Critical  Remarks.")  "  Lutro,"  with  which  Phoenix  has  been 
identified,  "  is  an  admirable  harbour.  You  open  it  like  a  box ;  unexpectedly  the 
rocks  stand  apart,  and  the  town  appears  within.  .  .  .  There  are  fifteen  fathoms 
in  the  middle  of  the  harbour,  diminishing  gradually  to  two  close  to  the  village  " 
(Conybeare  and  Howson,  ii.  343).  3.  The  adoption  of  it.  The  majority  having 
recommended  that  Phoenix  should  be  made  for,  the  captain,  favoured  by  a  change 
of  wind  from  strong  north-west  to  soft  south-east,  weighed  anchor  and  sailed  along 
close  in  shore,  so  little  apprehensive  of  danger  that  the  ship's  boat  was  left  towing 
astern  (ver.  16).  4.  The  mistake  of  it.  The  treacherous  character  of  the  wind 
which  had  decoyed  them  forth  from  the  Fair  Havens  soon  revealed  itself.  Sud- 
denly it  reverted  to  its  old  quarter  and  swept  down  with  hurricane  fury  upon  the 
ill-fated  corn-ship.  Whether  named  Euroclydon  or  Euraquilo,  the  wind  belonged 
to  the  typhonic  order,  an  east-north-easter  fierce  and  strong,  "  a  sudden  eddying 
squall,"  before  which  the  vessel  could  not  stand. 

"  Colder  and  colder  blew  the  wind 
A  gale  from  the  north-east. 
The  snow  fell  hissing  in  the  brine, 
And  the  billows  frothed  like  yeast. 

u  Down  came  the  storm,  and  smote  amain 

The  vessel  in  its  strength  ; 
She  shuddered  and  paused,  like  a  frighted  steed, 

Then  leaped  her  cable's  length." 

Longfellow. 

"  Every  one,"  writes  Ramsay  (St.  Paul,  etc.,  p.  327),  "  \a  h  >  has  any  experience  of 
sailing  on  lakes  or  bays  overhung  by  mountains,  can  appreciate  the  epithet 
*  typhonic '  which  Luke  uses  " — adding  that  a  ship  captain  when  relating  an 
experience  of  his  own  in  Cretan  waters,  said,  "  The  wind  comes  down  from  those 
mountains  fit  to  blow  the  ship  out  of  the  water."  Turning  her  back  to  the  gale 
Paul's  ship  ran  before  the  wind. 

Learn — 1.  The  danger  of  either  always  trusting  to  experts  or  always  follow- 
ing the  majority.  In  this  case  the  sailors  and  passengers  were  wrong,  and  Paul 
right.  2.  The  almightiness  of  God,  as  seen  in  the  elements  of  nature.  Wind 
and  wave  are  only  instruments  in  God's  hand,  and  vehicles  of  His  power.  3.  The 
wisdom  of  always  acting  with  prudent  foresight.  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow. 
Hurricanes  may  succeed  south  winds. 

oo  561 


chap,  xxvii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.    9.    Dangerous    Voyages. — Such 
are  those  which  are  undertaken — 
I.  At  unsuitable  times. 
II.  Over  stormy  seas. 

III.  Against  advice  from  the  ex- 
perienced. 

IV.  With  overweening  confidence  in 
one's  own  ability. 

Y.  In  defiance  of  almost  certain 
risks. — Many  such  voyages  of  a  moral 
kind  are  made  by  souls. 

Vers.  10-14.  The  Counsel  of  the 
Good. 

I.  Is  often  despised  by  the  world.— 

1.  Because  it  proceeds  from  the  good. 

2.  Because  it  is  unpleasant,  and  con- 
trary to  the  world's  wishes. 

II.  May  sometimes  appear  to  be  un- 
called for. — This  probably  was  felt  to 
be  the  case  with  Paul's  advice  to  the 
captain  and  owner,  which  was — 1.  Not 
asked,  and  may  have  looked  officious. 
2.  JSTot  probable,  as  emanating  from  a 
landsman  and  a  prisoner. 

III.  Can  seldom  be  neglected  with 
impunity. — Before  the  voyage  was  over, 
all  on  board  must  have  wished  they  had 
hearkened  to  the  apostle. 


Ver.  12.  The  Vote  of  the  Majority. 

I.  As  a  general  rule  it  is  wise  that 
the  majority  should  prevail. — On  this 
principle  only  can  social  government  or 
co-operative  action  proceed.  To  set 
aside  the  will  of  the  majority  where  all 
have  equal  rights,  in  favour  of  the  wish 
of  the  minorit}^  is  of  the  essence  of 
tyranny  and  oppression. 

II.  There  are  times  when  the 
majority  should  bow  to  the  minority. 
— As,  for  instance,  when  the  subject  in 
debate  is  one  upon  which  the  minority 
is  better  informed  or  more  likely  to  be 
able  to  give  a  right  decision.  To  refuse 
to  do  so  is  not  intelligence,  but  stupidity, 
not  principle,  but  stubbornness. 

III.  The  vote  of  the  majority  has 
not  unfrequently  been  wrong. — In- 
stances might  be  quoted  from  almost 
every  department  of  life  —  business, 
politics,  religion. 

Ver.  14.  The  Storms  of  Life. — Are 
most — 

I.  Unexpected  in  their  coming. 
II.   Severe  in  their  operation. 

III.  Long  in  their  continuance. 

IV.  Disastrous  in  their  effects. 


HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  15-26. 

Drifting  Upon  the  Deep  ;  or,  Preparing  for  The  Worst. 

I.  Making  for  shelter. — This  the  storm-driven  vessel  found  for  a  little  under  the 
lee  of  a  small  island  named  Olauda  or  Cauda,  the  modern  Gozzo,  about  twenty 
miles  south-west  of  Cape  Matala.  The  word  used  by  Luke  "  running  under,"  it 
has  been  observed  (Smith,  The  Shipwreck  of  St.  Paul,  2nd  ed.,  p.  100),  is  a 
striking  nautical  term  which  expresses  first  that  the  ship  had  the  wind  behind 
it,  and  secondly,  that  it  had  the  wind  between  itself  and  the  island.  Hence  the 
inference  is  that  it  passed  to  the  south-east  of  the  island. 

II.  Hoisting  up  the  boat. — This,  as  already  remarked,  had  been  towing  astern 
when  the  ship  left  the  Fair  Havens.  Either  the  storm  had  arisen  so  suddenly  or 
had  not  been  expected  to  continue,  so  that  at  first  no  attention  was  turned  to  the 
boat.  When  the  vessel  was  fairly  caught  by  the  hurricane,  it  was  impossible  to 
do  anything  in  the  way  of  securing  the  boat.  In  the  temporary  shelter  afforded 
by  the  island,  the  sailors  managed,  though  with  difficulty,  to  get  it  brought  on 
board.  It  had  obviously  by  this  time  become  waterlogged.  It  was  not  much 
of  a  protection  for  two  hundred  and  seventy  passengers ;  but  should  things 
come  to  the  worst  it  might  be  the  means  of  saving  some,  if  not  all. 

III.  Frapping  the  ship. — So  apprehensive  were  the  captain  and  owner  that 
the  violence  of  the  storm  might  cause  the  ship's  timbers  to  start,  and  the  ship  to 
spring  a  leak,  that  they  resorted  to  a  practice  which,  though  seldom  necessary,  in 
consequence  of  the  superior  construction  of  modern  vessels,  is  nevertheless  still 

562 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.    chap.  xxvn. 


occasionally  employed  by  sailors  in  a  storm.  They  used  helps,  undergirding  the 
ship.  They  put  chains  under  the  keel  and  over  the  gunwale  of  the  vessel,  and 
probably  ropes  along  its  sides,  to  strengthen  the  hull  and  keep  it  from  being 
battered  to  pieces.  Mr.  Smith  and  Conybeare  and  Howson  mention  several 
instances  of  the  practice  here  referred  to,  of  which  the  following  may  be  cited. 
1.  At  the  battle  of  Navarino  the  Albion  man-of-war  received  so  much  damage 
during  the  action,  that  it  became  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  frapping,  and  the 
vessel  had  chain  cables  passed  round  her  under  the  keel,  which  were  tightened 
by  others  passed  horizontally  along  the  sides,  interlacing  them  ;  and  she  was 
brought  home  in  this  state  to  Portsmouth.  2.  On  December  20th,  1837,  the 
schooner  St.  Croix,  fifty-three  tons  burden,  bound  for  Kingston,  Jamaica, 
encountered  a  severe  gale  from  south-west  and  lay  to  for  seven  days.  On  the 
26th  she  shipped  a  heavy  sea,  which  took  away  about  one-third  of  her  deck-load. 
For  the  preservation  of  the  crew,  vessel,. and  balance  of  deck-load,  it  was  found 
necessary  to  secure  the  top  of  the  ship,  which  was  done  by  passing  a  coil  of 
four-inch  Manilla  rope  round  and  round  the  vessel,  and  making  them  as  tight  as 
possible  by  means  of  heavers.  One  of  the  chains  was  also  passed  round  and 
fastened  with  tackles  and  heavers,  so  that  the  top  of  the  vessel  was  secured  and 
the  leak  in  the  waterways  was  stopped.  In  this  way  the  vessel  reached  its 
destination. 

IV.  Lowering  the  gear. — Considerable  dubiety  exists  as  to  the  exact  import 
of  this  expression — some  supposing  it  to  mean  that  the  sails  were  taken  down  so 
as  to  let  the  vessel  scud  along  under  bare  poles,  and  others  that  the  stern  anchor 
was  paid  out,  that,  by  dragging,  it  might  impede  the  ship's  progress ;  but  the 
opinion  most  in  favour  is  that  the  top  hamper  was  lowered  and  the  mast  rigged 
with  only  a  small  storm-sail.  The  reason  for  this  precaution  was  that  tbe 
sailors  dreaded  being  driven  upon  the  Great  Syrtis  (to-day  called  the  Gulf  of 
Sidra),  a  dangerous  shoal  upon  the  coast  of  Africa,  which  was  a  terror  to  all 
ancient  seamen — "  a  place  terrible  to  such  as  barely  hear  it  described,"  said 
Agrippa  in  his  memorable  speech,  dissuading  his  countrymen  from  going  to  war 
with  the  Romans  (Jos.,  Wars,  II.  xvi.  4) — and  on  which,  according  to  Yirgil,  the 
ship  of  ^Eneas  was  wrecked  (jEneid,  i.  157).  This  might,  to  some  extent,  have 
been  hindered,  if  not  wholly  prevented,  by  the  second  of  the  above  methods, 
lowering  a  stern  anchor — by  the  first  not  at  all ;  but  the  probability  is  that  the 
course  adopted  was  that  suggested  by  the  third, — viz.,  lying  to,  with  the  ship's 
head  turned  towards  the  wind  or  brought  as  near  it  as  possible,  with  as  much 
canvas  set  as  would  prevent  her  from  falling  off  into  the  trough  of  sea.  Smith, 
Conybeare  and  Howson,  Lewin,  Penrose,  and  other  competent  authorities,  are  of 
opinion  that  she  lay  to  within  seven  points  of  the  wind  on  what  is  called  the 
starboard  tack. 

V.  Lightening  the  ship — The  violence  of  the  gale  continuing,  additional 
measures  were  required  to  ensure  safety.  1.  A  part  of  the  cargo — perhaps  the 
deck  cargo,  or  whatever  portion  of  the  freight  could  be  most  easily  spared — was 
thrown  overboard  on  the  second  day  of  the  storm.  That  all  was  not  thrown  out 
appears  later  on  (ver.  38).  2.  The  tackling  of  the  ship  followed  on  the  succeeding 
day,  the  third  of  the  hurricane.  What  the  spare  gear  meant  cannot  be  definitely 
stated.  Mr.  Smith  conjectures  it  may  have  been  the  mainyard,  "  an  immense 
spar,  probably  as  long  as  the  ship,  which  would  require  the  united  efforts  of 
passengers  and  crew  to  launch  overboard,"  and  adds,  "  The  relief  a  ship  would 
experience  by  this  would  be  of  the  same  kind  as  in  a  modern  war- vessel  when  the 
guns  are  thrown  overboard."  In  this  work  of  casting  out  "  the  ship's  furniture  " 
the  A. V.,  following  certain  ancient  MSS.  represents  Luke  and  his  companions, 
perhaps  including  Paul,  as  taking  part ;  but,  according  to  the  best  texts  the  work 
was  done  by  the  sailors  alone. 

563 


chap.  xxvn.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    THE  ACTS. 


VI.  Despairing  of  safety. — This  was  the  condition  of  the  crew  and  passengers 
for  the  next  few  days.  When  the  ship  lay  to  under  the  starboard  tack  she  began 
to  drift  away  westward,  or,  more  correctly  speaking,  west  by  north,  at  the  rate 
of  (say)  thirty-six  miles  in  twenty-four  hours.  With  a  ship  manifestly  leaking, 
a  wild  storm  raging,  a  grey  sky  overhead  during  day,  concealing  the  sun,  and  a 
black  pall  at  night  shutting  out  the  stars,  so  that  no  observations  could  be  made 
of  their  whereabouts,  it  was  not  surprising  that  all  on  board  began  to  anticipate 
the  worst.  Tossed  about  at  the  mercy  of  wind  and  wave,  with  creaking  and 
slackening  timbers,  they  had  no  more  cheerful  prospect  than  that  before  long  their 
ship  would  founder  and  go  down,  as  Josephus's  vessel,  with  six  hundred  souls  on 
board,  had  done  in  this  same  sea,  the  Adriatic. 

VII.  Taking  heart  of  cheer. — How  many  days  had  passed  before  Paul 
interposed  with  his  words  of  comfort  is  not  told.  Despair  had  laid  its  icy  grasp 
on  every  heart.  Nobody  cared  for  food,  and  nobody  could  have  eaten  though 
food  had  been  prepared.  In  such  circumstances  the  apostle,  the  hurricane 
having  for  a  moment  lulled,  it  may  be  conjectured,  stood  forth  among  them, 
crew  and  passengers,  to  offer  words  of  cheer.  1.  He  reproved  them  for  not 
having  acted  on  his  advice  when  he  counselled  them  to  winter  in  Fair  Havens 
(ver.  10) ; — which  perhaps  shows  that  Paul  regarded  that  advice  as  having  been 
founded  on  more  than  his  own  natural  sagacity.  Had  they  listened  to  his 
suggestion,  they  had  not  come  by  their  present  injury  and  loss.  2.  He  assured 
them  that  no  lives  would  perish,  though  the  ship  would  be  lost.  This  he  stated, 
not  as  an  inference  of  his  own  foresight,  but  as  the  result  of  a  communication 
made  to  him  during  the  preceding  night,  direct  from  heaven,  by  an  angel  of  the 
God  whom  he  served,  and  in  answer  to  prayer.  That  heavenly  ambassador  had 
repeated  an  intimation  previously  made  (xxiii.  11),  that  he  must  go  to  Rome 
and  stand  before  Caesar  (which  implied  that  his  life  would  not  be  lost  in 
that  storm),  adding  the  further  statement  that,  in  answer  to  his  supplication, 
God  had  granted  him  the  lives  of  all  his  fellow-passengers.  3.  He  exhorted 
them  to  be  of  good  cheer.  Twice  used  (vers.  22-25),  this  expression  revealed 
at  once  his  earnestness  and  strong  conviction  of  the  truth  of  what  he  said — 
a  conviction  which  arose  from  his  faith  in  God,  whose  promises  to  him 
were  Yea  and  amen  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  He  believed  that  what  God  had  spoken  to 
him  would  come  to  pass.  Hence  he  could  afford  to  dismiss  all  anxiety  as  to  the 
issue  of  the  voyage.  Could  they  have  believed  him,  as  he  believed  God,  they 
might  have  done  the  same.  That  Luke  and  Aristarchus  were  relieved  of  their 
apprehensions  by  Paul's  address  need  hardly  be  questioned.  But  that  the  crew 
and  passengers  continued  in  alarm  is  apparent  from  the  circumstance  that  when 
next  Paul  spoke  to  them,  on  the  fourteenth  night  (ver.  33),  they  had  not 
broken  fast.  4.  He  told  them  they  would  be  cast  upon  a  certain  island.  As 
land  was  not  then  visible,  this  announcement  must  be  regarded  as  having  formed 
part  of  the  communication  made  to  Paul  by  the  angel.  The  addition  of  this  fact 
reminded  the  crew  and  passengers  that,  even  if  they  did  credit  Paul's  assurance, 
there  was  still  need  for  caution,  lest  in  the  stranding  of  the  vessel  they  should, 
after  all,  be  drowned.  God's  promise  in  no  way  relieved  them  of  the  necessity  of 
caring  for  their  own  safety. 

Learn — 1.  The  helplessness  of  man  when  he  falls  into  the  hands  of  God. 
Sailors  and  passengers  realise  this  when  caught  in  a  storm  at  sea.  2.  The 
worthlessness  of  material  treasure  when  compared  with  life.  "  Skin  for  skin, 
yea,  all  that  a  man  hath,  will  he  give  for  his  life."  3.  The  holy  courage  which 
true  piety  inspires.  Paul  lost  neither  heart  nor  head  in  the  storm.  4.  The 
certainty  that  worldly  and  unbelieving  men  receive  many  blessings  from  God  for 
His  people's  sakes.  5.  The  assurance  possessed  by  faith  that  God  will  keep  His 
promise. 

564 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.    chap,  xxvir. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  15.  The  Drifting  Life  and  Its 
Opposite  (compared  with  John  vi.  21). 
1.  The  drifting  life  is  our  first  subject. 
Its  name  is  legion.  It  is  not  the  only 
life  of  the  human  being — but  it  is  the 
life  of  hundreds  of  thousands.  "  Drift- 
ing "  is  its  superscription.  Caught  by 
the  Euroclydon  of  chance  and  change, 
of  accident  and  circumstance,  it  gives 
way  to  it,  and  so  is  driven.  It  drifts. 
Its  very  framework  and  setting — its 
external  condition,  its  employment,  its 
occupation,  its  profession — has  perhaps 
been  accident.  It  had  a  home,  and  it 
went  to  school,  it  did  its  lessons,  and 
ate  and  drank,  and  it  grew  up,  and  it 
took  its  chance,  and  here  it  is.  The 
outward  life  drifted.  If  this  were  all, 
something  might  be  said  of  its  quiet 
submission  to  a  higher  guidance — 
human  guidance  or  even  Divine.  But 
this  is  not  all.  The  life  which  we  are 
describing  is  not  only  passive  in  the 
sense  of  submission — it  is  passive  also 
in  departments  where  it  is  death  not 
to  be  active.  For  example,  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  drifting  into  associa- 
tions, drifting  into  habits,  drifting  into 
a  course  of  conduct.  How  else  can  we 
describe  nine- tenths  of  the  companion- 
ships, nine-tenths  of  the  attachments, 
nine-tenths  of  the  marriages,  which 
may  almost'  be  said  to  have  the  life 
itself  in  their  keeping  1  Drifting  is 
the  explanation  of  half  the  personal 
habits  which  make  a  good  or  a  bad 
life.  Letting  alone  is  another  word 
for  it.  Habits  are  only  tricks  on  a 
large  scale ;  every  one  knows  how  easy 
these  are  to  fall  into,  how  difficult  to 
get  rid  of ;  what  else  are  those  habits 
of  temper,  habits  of  speech,  habits  of 
thoughts — sloth,  debt,  intemperance, 
profaneness,  immorality — what  else  are 
they  but  negligences  at  first,  things 
thought  not  worth  attending  to,  so 
trivial,  so  immaterial,  so  easily  dropped 
at  any  moment  if  they  should  go  too 
far  or  become  troublesome  ?  We  drift 
into  them.  There  are  positive  habits 
and  negative.     You  let  your  morning 


prayer  pass  one  morning — you  just 
drifted  out  of  the  good  habit,  as  you 
drifted  into  the  bad  one.  There  are 
habits  of  the  mind  as  well  as  of  the  life. 
Opinion  is  a  habit  of  the  mind — not 
least  on  the  highest  subjects.  Faith 
itself  is  a  mental  habit — faith,  and  its 
opposite.  But  how  few  are  they,  by 
comparison,  who  carefullyand  earnestly 
form  these  mental  habits.  Reflect  for 
a  moment  upon  your  reasons  for 
thinking  this,  for  believing  that.  "  Be 
ready,"  St.  Peter  says,  "to  answer 
when  men  ask  you  for  a  reason  for  the 
hope  that  is  in  you " — can  we  obey 
that  precept  ?  Must  we  not  say,  most 
of  us,  I  drifted  into  my  faith — it  is  the 
religion  of  my  home  and  of  my  country. 
Very  sad,  sometimes,  is  the  spectacle 
of  this  kind  of  drifting.  2.  Thus  we 
reach  the  second  text,  and  the  second 
picture,  and  the  second  parable — that 
which  shows  us  the  disciples  crossing 
the  sea  of  Galilee  through  wind  and 
storm,  terrified  in  the  midst  of  it  first 
by  the  absence  and  then  by  the  appari- 
tion of  their  Master,  then  calmed  by 
His  voice  of  rea  ssurance,  receiving  Him 
into  their  ship,  and  straightway  finding 
themselves  at  the  land  whither  they 
went.  The  opposite  of  a  life  of  drifting 
is  obviously  a  life  of  aim,  of  purpose,  of 
directness.  A  life  which  goes,  not 
anywhere,  but  somewhither.  A  life 
with  a  terminus,  with  a  destination, 
with  a  haven.  A  life  possessing  both 
helm  and  pilot,  a  controlling  hand  and 
a  guiding  will.  Such  a  life  may  be, 
.and  yet  be  earthly.  A  business  life 
may  have,  in  terms  at  least,  all  these 
conditions.  But  how  when  we  take 
into  view  the  whole  of  being — eternity, 
as  well  as  time  1  How  then  ?  We 
want  to  know  what  is  the  security 
against  drifting  when  we  take  in  two 
worlds.  And  we  find  it  in  the  words, 
"  They  received  Him  into  the  ship." 
No  life  is  safe  from  drifting  unless 
it  has  religion  in  it.  A  strong  will 
cannot  prevent  the  ship,  which  is 
the  life,  from    being  caught  by  some 

565 


chap,  xxvii.    BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


Euroclydon,  and  driven,  helpless,  before 
it. — Dean  Vaughan. 

Vers.  15-20.  The  Voyage  of  Life.— As 
depicted  in  that  of  Paul  from  Crete. 
Such  as  sail  across  the  ocean  of  life 
are — 

I.  Often  exceedingly  tossed  with  a 
tempest. — 1.     Of     physical     affliction. 

2.  Of     mental     tribulation.      3.     Of 
heart-anxiety.     4.  Of  spiritual  distress. 

II.  Sometimes  reduced  to  such 
straits  that  they  must  part  with  all 
they  count  dear.— 1.  With  material 
substance.   2.  With  intellectual  wealth. 

3.  With   (supposed)    spiritual    riches. 

4.  With  all  ordinary  means  of  saving 
themselves. 

III.  Not  unfrequently  plunged  into 
despair. — 1.  About  their  bodily  life. 
2.  Concerning  their  soul's  salvation. 

Ver.  22.  Good  Cheer  for  Christian 
Sailors. 

I.  No  soul  shall  be  lost,  however 
severe  may  be  the  tempests  that  arise 
against  it. 

"  Let  troubles  rise  and  terrors  frown, 
And  days  of  darkness  fall ; 
Through  Him  all  dangers  we'll  defy, 
And  more  than  conquer  all." 

Scotch  ParapJtrase. 

II.  No  guarantee  that  everything 
else  may  not  be  lost. — The  ship  the 
Christian  sails  in  may  be  lost.  His 
body  may  perish.  His  creature  com- 
forts may  be  removed.  All  he  confides 
in  may  be  shattered.  He  himself  shall 
be  saved  (1  Cor.  iii.  15). 

Four  Anchors.  —  The  message — 
"  I  exhort  you  to  be  of  good  cheer  " 
— is  Christianity's  message  to  storm- 
tossed  souls.  When  the  long  voyage 
has  been  one  of  continual  storm  ;  when 
you  look  back  and  see  nothing  but  cloud, 
and  darkness,  and  disappointment ; 
when  the  very  cargo  that  you  ventured 
all  upon  has  been  thrown  overboard, 
and  there  is  nothing  left ;  when  you 
look  forward  and  hear  the  surf  pounding 
on  the  rocks — a  sign  of  death  close  at 
hand; — then  Christianity  comes  with 
this  message  :  "  /  exhort  you  to  be  cheer- 

566 


ful"  In  such  a  time  as  that  there 
are  four  anchors  which  the  Christian 
may  throw  out  while  he  wishes  for 
day.  They  are,  Duty,  Hope,  Christ, 
and  God. 

I.  Duty. — When  there  is  no  longer 
any  inspiration  in  life ;  when  you  can 
no  longer  see  that  you  can  do  anything  ; 
when  it  seems  that  all  life  thus  far  has 
been  a  failure ;  when  you  cannot  see 
that  you  can  accomplish  anything  in 
the  future ; — then  comes  Duty  to  stand 
by  your  side  and  say,  "  Do  not  leave 
the  ship.  You  are  in  peril  with  others ; 
you  are  bearing  a  burden  with  others  : 
bear  the  burden,  and  do  not  throw 
it  off  upon  them."  Duty — all  her 
surliness  turns  to  serenity,  and  all  her 
serenity  to  peace.  Let  a  man  live  for 
happiness — for  himself,  for  his  wife, 
for  his  children,  for  his  home,  for 
others — and  sooner  or  later  the  time 
of  shipwreck  will  come  to  him.  Let 
him  live  for  what  men  call  honour, 
and  honour  will  not  leave  him  in  the 
hour  of  shipwreck.  It  was  duty  that 
enabled  the  six  hundred  to  make  that 
charge  at  Balaclava,  though  some  one 
had  blundered,  and  they  rode  to  death. 
It  is  duty  that  enables  many  a  man  to 
stand  where  honour  has  no  reward  for 
him,  and  fame  no  value  to  him,  and 
yet  to  stand,  and,  having  done  all,  still 
stand ;  for  duty  inspires  him,  and  duty 
is  the  voice  of  God  speaking  in  con- 
science. 

II.  The  second  anchor  is  Hope — 
that  is,  immortal  hope.  Let  a  man 
live  under  the  impression  that  the 
horizon  of  this  present  time  is  the 
horizon  of  his  life,  and  I  do  not  see 
how  he  can  help  at  times  asking  him- 
self, Is  life  worth  living  ?  and  shaking 
his  head  sorrowfully  in  reply.  One  is 
prosperous  and  makes  money,  and  is 
wealthy — what  then  ?  WThat  can  he 
do  with  it  ?  Life  is  like  an  ocean  voyage. 
The  man  comes  out  in  the  morning  from 
his  cabin  and  starts  to  walk  the  deck. 
Whether  it  is  a  little  boat  or  a  big  one 
does  not  make  much  difference,  for 
after  a  few  years  he  has  traversed  the 
whole  deck  from  stern  to  stem,  stands 
on  the  bow,  and   knows  all   the  life 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.    chap.  xxviI. 


that  is.  What  then?  Lie  down  to 
sleep,  wearied  one;  in  the  morning 
we  shall  wake  in  the  harbour,  a  new 
continent  before  you,  and  your  friends 
there  waiting  to  receive  you.  This  is 
the  anchor  that  you  are  to  throw  out 
while  you  wish  for  day  :  "  Weeping 
may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh 
in  the  morning."  Blessed  are  those 
that  believe  in  a  morning. 

III.  The  third  anchor  is  Christ — 
Christ  as  a  real  Saviour  from  sorrow 
and  sin,  here  and  now;  Christ  as  the 
noblest  example  of  heroism ;  Christ 
as  the  inspiration  to  right  life,  because 
one  that  has  entered  into  life  and 
borne  the  brunt  of  life's  battle;  Christ, 
the  power  to  live  the  life  that  is  worth 
living. 

IV.  And  then  in  all  these,  God. — 
"  My  God,  whom  I  serve,  sent  His  angel 
to  stand  by  me  this  night. "  The  presence 
of  God.  God  in  the  garden  and  God  in 
the  desert ;  God  at  the  cradle  and  God 
at  the  grave  ;  God  at  the  wedding-feast 
and  God  at  the  funeral ;  God  in  the 
hour  of  plenty  and  God  in  the  hour 
of  famine ;  God  in  that  voice  of  duty, 
making  conscience  really  Divine  ;  God 
in  that  word  of  hope,  the  God  of  all 
hope,  filling  us  with  hope  ;  God  in  that 
Christ,  coming  to  take  man's  burdens 
and  show  them  how,  not  to  get  free 
from  them,  but  how  bravely  to  bear 
them.  Christ's  message  to  the  men 
who  are  storm-tossed,  whose  past  is 
one  long  cyclone,  whose  future  is  an 
unknown  grave,  and  the  only  comfort 
in  whose  ears  is  the  sound  of  the 
breakers  on  the  shore — the  message  of 
Christ  to  them  is  :  Be  of  good  cheer ; 
Duty  still  lives,  though  happiness  is 
dead;  Hope  has  come — it  beckons 
from  beyond  the  grave ;  Christ  is  the 
model  of  a  perfect  heroism  and  the 
power  of  a  Divine  life ;  and  over  all, 
and  in  all,  and  through  all,  is  the 
Father,  God. — Lyman  Abbott,  D.D. 

Ver.  23.  The  Confession  in  the  Midst 
of  the  Storm. — Paul  here  speaks — 1. 
Decidedly.  He  is  no  waverer,  no  halter 
between  two  opinions.  He  has  made 
up  his  mind.     He  is  thoroughly  decided. 


He  speaks  as  one  who  has  made  his 
choice.  2.  Certainly.  He  interposes 
no  "if"  or  "perhaps,"  but  speaks  as 
one  who  knows  his  relationship  to  God. 
3.  Calmly.  These  are  not  the  words 
of  excitement  or  fanaticism.  4.  Joy- 
fully. They  are  the  words  of  one 
exulting  in  the  consciousness  of  this 
Divine  relationship.  5.  Earnestly. 
With  him  all  connected  with  God  is  a 
profound  reality.  Such  is  our  model  ! 
Though  we  be  not  apostles,  we  are  to 
take  our  stand  here.  Nothing  less  than 
this  will  do.  Indecision,  oscillation, 
half-heartedness,  will  not  do.  Com- 
promise will  not  do.  Luke  warm ne.-s 
will  not  do.  Formalism  will  not  do. 
In  everything  relating  to  God  there 
must  be  reality,  sincerity,  completeness. 
The  whole  heart  must  be  there. — H. 
JBo?iar,  D.D. 

Paul's  Personal  Religion.  —  It  is 
Paul's  personal  religion,  then,  that 
these  words  of  his  bring  before  us — not 
in  any  of  its  doctrinal  details,  but, 
better  still,  in  the  whole  of  its  practical 
essence.  We  will  try  to  read  some  of 
its  features  as  the  words  reveal  them. 

I.  First,  we  will  note  what  we  may 
call  the  clearheadedness  of  Paul's 
religion.  The  religion  of  too  many  is 
a  thing  of  haze.  They  do  not  see 
through  it,  and  they  do  not  know  their 
position  in  it.  Their  abounding  ex- 
perience is  that  of  mist.  They  may  be 
Christians,  happily,  but  also  they  may 
not ;  they  themselves,  at  least,  are  not 
clear  on  the  subject.  Yet  it  is  in  their 
own  consciousness  that  the  evidence 
ought  to  be  strongest.  Now,  in  Paul's 
religion  there  is  not  a  trace  of  this. 
His  religious  outlook  is  clean  and  clear. 
He  does  not  at  this  moment  know  very 
well  where  he  is  as  a  voyager  on  God's 
world ;  but  he  does  know  distinctly 
where  He  is,  and  what  he  is,  as  a 
religious  being  under  God's  govern- 
ment. He  is  a  Christian  as  surely  as 
he  is  a  man.  He  lays  his  own  hcnl 
on  all  that  belongs  to  a  Christian. 
There  are  mysteries  enough  without 
having  this,  too,  for  a  mystery.  "  The 
God,"  says  he  to  the  hearkening  crowd 

567 


chap,  xxvii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


on  the  deck,  "  whose  I  am,  whom  also 
I  serve."  Paul  does  not  see  what  is 
awaiting  him  in  Rome,  but  he  will  tell 
himself,  and  he  will  tell  other  men, 
that  he  foresees  sufficiently  well  what 
is  awaiting  him  in  the  heavenly  "  city 
of  the  great  King." 

II.  A  second  thing,  then,  which  we 
note  in  Paul's  religion  is  its  clear-, 
heartedness.  Paul,  it  is  easy  to  see, 
is  not  embarrassed  with  his  religion. 
There  is  nothing  of  load  or  weight  in 
it — nothing  of  the  entanglement  of 
anxiety,  or  fear,  or  concealment,  or 
shame.  It  is  plain  that  he  is  rather 
proud  than  otherwise  of  his  religion. 
These  words  declare  his  religion,  throb 
with  it,  glory  in  it.  On  that  long 
voyage  he  has  never  kept  it  a  secret 
from  any  man  how  it  stands  between 
God  and  him.  This  of  itself  is  proof 
enough  that  there  is  no  degradation  in 
his  religious  position.  There  can  be 
nothing  in  it  that  is  unworthy  of  a 
man,  nothing  that  is  uncongenial  to 
the  most  gifted  and  capacious  of 
human  spirits.  Does  it  appear  to 
have  broken  his  energy,  or  crushed  his 
high  spirit — this  submission  of  himself 
and  his  powers  to  the  control  of  his  God  ? 
Nay ;  if  all  the  truth  were  told,  Paul 
was  never  Paul  at  his  best,  or  anything 
near  it,  till  he  could  say,  "  The  God 
whose  I  am,  whom  also  I  serve." 

III.  A  third  thing  we  have  to  note 
about  the  religion  of  Paul  is  its  out- 
ward expression — the  form  it  pre- 
sents to  the  observation  of  men.  This 
appears  in  the  phrase  "  Whom  also  I 
serve."  That  signifies,  "  To  whom  I 
do  worship — to  whose  honour  I  per- 
form all  my  religious  rites,  and  at 
whose  hands  I  take  all  my  religious 
duties."  In  a  word,  Paul  worships  his 
God — obeys  worshipping,  and  worships 
obeying.  His  religion,  rich  with  rever- 
ence, seeks  outward  manifestation  of 
itself,  and  the  manifestation  it  finds  is 
worship — the  observance  of  all  the 
prescribed  yet  untrammelled  methods 
of  homage  which  are  suitable  to  such 
a  God  as  his.  Those  listening  men  had 
most  of  them  their  gods,  to  whom  they 
did  service,  gave  honour,  made  offer  - 

568 


ings — divinities  whose  anger  they 
sought  to  soothe,  whose  favour  they 
coveted  to  win,  whose  temples  they 
were  fain  to  frequent.  Men  could 
thus  read  their  religion.  So  it  was, 
more  finely,  with  Paul.  His  religion, 
much  more  than  theirs,  was  a  spiritual 
religion,  but  it  was  not  left  altogether 
bodiless.  He  prayed,  he  praised — 
alone,  or  in  company  with  brethren. 

TV.  But  a  fourth  thing  which  we 
must  now  note  about  the  religion  of 
Paul  is  its  inward  thoroughness— its 
personalness,  and  depth,  and  solidity. 
The  essence  of  Paul's  religion,  we  have 
said,  is  in  this  passage  ;  we  may  now 
say  that  the  essence  of  the  passage  is 
in  these  three  words  :  "  Whose  I  am." 
Paul,  then,  simply  does  not  belong  to 
himself,  but  to  his  God.  For  him,  "  to 
live  is  Christ,"  and  to  die  is  only  more 
of  Christ.  But  we  must  let  these  three 
words  of  Paul's  mean  to  ourselves  the 
whole  that  they  meant  to  him. 
Assuredly  enough,  he  had  consecrated 
his  life  to  God's  will ;  but  he  had  done 
more.  He  had  given  his  whole  being 
to  God  Himself — to  Father,  Son,  and 
Spirit.  "  Whose,''7  says  he,  "  I  am  " — 
precisely  meaning  what  he  says.  Of 
course  Paul  was  His — His,  as  the 
flower  on  the  mountain-side  is  His 
who  made  it  ;  as  the  silent,  far-off 
star  is  His,  and  all  the  bustling  burden 
of  our  wheeling  world  ;  for  they  bear 
upon  them  the  lines  of  His  creating 
hand.  Of  course  Paul  was  His,  for 
nothing  else  than  His  all-working 
providence  from  moment  to  moment 
could  have  preserved  Paul  to  this  hour. 
True;  but  the  words  carry  more  in- 
tensity in  them  than  these  considera- 
tions could  ever  have  inspired.  Paul 
had  seen  more  to  stir  him,  and  had 
seen  what  stirred  him  more,  than  all 
creation  and  all  providence.  Paul, 
with  his  vision  Divinely  cleansed,  had 
looked  and  beheld  how  his  God,  as  the 
Man  Jesus,  had  girded  Himself  to  meet 
the  desperate  needs  of  Paul,  had  pitied 
Paul  in  his  helplessness  and  guilt,  had 
set  it  before  Himself  to  redeem  Paul 
at  any  cost  that  stayed  short  of  un- 
righteousness, and  had  verily  redeemed 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   THE  ACTS.    chap,  xxvii. 


Paul  at  the  cost  of  comfort,  companion- 
ship, reputation,  lordship,  life — borne 
down  under  a  great  lone  enduring  to 
which  the  world  can  bring  no  parallel. 
"  I  am  Thine  :  Thou  hast  saved  me.'' 

Y.  The  last  thing  we  will  note 
about  the  religion  of  Paul  is  its  tem- 
poral and  eternal  actuality.  That  we 
may  better  feel  this  momentous  cha- 
racteristic of  Paul's  religion,  let  me  ask 
you  to  think  again  of  the  simple  facts 
of  the  record.  Paul  knows  that  his 
God  is  great  enough  to  be  invisible, 
and  mighty  enough  to  be  controlling 
all  things  everywhere.  He  knows  he 
is  the  friend  of  his  God.  He  is  now 
in  jeopardy.  Paul's  religion,  then, 
with  all  its  soaring  sublimity,  and  all 
its  nearly  incredible  creed,  was  still  a 
system  of  facts,  and  not  of  fancies. 
His  religious  sentiment  worked  among 
actualities,  and  not  among  shadows. 
His  religious  reliance  had  a  vastness  of 
substantially  behind  it,  and  not  an 
infinitude  of  cloud.  Paul  felt  his  foot 
firm,  and  had  reason — firm  for  time, 
and  firm  for  eternity.  It  will  be  little 
more  than  extending  our  consideration 
of  this  last  characteristic  of  Paul's 
religion  if,  ere  we  close,  we  turn  our 
our  eye  upon  the  first  three  of  this 
messenger's  words — the  keynote  of 
his  message — "  Fear  not,  Paul." 
Absolutely  speaking,  this  is  the  key- 
tone  of  the  whole  religion  of  Christ, 
and  it  is  the  key-tone  of  no  other — 
hardly  a  tone  at  all  of  any  other. 
Not  the  best  of  other  religions  can 
even  pretend  to  carry  into  the  very 
heart  of  a  man  such  strong  self- 
possession.  But  do  not  these  three 
words  bring  a  breath  of  good  cheer  to 
every  Christian  of  us  who,  like  Paul, 
is  on  lines  of  duty  set  for  him  by  a 
gracious  Providence,  and  on  those  lines 
is  meeting  with  what  is  adverse, 
threatening,  dangerous?  As  obedient 
Christians,  as  dutiful  men  and  women 
of  Christ,  the  last  thing  for  us  to  do  is 
to  fear. — J.  A.  Kerr  Bain,  M.A. 

Yer.  23,  24.  The  True  Greatness  of 
the  Christian. — Whether  minister  or 
private  believer. 


I.  His  exalted  character. —He  be- 
longs to  God — "  whose  I  am."  1.  By 
right  of  creation.  2.  By  title  of  pur- 
chase. 3.  By  act  of  voluntary  dedica- 
tion. 

II.  His  noble  profession. — He  serves 
God— "Whom  I  serve."  1.  Intelli- 
gently, not  blindly.  2.  Heartily,  not 
grudgingly.  3.  Constantly,  not  inter- 
mittently. 

III.  His  heavenly  privilege. — 1. 
Visited  by  angels — >v  There  stood  by 
me  this  night  an  angel  of  God."  "  Are 
they  not  all  ministering  spirits  ?  "  etc. 
(Heb.  i.  14).  2.  Admitted  to  the  throne 
of  grace.  Paul  had  obviously  been 
praying  for  his  fellow-voyagers. 

IY.  His  wide-reaching  influence. — 
He  becomes  a  means  and  a  cause  of 
blessing,  even  to  those  who  love  neither 
him  nor  his  God.  "  God  hath  given 
thee  all  them  that  sail  with  thee " 
(compare  Matt.  v.  13). 

Yer.  24.  Paul's  God. 

I.  His  glorious  majesty. — 1.  Served 
by  angels.     2.   Worshipped  by  men. 

II.  His  wondrous  condescension. — 

1.  In  noting  the  drifting  ship.  2.  In 
visiting  His  suffering  servant.  3.  In 
answering  that  servant's  prayer. 

III.  His  regal  sovereignty. — 1. 
Over  the  sea.  2.  Over  the  lives  of 
men.     3.  Over  the  course  of  events. 

IY.  His  absolute  faithfulness. — 
In  keeping  His  promised  word  to  Paul 
— that  he  should  stand  before  Caesar. 

Y.  His  boundless  mercy. — In  grant- 
ing the  lives  of  all  on  board  the  ship, 
of  whom  most  knew  Him  not,  and 
many  loved  and  served  Him  not. 

The  divine  "  Must n ;  or  what  the 
Angel's  words  signified. — Six  things. 

I.  Three  to  Paul.— 1.  That  his  life 
would  be  spared.  Against  all  the 
probabilities  of  opposing  nature,  who- 
ever else  might  perish,  he  would  not. 
"All  things  possible  with  God";  and 
"  Our  times  in  His  hand," 

"  Not  a  single  shaft  can  hit 
Till  the  God  of  love  sees  fit." 

2.  That  his  appeal  to  Cmsar  had  not 
been  wrong.     If    Paul  had   ever  felt 

569 


chap,  xxvii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


misgiving  as  to  whether  he  had  followed  perior  to,  the  occasion,  was  Paul.     Of 

the  right  course  in  claiming  to  have  his  the     two     hundred     and     seventy -six 

cause  determined  by  the  Emperor,  the  souls   that   formed    the  vessel's   living 

angel's  words  must  have  reassured  him,  freight — master  and  owner,  centurion 

must  in  fact  have  led  him  to  conclude  and    prisoners,    sailors,    soldiers,    and 

that  his  action  had  been  dictated  by  passengers,  perhaps  not  even  excepting 

the  Spirit  of  God,  and  was  accordingly  Luke  and  Aristarchus— it  is    obvious 

approved  by  God  as  right.     To  a  good  that  all  were  filled  with  alarm,  plunged 

man  it  ever  is  a  source  of  highest  con-  in    despair,    preparing   for   the   worst, 

solation  to  know  that  his  footsteps  are  expecting  every  moment  to  go  to  the 

being  guided  by  the  Lord.     3.  That  the  bottom.     Of  course  these  were  not  to 

issue  of  his  trial  would  be  favourable,  be  blamed.     It  is  easy  to  be  cool  when 

The  angel  who  said  "  Fear  not "  could  sailing   over   placid    seas ;    but   to   be 

hardly  have  intended  that  the  Emperor  caught  in  a  Euroclydon,    which  whis- 

would  condemn  him.  ties   through    the   canvas,    makes   the 

II.  Three  to  Paul's  fellow-voyagers,  cordage  rattle,  strains  the  timbers  or 
— 1.  That  Paul  was  under  the  special  iron  plates  of  the  ship,  and  tosses  it 
protection  of  heaven.  This  must  have  about  upon  the  boiling  waters  like  a 
imparted  considerable  importance  to  plaything — is  sufficient  to  try  the 
Paul  in  their  eyes,  and  perhaps  con-  nerves  of  the  strongest,  bravest,  and 
vinced  them  of  his  innocence.  God  is  best  men.  Even  the  disciples  in  similar 
able  to  exalt  his  servants  before  men,  circumstances  were  afraid  (Matt.  viii. 
however  strongly  appearances  may  set  23-27).  Yet  Paul  was  self-possessed 
against  them.  2.  That  Paid  was  in  and  cool,  prisoner  though  he  was, 
God's  sight  the  principal  person  in  the  working  all  day  (ver.  19)  and  at  night 
ship.  The  real  steersman  and  com-  not  sleeping,  though  he  could  have 
mander,  while  all  the  rest  only  sailed  clone  so  more  peacefully  than  Jonah 
■with  him.  How  differently  are  men's  (i.  5),  but  waking,  visited  by  angels 
positions  even  in  this  world  estimated,  and  communing  with  heaven,  praying 
when  God  is  the  judge  !  3.  That  Paid  for  himself  and  his  fellow- voyagers. 
would  be  to  them  a  better  protector  than  Might  it  not  be  said,  "  And  he 
either  Julius  or  the  captain.  For  Paul's  thought  of  Christ,  who  stilled  the  wave 
sake  were  the  whole  ship's  company  to  on  the  Lake  of  Galilee  "  ?  Not  every 
be  saved.  The  men  of  the  world  little  Christian  could  behave  so  in  a  founder- 
know  how  many  benefits  they  receive  ing  ship  !  2.  Courage.  Having 
at  God's  hand,  simply  because  God's  stepped  forward  amidst  the  crowd  that 
servants  are  among  them. — Compiled  were  huddled  on  the  deck  he  reproved 
from  Stier.  the  captain,  centurion,  and  passengers, 

for  not  listening  to  his  advice,  when  he 

Ver.  25.  God  and  the  Believer.  besought    them     not    to    leave     Fair 

I.  God's  promises  to  the  believer  Havens  (ver.  10).  To  some  it  may 
are — 1.  Great.  2.  Clear.  3.  Com-  look  as  if  it  were  rather  an  irrelevant, 
forting.     4.  Saving.  if  not  unbecoming  and  boastful,  not  to 

II.  The  believer's  faith  in  God  is —  say  cruel,  speech  to  make  at  a  mo- 
1.  Simple.  2.  Hearty.  3.  Undoubting.  ment  when  all  were  standing  face  to 
4.  Sustaining.  face  with  death.     But  it  was  none  of 

these.     Pather  it  was   needful   to   be 

Vers.  21-26.  Adrift  upon  the  Deep  ;  said  if  Paul  was  to  gain  a  hearing  for 

or,  Paul's  Heroism  in  the  Storm.  what  he  had  next  to  communicate  ;  and 

I.  The   magnificent    spirit   he    dis-  it    was    manly,    fearless,    and    not  13. 

played. — 1.   Calmness.     The  only  man  3.   Confidence.     He  had  no  doubt  as  to 

on  board  the  tempest-tossed  merchant-  the  truthfulness  of  what  he  next  told 

man  that  lost  not  his  head,  but  whose  them — that    all    would    eventually   go 

coolness   was  equal   to,  and  even  su-  well  with  them;  that  their  fears  were 

570 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.    chap,  xxvii 


unnecessary ;  that  though  the  ship 
would  be  lost  they  would  not ;  that  the 
ship  would  be  wrecked  upon  a  certain 
island  (God  had  not  promised  him  the 
safety  of  the  ship,  ver.  22) — what 
island  he  could  not  say — but  that  not 
a  life  would  be  lost.  It  seemed  all  in 
the  highest  degree  improbable ;  but 
nevertheless  Paul  believed  all  that  he 
had  said  to  be  certain,  because  all  that 
he  had  said  had  been  revealed  to  him 
from  heaven.  Hence  his  confidence. 
Had  his  fellow-voyagers  believed  him, 
they  too  would  have  become  confident ; 
but  they  did  not.  Hence  their  hearts 
were  a  prey  to  black  despair.  4.  Cheer- 
fulness. While  on  every  countenance 
sat  gloom,  on  his  shone  the  lustre  of 
joy.  Though  exhorted  to  partake  of 
food,  they  could  not.  But  he,  standing 
in  their  midst,  took  bread  and,  having 
given  thanks,  brake  it  and  began  to 
eat.  What  a  picture  of  Christian 
gladness  !  (Eccles.  ix.  7). 

II.  The  secret  of  his  lofty  behaviour. 
■ — The  assurance  which  he  had  of  three 
things.  1.  Of  his  soul's  salvation. 
Paul  knew  that,  though  the  ship  went 
to  the  bottom,  it  would  make  no  differ- 
ence to  his  eternal  destiny,  it  would 
only  hasten  him  to  his  Master's 
presence.  He  understood  and  re- 
membered the  relation  in  which  he 
stood  to  God,  and  God  stood  to  him. 
He  belonged  to  God — "  whose  I  am  " 
(compare  Isa.  xliii.  1) — and  lived  for 
God — "  Whom  I  serve."  And  God,  he 
could  have  reverently  added,  belonged 
to  him  (Psalm  xvi.  5),  and  watched 
over  him.  Whatever  happened  he 
could  have  sung — 

"  When  peace  like  a  river  attendeth  my  way, 
When  sorrows  like  sea-billows  roll  ; 

Whatever  my  lot,  Thou  hast  taught  me  to 
know, 
It  is  well,  it  is  well  with  my  soul !  " 

God  and  he,  Christ  and  he,  could  not 
be  parted  (Rom.  viii.  35-39).  2.  Of  his 
body's  preservation.  The  angel  had 
told  him — what  once  before  his  Lord 
had  revealed  to  him  (xxiii.  11) — that 
he  must  stand  before  Caesar ;  and  that 
implied  that  he  could  not  drown.     The 


knowledge  of  that  kept  him  calm, 
courageous,  confident,  and  cheerful,  so 
far  as  his  own  fate  was  concerned^ 
Whoever  might  be  lost,  he  could  not 
be  !  Yet  more  !  3.  Of  the  safety  of  his 
fellow-voyagers.  It  is  hardly  likely  that 
Paul  would  have  been  either  calm  or 
cheerful  if  he  had  known  that,  while  he 
himself  should  be  saved,  all  the  rest  of 
the  ship's  company  should  be  lost.  But 
he  was  spared  this  trial.  The  angel's 
communication  was  that  all  should  be 
rescued.  And  so  the  mystery  of  his 
singular  behaviour  was  solved. 

Lesson.  —  They  who  would  show 
Paul's  calmness,  courage,  confidence, 
and  cheerfulness,  amid  the  storms  and 
tempests  of  life,  must  be  acquainted 
with  Paul's  God,  possess  Paul's  religion, 
and  exercise  Paul's  faith. 

Note. — With  regard  to  the  objection 
urged  against  the  historical  credibility 
of  these  verses  (see  ''Critical  Remarks"), 
the  following  observations  may  be 
pondered  : — "  We  may  at  once  grant 
that  the  narrative  would  go  on  without 
any  obvious  awkwardness,  if  verses 
21-26  were, omitted,  which  is  of  course 
true  of  many  a  paragraph  describing 
some  special  incident  in  a  historical 
work."  .  .  .  "But  it  is  half-hearted 
and  useless  to  cut  out  verses  21-26  as 
an  interpolation  without  cutting  out 
verses  33-38;  there,  too,  Paul  is 
represented  as  the  prophet  and  the 
consoler  on  a  higher  plane,  though  he 
is  also  the  mere  passenger  suffering 
from  hunger,  and  alive  to  the  fact  that 
the  safety  of  all  depends  on  their  taking 
food  and  being  fit  for  active  exertion  in 
the  morning.  Some  critics  go  so  far 
as  to  cut  out  verses  33-35.  But  it  is 
not  ^possible  to  cut  these  out  alone  ; 
there  is  an  obvious  want  of  sequence 
between  verse  32  and  verse  36,  and 
Holtzmann  therefore  seems  to  accept 
verses  33-35.  But  if  they  are  ac- 
cepted, I  fail  to  see  any  reason  for 
rejecting  verses  21-26  ;  these  two 
passages  are  so  closely  akin  in  purport 
and  bearing  on  the  context,  that  they 
must  go  together  ;  and  all  the  mischief 
attributed  to  verses  21-26  as  placing 
Paul   on    a    higher  plane   is   done   in 

571 


CHAP.  xxvn.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


verses    33-35."    .    .    .    "Further,    the  interpolation  theory  could  never  have 

excision    of    verses    21-26    would    cut  written  the  Epistles."  ..."  Finally, 

away  a  vital  part   of   the  narrative.  the  reason  why  the  historian  dwells  at 

(1)  These  verses  contain  the  additional  such  length  on  the  voyage  lies  mainly 

fact,  natural  in  itself  and  assumed  in  in    verses    21-26    and    33-38.     .    .    . 

verse  34  as  already  known,  that   the  But  the  interpolation  theory  would  cut 

crew  and  passengers  were  starving  and  out  the  centre  of   the   picture."  .  .  . 

weak.       (2)    They   fit   well    into    the  "There  remains  no  reason   to   reject 

context,  for  they  follow  naturally  after  verses    21-26   which    I   can    discover, 

the  spiritlessness  described  in  verse  20."  except    that   it   introduces  the  super- 

..."  But  let  us  cut  out  every  verse  human    element.  .  .  .  But  the  super- 

that  puts  Paul  on  a  higher  plane,  and  human  element  is  inextricably  involved 

observe  the  narrative  that  would  result:  in  this  book  :  you  cannot  cut  it  out  by 

Paul  twice  comes  forward  with  advice  any   critical    process    that    will    bear 

that  is  cautiously  prudent,  and  shows  scrutiny.       You   must   accept    all    or 

keen  regard  to  the  chance  of  safety,  leave    all." — Ramsay,    St,    Paul    the 

.  .  .  The   Paul   who   remains  on   the  Traveller,  etc.,  pp.  337-339. 

HOMILETICAL   ANALYSIS.— Verses  27—37. 

Neaiing  the  Breakers  ;  or,  a  Night  of  Anxiety. 

I.  The  situation  on  the  fourteenth  night. — (I.e.,  from  the  bursting  of  the 
storm,  which  occurred  soon  after  leaving  Fair  Havens,  perhaps  on  the  same  day, 
at  nightfall.)  1.  Drifting  in  the  Adria.  Though  usually  applied  to  the  Gulf  of 
Venice,  or  the  sea  between  Italy  and  Greece,  the  term  "Adria"  comprehended,  in  a 
wider  sense,  the  ocean  around  Sicily,  near  which  was  Melita.  The  later  Greek 
and  Roman  writers  even  called  by  this  name  the  entire  sheet  of  water  as  far  as 
Africa.  In  what  direction  they  drifted  can  be  inferred  from  the  statement  that 
they  were  wrecked  on  Melita,  or  Malta,  near  Sicily,  not  the  island  of  the  same 
name  on  the  Dalmatian  coast.  It  was  on  this  Ocean  of  Adria  that  Joseph  us 
was  wrecked  (Life,  3).  2.  Nearing  land.  The  time  was  now  midnight.  What- 
ever that  may  be  to  poets  and  landsmen,  to  tempest-tossed  sailors  in  a  sinking 
ship,  with  no  moon  or  stars  in  the  firmament  overhead,  or  even  with  these,  it 
must  ever  be  a  season  of  deep  horror  and  great  danger.  With  the  sound,  too,  of 
breakers  ahead  announcing  the  proximity  of  unknown  land,  the  acuteness  of 
distress  felt  by  crew  and  passengers  in  such  a  plight  must  be  simply  appalling. 

"  And  fast  through  the  midnight  dark  and  drear, 
Through  the  whistling  sleet  and  snow, 
Like  a  sheeted  ghost  the  vessel  swept 
Towards  the  reef  of  Norman's  woe. 

"  And  ever  the  fitful  gusts  between 
A  sound  came  from  the  land  ; 
It  was  the  sound  of  the  trampling  surf 
On  the  rocks  and  the  hard  sea-sand." 

Longfellow. 

Such  was  the  position  of  Paul's  ship  on  that  terrible  fourteenth  night.  The 
sailors  on  the  look-out  surmised,  from  the  sound  of  foam-crested  billows  dashing 
against  rocks  or  breaking  on  the  beach,  that  they  were  "  drawing  near  to  some 
country,"  and  this  surmise  the  soundings  forthwith  taken  confirmed — first 
twenty  fathoms,  and  again,  after  a  little  space,  fifteen  fathoms.  3.  Letting  go 
anchors.  So  imminent  was  the  peril,  and  so  great  the  fear  of  being  hurled  amid 
rocks,  that  the  mariners  dropped  into  the  sea  from  the  stern  four  anchors,  in  the 
hope  of  retarding  the  fate  which  now  appeared  inevitable.  Ancient  vessels,  not 
carrying  so  large  anchors  as  modern  ships,  had  often  more  of  them.     Lucian 

572 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.    chap.  xxvu. 


(JVav.,  v.),  in  describing  the  Alexandrian  corn-ship,  speaks  of  her  as  having 
anchors  (in  the  plural).  "  Athenseus  mentions  a  ship  which  had  eight " 
(Hackett) ;  and  that  Paul's  possessed  more  than  four  is  expressly  stated  (ver.  30). 
The  reason  for  dropping  the  anchors  from  the  stern,  instead  of  from  the  prow,  as 
was  customary  (Anchora  de  prord  jacitur,  Virgil,  ^En.  vi.  902),  is  evident.  Had 
the  ship  been  anchored  from  the  bows  it  might  have  swung  round  and  struck 
upon  the  rocks,  whereas,  anchored  from  the  stern,  it  was  ready  to  be  run  ashore 
at  any  moment.  The  anchorage  in  St.  Paul's  bay,  the  traditionary  locality  of 
the  shipwreck,  is  reported  good.  "  While  the  cables  hold  there  is  no  danger, 
as  the  anchors  will  never  start "  (Sailing  Directions).  4.  Longing  for  the  day. 
Whether  or  not  the  crew  and  passengers  cried  "  every  man  unto  his  god,"  as  the 
mariners  on  Jonah's  ship  did  (Jon.  i.  5),  and  as  it  may  well  be  believed  Paul  did 
(see  ver.  24),  all  on  board  fervently  wished  the  night  gone,  since,  for  aught  they 
knew,  any  moment  the  ship  might  founder,  or  the  cables  might  snap.  "The 
tension  of  hope  and  fear,  the  suspense  which  made  men  almost  cry — 

'And  if  our  fate  be  death,  give  light  and  let  us  die'— 

is  vividly  brought  brought  before  us  by  Luke's  words  "  (Plumptre).  5.  Attempt- 
ing to  escape.  Under  pretence  of  paying  out  anchors  from  the  foreship  a  number, 
perhaps  all,  of  the  sailors  lowered  the  boat  into  the  sea,  and,  mean-spirited  and 
selfish,  would  themselves  have  been  overboard  had  not  Paul,  with  his  eagle  eye, 
perceived  and  frustrated  their  design  by  informing  the  centurion  and  the  soldiers, 
adding,  with  a  peremptory  tone  of  authority,  that  unless  the  sailors  remained  on 
board,  the  rest  of  the  ship's  company  could  not  be  saved.  Either  Paul  had  re- 
ceived a  Divine  intimation  to  that  effect,  or  he  reasoned  that,  should  the  sailors 
abandon  the  vessel,  no  possibility  could  remain  of  successfully  working  it  in  any 
favourable  emergency  that  might  arise.  6.  Defeating  the  (would  be)  deserters. 
"  Nothing  can  show  more  forcibly,"  says  Lewin,  "  the  absolute  ascendency  which 
Paul  had  gained  over  his  comrcdes  than  the  implicit  faith  with  which  they  now 
executed  his  commands."  "  With  military  promptitude  the  soldiers  held  no  dis- 
cussion on  the  subject,  but  decided  the  question  by  immediate  action.  With  that 
short  sword  with  which  the  Roman  legions  cleft  their  way  through  every 
obstacle  to  universal  victory,  they  'cut  the  ropes,' -and  the  boat  fell  off,  and,  if 
not  instantly  swamped,  drifted  off  to  leeward  into  the  darkness,  and  was  dashed 
to  pieces  on  the  rocks  "  (Conybeare  and  Howson).  Beautifully  writes  Besser  : 
"  It  was  a  strong  faith  which  did  that.  The  last  bridge  between  the  lost  ship, 
for  which  there  was  no  deliverance,  and  the  near  land  was,  with  this  act,  broken. 
At  the  same  moment  that  the  centurion  ordered  the  boat's  ropes  to  be  cut  and 
the  boat  to  be  dropped  into  the  sea,  he  stepped  with  his  soldiers  into  the  salvation 
boat  of  Paul's  word,  which  was  hung  with  fast  cords  to  the  faithfulness  of 
Almighty  God.  Do  thou  also  hew  the  cords  from  every  boat  upon  which  thou 
hast  placed  thy  confidence  alongside  of  God,  and  then  will  to  thee  a  morning  light 
dawn  in  thy  night,  when  thou  shalt  see  the  glorious  help  of  God." 

II.  The  situation  on  the  fifteenth  dawn. — At  length  the  grey  light  of  coming 
dawn  began  to  relieve  the  intolerable  gloom  which  had  prevailed  during  night. 
The  rain  fell  in  torrents  (xxviii.  2).  The  crew  and  passengers  shivered  through 
cold,  wet,  hunger,  and  fear.  A  second  time,  therefore,  Paul  addressed  himself  to 
the  company.  1.  He  repeated  his  assurance  of  safety  for  all  on  board.  Not  a 
hair  of  their  heads  should  perish — not  even  of  the  sailors  who  had  so  meanly 
attempted  to  leave  them.  Thus  did  he  requite  their  evil  with  good,  and  heap 
coals  of  fire  upon  their  heads  (Rom.  ix.  20).  How  they  were  to  get  ashore  lay, 
as  yet,  beyond  his  knowledge.  Only  the  fact  that  all  should  reach  the  beach  alive 
had  been  revealed  to  him,  and  he  believed  that  that  would  come  to  pass  which 
God  had  said.   When  God  speaks,  faith  immediately  proceeds  to  hush  her  doubts, 

573 


chap,  xxvii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


knowing  that  nothing  can  be  too  hard  for  omnipotence  (Jer.  xxxii.  17).  2.  He 
besought  them  to  take  food.  For  fourteen  days  and  nights  they  had  eaten  nothing 
— at  least,  nothing  adequate  to  their  necessities,  having  been  able  to  obtain  no 
regular  meals,  and  having  had  no  heart  to  eat  what  they  could  obtain,  fear  and 
despair  having  quenched  their  appetites.  The  idea  that  they  had  been  keeping 
a  religious  fast  is  not  for  a  moment  to  be  entertained.  "  Appian,"  says 
Doddridge,  "  speaks  of  an  army  which  for  twenty  days  together  had  neither  food 
nor  sleep  :  by  which  he  must  mean  that  they  neither  made  full  meals  nor  slept 
whole  nights  together.  The  same  interpretation  mast  be  given  to  this  phrase  " 
(quoted  by  Hackett).  "  It  was  physically  impossible  that  the  two  hundred  and 
seventy-six  who  were  on  board  could  have  gone  on  for  fourteen  days  without  any 
food  at  all.  Scanty  rations  had,  we  must  believe,  been  doled  out  to  those  who 
came  for  them  ;  but  the  tension  of  suspense  was  so  great  that  they  had  not  sat 
down  to  any  regular  meal "  (Plumptre).  As  an  inducement  to  their  compliance 
with  his  entreaty  Paul  explained  that  this  was  absolutely  necessary  for  their 
safety  ;  meaning  that,  though  they  might  not  perish  through  drowning,  unless 
they  took  support  they  might  die  of  weakness  induced  by  starvation.  3.  He 
himself  set  them  an  example.  Having  taken  bread,  he  gave  thanks  to  God  in 
presence  of  them  all,  and  began  to  eat.  There  is  no  ground  for  assuming  either 
•that  Paul  intended  his  action  to  be  commemorative  of  the  Lord's  Supper  or  that 
the  Christians  present  (who  must  have  been  few)  understood  it  in  this  light. 
Just  as  little  did  he  purpose  to  represent  himself  as  the  father  or  head  of  the 
family,  since  he  did  not  distribute  among  the  company  the  bread  which  he  took. 
Simply  he  designed,  one  may  suppose,  to  exemplify  his  own  precept ;  and  in  so 
doing  he  properly  acted  as  a  pious  Jew  or  a  devout  Christian,  giving  thanks  to  God 
in  presence  of  them  all  for  the  lives  He  had  hitherto  preserved  amid  the  dangers  of 
the  deep  as  well  as  for  the  prospect  of  safety  that  lay  before  them  ;  for  the  food 
which,  in  His  providence,  they  still  possessed,  and  for  the  comparative  calmness  of 
mind  in  which  at  last  they  were  allowed  to  partake  of  it — after  which,  having 
broken  it,  he  began  to  eat.  It  must  have  been  a  sublime  as  well  as  strange 
spectacle  to  that  shipload  of  heathen  soldiers  and  prisoners,  sailors  and  passengers, 
all  shivering  and  shrunken,  poor,  emaciated  creatures,  starving  and  cold — to 
look  upon  the  face  and  hear  the  voice  of  the  one  unperturbed  spirit  among  them 
— a  physically  weak  but  spiritually  strong  Jew ;  a  shackled  prisoner,  standing  on 
the  deck  in  the  grey  light  of  dawn,  amid  the  rain  and  storm,  the  howling  of  the 
winds  and  dashing  of  the  waves,  perhaps  the  shrieking  of  the  passengers,  the 
cursing  of  the  soldiers,  and  the  shoutings  of  the  prisoners,  lifting  up  his  soul  to 
God  in  prayer,  and  then  quietly  partaking  of  food.  "  Were  I  a  painter,"  writes 
Be  sser,  "  I  would  paint  that  scene  ! "  And  one  feels  disposed  to  say,  Amen  ! 
One  would  like  to  have  heard  Paul's  "  grace,"  and  to  have  seen  the  faces  of  them 
who  listened  to  it  !  How  it  impressed  them  may  never  be  known ;  how  it 
affi  cteel  them  is  told.  "  Then  were  they  all  of  good  cheer,  and  themselves  also 
took  food." 

Learn — 1.  Man's  helplessness,  apart  from  God,  amid  the  storms  of  life.  2.  The 
unspeakable  baseness  of  the  natural  heart,  as  shown  in  the  mean  attempt  of  the 
sailors.  3.  The  value  of  a  good  man  in  times  of  difficulty  and  danger.  4.  The 
sublimity  of  true  religion,  as  seen  in  Paul. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  27.  Midnight  on  the  Sea.  starless  sky.     4.  A  rocky  coast.     5.  A 

I.  A  gloomy  picture. — 1.  A  stormy      despairing  crew, 
ocean.     2.    A  drifting  wreck.     3.    A         II.  A   suggestive  symbol. — Of  the 

574 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap.  xxvu. 


Christless  soul.  1.  Tossed  about  upon 
the  sea  of  life.  2.  Drifting,  he  knows 
not  whither.  3.  Without  a  star  of 
hope  in  the  interior  firmament  of  his 
soul.  4.  Nearing  an  unknown  country, 
the  future  world.  5.  Filled  with  alarm 
for  his  safety. 

III.  An  instructive  contrast. — The 
voyage  of  the  Christian  soul  different 
in  these  respects.  1.  Tossed  about  by 
life's  tribulations,  he  is  not  afraid. 
2.  Driven  to  and  fro,  he  always  knows 
whither  he  is  bound.  3.  Though  stars 
shine  not  without,  they  do  within. 
4.  The  country  he  nears  is  not  un- 
known. 5.  A  stranger  to  despair,  he  is 
conscious  of  a  settled  peace  and  holy  joy. 

Ver.  29.  Anchored  from  the  Stern. — 
Many  whose  faces  are,  or  seem  to  be, 
turned  towards  the  shore  of  the  better 
country  are  held  back,  being  anchored 
from  the  stern — 

I.  By  their  secret  lusts. 
II.  By  their  earthly  affections. 

III.  By  their  worldly  occupations. 

IV.  By  their  darling  enjoyments. 

Ver.  31,  along  with  ver.  22.  Theo- 
logical Doctrines  and  Theological  Mis- 
takes. 

I.  Theological  doctrines.  —  1.  The 
doctrine  of  Divine  Fore-ordination.  That 
God  fore-knows  and  fore-ordains  (or, 
vice  versd,  fore-ordains  and  fore-knows) 
everything  that  comes  to  pass  illus- 
trated by  the  promise  that  no  life 
should  be  lost.  2.  The  doctrine  of 
human  freedom.  That  man  is  respon- 
sible for  working  out  his  own  destiny 
exemplified  by  the  statement  that, 
except  the  sailors  remained  in  the 
ship,  neither  they  nor  the  rest  could 
be  saved. 

II.  Theological  mistakes.— 1.  That 
Divine  fore-ordination  precludes  human 
freedom.  This  is  an  error,  since  the 
same  wisdom  that  ordains  the  end 
ordains  also  the  means — viz.,  human 
freedom.  2.  That  human  freedom  pre- 
cludes Divine  fore-ordination.  This  the 
twofold  mystery  of  God's  relation  to 
His  intelligent  creatures,  that  He  can 
create  free  beings  without  Himself 
ceasing  to  be  free,  and  that  He  can  fix 


His  own  plan   without  fixing  (in  the 
sense  of  coercing)  man's. 

Ver.  34.  A  Daring  Prophecy.  "  There 
shall  not  a  hair  perish  from  the  head 
of  any  of  you  !  " 

I.  Most  unlikely  in  the  view  of 
reason. — Beyond  all  reasonable  ground 
of  hope  or  expectation  it  must  have 
seemed  to  crew  and  captain,  centurion 
and  owner,  soldiers  and  prisoners,  that, 
with  a  sinking  ship  on  a  wind-driven 
ocean,  and  an  unknown  coast  to  the 
leeward,  with  multitudes  on  board  who 
could  not  swim,  none  of  them  should 
be  lost !  Had  any  one  asserted  it  but 
Paul,  it  would  instantly  have  been 
scorned  as  unworthy  of  credence.  As 
it  was,  it  is  not  evident  that  much 
trust  was  reposed  in  the  prediction. 
So  most  of  God's  predictions  (not,  how- 
ever, the  world's,  which  always  seem 
reasonable  !)  are  spurned  by  the  un- 
believing world  as  contrary  to  common- 
sense,  if  not  impossible. 

II.  Absolutely  certain  in  the  eye  of 
faith. — To  Paul  it  looked  neither  im- 
possible nor  incredible  that  what  he 
had  affirmed  should  come  true.  Paul 
believed — 1.  That  God  had  the  power 
to  perform  this  unlikely  thing  ;  since  all 
things  were  possible  with  God,  and 
nothing  could  be  hard  for  Him  who 
held  the  water  (Isa.  xl.  12)  and  the 
lives  of  men  (Dan.  v.  23)  in  the  hollow 
of  His  hand.  2.  That  God  was  faith- 
ful,  and  would  perform  that  which  He 
had  promised  (ver.  25).  Such  faith 
characteristic  of  God's  people  (Rom. 
iv.  21).  On  these  grounds  the  Church 
rests  .her  confidence  to-day  in  the  pre- 
dictions of  Scripture. 

III.  Exactly  fulfilled  in  the  course 
of  experience. — Precisely  as  Paul  had 
said  it  came  to  pass.  At  one  time 
failure  threatened  (vers.  30,  31),  but 
in  the  end  all  escaped  safe  to  land 
(ver.  44).  So  in  the  long  run  will 
every  word  that  God  has  uttered  be 
fulfilled  (Matt.  v.  18,  xxiv.  35). 

Ver.  35.  Paul's  Prayer  upon  The 
Ship's  Deck  ;  or,  Grace  before  Meals. 

I.  A  time-honoured  practice. — Ren- 
dered  venerable   and    sacred    by    the 

575 


chap,  xxvii.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


example  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  ix.  13)  and 
of  Jesus  (Matt.  xiv.  19 ;  Mark  viii. 
6,  7  ;  Luke  ix.  16). 

II.  A  highly  becoming  practice. — 
Considering  whence  the  meals  come 
(James  i.  17)  and  the  undeservingness 
of  the  recipient  (Gen.  xxxii.  10). 

III.  A  truly  religious  practice. — 
Practically  enjoined  upon  Christians, 
not  alone  by  Christ's  example  and 
Paul's  (1  Cor.  x.  30),  but  by  direct 
Scripture  precept  (1  Thess.  v.  17; 
1  Tim.  iv.  4). 

IV.  An  eminently  useful  practice. 
— Being  calculated,  when  not  done  with 
ostentation  or  timidity,  or  in  secrecy, 
but  humbly  yet  courageously,  so  as  to  let 
its  true  character  be  seen — being  cal- 
culated to  seriously  impress  beholders. 

Y.  A  greatly  neglected  practice. — 
Much  reason  to  fear  that,  even  in  pious 
households  and  with  individual  Christ- 
ians, this  hallowed  custom  has  much 
fallen  into  disrepute — greatly  to  the 
injury  of  religion. 


Vers.  10-35.  Paul  in  the  Storm. — A 
noble  picture — 

I.  Of  manly  courage. — 1.  His  pru- 
dent counsel  (ver.  10).  2.  His  presence 
of  mind  (ver.  31). 

II.  Of  Christian  peace  of  mind. — 

1.  His    friendly    address    (ver.     21). 

2.  His  confident  trust  in  God  (ver.  25). 

III.  Of  apostolic  unction. — 1.  His 
prophetic  exhortation  (ver.  24).  2.  His 
priestly  love-feast  (ver.  35). 

Paul  in  The  Storm. — Christ's  glory 
reflected  in  the  apostle. 

I.  Christ's  prophetical  office. — In 
Paul's  warning  (ver.  10)  and  promise 
(ver.  25). 

II.  Christ's  priestly  office. — In  Paul's 
pastoral  care  (ver.  21)  and  love-feast 
(vers.  34,  35). 

III.  Christ's  kingly  office.— In  Paul's 
greatness  of  mind  (ver.  35)  and  the 
souls  given  to  him  and  rescued  for 
his  sake  (vers.  24,  31). — Gerok  in 
Lange. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  37—44. 

Running  Ashore',  or,  Escaping  Safe  to  Land. 

I.  Preparing  the  ship. — After  all  on  board,  following  Paul's  example,  and 
doubtless  comforted  by  Paul's  assurance  of  safety,  had  partaken  of  food,  they 
commenced  to  make  ready  for  the  work  which  lay  before  them  of  beaching  their 
vessel.  In  order  either  to  keep  it  afloat  or  to  enable  it  to  run  as  far  in  towards 
the  shore  as  possible,  they,  for  the  third  time,  lightened  it,  by  casting  overboard 
the  wheat,  by  which  must  be  understood  either  the  ship's  provisions,  which  would 
be  no  more  needed,  or  the  ship's  cargo  (or  what  remained  of  it)  which,  in  any  case, 
would  be  damaged  and  rendered  practically  worthless,  if  it  was  not  totally  lost. 
(See  "  Critical  Remarks.") 

II.  Selecting  a  place. — This  was  found  in  a  certain  bay  which  the  morning 
light  revealed,  but  which  they  did  not  recognise,  on  account  of  its  not  being  the 
usual  spot  for  landing  at  Melita.  It  had  a  beach  of  sand,  which  made  it  look  a 
promising  locality  in  which  to  land  their  disabled  craft.  Selecting  a  spot  where 
two  opposite  currents  appeared  to  meet,  they  resolved  at  that  point  to  make  the 
attempt,  in  which,  however,  they  were  not  certain  of  succeeding.  Hence  the 
clause  "  if  it  were  possible  "  (A.  V.),  or  as  it  is  in  the  R.V.,  "  they  took  counsel 
whether."  The  bay  is  believed  to  have  been  St.  Paul's  bay,  on  the  northern 
extremity  of  Malta,  in  front  of  which  lay  the  small  island  of  Salmonetta  (see 
"  Critical  Remarks  "). 

III.  Running  ashore. — First,  the  four  anchors  having  been  cast  off,  because, 
in  all  probability,  the  sailors  could  not  afford  the  time  necessary  to  take  them  up, 
were  left  in  the  sea.  Next,  the  rudder  bands  were  loosed— i.e.,  the  lashings  with 
which  they  had  been  secured  were  untied.  Then,  hoisting  up  the  foresail,  the 
seamen  made  for  the  beach.  Passing  the  island  of  Salmonetta,  and  observing 
the  water  behind  they  ran  the  ship  in  that  direction.     In  a  sandbank,  most 

576 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.    chap,  xxvii. 

likely  caused  by  the  meeting  of  counter  currents,  the  forepart  of  the  vessel  stuck 
in  the  ground,  while  the  stern  continued  to  be  lashed  by  the  waves. 

11  She  struck  where  the  white  and  fleecy  waves 
Looked  soft  as  the  carded  wool ; 
But  the  cruel  rocks,  they  gored  her  side 
Like  the  horns  of  an  angry  bull." 

Longfellow. 

IV.  Escaping  to  land. — 1.  The  counsel  of  the  soldiers  was  inhuman,  that  the 
prisoners  should  be  killed,  in  case  they  should  escape.  Even  if  explainable  by 
the  terrible  responsibility  which  attached  to  soldiers  entrusted  with  the  safe 
keeping  of  prisoners  (compare  xii.  19,  xvi.  27),  it  was  a  gruesome  proposal,  which 
might  have  been  carried  out  had  not  Julius  interposed.  2.  The  suggestion  of  the 
centurion  was  generous.  Dictated,  if  not  by  humanity,  by  a  desire  to  protect 
Paul,  it  served  to  show  the  influence  Paul's  personality  had  begun  to  exercise 
upon  his  mind.  One  cannot  help  recalling  here  that  it  was  a  Roman  centurion 
who  recognised  the  superhuman  majesty  of  Paul's  Master  (Matt,  xxvii.  54).  The 
course  recommended  by  Julius  was  that  those  among  the  soldiers  who  could  swim 
should  cast  themselves  overboard  and  get  first  to  land — in  which  case  they  could 
both  look  after  the  prisoners  as  they  arrived  upon  the  beach,  and  extend  a  help- 
ing hand  to  any  of  the  passengers  that  might  need  their  aid.  3.  The  escape  of 
the  others  was  accomplished  with  difficulty.  The  ship,  unable  to  resist  the  storm, 
fell  to  pieces.  Those  on  board  were  driven  to  save  themselves  as  best  they  could. 
Happily,  by  means  of  planks  of  wood  and  broken  pieces  of  the  ship,  this  was 
effected.  Not  with  comfort  or  with  ease,  but  with  complete  bodily  safety,  all 
contrived  to  reach  the  land. 

Learn — 1.  That  God  helps  those  who  help  themselves.  Though  Paul  had 
assured  his  fellow- voyagers  that  their  lives  would  be  spared,  it  was  needful  that 
they  should  take  every  precaution  against   their  lives'  loss.      2.  That — 

11  Man's  inhumanity  to  man 

Makes  countless  thousands  mourn." 

The  barbarous  proposal  of  the  soldiers  to  kill  the  prisoners  was  even  worse 
than  the  attempt  of  the  sailors  to  desert  the  ship.  3.  That  the  silent  influence 
for  good  of  a  good  man  is  often  all  the  greater  that  it  is  unconsciously  exercised. 
Paul's  presence  on  board  that  ship  saved  the  prisoners  from  a  bloody  death. 
4.  That  God  can  always  find  means  to  fulfil  His  promises.  He  had  promised 
that  not  a  life  ~  on  board  that  ship  should  be  lost,  and  so  it  came  to  pass 
that  they  all  escaped  safe  to  land.  • 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  37.  A  Great  Ship's  Company. —  Yer.  42.  The  Soldiers'  Counsel. 
Two   hundred  threescore  and   sixteen  I.    A    proposal    of    truculent   bar- 
souls —  barity. 

I.  Exposed  to  a  common  peril. — That  II.    An  example  of    base  ingrati- 
of  foundering  in  mid  ocean.  tude. 

II.  Inspired  by  a    common    hope  III.  An  instance  of  heartless  selfish- 
(ver.  34). — That  of  ultimate  safety.            ness. 

III.  Engaged   in   a   common   work 

(ver.  38). — That  of  self-preservation.  Ver.  44.  The  Voyage  of  the  Church  of 

IV.  Partakers  of  a  common  mercy      Jesus  Christ.     Like  that  of  Paul's  ship 
(ver.  44). — That  of  final  deliverance.         in  respect  of  five  things. 

pp.  577 


chap,  xxvii.    IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


I.  The  stormy  sea  over  which  it 
sails. 

II.  The  fierce  and  sudden  hurricanes 
it  encounters. 

III.  The  unknown  country  which  it 
nears. 

IV.  The  mixed  company  which  it 
bears  along. 

V.  The  ultimate  safety  to  which  it 
reaches. 

Or,  thus : — 

The  Barque  of  the  Church  Compared 
to  Paul's  Ship. 

I.  Its  dangers. — 1.  Contrary  winds 
(vers.  4,  14).  2.  Foolish  guides 
(vers.  11,  12).  3.  Superfluous  posses- 
sions (vers.  18,  19).  4.  Disunited 
associates  (vers.  30,  42).  5.  Concealed 
rocks  (vers.  39,  41). 

II.  Its  means  of  help. — 1.  The 
testimony  of  pious  teachers  (vers.  9, 
21).  2.  The  prophecies  of  the  Divine 
word  (vers.  23,  24).  3.  The  comforts 
of  the  holy  sacraments  (ver.  35). 
4.  The  blessing  of  believing  prayer 
(ver.  35).  5.  The  rescuing  hand  of 
the  Almighty  (vers.  24,  34,  44). — Gerok 
in  Lange. 

Or,  thus : — 

I.  The  conflict  of  the  ship  with  the 
elements. — Winds  and  waves  (vers. 
14,  15). 

II.  The  exertions  of  the  sailors. — 
They  undergird  the  ship  and  cast  the 
furniture  into  the  sea  (vers.  16-19). 

III.  The  apparent  hopelessness  of 
safety. — Through  the  leaking  of  the 
ship  (ver.  20). 

IV.  The  wonderful  rescue. — Paul's 
exhortation  and  God's  aid  (vers.  33- 
43). — Lisco. 

The  Voyage  of  Life. 

I.  The  setting  out. — 1.  The  various 
changes  of  surrounding  objects  (vers. 
1,  2,  4-8).  2.  The  friendships  (ver.  3). 
3.  The  first  clouds  in  the  heavens 
(vers.  9-15). 

II.  Fear  and  hope. — 1.  The  fear  of 
unbelief  (vers.  16-20).  2.  The  con- 
fidence of  faith  (vers.  21-26). 

III.  The  contest  with  adversities. — 

578 


1.  Trouble  discloses  hearts  (vers. 
27-32).  2.  Trouble  leads  to  God 
(vers.  33-38). 

IV.  The  haven  of  rest.— 1.  The 
shipwreck  and  the  billows  of  death 
(vers.  39-43).  2.  The  rescue  and  the 
landing  on  the  unknown  land  of  rest 
(ver.  44) — Lisco, 

Ver.  44.  "  And  so  it  came  to  pass  "  ; 
or,  thoughts  concerning  providence  and 
grace. — Human  life  often  likened  to  a 
voyage  :  "  Ask  what  is  human  life," 
etc.  (Cowper's  Hope,  1-6).  Paul's  ship 
an  emblem  of  the  Church,  whose  mem- 
bers are  sure  of  everlasting  safety.  The 
safety  of  Paul's  ship's  company  came  to 
pass. 

I.  In  accordance  with  the  Divine 
purpose  and  plan. — Twice  over  was 
this  announced  to  Paul  by  God  and 
by  Paul  to  his  fellow- voyagers  (vers. 
22,  34).  Not  a  life  would  be  lost,  not 
a  hair  of  their  head  would  perish.  So 
— 1.  In  providence,  everything  comes  to 
pass  in  accordance  with  the  same 
Divine  plan  and  purpose.  "  He  doeth 
according  to  His  will,"  etc.,  said 
Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv.  35).  "  He 
worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of 
His  own  will,"  says  Paul  (Eph.  i.  11). 
"  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  shall 
do  all  My  pleasure,"  adds  Jehovah 
(Isa.  xlvi.  10).  It  is  not  conceivable 
that  any  event  should  occur  outside 
and  beyond  God's  fore-knowledge  and 
fore-ordination  (see  on  ii.  23).     And — 

2.  In  grace.  The  salvation  of  be- 
lievers occurs  in  accordance  with  the 
same  Divine  purpose  and  plan.  They 
are  chosen,  called,  sanctified,  and  saved, 
by  sovereign  grace  (xiii.  48,  xxii.  14; 
Komviii.  28-30;  Eph.  i.  4-11,  iii.  11; 
2  Thess.  ii.  13;  1  Peter  i.  2).  It  is 
not  supposable  that  God  does  not  know 
beforehand  what  the  issues  will  be  of 
His  own  scheme  of  redeeming  grace. 

II.  In  spite  of  every  obstacle  or 
hindrance.  At  least  four  things 
threatened  to  defeat  the  Divine  purpose 
to  save  Paul  and  his  fellow-voyagers^ 
1.  The  severity  of  the  storm.  2.  The 
attempted    desertion    of    the     sailors. 

3.  The    inhuman     proposal    of     the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.    chap,  xxyii. 


soldiers.     4.  The   breaking  up  of  the  out,     but    with    and     by    means     of, 

vessel.     Nevertheless  it  came  to  pass  their  own  co-operation,  their  ultimate 

that   all   escaped   safe   to   land.        So  attainment  to  eternal    life    and  glory 

again — 1.    In  providence,   the   Divine  being      accomplished     through     their 

purpose   may   seem   to   be,   and    may  abiding   in   Christ,  following  holiness, 

actually  be,  opposed  by  similar  forces.  and  generally  working  out  their  own 

Take,  for  instance,  the  determination  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling, 
to    settle   Abraham's    descendants    in 

Canaan.  Notwithstanding  their  des-  Vers.  1-44.  (On  the  whole  chapter.) 
cent  into  Egypt  and  enslavement  Paul  and  His  Fellow  Voyagers — a  Com- 
there,  the  turning  away  from  them  of  parison  and  a  Contrast. 
the  royal  favour,  the  inhuman  edict  I.  The  comparison. — 1.  Partakers 
that  their  children  should  be  cast  into  of  a  common  humanity.  2.  Bound  for 
the  Nile,  the  failure  of  Moses's  first  a  common  port.  3.  Exposed  to  a 
attempt  at  their  liberation,  the  general  common  peril.  4.  Subjects  of  a  corn- 
breaking  down  of  their  national  spirit,  mon  deliverance. 

their  occupation  of  Egypt  became,  in  II.  The  contrast. — 1.  Grace  and 
God's  time,  an  accomplished  fact.  nature.  With  the  exception  of  Luke 
2.  In  grace,  nothing  can  prevent  the  and  Aristarchus,  Paul  was  probably 
ultimate  salvation  of  Christ's  people —  the  only  Christian  among  them, 
neither  the  ills  or  calamities  of  time  2.  Sagacity  and  dulness.  Paul's  fore- 
nor  the  falling  away  of  professed  cast  of  the  storm,  and  the  want  of  in- 
disciples,  nor  the  remains  of  indwelling  sight  on  the  part  of  the  centurion,  the 
corruption  in  the.  hearts  of  sincere  owner,  the  pilot  and  crew  (vers.  9-12). 
disciples,  nor  the  breaking  up  of  3.  Faith  and  unbelief.  Paul's  con- 
ecclesiastical  institutions  ;  in  short,  fidence  that  no  lives  would  be  lost :  their 
nothing  and  no  one  will  be  able  to  doubt  of  the  correctness  of  this  asser- 
separate  them  from  the  love  of  God,  tion  (vers.  22-26).  3.  Courage  and 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  their  Lord  despair.  Paul's  intrepidity  throughout  : 
(Rom.  viii.  38,  39).  their  universal  faintheartedness  (vers. 
III.  Through  the  use  of  means. —  31-33).  4.  Piety  and  wickedness. 
Paul  and  his  fellow-voyagers  had  to  Paul's  prayers  for  (ver.  24),  and  ex- 
use  means  in  order  to  effect  their  hortations  to  (vers.  25,  33,  34)  them  ; 
preservation.  Even  after  they  had  the  baseness  of  the  sailors  (ver.  30), 
been  assured  that  not  a  life  would  be  and  the  inhumanity  of  the  soldiers 
lost  they  had,  in  a  manner,  to  work  out  (ver.  42). 

their  own  deliverance,  by  lightening  the  III.   The  conclusion.       1.  That   all 

ship,  running  her  ashore,    and  either  are  not  alike  because  they  happen  to 

swimming  to  land  or  getting  ashore  on  sail  in  the  same  boat.     2.  That  com- 

planks   or  broken   pieces  of  the  ship.  mon  experiences  do  not  always  produce 

So — 1.  In  providence,  the  Divine  plans  on   different    men    the    same    effects, 

and  purposes  are  carried  out  through  3.  That  circumstances  which  call  forth 

the   employment   of    ordinary    means  the    nobility   of    the   good    frequently 

wielded  by   man's    intelligence.     And  serve   to  evoke  the   meanness  of   the 

equally — 2.    In   grace,    the    salvation  base.       4.    That  goodness   makes    the 

of    believers    is    effected,     not    with-  best  leaders  of  men. 


579 


CHAP.  Xxviii.  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


CHAPTER,    XXVIII. 

Paul's  Voyage  to  Rome — Departure  from  Malta. 

§  1,  Three  Months  in  Malta ;  or,  Two  Remarkable  Incidents  (vers.  1-10). 

1.  The  Preservation  of  Paul  (vers.  1-6). 

2.  The  Healing  of  Publius's  father  (vers.  7-10). 

§  2.  The  Castor  and  Pollux;  or,  Paul's  Arrival  in  Rome  (vers.  11-16). 

§  3.  An  Interview  with  the  Jewish  Leaders ;  or,  an  Explanation  of  his  Imprison- 
ment (vers.  17-22). 

§  4.  A  whole  Day's  Preaching  in  his  Private  Lodging  ;  or,  a  Last  Appeal  to  his 
Countrymen  (vers.  23-31). 

CRITICAL  REMARKS. 

Ver.  1.  The  best  authorities  read,  "  And  when  we  were  escaped,  then  we  knew" — lit.,  And 
having  teen  saved,  then  we  knew,  or  learned  (by  intercourse  with  the  inhabitants)  Melita. — 
Not  Meleda,  an  island  off  the  Illyrian  coast  in  the  Gulf  of  Venice,  but  the  modern  Malta. 

Ver.  2.  The  barbarous  people,  ol  f3dp(3apoi,  were  not  savages,  but  natives  who  spoke  neither 
the  Greek  nor  the  Roman  tongue  (compare  Rom.  i.  14  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  11 ;  Col.  iii.  11),  but  most 
likely  the  Punic — i.e.,  Phoenician  as  usod  by  the  Carthaginians.  No  little  kindness. — Meant 
kindness  not  to  be  met  with  every  day,  uncommon  (compare  xix.  11 ).  They  received  us. — Not 
to  their  fire  (Meyer),  but  to  their  regards,  as  in  Rom.  xiv.  1.  The  present  rain. — Not  the 
rain  which  came  on  suddenly  (Meyer),  but  the  rain  then  falling. 

Ver.  3.  But  when  Paul  had  gathered — lit.,  twisted  together — a  bundle,  large  quantity,  or 
heap,  of  sticks. — It  does  not  militate  against  the  truthfulness  of  this  part  of  the  narrative, 
that  Malta  now  shows  a  great  absence  of  wood ;  since  the  growth  of  population  in  the  island 
may  have  led  to  the  destruction  of  the  forests,  while,  as  an  additional  consideration,  the 
sticks  collected  by  Paul  may  have  been  driftwood  from  the  wreck.  A  viper.— ?xiSva,  the 
female  adder,  the  male  being  £xiS-  The  reptile  here  referred  to,  the  Vipera  aspis,  was 
common  in  the  Mediterranean  isles  (Tristram).  Out  of. — e/c  pointing  to  the  local  source. 
The  best  MSS.  read  d7r6,  which  might  signify  by  reason  of  (compare  xx.  9 ;  Luke  xix.  3). 
The  heat. — According  to  Agassiz  vipers  become  torpid  when  the  warmth  of  the  air  sinks 
below  the  mean  temperature  of  the  place  they  inhabit.  The  fact  that  poisonous  serpents 
are  not  now  found  in  Malta  was  formerly  adduced  (Coleridge)  as  a  difficulty  connected  with 
the  present  narrative ;  but  the  disappearance  of  noxious  reptiles  from  Malta  may  be  satis- 
factorily accounted  for  by  the  increase  of  population  and  the  cutting  down  of  the  timber 
in  the  island.  In  this  way  vipers  have  almost  entirely  disappeared  from  the  island  of 
Arran  in  Scotland  (The  Landsboroughs  :  Arran,  its  Topography,  etc.,  p.  242). 

Ver.  4.  The  venomous  beast. — Aristotle  {Eth.  Nic,  vii.  1)  uses  the  word  O-qpLov  to 
denote  any  animal  below  the  nature  of  man ;  Dioscorides  Physicus  (A.D.  60)  to  designate 
a  reptile,  d-qpiaica  (from  which  comes  our  word  "  treacle  ")  <pdpp.aKa  mean  antidotes  against 
the  bites  of  poisonous  animals.  Hang — lit.,  hanging — on  his  hand. — "  The  newer  critics 
(Ewald,  Lekebush,  Hausrath,-  and  others)  suppose  either  that  the  viper  curled  itself  round 
and  hung  from  the  Apostle's  hand  without  biting,  or  that  though  it  fastened  itself  by  biting, 
it  was  not  poisonous ;  but  this  opinion  neither  the  natives  nor  the  writer  entertained  " 
(Holtzmann).  A  murderer. — This  the  natives  probably  supposed  Paul  to  be,  not  because  the 
viper  had  fastened  on  his  hand  (Kuinoel),  or  because  a  serpent's  bite  was  the  Maltese  punish- 
ment for  murder  (Heinsius),  but  because  they  observed  his  chains  (vincula  videbant),  and 
concluded  him  to  be  a  notorious  criminal  (Bengel).  Vengeance. — Better,  Justice,  or  Nemesis, 
7)  dlicr).  The  goddess  Dike  who  avenged  crimes  was  no  mere  poetical  personification,  but  a 
divinity  honoured  with  a  special  sanctuary  in  the  harbour  town  of  Megaris.  Her  mother 
was  Themis,  the  ruling  world  power;  her  sisters  were  Irene  (Peace)  and  Eunomia  (Good 
order)  "  (Holtzmann). 
Ver.  5.  Felt  or  took  no  harm. — A  fulfilment  of  Mark  xvi.  12  (compare  Luke  x.  19). 
Ver.  6.  Swollen,  or  fallen  down  dead  suddenly. — "  Sudden  collapse  and  death  often  ensue 
from  the  bite  of  serpents  "  (Hackett).  "  Both  these,  the  inflammation  of  the  body  and  the 
falling  down  dead  suddenly,  are  recorded  as  results  of  the  bite  of  the  African  serpents " 

580 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap,  xxviii. 


(Alford).  Lucan,  ix.  790,  describes  the  bite  of  an  African  serpent,  Prester,  named  from 
the  verb  Ti/xirpaa-dai — 

11  Nasidium  Mar  si  cultorem  torridus  agri 
Percussit  Prestes.     Illi  ruber  igneus  ora 
Succendit,  tenditque  cutem,  pereunte  figuraV' 

which  may  thus  be  rendered — 

"  Nasidius  toiling  in  the  Marsian  fields 
The  burning  Prestes  bit — a  fiery  flush 
Lit  up  his  face  and  set  the  skin  astretch, 
And  all  its  comely  grace  had  passed  away." 

And  said  that  he  was  a  god. — Compare  xiv.  13-15.  "  Aut  latro,  inquiunt,  aut  deus :  sic 
modo  tauri,  modo  lapides.  Datur  tertium ;  homo  deo  "  (Bengel).  What  god  the  Maltese 
imagined  Paul  to  be,  whether  Hercules  (Grotius)  or  iEsculapius  (Wetstein),  cannot  be 
determined. 

Ver.  7.  In  the  same  quarters. — Better,  in  the  parts  about,  or  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
(R.V.)  that  place.  Possessions. — Estates  or  lands,  xw/°^>  as  m  lv-  34.  The  chief  (or  first 
irpQros,  as  in  ver.  17,  xiii.  50 ;  xxv.  2)  man  of  the  island  was  the  Roman  governor,  the  legate 
or  deputy  of  the  praetor  of  Sicily,  to  which,  as  in  the  time  of  Cicero  (4  Ver.,  c.  11)  the  smaller 
island  was  most  propably  annexed.  The  use  of  this  official  designation,  irpwros,  has  justly 
been  regarded  as  a  striking  proof  of  Luke's  historical  accuracy  (Baumgarten,  Tholuck, 
Ebrarcl,  Lardner,  Paley,  Howson),  two  inscriptions,  one  in  Greek  and  another  in  Latin, 
having  been  discovered  in  Malta  at  Citta  Vecchia,  in  which  this  title  is  similarly  employed. 
Moreover,  as  the  person  named  on  the  inscription  is  called  Prudens,  a  Roman  knight,  it  has 
been  inferred  that  Publius  may  have  belonged  to  this  class.  Publius  could  hardly  have 
been  called  the  first  of  the  Melitaeans,  irpuros  MeXiraiwu,  from  his  social  rank  or  wealth,  so 
long  as  his  father  lived.  The  us  whom  he  received  were  probably,  besides  Paul  and  Lis  com- 
panions, Luke  and  Aristarchus,  Julius  the  centurion.  The  notion  can  scarcely  be  entertained 
that  Publius  provided  for  the  whole  ship's  company  of  two  hundred  and  seventy-six  persons. 

Ver.  8.  The  specification  of  the  disease  under  which  Publius's  father  suffered  as  a  fever 
and  bloody  flux  or  dysentery,  besides  according  with  Luke's  professional  character  as  a 
physician,  was  another  testimony  to  his  accuracy  as  a  narrator  of  facts.  Whereas  formerly 
the  dry  climate  of  Malta  was  supposed  to  be  unfavourable  to  dysentery  and  inflammation  of 
the  lower  bowels,  physicians  resident  in  the  island  now  report  these  diseases  as  by  no 
means  uncommon  among  the  inhabitants.  Laid  his  hands  on  him — as  in  James  v.  14, 15 — and 
healed  him. — Whether  through  the  co-operation  of  Luke  the  physician  is  not  stated — though 
the  probability  is  not.  Yet  the  healings  in  ver.  9  may  have  been  affected  partly  through 
Luke's  aid. 

Ver.  10.  They  laded  us  with  such  things  as  were  necessary. — Better,  they  put  on  board 
such  things  as  we  needed  for  our  journey. 

Ver.  11.  After  three  months. — The  departure  from  Malta  took  place  in  the  following 
spring,  probably  towards  the  end  of  January — and  once  more  in  an  Alexandrian  ship 
(compare  xxvii.  6).  Which  had  wintered  in  the  isle. — At  Valetta,  the  principal  harbour  of 
Malta.  Whose  sign  was  Castor  and  Pollux. — Lit.,  marked  or  badged  with  the  Dioscuroi — i.e., 
the  Twin  Brothers,  Castor  and  Pollux,  whom  heathen  mythology  regarded  as  the  sons  of 
Jupiter  by  Leda,  and  as  the  patrons  of  sailors  (see  Hor.,  Odes,  I.  3,  2 ;  12,  27-32). 

Ver,  12.  Syracuse. — The  capital  of  Sicily,  on  the  south-east  coast  of  the  island,  and  about 
eighty  miles  north  of  Malta.  The  modern  Saragossa  occupies  only  a  portion  of  the  ancient 
city — viz.,  Ortygia. 

Ver.  13.  And  from  thence  we  fetched  a  compass,  or,  made  a  circuit  (R.V.) — Lit.,  having 
gone  round  about,  irepiikdouTes — i.e.,  either  tacking  because  of  the  unfavourable  wind  (Smith), 
or  standing  out  to  sea  (Lewin).  Some  ancient  authorities  read,  irepteXovres,  taking  up  the 
anchors,  as  in  xxvii.  40.  Rhegium. — The  present-day  Beggio,  an  Italian  seaport  opposite  to 
the  north-east  point  of  Sicily,  at  which  ships  from  Alexandria  were  accustomed  to  touch  on 
their  way  to  Rome,  and  where  Caligula  began  the  construction  of  a  harbour  for  their 
accommodation  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XIX.  ii.  5).  Titus,  taking  the  same  road  as  Paul  from  Judaea  to 
Rome,  called  in  at  Rhegium  (Suet.,  Tit.,c.  5).  Rhegium  was  "  a  city  whose  patron  divinities 
were,  by  a  curious  coincidence,  the  same  hero-protectors  of  sea-faring  men,  '  the  Great  Twin 
Brethren,'  to  whom  the  ship  itself  was  dedicated  "  (Conybeare  and  Howson,  ii.  369).  Puteoli. 
— Now  Pozzuoli,  eight  miles  south-west  of  Neapolis,  the  modern  Naples.  The  city  earlier 
called  At/ca:d/)%eia,  derived  its  later  name  from  the  springs  (putei)  which  abound  there,  or 
from  the  odour  of  its  waters  (a  putendo).  From  Rhegium  to  Puteoli  was  a  distance  of 
about  one  hundred  and  eighty- two  miles,  a  sail  of  two  days  with  a  fair  wind. 

Ver.  14.  Where  we  found  brethren. — The  city,  which  was  a  principal  station  for  Alexandrine 
ships  (Suet.,  Aug.,  981)  was  at  that  time  the  seat  of  a  Christian  Church,  which  had  probably 

581 


chap,  xxvni.   IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


been  founded  from  Rome.  Seven  days.— Compare  xx.  6,  xxi.  4.  Another  indication  that 
the  early  Christians  had  special  Sabbath-day  gatherings.  Ramsay  considers  this  statement 
about  varying  seven  days  "  irreconcilable  with  Paul's  situation  as  a  prisoner  " ;  but  Julius 
may  have  had  sufficient  reasons  for  granting  Paul  permission  to  comply  with  the  request  of 
the  brethren  (compare  ver.  12).  We  went  toward  Kome. — Better  that,  we  came  to  Rome 
(R.V.).  The  road  traversed  by  Julius  and  his  prisoners  would  proceed  first  to  Capua,  distant 
twelve  miles,  where  it  would  join  the  Appian  Way,  from  Rome  to  Brundusium,  the  modern 
Brindisi.  From  Capua  it  would  go  by  Sinuessa,  twenty-one  miles  further  on,  and  Terracina, 
seventy  Roman  miles  from  Capua.  At  Terracina  "  they  would  have  to  choose  between  two 
modes  of  travel,  taking  the  circuitous  road  round  the  Pontine  Marshes,  or  going  by  the  more 
direct  line  of  the  canal,"  both  roads  meeting  at  Appii  Forum,  eighteen  miles  from  Terracina  " 
(Plumptre). 

Ver.  15.  Appii  Forum,  or  "the  Market  of  Appius"  (R.V.).— A  small  (perhaps  an  assize) 
town  near  the  end  of  the  above-named  canal,  forty-three  miles  distant  from  Rome,  and 
called  after  the  builder  of  the  Appian  Way.  The  Three  Taverns. — Another  town  or  wayside 
inn,  ten  miles  nearer  Rome.     Cicero  mentions  both  places  in  his  letters  to  Atticus  (ii.  10). 

Ver.  16.  And  when  we  came  to,  or  entered  into  Rome. — The  capital  of  Italy  and  of  the 
Roman  Empire,  situated  on  the  Tiber,  fifteen  miles  from  its  mouth,  was  the  residence  of 
many  Jews  (ii.  10,  xviii.  2)  and  of  numerous  Christians,  to  whom  Paul  wrote  an  epistle  (see 
"  Hints  "  on  ver.  17).  The  centurion  delivered  the  prisoners  to  the  captain  of  the  guard,  or 
the  commander  of  the  camp — i.e.,  of  the  Praetorian  camp,  where  the  Emperor's  bodyguard  was 
stationed. — This  clause,  omitted  in  the  best  MSS.,  is  regarded  as  spurious  by  many  competent 
critics  (Mill,  Bengel.  Griesbach,  Lachmann,  Tischendorf ,  Westcott  and  Hort),  though  by  other 
scholars  (Meyer,  Alford,  Hackett,  Plumptre,  Hausrath,  Holtzmann)  it  is  retained.  Alford 
thinks  the  omission  of  the  words  may  have  been  originally  caused  by  the  transcriber's  eye 
passing  from  — apxos  to — apx^,  as  in  Syr.  (permisit  centurio  Paulo) ;  and  that  this  done,  the 
emendation  of  the  text  became  necessary.  Lechler,  while  regarding  the  words  as  spurious, 
considers  them  true  in  fact.  Wieseler,  founding  on  the  circumstance  that  Luke  speaks  of 
only  one  Stratopedarch  or  prefect  of  the  Praetorian  guard,  whereas  there  were  commonly  two, 
infers  that  Paul  must  have  come  to  Rome  not  later  than  the  early  part  of  A.D.  62,  since 
Burrus  Africanus,  who  had  been  appointed  sole  prefect  by  Claudius,  died  that  year.  Luke, 
however,  was  not  so  precise  in  relating  Roman  and  civil  matters  that  he  must  necessarily 
have  written  "  to  one  of  the  new  prefects,"  if  there  were  two,  while  even  if  there  wTere  Paul 
would  in  all  probability  be  delivered  not  to  the  two,  but  to  one — to  him,  namely,  whose 
business  it  wras  to  look  after  prisoners  sent  from  the  provinces.  Ramsay  (St.  Paul,  etc., 
pp.  347,  348)  suggests  that  the  Stratopedarch  was  not  the  Praetorian  Prefect,  but  another 
officer  Galled  Princess  Peregrinorum,  or  Chief  of  the  Foreigners — i.e.,  of  the  centurions  who 
belonged  to  legions  in  the  provinces,  and  who,  when  at  Rome  on  military  service,  resided 
under  his  command  in  a  camp  on  the  Celian  hill,  called  Castra  Peregrinorum. 

Ver.  17.  The  best  authorities  omit  Paul.  The  chief  of  the  Jews. — Better,  those  that  were 
the  chief  (first,  or  principal  men)  of  the  Jews,  or,  otherwise,  those  that  were  of  the  Jews  first. 
Most  likely  the  parties  summoned  were  the  rulers  of  the  synagogues,  and  such  as  were 
socially  exalted. 

Ver.  18.  Would  have  let  me  go,  or  desired  to  set  me  at  liberty. — Bethge  and  Holtzmann, 
who  regard  this  address  of  Paul's  to  the  Jews  of  Rome  as  a  pure  compilation  of  Luke's,  pro- 
nounce the  statement  in  this  clause  incorrect,  and  as  justified  neither  by  xxv.  9  nor  by  any 
other  verse.  But  the  apostle's  intention  obviously  was  to  say  that  the  Roman  officials  who 
examined  him  had  found  no  fault  in  him,  and  would  have  dismissed  him  from  the  bar  had  it 
not  been  for  the  opposition  of  the  Jews ;  and  this  is  distinctly  the  impression  one  receives 
from  reading  the  accounts  of  the  different  trials  the  apostle  underwent. 

Ver.  21.  We  neither  received  letters  out  of  Judaea  concerning  thee. — Zeller,  Baur,  Wendt, 
and  Holtzmann  think  it  incredible  that  the  Jews  of  Rome  had  no  knowledge  of  Paul,  of  his 
missionary  labours,  or  of  his  imprisonment.  But  the  Jewish  leaders  do  not  say  they  were 
entirely  ignorant  of  either  the  apostle  or  his  doings ;  merely  they  assert  they  had  received  no 
official  intelligence  regarding  him  from  the  Palestinian  Church,  either  by  letter  or  by 
messenger  (see  "  Homiletical  Analysis  "). 

Ver.  22.  As  concerning  this  sect. — The  above  critics  also  pronounce  it  strange  that  the 
Jewish  leaders  should  have  affected  to  be  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  a  Christian  Church  in 
Rome,  and  detect  in  their  statement  a  deliberate  misrepresentation  of  history  pn  the  part  of 
the  author  of  the  Acts  for  the  purpose  of  sustaining  his  theory  that  Paul  was  an  orthodox 
Jew,  who  only  turned  to  the  Gentile  mission  in  Rome  as  elsewhere  after  the  Jews  had 
declined  to  accept  his  gospel.     (See  "  Homiletical  Analysis.") 

Ver.  23.  Into  his  lodging. — Probably  the  "  hired  dwelling,"  ixladoj/xa,  of  ver.  30,  though 
some  (Heschyius,  Hackett)  consider  the  term  £eWa  points  to  a  private  house — perhaps  that 
of  Aquila,  or  of  some  other  Roman  Christian — in  which  he  was  entertained  as  a  guest.  For 
expounded  and  testified  read  expounding,  testifying,  and  persuading . 

582 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.   chap,  xxviii. 


Ver.  25.  The  one  word  spoken  by  Paul  did  not  occasion  (Meyer),  but  accompanied 
(De  Wette)  the  departure  of  the  Jewish  leaders. 

Ver.  26.  The  Isaianic  utterance,  also  quoted  in  the  Gospels  (Matt.  xiii.  14 ;  John  xii.  40), 
was  taken  from  the  LXX. 

Ver.  28  gives  the  last  recorded  words  of  Paul  in  Luke's  narrative.  Their  resemblance  to 
the  words  uttered  at  the  beginning  of  his  mission  (xiii.  46)  deserves  notice. 

Yer.  29  is  omitted  by  the  best  texts,,  and  the  majority  of  critics  regard  it  as  spurious 
(Mill,  Lachmami,  Tischendorf,  Westcott  and  Hort). 

Ver.  30.  Two  whole  years  in  his  own  hired  house. — This  almost  implies  that  his  former 
lodging  was  not  a  rented  dwelling,  The  charge  of  his  present  house  would  no  doubt  be 
borne  by  his  Christian  friends  at  Rome,  and  perhaps  also  at  Philippi  (Phil.  iv.  14,  18) ; 
but  see  on  xxi.  23  ("  Critical  Remarks  ").  Whether  he  obtained  release  at  the  end  of  these 
two  years  is  doubtful.  "  What  became  of  him  after  those  two  years,"  writes  Beyschlag 
(Riehm's  Handworterbuch  des  Biblischen  Altertums,  art.  Paulus),  "whether  he  obtained 
his  freedom  and  made  a  journey  to  the  far  west,  or  whether  the  persecution  under  Nero, 
A.D.  64,  found  him  still  in  prison,  can  no  more  be  ascertained."  "  We  must  therefore  abide 
by  the  view,"  says  Weiss  {Manual  of  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,  i.  373),  "that 
Paul's  deliverance  from  the  Roman  captivity  can  neither  be  proved  nor  denied  on  secure 
historical  grounds."  According  to  Eusebius  (H.  E.,  iii.  22)  Paul  was  released  from  his  first, 
and  experienced  a  second  captivity  under  Nero ;  and  this  opinion  has  been  advocated  by 
Church  historians  like  Mosheira,  Neander,  and  Gieseler,  as  well  as  by  introduction  writers 
like  Ewald,  Bleek,  Schulze,  Lange,  Salmon,  and  Dodds.  That  he  perished  in  the  Neronian 
persecution  is  supported  by  Baur,  Hausrath,  Holtzmann,  and  others,  who  dispute,  as  well 
as  by  Wieseler,  Ebrard,  Reuss,  Schaff,  and  others,  who  uphold,  the  authenticity  of  the 
Pastoral  Epistles.     (See  "  Hints  "  on  ver.  30.) 

Ver.  31.  With  all  confidence,  or  boldness. — Referring  rather  to' the  unrestricted  freedom 
with  which  he  preached  than  to  the  unwavering  assurance  he  had  that  what  he  preached 
was  true.     No  man  forbidding  him  explains  what  was  meant  by  his  boldness. 

That  the  writer  should  have  closed  his  work  in  this  sudden  fashion,  without  intimating 
whether  Paul  was  successful  in  his  appeal  or  what  became  of  him,  has  given  rise  to  various 
explanations;  but  manifestly,  either  (1)  the  book  was  written  and  published  before  the 
trial  came  on — in  which  case  its  issue  could  not  be  mentioned — which  is  hardly  likely ;  or 
(2)  if  after  his  death  or  liberation,  whichever  of  these  was  the  issue  of  Paul's  trial,  was 
already  known  to  Theophilus,  and  did  not  require  to  be  mentioned — which  again  is  not 
perfectly  satisfactory ;  or  (3)  Luke  may  have  ended  as  he  did  because  he  entertained  the 
idea  of  writing  a  third  treatise,  which  once  more  is  a  plausible  hypothesis,  if  Paul  was 
liberated  and  resumed  his  missionary  labours,  but  not  if  he  was  put  to  death  in  A.D.  64. 

HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—10. 

Three  Months  in  Malta  ;  or,  Two  Remarkable  Incidents. — 1.  The  Preservation  of 
Paul. 

I.  The  fire  upon  the  beach  (ver.  2). — 1.  The  name  of  the  island  on  which  they 
had  been  cast  ashore,  the  shipwrecked  voyagers  ascertained,  presumably,  by 
inquiring  of  the  natives.  Formerly  believed  to  be  the  island  of  Meleda,  in  the 
Gulf  of  Venice,  and  near  the  coast  of  Illyricum,  the  scene  of  Paul's  shipwreck  is 
now  universally  considered  to  have  been  the  modern  Malta  (according  to  some 
ancient  authorities,  Melitene)  in  the  Mediterranean,  about  sixty  miles  south  of 
Sicily.  The  argument  on  which  this  conclusion  rests  one  may  sum  up  thus: 
Malta  lies  in  the  track  of  a  vessel  driven  by  a  north-east  wind,  such  as  the 
Euroclydon  or  Euraquilo  was ;  the  reputed  locality  of  the  wreck,  as  mentioned 
in  the  apocryphal  acts  of  Peter  and  of  Paul,  agrees  with  Luke's  account ;  the 
Alexandrian  ship  in  which  re-embarkment  was  made  would  naturally  winter 
there,  rather  than  at  Meleda ;  the  subsequent  course  of  the  voyage  to  Puteoli 
was  that  which  a  vessel  would  pursue  in  going  from  Malta,  but  not  from  Meleda 
(Hackett,  Zockler).  2.  The  kindness  of  the  natives  showed  them  to  be  barbarians 
in  speech  only,  but  not  in  heart.  The  tongue  they  used  was  that  of  neither 
Greece  nor  Rome,  but  most  likely  Puuic,  or  a  Carthaginian  dialect  of  Phoenician. 
Nevertheless  the  service  they  rendered  to  the  cold  and  shivering  sailors  and 
soldiers  whom  Providence  had  cast  upon  their  coast,  proved  them  to  be  less 
degraded  than  many  who  have  borne  the  Christian  name,  but  by  their  cruel 

^-  583 


chap,  xxviii.   tlOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


treatment  of  shipwrecked  mariners  and  passengers  have  placed  themselves  out- 
side the  pale  of  humanity.  Observing  the  hapless  plight  of  the  two  hundred 
threescore  and  sixteen  souls  who  had  been  rescued  from  the  waves,  and  who, 
besides  being  drenched  with  brine,  were  exposed  to  the  combined  severity  of  a 
strong  north-east  wind  and  a  steady  rain,  the  natives  proceeded  to  light  a  fire  for 
their  comfort.  It  was  a  small  thing  to  do,  but  it  was  the  right  thing  at  the 
right  time,  and  evinced  the  thoughtful  consideration  of  those  who  did  it.  3.  The 
co-operation  of  Paul  was  almost  what  might  have  been  expected  from  one  who  had 
previously  taken  part  in  lightening  the  ship  (xxvii.  19).  The  writer  represents 
him  on  this  occasion  as  actively  engaged  in  assisting  the  barbarians  by  gathering 
up  and  twisting  together  into  a  bundle  a  quantity  of  sticks  to  cast  upon  the 
flame.  Some  have  objected  to  the  truthfulness  of  the  story  on  the  ground  that 
the  Malta  of  to-day  is  distinguished  by  a  great  absence  of  wood,  but  the  Malta 
of  Paul's  time  must  have  been  a  barren  spot  indeed  if  it  contained  no  brushwood  ; 
and  in  any  case  there  must  have  been  within  easy  reach,  strewed  along  the 
beach,  pieces  of  the  wreck,  which  could  have  been  made  available  for  the  purpose 
of  keeping  up  the  fire  when  once  it  had  been  lighted. 

II.  The  viper  on  Paul's  hand. — 1.  The  possibility  of  the  incident.  That  no 
such  venomous  reptiles  are  now  to  be  found  in  Malta  does  not  prove  that  none 
such  existed  there  in  Paul's  day,  any  more  than  the  fact  that  vipers  are  now 
almost  extinct  in  Arran  in  the  Frith  of  Clyde  shows  they  were  not  formerly 
numerous  in  that  island.  That  Paul  should  have  grasped  a  snake  in  the 
handful  of  brushwood  he  collected  is  explainable  by  remembering  that  in  con- 
sequence of  the  coldness  and  lateness  of  the  season  the  reptile  may  have  been  in 
a  torpid  state,  it  being  characteristic  of  such  creatures  that  they  sink  into  this 
condition  when  the  warmth  of  the  air  falls  below  the  mean  temperature  of  the 
place  they  inhabit.  That  the  beast  was  restored  to  activity  by  the  heat  of  the 
lire  into  which  it  was  flung  goes  without  saying,  while  that  it  could  easily  have 
leaped  high  enough  to  fasten  on  Paul's  hand  as  he  stood  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
flames  is  quite  credible,  since  vipers  are  accustomed  to  lurk  in  rocky  places,  from 
which  they  dart  out  upon  their  enemies  (Eccles.  x.  8),  rising  sometimes  several 
feet  at  a  bound.  2.  The  danger  arising  from  the  incident.  Though  not  expressly 
stated  that  the  viper  bit  Paul,  this  was  probably  the  case,  and  was  evidently 
believed  to  be  the  case  by  such  of  the  natives  as  were  standing  round  and 
observed  what  had  taken  place.  Knowing  well  the  deadly  nature  of  the  reptile's 
sting,  they  expected  every  moment  to  behold  the  apostle  either  swelling  up  in  his 
arm  with  strong  inflammation,  or  dropping  down  suddenly  to  the  ground,  as 
Shakespeare  {Antony  and  Cleopatra,  Act  v.,  sc.  2)  says  when  speaking  of  the 
asp-bitten  Cleopatra  and  her  maid  Charmian — 

"  If  they  had  swallowed  poison,  'twould  appear 
By  external  swelling  "  ; 

and  of  Charmian,  who,  following  Cleopatra's  example,  applied  the  asp  to  her 

bosom — 

"  Tremblingly  she  stood 
And  on  the  sudden  dropped." 

(See  "  Critical  Remarks.")  3.  The  termination  of  the  incident.  Neither  of  the 
results  anticipated  by  the  spectators  followed.  Calmly  the  apostle  shook  the 
beast  back  into  the  fire,  out  of  which  it  never  again  rose  ;  and,  though  the 
wondering  natives  kept  on  in  momentary  expectation  that  something  amiss 
would  happen  to  the  apostle,  he  suffered  no  evil  effects  whatever.  Rationalist 
interpreters  would  like,  if  they  could,  to  ascribe  this  either  to  the  non-poisonous 
character  of  the  reptile  or  to  the  fact  that  it  did  not  bite  the  apostle,  but  it  is 
certain  that  whether  the  creature  bit  him  or  not  Paul  would  see  in  his  preserva- 

584 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap,  xxviii. 


tion  a  result  due  to  the  providential  care  and  special  mercy  of  God.  Nor  does  it 
seem  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  Paul  was  enabled  to  behave  throughout  with 
the  calmness  he  displayed,  because  he  recalled  the  promise  which  his  Master  had 
given  to  the  eleven,  and  of  which  he  must  have  heard  (Mark  xvi.  18),  and 
bethought  himself  of  the  twice-given  assurance  (xxiii.  11,  xxvii.  24)  that  he 
would  see  Rome,  and  therefore  could  not  perish  in  Malta. 

III.  The  thoughts  of  the  Maltese. — These  were  various  and  deep,  but  mis- 
taken. 1.  A  wrong  conclusion.  When  they  saw  the  reptile  springing  from  the 
flames  and  fastening  on  Paul's  hand,  they  reasoned,  probably  observing  his 
fettered  wrists,  that  he  must  be  some  notorious  criminal — a  murderer,  for 
instance — whom,  though  he  had  escaped  the  waves,  Divine  Justice,  that  awful 
minister  of  high  Heaven's  wrath  that  ever  follows  on  the  heels  of  crime,  would 
not  permit  to  live.  This  suspicion,  which  they  whispered  to  each  other,  bore  a 
striking  testimony  to  the  sense  or  apprehension  of  Divine  justice  which  sleeps  in 
every  man,  even  the  most  degraded ;  supplied  a  signal  instance  of  man's  readi- 
ness to  lapse  into  error  when  interpreting  providential  occurrences  or  pronouncing 
upon  the  characters  of  others ;  and  gave  a  salutary  reminder  to  all  that  even  the 
best  of  men  may  be  misjudged  by  their  fellows.  2.  A  disappointed  exvectation. 
When  the  natives  remembered  what  the  bite  of  a  viper  signified  they  expected  to 
witness  the  apostle  either  dropping  down  before  them  a  dead  man  or  swelling 
up  along  his  arm  and  throughout  his  body  with  a  strong  inflammation  ;  but  in 
this  also  they  were  at  fault,  because  of  not  knowing  Him  who  had  promised, 
11  They  shall  take  up  serpents,  and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing  it  shall  in  no 
wise  hurt  them."  Verily  there  were  more  things  in  heaven  and  on  earth  than 
had  been  dreamt  of  in  their  philosophy  !  3.  A  superstitious  exclamation.  When 
they  found,  as  they  kept  looking  on  to  witness  the  final  collapse  of  the  apostle's 
vitality,  that  nothing  happened,  and  certainly  that  nothing  amiss  befell  him, 
they  changed  their  minds,  and  ejaculated  again  to  themselves  and  to  each  other, 
"  He  is  a  God  ! " — whether  "  ^Esculapius,  the  god  of  physicians,  who  ruled  over  the 
serpent,  or  Hercules,  who  crushed  serpents  in  his  cradle  "  (Stier),  for  both  were 
worshipped  in  Malta,  cannot  be  determined.  Once  more  they  were  as  sadly 
astray  as  when  they  had  pronounced  him  a  murderer.  Thus  "  the  multitude 
know  no  moderation  ;  it  either  exalts  one  to  heaven,  or  thrusts  him  down  to 
hell "  (Starke).  If  Paul  understood  what  the  natives  said  about  him,  it  need 
hardly  be  doubted  he  would  correct  their  misapprehension,  as  he  did  that  of 
the  men  of  Lycaonia  (xiv.  13). 

Learn. — 1.  That  human  nature  at  its  worst  estate  is  not  wholly  lost.  Soft 
places  exist  even  in  the  hardest  hearts.  2.  That  Christ's  people  should  always 
be  forward  in  helping  their  fellows.  Paul,  though  an  apostle,  disdained  not  to 
assist  in  collecting  sticks  for  the  fire.  3.  That  God  is  able  to  protect  His  people 
in  the  midst  of  greatest  dangers.  Paul,  who  had  been  rescued  from  the  waves, 
was  again  shielded  from  the  serpent's  bite.  4.  That  the  best  of  men  are  often 
mistaken  for  the  worst.  Paul  was  looked  upon  as  a  notorious  criminal. 
Paul's  master  had  been  condemned  as  a  malefactor.  5.  That  ignorance  and 
superstition  are  exceedingly  unstable  in  their  judgments.  The  one  moment  Paul 
was  shunned  as  a  murderer,  the  next  moment  honoured  as  a  God. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

"Ver.  2.  No  common  kindness.     The  a  time  of  urgent  necessity,  in  raising 

behaviour  of  the  natives  of  Malta  to  up  for  them  friends  in  a  place  where, 

Paul  and  his  fellow-voyagers  was —  and  at  a  time  when,  these  could  least 

I.  A  testimony  to  God's  providential  have  been  expected, 

care  in  providing  for  their  wants  in  II.  A  proof  of  the  remnant  of  good- 

585 


chap,  xxviii.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


ness  to  be  found  in  the  hearts  of  even 
the  most  degraded,  which  renders  their 
ultimate  recovery  neither  impossible 
nor  hopeless. 

III.  A  rebuke  to  many  Christians 
whose  conduct  in  showing  kindness  to 
their  fellow-men  falls  far  behind  that 
of  these  untutored  islanders.  "  Chris- 
tian dwellers  at  the  coast  may  learn  a 
Samaritan  love  from  these  strangers" 
(Besser). 

Two  Fires  upon  the  Beach. 

I.  On  the  shore  of  the  Galilean 
Lake  (John  xxr  9).  —  Prepared  by 
Christ  for  His  disciples.  An  emblem 
of  Christ's  love  towards,  thoughtful 
care  of,  and  bounteous  provision  for, 
His  people. 

II.  On  the  shore  of  St.  Paul's  Bay 
in  Malta  (xxviii.  2). — Prepared  by 
the  islanders  for  the  shipwrecked 
voyagers.  An  emblem  of  the  kindness 
which  men,  and  more  especially  Christ's 
followers,  should  show  towards  one 
another,  in  sympathising  with  and 
assisting  one  another. 

Vers.  3-6.  The  Incident  of  the  Viper ; 
or,  Faith  and  Superstition. 

I.  The  barbarians'  eyes  of  supersti- 
tion beheld  in  the  incident  four  things  : 

1.  An  ordinary  occurrence,  the  bite  of 
a  serpent,  which  they  expected  to  be 
followed  by  the  usual  result,  the  death 
of  the  bitten  one.  2.  A  supernatural 
detection  of  an  evildoer  as  they  sup- 
posed, whom  Divine  justice  would 
not  allow  to  live.  3.  An  inexplicable 
phenomenon,  which  led  them  to  as  er- 
roneous a  conclusion  as  that  they 
abandoned.  4.  The  presence  of  a  Divine 
being,  in  which  thought  they  were  right, 
though  the  Divine  presence  was  not 
that  of  Paul,  but  of  Paul's  Master  and 
Lord. 

II.  Paul's  eye  of  faith  beheld  in  the 
incident  four  things  :  1.  A  miracle  of 
Divine  power.  Either  in  preserving  him 
from  being  bitten  by  the  adder,  or,  if 
bitten,  in  protecting  him  against  hurt. 

2.  A  token  of  Divine  goodness  in  thus 
shielding  him  from  being  injured  by 
what  might  otherwise  have  proved  his 

586 


death.  3.  A  proof  of  the  Divine  faith- 
fulness. Christ  having  promised  to  His 
disciples  before  His  ascension  that  they 
should  take  up  serpents  and  not  be 
hurt  (Mark  xvi.  17,  18).  4.  A  mark  of 
Divine  honour.  Put  upon  Paul  in  pre- 
sence of  the  islanders,  not  for  his  sake 
alone,  but  for  theirs  as  well,  to  open 
for  him  a  door  of  usefulness  among 
them  so  long  as  he  remained  in  the 
island. 

Vers.  1-7.  The  Necessity  of  the  A  dvent 
for  the  Barbarian  World.  Exemplified 
by  the  barbarian  life  and  religion  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Melita. 

I.  Barbarian  virtues. — Two  errors 
held  on  the  subject  of  natural  goodness  : 
1.  That  of  those  who  deny  to  fallen 
man  any  goodness  at  all,  and  refuse  to 
admit  even  kindness  of  feeling,  contra- 
dicted by  the  virtues  of  hospitality  and 
sympathy  which  were  found  among 
the  islanders.  2.  The  opposite  error 
of  placing  too  high  a  value  on  those 
natural  virtues.  These  Melitans,  who 
"showed  no  little  kindness"  to  the 
wrecked  crew,  belonged  to  a  stock 
who,  in  the  most  civilised  days  of 
Carthage,  offered  human  sacrifice, 
and  after  every  successful  battle 
with  the  Romans  burnt  the  chief 
prisoners  alive  as  a  thank-offering  to 
Heaven.  3.  The  advent  of  Christ 
brought  a  new  spirit  into  the  world. 
"A  new  commandment  give  I  unto  you, 
that  ye  love  one  another."  That  was 
not  the  new  part.  The  Melitans  would 
not  have  disagreed  with  that.  "  As 
I  have  loved  you."  .  .  .  That  makes 
all  new. 

II.  Barbarian  ideas  of  retribution. 
— In  some  form  or  another  the  idea  of 
retribution  underlies  all  mythologies, 
and  constitutes  the  basis  of  all  natural 
religion.  1.  In  the  barbarian  concep- 
tion of  it,  however,  there  was  something 
gross,  corporeal,  and  dangerous ;  because 
they  misinterpreted  natural  laws  into 
vengeance.  If  we  ask  where  these 
Melitans  got  their  idea  of  retribution, 
the  reply  is  out  of  their  own  hearts. 
They  felt  the  external  connection  be- 
tween wrongdoing  and  penalty.      The 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  xxvm. 


penalty  they  would  have  executed  on  the   Father  was   not   angry  but   well 

murder   was   death.      They    naturally  pleased. 

threw  this  idea  of  theirs  into  the  cha-  III.  Barbarian  conception  of  Deity. 

racter   of   God,    and  blended  together  — "  They  changed  their  minds  and  said 

what    was   theirs   and   what   is    His.  that  he  was  a  god."     1.  This  implied  a 

This  is  valuable  as  a  proof  of  the  in-  certain   advance   in    religious    notions. 

stinctive  testimony   of  man's  heart  to  There  is  a  stage  of  worship  prior  to 

the    realities    of    retribution.      It    is  that  of  man- worship.     Men  have  wor- 

utterly  worthless  as  a  testimony  to  the  shipped  the  powers  of  nature  and  even 

form  in  which  retributive  justice  works,  brute  life.     The  Melitans  were  a  stage 

because   it   is   not   borne   out  by    the  beyond   this.     2.    In  this    worship   of 

facts   of   life.     2.  As   information   in-  the  human,  however,  it  was  adoration 

creased   this  idea    of   retribution   dis-  of  the  marvellous,  not  reverence  for  the 

appears.     Natural  laws  are  understood  good,  which  they  displayed.    It  was  not 

and   retribution  vanishes.      Assuredly  Paul's  character  to  which  they  yielded 

there  is  no  vengeance  such  as  this  which  homage,  but  the  wonderful  mystery  of 

suffers  not  the  murderer  to  live,  but  his  miraculous  escape.     The  mere  wor- 

arms    the   powers    of   nature    against  ship   of    the    mysterious    has    but    a 

him.     So  the  idea  of  retribution  goes  limited      existence.       As     you     teach 

for  those  who  can  see  no  deeper  than  laws    you    undermine    that    religion, 

the   outward  chance   of-  penalty.       3.  3.  The  Redeemer's  advent  taught  a  deeper 

The  advent  of  Christ  brought  deeper  truth  to  man.      The  apostle  spoke  al- 

and  truer  views.     It  taught  what  sin  most    slightingly    of    the    marvellous 

is  and  what  suffering  is.     It  showed  (1  Cor.  xiii.  1).     Love  is  diviner  than 

the  innocent  on  the  cross  bearing  the  all  wondrous  powers.     The  revelation 

penalty  of  the  world's  sin,  but  Him-  of  the  Son  was  to  proclaim  a  Father, 

self  still  the  Son  of  God,  with  whom  not  a  mystery. — Robertson,  of  Brighton. 


HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  7—10. 

Three  Months  in  Malta;  or,  Two  Remarkable  Incidents.     2.   The  Healing  of 
Publius's  Father. 

I.  The  subject  of  the  healing. — The  father  of  Publius,  the  chief,  or  first  man, 
of  the  island,  whose  estates  lay  in  the  vicinity  of  the  scene  of  the  shipwreck. 
That  Publius  was  designated  the  "  first  of  the  Melitseans  "  was  due  neither  to 
his  wealth,  which  was  presumably  great,  nor  to  his  rank,  which  was  obviously 
high,  but  to  his  office,  which  was  that  of  representative,  legate,  or  deputy  of  the 
Roman  praetor  of  Sicily,  to  which  the  smaller  island  of  Malta  wTas  annexed  as  an 
appanage.  Two  inscriptions  found  in  Malta,  at  Citta  Vecchia,  belonging  to  the 
time  of  Augustus,  one  in  Greek  and  the  other  in  Latin,  show  that  the  term 
"first"  was  frequently  so  used — the  Greek  inscription  running,  Lucius  Caius, 
son  of  Quirinus,  a  Roman  knight,  first  of  the  Melitseans.  That  his  father  lived 
with  him  was  probably  a  testimony  to  his  filial  affection. 

II.  The  motive  of  the  healing. — A  threefold  desire  on  the  part  of  Paul. 
1.  Philanthropical.  To  relieve,  if  he  could,  the  suffering  of  the  patient,  who  lay 
sick  of  fever  and  dysentery.  Paul  was  never  unmindful  of  his  own  precept — "  As 
therefore  ye  have  opportunity,  do  good  unto  all  men"  (Gal.  vi.  10;  compare 
Heb.  xiii.  16).  Like  his  Master,  who  "went  about  continually  doing  good" 
(x.  38),  he  was  ever  on  the  watch  for  occasions  to  serve."  Nor  can  one  more 
closely  resemble  either  Christ  or  Paul  than  by  ministering  to  the  infirm  and 
afflicted.  2.  Evangelical.  To  find  an  opening  for  the  gospel,  which  he  believed 
and  was  always  anxious  to  preach.  Paul  was  ever  ready  to  enter  with  his 
message  of  salvation  into  any  door  that  Providence  might  open,  whether  in 

587 


chap,  xxviii.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Ephesus  or  in  Rome,  in  Cyprus  or  in  Malta.  Like  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  always 
about  His  Father's  business  (Luke  ii.  49),  and  whose  meat  and  drink  it  was  to 
do  His  Father's  will  (John  iv.  32-34),  Paul  was  one  that  never  missed  a  chance 
of  publishing  the  good  news  of  grace  and  eternal  life  to  those  who  would  hear 
(Rom,  i.  15).  3.  Eucharistical.  To  make  some  return  for  the  generous  hospi- 
tality which  for  three  days  had  been  exhibited  towards  Paul  and  his  companions, 
which  was  only  common  gratitude,  a  virtue  in  which  the  apostle  never  failed 
(2  Tim.  i.  16-18).  It  is  not  absolutely  certain  that  Publius's  hospitality  was 
extended  to  the  whole  ship's  company,  though  possibly  the  meaning  of  the 
historian  may  be  just  this,  that  for  three  days  Publius  was  engaged  in  showing 
kindness  to  the  shipwrecked  voyagers,  having  them  up  in  relays  to  his  mansion 
or  grounds,  and  sumptuously  feeding  them.  Others,  however,  suppose  that  the 
entertainment  referred  to  Paul  and  his  companions,  Luke  and  Aristarchus,  with 
perhaps  Julius,  the  centurion,  and  tho  master  of  the  ship.  But  in  either  case 
Paul  would  naturally  feel  that  such  generosity  would  demand  some  return. 

III.  The  nature  of  the  healing. — 1.  Ordinary.  The  cure  of  a  fever  and 
dysentery,  and  yet  the  only  cure  of  its  kind  reported  of  Paul — indeed,  only  the 
third  work  of  healing  ascribed  to  him  in  the  Acts,  the  other  two  having  occurred 
at  Lystra  (xiv.  1-10)  and  at  Philippi  (xvi.  16-18),  unless  the  healings  and  exor- 
cisms attributed  to.  Paul  in  Ephesus  (xix.  11,  12)  be  taken  into  account.  That 
the  malady  from  which  Publius's  father  suffered  was  not  impossible,  even  in 
a  dry  climate  like  that  of  Malta,  physicians  resident  in  the  island  have  shown. 
2.  Miraculous.  It  is  evident  that  though  Luke  was  a  physician,  it  was  not  by 
him  but  by  Paul  that  the  cure  was  wrought.  It  vas  Paul  and  not  Luke  who 
entered  into  the  sick  man's  chamber.     Yet  Paul  had  no  power  in  himself  to  cure. 

IY.  The  method  of  the  healing. — 1,  Prayer.  The  apostle  followed  the  usual 
practice  of  Peter  in  attempting  the  sick  man's  cure  (ix.  40).  It  is  possible  that 
on  entering  the  patient's  chamber  Paul  had  no  idea  beyond  that  of  pra)dng  for 
his  restoration  to  health  (James  v.  14),  and  that  the  impulse  to  perform  a  mira- 
culous act  of  healing  was  communicated  to  his  mind  during  prayer.  If  he  con- 
templated a  miracle  from  the  first,  then  the  precedence  of  the  prayer  would 
assist  the  patient  to  detect  the  source  whence  his  cure  proceeded.  2.  Imposition 
of  hands.  In  so  acting  Paul  imitated  the  method  of  Christ  (Mark  vi.  5  ;  Luke 
iv.  20,  xiii.  13).  The  action  would  in  part  serve  to  connect  the  healing  and  the 
prayer  as  well  as  to  aid  the  faith  of  him  on  whom  the  miracle  was  wrought. 

Y.  The  effect  of  the  healing. — Threefold.  1.  Spread  of  fame.  The  rest  of 
the  islanders  who  had  diseases  on  them  came  to  Paul  for  assistance,  which,  like 
his  Master,  he  denied  not,  but  freely  granted,  laying  his  hands  upon  them  and 
healing  them  all  (Luke  iv.  40),  but  whether  in  every  instance  miraculously,  or 
with  the  assistance  of  Luke,  is  not  told.  2.  Increase  of  honour.  The  patients 
whom  he  cured  honoured  him  and  his  companions  with  many  honours — not 
rewards  for  their  services,  which  Paul  would  hardly  have  accepted  (xx.  33 ; 
Phil.  iv.  17),  but  "  attentions,"  marks  of  favour,  in  attestation  of  the  kindly  feel- 
ings with  which  they  were  regarded.  3.  Supply  of  need.  When  the  time 
arrived  for  departure  from  the  island  the  natives  put  on  board  ship  everything 
they  could  think  of  that  might  be  needful  for  the  voyage  of  Paul  and  his  com- 
panions, as  once  before  the  friends  at  Sidon  had  done  (xxvii.  3). 

Learn — 1.  That  Christians  should  never  allow  themselves  to  be  surpassed  in 
courtesy  by  men  of  the  world,  though  they  sometimes  are.  2.  That  Christ's 
people  should  be  distinguished  for  their  gratitude  to  those  who  show  them  kind- 
ness, which  they  sometimes  are  not.  3.  That  wherever  Christians  go  they 
should  endeavour  to  leave  those  they  meet  the  better  for  their  society,  which 
they  do  not  always  do.  4.  That  Christians  will  lose  nothing  either  in  this  world 
or  in  that  which  is  to  come  by  doing  good,  which  they  frequently  forget. 

588 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS   chap.  xxvm. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  7.  The  First  Man  in  Malta  :  a  (ver.  2) ;  their  dim  knowledge  of  God 

Sermon  on  true  Greatness. — Exemplified  (ver.  4) ;  their  lively  susceptibilities  for 

in  Publius.  impressions  of  the  Divine  (ver.  6) ;  their 

I.  First  in  rank. — The  deputy  of  the  childlike  gratitude  for  kindnesses  re- 
Sicilian  praetor,   the  representative  of  ceived  (ver.  10). 

Imperial  Home.      Exalted   station   a  III.  In  their  relation  to  redemption. 

great  talent,  conferring  great  powers  — The  gospel  which  Paul  carried  with 

and  creating  great  responsibilities.  him    to    the      island    and     doubtless 

II.  First  in  wealth. — A  reasonable  preached  to  its  inhabitants  having  been 
inference  from  the  mention  of  "  lands."  intended  for  them,  adapted  to  them, 
Like  social  dignity,  riches  a  splendid  offered  to  them,  and  to  some  extent,  it 
endowment  which,  when  rightly  used,  may  be  hoped,  believed  and  enjoyed  by 
may  be  productive  of  immense  good  to  them,  as  it  is  in  the  heathen  world  to- 
their  holder  as  well  as  to  his  less  for-  day. — Enlarged  from  Gerok. 

tunate  fellows  in  society  around. 

III.  First  in  goodness. — Which  after  Vers.  4-10.  The  Mistakes  of  the 
all  is  the  only  greatness.     Publius,  it  Maltese. 

is  obvious,  was    distinguished  by  at  I.  They  misinterpreted  the    provi- 

least   three   virtues   which    are   rare.  dence  of  God  (ver.  4). 

1.  Filial  devotion.  The  presence  of  his  II.  They  misjudged  the  character  of 
aged  father  in  his  official  mansion  pro-  Paul  (vers.  4,  6). 

bably  spoke  well  for  his  respect  for  and  III.  They  misunderstood  their  own 

attention  to  his  parents  (Ephes.  vi.  1, 2).  needs  (ver.  9). 

2.  Humble  condescension.      Though    a 

great  man,  he  did  not  shrink  from  con-  Vers.  7-10.  The  Beauty  and  the  Profit 

descending  to  men  of  low  estate  like  of  Kindness.     Illustrated    by   and   in 

the  shipwrecked  sailors  and  prisoners  Publius  and  Paul, 

who  had  been  cast  upon   his  island  I.  The  beauty  of  kindness. — Shown 

(Rom.  xii.  16).     3.  Generous  hospitality.  by — 1.  The  courteous  entertainment  of 

A  wealthy  landowner,  he  freely  parted  Paul  and  his  companions  by  Publius. 

with  his  means  to  supply  the  necessities  2.  The  unstinted  philanthropy  of  Paul 

of  the  poor  voyagers  whose  whole  goods  in  healing  not  only   Publius'    father, 

had  been  devoured  by  the  sea  (Prov.  but  all  the  diseased  islanders  who  came 

xxi.  26  ;  Psalm  cxii.  9  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  18).  to  him. 

II.  The  profit  of  kindness. — Expe- 

Ver.   1-10.  The  People  of  Malta  :  an  rienced  by — 1.  Publius,  who  must  have 

Expressive  Representation  of  the  Heathen  felt  his  generosity  to  the  apostle  more 

World.  than   repaid   by   the    healing   of    his 

I.  In  their  need  of  redemption. —  father.  2.  Paul,  who  doubtless  also 
Their  dark  superstition  (vers.  4-6),  owned  himself  abundantly  recompensed 
their  manifold  misery  (vers.  8,  9).  for  his  labours  among  the  islanders  by 

II.  In  their  capability  of  redemp-  the  tributes  of  affection  he  bore  away 
tion. — Their       friendly        hospitality  with  him  from  Malta. 

HOMILETIC AL  ANALYSIS.— Verses   11—16. 

Castor  and  Pollux  ;  or,  PauVs  arrival  in  Rome. 

I:  Departure  from  Malta. — 1.  The  time  of  sailing.  After  a  three  months' 
residence  in  Malta,  where  Paul  and  his  companions  had  been  honourably  and 

courteously  entertained  by  Publius  the  Roman  governor,  and  by  the  natives  of 
the  island  who  had  been  cured  of  their  maladies,  and  no  doubt  in  some  degree 

589 


CHAP,  xxvill.   HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


had  come  to  learn  the  true  nobility  of  their  benefactors'  characters.  That  these 
three  months  were  not  allowed  to  pass  without  an  endeavour  to  disseminate 
amongst  the  islanders  as  well  as  the  shipwrecked  voyagers  a  knowledge  of  the 
truth  may  almost  be  inferred  from  Paul's  well-known  zeal  and  enthusiasm 
for  the  gospel.  This  much  is  certain,  that  both  he  and  his  companions  bore 
away  with  them  from  Valetta  many  marks  of  the  affection  and  esteem  of  those 
whom  they  left  behind.  The  precise  date  of  embarkation,  though  not  stated, 
may  be  roughly  calculated.  If  they  landed  upon  Malta  about  the  end  of 
October  three  months  would  bring  them  to  the  end  of  January,  which  was  an 
early  but  still  a  possible  date  for  sailing,  and  the  passengers,  as  well  as 
Julius,  would  naturally  wish  to  embrace  the  first  opportunity  that  offered  for 
proceeding  with  their  journey.  2.  The  vessel  in  which  the  voyagers  re-embarked. 
Like  the  barque  which  had  been  wrecked,  this  was  a  ship  of  Alexandria ;  and 
like  the  former  also,  was  probably  laden  with  Egyptian  corn  for  the  Roman 
market.  More  fortunate  than  Paul's  vessel,  it  had  escaped  the  storm  which  had 
proved  so  disastrous  to  that ;  or  overtaken  by  the  same  Earoclydon,  it  had 
managed  to  reach  the  harbour  of  Yaletta  in  safety.  There,  having  spent  the 
inclement  months  of  winter,  with  the  opening  of  spring  it  was  ready  to  a  second 
time  affront  the  dangers  of  the  deep.  It  lends  to  the  picture  a  liveliness  which 
could  have  proceeded  only  from  an  eyewitness  to  be  told  that  the  figurehead 
upon  the  ship's  bows  was  that  of  the  Dioscuri  or  Twin  Brethren,  Castor  and 
Pollux,  whom  heathen  mythology  regarded  as  the  sons  of  Jupiter  and  Leda,  and 
looked  up  to  as  the  patrons  of  sea -faring  men :  "  whose  benign  constellation," 
sings  Horace  (Odes,  I.  xii.),  "as  soon  as  it  has  shone  forth  to  the  sailors,  the 
troubled  surge  falls  down  from  the  rocks,  the  winds  cease,  the  clouds  vanish,  and 
the  threatening  waves  subside  in  the  sea,  because  it  was  their  will." 

II.  Progress  of  the  voyage. — 1.  Three  days  at  Syracuse.     This  grand  historic 
city,  the  capital  of   Sicily,  famous  for  the  siege  which  it  suffered  during  the 
Peloponnesian  war,  lay  about  eighty  or  a  hundred  miles  north  of  Malta — i.e.,  a 
day's  sail  with  a  fair  wind.      Founded  in  B.C.   735  by   Corinthian  Dorians  on 
the  adjacent  island  of  Ortygia,  in  B.C.  485  under  Gelon,  first  its  Tyrannus  and 
afterwards  its  king,  it  became  a  splendid  city,  which  extended  over  to  the  main 
island.     In  Paul's  day  it  contained  the  residence  of  the  Roman  governor,  who, 
since  the  close  of  the  Second  Punic  War,  had  ruled  the  Romish  insular  province 
of    Sicily    (Riehm's    Handworterbuch   des   Biblischen    Altertums,    art.    Syrakus). 
Having  put  into  the  harbour,  the  Twin  Brothers  lay  for  three  days,  most  likely 
for  purposes  of  trade,  though  possibly  to  wait  for  a  favourable  breeze.     Whether 
the  apostle  and  his  companions  were  allowed  to  go  ashore  is  not  related  ;  but, 
judging  from  the  similar  permission  granted  at  Sidon  (xxvii.  3),  and  remember- 
ing the  important  services  rendered  to  Julius  by  Paul   during  the  preceding 
voyage  (xxvii.  10,  31),  it  may  reasonably  be  concluded  that  they  were.     2.  One 
day  at  Rhegium.     Having  weighed  anchor,  and  either  tacked  about  or  stood  out 
to   sea,  because  of   adverse   winds — certainly   not   having   sailed    round    Sicily 
(De  Wette) — "the  Twin  Brothers  on  the  same  day  arrived  at  Rhegium,  the 
modern  Reggio,  a  seaport  situated  on  the  Italian  coast,  and  nearly  opposite  to 
Messina."     "  By  a  curious  coincidence,"  say  Conybeare  and  Howson,  "  the  same 
hero  protectors  of  sea-faring  men,  the  Great  Twin  Brethren,"  were  the  patron 
divinities  of  the  city,  on  whose  ancient  coins  also  their  heads  were  exhibited. 
3.  Seven  days  at  Puteoli.     On  the  following   morning,  the   south  wind  having 
begun  to   blow,  the  gallant  ship  resumed  her  voyage,  and  next  day  landed  at 
Puteoli,  the  ancient  Diksearchia,  now  called  Pozznoli,  eight  miles  south-west -of 
Neapolis,  the  modern  Naples,  and  lying  in  a  sheltered  recess  of  the  bay.     A  few 
months  before  Paul's  arrival  it  had  been  elevated  to  the  dignity  of  a  Colonia 
(Tacitus,  Ann.,  xiv.  27).     Its  distance  of  one  hundred  and  eighty-two  miles  from 

590  ^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap,  xxviii. 


Rhegium  might  easily  have  been  traversed  in  twenty- six  hours,  supposing  the 
ship  to  have  made  seven  knots  an  hour.  In  any  case  it  was  a  quick  passage, 
and  due  to  the  favourable  wind  which  filled  the  sails.  "  Puteoli,"  say  Conybeare 
and  Howson,  "  was  the  Liverpool  of  Italy."  In  its  harbour  the  corn  ships  of 
Alexandria  were  accustomed  to  discharge  their  cargoes — Seneca  (Epist.,  77) 
mentioning  that  these  vessels,  easily  recognised  from  afar  by  their  flags,  were 
welcomed  by  loud  hurrahs  when  they  sailed  into  port,  especially  when  they 
arrived  in  early  spring.  From  its  wharves  armies  embarked,  while  ambassadors 
from  foreign  parts  landed  at  its  quay.  Travellers  from  Syria  commenced  at 
Puteoli  their  land  journey  towards  Home.  Before  proceeding  onward  to  the 
capital,  Luke  and  Aristarchus,  if  not  also  Paul,  embraced  the  opportunity  of 
holding  fellowship  with  the  Christians  whom  they  found  there.  That  disciples 
should  have  existed  in  Puteoli  was  not  surprising,  since  already  they  had  become 
numerous  in  Rome.  And  indeed  a  remarkable  confirmation  of  the  wide  and 
rapid  extension  of  Christianity  among  the  provincial  towns  of  Italy  has  been 
recently  derived  from  an  inscription  found  among  the  ruins  of  Pompeii,  destroyed 
by  the  first  eruption  of  Mount  Vesuvius  in  a.d.  79.  Painted  on  a  city  wall 
prior  to  its  overthrow,  the  words  "  Igni  gaude  Christiane,"  "  Rejoice  in  the  fire, 
O  Christian,"  clearly  show  that  in  Pompeii,  within  fifteen  miles  of  Puteoli,  a 
little  Christian  community  existed  (see  Modem  Discoveries  and  the  Christian 
Faith,  by  Dr.  Stokes,  in  The  Sunday  at  Home,  January  1892,  p.  149).  Re- 
quested to  remain  among  the  Christians  in  Puteoli  seven  days,  the  apostle,  first 
having  obtained  Julius'  permission,  consented.  That  the  centurion  should  have 
granted  such  permission  need  occasion  no  difficulty.  He  himself  may  have 
been  waiting  for  orders,  while  his  better  acquaintance  with  Paul  would  un- 
doubtedly dispose  him  to  extend  towards  so  remarkable  a  person  as  much 
indulgence  as  was  consistent  with  his  condition  as  a  prisoner.  How  the  seven 
days  were  spent  can  be  easily  imagined.  As  at  Troas  (xx.  6,  7)  and  at  Tyre 
(xxi.  4),  they  would  doubtless  be  devoted  to  Christian  fellowship,  to  speaking 
and  hearing  things  concerning  the  kingdom,  and  on  the  Lord's  day  to*' the 
breaking  of  bread  and  prayers.  Indeed,  the  mention  of  seven  days  in  each  of 
these  places  as  the  space  of  time  over  which  Paul's  visit  extended  points  by  no 
means  obscurely  to  the  existence  at  that  early  date  of  the  Christian  practice  of 
meeting  for  worship  on  the  Lord's  day. 

III.  Entry  into  Rome. — 1.  Met  by  the  brethren.  Having  heard  of  Paul's 
arrival  at  Puteoli,  probably  through  tidings  forwarded  by  the  Christians  there, 
"  the  brethren  " — i.e.,  the  Christians — of  the  metropolis  determined  to  hurry  out 
and  proffer  him  a  welcome  before  he  could  approach  the  town.  In  two  separate 
companies  they  set  forth,  on  the  great  military  road  called  the  Appian  Way, 
which  led  from  Rome  to  Capua,  and  from  Capua  to  Brundusium  (Brindisi),  on 
the  Adriatic  shore.  At  Capua,  distant  twelve  miles  from  Puteoli,  and  one 
hundred  and  twenty-five  from  Rome,  Julius  and  his  prisoners  would  join  the 
road.  The  advanced  party  of  Roman  Christians — among  whom  may  have  been 
Aquila  and  Priscilla,  and  others  named  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  the  Romans 
(Spence) — encountered  the  apostle  and  his  friends  at  Appii  Forum,  or  "The 
Market  of  Appius,"  about  forty  miles  from  the  capital  ;  the  second  company  at 
"  The  Three  Taverns,"  ten  miles  nearer.  The  first  of  these  towns,  named  from 
Appius  Claudius  Csecus,  the  builder  of  the  Appian  Way,  was  situated  on  the 
northern  border  of  the  Pontine  marshes,  at  the  end  of  the  canal  which  ran  for 
several  miles  along  the  road,  and  is  described  by  Horace  (Sat.,  I.  v.  4)  as  having 
been  full  of  low  tavern-keepers  and  bargemen.  The  second,  not  far  from  the 
modern  Cisterna,  appears  from  Cicero's  letters  to  Atticus  (ii.  12)  to  have  been 
located  near  the  point  where  the  road  from  Antium  crossed  the  Appian  Way. 
When  at  these  two  points  in  succession  the  apostle  looked  upon  the  Roman 

591 


chap,  xxviii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


Christians  who,  with  kindly  forethought,  had  thus  expressed  to  him  their 
sympathy,  he  "  thanked  God  and  took  courage  " — he  felt  the  burden  of  isolation 
lying  on  his  heart  in  large  measure  relieved,  and  gave  utterance  to  the  gratitude 
to  God  which  their  coming  inspired  within  his  soul.  "  The  diminution  of  fatigue, 
the  more  hopeful  prospect  of  the  future,  the  renewed  elasticity  of  religious  trust, 
the  sense  of  a  brighter  light  on  all  the  scenery  round  him — all  this,  and  more,  is 
involved  in  Luke's  sentence.  He  thanked  God  and  took  courage  "  (Conybeare  and 
Howson).  2.  Lodged  by  himself.  On  arriving  at  Rome  the  centurion  un- 
doubtedly acted  as  the  spurious  clause  in  ver.  16  intimates,  delivered  over  the 
prisoners  with  whom  he  had  been  intrusted  to  the  Praetorian  prefect,  whose  duty 
it  was  to  receive  such  as  were  sent  up  from  the  provinces  to  the  capital  for  trial 
(see,  however,  "Critical  Remarks ").  In  the  case  of  Paul,  however,  through 
the  intercession  of  Julius,  or  perhaps  in  consequence  of  the  representations  of 
Festus  and  Agrippa,  an  exception  was  made.  Whereas  ordinarily  prisoners 
remanded  from  the  provinces  were  confined  in  a  prison  attached  to  the  Praetorian 
camp  north-east  of  the  city  and  outside  of  the  Porta  Viminalis,  it  was  sometimes 
allowed  a  prisoner  to  dwell  in  his  own  lodging  under  the  supervision  of  a 
soldier.  This  favour  was  extended  to  the  apostle  by  the  prefect  of  the  day, 
who  may  have  been  Burrus  Africanus,  whom  Claudius  had  appointed  sole 
prefect,  and  who  certainly  retained  this  office  as  late  as  a.d.  62  (see  "  Critical 
Remarks ").  If  this  was  the  individual  into  whose  care  Paul  was  delivered, 
then  one  more  coincidence  occurs  between  Luke's  narrative  and  the  history  of 
the  times,  since  other  calculations  show  that  Paul  must  have  reached  Rome 
about — certainly  not  later  than  —that  date. 

Learn. — 1.  That  ships  of  commerce  have  often  been  used  by  God  to  carry  His 
messengers  throughout  the  world.  2.  That  God's  servants  have  frequently  to 
visit  places  where  no  special  blessing  appears  to  be  left  behind.  3.  That  God's 
hidden  ones  are  commonly  found  in  unexpected  places.  4.  That  the  hearts  of 
true  Christians  beat  towards  one  another  with  fraternal  love.  5.  That  Christian 
sympathy  has  a  rare  power  to  support  under  trial.  6.  That  God  can  raise  up 
friends  for  His  people  in  unexpected  places.  7.  That  when  a  man's  ways  please 
God,  even  his  enemies  are  at  peace  with  him. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  11.  On  Board  the  "  Dioscuroi"  when     seemingly    nothing    important 

or,  "  The  Twin  Brothers." — "  The  three  transpires  or  is  done.     Such  days  Paul 

Christians  stepped  without  hesitation  spent  at  Syracuse  and  Rhegium. 

on  board  a  ship  which  carried  a  heathen  II.  Have  their  uses  when  they  do 

flag.     Castor  and  Pollux  are  nothing  occur. — Afford   opportunities  for  rest, 

(1    Cor.    viii.    4);    but   all   the   ships  if  nothing  else,  and  also  for  meditation, 

belong  to  the  Lord,  and  no  idolatrous  Whether  Paul  met  with  Christians  at 

banner  can  injure  those  who  sail  with  Syracuse  is  not  stated. 

thankfulness  thereupon — a  consolation  III.  Are  worthy  of  being  recorded 

for  the  followers  of  the  apostle  of  the  in  the  story  of  one's  life. — Just  because 

Gentiles,  who  go  forth  with  the  banner  they  are  not  so  unimportant  as  they  seem, 
of  the  cross,  and  sail  in  ships  which 

have  the  golden  calf  of  mammon  for  Ver.  14.  Seven  Days  at  Puteoli. 

their  banner." — Besser.  I.  Seven  days  of  rest  in  the  onward 

pilgrimage  of  life. 

Vers.  12,  13.  Quiet  Days.  II.  Seven  days  of  communion  with 

I.  Are     found     in     most     people's  the  brethren  of  Christ. 

history. — No   man's  life  is  all  bustle  III.  Seven   days  of  service  in  the 

and   activity.     Interludes  must   occur  edification  of  the  Church. 

532 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS,   chap  Xxviii. 


IV.  Seven  days  of  preparation  for  2.  For  the  goodness  and   mercy  that 

entering  the  gates  of  Rome.  had  attended  him  throughout  his  pil- 
grimage.    3.  For  the  numerous  friends 

And  so  we  went  towards  Rome.  that  God  had  raised  up  around  him  at 

I.  As  travellers  towards  their  desti-  every  time  of  need.  4.  For  the  evi- 
nation. — A  picture  of  human  life,  and  dence  afforded  by  the  presence  of  these 
especially  of  Christian  pilgrims  nearing  Roman  Christians  of  the  progress  of 
the  city  of  the  great  king.  the  gospel. 

II.  As  prisoners  to  be  tried  by  II.  Paul  took  courage. — Believing 
their  judge. — Such  were  Paul  and  — 1.  That  God  would  guide  him  till 
many  others  in  the  company.  Once  his  journey  closed.  2.  That  God's 
more  a  picture  of  life,  both  ordinary  mercy  would  not  fail  him  in  the  great 
and  Christian.  "  We  must  all  appear  city  he  was  about  to  enter.  3  That 
before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ  "  friends  would  not  be  wanting  to  him 
(2  Cor.  v.  10).  in  Rome,  and  that  least  of  all  would 

III.  As  missionaries  toward  their  his  heavenly  Friend  desert  him.  4.  That 
field  of  labour. — Paul  at  least,  and  he  would  still  have  an  opportunity  to 
perhaps  also  his  companions,  should  be  advance  his  Master's  cause  in  the  m§- 
viewed  in  this  light,  since  Paul    had  tropolis  of  the  world. 

already  been  assured   that  he   should 

testify     for     Christ     at     Rome     also  ^T        -ia     t>     i    -n  r       *-l     n  *        -r 

,     ••«    -i-iv  Ver.    16.  Paul  Bejore  the  Gates  oj 

(  XXlll.       11),  7-) 

x               '  Home. 

„       II  ,«'  ii>  j.      i  ,i  I.  As  a  homeless  stranger,  and  yet 

Yevs  UU.  F^ndrng  Brethren  welcomed  by  loving  brethren. 

I.  Christ  s  people  are  to  be  met  wlth  A      >       u|       in  bond    and 

in    unexpected    places. — Paul    found  „  .      ..,    .,      tmwmtAtMm  4-w;™™,  ~e 

,,       .     \          iii-       if?  t    j      .  yet  with  the  gracious  testimony  ot 

them  in  places  where  he  himself  had  not  l*A  ..  *..    t,Mj                               J 

,        ,   /             ,  -r,  ,    ,.      1D  «od  in  ins  heart, 

been  before,  as  at  Puteoh  and  Rome.  TTT     .     „„  „#>,•„.  n---:-*.-*  „„+« 

II.  Have  usnally  small  difficulty  in  "L  .? s  an  offerlnS  *PP<"ted  "Jo 

,   J    , ,            . ,,     ,  J.  death  (tor  sooner  or   later  he  was  to 

i     J i      a  •     ™    •  j-        j                 i         G  lose  his  life   within   these  walls),  and 

brethren  in  Christ,  and  possessed  more  .  m  „,-A+rv„:A„„  ^rt„«„««rt„      i        i     *. 

.        » Al            '          i       i      •  •.     i  yet  a  victorious  conqueror,  who  plants 

or  less  ot  the  same  moral  and  spiritual  f,       .       -,     -,    c  ,  i               ■     .  i      %,    1  ■, 

,          ,     .  , .                                  r  the  standard  or  the  cross  in  the  citadel 

characteristics.  £  ,      , ,                 n      i 

TXX    «             i    A  i      /       i      n,  i    \  ot  heathenism. — Gerotc. 

III.  Commonly  take  (or  should  take) 

delight  in  each  other's  society. — The 

communion  of  saints  being  an  article  From  Jerusalem  to  Rome. — This  the 

in   the   creed   which   they   profess    in  course  of  the  gospel  in  the  Acts, 

common.  I.  A  painful  course,  full  of  shame 

IV.  Should   always   endeavour    to  and  persecution. 

be  mutually  helpful. — Bearing    each  II.  A   heroic    course,   full    of    the 

other's  burden's,  and  so  fulfilling  the  power  of  faith  and  the  glow  of  love. 

law  of  Christ.  III.  A    victorious    course,   full    of 

mighty  acts  and  Divine  wonders. 

Yer.  15.  Gratitude  and  Courage.  IV.  A  blessed  course,  full  of  salva- 

I.  Paul   thanked  God.  — 1.   For  the  tion  and  grace  for  the  present  and  the 

approaching  termination  of  his  journey.  future. — Ibid. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  17—22. 

An  Intervieu)  with  the  Jewish  Chiefs  ;  or,  an  Explanation  of  his  Imprisonment. 

I.  The  assembly  convened. — 1.  The  place.  Either  Paul's  own  private  dwelling 
(ver.  30),  which  doubtless,  through  the  kindness  of  Luke,  Aristarchus,  and  other 

Christian  friends,  he  had  been  enabled  to  hire ;  or  a  temporary  lodging  which 
had  been  provided  for  him  by  some  of  the  Roman  brethren.     M  Tradition  points 

,                                    QQ  593 


chap,  xxviii.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


to  the  vestibule  of  the  Church  of  Santa  Maria,  at  the  junction  of  the  Via  Lata 
and  the  Corso,  as  the  site  of  this  dwelling ;  but  it  has  been  urged  by  Dr.  Philip, 
at  present  working  as  a  missionary  in  the  Ghetto  at  Eome,  in  a  pamphlet 
On  the  Ghetto  (Eome,  1874),  that  this  site,  forming  part  of  the  old  Flaminian 
way,  was  then  occupied  by  arches  and  public  buildings,  and  that  it  was  far  more 
probable  Paul  would  fix  his  quarters  near  those  of  his  own  countrymen.  He 
acids  that  a  local  tradition  points  to  No.  2  in  the  Via  Stringhari,  just  outside 
the  Ghetto,  as  having  been  St.  Paul's  dwelling  place,  but  does  not  give  any 
documentary  evidence  as  to  its  nature  or  the  date  to  which  it  can  be  traced  back  " 
(Plumptre).  2.  The  time.  After  three  days,  which  most  likely  the  apostle 
spent  in  recruiting  his  wearied  frame  after  the  long  and  fatiguing  journey  he 
had  undergone.  It  showed  his  zeal  for  the  cause  he  represented,  that  he 
rested  only  three  days.  If  any  part  of  these  days  was  devoted  to  social 
intercourse,  it  would  certainly  be  with  Luke,  Aristarchus,  and  the  friends  who 
had  so  kindly  met  him  at  Appii  Forum  and  The  Three  Taverns.  3.  The  guests. 
In  other  circumstances  Paul  would  have  sought  out  his  countrymen  at  their 
synagogues.  As  this  was  impossible  in  the  position  in  which  he  then  was,  he 
could  only  invite  them  to  wait  on  him  at  his  lodging.  Accordingly  at  his 
request  they  come — the  chief  men  or  rulers  of  the  synagogues,  and  others 
probably  of  high  rank  to  whom  invitations  had  been  issued.  The  Jewish 
community  in  Rome  inhabited  the  "  Trastevere  "  or  district  beyond  the  river,  a 
part  of  the  city  then  notorious  as  the  residence  of  a  low  rabble  and  a  place  of  the 
meanest  merchandise.  The  beginnings  of  the  Jewish  colony  in  that  quarter 
could  have  been  traced  back  to  the  captives  brought  to  the  capital  by  Pompey 
after  his  eastern  campaign,  many  of  whom  had  become  freemen,  and  to  whom 
additions  were  constantly  made  as  the  years  went  on,  in  consequence  of  the 
mercantile  relations  which  subsisted  between  Pome  and  the  East.  Many  of 
these  colonists  were  wealthy,  and  contributed  largely  for  sacred  purposes  to  the 
mother  country.  (See  Oonybeare  and  Howson,  ii.  388,  389  ;  compare  "  Hints  " 
on  ver.  17). 

II.  The  explanation  offered. — 1 .  A  protestation  of  his  innocence.  To  the  leaders 
of  the  Jewish  community  Paul  explicitly  affirmed  that,  though  a  prisoner,  as 
they  beheld,  he  had  been  guilty  of  no  offence  against  the  people — i.e.,  the  Jewish 
nation  or  against  the  customs  of  their  fathers.  Paul  had  all  along  contended 
that  Christianity  formed  the  legitimate  because  divinely  promised  development  of 
Judaism,  and  that  in  seeking  to  carry  over  his  countrymen  to  an  acceptance  of 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  Messiah,  he  was  not  actuated  by  hostility  to  the  ancestral 
religion.  Nay,  he  had  even  shown  by  his  unwonted  zeal  in  attending  the 
Jewish  feasts  and  by  his  observance  of  a  Nazarite  vow  (xxi.  26),  that  he  was 
well  disposed  towards  the  customs  of  the  fathers ;  and,  though  critics  like  Zeller 
(Die  Apostelgeschichte,  p.  292)  cannot  understand  how  Paul  with  a  good 
conscience  could  have  advanced  the  claim  here  put  into  his  lips,  when  he  knew 
that  his  whole  activity  aimed  at  nothing  else  than  to  subvert  the  Mosaic 
religion  through  faith  in  Christ,  and  that  his  whole  religious  consciousness  had 
its  middle  point  in  the  abrogation  of  the  Law  through  the  gospel,  it  is  by  no 
means  hard  to  comprehend  if  one  remembers  that  Paul  never  did  insist  upon 
a  Jew  renouncing  Moses  before  he  exercised  faith  in  Christ.  2.  A  vindication 
of  his  appeal.  The  apostle  doubtless  felt  that  his  countrymen  in  Pome  would 
want  to  understand  how  he  came  to  be  a  prisoner  if  he  had  not  been  chargeable 
with  any  offence ;  and  in  order  to  meet  this  unspoken  but  natural  request,  he 
proceeded  to  relate  how  the  Roman  officials  who  examined  him  were  so  convinced 
of  his  innocence  that  they  would  willingly  have  set  him  at  liberty  had  it  not 
been  for  the  interference  of  the  Jews — i.e.,  of  the  Sanhedrists — and  how  solely, 
as  a  means  of  self-defence,  and  not  at  all  because  he  intended  to  prefer  any 

594 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap,  xxviii. 


accusation  against  the  nation,  he  had  been  obliged  to  appeal  unto  Caesar.  The 
accuracy  of  this  statement  also  has  been  challenged  by  Holtzmann  (Hand 
Commentar,  in  loco),  and  that  on  two  grounds  :  first,  that  the  Roman  officials 
expressed  no  such  desire  to  liberate  Paul  as  Luke  here  states ;  and,  second,  that 
it  was  not  the  Jews  but  Festus  (xxv.  9-12)  who  constrained  Paul  to  appeal  to 
Caesar.  But  one  who  reads  betwen  the  lines  at  xxv.  9  can  have  no  difficulty 
in  perceiving  that,  while  Festus  demanded  of  Paul  whether  he  would  go  to 
Jerusalem  to  be  judged,  Festus  himself  felt  inwardly  disposed  to  discharge  the 
apostle,  and  probably  would  have  done  so  but  for  the  threatening  attitude 
assumed  by  the  Sanhedrists ;  and  that  his  actual  proposal  partook  of  the  nature 
of  a  compromise,  which  enabled  him  neither  to  condemn  Paul  nor  to  displease 
the  Jews.  Moreover,  if  this  explanation  be  correct,  it  will  show  how  Paul  could 
speak  of  the  Jews  rather  than  of  Festus  as  the  parties  whose  action  constrained 
his  appeal.  3.  A  reason  stated  for  his  invitation.  He  wished  himself  to  .  place 
his  case  before  the  bar  of  their  unbiassed  judgments,  and  to  let  them  know  that 
he  was  in  reality  a  sufferer  for  one  of  the  main  points  of  the  national  faith, 
that  in  fact  he  was  a  prisoner  for  the  hope  of  Israel.  Perhaps  also  he  cherished 
the  expectation  that  in  this  way  he  would  obviate  any  hostile  interposition  on 
their  part  in  the  course  of  his  trial  (Holtzmann). 

III.  The  answer  returned. — 1.  A  confession  of  ignorance.  About  the  details  of 
his  case.  The  Jewish  leaders  assured  the  apostle  that  they  had  neither  received 
letters  from  Judaea  concerning  him,  nor  had  any  of  the  brethren  arrived  in  the 
city  to  report  or  speak  harm  of  him.  According  to  some  interpreters  the  synagogue 
chiefs  imagined  that  Paul  half  suspected  they  might  have  heard  disingenuous 
and  depreciatory  rumours  concerning  him  from  the  Judaean  metropolis,  and  were 
desirous  of  disabusing  his  mind  of  any  such  suspicion.  Others  are  at  a  loss  to 
understand  how  people,  living  in  the  centre  of  the  world,  as  the  Roman  Jews 
did,  could  have  professed  to  be  unacquainted  with  the  extraordinary  commotion 
excited  by  Paul  in  every  Jewish  community  into  which  he  had  hitherto  come. 
It  should,  however,  be  noted  that  they  do  not  assert  they  had  never  before  heard 
of  Paul — in  which  case  they  would  scarcely  have  accepted  his  invitation  to  wait 
upon  him  in  his  lodging ;  but  only  that  they  had  received  no  official  papers  from 
Judaea  about  his  case,  and  that  no  personal  messenger  had  arrived  with  tidings 
to  his  disadvantage.  Both  of  which  statements  might  easily  have  been  true. 
Until  Paul  had  appealed  to  Caesar  the  Jerusalem  Sanhedrists  had  no  special 
reason  for  sending  word  about  him  to  the  Roman  Christians  ;  and  even  after 
that  event,  as  no  great  interval  elapsed  between  the  appeal  and  the  voyage  to 
Rome,  it  is  easy  to  comprehend  how  communications  or  passengers  from  Judaea 
may  not  have  had  time  to  reach  Rome  before  the  apostle  himself  arrived. 
2.  An  expression  of  desire.  To  hear  what  Paul  himself  had  to  say  about  the 
new  sect  of  which  he  was  so  distinguished  a  champion,  and  which,  they  told  him, 
as  a  reason  for  their  request,  it  had  come  to  their  ears,  was  everywhere  spoken 
against.  How  they  could  have  pretended  to  be  so  ignorant  of  Christianity  as  to 
represent  it  as  a  sect  of  which  they  had  only  incidentally  heard  has  perplexed 
the  critics,  some  of  whom  do  not  hesitate  to  suggest  that  the  synagogue  leaders 
told  a  lie  (Schneckenburger,  Tholuck),  while  others  see  in  the  narrative  a 
falsification  of  actual  history  on  the  part  of  the  writer,  for  the  purpose  either  of 
vindicating  Paul's  character  as  that  of  an  orthodox  Jew  (Zeller),  or  of  showing 
how  Paul  in  Rome,  as  elsewhere,  commenced  a  Christian  mission  only  after  the 
gospel  had  been  rejected  by  the  Jews  (Baur,  Holtzmann).  That  a  large  and 
important  Christian  Church  existed  in  Rome  at  this  date  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  written  from  Corinth  shows,  not  to  speak  of  the  evidence  supplied  by 
the  Neronic  persecution,  of  which  Tacitus  says,  "Nero  subdidit  reos  et  quaesitissimis 
paenis  affecit  quos  per  flagitia  invisos,  vulgus  Christianos  appellabat"  (Annals, 

595 


chap,  xxviii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


xv.  44).  That  the  Jewish  leaders  were  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  such  a 
Christian  community  is  inconceivable.  Nor  do  they  deny  that  they  were 
cognisant  of  its  existence.  Only  they  express  themselves  concerning  it  with 
caution,  talking  of  it  as  a  sect  everywhere  spoken  against,  about  which  they 
were  anxious  to  receive  further  information.  As  to  the  reason  of  this  reserve 
various  explanations  have  been  offered  ;  as,  for  instance,  that  even  before  Claudius 
had  banished  the  Jews  from  Rome  the  Christians  had  separated  themselves  from 
the  synagogue,  so  that  they  remained  practically  unknown  to  the  Jews  who 
returned  after  the  edict  of  banishment  had  been  recalled  (Olshausen)  ;  that  the 
Jews  purposely  deceived  Paul  in  order  to  obtain  from  him  intelligence  about 
the  sect  (Tholuck) ;  and  that  the  Jews  seeing  Paul  apparently  in  favour  with  the 
Roman  authorities,  did  not  wish  to  assume  an  attitude  of  strong  opposition 
towards  the  Christians,  and  therefore  carefully  concealed  their  private  opinions 
(Philippi). 

Learn. — 1.  That  the  love  of  a  truly  Christian  heart  for  the  salvation  of  others 
is  practically  unquenchable.  Paul's  desire  for  the  conversion  of  his  countrymen 
was  a  remarkable  phenomenon.  Had  he  not  imbibed  much  of  his  Master's 
spirit,  his  love  for  his  own  kinsman  must  have  long  since  been  extinguished. 
2.  That  a  truly  Christian  heart  is  incapable  of  revenge.  Paul  had  nothing  to 
accuse  his  nation  of,  although  they  had  unjustly  hurled  against  him  baseless 
charges,  loaded  him  with  undeserved  chains,  and  even  pitilessly  thirsted  for  his 
blood  as  well  as  frequently  attempted  his  life.  3.  That  Christ's  followers  are 
tender  of  the  errors  and  superstitions  of  others.  Paul  in  preaching  Christ 
never  ran  down  Moses  or  depreciated  the  value  of  his  religious  institutions. 
4,  That  good  men  are  always  careful  of  their  own  good  names.  Paul  desired 
to  protect  himself  against  the  calumnies  that  he  feared  might  have  reached 
the  ears  of  his  countrymen  in  Rome.  5.  That  the  Christian  Church  has  in  no 
age  lacked  detractors.  As  in  the  first,  so  in  the  nineteenth  century,  this 
sect  is  everywhere  by  some,  though  happily  now  nowhere  by  all,  spoken 
against. 

HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  17.  The  Jews  in  Rome. — "  The  made  no  secret  that  he  approved  of  the 
Jewish  quarter  in  Rome  had  for  almost  Jews  when  they  abominated  such, 
a  hundred  years  been  the  unceasing  Otherwise  had  he  not  permitted  that  a 
object  of  attention,  of  sport,  and  of  large  part  of  the  town  on  that  side  of 
anger,  to  the  metropolis.  Before  the  the  Tiber  should  be  occupied  by  those 
first  Jewish  war  the  number  of  the  of  whom  the  greater  number  were 
Jews  in  Rome  had  been  of  less  im-  freed  men — that  is,  persons  who  were 
portance,  but  Pompey,  Cassius,  and  set  free  by  their  masters,  because  they 
Antoninus  had  sold  numerous  Jewish  could  not  be  constrained  to  forsake  the 
prisoners  of  war  as  slaves,  who  either  customs  of  their  fathers.  He  knew 
soon  were  made  free  because  they  were  also  that  they  sent  to  Jerusalem 
of  little  value  as  slaves,  or  indeed  were  collections  under  the  name  of  *  first- 
even  many  times  bought  free.  These  fruits,'  by  means  of  representatives 
liberti  formed  the  proper  root  of  the  who  offered  these  on  their  behalf.  In- 
Jewish  community  in  Rome,  on  which  tentionally  had  they  been  restricted 
account  the  Romish  Jews  were  styled  with  their  retail  traffic  to  the  four- 
simply  the  Libertines."  So,  at  least,  teenth  district  across  the  Tiber,  whither 
narrates  Philo  the  origin  of  the  Jewish  all  dirty  trades  were  banished.  Their 
community  in  Rome.  "  Csesar  desired  quarter  lay  upon  the  slope  of  the  Yati- 
for  himself  no  employment  for  his  can,  and  stretched  itself  over  one  of  the 
genius,  reports   the   philosopher,    and  flat  islands  in  the  Tiber,  which  were 

596 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap.  xxvm. 


exposed  to  inundations,  and  at  which  munity  in  Rome  was  the  Greek,  as  in- 
the  Tiber  boats  coming  f rom  Ostia  were  deed  Paul  had  written  in  Greek  to  the 
accustomed  to  land.  Here,  where  the  Christian  Church  there.  The  inscrip- 
ships'  cargoes  were  discharged,  was  for  tions  upon  the  Jewish  churchyard  in 
the  Jewish  brokers  the  correct  place  the  Transtiberine  quarter  and  upou  the 
which  from  year  to  year  they  in  other  superior  churchyard  on  the 
greater  numbers  occupied." ...  "To  the  Appian  Way  at  Capena  and  upon 
grief  of  the  Roman  world  the  Jewish  the  third  in  the  Catacombs  are  corn- 
immigrants  in  no  way  restricted  them-  posed  in  a  Hebraising  Greek,  less  often 
selves  to  business  in  general,  but  with  in  bad  Latin,  never  in  Hebrew.  Con- 
that  manysidedness  which  was  peculiar  sequently  even  in  the  Metropolis  the 
to  them,  no  department  of  life  was  Jewish  Greek  jargon  of  Asia  Minor 
safe  from  their  invasion.  Whilst  great  was  spoken,  as  Martial  makes  merry 
and  small,  from  Josephus,  the  favourite  over  the  manner  of  speech  even  of  the 
of  Flavius,  who  dwelt  in  the  palace  literary  Jews "  (Hausrath,  der  Apostel 
at  Septizonium,  down  to  the  female  Paulus,  pp.  474-478). 
beggar    who    was    stationed    on    the 

Capena,  they  loved  to  make  gain,  and  Yer   20>  The  R       0f  Israel 

by  their  Oriental  manners,  which  were  j    impianted   in   Israel's  heart  by 

strange  to  the  metropolitan,  and  the  q0(j 

abomination  in    which    the    Romans  j£  Recorded  in  their  sacred  scrip- 
held  the  gods  and  mysterious  writings  tures 

of  the  East,  they  largely  increased  their  n£  FulfiUed  by  the  resurrection  of 

power,  on  the  other  hand  we  see  them,  Jesus  Christ 

through  their  pliantness,  accommodat-  IV    polished  to  the  Jewish  people. 

ing  themselves  to  the  manners  of  the  v   Rejected    by    the    unbelieving 

metropolis,   and  developing   an  incre-  portion  of  the  nation. 
dible  allsidedness.     What  business  had 
the  son  of  Israel  not  practised  in  the 

capital    of    the    world?       Merchant,  Paul  s  Cham. 

banker,  shopkeeper,  pedlar,  as  a  rule,  *•  £  disgrace  to  Israel, 

he  was  also  an  officer,  and  frequently  IL  ~n  hon?ur  to  paul. 

a  soldier;  he  was  scholar,  poet,  critic,  IIL  A   comfort  to  Christians.— In 

yea,  even  actor  and  singer.     He  swore  case   they   should   be    called   uPon  fco 

by  the  temple  of  the  Thunderer,  and  suffer  for  the  truth- 
declaimed  in  mythological  roles  tragic 

trimeters  to  the  astonishment  of  the  Ver.  22.  Everyivhere  spoken  Against. 

court.    He  practised  also  as  a  physician,  That   this   could    have    been     said   of 

and  the  doctor  of  Herod  stood  in  such  Christianity  about  the  middle   of  the 

favour  that  one  had  better  lock  up  his  first  century  was  a  signal  testimony  to 

silver  if  he  allowed  himself  to  bargain  many  things. 

with    him.      This    emancipated    Jew  I.  To   the    truthfulness    of  Christ's 

loved  to  imitate  all  the  ways  of  the  prediction. — That  against  His  people 

heathen.     In  spite  of  certain  mockery  men   should   say   all   manner   of   evil 

from  the  heathen,  he  pressed  into  the  (Matt.  v.  11 ;  John  xvi.  2). 

public  baths,  and  with  the  persistence  II.  To  the  wickedness  of  the  human 

peculiar  to  him  blocked  up    the  best  heart.— -Which     could    speak   evil    of 

places,  doubly  pleased  if  he  succeeded  those  who  were  really  the  lights  of  the 

in  concealing  his  Jewish  origin.     The  world  and  the  salt  of  the  earth  (Matt, 

sportive  youth   of    the   metropolis   he  v.  13,  14). 

joined  in  all  playgrounds  with  success ;  III.  To  the  success  of  Christianity, 

in  short,  no  place  was  either  so  holy  or  — Which  had  made  its  presence  known 

profane  that  it  could  not  lodge  a  Jewish  and  felt  even  in  the  centre  of  the  world 

guest.     The  speech  of  this  Jewish  com-  (Rom.  i.  8). 

597 


chap.  Xxviii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


IV.  To  the  spiritual  power  of  the  been  accepted  by  the  critical  raculty  of 

gospel. — Which  roused    against    itself  mankind,    though    as    religions    they 

the  opposition  of  the  world.  contain  not  a  few  of  the  ;ame  doctrines 

as  Christianity  itself* 

Ver.  22.  Everywhere  spoken  against ;  II.  The  metaphysical  character  of 

or,  Popular  Objections  against  Christi-  its   doctrines. — Net  su  much   the  cir- 

anity. — Now,  as  in  Paul's  day,  Christi-  cumstance    that    the    Christian    docu- 

anity  is  objected  to  by  various  classes  ments   record   miracles,  in  which  the 

of    persons,   and    on   widely   different  scientific  and  philosophic  worlds  do  not 

grounds ;  as,  e.g. —  believe — though,   of   course,    to   many 

I.  The  supernatural  character  of  its  this  does  constitute  a  serious  difficulty 

origin. — This  has  been  a  difficulty  with  in  accepting  the  religion  which  these 

Christianity  from  the  beginning.    Christ  documents  teach  ;  but  the  circumstance 

advanced  this  claim  on  behalf  of  His  that  as  a  religion  Christianity  claims 

doctrine  when  He  first  promulgated  it  to  be  based  on  a  series  of  supernatural 

(John   vii.    16);   and   indeed  the  New  facts,  which,  if  once  admitted,  not  only 

Testament  writers  generally  maintain  explain  and  justify  the  miracles  com- 

that,   like   Mosaism,   Christianity   has  plained  of,  but  render  all  other  objec- 

its  source  in  Divine  revelation,  and  not  tions  to  Christianity  itself  unreasonably 

merely  in   such  Divine   revelation   as  These  facts  are  :   1.  The  incarnation  of 

might  be  imparted  to  the  human  mind  the  Second  Person  in  the  Godhead  in  the 

through,  but  in  such  as  transcended,  person  of  Jesus,  which,  if  true,  involves 

ordinary  channels.     The  Pharisees  and  not  only  Christ's  supreme  divinity,  but 

Jews  generally  rejected  this  claim  on  demands  also  a  plurality  of  persons  in 

the  ground  that  they  found  it  impossi-  the  Godhead.     2.  The  vicarious  sacri- 

ble  to  accept  as  Divine  revelation  what  Jice    of    Jesus    Christ   upon    the    cross, 

seemed  to  them  so  unmistakably  to  set  which,  if  true,  involves  the  antecedent 

aside  the  revelation  which  they  believed  doctrine  of  the  fall  of  man,  the  total 

had  been  given  to  Moses*  (John  ix.  29).  corruption  of  the  race,  and  the  inability 

Scientific  men  at  the  present  day  reject  of  man  to  save  himself,  as  well  as  the 

it  as  in  their  judgment  incompatible  possibility  of  a  free  salvation.     3.   The 

with  the  Reign  of   Law,  affirming  in  resurrection    of  Christ  from   the  dead, 

vindication  of  their  action  that,  if  there  which  again,  if  true,  involves  the  truth 

be  a  God,  of  which  many  of  them  are  of   the   two   preceding,    and    the   cer- 

not  sure,  they  have  no  knowledge  of  tainty  of  both  a  future  resurrection  of 

any  action  of  His  that  transcends  the  the  dead  (xxiv.  1 5  ;   1  Cor.  xv.  20)  and 

bounds  of  natural  law  (2  Peter  iii.  4).  a  final  judgment  of  the  world  (xvh.  31). 

Philosophers  reject  it  on  the  ground  4.   The  necessity  of  a  free  justification 

that  a  supernatural  origin  is  not  re-  by  Divine  grace,  and  an  entire  i  egene 

quired  for  the  production  of  what  they  ration  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  order  to 

find   to   be  the   essence   or  kernel   of  salvation — which,  once  more,  if  true, 

Christianity  ;  after  having  stripped  off  lays  the  axe  at  the  root  of  self-sufficiency 

what    they   regard   as   the   legendary  and  pride,  and  thus  inevitably  excites 

accretions    with   which    it    has    come  the  hostility  of  the  natural  heart.     It 

down     through     the     past     nineteen  is  perfectly  well  known  that  not  one 

centuries,   all   that   is  valuable  in  it,  of  these  doctrines  is  palatable  to  the 

they   affirm    may    be    sufficiently   ac-  world,  and  even  within  the  precincts 

counted   for  by  the   evolution  of   the  of  the  Church  itself   there  are  those 

human   mind.     Students  of   compara-  who  in  some  surprising  manner  claim 

tive  religion,  as  they  are  called,  reject  to  be  counted  Christians  who  repudiate 

it  on  the  plea  that  other  religions,  such  them  all. 

as  Mohammedanism    and    Buddhism,  III.  The  objectionable  character  of 

claim  to  have  originated  in  the  same  its  precepts. — Many  of  the  objections 

way,  and  yet   their  claims   have   not  urged   against    these    are   indeed   un- 

598 


IlOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.   chap,  xxvni. 


reasonable    and   contradictory,   having  the  almost  inevitable  result  that  it  is 
only  this  in  common,  that  they  dislike  spoken    against    and    rejected.     3.  A 
Christianity    and    often     lead     to    its  third   class   complain  that    the  precepts 
rejection.      1.  According  to  one  class  of  of  Christianity   are    too   impracticable, 
objectors,   the  precepts   of    Christianity  While   to   many  the   Sermon   on   the 
are   too   humbling.      This   holds   good,  Mount,    with    its    doctrines    of    non- 
especially   of    the   commandments,    to  resistance     of     evil,    renunciation     of 
repent   of   sin    and    believe   in   Jesus  wealth,   love   to   enemies,    doing   unto 
Christ.     Did  repentance  of  sin  mean  others  as  one  would  that  others  shoull 
nothing  more  than  a  formal,  conven-  do  unto  him,  etc.,  is  esteemed  the  very 
tional,  and  external   acknowledgment  essence  of  Christ's  religion,  the  class  of 
that  one  had  not  behaved  exactly  as  objectors  now  alluded  to  pronounce  its 
he  should  have  done — an  acknowledg-  programme  impracticable  and  visionary 
ment  which  one  might  condescendingly  — in  fact,  declare  its  non-suitability  to 
make  without  unduly  putting  an  in-  the  exigencies  of    modern  civilisation, 
dignity  upon  his  self-respect ;  and  were  shrink  not  from  saying  that  its  morality 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ  nothing  beyond  an  will   not   do  for  either    commercial   or 
equally  generous  recognition  on  man's  political  life,  and   that    if  Christianity 
part  that  Christ  had  lived  in  His  day  insists  on  its  doing,  Christianity  must 
and  generation  a  noble  and  self-sacri-  go  to  the  wall.     Of  course  Christianity 
ficing  life,  from  which  all  subsequent  will  not  go  to  the  wall,  but  the  nation 
ages  had  received  an  inspiration  and  and  the  people  shall  go  to  the  wall  that 
impulse  for  good,  then  the  acceptance  propose   to   transact    their    businesses 
of  Christianity  by  men's  hearts  would  and    conduct    their    politics    on   other 
not   have    been    so    difficult  as  it  is  principles  than  its. 
But  repentance  being  an  inward  and  IV.  The  visionary  character  of  its 
real  sorrow  for  sin,  which  prostrates  rewards. — Had  Christianity  proposed 
the  soul  before  God  in  self-humiliation,  to  confer   on  its  adherents  immediate 
and  faith  signifying  the  soul's  absolute  benefits  of  a  material  kind,  such  as  in- 
and  final  surrender  to  Jesus  Christ-  for  creased  wealth,  power,  pleasure,  fame, 
salvation   and   eternal    life,    the    soul  such  as  the  world  thirsts  for,  its  repu- 
instinctively  becomes  conscious  of  an-  tation  might  have  stood  higher  to  day 
tagonism  against  demands  so  imperious  than  it  does  with  the  unbelieving  world, 
and  exacting.     2.  To  a  second  class,  the  But  the  chief  blessings  which  Chris- 
p>recep>ts  of  Christianity  are  too  severe —  tianity    undertakes   to   confer    on    its 
too   lofty,    too   spiritual,    too    inward,  adherents    are     of     a     spiritual    sort 
too     thoroughgoing.      Easily     enough  (see  Ephes.  i.  3),  and  to  be  enjoyed  in 
summed  up  in  love  to  God  and  love  to  their  fulness  in  a  future  world.     Not 
man,  when  it  comes  to  be  understood  that  Christianity  has  nothing  to  confer 
that  what   Christianity  regards   as  a  on  its  adherents  here,  because  it  has 
perfect  discharge  of  these  duties  is  not  (see  1  Tim.  iv.  8) — it  has  a  sense  of  the 
the    performance   of   a   few   external,  pardoning   mercy    of    God,    peace    of 
conventional,  and  formal  courtesies  to  conscience,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  a 
God  in  the  shape  of  bodily  worship,  growing  enlightenment  in  the  truth  of 
however  elaborate  or  costly,  and  phil-  God  with  a  growing  conformity  to  the 
anthropies   to   man   in   the    shape   of  image   of    God,    and   over   and   above 
munificent     and      frequent     gifts     of  these  it  has  all  things  needful  for  life 
charity ;  but  the  continual  up-going  of  and  godliness  (2  Peter  i.  3),  all  those 
the  heart  towards  God  in  adoring  love  "  other   things  "   which    the   heavenly 
and   obedience,    and   outgoing  of    the  Father   knows    His    children    require 
heart  towards  man  in  sympathy  and  (Matt.    vi.    33).       But  because  Chris- 
succour — then    Christianity  is  felt  to  tianity    sets    a    higher    value    on    its 
be  too  exalted,  too  inward,  too  exacting  spiritual   blessings    than    on    its   tem- 
a  religion  for  the  natural  man,  with  poral   gifts   (John    vi.),   teaches    men 

599 


chap,  xxvnt.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


to  set  their  affections  on  things  above  men  pronounce  it  visionary,  other - 
rather  than  on  things  on  the  earth  worldly,  illusory,  and  pass  it  by  for 
(Col.  iii.  1,  2),  and  encourages  them  to  what  they  imagine  to  be  a  more  sub- 
seek  for  their  inheritance  in  the  future  stantial  good,  but  what  they  even- 
life  rather  than  in  this  (1  Peter  i.  3-5),  tually  discover  to  be  a  shadow. 

HOMILETICAL  ANALYSIS.— Verses  23—29. 

A  Whole  Day's  Preaching  ;  or,  a  Last  Appeal  to  his  Countrymen. 

I.  The  circumstances  under  which  this  appeal  was  made. — 1.  The  place.  The 
same  as  that  in  which  the  previous  address  was  delivered — viz.,  his  lodging.  (See 
preceding  "  Homily.")  2.  The  time.  A  day  which  had  been  appointed  by  the 
Jewish  leaders  themselves  more  than  likely  the  Jewish  Sabbath,  when  they  found 
themselves  free  from  business  engagements.  3.  The  auditors.  These  same 
Jewish  leaders,  and  others  of  their  co-religionists  whom  they  had  persuaded  to 
accompany  them  to  the  apostle's  lodging.  4.  The  speaker.  The  chained 
prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ,  who,  though  himself  looking  forward  to  a  trial  of  doubt- 
ful issue,  had  time  and  thought  to  bestow  on  the  spiritual  necessities  of  his  country- 
men in  Rome. 

II.  The  character  which  belonged  to  this  appeal. — 1.  The  burden  of  it.  The 
kingdom  of  God  and  Jesus  who  had  been  its  herald  (Eph.  ii.  17;  Matt.  iv.  17) 
and  founder  (Luke  xxii.  29,  30),  and  was  its  exalted  Head  and  Lord  (Matt, 
xxviii.  18;  John  xiii.  36;  Rom.  xiv.  9;  Eph.  i.  20-22;  Phil.  ii.  9-11).  2.  The 
manner  of  it.  By  expounding  the  Scriptures  (compare  xvii.  2),  reasoning  out  of 
the  law  of  Moses  and  out  of  the  prophets  (compare  Luke  xxiv.  27),  and  per- 
suading them  to  recognise  in  Jesus  their  long-promised  Messiah  (compare  xix.  8). 
3.  The  fervour  of  it.  Indicated  by  the  fact  that  he  continued  a  whole  day  from 
morning  till  evening  (compare  xx.  7). 

III.  The  result  in  which  this  appeal  issued. — 1.  The  faith  of  some.  To  these 
the  apostle's  preaching  carried  conviction.  Paul  seldom  taught  without  gaining 
converts ;  and  wherever  Christ  crucified  and  risen  as  the  King  and  Head  of 
God's  empire  of  salvation  is  proclaimed,  it  may  reasonably  be  anticipated  that 
some  hearts  will  be  won  to  believe.  2.  The  unbelief  of  others.  This  also  usually 
resulted  from  Paul's  preaching.  If  it  awoke  faith  in  some  hearts  it  likewise 
aroused  unbelief  and  opposition.  So  to-day  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel 
excites  against  it  the  antagonism  of  the  natural  heart,  which  not  unfrequently 
terminates  in  unbelief  and  rejection  of  the  truth.  3.  The  departure  of  all.  As 
the  Sanhedrists  in  Jerusalem  (xxiii.  7),  so  the  Jewish  listeners  in  Rome,  could  not 
agree  among  themselves,  and,  after  an  interchange  of  views  it  may  be  supposed 
(ver.  29),  withdrew  from  the  apostle's  presence. 

IV.  The  announcements  by  which  this  appeal  was  followed. — 1.  That  their 
rejection  of  the  gospel  had  been  foretold.  Quoting  from  Isa.  vi.  9,  10  (LXX.),  a 
passage  which  had  also  been  cited  by  Christ  in  Capernaum  (Matt.  xiii.  14,  15) 
and  in  Jerusalem  (John  xii.  40),  he  assured  them  that  their  present  obduracy 
had  been  distinctly  anticipated  in  the  Divine  commission  given  to  that  Old 
Testament  seer  to  whom  Jehovah  said,  "  Go  and  tell  this  people,  Hear  ye  indeed, 
but  understand  not,  and  see  ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not.  Make  the  heart  of  this 
people  fat,  and  make  their  ears  heavy,  and  shut  their  eyes,  lest  they  see  with  their 
eyes  and  hear  with  their  ears,  and  understand  with  their  heart,  and  convert  and 
be  healed."  The  words  practically  signified  that  Isaiah  would  carry  his  message 
to  a  people  who  should  refuse  to  hear  it ;  and  Paul's  citation  of  the  words  to  his 
countrymen  in  Rome  imported  that  he  recognised  in  them  the  true  successors  of 
the  unbelievers  to  whom  Isaiah  preached,  persons  with  souls  so  fast  bound  in 
carnal  security  that  they  could  not  be  aroused  to  a  concern  for  spiritual  things 

600 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap,  xxviii. 


(Ephcs.  iv.  19),  and  understandings  so  darkened  that  the  light  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  glory  of  God  could  not  shine  into  them  (2  Cor.  iv.  4) ;  yea,  it  seemed  to 
the  apostle  as  if  his  countrymen,  through  love  of  the  darkness  and  devotion  to 
their  own  self-righteous  ways,  had  deliberately  closed  their  understandings  and 
hearts  against  the  truth  in  case  they  should  repent  and  be  saved  (John.  hi.  19). 
If  both  the  Hebrew  prophet  and  the  Christian  apostle  represent  the  obduracy 
of  the  Jewish  people  as  a  punishment  sent  on  them  by  God  for  their  unbelief, 
that  was  only  a  strong  way  of  saying  that  they  had  wilfully  put  away  from 
themselves  the  offer  of  eternal  life  (compare  xiii.  46).  2.  That  the  gospel  should 
be  henceforth  preached  to  the  Gentiles,  who  should  not  reject  but  accept  it.  That  this 
actually  took  place  the  last  two  verses  of  the  narrative  inform  us.  For  two 
whole  years  the  apostle  waited  for  the  hearing  of  his  case,  either  because  his 
accusers  had  not  arrived,  or  their  witnesses  had  not  been  collected,  or  it  did  not 
suit  the  emperor's  convenience.  Whether  at  the  end  of  that  period  he  was 
released  from  captivity  or  put  to  death  is  debated  among  expositors  (see 
"  Critical  Remarks").  But  during  its  continuance  he  lived  in  a  hired  dwelling 
of  his  own,  the  rent  of  which  he  was  without  question  enabled  to  pay  through 
the  kindness  of  his  numerous  Christian  friends  (see,  however,  on  xxi.  23).  In 
this,  though  still  chained  to  a  soldier  of  the  Prretorian  guard,  he  enjoyed  a 
large  amount  of  liberty,  and  in  particular  "  received  all  that  came  to  him, 
preaching  the  kingdom  of  God  and  teaching  the  things  concerning  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  with  all  boldness,  none  forbidding  him."  Here  also  from  time  to 
time  he  welcomed  friends  from  distant  Churches,  such  as  Tychicus,  Epaphras, 
Epaphroditus,  and  Onesimus,  who  visited  him  with  tidings  how  the  brethren  in 
those  Churches  fared,  and  carried  back  in  the  shape  of  oral  communications, 
sometimes  also  in  the  form  of  letters  (Ephesians,  Philippians,  Colossians,  and 
Philemon),  wise  and  loving  words  of  counsel  and  encouragement  such  as  their 
circumstances  seemed  to  demand.  Likewise,  all  who  sought  his  presence  in  the 
city  to  inquire  into  the  kingdom  or  concerning  Jesus  met  with  a  cordial 
reception,  and  went  away  with  all  their  questions  answered,  even  if  not  always 
with  all  their  doubts  removed. 

Learn. — 1.  The  supreme  burden  of  the  gospel  ministry — the  kingdom  of  God. 
2.  The  transcendent  value  of  the  Scriptures — they  testify  of  Jesus,  the  founder 
and  sovereign  of  the  kingdom.  3.  The  dividing  power  of  the  gospel, — it  separates 
men  into  two  hostile  camps,  those  of  believers  and  unbelievers.  4.  The  prescient 
knowledge  of  Jehovah — who  foresees  the  treatment  men  will  accord  to  His 
message  of  reconciliation.  5.  The  culpability  of  all  who  reject  the  truth — men 
are  held  responsible  by  God  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts.  6.  The  mercy  of 
God — in  sending  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles.  7.  The  highest  glory  of  the  Gentile 
world — that  it  accepts  God's  message  of  salvation. 


HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  16-29.  Last  Words  of  Paul. 

I.  A  last  testimony  to  his  innocence 
(vers.  17-20). 

II.  A  last  confession  of  Jesus  Christ, 
as  the  Messiah  (ver.  23). 

III.  A  last  effusion  of  love  toward 
His  people  (vers.  17,  19,  20). 

IV.  A  last  stroke  of  the  hammer  on 
hardened  hearts  (vers.  25-28). — Gerok 
in  Lange. 


Yer.  23.  An  All-day  Meeting. 

I.  The  place. — A  private  lodging.  A 
vindication  of  kitchen  meetings  and 
drawing-room  assemblies  for  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel. 

II.  The  speaker. — A  chained  pri- 
soner. .As  strange  a  preacher  probably 
as  ever  addressed  his  fellow-men.  Cer- 
tainly as  sublime  a  spectacle  as  eye 
ever  gazed  upon — a  man  so  absorbed 

601 


CHAP,  xxviii.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS. 


in  the  desire  to  honour  Christ  and  save 
his  fellow-men,  that  he  forgets  all 
about  his  own  suffering  and  shame. 

II.  The  themes. — The  kingdom  of  God 
and  Jesus  Christ.  The  grandest  topics 
that  can  engage  the  intellects  and 
hearts  of  men.  Worthier  than  any- 
other  themes  to  claim  a  day's  con- 
versation. 

IY.  The  hearers. — The  Jews  of 
Rome.  Not  the  Christian  Jews,  but 
the  Jews  who  belonged  to  the  syna- 
gogues. So  that  this  all- day  meeting 
was  not  a  fellowship  meeting  of  dis- 
ciples, but  a  meeting  for  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel. 

V.  The  results.  —  Such  as  often 
happen.  Some  believed  and  some 
believed  not. 

Vers.  26,  27.  The  Historij  of  Un- 
belief. 

I.  Its  nature. — A  deliberate  and 
wilful  rejection  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel. 

II.  Its  origin. — It  results  from  an 
incapacity  to  understand  the  truth. 

III.  Its  effect. — To  render  the  heart 
obdurate,  the  understanding  darker, 
the  soul's  sensibility  to  Divine  things 
smaller,  and  the  possibility  of  ultimate 
recovery  feebler. 

IV.  Its  end. — The  soul's  loss.  Since 
without  knowledge  the  soul  cannot 
believe,  without  believing  it  cannot 
turn,  without  turning  it  cannot  be 
healed  or  saved. 

Yer.  28.   This  Salvation. 

I.  Its  author.— God. 

II.  Its  mediator. — Christ. 

III.  Its  preacher. — Paul,  and  after 
him  the  pastors  and  teachers  of  the 
Christian  Church,  not  excluding  all 
who  believe.  "  Let  him  that  heareth 
say,  Come !  " 

IY.  Its  mission. — To  the  Gentiles. 
Not  to  the  exclusion  of,  but  as  well  as 
to  the  Jews. 

Y.  Its  fortune. — If  rejected  by  some 
(the  Jews)  heard  by  others  (the 
Gentiles). 

Yer.  30.  Two  Whole  Years  in  his  own 
Hired  House,     What  then  ? 

602 


I.  That  Paul  was  liberated  after  a  suc- 
cessful trial  is  supported  by  the  follow- 
ing considerations  :  1.  The  unanimous 
testimony  of  the  Primitive  Church.  (1) 
The  Epistle  of  Clement,  Bishop  of  Rome 
— believed  to  have  been  Paul's  friend 
and  disciple  (Phil.  iv.  3) — wrote  in  a.d. 
99  that  Paul,  after  instructing  the  whole 
Roman  world  in  righteousness,  "  had 
gone  to  the  extremity  of  the  west " 
before  his  martyrdom  (Clem.  Rom.,  i. 
5).  (2)  Muratori's  Canon  (a.d.  170), 
in  the  account  given  by  it  of  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  says  :  "  Luke  relates  to 
Theophilus  events  of  which  he  was  an 
eyewitness,as  also  in  a  separate  place" — 
(Luke  xxii.  31-33)  it  is  supposed — "  he 
evidently  declares  the  martyrdom  of 
Peter,  but  (omits)  the  journey  of  Paul 
from  Rome  to  Spain."  (3)  Eusebius 
(a.d.  320)  writes  :  "  After  defending 
himself  successfully,  it  is  currently 
reported  that  the  apostle  again  went 
forth  to  proclaim  the  gospel,  and  after- 
wards came  to  Rome  a  second  time, 
and  was  martyred  under  Nero  "  [Hist, 
Eccl.,  ii.  22).  (4)  Chrysostom  (a.d. 
398)  mentions  it  as  an  undoubted 
historical  fact,  that  "  St.  Paul  after 
his  residence  in  Rome  departed  to 
Spain.  (5)  Jerome  (a.d.  390)  relates 
that  "  Paul  was  dismissed  by  Nero, 
that  he  might  preach  Christ's  gospel 
in  the  west."  2.  The  indirect  witness 
of  Scripture.  (1)  The  fact  that  Acts 
closes  without  mention  of  the  apostle's 
death  suggests  that  he  was  liberated 
at  the  end  of  the  two  years  (xxviii.  32). 
(2)  The  apostle  appears  himself  to 
have  expected  a  favourable  issue  to  his 
first  trial  (Phil,  ii.  24).  (3)  If  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  written  by 
Paul,  as  many  still  contend,  it  proves 
conclusively  that  he  was  liberated  from 
his  Roman  imprisonment ;  for  its 
writer  is  in  Italy  and  at  liberty  (Heb. 
xiii.  23,  24).  (4)  The  Pastoral  Epistles, 
whose  genuineness  has  often  been  dis- 
puted but  never  satisfactorily  disproved, 
support  the  theory  of  the  apostle's 
liberation,  as  the  historical  facts  they 
mention  cannot  be  placed  in  any  portion 
of  the  apostle's  life  before  or  during 
his  first  imprisonment  in  Rome. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    THE  ACTS.  chap,  xxviii. 


II.  That  Paul  was  put  to  death  by 
Nero,  either  as  the  result  of  his  trial 
or  soon  after  in  the  persecution  that 
arose  in  a.d.  64  against  the  Christians, 
though  advocated  by  many  has  little 
to  rest  upon  except — 1.  The  absence 
of  any  account  of  the  apostle's  subse- 
quent labours.  "  It  is  a  fact  that  we 
have  no  historical  trace  of  Pauline 
Church  foundations  in  Spain,  which 
makes  the  Spanish  journey  (above 
referred  to)  highly  improbable"  (Weiss, 
Manned  of  Introduction,  i.  372).  2. 
The  circumstance  that  in  Acts  xx.  25 
Luke  appears  to  betray  complete 
ignorance  of  the  apostle's  return  to 
his  former  mission  field,  which  shows, 
it  is  argued,  that  Luke  knew  nothing 
of  Paul's  deliverance  from  the  Roman 
captivity  (Ibid.,  i.  370).  3.  The 
necessity  of  finding  an  argument  in 
favour  of  the  spuriousness  of  the 
Pastoral  Epistles,  since  if  Paul  was 
not  released  from  captivity  the  case 
against  them  is  closed.  4.  The  im- 
probability of  a  second  imprisonment 
being  repeated  so  soon  afterwards 
under  circumstances  so  nearly  similar  to 
those  attending  the  first  (Baur,  Paul, 
his  Life  and  Works,  i.  246).  The 
similarity  of  the  circumstances,  how- 
ever, is  not  so  obvious  as  is  here 
suggested  (see  Weiss,  Manual,  i. 
373). 

Ver.  31.  Paul  Preaching  in  Rome. 

I.  The  sublimity  of  the  spectacle. — 
"  History  has  few  stranger  contrasts 
than  when  it  shows  us  Paul  preaching 
Christ  under  the  walls  of  Ne  ro's  palace. 
Thenceforward  there  were  but  two 
religions  in  the  Roman  world — the 
worship  of  the  Emperor  and  the  wor- 
ship of  the  Saviour.     The  old  super- 


stitions had  been  long  worn  out.  .  .  . 
The  residuum  they  left  was  the  phi- 
losophy of  Epicurus  and  the  religion  of 
Nerolatry.  But  a  new  doctrine  was 
already  taught  in  the  Forum  and 
believed  even  on  the  Palatine.  Over 
against  the  altars  of  Nero  and  Poppea 
the  voice  of  a  prisoner  was  daily  heard, 
and  daily  woke  in  grovelling  souls  the 
consciousness  of  their  Divine  destiny" 
(Conybeare  and  Howson,  ii.  458). 

II.  The  success  of  the  work. — Of 
this  testimony  is  furnished  by  the 
Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  in  which 
Paul  told  them  that  "  his  bonds  be- 
came manifest  in  Christ  throughout 
the  whole  Praetorian  guard  and  to  all 
the  rest "  (Phil.  i.  13),  and  that  even 
out  of  Caesar's  household  saints  had 
been  gathered  into  the  Church  of 
Christ  (Phil,  iv.  22),  while  those  who 
had  been  preaching  before  he  came,  or 
commenced  preaching  in  the  city  while 
he  taught  in  his  own  hired  room,  had 
by  his  example  been  stimulated  to 
greater  diligence  (Phil.  i.  14). 

III.  The  immortality  of  the 
preacher. — Whether  Paul  was  libe- 
rated or  put  to  death  at  the  end  of 
two  years,  it  is  certain  that  his  labours 
in  the  world's  metropolis  came  to  an 
end,  and  himself  disappeared  from  the 
stage  of  human  history.  But  the  work 
he  then  began  has  never  ceased*  to  in- 
fluence the  thoughts  and  destinies  of 
men  both  within  the  Church  and 
without,  not  in  Rome  merely,  but 
throughout  the  world ;  while  of  him- 
self the  words  of  the  Hebrew  prophet 
will  evermore  be  true  :  "  They  that 
be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of 
the  firmament,  and  they  that  turn 
many  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for 
ever  and  ever  "  (Dan.  xii.  3). 


NOTE. 
The  Theology  of  Paul  as  set  forth  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 

It  is  frequently  asserted  that  so  glaring  a  contradiction  exists  between  Paul's 
theology  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  his  theology  in  the  four  larger  Epistles 
bearing  his  name,  that  if  the  latter  represents  Paul's  doctrinal  system  the  former 
can  only  be  regarded  as  the  free  composition  of  the  author  of  the  Acts.  A 
careful  examination  of  the  various  discourses  attributed  to  Paul  in  the  Acts, 

603 


chap,  xxviii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS. 


however,  will  show  that  ithis  allegation  is  not  well  founded.  These  discourses 
are:  1.  That  delivered  in  the  synagogue  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia  (xiii.  16-41). 
2.  The  address  to  the  Lycaonians  (xiv.  15-17).  3.  The  exposition  given  to  the 
Athenians  on  Mars  Hill  (xvii.  22-31).  4.  The  farewell  charge  to  the  Ephesian 
elders  at  Miletus  (xx.  17-35).  5.  The  defence  made  to  his  countrymen  from  the 
castle  stairs  of  Antonia  in  Jerusalem  (xxii.  1-21).  6.  The  answer  before  Felix 
to  the  charges  of  Tertullus  (xxiv.  10-21).  7.  The  oration  before  Agrippa 
(xxvi.  2-23).  And  the  last  words  spoken  to  his  countrymen  in  Rome  (xxviii. 
23-28).  A  study  of  these  with  the  isolated  utterances  which  have  been  pre- 
served in  illustration  of  his  teaching,  as,  for  instance,  at  Philippi  (xvi.  31), 
Thessalonica  (xvii.  3),  and  Corinth  (xviii.  5),  shows  that  the  germs  at  least  of  the 
teaching  developed  in  the  Epistles  may  be  detected  in  the  Acts. 

I.  The  doctrine  of  God — Theology  proper — which  appears  in  the  Acts,  represents 
the  Supreme  Being:  (1)  as  a  living,  personal  intelligence,  unlike  the  dumb  idols 
of  wood  and  stone  which  were  worshipped  by  heathen  nations  (xiv.  15,  xvii.  29) ; 
(2)  as  a  spiritual  essence,  who  could  neither  be  confined  to  temples  made  with 
hands  (xvii.  24)  nor  worshipped  by  mere  external  performances  (xvii.  25)  ;  (3)  as 
the  Creator  of  the  universe  (xiv.  15),  and  in  particular  as  the  Author  of  human 
life  (xvii.  25,  28)  ;  (4)  as  the  Lord  of  providence  (xiv.  16,  17,  xvii.  26)  and  of 
grace  (xvii.  30,  xxvi.  18)  ;  and  (5)  as  the  final  Judge  of  mankind  (xvii.  31). 

II.  The  doctrine  of  Christ — Christology— is  equally  explicit.  1.  The  human 
nature  of  Jesus  is  repeatedly  and  clearly  emphasised  (xiii.  23,  38,  xvii.  31). 
2.  So  also  is  His  essential  Godhead — directly  by  calling  Him  God  (xx.  28),  and 
indirectly  by  styling  Him  Lord  (xvi.  31).  3.  His  Divine  Sons  hip,  if  not 
unambiguously  stated,  is  at  least  suggested  (xiii.  33).  4.  His  Messiahship  is 
proclaimed  in  language  that  admits  of  no  hesitation  (xiii.  27,  xvii.  3,  xxvi.  23). 

5.  His  death  as  an  atonement  for  sin  is  assuredly  implied  in  such  statements  as 
these,  that  "  through  this  man  " — who  had  been  slain  for  no  sin  of  His  own  and 
raised  again  from  the  dead — "  is  preached  the  forgiveness  of  sins  "  (xiii.  38),  and 
that  "the  Church  of  God"  (Christ)  had  been  "purchased  with  His  own  blood" 
(xx.  28).  6.  His  resurrection  from  the  dead  is  set  forth  in  the  clearest  light 
(xiii.  30,  34,  xvii.  31,  xxvi.  23).  7.  His  future  advent  as  the  Judge  of  men  is 
not  forgotten  (xvii.  31). 

III.  The    doctrine    of    man — Anthropology — is    also    admirably    outlined. 

1.  The  heavenly  origin  of  man's  spiritual  nature  is  impressively  taught 
(xvii.  28,  29) ;  as  also  is  2.  The  reality  of  his  fallen  condition,  which,  in  order  to 
salvation,  demands  the  forgiveness  of  sins  (xiii.  38).  3.  The  responsibility  of 
man  for  his  dealing  with  the  Gospel  offer  (xiii.  46,  xxviii.  29-28) ;  and  4.  His 
ultimate  accountability  to  God  (xvii.  31,  xxiv.  25),  are  likewise  plainly  set 
forth. 

TV.  The  doctrine  of  salvation — Soteriology — finds  a  place,  and  that  in  several 
particulars.  1.  The  blessings  of  which  salvation  consists  are  indicated  as  at 
least  three  in  number:  (1)  forgiveness  of  sins  (xiii.  38);  (2)  sanctification 
(xx.  32,  xxvi.  18) ;  and  (3)  an  inheritance  in  the  great  hereafter  (xx.  32,  xxvi.  18), 

2.  The  method  by  which  salvation  is  imparted  is  explained  to  be  (1)  by  a  Divine 
act  of  justification,  which  acquits  the  sinner,  and  renders  him  righteous  in  the 
eyes  of  the  law  (xiii.  39) ;  (2)  by  an  equally  Divine  work  of  upbuilding  through 
the  word  of  God  or  truth  of  the  GospeF(xx.  32) ;  and  (3)  by  a  Divine  bestowment 
of  heavenly  glory  when  the  work  of  sanctification  has  been  completed  (xx.  32). 

3.  The  ground  on  which  salvation  is  bestowed  on  any  is  the  atoning  death  of 
Jesus  Christ  (xiii.  39),  and  not  the  performance  of  any  ceremonial  or  moral  works 
whatsoever.  4.  The  condition  of  salvation  is  in  every  instance  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ  (xvi.  31).     5.  The  principal  source  of  salvation  is  grace  (xviii.  27,  xx.  32). 

6.  Its  world-wide  intention  is  expressly  pointed  out  (xiii.  46,  47,  xxii.   15,  21, 

604 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    THE  ACTS.  chap,  xxviii. 


xxvi.  17,  20,  23,  xxviii.  28).  7.  So  also  is  its  rejection  by  some  who  hear 
(xxviii.  27). 

V.  The  doctrine  of  the  last  things — Eschatology — is  not  forgotten.  1.  The 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  of  the  unjust,  is  repeatedly  insisted 
on  (xvii.  32,  xxiii.  6,  xxiv.  15,  xxvi.  8).  2.  The  judgment  of  the  last  day  is  lifted 
into  view  more  than  once  (xvii.  31,  xxiv.  25).  3.  The  blessed  portion  of  believers 
is  declared  to  be  eternal  life  (xiii.  46),  or  an  inheritance  among  the  sanctified 
(xx.  32.  xxvi.  18). 

It  is  impossible  to  note  these  several  points  of  doctrine  extracted  from  the  Acts 
without  perceiving  how  completely  they  harmonise  with  the  fuller  statements 
contained  in  the  Epistles. 


605 


INDEX. 


[Note  :  H.  ==  Homily ;  I.      Illustration  ;  N.  ""Note. 


Abraham,  history  of ;  or,  the  progenitor  of 

Israel,  H.  153 
Abrahanric  covenant,  H.  91 
Accession  of  Simon  Magus,  H.  182 
Accident  at  Troas,  H.  431 
Aceldama,  the  field  of  blood,  H.  38 
Actions,  doubtful,  H.  456 
Acts  and  Luke's  Gospel,  connection  between 

the :  two  treatises,  H.  15 
Acts  of  the  Apostles — 
author  and  date,  N.  8    ' 
integrity  and  credibility,  N.  3 
sources  and  aim,  N.  10 
theology  of  Paul  as  set  forth  in  the  Acts, 

H.  and  N.  603 
title  and  contents,  N.  1 
Admission  of  Gentiles  vindicated,  H.  248 
Adrift  upon  the  deep,  H.  562,  570 
Advent,  necessity  of  the,  for  barbarian  world, 

H.  586 
Advocates  of  servant   of  God,  best,  before 
judgment-seat  of  unrighteous   world, 
H.  488 
^Eneas,  healing  of,  H.  222,  223 
After-knowledge  and  foreknowledge,  Divine, 

H.  63 
Agabus,  the  prophet,  H.  450 
Aged  Christian's  retrospect  of  his  past  career, 

H.  536 
Agrippa  and  Bernice,  H.  523 

a  third  hearing  of  Paul  before,  H.  525 
and  Felix,  Paul's  two  distinguished  lis- 
teners, H.  548,  550 
Festus's  conversation   with,  about   Paul, 

H.  521 
persecution  of  the  Church  by,  H.  265 
secret  of  Paul's  joy  in  addressing,  H.  535 
shortcomings  of,  H.  552 
Agrippa's  wish,  II.  525 
Aims,  unrealised,  H.  459 
Alive  after  His  Passion,  H.  19 
All  men  alike,  H.  310 
of  grace,  H.  400 

things  common  :  a  sermon  on  Christian 
socialism,  H.  114 
All-day  meeting,  an,  H.  601 


Almost  a  Christian,  H.  552 

persuaded,  H.  552 
Alms-asking  and  alms-giving,  H.  80 
Alone  in  a  heathen  city,  H.  367 
Ananias  and  Barnabas,  H.  121 
and  Paul,  H.  484 
mission  of,  H.  212 
Ananias  and    Sapphira,  love  of    money  as 
exemplified  in,  H.  122 
or,  fearful  perversion  of  the  marriage 

state,  H.  121 
sevenfold  union  of,  H.  122 
sin  of,  H.  123,  124 

story  of;   or,  hypocrisy  unveiled,  H. 
119,  124 
Ananias's  theology,  H.  214 
Ananiases,  the  two,  H.  213 

three,  in  Acts,  H.  483 
Anchored  from  the  stern,  H.  575 
Anchors,  four,  H.  566 
Ancient  prayer-meeting,  an,  H.  343 

types  of  modern  men,  H.  418,  420 
Angel,  face  of  an,  N.  145 

in  the  bush,  H.  164 
Angels,  H.  197 
Annas  upon  the  move ;  or,  the  bursting  of 

the  storm,  H.  127 
Another  King,  one  Jesus,  H.  and  I.  363 
Antioch,  awakening  at,  H.  257 
Barnabas  at,  H.  259 
Church  at,  H.  279,  281 

origin  of,  H.  263 
circumcision  controversy  raised  at,  H.  347 
forward  movement  at,  H.  282 
in  Syria,  back  to,  H.  311 
Judaising  teachers  at,  H.  317 
Paul's   return  to :  close  of  second  mis- 
sionary journey,  H.  395 
departure    from :   commencement   of 
third  missionary  journey,  H.  398 
Pisidian,  sabbath  day  in,  H.  287 
second  sabbath  day  in,  H.  289 
Antipatris,  apostle's  ride  to,  N.  495 
Anxiety,  a  night  of :  nearing  the  breakers, 

H.  572 
Anxious  inquirers,  words  for,  H.  72 

607 


INDEX. 


Apollos,  a  model  preacher,  H.  400 

biography  of,  H.  400 
Apology,  first  Christian  ;  or,  the  Pentecostal 
mystery  explained,  H.  57 
of  Stephen ;  or,  a  vindication   of   Chris- 
tianity, H.  150 
Paul's  first,  H.  472 
Apostasy  of  Israel,  H,  165 
Apostle  and  slave-girl,  H.  348 

Christian,  the  lofty  oration  of  a :  Paul's 

answer,  H.  501 
Simon  the,  and  Simon  the  tanner,  H.  231 
Apostle's  ride  to  Antipatris,  N.  495 
Apostles  and  the  first  Christians  ;    or,    the 
effect  of  the  first  persecution,  H.  113 
before    Sanhedrim;     or,     sheep     among 

wolves,  H.  99 
college  of,  the  Sanhedrim  and  the,  H.  130 
courage  of  the,  H.  105 
four  lists  of  the,  N.  33 
in  gaol ;  or,  the  first  taste  of  persecution, 

H.  97 
removed  from  court ;  or,  conspirators  in 

conclave,  H.  103 
the,  and  the  Jewish  leaders,  H.  107 
wealth  of  the  ;  or,  Peter's  pence,  H.  80 
with  their  own  company ;  or,  the  wel- 
come of  the  first  confessors,  H.  108 
Apostles'  Creed,  the,  H.  323 
Apostleship,    completing    the :    election    of 

Matthias,  H.  36 
Apostolic  agent  prepared ;  or,  Peter's  trance, 
H.  231 
delegates,  first,  H.  186 
miracle,  first,  H.  81 
times,  progress  of  gospel  in,  H.  274 
Apostolical  generosity,  H.  81 
Appearances  of  the  risen  Christ,  H.  21 
Aquila  and  Paul,  H.  385 
and  Priscilla,  H.  385 
Aquila's  workshop,  Paul  in,  H.  385 
Archipelago,  across  the,  and  back,  H.  424 
Areopagus  oration,  the,  H.  377  ;  N.  359 
Paul  on  the;  or,  preaching  to  philosophers, 

H.  374  ;  N.  359 
unto  the  ;  or,  in  the  university  at  Athens, 
N.  371 
Arrested  in  the  temple  ;  or,  long  looked  for 

come  at  last,  H.  456 
Art  not  thou  that  Egyptian  ?  H.  and  N.  459 
Ascended  Lord,  command  of  the,  H.  23 
Ascending  Lord  and  His  witnesses,  H.  34 
Ascension  of  Christ,  and  its  lessons,  H.  28,  29 
necessity  of,  H.  29 
views  of,  H.  29 

was  it  a  visible  phenomenon  ?  H.  30 
the ;  or,  the  exaltation  of  the  Church's 
Head,  H.  24 
Ashore,  running ;  or,  escaping  safe  to  land, 

H.  576 
Asia  and  Bithynia,  forbidden  to  preach  in, 
N.  338 
certain  Jews  from,  H.  505 
Assembly,  first  Christian,  H.  38 
Assize,  the  world's,  H.  380 
Assos,  Paul  alone  on  his  way  to,  H.  432 

608 


Athenian  philosophers  and  their  relation  to 

Christianity,  H.  370 
Athens,  a  microcosmus,  H.  370 

in  the  university  at,  N.  371 

Paul  at,  H.  367,  377 
Awakened  souls,  cry  of,  H.  67 
Awakening  at  Antioch,  H.  257 

in  Samaria,  H.  184 

Bad  men,  good  points  in,  H.  505 
Baptism,  Christian,  administration  of,  H.  246 
household,  H.  347 
of  fire ;  or  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 

H.  46 
of  Saul,  H.  212 
on  the  import  of,  H.  407 
Baptisms,  two,  H.  24 
Barbarian  world,  necessity  of  the  Advent  for, 

H.  586 
Barbarians,  the  gospel  among,  H.  307 
Bar-jesus,  story  of,  H.  285 
Barnabas  and  Ananias,  H.  121 
and  Paul  and  the  Lord,  H.  330 
quarrel  between,  H.  330 
separation  of,  H.  328 
and  Saul 

at  Lystra,  H.  307 
homeward  journey  of,  H.  311 
in  Cyprus,  H.  282 
in  Iconium,  H.  304 
on  the  way  to  Jerusalem,  H.  319 
at  Antioch,  H.  259 

Joses;  or,  the  consecration  of  wealth,  H.116 
piety  of,  H.  260 
Beach,  two  fires  upon  the,  H.  586 
Beautiful  Gate  of  temple,  H.  78,  80 
Beauty  and  profit  of  kindness,  H.  589 
Beginning,  momentous,  H.  17 
Behold !  he  prayeth,  H.  214 

this  man  !  H.  528 
Believers,   daily  life  of  primitive;    or,   the 

Pentecostal  Church,  H.  72 
Believest  thou  the  prophets  ?  H.  551 
Believing,  hearing  and,  H.  99 

people,  H.  74 
Bernice  and  Agrippa,  H.  523 

a  third  hearing  of  Paul  before,  H.  525 
Bercea,  Silas  and  Timothy  in,  N.  367 
Beroeans,  noble,  H.  365 

Paul  and  Silas  among  the,  H.  364 
Best  graces  for  a  Church,  H.  115 
Bible,  pious  mothers  of  the,  H.  335 

three  questions  about  the,  H.  197 
Bible-reading,  H.  197 
Biography  of  Apollos,  H.  400 

of    Moses    in    three    chapters ;    or,   the 

founder  of  the  nation,  H.  160 
of  Stephen,  H.  145 
Bithynia  and  Asia,  forbidden  to  preach  in, 

N.  338 
Blessing,  great,  of  gospel,  H.  245 

Pentecostal,  H.  51 
Blessings  of  David,  H.  292 
Blinding  glory,  H.  469 
Blood,  first  taste  of,  H.  168 
the  field  of,  Aceldama,  H.  38 


INDEX. 


Blossoms,  true,  of  a  Christian  congregation, 

H.  116 
Blots  in  a  Church,  H.  140 
Blotting  out  of  sin,  the,  H.  87 
Boldness  in  preaching,  H.  Ill 
Bonds,  true,  of  a  Christian,  H.  451 
Books,  burning  of  the,  H.  412 

God's  three  great,  about  Himself,  H.  379 
Bound  in  the  Spirit,  H.  438 
Bread,  days  of  unleavened,  H.  263 
Breakers,  nearing  the  :  a  night  of  anxiety, 

H.  572 
Brethren,  chief  men  among  the,  H.  325 

finding,  H.  593 

in  Lydia's  house,  the,  H.  356 

Joseph's,  H.  160 

of  our  Lord,  H.  34 

weak,  concessions  to,  H.  455 
Bright  particular  star,  rising  of  a,  H.  142 
Builders  and  the  stone,  the,  H.  101 
Burial  of  Stephen,  H.  180 
Buried  in  Canaan,  H.  159 
Burning  bush,  H.  163 

of  the  books,  H.  412 
Bursting  of  the  storm,  the ;  or,  Annas  upon 

the  move,  H.  127 
Bush,  angel  in  the,  H.  164 

Caesar,  Paul's  appeal  to,  H.  520 
Caesar's  judgment-seat  and  Christ's  :  a  con- 
trast, H.  520 
Caesarea,  centurion  of,  N.  230 

Festus's  audience-chamber  at,  H.  529 
from,  to  Fair  Havens,  H.  556 
midnight  ride  to,  H.  492 
Paul's  imprisonment  at,  H.  506 
Peter's  arrival  at,  H.  237 
to  Joppa,  embassy  from,  H.  236 
with  Philip  at,  H.  448,  449 
Call  to  Macedonia,  H.  340 
Called  sinner,  history  of  a,  H.  155 
Calm  before  a  storm,  the ;  or,  a  page  from 

the  Church's  life,  H.  125 
Canaan,  buried  in,  H.  159 
Career,  Paul's  survey  of  his  past ;  or,  what  he 
was  and  did    before   his    conversion, 
H.  463,  466,  472 
Castor  and  Pollux  ;  or,  Paul's  arrival  in  Rome, 

H.  589,  592 
Centre  for  approaching  Gentile  mission,  pre- 
paration of,  H.  253 
Centurion  of  Caesarea,  N.  230 
Certain  disciple  named  Timothy,  H.  334 

no,  thing  to  write,  H.  528 
Certificates  of  character,  Cornelius's,  H.  236 
Chain,  Paul's,  H.  597 
Chained  prisoner  on  his  defence,  H.  535 
Changed  times,  I.  81 
Changes  in  government,  H.  516 
Characteristics  of  good  evangelist,  H.  199 

preacher,  H.  102 
Characters,  typical,  group  of,  H.  420 
Charges,  reckless,  men  who  make,  H.  505 
Charter  of  liberty,  the  Church's :  the  Jerusa- 
lem epistle,  H.  326 
Cheer,  good,  for  Christian  sailors,  H.  566 


Chief  men  among  the  brethren,  H.  325 
Children,  husbands,  wives,  H.  447 

to  you  and  to  your ;  or,  the  Church-mem- 
bership of  children,  H.  71 
Christ  alone,  salvation  in,  H.  101 
and  His  apostles,  H.  307 
and  John,  two  masters,  H.  407 
and  Moses,  H.  90 

ascension  of,  and  its  lessons,  H.  28,  29 
necessity  of,  H.  29 
views  of,  H.  29 

was  it  a  visible  phenomenon  ?  H.  30 
Church  of,  in  Europe,  H.  345 
clouds  that  conceal,  H.  30 
death  of,  H.  244 

and    resurrection    of,    a     necessity, 
H.  362 
earthly  ministry  of,  H.  16 
faith  in,  H.  542 
glory  of,  H.  85 

in  Jerusalem,  Paul's  adoption  of  a  Gentile 
mission  ;    or,  his  interview   with, 
H.471 
in  the  prophets,  H.  90 
Jesus,  faith  in,  H.  511 
Joseph  a  type  of ;    or,  the  last  of  the 

patriarchs,  H.  157 
mission  of,  H.  91 

Name  of,  hazarding  one's  life  for,  H.  326 
names  of,  H.  91 

of  God  and  Christian  history,  H.  17 
Paul's  sacrifices  in  the  cause  of,  N.  450 
Peter's  threefold  testimony  concerning, 

H.  91 
prayer  addressed  to,  H.  39 
resurrection  of,  H.  64 
risen,  and  the  power  of  the  gospel,  H.  115 

eating  and  drinking  with,  H.  245 
Saul  preaching,  H.  219,  221 
second  coming  of,  H.  30 
sufferings  of,  H.  87 
the  risen,  fellowship  with,  H.  18 

appearances  of,  H  21 
threefold  office  of,  H.  245 
two  visions  of,  H.  214 
voices  from  mouth  of,  H.  470 
was  Paul's  vision  of,  an  objective  reality  ? 

N.  545 
witness  of  the  second  psalm  to,  H.  292 
Christ's  answers,  soul's  questions  and,  H.  211 
judgment-seat  and  Caesar's :    a  contrast, 

H.  520 
Name,  H.  245 
question  to  Saul,  H.  468 

to  Paul,  H.  211 
servants,  troubles  of,  H.  88 
suffering  servants,  comfort  for,  H.  488 
witnesses,  H.  26 
Christian,  almost  a,  H.  552 

apology,  first ;  or,  the  Pentecostal  mystery- 
explained,  H.  57 
assembly,  first,  H.  38 
baptism,  administration  of,  H.  246 
Church,  four  causes  of  joy  in  a,  H.  126 
on  earth,  Church  in  wilderness  a  type 
of,  H.  164 


B  T* 


609 


INDEX. 


Christian  Church,  variety  of  gifts  bestowed 

Church,  characteristics  of  the,  H.  440 

on,  H.  226 

Christian,  four  causes  of  joy  in  a,  H.  126 

companions,  H.  385 

place  of  women  in  the,  H.  449 

conception  of  God,  H.  Ill 

variety  of  gifts  bestowed  on  the,  H.  226 

congregation,  true  blossoms  of  a,  H.  116 

discipline,  H.  122 

courage,  H.  Ill 

dissension  in  the,  N.  140 

deacons,  first,  H.  140 

elders  of  the,  H.  and  N.  436 

early,  practice,  light  from,  H.  428 

example  to  the  unsteadfast  in  the,  H.  430 

farewells,  H.  447 

in  Jerusalem;  or,  ten  days  before  Pente- 

fortitude, H.  520 

cost,  H.  31 

history,  Christ  of  God  and,  H.  17 

in  Mary's  house,  H.  268 

journeymen  on  their  travels,  H.  385 

in  wilderness  a  type  of  Christian  Church 

knowledge,  growth  in,  H.  400 

on  earth,  H.  164 

martyr,  first,  H.  172,  174 

of  Christ,  conversion  of  heathen  a  source 

minister,    qualifications     and    work    of, 

of  joy  to  the,  H.  319 

H.  470 

in  Europe,  H.  345 

ministers,  dignity  and  duty  of,  H.  348 

of  Jesus  Christ,  H.  223 

words  of  warning  for,  H.  439 

voyage  of  the,  H.  577,  578 

ministry,  H.  115 

on  sleeping  in,  H.  430 

orator,  qualities  requisite  for  a,  H.  464 

Pentecostal ;  or,  the  daily  life  of  primitive 

Paul's  subsequent  career  as  a  ;  or,  how  he 

believers,  H.  72 

turned  tothe Gentile  mission,  H.  543 

persecution  of  the,  by  Agrippa,  H.  263. 

preacher,  model  for,  H.  85 

265 

resignation,  H.  451 

prayers  of  the,  H.  267 

salutations,  H.  523 

primitive,  murmuring  in  the,  H.  139 

service  in  strange  place,  H.  527 

palmy  days  of  the,  H.  126 

three  differing  types  of,  H.  269 

progress  of  the,  H.  142 

socialism,  a  sermon  on  :  all  things  com- 

prosperous, H.  74 

mon,  H.  114 

the  strength  of  a,  H.  336 

primitive,    and    modern     unchristian 

visitation,  first,  H.  187 

communism    compared   and    con- 

which was  in  Jerusalem,  H.  179 

trasted,  H.  73 

Church's  care  of  the  poor ;  or,  serving  tables, 

steadfastness,  H.  73 

H.  140 

the  name,  H.  260 

charter  of  liberty  :  the  Jerusalem  epistle, 

true  bonds  of  a,  H.  451 

H.  326 

greatness  of  a,  H.  569 

first  strife  allayed  ;  or,  the  institution  of 

unity,  ideal  of,  H.  51 

the  diaconate,  H.  137 

work,  H.  82 

Head,  exaltation  of  the ;  or,  the  Ascen- 

Christian's,   aged,    retrospect    of    his    past 

sion,  H.  24 

career,  H.  536 

history,  story  of  Israel  a  type  of,  H.  291 

vocation,  H.  27 

life,  a  page  from  the  ;  or,  the  calm  before 

Christians,  model,  H.  74 

a  storm,  H.  125 

Christianity  and  socialism,  H.  115 

persecutor  punished,  H.  272,  274 

Athenian  philosophers  and  their  relation 

poverty  and  Church's  wealth,  H.  80 

to,  H.  370 

Church-membership  of  children  ;  or,  to  you 

double  work  of,  H.  287 

and  to  your  children,  H.  71 

new  doctrines  of,  H.  371 

Circumcision  controversy  raised  at  Antioch, 

popular  objections  against,  H.  598 

H.  317 

reasons  why  men  oppose  themselves  to, 

settled,  H.  320,  323 

H.  418 

no  salvation  without,  H.  319 

teaching  of,  at  once  old  and  new,  H.  371 

Citizenship,  Roman  and  heavenly,  H.  476 

the   origin   of ;   or,  of   men   or   of  God, 

City,  reformed,  H.  184 

H.  134 

City-troublers,  preachers  of  gospel,  H.  352 

two  apologies  of,  towards  Judaism  and 

Civil  magistrate,  Gallio  the,  H.  395 

towards    heathenism :     Stephen    and 

power  of  the,  H.  130 

Paul,  H.  380 

Cleaving  to  the  Lord,  H.  259 

vindication  of ;  or,  the  apology  of  Stephen, 

Clouds  that  conceal  Christ,  H.  30 

H.  150 

Collection,  concerning  the,  H.  261 

world's  misconceptions  about,  H.  523,  525 

College  of  apostles,  the  Sanhedrim  and  the, 

Church  at  Antioch,  H.  279,  281 

H.  130 

origin  of,  H.  253 

Come  over  and  help  us — cry  of  the  heathen, 

at  Jerusalem,  letter  from  the,  H.  323 

H.  339 

Peter's  report  to,  H.  248 

Comfort    for    Christ's    suffering    servants, 

at  Philippi,  H.  356 

H.  488 

best  graces  for  a,  H.  115 

Command  of  the  ascended  Lord,  H.  23 

blots  in  a,  H.  140 

Commission,  preacher's,  H.  129 

610 


INDEX. 


Common,  all  things  :  a  sermon  on  Christian 

socialism,  H.  114 
Communion  festival  at  Troas,  H.  426,  429 
Communism,  modern  unchristian,  and  primi- 
tive Christian  socialism  compared  and 
contrasted,  H.  73 
Companions,  Paul's,  on  the  second  mission- 
ary journey,  N.  335 
Companionship  with  Jesus,  H.  105 
Company,  great  ship's,  H.  577 
Completing    the    apostleship  :     election    of 

Matthias,  H.  36 
Concessions  to  weak  brethren,  H.  455 
Conclave,  conspirators  in ;   or,  the  apostles 

removed  from  court,  H.  103 
Concordat,  the  Jerusalem,  N.  325 
Confession  in  the  midst  of  storm,  N.  567 

of  faith,  the  first,  H.  323 
Confessors,   welcome  of  the   first ;    or,   the 
apostles    with    their    own    company, 
H.  108 
Confirmation  of  the  saints,  H.  185 

scriptural,  H.  313 
Congregation,  a  minister  and  his,  H.  239 
at  prayer,  H.  110 

Christian,  true  blossoms  of  a,  H.  116 
picture  of  a  model,  H.  240 
Conquer,  divide  and ;  or,  Paul's  happy  stroke, 

N.  485 
Conscience,  a  good,  H.  483 
liberty  of,  H.  106 
three  phases  of,  H.  512 
Consecration  of  wealth  ;  or,  Joses  Barnabas, 

H.  116 
Conspiracy  of  (more  than)  forty,  H.  488 
Conspirators  in   conclave  ;   or,  the  apostles 

removed  from  court,  H.  103 
Contemplating  new  plans,  H.  413 
Contest,  triangular :  sorcerer,  proconsul,  and 

apostle,  H.  286 
Continuing  in  the  faith,  H.  313 
in  the  grace  of  God,  H.  298 
Contrary  winds,  H.  560 
Controversy,  ecclesiastical,  H.  251 
Convenient  seasons,  H.  512 
Conversion  as  illustrated  by  that  of  Paul, 
H.  211 
of  Cornelius,  H.  245 
of  Crispus,  H.  388 
of  heathen  a  source  of  joy  to  the  Church 

of  Christ,  H.  319 
of  Lydia,  H.  344,  346,  347 
of  Saul,  H.  206,  209,  211,  212,  215,  218 
of  the  Ethiopian  eunuch,  H.  193,  203 
of  the  Gentiles,  H.  323 
of  the  jailor  at  Philippi,  H.  354 
Paul's  survey  of  his  past  career ;  or,  what 
he  was  and  did  before  his,  H.  463,  466 
secret  of  Paul's,  explained,  537 
sermon  on,  H.  542 
true,  marks  of,  H.  218 
Convert,  doubtful,  reception  of  a,  H.  182 

first,  in  Europe,  H.  345 
Convert's  danger,  a  new,  H.  217 
Converts,  first ;  or,  the  firstfruits  of  the  gospel 
harvest,  H.  65 


Conviction  of  sin,  H.  67 
Corinth,  court-scene  in,  H.  394 
great  things  in,  H.  390 
how  often  did  Paul  visit  ?  H.  425 
Paul  at;   or,  meeting  with  new  friends, 

H.  383 
Paul's  midnight  vision  at,  H.  390 

preaching  at,  H.  392 
year  and  six  months  in,  H.  386 
Corn  in   Egypt;  or,  good  news  from  a  far 

country,  H.  159 
Cornelius  the  centurion,  H.  230 

conversion  of,  H.  245 
Cornelius's  certificates  of  character,  H.  236 
house,  Peter's  sermon  in,  H.  241 
messengers  at  Joppa,  H.  235 
vision,  H.  228 
Corner-stone,  rejected,  H.  101 
Council  at  Jerusalem,  the,  H.  320 
Council-chamber,  scene  in  the,  H.  480 
Counsel,  Gamaliel's.  H.  133,  134 
of  the  good,  H.  562 
soldiers',  H.  577 
Counsels,  mistaken,  H.  452 
Counterpart  of  Paul,  great  modern — Martin 

Luther,  N.  450 
Country,  far,  good  news  from  a ;  or,  corn  in 

Egypt,  H.  159 
Courage  and  gratitude,  H.  593 
Christian,  H.  Ill 
of  the  apostles,  H.  105 
Court,  a  friend  at ;  or,  Gamaliel  and  his  col- 
leagues, H.  131 
the  apostles  removed  from  ;  or,  conspira- 
tors in  conclave,  H.  103 
Court-scene  in  Corinth,  H.  394 

in  the  olden  time,  H.  519 
Covenant,  Abrahamic,  H.  91 
Covenants,  two — against  Paul  and  for  him, 

H.  490 
Credibility  of  the  story  of  Paul's  conversion, 

note  on,  H.  209 
Creed  of  the  Sadducee,  H.  486 

the  Apostles',  H.  323 
Crete,  from  Fair  Havens  to:    caught  in  a 

storm,  H.  560 
Crimes,  great,  remembered,  H.  473 
Criminality  of  Jewish  rulers,  H.  291 
Cripple,  the  Lystra,  H.  309 
Crispus,  conversion  of,  H.  388 
Cross,  holy,  way  of  the,  H.  135 

the  crucifiers,  and  the  Crucified,  H.  71 
Crowns,  Stephen's  three,  H.  172 
Crucified,  the  cross,  the  crucifiers,  and  the, 

H.  71 
Cry  of  awakened  souls,  H.  67 

of  the  heathen — Come  over  and  help  us, 

H.  339 
of  the  nations,  H.  340 
Cure  of  a  pythoness,  H.  348 
Custom  of  the  Romans,  not  the,  H.  523 
Cyprus,  Barnabas  and  Saul  in,  H.  282 

Daily  life  of  primitive  believers ;    or,  the 

Pentecostal  Church,  H.  72 
Damascus,  H.  210 

611 


INDEX. 


Damascus,  before  and  in,  H.  466 

miracle  near,  H.  206,  210 

Paul's  escape  from,  H.  217 

Saul  at,  H.  215 

Danger,  a  new  convert's,  H.  217 

impending,  announced,  H.  445 
Dangerous  voyages,  H.  562 
Daring  prophecy,  a,  H.  575 
Darkness  and  light,  kingdoms  of,  in  conflict, 

H.  185 
David,  blessings  of,  H.  292       *. 

life,  death,  and  burial  of,  H.  292 
Day  of  judgment,  great,  H.  380 
of  Pentecost,  H.  76 
of  the  Lord,  H.  59 
our,  H.  292 
Days  of  unleavened  bread,  H.  263 
the  forty,  H.  18 
words  of,  H.  22 
Deacon,  Stephen  the,  H.  145 
Deacons,  first  Christian,  H.  140 
Dead,   did  Jesus  Christ  actually  rise  from 
the  ?  H.  19 
raising  the— credible  or  incredible  ?   H. 
536 
Death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  a  necessity, 
H.  362 
of  Christ,  H.  244 
of  Herod,  H.  272,  274 
of  James  the  brother  of  John,  H.  266. 
267,  274 
Deaths,  sudden,  H.  122 
Deep,  drifting  upon  the,  H.  562,  570 
Defeated  plot,  a,  H.  491 
Defence,  model,  H.  519 

Paul's,  H.  535 
Deliverance,  Peter's,  H.  269 
Demetrius  and  his  brother  craftsmen,   H. 

418 
Descending  Spirit,  H.  52 
Descent  of  Holy  Ghost ;  or,  the  baptism  of 

fire,  H.  46 
Despondency,  ministerial,  thoughts  for  the 

night  of,  H.  390 
Destiny,  individual,  H.  39 
Devices,  Satan's,  H.  348 
Devout  men,  H.  56 
Diaconate,    institution    of    the ;     or,    the 

Church's  first  strife  allayed,  H.  137 
Diana  and  Jesus,  H.  419 

temple  of,  endangered,  H.  415  ;  N.  420 
Did  Jesus  Christ  actually  rise  from  the  dead  ? 

H.  19 
Difference,  no,  H.  233 

no,  between  us  and  them,  i.e.  between 
man  and  man,  H.  323 
Dignity  of  man,  H.  379 
Dioscuroi,    on    board    the,    or    the    Twin 

Brothers,  H.  592 
Discipline,  Church,  H.  122 
Discourse,  a  great,  and  what  came  of  it, 

H.  507 
Dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  H.  58 
Dissension  in  the  Church,  N.  140 
Divide  and  conquer  ;  or,  Paul's  happy  stroke, 
N.  485 

612 


Dividing  power  of  the  gospel,  H.  307 
Divine  after-knowledge  and  foreknowledge, 
H.  63 

"  must,"  the,  H.  569 

warnings,  H.  252 

worship,  some  thoughts  about,  H.  503 
Divinity    and   Personality    of   Holy   Spirit, 

H.  50 
Docility    of    temper   in   relation   to   truth, 

H.  366 
Doctrine  of  a  resurrection,  H.  504 

of  future  judgment  a  doctrine  of  reason, 
N.  380 

of  justification,  Paul's,  H.  298 
Doctrines  and  mistakes,  theological,  H.  575 
Doing  good,  who  went  about,  H.  244 
Door,  great,  opened  for  gospel,  H.  407 

of  faith,  H.  314 
Dorcas  and  Peter,  H.  226 

raising  of,  H.  223 
Double  work  of  Christianity,  H.  287 
Doubtful  actions,  H.  and  N.  456 

convert,  reception  of  a,  H.  182 

strategy,  Paul's,  H.  480 
Downward  course  of  Israel,  H.  166 
Draught  of  souls,  miraculous,  H.  72 
Drifting  life  and  its  opposite,  N.  565 

upon  the  deep,  H.  662,  570 
Drunkenness  and  spiritual  influence,  H.  58 
Drusilla  and   Felix,  Paul's   interview   with, 
H.  507,  512 

the  wife  of  Felix,  H.  510 
Dwellers,  the  house  and  its,  H.  167 

Early  Christian  practice,  light  from,  H.  428 
Earth,  Saul  arose  from  the,  N.  212 
Earthly  ministry  of  Christ,  H.  16 
Eating    and    drinking    with    risen    Christ, 

H.  245 
Ecclesiastical  assembly,  first,  H.  322 

controversy,  H.  251 
Effects  of  Peter's  sermon,  N.  74 
Egypt,  a  type  of  the  world,  H.  158 

corn  in  ;  or,  good  news  from  a  far  country, 

H.  159 
Egyptian,  art  not  thou  that  ?  H.  and  N.  459 
Elders   at   Miletus,   Paul's   address   to  the, 

H.  436 
of  Ephesus,  a  meeting  with  the,  H.  433 
of  the  Church,  H.  and  N.  436 
Eldership,  office  of  the,  H.  313 
Election     of     Matthias :      completing    the 

apostleship,  H.  36 
Elements  of  truly  noble  spirit,  N.  365 
Eloquence,  vapid,  of  a  heathen  lawyer,  H. 

498 
Elymas  Bar-jesus   and  Simon  Magus :   two 

sorcerers,  H.  286 
Sergius,  Saul ;  or,  three  sorts  of  wisdom, 

H.  285,  286 
Embassy  from  Caesarea  to  Joppa,  H.  236 
Emperor,   an    appeal   to    the — Paul  before 

Festus,  H.  517 
Entering  the  kingdom,  H.  313 
Ephesus,  an  incident  in,  H.  409 
Demetrius  of,  H.  418 


INDEX. 


Ephesus,  meeting  with  the  elders  of,  H.  433 
Paul's  last  days  in,  H.  413 

return  to,  H.  404 
popular  tumult  in,  H.  415,  419  ;  N.  403 
sailing  past ;    or,   bound  for  Jerusalem, 

H.  431 
three  years'  ministry  in,  H.  407,  412 
town-clerk  of,  H.  419 
two  years'  work  in,  N.  409 
uproar  at,  H.  419 ;  N.  403 
Epistle,  the  Jerusalem  :  the  Church's  charter 

of  liberty,  H.  326 
Erastus    and     Timothy,    mission    of,    into 

Macedonia,  H.  and  I.  414 
Escapes,  Paul's  midnight,  H.  495 
Escaping  safe  to  land ;  or,  running  ashore, 

H.  576 
Eternal  life,  ordained  to,  H.  301 
Ethiopia,  gospel  carried  into,  H.  193 
Ethiopian  eunuch,  conversion  of  the,  H.  193, 
203 
Philip  and  the,  H.  198,  199,  200,  201 
Eunuch,  conversion  of  the  Ethiopian,  H.  193, 

203 
Europe,  Church  of  Christ  in,  H.  345 
first  convert  in,  H.  345 
gospel  carried  to,  H.  341 
Paul's  second  visit  to,  H.  424 
Eutychus,  story  of  the  young  man,  H.  426, 

430 
Evangelist,  characteristics  of  a  good,  H.  199 
Everywhere  spoken  against,  H.  597,  598 
Evil  overruled  for  good,  H.  178 

renewed  fore-announcements  of,  H.  448 
Exaltation  of  the  Church's   Head;  or,  the 

Ascension,  H.  24 
Examination,  Gentile  candidate's,  H.  237 
Excitement  in  Jerusalem  ;  or,  what  the  mul- 
titude  thought   of  the  phenomenon, 
H.  55 
Experience  of  a  soul,  H.  156 
Experiences,  mixed,  H.  366 
three  significant,  H.  386 
Expository  preaching,  H.  252 

Fables,  Grecian,  on  the  subject  of  Lycaonia, 

I.  309 
Face  of  an  angel,  N.  145 

Stephen's  illuminated,  N.  145 
Fair  Havens,  from  Caesarea  to,  H.  556,  560 
from,  to   Crete :  caught  in  a  storm, 
H.  560 
Faith    and    superstition :    incident    of    the 
viper,  H.  586 
continuing  in  the,  H.  313 
door  of,  H.  314 
first  confession  of,  H.  323 
in  Christ,  H.  542 
Jesus,  H.  511 
saving,  is  faith  in  Christ,  N.  542 
substance  of  the,  H.  437 
to  be  saved,  H.  309 
true,  characteristics  of,  H.  347 
Far  country,  good  news  from  a ;  or,  corn  in 
Egypt,  H.  159 
off  and  to  near,  peace  to,  H.  243 


Farewell,  pastor's,  H.  440 
Farewells,  Christian,  H.  447 
Fast  in  the  stocks,  H.  352 
Fathers,  God  of  our,  H.  84 

promise  made  to  the,  H.  536 
Feast,  keeping  the,  H.  398 
of  the  Fulfilment,  H.  50 
Felix  and  Agrippa,  Paul's  two  distinguished 
listeners,  H.  548,  550 
character  of,  H.  510 
Drusilla,  the  wife  of,  H.  510 
love  of  money  as  exemplified  in,  H.  512 
Lysias'  letter  to,  N.  494 
Paul  before,  H.  510 
Paul's  first  interview  with,  H.  495 

interview  with,  and  Drusilla,  H.  507, 
512 
Fellowship  with  the  risen  Christ,  H.  18 
Fellow-voyagers,  Paul  and  his,  H.  579 
Fellow- workers  in  gospel,  H.  307 
Festus,  Paul  before :  an  appeal  to  the  em- 
peror, H.  517 
Festus's  audience-chamber  at  Caesarea,  H. 
529 
conversation   with   Agrippa  about  Paul 

H.  521 
excuse    for    calling    forth  his  prisoner, 
H.525 
Field  of  blood,  the,  Aceldama,  H.  38 
Fighting  against  God,  H.  134,  468 
Filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  H.  51 

with  joy,  H.  302 
Finding  brethren,  H.  593 
Fire,  baptism  of;  or,  the  descent  of  Holy 
Ghost,  H.  46 
tongues  of,  H.  50 
Fires  of  persecution  rekindled,  H.  178 

two,  upon  the  beach,  H.  586 
First  apostolic  delegates,  H.  186 
miracle,  H.  81 
Christian  apology;    or,  the  Pentecostal 
mystery  explained,  H.  57 
assembly,  H.  38 
deacons,  H.  140 
martyr,  H.  172,  174 
Christians,  apostles  and  the  ;  or,  the  effect 

of  the  first  persecution,  H.  113 
Church  visitation,  H.  187 
confession  of  faith,  H.  323 
confessors,    welcome    of    the ;     or,    the 
apostles  with  their  own  company, 
H.  108 
convert  in  Europe,  JI.  345 
converts ;  or,  the  firstfruits  of  the  gospel 

harvest,  H.  65 
day  of  the  week,  H.  429 
ecclesiastical  assembly,  H.  322 
interview,  Paul's,  with  Felix,  H.  495 
man  in  Malta  :  sermon  on  true  greatness, 

H.589 
missionary  journey,    commencement  of, 
H.  282 
ship,  H.  285 
missionaries,  designation  and  despatch  of, 

H.  279 
pagan  persecution,  H.  349 

613 


INDEX. 


First  persecution,  effect  of  the  ;  or,  the  apos- 
tles and  the  first  Christians,  H.  113 
recorded  missionary  meeting,  H.  313 
strife  allayed,  Church's ;  or,  the  institu- 
tion of  the  diaconate,  H.  137 
taste  of  blood,  H.  168 

of   persecution ;    or,   the   apostles  in 
gaol,  H.  97 
Firstfruits  of  the  gospel  harvest ;  or,  the  first 

converts,  H.  65 
Flock,  pastor's  duty  towards  his,  H.  440 
Foes  and  friends  of  Paul,  H.  490 
Followers  of  Christ,  world's  misrepresenta- 
tions of,  H.  455 
Forbidden  to  preach  in  Asia  and  Bithynia, 

N.  338 
Fore-announcements  of  evil,  renewed,  H.  448 
Foreign  missionary's  return,  H.  455 

missions,  opposition  to,  H.  475 
Foreknowledge  and  after-knowledge,  Divine, 

H.  63 
Foreordination,  sermon  on,  H.  301 
Forgiveness,  sermon  on,  H.  298 
Fortitude,  Christian,  H.  520 
Fortunate  journey,  II.  240 
Fortunes  of  the  Twelve,  H.  130 
Forty,  conspiracy  of  (more  than),  H.  488 
days,  the,  H.  18 
words  of,  H.  22 
Forward  movement  at  Antioch,  H.  282 
Founder  of  the  nation  ;  or,  the  biography  of 

Moses  in  three  chapters,  H.  160 
Four  anchors,  H.  566 

causes   of  joy  in    a    Christian   Church, 

H.  126 
classes  in  the  school  of  suffering,  H.  1 35 
lists  of  the  apostles,  N.  33 
marvels,  H.  198 

Old  Testament  typical  persons,  H.  167 
remarkable    things    in    Peter's    sermon, 

H.  65 
valuable  lessons,  H.  330 
Friend  at  court,  a;    or,  Gamaliel  and  his 

colleagues,  H.  131 
Friends  and  foes  of  Paul,  H.  490 
Fulfilment,  Feast  of  the,  H.  50 
Full  of  good  works,  H.  225 
Future  judgment,  doctrine  of,  a  doctrine  of 
reason,  N.  380 

Galatia,  region  of,  H.  337 
Gallio,  Paul  before,  H.  392 

Sosthenes  and,  H.  395 

the  civil  magistrate,  H.  395 
Gallio's  action,  N.  395 

behaviour,  H.  395 
Gamaliel  and  his  colleagues ;  or,  a  friend  at 

court,  H.  131 
Gamaliel's  counsel,  H.  130,  134 
Gaol,  apostles  in  ;  or,  the  first  taste  of  per- 
secution, H.  97 
Gate,  Beautiful,  of  temple,  H.  78,  80 
Generosity,  apostolical,  H.  81 
Gentile  candidate's  examination,  H.  237 

inquirer  directed,  H.  228 

knocking  for  admission,  H.  235 

614 


Gentile  mission,  how  Paul  turned  to  the,  H. 
543 
Paul's  adoption  of  a  ;  or,  his  interview 

with  Christ  in  Jerusalem,  H.  471 
preparation  of  centre  for  approaching, 
H.  253 
Gentiles,  admission  of,  vindicated,  H.  248 

and  Jews,  H.  301 

conversion  of  the,  H.  323 

gospel  preached  to,  H.  241 
Gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  H.  71,  130,  245 
Gifts,    variety    of,    bestowed    on    Christian 

Church,  H.  226 
Girdle,  Paul's,  lessons  from,  H.  451 
Give,  more  blessed  to,  than  to  receive,  H.  441 
Glorify  the  Word  of  God,  how  to,  H.  302 
Glory,  blinding,  H.  469 

God  of,  H.  155 

of  Christ,  H.  85 

of  gospel  of  grace  of  God,  H.  547 

of  that  light,  H.  470 
God  alone  King,  H.  274 

and  man,  obedience  to,  H.  130 

and  religion,  Paul's,  H.  504 

and  the  believer,  H.  570 

Christ  of,  and  Christian  history,  H.  17 

Christian  conception  of,  H.  Ill 

righting  against,  H.  134,  468 

glorified  by  people  for  healing  of  lame 
man,  H.  107 

gospel  of  grace  of,  H.  438,  547 

grace  of,  continuing  in  the,  H.  298 

great  things  of,  man's  reception  of,  H.  57 

greatness  and  majesty  of,  H.  168 

heart  not  right  with,  H.  189 

ignorant  worshippers  of,  H.  378 

impossibility  of  withstanding,  H.  253 

Israel  beloved  of,  H.  94 

kingdom  of,  H.  23 
progress  of,  H.  274 

no  respecter  of  persons,  H.  242,  243 

of  glory,  H.  155 

of  men  or  of;  or,  the  origin  of  Christianity, 
H.  134 

of  our  fathers,  H.  84 

Old  Testament  views  of,  H.  323 

Paul's,  H.  569 

seeking  after,  H.  379 

to  the  unknown,  H.  378 

was  with  him,  H.  244 

wonderful  works  of,  H.  56 

Word  of,  H.  391 

words  to  seekers  after,  H.  198 
God's  grace,  gospel  the  word  of,  H.  306 

hope  for  His  workers,  H.  388 

judgment  on  whited  walls,  H.  484 

knowledge  of  the  heart,  H.  323 

offspring,  H.  379 

people,  portion  of,  H.  158 

presence  with  His  people,  H.  158 

promises  to  His  people,  H.  155 

three  great  books  about  Himself,  H.  379 

witness  of  Himself,  H.  311 
Gods  are  come  down  to  us  in  the  likeness  of 
men,  H.  309 

hand-made,  H.  419 


INDEX. 


Gods,  strange,  H.  370 
Good  cheer  for  Christian  sailors,  H.  566 
conscience,  a,  H.  483 
counsel  of  the,  H.  562 
evil  overruled  for,  H.  178 
man,  troubles  of  a,  H.  459 
men,  quarrels  of,  H.  330 
news   from  a  far  country ;    or,  corn  in 

Egypt,  H.  159 
points  in  bad  men,  H.  505 
preacher,  characteristics  of,  H.  102 
tidings,  H.  184 

of  peace,  publishing,  H.  243 
work,  another,   interrupted :    Bercea,   H. 

364 
works,  full  of,  H.  225 
Gospel  among  barbarians,  H.  307 
carried  into  Ethiopia,  H.  193 

to  Europe,  H.  341 
dividing  power  of  the,  H.  307 
fellow-workers  in,  H.  307 
great  blessing  of,  H.  245 

door  opened  for,  H.  407 
harvest,  firstfruits  of  the ;    or,  the  first 

converts,  H.  65 
hearers    and    their    different    attitudes, 

characters,  and  destinies,  H.  301 
man's  treatment  of,  H.  380 
of  grace  of  God,  H.  438,  547 
preached  to  Gentiles,  H.  241 
preacher  and  his,  H.  307 
preachers  of,  city-troublers,  H.  352 
progress  of,  in  apostolic  times,  H.  274 
promise  of  the,  H.  71 
risen  Christ  and  the  power  of  the,  H.  115 
spreading,   the ;    or,  Philip   in    Samaria, 

H.  181 
the  word  of  God's  grace,  H.  306 
truth,  Paul  a  model  witness  of,  H.  547 
Government,  changes  in,  H.  516 
Governor,  new,  succession  of  a,  H.  518 
Grace,  all  of,  H.  400 
before  meals,  H.  575 
God's,  gospel  the  word  of,  H.  306 
of  God,  continuing  in  the,  H.  298 

gospel  of,  H.  438,  547 
providence    and,    thoughts    concerning, 
H.  578 
Graces,  best,  for  a  Church,  H.  115 
Gratitude  and  courage,  H.  593 
Great  crimes  remembered,  H.  473 
prophecy  and  its  fulfilment,  H.  156 
things  in  Corinth,  H.  390 

of  God,  man's  reception  of,  H.  57 
Greatness  and  majesty  of  God,  H.  168 

true,  sermon  on  :  first  man  in  Malta,  H.  589 
of  Christian,  H.  569 
Grecian  fables  on  the  subject  of  Lycaonia, 

I.  309 
Ground,  holy,  H.  164 
Group  of  typical  characters,  H.  420 
Growth  and  power  of  Word  of  God,  H.  412 
in  Christian  knowledge,  H.  400 

Hand  of  providence,  H.  490 
Hands,  two  right,  H.  63,  64 


Hand -made  gods,  H.  419 

Happy  stroke,  Paul's  ;  or,  divide  and  conquer, 

N.  485 
Harvest,  firstfruits  of  the  gospel ;  or,  the  first 

converts,  H.  65 
Hazarding  one's  life  for  Name  of  Christ,  H.  326 
Head,  exaltation  of  the  Church's  ;    or,  the 

Ascension,  H.  24 
Healing,  miracle  of,  H.  82 
of  ^Eneas,  H.  222,  223 
of  lame  man,  H.  78,  82 

God  glorified  by  people  for,  H.  107 
secret  of  miracle  explained,  H.  83 
of  Publius's  father,  H.  587 
Hearers,  gospel,  and  their  different  attitudes, 
characters,  and  destinies,  H.  301 
preachers  and  their,  some  thoughts  about, 
H.  475 
Hearing  and  believing,  H.  99 
patient,  H.  535 
Word  of  God,  H.  409 
Heart,  God's  knowledge  of  the,  H.  323 
not  right  with  God,  H.  189 
the  natural,  H.  191 
thoughts  of  the,  H.  190 
Heart-purification,  H.  323 
Heathen  city,  alone  in  a,  H.  367 

conversion  of,  a  source  of  joy  to  the  Church 

of  Christ,  H.  319 
cry  of  the — "  Come  over  and  help  us," 

H.  339 
lawyer,  vapid  eloquence  of  a,  H.  498 
mission,  mirror  for  the,  H.  234 
world,  expressive  representation  of  the: 
the  people  of  Malta,  H.  589 
Heathenism  and  Judaism,  two  apologies  of 
Christianity    towards :    Stephen    and 
Paul,  H.  380 
Heaven  opened,  H.  233 

why  stand  we  gazing  into  ?  H.  30 
Heavens  opened,  H.  171 
Heavenly  and  Roman  citizenship,  H.  476 
treasure,  H.  197 
vision,  H.  544,  545 
Worker,  H.  16 
Hebrew,  did  Christ  speak  ?  N.  541 
Helps  and  hindrances,  H.  447 
Heretics,  how  to  deal  with,  H.  319 
Herod  and  Peter,  H.  270 
death  of,  H.  272,  274 
sin  and  punishment  of,  H.  274 
Heroism  of  Paul,  H.  451 

Paul's,  in  the  storm,  H.  570 
High  places,  wickedness  in,  H.  516 
Highway  of  life,  meetings  on  the,  H.  199 
Hindrances  and  helps,  H.  447 
Hired  house,  two  whole  years  in  his  own — 

what  then  ?  H.  602 
Historical  credibility  of  speech  of  Stephen, 

N.  152 
History,  Christian,  Christ  of  God  and,  H.  17 
Church's,  story  of   Israel  a  type  of,  H. 

291 
of  a  called  sinner,  H.  155 
of  Abraham ;  or,  the  progenitor  of  Israel, 
H.  153 

615 


INDEX. 


History  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  H.  244 

Israel,   progenitor    of;    or,    the    history  of 

John  Mark,  H.  275 

Abraham,  H.  153 

of  unbelief,  H.  602 

story  of,  a  type  of  Church's  history,  H.  291 

personal,  of  Jesus,  H.  39 

the  Hope  of,  H.  597 

Holy  cross,  way  of  the,  H.  135 

Italy,  Paul's  voyage  to,  H.  559 

Ghost,  a  sermon  on  the,  H.  50 

and  Satan,  the,  H.  122 

Jail,  singing  in,  H.  352 ;  I.  353 

descent  of;   or,  the  baptism  of   fire, 

Jailor  at  Philippi,  story  of  the,  H.  353,  354 

H.  46 

James  and  the  elders  at  Jerusalem,  with  ;  or, 

gift  of  the,  H.  71,  130,  245 

mistaken  counsels,  H.  452 

on  receiving  the,  H.  and  I.  406 

the  brother  of  John,  death  of,  H.  266,  267, 

receiving  the,  H.  187 

274 

tongues  which,  gives,  H.  407 

Jameses,  three,  of  Scripture,  H.  269 

witness  of  the,  H.  130 

Jerusalem,     bound    for;    or,    sailing    past 

ground,  H.  164 

Ephesus,  H.  431 

Spirit,  filled  with  the,  H.  51 

Church  in ;  or,  ten  days  before  Pentecost, 

Personality  and  Divinity  of  the,  H.  50 

H.  31 

Home-coming  of  the  messengers,  H.  275 

which  was  in,  H.  179 

Homeward  journey  of  Paul  and  Barnabas, 

concordat,  the,  N.  325 

H.  311 

epistle,    the :    the    Church's    charter    of 

Hope  of  Israel,  the,  H.  597 

liberty,  H.  326 

and  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  H. 

excitement  in ;   or,  what  the  multitude 

484 

thought  of  the  phenomenon,  H.  55 

Hour  of  prayer,  H.  80 

hastening  to,  H.  433 

House  and  its  dwellers,  the,  H.  167 

letter  from  the  Church  at,  H.  323 

model,  H.  231 

Paul  and  Barnabas  on  the  way  to,  H.  319 

Household  baptism,  H.  347 

Paul's  adoption  of  a  Gentile  mission  ;  or, 

Housetop,  Peter's  vision  on  the,  H.  234 

his  interview  with  Christ  in,  H.  471 

Husbands,  wives,  children,  H.  447 

desire  to  be  in,  at  Pentecost,  H.  432 

Hypocrisy  unveiled ;  or,  the  story  of  Ananias 

third  visit  to,  H.  320 

and  Sapphira,  H.  119 

Peter's  report  to  Church  at,  H.  248 

Hypocrite,  detection  of  a,  H.  187 

Saul's  first  visit  to  :  his  discipleship  con- 

firmed, H.  217 

Iconium,  Paul  and  Barnabas  in,  H.  304 

the  council  at,  H.  320 

Ideal  of  Christian  unity,  H.  51 

to  Rome,  from,  H.  593 

Idolatry,  H.  310 

with  James  and  the  elders  at;  or,  mistaken 

of  novelty,  N.  372 

counsels,  H.  452 

Ignorance,  sins  of,  H.  87,  484 

Jesus  and  Diana,  H.  419 

Ignorant  worshippers  of  God,  H.  378 

and  Paul,  H.  411 

Illness,  Paul's  supposed,  at  Perga,  N.  290 

before  the  Sanhedrim,  H.  484 

Imaginings,  vain,  H.  110 

and  the  resurrection,  H.  370 

Impending  danger  announced,  H.  445 

ascension  of,  H.  29 

Impotence,  state  of  sin  a  state  of,  H.  82 

Christ,  Church  of,  H.  223 

Imprisonment  of  Paul  and  Silas,  H.  349 

did,  actually  rise  from  the  dead  ?  H.  19 

Paul's,  at  Caesarea,  H.  506 

Leadership  of,  H.  243 

explanation  of,  H.  593 

marks  of  a  true  minister  of,  H.  437 

Incident  in  Epbesus,  an,  H.  409 

power  of  love  to,  H.  447 

Incomparable  Teacher,  H.  16 

See  also  Christ 

Increase  of  nations,  H.  163 

companionship  with,  H.  105 

Indictment  of  Tertullus,  H.  498 

from  Joshua  to,  H.  166 

terrible,  H.  168 

I  know,  and  Paul  I  know  ;  but  who  are  ye  ? 

Indignation,  misdirected,  H.  129 

H.  411 

Individual  destiny,  H.  39 

Lord,  Name  of  the,  H.  411,  412 

Infidelity,  uncertainties  of,  H.  528 

Name  of,  H.  17 

Influence,  drunkenness  and  spiritual,  H.  58 

of  Nazareth,  did,  really  work  miracles  ? 

Inhabitants  of  Samaria,  H.  182 

N.  63 

Inheritance,  way  to  the,  H.  541 

history  of,  H.  244 

Inquirer,  Gentile,  directed,  H.  228 

one,  another  King,  H.  pnd  I.  363 

Inquirers,  anxious,  words  for,  H.  72 

— dead  or  alive  ?  H.  524 

Institution  of  the  diaconate ;  or,  the  Church's 

personal  history  of,  H.  39 

first  strife  allayed,  H.  137 

Saviour,  H.  291 

Intercessory  prayer,  H.  190 

Spirit  of,  H.  339 

Intolerance  in  religion,  spirit  of,  H.  466 

sufferings  of,  H.  198 

Israel,  apostasy  of,  H.  165 

unrecorded  words  of,  N.  441 

beloved  of  God,  H.  94 

what  the  Name  of,  is  to  a  preacher,  H.  218 

downward  course  of,  H.  166 

whom  Paul  preacheth,  H.  411 

616 


INDEX. 


Jewish  chiefs,  interview  with,  H.  593 
leaders  and  the  apostles,  H.  107 

opposition  of,  H.  99 
orthodoxy,  a  vindication  of  his ;  or,  Paul's 

appeal  to  his  past  life,  H.  533 
rulers,  criminality  of,  H.  291 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  H.  301 

and  the  temple  of  Diana,  N.  420 
continued  opposition  from,  H.  304 
from  Asia,  certain,  H.  505 
in  Rome,  N.  596 
John  and  Christ,  two  masters,  H.  407 
and  Peter,  H.  80 
Mark,  history  of,  H.  275 
Mark's  departure,  H.  290 
John's  disciples,  re-baptism  of  some  of,  H. 

404 
Joppa,  among  disciples  at,  H.  223,  225 
Cornelius's  messengers  at,  H.  235 
embassy  from  Csesarea  to,  H.  236 
Joseph  a  type  of  Christ ;  or,  the  last  of  the 

patriarchs,  H.  157 
Joseph's  brethren,  H.  160 
Joses  surnamed  Barnabas,  H.  116 
Joshua  to  Jesus,  from,  H.  166 
Journey,  first  missionary,  commencement  of, 
H.  282 
second  missionary,  commencement  of,  H. 

328,  398 
third  missionary,  commencement  of,  H. 
398 
Paul's  companions  on,  N.  335 
fortunate,  H.  240 
Journeymen,    Christian,    on    their    travels, 

H.  385 
Joy,  conversion  of  heathen  a  source  of,  to  the 
Church  of  Christ,  H.  319 
filled  with,  H.  302 
four  causes  of,  in   a  Christian   Church, 

H.  126 
in  Samaria,  H.  182 
Joyful  traveller  on  his  way  home,  H.  198 
Judaising  teachers  at  Antioch,  H.  317 
Judaism  and  heathenism,  two  apologies  of 
Christianity    towards :    Stephen    and 
Paul,  H.  380 
Judas,  concerning,  H.  38 

miracle  in  house  of,  H.  470 
miserable  end  of ;  or,  the  wages  of  sin, 
H.  39 
Judges  and  kings,  H.  291 
Judgment,  God's,  on  whited  walls,  H.  484 
great  day  of,  H.  380 
on  Elymas  and  its  effects,  H.  287 
Judgments,  mistaken,  H.  501 
Judgment-seat,  Caesar's  and  Christ's  :  a  con- 
trast, H.  520 
Jupiter,  temple  of,  at  Lystra,  N.  310 
Justification,  Paul's  doctrine  of,  H.  298 
Justus  and  Matthias,  H.  39 

Keeping  the  feast,  H.  398 

Kindness,  beauty  and  profit  of,  H.  589 

no  common,  H.  585 
King,  another,  one  Jesus,  H.  and  I.  363 

God  alone,  H.  274 


King,  world's  treason  against  its,  H.  110 
Kings  and  judges,  H.  291 
Kingdom,  entering  the,  H.  313 
of  God,  H.  23 

progress  of,  H.  274 
way  into  the,  H.  313 
Kingdoms  of  darkness  and  light  in  conflict, 

H.  185 
Knowledge,  Christian,  growth  in,  H.  400 

Ladder  of  Salvation,  the;  or,  Scala  Salutis, 

H.  72 
Lame  man,  healing  of,  H.  78,  82 

God  glorified  by  people  for,  H.  107 
secret  of  miracle  explained,  H.  83 
Land,  escaping  safe  to  ;  or,  running  ashore, 

H.  576 
Last  appeal,  Paul's,,  to  his  countrymen,  H. 
600 
of  the  patriarchs;  or,  Joseph  a  type  of 

Christ,  H.  157 
words  of  Paul,  H.  601 
Lawyer,  heathen,  vapid  eloquence  of  a,  H. 

498 
Leadership  of  Jesus  Christ,  H.  243 
Lessons,  four  valuable,  H.  330 

of  the  ascension  of  Christ,  H.  28 
Let  go  in  peace,  H.  328 

those  men  go  !  H.  356 
Letter  from  the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  H. 

323 
Liberty  of  conscience,  H.  106 

the  Church's  charter  of :  the  Jerusalem 
epistle,  H.  326 
Life,  drifting,  and  its  opposite,  N.  565 
meetings  on  the  highway  of,  H.  199 
model  of,  H.  295 
Prince  of,  H.  88 
repentance  unto,  H.  253 
storms  of,  H.  562 
voyage  of,  H.  566,  578 
Light  and  darkness,  kingdoms  of,  in  conflict, 
H.  185 
from  early  Christian  practice,  H.  428 
glory  of  that,  H.  470 
of  nature,  H.  311 
■Lights,   great,   which    shone   around   Paul, 

H.  468 
Loosened  bands  and  opened  doors,  H.  353 
Lord  and  Paul  and  Barnabas,  the,  H.  330 
ascending,  and  His  witnesses,  H.  34 
brethren  of  our,  H.  34 
cleaving  to  the,  H.  259 
day  of  the,  H.  59 
laughed  at  Paul's  enemies,  how  the,  H. 

491 
reigns,  the,  H.  517 
remembering  words  of  the,  H.  252 
right  ways  of  the,  perverting,  H.  2i  6 
the  ascended,  command  of,  H.  23 
upon  the  right  hand,  H.  64 
way  of  the,  H.  400 
what  shall  I  do  ?  H.  469 
will  of  the,  be  done  !  H.  451 
Love  of  money  as  exemplified  in  Ananias 
and  Sapphira,  H.  122 

617 


INDEX. 


Love  f  f  money  as  exemplified  in  Felix,  H.  512 

to  Jesus  Christ,  power  of,  H.  447 
Luke  and  Paul,  N.  342 

the  beloved  physician,  N.  342 
Luke's  Gospel  and  Acts,  connection  between : 

the  two  treatises,  H.  15 
Luther,  Martin— great  modern  counterpart 

of  Paul,  N.  450 
Lycaonia,  Grecian  fables  on  the  subject  of, 
1.309 

Paul  and  Silas  in,  H.  333 
Lydda,  miracle  at,  H.  222 
Lydia,  conversion  of,  H.  344,  346,  347 
Lydia's  heart  opened,  H.  346 

house,  the  brethren  in,  H.  356 
Lysias'  letter  to  Felix,  H.  494 
Lystra  cripple,  the,  H.  309 

Paul  and  Barnabas  at,  H.  307 

temple  of  Jupiter  at,  N.  310 

Macedonia,  call  to,  H.  310 

man  of,  vision  of  the,  H.  336 

mission  of  Timothy  and  Erastus  into,  H. 
and  I.  44 
Madman,  which  is  the  ?  H.  550 
Magistrate,  civil,  Gallio  the,  H.  395 

power  of  the,  H.  130 
Magnifying  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  H.  411, 

412 
Maid  named  Rhoda,  a,  H.  268 
Majesty  and  greatness  of  God,  H.  168 
Majority,  vote  of  the,  H.  562 
Malta,  first  man  in :  sermon  on  true  great- 
ness, H.  589 

people  of :  expressive  representation  of 
heathen  world,  H.  589 

three  months  in,  H.  583,  587 
Maltese,  mistakes  of  the,  H.  589 
Man  and  God,  obedience  to,  H.  130 

and  man,  no  difference  between,  H.  323 

behold  this!  H.  528 

dignity  of,  H.  379 

I  myself  also  am  a,  H.  239 

not  for,  to  know  times  and  seasons,  H.  26 

of  Macedonia,  vision  of  the,  H.  336 
Man's  partnership   with  Satan  in  his  sins, 
H.  121 

reception  of  great  things  of  God,  H.  57 

treatment  of  gospel,  H.  380 
Marks  of  a  true  minister  of  Jesus   Christ, 
H.  437 

of  true  conversion,  H.  218 
Marriage  state,  fearful  perversion  of  the  ;  or, 

Ananias  or  Sapphira,  H.  121 
Marriages,  mixed,  H.  335 
Mars'  Hill,  great  sermon  on,  N.  359  ;  H.  377 
Martyr,  first  Christian,  H.  172,  174 

Stephen,  Thy,  H.  473 
Martyrdom  of  Stephen,  H.  168 

sleeping  on  eve  of,  I.  267 
Marvellous  sight,  a,  H.  301 
Marvels,  four,  H.  198 

three,  H.  52 
Mary's  house,  Church  in,  H.  268 
Masters,  two,  John  and  Christ,  H.  407 
Matthias  and  Justus,  H.  39 

618 


Matthias,     election    of :     completing     the 

apostleship,  H.  36 
Meals,  grace  before,  H.  575 
Mediatorial  throne,  H.  64 
Meeting,  an  all-day,  H.  601 

with  new  friends  :  Corinth,  H.  383 
with  Timothy,  H.  333 
Meetings  on  the  highway  of  life,  H.  199 
Memorable  moments,  H.  541 
Men,  devout,  H.  56 

oppose     themselves     to      Christianity, 

reasons  why,  H.  418 
or  of  God,  of ;   or,  the  origin  of  Chris- 
tianity, H.  134 
who  make  reckless  charges,  H.  505 
whom    the    world   sometimes    seeks    to 
murder,  H.  547 
Messengers,  home-coming  of  the,  H.  275 
Messianic  salvation,  H.  59 
Microcosmus,  a  :  Athens,  H.  370 
Midnight  escapes,  Paul's,  H.  495 
on  the  sea,  H.  574 
ride  to  Caesarea,  H.  492 
vision,  Paul's,  at  Corinth,  H.  390 
Visitor,  Paul's,  H.  478,  488 
Miletus,  a  halt  at,  H.  433 
Minister  and  his  congregation,  a,  H.  239 
Christian,  qualifications  and  work  of,  H. 

470 
of  Jesus  Christ,  marks  of  a  true,  H.  437 
,  or  missionary,  ideal,  H.  214 

true,  indispensable    requirements   of, 
H.  281 
true,  qualifications,  work,  and  reward  of, 
H.  219 
Minister's  tears,  H.  437 
Ministers,  Christian,   dignity  and   duty  of, 
H.  348 
words  of  warning  for,  H.  439 
how,  should  preach,  H.  409 
Ministerial  despondency,  thoughts  for  the 
night  of,  H.  390 
ordination,  true,  H.  541 
responsibility,  thoughts  about,  H.  388 
success,  secret  of,  H.  391 
Ministering  spirits,  H.  129 
Ministry,  Christ's  earthly,  H.  16 
Christian,  H.  115 
of  Stephen,  H.  142 
office  of  the,  H.  438 
Miracle  at  Lydda,  H.  222 
at  temple  gate,  H.  82 
first  apostolic,  H.  81 
in  house  of  Judas,  H.  470 
near  Damascus,  H.  206,  210 
of  healing,  H.  82 
Miracles,  did  Jesus  of  Nazareth  really  work  ? 

N.  63 
Miraculous  draught  of  souls,  H.  72 
Mirror  for  the  heathen  mission,  H.  234 
Misconceptions,  world's,  about  Christianitv, 

H.  523 
Misdirected  indignation,  H.  129 
Miserable  end  of  Judas;   or,  the  wages  of 

sin,  H.  39 
Mission  at  Philippi,  opening  of  the,  H.  343 


INDEX. 


Mission  of  Ananias,  H.  212 
of  Christ,  H.  91 

of  Peter  and  John  to  Samaria,  H.  185 
of  Timothy  and  Erastus  into  Macedonia, 

H.  and  I.  414 
Philip's,  to  Samaria,  H.  182 
Missions,  mistaken,  H.  466 
Missionary,  best  travelling  attendance  of,  on 
his  departure,  H.  282 
journey,  first,  commencement  of,  H.  282 
second,  commencement  of,  H.  328 

Paul's  companions  on,  N.  335 
third,  commencement  of,  H.  398 
meeting,  first  recorded,  H.  313 
or  minister,  ideal,  H.  214 

true,  indispensable  requirements  of, 
B.  281 
ship,  first,  H.  285 
Missionary's  life,  routine  of  a,  H.  426 

return,  foreign,  H.  455 
Missionaries,  first,  designation  and  despatch 

of,  H.  279 
Mistaken  counsels,  H.  452 
judgments,  H.  501 
missions,  H.  466 
Paul's,  thoughts,  H.  540 
thoughts,  Paul's,  H.  540 
worship,  H.  238 
Mistakes  and  doctrines,  theological,  H.  575 
of  Simon  Magus,  H.  190 
of  the  Maltese,  H.  589 
Mixed  experiences,  H.  360 

marriages,  H.  335 
Model  Christians,  H.  74 

congregation,  picture  of  a,  H.  240 
defence,  H.  519 
for  Christian  preacher,  H.  85 
house,  H.  231 
of  life,  H.  295 
preacher  :  Apollos,  H.  400 
.  witness,  Paul  a,  of  gospel  truth,  H.  547 
Modern  counterpart  of  Paul,  great — Martin 
Luther,  N.  450 
men,  ancient  types  of,  H.  418,  420 
unchristian    communism  and    primitive 
Christian  socialism  compared  and  con- 
trasted, H.  73 
Momentous  beginning,  H.  17 
Moments,  memorable,  H.  541 
Money,  H.  189 

love  of,  as  exemplified  in  Ananias  and 
Sapphira,  H.  122 
in  Felix,  H.  512 
Moral    and    spiritual    history    of    a    soul, 

H.  353 
More  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,  H.  441 
Moses  and  Christ,  H.  90 

biography  of,  in  three  chapters ;  or,  the 

founder  of  the  nation,  H.  160 
Prophet  like  unto,  H.  90 
story  of,  H.  163 
Mothers,  pious,  of  the  Bible,  H.  335 
Motto,  preacher's,  H.  106 
Much-employed  servant  of  God,  quiet  hours 

of  a,  H.  432 
Multitudes,  stirring  up  the,  H.  367 


Murder,  men  whom  the  world  sometimes 

seeks  to,  H.  547 
Murmuring  in  the  primitive  Church,  H.  139 
"  Must,"  the  Divine,  H.  569 
Mystery  of  Pentecost  explained ;  or,  the  first 
Christian  apology,  H.  57 

traced  up  to  Christ,  H.  60 

Name,  Christ's,  H.  245 

none  other,  H.  102 

of  Christ,  hazarding  one's  life  for,  H.  326 

of  Jesus,  H.  17 

what  the,  is  to  a  preacher,  H.  218 

of  the  Lord  Jesus,  H.  411,  412 

suffering  shame  for  the,  H.  135 
Names  of  Christ,  H.  91 
Narrow  escape  from  scourging,  Paul's,  H.  474 
Nations,  cry  of  the,  H.  340 

increase  of,  H.  163 
Natural  heart,  the,  H.  191 

selection  in  spiritual  world,  H.  39 
Nature,  light  of,  H.  311 
Nazarenes,  sect  of,  H.  500 
Nazareth,  did  Jesus  of,  really  work  miracles  ? 

N.  63 
Nazarites,  Paul  among  the,  H.  458 
Near  and  to  far  off,  peace  to,  H.  243 
Nearing  the  breakers :  a  nightof  anxiety,H.572 
Necessity  of  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ, 
H.  362 

of  the  ascension  of  Christ,  H.  29 

true  preacher's,  H.  438 
New  and  old,  teaching  of  Christianity  at 
once,  H.  371 

doctrines  of  Christianity,  H.  371 

governor,  succession  of  a,  H.  515 

plans,  contemplating,  H.  413 

sense  of  sin,  the  Spirit  and  the,  H.  67 

Testament,  number  three  in  the,  H.  233 
News,  good,  from  a  far  country  ;  or,  corn  in 

Egypt,  H.  159 
Night  of  anxiety,  a :  nearing  the  breakers, 
H.  572 

service  at  Troas,  H.  430 

songs  in  the,  H.  353 
No  delay  !  H.  523 

salvation  out  of  Christ,  H.  102 

small  stir  about  that  way,  H.  418 
Nobility  of  mind,  true,  H.  365 
Noble  Berceans,  H.  365 

spirit,  elements  of  truly,  N.  365 
None  other  name,  H.  102 
Novelty,  idolatry  of,  N.  372 

Obedience  to  God  and  man,  H.  130 
Objections    against    Christianity,     popular, 

H.  598 
Objective  reality,     was    Paul's    vision    o£ 

Christ  a  ?   N.  545 
Offspring,  God's,  H.  379 
Old  and  new,  teaching  of  Christianity  at 
once,  H.  371 
disciple,  an,  H.  455 
plot,  revival  and  defeat  of  an,  H.  515 
story,  Paul's  rehearsal  of  an ;  or,  the  secret 
of  his  conversion  explained,  H.  537 

619 


INDEX. 


Old  Testament  prophets,  H.  291 
Testament  Scripture,  H.  38 
typical  persons,  four,  H.  167 
views  of  God,  H.  323 
Olden  time,  court-scene  in  the,  H.  519 
One  Jesus — dead  or  alive?  H.  524 
Only  salvation,  the,  H.  102 
Opened  doors  and  loosened  bands,  H.  353 

heavens,  H.  171 
Opening  of  the  mission  at  Philippi,  H.  343 
Opponents  of  Stephen,  H.  145 
Opposition,  continued,  from  Jews,  H.  304 
of  Jewish  leaders,  H.  99 
to  foreign  missions,  H.  475 
Oration,  effect  of  Paul's,  on  his  audience, 
H.  474 
lofty,    of   a    Christian    apostle:    Paul's 

answer,  H.  501 
the  Areopagus,  N.  359 ;  H.  377 
Orator,  Christian,  qualities  requisite  for  a, 

H.  464 
Ordained  to  eternal  life,  H.  301 
Ordination,  true  ministerial,  H.  541 
Origin  of  Christianity,  the  ;  or,  of  men  or  of 
God,  H.  134 

Pagan  persecution,  first,  H.  349 

Page  from  the  Church's  life ;  or,  the  calm 

before  a  storm,  H.  125 
Palmy  days  of  the   primitive  Church,   H. 

126 
Partnership,  man's,  with  Satan  in  his  sins, 

H.  121 
Passing  through  Perga,  N.  290 
Passion,  alive  after  His,  H.  19 
Past  and  present,  H.  380 
Pastoral  office — its  true  function,  H.  313 

visitation,  H.  330 
Pastor's  duty  towards  his  flock,  H.  440 

farewell,  H.  440 
Pastors,   three  things  of   which   Christian, 

should  take  heed,  H.  440 
Patient  hearing,  H.  535 
Patriarchs,  last  of  the ;  or,  Joseph  a  type  of 
Christ,  H.  157 
the  twelve,  H.  156 
Paul  a  model  witness  of  gospel  truth,  H.  547 
alone  on  his  way  to  Assos,  H.  432 
among  the  Nazarites,  H.  458 
and  Ananias,  H.  484 
and  Barnabas  and  the  Lord,  H.  330 
at  Lystra,  H.  307 
homeward  journey  of,  H.  311 
in  Iconium,  H.  304 
on  the  way  to  Jerusalem,  H.  319 
quarrel  between,  H.  330 
separation  of,  H.  328 
and  his  fellow- voyagers  H.  579 
and  Jesus,  H.  411 

before  the  Sanhedrim,  H.  484 
and  Luke,  N.  342 

and  Silas  among  the  Beroeans,  H.  364 
at  Thessalonica,  H.  360 
imprisonment  of,  H.  349 
in  Lycaonia,  H.  333 
in  Philippi,  H.  341 

620 


Paul  and  Stephen :  two  apologies  of  Christi- 
anity towards  Judaism  and  to- 
wards heathenism,  H.  380 

at  Athens,  H.  367,  377 

at  Corinth ;  or,  meeting  with  new  friends, 
H.  383 

before  Felix,  H.  510 

before  Festus — an  appeal  to  the  emperor, 
H.  517 

before  Gallio,  H.  392 

before  the  gates  of  Kome,  H.  593 

Christ's  question  to,  H.  211 

Festus's  conversation  with  Agrippa  about, 
H.  521 

foes  and  friends  of,  H.  490 

great  lights  which  shone  around,  H.  468 
modern      counterpart     of  —  Martin 
Luther,  N.  450 

heroism  of,  H.  451 

in  Aquila's  workshop,  H.  385 

in  the  storm,  H.  576 

in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  H.  473 

on  Areopagus ;  or,  preaching  to  philo- 
sophers, H.  374  ;  N.  359 

preacher  such  as,  H.  511 

preacheth,  Jesus  whom,  H.  411 

preaching  in  Rome,  H.  603 

preservation  of,  H.  583 

stoning  of,  H.  311 

the  persecutor,  H.  466 

the  prisoner,  H.  491 

theology  of,  as  set  forth  in  the  Acts,  H. 
and  N.  603 

visit  Corinth,  how  often  did  ?  H.  425 

was,  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim  ?  H.  540 

youth  of,  promising  but  disappointing, 
H.  465 

See  also  Saul 
Paul's  address  to  the  elders  at  Miletus,  H.  436 

adoption  of  a  Gentile  mission ;  or,  his 
interview  with  Christ  in  Jeru- 
salem, H.  471 

answer ;    or,    the    lofty    oration    of    a 
Christian  apostle,  H.  501 

appeal  to  Caesar,  H.  520 

to  his  past  life ;  or,  a  vindication  of 
his  Jewish  orthodoxy,  H.  533,  536 

arrival  in  Rome,  H.  589 

case,  H.  523 

chain,  H.  597 

companions  on  the  second  missionary 
journey,  N.  335 

conversion,  H.  206,  209,  211,  212,  215,218 

departure  from  Antioch :  commencement 
of  third  missionary  journey,  H.  398 

desire  to  be  in  Jerusalem  at  Pentecost, 
H.  432 

defence,  H.  535 

doctrine  of  justification,  H.  298 

doubtful  strategy,  H.  480 

enemies,  how  the  Lord  laughed  at,  H.  491 

escape  from  Damascus,  H.  217 

first  apology,  H.  472 

interview  with  Felix,  H.  495 

friends,  H.  559 

or,  the  sacred  circle  of  seven,  H.  426 


INDEX. 


aul's  imprisonment  at  Csesarea,  H.  506 
increase  in  strength,  H.  216 
interview  with  Felix  and  Drusilla,  H.  507, 

512 
girdle,  lessons  from,  H.  451 
God,  H.  569 

and  Paul's  religion,  H.  504 
happy  stroke ;   or,  divide   and  conquer, 

N.  485 
heroism  in  the  storm,  H.  570 
joy,  secret   of,   in   addressing    Agrippa, 

H.535 
last  days  in  Ephesus,  H.  413 
life  endangered,  H.  488 
midnight  escapes,  H.  495 
vision  at  Corinth,  H.  390 
Visitor,  H.  487,  488 
mistaken  thoughts,  H.  540 
oration,  effect  of,  on  his  audience,  H.  474 
personal  religion,  H.  567 
prayer  upon  the  ship's  deck,  H.  575 
preaching  at  Corinth,  H.  392 
rehearsal  of  an  old  story ;  or,  the  secret 
of  his  conversion  explained,  H.  537 
return    to     Antioch :     close    of    second 
missionary  journey,  H.  395 
to  Ephesus,  H.  404 
sacrifices  in  the  cause  of  Christ,  N.  450 
safety  ensured,  H.  492 
sermon  in    the    synagogue   at   Antioch, 

H.  289 
subsequent  career  as  a  Christian ;  or,  how 
he  turned  to  the  Gentile  mission, 
H.  543 
supposed  illness  at  Perga,  N.  290 
survey  of  his  past  career ;  or,  what  he  was 
and  did  before  his  conversion,  H. 
463,  466,  472 
third  visit  to  Jerusalem,  H.  320 
two  distinguished  listeners — Felix    and 

Agrippa,  H.  548,  550 
vision  of  Christ  an  objective  reality,  was  1 

N.  545 
visit  to  Thessalonica,  H.  363 
voyage  to  Italy,  H.  559 
Peace,  let  go  in,  H.  328 
preaching,  H.  243 
publishing  good  tidings  of,  H.  243 
to  far  off  and  to  near,  H.  243 
Pence,  Peter's  ;  or,  the  wealth  of  the  apostlesj 

H.  80 
Pentecost,  Day  of,  H.  76 

Paul's    desire   to   be   in   Jerusalem    at, 

*  H.  432 
phenomena  at,  H.  52 

ten  days  before  ;  or,  the  Church  in  Jeru- 
salem, H.  31 
Pentecostal  blessing,  H.  51 

Church;    or,  the  daily  life  of  primitive 

believers,  H.  72 
mystery  explained  ;  or,  the  first  Christian 
apology,  H.  57 
traced  up  to  Christ,  H.  60 
power,  H.  27 
wonder,  H.  51 
People,  believing,  H.  74 


Perga,  incident  at :  John  Mark's  departure, 
H.  290 
passing  through,  N.  290 
Paul's  supposed  illness  at,  N.  290 
Perplexing    things    about    Christianity    to 

worldly  men,  H.  525 
Persecution,  fires  of,  rekindled,  H.  178 

first,  effect  of  the ;  or,  the  apostles  and 
the  first  Christians,  H.  113 
pagan, H.  349 

taste  of ;   or,  the   apostles   in   gaol 
H.  97 
of  the  Church  by  Agrippa,  H.  263,  265 
unsuccessful,  a  case  of,  H.  392 
Persecutor,  Church's,  punished,  H.  272,  274 
Paul  the.  H.  466 

turned  preacher,  H.  215,  219,  221 
Personal  history  of  Jesus,  H.  39 

religion,  Paul's,  H.  567 
Personality  and    Divinity  of    Holy    Spirit, 

H.  50 
Persons,  God  no  respecter  of,  H.  242,  243 
Perversion,  fearful,  of  the  marriage  state ; 

or,  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  H.  121 
Perverting  right  ways  of  the  Lord,  H.  286 
Peter  and  Dorcas,  H.  226 
and  Herod,  H.  270 
and  John,  H.  80 

mission  of,  to  Samaria,  H.  185 
or,  the  first  apostolic  delegates,  H.  186 
the  speech  of,  H.  91 
theology  of,  H.  250 
Peter's  arrival  at  Caesarea,  H.  237 
deliverance,  H.  269 
pence  ;   or,  the  wealth  of  the  apostles, 

H.  80 
report  to  Church  at  Jerusalem,  H.  248 
sermon  :  1.  First  Christian  apology ;  or  the 
Pentecostal     mystery     explained, 
H.  67 
2.  Mystery  of  Pentecost  traced  up  to 

Christ,  H.  60 
effects  of,  N.  74 

four  remarkable  things  in,  H.  65 
second  sermon  (in  Solomon's  Porch) :  1. 
The  secret  of  the  miracle  explained, 

H.  83 
2.  The  people   comforted  and  coun- 
selled, H.  85 
sermon  in  Cornelius's  house,  H.  241 
shadow,  H.  126 
threefold    testimony  concerning   Christ, 

H.  91 
trance  ;  or,  the  apostolic  agent  prepared 

H.  231 
vision  on  the  housetop,  H.  234 
lessons  from,  H.  234 
Pharaohs  mentioned  in  Scripture,  H.  159 
Phases  of  conscience,  three,  H.  512 
Phenomenon,  visible,  was  Christ's  ascension 
a  ?  H.  30 
what  the  multitude  thought  of  the ;  or, 
excitement  in  Jerusalem,  H.  55 
Phenomena  at  Pentecost,  H.  52 
Philip  and  the  Ethiopian  eunuch,  H.  198, 199, 
200,  201 

621 


INDEX. 


Philip  at  Caesarea,  with,  II.  448,  449 

in  Samaria  ;  or,  the  gospel  spreading,  H. 

181,  182 
the  deacon,  H.  199 
Philippi,  Church  at,  H.  356 

jailor  at,  story  of  the,  H.  353,  354 
Paul  and  Silas  in,  H.  341 
sabbath  in,  H.  344 
Philosophers,  Athenian,  and  their  relation  to 
Christianity,  H.  370 
preaching  to  ;  or,  Paul  on  Areopagus,  H. 
374,  377 
Physician,  Luke  the  beloved,  N.  342 
Piety  of  Barnabas,  H.  260 

or  presumption — which  ?  H.  414 
Pious  mothers  of  the  Bible,  H.  335 
Pisidian  Antioch,  sabbath  day  in,  H.  287 

second  sabbath  day  in,  H.  299 
Plot,  a  defeated,  H.  491 

old,  revival  and  defeat  of  an,  H.  515 
Poor,  Church's  care  of  the  ;  or,  serving  tables, 

H.  140 
Popular  objections  against  Christianity,  H. 
598 
tumult  in  Ephesus,  H.  415,  419  ;  N.  403 
Porch,  Solomon's ;  or,  Peter's  second  sermon  : 

1.  The  secret  of  the  miracle  explained, 
H.  83 

2.  The  people  comforted  and  coun- 
selled, H.  85 

Portion  of  God's  people,  H.  158 
Poverty  and  wealth,  Church's,  H.  80 
Power  and  growth  of  Word  of  God,  H  412 

for  service,  H.  27 

of  love  to  Jesus  Christ,  H.  447 

of  the  civil  magistrate,  H.  130 

of  the  gospel,  risen  Christ  and  the,  H.  115 

Pentecostal,  H.  27 
Prayer  addressed  to  Christ,  H.  39 

congregation  at,  H.  110 

hour  of,  H.  80 

intercessory,  H.  190 

Paul's,  upon  the  ship's  deck,  H.  575 
Prayers  of  the  Church,  H.  267 
Prayer-meeting,  an  ancient,  H.  343 
Praying  always,  H.  231 

and  preaching,  H.  140 
Preach,  how  ministers  should,  H.  409 
Preacher,  a  model :  Apollos,  H.  400 

and  his  gospel,  H.  307 

Christian,  model  for,  H.  85 

good,  characteristics  of,  H.  102 

persecutor  turned,  H.  215,  219,  221 

such  as  Paul,  H.  511 

what  the  Name  of  Jesus  is  to  a,  H.  218 
Preacher's  commission,  H.  129 

motto,  H.  106 
Preachers  and  their  hearers,  some  thoughts 
about,  H.  475 

of  gospel  city-troublers  H.  352 

precepts  for,  H.  437 
Preaching  and  praying,  H.  140 

boldness  in,  H.  Ill 

expository,  H.  252 

in  Kome,  Paul,  H.  603 

peace,  H.  243 

622 


Preaching  to  philosophers  ;  or,  Paul  on  Areo- 
pagus, H.  374,  377  ;  N.  359 

whole  day's,  H.  600 

world's  veto  upon,  H.  129 
Precepts  for  preachers,  H.  437 
Preparing  for  the  worst,  H.  562 
Presence,  God's,  with  His  people,  H.  158 
Present  and  past,  H.  380 
Preservation  of  Paul,  H.  583 
Presumption  or  piety  —which  ?  H.  414 
Prey,  wolf  and  his,  H.  180 
Primitive  believers,  daily  life   of ;    or,  the 
Pentecostal  Church,  H.  72 

Christian  socialism  and  modern  unchris- 
tian communism  compared  and 
contrasted,  H.  73 

Church,  murmuring  in  the,  H.  139 
palmy  days  of  the,  H.  126 
Prince  of  life,  H.  88 
Priscilla  and  Aquila,  H.  385 
Prison,  saints  in,  I.  487 
Prisoner,  a  chained,  on  his  defence,  H.  535 

Paul  the,  H.  491 
Profit  and  beauty  of  kindness,  H.  589 
Progress  of  gospel  in  apostolic  times,  H.  274 

of  kingdom  of  God,  H.  274 

of  the  Church,  H.  142 
Promise  made  to  the  fathers,  H.  536 

of  the  gospel,  H.  71 

time  of  the,  H.  162 
Promises,  God's,  to  His  people,  H.  155 
Promising  situation  changed,  the :  Pisidian 

Antioch,  H.  299 
Prophecy,  a  daring,  H.  575 

great,  and  its  fulfilment,  H.  156 
Prophesy,  virgins  which  did,  H.  449 
Prophet  like  unto  Moses,  H.  90 

world's  true,  H.  90 
Prophets  and  sons  of  the  prophets,  H.  92 

believest  thou  the  ?  H.  551 

Christ  in  the,  H.  90 

Old  Testament,  H.  291 

voices  of  the,  H.  292 
Prosperous  Church,  H.  74 
Providence  and  grace,  thoughts  concerning, 
H.  578 

hand  of,  H.  490 
Publius's  father,  healing  of,  H.  587 
Puteoli,  seven  days  at,  H.  592 
Pythoness,  cure  of  a,  H.  348 

Qualifications    and    work    of    Christian 

minister,  H.  470 
Qualities  requisite  for  a   Christian    orator, 

H.464 
Quarrel  between  Barnabas  and  Paul,  H.  330 
Quarrels  of  good  men,  H.  330 
Questionable  question,  H.  26 
Questions,  three,  about  the  Bible,  H.  197 
Quiet  days,  H.  592 

hours  of  a  much-employed    servant  of 

God,  H.  432 


Raising  of  Dorcas,  H.  223 

the  dead — credible  or  incredible  ?  H.  536 


INDEX. 


Reason,  doctrine  of  future  judgment  a  doc- 
trine of,  N.  380 
Re-baptism   of    some    of    John's    disciples, 

H.404 
Receive,  more  blessed  to  give  than  to,  H.  441 
Receiving  the  Holy  Ghost,  H.  187 
Reception,   man's,  of  great   things  of  God, 
H.  57 
of  a  doubtful  convert,  H.  182 
of  new  truth,  on  the,  H.  243 
Reckless  charges,  men  who  make,  H.  505 
Reformed  city,  H.  184 
Refreshing,  times  of,  H.  88 
Region  of  Galatia,  H.  337 
Regions  beyond  :  vision  of  the  man  of  Mace- 
donia, H.  336 
Rejected  Corner-stone,  H.  101 
Religion  and  God,  Paul's,  H.  504 
Paul's  personal,  H.  567 
spirit  of  intolerance  in,  H.  466 
true,  H.  465 
Religious  life,  vows  in  the,  H.  398 

service,  strange,  H.  352 
Remarkable  things,  four,  in  Peter's  sermon, 
H.  65 
year,  H.  260 
Remembering  word  of  the  Lord,  H.  252 
Repentance  of  sin,  H.  379 
unto  life,  H.  253 
works  worthy  of,  H.  547 
Representations,    world's,    of    followers    of 

Christ,  H.  455 
Requirements,  indispensable,  of  true  minis- 
ter or  missionary,  H.  281 
Resignation,  Christian,  H.  451 
Respecter  of  persons,  God  no,  H.  242,  243 
Responsibility,  ministerial,  thoughts  about, 

H.388 
Restoration,  times  of,  H.  88 
Resurrection,  death  and,  of  Christ  a  neces- 
sity, H.  362 
doctrine  of  a,  H.  504 
Jesus  and  the,  H.  370 
of  Christ,  H.  64 

f  the  dead,   Hope  of  Israel    and    the, 
H.  484 
Retrospect,    aged    Christian's,    of   his    past 

career,  H.  536 
Rhoda,  a  maid  named,  H.  268 
Right  hands,  two,  H.  63,  64 

ways  of  the  Lord,  perverting,  H.  286 
Righteous  One,  H.  470 

Risen  Christ  and  the  power  of  the  gospel, 
H.  115 
appearances  of  the,  H.  21 
eating  and  drinking  with  the,  H.  245 
fellowship  with  the,  H.  18 
Rising  of  a  bright  particular  star,  H.  142 
Rome,  after  I  have  been  there  I  must  also 
see,  N.  413 
and  so  we  went  towards,  H.  593 
from  Jerusalem  to,  H.  593 
Jews  in,  N.  596 
Paul  before  the  gates  of,  H.  593 

preaching  in,  H.  603 
Paul's  arrival  in,  H.  589 


Roman  and  heavenly  citizenship,  H.  476 
and  uncondemned,  is  it  lawful  to  scourge 

a  man  who  is  a  ?  H.  475 
Romans,  not  the  custom  of  the,  H.  523 
Room,  upper,  N.  33 
Routine  of  a  missionary's  life,  H.  426 
Rulers,  Jewish,  criminality  of,  H.  291 
Running  ashore ;  or,  escaping  safe  to  land, 

H.  576 

Sabbath  day  in  Pisidian  Antioch,  H.  287 
second  ditto,  H.  299 
days  and  week-days ;  or,  work  and  wor- 
ship, H.  385 
in  Philippi,  H.  344 
Sacred  circle  of  seven ;    or,  Paul's  friends, 

H.  426 
Sacrifices,    Paul's,   in   the    cause  of  Christ, 

N.  450 
Sadducee,  creed  of  the,  H.  486 
Safety,  Paul's,  ensured,  H.  492 
Sailing  past  Ephesus ;  or,  bound  for  Jerusa- 
lem, H.  431 
Sailors,  Christian,  good  cheer  for,  H.  566 
Saints,  confirmation  of  the,  H.  185 

in  prison,  I.  487 
Salutations,  Christian,  H.  523 
Salutis,  Scala ;  or,  the  Ladder  of  Salvation, 

H.  72 
Salvation  in  Christ  alone,  H.  101 
Messianic,  H.  59 

no,  without  circumcision,  H.  319 
the  Ladder  of  ;  or,  Scala  Salutis,  H.  72 
this,  H.  291,  301,  602 
way  of,  H.  353 
words  of,  H.  252 
Samaria,  awakening  in,  H.  184 
inhabitants  of,  H.  182 
joy  in,  H.  182 

Philip  in ;  or,  the  gospel  spreading,  H.  181 
Philip's  mission  to,  H.  182 
mission  of  Peter  and  John  to,  H.  185 
Sanhedrim  and  the  college  of  apostles,  H.  130 
apostles  before  ;  or,  sheep  among  wolves, 

H.  99 
Jesus  and  Paul  before  the,  H.  484 
was  Paul  a  member  of  the  ?  N.  540 
Sapphira,   Ananias   and,  love  of  money  as 
exemplified  in,  H.  122 
or,   fearful   perversion   of    the    mar- 
riage state,  H.  121 
sevenfold  union  of,  H.  122 
sin  of,  H.  12b,  124 

story  of;   or,  hypocrisy  unveiled,  H. 
119, 124 
Satan  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  H.  122 

man's    partnership    with,    in    his    sins, 
H.  121 
Satan's  devices,  H.  348 
Saul  and  Barnabas  in  Cyprus,  H.  282 
and  Paul,  H.  180 
and  Stephen,  H.  180 
arose  from  the  earth,  N.  212 
at  Damascus,  H.  215 
baptism  of,  H.  212 
Christ's  question  to,  H.  468 

623 


INDEX. 


Saul,  conversion  of,  H.  206,  209,  211,  212, 
215,  218 
preaching  Christ,  H.  219,  221 
Sergius,  Elymas ;  or,  three  sorts  of  wis- 
dom, H.  285,  286 
young  man  named,  H.  171 
See  also  Paul 
Saul's  first  visit  to  Jerusalem :  his  disciple- 
ship  confirmed,  H.  217 
Saving  faith  is  faith  in  Christ,  N.  542 
Saviour  Jesus,  H.  291 
Scala  Salutis  ;  or,  the  Ladder  of  Salvation, 

H.  72 
Scene  in  the  council-chamber,  H.  480 
Sceva's  sons,  story  of,  H.  409 
Schism  and  separation,  H.  409 
School  of  suffering,  four    classes    in    the, 

H.  135 
Scourging,  Paul's  narrow  escape  from,  H.  474 
Scriptural  confirmation,  H.  313 
Scripture,  Old  Testament,  H.  38 
Pharaohs  mentioned  in,  H.  159 
three  Jameses  of,  H.  269 
Scriptures,  searching  the,  H.  365 
Sea,  midnight  on  the,  1 I.  574 
Searching  the  Scripturoc,  H.  365 
Seasons  and  times,  not  for  man  to  know, 
H.  26 
convenient,  H.  512  ' 
Second  coming  of  Christ,  H.  30 

missionary  journey  commenced,  H.  328 

Paul's  companions  on  the,  N.  335 
psalm,  witness  of  the,  to  Christ,  H.  292 
visit  to  Europe,  Paul's,  H.  424 
Secret  of  ministerial  success,  H.  391 

of  Paul's  joy  in  addressing  Agrippa,H.  535 
Sect  of  Nazarenes,  H.  500 
Seekers  after  God,  words  to,  H.  198 
Seeking  after  God,  H.  379 
Selection,  natural,  in  spiritual  world,  H.  39 
Sense  of  sin,  the  new,  the  Spirit  and,  H.  67 
Separation  and  schism,  H.  409 

of  Barnabas  and  Paul,  H.  328 
Sergius  Paulus,  a  prudent  man,  H.  286 

Saul,  Elymas ;  or,  three  sorts  of  wisdom, 
H.  285,  286 
Sermon  for  philosophers,  H.  377 

great,  on  Mars'  Hill,  N.  359  ;  H.  377 
on  foreordination,  H.  301 
on  forgiveness,  H.  298 
on  the  Holy  Ghost,  H.  50 
on  wealth,  H.  116 

Paul's,  in  synagogue  at  Antioch,  H.  287 
Servant  of  God,  best  advocates  of,  before 
judgment-seat      of      unrighteous 
world,  H.  488 
quiet    hours    of    a    much-employed, 
H.  432 
Service,  Christian,  in  strange  place,  H.  527 
three  differing  types  of,  H.  269 
power  for,  H.  27 
strange  religious,  H.  352 
Serving  tables ;  or,  the  Church's  care  of  the 

poor,  H.  140 
Setting  sail :  from  Caesarea  to  Fair  Havens, 
H.  556 

624 


Seven  chosen,  the,  H.  141 
days  at  Puteoli,  H.  592 

at  Tyre,  H.  445  ;  N.  447 
sacred  circle  of;    or,  Paul's  friends,  H. 
426 
Sevenfold  union  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira, 

H.  122 
Shadow,  Peter's,  H.  126 
Shame  for  the  Name,  suffering,  H.  135 
Sheep  among  wolves;    or,  apostles   before 

Sanhedrim,  H.  99 
Ship,  first  missionary,  H.  285 
Ship's  company,  great,  H.  577 

deck,  Paul's  prayer  upon  the,  H.  575 
Sight,  a  marvellous,  H.  301 
Silas  and  Paul  among  the  Berceans,  H.  364 
at  Thessalonica,  H.  360 
imprisonment  of,  H.  349 
in  Lycaonia,  H.  333 
in  Philippi,  H.  341 
and  Timothy  in  Bercea,  N.  367 
Simon  Magus,  accession  of,  H.  182,  185 

and  Elymas  Bar-jesus :  two  sorcerers, 

H.  286 
mistakes  of,  H.  190 
Simon  the  apostle  and  Simon  the  tanner, 

H.  231 
Simons,  the  two ;  or,  detection  of  a  hypocrite, 

H.  187 
Sin,  conviction  of,  H.  67 

of  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  H.  123 

repentance  of,  H.  379 

state  of,  a  state  of  impotence,  H.  82 

the  blotting  out  of,  H.  87 

the  Spirit  and  the  new  sense  of,  H.  67 

wages  of ;  or,  the  miserable  end  of  Judas, 

H.  39 
washing  away  of,  H.  471 
Sins,  man's  partnership  with  Satan  in  his, 
H.  121 
of  ignorance,  H.  87,  484 
Singing  in  jail,  H.  352 ;  I.  353 
Sinner,  history  of  a  called,  H.  155 
Sirs,  why  do  ye  these  things  ?  H.  310 
Situation,  the  promising,  changed  :  Pisidian 

Antioch,  H.  299 
Slave-girl  and  the  apostle,  H.  348 
Sleep  of  Stephen,  H.  172 
Sleeping  in  church,  on,  H.  430 
on  eve  of  martyrdom,  I.  267 
Soberness  and  truth,  words  of,  H.  550 
Socialism,  Christian,  a  sermon  on  :  all  things 
common,  H.  114 
Christianity  and,  H.  115 
primitive    Christian,    and    modern    un- 
christian communism  compared  and 
contrasted,  H.  73 
Soldier's  counsel,  H.  577 
Solomon's  Porch  ;  or,  Peter's  second  sermon  : 

1.  The  secret  of  the  miracle  explained, 

H.  83 

2.  The  people  comforted  and   coun- 

selled, H.  85 
Somebodies,  the  world's,  N.  133 
Songs  in  the  night,  H.  353 
Sons  of  the  prophets,  prophets  and,  H.  92 


"% 


INDEX. 


Sorcerers,  two  :   Simon  Magus  and  Elymas 

Bar-jesus,  H.  286 
Sosthenes  and  Galiio,  H.  395 
Soul,  experience  of  a,  H.  156 

moral  and  spiritual  history  of  a,  H.  353 
Soul's  questions    and  Christ's  answers,   H. 

211 
Souls,  awakened,  cry  of,  H.  67 

miraculous  draught  of,  H.  72 

subverting,  H.  326 

two,  struggling  against  truth,  H.  548 
Soul-ministry,  H.  470 
Speak  for  himself,  permitted  to,  H.  535 
Speaking  evil  of  the  way,  H.  408 
Speech  of  Peter,  the,  H.  91 

of  Stephen,  H.  152 

historical  credibility  of,  N.  152 
Spirit,  bound  in  the,  H.  438 

descending,  H.  52 

dispensation  of  the,  H.  58 

noble,  elements  of  truly,  N.  365 

of  intolerance  in  religion,  H.  466 

of  Jesus,  H.  339 

the,  and  the  new  sense  of  sin,  H.  67 
Spirit's  utterances,  how  the  world  receives 

the,  H.  56 
Spirits,  ministering,  H.  129 
Spiritual  and  moral  history  of  a  soul,  H.  353 

influence,  drunkenness  and,  H.  58 

world,  natural  selection  in,  H.  39 
Spoken  against,  everywhere,  H.  597,  598 
Spots  in  the  sun,  H.  485 
Star,  rising  of  a  bright  particular,  H.  142 
State  dignitaries,  talked  about  by,  H.  521 

of  sin  a  state  of  impotence,  H.  82 
Steadfastness,  Christian,  H.  73 
Stephen  and  Paul,  two  apologies  of  Chris- 
tianity towards  Judaism  and  towards 
heathenism,  H.  380 

and  Saul,  H.  180 

apology  of ;   or,  a  vindication  of  Chris- 
tianity, H.  150  . 

biography  of,  H.  145 

burial  of,  H.  180 

martyrdom  of,  H.  168 

ministry  of,  H.  142 

opponents  of,  H.  145 

sleep  of,  H.  172 

speech  of,  H.  152 

the  deacon,  H.  145 

Thy  martyr,  H.  473 
Stephen's  illuminated  face,  N.  145 

prayer  for  himself,  H.  172 
for  his  enemies,  H.  172 

three  crowns,  H.  172 
Stern,  anchored  from  the,  H.  575 
Stirring  up  the  multitudes,  H.  367 
Stocks,  fast  in  the,  H.  352 
Stone,  the  builders  and  the,  H.  101 
Stones,  changed,  H.  171 
Stoning  of  Paul,  H.  311 
Storm,  caught  in  a ;  or,  from  Fair  Havens  to 
Crete,  H.  560 

confession  in  the  midst  of,  N.  567 

Paul  in  the,  H.  576 

Paul's  heroism  in  the,  H.  570 


Storm,  the  bursting  of  the ;  or,  Annas  upon 
the  move,  H.  127 

the  calm  before  a ;  or,  a  page  from  the 
Church's  life,  H.  125 
Storms  of  life,  H.  562 
Strange  gods,  H.  370 

place,  Christian  service  in,  H.  527 

religious  service,  H.  352 

sight,  a,  H.  214 
Strategy,  Paul's  doubtful,  H.  480 
Strength  of  a  Church,  the,  H.  336 

Paul's  increase  in,  H.  216 
Strife,  Church's  first,  allayed  ;  or,  the  institu- 
tion of  the  diaconate,  H.  137 
Strong,  duty  of  the,  towards  the  weak,  H. 

441 
Struggle,  the  great,  H.  271 
Substance  of  the  faith,  H.  437 
Subverting  souls,  H.  326 
Success,  ministerial,  secret  of,  H.  391 
Sudden  deaths,  H.  122 
Suffering,  four  classes  in  the  school  of,  H.  135 

servants,  Christ's  comfort  for,  H.  488 
Sufferings  of  Jesus,  H.  198 

of  Christ,  H.  87 
Sun,  spots  in  the,  H.  485 
Superstition,  H.  377 

and  faith  :  incident  of  the  viper,  H.  586 
Supposed,  as  I,  H.  523 
Synagogue   at   Antioch,  Paul's   sermon  in, 

H.  287 
Syria,  Antioch  in,  back  to,  H.  311 

Tabeenacle  of  testimony  in   wilderness, 

H.  165 
Tables,  serving ;  or,  the  Church's  care  of  the 

poor,  H.  140 
Take  heed  to  yourselves  :  words  of  warning 

for  Christian  ministers,  H.  439 
Taken  up  ;  or,  views  of  the  Ascension,  H.  29 
Tanner,   Simon  the,  and  Simon  the  apostle, 

H.  231 
Teacher,  incomparable,  H.  16 
Tears,  minister's,  H.  437 
Temper,   docility   of,  in  relation  to  truth, 

H.  366 
Temple,  arrested  in  the  ;  or,  long  looked  for 
come  at  last,  H.  456 
Beautiful  Gate  of,  H.  78,  80 
gate,  miracle  at,  H.  82 
of  Diana  endangered,  H.  415  ;  N.  420 
Paul  in  the,  at  Jerusalem,  H.  473 
Ten  days  before  Pentecost ;  or,  the  Church  in 

Jerusalem,  H.  31 
Terrible  indictment,  H.  168 
Tertullus,  indictment  of,  H.  498,  500 
Testimony,     Peter's    threefold,    concerning 
Christ,  H.  91 
tabernacle  of,  in  wilderness,  H.  165 
Theological  doctrines  and  mistakes,  H.  575 
Theology  of  Paul  as  set  forth  in  the  Acts, 
H.  and  N.  603 
of  Peter,  H.  250 
Thessalonica,  Paul  and  Silas  at,  H.  360 

Paul's  visit  to,  H.  363 
They  went  about  to  slay  him,  H.  218 


s  s 


625 


INDEX. 


Third  hearing  of  Paul  before  Agrippa  and 
Bernice,  H.  525 
missionary  journey,  commencement  of, 
H.  398 
Thoughts  of  the  heart,  H.  190 

Paul's  mistaken,  H.  540 
Three  Ananiases  in  Acts,  the,  H.  483 
crowns,  Stephen's,  H.  172 
differing  types  of  Christian  service,  H.  269 
great  books,  God's,  about  Himself,  H.  379 
Jameses  of  Scripture,  the,  H.  268 
marvels,  H.  52 

months  in  Malta,  H.  583,  587 
number,  in  the  New  Testament,  H.  233 
phases  of  conscience,  H.  512 
questions  about  the  Bible,  H.  197 
significant  experiences,  H.  386 
sorts  of  wisdom  ;  or,   Elymas,   Sergius, 

Saul,  H.  285,  286 
things  of  which  Christian  pastors  should 

take  heed,  H.  440 
years'  ministry  in  Ephesus,  H.  407,  412 
Threefold  office  of  Christ,  H.  245 

testimony,    Peter's,    concerning    Christ, 
H.  91 
Throne,  mediatorial,  H.  64 
Tidings,  good,  H.  184 
Time  of  the  promise,  H.  162 
Times  and  seasons,  not  for  man  to  know,  H.  26 
of  refreshing,  H.  88 
of  restoration,  H.  88 
Timothy  and  Erastus,  mission  of,  into  Mace- 
donia, H.  and  I.  414 
and  Silas  in  Bercea,  N.  367 
certain  disciple  named,  H.  334 
meeting  with,  H.  333 
Tongues  of  fire,  H.  50 

which  the  Holy  Ghost  gives,  H.  407 
Town-clerk  of  Ephesus,  H.  419 
Trance,  Peter's ;  or,  the  apostolic  agent  pre- 
pared, H.  231 
Traveller,  joyful,  on  his  way  home,  H.  198 
Travelling  attendance,  best,  of  missionary  on 

his  departure,  H.  282 
Treason,  world's,  against  its  King,  H.  110 
Treasure,  heavenly,  H.  197 
Treatises,  the  two :  connection  between  the 

Acts  and  Luke's  Gospel,  H.  15 
Triangular  contest :  sorcerer,  proconsul,  and 

apostle,  H.  286 
Trio,  a  remarkable,  H.  394 
Troas,  accident  at,  H.  431 

communion  festival  at,  H.  426,  429 
night  service  at,  H.  430 
Troubles  of  a  good  man,  H.  459 
of  Christ's  servants,  H.  98 
of  unbelievers,  H.  98 
True  blossoms  of  a  Christian  congregation, 
H.  116 
Church,  the  Church  at  Antioch  a,  H.  281 
faith,  characteristics  of,  H.  347 
greatness  of  Christian,  H.  569 
minister  or  missionary,  indispensable  re- 
quirements of,  H.  281 
qualifications,  work,  and  reward  of, 
H.  219 

626 


True  ministerial  ordination,  H.  541 

nobility  of  mind,  H.  365 

religion,  H.  465 
Truth  and  soberness,  words  of,  H.  550 

docility  of  temper  in  relation  to,  H.  366 

new,  on  the  reception  of,  H.  243 

two  souls  struggling  against,  H.  548 
Tumult,  popular,  in  Ephesus,  H.  415,  419  ; 

N.  403 
Turning  world  upside  down,  H.  363 
Twelve,  fortunes  of  the,  H.  130 

patriarchs,  the,  H.  156 
Twin  Brothers,  on  board  the,  or  the  Dioscuroi, 

H.  592 
Two  Ananiases,  the,  H.  213 

baptisms,  H.  24 

covenants — against   Paul    and  for    him, 
H.  490 

fires  upon  the  beach,  H.  586 

masters,  John  and  Christ,  H.  407 

right  hands,  H.  63 

Simons,  the ;  or,  detection  of  a  hypocrite, 
H.  187 

sorcerers :    Simon    Magus    and    Elymas 
Bar-jesus,  H.  286 

souls  struggling  against  truth,  H.  548 

treatises,   the  :    connection   between  the 
Acts  and  Luke's  Gospel,  H.  15 

visions  of  Christ,  H.  214 

whole  years  in  his  own  hired  house — what 
then  ?  H.  602 

years'  work  in  Ephesus,  N.  409 
Typical  character,  group  of,  H.  420 

persons,  four  Old  Testament,  H.  167 
Tyre,  seven  days  at,  H.  445 ;  N.  447 

Unbelief,  history  of,  H.  602 
Unbelievers,  troubles  of,  H.  98 
Uncertainties  of  infidelity,  H.  528 
Unchristian  communism,  modern,  and  primi- 
tive Christian  socialism  compared  and 

contrasted,  H.  73 
Union,  sevenfold,  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira, 

H.  122 
Unity,  Christian,  ideal  of,  H.  51 
University  of  Athens,  in  the ;  or,  unto  the 

Areopagus,  N.  371 
Unknown  God,  to  the,  H.  378 
Unleavened  bread,  days  of,  H.  263 
Unrealised  aims,  H.  459 
Unreasonable  things,  H.  529 
Unrecorded  words  of  Jesus,  N.  441 
Unrighteous  world,  best  advocates  of  servant 

of  God  before  judgment-seat  of,  H.  488* 
Unsteadfast  in  the  Church,  example  to  the,* 

H.  430 
Unsuccessful  persecution,  a  case  of,  H.  392 
Upper  room,  N.  33 
Uproar  at  Ephesus,  H.  419 
Upside  down,  turning  world,  H.  363 
Utterances,  Spirit's,  how  the  world  receives 

the,  H.  56 

Vain  imaginings,  H.  110 

Veto,  world's,  upon  preaching,  H.  129 

Views  of  the  Ascension ;  or,  taken  up,  H.  29 


INDEX. 


Vindication  of  Christianity  ;  or,  the  apology 
of  Stephen,  H.  150 

Viper,  incident  of  the :  faith  and  superstition, 
H.  586 

Virgins  whieh  did  prophesy,  H.  449 

Visible  ascension,  H.  30 

Vision,  Cornelius's,  H.  228 
heavenly,  H.  544,  545 
midnight,  in  the  castle,  H.  488 
of  the  man  of  Macedonia,  H.  336 
Paul's  midnight,  at  Corinth,  H.  390 
Peter's,  on  the  housetop,  H.  234 

Visions  for  young  men,  H.  58 
of  Christ,  two,  H.  214 

Visitation,  first  Church,  H.  187 
pastoral,  H.  330 

Visitor,  Paul's  midnight,  H.  487,  488 

Vocation,  Christian's,  H.  27 

Voices  from  mouth  of  Christ,  H.  470 
of  the  prophets,  H.  292 

Vote  of  the  majority,  H.  562 

Vows  in  the  religious  life,  H.  398 

Voyage  of  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  H.  577, 
578 
of  life,  H.  566,  578 
*o  Italy,  Paul's,  H.  559 

Voyages,  dangerous,  H.  562 

Wages  of  sin ;  or,  the  miserable  end  of  Judas, 

H.  39 
Waiting-time,  H.  42 
Warning,  words  of,  for  Christian  ministers, 

H.  439 
Warnings,  Divine,  H.  252 
Washing  away  of  sin,  H.  471 
Way  into  the  kingdom,  H.  313 

no  small  stir  about  that,  H.  418 

of  salvation,  H.  353 

of  the  holy  cross,  H.  135 

of  the  Lord,  H.  400 

speaking  evil  of  the,  H.  408 

the,  H.  211 

to  the  inheritance,  H.  541 
"  We"  passages  in  Acts,  writer  of,  N.  342 
Weak  brethren,  concessions  to,  H.  455 

duty  of  the  strong  towards  the,  H.  441 
Wealth  and  poverty,  Church's,  H.  80 

consecration    of ;    or,    Joses    Barnabas, 
H.  116 

of  the  apostles ;  or,  Peter's  pence,  H.  80 

sermon  on,  H.  116 
Weariness  in  well-doing,  H.  290 
Week,  first  day  of  the,  H.  429 
Week-days  and  sabbath  days ;  or,  work  and 

worship,  H.  385 
Welcome   of   the   first  confessors ;    or,    the 
apostles   with    their    own    company, 
H.  108 
Well-doing,  weariness  in,  H.  290 
What  meaneth  this  ?  H.  56 

shall  I  do,  Lord  ?  H.  469 

we  do  with  these  men}?  H.  106 
Which  is  the  madman  ?  H.  550 
Whited  walls,  God's  judgment  on,  H.  484 
Whole  day's  preaching,  H.  600 
Why  stand  we  gazing  into  heaven  ?  H.  30 


Wickedness  in  high  places,  H.  516 
Wilderness,  Church  in,  a  type  of  Christian 
Church  on  earth,  H.  164 
tabernacle  of  testimony  in,  H.  165 
Will  of  the  Lord  be  done  1  H.  451 
Winds,  contrary,  H.  560 
Wisdom,  three  sorts  of  ;  or,  Elymas,  Sergius, 

Saul,  H.  285,  286 
Withstanding  God,  impossibility  of,  H.  253 
Witness,  God's,  of  Himself,  H.  311 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  H.  130 
of  the  second  psalm  to  Christ,  H.  292 
Witnesses,  ascending  Lord  and  His,  H.  34 

Christ's,  H.  26 
Wives,  husbands,  children,  H.  447 
Wolf  and  his  prey,  H.  180 
Wolves,  sheep  among  ;  or,  apostles  before 

Sanhedrim,  H.  99 
Women  in  the  Christian  Church,  place  of 

H.  449 
Wonder,  Pentecostal,  H.  51 
Wonderful  works  of  God,  H.  56 
Word  of  God,  H.  391 

growth  and  power  of,  H.  412 
hearing,  H.  409 
how  to  glorify  the,  H.  302 
Words  for  anxious  inquirers,  H.  72 
of  Jesus,  unrecorded,  N.  441 
of  salvation,  H.  252 
of  the  forty  days,  H.  22 
of  truth  and  soberness,  H.  550 
to  seekers  after  God,  H.  198 
Work    and    worship ;     or,    week-days    and 
sabbath  days,  H.  385 
Christian,  H.  82 
Works,  wonderful,  of  God,  H.  56 
worthy  of  repentance,  H.  547 
Worker,  heavenly,  H.  16 
Workers,  God's  hope  for  His,  H.  388 
World,  Egypt  a  type  of  the,  H.  158 

how  the,  receives  the  Spirit's  utterances, 

H.  56 
men   whom    the,    sometimes    seeks    to 

murder,  H.  547 
spiritual,  natural  selection  in,  H.  39 
turning,  upside  down,  H.  363 
World's  assize,  the,  H.  380 

misconceptions    about    Christianity,    H. 

523,  525 
misrepresentations  of  followers  of  Christ, 

H.  455 
somebodies,  the,  N.  133 
treason  against  its  King,  H.  110 
true  Prophet,  H.  90 
veto  upon  preaching,  H.  129 
Worship    and    work ;    or,    week-days    and 
sabbath  days,  H.  385 
Divine,  some  thoughts  about,  H.  503 
mistaken,  H.  238 
Worshippers  of  God,  ignorant,  H.  378 
Worst,  preparing  for  the,  H.  562 

Year  and  six  months  in  Corinth,  H.  386 

remarkable,  H.  260 
Years,  two  whole,  in  his  own  hired  house — 
what  then  ?  H.  602 

627 


INDEX. 


Young  man  Eutychus,  story  of  the,  H.  426, 
430 
named  Saul,  H.  171 
this,  H.  492 


Young  men,  visions  for,  H.  58 
Youth  of  Paul,  promising  but  disappointing, 
H.  465 
what  a,  may  be  and  do,  H.  492 


HOMILIES  FOR   SPECIAL  OCCASIONS. 


Church  Seasons:  Advent,  ch.  i.  11.  Christmas,  ch.  i.  1;  iii.  24;  26.  St.  Stephen's  Day, 
ch.  vi.  8 ;  vii.  1-53 ;  54-64 ;  60.  St.  Paul's  Day,  ch.  vii.  58 ;  ix.  1-9 ;  xxii.  1-5 ;  6-16. 
St.  Matthias'  Day,  ch.  i.  15-26;  23.  Good  Friday,  ch.  iii.  18;  iv.  11;  x.  39.  Easter, 
ch.  ii.  31 ;  xxv.  19 ;  xxvi.  8.  Great  Forty  Days,  ch.  i.  2-5 ;  3.  Ascension  Day,  ch.  i. 
6-11 ;  9  ;  9-11 ;  iv.  33.     Whit  Sunday,  ch.  ii.  1-4 ;  1 ;  3  ;  4 ;  5-13  ;  17,  18  ;  38 ;  v.  32. 

Missions  to  Heatlien  :  ch.  xiii.  1-3  ;  2,  3  ;  4-12  ;  xiv.  1-7  ;  26,  27  ;  xv.  3  ;  2'6  ;  xvi.  9  ;  13  ; 
xvii.  18;  22-34;  xviii.  10;  xix.  8-12;  23-41;  26;  xx.  1-6;  xxi.  17-20;  xxii.  23.  Bible 
Society,  ch.  viii.  28  ;  30;  xi.  16;  xvi.  1  ;  xvii.  11 ;  xviii.  11 ;  xxvi.  27. 

Evangelistic  Services :  ch.  ii.  37  ;  37-40  ;  iii.  19 ;  iv.  12  ;  viii.  9-13 ;  ix.  6 ;  xi.  14  ;  18  ;  xiii.  26  ; 
47;  xiv.  3  ;  27;  xvi.  19-34;  23-34  ;  30,  31 ;  xvii.  22;  27 ;  30;  xviii.  10;  xx.  24 ;  xxii.  10; 
xxiv.  24,  25;  25;  xxvi.  18;  22,  23;  28;  xxviii.  28. 

Special:  Ordination,  ch.  iii.  11-16 ;  iv.  8-12  ;  33;  v.  20;  vi.  1-7;  ix.  15,  16  ;  x.  29  ;  xiv.  21,  22; 
23  ;  xv.  3  ;  xviii.  11 ;  xix.  8-12  ;  xx.  17  ;  24  ;  xxii.  22  ;  xxvi.  16-18.  Workers,  ch.  iii.  1-7 ; 
iv.  13;  vi.  1-7;  xiv.  3;  23;  xv.  36-40;  xvii.  11;  xviii.  10;  xxii.  22.  Baptism,  ch.  x.  47, 
48  ;  xvi.  15  ;  xix.  3.  Confirmation,  ch.  viii.  14-17 ;  xiv.  22  ;  xix.  2.  To  aged,  ch.  xxi.  16. 
To  parents,  ch.  xxi.  5.  "Women,  ch.  xvi.  1;  14.  Young  men,  ch.  xxiii.  18;  xxvii.  44. 
Girls'  Friendly  Society,  ch.  xii.  13;  14.  Sailors,  ch.  xxvii.  15;  10-35;  15-20;  21-26; 
22  ;  29.  Christian  socialism,  ch.  ii.  44,  45 ;  iv.  32  ;  36,  37.  Death,  ch.  v.  5-10  (sudden)  ; 
xiii.  36.     Almsgiving,  ch.  iv.  36,  37 ;  xi.  29,  30. 


628 


3  1197  00275  0088 


DATE  DUE 

APR  2  4  WW 

1 

! 

.  .,._  .  ..„ 

