00 


00 


•  CD 


-co 


PRESENTED 

TO 

Wsclfffe  College, 

TORONTO, 

BY   JOHN    CHARLES    SHARPE, 
1911. 


LIBRARY 


0! 


TORONTO 


Shelf  No.. 
Register  No..  AA 


19 


PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN 


, 

PRINCIPLES  FOR 

CHURCHMEN 

A   MANUAL   OF    POSITIVE    STATEMENTS 
ON   SOME   SUBJECTS   OF   CONTROVERSY 


EXPLANATORY  INTRODUCTION  ON  THE  PRESSING  DANGERS 
WHICH  BESET  THE   CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND 


BY   THE   RIGHT   REV. 

BISHOP    RYLE,    D.D. 


AUTHOR  OF 

"EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS  ON  THE  GOSPELS"  "OLD  PATHS' 
"LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES"  ETC. 


fourth  (Ebititm, 

CONTAINING  THE  BISHOP'S  FAREWELL  LETTER  TO  THE 
DIOCESE  OF  LIVERPOOL 


LONDON 

CHAS.    J.    THYNNE 

WYCLIFFE   HOUSE,  6  GREAT   QUEEN   STREET 
LINCOLN'S    INN,  W.C. 

MAY    IQOO 


BISHOP  RYLE'S  FAREWELL  TO  HIS  DIOCESE. 


REVEREND  AND  DEAR  BRETHREN, — Almost  the  last  words  of  the 
great  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles  are  before  the  eyes  of  my  mind 
to-day :  "  I  have  finished  my  course ;  the  time  of  my  departure 
is  at  hand."  After  filling  unexpectedly  the  office  of  your  Bishop 
for  nearly  twenty  years,  I  am  about  to  resign  a  post  which  years 
and  failing  health  at  the  age  of  eighty-three  told  me  I  was  no 
longer  able  to  fill  with  advantage  to  the  diocese  or  to  the 
Church  of  England. 

I  have  resigned  my  Bishopric  with  many  humbled  feelings. 
As  I  look  back  over  the  years  of  my  episcopate,  I  am  conscious 
that  I  have  left  undone  many  things  which  I  hoped  to  have 
done  when  I  first  came  to  Liverpool.  I  am  equally  conscious 
that  the  many  things  I  have  had  to  do  with — meetings,  ordina 
tions,  confirmations,  and  consecrations — have  been  done  very 
imperfectly.  I  only  ask  you  to  remember  that  I  was  sixty-four, 
and  not  a  young  man,  when  I  first  came  here,  and  to  believe 
that,  amidst  many  difficulties,  I  have  tried  to  do  my  duty. 
But  I  am  thankful  that  our  God  is  a  merciful  God. 

I  can  truly  say  that  my  approaching  separation  from  Liver 
pool  will  be  a  heavy  wrench  to  me.  I  shall  never  forget  you. 
I  had  ventured  to  hope  that  I  might  be  allowed  to  end  my 
days  near  the  Mersey,  and  to  die  in  harness.  But  God's 
thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts,  and  He  has  gradually  taught 
me  by  failing  health  that  the  huge  population  of  this  diocese 
requires  a  younger  and  stronger  Bishop. 

Before  I  leave  you  I  ask  you  to  accept  a  few  parting  words 
from  an  old  minister  who  has  had  more  than  fifty-eight  years' 
experience,  and  during  that  time  has  seen  and  learned  many 

T 


vi          BISHOP  KYLE'S  FAREWELL  TO  HIS  DIOCESE. 

things.  It  is  written,  "Days  should  speak,  and  multitude  of 
years  should  teach  wisdom"  (Job  xxxii.  7).  Let  me,  then, 
charge  all  the  clergy  whom  I  am  about  to  leave  behind  me 
never  to  neglect  their  preaching.  Your  districts  and  population 
may  be  comparatively  small  or  large.  But  the  minds  of  your 
people  are  thoroughly  awake.  They  will  not  be  content  with 
dull,  tame  sermons.  They  want  life,  and  light,  and  fire,  and 
love  in  the  pulpit  as  well  as  in  the  parish.  Let  them  have 
plenty  of  it.  Never  forget  that  a  lively,  Christ-exalting 
minister  will  always  have  a  church-going  people. 

Last,  but  not  least,  cultivate  and  study  the  habit  of  being 
at  peace  with  all  your  brother  ministers.  Beware  of  divisions. 
One  thing  the  children  of  the  world  can  always  understand 
if  they  do  not  understand  doctrine.  That  thing  is  angry 
quarrelling  and  controversy.  Be  at  peace  among  yourselves. 

May  God  bless  you  all. 

To  the  many  lay  Churchmen  whom  I  shall  leave  behind  in 
this  diocese  (knowing  far  less  of  them  than  I  should  have  done 
if  I  had  come  among  them  a  younger  man),  I  can  only  send  my 
best  wishes,  and  add  my  prayers  that  this  diocese  may  have 
God's  blessing  both  in  temporal  and  spiritual  prosperity.  Cling 
to  the  old  Church  of  England,  my  lay  brethren,  cling  to  its 
Bible,  its  Prayer-book,  and  its  Articles.  Let  no  charitable 
institution  suffer.  Consider  the  many  poor  and  needy.  Support 
missionary  work  at  home  and  abroad.  Help  the  underpaid 
clergy.  Never  forget  that  the  principles  of  the  Protestant 
Eeformation  made  this  country  what  she  is,  and  let  nothing 
ever  tempt  you  to  forsake  them. 

In  a  little  time  we  shall  all  meet  again ;  many,  I  hope,  on 
the  King's  right  hand  and  few  on  the  left.  Till  that  time 
comes  I  commend  you  to  God  and  the  word  of  His  grace,  which 
is  able  to  build  you  up,  and  give  you  an  inheritance  among 
them  that  are  sanctified. — I  remain,  your  affectionate  Bishop 
and  lasting  friend, 

J.  C.  LIVERPOOL. 

THE  PALACE,  ABERCROMBY  SQUARE, 
February  1st,  1900. 


INTRODUCTION 

TO    THE   THIRD   EDITION. 


THE  volume  now  in  the  reader's  hands  requires  a  few 
pages  of  explanatory  introduction, 

It  consists  of  eighteen  papers,  on  subjects  of  deep 
interest  to  all  Churchmen  in  the  present  day.  About 
some  of  these  subjects  a  wave  of  most  unsatisfactory 
opinion  is  spreading  over  the  land.  About  all  of  them 
there  is  a  painful  amount  of  ignorance  and  uncertainty 
in  many  minds,  and  myriads  of  Churchmen  seem  unable 
to  say  what  they  think  and  what  they  believe.  On  each 
of  them  this  volume  will  be  found  to  contain  some  plain 
and  positive  statements,  based  on  Scripture  and  the 
authorized  formularies  of  the  Church  of  England. 

Three  of  these  eighteen  papers  have  already  ap 
peared  in  a  volume  which  I  published  some  years  ago, 
entitled  Knots  Untied.  The  papers  I  refer  to  are  those 
on  "  The  Church,"  "  Worship,"  and  "  Baptism."  Tor  re- 
introducing  them  in  the  present  volume  I  make  no 
apology.  They  are  subjects  which  could  not  be  well 
omitted  from  it,  without  making  the  work  incomplete 
as  a  systematic  manual  for  Churchmen  on  doubtful  or 
disputed  points. 

My  object  in  sending  forth  this  volume  at  the  present 
time  I  will  state  without  any  hesitation.  I  send  it  forth 
because  of  the  critical  position  in  which  the  Established 
Church  of  England  stands  in  consequence  of  her  "  unhappy 

yii 


Vlll  INTRODUCTION. 

divisions."  It  is  my  firm  conviction  that,  notwithstand 
ing  a  great  outward  show  of  zeal,  and  a  perfect  plethora 
of  ceremonial  machinery  and  talk,  our  good  old  Church  is 
"in  great  danger."  About  the  twofold  nature  of  that 
danger  I  wish  to  speak  very  plainly. 

I.  The  first  and  chief  part  of  the  danger  of  the  Church 
of  England  arises  from  the  continual  existence  among  us 
of  a  body  of  Churchmen  who  seem,  if  words  and  actions 
mean  anything,  determined  to  unprotestantize  the  Church  of 
England,  to  re-introduce  principles  and  practices  which  our 
forefathers  deliberately  rejected  three  centuries  ago,  and, 
in  one  word,  to  get  behind  the  Protestant  Eeformation. 
That  there  is  such  a  body  of  Churchmen, — that  hundreds 
of  them  from  time  to  time  have  shown  the  tendency  of 
their  views  by  secession  to  Eome, — that  for  many 
years  their  proceedings  have  called  forth  remonstrances 
and  warnings  from  most  of  our  bishops, — that  the  eyes 
of  all  Christendom  are  fixed  on  this  body,  and  men  are 
watching  and  wondering  whereunto  it  will  grow, — that 
Eomanists  rejoice  in  its  rise  and  progress,  and  all  true- 
hearted  Protestants  in  other  lands  grieve  and  mourn, — 
all  these,  I  say,  are  great  patent  facts,  which  it  is  waste  of 
time  to  prove,  because  they  cannot  be  denied. 

The  zeal,  earnestness,  and  self-denial  of  this  body  of 
Churchmen  I  do  not  for  a  moment  dispute.  But  I  cannot  at 
all  admit  that  they  have  any  monopoly  of  these  qualifications. 
Nor  can  I  admit  that  any  quantity  of  zeal  and  earnestness 
confers  a  licence  to  introduce  "  divers  and  strange  doc 
trines"  and  practices  into  our  parish  churches,  and  to 
overstep  the  limits  laid  down  in  the  authorized  formularies 
of  the  Church  of  England. 

But  the  point  to  which  I  want  to  direct  the  special 
attention  of  my  readers  is  this.  It  is  an  unhappy  fact 
that  the  chief  subject  of  contention  between  the  school 
to  which  I  have  referred  and  their  opponents,  has  been 


INTRODUCTION.  ix 

for  several  years  the  blessed  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's 
Supper.  Scores  of  clergymen  have  adopted  the  practice 
of  administering  the  Lord's  Supper  with  usages  which 
have  been  almost  entirely  laid  aside  for  300  years, — 
usages  to  all  appearance  borrowed  from  the  Church  of 
Rome, —  usages  which  even  Archbishop  Laud  in  the 
plenitude  of  his  power  never  dared  to  enforce, — 
usages  which,  to  the  vast  majority  of  thinking  men, 
seem  intended  to  bring  back  into  our  Church  that 
most  dangerous  of  all  Romish  doctrines,  the  sacrifice  of 
the  Mass. 

The  legality  of  these  new  usages  in  the  administration 
of  the  Lord's  Supper  has  been  made  the  subject  of  re 
peated  trials  before  the  highest  Law  Courts  of  this  realm. 
The  final  result  has  been  that  almost  all  have  been  pro 
nounced  distinctly  illegal,  and  that  every  clergyman  who 
persists  in  wearing  a  chasuble,  or  burning  incense,  or 
having  lighted  candles  on  the  Communion  table,  or 
mixing  water  with  the  sacramental  wine,  or  elevating 
and  adoring  the  consecrated  elements,  is  doing  that  which 
contravenes  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England,  is 
putting  a  sense  on  the  "  Ornaments  Eubric  "  which  the 
highest  Courts  of  the  realm  distinctly  condemn,  and 
therefore  is  breaking  the  law. 

But  now  comes  a  miserable  fact,  which  constitutes 
the  present  greatest  danger  of  the  Church  of  England. 
Some  of  those  clergymen  who  have  adopted  these  novel 
usages  in  the  Lord's  Supper  refuse  to  pay  the  slightest 
attention  to  the  judgments  of  the  Law  Courts,  or  to 
the  admonitions  of  their  bishops.  In  the  face  of  the 
contemporanea  expositio  of  three  centuries,  which  cer 
tainly  confirms  the  interpretation  of  the  Ornaments 
Rubric  given  by  the  Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy 
Council, — in  the  face  of  the  utter  absence  of  anything  in 
our  Communion  Office  to  confirm  their  novel  views, — in 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

the  face  of  their  own  solemn  vow  and  promise  to  obey 
their  bishop, — they  persist  in  their  own  way  of  admini 
stering  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  for  the  sake  of  things 
which  they  themselves  must  allow  are  not  essential  to  it, 
they  seem  prepared  to  rend  in  pieces  the  Church  of  Eng 
land.  And  in  all  this,  worst  of  all,  they  are  aided, 
backed,  countenanced,  and  supported  by  hundreds  of 
clergymen  who  never  dream  of  breaking  the  law  them 
selves,  but  seem  to  regard  these  law-breaking  brethren  as 
martyrs,  and  as  excellent,  worthy,  and  persecuted  men, 
who  ought  to  be  let  alone!  If  all  this  does  not  con 
stitute  a  most  dangerous  state  of  things,  I  know  not 
what  is  danger  to  a  Church.  Without  some  change  I 
am  convinced  it  will  sooner  or  later  be  the  ruin  of  the 
Established  Church  of  England. 

I  hear  so  many  foolish  and  unreasonable  things  said 
about  the  perilous  position  of  matters,  which  I  have  tried 
to  describe,  that  I  think  it  my  duty  to  offer  a  few  remarks 
to  all  men  of  practical  common  sense,  which  may  serve  to 
clear  the  air,  and  be  useful  to  some. 

(a)  I  sometimes  hear  it  said  that  the  ecclesiastical 
lawsuits  of  recent  times  about  the  Lord's  Supper  ought 
never  to  have  been  instituted, — that  law-breaking  clergy 
men  might  easily  have  been  kept  in  order  by  their 
bishops, — and  that  those  who  instituted  legal  proceed 
ings  were  "  persecutors "  and  troublers  of  Israel.  How 
the  law  could  be  ascertained  without  a  carefully-pre 
pared  argument  before  competent  judges  I  fail  to  see. 
What  likelihood  there  was  of  modern  law-breakers  pay 
ing  any  attention  to  Episcopal  admonitions  I  leave  all 
calm  observers  to  consider.  But  as  to  the  hard  names 
and  bitter  epithets  heaped  on  prosecutors,  I  regard  them 
with  sorrow  as  unworthy  of  the  lips  from  which  they 
come.  Englishmen,  who  remember  that  the  true  doc 
trine  of  the  Lord's  Supper  was  the  very  point  for  which 


INTRODUCTION.  XI 

the  Marian  martyrs  went  to  the  stake,  ought  surely  not 
to  be  surprised  if  many  people  are  extremely  sensitive 
about  the  least  attempt  to  bring  back  the  Eomish  Mass. 
I  for  one  do  not  wonder.  Thousands  of  people,  I  believe, 
would  put  up  with  many  ceremonial  novelties  who  would 
resist  to  the  uttermost  any  innovations  in  the  Lord's 
Supper.  The  words  of  Bishop  Thirlwall  in  his  last 
Charge  are  worth  remembering :  — "  The  persons  who 
instituted  these  proceedings,  though  to  their  adversaries 
they  might  appear  persecutors,  could  not  but  look  on 
themselves  as  simply  acting  on  the  defensive,  in  resistance 
to  an  unprovoked  and  unlawful  aggression,  and  for  the 
purpose  of  resisting  what  to  them  seemed  a  tremendous 
evil."  (Thirlwall's  Eemains,  vol.  ii.  306.)  It  is  easy 
and  cheap  work  to  call  names,  and  revile  opponents  as 
"  persecutors."  But  the  plain  truth  is,  that  those  who 
break  the  law  and  refuse  to  obey  their  bishop  are  the  real 
persecutors  of  the  Church. 

(6)  I  have  heard  it  said  frequently  that  the  interpre 
tation  of  the  famous  Ornaments  Eubric,  laid  down  after 
careful  and  deliberate  inquiry  by  the  Judicial  Committee 
of  the  Privy  Council,  is  altogether  incorrect,  and  therefore 
ought  not  to  be  obeyed.  I  have  even  heard  it  said  that 
their  last  decision  (I  refer  to  the  Kidsdale  case)  was  one 
"  of  policy,  and  not  of  justice."  I  hear  such  sayings  with 
considerable  indifference,  and  call  to  mind  the  old  adage, 
that  "  Defeated  litigants  always  blame  the  Court  in  which 
they  fail."  But  broad  assertions  are  not  arguments.  It  is 
easy  for  some  angry  divines  to  say  superciliously  that  lead 
ing  English  lawyers,  of  proved  intellectual  vigour  and  long 
experience,  are  incompetent  to  handle  ecclesiastical  sub 
jects,  to  analyze  the  language  of  documents,  and  weigh  the 
meaning  of  words  in  formularies,  and  that  they  know 
nothing  about  rubrics  and  Church  history,  and  cannot 
grasp  such  matters.  But  who,  I  should  like  to  know,  will 


XU  INTRODUCTION, 

believe  all  this  ?  The  immense  majority  of  thinking  men 
in  the  House  of  Lords  or  the  House  of  Commons, — in  the 
Temple  or  Lincoln's  Inn, — in  the  City  or  the  West  End, 
— in  Oxford  or  Cambridge, — in  Liverpool,  Manchester, 
Leeds,  Birmingham,  Sheffield,  Nottingham,  or  Bristol, 
will  never  believe  it  for  a  moment,  and  will  think 
poorly  of  the  sense  of  those  who  say  such  things.  As  for 
the  unworthy  insinuation  that  eminent  English  judges  of 
spotless  character  would  ever  stain  their  judicial  ermine 
by  deciding  ecclesiastical  questions  in  a  party  spirit,  from 
reasons  of  "  policy  rather  than  justice,"  and  from  impure 
motives,  I  will  not  condescend  to  notice  it.  I  pity  alike 
the  men  who  can  make  such  insinuations,  and  the  men 
who  can  believe  them. 

(c)  I  hear  it  said  sometimes,  that  spiritual  questions 
ought  to  be  left  to  spiritual  men,  and  that  a  Court  com 
posed  mainly  of  laymen,  like  the  Judicial  Committee,  is 
incompetent  to  try  theological  cases.  This  at  first  sight 
appears  a  very  plausible  idea ;  but  I  do  not  think  it  will 
bear  the  test  of  calm  consideration.  No  doubt  the  pre 
sent  Court  of  Final  Appeal,  like  every  Judicial  Court 
composed  of  men,  may  have  its  faults  and  imperfections, 
and  the  Eoyal  Commission  on  Ecclesiastical  Courts  may 
possibly  have  suggested  some  improvements.  But  if  the 
Judicial  Committee  of  Privy  Council  is  to  be  set  aside  in 
ecclesiastical  cases,  and  a  so-called  spiritual  Court  set  up 
in  its  stead,  I  doubt  extremely  whether  a  better  Court, 
and  one  which  will  satisfy  the  laity,  can  possibly  be  con 
structed.  It  is  easy  to  find  fault  with  an  institution  and 
pull  it  down,  but  it  is  not  always  so  easy  to  build  a  better. 
Where  are  the  constituent  parts  to  come  from?  Who  are 
to  be  the  new  and  improved  judges?  I  declare  I  look 
over  the  land  from  north  to  south,  and  from  east  to  west, 
and  I  fail  to  discover  the  materials  out  of  which  your 
"  readjusted  "  Court  of  Appeal  is  to  be  composed.  There 


INTRODUCTION.  xill 

may  be  hidden  Daniels  ready  to  come  to  the  judgment- 
seat,  of  whom  I  know  nothing.  But  I  should  be  glad  to 
know  who  they  are. 

Shall  we  ask  the  State  to  sweep  away  the  present 
Court  of  Appeal,  and  compose  one  of  bishops  only  ? 
I  am  afraid  such  a  Court  would  never  give  satisfaction. 
If  there  is  any  one  point  on  which  the  Guardian  and 
the  Record,  the  Church  Times,  the  Bock,  and  the  English 
Churchman  are  entirely  agreed,  it  is  the  fallibility  of 
bishops  !  Each  of  these  papers  would  tell  us  that  several 
English  prelates  are  anything  but  wise  and  orthodox,  and 
are  not  trustworthy  judges  of  disputed  questions.  But  if 
this  is  the  case,  what  likelihood  is  there  that  the  whole 
Church  would  be  satisfied  with  their  judicial  decisions  ? 
Last,  but  worst  of  all,  the  private  opinions  of  almost  all 
English  bishops  are  so  well  known  that  they  are  not  fit 
to  be  judges  of  disputed  ecclesiastical  questions.  Their 
decisions  would  be  foregone  conclusions. 

Shall  we  turn  away  from  the  bishops,  and  compose  the 
new  Court  of  Appeal  of  deans,  University  professors,  and 
select  eminent  theologians,  picked  out  of  Convocation  ? 
Again  the  same  objection  applies.  He  that  can  run  his 
eye  over  the  list  of  English  deans,  or  the  professorial 
staff  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  and  then  talk  of  forming 
out  of  that  list  an  unexceptionable  tribunal,  acceptable  to 
all  parties,  must  be  a  man  of  faith  bordering  on  credulity. 
As  to  the  "  select  eminent  theologians,"  I  have  yet  to 
know  who  is  to  have  the  selection.  The  very  divines 
whom  one  school  of  Churchmen  would  choose,  are  men 
whom  another  school  would  not  allow  to  be  sound 
"  theologians  "  at  all. 

The  fact  is,  that  the  favourite  theory  of  those  who 
would  refer  all  ecclesiastical  causes  to  clerical  judges,  is 
a  theory  which  will  never  work.  It  sounds  plausible  at 
first,  and  looks  well  at  a  distance,  but  it  is  utterly 


xiv  INTRODUCTION. 

unpractical.  Laymen,  and  legal  laymen,  trained  and 
accustomed  to  look  at  all  sides  of  a  question,  are  the  only 
material  out  of  which  a  satisfactory  Court  of  Appeal  can 
be  formed.  Ecclesiastics,  as  a  rule,  are  unfit  to  be  judges. 
We  do  not  shine  on  the  bench,  whatever  we  may  do  in  the 
pulpit.  If  there  is  one  thing  that  bishops  and  presbyters 
rarely  possess,  it  is  the  judicial  mind,  and  the  power  of 
giving  an  impartial,  unbiassed  decision.1 

(d)  I  have  heard  it  said  sometimes,  that  the  matters 
for  which  the  recent  objectors  to  decisions  about  the 
Ornaments  Eubric  contend  are  mere  matters  of  taste. 
The  whole  question,  forsooth,  is  one  of  aestheticism  and 
ornamentation !  Why  wrangle  and  quarrel,  some  say, 
about  such  trifles  ?  I  wish  I  could  believe  this  view. 
Unhappily  there  is  strong  testimony  the  other  way. 
With  the  party  of  whom  I  am  now  speaking,  the  whole 
value  of  ceremonial  consists  in  its  significance  as  a 
visible  symbol  of  doctrine.  The  evidence  of  leading 
men  before  the  Eitual  Commission,  the  language  con 
tinually  used  in  certain  books  and  manuals  about  the 

1  "The  composition  of  a  purely  ecclesiastical  tribunal  to  be  substituted 
for  the  present  *  Court  of  Appeal '  in  cases  of  heresy,  is  a  problem  beset 
with  such  complicated  difficulties,  as  to  render  it  almost  hopeless  that  any 
scheme  will  ever  be  derived  for  its  solution,  which  would  give  general 
satisfaction  :  even  if  there  were  not  so  many  who  would  reject  it  for  the 
very  reason  that  it  appears  to  recognise  a  principle — the  mystical  prero 
gative  of  the  clergy — which  they  reject  as  groundless  and  mischievous. " 
(Bishop  Thirlwall's  Remains,  vol.  ii.  p.  135.) 

"  That  the  members  of  the  Judicial  Committee  would  ever  consent,  or 
be  permitted,  to  renounce  their  supreme  jurisdiction,  and  exchange  their 
judicial  functions  in  this  behalf,  for  a  purely  ministerial  agency  by 
which  they  will  have  passively  to  accept,  and  simply  to  carry  into  effect, 
the  decision  of  a  clerical  council,— this  is  something  which  I  believe  is  no 
longer  imagined  to  be  possible,  even  by  the  most  ardent  and  sanguine 
advocate  of  what  he  calls  the  inalienable  rights  of  the  clergy,  so  long  as 
the  Church  remains  in  union  with  the  State  on  the  present  terms  of  the 
alliance.  But  if  they  do  not  take  up  this  subordinate  position,  the  prin 
ciple  of  the  ecclesiastical  prerogative  in  matter  of  doctrine,  which  to  those 
who  maintain  it  is  probably  more  precious  than  any  particular  application 
of  it,  is  abandoned  and  lost.  The  Church  will,  in  their  language,  continue 
to  groan  in  galling  fetters,  and  an  ignominious  bondage."  (Bishop 
Thirlwall's  Remains,  vol.  ii.  p.  137.) 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 

Lord's  Supper,  all  tend  to  show  that  the  question  in 
dispute  is,  whether  in  the  sacrament  there  is  a  propi 
tiatory  sacrifice  as  well  as  a  sacrifice  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving,  and  whether  there  is  a  real  presence  beside 
that  in  the  hearts  of  believers.  These  are  not  trifles, 
but  serious  doctrinal  errors,  and  points  on  which  I  am 
persuaded  the  bulk  of  English  Churchmen  will  never 
tolerate  the  least  approach  to  the  Church  of  Eome.  To 
use  the  words  of  the  late  Bishop  Thirlwall,  "The  real 
question  is,  whether  our  Communion  Office  is  to  be 
transformed  into  the  closest  possible  resemblance  to  the 
Eomish  Mass."  (Thirlwall's  Eemains,  vol.  ii.  p.  233.)1 

(e)  Last,  but  not  least,  I  hear  it  sometimes  said,  that 
obedience  to  rubrics  ought  to  be  enforced  all  round,  and 
that  it  is  not  fair  to  require  one  clergyman  to  obey  the 
Ornaments  Kubric  as  interpreted  by  the  Privy  Council, 
while  another  clergyman  is  allowed  to  neglect  another 
rubric  altogether.  This  is  a  favourite  argument  in  many 
quarters,  but  I  am  unable  to  see  any  force  in  it.  In 
matters  like  these  there  is  no  parallelism  whatever 
between  acts  of  omission  and  acts  of  addition.  To 
place  on  the  same  level  the  conduct  of  the  man  who, 
in  administering  the  Lord's  Supper,  introduces  novelties 
of  most  serious  doctrinal  significance,  and  the  conduct 
of  the  man  who  does  not  observe  some  petty  obsolete 
direction,  of  no  doctrinal  significance  at  all,  is  to  my 
mind  contrary  to  common  sense.  But,  after  all,  complete 


1  The  following  evidence  was  deliberately  given  by  that  well-known 
clergyman,  the  Rev.  "W.  J.  E.  Bennett,  vicar  of  Frome,  before  the  Royal 
Commission  on  Ritual : — 

" 2606.  '  Is  any  doctrine  involved  in  your  using  the  chasuble ? '  'I 
think  there  is. ' 

"2607.     '  What  is  that  doctrine  ?'     '  The  doctrine  of  the  sacrifice.' 

"  2608.  '  Do  you  consider  yourself  a  sacrificing  priest  ? '  '  Distinctly 
so.' 

"  2611.  '  Then  you  think  you  offer  a  propitiatory  sacrifice  ? '  '  Yes,  I 
think  I  do  offer  a  propitiatory  sacrifice. '  " 


XVi  INTRODUCTION. 

and  perfect  obedience  to  all  the  rubrics  is  simply  impos 
sible,  and  I  do  not  suppose  there  is  a  single  clergyman 
in  England  who  observes  all.  The  three  first  rubrics  in 
the  Communion  Service  are  illustrations  of  what  I  mean. 
Moreover,  the  change  of  laws  and  customs,  and  the 
large  liberty  now  allowed  to  a  clergyman,  have  rendered 
some  ancient  rubrical  requirements  obsolete  and  inex 
pedient.  A  certain  discretion  must  be  allowed  to  a 
bishop  in  the  nineteenth  century  in  deciding  what 
rubrics  the  circumstances  of  the  Church  require  to  be 
observed.  If  I  ask  one  clergyman  to  obey  the  ruling 
of  the  Privy  Council  about  the  Ornaments  Eubric,  and 
to  discontinue  the  use  of  the  chasuble,  the  incense,  the 
lighted  candles,  and  the  like,  I  do  so  because  of  the 
immense  importance  of  maintaining  Protestant  views  of 
the  Lord's  Supper,  and  the  deep  jealousy  which  prevails 
among  the  laity  about  the  appearance  of  anything  like 
the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass. — If  I  decline  to  ask  another 
clergyman  to  have  daily  matins,  and  vespers,  and  saints' 
day  services,  in  some  huge,  overgrown,  poor  parish,  in 
a  mining  district,  or  at  the  north  or  south  ends  of 
Liverpool,  where  ninety-nine  out  of  a  hundred  of  his 
parishioners  cannot  possibly  attend  such  services,  I  decline, 
because  I  think  his  time,  in  the  short  twelve  hours  of 
the  day,  might  be  far  better  employed.  He  can  spend 
his  day  more  usefully,  in  going  from  house  to  house 
among  his  people,  than  by  reading  prayers  in  an  empty 
church.  He  can  do  far  more  good  by  doing  things 
which  were  flatly  forbidden  240  years  ago  (when  our 
rubrics  were  last  settled), — by  non-liturgical  services  in 
unconsecrated  rooms,  by  Cottage  Lectures,  by  Bible 
Classes,  by  Young  Men's  Meetings,  by  Mothers'  Meetings, 
by  Temperance  Meetings,  by  Prayer  Meetings,  and  other 
well-known  modern  means  of  usefulness.  And  when 
men  tell  me  that  my  balances  are  unjust,  and  that  it  is 


INTRODUCTION".  XV11 

not  fair  to  interfere  with  the  one  clergyman  and  to  leave 
the  other  clergyman  alone,  I  hear  the  accusation  with 
indifference.  I  believe  I  am  doing  that  which  is  best 
for  the  Church  of  England,  and  most  likely  to  advance 
her  interests. 

I  leave  this  weary  subject  here.  For  dwelling  on  it 
at  such  length,  and  trying  to  discuss  it  from  every  point 
of  view,  I  make  no  apology.  The  position  of  the  Church 
is  so  critical,  and  the  danger  so  great,  that  a  bishop  has 
no  right  to  hold  his  peace.  Without  some  change  of 
weather,  or  change  in  men's  minds,  or  change  in  the 
management  of  the  ship,  I  see  nothing  before  us  but 
disaster  and  damage  to  the  Church  of  England. 

What  the  end  of  the  present  distressing  strife  is  likely 
to  be,  it  is  impossible  to  say.  There  is  not  the  slightest 
sign  of  abatement  in  the  activity  of  extreme  Eitualists. 
Every  year  they  seem  to  act  more  boldly,  and  to  be  more 
insatiable  in  their  demands.  The  fierce,  violent,  and 
intolerant  tone  of  their  advocates  on  Congress  platforms, 
— their  openly  avowed  desire  to  get  behind  the  Eliza 
bethan  Reformation,  and  to  restore  the  first  prayer- 
book  of  Edward  VI.  to  public  use, — their  contemptuous 
refusal  to  exhibit  the  slightest  sympathy  with  the  recent 
Luther  Commemoration, — their  habitual  disobedience  to 
legal  decisions  and  Episcopal  admonitions, — all  these  are 
painful  symptoms  which  he  who  runs  may  read.  They 
are  symptoms  which  almost  justify  the  suspicion  that  the 
ultimate  design  of  extreme  Eitualists  is  to  procure 
the  repeal  of  the  Gorham  decision,  and  all  the  Privy 
Council  judgments  which  have  gone  against  them, — to 
turn  the  evangelical  clergy  out  of  the  Church  of  England, 
— to  bring  back  and  legalize  Mass  in  our  Communion, 
— to  cancel  the  Act  of  Settlement  which  requires  our 
Sovereigns  to  be  Protestants, — and  finally,  to  bring  about 
reunion  between  the  Anglican  Church  and  the  Church 

b 


to 
ut 

„ 


XVU1  INTRODUCTION. 

Eome.  That  such  are  the  latent  intentions  of  the  extreme 
Ritualists,  is  the  firm  conviction  of  not  a  few  quiet 
observers  of  the  times.  Whether  their  suspicions  are 
correct  or  not,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say.  But  I  must 
say  that  it  does  not  surprise  me  that  such  suspicions 
exist.1 

For  my  own  part  I  do  not  wish  to  be  a  black  prophet. 
I  have  great  faith  in  our  Church's  tenacity  of  life.  She 
survived  the  temporary  suppression  of  Protestantism  in 
the  reign  of  Bloody  Mary.  She  survived  the  overthrow 
of  Episcopacy  and  the  proscription  of  the  Liturgy  in  the 
days  of  the  Commonwealth.  She  survived  the  expulsion 
of  2000  most  able  clergymen  in  1662  by  the  Act  of 
Uniformity.  She  survived  the  secession  of  the  non- 
jurors,  when  William  III.  came  to  the  throne.  She 
survived  the  loss  of  the  Methodist  body  in  the  last 
century.  She  has  survived  the  departure  to  their  own 
place  of  Manning,  Newman,  Oakley,  Faber,  the  two 
Wilberforces,  and  many  others  in  our  own  day.  If  she 

1  The  following  extract  from  the  Scotch  Free  Church  Magazine  for 
April  1884  is  worth  reading.  It  is  a  common  saying  that  lookers-on 
sometimes  see  most  of  the  game  : — 

"That  Romanism  is  spreading  in  England  is  notorious  ;  and  to  us  it 
seems  little  less  than  treason  in  those  who  think  the  Mass  idolatrous  to 
consent  on  any  terms  to  be  silent.  Says  the  Church  Review: — 'The 
thing  which  English  Catholics  have  in  hand  at  present,  and  are  likely  to 
have  in  hand,  as  their  principal  work,  for  at  least  one  generation  to  come, 
is  the  restoration  of  the  altar,  the  re-establishment  of  the  Mass  in  its  seat 
of  honour,  as  tJie  sun  and  centre  of  Christian  worship.  Till  this  great 
work  has  progressed  much  further  than  it  has  at  present,  it  would  be 
waste  of  time  to  emphasize  too  strongly  doctrines  of  great  importance 
indeed,  but  of  less  importance  than  that  of  the  Eucharistic  sacrifice.  But 
unless  the  Catholic  revival  is  to  come  to  an  untimely  end — a  catastrophe 
which  there  is  no  reason  faithlessly  to  anticipate — the  future  will  see  in 
our  restored  public  worship  unmistakable  marks  of  the  belief  of  the 
Christian  Church  in  the  efficacy  of  the  intercessions  poured  forth  by 
blessed  Mary  and  all  saints  at  the  throne  of  grace,  and  of  our  real 
communion  (that  is,  mutual  union)  with  them  in  the  acts  which  we 
perform  as  members  of  the  one  body  of  Christ. ' " 


INTRODUCTION,  xil 

is  faithful  to  Protestant  principles,  I  believe  she  would 
survive  the  secession  of  the  whole  "  English  Church 
Union,"  if  they  left  us  next  year !  But  I  cannot  bring 
myself  to  believe  yet  that  the  great  majority  of  the 
members  of  that  body  would  actually  leave  the  Church 
of  their  forefathers,  on  account  of  things  which  they 
themselves  must  allow  are  not  essential  to  the  Lord's 
Supper.  Many  of  them,  I  suspect,  are  utterly  blind  to 
the  logical  consequences  of  their  movement.  Like  the 
followers  of  Absalom,  they  have  joined  it  "in  their 
simplicity,  and  know  not  anything."  But  while  I  shrink 
from  imputing  treachery  and  disloyalty  to  the  leaders  of 
extreme  Eitualism,  I  shall  never  shrink  from  declaring 
my  conviction  that  their  movement  endangers  the  life  of 
the  Established  Church  of  England. 

II.  The  other  pressing  danger  of  the  Church  of 
England  which  induces  me  to  send  forth  this  volume 
is  one  of  a  very  different  kind.  It  consists  in  the  rise 
and  progress  of  a  spirit  of  indifference  to  all  doctrines  and 
opinions  in  religion. 

A  wave  of  colour-blindness  about  theology  appears 
to  be  passing  over  the  land.  The  minds  of  many  seem 
utterly  incapable  of  discerning  any  difference  between 
faith  and  faith,  creed  and  creed,  tenet  and  tenet,  opinion 
and  opinion,  thought  and  thought,  however  diverse, 
heterogeneous,  contrariant,  and  mutually  destructive 
they  may  be.  Everything,  forsooth,  is  true,  and  nothing 
is  false,  everything  is  right  and  nothing  is  wrong,  every 
thing  is  good  and  nothing  is  bad,  if  it  approaches  us 
under  the  garb  and  name  of  religion.  You  are  not  i 
allowed  to  ask  what  is  God's  truth,  but  what  is  liberal, 
and  generous,  and  kind. 

(a)  We  may  see  the  danger  in  the  vastly  altered  tone  of 
public  feeling  about  Romanism  which  has  appeared  in 


XX  INTRODUCTION. 

the  last  forty  years.  There  is  no  longer  that  general 
dislike  and  aversion  to  Popery  which  was  once  almost 
universal  in  this  realm.  The  edge  of  the  old  British 
feeling  about  Protestantism  seems  blunted  and  dull. 
Some  profess  to  be  tired  of  all  religious  controversy,  and 
are  ready  to  sacrifice  God's  truth  for  the  sake  of  peace. — 
Some  look  on  Eomanism  as  simply  one  among  many 
English  forms  of  religion,  and  neither  worse  nor  better 
than  others. — Some  try  to  persuade  us  that  Romanism 
is  changed,  and  not  nearly  so  bad  as  it  used  to  be. — 
Some  boldly  point  to  the  faults  of  Protestants,  and  loudly 
cry  that  Eomanists  are  quite  as  good  as  ourselves. — Some 
think  it  fine  and  liberal  to  maintain  that  we  have  no 

\  right  to  think  any  one  wrong  who  is  in  earnest  about  his 
creed. — And  yet  the  two  great  historical  facts,  (a)  that 
ignorance,  immorality,  and  superstition  reigned  supreme 
in  England  400  years  ago  under  Popery,  (b)  that  the 
Eeformation  was  the  greatest  blessing  God  ever  gave  to 
this  land, — both  these  are  facts  which  no  one  but  a 
Papist  ever  thought  of  disputing  fifty  years  ago !  In  the 
present  day,  alas,  it  is  convenient  and  fashionable  to 

-  forget  them !  No  doubt  this  altered  tone  of  public 
feeling  has  been  furthered  immensely  by  the  proceedings 
of  the  extreme  Ritualistic  party  in  the  Church  of  England. 
That  energetic  and  active  body  has  been  vilifying  the  Re 
formation,  and  sneering  at  Protestantism,  for  many  years, 
with  only  too  much  success.  It  has  corrupted,  leavened, 
blinded,  and  poisoned  the  minds  of  many  Churchmen,  by 
incessant  misrepresentation.  It  has  gradually  familiarized 
people  with  every  distinctive  doctrine  and  practice  of 
Romanism, — the  real  presence, — the  mass, — auricular 
confession  and  priestly  absolution, — the  sacerdotal  charac 
ter  of  the  ministry,  —  the  monastic  system, —  and  a 
histrionic,  sensuous,  showy  style  of  public  worship ; — and 
the  natural  result  is,  that  many  simple  people  see  no 


INTRODUCTION.  XXI 

mighty  difference  between  the  Church  of  England  and 
the  Church  of  Eome.  Besides  this,  the  spurious  liberality 
of  the  day  we  live  in  helps  on  the  reaction  of  feeling. 
It  is  fashionable  now  to  say  that  all  sects  should  be 
equal, — that  the  State  should  have  nothing  to  do  with 
religion, — that  all  creeds  should  be  regarded  with  equal 
favour  and  respect, — and  that  there  is  a  substratum  of 
common  truth  at  the  bottom  of  all  religions,  whether 
Buddhism,  Mohammedanism,  or  Christianity  !  The  conse 
quence  is,  that  myriads  of  ignorant  folks  begin  to  think 
there  is  nothing  peculiarly  dangerous  in  the  tenets  of 
Papists  any  more  than  in  the  tenets  of  Methodists, 
Independents,  Presbyterians,  or  Baptists, — and  that  we 
ought  to  let  Eomanism  alone,  and  never  expose  its 
unscriptural  character.  One  thing  at  any  rate  is  patent 
and  obvious  to  every  observing  eye.  Whatever  the 
cause  may  be,  public  feeling  in  England  is  strangely 
altered  about  the  Church  of  Eome. 

(6)  We  may  see  the  danger  again  in  the  widely-spread 
disposition  to  make  cleverness  and  earnestness  the  only 
tests  of  orthodoxy  in  religion.  Thousands  of  professing 
Christians  nowadays  seem  utterly  unable  to  distinguish 
things  that  differ.  If  a  preacher  or  lecturer  is  only 
clever  and  eloquent  and  earnest,  they  appear  to  think  he 
is  all  right,  however  strange  and  heterogeneous  his 
sermons  or  lectures  may  be.  Popery  or  Protestantism, 
an  atonement  or  no  atonement,  a  personal  Holy  Ghost  or 
no  Holy  Ghost,  future  punishment  or  no  future  punish 
ment,  High  Church  or  Low  Church  or  Broad  Church, 
Trinitarianism,  Arianism,  or  Unitarianism,  nothing  comes 
amiss  to  them, — they  can  swallow  all,  if  they  cannot 
digest  it!  Carried  away  by  a  fancied  liberality  and 
charity,  they  seem  to  regard  doctrine  as  a  matter  of  no 
importance,  and  to  think  everybody  is  going  to  be  saved 
and  nobody  going  to  be  lost.  Their  religion  is  made  up 


XX11  INTRODUCTION. 

of  negatives ;  and  the  only  positive  thing  about  them  is; 
that  they  dislike  distinctness,  and  think  all  extreme  and 
decided  and  positive  views  are  very  naughty  and  very 
wrong! 

These  people  live  in  a  kind  of  mist  or  fog.  They  see 
nothing  clearly,  and  do  not  know  what  they  believe. 
They  have  not  made  up  their  minds  about  any  great 
point  in  the  Gospel,  and  seem  content  to  be  honorary 
members  of  all  schools  of  thought.  For  their  lives  they 
could  not  tell  you  what  they  think  is  truth  about  for 
giveness  of  sins,  or  justification,  or  regeneration,  or  sancti- 
fication,  or  the  Lord's  Supper,  or  baptism,  or  faith,  or 
conversion,  or  inspiration,  or  the  future  state.  They  are 
eaten  up  with  a  morbid  dread  of  CONTROVERSY  and  an 
ignorant  dislike  of  PARTY  SPIRIT,  and  yet  they  really 
cannot  define  what  they  mean  by  these  phrases.  The 
only  point  you  can  make  out  is  that  they  admire  earnest 
ness  and  cleverness  and  charity,  and  cannot  believe  that 
any  clever,  earnest,  charitable  man  can  ever  be  in  the 
wrong !  And  so  they  live  on  undecided,  and  too  often 
undecided  they  drift  down  to  the  grave,  without  comfort 
in  their  religion,  and,  I  am  afraid,  often  without  hope. 

The  explanation  of  this  boneless,  nerveless  condition  of 
soul  is  perhaps  not  difficult  to  find.  The  heart  of  man 
is  naturally  in  the  dark  about  religion, — has  no  intuitive 
sense  of  truth, — and  really  NEEDS  instruction  and  illumi 
nation.  Besides  this,  the  natural  heart  in  most  men 
hates  exertion  in  religion,  and  cordially  dislikes  patient 
painstaking  inquiry.  Above  all,  the  natural  heart  gene 
rally  likes  the  praise  of  others,  shrinks  from  collision,  and 
loves  to  be  thought  charitable  and  liberal.  The  whole 
result  is  that  a  kind  of  broad  religious  "  agnosticism  " 
just  suits  an  immense  number  of  people,  and  specially 
suits  young  persons.  They  are  content  to  shovel  aside 
all  disputed  points  as  rubbish,  and  if  you  charge  them 


INTRODUCTION.  xxiii 

with  indecision,  they  will  tell  you, — "  I  do  not  pretend 
to  understand  controversy ;  I  decline  to  examine  contro 
verted  points.  I  daresay  it  is  all  the  same  in  the  long 
run." — Who  does  not  know  that  such  people  swarm  and 
abound  everywhere  ?  And  who  does  not  know  that  any 
one  who  denounces  this  state  of  things,  and  insists  that 
a  clergyman  should  be  loyal  to  the  articles  of  his  Church, 
is  regarded  as  a  narrow,  party-spirited,  ungenerous  person, 
quite  unsuited  to  the  nineteenth  century  ? 

(c)  "We  may  see  the  danger,  lastly,  in  the  demand  which 
many  are  loudly  making  for  the  adoption  of  a  general 
policy  of  toleration  and  forbearance  within  the  pale  of 
the  Church  of  England.  Such  a  policy,  we  are  gravely 
told,  is  the  true  remedy  for  "  the  present  distress."  Every 
clergyman  is  to  be  allowed  to  hold  and  teach  and  do  what 
he  likes.  No  one  is  ever  to  be  called  to  account  either 
for  his  ceremonial  actions  at  the  Lord's  table  or  his 
sermons  in  the  pulpit.  Every  school  of  thought,  however 
extreme,  is  to  be  tolerated.  No  prosecutions  in  any 
Court,  whether  spiritual  or  secular,  are  to  be  permitted. 
The  model  for  the  Anglican  Church  is  to  be  Israel  in  the 
days  of  the  judges :  "  Every  man  is  to  do  what  is  right 
in  his  own  eyes"  (Judg.  xxi.  25). 

The  mere  fact  that  such  a  monstrous  policy  as  I  have 
described  finds  acceptance  with  many  Churchmen  is,  to 
my  mind,  one  of  the  greatest  perils  of  the  Church  of 
England ;  and,  like  extreme  Eitualism,  its  adoption  could 
only  have  one  result.  That  result  would  ultimately  be 
disruption,  disintegration,  and  disestablishment.  You 
could  not  possibly  have  two  or  three  distinct  churches 
within  one  communion.  It  is  amazing  to  me  that  the 
advocates  of  this  notable  policy  of  universal  toleration  do 
not  see  that  it  would  infallibly  end  in  our  Church  being 
broken  to  pieces. 

No  doubt,  at  first  sight  this  policy  of  universal  tolera- 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

tion  looks  very  specious.  It  suits  the  temper  of  the 
times.  What  more  likely  to  provide  peace  and  stop 
quarrelling  than  to  declare  the  Church  a  kind  of  Noah's 
ark,  within  which  every  kind  of  opinion  and  creed  shall 
dwell  safe  and  undisturbed,  and  the  only  terms  of  com 
munion  shall  be  willingness  to  come  inside  and  let  your 
neighbour  alone  ?  Nevertheless,  I  must  confess  my  utter 
inability  to  understand  how  the  policy  could  ever  be 
carried  out  without  throwing  overboard  all  Articles  and 
Creeds,  without  doing  away  with  all  subscriptions,  in  short, 
without  altering  the  whole  constitution  of  the  Church  of 
England. 

Whether  this  state  of  things  will  ever  be  sanctioned 
and  allowed  I  cannot  tell.  Nothing  in  these  days  is 
impossible.  Nothing  is  too  absurd  to  concede  and 
allow  in  the  present  mania  for  complete  freedom  of 
thought,  and  absolute  liberty  of  opinion.  I  will  only 
ask  my  readers  to  consider  carefully  what  the  practical 
working  of  the  new  system  would  be. 

What  would  be  the  position  of  the  laity  ?  At  present 
the  English  lay-churchman,  wherever  he  lives  in,  or 
moves  to  in  England,  may  justly  expect  to  find  a  certain 
degree  of  uniformity  in  the  services  and  sermons  of  the 
Parish  Church.  No  doubt  he  may  find  more  singing  and 
surplice-wearing  and  outward  ceremonial  in  one  place 
than  another.  One  clergyman  may  give  more  prominence 
to  one  set  of  verities  than  another.  But,  on  the  whole, 
the  diversity  is  generally  within  limits. — There  will  be 
an  end  of  all  this  when  the  reign  of  universal  toleration 
begins.  He  will  be  startled  to  hear  from  one  pulpit 
that  much  of  the  Old  Testament  is  defective  and 
uninspired,  or  that  there  is  no  such  person  as  the  devil, 
and  no  future  punishment.  If  he  moves  to  another 
parish,  he  may  be  astonished  to  see  the  Lord's  Supper 
administered  with  a  sacrificial  dress,  and  accompanied  by 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

incense  and  lighted  candles  in  broad  day,  and  adoration 
of  the  consecrated  elements.  If  he  dislikes  all  this,  he 
must  not  complain  !  However  much  aggrieved,  he  will  be 
told  that  this  is  the  famous  policy  of  toleration,  and  that 
he  must  submit !  Will  the  laity  be  content  and  satisfied 
with  this  state  of  things  ?  I  doubt  it  extremely.  There 
would  be  general  grumbling  all  over  the  country.  Myriads 
of  the  middle  class  would  leave  the  Church,  and  become 
dissenters. 

What  would  be  the  position  of  the  English  clergy? 
At  present,  in  spite  of  much  friction  and  jarring,  the  great 
majority  of  the  three  schools  of  thought, — high,  low,  and 
broad — manage  to  get  on  pretty  amicably,  and  respect  one 
another.  There  is  a  common  bond  of  union  in  loyal 
love  to  the  Church  of  England,  and  a  cordial  desire  to 
hand  her  down  uninjured  to  their  children.  There  is  a 
common  determination  to  abide  within  the  limits  of  our 
creeds  and  formularies,  and  not  to  trangress  them.  There 
is  a  common  dislike  to  the  furious  zealots  of  either  extreme, 
who  are  striving  by  addition  or  subtraction  to  depart  from 
the  old  paths.  There  will  be  an  end  of  all  this  when  the 
reign  of  universal  toleration  begins !  When  the  mass  on  one 
side,  and  avowed  scepticism  on  the  other,  are  formally 
sanctioned  by  authority,  it  is  vain  to  suppose  there  would 
not  be  a  large  secession  of  some  conscientious  clergy  from 
our  communion.  Others  who  did  not  secede  would  draw 
together  for  protection,  and  crystallize  and  solidify  their 
own  peculiar  views,  and  refuse  to  recognise  any  others.  In 
short,  there  would  be  a  multiplication  and  increase  of  our 
"unhappy  divisions,"  which  would  endanger  the  existence 
of  the  Church  of  England,  and  shake  it  to  the  very 
centre. 

What,  above  all,  would  be  the  position  of  our  English 
Bishops  ?  At  present  they  make  a  solemn  promise,  at 
their  consecration,  that  they  will  be  "ready,  with  all 


XXVi  INTRODUCTION. 

faithful  diligence,  to  banish  and  drive  away  all  erroneous 
and  strange  doctrine  contrary  to  God's  word,  and  both 
privately  and  openly  to  call  upon  and  encourage  others 
to  the  same."  Once  let  the  much  -  praised  policy  of 
universal  toleration  be  accepted  and  formally  authorized, 
and  I  fail  to  see  the  slightest  use  in  this  promise.  Some 
of  a  bishop's  clergy  will  hold  a  Komish  view  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  and  openly  call  it  the  Mass.  Others  will  be 
content  with  the  views  of  the  prayer-book,  and  indignantly 
repudiate  incense,  chasuble,  a  material  presence,  an  altar, 
and  a  sacrifice.  Some  of  his  candidates  for  ordination 
will  hold  doctrines  which  cannot,  by  any  ingenuity,  be 
reconciled  with  the  Articles,  and  coolly  write  them  down 
in  their  examination  papers.  Others,  with  equal  coolness, 
will  offer  sceptical  statements  about  inspiration  and  the 
atonement.  What,  then,  is  the  unhappy  bishop  to  do  ? 
He  will  be  able  to  do  nothing  at  all.  He  must  be  an 
"  honorary  member  of  all  schools  of  thought."  He  will 
be  obliged  to  smile  on  all  with  equal  complacency,  and 
to  license,  institute,  and  ordain  anybody  or  everybody, 
without  asking  any  questions  at  all,  or  requiring  any 
declarations,  promises,  vows,  oaths,  or  subscriptions.  If 
the  Church  of  England  long  survived  such  a  chaotic  state 
of  things,  it  would  be  a  miracle  indeed.  When  there  are 
no  laws  or  rules,  there  can  be  no  order  in  any  community. 
When  there  is  no  creed  or  standard  of  doctrine,  there  can 
be  no  church,  but  a  babel. 

Such  are  the  pressing  dangers  which  appear  to  me  to 
beset  the  Church  of  England  in  the  present  day.  On 
one  side  there  is  the  danger  of  relapsing  into  Popery,  and 
going  back  behind  the  Keformation.  On  the  other  side 
is  the  growing  danger  of  total  indifference  to  sound 
doctrine,  under  the  specious  garb  of  liberality,  and  un 
willingness  to  think  any  earnest  man  is  wrong.  In  short, 
at  the  rate  we  are  going  now,  the  end  of  our  good  old 


INTRODUCTION.  xxvii 

Church,  unless  God  interferes,  will  be  either  Popery  or 
infidelity. 

In  view  of  these  two  great  dangers,  I  now  send  forth 
this  volume  as  a  humble  contribution  to  the  treasury  of 
truth,  and  a  protest  against  error.  The  principles  it 
contains  I  have  held  and  advocated  for  more  than  forty 
years,  and  I  never  felt  more  convinced  than  I  do  now 
that  they  are  Scriptural  principles,  Church  principles,  true, 
trustworthy,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation. 

If  this  volume  is  the  means  of  opening  the  eyes  of  any 
who  have  been  led  astray,  or  of  checking  any  who  are 
wavering  and  disposed  to  leave  the  old  path,  I  shall  be 
abundantly  repaid  for  the  labour  which  it  has  cost  me, 
amidst  the  many  demands  on  a  Lancashire  bishop's  time. 

What  the  final  result  of  the  present  state  of  things 
will  be  I  do  not  pretend  to  predict.  There  is  immense 
vitality  in  the  Church  of  England,  and  I  do  not  despair. 
But  it  is  grievous  to  see  how  many  faithful  laymen  are 
thoroughly  weary  and  sick  at  heart,  and  ready  to  forsake 
the  old  ship.  Some  are  turning  from  church  to  chapel, 
and  becoming  dissenters  or  Plymouth  Brethren.  Some 
are  beginning  to  advocate  disestablishment,  and  to  ask 
what  is  the  use  of  a  church  without  discipline  or  creed. 
Some  few  are  disposed  to  flirt  with  scepticism,  and  to  doubt 
whether  there  is  such  a  thing  as  "  truth."  I  entreat  such 
men  to  be  patient.  I  ask  them  to  believe  that  the  true 
Churchman  occupies  an  impregnable  position  so  long  as 
the  law  is  unaltered,  and  I  invite  them  to  arm  their 
minds  with  the  principles  which  this  volume  contains. 

J.  C.  LIVEEPOOL 


CONTENTS. 


FAREWELL   LETTER  TO  THE  DIOCESE  OF  LIVERPOOL,  .  .  V 

EXPLANATORY  INTRODUCTION,  .  .  .  .  .          vii 

I.  THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES,     ...          1 
n.  THE  CHURCH'S  COMPREHENSIVENESS,  .  .  .31 

III.  HOW  FAR  MAT  CHURCHMEN  DIFFER  ?  .  .46 

IV.  CAN  THERE  BE   MORE  UNITY  AMONG  CHURCHMEN  ?  .  65 
V.    THE  IMPORTANCE   OF  DOGMA,               .                .                .                .89 

VI.    THOUGHTS   ON  THE   CHURCH,  .  .  .  .111 

VII.    THOUGHTS  ON  THE  MINISTRY,  .  .  .  .151 

VIII.    THOUGHTS  ON  PUBLIC  WORSHIP,        .  .  .  .173 

IX.    THOUGHTS   ON   THE   PRAYEU-BOOK,     ....         202 

X.    THOUGHTS  ON  BAPTISM,          .  .  .  .  .218 

XI.    THOUGHTS   ON  THE  SUPPER  OF   THE   LORD,  .  .  .252 

XII.    REAL  CHURCH  WORK,  .....         282 

•    XIII.    CHURCH  AND  DISSENT,  .....         300 

XIV.    DISESTABLISHMENT,  ......         313 

XV.    THE   LESSONS   OF  ENGLISH   CHURCH  HISTORY,  .  .         354 

XVI.    CAN  THE  CHURCH  REACH  THE  MASSES  ?       .  .  .         396 

XVII.    THOUGHTS  FOR  SCEPTICS,        .....        422 

XVIII.    THE  BEST  EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY,      .  .  .441 


PRINCIPLES   FOR  CHURCHMEN. 


THE  CHUKCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PKINCIPLES. 

I  HAVE  chosen  this  subject  for  two  simple  but  weighty 
reasons.  Let  me  explain  briefly  what  they  are. 

My  first  reason  is  the  abounding  ignorance  which  pre 
vails  among  many  Churchmen  about  the  real  principles 
of  the  Communion  to  which  they  belong.  Myriads  of 
people,  I  am  afraid,  attend  our  churches  from  year  to 
year,  who  could  not,  if  their  lives  depended  on  it,  give  an 
orderly  account  of  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  Church  of 
England.  They  have  probably  been  baptized  and  con 
firmed,  and  perhaps  admitted  to  the  Lord's  Supper  in 
our  pale.  They  attend  our  services  and  use  our  Prayer- 
book.  They  are  even  zealous  for  the  union  of  Church 
and  State.  But  they  have  never  read  the  Articles,  or 
thoroughly  investigated  the  Creeds !  Eomanists  and 
Dissenters  are  generally  well  acquainted  with  the  leading 
principles  of  their  respective  systems.  The  Churchman 
too  often  knows  nothing  of  his.  To  lessen  this  ignorance, 
and  supply  a  little  light,  is  one  object  of  this  paper. 

My  other  reason  is  the  rise  and  progress  in  the  last 
forty  years  of  much  unsound  teaching  under  the  specious 
name  of  "Church  principles."  That  vague,  misty,  and 
indefinite  phrase  seems  to  turn  many  heads,  and  attracts 

A 


2  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

adherents  who  use  it  without  knowing  what  it  means. 
There  is  a  kind  of  fascination  about  it  which  appears  to 
rob  some  people  of  their  common  sense.  They  go  up  and 
down  the  world  talking  incessantly  of  "  sound  Church 
principles"  and  "true  Church  views,"  without  the  slightest 
clear  idea  what  they  really  are.  Nay,  worse  than  this, 
if  you  bring  them  to  book,  you  find  that  their  favourite 
expressions  often  cover  a  whole  shoal  of  weak,  foolish, 
unscriptural,  and  semi-Eomish  opinions.  To  expose  the 
fallacy  of  these  so-called  "Church  principles,"  and  to 
exhibit  in  contrast  the  true  distinctive  principles  of  the 
Church  of  England,  is  the  second  object  which  I  have  in 
view  in  this  paper. 

It  will  clear  my  way  at  the  outset,  if  I  remind  my 
readers  that  the  "  Church  principles  "  which  I  am  going 
to  treat  in  this  paper  are  the  principles  of  the  "  Estab 
lished  Church  of  England."  The  "  Catholic  Church  "  is 
a  favourite  expression  which  is  continually  used  in  the 
present  age.  But  it  is  one  of  those  great,  swelling,  high- 
sounding,  vague  expressions  which  mean  anything, 
everything,  or  nothing,  according  to  the  mind  of  him 
who  uses  them,  and  I  shall  pass  it  by.  Doubtless  there 
is  a  "  Holy  Catholic  Church,"  about  which  I  could  say 
much ;  but  I  shall  not  dwell  on  the  subject  now.  I 
shall  stick  to  my  subject.  The  principles  I  am  going  to 
consider  are  the  principles  of  that  Eeformed  Church  of 
England,  which  was  emancipated  from  Eome  300  years 
ago, — the  Church  whose  foundations  were  cemented  afresh 
with  the  blood  of  Hooper,  Eidley,  Latimer,  and  their  mar 
tyred  companions, — the  Church  which  was  temporarily 
overthrown  by  the  semi-Eomanism  of  Laud, — drained  of 
its  life-blood  by  Charles  II.'s  Act  of  Uniformity, — revived 
by  the  noble  work  of  Whitfield,  Wesley,  Eomaine,  and 
Venn  in  the  last  century, — and  which,  in  spite  of  many 
traitors  within  and  many  Liberationists  without,  is  still 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  3 

recognized  by  Queen,  Lords,  and  Commons  as  the 
Established  Church  of  this  realm.  Esto  perpetua  I  The 
principles  of  that  "  Particular  or  National  Church  "  I  am 
going  to  exhibit  and  defend.  (Article  xxxiv.) 

To  the  remark  I  have  just  made,  in  order  to  clear  the 
way,  I  must  add  one  more,  which,  I  fear,  will  startle 
some  Churchmen.  When  I  speak  of  the  "  distinctive 
principles  of  the  Church  of  England,"  I  do  not  mean  for 
a  moment  its  distinctive  Episcopal  government,  or  its 
distinctive  Liturgical  mode  of  worship.  Much  as  I  value 
these  two  things,  I  cannot  forget  that  a  Church  may  possess 
them,  and  yet  be  in  a  most  corrupt  and  useless  condition. 
The  trumpet  of  ecclesiastical  history  gives  no  uncertain 
sound  on  this  point.  The  African,  and  Syrian,  and 
Asiatic  Churches,  whose  candlestick  has  been  long  taken 
away,  are  plain  proofs  that  you  want  something  more 
than  Bishops  and  Liturgies  in  order  to  keep  a  Church 
alive.  No !  The  distinctive  principles  of  the  Church  of 
England  which  I  have  in  view  are  those  mighty  doctrinal 
principles  which  have  been  her  strength  and  her  stay  for 
300  years.  I  mean  those  distinctive  principles  on  which 
her  walls  were  rebuilt  by  Cranmer,  and  Parker,  and  Jewel, 
at  the  era  of  the  blessed  Eeformation, — principles  which, 
though  sorely  jeopardized  at  some  periods  of  our  history, 
have  never  been  entirely  suppressed,  and,  though  cast 
down,  have  not  been  destroyed.  To  the  maintenance  of 
those  principles,  and  not  to  Episcopacy  or  a  Liturgy,  I 
believe  our  Church  owes  any  measure  of  power,  influence, 
usefulness,  or  blessing  from  God,  which  it  has  enjoyed 
for  the  last  three  centuries.  Once  let  those  principles 
be  forsaken  and  repudiated,  and  our  Church  will  decay 
and  die,  like  those  ancient  Churches  which  I  have  just 
named.  To  state  as  briefly  as  possible  what  those 
principles  are,  is  my  main  object  in  drawing  up  this  paper. 

Now  where  shall  we  turn  in  order  to  find  out  these 


4  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

great  "  distinctive  principles  "  to  which  I  have  just  been 
referring  ?  I  answer,  unhesitatingly,  to  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles,  which  are  to  be  found  at  the  end  of  every  com 
plete  and  unmutilated  copy  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer.  Those  Articles,  however  little  known  and  read 
by  many,  are  the  Church's  authorized  Confession  of  Faith. 
Their  very  title  calls  them  "  Articles  agreed  upon  by  the 
Archbishops  and  Bishops  of  both  provinces,  and  the  whole 
clergy,  for  the  avoiding  of  diversities  of  opinions,  and  for 
the  establishing  of  consent  touching  true  religion."  He 
that  really  wants  to  ascertain  what  are  sound  "  Church 
views  "  and  "  Church  principles  "  ought  certainly  to  turn 
first  to  the  Thirty -nine  Articles. 

Of  course  I  am  aware  that  the  Articles  find  no  favour 
with  some,  and  are  thought  hard,  and  narrow,  and  strict, 
and  obsolete,  and  ill  adapted  to  these  times.  "  Give  me 
the  Church's  Prayer-book,"  they  say,  "  and  do  not  talk  to 
me  about  the  Articles."  But  there  are  several  awkward 
facts,  which  these  people  appear  to  forget.  They  forget 
that  the  Articles  form  a  part  of  the  Prayer-book  itself, 
and  that  no  copy  of  our  Liturgy  is  complete  which  does 
not  contain  them.  Furthermore,  they  forget  that  even 
in  the  days  of  the  unhappy  Charles  I.  a  declaration 
was  prefixed  to  the  Articles,  containing  these  words : 
"  The  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England  do  contain  the 
true  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England  agreeable  to 
God's  Word."  Last,  and  not  least,  they  forget  that  the 
Statute  Law  of  the  land,  in  the  shape  of  an  Act  of 
Parliament  first  passed  in  Elizabeth's  time,  and  then 
deliberately  re-enacted  in  Queen  Victoria's  reign,  requires 
every  clergyman,  instituted  to  any  living,  at  this  very 
day,  when  he  begins  to  officiate  in  his  church,  "  publicly 
and  openly,  in  the  presence  of  his  congregation,  to  read 
the  whole  Thirty-nine  Articles,  and  immediately  after 
reading  to  make  the  declaration  of  assent  to  them," 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  5 

saying,  "  /  believe  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Efngland, 
as  therein  set  forth,  to  be  agreeable  to  the  Word  of  God." 
These  are  indisputable  facts,  which  cannot  be  explained 
away.  In  the  face  of  these  facts,  I  maintain  that  no 
loyal  Churchman  has  a  right  to  complain  if  I  turn  to 
the  Articles  in  order  to  ascertain  the  distinctive  principles 
of  the  Church  of  England.1 

But  I  shall  not  leave  this  subject  here.  Short 
memories  about  everything  in  religion,  from  the  fourth 
commandment  downward,  are  so  sadly  common,  and  the 
ingenious  device  of  playing  off  the  Prayer-book  against 
the  Articles,  as  if  they  were  contrary  one  to  another,  is 
so  prevalent,  that  I  shall  supply  a  few  more  facts  about 
the  Articles  which  are  well  worth  remembering.  They 
all  tend  to  confirm,  strengthen,  and  fortify  the  authority 
and  value  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  Let  us  take  the 
evidence  of  six  well-known  English  divines,  of  widely 
different  schools,  who  have  long  passed  away  from  this 
world. 

(1)  Let  us  hear  the  evidence  of  "Thomas  Kogers," 
Chaplain  to  Archbishop  Bancroft,  who  published,  in 
1607,  the  first  "Exposition  of  the  Articles"  which  ever 
appeared.  This  book,  written  within  forty  years  of  the 
time  when  the  Articles  were  finally  ratified,  was  dedicated 
to  the  Archbishop,  and  was  a  work  of  great  authority  at 
the  time.  In  the  Preface  to  this  work  he  says : — 

"The  purpose  of  our  Church  is  best  known  by  the 

1  The  Fifth  Canon  of  1604  contains  the  following  remarkable  words  : — 
' '  Whosoever  shall  hereafter  affirm,  that  any  of  the  nine  and  thirty  Articles 
agreed  upon  by  the  Archbishops  and  Bishops  of  both  provinces,  and  the 
whole  Clergy,  in  the  Convocation  holden  in  London,  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  God  1562,  for  avoiding  diversities  of  opinions,  and  for  establishing 
consent  touching  true  religion,  are  in  any  part  superstitious  or  erroneous, 
or  such  as  he  may  not  with  a  good  conscience  subscribe  unto,  let  him 
be  excommunicated  ipso  facto,  and  not  restored,  but  only  by  the  Arch 
bishop,  after  his  repentance,  and  public  recantation  of  such  his  wicked 
errors," 


6  PRINCIPLES    FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

doctrine  which  she  does  profess:  the  doctrine  by  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  established  by  Act  of  Parliament ; 
the  Articles  by  the  words  whereby  they  are  expressed : 
and  other  doctrine  than  in  the  said  Articles  is  contained, 
our  Church  neither  hath  nor  holdeth,  and  other  sense 
they  cannot  yield  than  their  words  do  impart." 

(2)  Let  us  next  heai  what  great  and  good  Bishop  Hall 
says,  in  his  work  on  "  The  Old  Eeligion  : " — "  The  Church 
of  England,  in  whose  motherhood  we  have  all  come  to 
pride  ourselves,  hath  in  much  wisdom  and  piety  delivered 
her  judgment  concerning  all  necessary  points  of  religion, 
in  so  complete  a  body  of  divinity  as  all  hearts  may  rest 
in.     These  we  read,  these  we  subscribe,  as  professing  not 
their  truth  only,  but  their  sufficiency  also.     The  voice 
of  God  our  Father,  in  His  Scriptures,  and,  out  of  them, 
the  voice  of  the  Church  our  mother,  in  her  Articles,  is 
that  which  must  both  guide  and  settle  our  resolutions. 
Whatsoever  is  beside  these,  is  either  private,  or  unneces 
sary,  or  uncertain."     (Hall's  Works,  Oxford  edition,  vol.  ix. 
p.  308.) 

(3)  Let  us  next  hear  what  Bishop  Stillingfleet  says  in 
his  "  Unreasonableness  of   Separation : " — "  This  we   all 
say,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England  is  con 
tained    in  the  Thirty-nine  Articles ;    and,  whatever  the 
opinions  of  private  persons  may  be,  this  is  the  standard  by 
which  the  sense  of  our  Church  is  to  be  taken."     (London, 
4to  edition,  p.  95.     1631.) 

(4)  Let  us  next  hear  what  Bishop  Burnet  says : — 
"  The  Thirty-nine  Articles  are  the  sum  of  our  doctrines, 
and  the  confession  of  our  faith."     (Burnet  on  Articles, 
Pref.  p.  i.,  Oxford  edition.     1831.) 

(5)  Let  us  next  hear  what  Bishop  Beveridge  says,  in 
the  Preface  to  his  great  work  on  the  Articles : — "  The 
Bishops  and  clergy  of  both  provinces  of  this  nation,  in 
a  Council  held  at  London,  1562,  agreed  upon  certain 


Articles  of  religion,  to  the  number  of  thirty-nine,  which 
to  this  day  remain  the  constant  and  settled  doctrine  of 
our  Church;  which,  by  an  Act  of  Parliament  of  the 
13th  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  15*71,  all  that  are  entrusted 
with  any  ecclesiastical  preferments  are  bound  to  subscribe 
to."  (Beveridge  on  Articles,  vol.  i.  p.  9,  Oxford  edition. 
1840.) 

(6)  Let  us  hear,  lastly,  what  Bishop  Tomline  says  : — 
"  The  Thirty-nine  Articles  are  the  criterion  of  the  faith 
of  the  members  of  the  Church  of  England."  ("  Elements 
of  Theol."  vol.  ii.  p.  34.  1799.)  And  in  another  place 
he  says : — "  The  Articles  are  to  be  subscribed  in  their 
plain  and  obvious  sense,  and  assent  is  to  be  given  to 
them  simply  and  unequivocally.  If  the  candidate  for 
holy  orders  thinks  that  he  sees  reason  to  dissent  from 
any  of  the  doctrines  asserted  in  them,  no  hope  of  emolu 
ment  or  honour,  no  dread  of  inconvenience  or  disappoint 
ment,  should  induce  him  to  express  his  solemn  assent  to 
propositions  which  in  fact  he  does  not  believe.  And  let 
it  ever  be  remembered  that,  in  a  business  of  this  serious 
and  important  nature,  no  species  whatever  of  evasion,  or 
subterfuge,  or  reserve,  is  to  be  allowed,  or  can  be  practised, 
without  imminent  danger  of  incurring  the  wrath  of  God." 
("Elements  of  TheoL,"  vol.  ii.  p.  567.) 

It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  witnesses,  and  to  overload 
the  subject  with  evidence.  But  in  these  matters  enough 
is  as  good  as  a  feast.  Enough,  probably,  has  been  said  to 
satisfy  any  candid  and  impartial  mind  that  the  ground  I 
have  taken  up  about  the  Articles  has  not  been  taken  up 
without  good  reason.  He  that  desires  to  go  more  deeply 
into  the  subject  would  do  well  to  consult  Dean  Goode's 
writings  about  it,  in  a  controversy  which  he  held  with 
the  late  Henry  Philpotts,  Bishop  of  Exeter.  In  that 
remarkable  controversy,  I  am  bold  to  say,  the  Dean 
proved  himself  more  than  a  match  for  the  Bishop. 


8  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

(Goode's  "  Defence  of  Thirty-nine  Articles,  and  Vindica 
tion  of  Defence."     Hatchard.     1848.) 

One  remark  I  must  make,  in  self-defence,  before 
leaving  this  branch  of  my  subject.  I  particularly  request 
that  no  one  who  reads  this  paper  will  misunderstand  the 
grounds  I  have  been  taking  up.  Let  no  one  suppose  that 
I  think  lightly  of  the  Prayer-book,  because  I  do  not 
regard  it  as  the  Church  of  England's  primary  standard 
and  test  of  truth.  Nothing  could  be  more  erroneous 
than  such  an  idea.  In  loyal  love  to  the  Prayer-book, 
and  deep  admiration  of  its  contents,  I  give  place  to  no 
man.  Taken  for  all  in  all,  as  an  uninspired  work,  it  is 
an  incomparable  book  of  devotion  for  the  use  of  a  Chris 
tian  congregation.  This  is  a  position  I  would  defend 
anywhere  and  everywhere.  But  the  Church  of  England's 
Book  of  Common  Prayer  was  never  intended  to  be  the 
Church's  standard  of  doctrine  in  the  same  way  that  the 
Articles  were.  This  was  not  meant  to  be  its  office ;  this 
was  not  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  compiled.  It  is  a 
manual  of  public  devotion :  it  is  not  a  confession  of  faith. 
Let  us  love  it,  honour  it,  prize  it,  reverence  it,  admire  it, 
and  faithfully  use  it.  But  let  us  not  exalt  it  to  the  place 
which  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  alone  can  fill,  and  which 
common  sense,  Statute  Law,  and  the  express  opinions  of 
eminent  divines  unanimously  agree  in  assigning  to  them. 
The  Articles,  far  more  than  the  Prayer-book,  are  the 
Church's  standard  of  sound  doctrine,  and  the  real  test  of 
true  Churchmanship.1 

1  "Prayers,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  are  compositions  which  are 
not  so  precisely  framed  and  worded  as  cold,  dry,  dogmatic  statements  of 
doctrine.  They  are  what  the  rhetorical  speech  of  the  advocate  is, 
compared  to  the  cautious  and  well-balanced  decision  of  the  judge.  '  In 
the  Prayer-book,'  says  Dean  Goode,  'we  have  a  collection  of  national 
formularies  of  devotion,  written  at  a  time  when  a  large  proportion  of  the 
people  were  inclined  to  Romanism,  and  at  the  same  time  compelled  to 
attend  the  service  of  the  National  Churches, — and  consequently  carefully 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  9 

And  now,  with  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  in  my  hand, 
let  me  try  to  point  out  what  are  the  great  "  distinctive 
principles  of  the  Church  of  England."  I  make  the 
attempt  with  unfeigned  diffidence.  I  have  a  painful 
recollection  of  "  our  unhappy  divisions."  I  am  well  aware 
that,  beside  disloyal  semi-Eomish  Churchmen  and  disloyal 
semi-sceptical  Churchmen,  there  are  hundreds  of  loyal 
members  of  our  Communion  who  do  not  see  things  as  I 
do.  But  all  this  is  no  reason  why  I  should  not  give  my 
own  opinion,  and  exhibit  the  subject  as  it  appears  to  me. 
At  any  rate  I  have  a  very  decided  opinion,  and  my 
readers  shall  hear  what  it  is. 

I.  The  first  distinctive  principle  of  the  Church  of 
England  appears  to  me  to  be  its  unvarying  reverence  for 
holy  Scripture.  It  always  recognizes  "the  supremacy 
and  sufficiency  "  of  God's  Word  written,  as  the  only  rule 
of  faith  and  practice.  (Lambeth  Synod.  1878.) 

Its  theory  is  that  man  is  required  to  believe  nothing 
as  necessary  to  salvation  which  is  not  in  the  Bible.  It 
totally  denies  that  there  is  any  other  guide  for  man's 
soul  co-equal  or  co-ordinate  with  the  Bible.  The 
supreme  authority  of  Scripture,  in  short,  is  one  of  the 
corner-stones  of  the  Church  of  England.  Here,  it  would 
have  its  members  know,  is  rock :  all  else  is  sand. 

The  Sixth  Article  declares  that  "holy  Scripture  contains 
all  things  necessary  to  salvation ;  so  that  whatsoever  is 
not  read  therein,  nor  may  be  proved  thereby,  is  not  to  be 

drawn  up,  so  as  to  give  as  little  offence  as  possible  to  Romish  prejudices. 
Is  such  a  book  calculated  to  serve  the  purpose  of  a  standard  of  faith  ? ' 
1  In  the  Articles,'  he  adds,  *  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  a  precise  confession 
of  faith  on  all  the  great  points  of  Christian  doctrine,  drawn  up  in  dogmatic 
propositions,  as  a  test  of  doctrinal  soundness  for  the  clergy.'  The  Liturgy- 
is  an  excellent  book,  beyond  question.  But  to  say  that  it  can  serve  the 
purpose  of  a  standard  of  faith  so  well  as  the  Articles,  is,  to  say  the  least, 
unreasonable."  ("  Knots  Untied,"  p.  84.) 


10  PRINCIPLES   FOE    CHURCHMEN. 

required  of  any  man,  that  it  should  be  believed  as  an 
article  of  the  faith,  or  be  thought  requisite  or  necessary 
to  salvation." 

The  Eighth  Article  says  that  "  the  three  Creeds  ought 
thoroughly  to  be  believed  and  received,  for  they  may  be 
proved  by  most  certain  warrants  of  holy  Scripture." 

The  Twentieth  Article  says,  "  It  is  not  lawful  for  the 
Church  to  ordain  anything  that  is  contrary  to  God's 
Word  written,  neither  may  it  so  expound  one  place  of 
Scripture  that  it  be  repugnant  to  another." 

The  Twenty-first  Article  says  that  "things  ordained 
by  General  Councils  as  necessary  to  salvation,  have 
neither  strength  nor  authority,  unless  it  may  be  declared 
that  they  be  taken  out  of  Holy  Scripture." 

The  Twenty-second  Article  condemns  certain  Eomish 
doctrines  and  practices,  "because  they  are  grounded  on 
no  warranty  of  Scripture,  but  rather  repugnant  to  the 
Word  of  God." 

The  Twenty-eighth  Article  condemns  Transubstantia- 
tion,  because  it  "  cannot  be  proved  by  Holy  Writ,  but  is 
repugnant  to  the  plain  words  of  Scripture." 

The  Thirty-fourth  Article  says  that  "  traditions  and 
ceremonies  of  the  Church  may  be  changed,  so  that 
nothing  be  ordained  against  God's  Word." 

Now  I  see  in  all  this  abundant  proof  that  the  Bible, 
and  the  Bible  only,  is  the  rule  of  faith  in  the  Church  of 
England,  and  that  no  doctrine  is  "  Church  doctrine " 
which  cannot  be  reconciled  with  God's  Word.  I  see  a 
complete  answer  to  those  Churchmen  who  tell  us  that 
we  make  an  idol  of  the  Bible,  and  that  we  ought  to  go  to 
the  Fathers,  or  to  primitive  tradition,  or  to  the  voice  of 
the  Church,  or  to  the  Prayer-book,  for  spiritual  direction, 
I  see  that  any  sense  placed  on  any  part  of  the  Prayer- 
book  which  is  not  reconcileable  with  Scripture,  must  be 
a  mistake,  and  ought  not  to  be  received.  I  see,  above 


THE  CHUIICH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  11 

all,  that  all  who  pour  contempt  on  the  Bible,  as  an 
imperfect,  defective  Book,  which  is  not  complete  without 
"  ancient  interpretation,"  or  ought  not  to  be  believed  if 
it  contradicts  "  modern  thought,"  are  taking  up  ground 
which  is  at  variance  with  the  Church's  own  Confession 
of  Faith.  They  may  be  devout,  zealous,  clever,  earnest, 
and  confident  persons  ;  but  they  are  contradicting  the 
Articles,  and  they  are  not  thoroughly  sound  Church 
men. 

II.  The  second  distinctive  principle  of  the  Church  of 
England  appears  to  me  to  be  its  doctrinal  Evangelicalism. 
I  am  afraid  that  in  saying  this  I  use  a  phrase  which  some 
may  think  offensive  and  controversial.  I  am  sorry  for  it ; 
but  I  can  find  no  other  language  to  convey  my  meaning. 
What  I  do  mean  is  that  our  Church's  Confession  of  Faith 
gives  an  unmistakeable  prominence  to  those  doctrines 
which,  rightly  or  wrongly,  are  called  in  this  day 
"  Evangelical." 

For  the  proof  of  this  assertion  I  will  simply  refer  my 
readers  to  the  titles,  contents,  and  order  of  the  first 
eighteen  Articles  out  of  the  thirty-nine,  and  then  ask 
any  unprejudiced  thinking  man  to  use  his  judgment  and 
exercise  his  senses.  What  kind  of  subjects  will  he  find 
handled  in  twelve  out  of  the  eighteen  ?  Why,  such  great 
doctrinal  subjects  as  the  sufficiency  of  Scripture,  in  the 
sixth  Article, — everlasting  life  through  Christ  offered  to 
mankind  in  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  in  the  New, 
in  the  seventh, — original  sin,  in  the  ninth, — free-will 
and  the  need  of  God's  grace,  in  the  tenth, — justification 
by  faith,  in  the  eleventh, — good  works  as  the  fruits  of 
justification,  in  the  twelfth, — the  uselessness  of  works 
before  justification,  in  the  thirteenth, — the  nullity  of 
works  of  supererogation,  in  the  fourteenth, — Christ  alone 
without  sin,  in  the  fifteenth, — sin  after  baptism,  in  the 


12  PRINCIPLES   FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

sixteenth, — election  and  its  evidences,  in  the  seventeenth, 
— and  eternal  salvation  only  by  Christ,  in  the  eighteenth. 
And  in  what  position  will  he  find  these  great  subjects  ? 
Why,  they  are  placed  in  the  forefront  of  the  whole  Con 
fession  of  the  Church  !  They  occupy  the  post  of  honour, 
and  stand  forward,  as  the  weightiest  and  most  important 
matters  of  the  faith.  And  it  is  not  till  the  mind  of  the 
Church  has  been  fully  declared  about  them,  that  we 
find  anything  about  the  visible  Church,  the  ministry,  or 
the  sacraments.  To  them  the  second  place  is  most 
manifestly  assigned. 

Now  what  shall  we  say  to  these  things  ?  I  will 
answer  that  question  by  putting  before  my  readers  a 
hypothetical  case.  Let  us  suppose  for  a  moment  that 
one  of  the  leading  churches  in  Liverpool  or  Manchester 
is  vacant  by  the  death  or  promotion  of  the  incumbent, 
and  a  new  clergyman  has  to  be  appointed.  Let  us 
suppose  that  the  bias  and  inclination  of  the  patron  are 
not  known,  and  that  no  one  can  tell  whom  he  will  select. 
Let  us  suppose,  furthermore,  that  the  clergyman  whom 
he  finally  presents  is  an  entire  stranger  in  Liverpool  or 
Manchester,  and  that  no  one  has  the  least  idea  what 
opinions  he  holds,  and  to  what  "  school  of  thought "  in 
the  Church  he  belongs.  Let  us  suppose,  after  this,  that 
this  unknown  clergyman  commences  his  duties,  and  for  the 
first  three  months  is  continually  preaching  bold,  decided, 
outspoken  sermons,  about  such  points  as  the  sufficiency 
of  Scripture,  original  sin,  the  need  of  grace,  justification 
by  faith,  and  salvation  only  by  Christ ;  and,  though  he 
occasionally  handles  other  subjects,  makes  the  great 
doctrines  I  have  just  referred  to  the  staple  of  his 
preaching.  Let  us  just  suppose  all  this,  and  then  ask 
ourselves  what  conclusion  the  people  of  Liverpool  or 
Manchester  would  form  ?  Why,  I  will  engage  to  say 
that  if  you  picked  a  jury  of  the  first  twelve  intelligent 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  13 

hearers  of  this  clergyman,  and  asked  them  at  the  end  of 
three  months  to  what  school  of  thought  in  the  Church 
the  new  parson  belonged,  and  what  kind  of  views  he 
held,  their  verdict  would  be  decided  and  unanimous. 
They  would  reply  with  one  voice,  "  He  is  thoroughly 
Evangelical." 

I  ask  any  impartial  man  to  apply  this  hypothetical 
case  to  the  point  which  I  am  now  trying  to  prove.  I 
ask  him  to  study  our  Church's  Confession  of  Faith,  and 
to  notice  carefully  the  contents  and  order  of  the  first 
eighteen  Articles,  and  to  observe  what  comes  first  and 
what  comes  second,  in  the  whole  thirty-nine.  And  then 
I  appeal  to  his  common  sense, "and  ask  him  if  it  is 
possible  to  deny  that  one  distinctive  principle  of  the 
Church  of  England  is  its  "  doctrinal  Evangelicalism  "  ? 

Before  I  pass  on,  let  me  venture  to  advise  my  fellow- 
Churchmen  never  to  be  ashamed  of  holding  Evangelical 
views.  Those  views,  I  am  quite  aware,  are  not  fashionable 
nowadays.  They  are  ridiculed  as  old-fashioned,  narrow, 
defective,  and  effete.  Those  who  maintain  them  are 
regarded  as  illiberal,  impracticable  old  fossils.  Never 
mind  !  We  have  no  cause  to  be  ashamed.  Evangelicalism 
is  not  dead  yet.  Its  whole-hearted  and  "  thorough " 
adherents  live  well  and  die  well,  and  do  some  good  in 
the  world.  And,  not  least,  Evangelicalism  is  one  of  the 
distinctive  principles  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  and 
therefore  of  the  Church  of  England. 

III.  The  third  distinctive  principle  of  the  Church  of 
England  appears  to  me  to  be  its  clear  and  outspoken 
testimony  against  the  errors  of  the  Church  of  Home. 

This  is  a  point,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  about  which  there 
is  a  sad  amount  of  unsoundness  among  Churchmen  in 
the  present  day.  Some  seem  thoroughly  ashamed  of  the 
"Reformers  and  the  Protestant  Eeformation,  and  can  talk 


14  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

coolly  of  the  possibility  of  reunion  with  the  Papacy. 
Others  profess  to  dislike  controversy  about  Popery,  and 
avoid  reference  to  it  as  much  as  possible.  The  plague  is 
abroad.  The  old  English  dislike  to  Eomanism  is  cooling 
down  most  painfully.  The  days  of  Queen  Mary  and  the 
fires  of  Oxford  and  Smithfield  seem  forgotten.  The  gallant 
struggles  of  Parker,  and  Jewel,  and  the  Elizabethan 
divines  are  lightly  esteemed.  But  all  this  time  what 
say  the  Articles  ?  I  assert  unhesitatingly  that  a 
thoroughly  Protestant  spirit  runs  throughout  them,  and 
their  testimony  against  Eomish  error  is  clear,  ringing, 
and  unmistakable. 

What  says  the  Nineteenth  Article  ?  "  The  Church  of 
Eome  hath  erred,  not  only  in  their  living  and  manner  of 
ceremonies,  but  also  in  matters  of  faith." 

What  says  the  Twenty-second  Article  ?  "  The  Eomish 
doctrine  concerning  Purgatory,  Pardons,  Worshipping  and 
Adoration,  as  well  of  Images  as  of  Eeliques,  and  also 
invocation  of  Saints,  is  a  fond  thing  vainly  invented,  and 
grounded  upon  no  warranty  of  Scripture,  but  rather 
repugnant  to  the  Word  of  God." 

What  says  the  Twenty -fourth  Article  ?  It  forbids  the 
Eomish  custom  of  having  public  prayers,  and  ministering 
the  sacraments  in  Latin,  as  "  repugnant  to  the  Word  of 
God." 

What  says  the  Twenty -fifth  Article  ?  It  declares  that 
the  five  Eomish  sacraments  of  Confirmation,  Penance, 
Orders,  Matrimony,  and  extreme  Unction,  are  not  to  be 
accounted  sacraments  of  the  Gospel. 

What  says  the  Twenty-eighth  Article  ?  It  declares 
that  "  transubstantiation,  or  the  change  of  the  substance 
of  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  cannot  be  proved 
by  Holy  Writ,  is  repugnant  to  the  plain  words  of  Scripture, 
overthroweth  the  nature  of  a  sacrament,  and  hath  given 
occasion  to  many  superstitions."  It  also  declares  that 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  15 

"the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  was  not  by 
Christ's  ordinance  reserved,  carried  about,  lifted  up,  or 
worshipped." 

What  says  the  Thirtieth  Article  ?  "  The  cup  of  the 
Lord  is  not  to  be  denied  to  the  lay-people." 

What  says  the  Thirty-first  Article  ?  "  The  sacrifices 
of  masses,  in  which  it  was  commonly  said  the  priest  did 
offer  Christ  for  the  quick  and  dead,  to  have  remission  of 
pain  and  guilt,  were  blasphemous  fables  and  dangerous 
deceits." 

What  says  the  Thirty-second  Article  ?  "  Bishops, 
priests,  and  deacons  are  not  commanded  by  God's  law  to 
vow  the  estate  of  single  life,  or  to  abstain  from  marriage." 

What  says  the  Thirty-seventh  Article  ?  "  The  Bishop 
of  Eome  hath  no  jurisdiction  in  this  realm  of  England." 

What  shall  we  say  to  all  this  ?  Nine  times  over 
the  Thirty -nine  Articles  condemn  in  plain  and  explicit 
language  certain  leading  doctrines  of  the  Church  of  Eome, 
and  declare  in  favour  of  what  must  be  called  "  Protestant " 
views.  And  yet  men  dare  to  tell  us  that  it  is  very 
wrong  and  very  uncharitable  to  be  so  hot  in  favour 
of  Protestantism, — that  Eomanism  is  not  such  a  mis 
chievous  and  dangerous  thing  as  it  was  once  thought, 
— and  that  by  making  such  a  piece  of  work  about 
Popery,  and  Protestantism,  and  Eitualism,  and  semi- 
Popery,  we  are  only  troubling  the  country  and  doing 
more  harm  than  good !  Well,  I  am  content  to  point  to 
the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  There  is  my  apology  !  There 
is  my  defence !  I  will  take  up  no  other  ground  at 
present.  I  will  not  say,  as  I  might  do,  that  Popery  is 
an  unscriptural  system,  which  every  free  nation  ought  to 
dread,  and  every  Bible-reading  Christian  of  any  nation 
ought  to  oppose.  I  simply  point  to  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles  ?  I  ask  any  one  to  explain  how  any  English 
clergyman  can  be  acting  consistently,  if  he  does  not 


16  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

oppose,  denounce,  expose,  and  resist  real,  unmistakable 
Popery  in  every  shape,  either  within  the  Church  or 
without.  Other  Christians  may  do  as  they  please,  and 
countenance  Popery  if  they  like.  But  so  long  as  the 
Articles  stand  unrepealed  and  unaltered,  "Protestantism" 
is  a  distinctive  principle  of  the  Church  of  England, 
and  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  every  clergyman  to  oppose 
Popery.1 

IV.  The  fourth  distinctive  principle  of  the  Church  of 
England  appears  to  me  to  be  its  rejection  of  any  sacerdotal 
or  sacrificial  character  in  the  Christian  ministry. 

I  hope  I  need  hardly  remind  my  readers  that  the 
pretended  "  sacerdotalism  "  of  ministers  is  one  of  the  oldest 
and  most  mischievous  errors  which  has  ever  plagued 
Christendom.  Partly  from  an  ignorant  hankering  after 
the  priesthood  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation  which  passed 
away  when  Christ  died, — partly  from  the  love  of  power 
and  dignity  which  is  natural  to  ministers  as  much  as  to 
other  men, — partly  from  the  preference  of  unconverted 
men  for  a  supposed  priest  and  mediator  whom  they  can 
see,  rather  than  one  in  heaven  whom  they  cannot  see, — 
partly  from  the  general  ignorance  of  mankind  before  the 
Bible  was  printed  and  circulated, — partly  from  one  cause, 
and  partly  from  another,  there  has  been  an  incessant 
tendency  throughout  the  last  eighteen  centuries  to  exalt 
ministers  to  an  unscriptural  position,  and  to  regard  them 
as  priests  and  mediators  between  God  and  man.  How 
much  the  Church  of  Eome  has  erred  in  this  direction, 
with  its  so-called  "  sacrifice  of  the  mass  "  and  its  organized 
system  of  auricular  confession,  and  what  enormous  evils 
have  resulted  from  these  errors,  I  have  no  time  to 
describe  now.  The  disease,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  has 

1  "  Our  English  Communion,  if  she  is  not  Protestant,  has  no  standing- 
place  among  the  Churches." — Bishop  of  Rochester's  Pastoral,  1878,  p.  53. 


THE  CHUECH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PKINCIPLES.  1*7 

infected  our  own  Church.  There  are  scores  of  English 
churches  at  this  moment  in  which  the  service  is  so 
conducted  that  you  might  think  you  were  in  a  Popish 
chapel.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  administered  as  a  sacrifice 
far  more  than  as  a  sacrament,  and  the  clergy  are  practi 
cally  acting  as  sacrificing  priests.  The  Lord's  Table  is 
called  an  "  altar,"  although  it  is  never  once  so  called  in 
the  Prayer-book  !  The  consecrated  elements  are  treated 
with  an  idolatrous  reverence,  as  if  God  Himself  was 
present  under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine.  The  habit 
of  private  sacramental  confession  to  clergymen,  as  absolv 
ing  priests,  is  encouraged  and  urged  on  the  people.  I 
speak  as  to  wise  men.  Every  intelligent  Englishman 
knows  that  what  I  say  is  true. 

Now  I  have  not  time  to  point  out  fully  that  there  is 
not  a  word  in  the  Acts  or  the  Epistles  to  show  that  the 
Apostles  ever  professed  to  be  sacrificing  priests,  or  to 
make  any  material  oblation  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  or  to 
hear  private  confessions,  and  confer  judicial  absolutions. 
But  I  do  ask  my  readers  to  remember  that  there  is  not  a 
sentence  in  the  Articles  to  warrant  the  idea  of  a  sacer 
dotal  and  sacrificial  ministry. 

In  the  Twenty -third  Article  we  are  simply  told  that 
"It  is  not  lawful  for  any  man  to  take  upon  him  the 
office  of  public  preaching,  or  ministering  the  Sacraments 
hi  the  congregation,  before  he  be  lawfully  called,  and 
sent  to  execute  the  same.  And  those  we  ought  to  judge 
lawfully  called  and  sent,  which  be  chosen  and  called  to 
this  work  by  men  who  have  public  authority  given  unto 
them  in  the  congregation,  to  call  and  send  ministers  into 
the  Lord's  vineyard." 

In  the  Thirty-first  and  Thirty-second  Articles  there  is 
a  marked  distinction  made  between  the  Romish  priest  in 
the  Thirty -first,  who  is  called  in  the  Latin  version  of  the 
Article,  "  sacerdos  "  (a  sacrificing  priest),  and  the  English 

B 


18  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

priests  in  the  Thirty-second,  who  are  called  in  the  same 
Latin  version  "  presbyteri  or  elders."  Stronger  evidence 
that  the  word  "  priest,"  in  our  Prayer-book,  only  means 
"  presbyter,"  or  elder,  it  would  be  hard  to  find ! 

Throughout  the  whole  latter  part  of  the  Articles,  from 
the  Nineteenth  to  the  Thirty-ninth,  there  is  one  uniform 
marked  absence  of  a  single  word  that  could  justify  the 
idea  of  a  "  sacerdotal "  ministry  being  sanctioned  in  the 
Church  of  England.  In  fact  there  is  a  speaking  silence, 
just  as  remarkable  as  the  silence  on  the  same  subject  in 
the  Epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus  in  the  New  Testament. 
That  silence,  I  believe,  was  intentional.  And  the  con 
clusion  I  draw  is  most  decided, — that  the  compilers  of 
the  Articles  purposely  and  deliberately  rejected  the  idea 
of  a  sacerdotal  and  sacrificial  ministry,  and  took  care 
not  to  leave  so  much  as  a  peg  in  the  Articles  to  hang  it 
upon.  In  short,  they  repudiated  it  as  a  deadly  error. 

If  any  one  supposes  that  Evangelical  Churchmen 
undervalue  the  office  of  the  Christian  minister,  he  is 
totally  mistaken.  We  regard  it  as  an  honourable  office 
instituted  by  Christ  Himself,  and  of  general  necessity  for 
carrying  on  the  work  of  Christ's  Gospel.  We  look  on 
ministers  as  preachers  of  God's  Word,  God's  ambassadors, 
God's  messengers,  God's  servants,  God's  shepherds,  God's 
stewards,  God's  overseers,  and  labourers  in  God's  vine 
yard. 

But  we  steadily  refuse  to  admit  that  Christian  ministers 
are  in  any  sense  sacrificing  priests,  mediators  between  God 
and  man,  lords  of  men's  consciences,  or  private  confessors. 
We  refuse  it,  not  only  because  we  cannot  see  it  in  the 
Bible,  but  also  because  we  have  read  the  lessons  of  Church 
history,  and  seen  the  enormous  evils  to  which  it  has 
given  rise.  We  believe  that  sacerdotalism  or  priestcraft 
has  often  been  the  curse  of  Christianity,  and  the  ruin  of 
true  religion.  We  say  boldly  that  the  exaltation  of  the 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  19 

ministerial  office  to  an  unscriptural  place  and  extravagant 
dignity  in  the  Church  of  England  is  likely  to  alienate 
the  affections  of  the  laity,  to  ruin  the  Church,  and  to 
be  the  source  of  every  kind  of  error  and  superstition. 
"  Sacerdotalism,"  said  an  eminent  Liberal  statesman  (Mr. 
Forster  of  Bradford)  not  long  ago,  "if  tolerated  in  the 
Established  Church,  will,  in  my  own  case,  turn  an  honest 
and  fearless  supporter  of  the  existing  system  into  an 
equally  honest  and  determined  opponent." — "  I  would  as 
little  sanction  a  sacerdotal  State  Church  as  I  would  the 
union  of  the  State  with  Eomanism." — And  we  say,  in 
addition,  though  last,  not  least,  that  sacerdotalism  has 
not  the  slightest  warrant  in  the  Thirty -nine  Articles.  A 
non-sacerdotal  ministry  is  a  distinctive  principle  of  the 
Church  of  England. 

V.  The  fifth  and  last  distinctive  principle  of  the 
Church  of  England  appears  to  me  to  be  its  wise,  well- 
balanced,  and  moderate  estimate  of  the  sacraments. 

I  need  hardly  tell  my  readers  that  extravagant  views 
of  the  effects  of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  have 
been  in  every  age  of  the  Church  the  most  fertile  source 
of  mischievous  superstition.  Such  is  the  intensity  of 
man's  natural  tendency  to  formalism  in  religion,  that 
myriads  have  always  clung  to  the  idea  that  these  two 
sacraments  confer  grace,  independently  of  faith,  in  those 
that  receive  them,  and  that  they  work  on  the  soul  in  a 
kind  of  physical  way,  if  I  may  so  speak,  like  medicines 
on  the  body.  The  high-flown  rhetorical  language  of  the 
Fathers  about  them  did  immense  harm  in  the  early 
ages.  The  Church  of  Eome  has  stereotyped  and  crys 
tallized  the  error,  by  the  decree  of  the  Council  of  Trent 
(7  Ses.  8  Canon.  Cramp's  "Text-book  of  Popery,"  p.  155) : 
"  Whosoever  shall  affirm  that  grace  is  not  conferred  by 
these  sacraments  of  the  new  law,  by  their  own  power 


20  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

(ex  opere  operato),  but  that  faith  in  the  Divine  promises  is 
all  that  is  necessary  to  obtain  grace :  let  him  be  accursed." 
Thousands  of  English  Churchmen,  wittingly  or  unwit 
tingly,  seem  to  maintain  practically  the  same  view  as  the 
Church  of  Eome,  and  to  attribute  to  the  mere  outward 
administration  of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  a  kind 
of  invariable  influence  and  power,  no  matter  how  they 
are  used. 

The  harm  that  these  extravagant  views  do  to  the  souls 
of  men  is  simply  incalculable.  They  help  to  fill  "the 
broad  way "  with  travellers.  Multitudes  live  and  die 
in  the  secret  belief  that  they  were  "born  again,"  and 
received  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  in  baptism,  though  from 
their  infancy  they  have  known  nothing  of  what  the 
Church  Catechism  calls  "a  death  unto  sin  and  a  new 
birth  unto  righteousness."  They  are  not  "  dead  to  sin," 
but  actually  live  in  it ;  and  yet,  forsooth,  they  think  they 
are  born  again  !  Multitudes  more  are  continually  receiv 
ing  the  Lord's  Supper  under  the  belief  that  somehow 
or  other  it  must  do  them  good,  though  they  are  utterly 
destitute  of  the  Catechism  standard,  and  neither  "  repent 
of  sin,"  nor  "  purpose  to  lead  a  new  life,"  nor  "  have  a 
lively  faith  in  God's  mercy  in  Christ,  nor  a  thankful 
remembrance  of  His  death,  nor  live  in  charity  with  all 
men."  They  seem,  in  short,  to  have  imbibed  the  idea 
that  the  Lord's  Supper  can  give  grace  to  the  graceless, 
and  is  a  means  of  conversion  and  justification  !  And  all 
this  time  the  Scripture  says  expressly,  "He  is  not  a 
Jew  which  is  one  outwardly;  neither  is  that  circum 
cision  which  is  outward  in  the  flesh :  but  he  is  a  Jew 
which  is  one  inwardly:  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the 
heart,  in  the  Spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter ;  whose  praise  is 
not  of  men,  but  of  God"  (Eom.  ii.  28,  29).  And  again : 
"  Baptism  doth  also  now  save  us  (not  the  putting  away 
of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  con- 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  21 

science  toward  God)"  (1  Pet.  iii.  21).  And  again:  "He 
that  eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh 
damnation  to  himself,  not  discerning  the  Lord's  body  " 
(1  Cor.  xi.  29). 

Now  to  these  extravagant  views  of  the  effect  of  the 
sacraments,  I  unhesitatingly  assert  that  the  Church  of 
England  gives  no  countenance  at  all.  The  Twenty-fifth 
Article  declares  plainly  about  both  sacraments,  that  "  in 
such  only  as  worthily  receive  the  same  they  have  a  whole 
some  effect  or  operation;  but  they  that  receive  them 
unworthily,  purchase  to  themselves  damnation."  The 
Twenty-eighth  Article  says  :  "  To  such  as  rightly,  worthily, 
and  with  faith  receive  the  same,  the  bread  which  we  break 
is  a  partaking  of  the  body  of  Christ,  and  likewise  the  cup 
of  blessing  is  a  partaking  of  the  blood  of  Christ."  The 
Twenty-ninth  Article  says :  "  The  wicked,  and  such  as 
be  void  of  a  lively  faith,  although  they  do  carnally  and 
visibly  press  with  their  teeth  the  Sacrament  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  Christ,  yet  in  no  wise  are  they  partakers  of 
Christ:  but  rather  to  their  condemnation,  do  eat  and 
drink  the  sign  or  Sacrament  of  so  great  a  thing." 

It  is  no  answer  to  all  this  to  quote  the  language  of 
the  Service  for  Infant  Baptism,  which  says  of  every  child 
baptized,  "  This  child  is  regenerate."  You  might  just  as 
well  say  that  every  child  who  repeats  the  words  of  the 
Church  Catechism  is  really  "  elect "  and  really  "  sancti 
fied,"  because  he  says,  "  I  believe  in  God  the  Holy  Ghost, 
who  sanctifieth  me  and  all  the  elect  people  of  God." 
The  utmost  you  can  make  of  the  expression  is,  as  Bishop 
Carleton  says,  that  "  It  is  the  charity  of  the  Church ; "  or, 
as  Bishop  Downame,  Archbishop  Usher,  and  Dean  Durel 
say,  "  The  judgment  of  charity."  The  dictum  of  Lord 
Chancellor  Hatherley,  in  the  Voysey  judgment,  must  never 
be  forgotten  :- — "  Pious  expressions  of  devotion  are  not  to 
be  taken  as  binding  declarations  of  doctrine."  "  The 


22  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Articles,"  said  the  "  Solicitors'  Journal,"  when  that  judg 
ment  was  delivered,  "  and  these  alone,  are  to  be  considered 
as  the  code  of  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England."  And 
I  repeat  my  deliberate  conviction,  that  the  wise  and 
moderate  statement  of  the  Articles,  that  grace  is  not 
invariably  tied  to  either  baptism  or  the  Lord's  Supper,  is 
the  true  doctrine  of  our  Church,  and  one  of  its  distinctive 
principles. 

I  hope  my  fellow-Churchmen  in  this  day  will  stand 
firm  on  this  subject.  There  is,  I  am  afraid,  a  sad  dis 
position  to  give  way  and  recede  from  Protestant  truth  in 
this  direction.  Partly  from  a  fear  of  not  honouring  the 
sacraments  enough,  partly  from  the  pressure  of  modern 
ritualistic  teaching,  there  is  a  strong  tendency  to  exalt 
baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  to  a  place  never  given  to 
them  in  Scripture,  and  especially  not  in  the  pastoral 
Epistles.  Let  us  set  our  foot  down  firmly  on  the  wise 
and  moderate  principles  laid  down  in  our  Articles,  and 
refuse  to  go  one  inch  beyond.  Let  us  honour  sacraments 
as  holy  ordinances  appointed  by  Christ  Himself,  and 
blessed  means  of  grace.  But  let  us  steadily  refuse  to 
admit  that  Christ's  sacraments  convey  grace  ex  opere 
operate,  and  that  in  every  case  where  they  are  adminis 
tered  good  must  of  necessity  be  done,  no  matter  how  or 
by  whom  they  are  received.  Let  us  refuse  to  admit  that 
they  are  the  principal  media  between  Christ  and  the 
soul, — above  faith,  above  preaching,  above  prayer,  and 
above  the  Word.  Let  us  maintain,  with  the  judicious 
Hooker,  that  "all  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  who 
receive  the  sacraments  of  His  grace."  Let  us  ever  pro 
test  against  the  idea  that  in  baptism  the  use  of  water,  in 
the  name  of  the  Trinity,  is  invariably  and  necessarily 
accompanied  by  the  "  new  birth "  of  the  inward  man. 
Let  us  never  encourage  any  one  to  suppose  he  will  receive 
any  benefit  from  the  Lord's  Supper,  unless  he  comes  to  it 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  23 

with  "  repentance  for  sin,  and  lively  faith  in  Christ,  and 
charity  toward  all  men."  Holding  these  principles,  no 
doubt  men  are  reviled  as  Low  Churchmen,  Zwinglians, 
"  unlearned  and  ignorant  men,"  and  half  Dissenters.  But 
those  who  talk  against  them  in  this  fashion  will  never 
satisfy  a  jury  of  impartial  intelligent  men  that  their 
views  of  the  sacraments  are  not  the  wise,  moderate,  dis 
tinctive  principles  of  the  Church  of  England. 

In  drawing  my  paper  to  a  conclusion,  I  may  be  allowed 
to  observe  that  the  statements  I  have  made  in  it  might 
easily  be  confirmed  by  a  great  cloud  of  witnesses.  Our 
Church's  reverence  for  Scripture  as  the  only  rule  of  faith, 
— our  Church's  doctrinal  Evangelicalism, — our  Church's 
Protestantism, — our  Church's  repudiation  of  a  sacerdotal 
ministry, — our  Church's  rejection  of  the  ex  opere  operate 
theory  of  the  sacraments, — all  these  points  might  be 
abundantly  supported  by  quotations  from  the  Liturgy,  the 
Homilies,  Bishop  Jewel's  Apology,  and  the  writings  of 
the  Eeformers  and  Elizabethan  divines.  But  this  would 
occupy  more  room  than  I  can  afford  to  give  in  this  paper, 
and  it  is  possible  to  overload  men's  minds  in  an  age  when 
people  are  sadly  afflicted  with  intellectual  dyspepsia,  and 
cannot  digest  much.  I  have  thought  it  better  to  stick 
to  the  Articles,  and  to  draw  my  arguments  solely  and 
entirely  from  them.  I  only  remark  that  those  who  have 
time  to  investigate  the  subject  farther  will  be  abundantly 
rewarded.  Beading  in  Eeformation  theology  is  reading 
that  will  pay. 

Of  course  I  am  aware  that  the  whole  subject  of  my 
paper  is  one  on  which,  as  Sir  Eoger  de  Coverley  used  to 
say,  "  There  is  much  to  be  said  on  both  sides."  I  shall 
be  told  that  many  loyal  members  of  the  Church  of 
England,  true-hearted  and  worthy  men,  opposed  alike  to 
popery  and  infidelity,  spending  and  being  spent  daily  for 
the  Anglican  Communion,  do  not  see  things  as  I  do,  and 


24  PRINCIPLES    FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

would  not  subscribe  to  the  account  of  the  Church's 
"distinctive  principles"  which  I  have  laid  before  you 
to-day. 

Well,  I  admit  all  this,  fully  and  freely.  To  use  a 
familiar  saying,  "  More's  the  pity  ! "  It  always  has  been 
so.  It  always  will  be  so,  I  suppose.  So  long  as  human 
nature  is  what  it  is,  you  will  never  get  all  men  to 
approach  religious  subjects  from  the  same  standpoint,  or 
to  attach  precisely  the  same  meaning  to  theological  terms 
and  words.1  To  see  the  conflicting  interpretations  which 
two  equally  honest  minds  will  sometimes  put  on  the 
same  language  is  to  my  mind  one  of  the  wonders  of  the 
world.  So  long  as  the  early  training  of  young  English 
clergymen  is  so  miserably  defective  as  it  is,  I  am  not 
surprised  at  any  amount  of  defective  theology.  More 
over,  I  know  that  our  Church  is  largely  and  wisely  com 
prehensive,  and  has  always  found  room  for  more  than  one 
school  in  her  pale.  I  frankly  allow  that  many  of  those 
who  disagree  with  the  views  I  have  expressed  to-day  are 
just  as  loyal  to  the  Church  of  England  as  myself,  and 
I  have  not  the  slightest  wish  to  ostracize  them,  or  drive 
them  out  of  our  communion.  Of  course,  I  think  them 
mistaken  and  in  error,  and  they  probably  think  just  the 
same  about  me !  But  I  do  not  want  to  unchurch  them, 
so  long  as  they  honestly  and  ex  animo  subscribe  to  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles.  Papists,  Socinians,  and  infidels  are 
certainly  in  the  wrong  place  in  the  Church  of  England, 
and  I  cannot  tolerate  them.  Within  these  limits,  how- 

1  "  It  is  apparently  the  inexorable  law  of  the  operation  of  the  human 
intellect,  that  there  must  be  diversities  of  opinion,  opposed  modes  of 
thought  and  feeling,  determined  partly  by  original  differences  of  mental 
constitution,  partly  by  the  association  of  education.  "We  cannot  all  hope 
to  be  alike.  The  Church  of  Christ,  in  this  respect,  is  no  exception  to 
other  societies.  From  the  beginning  of  its  existence,  from  the  days  of  its 
apostolic  infancy,  there  have  been  in  it  'schools  of  thought.'  " — Professor 
Incd's  Inaugural  Lectures  at  Oxford,  1878. 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  25 

ever,  I  can  tolerate  a  great  deal,  and  cultivate  hope  and 
charity  about  others. 

But  while  I  admit  all  this,  I  must  express  my  own 
decided  conviction  that  the  statement  I  have  given  of  the 
distinctive  principles  of  the  Church  of  England  is  a  true 
and  correct  one, — that  there  is  no  flaw  in  the  argument, 
— and  that  no  Churchmen  have  less  cause  to  be  ashamed 
of  their  peculiar  views  than  those  who  are  called  "  Evan 
gelical  Churchmen."  Nor  is  this  all.  I  am  persuaded 
that  no  religious  teaching  at  this  moment  is  doing  so 
much  real  good  throughout  the  world,  in  awakening, 
convincing,  and  converting  souls,  as  that  old-fashioned, 
despised  teaching  which  is  called  "  Evangelical."  Other 
schools,  no  doubt,  wear  smarter  uniforms,  blow  louder 
trumpets,  carry  more  sail,  and  make  much  more  show 
before  men.  Ours,  I  humbly  believe,  has  the  most  of 
the  favour  and  blessing  of  Almighty  God.  If  I  did  not 
think  so,  I  would  leave  it  to-day. 

And  now  let  me  conclude  all  with  four  pieces  of  advice 
which  I  offer  in  brotherly  affection  to  all  who  read  this 
paper.  Take  them  as  coming  from  one  who,  through  evil 
report  and  good  report,  for  nearly  half  a  century  has  stuck 
to  Evangelical  opinions,  has  marked  the  rise  and  progress 
of  other  more  popular  schools,  and  carefully  studied  their 
distinctive  views,  and  at  the  end  of  a  long  life  is  not  a 
bit  ashamed. 

(1)  In  the  first  place,  I  advise  every  one  who  reads 
this  paper  to  read  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  regularly,  at 
least  once  every  year,  and  to  make  himself  thoroughly 
familiar  with  their  contents. 

It  is  not  a  reading  age,  I  fear.  Newspapers,  and 
periodicals,  and  shilling  novels  absorb  the  greater  part  of 
the  time  given  to  reading.  I  am  sorry  for  it  If  I 
could  only  reach  the  ear  of  all  thinking  lay  Churchmen, 
I  should  like  to  say,  "  Do  read  your  Articles."  As  for 


26  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

clergymen,  if  I  had  my  own  way,  I  would  require  them 
to  read  the  Articles  publicly  in  church  once  every  year. 

Ignorance,  I  am  compelled  once  more  to  say,  is  one  of 
the  grand  dangers  of  members  of  the  Church  of  England 
in  the  present  day.  The  bulk  of  her  people  neither 
know,  nor  understand,  nor  seem  to  care  about,  the  inside 
of  any  of  the  great  religious  questions  of  the  day. 
Presbyterians  know  their  system.  Baptists,  Independents, 
and  Methodists  know  theirs.  Papists  are  all  trained 
controversialists.  Churchmen  alone,  as  a  body,  are  too 
often  profoundly  ignorant  of  their  own  Church,  and  all 
its  principles,  doctrines,  and  history.  Not  one  in  twenty 
could  render  a  good  reason  of  his  position,  and  tell  you 
why  he  is  a  Churchman ! 

Let  us  cast  aside  this  reproach.  Let  all  Churchmen 
awake  and  rub  their  eyes,  and  begin  to  "  read  up  "  their 
own  Church  and  its  doctrines.  If  any  man  wants  to 
know  where  to  begin,  I  advise  him  to  begin  with  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles.  And  if  any  one  wishes  for  a  sound 
exposition  of  the  Articles,  let  him  read  Dr.  Boultbee's 
"  Theology  of  the  Church  of  England."  (Longman.) 

(2)  In  the  second  place,  I  advise  all  who  read  this 
paper  to  teach  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  to  all  young 
people  who  are  yet  of  an  age  to  be  taught.  It  is  a 
burning  shame  that  the  Articles  are  not  made  an  essential 
part  of  the  system  of  every  school  connected  with  the 
Church  of  England,  whether  it  be  elementary  or  classical, 
whether  it  be  for  high  or  low,  for  rich  or  poor. 

I  speak  from  experience.  It  is  a  simple  fact,  that 
the  beginning  of  any  orderly  and  clear  doctrinal  views  I 
have  ever  attained  myself,  was  reading  up  the  Articles 
at  Eton,  for  the  Newcastle  Scholarship,  and  attending  a 
lecture  at  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  on  the  Articles,  by  a 
college  tutor.  I  shall  always  thank  God  for  what  I 
learned  then.  Before  that  time  I  really  knew  nothing 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  2*7 

systematically  of  Christianity.  I  knew  not  what  came 
first  or  what  last.  I  had  a  religion  in  my  head  without 
order.  The  things  which  I  found  good  for  myself  I 
commend  to  others.  JEocperto  crede.  If  you  love 
young  people's  souls,  and  would  ground  them,  and 
stablish  them,  and  arm  them  against  error  betimes,  take 
care  that  you  teach  them  not  only  the  Catechism,  but 
also  the  Articles. 

(3)  In  the  third  place,  I  advise  all  who  read  this 
paper  to  test  all  Churchmanship  by  the  test  of  the 
Articles.  Be  not  carried  away  by  those  who  are  always 
talking  of  "  Church  views,"  "  catholic  principles,"  "  catholic 
ceremonies,"  "  holy,  earnest,  parish  priests,"  "  hard-working 
clergymen,"  "  devoutness,"  "  work,"  and  the  like.  Depend 
on  it,  these  vague  expressions  often  cover  over  a  vast 
quantity  of  unsound  or  defective  Churchmanship ! 

As  to  "  catholic  principles,"  hear  what  the  Bishop  of 
Manchester  said  about  them  in  January  1878  : — 

"  Year  by  year,  out  of  this  undefined,  ill-understood,  misused  word 
'catholic,'  new  and  strange  dogmas  and  usages  are  evoked.  And  the 
plea  is,  that  to  some  these  things  are  'a  great  comfort.'  The  same 
plea  might  be  urged  for  dram-drinking  !  Etymologically  and  truly,  that 
only  comforts  which  strengthens.  And  I  have  seen  nothing  to  prove  to 
me  that  the  new  school  of  '  catholic  teaching '  is  producing  men  and 
women  more  imbued  with  the  true  spirit  of  Christianity,  which  is  the 
spirit  of  love  and  of  power  and  of  a  sound  mind,  than  that  old  school  of 
English  Churchmanship  in  which  I  was  trained,  and  in  which  I  hope  to 
die." — Guardian,  January  16,  1878. 

As  to  "  devoutness,"  hear  what  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester 
says : — 

"  It  is  utterly  irrelevant  to  bring  forward  the  goodness  and  devoutness 
of  the  Catholic  school.  Thank  God,  there  are  very  many  good  and 
devoted  Roman  Catholics  in  this  world  ;  but  this  goodness  and  devotion 
do  not  make  their  principles  a  whit  different  from  what  they  are,  or 
render  their  doctrines  in  the  faintest  degree  more  reconcilable  with  the 
teachings  and  principles  of  the  Reformation."  —  Charge.  Guardian, 
January  16,  1878. 


28  PRINCIPLES  FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

As  to  work,  I  am  afraid,  in  many  well-worked  parishes, 
as  they  are  called,  it  means  nothing  more  than  feeding 
the  hungry,  clothing  the  naked,  giving  medicine  to  the 
sick,  distributing  alms  to  the  poor,  keeping  cottages 
clean,  visiting  schools,  and  administering  the  Sacrament 
to  the  infirm  and  dying.  Such  "  work,"  as  it  is  called, 
is  all  very  well  in  its  way,  makes  a  man  look  busy, 
takes  up  time,  and  quite  satisfies  many  people.  But  is 
it  the  chief  "  work  "  for  which  a  clergyman  is  ordained  ? 
Is  he  really  meant  to  be  little  more  than  a  relieving 
officer,  or  doctor,  or  sanitary  inspector,  or  manager  of 
schools  ?  Is  not  his  chief  work  to  preach  and  teach 
Christ's  Gospel  ?  Does  he  do  so  ?  That  is  the  first  and 
foremost  question ; — and  to  answer  it  you  have  a  right 
to  turn  to  the  Bible  and  the  Articles.  Try  all  that 
clergymen  preach  and  teach,  by  one  simple  measure, — 
Does  it  or  does  it  not  agree  with  the  Articles  ?  You 
have  an  undoubted  right  to  do  this,  and  no  English 
clergyman  has  any  right  to  object  to  your  doing  it. 
Say  to  him,  if  he  does  object,  "You  publicly  read 
and  subscribed  to  the  Articles,  when  you  accepted 
your  cure  of  souls.  Do  you  or  do  you  not  abide  by 
your  subscription  ? " 

This  is  the  simple  ground  we  want  to  take  up  in  the 
various  Societies  which — amidst  much  abuse,  obloquy, 
and  opposition — are  labouring  to  maintain  the  Protestant 
character  of  the  Church  of  England.  We  are  not  in 
tolerant,  whatever  some  may  please  to  say.  '  We  do  not 
want  to  persecute  anybody  for  trifles,  or  to  magnify  petty 
differences,  or  to  narrow  the  limits  of  our  Church.  We 
have  not  the  slightest  wish  to  excommunicate  every  one 
who  cannot  agree  with  us  in  every  jot  and  tittle  of  our 
opinions.  We  would  think  and  let  think.  But  we  do 
contend  that  there  are  bounds  to  the  liberty  of  thought 
which  our  Church  allows  to  her  children,  and  that  those 


THE  CHURCH'S  DISTINCTIVE  PRINCIPLES.  29 

bounds  ought  not  to  be  transgressed.  We  object  to  the 
Popish  Mass,  the  Popish  Auricular  Confession,  and  all 
the  Popish  practices  which  so  many  are  trying  to  intro 
duce  among  us,  to  the  infinite  disgust  of  the  laity,  and 
the  infinite  damage  of  the  Church  of  England.  We  want 
to  maintain  the  great  distinctive  principles  of  the  Church 
of  England  pure,  whole,  and  undefiled,  and  to  hand  them 
down  as  such  to  our  children.  "  Nolumus  leges  ecdesice 
mutari."  And  we  say  that  any  one  who  holds  prefer 
ment  in  the  Church  of  England  ought  to  obey  the  laws 
of  the  Church  of  England,  so  long  as  those  laws  are 
unrepealed.  If  English  rulers  ever  repeal  the  Acts  of 
Parliament  called  the  13th  of  Elizabeth,  and  28th  and 
29th  of  Victoria,  and  get  rid  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles, 
we  will  take  up  other  grounds  for  opposing  extreme 
Eitualism,  and  will  concede  that  a  Churchman  may  be 
anything  or  everything  in  opinion,  and  may  even  be  a 
Papist !  But  so  long  as  things  are  as  they  are,  we  say 
we  have  a  right  to  demand  that  respect  shall  be  paid  to 
the  Articles. 

(4)  Finally,  let  me  advise  every  Churchman  who 
values  his  soul  never  to  be  ashamed  of  the  great  leading 
doctrines  which  are  so  nobly  set  forth  in  the  Thirty -nine 
Articles. 

Never  mind  if  people  call  you  "extreme,  party-spirited, 
going  too  far,  puritanical,  ultra-Methodist,"  and  the  like. 
Ask  them  if  they  have  ever  read  the  first  eighteen 
Articles  of  their  own  Church.  Tell  them,  so  long  as  you 
are  a  Churchman,  you  will  never  be  ashamed  of  holding 
"  Church  doctrine,"  and  that  you  know  what  Church 
doctrine  is,  if  they  do  not. 

Eemember,  above  all,  that  nothing  but  clear,  distinct 
views  of  doctrine — such  views  as  you  will  find  in  the 
first  eighteen  Articles — will  ever  give  you  peace  while 
you  live,  and  comfort  when  you  die. 


30  PRINCIPLES    FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

"Devoutness,"  and  "earnestness,"  and  "catholic"  views, 
and  "  catholic  "  principles,  and  "  catholic  "  ceremonies  are 
fine,  specious,  high-sounding  terms,  and  very  beautiful  to 
look  at  and  talk  about,  when  we  are  well,  and  happy, 
and  prosperous.  But  when  the  stern  realities  of  life 
break  in  upon  us,  and  we  are  in  trouble, — when  the 
valley  of  death  looms  in  sight,  and  the  cold  river  must 
be  crossed, — in  seasons  like  those  we  want  something 
better  than  mere  "  earnestness  "  and  "  catholic  principles  " 
to  support  our  souls.  Oh  no !  it  is  cold  comfort  then, 
as  our  feet  touch  the  chill  waters,  to  be  told,  "  Fear  not ! 
You  hold  catholic  views,  you  have  been  baptized,  you 
have  gone  to  the  Lord's  Supper  constantly.  Take  com 
fort  !  All  is  well !  " — It  will  never,  never  do  !  "  Non 
tali  auxilio  tempus  eget"  We  want  then  to  "  know  and 
feel "  that  God  is  our  God,  that  Christ  is  our  Christ,  that 
we  have  the  Holy  Spirit  within  us,  that  our  sins  are 
pardoned,  that  we  are  sprinkled  with  the  precious  blood 
of  the  Lamb,  that  our  souls  are  saved,  that  our  persons 
are  justified,  that  our  hearts  are  changed,  that  our  faith 
is  genuine  and  real.  "  Catholic  principles  "  and  "  catholic 
ceremonial "  alone  will  not  be  enough  then.  Nothing,  in 
short,  will  do  in  that  solemn  hour  but  clear,  distinct 
gospel  doctrine,  embraced  by  our  inward  man,  and  made 
our  own  by  living  faith.  Doctrines  such  as  those  set 
forth  in  the  Articles  are  the  only  doctrines  which  are 
life,  and  health,  and  strength,  and  peace.  Never  be 
ashamed  of  laying  hold  of  them,  maintaining  them,  making 
them  your  own  personal  property,  and  contending  for 
them  to  the  death.  Be  very  sure  those  doctrines  are  the 
religion  of  the  Bible  and  of  the  Church  of  England ! 


II. 

THE  CHURCH'S  COMPREHENSIVENESS. 

THE  title  of  this  paper  contains  a  word  which  requires  a 
little  explanation.  That  word  is  "comprehensiveness." 
In  order  to  explain  my  meaning,  I  will  mention  a  few 
questions  about  which  men's  minds  seem  curiously  be 
wildered  in  these  days.  The  questions  are  such  as  these : 
Was  the  Reformed  Church  of  England  intended  to  be  a 
narrow  communion  in  which  no  difference  of  opinion  was 
to  be  allowed  ? — Were  its  members  meant  to  be  confined 
to  a  rigid  uniformity  of  thought  on  every  conceivable  point 
of  doctrine  and  practice  ? — Was  any  liberty  of  thinking  to 
be  allowed  ? — What  were  to  be  the  limits  of  such  liberty  ? 
On  each  of  these  questions  I  shall  try  to  throw  a  little 
light  in  this  paper. 

(1)  To  be  as  comprehensive  as  possible,  consistently 
with  reverence  for  the  rule  of  Scripture,  should  be  the 
aim  of  every  well-constituted  National  Church.  Reason 
and  common  sense  alike  point  this  out.  It  should  allow 
large  liberty  of  thought  within  certain  limits.  Its  neces- 
saria  should  be  few  and  well-defined.  Its  non-neces- 
saria  should  be  very  many.  It  should  make  generous 
allowance  for  the  infinite  variety  of  men's  minds,  the 
curious  sensitiveness  of  scrupulous  consciences,  and  the 
enormous  difficulty  of  clothing  thoughts  in  language 


32  PRINCIPLES   FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

which  will  not  admit  of  more  than  one  meaning.  A  sect 
can  afford  to  be  narrow  and  exclusive;  a  National  Church 
ought  to  be  liberal,  generous,  and  as  "  large-hearted "  as 
Solomon  (1  Kings  iv.  29).  Above  all,  the  heads  of  a 
National  Church  should  never  forget  that  it  is  a  body  of 
which  the  members,  from  the  highest  minister  down  to 
the  humblest  layman,  are  all  fallen  and  corrupt  creatures, 
and  that  their  mental  errors,  as  well  as  their  moral 
delinquencies,  demand  very  tender  dealing.  The  great 
Master  of  all  Churches  was  one  who  would  not  "  break 
a  bruised  reed  or  quench  smoking  flax"  (Matt.  xii.  20), 
and  tolerated  much  ignorance  and  many  mistakes  in  His 
disciples.  A  National  Church  must  never  be  ashamed 
to  walk  in  His  steps.  To  secure  the  greatest  happiness 
and  Wealth  of  the  greatest  number  in  the  State  is  the 
aim  of  every  wise  politician.  To  comprehend  and  take 
in,  by  a  well-devised  system  of  Scriptural  Christianity, 
the  greatest  number  of  Christians  in  the  nation,  ought  to 
be  the  aim  of  every  National  Church. 

Now  comprehensiveness,  such  as  I  have  described,  I 
believe  to  be  a  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  National 
Church  of  England.  I  do  not  admit  the  truth  of 
Chatham's  famous  dictum,  that  we  have  Calvinistic 
Articles,  a  Popish  Liturgy,  and  Arminian  clergy.  It 
sounds  smart,  but  it  is  not  correct.  No  doubt  we  have 
within  our  pale  three  widely  different  "  schools  of 
thought," — the  old  historical  schools  commonly  called 
High,  and  Low,  and  Broad.  They  are  schools  which  have 
existed  for  nearly  three  centuries,  and,  unless  human 
nature  greatly  alters,  I  believe  they  will  exist  as  long  as 
the  Church  of  England  stands.  But  for  all  this  I  believe 
that  there  is  no  Church  on  earth  which  contains  so  large  a 
number  of  educated,  intelligent,  independent,  thoughtful, 
free-speaking  ministers  and  laymen ;  who,  while  they 
differ  widely  on  some  points,  and  each  thinks  himself 


THE  CHURCH'S  COMPREHENSIVENESS.  33 

right  and  others  wrong,  are  all  firmly  attached  to  their 
own  Communion,  and  would  be  ready,  if  need  be,  to  fight 
for  it  to  the  very  last.  We  all  probably  think  we  could 
reform  and  amend  the  Church  a  little,  and  each  school  has 
its  own  special  nostrums  and  medicines,  which  it  believes 
Would  improve  the  Church's  health,  if  taken.  And,  like 
genuine  Englishmen,  we  are  all  ready  to  grumble  because 
we  cannot  have  everything  our  own  way.  Yet  there  is 
a  curious  amount  of  agreement  among  us  about  certain 
great  principles.  We  all  love  our  old  English  Bible,  if 
we  do  not  always  interpret  it  alike.  We  like  Episcopacy, 
if  we  do  not  equally  like  all  our  Bishops.  We  like  the 
Prayer-book,  if  we  do  not  put  the  same  sense  on  all  its 
phrases.  We  like  our  parochial  system  and  our  parish 
churches.  We  like  our  Articles,  and  Creeds,  and  mode 
of  worship.  And  if  any  man  asks  how  much  we  like 
these  things,  I  advise  him  to  try  to  take  them  away.  He 
would  soon  find  that  he  might  as  weM  try  to  interfere 
between  husband  and  wife  in  a  family  quarrel,  and  that 
all  parties  would  agree  in  telling  him  to  mind  his  own 
business,  and  in  shutting  the  door  in  his  face. 

The  plain  truth  is  that  our  National  Church  is  very 
like  our  National  Army,  which  contains  several  various 
forces,  each  firmly  convinced  of  its  own  peculiar  im 
portance.  In  time  of  peace  the  Guards  chaff  the  Line, 
and  the  Line  the  Guards,  the  Cavalry  makes  light  of  the 
Artillery,  and  the  Artillery  of  the  Cavalry,  the  kilted 
Highlanders  think  little  of  the  Eifle  Brigade  or  the 
Welsh  Fusiliers,  and  the  Irish  regiments  think  themselves 
best  of  all.  But  let  the  stern  realities  of  war  once  begin, 
and  a  British  army  be  sent  to  a  foreign  shore, — let  the 
campaign  really  commence,  and  the  enemy  be  met  on  the 
field  of  battle, — let  the  word  be  given  to  advance  across 
the  Alma,  or  charge  up  the  valley  of  death  at  Balaclava, 
or  storm  the  Redan,  or  force  the  Khyber  Pass, — and 

C 


34  PRINCIPLES    FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

where  will  you  find  more  real  union,  and  brotherly  feeling, 
and  readiness  to  stand  shoulder  to  shoulder,  than  in  the 
army  of  our  Queen  ?  And  so  I  believe  it  is  in  our 
National  Church.  There  may  be  many  traitors  among  us, 
sceptics  and  Eomanists,  who  are  useless  and  untrust 
worthy,  and  ought  to  go  to  their  own  place.  But  for  all 
this,  there  is  a  vast  amount  of  substantial  agreement 
within  our  pale.  In  spite  of  all  her  apparent  differences, 
and  conflicting  schools  of  thought,  the  National  Church 
has  strong  elements  of  cohesiveness,  and  contrives  to 
satisfy  and  keep  together  a  very  large  proportion  of  the 
people  of  this  land.  This  is  what  I  call  successful 
comprehensiveness. 

In  questions  like  these  there  is  nothing  like  coming  to 
names  and  facts.  From  the  long  roll  of  great  divines  to 
which  the  National  Church  can  thankfully  point,  let  me 
select  a  few  examples  of  men  of  different  schools  of 
thought,  and  then  let  me  ask  any  sensible  Churchman 
whether  there  is  one  of  them  whom  he  would  wish  to 
blackball  and  exclude  from  our  ranks.  Let  us  think  of 
Eidley  and  Latimer  and  Jewel,  of  Hooker  and  Andrews 
and  Pearson  and  Hammond,  of  Davenant  and  Hall  and 
Usher  and  Eeynolds,  of  Stillingfleet  and  Patrick  and 
Waterland  and  Bull,  of  Eobert  Nelson  and  George 
Herbert,  of  Eomaine  and  Toplady  and  Newton  and 
Scott  and  Cecil  and  Simeon,  of  Bishops  Eyder  and 
Blomfield  and  Baring  and  "Waldegrave  and  Jeune  and 
Thirlwall,  of  Archbishops  Sumner  and  Longley  and 
Tait  and  Whately,  of  the  martyred  Bishop  Patteson, 
and  the  late  Canon  Mozley.  What  reading  man  does 
not  know  that  these  divines  differed  widely  about  many 
subjects, — about  the  Church,  the  ministry,  and  the 
sacraments — about  the  meaning  of  some  words  and 
phrases  in  the  Prayer-book — about  the  relative  place 
and  proportion  they  assigned  to  some  doctrines  and 


THE  CHURCH'S  COMPREHENSIVENESS.  35 

verities  of  the  faith  ?  But  they  all  agreed  in  loving 
the  Church  of  England,  in  thanking  God  for  her  Eefor- 
mation,  in  maintaining  her  protest  against  the  Church  of 
Rome  (see  Note  A),  in  using  her  forms  of  worship,  and 
in  labouring  for  her  prosperity.  They  could  pray  and 
praise  together.  In  days  of  darkness  and  persecution 
they  drew  together,  like  Hooper  and  Ridley  in  Queen 
Mary's  time,  and  found  common  ground.  We  may  all 
have  our  pets  and  favourites  in  this  list.  We  may 
greatly  prefer  some  of  these  men  to  others.  We  may 
think  some  of  them  were  in  error,  and  did  not  "  declare 
all  the  counsel  of  God."  But  after  all,  is  there  one  of 
them  whom  we  should  like  to  have  turned  out  of  our 
communion  ?  I  reply,  Not  one  !  With  all  their  shades 
of  opinion  they  were  "honest  Churchmen,"  and  there 
was  room  in  our  pale  for  all.  And  this  is  what  I  call 
the  practical  comprehensiveness  of  the  National  Church. 

(2)  But  are  there  no  limits  to  the  comprehensiveness  of 
the  Church  of  England  ?  This  is  a  very  delicate  question  ; 
but  I  am  prepared  to  look  it  fully  in  the  face.  It  is  one 
of  such  vast  importance,  in  a  day  of  abounding  liberalism, 
that  it  seems  very  desirable  to  lay  down  one  or  two 
leading  principles  on  the  subject. 

There  ought  to  be  some  limits  to  the  comprehensive 
ness  of  every  Church,  for  the  sake  of  order.  Once  more 
I  assert  that  reason  and  common  sense  point  to  this 
conclusion. 

Order  is  Heaven's  first  law.  There  was  order  in  Eden 
before  the  fall.  There  will  be  perfect  order  on  earth  at 
the  restitution  of  all  things.  A  Christian  Church  utterly 
destitute  of  order  does  not  deserve  to  be  called  a  Church 
at  all.  A  Church,  like  every  other  corporation  on  earth, 
must  have  definite  terms  of  membership.  It  must  have 
a  creed,  and  certain  fixed  principles  of  doctrine  and 
worship.  Its  members  have  a  right  to  know  what  its 


36  PEINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

ministers  are  set  to  teach.  A  Church  which  is  a  mere 
boneless  body,  like  a  jelly-fish,  a  colourless,  bloodless, 
creedless  Pantheon,  in  which  every  one  is  right  and 
nobody  is  wrong  who  is  in  earnest,  and  in  which  it  does 
not  matter  a  jot  what  is  preached  and  taught,  so  long  as 
the  preachers  are  sincere, — such  a  Church  is  an  un 
practical  absurdity,  and  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  dream. 
The  Church  which  abandons  all  "  limits,"  and  will  not 
proclaim  to  mankind  what  it  believes,  or  would  have  its 
members  believe,  may  do  very  well  for  Cloudland  or 
Utopia  ;  but  it  will  never  do  for  a  world  where  there 
are  tears  and  crosses,  troubles  and  sorrows,  sickness  and 
death. 

The  member  of  the  National  Church  of  England  has 
a  right  to  expect  one  general  type  of  teaching  and 
worship,  whether  he  goes  into  a  parish  church  in  Truro 
or  Lincoln,  in  Canterbury  or  Carlisle.  Different  shades 
of  statement  in  the  pulpit,  he  may  find  himself  obliged  to 
tolerate.  But  he  may  justly  complain  if  the  doctrine  of 
one  diocese  is  as  utterly  unlike  that  of  another  as  light 
and  darkness,  black  and  white,  acids  and  alkalies,  oil  and 
water.  "  Liberty  of  prophesying  "  and  free  thought,  in 
the  abstract,  are  excellent  things.  But  they  must  have 
some  bounds.  Just  as  in  States  the  extreme  of  liberty 
becomes  licentiousness  and  tyranny,  so  in  Churches  it 
becomes  disorder  and  confusion.  The  Church  which 
regards  Deism,  Socinianism,  Eomanism,  and  Protestantism 
with  equal  favour  or  equal  indifference,  is  a  mere  Babel,  a 
"  city  of  confusion,"  and  not  a  city  of  God. 

Now,  I  contend  that  the  National  Church  of  England 
has  set  up  wisely-devised  "  limits  "  to  its  comprehensive 
ness.  Those  limits,  I  believe,  are  to  be  found  in  the 
Articles,  the  Creeds,  and  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer. 
These  well-known  documents,  I  maintain,  provide  limits 
wide  enough  for  all  reasonable  men  who  do  not  object 


THE  CHURCH'S  COMPREHENSIVENESS.  37 

in  toto  to  liturgies  and  Episcopacy.  They  are  documents, 
no  doubt,  which  all  do  not  interpret  alike.  As  long  as 
the  world  stands,  and  as  long  as  language  is  what  it  is, 
you  will  never  get  men  to  place  precisely  the  same 
meaning  on  theological  phrases  and  words.  But,  however 
variously  we  may  interpret  the  Articles,  Creeds,  and 
Prayer-book,  they  are  unmistakeable  limits,  fences,  and 
bounds  within  which  the  National  Church  requires  its 
ministers  to  walk,  and  he  that  flatly  rejects  them,  denies 
them,  contradicts  them,  and  transgresses  them,  is  in  his 
wrong  place  inside  the  Church  of  England. 

(a)  If.  for  example,  on  the  one  hand,  a  man  calling 
himself  a  Churchman  deliberately  denies  the  doctrine  of 
the   Trinity,  or   the   proper   deity  of   Christ,  or   the   per 
sonality  and  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  the  atonement 
and  mediation  of  Christ,  or  the  inspiration   and   divine 
authority  of    Scripture,  or   justification  by  faith,  or  the 
inseparable   connection   of   saving   faith  and   holiness,  or 
the  obligation  of  the  two  sacraments,  I  cannot  understand 
what  he  is  doing  in  our  ranks.     Of  course,  as  an  English 
man,   he   may   come   into   our  places   of  worship.     But 
common  sense  seems  to  me  to  point  out  that  he  cannot 
conscientiously  use  our    Prayer-book,  and    that   he    has 
certainly  no  right  to    occupy  our    pulpits    and    reading 
desks. 

(b)  If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  minister  of  the  National 
Church  maintains  and  teaches  those  distinctive  doctrines 
of  the  Church  of  Eome  which  are  plainly  named,  defined, 
and  repudiated  in  the  Thirty -nine  Articles,  and  ignoring 
the  public  declaration  which  he  made  on  taking  a  living, 
deliberately  teaches  transubstantiation,  the  sacrifice  of  the 
mass,  purgatory,  the  necessity  of  auricular  confession,  and 
the  invocation  of  saints,  I  contend  that  he  is  transgressing 
the  liberty  allowed  by  the  Church  of  England.     He  may 
be  zealous,  sincere,  earnest,  and  devout,  but  he  is  in  the 


38  PRINCIPLES  FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

wrong  place  in  a  Protestant  communion.  He  has  stepped 
over  the  just  limits  of  the  Church's  comprehensiveness, 
and  is  occupying  an  untenable  and  unwarrantable 
position. 

Whether  these  documentary  limits  of  our  Church's 
comprehensiveness  are  the  wisest  and  best  that  could 
have  been  devised,  I  will  not  undertake  now  to  consider. 
At  any  rate,  they  are  at  present  the  law  of  the  land. 
But  one  assertion  I  will  venture  boldly  to  make.  Search 
all  the  Confessions  of  Faith  in  Christendom,  and  I  defy 
any  man  to  find  one  which  combines  decision  and 
firmness  in  necessary  things,  and  moderation  in  non- 
necessary  things,  so  admirably  as  the  Thirty-nine  Articles 
of  the  Church  of  England.  Nor  yet  will  you  find  a 
Church  which  allows  such  liberty  and  freedom  of  thought 
to  its  ministers,  and  imposes  so  light  a  yoke  on  their 
consciences.  If  a  clergyman  will  only  subscribe  the 
Articles  ex  animo,  and  "  consent  to  the  use "  of  the 
Prayer-book  in  conducting  public  worship,  he  is  at  once 
a  chartered  freeman  of  our  Anglican  corporation.  Let 
our  rivals  in  other  communions  say  what  they  please 
about  our  need  of  "  liberation."  The  freest  pulpit  on 
earth  is  the  pulpit  of  our  Established  Church. 

Of  course  the  things  I  have  just  said  appear  very 
narrow  and  illiberal  to  some  minds.  There  are  many 
nowadays  who  are  so  enamoured  of  liberty  that  they 
would  throw  down  all  theological  "  limits,"  fences,  and 
restrictions,  and  leave  the  platform  of  our  Church  as  bare 
as  a  common.  They  tell  us  the  only  way  to  save  the 
Church  from  shipwreck  is  to  pitch  overboard  Articles 
and  Creeds  as  useless  lumber,  and  to  assign  no  bounds  to 
her  "  comprehensiveness,"  so  long  as  her  ministers  are 
earnest  and  sincere.  I  am  utterly  unable  to  see  with 
the  eyes  of  these  people.  I  believe  that  it  is  miserable 
policy  to  try  to  purchase  unity  and  peace  and  charity  at 


THE  CHURCH'S  COMPREHENSIVENESS.  39 

the  expense  of  faith  and  hope  and  truth.  I  contend  that 
a  rejection  of  Deism  and  Socinianism  on  one  side,  and  a 
rejection  of  Romanism  and  superstition  on  the  other, 
form  "  just,  and  reasonable,  and  fair  limits  to  comprehen 
siveness,"  and  that  our  Church  does  well  and  wisely  in 
requiring  her  ministers  to  walk  within  them.  (See 
Note  B.) 

But  I  go  farther  than  this.  I  contend  that  the 
maintenance  of  certain  well-defined  "limits  to  compre 
hensiveness  "  is  absolutely  essential  to  the  welfare  of  a 
Church,  and  that  without  such  limits  it  is  vain  to  expect 
any  blessing  from  God.  I  think  I  could  name  Churches 
which  have  fallen  into  decay,  and  become  lightless  light 
houses,  in  consequence  of  giving  up  Creeds  and  Confes 
sions  of  Faith.  In  the  vain  pursuit  of  liberty  they  have 
sacrificed  vitality,  and,  casting  overboard  distinctive  doc 
trine,  have  committed  suicide.  They  continue  to  this 
day,  and  have  a  name  and  place  on  the  earth,  but,  like 
extinct  volcanoes,  they  have  neither  heat,  light,  nor  fire. 
Nor  yet  is  this  all.  I  fail  to  see  in  ecclesiastical 
history  a  single  instance  of  good  being  done  to  souls 
except  by  the  agency  of  men  who  adhered  strictly  to 
positive  doctrinal  "limits,"  and  preached  and  taught 
positive  distinctive  truths.  "Weigh  and  analyze  the 
teaching  of  any  English  divine  who  has  shaken  the  earth 
from  the  time  of  the  Reformation  down  to  the  present 
day.  Tell  me,  if  you  can,  of  one  who  ever  roused  con 
sciences,  awoke  the  sleeping,  and  revived  the  dead,  who 
did  not  hold  and  proclaim  a  well-defined  and  limited 
theology.  Show  me,  if  you  can,  a  single  "master  of 
assemblies,"  from  Latimer  down  to  the  most  popular 
mission-preacher  of  this  day,  who  ever  wrought  deliver 
ance  on  earth,  and  turned  the  world  upside  down  by  a 
mere  colourless  gospel, — a  gospel  without  the  Trinity, 
without  the  Atonement,  without  the  blood  of  Christ,  with- 


40  PRINCIPLES  FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

out  the  Holy  Spirit,  without  justification,  without  regene 
ration.  No  !  you  will  never  find  one — never,  never ! 
Grapes  will  not  grow  on  thorns,  nor  figs  on  thistles.  The 
Church  which  allows  its  ministers  to  teach  a  vague 
gospel  of  earnestness  and  sincerity,  instead  of  distinctive 
Christian  doctrine,  may  get  the  reputation  of  being  very 
liberal  and  tolerant  in  these  latter  days,  but  it  will  never 
convert  and  satisfy  souls.  A  Church  must  have  some 
"  limits "  and  bounds  to  its  "  comprehensiveness,"  if  it 
desires  to  do  good. 

And  now  let  me  conclude  with  an  earnest  appeal  to 
my  brother  Churchmen,  by  way  of  application.  For  the 
sake  of  peace,  for  the  sake  of  truth,  for  the  sake  of  the 
Church  of  England,  for  the  sake  of  Christ, — let  us  strive 
and  pray  that  we  may  hold  fast  both  the  principles 
referred  to  in  the  subject  of  this  paper — the  principle 
of  "  comprehensiveness "  and  the  principle  of  "  limita 
tion." 

(a)  Let  us  be  of  a  comprehensive  spirit.  Let  us  not 
exclude  from  the  Church  those  whom  the  Church  has 
not  excluded,  nor  ostracize  and  excommunicate  every  one 
who  cannot  pronounce  our  shibboleths,  or  work  exactly 
on  our  lines.  I  am  a  thoroughgoing  Evangelical 
Churchman,  and  I  am  not  a  bit  ashamed  of  it.  I  will 
never  give  place  by  subjection,  and  admit  that  any  one 
is  a  better  Churchman  than  myself.  But  I  have  no 
sympathy  with  those  who  advocate  a  rigid,  unbending, 
cast-iron  uniformity  within  our  pale,  and  want  all 
Churchmen  to  be,  like  the  rails  round  Hyde  Park  in 
London,  of  one  unvarying  mental  colour,  height,  shape, 
and  thickness.  If  any  man  asks  me  to  cast  out  of  the 
Church  of  this  day  men  of  the  type  of  Andrews  and 
Sanderson  and  George  Herbert,  or  of  Burnet  and 
Tillotson  and  Whichcote,  or  of  Bishops  Blomfield  or 


THE  CHUKCH'S  COMPKEHENSIVENESS.  41 

Thirl  wall,  or  of  Bishops  Wilberforce  or  Selwyn,  I  tell  him 
plainly  that  I  will  not  lift  a  finger  to  do  it.  No  doubt 
I  could  not  preach  very  comfortably  in  the  pulpits  of  such 
men,  nor  they  in  mine.  I  could  not  take  them  as  curates 
if  I  was  an  incumbent,  nor  could  they  take  me.  I  prefer 
to  support  my  own  favourite  religious  Societies,  and  they 
prefer  theirs.  But  if  any  Evangelical  Churchman  wants 
to  thrust  these  men  out  of  the  Church  of  England,  be 
cause,  like  Apollos,  they  do  not  seem  to  him  to  know 
the  "way  of  God  perfectly,"  I  will  not  help  him.  I 
will  tolerate  them,  on  my  principle  of  "  Church  com 
prehensiveness,"  and  in  return  I  expect  them  to  tolerate 
me. 

(b)  On  the  other  hand,  let  us  neither  be  ashamed  nor 
afraid  of  having  limits  to  our  comprehensiveness,  even  the 
limits  of  our  mother,  the  Church  of  England.  Let  us  not 
overstrain  the  quality  of  liberalism  so  far  as  to  sanction 
theological  licentiousness.  Let  us  be  as  broad  as  the 
Articles  and  Creeds,  but  not  one  inch  broader.  If  any 
one  tries  to  persuade  me  that  I  ought  to  smile  and  look 
on  complacently,  with  folded  arms,  while  beneficed  or 
licensed  clergymen  teach  Deism,  Socinianism,  or  Roman- 
ism,  I  must  tell  him  plainly  that  I  cannot  and  will  not 
do  it.  He  may  tell  me  that  I  am  a  "  troubler  of  Israel," 
and  a  bitter  controversialist ;  but  I  repeat  that,  when  truth 
is  in  danger,  I  cannot  and  will  not  sit  still.  At  this  rate 
the  apostles  ought  to  have  left  the  world  alone  eighteen 
centuries  ago  !  They  ought  to  have  been  satisfied  with  the 
teaching  of  Socrates  and  Plato,  and  were  fools  to  attack 
heathenism,  and  live  and  die  preaching  Christ  crucified ! 
At  this  rate  the  English  Eeformation  was  a  huge  schism 
and  mistake,  and  Eidley  and  Latimer  ought  never  to  have 
resisted  Rome  and  gone  to  the  stake  !  No,  indeed  !  I 
love  my  own  Church  too  well  to  tolerate  either  scepti 
cism  on  the  one  hand  or  Romanism  on  the  other,  and  I 


42  PEINClPLfiS    1*011   CHURCHMEN. 

think  I  am  only  doing  my  duty  to  my  ordination  vows  in 
trying  to  "  drive  both  away." 

But  after  all,  it  matters  little  what  bishops  and  clergy 
may  think  or  do.  The  question  before  us  is  rapidly  getting 
out  of  clerical  hands.  There  are  handwritings  on  the  walls, 
which  it  needs  no  Daniel  to  interpret.  I  think  I  know 
something  of  the  laity,  and  especially  in  the  middle  classes, 
in  this  country,  and  I  am  certain  they  will  never  tolerate 
and  support  a  National  Church  which  desires  to  return  to 
Eome,  or  has  no  theological  "  limits,"  and  holds  no  dis 
tinctive  doctrines.  (See  Note  C.)  They  do  not  want  the 
Established  Church  of  England  to  be  narrow,  illiberal, 
party-spirited,  and  exclusive.  But  in  a  weary,  working, 
sorrowful  world,  the  laity  will  not  put  up  with  a  religion 
either  of  negations  or  superstitions.  They  want  bread, 
and  they  will  not  be  content  with  stones.  Once  let  the 
English  laity  see  that  a  reign  of  complete  latitudinarianism 
has  begun,  that  the  old  landmarks  are  thrown  down,  and 
that  the  National  Church  does  not  care  a  jot  whether 
her  ministers  preach  Deism  or  Bible  Christianity, 
Protestantism  or  Popery,  but  gives  equal  favour  to  all, 
— once,  I  say,  let  the  laity  see  this,  and  they  will  desert 
the  National  Church  and  leave  it  to  perish.  Give  the 
laity  the  old  paths  of  the  Bible,  and  the  well-defined 
limits  of  the  Articles,  Creeds,  and  Prayer-book,  and  they 
will  stand  by  the  Church  to  the  last.  Destroy  those 
limits,  or  refuse  to  enforce  and  maintain  them,  and  they 
will  soon  cry,  "  Let  us  depart  hence ; "  our  candlestick 
will  be  removed,  and  the  Church  will  die  for  want  of 
Churchmen.  In  short,  there  is  no  alternative.  The 
question  is  one  of  life  or  death.  The  English  National 
Church  must  either  be  Protestant,  and  have  doctrinal 
"  limits,"  or  cease  to  exist. 


THE  CHURCH'S  COMPREHENSIVENESS.  43 


NOTES. 

NOTE  A. — It  is  a  curious  and  noteworthy  fact,  that 
even  Archbishop  Laud,  with  all  his  High-Churchism,  used 
the  following  language  about  the  Church  of  Eome : — 

"A  Church  may  hold  the  fundamental  points,  literally,  and  as  long  as 
it  stays  there  be  without  control,  and  yet  err  grossly,  dangerously,  nay, 
damnably,  in  the  exposition  of  them  ;  and  this  is  the  Church  of  Rome's 
case," 

"  There  is  great  peril  of  damnable  schism,  heresy,  and  other  sin,  by 
living  and  dying  in  the  Roman  faith,  tainted  with  so  many  superstitions 
as  at  this  day  it  is,  and  this  tyranny  to  boot." 

"  All  Protestants  unanimously  agree  in  this,  that  there  is  great  peril  of 
damnation  for  any  man  to  live  and  die  in  the  Roman  persuasion. " 

(I  find  these  quotations  in  a  pamphlet  of  Dean  Goode's, 
entitled,  "  Is  the  Reformation  a  Blessing  ? "  Hatchard, 
1850.) 

Archbishop  Sancroft,  the  famous  nonjuror,  before  he 
ceased  to  be  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  recommended 
the  clergy  "  to  take  all  opportunities  of  assuring  and 
convincing  the  Nonconformists,  that  the  Bishops  are 
really  and  sincerely  irreconcileable  enemies  to  the  errors, 
superstitions,  idolatries,  and  tyrannies  of  the  Church  of 
Rome." 

NOTE  B. — "Those  who,  in  their  dread  of  strife  and  party  violence, 
would  seek  to  preserve  union  by  abstaining  from  all  mention  of  every 
doctrine  that  is  likely  to  afford  matter  of  controversy,  by  laying  aside 
all  formularies  and  confessions  of  faith,  and  by  regarding  with  indif 
ference  all  varieties  of  opinion  among  professors  of  Christianity,  would 
in  fact  put  an  end  to  the  very  existence  of  the  society  itself,  whose 
integrity  and  concord  they  would  preserve.  In  preventing  hurtful 
contentions,  by  giving  up  everything  that  is  worth  contending  about, 
they  would  be  rooting  out  the  wheat  along  with  the  tares  ;  and  for  the 
sake  of  extirpating  noxious  weeds,  would  be  condemning  the  field  to 
perpetual  sterility.  And,  after  all,  it  would  be  but  an  apparent  union 
that  would  result  ;  since  the  members  of  the  same  nominal  Church  could 
have  but  little  sympathy  with  each  other's  sentiments  and  designs,  when 
they  know  them  to  be  essentially  at  variance  with  their  own." — "We  are 


44  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

not  then  to  hold  a  society  together  by  renouncing  the  objects  of  it ;  nor 
to  part  with  our  faith  and  our  hope,  as  a  means  of  attaining  charity." — 
Archbishop  Whately'a  Bampton  Lectures,  I.  44. 

To  this  note  I  shall  venture  to  add  another  extract 
from  the  same  volume,  which  in  an  age  of  extreme 
theological  violence  and  party  spirit  deserves  the  serious 
attention  of  all  thoughtful  Churchmen  : — 

"  Party  spirit  is  justly  charged  upon  those  who  go  all  lengths  of  bigoted 
partiality  and  narrow-minded  prejudice,  in  matters  relating  to  their 
party  ;  who  are  wanting  in  candour  and  charity  towards  those  of  another 
party,  and  unfair  in  any  contest  with  them  ;  who  are  strangers,  in  short, 
to  that  '  wisdom  from  above,  which  is  not  only  peaceable  and  gentle,'  but 
also  'without  partiality.'  The  great  historian  of  Greece  (Thucydidex, 
B.  iii.),  who  described,  with  such  frightful  vividness  of  colouring,  the 
political  party  spirit  of  his  own  times,  and  who  pronounced,  with  the 
prophetic  power  which  results  from  wide  experience,  acute  observation, 
and  sound  judgment,  that  the  like  would  be  ever  liable  to  recur,  though 
in  various  forms  and  degrees,  has  proved  but  too  true  a  prophet.  Much 
of  his  description  may  be  applied,  with  very  slight  or  without  any 
alteration,  to  many  subsequent  periods,  not  excepting  the  present  ;  and 
especially  in  what  relates  to  that  kind  of  party-spirit  which  has  been 
last  mentioned.  No  assurances,  he  says,  or  pledges,  of  either  party, 
could  gain  credit  with  the  other  ;  the  most  reasonable  proposals,  coming 
from  an  opponent,  were  received,  not  with  candour,  but  with  suspicion  ; 
no  artifice  was  reckoned  dishonourable  by  which  a  point  could  be  carried. 
All  recommendation  of  moderate  measures  was  reckoned  a  mark  either 
of  cowardice  or  of  insincerity  ;  he  only  was  accounted  a  thoroughly  safe 
man  whose  violence  was  blind  and  boundless  ;  and  those  who  endeavoured 
to  steer  a  middle  course  were  spared  by  neither  side." — Archbishop 
Whately's  Bampton  Lectures,  pp.  57,  58. 

NOTE  C. — The  following  passage  from  the  Quarterly 
Eeview  for  October  1878  deserves  the  attention  of  all 
who  fancy  that  the  English  laity  will  ever  allow  the 
advocates  of  extreme  ritualism  to  do  what  they  please 
with  the  Church  of  England : — 

"A  startling  disillusion  would  await  these  priests"  (the  ultra- 
Ritualistic  clergy)  "if  ever  the  experiment  of  disestablishment  were 
to  be  tried.  They  would  find  that  the  laity,  once  driven  to  protect 
themselves  against  clerical  usurpations,  would  take  good  care  that  the 
Protestantism  which  they  cherish  in  the  Prayer-book,  as  in  the  other 


THE  CHURCH'S  COMPREHENSIVENESS.      45 

formularies  of  the  Church,  was  enforced  upon  her  ministers  with  a 
stringency  never  yet  approached.  The  High  Churchmen  of  the  day  are 
endeavouring  to  read  into  the  Prayer-book  the  corruptions  which  it  was 
its  very  object  to  shake  off,  and  they  attempt  to  explain  away  the  Articles 
in  accordance  with  this  perversion  of  historical  truth.  Should  the  laity 
have  the  opportunity  of  making  their  voice  heard,  they  would  finally 
prevent,  at  whatever  cost,  any  such  juggle  with  facts.  It  is  impossible, 
however,  within  our  space,  to  enter  into  the  collateral  controversies  thus 
suggested.  We  trust  that  we  have  sufficiently  shown  that  the  Church  of 
England  bears  upon  its  face  the  most  unmistakable  marks  of  being  a 
Protestant,  no  less  than  a  Catholic,  Church  ;  and  that  until  the  rise  of 
the  un-English  school  of  theology  now  so  prominent,  it  was  united,  alike 
by  its  history  and  by  the  principles  of  its  greatest  divines,  with  Protestant 
interests  and  Protestant  principles.  It  is  conceivable  that  the  Ritualists 
and  their  High  Church  allies  may  seduce  a  considerable  body  of  the 
English  clergy  from  loyalty  to  those  principles  and  interests.  But 
in  proportion  as  they  succeed,  they  will  produce  an  impassable  gulf 
between  the  Church  of  England  of  the  Reformation  and  that  of  the 
present  day,  and  a  similar  and  a  more  disastrous  division  between 
the  English  clergy  and  the  English  people.  When  the  clergy  abjure 
Protestantism,  they  will  abjure  all  sympathy  with  one  of  the  primary 
movements  of  English  life  :  their  Church  will  cease  to  be  the  Church  of 
England,  and  they  will  sink  into  the  condition  of  an  Ultramontane 
priesthood  amidst  a  contemptuous  laity." — Quarterly  Review  Article, 
October  1878  :  "  Is  the,  Church  qf  England  Protestant  ?  "  p.  549. 


III. 

HOW  FAR  MAY  CHURCHMEN  DIFFER? 

THE  subject  which  lies  before  us  has  always  been  one  of 
vast  importance  in  the  Church  of  England.  Every  well- 
informed  student  of  history  knows  that  it  is  a  "  burning 
question,"  which  for  three  centuries  has  been  the  fruitful 
parent  of  strifes  and  divisions.  But  though  we  are 
poor  judges  of  our  own  time,  I  venture  to  think  there 
never  was  a  time  since  the  Reformation  when  the  sub 
ject  required  more  serious  attention  than  it  does  now. 
Whether  we  Churchmen  like  to  confess  it  or  not,  the 
Anglican  Church  is  in  a  somewhat  critical  state.  Upon  a 
right  solution  of  the  subject  before  us  hinges  the  mighty 
question,  "  Can  the  Established  Church  of  this  country 
hold  together  ?  Shall  we  live  or  shall  we  die  ?" 

I  think  the  simplest  way  of  handling  the  subject  will 
be  to  examine,  first  of  all,  two  views  of  it  which  are 
commonly  held  in  this  day — both,  in  my  judgment, 
totally  incorrect  and  mischievous — and  both,  I  am  sorry 
to  say,  extremely  popular  in  some  quarters.  Against  both 
I  shall  enter  my  protest,  and  give  my  reasons  for  protesting; 
and  I  shall  then  attempt  to  point  out  the  right  answer 
which,  in  my  opinion,  ought  to  be  given  to  the  question. 

I.  The  first  view  of  the  subject  which  I  shall  protest 


HOW    FAR   MAY    CHURCHMEN    DIFFER  ?  4*7 

against  is  that  of  extreme  liberalism.  This  is  the  view  of 
those  who  maintain  that  every  kind  of  diversity  in  opinion, 
practice,  and  ritual  ought  to  be  tolerated  in  our  pale,  and 
that  no  clergyman  ought  to  be  interfered  with,  no  matter 
what  he  thinks,  teaches,  or  does.  As  it  was  in  the  days 
of  the  Judges,  these  men  say,  every  one  is  to  be  allowed 
to  "  do  what  is  right  in  his  own  eyes." 

This  form  of  liberalism  is  represented  by  the  position 
taken  up  by  the  ultra-Ritualists  and  the  Romanizing 
party  within  our  pale.  What  they  are  continually 
claiming  is  more  liberty, — liberty  to  introduce  one  bit  of 
Popery  after  another, — liberty  for  the  Mass,  liberty  for 
auricular  confession,  liberty  for  prayers  for  the  dead, 
liberty  for  the  doctrine  of  purgatory,  liberty  for  Mary- 
worship,  liberty  for  the  most  thorough  sacerdotalism. 
He  who  opposes  them  is  held  up  to  public  execration  as 
a  bitter,  narrow-minded,  bigoted  persecutor.  And  most 
Englishmen,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  are  so  extremely  kind 
and  liberal  when  they  see  a  great  show  of  zeal,  that  a 
cry  is  soon  raised,  "  Give  the  zealous,  devout  Ritualists 
liberty  ;  they  mean  well :  leave  them  alone." 

The  other  form  of  extreme  liberalism  is  to  be  seen  in 
the  position  taken  up  by  the  ultra-Broad  Churchmen  of 
this  day.  These  men  also,  from  their  point  of  view,  claim 
liberty  as  much  as  the  ultra-Ritualists.  But  liberty  for 
what  ?  Why,  liberty  to  ignore  or  disregard  Articles, 
Creeds,  and  Confessions  of  Faith ;  liberty  to  deny  the 
inspiration  of  Scripture,  the  atonement,  the  personality  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  reality  of  future  punishment,  the 
obligation  of  the  Lord's  day.  He  that  opposes  them  is 
sneered  at  as  an  ignorant,  obsolete  old  fossil.  And 
Englishmen,  who  dearly  love  to  make  an  idol  of  clever 
ness,  and  liberalism  so  called,  cry  out  again,  "  Let  them 
alone :  don't  discourage  free  thought :  these  clever  fellows 
cannot  be  far  wrong." 


48  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Now  my  objections  to  all  this  morbid  liberalism,  which 
bids  us  tolerate  every  kind  of  opinion,  lie  in  a  nut-shell. 
It  is  utterly  destructive  of  order  in  the  Church  of 
England,  and  substitutes  complete  anarchy  in  its  place. 
Every  Scriptural  Church  must  have  a  Creed  and  certain 
fixed  principles,  and  by  them  its  ministers  must  abide. 
The  use  of  a  Church  is  gone  if  its  lay  members  are  to  be 
obliged  to  submit  to  every  vagary  which  may  enter  a 
minister's  mind.  No  doubt  the  English  lay  Churchman  is 
a  very  patient  and  enduring  creature,  and,  like  Issachar, 
will  crouch  for  a  long  time  under  burdens.  But  there  is 
a  limit  to  patience  and  toleration.  If  the  principles  of 
extreme  liberalism  are  to  prevail, — if  the  clergy  are  to 
be  allowed  to  teach  either  Popery  or  Scepticism,  and 
neither  Bishops  nor  Courts  of  Law  are  ever  to  interfere, 
— if  every  diversity  of  opinion  and  practice  is  to  be 
tolerated  in  our  parish  churches,  and  nothing  is  ever  to 
be  checked  or  stopped,  however  unscriptural  and  mis 
chievous, — then  I  believe  the  Established  Church  will 
soon  fall,  and  fall  deservedly.  The  laity  will  leave  her, 
and  God  will  forsake  her. 

II.  The  other  view  of  our  subject  which  I  shall  pro 
test  against  is  that  of  extreme  narrowness.  This  is  the 
view  of  those  who  maintain  that  no  diversity  whatever 
of  opinion,  practice,  or  ritual  ought  to  be  tolerated  within 
our  pale,  that  even  about  the  non-essentials  of  religion 
no  liberty  of  judgment  should  be  permitted,  that  a  cast- 
iron  uniformity  about  every  jot  and  tittle  of  worship 
ought  to  be  required,  and  that  the  slightest  departure 
from  one  hard-and-fast  line  ought  to  be  regarded  with 
suspicion,  if  not  visited  with  pains,  penalties,  and  prose 
cutions. 

This  was  the  position  taken  up  by  Archbishop  Whit- 
gift,  in  the  reign  of  our  last  Tudor  sovereign,  Queen 


HOW   FAR   MAY   CHURCHMEN   DIFFER  1  49 

Elizabeth.  True  toleration  was  unhappily  not  under 
stood  by  men  just  emancipated  from  the  bondage  ot 
Eome.  The  wretched  attempts  made  at  that  time  to 
compel  uniformity,  and  to  silence  men  like  Travers, 
Cartwright,  the  authors  of  the  "Admonition,"  and  the 
"  Martin  Mar-prelate  "  tracts,  I  am  bold  to  say,  laid  the 
first  foundation  of  English  dissent. 

This,  again,  was  the  position  taken  up  by  that  weak 
zealot,  Archbishop  Laud.  He  vainly  endeavoured  to 
stamp  out  what  he  ignorantly  called  "Calvinism,"  and 
to  silence  all  who  were  thoroughgoing  Protestants.  He 
reaped  according  as  he  sowed.  He  ruined  the  Church 
of  England  for  a  season,  and  brought  himself  and  his 
king  to  the  block. 

This,  again,  was  the  position  taken  up  by  the  Puritans 
of  the  Long  Parliament  in  the  Commonwealth  times,  when 
they  came  into  power.  Smarting  under  Laud's  tyranny,  they 
retaliated  by  deposing  the  Bishops  and  prohibiting  the  use 
of  the  Liturgy,  and  cramming  down  every  throat  the 
"  Solemn  League  and  Covenant."  How  true  it  is  that "  Op 
pression  maketh  a  wise  man  mad" !  The  stupid  intolerance 
of  the  Puritans  produced  its  natural  result.  A  violent 
reaction  took  place  when  Charles  II.  returned  to  the  throne, 
and  the  Episcopal  Church  regained  its  old  position.  The 
disgraceful  Act  of  Uniformity  was  passed;  2000  of  the 
best  ministers  of  the  day  were  shamefully  driven  out  of 
their  livings,  in  violation  of  royal  promises  made  at 
Breda;  and  the  Church  of  England  received  a  blow 
from  her  own  hands  which  has  injured  her  irretriev 
ably. 

This,  finally,  is  the  position  which  some  Churchmen 
seem  disposed  to  take  up  in  the  present  day.  This  is  a 
delicate  point  to  handle,  I  know ;  but  it  is  one  which  I 
shall  not  shrink  from  handling.  It  is  a  plain  duty  in 
these  perilous  times  to  throw  aside  reserve  and  to  speak 


50  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

out.  F  say,  then,  that  there  is  a  growing  disposition  in 
some  quarters  to  measure  clergymen  entirely  by  what 
they  do  or  not  do,  think  or  not  think,  about  the  non- 
necessaria  and  non-essentials  of  religion.  There  is  a 
generation  of  men  who  seem  utterly  unable  to  see  any 
good  in  a  clergyman,  however  blameless  both  in  preach 
ing  and  life,  if  he  does  not  see  eye  to  eye  with  themselves 
about  externals.  The  man  may  preach  the  three  E's — • 
ruin,  redemption,  and  regeneration — as  fully  and  faith 
fully  as  Latimer  or  Whitfield ;  yes,  far  better  than  his 
accusers  preach  themselves.  He  may  be  a  most  diligent, 
self-denying  pastor,  far  more  diligent  than  they  are.  It 
all  goes  for  nothing,  if  certain  other  things  are  lacking ! 
Does  the  man  preach  in  a  surplice  ?  Does  he  have  the 
Psalms  chanted  ?  Does  he  turn  to  the  East  in  saying 
the  Belief  ?  Does  he  keep  Saints'  days  ?  If  he  does  any 
of  these  things,  all  the  preaching,  working,  and  living  go  for 
nothing.  He  is  an  unsound  man  !  He  is  not  trustworthy  ! 
He  is  a  compromiser !  He  is  a  trimmer !  He  is  to  be 
gibbeted  in  the  press,  and  held  up  as  a  butt  for  slander 
and  suspicion !  He  is  edging  off  towards  Eome !  He 
has  the  incipient  marks  of  the  Beast !  In  short,  the 
narrowness  of  Whitgift,  of  Laud,  and  of  the  Common 
wealth  Puritans  is  not  dead.  It  lives ;  and  is  to  be  seen 
among  us  in  the  present  day. 

Now,  against  this  extreme  narrowness  I  desire  to 
protest  as  strongly  as  I  do  against  extreme  liberalism.  I 
will  never  consent,  on  the  one  side,  to  tolerate  all 
diversities  of  opinion  and  turn  our  Church  into  a  Pantheon. 
But  neither  will  I  consent,  on  the  other  side,  to  tolerate 
no  diversities  at  all,  and  to  denounce  every  one  as 
"  unsound "  who  does  not  agree  with  me  about  non- 
essentials.  In  non  necessariis  libertas  is  the  great  principle 
which  I  am  determined  to  maintain.  In  things  not 
needful  to  salvation,  I  would  have  every  one  fully 
"  persuaded  in  his  own  mind." 


HOW    FAR    MAY    CHUfcCHMEN    DIFFER?  51 

(a)  Narrowness    about  non-essentials  appears    to    me 
utterly  unscriptural.     I  see  no  proof  that  government  and 
worship   in    the   early   Churches   were   always   one   and 
the  same.     About  meats  offered  to  idols,  St.  Paul  clearly 
allowed  diversity  of  judgment.    Eead  the  14th  of  Komans. 
"  The  kingdom  of  God,"  he  says,  "  is  not  meat  and  drink." 
On  another  point  he  is   content  to  close  his  argument 
with  the  gentle  remark,   "  We  have   no  such  custom " 
(1  Cor.  xi.  16). 

(b)  Narrowness    about   non-essentials    appears  to  me 
eminently  calculated  to  wound  and  crush  tender  consciences. 
To  do  this  is  a  downright  sin  against  Christ.     A  man  may 
be  very  weak  and  silly  and  scrupulous  in  some  matters, 
but  he  ought  not  on  that  account  to  be  crushed,  and 
pushed,  and  snubbed,  and  held  up  to  scorn.     "  For  meat 
destroy  not  the  work  of   God"  (Eom.  xiv.   20).      For 
wearing  a  surplice  in  the  pulpit,  do  not  dub  a  man  a 
heretic.     I  declare  I  think  better  of  a  man  who  has  a 
tender  conscience  in  spite  of  all  his  mistakes,  than  I  do  of 
a  violent,  coarse  partisan  who  has  got  no  conscience  at  all. 

(c)  Narrowness   about  non-essentials  is  presumptuous. 
To  speak  positively  about  things  which  God  has  not  thought 
fit  to  decide,  and  to  lay  down  the  law  stringently  about 
questions  which  the  Scripture  has  left  open,  is  as  good  as 
saying,  "  We  are  the  men  :  knowledge  shall  die  with  us. 
We  are  infallible,  and  whoever  differs  from  us  must  be 
wrong."     To  say  the  least,  this  is  not  humility. 

(d)  Narrowness  about  non-essentials  exhibits  gross  ignor 
ance  of  human  nature.     It  is  utterly  absurd  to  suppose 
that  poor  sinful  creatures  like  Adam's  children  will  ever  be 
entirely  of  one  mind  about  anything  which  God  has  not 
clearly  revealed  to  them.     Diversities  of   judgment  are 
precisely  what  common  sense  should  lead  us  to  expect  in 
a  fallen  world,  and  to  denounce  them  roughly  is  childish 
waste  of  time. 


52  PRINCIPLES    FOE    CHURCHMEN. 

(e)  Narrowness  about  non-essentials  was  certainly  not 
approved  ly  the  first  Protestant  Reformers.  When  Hooper 
refused  to  wear  the  usual  Episcopal  dress,  and  went  to 
prison  rather  than  give  way,  both  Peter  Martyr  and 
Bucer  told  him  he  was  wrong.  When  Calvin  gave  his 
judgment  about  the  English  Liturgy,  he  said  that  its 
defects  were  "  tolerable,"  that  is,  such  as  might  be  borne 
and  were  not  worth  quarrelling  about. 

(/)  Narrowness  about  non-essentials  shows  forgetfulness 
of  the  lessons  of  our  own  Church  history.  What  indeed  has 
been  the  true  cause  of  almost  all  the  dissent,  and  strifes, 
and  divisions,  and  secessions,  and  persecutions  which  have 
constantly  plagued  English  Christianity  for  the  last  three 
centuries  ?  What  but  the  incessant  and  persistent  effort 
to  compel  people  to  be  of  one  mind  about  things  which 
are  not  needful  to  salvation,  and  the  exaltation  of  the 
minor  parts  of  religion  to  the  neglect  of  the  weightier 
matters  of  the  gospel  ? 

(g)  Finally,  narrowness  about  non-essentials  is  one  of  the 
principal  things  at  this  moment  which  "bring  Evangelical 
Churchmanship  into  contempt.  At  Oxford  and  at 
Cambridge,  on  the  Bench  and  at  the  Bar,  in  the  Army 
and  Navy,  in  the  City  and  in  Parliament,  the  thing 
which  men  dislike  most  in  the  Evangelical  school  is  alleged 
illiberality  about  non-essentials.  When  we  are  zealous 
about  great  leading  doctrines,  they  very  likely  do  not 
approve  it  much,  but  they  do  not  openly  condemn  it. 
But  when  they  see  us  making  a  violent  disturbance  about 
things  indifferent,  they  make  no  secret  of  their  disgust. 
And  I  really  do  not  wonder.  We  give  occasion,  and 
needlessly  increase  the  offence  of  the  cross. 

I  will  say  no  more  about  this  branch  of  my  subject ; 
but  before  I  leave  it  I  must  say  a  few  words  to  prevent 
slander,  misconstruction,  and  misunderstanding.  I  think 
all  changes,  needless  changes,  in  the  ceremonies  and 


HOW    FAB    MAY    CHURCHMEN    DIFFER?  53 

conduct  of  public  worship  a  very  serious  error ;  and  if 
the  man  who  introduces  them  loses  the  confidence  of  his 
people  and  drives  away  many  of  his  congregation,  I 
consider  that  he  has  no  right  to  be  surprised.  He  will 
find  they  regard  his  outward  changes  in  matters  of 
worship  as  symptoms  of  inward  changes  of  opinion,  and 
judge  him  accordingly.  All  needless  changes  are  unwise, 
mischievous,  and  create  suspicion.  It  was  when  the 
Galatians  changed  their  ways,  and  began  to  "observe 
days  and  months  and  times  and  years,"  that  St.  Paul  cried, 
"  I  am  afraid  of  you  "  (Gal.  iv.  11). 

My  only  contention  is  this,  that  whatever  our  private 
opinion  is  on  matters  not  necessary  to  salvation,  we 
must  not  lightly  condemn  men  who  do  not  see  them 
as  we  do.  To  brand  clergymen  as  unsound  and  hereti 
cal,  who  have  been  always  accustomed  since  their 
ordination  to  do  things  in  public  worship  which  we 
do  not  do,  because  they  do  not  agree  with  ourselves, 
is  contrary  alike  to  Scripture,  charity,  and  common 
sense. 

So  much  for  extreme  liberalism  and  extreme  narrow 
ness.  Both  states  of  mind  are  so  painfully  common  that 
I  make  no  apology  for  discussing  them  at  full  length, 
and  trying  to  show  that  both  are  grossly  erroneous,  and 
of  mischievous  tendency. 

III.  I  shall  next  try  to  show  what  diversities  of  opinions, 
practice,  and  ritual  cannot  justly  claim  to  be  tolerable  within 
the  pale  of  the  Church  of  England.  I  shall  do  this  as 
briefly  as  possible. 

I  say,  then,  first  and  foremost,  that  nothing  ought  to 
be  tolerated  in  the  Church  of  England  which  contradicts 
the  Bible,  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  and  the  Prayer-book. 
If  we  once  allow  men  openly  to  contradict  the  Scriptures, 
the  authorized  formularies  to  which  they  have 


54  PEINCIPLES    FOE    CHURCHMEN. 

publicly  declared  their  assent,  I  see  nothing  before  us  but 
chaos  and  confusion.  If,  for  example,  a  clergyman  denies 
the  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  or  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity, 
or  the  Godhead  of  Christ,  or  the  atonement,  or  the 
personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  the  necessity  of 
repentance  and  faith,  and  of  holiness  as  the  fruit  of 
faith,  or  the  judgment  to  come, — if  he  teaches  justification 
by  works,  Mariolatry,  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  the  necessity 
of  auricular  confession  and  priestly  absolution,  the  "  opus 
operatum "  view  of  the  sacraments,  and  purgatory, — in 
any  such  cases  I  hold  that  his  parishioners  cannot  be 
justly  and  reasonably  expected  to  tolerate  it.  It  is 
perfectly  monstrous  to  say  that  they  ought  to  be  quiet 
for  the  sake  of  peace,  and  to  put  up  with  it.  Parishioners 
so  aggrieved  have  a  right  to  bring  the  matter  before  the 
Bishop.  The  Bishop  has  a  right  to  call  the  clergyman  to 
account,  and  ought  so  to  call  him.  If  he  persists  and 
refuses  to  obey  the  Bishop's  admonition,  in  spite  of  his 
oaths  and  declarations,  the  Bishop  has  a  right  to  remit 
the  matter  to  an  Ecclesiastical  Court,  or  in  some  way  to 
call  in  the  aid  of  the  law.  And  to  say,  as  some  do,  that 
all  this  is  intolerance  and  persecution,  is  simply  ridiculous, 
and  a  gross  misapplication  of  language.  The  offending 
clergyman  in  this  instance  transgresses  the  terms  on 
which  he  holds  his  position  as  an  Anglican  clergyman, 
and  is  guilty  of  a  breach  of  contract.  He  has  broken 
his  promise  to  abide  by  the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  His 
conduct  is  such  as  would  not  be  tolerated  in  a  civilian, 
or  in  the  army  or  the  navy,  or  the  legal  or  the  medical 
profession.  As  an  Englishman  he  has  an  undoubted 
right  to  hold  and  teach  what  opinions  he  pleases  ;  but 
as  a  clergyman  he  has  certainly  no  right  to  contravene, 
contradict,  or  deny  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England 
within  the  pale  of  the  Establishment.  To  talk  of  persecu 
tion  in  such  a  case  is  absurd  !  It  is  he  who  persecutes 


HOW    FAR    MAY    CHURCHMEN    DIFFER?  55 

the  Church  of  England,  and  not  the  Church  of  England 
which  persecutes  him. 

I  say,  furthermore,  that  no  practice  or  ritual  ought  to 
be  tolerated  in  the  Church  of  England  which  tends  to 
reintroduce  distinctive  Romish  doctrines  which  the 
Church  has  formally  repudiated  in  her  formularies.  If, 
for  instance,  a  clergyman  chooses  to  wear  a  peculiar 
dress  in  administering  the  Lord's  Supper,  as  if  he  were 
offering  a  material  sacrifice,  and  teaches  his  people  that 
he  does  so  because  he  is  a  sacrificing  priest, — if  he 
consecrates  the  elements  with  such  gestures  and  postures 
that  he  appears  to  ordinary  minds  to  be  doing  a  sacrificial 
action, — if  he  treats  the  consecrated  elements  with  such 
exaggerated  reverence  that  he  appears  to  believe  there  is 
an  actual  change  in  the  elements,  and  that  Christ's  body 
and  blood  are  locally  present  under  the  forms  of  bread 
and  wine, — in  such  a  case  I  hold  firmly  that  he  exceeds 
the  just  and  reasonable  limits  of  toleration  in  the  pale  of 
the  Church  of  England.  His  actions  express  a  doctrine 
which  has  been  distinctly,  precisely,  and  conspicuously 
rejected  by  the  Church,  and  notably  in  the  Thirty-first 
Article, — I  mean  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass.  It  is  a 
doctrine  which  lies  at  the  root  of  the  whole  system  of 
the  Church  of  Eome.  It  is  the  doctrine  which,  above 
all  others,  our  Keforrners  rejected,  and  rather  than  submit 
to  it,  they  died  at  the  stake.  It  is  a  doctrine  which 
cannot  be  got  out  of  the  Prayer-book  by  any  fair  and 
impartial  interpretation.  The  actions,  gestures,  and  dress 
which  express  the  doctrine  (in  spite  of  that  unhappy 
tangle,  the  Ornaments  Eubric)  have  been  for  three 
centuries  disused  in  our  Church,  with  such  rare 
exceptions  (in  some  obscure  parishes)  that  they  only 
help  to  confirm  the  rule.  I  assert  without  hesitation, 
that,  in  a  case  like  this,  no  offending  clergyman  has  any 
just  right  to  complain  if  the  laity  refuse  to  tolerate  his 


56  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

ways,  if  the  Bishop  admonishes  him  that  he  is  wrong,  and 
if  he  finally  comes  under  the  censure  of  the  law.  To 
talk  of  all  this  as  intolerance,  I  repeat,  is  childish  and 
silly.  Intolerance  indeed  !  In  a  free  country  like  this, 
a  man  has  a  perfect  right  to  be  a  Eoman  Catholic  if  he 
pleases  ;  but  he  has  no  right  to  be  a  Eoman  Catholic  and 
at  the  same  time  to  be  a  beneficed  or  licensed  clergyman 
of  the  Church  of  England,  and  to  receive  her  pay.  Once 
admit  the  principle  that  it  is  legal  to  teach  the  sacrifice 
of  the  Mass  in  the  Anglican  Church,  and  there  is  nothing 
worth  fighting  for  in  our  controversy  with  Eome.  Once 
admit  the  Mass,  and  the  sooner  we  go  down  on  our  knees 
to  the  Pope,  confess  our  schism,  beg  his  pardon,  and  ask 
to  be  taken  back  into  his  fold,  the  better  !  We  have  not 
a  leg  to  stand  on  outside  the  Eoman  communion.  Never, 
I  repeat  emphatically,  never,  never  let  us  tolerate  the 
least  attempt  to  reintroduce  the  Mass.  For  the  honour 
of  Christ  and  His  finished  work,  let  us  resist  the  sacrifice 
of  the  Mass  while  we  have  breath  in  our  bodies. 

IV.  So  much  for  things  which  ought  not  to  be  toler 
ated.  I  will  now  turn  to  the  other  side  of  the  question, 
and  consider  what  diversities,  on  all  principles  of  justice, 
fairness,  and  common  sense,  we  ought  to  tolerate.  This  part 
of  the  subject,  I  feel  deeply,  is  a  difficult  one.  It  is  much 
more  easy  to  approach  the  matter  from  the  negative  side 
than  the  positive  one.  I  shall  try,  however,  to  lay  down  a 
few  general  principles  and  to  supply  a  few  illustrations, 
which  I  think  deserve  the  attention  of  all  Churchmen. 
Starting  with  the  broad  principle,  that  absolute  and 
entire  agreement  upon  all  points  is  unattainable,  let  us 
try  to  find  out  what  diversities  we  ought  to  tolerate  and 
allow. 

(a)  I  say,  then,  that  we  ought  to  tolerate  diversities 
of  opinion,  practice,  and  ritual,  about  matters  of  which 


HOW    FAR   MAY   CHURCHMEN    DIFFER?  57 

the  Scriptures  have  either  not  spoken  at  all,  or  else  have 
spoken  so  slightly  or  uncertainly  that  it  is  not  clear  what 
is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  a  settled  principle  with 
me,  that  you  never  ought  to  be  positive,  intolerant,  con 
demnatory,  or  censorious  about  any  matter  on  which  you 
cannot  quote  a  plain  text.  Hold  your  own  private 
opinions  as  tightly  as  you  please ;  but  do  not  be  in 
tolerant. 

(I)  I  say,  furthermore,  that  we  ought  to  tolerate 
diversities  in  matters  about  which  both  Scripture  and 
Prayer-book  rubrics  are  alike  silent,  and  which  involve 
no  question  of  doctrine.  That  there  are  a  good  many 
points  of  this  kind  we  must  all  be  aware.  It  is  vain  to 
expect  all  persons  to  see  eye  to  eye  about  them  as  long 
as  the  world  stands.  Now,  to  condemn  men  as  heretical, 
and  unsound,  and  erring,  because  they  do  not  arrive  at 
the  same  conclusions  as  we  do  about  these  points, 
seems  to  me  the  height  of  intolerance.  We  may 
think  them  very  much  mistaken ;  but  in  the  absence  of 
Bible  or  Prayer-book  argument,  they  have  as  much  right 
to  have  an  opinion  as  ourselves. 

(c)  I  say,  furthermore,  that  we  ought  to  tolerate 
diversities  of  practice,  even  about  the  observance  of 
rubrics,  when  local  circumstances  make  a  strict  and 
literal  observance  useless  and  impossible,  or  even  detri 
mental  to  the  interest  of  the  Church  of  England.  This 
may  sound  odd  at  first  hearing,  but  I  will  explain  further 
on  what  I  mean. 

So  much  for  general  principles  as  to  the  toleration  of 
diversities.  It  only  remains  for  me  now  to  offer  a  few 
practical  illustrations  in  order  to  throw  light  on  what  I 
have  been  saying.  I  do  this  with  great  diffidence  and  a 
deep  sense  of  my  own  fallibility.  I  cannot  expect  every 
one  to  agree  with  me;  but  I  have  determined  to  say 
what  I  think. 


58  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

I  say,  then,  that,  in  my  judgment,  loyal  Church 
men  ought  to  tolerate  diversities  of  opinion,  practice, 
and  ritual  about  such  points  as  the  following : — the  dress 
to  be  worn  in  the  pulpit,  whether  surplice  or  black  gown, 
— the  quantity  of  singing  in  public  worship, — the  manner 
of  administering  the  Lord's  Supper,  whether  by  pro 
nouncing  words  to  a  whole  rail  or  to  each  individual, — - 
the  selection  of  voluntary  religious  societies  to  be  sup 
ported, — the  books  and  tracts  to  be  circulated, — the 
extraordinary  means  to  be  used  in  working  parishes. 
As  to  daily  services,  and  saints'  day  services,  a  strict 
observance  of  the  rubrics  in  many  parishes  would  be 
perfectly  useless  and  a  misapplication  of  time.  There 
are  but  twelve  hours  in  the  day.  There  are  scores  of 
useful  things  nowadays,  which  were  either  unknown 
or  illegal  in  the  days  when  saying  matins  and  vespers 
was  enjoined.  As  to  repeating  the  words  of  administra 
tion  to  each  individual  communicant  in  the  Lord's  Supper, 
the  number  of  communicants  in  some  parishes  makes 
strict  compliance  almost  impossible,  and  lengthens  the 
service  most  inconveniently,  to  the  injury,  if  not  the 
destruction,  of  the  afternoon  congregation.  To  all  these 
points  one  common  remark  applies.  Not  one  of  them  is 
a  thing  necessary  to  salvation.  Most  of  them  are  things 
left  entirely  open  by  the  Church  of  England,  and  are  not 
expressive  of  any  principle  or  doctrine.  And  even  in  the 
two  instances  where  the  rubric  seems  to  be  against  a 
clergyman,  it  is  a  striking  example  of  the  old  proverb, 
" Summa  lex  summa  injuria" 

In  all  such  cases  I  hold  that  it  is  our  wisdom  to 
allow  diversities  of  opinion  and  practice.  We  ought  to 
think  and  let  think.  Upon  every  point  which  I  have 
mentioned  I  have  myself  a  very  decided  opinion,  and  I 
used  to  act  accordingly  when  I  was  an  incumbent.  Even 
now  I  privately  think  every  clergyman  who  disagrees 


HOW    FAR    MAY    CHURCHMEN    DIFFER?  59 

with  me  a  very  mistaken  man !  I  am  fully  persuaded 
that  he  is  wrong  and  I  am  right,  and  that  mine  is  the 
more  excellent  way !  But  I  am  equally  convinced  that 
these,  and  many  other  points  which  I  have  not  time  to 
specify,  are  open  questions,  and  are  wisely  and  purposely 
left  open  by  the  comprehensive  principles  of  the  Church 
of  England.  Whatever  I  may  think,  they  are  diversities 
which  I  must  tolerate,  and  tolerate  courteously,  civilly, 
and  like  a  Christian  gentleman.  And  as  to  condemning 
men  as  unsound,  untrustworthy,  heretical,  disloyal  Church 
men,  and  the  like,  on  account  of  these  things,  I  think  it 
downright  wrong.  Let  me  cap  this  by  saying  that  it  is 
also  most  impolitic.  Intolerance  is  always  offensive. 
Nothing  so  disgusts  and  repels  a  man  as  to  find  himself 
condemned  as  a  heretic  for  things  not  necessary  to  salva 
tion.  To  be  courteously  tolerant  of  diversities,  whatever 
our  private  opinions  may  be,  is  Scriptural  charity,  Scrip 
tural  policy,  and  Scriptural  common  sense. 

Time  would  fail  me  if  I  dwelt  at  greater  length  on 
this  branch  of  my  subject.  Perhaps  I  have  said  enough 
to  make  my  meaning  plain.  I  leave  it  with  the  broad 
general  remark,  that  in  the  minor  matters  of  religion 
there  will  be  diversities  of  opinion  and  practice  as  long 
as  the  world  stands,  and  that  as  long  as  these  diversities 
involve  no  questions  of  principle,  and  express  no  doctrine,  it- 
is  wise  to  tolerate  them  and  not  make  a  disturbance. 
There  are  plenty  of  weighty  matters  requiring  all  our 
attention,  affecting  the  very  foundations  of  Protestantism 
and  revealed  religion.  Let  us  reserve  our  strength  for 
them,  and  not  waste  our  time  in  squabbles  about 
secondary  matters  which  only  make  us  ridiculous  in  the 
eye  of  the  public. 

And  now  let  me  conclude  all  with  a  few  words  of  practi 
cal  application.  I  give  them  as  words  for  the  times,  and 
I  ask  my  readers  to  take  them  for  what  they  are  worth. 


60  PKINCIPLES   FOE   CHUECHMEN. 

(a)  First  and  foremost,  let  us  not  be  moved  by  the 
violent  language  used  about  the  ecclesiastical  lawsuits  of 
the  last  thirty  years.  "Narrow,  party-spirited,  violent, 
bitter,  bigoted,  coarse,  vulgar,  persecuting,"  and  the  like  ; 
nothing  is  too  bad  to  say  of  the  promoters  of  these  suits. 
It  matters  little.  Some  people  always  dislike  sentinels, 
watchmen,  and  police.  But  what  does  it  all  come  to 
when  you  look  beneath  this  cloud  of  hard  words  ?  Men 
have  simply  desired  to  preserve  the  Protestantism  of  the 
Church  of  England,  and  defend  it  against  the  insidious 
attacks  of  the  Eomanizing  movement  of  the  day.  They 
have  appealed  to  the  Law  courts,  when  no  other  remedy 
could  be  found,  in  order  to  get  the  best  legal  decisions 
within  reach,  about  points  which  people  said  were 
doubtful.  They  have  obtained  decisions  on  many  of 
these  points,  which  even  the  Bishops,  who  disapprove  the 
suits,  are  not  ashamed  to  use,  and  to  call  "  the  law."  And 
where,  I  should  like  to  know,  is  the  mighty  harm  of  all 
this  ?  Harm  indeed !  I  believe  the  suits  have  saved 
the  Church  of  England  from  ruin. 

All  lawsuits,  I  am  aware,  are  most  unpopular. 
"  Horrid  people !  going  to  law."  But  I  challenge  any  one  to 
show  how  law  can  be  ascertained  without  suits.  Tne  simple 
aim  in  recent  Ecclesiastical  Suits  has  been  to  establish 
principles.  Whether  the  recommendations  of  the  Koyal 
Commission  on  Ecclesiastical  Courts  will  ever  be  adopted 
by  Parliament,  and  become  the  law  of  the  land,  I  cannot 
tell.  For  anything  I  know,  the  "  Clergy  Discipline  Act " 
and  the  "Public  Worship  Act"  may  be  swept  away. 
Other  new  tribunals  may  be  set  up.  But  of  one  thing 
I  am  very  certain,  there  will  never  cease  to  be  Eccle 
siastical  Suits  as  long  as  the  world  stands.  There  will 
be  disputes,  arguments,  decisions,  appeals,  and  angry, 
disappointed  litigants,  until  the  end  of  time.  It  is 
amazing,  to  my  mind,  that  any  one  should  doubt  this, 


HOW   FAfc   MAY   CHURCHMEN   DIFFER?  61 

After  all,  what  saith  the  Scripture  ?  People  sometimes 
ask  whether  we  think  St.  Paul  would  have  gone  to  law  ? 
I  reply  by  another  question,  Would  St.  Paul  have  toler 
ated  false  teachers,  and  not  recommended  discipline  ? 
Would  he  recommend  us  not  to  interfere  with  heretics  ? 
Eead  Galatians  v.  10.  What  did  he  mean  when  he  said 
of  a  false  teacher :  "  He  that  troubleth  you  shall  bear  his 
judgment "  ?  What  did  he  mean  when  he  said,  "  I 
would  they  were  cut  off  which  trouble  you  "  ?  Whatever 
some  may  say,  that  phrase,  I  hold  with  Bengel,  Fergusson, 
Henry,  Estius,  Whitby,  Gill,  and  Ellicott,  means  "  cut  oft' 
from  the  Church." 

Some  well-meaning  people,  I  believe,  would  prevent 
all  lawsuits  by  the  notable  plan  of  throwing  open  the 
whole  question  of  usages  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  and 
allowing  every  clergyman  to  administer  it  with  any  cere 
monies  he  likes.  This,  I  suppose,  is  the  policy  of 
"  forbearance  and  toleration "  for  which  many  have 
petitioned,  though  how  such  a  policy  could  be  carried 
out  in  the  face  of  the  decisions  of  the  Queen's  courts,  I 
fail  to  see,  except  by  a  special  Act  of  Parliament.  A 
more  unwise  and  suicidal  policy  than  this  I  cannot  con 
ceive.  You  would  divide  every  diocese  into  two  distinct 
and  sharply-cut  parties.  You  would  divide  the  clergy 
into  two  separate  classes — those  who  wore  chasubles  and 
used  incense  and  the  like,  and  those  who  did  not ;  and  of 
course  there  would  be  no  more  communion  between  the 
two  classes.  As  to  the  unfortunate  Bishops,  they  must 
either  have  no  consciences,  and  see  no  differences,  and 
be  honorary  members  of  all  schools  of  thought,  or  else 
they  must  offend  one  party  of  their  clergy  and  please  the 
other.  This  is  indeed  a  miserable  prospect !  "  Forbear 
ance  and  toleration "  are  fine,  high-sounding  words ;  but 
if  they  mean  that  every  clergyman  is  to  be  allowed  to  do 
what  he  likes,  they  seem  to  me  the  certain  forerunner  of 


62  PRINCIPLES  FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

confusion,  division,  anarchy,  disruption,  and  disestablish 
ment. 

(b)  My  second  word  is  this.     Let  us  try  to  understand 
the  times  in  which  we  live.     They  are  perilous  times,  I  am 
convinced,  and  if  the  balance  of  political  parties  alters, 
we  never  know  what  a  day  may  bring  forth.     Never,  I 
believe,  was  it  so  important  for  loyal  Churchmen  to  be 
organized,  disciplined,  and  got  ready  to  meet  any  emergency. 
I  entreat  Evangelical  Churchmen  to  remember  that  it  is 
unwise  to  keep  aloof  from  Diocesan  Conferences,  Church 
Congresses,  and  other  machinery  which  is  being  brought 
into  use  in  this  age.     If  Disestablishment  comes  they  will 
all  be  wanted.     The  Times  newspaper  has  recently  said 
with  much  shrewdness,  that  the  day  is  past  when  the 
Church  could  get  on  without  corporate  life  and  activity. 
That   witness   is   true  !     We   cannot   stop   these   things, 
however  little  we  may  like  them.     We  ought  to  assert 
our  right  to  take  part  in  them,  to  be  heard  in  them,  and 
to  prove  that  we  are  as  good  Churchmen  as  any  in  our 
pale.     I  am  quite  certain  that  men  like  Eomaine  and 
Venn  and  Cecil  and  Simeon  would  have  come  forward 
and  taken  part  in  them  if  they  had  had  the  opportunity 
which  we  have.     If  we  let  them  fall  into  the  hands  of 
one  restless,  revolutionary  school,  and  refuse  to  go  any 
where  unless  we  have  everything  our  own  way,  I  do  not 
think  we  shall  be  doing  our  duty. 

(c)  My  third  word  is  this.     Let  us  try  to  have  know 
ledge  as  well  as  zeal.     I  observe  with  deep  regret  that 
many  Churchmen   seem    to   know   so   little   of    English 
Church  history,  and  of  theological  literature,  that  they 
talk  and  write  very  strange  things.     They  appear,  for 
example,  to  suppose  that  all  High  Churchmen  are  like 
the  famous  incumbent  of  St.  Alban's,  Holborn,  and  all 
Broad  Churchmen  are  like  Mr.  Voysey !     And  so,  if  you 
say  a  single  favourable  word  about  "  High"  and  "  Broad  " 


HOW    FAR    MAY    CHURCHMEN    DIFFER?  63 

men,  they  are  filled  with  horror,  cast  dust  in  the  air,  rush 
into  print,  write  violent  letters  to  the  newspapers,  and 
denounce  you  as  a  renegade  and  as  an  apostate.  But 
would  it  not  be  well  if  these  zealous  people  would 
remember  that  High  Churchmen  like  Hooker,  and 
Andrews,  and  Beveridge,  and  Herbert,  and  Pearson, 
were  just  as  much  opposed  to  Popery  as  themselves  ; 
and  that  Broad  Churchmen  like  Burnet,  and  Tenison,  and 
Patrick,  and  Stillingfleet,  and  Clagett,  were  in  their  day 
among  the  ablest  writers  against  Komanism  ?  Surely  to 
lump  all  High  and  Broad  Churchmen  together  in  one 
common  condemnation  is  to  make  a  sad  exhibition  of  our 
own  ignorance  !  And  would  it  not  be  well  to  remember 
that  there  have  been  in  the  last  forty  years,  and  some 
are  living  now,  not  a  few  Bishops  and  Deans  who  were 
and  are  as  sound  as  any  about  Protestantism,  and  as 
loyal  and  true-hearted  Churchmen,  and  yet  could  not  be 
called  members  of  the  Evangelical  body  ?  I  need  hardly 
mention  such  men  as  Archbishop  Longley,  Bishop  Blom- 
field,  Dean  Alford,  and  others  whose  names  are  known  to 
any  intelligent  Churchman.  Do  these  extremely  zealous 
gentlemen  really  mean  to  say  that  we  ought  to  turn  away 
from  these  Bishops  and  Deans,  refuse  to  meet  them, 
proclaim  a  crusade,  and  try  to  thrust  them  out  of  the 
Church  ?  And  would  it  not  be  well  to  remember  that 
nowadays  Evangelical  Churchmen  have  no  monopoly  of 
grace,  and  faith,  and  holiness,  and  self-denial,  and  love  to 
Christ,  the  Bible,  and  souls ;  and  that  biographies  like 
some  which  have  been  published  in  late  years  show 
plainly  that  there  is  some  good  outside  the  Evangelical 
camp  ?  These  things,  I  fear,  are  not  sufficiently  remembered. 
I  wish  some  people  read  a  little  more  than  they  do.  Want 
of  reading  is  the  mother  of  ignorance,  and  ignorance  is 
the  mother  of  narrowness  and  intolerance.  I  like  zeal ; 
but  I  like  it  to  be  zeal  according  to  knowledge. 


64  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

(d)  My  closing  word  is  this.  Let  us  all  cultivate 
more  and  more  that  blessed  grace,  true  Scriptural  charity. 
It  is  a  plant  which  is  becoming  sadly  scarce  in  England, 
to  the  great  injury  of  religion.  The  modern  plant  is 
sadly  weak  and  degenerate.  Oh  that,  among  other 
revivals,  there  was  a  revival  of  charity  !  Old  Scriptural 
charity  "  believes  all  things,  hopes  all  things,  and  rejoices 
in  truth."  Modern  charity  seems  not  only  to  believe  all 
things,  but  to  believe  any  lie,  and  to  rejoice  in  spreading 
it, — to  hope  nothing,  and  to  delight  in  slandering,  sus 
pecting  and  depreciating  brethren  on  the  slightest  and 
most  insufficient  evidence.  I  fear  that  the  Ninth  Com 
mandment  and  1  Cor.  xiii.  are  too  much  neglected  in  the 
nineteenth  century.  Well  says  the  Litany,  "  From  all 
uncharitableness,  good  Lord,  deliver  us." 

It  was  a  grand  saying  of  that  great  man  Oliver  Crom 
well,  when  certain  ministers  pressed  him  beyond  measure 
about  secondary  matters  in  which  he  could  not  agree  with 
them  :  "  I  do  beseech  you  by  the  mercies  of  God  to  try  to 
think  it  possible  that  you  are  sometimes  in  the  wrong." 
Head-knowledge,  and  clearness  of  doctrine,  and  sound 
views  of  the  Gospel,  no  doubt,  are  excellent  things.  But 
even  knowledge  has  its  attendant  dangers.  It  is  written, 
"Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  edifieth  "  (1  Cor.  viii.  1). 


IV. 

CAN  THERE  BE  MORE  UNITY  AMONG 
CHURCHMEN  ? 

THE  question  which  heads  this  paper  is  a  very  hard  one 
to  answer,  and  I  scarcely  know  how  to  handle  it  without 
giving  some  offence.  Scylla  is  on  my  right  hand,  and 
Charybdis  on  my  left.  On  the  one  hand  I  am  afraid  of 
being  too  narrow,  and  on  the  other  I  am  afraid  of  being 
too  broad.  In  short,  I  feel  I  am  entering  a  path  where 
I  cannot  walk  without  treading  on  somebody's  feet,  and 
fingering  a  knot  which  perhaps  will  never  be  untied.  If 
I  come  in  collision  with  any  cherished  opinions,  I  ask 
my  readers  to  bear  with  me,  and  give  me  a  patient 
hearing. 

One  thing  I  premise  at  the  outset,  and  a  candid  state 
ment  on  the  point  may  save  trouble.  I  mean  to  stick 
closely  to  my  subject.  I  am  not  going  to  handle  the 
grand  topic  of  unity  among  all  true  believers.  What  I 
have  in  view  is  more  unity  among  zealous  and  pious 
Churchmen  of  different  schools  of  thought. 

Let  it  then  be  understood  that  I  shall  say  nothing 
about  unity  with  Nonconformists.  That  is  not  the 
question  of  this  paper,  and  I  purposely  leave  it  alone  to-day. 
It  is  unity  among  Churchmen — unity  in  our  own  camp. 

Let  me  add  furthermore,  that  I  shall  waste  no  words 
on  the  idea  of  unity  with  those  within  our  pale,  who 

K 


66  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

disclaim  all  sympathy  with  Protestantism,  who  vilify  the 
Beformers,  and  openly  avow  their  Eomish  proclivities. 
We  all  know  that  there  are  many  such  men  among  us. 
That  they  are  often  zealous  religionists  I  willingly  admit, 
but  that  they  are  genuine  Churchmen  I  flatly  deny.  I 
want  no  unity  with  such  men,  unless  they  will  give  up 
their  peculiar  views.  So  long  as  they  hold  their  present 
opinions,  they  are  in  the  wrong  place  inside  the  Church 
of  England.  Our  Church  no  doubt  is  very  comprehensive. 
In  our  mother's  house  are  "  many  mansions."  But  she 
certainly  cannot  accommodate  at  one  tune  the  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury  and  the  Pope  of  Eome. 

Nor  yet  shall  I  waste  words  on  the  idea  of  unity  with 
those  unhappy  men  within  our  pale,  who  declare  plainly 
that  they  wish  to  do  away  with  all  Creeds  and  Articles, 
and  to  make  a  vague  "  earnestness  "  a  substitute  for  faith 
and  sound  doctrine.  I  find  no  place  for  unity  with  such 
men,  however  clever  and  amiable,  simply  because  I  know 
not  where  to  find  them.  You  cannot  build  on  a  fog  or  a 
quicksand.  A  house  must  have  a  foundation,  and  a 
Church  must  have  a  creed.  The  Church,  whose  peace 
and  well-being  I  wish  to  promote  to-day,  is  not  a  mere 
creedless  Pantheon,  but  a  body  which  has  a  distinct, 
well-defined,  Scriptural  theology, — a  body  which  can 
point  to  its  Articles  and  Liturgy  and  say,  "Si  quceris 
fidem,  circumspice"  Unity  purchased  at  the  expense  of 
creeds  and  doctrines  is  a  miserable,  cold,  worthless  unity. 
I,  for  one,  want  none  of  it. 

The  unity  whose  possibilities  I  desire  to  consider,  and 
whose  increase  I  want  to  promote,  is  unity  among  "  pious 
and  zealous  Churchmen," — Churchmen  who,  while  they 
occupy  different  standpoints,  are  honestly  agreed  on 
certain  common  fundamental  principles.  They  love  the 
Church  of  England  ;  they  love  her  Articles ;  they  love 
her  Prayer-book.  They  labour  for  her  prosperity.  They 


CAN    THERE    BE    MORE    UNITY    AMONG    CHURCHMEN  ?       6*7 

do  not  want  her  to  be  un-Protestantized.  They  do  not 
want  her  to  give  up  her  Confession  of  Faith.  On  these 
points  they  are  at  one.  There  are  hundreds  of  such  men, 
I  am  persuaded,  at  this  moment  in  each  of  the  four  great 
schools  of  thought, — High,  Broad,  Evangelical,  and  No- 
Party-men, — Godly  men,  Christ-loving  men,  converted 
men,  holy  men,  gifted  men,  hard-working  men,  men  who 
have  a  common  belief  in  the  Trinity,  the  Atonement, 
and  the  Inspiration  of  Scripture ;  men  reading  the  same 
Bible  and  using  the  same  Liturgy, — and  yet  men  sadly 
estranged  and  separated  from  one  another.  And  the  one 
subject  to  which  I  propose  to  confine  myself  is  this  : 
"  Can  a  greater  degree  of  unity  be  obtained  among  these 
Churchmen  ? "  Perfect  unity,  I  admit  at  once,  it  is  vain 
to  expect,  and  I  do  not  pretend  to  speak  of  it.  It  is 
eminently  an  age  of  free  and  independent  thought.  We 
shall  never  have  perfect  unity  till  we  are  in  heaven.  But 
can  we  attain  more  unity  than  we  have  now,  while  we 
are  on  earth  ? 

I  shall  open  the  whole  question  with  two  general  remarks. 

The  subject  before  us  is  a  very  painful  one.  We  are 
brought  face  to  face  with  a  melancholy  evidence  of  the 
fall  of  man,  and  its  effect  on  reason  and  intellect,  as  well 
as  on  heart  and  will.  We  see  the  broad  fact  that 
hundreds  of  Christian  men,  speaking  the  same  language, 
members  of  the  same  Church,  subscribing  to  the  same 
Articles,  believing  the  same  Creeds,  reading  the  same 
Bible,  using  the  same  Prayer-book,  are  divided  into  at 
least  four  distinct  schools  of  thought,  and  appear  utterly 
unable  to  agree.  Each  school  contains  scores  of  learned, 
gifted,  hard-headed,  hard-working  men.  There  is  no 
monopoly  of  these  things  now  in  any  quarter  of  the 
Church,  whatever  there  may  have  been  formerly.  And 
yet  we  stand  aloof  from  each  other,  disunited,  suspicious, 
mistrustful,  and  apparently  incapable  of  arriving  at  a 


68  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

common  understanding.  What  a  lamentable  spectacle  it 
is !  I  pity  the  man  who  does  not  mourn  over  it,  and 
long  to  discover  some  "  irenicon,"  or  means  of  bringing  us 
together.  The  millennium  has  evidently  not  begun  yet. 
We  do  not  yet  see  eye  to  eye. 

The  subject,  moreover,  is  a  very  delicate  and  difficult 
one.  In  treating  it  I  feel  like  one  handling  Sevres  china, 
and  I  dread  making  a  slip  and  doing  harm.  Between  a 
narrow  spirit  and  a  spirit  of  compromise  it  is  very  hard 
to  avoid  mistakes.  An  excessive  zeal  for  pure  doctrine 
is  apt  to  make  us  illiberal  and  uncharitable.  An  excessive 
love  of  unity  is  apt  to  blunt  our  spiritual  discernment, 
until  we  sacrifice  God's  truth  on  the  altar  of  peace.  I 
hope  I  shall  not  err  in  either  direction.  Whether  I 
shall  succeed  in  hitting  the  golden  mean  remains  to  be 
proved. 

Now  the  utmost  I  can  hope  to  do  with  such  a  subject 
as  this, — so  painful,  so  important,  so  delicate,  and  so 
difficult, — is  to  offer  a  few  suggestions  for  the  private 
consideration  of  my  readers.  Some  of  them  may  appear 
at  first  sight  weak,  trivial,  and  small.  Calm  reflection,  I 
trust,  will  show  that  they  are  not  so.  Great  reformations 
are  seldom  effected  "per  saltum"  The  "bit  by  bit" 
reformer  in  the  long  run  is  the  most  useful  man.  By 
repeated  little  bites  the  mouse  gnawed  the  cable  through. 
Some  of  my  suggestions  may  appear  crude,  visionary,  and 
impracticable,  and  yet  some  master-hand  may  shape  these 
rude  materials  into  an  excellent  work.  Such  as  they  are, 
I  will  proceed  to  lay  five  suggestions  before  all  into  whose 
hands  this  volume  may  fall,  and  I  will  ask  them,  like 
the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons  approaching  the 
throne  at  the  opening  of  a  new  Parliament,  to  put  the 
best  construction  on  what  I  say. 

I.  My  first  suggestion  is  this.  If  we  went  to  obtain 
more  unity  among  Churchmen,  we  must  cultivate  the  habit 


CAN    THERE    BE    MOKE    UNITY    AMONG    CHURCHMEN?       69 

of  recognizing  the  grace  of  God  and  love  to  Christ,  wherever 
that  grace  and  love  are  to  be  found. 

Admission  of  this  principle  lies  at  the  root  of  my 
whole  subject.  That  real  saving  grace  in  the  heart  is 
perfectly  compatible  with  much  error  in  the  head,  is  a 
matter  of  fact  which  no  well-informed  Christian  can  ever 
think  of  denying.  It  is  a  phenomenon  which  it  is  hard 
to  explain  thoroughly.  To  what  length  of  false  doctrine 
a  man  may  go  and  yet  be  a  true  child  of  God,  and  to 
what  height  of  orthodoxy  a  man  may  attain  and  yet  be 
inwardly  unconverted,  are  two  of  the  deepest  practical 
mysteries  in  theology.  But  the  proofs  that  a  Christian 
may  be  very  wrong  in  doctrine  while  thoroughly  right 
in  heart,  are  clear,  plain,  and  unmistakeable. 

I  need  not  weary  my  readers  with  evidence  upon  a 
point  with  which  most  students  of  the  Bible  are  familiar. 
Think  of  the  instance  of  the  apostles  before  our  Lord's 
crucifixion.  Who  can  fail  to  see  that  their  knowledge 
was  most  imperfect,  and  their  views  of  Christ's  atonement 
very  obscure.  Yet  they  were  all  good  men. — Consider 
the  case  of  Apollos  in  the  Acts.  Here  was  a  man  who 
was  "  fervent  in  spirit,  and  spake  and  taught  diligently 
the  things  of  the  Lord."  But  he  only  knew  the  baptism 
of  John,  and  needed  to  be  taught  the  way  of  God  more 
perfectly.  Yet  he  was  a  good  man.  There  is  many  an 
Apollos,  I  believe,  in  England. — Look  at  Martin  Luther, 
and  the  whole  company  of  his  fellow-labourers  in  Germany. 
They  all  held  stoutly  the  unscriptural  doctrine  of  Consub- 
stantiation.  Yet  they  were  good  men. — Examine  the 
history  of  our  own  English  Reformers.  How  dim  and 
indistinct  were  their  perceptions  of  the  Lord's  Supper  in 
the  days  of  Henry  the  Eighth !  Yet  they  were  good  men. — 
Ponder  well,  above  all,  the  records  of  the  Church  of  Eome. 
Remember  the  names  of  such  men  as  Ferus,  Jansenius, 
Pascal,  and  Quesnel.  They  erred  on  many  points,  no 


70  PBINCIPLES    FOE   CHURCHMEN. 

doubt;  yet  who  will  dare  to  say  they  were  not  good 
men  ?  He  that  wants  to  see  this  point  well  worked 
out  by  a  master  mind,  should  study  Hooker's  first 
sermon. 

Facts  such  as  these  demand  very  serious  consideration. 
They  teach  a  lesson  which  must  not  be  overlooked.  They 
show  us  that  many  Churchmen  with  whom  we  now 
disagree  may  be  real  Christians,  in  spite  of  all  their  errors. 
Their  hearts  may  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  though 
their  heads  are  very  wrong.  However  erroneous  we  may 
consider  their  views,  we  must  charitably  hope  that  they 
are  in  the  way  of  life  and  travelling  toward  heaven,  and 
shall  be  "  saved  by  the  grace  of  God,  even  as  ourselves." 
However  much  we  may  believe  they  mar  their  own 
usefulness  by  their  imperfect  statement  of  truth,  we  must 
not  rashly  pronounce  them  godless  and  graceless,  lest  we 
be  found  condemning  those  whom  God  has  received.  To 
speak  plainly,  it  never  will  do  to  brand  people  as  uncon 
verted  heretics,  and  children  of  wrath,  because  they  differ 
from  us  about  the  effect  of  the  Sacraments,  and  the 
precise  nature  of  inspiration.  Firmly  as  we  may  cling 
to  our  own  views  of  such  subjects,  we  must  carefully 
remember  that  it  is  possible  to  hold  the  Head  and  stand 
on  the  rock,  under  a  great  cloud  of  error. 

The  whole  state  of  things  may  puzzle  us.  It  may 
puzzle  us  to  understand  how  some  of  our  brethren  can 
reconcile  the  hymns  they  sing  with  the  unsatisfactory 
sermons  they  preach.  It  may  puzzle  us  to  understand 
how  men  can  read  the  Bible,  and  pray,  and  love  Christ, 
and  live  holy  lives,  and  yet  remain  in  such  darkness 
about  the  truth.  Above  all,  it  may  puzzle  us  to  under 
stand  how  men  holding  such  strange  and  unsound  views 
can  be  in  the  way  to  heaven,  and  stand  at  last  at  Christ's 
right  hand.  Still,  for  all  this,  we  must  steadily  school 
ourselves  to  hold  the  principle  that  this  state  of  things 


CAN    THERE    BE    MORE    UNITY    A.MONG    CHURCHMEN?       *71 

is  possible,  however  inexplicable,  and  that  it  is  part  of 
the  mysterious  economy  of  grace. 

What  good  will  the  admission  of  this  principle  do  to 
the  cause  of  unity  ?  some  one  will  ask.  I  answer  unhesi 
tatingly,  Much  every  way  !  It  will  teach  us  the  habit  of 
respecting  many  Churchmen  of  other  schools  of  thought, 
even  while  we  disagree  with  them.  How  can  we  refuse 
to  respect  men  who  are  washed  in  the  Saviour's  blood, 
heirs  of  the  same  kingdom,  travellers  in  the  same  road, 
servants  of  the  same  Master,  though  we  may  think  them 
terribly  mistaken  ?  How  can  we  refuse  to  respect  those 
whom  we  admit  we  shall  meet  in  heaven,  and  dwell  with 
for  evermore  ?  Thank  God,  there  will  be  no  imperfect 
knowledge  there !  As  good  old  Berridge  said,  "  God 
washes  all  our  hearts  on  earth,  and  in  heaven  He  will 
also  wash  our  brains."  Surely  to  have  arrived  at  this 
stage  of  feeling  is  an  immense  gain.  It  is  not  unity 
itself,  I  freely  grant;  but  it  is  one  step  towards  it.  To 
have  learned  to  respect  our  brethren  while  we  differ 
from  them,  and  to  admit  that  they  may  be  servants  of 
Christ  in  spite  of  much  obscure  and  unsound  doctrine, 
is  a  long  day's  march  in  a  right  direction.  In  such  an 
intricate  and  difficult  question  as  this,  it  is  a  great  thing 
to  get  firm  hold  of  a  right  principle.  And,  whatever 
some  may  please  to  think,  I  maintain  that  the  admitted 
hope  of  a  common  heaven  at  last  is  an  uniting  principle, 
and  must  insensibly  tend  to  draw  men  together. 

II.  My  second  suggestion  is  this.  If  we  would  obtain 
more  unity  among  Churchmen,  we  must  cultivate  the  habit 
of  speaking  charitably  and  courteously  of  those  who  disagree 
with  us. 

I  desire  to  touch  this  point  gently  and  cautiously.  It 
is  debatable  ground  at  any  time,  and  I  am  not  sure 
that  I  am  a  very  fit  person  to  give  an  opinion  about  it. 


72  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Some  may  think  that  I  am  not  quite  the  man  to  be 
"censor  morum"  in  this  matter,  and  may  remind  me 
of  the  Scriptural  proverb,  "  Physician,  heal  thyself." 
Well,  I  believe  I  have  been  an  offender  in  my  time,  and 
in  the  heat  of  speaking  in  a  controversial  age,  I  have 
doubtless  said  sharper  and  hotter  things  than  I  ought  to 
have  said, — things  for  which  in  calmer  moments  I  have 
been  sorry.  I  hope,  as  I  grow  older,  I  grow  wiser.  This, 
at  any  rate,  is  my  present  deliberate  conviction, — that 
nothing  so  disunites  and  divides  Churchmen  and  Church 
men,  as  the  use  of  uncivil  and  discourteous  language. 

Let  no  one  mistake  my  meaning.  To  strong  and  plain 
language  in  condemning  what  we  disapprove,  I  see  no 
objection.  It  is  often  the  truest  charity  to  speak  out, 
and  call  things,  and  even  persons,  on  fit  occasions,  by 
their  right  descriptive  names.  In  a  dull,  sleepy  world, 
it  is  positively  necessary  sometimes  to  speak  strongly  and 
sharply,  like  the  first  lieutenant  in  a  ship  when  a  man  is 
overboard,  in  order  to  get  men's  attention.  Our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  spoke  of  Herod  as  "  that  fox."  St. 
Paul  told  Ananias,  the  high  priest,  that  he  was  a  "  whited 
wall ;  "  and  called  Elymas  the  sorcerer  "  a  child  of  the  devil, 
and  an  enemy  of  all  righteousness ; "  and  applied  to  the 
Cretans  the  old  proverb,  "  Always  liars,  evil  beasts,  slow 
bellies."  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  strong  language  is 
not  always  wrong.  But  we  must  carefully  distinguish 
between  phraseology  that  is  strong,  and  phraseology  that 
is  violent,  offensive,  and  abusive.  It  is  possible  to  speak 
very  strongly,  and  yet  to  be  dignified,  courteous,  and 
gentlemanlike.  But  it  is  surely  desirable  to  avoid  ex 
pressions  which  are  stinging,  irritating,  vexatious,  and 
opprobrious.  It  is  written,  "  There  is  that  speaketh  like 
the  piercings  of  a  sword."  We  should  never  scold,  nor 
rail,  nor  revile.  If  we  want  more  unity,  we  should  never 
forget  this. 


CAN    THEKE    BE    MORE    UNITY    AMONG    CHURCHMEN?       73 

There  is  nothing  like  giving  instances  and  examples, 
when  handling  a  topic  like  this.  When  a  hard  name  is 
sweepingly  and  ruthlessly  applied  to  a  whole  school  of 
Churchmen,  which  only  belongs  in  reality  to  a  few  indi 
viduals, — when  all  Evangelical  Churchmen  are  held  up 
to  scorn  as  Zwinglians, — when  all  Eitualists  are  called 
Jesuits  and  liars, — when  all  Broad  Churchmen  are  called 
Neologians, — when  all  who  hold  baptismal  regeneration 
are  called  Papists, — when  sweeping  language  of  this 
kind  is  indiscriminately  used,  without  remembering  St. 
Jude's  advice,  "  Of  some  have  compassion,  making  a 
difference,"- — in  my  judgment  it  does  great  harm.  It 
drives  many  to  an  immense  distance  from  our  own  camp, 
and  creates  breaches  which  perhaps  are  never  healed. 

I  must  plainly  say  that  in  this  one  point  I  think  many 
of  the  Eeformers  greatly  erred.  They  often  used  terribly 
hard  words  in  speaking  of  their  adversaries.  In  this 
matter  let  us  not  be  their  successors.  Unhappily  they 
have  been  too  often  imitated.  Wesley  and  Toplady  last 
century  wrote  positive  rubbish  about  one  another,  and 
scolded  like  Billingsgate  fishwomen  of  a  day  long  past. 
Let  us  take  care  we  do  not  let  their  mantle  fall  on  us. 
A  good  cause  need  not  be  supported  by  violent  language, 
and  it  is  a  sign  of  weakness  when  men  resort  to  it.  It 
never  ought  to  be  said  that  when  a  man  becomes  a 
decided  theologian,  he  often  forgets  to  be  a  courteous 
gentleman.  It  was  one  of  Coleridge's  best  sayings,  that 
"  the  Christian  ought  to  be  the  highest  style  of  gentle 
man." 

I  admit  it  is  very  hard  to  draw  the  right  line.  There 
must  needs  be  controversy,  and  it  is  very  difficult  to 
conduct  it  in  loving  and  courteous  language.  "  The  tongue 
is  a  world  of  iniquity."  Of  one  thing,  however,  I  am 
very  sure, — the  more  lovingly  we  conduct  it,  the  more 
likely  are  we  to  win  opponents  to  our  views.  Of  course 


74  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

we  wish  no  man  to  be  always  complimentary,  flattering, 
smooth-tongued,  and  carrying  butter  and  honey  every 
where  in  a  lordly  dish.  But  we  do  need  to  remind  our 
selves  that  the  Holy  Ghost  says,  "  Grievous  words  stir 
up  anger."  Few  men  were  more  faithful  to  Christ's 
truth,  and  more  firm  in  opposing  error,  than  our  honoured 
Fathers,  Bickersteth,  Haldane  Stewart,  and  Marsh.  Yet 
few  made  fewer  enemies  and  more  friends.  And  why  ? 
Because  they  were  eminently  men  of  courtesy,  charity, 
and  love.  People  will  stand  almost  anything  without 
taking  offence,  if  they  are  convinced  that  you  love  them. 
A  day  is  coming  when  a  word  spoken  in  love  will  out 
weigh  folios  of  controversial  divinity. 

The  words  of  Matthew  Henry  to  a  young  minister 
are  weighty  and  wise :  "  Be  not  censorious.  Widen  not 
your  differences.  Judge  charitably  of  all.  Praise  that 
which  is  good,  and  make  the  best  of  what  you  dislike. 
Let  us  be  offensive  to  none,  but  obliging  to  all."  (Life, 
p.  297.) 

None  feel  more  deeply  than  I  do,  that  it  is  much  more 
easy  to  preach  all  this  than  to  practise  it.  The  love  of 
saying  smart  things,  of  having  the  last  word,  and  of 
saying  all  that  can  be  said,  is  a  terrible  snare  to  poor 
human  nature.  Well  says  Charles  Bridges :  "  There  is 
a  self-pleasing  sarcastic  spirit,  which  would  rather  lose  a 
friend  than  miss  making  a  clever  stroke."  (Bridges 
on  Proverbs,  vol.  i.  p.  291.)  But  of  no  principle  in  my 
paper  do  I  feel  more  confident  that  it  is  true  than  this, — 
that  as  a  general  rule,  courtesy  in  language  is  a  great 
help  to  unity. 

III.  My  third  suggestion  is  this.  If  we  would  obtain 
more  unity  among  Churchmen,  we  must  cultivate  accurate 
acquaintance  with  the  real  opinions  and  phraseology  of 
other  schools. 


CAN   THERE   BE   MORE   UNITY   AMONG   CHURCHMEN  ?       75 

The  point  is  one  of  no  mean  importance.  Ignorance, 
I  firmly  believe, — pure  ignorance  of  one  another's  doc 
trinal  sentiments, — is  one  great  cause  of  the  dissensions 
among  Churchmen.  Few  Churchmen  thoroughly  com 
prehend  any  views  excepting  those  of  their  own  school. 
Their  conceptions  of  the  views  of  other  schools  are 
often  picked  up  second-hand,  and  no  more  like  reality 
than  bad  caricatures.  Just  as  Nero  is  said  to  have 
clothed  the  early  Christians  in  the  skins  of  beasts,  and 
then  to  have  baited  them  with  dogs,  so  we  are  all  apt 
to  attribute  to  our  opponents  all  manner  of  strange 
and  monstrous  opinions,  and  then  to  denounce  them  as 
heretics.  No  wonder  there  is  so  little  unity  among 
Churchmen,  when  they  understand  each  other  so  im 
perfectly. 

The  extent  of  this  ignorance  is  something  marvellous 
and  appalling.  I  frankly  own  that  it  is  only  within  the 
last  few  years  that  I  have  realized  its  length  and  breadth 
and  depth  and  height. 

On  the  one  hand,  how  many  High  Churchmen  have 
the  most  absurd  conceptions  of  what  is  held  and  taught 
by  an  Evangelical  clergyman !  They  imagine  he  is  a 
kind  of  disorderly,  wild  person,  who  alters  the  Prayer- 
book  at  discretion, — who  dislikes  baptism, — despises  the 
Lord's  Supper, — admires  dirty  churches, — cares  for  no 
thing  but  preaching, — makes  light  of  the  prayers, — 
prefers  Dissenters  to  Churchmen, — hates  Bishops, — 
disapproves  of  good  works, — and  does  not  see  much 
beauty  in  the  Church  of  England.  Ludicrous  as  this 
picture  may  appear,  I  am  afraid  it  is  a  correct  account 
of  what  many  High  Churchmen  think !  I  often  think 
that  they  know  no  more  about  the  true  type  of  an  Evan 
gelical  Churchman  than  a  native  of  Timbuctoo  knows 
about  skating  and  ice-creams,  or  an  Esquimaux  knows 
about  grapes,  peaches,  and  nectarines. 


76  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

On  the  other  hand  (for  I  wish  to  mete  out  equal 
justice),  how  many  Evangelical  Churchmen  have  the 
most  crude  and  inaccurate  ideas  about  the  amount  of 
sound  doctrine  held  by  High  Churchmen !  They  fancy 
that  every  man  who  does  not  pronounce  their  shibboleths 
and  speak  their  language  must  be  a  Papist.  They  are 
frightened  out  of  their  wits  at  the  idea  of  any  one  hold 
ing  "baptismal  regeneration"  and  the  "real  presence," 
and  imagine  it  impossible  he  can  be  a  right  man. — Yet 
they  forget  there  are  two  senses  of  the  word  "  regenera 
tion"  among  divines,  a  high  and  a  low  sense,  and  that 
some  good  men,  like  Bishop  Hopkins,  have  held  that  all 
baptized  people  are  ecclesiastically,  though  not  all  spiritually, 
regenerate.  They  forget  that  there  are  two  meanings 
attached  to  the  phrase  "real  presence,"  and  that  many 
teach  a  real  spiritual  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's 
Supper,  who  indignantly  repudiate  the  idea  of  a  corporal, 
local,  material  presence  in  the  bread  and  wine.  The  late 
Archbishop  Longley  said,  in  his  last  charge,  "  The  real 
presence  in  one  sense  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of 
England;" — but  he  carefully  added,  "as  to  a  presence 
elsewhere  than  in  the  heart  of  a  believer  the  Church 
of  England  is  silent."  I  do  not,  for  my  own  part,  endorse 
Bishop  Hopkins  or  Dr.  Longley.  I  dislike  the  expression 
"  real  presence,"  as  inseparably  connected  with  Popery  and 
liable  to  misconstruction.  I  do  not  the  least  understand 
any  "  regeneration  "  except  a  moral  and  spiritual  one,  and 
can  see  no  warrant  for  it  in  Scripture.  I  only  contend 
that  we  must  make  fair  allowance  for  men  using  the 
words  we  use  in  a  very  different  sense  from  that  in  which 
we  use  them.  If  we  want  more  unity,  we  must  not  make 
men  offenders  for  a  word. 

How  this  vast  cloud  of  ignorance  is  to  be  removed,  I 
do  not  pretend  to  say.  Most  of  it,  no  doubt,  arises  from 
want  of  reading  and  study.  It  certainly  is  not  a  reading 


CAN  THERE  BE  MORE  UNITY  AMONG  CHURCHMEN?   77 

age,  except  for  reading  newspapers  and  periodicals. 
Only  one  of  all  the  schools  of  Churchmen  can  support 
a  quarterly  review.  Even  the  monthly  organs  languish, 
and  receive  very  scanty  patronage.  Many  Churchmen 
work  round  and  round,  like  a  horse  in  a  mill,  talking 
with  nobody  but  those  who  agree  with  them,  reading 
nothing  but  the  Record,  Eock,  English  Churchman, 
Guardian,  or  Church  Times,  or  reading  nothing  at  all ! 
In  such  a  state  of  things  it  is  no  marvel  if  we  misunder 
stand  one  another  and  are  estranged. 

I  can  only  express  my  own  deliberate  conviction,  that 
a  little  more  patient  study  of  the  books  and  writings  of 
other  schools  would  open  all  our  eyes  and  do  us  good. 
We  should  find  that  some  of  our  controversies  were 
only  logomachies,  or  strifes  about  words.  We  should 
discover  the  wisdom  of  that  golden  maxim  in  all  theo 
logical  discussions, — "First  define  your  terms."  We 
should  find  that,  under  the  surface  of  much  diverse  and 
varying  phraseology,  there  is  more  substantial  agreement 
among  many  Churchmen  than  we  suppose.  In  short,  we 
should  discover  that  accurate  knowledge  is  one  great 
help  to  more  unity. 

IV.  My  fourth  suggestion  is  this.  If  we  want  to 
obtain  more  unity  among  Churchmen,  we  should  cultivate 
opportunities  of  meeting  men  of  other  schools  on  neutral 
ground. 

Prejudice,  or  unreasoning  dislike  of  others,  is  probably 
one  of  the  most  mischievous  causes  of  division  in  the 
present  day.  Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  find  one 
Churchman  disliking  another  and  speaking  against  him, 
without  ever  having  seen  his  face,  heard  his  voice,  or 
read  one  line  of  his  writings !  To  dispel  prejudices,  the 
best  plan  is  to  get  men  together,  and  let  them  look  at 
each  other  face  to  face.  They  say  in  the  City,  that  wheii 


*78  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

they  want  a  business  matter  pushed  they  seek  an  inter 
view,  and  that  one  interview  will  do  more  than  a  score 
of  letters.  I  can  quite  believe  it.  I  suspect  if  some  of 
us  could  have  a  quiet  walk  or  spend  a  quiet  evening  in 
company  of  some  Churchman  we  now  dislike,  we  should 
be  surprised  when  we  got  up  next  morning  to  find  what 
a  different  feeling  we  had  about  him.  We  should  say, 
"  I  like  that  man,  though  I  do  not  agree  with  him." 
Great  is  the  power  of  the  face,  the  manner,  the  voice,  and 
the  eye.  Seeing  is  believing. 

How  we  are  to  get  opportunities  of  meeting  men  of 
other  schools  on  neutral  ground  is  a  point  of  detail  on 
which  every  one  must  judge  for  himself.  But  I  may  be 
allowed  to  say  that  to  my  mind  here  lies  one  use  of 
Congresses  and  Diocesan  Conferences,  and  one  reason 
why  we  should  attend  them.  They  enable  men  of 
different  schools  to  see  one  another ;  and  if  they  do 
nothing  else,  they  help  to  rub  off  corners  and  lessen 
prejudices. 

I  will  not  dwell  on  this  topic,  because  it  is  one  on 
which  some  do  not  agree  with  me.  I  do  not  particularly 
like  Congresses.  I  never  expect  them  to  do  very  much 
for  the  Church,  or  to  add  much  to  our  stock  of  know 
ledge.  I  have  attended  them  purely  as  a  matter  of  duty. 
I  have  advised  others  to  attend  them  for  the  same  reason. 
But  one  good  thing,  I  am  convinced,  they  do.  They 
help  Churchmen  to  understand  one  another,  and  in  this 
way  they  are  useful. 

Whether  those  who  go  to  Congresses  take  much 
harm  by  going  I  do  not  know.  Personally  I  am  not 
conscious  of  having  imbibed  any  poison,  or  caught  any 
theological  disease.  But  whether  good  is  done  to  the 
cause  of  unity  by  our  going,  I  feel  no  doubt  at  all.  I 
believe  some  High  Churchmen  and  Broad  Churchmen 
have  discovered  for  the  first  time  that  Evangelical 


CAN  THERE  BE  MORE  UNITY  AMONG  CHURCHMEN?   79 

Churchmen  read  and  think,  and  are  not  always  "unlearned 
and  ignorant  men."  They  have  discovered  that  they  love 
the  Church  of  England  from  their  standpoint  as  much  as 
any,  and  that  they  are  not  dissenting  wolves  in  sheep's 
clothing.  They  have  discovered,  not  least,  that  they  can 
talk  civilly  and  courteously  and  considerately,  and  that 
they  are  not  all  unmannerly,  rude,  Johnsonian  bears. 
And  all  this  has  come  from  meeting  them  face  to  face 
on  neutral  ground.  Surely  it  did  good. 

I  will  not  dwell  further  on  this  point.  I  will  only 
repeat  my  firm  conviction,  that  if  Churchmen  would 
strive  to  meet  one  another  on  neutral  ground  more  often 
than  they  do,  it  would  be  a  vast  help  towards  more  unity. 

V.  My  fifth  suggestion  is  this.  If  we  would  obtain 
more  unity  with  Churchmen  of  other  schools  of  thought, 
we  must  co-operate  with  them  whenever  we  can. 

I  feel  here  that  I  am  about  to  tread  on  very  tender 
ground,  and  to  handle  a  question  which  admits  of  much 
being  said  on  both  sides.  I  cannot  hope  that  what  I  am 
going  to  say  will  be  satisfactory  to  everybody.  But  I 
must  be  allowed  to  say  what  I  think. 

I  hold  it  then  to  be  a  plain  duty  to  co-operate  with 
Churchmen  of  other  schools,  whenever  we  are  able  to  do 
so  heartily  and  honestly.  To  talk  of  unity  when  you 
can  DO  nothing  together,  seems  foolish  and  unreasonable. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  vain  to  conceal  from  ourselves  that 
there  are  limits  in  this  matter.  Co-operation  with  those 
you  differ  from  is  possible  up  to  a  certain  point.  But 
there  is  a  point  at  which  you  must  stop,  and  co-operation 
seems  impossible. 

Co-operation  for  objects  of  a  temporal  or  semi-temporal 
kind  is  clearly  a  possibility.  For  the  relief  of  poverty 
and  distress,  —  for  general  aid  to  sufferers  from  war, 
pestilence,  or  famine,-— for  supporting  the  maintenance 


80  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

of  a  Scriptural  system  of  education  against  a  secular 
system, — for  maintaining  the  union  of  Church  and  State, 
— for  helping  forward  the  cause  of  temperance  and 
purity, — for  resisting  the  progress  of  infidelity, — for 
promoting  measures  of  Church  reform, — for  all  these  ends 
I  see  no  reason  why  "  zealous  and  pious  Churchmen  "  of 
all  schools  should  not  heartily  work  together.  I  go 
farther.  I  think  they  ought  to  work  together.  It  would 
smooth  down  many  asperities,  narrow  breaches,  heal 
wounds,  and  induce  a  kind  and  genial  feeling  between 
men.  Nothing  so  unites  as  real  work.  I  should  be 
ashamed  of  myself  if  I  would  not  help  to  launch  a  life 
boat  to  rescue  shipwrecked  sailors,  or  to  work  a  fire- 
engine  when  lives  were  in  peril,  because  I  did  not  like 
my  fellow-helpers.  And  I  should  be  ashamed  if  I 
refused  to  assist  works  of  mercy,  charity,  patriotism,  or 
philanthropy,  unless  on  condition  that  all  who  co-operated 
with  me  were  Churchmen  of  my  own  school  of  thought. 
Hitherto  I  can  go,  and  I  should  think  it  a  plain  duty  to 
go  so  far. 

But  co-operation  for  direct  spiritual  work,  for  teaching 
saving  religion,  for  direct  dealing  with  souls,  appears  to 
me  a  rather  different  matter.  Here,  I  must  honestly 
say,  co-operation  with  Churchmen  who  differ  from  you 
seems  open  to  some  objections.  It  may  be  my  dulness 
and  stupidity  that  at  present  I  am  unable  to  see  the 
answer  to  these  objections.  But  it  is  my  deliberate 
conviction  that  if  High,  Broad,  and  Low  Churchmen  are 
sincere,  outspoken,  hearty,  and  earnest  in  their  several 
views,  it  is  not  easy  for  them  to  work  smoothly  and 
comfortably  together  in  direct  dealings  with  souls. 

Can  they  often  preach  in  one  another's  pulpits  with 
comfort  and  profit  ?  That  is  the  best  and  most  practical 
way  of  putting  the  subject.  A  young,  enthusiastic,  and 
unreflecting  mind  may  fancy  that  they  can.  I  answer, 


CAN    THERE    BE    MOEE    UNITY    AMONG    CHUKCHMEN  ?      81 

on  the  contrary,  that,  as  things  are  at  present,  they 
cannot  continuously  and  for  any  length  of  time,  though 
they  may  occasionally.  Let  us  just  think.  What 
decided  High  Churchman  would  like  a  decided  Evan 
gelical  to  occupy  his  pulpit  and  pour  out  his  soul  about 
regeneration  ? — And,  vice  versa,  what  Evangelical  clergy 
man  would  like  a  High  Churchman  to  address  his  con 
gregation,  and  say  all  he  thought  about  the  sacraments  ? 
And  where  is  the  preacher,  in  such  a  case,  whatever 
might  be  his  desire  for  unity,  who  would  not  feel  himself 
chained,  and  fettered,  and  muzzled,  and  hampered,  and 
unable  to  speak  freely  and  fully,  for  fear  of  giving 
offence  ?  It  is  hard  enough  to  preach  effectively  at  any 
time ;  but  to  do  it  with  a  mind  clogged  and  cramped  is 
almost  impossible.  And  where  is  the  English  congrega 
tion  that  would  not  feel  perplexed  and  annoyed  by 
hearing  conflicting  doctrines  and  arguments  to  which 
it  was  entirely  unaccustomed  ?  It  is  very  easy  for 
shallow  thinkers,  and  writers  in  the  daily  press,  to  sneer 
at  the  divisions  of  the  English  clergy  as  "  divisions  about 
trifles,"  and  to  ask  us  why  we  cannot  all  unite  in  trying 
to  "  evangelize "  the  neglected  populations  of  our  large 
towns  ?  With  such  men  the  model  incumbent  is  the 
man  who  would  have  had  Dean  Stanley,  Dean  M'Neile, 
and  Dean  Hook  preaching  in  his  church  three  Sundays 
successively,  merely  because  they  were  all  "  earnest " 
men  !  With  such  men  an  eloquent  sermon  is  an  eloquent 
sermon,  and  they  do  not  seem  to  think  it  matters  one 
jot  what  doctrine  it  contains ! — But  what  do  such  men 
mean  when  they  talk  of  evangelizing?  What  do  they 
suppose  an  evangelizer  ought  to  say  and  teach  ?  Why, 
here  is  precisely  the  whole  question  on  which  "  schools 
of  thought"  are  diametrically  opposed  to  one  another! 
What  one  calls  evangelizing,  another  does  not.  What 
one  would  think  wholesome  milk,  another  would  think 

I 


82  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

rank  poison.  It  is  a  sorrowful  conclusion,  but  I  know 
not  how  to  avoid  it,  as  things  are  at  present.  Co-opera 
tion  of  "  schools  "  for  direct  spiritual  work  at  home  seems 
to  be  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible.  It  may 
come  some  time,  but  the  Church  is  not  ripe  for  it  yet. 
Bishops  may  sigh  for  it,  and  newspaper  writers  may 
talk  glibly  of  it  as  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world ;  but  it 
is  not  easy.  If  preachers  of  different  schools,  following 
each  other  in  one  pulpit,  were  to  throw  heart  and  soul 
into  their  sermons,  the  result  would  be  a  Babel  of  con 
fusion,  —  a  diminution,  not  an  increase  of  unity,  — 
quarrelling  and  not  harmony, — strife  and  not  peace.  If 
we  love  unity  and  want  more  of  it,  I  suspect  that  at 
present  in  direct  spiritual  work  each  "  school "  of  Church 
men  must  be  content  to  work  on  alone,  and  will  do  most 
good  by  working  on  alone.  The  acids  and  alkalies 
must  be  kept  separate,  lest  there  be  effervescences  and 
explosions,  and  a  general  blow  up.  Better  days  may  be 
in  store  for  us,  but  they  have  not  come  yet. 

Some  excellent  but  unpractical  men,  I  observe,  are 
very  anxious  that  the  various  "  schools  of  thought"  should 
co-operate  in  the  work  of  Foreign  Missions.  "  Surely," 
they  say,  "you  might  all  agree  to  work  together  about 
the  poor  heathen."  A  beautiful  theory,  no  doubt !  A 
very  pleasing  vision  !  But  I  take  leave  to  say  that  the 
idea  is  utterly  chimerical  and  unpractical,  and  the  thing  is 
impossible.  It  looks  very  fair  at  a  distance,  and  sounds 
very  grand  in  charges  and  platform  speeches.  But  when 
you  begin  to  look  coolly  at  it,  you  find  it  will  not  work. 

How  are  missions  to  the  heathen  to  be  carried  on 
unless  the  managing  Committees  are  agreed  about  the 
men  they  ought  to  send  out,  and  the  doctrines  those 
men  are  to  preach  ?  Where  is  the  likelihood  of  a  Board 
of  Missions  consisting  of  High,  Low,  and  Broad  Church 
men  agreeing  harmoniously  about  points  like  these  ?  Is 


CAN    THERE    BE    MORE    UNITY    AMONG    CHURCHMEN  ?      83 

it  likely  that  men  who  cannot  agree  about  curates  will 
agreee  about  missionaries  ?  Can  we  imagine  such  a 
Board  getting  over  its  difficulty  by  resolving  to  ask  no 
questions  of  its  missionaries,  and  to  send  out  anybody 
and  everybody  who  is  an  "  earnest "  man  ?  The  very  idea 
is  monstrous.  If  there  is  any  minister  who  must  have 
distinct  views  of  doctrine,  it  is  the  missionary.  The 
whole  scheme,  in  my  judgment,  is  preposterous  and 
unworkable.  The  difficulties  of  missionary  work  under 
any  conditions  are  immense,  as  all  who  give  their  atten 
tion  to  it  know  well.  But  I  can  imagine  no  scheme 
so  sure  to  fail  as  the  scheme  of  uniting  all  "  schools  of 
thought "  in  a  kind  of  joint-stock  Board  to  carry  it  on. 
The  certain  consequence  would  be  either  a  helpless 
feebleness  or  a  scandalous  quarrelling,  and  the  whole 
result  a  disastrous  breakdown  of  the  movement.  Co 
operation  in  missions,  whatever  some  may  think,  is,  in 
my  humble  judgment,  an  impossibility.  There  is  no 
wiser  course,  if  we  love  peace,  than  to  let  each  "  school " 
work  on  in  its  own  way. 

The  subject  is  a  very  humbling  one,  I  grant ;  but  it  is 
useless  to  ignore  facts.  Facts  are  stubborn  things ;  and 
I  trust  we  are  not  so  wedded  to  any  favourite  theory 
as  to  dismiss  any  facts  that  overthrow  it  with  the  sweeping 
remark,  "  So  much  the  worse  for  the  facts."  The  theory 
of  exhibiting  the  unity  of  all  zealous  Churchmen  by 
general  and  universal  co-operation  is  a  beautiful  one,  no 
doubt ;  but  it  is  useless  to  struggle  after  impossibilities. 
There  is  a  gradient  beyond  which  no  locomotive  engine 
will  work  or  draw  a  load ;  its  wheels  turn  round  on  the 
rails,  and  the  train  comes  to  a  stand-still.  We  must 
remember  this  in  our  zeal  for  unity  among  Churchmen. 
We  must  strive  to  co-operate  with  one  another  where  we 
can ;  but  we  must  not  attempt  to  do  it  when  we  cannot, 
lest  we  damage  our  cause. 


84  PRINCIPLES  FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

My  suggestions  are  now  ended.  Of  course,  I  know  not 
what  Churchmen  of  other  schools  than  my  own  may  think 
of  them.  I  can  only  speak  from  an  Evangelical  point  of 
view.  But  it  is  my  firm  impression  that  attention  to  these 
five  suggestions  would  produce  a  much  greater  amount 
of  unity  in  the  Church  of  England  than  there  is  now. 
It  may  be  that  my  ideas  are  Utopian,  and  that  I  am 
aiming  at  more  than  it  is  right  to  expect  in  an  evil 
world,  "  lying  in  the  wicked  one."  It  may  be  that  God 
allows  these  divisions  among  us,  in  order  to  try  our 
patience,  make  us  humble,  and  teach  us  to  long  for 
Christ's  second  advent.  The  apostles  Paul  and  Bar 
nabas  could  not  agree,  and  parted  company.  Luther 
and  Zwingle  could  not  agree  about  the  Lord's  Supper. 
Eidley  and  Hooper  could  not  agree  about  vestments. 
Even  the  English  refugees  in  Queen  Mary's  days  on  the 
Continent,  could  not  agree  at  the  time  of  the  troubles  of 
Frankfort.  It  may  be  that  nothing  will  bring  Churchmen 
nearer  together  except  fiery  persecution,  just  as  the  fire 
welds  iron  bars  which  will  never  unite  when  cold.  It 
may  be  that  God  is  about  to  break  us  up  altogether,  and 
to  prove  the  failure  of  all  creature  machinery.  All  these 
things  may  be.  In  the  meantime,  I  pray  that  we  may 
all  do  what  we  can  to  promote  more  unity  among 
Churchmen.  Let  us  "contend  earnestly  for  the  faith," 
and  value  truth  far  more  than  peace.  But  let  us  never 
forget  the  text,  "  If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  lieth  in 
you,  live  peaceably  with  all  men  "  (Eom.  xii.  1 8). 

I  shall  now  conclude  my  paper  with  two  words  of 
caution.  They  are,  I  venture  to  think,  cautions  for  the 
times. 

(1)  For  one  thing,  let  us  all  take  care  that  we  do  not 
underrate  the  importance  of  unity  because  of  the  apparent 
difficulty  of  obtaining  it.  This  would  indeed  be  a 
fatal  mistake.  I  consider  that  the  subject  is  of  PRESSING 


CAN    THERE    BE    MORE    UNITY    AMONG    CHURCHMEN?      85 

IMPORTANCE.  Our  want  of  unity  is  one  great  cause  of 
weakness  in  the  Church  of  England.  It  weakens  our 
influence  generally  with  our  fellow  -  countrymen.  Our 
internal  disunion  is  the  stock  argument  against  vital 
Christianity  among  the  masses.  If  we  were  more  at 
one,  the  world  would  be  more  disposed  to  believe. — It 
weakens  us  in  the  House  of  Commons.  Liberationists 
parade  our  divisions  before  the  world,  and  talk  of 
us  as  "  a  house  divided  against  itself." — It  weakens  us 
in  the  country.  Thousands  of  laymen  who  are  unable 
to  look  below  the  surface  of  things,  are  thoroughly 
perplexed,  and  cannot  understand  what  it  all  means. — 
It  weakens  us  among  the  rising  generation  of  young 
men.  Scores  of  them  are  kept  out  of  the  ministry 
entirely  by  the  existence  of  such  distinct  parties  amongst 
us.  They  see  zeal  and  earnestness  side  by  side  with 
division,  and  are  so  puzzled  and  perplexed  by  the  sight 
that  they  turn  away  to  some  other  profession,  instead  of 
taking  orders.  And  all  this  goes  on  at  a  period  in  the 
world's  history  when  closed  ranks  and  united  counsels 
are  more  than  ever  needed  in  the  Church  of  England. 
Popery  and  infidelity  are  combining  for  another  violent 
assault  on  Christ's  Gospel,  and  here  we  are  divided  and 
estranged  from  one  another  !  Common  sense  points  out 
that  this  is  a  most  dangerous  state  of  things.  Our  want 
of  unity  is  an  evil  that  imperatively  demands  attention. 

I  never  felt  more  convinced  than  I  do  now,  that  the 
very  existence  of  our  Church  in  a  few  years  may  depend 
on  our  obtaining  more  unity  among  Churchmen.  If 
disestablishment  comes  (and  come  it  will,  many  say),  the 
Church  of  England  will  infallibly  go  to  pieces,  unless  the 
great  schools  of  thought  can  get  together  and  understand 
one  another  more  than  they  do  now.  "  A  house  divided 
against  itself  cannot  stand."  A  self-governing  Church, 
unchecked  by  the  State,  with  free  and  full  synodical 


86  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

action,  divided  as  much  as  ours  is  now,  would  most 
certainly  split  into  sections  and  perish.  To  avoid  such  a 
consummation  as  this,  for  the  sake  of  the  world,  for  the 
sake  of  our  children,  for  the  sake  of  our  beloved  country, 
in  the  interest  of  Christ's  truth,  and  to  prevent  the 
triumph  of  Popery,  Churchmen  ought  to  strain  every 
nerve,  deny  themselves  much,  and  make  every  sacrifice 
except  principle. 

While  we  have  a  little  breathing  time  and  a  little 
peace,  let  us  see  if  we  cannot  make  up  our  breaches,  and 
build  up  some  of  the  gaps  in  our  walls.  Why  should  the 
Assyrian  come,  and  find  us  hopelessly  divided  among 
ourselves  ?  Why  should  the  Koman  army  approach  our 
walls,  and  find  us  wasting  our  strength  in  internal 
contests,  like  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem,  when  Titus  besieged 
them  ?  Were  Churchmen  more  united,  we  might  defy 
our  worst  enemies.  Shoulder  to  shoulder,  like  the 
"thin  red  line"  at  Balaclava,  which  defeated  the 
Russians, — back  to  back,  fighting  front  and  rear  at  once, 
like  the  Forty-Second  at  Quatre  Bras, — we  might  hope  to 
withstand  Pope  and  Infidel  and  Liberationist,  all  com 
bined,  and  be  more  than  conquerors.  But  going  on  as 
we  do  now,  disunited  and  divided,  and  ready  to  say 
lazily,  "  It  cannot  be  helped,"  we  are  weak,  and  ready  to 
fall.  "Divide  et  impera"  is  a  maxim  well  known  to 
the  devil.  "  The  Romans  will  come  and  take  away  our 
place  and  nation  "  (John  xi.  48). 

(2)  For  another  thing,  let  us  take  care  that  the  want 
of  unity  among  Churchmen  does  not  tempt  us  to  le 
content  with  a  negative  creed,  under  the  miserable  idea 
that  we  cannot  tell  who  is  right,  and  that  we  wish  to 
belong  to  no  party.  I  address  this  caution  especially  to 
my  younger  brethren  in  the  ministry,  and  I  do  beseech 
them,  with  all  my  heart  and  soul  and  mind  and  strength, 
to  beware  of  tumbling  into  the  wretched  pitfall  of  having 


CAN    THERE    BE    MORE    UNITY    AMONG    CHURCHMEN  ?      87 

no  decided  opinions  at  all.  Prom  being  a  tame,  colourless, 
timid,  hesitating  teacher,  afraid  of  anything  positive,  with 
no  more  theological  back-bone  than  a  jelly-fish,  may  the 
Lord  deliver  you  !  Pray  do  not  be  party-spirited ;  but  do 
not  shrink  from  holding  distinct  doctrinal  views,  from 
the  cowardly  fear  of  being  called  a  "  party  man."  Do  not 
flatter  yourself  that  you  cannot  help  being  undecided, 
and  that  it  is  not  your  fault  if  you  cannot  make  up  your 
mind  about  truth.  Have  you  really  used  all  appointed 
means  ?  Are  you  sure  you  have  read  your  New  Testa 
ment,  with  special  prayer  for  the  teaching  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  about  controverted  things  ?  Have  you  studied 
your  Articles  and  Creeds,  and  the  history  of  the  English 
Eeformation  ?  Lay  to  heart  these  questions.  Deal  fairly 
and  honestly  with  your  soul. 

Believe  me,  you  will  never  be  useful  and  happy  unless 
you  are  decided  in  your  views  of  truth.  Usefulness  is 
impossible  if  you  are  a  prey  to  habitual  indecision.  Men 
will  not  believe  what  you  say,  unless  they  see  by  matter 
and  manner  that  you  have  made  up  your  own  mind. 
Happiness  is  equally  impossible.  Nothing  is  more 
miserable  than  to  live  in  a  constant  state  of  mental 
suspense.  Oh,  stand  not  still  because  Churchmen  are 
divided !  Tor  your  own  soul's  sake,  and  for  the  good  of 
others,  dare  to  be  decided,  and  make  up  your  mind. 

To  each  and  all  who  read  this  paper,  I  say  in  conclu 
sion,  let  us  long  for  unity,  pray  for  unity,  work  for  unity, 
make  many  sacrifices  for  unity  with  all  pious  and 
zealous  genuine  Churchmen,  by  whatever  name  they  may 
be  called.  But  never  let  our  thirst  for  unity  tempt  us 
to  desert,  to  compromise,  to  hold  back,  to  water  down,  to 
shrink  from  proclaiming,  the  distinctive  doctrines  of 
Christ's  Gospel.  The  more  faithful  we  are  to  them,  the 
more  good  men  of  other  schools  will  respect  us,  even 
while  they  disagree  with  our  views.  Trimmers  and 


88  PRINCIPLES  FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

compromisers  are  never  respected,  and  carry  no  weight 
with  them.  John  Bunyan's  "Mr.  Anything"  in  the 
"  Holy  War  "  was  kicked  by  both  sides.  Boldness  and 
honesty  are  always  respected,  and  especially  when  they 
are  combined  with  courtesy  and  love.  Then  let  us  strive 
so  to  live,  so  to  preach,  so  to  work,  and  so  to  love,  that  if 
other  Churchmen  cannot  see  with  our  eyes,  they  may  at 
any  rate  respect  us.  Above  all,  let  us  never  forget  to 
pray  in  the  words  of  our  Liturgy,  that  "  all  who  profess 
and  call  themselves  "  Churchmen,  as  well  as  "  Christians, 
may  hold  the  faith  in  the  unity  of  the  Spirit,  in  the  bond 
of  peace,  and  in  righteousness  of  life."  Prayer  for  unity 
is  prayer  according  to  the  mind  of  Christ. 


V. 
THE  IMPOETANCE  OF  DOGMA. 

THE  word  which  forms  the  title  of  this  paper  requires 
some  explanation  and  definition.  What  are  we  to  under 
stand  by  "  dogma  "  ?  Before  we  go  a  step  further,  let  us 
see  clearly  what  "  dogma  "  means. 

"  Dogma,"  says  my  friend,  the  late  Canon  Garbett 
(Southport  Conference  Address,  1877),  "is  to  be  dis 
tinguished  from  dogmatism.  Dogma  is  a  word  that 
simply  means  a  definite  ascertained  truth,  whatever  the 
mode  in  which  it  has  been  ascertained,  which  is  no 
longer  the  subject  of  inquiry,  simply  because  inquiry 
has  ended,  and  the  result  has  been  accepted.  Wherever 
there  is  any  fixed  ascertained  truth  whatever,  there 
must  be  dogma.  If  there  be  no  dogma,  there  is  no 
known  truth." 

"Dogma,"  says  Dean  Hook  in  his  "Church  Dictionary," 
"is  a  word  used  originally  to  express  any  doctrine  of 
religion  formally  stated.  Dogmatic  theology  is  the  state 
ment  of  positive  truths  in  religion." 

To  these  definitions  I  shall  only  add  one  more 
remark,  by  way  of  caution.  We  must  never  forget 
that  there  is  a  wide  difference  between  dogma  in  science 
and  dogma  in  religion.  In  religion,  to  be  dogmatical  is 
often  a  positive  duty ;  in  science,  it  is  often  sheer  pre 
sumption.  In  the  study  of  natural  science,  on  the  one 


90  PRINCIPLES  FOB    CHURCHMEN. 

hand,  we  have  no  inspired  book  to  guide  us.  We  have 
no  revelation  from  heaven  to  teach  us  about  biology,  or 
chemistry,  or  astronomy,  or  geology.  "We  can  only  attain 
conclusions  in  these  subjects  by  careful  observation  of 
phenomena,  by  patient  investigation  and  induction  of 
facts,  or  by  a  diligent  use  of  such  helps  as  the  microscope 
and  telescope  afford.  Even  then  our  conclusions  are 
often  very  imperfect,  and  we  ought  to  be  modest  in  our 
assertions,  and  to  beware  of  overmuch  positiveness. 
"  The  highest  wisdom  in  many  matters  of  science,"  said 
Faraday,  "is  to  keep  ourselves  in  a  state  of  judicious 
suspense."  To  be  always  positive  and  dogmatical  in 
natural  science,  is  a  mark  of  a  shallow  and  conceited 
mind.1 — In  religion,  on  the  contrary,  we  start  with  an 
infallible  Bible  to  guide  us.  Our  only  business  is  to 
ascertain  the  meaning  of  that  Bible.  When  it  speaks 
plainly,  clearly,  and  unmistakably  upon  any  point,  we 
have  a  perfect  right  to  form  positive  and  decided  conclu 
sions,  and  to  speak  positively  and  decidedly.  Dogmatical 
language  in  such  cases  is  not  only  not  presumption,  but 
a  downright  duty; — and  not  to  be  positive  when  God  has 
spoken  positively,  is  a  symptom  of  ignorance,  timidity,  or 
unbelief. 

The  subject  I  am  going  to  take  up,  my  readers  will 
now  understand,  is  the  importance  of  holding  distinct 
and  systematic  theological  views,  and  of  making  positive 
statements  of  doctrine  in  teaching  and  dispensing  God's 
Word.  With  the  Bible  in  a  minister's  hands  there  ought 
to  be  nothing  faltering,  hesitating,  and  indefinite  in  his 
exhibition  of  the  things  necessary  to  salvation.  He  must 
not  shrink  from  making  strong  assertions,  and  drawing 


1  "  All  human  knowledge  is  but  fragmentary.  All  of  us  who  call  our 
selves  students  of  nature  possess  only  portions  of  natural  science."  (Pro 
fessor  Virchow  on  "The  Freedom  of  Science,"  p.  20.)  I  take  occasion  to 
recommend  strongly  this  little  book. 


THE    IMPORTANCE    OF    DOGMA.  91 

sharply-cut  and  well-developed  conclusions.  He  must 
not  hesitate  to  say,  "This  is  certainly  true,  and  you 
ought  to  believe  it :  this  is  certainly  false,  and  you  ought 
to  refuse  it.  This  is  right,  and  you  ought  to  do  it :  this 
is  wrong,  and  you  ought  not  to  do  it."  It  is  the  duty  of 
ministers  to  speak  like  men  who  have  quite  made  up 
their  minds,  who  have  grappled  with  Pilate's  question : 
"  What  is  truth  ? "  and  are  prepared  to  give  the  question 
an  unhesitating  answer.  In  short,  if  men  mean  to  be 
faithful  ministers  of  the  New  Testament,  they  must  hold 
and  teach  "dogma."  And  of  all  Christian  ministers, 
there  are  none,  I  am  convinced,  who  ought  to  be  so 
distinct  and  decided  in  their  statement  of  "  dogma"  as  the 
ministers  of  the  Church  of  England. 

The  subject,  I  venture  to  think,  is  one  of  vast  import 
ance  in  the  present  day,  and  it  needs  to  be  pressed  on 
the  attention  both  of  clergymen  and  laymen.  But  the 
subject  is  a  very  wide  and  deep  one,  and  can  only  be 
touched  lightly  in  a  short  paper  like  this.  I  shall  there 
fore  content  myself  with  laying  down  two  general  pro 
positions,  and  offering  a  few  remarks  upon  each  of  them. 
The  object  of  my  first  proposition  will  be  to  prove  the 
peculiar  importance  of  "  dogma "  in  these  days.  The 
object  of  my  second  will  be  to  show  the  great  encourage 
ments  there  are  to  hold  and  teach  it. 

I.  My  first  proposition  is  this :  A  strong  dislike  to  all 
"dogma"  in  religion  is  a  most  conspicuous  and  growing  sign 
of  the  times.  Hence  arises  the  peculiar  importance  of  holding 
and  teaching  it. 

This  dislike  is  a  fact,  I  am  bold  to  say,  which  wants 
realizing  and  recognizing.  It  does  not  receive  the  atten 
tion  it  deserves.  We  have  been  so  much  occupied  of  late 
years  in  resisting  those  who  believe  too  much,  that  we 
have  somewhat  overlooked  those  who  believe  too  little. 


92  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Whether  we  like  to  hear  it  or  not,  there  is  a  sore  disease 
in  the  land,  which  is  eating  like  a  canker  into  the  vitals 
of  English  religion.  It  is  a  pestilence  walking  in  dark 
ness,  which  threatens  to  infect  a  large  proportion  of  the 
rising  generation. 

The  evidences  of  this  dislike  to  "dogma"  are  so 
abundant  that  the  only  difficulty  lies  in  selection.  Unless 
we  are  men  who  having  eyes  see  not,  and  having  ears 
hear  not,  we  may  see  them  on  every  side. 

(a)  I  might  ask  any  intelligent  man,  for  example,  to 
mark  the  vague  tone  of  the  great  majority  of  English 
newspapers,  when  they  touch  religious  subjects.  He  will 
find  that  while  they  are  generally  willing  to  praise  Chris 
tian  morality,  they  too  often  ignore  Christian  doctrine. — I 
might  ask  him  to  observe  the  bitterness  with  which 
School  Boards  frequently  speak  of  what  they  are  pleased 
to  call  "  theology,"  and  how  ready  they  are  to  shovel  it 
all  aside  under  the  vague  name  of  "sectarianism" — I 
might  ask  him  to  analyze  the  most  popular  fictions  and 
novels  of  the  last  forty  years,  which  profess  to  paint 
Christians,  and  to  notice  how  the  portrait  almost  invari 
ably  avoids  everything  like  doctrine,  and  exhibits  the 
model  Christian  like  a  cut  flower  at  a  flower  show,  a 
mere  bloom  without  root. — I  might  ask  him  to  look  at 
the  anxiety  which  liberal  speakers  (so-called)  are  con 
stantly  showing,  in  addressing  popular  audiences,  to  sweep 
away  all  "  denominational  Christianity"  and  to  throw  aside 
Creeds  and  Confessions  as  old  worn-out  clothes,  which  only 
fetter  the  limbs  of  modern  Englishmen. — In  each  of 
these  cases  let  him  note  one  common  symptom :  that  is, 
a  morbid,  unreasoning  desire  to  have  the  fruits  of  Chris 
tianity  without  the  roots, — to  have  Christian  morality 
without  Christian  dogma.  And  then  let  him  deny,  if 
he  can,  that  a  dislike  to  "  dogma"  is  a  widespread  evil  of 
our  times. 


THE   IMPORTANCE   OF    DOGMA.  93 

(J)  I  will  then  ask  any  intelligent  man  to  examine  the 
opinions  commonly  expressed  in  the  talk  of  private  life. 
You  have  only  got  to  bring  up  the  subject  of  religion  in 
society,  and  you  will  get  further  proofs  still.  In  five 
houses  out  of  six,  where  people  have  anything  like  real 
religion,  you  will  find  that  they  make  a  regular  idol  of 
" earnestness"  They  do  not  pretend  to  know  anything 
about  controversies  and  disputed  questions,  or  to  have 
any  opinion  as  to  who  is  right  and  who  is  wrong.  They 
only  know  that  they  admire  "  earnestness ; "  and  they 
cannot  think  that  earnest,  hard-working  men  can  be 
unsound  in  the  faith.  Tell  them  that  any  "earnest" 
clergyman  whom  they  name  does  not  preach  the  Gospel, 
and  they  are  downright  offended.  Impossible  !  whatever 
doctrines  an  "  earnest "  man  holds  and  teaches,  they 
think  it  narrow  and  uncharitable  and  illiberal  in  you  to 
distrust  him.  In  vain  you  remind  them  that  zeal  and 
laboriousness  are  useless,  if  a  minister  does  not  teach 
God's  truth;  and  that  Pharisees  and  Jesuits  had  zeal 
enough  to  "  compass  sea  and  land."  They  know  nothing 
about  that;  they  do  not  profess  to  argue.  All  they 
know  is  that  work  is  work ;  and  that  an  earnest  man 
must  le  a  good  man,  and  cannot  be  in  the  wrong,  what 
ever  he  teaches.  And  what  does  it  all  come  to  ?  They 
dislike  "  dogma,"  and  will  not  make  up  their  minds  as  to 
what  is  truth. 

(c)  Hitherto  we  have  seen  the  evil  I  am  considering 
in  solution,  and  in  its  most  common  and  diluted  forms. 
If  we  want  to  see  it  in  its  more  solid  and  crystallized 
state,  we  have  only  to  turn  to  the  preaching  and  writings 
of  the  extreme  Broad  Churchmen  of  our  days.  I  will  not 
weary  my  readers  with  a  catalogue  of  the  strange  and 
loose  utterances  which  come  incessantly  from  that  quarter, 
about  inspiration,  about  the  atonement,  about  the  sacrifice 
and  death  of  Christ,  about  the  incarnation,  about  miracles, 


94  PRINCIPLES   FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

about  Satan,  about  the  Holy  Spirit,  about  future  punish 
ment.  I  will  not  pain  them  by  recounting  the  astounding 
theories  sometimes  propounded  about  "the  blood  of 
Christ."  Time  would  fail  me  if  I  tried  to  sketch  the 
leading  features  of  a  misty  system  which  appears  to 
regard  all  religions  as  more  or  less  true,  and  in  which 
"  tabernacles  "  seem  to  be  wanted  for  Socrates,  and  Plato, 
and  Pythagoras,  and  Seneca,  and  Confucius,  and  Mahomet, 
and  Channing,  and  Theodore  Parker,  as  well  as  for 
Christ,  and  Moses,  and  Elias, — all,  forsooth,  being  true 
prophets,  great  masters,  great  teachers,  great  leaders  of 
thought !  I  shall  content  myself  with  the  remark,  that 
dislike  to  "  dogma  "  is  one  prominent  characteristic  of  the 
leaders  and  champions  of  the  extreme  Broad  Church 
party.  Search  their  sermons  and  books,  and  you 
find  plenty  of  excellent  negatives,  —  plenty  of  great 
swelling  words  about  "the  fatherhood  of  God,  and 
charity,  and  light,  and  courage,  and  manliness,  and  large- 
heartedness,  and  wide  views,  and  free  thought," — plenty 
of  mere  wind-bags,  high-sounding  abstract  terms,  such  as 
"  the  true,  and  the  just,  and  the  beautiful,  and  the  high- 
souled,  and  the  genial,  and  the  liberal,"  and  so  forth. 
But,  alas !  there  is  an  utter  absence  of  distinct,  solid, 
positive  doctrine ;  and  if  you  look  for  a  clear,  systematic 
account  of  the  way  of  pardon  and  peace  with  God, — of 
the  right  medicine  for  a  burdened  conscience,  and  the 
true  cure  for  a  broken  heart, — of  faith  and  assurance,  and 
of  justification,  and  regeneration,  and  sanctification, — you 
look  in  vain.  The  words  indeed  you  may  sometimes 
find,  but  not  the  realities, — the  words  in  new  and 
strange  senses,  fair  and  good-looking  outside,  like  rotten 
fruits ;  but,  like  them,  empty  and  worthless  within. 
But  one  thing,  I  repeat,  is  abundantly  clear:  "dogma" 
and  positive  doctrinal  statements  are  the  abomination 
of  extreme  Broad  Churchmen.  Their  cry  is  continually, 


THE    IMPORTANCE    OF    DOGMA.  95 

like  that  of  the  old  Roman  senator,  "  Delenda  est 
Carthago :  down  with  dogma,  down  with  it,  even  to  the 
ground ! " 

(d)  I  am  afraid  that  time  and  space  would  fail  me  if 
I  travelled  outside  our  own  communion,  in  order  to  find 
additional  proof  of  the  widespread  dislike  to  "  dogma  " 
which  we  need  to  realize  in  this  age.  We  hear  of  it 
among  Nonconformists :  the  oldest  and  soundest  of  them 
complain  bitterly  that  the  plague  has  begun  among  the 
descendants  of  the  Puritans,  and  that  old  orthodox  views 
are  becoming  scarce. — We  hear  of  it  from  Scotland :  not 
a  few  Presbyterians  are  beginning  to  speak  contemp 
tuously  of  the  Assembly's  Catechism  as  a  yoke  which 
ought  to  be  thrown  off. — We  hear  of  it  from  Switzer 
land  :  the  Churches  of  Zwingle  and  Calvin  are  said  to 
be  so  deeply  tainted  with  Socinianism,  since  they  threw 
creeds  overboard,  that  it  might  almost,  to  speak  figura 
tively,  make  their  founders  turn  in  their  graves. — We  hear 
of  it  from  America :  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pearsall  Smith 
addressed  the  crowds  at  the  famous  Brighton  Conference, 
their  simple-minded  and  well-meaning  hearers  must  have 
been  puzzled  to  hear  the  often  reiterated  expression, 
"  We  do  not  want  theology."  But  I  trust  I  have  said 
enough  to  convince  my  readers,  that  when  I  speak  of 
dislike  to  "  dogma "  as  one  of  the  largest  and  most  for 
midable  perils  of  the  day,  I  do  not  use  any  exaggerated 
language,  or  speak  without  good  reason. 

The  causes  of  this  dislike  to  "dogma"  we  need  not 
go  far  to  seek.  There  is  nothing  new  about  it,  and 
nothing  therefore  which  ought  to  surprise  us.  Eighteen 
centuries  ago  St.  Paul  forewarned  us,  "  the  time  will  come 
when  men  will  not  endure  sound  doctrine  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  3). 
And  the  older  the  world  gets,  and  the  nearer  to  the 
second  advent  of  Christ,  the  more  clearly  shall  we  see 
that  prophecy  fulfilled.  We  only  see  a  full  development 


96  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

of  an  old  disease.  There  never  have  been  wanting  thousands 
of  lazy,  worldly  Christians,  who  say  with  the  poet, — 

*'  For  modes  of  faith  let  graceless  zealots  fight ; 
He  can't  be  wrong  whose  life  is  in  the  right." 

Even  in  1*772,  more  than  a  hundred  years  ago,  Archdeacon 
Blackburn  and  "  The  Feathers  Tavern  Association  "  got  up 
a  petition  for  doing  away  with  subscription  to  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles,  which  attracted  a  good  deal  of  notice.  The 
great  Paley  was  weak  enough  to  countenance  it.  Burke, 
the  famous  statesman,  on  the  other  hand,  was  wise  enough 
to  oppose  it,  in  an  able  speech  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
The  plain  truth  is,  that  the  root  of  the  whole  evil  lies  in 
the  fallen  nature  of  man,  and  his  deeply-seated  unbelief 
in  God's  word.  I  suspect  we  have  no  idea  how  little 
faith  there  is  on  earth,  and  how  few  people  entirely 
believe  Bible  statements.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity 
against  God."  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the 
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God"  (Eom.  viii.  7;  1  Cor.  ii.  14). 
The  natural  man  hates  the  Gospel  and  all  its  distinctive 
doctrines,  and  delights  in  any  ostensible  excuse  for  re 
fusing  it.  One  man  is  proud :  he  dislikes  the  distinctive 
doctrines  of  Christianity,  because  they  leave  him  no 
room  to  boast. — Another  is  lazy  and  indolent :  he  dislikes 
distinctive  doctrine,  because  it  summons  him  to  trouble 
some  thought,  and  self -inquiry,  and  mental  self-exertion. 
— Another  is  grossly  ignorant;  he  fancies,  like  Gallio, 
that  all  distinctive  doctrine  is  a  "  mere  matter  of  words 
and  names,"  and  that  it  does  not  signify  a  jot  what  we 
believe. — Another  is  thoroughly  worldly :  he  shrinks  from 
distinctive  doctrine,  because  it  condemns  his  darling 
world. — But  in  one  form  or  another,  I  am  satisfied, 
"  original  sin  "  is  the  cause  of  all  the  mischief.  And  the 
whole  result  is,  that  vast  numbers  of  men  are  pleased 
with  the  seemingly  new  idea  that  "dogma"  is  of  no 


THE    IMPORTANCE    OF    DOGMA.  97 

great  importance,   and  greedily   swallow  it  down.       It 
supplies  a  convenient  excuse  for  indecision. 

The  consequences  of  this  widespread  dislike  to  "dogma" 
are  very  serious  in  the  present  day.  Whether  we  like 
to  allow  it  or  not,  it  is  an  epidemic  which  is  just  now 
doing  great  harm,  and  specially  among  young  people. 
It  creates,  fosters,  and  keeps  up  an  immense  amount  of 
instability  in  religion.  It  produces  what  I  must  venture 
to  call,  if  I  may  com  the  phrase,  a  "  jelly-fish "  Chris 
tianity  in  the  land :  that  is,  a  Christianity  without  bone, 
or  muscle,  or  power.  A  jelly-fish,  as  every  one  knows 
who  has  been  much  by  the  sea-side,  is  a  pretty  and 
graceful  object  when  it  floats  in  the  sea,  contracting  and 
expanding  like  a  little,  delicate,  transparent  umbrella. 
Yet  the  same  jelly-fish,  when  cast  on  the  shore,  is  a  mere 
helpless  lump,  without  capacity  for  movement,  self- 
defence,  or  self-preservation.  Alas !  it  is  a  vivid  type 
of  much  of  the  religion  of  this  day,  of  which  the  leading 
principle  is, — "  No  dogma,  no  distinct  tenets,  no  positive 
doctrine." — We  have  hundreds  of  "  jelly-fish  "  clergymen, 
who  seem  not  to  have  a  single  bone  in  their  body  of 
divinity.  They  have  no  definite  opinions;  they  belong 
to  no  school  or  party :  they  are  so  afraid  of  "  extreme 
views "  that  they  have  no  views  at  all. — We  have 
thousands  of  "jelly-fish"  sermons  preached  every  year, 
sermons  without  an  edge,  or  a  point,  or  a  corner,  smooth 
as  billiard  balls,  awakening  no  sinner,  and  edifying  no 
saint. — We  have  legions  of  "  jelly-fish  "  young  men  annu 
ally  turned  out  from  our  Universities,  armed  with  a  few 
scraps  of  second-hand  philosophy,  who  think  it  a  mark  of 
cleverness  and  intellect  to  have  no  decided  opinions  about 
anything  in  religion,  and  to  be  utterly  unable  to  make 
up  their  minds  as  to  what  is  Christian  truth.  They  live 
apparently  in  a  state  of  suspense,  like  Mahomet's  fabled 
coffin,  hanging  between  heaven  and  earth.  Their  high 

G 


98  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

souls  are  not  satisfied  with  arguments  which  satisfied 
Butler,  and  Paley,  and  Chalmers,  and  M'llvaine,  and 
Whately,  and  Whewell,  and  Mozley !  Their  only  creed 
is  a  kind  of  "Nihilism."  They  are  sure  and  positive 
about  nothing. — And  last,  and  worst  of  all,  we  have 
myriads  of  jelly-fish  worshippers, — respectable  church- 
going  people,  who  have  no  distinct  and  definite  views 
about  any  point  in  theology.  They  cannot  discern  things 
that  differ,  any  more  than  colour-blind  people  can  dis 
tinguish  colours.  They  think  everybody  is  right  and 
nobody  wrong,  everything  is  true  and  nothing  is  false, 
all  sermons  are  good  and  none  are  bad,  every  clergyman 
is  sound  and  no  clergyman  unsound.  They  are  "  tossed 
to  and  fro,  like  children,  by  every  wind  of  doctrine ; " 
often  carried  away  by  any  new  excitement  and  sensa 
tional  movement;  ever  ready  for  new  things,  because 
they  have  no  firm  grasp  on  the  old ;  and  utterly  unable 
to  "  render  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  them."  All 
this,  and  much  more,  of  which  I  cannot  now  speak  par 
ticularly,  is  the  result  of  the  unhappy  dread  of  "  dogma  " 
which  has  been  so  strongly  developed,  and  has  laid  such 
hold  on  many  Churchmen,  in  these  latter  days. 

I  turn  from  the  picture  I  have  exhibited  with  a  sorrow 
ful  heart.  I  grant  it  is  a  gloomy  one ;  but  I  am  afraid 
it  is  only  too  accurate  and  true.  Let  us  not  deceive 
ourselves.  "  Dogma  "  and  positive  doctrine  are  at  a  dis 
count  just  now.  Instability  and  unsettled  notions  are  the 
natural  result,  and  meet  us  in  every  direction.  Never 
was  it  so  important  for  laymen  to  hold  systematic  views 
of  truth,  and  for  ordained  ministers  to  "enunciate  dogma" 
very  clearly  and  distinctly  in  their  teaching. 

II.  The  second  proposition  I  wish  to  lay  before  my 
readers  is  this :  In  spite  of  all  that  is  said  against  dogma, 
its  advocates  have  no  cause  to  le  ashamed. 


THE    IMPORTANCE    OF    DOGMA.  99 

I  launch  that  statement  without  the  slightest  hesita 
tion.  The  assailants  of  "dogma"  make  such  boasting, 
and  blow  their  trumpets  so  loudly,  that  I  suspect  some 
old  Christians  of  late  years  have  been  rather  frightened. 
They  have  thought  that  the  ark  was  in  danger,  and  that 
we  must  moderate  our  tone,  and  retire  from  our  old  lines  ! 
Let  no  man's  heart  fail  at  this  crisis.  There  is  no  cause 
for  alarm.  It  is  the  mark  of  ill-disciplined  and  half- 
savage  armies  to  blow  horns  and  beat  drums,  and  cover 
their  real  weakness  by  noise.  The  true  soldier  holds  his 
tongue,  and  reserves  his  breath  for  the  actual  struggle. 
"  In  quietness  and  confidence  is  our  strength."  In  spite 
of  all  the  hard  words  poured  on  "  dogma," — as  effete, 
worn  out,  injurious  to  free  thought,  unsuited  to  the  nine 
teenth  century,  and  so  forth, — there  remains  a  catena  of 
facts  in  support  of  "  dogma,"  which  I  believe  it  is  im 
possible  to  explain  away.  In  short,  there  is  a  mass  of 
evidence  which  cannot  be  refuted. 

Into  the  broad  general  question  of  the  value  of  Creeds 
and  Confessions  as  the  expression  of  dogma,  I  do  not 
propose  to  enter.  I  have  not  room  for  it,  and  it  is  not 
the  precise  subject  before  us.  I  simply  remark,  with  all 
respect  to  the  Plymouth  Brethren,  that  clearly  specified 
terms  of  membership  appear  to  me  an  absolute  necessity 
to  the  well-being  and  good  order  of  a  Church.  It  is  not 
enough  to  say,  "We  believe  the  Bible."  We  must 
distinctly  understand  what  the  leading  facts  and  doctrines 
of  the  Bible  are ;  and  this  is  exactly  the  point  where 
Creeds  and  Confessions  are  useful.  Those  who  care  to 
study  this  subject  will  find  it  admirably  handled  in  a 
Scotch  book,  entitled  "  Dunlop's  Uses  of  Creeds  aud  Con 
fessions  of  Faith."  Burke's  speech  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  on  Archdeacon  Blackburn's  petition,  is  also 
well  worth  reading  (Burke's  Works,  vol.  x.).  He  truly 
says,  "  Subscription  to  Scripture  alone  is  the  most 


100  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

astonishing  idea  I  ever  heard,  and  will  amount  to  no 
subscription  at  all."  But  I  purposely  pass  by  this 
question.  I  shall  confine  myself  to  a  simple  statement 
of  certain  broad  facts,  which  ought  to  encourage  every 
loyal  Churchman  to  hold  distinct  doctrinal  views,  and 
not  to  be  ashamed  of  "  dogma." 

(a)  In  the  first  place,  let  us  turn  "boldly  to  our  Bibles. 
Is  "  dogma "  there  or  not  ?  Of  course  I  do  not  forget 
that  this  witness  goes  for  little  with  many.  They  re 
gard  the  Bible  as  nothing  more  than  a  respectable 
collection  of  old  Jewish  writings,  of  uncertain  antiquity, 
containing  many  good  things,  but  not  as  an  infallible  book, 
to  whose  dicta  they  must  bow.  Whenever  it  contradicts 
their  so-called  "  verifying  faculty,  and  inward  conscious 
ness,  and  intuitive  convictions,"  they  refuse  to  accept  its 
teaching !  I  shall  have  a  word  for  these  gentlemen  by 
and  by.  But  I  thank  God  that  many  clergymen  and 
laymen  in  the  Church  of  England  are  of  a  very  different 
mind.  There  are  yet  left  some  thousands  amongst  us 
who  have  not  forgotten  their  Ordination  Vows,  in  which 
clergymen  profess  their  determination  to  "  instruct  people 
out  of  Scripture,"  and  to  "  teach  nothing  necessary  to 
salvation  but  that  which  may  be  concluded  and  proved 
by  Scripture."  To  them  and  thousands  like  them,  I  can 
confidently  appeal.  Do  we  not,  then,  all  know  and  feel, 
as  we  read  our  New  Testaments,  that  "  dogma  "  meets  us 
in  every  book  from  Matthew  down  to  Eevelation  ?  Is 
not  the  fashionable  claptrap  assertion,  that  the  chief 
object  of  the  Gospels  and  Epistles  was  to  teach  us  high 
moral  precepts  and  charity  rather  than  "  dogma,"  so  utterly 
contrary  to  the  real  facts  of  the  case,  which  meet  our 
eyes  when  we  read  our  Bibles,  that  it  is  absurdly  untrue? 
Are  not  "dogma"  and  doctrine  so  intimately  woven  up  and 
intermingled  with  moral  precepts  in  the  New  Testament, 
that  you  cannot  separate  them  ?  We  all  know  there  is 


THE    IMPORTANCE    OF    DOGMA.  101 

only  one  answer  to  such  questions.  As  for  those  un 
happy  men  who  can  stand  in  a  reading-desk,  and  there 
read  such  books  as  St.  John's  Gospel,  and  the  Epistles 
to  the  Eomans,  Galatians,  Ephesians,  and  Hebrews  to  a 
Church  of  England  congregation,  and  then  denounce 
"  dogma,"  and  cry  down  dogmatic  theology,  and  sneer  at 
Bibliolatry  in  the  pulpit,  I  can  only  say  that  I  do  not 
understand  them.  He  that  gives  up  teaching  "  dogma," 
in  my  opinion,  may  just  as  well  say  that  he  gives  up 
teaching  the  Bible.  You  cannot  neglect  "dogma"  without 
ignoring  Scripture. 

(b)  In  the  second  place,  we  can  turn  boldly  to  our 
Thirty-nine  Articles.  Is  "  dogma "  in  them  or  not  ? 
Once  more,  I  do  not  forget  that  many  think  very  little  of 
that  admirable  Confession  of  Faith.  They  coolly  tell  us 
in  that  offhand,  conceited  style  which  is  so  painfully 
common  in  this  day,  that  "  nobody  really  believes  all  the 
Articles ! "  Some  tell  us  plainly  that  they  regard  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  as  a  burdensome  stone,  and  an 
incubus  on  men's  consciences,  and  that  we  should  do  far 
better  to  abolish  them,  throw  them  overboard,  and  be 
content  with  subscription  to  the  Apostles'  Creed,  or  with 
no  subscription  at  all !  But  all  this  time  the  law  of  the 
land,  and  of  the  Church,  stands  firm  and  unrepealed,  and 
every  incumbent  on  taking  possession  of  a  living  is 
obliged  to  declare  publicly  that  he  will  teach  and  preach 
"  nothing  contrary  to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles."  Yet 
what  are  these  Articles  but  a  wise  compendium  of  dog 
matical  statements  ?  With  few  exceptions,  they  are  a 
series  of  doctrinal  assertions,  carefully  drawn  out  of 
Scripture,  which  the  Church  regards  as  of  special  and 
primary  importance.  Where,  I  should  like  to  know,  is 
our  honesty,  if  we  shrink  from  "enunciating  dogma" 
after  pledging  ourselves  to  the  Articles  ?  Where  is  plain 
faithfulness  to  our  ministerial  engagements  if  we  do  not 


102  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

teach  and  preach  distinct,  systematic  doctrine  ?  As  for 
those  clergymen  who  hold  livings,  and  retain  positions  in 
our  Church,  while  they  openly  contradict  the  Articles,  or 
deliberately  sneer  at  their  statements  of  doctrine,  as 
"  narrow,  and  illiberal,  and  unsuited  to  the  nineteenth 
century,"  I  can  only  say  once  more  that  I  do  not  under 
stand  them.  I  can  admire  their  zeal  and  cleverness ;  but 
I  cannot  see  that  they  are  in  their  right  place  in  the 
pulpit  of  the  Church  of  England.  He  that  is  for  no 
"  dogma,"  no  Articles,  and  no  Creeds,  in  my  judgment  is 
no  true  and  loyal  Churchman. 

(c)  In  the  third  place,  we  can  turn  'boldly  to  the  Prayer- 
book.  Is  "  dogma "  there  or  not  ?  That  famous  book, 
with  all  its  unquestionable  imperfections,  finds  favour  in 
the  eyes  of  all  schools  of  thought  within  our  pale,  and  of 
myriads  outside.  You  rarely  meet  with  any  one,  however 
broad  and  liberal,  however  inimical  to  Creeds  and  Articles, 
who  quarrels  with  our  time-honoured  Liturgy,  or  would 
like  to  see  it  much  altered.  "Week  after  week  its  old 
familiar  words  are  read  all  over  the  globe,  wherever  the 
English  flag  flies  and  the  English  language  is  spoken. 
The  older  the  world  grows,  the  more  men  seem  disposed 
to  say,  with  George  Herbert  on  his  death-bed,  "  The 
prayers  of  my  mother  the  Church  of  England,  there  are 
none  like  them ! "  Yet  all  this  time  it  is  a  curious  fact 
that  an  immense  amount  of  dogmatic  theology  runs 
through  the  Prayer-book,  and  underlies  its  simple  peti 
tions  !  He  that  sits  down  and  makes  a  list  will  be 
surprised  to  find  what  a  large  amount  of  doctrinal  state 
ments  the  old  book  contains  about  the  Trinity,  about  the 
proper  deity  of  Christ,  about  the  personality  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  about  the  sacrifice  and  mediation  of  Christ,  about 
the  work  of  the  Spirit,  and  many  other  points.  They 
occur  again  and  again  in  sentences  with  which  we  are  so 
familiar  that  we  overlook  their  contents.  Take,  for  a 


THE    IMPORTANCE    OF    DOGMA.  103 

single  instance,  the  dogma  of  eternal  punishment.  The 
question  has  been  raised  of  late  whether  the  Church  of 
England  says  anything  about  it  in  her  formularies.  Yet 
all  this  time  the  Prayer-book  contains  three  singularly 
strong  expressions  on  the  subject.  In  the  Litany  almost 
the  first  petition  is,  "  From  everlasting  damnation,  good 
Lord,  deliver  us."  In  the  Burial  Service  we  say,  by  the 
side  of  the  open  grave,  "  Deliver  us  not  into  the  bitter 
pains  of  eternal  death."  Even  in  the  Church  Catechism 
we  teach  children  that  in  the  Lord's  Prayer  they  ask  to 
be  "  kept  from  our  ghostly  enemy  and  everlasting  death." 
Once  more  I  say,  he  that  thinks  little  of  "  dogma,"  and  yet 
uses  tlie  Prayer-book  of  the  Church  of  England,  is  very 
inconsistent,  and  is  occupying,  whether  he  knows  it  or 
not,  a  most  untenable  and  unreasonable  position.  I 
assert  confidently  that  the  Prayer-book  is  full  of  dog 
matic  theology. 

(d)  And  now,  in  the  fourth  place,  I  have  a  word  for 
those  numerous  opponents  of  "dogma"  who  care  little 
for  the  Bible,  Articles,  or  Prayer-book.  Let  me  come 
down  into  the  plain  and  try  conclusions  with  them.  I 
say  that  the  advocates  of  dogma  can  turn  'boldly  to  the 
whoU  history  of  the  progress  and  propagation  of  Christianity, 
from  the  time  of  the  apostles  down  to  the  present  day,  and 
fearlessly  appeal  to  its  testimony.  I  challenge  any  one  to 
deny  what  I  am  going  to  say,  and  disprove  it  if  he  can. 
I  affirm,  unhesitatingly,  that  there  never  has  been  any 
spread  of  the  Gospel,  any  conversion  of  nations  or 
countries,  any  successful  evangelistic  work,  excepting  by 
the  proclamation  of  "  dogma."  I  invite  any  opponent  of 
dogmatic  theology  to  name  a  single  instance  of  a  country, 
or  town,  or  people,  which  has  ever  been  Christianized, 
moralized,  or  civilized  by  merely  telling  men  that  Christ 
was  a  great  moral  Teacher;  that  they  must  love  one 
another ;  that  they  must  be  true,  and  just,  and  unselfish, 


104  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

and  generous,  and  brotherly,  and  high-souled,  and  the 
like  !  No  !  no  !  no  !  Not  one  single  victory  can  such 
teaching  show  us;  not  one  trophy  can  such  teaching 
exhibit.  It  has  wrought  no  deliverance  on  the  earth. 
The  victories  of  Christianity,  wherever  they  have  been 
won,  have  been  won  by  distinct  doctrinal  theology, — by 
telling  men  of  Christ's  vicarious  death  and  sacrifice, — by 
showing  them  Christ's  substitution  on  the  cross,  and  His 
precious  blood, — by  teaching  them  justification  by  faith, 
and  bidding  them  believe  on  a  crucified  Saviour, — by 
preaching  ruin  by  sin,  redemption  by  Christ,  regeneration 
by  the  Spirit;  by  lifting  up  the  Brazen  Serpent, — by 
telling  men  to  look  and  live, — to  believe,  repent,  and  be 
converted.  This, — this  is  the  only  teaching  which  for 
eighteen  centuries  God  has  honoured  with  success,  and  is 
honouring  at  the  present  day  both  at  home  and  abroad. 
Let  the  clever  advocates  of  a  broad  and  undogmatic 
theology, — the  preachers  of  the  gospel  of  earnestness,  and 
sincerity,  and  cold  morality, — show  us  at  this  day  any 
English  village,  or  parish,  or  city,  or  district,  which  has 
been  evangelized  without  "  dogma "  by  their  principles. 
They  cannot  do  it,  and  they  never  will.  Christianity 
without  "dogma"  is  a  powerless  thing.  It  may  be 
beautiful  to  some  minds,  but  it  is  childless  and  barren, 
cold  and  unfertilizing  as  the  moon.  There  is  no  getting 
over  facts.  The  good  that  is  done  in  the  earth  may  be 
comparatively  small.  Evil  may  abound,  and  ignorant 
impatience  may  murmur  and  cry  out  that  Christianity 
has  failed.  But,  depend  on  it,  if  we  want  to  do  good 
and  shake  the  world,  we  must  fight  with  the  old  apos 
tolic  weapons,  and  stick  to  "  dogma."  No  dogma,  no 
fruits  !  No  positive  evangelical  doctrine,  no  evangeliza 
tion  ! 

(e)  In  the  fifth  place,  we  may  turn  boldly  to  the  lives 
of  all  the  most  eminent  saints  who  have  adorned  the 


THE    IMPORTANCE    OF    DOGMA.  105 

Church  of  Christ,  since  its  great  Head  left  the  world, 
and  summon  them  as  witnesses.  I  will  not  weary  my 
readers  with  long  lists  of  names,  for  happily  they  are 
legion.  Let  us  examine  the  holiest  Fathers,  and  School 
men,  and  Reformers,  and  Puritans,  and  Anglicans,  and 
Dissenters,  and  Churchmen  of  every  school,  and  Christians 
generally  of  every  name,  and  nation,  and  people,  and 
tongue.  Let  us  search  their  diaries,  and  analyze  their 
biographies,  and  study  their  letters.  Let  us  just  see 
what  manner  of  men  they  have  been  in  every  age,  who, 
by  the  consent  of  all  their  contemporaries,  have  been 
really  holy,  and  saintly,  and  good.  Where  will  you  find 
one  of  them  who  did  not  cling  to  "  dogma,"  who  did  not 
hold  certain  great  distinct  doctrinal  views,  and  live  in 
the  faith  of  them  ?  I  am  satisfied  you  will  not  find  one ! 
In  their  clearness  of  perception  and  degree  of  spiritual 
light,  in  the  proportion  they  have  assigned  to  particular 
articles  of  faith,  they  may  have  differed  widely.  In  their 
mode  of  expressing  their  theological  opinions  they  may 
not  have  agreed.  But  they  have  always  had  one  common 
stamp  and  mark.  They  have  not  been  content  with 
vague  ideas  of  "  earnestness,  and  goodness,  and  sincerity, 
and  charity."  They  have  had  certain  systematic,  sharply- 
cut,  and  positive  views  of  truth.  They  have  known 
whom  they  believed,  and  what  they  believed,  and  why 
they  believed.  And  so  it  always  will  be.  You  will 
never  have  Christian  fruits  without  Christian  roots,  what 
ever  novel-writers  may  say  ;  you  will  never  have  eminent 
holiness  without  dogmatic  theology. 

(/)  In  the  last  place,  let  us  turn  to  the  death-beds  of  all 
who  die  with  solid  comfort  and  good  hope,  and  appeal  to 
them.  There  are  few  of  us  who  are  not  called  on  occa 
sionally,  as  we  travel  through  life,  to  see  people  passing 
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  and  drawing 
near  to  their  latter  end.  and  to  those  "things  unseen 


106  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

which  are  eternal."  We  all  of  us  know  what  a  vast 
difference  there  is  in  the  manner  in  which  such  people 
leave  the  world,  and  the  amount  of  comfort  and  hope 
which  they  seem  to  feel.  Can  any  of  us  say  that  he  ever 
saw  a  person  die  in  peace  who  did  not  know  distinctly 
what  he  was  resting  on  for  acceptance  with  God, 
and  could  only  say,  in  reply  to  inquiries,  that  he  was 
"  earnest  and  sincere "  ?  I  can  only  give  my  own 
experience :  I  never  saw  one.  Oh,  no !  The  story  of 
Christ's  moral  teaching,  and  self-sacrifice,  and  example, 
and  the  need  of  being  earnest  and  sincere  and  like  Him, 
will  never  smooth  down  a  dying  pillow.  Christ  the 
teacher,  Christ  the  great  pattern,  Christ  the  prophet,  will 
not  suffice.  We  want  something  more  than  this !  We 
want  the  story  of  Christ  dying  for  our  sins,  and  rising 
again  for  our  justification.  We  want  Christ  the  mediator, 
Christ  the  substitute,  Christ  the  intercessor,  Christ  the 
redeemer,  in  order  to  meet  with  confidence  the  King  of 
terrors,  and  to  say,  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  0 
grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ? "  Not  a  few,  I  believe,  who 
have  gloried  all  their  lives  in  rejecting  dogmatic  religion, 
have  discovered  at  last  that  their  "  broad  theology"  is  a 
miserable  comforter,  and  the  gospel  of  mere  "  earnestness" 
is  no  good  news  at  all.  Not  a  few,  I  firmly  believe,  could 
be  named,  who  at  the  eleventh  hour  have  cast  aside  their 
favourite,  new-fashioned  views,  and  have  fled  for  refuge 
to  "  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,"  and  left  the  world  with 
no  other  hope  than  the  old-fashioned  Evangelical  doctrine 
of  faith  in  a  crucified  Jesus.  Nothing  in  their  life's 
religion  has  given  them  such  peace  as  the  simple  truth 
grasped  at  the  eleventh  hour, — 

"  Just  as  I  am  :  without  one  plea, 
But  that  Thy  blood  was  shed  for  me, 
And  that  Thou  bidd'st  me  come  to  Thee, — 
0  Lamb  of  God,  I  come." 


THE    IMPORTANCE    OF    DOGMA.  107 

Surely,  when  this  is  the  case,  we  have  no  need  to  be 
ashamed  of  dogmatic  theology. 

And  now,  as  I  leave  the  subject,  let  me  wind  up  all  I 
have  said  with  an  expression  of  my  earnest  hope  that  all 
honest,  true-hearted  Churchmen  will  walk  in  the  steps  of 
their  forefathers,  and  stick  to  the  old  weapons  which  they 
wielded  so  well  and  successfully.  Let  no  scorn  of  the 
world,  let  no  ridicule  of  smart  writers,  let  no  sneers  of 
liberal  critics,  let  no  secret  desire  to  please  and  conciliate 
the  public,  tempt  us  for  one  moment  to  leave  the  old  paths, 
and  drop  the  old  practice  of  enunciating  dogma — clear, 
distinct,  well-defined,  and  sharply-cut  "dogma  " — in  all  our 
utterances  and  teachings.  Let  us  beware  of  being  vague, 
and  foggy,  and  hazy  in  our  statements.  Let  us  be  specially 
particular  about  such  points  as  original  sin,  the  inspiration 
and  authority  of  Scripture,  the  finished  work  of  Christ, 
the  complete  atonement  made  by  His  death,  the  priestly 
office  which  He  exercises  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  the 
inward  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  hearts,  the  reality  and 
eternity  of  future  punishment.  On  all  these  points  let  our 
testimony  be  not  Yea  and  Nay,  but  Yea  and  Amen ;  and 
let  the  tone  of  our  witness  be  plain,  ringing,  and  unmis 
takable.  "  If  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound,  who 
shall  prepare  himself  to  the  battle  ? "  (1  Cor.  xiv,  8).  If 
we  handle  such  subjects  in  a  timid,  faltering,  half-hearted 
way,  as  if  we  were  handling  hot  iron,  and  we  had  not 
made  up  our  minds  "  what  is  truth,"  it  is  vain  to  expect 
people  who  hear  us  to  believe  anything  at  all.  It  is  the 
bold,  decided,  outspoken  man,  like  our  departed  brethren 
Capel  Molyneux  or  Hugh  M'Neile,  who  makes  a  deep 
mark,  and  sets  people  thinking,  and  "turns  the  world 
upside  down."  It  was  "dogma"  in  the  apostolic  ages 
which  emptied  the  heathen  temples,  and  shook  Greece  and 
Rome.  It  was  "  dogma  "  which  awoke  Christendom  from 
its  slumbers  at  the  time  of  the  Reformation,  and  spoiled 


108  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

the  Pope  of  one-third  of  his  subjects.  It  was  "  dogma  " 
which,  a  hundred  years  ago,  revived  the  Church  of  Eng 
land  in  the  days  of  Whitfield,  Wesley,  Venn,  and  Eomaine, 
and  blew  up  our  dying  Christianity  into  a  burning  flame. 
It  is  "  dogma  "  at  this  moment  which  gives  power  to  every 
successful  mission,  whether  at  home  or  abroad.  It  is 
doctrine — doctrine,  clear  ringing  doctrine — which,  like 
the  rams'  horns  at  Jericho,  casts  down  the  opposition  of 
the  devil  and  sin.  Let  us  go  on  clinging  to  "  dogma " 
and  doctrine,  whatever  some  may  please  to  say ;  and  we 
shall  do  well  for  ourselves,  well  for  others,  well  for 
the  Church  of  England,  and  well  for  Christ's  cause  in  the 
world. 

And  now  let  me  conclude  this  paper  with  two  special 
words  of  warning.  They  are  warnings  so  closely  con 
nected  with  my  subject  that  I  dare  not  keep  them 
back.  I  offer  them  with  some  diffidence,  for  I  lay  no 
claim  to  infallibility.  I  ask  my  readers  to  take  them 
for  what  they  are  worth.  They  are  cautions  for  the 
times. 

(a)  On  the  one  hand  I  desire  to  raise  a  warning  voice 
against  the  growing  disposition  to  sacrifice  dogma  on  the 
altar  of  so-called  unity,  and  to  give  up  sound  doctrine  for 
the  sake  of  peace  and  co-operation.  The  tide  is  running 
strongly  in  that  direction :  we  must  mind  what  we  are 
about,  and  bend  to  our  oars,  "  hard  all ! "  Peace  is  an 
excellent  thing ;  but  it  may  be  bought  too  dear.  And 
it  is  bought  too  dear  if  we  keep  back  any  portion  of 
gospel  truth,  in  order  to  exhibit  to  men  a  hollow 
semblance  of  agreement.  The  divisions  of  the  Church  of 
England  are  unhappy  and  dangerous.  They  are  the 
strength  of  Liberationism,  and  the  laughing-stock  of  the 
world.  They  are  an  evil  omen.  God  sees  them,  and  is 
displeased.  When  children  fight  about  the  candle,  they 


THE    IMPOETANCE    OF    DOGMA.  109 

are  often  left  in  the  dark.  But  for  Christ's  sake  let  us 
beware  of  trying  to  heal  our  breaches  by  lowering  our 
standard  of  doctrine,  and  watering  our  statements  of  truth 
in  order  to  avoid  giving  offence.  To  skin  over  a  wound 
externally,  while  mischief  is  going  on  inside,  is  poor  sur 
gery,  and  not  a  cure.  Some  men  cut  the  knot  by  refusing 
to  show  their  faces  or  open  their  mouths  except  in  the 
presence  of  sympathizing  and  congenial  audiences.  Be  it 
so,  if  they  please.  I  shall  throw  no  stone  at  them. 
Others  think  they  are  more  in  the  line  of  duty  (if  not  of 
pleasure)  when  they  stand  up  boldly  in  any  place  where 
they  can  get  a  fair  hearing,  whether  on  Congress  platforms 
or  in  cathedral  pulpits,  and  try  to  confess  Christ,  and  to 
confront  error  by  truth.  But,  whatever  line  of  conduct 
we  adopt,  whether  we  sit  at  home  at  ease,  or  do  battle 
and  jeopardize  our  lives  on  high  places,  and  face  contra 
diction,  let  us  never  compromise  sound  doctrine  for  the 
sake  of  pleasing  any  one,  whether  he  be  Bishop  or  Pres 
byter,  Eomanist  or  Infidel,  Eitualist  or  Neologian,  Church 
man  or  Dissenter,  or  Plymouth  brother.  Let  our  principle 
be,  "  amicus  Socrates,  amicus  Plato,  sed  magis  arnica  veritas." 
Let  us  be  civil  and  courteous  to  every  one,  however  much 
we  may  disagree  with  him.  Let  us  not  forget  Luther's 
maxim :  " In  quo  aliquid  Christi  video,  ilium  diligo"  But 
never,  never  let  us  compromise  and  give  up  one  jot  or 
tittle  of  Evangelical  dogma. 

Well  says  Martin  Luther :  "  Accursed  is  that  charity 
which  is  preserved  by  the  shipwreck  of  faith  or  truth,  to 
which  all  things  must  give  place ;  both  charity,  or  an 
apostle,  or  an  angel  from  heaven."  Well  says  Dr.  Gauden : 
"  If  either  peace  or  truth  must  be  dispensed  with,  it  is 
peace  and  not  truth.  Better  to  have  truth  without  public 
peace  than  peace  without  saving  truth."  Well  says 
Gregory  Nazianzen :  "  That  man  little  consults  the  will 
and  honour  of  God,  who  will  expose  the  truth  in  order  to 


110  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

obtain    the    repute    of    an    easy   mildness."       (Morning 
Exercises,  vol.  iv.  p.  221.) 

(b)  On  the  other  hand,  I  desire  to  raise  a  warning 
voice  against  the  growing  tendency  to  "be  dogmatical  about 
things  which  are  not  necessary  to  salvation, — to  be  positive 
where  the  Bible  is  silent,  to  condemn  and  anathematize 
those  whom  God  has  not  condemned,  and  to  exalt  things 
indifferent  and  secondary  to  a  level  with  the  primary 
verities  and  weightier  matters  of  the  gospel.  By  all 
means  let  us  be  bold,  firm,  and  unbending  as  steel,  about 
every  jot  and  tittle  of  Evangelical  dogma  and  Christ's 
truth ;  but  let  us  not  cultivate  the  detestable  habit  of  ex 
communicating  every  man  who  does  not  see  everything, 
in  the  adiaphora  of  worship,  exactly  with  our  eyes,  and 
pronounce  Shibboleth  precisely  as  we  do.  For  Christ's 
sake  let  us  make  allowances  for  slight  varieties  of  opinion 
in  non-essential  matters.  Let  us  not  out-ritualize  ritualists 
in  over-scrupulousness  and  particularity.  Let  us  not 
squabble  about  straws  when  the  Canaanite  and  Perizzite 
are  in  the  land,  or  bite  and  devour  one  another,  like  the 
wretched  Jewish  factions  in  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  when 
the  Komans  were  thundering  at  the  gates.  Never,  never, 
I  am  persuaded,  was  the  old  saying  of  Eupertus  Meldenius 
so  worthy  of  daily  remembrance  :  "  In  necessariis  unitas, 
— dn  non  necessariis  liber t as, — in  omnibus  caritas!' 


VL, 

THOUGHTS  ON  THE  CHUECH. 

THERE  is  hardly  any  subject  in  religion  which  is  so  much 
misunderstood  as  the  subject  of  the  "  Church."  There 
is  probably  no  misunderstanding  which  has  done  more 
harm  to  professing  Christians  than  the  misunderstanding 
of  this  subject. 

The  word  "  Church "  is  a  word  that  is  constantly 
used,  and  yet  we  cannot  help  observing  that  different 
people  use  it  in  different  senses.  The  English  politician 
in  our  day  talks  of  "  the  Church."  What  does  he  mean  ? 
You  will  generally  find  he  means  the  Episcopal  Church 
established  in  hi  own  country. — The  Eoman  Catholic 
talks  of  "the  Church."  What  does  he.  mean?  He 
means  the  Church  of  Eome,  and  tells  you  that  there  is 
no  other  Church  in  the  world  except  his  own. — The 
Dissenter  talks  of  "  the  Church."  What  does  he  mean  ? 
He  means  the  communicants  of  that  chapel  of  which  he 
is  a  member. — The  members  of  the  Church  of  England 
talk  of  "the  Church."  What  do  they  mean?  One 
means  the  building  in  which  he  worships  on  a  Sunday ; — 
another  means  the  clergy,  and  when  any  one  is  ordained, 
tells  you  that  he  has  gone  into  the  Church ; — a  third  has 
some  vague  notions  about  what  he  is  pleased  to  call 
apostolical  succession,  and  hints  mysteriously  that  the 


112  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

Church  is  made  up  of  Christians  who  are  governed  by 
Bishops,  and  of  none  beside.  There  is  no  denying  these 
things.  They  are  all  patent  and  notorious  facts.  And 
they  all  help  to  explain  the  assertion  with  which  I 
started, — that  there  is  no  subject  so  much  misunderstood 
as  that  of  the  "  Church." 

Now  I  believe  that  to  have  clear  ideas  about  the 
Church,  is  of  the  first  importance  in  the  present  day.  I 
believe  that  mistakes  on  this  point  are  one  great  cause 
of  the  religious  delusions  into  which  so  many  fall.  I 
want  to  clear  the  subject  of  that  misty  vagueness  by 
which  it  is  surrounded  in  so  many  minds.  It  was  a 
most  true  saying  of  Bishop  Jewell,  the  reformer,  "  There 
never  was  anything  yet  so  absurd  or  so  wicked,  but  it  might 
seem  easy  to  be  covered  and  defended  lyy  the  name  of  the 
Church" 1  (Jewell's  Apol.  sec.  xx.) 

I.  Let  me  then  show,  first  of  all,  what  is  that  one  true 
Church,  out  of  which  no  man  can  be  saved. 

II.  Let  me   show,  in  the  second  place,  what  is  the 
position  and  value  of  all  branches  of  the  visible  or  professing 
Church  of  Christ. 

III.  And  let  me,  in  the  third  place,  draw  from  the 
subject  some  practical  counsels  and  cautions  for  the  times  in 
which  we  live. 

I.  First  of  all,  let  me  show  the  readers  of  this  paper 
that  one  true  Church,  out  of  which  no  man  can  be  saved. 

There  is  a  Church,  outside  of  which  there  is  no  salva 
tion, — a  Church  to  which  a  man  must  belong,  or  be  lost 
eternally.  I  lay  this  down  without  hesitation  or  reserve. 

1  "The  adversaries  of  the  truth  defend  many  a  false  error  under  the 
name  of  the  holy  Church." 

"  Beware  of  deceit,  when  thou  hearest  the  name  of  the  Church.  The 
verity  is  then  assaulted.  They  call  the  Church  of  the  devil  the  Holy 
Church  many  times." — Bishop  Hooper.  1547.  Parker  Edit.  pp.  83,  84. 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    CHURCH. 


113 


I  say  it  as  strongly  and  as  confidently  as  the  strongest 
advocate  of  the  Church  of  Eome.  But  what  is  this 
Church  ?  Where  is  this  Church  ?  What  are  the  marks 
by  which  this  Church  may  be  known  ?  This  is  the  grand 
question. 

The  one  true  Church  is  well  described  in  the  Com 
munion  Service  of  the  Church  of  England,  as  "  the 
mystical  body  of  Christ,  which  is  the  blessed  company 
of  all  faithful  people."  It  is  composed  of  all  believers 
in  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  made  up  of  all  God's  elect,  of 
all  converted  men  and  women,  of  all  true  Christians. 
In  whomsoever  we  can  discern  the  election  of  God  the 
Father,  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  God  the  Son,  the 
sanctifying  work  of  God  the  Spirit,  in  that  person  we 
see  a  member  of  Christ's  true  Church.1 

1  "The  Church  is  the  body  of  Christ.  It  is  the  whole  number  and 
society  of  the  faithful,  whom  God  through  Christ  hath  before  the  beginning 
of  time  appointed  to  everlasting  life. "  —  Dean  NoweWs  Catechism, 
sanctioned  by  Convocation.  1572. 

"  That  Church  which  is  Christ's  body,  and  of  which  Christ  is  the  head, 
standeth  only  of  living  stones,  and  true  Christians,  not  only  outwardly 
in  name  and  title,  but  inwardly  in  heart  and  in  truth." — Bishop  Ridley. 
1556.  Parker  Edit.  p.  126. 

' '  Unto  this  Church  pertain  so  many  as  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  until  this  time  have  unfeignedly  believed  in  Christ,  or  shall  believe 
unto  the  very  end  of  the  world.  Against  this  Church  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  prevail." — Thomas  Becon,  Chaplain  to  Archbishop  Cranmer. 
1550.  Parker  Edit.  vol.  i.  p.  294. 

"  The  holy  Catholic  Church  is  nothing  else  but  a  company  of  saints. 
To  this  Church  pertain  all  they  that  since  the  beginning  of  the  world 
have  been  saved,  and  that  shall  be  saved  unto  the  end  thereof." — Bishop 
Coverdale.  1550.  Parker  Edit.  p.  461. 

"  The  Catholic  Church,  which  is  called  the  body  of  Christ,  consists  of 
such  as  are  truly  sanctified,  and  united  to  Christ  by  an  internal  alliance, 
so  that  no  wicked  person,  or  unbeliever,  is  a  member  of  this  body,  solely 
by  the  external  profession  of  faith  and  participation  of  sacraments." — 
Bishop  Davenant  on  Colos.  i.  p.  18.  1627. 

"They  who  are  indeed  holy  and  obedient  to  Christ's  laws  of  faith  and 
manners,  these  are  truly  and  perfectly  the  Church.  These  are  the  Church 
of  God  in  the  eyes  and  heart  of  God.  For  the  Church  of  God  is  the  body 


114  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

It  is  a  Church  of  which  all  the  members  have  the 
same  marks.  They  are  all  born  again  of  the  Spirit. 
They  all  possess  "  repentance  towards  God,  faith  towards 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  and  holiness  of  life  and  con 
versation.  They  all  hate  sin,  and  they  all  love  Christ. 
They  worship  differently,  and  after  various  fashions : 
some  worship  with  a  form  of  prayer,  and  some  with 
none  ;  some  worship  kneeling,  and  some  standing  :  but 
they  all  worship  with  one  heart.  They  are  all  led  by 
one  Spirit ;  they  all  build  upon  one  foundation ;  they 
all  draw  their  religion  from  one  single  book  ;  they  are 
all  joined  to  one  great  Head  and  centre,  that  is,  Jesus 
Christ.  They  all,  even  now,  can  say  with  one  heart, 
"  Hallelujah ; "  and  they  all  can  respond  with  one  heart 
and  voice,  "  Amen  and  amen." 

It  is  a  Church  which  is  dependent  upon  no  ministers 
upon  earth,  however  much  it  values  those  who  preach 
the  Gospel  to  its  members.  The  life  of  its  members 
does  not  hang  on  Church-membership  and  baptism  and 
the  Lord's  Supper,  although  they  highly  value  both  the 
Sacraments  when  they  are  to  be  had.  But  it  has  only  one 
Great  Head,  one  Shepherd,  one  chief  Bishop,  and  that 
is  Jesus  Christ.  He  alone,  by  His  Spirit,  admits  the 
members  of  this  Church,  though  ministers  may  show  the 
door.  Till  He  opens  the  door,  no  man  on  earth  can  open 
it,  neither  Bishops,  nor  presbyters,  nor  Convocations,  nor 
Synods.  Once  let  a  man  repent  and  believe  the  gospel, 
and  that  moment  he  becomes  a  member  of  this  Church. 
Like  the  penitent  thief,  he  may  have  no  opportunity  of 

of  Christ.  But  the  mere  profession  of  Christianity  makes  no  man  a 
member  of  Christ,  nothing  but  a  new  creature,  nothing  but  a  faith 
working  by  love,  and  keeping  the  commandments  of  God." — Bishop 
Jeremy  Taylor's  Dissuasive  from  Popery,  Part  ii.  b.  1,  sec.  1.  1660. 

"That  Church  which  is  Christ's  mystical  body  consisteth  of  none  but 
only  true  Israelites,  true  sons  of  Abraham,  true  servants  and  saints  of 
God."-//ooJbr,  Ecdes.  Polity,  b.  3,  i.  1600. 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE  CHURCH.  115 

being  baptized ;  but  he  has  that  which  is  far  better  than 
any  water-baptism — the  baptism  of  the  Spirit.  He  may 
not  be  able  to  receive  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's 
Supper ;  but  he  eats  Christ's  body  and  drinks  Christ's 
blood  by  faith  every  day  he  lives,  and  no  minister  on 
earth  can  prevent  him.  He  may  be  excommunicated  by 
ordained  men,  and  cut  off  from  the  outward  ordinances 
of  the  professing  Church ;  but  all  the  ordained  men  in 
the  world  cannot  shut  him  out  of  the  true  Church.1 

It  is  a  Church  whose  existence  does  not  depend  on 
forms,  ceremonies,  cathedrals,  churches,  chapels,  pulpits, 
fonts,  vestments,  organs,  endowments,  money,  kings, 
governments,  magistrates,  or  any  act  or  favour  whatso 
ever  from  the  hand  of  man.  It  has  often  lived  on  and 
continued,  when  all  these  things  have  been  taken  from 
it.  It  has  often  been  driven  into  the  wilderness,  or  into 
dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  by  those  who  ought  to  have 
been  its  friends.  But  its  existence  depends  on  nothing 
but  the  presence  of  Christ  and  His  Spirit,  and  so  long 
as  they  are  with  it,  the  Church  cannot  die. 

(a)  This  is  the  Church  to  which  the  titles  of  present 
honour  and  privilege,  and  the  promise  of  future  glory 
especially  belong.2  This  is  the  body  of  Christ.  This 

1  "  A  man  may  be  a  true  and  visible  member  of  the  Holy  Catholic 
Church,  and  yet  be  no  actual  member  of  any  visible  Church. 

"  Many  there  be,  or  may  be  in  most  ages,  which  are  no  members  of  the 
visible  Church,  and  yet  better  members  of  the  true  Church  than  the 
members  of  the  Church  visible  for  the  present  are." — Jackson  on  the 
Church.  1670. 

8  "Whatsoever  we  read  in  Scripture  concerning  the  endless  love  and 
saving  mercy  which  God  showeth  towards  His  Church,  the  only  proper 
subject  thereof  is  this  Church,  which  we  properly  term  the  mystical  body 
of  Christ."— Hooker,  Eccles.  Pol.  b.  3,  i.  1600. 

"  If  any  will  agree  to  call  the  universality  of  professors  by  the  title 
of  the  Church,  they  may  if  they  will.  Any  word  by  consent  may  signify 
anything.  But  if  by  a  Church  we  mean  that  society  which  is  really 
joined  to  Christ,  which  hath  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  heir  of 
the  promises  and  of  the  good  things  of  God,  which  is  the  body  of  which 


116  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

is  the  Bride.  This  is  the  Lamb's  Wife.  This  is  the 
flock  of  Christ.  This  is  the  household  of  faith  and  the 
family  of  God.  This  is  God's  building,  God's  foundation, 
and  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is  the  Church 
of  the  first-born,  whose  names  are  written  in  heaven. 
This  is  the  royal  priesthood,  the  chosen  generation,  the 
peculiar  people,  the  purchased  possession,  the  habitation 
of  God,  the  light  of  the  world,  the  salt  and  the  wheat  of 
the  earth.  This  is  the  "  holy  catholic  Church "  of  the 
Apostles'  Creed.  This  is  the  "  one  catholic  and  Apostolic 
Church "  of  the  Nicene  Creed.  This  is  that  Church  to 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  promises, — "  the  gates  of  hell  shall 
not  prevail  against  it,"  and  to  which  He  says,  "  I  am 
with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  (Matt. 
xvi.  18,  xxviii.  20.) 

(b)  This  is  the  only  Church  which  possesses  true  unity. 

Christ  is  the  head,  then  the  invisible  part  of  the  visible  Church,  that  is, 
the  true  servants  of  Christ,  only  are  the  Church." — Bishop  Jeremy 
Taylor  s  Dissuasive  from  Popery.  1660. 

"  The  Catholic  Church  in  the  prime  sense  consists  only  of  such  men  as 
are  actual  and  indissoluble  members  of  Christ's  mystical  body,  or  of  such 
as  have  the  Catholic  faith  not  only  sown  in  their  brains  and  under 
standings,  but  thoroughly  rooted  in  their  hearts.  All  the  glorious 
prerogatives,  titles,  or  promises,  annexed  to  the  Church  in  Scripture,  are 
in  the  first  place  and  principally  meant  of  Christ's  live  mystical  body. " — 
Jackson  on  the  Church.  1670. 

"  What  is  meant  in  the  Creed  by  the  Catholic  Church  ?  That  whole 
universal  company  of  the  elect,  that  ever  were,  are,  or  shall  be,  gathered 
together  in  one  body,  knit  together  in  one  faith,  under  one  head,  Jesus 
Christ." — Archbishop  Uslier.  1650. 

"In  the  Creed,  we  do  believe  in  the  Church,  but  not  in  this  or  that 
Church,  but  the  Catholic  Church,  which  is  no  particular  assembly  of 
men,  much  less  the  Roman  synagogue,  tied  to  any  one  place,  but  the 
body  of  the  elect  which  hath  existed  from  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
and  shall  exist  unto  the  end. "—  Whitaker's  Disputations.  1610.  Parker 
Edit.  vol.  i.  p.  299. 

"The  Holy  Catholic  Church,  a  number  that  serve  God  here,  and  enjoy 
Him  in  eternity.  Universal,  diffused  through  the  various  ages,  places, 
and  nations  of  the  world.  Holy,  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and 
sanctified  by  His  Spirit."— Archbishop  Leighton  on  the  Creed.  1680. 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  CHURCH.          11  "7 

Its  members  are  entirely  agreed  on. all  the  weightier 
matters  of  religion,  for  they  are  all  taught  by  one  Spirit. 
About  God,  and  Christ,  and  the  Spirit,  and  sin,  and 
their  own  hearts,  and  faith,  and  repentance,  and  the 
necessity  of  holiness,  and  the  value  of  the  Bible,  and 
the  importance  of  prayer,  and  the  resurrection,  and 
judgment  to  come,  about  all  these  points  they  see  eye 
to  eye.  Take  three  or  four  of  them,  strangers  to  one 
another,  from  the  remotest  corners  of  the  earth  ;  examine 
them  separately  on  these  points  :  you  will  find  them  all 
of  one  mind.1 

(c)  This  is  the  only  Church  which  possesses  true  sanctity. 
Its  members  are  all  holy.     They  are  not  merely  holy  by 
profession,  holy  in  name,  and  holy  in  the  judgment  of 
charity ;  they  are  all  holy  in  act,  and  deed,  and  reality, 
and  life,  and  truth.     They  are  all  more  or  less  conformed 
to  the  image  of  Jesus  Christ ;  they  are  all  more  or  less 
like  their  great  Head.     No  unholy  man  belongs  to  this 
Church.2 

(d)  This  is  the  only  Church  which  is  truly  catholic.     It 
is  not  the  Church  of  any  one  nation  or  people;  its  members 
are  to  be  found  in  every  part  of  the  world  where  the 
gospel  is  received  and  believed.     It  is  not  confined  within 
the  limits  of  any  one  country,  nor  pent  up  within  the 
pale  of  any  particular  forms  or  outward  government.     In 
it  there  is  no  difference  between  Jew  and  Greek,  black 
man    and   white,   Episcopalian    and    Presbyterian, — but 

1  "  To  the  mystical  and  invisible  Church  belongs  peculiarly  that  unity 
which  is  often  attributed  unto  the  Church."      "This  is  the  society  of 
those  for  whom  Christ  did  pray  that  they  might  be  one." — Barrow  on 
the  Unity  of  the  Church.     1670. 

2  "To  this  Holy  Catholic  Church,  which  forms  the  mystical  body  of 
Christ,  we  deny  that  the  ungodly,  hypocrites,  or  any,  belong,  who  are 
not  partakers  of  spiritual  life,  and  are  void  of  inward  faith,  charity,  and 
holiness.     The  most  learned  Augustine  has  denied  it  as  well,  giving  it  as 
his  opinion  that  all  such  should  be  ranked  among  the  members  of  Anti 
christ."—  Bishop  Davenant's  Determinations.     1634.     Vol.  ii.  p.  475. 


118  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

faith  in  Christ  is  all.  Its  members  will  be  gathered  from 
north,  and  south,  and  east,  and  west,  in  the  last  day,  and 
will  be  of  every  name,  and  denomination,  and  kindred, 
and  people  and  tongue, — but  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus. 

(e)  This  is  the  only  Church  which  is  truly  apostolic.  It 
is  built  on  the  foundation  laid  by  the  apostles,  and  holds 
the  doctrines  which  they  preached.  The  two  grand 
objects  at  which  its  members  aim,  are  apostolic  faith 
and  apostolic  practice.  The  man  who  talks  of  "  following 
the  apostles  "  without  possessing  these  two  things,  is  no 
better  than  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal.1 

(/)  This  is  the  only  Church  which  is  certain  to  endure 
unto  the  end.  Nothing  can  altogether  overthrow  and 
destroy  it.  Its  members  may  be  persecuted,  oppressed, 
imprisoned,  beaten,  beheaded,  burned.  But  the  true 
Church  is  never  altogether  extinguished :  it  rises  again 
from  its  afflictions ;  it  lives  on  through  fire  and  water. 
When  crushed  in  one  land,  it  springs  up  in  another. 
The  Pharaohs,  the  Herods,  the  Neros,  the  Julians,  the  Dio- 
cletians,  the  Bloody  Marys,  the  Charles  the  Ninths,  have 
laboured  in  vain  to  put  down  this  Church.  They  slay  their 
thousands,  and  then  pass  away  and  go  to  their  own  place. 
The  true  Church  outlives  them  all,  and  sees  them  buried 
each  in  his  turn.  It  is  an  anvil  that  has  broken  many  a 
hammer  in  this  world,  and  will  break  many  a  hammer 
still.  It  is  a  bush  which  is  often  burning,  and  yet  is 
not  consumed.2 

(g)  This  is  the  only  Church  of  which  no  member  can 
perish.  Once  enrolled  in  the  lists  of  this  Church,  sinners 

1  "They  are  the  successors  of  the   apostles,  that  succeed  in  virtue, 
holiness,  truth,  and  so  forth  ;  not  they  that  sit  upon  the  same  stool." — 
Bishop  BaUngton.     1615.     Folio  edition,  p.  307. 

2  "  The  Holy  Catholic  Church  is  built  upon  a  rock,  so  that  not  even 
the  gates  of  hell  can  prevail  against  it.     This  is  the  privilege  of  the  elect 
and  believers.     All  the  ungodly  and  hypocrites  are  built  upon  the  sand, 
are  overcome  by  Satan,  and  are  sunk  at  last  into  hell.     How  then  can 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  CHURCH.          119 

are  safe  for  eternity ;  they  are  never  cast  away.  The 
election  of  God  the  Father, — -the  continual  intercession 
of  God  the  Son, — the  daily  renewing  and  sanctifying 
power  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  surround  and  fence  them 
in  like  "  a  garden  enclosed."  Not  one  bone  of  Christ's 
mystical  body  shall  ever  be  broken.  Not  one  lamb  of 
Christ's  flock  shall  ever  be  plucked  out  of  His  hand.1 

(h)  This  is  the  Church  which  does  the  work  of  Christ 
upon  earth.  Its  members  are  a  little  flock,  and  few  in 
number  compared  with  the  children  of  the  world :  one 
or  two  here  and  two  or  three  there, — a  few  in  this 
parish,  and  a  few  in  that.  But  these  are  they  who  shake 
the  universe.  These  are  they  who  change  the  fortunes 
of  kingdoms  by  their  prayers.  These  are  they  who  are 
the  active  workers  for  spreading  the  knowledge  of  pure 
religion  and  undefiled.  These  are  the  life-blood  of  a 
country, — the  shield,  the  defence,  the  stay,  and  the 
support  of  any  nation  to  which  they  belong. 

(i)  This  is  the  Church  which  great  divines  often  call  "in- 
visible''  because  its  distinguishing  marks  are  not  outward 
but  inward,  even  the  graces  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the 
hearts  of  its  members,  which  the  world  can  neither  see 
nor  understand  (John  xiv.  17).  But  while  this  is  true, 
the  word  "  invisible  "  must  be  carefully  guarded  against 
misconstruction.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  true 
Church  is  eminently  visible  to  those  who  have  eyes  to  see 
it.  Its  members,  like  their  Master,  cannot  be  hid.  Their 

they  form  a  part  of  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,  which  admits  not  con 
demned  members  ?  "—Bishop  Davenant's  Determinations.  1634.  Vol. 
ii.  p.  478. 

"The  preservation  of  the  Church  is  a  continuing  miracle.  It  resembles 
Daniel's  safety  among  the  hungry  lions,  but  prolonged  from  one  age  to 
another.  The  ship  wherein  Christ  is,  may  be  weather-beaten,  but  shall 
not  perish." — Archbishop  Leighton  on  the  Creed.  1680. 

1  "Of  all  such  as  are  effectually  called,  or  authentically  admitted  into 
this  society,  none  will  revolt  again  to  the  synagogue  of  Satan,  or  to  the 
world."— Jackson  on  the  Church.  1670. 


120  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

holy  lives  and  characters  will  always  show  whose  they 
are,  and  whom  they  serve  on  earth,  and  where  they  are 
going  when  they  die.  In  the  best  visible  Church,  says 
the  Twenty-sixth  Article,  "  the  evil  is  ever  mingled  with 
the  good."  In  the  true  Church,  on  the  contrary,  all  the 
members  are  holy  and  good,  and  there  is  no  mixture  at 
all.  In  this  sense,  we  must  remember,  the  true  Church 
is  always  visible. 

(f)  This  is  the  Church  which  shall  le  truly  glorious  at 
the  end.  When  all  earthly  glory  has  passed  away,  then 
shall  this  Church  be  presented  without  spot  before  God 
the  Father's  throne.  Thrones,  principalities,  and  powers 
upon  earth  shall  come  to  nothing.  Dignities,  and  offices, 
and  endowments  shall  all  pass  away ;  but  the  Church  of 
the  first-born  shall  shine  as  the  stars  at  the  last,  and  be 
presented  with  joy  before  the  Father's  throne,  in  the  day 
of  Christ's  appearing.  When  the  Lord's  jewels  are  made 
up,  and  the  "  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  "  takes  place, 
Episcopacy,  and  Presbyterianism,  and  Congregationalism 
will  not  be  mentioned.  One  Church  only  will  be  named, 
and  that  is  the  Church  of  the  elect. 

(k)  This  is  the  Church  for  which  a  true  minister  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ's  gospel  chiefly  labours.  What  is  it 
to  a  true  minister  to  fill  the  building  in  which  he 
preaches  ?  What  is  it  to  him  to  see  the  communicants 
come  up  more  and  more  to  his  table  ?  What  is  it  to 
him  to  see  his  party  grow  ?  It  is  all  nothing,  unless  he 
can  see  men  and  women  "  born  again," — unless  he  can 
see  souls  converted  and  brought  to  Christ, — unless  he 
can  see  here  one,  and  there  another,  "  coming  out  from 
the  world,"  "  taking  up  the  cross  and  following  Christ," 
and  thus  increasing  the  numbers  of  the  one  true  Church. 

(I)  This  is  the  Church  to  which  a  man  must  belong,  if  he 
would  be  saved.  Till  you  belong  to  this,  you  are  nothing 
better  than  a  lost  soul.  You  may  have  the  form,  the 


THOUGHTS    ON  THE    CHURCH.  121 

husk,  the  skin,  and  the  shell  of  religion,  but  you  have 
not  got  the  substance  and  the  life.  Yes :  you  may  have 
countless  outward  privileges, — you  may  enjoy  great  light, 
and  knowledge,  and  opportunities ; — but  if  you  do  not 
belong  to  the  body  of  Christ,  your  light,  and  knowledge,  and 
privileges,  and  opportunities  will  not  save  your  soul.  Alas, 
for  the  ignorance  that  prevails  on  this  point !  Men  fancy, 
if  they  join  this  Church  or  that  Church,  and  become  com 
municants,  and  go  through  certain  forms,  that  all  must 
be  right  with  their  souls.  It  is  an  utter  delusion ;  it  is 
a  gross  mistake.  All  were  not  Israel  who  were  called 
Israel;  and  all  are  not  members  of  Christ's  body  who 
profess  themselves  Christians.  Take  notice,  you  may  be 
a  staunch  Episcopalian,  or  Presbyterian,  or  Independent, 
or  Baptist,  or  Wesleyan,  or  Plymouth  Brother, — and  yet 
not  belong  to  the  true  Church.  And  if  you  do  not,  it 
will  be  better  at  last  if  you  had  never  been  born.1 

II.  Let  me  pass  on  now  to  the  second  point  I  proposed 
to  speak  of.  Let  me  explain  the  position  and  valw  of  alt 
branches  of  the  visible  or  professing  Church  of  Christ. 

What  do  we  mean  when  we  use  the  expression  "  A 
visible  Church  "  ?  I  answer  that  question  in  the  words  of 
the  Nineteenth  Article  of  the  Church  of  England.  It  is 
there  described  as  "  a  congregation  of  faithful  men,  in 
which  the  pure  word  of  God  is  preached  and  the  sacra 
ments  be  duly  administered  according  to  Christ's 
ordinance."  I  take  the  meaning  of  this  definition  to  be, 
that  where  there  is  a  body  of  men  professing  one  com 
mon  faith  in  Christ  and  the  doctrine  of  His  gospel,  with 

1  "We  insist  that  Christians  do  certainly  become  members  of  par 
ticular  Churches, — such  as  the  Roman,  Anglican,  or  Gallican, — by  out 
ward  profession  ;  yet  do  not  become  .true  members  of  the  Holy  Catholic 
Church,  which  we  believe,  unless  tney  are  sanctified  by  the  inward  gift 
of  grace,  and  are  united  to  Christ,  the  Head,  by  the  bond  of  the  Spirit." 
—Bishop  Davenant's  Determinations.  1634.  Vol.  ii.  p.  474. 


122  PRINCIPLES    IOE    CHURCHMEN. 

a  ministry  of  the  word,  and  a  right  administration  of  the 
sacraments,  there  is  a  visible  Church. 

A  Church,  therefore,  is  called  visible,  because  its  marks 
or  characteristics  can  be  seen  and  known  of  men.  Its 
confession  of  faith,  its  ministry,  its  worship,  and  its 
sacraments  are  its  distinguishing  marks  and  signs. 
Through  them  it  is  visible.  Where  these  marks  are,  there 
is  what  the  Thirty-fourth  Article  calls  a  "  particular  or 
national  Church."  Such  a  Church,  no  doubt,  may  be 
small,  weak,  schismatical,  defective — even  corrupt.  But 
it  would  be  hard  to  prove  that  it  is  not  a  branch  of  the 
great  visible  Church  of  Christ,  like  the  erring  Churches 
of  Alexandria  and  Antioch. 

Now  what  does  Scripture  teach  us  about  professing 
visible  Churches  ?  What  it  teaches  about  the  one  true 
Church  which  some  call  "  invisible/'  we  have  seen.  Let 
us  now  see  what  the  same  Scripture  teaches  about 
Churches  which  the  Article  of  the  Church  of  England 
calls  "  visible." 

Every  careful  reader  of  the  Bible  knows  that  separate 
professing  Churches  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the 
New  Testament.  At  Corinth,  at  Ephesus,  at  Thessa- 
lonica,  at  Antioch,  at  Smyrna,  at  Sardis,  at  Laodicea,  and 
several  other  places, — at  each  we  find  a  distinct  body  of 
professing  Christians, — a  body  of  people  baptized  in 
Christ's  name,  and  professing  the  faith  of  Christ's  gospel. 
And  these  bodies  of  people  we  find  spoken  of  as  the 
"  Churches  "  of  the  places  which  are  named.  Thus  St.  Paul 
says  to  the  Corinthians,  "  But  we  have  no  such  custom, 
neither  the  Churches  of  Christ"  (1  Cor.  xi.  16).  So 
also  we  read  of  the  Churches  of  Judsea,  the  Churches  of 
Syria,  the  Churches  of  Galatia,  the  Churches  of  Asia,  the 
Churches  of  Macedonia.  In  each  case  the  expression 
means  the  bodies  of  baptized  Christians  in  the  countries 
mentioned. 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    CHURCH.  123 

Now,  we  have  but  little  information  given  us  in  the 
New  Testament  about  these  Churches; — but  that  little 
is  very  clear  and  plain,  so  far  as  it  goes. 

We  know,  for  one  thing,  that  these  Churches  were  all 
mixed  bodies.  As  the  Article  of  the  Church  of  England 
truly  says,  "the  evil  are  ever  mingled  with  the  good." 
Not  one  was  perfect  and  free  from  dead  branches.  They 
consisted  not  only  of  converted  persons,  but  of  many 
unconverted  persons  also.  They  contained  not  only 
believers,  but  members  who  fell  into  gross  errors  and 
mistakes,  both  of  faith  and  practice.  Good  fish  and  bad 
were  in  the  same  net ;  wheat  and  tares  were  in  the  same 
field.  This  is  clear  from  the  account  we  have  of  the 
Churches  at  Corinth,  at  Ephesus,  and  at  Sardis.  Of 
Sardis  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  says,  that  there  were 
"  a  few,"  a  few  only,  in  it,  who  had  not  "  defiled  their 
garments  "  (Rev.  iii.  4). 

We  know,  moreover,  that,  even  in  the  apostles'  times, 
Churches  received  plain  warnings,  that  they  might  perish 
and  pass  away  altogether.  To  the  Eomans  the  threat 
was  held  out  that  they  should  be  "cut  off;"  to  the 
Ephesians,  that  their  "candlestick  should  be  taken 
away ; "  to  the  Laodiceans,  that  they  "  should  be  utterly 
rejected"  (Rom.  xi.  22  ;  Rev.  ii.  5,  iii.  16). 

We  know,  moreover,  that  all  these  Churches  had 
certain  common  visible  marks  or  characteristics,  which 
the  heathen  world  around  them  could  see.  In  all  there 
was  public  worship,  preaching,  reading  of  the  Scriptures, 
prayer,  praise,  discipline,  order,  government,  the  ministry, 
and  the  sacraments.  What  kind  of  government  some 
Churches  had  it  is  impossible  to  say  positively.  We 
read  of  officers  who  were  called  angels,  of  bishops,  of 
deacons,  of  elders,  of  pastors,  of  teachers,  of  evangelists,  of 
prophets,  of  helps,  of  governments  (1  Cor.  xii.  28  ;  Eph. 
iv.  11  ;  Phil.  i.  1  ;  1  Tim.  iii.;  Rev.  i.  20).  All  these 


124  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

are  mentioned.  But  the  particulars  about  most  of  these 
offices  are  kept  from  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  As  to  the 
standard  of  doctrine  and  practice  in  the  Churches  we 
have  the  fullest  and  most  distinct  information.  On  these 
points  the  language  of  the  New  Testament  is  clear  and 
unmistakable.  But  as  to  government  and  outward 
ceremonies,  the  information  given  to  us  is  strikingly 
small.  The  contrast  between  the  Church  of  the  Old 
Testament  and  the  Churches  of  the  New,  in  this  respect, 
is  very  great.  In  the  one  we  find  little  about  doctrine, 
but  much  about  forms  and  ordinances ;  in  the  other  we 
have  much  about  doctrine,  and  little  about  forms.  In 
the  Old  Testament  Church  the  minutest  directions  were 
given  for  the  performance  of  every  part  of  the  ceremonies 
of  religion.  In  the  New  Testament  Church  we  find  the 
ceremonies  expressly  abolished,  as  no  longer  needed  after 
Christ's  death,  and  nothing  hardly  except  a  few  general 
principles  supplying  their  place.  The  New  Testament 
Churches  have  got  no  book  of  Leviticus.  Their  two 
chief  principles  seem  to  be,  "Let  all  things  be  done 
decently  and  in  order, — let  all  things  be  done  unto 
edification"  (1  Cor.  xiv.  26,  40).  But  as  to  the  appli 
cation  of  these  general  principles,  it  seems  to  have  been 
left  to  each  particular  Church  to  decide.1 

We  know,  finally,  that  the  work  begun  by  the  mis- 

1  "  I  find  no  one  certain  and  perfect  kind  of  government  prescribed  or 
commended  in  the  Scriptures  to  the  Church  of  Christ." 

"  I  do  deny  that  the  Scriptures  do  express  particularly  everything  that 
is  to  be  done  in  the  Church,  or  that  it  doth  put  down  any  one  sort  of 
form  and  kind  of  government  of  the  Church  to  be  perpetual  for  all  times, 
persons,  and  places,  without  alteration." — Archbishop  Whitgift.  1574. 
Folio  edition,  p.  84. 

"I  for  my  part  do  confess  that  in  revolving  the  Scriptures,  I  could 
never  find  but  that  God  hath  left  the  like  liberty  to  the  Church  govern 
ment,  as  He  hath  done  to  the  Civil  government ;— to  be  varied  according 
to  time,  place,  and  accidents.  So  likewise  in  Church  matters,  the  sub 
stance  of  doctrine  is  immutable,  and  so  are  the  general  rules  of  govern- 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    CHTJKCH.  125 

sionary  preaching  of  the  apostles  was  carried  on  through 
the  instrumentality  of  the  professing  Churches.  It  was 
through  their  public  assemblies  that  God  converted 
sinners  and  built  up  saints.  Mixed  and  imperfect  as 
these  Churches  plainly  were,  within  their  pale  were  to 
be  found  nearly  all  the  existing  believers  and  members 
of  the  body  of  Christ.  Everything  in  the  New  Testament 
leads  us  to  suppose  that  there  could  have  been  few 
believers,  if  any,  who  were  not  members  of  some  one  or 
other  of  the  professing  Churches  scattered  up  and  down 
the  world. 

Such  is  about  the  whole  of  the  information  the  New 
Testament  gives  us  concerning  visible  Churches  in  the 
apostolic  times.  How  shall  we  use  this  information  ? 
What  shall  we  say  of  all  the  visible  Churches  in  our 
own  time  ?  We  live  in  days  when  there  are  many 
Churches : — the  Church  of  England,  the  Church  of  Scot 
land,  the  Church  of  Ireland,  the  Church  of  Eome,  the 
Greek  Church,  the  Syrian  Church,  the  Armenian  Church, 
the  Lutheran  Church,  the  Genevan  Church,  and  many 
others.  We  have  Episcopalian  Churches ;  we  have 
Presbyterian  Churches ;  we  have  Independent  Churches. 
In  what  manner  shall  we  speak  of  them  ?  Let  me  put 
down  a  few  general  principles.1 

(a)  For  one  thing,  no  visible  Church  on  earth  lias  a 
right  to  say,  "  We  are  the  true  Church,  and  except  men 
belong  to  our  communion  they  cannot  be  saved."  No 
Church  whatever  has  a  right  to  say  that, — whether  it 
be  the  Church  of  Rome,  the  Church  of  Scotland,  or  the 

ment.  But  for  rites,  and  ceremonies,  and  the  particular  hierarchies, 
policies,  and  discipline  of  the  Churches,  they  be  left  at  large." — Lord 
Bacon's  Works,  vol.  vii.  p.  68. 

1  For  convenience  sake  these  Churches  collectively  are  often  spoken  of 
as  "The  Church,"  in  contradiction  to  the  heathen  and  Mahometan  part 
of  mankind.  Only  let  us  remember  that  this  is  a  very  mixed  Church, 
and  one  to  which  no  special  promises  belong. 


126  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

Church  of  England ;  whether  it  be  an  Episcopalian 
Church,  a  Presbyterian,  or  an  Independent.  Where  is 
the  text  in  the  Bible  that  ties  admission  into  the  kingdom 
of  God  to  the  membership  of  any  one  particular  visible 
Church  upon  earth !  I  say  confidently,  Not  one  ! 

(b)  Furthermore,  no  visible  Church  has  a  right  to  say, 
"  We  alone  have  the  true  form  of  worship ;  we  alone 
have  the  true  Church  government,  the  true  way  of 
administering  the  sacraments,  and  the  true  manner  of 
offering  up  united  prayer ;  and  all  others  are  completely 
wrong."  No  Church,  I  repeat,  has  a  right  to  say  anything 
of  the  kind.  Where  can  such  assertions  be  proved  by 
Scripture  ?  What  one  plain,  positive  word  of  revelation 
can  men  bring  forward  in  proof  of  any  such  affirma 
tions  ?  I  say  confidently,  Not  one.  There  is  not  a  text 
in  the  Bible  which  expressly  commands  Churches  to  have 
one  special  form  of  government,  and  expressly  forbids 
any  other.  If  there  is,  let  men  point  it  out.  There  is 
not  a  text  which  expressly  confines  Christians  to  the  use 
of  a  liturgy,  or  expressly  enjoins  them  only  to  have 
extempore  prayer.  If  there  is,  let  it  be  shown.  And 
yet  for  hundreds  of  years  Episcopalians  and  Presbyterians 
and  Independents  have  contended  with  each  other,  as  if 
these  things  had  been  settled  as  minutely  as  the  Levitical 
ceremonies,  and  as  if  everybody  who  did  not  see  with 
their  eyes  was  almost  guilty  of  a  deadly  sin !  It  seems 
wonderful  that  in  a  matter  like  this  men  should  not  be 
satisfied  with  the  full  persuasion  that  they  themselves  are 
right,  but  must  also  go  on  to  condemn  everybody  who 
disagrees  with  them,  as  utterly  wrong.  And  yet  this 
groundless  theory, — that  God  has  laid  down  one  par 
ticular  form  of  Church  government  and  ceremonies, — has 
often  divided  men  who  ought  to  have  known  better.  It 
has  caused  even  good  men  to  speak  and  write  very  un 
advisedly  ;  it  has  been  made  a  fountain  of  incessant 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    CHURCH.  127 

strife,  intolerance,  and  bigotry  by  men  of  all  parties, — 
even  among  Protestants, — from  the  times  of  Cartwright, 
Travers,  and  Laud,  down  to  the  present  day.  No  wonder 
that  the  "judicious"  Hooker  witnessed  and  protested 
against  it. 

(c)  Furthermore,  no  visible  Church  on  earth  has  a  right 
to  say,  "  We  shall  never  fall  away :    we  shall  last  for 
ever."     There  is  no  promise  in  the  Bible  to  warrant  the 
continuance  of  any  one  professing  Church  upon  earth. 
Many    have    fallen    completely ;    many    have    perished 
already.     Where  are  the  Churches  of  Africa,  in  which 
Augustine  and  Cyprian  used  once  to  preach  ?     Where 
are  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor,  of  many  of  which  we 
read  in  the  New  Testament  ?     They  are  gone :  they  have 
passed  away,  and  left  hardly  a  wreck  behind.     Other 
existing  Churches  are  so  corrupt  that  it  is  a  plain  duty 
to  leave  them,  lest  we  become  partakers  of  their  sins,  and 
share  in  their  plagues. 

(d)  Furthermore,  no  visible  Church  is  in  a  sound  and 
healthy  state,  which  has  not  the  marks  we  see  in  all  the 
New   Testament   Churches.      A   Church    in  which    the 
Bible    is    not   the  standard   of    faith    and    practice, — a 
Church  in  which  repentance,  faith,  and  holiness  are  not 
prominently  put  forward  as   essential  to  salvation, — a 
Church  in  which  forms  and  ceremonies  and  ordinances, 
not  commanded  in  the  Bible,  are  the  chief  things  urged 
upon  the  attention  of  the  members, — such  a  Church  is 
in  a  very  diseased  and  unsatisfactory  state.     It  may  not 
formally  deny  any  article  of  the  Christian  faith, — it  may 
have  been  founded  originally  by  the  apostles, — it  may 
boast  that  it  is  Catholic ;  but  if  the  apostles  were  to  rise 
from  the  dead,  and  visit  such  a  Church,  I  believe  they 
would  command  it  to  repent,  and  have  no  communion 
with  it  till  it  did. 

(c)  Furthermore,  no  mere  membership  of  any  visible 


128  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Church  will  avail  a  man  anything  "  in  the  hour  of  death 
and  in  the  day  of  judgment."  No  communion  with  a 
visible  Church  will  stand  in  the  place  of  direct  personal 
communion  with  Jesus ;  no  attendance  whatever  on  its 
ordinances  is  a  substitute  for  personal  faith  and  conver 
sion.  It  will  be  no  consolation,  when  we  lay  our  heads 
upon  a  dying  pillow,  if  we  can  say  no  more  than  this, — 
that  we  have  belonged  to  a  pure  Church.  It  will  be  no 
answer  in  the  last  great  day,  when  the  secrets  of  all 
hearts  are  revealed,  if  we  can  only  say  that  we  worshipped 
in  the  Church  in  which  we  were  baptized,  and  attended 
upon  its  forms. 

But  let  me  pass  away  from  negatives  and  come  to 
positive  assertions.  What  is  the  great  use  and  purpose 
for  which  God  has  raised  up  and  maintained  visible 
Churches  upon  earth  ?  They  are  useful  as  witnesses, 
keepers,  and  librarians  of  Holy  Scripture.  They  are 
useful  as  maintainers  of  a  regular  succession  of  ministers 
to  preach  the  Gospel.  They  are  useful  as  preservers  of 
order  among  professing  Christians.  But  their  great  and 
principal  use  is  to  train  up,  to  rear,  to  nurse,  to  keep 
together  members  of  that  one  true  Church,  which  is  the 
body  of  Jesus  Christ.  They  are  intended  to  "  edify  the 
body  of  Christ"  (Eph.  iv.  12). 

Which  is  the  best  visible  Church  upon  earth  ?  That 
is  the  best  which  adds  most  members  to  the  one  true 
Church,  which  most  promotes  "  repentance  towards  God, 
faith  towards  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  and  good  works 
among  its  members.  These  are  the  true  tests  and  tokens 
of  a  really  good  and  flourishing  Church.  Give  me  that 
Church  which  has  evidence  of  this  kind  to  show ! 

Which  is  the  worst  visible  Church  on  earth  ?  That  is 
the  worst  which  has  the  fewest  members  of  the  one  true 
Church  to  show  in  its  ranks.  Such  a  Church  may  possess 
excellent  forms,  pure  orders,  venerable  customs,  ancient 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    CHUKCH.  129 

institutions ;  but  if  it  cannot  point  to  faith,  repentance, 
and  holiness  of  heart  and  life  in  its  members,  it  is  a  poor 
Church  indeed.  "  By  their  fruits "  the  Churches  upon 
earth  must  be  judged,  as  well  as  individual  Christians.1 

I  advise  all  readers  of  this  paper  to  seek  to  understand 
these  things.  Try,  on  the  one  side,  to  understand  that 
a  visible  professing  Church  is  a  scriptural  institution, 
warranted  by  the  word  of  God.  It  is  not,  as  some  would 
tell  us  in  these  days,  a  mere  human  device,  a  thing 
which  God  does  not  speak  of  in  the  word.  It  is  amazing 
to  my  mind  that  any  one  can  read  the  New  Testament, 
and  then  say  that  visible  Churches  are  not  authorized 
in  the  Bible ! — Try,  on  the  other  side,  to  understand  that 
something  more  is  needed  than  merely  belonging  to  this 
Church,  or  that  Church,  in  order  to  take  a  man  to 
heaven.  Are  you  born  again  ?  Have  you  repented  of 
your  sins  ?  Have  you  laid  hold  of  Christ  by  faith  ?  Are 
you  a  man  holy  in  life  and  conversation  ?  These  are  the 
grand  points  that  a  man  must  seek  to  ascertain.  With 
out  these  things,  the  highest,  the  strictest,  and  the  most 
regular  member  of  a  visible  Church  will  be  a  lost 
Churchman  in  the  last  great  day. 

Look  upon  visible  Churches  with  their  outward  forms 
and  ordinances,  as  being  to  the  one  true  Church  what 
the  husk  is  to  the  kernel  of  the  nut.  Both  grow 
together,  both  husk  and  kernel ;  yet  one  is  far  more 
precious  than  the  other.  Just  so  the  true  Church  is  far 
more  precious  than  the  outward  and  visible. — The  husk 

1  "  That  which  makes  every  visible  Church  to  be  more  or  less  the  true 
Church  of  God,  is  the  greater  or  less  efficacy  or  conformity  of  its  public 
doctrines  and  discipline  for  enacting  or  fashioning  the  visible  members  of 
it,  that  they  may  become  live  members  of  the  Holy  Catholic  Church,  or 
living  stones  of  the  new  Jerusalem.  Every  true  visible  Church  is  an 
inferior  free  school  or  nursery  for  training  up  scholars,  that  they  may 
be  fit  to  be  admitted  into  the  celestial  academy."—  Jackson  on  the  Chwrch* 
lt>7U. 

I 


130  PRINCIPLES    FOE    CHURCHMEN. 

is  useful  to  the  kernel ;  it  preserves  it  from  many 
injuries,  and  enables  it  to  grow.  Just  so  the  outward 
Church  is  useful  to  the  body  of  Christ ;  it  is  within  the 
pale  of  its  ordinances  that  believers  are  generally  born 
again,  and  grow  up  in  faith,  hope,  and  charity. — The 
husk  is  utterly  worthless  without  the  kernel.  Just  so 
the  outward  Church  is  utterly  worthless  except  it  guards 
and  covers  over  the  inward  and  the  true. — The  husk  will 
die,  but  the  kernel  has  a  principle  of  life  in  it.  Just  so 
the  forms  and  ordinances  of  the  outward  Church  will  all 
pass  away,  but  that  which  lives  and  lasts  for  ever  is  the 
true  Church  within. — To  expect  the  kernel  without  the 
husk  is  expecting  that  which  is  contrary  to  the  common 
order  of  the  laws  of  nature.  To  expect  to  find  the  true 
Church,  and  members  of  the  true  Church,  without  having 
an  orderly  and  well-governed  visible  Church,  is  expecting 
that  which  God,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  does 
not  grant  in  this  world.1 

I  charge  every  reader  of  this  paper  to  seek  a  right 
understanding  upon  these  points.  To  give  to  the  visible 
Church  the  names,  attributes,  promises,  and  privileges 
which  belong  to  the  one  true  Church,  —  the  body  of 
Christ ;  to  confound  the  two  things,  the  visible  and  the 
inward  Church, — the  Church  professing  and  the  Church 
of  the  elect, — is  an  immense  delusion.  It  is  a  trap  into 
which  only  too  many  fall.  It  is  a  great  rock,  on  which 
many  in  these  days  unhappily  make  shipwreck. 

Once  confound  the  body  of  Christ  with  the  outward 
professing  Church,  and  there  is  no  amount  of  error  into 
which  you  may  not  at  last  fall.  Nearly  all  perverts  to 
Eomanism  begin  with  getting  wrong  here.2 

1  "  The  invisible  Church  is  ordinarily  and  regularly  part  of  the  visible, 
but  yet  that  only  part  that  is  the  true  one." — Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor. 
1670. 

2  "For  lack  of  diligently  observing  the  difference  first  between  the 
Church  of  God,  mystical  and  visible, — then  between  the  visible  sound 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  CHURCH.          131 

Once  accept  the  idea  that  Church  government  is 
of  more  importance  than  sound  doctrine,  and  that  a 
Church  with  bishops  teaching  falsehood  is  better  than  a 
Church  without  bishops  teaching  truth,  and  none  can 
say  what  you  may  come  to  in  religion. 

III.  Let  me  now  pass  on  to  the  third  and  last  thing 
I  proposed  to  do.  Let  me  draw  from  the  subject  some 
practical  counsels  and  cautions  for  the  times  in  which  we 
live. 

I  feel  deeply  that  I  should  neglect  a  duty  if  I  did  not 
do  this.  The  errors  and  mistakes  connected  with  the 
subject  of  the  Church  are  so  many  and  so  serious,  that 
they  need  to  be  plainly  denounced,  and  men  need  to  be 
plainly  put  upon  their  guard  against  them.  You  have 
read  the  general  principles  laid  down  about  the  one  true 
Church,  and  about  the  visible  professing  Churches. 
Now  let  me  go  on  to  make  some  particular  application 
of  these  general  principles  to  the  times  in  which  we 
live. 

1.  First  of  all,  do  not  suppose,  because  I  have  said  that 
mere  outward  membership  of  a  visible  Church  cannot  save 
a  soul,  that  it  does  not  signify  to  what  visible  Church  a 
man  belongs.  It  does  signify  to  what  visible  Church  a 
man  belongs ;  and  it  signifies  very  much.  There  are 
Churches  in  which  the  Bible  is  practically  lost  sight  of 
altogether.  There  are  Churches  in  which  Jesus  Christ's 
Gospel  is  buried,  and  lies  completely  hidden.  There  are 
Churches  in  which  a  man  may  hear  God's  service  per 
formed  in  an  unknown  tongue,  and  hardly  hear  of 
"  repentance  towards  God,  faith  towards  Christ,"  and  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  from  one  end  of  the  year  to  the 
other.  Such  are  some  of  the  Armenian  and  Greek 

and  the  visible  corrupted,— the  oversights  are  neither  few  nor  light  that 
have  been  committed."— Hooker,  Ecck*.  Pol  3.     1600. 


132  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Churches,  and  such,  above  all  others  in  error,  is  the 
Church  of  Eome.  To  belong  to  such  Churches  brings 
serious  peril  upon  any  soul.  They  do  not  help  men 
to  the  one  true  Church.  They  are  far  more  likely  to 
keep  men  out,  and  put  barriers  in  their  way  for  ever. 
Beware  of  ever  being  tempted  to  belong  to  these  Churches 
yourself,  or  ever  thinking  lightly  of  the  conduct  of  those 
who  join  those  Churches,  as  if  they  had  only  committed  a 
little  sin.1 

2.  In  the  next  place,  do  not  le  moved  ly  the  argument 
of  the  Roman  Catholic,  when  he  says,  "  There  is  only  one 
true  Church,  and  that  one  true  Church  is  the  Church  of 
Home,  and  you  must  join  us  if  you  mean  to  be  saved" 
A  more  preposterous  and  unwarrantable  assertion  was 
never  made,  if  the  question  is  simply  tried  by  the  Bible. 
It  is  a  wonderful  proof  of  the  fallen  condition  of  man's 
understanding,  that  so  many  people  are  taken  in  by  it. 
Tell  the  man  who  uses  this  argument  that  there  is 
indeed  only  one  true  Church,  but  it  is  not  the  Church  of 
Eome,  or  the  Church  of  England,  or  any  other  country 
upon  earth.  Defy  him  boldly  to  show  a  single  text 
which  says  that  the  Church  of  Eome  is  that  one  true 
Church  to  which  men  must  belong.  Tell  him  that  to 
quote  texts  of  Scripture  which  merely  speak  of  "  the 
Church,"  is  no  proof  on  his  side  at  all,  and  that  such 
texts  might  just  as  well  refer  to  the  Church  of  Jerusalem, 

1  "  If  it  be  possible  to  be  there  where  the  true  Church  is  not,  then  is  it 
at  Rome. " — Church  of  England  Homily  for  Whitsunday. 

"  We  have  forsaken  a  Church  in  which  we  could  neither  hear  the  pure 
word  of  God,  nor  administer  the  sacraments,  nor  invoke  the  name  of 
God  as  we  ought, — and  in  which  there  was  nothing  to  retain  a  prudent 
man  who  thought  seriously  of  his  salvation." — Bishop  Jewel's  Apology. 

"Such  adherence  to  the  visible  or  representative  Church  of  Rome,  as 
the  Jesuits  and  others  now  challenge,  doth  induce  a  separation  from  the 
Holy  Catholic  Church,  and  is  more  deadly  to  the  soul  than  to  be  bedfellow 
to  one  sick  of  the  pestilence  is  to  the  body." — Jackson  on  the  Catholic 
Church.  1670. 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE   CHURCH.  133 

or  the  Church  of  Antioch,  as  to  Eome.  Point  out  to 
him  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Eomans, 
which  foretells  Eomish  arrogance,  and  Eomish  presump 
tion,  and  the  possibility  of  Eome  itself  being  "  cut  off." 
Tell  him  that  his  Church's  claim  to  be  the  one  true 
Church  is  a  baseless  assumption, — a  house  built  upon 
sand,  which  has  not  a  tittle  of  Scripture  to  rest  upon. 
Alas,  how  awful  it  is  to  think  that  many  in  this  day 
of  light  and  knowledge  should  be  completely  carried 
away  by  that  most  illogical  argument :  "  There  must  be 
one  true  Church;  that  one  true  Church  must  be  a 
visible,  professing  Church ;  the  Church  of  Eome  is  that 
one  true  Church :  therefore  join  it,  or  you  will  not  be 
saved ! " 

3.  In  the  next  place,  do  not  be  shaken  ty  those  persons 
who  talk  of  "  the  'voice  of  the  Church"  and  the  "  Catholic 
Church"  when  you  disagree  with  them,  as  if  the  mry  men 
tion  of  these  words  ought  to  silence  you.  There  are  many 
in  these  days  of  theological  warfare,  whose  favourite 
weapon,  when  the  Bible  is  appealed  to,  is  this:  "The 
Church  says  it ;  the  Church  has  always  so  ruled  it ;  the 
voice  of  the  Church  has  always  so  pronounced  it."  I 
warn  you  never  to  be  put  down  by  arguments  of  this 
kind.  Ask  men  what  they  mean  when  they  talk  in  this 
vague  way  about "  the  Church."  If  they  mean  the  whole 
professing  Church  throughout  the  world,  call  upon  them 
to  show  when  and  where  the  whole  Church  has  met  in 
order  to  decide  the  matter  about  which  they  speak. — Or  ask 
them  if  the  Church  had  met,  what  right  its  decision  would 
have  to  be  listened  to,  except  it  could  be  shown  to  be 
founded  upon  the  word  of  God? — Or,  if  they  mean  by 
"  the  voice  of  the  Church,"  the  voice  of  the  Church  of 
England,  ask  them  to  show  you  in  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles  the  doctrine  which  they  want  you  to  receive, 
and  are  pressing  upon  you.  Point  out  to  them  that  the 


134  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Church  of  England  says  in  those  Articles,  that  "  nothing 
is  to  be  required  of  men,  as  necessary  for  salvation, 
except  it  can  be  read  in,  or  proved  by,  the  Holy  Scrip 
tures."  Point  out  to  them  that  it  says  furthermore,  that 
although  "  the  Church  has  power  to  decree  rites  and 
ceremonies,  and  has  authority  in  controversies  of  faith," 
yet  "it  is  not  lawful  for  the  visible  Church  to  ordain 
anything  contrary  to  God's  word  written,  or  so  to 
expound  one  place  of  Scripture  as  to  make  it  repugnant 
to  another."  Show  them  also  what  the  Church  of 
England  says  when  it  speaks  of  the  three  creeds, — the 
Apostles'  Creed,  the  Mcene  Creed,  and  the  Athanasian 
Creed.  It  does  not  say  they  are  to  be  received  and 
believed,  because  the  primitive  Church  put  them  forth, 
but  because  "  they  may  be  proved  by  most  certain 
warrants  of  Holy  Scripture"  (Art.  vi.  xx.  viii.). 

Tell  men,  when  they  talk  mysteriously  to  you  about 
"  hearing  the  Church,"  that  our  Lord  was  not  speaking  of 
matters  of  faith  at  all,  when  he  said,  "  hear  the  Church," 
but  only  about  private  quarrels  between  man  and  man 
(Matt,  xviii.  17).  Tell  them  that  your  rule  of  faith  and 
practice  is  the  Bible  only,  and  that  if  they  will  show  you 
their  views  in  the  Bible,  you  will  receive  them,  but  not 
otherwise.  Tell  them  that  their  favourite  arguments, 
"  the  voice  of  the  Church,"  and  the  "  Catholic  Church," 
are  nothing  but  high-sounding  phrases,  and  meaningless 
terms.  They  are  "  great  swelling  words  "  which  make  a 
noise  in  the  distance,  but  in  reality  have  neither  substance 
nor  power. 

Alas,  that  it  should  be  needful  to  say  all  this !  But 
I  fear  there  are  only  too  many  to  whom  "  the  voice  of 
the  Church "  has  been  like  the  fabled  Medusa's  head : 
it  seems  to  have  petrified  their  common  sense.1 

1  The  only  case  in  which  an  appeal  to  the  testimony  of  the  Church 
seems  allowable  is  where  it  is  made  in  order  to  establish  an  historical  fact. 


THOUGHTS   ON    THE    CHURCH.  135 

4.  In  the  next  place,  let  me  warn  members  of  the 
Church  of  England  never  to  take  up  ground  on  behalf  of 
their  Church,  which  cannot  le  defended  from  the  Holy 
Swnptures.  I  love  the  Church  of  which  I  am  a  minister, 
and  I  delight  to  take  up  high  ground  on  its  behalf.  But 
I  do  not  call  that  ground  really  high  which  is  not 
also  Scripturally  safe.  I  think  it  foolish  and  wrong 
to  take  up  ground  from  which  we  are  sure  to  be  driven 
when  we  begin  to  argue  closely  with  those  who  differ 
from  us. 

Now  there  are  many  in  this  day  who  would  have  us 
tell  all  Presbyterians  and  Independents  that  the  only 
true  Church  is  always  an  Episcopal  Church ;  that  to  this 
belong  the  promises  of  Christ,  and  to  no  other  kind  of 
Church  at  all ;  that  to  separate  from  an  Episcopal  Church 
is  to  leave  the  "  Catholic  Church,"  to  be  guilty  of  an  act 
of  schism,  and  fearfully  to  peril  the  soul.  This  is  the 
argument  made  use  of  by  many.  Beware,  I  beseech  you, 
of  ever  taking  up  such  ground.  It  cannot  be  maintained : 
it  cannot  be  shown  to  be  tenable  by  plain,  unmistakable 
texts  of  Scripture. 

When  the  Scripture  says,  "Except  a  man  be  born  again, 
he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God," — when  the  Scripture 
says,  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish," — 
when  the  Scripture  says,  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall 
see  the  Lord," — when  the  Scripture  says,  "He  that 
believeth  not  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  damned," 
— when  the  Scripture  so  speaks,  such  doctrines  cannot  be 

For  instance,  the  Sixth  Article  of  the  Church  of  England  says,  that  of  the 
"Authority  of  the  Canonical  Books  of  the  New  Testament,  there  never 
was  any  doubt  in  the  Church,"— that  is,  in  the  whole  body  of  professing 
Churches.  Only  let  it  be  remembered  that  receiving  the  testimony  of  the 
Church  to  a  fact  does  not  for  a  moment  imply  that  the  Church  has  any 
authoritative  power  to  interpret  doctrine  infallibly.  A  man  may  be  a  very 
competent  witness  to  the  fact  that  a  book  has  been  faithfully  printed,  and 
yet  know  little  or  nothing  about  the  meaning  of  its  contents. 


136  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

proclaimed  too  plainly  by  us.  But  never  anywhere  does 
Scripture  say,  from  Matthew  down  to  Eevelation,  "Except 
a  man  belong  to  a  Church  governed  by  bishops,  he  cannot 
be  saved."  There  is  not  a  text  in  Scripture  which  says 
anything  of  the  kind,  from  first  to  last.  It  is  in  vain 
for  us  to  argue  as  if  Scripture  had  spoken  in  this  way. 
Once  begin  to  require  things  in  religion  which  are  not 
required  of  men  in  the  Bible,  and  where  are  we  to 
stop  ? l 

Let  no  one  misunderstand  my  meaning  in  saying  this. 
I  am  deeply  convinced  of  the  excellency  of  my  own 
Church, — I  would  even  say,  if  it  were  not  a  proud  boast, 
its  superiority  over  any  other  Church  upon  earth.  I 
see  more  for  Episcopacy  in  the  Bible  than  I  do  for  any 
other  form  of  Church  government.  I  consider  the 
historical  fact  that  there  were  bishops  in  most  of  the 
professing  Churches  at  the  beginning  of  Christianity, 
deserves  much  weight.  I  believe  it  is  far  wiser  to  have 
a  regular,  settled  liturgy,  for  the  use  of  congregations, 
than  to  make  a  congregation  dependent  upon  its  minister's 

1  "You  shall  not  find  in  all  the  Scripture  this  your  essential  point  of 
succession  of  bishops.  "—John  Bradford,  Reformer  and  Martyr,  Chaplain 
to  Bishop  Ridley.  1550. 

"I  conceive  that  the  power  of  ordination  was  restrained  to  bishops 
rather  by  apostolical  practice,  and  the  perpetual  custom  and  Canons  of 
the  Church,  than  by  an  absolute  precept  that  either  Christ  or  His  apostles 
gave  concerning  it.  Nor  can  I  yet  meet  with  any  convincing  argument 
to  set  it  upon  a  more  high  and  divine  institution." — Bishop  Cosln. 
1660. 

"  We  have  found  neither  any  express  commandment,  nor  any  example, 
which  prescribes  as  universal  and  unchangeable  one  particular  system  for 
the  regulation  of  the  Church  and  its  ministers.  Our  argument  consists 
only  of  inferences.  The  conclusion  in  favour  of  Episcopacy  from  the 
New  Testament,  are  intimations  rather  than  proofs.  We  can  produce 
no  single  text  so  clear  as  to  compel  us  to  conclude  that  the  apostles 
deemed  any  one  peculiar  form  of  government  to  be  indispensable  and 
unalterable  in  the  Church. " — Discourses  by  Rev.  G.  Benson,  Master  of  the 
Temple. 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    CHURCH.  13*7 

frames  and  feelings  for  the  tone  of  its  regular  prayers.  I 
think  that  endowments  settled  and  established  by  law 
are  a  way  of  paying  ministers  far  preferable  to  the  volun 
tary  system.  I  am  satisfied  that,  well  administered,  the 
Church  of  England  is  more  calculated  to  help  souls  to 
heaven  than  any  Church  on  earth.  But  I  never  can 
take  up  the  ground  that  some  men  do  in  this  day,  who 
say  that  the  Episcopal  Church  is  the  only  true  Church  in 
Great  Britain,  and  that  all  outside  that  Church  are  guilty 
schismatics.  I  cannot  do  it,  because  I  am  sure  such 
ground  as  this  can  never  be  maintained. 

I  am  quite  aware  that  the  opinions  I  am  expressing 
on  this  point  are  utterly  opposed  to  those  which  many 
members  of  the  Church  of  England  hold  in  the  present 
day.  Such  men  will  say,  I  am  no  sound  Churchman ; 
I  am  ignorant  of  true  Church  principles ;  and  so  forth. 
Such  charges  weigh  very  little  with  me.  I  have  found 
that  those  who  talk  loudest  about  the  Church  are  not 
always  its  most  faithful  friends,  and  often  end  with 
leaving  it  altogether.  I  should  like  men  who  tell  me 
my  views  are  not  "  Church "  views,  to  consider  calmly 
what  authority  they  have  for  such  an  assertion.  I  appeal 
confidently  to  the  authorized  formularies  of  the  Church 
of  England,  and  I  defy  them  to  meet  me  on  that  ground. 
What  do  those  formularies  say  of  the  visible  Church  ? 
Hear  the  Nineteenth  Article:  "It  is  a  congregation  of 
faithful  men,  in  which  the  pure  word  of  God  is  preached, 
and  the  sacraments  be  duly  ministered." — What  do  they 
say  of  the  ministry  ?  Hear  the  Twenty-third  Article : 
"We  ought  to  judge  those  lawfully  called  and  sent, 
which  be  chosen  and  called  to  this  work  by  men  who 
have  public  authority  given  unto  them  in  the  congrega 
tion  to  call  and  send  ministers  into  the  Lord's  vineyard." — 
What  do  they  say  of  ceremonies  ?  Hear  the  Thirty-fourth 
Article :  "  They  may  be  changed,  according  to  the  diver- 


138  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

sities  of  countries,  times,  and  men's  manners,  so  that 
nothing  be  ordained  against  God's  word."  —  What  do 
they  say  of  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons  ?  Hear  the 
preface  to  the  Ordination  Service :  "  It  is  evident  unto 
all  men  diligently  reading  the  Holy  Scriptures  and 
ancient  authors,  that  from  the  apostles'  times  there  have 
been  these  orders  of  ministers  in  Christ's  Church: 
bishops,  priests,  and  deacons." — What  do  they  say  of 
ministers  ordained  according  to  this  service  ?  Hear  the 
Thirty-sixth  article :  "  We  decree  all  such  to  be  rightly, 
orderly,  and  lawfully  consecrated  and  ordered." 

Now  to  all  this  I  heartily  and  cordially  subscribe. 
The  Church  of  England  calmly  asserts  that  its  own 
ministers  are  scripturally  ordained.  But  this  is  a  very 
different  thing  from  saying  that  those  who  are  not 
ordained  in  like  manner  are  not  ordained  at  all.  It 
calmly  asserts  that  there  always  have  been  bishops, 
priests,  and  deacons.  But  this  is  very  different  from 
saying  that  where  these  orders  are  not,  there  is  no  true 
Church.  It  calmly  asserts  that  a  man  must  be  law 
fully  called  and  sent,  in  order  to  be  a  minister.  But 
it  nowhere  says  that  none  but  bishops  have  power  to 
call.1 

I  believe  the  Church  of  England  has  been  graciously 
led  to  adopt  the  language  of  true  scriptural  moderation. 

1  "  It  might  have  been  expected  that  the  defenders  of  the  English 
Hierarchy  against  the  first  Puritans  should  take  the  highest  ground,  and 
challenge  for  the  bishops  the  same  unreserved  submission  on  the  same 
plea  of  exclusive  apostolical  prerogative,  which  their  adversaries  feared  not 
to  insist  on  for  their  elders  and  deacons.  It  is  notorious,  however,  that 
such  was  not  in  general  the  line  preferred  by  Jewel,  Whitgift,  Bishop 
Cooper,  and  others,  to  whom  the  management  of  that  controversy  was 
intrusted  during  the  early  part  of  Elizabeth's  reign.  It  is  enough  with 
them  to  show  that  the  government  by  archbishops  and  bishops  is  ancient 
and  allowable.  They  never  venture  to  urge  its  exclusive  claims,  or  to 
connect  the  succession  with  the  validity  of  the  sacraments." — Keble'a 
Preface  to  Hooker's  Works,  p.  59. 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    CHURCH.  139 

It  is  a  moderation  strikingly  in  contrast  with  the  bold, 
decided  language  which  it  uses  when  speaking  in  the 
doctrinal  Articles  about  things  essential  to  salvation. 
But  it  is  the  only  true  ground  which  can  ever  be  main 
tained  :  it  is  the  only  ground  on  which  we  ought  to  stand. 
Let  us  be  satisfied  that  our  own  communion  is  scriptural ; 
but  let  us  never  pretend  to  unchurch  all  other  commu 
nions  beside  our  own.  For  my  own  part,  I  abhor  the 
idea  of  saying  that  men  like  Carey,  and  Bhenius,  and 
Williams,  and  Campbell,  the  missionaries,  were  not  real 
ministers  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  loathe  the  idea  of  handing 
over  the  communions  to  which  such  men  as  Matthew 
Henry,  and  Doddridge,  and  Eobert  Hall,  and  M'Cheyne, 
and  Chalmers  belonged,  to  the  uncovenanted  mercies  of 
God,  or  saying  such  men  as  these  were  not  really  and 
truly  ordained.  Hard  language  is  sometimes  used  about 
them :  people  dare  to  talk  of  their  not  belonging  to  the 
Catholic  Church,  and  of  their  being  guilty  of  schism.  I 
cannot  for  a  moment  hold  such  views ;  I  deeply  lament 
that  any  one  should  hold  them.  I  would  to  God  that  we 
had  many  Episcopalians  like  the  men  I  have  named. 
People  may  shut  them  out  from  what  they  call  the 
Catholic  Church,  but  I  am  firmly  persuaded  they  will  not 
shut  them  out  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  Surely  those 
whom  God  hath  not  excluded,  we  should  take  care  not  to 
exclude. 

5.  In  the  next  place,  let  me  warn  you  not  to  set  down 
men  as  no  Christians,  because  they  do  not  agree  with  you  in 
your  manner  of  worshipping  God.  In  saying  this/ 1  would 
have  it  distinctly  understood  that  I  am  not  speaking  of 
those  who  deny  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  and  the 
sufficiency  of  Scripture  to  make  men  wise  unto  salvation. 
I  speak  with  especial  reference  to  the  great  body  of  Pro 
testant  Dissenters  in  England,  who  hold  the  leading 
doctrines  of  the  Gospel  as  set  forth  at  the  time  of  the 


140  PRINCIPLES    FOE    CHURCHMEN. 

Keformation.  I  wish  every  member  of  the  Church  of 
England  to  take  broad,  charitable,  and  Scriptural  views  of 
such  persons,  and  to  dismiss  from  his  mind  the  narrow- 
minded,  bigoted  prejudices  which  are  so  unhappily  com 
mon  on  the  subject.  Are  they  members  of  the  one  true 
Church  ?  Do  they  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Are 
they  born  again  of  God's  Spirit?  Are  they  penitent, 
believing,  holy  people?  If  they  are,  they  will  get  to 
heaven,  I  firmly  believe,  as  certainly  as  any  Episcopalian 
on  earth.  Men  must  tolerate  them, — if  such  a  word  may 
be  used, — men  must  tolerate  them,  see  them,  and  love 
them  too,  in  heaven  and  the  glorious  kingdom  of  Christ. 
Surely,  if  we  expect  to  meet  men  of  different  denomina 
tions  from  our  own  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  to  spend  eternity  in  their  company,  we  ought  not  to 
look  coldly  on  them  upon  earth.  Surely  it  were  far  better 
to  begin  something  like  union  and  co-operation  with  them, 
and  to  cultivate  a  spirit  of  love  and  kind  feeling  towards 
them  while  we  can. 

"We  may  think  our  Dissenting  brethren  mistaken  in 
many  of  their  views.  We  may  believe  they  miss  privi 
leges  and  lose  advantages  by  being  separated  from  our 
own  Church.  We  may  be  fully  satisfied  that  Episcopacy 
is  that  form  of  government  which  is  most  agreeable  to 
God's  word,  and  most  in  harmony  with  what  we  read  of 
in  the  history  of  the  early  Church.  We  may  feel 
persuaded  that,  taking  human  nature  as  it  is,  it  is  far 
better,  both  for  ministers  and  hearers,  to  have  a  liturgy 
or  settled  form  of  prayer,  and  endowments  guaranteed  by 
the  State  and  not  dependent  on  pew  rents  or  offertories. 
We  may  feel  persuaded,  from  observation  of  the  working 
of  the  voluntary  system  and  of  the  state  of  religion  among 
Dissenters  generally,  that  the  way  of  the  Church  of  Eng 
land  is  the  more  excellent  way.  But,  after  all,  we  must 
not  speak  positively  where  the  Bible  does  not  speak 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    CHURCH.  141 

positively.  Where,  in  all  the  compass  of  Scripture,  can 
we  point  out  that  text  which  says  that  Episcopacy  and  a 
liturgy  are  things  absolutely  needful  to  salvation  ?  I  say, 
without  fear  of  contradiction,  nowhere  at  all. 

We  may  regret  the  divisions  among  professing  Christians 
in  our  own  country.  We  may  feel  that  they  weaken  the 
holy  cause  of  Christ's  Gospel.  We  may  feel  that  people 
have  often,  and  do  often,  become  Dissenters  in  England 
from  very  insufficient  reasons,  and  from  motives  by  no 
means  of  the  highest  order.  But,  after  all,  we  must  not 
forget  by  whom  the  greater  part  of  these  divisions  were 
primarily  occasioned.  Who  obliged  the  bulk  of  English 
Nonconformists  to  secede  ?  Who  drove  them  out  of  the 
fold  of  the  Church  of  England  ?  We  of  the  Church  of 
England  did  it  ourselves,  by  not  properly  providing  for 
their  souls'  wants  !  Who  in  reality  built  the  Dissenting 
Chapels,  the  Bethels,  the  Bethesdas,  which  so  often  offend 
the  eyes  of  many  members  of  the  Church  of  England  in 
these  days  ?  We  did  ourselves  :  we  did  it  by  gross  neglect 
of  the  people's  souls, — by  the  grossly  unscriptural  kind  of 
preaching  which  prevailed  in  the  pulpits  of  our  churches 
a  century  ago.  I  believe  the  plain  truth  is,  that  the  vast 
majority  of  Dissenters  in  England  did  not  leave  the  Church 
of  England,  at  first,  from  any  abstract  dislike  to  the 
principles  of  Episcopacy,  or  liturgies,  or  establishments; 
but  they  did  dislike  the  moral  essays  and  inconsistent  lives 
of  the  clergy ;  and  we  must  confess,  with  shame,  that  they 
had  only  too  much  reason.  Some  may  think  it  strange 
that  they  did  not  see  the  beauties  of  our  Prayer-book  and 
Episcopacy  more  clearly ;  but  there  was  one  thing  they 
saw  more  clearly, — and  that  was,  that  men  wholly  taken 
up  with  field-sports  and  the  world,  and  never  preaching 
Christ,  were  not  likely  to  teach  them  the  way  to  be  saved. 
Surely  when  these  things  are  so,  we  have  no  right  to  speak 
harshly  about  Dissenters,  we  have  no  right  to  wonder  at 


142  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

secessions  and  separations.  If  sheep  are  not  fed,  who  can 
wonder  if  they  stray  ?  If  men  found  out  that  the  Gospel 
was  not  preached  by  the  clergy  of  the  Church  of  England, 
who  can  blame  them  if  they  cared  more  for  the  Gospel 
than  for  the  clergy,  and  went  to  hear  that  Gospel  wherever 
it  could  be  heard  ? 

I  know  well  that  such  opinions  as  these  are  very 
distasteful  to  many  people.  Many  will  think  I  am  taking 
very  low  ground  in  speaking  as  I  have  done  about 
Dissenters.  It  is  easy  to  think  so,  and  to  fancy  higher 
ground  might  be  found.  It  is  not  quite  so  easy  to  point 
out  higher  ground  in  Scripture,  or  to  justify  the  language 
frequently  used  in  speaking  of  English  Dissenters,  upon 
any  principles  whatever.  We  must  consider  calmly  the 
conduct  of  the  Church  of  England  for  the  last  two  hundred 
years  ;  we  must  not  forget  that  "  he  is  the  schismatic  who 
causes  the  schism ; "  we  must  confess  that  the  Church  of 
England  caused  most  of  the  dissent  that  has  taken  place. 
However  much  we  may  regret  divisions,  we  must  take  the 
greater  part  of  the  blame  to  ourselves.  Surely  we  ought 
to  feel  very  tenderly  towards  our  separating  brethren. 
We  should  not  forget  that  many  Nonconformist  bodies 
hold  the  essence  of  Jesus  Christ's  gospel.  Justice  and 
fairness  demand  that  we  should  treat  them  with  kindness. 
Whatever  their  mistakes  may  be,  the  Church  of  England 
made  the  vast  majority  of  them  what  they  are  at  the 
present  day.  Granting  for  a  moment  that  they  are 
wrong,  we  are  not  the  men  who  can,  with  any  face,  tell 
them  so. 

6.  Let  me  pass  on  now  to  another  warning  of  a 
different  kind :  let  me  warn  my  readers  not  to  fancy  that 
divisions  and  schisms  are  unimportant  things.  This  also  is 
a  great  delusion,  and  one  into  which  many  fall,  when  they 
find  there  is  no  visible  Church  which  can  be  called  the  only 
true  Church  on  earth.  So  weak  are  our  understandings, 


THOUGHTS  ON    THE    CHURCH.  143 

that  if  we  do  not  fall  over  upon  the  one  side,  we  are 
disposed  at  once  to  fall  over  on  the  other.  Settle  it 
down  then  in  your  mind  that  all  divisions  among 
Christians  are  an  immense  evil, — all  divisions  strengthen 
the  hands  of  infidels, — all  divisions  help  the  devil.  The 
great  maxim  of  Satan  is,  "  divide  and  conquer."  If  he 
can  set  professing  Christians  by  the  ears,  and  make  them 
spend  their  strength  in  contending  one  with  another,  our 
spiritual  enemy  has  gained  a  great  point.  You  may  be 
very  sure  that  union  is  strength,  and  you  may  be  no  less 
sure  that  discipline  and  uniformity  are  one  great  aid  to 
union.  Order  is  a  vast  help  to  efficient  working  in 
Christ's  cause  as  well  as  in  other  things,  and  "  God  is  not 
the  author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  as  in  all  Churches 
of  the  saints"  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33). 

I  would  not  be  misunderstood  in  saying  this.  I  fully 
admit  that  separation  is  justifiable  under  some  circum 
stances,  beyond  a  question.  But  it  is  absurd  to  say  on 
that  account  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  schism.  I 
for  one  cannot  say  so.  Men  ought  to  tolerate  much,  and 
put  up  with  much,  before  they  think  of  separating  and 
dividing,  and  leaving  one  Church  for  another.  It  is  a 
step  which  nothing  but  the  deliberate  teaching  of  false 
doctrine  can  really  justify.  It  is  a  step  that  should  never 
be  taken  without  much  consideration,  much  waiting,  and 
much  prayer.  It  is  a  step  that  seems  to  me  more  than 
questionable,  except  it  can  be  clearly  proved  that  the 
salvation  of  the  soul  is  really  at  stake.  It  is  a  step  that 
in  England  is  often  taken  far  too  lightly,  and  with  an 
evident  want  of  thought  as  to  its  serious  nature  and 
tendency.  It  is  a  common  opinion  of  ignorant  people, 
"It  is  no  matter  where  we  go.  It  is  no  matter  if  we 
first  join  one  denomination  and  then  join  another, — first 
worship  with  this  people  and  then  with  that.  It  is  all  the 
same  where  we  go,  if  we  do  but  go  to  some  place  of 


144  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

worship."  I  say  this  common  opinion  is  an  enormous 
evil,  and  ought  to  be  denounced  by  all  true-hearted 
Christians.  This  Athenian  kind  of  spirit,  which  ever 
wants  something  new, — which  must  have  something 
different  in  religion  from  what  it  had  a  little  time  ago, — 
is  a  spirit  which  I  cannot  praise.  I  believe  it  to  be  the 
mark  of  a  very  diseased  and  unhealthy  state  of  soul. 

7.  In  the  next  place,  let  me  warn  you  not  to  ~be  shaken 
ty  those  who  say  that  all  visible  Churches  are  necessarily 
corrupt,  and  that  no  man  can  belong  to  them  without  peril 
to  his  soul.  There  never  have  been  wanting  men  of  this 
kind,  men  who  have  forgotten  that  everything  must  be 
imperfect  which  is  carried  on  by  human  agency,  and 
have  spent  their  lives  in  a  vain  search  after  a  perfectly 
pure  Church.  Members  of  all  Churches  must  be  pre 
pared  to  meet  such  men,  and  especially  members  of  the 
Church  of  England.  It  should  never  be  forgotten  that 
fault-finding  is  the  easiest  of  all  tasks.  There  never  was 
a  system  upon  earth,  in  which  man  had  anything  to  do, 
in  which  faults,  and  many  faults  too,  might  not  soon  be 
found.  You  must  expect  to  find  imperfections  in  every 
visible  Church  upon  earth :  there  always  were  such  in 
the  New  Testament  Churches ;  there  always  will  be  such 
now.  There  is  only  one  Church  without  spot  or  blemish  : 
that  is  the  one  true  Church,  the  body  of  Christ,  which 
Christ  shall  present  to  His  Father  in  the  last  great  day. 

With  regard  to  the  Church  of  England,  I  will  only 
remark,  that  men  ought  not  to  confound  the  bad  working 
of  a  system  with  the  system  itself.  It  may  be  quite 
true  that  many  of  its  ministers  are  not  what  they  ought 
to  be,  and  that  some  of  its  revenues  are  misapplied,  and 
not  properly  spent.  This  does  not  prove  that  the  whole 
machinery  of  the  Church  of  England  is  rotten  and  cor 
rupt,  or  that  the  whole  Church  is  an  institution  which 
ought  to  be  cast  down.  Surely  there  is  many  a  good 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    CHURCH.  145 

machine  on  earth  at  this  moment  which  works  badly, 
simply  because  it  is  in  hands  that  know  not  in  what 
way  it  ought  to  be  worked. 

I  will  only  ask  those  who  advise  men  to  leave  the 
Church  of  England,  what  they  have  got  better  to  show 
us  ?  Where  is  the  visible  Church, — where  is  the  deno 
mination  of  Christians  upon  earth  which  is  perfect, — 
without  spot,  and  without  blemish  ?  None :  I  say  con 
fidently,  none  are  to  be  found  at  all !  Many  people  of 
scrupulous  conscience,  I  firmly  believe,  have  found  this 
to  their  cost  already.  They  left  the  Church  of  England 
because  of  alleged  imperfections :  they  thought  they 
could  better  their  condition.  What  do  they  think  now  ? 
If  the  truth  were  really  told,  I  believe  they  would  con 
fess  that  in  getting  rid  of  one  kind  of  imperfection  they 
have  met  with  another,  and  that  in  healing  one  sore 
they  have  opened  two  more  far  worse  than  the  first. 

If  any  reader  of  this  paper  is  a  member  of  the  Church  of 
England,  let  me  simply  advise  him  not  to  leave  that  Church 
lightly,  and  without  good  reason.  Numerous  forms  and 
ceremonies  may  be  attended  with  evil  consequences,  but 
there  are  also  evils  in  the  absence  of  them.  Episcopac; 
may  have  its  disadvantages,  but  Presbyterianism  and 
Congregationalism  have  their  disadvantages  too.  A 
liturgy  may  possibly  cramp  and  confine  some  highly 
gifted  ministers,  but  the  want  of  one  sadly  cramps  and 
confines  the  public  devotion  of  many  congregations. 
The  Church  of  England  Prayer-book  may  not  be  perfect, 
and  may  be  capable  of  many  improvements :  it  would 
be  strange  if  this  was  not  the  case,  when  we  remember 
that  its  compilers  were  not  inspired  men.  Still,  after 
all,  the  Prayer-book's  imperfections  are  few,  compared 
to  its  excellences.  The  testimony  of  Eobert  Hall,  the 
famous  Baptist,  on  this  subject  is  very  striking.  He  says, 
"  The  evangelical  purity  of  its  sentiments,  the  chastened 

I 


146  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

fervour  of  its  devotion,  and  the  majestic  simplicity  of  its 
language,  have  combined  to  place  it  in  the  very  first  rank 
of  uninspired  compositions." 

8.  In  the  last  place,  let  me  advise  every  reader  of 
this  paper  to  try  to  understand  thoroughly  the  principles 
and  constitution  of  the  Church  of  England.  I  say  that 
advisedly.  I  say  it  to  Churchmen  and  Dissenters  alike. 
I  feel  that  the  ignorance  which  prevails  in  our  country 
about  the  Church  of  England  is  very  painful.  There 
are  thousands  of  members  of  that  Church  who  never 
studied  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  of  Keligion, — who  hardly 
know  of  their  existence, — and  who  have  often  found 
fault  with  the  very  doctrines  that  these  Articles  contain, 
and  especially  the  seventeenth.  Yet  those  Articles  are 
the  Church's  Confession  of  faith ;  they  show  what  is 
the  Church's  view  of  doctrine.  No  man,  I  say,  is  a 
true  member  of  the  Church  of  England  who  does  not 
thoroughly  agree,  in  heart  and  in  truth,  with  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles  of  his  own  Church. 

So  also  there  are  thousands  who  have  never  read  the 
Homilies  which  the  Church  of  England  has  provided. 
Many  have  never  heard  of  them,  much  less  read  them. 
Yet  those  Homilies  are  declared  by  the  Thirty-fifth 
Article  to  "  contain  godly  and  wholesome  doctrine,"  and 
they  condemn  thousands  of  so-called  Churchmen  in  this 
day. 

So  also  are  there  hundreds  of  thousands  who  do  not 
know  that  the  laity  might  prevent  any  improper  minister 
from  being  ordained  in  the  Established  Church.  No  man 
can  be  ordained  a  deacon  in  the  Church  of  England 
without  notice  being  read  in  the  parish  church  to  which 
he  belongs,  and  without  people  being  invited  to  tell  the 
bishop  if  they  know  of  any  just  cause  or  impediment 
why  he  should  not  be  ordained.  But  the  laity  hardly 
ever  raise  any  impediment  against  the  ordination  of  a 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  CHURCH.  147 

young  man.  When  this  is  the  case,  if  men  utterly 
unfit  for  the  ministerial  office  get  into  the  ministry  of 
the  Church  of  England,  the  blame  ought  not  to  be 
borne  only  by  the  bishops  who  ordain  them,  but  to  be 
shared  by  the  laity  who  never  objected  to  their  being 
ordained. 

I  ask  all  Churchmen  who  read  this  paper  to  wipe 
off  this  reproach.  Try  to  understand  your  own  Church. 
Study  the  Articles  of  Eeligion  regularly :  make  yourself 
master  of  them.  Eead  the  Homilies  with  care,  and  see  in 
them  what  the  Eeformers  taught  as  true.  Surely,  I  may 
well  come  round  to  the  point  with  which  I  started.  I  may 
well  say  that  ignorance  covers  the  whole  subject  as  with 
a  cloud.  As  to  the  true  Church, — as  to  the  visible  pro 
fessing  Churches, — as  to  the  real  doctrines  and  constitu 
tion  of  the  Established  Church  of  England, — as  to  all 
these  subjects  it  is  painful  to  see  the  ignorance  which 
prevails.  It  ought  not  to  be  so. 

And  now  let  me  conclude  by  saying  a  few  words  of 
practical  application  to  the  conscience  of  every  one  who 
reads  this  paper. 

(a)  First  of  all,  let  me  ask  you  solemnly  and  seriously 
whether  you  belong  to  that  one  true  Church  of  Christ 
which  I  began  by  describing. 

I  do  not  now  ask  whether  you  go  to  a  place  of  worship 
on  the  Sunday.  I  do  not  ask  whether  you  call  yourself 
a  Churchman,  or  whether  you  are  a  Dissenter.  I  only 
ask  whether  you  belong  to  the  Church  which  is  made  up 
of  true  believers, — whether  you  have  been  brought  to  the 
knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ, — whether  you  have  laid  aside 
the  world  and  sin,  and  come  out  from  it,  and  fled  to 
Christ  by  faith  ?  If  you  have  not,  take  warning  this  day 
that  you  are  in  a  most  dangerous  and  unsatisfactory  state 
of  soul.  You  have  got  hold  of  nothing  worth  calling 


148  .PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

religion :  you  have  got  the  husk  of  Christianity,  but  not 
the  kernel.  "5£ou  have  nothing  to  rest  upon, — nothing 
to  comfort  you  in  the  day  of  trial, — nothing  to  satisfy 
you  in  an  empty  world, — and  nothing,  above  all  things, 
to  save  you  in  the  last  day.  The  hopes  of  all  men  shall 
be  put  upon  their  trial  sooner  or  later.  Except  you 
belong  to  the  one  true  Church,  your  end  will  be  a 
Churchman  or  Dissenter  lost, — a  Churchman  or  Dissenter 
eternally  cast  away,  and  shut  out  from  heaven — without 
hope,  and  without  comfort, — and  that  for  ever. 

Oh  that  men  would  but  see  that  salvation  turns  upon 
this  question !  Oh  that  men  would  but  see  that  it  shall 
profit  nothing  to  say,  "  I  have  always  gone  to  my 
church,"  or  "  always  gone  to  meeting,"  if  they  have 
not  gone  to  Christ  by  faith,  and  been  born  again/*  and 
been  made  one  with  Christ,  and  Christ  with  themV^Oh 
that  men  would  understand  that  the  kingdom  of  (jfod  is 
"  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righteousness,  and  peace,  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost ; "  that  true  religion  does  not  turn 
on  Episcopacy,  or  Presbyterianism, — on  churches  or 
chapels, — on  liturgies  or  extempore  prayer;  but  on 
justification  and  sanctification,  on  saving  faith  and  new 
hearts ! l  Oh  that  men  would  set  their  minds  more 
upon  these  points,  and  leave  off  their  miserable  squab 
bling  about  unprofitable  controversies,  and  settle  down 
to  this  one  great  question :  "  Have  I  come  to  Christ, 
and  laid  hold  of  Him,  and  been  born  again  ? " 

(6)  In  the  next  place,  if  you  do  not  belong  to  the  one 

1  ' '  I  cannot  be  so  narrow  in  my  principles  of  Church  communion  as 
many  are,  that  are  so  much  for  a  liturgy,  or  so  much  against  it, — so  much 
for  ceremonies,  or  so  much  against  them,  that  they  can  hold  communion 
with  no  Church  that  is  not  of  their  mind  and  way. 

"  I  cannot  be  of  their  mind  who  think  God  will  not  accept  him  that 
prayeth  by  the  Common  Prayer-book ;  and  that  such  forms  are  a  self- 
invented  worship  which  God  rejecteth ;  nor  yet  can  I  be  of  their  mind 
that  say  the  like  of  extempore  prayers.  "—Baxter,  in  Orme's  Life,  p.  385. 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    CHURCH.  149 

true  Church,  let  me  ask  you,  in  all  brotherly  affection,  to 
come  and  join  that  one  true  Church  this  day. 

I  call  upon  you,  and  invite  you  to  come  and  be  a 
Churchman  in  the  highest  and  best  sense.  Come  and 
be  a  member  of  that  one  Church  of  which  Jesus  is  the 
Head, — Jesus,  the  High  Priest, — Jesus,  the  Mediator. 
Come  and  join  that  Church  in  which  Jesus  is  the 
Saviour, — that  Church  into  which  Jesus  stands  ready 
to  admit  you,  saying,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
Come  to  Christ  this  day,  if  you  have  never  come 
before.  This  is  the  end  for  which  I  desire  to  write  and 
preach;  and  it  is  of  little  use  or  value  to  write  and 
preach  for  anything  else.  Come,  I  say  once  more :  come 
to  Christ  this  day.  Call  upon  Him :  say  to  Him,  "  0 
Lord,  save  me,  or  I  perish.  Lord,  let  me  not  be  lost  in 
the  midst  of  light  and  privileges.  Let  me  not  only  have 
knowledge  in  the  head,  but  grace  in  the  heart.  Let  me 
not  only  be  a  member  of  a  professing  Church  on  earth, 
but  a  living  member  of  Thy  body,  and  a  sharer  in  Thy 
glory!" 

(c)  Last  of  all,  if  you  can  say  that  you  belong  to  the 
one  true  Church,  then  you  may  rejoice.  Your  Church 
shall  never  fall:  your  Church  shall  never  come  to  an 
end.  The  world  and  all  its  greatness  will  pass  away. 
The  works  of  statesmen  shall  vanish  and  come  to  nothing. 
The  cathedrals  and  churches  of  man's  erecting  shall  all 
crumble  into  dust :  but  the  one  true  Church  shall  never 
perish.  It  is  built  upon  a  rock.  It  shall  stand  for  ever. 
It  shall  wax  brighter  and  brighter  to  the  end,  and  never 
be  so  bright  as  when  the  wicked  shall  be  separated  from 
it,  and  it  shall  stand  alone. 

If  you  belong  to  the  true  Church,  do  not  waste  your 
time  in  controversies  about  outward  things.  Say  to 
them  all,  "Get  ye  behind  me."  Care  for  nothing  so 


150  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

much  as  the  heart  and  marrow  of  Christianity.  Let  the 
grand  point  to  which  you  give  your  attention  be  the 
essence  of  true  religion, — the  foundation  of  the  one  true 
Church. 

If  you  belong  to  the  true  Church,  see  that  you  love  all 
its  members.  Let  your  principle  be,  "  Grace  be  with  all 
that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity"  (Eph.  vi.  24). 
Wherever  you  find  a  man  that  has  grace  and  faith,  hold 
out  your  right  hand  to  him.  Do  not  stop  to  ask  him 
where  he  was  baptized,  and  what  place  of  worship  he 
attends.  Has  he  been  with  Jesus  ?  Is  he  born  again  ? 
Then  say  to  yourself,  "  This  is  a  brother.  I  am  to  be 
with  him  in  heaven  by  and  by  for  ever :  let  me  love 
him  upon  earth.  If  we  are  to  be  in  the  same  home,  let 
us  love  each  other  even  now  upon  the  road." l 

Finally,  if  you  belong  to  the  true  Church,  try  to  in 
crease  the  number  of  members  of  that  Church.  Do  not 
work  merely  for  a  party :  do  not  labour  merely  to  get 
proselytes  to  your  own  professing  visible  Church.  Let 
your  first  care  be  to  pluck  brands  from  the  fire, — to 
awaken  sleeping  souls, — to  rouse  those  who  are  in  dark 
ness  and  ignorance,  and  to  make  them  acquainted  with 
Him  who  is  "  the  light  of  the  world,"  and  "whom  to  know 
is  life  eternal."  Never  forget  that  he  who  has  helped  to 
turn  one  sinner  from  his  sins  and  make  him  a  temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  has  done  a  far  more  glorious  and  lasting 
work  than  if  he  had  built  York  Minster  or  St.  Peter's  at 
Eome. 

I  commend  these  things  solemnly  to  the  attention  of 
every  one  who  reads  this  paper.  That  you  may  know 
them  by  experience  is  my  heart's  desire.  That  the 
knowledge  of  them  may  spread  more  and  more  is  my 
daily  prayer. 

1  "  Wherever  my  Lord  has  a  true  believer,  I  have  a  brother." — Bishop 
M'llvaine. 


VIL 
THOUGHTS  ON  THE  MINISTKY. 

THERE  are  few  subjects  on  which  error  has  been  so 
frequent  in  the  Churches  of  Christ  as  the  subject  of  the 
Christian  ministry.  There  are  few  errors  which  have  done 
so  much  harm  to  the  cause  of  pure  religion.  I  propose  in 
this  paper  to  offer  a  few  brief  thoughts  on  the  whole 
subject,  which  may  help  to  clear  the  minds  of  some  of  my 
readers,  and  dispel  the  fog  by  which  it  is  too  often 
surrounded.  He  that  really  knows  what  he  believes  in 
these  days  about  the  Church,  the  Ministry,  and  the 
Sacraments,  and  can  give  Scriptural  reasons  for  his  belief, 
is  an  uncommon  man. 

I.  First  and  foremost,  let  me  show  my  readers  what 
warrant  and  authority  we  have  for  the  minister's  office. 

I  meet  that  inquiry  without  hesitation.  The  office  of  a 
minister  is  a  Scriptural  institution,  ordained,  appointed, 
taught,  and  commanded,  both  directly  and  indirectly,  in 
the  New  Testament.  From  the  very  first  an  order  of  men 
was  set  apart  for  the  service  of  religion,  for  the  conduct 
of  public  worship,  for  keeping  up  prayer  and  praise,  for 
administering  the  sacraments,  for  teaching  the  ignorant, 
for  building  up  the  saints,  and  for  ordaining  others  to 
carry  on  God's  work  in  the  world.  In  short,  wherever 


151 


152  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

the  Apostles  founded  Churches,  they  appointed  pastors  to 
feed  the  flocks  they  had  gathered  together. 

The  proof  of  this  assertion  stands  out  so  plainly  before 
my  eyes  in  the  Acts  and  Epistles,  that  I  am  unable  to 
understand  how  any  one  who  takes  the  Bible  for  his  rule 
of  faith  can  get  over  it.  The  two  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  to 
Timothy,  and  the  one  to  Titus,  appear  to  me  to  settle  the 
question.  If  these  three  inspired  letters  do  not  sanction 
the  Christian  ministry,  there  appears  to  my  mind  no 
meaning  in  words.  Beside  them  stand  the  broad  facts, 
that  St.  Paul  "  ordained  elders  in  every  Church "  (Acts 
xiv.  23), — that  "elders"  of  the  Church  are  mentioned  six 
times  in  the  Acts  and  in  the  Epistles  of  James  and  Peter, 
— that  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  gives  a  list  of  officers 
set  in  the  Church  by  God,  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Philip- 
pians  begins  by  naming  with  the  saints  at  Philippi  "  the 
bishops  and  deacons."  All  these  facts,  I  say,  make  a  mass 
of  evidence  which  I  cannot  get  over.  I  do  not  maintain 
that  they  prove  the  divine  right  of  Episcopacy  as  the 
only  Scriptural  form  of  Church  government,  a  theory 
which,  with  Bishop  Lightfoot,  I  entirely  repudiate.  But 
I  do  maintain  that  in  face  of  these  facts  I  am  justified  in 
asserting  with  confidence  that  the  ministerial  office  is  a 
Scriptural  institution.  Its  warrant,  in  short,  is  the  written 
Word  of  God.  Take  a  jury  of  the  first  twelve  intelligent, 
honest,  disinterested,  unprejudiced  men  you  can  find,  and 
set  them  down  with  a  New  Testament  to  examine  this 
question  by  themselves :  "  Is  the  ministry  a  Scriptural 
thing  or  not?"  I  have  no  doubt  what  their  verdict 
would  be. 

I  ask  my  readers  to  remember  this  point,  and  to  let  it 
sink  down  into  their  minds.  Let  us  beware  in  these  days 
that  we  do  not  rush  into  the  extreme  of  undervaluing  the 
office  which  the  minister  of  Christ  holds.  There  is  some 
danger  in  this  direction.  Let  us  grasp  firmly  certain  fixed 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    MINISTRY.  153 

principles  about  the  Christian  ministry,  and,  however 
strong  our  dislike  of  priestcraft  and  aversion  to  Eomanism, 
let  nothing  tempt  us  to  let  these  principles  slip  out  of  our 
hands.  Surely  there  is  solid  middle  ground  between  a 
grovelling  idolatry  of  sacerdotalism  on  one  hand,  and  a 
disorderly  anarchy  on  the  other.  Surely  it  does  not  follow, 
because  we  will  not  be  Papists  in  this  matter  of  the 
ministry,  that  we  must  needs  be  Quakers  or  Plymouth 
Brethren.  This,  at  any  rate,  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
the  mind  of  St.  Paul. 

As  for  myself,  so  far  from  undervaluing  the  office  of 
the  ministry,  I  am  disposed  to  magnify  its  importance. 
It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  reasons  for  saying  this.  But 
two  shall  suffice. 

(a)  Tor  one  thing,  the  ministerial  office  is  a  most  wise 
and  useful  provision  of  God.  It  secures  the  regular  main 
tenance  of  all  Christ's  ordinances  and  means  of  grace.  It 
provides  an  undying  machinery  for  promoting  the  awaken 
ing  of  sinners  and  the  edification  of  saints.  All  experience 
proves  that  everybody's  business  soon  becomes  nobody's 
business ;  and  if  this  is  true  in  other  matters,  it  is  no  less 
true  in  the  matter  of  religion.  Our  God  is  a  God  of  order, 
and  a  God  who  works  by  means,  and  we  have  no  right  to 
expect  His  cause  to  be  kept  up  by  constant  miraculous 
interpositions,  while  His  servants  stand  idle.  For  the 
uninterrupted  preaching  of  the  Word  and  administration 
of  the  sacraments,  no  better  plan  can  be  devised  than  the 
appointment  of  a  regular  order  of  men  who  shall  give 
themselves  wholly  to  Christ's  business. 

(6)  For  another  thing,  let  us  settle  it  firmly  in  our  minds 
that  the  ministerial  office  is  an  honourable  privilege.  It 
is  an  honour  to  be  the  Ambassador  of  a  King :  the  very 
PERSON  of  such  an  officer  of  State  is  respected,  and  called 
legally  sacred.  It  is  an  honour  to  bear  the  tidings  of  a 
victory  such  as  Trafalgar  and  Waterloo  :  before  the  inveD- 


154  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

tion  of  telegraphs  it  was  a  highly  coveted  distinction. 
But  how  much  greater  honour  is  it  to  be  the  ambassador 
of  the  King  of  kings,  and  to  proclaim  the  good  news  of 
the  conquest  achieved  on  Calvary !  To  serve  directly 
such  a  Master,  to  carry  such  a  message,  to  know  that  the 
results  of  our  work,  if  God  shall  bless  it,  are  eternal,  this 
is  indeed  a  privilege.  Other  labourers  may  work  for  a 
corruptible  crown,  but  the  minister  of  Christ  for  an  incor 
ruptible.  Never  is  a  land  in  worse  condition  than  when 
the  ministers  of  religion  have  caused  their  office  to  be 
ridiculed  and  despised.  It  is  a  tremendous  word  in 
Malachi :  "  I  have  made  you  contemptible  and  base  before 
all  the  people  according  as  ye  have  not  kept  my  ways  " 
(Malachi  ii  9).  But,  whether  men  will  hear  or  forbear, 
the  office  of  a  faithful  ambassador  is  honourable.  It  was 
a  fine  saying  of  an  old  missionary  on  his  death-bed,  who 
died  at  the  age  of  ninety-six :  "  The  very  best  thing  that 
a  man  can  do  is  to  preach  the  Gospel." 

Let  me  leave  this  branch  of  my  subject  with  an  earnest 
request  that  all  who  pray  will  never  forget  to  make 
supplications  and  prayers  and  intercession  for  the  ministers 
of  Christ,  that  there  never  may  be  wanting  a  due  supply 
of  them  at  home  and  in  the  mission  field,  that  they  may 
be  kept  sound  in  the  faith  and  holy  in  their  lives,  and 
that  they  may  take  heed  to  themselves  as  well  as  to  the 
doctrine  (1  Tim.  iv.  16). 

Let  it  be  remembered  that  while  our  office  is  honourable, 
useful,  and  Scriptural,  it  is  also  one  of  deep  and  painful 
responsibility  !  We  watch  for  souls  "  as  those  who  must 
give  account"  at  the  judgment  day  (Heb.  xiii.  17).  If 
souls  are  lost  through  our  unfaithfulness,  their  blood 
will  be  required  at  our  hands.  If  we  had  only  to  read 
services  and  administer  sacraments,  to  wear  a  peculiar  dress 
and  go  through  a  round  of  ceremonies,  bodily  exercise, 
gestures,  and  postures,  our  position  would  be  comparatively 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    MINISTRY.  155 

light.  But  this  is  not  all.  We  have  got  to  deliver  our 
Master's  message, — to  keep  back  nothing  that  is  profitable, 
— to  declare  all  the  counsel  of  God.  If  we  tell  our  con 
gregations  less  than  the  truth  or  more  than  the  truth,  we 
may  ruin  for  ever  immortal  souls.  Life  and  death  are  in 
the  power  of  the  preacher's  tongue.  "  Woe  is  unto  us  if 
we  preach  not  the  Gospel !"  (1  Cor.  ix.  16). 

Once  more  I  say  to  all  readers  of  this  paper,  Pray  for 
ministers.  No  wonder  St.  Paul  asks,  "  Who  is  sufficient 
for  these  things?"  (2  Cor.  ii.  16).  Eemember  the  old  saying 
of  the  Fathers :  "  None  are  in  more  spiritual  danger  than 
ministers."  It  is  easy  to  criticise  and  find  fault  with  us. 
We  have  a  treasure  in  earthen  vessels.  We  are  men 
of  like  passions  with  others,  and  not  infallible.  Pray 
for  us  in  these  trying,  tempting,  controversial  days,  that 
our  Church  may  never  lack  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons 
who  are  sound  in  the  faith,  bold  as  lions,  wise  as  serpents, 
and  yet  harmless  as  doves.  The  very  man  who  said, 
"  Grace  is  given  me  to  preach,"  is  the  same  man  who  said, 
in  another  place,  "  Pray  for  us,  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord 
may  have  free  course,  and  be  glorified,  and  that  we  may 
be  delivered  from  unreasonable  and  wicked  men :  for  all 
men  have  not  faith"  (2  Thess.  iii.  1,  2). 

II.  In  the  second  place,  I  think  it  necessary  to  fence 
the  ministerial  office  with  cautions. 

I  can  find  no  words  to  express  my  strong  feeling  about 
the  importance  of  holding  right  views  of  the  ministerial 
office.  Error  on  this  point  has  been  the  plague  of  the 
Church  of  Christ  for  at  least  sixteen  centuries,  and  the 
fruitful  source  of  innumerable  evils.  I  wish,  therefore,  to 
place  my  readers  on  their  guard,  and  to  point  out  what 
the  minister  of  the  New  Testament  is  not,  and  was  never 
meant  to  be. 

(a)  First  and  foremost,  the  Christian  minister  is  not  a 


156  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

mediator  between  God  and  men.  This  is  an  office  which 
belongs  to  Christ  alone,  and  He  has  never  deputed  it  to 
any  one.  Christianity  is  not  a  vicarious  religion.  I 
mean  by  this  that  a  man  cannot  put  his  soul  in  his 
minister's  hands  as  he  puts  his  money  in  the  hands  of  a 
banker,  or  his  legal  affairs  in  the  hands  of  a  lawyer,  and 
then  assume  that  of  course  he  will  go  to  heaven.  This  is 
a  complete  delusion.  Every  one  of  us  must  have  personal 
dealings  for  himself  with  Christ,  by  his  own  faith,  his  own 
prayer,  and  his  own  actions,  and  no  one  else  can  act  for 
him.  We  must  seek  for  ourselves  if  we  want  to  find  and 
know  for  ourselves,  if  we  want  the  door  of  mercy  to  be 
opened.  A  true  minister  will  show  the  Mediator ;  but 
he  cannot  be  the  mediator  himself. 

(&)  In  the  next  place,  the  Christian  minister  cannot 
give  grace.  He  cannot  give  it  at  the  font,  when  he  reads 
the  baptismal  service  and  receives  an  infant  into  the 
Church.  He  cannot  give  it  at  the  communion  table, 
when  he  consecrates  the  bread  and  wine,  and  gives  them 
to  the  communicants.  He  cannot  give  it  in  the  pulpit, 
however  faithfully  he  preaches  the  gospel.  He  cannot 
give  it  at  the  bedside  of  the  dying  man,  however  faith 
fully  and  lovingly  he  pleads  with  him.  Oh  no  !  To  give 
life  is  the  peculiar  prerogative  of  God.  "  It  is  the  Spirit 
that  quickeneth  "  (John  vi.  6  3).  The  cleverest  philosophers 
cannot  create  natural  life,  and  the  greatest  ministers  can 
not  give  spiritual  life.  We  may  teach  the  value  and  need 
of  grace,  but  we  cannot  give  it.  We  may  say, "  Kepent,  be 
converted,  behold  the  Lamb."  But  we  can  go  no  further. 
What  we  say,  the  Holy  Ghost  must  apply  to  the  soul. 

(c)  In  the  next  place,  the  Christian  minister  was  not 
meant  to  be  a  confessor.  It  is  supposed  by  some  Christians 
that  one  chief  duty  of  a  minister  of  religion  is  to  hear 
private  confessions  of  sin  from  the  people  committed  to  his 
charge,  and  after  hearing  to  grant  absolution.  The  idea 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    MINISTRY.  157 

is  utterly  without  warrant  of  Scripture.  There  is  neither 
precept  nor  example  to  justify  it.  The  practice  is  dis 
honouring  to  the  priestly  office  of  Christ,  and  has  been 
proved  by  experience  to  do  far  more  harm  than  good.  It 
puts  two  sinners  in  a  thoroughly  wrong  position.  It  exalts 
the  confessor  far  too  high.  It  places  those  who  confess 
far  too  low.  It  gives  the  confessor  a  place  which  it  is 
not  safe  for  any  child  of  Adam  to  occupy.  It  imposes  on 
those  who  confess  a  bondage  to  which  it  is  not  safe  for 
any  child  of  Adam  to  submit.  It  sinks  one  poor  sinner 
into  the  degrading  attitude  of  a  serf.  It  raises  another 
poor  sinner  into  a  dangerous  mastery  over  his  brother's 
soul.  It  makes  the  confessor  little  less  than  a  God.  It 
makes  those  who  confess  little  better  than  slaves.  If  my 
readers  love  the  Church  of  England,  and  wish  the 
ministerial  office  to  be  held  in  honour,  I  charge  them 
never  to  countenance  the  idea  that  clergymen  ought  to  be 
confessors,  or  to  tolerate  any  attempt  to  reintroduce 
auricular  confession. 

(d)  In  the  next  place,  the  Christian  minister  is  not 
infallible.  The  vulgar  notion  that  a  clergyman  is  not 
likely  to  hold  or  teach  erroneous  doctrines,  and  that  we 
seldom  need  to  doubt  the  truth  of  anything  he  tells  us  in 
the  pulpit,  is  one  of  the  most  mischievous  errors  which  has 
been  bequeathed  to  England  by  the  Church  of  Eome.  It 
is  a  complete  delusion.  Ordination  confers  no  immunity 
from  error.  Clergymen,  like  Churches,  may  err  both  in 
living  and  matters  of  faith.  The  Apostle  Peter  erred 
greatly  at  Antioch,  where  Paul  withstood  him  to  the  face. 
Many  of  the  Fathers  and  Eeformers  and  Puritans  made 
great  mistakes.  The  teaching  of  all  ministers  ought  to  be 
constantly  compared  with  the  Scriptures,  and  when  it 
contradicts  the  Scriptures  it  ought  not  to  be  believed. 
However  high  a  clergyman's  office  may  be,  and  however 
learned  and  devout  he  may  appear,  he  is  still  only  an 


158  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

uninspired  man,  and  can  make  mistakes.      His  opinion 
must  never  be  set  above  the  Word. 

(e)  Last,  but  not  least,  the  Christian  minister  is  not  a 
sacrificing  priest,  and  does  not  offer  any  sacrifice  in  the 
Lord's  Supper.  This  is  a  point  which  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  understand.  A  flood  of  erroneous  teaching 
is  coming  over  the  Church  of  England  on  the  subject,  and 
it  becomes  every  loyal  Churchman  to  be  on  his  guard. 
That  a  clergyman  is  repeatedly  called  a  "  priest "  in  the 
rubrics  of  the  Prayer-book  no  one  thinks  of  denying.  But 
that  the  word  "  priest "  in  these  rubrics  means  anything 
more  than  "  presbyter  "  or  "  elder  "  can  never  be  proved. 
It  certainly  does  not  mean  a  person  who  offers  up  a 
sacrifice.  The  plain  truth  is,  that  there  can  be  no  priest 
without  a  sacrifice;  and  for  any  sacrifice  in  the  Lord's 
Supper,  except  that  of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  which  all 
Christians  can  offer  up,  there  is  no  place  under  the  Gospel, 
or  in  the  standards  of  the  Church  of  England.  To  use 
the  words  of  the  Thirty-first  Article,  "The  offering  of 
Christ  once  made  is  that  perfect  redemption,  propitiation, 
and  satisfaction  for  all  the  sins  of  the  whole  world ;  and 
there  is  none  other  satisfaction  for  sin  but  that  alone." 
It  cannot  be  added  to  or  repeated  in  the  Lord's  Supper. 
There  is  not  a  tittle  of  proof  that  this  blessed  Sacrament 
was  regarded  as  a  sacrifice  by  our  Lord  or  His  Apostles. 
Not  once  is  it  called  a  sacrifice  in  the  Acts  or  Epistles  of 
God's  Word  written,  not  once  in  the  Articles  of  our 
Church,  not  once  in  the  Communion  Service  of  the 
Prayer-book,  not  once  in  the  Church  Catechism !  In  the 
face  of  such  crushing  facts  as  these,  they  are  not  to  be 
heard  who  say  that  clergymen  are  sacrificing  priests.  A 
man  cannot  be  literally  a  priest  when  he  has  no  sacrifice 
to  offer.  Let  us  take  our  stand  firmly  on  this  principle, 
the  principle  alike  of  the  Bible,  the  Thirty-nine  Articles, 
and  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer. 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    MINISTRY.  159 

I  leave  the  negative  side  of  my  subject  here.  In  what 
I  have  said  by  way  of  caution,  to  show  what  the  Christian 
minister  is  not,  I  trust  my  readers  will  not  misunder 
stand  my  meaning.  If  any  one  supposes  that  I  think 
lightly  of  the  office  of  a  Christian  minister,  he  is  totally 
mistaken.  I  regard  it  as  an  honourable  office,  instituted 
by  Christ  Himself,  and  of  general  necessity  for  carrying 
on  the  work  of  Christ's  Gospel.  I  look  on  ministers  as 
preachers  and  teachers  of  God's  Word,  God's  ambassadors, 
God's  messengers,  God's  servants,  God's  shepherds,  God's 
stewards,  God's  overseers,  God's  witnesses,  as  labourers 
in  God's  vineyard  and  trumpeters  in  God's  army, — offices 
of  great  labour,  great  dignity,  and  great  responsibility. 
But  I  cannot  give  them  names  and  official  titles  for  which 
I  find  no  authority  in  Scripture,  or  in  the  formularies  of 
my  own  Church. 

III.  The  third  thing  which  I  propose  to  do  in  this 
paper  is  to  show  my  readers  what  is  the  chief  work  for 
which  the  ministers  of  Christ's  CJiurch  are  ordained.  That 
work,  I  say  without  hesitation,  is  to  preach  God's  Word. 

That  the  Christian  minister  is  intended  to  lead  the 
worship  of  God  in  the  congregation,  to  read  the  Scrip 
tures  to  the  people,  to  administer  the  Sacrament,  to  visit 
the  sick  and  dying,  to  carry  the  gospel  from  house  to 
house,  to  look  carefully  after  the  young,  to  maintain 
godly  discipline,  to  instruct  the  ignorant,  to  warn  the 
sunruly,  to  comfort  the  feeble-minded,  to  reprove,  to 
rebuke,  to  exhort,  to  sympathise,  as  occasion  requires, — 
all  this  is  undoubtedly  true.  The  clergyman  who  neglects 
such  work  is  not  doing  his  duty.  But  after  all,  the  main, 
principal,  and  foremost  business  of  a  minister  in  the 
Church  of  England  is  to  be  a  preacher  of  the  word. 

The  plain  truth  is  that,  in  the  great  battle  which  Christ's 
Church  has  to  fight,  the  minister  is  to  be  the  trumpeter. 


160  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

This,  we  read  in  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  was  peculiarly  the 
office  which  God  commanded  the  Old  Testament  prophets 
to  discharge.  And  the  New  Testament  is  not  contrary  to 
the  Old.  A  little  reflection  and  examination  will  soon 
show  us  that  a  better  illustration  of  the  position  and 
duty  of  the  Christian  minister  than  that  of  a  trumpeter, 
could  hardly  be  found  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  1-7). 

Does  the  trumpet  sound  the  alarm  and  awaken  the 
soldier  to  meet  danger?  In  time  of  war,  "Saul  blew 
the  trumpet,  saying,  Let  the  Hebrews  hear"  (1  Sam. 
xiii.  3).  So  must  the  minister  endeavour  continually  to 
arouse,  to  awaken,  and  to  stir  careless  souls. 

Does  the  trumpeter  sound  a  peculiar  note  to  show  the 
soldier  the  duty  required  ?  It  was  in  this  way  that  the 
tribes  in  the  wilderness  were  directed  (Num.  x.  1-6). 
So  must  the  minister  try  to  guide  souls,  and  show  them 
the  way  they  must  go. 

Does  the  trumpeter  sound  the  recall  when  the  troops 
are  going  in  a  wrong  direction,  and  need  to  be  halted  ? 
(2  Sam.  ii.  28).  So  must  the  minister  try  to  stop  souls 
when  they  are  going  astray. 

Does  the  trumpeter  sound  a  rousing  blast  when  the 
soldier  is  ordered  to  charge  ?  It  was  thus  that  Gideon 
stirred  his  little  band  against  the  Midianites,  when  he 
told  them  to  blow  their  trumpets  and  cry,  "  The  sword  of 
the  Lord  and  Gideon"  (Judges  vii.  20).  So  must  the 
minister  try  to  cheer  and  encourage  souls,  and  say,  "  Fear 
not :  quit  you  like  men,  be  strong." 

Does  the  trumpeter  sound  a  gathering  note,  to  call  the 
soldiers  together  and  unite  them  in  one  band  ?  It  was 
thus  that  Nehemiah  acted  when  the  feeble  Jews  were 
building  the  wall  of  Jerusalem :  "  In  what  place  ye  hear 
the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  there  resort  ye  to  us  "  (Neh. 
iv.  20).  So  must  the  minister  try  to  unite  Christians, 
and  make  them  one  body,  and  helpful  to  one  another. 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    MINISTRY.  161 

Last,  but  not  least,  does  the  trumpeter  stand  by  the 
commanding  officer,  and  take  his  orders  from  him  ?  So 
it  was  with  Nehemiah :  "  He  that  sounded  the  trumpet 
was  by  me"  (Neh.  iv.  18).  So  it  should  be  with  the 
minister.  He  must  always  keep  close  to  the  Captain, 
Jesus  Christ,  and  act  and  teach  entirely  at  His  com 
mand. 

In  short,  the  office  of  the  trumpeter  is  an  important 
and  honourable  one,  and  the  figure  is  one  of  which  the 
Christian  minister  has  no  cause  to  be  ashamed.  To 
preach  the  Word  of  God,  to  proclaim  the  everlasting 
Gospel,  to  teach  continually  in  the  pulpit,  and  from 
house  to  house,  the  noble  lesson  which  Christ  has  given 
us, — all  this  may  seem  contemptible  to  some.  The  men 
of  Jericho,  no  doubt,  despised  the  blowing  of  trumpets 
around  their  city.  But  when  the  seventh  day  arrived 
and  their  walls  fell  down  flat,  they  found,  to  their  cost, 
that  the  things  which  they  had  despised  were  "  mighty  to 
pull  down  strongholds." 

Let  me  take  occasion  to  urge  on  all  who  read  this 
paper,  the  immense  importance  of  maintaining  right  and 
sound  views  of  the  subject  of  preaching.  Let  us  distinctly 
understand,  firmly  hold,  and  constantly  tell  others  that 
the  first,  foremost,  and  principal  work  of  the  minister  is 
to  be  a  preacher  of  God's  Word,  and  let  us  beware  of  the 
growing  disposition  to  depreciate  sermons,  and  to  exag 
gerate  the  Lord's  Supper  and  the  reading  of  liturgical 
services.  The  communion  table  and  the  reading  desk 
are  being  exalted  to  such  a  position  that  they  are  com 
paratively  overshadowing  the  pulpit.  Hundreds  of  sin 
cere,  devoted,  earnest,  hard-working  clergymen  give  such 
an  extravagant  amount  of  time  to  the  public  reading  of 
prayers,  and  the  administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
that  they  leave  themselves  no  leisure  for  pulpit  pre 
paration,  and  are  obliged  to  content  their  congregations 

L 


162  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

with  short,  shallow,  hastily-composed  sermons,  devoid 
alike  of  matter,  power,  fire,  or  effectiveness.  In  saying 
this,  I  know  that  I  tread  on  delicate  ground.  But  I 
must  speak  what  I  think.  In  right  and  due  reverence 
for  the  Lord's  Supper,  I  trust  I  yield  to  none.  But  I 
plead  for  Scriptural  proportion  in  our  estimate  of  means 
of  grace;  and  when  sacraments  and  liturgical  prayers 
are  made  everything  in  public  worship,  and  preaching 
the  Word  is  made  little  of,  or  thrust  into  a  corner,  I 
assert  that  Scriptural  proportion  is  disregarded. 

What  warrant  have  we  in  the  Bible  for  making  the 
Lord's  Supper  the  first,  foremost,  principal,  and  most 
important  thing  in  public  worship,  and  making  com 
paratively  little  of  preaching  ?  There  are  at  most  but 
five  books  in  the  whole  canon  of  the  New  Testament  in 
which  the  Lord's  Supper  is  even  mentioned.  About 
grace,  faith,  and  redemption, — about  the  work  of  Christ, 
the  work  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  love  of  the  Father, — 
about  man's  ruin,  weakness,  and  spiritual  poverty, — 
about  justification,  sanctification,  and  holy  living, — about 
all  these  mighty  subjects  we  find  the  inspired  writers 
giving  us  line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept. 
About  the  Lord's  Supper,  on  the  contrary,  we  may 
observe  in  the  great  bulk  of  the  New  Testament  a 
speaking  silence.  Even  the  Epistles  to  Timothy  and 
Titus,  containing  much  instruction  about  a  minister's 
duties,  do  not  contain  a  word  about  it.  This  fact  alone 
surely  speaks  volumes !  To  thrust  the  Lord's  Supper 
forward,  till  it  towers  over  and  overrides  everything 
else  in  religion,  is  giving  it  a  position  for  which  there  is 
no  authority  in  God's  Word. 

What,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  witness  of  the  New 
Testament  about  the  value  of  preaching  ?  I  find  that 
our  Lord  Jesus  during  the  whole  period  of  His  earthly 
ministry  was  continually  and  everywhere  a  preacher.  I 


THOUGHTS    ON   THE   MINISTRY.  163 

find  that  His  last  command  to  the  Apostles  was  to 
"  go  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every 
creature  "  (Mark  xvi.  15).  I  find  that  the  whole  company 
of  His  Apostles  and  Disciples  were  continually  teaching 
and  preaching  the  Word.  I  can  find  no  record  of  Church 
assemblies  in  the  New  Testament  in  which  preaching, 
or  teaching  orally,  does  not  occupy  a  most  prominent 
position.  It  appears  to  me  to  be  the  chief  instrument 
by  which  the  Holy  Ghost  not  only  awakens  sinners,  but 
also  leads  on  and  establishes  saints.  I  observe  that  in 
the  very  last  words  that  St.  Paul  wrote  to  Timothy,  as  a 
young  minister,  he  especially  enjoins  on  him  to  "preach  the 
Word "  (2  Tim.  iv.  2).  I  cannot  therefore  believe  that 
any  system  of  worship  in  which  the  sermon  is  made  little 
of,  or  thrust  into  a  corner,  can  be  a  Scriptural  system,  or 
one  likely  to  have  the  blessing  of  God.  I  hold  firmly 
with  Bishop  Latimer  that  it  is  one  of  Satan's  great  aims 
to  exalt  ceremonies  and  put  down  preaching.  The  first 
thing  which  the  Church  of  England  commissions  her 
ministers  to  do  is  to  preach.  In  the  Ordination  service, 
the  bishop  says  to  every  priest,  "  Take  thou  authority  to 
preach  the  Word  of  God."  "  Ye  shall  call  on  this  child 
to  hear  sermons,"  is  the  first  charge  which  our  baptismal 
service  gives  to  god-fathers  and  god-mothers.  There  is  a 
deep  meaning  in  the  words,  "  Despise  not  prophesyings  " 
(1  Thess.  v.  20).  A  contempt  for  sermons  is  a  sure 
mark  of  a  decline  in  spiritual  religion. 

What  may  we  learn  from  Church  history  in  every  age 
about  the  importance  of  preaching  ?  It  is  certain  that 
the  brightest  days  of  the  Primitive  Church  were  the  days 
when  men  like  Chrysostom  and  Augustine  were  con 
stantly  expounding  God's  Word,  and  swaying  multitudes 
by  their  sermons.  It  is  equally  certain  that  the  darkest 
era  in  the  annals  of  Christendom  was  the  time  before  the 
Reformation,  when  the  pulpit  was  silent,  and  Christianity 


164  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

seemed  nothing  more  than  a  huge  mass  of  forms  and 
ceremonies.  It  was  the  preaching  of  men  like  Luther 
and  Zwingle  on  the  Continent,  and  Latimer  and  Hooper 
in  our  own  land,  which  opened  the  eyes  of  the  laity  and 
broke  the  chains  of  Eome.  It  was  the  preaching  of 
Whitfield,  and  the  Wesleys,  and  Grimshaw,  and  Berridge, 
and  Eomaine,  and  Venn  in  the  last  century,  which  awoke 
our  sleeping  forefathers,  saved  the  Church  of  England 
from  ruin,  and  delivered  this  kingdom  from  a  worse  than 
French  revolution. 

I  charge  my  readers  to  remember  these  facts  and 
consider  them  well.  Stand  fast  on  old  principles.  Do 
not  forsake  the  old  paths.  Let  nothing  tempt  you  to 
believe  that  multiplication  of  forms  and  ceremonies,  con 
stant  reading  of  liturgical  services,  or  frequent  com 
munions,  will  ever  do  so  much  good  to  souls  as  the 
powerful,  fiery,  fervent  preaching  of  God's  Word.  Daily 
services  without  sermons  may  gratify  and  edify  a  few 
handfuls  of  believers,  but  they  will  never  reach,  draw, 
attract,  or  arrest  the  great  mass  of  mankind.  If  men 
want  to  do  good  to  the  multitude,  if  they  want  to  reach 
their  hearts  and  consciences,  they  must  walk  in  the  steps 
of  Whitfield,  Latimer,  Luther,  Chrysostom,  and  St.  Paul ; 
they  must  attack  them  through  their  ears.  They  must 
blow  the  trumpet  of  the  everlasting  gospel  loud  and  long. 
They  must  u  preach  the  Word." 

IV.  The  last  thing  which  I  propose  to  do  in  this  paper, 
is  to  show  my  readers  how  the  chief  work  of  a  minister  is 
to  be  done.  I  say,  then,  without  hesitation,  that  a  preacher 
will  do  no  good  if  he  does  not  "  declare  all  the  counsel 
of  God."  In  his  sermons  he  must  "  keep  back  nothing 
that  is  profitable."  He  must  boldly,  confidently,  and  fully 
proclaim  God's  message,  as  if  he  thoroughly  believed  it. 
He  must  never  forget  that  he  is  a  trumpeter  in  the  army 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    MINISTRY.  165 

of  Christ,  and  take  heed  that  his  trumpet  "gives  no 
uncertain  sound." 

In  military  matters,  common  sense  points  out  that  the 
trumpeter  of  a  regiment  is  perfectly  useless  if  he  does  not 
know  how  to  use  the  instrument  which  is  placed  in  his 
hands.  He  may  be  duly  entered  on  the  muster  roll,  and 
occupy  a  conspicuous  position,  and  wear  a  splendid  uni 
form  ;  but  if  he  does  not  know  how  to  carry  out  the  orders 
of  his  commanding  officer,  if  he  can  neither  give  the  sound 
to  advance  or  retreat,  to  charge,  to  halt,  or  to  retire,  he  is 
more  likely  to  do  harm  than  good.  In  fact,  he  is  likely, 
in  the  day  of  battle,  to  throw  the  whole  force  into  con 
fusion. 

Now,  in  the  great  campaign  of  the  Church  of  Christ, 
it  is  just  the  same  with  the  ministers  of  the  everlasting 
gospel.  A  man  may  be  duly  ordained  and  commissioned 
by  those  who  have  authority,  and  placed  in  charge  of  a 
congregation ;  but  if  he  does  not  know  what  to  preach, 
so  as  to  do  good  to  souls,  if  his  message  is  so  uncertain, 
confused,  and  indistinct,  that  his  hearers  cannot  under 
stand  what  he  wishes  them  to  believe,  to  be,  or  to  do,  it 
is  absurd  to  suppose  that  he  will  help  any  one  to  heaven. 
In  spite  of  orders,  licence,  and  commission,  such  a  minister 
is  as  useless  as  the  ignorant  regimental  trumpeter.  The 
blessing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not  promised  to  any  and 
every  kind  of  sermon,  but  to  sermons  which  contain  dis 
tinct  Scriptural  truth. 

I  say  with  sorrow,  but  I  feel  obliged  to  say  it,  that  the 
absence  of  "  a  certain  sound,"  the  want  of  sharply-cut, 
well-defined  doctrine  in  sermons  is  one  of  the  worst  and 
most  dangerous  symptoms  of  the  present  day.  It  is  a 
growing  evil,  I  am  afraid,  and  one  that  requires  looking 
in  the  face.  I  hear  on  all  sides  that  old  and  experienced 
Christians  complain  that  a  vast  quantity  of  modern  preach 
ing  is  so  foggy,  and  hazy,  and  dim,  and  indistinct,  and 


166  PRINCIPLES    FOB    CHURCHMEN. 

hesitating,  and  timid,  and  cautious,  and  fenced  with 
doubts,  that  the  preacher  does  not  seem  to  know  what 
he  believes  himself.  Of  course,  his  hearers  cannot  be 
expected  to  believe  anything  at  all !  I  do  not  hear  so 
often  that  men  preach  honest,  outspoken  Komanism  or 
Scepticism,  as  that  they  ingeniously  fill  up  their  pulpit 
half-hour  with  colourless,  pointless  homilies,  containing 
nothing  at  all.  And  I  do  hear  it  constantly  said,  that 
throughout  the  land  there  is  a  deplorable  scarcity  of  a 
"  certain  sound  "  from  the  lips  of  Christian  ministers. 

What  excuse  any  English  clergyman  can  allege  for 
undecided  and  indistinct  teaching,  and  an  "  uncertain 
sound  "  in  his  pulpit,  I  am  utterly  at  a  loss  to  discover. 
He  is  a  minister  of  a  Church  which  has  declared  her 
mind  about  doctrine  most  distinctly  in  that  noble  con 
fession  of  faith,  the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  I  ask  any 
impartial  man  to  read  those  Articles,  and  to  mark  the 
strong  and  decided  language  which  they  use  in  speaking 
of  things  which  are  essential  to  salvation.  I  say,  without 
hesitation,  that,  concerning  the  nature  of  God  and  the 
Holy  Trinity, — concerning  the  sufficiency  and  authority 
of  Scripture, — concerning  the  sinfulness  and  helplessness 
of  natural  man, — concerning  justification  by  faith  alone, 
— concerning  the  place  and  value  of  good  works, — con 
cerning  salvation  only  by  the  name  of  Christ, — concerning 
all  these  grand  foundations  of  the  Christian  religion,  and 
about  the  errors  of  the  Church  of  Eome,  it  is  hard  to 
conceive  language  more  decided,  clear,  distinct,  ringing, 
and  trumpet-toned  than  that  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles. 

But  this  is  not  all.  The  Church  of  England  requires 
every  person  who  is  ordained  to  declare  his  assent  to  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  ministry. 
And,  as  if  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure,  the  Church 
requires  every  clergyman,  instituted  to  any  living,  at  this 
very  day,  when  he  begins  to  officiate  in  his  Church, 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE   MINISTRY.  167 

"  publicly  and  openly,  in  the  presence  of  his  congrega 
tion,  to  read  the  whole  Thirty-nine  Articles,  and  imme 
diately  after  reading  to  make  the  declaration  of  assent 
to  them,"  saying,  "  /  believe  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of 
England,  as  therein  set  forth,  to  be  agreeable  to  the  Word 
of  God"  These  are  indisputable  facts,  which  cannot  be 
explained  away.  In  the  face  of  these  facts,  I  cannot 
understand  how  any  clergyman  can  be  content  to  preach 
such  indistinct  and  uncertain  sermons  that  no  man  can 
possibly  learn  from  them  what  he  must  do  to  be  saved. 

I  speak  strongly  because  I  feel  deeply.  The 
condition  of  the  Church  of  England  demands  "  great 
plainness  of  speech."  When  the  ship  is  among  breakers, 
the  officer  of  the  watch  cannot  afford  to  polish  his  lan 
guage  and  use  circumlocution.  The  ship  of  the  Church 
of  England  is  in  danger,  and  all  her  sons  must  do  their 
duty.  Let  me  therefore  mention  a  few  leading  points 
about  which  a  distinct,  certain  sound  is  much  wanted 
just  now  in  all  our  pulpits. 

(a)  We  want  a  more  certain  sound  about  the  inspira 
tion,  sufficiency,  and  supremacy  of  Holy  Scripture.     There 
is  a  growing  inclination  to  depreciate  the  blessed  volume, 
as  a  respectable  old  book  and  nothing  more,  containing  a 
great  deal  of  truth,  but  truth  mixed  up  with  error  and 
fables.     There  is  a  hasty  readiness  to  assume  that  when 
ever  the  conclusions  of  so-called  science  conflict  with  the 
Bible,  the  Bible  must  be  wrong  and  science  right,  it  being 
coolly  forgotten  that  perhaps  we  do  not  rightly  interpret 
the  Book.    Away  with  all  this !     Let  us  boldly  place  the 
Bible  on  the  pedestal  where  our  forefathers  placed  it,  and 
maintain,  like  them,  that,  however  imperfectly  we  may 
understand  it,  the  old  Book  is  perfect,  and  is  an  infallible 
rule  of  faith  and  practice. 

(b)  We  want  a  more  certain  sound  about  the  sinfulnesst 
guilt,  and  corruption  of  human  nature.     There  is  a  wide- 


168  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN, 

spread  disposition  to  speak  of  man  as  a  pitiable  creature, 
but  not  as  deserving  of  God's  wrath  and  condemnation, — 
as  one  who  is  weak  and  unstable,  but  not  as  one  who  has 
no  power  to  turn  himself,  do  good,  and  continue  right 
before  God.  Let  us  return  to  the  old  paths,  and  unhesi 
tatingly  declare  man's  utter  vileness  and  danger,  and  his 
pressing  need  of  a  new  birth,  and  an  entire  change  of 
heart.  Whether  men  know  it  or  not,  I  believe  there  is 
a  vast  amount  of  Pelagianism  around  us. 

(c)  We  want  a  more  certain  sound  about  the  work  and 
offices  of    our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.      Men  nowadays  will 
dwell  exclusively  on  His  prophetical  office,  the  beauty 
of  His  personal  character,  the  splendid  example  of  His 
kindness,  patience,  condescension,  purity,  and  self-denial. 
All  this,  however  true,  is  only  half  the  truth,  and  by  far 
the  least  important  half   too.     The    main  thing    about 
Christ,  of  which  this  age  never  hears  enough,  is  the  atone 
ment  He  made  by  His  death,  His  vicarious  sacrifice  on 
the  Cross,  the  redemption  He  obtained  for  man  by  His 
blood,  His  victory  over  the  grave  by   His   resurrection, 
His  active  life  of  intercession  at  God's  right  hand,  the 
absolute  necessity  of  simple  faith  in  Him.     These  blessed 
truths  are  seldom  made  enough  of  in  this  day.     They  are 
either  judiciously  dropped  as  offensive,  or  coolly  left  in 
the  background,  as  old  fossils  unsuited  to  the  nineteenth 
century.     If  there  is  not  a  vast  amount  of  veiled  So- 
cinianism  around  us,  I  am  greatly  mistaken. 

(d)  We  want  a  more  certain  sound  about  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.     There  is  a  great  quantity  of  teaching,  I 
am  afraid,  in  which  there  is  no  place  left  for  the  Third 
Person  of  the  Trinity.     His  presence  in  the  hearts  of 
professing  Christians  is  taken  for  granted.     They  have 
Him  as  a  matter  of  course,  because  they  are  baptized,  or 
because  they  belong  to  the  Church,  or  because  they  are 
communicants  !     In  short,  many  congregations  might  say, 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    MINISTRY.  169 

like  one  of  old,  "  We  have  not  so  much  as  heard  whether 
there  is  any  Holy  Ghost."  But  surely  this  is  not 
Apostolic  teaching.  People  need  to  be  told  now  as  much 
as  they  were  told  eighteen  centuries  ago,  that  the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit  are  the  only  evidence  of  having  the  Spirit, 
and  that  those  fruits  must  be  seen, — that  we  must  be 
born  of  the  Spirit,  led  by  the  Spirit,  sanctified  by  the 
Spirit,  and  feel  the  operations  of  the  Spirit.  "  If  any 
man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His " 
(Eom.  viii.  9).  There  is  far  more  of  the  Macedonian 
heresy  existing  in  the  nineteenth  century  than  most 
people  suppose. 

(e)  We  want  a  more  certain  sound  about  personal  holi 
ness.  I  fear  the  standard  of  daily  life  is  lower  just  now 
than  it  has  been  for  many  years.  People  seem  unable  to 
realize  that  there  is  anything  inconsistent  with  baptismal 
vows,  in  ball-going,  theatre-going,  gambling,  card-playing, 
excessive  dressing,  novel-reading,  Sabbath-breaking,  and 
an  incessant  round  of  gaiety  and  amusements.  The 
border-line  between  the  Church  and  the  world  seems 
completely  effaced  and  forgotten.  A  crucified  life  of  self- 
denial  and  close  walk  with  God,  a  life  of  real  devotedness 
and  zeal  to  do  good,  is  hardly  ever  to  be  seen  !  Yet  surely 
our  Lord  meant  something  when  He  spoke  of  "  taking  up 
the  cross,"  and  St.  Paul  meant  something  when  he  said, 
"  Come  out  and  be  separate." — "  Be  not  conformed  to  this 
world."  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord  " 
(2  Cor.  vi.  17  ;  Kom.  xii.  2  ;  Heb.  xii.  14).  If  Christ 
returns  the  second  time  in  this  generation,  we  shall  find 
His  words  about  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot  fully  verified. 
Those  days  are  upon  us. 

(/)  We  want  a  more  certain  sound  about  the  sacra- 
ments  of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  Thousands  of 
people  seem  to  live  and  die  in  the  secret  belief  that  they 
were  "  born  again,"  and  received  the  grace  of  the  Spirit, 


170  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

in  baptism,  though  from  their  infancy  they  have  known 
nothing  of  what  the  Church  Catechism  calls  "  a  death 
unto  sin  and  a  new  birth  unto  righteousness."  They  are 
not  "  dead  to  sin,"  but  actually  live  in  it ;  and  yet,  for 
sooth,  they  think  they  are  born  again ! — Multitudes  more 
are  continually  receiving  the  Lord's  Supper  under  the 
belief  that  somehow  or  other  it  must  do  them  good,  though 
they  are  utterly  destitute  of  the  Catechism  standard,  and 
neither  "  repent  of  sin,  nor  purpose  to  lead  a  new  life,  nor 
have  a  lively  faith  in  God's  mercy  in  Christ,  nor  a  thank 
ful  remembrance  of  His  death,  nor  live  in  charity  with  all 
men."  They  seem,  in  short,  to  have  imbibed  the  idea 
that  the  Lord's  Supper  can  give  grace  to  the  graceless, 
and  is  a  means  of  conversion  and  justification  !  And  all 
this  time  the  Scripture  says  expressly,  "  He  is  not  a  Jew, 
which  is  one  outwardly ;  neither  is  that  circumcision 
which  is  outward  in  the  flesh ;  but  he  is  a  Jew,  which 
is  one  inwardly ;  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart, 
in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter;  whose  praise  is 
not  of  men,  but  of  God"  (Rom.  ii.  29).  And  again: 
"  Baptism  doth  also  now  save  us  (not  the  putting  away 
of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  con 
science  toward  God)"  (1  Pet.  iii.  21).  And  again: 
"He  that  eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily,  eateth  and 
drinketh  damnation  to  himself,  not  discerning  the  Lord's 
body"(l  Cor.  xi.  29). 

Now  to  these  extravagant  views  of  the  effect  of  the 
sacraments  I  unhesitatingly  assert  that  the  Church  of 
England  gives  no  countenance  at  all,  and  her  clergy 
ought  to  give  a  "certain  sound"  about  them.  The 
Twenty-fifth  Article  declares  plainly  about  both  sacra 
ments,  that  "in  such  only  as  worthily  receive  the  same 
they  have  a  wholesome  effect  or  operation ;  but  they  that 
receive  them  unworthily  purchase  to  themselves  damna 
tion/'  The  Twenty-eighth  Article  says :  "  To  such  as 


THOUGHTS   ON    THE    MINISTRY.  171 

rightly,  worthily,  and  with  faith  receive  the  same,  the 
bread  which  we  break  is  a  partaking  of  the  body  of 
Christ,  and  likewise  the  cup  of  blessing  is  a  partaking 
of  the  blood  of  Christ."  The  Twenty-ninth  Article  says  : 
"  The  wicked,  and  such  as  be  void  of  a  lively  faith, 
although  they  do  carnally  and  visibly  press  with  their 
teeth  the  Sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  yet 
in  no  wise  are  they  partakers  of  Christ ;  but  rather,  to 
their  condemnation,  do  eat  and  drink  the  sign  or  Sacra 
ment  of  so  great  a  thing." 

(g)  Last,  but  not  least,  we  want  everywhere  a  more 
certain  sound  about  the  state  after  death.  There  is  a 
growing  disposition  in  this  day  to  give  up  the  old  doc 
trine  of  the  judgment  of  the  wicked,  and  the  eternal 
misery  of  all  who  die  impenitent  and  unbelieving.  Men 
are  gradually  being  indoctrinated  with  the  notion  that 
there  is  hope  for  all  beyond  the  grave,  and  that  at  any 
rate  there  is  nothing  to  fear,  and  no  punishment  after 
death,  no  matter  how  we  live  or  die.  I  regard  such 
teaching  as  most  mischievous  and  likely  to  promote 
carelessness  and  immorality.  Yet  in  hundreds  of  pulpits 
I  suspect  the  subject  is  either  carefully  avoided,  or  else 
handled  in  a  most  unsatisfactory  manner.  Let  us  be 
ware  of  being  wise  above  that  which  is  written,  and  of 
ignoring,  shirking,  or  strangling  plain  texts  of  Scripture. 
I  cannot  feel  surprised  when  I  am  told  that  abandoned 
women  in  the  streets  of  London  have  been  heard  to  say, 
"  Come  along :  who's  afraid  ?  Some  of  the  parsons  say 
there  is  no  hell." 

Such  are  the  seven  points  about  which  I  declare  my 
belief  that  a  "  certain  sound  "  is  greatly  wanted  among 
Christian  ministers  in  this  day.  I  commend  them  to  the 
thought,  and  reflection,  and  prayers  of  all  who  read  this 
paper.  I  lay  no  claim  to  infallibility.  I  may  be  greatly 
mistaken.  But  it  is  my  deliberate  conviction  that  the 


1*72  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

parishes  in  which  these  seven  points  are  most  distinctly 
preached  in  the  pulpit,  and  afterwards  boldly  and  lovingly 
taught  from  house  to  house,  are  precisely  those  parishes 
in  which  the  congregations  are  largest,  the  communicants 
most  numerous,  and  the  power  of  godliness  in  daily  life 
most  conspicuous  among  the  worshippers.  I  assert 
boldly,  that  if  there  was  more  "  certain  sound "  in  the 
pulpit  on  those  seven  points,  there  would  soon  be  far 
more  vital  religion  in  the  land,  and  a  very  different 
census  of  religious  worship.  Oh  that  we  could  pray 
more  constantly,  "  Lord,  send  forth  more  labourers  into 
Thy  harvest !  Eaise  up  many  more  faithful  ministers  in 
Thy  Church  !  Eevive  Thy  work  in  England  !  Give  us 
more  trumpeters  of  the  Gospel ! " 


VIII. 
THOUGHTS  ON  PUBLIC  WORSHIP. 

THE  title  of  this  paper  touches  a  subject  of  great  import 
ance  in  the  present  day.  We  live  in  times  when  there  is 
a  vast  quantity  of  public  worship.  Most  people  who 
have  any  respect  for  appearances  go  to  some  church  or 
chapel  on  Sundays.  But  we  all  know  that  quantity  is  of 
little  value  without  quality.  It  is  not  enough  that  men 
worship  sometimes.  There  remains  behind  a  mighty 
question  to  be  answered, — "  How  do  they  worship  ? " 

Not  all  religious  worship  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God. 
This  is  as  clear  as  the  sun  at  noon-day  to  any  honest 
reader  of  the  Bible.  The  Bible  speaks  of  worship  which 
is  "  in  vain,"  as  well  as  worship  which  is  true, — and  of 
"  will- worship,"  as  well  as  spiritual  worship  (Matt.  xv.  9  ; 
Col.  ii.  23).  To  suppose,  as  some  thoughtless  persons  do, 
that  it  signifies  nothing  where  we  go  on  Sundays,  and 
matters  nothing  how  the  thing  is  done,  provided  it  is 
done,  is  mere  childish  folly.  Merchants  and  tradesmen 
do  not  carry  on  their  business  in  this  fashion.  They  look 
at  the  way  their  work  is  done,  and  are  not  content  with 
work  done  anyhow.  Let  us  not  be  deceived.  God  is  not 
mocked.  The  question  before  our  eyes  is  a  very  serious 
one, — "  How  do  we  worship  ? " 

I  propose  to  lay  down  some  Scriptural  principles  about 


174  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

the  subject  of  worship.  In  a  day  of  profound  ignorance 
in  some  quarters,  and  of  systematic  false  teaching  in 
others,  I  hold  it  to  be  of  primary  importance  to  have  clear 
ideas  about  all  disputed  points  in  religion.  I  fear  that 
thousands  of  English  men  and  women  can  render  no 
reason  of  their  faith  and  practice.  They  do  not  know  why 
they  believe,  or  what  they  believe,  or  why  they  do  what 
they  do.  Like  children,  they  are  "  tossed  to  and  fro  and 
carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine,"  and  are  liable 
to  be  led  astray  by  the  first  clever  heretic  who  meets  them 
(Eph.  iv.  14).  In  a  day  like  this  let  me  try  to  set  before 
my  readers  some  distinct  notions  about  Christian  worship. 

I.  I   will   show    the   general    importance    of    public 
worship. 

II.  I    will    show    the    leading   principles    of    public 
worship. 

III.  I  will  show  the  essential  parts  of  complete  public 
worship. 

IV.  I  will  show  the  things  to  be  avoided  in  public 
worship. 

V.  I  will  show  the  tests  by  which  our  public  worship 
should  be  tried. 

Let  it  be  remembered  that  I  purposely  confine  my 
attention  to  public  worship.  I  purposely  pass  over  all 
private  religious  habits,  such  as  praying,  Bible-reading, 
self-examination,  and  meditation.  No  doubt  they  lie  at 
the  very  root  of  personal  Christianity,  and  without  them 
all  public  religion  is  utterly  in  vain.  But  they  are  not 
the  subject  I  want  to  handle  in  this  paper.  It  is  a  good 
rule  to  mind  one  thing  at  a  time.  If  I  can  make  any  one 
see  the  five  points  about  public  worship,  which  I  have  laid 
down,  clearly  and  distinctly,  I  venture  to  think  I  shall 
have  done  his  soul  an  immense  service. 


THOUGHTS    ON    PUBLIC    WOESHIP.  175 

I.  I  have  first  to  show  the  general  importance  of  public 
worship. 

I  need  not  dwell  long  on  this  part  of  my  subject.  This 
paper  is  not  likely  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  any  who  do 
not  at  least  call  themselves  Christians.  There  are  few, 
except  downright  infidels,  who  will  dare  to  say  that  we 
ought  not  to  make  some  public  profession  of  religion. 
Most  people,  whatever  their  own  practice  may  be,  will 
admit  that  we  ought  to  meet  other  Christians  at  stated 
times  and  in  stated  places,  and  unitedly  and  together  to 
worship  God.1 

Public  worship,  I  am  bold  to  say,  has  always  been  one 
mark  of  God's  servants.  Man,  as  a  general  rule,  is  a 
social  being,  and  does  not  like  to  live  separate  from  his 
fellows.  In  every  age  God  has  made  use  of  that  mighty 
principle,  and  has  taught  His  people  to  worship  Him 
publicly  as  well  as  privately,  together  as  well  as  alone. 
I  believe  the  last  day  will  show  that  wherever  God  has 
had  a  people  He  has  always  had  a  congregation.  His 
people,  however  few  in  number,  have  always  assembled 
themselves  together,  and  approached  their  heavenly  Father 

1  "  To  deny  God  a  worship  is  as  great  a  folly  as  to  deny  His  being.  He 
that  renounceth  all  homage  to  his  Creator,  envies  Him  the  being  of  which 
he  cannot  deprive  Him.  The  natural  inclination  to  worship  is  as  universal 
as  the  notion  of  a  God  ;  else  idolatry  had  never  gained  a  footing  in  the 
world.  The  existence  of  God  was  never  owned  in  any  nation  without  a 
worship  of  God  being  appointed  ;  and  many  people  who  have  turned  their 
backs  upon  some  other  parts  of  the  law  of  nature,  have  paid  a  continual 
homage  to  some  superior  and  invisible  Being.  The  Jews  gave  a  reason 
why  man  was  created  in  the  evening  of  the  Sabbath,  because  he  should 
begin  his  being  with  the  worship  of  his  Maker.  As  soon  as  ever  he  found 
himself  to  be  a  creature,  his  first  solemn  act  should  be  a  particular  respect 
to  his  Creator.  To  fear  God  and  keep  His  commandments  is  the  whole  of 
man  (Eccles.  xii.  13),  or  is  'whole  man  ;'  he  is  not  a  man,  but  a  beast, 
without  observance  of  God.  Religion  is  as  requisite  as  reason  to  complete 
a  man.  He  were  not  reasonable  if  he  were  not  religious,  because  by 
neglecting  religion  he  neglects  the  chief est  dictate  of  reason. " — Charnock's 
Works.  Nichol's  Edition,  vol.  i.  p.  182. 


176  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

in  company.  They  have  been  taught  to  do  it  for  many 
wise  reasons, — partly  to  bear  a  public  testimony  to  the 
world, — partly  to  strengthen,  cheer,  help,  encourage,  and 
comfort  one  another, — and,  above  all,  to  train  and  prepare 
them  for  the  general  assembly  in  heaven.  "  As  iron 
sharpeneth  iron,  so  doth  the  countenance  of  a  man  his 
friend"  (Prov.  xxvii.  17).  That  man  can  know  little  of 
human  nature  who  does  not  know,  that  to  see  others 
doing  and  professing  the  same  things  that  we  do  in  religion, 
is  an  immense  help  and  encouragement  to  our  souls. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  Bible  down  to  the  end,  you 
may  trace  out  a  line  of  public  worship  in  the  history  of 
all  God's  saints.  You  see  it  in  the  very  first  family  that 
lived  on  earth.  The  familiar  story  of  Cain  and  Abel 
hinges  entirely  on  acts  of  public  worship. — You  see  it  in 
the  history  of  Noah.  The  very  first  thing  recorded  about 
Noah  and  his  family,  when  they  came  forth  from  the  ark, 
was  a  solemn  act  of  public  worship. — You  see  it  in  the 
history  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  Wherever  the 
patriarchs  had  a  tent  they  always  had  an  altar  (Gen. 
xii.  7 ;  xiii.  4).  They  not  only  prayed  in  private,  but 
worshipped  in  public. — You  see  it  throughout  the  whole 
Mosaic  economy,  from  Sinai  downward,  till  our  Lord 
appeared.  The  Jew  who  was  not  a  public  worshipper  in 
the  tabernacle  or  the  temple,  would  have  been  cut  off 
from  the  congregation  of  Israel. — You  see  it  throughout 
the  whole  New  Testament.  The  Lord  Jesus  Himself  gives 
a  special  promise  of  His  presence  wherever  two  or  three 
are  assembled  in  His  name.  The  Apostles,  in  every 
Church  they  founded,  made  the  duty  of  assembling 
together  a  first  principle  in  their  list  of  duties.  Their 
universal  rule  was,  "  Forsake  not  the  assembling  of  your 
selves  together  "  (Heb.  x.  25).  These  things  are  ancient 
things,  I  know  ;  but  it  is  well  to  be  reminded  of  them. 
Just  as  you  may  lay  it,  down,  as  a  certainty,  that  where 


THOUGHTS    ON   PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  177 

there  is  no  private  prayer  there  is  no  grace  in  a  man's 
heart,  so  you  may  lay  it  down,  as  the  highest  probability, 
that  where  there  is  no  public  worship  there  is  no  Church 
of  God,  and  no  profession  of  Christianity.1 

Turn  now  from  the  Word  of  God  to  the  pages  of  Church 
history,  and  what  will  you  find  ?  You  will  find  that  from 
the  days  of  the  Apostles  down  to  this  hour,  public  worship 
has  always  been  one  of  God's  great  instruments  in  doing 
good  to  souls.  Where  is  it  that  sleeping  souls  are  generally 
awakened,  dark  souls  enlightened,  dead  souls  quickened, 
doubting  souls  brought  to  decision,  mourning  souls  cheered, 
heavy-laden  souls  relieved  ?  Where,  as  a  general  rule, 
but  in  the  public  assembly  of  Christian  worshippers,  and 
during  the  preaching  of  God's  Word  ?  Take  away  public 
worship  from  a  land,  shut  up  the  churches  and  chapels, 
forbid  people  to  meet  together  for  religious  services,  pro 
hibit  any  kind  of  religion  except  that  which  is  private, — 
do  this,  and  see  what  the  result  would  be.  You  would 
inflict  the  greatest  spiritual  injury  on  the  country  which 
was  so  treated.  You  could  do  nothing  so  likely  to  help 
the  devil  and  stop  the  progress  of  Christ's  cause,  except 
the  taking  away  of  the  Bible.  Next  to  the  Word  of  God 
there  is  nothing  which  does  so  much  good  to  mankind  as 
public  worship.  "Faith  cometh  by  hearing"  (Kom.  x. 
17).  There  is  a  special  presence  of  Christ  in  religious 
assemblies  (Matt,  xviii.  20). 

I  grant  freely  that  public  worship  may  become  a  mere 
act  of  formality.  Thousands  of  so-called  Christians,  no 
doubt,  are  continually  going  to  churches  and  chapels,  and 
getting  no  benefit  from  their  attendance.  Like  Pharaoh's 

1  The  reader  will  of  course  understand  that  I  fully  admit -the  impos 
sibility  of  public  worship  being  kept  up  in  time  of  persecution.  When 
the  Roman  Emperors  persecuted  the  early  Church,  and  all  Christians  were 
proscribed,  there  could  of  necessity  have  been  no  public  worship.  But 
these  are  evidently  exceptional  cases. 

M 


178  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

lean  kine,  they  are  nothing  bettered,  but  rather  worse, 
more  impenitent  and  more  hardened.  No  wonder  that 
the  ignorant  Sabbath-breaker  defends  himself  by  saying, 
— "For  anything  I  can  see,  those  who  go  nowhere  on 
Sundays  are  just  as  good  people  as  church-goers  and 
chapel-goers."  But  we  must  never  forget  that  the  misuse 
of  a  good  thing  is  no  argument  against  the  use  of  it.  Once 
begin  to  refuse  everything  that  is  misused  in  this  sinful 
world,  and  there  is  hardly  anything  left  for  you  that  is 
good.  Take  a  broader  view  of  the  question  before  you. 
Look  at  any  district  you  like  in  England,  and  divide 
people  into  two  great  parties, — worshippers  and  non- 
worshippers.  I  will  engage  you  will  find  that  there  is  far 
more  good  among  those  that  worship  than  among  those 
that  do  not.  It  does  make  a  difference,  whatever  men 
may  say.  It  is  not  true  that  worshippers  and  non- 
worshippers  are  all  alike. 

Once  more  I  ask  every  reader  to  remember  the  solemn 
words  of  St.  Paul :  "  Forsake  not  the  assembling  of  your 
selves  together,  as  the  manner  of  some  is ;  but  exhort  one 
another"  (Heb.  x.  25).  Act  upon  that  exhortation,  as 
long  as  you  live,  and  through  evil  report  and  good  report 
continue  a  regular  attendant  at  public  worship.  Care  not 
for  the  bad  example  of  many  around  you  who  rob  God  of 
His  day,  and  never  go  up  to  His  house  from  one  end  of 
the  year  to  the  other.  Go  on,  go  on  worshipping  in  spite 
of  every  discouragement,  and  doubt  not  that  in  the  long 
run  of  life  it  does  you  good.  Prove  your  own  meet- 
ness  for  heaven  by  your  feelings  toward  the  earthly 
assemblies  of  God's  people.  Happy  is  that  man  who 
can  say  with  David,  "I  was  glad  when  they  said 
unto  me,  Let  us  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord."  "I 
had  rather  be  a  doorkeeper  in  the  house  of  my  God, 
than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  wickedness  "  (Ps.  cxxii.  1 ; 
Ixxxiv.  10). 


THOUGHTS    ON   PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  179 

II.  I  proceed,  in  the  second  place,  to  show  the  leading 
principles  of  public  worship. 

These  leading  principles  are  so  plain  and  obvious  to  any 
thoughtful  reader  of  the  Bible,  that  I  need  not  dwell  on 
them  at  any  length.  But  for  the  sake  of  some  who  may 
not  hitherto  have  given  much  attention  to  the  subject,  I 
feel  it  best  to  state  them  in  order. 

(a)  For  one  thing,  true  public  worship  must  be  directed 
to  the  right  object.  It  is  written  plainly,  both  in  the  Old 
and  New  Testament :  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy 
God,  and  Him  only  shalt  thou  serve"  (Deut.  vi.  13  ;  Matt, 
iv.  10).  All  adoration  and  prayers  addressed  to  the  Virgin 
Mary,  the  saints  and  angels,  are  utterly  useless,  and 
unwarranted  by  Scripture.  It  is  worship  that  is  mere 
waste  of  time.  There  is  not  the  slightest  proof  that  the 
departed  saints  or  the  angels  can  hear  our  worship,  or  that, 
if  they  did  hear  it,  they  could  do  anything  for  us.  It  is 
worship  that  is  most  offensive  to  God.  He  is  a  jealous 
God,  and  has  declared  that  He  will  not  give  His  glory  to 
another.  Of  all  His  Ten  Commandments  there  is  none 
more  stringent  and  sweeping  than  the  second.  It  forbids 
us  not  only  to  worship,  but  even  to  "bow  down"  to 
anything  beside  God. 

(J)  For  another  thing,  true  public  worship  must  be 
directed  to  God  through  the  'mediation  of  Christ.  It  is 
written  plainly :  "  I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life : 
no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  me"  (John  xiv.  6). 
It  is  written  of  Christians,  that  they  are  a  people  who 
" come  unto  God  by  Christ"  (Heb.  vii.  25).  The  mighty 
Being  with  whom  we  have  to  do,  without  controversy,  is 
a  God  of  infinite  love,  kindness,  mercy,  and  compassion. 
"  God  is  love."  But  it  is  no  less  true  that  He  is  a  Being 
of  infinite  justice,  purity,  and  holiness,  that  He  has  an 
infinite  hatred  of  sin,  and  cannot  bear  that  which  is  evil. 
He  is  the  same  God  that  cast  down  the  angels  from 


180  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

heaven,  drowned  the  world  with  a  flood,  and  burned  up 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  He  who  carelessly  presumes  to 
draw  near  to  Him  without  an  atonement  and  a  mediator, 
or  by  any  other  mediator  than  the  one  Mediator  whom  He 
has  appointed,  will  find  that  He  worships  in  vain.  "  Our 
God  is  a  consuming  fire"  (Heb.  xii.  29). 

(c)  For  another  thing,  true  public  worship  must  be 
either  directly  Scriptural,  or  deducible  from  Scripture, 
or  in  harmony  with  Scripture.  It  is  written  plainly  con 
cerning  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  time :  "  In  vain  do  they 
worship  me,  teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments 
of  men  "  (Matt.  xv.  9).  No  doubt  there  is  a  conspicuous 
absence  of  particular  injunctions  about  New  Testament 
worship.  No  doubt  there  is  a  reasonable  liberty  allowed 
to  Churches  and  congregations  in  their  arrangements  about 
worship.  But  still  the  rule  must  never  be  forgotten  : 
"  Nothing  must  be  required  of  men  contrary  to  God's 
Word."  Well  says  the  twentieth  Article  of  the  Church 
of  England :  "  The  Church  hath  power  to  decree  rites  and 
ceremonies,  and  authority  in  controversies  of  faith.  And 
yet  it  is  not  lawful  for  the  Church  to  ordain  anything 
that  is  contrary  to  God's  Word  written."  Well  says  the 
thirty-fourth  Article  :  "  Ceremonies  at  all  times  have  been 
divers,  and  may  be  changed  according  to  the  diversities  of 
countries,  times,  and  men's  manners,  so  that  nothing  be 
ordained  against  God's  Word."  I  say  therefore  that  any 
man  who  tells  me  that  there  are  seven  sacraments,  when 
the  Bible  only  mentions  two,  —  or  that  any  man- 
made  ordinance  is  as  binding  on  our  consciences 
and  as  needful  to  salvation  as  an  ordinance  appointed 
by  Christ,  is  telling  me  what  he  has  no  right  to  tell. 
We  must  not  listen  to  him.  He  is  committing  not 
only  a  mistake,  but  a  sin.  All  such  worship  St.  Paul 
calls  "  will-worship,"  and  declares  to  be  of  no  value  (Col. 
ii.  23). 


THOUGHTS    ON    PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  181 

(d)  For  another  thing,  true  public  worship  must  be 
an  intelligent  worship.     I  mean  by  that  expression  that 
worshippers  must  know  what  they  are  doing.      It   is 
written  plainly  as  a  charge  against  the  Samaritans  :  "  Ye 
worship  ye  know  not  what :  we  know  what  we  worship  " 
(John  iv.  22).     It  is  written  of  the  heathen  Athenians, 
that  they  ignorantly  worshipped  an  "  unknown  god."     It 
is  utterly  false  that  ignorance  is  the  mother  of  devotion. 
The  poor  Italian  Papists,  unable  to  read,  and  not  knowing 
a  chapter  in  the  Bible,  may  appear  extremely  devout  and 
sincere,  as  they  kneel  in  crowds  before  the  image  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  or  hear  Latin  prayers  which  they  do  not 
understand.     But  it  is  utterly  preposterous  to  suppose 
that  their  worship  is  acceptable.      He  who  made  man  at 
the  beginning  made  him  an  intelligent  being,  with  mind  as 
well  as  body.     A  worship  in  which  the  mind  takes  no 
part  is  useless  and  unprofitable.     It  might  suit  a  beast 
as  well  as  a  man. 

(e)  For  another  thing,  true  public  worship  must  be  the 
worship  of  the  heart.     I  mean  by  this,  that  the  affections 
must  be  employed  as  well  as  our  intellect,  and  our  inward 
man  must  serve  God  as  well  as  our  body.     It  is  written 
plainly  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  the  saying  is  quoted  by 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  :  "  This  people  draweth  nigh  to  Me 
with  their  mouth,  and  honoureth  Me  with  their  lips ;  but 
their  heart  is  far  from  Me.     But  in  vain  do  they  worship 
Me"  (Isa.  xxix.  13  ;  Matt.  xv.  8).     It  is  written  of  the 
Jews  in  Ezekiel's  time :  "  They  come  unto  thee  as  the 
people  cometh,  and  they  sit  before  thee  as  My  people,  and 
they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  will  not  do  them  :  for  with 
their  mouth  they  show  much  love,  but  their  heart  goeth 
after  their  covetousness  "  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31).     The  heart 
is  the  principal  thing  that  God  asks  man  to  bring  in  all 
his  approaches  to  Him,  whether  public  or  private.     A 
church  may  be  full  of  worshippers  who  may  give  God  an 


182  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

immense  amount  of  bodily  service.  There  may  be 
abundance  of  gestures,  and  postures,  and  turnings  to  the 
East,  and  bowings,  and  crossings,  and  prostrations,  and 
grave  countenances,  and  upturned  eyes,  and  yet  the  hearts 
of  the  worshippers  may  be  at  the  end  of  the  earth, — one 
thinking  only  of  coming  or  past  pleasures,  another  of 
coming  or  past  business,  and  another  of  coming  or  past 
sins.  Such  worship,  we  may  be  very  sure,  is  utterly 
worthless  in  God's  sight.  It  is  even  worse  than  worthless  : 
it  is  abominable  hypocrisy.  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  He  cares 
nothing  for  man's  bodily  service  without  man's  heart. 
Bodily  service  profiteth  little.  "Man  looketh  on  the 
outward  appearance ;  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart." 
The  broken  and  contrite  heart  is  the  true  sacrifice,  the 
sacrifice  which  God  will  not  despise l  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7  ; 
Ps.  li.  7). 

(/)  In  the  last  place,  true  public  worship  must  be  a 
reverent  worship.     It  is  written :  "  Keep  thy  foot  when 

1  ' '  Men  may  attend  on  worship  all  their  days,  with  a  juiceless  heart  and 
unquickened  frame,  and  think  to  compensate  the  neglect  of  the  manner, 
with  the  abundance  of  the  matter  of  the  service.  Outward  expressions  are 
only  the  badges  and  liveries  of  services,  not  the  service  itself.  As  the 
strength  of  sin  lies  in  the  inward  frame  of  the  heart,  so  the  strength  of 
worship  lies  in  the  inward  complexion  and  temper  of  the  soul.  "What  do 
a  thousand  services  avail,  without  cutting  the  throat  of  carnal  affections  ? 
What  are  loud  prayers,  but  as  sounding  brass  and  tinkling  cymbals,  with 
out  divine  charity?  A  pharisaical  diligence  in  outward  forms  had  no 
better  title  vouchsafed  by  our  Saviour  than  that  of  hypocrisy.  God  desires 
not  sacrifices,  nor  delights  in  burnt-offerings.  Shadows  are  not  to  be 
offered  instead  of  substance.  God  required  the  heart  of  man  for  itself,  but 
commanded  outward  ceremonies,  as  subservient  to  inward  worship,  and 
goads  and  spurs  unto  it.  They  were  never  appointed  as  the  substance  of 
religion,  but  as  auxiliaries  to  it. 

"  Could  the  Israelites  have  been  called  worshippers  of  God  according  to 
His  order,  if  they  had  brought  Him  a  thousand  lambs  that  had  died  in  a 
ditch  or  been  killed  at  home  ?  They  were  to  be  brought  to  the  altar  living, 
and  the  blood  shed  at  the  foot  of  it.  A  thousand  sacrifices  killed  without, 
had  not  been  so  valuable  as  one  brought  alive  to  the  place  of  offering. " — 
Charnock,  vol.  i.  323. 


THOUGHTS    ON    PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  183 

thou  goest  to  the  house  of  God,  and  be  more  ready  to  hear 
than  to  give  the  sacrifice  of  fools :  for  they  consider  not 
that  they  do  evil "  (Eccles.  v.  1).  It  is  recorded  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  began  and  ended  His  ministry  with  two 
practical  protests  against  irreverent  worship.  On  two 
distinct  occasions  He  cast  out  of  the  temple  the  buyers 
and  sellers  who  were  profaning  its  courts  by  their  traffic, 
and  justified  His  act  by  the  weighty  words  :  "  It  is  written, 
My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  prayer,  but  ye  have 
made  it  a  den  of  thieves  "  (Matt.  xxi.  13).  People  who 
call  themselves  Christians  and  go  to  churches  and  chapels 
to  stare  about,  whisper,  fidget,  yawn,  or  sleep,  but  not  to 
pray,  or  praise,  or  listen,  are  not  a  whit  better  than  the 
wicked  Jews.  They  do  not  consider  that  God  detests 
profaneness  and  carelessness  in  His  presence,  and  that  to 
behave  before  God  as  they  would  not  dare  to  behave 
before  a  king,  is  a  very  grave  offence  indeed.  We  must 
beware  that  we  do  not  rush  from  one  extreme  into  another. 
It  does  not  follow,  because  bodily  service  alone  is  useless, 
that  it  does  not  matter  how  we  behave  ourselves  in  the 
congregation.  Surely  even  nature,  reason,  and  common 
sense  should  teach  men  that  there  is  a  manner  and 
demeanour  suitable  to  mortal  man,  when  he  draws  nigh  to 
his  Almighty  Maker.  It  is  not  for  nothing  that  it  is 
written :  "  God  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly 
of  the  saints,  and  to  be  had  in  reverence  of  all  them  that 
are  about  Him  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  7).  If  it  is  worth  while  to 
attend  public  worship  at  all,  it  is  worth  while  to  do  it 
carefully  and  well.  God  is  in  heaven,  and  we  are  on 
earth.  Let  us  not  be  rash  and  hasty.  Let  us  mind  what 
we  are  about.  "  Let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  serve 
God  acceptably  with  reverence  and  godly  fear  "  (Heb.  xii. 
28,  29). 

I  ask  the  special  attention  of  my  readers  to  the  six 
leading  principles  which  I  have  just  laid  down.     I  fear 


184  PRINCIPLES   FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

they  strike  at  the  root  of  the  worship  of  myriads  in  our 
own  land,  to  say  nothing  of  Papists,  Mahometans,  and 
heathens  abroad.  Myriads  of  English  people,  I  fear,  are 
regularly  spending  their  Sundays  in  a  worship  which  is 
utterly  useless.  It  is  a  worship  without  Scripture,  with 
out  Christ,  without  the  Holy  Spirit,  without  knowledge, 
without  heart,  and  without  the  slightest  benefit  to  the 
worshippers.  For  any  good  they  get  from  it,  they  might 
just  as  well  be  sitting  at  home,  and  not  worship  at  all. 
Take  heed  that  this  is  not  your  condition.  Eemember,  as 
long  as  you  live,  that  it  is  not  quantity  of  worship,  but 
quality  that  God  regards.  The  inward  and  spiritual 
character  of  the  congregation  is  of  far  more  importance 
in  His  sight,  than  the  number  of  the  worshippers,  or  the 
outward  and  visible  signs  of  devotion  which  they  exhibit. 
Children  and  fools,  who  admire  poppies  more  than  corn, 
may  think  all  is  right  when  there  is  a  great  external  show 
of  religion.  But  it  is  not  so  with  God.  His  all-seeing 
eye  looks  at  the  inner  man. 

III.  I  proceed,  in  the  third  place,  to  show  the  essential 
parts  of  Christian  public  worship. 

I  will  suppose  the  case  of  a  man  who  has  never  given 
the  subject  of  religion  any  sincere  attention,  and  has  never 
gone  regularly  to  any  place  of  worship  at  all.  I  will 
suppose  such  a  man  to  be  awakened  to  a  sense  of  the 
value  of  his  soul,  and  to  be  desirous  of  information  about 
things  in  religion.  He  is  puzzled  by  finding  that  all 
Christians  do  not  worship  God  in  the  same  way,  and  that 
one  neighbour  worships  God  in  one  fashion,  and  another 
in  another.  He  hears  one  man  saying  that  there  is  no 
road  to  heaven  excepting  through  his  church,  and  another 
replying  that  all  will  be  lost  who  do  not  join  his  chapel. 
Now  what  is  he  to  think  ?  Are  there  not  certain  things 
which  are  essential  parts  of  Christian  worship  ?  I  answer 


THOUGHTS    ON    PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  185 

without  hesitation  that  there  are.  It  shall  be  my  next 
business  to  exhibit  them  in  order. 

I  freely  grant  that  there  is  little  said  on  the  nature  of 
public  worship  in  the  New  Testament.  There  is  a  wide 
difference  in  this  respect  between  the  law  of  Moses  and 
the  law  of  Christ.  The  Jew's  religion  was  full  of  strict 
and  minute  directions  about  worship :  the  Christian's  con 
tains  very  few  directions,  and  those  of  the  simplest  and 
most  general  description. — The  Jew's  religion  was  full  of 
types,  emblems,  and  figures :  the  Christian's  only  contains 
two,  viz. :  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper. — The  Jew's 
religion  approached  the  worshipper  chiefly  through  the 
eye :  the  New  Testament  religion  appeals  directly  to  the 
heart  and  conscience. — The  Jew's  religion  was  confined  to 
one  particular  nation :  the  Christian's  was  meant  for  the 
whole  world. — The  Jew  could  turn  to  the  writings  of 
Moses  and  see  at  a  glance  every  ceremonial  item  of  his 
worship :  the  Christian  can  only  point  to  a  few  isolated 
texts  and  passages,  which  are  to  be  applied  by  every 
Church  according  to  circumstances. — In  a  word,  there  is 
nothing  answering  to  Exodus  or  Leviticus  in  the  New  Testa 
ment  Scriptures.  Yet  a  careful  reader  can  hardly  fail  to 
pick  out  of  them  the  essential  parts  of  Christian  worship. 
Where  these  essential  parts  are  present,  there  is  Christian 
worship.  Where  they  are  absent,  the  worship  is,  to  say 
the  least,  defective,  imperfect,  and  incomplete. 

(a)  In  complete  public  worship  the  Sabbath  should 
always  be  honoured.  That  blessed  day  was  appointed  for 
this  very  purpose,  among  others,  to  give  men  an  oppor 
tunity  of  meeting  together  in  God's  service.  A  Sabbath 
was  given  to  man  even  in  Paradise.  The  observance  of  a 
Sabbath  was  made  part  of  the  Ten  Commandments.  The 
worship  of  God  on  the  Sabbath  was  observed  by  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  Himself.  To  meet  together  on  one  day  in 
the  week  at  least,  was  a  practice  of  the  early  Christians, 


186  PEINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

though  they  met  on  the  first  day  instead  of  the  seventh 
(Acts  xx.  7  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  2).  To  assemble  in  God's  house 
on  the  Christian  Sabbath  has  been  the  custom  of  all  pro 
fessing  Christians  for  eighteen  hundred  years.  The  best 
and  holiest  of  God's  saints  have  always  pressed  on  others 
most  strongly  the  value  of  Sabbath  worship,  and  borne 
witness  to  its  usefulness.  It  sounds  very  fine  and  spiritual, 
no  doubt,  to  say  that  every  day  should  be  a  Sabbath  to  a 
Christian,  and  that  one  day  should  not  be  kept  more  holy 
than  another.  But  facts  are  stronger  than  theories. 
Experience  proves  that  human  nature  requires  such  helps 
as  fixed  days  and  hours  and  seasons,  for  carrying  on 
spiritual  business,  and  that  public  worship  never  prospers 
unless  we  observe  God's  order.  "The  Sabbath  was  made 
for  man "  by  Him  who  made  man  at  the  beginning,  and 
knew  what  flesh  and  blood  is.  As  a  general  rule,  it  will 
always  be  found  that  where  there  is  no  Sabbath  there  is 
no  public  worship. 

(b)  In  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  a 
ministry.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  say  that  it  must  be  an 
Episcopal  ministry.  I  am  not  so  narrow  and  uncharitable 
as  to  deny  the  validity  of  Presbyterian  orders.  I  only 
maintain  that  it  is  the  mind  of  God  that  ministers  of  some 
kind  should  conduct  the  worship  of  Christian  congrega 
tions,  and  be  responsible  for  its  decent  and  orderly  conduct 
in  approaching  God.  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand  how 
any  one  can  read  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the  Epistles 
to  the  Corinthians,  Ephesians,  Timothy  and  Titus,  and 
deny  that  the  ministry  is  an  appointment  of  God.  Eeason 
itself  might  tell  us  that  business  which  is  left  to  nobody 
in  particular  to  attend  to,  is  a  business  which  is  soon 
entirely  neglected.  Order  is  said  to  be  heaven's  first  law. 
Once  let  a  people  begin  with  no  Sabbath  and  no  ministry, 
and  they  must  never  be  surprised  if  they  end  with  no 
public  worship,  no  religion,  and  no  God. 


THOUGHTS    ON    PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  187 

(c)  In  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  the 
preaching  of  God's  Word.     I  can  find  no  record  of  Church 
assemblies  in  the  New  Testament,  in  which  preaching  and 
teaching  orally  does  not  occupy  a  most  prominent  position. 
It  appears  to  me  to  be  the  chief  instrument  by  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  not  only  awakens  sinners,  but  also  leads  on 
and  establishes  saints.     I  observe  that  in  the  very  last 
words  that  St.  Paul  wrote  to  Timothy,  as  a  young  minister, 
he  especially  enjoins  on  him  to  "  preach  the  Word  "  (2 
Tim.  iv.  2).     I  cannot  therefore  believe  that  any  system 
of  worship  in  which  the  sermon  is  made  little  of,  or  thrust 
into  a  corner,  can  be  a  Scriptural  system,  or  one  likely  to 
have  the  blessing  of  God.     I  have  no  faith  in  the  general 
utility  of  services  composed  entirely  of  prayer-reading, 
hymn-singing,  sacrament-receiving,  and  walking  in  proces 
sions,  without  any  sermon.     I   hold  firmly  with  Bishop 
Latimer,  that  it  is  one  of  Satan's  great  aims  to  exalt  cere 
monies  and  put  down  preaching.     There  is  a  deep  mean 
ing  in  the  words,  "  Despise  not  prophesyings  "  (1  Thess.  v. 
20).     A  contempt  for  sermons  is  a  pretty  sure  mark  of  a 
decline  in  spiritual  religion. 

(d)  In  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  united 
public  prayer.    I  can  find  no  account  of  religious  assemblies 
in  the  New  Testament  in  which  prayer  and  supplication 
do  not  form  a  principal  business.     I  find  St.  Paul  telling 
Timothy  :  "  I  exhort,  first  of  all,  that  supplications,  prayers, 
intercessions,  and  giving  of  thanks,  be  made  for  all  men  " 
(1  Tim.  ii.  1).     Such  prayers  should  be  plain  and  intel 
ligible,  that  all  the  worshippers  may  know  what  is  going 
on,  and  be  able  to  go  along  with  him  who  prays.     They 
should  as  far  as  possible  be  the  joint  act  of  all  the  assembly, 
and  not  the  act  of  one  man's  mind  alone.     A  congregation 
of  professing  Christians  which  only  meets  to  hear  a  grand 
sermon,  and  takes  no  part  or  interest  in  the  prayers,  seems 
to   me   to   fall  far  short   of  the   standard   of  the  New 


188  PRINCIPLES   FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Testament.      Public  worship   does  not   consist    only  of 
hearing.1 

(e)  In  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  the 
public  reading  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  This  was  evidently 
a  part  of  the  service  of  the  Jewish  synagogue,  as  we  may 
learn  from  what  happened  at  Nazareth,  and  at  Antioch  in 
Pisidia  (Luke  iv.  16  ;  Acts  xiii.  15).  We  cannot  doubt 
that  the  Christian  Church  was  intended  to  honour  the 
Bible  as  much  as  the  Jewish.  To  my  eye,  St.  Paul 
points  to  this  when  he  says  to  Timothy,  "  Till  I  come  give 
attention  to  reading"  (1  Tim.  iv.  13).  Keason  and  com 
mon  sense  alike  teach  the  usefulness  of  the  practice.  A 
visible  Church  will  always  contain  many  professing  mem 
bers  who  either  cannot  read,  or  have  no  will  or  tune  to 
read  at  home.  What  safer  plan  can  be  devised  for  the 
instruction  of  such  people  than  the  regular  reading  of  God's 
Word  ?  A  congregation  which  hears  but  little  of  the 
Bible  is  always  in  danger  of  becoming  entirely  dependent 

1  The  reader  is  requested  to  observe  that  I  purposely  abstain  from  saying 
anything  about  the  vexed  question  whether  public  prayers  in  the  congre 
gation  should  be  liturgical  and  pre- composed,  or  extemporaneous.  I  say 
nothing,  because  nothing  is  said  about  it  in  Scripture.  Neither  liturgies 
nor  extemporaneous  prayer  are  expressly  sanctioned,  or  expressly  prohibited, 
in  God's  "Word.  A  large  liberty  is  mercifully  given  to  the  Churches.  I 
think  the  Christian  (so  called)  who  anathematises  and  abuses  his  brother 
because  he  uses  a  liturgy,  is  an  ignorant,  narrow-minded  bigot  on  one  side. 
I  think  the  Christian  (so  called)  who  anathematises  and  excommunicates 
his  brother  because  he  does  not  use  a  liturgy,  is  a  narrow-minded,  ignorant 
bigot  on  the  other  side.  Both  are  wrong. 

My  own  mind  has  been  long  made  up.  If  all  ministers  prayed  extem 
pore  always  as  some  ministers  pray  sometimes,  I  should  be  against  a 
liturgy.  But  considering  what  human  nature  is,  I  decidedly  think  it 
better  both  for  minister  and  people,  in  the  regular,  habitual,  and  stated 
assemblies  of  the  Church,  to  have  a  liturgy.  With  all  its  imperfections,  I 
am  very  thankful  for  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.  It  may  have  defects, 
because  it  was  not  compiled  by  inspiration.  But  for  all  that,  it  is  an 
admirable  and  matchless  manual  of  public  devotion.  I  would  not  impose 
the  use  of  it  on  a  brother's  conscience  for  a  thousand  worlds.  But  I  claim 
the  right  to  use  it  myself  undisturbed. 


THOUGHTS    ON    PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  189 

on  its  minister.  God  should  always  speak  in  the  assembly 
of  His  people  as  well  as  man. 

(/)  In  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  united 
public  praise.  That  this  was  the  custom  among  the  first 
Christians,  is  evident  from  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  Ephesians 
and  Colossians  in  which  he  commended  the  use  of  "  psalms 
and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs."  That  it  was  a  custom 
so  widely  prevalent  as  to  be  a  mark  of  the  earliest 
Christians,  is  simple  matter  of  history.  No  one  indeed 
can  read  the  Old  Testament  and  not  discover  the  extremely 
prominent  place  which  praise  occupied  in  the  temple 
service.  What  man  in  his  senses  can  doubt  that  the 
service  of  song  was  meant  to  be  highly  esteemed  under 
the  New  Testament  ?  Praise  has  been  truly  called  the 
flower  of  all  devotion.  It  is  the  only  part  of  our  worship 
which  will  never  die.  Preaching  and  praying  and  reading 
shall  one  day  be  no  longer  needed.  But  praise  shall  go 
on  for  ever.  A  congregation  which  takes  no  part  in 
praise,  or  leaves  it  all  to  be  done  by  deputy  through  a 
choir,  can  be  hardly  thought  in  a  satisfactory  state. 

(g)  Finally,  in  complete  public  worship  there  should 
be  the  regular  use  of  the  two  sacraments  which  Christ 
appointed  in  His  Church.  By  baptism  new  members 
should  be  continually  added  to  the  congregation,  and 
publicly  enrolled  in  the  list  of  professing  Christians.  By 
the  Lord's  Supper  believers  should  be  continually  offered 
an  opportunity  of  confessing  their  Master,  and  continually 
strengthened  and  refreshed,  and  put  in  remembrance  of  His 
sacrifice  on  the  cross.  I  believe  that  no  one  who  neglected 
these  two  sacraments  would  have  been  regarded  as  a 
Christian  by  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter,  St.  James  and  St. 
John.  No  doubt,  like  every  other  good  thing,  they  may 
be  painfully  misused  and  profaned  by  some,  and  supersti- 
tiously  idolized  by  others.  But  after  all  there  is  no 
getting  over  the  fact  that  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper 


190  PRINCIPLES  FOE  OHUKCHMEN. 

were  ordained  by  Christ  Himself  as  means  of  grace,  and 
we  cannot  doubt  He  meant  them  to  be  reverently  and 
duly  used.  A  man  who  preferred  to  worship  God  for 
many  years  without  ever  receiving  the  sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  is  a  man,  I  am  firmly  persuaded,  who  would 
not  have  been  thought  in  a  right  state  in  the  days  of  the 
Apostles. 

I  commend  these  seven  points  to  the  serious  attention 
of  all  who  read  this  paper,  and  invite  them  to  consider  them 
well.  I  can  easily  believe  that  I  may  have  said  things 
about  them  with  which  some  Christians  may  not  agree. 
I  am  not  their  judge.  To  their  own  Master  they  must 
stand  or  fall.  I  can  only  tell  them,  as  an  honest  man, 
what  appears  to  me  the  teaching  of  Holy  Scripture.  I  do 
not  for  a  moment  say  that  no  man  will  be  saved  who  does 
not  see  public  worship  precisely  with  my  eyes.  I  say 
nothing  of  the  kind.  But  I  do  say  that  any  regular 
system  of  public  worship  which  does  not  give  a  place  to 
the  Sabbath,  the  ministry,  preaching,  prayer,  Scripture- 
reading,  praise,  and  the  two  sacraments,  appears  to  me 
deficient  and  incomplete.  If  you  attend  a  place  of  worship 
where  any  of  these  seven  points  is  neglected,  I  think  you 
suffer  loss  and  damage.  You  may  be  doing  well ;  but  I 
think  you  might  be  doing  better.  To  my  mind,  these 
seven  parts  of  public  worship  appear  to  stand  out  plainly 
on  the  face  of  the  New  Testament ;  and  I  plainly  say  so. 

IV.  I  proceed,  in  the  fourth  place,  to  show  some  things 
which  ought  to  be  avoided  in  public  worship. 

I  am  well  aware  that  there  is  no  perfection  in  this 
world.  There  is  no  visible  Church,  I  am  sure,  in  whose 
public  worship  it  would  not  be  easy  to  show  faults,  defects, 
and  shortcomings.  The  best  service  in  the  best  visible 
Church  on  earth  will  always  be  infinitely  below  the 
standard  of  the  glorified  Church  in  heaven.  I  admit  with 


THOUGHTS    ON    PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  191 

sorrow  and  humiliation,  that  the  faith,  and  hope,  and  life, 
and  worship  of  God's  people,  are  all  alike  full  of  imper 
fections.  To  be  continually  separating  and  seceding  from 
Churches,  because  we  detect  blemishes  in  their  adminis 
tration,  is  not  the  act  of  a  wise  man.  It  is  to  forget  the 
parable  of  the  wheat  and  tares. 

But  I  cannot  forget,  for  all  this,  that  we  have  fallen  on 
dangerous  times  in  the  matter  of  worship.  There  are 
things  going  on  in  many  English  churches  and  chapels  in 
the  present  day  so  highly  objectionable,  that  I  feel  it  a 
plain  duty  to  offer  some  cautions  about  them.  Plain 
speaking  about  them  is  imperatively  demanded  at  a 
minister's  hands.  If  watchmen  hold  their  peace,  how 
shall  the  city  take  alarm  ?  "  If  the  trumpet  give  an 
uncertain  sound,  who  shall  prepare  himself  for  the  battle?" 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  8). 

There  are  three  great  and  growing  evils  in  public 
worship,  which  require  special  watching  in  the  present 
day.  I  feel  it  a  positive  duty  to  direct  men's  attention 
to  them.  I  know  not  into  whose  hands  this  paper  may 
have  fallen,  or  where  you  worship ;  but  I  warn  you 
plainly  to  stand  on  your  guard  about  these  evils,  and 
to  take  heed  that  they  do  not  infect  and  damage  your 
soul. 

(a)  Beware,  for  one  thing,  of  any  worship  in  which  a 
disproportionate  honour  is  given  to  any  one  ordinance  of 
Christ,  to  the  neglect  of  another.  There  are  Churches  at 
this  moment,  in  which  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper, 
like  Aaron's  rod,  swallow  up  everything  else  in  religion. 
Nothing  besides  receives  much  attention.  The  honour 
done  to  the  font  and  the  Lord's  table  meets  you  at  every 
turn.  All  else,  in  comparison,  is  jostled  out  of  its  place, 
overshadowed,  dwarfed,  and  driven  into  a  corner.  Wor 
ship  of  this  sort,  I  hesitate  not  to  say,  is  useless  to  man's 
soul.  Once  alter  the  proportions  of  a  doctor's  prescrip- 


192  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

tion,  and  you  may  turn  his  medicine  into  a  poison.  Once 
bury  the  whole  of  Christianity  under  Baptism  and  the 
Lord's  Supper,  and  the  real  idea  of  Christian  worship  is 
completely  destroyed. 

(b)  Beware,  for  another  thing,  of  any  worship  in  which 
an  excessive  quantity  of  decoration  and  ornament  is  used. 
There  are  many  Churches  at  this  moment,  in  which 
Divine  service  is  carried  on  with  such  an  amount  of 
gaudy  dressing,  candle-lighting,  and  theatrical  ceremonial, 
that  it  defeats  the  very  purpose  of  worship.  Simplicity 
should  be  the  grand  characteristic  of  New  Testament 
worship.  Ornament  at  any  time  should  be  employed 
with  a  very  sparing  hand.  Neither  in  the  Gospels  nor 
in  the  Epistles  shall  we  find  the  slightest  warrant  for  a 
gorgeous  and  decorated  ceremonial,  or  for  any  symbols 
except  water,  bread,  and  wine.  Above  all,  the  inherent 
wickedness  of  human  nature  is  such  that  our  minds  are 
only  too  ready  to  turn  away  from  spiritual  things  to 
visible  things.  Whether  men  like  it  or  not,  what  the 
heart  of  man  needs  teaching,  is  the  uselessness  of  outward 
ornaments  without  inward  grace.1 

I  "  Pompous  rites  have  been  the  great  engine  whereby  the  devil  hath 
deceived  the  souls  of  men,  and  wrought  them  to  a  nauseating  simplicity 
of  divine  worship,  as  if  unworthy  the  majesty  and  excellency  of  God  (2 
Cor.  xi.  3).     But  the  Jews  would  not  understand  the  glory  of  the  second 
temple  in  the  presence  of  the  Messiah,  because  it  had  not  the  pompous 
grandeur  of  the  temple  erected  by  Solomon. 

"  Hence  in  all  ages  men  have  been  forward  to  disfigure  God's  models 
and  to  dress  up  a  brat  of  their  own  ;  as  though  God  had  been  defective  in 
providing  for  His  own  honour  in  His  institutions  without  the  assistance  of 
His  creature.  This  hath  always  been  in  the  world ;  the  old  world  had 
their  imaginations,  and  the  new  world  hath  continued  them.  The 
Israelites  in  the  midst  of  miracles  and  under  the  memory  of  a  famous 
deliverance,  would  erect  a  calf.  The  Pharisees  who  sat  in  Moses'  chair, 
would  coin  new  traditions  and  enjoin  them  to  be  as  current  as  the  law  of 
God.  Papists  will  be  blending  Christian  appointments  with  Pagan 
ceremonies  to  please  the  carnal  fancies  of  the  common  people. 

II  How  often  hath  the  practice  of  the  Primitive  Church,  the  custom 


THOUGHTS    ON    PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  193 

(c)  Beware,  above  all  things,  of  any  worship  in  which 
ministers  wear  the  dress,  or  act  in  the  manner,  of  sacri 
ficing  priests.  There  are  hundreds  of  Churches  at  this 
moment,  in  which  the  Lord's  Supper  is  administered  as  a 
sacrifice  and  not  as  a  Sacrament,  and  the  clergy  are 
practically  acting  as  mediators  between  God  and  man. 
The  real  corporal  presence  of  our  Lord's  body  and  blood 
under  the  form  of  bread  and  wine,  is  openly  taught.  The 
Lord's  table  is  called  an  altar.  The  consecrated  elements 
are  treated  with  an  idolatrous  reverence,  as  if  God  Himself 
was  in  them.  The  habit  of  private  confession  to  clergy 
men  is  encouraged  and  urged  on  the  people.  I  find  it 
impossible  to  believe  that  such  worship  as  this  can  be 
anything  but  offensive  to  God.  He  is  a  jealous  God,  and 
will  not  give  His  honour  to  another.  The  sacrifice  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross  once  offered,  can  in  no 
sense  or  way  ever  be  repeated.  His  mediatorial  and 
priestly  office  He  has  never  deputed  to  any  man,  or  any 
order  of  men.  There  is  not  a  word  in  the  Acts  or 
Epistles  to  show  that  the  Apostles  ever  pretended  to  be 
sacrificing  priests,  or  to  make  any  oblation  in  the  Lord's 
Supper,  or  to  hear  private  confessions,  and  confer  judicial 
absolutions.  Surely  that  simple  fact  ought  to  make  men 
think.  Beware  of  sacrificialism !  Beware  of  the  Mass! 

Against  the  three  evils  of  which  I  have  just  been 
speaking,  I  desire  to  lift  up  a  warning  voice.  Take  heed, 
and  beware  that  you  are  not  spoiled  by  them.  Take 
heed  of  supposing  that  such  worship  is  acceptable  in 

wherein  we  are  bred,  the  sentiments  of  our  ancestors,  been  owned  as  a  more 
authentic  rule  in  matters  of  worship,  than  the  mind  of  God  delivered  in 
His  "Word  !  It  is  natural  by  creation  to  worship  God ;  and  it  is  as  natural 
by  corruption  for  man  to  worship  Him  in  a  human  way,  and  not  in  a 
divine.  Is  not  this  to  impose  laws  upon  God  ?  to  reckon  ourselves  wiser 
than  He  ?  To  think  Him  negligent  of  His  own  services,  and  that  our 
feeble  brains  can  find  out  ways  to  accommodate  His  honour  better  than 
Himself  hath  done?" — CJiarnock,  voL  i.  p.  222. 

N 


194  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

God's  sight.  It  may  be  pressed  upon  you  most 
plausibly  by  clever  men.  It  may  be  very  attractive  to 
the  eye  and  ear,  and  the  sensual  part  of  our  nature.  But 
it  has  one  fatal  defect  about  it :  it  cannot  be  defended 
and  maintained  by  plain  texts  of  Scripture.  Sacra- 
mentalism,  Ceremonialism,  Sacrificialism,  will  never  be 
found  in  Bibles  fairly  read  and  honestly  interpreted. 

Search  the  pages  of  English  history,  if  nothing 
else  will  open  your  eyes,  and  see  what  those  pages 
tell  you.  Of  worship  in  which  Sacraments,  Cere 
monies,  Sacerdotalism,  and  the  Mass  made  the  prin 
cipal  part, — of  such  worship  England  has  surely  had 
enough.  Such  worship  was  tried  by  the  Church  of  Eome 
in  the  days  of  our  forefathers,  for  centuries  before  the 
Protestant  Eeformation,  and  utterly  failed.  It  filled  the 
land  with  superstition,  ignorance,  formalism,  and 
immorality.  It  comforted  no  one,  sanctified  no  one, 
elevated  no  one,  helped  no  one  toward  heaven.  It  made 
the  priests  overbearing  tyrants,  and  the  people  cringing 
slaves.  And  shall  we  go  back  to  it?  God  forbid!  Shall 
we  once  more  be  content  with  services  in  which  Baptism, 
the  Lord's  Supper,  the  power  of  the  priesthood,  the  real 
corporal  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Eucharist,  the  necessity 
of  symbolical  decorations,  the  value  of  processions,  banners, 
pictures,  altar  lights,  are  incessantly  pressed  on  our 
minds  ?  Once  more  I  say,  God  forbid!  Let  every  one 
that  loves  his  soul  come  out  from  such  worship  and  be 
separate.  Let  him  avoid  it  and  turn  away  from  it,  as  he 
would  from  poison. 

V.  I  proceed,  in  the  last  place,  to  show  some  tests  ly 
which  our  public  worship  should  le  tried. 

This  is  a  point  of  vast  importance,  and  one  which 
every  professing  Christian  should  look  fairly  in  the  face. 
Too  many  are  apt  to  cut  the  knot  of  all  difficulties  about 


THOUGHTS    ON    PUBLIC    WOKSHIP.  195 

the  subject  before  us,  by  referring  to  their  own  feelings. 
They  will  tell  you  that  they  are  not  theologians,  that 
they  do  not  pretend  to  understand  the  difference  between 
one  school  of  divinity  and  another.  But  they  do  know 
that  the  worship  in  which  they  take  part  makes  them 
fed  so  much  better,  that  they  cannot  doubt  it  is  all  right. 
I  am  not  disposed  to  let  such  people  turn  away  from 
the  subject  of  this  paper  quite  so  easily.  I  cannot  forget 
that  religious  feelings  are  very  deceitful  things.  There 
is  a  sort  of  gentle  animal  excitement  produced  in  some 
minds  by  hearing  religious  music  and  seeing  religious 
spectacles,  which  is  not  true  devotion  at  all.  While  it 
lasts,  such  excitement  is  very  strong  and  very  contagious ; 
but  it  soon  comes  and  soon  goes,  and  leaves  no  permanent 
impression  behind  it.  It  is  a  mere  sensuous  animal 
influence,  which  even  the  most  ignorant  Eomanist  may 
feel  at  seasons,  and  yet  remain  a  Komanist  both  in 
doctrine  and  practice. 

(a)  True  spiritual  worship  will  affect  a  man's  heart  and 
conscience.     It  will  make  him  feel  more  keenly  the  sinful- 
ness  of  sin,  and  his  own  particular  personal  corruption. 
It  will  deepen  his  humility.     It  will  render  him  more 
jealously    careful    over   his    inward   life.     False    public 
worship,  like  dram-drinking  and  opium-eating,  will  every 
year  produce  weaker  impressions.    True  spiritual  worship, 
like  wholesome  food,  will  strengthen  him  who  uses  it, 
and  make  him  grow  inwardly  every  year. 

(b)  True  spiritual  worship  will  draw  a  man  into  closer 
communion  with  Jesus  Christ  Himself.     It  will  lift  him 
far  above  Churches,  and  ordinances,  and  ministers.     It 
will  make  him  hunger  and  thirst  after  a  sight   of  the 
King.     The  more  he  hears,  and  reads,   and  prays,  and 
praises,  the  more  he  will  feel  that  nothing  but  Christ 
Himself  will  feed  the  life  of  his  soul,  and  that  heart 
communion  with  Him  is  "  meat  indeed  and  drink  indeed." 
The  false  worshipper,  in  the  time  of  need,  will  turn  to 


196  PRINCIPLES    FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

external  helps,  to  ministers,  ordinances,  and  Sacraments. 
The  true  worshipper  will  turn  instinctively  to  Christ  by 
simple  faith,  just  as  the  compass  needle  turns  to  the 
pole. 

(c)  True   spiritual  worship  will  continually  extend  a 
man's  spiritual  knowledge.     It   will  annually   give   bone 
and  sinew  and  muscle  and  firmness  to  his  religion.     A 
true  worshipper  will  every  year  know  more  of  self,  and 
God,  and  heaven,  and  duty,  and  doctrine,  and  practice, 
and  experience.     His  religion  is  a  living  thing,  and  will 
grow.     A  false  worshipper  will  never  get  beyond  the  old 
carnal  principles  and  elements  of  his  theology.     He  will 
annually  go  round  and  round  like  a  horse  in  a  mill,  and, 
though  labouring  much,  will   never   get   forward.      His 
religion  is  a  dead  thing,  and  cannot  increase  and  multiply. 

(d)  True  spiritual  worship  will   continually   increase 
the  holiness  of  a  man's  life.     It  will  make  him  every 
year  more  watchful  over  tongue,  and  temper,  and  time,  and 
behaviour,  in   every  relation  of  life.     The  true  worship 
per's  conscience  becomes  annually  more  tender.    The  false 
worshipper's  becomes    annually   more   seared   and   more 
hard. 

Give  me  the  worship  that  will  stand  the  test  of  our 
Lord's  great  principle,  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
them."  Give  me  the  worship  that  sanctifies  the  life, — 
that  makes  a  man  walk  with  God  and  delight  in  God's 
law> — that  lifts  him  above  the  fear  of  the  world  and  the 
love  of  the  world, — that  enables  him  to  exhibit  some 
thing  of  God's  image  and  God's  likeness  before  his  fellow- 
men, — that  makes  him  just,  loving,  patient,  humble, 
unselfish,  temperate.  This  is  the  worship  that  comes 
down  from  heaven,  and  has  the  stamp  and  seal  and 
superscription  of  God. 

Whatever  men  may  please  to  say,  the  grand  test  of 
the  value  of  any  kind  of  worship  is  the  effect  it  produces 


THOUGHTS    ON   PUBLIC   WORSHIP.  197 

on  the  lives  of  the  worshippers.  A  man  may  tell  me 
that  what  is  called  Eitualism  nowadays  is  the  best  and 
most  perfect  mode  of  worshipping  God.  He  may  despise 
the  simple  and  unadorned  ceremonial  of  Evangelical  con 
gregations.  He  may  exalt  to  the  skies  the  excellence  of 
ornament,  decoration,  and  pageantry,  in  our  service  of 
God.  But  I  take  leave  to  tell  him  that  I  shall  try  his 
favourite  system  by  its  results.  So  long  as  I  find  that 
ultra-Eitualistic  worshippers  can  turn  from  matins  and 
early  communions  to  races  and  operas,  can  oscillate  be 
tween  the  confessional  and  the  ball-room,  and  take  no 
interest  in  missions  at  home  or  abroad,  so  long  I  shall  think 
little  of  the  value  of  ultra-Eitualistic  worship. 

Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  The 
best  public  worship  is  that  which  produces  the  best  private 
Christianity.  The  best  Church  Services  for  the  congre 
gation  are  those  which  make  its  individual  members  most 
holy  at  home  and  alone.  If  you  want  to  know  whether 
your  own  public  worship  is  doing  you  good,  try  it  by 
these  tests.  Does  it  quicken  your  conscience  ?  Does  it 
send  you  to  Christ  ?  Does  it  add  to  your  knowledge  ? 
Does  it  sanctify  your  life  ?  If  it  does,  depend  on  it,  it  is 
worship  of  which  you  have  no  cause  to  be  ashamed. 

My  paper  is  finished  and  my  work  is  done.  It  only 
remains  for  me  to  wind  up  all  by  a  few  words  of  friendly 
application. 

1.  I  ask  every  reader  to  accept  a  word  of  inquiry. 
Do  you  worship  God  in  public  at  all  ? 

I  ask  that  question  because  there  are  many  in  this 
day  who  never  go  within  the  walls  of  a  church  or  chapel. 
They  are  not  professedly  infidels,  but  they  give  no  out 
ward  sign  of  belief.  They  are  not  open  enemies  of  God's 
Sabbath,  and  have  no  wish  to  see  it  made  a  day  of  work ; 
but  they  have  no  idea  of  keeping  it  holy,  and  making  it 


198  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

God's  day.  There  are  many  people  in  this  state.  Are 
you  one  of  them? 

If  any  reader  of  this  paper  never  worships  God  in 
public,  I  only  ask  you  to  remember  that  at  present  you 
are  unfit  to  die,  unfit  to  meet  God,  unfit  to  go  to  heaven. 
What  would  the  eternal  presence  of  God,  the  eternal 
company  of  saints  and  angels,  the  eternal  song  of  praise, 
the  eternal  Sabbath  of  holiness,  what  would  it  all  be  to 
you  but  downright  misery  ?  You  are  not  in  the  state 
of  mind  to  value  it,  so  long  as  you  do  not  care  for  public 
worship  on  earth.  Oh,  awake  and  repent !  awake  and  be 
converted ;  awake  and  become  a  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus 
this  very  day !  It  is  never  too  late  to  begin.  It  is 
never  a  hopeless  thing  to  seek  Christ.  You  are  one  of 
those  whom  He  came  to  save,  and  whom  He  invites  to 
come  to  Him.  Awake,  repent,  and  be  converted  this 
very  day.  Of  sin  and  carelessness  and  unbelief  you  may 
well  be  ashamed.  But  you  never  need  be  ashamed  of 
worshipping  God. 

2.  If  any  reader  of  this  paper  is  a  worshipper  of  God, 
accept  a  word  of  caution.  Examine  yourself  this  day 
in  the  light  of  this  paper,  and  consider  whether  you 
are  a  true  worshipper.  In  one  word, — How  do  you 
worship  ? 

Take  care  that  you  do  not  go  down  to  the  pit  from 
under  the  pulpit.  Take  care  that  you  do  not  make  ship 
wreck  of  your  soul  in  the  very  midst  of  public  prayers, 
public  praise,  and  public  means  of  grace.  Eemember 
every  Sunday  that  you  live,  that  God  reads  your  heart, 
and  sees  what  is  going  on  within  you.  Eemember  that 
to  fill  your  place  in  the  congregation  with  decency  and 
regularity,  may  be  quite  enough  to  satisfy  man,  but  that 
it  takes  a  great  deal  more  than  this  to  be  a  Christian  in 
the  sight  of  God.  Remember  that  a  day  is  coming,  and 
will  soon  be  here,  when  we  shall  have  to  stand  before  the 


THOUGHTS    ON   PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  199 

bar  of  God,  and  shall  be  judged  not  by  parishes  and  con 
gregations,  but  each  by  ourselves,  each  individually,  and 
each  alone.  Look  forward  to  that  day.  Think  of  it 
every  Sunday.  Prepare  every  Sunday  to  meet  your 
God. 

Oh  !  worshipper,  into  whose  hands  this  paper  has  fallen, 
I  know  not  who  and  what  you  are,  but  I  say  to  you,  in 
God's  name,  take  heed  how  you  worship.  Mind  that  you 
know  something  of  the  roots  and  fruits  of  Christianity,  as 
well  as  of  the  outward  form.  Mind  that  you  are  experi 
mentally  acquainted  with  repentance  towards  God,  faith 
toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  a  new  heart  and  a  new 
life.  Take  heed  that  you  come  to  Christ,  as  well  as 
come  to  church  or  chapel.  Take  heed  that  you  sit  at 
Christ's  feet  by  faith,  as  well  as  sit  bodily  in  His  house. 
Take  heed  that  you  hear  Christ's  voice  and  follow  Him, 
as  well  as  hear  your  minister's  sermons.  Take  heed  that 
you  know  what  it  is  to  be  born  again,  as  well  as  to  be 
baptized,  and  to  eat  Christ's  body  and  drink  Christ's 
blood  by  faith,  as  well  as  to  go  to  the  table  of  the  Lord. 
I  give  you  these  cautions  in  love.  I  ask  you  to  take 
them  in  good  part.  I  only  know  that  if  you  are  not 
found  at  length  a  true  worshipper,  you  had  better  never 
have  been  born. 

3.  If  any  reader  of  this  paper  knows  anything  of  true 
worship,  accept  a  word  of  encouragement.  Look  upward, 
onward,  and  forward,  and  be  of  good  cheer. 

The  day  is  coming  when  there  shall  be  a  congregation 
that  shall  never  break  up,  and  a  Sabbath  that  shall  never 
end,  a  song  of  praise  that  shall  never  cease,  and  an 
assembly  that  shall  never  be  dispersed.  In  that  assembly 
shall  be  found  all  who  have  worshipped  God  in  spirit 
upon  earth.  If  you  are  one,  you  shall  be  there. 

Here,  I  have  no  doubt,  you  worship  God  with  a  deep 
sense  of  weakness,  corruption,  and  infirmity.  There,  at 


200  PRINCIPLES   FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

last,  you  shall  be  able,  with  a  renewed  body,  to  serve 
Him  without  weariness,  and  to  attend  on  Him  without 
distraction. 

Here,  at  your  very  best,  you  see  through  a  glass 
darkly,  and  know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  most  imper 
fectly.  It  is  your  grief  that  you  do  not  know  Him 
better  and  love  Him  more.  There,  freed  from  all  the 
dross  and  defilement  of  indwelling  sin,  you  shall  "see 
Jesus  "  as  you  have  been  seen,  and  know  as  you  have  been 
known.  Surely,  if  faith  has  been  sweet  and  peace- 
giving,  sight  will  be  far  better. 

Here  you  have  often  found  it  hard  to  worship  God 
joyfully,  by  reason  of  the  sorrows  and  cares  of  this  world. 
Tears  over  the  graves  of  those  you  loved  have  often  made 
it  hard  to  sing  praise.  Crushed  hopes  and  family 
sorrows  have  sometimes  made  you  hang  your  harp  on 
the  willows.  There  every  tear  shall  be  dried,  every  saint 
who  has  fallen  asleep  in  Christ  shall  meet  us  once  more, 
and  every  hard  thing  in  our  life-journey  shall  be  made 
clear  and  plain  as  the  sun  at  noon-day. 

Here  you  have  often  felt  that  you  stand  comparatively 
alone,  and  that  even  in  God's  house  the  real  spiritual 
worshippers  are  comparatively  few.  There  you  shall  at 
length  see  a  multitude  of  brethren  and  sisters  that  no 
man  can  number,  all  of  one  heart  and  one  mind,  all  free 
from  blemishes,  weaknesses,  and  infirmities,  all  rejoicing 
in  one  Saviour,  and  all  prepared  to  spend  an  eternity  in 
His  praise.  You  shall  have  worshipping  companions 
enough  in  heaven. 

I  charge  my  believing  readers  to  lift  up  their  hearts 
and  look  forward !  The  time  is  very  short.  The  night 
is  far  spent.  The  day  is  at  hand.  Worship  on.  Pray 
on.  Praise  on.  Bead  on.  Contend  earnestly  for  the 
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.  Eesist  manfully  every 
effort  to  spoil  Scriptural  worship.  Strive  earnestly  to 


THOUGHTS    ON    PUBLIC    WORSHIP.  201 

hand  down  the  light  of  Gospel  worship  to  our  children's 
children.  Yet  a  little  time,  and  He  that  shall  come  will 
come,  and  will  not  tarry.  Blessed  in  that  day  will  be 
those,  and  those  only,  who  are  found  true  worshippers, 
worshippers  in  spirit  and  truth ! 


IX. 

THOUGHTS  ON  THE  PRAYEK-BOOK. 

THERE  is  probably  no  book  in  existence,  next  to  the 
Bible,  which  is  so  well  known,  and  yet  so  little  appre 
ciated,  as  the  English  "  Book  of  Common  Prayer."  Out 
of  the  myriads  who  hold  the  book  in  their  hands  on 
Sundays,  I  suspect  few  have  ever  considered  the  immense 
value  of  a  liturgical  form,  and  fewer  still  have  ever 
realized  the  peculiar  excellencies  and  principles  of  the 
Church  of  England  liturgy.  On  these  three  subjects  I 
propose  to  say  a  few  words  in  this  paper,  which  I  think 
may  prove  useful  to  many  readers. 

I.  First  and  foremost,  I  propose  to  say  something  about 
the  general  usefulness  of  forms  of  prayer  in  pullic  worship. 
I  frankly  admit  that  on  this  point  Christians  are  not 
entirely  of  one  mind.  How  does  the  matter  stand  ? 
In  what  respect  do  the  visible  Churches  of  Christ  differ  ? 
Let  me  answer  these  questions. 

Some  Churches  hold,  that  no  prepared  form  of  prayer 
ought  ever  to  be  used.  They  leave  this  part  of  worship 
entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  minister,  and  trust  to  the  Spirit 
guiding  him  aright.  They  say  that  the  prayers  ought  to 
be  unwritten  or  extempore  prayers.  This  is  the  opinion 
held  by  the  Scotch  Presbyterians,  and  by  the  greater  part 
of  the  English  dissenters  in  our  own  land. 


202 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    PKAYER-BOOK.  203 

Other  Churches  hold  that  it  is  best  to  have  a  form  of 
prayer  prepared,  and  to  require  the  minister  to  use  it. 
They  leave  the  minister  no  discretion  in  the  matter.  They 
supply  him  with  a  book  of  prayers,  and  direct  him  to  read 
out  of  this  book,  whenever  the  congregation  assembles  for 
public  worship.  This  is  the  opinion  held  by  the  Church 
of  England,  by  the  Irish  Church,  by  the  Episcopal  Church 
of  America,  and  by  a  few  other  denominations. 

Now,  which  of  these  two  plans  of  public  worship  is 
the  best  ?  Which  is  wisest  ?  Which  is  most  edifying  ? 
Which  is  most  profitable  ?  I  want  to  say  something 
about  these  questions,  and  I  invite  the  reader's  serious 
attention.  My  own  opinion  is  decided  and  unhesitating. 
I  am  by  conscientious  choice  a  minister  of  the  Church 
of  England.  I  think  it  is  far  better  to  have  a  form  of 
public  prayers  than  to  have  extempore  prayer.  I  will 
now  give  some  reasons  why  I  think  so. 

Before  I  say  a  word  about  the  question,  let  me 
remind  the  reader  that  the  matter  is  not  one  which  is 
necessary  to  salvation.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  say  that 
there  can  be  no  acceptable  public  Christian  worship 
without  a  Prayer-book.  I  am  only  saying  what  appears 
to  me  the  most  weful  manner  of  worship.  The  point  I 
am  considering  is  not  one  of  those  on  which  mistakes 
may  ruin  souls.  Beside  this,  let  me  remind  the  reader 
that  I  am  not  about  to  make  a  special  defence  of  the 
Prayer-book  of  the  Church  of  England.  I  am  quite 
ready  to  do  that  before  I  conclude  this  paper.  The 
immediate  question  before  us  is  not  whether  a  certain 
liturgy  is  a  good  one,  but  whether  it  is  good  to  have  any 
liturgy  at  all.  All  that  I  wish  to  do  at  present  is  to 
give  some  general  reasons  why  forms  of  public  prayer 
appear  to  me  very  preferable  to  extempore  prayer. 

(a)  In  the  first  place,  extempore  prayer  makes  the 
congregation  entirely  dependent  on  the  minister's  health 


204  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

or  circumstances,  or  what  are  commonly  called  his  frames 
and  feelings.  He  may  be  sick  and  ill  when  he  is  leading 
their  devotions.  He  may  be  depressed  in  spirit  by  family 
trials  or  private  affliction.  Whenever  this  is  the  case,  his 
people  are  sure  to  suffer.  A  minister  is  only  a  man.  If 
he  prays  extempore,  his  "  frames  and  feelings  "  must  neces 
sarily  give  a  tone  and  colour  and  bias  to  his  prayers. 
But  this  could  not  be  the  case,  if  he  prayed  from  a 
book. 

(b)  In  the  second  place,  extempore  prayer  makes  the 
congregation  entirely  dependent  on  the  minister's  memory. 
He  may  forget  many  things  which   he  ought   to  pray 
for,    and    meant    to    pray    for,    before    he    entered    the 
Church.     He  may  omit  to  mention  many  things  before 
God  which  he  had  privately  intended  to  make  subjects 
of  prayer.     He  is  only  a  man,  and  his  memory  is  liable 
to  error.     But  this  could  not  happen  if  he  prayed  from 
a  book. 

(c)  In  the  third  place,  extempore  prayer  makes  the 
congregation  entirely  dependent  on  the  minister's  sound 
ness  in  doctrine.      He  may  be  gradually  falling  away 
from  the  faith,  and  slipping  into  Komanism,  or  Socinianism, 
or  Scepticism.     He  may  be,  almost  insensibly  to  himself, 
little  by  little,  departing  from  the  truth,  adding  to  or 
taking  away  from  the  Gospel  of  Christ.     His  people,  in 
this  case,  are  sure  to  suffer.     His  inward  unsoundness 
will   almost   always   appear    in  his   prayers.      But  this 
could  not  happen  if  he  prayed  from  a  book. 

(d)  In  the  fourth  place,  extempore  prayer  makes  it 
almost  impossible  for  the  congregation  to  join  in  public 
worship.     They  cannot  possibly  know  what  the  minister 
is  going  to  pray  for.     They  must  keep  their  minds  con 
tinually  on  the  stretch  while  he  is  praying,  and  may 
sometimes  lose  the  thread  of  his  prayer.    They  may  even 
not  understand  him  sometimes  on  account  of  his  language, 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  PRAYER-BOOK.        205 

just  as  they  do  not  always  understand  his  preaching. 
But  this  could  not  happen  if  he  prayed  from  a  book. 

(e)  In  the  last  place,  extempore  prayer,  in  course 
of  time,  becomes  as  much  a  form  to  most  congregations 
as  any  form  of  prayer  that  ever  was  composed.  The 
thoughts  of  ministers,  after  a  few  years,  are  found  to  run 
pretty  much  in  the  same  groove,  and  upon  the  same 
rails.  Their  hearers,  after  a  few  years,  know  perfectly 
well  their  phrases,  their  modes  of  expression,  and  the 
order  of  their  petitions.  They  can  even  make  a  shrewd 
guess  how  long  the  prayer  will  last,  and  when  it  is 
drawing  near  to  a  close.  When  this  is  the  case, — and  all 
who  have  worshipped  in  the  Presbyterian  Churches  of 
Scotland  know  well  that  it  is  so, — it  really  becomes  just  as 
formal  an  act  to  pray  extempore  as  to  pray  from  a  book ! 

I  lay  these  things  before  the  attention  of  my  readers, 
and  commend  them  to  their  serious  consideration.  I 
commend  them  especially  to  Churchmen.  I  ask  them 
not  to  be  shaken  in  mind  by  the  common  charges  which 
are  made  against  our  manner  of  worshipping  God  in  the 
Church  of  England.  It  is  easy  for  ignorant  or  thought 
less  persons  to  say  that  to  use  a  Prayer-book  is  "  Popish," 
"  legal,"  "  formal,"  "  bondage,"  and  the  like.  It  is  easy 
to  say  that  extempore  prayer  is  a  more  "  spiritual "  mode 
of  worship.  It  is  far  more  easy  to  say  such  things  than 
to  prove  them.  People  too  often  catch  these  sayings 
from  one  another,  and  repeat  them  without  calm  and 
sober  thinking.  If  some  of  the  enemies  of  the  Church 
of  England  would  read  and  consider  a  little  more  than 
they  do,  they  would  perhaps  not  talk  so  foolishly  as  they 
sometimes  do. 

Let  me  make  a  few  general  remarks  before  I  pass  away 
from  this  branch  of  my  subject. 

1.  Salvation  does  not  depend  on  being  a  member  of  a 
Church  which  has  a  Prayer-book,  or  of  a  Church  which 


206  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

permits  nothing  but  extempore  prayer.  We  must  each 
individually  be  born  again,  repent  of  sin,  believe  on 
Christ,  become  new  creatures,  and  live  holy  lives.  With 
out  this  it  will  matter  nothing  at  the  last  day  what  we 
thought  about  extempore  prayer. 

2.  Extempore   prayer   may  sometimes    be    extremely 
solemn,    spiritual,    soul-exalting,    and   heart-edifying.     I 
have    sometimes    heard    clergymen    of    the    Church    of 
England  pray  extempore  in  public,  so  beautifully  that  I 
could  desire  nothing  better.     If  all  men  prayed  always, 
as  some  men  do  sometimes,  there  would  be  nothing  better 
than  extempore  prayer.     But  all  ministers  are  not  highly 
gifted.     The  question  to  be  considered  is,  what  mode  of 
worship  is  most  likely  to  be  carried  on  effectively  and 
profitably  to  a  congregation,  from  week   to  week,  and 
month  to  month,  and  year  to  year,  by  the  average  run  of 
ministers  ?     Taking  a  broad  view  of  ministers,  if  I  must 
choose,  I  would  far  rather  that  most  ministers  prayed 
from  a  book. 

3.  Prayer  from  a  book  may  often  be  spoilt  by  the  bad 
reading  of  the  minister.     He  may  read  so  rapidly,  or  so 
low,  or  so  irreverently,  as  to  do  no  good  to  the  congrega 
tion.     He  may  even  weary  and  disgust  his  congregation. 
But  forms  of  prayer  are  not  to  be  judged  by  the  reading 
of  careless  and  unconverted  ministers.     Let  a  man  hear 
a   Prayer-book   read  reverently,   carefully,   audibly,  and 
emphatically,  with  all  the  congregation  joining,  before  he 
finds  fault  with  "  formal  prayers."     Forms  may  be  read 
spiritually  quite  as  easily  as  extempore  prayers  may  be 
used  formally. 

4.  Finally,   let    all    Churchmen    who    hanker    after 
extempore  prayer,  and  profess  to  be  weary  of  the  Prayer- 
book,  spend  a  few  months  in  Scotland,  and  attend  no 
other  worship  but  that  of  the  Presbyterians.     They  will 
hear  many  good  prayers,  I  have  no  doubt.     They  will 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  PRAYEK-BOOK.       207 

sometimes  be  much  edified  and  pleased.  The  Church  of 
Chalmers  and  M'Cheyne  contains  ministers  who  would 
adorn  any  Church  on  earth.  But  at  the  end  of  a  few 
months,  unless  I  am  greatly  mistaken,  most  sensible 
Churchmen  will  return  home  convinced  that,  in  the  long 
run,  there  is  nothing  so  useful  for  a  congregation  as  a 
good  form  of  prayer. 

The  Church  that  has  good,  sound,  Scriptural,  fervent 
extempore  prayers,  in  my  judgment,  does  well.  But  the 
Church  that  has  a  well-composed,  well-arranged  Scriptural 
liturgy,  in  my  judgment,  does  far  better.  The  way  of 
"forms"  in  public  worship  is  better  than  the  way  of 
"  extempore  "  prayer. 

II.  From  the  general  usefulness  of  forms  of  prayer,  I 
pass  on  to  speak  of  the  special  excellencies  of  the  English 
Prayer-book. 

The  tunes  in  which  we  live  make  the  subject  of  special 
importance.  The  Prayer-book  is  constantly  assailed  by 
enemies  of  every  description.  Even  Churchmen  are  too 
ready  to  see  the  alleged  blemishes  of  the  book,  and  to 
forget  its  merits.  In  times  like  these  it  may  be  well 
to  arm  the  friends  of  the  Liturgy  with  a  few  simple 
arguments  in  its  behalf. 

It  may  clear  our  way  to  remind  the  reader  once  more 
that  the  question  I  am  now  considering  is  not  the  com 
parative  merit  of  extempore  or  of  pre-composed  prayer  in 
public  worship.  That  question  has  been  already  fully 
considered  in  the  former  part  of  this  paper.  The  one 
single  point  to  which  our  attention  will  be  directed  is 
the  special  value  of  the  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England. 
Granting  that  a  man  is  convinced  that  a  form  of  prayer 
is  best,  let  me  try  to  show  him  that  we  have  many  reasons 
to  be  thankful  for  the  form  provided  for  worshippers  in 
the  Church  of  England. 


208  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Furthermore,  it  may  clear  our  way  to  remind  the 
reader  that  I  do  not  for  a  moment  maintain  that  the 
Prayer-book  is  free  from  defects.  It  was  not  given  by 
inspiration,  like  the  Bible.  It  was  drawn  up  by  unin 
spired  men,  who  had  their  failings  and  infirmities ;  and, 
like  everything  else  that  comes  from  the  hands  of  un 
assisted  man,  it  is  imperfect.  I  claim  no  infallibility  for 
the  Prayer-book.  I  fairly  admit  that  there  are  things 
in  it  which  might  have  been  done  better.  But  I  am 
bold  to  say  that  its  merits  far  outstrip  its  defects ;  its 
blemishes  are  few  and  far  between ;  its  excellencies  are 
very  many  and  very  great.  The  chaff  of  the  Liturgy 
is  little  compared  to  the  wheat,  and  the  dross  trifling 
compared  to  the  gold. 

Let  me  now  set  down  in  order  some  of  the  leading 
merits  of  the  Church  of  England  Prayer-book.  Before  we 
give  ear  to  the  charges  which  some  Dissenters  and  some 
Scotch  Presbyterians  sometimes  make  against  our 
venerable  Liturgy,  let  us  consider  calmly  its  many  claims 
to  our  confidence. 

(1)  The  first  merit  of  the  Prayer-book  is  the  large 
quantity  of  God's  Word  which  it  contains.     A  very  con 
siderable  portion  of  the  volume  is  neither  more  nor  less 
than  extracts  from  the  Bible.     To  say  nothing  of  other 
parts,  the  Psalms,  the  Epistles,  and  the  Gospels  make  no 
small  part   of  the  whole   book.     The  man  who  pours 
indiscriminate  abuse  on  the  Liturgy,  would  do  well  to 
remember  this.     Let  him  consider  that  more  than  one- 
half  of  a  Churchman's  form  of  worship  consists  of  selected 
passages  of  Holy  Scripture. 

(2)  The  second  merit  of  the  Prayer-book  is  the  sound 
doctrine    that    runs    through    the    daily    prayers    and 
petitions,  which  it  puts  in  the  mouth  of  those  who  use 
it.     The    sinfulness  of   man,  the  holiness  of    God,   the 
redemption  of  sinners  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  daily 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  PRAYER-BOOK.        209 

need  in  which  we  all  stand  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  import 
ance  of  godly  living,  the  sinfulness  and  guilt  of  sin,  the 
weakness  of  human  nature,  the  personality  of  the  devil, 
the  reality  and  eternity  of  hell  and  heaven,  the  full  supply 
of  mercy  and  grace  which  is  laid  up  for  us  in  Christ, — 
all  these  things  appear  again  and  again  in  the  prayers 
of  the  Liturgy.  Expressions  no  doubt  may  be  pointed  out 
in  the  Services  for  Baptism,  Burial,  and  the  Visitation  of 
the  Sick,  which  admit  of  misconstruction,  and  are  often  sadly 
misconstrued ;  but  these  expressions  after  all  are  few  in 
number.  No  impartial  judge  can  deny  that  the  general  tone 
of  Prayer-book  prayers  is  Scriptural,  Evangelical,  and  sound. 

(3)  The  third  merit  of  the  Prayer-book  is  the  wide 
variety  of  subjects  which  its  petitions  embrace.     It  fairly 
sweeps  the  whole  circle  of  man's  wants,  necessities,  and 
relations.     Our  bodies  and  our  souls,  our  temporal  and 
our    eternal    interests,    our    position    as    subjects    and 
members  of  families,  our  sorrows  and  our  joys,  our  sick 
ness  and  our  health,  our  poverty  and  our  riches,  our 
journeys  by  land  or  water, — all  are  remembered  in  the 
Liturgy.     Nothing  seems  to  be  forgotten  or  left  out.     A 
man's  circumstances  must  be  very  peculiar  indeed  if  he 
does  not  find  his  case  mentioned  in  the  daily  prayers  of 
the  English  Liturgy.     It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  no 
Church  on  earth  brings  so  many  matters  before  God  in 
its  public  worship  as  the  Church  of  England. 

(4)  The  fourth  merit  of  the  Prayer-book  is  the  con 
gregational  character  of  the  worship  which  it  invites  those 
who  use  it  to  offer  up.     It  does  not  give  the  office  of 
praying  entirely  to  the  minister,  and  leave  the  people  to 
sit  by  in  silence  and  listen.     It  frequently  directs  "  the 
people "  in  its  rubrics.     It  assigns  to  every  member  of 
the  congregation  a  place  in  the  worship.     It  invites  all 
to  join  audibly  in  the  confession  of  sin  and  declaration 
of  faith.     It  requires  all  to  read  a  portion  of  the  service 

o 


210  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

together  with  the  minister.  It  calls  on  all  to  say  "  amen  " 
after  every  prayer  which  the  minister  reads.  Of  all  foolish 
sayings  against  the  Church  of  England  there  is  none  so 
foolish  as  the  saying  that  it  is  a  "  Popish  "  and  "  priest- 
ridden  "  Church !  No  Church  on  earth  makes  so  much 
of  the  laity  in  public  worship  as  the  Church  of  England. 

(5)  The  fifth  merit  of  the  Prayer-book  is  its  wonderful 
suitableness  to  the  wants  of  the  poor  and  unlearned.     The 
bulk  of  all  congregations  will  probably  be  ignorant,  as 
long  as  the  world  stands.     Long,  argumentative,  doctrinal 
prayers,  however  clever  and    gifted  they  may  seem,  are 
utterly  unfitted  to  most  men's    minds.       Now  here   is 
exactly  the  point  at  which  the  English  Liturgy  is  most 
excellent.     It  is  full  of  little  short  collects,  containing 
much  in  few  words,  and  easily  understood.     It  is  con 
sequently  full  of  little  breaks  and  pauses,  which  to  an 
ignorant  worshipper  are  of  great  importance.     They  give 
him  time  to  take   breath.     They  enable  him   to  begin 
again,   if   he   has    lost  the  thread  of   the  last  petition. 
They  help  to  keep  his  slumbering  mind  awake,  by  the 
constant  change  of  voice,  and  repeated  "amens,"  which 
he  cannot  help  hearing.     The  Litany  alone  is  a  simple 
but    eminently    comprehensive    collection    of    petitions, 
which  even  a  child,  if  attentive,  can  hardly  fail  to  under 
stand. 

(6)  The  last,  but  not  the  least,  merit  of  the  English 
Prayer-book    is    the    immense  proportion    of  intercession 
which    it  contains.       It   calls   on    those  who  use  it  to 
remember  others  before  God  as  well  as  themselves.     It 
encourages  habits  of  sympathy  and  fellow-feeling  with  all 
mankind.     It  keeps  up  a  constant  testimony  against  the 
selfishness  to  which  we  are  all  naturally  prone.     It  invites 
us  to  speak  to  God  for  others  as  well  as  for  ourselves. 
In    no   Church    on   earth    perhaps   is  the   command  to 
"pray  for  one   another"    so   faithfully   remembered,   in 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  PRAYER-BOOK.        211 

theory  at  least,  if  not  in  practice,  as  in  the  Church  of 
England. 

Such  are  the  six  leading  excellencies  of  the  English 
Prayer-book.  Each  one  of  these  six  is  a  text,  on  which 
much  more  might  be  said,  if  space  permitted.  Each 
contains  a  seed  of  thought,  which  Churchmen  would  do 
well  to  lay  up  in  their  minds  and  remember. 

The  practical  conclusions  which  may  be  drawn  from 
what  has  been  said  deserve  serious  consideration.  They 
ought  to  be  pondered  well  by  all  who  call  themselves 
members  of  the  Church  of  England. 

For  one  thing, — if  the  English  Prayer-book  contain  so 
many  excellencies,  we  ought  not  to  esteem  it  lightly,  or 
think  it  of  no  consequence  whether  we  hear  it  used  on 
Sunday  or  not.  Salvation,  no  doubt,  does  not  depend  on 
going  to  Church.  It  is  not  necessary  to  use  a  Prayer- 
book  in  order  to  get  to  heaven.  A  personal  interest  in 
Christ  is  the  one  thing  needful.  Experimental  acquaint 
ance  with  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  far  more 
important  than  acquaintance  with  the  English  Liturgy. 
But  still,  though  all  this  is  true,  there  is  no  denying  that 
our  edification  in  public  worship  depends  greatly  on  the 
kind  of  prayers  that  are  prayed.  Let  the  Churchman 
know  that  he  ought  to  be  more  thankful  for  his  Prayer- 
book.  He  may  often  perhaps  hear  better  preaching  in 
chapel  than  in  Church.  But  he  may  depend  upon  it  he 
will  not  often  hear  better  prayers. 

For  another  thing, — if  the  English  Prayer-book  contain 
so  many  excellencies,  the  members  of  the  Church  of 
England  ought  not  to  be  ashamed  of  defending  it,  and 
maintaining  its  cause.  Let  them  speak  out  boldly  when 
they  hear  men  assailing  the  Prayer-book  and  saying  evil 
things  about  it.  Let  them  ask  the  assailants  whether 
they  know  anything  about  the  subject  of  which  they  are 
speaking.  Let  them  challenge  them  fearlessly  to  point 


212  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

out  any  better  worship  than  that  which  the  Church  of 
England  provides.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  the  Prayer- 
book  is  imperfect,  faulty,  and  defective.  It  is  not 
quite  so  easy  to  show  us  the  extempore  prayers  that 
are  better.  Of  its  ministers,  the  Church  of  England 
may  well  be  ashamed  sometimes.  But  it  never  need  be 
ashamed  of  its  Liturgy. 

Finally, — if  the  English  Prayer-book  contains  so  many 
excellencies,  let  English  Churchmen  study  the  book 
more,  and  be  more  acquainted  with  its  contents.  Few, 
alas !  know  much  about  it.  Ignorance  is  the  great 
danger  of  many  who  consider  themselves  excellent 
members  of  the  Church  of  England.  They  are  little 
acquainted  either  with  the  Articles  or  Liturgy  of  their 
own  Communion.  They  can  hardly  tell  you  what  their 
Church  asks  them  to  believe,  or  how  their  Church 
bids  them  worship.  One  of  the  great  wants  of  the 
day,  next  to  more  praying,  is  more  thinking  and  more 
reading. 

III.  The  last  thing  I  propose  to  do  is  to  offer  to  all 
my  readers  a  broad  general  caution  about  the  English 
Prayer-book.  That  caution  is  simply  this.  Take  care 
that  you  clearly  understand  the  great  leading  principle 
on  which  the  Prayer-look  was  at  first  compiled,  and  on 
which  it  was  always  meant  to  be  interpreted.  It  is  a 
principle  which  runs  throughout  the  book  from  end  to 
end.  The  mischief  which  has  arisen,  and  the  false 
teaching  which  has  flowed  from  gross  ignorance  or 
neglect  of  this  principle,  are  simply  incalculable. 

The  principle  of  the  Prayer-book  is,  to  suppose  all 
members  of  the  Church  to  be  in  reality  what  they  are 
in  profession,  to  be  true  believers  in  Christ,  to  be  sancti 
fied  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Prayer-book  takes  the 
highest  standard  of  what  a  Christian  ought  to  be,  and 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  PRAYEK-BOOK.        213 

all  through  its  prayers  is  worded  accordingly.  The 
minister  addresses  those  who  assemble  together  for  public 
worship  as  believers.  The  people  who  use  the  words  the 
liturgy  puts  into  their  mouths,  are  supposed  to  be  believers. 
But  those  who  drew  up  the  Prayer-book  never  meant  to 
assert  that  all  who  were  members  of  the  Church  of 
England  were  actually  and  really  true  Christians.  On 
the  contrary,  they  tell  us  expressly  in  the  Articles,  that 
"  in  the  visible  Church  the  evil  be  ever  mingled  with  the 
good."  But  they  held  that  if  forms  of  devotion  were 
drawn  up  at  all,  they  must  be  drawn  up  on  the  supposi 
tion  that  those  who  used  them  were  real  Christians,  and 
not  false  ones.  And  in  so  doing  I  think  they  were  quite 
right.  A  liturgy  for  unbelievers  and  unconverted  men 
would  be  unreasonable,  and  practically  useless.  The  part 
of  the  congregation  for  whom  it  was  meant  would  care 
little  or  nothing  for  any  liturgy  at  all.  The  holy  and 
believing  part  of  the  congregation  would  find  its  language 
entirely  unsuited  to  them. 

(a)  This  general  principle  of  the  Prayer-book,  is  the 
principle  on  which  the  baptismal  service  is  drawn    up. 
It  supposes  those  who  bring  their  children  to  be  baptized, 
to  bring  them  as  believers.     As  the  seed  of  godly  parents 
and  children  of  believers  their  infants  are  baptized.    As 
believers,  the  sponsors   and  parents  are  exhorted  to  pray 
that  the  child  may  be  born  again,  and  encouraged  to  lay 
hold  on  the  promises.     And  as  the  child  of  believers  the 
infant  when   baptized  is  pronounced  "regenerate,"  and 
thanks  are  given  for  it.     But  the  Prayer-book  does  not 
teach  the  invariable  regeneration  of  all  who  are  baptized. 

(b)  This  principle  is  that  on  which  the  Communion  Office 
and  Confirmation  Service  are  evidently  framed.     I  suppose 
that  no  intelligent  person  would  seriously  maintain  that 
all  the  communicants  who  say,  "  the  remembrance  of  our 
sins  is  grievous  and  the  burden  of  them  is  intolerable,"  do 
really  feel  and  mean  what  they  say  !     You  have  only  to 


214  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

search  their  characters  and  lives,  and  you  soon  find  that 
many  of  them  feel  nothing  of  the  kind. — So  also  I  pre 
sume  no  one  of  common  sense  really  believes  that  all  the 
young  persons,  who  are  confirmed,  do  really  think  that 
they  are  "bound  to  believe  and  do"  what  they  profess,  when 
they  say  in  reply  to  the  Bishop's  question, "  I  do."  Too 
many,  it  may  be  feared,  never  think  at  all.  But  in  both 
cases  the  Prayer-book  puts  in  the  mouths  of  those  who 
are  confirmed  or  come  to  the  table,  the  language  they 
ought  to  use,  on  the  great  ruling  principle  of  charitable 
supposition.  But  it  does  not  in  the  least  follow  that  all 
is  right  because  the  language  is  used. 

(c)  This  is  the  only  principle  on  which  many  of  the 
collects  can  be  reasonably  explained.  The  collect  for  the 
Epiphany  says,  "  Grant  that  we  who  know  Thee  now  by 
faith  may  after  this  life  have  the  fruition  of  Thy  glorious 
Godhead."  Will  any  one  tell  us  that  the  compilers  of  the 
Prayer-book  meant  to  teach,  that  all  who  use  the  Prayer- 
book  do  know  God  by  faith  ?  Surely  not. — The  collect 
for  Sexagesima  Sunday  says,  "  0  Lord  God,  who  seest  that 
we  put  not  our  trust  in  anything  that  we  do,"  etc.  Will 
any  dare  to  say  that  these  words  could  ever  be  literally 
true  of  all  members  of  the  Church  of  England  ?  Are 
they  not  manifestly  a  charitable  supposition? — The  collect 
for  the  Third  Sunday  after  Trinity  says,  "We  to  whom 
Thou  hast  given  a  hearty  desire  to  pray,"  etc.  Who  can 
have  a  doubt  that  this  is  a  form  of  words,  which  is  used 
by  many  of  whom  it  could  not  strictly  and  truly  be  said 
for  one  minute  ? — Who  can  fail  to  see  in  all  these  in 
stances  one  uniform  principle,  the  principle  of  charitably 
assuming  that  members  of  a  Church  are  what  they  profess 
to  be  ?  The  Church  puts  in  the  mouth  of  her  worship 
ping  people  the  sentiments  and  language  they  ought  to 
use,  and  if  they  do  not  come  up  to  her  high  standard  the 
fault  is  theirs,  not  hers.  But  to  say  that  by  adopting 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  PRAYER-BOOK.        215 

such  expressions  she  stamps  and  accredits  all  her  mem 
bers  as  real  and  true  Christians  in  the  sight  of  God! 
would  be  manifestly  unreasonable. 

(d)  This  is  the  only  principle  on  which  the  service  for  the 
churching  of  women  can  be  interpreted.     Every  woman 
for  whom  that  service  is  used,  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  Lord's 
servant,"  and  is  required  to  answer  that  she  "  puts  her 
trust  in  the  Lord."     Yet  who  in  his  senses  can  doubt 
that  such  words  are  utterly  inapplicable  in  the  case  of  a 
great  proportion  of  the  women  who  come  to  be  churched  ? 
They  are  not "  servants  of  the  Lord."     They  do  not  in  any 
sense  "  put  their  trust  "  in  Him.     And  who  would  dare 
to  argue  that  the  compilers  of  the  liturgy  considered  that 
all  women  who  were  churched  did  really  trust  in  the 
Lord,  merely   because   they  used  this   language  ?     The 
simple  explanation  is,  that  they  drew  up  the  service  on 
the  same  great  principle  which  runs  through  the  whole 
Prayer-book,  the  principle  of  charitable  supposition. 

(e)  This  is  the  only  principle  on  which  the  service  of 
baptism  for  grown-up  people  can  be  interpreted.     In  that 
service  the  minister  first  prays  that  the  person  about  to 
be  baptized  may  have  the  Holy  Spirit  given  to  him,  and 
be  born  again.     The  Church  cannot  take  upon  herself  to 
pronounce  decidedly  that  he  is  born  again,  until  he  has 
witnessed  a  good  confession,  and  shown  his  readiness  to 
receive  the  seal  of  baptism.     Then,  after  that  prayer,  he 
is  called  upon  openly  to  profess  repentance   and  faith 
before  the  minister  and  congregation,  and,  that  being  done, 
he  is   baptized.      Then,   and  not  till   then,   comes  the 
declaration  that  the  person  baptized  is  "  regenerate,"  and 
is  born  again  and  made  an  heir  of  everlasting  salvation. 
But  can  these  words  be  strictly  and  literally  true,  if  the 
person  baptized  is  a  hypocrite,  and  has  all  along  professed 
that  which  he  does  not  feel  ?     Are  not  the  words  mani 
festly  used  on  the   charitable   supposition  that  he  has 


216  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

repented  and  does  believe,  and  in  no  other  sense  at  all  ? 
And  is  it  not  plain  to  every  one,  that  in  the  absence  of 
this  repentance  and  faith,  the  words  used  are  a  mere 
form,  used  because  the  Church  cannot  draw  up  two  forms, 
but  not  for  a  moment  implying  that  inward  and  spiritual 
grace  necessarily  accompanies  the  outward  sign,  or  that 
a  death  unto  sin  and  a  new  birth  unto  righteousness  is 
necessarily  conveyed  to  the  soul  ?  In  short,  the  person 
baptized  is  pronounced  "regenerate"  upon  the  broad  prin 
ciple  of  the  Prayer-book,  that,  in  the  Church  services, 
people  are  charitably  supposed  to  be  what  they  profess 
to  be. 

(/)  This  is  the  only  intelligible  principle  on  which  the 
burial  service  can  be  interpreted.  In  that  service  the 
person  buried  is  spoken  of  as  a  dear  brother  or  sister. 
It  is  said  that  it  hath  pleased  God  of  His  great  mercy 
to  take  to  Himself  his  soul.  It  is  said,  "We  give 
Thee  hearty  thanks  that  it  hath  pleased  Thee  to 
deliver  this  our  brother  out  of  the  miseries  of  this 
sinful  world."  It  is  said  that  "our  hope  is  this  our 
brother  rests  in  Christ."  Now  what  does  all  this  mean  ? 
Did  the  compilers  of  the  Prayer-book  wish  us  to  believe 
that  all  this  was  strictly  and  literally  applicable  to  every 
individual  member  of  the  Church  over  whose  body  these 
words  were  read  ?  Will  any  one  look  the  Service  honestly 
in  the  face  and  dare  to  say  so  ?  I  cannot  think  it.  The 
simple  explanation  of  the  service  is,  that  it  was  drawn 
up,  like  the  rest,  on  the  presumption  that  all  members 
of  a  Church  were  what  they  professed  to  be.  The  key 
to  the  interpretation  of  it  is  the  same  great  principle,  the 
principle  of  charitable  supposition. 

(cf)  This  is  the  only  principle  on  which  the  Catechism  can 
be  interpreted.  In  it  every  child  is  taught  to  say,  "  In 
baptism  I  was  made  a  member  of  Christ,  a  child  of  God, 
and  an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ; "  and  a  little 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  PRAYER-BOOK.        217 

further  on,  "  I  learn  to  believe  in  God  the  Holy  Ghost 
who  sanctifieth  me  and  all  the  elect  people  of  God." 
Now  what  does  this  mean?  Did  the  Prayer-book  writers 
intend  to  lay  it  down  as  an  abstract  principle  that  all 
baptized  children  are  sanctified  and  all  elect  ?  Will  any 
one  in  the  present  day  stand  forth  and  tell  us  that  all 
the  children  in  his  parish  are  actually  sanctified  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  ?  If  he  can,  I  can  only  say  that  his  parish 
is  an  exception,  or  else  Bible  words  have  no  meaning. 
But  I  cannot  yet  believe  that  any  one  would  say  so.  I 
believe  there  is  but  one  explanation  of  all  these  expres 
sions  in  the  Catechism.  They  are  the  words  of  charitable 
supposition,  and  in  no  other  sense  can  they  be  taken. 

How  any  one  can  fail  to  see  this  principle  running 
through  the  Prayer-book  services,  is  one  of  those  things 
which  I  fail  to  understand.  It  is  quite  certain  that  St. 
Paul  wrote  his  epistle  in  the  New  Testament  to  the 
Churches  upon  this  principle.  He  constantly  addresses 
their  members  as  "saints"  and  elect,  and  as  having  grace, 
and  faith,  and  hope,  and  love,  though  it  is  evident  that 
some  of  them  had  no  grace  at  all !  I  am  firmly  convinced 
that  the  compilers  of  our  Prayer-book  drew  up  its  services 
upon  the  same  lines,  the  lines  of  charitable  supposition ; 
and  it  is  on  this  principle  alone  that  the  book  can  be 
interpreted. 

With  this  caution  I  close  this  paper  on  the  English 
Liturgy.  No  one  can  value  the  book  more  than  I  do, 
and  the  longer  I  live  the  more  I  value  it.  But  I  warn 
my  readers  never  to  forget  that  one  principle  runs  through 
it  all.  That  principle  is  the  principle  that  worshippers 
really  are  what  they  profess  to  be.  On  that  principle 
the  book  is  incomparable  as  a  manual  of  public  worship. 
And  without  that  principle  people  are  apt  to  draw  from  it 
mischievous  lessons,  which  it  was  never  meant  to  teach. 


X. 

THOUGHTS   ON  BAPTISM. 

BAPTISM  is  one  of  the  two  only  sacraments  which  "  Christ 
has  ordained  in  His  Church."  It  is  declared  by  our 
Church  Catechism  to  be  "generally  necessary  to  salva 
tion."  The  same  Catechism .  teaches  us  that  there  are 
two  parts  in  a  Sacrament, — the  outward  visible  sign  and 
the  inward  spiritual  grace.  In  baptism  the  outward 
visible  sign  is  said  to  be  "water,"  and  the  inward  and 
spiritual  grace,  "  a  death  unto  sin  and  a  new  birth  unto 
righteousness." 

I  offer  the  following  pages  to  Churchmen,  in  the  hope 
that  they  may  assist  those  who  read  them  to  form  some 
clear  views  about  the  sacrament  of  baptism.  Unhappily, 
there  is  perhaps  no  subject  in  Christianity  about  which 
such  difference  of  opinion  exists.  The  very  name  recalls 
to  one's  mind  an  endless  list  of  strifes,  disputes,  heart 
burnings,  controversies,  and  divisions. 

I  propose  in  this  paper  to  offer  a  few  remarks  on  this 
disputed  subject.  I  am  not  bold  enough  to  suppose  that 
I  can  throw  any  light  on  a  controversy  which  so  many 
great  and  good  men  have  handled  in  vain.  But  I  know 
that  every  additional  witness  is  useful  in  a  disputed  case. 
I  want  to  strengthen  the  hands  of  those  I  agree  with, 
and  to  show  them  that  we  have  no  reason  to  be  ashamed 

Ste 


THOUGHTS    ON    BAPTISM.  219 

of  our  opinions.  I  want  to  suggest  a  few  things  for  the 
consideration  of  those  I  do  not  agree  with,  and  to  show 
them  that  the  Scriptural  argument  in  this  matter  is  not, 
as  some  suppose,  all  on  one  side. 

I.  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM, — WHAT  is  IT? 

(1)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  appointed  by  our  Lord 
Jesus    Christ,    for    the    continual    admission    of    fresh 
members  into  His  visible  Church.     In  the  army  every 
new  soldier  is  formally  added  to  the  muster-roll  of  his 
regiment.     In   a   school   every  new   scholar  is  formally 
entered  on  the  books  of  the  school.     And  every  Christian 
begins  his  Church-membership  by  being   baptized.     By 
baptism  he  is  undoubtedly  introduced    into  a  state   of 
great  religious  privilege.     He  is  entitled  to  a  place  in 
the  Christian  congregation,  to  the  use  of  means  of  grace, 
to  the  care  and  instruction  of  Christian  ministers  while 
he  lives,  and  to  be  buried  with  Christian  burial  when  he 
dies. 

(2)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  of  great  simplicity.     The 
outward  part  or  sign  is  water,  administered  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  in  the 
name  of  Christ  alone.    The  inward  part,  or  thing  signified, 
is  that  "death  unto  sin  and  new  birth  unto  righteous 
ness," — that  washing  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  inward 
cleansing  of    the  heart  by  the   Holy   Ghost, — without 
which  no  one  can  be  saved.     It  is  this  death  unto  sin 
and  new  birth  we  must  always  remember,  and  not  the 
baptismal  water,  which  makes  us  children  of  grace.     The 
word  "  hereby  "  in  the  Church  catechism,  about  the  inward 
part  of  baptism,  is  generally  quite  misunderstood.     The 
27th  Article  of   the  Church  of  England  says  rightly, — 
"  Baptism  is  not  only  a  sign  of  profession  and  mark  of  differ 
ence  whereby  Christian  men  are  discerned  from  others  that  be 


220  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

not  christened,  but  it  is  also  a  sign  of  regeneration  or 
new  birth." 

(3)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  on  which  we  may  con 
fidently  expect  the  highest  blessings,  when  it  is  rightly 
used.      It  is   unreasonable  to   suppose  that   the   Great 
Head  of  the  Church  would  solemnly  appoint  an  ordinance 
which  was  to  be  as  useless  to  the  soul  as  a  mere  human 
enrolment  or  an  act  of  civil  registration.     The  sacrament 
we  are  considering  is  not  a  mere  man-made  appointment, 
but    an   institution    appointed    by   the    King    of    kings. 
When  faith  and  prayer  accompany  baptism,  and  a  diligent 
use  of  Scriptural  means  follows  it,  we   are  justified  in 
looking  for  much  spiritual  blessing.     Without  faith  and 
prayer  baptism  becomes  a  mere  form. 

(4)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  which  is  expressly  named 
in  the  New  Testament  about  eighty  times.     Almost  the 
last  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  were  a  command  to 
baptize :  "  Go  ye  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them 
in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."     (Matt,  xxvii.  19.)     We  find  Peter  saying 
on   the   day  of   Pentecost, — "Kepent    and    be    baptized 
every  one  of  you;"   and  in  the  house   of   Cornelius, — 
"  Can  any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  should  not  be 
baptized?"      (Acts  ii.  38,  x.  47.)      We   find   St.  Paul 
was   not   only  baptized  himself,  but   baptized    disciples 
wherever  he  went.     To  say,  as  some  do,  in  the  face  of 
these  texts,  that  baptism  is  an  institution  of  no  import 
ance,   is   to   pour  contempt   on   the   Bible.     To  say,  as 
others  do,  that  baptism  is  only  a  thing  of  the  heart,  and 
not  an  outward  ordinance  at  all,  is  to  say  that  which  it 
seems  hard  to  reconcile  with  the  Bible. 

(5)  Baptism    is    an    ordinance    which,    according    to 
Scripture,  a  man  may  receive,  and  yet  get  no  good  from 
it.      Can  any   one    doubt    that    Judas    Iscariot,   Simon 
Magus,     Ananias     and     Sapphira,    Demas,    Hymenseus, 


THOUGHTS  ON    BAPTISM.  221 

Philetus,  and  Nicolas,  were  all  baptized  people?  Yet 
what  benefit  did  they  receive  from  baptism?  Clearly, 
for  anything  that  we  can  see,  none  at  all !  Their  hearts 
were  "not  right  in  the  sight  of  God."  (Acts  viii.  21.) 
They  remained  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  and  "  dead 
while  they  lived."  (Eph.  ii.  1 ;  1  Tim.  v.  6.) 

(6)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  which  in  Apostolic  times 
went    together   with    the    first    beginnings    of    a   man's 
religion.      In    the    very   day  that    many   of    the    early 
Christians  repented  and  believed,  in  that  very  day  they 
were  baptized.     Baptism  was  the  expression  of  their  new 
born  faith,  and  the  starting-point  in  their  Christianity. 
No  wonder  that  in  such  cases  it  was  regarded   as  the 
vehicle  of  all  spiritual  blessings.     The  Scriptural  expres 
sions,  "buried  with   Christ  in  baptism" — "putting  on 
Christ   in  baptism" — "baptism   doth  also   save  us" — 
would  be  full  of  deep  meaning  to  such  persons.     (Eom. 
vi.  4;  Col.  ii.  12;  Gal.  iii.  27  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  21.)     They 
would  exactly  tally  with  their  experience.     But  to  apply 
such   expressions    indiscriminately    to     the     baptism    of 
infants  in  our  own  day  is,  in  my  judgment,  unreasonable 
and  unfair.     It  is  an  application  of  Scripture  which,  I 
believe,  was  never  intended. 

(7)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  which  a  man  may  never 
receive,  and  yet  be  a  true  Christian,  and  be  saved.     The 
case  of  the  penitent  thief  is   sufficient  to  prove  this. 
Here  was  a  man  who  repented,  believed,  was  converted, 
and  gave  evidence  of  true  grace,  if  any  one  ever  did. 
We  read  of  no  one  else  to  whom  such  marvellous  words 
were  addressed  as  the  famous  sentence, — "  To-day  shalt 
thou  be  with  Me  in  paradise."    (Luke  xxiii.  43.)     And 
yet  there  is  not  the  slightest  proof  that  this  man  was 
ever  baptized  at  all !     Without  baptism  and  the  Lord's 
Supper  he  received  the  highest  spiritual  blessings  while 
he  lived,  and  was  with  Christ  in  paradise  when  he  died. 


222  PRINCIPLES    FOR.  CHURCHMEN. 

To  assert,  in  the  face  of  such  a  case,  that  baptism  is 
absolutely  necessary  to  salvation  is  something  monstrous. 
To  say  that  baptism  is  the  only  means  of  regeneration, 
and  that  all  who  die  unbaptized  are  lost  for  ever,  is  to 
say  that  which  cannot  be  proved  by  Scripture,  and  is 
revolting  to  common  sense. 

(8)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  which  ought  to  be 
followed  up  in  the  case  of  infants  when  they  come  to 
years  of  discretion,  by  public  reception  into  the  con 
gregation.  Such  reception  is  provided  by  the  Church  of 
England  in  the  excellent  and  useful  rite  of  Confirmation. 
Young  persons  who  were  baptized  at  an  age  when  they 
were  passive  and  unconscious,  should  be  carefully  taught 
"  what  a  solemn  promise  "  was  made  for  them  in  baptism, 
and  urged  to  come  forward  and  take  that  promise  on 
themselves.  Confirmation,  no  doubt,  is  not  a  sacrament, 
and  was  not  ordained  by  Christ,  and  cannot  be  called 
"  necessary  to  salvation."  But  confirmation  rightly  used, 
and  preceded  by  sound  Scriptural  instruction,  is  a  most 
valuable  ordinance,  and  has  been  most  wisely  adopted  in 
the  Church  of  England. 

I  leave  this  part  of  my  subject  here.  I  commend  the 
eight  propositions  which  I  have  laid  down  to  the  serious 
consideration  of  all  who  wish  to  attain  clear  views  about 
baptism.  In  considering  the  two  Sacraments  of  the 
Christian  religion  I  hold  it  to  be  of  primary  importance 
to  put  away  from  us  the  vagueness  and  mysteriousness 
with  which  too  many  surround  them.  After  all,  let  us 
be  careful  that  we  believe  neither  more  nor  less  about 
them  than  we  can  prove  by  plain  texts  of  Scripture. 

II.  IN  WHAT  WAY  OUGHT  BAPTISM  TO  BE  ADMINISTERED  ? 

This  is  a  point  on  which  a  wide  difference  of  opinion 
prevails.  Some  Christians  maintain  strongly  that  com- 


THOUGHTS   ON    BAPTISM.  223 

plete  immersion  in  water  is  absolutely  necessary  and 
essential,  in  order  to  make  a  valid  baptism.  They  hold 
that  no  person  is  really  baptized  unless  he  is  entirely 
"  dipped,"  and  covered  over  with  water.  Others,  on  the 
contrary,  maintain  with  equal  firmness  that  immersion  is 
not  necessary  at  all,  and  that  sprinkling  or  pouring  a 
small  quantity  of  water  on  the  person  baptized  fulfils  all 
the  requirements  of  Christ. 

My  own  opinion  is  distinct  and  decided  that  Scripture 
leaves  the  point  an  open  question.  I  can  find  nothing 
in  the  Bible  to  warrant  the  assertion  that  either  dipping 
or  sprinkling  is  essential  to  baptism. — I  believe  it  would 
be  impossible  to  prove  that  either  way  of  baptizing  is 
exclusively  right,  or  that  either  is  downright  wrong.  So 
long  as  water  is  used  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity,  or  in 
the  name  of  Christ,  the  precise  mode  of  administering 
the  ordinance  is  left  an  open  question. 

This  is  the  view  adopted  by  the  Church  of  England. 
The  baptismal  service  expressly  sanctions  "  dipping "  in 
the  most  plain  terms.1  To  say,  as  many  Baptists  do, 
that  the  Church  of  England  is  opposed  to  baptism  by 
immersion  is  a  melancholy  proof  of  the  ignorance  in 
which  many  dissenters  live !  Thousands,  I  am  afraid, 
find  fault  with  the  Prayer-book  without  having  ever 
examined  its  contents.  If  any  one  wishes  to  be  bap 
tized  by  "  dipping"  in  the  Church  of  England,  let 
him  understand  that  the  parish  clergyman  is  just 
as  ready  to  dip  him  as  the  Baptist  minister,  and 
that  "  immersion "  may  be  had  in  Church  as  well  as  in 
Chapel. 

There  is  a  large  body  of  Christians,  however,  who  are 

1  The  rubric  of  the  Prayer-book  service  for  the  public  baptism  of 
infants  says, — "If  the  godfather  and  godmother  shall  certify  to  the 
priest  that  the  child  may  well  endure  it,  he  shall  dip  it  in  the  water 
discreetly  and  warily." 


224  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

not  satisfied  with  this  moderate  view  of  the  question. 
They  will  have  it  that  baptism  by  dipping  or  immersion  is 
the  only  Scriptural  baptism.  They  say  that  all  the  persons 
whose  baptism  we  read  of  in  the  Bible  were  "  dipped." 
They  hold,  in  short,  that  where  there  is  no  immersion 
there  is  no  baptism. 

I  fear  it  is  almost  waste  of  time  to  attempt  to  say 
anything  on  this  much-disputed  question.  So  much  has 
been  written  on  both  sides  without  effect  during  the  last 
two  hundred  years,  that  I  cannot  hope  to  throw  any  new 
light  on  the  subject.  The  utmost  that  I  shall  try  to  do 
is  to  suggest  a  few  considerations  to  any  whose  minds  are 
in  doubt.  I  only  ask  them  to  remember  that  I  do  not 
say  that  baptism  by  "  dipping  "  is  positively  wrong.  All 
I  say  is,  that  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary,  and  is  not 
absolutely  commanded  in  Scripture. 

(a)  I  ask,  then,  any  doubting  mind  to  consider  whether 
it  is  in  the  least  probable  that  all  the  cases  of  baptism 
described  in  Scripture  were  cases  of  complete  immersion  ? 
The  three  thousand  baptized  in  one  day  at  the  feast  of 
Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  41), — the  jailor  at  Philippi  suddenly 
baptized  at  midnight  in  prison  (Acts  xvi.  33) — is  it  at 
all  likely  or  probable  that  they  were  all  "  dipped  "  ?  To 
my  own  mind,  trying  to  take  an  impartial  view,  it  seems 
in  the  highest  degree  improbable.  Let  those  believe  it 
who  can. 

(V)  I  ask  any  one  to  consider,  furthermore,  whether  it  is 
at  all  probable  that  a  mode  of  baptism  would  have  been 
enjoined  as  necessary,  which  in  some  climates  is  im 
practicable  ?  At  the  north  and  south  poles,  for  example, 
the  temperature,  for  many  months,  is  many  degrees 
below  freezing-point.  In  Tropical  countries,  on  the  other 
hand,  water  is  often  so  extremely  scarce,  that  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  find  enough  for  common  drinking  purposes. 
Now  will  any  maintain  that  in  such  climates  there  can 


THOUGHTS    ON  BAPTISM.  225 

be  no  baptism  without  immersion  ?  Will  any  one  tell  us 
that  in  such  climates  it  is  really  necessary  that  every 
candidate  for  baptism  should  be  completely  "  dipped "  ? 
Let  those  believe  it  who  can. 

(c)  I  ask  any  one  to  consider,  further,  whether  it  is  at 
all  probable  that  a  mode  of  baptism  would  have  been 
enjoined  which,  in  some  conditions  of  health,  is  simply 
impossible.     There  are  thousands  of  persons  whose  lungs 
and  general  constitution  are  in  so  delicate  a  state  that 
total  immersion  in  water  would  be  death  to  them.     Now 
will  any  maintain  that  such  persons  ought  to  be  debarred 
from   baptism   unless   they   are   "  dipped "  ?      Let   those 
believe  it  who  can. 

(d)  I  ask  any  one  to  consider,  further,  whether  it  is 
probable  that  a  mode  of    baptizing  would  be  enjoined 
which  in  many  countries  would  practically  exclude  women 
from  baptism.     The  sensitiveness  and  strictness  of  Eastern 
nations  about  the  treatment  of  their  wives  and  daughters 
are  notorious  facts.     There  are  many  parts  of  the  world 
in  which  women  are  so  completely  separated  and  secluded 
from  the  other  sex  that  there  is  the  greatest  difficulty  in 
even  speaking  to  them  about  religion.     To  talk  of  such 
an  ordinance  as  baptizing  them  by  "  immersion "  would, 
in  hundreds  of  cases,  be  perfectly  useless.     The  feelings 
of  fathers,  husbands,  and  brothers,  however   personally 
disposed  to  receive  Christian  teaching,  would  be  revolted 
by  the  mention  of  it.     And  will  any  one  maintain  that 
such  women  are  to  be  left  unbaptized  altogether  because 
they  cannot  be  dipped  ?     Let  those  believe  it  who  can. 

I  believe  I  might  well  leave  the  subject  of  the  mode 
of  baptism  at  this  point.  But  there  are  two  favourite 
arguments  which  the  advocates  of  immersion  are  con 
stantly  bringing  forward,  about  which  I  think  it  righb  to 
say  something. 

One  of  these  favourite  arguments  is  based  on  the 

P 


226  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

meaning  of  the  Greek  word  in  the  New  Testament,  which 
we  translate  "  to  baptize."  It  is  constantly  asserted  that 
this  word  can  mean  nothing  else  but  dipping  or  complete 
"  immersion."  The  reply  to  this  argument  is  short  and 
simple.  The  assertion  is  utterly  destitute  of  foundation. 
Those  who  are  best  acquainted  with  New  Testament 
Greek  are  decidedly  of  opinion  that  to  baptize  means  "  to 
wash  or  cleanse  with  water,"  but  whether  by  immersion 
or  not  must  be  entirely  decided  by  the  context.  We 
read  in  St.  Luke  (xi.  38),  that  when  our  Lord  dined  with 
a  certain  Pharisee,  "  the  Pharisee  marvelled  that  He  had 
not  first  washed  before  dinner."  It  may  surprise  some 
readers,  perhaps,  to  hear  that  these  words  would  have 
been  rendered  more  literally,  "  that  He  had  not  first  been 
baptized  before  dinner."  Yet  it  is  evident  to  common 
sense  that  the  Pharisee  could  not  have  expected  our  Lord 
to  immerse  or  dip  Himself  over  head  in  water  before 
dining !  It  simply  means  that  he  expected  Him  to 
perform  some  ablution,  or  to  pour  water  over  His  hands 
before  the  meal.  But  if  this  is  so,  what  becomes  of  the 
argument  that  to  baptize  always  means  complete  "  immer 
sion  "  ?  It  is  cut  from  under  the  feet  of  the  advocate  of 
"  dipping,"  and  to  reason  further  about  it  is  mere  waste 
of  time. 

Another  favourite  argument  in  favour  of  baptism 
by  immersion  is  drawn  from  the  expression  "  buried  with 
Christ  in  baptism,"  which  St.  Paul  uses  on  two  occasions. 
(Eom.  vi.  4  ;  Col.  ii.  12.)  It  is  asserted  that  going  down 
into  the  water  of  baptism,  and  being  completely  "dipped  " 
under  it,  is  an  exact  figure  of  Christ's  burial  and  coming 
up  out  of  the  grave,  and  represents  our  union  with 
Christ,  and  participation  in  all  the  benefits  of  His  death 
and  resurrection.  But,  unfortunately  for  this  argument, 
there  is  no  proof  whatever  that  Christ's  burial  was  a 
going  down  into  a  hole  dug  in  the  ground,  On  the 


THOUGHTS    ON    BAPTISM.  227 

contrary,  it  is  far  more  probable  that  His  grave  was  a 
cave  cut  out  of  the  side  of  a  rock,  like  that  of  Lazarus, 
and  on  a  level  with  the  surrounding  ground.  Such,  at 
least,  was  the  common  mode  of  burying  round  Jerusalem. 
At  this  rate  there  is  no  resemblance  whatever  between 
going  down  into  a  bath,  or  baptistry,  and  the  burial  of 
our  Lord.  The  actions  are  not  like  one  another.  That 
by  profession  of  a  lively  faith  in  Christ  at  baptism  a 
believer  declares  his  union  with  Christ,  both  in  His 
death  and  resurrection,  is  undoubtedly  true.  But  to  say 
that  in  "  going  down  into  the  water  "  he  is  burying  his 
body  just  as  His  Master's  body  was  buried  in  the  grave, 
is  to  say  what  cannot  be  proved. 

In  saying  all  this  I  should  be  very  sorry  to  be  mis 
taken.  God  forbid  that  I  should  wound  the  feelings  of 
any  brother  who  has  conscientious  scruples  on  this 
subject,  and  prefers  baptism  by  dipping  to  baptism  by 
sprinkling.  I  condemn  him  not.  To  his  own  Master 
he  stands  or  falls.  He  that  conscientiously  prefers 
dipping  may  be  dipped  in  the  Church  of  England,  and 
have  all  his  children  dipped  if  he  pleases.  What  I 
contend  for  is  liberty.  I  find  no  certain  law  laid  down 
as  to  the  mode  in  which  baptism  is  to  be  administered, 
so  long  as  water  is  used  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity. 
Let  every  man  be  persuaded  in  his  own  mind.  He  that 
sprinkles  in  baptism  has  no  right  to  excommunicate  him 
that  dips, — and  he  that  dips  has  no  right  to  excom 
municate  him  that  sprinkles.  Neither  of  them  can 
possibly  prove  that  the  other  is  entirely  wrong. 

I  leave  this  part  of  my  subject  here.  Whatever 
some  may  think,  I  am  content  to  regard  the  precise  mode 
of  baptizing  as  a  thing  indifferent,  as  a  thing  on  which 
every  one  may  use  his  liberty.  I  firmly  believe  that  this 
liberty  was  intended  of  God.  It  is  in  keeping  with 
many  other  things  in  the  Christian  dispensation.  I  find 


228  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

nothing  precise  laid  down  in  the  New  Testament  about 
ceremonies,  or  vestments,  or  liturgies,  or  Church  music, 
or  the  shape  of  Churches,  or  the  hours  of  service,  or  the 
quality  of  bread  and  wine  to  be  used  at  the  Lord's 
Supper.  On  all  these  points  I  see  a  liberal  discretion 
allowed  to  the  Church  of  Christ.  So  long  as  things  are 
"  done  to  edifying,"  the  principle  of  the  New  Testament 
is  to  allow  a  wide  liberty. 

I  hold  firmly  myself  that  the  validity  and  benefit  of 
baptism  do  not  depend  on  the  quantity  of  water  employed, 
but  on  the  state  of  heart  in  which  the  sacrament  is  used. 
Those  who  insist  on  every  grown-up  person  being  plunged 
over  head  in  a  baptistry,  and  those  who  insist  on  pouring 
an  immense  handful  of  water  in  the  face  of  every  tender 
infant  they  receive  into  the  Church  at  the  font,  are  both 
alike,  in  my  judgment,  greatly  mistaken.  Both  are 
attaching  far  more  importance  to  the  quantity  of  water 
used  than  I  can  find  warranted  in  Scripture.  It  has 
been  well  said  by  a  great  divine, — "A  little  drop  of 
water  may  serve  to  seal  the  fulness  of  Divine  grace  in 
baptizing,  as  well  as  a  small  piece  of  bread  and  the  least 
tasting  of  wine  in  the  Holy  Supper."  (Witsius,  Econ. 
Fed.  1.  4,  ch.  xvi.  30.)  To  that  opinion  I  entirely 
subscribe. 

III.    TO  WHOM  OUGHT  BAPTISM  TO  BE  ADMINISTERED  ? 

It  is  impossible  to  handle  this  branch  of  the  subject 
without  coming  into  direct  collision  with  the  opinions  of 
others.  But  I  hope  it  is  possible  to  handle  it  in  a 
kindly  and  temperate  spirit.  At  any  rate  it  is  no  use  to 
avoid  discussion  for  fear  of  offending  Baptists.  Disputed 
points  in  theology  are  never  likely  to  be  settled  unless 
men  on  both  sides  will  say  out  plainly  what  they  think, 
and  give  their  reasons  for  their  opinions.  To  avoid  the 


THOUGHTS   ON   BAPTISM.  229 

subject  because  it  is  a  controversial  one,  is  neither  honest 
nor  wise.  A  clergyman  has  no  right  to  complain  that 
his  parishioners  become  Baptists,  if  he  never  instructs 
them  about  infant  baptism. 

I  begin  by  laying  it  down  as  a  point  almost  undisputed, 
that  all  grown-up  converts  at  Missionary  stations  among 
the  heathen  ought  to  be  baptized.  As  soon  as  they 
embrace  the  Gospel  and  make  a  credible  profession  of 
repentance  and  faith  in  Christ,  they  ought  at  once  to 
receive  baptism.  This  is  the  doctrine  and  practice  of 
Episcopal,  Presbyterian,  Wesleyan,  and  Independent 
Missionaries,  just  as  much  as  it  is  the  doctrine  of 
Baptists.  Let  there  be  no  mistake  on  this  point.  To 
talk,  as  some  Baptists  do,  of  "  believer's  baptism,"  as  if 
it  was  a  kind  of  baptism  peculiar  to  their  own  body 
is  simply  nonsense.  "  Believer's  baptism "  is  known 
and  practised  in  every  successful  Protestant  Mission 
throughout  the  world. 

But  I  now  go  a  step  further.  I  lay  it  down  as  a 
Christian  truth,  that  the  children  of  all  professing 
Christians  have  a  right  to  baptism,  if  their  parents 
require  it,  as  well  as  their  parents.  Of  course  the 
children  of  professed  unbelievers  and  heathen  have  no 
title  to  baptism,  so  long  as  they  are  under  the  charge  of 
their  parents.  But  the  children  of  professing  Christians 
are  in  an  entirely  different  position.  If  their  fathers 
and  mothers  offer  them  to  be  baptized,  the  Church  ought 
to  receive  them  in  baptism,  and  has  no  right  to  refuse 
them. 

It  is  precisely  at  this  point  that  the  grave  division  of 
opinion  exists  between  the  body  of  Christians  called 
Baptists  and  the  greater  part  of  Christians  throughout 
the  world.  The  Baptist  asserts  that  no  one  ought  to  be 
baptized  who  does  not  make  a  personal  profession  of 
repentance  and  faith,  and  that  as  children  cannot  do  this 


230  PRINCIPLES    FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

they  ought  not  to  be  baptized.  I  think  that  this 
assertion  is  not  borne  out  by  Scripture,  and  I  shall 
proceed  to  give  the  reasons  why  I  think  so.  I  believe  it 
can  be  shown  that  the  children  of  professing  Christians 
have  a  right  to  baptism,  and  that  it  is  a  complete  mistake 
not  to  baptize  them. 

Let  me  remind  the  reader  at  the  outset,  that  the 
question  under  consideration  is  not  the  Baptismal  Service 
of  the  Church  of  England.  Whether  that  Service  is 
right  or  wrong, — whether  it  is  useful  to  have  godfathers 
and  godmothers,  are  not  the  points  in  dispute.  It  is 
mere  waste  of  time  to  say  anything  about  them.1  The 
question  before  us  is  simply  whether  infant  baptism  is 
right  in  principle.  That  it  is  right  is  held  by  Presby 
terians,  Independents,  and  Methodists,  who  use  no 
Prayer-book,  just  as  stoutly  as  it  is  by  Churchmen.  To 
the  consideration  of  this  one  question  I  shall  strictly 
confine  myself.  There  is  not  the  slightest  necessary 
connection  between  the  Liturgy  and  infant  baptism.  I 
heartily  wish  that  some  people  would  remember  this.  To 
insist  on  dragging  in  the  Liturgy,  and  mixing  it  up  with 
the  abstract  question  of  infant  baptism,  is  neither  good 
logic,  nor  fairness,  nor  common  sense. 

Let  me  clear  the  way  furthermore,  by  observing  that 
I  will  not  be  drawn  away  from  the  real  point  at  issue  by 
the  ludicrous  descriptions  which  some  people  give  of  the 
abuse  of  infant  baptism.  No  doubt  it  is  easy  for  popular 
writers  and  preachers  to  draw  a  vivid  picture  of  an 
ignorant,  prayerless,  couple  of  peasants,  bringing  an 
unconscious  infant  to  be  sprinkled  at  the  font  by  a  care 
less  sporting  parson  !  It  is  easy  to  finish  off  the  picture 
by  saying,  "  What  good  can  infant  baptism  do  ?" — 

1  Readers  who  wish  to  examine  the  true  meaning  of  the  Baptismal 
Service  are  requested  to  read  a  tract  of  mine,  called  "A  Guide  to  Church 
men  about  Baptism  and  Regeneration. " 


THOUGHTS    ON    BAPTISM.  231 

Such  pictures  are  very  amusing  perhaps,  but  they  are  no 
argument  against  the  principle  of  infant  baptism.  The 
abuse  of  a  thing  is  no  proof  that  it  ought  to  be  disused 
and  is  wrong.  Moreover,  those  who  live  in  glass  houses 
had  better  not  throw  stones.  Strange  pictures  might  be 
drawn  of  what  happens  sometimes  in  Baptist  Chapels  at 
adult  baptisms !  But  I  forbear.  I  want  the  reader  to 
look  not  at  pictures  but  at  Scriptural  principles. 

Let  me  now  supply  a  few  simple  reasons  why  I 
hold,  in  common  with  all  Episcopalians,  Presbyterians, 
Methodists,  and  Independents  throughout  the  world,  that 
infant  baptism  is  a  right  thing,  and  that  in  denying 
baptism  to  children  the  Baptists  are  mistaken.  The 
reasons  are  as  follows. 

(a)  Children  were  admitted  into  the  Old  Testament 
Church  by  a  formal  ordinance,  from  the  time  of  Abraham 
downwards.  That  ordinance  was  circumcision.  It  was  an 
ordinance  which  God  Himself  appointed,  and  the  neglect 
of  which  was  denounced  as  a  great  sin.  (Gen.  xvii.  13, 
14.)  It  was  an  ordinance  about  which  the  highest 
language  is  used  in  the  New  Testament.  St.  Paul  calls 
it  "  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith."  (Eom.  ii.  4.) 
Now,  if  children  were  considered  to  be  capable  of 
admission  into  the  Church  by  an  ordinance  in  the  Old 
Testament,  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  they  cannot  be 
admitted  in  the  New.  The  general  tendency  of  the 
Gospel  is  to  increase  men's  spiritual  privileges,  and  not 
to  diminish  them.  Nothing,  I  believe,  would  astonish 
a  Jewish  convert  so  much  as  to  tell  him  his  children 
could  not  be  baptized !  "  If  they  are  fit  to  receive 
circumcision,"  he  would  reply,  "  why  are  they  not  fit  to 
receive  baptism  ?"  And  my  own  firm  conviction  has 
long  been  that  no  Baptist  could  give  him  an  answer. 
In  fact  I  never  saw  an  argument  against  infant  baptism 
that  might  not  have  been  equally  directed  against  infant 


232  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

circumcision.  No  man,  however,  in  his  sober  senses, 
would  presume  to  say  that  infant  circumcision  was 
wrong. 

(b)  The  baptism  of   children  is  nowhere  forbidden  in 
the  New  Testament.     There   is   not   a   single   text   from 
Matthew  to  Eevelation,  which  either  directly  or  indirectly 
hints  that  infants  should  not  be  baptized.     Some,  perhaps, 
may  see  little  in  this  silence.     To  my  mind  it  is  a  silence 
full  of  meaning  and  instruction.     The  first  Christians,  be 
it  remembered,  were  many  of  them  by  birth  Jews.     They 
had  been  accustomed  in  the  Jewish  Church,  before  their 
conversion,  to  have  their  children  admitted  into  church- 
membership  by  a  solemn  ordinance,  as  a  matter  of  course. 
Without   a   distinct    prohibition    from    our    Lord    Jesus 
Christ,  they  would  naturally  go  on  with  the  same  system 
of  proceeding,  and  bring  their  children  to  be  baptized. 
But   we  find  no  such  prohibition !     That   absence  of  a 
prohibition,  to  my  mind,  speaks   volumes.      It   satisfies 
me  that  no  change  was  intended  by  Christ  about  children. 
If  He  had  intended  a  change,  He  would  have  said  some 
thing  to  teach  it.     But  He  says  not  a  word !     That  very 
silence  is,  to  my  mind,  a  most  powerful  and  convincing 
argument.     As  God  commanded  Old  Testament  children 
to  be  circumcised,  so  God  intends  New  Testament  children 
to  be  baptized. 

(c)  The   baptism  of  households  is  specially  mentioned 
in  the  New  Testament.     "We  read  in  the  Acts  that  Lydia 
was  baptized  "  and  her  household,"  and  that  the  jailor  of 
Philippi  "  was  baptized,  he  and  all  his."     (Acts  xvi.  1 5, 
33.)     Now  what  meaning  would  any  one  attach  to  these 
expressions  if  he  had  no  theory  to  maintain,  and  could 
view  them  dispassionately  ?     Would  he  not  explain  the 
"household"  to   include   the   young  as   well  as    old, — 
children  as  well  as  grown-up  people  ?    Who  doubts  when 
he  reads  the  words  of  Joseph  in  Genesis, — "  take  food 


THOUGHTS  ON  BAPTISM.  233 

for  the  famine  of  your  households  "  (Gen.  xlii.  33)  ;  or, — • 
"  take  your  father  and  your  households  and  come  unto 
me"  (Gen.  xlv.  18),  that  children  are  included?  Who 
can  possibly  deny  that  when  God  said  to  Noah,  "  Come 
thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark,"  He  meant  Noah's 
sons  ?  (Gen.  vii.  1.)  For  my  own  part,  I  cannot  see  how 
these  questions  can  be  answered  without  establishing  the 
principle  of  infant  baptism.  Admitting  most  fully  that 
it  is  not  directly  said  that  St.  Paul  baptized  little 
children,  it  seems  to  my  mind  the  highest  probability 
that  the  "  households  "  he  baptized  comprised  children  as 
well  as  grown-up  people. 

(d)  The  behaviour  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  little 
children,  as  recorded  in  the  Gospels,  is  very  peculiar  and 
full  of  meaning.  The  well-known  passage  in  St.  Mark 
is  an  instance  of  what  I  mean.  "  They  brought  young 
children  to  Him,  that  He  should  touch  them :  and  His 
disciples  rebuked  those  that  brought  them.  But  when 
Jesus  saw  it,  He  was  much  displeased,  and  said  unto 
them,  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto  Me,  and 
forbid  them  not:  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Whosoever  shall  not  receive  the 
kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child,  he  shall  not  enter 
therein.  And  He  took  them  up  in  His  arms,  put  His 
hands  upon  them,  and  blessed  them."  (Mark  x. 
13-16.) 

Now  I  do  not  pretend  for  a  moment  to  say  that  this 
passage  is  a  direct  proof  of  infant  baptism.  It  is  nothing 
of  the  kind.  But  I  do  say  that  it  supplies  a  curious 
answer  to  some  of  the  arguments  in  common  use  among 
those  who  object  to  infant  baptism.  That  infants  are 
capable,  of  receiving  some  benefit  from  our  Lord, — that 
the  conduct  of  those  who  would  have  kept  them  from 
Him  was  wrong  in  our  Lord's  eyes, — that  He  was  ready 
and  willing  to  bless  them,  even  when  they  were  too 


234  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

young  to  understand  what  He  said  or  did, — all  these 
things  stand  out  as  clearly  as  if  written  with  a  sun 
beam  !  A  direct  argument  in  favour  of  infant  baptism 
the  passage  certainly  is  not.  But  a  stronger  indirect 
testimony  it  seems  to  me  impossible  to  conceive. 

I  might  easily  add  to  these  arguments.  I  might 
strengthen  the  position  I  have  taken  up  by  several  con 
siderations  which  seem  to  me  to  deserve  very  serious 
attention. 

I  might  show,  from  the  writings  of  old  Dr.  Lightfoot,  a 
master  of  Jewish  literature  in  the  l*7th  century,  that  the 
baptism  of  little  children  was  a  practice  with  which  the 
Jews  were  perfectly  familiar.  When  Gentile  proselytes 
were  received  into  the  Jewish  Church  by  baptism,  before 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came,  their  infants  were  received, 
and  baptized  with  them  as  a  matter  of  course. 

I  might  show  that  infant  baptism  was  uniformly 
practised  by  all  the  early  Christians.  Every  Christian 
writer  of  any  repute  during  the  first  1500  years  after 
Christ,  with  the  single  exception  perhaps  of  Tertullian, 
speaks  of  infant  baptism  as  a  custom  which  the  Church 
has  always  sanctioned. 

I  might  show  that  the  vast  majority  of  eminent 
Christians,  from  the  period  of  the  Protestant  Eeformation 
down  to  the  present  day,  have  maintained  the  right  of 
infants  to  be  baptized.  Luther,  Calvin,  Melancthon,  and 
all  the  Continental  Eeformers, — Cranmer,  Eidley,  Latimer, 
and  all  the  English  Reformers, — the  great  body  of  all 
the  English  Puritans,  —  the  whole  of  the  Episcopal, 
Presbyterian,  Independent,  and  Methodist  Churches  of 
the  present  day, — are  all  of  one  mind  on  this  point. 
They  all  hold  infant  baptism. 

But  I  will  not  weary  the  reader  by  going  over  this 
ground.  I  will  proceed  to  notice  two  arguments  which 
are  commonly  used  against  infant  baptism,  and  are 


THOUGHTS    ON   BA.PTISM.  235 

thought  by  some  to  be  unanswerable.  Whether  they 
really  are  so  I  will  leave  the  reader  to  judge. 

(1)  The  first  favourite  argument  against  infant 
baptism  is  the  entire  absence  of  any  direct  text  or 
precept  in  its  favour  in  the  New  Testament.  "Show 
me  a  plain  text,"  says  many  a  Baptist,  "  commanding  me 
to  baptize  little  children.  Without  a  plain  text  the 
thing  ought  not  to  be  done." 

I  reply,  for  one  thing,  that  the  absence  of  any  text 
about  infant  baptism  is,  to  my  mind,  one  of  the  strongest 
evidences  in  its  favour.  That  infants  were  formerly 
admitted  into  the  Church  by  an  outward  ordinance,  for 
1800  years  before  Christ  came,  is  a  fact  that  cannot  be 
denied.  Now  if  He  had  meant  to  change  the  practice, 
and  exclude  infants  from  baptism,  I  should  expect  to 
find  some  plain  text  about  it.  But  I  find  none,  and 
therefore  I  conclude  that  there  was  to  be  no  alteration 
and  no  change.  The  very  absence  of  any  direct  command, 
on  which  the  Baptists  lay  such  stress,  is,  in  reality,  one 
of  the  strongest  arguments  against  their  view  of  baptism. 

But  I  reply,  for  another  thing,  that  the  absence  of 
some  plain  text  or  command  is  not  a  sufficient  argument 
against  infant  baptism.  There  are  not  a  few  things 
which  can  be  proved  and  inferred  from  Scripture,  though 
they  are  not  plainly  and  directly  taught.  Let  the 
Baptist  show  us  a  single  plain  text  which  directly 
warrants  the  admission  of  women  to  the  Lord's  Supper. 
— Let  him  show  us  one  which  directly  teaches  the 
keeping  of  the  Sabbath  on  the  first  day  of  the  week 
instead  of  the  seventh. — Let  him  show  us  one  which 
directly  forbids  gambling. — Any  well-instructed  Baptist 
knows  that  it  cannot  be  done.  But  surely,  if  this  is  the 
case,  there  is  an  end  of  this  famous  argument  against 
infant  baptism  !  It  falls  to  the  ground. 

(2)  The    second    favourite    argument    against    infant 


236  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

baptism  is  the  inability  of  infants  to  repent  and  believe. 
"What  can  be  more  monstrous,"  says  many  a  Baptist, 
"than  to  administer  an  ordinance  to  an  unconscious 
babe  ?  It  cannot  possibly  know  anything  of  repentance 
and  faith,  and  therefore  it  ought  not  to  be  baptized." 
The  Scripture  says, — "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized 
shall  be  saved ; "  and,  "  Eepent,  and  be  baptized."  (Mark 
xvi.  16;  Acts  ii.  38.) 

In  reply  to  this  argument,  I  ask  to  be  shown  a  single 
text  which  says  that  nobody  ought  to  be  baptized  until 
he  repents  and  believes.  I  shall  ask  in  vain.  The 
texts  just  quoted  prove  conclusively  that  grown-up 
people  who  repent  and  believe  when  Missionaries  preach 
the  Gospel  to  them,  ought  at  once  to  be  baptized.  But 
they  do  not  prove  that  their  children  ought  not  to  be 
baptized  together  with  them,  even  though  they  are  too 
young  to  believe.  The  plain  truth  is,  that  the  often- 
quoted  texts,  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved," — and,  "Eepent  ye,  and  be  baptized,"  will  never  carry 
the  weight  that  Baptists  lay  upon  them.  To  assert  that 
they  forbid  any  one  to  be  baptized  unless  he  repents 
and  believes,  is  to  put  a  meaning  on  the  words  which 
they  were  never  meant  to  bear.  They  leave  the  whole 
question  of  infants  entirely  out  of  sight.  The  text, 
"Nobody  shall  be  baptized  except  he  repents  and 
believes,"  would,  no  doubt,  have  been  a  very  conclusive 
one.  But  such  a  text  cannot  be  found ! 

After  all,  will  any  one  tell  us  that  an  intelligent 
profession  of  repentance  and  faith  is  absolutely  necessary 
to  salvation  ?  Would  even  the  most  rigid  Baptist  say 
that  because  infants  cannot  believe,  all  infants  must  be 
damned  ?  Yet  our  Lord  said  plainly, — "  He  that  believeth 
not  shall  be  damned."  (Mark  xvi.  16.) — Will  any  man 
pretend  to  say  that  infants  cannot  receive  grace  and  the 
Holy  Ghost?  John  the  Baptist,  we  know,  was  filled 


THOUGHTS    ON    BAPTISM.  237 

with  the  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb.  (Luke  i. 
15.) — Will  any  one  dare  to  tell  us  that  infants  cannot 
be  elect,  —  cannot  be  in  the  covenant,  —  cannot  be 
members  of  Christ, — cannot  be  children  of  God, — cannot 
have  new  hearts, — cannot  be  born  again, — cannot  go  to 
heaven  when  they  die  ? — These  are  solemn  and  serious 
questions.  I  cannot  believe  that  any  well-informed 
Baptist  would  give  them  any  but  one  answer.  Yet 
surely  those  who  may  be  members  of  the  glorious  Church 
above,  may  be  admitted  to  the  Church  below !  Those 
who  are  washed  with  the  blood  of  Christ  may  surely  be 
washed  with  the  water  of  baptism !  Those  who  are 
capable  of  being  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  may 
surely  be  baptized  with  water !  Let  these  things  be 
calmly  weighed.  I  have  seen  many  arguments  against 
infant  baptism,  which,  traced  to  their  logical  conclusion, 
are  the  arguments  against  infant  salvation,  and  condemn 
all  infants  to  eternal  ruin  ! 

I  leave  this  part  of  my  subject  here.  I  am  almost 
ashamed  of  having  said  so  much  about  it.  But  the 
times  in  which  we  live  are  my  plea  and  justification.  I 
do  not  write  so  much  to  convince  Baptists,  as  to  establish 
and  confirm  Churchmen.  I  have  often  been  surprised 
to  see  how  ignorant  some  Churchmen  are  of  the  grounds 
on  which  infant  baptism  may  be  defended.  If  I  have 
done  anything  to  show  Churchmen  the  strength  of  their 
own  position,  I  feel  that  I  shall  not  have  written  in 
vain. 

IV.  WHAT  POSITION  BAPTISM  OUGHT  TO  HOLD  IN  OUR 
EELIGION. 

This  is  a  point  of  great  importance.  In  matters  of 
opinion,  man  is  ever  liable  to  go  into  extremes.  In 
nothing  does  this  tendency  appear  so  strongly  as  in  the 


238  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

matter  of  religion.  In  no  part  of  religion  is  man  in  so 
much  danger  of  erring,  either  on  the  right  hand  or  the 
left,  tut  about  the  Sacraments.  In  order  to  arrive  at  a 
settled  judgment  about  baptism,  we  must  beware  both  of 
the  error  of  defect,  and  of  the  error  of  OXCCHH. 

(ft)  We  muHt  beware,  for  one  tiling,  of  despising 
'baptism,  This  is  the  error  of  defect.  Many  in  the 
present  day  seem  to  regard  it  with  perfect  indifference. 
They  pass  it  by,  and  give  it  no  place,  or  position  in  their 
religion.  Because,  in  many  caseH,  it  seems  to  confer  no 
benefit,  they  appear  to  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  it 
can  confer  none.  They  care  nothing  if  baptism  is  never 
named  in  the  sermon.  They  dislike  to  have  it  publicly 
administered  in  the  congregation.  In  short,  they  seem 
to  regard  the  whole  subject  of  baptism  as  a  trouble- 
Home,  question,  which  they  are  determined  to  hit  alone. 

Now,  I  only  ask  such  persons  to  consider  gravely 
whether  their  attitude  of  mind  is  justified  by  Scripture. 
Let  them  remember  our  Lord's  distinct  and  precise 
command  to  "baptize,"  when  He  left  His  disciples  alone 
in  the  world.  Let  thorn  remember  the  invariable 
practice  of  the.  Apostles,  wherever  they  went  preaching 
the  Gospel.  Let  them  mark  the  language  used  about 
baptism  in  several  places  in  the  Kpistles.  Now  is  it 
likely, — is  it  probable, — is  it  agreeable  to  reason  and 
common  sense-,  that  baptism  can  be  safely  regarded  as 
a  dropped  subject,  and  quietly  laid  on  the  shelf? 
Surely,  1  think  these  questions  can  only  receive  one 
answer. 

It  is  utterly  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Great 
Head  of  the  Church  would  burden  His  people  in  all  ages 
with  an  empty,  powerless,  unprofitable  institution.  It  is 
ridiculous  to  suppose  His  Apostles  would  speak  as  they 
do  about  baptism,  if  in  no  case,  and  under  no  circum 
stances,  could  it  be  of  any  use  or  help  to  a  man's  soul 


THOUGHTS   ON   BAPTISM.  239 

Let  these  things  he  calmly  weighed.  Let  us  take  hood, 
lest  in  fleeing  from  hlind  superstition,  wo  are  found 
equally  hlind  in  another  way,  and  pour  contempt  upon 
an  appointment  of  Christ. 

(b)  Wo  must  beware,  for  another  thing,  of  making  an 
idol  of  baptism.  This  is  the  error  of  excess.  Many  in 
the  present  day  exalt  baptism  to  a  position  which  nothing 
in  Scripture  can  possibly  justify.  If  they  hold  infant 
baptism,  thoy  will  toll  you  that  the  grace  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  invariably  accompanies  the.  administration  of  the 
ordinance, — that  in  every  case  a  seed  of  Divine  life  is 
implanted  in  the  heart,  to  which  all  subsequent  religious 
movement  must  be  traced, — and  that  all  baptized  children 
are  as  a  matter  of  course  born  again,  and  made  partakers 
of  the  Holy  Ghost! — If  thoy  do  not  hold  infant  baptism, 
thoy  will  tell  you  that  to  go  down  into  the  water  with  a 
profession  of  faith  and  repentance  is  the  very  turning- 
point  in  a  man's  religion, — that  until  wo  have  gone  down 
into  the  water  we  are  nothing, — and  that  when  wo  have 
gone  down  into  the  water,  we  have  taken  the  first 
step  toward  heaven  !  It  is  notorious  that  many  High 
Churchmen  and  Baptists  hold  these  opinions,  though  not 
all.  And  I  say  that,  although  they  may  not  mean  it, 
they  are  practically  making  an  idol  of  baptism. 

I  ask  all  persons  who  hold  these  exceedingly  high  and 
lofty  views  of  baptism,  to  consider  seriously  what  warrant 
they  have  in  the  Bible  for  their  opinions.  To  quote 
texts  in  which  the  greatest  privileges  and  blessings  are 
cornier, ted  with  baptism,  is  not  enough.  What  we.  want 

are  plain  texts  which  show  that  those  blessings  and 
privileges  are  always  and  invariably  conferred.  Tl  10 
question  to  be  settled  is  not  whether  a  child  '///////  bo 
born  again  and  receive  grace  in  baptism,  but  whether  all 
children  are  born  again,  and  receive  grace  when  they  arc 
baptized, — The  question  is  not  whether  an  adult  may 


240  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

"  put  on  Christ "  when  he  goes  down  into  the  water,  but 
whether  all  do  as  a  matter  of  course.  Surely  these 
things  demand  grave  and  calm  consideration ! — It  is 
positively  wearisome  to  read  the  sweeping  and  illogical 
assertions  which  are  often  made  upon  the  subject.  To  tell 
us,  for  example,  that  our  Lord's  famous  words  to  Nico- 
demus  (John  iii.  5)  teach  anything  more  than  the  general 
necessity  of  being  "  born  of  water  and  the  Spirit "  is  an 
insult  to  common  sense.  Whether  all  persons  baptized 
are  "  born  of  water  and  the  Spirit "  is  another  question 
altogether,  and  one  which  the  text  never  touches  at  all ! 
To  assert  that  it  is  taught  in  the  text  is  just  as  illogical 
as  the  common  assertion  of  the  Baptist,  when  he  tells 
you,  that  because  Jesus  said, — "  He  that  believeth  and  is 
baptized  shall  be  saved," — therefore  nobody  ought  to  be 
baptized  until  he  believes  ! 

The  right  position  of  baptism  can  only  be  decided  by 
a  careful  observation  of  the  language  of  Scripture  about 
it.  Let  a  man  read  the  New  Testament  honestly  and 
impartially  for  himself.  Let  him  come  to  the  reading  of 
it  with  an  unprejudiced,  fair,  and  unbiassed  mind.  Let 
him  not  bring  with  him  preconceived  opinions  and  a 
blind  reverence  for  the  judgment  of  any  uninspired 
writing  of  any  man,  or  of  any  set  of  men.  Let  him 
simply  ask  the  question, — "What  does  Scripture  teach 
about  baptism,  and  its  place  in  Christian  theology  ?" — 
and  I  have  little  doubt  as  to  the  conclusion  he  will  come 
to.  He  will  neither  trample  baptism  under  his  feet,  nor 
exalt  it  over  his  head. 

(a)  He  will  find  that  baptism  is  frequently  mentioned, 
and  yet  not  so  frequently  as  to  lead  us  to  think  that  it 
is  the  very  first,  chief,  and  foremost  thing  in  Christianity. 
In  fourteen  out  of  twenty-one  Epistles,  baptism  is  not 
even  named.  In  five  out  of  the  remaining  seven,  it  is 
only  mentioned  once.  In  one  out  of  the  remaining 


THOUGHTS    OX   BAPTISM.  241 

two,  it  is  only  mentioned  twice.  In  the  two  pastoral 
Epistles  to  Timothy,  it  is  not  mentioned  at  all.  There 
is,  in  short,  only  one  Epistle,  viz.,  the  First  to  the 
Corinthians,  in  which  baptism  is  even  named  on  more 
than  two  occasions.  And  singularly  enough,  this  is  the 
very  Epistle  in  which  St.  Paul  says, — "  I  thank  God 
that  I  baptized  none  of  you," — and  "  Christ  sent  me  not 
to  baptize,  but  to  preach  the  Gospel."  (1  Cor.  i.  14,  17.) 

(&)  He  will  find  that  baptism  is  spoken  of  with  deep 
reverence,  and  in  close  connection  with  the  highest 
privileges  and  blessings.  Baptized  people  are  said  to  be 
"  buried  with  Christ," — to  have  "  put  on  Christ," — to 
"  have  risen  again," — and  even  (by  straining  a  doubtful 
text)  to  have  the  "washing  of  regeneration."  But  he 
will  also  find  that  Judas  Iscariot,  Ananias  and  Sapphira, 
Simon  Magus,  and  others,  were  baptized,  and  yet  gave  no 
evidence  of  having  been  born  again.  He  will  also  see  that 
in  the  First  Epistle  of  John,  people  "  born  of  God "  are 
said  to  have  certain  marks  and  characteristics  which 
myriads  of  baptized  persons  never  possess  at  any  period 
of  their  lives.  (1  John  ii.  29,  iii.  9,  v.  1,  4,  18.) 
And  not  least,  he  will  find  St.  Peter  declaring  that  the 
baptism  which  "  saves  "  is  "  not  the  putting  away  the  filth  of 
the  flesh"  that  is,  not  the  mere  washing  of  the  body,  but 
the  "answer  of  a  good  conscience."  (1  Pet.  iii.  21.) 

(c)  Finally,  he  will  discover  that  while  baptism  is 
frequently  spoken  of  in  the  New  Testament,  there  are 
other  subjects  which  are  spoken  of  much  more  frequently. 
Faith,  hope,  charity,  God's  grace,  Christ's  offices,  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  redemption,  justification,  the 
nature  of  Christian  living — all  these  are  points  about 
which  he  will  find  far  more  than  about  baptism.  Above 
all,  he  will  find,  if  he  marks  the  language  of  Scripture 
about  the  Old  Testament  sacrament  of  circumcision,  that 
the  value  of  God's  ordinances  depends  entirely  on  the 

Q 


242  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

spirit  in  which  they  are  received,  and  the  heart  of  the 
receiver.  "  In  Jesus  Christ  neither  circumcision  availeth 
anything,  nor  uncircumcision,  but  faith  which  worketh 
by  love, — or  a  new  creature"  (Gal.  v.  6;  vi.  15). 
"  He  is  not  a  Jew,  which  is  one  outwardly ;  neither  is 
that  circumcision,  which  is  outward  in  the  flesh ;  but  he 
is  a  Jew,  which  is  one  inwardly ;  and  circumcision  is 
that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter; 
whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God"  (Eom.  ii. 
28,  29). 

It  only  remains  for  me  now  to  say  a  few  words  by 
way  of  practical  conclusion  to  the  whole  paper.  The 
nature,  manner,  subjects,  and  position  of  baptism  have 
been  severally  considered.  Let  me  now  show  the  reader 
the  special  lessons  to  which  I  think  attention  ought  to 
be  directed. 

(1)  For  one  thing,  I  wish  to  urge  on  all  who  study 
the  much-disputed  subject  of  baptism,  the  importance  of 
aiming  at  simple  views  of  this  sacrament.  The  dim, 
hazy,  swelling  words,  which  are  often  used  by  writers 
about  baptism,  have  been  fruitful  sources  of  strange  and 
unscriptural  views  of  the  ordinance.  Poets,  and  hymn- 
composers,  and  Romish  theologians,  have  flooded  the 
world  with  so  much  high-flown  and  rhapsodical  language 
on  the  point,  that  the  minds  of  many  have  been 
thoroughly  bewitched,  dizzied,  drugged,  swamped,  and 
confounded.  Thousands  have  imbibed  notions  about 
baptism  from  poetry,  without  knowing  it,  for  which  they 
can  show  no  warrant  in  God's  Word.  Milton's  Paradise 
Lost  is  the  sole  parent  of  many  a  current  view  of 
Satan's  agency ;  and  uninspired  poetry  is  the  sole  parent 
of  many  a  man's  views  of  baptism  in  the  present  day. 

Once  for  all,  let  me  entreat  every  reader  of  this  tract 
to  hold  no  doctrine  about  baptism  which  is  not  plainly 
taught  in  God's  "Word.  Let  him  beware  of  maintaining 


THOUGHTS    ON    BAPTISM.  243 

any  theory,  however  plausible,  which  cannot  be  supported 
by  Scripture.  In  religion,  it  matters  nothing  who  says  a 
tiling,  or  how  beautifully  he  says  it.  The  only  question 
we  ought  to  ask  is  this,  "  Is  it  written  in  the  Bible  ? 
What  saith  the  Lord  ?" 

(2)  For  another  thing,  I  wish  to  urge  on  many  of  my 
fellow-churchmen  the  dangerous  tendency  of  extravagantly 
high  views  of  the  efficacy  of  baptism.  I  have  no  wish 
to  conceal  my  meaning.  I  refer  to  those  Churchmen 
who  maintain  that  grace  invariably  accompanies  baptism, 
and  that  all  baptized  infants  are  in  baptism  "  born  again." 
I  ask  such  persons,  in  all  courtesy  and  brotherly  kindness, 
to  consider  seriously  the  dangerous  tendency  of  their 
views,  and  the  consequences  which  logically  result  from 
them. 

They  seem  to  me,  and  to  many  others,  to  degrade  a 
holy  ordinance  appointed  by  Christ  into  a  mere  charm, 
which  is  to  act  mechanically,  like  a  medicine  acting  on 
the  body,  without  any  movement  of  a  man's  heart  or 
soul.  Surely  this  is  dangerous  ! 

They  encourage  the  notion  that  it  matters  nothing  in 
what  manner  or  spirit  people  bring  their  children  to  be 
baptized.  It  signifies  nothing  whether  they  come  with 
faith,  and  prayer,  and  solemn  feelings,  or  whether  they 
come  careless,  prayerless,  godless,  and  ignorant  as 
heathens  ?  The  effect,  we  are  told,  is  always  the  same 
in  all  cases !  In  all  cases,  we  are  told,  the  infant  is 
"  born  again  "  the  moment  it  is  baptized,  although  it  has 
no  right  to  baptism  at  all,  except  as  the  child  of  Christian 
parents.  Surely  this  is  dangerous  ! 

They  help  forward  the  perilous  and  soul-ruining 
delusion  that  a  man  may  have  grace  in  his  heart,  which 
never  can  be  seen  in  his  life.  Multitudes  of  our 
worshippers  have  not  a  spark  of  religious  life  or  grace 
about  them.  And  yet  we  are  told  that  they  must  all  be 


244  PRINCIPLES   FOtt   CHURCHMEN. 

addressed  as  regenerate,  or  possessors  of  grace,  because 
they  have  been  baptized  !  Surely  this  is  dangerous  ! 

Now  I  firmly  believe  that  hundreds  of  excellent 
Churchmen  have  never  fully  considered  the  points  which 
I  have  just  brought  forward.  I  ask  them  to  do  so. 
For  the  honour  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  the  honour  of 
Christ's  holy  sacraments,  I  invite  them  to  consider 
seriously  the  tendency  of  their  views.  Sure  am  I  that 
there  is  only  one  safe  ground  to  take  up  in  stating  the 
effects  of  baptism,  and  that  is  the  old  ground  stated  by 
our  Lord :  "  Every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit " 
(Luke  vi.  44).  When  baptism  is  used  profanely  and 
carelessly,  we  have  no  right  to  expect  a  blessing  to 
follow  it,  any  more  than  we  expect  it  for  a  careless 
recipient  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  When  no  grace  can  be 
seen  in  a  man's  life,  we  have  no  right  to  say  that  he  is 
"  regenerate,"  and  has  received  grace  in  baptism. 

(3)  In  the  last  place,  I  wish  to  urge  on  all  Christians 
the  immense  importance  of  giving  to  each  part  of 
Christianity  its  proper  proportion  and  value,  but  nothing 
more.  Let  us  beware  of  wresting  things  from  their 
right  places,  and  putting  that  which  is  second  first,  and 
that  which  is  first  second.  Let  us  give  all  due  honour 
to  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  as  sacraments  ordained 
by  Christ  Himself.  But  let  us  never  forget  that,  like 
every  outward  ordinance,  their  benefit  depends  entirely 
on  the  manner  in  which  they  are  received.1  Above  all, 
let  us  never  forget  that  while  a  man  may  be  baptized, 
like  Judas,  and  yet  never  be  saved,  so  also  a  man  may 
never  be  baptized,  like  the  penitent  thief,  and  yet  may  be 
saved.  The  things  needful  to  salvation  are  an  interest 
in  Christ's  atoning  blood,  and  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  the  heart  and  life.  He  that  is  wrong  on  these 

1  ' '  In  such  only  as  worthily  receive  the  sacraments  they  have  a  whole- 
some  effect  or  operation." — 25th  Article  of  the  Church  of  England. 


THOUGHTS    ON   BAPTISM.  245 

two  points  will  get  no  benefit  from  his  baptism,  whether 
he  is  baptized  as  an  infant  or  grown  up.  He  will  find 
at  the  last  day  that  he  is  wrong  for  evermore. 

It  only  remains  for  me  now  to  wind  up  all  I  have 
said  with  a  few  words  of  solemn  appeal  to  every  one 
into  whose  hands  this  tract  may  happen  to  fall. 

I  say  "  solemn  appeal,"  and  I  say  it  advisedly.  I  feel 
strongly  the  immense  importance  of  sound  and  Scriptural 
views  of  the  whole  question  I  have  been  considering. 
I  feel  it  especially  as  respects  that  part  of  it  which 
touches  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England.  Men 
sometimes  say  it  makes  no  difference  whether  we  think 
all  baptized  persons  are  regenerate  or  not.  They  tell  us 
it  all  comes  to  the  same  thing  in  the  long  run.  I  cannot 
say  so.  To  my  humble  apprehension  it  seems  to  make 
an  immense  difference.  If  I  tell  a  man  that  he  has 
grace  in  his  heart,  and  only  needs  to  "  stir  up  a  gift " 
already  within  him,  it  is  one  thing.  If  I  tell  him  that 
he  is  dead  in  sins,  and  must  be  born  again,  it  is  quite 
another.  The  moral  effect  of  the  two  messages  must, 
on  the  very  face  of  it,  be  widely  different.  The  one,  I 
contend,  is  calculated,  by  God's  blessing,  to  awaken  the 
sinner.  The  other,  I  contend,  is  calculated  to  lull  him 
to  sleep. — The  one,  I  maintain,  is  likely  to  feed  sloth, 
check  self-examination,  and  encourage  an  easy  self-satis 
fied  state  of  soul.  He  has  got  some  grace  within  him 
whenever  he  likes  to  use  it ;  why  should  he  be  in  a 
hurry,  why  be  afraid  ?  The  other,  I  maintain,  is  likely  to 
rouse  convictions,  drive  him  to  self-inquiry,  and  frighten 
him  out  of  his  dangerous  security.  He  has  nothing 
within  him  to  rest  upon, — he  must  find  a  refuge  and 
remedy, — he  is  lost  and  perishing ;  what  must  he  do 
to  be  saved  ? — The  one  message,  I  affirm,  is  likely  to 
keep  men  natural  men,  the  other  to  make  them  spiritual 
men  j  the  one  to  have  no  effect  upon  the  conscience,,  the 


246  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

other  to  lead  to  Christ. — Let  men  say  what  they  will,  I 
for  one  dare  not  say  I  think  it  all  conies  to  the  same 
thing. 

I.  see  fresh  reason  continually  for  dreading  the  doctrine 
that  all  baptized  persons  are  regenerate.  I  hear  of  lay 
men  who  once  did  run  well,  losing  their  first  love,  and 
appearing  to  make  shipwreck  of  their  faith.  I  hear  of 
ministers,  who  once  bade  fair  to  be  pillars  in  the  Church, 
stumbling  at  this  stumbling-stone,  and  marring  all  their 
usefulness.  I  see  the  doctrine  leavening  and  spoiling  the 
religion  of  many  private  Christians,  and  insensibly  paving 
the  way  for  a  long  train  of  unscriptural  notions.  I  see 
it  interfering  with  every  leading  doctrine  of  the  Gospel. 
It  encourages  men  to  believe  that  election,  adoption, 
justification,  and  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  are  all 
conferred  on  them  in  baptism ;  and  then,  to  avoid  the 
difficulties  which  such  a  system  entails,  the  fulness  of  all 
these  mighty  truths  is  pared  down,  mutilated,  and  ex 
plained  away,  or  else  the  minds  of  congregations  are 
bewildered  with  contradictory  and  inconsistent  statements. 
I  see  it  ultimately  producing  in  some  minds  a  mere  sacra 
mental  Christianity, — a  Christianity  in  which  there  is 
much  said  about  union  with  Christ ;  but  it  is  a  union 
begun  only  by  baptism,  and  kept  up  only  by  the  Lord's 
Supper, — a  Christianity  in  which  the  leading  doctrines 
that  the  Apostle  Paul  dwells  on  in  almost  all  his  epistles, 
have  nothing  but  a  subordinate  position, — a  Christianity 
in  which  Christ  has  not  His  rightful  office,  and  faith  has 
not  its  rightful  place.  I  see  all  this,  and  mourn  over  it 
unfeignedly.  I  cannot  think  that  the  subject  I  am 
urging  on  the  reader's  attention  is  one  of  secondary  im 
portance.  And  once  more  I  say,  I  cannot  leave  him 
without  a  solemn  appeal  to  his  conscience,  whoever  he 
may  be,  into  whose  hands  this  tract  may  fall. 

I   appeal,  then,  to   all  men  who  love  the  Bible,  and 


THOUGHTS    ON    BAPTISM.  247 

make  it  their  standard  of  truth  and  error ;  and  in  saying 
this,  I  address  myself  especially  to  all  members  of  the 
Church  of  England.  I  ask  you  to  observe  the  manner 
of  living  of  multitudes  of  baptized  persons  on  every  side 
of  you ;  I  ask  you  to  observe  how  their  hearts  are 
entirely  set  on  this  world,  and  buried  in  its  concerns. 
And  I  then  ask  you,  Are  they  born  of  God  ?  If  you  say 
Yes !  I  answer,  How  can  that  be,  when  your  Bible  ex 
pressly  says,  "  He  that  is  born  of  God  doeth  righteous 
ness,  and  doth  not  commit  sin!"  (1  John  ii.  29  ;  iii.  9). 
Are  they  children  of  God  ?  If  you  say  Yes !  I  answer, 
How  can  that  be,  when  the  Bible  says  expressly,  "  In 
this  the  children  of  God  are  manifest  and  the  children  of 
the  devil;  whosoever  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of 
God"  (1  John  iii.  10).  Are  they  sons  of  God?  If 
you  say  Yes  !  I  answer,  How  can  that  be,  when  the 
Bible  says  expressly,  "  As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God"  (Eom.  viii.  14). 
What  will  you  say  to  these  things  ?  Surely  you  will 
not  turn  your  back  upon  the  Bible. 

I  appeal  next  to  all  who  love  the  good  old  rule  of  the 
Bible,  "  Every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit  "  (Luke 
vi.  44).  I  ask  you  to  try  the  great  bulk  of  professing 
Christians  by  the  fruits  they  bring  forth,  and  to  say 
what  kind  of  fruits  they  are.  Is  it  not  perfectly  true 
that  many  baptized  persons  know  little  or  nothing  of  the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  much,  only  too  much,  of  the 
works  of  the  flesh  ?  Is  it  not  certain  that  they  are  desti 
tute  of  those  marks  of  being  born  of  God  which  the  Bible 
describes  ?  What  will  you  say  to  these  things  ?  Surely 
if  you  abide  by  your  old  principle  you  will  hardly  say 
that  all  baptized  people  have  within  them  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I  appeal  next  to  all  who  love  the  Church  Catechism, 
and  profess  to  be  guided  by  its  statements  about  the 
sacraments.  You  are  aware  that  the  inward  and  spiritual 


248  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

grace  of  baptism  is  there  said  to  be  "  a  death  unto  sin 
and  a  new  birth  unto  righteousness."  I  ask  you,  as  in 
the  sight  of  God,  to  say  whether  any  evidence  whatever 
of  this  grace  can  be  seen  in  the  lives  of  many  baptized 
persons.  Where  is  there  deadness  to  sin  ?  They  live  in 
it.  It  is  their  element.  Where  is  their  new  birth  unto 
righteousness  ?  They  are  habitual  "  servants  of  sin,  and 
free  from  righteousness"  (Kom.  vi.  20).  Sin  reigns  and 
rules  in  their  mortal  bodies.  They  are  enemies  of  all 
righteousness.  What  will  you  say  to  these  things  ? 
Surely  you  will  not  tell  us,  that  the  outward  and  visible 
sign  is  always  attended  by  the  inward  and  spiritual  grace. 
If  so,  grace  and  no  grace  are  the  same  thing. 

I  appeal,  lastly,  to  all  who  dread  antinomianism  and 
licentious  doctrine.  You  have  heard  of  those  wretched 
persons  who  profess  to  glory  in  Christ  and  free  grace, 
and  yet  think  it  no  shame  to  live  immoral  lives,  and 
continue  in  wilful  sin.  You  think  such  conduct  horrible, 
an  insult  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  a  disgrace  to  Christianity. 
And  you  are  right  to  think  so.  But  what  will  you  say 
to  the  doctrine,  that  a  man  may  have  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  yet  not  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ; — may 
have  grace  in  his  heart,  and  yet  show  no  sign  of  it  in  his 
life  ?  What  will  you  say  to  these  things  ?  Surely,  if 
you  are  consistent,  you  will  recoil  from  the  idea  of  dis 
honouring  the  Third  Person  of  the  blessed  Trinity,  no 
less  than  you  do  from  dishonouring  the  Lord  Himself. 
Surely  you  will  shrink  from  saying  that  all  baptized 
persons  have  the  Holy  Ghost. 

And  now  I  leave  this  subject  in  the  hands  of  my 
readers,  and  I  heartily  pray  God  to  guide  them  by  His 
Spirit  to  a  right  understanding  of  it.  I  ask  you  to  com 
pare  what  I  have  said  with  the  Bible,  and  I  invite  you 
to  give  the  whole  question  your  calm  consideration  and 
your  earnest  prayers.  If  in  the  course  of  this  paper  I 


THOUGHTS    ON    BAPTISM.  249 

have  said  anything  that  hurts  your  feelings,  I  am  sorry 
for  it.  If  I  have  said  anything  contrary  to  the  truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus,  I  hope  the  Lord  will  make  me  see  it.  But 
I  think  I  can  say  with  a  good  conscience,  that  I  have 
stated  nothing  about  baptism  which  I  do  not  honestly 
believe  to  be  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible,  and  the  doctrine 
of  the  Church  of  England. 


NOTES. 

The  following  quotations  bearing  on  the  subject  discussed  in  thispaper,are 
drawn  from  writers,  of  whom  some  are  the  greatest  and  most  learned 
divines  the  world  has  ever  seen.  They  are  specially  commended  to 
the  attention  of  members  of  the  Church  of  England. 

"In  baptism  those  that  come  feignedly,  and  those  that  come  un- 
feignedly,  both  be  washed  with  the  sacramental  water,  but  both  be  not 
washed  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  clothed  with  Christ." 

"All  that  be  washed  with  water  be  not  washed  with  the  Holy  Spirit." 
— Archbishop  Cranmer.  1553. 

"Good  and  evil,  clean  and  unclean,  holy  and  profane,  must  needs  pass 
by  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  except  you  will  indeed,  in  more  ample  and 
large  measure,  tie  the  grace  of  God  unto  it  than  ever  did  the  Papists,  and 
say  that  all  be  baptized  be  also  saved." — Archbishop  Whitgift.  1583. 

"Are  all  they  that  are  partakers  of  the  outward  washing  of  baptism, 
partakers  also  of  the  inward  washing  of  the  Spirit  ?  Doth  this  sacrament 
seal  up  their  spiritual  ingrafting  into  Christ  to  all  who  externally  receive 
it  ?  Surely  no  !  Though  God  hath  ordained  these  outward  means  for  the 
conveyance  of  grace  to  our  souls,  yet  there  is  no  necessity  that  we  should 
tie  the  working  of  God's  Spirit  to  the  sacraments  more  than  to  the  word. " 
—Archbishop  Usher.  1624. 

"In  baptism,  as  the  one  part  of  that  holy  mystery  is  Christ's  blood, 
so  is  the  other  part,  the  material  water.  Neither  are  these  parts  joined 
together  in  place,  but  in  mystery  ;  and  therefore  they  be  oftentimes 
severed,  and  the  one  is  received  without  the  other. " — Bishop  Jewell.  1 559. 

"Christ  said,  'Except  a  man  be  born  again  from  above,  he  cannot  see 
the  kingdom  of  God.'  Ye  must  have  a  regeneration  :  and  what  is  this 
regeneration  ?  It  is  not  to  be  christened  in  water  as  these  firebrands  (the 
Roman  Catholics)  expound  it,  and  nothing  else." — Bishop  Latimer.  1540 


250  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

•''  All  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  which  receive  the  sacraments  of  His 
grace." — Richard  Hooker.  1597. 

"  Not  all  are  regenerated  who  are  washed  with  the  baptismal  water." — 
Dr.  Whittaker,  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Cambridge.  1590. 

"What  is  the  advantage  or  benefit  of  baptism  to  the  common 
Christian  ?  The  same  as  was  the  benefit  of  circumcision  to  the  Jew 
outward  (Rom.  ii.  28).  There  is  a  general  grace  of  baptism  which  all 
the  baptized  partake  of  as  a  common  favour  ;  and  that  is  their  admission 
into  the  visible  body  of  the  Church ;  their  matriculation  and  outward 
incorporation  into  the  number  of  the  worshippers  of  God  by  external 
communion.  And  so  as  circumcision  was  not  only  a  seal  of  the  righteous 
ness  which  is  by  faith,  but  as  an  overplus,  God  appointed  it  to  be  a  wall 
of  separation  between  Jew  and  Gentile  :  so  is  baptism  a  badge  of  an  out 
ward  member  of  the  Church,  a  distinction  from  the  common  sort  of  the 
brethren.  And  God  thereby  seals  a  right  upon  the  party  baptized  to  His 
ordinances,  that  He  may  use  them  as  His  privileges,  and  wait  for  an 
inward  blessing  by  them.  Yet  this  is  but  the  porch,  the  shell,  and  out 
side.  All  that  are  outwardly  received  into  the  visible  Church  are  not 
spiritually  ingrafted  into  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  Baptism  is 
attended  upon  always  by  that  general  grace,  but  not  always  by  that 
special." — Archbishop  Usher.  1624. 

"All  that  receive  baptism  are  called  children  of  God,  regenerate, 
justified :  for  to  us  they  must  be  taken  for  such  in  charity,  until  they 
show  themselves  other.  But  Bishop  Montague  (a  friend  of  Archbishop 
Laud)  affirmeth  that  this  is  not  left  to  men's  charity,  as  you,  saith  he,  do 
inform  the  world,  because  we  are  taught  in  the  service-book  of  our  Church 
earnestly  to  believe  that  Christ  hath  favourably  received  these  infants 
that  are  baptized,  that  He  hath  embraced  them  with  the  arms  of  His 
mercy,  that  He  hath  given  them  the  blessing  of  everlasting  life  ;  and 
out  of  that  belief  and  persuasion  we  are  to  give  thanks  faithfully  and 
devoutly  for  it.  All  this  we  receive  and  make  no  doubt  of  it ;  but  when 
we  have  said  all  we  must  come  to  this,  that  all  this  is  the  charity  of  the 
Church,  and  what  more  can  you  make  of  it  ? " — George  Carleton,  Bishop 
of  Chichester.  1619. 

"The  office  for  baptizing  infants  carries  on  the  supposition  of  an 
internal  regeneration." — Bishop  Burnet.  1689. 

' '  There  is  justification  for  that  prayer  in  our  public  liturgy,  when  the 
congregation  gives  thanks  to  God  for  the  child  baptized,  that  it  hath 
pleased  Him  to  regenerate  this  infant  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  etc.  For  it 
cannot  be  denied  but  that  the  holy  ordinance  of  baptism,  the  seal  of  our 
sanctification,  doth  take  effect  many  times  immediately  in  the  infusion  of 
present  grace  into  the  infant's  soul,  though  many  times  also  it  hath  not 
its  effect  till  many  years  after.  But  seeii)g  it  is  questionably  true  in 
many,  we  may  and  must  charitably  suppose  it  in  every  one,  for  when  we 


THOUGHTS   ON   BAPTISM.  251 

come  to  particulars  whom  dare  we  exclude  ?  And  this  we  may  do  without 
tying  the  grace  of  regeneration  necessarily  to  baptism,  as  some  complain 
that  we  do."—  William  Pemble,  Magdalen  Hall,  Oxford.  1635. 

"The  Apostles  always,  when  they  descend  to  particular  men  or 
Churches,  PRESUME  every  Christian  to  be  elect,  sanctified,  justified,  and 
in  the  way  of  being  glorified,  until  he  himself  shall  have  proved  himself 
to  be  wicked,  or  an  apostate." — Bishop  Davenant.  1627. 

"As  to  what  he  says,  that  no  one  can  be  a  minister  of  the  Church  of 
England,  who  is  noc  certainly  persuaded  of  the  regeneration  of  every 
infant  baptized,  neither  also  is  that  true.  The  minister  truly  gives  God 
thanks  after  each  infant  has  been  baptized,  that  it  has  pleased  God  to 
regenerate  him  with  His  Holy  Spirit.  But  it  does  not  then  follow  that 
he  ought  to  be  certain  of  the  regeneration  of  every  infant  baptized.  For 
it  is  sufficient,  if  he  is  persuaded  of  the  regeneration  of  some  only — for 
instance,  of  elect  infants,  or,  if  you  like,  even  of  some  only  of  their 
number — that  on  that  account  he  may  be  able,  nay  ought,  to  give  God 
thanks  for  each  and  all  baptized.  Since  who  is  elect  he  knows  not :  and 
it  is  but  just  that  he  should  by  the  judgment  of  charity  presume  that  as 
many  as  he  baptizes  are  elect,  and  if  any  are  regenerated,  in  baptism 
(which  none  but  a  Socinian  or  other  Catabaptist  will  deny)  regenerated*'1 
— Dr.  Durel,  Dean  of  Windsor t  and  Chaplain  to  the  King.  1677. 


XL 

THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPEE  OF  THE  LOED. 

"  THE  Supper  of  the  Lord  ! "  This  is  the  simple  name 
which  the  Church  Catechism  gives  to  the  solemn  ordin 
ance  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  appointed  on  the 
evening  before  He  was  crucified.  The  child  is  asked 
the  question, "  How  many  sacraments  has  Christ  ordained 
in  His  Church  ? "  And  the  answer  the  child  is  taught 
to  give  is  this, — "Two  only,  as  generally  necessary  to 
salvation,  that  is  to  say,  Baptism,  and  the  Supper  of  the 
Lord." 

I  propose  in  this  little  paper  to  say  something  about 
the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

I  know  no  part  of  the  Christian  religion  which  is  so 
thoroughly  misunderstood  as  the  Lord's  Supper.  On  no 
point  have  there  been  so  many  disputes,  strifes,  and 
controversies  for  more  than  1800  years.  On  no  point 
have  mistakes  done  so  much  harm  as  mistakes  about 
this  Sacrament.  Even  at  this  very  day  the  battle  is  still 
raging,  and  Christians  seem  hopelessly  divided.  The 
very  ordinance  which  was  meant  for  our  peace  and  profit 
has  become  the  cause  of  discord  and  the  occasion  of  sin. 
These  things  ought  not  so  to  be ! 

In  examining  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  I 
shall  content  myself  with  asking  four  questions,  and 
offering  answers  to  them. 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    253 


I.  WHY  WAS  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER  ORDAINED? 

I  answer  that  question  in  the  words  of  the  Church 
Catechism.  I  am  sure  I  cannot  mend  them.  It  was 
ordained  "  for  the  continual  remembrance  of  the  sacrifice 
of  the  death  of  Christ,  and  of  the  benefits  which  we 
receive  thereby."  The  bread  which  is  broken,  given, 
and  eaten  in  the  Lord's  Supper  is  meant  to  remind  us  of 
Christ's  body  given  on  the  cross  for  our  sins.  The  wine 
which  is  poured  out  and  received  is  meant  to  remind  us 
of  Christ's  blood  shed  on  the  cross  for  our  sins.  He 
that  eats  that  bread  and  drinks  that  wine  is  reminded, 
the  most  striking  and  forcible  manner,  of  the  benefits 
Christ  has  obtained  for  his  soul,  and  of  the  death  of 
Christ  as  the  hinge  and  turning-point  on  which  all  those 
benefits  depend. 

Now,  is  the  view  here  stated  the  doctrine  of  the  New 
Testament  ?  If  it  is  not,  for  ever  let  it  be  rejected,  cast 
aside,  and  refused  by  men.  If  it  is,  let  us  never  be 
ashamed  to  hold  it  fast,  to  profess  our  belief  in  it,  to  pin 
our  faith  on  it,  and  steadfastly  refuse  to  hold  any  other 
view,  no  matter  by  whom  it  is  taught.  In  subjects  like 
this  we  must  call  no  man  master.  It  signifies  little 
what  great  Bishops  and  learned  divines  have  thought 
fit  to  put  forth  about  the  Lord's  Supper.  If  they  teach 
more  or  less  than  the  Word  of  God  contains,  they  are  not 
to  be  believed. 

I  take  down  my  Bible  and  turn  to  the  New  Testament. 
There  I  find  no  less  than  four  separate  accounts  of  the 
first  appointment  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  St.  Matthew, 
St.  Mark,  St.  Luke,  and  St.  Paul,  all  four  describe  it :  all 
four  agree  in  telling  us  what  our  Lord  did  on  this 
memorable  occasion.  Two  only  tell  us  the  reason  which 
our  Lord  assigned  why  His  disciples  were  to  eat  the 
bread  and  drink  the  cup :  St.  Paul  and  St.  Luke  both 


254  PRINCIPLES    FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

record  the  remarkable  words,  "  Do  this  in  remembrance 
of  Me."  St.  Paul  adds  his  own  inspired  comment :  "  As 
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show 
(or  declare  or  proclaim)  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come" 
(1  Cor.  xi.  26).  When  Scripture  speaks  so  plainly,  why 
cannot  men  be  content  with  it  ?  Why  should  we 
mystify  and  confuse  a  subject  which  in  the  New  Testa 
ment  is  so  simple  ?  The  "  continual  remembrance  of 
Christ's  death "  was  the  one  grand  object  for  which  the 
Lord's  Supper  was  ordained.  He  that  goes  further  than 
this  is  adding  to  God's  Word,  and  does  so  to  the  great 
peril  of  his  soul. 

Now,  is  it  reasonable  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  would 
appoint  an  ordinance  for  so  simple  a  purpose  as  the 
keeping  His  death  in  remembrance  ?  Most  certainly  it 
is.  Of  all  the  facts  in  His  earthly  ministry  none  are 
equal  in  importance  to  that  of  His  death.  It  was  the 
great  satisfaction  for  man's  sin,  which  had  been  appointed 
in  God's  everlasting  covenant  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  It  was  the  great  atonement  of  almighty  power, 
to  which  every  sacrifice  of  animals,  from  the  fall  of  man, 
continually  pointed.  It  was  the  grand  end  and  purpose 
for  which  Messiah  came  into  the  world.  It  was  the 
corner-stone  and  foundation  of  all  man's  hopes  of  pardon 
and  peace  with  God.  In  short,  Christ  would  have  lived, 
and  taught,  and  preached,  and  prophesied,  and  wrought 
miracles  in  vain,  if  He  had  not  crowned  all  by  dying 
for  our  sins !  His  death  was  our  life.  His  death  was 
the  payment  of  our  debt  to  God.  Without  His  death 
we  should  have  been  of  all  creatures  most  miserable. 
No  wonder  that  an  ordinance  was  specially  appointed 
to  remind  us  of  our  Saviour's  death.  It  is  that  very 
one  thing  of  which  poor,  weak,  sinful  man  needs  to  be 
continually  reminded. 

Does  the  New  Testament  warrant  men  in  saying  that 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    255 

the  Lord's  Supper  was  ordained  to  be  a  sacrifice,  and 
that  in  it  Christ's  body  and  blood  are  materially  present 
under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine  ?  Most  certainly 
not.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  said  to  the  disciples,  "  This 
is  my  Body,  and  this  is  my  Blood,"  He  evidently  meant, 
"  This  bread  in  my  hand  is  an  emblem  of  my  Body,  and 
this  cup  of  wine  in  my  hand  contains  an  emblem  of  my 
Blood."  The  disciples  were  accustomed  to  hear  Him 
use  such  language.  They  remembered  Him  saying, 
"  The  field  is  the  world,"  "  The  good  seed  are  the  children 
of  the  kingdom"  (Matt.  xiii.  38).  It  never  entered 
into  their  minds  that  He  meant  to  say  He  was  holding 
His  own  body  and  His  own  blood  in  His  hands,  and 
literally  giving  them  His  own  literal  body  and  blood  to 
eat  and  drink.  Not  one  of  the  writers  of  the  New 
Testament  ever  speaks  of  the  sacrament  as  a  "  sacrifice," 
or  calls  the  Lord's  table  an  "  altar,"  or  even  hints  that  a 
Christian  minister  is  a  sacrificing  priest.  The  universal 
doctrine  of  the  New  Testament  is,  that  after  the  one 
offering  of  Christ  there  remains  no  more  need  of  sacrifice l 
(Heb.  x.  12-18). 

Does  the  English  Prayer-book  warrant  any  Church 
man  in  saying  that  the  Lord's  Supper  was  meant  to  be  a 
sacrifice,  and  that  Christ's  body  and  blood  are  present 
under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine  ?  Once  more  I 
reply,  Most  certainly  not.  Not  once  is  the  word  altar 
to  be  found  in  the  Prayer-book :  not  once  is  the  Lord's 
Supper  called  a  sacrifice.  Throughout  the  Communion 
Service  the  one  idea  of  the  ordinance  continually  pressed 
on  our  attention  is  that  of  a  "  remembrance  "  of  Christ's 

1  If  any  one  fancies  that  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  Hebrews,  "We  have 
an  altar,"  are  a  proof  that  the  Lord's  Table  is  an  altar,  I  advise  him  to 
read  what  Waterland,  no  mean  theologian,  says  on  the  subject : — "Chris 
tians  have  an  altar  whereof  they  partake.  That  Altar  is  Christ  our  Lord, 
who  is  Altar,  Priest,  and  Sacrifice,  all  in  One." — Waterland' 8  Works, 
vol.  v.  268.  Oxford  edition. 


256  PRINCIPLES   FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

death.  As  to  any  presence  of  Christ's  natural  body  and 
blood  under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine,  the  rubric  at 
the  end  of  the  Service  gives  the  most  flat  and  distinct 
contradiction  to  the  idea.  That  rubric  expressly  asserts 
that  "  the  natural  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  in  heaven, 
and  not  here."  Those  many  Churchmen,  who  delight  in 
talking  of  the  "  altar,"  the  "  sacrifice,"  the  "  priest,"  and 
the  "  real  presence  "  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  would  do  well 
to  remember  that  they  are  using  language  which  is 
entirely  unused  by  the  Church  of  England.  The  only 
presence  which  our  Church  recognises  is  a  spiritual 
one. 

The  point  before  us  is  one  of  vast  importance.  I 
charge  every  reader  of  this  paper  to  lay  hold  upon  it 
firmly,  and  never  let  it  go.  It  is  the  very  point  on 
which  our  Eeformers  had  their  sharpest  controversy 
with  the  Eomanists,  and  went  to  the  stake  rather 
than  give  way.  Sooner  than  admit  that  the  Lord's 
Supper  was  a  sacrifice,  they  cheerfully  laid  down 
their  lives.  The  Thirty-first  Article  of  our  Church 
expressly  declares  that  "  the  sacrifices  of  the  Masses  were 
blasphemous  fables  and  dangerous  deceits."  To  bring 
back  the  doctrine  of  the  real  presence,  and  to  turn  the 
good  old  English  communion  into  the  Eomish  Mass,  is 
to  pour  contempt  on  our  Martyrs,  and  upset  the  first 
principles  of  the  Protestant  Eeformation.  Nay,  rather, 
it  is  to  ignore  the  plain  teaching  of  God's  Word,  and  do 
dishonour  to  the  priestly  office  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
The  Bible  teaches  expressly  that  the  Lord's  Supper  was 
ordained  to  be  a  "  remembrance "  of  Christ's  body  and 
blood,  and  not  an  offering.  The  Bible  teaches  that 
Christ's  vicarious  death  on  the  cross  was  the  one  perfect 
sacrifice  for  sin,  which  never  needs  to  be  repeated. 
Stand  fast  in  these  two  great  principles  of  the  Christian 
faith.  A  clear  view  of  the  intention  of  the  Lord's 


THOUGHTS    ON   THE    SUPPER   OF    THE    LORD.         257 

Supper  is  one  of  the  soul's  best  safeguards  against  the 
delusions  of  these  latter  days. 

II.  WHAT  is  THE  KIGHTFUL  POSITION  OF  THE  LORD'S 
SUPPER  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  EELIGION  ? 

Like  the  ark  of  God  in  the  Old  Testament,  this  blessed 
Sacrament  has  a  proper  position  and  rank  among  Christian 
ordinances,  and,  like  the  ark  of  God,  it  may  easily  be  put 
in  the  wrong  one.  The  history  of  that  ark  will  readily 
recur  to  our  minds.  Put  in  the  place  of  God,  and  treated 
like  an  idol,  it  did  the  Israelites  no  good  at  all.  In  the 
days  of  Eli,  it  could  not  save  them  out  of  the  hand  of 
the  Philistine.  Their  armies  were  defeated,  and  the  ark 
itself  was  taken. — Denied  and  dishonoured  by  being  placed 
in  an  idol's  temple,  it  was  the  cause  of  God's  wrath 
falling  on  a  whole  nation,  till  the  Philistines  said  with 
one  voice,  "Send  it  away." — Treated  with  carelessness 
and  levity,  it  brought  down  God's  judgment  on  the 
men  of  Bethshemesh  and  on  Uzza. — Treated  with  rever 
ence  and  respect,  it  brought  a  blessing  on  Obed-edom 
and  all  his  house.  It  is  even  so  with  the  Lord's  Supper. 
Placed  in  its  right  position,  it  is  an  ordinance  full  of 
blessing.  The  great  question  to  be  settled  is,  What  is 
that  position  ? 

(1)  The  Lord's  Supper  is  not  in  its  right  place  when 
it  is  made  the  first,  foremost,  principal,  and  most  important 
thing  in  Christian  worship.  That  it  is  so  in  many 
quarters,  we  all  must  know.  The  well-known  "  masses  " 
of  the  Eomish  Church,  the  increasing  importance  attached 
to  "Holy  Communion,"  as  it  is  called,  by  many  in  our 
own  Church,  are  plain  evidence  of  what  I  mean.  The 
sermon,  the  mode  of  conducting  prayer,  the  reading  of 
"  holy  Scripture,"  in  many  Churches  are  made  second  to 
this  one  thing, — the  administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

R  • 


258  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

We  may  well  ask,  "  What  warrant  of  Scripture  is  there 
for  this  extravagant  honour  ? "  but  we  shall  get  no 
answer.  There  are  at  most  but  five  books  in  the  whole 
canon  of  the  New  Testament  in  which  the  Lord's  Supper 
is  even  mentioned.  About  grace,  faith,  and  redemption ; 
about  the  work  of  Christ,  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  and 
the  love  of  the  Father ;  about  man's  ruin,  weakness, 
and  spiritual  poverty ;  about  justification,  sanctification, 
and  holy  living; — about  all  these  mighty  subjects  we 
find  the  inspired  writers  giving  us  line  upon  line,  and 
precept  upon  precept.  About  the  Lord's  Supper,  on  the 
contrary,  we  may  observe  in  the  great  bulk  of  the  New 
Testament  a  speaking  silence.  Even  the  Epistles  to 
Timothy  and  Titus,  containing  much  instruction  about 
a  minister's  duties,  do  not  contain  a  word  about  it. 
This  fact  alone  surely  speaks  volumes !  To  thrust  the 
Lord's  Supper  forward,  till  it  towers  over  and  overrides 
everything  else  in  religion,  is  giving  it  a  position  for 
which  there  is  no  authority  in  God's  Word. 

(2)  Again,  the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  in  its  right  place 
when  it  is  administered  with  an  extravagant  degree  of 
outward  ceremony  and  veneration.  In  saying  this  I 
should  be  sorry  to  be  misunderstood.  God  forbid  that 
I  should  countenance  anything  like  carelessness  or  irre 
verence  in  the  use  of  any  ordinance  of  Christ.  By  all 
means  let  us  give  honour  where  honour  is  due.  But  I 
ask  all  who  read  this  paper,  whether  there  is  not  some 
thing  painfully  suspicious  about  the  enormous  amount  of 
pomp  and  bodily  reverence  with  which  the  Lord's  Supper 
is  now  administered  in  many  of  our  Churches  ?  The 
ostentatious  treatment  of  the  Communion  table  as  an 
altar, — the  lights,  ornaments,  flowers,  millinery,  gestures, 
postures,  bowings,  crossings,  incensing,  processions,  which 
are  connected  with  the  so-called  altar, — the  mysterious 
and  obsequious  veneration  with  which  the  bread  and  wine 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    259 

are  consecrated,  given,  taken,  and  received, — what  does 
it  all  mean  ? l  Where  is  there  in  all  this  the  simplicity 
of  the  first  institution,  as  we  find  it  recorded  in  the 
Bible  ?  Where  is  the  simplicity  which  our  Protestant 
Keformers  both  preached  and  practised  ?  Where  is  the 
simplicity  which  any  plain  reader  of  the  English  Prayer- 
book  might  justly  expect  ?  We  may  well  ask — Where  ? 
The  true  Lord's  Supper  is  no  longer  there.  The  whole 
thing  savours  of  Eomanism.  A  plain  man  can  only  see 
in  it  an  attempt  to  introduce  into  our  worship  the 
doctrine  of  sacrifice,  the  "  blasphemous  fable  and  dangerous 
deceit "  of  the  mass,  the  Popish  real  presence,  and  tran- 
substantiation.  It  is  impossible  to  avoid  feeling  that  a 
deadly  heresy  underlies  this  pompous  ceremonial,  and 
that  we  have  not  to  do  merely  with  a  childish  love  of 
show  and  form,  but  with  a  deep-laid  design  to  bring 
back  Popery  into  the  Church  of  England,  and  to  subvert 
the  Gospel  of  Christ.  One  thing  at  any  rate  is  very 
plain  to  my  mind :  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
administered  as  it  is  now  in  many  places,  is  not  in  its 
rightful  position.  It  is  so  disguised,  and  painted,  and 
daubed,  and  overlaid,  and  bloated,  and  swollen,  and 
changed  by  this  new  treatment,  that  I  can  hardly  see  in 
it  any  Lord's  Supper  at  all. 

1  It  is  truly  lamentable  to  observe  how  many  young  men  and  women  of 
whom  better  things  might  have  been  expected,  i'all  away  into  semi- 
Romanism  in  the  present  day,  under  the  attraction  of  a  highly  ornamental 
and  sensuous  ceremonial.  Flowers,  crucifixes,  processions,  banners, 
incense,  gorgeous  vestments,  and  the  like,  never  fail  to  draw  such  young 
persons  together,  just  as  honey  attracts  flies.  I  will  not  insult  the 
common  sense  of  those  who  find  these  things  attractive,  by  asking  them 
whether  they  really  believe  they  get  any  food  from  them  for  heart,  and 
conscience,  and  soul.  But  I  should  like  them  to  consider  seriously  what 
these  things  mean.  Do  they  really  know  that  the  doctrines  of  the  mass 
and  transubstantiation  are  the  root  of  the  whole  system  ?  Are  they  pre 
pared  to  swallow  these  awful  heresies  ?  I  suspect  many  are  playing  with 
Ritualism  in  these  times  without  the  least  idea  what  unscriptural  errors 
it  covers  over. 


260  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

(3)  Again,  the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  in  its  right  place 
when  it  is  pressed  on  all  worshippers  indiscriminately,  as  a 
means  of  grace,  which  all  as  a  matter  of  course  ought  to 
use.  Once  more  I  ask  that  no  one  will  misunderstand 
me.  I  feel  as  strongly  as  any  one,  that  to  go  to  a 
Church  as  a  worshipper,  and  yet  not  be  a  communicant, 
is  to  be  a  most  inconsistent  Christian,  and  that  to  be 
unfit  for  the  Lord's  Table  is  to  be  unfit  to  die.  But  it 
is  one  thing  to  teach  this,  and  quite  another  to  urge  all 
men  to  receive  the  Sacrament  as  a  matter  of  course, 
whether  they  are  qualified  to  receive  it  or  not.  I  should 
be  sorry  to  raise  a  false  accusation.  I  do  not  for  a 
moment  suppose  that  any  High  Church  clergyman 
recommends,  in  naked  language,  wicked  people  to  come 
to  the  Lord's  Supper  that  they  may  be  made  good.  But 
I  cannot  forget  that  from  many  pulpits  people  are  con 
stantly  taught  that  they  are  born  again,  and  have  grace, 
by  virtue  of  their  baptism ;  and  that  if  they  want  to  stir 
up  the  grace  within  them,  and  get  more  religion,  they 
must  use  all  means  of  grace,  and  specially  the  Lord's 
Supper !  And  I  cannot  help  fearing  that  thousands  in 
the  present  day  are  practically  substituting  attendance 
at  the  Lord's  Supper  for  repentance,  faith,  and  vital 
union  with  Christ,  and  flattering  themselves  that  the 
more  often  they  receive  the  Sacrament,  the  more  they 
are  justified,  and  the  more  fit  they  are  to  die.  My  own 
firm  conviction  is  that  the  Lord's  Supper  should  on  no 
account  be  placed  before  Christ,  and  that  men  should 
always  be  taught  to  come  to  Christ  by  faith  before  they 
draw  near  to  the  Lord's  Table.  I  believe  that  this  order 
can  never  be  inverted  without  bringing  in  gross  super 
stition,  and  doing  immense  harm  to  men's  souls.  Those 
parts  of  Christendom  where  "  the  mass "  is  made  every 
thing,  and  the  "Word  of  God  hardly  ever  preached,  are 
precisely  those  parts  where  there  is  the  most  entire 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    261 

absence  of  vital  Christianity.  I  wish  I  could  say  there 
was  no  fear  of  our  coming  to  this  state  of  things  in  our 
own  land.  But  when  we  hear  of  hundreds  crowding  the 
Lord's  Table  on  Sundays,  and  then  plunging  into  every 
dissipation  on  week-days,  there  is  grave  reason  for 
suspecting  that  the  Lord's  Supper  is  pressed  on  many 
congregations  in  a  manner  utterly  unwarranted  by 
Scripture. 

Does  any  one  ask  now  what  is  the  rightful  position  of 
the  Lord's  Supper  ?  I  answer  that  question  without  any 
hesitation.  I  believe  its  rightful  position,  like  that  of 
holiness,  is  between  grace  and  glory,  between  justifica 
tion  and  heaven,  between  faith  and  paradise,  between 
conversion  and  the  final  rest,  between  the  wicket-gate 
fcnd  the  celestial  city,  It  is  not  Christ ;  it  is  not  con 
version  ;  it  is  not  a  passport  to  heaven.  It  is  for  the 
strengthening  and  refreshing  of  those  who  have  come  to 
Christ  already,  who  know  something  of  conversion,  who 
are  already  in  the  narrow  way,  and  have  fled  from  the 
city  of  destruction. 

III.    WHO    OUGHT    TO    BE    COMMUNICANTS  ? 

It  will  clear  the  ground  if  I  first  show  who  ought  not 
to  be  partakers  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  ignorance 
which  prevails  on  this,  as  well  as  on  every  part  of  the 
subject,  is  vast,  lamentable,  and  appalling.  If  I  can 
contribute  anything  that  may  throw  light  upon  it,  I  shall 
feel  very  thankful.  The  giants  whom  John  Bunyan 
describes,  in  Pilgrim's  Progress,  as  dangerous  to  Chris 
tian  pilgrims,  were  only  two — Pope  and  Pagan.  If  the 
good  old  Puritan  had  foreseen  the  times  we  live  in,  he 
would  have  said  something  about  the  giant  Ignorance. 

(a)  Not  all  baptized  persons  ought  to  be  urged  to 
become  communicants  as  a  matter  of  course.  There  is 


262  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

such  a  thing  as  fitness  and  preparedness  for  the  Sacra 
ment.  It  does  not  work  like  a  medicine,  independently 
of  the  state  of  mind  of  those  who  receive  it.  The 
Twenty-fifth  Article  of  our  Church  declares,  that  "in 
such  only  as  worthily  receive  the  Sacraments  they  have 
a  wholesome  operation."  The  teaching  of  those  who 
press  all  their  congregation  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Table, 
as  if  the  coming  must  necessarily  do  every  one  good,  is 
entirely  without  warrant  of  Scripture.  Nay,  rather,  it  is 
teaching  which  is  calculated  to  do  immense  harm  to 
men's  souls,  and  to  turn  the  reception  of  the  Sacrament 
into  a  mere  form.  Ignorance  can  never  be  the  mother 
of  acceptable  worship,  and  an  ignorant  communicant  who 
comes  to  the  Lord's  Table  without  knowing  why  he 
comes  is  altogether  in  the  wrong  place.  "  Let  a  man 
examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread  and 
drink  of  that  cup."  "  To  discern  the  Lord's  body," — 
that  is,  to  understand  what  the  elements  of  bread  and 
wine  represent,  and  why  they  are  appointed,  and  what  is 
the  particular  use  of  remembering  Christ's  death, — is  an 
essential  qualification  of  a  true  communicant  (1  Cor. 
xi.  28,  29).  God  commands  all  men  everywhere  to 
repent  and  believe  the  Gospel ;  but  He  does  not  in  the 
same  way,  or  in  the  same  manner,  command  everybody 
to  come  to  the  Lord's  Table.  No ;  this  thing  is  not  to 
be  taken  in  hand  unadvisedly,  lightly,  or  carelessly !  It 
is  a  solemn  ordinance,  and  solemnly  it  ought  to  be  used. 
(6)  But  this  is  not  all.  Sinners  living  in  open  sin, 
and  not  determined  to  give  it  up,  ought  on  no  account  to 
come  to  the  Lord's  Table.  To  do  so  is  a  positive  insult 
to  Christ,  and  to  pour  contempt  on  His  Gospel.  It  is 
nonsense  to  profess  we  desire  to  remember  Christ's  death, 
while  we  cling  to  the  accursed  thing  which  made  it 
needful  for  Christ  to  die.  The  mere  fact  that  a  man  is 
continuing  in  sin  is  plain  evidence  that  he  does  not  care 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    263 

for  Christ,  and  feels  no  gratitude  for  redemption.  The 
ignorant  Eomanist  who  goes  to  the  priest's  confessional 
and  receives  absolution  may  think  he  is  fit  to  go  to  the 
Mass,  and  after  Mass  may  return  to  his  sins.  He  never 
reads  the  Bible,  and  knows  no  better.  But  the  English 
Churchman  who  habitually  breaks  any  of  God's  com 
mandments,  and  yet  goes  to  the  Sacrament,  as  if  it  would 
do  him  good,  is  very  guilty  indeed.  So  long  as  he 
chooses  to  continue  his  wicked  habits,  he  cannot  receive 
the  slightest  benefit  from  Christ's  ordinances,  and  is  only 
adding  sin  to  sin.  To  carry  unrepented  sin  up  to  the 
communion  rail,  and  there  receive  the  bread  and  wine, 
knowing  in  our  own  hearts  that  we  and  wickedness  are 
yet  friends,  is  one  of  the  worst  things  a  man  can  do,  and 
one  of  the  most  hardening  to  conscience.  If  a  man  must 
have  his  sins,  and  cannot  give  them  up,  let  him  by  all 
means  stay  away  from  the  Lord's  Supper.  There  is  such 
a  thing  as  "  eating  and  drinking  unworthily,"  and  to  our 
own  "  condemnation."  To  no  one  do  these  words  apply 
so  thoroughly  as  to  an  open  sinner. 

(c)  But  one  thing  more  remains.  Self-righteous  people, 
who  think  that  they  are  to  be  saved  by  their  own  works, 
have  no  business  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Table.  Strange 
as  it  may  sound  at  first,  these  persons  are  the  least 
qualified  of  all  to  receive  the  Sacrament.  They  may  be 
outwardly  correct,  moral,  and  respectable  in  their  lives ; 
but  so  long  as  they  trust  in  their  own  goodness  for 
salvation,  they  are  entirely  in  the  wrong  place  at  the 
Lord's  Supper.  For  what  do  we  declare  at  the  Lord's 
Supper  ?  We  publicly  profess  that  we  have  no  good 
ness,  righteousness,  or  worthiness  of  our  own,  and  that 
all  our  hope  is  in  Christ.  We  publicly  profess  that  we 
are  guilty,  sinful,  and  corrupt,  and  naturally  deserve 
God's  wrath  and  condemnation.  We  publicly  profess 
that  Christ's  merit  and  not  ours,  Christ's  righteousness 


264  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

and  not  ours,  is  the  alone  cause  why  we  look  for  accept 
ance  with  God.  Now  what  has  a  self-righteous  man  to 
do  with  an  ordinance  like  this  ?  Clearly  nothing  at  all. 
One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  very  plain :  a  self-righteous 
man  has  no  business  to  receive  the  Sacrament  in  the 
Church  of  England.  The  Communion  Service  of  the 
Church  bids  all  communicants  declare  that  "  they  do  not 
presume  to  come  to  the  table  trusting  in  their  own 
righteousness,  but  in  God's  manifold  and  great  mercies." 
It  tells  them  to  say,  "  We  are  not  worthy  so  much  as 
to  gather  up  the  crumbs  under  Thy  table," — "  the  remem 
brance  of  our  sins  is  grievous  unto  us ;  the  burden  of 
them  is  intolerable."  How  any  self-righteous  Church 
man  can  ever  go  to  the  Lord's  Table  and  take  these 
words  into  his  mouth  passes  my  understanding !  It 
only  shows  that  many  professing  Christians  use  excellent 
forms  of  worship  without  taking  the  trouble  to  consider 
what  they  mean. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  the  Lord's  Supper  was  not 
meant  for  dead  souls,  but  for  living  ones.  The  careless, 
the  ignorant,  the  wilfully  wicked,  the  self-righteous,  are 
no  more  fit  to  come  to  the  Communion  rail  than  a  dead 
corpse  is  fit  to  sit  down  at  a  king's  feast.  To  enjoy  a 
spiritual  feast  we  must  have  a  spiritual  heart,  and  taste, 
and  appetite.  To  suppose  that  Christ's  ordinances  can 
do  good  to  an  unspiritual  man  is  as  foolish  as  to  put 
bread  and  wine  into  the  mouth  of  a  dead  person !  The 
careless,  the  ignorant,  and  the  wilfully  wicked,  so  long  as 
they  continue  in  that  state,  are  utterly  unfit  to  be  com 
municants.  To  urge  them  to  attend  is  not  to  do  them 
good,  but  harm. 

But  after  all,  the  ground  having  been  cleared  of  error, 
the  question  still  remains  to  be  answered,  Who  are  the 
sort  of  persons  who  ought  to  be  communicants  ?  I 
answer  that  question,  once  more,  in  the  words  of  the 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    SUPPER    OF    THE    LOED.         265 

Church  Catechism.  I  there  find  the  inquiry  made, 
"  What  is  required  of  them  who  come  to  the  Lord's 
Supper  ? "  In  reply  I  find  it  taught  that  people  should 
"  examine  themselves  whether  they  repent  them  truly  of 
their  former  sins,  steadfastly  purposing  to  lead  a  new 
life;  whether  they  have  a  lively  faith  in  God's  mercy 
through  Christ,  with  a  thankful  remembrance  of  His 
death ;  and  whether  they  are  in  charity  with  all  men." 
In  a  word,  I  find  that  a  worthy  communicant  is  one 
who  possesses  three  simple  marks  and  qualifications, — 
repentance,  faith,  and  charity.  Does  a  man  truly  repent 
of  sin  and  hate  it  ?  Does  a  man  put  his  trust  in  Jesus 
Christ  as  his  only  hope  of  salvation  ?  Does  a  man  live 
in  charity  towards  others  ?  He  that  can  truly,  and  with 
a  good  conscience,  reply  to  each  of  these  questions,  "  I 
do,"  he  is  a  man  that  is  scripturally  qualified  for  the 
Lord's  Supper.  Let  him  come  boldly.  Let  no  barrier 
be  put  in  his  way.  He  comes  up  to  the  Bible  standard 
of  communicants.  He  may  draw  near  with  confidence, 
and  feel  assured  that  the  great  Master  of  the  banquet  is 
not  displeased. 

Such  a  man's  repentance  may  be  very  imperfect. 
Never  mind  !  Is  it  real  ?  Does  he  truly  repent  at  all  ? 
His  faith  in  Christ  may  be  very  weak.  Never  mind! 
Is  it  real  ?  A  penny  is  as  truly  the  current  coin  of  the 
realm,  and  as  really  stamped  with  the  Queen's  image,  as 
a  sovereign.  His  charity  may  be  very  defective  in  quan 
tity  and  degree.  Never  mind !  Is  it  genuine  ?  The 
grand  test  of  a  man's  Christianity  is  not  the  quantity  of 
grace  he  has  got,  but  whether  he  has  any  grace  at  all. 
The  first  communicants,  when  Christ  Himself  gave  the 
bread  and  wine,  were  weak  indeed, — weak  in  knowledge, 
weak  in  faith,  weak  in  courage,  weak  in  patience,  weak 
in  love !  But  they  had  that  about  them  which  outweighed 
all  defects :  they  were  real,  genuine,  sincere,  and  true. 


266  PRINCIPLES    FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

For  ever  let  this  great  principle  be  rooted  in  your 
mind, — the  only  worthy  communicant  is  the  one  who  is 
experimentally  acquainted  with  repentance  toward  God, 
faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  practical  love 
toward  others.  Are  you  that  one  ?  Then  you  may 
draw  near  to  the  table,  and  take  the  Sacrament  to  your 
comfort.  Lower  than  this  I  dare  not  pitch  my  standard 
of  a  communicant.  I  will  never  help  to  crowd  a  com 
munion  rail  with  careless,  ignorant,  self-righteous  attend 
ants.  Higher  than  this  I  will  not  pitch  my  standard. 
I  will  never  tell  any  one  to  keep  away  till  he  is  perfect, 
and  to  wait  till  his  heart  is  as  unruffled  as  an  angel's.  I 
will  not  do  so,  because  I  believe  that  neither  my  Master 
nor  His  Apostles  would  have  done  so.  Show  me  one  that 
really  feels  his  sins,  really  leans  on  Christ,  really 
struggles  to  be  holy,  and  I  will  bid  him  welcome  in 
my  Master's  name.  He  may  feel  weak,  erring,  empty, 
feeble,  doubting,  wretched,  and  poor.  What  matter  \ 
St.  Paul,  I  believe,  would  have  received  him  as  a  right 
communicant,  and  I  will  do  likewise. 

IV.  WHAT  MAY  COMMUNICANTS  EXPECT  FROM  THE 
LORD'S  SUPPER? 

This  is  a  point  of  grave  importance,  and  one  on  which 
vast  mistakes  abound.  On  no  point,  perhaps,  connected 
with  this  ordinance  are  the  views  of  Christians  so  vague 
and  misty  and  undefined. 

One  common  idea  among  men  is,  that  "taking  the 
Sacrament  must  do  them  good."  Why,  they  cannot  ex 
plain.  What  good,  they  cannot  exactly  say.  But  they 
have  a  loose  general  notion  that  it  is  the  right  thing  to 
be  a  communicant,  and  that  somehow  or  other  it  is  of 
service  to  their  souls !  This  is,  of  course,  nothing  better 
than  ignorance.  It  is  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  such 


THOUGHTS    ON    THE    SUPPER    OF    THE    LORD.         267 

communicants  can  please  Christ,  or  receive  any  real 
benefit  from  what  they  do.  If  there  is  any  principle 
clearly  laid  down  in  the  Bible  about  any  act  of  religious 
worship,  it  is  this, — that  it  must  be  intelligent.  The 
worshipper  must  at  least  understand  something  about 
what  he  is  doing.  Mere  bodily  worship,  unaccompanied 
by  mind  or  heart,  is  utterly  worthless.  The  man  who 
walks  up  to  a  communion  rail,  and  eats  the  bread  and 
drinks  the  wine  as  a  mere  matter  of  form,  because  his 
minister  tells  him  to  come  there,  without  any  clear  idea 
of  what  it  all  means,  derives  no  benefit.  He  might  just 
as  well  stay  at  home. 

Another  common  idea  among  men  is  that  "  taking  the 
Sacrament  will  help  them  to  heaven,  and  take  away  their 
sins."  To  this  delusive  idea  you  may  trace  up  the  habit 
in  some  parishes  of  going  to  the  Sacrament  once  a  year, 
in  order,  as  an  old  farmer  once  said,  "  to  wipe  off  the 
year's  sins."  To  this  idea,  again,  you  may  trace  the  sadly 
common  practice  of  sending  for  a  minister  in  time  of 
sickness,  in  order  to  receive  the  Sacrament  before  death. 
Alas,  how  many  take  comfort  about  their  relatives,  after 
they  have  lived  a  most  ungodly  life,  for  no  better  reason 
than  this, — that  they  took  the  Sacrament  when  they  were 
dying!  Whether  they  repented  and  believed  and  had 
new  hearts,  they  neither  seem  to  know  nor  care.  All 
they  know  is  that  "  they  took  the  Sacrament  before  they 
died  ! "  My  heart  sinks  within  me  when  I  hear  people 
resting  on  such  evidence  as  this. 

Ideas  like  these  are  mournful  proofs  of  the  ignorance 
that  fills  the  minds  of  men  about  the  Lord's  Supper. 
They  are  ideas  for  which  there  is  not  the  slightest  war 
rant  either  in  Scripture  or  the  Prayer-book.  The  sooner 
they  are  cast  aside  and  given  up,  the  better  for  the  Church 
and  the  world. 

Let  us  settle  it  firmly  in  our  minds  that  the  Lord's 


268  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Supper  was  not  given  to  be  a  means  either  of  justification 
or  of  conversion.  It  was  never  meant  to  give  grace 
where  there  is  no  grace  already,  or  to  provide  pardon 
when  pardon  is  not  already  enjoyed.  It  cannot  possibly 
supply  the  absence  of  repentance  to  God,  and  faith  to 
ward  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  an  ordinance  for  the 
penitent,  not  for  the  impenitent, — for  the  believing,  not 
for  the  unbelieving, — for  the  converted,  not  for  the  un 
converted.  The  unconverted  man,  who  fancies  that  he 
can  find  a  short-cut  road  to  heaven  by  taking  the  Sacra 
ment,  without  treading  the  well-worn  steps  of  repentance 
and  faith,  will  find  to  his  cost  one  day  that  he  is  totally 
deceived.  The  Lord's  Supper  was  meant  to  increase  and 
help  the  grace  that  a  man  has,  but  not  to  impart  grace 
that  he  has  not.  It  was  certainly  never  intended  to 
make  our  peace  with  God,  to  justify,  or  to  convert. 

The  simplest  statement  of  the  benefit  which  a  true- 
hearted  communicant  may  expect  to  receive  from  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  that  which  is  supplied  by  the  Church 
Catechism, — "The  strengthening  and  refreshing  of  our 
souls."  Clearer  views  of  Christ  and  His  atonement, 
clearer  views  of  all  the  offices  which  Christ  fills  as  our 
Mediator  and  Advocate,  clearer  views  of  the  complete 
redemption  Christ  has  obtained  for  us  by  His  vicarious 
death  on  the  cross,  clearer  views  of  our  full  and  perfect 
acceptance  in  Christ  before  God,  fresh  reasons  for  deep 
repentance  for  sin,  fresh  reasons  for  lively  faith,  fresh 
reasons  for  living  a  holy,  consecrated,  Christ-like  life, — 
these  are  among  the  leading  returns  which  a  believer 
may  confidently  expect  to  get  from  his  attendance  at  the 
Lord's  Table.  He  that  eats  the  bread  and  drinks  the 
wine  in  a  right  spirit  will  find  himself  drawn  into  closer 
communion  with  Christ,  and  will  feel  to  know  Him  more, 
and  understand  Him  better.  Well  says  the  Communion 
Office  of  our  Prayer-book,  "  The  benefit  is  great,  if  with  a 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    269 

true  penitent  heart  and  lively  faith  we  receive  that  Holy 
Sacrament ;  for  then  we  spiritually  eat  the  flesh  of  Christ, 
and  drink  His  blood ;  then  we  dwell  in  Christ,  and  Christ 
in  us ;  we  are  one  with  Christ,  and  Christ  with  us." 

(a)  Eight  reception  of  the  Lord's  Supper  has  a  humbling 
effect  on  the  soul.  The  sight  of  the  emblems  of  Christ's 
body  and  blood,  reminds  us  how  sinful  sin  must  be,  if 
nothing  less  than  the  death  of  God's  own  Son  could  make 
satisfaction  for  it,  or  redeem  us  from  its  guilt.  Never, 
surely,  ought  we  to  be  so  "  clothed  with  humility,"  as 
when  we  kneel  at  the  Communion  rail. 

(&)  Eight  reception  of  the  Lord's  Supper  has  a  cheering 
effect  on  the  soul.  The  sight  of  the  bread  broken,  and 
the  wine  poured  out,  reminds  us  how  full,  perfect,  and 
complete  is  our  salvation.  Those  lively  emblems  remind 
us  what  an  enormous  price  has  been  paid  for  our  redemp 
tion.  They  press  on  us  the  mighty  truth  that,  believing 
on  Christ,  we  have  nothing  to  fear,  because  a  sufficient 
payment  has  been  made  for  our  debt.  The  "  precious 
blood  of  Christ"  answers  every  charge  that  can  be  brought 
against  us.  God  can  be  a  just  God,  and  yet  the  justifier 
of  every  one  that  believeth  on  Hun. 

(c)  Eight  reception  of  the  Lord's  Supper  has  a  sanctifying 
effect  on  the  soul.     The  bread  and  wine  remind  us  how 
great  is   our  debt  of  gratitude   to  our  Lord,  and  how 
thoroughly  we  are  bound  to  live  for  Him  who  died  for 
our  sins.     They  seem  to  say  to  us,  "  Eemember  what 
Christ  has  done  for  you,  and  ask  yourself  whether  there 
is  anything  too  great  to  do  for  Him." 

(d)  Eight  reception  of  the  Lord's  Supper  has  a  restraining 
effect  on  the  soul.     Every  time  a  believer  goes  up  to  the 
Communion  rail  he  is  reminded  what  a  serious  thing  it  is 
to  be  a  Christian,  and  what  an  obligation  is  laid  on  him 
to  lead  a  consistent  life.     Bought  with  such  a  price  as 
that  bread  and  wine  call  to  his  recollection,  ought  he  not 


270  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

to  glorify  Christ  in  body  and  spirit,  which  are  His  ?  The 
man  that  goes  regularly  and  intelligently  to  the  Lord's 
Table  finds  it  increasingly  hard  to  yield  to  sin  and  con 
form  to  the  world. 

Such  is  a  brief  account  of  the  benefits  which  a  right- 
hearted  communicant  may  expect  to  receive  from  the 
Lord's  Supper.  In  eating  that  bread  and  drinking  that 
cup,  such  an  one  will  have  his  repentance  deepened,  his 
faith  increased,  his  knowledge  enlarged,  his  habit  of  holy 
living  strengthened.  He  will  realise  more  of  the  "  real 
presence  "  of  Christ  in  his  heart.  Eating  that  bread  by 
faith,  he  will  feel  closer  communion  with  the  body  of 
Christ.  Drinking  that  wine  by  faith,  he  will  feel  closer 
communion  with  the  blood  of  Christ.  He  will  see  more 
clearly  what  Christ  is  to  him,  and  what  he  is  to  Christ. 
He  will  understand  more  thoroughly  what  it  is  to  be 
"one  with  Christ,  and  Christ  one  with  him."  He  will 
feel  the  roots  of  his  soul's  spiritual  life  watered,  and  the 
work  of  grace  in  his  heart  stablished,  built  up,  and  car 
ried  forward.  All  these  things  may  seem  and  sound 
foolishness  to  a  natural  man ;  but  to  a  true  Christian 
these  things  are  light,  and  health,  and  life,  and  peace. 
No  wonder  that  a  true  Christian  finds  the  Lord's  Supper 
a  source  of  blessing  ! 

Eemember,  I  do  not  pretend  to  say  that  all  Christians 
experience  the  full  blessing  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  I 
have  just  attempted  to  describe.  Nor  yet  do  I  say  that 
the  same  believer  will  always  find  his  soul  in  the  same 
spiritual  frame,  and  always  receive  the  same  amount  of 
benefit  from  the  Sacrament.  But  this  I  will  boldly  say, — 
you  will  rarely  find  a  true  believer  who  will  not  say  that 
he  reckons  the  Lord's  Supper  one  of  his  best  helps  and 
highest  privileges.  He  will  tell  you  that  if  he  were 
deprived  of  the  Lord's  Supper  he  should  find  the  loss  of 
it  a  great  drawback  to  his  soul.  There  are  some  things 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    271 

of  which  we  never  know  the  value  till  they  are  taken 
from  us.  So  I  believe  it  is  with  the  Lord's  Supper.  The 
weakest  and  humblest  of  God's  children  gets  a  blessing 
from  this  Sacrament,  to  an  extent  of  which  he  is  not 
aware. 


V.  WHY  DO  MANY  SO-CALLED  CHRISTIANS  NEVER  ATTEND 
THE  LORD'S  SUPPER? 

It  is  a  simple  matter  of  fact  that  myriads  of  baptized 
persons  never  come  to  the  Table  of  the  Lord.  They 
would  not  endure  to  be  told  that  they  deny  the  faith, 
and  are  practically  not  in  communion  with  Christ.  When 
they  worship,  they  attend  a  place  of  Christian  worship ; 
when  they  hear  religious  teaching,  it  is  the  teaching  of 
Christianity  ;  when  they  are  married,  they  use  a  Christian 
service ;  when  their  children  are  baptized,  they  ask  for 
the  Sacrament  of  Baptism.  Yet  all  this  time  they  never 
come  to  the  Lord's  Supper !  They  live  on  in  this  state 
of  mind  for  many  years,  and  to  all  appearance  are  not 
ashamed.  They  often  die  in  this  condition  without  ever 
having  received  the  Sacrament,  and  yet  profess  to  feel 
hope  at  the  last,  and  their  friends  express  a  hope  about 
them.  And  yet  they  live  and  die  in  open  disobedience 
to  a  plain  command  of  Christ !  These  are  simple  facts. 
Let  any  one  look  around  him,  and  deny  them  if  he  can. 
I  challenge  any  one  to  deny  that  the  non-communicants 
in  almost  all  English  congregations  form  the  large 
majority,  and  the  communicants  the  small  minority  of 
the  worshippers. 

Now  how  is  this  V  What  account  can  we  give  of  it  ? 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  last  injunctions  to  His  disciples 
are  clear,  plain,  and  unmistakable.  He  says  to  all,  "  Eat, 
drink  !  do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me."  Did  He  leave 
it  to  our  discretion  whether  we  would  attend  to  His 


272  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

injunction  or  not  ?  Did  He  mean  that  it  did  not  signify 
whether  His  disciples  did  or  did  not  keep  up  the  ordi 
nance  He  had  just  established  ?  Certainly  not.  The  very 
idea  is  absurd,  and  one  which  was  certainly  never  dreamed 
of  in  apostolic  times.  St.  Paul  evidently  takes  it  for 
granted  that  every  Christian  was  a  communicant.  A 
class  of  Christian  worshippers  who  never  came  to  the 
Table  was  a  class  whose  existence  was  unknown  to  him. 
What,  then,  are  we  to  say  of  that  large  multitude  of  non- 
communicants  which  walks  out  of  our  churches  every 
Sacrament  Sunday,  unabashed,  unhumbled,  not  afraid,  not 
the  least  ashamed  ?  Why  is  it  ?  How  is  it  ?  What 
does  it  all  mean  ?  Let  us  look  these  questions  fairly  in 
the  face,  and  endeavour  to  give  an  answer  to  them. 

(1)  For  one  thing,  many  are  not  communicants  because 
they  are  utterly  careless  and  thoughtless  about  religion, 
and  ignorant  of  the  very  first  principles  of  Christianity. 
They  go  to  church  as  a  matter  of  form,  because  othei 
people  go ;  but  they  neither  know  nor  care  anything 
about  what  is  done  at  church !  The  faith  of  Christ  has 
no  place  either  in  their  hearts,  or  heads,  or  consciences, 
or  wills,  or  understandings.  It  is  a  mere  affair  of  "  words 
and  names,"  about  which  they  know  no  more  than  Festus 
or  Gallio,  of  whom  we  read  in  the  Acts.  There  were  very 
few  such  Christians  in  St.  Paul's  times,  if  indeed  there 
were  any.  There  are  far  too  many  in  these  last  days  of 
the  world,  when  everything  seems  to  be  wearing  out  and 
running  to  seed.  They  are  the  dead-weight  of  the  Churches, 
and  the  scandal  of  Christianity.  What  such  people  need 
is  light,  knowledge,  grace,  a  renewed  conscience,  a  changed 
heart.  In  their  present  state  they  have  no  part  or  lot  in 
Christ ;  and  dying  in  this  state  they  are  unfit  for  heaven. 
Do  I  wish  them  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper  ?  Certainly 
not,  till  they  are  converted.  "Except  a  man  be  con- 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    273 

verted,  and  become  as  a  little  child,  he  will  never  enter 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  (Matt,  xviii.  3). 

(2)  For   another  thing,  many  are  not  communicants 
because  they  know  they  are  living  in  the  habitual  practice 
of  some  sin,  or  in  the  habitual  neglect  of  some  Christian 
duty.     Their  conscience  tells  them  that  so  long  as  they 
live  in  this  state,  and  do  not  break  off  from  their  sins, 
they  are  unfit  to  come  to  the  Table  of  the  Lord.     Well, 
they  are  so  far  quite  right !     I  wish  no  man  to  be  a  com 
municant  if  he  cannot  give  up  his  sins.     But  I  warn 
these  people  not  to  forget  that  if  they  are  unfit  for  the 
Lord's  Supper  they  are  unfit  to  die,  and  that  if  they  die 
in  their  present  condition  they  will  be  lost  eternally ! 
The  same  sins  which  disqualify  them  for  the  Sacrament, 
most  certainly  disqualify  them  for  heaven.     Do  I  want 
them  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper  as  they  are  ?     Cer 
tainly  not !     But  I  do  want  them  to  repent  and  be  con 
verted,  to  cease  to  do  evil,  and  to  break  off  from  their 
sins.     For  ever  let  it  be  remembered  that  the  man  who 
is  unfit  for  the  Lord's  Supper  is  unfit  to  die ! 

(3)  For   another  thing,  some   are  not  communicants 
because  they  fancy  it  will  add  to   their  responsibility. 
They   are  not,   as  many,  ignorant    and    careless    about 
religion.     They  even  attend  regularly  on  the  means  of 
grace,  and  like  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.     But  they 
say  they  dread  coming  forward  and  making  a  profession. 
They   fear  that  they  might   afterwards  fall  away,  and 
bring  scandal  on  the  cause  of  Christianity.     They  think 
it  wisest  to  be  on  the  safe  side,  and  not  commit  them 
selves  at  all.     Such  people  would  do  well  to  remember 
that  if   they   avoid  responsibility   of  one  kind  by  not 
coming  to  the  Lord's  Table,  they  incur  responsibility  of 
another  kind,  quite  as  grave,  and  quite  as  injurious  to 


274  PRINCIPLES   FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

the  soul.  They  are  responsible  for  open  disobedience  to 
a  command  of  Christ.  They  are  shrinking  from  doing 
that  which  their  Master  continually  enjoins  on  His 
disciples, — from  confessing  Him  before  men.  No  doubt 
it  is  a  serious  step  to  come  forward  and  receive  the 
Sacrament.  It  is  a  step  that  none  should  take  lightly 
and  without  self-examination.  But  it  is  no  less  a  serious 
step  to  walk  away  and  refuse  the  ordinance,  when  we 
remember  Who  invites  us  to  receive  it,  and  for  what 
purpose  it  was  appointed.  I  warn  the  people  I  am  now 
dealing  with  to  take  heed  what  they  are  doing.  Let 
them  not  flatter  themselves  that  it  can  ever  be  a  wise,  a 
prudent,  a  safe  line  of  conduct  to  neglect  a  plain  com 
mand  of  Christ.  They  may  find  at  length,  to  their  cost, 
that  they  have  only  increased  their  guilt  and  forsaken 
their  own  mercies. 

(4)  For  another  thing,  some  are  not  communicants 
because  they  fancy  they  are  not  yet  worthy.  They  wait 
and  stand  still,  under  the  mistaken  notion  that  no  one  is 
qualified  for  the  Lord's  Supper  unless  he  feels  within  him 
something  like  perfection.  They  pitch  their  idea  of  a 
communicant  so  high  that  they  despair  of  attaining  to  it. 
Waiting  for  inward  perfection  they  live,  and  waiting  for 
it  too  often  they  die.  Now  such  persons  would  do  well 
to  understand  that  they  are  completely  mistaken  in  their 
estimate  of  what  "  worthiness  "  really  is.  They  are  for 
getting  that  the  Lord's  Supper  was  not  intended  for 
unsinning  angels,  but  for  men  and  women  compassed  with 
infirmity,  dwelling  in  a  world  full  of  temptations,  and 
needing  mercy  and  grace  every  day  they  live.  A  sense 
of  our  own  utter  unworthiness  is  the  best  worthiness  we 
can  bring  to  the  Communion  rail.  A  deep  feeling  of  our 
own  entire  indebtedness  to  Christ  for  all  we  have  and 
hope  for,  is  the  best  feeling  we  can  bring  with  us.  The 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LOKD,    275 

people  I  now  have  in  view  ought  to  consider  seriously 
whether  the  ground  they  have  taken  up  is  tenable,  and 
whether  they  are  not  standing  in  their  own  light.  If 
they  are  waiting  till  they  feel  in  themselves  perfect 
hearts,  perfect  motives,  perfect  feelings,  perfect  repent 
ance,  perfect  love,  perfect  faith,  they  will  wait  for  ever. 
There  never  were  such  communicants  in  any  age, — 
certainly  not  in  the  days  of  our  Lord  and  of  the 
Apostles ;  there  never  will  be  as  long  as  the  world 
stands.  Nay,  rather,  the  very  thought  that  we  feel 
literally  worthy,  is  a  symptom  of  secret  self -righteousness, 
and  proves  us  unfit  for  Communion  in  God's  sight. 
Sinners  we  are  when  we  first  come  to  the  throne  of 
grace,  —  sinners  we  shall  be  till  we  die ;  converted, 
changed,  renewed,  sanctified,  but  sinners  still.  In  short, 
no  man  is  a  really  worthy  communicant  who  does  not 
deeply  feel  that  he  is  a  "  miserable  sinner." 

(5)  In  the  last  place,  some  object  to  be  communicants 
because  they  see  others  coming  to  the  Lord's  Table  who 
are  not  worthy,  and  not  in  a  right  state  of  mind.  Be 
cause  others  eat  and  drink  unworthily,  they  refuse  to  eat 
and  drink  at  all.  Of  all  the  grounds  taken  up  by  non- 
communicants  to  justify  their  own  neglect  of  Christ's 
ordinance,  I  must  plainly  say,  I  know  none  which  seems 
to  me  so  foolish,  so  weak,  so  unreasonable,  and  so  un- 
scriptural  as  this.  It  is  as  good  as  saying  that  we  will 
never  receive  the  Lord's  Supper  at  all !  When  shall  we 
ever  find  a  body  of  communicants  on  earth  of  which  all 
the  members  are  converted  ?  It  is  setting  up  ourselves 
in  the  most  unhealthy  attitude  of  judging  others.  "  Who 
art  thou  that  judgest  another  ? "  "  What  is  that  to  thee  ? 
Follow  thou  me."  It  is  depriving  ourselves  of  a  great 
privilege  merely  because  others  profane  it  and  make  a 
bad  use  of  it.  It  is  pretending  to  be  wiser  than  our 


276  PRINCIPLES  FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Master  Himself.  If  the  words  of  St.  Luke  mean  any 
thing,  Judas  Iscariot  was  present  at  the  first  Communion, 
and  received  the  bread  and  wine  among  others.  It  is 
taking  up  ground  for  which  there  is  no  warrant  in  Scrip 
ture.  St.  Paul  rebukes  the  Corinthians  sharply  for  the 
irreverent  behaviour  of  some  of  the  communicants ;  but 
I  cannot  find  him  giving  a  single  hint  that  when  some 
came  to  the  Table  unworthily,  others  ought  to  walk  off 
or  stay  away.  Let  me  advise  the  non-communicants  I 
have  now  in  view  to  beware  of  being  wise  above  that 
which  is  written.  Let  them  study  the  parable  of  the 
wheat  and  tares,  and  mark  how  both  were  to  "grow 
together  till  the  harvest."  Perfect  Churches,  perfect 
congregations,  perfect  bodies  of  communicants,  are  all 
unattainable  in  this  world  of  confusion  and  sin.  Let  us 
covet  the  best  gifts,  and  do  all  we  can  to  check  sin  in 
others ;  but  let  us  not  starve  our  own  selves  because 
others  are  ignorant  sinners,  and  turn  their  meat  into 
poison.  If  others  are  foolish  enough  to  "  eat  and  drink 
unworthily,"  let  us  not  turn  our  backs  on  Christ's  ordin 
ance,  and  refuse  to  eat  and  drink  at  all. 

Such  are  the  five  common  excuses  why  myriads  in  the 
present  day,  though  professing  themselves  Christians, 
never  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper.  One  common  remark 
may  be  made  about  them :  there  is  not  a  single  reason 
among  the  five  which  deserves  to  be  called  "  good,"  and 
which  does  not  condemn  the  man  who  gives  it.  I 
challenge  any  one  to  deny  this.  I  have  said  repeatedly 
that  I  want  no  one  to  be  a  communicant  who  is  not 
properly  qualified.  But  I  ask  those  who  stay  away 
never  to  forget  that  the  very  reasons  they  assign  for  their 
conduct  are  their  condemnation.  I  tell  them  that  they 
stand  convicted  before  God  of  either  being  very  ignorant 
of  what  a  communicant  is,  and  what  the  Lord's  Supper 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    277 

is ;  or  else  of  being  persons  who  are  not  living  rightly, 
and  are  unfit  to  die.  In  short,  to  say  "  I  am  a  non- 
communicant,"  is  as  good  as  saying  one  of  three  things  : — 
"  I  am  living  in  sin,  and  cannot  come ;  I  know  Christ 
commands  me,  but  I  will  not  obey  Him ;  I  am  an 
ignorant  man,  and  do  not  understand  what  the  Lord's 
Supper  means." 

I  know  not  in  what  state  of  mind  the  reader  of  this 
paper  may  be,  or  what  his  opinions  may  be  about  the 
Lord's  Supper.  But  I  will  conclude  the  whole  subject 
by  offering 

SOME  WARNINGS, 

which  I  venture  to  think  are  peculiarly  required  by  the 
times. 

(1)  In  the  first  place,  do  not  neglect  the  Lord's  Supper. 
The  man  who  coolly  and  deliberately  refuses  to  use  an 
ordinance  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  appointed  for  his 
profit,  may  be  very  sure  that  his  soul  is  in  a  very  wrong 
state.     There  is  a  judgment  yet  to  come ;  there  is  an 
account  to  be  rendered  of  all  our  conduct  on  earth.    How 
any  one  can  look  forward  to  that  day,  and  expect  to  meet 
Christ  with  comfort  and  in  peace,  if  he  has  refused  all 
his  life  to  meet  Christ  in  His  own  ordinance,  is  a  thing 
that  I  cannot  understand.     Eeader,  does  this  come  home 
to  you  ?     Mind  what  you  are  doing. 

(2)  In    the  second    place,   do  not  receive    the  Lord's 
Supper  carelessly,  irreverently,  and  as  a  matter  of  form. 
The  man  who  walks  up  to  the  Communion  rail,  and  eats 
the  bread  and  drinks  the  wine,  while  his  heart  is  far 
away,  is  committing  a  great  sin,  and  robbing  himself  of  a 


2*78  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

great  blessing.  In  this,  as  in  every  other  means  of  grace, 
everything  depends  on  the  state  of  mind  in  which  the 
ordinance  is  used.  He  that  draws  near  without  re 
pentance,  faith,  and  love,  and  with  a  heart  full  of  sin 
and  the  world,  will  certainly  be  nothing  better,  but  rather 
worse.  Eeader,  does  this  come  home  to  you  ?  Mind 
what  you  are  about. 

(3)  In   the   third  place,  do  not  make  an  idol  of  the 
Lord's  Supper.     The  man  who  tells  you  that  it  is  the 
first,  foremost,  chief,  and  principal  ordinance  in  Christianity, 
is  telling  you  that  which  he  will  find  it  hard  to  prove. 
In  the  great  majority  of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament 
the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  even   named.     In   the   letter 
to   Timothy   and   Titus,   about  a   minister's    duties,   the 
subject  is  not  even  mentioned.     To  repent  and  be  con 
verted,  to  believe  and    be    holy,  to  be  born  again  and 
have  grace  in  our  hearts, — all  these  things  are  of    far 
more  importance  than  to  be  a  communicant.     Without 
them  we  cannot  be  saved.     Without  the  Lord's  Supper 
we  can.     The  penitent  thief  was  not  a  communicant,  and 
Judas  Iscariot  was.    Header,  are  you  tempted  to  make  the 
Lord's   Supper  override   and    overshadow  everything  in 
Christianity,  and  place  it  above  prayer  and  preaching  ? 
Take  care.     Mind  what  you  are  about. 

(4)  In  the  fourth  place,  do  not  use  the  Lord's  Supper 
irregularly.     Never   be   absent  when  this  ordinance  is 
administered.     Make  every  sacrifice  to  be  in  your  place. 
Kegular  habits  are  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  the 
health  of  our  bodies.     Kegular  use  of   every  means  of 
grace  is  essential  to  the  prosperity  of  our  souls.     The 
man  who  finds  it  a  weariness  to  attend  on  every  occasion 
when  the  Lord's  Table  is  spread,  may  well  doubt  whether 
all  is  right  within  him,  and  whether  he  is  ready  for  the 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    279 

Marriage  Supper  of  the  Lamb.  If  Thomas  had  not  been 
absent  when  the  Lord  appeared  the  first  time  to  the 
assembled  disciples,  he  would  not  have  said  the  foolish 
things  he  did.  Absence  made  him  miss  a  blessing 
(John  xx.  19—29).  Eeader,  does  this  come  home  to 
you  ?  Mind  what  you  are  about 

(5)  In  the  fifth  place,  do  not  do  anything  to  briny 
discredit  on  your  profession  as  a  communicant.     The  man 
who  after  attending  the  Lord's  Table  runs  into  sin,  does 
more  harm  perhaps  than  any  sinner.     He  is  a  walking 
sermon  on  behalf  of  the  devil.     He  gives  occasion  to  the 
enemies  of  the  Lord  to  blaspheme.     He  helps  to  keep 
people  away  from  Christ.     Lying,  drinking,  adulterous, 
dishonest,  passionate  communicants  are  the  helpers  of  the 
devil,  and  the  worst  enemies  of  the  Gospel.    Eeader,  does 
this  come  home  to  you  ?     Mind  what  you  are  about. 

(6)  In  the  last   place,  do  not  despond  and    be  cast 
down,  if,  with  all  your  desires,  you  do  not  feel  to  get 
great  good  from  the  Lord's  Supper.     Very  likely   you 
are  expecting   too  much.     Very  likely  you  are  a  poor 
judge  of   your    own  state.     Your   soul's  roots  may  be 
strengthening  and  growing,  while  you  think  you  are  not 
getting  on.     Very  likely  you  are  forgetting  that  earth  is 
not  heaven,  and  that  here  we  walk  by  faith  and  not  by 
sight,  and  must  expect  nothing  perfect.     Lay  these  things 
to  heart.     Do  not  write  bitter  things  against  yourself 
without  cause. 

To  any  reader  into  whose  hands  this  book  may 
fall,  I  commend  the  whole  subject  of  it  as  deserving  of 
serious  and  solemn  consideration.  I  am  nothing  better 
than  a  weak  fallible  man  myself.  But  if  I  have  made 
up  my  mind  on  any  point  it  is  this, — that  there  is  no 


280  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

truth  which  demands  such  plain  speaking  as  truth  about 
the  Lord's  Supper. 

I  pause  here.  I  trust  I  have  said  enough  to  make 
clear  the  views  I  hold  of  the  true  intention  and  rightful 
position  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  If,  in 
expounding  these  views,  I  have  said  anything  that  grates 
on  the  feelings  of  any  reader,  I  can  assure  him  that  I  am 
unfeignedly  sorry.  Nothing  could  be  further  from  my 
desire  than  to  hurt  the  feelings  of  a  brother. 

But  it  is  my  firm  conviction  that  the  state  of  the 
Church  of  England  requires  great  plainness  of  speech 
and  distinctness  of  statement  about  the  Sacraments. 
There  is  nothing,  I  am  persuaded,  which  the  times  so 
imperatively  demand  of  Evangelical  Churchmen,  as  a 
bold,  manly  and  explicit  assertion  of  the  great  principles 
held  by  our  forefathers,  and  specially  about  Baptism  and 
the  Lord's  Supper.  If  we  would  strengthen  the  things 
that  remain  which  are  ready  to  die,  we  must  resolutely 
go  back  to  the  old  paths,  and  maintain  old  truths  in  the 
old  way.  We  must  give  up  the  vain  idea  that  we  can 
ever  make  the  cross  of  Christ  acceptable  by  polishing, 
and  varnishing,  and  painting,  and  gilding  it,  and  sawing 
off  its  corners.  We  must  cease  to  suppose  that  we  can 
ever  lure  men  into  being  Evangelical  by  a  trimming, 
temporizing,  half  and  half,  milk  and  water  mode  of 
exhibiting  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel;  or  by  wearing 
borrowed  plumes,  and  dabbling  with  High-Churchism ; 
or  by  loudly  proclaiming  that  we  are  not  "  party  men  ; " 
or  by  laying  aside  plain  Scriptural  phrases,  and  praising 
up  "  earnestness ; "  or  by  adroitly  keeping  back  truths 
that  are  likely  to  give  offence.  The  plan  is  an  utter 
delusion.  It  wins  no  enemy.  It  disgusts  many  a  true 
friend.  It  makes  the  worldly  bystander  sneer,  and  fills 
him  with  scorn.  We  may  rest  assured  that  the  right 
line  and  the  wisest  course  for  the  Evangelical  body  to 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  SUPPER  OF  THE  LORD.    281 

pursue,  is  to  adhere  steadily  to  the  old  plan  of  maintaining 
the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  specially  the  truth  about  the  two 
Sacraments  of  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  Let  us 
be  courteous,  amiable,  charitable,  affable,  considerate  for 
the  feelings  of  others  by  all  means,  but  let  no  considera 
tion  make  us  keep  back  any  part  of  God's  truth. 


XII. 
EEAL  CHUECH  WOKK 

WE  live  in  days  when  there  is  an  immense  increase  of 
what  is  called  "  Church  work."  The  contrast  between 
the  ways  of  the  present  age,  and  the  ways  of  our  grand 
fathers,  in  trying  to  do  good,  is  very  great  indeed.  To 
preach  the  Gospel,  and  expound  the  Scriptures  both  on 
Sundays  and  week-days, — to  visit  the  sick  frequently, — 
to  go  from  house  to  house  as  a  pastor,  endeavouring  by 
kindly  influence  over  all  the  members  of  families  to  get 
at  hearts  and  consciences, — to  keep  up  efficient  day- 
schools,  night-schools,  and  Bible  classes, — to  create  and 
maintain  an  interest  about  the  souls  of  others,  by  Foreign 
and  Home  Missions, — this  used  to  be  the  work  of  the 
clergyman,  and  this  was  the  kind  of  work  in  which  he 
was  ever  trying  to  enlist  the  practical  sympathy  of  his 
parishioners.  It  was  good,  solid,  healthy,  soul-helping, 
Christ-like  work. 

A  great  change  has  taken  place  in  the  last  forty  years. 
A  quantity  of  work  is  continually  being  carried  on  both 
by  clergymen  and  laymen,  which,  however  well-meant, 
can  hardly  be  called  religious,  and  in  reality  has  a  pain 
ful  tendency  to  throw  true  Christian  work  into  the  back 
ground,  if  not  to  throw  it  entirely  on  one  side.  No  one, 
for  instance,  can  fail  to  observe  that  a  large  number  of 

2*2 


REAL  CHURCH    WORK.  283 

Churchmen  are  spending  all  their  time  and  strength  on 
Church  music,  Church  decorations,  Church  ceremonials, 
and  an  incessant  round  of  Church  services.  Others  are 
equally  absorbed  in  such  subjects  as  temperance,  social 
purity,  cookery  for  the  poor,  improved  dwellings  for  the 
working-classes.  Others  are  incessantly  getting  up  popu 
lar  concerts,  penny  readings,  secular  lectures,  and  evening 
recreations,  and  proclaiming  everywhere  that  the  way  to 
do  good  is  to  amuse  people.  Others  are  always  occupied 
with  guilds,  and  societies,  and  associations,  and  think  you 
very  wrong  and  heathenish  if  you  do  not  join  them. 
Myriads  of  Churchmen  are  restlessly  busy  about  such 
things  from  one  end  of  the  land  to  the  other ;  and  super 
ficial  observers  are  often  saying,  "  What  a  great  deal  of 
Church-work  there  is  in  these  days ! " 

Now  I  would  not  for  a  moment  be  supposed  to  mean 
that  the  things  I  have  just  mentioned  are  wrong  and 
wicked.  Nothing  could  be  further  from  my  intention 
in  drawing  up  this  paper.  But  I  doubt  whether  the 
present  state  of  things  is  altogether  healthy.  I  doubt 
whether  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  hearts  and 
consciences  is  not  insensibly  being  left  out  in  the 
cold  and  neglected.  Amidst  the  incessant  bustle  and 
stir  about  matters  of  entirely  secondary  importance, 
I  doubt  whether  the  sort  of  direct  spiritual  work  to 
which  the  Apostles  wholly  gave  themselves,  receives 
as  much  attention  as  it  ought.  It  is  quite  certain 
that  musical  services,  and  Church  decoration,  and  concerts, 
and  penny  readings,  and  bazaars,  and  improved  cookery, 
and  the  like,  will  not  save  souls.  It  is  equally  certain 
that,  without  repentance,  and  faith,  and  holy  living,  and 
practical,  self-denying,  kindly  charity,  no  one  is  meet  for 
heaven.  Do  these  simple,  old-fashioned  graces  fill  the 
place  which  they  ought  to  do  in  the  daily  proceedings  of 
many  so-called  Church-workers  in  this  day  ?  I  confess 


284  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

I  doubt  it  exceedingly.  I  certainly  see  on  every  side  a 
vast  increase  of  what  people  call "  Church- work."  But  I 
own  to  a  strong  suspicion  that  there  is  little  or  no  in 
crease  of  true  religion.  There  is  more  show,  undoubtedly. 
But  I  doubt  extremely  whether  there  is  more  reality, 
and  more  growth  of  practical  godliness  and  zeal  to  save 
souls. 

I  propose  to  bring  the  matter  to  a  point  in  this  paper, 
by  expounding  the  famous  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan. 
I  shall  try  to  show  my  readers  what  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  considers  the  test  of  real  vital  religion.  Whether 
the  great  Head  of  the  Church  attaches  much  value  to 
much  of  the  "  Church-work  "  of  these  days, — our  bazaars, 
our  concerts,  our  penny  readings,  our  musical  services, 
our  church  decorations, — is  to  my  mind  a  very  serious 
question.  Whether  He  thinks  the  immense  quantity  of 
time  and  money  which  they  absorb,  well  spent,  is  another 
very  serious  question  which  I  find  it  difficult  to  answer. 
But  I  do  know  that  He  loves  to  see  Christians  walking 
in  the  practical  lines  laid  down  for  us  in  the  parable  of 
the  good  Samaritan.  He  that  would  know  the  highest 
style  of  "  Church-work,"  the  work  that  Christ  would  have 
us  attend  to,  let  him  mark  the  lessons  contained  in  this 
most  practical  parable. 

I  say  "  practical "  with  a  purpose  and  meaning.  What 
ever  some  ignorant  persons  may  say,  Christianity  is 
eminently  a  practical  religion.  Its  great  end  and  aim 
is  not  only  to  show  the  way  of  peace  with  God,  but  the 
way  of  holiness  of  life.  That  salvation  is  only  by  grace, — 
that  justification  is  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the 
law, — both  these  are  foundation  verities,  cardinal  truths 
of  the  Gospel.  But  it  is  no  less  true  that  saving  faith 
will  always  be  known  by  its  fruits,  and  that  the  "  grace 
of  God,  which  bringeth  salvation,  teaches  us  to  live 
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world " 


REAL    CHURCH    WORK.  285 

(Titus  ii.  12).  He  is  a  poor  sort  of  Christian  to  whom 
Christ  is  not  made  sanctification  as  well  as  righteousness  ! 

The  man  who  does  not  see  these  things  has  hitherto 
read  his  New  Testament  to  very  little  purpose.  He 
should  study  the  latter  chapters  of  nearly  all  St.  Paul's 
Epistles.  He  should  mark  the  high  standard  of  living 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  continually  sets  before  His  disciples 
in  the  Gospels.  And,  to  come  to  the  subject  of  this 
paper,  where  shall  we  find  more  heart-searching  words 
about  duty  to  our  neighbour  than  in  the  parable  of  the 
good  Samaritan  ?  That  well-known  parable  concludes 
with  the  searching  injunction,  "  Go,  and  do  thou  like 
wise."  Eeader,  wouldst  thou  be  found  a  true  Christian  at 
the  last  day  ?  Wouldst  thou  not  be  condemned  as  nothing 
better  than  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal  ?  Then 
make  the  Samaritan  thy  pattern.  Be  not  content  with  mere 
thinking,  feeling,  talking,  and  intending.  "  Go,  and  do." 

Three  lessons  appear  to  me  to  stand  out  on  the  face  of 
this  parable.  Let  me  try  to  show  what  they  are,  and 
then  draw  from  the  whole  subject  some  practical  lessons. 

I.  See,  first  of  all,  what  misery  sin  has  brought  into  the 
world. 

"  A  certain  man,"  says  our  Lord,  "  went  down  from 
Jerusalem  to  Jericho,  and  fell  among  thieves.  They 
stripped  him  of  his  raiment,  robbed  him,  beat  him, 
wounded  him,  and  departed,  leaving  him  half  dead." 
Lying  helpless  by  the  wayside, — exposed  naked  to  the 
burning  rays  of  an  Oriental  sun, — liable  to  be  torn  by 
vultures  ever  looking  out  for  a  carcase,  or  devoured  by 
jackals  when  the  sun  went  down, — in  all  probability, 
without  speedy  aid,  this  poor  traveller  would  soon  have 
died.  Here  was  covetousness,  violence,  cruelty,  robbery, 
murder,  lawless  disregard  of  life  and  property,  all  com 
bined.  Such  are  the  consequences  which  the  fall  has 


286  PKINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

brought  into  the  world.  Such  is  the  heartless,  hateful 
conduct  of  which  fallen  man  is  capable. 

But  does  conduct  like  this  stand  alone  ?  Alas,  no ! 
In  the  present  day  human  nature  is  still  the  same.  Sel 
fishness,  oppression,  cruelty,  robbery,  and  even  murder, 
are  still  to  be  found  more  or  less  in  every  quarter  of  the 
globe.  The  slave  trade  of  Africa,  which  goes  on  even 
now  on  the  east  coast,  and  in  the  Soudan, — the  massacres 
of  the  Indian  Mutiny,  and  recently  in  Egypt, — the  treat 
ment  of  women,  children,  the  sick,  and  the  poor  in  almost 
every  heathen  country, — the  social  disorders  which  dis 
grace  some  parts  of  Christendom, — the  robberies,  murders, 
and  deeds  of  violence  which  our  own  newspapers  record 
from  time  to  time  in  our  own  beloved  Christian  land, — 
all  these  things  cry  aloud  to  heaven,  and  prove  that  the 
case  of  the  traveller  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho  does  not 
stand  alone. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  the  suffering  and  the  down 
trodden,  the  victims  of  oppression  and  robbery  and 
violence,  are  everywhere.  They  are  to  be  found  more  or 
less  in  every  climate,  and  in  every  country  under  the 
sun.  They  live  in  Europe,  in  Asia,  in  Africa,  and  in 
America.  They  dwell  by  the  banks  of  the  Seine  as  well 
as  the  banks  of  the  Thames, — by  the  banks  of  the 
Mississippi  and  Amazon  as  well  as  the  banks  of  the 
Niger  or  Ganges.  They  abound  under  republics  as  well 
as  under  monarchies, — under  liberal  governments  as  well 
as  under  despotism.  Everywhere  you  will  find  trouble, 
care,  sorrow,  selfishness,  bloodshed,  and  covetousness. 
We  see  comparatively  very  little  of  it,  thank  God  !  in 
our  own  happy  land.  But  even  we  see  and  hear  far 
too  much.  We  have  but  a  faint  idea  of  the  enormities 
which  go  on  in  heathen  countries,  where  the  restraining 
influence  of  Christianity  is  unknown. 

Now  how  shall  we  explain  this  ?     What  is  the  cause 


REAL    CHURCH    WORK.  287 

of  the  state  of  things  which  I  have  just  tried  to  describe  ? 
Did  God  create  men  at  the  beginning  to  bite  and  devour 
one  another  ?  Most  certainly  not.  Are  human  govern 
ments  to  blame  because  robbery  and  violence  abound  ? 
Not  altogether.  The  fault  lies  far  too  deep  to  be  reached 
by  human  laws.  I  pity  those  well-meaning  people  who 
imagine  that  any  legislation  can  ever  drive  evil  out  of 
the  world.  There  is  a  deep-seated  cause  of  human  misery 
which  baffles  all  their  schemes :  THAT  CAUSE  IS  SIN. 
Sin  is  the  universal  disease  which  infects  the  whole  earth. 
Sin  brought  in  thorns  and  thistles  at  the  beginning,  and 
obliged  man  to  earn  his  bread  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow. 
Sin  is  the  reason  why  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and 
travaileth  in  pain,  and  the  foundations  of  the  earth  are 
out  of  course.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  all  the  burdens  which 
now  press  down  mankind.  Most  men  know  it  not,  and 
weary  themselves  in  vain  to  explain  the  state  of  things 
around  them.  But  I  boldly  affirm  that  original  sin  and 
the  fall  of  Adam  are  the  great  root  and  foundation  of 
all  sorrow,  hatred  and  wrong-doing,  whatever  proud  man 
may  think.  Social  Science  Congresses,  Sanitary  Con 
gresses,  Trade  Union  Congresses,  British  Association 
Meetings,  the  organization  of  schemes  for  popular  amuse 
ment  and  recreation,  are  all  very  well  in  their  way.  But 
they  are  often  "  labour  in  vain,"  because  they  ignore  the 
fall  of  Adam,  and  original  sin, — great  stubborn  facts, 
which  disturb  all  their  calculations,  and  without  acknow 
ledging  which  the  great  problems  of  human  nature  can 
never  be  solved. 

How  much  we  ought  to  hate  sin,  and  to  make  the 
checking  of  sin  the  first  object  in  our  efforts  to  do  good! 
How  much  we  ought  to  long  and  strive  to  promote 
the  progress  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ !  This,  after  all,  is 
the  true  reformer  and  civilizer  of  mankind.  Just  in 
proportion  as  men  are  brought  under  the  influence  of 


288  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN 

the  despised  old  Gospel  will  be  the  increase  of  "  peace 
on  earth  and  goodwill"  among  men.  The  more  Christ 
is  known  and  loved,  and  the  more  the  Bible  is  read,  the 
more  will  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  love  one  another. 
The  more  grace  reigns  over  hearts  and  lives,  the  less 
hatred  and  violence  will  there  be  in  the  world.  If  pure 
and  undefiled  religion  prevailed  everywhere,  such  plagues 
and  pests  and  nuisances  as  quarrelling,  robbing,  murder, 
drunkenness,  fornication,  swindling,  gambling,  idleness, 
lying,  and  cheating  would  be  comparatively  unknown. 
Half  the  prisons  and  workhouses  would  soon  be  shut  up. 
Magistrates  and  policemen  would  have  little  to  do.  Half 
the  poor-rates  would  be  saved.  He  is  the  truest  friend 
to  human  happiness  who  does  the  most  to  spread  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  and  evangelize  the  world.  Men 
may  laugh  and  mock  at  missions  if  they  will.  But  the 
despised  Evangelical  Missionary,  at  home  and  abroad,  the 
preacher  of  Christ  and  justification  by  faith,  the  preacher 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  sanctification,  is  the  best  friend  of 
mankind. 

II.  Let  me  turn  now  to  another  lesson  which  stands 
out  on  the  face  of  this  parable.  See  how  much  religious 
profession  there  may  be  without  accompanying  religious 
practice. 

Our  Lord  mentions  two  simple  facts,  which  I  will  give 
in  His  own  words :  "  By  chance  there  came  down  a 
certain  priest  that  way  :  and  when  he  saw  him,  he  passed 
by  on  the  other  side.  And  likewise  a  Levite,  when  he 
was  at  the  place,  came  and  looked  on  him,  and  passed  by 
on  the  other  side."  There  is  a  deep  mine  of  suggestive 
truth  in  those  two  verses, — truth  which,  in  every  age  of 
the  world,  has  deserved  attention,  but  truth  which  never 
required  proclaiming  so  loudly  as  it  does  now. 

The  Jewish  priests  and  Levites,  we  must  remember, 


EEAL   CHURCH    WOKK.  289 

were  the  official  leaders  and  representatives  of  the  Jewish 
religion.  They  were,  in  a  certain  sense,  mediators  between 
God  and  the  people  until  Messiah  came.  As  such  they 
were  under  special  obligations  to  exhibit  better  knowledge 
of  God's  mind  and  holier  practice  than  other  children  of 
Abraham.  Their  lips  were  to  keep  and  teach  knowledge. 
They  were  the  authorized  expounders  of  the  law.  They 
were  the  acknowledged  models,  patterns,  and  standards 
of  godliness  in  life. 

Yet  here  our  Lord  shows  us  two  high  professors  of 
religion  so  utterly  destitute  of  mercy,  pity,  and  kind 
feeling,  that  they  could  see  a  fellow-man  lying  by  the 
roadside  stripped,  wounded,  and  half  dead,  and  yet  pass 
on  their  way  without  lifting  a  finger  to  help  him.  Never 
was  there  a  clearer  proof  that  a  man  may  have  the  form, 
and  even  the  official  dress  of  religion,  and  yet  at  the 
same  time  know  nothing  of  its  power ! 

The  teaching  of  Scripture  on  this  point  is  very  distinct 
and  explicit.  Barren  formality  will  save  no  man's  soul 
however  high  his  office,  if  his  heart  is  not  right  in  the 
sight  of  God.  Hophni  and  Phinehas,  Annas  and  Caiaphas, 
were  all  in  the  direct  line  of  succession  from  Aaron,  but, 
for  anything  we  can  see,  they  perished  miserably  in  their 
sins.  Barren  formality  in  worshipping  deprives  the 
holiest  ordinances  of  value,  and  turns  them  into  dead 
forms.  What  says  the  book  of  Isaiah  ?  "  Bring  no  more 
vain  oblations. — Your  appointed  feasts  my  soul  hateth  " 
(Isa.  i.  13, 14).  What  says  our  Lord  Himself  ?  "  I  will 
have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice "  (Matt.  ix.  1 3).  What 
says  St.  Paul  ?  "  Circumcision  is  nothing.  Circumcision 
profiteth  not, — unless  it  is  joined  with  faith  working  by 
love, — a  new  creature, — and  keeping  the  commandments 
of  God  "  (Gal.  v.  6,  vi.  15  ;  1  Cor.  vii.  19).  "  He  that 
eateth  and  drinketh  '  the  Lord's  Supper '  unworthily,  eateth 
and  drinketh  damnation  to  himself"  (1  Cor.  xi.  29). 

T 


290  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Of  all  the  sins  which  our  blessed  Lord  denounced 
on  earth,  none  drew  down  such  severe  reproof  from 
His  lips  as  hypocrisy,  part-acting,  and  mere  external 
religion.  Eight  times  over  in  one  single  chapter  we 
read  the  solemn  words,  "  Woe  unto  you,  scribes  and 
Pharisees,  hypocrites"  (Matt,  xxiii.  13-29).  The  higher 
a  man's  outward  profession,  the  more  offensive  does 
he  seem  to  be  to  Christ,  if  he  has  no  inward  grace 
in  his  heart.  It  was  the  awful  saying  of  our  Lord  ot 
the  formal  scribes  and  Pharisees,  "  The  publicans  and 
harlots  go  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  you" 
(Matt.  ii.  31). 

Our  lot  is  cast  in  an  age  when  this  subject  demands 
the  serious  thought  of  all  professing  Christians.  Perhaps 
there  never  was  a  period  in  the  history  of  England  when 
the  externals  of  religion  received  such  an  amount  of 
attention  as  they  do  now.  It  is  an  age  of  Church 
building,  Church  restoring,  and  Church  decoration.  It 
is  an  age  of  multiplied  services  and  celebrations  of  the 
Lord's  Supper.  It  is  an  age  of  dresses,  and  processions, 
and  banners,  and  gestures,  and  postures,  and  bowings, 
and  turnings,  and  sensuous  religion. — Do  I  say  that 
these  things  are  in  themselves  downright  wicked,  like 
robbery  and  murder  ?  I  say  nothing  of  the  kind.  Many 
of  them  are  only  "pernicious  trifles,"  though  suspicious 
symptoms  of  inward  disease. — Do  I  say  that  all  who 
love  these  things  are  wicked  persons  ?  Once  more  I 
say  nothing  of  the  kind.  But  I  do  say  that  there  is 
great  danger  of  forgetting  that  these  things  do  not  consti 
tute  saving  Christianity,  and  that  the  one  principal  thing 
God  looks  at  in  worshippers  is  the  state  of  the  heart. 
An  English  Christian  may  be  as  outwardly  correct  as  a 
priest  and  Levite  in  the  days  of  our  Lord ;  but  if,  like 
them,  he  has  no  inward  love,  he  will  not  be  saved.  A 
barren  formalism,  which  knows  nothing  of  experimental 


EBAL   CHUECH   WOEK.  291 

repentance,  faith,  charity,  and  self-denying  kindness,  may 
please  the  eye,  and  pass  muster  among  men;  but  we 
may  depend  it  is  worthless  in  the  sight  of  God. 

We  hear  continually,  in  this  day,  of  enormous  sums  of 
money  being  spent  on  Church  decoration,  on  ferns  and 
costly  flowers  at  the  great  festivals,  on  incessant  daily 
services  and  holy  communions,  on  a  multiplied  staff  of 
clergy  to  keep  up  a  round  of  ceremonial,  on  music  and 
singing  of  the  choicest  description.  On  all  these  objects 
the  annual  expenditure  in  England  at  this  time  is  simply 
prodigious.  But  I  should  like  much  to  know  whether 
the  congregations  which  enjoy  this  kind  of  public  external 
religion,  and  give  such  large  offerings  to  maintain  it, 
contribute  anything  worth  mentioning,  by  comparison, 
to  the  cause  of  Missions  to  the  heathen,  or  to  Home 
Missions,  or,  to  speak  briefly,  to  any  evangelistic  or 
Samaritan  work  in  a  sinful  dying  world.  I  am  sadly 
afraid  that  the  results  of  inquiry  would  prove  extremely 
unsatisfactory,  and  that  we  should  discover  some  most 
unhealthy  symptoms  in  our  Church's  condition.  "  Hath 
the  Lord  as  great  delight  in  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices, 
as  in  obeying  the  voice  of  the  Lord?"  (1  Sam.  xv.  22). 
Does  God  care  for  ferns  and  flowers  and  fine  musical 
services,  when  Christ's  work,  and  active  aggressive 
evangelism,  and  personal  dealing  with  souls,  and  true 
brotherly  Samaritan  conduct,  are  neglected  ?  Never,  never 
let  us  forget,  that  while  "  man  looketh  at  the  outward  ap 
pearance,  the  Lord  looketh  at  the  heart "  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7). 
All  public  religion  is  worthless  which  does  not  bear  the 
fruit  of  active,  Christ-like  love.  The  congregation  which 
pleases  God  most  in  this  day  is  not  necessarily  that  in 
which  there  is  the  finest  music  and  the  most  ornamental 
ceremonial.  The  congregation  which  He  approves  is 
that  in  which,  however  plain  the  service,  there  are  most 
good  Samaritans,  most  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 


292  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

most  direct  personal  effort  to  convert  sinners  and  save 
souls.     This  is  real  Church  work. 

III.  Let  me  now  turn,  in  the  last  place,  to  the  grand 
lesson  about  true  Christian  work  and  labour  of  love  which  our 
Lord  sets  before  us  in  this  parable.  I  cannot  do  better  than 
show  it  to  you  in  His  own  matchless  words.  I  read,  "  A 
certain  Samaritan,  as  he  journeyed,  came  where  he  was:  and 
when  he  saw  him,  he  had  compassion  on  him,  and  went 
to  him,  and  bound  up  his  wounds,  pouring  in  oil  and 
wine,  and  set  him  on  his  own  beast,  and  brought  him  to 
an  inn,  and  took  care  of  him.  And  on  the  morrow  when 
he  departed,  he  took  out  two  pence,  and  gave  them  to  the 
host,  and  said  unto  him,  Take  care  of  him,  and  whatsoever 
thou  spendest  more,  when  I  come  again  I  will  repay 
thee." 

What  a  striking  portrait  of  the  queen  of  all  the  graces 
you  have  in  these  words !  Here  was  ready,  unexpected 
kindness.  The  Samaritan  saw  a  case  needing  help,  and 
at  once  felt  and  acted.  He  required  no  begging,  can 
vassing,  or  importunity.  His  eye  saw,  his  heart  was 
touched,  and  his  hand  helped  altogether. — Here  was 
kindness  unaffected  ly  example.  He  might  easily  have 
said,  The  Jewish  priest  and  Levite  did  nothing  for  this 
traveller,  and  why  should  I  do  anything  at  all  ?  He 
showed  a  noble  independence  of  judgment.  Whatever 
others  did,  he  cared  not.  He  knew  his  own  duty,  and 
was  resolved  to  do  it,  even  though  he  did  it  alone. — Once 
more,  here  was  kindness  requiring  self-denial,  trouble,  time, 
and  self-sacrifice.  Money,  patient  care,  his  own  ease 
and  convenience,  were  all  bestowed  without  grudging  on 
a  stranger.  He  did  as  he  would  be  done  by. 

Now,  what  a  solemn  fact  it  is  that  the  parable  ends 
with  the  searching  words,  "  Go,  and  do  thou  likewise  "  ! 
If  ever  there  was  a  time  when  conduct  like  the 


REAL  CHURCH   WORK.  293 

tan's  was  rare,  it  is  the  time  in  which  we  live.  Selfish 
indifference  to  the  wants  of  others  is  a  painful  charac 
teristic  of  the  age.  Search  the  land  in  which  we  live, 
from  the  Isle  of  Wight  to  Berwick-on-Tweed,  and  from 
the  Land's  End  to  the  North  Foreland,  and  name,  if  you 
can,  a  single  county  or  town  in  which  the  givers  to 
really  good  healthy  Church  works  are  not  a  small 
minority,  and  in  which  philanthropic  and  religious 
agencies  are  not  kept  going,  only  and  entirely,  by 
painful  begging  and  constant  importunity.  Go  where 
you  will,  the  report  is  always  the  same.  Hospitals, 
Missions  at  home  and  abroad,  evangelistic  and  educa 
tional  agencies,  Churches,  Chapels,  and  Mission  Halls, 
all  are  incessantly  checked  and  hindered  by  want  of 
support.  Where  are  the  Samaritans,  we  may  well  ask, 
in  this  land  of  Bibles  and  Testaments  ?  Where  are  the 
men  who  love  their  neighbours,  and  will  help  to  provide 
for  dying  bodies  and  souls  ?  Where  are  the  people  al 
ways  ready  and  willing  to  give  unasked,  and  without 
asking  how  much  others  have  given  ?  Millions  are  an 
nually  spent  on  deer-forests,  and  moors,  and  hunting,  and 
yachting,  and  racing,  and  gambling,  and  balls,  and  theatres, 
and  dressing,  and  pictures,  and  furniture,  and  recreation. 
Little,  comparatively,  ridiculously  little,  is  given  or  done 
for  the  cause  of  Christ.  A  miserable  guinea  subscription 
too  often  is  the  whole  sum  bestowed  by  some  Croesus  on 
the  bodies  and  souls  of  his  fellow-men.  Dives  "  fares 
sumptuously  every  day,"  while  Lazarus  starves  and  lan 
guishes  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  his  door.  The  very 
first  principles  of  giving  seem  lost  and  forgotten  in  many 
quarters.  People  must  be  bribed  and  tempted  to  con 
tribute  by  bazaars,  as  children  in  badly-managed  families 
are  bribed  and  tempted  to  be  good  by  sugar-plums. 
They  must  not  be  expected  to  give  unless  they  get  some 
thing  in  return  !  And  all  this  goes  on  in  a  country  where 


294  PRINCIPLES    FOfc    CHURCHMEN. 

people  call  themselves  Christians,  and  go  to  Church  and 
glory  in  our  ritual,  and  talk  of  the  vast  amount  of 
"  Church  -  work  "  going  on,  and  profess  to  believe  the 
parable  of  the  good  Samaritan !  I  fear  there  will  be  a 
sad  waking  up  at  the  last  day. 

Where,  after  all,  to  come  to  the  root  of  the  matter, 
where  is  that  brotherly  love  which  used  to  be  the  dis 
tinguishing  mark  of  the  primitive  Christians  ?  Where, 
amidst  the  din  of  controversy  and  furious  strife  of  parties, 
where  is  the  fruit  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  primary 
mark  of  spiritual  regeneration  ?  Where  is  that  charity 
without  which  we  are  no  better  than  "  sounding  brass 
and  tinkling  cymbals  "  ?  Where  is  the  charity  which  is 
"  the  bond  of  perfectness  "  ?  Where  is  that  love  by  which 
our  Lord  declared  all  men  should  know  His  disciples,  and 
which  St.  John  said  was  the  distinction  between  the 
children  of  God  and  the  children  of  the  devil  ?  Where 
is  it  indeed  ? — Eead  in  the  newspapers  the  frightfully 
violent  language  of  opposing  politicians.  Mark  the 
hideous  bitterness  of  controversial  theologians,  both 
in  the  press  and  on  the  platform.  Observe  the 
fiendish  delight  with  which  anonymous  letter-writers 
endeavour  to  wound  the  feelings  of  opponents,  and 
then  to  pour  vitriol  into  the  wound.  Look  at  all  this 
ghastly  spectacle  which  any  observing  eye  may  see  any 
day  in  England.  And  then  remember  that  this  is  the 
country  in  which  men  are  reading  the  New  Testament, 
and  professing  to  follow  Christ.  Can  anything  more 
grossly  inconsistent  be  conceived  ?  Can  anything  be 
imagined  more  offensive  to  God  ?  Truly,  it  is  astonishing 
that  such  myriads  should  be  so  keen  about  Christian  pro 
fession  and  external  worship,  and  talk  so  loudly  about 
Church  work,  and  yet  be  so  utterly  careless  about  the 
simplest  elements  of  Christian  practice.  Where  there  is 
no  love  there  is  no  spiritual  life.  Without  love,  although 


REAL   CHURCH   WORK.  295 

baptized  and  communicants,  men  are  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins. 

It  is  no  pleasure  to  me  to  write  these  things,  and  I  can 
truly  say  that  I  have  handled  them  with  pain.  But  I 
am  thoroughly  convinced  that  the  times  demand  very 
plain  testimony  on  the  subject.  The  rise  and  progress  of 
immense  zeal  about  the  externals  of  religion,  without  any 
corresponding  increase  in  brotherly  feeling,  neighbourly 
conduct,  Christian  charity,  and  real  Scriptural  effort  to  con 
vert  and  save  souls,  I  regard  as  one  of  the  most  dangerous 
symptoms  of  the  Church  in  this  day.  It  is  high  time  to  awake 
out  of  sleep,  and  amend  our  ways,  lest  we  be  given  over 
to  judicial  blindness,  and  be  forsaken  of  God.  A  Church 
in  which  Pharisees  and  formalists  are  many,  and  good 
Samaritans  are  few,  is  in  a  most  unhealthy  condition. 
God  grant  we  may  "  strengthen  the  things  that  remain," 
before  it  is  too  late,  lest  our  candlestick  be  taken  away ! 

(a)  And  now,  before  I  conclude  this  paper,  let  me  ask 
if  any  reader  of  its  pages  really  wishes  to  walk  in  the 
steps  of  the  good  Samaritan  ?  Listen  to  me  for  a  few 
moments,  and  I  will  give  you  some  advice. 

You  will  never  be  the  man  commended  in  the  parable 
unless  you  begin  at  the  right  end.  A  truly  loving  heart 
will  only  spring  from  inward  grace  and  experimental 
union  with  Christ.  Cut  flowers  do  not  make  a  garden. 
A  little  spasmodic  philanthropy,  and  giving  your  goods 
to  feed  the  poor,  will  never  make  a  Samaritan.  Oh,  no  ! 
you  must  have  within  you  the  deep  hidden  roots  of 
conviction  of  sin,  of  lively  faith  in  Christ  and  sense  of 
obligation  to  Him,  of  real  communion  with  God.  Once 
know  something  of  these  things  and  you  will  never  be 
content  with  a  selfish,  formal  Christianity.  You  will 
long,  and  strive,  and  burn  to  be  like  your  Master,  and 
will  be  always  trying  to  do  good,  and  to  leave  the  world 
a  better  world  than  it  was  when  you  were  born. 


296  PRINCIPLES   FOR    CHUKCHMEN. 

Brother  or  sister,  either  you  have  a  soul  or  you  ha  ye 
not.  You  will  surely  never  deny  that  you  have.  Then 
if  you  have  a  soul,  seek  that  soul's  salvation.  Of  all 
gambling  in  the  world,  there  is  none  so  reckless  as  that 
of  the  man  who  lives  unprepared  to  meet  God,  and  yet 
puts  off  repentance. — Either  you  have  sins  or  you  have 
none.  If  you  have  (and  who  will  dare  to  deny  it  ?), 
break  off  from  those  sins,  cast  away  your  transgressions, 
and  turn  away  from  them  without  delay. — Either  you 
need  a  Saviour  or  you  do  not.  If  you  do,  flee  to  the  only 
Saviour  this  very  day,  and  cry  mightily  to  Him  to  save 
your  soul.  Apply  to  Christ  at  once.  Seek  Him  by 
faith.  Commit  your  soul  into  His  keeping.  Cry  mightily 
to  Him  for  pardon  and  peace  with  God.  Ask  Him  to 
pour  down  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  you  and  make  you  a 
thorough  Christian.  He  will  hear  you.  No  matter  what 
you  have  been,  He  will  not  refuse  your  prayer.  He  has 
said,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast 
out"  (John  vi.  37). 

Beware,  every  one  into  whose  hands  this  paper  may 
fall,  beware  of  a  vague  and  indefinite  Christianity.  Be  not 
content  with  a  general  hope  that  all  is  right,  because  you 
belong  to  the  old  Church  of  England,  and  that  all  will  be 
well  at  last  because  God  is  merciful.  Eest  not,  rest  not,  with 
out  personal  union  with  Christ  Himself.  Eest  not,  rest  not 
till  you  have  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  in  your  heart,  that 
you  are  washed  and  sanctified,  and  justified,  and  one  with 
Christ,  and  Christ  in  you.  Kest  not  till  you  can  say  with 
the  apostle,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am 
persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have 
committed  to  Him  against  that  day  "  (2  Tim.  i.  12).  Then, 
and  then  only,  will  you  feel  something  of  the  spirit  of 
the  Samaritan.  True  charity  and  love  to  our  neigh 
bour  will  never  be  really  learned  except  in  the  school  of 
Christ. 


REAL   CHURCH   WORK.  297 

(5)  Once  more,  does  any  reader  of  this  paper  want 
motives  to  keep  him  up  to  the  Samaritan  standard,  and 
does  he  shrink  from  the  idea  of  doing  more  than  others  ? 
Let  such  an  one  listen  to  me  for  a  few  brief  moments, 
and  I  have  somewhat  to  say  to  him. 

Brother  or  sister,  have  you  forgotten  your  debt  to 
Christ  ?  Think  what  that  blessed  Saviour  did  for  you. 
Surely  there  is  nothing  too  great  to  do  for  Him.  Much 
forgiven,  you  ought  to  love  much. — Have  you  forgotten 
the  example  of  Christ  ?  He  was  ever  going  about  doing 
good.  His  earthly  career  was  one  long  life  of  kind  and 
charitable  actions.  With  what  face  will  you  meet  Him 
if  you  never  try  to  imitate  Him  ? — Have  you  forgotten 
the  solemn  account  you  have  to  render  in  the  judgment 
of  the  last  day  ?  It  is  not  open  sin  that  was  charged  on 
those  on  the  left  hand,  in  the  parable  of  the  sheep  and 
goats.  It  was  simply  omission  of  duty,  and  want  of 
active  love  to  others.  They  were  condemned  because 
they  had  done  nothing  at  all.  Alas,  for  myriads  of 
professing  Christians !  Weighed  in  the  balance  of 
the  end  of  the  25th  chapter  of  Matthew,  their  pro 
spects  are  miserable  indeed.  Eeader,  think  of  these 
motives,  and  inwardly  digest  them.  What  good  are  you 
doing  in  the  world  ?  What  gap  will  it  make  when  you 
are  taken  away  ?  Oh,  awake,  awake,  awake  to  a  sense 
of  responsibility.  Men  and  women  who  live  and  die  in. 
ignorance  of  the  Samaritan's  character  in  this  parable  will 
find  one  day  that  they  had  better  never  have  been  born. 
Look  round  the  world,  look  round  the  neighbourhood  in 
which  you  dwell.  Ask  yourself  whether  there  is  nothing 
you  can  do  to  check  immorality,  vice,  and  sin, — nothing 
to  promote  temperance,  soberness,  and  chastity, — nothing 
to  lessen  sorrow  and  increase  happiness,  —  nothing  to 
promote  the  cause  of  Christ, — nothing  to  fill  heaven, — 
nothing  to  empty  hell.  What,  nothing,  nothing,  nothing  I 


298  PRINCIPLES  FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

I  never  will  believe  it.  There  is  always  some  work  of 
mercy  which  the  least  and  humblest  can  do.  If  you  have 
but  a  grain  of  influence,  throw  it  boldly  into  the  scale  of 
good.  Only  do  not  sit  still.  Time  is  flying.  Up  and 
be  doing.  Beware  of  living  the  life  of  a  sloth,  lest  you 
end  by  dying  the  death  of  a  dog.  Eemember  your  Lord's 
words,  "  Go,  and  do  like  "  the  Samaritan. 

Header,  let  these  truths  sink  down  deeply  into  your 
heart.  It  is  a  melancholy  fact  that  there  are  few  Chris 
tian  duties  so  little  practised  as  that  of  active  practical 
love.  It  is  sad  to  see  how  much  bitterness,  unmerciful- 
ness,  spite,  hardness,  and  selfishness  there  is  among  men. 
Yet  there  are  few  duties  so  strongly  enforced  in  the  New 
Testament  Scriptures  as  this  duty  is,  and  few  of  which 
the  neglect  so  clearly  shuts  a  man  out  of  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

Would  you  give  proof  that  you  are  at  peace  with  God, 
washed  in  Christ's  blood,  born  of  the  Spirit,  and  made 
God's  child  by  adoption  and  grace  ?  Then  remember  the 
parable  of  the  good  Samaritan,  and  act  upon  it.  This 
is  real  Church  work.  Like  your  Father  in  heaven,  be 
actively  kind,  loving,  and  charitable.  Has  any  man 
injured  you,  as  the  Jews  injured  the  Samaritans  ?  This 
day  forgive  him,  and  try  to  do  him  good.  As  an  old 
divine  says,  "We  ought  to  forgive  ourselves  little,  and 
others  much." 

Would  you  do  good  to  the  world  ?  Would  you  have 
any  influence  on  others,  and  make  them  see  the  beauty  of 
true  religion  ?  Then  remember  the  parable  of  the  Sama 
ritan,  and  act  upon  it.  This  is  real  Church  work.  Men 
who  care  not  for  doctrines  can  understand  a  loving  temper 
and  charitable  deeds. 

Would  you  grow  in  grace  yourself,  and  become  more 
holy  in  all  your  ways,  words,  and  works  ?  Then  remem 
ber  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan,  and  act  upon  it. 


HEAL   CHURCH  WOKK.  299 

Nothing  so  grieves  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  brings  spiritual 
darkness  over  the  soul,  as  giving  way  to  a  selfish,  ill- 
natured,  and  unkind  temper  (Eph.  iv.  30—32). 

Would  you  pass  through  life  with  comfort,  and  see 
good  days  ?  Then  remember  the  parable  of  the  good 
Samaritan  and  act  upon  it.  This  is  real  Church  work. 
Implacable  and  uncharitable  tempers  are  one  great 
cause  of  the  unhappiness  which  abounds  in  this  world. 
Resolve  to  be  one  of  those  who  will  forgive  "  seventy 
times  seven,"  and  do  good,  looking  for  nothing  again, 
and  you  will  never  have  cause  to  regret  it.  In  the 
long  run  of  life  the  man  of  peace  and  love  is  never 
a  loser.  Remember  the  words  of  St.  Paul:  "Dearly 
beloved,  avenge  not  yourselves,  but  rather  give  place  unto 
wrath :  for  it  is  written,  Vengeance  is  mine ;  I  will  repay, 
saith  the  Lord.  Therefore  if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed 
him ;  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink :  for  in  so  doing  thou 
shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head.  Be  not  overcome  of 
evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good"  (Rom.  xii.  19-21). 

Last  of  all,  would  you  like  to  leave  good  evidences 
behind  you  when  you  die  ?  Would  you  like  to  be  one 
whose  Christian  character  no  one  can  deny,  after  you  are 
buried  ?  Then  remember  the  parable  of  the  good  Sama 
ritan,  and  act  upon  it.  Under  every  provocation,  and  in 
all  circumstances,  be  a  forgiving  man,  a  kind  man,  a  man 
who  is  always  trying  to  do  good.  This  is  real  Church 
work.  This  is  the  best  and  most  infallible  proof  that  a 
professed  member  of  Christ  is  what  he  professes.  No 
Christian  is  so  like  Christ  as  the  Christian  who  is  a  great 
f orgiver,  and  "  goes  about  doing  good."  No  one  is  so  like 
the  devil  as  the  uncharitable  man.  Reader,  remember 
the  words  of  St.  Paul:  "Even  as  Christ  forgave  you, 
so  also  do  ye"  (Col.  iii.  13).  "Walk  in  love,  as  Christ 
also  hath  loved  us  "  (Eph.  v.  2). 


XIII. 
CHURCH  AND  DISSENT. 

DISSENT  from  the  Established  Church  of  England  is  a 
great  fact.  However  much  men  may  disagree  about  its 
cause  or  its  cure,  the  good  it  does  or  the  harm,  one  thing 
is  perfectly  certain,  dissent  is  a  huge  standing  fact.  The 
intelligent  foreigner  who  visits  England  with  his  eyes 
open,  cannot  fail  to  see  hundreds  of  places  of  worship 
which  are  not  parish  churches,  and  upon  inquiring  he 
hears  that  their  attendants  do  not  belong  to  the  Church 
of  England.  The  collector  of  statistics,  who  makes  notes 
.about  everything,  will  tell  you  that  there  are  scores  of 
religious  denominations  in  England  beside  the  Episcopal, 
and  that  their  members  may  be  numbered  by  millions. 
In  short,  English  Protestant  Dissent  is  a  great  fact,  and 
it  is  useless  to  deny  its  existence.  I  propose  in  this 
paper  to  say  a  few  plain  words  about  it. 

Let  me  clear  the  way  by  explaining  why  I  myself 
prefer  Church  to  Dissent.  I  will  answer  that  question 
as  briefly  as  possible,  by  giving  some  practical  reasons 
why  I  am,  and  always  have  been,  a  Churchman.  I  am 
quite  aware  that  these  reasons  are  not  what  some  would 
give.  I  have  not  any  sympathy  with  persons  who  main 
tain  that  there  can  le  no  church  without  a  bishop,  and 
no  acceptable  worship  without  a  liturgy.  But  for  all 

300 


CHURCH   AND   DISSENT.  301 

that,  I  have  reasons  for  my  Churchmanship  which  entirely 
satisfy  my  conscience,  and  I  will  tell  my  readers  what 
they  are. 

(1)  I    prefer    the    Church's    standard    of  ministerial 
soundness  to  that  of  the  Chapel.     Our  standard  is  that 
admirable  confession  of  faith,  the  Thirty-nine  Articles. 
Every  Churchman  has  a  legal  right  to  demand  that  his 
clergyman  shall  preach  and  teach  nothing  contrary  to 
these   Articles.     I    know    no    human    standard    better. 
What  is  the  Chapel's  standard  ?     That,  in  many  cases, 
would  be  found  a  very  difficult  question  to  answer.     In 
no  case  could  a    better    standard    be    found    than    the 
Articles. 

(2)  I  prefer  the  Church's  form  of  government  to  that 
of  the   Chapel.     Episcopacy,  no   doubt,  is    very    badly 
exhibited  at  present  in  our  huge  overgrown  dioceses,  and 
needs  a  complete  reform.     But  Episcopacy,  in  my  judg 
ment,  is  infinitely  better  than  Presbyterianism,  or  Con 
gregationalism,  or  the  anarchy  of  Plymouth  Brethrenisin. 
I  might  add  that  I  see  far  more  for  it  in  Scripture. 

(3)  I  prefer  the  Church's  mode  of  worship  to  that  of 
the  Chapel.     The  Prayer-book,  no  doubt,  is  not  a  perfect 
book,  and  has  some  blemishes.     But  I  infinitely  prefer 
Prayer-book  prayers  to  extempore  prayers.     Above  all,  I 
prefer   the  large  quantity  of  Scripture  regularly  read  in 
our  services  to  one  or  two  arbitrarily-selected  chapters. 

(4)  I  prefer  the  Church's   system  of  faced,  settled,  and 
independent   endowments  to  the  voluntary  system  of  the 
Chapel.     Pew-rents  in  many  cases,  I  dare  say,  produce 
very  large  incomes,  and  in  new  districts  they  may  be  a 
necessary  evil.      But  after  forty  years'  observation  of 
Dissent  in  rural  districts,  I   am  satisfied  that  the  very 
worst  mode  of  paying  the  ministry  is  the  voluntary  sys 
tem  of  the  Chapel. 

(5)  I    prefer    the    territorial    system    of    the    English 


302  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

Church  to  the  congregational  system  of  the  Chapel.  No 
other  system  ensures  the  supervision  of  every  soul  in  a 
district  of  England,  but  that  which  assigns  to  every 
minister  a  territory. 

(6)  I  prefer  the  Church's  system  of  admission  to  full 
Church  membership,  to  that  of  the  Chapel.  The  Church, 
in  the  main,  throws  people  on  their  own  responsibility, 
and  bids  them  "  examine  themselves "  whether  they 
repent  and  believe.  Most  other  religious  bodies  appear 
to  require  a  public  profession,  satisfactory  to,  and  en 
dorsed  by,  the  existing  members.  I  have  seen  enough, 
and  too  much,  of  the  working  of  this  latter  system  to 
like  it,  or  to  believe  it  does  good. 

Such  are  the  six  reasons  why  I  think  it  much  letter  to 
be  a  Churchman  than  a  Dissenter.  I  could  enlarge  on 
every  one  of  them  at  great  length.  But  time  and  space 
make  it  impossible.  They  are  reasons  which  may  not 
satisfy  all  my  readers.  Be  it  so.  I  only  say  that  in 
the  long  run  of  years  they  will  be  found  worth  attention. 
The  man  who  hears  a  good  sermon  at  Chapel  some 
Sunday,  and  then  tests  the  comparative  merits  of  Church 
and  Dissent  by  the  excited  feelings  of  a  single  day,  or  a 
few  weeks,  will  doubtless  say,  "  I  see  no  difference 
between  Church  and  Chapel."  The  thoughtful  man, 
who  carefully  notices  the  working  of  systems,  in  a  series 
of  years,  is  the  man  to  whose  verdict  I  appeal. 

Once  more  I  request  my  readers  not  to  misapprehend 
or  misrepresent  me.  Let  them  remember  I  do  not  say 
that  it  is  wicked  to  be  a  Dissenter,  or  that  no  Dissenters 
can  be  saved.  I  do  not  deny  that  many  Dissenters  are 
better  than  many  Churchmen,  and  that  it  is  better  to  go 
to  an  orthodox  Dissenting  Chapel  than  to  a  Parish  Church 
where  the  clergyman  is  a  Papist  or  a  sceptic.  I  only 
say  that,  when  the  Gospel  can  be  heard  both  in  Chapel 
and  Church,  I  greatly  prefer  Church  to  Chapel, 


CHURCH   AND   DISSENT.  303 

I  respect  many  Dissenting  ministers  extremely.  I 
admire  their  gifts,  their  graces,  and  their  zeal.  I  have 
no  doubt  that  they  do  a  great  deal  of  good  and  save 
many  souls.  I  never  forget  that  English  Dissent  was 
mainly  created  by  the  abominable  bigotry  or  shameful 
neglect  of  English  bishops  and  clergymen.  I  always 
steadily  refuse  to  unchurch  Dissenters,  to  deny  the 
validity  of  their  orders,  to  ignore  their  sacraments,  or  to 
hand  them  over  to  the  "  uncovenanted  mercies  "  of  God. 
I  am  always  glad  to  meet  them  on  common  ground,  and 
to  co-operate  with  them  whenever  I  can.  But  I  never 
say  that  it  is  just  as  good  for  an  Englishman  to  be  a 
Dissenter  as  to  be  a  Churchman,  because,  as  an  honest 
man,  a  Bible  reader,  and  a  close  observer  of  human 
nature,  I  do  not  believe  it. 

But  some  one  may  like  to  know  how  I  account  for 
the  large  quantity  of  Dissent  which  undoubtedly  exists. 
Why,  if  the  Church  of  England  possesses  so  many  good 
points  and  excellences,  why  are  so  many  English  people 
nonconformists  ?  Is  there  anything  radically  unsound 
or  unscriptural  in  our  Articles,  Creeds,  or  formularies  ? 
I  answer  boldly,  Nothing  at  all.  Our  great  confes 
sion  of  faith,  the  Thirty -nine  Articles,  may  safely 
challenge  comparison  with  any  confession  in  the  world. 
Our  Prayer-book,  with  all  its  imperfections,  is  a  match 
less  manual  of  public  worship,  and  is  growing  rather 
than  declining  in  favour  with  mankind.  Is  there  any 
abstract  dislike  to  bishops  and  liturgies  and  surplices  in 
the  British  mind  ?  I  believe  next  to  none  at  all.  Give 
the  average  Briton  the  pure  Gospel  of  Christ  in  the 
pulpit,  a  holy,  conscientious  minister  to  preach  it,  a  hearty, 
lively  service  to  accompany  it,  diligent  week-day  pastoral 
work  to  follow  it,  and  the  vast  majority  of  Englishmen 
are  content,  and  want  no  more.  We  must  go  further 
than  this  to  discover  the  cause  of  Dissent, 


304  PRINCIPLES    FOE    CHURCHMEN. 

My  own  solution  of  the  problem  is  short  and  simple. 
I  believe  that  the  first  seeds  of  Dissent  were  sown  by  the 
narrow  intolerance  of  the  Church  in  the  days  of  the 
Stuarts.  The  wretched  attempt  to  produce  uniformity 
by  fines  and  penalties  and  imprisonment  "drove  wise  men 
almost  mad,"  and  made  them  say,  "  Can  any  good  thing 
come  out  of  a  Church  which  sanctions  such  things  ?" — 
I  believe,  secondly,  that  the  utter  deadness  and  apathy 
of  the  Church  in  the  last  century  did  even  more  to  drive 
men  and  women  out  of  our  pale  than  the  intolerance  of 
the  Stuarts.  Bishops  who  scandalously  neglected  their 
dioceses,  and  were  everything  that  bishops  ought  not  to 
be, — parochial  clergymen  who  did  nothing  for  souls, 
preached  no  Gospel,  and  lived  terribly  worldly  lives, — 
these  unhappy  representatives  of  our  Church  filled  the 
country ;  these  were  the  real  founders  of  Dissent,  and 
caused  half  the  chapels  to  be  built  in  the  land.  I 
declare  my  own  firm  conviction,  that  if  the  bishops  and 
clergy  of  the  last  century  had  done  their  duty,  and 
understood  their  times  as  well  as  many  do  now,  an 
immense  proportion  of  English  nonconformity  would 
never  have  existed,  and  John  Wesley  and  his  companions 
would  never  have  seceded  from  the  Church  of  England. 
We  reap  what  our  forefathers  sowed,  and  it  is  no  use  to 
complain.  In  short,  English  Church  apathy  has  created 
English  nonconformity,  and  to  speak  angrily  and  con 
temptuously  of  those  whom  we  ourselves  have  made 
Dissenters  is,  to  say  the  least,  most  unjust.  That  old 
saying  is  too  much  forgotten,  "  Schismaticiis  est  qui 
separationem  causat,  non  qui  separat." 

The  precise  amount  of  good  or  harm  which  English 
Dissent  has  done,  or  is  doing,  is  a  wide  and  difficult 
question,  and  much  may  be  said  on  both  sides.  I  shall 
only  say  a  few  words  in  order  to  strike  the  balance. 

On  the  one  hand,  I  have  not  the  slightest  sympathy 


CHURCH   AND    DISSENT.  305 

with  those  who  regard  Dissent  as  always  evil,  and  only 
evil,  and  would  hand  nonconformists  over  to  the 
"  uncovenanted  mercies "  of  God.  I  believe  this  to  be 
an  entirely  untenable  position.  I  shall  never  hesitate  to 
declare  my  conviction  that  in  thousands  of  parishes 
Dissenters  have  done  an  immense  amount  of  spiritual 
good.  They  have  supplied  the  Church's  "  lack  of  service." 
They  have  brought  to  Christ  myriads  who  were  perishing 
in  ignorance  and  sin.  They  have  taught  the  elements  of 
Christianity  to  multitudes  who  would  otherwise  have  died 
without  God  and  without  hope.  These  are  facts  which  it  is 
impossible  to  deny.  I  may  be  excused  for  regretting  that 
the  good  work  they  have  done  has  not  been  done  within 
our  own  pale,  and  by  our  own  soldiers.  But  the  work 
has  been  done ;  and  I  hold  with  the  great  Apostle  of 
the  Gentiles,  "  If  Christ  is  preached  I  rejoice,  yea,  and 
will  rejoice  "  (Phil.  i.  18).  Above  all,  I  cannot  forget  that 
remarkable  passage  in  the  Gospel,  when  John  said  to  our 
great  Master,  "We  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  Thy 
name,  and  he  followed  not  with  us :  and  we  forbade  him, 
because  he  followeth  not  us.  But  Jesus  said,  Forbid 
him  not :  for  there  is  no  man  which  shall  do  a  miracle 
in  my  name,  that  can  lightly  speak  evil  of  me.  Tor  he 
that  is  not  against  us  is  on  our  part."  (Mark  ix.  38,  39, 
40.)  In  short,  when  I  look  at  the  mass  of  infidelity, 
heathenism,  and  immorality  which  exists  in  the  world,  I 
must  and  will  thank  God  for  the  work  done  by  Trinitarian 
Dissenters.  The  enemy  is  coming  in  upon  us  like  a  flood  ; 
I  welcome  any  volunteer  who  fights  on  our  side,  however 
strange  and  rough  his  uniform  may  be.  Human  nature 
is  like  a  wreck  on  a  sandbank ;  I  welcome  any  oarsman 
who  will  help  to  launch  the  life-boat,  and  rescue  souls 
from  a  watery  grave. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  vain  to  deny  that  the  incon 
veniences,   not  to   say  the   evils,   arising    from  English 

TJ 


306  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Dissent,  are  very  many  and  very  great.  The  divisions  of 
Christians  are  always  an  immense  source  of  weakness  to 
the  whole  cause  of  Christ  in  the  world.  An  enormous 
amount  of  time,  money,  and  energy  is  wasted  on  separate 
machinery  and  organization,  which  would  be  saved  if  we 
were  one  united  body.  We  supply  the  infidel  with 
an  argument  which  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  refute. 
"  When  you  can  agree  among  yourselves,"  he  says,  "  it 
will  be  time  enough  for  me  to  believe."  Collisions  are 
continually  arising  between  Church  and  Chapel,  and 
especially  in  small  parishes,  where  either  party  thinks  its 
interests  are  in  danger.  The  common  cause  of  Christian 
education  takes  damage  all  over  the  country  from  the 
morbid  fear  of  many  that  distinct  religious  teaching  will 
injure  their  own  particular  denomination.  Above  all, 
the  senseless  bitter  crusade  of  Liberationists  against  the 
Establishment,  which,  if  successful,  would  almost  paganize 
some  of  the  rural  districts,  and  do  its  promoters  no  good, 
is  rapidly  creating  a  breach  between  Episcopalians  and 
their  rivals,  which  will  never  be  healed.  All  these,  I 
say,  are  evils,  grievous  evils,  and  I  pity  the  man  who  has 
not  eyes  to  see  them,  or  seeing  them  does  not  long  to 
devise  means  by  which  they  may  be  lessened  or  removed. 
This  brings  me  at  last  to  a  very  serious  point  in 
the  whole  subject.  Can  nothing  be  done  to  improve 
the  relations  of  Church  and  Dissent  in  England  ?  The 
present  state  of  things  is  painfully  unsatisfactory.  The 
divisions  of  Christians  who  hold  such  an  immense  amount 
of  truth  in  common  about  the  Bible,  the  Trinity,  the 
Atonement,  the  work  of  Christ,  and  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit, — about  repentance,  and  conversion,  and  faith, 
and  holiness,  and  heaven,  and  heil,  and  resurrection,  and 
judgment, — these  divisions,  I  say,  are  scandalous  and 
deplorable.  They  are  enough  to  make  an  angel  weep. 
They  exist  and  stare  us  in  the  face,  while  Eomanism  and 


CHU&Cfl   AND    DISSENT.  307 

infidelity  abound  on  every  side  and  ignore  both  Church 
and  Chapel.  Englishmen  who  profess  to  believe  and  read 
the  same  Bible  are  wrangling  about  modes  of  worship, 
while  myriads  around  them  seem  to  think  there  is  no 
God  to  worship.  Can  nothing  be  done  to  ameliorate  the 
existing  condition  of  things,  and  bring  us  closer  together  ? 
I  will  offer  a  few  plain  suggestions  from  the  standpoint 
of  a  Churchman. 

1.  For  one  thing,  we  should  always  remember  that 
we    must    draw    a    broad    line    of    distinction    between 
Dissenters  and  Dissenters.     If  we  suppose,  for  example, 
because  some  wild  men  are  incessantly  telling  the  public 
"  that  the  Established  Church  is  a  Babylon  which  ought 
to  be  destroyed, — or  that  all  the  Prayer-books  ought  to 
be  burned, — or  that  the  union  of  Church  and  State  is  an 
adulterous  connection, — or  that  all  clergymen  ought  to 
be  stripped  of  their  endowments   and  turned  into   the 
streets, — or  that  Anglican  ministers  are  mere  serfs  and 
slaves  who  are  paid  out  of  the  taxes," — if,  I  say,  we 
suppose,  because  some  Dissenters  talk  in  this  way,  that 
all  Dissenters  agree  with  them,  we  are  quite  mistaken. 
I  believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  vast  majority   of 
serious   God-fearing   nonconformists  have   no   sympathy 
with  this  kind  of  language,  and  thoroughly  dislike  it. 
Although  attached  to  their  own  chapels,  they  have  no 
wish  to  quarrel  with  the   Church,  and  are  willing  to 
"  think  and  let  think."     The  empty  tubs  always  make 
most  noise.     "We  must  not  condemn  all  Dissenters  on 
account  of  the  extravagant  words  of  a  rabid  minority. 

2.  For  another  thing,  we  should  cultivate  the  habit  of 
treating  Dissenters  with  kindness,  courtesy,  and  consideration. 
Let  us  not  deal  with  them  as  the  Jews  did  with  the 
Samaritans.       I    am    firmly    convinced,    after    studying 


30$  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Dissent  carefully  for  about  forty  years,  that  many 
Dissenters  are  what  they  are  from  downright  ignorance 
of  the  real  nature  of  the  Church  of  England.  Cradled 
and  nursed  in  the  midst  of  nonconformity,  taught  from 
their  earliest  years  to  see  all  religion  through  the 
spectacles  of  the  Chapel,  trained  from  their  youth  to  read 
nothing  but  non-episcopalian  literature,  accustomed  every 
Sunday  to  hear  nothing  but  a  Methodist,  or  Baptist,  or 
Independent  sermon,  they  often  know  nothing  whatever 
of  the  Church  of  England,  its  worship,  its  history,  its 
theology,  or  its  claims  to  attention.  In  short,  they  are 
almost  entirely  ignorant  of  the  communion  from  which 
they  keep  aloof.  And  when  you  add  to  all  this  the  painful 
fact  that  perhaps  the  only  parochial  incumbent  whom 
they  have  known,  has  sometimes  not  adorned  his  pro 
fession,  and  has  seemed  to  be  a  man  determined  to  know 
everything  except  "  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified,"  we 
really  must  not  be  surprised  at  the  prejudices  of  Dissenters, 
and  must  make  great  allowances.  In  short,  we  must 
deal  gently  with  them,  and  not  forget  the  circumstances 
under  which  their  position  was  first  taken  up. 

3.  For  another  thing,  we  must  not  waste  time  and 
energy  on  the  pleasant  but  quixotic  idea  that  we  can 
ever  bring  about  a  wholesale  reunion  of  Church  and  Dissent. 
I  am  sorry  to  throw  cold  water  on  the  charitable  plans 
of  some  of  my  brethren.  I  freely  admit  that  nothing  is 
impossible.  But  of  all  improbable  and  unlikely  things, 
I  see  none  more  improbable  and  unlikely  than  a  fusion 
and  amalgamation  of  Methodists,  Independents,  and 
Baptists  with  the  Church  of  England.  Whatever  may 
happen  in  isolated  cases,  it  is  not  reason  to  suppose  that 
trained  and  educated  Dissenting  ministers,  as  a  rule,  will 
ignore  their  own  orders,  and  seek  to  be  re-ordained.  Nor 
is  it  reason  to  suppose  that  their  congregations  would 


CHUKCH   AND   DISSENT.  309 

follow  them.  And  unhappily  this  is  not  all.  Our  own 
internal  divisions  place  an  insuperable  barrier  in  the  way 
of  reunion.  We  do  not  approach  the  subject  with  clean 
hands.  So  long  as  our  own  beloved  Church  of  England 
is  infected  with  semi-Komanism  on  the  extreme  right, 
and  semi-unbelief  on  the  extreme  left,  and  cannot  cure 
or  expel  these  diseases,  so  long,  we  may  depend  on  it,  our 
Nonconformist  brethren  will  never  embark  in  our  ship. 
So  long  as  the  principles  of  the  Eeformation  appear  in 
peril,  so  long  the  disciples  of  Owen,  and  Doddridge,  and 
Gill,  and  Dr.  Coke,  and  Eobert  Hall,  and  Angell  James 
will  never  re-enter  our  pale. 

4.  For  another  thing,  if  we  would  improve  the  rela 
tions  of  Church  and  Dissent,  we  ought  to  co-operate  with 
Dissenters  whenever  we  can.  It  is  vain  to  deny  that  there 
is  much  common  ground  on  which  we  can  work  together 
without  the  slightest  compromise  of  principle ;  and  I 
contend  that  we  ought  to  be  always  ready  to  occupy  that 
ground  in  a  brotherly  spirit,  and  not  to  stand  aloof,  and 
turn  the  cold  shoulder  on  possible  allies.  The  great  con 
troversy  with  infidelity, — the  cause  of  Scriptural  education, 
— the  maintenance  of  a  holy  Sunday, — the  improvement 
of  the  dwellings  of  the  poor, — the  grand  temperance  move 
ment, — the  translation  and  circulation  of  the  Bible, — all 
these  are  points  about  which  I  advise  every  Churchman 
to  work  with  Dissenters  whenever  he  can.  I,  for  one, 
rejoiced  heartily  in  the  constitution  of  the  Committee  for 
the  revision  of  the  authorized  version  of  the  Scriptures. 
That  Committee,  we  should  remember,  contained  not  a  few 
Dissenters  as  well  as  Churchmen.  I  thank  God  for  it. 
It  was  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  If  men  can  unite 
for  revising  the  translation  of  God's  Word  written,  why 
should  they  not  unite  for  distributing  it  ?  I  myself  never 
expected  very  much  from  this  Revision  Committee.  I 


310  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

never  thought  it  would  do  either  so  much  good  or  so  much 
harm  as  many  expect ;  though  I  have  no  doubt  it  will 
make  the  meaning  of  some  texts  of  Scripture  more  plain. 
But  if  it  does  nothing  else,  it  has  proved  one  thing.  It 
has  proved  most  assuredly  that  Churchmen  and  Dissenters 
can  work  together,  and  respect  one  another.  I  grant 
that  this  is  not  union,  but  it  is  a  long  step  towards  it. 

I  bring  my  suggestions  to  a  close  here.  I  have 
touched  them  briefly,  though  they  admit  of  expansion, 
and  I  only  give  them  as  seeds  for  thought.  Some  may 
perhaps  think  them  small,  and  trivial,  and  useless.  Be 
it  so.  The  oil  which  is  dropped  on  the  machinery  is 
a  small  thing,  but  without  it  the  mighty  steam-engine 
would  never  work.  The  water  which  trickles  on  the 
saw  of  the  marble-cutter  is  a  small  thing,  but  without  it 
the  great  block  would  never  be  cut  through.  We  should 
never  despise  "  little  things."  Load  after  load  of  earth, 
tipped  over  the  end  of  the  railway  embankment,  gradually 
brings  the  sides  of  the  valley  together.  Attention  to  the 
suggestions  I  have  made  would,  in  my  opinion,  do  much 
to  improve  the  relations  of  Church  and  Dissent. 

My  general  advice  to  all  Churchmen,  as  to  the  best 
mode  of  dealing  with  Dissenters,  is  short  and  simple.  Be 
kind  and  charitable  and  courteous  to  them.  Eemember 
they  have  been,  as  a  rule,  called  into  existence,  and  made 
what  they  are,  by  the  neglect  and  sin  of  our  own  Church, 
and  do  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  condemn  them.  Do  not  quar 
rel  with  them.  Avoid  all  controversy  with  them  about 
their  peculiar  opinions.  It  does  no  good :  it  never  wins 
them :  it  gives  them  an  advantage.  They  live  in  a  free 
country,  and  have  as  much  right  to  have  an  opinion  as 
ourselves.  If  they  do  real  spiritual  good,  if  they  preach 
Christ,  if  they  save  souls,  thank  God  for  it,  and  do  not 
pretend  to  ignore  it.  Eemember  the  words  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  "  Forbid  him  not : — he  that  is  not  against  us  is 


CHURCH  AND    DISSENT.  311 

on  our  part"  (Mark  ix.  39).  But  never  for  a  moment 
admit  that,  as  a  system,  Dissent  is  as  good  as  the  Church 
of  England,  and  that  it  is  all  the  same  whether  a  man  is 
a  Churchman  or  a  Dissenter.  If  you  do  so,  you  seem  to 
me  to  make  a  great  mistake. 

My  general  advice  to  Churchmen  who  are  tempted  to 
become  Dissenters  is  equally  short  and  simple.  Do  not 
be  in  a  hurry  to  leave  the  Church  of  England!  You 
may  live,  perhaps,  in  a  parish  where  your  position  is 
very  difficult.  But  do  not  be  in  a  hurry.  Stand  firm. 
Stick  to  your  own  Church.  Use  your  common  sense. 
Distinguish  between  faults  of  administration  and  faults 
of  principle.  Your  old  house  may  have  faults.  But  do 
not  quit  it  hastily.  You  may  go  further  and  fare  worse. 
Do  not  expect  perfection  here  upon  earth.  The  wheat 
and  the  tares  will  grow  together  till  the  harvest.  Think 
twice  before  you  leave  the  Church  of  England.  Episco 
pacy,  a  Liturgy,  the  Articles,  the  Territorial  system,  are 
not  things  that  ought  to  be  lightly  esteemed. 

It  is  a  cheap  and  easy  remedy  to  secede  from  a  Church 
when  we  see  evils  round  us ;  but  it  is  not  always  the 
wisest  course.  To  pull  down  a  house  because  the  chim 
neys  smoke,  or  the  windows  do  not  fit, — to  chop  off  a 
hand  because  we  have  cut  our  finger, — to  forsake  a  ship 
because  she  has  sprung  a  leak,  or  has  some  few  unsound 
planks, — all  this,  we  know,  is  childish  impatience.  But 
is  it  a  wise  man's  act  to  forsake  a  Church,  because  things 
in  our  own  parish,  and  under  our  own  minister,  in  that 
Church  are  wrong  ?  I  answer  decidedly  and  unhesitat 
ingly,  No ! 

It  is  not  so  sure  as  it  seems  that  we  mend  matters  by 
leaving  the  Church  of  England.  Every  man  knows  the 
faults  of  his  own  house,  but  he  never  knows  the  faults  of 
another  till  he  moves  into  it,  and  then  perhaps  he  finds 
he  is  worse  off  than  he  was  before  his  move  1  There  are 


312  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

often  smoky  chimneys,  and  bad  drains,  and  draughts,  and 
doors  that  will  not  shut,  and  windows  that  will  not  open, 
in  No.  2  as  well  as  in  No.  1.  All  is  not  perfect  among 
Dissenters  and  Plymouth  Brethren.  We  may  find  to 
our  cost,  if  we  join  them,  in  disgust  with  the  Church  of 
England,  that  we  have  only  changed  one  sort  of  evil  for 
another,  and  that  the  chimney  smokes  in  chapel  as  well 
as  in  church. 

Let  me  conclude  by  expressing  an  earnest  hope  that 
we  shall  always  resolve  to  honour  the  "grace  of  God," 
wherever  we  see  it.  In  whomsoever  we  find  "  Aliquid 
Christi,"  let  us  respect  him,  even  though  he  does  not 
belong  to  our  own  communion.  In  high  esteem  for  the 
orders  and  worship  of  our  Church  I  give  place  to  no  man. 
In  my  own  way  I  am  as  "  High"  a  Churchman  as  any  one 
of  my  readers.  But  we  travel  towards  a  world  in  which 
possession  of  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost  will  be  the  one 
thing  needful,  and  Episcopacy  and  a  liturgy  will  be  of  no 
use  to  us  if  we  have  not  been  washed  in  the  blood  of 
Christ.  Let  us  remember  this  on  earth,  and  honour  the 
grace  of  God,  whatever  be  the  denomination  of  the  man 
who  possesses  it,  and  whatever  kind  of  Dissenter  he  may 
be.  After  all,  "  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and 
drink,  but  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost."  "  In  Jesus  Christ  neither  circumcision  availeth 
anything,  nor  uncircumcision,  but  faith  which  worketh 
by  love"  (Bora  xiv.  17 ;  Gal.  v.  6). 


XIV. 

DISESTABLISHMENT. 

THERE  is  a  subject  much  talked  of  in  the  present  day, 
about  which  I  wish  to  say  a  few  words.  That  subject  is 
the  Disestablishment  and  Disendowment  of  the  Church  of 
England. 

The  subject  is  one  of  real  importance,  and  demands 
the  careful  attention  of  Churchmen.  A  Society,  called 
the  Liberationist  Society,  has  been  formed  for  the  express 
purpose  of  promoting  Disestablishment,  and  has  many 
active  and  able  supporters.  This  Society  collects  annually 
large  sums  of  money  for  the  purpose  of  spreading  its  own 
views.  It  pays  lecturers  to  go  throughout  the  country, 
making  violent  attacks  on  the  union  of  Church  and 
State.  It  prints  and  publishes  large  quantities  of  tracts, 
containing  statements  about  the  Church  of  England  of  a 
very  erroneous  character,  which  will  not  bear  investigation. 
In  short,  there  is,  in  full  operation,  an  organized  crusade 
against  the  Establishment.  The  campaign  has  begun. 
These  are  facts  which  every  Churchman  ought  to  know. 
It  is  folly  to  ignore  them. 

The  world  is  fond  of  saying  that  clergymen  cannot  give 
an  honest  and  disinterested  opinion  about  this  subject. 
"  They  are  only  fighting  for  the  loaves  and  fishes,"  is  the 
cry7.  Well,  the  world  may  say  what  it  pleases  :  I  am 

813 


314  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

getting  too  old  to  care  for  such  charges.  I  only  care  for 
the  spread  of  truth,  and  I  shall  not  shrink  from  giving  my 
opinion,  and  showing  "the  thing  as  it  is."  It  may  be  very 
true  that  at  present  Disestablishment  is  not  within  the 
range  of  "practical  politics."  But  it  may  be  pressed 
upon  us  very  soon.  Events  work  quickly  in  this  day. 
It  is  well  to  be  prepared  with  some  knowledge  of  the 
subject. 

In  handling  the  subject  I  shall  say  nothing  about  the 
justice  or  honesty  of  Disestablishment  and  Disendowment, 
though  I  might  say  a  good  deal.  I  suppose  Parliament 
has  power  to  deprive  any  corporate  body  of  its  property, 
and,  if  it  thinks  fit,  can  take  away  the  endowments 
of  the  Church  of  England.  I  shall  stick  close  to  one 
simple  question : — that  question  is,  "  What  good  would 
it  do?" 

Let  us,  then,  suppose  that  Parliament  resolves  some  day 
to  disestablish  the  Church  of  England,  as  it  has  already 
disestablished  the  Church  of  Ireland.  Let  us  suppose 
that  an  Act  of  Parliament  is  passed  by  which  the  con 
nection  between  Church  and  State  is  dissolved  for  ever, 
and  the  State  takes  possession,  as  far  as  it  can,  of  the 
property  of  the  Church.  What  would  the  consequences 
be? 

The  practical  consequences  of  Disestablishment,  I  take 
it,  would  be  something  of  this  kind : — 

(1)  The  Bishops  would  cease  to  be  Peers  of  the  Eealm, 
and  to  sit  in  the  House  of  Lords. 

(2)  The  income  of  the  Bishops  and  clergy,  from  tithes, 
old  money  endowments,  and  lands,  would  be  appropriated 
by  the  State,  and  applied  to  other  purposes,  as  fast  as  the 
present  receivers  of  it  died  off. 

(3)  In  process  of  time  there  would  be  nothing  left  to 
the  Church,  out  of  all  her  present  possessions,  except  the 
church-buildings,  the  pew-rents,  a  life-interest  in  the  income 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  315 

of  the  Bishops  and  clergy  for  a  few  years,  and  the  endow 
ments  of  the  last  two  centuries.  This  property,  on  the 
principles  of  the  Irish  Church  Act,  would  probably  be  left 
to  the  Church  of  England.  Some  wild  and  rabid  Libera- 
tionists,  I  believe,  have  coolly  proposed  that  the  clergy 
shall  be  stripped  of  their  life-incomes,  and  turned  into  the 
street,  as  paupers,  the  very  day  the  Disestablishing  Act 
passes !  They  have  also  proposed  that  parish  churches 
shall  be  taken  away  from  Episcopalians,  and  applied  to 
other  uses !  Whether  they  are  to  be  put  up  to  auction 
and  sold  to  the  highest  bidder,  or  turned  into  Libraries, 
Museums,  Mechanics'  Institutes,  or  Music  Halls,  I  do  not 
yet  know.  I  decline,  however,  to  notice  such  nonsense  as 
this.  Until  the  House  of  Commons  is  very  unlike  any 
House  which  has  ever  been  elected  in  this  country,  it  will 
never  sanction  such  a  policy,  or  ignore  vested  interests. 
The  members  of  the  Church  of  England  are  far  too 
numerous  and  influential  to  make  wholesale  confiscation 
possible.  There  is  no  earthly  reason  why  the  strong 
Church  of  England  should  be  treated  more  hardly  than 
the  weak  Church  of  Ireland. 

After  Disestablishment  all  Churches  and  sects  would 
be  left  on  a  dead  level  of  equality.  No  favour  or 
privilege  would  be  granted  by  the  State  to  one  more 
than  another.  The  State  itself  would  have  nothing  to 
do  with  religion,  and  would  leave  the  supply  of  it 
to  the  principles  of  free  trade  and  the  action  of  the 
voluntary  system.  In  a  word,  the  Government  of 
England  would  allow  all  its  subjects  to  serve  God  or 
Baal, — to  go  to  heaven  or  to  another  place, — just  as 
they  please.  The  State  would  take  no  cognizance  of 
spiritual  matters,  and  would  bok  on  with  Epicurean 
indifference  and  unconcern.  The  State  would  continue 
to  care  for  the  bodies  of  its  subjects,  but  it  would  entirely 
ignore  their  souls. 


316  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Gallic,  who  thought  Christianity  was  a  matter  of  "  words 
and  names,"  and  "  cared  for  none  of  these  things,"  would 
become  the  model  of  an  English  Statesman.  The 
Sovereign  of  Great  Britain  might  be  a  Papist,  the  Prime 
Minister  a  Mahometan,  the  Lord  Chancellor  a  Jew. 
Parliament  would  begin  without  prayer.  Oaths  would  be 
dispensed  with  in  Courts  of  Justice.  The  next  king 
would  be  crowned  without  a  religious  service  in  West 
minster  Abbey.  Prisons  and  workhouses,  men-of-war 
and  regiments,  would  all  be  left  without  chaplains.  In 
short,  for  fear  of  offending  infidels  and  people  who  object 
to  intercessory  prayer,  I  suppose  that  regimental  bands 
would  be  forbidden  to  play  "  God  Save  the  Queen." 

This,  so  far  as  I  can  make  out,  is  the  state  of  things 
which  the  Liberationists  wish  to  bring  about  in  Great 
Britain.  This  is  the  end  and  object  of  all  their  talk,  and 
noise,  and  organization,  and  agitation.  This  is  the  delight 
ful  condition  of  matters  which  their  advocates  and 
supporters,  both  in  and  out  of  Parliament,  want  to  set  up 
in  the  land.  This  is  what  they  mean  when  they  talk  of 
"  Disestablishment."  Let  them  deny  it  if  they  can. 

Now,  let  us  consider  quietly  what  good  would  all  this  do  ? 
I  will  proceed  step  by  step,  and  examine  six  broad 
questions  one  by  one.  I  will  assume  that  Disestablish 
ment  actually  takes  place.  I  will  then  ask : — 

I.  What  good  would  it  do  to  Dissenters  ? 
II.  What  good  would  it  do  to  the  Church  ? 

III.  What  good  would  it  do  to  the  tithe-payers  ? 

IV.  What  good  would  it  do  to  the  poor  ? 

V.  What  good  would  it  do  to  the  cause  of  Christian 

charity  ? 
VI.  What  good  would  it  do  to  the  State  ? 

I  shall  try  to  answer  each  of  these  questions  in  order, 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  317 

I.  First  of  all,  What  good  would  Disestablishment 
do  to  the  Dissenters?  I  answer  that  question  without 
the  slightest  hesitation.  It  would  do  them  no  good 
at  all. 

I  take  up  this  point  first  because  it  comes  first  in  order. 
The  Dissenters,  as  a  body,  with  some  notable  exceptions, 
are  the  chief  agitators  for  Disestablishment.  They  evidently 
think  that  it  would  be  greatly  for  their  benefit,  and  would 
improve  their  position.  I  venture  to  think  that  they  are 
totally  and  entirely  mistaken.  I  will  give  my  reasons  for 
saying  so. 

Would  Disestablishment  destroy  the  Church  of  Eng 
land,  and  take  the  great  rival  of  Dissenters  completely 
out  of  the  way  ?  Would  it  leave  the  Dissenters  a  clear 
field,  and  throw  the  whole  population  into  their  hands  ? 
It  would  do  nothing  of  the  kind ! — Unless  the  House 
of  Commons  resolves  to  proscribe  the  use  of  the  Liturgy, 
— to  make  it  penal  to  be  an  Episcopalian, — to  con 
fiscate  the  property  of  Churchmen,  on  the  principles 
of  French  Communism,  —  and  to  imprison  or  shoot 
clergymen  who  work  harder  than  others,  on  the  prin 
ciples  of  Sheffield  rattening,  —  unless  the  House  of 
Commons  does  this,  the  Church  of  England  will  never 
be  killed  by  Disestablishment.  The  Dissenters  would 
soon  find  that  the  old  Church,  when  disestablished,  was 
not  dead,  but  alive. 

Disestablishment  would  not  even  ruin  the  Church 
financially.  The  pew-rents  and  offertories  would  still 
remain :  Parliament  could  not  take  them.  The  endow 
ments  of  the  last  two  centuries  would  still  remain : 
Parliament,  on  the  reasonable  principles  of  the  Irish 
Act,  would  not  touch  them.  The  life-interests  of  the 
Bishops  and  clergy,  on  the  same  principles,  would  still 
remain.  A  judicious  system  of  life  insurance  or  com 
mutation,  such  as  wise  lay  Churchmen,  accustomed  to 


318  PRINCIPLES   FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

financial  matters,  could  soon  devise,  would  turn  those 
life-interests  into  a  very  large  capital  for  investment,  if 
safe  investment  could  be  found.  In  short,  though  sorely 
crippled  and  impoverished,  the  Church  of  England  would 
not  be  ruined.  We  could  still  get  on,  and  would  get  on, 
though  many  of  us  might  have  to  reduce  our  expenditure 
very  largely.  The  Liberationists  would  soon  discover, 
after  spoiling  and  impoverishing  us  as  much  as  they 
could,  that  we  were  not  quite  bankrupt.  "We  should 
maintain  our  position,  in  spite  of  our  poverty,  and  not 
die.  Let  the  Dissenters  remember  that. 

Disestablishment  would  not  affect  the  influence  of  the 
Church  in  great  towns  in  the  slightest  appreciable  degree. 
The  tithe-receiving  clergy  in  rural  districts  would  doubtless 
lose  half  their  income  by  life  insurance  or  commutation, 
and  be  sorely  hampered.  But  the  clergy  in  most  large 
cities,  such  as  London,  Liverpool,  Manchester,  Birmingham, 
Leeds,  and  Sheffield,  who  generally  depend  chiefly  on 
pew-rents,  Easter  offerings,  and  offertories,  as  a  body, 
would  be  nearly  as  well  off  after  Disestablishment  as  they 
were  before.  "  The  great  towns  govern  the  country,"  we 
are  continually  told.  Yet  in  most  great  towns  the 
Church  would  be  as  powerful  as  ever !  Once  more,  I  say, 
let  the  Dissenters  remember  that. 

Disestablishment  would  not  make  the  bulk  of  English 
men  forsake  the  Church  of  England  and  become  Baptists, 
Independents,  Presbyterians,  or  Methodists.  It  would 
not  fill  the  chapels  and  empty  the  churches.  It  would 
not  make  the  aristocracy,  or  the  upper  and  middle  classes, 
or  a  large  part  of  the  working  classes,  burn  their  Prayer- 
books,  desert  Episcopally-ordained  ministers,  and  fall  in 
love  with  extempore  prayer.  Not  a  bit  of  it !  The  vast 
majority  of  Churchmen  would  stick  to  Bishops,  rectors, 
vicars,  curates,  liturgical  worship,  and  the  old  paths  of 
the  Church  of  England,  closer  and  tighter  than  ever. 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  319 

They  would  make  more  of  their  poor  old  Church  in  her 
adversity  than  they  ever  did  in  her  prosperity.  They 
would  love  her  better  and  open  their  purses  more  liberally, 
when  they  saw  her  in  plain  attire,  than  they  ever  did 
when  she  was  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen.  In  point 
of  number  of  adherents,  I  verily  believe  Disestablishment 
would  soon  prove  a  dead  loss  to  Dissenters,  and  not  a 
gain. 

Disestablishment  would  not  give  more  liberty  to  Dis 
senters,  or  enable  them  to  do  anything  which  they  cannot 
do  now.  No  Christians  on  earth  have  such  a  plethora  of 
civil  and  religious  liberty  as  the  English  Nonconformists 
have  in  the  present  day.  They  have  far  more  freedom 
than  Churchmen !  They  can  build  chapels  anywhere, 
preach  anywhere,  gather  congregations  anywhere,  worship 
in  any  way,  and  serve  God  in  any  way,  no  man  forbidding 
them,  while  Churchmen  are  checked  and  stopped  by  laws 
and  restrictions  at  every  turn.  What  in  the  world  could 
the  Dissenters  do  more,  if  the  Church  was  Disestablished 
to-morrow  ?  I  do  not  suppose  they  would  ask  leave  to 
shoot  or  hang  all  the  clergy,  to  "  improve  us  off  the  face 
of  the  earth,"  to  confiscate  the  cathedrals  and  parish 
churches,  and  to  compel  the  millions  of  English  men  and 
women  who  now  go  to  church  to  go  to  chapel,  on  pain  of 
fines  or  death.  But,  short  of  this,  I  know  of  nothing 
they  cannot  do  now.  They  have  free  liberty  to  make  all 
Englishmen  Dissenters,  if  they  can ;  and  what  more  do 
they  want  ?  The  dissolution  of  the  union  of  Church  and 
State  would  do  Dissenters  no  good  at  all. 

Last,  but  not  least,  Disestablishment  would  not  remove 
the  social  disabilities  under  which  Dissenters,  and  especially 
Dissenting  ministers,  are  said  now  to  labour.  This,  I  am 
aware,  is  a  very  difficult  and  delicate  subject,  and  I  am 
almost  afraid  to  touch  it,  lest  I  should  unintentionally 
give  offence  or  hurt  feelings.  But  the  alleged  grievance 


320  PRINCIPLES   FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

is  said  to  be  one  which  our  Dissenting  brethren  feel  very 
keenly.  They  complain,  I  am  told,  that  we  do  not  meet 
them  on  terms  of  social  equality,  and  that  we  treat  them 
as  if  they  belonged  to  an  inferior  caste  or  order. 

I  must  honestly  say  that  I  think  there  are  no  just 
grounds  for  this  charge,  and  that  the  grievance  complained 
of  is  purely  sentimental  and  imaginary.  Speaking  for 
myself,  I  shall  certainly  not  plead  guilty.  I  have  often 
co-operated  with  Dissenters  on  behalf  of  the  London  City 
Mission  and  Bible  Societies.  I  have  spoken  side  by  side 
with  their  ministers  on  many  a  platform.  I  have  enter 
tained  the  leading  members  of  the  Wesleyan  Conference 
at  my  own  house  in  Liverpool.  I  have  never  disputed 
the  talents,  gifts,  and  graces  of  such  men  as  Angell 
James,  and  Sherman,  and  Binney,  and  Stoughton,  and 
Spurgeon,  and  Morley  Punshon.  Their  works  are  on  the 
shelves  of  my  library,  and  I  read  and  admire  them. 
If  I  treated  such  men  as  belonging  to  an  inferior  caste, 
I  should  think  I  had  made  a  poor  exhibition  of  my 
Christianity,  my  courtesy,  and  my  common  sense. 

But  really  our  Nonconformist  brethren  seem  to  forget 
that  when  conscientious  and  earnest-minded  Christians 
do  not  belong  to  the  same  Church,  and  do  not  worship 
God  in  the  same  way,  there  is  never  likely  to  be  much 
social  intercourse,  or  visiting,  or  intermarrying  between 
their  families.  In  fact,  the  stronger  and  deeper  the  con 
scientiousness,  the  greater  and  wider  will  be  the  separation. 
Moreover,  they  seem  to  forget  that  so  long  as  young 
English  Churchmen  are  trained  for  the  ministry  at 
Oxford  and  Cambridge,  and  Episcopal  Theological  Col 
leges  like  Highbury  and  St.  Aidan's,  and  young  English 
Dissenters  are  generally  trained  for  the  ministry  at  their 
own  peculiar  Dissenting  Colleges,  there  is  a  bond  of  union 
wanting  between  them,  which,  generally  speaking,  nothing 
else  will  supply.  Men  must  mix  together  and  be  edu- 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  321 

cated  side  by  side  when  they  are  young,  if  they  are  to  be 
on  familiar  terms  when  they  grow  up. 

One  thing,  to  my  mind,  is  perfectly  certain.  The 
alleged  grievance  I  am  now  considering  has  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  the  union  of  Church  and  State,  and 
would  not  be  removed  by  the  dissolution  of  that  union. 
It  is  a  state  of  things  which  arises  entirely  from  the  fact 
that  Dissenters  conscientiously  hold  one  set  of  opinions, 
and  we  conscientiously  hold  another.  "Would  Dis 
establishment  make  us  give  up  our  respective  opinions  ? 
Would  it  turn  Episcopalians  into  Presbyterians,  or  make 
Baptists  and  Independents  adopt  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  ?  We  all  know  it  would  do  nothing  of  the  kind. 
On  the  contrary,  I  believe  Churchmen  would  cling  to 
their  old  opinions  more  tightly  than  ever,  and  keep  to 
themselves  more  thoroughly  than  they  ever  did  before. 
Where,  then,  is  the  use  of  raising  a  false  issue,  and 
holding  out  expectations  from  Disestablishment  which  are 
certain  not  to  be  realized  ?  The  existing  line  of  social 
demarcation  between  Churchmen  and  Dissenters  may  be 
right  or  wrong,  wise  or  foolish ;  but  it  is  a  line  drawn  by 
the  very  fact  that  they  belong  to  two  distinct  religious 
systems.  The  separation  of  Church  and  State  would  do 
nothing  whatever  towards  the  removal  of  the  alleged 
disability,  and  it  would  be  felt  as  strongly  after  Dis 
establishment  as  before.  The  much  wished-for  equality 
and  dead  level  of  Churchmen  and  sects  would  not  have 
the  slightest  effect  in  filling  up  the  gulf  and  bridging 
over  the  chasm.  In  social  matters  Churchmen  would 
keep  to  Churchmen,  and  Dissenters  would  keep  to  Dis 
senters,  just  as  they  do  now,  and  even  more ;  and  I 
marvel  that  any  man  of  sense  and  reflection  can  expect 
anything  else. 

In  saying  all  this  I  would  not  be  misunderstood.  I 
disclaim  the  slightest  feeling  of  ill-will  towards  Dissenters, 

X 


322  PRINCIPLES  FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

I  have  not  the  least  desire  to  interfere  with  them.  I 
respect  their  conscientious  convictions,  even  when  I  think 
them  mistaken.  I  am  thoroughly  thankful  for  any  good 
work  they  do.  I  wish  to  allow  them  to  work  and 
worship  in  their  own  way.  I  only  express  my  own  firm 
conviction  that  Disestablishment  would  do  the  Dissenters 
no  good,  but  great  harm.  In  their  own  interest  they  had 
better  be  quiet  and  let  us  alone. 

II.  In  the  second  place,  What  good  would  Disestab 
lishment  do  to  the  Churck  of  England?  My  answer  is 
twofold.  It  might  possibly  do  it  a  little  good ;  but  it 
would  certainly  do  it  a  great  deal  of  harm. 

The  advocates  of  Disestablishment,  I  am  well  aware, 
are  fond  of  telling  us  that  their  movement  is  all  for  our 
real  advantage !  They  mean  us  no  harm !  not  they ! 
They  love  the  Church  of  England,  but  dislike  its  con 
nection  with  the  State.  The  Liberationist  agitators  are 
in  reality  our  best  friends,  and  we  ought  to  be  exceed 
ingly  obliged  to  them  for  their  disinterested  labours  for 
our  benefit !  They  want  to  strike  the  chains  off  our 
limbs,  to  deliver  us  from  a  yoke  of  bondage,  and  make 
us  free  and  independent.  Brave  words  these !  and  I 
quite  believe  that  some  of  those  who  use  them  mean 
what  they  say.  But  they  utterly  fail  to  convince  me. 
At  the  risk  of  being  told  that  I  am  only  caring  for  "  the 
loaves  and  fishes,"  I  will  give  my  reasons. 

The  good  that  Disestablishment  would  do  the  Church 
of  England  is  very  small.  It  would  doubtless  give  us 
more  liberty,  and  might  enable  us  to  effect  some  useful 
reforms.  It  would  bring  the  laity  forward  into  their 
rightful  position  from  sheer  necessity.  It  would  probably 
give  us  a  real  and  properly  constituted  Convocation, 
including  laity  as  well  as  clergy.  It  would  lead  to  an 
increase  of  Bishops,  a  division  of  dioceses,  and  a  recon- 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  323 

struction  of  our  cathedral  bodies.  It  would  make  an 
end  of  Crown  jobs  in  the  choice  of  Bishops,  and  upset 
the  whole  existing  system  of  patronage.  It  would 
destroy  all  sinecure  offices,  and  drive  all  drones  out  of 
the  ecclesiastical  hive.  It  would  enable  us  to  make  our 
worship  more  elastic,  and  our  ritual  better  suited  to  the 
times.  All  these  are  gains  unquestionably,  but  gains 
whose  value  must  not  be  exaggerated. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  harm  that  Disestablishment 
would  do  to  the  Church  of  England  is  very  great  indeed. 
It  would  sorely  impoverish  the  thousands  of  rural  clergy, 
whose  income  depends  on  tithes,  and  would  make  it 
ultimately  necessary  to  diminish  their  number  by  at  least 
one-half,  to  consolidate  half  the  livings  and  put  an  end 
to  half  the  services !  The  voluntary  system  in  rural 
districts  is  notoriously  an  entire  failure.  None  know 
that  better  than  the  ministers  of  Nonconformist  country 
chapels.1  It  would  tax  the  energies  of  a  disestablished 
Church  most  heavily  to  keep  up  an  Episcopal  ministry 
outside  the  towns.  It  would  imTnp.nap.1y  cripple  the 
power  of  the  Church  of  England  to  do  much  for  the 
evangelization  of  the  heathen  abroad,  and  the  general 
spread  of  the  Gospel  at  home.  "  Sustentation  funds " 
would  absorb  three-quarters  of  the  Church's  attention ; 
and  we  should  find  it  hard  enough  to  maintain  our 
position,  and  much  harder  to  extend  our  lines.  Last,  but 
not  least,  Disestablishment  would  almost  certainly  lead  to 
divisions,  schisms,  and  possibly  disruption  in  the  Episcopal 
body.  We  should  all  become  more  narrow  and  less  liberal 
and  comprehensive  in  our  views.  Of  course,  this  goes 
for  nothing  with  some  Christians,  who  seem  to  think  that 
divisions  and  schisms  are  very  nice  things,  and  that 
multiplication  of  sects  is  the  nearest  thing  to  heaven  upon 
earth  !  I  content  myself  with  remarking  that  our  Lord 
1  See  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  at  the  end  of  this  paper. 


324  J>KINCIPLSS    P0ft   CHURCHMEN. 


Jesus  Christ  says,  "  A  house  divided  against  itself  cannot 
stand."  The  more  divisions  among  Christians,  the  greater 
the  weakness  and  the  smaller  the  influence  of  Christianity  ! 
To  promote  an  increase  of  division  among  English  Chris 
tians  is  the  surest  way  to  help  the  Pope,  the  infidel,  and 
the  devil. 

I  will  not  waste  words  on  those  who  tell  us  that  the 
English  clergy,  after  Disestablishment,  would  preach 
better,  and  write  better,  and  speak  better,  and  work 
better  than  they  do  now,  and  that,  like  wild  elephants,  we 
should  all  be  made  tamer  and  more  useful  by  starving. 
Anybody  can  make  vague  assertions  like  these:  but 
assertions  are  worth  nothing  when  they  are  contradicted 
by  plain  facts.  I  do  not  see  that  the  American  Episco 
palians  over  the  water,  who  have  no  connection  with  the 
State,  are  a  bit  better  preachers  and  workers  than  the 
clergy  of  the  English  Establishment.  Above  all,  I  do  not 
see  that  English  Nonconformist  ministers,  as  a  body,  are 
at  all  superior,  in  preaching  or  working,  to  the  clergy  of 
the  English  Established  Church. 

In  short,  the  assertion  of  the  advocates  of  Disestablish 
ment,  that  this  movement  would  do  the  Church  of 
England  good,  appears  to  me  utterly  destitute  of  founda 
tion.  An  ounce  of  facts  is  better  than  a  pound  of 
theories.  Free  Churches  are  very  fine  things  to  talk 
about,  and  look  very  fine  at  a  distance  ;  but  matters  are 
not  always  serene  inside.  The  good  that  Disestablishment 
would  do  to  the  Church  of  England  is  comparatively 
small,  and  very  uncertain.  The  harm  that  it  would  do 
is  very  certain  and  very  great.  The  advocates  of  Dis 
establishment  may  say  what  they  please  about  wishing 
to  do  us  good,  but  they  must  not  expect  us  to  believe 
them.  They  had  better  drop  that  line  of  argument 
altogether.  The  man  who  tries  to  disestablish  and  dis 
endow  the  Church  of  England,  and  set  it  free  from  the 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  325 

State,  is,  in  my  judgment,  an  enemy  of  the  Church,  and 
not  a  friend. 

III.  In  the  third  place,  What  good  would  Disestablish 
ment  do  to  the,  tithe-payers!  I  answer  that  question 
very  decidedly.  It  would  not  do  them  the  slightest  good 
whatever. 

This  is  a  point  that  needs  clearing  up.  It  touches 
men's  pockets,  and  therefore  they  feel  interested  about  it. 
Moreover,  there  is  an  amazing  amount  of  ignorance  in 
men's  minds  about  it.  I  have  not  a  doubt  that  many 
farmers  and  small  occupiers  of  land  in  England  are  under 
the  belief  that,  if  Disestablishment  came,  they  would  be 
a  great  deal  better  off  than  they  are  now.  They  are 
secretly  rejoicing  in  the  vision  of  "  no  more  Established 
Church !  no  more  parsons  to  take  rent-charge !  no  more 
tithes  !  So  much  more  money  in  our  pockets  ! " 

Now  I  am  sorry  to  dispel  this  pleasing  vision,  but  I 
am  obliged  to  do  it.  Facts  are  stubborn  things,  and 
cannot  be  evaded.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  "  reckoning 
without  your  host."  I  recommend  tithe-payers,  who  are 
generally  sensible,  hard-headed  fellows,  to  look  at  the 
subject  on  all  sides.  "  Wait  a  bit,  my  friends,"  I  would 
say  :  "  don't  be  in  a  hurry.  Before  you  help  to  destroy 
the  union  of  Church  and  State,  consider  whether  the 
destruction  will  help  your  pockets."  You  think  it  will. 
I  tell  you  it  will  not.  Let  us  see. 

It  is  a  fact  that  for  centuries  nearly  all  land  in  Eng 
land  has  been  subject  to  the  payment  of  tithes.  For 
hundreds  of  years  land  has  been  bought  and  sold,  let  and 
hired,  rented  and  farmed,  at  more  or  less  annual  payment, 
according  to  the  amount  of  tithe.  Tithe  has  been  a 
regular  charge,  which  has  been  taken  into  account  in 
every  agreement  between  landlord  and  tenant  for  many 
generations,  Ife  that  gays  no  tithe  pays  more  rent,  and 


326  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Tie  that  pays  tithe  pays  less  rent.  Every  farmer  of  average 
sense  knows  all  this  perfectly  well.  To  tell  them  such 
things,  to  use  a  homely  phrase,  is  like  telling  them  that 
two  and  two  make  four,  or  that  there  are  twenty  shil 
lings  in  a  pound.  It  is  a  simple  fact,  which  is  known 
from  one  end  of  England  to  another,  wherever  men  are 
not  wilfully  blind,  or  grossly  ignorant,  or  dishonest 
reasoners. 

Well,  if  the  Church  of  England  is  disestablished  and 
disendowed,  it  is  plain  that  tithe-payment  will  either  be 
done  away  or  not.  The  clergy,  of  course,  will  cease  to 
receive  the  tithes.  But  what  will  become  of  the  tithes  ? 
Will  Parliament  do  away  with  the  payment  of  tithes 
altogether  ?  or  will  Parliament  decree  that  tithes  shall 
be  paid  to  some  other  purpose  than  the  support  of  the 
clergy  ?  One  course  or  another  must  be  adopted,  and  in 
either  case  the  tithe-payers  would  not  gain  a  single 
farthing ! 

Let  us  suppose,  on  the  one  hand,  that  tithes  are  com 
pletely  abolished,  and  cease  to  be  paid.  At  once  every 
landlord  in  England  would  raise  his  rents,  and  on  every 
principle  of  justice  and  equity  he  would  have  a  right  to 
do  so.  A  very  nice  thing  it  would  be  for  the  landlords, 
and  a  very  pretty  addition  it  would  be  to  their  incomes ! 
But  the  tenants  would  gain  nothing  at  all !  What  they 
saved  in  tithes  they  would  lose  in  rent. 

Let  us  suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  tithes  are  not 
abolished  when  Disestablishment  comes,  but  applied  to 
some  other  purpose  than  the  support  of  the  clergy.  Well, 
if  they  are  riot  abolished,  there  is  an  end  of  the  whole 
question.  Disestablishment  would  evidently  do  no  good, 
in  that  case,  to  the  pockets  of  tithe-payers.  They  would 
continue  to  pay,  and  would  be  just  where  they  were 
before ! 

I  defy  any  advocate  of  Disestablishment  and  Disen- 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  327 

dowment  to  show  any  escape  from  these  conclusions. 
Some  tell  us  they  would  apply  the  tithes  to  the  payment 
of  poor-rates  and  highway-rates.  Where  would  be  the 
good  of  this  ?  At  once  the  landlords  would  raise  their 
rents.  Land  is  now  let  and  hired  subject  to  payment  of 
poor-rates  and  highway-rates,  and  they  make  a  regular 
deduction  from  the  rent.  Take  off  the  burden  of  poor- 
rates  and  highway-rates,  and  of  course  the  rent  would  le 
raised  I  Some  would  -  be  philanthropists  tell  us  they 
would  apply  the  tithes  to  public  objects,  such  as  harbours 
of  refuge,  public  parks  for  great  towns,  museums,  lunatic 
asylums,  and  the  like.  Public  objects,  indeed !  What 
benefit  would  rural  tithe-payers  get  from  them  ?  What 
would  a  Suffolk  tithe-payer  care  for  harbours  at  Filey 
or  Dover,  or  parks  and  museums  at  Wolverhampton  or 
Oldham  ?  His  tithe-money  would  annually  go  away  for 
objects  which  would  do  him  no  good  at  all.  I  suspect 
in  a  few  years  the  tithe-payers  would  get  sick  of  the 
new  system,  and  would  wish  the  old  system  could  be  set 
up  again. 

Let  us  add  to  all  this,  that  the  Episcopal  clergyman, 
deprived  of  the  tithes  in  a  rural  parish,  would  of  course 
cease  to  pay  any  rates,  except  for  his  house  and  garden. 
At  present  the  clergyman  is  often  the  largest  ratepayer 
in  the  parish !  In  future  what  he  used  to  pay  must  be 
made  up  by  the  other  ratepayers.  Let  us  remember, 
beside,  that  without  the  tithes  the  rural  clergyman  would 
in  most  cases  be  obliged  to  curtail  his  expenses,  and  to 
spend  much  less  money  in  the  parish  than  he  does  now. 
In  either  case  the  tithe-payers  would  suffer,  and  the 
parish  would  lose  more  than  it  gained  by  Disestablish 
ment.  There  is  an  old  fable,  which  tells  of  a  man  killing 
his  goose  for  the  sake  of  the  golden  eggs  she  laid.  Of 
course  he  found  that  he  never  got  another  egg !  I  often 
think  of  that  fable  when  I  hear  of  rural  tithe-payers 


328  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

clamouring  for  Disestablishment.     At  any  rate,  it  would 
do  them  no  good. 

IV.  In  the  fourth  place,  What  good  would  Disestablish 
ment  do  to  the  poor?  I  answer  that  inquiry  without 
hesitation.  It  would  not  only  do  them  no  good,  but 
would  do  them  great  harm. 

This  is  a  very  serious  question.  "  The  poor  shall  never 
cease  out  of  the  land."  To  "  remember  the  poor "  is  a 
plain  command  of  Scripture.  All  changes,  whether 
political  or  ecclesiastical,  which  tend  to  injure  the  poor, 
are,  on  the  very  face  of  them,  objectionable.  This  is  the 
heaviest  indictment  I  bring  against  the  whole  Disestab 
lishment  movement.  It  would  inflict  grievous  damage, 
both  temporal  and  spiritual,  on  the  agricultural  poor,  the 
very  poor  who  of  all  classes  in  England  are  most  ill-paid, 
and  deserve  most  consideration. 

Disestablishment  would  injure  the  poor  temporally.  I 
challenge  any  man  of  average  intelligence  to  deny  that 
in  thousands  of  rural  parishes  throughout  England  the 
clergyman  is  the  means  of  doing  an  immense  amount  of 
temporal  good  to  the  poor.  Where  is  the  well-ordered 
rural  parish  in  which  the  clergyman's  house  is  not  the 
mainspring  of  a  large  machinery  of  charity  to  men's 
bodies  ?  Who  does  not  know  that  it  is  the  clergyman 
who  in  every  well-ordered  country  parish  is  naturally 
expected  to  take  the  lead  about  clothing  clubs,  shoe  clubs, 
boot  clubs,  coal  clubs,  soup  clubs,  blanket  clubs,  libraries, 
and  a  hundred  other  means  of  helping  the  poor  ?  Who 
does  not  know  that  in  every  well-ordered  country  parish 
the  clergyman  is  ready  to  be  the  unpaid  friend  of  every 
one  who  needs  a  friend,  whether  in  the  way  of  money,  or 
advice,  or  sympathy, — and  the  friend  of  poor  Dissenters  as 
well  as  poor  church-goers  ?  I  defy  any  one  to  deny  this. 
The  quantity  of  temporal  good  which  the  agricultural  poor 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  329 

receive  from  the  clergy  at  present  is  something,  I  suspect, 
of  which  dwellers  in  towns,  and  Liberationist  orators  on 
platforms,  have  not  the  slightest  idea.  It  is  good  which 
is  done  quietly  and  unostentatiously,  without  parade  or 
blowing  of  trumpets.  But  it  is  done ;  and  the  last  day 
alone  will  declare  the  full  extent  of  it. 

Well,  there  will  be  an  end  of  a  great  deal  of  this  if 
Disestablishment  comes.  Stripped  of  more  than  half  his 
professional  income,  reduced  to  be  the  minister  of  the 
Episcopalians  alone  in  his  parish,  the  rural  clergyman  will, 
of  course,  cease  to  do  what  he  once  did  for  the  poor.  In 
most  cases  he  would  not  be  able  to  do  much,  if  he  had 
the  will.  He  must  rigidly  confine  himself  to  the  members 
of  his  own  congregation.  If  any  man  thinks  this  would 
be  a  nice  change,  and  an  advantage  to  the  rural  parishes, 
I  differ  from  him  entirely.  The  destruction  of  the  Establish 
ment  would  inflict  immense  temporal  damage  on  the  poor. 

Disestablishment  would  do  great  spiritual  harm  to  the 
poor.  Stripped  of  a  large  part  of  her  present  endowments, 
the  Church  of  England  would  be  able  to  do  far  less  than 
she  now  does  for  the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom, 
whether  at  home  or  abroad.  Aggressive  measures  for  the 
evangelization  of  mining  and  manufacturing  populations, 
the  building  of  new  churches  and  schools,  the  formation 
of  new  districts  in  poor  neighbourhoods, — all  these  things 
would  either  be  entirely  stopped  or  greatly  curtailed. 
With  a  rural  clergy  deprived  of  more  than  half  their 
income,  with  town  congregations  obliged  to  give  liberally 
to  support  the  Church  in  the  country,  the  Church's  power 
of  doing  good  to  souls  would  be  painfully  lessened  and 
diminished.  To  sustain  her  without  extending,  to  keep 
her  alive  without  increasing,  to  enable  her  to  live  without 
growth,  would  require  the  utmost  exertions  of  her  children. 
None  would  suffer  so  much  from  this  state  of  things  as 
the  poor. 


330  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  the  voluntary  system,  on  which 
in  great  measure  the  Church  would  be  thrown,  after 
Disestablishment,  is  a  total  and  entire  failure  in  rural 
districts.  Dr.  Parker,  an  eminent  Nonconformist  minister, 
calls  it  "a  miserable  failure."  It  is  a  failure  in  the 
United  States  of  America,  in  spite  of  all  the  wealth  and 
energy  of  the  Americans.  There  are  myriads  of  poor  in 
New  York,  and  in  the  backwoods,  who  are  just  like  sheep 
without  a  shepherd.  It  is  a  failure  in  England  among 
the  Nonconformists  at  this  day.  With  all  their  many 
privileges  and  advantages,  they  can  neither  pay  their 
ministers  sufficiently  in  rural  districts,  nor  provide 
sufficient  chapels  for  poor  neighbourhoods.  Above  all, 
they  cannot  provide  day  schools  for  their  own  poor 
children,  and  are  obliged  to  confess  it !  At  the  eleventh 
hour  they  have  supported  an  "Education  Act,"  which 
orders  Board-schools  to  be  built  by  a  compulsory  rate, 
and  by  so  doing  they  have  practically  admitted  that  the 
voluntary  system  has  thoroughly  broken  down  ! 1 

I  cannot  get  over  facts  like  these.  I  advise  every  poor 
man  in  England  who  is  urged  to  sign  a  petition  for 
Disestablishment,  to  think  twice  before  he  signs,  and  to 
ask,  "  What  good  will  it  do  to  the  poor  ? "  Disestablish 
the  Church  of  England,  and  the  very  first  to  suffer  from 
it  would  be  the  poor.  In  the  interests  of  the  poor,  if 
there  were  no  other  reasons,  I  see  no  good,  but  immense 
evil,  in  Disestablishment. 

V.  In  the  fifth  place,  What  good  would  Disestablish 
ment  do  to  the  cause  of  peace  and  charity?  I  shall 
answer  that  question  very  decidedly.  It  would  do  no 
good  at  all. 

1  The  reader  is  once  more  advised  to  study  carefully  the  candid  admission 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon  about  the  voluntary  system  in  rural  districts  at  the  end 
of  this  paper. 


DISESTA  BLISHMENT.  331 

The  quantity  of  stuff  and  nonsense  and  silly  romantic 
rubbish,  which  is  talked  on  this  point,  is  very  curious. 
There  are  many  innocent-minded  people,  I  believe,  both 
Churchmen  and  Dissenters,  who  really  think  that,  if  the 
union  of  Church  and  State  were  dissolved,  English 
Christians  would  get  on  far  more  happily  and  comfortably 
than  they  do  now.  There  would  be  no  more  jealousies, 
or  envyings,  or  rivalries,  or  wranglings,  or  squabblings,  or 
quarrelling,  or  party  spirit !  Ephraim  would  no  longer 
vex  Judah,  nor  Judah  Ephraim !  The  whole  Christian 
body  in  Great  Britain  would  become  a  great  Evangelical 
alliance  and  happy  family  !  Baptists,  and  Independents, 
and  Presbyterians,  and  Episcopalians,  would  fraternize 
lovingly,  and  exchange  pulpits !  Mr.  Spurgeon  would 
preach  in  St.  Paul's,  and  the  Bishop  of  London  in  the 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle !  Such  are  the  visions  with 
which  many  worthy  Christian  laymen  amuse  themselves, 
and  even  laymen  who  do  not  approve  of  Disestablishment. 
They  regard  it  as  a  painful  operation,  like  drawing  a 
tooth,  and  they  are  very  sorry  it  should  ever  be  performed. 
But  the  operation  once  over,  and  the  tooth  once  out,  they 
really  believe  we  shall  all  be  much  happier  and  better 
friends  for  it.  Like  little  children  after  a  quarrel,  we 
should  just  "  kiss  and  be  friends." 

Now,  I  believe  nothing  whatever  of  the  kind.  I  am 
all  for  unity,  wherever  it  can  be  obtained,  and  I  would 
willingly  make  large  sacrifices  in  order  to  obtain  it.  I 
think  the  present  divided  state  of  English  Christians  a 
disgrace  to  religion.  I  disclaim  the  slightest  sympathy 
with  those  who  think  that  you  cannot  have  too  many 
sects  and  denominations,  and  that  it  does  not  matter  a 
jot  where  you  worship,  or  what  you  hear  preached.  I 
want  to  see  more  unity,  and  I  should  like  to  see  more 
uniformity.  But,  for  all  this,  I  have  not  the  slightest 
faith  in  unity  being  promoted  by  force,  and  plunder,  and 


332  PRINCIPLES    FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

spoliation,  and  levelling  down.  Charity  and  peace  among 
Christians  will  never  be  brought  about  by  violence. 
Peace  between  Episcopalians  and  Dissenters  is  about  the 
last  thing  which  would  result  from  Disestablishment. 
It  would  make  a  breach  that  would  never  be  built  up. 

Let  us  just  take  a  practical,  common-sense  view  of  the 
matter  in  hand.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  Liberationists 
succeed  in  carrying  out  the  Disestablishment  and  Dis- 
endowment  of  the  Church  of  England.  Let  us  suppose 
that  some  reckless  House  of  Commons,  and  some 
popularity-hunting  Prime  Minister,  give  way  at  length 
to  the  importunity  of  the  Liberationists  and  their  many 
allies,  and  force  through  Parliament  a  Disestablishing 
Act  for  the  Church  of  England,  like  that  which  was 
passed  for  the  Church  of  Ireland.  Such  an  event  could 
only  take  place,  I  believe,  after  years  of  mischievous 
strife  and  agitation,  and  after  hundreds  of  keen  conflicts 
between  Churchmen  and  chapel-goers  all  over  the  land. 
The  Established  Church  of  England,  with  all  its  defects 
and  divisions,  is  a  large  and  powerful  body,  and  would 
make  a  long  fight,  and  die  very  hard.  Will  any  man  in 
his  sober  senses  tell  me  that  this  miserable  long-drawn 
strife  would  promote  unity  ?  "Would  it  not  rather  leave 
behind  it  festering  sores  that  would  never  be  healed  ? 
Of  course  it  would !  It  would  make  unity  between 
English  Episcopalians  and  their  adversaries  an  im 
possibility  for  several  generations.  The  costly  china 
plate  would  be  broken.  It  might  perhaps  be  riveted,  but 
it  could  never  be  mended  again. 

But  this  is  not  all.  Suppose  that  the  Disestablishing 
Act  tends  to  deprive  the  rural  clergy,  who  depend  on 
tithes,  of  half  their  incomes,  as  it  certainly  would. 
Suppose  that  thousands  of  quiet  country  rectors  and 
vicars  are  suddenly  obliged  to  reduce  their  expenditure, 
to  alter  their  style  of  living,  to  take  away  their  boys  from 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  333 

good  schools,  to  give  their  girls  an  inferior  education,  and 
to  sacrifice  a  great  many  comforts ;  and  all  this  in  con 
sequence  of  the  attacks  of  the  Liberationist  Society  and 
the  Dissenters.  Suppose  all  this  to  take  place.  Will 
any  man  pretend  to  say  that  there  could  possibly  be  much 
harmony  and  friendly  feeling  between  Churchmen  and 
chapel-goers  in  such  a  condition  of  things  ?  It  is  absurd 
to  expect  it.  For  centuries  there  would  be  a  gulf  between 
Episcopalians  and  non-Episcopalians  in  England,  which 
nothing  would  fill  up.  Disestablishment  would  be  the 
grave  of  unity. 

"  It  ought  not  to  be  so,"  some  innocent-minded  man 

may   say.     "The  union   of    Church    and    State    is    not 

essential  to  Christianity.     Men  may  surely  differ  about  it 

and  keep  friends.     When  the  battle  is  over,  why  not 

forgive  and  forget?" — What  ought  to  be,  is  a  vague 

phrase,  which  I  will  not  stop  to  discuss.     What  would 

be,   is   another   question ;  and   from   my   observation   of 

human  nature  I  have  a  very  decided  opinion  about  it. 

Believers  who  hold  different  views  on  non-essential  points 

in  religion  can  get  on  very  comfortably  so  long  as  they 

are  tolerant,  and  do  not  assault  each  other,  and  tread  on 

one  another's  toes.     But  the  moment  A  begins  to  say  to 

B,  "  I  shall  try  to  half -ruin  your  Church,  and  to  get  half 

your  income  taken  away,"  it  is  nonsense  to  expect  any 

more  friendship  between  A  and  B  !     The  Bible  commands 

us  to  "  forgive  our  enemies,  to  do  good  to  them  that  hate 

us,  and  to  pray  for  those  that  despitefully  use  us."     But 

the  Bible  nowhere  says  that  we  are  to  regard  our  enemies 

as  beloved  brothers  and  friends.    The  Bible  says,  "  If  any 

man  take  thy  coat,  let  him  take  thy  cloak  also."     But 

the  Bible  nowhere  says  that  we  are  to  regard  the  man 

who  has  violently  taken  our  coats  and  cloaks  as  a  pleasant, 

praiseworthy,  and  honest  man,  and  to  shake  hands  with 

him  as  a  dear  friend. 


334  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

For  my  own  part,  I  can  truly  say  that  for  forty  years 
I  have  laboured  hard  to  promote  unity  and  good  feeling 
between  Churchmen  and  Nonconformists.  I  have  gone 
so  far  in  this  direction  that  I  have  often  been  blamed, 
vilified,  and  slandered  by  my  brother  Churchmen,  as  half 
a  Dissenter.  I  have  gone  on  steadily  nevertheless,  and 
have  always  said  that  Dissenters  deserve  much  kindness 
and  consideration,  because  the  Church's  neglect  has  made 
them  what  they  are.  But  if  Dissenters  will  not  let  the 
Church  alone,  and  will  not  rest  till  they  have  destroyed 
the  Establishment,  I  give  up  all  hopes  of  unity.  You 
cannot  get  on  comfortably  with  men  who  have  deliberately 
striven  to  upset  your  Church,  and  to  take  away  half  your 
income !  Co-operation  in  future  would  be  almost  im 
possible.  The  Bible  Society  and  the  London  City  Mission 
would  suffer  heavily.  From  the  day  that  the  Church  of 
England  is  disestablished  there  will  be  an  end  of  much 
unity  between  Episcopalians  and  their  Dissenting  adver 
saries.  There  is  little  enough  now,  and  after  Disestablish 
ment  there  will  be  much  less.  It  is  my  deliberate 
judgment  that  those  who  labour  to  destroy  the  union  of 
Church  and  State  in  England,  under  the  vain  idea  of 
putting  all  Churches  and  sects  on  a  dead  level,  are  making 
unity  and  good  feeling  between  Church  and  Chapel 
impossible  for  two  hundred  years. 

VI.  In  the  last  place,  what  good  would  Disestablish 
ment  do  to  the  State  ?  My  answer  is  short  and  decided. 
It  would  do  it  no  good,  but  very  great  harm. 

This  question  is  far  too  wide  and  complicated  to  be 
fully  discussed  in  a  paper  like  this.  But  I  shall  try  to 
throw  a  little  light  on  it.  If  I  can  only  show  that  the 
dissolution  of  the  union  of  Church  and  State  involves  far 
more  serious  consequences  than  most  of  its  advocates 
dream  of,  I  shall  be  content.  Such  clap-trap  phrases  as 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  335 

"non-interference  with  spiritual  matters," — "unsectarian 
legislation," — "allowing  no  special  privilege  to  any 
denomination," — "  adopting  the  principles  of  free  trade  in 
religion," — "  leaving  all  Churches  and  sects  to  themselves," 
— "  taking  no  cognizance  of  any  but  secular  matters/' — 
all  these  are  fine,  high-sounding  expressions,  and  look  very 
pretty  in  theory.  But  the  moment  you  begin  to  work 
them  out  logically  in  practice,  you  will  find  grave 
objections  rising  up  in  your  way,  objections  that  cannot 
be  got  over. 

To  begin  with,  Scripture  teaches  plainly  that  God  rules 
everything  in  this  world, — that  He  deals  with  nations 
as  they  deal  with  Him, — that  national  prosperity  and 
national  decline  are  ordered  by  Him,  —  that  wars, 
pestilences,  and  famines  are  part  of  His  providential 
government  of  the  world, — and  that  without  His  blessing 
no  nation  can  prosper.  Now,  do  we  believe  all  this  or 
not  ?  If  we  do  believe  it,  it  is  simply  absurd  to  say  that 
Governments  have  nothing  to  do  with  religion,  and  that 
they  may  safely  ignore  God.  That  often  quoted  text, 
"  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,"  has  nothing  whatever 
to  do  with  the  matter  in  hand  (John  xviii.  36).  When 
our  Lord  spoke  these  words,  He  only  meant  to  teach 
Pilate  that  His  kingdom  was  not  a  mere  secular  kingdom, 
like  a  heathen  Eoman  Emperor's,  and  that  it  was  not 
maintained  or  propagated,  like  the  kingdoms  of  this 
world,  by  the  sword.  But,  to  say  that  our  Lord  meant 
that  "  Governments  were  never  to  support  or  countenance 
religion,"  is  a  preposterous  and  unwarrantable  interpreta 
tion  of  Scripture.  Whether  men  like  to  see  it  or  not,  I 
believe  it  is  the  first  duty  of  a  State  to  honour  and 
recognise  God.  The  Government  that  refuses  to  do  this, 
in  order  to  save  itself  trouble,  and  to  avoid  favouring  one 
Church  more  than  another,  may  think  it  is  doing  a  very 
"smart"  and  politic  thing.  But  I  believe  its  line  of 


336  PRINCIPLES  FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

procedure  is  offensive  to  the  Most  High,  and  eminently 
calculated  to  draw  down  His  displeasure. 

Again,  reason  itself  points  out  that  the  moral  standard 
of  a  nation's  subjects  is  the  grand  secret  of  its  prosperity. 
Gold  mines,  and  manufactures,  and  scientific  discoveries, 
and  eloquent  speeches,  and  commercial  activity,  and  de 
mocratic  institutions,  are  not  enough  to  make  or  to  keep 
nations  great.  Tyre,  and  Sidon,  and  Egypt,  and  Carthage, 
and  Athens,  and  Eome,  and  Venice,  and  Spain,  and 
Portugal,  had  plenty  of  such  possessions  as  these,  and  yet 
fell  into  decay.  The  sinews  of  a  nation's  strength  are 
truthfulness,  honesty,  sobriety,  purity,  temperance,  economy, 
diligence,  brotherly  kindness,  charity  among  its  inhabitants. 
Let  those  deny  this  who  dare. — And  will  any  man  say 
that  there  is  any  surer  way  of  producing  these  character 
istics  in  a  people  than  by  encouraging,  and  fostering,  and 
spreading,  and  teaching  pure  Scriptural  Christianity  ? 
The  man  who  says  there  is  must  be  an  infidel. — Then,  if 
these  things  are  so,  the  first  duty  of  a  State  ought  to  be 
to  encourage  and  countenance  religion  among  its  subjects 
in  every  possible  way.  Does  a  State  want  its  subjects  to 
be  provident,  truthful,  diligent,  temperate,  honest,  moral, 
and  charitable  ?  Does  it  or  does  it  not  ?  If  it  does,  it 
ought  to  encourage,  and  not  to  ignore,  religion.  To 
punish  vice  and  yet  not  cherish  virtue, — to  spend  public 
money  in  building  jails  and  yet  not  encourage  churches, 
is,  to  say  the  least,  an  absurdly  inconsistent  policy. 
The  more  true  religion  the  better  subjects  !  The  more 
good  subjects  the  more  prosperity !  The  Government 
which  ignores  religion,  and  coolly  declares  that  it  does 
not  care  whether  its  subjects  are  Christians  or  not,  is 
guilty  of  an  act  of  suicidal  folly.  Irreligion,  even  in  a 
temporal  point  of  view,  is  the  worst  enemy  of  a  nation. 

Once  more,  the  practical  consequences  which  logically 
result  from  carrying  out  the  principle  of  Disestablishment, 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  337 

are  so  monstrous  and  appalling,  that  one  can  hardly  believe 
that  people  who  clamour  for  disconnecting  Church  and 
State  have  ever  fully  considered  them.  Let  us  look  at 
them.  Grant  that  the  Church  is  disestablished,  and  that 
the  English  Government  resolves  to  have  nothing  more  to 
do  with  religion,  and  to  leave  it  to  the  voluntary  system. 
In  order  to  carry  out  this  principle  consistently,  the 
Succession  Act  must  be  repealed,  and  our  Sovereigns 
might  be  Papists  !  Our  Kings  and  Queens,  if  we  had  any 
more,  would  be  crowned  without  any  religious  service. 
Our  Parliaments  would  carry  on  their  proceedings  without 
prayer.  Our  regiments  and  men-of-war  would  no  longer 
have  chaplains.  Our  prisons  and  workhouses  would  have 
no  chaplains.  Even  the  religious  observance  of  Sunday 
would  be  in  danger.  "  Nonsense,"  some  may  say.  "  Of 
course  we  do  not  want  such  a  state  of  things.  We  only 
want  to  dissolve  the  union  between  the  State  and  the 
Church  of  England."  People  may  cry  "  Nonsense,"  if  they 
like,  but  they  will  never  prove  that  the  state  of  things  I 
have  just  described  will  not  be  the  logical  consequence  of 
Disestablishment,  if  followed  out  to  its  legitimate  con 
clusions.  After  Disestablishment,  the  State,  if  it  acts 
consistently,  must  either  leave  the  souls  of  soldiers,  sailors, 
prison  and  workhouse  inmates  entirely  alone,  or  else  we 
must  get  over  the  difficulty  by  putting  up  chaplaincies  to 
public  tender,  and  jobbing  them  out  to  the  lowest  bidder, 
whether  he  be  Episcopalian,  Presbyterian,  Congregation- 
alist,  Socinian,  or  Papist ! — there  is  no  other  course  open 
to  us.  If  the  rulers  of  the  State,  after  Disestablishment, 
appoint  any  particular  chaplains  to  ships,  regiments,  work 
houses,  and  jails,  they  are  at  once  open  to  the  charge  of 
showing  favour  to  one  denomination  more  than  another. 
Of  course  the  Liberationist  Society  will  not  let  the  State 
do  this ! 

The  example  of  the  United  States  and  the  Colonies  is 

Y 


338  PEINCIPLES    FOR    CHUECHMEN. 

not  the  slightest  reply  to  what  I  am  saying.  The 
Americans  do  not  entirely  separate  religion  and  the 
State.  The  American  Congress,  I  believe,  has  a  chaplain, 
and  is  opened  with  prayer.  The  army  and  navy,  the 
prisons  and  reformatories  of  America  have  chaplains,  I 
have  no  doubt.  But  even  then  I  can  find  no  guarantee 
that  these  chaplains  may  not  be  Socinians  or  Papists ! — 
And  after  all,  the  case  of  America  only  shows  that  our 
shrewd  cousins  see  the  utter  uselessness  of  trying  to 
carry  out  the  principles  of  the  Liberationist  Society  to 
their  logical  results,  and  are  obliged  to  act  with  splendid 
inconsistency.  In  practice  even  a  new  country  like 
America,  not  fettered  by  old  precedents,  finds  it  im 
possible  entirely  to  ignore  God.  I  cannot  quite  persuade 
myself  that  what  Americans  find  impossible  will  ever  be 
attempted  in  England.  When  Liberationists  have  upset 
the  union  of  Church  and  State,  they  will  have  to  connive 
at  some  inconsistencies !  The  moment  they  admit  the  ne 
cessity  of  supplying  religion  to  workhouses  and  jails,  they 
must  either  throw  open  the  chaplaincies  to  public  tender, 
or  give  up  the  principle  of  religious  equality,  and  favour 
some  particular  Church  by  appointing  one  of  its  ministers. 
Furthermore,  I  am  by  no  means  sure  that  the  state 
of  religious  matters  in  the  United  States,  without 
an  Established  Church,  is  nearly  so  paradisaical  and 
satisfactory  as  the  enemies  of  Establishments  say  that 
it  is.  Vague  assertions  are  often  made  on  this  point, 
which  seem  to  me,  after  some  little  inquiry,  to  be 
utterly  wanting  in  foundation.  I  doubt  exceedingly 
whether  religion  in  the  back  settlements  of  America  is 
in  a  prosperous  state.  A  well-known  American  tale, 
called  "  The  Shady  Side,"  gives  a  painful  impression  of  the 
position  of  many  American  ministers.  I  doubt  whether 
even  in  the  towns  all  things  are  serene,  and  Christianity 
is  in  a  flourishing  condition,  The  pictures  drawn  by  Ward 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  339 

Beecher  and  Talmage,  the  two  well-known  American 
preachers,  of  the  moral  atmosphere  of  New  York,  are 
something  appalling.  My  own  belief  is,  to  speak  plainly, 
that  the  example  of  America  tells  far  more  against  the 
Disestablishment  movement  than  for  it.  It  is  a  re 
markable  fact,  that  the  farewell  address  of  the  famous 
American  statesman,  George  Washington,  contained  this 
passage  : — "  Let  us  with  caution  indulge  the  supposition 
that  morality  can  be  maintained  without  religion. 
Whatever  may  be  conceded  to  the  influence  of  refined 
education  on  minds  of  peculiar  structure,  reason  and 
experience  both  forbid  us  to  expect  that  national  morality 
can  prevail  in  exclusion  of  religious  principle."  Even 
Daniel  Webster,  an  American  statesman  of  later  date, 
and  of  lower  type  than  Washington,  said,  "  Eeligion  is 
the  only  solid  basis  of  morals,  and  moral  instruction  not 
resting  on  this  basis  is  only  building  upon  sand.  It  is  a 
mockery  and  insult  to  common  sense  to  maintain  that  a 
school  for  the  instruction  of  youth  from  which  Christian 
instruction  is  shut  out  is  not  atheistical  and  infidel " 
("  Talmage's  Sermons,"  second  series,  p.  3  6  2).  It  is  a  simple 
matter  of  fact  that  there  is  such  a  widespread  feeling  of 
alarm  among  many  Christian  men  in  America  at  the 
rapid  spread  of  infidelity  and  immorality,  that  a  most 
important  Convention  was  held  in  New  York  in  the  year 
1873,  in  order  to  set  on  foot  a  movement  for  obtaining 
a  national  recognition  of  Christianity.  The  land  of  tall- 
talk  and  bunkum,  the  model  country  of  Liberationist 
orators,  is  not  the  dependable  witness  against  Establish 
ments  that  many  suppose  her  to  be.  Look  below  the 
surface  and  behind  the  curtain  of  society  in  America, 
and  you  will  find  little  to  encourage  the  separation  of 
Church  and  State.  The  great  Anglo-Saxon  nation  with 
out  an  Establishment  would  be  a  far  greater  and  far 
happier  nation  if  she  had  one. 


340  PRINCIPLES    FOE    CHURCHMEN. 

After  all,  I  am  one  of  those  old-fashioned  people  who 
believe  in  a  God.  I  believe  in  Him  not  only  as  the  God 
of  creation,  but  as  the  God  of  providence, — the  God 
who  governs  the  world,  the  God  who  hears  and  answers 
prayer.  Believing  all  this,  I  will  never  admit  that  it 
signifies  nothing  whether  a  Government  recognises 
Christianity  or  not,  and  that  it  matters  little  whether 
a  country  has  an  Established  Church.  I  set  my  foot 
down  firmly  on  the  great  principle,  "  Them  that  honour 
Me  I  will  honour,  and  those  that  despise  Me  shall  be 
lightly  esteemed."  I  apply  that  principle  to  nations, 
and  I  believe  it  will  always  hold  good.  The  Act  of 
Parliament  which  disestablished  the  Church  of  England 
might  do  great  damage  to  the  Church,  but  I  am  quite 
sure  it  would  do  far  more  damage  to  the  State.  We 
should  lose  much,  but  the  State  would  lose  a  great 
deal  more.  As  a  patriot  and  an  Englishman  I  would 
maintain  the  union  of  Church  and  State  for  the  sake  of 
my  country. 

What  may  be  before  us  no  man  can  tell.  But  in 
an  age  like  our  own, — an  age  of  restlessness, — an  age 
of  liberality,  falsely  so  called, — an  age  of  popularity- 
hunting, — an  age  of  sensationalism  and  surprises, — an 
age  of  idolatry  of  the  mob, — an  age  of  contempt  for  old 
things,  merely  because  they  are  old, — an  age  of  spasmodic 
feverish  zeal  for  new  things,  merely  because  they  are  new, 
— an  age  of  change  for  the  sake  of  change, — an  age  of 
laziness  and  apathy  among  the  defenders  of  the  old 
things,  and  of  earnestness  and  perseverance  among  the 
advocates  of  the  new, — in  such  an  age  I  shall  never  be 
surprised  if  Disestablishment  comes.  When  it  does 
come,  I  believe  it  will  inflict  such  an  amount  of  damage 
on  the  State  as  the  mind  of  man  can  hardly  conceive. 
I  declare  I  had  far  rather  see  the  Episcopal  Establishment 
upset,  and  the  Baptists  or  Independents  made  the 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  341 

Established  Church  of  England,  than  see  the  State 
ceasing  to  recognise  God.  I  had  far  rather  see  our  next 
Sovereign  crowned  in  Westminster  Abbey  by  a  Spurgeon, 
or  the  President  of  the  Wesleyan  Conference,  with 
an  extempore  prayer,  and  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury 
standing  as  a  private  individual  in  the  crowd,  than 
see  our  Government  turning  its  back  on  Christianity 
altogether. 

When  I  read  English  history,  I  see  plainly  that  the 
real  greatness  of  this  country  dates  from  the  Protestant 
Reformation.  I  see  that  it  was  under  Sovereigns  who 
ordered  the  Bible  to  be  translated  and  circulated,  and 
under  Parliaments  which  ratified  the  Thirty-nine  Articles, 
and  took  great  practical  interest  in  religion, — that  our 
nation  took  its  first  great  start  in  its  career  of  freedom, 
wealth,  and  power.  I  see  that  the  influence  of  England 
was  seldom  more  felt  in  Europe  than  it  was  in  the  days 
of  Oliver  Cromwell,  when  that  great,  though  misguided, 
man  threw  the  shield  of  England  over  persecuted  Pro 
testants  in  Savoy,  and  even  awed  the  Pope  by  interfering 
in  religious  matters.  Seeing  all  this,  I  will  never  believe 
that  Disestablishment  would  do  no  harm  to  the  State. 
On  the  contrary,  I  believe  it  would  bring  down  God's 
heaviest  judgments  on  this  realm.  I  repeat  that  the 
Act  of  Parliament  which  dissolved  Church  and  State 
would  do  great  damage  to  the  Church ;  but  it  would  be 
as  nothing  compared  to  the  injury  it  would  ultimately 
inflict  on  the  State. 

In  what  manner  God  would  punish  England,  if 
English  Governments  cast  off  all  connection  with  religion, 
I  cannot  tell.  Whether  He  would  punish  us  by  some 
sudden  blow,  such  as  defeat  in  war,  and  the  occupation 
of  our  territory  by  a  foreign  power, — whether  He  would 
waste  us  away  gradually  and  slowly  by  placing  a  worm 
at  the  roots  of  our  commercial  prosperity, — whether  He 


342  PRINCIPLES   FOE   CHURCHMEN. 

would  break  us  to  pieces  by  letting  fools  rule  over  us 
and  allowing  Parliaments  to  obey  them,  and  permitting 
us,  like  the  Midianites,  to  destroy  one  another, — whether 
He  would  ruin  us  by  sending  a  dearth  of  wise  statesmen 
in  the  upper  ranks,  and  giving  the  reins  of  power  to 
communists,  socialists,  and  mob-leaders, — all  these  are 
points  which  I  have  no  prophetical  eye  to  see,  and  I  do 
not  pretend  to  determine.  God's  sorest  judgments,  the 
ancients  said,  "are  like  millstones,  they  grind  very 
slowly,  but  they  grind  very  fine."  The  thing  that  I  fear 
most  for  my  country  is  gradual,  insensible  dry-rot  and 
decay.  But  of  one  thing  I  am  very  sure, — the  State 
that  begins  by  sowing  the  seed  of  national  neglect  of 
God,  will  sooner  or  later  reap  a  harvest  of  national 
disaster  and  national  ruin.  If  Disestablishment  comes, 
it  will  do  no  hurt  to  the  true  Church  of  Christ,  the  body 
of  real  believers :  that  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  man  to 
harm.  It  will  do  little  comparative  injury  to  the  visible 
Episcopal  Church  of  England :  though  impoverished  and 
crippled  in  many  ways,  she  will  still  live  and  not  die. 
But  it  will  do  boundless  harm  to  the  State,  and  in  the 
end  will  prove  the  ruin  of  all  our  greatness. 

I  have  now  considered  the  subject  of  this  paper  to  the 
best  of  my  ability.  I  have  done  it  honestly  and  con 
scientiously,  and  have  carefully  avoided  any  exaggeration. 
It  only  remains  for  me  to  wind  up  the  whole  subject  by 
a  few  words  of  friendly  advice  to  the  various  classes  into 
whose  hands  the  paper  may  fall. 

(1)  Some  of  my  readers  may  perhaps  be  men  who 
make  no  profession  whatever  in  religion,  and  care  neither 
for  Church  nor  chapel.  I  fear  there  are  many  such 
men  in  the  land,  and  I  suppose  there  always  will  be. 
Pilate,  who  asked  sneeringly,  "  What  is  truth  ? " — Gallic, 
who  thought  Christianity  was  only  a  "matter  of  words 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  343 

and  names," — Festus,  who  thought  it  a  "superstition 
concerning  one  Jesus," — all  these  have  never  wanted 
successors.  Men  of  this  sort,  of  course,  do  not  care  a 
jot  whether  the  Church  of  England  is  disestablished  or 
not.  "  It  is  all  the  same  to  them.  Eeligion  is  not  a 
thing  in  their  way."  Yet  even  to  these  men  I  offer  a 
word  of  counsel. 

Are  you  quite  sure  that  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to 
have  less  religion  in  England  than  there  is  now  ?  Of 
course,  if  the  Church  is  disestablished  and  impoverished, 
there  will  be  less.  Now  are  you  quite  sure  you  will  like 
this  ?  Do  you  wish  your  wife,  your  children,  your 
servants,  your  clerks,  your  tenants,  your  labourers,  your 
partners  in  business,  to  have  less  religion  and  to  become 
more  godless  than  they  are  now  ?  I  should  like  that 
question  to  be  answered. 

If  you  do  not  wish  this  state  of  things  to  arise,  I  advise 
you  to  think  twice  before  you  allow  the  English  Church 
Establishment  to  be  destroyed,  and  the  tithes  and  land  to 
be  taken  away.  Say  what  men  please,  this  must  have 
the  effect  of  weakening  the  Church,  lessening  the  number 
of  her  clergy,  and  reducing  the  whole  quantity  of  religion 
in  the  country  to  a  lower  level.  A  tree  once  felled  and 
cut  down  can  never  be  put  up  again,  and  its  shade  and 
beauty  may  be  regretted  in  vain.  If  you  stand  by  and 
look  on  with  folded  arms,  careless  and  unconcerned,  while 
men  are  sawing  in  two  the  connection  of  Church  and 
State,  you  may  live  to  find  out  too  late  that  you  committed 
a  fatal  mistake. 

(2)  Some  of  my  readers  may  be  zealous  Churchmen,  who 
really  believe  it  would  be  a  good  thing  if  the  Church  was 
disestablished.  There  are  many  men  of  this  class  in 
England,  some  very  "high,"  and  some  very  "low"  in 
opinion,  who  are  continually  building  castles  in  the  air 
about  the  "  Church  of  the  future."  They  have  pleasing 


344  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

visions  of  a  free,  rich,  and  powerful  Church,  no  longer 
fettered  by  connection  with  the  State,  guided  by  perfect 
Bishops,  no  longer  interfered  with  by  naughty  Parliaments 
and  wicked  Courts  of  law,  possessing  perfect  unity,  and 
able  to  do  a  hundred  things  which  it  cannot  do  now.  To 
these  amiable  and  well-meaning  enthusiasts  I  offer  a  word 
of  counsel. 

I  will  ask  them  to  remember  two  old  proverbs.  One 
says,  "All  is  not  gold  that  glitters."  The  other  says, 
"  Look  before  you  leap."  A  free  Church  is  a  fine  thing 
to  talk  about ;  but  it  is  not  always  so  free  as  it  appears. 
There  are  other  chains  and  screw-presses  beside  those  of 
Parliament,  secular  law-courts,  and  the  Eoyal  supremacy. 
The  frogs  in  the  fable  found  fault  with  "King  Log," 
because  he  lay  still  like  a  huge  inert  mass,  and  did 
nothing  at  all.  But  they  soon  found  that  "  King  Stork  " 
was  much  worse.  Appeals  to  Courts  of  law  will  not  be 
prevented  by  Disestablishment.  So  long  as  there  are 
rights  and  wrongs,  and  questions  of  place  and  salary, 
so  long  the  English  courts  of  law  will  be  open  to 
Episcopalians  who  want  redress.  A  diminution  of 
ministerial  incomes  is  a  very  serious  matter,  and  it  will 
certainly  accompany  Disestablishment  in  rural  parishes, 
to  the  great  damage  of  the  Church's  power.  Let  no 
Churchman  dream  for  a  moment  that  there  will  ever  be 
Disestablishment  without  Disendowment. — Last,  but  not 
least,  unity  will  not  be  obtained  by  dissolving  the  con 
nection  of  Church  and  State.  There  will  be  divisions 
of  opinion  among  English  Episcopalians  after  Dis 
establishment,  and  perhaps  far  more  serious  ones  than 
there  ever  were  before.  Look  at  the  American  Epis 
copalian  Church  across  the  Atlantic.  They  have  no 
connection  with  the  State.  But  they  have  not  attained 
perfect  unity. 

It  is  an  utter  delusion  to  suppose  that  Disestablish- 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  345 

ment  is  the  only  cure  for  the  Church's  defects  and  abuses. 
Of  all  common  cries  in  this  day,  I  know  none  so  un 
reasoning  and  foolish  as  thi».  I  grant  freely,  as  I  have 
already  said,  that  we  have  many  things  in  the  Church 
of  England  which  might  be  altered  for  the  better.  Our 
dioceses  might  be  divided,  our  Convocation  reconstructed, 
our  cathedrals  made  more  useful,  our  services  made 
more  simple  and  better  suited  to  the  times.  But  why, 
in  the  name  of  common  sense,  should  we  not  try  to 
obtain  all  these  Church  reforms  without  Disestablish 
ment  ?  Why  not  try  to  correct  our  abuses  without 
dissolving  the  union  of  Church  and  State  ?  I  have  read 
of  an  Asiatic  potentate  who  never  tasted  roast  pig,  till  a 
day  came,  when  his  house  was  accidentally  set  on  fire,  and 
his  pig-sty  with  its  squeaking  inmates  burned.  He  found 
the  taste  of  roast  pig  so  good  that  he  resolved  to  repeat 
the  feast  in  the  following  week,  by  the  curious  plan  of 
ordering  another  house  with  a  pig-sty  to  be  burned.  And 
this  process  went  on,  the  story  goes,  for  several  weeks, 
till  at  last  some  one  suggested  that  he  might  easily  have 
roast  pig  without  burning  a  house.  This  potentate,  most 
men  will  agree  with  me,  was  not  very  wise.  But  I 
really  think  he  was  not  one  bit  more  foolish  than  those 
folks  who  tell  us  that  we  cannot  reform  the  Church 
without  disestablishing  it !  At  any  rate,  let  us  first  try 
to  roast  the  pig  in  the  common  way,  before  we  adopt  the 
rude  and  coarse  plan  of  setting  the  house  on  fire. 

In  short,  I  advise  my  zealous  brethren  in  the  Church 
of  England,  who  are  hungering  and  thirsting  for  Dis 
establishment,  to  be  content  with  such  things  as  they 
have,  to  let  well  alone,  and  to  do  nothing  rashly.  It  is 
not  a  friend,  but  an  enemy,  who  is  whispering  to  them, 
"  Break  off  the  union  of  Church  and  State, — cast  thyself 
down."  Let  them  ask  the  wisest  Episcopalians  in  the 
United  States  and  in  the  Colonies  whether  they  advise 


346  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Disestablishment,  and  think  it  desirable !  Let  them 
beware,  lest  they  learn  too  late,  by  painful  experience, 
the  wisdom  contained  in  the  famous  epitaph : — "  I  was 
well :  I  would  be  better :  I  took  physic,  and  here  I  am." 
I  always  think  of  that  epitaph  when  I  hear  an  English 
Churchman  expressing  a  wish  for  Disestablishment. 

(3)  Some  of  my  readers  perhaps  are  honest  Dissenters, 
who  have  been  told  by  the  itinerant  advocates  of  the 
Liberationist  Society,  that  it  is  a  Christian  duty  to 
endeavour  to  disestablish  the  Church  of  England.  Their 
ears  have  been  filled  with  monstrous  stories  about  the 
Church,  until  they  regard  her  as  a  huge  public  nuisance 
which  ought  to  be  swept  away.  To  them  also  I  tender  a 
few  words  of  friendly  advice.. 

I  may  fairly  ask  to  be  heard  by  Dissenters.  I  am, 
and  always  have  been,  what  is  called  a  "  Low  Churchman/' 
I  have  never  in  my  life  interfered  with  Dissenters,  or 
turned  a  cold  shoulder  upon  them.  I  have  never  refused 
to  acknowledge  non-Episcopal  services.  I  have  never 
denied  that  Dissenters  have  done  and  are  doing  much 
good  to  souls.  I  have  never  vilified  them  or  denounced 
them  as  schismatics.  To  none  of  these  things  will  I 
plead  guilty.  When,  therefore,  I  offer  a  word  of  advice 
to  Dissenters,  I  may  ask  to  be  patiently  heard. 

I  advise  them,  for  one  thing,  to  use  their  own  good 
sense,  and  not  to  believe  all  the  gross  misstatements 
that  some  Liberationists  are  continually  making  about 
the  Church  of  England.  It  is  utterly  untrue  that  Dis 
establishment  would  enable  the  State  to  save  twenty-six 
millions  of  annual  taxes.  The  whole  endowments  of  the 
Church  are  not  five  millions  a  year ! — It  is  utterly  untrue 
that  the  Bishops  are  rolling  in  wealth,  and  the  clergy  are 
overpaid.  The  Bishops  have  so  many  demands  on  their 
purses  that  they  can  hardly  make  both  ends  meet,  and 
the  clergy,  if  incomes  were  divided,  would  not  have 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  347 

three  hundred  a  year  a-piece ! — It  is  utterly  untrue  that 
the  clergy  are  paid  by  the  State,  or  that  the  people  are 
taxed  to  pay  the  clergy:  the  State  never  gave  the 
Church  any  tithes  or  lands  at  all ! — It  is  utterly  untrue 
that  the  Bishops  and  clergy  are  "  State-made  parsons," 
seeing  that  the  State  cannot  ordain  any  minister,  and  the 
Crown  can  only  nominate  as  Bishops  men  who  are 
already  ordained. — It  is  utterly  untrue  that  the  Church 
prayers  are  "  State-made  prayers,"  seeing  that  the  Prayer- 
book  was  compiled  by  our  Protestant  Eeformers. — It  is 
utterly  untrue  that  the  Prayer-book  is  a  mere  Popish 
book,  considering  that  the  greater  part  of  it  is  pure 
Scripture. — All  these  things  are  ridiculous  untruths, 
which  it  is  a  shame  for  any  man  to  circulate,  and  a 
discredit  to  any  man  to  believe.  May  I  not  ask  honest 
Dissenters,  when  they  hear  statements  such  as  these,  to 
exercise  their  own  good  sense,  and  to  put  the  simple 
question,  "  Is  this  really  true  ? "  A  cause  which  can 
only  be  built  on  a  foundation  of  gross  misstatements 
is  a  very  unsatisfactory  cause  to  support.  A  readiness 
to  believe  falsehoods  is  not  a  nice  character !  If  there 
is  anything  God  hates,  it  is  falsehood.  "  Thou  shalt  not 
bear  false  witness  "  is  a  commandment  not  yet  repealed. 

For  another  thing,  I  advise  all  honest  Dissenters  to  use 
their  own  common  sense,  and  to  make  a  proper  distinction 
between  a  system  and  the  faults  of  those  who  work  a 
system.  No  doubt  many  clergymen  are  worldly,  careless, 
unconverted  men.  No  doubt  the  endowments  of  the 
Established  Church  are  not  always  well  employed.  No 
doubt  some  clergymen  are  half-sceptics  and  some  are  half- 
Papists.  No  doubt  some  parishes,  both  in  town  and 
country,  are  sadly  neglected.  But  all  this  does  not  prove 
that  the  principle  of  an  Established  Church  is  wrong. 
This  state  of  things  will  not  be  cured  by  dissolving  the 
union  of  Church  and  State.  Are  all  Dissenting  ministers 


348  PRINCIPLES  FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

converted  men  ?  Do  no  Dissenting  ministers  ever  spend 
their  incomes  badly  ?  Are  all  Dissenting  ministers 
entirely  sound  in  the  faith,  and  free  from  any  erroneous 
doctrine  ?  These  are  unpleasant  questions,  and  I  have  no 
wish  to  press  them.  But  there  is  an  old  proverb  which 
says,  "  Those  who  live  in  glass  houses  should  not  throw 
stones."  The  abuse  of  a  thing  is  no  argument  against  the 
use  of  it.  The  occasional  inconsistency,  or  unsoundness 
of  clergymen,  in  so  large  a  Church  as  the  Established 
Church  of  England,  with  20,000  ministers  in  its  pale, 
supplies  no  proof  that  the  principle  of  an  Establishment 
is  wrong  and  unsound. 

I  advise  honest  Dissenters,  for  another  thing,  to  remem 
ber  the  broad  fact  that  many  of  their  forefathers  and 
predecessors,  among  Nonconformists,  were  strongly  in 
favour  of  an  Established  Church,  and  never  admitted  the 
principle  that  Governments  ought  to  ignore  God,  and  have 
nothing  to  do  with  religion.  Owen,  and  Baxter,  and 
Flavel,  and  Howe,  and  Matthew  Henry,  were  men  of 
whom  Nonconformists  are  justly  proud.  They  were  men 
whose  names  would  do  honour  to  the  rolls  of  any  Christian 
Church.  Yet  every  one  of  these  good  men  was  strongly  in 
favour  of  the  connection  between  Church  and  State.  No 
men  loved  religious  liberty  more.  None  contended  more 
earnestly  against  the  narrow  -  minded  requirements  of 
Churchmen  in  their  day,  and  made  more  sacrifices  for 
Nonconformity  than  these  good  men.  Yet  none  of  them 
ever  dreamed  of  maintaining  that  the  connection  of 
Church  and  State  was  "  an  adulterous  connection,"  or  that 
Governments  had  nothing  to  do  with  religion.  Alas,  we 
may  well  say,  "  How  is  the  fine  gold  become  dim  ! "  I 
firmly  believe  that  if  Owen,  Baxter,  Howe,  Flavel,  and 
Matthew  Henry  could  rise  from  their  graves  this  day, 
they  would  be  among  the  foremost  opponents  of  the 
liberationist  Society. 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  349 

I  ask  honest  Dissenters  in  the  last  place  to  consider 
quietly  what  one  single  grievance  they  labour  under  now, 
— what  disability,  what  hardship,  what  disadvantage, — 
which  would  be  removed  by  Disestablishment.  Let  them 
name  one  if  they  can.  I  declare  I  cannot  put  my  finger 
on  one.  They  may  possibly  complain  that  Nonconformist 
ministers  are  not  made  so  much  of  as  Church  ministers, 
and  do  not  occupy  so  high  a  social  position.  Well,  if 
that  really  is  a  grievance,  I  defy  them  to  show  how 
Disestablishment  would  remove  it.  I  repeat,  emphatically, 
that  until  Dissenters  can  persuade  the  great  bulk  of  the 
English  people  to  give  up  Episcopacy  and  the  Liturgy, 
and  to  become  Baptists,  Independents,  Presbyterians,  or 
Methodists, — until  they  can  do  this,  I  say,  they  will  never 
prevent  the  bulk  of  Churchmen  making  much  of  their 
own  ministers,  and  giving  them  a  social  precedence.  The 
alleged  grievance  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  connection 
of  Church  and  State,  and  Disestablishment  would  cer 
tainly  not  take  it  away.  Why,  then,  cannot  Dissenters 
keep  quiet,  and  let  the  Church  alone  ? 

(4)  And  now,  last  of  all,  this  tract  may  perhaps  be 
read  by  some  honest  Churchmen  who  are  content  with 
the  present  relations  of  Church  and  State,  and  have  no 
wish  to  see  them  changed.  To  them  also  I  shall  offer  a 
word  of  advice,  and  I  earnestly  hope  it  may  not  be  thrown 
away. 

For  one  thing,  we  must  awake  to  a  sense  of  the  danger 
in  which  we  stand  just  now,  and  must  work  hard  to  oppose 
our  enemies.  There  is  no  safety  in  apathy.  If  others 
combine,  we  must  combine.  If  others  agitate,  we  must 
boldly  resist  the  agitation.  If  others  assert  falsehoods, 
we  must  assert  truth.  If  others  flood  the  country  with 
cheap  tracts  and  leaflets  attacking  the  Church,  we  must 
meet  the  attack  by  a  counter-flood  of  cheap  literature  in 
the  Church's  defence.  "  Defence,  not  Defiance,"  must  be 


350  PRINCIPLES   FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

our  motto.  Controversies  and  conflicts  with  other  pro 
fessing  Christians  are  odious  things.  But  the  conduct  of 
the  Liberationists  seems  likely  to  leave  us  no  alternative. 
If  they  will  not  let  us  alone,  we  must  fight. 

We  have  nothing  whatever  to  fear  for  the  connection 
of  Church  and  State,  if  Churchmen  will  only  awake,  arise, 
and  do  their  duty.  Twenty  thousand  clergymen  and  ten 
million  laymen  are  a  force  which  the  Liberationist  Society 
ought  never  to  overthrow.  But  we  must  combine, 
organize,  work,  write,  speak,  and  spread  information ; 
and,  above  all,  we  must  not  go  to  sleep.  The  Churchman 
who  folds  his  arms  in  our  camp,  and  says,  "  Peace,  peace  ! 
anything  for  a  quiet  life ;  let  things  take  their  course  ! " 
may  be  a  very  nice,  amiable  Churchman,  but  he  is  no 
true  friend  to  the  Church  of  England.  I  dread  the 
laziness  of  Churchmen  more  than  the  whole  attack  of  the 
Liberationist  Society. 

For  another  thing,  if  we  would  prevent  Disestablish 
ment,  we  must  spare  no  pains  to  reform  the  Church  of 
England.  We  need  reform :  there  is  no  mistake  about 
that.  Our  unreformed  abuses  are  the  worst  foes  of  the 
union  of  Church  and  State.  Our  large  undivided  dio 
ceses,  our  too  often  useless  cathedrals,  our  anomalous  and 
ill-constituted  Convocation,  our  want  of  elasticity  in 
liturgical  worship,  our  shiftless  adherence  to  old-fashioned 
modes  of  evangelization,  our  helpless  inability  to  arrange 
systematic  co-operation  of  clergy  and  laity,  our  barbarous 
Ecclesiastical  Courts,  our  grossly  defective  discipline, — all 
these,  and  not  a  few  more,  are  weak  points  in  our  line  of 
defence,  which  skilful  enemies  are  not  slow  to  detect. 
They  are  points  in  which  reform  would  not  be  difficult,  if 
the  matter  was  not  trifled  with,  but  heartily  and  earnestly 
taken  up.  Oh  that  God  would  raise  up  among  us  some 
powerful,  wise,  energetic  Church  reformer !  Church  reform 
is  one  of  the  best  bulwarks  against  Church  Disestablishment, 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  351 

We  all  know  what  is  done  on  board  a  man-of-war  when 
an  enemy  is  in  sight,  and  an  action  is  about  to  begin.  The 
decks  are  cleared ;  the  lumber  is  thrown  overboard ;  every 
man  is  sent  to  his  quarters ;  useless  passengers  and  non- 
combatants  are  put  under  hatches,  or  consigned  to  the 
hold.  It  is  high  time  to  do  the  same  with  the  Church 
of  England,  if  the  struggle  for  Disestablishment  is  at 
hand.  It  is  nonsense  to  ignore  the  weak  points  in 
our  system.  We  have  weak  points,  and  they  are 
part  of  the  strength  of  our  adversaries.  Let  us 
strive  to  get  rid  of  them  without  delay.  Let  us 
resolutely  and  energetically  take  up  the  subject  of  Church 
Reform. 

I  leave  the  whole  subject  now  with  feelings  of  sorrow. 
I  grieve  to  think  that  English  Protestant  Christians  should 
be  on  the  point  of  wasting  time,  and  energy,  and  strength, 
and  talents  in  such  a  miserable,  unprofitable  controversy 
as  this  about  Disestablishment !  If  ever  there  was  a  time 
when  British  Christians  should  cease  from  controversy, 
and  unite  as  one  man,  in  order  to  resist  the  rising  flood 
of  Popery  and  infidelity,  that  time  is  now.  Yet  this  is 
the  very  time  when  the  Liberationist  body  chooses  to  stir 
up  strife  all  over  England,  for  the  most  useless  and  un 
profitable  cause  in  the  world, — a  cause  in  which  their 
success  will  do  good  to  nobody,  and  do  harm  to  many! 
Well,  be  it  so !  The  Liberationists  are  sowing  the 
wind,  and  they  must  reap  the  whirlwind.  They  are  the 
first  to  begin  the  miserable  strife,  and  the  blame  of  all 
the  wretched  consequences  must  lie  at  their  door.  But 
when  I  think  of  the  ill  feeling  they  are  stirring  up,  the 
angry  passions  that  will  be  called  forth,  the  hard  words 
that  will  be  spoken,  the  divisions  that  will  be  made  for 
ever  in  parishes,  if  they  succeed,  the  sin  that  will  be 
caused,  the  good  that  will  be  for  ever  stopped,  and  the 
harm  that  will  be  for  ever  done, — when  I  think  of  all 


352  PKINCIPLES    FOE    CHURCHMEN. 

this,  I  cannot  help  saying  with  a  wise  old  statesman, 
"  Why  cannot  you  let  things  alone  ?" 

The  following  letter  hy  Mr.  Spurgeon  deserves  the 
attention  of  all  who  think  that  the  voluntary  system  is  a 
success  among  the  Baptists  in  the  rural  districts.  It  was 
written  in  1867. 


"  An  JZpistle  to  the  Members  of  the  Baptized  Churches 
of  Jesus  Christ. 

"  BELOVED  BRETHREN, — An  exceedingly  great  and  bitter  cry  has  gone 
up  unto  heaven  concerning  many  of  us.  It  is  not  a  cry  from  the  world 
which  hates  us,  nor  from  our  fellow-members  whom  we  may  have  offended, 
but  (alas  that  it  should  be  so  !)  it  is  wrung  from  hundreds  of  poor  but 
faithful  ministers  of  Christ  Jesus  who  labour  in  our  midst  in  word  and 
doctrine,  and  are  daily  oppressed  by  the  niggardliness  of  churls  among  us. 
.  ,  .  Hundreds  of  our  ministers  would  improve  their  circumstances  if 
they  were  to  follow  the  commonest  handicrafts.  The  earnings  of  artisans 
of  but  ordinary  skill  are  far  above  the  stipends  of  those  among  us  who  are 
considered  to  be  comfortably  maintained.  .  .  .  "We  are  asked  repeatedly 
to  send  students  to  spheres  where  £40  is  mentioned  as  if  it  were  com 
petence,  if  not  more,  and  those  who  so  write  are  not  always  farm-labourers, 
but  frequently  tradesmen,  who  must  know  what  penury  £40  implies.  A 
church  contributing  £70  frequently  counts  itself  munificent,  but  many  of 
its  members  must  know  that  such  a  sum  is  not  respectability,  nor  much 
less  than  hard,  pinching,  but  covert  want.  I  heard  the  other  day 
of  a  minister — whose  congregation  would  be  shocked  to  know  it,  and  I 
hope  ashamed  also — who  very  seldom  sees  a  joint  of  meat,  except  on 
other  people's  tables,  and  is  indebted  to  gifts  from  friends  in  other  deno 
minations  for  parcels  of  left-off  clothing,  which  are  made  up  for  his 
otherwise  ragged  children.  With  desperate  self-denial  alone  is  he  kept 
from  debt ;  comfort  he  never  knows.  If  these  things  needed  to  be  so,  it 
were  a  theme  of  rejoicing  that  our  brethren  are  honoured  to  endure  hard 
ness  for  Christ's  sake  ;  but  these  are  in  many  cases  needless  hardships,  and 
should  not  be  inflicted  upon  our  honoured  brethren.  If  their  Master  called 
them  to  it,  well  and  good  ;  but  it  is  not  the  Master,  it  is  the  thoughtless 
fellow-servant  who  puts  them  to  so  severe  a  trial.  Persuaded  that  a  great 
reform  is  needed,  I  propose  to  publish  such  cases  of  deep  necessity  as  may 
be  supplied  to  me  by  Baptist  ministers,  and  are  well  authenticated.  The 
names  and  addresses  shall  be  sacredly  kept  secret,  but  the  facts  shall 
be  published,  that  holy  shame  may  induce  a  speedy  amendment.  Any 


DISESTABLISHMENT.  353 

person  can  reprint  this  article,  and  the  more  widely  it  is  distributed  the 
better.  I  speak  not  without  abundant  cause.  I  am  no  retailer  of  base 
less  scandal.  I  am  no  advocate  for  an  idle  and  ill-deserving  ministry.  I 
open  my  mouth  for  a  really  earnest,  godly,  laborious,  gracious  body  of 
men,  who  are  men  of  God,  and  approved  of  His  Church.  Are  these  for 
ever  to  be  starved?  Shall  the  ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn  be 
always  muzzled?  Shall  he  who  planted  the  vineyard  eat  none  of  its 
fruit  ?  It  is  our  shame  as  Baptists,  to  be  mean  towards  our  pastors. 
Brethren,  help  to  roll  away  this  reproach  at  once  and  for  ever. 

"C.  H.  SPUKGEON." 
— The  Sword  and  the  Trowel,  vol.  iii.  pp.  17-20. 


XV. 

THE  LESSONS  OF  ENGLISH  CHUECH  HISTOEY. 

I  FEAR  the  title  of  this  paper  is  not  very  attractive  or 
inviting.  History  is  notoriously  regarded  as  a  dry,  dull, 
and  uninteresting  subject.  It  is  an  awkward  fact  which 
is  related  in  the  book  of  Esther,  that  on  the  night  when 
King  Ahasuerus  could  not  sleep,  he  commanded  his 
servants  to  read  him  "  the  book  of  records  of  the 
chronicles."  (Esther  vi.  1.) 

But  surely  this  ought  not  to  be  so.  The  study  of 
history,  and  specially  of  Church  history,  ought  always  to 
be  interesting  to  a  Christian  mind.  What  is  history  but 
philosophy  teaching  by  examples  ?  What  so  common  as 
the  remark  of  wise  men,  that  history  often  repeats  itself  ? 
What  is  so  likely  to  show  us  what  we  may  expect  from 
human  nature  in  our  own  times,  as  an  accurate  knowledge 
of  the  workings  of  human  nature  in  times  past  ?  Let 
me  try  to  show  my  readers  that  there  are  some  deeply 
interesting  lessons  to  be  learned  from  English  Church 
History. 

I  have  chosen  this  particular  subject  because  of  the 
times  in  which  we  live,  and  the  critical  position  of  the 
Church  of  England.  It  is  notorious  that  the  English 
Establishment  is  distracted,  vexed,  and  almost  rent  in 
twain  by  the  rise  and  progress  of  what  is  commonly 

354 


THE    LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.       355 

called  Ritualism.  The  growth  of  this  school  of  opinion 
within  our  pale  is  calculated  to  inflict  serious  damage  on 
our  heloved  Church.  How  to  oppose  it  most  wisely,  and 
meet  it  most  successfully,  demands  the  best  attention  of 
all  faithful  Churchmen.  To  supply  Churchmen  with 
a  few  good  historical  arguments  for  opposing  Ritualism, 
to  show  them  a  few  good  reasons  why  it  ought  to  be 
firmly  rejected,  is  one  great  object  of  this  paper. 

I  need  not  say  that  the  first  and  foremost  argument  to 
be  used  against  Ritualism,  or  any  other  religious  error,  is 
the  Bible.  "To  the  law  and  the  testimony!"  What 
saith  the  Scripture  ?  If  the  advocates  of  Ritualism  can 
show  us  that  its  peculiar  tenets — viz.  the  real  presence, 
the  practice  of  auricular  confession,  the  use  of  incense, 
sacrificial  vestments,  processions,  lights  on  the  communion 
table,  and  adoration  of  the  consecrated  elements  in  the 
Lord's  Supper — are  things  taught  in  the  New  Testament, 
as  practised  by  the  Apostles,  I  am  ready  to  become  a 
Ritualist  to-day.  They  have  never  shown  it,  and  they 
never  will.  These  things  are  not  in  the  Book. 

The  second  argument  to  be  used  against  Ritualism  is 
the  Church's  authorized  confession  of  faith,  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles.  These  Articles  are  distinctly  recognised 
by  the  Statute  Law  of  England  as  the  Church's  test  of 
sound  doctrine.  The  testimony  of  these  Articles,  on 
most  of  the  leading  points  of  the  Ritualistic  creed,  is 
decidedly  Protestant  and  evangelical.  The  advocates  of 
Ritualism  know  that  full  well !  "No  wonder  they  often 
call  the  Articles  "  the  forty  stripes  save  one." 

The  third  argument  against  Ritualism  is  the  Church's 
authorized  manual  of  devotion,  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer.  Let  that  good  old  book,  to  use  the  words  of  its 
own  Preface,  "  be  allowed  such  just  and  favourable  con 
struction  as  in  common  equity  ought  to  be  allowed  to  all 
human  writings."  Let  it  be  fairly,  honestly,  and  equitably 


356  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

interpreted,  with  all  the  light  that  the  well-known  opinions 
of  its  compilers  and  the  contemporaneous  exposition  of 
three  centuries  throw  upon  it,  and  we  have  no  fear  for 
the  result.  Let  the  advocates  of  Eitualism,  for  instance, 
show  us  a  single  sentence  in  the  Communion  Office  in 
which  the  communion  table  is  called  an  altar,  or  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  called  a  sacrifice,  or  adoration  of  the 
consecrated  elements  is  enjoined.  Let  them  explain  away, 
if  they  can,  that  most  incisive  Kuhric  which  follows  the 
Communion  Service,  and  declares  that  "  the  natural  body 
and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ  are  in  heaven  and  not 
here,"  —  and  that  "the  sacramental  bread  and  wine 
remain  still  in  their  very  natural  substances,  and  there 
fore  may  not  be  adored ;  for  that  were  idolatry,  to  be 
abhorred  of  all  faithful  Christians."  Error  about  the 
Lord's  Supper,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  assert,  is  the  corner 
stone  of  the  whole  Eitualistic  system.1  To  that  error 
the  Prayer-book,  fairly  interpreted,  affords  no  sanction 
at  all. 

But  after  all,  there  is  one  more  argument  against 
Eitualism  which  seldom  receives  the  attention  which  it 
deserves.  That  argument  is  to  be  found  in  the  lessons 
of  English  Church  History.  To  point  out  what  those 
lessons  are,  to  show  the  conclusions  to  which  an  impartial 
study  of  English  History  ought  to  lead  every  unprejudiced 
mind,  is  the  aim  which  I  propose  to  myself  in  this 
paper. 

Let  me  clear  the  way  by  explaining  what  I  am  about 
to  do.  Let  no  reader  suppose  for  a  moment  that  I  am  going 
to  wade  through  the  jungles  of  obscure  antiquity,  or  to 
deluge  him  with  dry  disquisitions  about  pre-historic  times. 
Whether  St.  Paul  ever  preached  in  England  or  not; 
whether  there  ever  was  a  flourishing  ancient  British 

1  Those  who  care  to  examine  the  controversy  about  the  Lord's  Supper 
are  invited  to  read  the  note  which  concludes  this  paper. 


THE    LESSONS    OF   ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.       357 

Church;  whether  Augustine  of  Canterbury  was  an 
apostolic  man  or  an  ambitious  meddler;  whether  there 
was  much  vital  religion  in  the  days  of  Alfred,  and  Bede, 
and  Edmund,  and  Canute,  and  Harold,  and  William  the 
Conqueror, — all  these  are  points  which  I  shall  leave 
alone.  I  shall  confine  myself  strictly  to  the  Church 
History  of  the  last  six  hundred  and  fifty  years, — a  period 
in  which  the  Eeformation  stands  about  midway.  From 
the  history  of  these  six  hundred  and  fifty  years  I  shall 
try  to  draw  out  five  most  instructive  lessons, — lessons 
built  on  great,  wide,  broad,  unmistakable  facts,  which 
seem  to  my  eyes  as  clear  as  the  sun  at  noon-day. 
Whether  my  readers  will  find  them  interesting  I  do  not 
yet  know.  If  they  do  not,  I  can  only  declare  my  belief 
that  the  fault  will  not  lie  in  the  facts,  but  in  my  way  of 
putting  them. 

I.  The  first  period  of  English  Church  History  from 
which  I  shall  draw  a  lesson,  consists  of  the  three  hundred 
years  which  immediately  preceded  the  Protestant  Eefor 
mation.  It  is  a  period  extending  from  the  reign  of 
Henry  III.  to  that  of  Henry  VIII.  It  is  a  period  when 
the  Church  of  this  land  was  thoroughly,  entirely,  and 
completely  Bonian  Catholic,  when  the  Bishop  of  Koine 
was  the  spiritual  head  of  the  Church,  when  Eomanism 
reigned  supreme  from  the  Isle  of  Wight  to  Berwick-on- 
Tweed,  and  from  the  Land's  End  to  the  North  Foreland, 
when  the  ministers  of  religion  in  England  and  the  people 
were  all  alike  Papists. 

Now  what  is  the  lesson  I  wish  to  draw  from  this 
period  ?  Why,  simply  this :  that  English  religion  was 
never  in  so  dark  and  lad  a  condition  as  it  was  in  the 
days  when  Romanism  had  everything  its  own  way  in 
England. 

The  facts  that  prove  the  truth  of  this  assertion  are 


358  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

so  painfully  numerous  that  it  is  hard  to  say  where  to 
begin  and  where  to  end,  what  to  select  and  what  to 
keep  back.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  for  three 
centuries  before  the  Beforination,  Christianity  in  England 
seems  to  have  been  buried  under  a  mass  of  ignorance, 
superstition,  priestcraft,  and  immorality.  The  likeness 
between  the  religion  of  this  period  and  that  of  the 
apostolic  age  was  so  small,  that  if  St.  Paul  had  risen 
from  the  dead  he  would  hardly  have  called  it  Christianity 
at  all ! 

As  to  ignorance,  there  were  no  English  Bibles  in  the 
land,  except  a  few  in  Wycliffe's  time,  and  few  of  the 
priests  could  have  told  men  what  the  Bible  contained. 
The  facts  which  were  brought  to  light  on  Bishop  Hooper's 
visitation  of  the  diocese  of  Gloucester,  in  the  time  of 
Edward  VI.,  are  sufficient  proof  of  what  I  say.  Out 
of  311  clergy  of  his  diocese  he  found  168  unable  to 
repeat  the  ten  commandments !  The  worship,  so  called, 
consisted  of  services  in  Latin,  which  nobody  hardly 
understood,  masses,  and  prayers  to  the  Virgin  and  the 
saints.  The  practical  religion  of  most  lay  people  was 
made  up  of  occasional  almsgiving,  mass-attending,  penance, 
absolution,  and  extreme  unction  at  the  last.  Preaching 
there  was  hardly  any,  and  what  there  was  was  unscrip- 
tural  rubbish,  and  not  worth  hearing.  In  short,  it  was  a 
period  of  darkness  that  might  be  felt. 

As  to  superstition,  the  worship  of  relics,  images,  and 
dead  men  like  Thomas  a  Becket,  of  itself  speaks  volumes. 
Famine,  we  all  know  from  the  last  siege  of  Paris,  will 
make  starving  men  feed  greedily  on  rats  and  mice,  and 
other  most  loathsome  descriptions  of  food.  Want  of  the 
Bible  will  make  people  accept  the  most  degrading  dogmas 
as  truth,  and  bow  down  to  worship  objects  ludicrous, 
monstrous,  and  profane. 

As  to  priestcraft,   the   tricks   by   which   the   Romish 


THE    LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHUECH    HISTORY.       359 

priests  extorted  money  out  of  people's  pockets  and 
enriched  the  Church,  the  lying  wonders,  impositions,  and 
false  miracles,  are  too  shocking  to  dwell  upon.  The  rood 
or  crucifix  of  Bexley,  which  frowned  when  worshippers 
offered  copper,  and  smiled  when  they  offered  gold, — the 
pretended  blood  of  Christ  at  the  Abbey  of  Hales, — the  pre 
tended  feathers  from  angels'  wings, — the  clothes  of  the 
Virgin  Mary, — and  pieces  of  the  true  cross,  are  enough  to 
stamp  the  priests  who  made  money  by  them,  as  either  fools 
or  knaves.  If  they  believed  these  things  to  be  real  and 
true  objects  of  adoration,  they  were  fools :  if  they  knew 
them  to  be  cheats  and  impositions,  and  yet  took  offerings 
of  money  for  showing  them,  they  were  knaves. 

As  to  immorality,  perhaps  the  less  said  about  the 
matter  the  better.  Abbeys,  monasteries,  and  nunneries, 
an  unmarried  clergy,  and  an  ignorant,  priest-ridden  laity, 
auricular  confession,  and  money-bought  absolution, — all 
these  things  produced  their  natural  fruits.  There  was 
not  a  commandment  of  the  ten  which  men  might  not 
easily  trample  under  foot,  so  long  as  they  kept  in  with 
the  priests,  and  submitted  to  the  Church. 

This  picture  of  the  three  centuries  before  the  Eefor- 
tion,  may  seem  a  black  and  extravagant  one.  I  have 
no  reason  to  think  it  is  a  bit  over-coloured.  The  more 
you  look  into  authentic  and  honest  history,  such  as  the 
works  of  Strype,  Burnet,  and  Blunt,  the  more  you  will 
find  it  is  a  true  and  correct  account.1 

Of  course  my  readers  will  remember  I  am  only  speaking 
of  the  religious  condition  of  the  age.  I  do  not  say  that 
there  were  no  able  statesmen,  and  brave,  honourable 
warriors  in  those  times.  No  doubt  there  were  many, 
just  as  there  were  many  in  the  palmy  days  of  heathen 

1  Calvin's  tract  on  The  Advantages  of  an  Inventory  of  Relics,  is  a 
most  curious  and  instructive  storehouse  of  information  on  Romish  relics, 
and  ought  to  be  better  known  than  it  is. 


360  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Greece  or  Eome.  I  do  not  say  that  ALL  the  clergy  were 
ignorant,  unlearned,  or  immoral.  I  say  nothing  of  the 
kind. 

There  were  clever  ecclesiastical  architects  in  those 
times.  Our  cathedrals  and  old  parish  churches  supply 
abundant  proof  of  that.  Even  now  we  cannot  surpass 
them  in  building  up  material  temples. 

There  were  hard  students  and  deep  thinkers  in  those 
times.  Such  schoolmen  as  Alexander  Hales,  in  1240 
(doctor  irrefragabilis) ;  Koger  Bacon,  in  1280  (doctor 
mirabilis);  Duns  Scotus,  in  1308  (doctor  subtilis) ; 
William  Ockham,  in  1347  (doctor  singularis) ;  Thomas 
Bradwardine,  in  1350  (doctor  profundus),  were  known 
and  respected  all  over  Europe,  however  little  known 
now. 

There  were  stout  opponents  of  the  Pope's  supremacy, 
like  Eobert  Grostete,  Bishop  of  Lincoln.  There  were 
bold  exposers  of  Popish  corruptions,  like  John  Wycliffe, 
who  paved  the  way  for  the  Eeformation,  and  did  good 
in  their  day.  There  were  Lollards  scattered  here  and 
there  all  over  England,  who  held  much  truth,  and 
patiently  endured  much  persecution. 

But  one  swallow  does  not  make  a  summer.  Men  like 
these  were  bright  exceptions,  and  only  made  the  dark 
ness  around  them  more  visible.  The  fact  still  remains, 
that  the  enormous  majority  of  English  clergy  and  people, 
for  the  three  centuries  before  the  Keformation,  were  in 
a  miserable  state  of  superstition,  ignorance,  and  corrup 
tion.  There  was  an  utter  famine  of  vital  Christianity  in 
the  land.  Practically,  the  religion  of  most  Englishmen 
was  Mary-worship,  saint- worship,  and  slavery  to  priests. 
The  true  doctrines  of  Scripture  concerning  Christ  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  were  almost  unknown.  The  truth  about 
repentance,  faith,  conversion,  and  justification  was  nearly 
as  much  lost  sight  of  as  if  it  had  never  existed.  If  you 


THE    LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.       361 

had  taken  the  first  hundred  men  you  could  see  in  the 
streets  of  London,  Norwich,  Bristol,  Exeter,  York,  or 
Leicester,  and  asked  them  separately,  "What  must  a 
man  do  to  be  saved  ? " — I  doubt  whether  five  in  the 
hundred  could  have  given  you  the  right  apostolical 
answer,  if  their  lives  had  depended  on  it. 

Such  was  the  English  Church  when  the  Pope  of 
Eome  had  everything  in  his  own  hands,  and  Romanism 
reigned  supreme  and  undisturbed.  Let  this  lesson  sink 
down  into  your  heart,  and  be  kept  ready  for  use.  Keep 
your  powder  dry.  Listen  not  to  those  people  who  tell 
you  that  the  grand  panacea  for  the  evils  of  this  day  is  a 
revival  of  Catholic  principles.  Listen  not  for  a  moment 
to  those  who  advise  a  return  to  Romish  practices,  and 
hint  at  the  benefits  of  re-union  with  Rome !  Re-union 
with  Rome !  I  cannot  imagine  a  more  monstrous  pro 
position,  and  one  more  thoroughly  condemned  by  the 
teaching  of  history  and  common  sense. 

Tell  those  who  advise  re-union  with  Rome,  that  you 
know  what  Romanism  did  for  England  when  it  ruled 
undisturbed,  and  that  this  is  enough  for  you.  Tell  them 
that  the  beautiful  "  Catholic  system,"  so  called,  was  the 
reign  of  ignorance,  priestcraft,  superstition,  idolatry,  and 
immorality,  and  that  you  have  no  wish  to  return  to  it. 
It  was  tried  for  three  centuries,  and  failed ;  it  was 
weighed  in  the  balances,  and  found  wanting.  It  built 
splendid  churches  of  stone,  but  it  raised  no  living 
temples  to  the  glory  of  God.  Tell  them,  in  short,  that 
the  panacea  for  these  days  is  not  the  revival  of  masses, 
processions,  incense,  monasteries,  nunneries,  sacrificial 
garments,  and  the  confessional;  but  more  preaching  of 
the  Gospel,  more  reading  of  the  Bible,  more  repentance, 
more  faith,  more  holiness.  Tell  them  all  this,  and  you 
will  have  learned  a  good  lesson  from  the  Church  history 
of  the  three  centuries  before  the  Reformation. 


362  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Facts  are  facts,  and  there  is  no  getting  over  the  facts 
of  history.  When  it  is  right  to  forsake  light  for  dark 
ness,  and  truth  for  error,  knowledge  for  ignorance,  purity 
for  impurity,  liberty  for  bondage,  and  good  for  bad,  then, 
and  not  till  then,  it  will  be  time  for  English  Churchmen 
to  talk  of  re-union  with  the  infallible  and  unchangeable 
Church  of  Rome.  In  the  face  of  the  facts  of  English 
Church  history,  I  boldly  say  that  rather  than  go  back  to 
Popery,  the  Church  of  England  had  better  perish  altogether. 

II.  The  next  lesson  from  English  Church  history  to 
which  I  shall  invite  the  attention  of  my  readers,  will  be 
drawn  from  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the 
period  between  1530  and  1600.  That  period  comprises 
the  reigns  of  Henry  VIII.,  Edward  VI.,  Bloody  Mary, 
and  Elizabeth.  Within  these  seventy  years  took  place 
the  mightiest  change  of  thought  and  opinion  which  this 
country  ever  passed  through.  The  chains  which  the 
Popes  of  Eome  had  thrown  around  England,  were  broken 
and  cast  aside.  Englishmen  awoke  from  their  long  sleep, 
and  returned  to  the  Christianity  of  the  Scriptures.  In  a 
word,  England  ceased  to  be  a  Popish  country,  and  became 
Protestant. 

Now  what  is  the  lesson  I  want  men  to  learn  from  this 
part  of  English  Church  history  ?  Why,  simply  this :  I 
want  them  to  settle  in  their  minds  that  the  change  of  these 
seventy  years  is  a  cause  for  unmixed  thankfulness,  and  that 
the  greatest  "blessing  God  has  ever  bestowed  on  this  country 
was  the  Protestant  Reformation.  Hold  fast  that  lesson, 
and  never  let  it  go. 

I  am  sadly  afraid  a  right  estimate  of  the  English 
Reformation  is  not  so  common  as  it  used  to  be.  A  gene 
ration  has  risen  up  in  the  last  fifty  years,  which  either 
reviles  the  Reformers,  or  else  plumes  itself  on  making  an 
idol  of  a  vague  thing  called  "  earnestness,"  and  regarding 


THE    LESSONS    OF   ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTOIIY.        363 

all  differences  of  creeds  as  strifes  of  words.  Some  in 
this  day  are  not  ashamed  to  scoff  at  Cranmer,  Latimer, 
and  other  martyred  Eeformers,  and  labour  to  blacken 
their  characters  and  depreciate  their  work.  Others  do  not 
hesitate  to  tell  you  that  they  think  "earnest"  Papists  quite 
as  good  Christians  as  "  earnest "  Protestants,  and  admire 
Erasmus  as  much  as  Luther,  Gardiner  as  much  as  Hooper, 
and  Queen  Mary  as  much  as  King  Edward  VI.  Let  me, 
in  the  face  of  these  strange  views,  dwell  a  little  on  the 
immense  value  of  the  Protestant  Eeformation,  and  try  to 
point  out  how  deeply  thankful  we  Englishmen  ought  to 
be  for  it. 

I  grant  many  things  without  demur  to  those  who  carp 
at  the  English  Eeformation.  I  grant  that  the  agents  by 
whom  it  was  first  begun  and  carried  out,  were  many  of 
them  most  unsatisfactory  men.  I  am  not  concerned  to 
defend  the  character  of  Henry  VIII.,  or  of  the  courtiers 
of  Edward  VI.,  or  even  of  that  very  arbitrary  lady,  Queen 
Elizabeth.  I  am  not  prepared  to  defend  everything  that 
Cranmer  and  his  companions  did  and  said  in  the  heat  of 
conflict.  I  freely  admit  that  the  Eeformation  was  never 
perfected  and  completed,  and  that  even  the  best  Eeformers 
themselves  were  not  perfect  men. 

But  still,  after  all  these  admissions,  I  firmly  maintain 
that  the  English  Eeformation  was  an  enormous  blessing, 
and  I  pity  the  Englishman  who  cannot  see  it  in  this  light. 
Say  what  men  will  against  it,  there  remain  certain  great 
historical  facts,  which  never  can  be  got  over,  and  I  com 
mend  these  facts  to  the  attention  of  all  who  read  this 
paper. 

I  say  then,  without  hesitation,  that  to  the  Eeformation 
we  owe  an  English  Bible,  and  permission  for  every  one 
to  read  it.  Before  the  Eeformation  the  Bible  was  locked 
up  in  a  dead  language,  and  the  laity  were  discouraged 
from  acquaintance  with  it. — To  the  Eeformation  we  owe 


364  PRINCIPLES    FOE  CHURCHMEN. 

the  revival  of  the  true  doctrine  of  forgiveness  of  sins  by 
simple  faith  in  Christ's  mediation.  Before  it  men  groped 
in  darkness,  amidst  saints,  and  priests,  and  penances,  and 
absolutions,  and  never  got  peace  for  their  souls. — To  the 
Keformation  we  owe  an  English  religious  service  in  every 
parish  throughout  the  land,  which  any  poor  man  can 
understand.  Before  it  the  priests  repeated  prayers  in 
Latin,  and  the  people  worshipped  by  deputy. — To  the 
Keformation  we  owe  the  production  of  a  true  standard  of 
practical  holiness.  Before  it  people  fancied  the  highest 
pitch  of  godliness  was  to  be  a  monk  or  a  nun. — To  the 
Reformation  we  owe  the  assertion  of  the  supremacy  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  as  the  sole  rule  of  faith  and  practice. 
Before  it  there  was  no  certain  standard,  except  that  most 
uncertain  guide  the  "  voice  of  the  Church." — To  the  Ke 
formation  we  owe  the  revival  of  true  preaching  of  the 
Gospel.  Before  it  people  could  learn  nothing  except  from 
forms  and  ceremonies. — To  the  Keformation  we  owe  the 
compilation  of  one  of  the  best  confessions  of  faith  the  world 
has  ever  seen, — the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  Before  it  few 
English  Christians  knew  clearly  what  they  thought  or 
believed. — To  the  Keformation  we  owe  the  simplifying, 
the  purifying,  and  the  popularizing  of  the  whole  Christian 
religion  within  these  realms.  Before  it  the  true  faith 
was  fairly  buried  under  a  mass  of  idolatry,  superstition, 
priestcraft,  and  mystery. — In  a  word,  the  debt  we  owe 
to  the  Keformation  is  so  large  that  the  great  difficulty 
is  to  realize  it  at  all.  It  is  a  debt  of  which  we  can 
form  no  conception  at  this  day,  because  we  can  form  no 
adequate  idea  of  the  state  of  things  from  which  the 
overthrow  of  Popery  delivered  us.  But  this  I  am  bold 
to  say, — whatever  England  is  among  the  nations  of  the 
earth,  as  a  Christian  country,  whatever  political  liberty 
we  enjoy,  whatever  freedom  we  have  in  religion,  whatever 
safety  for  life  and  property  there  is  among  us,  whatever 


THE   LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.       365 

purity  and  happiness  there  is  in  our  homes,  whatever 
protection  and  care  for  the  poor, — we  owe  it,  in  very 
great  measure,  to  the  Protestant  Reformation.  The  man 
that  does  not  see  all  this  is,  in  my  humble  judgment,  a 
very  blind  or  a  very  ungrateful  man. 

Let  this  lesson  of  English  Church  history  sink  down 
into  your  heart,  and  never  forget  it.  Listen  not  to  those 
who,  like  some  of  the  Eitualistic  champions,  are  fond  of 
vilifying  the  Reformation  as  a  "  deformation,"  and  scoffing 
at  the  Reformers  as  "  unredeemed  villains,"  deserving  no 
more  respect  than  Danton,  Marat,  and  Robespierre ! 
Violent  language  like  this  injures  nobody  but  those  who 
use  it.  Of  course,  the  enemies  of  Cranmer,  Ridley, 
Latimer,  and  Hooper  in  this  day  can  easily  point  to 
defects  in  their  characters  and  blemishes  in  their  lives. 
They  were  only  men,  and  as  men  they  were  imperfect. 
But  when  they  have  strained  their  malice  to  the  utter 
most,  they  will  never  find  Englishmen  who  did  more  good 
in  their  day,  lived  better,  died  better,  and  left  a  better 
mark  on  our  country,  than  did  our  martyred  Reformers. 

For  my  own  part,  the  more  I  consider  the  enormous 
difficulties  the  Reformers  had  to  contend  with,  the  self- 
willed,  tyrannical,  inconsistent  conduct  of  Henry  VIII., 
the  tender  years  of  Edward  VI.,  the  bloody,  persecuting 
cruelty  of  Queen  Mary,  the  arbitrary,  compromising  policy 
of  Queen  Elizabeth, — the  more  I  consider  these  things, 
the  more  I  admire  the  English  Reformers.  I  marvel  not 
that  they  did  so  little,  but  that  they  did  so  much.  I 
marvel  not  that  they  were  imperfect  and  committed 
mistakes,  but  that  they  were  what  they  were  and  did 
what  they  did. 

Say  what  men  will,  there  are  facts  which  speak  louder 
than  words.  The  Reformation  found  Englishmen  steeped 
in  ignorance,  and  left  them  in  possession  of  knowledge, 
— found  them  without  Bibles,  and  left  them  with  God's 


366  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Word  in  every  parish, — found  them  in  darkness,  and  left 
them  in  comparative  light, — found  them  priest-ridden 
and  left  them  enjoying  the  liberty  which  Christ  bestows, 
— found  them  strangers  to  the  blood  of  atonement,  to 
faith  and  grace  and  holiness,  and  left  them  with  the  key 
to  the  possession  of  these  things  in  their  hands, — found 
them  blind,  and  left  them  seeing, — found  them  slaves, 
and  left  them  free.  For  ever  let  us  thank  God  for  the 
Eeformation  !  It  lighted  a  candle  which  ought  never  to 
be  extinguished  or  allowed  to  grow  dim. 

III.  The  third  lesson  from  English  Church  history  to 
which  I  shall  invite  the  attention  of  my  readers,  is  taken 
from  the  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  which  immediately 
followed  the  Eeformation.  That  period  includes  the 
reign  of  James  I.  and  Charles  I.,  the  Commonwealth, 
Charles  II.,  James  II.,  "William  and  Mary,  George  I.,  and 
George  II.  Within  it  you  will  find  some  of  the  most 
momentous  events  in  the  history  of  England, — the  over 
throw  of  the  Church  and  Monarchy,  the  Commonwealth, 
the  Eestoration,  the  expulsion  of  the  Nonconformists  in 
1662,  the  Ee volution  which  expelled  the  Stuarts  from  the 
throne,  and  the  final  establishment  of  religious  toleration. 
Taken  altogether,  it  is  a  melancholy  era  in  our  ecclesiastical 
annals.  I  pity  the  Churchman  who  can  examine  it 
without  feelings  of  shame,  sorrow,  and  humiliation. 

Now  what  is  the  lesson  I  learn  from  this  period  ? 
Why,  simply  this :  Departure  from  the  principles  of  the 
Reformation  inflicted  irreparable  injury  on  the  Church  of 
England. 

That  there  was  a  gradual  departure  from  Eeformation 
principles  during  the  seventeenth  century,  is  as  certain 
as  any  fact  in  history.  Under  the  leadership  of  Arch 
bishop  Laud  there  arose  in  England  a  school  of  Church 
men  who  made  no  secret  of  their  want  of  entire  sympathy 


THE   LESSONS    OF   ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.       367 

with  our  Keformers,  and  their  desire  to  make  our  Church 
less  Protestant,  less  evangelical,  less  Calvinistic  (as  they 
called  it),  than  it  was  in  the  days  of  Edward  VI.  and 
Elizabeth.  The  divines  of  this  school  would  have  been 
horrified  if  you  had  called  them  Eomanizers  ;  but  that 
they  were  un-protestantizers  is  a  fact  that  cannot  well  be 
denied.  About  the  doctrines  of  grace,  about  the  sacra 
ment  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  about  the  Episcopal  office, 
about  the  primitive  Church  and  tradition,  about  the  cere 
monials  of  public  worship,  about  the  so-called  impropriety 
of  publicly  attacking  Popery,  about  the  so-called  wicked 
ness  of  Calvinism, — the  tone  of  these  Laudian  divines 
was  peculiar  and  unmistakable.  Their  hearts  were  not 
entirely  with  the  Reformers.  Study  the  religious  litera 
ture  of  this  day,  and  you  will  find  that,  excepting  Hall, 
and  Davenant,  and  Usher,  and  Hopkins,  and  a  very  few 
more,  there  is  hardly  a  Churchman  of  that  day  whose 
writings  have  the  full  taste  of  the  Protestant  Eeforma- 
tion.  You  feel  at  once,  as  you  read  most  of  the  divinity 
of  the  age  of  the  Stuarts,  that  you  have  stepped  into  a 
new  theology,  and  are  in  a  new  atmosphere.  Learning, 
eloquence,  devoutness,  good  reasoning, — all  this  you  will 
find  abundantly  in  the  pages  of  Caroline  divines.  But 
you  miss  the  clear,  distinct,  sharply-cut  doctrinal  system 
of  the  martyred  Fathers  of  the  Church  of  England,  and 
their  immediate  successors.  You  have  landed  on  a  new 
soil,  and  are  breathing  a  new  air.  And  the  explanation 
is  very  simple.  Everywhere,  almost,  under  the  Stuarts, 
the  bishops  and  clergy  gradually  fell  away  from  the  old 
standard  of  the  Eeformation,  and  were  less  thoroughly 
Protestant  than  the  men  of  Edward  VI.'s  and  Elizabeth's 
day. 

Of  course  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  there 
were  not  many  good  and  conscientious  men  among  the 
followers  of  Laud,  and  the  leading  Churchmen  under  the 


368  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

Stuarts.  There  were  many,  I  believe,  who  were  firmly 
persuaded  they  were  doing  the  Church  service  in  drawing 
back  a  little  from  the  standard  of  the  Beformers,  and 
who  thought  they  were  only  making  the  Church  more 
beautiful,  more  primitive,  and  more  excellent,  because 
less  Genevan.  There  were  many  who  really  thought  that 
the  best  way  to  make  men  Churchmen  was  to  compel 
them  to  come  to  church,  and  the  surest  way  to  stop 
Nonconformity  was  to  persecute  Nonconformists.  But  it 
is  a  curious  fact,  and  most  noteworthy  in  these  times, 
that  these  well-meaning  Churchmen  seem  to  have  been 
utterly  blind  to  the  consequences  of  their  movement.  They 
appear  never  to  have  asked  themselves  in  what  light  their 
proceedings  were  regarded  by  others.  They  did  not 
understand  the  English  people.  They  awoke  too  late  to 
find  that  they  had  been  like  children  playing  with  fire. 
They  found  that  the  consequences  of  drawing  back  from 
the  old  paths,  directly  and  indirectly,  were  disastrous, 
mischievous,  and  evil  in  the  extreme.  Let  me  show  you 
what  they  were. 

First,  there  arose  throughout  the  middle  classes  and 
lower  orders  a  spirit  of  thorough  alienation  from  the 
Church  of  England.  The  attempt  to  compel  uniformity 
failed  completely,  as  it  always  will.  Worshippers  must 
be  volunteers,  and  not  pressed  men.  An  impression 
spread  everywhere  that  the  bishops  were  not  true  Pro 
testants  at  heart,  and  could  not  be  trusted.  The  mass 
of  English  people  began  to  dislike  prelates  whom  they 
saw  principally  occupied  in  persecuting  Puritans,  silenc 
ing  preachers,  checking  zeal,  exalting  forms,  deifying 
sacraments,  and  complimenting  Popery.  They  began  to 
hate  the  liturgy  itself,  when  they  saw  it  crammed  down 
men's  throats  by  force,  and  people  persecuted  if  they 
prayed  without  it.  The  multitude  seldom  draws  nice 
distinctions.  It  measures  institutions  chiefly  by  their 


THE    LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.       369 

working  and  administration,  and  cares  little  for  theories 
and  philosophical  principles.  Episcopacy  no  doubt  was 
primitive  and  apostolical,  and  the  liturgy  was  very 
venerable  and  beautiful.  But  little  by  little  English 
men,  between  1600  and  1650,  began  to  connect  Episco 
pacy  with  tyranny,  the  Liturgy  with  formality,  and  the 
Church  of  England  with  Popery,  fines,  imprisonment,  and 
punishments.  When  the  famous  Long  Parliament  met, 
in  the  time  of  Charles  I.,  there  was  a  painful  unanimity 
of  ill-feeling  towards  the  poor  old  Church  of  England. 
The  county  and  borough  members,  with  few  exceptions, 
were  found  for  once  entirely  of  one  mind.  They  were 
thoroughly  dissatisfied  with  the  Church  Establishment, 
and  its  assailants,  both  in  number  and  influence,  com 
pletely  swamped  its  defenders.  And  all  this  was  the 
result  of  retrograding  from  Information  principles. 

But,  unhappily,  want  of  confidence  was  not  the  only 
consequence  of  departure  from  thorough  Protestant 
principles.  The  general  dissatisfaction  culminated  at 
last  in  the  temporary  destruction  of  the  Church  of 
England.  An  ecclesiastical  revolution  took  place,  which 
settled  at  length  into  a  kind  of  reign  of  terror.  The 
pent-up  feelings  of  the  middle  and  lower  orders,  once  let 
loose,  broke  out  into  a  hurricane,  before  which  the  frame 
work  of  the  Church  of  England  was  clean  swept  away. 
Bishops,  and  deans,  and  clergy,  and  liturgy  were  shovelled 
off  the  stage  like  so  much  rubbish.  Good  things  as  well 
as  bad  were  involved  in  one  common  ruin.  A  bloody 
civil  war  broke  out.  Charles  I.  followed  Laud  and 
Strafford  to  the  scaffold.  Everything  in  Church  and 
State  was  turned  upside  down.  Common  order  at  last 
was  only  kept  by  the  iron  hand  of  a  military  dictator, 
that  great  son  of  Anak,  Oliver  Cromwell.  The  crown 
and  the  mitre  and  the  Prayer-book  were  all  alike  excom 
municated,  and  rolled  in  the  dust.  And  all  this  was  the 

2  A 


370  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

result  of  departing  from  the  principles  of  the  Reformation. 
Those  who  led  that  movement  sowed  the  wind  and 
reaped  the  whirlwind. 

Nor  have  we  come  to  the  end  of  the  story.  There 
were  other  indirect  consequences,  of  which  we  feel  the 
bad  effects  down  to  this  day.  The  whole  balance  of 
English  feeling  about  the  Church  of  England  was  com 
pletely  disarranged  and  disturbed,  and  equilibrium  has 
never  been  completely  restored.  A  pendulum  was  set 
swinging  which  has  now  oscillated  violently  for  two 
hundred  years.  First  came  a  strong  reaction  in  favour 
of  the  Church,  when  the  Stuarts  returned  to  the  throne 
after  Cromwell's  death,  having  learned  nothing  and  for 
gotten  nothing.  Moderation  and  toleration  were  then 
thrown  to  the  winds,  and  Episcopalians  proved  that  they 
could  be  as  intolerant  as  the  Nonconformists  of  the  West 
minster  Assembly.  The  wretched  Act  of  Uniformity  was 
passed,  by  which  two  thousand  of  the  best  clergy  of  the 
age  were  turned  out  of  our  pale,  and  lost  to  the  Church 
for  ever.  Then  came  a  long  and  dreary  period  of  exhaus 
tion  and  stagnation,  a  time  during  which  the  Church,  like 
a  torpid  sloth,  existed  and  hung  on  the  State  tree,  but 
scarcely  lived,  moved,  or  breathed.  And  at  last  came 
the  season  of  universal  toleration,  when  Nonconformity 
was  fairly  settled,  legalized,  and  rooted  in  the  land  for 
ever,  and  the  Church  stood  face  to  face  with  myriads  of 
irritated  Dissenters.  And  all  this  was  the  consequence  of 
departure  from  the  old  principles  of  the  Protestant  Refor 
mation. 

Such  are  the  lessons  of  English  Church  history  in  the 
century  and  a  half  after  the  Reformation, — mischief,  irre 
parable  mischief,  arising  out  of  the  retrograde  policy  of 
zealous  but  misguided  Churchmen.  I  trust  these  lessons 
will  sink  down  into  the  hearts  of  my  readers,  and  that 
they  will  know  how  to  use  them. 


THE    LESSONS    OF   ENGLISH    CHURCH   HISTORY.       37 1 

Listen  not  to  those  who  in  the  present  day  are  in 
cessantly  misrepresenting  the  Puritans.  Many  try  to 
persuade  you  that  the  Puritans  were  enemies  to  the 
Church  of  England,  unlearned,  ignorant  fanatics,  who 
hated  alike  the  crown,  the  bishops,  and  the  Prayer-book. 
The  man  who  says  so  only  shows  his  own  ignorance  of 
historical  facts.  With  all  their  many  faults,  the  Puritans 
were  not  so  black  as  they  are  painted.  Charles  II.,  in 
his  declaration  of  21st  October  1660,  admits  that  the 
Puritans  were  not  averse  either  to  Episcopacy  or  a  form 
of  prayer.  With  all  their  errors  and  shortcomings,  the 
Puritans,  as  a  body,  were  better  Churchmen  in  matters 
of  doctrine  than  many  of  the  men  who  drove  them  out 
of  the  Church.  Their  written  works  speak  for  them  to  this 
very  day.  Let  any  intelligent  man  compare  the  works 
of  Laud  and  Heylin,  and  their  companions,  with  those  of 
Owen,  and  Baxter,  and  Manton,  and  Charnock,  arid  Watson, 
and  Brooks,  and  their  fellow-labourers,  and  say  which 
class  of  writers  is  most  in  harmony  with  the  doctrine  of 
the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  Let  him  do  that  honestly,  and 
I  have  no  doubt  whatever  about  the  reply. 

Settle  it  in  your  mind  that  the  large  mass  of  Non 
conformity  which  has  existed  in  England  ever  since  the 
days  of  the  Stuarts  down  to  this  very  day,  is  mainly  the 
result  of  the  stupid  retrograde  policy  of  the  bishops  of 
the  Church  of  England.  The  bulk  of  the  Nonconformists 
of  the  seventeenth  century  would  probably  never  have 
left  our  Church,  if  our  Church  had  not  drawn  back  from 
the  Eeformation.  They  had  no  abstract  dislike  of  Episco 
pacy,  or  a  Liturgy,  or  an  Establishment.  But  they  did 
dislike  the  Eomanizing  tendency  of  our  prelates,  and 
would  not  give  way  to  it.  If  men  like  Cranmer,  and 
Grindal,  and  Abbot,  and  Jewel,  had  been  the  rulers  of 
the  Church,  nine-tenths  of  English  Nonconformity,  I 
believe,  would  never  have  existed.  The  blame,  in  very 


372  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

great  measure,  lies  at  our  own  door.  By  departure  from 
Eeformation  principles  the  Church  cut  off  her  own  hands, 
and  plucked  out  her  own  eyes,  and  inflicted  injuries  on 
herself  which  will  probably  never  be  healed.  To  speak 
plainly,  nine-tenths  of  English  Nonconformity  were  created 
and  built  up  by  the  Church's  own  folly  and  unfaithful 
ness.  We  departed  first  from  the  Eeformation,  and 
retrograded  from  the  sharp-cut  Protestantism  of  the 
Eeformers ;  and  then  the  Nonconformists  departed  from 
us,  and  set  up  for  themselves.  If  we  are  weakened  this 
day  by  the  existence  of  huge  bodies  of  Independents, 
Presbyterians,  and  Baptists  in  our  land,  we  must  remem 
ber  we  ourselves  were  first  to  blame.  If  the  Church  had 
done  her  duty  to  her  children,  and  walked  in  the  steps 
of  Cranmer,  and  Eidley,  and  Latimer,  and  Jewel,  her 
children  in  all  probability  would  never  have  left  her  fold. 

IV.  The  next  period  of  English  Church  history  to 
which  I  shall  invite  the  attention  of  my  readers,  com 
prises  the  interval  between  1730  and  1830,  and  takes  in 
the  reign  of  the  three  last  Georges.  It  is  an  era  which 
witnessed  a  religious  change  in  this  country,  second  only 
in  importance  to  that  of  the  Eeformation.  It  witnessed 
the  rise  and  progress  of  what  is  commonly  called 
Methodism,  and  the  formation  of  the  Evangelical  body 
in  the  Church  of  England. 

Now  what  is  the  lesson  I  want  you  to  learn  from  this 
period  ?  It  is  simply  this :  The  revival  of  Reformation 
principles  in  the  eighteenth  century  was  the  salvation  of 
English  Christianity. 

Few  persons,  unless  they  have  specially  examined  the 
subject,  can  have  any  idea  of  the  low  and  degraded  state  of 
religion  in  England  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
From  the  expulsion  of  the  Puritans  in  1662,  for  a  period 
of  eighty  or  ninety  years,  the  Church  of  Christ  in  England 


THE  LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHUKCH   HISTORY.       373 

seemed  to  fall  lower  and  lower  every  year,  until  a  thick 
moral  and  spiritual  darkness  overspread  the  land.  Mere 
natural  theology,  with  hardly  any  distinctive  doctrines 
of  the  Gospel,  formed  the  staple  teaching  both  in  church 
and  chapel.  Sermons  were  little  better  than  dry  moral 
essays,  devoid  of  anything  likely  to  awaken  or  convert 
souls.  Infidelity  and  Scepticism  were  openly  avowed  by 
many  of  the  laity,  and  Arianism  and  Socinianism  were 
unblushingly  taught  by  not  a  few  of  the  clergy.  Learned 
and  well-meaning  bishops,  like  Seeker,  and  Butler,  and 
Gibson,  and  Lowth,  and  Home,  and  Lavington,  and 
Warburton,  had  eyes  enough  to  see  the  evil  of  the  times, 
but  seemed  powerless  to  meet  them.  As  for  the  moral 
writers  of  the  day,  such  as  Addison,  Johnson,  and  Steele, 
they  had  no  more  influence  on  the  masses  than  Mrs. 
Partington's  famous  broom  had  on  the  waves  of  the 
Atlantic  Ocean. 

It  is  really  difficult  to  name  a  single  bright  and 
redeeming  feature  in  this  dark  picture  of  the  first  half 
of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  parochial  clergy  were 
sunk  in  worldliness,  and  neither  knew  nor  cared  any 
thing  about  their  profession.  Their  lives  were  too  often 
immoral,  and  their  sermons  were  so  unutterably  poor,  that 
the  printed  ones  are  now  unsaleable,  and  the  unprinted 
ones  must  have  been  rubbish.  Education  for  the  lower 
orders  was  at  zero,  and  few  rural  parishes  had  any 
school  at  all.  Gambling,  duelling,  swearing,  Sabbath- 
breaking,  fornication,  and  drunkenness  were  hardly 
regarded  as  sins  by  fashionable  people,  and  of  course 
were  thought  very  venial  by  the  poor.  Hogarth's  pictures, 
and  the  writings  of  Fielding,  Smollett,  Swift,  and  Sterne, 
are  sufficient  evidence  of  the  morality  that  prevailed ! 

Hardly  one  of  the  good  works  with  which  we 
are  now  familiar  was  even  known  at  this  period. 
Wilberforce  had  not  attacked  the  slave  trade.  Howard 


374  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHUECHMEN. 

had  not  reformed  prisons.  Eaikes  had  not  founded 
Sunday  schools.  We  had  no  Bible  Societies,  no  Eagged 
Schools,  no  City  Missions,  no  Pastoral  Aid  Societies. 
The  spirit  of  slumber  was  over  the  land.  In  a  religious 
and  moral  point  of  view  England  was  sound  asleep.  In 
short,  one  only  marvels  that  the  foundations  of  Church 
and  State  and  social  order  were  not  completely  broken 
up,  and  that  the  country  was  not  given  over  to  a  counter 
part  of  the  first  French  Eevolution. 

Now  what  was  it  that,  under  God,  saved  England,  and 
turned  the  tide  of  irreligion  and  immorality  ?  To  what 
instrumentality  are  we  indebted  for  the  immense  change 
which  unquestionably  took  place  between  1750  and 
1830,  and  the  enormous  improvement  in  the  moral  and 
religious  condition  of  the  land,  which  even  our  worst 
enemies  must  allow  ?  This  is  one  of  the  most  instructive 
inquiries  in  English  Church  history,  and  I  invite  your 
special  attention  to  the  answer. 

The  agents  who  revived  English  Christianity  from  its 
fallen  and  death-like  condition,  were  a  few  individuals, 
mostly  clergymen,  whom  God  stirred  up  about  the  same 
time ;  and  the  agency  which  they  employed  was  the 
preaching  of  the  great  leading  principles  of  the  Protestant 
Eeformation.  George  Whitefield,  John  Wesley,  Charles 
Wesley,  William  Grimshaw,  William  Eomaiue,  Henry 
Venn,  Daniel  Eowlands,  John  Berridge,  and  a  few  score  of 
like-minded  clergymen, — these  were  the  men  who  literally 
delivered  the  Church  of  England  from  death ;  and  the 
weapons  of  their  warfare  were  the  glorious  old  doctrines 
of  our  Protestant  Eeformers.  The  supremacy  of  Holy 
Scripture, — the  total  corruption  of  human  nature, — the 
atonement  wrought  out  for  us  by  Christ's  vicarious  death, 
— justification  by  faith, — the  absolute  necessity  of  heart 
conversion  by  the  Holy  Spirit, — the  inseparable  con 
nection  between  faith  and  holiness, — salvation  by  free 


THE   LESSONS    OF   ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.        375 

grace, — these  were  the  truths  which  the  evangelists  of  the 
eighteenth  century  went  about  preaching  and  proclaiming. 
They  found  them  in  the  Bible ;  they  found  them  in  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles ;  they  found  them  in  the  Prayer- 
book,  the  homilies,  and  the  writings  of  the  Eeformers. 
Finding  them  there,  they  boldly  told  men  that  -this 
was  the  old  way  of  truth,  and  while  they  told  them  so, 
they  turned  the  world  upside  down.  Yes !  without 
money,  without  patronage,  without  bishops,  without  the 
press,  without  Exeter  Hall,  they  effected  a  spiritual 
revolution ! 

The  amount  of  good  which  these  gallant  evangelists 
did  will  probably  never  be  known  till  the  last  day.  At 
first  the  bishops  and  nobility  affected  to  despise  them ; 
the  men  of  letters  sneered  at  them  as  fanatics ;  the  wits 
cut  jokes,  and  invented  smart  names  for  them ;  the 
Church  shut  her  doors  on  them ;  the  old  Dissenters  too 
often  turned  the  cold  shoulder  on  them  ;  the  ignorant 
mob  frequently  persecuted  and  pelted  them; — but  the 
movement  went  on,  and  made  itself  felt  in  every  part  of 
the  land.  Many  were  aroused  and  awakened  to  thought 
about  religion, — many  were  shamed  out  of  their  sins, — 
many  were  restrained  and  frightened  at  their  own 
ungodliness, — many  were  gathered  together,  and  induced 
to  profess  decided  religion, — many  were  converted, — 
many  were  silenced,  and  secretly  provoked  to  emulation. 
The  little  sapling  became  a  strong  tree ;  the  little  rill 
became  a  deep,  broad  stream ;  the  little  spark  became  a 
steady  burning  flame.  A  candle  was  lighted  of  which 
we  are  now  enjoying  the  benefit.  The  feeling  of  all 
classes  in  the  land  about  religion  and  morality,  insensibly 
assumed  a  totally  different  complexion.  And  all  this, 
remember,  was  effected  by  a  revival  of  the  doctrines  of 
the  Eeformation.  These  were  the  doctrines  which  turned 
England  upside  down,  arrested  the  attention  of  peers  and 


376  PRINCIPLES    FOE    CHURCHMEN. 

philosophers,  made  colliers  and  ploughmen  weep  till  their 
dirty  faces  were  seamed  with  tears,  plucked  thousands 
like  brands  from  the  burning,  and  altered  the  character 
of  the  age.  Call  them  simple  and  elementary  doctrines 
if  you  will ;  say,  if  you  please,  that  you  see  nothing 
grand,  new,  striking  about  them ;  but  there  remains 
the  undeniable  fact  of  history, — that  the  revival  of 
Eeformation  doctrines  saved  English  Christianity  from 
destruction  a  hundred  years  ago.1 

Let  this  fourth  great  lesson  of  English  Church  history 
sink  down  into  your  heart,  and  be  ready  to  use  it. 
Listen  not  to  those  who  are  fond  of  running  down  the 
Evangelical  leaders  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  under 
valuing  the  mighty  work  which  they  did. 

Some  men,  forsooth,  in  these  latter  days,  will  tell  us 
that  Whitefield,  and  Wesley,  and  Eomaine,  and  Berridge, 
and  Venn,  and  Grimshaw  were  unlearned  and  ignorant 
men, — narrow-minded  zealots,  who  despised  sacraments, 
and  held  very  partial  and  imperfect  views  of  truth, — 
ranting  fanatics,  who  disliked  the  Prayer-book,  and  cared 
for  nothing  but  preaching, — hot-headed  enthusiasts,  who 
put  no  real  matter  into  their  sermons,  and  only  "  split 
the  ears  of  groundlings  with  excessive  loudness  of  voice." 
I  advise  my  readers  to  pay  no  regard  to  such  accusations. 
Those  who  make  them  are  only  exposing  their  own 
ignorance  of  simple  facts. 

As  to  learning,  the  Eeformers  of  the  eighteenth  century 
were  nearly  all  members  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  and 
some  of  them  Fellows  of  Colleges.  Komaine  and  the 
Wesleys  were  well  known  at  Christ  Church,  Oxford. 
Berridge,  of  Clare  Hall,  Cambridge,  was  one  of  the  first 
men  of  his  year.  They  were  as  well  educated  as  most 

1  Those  who  wish  to  see  this  part  of  my  subject  more  fully  discussed, 
are  referred  to  a  volume  which  I  brought  out  in  1869,  entitled  Christian 
Leaders  of  the  Last  Century.  Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  3s.  net  (Thynne). 


THE    LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.        377 

clergymen  of  this  day,  and  certainly  had  more  brains 
than  many  who  now  sneer  at  them. 

As  to  despising  sacraments,  it  is  totally  false.  I 
cannot  find  one  among  them  who  did  not  attach  great 
importance  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  did  not  frequently 
press  it  in  its  due  proportion  on  his  believing  hearers. 
I  doubt  if  there  is  a  single  Eitualist  incumbent  in  all 
England  who  has  as  many  regular  communicants  as 
Grimshaw  had  at  Haworth.  The  difference  between  the 
Eeformers  of  the  eighteenth  century  and  many  of  their 
modern  detractors  is  simply  this, — they  advised  none  to 
be  communicants  unless  they  repented  and  believed ! 

As  to  neglecting  all  parts  of  religious  worship  except 
preaching,  again  the  charge  is  totally  false.  No  one 
valued  the  Prayer-book  and  read  it  more  impressively 
than  Whitefield,  Eowlands,  and  Eomaine.  No  congre 
gations  in  this  day,  I  suspect,  have  better  or  heartier 
singing  than  their  congregations.  They  had  not  "  Hymns 
Ancient  and  Modern,"  perhaps,  but  they  had  among 
them  such  hymn- writers  as  Charles  "Wesley,  Toplady,  and 
John  Newton.  Even  now  Eitualists  are  obliged  to 
confess  the  beauty  of  their  hymns.  If  they  do  not  like 
their  doctrines,  they  are  not  ashamed  to  use  their 
"  spiritual  songs." 

Grand  Gothic  churches,  I  grant,  the  Eeformers  of  the 
last  century  did  not  build.  They  had  no  money  to  build 
them,  and  if  they  had,  the  age  supplied  no  architects  to 
design  them.  But  after  all  they  had  among  them  plenty 
of  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Better  a  thousand  times 
have  ugly  square  brick  chapels  full  of  living  stones  and 
the  Spirit  of  God,  than  grand  cathedral-like  churches  full 
of  coldness,  deadness,  histrionic  ceremonial,  superstition, 
and  formality. 

Once  more  I  say,  let  us  never  despise  the  men  who 
revived  Eeformation  doctrines  in  the  eighteenth  century 


378  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Whatever  be  their  faults  and  infirmities,  they  saved  the 
life  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  without  them  the 
Establishment  would  not  have  survived  to  this  day.  If 
short-sighted  bishops  and  blind  clergy  had  not  snubbed  and 
opposed  them,  they  would  have  done  even  a  greater  work 
than  they  did.  But  for  what  they  did  let  us  thank  God, 
and  never  refuse  to  give  them  the  honour  they  deserve. 

V.  The  fifth  and  last  period  of  English  Church  history 
to  which  I  finally  invite  attention,  is  that  which  extends 
from  the  year  1830  down  to  the  present  day.  It  is  a 
period  which  is  characterized  by  one  great  and  paramount 
feature.  That  feature  is  the  rise  and  progress  of  that 
strange  Eomanizing  movement  within  the  Church  of 
England,  which  rightly  or  wrongly  is  called  Eitualism. 

Now  what  is  the  lesson  I  shall  ask  my  readers  to 
learn  from  this  period  ?  I  reply  honestly  that  I  shall 
not  talk  of  any  lesson  at  all.  We  are  in  the  midst  of 
the  conflict.  We  are  poor  judges  of  what  is  going  on 
around  us.  But  I  shall  mention  the  conclusions  that  1 
have  arrived  at  in  my  own  mind.  These  conclusions  are 
simply  these,  that  Ritualism  is  a  fresh  departure  from  the 
principles  of  the  Reformation  and  a  movement  towards 
Rome,  and  that  as  such  it  endangers  the  very  existence 
of  the  Church  of  England. 

A  question  arises  at  the  very  outset  of  this  part 
of  my  subject  which  demands  consideration.  Is  the 
movement  called  Eitualism  a  movement  towards  Eome 
or  not  ?  Do  the  Eitualists  really  wish  to  suppress  Pro 
testantism  and  re-introduce  Popery  ?  Hundreds  of  well- 
meaning  and  simple-minded  Churchmen  reply,  No !  They 
would  have  us  believe  that  Eitualists  are  only  aiming  at  a 
more  ornate  ceremonial  than  other  Churchmen,  and  that 
they  are  not  Eomanizers  at  heart.  With  these  amiable 
apologists  I  have  no  sympathy  at  all.  The  question  is 


THE    LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHUECH    HISTORY.        379 

one  on  which  I  feel  no  manner  of  doubt.  That  Ritualism 
is  a  Eomeward  movement,  and  that  it  leads  to  Popery, 
is  as  clear  to  my  mind  as  the  sun  at  noonday.  The 
proofs,  in  my  humble  judgment,  are  clear,  full,  and  un 
answerable. 

It  is  proved  by  the  writings  of  all  the  leading  Ritualists 
of  the  day.  Let  any  honest  and  impartial  Churchman 
study  such  papers  as  the  Church  Times  and  Church 
Review,  read  some  of  the  "  Catechisms "  and  "  Manuals 
of  Devotion  "  published  by  Ritualistic  clergymen,  peruse 
the  debates  and  proceedings  of  such  bodies  as  the  English 
Church  Union,  and  tell  us  plainly  the  impression  these 
writings  have  on  his  mind.  I  defy  him  to  avoid  the 
conclusion  that  Ritualism  is  the  highway  to  Rome. 

It  is  proved  by  the  repeated  secession  of  Ritualists 
from  the  Church  of  England  to  the  Church  of  Rome. 
Why  have  such  men  as  Manning,  and  Newman,  and 
Oakley,  and  the  two  Wilberforces,  and  Orby  Shipley,  and 
Luke  Rivington,  gone  over  to  the  Pope's  camp  ?  Simply 
because  they  found  the  principles  of  their  school  could  land 
them  in  no  other  logical  conclusion.  But  their  migration 
was  one  more  proof  that  Ritualism  is  the  highway  to  Rome. 

It  is  proved  by  the  repeated  reference  to  the  subject 
which  bishops  have  made  in  their  charges  for  the  last 
fifty  years.  Mild  and  gentle  and  conciliatory  to  an 
extreme,  as  these  documents  have  often  been,  it  is  im 
possible  not  to  see  that  our  prelates  detect  a  Romeward 
tendency  in  Ritualism.  Their  cautions  to  Ritualists,  you 
will  notice,  are  almost  always  in  one  direction.  "  Take 
care,"  they  seem  to  say,  "  that  you  do  not  go  too  far  in  a 
Romish  direction.  You  are  excellent,  earnest,  useful  men  ; 
but  don't  go  too  near  the  edge.  Your  danger  is,  tumbling 
over  into  the  arms  of  Rome." 

It  is  proved  by  the  rejoicings  of  the  Roman  Catholics 
themselves  over  the  whole  Ritualistic  movement,  and  the 


380  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

disgust  with  which  it  is  regarded  by  Scotch  Presbyterians, 
real  old-fashioned  Nonconformists,  and  most  English 
Methodists.  Both  the  joy  of  the  one  party  and  the  dis 
gust  of  the  other  arise  from  the  same  cause.  Both  see 
clearly  that  Kitualism  damages  Protestantism  and  helps 
the  Pope. 

It  is  proved,  above  all,  by  the  unvarying  character  of 
all  the  ceremonial  novelties  which  Eitualists  have  thrust 
into  our  Church  worship  during  the  last  twenty-five 
years.  They  have  all  been  in  one  direction,  whether  of 
dress,  or  gesture,  or  posture,  or  action,  or  anything  else. 
They  have  all  been  as  unprotestant  as  possible.  They 
have  all  been  borrowed  or  imitated  from  Popery.  They 
have  all  exhibited  one  common  bias  and  animus, — an 
anxious  desire  to  get  as  far  as  possible  from  the  ways 
of  the  Keformers,  and  to  get  as  near  as  possible,  whether 
legally  or  illegally,  to  the  ways  of  Eome.  They  have  all 
shown  one  common  systematic  determination  to  unpro- 
testantize,  as  far  as  possible,  the  simple  worship  of  the 
poor  old  Church  of  England,  and  to  assimilate  it,  as 
far  as  possible,  to  the  gaudy  and  sensuous  worship  of 
Popery.  A  short  catalogue  of  specimens  will  show  what 
I  mean. 

(a)  The  Keformers  found  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass  in 
our  Church.     They  cast  it  out  as  a  "  blasphemous  fable 
and  dangerous  deceit,"  and  called  the  Lord's  Supper  a 
sacrament.     The  Eitualists  have  re-introduced  the  word 
sacrifice,  and  glory  in  calling  the  Lord's  Supper  a  mass ! 

(b)  The  Eeformers  found  altars  in  all  our  churches. 
They  ordered  them  to  be  taken  down,  cast  the  word  "  altar" 
entirely  out  of  our  Prayer-book,  and  spoke  only  of  the 
Lord's  table  and  the  Lord's  board.     The  Eitualists  delight 
in  calling  the  Lord's  table  the  altar,  and  setting  up  Popish 
altars  in  all  their  churches ! 

(c)  The  Eeformers  found  our  clergy  sacrificing  priests, 


THE    LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.       381 

and  made  them  prayer-reading,  preaching  ministers, — 
ministers  of  God's  Word  and  sacraments.  The  Eitualists 
glory  in  calling  every  clergyman  a  sacrificing  priest ! 

(d)  The  Eeformers  found  the  doctrine  of  a  real  corporal 
presence  in  our  Church,  and  laid  down  their  lives  to 
oppose  it.     They  would  not  even  allow  the  expression 
"  real   presence "    a  place  in   our    Prayer  -  book.      The 
Eitualists  have  re-introduced  the  doctrine,  and   honour 
the  consecrated   elements    in   the   Lord's    Supper  as   if 
Christ's  natural  body  and  blood  were  in  them. 

(e)  The  Eeformers  found  in  all  our  churches  images, 
rood  screens,  crucifixes,  and  holy  places,  and  indignantly 
cast  them  out.      The  Eitualists   are  incessantly  trying 
to  bring  them  back. 

(/)  The  Eeformers  found  our  worship  stuffed  with  pro 
cessions,  incense-burning,  flag-carrying,  candles,  gestures, 
postures,  flowers,  and  gaudy  sacrificial  garments,  and 
ordered  them  all  to  be  put  away.  The  Eitualists  are 
always  labouring  to  re-introduce  them. 

Can  any  one  in  his  senses  doubt  what  all  this  means  ? 
Straws  show  which  way  the  wind  blows.  Ceremonial 
trifles  show  the  current  of  religious  feeling.  He  that 
looks  at  the  catalogue  of  facts  which  I  have  just  brought 
forward,  and  then  tells  us  that  there  is  no  tendency  in 
Eitualism  towards  Eome,  is  past  all  argument,  and  must 
be  let  alone.  There  are  none  so  blind  as  those  that  will 
not  see. 

But  after  all,  is  Eitualism  doing  any  harm  to  the 
Church  of  England?  With  all  its  faults  and  defects, 
does  not  the  movement  do  more  good  than  evil  ?  Is  it 
not  better  to  believe  all  things,  and  hope  all  things,  and 
to  leave  Eitualism  alone  ?  These  are  questions  which 
many  in  their  simplicity  are  continually  asking,  and  they 
are  questions  which  demand  a  plain  answer. 

Some  tell  us  that  Eitualism  has  revived  the  Church, 


382  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

rallied  the  laity,  infused  a  new  spirit  into  the  Establish 
ment,  lengthened  her  cords,  and  strengthened  her  stakes. 
Some  tell  us  that  the  existence  of  a  Eitualistic  party  in 
our  Church  is  an  excellent  and  healthy  symptom,  that 
parties  keep  each  other  in  check,  and  act  as  counter 
irritants  in  the  constitution,  and  that  except  Eitualism 
abides  in  the  Church  we  shall  not  be  saved.  My  own 
opinion  is  diametrically  the  reverse.  I  believe  that 
Eitualism  has  done,  and  is  doing,  universal  damage  to 
the  Church  of  England,  and  that,  unless  checked  or  re 
moved,  it  will  prove  the  destruction  of  the  Establishment. 

Eitualism  is  dividing  the  clergy  into  two  distinct 
parties,  and  hastening  on  an  internecine  conflict.  So 
long  as  the  difference  was  only  between  High  Church 
and  Low  Church,  little  harm  was  done.  But  when  the 
struggle  is  between  Popery  and  Protestantism,  union  is 
impossible.  Both  parties  cannot  possibly  co-operate 
with  any  advantage  in  the  same  ecclesiastical  pale,  and 
it  is  preposterous  to  suppose  they  can.  One  or  the  other 
is  in  the  wrong  place.  What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  The 
Master  Himself  has  declared,  "  If  a  house  be  divided 
against  itself,  that  house  cannot  stand"  (Mark  iii.  25).1 

Eitualism  is  gradually  robbing  our  Church  of  some 
of  its  best  members  among  the  laity.  Not  a  few  bankers, 
lawyers,  doctors,  merchants,  and  naval  and  military  officers, 
are  dropping  off  and  leaving  the  ship.  Their  confidence  is 
thoroughly  shaken.  They  cannot  understand  an  Estab 
lished  Church  in  which  the  service  is  Eomish  in  one  parish 

1  If  any  oiie  supposes  that  I  wish  to  narrow  the  limits  of  English 
Church  manship,  and  to  confine  it  to  one  party,  he  is  totally  mistaken.  I 
never  met  a  sensible  Evangelical  Churchman  who  did  not  admit  fully  that 
the  Church  of  England  is  a  comprehensive  Church,  and  that  she  was 
meant  to  include  in  her  pale  the  three  old-fashioned  schools  of  opinion 
commonly  known  as  High,  Low,  and  Broad. 

But  we  do  maintain,  and  shall  never  cease  to  maintain,  that  the  Church 
of  England  was  never  meant  to  comprehend  downright  Popery,  and  that 
those  who  hold  all  Romish  doctrine  have  no  lawful  place  in  her  ministry. 


THE    LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.         383 

and  Protestant  in  another.  They  are  becoming  disgusted 
with  the  continued  toleration  of  Komish  novelties,  which 
their  own  common  sense  tells  them  are  as  thoroughly  un- 
churchmanlike  as  they  are  unscriptural.  Some  of  them  go 
off  to  the  Plymouth  Brethren,  some  join  the  Dissenters, 
and  some  stand  aloof,  and  refuse  to  take  any  part  in  the 
Church's  affairs.  This  state  of  things  is  most  mischievous. 
The  life-blood  of  the  Church  is  being  drained  away. 

Kitualism  is  alienating  the  middle  classes  and  lower 
orders  from  the  Church  of  England.  Thousands  of 
tradesmen  and  farmers  and  artisans  have  an  instinctive 
horror  of  Popery.  They  may  not  be  very  intelligent  or 
deeply  read  in  theological  matters,  but  they  are  deter 
mined  not  to  put  up  with  Popery.  They  cannot  draw 
nice  distinctions :  they  are  apt  to  call  a  spade  a  spade, 
and  to  give  things  their  right  name.  And  if  they  see 
the  slightest  attempt  to  re-introduce  Popish  ceremonies 
into  our  parish  churches,  their  suspicions  are  roused,  and 
they  walk  off  to  chapel.  The  Churchman  who  allows 
these  suspicions  to  be  roused  may  be  earnest,  well-mean 
ing,  and  zealous,  but  he  is  no  true  friend  to  the  Church 
of  England. 

Once  for  all,  I  must  honestly  avow  that  my  chief  fears 
of  Eitualism  arise  from  the  effect  which  it  has  on  the 
minds  of  the  lower  and  middle  classes.  They  do  not  like 
it.  They  will  not  have  it.  They  call  it  Popery. 

Shallow  -  minded  members  of  the  aristocracy,  —  ill- 
taught  ascetics, — self-willed  and  half -instructed  members 
of  Evangelical  families,  who  want  to  mix  ball-going  and 
worldliness  with  religious  formalism,  and  to  compound 
for  the  one  by  supporting  the  other, — idle  young  ladies 
and  thoughtless  young  men,  who  love  anything  gaudy, 
sensational,  and  theatrical  in  worship, — all  these  may 
stick  to  Eitualism  and  stoutly  support  it.  They  are  like 


384  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

children  who  admire  poppies  more  than  corn,  and  like 
babies  who  care  for  toys  more  than  food.  But  Eitualism 
does  not  meet  the  wants  of  the  hard-working,  the  hard- 
headed,  the  hard-handed  masses  of  the  middle  classes, 
and  intelligent  artisans,  the  brain  and  muscle  of  England. 
These  men  want  food  for  their  souls  and  rest  for  their 
consciences.  They  find  life  too  hard  and  heart-wearing 
to  be  content  with  trifles  and  toys  in  worship.  If  the 
Church  can  only  offer  them  Eitualism,  they  will  turn 
away  from  her  in  disgust.  If  she  will  faithfully  give 
them  the  pure  Gospel,  they  will  never  leave  her,  and 
never  forsake  her. 

Only  let  Eitualism  grow  and  spread  for  a  few  more 
years,  and  the  end  will  come.  The  Church  will  perish 
for  want  of  Churchmen.  Generals  and  colonels  and 
bands  do  not  make  up  an  army,  and  bishops  and  choris 
ters  and  clergy  alone  do  not  make  up  a  Church.  The 
Church  of  England  will  never  stand  if  it  disgusts  and 
drives  away  its  congregations.  Disestablishment  will 
come  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  Church  of  a  minority 
will  not  be  spared  in  England  any  more  than  in  Ireland. 
Statesmen  and  orators  will  declare  that  the  English 
Establishment  is  "  a  huge  anomaly,"  and  must  be  got  rid 
of.  The  voice  of  the  people  will  demand  our  destruc 
tion  ;  and  on  modern  principles  it  will  be  obeyed.  The 
Church  of  England,  once  disestablished,  will  split  into 
pieces,  or  become  a  mere  sect,  like  the  Scotch  Episcopal 
Church ;  and  the  pages  of  history  will  then  record  that 
she  made  shipwreck  of  all  her  greatness  by  the  suicidal 
attempt  to  recede  from  Protestantism  and  re-introduce 
Popery. 

Such  are  my  reasons  for  regarding  Eitualism  with  un 
mixed  dislike.  It  threatens  the  very  existence  of  our 
beloved  Church  of  England.  Such  are  the  conclusions 
I  arrive  at  from  the  review  of  the  fifth  and  last  period 


THE    LESSONS    OF   ENGLISH   CHURCH   HISTORY.       385 

of  English  Church  history.  Whether  iny  fears  are  well 
founded,  and  the  lesson  I  have  drawn  the  true  one,  time 
alone  will  show.  But  I  should  not  be  doing  my  duty  as 
an  honest  man,  if  I  did  not  tell  my  readers  that  we  are 
in  a  most  critical  position,  and  that  the  future  must  be 
regarded  with  deep  anxiety.  In  short,  I  leave  the  Church 
history  of  the  last  sixty  years,  with  the  firm  belief  that, 
unless  Eitualism  dries  up  or  is  checked,  the  Established 
Church  of  this  country  in  a  very  few  years  will  be  broken 
to  pieces.1  The  leaders  of  the  Eitualists,  I  willingly  allow, 
may  be  zealous,  earnest,  able,  well-meaning  men.  They 
may  conscientiously  believe,  like  many  of  Laud's  school, 
that  they  are  helping  the  Church  of  England,  and  doing 
God  service.  But  it  is  my  firm  belief  that,  like  Laud's 
school,  they  are  ruining  the  Church  instead  of  helping  it, 
and  are  likely  to  bring  the  whole  house  to  the  ground. 

My  paper  must  now  come  to  a  conclusion.  I  have  tried 
to  the  best  of  my  ability  to  draw  lessons  from  five  periods 
of  English  Church  history, — (1)  from  the  period  before 
the  Eeformation, — (2)  from  the  period  of  the  Eeformation 
itself, — (3)  from  the  days  of  Laud  and  his  party, — (4) 
from  the  days  of  Evangelical  revivalism  in  the  eighteenth 
century, — (5)  from  the  rise  and  progress  of  Eitualism  in 
our  own  day.  On  each  and  all  of  these  periods  I  feel 
that  I  have  only  touched  the  surface  of  my  subject,  and 
that  I  might  have  said  far  more  if  time  had  permitted. 
But  I  hope  at  any  rate  I  have  supplied  some  food  for 
thought.  I  shall  now  wind  up  all  with  a  few  words 
of  practical  application.  I  have  dealt  with  five  periods 
of  Church  history,  and  I  will  offer,  as  a  friend,  five  short 
pieces  of  parting  advice. 

(1)  My  first  advice  to  every  one  into  whose  hands 

1  "The  proceedings  of  the  English  Church  Union  will  destroy  the 
English  Church,  if  they  are  encouraged  in  their  present  course. " — (Letter 
of  the  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells.  December  1870. ) 

2B 


386  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

this  paper  may  fall  is  this.  Bead  up  the  great  facts 
of  English  Church  history,  and  make  yourself  thoroughly 
familiar  with  them.  Know  what  our  country  was  when 
the  Pope  ruled  supreme ;  know  what  the  Eeformation  did 
for  us ;  know  what  the  principles  of  the  Eeformation  were 
and  are.  Eead  such  books  as  Foxe's  Martyrs,  Soames'  His 
tory  of  the  Reformation,  Fuller's  Church  History,  Blunts 
History  of  the  Reformation,  Marsden's  History  of  the  Puri 
tans.  Eead,  not  least,  your  own  Thirty-nine  Articles,  at 
least  once  every  year.  Do  this  and  you  will  not  be  easily 
led  astray.  Ignorance  is  one  great  ally  of  Eitualism.1 

(2)  My   second   advice   is  this.       Mind  you  do  not 
underrate  the  danger  in  which  the  Church  of  England  is 
in  from  Eitualism.     That  danger,  I  believe,  is  far  greater 
than  many  suppose.     The   friends   of  Eitualism  among 
the  clergy  are  numerous,  zealous,  able,  unwearied.    Many 
Eitualists  compass  sea  and  land,  and  leave  no  stone  un 
turned,  to  effect  their  objects.     Many  of  them,  I  believe, 
are  determined  never  to  rest  till  they  have  the  mass  at 
every  parish  communion  table,  and  the   confessional  in 
every  church,  and  sacrificial  garments  on   every  clerical 
back.     Do  not  fold  your  arms  and  sit  still.     If  we  mean 
to  preserve  Protestantism  in  the  Church  of  England,  if 
we  mean  to  keep  the  martyrs'  candle  lighted,  we  must 
stand  to  our  arms  and  fight.     Indolence  and  self-security 
are  another  great  ally  of  Eitualism. 

(3)  My  third  advice  is  this.     Settle  it  in  your  mind 
that  Protestant  and  Evangelical  principles  are  the  real 

1  Some  men  are  fond  of  sneering  at  Foxe's  Martyrs,  and  decrying  Foxe 
as  unworthy  of  credit.  Such  attacks  are  ancient  things,  and  the  friends 
of  Popery  have  never  ceased  to  make  them.  Those  who  care  to  see  the 
opinion  of  Foxe  entertained  by  such  men  as  Parker,  Grindal,  Whitgift, 
Fuller,  Strype,  Burnet,  Soames,  Dr.  Wordsworth,  Southey,  and  Froude, 
will  find  them  in  the  preface  to  my  Light  from  Old  Times.  Cloth  gilt, 
2s.  6d.  net  (Thynne).  They  will  there  see  that  the  estimate  of  Foxe 
formed  by  these  eminent  bishops  and  writers  differs  widely  from  that  of 
some  modern  writers. 


THE    LESSONS    OF   ENGLISH   CHURCH    HISTORY.       387 

true  principles  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  the  only 
principles  that  will  keep  the  Church  alive.  They  are  the 
principles  of  your  own  Thirty-nine  Articles,  and  of  the 
glorious  Eeformation.  They  are  the  only  principles  that 
do  good  to  souls.  Processions,  incense,  flowers,  gaudy 
vestments,  bowings,  turnings,  crossings,  and  the  like,  may 
gather  crowds  of  gaping  people  for  a  time,  like  any  other 
exhibition.  But  they  convince  no  sinner,  heal  no  con 
science,  build  up  no  saint,  lead  none  to  Christ.  Nothing 
will  do  that  but  the  word  of  the  Gospel  and  the  grace  of 
God.  Never  be  ashamed  of  simple  Evangelical  religion. 
Want  of  confidence  in  it  is  another  great  ally  of  Ritualism. 
(4)  My  fourth  advice  is  this.  Do  not  be  in  a  hurry 
to  leave  the  Church  of  England,  because  many  of  her 
clergy  are  unfaithful.  It  is  cheap  and  easy  policy  for 
Churchmen  to  shirk  trouble  and  run  away  in  the  hour  of 
conflict ;  but  it  is  neither  manly,  nor  Christian,  nor  kind. 
It  is  a  short-cut  road  out  of  difficulties,  to  launch  the 
long-boat  when  the  good  ship  is  in  jeopardy,  and  to  leave 
your  comrades  to  sink.  But  it  is  not  the  line  of  action 
which  becomes  an  Englishman.  As  Nelson  said  at  Tra 
falgar,  "  England  expects  every  man  to  do  his  duty,"  so 
does  the  Church  of  England  expect  every  Protestant 
Churchman  to  do  his  duty,  and  stick  by  the  ship.  Let 
us  not  play  the  enemy's  game,  by  deserting  the  good  old 
fortress,  so  long  as  the  Articles  are  unchanged  and  the 
pulpit  is  unfettered.  Let  us  not  basely  forsake  our  old 
mother  in  her  day  of  trouble.  Rather,  like  Venn,  and 
Romaine,  and  Grimshaw,  and  Berridge,  let  us  man  the 
walls,  stand  to  our  guns,  nail  our  colours  to  the  mast, 
and  fight  as  long  as  we  have  a  foot  to  stand  on.  Sneaks 
and  deserters  who  are  always  making  strategical  move 
ments  to  the  rear  are  the  weakness  of  an  army.  Rabbit- 
hearted  Churchmen,  who  are  always  bolting  into  holes  at  the 
slightest  shadow  of  danger,  are  the  best  allies  of  Ritualism. 


388  PKINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

(5)  My  last  advice  is  this.  Work  publicly  and 
privately,  and  work  hard,  for  the  defence  of  Christ's 
truth  and  the  maintenance  of  Eeformation  principles 
in  the  Church  of  England.  But  work  together  in 
an  organized  and  systematic  way,  or  else  you  will  do 
very  little.  "Men  with  muskets"  do  not  make  an  army, 
as  the  French  found  to  their  cost,  and  Evangelical 
Churchmen  without  organization  will  do  but  little  in 
opposing  Eitualism.  Associate,  unite,  organize,  work 
together,  keep  together,  and  much  may  be  done.  Work 
charitably  and  kindly,  and  make  allowance  for  the  utter 
ignorance  in  which  many  Ritualists  live  of  the  real 
nature  of  Evangelical  principles.  Many  of  them,  alas, 
appear  to  know  no  more  of  the  views  of  Evangelical 
Churchmen  than  an  illiterate  country  labourer  knows  of 
the  streets  of  London.  They  talk  and  write  as  if  they 
had  never  heard  of  any  theological  school  but  their 
own !  Eemember  this,  and  deal  gently  with  them.  But 
while  you  work  charitably,  lovingly,  courteously,  kindly, 
do  not  forget  to  work  hard. — Work  for  your  Church's 
sake ;  the  Church  of  Hooper  and  Latimer  deserves  some 
exertion. — Work  for  your  children's  sake ;  when  you  are 
dead  take  heed  lest  they  be  left  like  sheep  without  a 
shepherd. — Work  for  your  country's  sake ;  her  Protes 
tantism  is  the  key  of  her  strength :  this  once  lost,  she  is 
like  Samson  shorn  of  his  hair. — Work  not  least  for  your 
own  soul's  sake.  It  will  do  you  good.  It  will  nerve 
your  graces.  It  will  keep  down  besetting  sins.  It  is 
not  exercise,  but  sitting  still,  that  does  the  body  harm. 

Think  of  these  things,  and  do  not  despise  them. 
Some  men  may  cry,  "  Peace  !  peace !  Keep  quiet !  Oh, 
sacrifice  anything  for  peace!"  I  answer,  there  can  be  no 
real  peace  while  our  Church  tolerates  and  fosters  Popery. 
Is  ecclesiastical  peace  really  so  sweet  that  it  is  worth 
purchasing  at  the  expense  of  truth  ?  Is  a  quiet  life  so 


THE    LESSONS    OF   ENGLISH    CHUKCH    HISTORY.       389 

precious  that,  in  order  to  secure  it,  we  will  tolerate  the 
mass  and  auricular  confession  ?  Is  it,  or  is  it  not  ? 

God  forbid  that  we  should  ever  sacrifice  truth  to  a 
love  of  peace !  Peace  in  a  Church  without  truth  is  a 
worthless  possession.  What  others  think  I  know  not. 
My  own  mind  is  made  up.  I  have  come  to  one  decided 
conclusion.  I  say,  give  me  a  really  Protestant  and 
Evangelical  Established  Church,  or  no  Established  Church 
at  all.  When  the  Eeformed  Church  of  England  renounces 
her  Protestant  principles,  and  goes  back  to  Popery,  her 
life  and  glory  will  have  clean  departed,  and  she  will  not 
be  worth  preserving.  She  will  be  an  offence  to  God,  and 
not  a  resting-place  for  any  true  Christian. 

NOTE. 

CONTROVERSY  about  the  Lord's  Supper,  we  all  know,  is  at  this  moment 
one  of  the  chief  causes  of  division  and  disturbance  in  the  Church  of  Eng 
land.  No  less  than  four  great  legal  suits  have  arisen  out  of  the  subject ; 
suits  commonly  known  as  the  Mackonochie  case,  the  Purchas  case,  the 
Bennett  case,  and  the  Ridsdale  case.  At  such  a  crisis,  it  may  not  be 
uninteresting  to  some  readers  to  hear  the  opinions  of  some  of  our  well- 
known  English  divines  about  the  points  in  dispute. 

I  will  give  fourteen  quotations  from  fourteen  men  of  no  mean  authority, 
and  ask  the  reader  to  consider  them. 

(1)  Archbishop  Cranmer,  in  the  Preface  to  his  Answer  to  Gardiner, 
says : — 

"They  (the  Romanists)  say  that  Christ  is  corporally  under  or  in  the 
forms  of  bread  and  wine  ;  we  say  that  Christ  is  not  there,  neither  cor 
porally  nor  spiritually.  But  in  them  that  worthily  eat  and  drink  the 
bread  and  wine  He  is  spiritually,  and  corporally  He  is  in  heaven. — I 
mean  not  that  Christ  is  spiritually,  either  on  the  table,  or  in  the  bread 
and  wine  that  be  set  on  the  table,  but  I  mean  that  He  is  present  in  the 
ministration  and  receiving  of  that  Holy  Supper,  according  to  His  own 
institution  and  ordinance."— (See  Goode  on  the  Eucharist,  vol.  ii.  p.  772.) 

(2)  Bishop  Ridley,  in  his  Disputation  at  Oxford,  says  : — 

"The  circumstances  of  the  Scripture,  the  analogy  and  proportion  of  the 
Sacraments,  and  the  testimony  of  the  faithful  Fathers,  ought  to  rule  us  in 
taking  the  meaning  of  the  Holy  Scripture  touching  the  Sacraments. 

"  But  the  words  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  circumstances  of  the  Scrip- 
t;ure,  th.e  analogy  of  the  Sacraments,  and  the  sayings  of  th,e  Fathers  do 


390  PEINCIPLES    FOE    CHUKCHMEN. 

most  effectually  and  plainly  prove  a  figurative  speech  in  the  words  of  the 
Lord's  Supper. 

"Therefore  a  figurative  sense  and  meaning  is  specially  to  be  received  in 
these  words, — '  This  is  my  body.' " — (See  Goode  on  the  Eucharist,  vol.  ii. 
p.  766.) 

Again,  in  the  same  Disputation  at  Oxford,  he  says  of  the  Romish 
doctrine  of  the  Real  Presence  : — 

"It  destroyeth  and  taketh  away  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
which  was  commanded  only  to  be  used  and  continued  until  the  Lord 
Himself  should  come.  If  therefore  He  be  now  really  present  in  the  body 
of  His  flesh,  then  must  the  Supper  cease  ;  for  a  remembrance  is  not  of  a 
thing  present,  but  of  a  thing  past  and  absent.  And,  as  one  of  the 
Fathers  saith,  'A  figure  is  vain  where  the  thing  figured  is  present.'" — 
(See  Foxe's  Martyrs,  in  loco.) 

(3)  Bishop  Hooper,  in  his  Brief  and  Clear  Confession  of  the  Christian 
Faith,  says  : — 

"I  believe  that  all  this  Sacrament  consisteth  in  the  use  thereof;  so 
that  without  the  right  use  the  bread  and  wine  in  nothing  differ  from 
other  common  bread  and  wine  that  is  commonly  used  :  and  therefore  I 
do  not  believe  that  the  body  of  Christ  can  be  contained,  hid,  or  enclosed 
in  the  bread,  under  the  bread,  or  with  the  bread, — neither  the  blood  in 
the  wine,  under  the  wine,  or  with  the  wine.  But  I  believe  and  confess 
the  only  body  of  Christ  to  be  in  heaven,  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  ; 
and  that  always,  and  as  often  as  we  use  this  bread  and  wine  according  to 
this  ordinance  and  institution  of  Christ,  we  do  verily  and  indeed  receive 
His  body  and  blood." — (Hooper's  Works:  Parker  Society  Edition,  vol.  ii. 
p.  48.) 

(4)  Bishop  Latimer,  in  his  Disputation  at  Oxford,  says  : — 

"In  the  Sacrament  there  is  none  other  presence  of  Christ  required  than 
a  spiritual  presence.  And  this  presence  is  sufficient  for  a  Christian  man, 
and  the  presence  by  which  we  abide  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  us,  to  the 
obtaining  of  eternal  life  if  we  persevere  in  the  true  Gospel ;  that  this  same 
presence  may  be  called  a  real  presence  because  to  the  faithful  believer 
there  is  the  real  and  spiritual  body  of  Christ." — (Latimer' s  Works :  Parker 
Society  Edition,  vol.  ii.  p.  252.) 

Again,  he  says  in  the  same  disputation  :  ' '  Christ  spake  never  a  word  of 
sacrificing  in  saying  of  mass  ;  nor  promised  His  hearers  any  reward,  but 
among  the  idolaters  with  the  devil  and  his  angels,  except  they  repent 
speedily.  Therefore  sacrificing  priests  should  now  cease  for  ever  ;  for 
now  all  men  ought  to  offer  their  own  bodies  a  quick  sacrifice  holy  and 
acceptable  before  God.  The  Supper  of  the  Lord  was  instituted  to  provoke 
us  to  thanksgiving,  and  to  stir  us  up  by  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  to 
remember  his  death  till  He  cometh  again." — (Works,  ii,  256.) 


THE    LESSONS    OF   ENGLISH    CHUECH   HISTORY.       391 

Again,  he  says  in  his  last  examination  :  "There  is  a  change  in  the  bread 
and  wine,  and  such  a  change  as  no  power  but  the  omnipotency  of  God 
can  make,  in  that  that  which  before  was  bread,  should  now  have  the  dignity 
to  exhibit  Christ's  body.  And  yet  the  bread  is  still  bread,  and  the  wine 
is  still  wine;  for  the  change  is  not  in  the  nature,  but  the  dignity." — 
Works,  ii.  286.) 

(5)  Bishop  Jewell,  in  his  work  on  the  Sacraments,  says : — 

"Let  us  examine  what  difference  there  is  between  the  body  of  Christ 
and  the  sacrament  of  His  body. 

"The  difference  is  this  :  a  sacrament  ;s  a  figure  or  token  ;  the  body  of 
Christ  is  figured  or  tokened.  The  sacramental  bread  is  bread,  it  is  not 
the  body  of  Christ ;  the  body  of  Christ  is  flesh,  it  is  no  bread.  The  bread 
is  beneath  ;  the  body  is  above.  The  bread  is  on  the  table  ;  the  body  is  in 
heaven.  The  bread  is  in  the  mouth;  the  body  is  in  the  heart.  The 
bread  feedeth  the  body;  the  body  feedeth  the  soul.  The  bread  shall 
come  to  nothing  ;  the  body  is  immortal,  and  shall  not  perish.  The  bread 
is  vile ;  the  body  of  Christ  is  glorious.  Such  a  difference  is  there  between 
the  bread  which  is  a  sacrament  of  the  body,  and  the  body  of  Christ  itself. 
The  Sacrament  is  eaten  as  well  of  the  wicked  as  of  the  faithful ;  the  body 
is  only  eaten  of  the  faithful.  The  Sacrament  may  be  eaten  unto  judg 
ment  ;  the  body  cannot  be  eaten  but  unto  salvation.  Without  the 
Sacrament  we  may  be  saved  ;  but  without  the  body  of  Christ  we  have  no 
salvation, — we  cannot  be  saved.  "—(Jewell's  Works,  vol.  iv.,  Parker 
Society  Edition,  p.  1121.) 

(6)  Richard  Hooker,  in  his  Ecclesiastical  Polity,  says  :— 

"The  real  presence  of  Christ's  most  blessed  body  and  blood  is  not  to  be 
sought  for  in  the  Sacrament,  but  in  the  worthy  receiver  of  the  Sacrament. 

"And  with  this  the  very  order  of  our  Saviour's  words  agreeth.  First, 
'Take  and  eat;'  then,  *  This  is  my  body  which  is  broken  for  you.' 
First,  '  Drink  ye  all  of  this  ; '  then  followeth,  '  This  is  my  blood  of  the  New 
Testament,  which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins. '  I  see  not 
which  way  it  should  be  gathered  by  the  words  of  Christ,— when  and 
where  the  bread  is  His  body  or  the  wine  His  blood,  but  only  in  the  very 
heart  and  soul  of  him  which  receiveth  them.  As  for  the  Sacraments,  they 
really  exhibit,  but  for  aught  we  can  gather  out  of  that  which  is  written  of 
them,  they  are  not  really  nor  do  really  contain  in  themselves  that  grace 
which  with  them  or  by  them  it  pleaseth  God  to  bestow."— (Hooker,  Eccl. 
Pol,  book  v.  p.  67.) 

(7)  Jeremy  Taylor,  in  his  book  on  the  Real  Presence  (edit.  1654,  pp. 
13-15),  says  :— 

"  We  say  that  Christ's  body  is  in  the  Sacrament  really,  but  spiritually. 
The  Roman  Catholics  say  that  it  is  there  really,  but  spiritually.  For  so 
Bellarmine  is  bold  to  say  that  the  word  may  be  allowed  in  this  question. 


392  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Where  now  is  the  difference  ?  Here  by  spiritually,  they  mean  spiritual 
after  the  manner  of  a  spirit.  "We  by  spiritually,  mean  present  to  our 
spirit  only.  They  say  that  Christ's  body  is  truly  present  there  as  it  was 
upon  the  cross,  but  not  after  the  manner  of  all  or  anybody,  but  after  that 
manner  of  being  as  an  angel  is  in  a  place.  That's  their  spiritually. — But 
we  by  the  real  spiritual  presence  of  Christ  do  understand  Christ  to  be 
present,  as  the  Spirit  of  God  is  present  in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful,  by 
blessing  and  grace  ;  and  this  is  all  which  we  mean  beside  the  topical  and 
figurative  presence." 

(8)  Archbishop  Usher,  in  his  Sermon  before  the  House  of  Commons, 
says : — 

"In  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  bread  and  wine  are  not 
changed  in  substance  from  being  the  same  with  that  which  is  served  at 
ordinary  tables ;  but  in  respect  of  the  sacred  use  whereunto  they  are 
consecrated,  such  a  change  is  made  that  now  they  differ  as  much  from 
common  bread  and  wine  as  heaven  from  earth.  Neither  are  they  to  be 
accounted  barely  significative,  but  truly  exhibitive  also  of  those  heavenly 
things  whereunto  they  have  relation  ;  as  being  appointed  by  God  to  be  a 
means  of  conveying  the  same  to  us,  and  putting  us  in  actual  possession 
thereof.  So  that  in  the  use  of  this  holy  ordinance,  as  verily  as  a  man 
with  his  bodily  hand  and  mouth  receiveth  the  earthly  creatures  of  bread  and 
wine,  so  verily  with  his  spiritual  hand  and  mouth,  if  he  have  any,  doth  he 
receive  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  And  this  is  that  real  and  substantial 
presence  which  we  affirm  to  be  in  the  inward  part  of  the  sacred  action." 

(9)  Bishop  Beveridge,  in  his  comment  on  the  Twenty-eighth  Article, 

says  : — 

"  If  the  bread  be  not  really  changed  into  the  body  of  Christ,  then  the 
body  of  Christ  is  not  really  there  present ;  and  if  it  be  not  really  there 
present,  it  is  impossible  that  it  should  be  really  taken  and  received  into 
our  bodies,  as  bread  is." 

Again,  he  says,  "I  cannot  see  how  it  can  possibly  be  denied,  that  Christ 
ate  of  the  bread  whereof  He  said,  This  is  my  body  ;  and  if  He  ate  it,  and 
ate  it  corporally  (that  is,  ate  His  body  as  we  eat  bread),  then  He  ate 
Himself,  and  made  one  body  two,  and  then  crowded  them  into  one  again, 
putting  His  body  into  His  body,  even  His  whole  body  into  part  of  His 
body,  His  stomach.  And  so  He  must  be  thought  not  only  to  have  two 
bodies,  but  two  bodies  one  within  another ;  yea,  so  as  to  be  one  devoured 
by  another  ;  the  absurdity  of  which,  and  of  like  assertions,  he  that  hath 
but  half  an  eye  may  easily  discover.  So  that  it  must  needs  be  granted  to 
be  in  a  spiritual  manner  that  the  Sacrament  was  instituted,  and  by  con 
sequence  that  it  is  in  a  spiritual  manner  the  Sacrament  must  be  received. " 
—(Beveridge  on  the  Articles.  Ed.  Oxford:  1846.  Pp.  482-486.) 


THE    LESSONS    OF   ENGLISH    CHUKCH    HISTOKY.       393 

(10)  Waterland  says  :— 

"The  Fathers  well  understood  that  to  make  Christ's  natural  body  the 
real  sacrifice  of  the  Eucharist,  would  not  only  be  absurd  in  reason,  but 
highly  presumptuous  and  profane  ;  and  that  to  make  the  outward  symbols 
a  proper  sacrifice,  a  material  sacrifice,  would  be  entirely  contrary  to  gospel 
principles,  degrading  the  Christian  sacrifice  into  a  Jewish  one,  yea,  and 
making  it  much  lower  and  meaner  than  the  Jewish  one,  both  in  value  and 
dignity.  The  right  way,  therefore,  was  to  make  the  sacrifice  spiritual, 
and  it  could  be  no  other  upon  Gospel  principles." — (Works,  vol.  iv. 
p.  762.) 

"No  one  has  any  authority  or  right  to  offer  Christ  as  a  sacrifice, 
whether  really  or  symbolically,  but  Christ  Himself;  such  a  sacrifice  is  His 
sacrifice,  not  ours, — offered  for  us,  not  by  us,  to  God  the  Father." — 
( Works,  vol.  iv.  p.  753. ) 

"  The  words  of  the  Catechism,  verily  and  indeed  taken  and  received  by 
the  faithful,  are  rightly  interpreted  of  a  real  participation  of  the  benefits 
purchased  by  Christ's  death.  The  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  taken 
and  received  by  the  faithful,  not  corporally,  not  internally,  but  verily 
and  indeed,  that  is  effectually.  The  sacred  symbols  are  no  bare  signs,  no 
untrue  figures  of  a  thing  absent ;  but  the  force,  the  grace,  the  virtue,  and 
benefit  of  Christ's  body  broken  and  blood  shed,  that  is,  of  His  passion,  are 
really  and  effectually  present  with  all  them  that  receive  worthily.  This 
is  all  the  real  presence  that  our  Church  teaches. " — (  Waterland's  Works. 
Oxford:  1843.  Vol.  vi.  p.  42.) 

(11)  Bishop   Burnet,  in  his  comment  on  the  Twenty-eighth  Article, 
says : — 

"We  assert  a  real  presence  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ :  but  not  of 
His  body  as  it  is  now  glorified  in  heaven,  but  of  His  body  as  it  was  broken 
on  the  cross,  when  His  blood  was  shed  and  separated  from  it :  that  is, 
His  death,  with  the  merits  and  effects  of  it,  are  in  a  visible  and  federal 
act  offered  in  the  Sacrament  to  all  worthy  believers.  By  real  we  under 
stand  true,  in  opposition  both  to  fiction  and  imagination,  and  to  those 
shadows  that  were  in  the  Mosaical  dispensation,  in  which  the  manna,  the 
rock,  the  brazen  serpent,  but  immeasurably  the  cloud  of  glory,  were  types 
and  shadows  of  Messiah  that  was  to  come,  with  whom  came  grace  and 
truth,  that  is,  a  most  wonderful  manifestation  of  the  mercy  and  grace  of 
God,  and  a  verifying  of  promises  made  under  the  law.  In  this  sense  we 
acknowledge  a  Real  Presence  of  Christ  in  the  Sacrament.  Though  we  are 
convinced  that  our  first  Reformers  judged  right  concerning  the  use  of  the 
phrase,  Real  Presence,  that  it  was  better  to  be  let  fall  than  to  be  continued, 
since  the  use  of  it,  and  that  idea  which  does  naturally  arise  from  the 
common  acceptation  of  it,  may  stick  deeper,  and  feed  superstition  more 
than  all  those  larger  explanations  that  are  given  to  it  can  be  able  to 
avert." 


394  PKINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

(12)  Dean  Aldrich,  of  Christ  Church,  says  :— 

' '  The  Church  of  England  has  wisely  forborne  to  use  the  term  of  '  Real 
Presence'  in  all  the  books  that  are  set  forth  by  her  authority.  We 
neither  find  it  recommended  in  the  Liturgy,  nor  the  Articles,  nor  the 
Homilies,  nor  the  Church's  Catechism,  nor  Nowell's.  For  although  it  be 
seen  in  the  Liturgy,  and  once  more  in  the  Articles  of  1552,  it  is  mentioned 
in  both  places  as  a  phrase  of  the  Papists,  and  rejected  for  the  abuse  of  it. 
So  that  if  any  Church  of  England  man  use  it,  he  does  more  than  the 
Church  directs  him.  If  any  reject  it,  he  has  the  Church's  example  to 
warrant  him  ;  and  it  would  very  much  contribute  to  the  peace  of  Christendom 
if  all  men  would  write  after  so  excellent  a  copy." — (Dean  Aldrich's  "Reply 
to  Two  Discourses."  Oxford  :  1682.  4to,  pp.  13-18.) 

(13)  Henry  Philpotts,  Bishop  of  Exeter,  in  his  letter  to  Charles  Butler, 
says  : — 

"The  Church  of  Rome  holds  that  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are 
present  under  the  accidents  of  bread  and  wine  ;  the  Church  of  England 
holds  that  their  real  presence  is  in  the  soul  of  the  communicant  at  the 
Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

' '  She  holds,  that  after  the  consecration  of  the  bread  and  wine  they  are 
changed  not  in  their  nature  but  in  their  use ;  that  instead  of  nourishing 
our  bodies  only,  they  now  are  instruments  by  which,  when  worthily 
received,  God  gives  to  our  souls  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  to  nourish 
and  sustain  them  ;  that  this  is  not  a  fictitious  or  imaginary  exhibition  of 
our  crucified  Redeemer  to  us,  but  a  real  though  spiritual  one,  more  real, 
indeed,  because  more  effectual,  than  the  carnal  exhibition  and  manduca- 
tion  of  Him  could  be  (for  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing). 

' '  In  the  same  manner,  then,  as  our  Lord  Himself  said,  *  I  am  the  true 
bread  that  came  down  from  heaven '  (not  meaning  thereby  that  he  was  a 
lump  of  baked  dough,  or  manna,  but  the  true  means  of  sustaining  the 
true  life  of  man,  which  is  spiritual,  not  corporeal),  so  in  the  Sacrament, 
to  the  worthy  receiver  of  the  consecrated  elements,  though  in  their  nature 
mere  bread  and  wine,  are  yet  given,  truly,  really,  and  effectively,  the 
crucified  body  and  blood  of  Christ ;  that  body  and  blood  which  were  the 
instruments  of  man's  redemption,  and  upon  which  our  spiritual  life  and 
strength  solely  depend.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  crucified  Jesus  is 
present  in  the  Sacrament  of  His  Supper,  not  in,  nor  with,  the  bread  and 
wine,  nor  under  their  accidents,  but  in  the  souls  of  communicants  ;  not 
carnally,  but  effectually  and  faithfully,  and  therefore  most  really." — 
(Philpotfs  Letter  to  Butler.  8vo  edit.  1825,  pp.  235,  236.) 

(14)  Archbishop  Longley  says,  in  his  last  Charge,  printed  and  published 
after  his  death  in  1868  : — 

"The  doctrine  of  the  Real  Presence  is,  in  one  sense,  the  doctrine  of  the 
Church  of  England.  She  asserts  that  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are 


THE   LESSONS    OF    ENGLISH    CHURCH    HISTORY.       395 

1  verily  and  indeed  taken  and  received  by  the  faithful  in  the  Lord's 
Supper. '  And  she  asserts  equally  that  such  presence  is  not  material  or 
corporeal,  but  that  Christ's  body  'is  given,  taken,  and  eaten  in  the 
Supper,  only  after  a  heavenly  and  spiritual  manner.'  (Art.  xxviii.) 
Christ's  presence  is  effectual  for  all  those  intents  and  purposes  for  which 
His  body  was  broken  and  His  blood  shed.  As  to  a  presence  elsewhere 
than  in  the  heart  of  a  believer,  the  Church  of  England  i*  silent,  and  the 
words  of  Hooker  therefore  represent  her  views  :  '  The  real  presence  of 
Christ's  most  blessed  body  and  blood  is  not  to  be  sought  in  the  Sacrament, 
but  in  the  worthy  receiver  of  the  Sacrament.' " 

I  will  now  conclude  the  whole  subject  with  the  following  remarkable 
quotation,  which  I  commend  to  the  special  attention  of  all  my  readers.  It 
is  from  a  pamphlet  by  the  Eev.  W.  Maskell : — 

"The  strong  assertions"  of  the  Prayer-book  Communion  Service,  "in 
their  plainest  and  obvious  meaning,  support  the  low  view,  held  and 
insisted  on  by  so  many  of  our  clergy,  that  the  Real  Presence  is  a  doctrine 
not  approved  by  the  Church  of  England,  and  not  to  be  distinguished  from 
the  Romish  error,  as  they  go  on  to  say,  of  Transubstantiation. " — (From 
a  Second  Letter  on  '  The  Present  Position  of  the  High  Church  Party  in 
the  Church  of  England,"  by  the  Rev.  W.  Maskell,  vicar  of  St.  Mary's 
Church,  Torquay,  p.  62.  1850.) 

I  shall  make  no  comment  on  the  above  quotations.  They  speak  for 
themselves.  They  prove,  at  any  rate,  that  the  views  of  the  Lord's  Supper 
which  are  commonly  held  by  Evangelical  Churchmen  (so  called)  are  not 
new.  They  are  "old  paths,"  paths  marked  by  the  feet  of  some  of  the 
greatest  divines  of  the  Church  of  England, 


XVI. 

CAN  THE  CHUECH  KEACH  THE  MASSES? 

IT  is  a  great  fact  which,  I  fear,  admits  of  no  dispute,  that 
the  working  classes  of  England,  as  a  body,  are  "con 
spicuously  absent"  from  the  public  worship  of  God  on 
Sundays.  Census  after  census  in  our  large  towns  has 
lately  brought  this  painful  fact  before  the  public  mind. 
My  own  eyes  continually  see  proofs  of  it,  when  I  preach 
in  some  quarters  of  Liverpool.  I  often  see  things  which 
make  my  heart  bleed.  After  making  every  allowance 
for  defective,  unfair,  and  unfriendly  enumerations,  there 
remains  a  mass  of  evidence  which  cannot  be  gainsaid. 
A  vast  number  of  English  working  men  never  go  either 
to  Church  or  Chapel,  and,  to  all  appearance,  live  and  die 
"  without  God." 

This  state  of  things,  we  must  all  feel,  is  eminently 
unsatisfactory,  and  deserves  the  best  attention  of  all 
loyal  Churchmen.  But  it  is  much  more  than  unsatis 
factory.  It  endangers  the  very  existence  of  the  Estab 
lished  Church  of  England.  We  cannot  expect  to  prosper 
and  hold  our  position  without  "  the  masses."  The  Church, 
whose  adherents  are  a  minority  in  the  land,  will  not  be 
long  allowed  to  retain  her  endowments  and  her  connec 
tion  with  the  State  in  this  age ;  and  without  the  working 
classes  our  Church  is  in  a  minority  at  any  Parliamentary 

396 


CAN  THE    CHURCH    REACH   THE   MASSES?  397 

election.  A  regiment  consisting  only  of  officers  and  band, 
without  rank  and  file,  adds  nothing  to  the  strength  of  an 
army.  A  Church  which  can  only  number  the  rich  among 
its  members,  and  is  deserted  by  the  poor,  is  in  a  most 
unhealthy  condition,  and  not  like  a  servant  of  her  Divine 
Master,  whom  "  the  common  people  heard  gladly  "  (Mark 
xii.  3*7).  I  repeat  that  we  are  in  front  of  a  dangerous 
and  unsatisfactory  state  of  things.  It  is  high  time  to 
search  our  ways,  and  try  to  "  set  our  house  in  order,"  if 
we  would  not  die,  but  live. 

The  subject  is  wide,  and  I  can  do  little  more  than 
touch  the  fringe  of  it.  I  shall  simply  try  to  clear  away 
three  common  delusions,  and  to  point  out  four  remedial 
things  which,  in  my  opinion,  are  much  wanted  in  this 
day,  and,  by  God's  blessing,  might  improve  our  position. 
As  Napoleon  said  at  Marengo,  "It  is  not  too  late  to  win 
the  battle." 

(a)  For  one  thing,  then,  I  do  not  believe  that  the 
absence  of  working  men  from  public  worship  arises  from 
the  spread  of  systematic  infidelity  among  them.  I  know 
that  this  is  an  opinion  held  by  many ;  but  I  take  leave 
to  call  it  a  delusion.  My  own  impression  is  decided, 
that  even  among  the  rudest  and  roughest  ranks  of  English 
society,  there  is  often  a  deep-seated  vein  of  sturdy  faith 
in  a  God  and  a  world  to  come.  No  doubt  there  is  a 
large  quantity  of  most  offensive  infidel  literature,  of  a 
common  nature,  which  is  exclusively  circulated  among 
the  poorer  classes,  and  is  far  too  coarsely  flavoured  to 
suit  the  taste  of  the  upper  ten  thousand.  But  of  real 
reasoning  and  argumentative  scepticism,  there  is  just  as 
much  (and  perhaps  more)  among  the  rich  as  among  the 
poor.  It  does  not  strike  us,  probably,  for  the  simple  reason 
that  the  poor  are  many,  and  the  rich  are  few.  But  at  this 
very  moment,  I  shrewdly  suspect  there  are  more  agnostics 
and  sceptics,  in  proportion  to  the  population,  in  the  West 


398  PRINCIPLES   FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

End  of  London  than  in  the  East !  Nor  is  this  all.  The 
Tower  Hamlets  unbeliever  is  often  a  more  honest  man 
than  his  rich  brother  in  Belgravia.  Erring  as  he  is,  he 
has  the  courage  of  his  opinions,  and  never  goes  to  Church 
at  all !  The  rich  sceptic,  on  the  contrary,  will  often 
attend  religious  services  for  respectability's  sake,  or  by 
way  of  example  to  his  servants,  while  in  reality  he 
despises  the  whole  thing  in  his  heart. 

(b)  Eor  another  thing,  it  is  a  complete  delusion,  in  my 
opinion,  to  suppose  that  the  working  classes  in  England 
have  any  inherent  dislike  to  the  Established  Church,  and, 
if  left  to  themselves,  prefer  the  Dissenting  Chapel.     I 
believe  nothing  of  the   kind.     I   grant  that  our  poorer 
brethren  are  very  apt  to  judge  the  Church  by  the  parson, 
and  if  he  is  not  a  satisfactory  persona  ecclesice,  to  take 
a  dislike  to  the  body  which  he  represents.     If,  for  instance, 
he  is  a  thoroughly  worldly  man,  "  a  Nimrod,  a  ramrod,  or 
a  fishing-rod,"  who  neither  does  his  duty  as  a  preacher  or 
a  pastor, — or,  if  he  is  one  who,  in  his  zeal  for  ceremonial, 
does  things  which  they  think  are  Romanism, — it  is  very 
likely  they  will  forsake  the  Church,  and  stay  at  home,  or 
go   to    Chapel.     But  whenever  the   Church  is  properly 
represented,  both  in  the  pulpit  and  the  parish,  I  maintain 
that,  as  a  general  rule,  the  working  men  will  stick  to  her, 
and  prefer  her  ministrations  to  any  other.     They  like  her 
Prayer-book,  her  orders,  and  her  general  system,  and  will 
stand  by  her  to  the  last. 

(c)  Once  more,  but  not  least,  I  regard  it  as  a  rank 
delusion  to   imagine  that   Christianity  is  an  effete  and 
worn-out  system,  that  the  old  gospel  has  lost  its  power, 
and  that  the  nineteenth  century  requires  a  new  religion. 
This  is  a  sadly  common  idea  in  certain  quarters.     Men 
of  intellect,  as  they  are  called,  sneer  contemptuously  at 
such  grand  old  verities  as  the  atonement  of  Christ,  the 
inspiration  of  the  Bible,  the  reality  of  miracles,  the  need 


CAN    THE   CHURCH    EEACH  THE  MASSES?  399 

of  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  personality  of  Satan, 
the  judgment  to  come.  They  coolly  tell  us  that  these 
things  will  never  move  the  working  classes  in  this  day, 
and  that  they  will  not  come  to  Church  unless  we  give 
them  a  broader,  more  rational  theology,  stripped  of  every 
thing  supernatural.  I  do  not  admit  this  for  a  moment. 
It  is  empty  talk  and  baseless  assertion.  I  fail  to  see  the 
slightest  evidence  that  the  old  religion,  which  "  turned 
the  world  upside  down  "  eighteen  centuries  ago,  has  lost 
any  of  its  power.  I  can  discover  no  new  system  of 
teaching  which  regenerates  heathen  tribes,  relieves  bur 
dened  consciences,  binds  up  broken  hearts,  checks  sin, 
changes  characters,  deprives  death  of  its  terrors,  compared 
to  the  old-fashioned  gospel  of  Christ.  If  there  is  such  a 
new  system,  let  men  show  it  to  us,  and  show  us  its  fruits. 
The  working  classes,  I  am  convinced,  are  not  to  be  won 
to  public  worship  by  modern  wind-bags  and  fireworks, 
but  by  the  old  story  of  the  Cross. 

But,  after  all,  what  positive  suggestions  can  be  made  in 
order  to  meet  the  evil  which  we  deplore  ?  What  is  it 
that  is  wanting  in  the  present  day,  which  would  be  likely 
to  draw  the  working  classes  into  our  Churches,  if  we  could 
supply  it  ?  I  will  briefly  name  four  things  which,  in  my 
judgment,  are  secrets  of  strength,  and  commend  them  to 
the  consideration  of  my  readers. 

I.  My  first  suggestion  is  this.  If  we  want  to  get 
at  the  working  classes,  the  Church  must  have  a  great 
increase  of  living  agents  in  the  large  overgrown  parishes, 
where  working  men  chiefly  reside. 

No  man,  however  zealous,  can  do  more  than  a  certain 
amount  of  work.  To  suppose  that  the  incumbent  of  a 
parish  of  10,000  people  in  a  mining,  manufacturing,  or 
seaport  district,  can  keep  pace  with,  or  overtake  the 
spiritual  wants  of  his  parishioners,  so  long  as  he  is 


400  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

single-handed  and  alone,  is  simply  absurd.  The  thing 
is  physically  impossible.  When  he  has  every  week  read 
the  services  and  preached  sermons,  married,  baptized,  and 
buried  according  to  requirement,  visited  a  few  sick,  and 
superintended  his  schools,  his  week  will  be  gone.  There 
will  be  hundreds  of  houses  which  he  has  no  time  to 
enter,  and  even  thousands  of  men  and  women  whom  he 
does  not  know,  and  who  hardly  know  his  name.  Can 
any  one  wonder  if  the  isolated  incumbent  of  such  a 
parish  often  breaks  down  in  health  and  heart,  and  resigns  or 
dies  ?  Have  we  any  right  to  be  surprised  if  the  working 
classes  in  such  a  parish  live  without  religion,  and  are  a 
prey  to  drunkenness,  gambling,  extravagance,  improvi 
dence,  Sabbath-breaking,  unchastity,  and  general  immo 
rality  ?  What  else  can  be  expected  from  human  nature, 
if  half-educated  men  and  women  are  never  visited,  and 
are  left  to  themselves  ?  What  right  have  we  to  be 
surprised  and  indignant  if  many  of  them  join  some 
Nonconformist  body,  or  go  over  to  the  Church  of  Kome  ? 
Why  should  they  care  for  a  Church  which  does  not  seem 
to  care  for  them  ?  To  frown  on  seceders  in  such  a  case 
as  schismatics  is  senseless  and  foolish.  If  the  Church  of 
England  really  wants  to  get  hold  of,  and  keep  hold  of, 
the  working  classes  in  such  a  district  as  I  have  described, 
she  must  send  more  living  agents  among  them.  If  she 
does  not  begin  here,  she  will  certainly  lose  them,  and  in 
many  cases  has  lost  them  already.  If  she  does  not 
go  down  to  the  people,  the  people  will  not  come  up  to 
her. 

When  I  speak  of  living  agents,  I  mean  missionary 
curates,  Scripture-readers,  lay  agents,  Bible-women,  and 
voluntary  lay  helpers.  To  begin  spiritual  operations  by 
building  churches  in  huge,  overgrown,  neglected  parishes 
of  working-folks,  is  useless  waste  of  money  and  time. 
It  is  beginning  at  the  wrong  end.  You  may  build  the 


CAN  THE   CHURCH    REACH  THE   MASSES?  401 

churches,  as  certain  well-meaning  men  did  in  Bethnal 
Green,  forty-five  years  ago,  and  find  them,  by  and  by,  as 
empty  as  barns  in  July.  The  right  course  is  to  walk  in 
the  steps  of  the  apostles,  and  begin  with  living  agency. 
There  was  a  grand  heathen  temple  of  Diana  when  St. 
Paul  was  at  Ephesus,  but  I  do  not  find  that  this  great 
servant  of  Christ  reared  a  church  or  a  cathedral.  He 
lived  and  died  a  tent-maker !  Our  first  step  should  be 
to  send  living  agents  from  street  to  street,  and  lane  to 
lane,  and  alley  to  alley,  and  house  to  house,  and  room  to 
room,  and  garret  to  garret,  and  cellar  to  cellar,  until  there 
is  not  a  working  man  or  woman  in  the  parish  who  has 
not  been  looked  in  the  face,  or  shaken  by  the  hand,  and 
until  not  one  can  say,  "The  Church  of  England  does 
not  care  for  my  soul." 

Only  let  us  distinctly  understand  that  the  agents  we 
send  forth  must  be  men  and  women  of  the  right  sort, 
whose  chief  weapon  is  the  written  word  of  God,  the 
Bible.  The  missionary  curate  must  not  be  a  man  who 
stands  on  his  dignity  as  an  ordained  minister,  and  never 
feels  at  ease  unless  he  has  a  Prayer-book  in  his  hand  and 
a  surplice  on  his  back.  He  must  walk  in  the  steps  of 
the  apostles.  He  must  be  content  with  the  first  ele 
ments  of  the  gospel  on  his  lips,  and  the  simplest  possible 
kind  of  religious  services,  held  anywhere  and  in  any  place 
when  he  can  get  together  a  few,  in  a  barn,  a  cellar,  a 
garret,  a  warehouse,  or  even  in  the  open  air.  The  lay 
agent  must  be  eminently  a  man  of  love  and  patience,  not 
discouraged  by  opposition  and  coldness,  but  always  the 
same,  however  he  is  treated,  and  always  full  of  Christ, 
the  Bible,  and  readiness  to  do  good. 

Lastly,  but  above  all,  it  must  never  be  forgotten  that 
no  living  agent,  whether  clerical  or  lay,  will  ever  be  of 
use  unless  he  knows  something  of  saving  religion  by  his 
own  heart's  experience.  Unless  he  has  some  real  experi- 

2c 


402  PKINCIPLES   FOE   CHURCHMEN. 

mental  knowledge  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  the  excellence 
of  Christ's  Gospel,  and  its  suitableness  to  the  wants  of 
man's  soul,  the  beauty  of  holiness,  the  value  of  the  Bible 
and  prayer,  the  unspeakable  importance  of  Sabbath- 
keeping,  temperance,  and  chastity,  he  will  do  the  Church 
of  England  very  little  service.  The  working  classes  have 
a  keen  sense  of  reality.  They  have  an  instinctive  horror 
of  formalism,  ceremonialism,  priestcraft,  hypocrisy,  and 
false  profession.  They  hate  all  this  with  a  perfect  hatred. 
But  if  a  living  agent  comes  among  them  who  is  a  real, 
thorough  Christian,  and  full  of  zeal  and  love  to  souls,  he 
will  generally  see  "  signs  and  wonders "  following  his 
work.  Even  those  who  will  not  take  his  advice  will 
respect  him,  and  allow  no  one  to  do  him  harm. 

So  much  for  my  first  suggestion.  If  the  Church  of 
England  wants  to  reach  the  working  classes,  her  first  and 
wisest  course  is  to  multiply  her  living  agents.  If  her 
wealthy  children  among  the  laity  will  not  come  forward 
and  enable  her  to  do  this,  she  will  be  ruined. 

II.  My  second  suggestion  is  this.  The  Church  ought 
to  provide  facilities  for  an  organized  system  of  aggressive 
evangelization  in  her  large  parishes. 

This  subject  is  a  very  delicate  and  difficult  one,  and  I 
approach  it  with  some  diffidence.  But  the  extremely 
critical  position  of  our  beloved  Church  in  many  of  our 
large  parishes  makes  plain  speaking  a  positive  duty. 
When  a  ship  is  among  breakers,  it  is  no  time  to  stand 
on  ceremony.  Let  me  therefore  explain  fully  what  I 
mean. 

The  parochial  system  of  our  Church — the  system  by 
which  every  incumbent  has  a  territorial  district  assigned 
to  him,  and  represents  the  Church  of  England  within  it — 
is  an  admirable  system,  when  properly  worked.  I  know 
no  system  so  likely  to  do  good,  so  wisely  conceived,  and 


CAN   THE  CHUECH   REACH  THE   MASSES?  403 

so  eminently  calculated  to  promote  the  salvation  of  souls. 
It  marks  out  definite  work  for  every  clergyman,  and  pre 
vents  him  becoming  the  minister  of  a  few  picked,  petted, 
and  partial  adherents.  It  secures  spiritual  oversight  for 
every  family  in  our  population,  so  that  no  one  can  ever 
say,  "  There  is  no  one  to  care  for  my  soul."  I  do  not 
hesitate  to  say  that  an  English  parish  rightly  worked, 
with  right  preaching  in  the  pulpit,  right  education  in  the 
schools,  right  visiting  from  house  to  house,  and  right 
machinery  for  assisting  the  sick  and  poor,  is  one  of  the 
pleasantest  and  most  refreshing  sights  in  this  evil  world. 
Granted  a  faithful  administration,  and  I  know  nothing  so 
good  as  the  parochial  system  of  the  Church  of  England. 

But  just  in  proportion  to  the  good  which  the  parochial 
system  does  when  it  is  properly  worked,  is  the  harm 
which  it  does  when  it  is  worked  badly,  or  not  worked  at 
all.  The  old  saying  is  true,  "  The  worst  thing  is  the  cor 
ruption  of  a  good  thing."  Grant  for  a  moment  that  the 
clergyman  of  some  huge  overgrown  parish  is  aged,  worn 
out,  or  thoroughly  out  of  health, — or  grant  that  he  is 
poor  and  obliged  to  take  pupils  or  write  for  his  livelihood, 
and  so  unable  to  give  his  whole  time  to  his  parochial 
work, — or  grant  that  he  is  oppressed  and  bowed  down 
with  private  family  troubles, — or  grant  that  he  is  unfit, 
from  his  turn  of  mind,  for  the  charge  of  a  large  town 
population, — or  grant,  what  is  worst  of  all,  but  unhappily 
quite  possible,  that  he  is  unsound  in  doctrine  and  does 
not  preach  the  gospel,  or  worldly  in  life  and  cares 
nothing  for  spiritual  things, — grant  any  of  these  things, 
and  the  parochial  system  becomes  a  most  damaging  insti 
tution,  a  curse  and  not  a  blessing,  a  hindrance  and  not  a 
help,  a  nuisance  and  not  a  benefit,  a  weakness  and  not 
a  strength  to  the  Established  Church  of  this  realm. 

Now,  it  is  nonsense  to  deny  that  there  are  some  large 
parishes  in  almost  every  diocese  in  England  where  the 


404  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

parochial  clergyman,  from  one  cause  or  another,  does 
little  or  nothing.  The  parishioners  are  not  visited,  and 
are  like  sheep  without  a  shepherd.  The  bulk  of  the 
people  never  come  near  the  church  at  all.  Sin,  and 
immorality,  and  ignorance,  and  infidelity  increase  and 
multiply  every  year.  The  few  who  worship  anywhere 
take  refuge  in  the  chapels  of  Methodists,  Baptists,  and 
Independents,  if  not  in  more  questionable  places  of 
worship.  The  parish  church  is  comparatively  deserted. 
People  in  such  parishes  live  and  die  with  an  abiding 
impression  that  the  Church  of  England  is  a  rotten,  use 
less  institution,  and  bequeath  to  their  families  a  legacy 
of  prejudice  against  the  Church,  which  lasts  long  if  not 
for  ever.  Will  any  one  pretend  to  tell  me  that  there  are 
not  many  large  English  parishes  in  this  condition  ?  I 
defy  him  to  do  so.  I  am  writing  down  things  that  are 
only  too  true,  and  it  is  vain  to  pretend  to  conceal  them. 

But  what  does  the  Church  of  England  do  for  such 
parishes  as  these  ?  I  answer,  Nothing,  nothing  at  all ! 
It  is  precisely  here  that  our  territorial  system  fails  and 
breaks  down  altogether.  So  long  as  the  parochial 
minister  does  his  duty  up  to  the  bare  letter  of  legal 
requirement,  it  is  a  ruled  point,  both  in  theory  and  in 
practice,  and  a  matter  of  ecclesiastical  etiquette,  that 
nobody  must  interfere  with  him !  His  people  may  be 
perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge !  Infidels,  Mormonites, 
and  Papists  may  be  going  to  and  fro,  and  beguiling 
unstable  souls  !  Dissenters  of  all  sorts  may  be  building 
chapels,  and  filling  them  with  the  families  of  aggrieved 
and  neglected  Churchmen  !  The  children  of  the  Church 
may  be  drawn  away  from  her  every  year  by  scores! 
But  no  matter!  The  Church  cannot  interfere!  The 
Church  of  England  looks  on  with  folded  arms,  and  does 
nothing  at  all.  Can  any  one  imagine  a  more  ruinous 
system  ?  Can  any  one  wonder  that  some  irritated  and 


CAN   THE  CHURCH  REACH  THE  MASSES?  405 

disgusted  Churchmen  become  confirmed  Dissenters,  and 
that  others  despise  or  loathe  the  Church  which  allows 
such  a  state  of  things  to  go  on,  and  that  thousands  relapse 
into  a  state  of  semi-heathenism  ?  Can  any  one  feel  sur 
prised  if  the  inhabitants  of  such  parishes  complain  bitterly 
that  they  are  left  without  remedy  until  their  parson  is 
either  converted  or  dead  ? 

I  write  strongly  because  I  feel  warmly.  I  do  not 
believe  there  are  five  Bishops  on  the  bench  who  would 
not  admit  they  have  large  parishes  in  their  dioceses 
which  are  in  a  most  unsatisfactory  state,  and  yet  under 
our  present  ministerial  system  they  cannot  be  improved 
by  the  Church  of  England.  No !  If  the  incumbent 
likes  to  shut  his  door  against  improvement,  and  entrench 
himself  behind  a  perfunctory  discharge  of  his  duties,  the 
Bishop  can  only  sit  still,  and  wait,  and  hope,  and  pray  ! 
And  while  this  goes  on  for  twenty  or  thirty  years,  the 
Church  suffers,  Churchmen  are  driven  into  Dissent,  the 
world  mocks,  the  infidel  sneers,  the  devil  triumphs,  and 
souls  are  ruined.  In  short,  a  neglected  parish  is  at 
present  a  keyless  Bramah  lock,  and  cannot  be  picked. 
Like  the  Englishman's  house,  it  is  the  incumbent's  castle, 
and  nobody  can  enter  it  to  do  good,  except  a  Dissenter ! 
It  was  a  common  joke  of  O'Connell's,  that  a  certain  Irish 
town  had  over  its  gates  the  inscription,  "  Jew,  Turk,  and 
Atheist  may  enter  here,  but  not  a  Papist."  I  fear  that 
the  case  of  a  neglected  English  parish  is  somewhat 
parallel  You  may  write  over  its  boundaries,  "  Infidels, 
Papists,  and  Dissenters  may  enter  here  and  do  what  tho.y 
like,  but  not  a  Churchman."  If  this  is  not  a  weak  point, 
a  flaw,  and  a  blot  in  our  ecclesiastical  system,  I  know 
not  what  is.  It  is  an  abuse  that  cries  to  heaven  against 
the  Church  of  England,  and  it  ought  to  be  redressed. 
Here,  if  anywhere,  there  is  need  of  reform. 

The  suggestion  I  have  to  make  is  this.    Let  the  Bishop 


406  PRINCIPLES   FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

of  every  diocese  be  empowered  to  call  into  existence  a 
new  class  of  ministers,  to  be  named  "  Evangelists."  Let 
him  be  empowered,  with  the  advice  of  a  select  Council  of 
presbyters  and  leading  laymen,  to  arrange  with  any 
incumbent  of  a  large  overgrown  parish  to  separate  from 
such  parish  a  district  of  3000  or  4000  people,  and  place 
them  under  the  charge  of  an  evangelist,  to  work  in  any 
way  that  he  can.  Let  the  evangelist  be  licensed  to  the 
Bishop,  and  responsible  to  him  and  his  Council  only,  they 
undertaking  to  superintend  and  maintain  him.  Let  the 
incumbent  of  the  mother  Church  be  set  free  from  any 
responsibility  whatever  for  the  separated  district.  Let 
the  main  object  of  these  evangelists  be  to  proclaim 
Christ's  Gospel  in  its  simplest  form,  to  arouse  the  care 
less,  to  arrest  the  attention  of  the  indifferent,  to  inform 
the  ignorant,  to  gather  together  the  scattered  believers, 
and  to  show  them  how  to  keep  their  souls  in  the  right 
way.  Let  them,  in  short,  use  the  same  weapons  that 
were  used  a  century  ago,  with  such  mighty  power,  by 
Grimshaw  and  Berridge.  But,  unlike  these  noble-minded 
men,  let  them  be  sanctioned,  authorized,  commissioned, 
and  encouraged  by  those  in  authority,  and  not  snubbed, 
threatened,  frowned  upon,  and  rebuked.  Above  all,  let 
them  proclaim,  as  Berridge  and  Grimshaw  used  to  do 
everywhere,  that  they  come  as  members  and  friends  of 
the  Established  Church  of  England,  and  desire  to 
strengthen  and  assist  her  cause. 

Now,  I  am  well  aware  that  the  suggestion  I  now  make 
is  open  to  a  host  of  objections,  and  could  only  be  carried 
into  effect  with  great  difficulty.  But  I  have  yet  to  learn 
that  the  objections  are  insuperable.  As  to  difficulty, 
there  never  was  any  good  thing  done  in  this  world 
without  it.  The  great  enemy  of  souls  never  allows  his 
kingdom  to  be  invaded  without  a  struggle.  One  thing, 
at  any  rate,  is  very  certain.  The  plan  I  suggest  has 


CAN  THE  CHUECII    EEACH  THE  MASSES?  407 

been  tried  in  the  dioceses  of  London  and  Rochester  with 
great  success,  and  with  much  benefit  to  the  Church  of 
England.  This  is  a  simple  fact.  It  is  an  old  saying 
that  an  ounce  of  fact  is  worth  a  pound  of  theory. 

(a)  Some  men  will  tell  me  that  the  plan  I  suggest  is 
not  Scriptural.  I  am  not  so  sure  of  that.  I  find  a  text 
in  which  an  inspired  apostle  says,  "  He  gave  some, 
apostles ;  and  some,  prophets ;  and  some,  evangelists ; 
and  some,  pastors  and  teachers"  (Eph.  iv.  11).  More 
over,  if  we  talk  of  Scriptural  authority,  I  think  we  might 
be  puzzled  to  find  any  direct  express  authority  for 
parishes,  dioceses,  and  rural  deaneries,  or  for  rectors, 
vicars,  archdeacons,  and  rural  deans.  At  any  rate,  there 
is  nothing  contrary  to  Scripture  in  the  idea  of  "  an 
evangelist."  Nay,  rather  it  might  easily  be  shown  that 
the  first  preachers  we  read  of  in  the  Acts  were  much 
more  like  itinerant  Evangelists  than  settled  parochial 
clergymen ! 

(&)  Some  men,  again,  will  tell  me  that  the  plan  I 
suggest  is  entirely  new.  This,  again,  admits  of  consider 
able  doubt.  I  find  in  the  early  Church,  according  to 
Dr.  Burton,  "  there  appear  to  have  been,  in  addition  to 
presbyters  and  deacons,  who  may  be  called  resident 
ministers,  preachers  of  the  gospel  who  were  not  attached 
to  any  particular  Church,  but  who  travelled  about  from 
plaee  to  place  discharging  their  spiritual  duties.  These 
men  were  called  in  a  special  manner  Evangelists."  (See 
Riddle's  "  Christian  Antiquities.")  I  find  in  the  reign  of 
Edward  VI.  that  our  own  Reformers  appointed  certain 
preachers,  among  whom  were  Bradford,  Knox,  and  Grindal, 
who  had  a  general  commission  and  went  everywhere  in 
England  preaching  the  Word.  In  short,  the  charge  of 
novelty  cannot  be  supported. 

(c)  But  some  man  will  object  that  the  scheme  I  pro- 
pcse  would  break  up  the  parochial  system,  and  greatly 


408  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

damage  the  Church  of  England.  I  do  not  believe  it  a 
bit.  I  believe,  on  the  contrary,  to  begin  with,  that  it 
would  do  immense  good  among  the  laity.  It  would 
rally  them  round  the  Church  of  England,  and  show  them 
that  they  were  not  entirely  forgotten.  It  would  keep 
them  within  the  pale  of  the  Church,  and  preserve  them 
from  being  carried  off  by  Dissenters  and  Plymouth 
Brethren.  But  I  go  a  step  further.  I  believe  it  would 
do  good  eventually  among  the  parochial  clergy.  They 
would  see  at  last  that  the  diocesan  evangelist  did  not 
come  into  their  parishes  as  an  enemy,  but  as  a  friend. 
They  would  gradually  learn  to  value  his  aid,  and  might 
even  be  provoked  to  emulation  by  hearing  and  seeing 
what  he  did. 

The  truth  must  be  spoken  on  this  matter,  however 
offensive  it  may  be  to  some.  The  Church  of  England 
has  made  an  idol  of  her  parochial  system,  and  has  for 
gotten  that  it  has  weak  points  as  well  as  strong  ones, 
defects  as  well  as  advantages.  To  hear  some  men  talk, 
you  might  fancy  the  parochial  system  came  down  from 
heaven,  like  the  pattern  of  the  Mosaic  tabernacle,  and 
that  to  attempt  any  other  sort  of  ministry  but  a  parochial 
one  was  a  heresy  and  a  sin.  It  is  high  time  that  we 
should  change  our  tone,  and  humbly  acknowledge  cur 
mistake.  It  is  useless  to  ignore  the  fact  that  neglected 
or  unworked  parishes  weaken  the  Church  of  England, 
and  that  they  cannot  be  safely  let  alone,  however  difficult 
the  application  of  the  remedy  may  be.  We  must  face 
this  difficulty  if  we  want  to  win  back  the  affections  of 
myriads  of  our  fellow-countrymen.  We  must  break  the 
bonds  which  black  tape  has  too  long  placed  on  us,  aid 
cast  them  aside.  Parishes  must  no  longer  be  regarded 
as  ecclesiastical  preserves,  within  which  no  Churchman 
can  fire  a  spiritual  shot,  or  do  anything  without  tlie 
licence  of  the  incumbent.  This  notion  ought  to  go  down 


CAN    THE   CHUECH   REACH   THE  MASSES  ?  409 

before  a  new  order  of  things,  sanctioned  and  directed  by 
the  Bishop  and  his  Council.  Of  all  possible  reforms, 
there  are  few  that  I  desire, more  heartily  to  see  than  the 
institution  of  an  order  of  diocesan  "  Evangelists." 

The  subject  is  one  which  requires  great  plainness  of 
speech.  In  true  love  to  the  Church  of  England  I  will 
give  place  to  no  man.  I  daily  pray  for  her  peace  and 
labour  for  her  prosperity.  But  I  dare  not  shut  my  eyes 
to  the  fact  that  my  Church  is  sadly  wanting  in  elasticity 
and  power  of  adapting  herself  to  circumstances.  Its 
organization  is  stiff  and  rigid,  like  a  bar  of  cast-iron, 
when  it  ought  to  be  supple  and  bending  like  whalebone. 
Hence  its  machinery  is  continually  cracking,  snapping, 
and  breaking  down.  Churchmen  talk  and  act  as  if  a 
system  which  did  pretty  well  for  five  millions  of  English 
men  250  years  ago,  when  there  were  very  few  Dissenters, 
must  needs  be  perfectly  suited  to  the  thirty  millions  of 
to-day !  Like  some  fossilized  country  squire,  who  lives 
twenty  miles  from  a  railway,  and  never  visits  London,  the 
poor  dear  old  Church  of  England  must  still  travel  in  the  old 
family  coach,  shoot  with  the  old  flint-locked  single-barrel 
gun,  and  wear  the  old  jack-boots  and  long  pigtail.  And 
all  this  time  Dissent  is  netting  the  Church's  children  by 
scores,  and  laughing  in  her  sleeve  at  the  old  gentleman's 
folly.  Surely  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep  and 
attempt  some  reform  of  our  parochial  system ! 

I  leave  this  suggestion  here.  If  I  have  said  enough 
to  set  some  minds  thinking,  I  shall  be  abundantly  satis 
fied.  I  have  learned  by  sorrowful  experience  that  the 
plan  I  propose  is  not  acceptable  in  some  quarters.  An 
excessive  tenderness  for  the  supposed  rights  of  incumbents 
makes  people  shrink  from  the  very  idea  of  interfering 
with  their  parishes,  however  unsatisfactory  their  condition 
may  be.  But  nothing  will  alter  my  opinion,  that  unless 
such  a  system  of  aggressive  evangelization  as  I  propose  is 


410  PRINCIPLES   FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

adopted,  the  working  classes  in  many  districts  will  never 
be  brought  into  the  Church  of  England,  and  will  live  and 
die  outside.1 

III.  My  third  suggestion  is  this.  We  want  a  great 
deal  more  direct  lively  preaching  of  the  gospel  in  all  our 
pulpits,  whether  in  the  full  liturgical  service  of  the 
Church  or  the  simpler  elementary  service  of  the  mission 
room. 

In  saying  this  I  would  not  be  mistaken.  I  ask  men 
to  remark  that  I  lay  stress  most  emphatically  on  the 
words  "  direct "  and  "  lively."  That  the  distinctive  doc 
trines  of  the  gospel  are  far  more  frequently  found  in  the 
sermons  of  this  day  than  they  were  in  the  sermons  of 
last  century  I  have  no  doubt  whatever.  The  wretched 

1  The  following  passage  appears  in  a  leading  article  of  the  Times  news 
paper  of  February  14th,  1883.  It  supplies  such  a  remarkable  confirmation 
of  some  of  the  opinions  expressed  in  this  part  of  my  paper  that  I  make  no 
apology  for  inserting  it  :— 

"  The  Church  sees  thousands  of  her  children  committed  for  no  one 
knows  how  long  to  the  spiritual  care  of  some  one  who  has  long  ceased  to 
care  for  souls,  if,  indeed,  he  ever  did.  Such  a  man  may  have  his  merits, 
and  may  have  run  up  in  a  long  course  of  years  some  score  of  good  service. 
By  every  rule  of  public  affairs,  not  only  ought  he  to  have  the  liberty  to 
retire— he  ought  to  be  encouraged,  nay,  compelled,  to  retire.  The  first 
rule  of  public  service  is  that  it  be  done,  and  that  it  be  done  as  well 
as  possible.  Having,  then,  due  regard  to  the  great  end  for  which 
Churches  are  founded  and  maintained,  it  is  straining  at  a  gnat  and 
swallowing  a  camel  to  make  scruples  about  '  simony,'  as  it  is  called,  and 
leave  large  congregations  in  incapable  and  indifferent,  if  not  unwilling, 
hands. 

"There  is  no  Church,  there  is  no  Government,  there  is  no  institution 
in  the  world,  that  so  little  adapts  its  means  to  its  ends,  its  resources  to 
work,  its  men  to  its  positions,  as  the  Church  of  England.  The  fact  is 
proved,  the  want  supplied,  and  the  evil  mitigated  by  the  surrounding 
atmosphere  of  Nonconformity,  everywhere  pressing  in  to  fill  the  void. 
Always  and  everywhere  there  are  to  be  found  those  who  will  reap  a 
harvest  of  souls  wherever  it  may  offer  itself.  The  kingdom  of  grace  has  a 
spontaneous  development,  which  ever  supplies  the  shortcomings  of  human 
government  and  administration.  No  Bishop,  however  exalted,  no  theo- 


CAN  THE  CHUfcCH   REACH  THE  MASSES?  411 

moral  essays  which  our  forefathers  often  heard,  and  which 
brought  out  the  bitter  remark  that  the  clergy  were  only 
"  apes  of  Epictetus,"  are  no  longer  tolerated,  and,  I  trust, 
will  never  return.  But  still,  I  must  express  a  suspicion 
that  the  distinctive  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  are  often 
placed  before  the  working  classes  in  such  an  unattractive 
way  that  they  will  not  listen,  and  will  rather  stay  at 
home. 

It  is  vain  to  deny  that  when  Christ's  gospel  has  been 
preached  by  such  men  as  Whitfield,  and  Wesley,  and 
Venn,  and  Grimshaw,  in  days  past, — or  by  Spurgeon,  or 
Guthrie,  or  Moody,  or  Aitken,  in  our  own  age, — there 
was,  and  is,  little  difficulty  in  getting  working  men  to 
hear  them.  Where  is  the  defect,  then  ?  What  is  it  that 
is  wanting  ?  I  fear  there  is  only  one  simple  answer : — 

logian,  however  narrow  or  however  Quixotic,  can  deny,  even  upon  his  own 
theories,  a  Divine  origin  and  order  to  the  self-denying  zeal  of  the  men 
who  do  their  best,  by  the  simplest  means  at  hand,  to  raise  the  surrounding 
tone  of  morality  and  religion,  to  rebuke  vice,  and  to  encourage  the  virtues 
that  all  alike  recognise,  even  if  they  practise  them  not.  The  good  work 
to  be  done  is  as  plain  and  as  universal  as  the  sun  in  the  heavens.  The 
school  and  the  field  of  true  faith  is  all  the  world,  and  knows  no  demarca 
tions  or  prohibitions.  An  artificial  and  cumbersome  establishment, 
standing  upon  gone-by  ages,  and  inheriting  innumerable  anomalies, 
hindrances,  and  scandals,  may  be  too  sacred  a  thing  to  be  rudely  handled. 
But  it  cannot  cover  the  ground  or  reap  the  harvest.  Part — indeed,  the 
greater  part — must  be  left  to  those  who,  if  less  privileged,  are  less  tram 
melled,  and  who  have  the  power  not  of  authority,  but  of  freedom.  In 
such  a  case  there  must  be  some  jarring,  some  antagonism.  How  shall  it 
be  cured  ?  How  shall  the  Established  Church  acquire  for  itself  that  full 
liberty  of  action  which  it  continually  sees  employed  against  itself?  It 
must  condescend  to  gather  all  the  lessons  it  can  from  the  organization  and 
tactics  of  those  whom  it  only  too  naturally  regards  as  its  rivals,  if  not 
foes  ?  How  do  they  get  possession  of  the  ground  ?  How  do  they  advance 
everywhere  and  hold  the  ground  they  win  ?  They  do  it  by  the  use  of 
common  sense.  That  is  what  the  Church  of  England  will  have  to  submit 
to.  The  ministry — that  is,  the  entire  system  of  employment  in  the 
service  of  the  Church  of  England — will  have  to  be  adapted  to  the  work 
everywhere  to  be  done,  unless  the  Church  is  to  find  itself  one  day  the 
shadow  of  a  great  name." 


412  PRINCIPLES  FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

Our  clergymen,  as  a  body,  do  not  pay  sufficient  attention 
to  the  way  of  putting  things.  They  forget  that  it  is  not 
enough  to  have  good  tools,  if  they  do  not  handle  those 
tools  in  the  right  way.  "Will  any  one  tell  me  that  Whit- 
field,  last  century,  or  Moody,  in  our  own  time,  would  ever 
have  assembled  myriads  of  working  men,  by  their  preach 
ing,  if  they  had  only  read  to  them,  in  a  kind  of  monotone 
voice,  dry,  heavy,  stiff,  dull,  cold,  tame,  orthodox  theo 
logical  essays,  couched  in  the  first  person  plural  number, 
full  of  "we"  and  "we"  and  "we,"  and  destitute  of 
warmth,  vivacity,  direct  appeal,  or  fire  ?  I  will  never 
believe  it.  But  surely,  if  their  style  of  address  arrests 
and  attracts  the  working  classes,  it  seems  a  thousand  pities 
that  it  is  not  more  generally  adopted.  It  is  perfectly 
amazing  to  me  that  at  this  late  period  of  the  world  men 
should  need  to  be  told,  what  Greeks  and  Eomans  knew 
well,  that  it  is  not  the  speaker's  thoughts  only  which 
arrest  the  attention  of  hearers,  but  the  style  and  manner 
in  which  those  thoughts  are  conveyed. 

I  hear  people  complain,  sometimes,  that  "Mission 
Services"  produce  no  lasting  effect;  and  too  often  the 
complaint  is  just  and  well-founded.  Yet  the  explana 
tion,  in  many  cases,  is  simple  and  easy.  A  mission 
preacher  is  invited  to  come  into  a  parish,  and  when  he 
comes  he  addresses  the  people  with  "  thoughts  that 
breathe  and  words  that  burn."  He  brings,  very  pro 
bably,  no  new  doctrine.  He  tells  them  nothing  that 
they  have  not  heard  before.  But  he  tells  his  story  with 
such  vivacity,  and  fire,  and  personal  application,  that  he 
rouses  the  whole  parish,  and  makes  all  classes  want  to 
hear  him.  The  church  is  filled.  The  incumbent  is 
delighted.  The  old  clerk  and  sexton  keep  awake.  The 
empty  benches  are  all  occupied.  The  whole  place  seems 
stirred.  And  then  what  happens,  far,  far  too  often  ? 
The  mission  preacher  goes  away,  and  the  fire  cools  down. 


CAN  THE  CHURCH  EEACH  THE  MASSES?  413 

The  innocent,  well-meaning  incumbent  returns  to  his  old 
style  of  preaching  and  gets  into  his  old  groove,  and  in 
two  months  undoes  the  missioner's  work,  and  empties  the 
church  again !  And  all  this  is  because  he  will  not  see 
that  fiery  liveliness  and  directness  of  style  are  one  grand 
secret  of  pulpit  success.  "Be  awake  yourself,  if  you 
want  to  keep  your  people  awake,"  is  an  excellent  pulpit 
maxim.  For  my  part,  I  heartily  wish  that  clergymen 
who  invite  missioners  to  address  their  people  would 
remember,  that  if  they  would  keep  up  the  missioner's 
work,  they  must  preach  in  his  style.  I  suspect  it  would 
be  a  great  gain  to  the  Establishment  if  a  huge  bonfire 
were  made,  and  myriads  of  dull,  essay-style  sermons 
were  dragged  out  of  parsonage  studies,  thrown  into  the 
bonfire,  and  burned ! 

After  all,  it  is  vain  to  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that 
there  is  great  room  for  improvement  in  the  preaching  of 
the  Church  of  England.  At  present  it  is  certainly  below 
the  mark.  Neither  in  matter,  nor  in  style,  nor  in  deli 
very,  does  our  pulpit  come  up  to  the  requirements  of  the 
day.  There  never  was  a  time  since  the  beginning  of  the 
world  when  powerful  speaking  of  any  kind  had  more 
influence  than  it  has  now.  There  never  was  a  time 
when  it  was  so  important  for  the  clergy  to  speak  for 
Christ  with  eloquence,  life,  plainness,  and  power.  But, 
alas,  how  sadly  rare  this  kind  of  preaching  is !  How 
far  a  man  may  travel  before  he  hears  a  really  striking 
sermon !  How  few  clergymen  command  the  attention 
of  their  congregations !  How  many  forget  that  "  the 
foolishness  of  preaching"  is  not  foolish  preaching  !  These 
things  ought  not  so  to  be. 

One  reason,  no  doubt,  is  the  utter  want  of  training  for 
the  pulpit  which  the  Church  of  England  provides  for  her 
young  ministers.  Few  men,  I  believe,  ever  go  into  orders 
with  any  clear  idea  of  what  a  sermon  ought  to  be,  or  how 


414  PRINCIPLES   FOR  CHURCHMEN. 

they  ought  to  set  about  making  one.  Their  sermons  for 
the  first  few  years  of  their  ministry  are  nothing  better 
than  experiments,  and  they  often  end  with  giving  up  in 
despair,  and  regularly  preaching  the  compositions  of  other 
men.  "  Alas !  master,  it  was  borrowed,"  would  be  the 
true  comment  on  many  a  clergyman's  sermon.  This  is 
an  evil  which  might  partly  be  remedied  by  the  Univer 
sities  providing  instruction  in  sacred  rhetoric,  and  partly 
by  the  Bishops  laying  more  stress  on  the  composition  of 
a  sermon  in  their  examinations  for  orders.  But  it  is  a 
matter  in  which  something  ought  to  be  done.  There  is 
real  need  for  reform. 

The  main  reason  why  the  pulpit  of  the  Church  of 
England  is  so  weak  is,  I  fear,  a  much  more  serious  one. 
A  stupid  notion  has  lately  possessed  many  clerical  minds, 
that  preaching  is  no  longer  of  importance, — that  edu 
cation  and  the  increase  of  reading  make  men  think  little 
of  sermons, — that  the  prayers  of  the  Church  are  the 
principal  thing,  and  the  sermon  is  of  little  moment, — that 
our  main  effort  should  be  to  improve  the  ceremonial  of 
the  Church,  and  that  we  need  not  think  much  about 
the  pulpit!  A  greater  mass  of  delusion  than  all  this  line 
of  argument  I  cannot  conceive.  It  may  suit  those  who 
want  excuses  for  laziness  in  preparing  their  sermons. 
It  will  never  satisfy  those  who  open  their  eyes  and  look 
at  facts.  There  never  was  a  period  in  the  history  of  our 
Church  when  men  were  more  ready  to  listen  to  really 
good  sermons,  if  they  can  only  get  them,  or  more  quick 
to  show  their  dislike  to  bad  sermons,  if  you  will  preach 
bad  ones.  Shrewd  men  of  all  schools  of  opinion  are  wide 
awake  on  this  point.  Wise  men,  whether  High,  or  Low, 
or  Broad,  do  not  think  lightly  of  sermons,  or  hold  them 
in  low  esteem.  Let  us  all  look  this  matter  in  the  face, 
and  see  if  we  cannot  improve.  Let  us  strive  to  reform 
our  preaching. 


CAN   THE   CHUKCH    REACH   THE   MASSES?  415 

I  cannot,  however,  leave  this  part  of  my  subject  with 
out  adding  the  expression  of  my  own  firm  conviction, 
that  there  is  far  less  preaching  of  the  whole  Gospel  than 
there  ought  to  be.  When  I  say  that,  I  mean  that  there 
is  not  enough  made  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself, 
and  His  office  and  work  for  our  souls.  We  are  all  apt 
to  forget  that  it  is  quite  possible  to  make  an  orthodox 
statement  of  doctrine,  and  yet  not  to  present  Christ  to  our 
hearers  in  the  manner  and  proportion  in  which  He  is 
presented  to  us  in  the  New  Testament.  I  am  struck  with 
the  undeniable  fact  that  all  preachers  who  succeed  in  get 
ting  hold  of  the  working  classes — whether  Whitfield,  or 
Moody,  or  any  other — give  a  very  marked  prominence  in 
their  sermons  to  the  atoning  death,  the  ever-living  inter 
cession,  the  boundless  mercy,  the  almighty  power  to  save, 
of  that  blessed  Person  in  whose  name  Christian  worship 
pers  meet  together.  You  have  only  to  read  reports  of 
their  preaching  in  order  to  see  proof  of  what  I  say.  And 
I  will  not  hesitate  to  declare  my  firm  belief,  that  if  we 
would  get  hold  of  the  working  classes,  we  must  make 
"  Christ  crucified  and  risen  again  "  the  sun  and  centre  of 
our  sermons,  far  more  than  we  have  done  in  the  Church 
of  England.  It  is  a  lever  which  shook  the  world  eighteen 
centuries  ago,  and  is  able  to  shake  it  now.  It  is  a  great 
magnet  which  in  every  age,  from  the  apostles  down 
wards,  has  drawn  men  whom  nothing  else  could  draw. 
And  it  is  a  magnet,  I  am  convinced,  which  has  lost  -none 
of  its  attractive  influence.  I  need  hardly  say  that  it 
would  be  easy  to  enlarge  on  this  point,  if  time  permitted. 
But  I  cannot  leave  it  without  quoting  the  words  of  a 
mighty  layman,  which  deserve  attention, — a  layman  of 
great  experience  and  observation, — a  layman  who  in  his 
day  has  taken  great  interest  in  religious  questions.  The 
layman  I  mean  is  the  late  Prime  Minister  of  England 
— Mr.  Gladstone.  He  said  on  the  22nd  March  1877: 


416  PRINCIPLES   FOE  CHURCHMEN. 

"  It  is  the  preaching  of  Christ  our  Lord  which  is  the 
secret,  and  substance,  and  centre,  and  heart  of  all  preach 
ing;  not  merely  of  facts  about  Him,  and  notions  about 
Him,  but  of  His  person,  His  work,  His  character, 
His  simple  yet  unfathomable  sayings,  —  here  lies  the 
secret."  (Times,  March  23rd,  1877.)  That  witness  is 
true.  Mr.  Gladstone  never  said  a  truer  thing  in  his  life. 
The  sermon  full  of  Christ  is  the  sermon  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  most  usually  blesses  to  the  souls  of  all  classes. 

IV.  The  fourth  and  last  suggestion,  which  I  venture 
to  make,  in  order  to  solve  the  problem  discussed  in  this 
paper,  is  one  which  I  hold  to  be  of  vast  importance. 

I  say,  then,  that  if  we  want  to  bring  the  working 
classes  to  church,  there  needs,  throughout  the  land,  a  great 
increase  of  sympathy  and  friendly  personal  dealing  with 
them  on  the  part  of  the  clergy. 

I  confess  that  I  have  immense  faith  in  the  power  of 
sympathy  and  kindness.  I  believe  the  late  Judge  Tal- 
fourd  hit  the  nail  right  on  the  head  when  he  said,  in 
almost  his  last  Charge  to  a  Grand  Jury,  at  Stafford 
Assizes :  "  Gentlemen,  the  great  want  of  the  age  is  more 
sympathy  between  classes."  I  entirely  agree  with  him. 
I  think  an  increase  of  sympathy  and  fellow-feeling 
between  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  employer  and 
employed,  parson  and  people,  is  one  healing  medicine 
which  the  age  demands.  Sympathy,  exhibited  in  its 
perfection,  was  one  secondary  cause  of  the  acceptance 
which  Christ's  Gospel  met  with  on  its  first  appearance  in 
the  heathen  world.  Well  says  Lord  Macaulay :  "  It  was 
before  Deity  taking  a  human  form,  walking  among  men, 
partaking  of  their  infirmities,  leaning  on  their  bosoms, 
weeping  over  their  graves,  slumbering  in  the  manger, 
bleeding  on  the  cross,  that  the  prejudices  of  the  syna 
gogue,  and  the  doubts  of  the  academy,  and  the  fasces  of 


CAN    THE    CHURCH    REACH    THE    MASSES  ?  417 

the  lictor,  and  the  swords  of  thirty  legions,  were  humbled 
in  the  dust."  And  sympathy,  I  firmly  believe,  can  do 
as  much  in  the  present  century  as  it  did  in  the  first. 
If  anything  will  melt  down  the  cold  isolation  of  classes 
in  these  latter  days,  and  make  our  social  body  consist  of 
solid  cubes  compacted  together,  instead  of  spheres  only 
touching  each  other  at  one  point,  it  will  be  a  large  growth 
of  Christlike  sympathy. 

Now  I  assert  confidently  that  the  English  working 
man  is  peculiarly  open  to  sympathy,  and  the  clergyman 
has  peculiar  opportunities  of  showing  it.  The  working 
man  may  live  in  a  poor  dwelling ;  and  after  toiling  all 
day  in  a  coal-pit,  or  cotton-mill,  or  iron-foundry,  or  dock, 
or  chemical  works,  he  may  often  look  very  rough  and 
dirty.  But  after  all  he  is  flesh  and  blood  like  ourselves. 
Beneath  his  outward  roughness  he  has  a  heart  and  a  con 
science,  a  keen  sense  of  justice,  and  a  jealous  recollection 
of  his  rights,  as  a  man  and  a  Briton.  He  does  not  want 
to  be  patronized  and  flattered,  any  more  than  to  be 
trampled  on,  scolded,  or  neglected;  but  he  does  like  to 
be  dealt  with  as  a  brother,  in  a  friendly,  kind,  and  sym 
pathizing  way.  He  will  not  be  driven;  he  will  do 
nothing  for  a  cold,  hard  man,  however  clever  he  may  be. 
But  give  him  a  clergyman  who  really  understands  that  it 
is  the  heart  and  not  the  coat  which  makes  the  man,  and 
that  the  guinea's  worth  is  in  the  gold,  and  not  in  the 
stamp  upon  it.  Give  him  a  clergyman  who  will  not  only 
preach  Christ  in  the  pulpit,  but  come  and  sit  down  in 
his  house,  and  take  him  by  the  hand  in  a  Christ-like, 
familiar  way  during  the  week.  Give  him  a  clergyman 
who  realizes  that  in  Christ's  holy  religion  there  is  no 
respect  of  persons,  that  rich  and  poor  are  "  made  of  one 
blood,"  and  need  one  and  the  same  atoning  blood,  and 
that  there  is  only  one  Saviour,  and  one  Fountain  for  sin, 
and  one  heaven,  both  for  employers  and  employed.  Give 

2  D 


418  PRINCIPLES   FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

him  a  clergyman  who  can  weep  with  them  that  weep,  and 
rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice,  and  feel  a  tender  interest 
in  the  cares,  and  troubles,  and  births,  and  marriages,  and 
deaths  of  the  humblest  dweller  in  his  parish.  Give  the 
working  man,  I  say,  a  clergyman  of  that  kind,  and,  as  a 
general  rule,  the  working  man  will  come  to  his  Church. 
Such  a  clergyman  will  not  preach  to  empty  benches. 

I  invite  the  special  attention  of  my  clerical  brethren  to 
this  point.  We  live  in  days  when  public  work  of  all 
kinds  seems  every  year  to  absorb  more  of  a  clergyman's 
time.  Committees,  Bible  classes,  semi-secular  lectures, 
meetings,  frequent  services  and  Communions,  are  rapidly 
increasing  so  much  that  they  seem  to  leave  ministers  no 
time  for  old-fashioned  house-to-house  work,  family  work, 
and  winning  the  confidence  of  individual  souls.  I  warn 
them  to  be  on  their  guard.  A  house-going  minister  is 
one  secret  of  a  church-going  people.  All  the  public 
work  in  the  world,  however  good,  will  not  compensate  for 
the  loss  of  opportunities  for  cultivating  relations  of  sym 
pathy  between  yourselves  and  your  people.  Make  time 
for  going  among  them,  sitting  down  with  them,  holding 
friendly  converse  with  them,  talking  face  to  face,  and  in 
the  long  run  you  will  find  no  time  so  well  bestowed. 

I  am  not  speaking  theoretically  only.  I  have  seen 
proof  upon  proof  that  I  have  warrant  for  what  I  say,  both 
in  colliery  districts  and  in  towns.  I  will  give  one,  and 
so  conclude  my  paper. 

I  know  at  this  moment  a  parish  of  5000  people  in 
Liverpool  with  not  a  rich  man  in  it,  but  only  small 
shopkeepers,  artisans,  and  poor.  There  are  only  thirty 
families  in  it  which  keep  a  servant,  and  not  one  family 
which  keeps  two.  There  are  195  houses  with  more  than 
one  family  in  each.  There  are  133  families  living  in 
cellars.  Many  of  these  cellars  are  within  a  few  yards 
from  the  church,  and  under  its  shadow.  In  short,  that 


CAN  THE  -CHURCH  REACH  THE  MASSES?     419 

this  is  a  thoroughly  poor,  working  class  parish,  I  think 
no  one  can  deny. 

Now,  what  does  the  Church  of  England  do  in  this 
parish  ?  Listen  reader,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

In  a  plain  brick  church,  holding  1000,  built  thirteen 
years  ago,  there  is  a  simple,  hearty  service,  and  an  ave 
rage  attendance  of  700  on  Sunday  morning,  300  in  the 
afternoon,  and  950  in  the  evening.  About  half  the  sit 
tings  are  rented  and  half  free.1  In  three  mission  rooms 
there  is  an  average  attendance  of  about  3  5  0  in  the  morn 
ing,  and  450  in  the  evening. 

The  communicants  are  almost  all  of  the  working 
classes,  and  nearly  half  men.  I  myself  helped  once  to 
administer  the  consecrated  elements  to  395  persons,  and 
I  saw  the  hands  which  received  them,  and  I  know  by 
those  hands  that  many  of  them  were  dock  labourers  and 
foundry  men. 

The  worthy  minister  of  this  parish  began  his  work 
alone  about  fourteen  years  ago,  with  four  people  in  a 
cellar.  After  his  church  was  built,  he  had  only  eight 
communicants  at  his  first  administration  of  the  Lord's 
Supper.  He  has  now  800  communicants,  and  is  aided 
by  two  paid  curates,  one  paid  Scripture  reader,  one  paid 
Bible-woman,  and  one  paid  organist.  But  he  has  besides, 
82  voluntary  Sunday  school  teachers,  120  Church 
workers,  18  Bible  classes,  with  600  adults  on  the  regis 
ter,  and  1*700  Sunday  scholars.  There  are  six  services 
in  church  every  week,  and  four  services  in  mission 

1  Let  me  here  remark  that  I  do  not  believe  for  a  moment  that  the  work 
ing  classes  are  to  be  drawn  to  church  by  an  immense  amount  of  sensuous 
ornament  and  decoration,  or  by  the  "free  and  open"  system.  The  best 
attended  working  man's  Church  in  Liverpool  is  not  a  free  and  open  one, 
and  I  cannot  hear  that  the  congregation  wish  for  a  change.  As  to  exces 
sive  decoration,  I  believe  the  intelligent  working  man  regards  it  as  childish, 
and  does  not  care  to  see  it.  On  both  points  I  could  say  much.  But 
opinions  differ,  and  for  peace  sake  I  forbear. 


420  PRINCIPLES   FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

rooms,  throughout  the  year,  besides  two  prayer  meetings 
every  month. 

The  practical  and  moral  results  of  the  Church's  work 
in  this  parish  are  patent  and  unmistakable.  Of  course 
some  of  the  people  remain  to  this  day  irreligious,  careless, 
unchanged,  and,  like  the  "  wayside"  hearers  in  the  parable 
of  the  sower,  the  wheat  and  the  tares  will  grow  together 
till  the  harvest.  No  minister  can  give  grace,  however 
faithfully  he  may  preach  it.  But  there  are  plain  proofs 
in  this  case  that  labour  is  not  in  vain.  It  bears  "  fruit 
that  remains."  The  congregation  raises  £800  a  year  for 
the  cause  of  God.  There  are  1100  pledged  abstainers  in 
the  district.  There  is  not  a  single  house  of  ill  fame  or  a 
single  known  infidel  in  the  parish. 

These  are  facts,  simple  facts,  which  any  one  who  visits 
Liverpool  may,  if  he  likes,  verify  for  himself.  The  in 
cumbent  of  this  parish  is  a  quiet,  unpretending  man,  who 
perhaps  would  not  gather  a  congregation  in  the  Temple, 
Westminster  Abbey,  or  St.  Paul's,  or  fascinate  an  Oxford 
or  Cambridge  University  audience.  But  of  one  thing  I 
am  certain,  he  is  a  man  who  tries  to  preach  Christ  in  the 
pulpit,  and  to  visit  his  people  in  a  Christ-like,  sympa 
thizing  way  as  a  pastor,  at  the  rate  of  7  5  families  a  week, 
and  to  these  two  things  I  attribute  his  success. 

Of  course  man  cannot  command  success  under  any 
circumstances.  "  It  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth."  Nor 
can  such  results  as  those  I  have  just  stated  be  reasonably 
expected  in  huge,  overgrown,  long-neglected  parishes  of 
fifteen  or  twenty  thousand  people.  In  such  districts  it 
is  no  wonder  if  thousands  are  slaves  of  drink,  or  live  in 
ignorance,  worldliness,  and  sin,  and  cannot  be  got  at. 
Yet  even  then  much  may  be  done  by  a  right  incumbent, 
with  a  good  staff  of  curates  and  lay-helpers,  and  by 
steadily  keeping  in  view  territorial  subdivision. 

But  nothing  shall  make  me  flinch  from  the  position 


CAN    THE    CHURCH    REACH    THE    MASSES?  421 

that,  with  a  proper  supply  of  clergy  and  lay -helpers  of 
the  right  sort,  and  a  reasonable  subdivision  of  our  large 
parishes,  we  have  no  reason  to  despair  about  the  working 
classes.  I  will  never  admit  that  they  are  hopelessly  sunk 
in  ignorance  and  infidelity, — never,  never !  I  will  never 
admit  that  they  cannot  be  got  to  church, — never,  never ! 
Give  us  right  preaching  in  every  pulpit,  accompanied  by 
right  house-to-house  visiting  in  every  parish,  and  I  believe 
the  working  classes  will  be  found  the  best  friends  and 
members  of  the  Church  of  England.  She  will  become  in 
deed  as  well  as  in  name  "  the  Church  of  the  people." 

I  assert  emphatically  that  by  the  use  of  right  means, 
and  with  God's  blessing,  the  Church  can  reach  the 
masses. 


XVII. 
THOUGHTS  FOE  SCEPTICS. 

WE  live  in  times  when  a  wave  of  unbelief  is  passing  over 
Christendom,  like  a  wave  of  fever,  cholera,  diphtheria,  or 
plague.  It  is  vain  to  deny  it.  Every  intelligent  observer 
of  the  times  knows  that  it  is  so.  I  do  not  say  for  a 
moment  that  the  advance  of  science  necessarily  makes  men 
unbelievers.  Nothing  is  further  from  my  thoughts.  I 
welcomed  the  visit  of  the  British  Association  to  Southport 
in  the  Diocese  of  Liverpool  in  1883,  and  I  am  thankful  for 
every  addition  to  our  knowledge  which  its  leaders  annually 
announce.  I  doubt  whether  formal,  organized,  systematic, 
reasoning  infidelity  is  so  common  as  many  suppose.  But  I 
do  say  that  there  is  in  the  air  of  these  times  a  dispo 
sition  to  question  everything  in  revealed  religion,  and  to 
suspect  that  science  and  revelation  cannot  be  reconciled. 
The  faith  of  many  church-goers  and  professing  Christians 
seems  cold,  and  languid,  and  torpid.  They  are  continually 
harping  on  petty  modern  objections  to  Scripture, — "  Are 
such  and  such  things  in  the  Bible  really  quite  true  ?  Do 
not  some  clever  and  learned  people  say  we  should  not 
believe  them  ? "  This  is  the  kind  of  mischievous  talk 
which  is  often  heard  in  many  quarters.  To  supply  some 
simple  antidotes  to  this  sceptical  spirit,  to  show  the 
unreasonableness  of  it,  to  nerve  and  invigorate  the 


THOUGHTS    FOR    SCEPTICS.  423 

Christian,  to  make  him  see  the  strength  of  his  position, 
to  help  him  to  get  rid  of  a  doubting  spirit,  and  to  enable 
him  to  grasp  his  old  creed  more  tightly  than  ever, — these 
are  the  objects  I  have  in  view  in  this  paper. 

In  times  like  these  it  is  well  to  remember  the 
striking  words  which  came  from  the  lips  of  Zophar 
the  Naamathite,  one  of  the  three  friends  who  came  to 
comfort  the  patriarch  Job  in  his  affliction.  Those  worthy 
men,  no  doubt,  meant  well ;  and  their  sympathy  is 
deserving  of  all  praise  in  a  cold  and  unfeeling  world. 
But  they  completely  misunderstood  the  case  before  them, 
and  so  proved  "  physicians  of  no  value."  They  only 
irritated  the  poor  sufferer,  and  added  to  his  troubles. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  undeniable  that  they  said  many  wise 
and  excellent  things,  and  of  these  the  following  passage 
is  one :  "  Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God  ?  canst 
thou  find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection  ?  It  is  as 
high  as  heaven ;  what  canst  thou  do  ?  deeper  than  hell ; 
what  canst  thou  know  ? "  (Job  xi.  7,  8). 

These  verses  contain  four  weighty  questions.  Two 
of  them  we  certainly  cannot  answer,  but  two  we  can. 
A  little  brief  discussion  of  the  whole  subject  to  which 
the  passage  points  appears  suitable  to  the  age  in  which 
we  live. 

I.  First,  and  foremost,  a  wise  Christian  ought  always 
to  admit  that  there  are  many  thirds  in  Bible  religion  which 
of  necessity  we  cannot  fully  understand.  The  Book  of 
Eevelation,  the  Book  of  God,  contains  much  which,  like 
God  Himself,  we  cannot  "  find  out  to  perfection." 

The  catalogue  of  these  hard  things  is  not  a  small  one, 
and  I  shall  only  supply  a  few  leading  instances.  I  will 
mention  the  Mosaic  account  of  creation — the  fall,  and 
entrance  of  sin  into  the  world — the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity — the  incarnation  of  Christ — the  atonement  for 


424  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

sin  made  by  Christ's  death — the  personality  and  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit — the  inspiration  of  Scripture — the  reality 
of  miracles — the  use  and  efficacy  of  prayer — the  precise 
nature  of  the  future  state — the  resurrection  of  the  flesh 
after  death,  —  each  and  all  of  these  subjects,  I  say, 
contains  much  that  we  cannot  fully  explain,  because  it  is 
above  the  reach  of  our  faculties.  No  Christian  of 
common  sense,  I  believe,  would  pretend  to  deny  it.  The 
humblest  child  could  ask  questions  about  each  of  them 
which  the  wisest  theologian  in  Christendom  could  never 
answer. 

But  what  of  it  ?  Does  it  follow  that  we  are  to  believe 
nothing  about  a  subject,  and  to  reject  it  altogether,  because 
we  do  not  understand  everything  about  it  ?  Is  this  fair 
and  reasonable  ?  Is  this  the  way  that  we  deal  with  our 
children  when  we  require  them  to  begin  the  study  of 
mathematics,  or  any  other  branch  of  education  ?  Do  we 
allow  our  boys  to  say,  "  I  will  learn  nothing  till  I  under 
stand  everything  ? "  Do  we  not  require  them  to  take 
many  things  on  trust,  and  to  begin  by  simply  believing  ? 
"  I  speak  as  to  wise  men,  judge  ye  what  I  say." 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  to  refuse  to  believe  Christian 
doctrines  because  they  are  above  our  reason,  and  we 
cannot  fully  understand  them,  is  only  one  among  many 
proofs  of  man's  natural  pride  and  arrogance.  We  are 
all,  at  our  best,  poor,  weak,  defective  creatures.  Our 
power  of  grasping  any  subject,  and  seeing  all  round  it,  is 
extremely  small.  Our  education  rarely  goes  on  for  more 
than  twenty  years,  and  is  often  very  shallow  and 
superficial.  After  twenty-five  most  of  us  add  little  to 
our  knowledge.  We  plunge  into  some  profession  in 
which  we  have  little  time  for  thought  or  reading,  and 
are  absorbed  and  distracted  by  the  business  and  cares  of 
life.  By  the  time  we  are  seventy,  our  memories  and 
intellects  begin  to  fail,  and  in  a  few  years  we  are  carried 


THOUGHTS    FOR    SCEPTICS.  425 

to  our  graves  and  see  corruption.  And  is  it  likely,  or 
probable,  or  reasonable  to  suppose  that  such  a  creature  as 
this  can  ever  understand  perfectly  the  Eternal  and 
Almighty  God,  or  the  communications  that  God  has  made 
to  man  ?  Is  it  not  rather  certain  that  there  will  be 
many  things  about  God  and  revelation  that  he  cannot, 
from  his  very  nature,  comprehend  ?  I  will  not  insult 
my  readers  by  asking  for  a  reply.  I  assert,  without 
hesitation,  that  no  Christian  ever  need  be  ashamed  of 
admitting  that  there  are  many  things  in  revealed  religion 
which  he  does  not  fully  understand,  and  does  not  pretend 
to  explain.  Yet  he  believes  them  fully,  and  lives  in  this 
belief. 

After  all,  when  a  Christian  meets  one  of  those  few 
men  of  science  who  profess  to  believe  nothing  in  religion 
which  he  cannot  fully  understand,  he  would  do  well  to 
ask  him  a  simple  question.  Has  he  ever  investigated 
the  facts  and  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  which  he  says  are 
incredible,  with  the  same  careful  pains  which  he  exercises 
when  he  uses  his  microscope,  his  telescope,  his  spectroscope, 
his  dissecting  knife,  or  his  chemical  apparatus  ?  I  doubt 
it  extremely.  I  venture  to  believe  that  if  some  scientific 
infidels  would  examine  the  Book  of  God  with  the  same 
reverent  analysis  with  which  they  daily  examine  the 
Book  of  Nature,  they  would  find  that  the  things  "  hard 
to  be  understood"  are  not  so  many  and  inscrutable  as 
they  now  suppose,  and  that  the  things  plain  and  easy  are 
a  wide  field  which  richly  repays  cultivation.  That  we 
"cannot  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfection"  let  us 
always  admit.  But  let  us  never  admit  that  we  can  find 
out  nothing,  and  are  justified  in  neglecting  Him. 

II.  The  second  point  which  I  wish  to  bring  forward  is 
this.  A  wise  Christian  ought  always  to  remember  that 
there  are  countless  things  in  the  material  world  around  u& 


426  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

which  we  do  not  fully  understand.  There  are  deep  things 
in  the  Book  of  Nature  as  well  as  in  the  Bible.  Its  pages 
contain  hard  knots  and  mysteries  as  well  as  the  pages  of 
the  Book  of  God.  In  short,  science  contains  its  hard 
things  as  well  as  faith. 

I  am  quite  sure  that  the  wisest  and  most  learned  men 
of  science  would  be  the  most  ready  to  admit  the  truth 
of  what  I  have  just  said.  If  anything  has  specially 
characterized  them  in  every  age,  it  has  been  their  deep 
humility.  The  more  they  have  known,  the  more  they 
have  confessed  the  limited  extent  of  their  knowledge. 
The  memorable  language  which  Sir  Isaac  Newton  is  said 
to  have  used  towards  the  end  of  his  life  ought  never  to 
be  forgotten  : — "  I  have  been  nothing  more  than  a  little 
child  who  has  picked  up  a  few  shells  and  pebbles  on  the 
shore  of  the  ocean  of  truth." 

How  little,  to  begin  with,  do  we  know  about  the 
heaven  over  our  heads,  or  the  earth  under  our  feet !  The 
sun,  the  moon,  the  planets,  the  fixed  stars,  the  comets, 
can  all  supply  deep  questions  which  the  wisest  astronomers 
cannot  answer.  Yet,  for  all  this,  who  but  a  fool  would 
despise  the  work  of  Newton,  and  Halley,  and  Herschel, 
and  Arago,  and  Airey  ?  The  age  of  the  globe  on  which 
we  live,  the  date  and  cause  of  the  various  convulsions  it 
has  gone  through,  long  before  man  was  created,  the 
duration  of  the  periods  between  each  change  of  climate 
and  temperature,  what  wise  geologists  will  dare  to  speak 
positively  of  such  subjects  as  these  ?  They  may  speculate, 
and  guess,  and  propound  theories.  But  how  often  their 
conclusions  have  been  overthrown !  Yet  who  would  dare 
to  say  that  Buckland,  and  Sedgwick,  and  Phillips,  and 
Lyell,  and  Murchison,  and  Owen  had  written  nothing 
worth  notice  ? 

How  little  can  we  account  for  the  action  of  some 
deadly  poisons,  and  especially  in  the  case  of  snake-bites 


THOUGHTS    FOR    SCEPTICS.  427 

and  hydrophobia !  The  virus  of  a  mad  dog's  bite  will 
often  remain  dormant  in  the  system  for  months,  and  then 
become  active,  and  defy  all  medical  treatment.  But  no 
one  can  explain  what  that  virus  is.  The  deaths  caused 
by  snake-bites  in  India  are  reported  to  be  about  20,000 
a  year.  Yet  to  this  day  the  precise  nature  of  the  cobra's 
venom  has  baffled  all  chemical  analysis,  and  once  received 
into  the  human  body,  the  most  skilful  doctors  find  they 
cannot  prevent  that  venom  causing  death.  But  what 
man  in  his  senses  would  conclude  that  chemistry  and 
medicine  are  unworthy  of  respect,  and  that  Liebig,  and 
Fresenius,  or  Hervey,  and  Hunter,  and  Jenner,  and 
Watson,  have  conferred  no  benefit  on  the  world  ? 

How  little  can  men  of  science  account  for  all  the 
phenomena  of  light,  heat,  electricity,  magnetism,  and 
chemical  action !  How  many  problems  lie  under  the 
words,  "  matter,  force,  energy,"  which  no  one  has  solved ! 
Far  be  it  from  me  to  disparage  the  extraordinary  advances 
which  physical  science  has  made  in  this  generation.  But 
I  am  quite  certain  that  its  leading  students,  from  Faraday 
downwards,  will  confess  that  there  are  many  things  which 
they  cannot  explain. 

How  little  do  we  know  about  earthquakes,  volcanic 
eruptions,  hurricanes,  and  epidemics !  They  come  sud 
denly,  like  the  recent  awful  catastrophes  at  Ischia  and 
Java,  or  the  historic  events  at  Pompeii  and  Lisbon.  They 
cause  immense  destruction  of  life  and  property.  But 
why  they  come  when  they  do  come,  and  what  laws 
regulate  them,  so  that  the  inhabitants  of  a  country  may 
be  prepared  for  them,  even  in  this  enlightened  nineteenth 
century,  we  are  totally  and  entirely  ignorant.  We  can 
only  lay  our  hands  on  our  mouths  and  be  still. 

How  little,  to  bring  matters  to  a  familiar  point,  how 
less  than  little,  or  nothing  in  reality,  can  we  explain  the 
connection  between  our  minds  and  bodies !  Who  can 


428  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

tell  me  why  a  sense  of  shame  makes  the  little  child's 
face  turn  red,  or  a  sense  of  fear  makes  the  same  face 
turn  pale  ?  Who  can  tell  me  how  my  will  affects  my 
members,  and  what  it  is  that  makes  me  walk,  or  move, 
or  lift  my  hand  whenever  I  wish  ?  Nobody  ever  did 
explain  it,  and  nobody  ever  will.  It  is  one  of  the  many 
things  that  baffle  all  inquiry. 

Now  what  shall  we  say  to  the  facts  I  have  adduced  ? 
That  they  are  facts  I  am  sure  no  man  of  common  sense 
will  deny.  If  I  were  to  say  to  a  man  of  science,  "  I  do 
not  believe  any  of  your  conclusions  because  there  are 
many  hard  things  in  the  Book  of  Nature  which  you 
cannot  explain,"  I  should  be  acting  very  foolishly.  I 
shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  I  have  not  the  slightest 
sympathy  with  those  weak-kneed  Christians,  who  seem 
to  think  that  science  and  religion  can  never  harmonize, 
and  that  they  must  always  scowl  and  look  askance  at 
one  another,  like  two  quarrelsome  dogs.  On  the 
contrary,  I  shall  always  hail  the  annual  discoveries  of 
physical  science  with  a  hearty  welcome.  For  the  con 
tinual  progress  of  its  students  by  experiment  and 
observation,  and  for  their  annual  accumulation  of  facts, 
I  am  deeply  thankful.  I  am  not  the  least  afraid  that 
science  will  ever  finally  contradict  Christian  theology 
(though  it  may  appear  to  do  so  for  a  season),  if  students 
of  science  will  only  be  logical.  I  only  fear  that,  in 
their  zeal,  they  are  sometimes  apt  to  forget  that  it  is 
most  illogical  to  draw  a  general  conclusion  from  a 
particular  premise, — to  build  houses  of  theories  without 
foundations.  I  am  firmly  convinced  that  the  words  of 
God's  mouth  and  the  works  of  God's  hands  will  never 
be  found  really  to  contradict  one  another.  When  they 
appear  to  do  so,  I  am  content  to  wait.  Time  will  untie 
the  knot. 

I  do  not  forget  that  some  young  philosophers  are  fond 


THOUGHTS    FOR    SCEPTICS.  429 

of  talking  of  the  "  Laws  of  Nature,"  and  of  saying  that 
they  cannot  reconcile  them  with  the  Bible.  They  tell 
us  that  these  "laws"  are  unchangeable,  and  that  the 
miracles  and  supernatural  parts  of  Kevelation,  which 
seem  to  contradict  the  laws  of  nature,  are  therefore 
incredible.  But  these  philosophers  would  do  well  to 
remember  that  it  is  not  at  all  certain  that  we  know  all 
the  laws  of  nature,  and  that  higher  and  deeper  laws 
may  yet  be  discovered.  At  any  rate  they  must  own 
that  some  of  the  existing  "  laws  "  were  not  known  and 
received  three  or  four  centuries  ago.  But  surely,  if  that 
is  the  case,  we  may  fairly  assume  that  many  other 
"  laws  "  may  yet  be  found  out,  and  that  many  problems 
which  we  cannot  solve  now  will  be  solved  hereafter. 
(See  Note  A.) 

Two  things,  however,  I  must  say,  before  leaving  this 
part  of  my  paper. 

(a)  On  the  one  side,  I  appeal  to  those  few  men  of 
science  who  turn  away  from  Christianity,  and  refuse  to 
believe,  because  of  the  hard  things  which  its  creed 
requires  them  to  believe.  I  ask  them  whether  this  is 
just  and  fair.  We  do  not  turn  away  from  physical 
science  because  it  contains  many  things  which  they 
themselves  admit  they  cannot  explain.  On  the  contrary, 
we  bid  them  God -speed,  and  wish  success  to  their 
researches  and  investigations.  But  in  return  we  ask 
them  to  deal  honestly  with  Christianity.  We  admit  that 
it  contains  difficulties,  like  physical  science;  but  we 
cannot  allow  that  this  is  any  reason  why  it  should  be 
rejected  altogether. 

(&)  On  the  other  side,  I  appeal  to  those  timid 
Christians  whose  faith  is  shaken  by  the  attacks  which 
men  of  science  sometimes  make  on  their  creed,  and  are 
ready  to  throw  down  their  arms  and  run  away.  I  ask 
them  whether  this  is  not  weak,  and  cowardly,  and  foolish? 


430  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

I  bid  them  remember  that  the  difficulties  of  the  sceptical 
man  of  science  are  just  as  great  as  those  of  the  Christian. 
I  entreat  them  to  stand  firm  and  not  be  afraid.  Let  us 
frankly  admit  that  there  are  deep  things  and  "  hard  to  be 
understood  "  in  our  creed.  But  let  us  steadily  maintain 
that  this  is  no  proof  that  it  is  not  true  and  not  worthy  of 
all  acceptation. 

III.  The  third  and  last  point  to  which  I  shall  ask  the 
attention  of  my  readers  is  this.  While  it  is  true  that 
we  cannot  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfection,  it  is  not  true 
to  say  that  we  can  find  out  nothing  at  all  in  religion.  On 
the  contrary,  we  know  many  things  which  are  enough  to 
make  unbelief  and  agnosticism  inexcusable. 

What  then,  do  we  know  ?  Let  me  mention  a  few 
facts  which  no  intelligent  person  can  pretend  to  deny. 

(a)  We  find  ourselves  living  in  a  world  full  of  sorrow, 
pain,  strife,  and  wickedness,  which  no  advance  of  science, 
learning,  or  civilization  is  able  to  prevent.  We  see 
around  us  daily  proof  that  we  are  all,  one  after  another, 
going  out  of  this  world  to  the  grave.  Humbling  as  the 
thought  is,  we  are  all  dying  daily,  and  these  bodies, 
which  we  take  such  pains  to  feed,  and  clothe,  and 
comfort,  must  see  corruption.  It  is  the  same  all  over 
the  globe.  Death  comes  to  all  men  and  women  alike,  of 
every  name,  and  nation,  and  people,  and  tongue;  and 
neither  rank,  nor  riches,  nor  intellect,  can  grant  exemp 
tion.  Dust  we  are,  and  to  dust  we  return.  At  any  rate, 
we  know  this. 

(&)  We  find,  moreover,  that  all  over  the  world  the 
vast  majority  of  mankind  have  a  settled,  rooted,  inward 
feeling,  that  this  life  is  not  all,  that  there  is  a  future 
state,  and  an  existence  beyond  the  grave.  The  absence 
of  this  feeling  is  the  exception.  There  it  is.  Assyria, 
Egypt,  Greece,  Eome,  Hindustan,  China,  Mexico,  and  the 


THOUGHTS    FOR    SCEPTICS.  431 

darkest  heathen  tribes,  as  a  general  rule,  are  agreed  on 
this  point,  however  strange  and  diverse  their  ideas  of 
God,  and  religion,  and  the  soul.  Will  any  one  tell  me 
that  we  do  not  know  this  ? 

(c)  We  find,  moreover,  that  the  only  thing  which  has 
ever  enabled  men  and  women  to  look  forward  to  the 
future  without  fear,  and  has  given  them  peace  in  life 
and  hope  in  death,  is  that  religion  which  Jesus  Christ 
brought  into  the  world  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  and 
of  which  Christ  Himself  is  the  sun,  and  centre,  and  root, 
and  foundation.  Christ,  I  say  emphatically,  Christ  and 
His  "Divinity,  Christ  and  His  atoning  death,  Christ  and 
His  resurrection,  Christ  and  His  life  in  heaven.  Yes ! 
that  very  religion  of  Christ  which  some  tell  us  they 
cannot  receive  because  of  the  mysteries  and  difficulties 
of  its  creed,  has  made  the  deepest  moral  mark  on  man 
kind  that  has  ever  been  made  since  man  was  created. 
Nothing  called  religion,  whether  classic  heathenism,  or 
Buddhism,  or  Confucianism,  or  Mahometanism,  has  ever 
produced  effects  on  consciences  and  conduct,  which  can 
bear  comparison  for  a  moment  with  the  effects  produced 
by  Christianity.  The  changes  which  have  taken  place 
in  the  state  of  the  world  before  Christ  and  the  world 
after  Christ,  and  the  difference  at  this  day  between 
those  parts  of  the  globe  where  the  Bible  is  read,  and 
those  where  it  is  not  known,  are  great  patent  facts 
which  have  never  been  explained  away.  The  holiest 
lives  and  the  happiest  deaths  which  have  been  seen  on 
the  earth  for  eighteen  centuries  have  been  the  result  of 
the  supernatural  theology  of  the  Bible,  of  faith  in  and 
of  obedience  to  Christ,  and  the  story  of  the  cross.  I 
challenge  any  one  to  deny  this. 

(d)  We  find,  above  all,  that  the  Historic  Founder  of 
Christianity,  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  is  a  great  fact  which 
has  been  before  the  world  for  eighteen  centuries,  and  has 


432  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

completely  baffled  all  the  efforts  of  infidels  and  non- 
Christians  to  explain  it  away.  No  sceptical  writer  has 
ever  given  a  satisfactory  answer  to  the  question,  "  Who 
was  Christ  ?  Whence  did  he  come  ? "  The  super 
human  purity  of  His  life,  confessed  even  by  men  like 
Eousseau  and  Napoleon  (see  Note  B),  the  superhuman 
wisdom  of  His  teaching,  the  superhuman  mystery  of  His 
death,  the  inexplicable  incident  of  His  resurrection,  the 
undeniable  influence  which  His  apostles  obtained  for  His 
doctrines  without  the  aid  of  money  or  arms, — all  these 
are  simple  matters  of  history,  and  demand  the  attention 
of  every  honest  man  who  really  wishes  to  inquire  into 
the  great  subject  of  religion.  They  are  indisputable 
facts  in  the  annals  of  the  world.  Let  those  who  dare 
deny  them. 

Now  what  shall  we  say  to  these  facts  ?  That  they 
are  facts  I  think  no  one  of  average  intelligence  can 
possibly  deny.  I  assert  that  they  form  a  mass  of 
evidence  in  favour  of  Christianity  which  cannot  be  safely 
neglected  by  any  honest  mind.  "What  canst  thou 
know  ? "  says  Zophar.  I  answer,  we  know  enough  to 
justify  every  Christian  in  resting  his  soul  calmly  and 
confidently  on  the  revelation  which  God  has  given  us 
of  Himself,  and  of  Christ,  in  His  Bible.  That  revelation 
is  supported  by  such  an  enormous  mass  of  probable 
evidence  that  we  may  safely  trust  its  truth.  I  answer, 
furthermore,  that  we  "  know "  enough  to  warrant  us  in 
urging  every  sceptic  to  consider  seriously,  as  a  prudent 
man,  whether  he  is  not  occupying  a  very  dangerous  and 
untenable  position.  Probabilities  are  all  against  him; 
and  probabilities,  in  the  vast  majority  of  things,  are  the 
only  guide  of  choice  and  action.  He  cannot  say  that 
the  witness  of  eighteen  centuries  is  so  weak  and  worth 
less  that  it  deserves  no  attention.  On  the  contrary, 
it  is  so  strong  that,  if  he  cannot  explain  it  away,  he 


THOUGHTS    FOR    SCEPTICS.  433 

ought  either  to  throw  down  the  arms  of  his  unbelief,  or 
to  avow  that  he  is  not  open  to  reason.  In  a  word,  he  is 
not  willing  to  be  convinced.  He  has  shut  his  eyes,  and 
is  determined  not  to  open  them.  Well  might  our  Lord 
say,  "  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither 
will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead." 
Well  might  He  "  marvel  at  unbelief "  (Luke  xvi.  3 1  ; 
Mark  vi.  6). 

I  shall  now  conclude  this  paper  with  two  general  remarks 
which  I  commend  to  the  attention  of  all  who  read  it. 

1.  For  one  thing,  let  me  try  to  show  the  true  causes  of 
a  vast  amount  of  the  unbelief  of  the  present  day. 

That  there  is  a  good  deal  of  unbelief  in  this  age  it  is 
vain  to  deny.  The  number  of  people  who  attend  no 
place  of  worship,  and  seem  to  have  no  religion,  is  very 
considerable.  A  vague  kind  of  scepticism  or  agnosticism 
is  one  of  the  commonest  spiritual  diseases  in  this  genera 
tion.  It  meets  us  at  every  turn,  and  crops  up  in  every 
company.  Like  the  Egyptian  plague  of  frogs,  it  makes 
its  way  into  every  family  and  home,  and  there  seems  no 
keeping  it  out.  Among  high  and  low,  and  rich  and 
poor,  in  town  and  in  country,  in  universities  and  manu 
facturing  towns,  in  castles  and  in  cottages,  you  will 
continually  find  some  form  of  unbelief.  It  is  no  longer 
a  pestilence  that  walketh  in  darkness,  but  a  destruction 
that  wasteth  at  noonday.  It  is  even  considered  clever 
and  intellectual,  and  a  mark  of  a  thoughtful  mind. 
Society  seems  leavened  with  it.  He  that  avows  his 
belief  of  everything  contained  in  the  Bible  must  make 
up  his  mind  in  many  companies  to  be  smiled  at 
contemptuously,  and  thought  an  ignorant  and  weak  man. 

(a)  Now  there  is  no  doubt  that,  as  I  have  already 
said,  the  seat  of  unbelief  in  some  persons  is  the  head. 
They  refuse  to  accept  anything  which  they  cannot  under 
stand,  or  which  seems  above  their  reason.  Inspiration, 

2E 


434  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

Miracles,  the  Trinity,  the  Incarnation,  the  Atonement, 
the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Eesurrection,  the  Future  State,  all 
these  mighty  verities  are  viewed  with  cold  indifference  as 
disputable  points,  if  not  absolutely  rejected.  "  Can  we 
entirely  explain  them  ?  Can  we  satisfy  their  reasoning 
faculties  about  them  ?"  If  not,  they  must  be  excused  if 
they  stand  in  doubt.  What  they  cannot  fully  under 
stand,  they  tell  us  they  cannot  fully  believe,  and  so  they 
never  observe  the  Sabbath,  and  never  exhibit  any  religion 
while  they  live,  though,  strangely  enough,  they  like  to  be 
buried  with  religious  forms  when  they  die. 

(b)  But  while  I  admit  this,  I  am  equally  certain  that 
with  some  the  real  seat  of  unbelief  is  the  heart.     They 
love  the  sins  and  habits  of  life  which  the  Bible  condemns, 
and  are  determined  not  to  give  them  up.     They  take 
refuge  from  an  uneasy  conscience  by  trying  to  persuade 
themselves  that  the  old  Book  is  not  true.     The  measure 
of   their   creed   is  their  affection.     Whatever  condemns 
their  natural  inclinations,  they  refuse  to   believe.     The 
famous  Lord  Kochester,  once  a  profligate  and  an  infidel, 
but  at  last  a  true  penitent,  is  recorded  to  have  said  to 
Bishop   Burnet,  as  he   drew  near  his  end,   "It  is  not 
reason,  but  a  bad  life  which    is    the   great   argument 
against  the  Bible."     A  true  and  weighty  saying !     Many, 
I  am  persuaded,  profess  that  they  do  not  believe,  because 
they  know,  if  they  did  believe,  they  must  give  up  their 
favourite  sins. 

(c)  Last,  but  not  least,  with  far  the  greater  number  of 
people    the    seat    of    unbelief  is   a   lazy,  indolent   will. 
They  dislike  all  kind  of  trouble.     Why  should  they  deny 
themselves,  and    take   pains   about    Bible  -  reading    and 
praying,   and  Sabbath   observance,   and   diligent  watch 
fulness   over  thoughts,   and   words,   and    actions,   when, 
after  all,  it  is  not  quite  certain  that  the  Bible  is  true  ? 
This,  I  have  little  doubt,  is  the  form  of  unbelief  which 


THOUGHTS    FOR    SCEPTICS.  435 

prevails  most  frequently  among  young  people.  They  are 
not  agitated  by  intellectual  difficulties.  They  are  often 
not  the  slaves  of  any  special  lusts  or  passions,  and  live 
tolerably  decent  lives.  But  deep  down  in  their  hearts 
there  is  a  disinclination  to  make  up  their  minds,  and  to 
be  decided  about  anything  in  religion.  And  so  they 
drift  down  the  stream  of  life  like  dead  fish,  and  float 
helplessly  on,  and  are  tossed  to  and  fro,  hardly  knowing 
what  they  believe.  And  while  they  would  shrink  from 
telling  you  they  are  not  Christians,  they  are  without  any 
backbone  in  their  Christianity. 

Now,  whether  head,  or  heart,  or  will  be  in  fault,  it  is 
some  comfort  to  remember  that  there  is  probably  less  of 
real,  downright,  reasoning  unbelief  than  there  appears  to 
be.  Thousands,  we  may  be  sure,  do  not  in  their  heart  of 
hearts  believe  all  that  they  say  with  their  lips.  Many  a 
sceptical  saying  is  nothing  more  than  a  borrowed  article, 
picked  up  and  retailed  by  him  who  says  it,  because  it 
sounds  clever,  while,  in  reality,  it  is  not  the  language  of 
his  inner  man.  Sorrow,  and  sickness,  and  affliction 
often  bring  out  the  strange  fact  that  so-called  sceptics 
are  no  sceptics  at  all,  and  that  many  talk  scepticism 
merely  from  a  desire  to  seem  clever,  and  to  win  the 
temporary  applause  of  clever  men.  That  there  is  an 
immense  amount  of  unbelief  in  the  present  day  I  make 
no  question;  but  that  much  of  it  is  mere  show  and 
pretence  is,  to  my  mind,  as  clear  as  noonday.  No  man, 
I  think,  can  do  pastoral  work,  and  come  to  close  quarters 
with  souls,  visit  the  sick,  and  attend  the  dying,  without 
coming  to  that  conclusion. 

The  parting  advice  I  offer  to  heart  sceptics  is  simply 
this.  Let  me  entreat  you  to  deal  honestly  with  your  soul 
about  secret  sins.  Are  you  sure  there  is  not  some  bad 
habit,  or  lust,  or  passion,  which,  almost  insensibly  to 
yourself,  you  would  like  to  indulge,  if  it  were  not  for 


436  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

some  remaining  scruples  ?  Are  you  quite  sure  that  your 
doubts  do  not  arise  from  a  desire  to  get  rid  of  restraint  ? 
You  would  like,  if  you  could,  to  do  something  the  Bible 
forbids,  and  you  are  looking  about  for  reasons  for 
disregarding  the  Bible.  Oh  !  if  this  is  the  case  with  any 
of  my  readers,  awake  to  a  sense  of  your  danger !  Break 
the  chains  which  are  gradually  closing  round  you.  Pluck  out 
the  right  eye  if  need  be ;  but  never  be  the  servant  of  sin. 
I  repeat  that  the  secret  love  of  some  vicious  indulgence 
is  the  real  beginning  of  a  vast  amount  of  infidelity. 

The  parting  advice  I  offer  to  lazy  sceptics  is  this. 
Let  me  entreat  you  to  deal  honestly  with  your  souls  about 
the  use  of  means  for  acquiring  religious  knowledge.  Can 
you  lay  your  hand  on  your  heart  and  say  that  you  really 
take  pains  to  find  out  what  is  truth  ?  Do  not  be 
ashamed  to  pray  for  light.  Do  not  be  ashamed  of 
reading  some  leading  book  about  the  Creeds  and  the 
Confession  of  your  own  Church,  and,  above  all,  do  not  be 
ashamed  of  regularly  studying  the  text  of  your  Bible. 
Thousands,  I  am  persuaded,  in  this  day,  know  nothing 
of  the  Holy  Book  which  they  affect  to  despise,  and  are 
utterly  ignorant  of  the  real  nature  of  that  Christianity 
which  they  pretend  they  cannot  believe.  Let  not  that 
be  the  case  with  you.  That  famous  "honest  doubt," 
which  many  say  is  better  than  "half  the  creeds,"  is 
a  pretty  thing  to  talk  about.  But  I  venture  a  strong 
suspicion  that  much  of  the  scepticism  of  the  present  day, 
if  sifted  and  analyzed,  would  be  found  to  spring  from 
utter  ignorance  of  the  primary  evidences  of  Christianity. 

2.  The  other  concluding  remark  which  I  will  make  is 
this.  I  will  try  to  explain  the  reason  why  so  many 
professing  Christians  are  continually  frightened  and 
shaken  in  their  minds  by  doubts  about  the  truth  of 
Christianity. 

That  this  is  the  case  of  many  I  have  a  very  strong 


THOUGHTS    FOR    SCEPTICS.  43*7 

impression.  I  suspect  there  are  thousands  of  Sabbath- 
keeping,  church-going  Christians  who  would  repudiate 
with  indignation  the  charge  of  scepticism,  and  yet  are 
constantly  troubled  about  the  truth  of  Christianity. 
Some  new  book,  or  lecture,  or  sermon,  appears  from  the 
pen  of  men  like  Darwin  or  Colenso,  and  at  once  these 
worthy  people  are  scared  and  panic-stricken,  and  run 
from  clergyman  to  clergyman  to  pour  out  their  anxieties 
and  fears,  as  if  the  very  ark  of  God  was  in  danger. 
"  Can  these  new  ideas  be  really  true  ? "  they  cry. 
"Must  we  really  give  up  the  Old  Testament,  and  the 
flood,  and  the  miracles,  and  the  resurrection  of  Christ  ? 
Alas !  alas !  what  shall  we  do  ?"  In  short,  like  Ahaz, 
their  "hearts  are  moved,  as  the  trees  of  the  wood  are 
moved  with  the  wind  "  (Isa.  vii.  2). 

Now  what  is  the  cause  of  this  readiness  to  give  way 
to  doubts  ?  Why  are  so  many  alarmed  about  the  faith 
of  eighteen  centuries,  and  frightened  out  of  their  wits 
by  attacks  which  no  more  shake  the  evidences  of 
Christianity  than  the  scratch  of  a  pin  shakes  the  Great 
Pyramid  of  Egypt  ? 

The  reason  is  soon  told.  The  answer  lies  in  a  nutshell. 
The  greater  part  of  modern  Christians  are  utterly 
ignorant  of  the  evidences  of  Christianity  and  the 
enormous  difficulties  of  infidelity.  The  education  of  the 
vast  majority  of  people  on  these  subjects  is  wretchedly 
meagre  and  superficial,  or  it  is  no  education  at  all.  Not 
one  in  a  hundred  church-goers,  probably,  has  ever  read 
a  page  of  Leslie,  or  Leland,  or  Watson,  or  Butler,  or 
Paley,  or  Chalmers,  or  M'llvaine,  or  Bishop  Wilson,  or 
Porteus,  or  Whately.  What  wonder  if  the  minds  of 
such  people  are  like  a  city  without  walls,  and  utterly 
unable  to  resist  the  attacks  of  the  most  commonplace 
infidelity,  much  less  of  the  refined  and  polished  scepticism 
of  these  latter  days. 


438  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

The  remedy  for  this  state  of  things  is  patent  and 
plain.  Every  professing  Christian  should  arm  his  mind 
with  some  elementary  knowledge  of  the  evidences  of 
revealed  religion  and  the  difficulties  of  infidelity,  and  so 
be  ready  to  give  a  reason  of  the  faith  that  he  professes. 
He  ought  not  merely  to  read  and  love  his  Bible,  but  to 
be  able  to  tell  any  one  why  he  believes  the  Bible  to  be 
true.  Ministers  should  preach  occasionally  on  evidences. 
It  was  one  of  that  great  man  Cecil's  counsels  to  a 
clergyman,  "In  your  sermons  never  forget  the  infidel." 
Schools,  colleges,  and  universities,  which  make  any 
pretence  to  be  Christian,  should  never  altogether  leave 
out  evidences  in  their  scheme  of  instruction  for  the 
young.  In  short,  if  we  want  the  coming  generation  to 
hold  fast  Christianity,  we  must  provide  them  with 
defensive  armour. 

With  these  two  remarks  I  close  my  paper.  Thank 
God !  we  travel  on  to  a  world  where  there  is  no  ignorance, 
no  scepticism,  and  no  doubt.  We  shall  soon  see  as  we 
have  been  seen,  and  know  as  we  have  been  known. 
Alas  !  what  a  waking  up  remains  for  many  the  moment 
the  last  breath  is  drawn !  There  is  no  unbelief  in  the 
grave.  Voltaire  now  knows  whether  there  is  a  sin-hating 
God ;  and  David  Hume  now  knows  whether  there  is  an 
endless  hell.  The  infant  of  days,  by  merely  dying, 
acquires  a  knowledge  which  the  subtlest  philosophers, 
while  on  earth,  profess  their  inability  to  attain.  The 
dead  Hottentot  knows  more  than  the  living  Socrates. 
To  that  future  world  the  true  Christian  may  look  forward 
calmly,  confidently,  and  without  fear.  He  that  has 
Christ  in  his  heart,  and  the  Bible  in  his  hand,  is  standing 
on  a  rock,  and  has  no  cause  to  be  afraid.  "  Therefore, 
my  beloved  brethren,  let  us  be  stedfast,  umnoveable, 
always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  knowing  that 
our  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord"  (1  Cor.  xv.  58). 


THOUGHTS    FOR    SCEPTICS.  439 

If  we  cannot  "  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfection,"  we 
can  know  enough  to  give  us  peace  in  life,  and  hope 
in  death.  What  we  "  know  "  let  us  hold  fast. 

One  thing,  at  least,  is  certain.  If  we  "  know  "  little, 
we  can  do  much.  Is  it  not  written,  "  If  any  man  will 
do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be 
of  God ; "  "  The  secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our 
God:  but  those  things  which  are  revealed  belong  unto 
us  and  to  our  children  for  ever,  that  we  may  do  all  the 
words  of  this  law."  (John  vii.  17  ;  Deut.  xxix.  29.) 

NOTE    A.    TO    PAGE    429. 

The  following  page  from  Carlyle's  "Sartor  Resartus"  contains  so  many 
useful  thoughts  about  miracles  and  the  so-called  laws  of  nature,  that  I 
make  no  apology  for  giving  it  to  the  readers  of  this  paper,  and  commending 
it  to  their  attention.  In  giving  it  I  must  not  be  supposed  to  be  a  whole 
sale  admirer  of  the  writer,  or  of  his  peculiar  style  : — 

"  '  But  is  not  a  Miracle  simply  a  violation  of  the  Laws  of  Nature  ? '  ask 
several.  Whom  I  answer  by  this  new  question,  What  are  the  Laws  of 
Nature  ?  To  me,  perhaps,  the  rising  of  one  from  the  dead  were  no 
violation  of  these  Laws,  but  a  confirmation  ;  were  some  far  deeper  Law, 
now  first  penetrated  into,  and  by  Spiritual  Force,  even  as  the  rest  have 
all  been,  brought  to  bear  on  us  with  its  Material  force. 

"  Here,  too,  some  may  inquire,  not  without  astonishment,  '  On  what 
ground  shall  one  that  can  make  iron  swim,  come  and  declare  that  there 
fore  he  can  teach  religion  ? '  To  us,  truly,  of  the  nineteenth  century,  such 
declaration  were  inapt  enough,  which,  nevertheless,  to  our  fathers  of  the 
first  century  was  full  of  meaning. 

"  '  But  is  it  not  the  deepest  Law  of  Nature  that  she  be  constant  ? '  cries 
an  illuminated  class.  '  Is  not  the  Machine  of  the  Universe  fixed  to  move 
by  unalterable  rules  ? '  Probable  enough,  good  friends  ;  nay,  I,  too,  must 
believe  that  the  God  whom  ancient  inspired  men  assert  to  be  'without 
variableness  or  shadow  of  turning '  does  indeed  never  change  ;  that  Nature, 
that  the  Universe,  which  no  one  whom  it  so  pleases  can  be  prevented  from 
calling  a  Machine,  does  move  by  the  most  unalterable  rules.  And  now  of 
you,  too,  I  make  the  old  inquiry,  '  What  those  same  unalterable  rules, 
forming  the  complete  statute  book  of  Nature,  may  possibly  be  ? ' 

'"They  stand  written  in  our  Works  of  Science,'  say  you, — 'in  the 
accumulated  records  of  man's  experience '  ?  Was  man  with  his  experience 
present  at  the  Creation,  then,  to  see  how  it  all  went  on?  Have  any 
deepest  scientific  individuals  yet  dived  down  to  the  foundation  of  the 
Universe,  and  gauged  everything  there  ?  Did  the  Maker  take  them  into 


440  PRINCIPLES    FOE   CHURCHMEN. 

His  counsel,  that  they  read  His  ground-plan  of  the  incomprehensible  All ; 
and  can  say,  'This  stands  marked  therein,  and  no  more  than  this'! 
Alas !  not  in  any  one !  These  scientific  individuals  have  been  nowhere 
but  where  we  also  are,  have  seen  some  handbreadths  deeper  than  we  see 
into  the  Deep  that  is  infinite,  without  bottom,  as  without  shore. 

"System  of  Nature !  To  the  wisest  man,  wide  as  is  his  vision,  Nature 
remains  of  quite  infinite  depth,  of  quite  infinite  expansion  ;  and  all 
experience  thereof  limits  itself  to  some  few  computed  centuries  and 
measured  square  miles.  The  course  of  Nature's  phases,  on  this  our  little 
fraction  of  a  Planet,  is  partially  known  to  us  ;  but  who  knows  what 
deeper  courses  these  depend  on,  what  infinitely  larger  Cycle  (of  causes) 
our  little  Epicycle  revolves  on  ?  To  the  Minnow  every  cranny,  and 
pebble,  and  quality,  and  accident  of  its  little  native  Creek  may  have 
become  familiar  ;  but  does  the  Minnow  understand  the  Ocean  Tides  and 
periodic  currents,  the  Trade-winds,  and  Monsoons,  and  Moon's  Eclipses  ; 
by  all  which  the  condition  of  its  little  is  regulated,  and  may,  from  time 
to  time  (wmniraculously  enough)  be  quite  overset  and  reversed  ?  Such  a 
Minnow  is  Man  ;  his  Creek  this  Planet  Earth,  his  Ocean  the  immeasur 
able  All,  his  Monsoons  and  Periodic  Currents  the  Mysterious  Course  of 
Providence  through  .<Eons  of  Mona  !  " 

NOTE  B.  TO  PAGE  432. 

The  language  of  Rousseau  about  Christ,  referred  to  in  this  sermon,  is 
so  remarkable  that  I  think  it  may  be  useful  to  give  it  in  its  entirety : — 

"Is  it  possible  that  H.e,  whose  history  the  Gospel  records,  can  be  but 
a  mere  man  ?  Does  He  speak  in  the  tone  of  an  enthusiast,  or  of  an 
ambitious  sectary?  What  mildness,  what  purity  in  His  manners! 
What  touching  grace  in  His  instructions,  what  elevation  in  His  maxims  ! 
What  profound  wisdom  in  His  discourses !  What  presence  of  mind  ! 
What  ingenuity,  and  what  justness  in  His  answers  !  What  government 
of  His  passions  !  What  prejudice,  what  blindness  or  ill  faith  must  that 
be  which  dares  to  compare  Socrates,  the  son  of  Sophroniscus,  with  the  Son 
of  Mary  1  What  a  difference  between  the  two  !  Socrates  dying  without 
pain,  without  disgrace,  easily  sustains  his  part  to  the  last.  The  death  of 
Socrates  philosophizing  tranquilly  with  his  friends  is  the  mildest  that 
could  be  desired :  that  of  Jesus  expiring  in  torments,  injured,  mocked, 
cursed  by  all  the  people,  is  the  most  horrible  that  can  be  feared.  Socrates, 
taking  the  empoisoned  cup,  blesses  him  who  presents  it  to  him  with  tears. 
Jesus,  in  the  midst  of  a  frightful  punishment,  prays  for  his  enraged 
executioners.  Yes,  if  the  life  and  death  of  Socrates  are  those  of  a  sage, 
the  life  and  death,  of  Jesus  are  those  of  a  God. " — Housseau,  Emile. 

The  words  of  Napoleon  at  St.  Helena  towards  the  close  of  his  life  were 
these  :  "I  know  men,  and  I  tell  you  that  Jesus  is  not  a  man." 


XVIII. 
THE  BEST  EVIDENCES  OE  CHRISTIANITY. 

OUR  lot  is  cast  in  times  when  there  is  a  tendency  to  try 
all  ancient  institutions  by  their  results.  Schools,  colleges, 
universities,  corporations,  old  endowed  charities,  all  are 
successively  put  into  the  crucible,  and  placed  in  the 
furnace.  "  Will  an  institution  stand  the  fire  ?  Is  the 
result  of  the  operation  dross  or  good  metal  ? "  These 
are  the  only  questions  which  men  require  to  be  answered. 

Now,  I  wish  to  apply  this  great  principle  to  the  religion 
which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  brought  into  the  world 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  Some  men  tell  us  that  it  is 
an  effete  and  worn-out  thing,  utterly  unsuited  to  the 
nineteenth  century.  Christianity,  in  short,  is  regarded 
with  contempt  by  many  who  call  themselves  leaders  of 
thought  in  modern  times.  Like  an  old  almanac,  its 
work  is  done,  and  it  may  be  thrown  aside !  Its  Bible 
and  its  Sundays,  its  ministers  and  its  worship,  its  prayers 
and  its  sacraments,  all  are  unworthy  of  the  notice  of 
intellectual  men,  and  may  be  safely  neglected,  smiled  at, 
and  handed  over  to  the  ignorant  and  the  poor !  Such  is 
the  line  of  thinking,  writing,  and  talking  in  too  many 
quarters. 

Now,  my  simple  object  in  this  paper  is  to  point  out 
the  unreasonableness,  not  to  say  dishonesty,  of  ignoring 


442  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

the  enormous  results  and  effects  which  Christianity  has 
produced  in  the  world.  I  ask  the  sceptic  and  the 
agnostic  to  try  Christianity  by  its  fruits.  I  defy  them 
to  deny  the  existence  of  those  fruits.  I  say  that  man 
kind  owes  a  huge  debt  to  Christianity,  whether  mankind 
knows  it  or  not,  of  which  the  amount  can  never  be 
calculated.  In  short,  the  fruits  of  Christianity  are  an 
unanswerable  proof  to  my  own  mind  of  its  divine  origin, 
and  a  stupendous  difficulty  in  the  way  of  infidelity, 
which  has  never  been  fairly  grappled  with  or  explained 
away.  They  demand  attention.  They  court  investigation. 
The  plain  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  contain  a 
principle  which  is  too  much  forgotten  in  this  day : 
"  Every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit "  (Luke  vi.  44). 

There  are  only  two  points  to  which  I  shall  invite  the 
attention  of  my  readers. 

I.  For  one  thing,  let  us  consider  briefly  some  of  the  fruits 
which  Christianity  has  produced  in  the  world. 

II.  For  another,  let  us  consider  the  leading  doctrines  by 
whose  agency  these  fruits  have  been  produced. 

I  do  not  for  a  moment  pretend  to  bring  forward  any 
thing  new  or  deep.  I  am  going  to  speak  of  ancient, 
familiar  things,  which  any  one  of  average  intelligence  can 
understand.  But  it  is  precisely  the  simplicity  of  my 
argument  which  makes  many  overlook  it.  We  have  so 
many  great  swelling  words  in  this  day  from  the  enemies 
of  Christianity,  about  "laws  of  nature,  development, 
matter,  germs,  force,"  and  the  like,  that  we  are  apt  to 
forget  the  immense  mass  of  evidence  in  favour  of  revealed 
religion  which  is  lying  close  by  our  side. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  what  fruits  has  Christianity 
produced  in  the  world  ? 

We  are  not  fit  to  consider  this  question,  unless  we 


THE    BEST   EVIDENCES    OF    CHRISTIANITY.  443 

realize  the  actual  condition  of  the  world  when  Chris 
tianity  was  introduced.  We  must  remember  that  the 
Augustan  age,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  born  and 
His  Church  founded,  was  the  era  when  heathenism  had 
carried  art  and  literature  to  the  highest  pitch  of  excel 
lence.  Even  at  this  day  the  temples  of  Luxor  and 
Carnac,  the  Parthenon  at  Athens,  and  the  Coliseum  at 
Rome,  are  among  the  most  remarkable  buildings  in  the 
world.  The  works  of  Homer,  and  Herodotus,  and  Thu- 
cydides,  and  JEschylus,  and  Sophocles,  and  Euripides,  and 
Plato,  among  the  Greeks, — of  Cicero,  and  Tacitus,  and 
Virgil,  and  Horace,  among  the  Komans, — are  admired 
and  read  by  almost  all  educated  men,  and  in  their  way 
are  unsurpassed  after  eighteen  centuries  have  passed 
away.  In  short,  if  the  education  of  mind,  and  reason, 
and  intellect,  and  the  cultivation  of  art  and  literature, 
could  make  men  holy  and  happy  in  this  life,  and  give 
them  a  good  hope  for  the  life  to  come,  the  world,  before 
Christ,  did  not  need  the  introduction  of  Christianity. 

But  what  was  the  world  before  Christ,  even  the  most 
polished  and  refined  portion  of  it,  in  the  matter  of 
religion  and  morality?  That  is  the  question.  The 
answer  may  be  given  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul:  "The 
world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God"  (1  Cor.  i.  21).  Dark 
ness,  thick  darkness,  covered  the  earth.  Athens  and 
Eome  were  full  of  magnificent  temples,  in  which  men 
worshipped  images  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  wood,  and 
stone,  the  work  of  their  own  hands.  The  greatest  philo 
sophers,  such  as  Socrates,  groped,  as  in  the  night.  The 
doctrine  of  the  Being  of  the  true  God  seems  to  have 
been  completely  lost,  and  in  its  place  the  most  debasing 
idolatry  and  grovelling  superstition  universally  prevailed. 

The  following  passage  from  Bishop  Wilson's  admirable 
"  Lectures  on  Christian  Evidences  "  (vol.  i.  p.  47,  2nd  edi 
tion),  contains  a  picture  which  I  believe  is  not  one  bit  over- 


444  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

coloured  : — "  Whether  you  consider  the  barbarian  nations, 
or  those  which  were  most  polished, — whether  you  look 
back  to  the  earliest  times  of  which  we  have  any  authentic 
history,  or  those  nearer  the  birth  of  our  Lord, — all  was 
one  thick  impenetrable  mass  of  moral  disorder  and  ruin. 
The  most  abject  and  disgusting  idolatry,  the  worship  of 
the  beasts  and  birds,  of  stocks  and  stones,  the  deifica 
tion  of  kings  and  warriors,  of  human  virtues  and  vices, 
of  insects  and  creeping  things,  and  even  of  that  most 
disgusting  of  all  reptiles,  the  serpent,  prevailed.  Practices 
the  most  flagitious  were  interwoven  with  the  histories 
and  ceremonies  of  these  wretched  deities.  From  this 
source,  aided  by  the  corrupt  heart  of  man,  flowed  out  a 
torrent  of  vices  and  abominations  in  public  and  private 
life.  Fraud,  theft,  rapine,  fell  revenge,  suicide,  fornication, 
adultery,  murder  of  infants,  unnatural  crimes,  the  atrocious 
cruelties  of  war,  the  slavery  and  oppression  of  captives, 
gladiatorial  shows,  not  only  abounded,  but  were  patronized, 
countenanced  by  the  great  body  of  men,  connived  at,  if 
not  practised,  by  statesmen  and  philosophers,  publicly 
reprobated  by  none." 

Hear  what  the  worthy  Bishop  says  in  another  passage: — 
"  The  heathen  were  impure  and  abominable  even  in  their 
religion.  Their  gods  and  goddesses  were  profligate,  im 
pure,  revengeful,  odious.  '  The  very  light  that  was  in 
them  was  darkness.'  For  what  could  the  histories  of 
Jupiter,  Juno,  and  Bacchus  and  Mercury  and  Venus 
teach,  but  vice,  and  drunkenness,  and  lewdness,  and  theft, 
and  fraud  ?  What  were  the  Floralia,  and  Bacchanalia, 
and  Saturnalia?  'It  is  a  shame,'  observes  the  great 
apostle,  '  even  to  speak  of  those  things  which  were  done 
of  them  in  secret'  (Eph.  v.  12).  Christians,  as  indivi 
duals,  may  be  wicked  and  unjust,  and,  alas !  often  are  so. 
But  this  is  notwithstanding  their  religion,  and  in  spite  of 
it,  as  Bishop  Warburton  has  fairly  remarked,  and  there- 


THE    BEST    EVIDENCES    OF    CHRISTIANITY.  445 

fore  cases  of  the  grossest  iniquity  are  rare.  The  heathen, 
on  the  contrary,  were  impure  and  abominable  in  con 
sequence  of  their  religion,  and  because  of  it ;  and  therefore 
a  depravity  of  which  we  have  scarcely  a  conception  pre 
vailed,  and  cases  of  virtue  and  comparative  purity  were 
rare  and  uncommon." 

Now  I  believe  this  terrible  picture  of  the  world  before 
Christ  is  not  one  bit  overdrawn.  I  believe  it  would  be 
easy  to  confirm  its  accuracy  by  reference  to  Greek  and 
Latin  authors.  But  it  would  be  impossible  to  do  so 
without  bringing  forward  things  of  which  "it  is  a  shame 
even  to  speak."  I  only  ask  Christians  to  remember  that 
the  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Eomans,  which  is 
often  not  read  through  in  public,  contains  a  plain,  un 
varnished  description  of  heathenism  as  it  really  was  in 
the  days  of  St.  Paul. 

But  what  was  the  agency  by  which  this  awful  state  of 
things  in  the  heathen  world  was  altered,  amended,  and 
gradually  swept  away  throughout  all  the  Eoman  empire  ? 
That  it  has  been  swept  away  is  a  simple  historical  fact. 
But  what  wrought  the  change  ?  What  was  it  that 
emptied  the  heathen  temples,  destroyed  the  vocation  of 
the  idolatrous  priesthood,  raised  the  whole  standard  of 
morality,  and,  to  use  the  words  of  Scripture,  "  turned  the 
world  upside  down  "  ?  (Acts  xvii.  6).  I  answer,  unhesi 
tatingly,  the  introduction  and  progress  of  Christianity. 
How  vast,  and  wide,  and  deep  the  change  was  we  can 
hardly  realize  at  this  present  day.  What  is  before  our 
eyes  in  Europe  we  know.  What  was,  when  heathenism 
reigned  supreme,  we  cannot  grasp  and  take  in. 

I  ask  your  attention  to  the  following  eloquent  passage 
from  the  pen  of  a  living  writer : — 

"  The  argument  which  meets  us  first  in  surveying  the 
history  of  Christianity,  and  in  estimating  the  outstanding 
and  singular  features  of  its  success,  is  its  early,  wide,  and, 


446  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

within  certain  limits,  absolutely  irresistible  diffusion. 
Other  facts  attest  this ;  but  I  select  one  as  to  which  there 
can  be  no  controversy,  the  extirpation  by  it  of  idolatry 
such  as  it  existed  in  the  old  Eoman  world.  That  system, 
from  the  Euphrates  to  the  farthest  shore  of  Britain,  from 
the  Nile  to  the  forests  of  Germany,  has  utterly  passed 
away.  The  whole  regions  around  the  Mediterranean,  to 
the  limits  of  civilization,  and  beyond  them,  '  have  changed 
their  gods ; '  and  though  something,  as  time  advanced, 
may  be  claimed  for  Mahommedanism,  the  great,  decisive, 
all  -  prevailing  impulses  have  come  from  Christianity. 
The  classic  Paganism,  Greek  and  Eoman,  the  Assyrian, 
the  Egyptian  and  North  African,  the  Druidic,  and  ulti 
mately  the  Teutonic,  have  all  fallen  to  rise  no  more ; 
and  at  this  moment  there  is  not  on  the  face  of  the  earth 
a  single  worshipper  of  the  '  great  goddess  Diana '  or  '  the 
image  that  fell  down  from  Jupiter,'  of  Baal  or  Dagon,  of 
Isis  or  Serapis,  of  Thor  or  Wodin.  They  are  preserved 
in  imperishable  literature  and  in  equally  imperishable 
art.  Homer  and  the  great  tragedians  have  enshrined 
them.  Virgil  and  Ovid  record  them,  and  even  Milton  in 
his  '  Paradise  Lost,'  to  say  nothing  of  that  wonderful 
Book,  which,  in  revealing  their  abominations,  will  be 
found  to  have  carried  farthest  and  widest  their  memory. 
But  not  a  single  shrine  remains  to  them  in  the  proper 
sense  of  the  word,  not  even  where  the  Apollo  or  Venus, 
the  Minerva  or  Hercules,  enchain  universal  admiration. 
They  are  abolished  as  idols,  while  immortalized  as  relics ; 
and  not  even  the  exquisite  beauty  lavished  upon  them 
can  hide  the  moral  deformity  to  which  they  owe  their 
downfall.  It  is  long  centuries  since  one  simple  soul 
regarded  them  with  anything  of  the  feeling  with  which 
the  African  trembles  before  the  rudest  fetish,  or  the 
Hindoo  before  the  most  unsightly  of  his  divinities. 
Another  conquest  so  complete  and  absolute  does  not 


THE    BEST    EVIDENCES    OF    CHRISTIANITY.  447 

mark  the  history  of  the  world.  All  ranks  and  classes 
passed  through  the  revolution.  The  husbandman  had  to 
give  up  his  offerings  to  Liber  and  Ceres,  the  sailor  his 
votive  tablets  to  Neptune,  the  soldier  his  chaplets  to 
Mars.  The  youth  had  to  forget  his  place  in  the  pro 
cession,  the  virgin  her  part  in  the  dance  or  secular 
games.  The  senator  had  to  forego  his  libation  on 
entering  the  senate,  the  general  his  search  after  the 
omens  before  battle,  the  very  emperor  the  honour  of  his 
own  coins  and  titles  of  divinity.  What  but  an  immense 
and  boundless  power  could  have  wrought  this  change, 
and  wrought  it,  not  by  constraint,  but  willingly,  through 
the  force  of  persuasion  ? "  ("  The  Success  of  Christianity," 
by  Principal  Cairns,  pp.  5,  6.  Eel.  Tract  Soc.) 

Will  any  of  those  who  profess  to  deny  the  truth  of 
Christianity  deny  the  facts  which  this  passage  contains  ? 
It  is  impossible.  He  will  find  all  history  against  him. 
But  if  he  cannot  deny  the  facts,  he  ought  to  tell  us  how 
they  can  on  his  principles  be  accounted  for.  We  say 
they  are  irrefragable  and  unanswerable  proofs  that  Chris 
tianity  came  down  from  God. 

Great,  however,  as  the  fruits  of  Christianity  have  been 
in  the  overthrow  and  destruction  of  idolatry,  they  are 
fully  equalled,  if  not  surpassed,  by  the  enormous  practical 
results  which  Christianity  has  produced  on  the  moral 
standard  and  social  conduct  of  mankind.  About  human 
life  and  property, — about  women,  children,  servants,  and 
the  poor, — about  justice  and  equity  between  man  and 
man, — about  decency,  purity,  and  charity, — about  all 
these  subjects  the  standard  of  public  opinion  has  been 
entirely  changed  since  the  gospel  leavened  the  Koman 
world. 

Once  more  I  ask  attention  to  a  passage  in  which 
another  living  writer  has  ably  summed  up  the  practical 
results  of  Christianity  : — 


448  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

"  We  fear  no  challenge  when  we  affirm  that  in  its 
purest  form  Christianity  has  fostered  the  ideas  and 
encouraged  the  habits  out  of  which  all  true  civilization 
springs.  It  has  fostered  regard  for  man  as  essentially 
a  noble  being,  having  an  immortal  soul  made  in  God's 
image,  with  boundless  capacities  of  expansion  and  im 
provement  ;  regard  for  woman  as  the  helpmeet  and  com 
panion  of  man — not  his  drudge,  or  slave,  or  concubine ; 
regard  for  marriage  as  a  holy  contract  entered  into  before 
God,  not  to  be  lightly  set  aside ;  regard  for  children  as 
the  heritage  of  the  Lord — not  burdens  or  incumbrances, 
but  lent  by  the  Lord  to  be  brought  up  for  Him ;  regard 
for  the  family  as  a  divine  institution,  intended  to  be  a 
fountain  of  holy  joys,  and  a  nursery  of  all  estimable 
habits  and  all  kindly  affections ;  regard  for  the  sick,  the 
infirm,  and  the  aged,  whose  sorrows  we  are  ever  to  pity, 
and  whose  privations  we  are  to  make  up  in  some  measure 
from  our  more  ample  stores.  The  very  word  Christian, 
in  its  true  spirit,  has  been  identified  with  all  these  ideas 
and  habits.  In  that  sense  it  has  a  glory  all  its  own ; 
and  no  more  damaging  criticism  can  be  passed  on  persons 
outraging  truth  and  rectitude  than  that  they  are  a  dis 
grace  to  the  Christian  name."  ("  Christianity  and  Secu 
larism,"  by  Dr.  Blaikie,  p.  5.  Eel.  Tract  Soc.) 

It  would  be  perfectly  easy  to  add  to  the  statements 
contained  in  this  passage  if  time  and  space  permitted. 
The  difficulty  in  the  matter  is  not  so  much  the  discovery 
of  evidence  as  the  selection  of  it.  The  mass  of  facts 
which  might  be  adduced  to  show  the  rich  and  blessed 
fruits  of  Christianity  is  simply  enormous,  and  I  pity  the 
sceptic  who  refuses  to  look  at  it.  To  those  who  care  to 
investigate  the  subject  more  fully  I  strongly  recommend 
two  volumes  which  have  recently  been  published.  One 
is  called  "  Gesta  Christi"  by  an  American  writer  named 
Brace;  the  other  is  called  "  Modern  Missions  and  Culture," 


THE    BEST    EVIDENCES    OF    CHRISTIANITY.  449 

by  Dr.  Werneck,  a  German.  Each  of  these  volumes 
contains  a  vast  quantity  of  valuable  information  which  is 
accessible  to  few  English  readers,  and  will  richly  repay 
perusal. 

I  admit  most  fully  that  there  have  been  periods, 
during  the  last  eighteen  centuries,  when  the  fruits  of 
Christianity  have  been  miserably  scanty  and  poor,  and 
the  tree  which  bore  them  has  seemed  rotten  and  only  fit 
to  be  cut  down.  I  do  not  forget  the  corruption  of  faith 
and  practice  in  the  dark  ages,  the  hideous  immorality  of 
many  bishops  of  Eome,  the  vile  doings  of  many  monas 
teries  and  nunneries,  the  ignorance  and  superstition  of 
priests,  the  grovelling  superstition  of  laymen.  These  are 
things  I  do  not  pretend  to  deny.  I  grant  that  the  tide 
of  truth  sometimes  ebbed  so  low  that  it  was  almost  out 
of  sight,  and  the  light  was  so  dim  that  it  was  well-nigh 
extinguished.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  the 
worst  times  there  were  always  some  men  who  protested 
loudly  against  the  wickedness  around  them,  such  as 
Bradwardine,  and  Grostete,  and  Wycliffe,  and  John  Huss, 
and  Jerome  of  Prague,  and  Savonarola.  And  there  were 
always  some  scattered  bodies  of  Christians  who,  by  life 
and  doctrine,  witnessed  faithfully  against  corruption,  such 
as  the  Vallenses  and  Albigenses,  the  Waldensian  Churches, 
and  the  Lollards.  And,  after  all,  if  the  state  of  the 
Eoman  world  in  the  days  of  the  apostle  and  the  state 
of  the  world  at  this  day  could  be  fairly  compared,  there 
is  not  the  slightest  doubt  what  the  verdict  would  be. 
The  change  for  the  better  would  be  found  so  vast  that 
no  words  could  describe  it.  The  fruits  of  Christianity 
are  such,  in  spite  of  all  failures  and  defects,  that  the 
moral  difference  between  the  world  before  Christ  and  the 
world  after  Christ  is  the  difference  between  gold  and 
dross,  sweet  and  bitter,  white  and  black,  darkness  and 
light. 

2F 


450  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  we  are  all  so  familiar  with  the 
public  blessings  Christianity  has  insensibly  conferred  on 
the  world,  that  we  cannot  realize  the  condition  of  things 
from  which  it  has  delivered  us.  Few  men  take  the 
trouble  to  read  or  think  about  anything  except  eating, 
drinking,  dressing,  business,  politics,  recreation,  money, 
and  temporalities.  The  many  never  reflect  on  the  enor 
mous  debt  which  they  daily  owe  to  the  effects  of  Bible 
religion  and  the  very  Christianity  which  so  many  pretend 
to  despise.  Does  the  infidel,  who  lies  in  some  hospital 
for  weeks,  tenderly  nursed  and  cared  for,  reflect  that 
without  Christianity  there  would  have  been  no  hospital 
at  all?  I  doubt  it. — Does  the  British  workman,  who 
never  goes  to  a  place  of  worship,  and  never  reads  his 
Bible,  and  often  sneers  at  parsons,  reflect  that  without 
Christianity  he  would  never  have  been  sure  of  his  wages, 
and  would  have  often  been  treated  as  a  bond-slave  and  a 
serf  ?  I  doubt  it. — Does  the  high-born  woman  of  fashion, 
who  makes  a  god  of  dress  and  amusement,  and  regards 
"  religious  people  "  with  ill-disguised  contempt,  ever  reflect 
that  without  Christianity  she  would  have  enjoyed  little 
liberty  of  action,  little  independence  of  thought  or  choice, 
and  her  very  honour  would  have  been  little  respected  ? 
I  doubt  it. — Does  the  scientific  agnostic,  who  sits  at 
home  at  ease,  or  travels  about  on  Sundays,  and  despises 
churches,  clergymen,  and  Bibles,  and  ignores  his  soul, — 
does  he  ever  fairly  and  honestly  reflect  that  without 
Christianity  he  would  have  had  little  safety  for  property, 
home,  or  person,  little  liberty  of  thought,  and  little  chance 
of  justice  if  he  came  in  collision  with  ruling  power  ? 
Does  he,  I  say,  think  of  all  this  ?  Once  more  I  say,  I 
doubt  it. — In  short,  I  am  firmly  convinced  that  of  all 
the  debts  which  have  been  repudiated  since  creation, 
there  never  was  one  so  shamefully  ignored  and  repudiated 
as  the  debt  which  the  world  owes  to  Christianity.  If 


THE    BEST   EVIDENCES    OF   CHRISTIANITY,  451 

revealed  religion  could  only  be  fairly  tried  by  its  fruits, 
there  is  no  doubt  what  the  verdict  would  be.  Secularism, 
agnosticism,  scepticism,  and  infidelity  would  be  confounded 
and  silenced  for  ever. 

II.  I  will  now  turn  to  the  other  point  which  I  under 
took  to  consider.  Let  us  inquire  what  were  the  leading 
doctrines  of  Christianity  ty  the  agency  of  which  its  fruits 
have  been  produced. 

I  regard  this  point  as  one  of  great  importance.  It  is 
certain  that  not  everything  called  Christianity  is  the 
Christianity  which  was  taught  by  Christ  and  His  Apostles. 
It  is  equally  certain  that  nothing  but  "  the  tree"  that  they 
planted  will  ever  bear  good  fruit.  To  expect  good  fruit 
from  the  grossly  unscriptural  religion  of  pre-Keformation 
days,  or  from  the  vague,  hazy,  broad,  boneless,  jelly-fish 
teaching,  which  many  call  religion  in  the  nineteenth  cen 
tury,  is  unreasonable  and  absurd.  Such  religions  never 
yet  bore  good  fruit :  they  never  can  and  they  never  will. 

Fruit-bearing  Christianity  has  never  been  a  mere  vica 
rious  religion.  By  that  I  mean  a  religion  which  teaches 
men  to  put  their  souls  in  the  hands  of  a  priest,  and  to 
leave  him  to  settle  matters  between  them  and  God.  Nor 
yet  has  it  been  a  mere  formal  and  ceremonial  religion. 
By  that  I  mean  a  religion  which  teaches  men  to  rest  in 
the  observation  of  times  and  seasons,  and  gestures  and 
postures,  and  bodily  acts,  in  which  the  heart  and  soul 
have  nothing  to  do.  Nor  yet  has  it  been  a  religion  of 
mere  asceticism.  By  that  I  mean  a  religion  which  teaches 
men  and  women  that  the  way  to  please  God  is  to  shut 
ourselves  up  in  monasteries  and  nunneries,  and  leave  the 
world  to  itself.  Nor  yet  has  it  been  a  mind-cramping 
religion.  By  that  I  mean  a  religion  which  teaches  men 
that  they  must  not  think  and  read  for  themselves,  but 
must  shut  their  eyes,  and  hear  the  Church,  and  believe 


452  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

whatever  they  are  told.  Christianity  of  these  kinds,  I 
repeat  emphatically,  has  never  borne  good  fruit.  When 
ever  and  wherever  it  has  prevailed,  in  any  country  or  at 
any  era,  such  religion  has  done  little  or  no  good  to  the 
world.  It  has  made  no  mark  on  lives  or  characters. 
It  has  been  no  better  than  a  refined  -and  polished 
heathenism,  a  stuffed  carcase,  a  whitened  sepulchre,  a 
body  without  life.  It  has  certainly  supplied  no  evidence 
to  silence  the  sceptic,  or  to  prove  the  truth  of  divine 
revelation. 

The  Christianity  which  I  call  fruit-bearing, — which 
shows  its  divine  origin  by  its  blessed  effects  on  mankind, 
— the  Christianity  which  you  may  safely  defy  infidels  to 
explain  away, — that  Christianity  is  a  very  different  thing. 
Let  me  show  some  of  its  leading  marks  and  features. 

(a)  For  one  thing,  fruit-bearing  Christianity  has  always 
taught  the  inspiration,  sufficiency,  and  supremacy  of  Holy 
Scripture.  It  has  told  men  that  "  God's  Word  written"  is 
the  only  trustworthy  rule  of  faith  and  practice  in  religion, 
that  God  requires  nothing  to  be  believed  that  is  not  in  this 
Word,  and  that  nothing  is  right  which  contradicts  it.  It 
has  never  allowed  reason,  the  verifying  faculty,  or  the 
voice  of  the  Church,  to  be  placed  above,  or  on  a  level  with 
Scripture.  It  has  steadily  maintained  that,  however  im 
perfectly  we  may  understand  it,  the  old  Book  is  meant  to 
be  the  only  standard  of  life  and  doctrine. 

(&)  For  another  thing,  fruit-bearing  Christianity  has 
always  taught  fully  the  sinfulness,  guilt,  and  corruption  of 
human  nature.  It  has  told  men  that  they  are  born  in  sin, 
deserve  God's  wrath  and  condemnation,  and  are  naturally 
inclined  to  do  evil.  It  has  never  allowed  that  men  and 
women  are  only  weak  and  pitiable  creatures,  who  can 
become  good  when  they  please,  and  make  their  own  peace 
with  God.  On  the  contrary,  it  has  steadily  declared  man's 
danger  and  vileness,  and  his  pressing  need  of  a  divine 


THE    BEST   EVIDENCES    OF    CHRISTIANITY.  453 

forgiveness  and  satisfaction  for  his  sins,  a  new  birth  or 
conversion,  and  an  entire  change  of  heart. 

(c)  For  another  thing,   fruit-bearing  Christianity  has 
always  set  before  men  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  chief 
object  of  faith  and  hope  in  religion,  as  the  Divine  Media 
tor  between  God  and  men,  the  only  source  of  peace  of 
conscience,  and  the  root  of  all  spiritual  life.    It  has  never 
been  content  to  teach  that  He  is  merely  our  Prophet,  our 
Example,  and  our  Judge.     The  main  things  it  has  ever 
insisted  on  about  Christ  are  the  atonement  for  sin  He 
made  by  His  death,  His  sacrifice  on  the  cross,  the  com 
plete  redemption  from  guilt  and  condemnation  by  His 
blood,  His  victory  over  the  grave  by  His  resurrection,  His 
active  life  of  intercession  at  God's  right  hand,  and  the 
absolute  necessity  of  simple  faith  in  Him.     In  short,  it 
has  made  Christ  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  in  Christian 
theology. 

(d)  Last,  but  not  least,  fruit-bearing  Christianity  has 
always  honoured  the  Person  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
magnified  His  work.     It  has  never  taught  that  all  pro 
fessing  Christians  have  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  in  their 
hearts,  as  a  matter  of  course,  because  they  are  baptized, 
or  because  they  belong  to  the  Church,  or  because  they 
are  communicants.     It  has  steadily  maintained  that  the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  the  only  evidence  of  having  the 
Spirit,  and  that  those  fruits  must  be  seen, — that  we  must 
be  born  of  the  Spirit,  led  by  the  Spirit,  sanctified  by  the 
Spirit,  and  feel  the  operations  of  the  Spirit, — -and  that  a 
close  walk  with  God  in  the  path  of  His  commandments, 
a  life  of  holiness,  charity,  self-denial,  purity,   and  zeal 
to  do  good,  are  the  only  satisfactory  marks  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

Such  is  true  fruit-bearing  Christianity.  Well  would  it 
have  been  for  the  world  if  there  had  been  more  of  it 
during  the  last  eighteen  centuries  !  Too  often,  and  in  too 


454  PEINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

many  parts  of  Christendom,  there  has  been  so  little  of  it, 
that  Christ's  religion  has  seemed  extinct,  and  has  fallen 
into  utter  contempt.  But  just  in  proportion  as  such 
Christianity  as  I  have  described  has  prevailed,  the  world 
has  benefited,  the  infidel  been  silenced,  and  the  truth  of 
Divine  revelation  been  acknowledged.  The  tree  has  been 
known  by  its  fruit. 

This  is  the  Christianity  which,  in  the  days  of  the 
Primitive  Church,  "  turned  the  world  upside  down."  It 
was  this  that  emptied  the  idol  temples  of  their  worshippers, 
routed  the  Greek  and  Eoman  philosophers,  and  obliged 
even  heathen  writers  to  confess  that  the  followers  of  the 
"new  superstition,"  as  they  called  it,  were  people  who 
loved  one  another,  and  lived  very  pure  and  holy  lives. 

This  is  the  Christianity  which,  after  dreary  centuries 
of  ignorance,  priestcraft,  and  superstition,  produced  the 
Protestant  Eeformation,  and  changed  the  history  of 
Europe.  The  leading  doctrines  which  were  preached  by 
Luther  and  Zwingle  on  the  Continent,  and  by  Latimer  and 
his  companions  in  England,  were  precisely  those  which  I 
have  briefly  described.  That  they  bore  rich  fruit,  in  an 
immense  increase  of  general  morality  and  holiness,  is  a 
simple  fact  which  no  historian  has  ever  denied. 

This  is  the  Christianity  which,  in  the  middle  of  last 
century,  delivered  our  own  Church  from  the  state  of 
deadness  and  darkness  into  which  she  had  fallen.  The 
main  truths  on  which  Whitfield,  and  Wesley,  and 
Eomaine,  and  Venn,  and  their  companions,  continually 
insisted,  were  the  truth  about  sin,  Christ,  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  holiness.  And  the  results  were  the  same  as  they  were 
in  the  primitive  days,  and  at  the  era  of  the  Eeformation. 
Men  persecuted  and  hated  all  who  taught  these  truths, 
but  no  one  could  say  that  they  did  not  make  men  live 
and  die  well. 

This  is  the  Christianity  which  is  doing  good  at  this 


THE   BEST    EVIDENCES    OF   CHRISTIANITY.  455 

day,  wherever  good  is  done.  Search  the  missionary 
stations  in  Africa,  India,  or  China.  Visit  the  great  over 
grown,  semi-heathen  parishes  in  colliery  districts  or  manu 
facturing  towns  in  our  own  land.  In  every  case  you  will 
find  the  same  report  must  be  made.  The  only  religious 
teaching  which  can  show  solid,  positive  results,  is  that 
which  gives  prominence  to  the  doctrines  which  I  have 
endeavoured  to  describe.  Wherever  they  are  rightly 
taught,  Christianity  can  point  to  fruits  which  are  an 
unanswerable  proof  of  its  divine  origin. 

So  much  for  fruit-bearing  Christianity.  I  leave  the 
subject  with  one  remark  about  it.  Let  it  never  be  for 
gotten  that  its  leading  principles  are  those  which  are  least 
likely  to  please  the  natural  man.  On  the  contrary,  they 
are  precisely  those  which  are  calculated  to  be  unpopular 
and  to  give  offence.  Proud  man  does  not  like  to  be  told 
that  he  is  a  weak,  guilty  sinner, — that  he  cannot  save  his 
own  soul,  and  must  trust  in  the  work  of  another, — that 
he  must  be  converted  and  have  a  new  heart, — that  he 
must  live  a  holy,  self-denying  life,  and  come  out  from  the 
world.  Surely  the  mere  fact  that  this  kind  of  unpopular 
teaching  characterizes  successful  Christianity,  and  bears 
fruit  in  the  world,  is  a  strong  evidence  that  Christianity 
is  a  divine  revelation,  and  really  comes  from  God. 

And  now  I  will  conclude  this  paper  with  four  words  of 
practical  application,  which  I  shall  address  to  four  different 
classes  of  people. 

1.  In  the  first  place,  I  have  a  word  for  those  who  are 
tempted  to  give  way  to  scepticism  and  unbelief,  and  are  half 
disposed  to  throw  overboard  Christianity  altogether.  What 
shall  I  say  to  you  ?  Listen,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

I  entreat  you,  before  you  go  any  farther,  to  deal  honestly 
with  the  religion  of  faith  and  those  who  profess  it,  and  try 
it  by  its  fruits.  That  there  is  such  a  religion  in  the  midst 
of  us,  and  that  there  are  thousands  who  profess  it,  are 


456  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

simple  facts  which  nobody  can  deny.  These  thousands 
believe  without  doubting  certain  great  truths  of  Christi 
anity,  and  live  and  die  in  their  belief.  Let  it  be  admitted 
that,  in  some  points,  these  men  of  faith  do  not  agree, — 
such  as  the  Church,  the  ministry,  and  the  sacraments. 
But  after  every  deduction,  there  remains  an  immense 
amount  of  common  theology,  about  which  their  faith  is 
one.  On  such  points  as  sin,  and  God,  and  Christ,  and  the 
atonement,  and  the  authority  of  the  Bible,  and  the  im 
portance  of  holiness,  and  the  necessity  of  prayer,  and  self- 
denial,  and  the  value  of  the  soul,  and  the  reality  of  heaven 
and  hell,  and  judgment,  and  eternity, — on  such  points  as 
these,  I  say,  these  men  of  faith  are  very  much  of  one 
mind. 

Now,  I  ask  all  sceptics  and  agnostics,  is  it  honest  to 
turn  away  from  these  men  of  faith  and  their  religion 
with  contempt,  because  they  have  many  weaknesses  and 
infirmities  ?  Is  it  fair  to  despise  their  religion,  and  wrap 
yourself  up  in  unbelief,  because  of  their  controversies  and 
strifes,  their  feeble  literature  and  their  party  spirit  ?  Is  it 
fair  to  ignore  the  fruits  of  peace,  and  hope  and  comfort, 
which  they  enjoy  ?  Mark  the  solid  work  which,  with  all 
their  faults,  they  do  in  the  world,  in  lessening  sorrow  and 
sin,  and  increasing  happiness,  and  improving  their  fellow- 
men.  What  fruits  and  work  can  unbelief  show  which  will 
bear  comparison  with  the  fruits  of  faith  ?  What  good  has 
secularism,  or  agnosticism,  or  deism,  done  to  mankind  ? 
What  missions  have  they  sent  forth  to  the  world  ?  What 
cities  or  countries  on  earth  have  they  civilized,  purified, 
and  made  more  holy  and  happy  ?  What  have  the  gods 
which  some  despisers  of  revelation  seem  to  worship, — evolu 
tion,  development,  matter,  force,  destiny, — -what  have  they 
done  to  enable  men  to  meet  the  many  ills  to  which  all  flesh 
is  heir  ?  What  aching  consciences  have  they  relieved  ? 
What  broken  hearts  have  they  bound  up  ?  What  sick-beds 


THE    BEST   EVIDENCES    OF    CHRISTIANITY.  457 

have  they  cheered  ?  What  bereaved  parents  and  widows 
have  they  comforted  ?  We  ask  in  vain.  We  shall  get  no 
answer.  Look  these  facts  in  the  face  and  deal  honestly 
with  them.  Systems  ought  to  be  judged  by  their  "  fruits  " 
and  results.  When  the  so-called  systems  of  modern 
unbelief  and  scepticism,  and  free  thought,  can  point  to  as 
much  good  done  in  the  world  by  their  adherents  as  simple 
faith  has  done  by  the  hand  of  its  friends,  we  may  give 
them  some  attention.  But  till  they  do  that,  I  boldly  say, 
that  the  simple,  old-fashioned  religion  of  faith  has  a  just 
claim  on  our  respect,  esteem,  and  obedience,  and  ought  not 
to  be  lightly  esteemed,  ridiculed,  or  despised. 

2.  In  the  second  place,  I  have  a  word  for  those  prof essing 
Christians  who  have  no  life  or  reality  about  their  religion, 
and  are  only  nominal  members  of  Christ's  Church.  I  need 
hardly  say  there  are  myriads  of  people  in  this  condition. 
They  are  not  sceptics,  and  would  be  justly  offended  if  you 
called  them  infidels  or  agnostics.  Yet,  if  truth  must  be 
spoken,  except  going  to  church  or  chapel  on  Sundays,  they 
give  no  sign  of  Christianity.  If  you  mark  their  daily  life, 
they  seem  neither  to  think,  nor  feel,  nor  care  for  their  souls, 
or  God,  or  eternity. 

Now,  I  warn  any  readers  of  this  paper  who  are 
in  this  state,  and  I  say  it  with  pain,  that  you  are 
the  true  cause  of  a  vast  proportion  of  infidelity.  I 
remember  a  careless  sceptic  saying  to  me, — "Do  you 
think  I  am  going  to  believe  your  Christianity,  when  I  see 
so  many  of  your  church-goers  behaving  as  they  do  ? 
Do  you  mean  to  tell  me  that  they  think  their  creed 
is  true,  and  that  they  really  believe  in  a  resurrection 
and  a  judgment  to  come  ?  It  will  be  time  enough  for 
me  to  believe  when  I  see  your  people  really  believing 
At  present  your  Christianity  seems  a  great  sham  and 
a  mere  form." — Alas !  such  talk  as  this  is  only  too 
much  justified  by  facts  Nothing,  nothing,  I  am  con- 

2a 


458  PRINCIPLES    FOR   CHURCHMEN. 

vinced,  does  so  much  to  help  the  progress  of  modern 
infidelity  as  the  utter  absence  of  reality  and  earnestness 
among  professing  Christians.  Men  and  women  who  crowd 
churches  on  Sundays,  and  then  live  worldly,  selfish  lives 
all  the  week,  are  the  best  and  most  efficient  allies  of 
scepticism.  "  If  you  believed  what  you  repeat  under  the 
pulpit,"  the  sceptic  says,  "  you  would  never  live  as  you 
live  at  home."  Oh  that  people  would  think  of  the  mis 
chief  done  by  inconsistency  !  "  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest, 
and  arise  from  the  dead."  It  is  bad  enough  to  ruin  your 
own  soul.  But  do  not  add  to  your  sin  by  ruining  others. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  I  have  a  word  for  those  sincere 
but  weak-minded  Christians  who  are  surprised  and  frightened 
at  the  unbelief  of  these  latter  days,  and  live  in  a  constant 
state  of  panic  and  alarm.  What  shall  I  say  to  you  ? 
Listen,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

I  ask  you,  then,  to  look  to  your  Bibles,  and  lay  aside 
your  fears.  There  is  nothing  in  unbelief  which  ought  to 
surprise  you.  Search  the  Scriptures,  and  you  will  find 
that  the  unbelief  of  this  present  century  is  only  an  old 
enemy  in  a  new  dress,  an  old  disease  in  a  new  form.  Since 
the  day  when  Adam  and  Eve  fell,  the  devil  has  never 
ceased  to  tempt  men  not  to  believe  God,  and  has  said, 
directly  or  indirectly,  "  Ye  shall  not  die  even  if  you  do  not 
believe."  In  the  latter  days  especially  we  have  warrant 
of  Scripture  for  expecting  an  abundant  crop  of  unbelief : — 
"When  the  Son  of  Man  cometh,  shall  He  find  faith 
on  the  earth  ? "  "  Evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse 
and  worse."  "  There  shall  come  in  the  last  days  scoffers  " 
(Luke  xviii.  8  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  13  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  3).  Here  in 
England,  scepticism  is  that  natural  rebound  from  semi- 
popery  and  superstition,  which  many  wise  men  have  long 
predicted  and  expected.  It  is  precisely  that  swing  of  the 
pendulum  which  far-sighted  students  of  human  nature 
looked  for ;  and  it  has  come. 


THE    BEST   EVIDENCES    OF    CHRISTIANITY.  459 

But  as  I  tell  you  not  to  be  surprised  at  the  widespread 
scepticism  of  the  times,  so  also  I  must  urge  you  not  to  be 
shaken  in  mind  by  it,  or  moved  from  your  stedfastness. 
There  is  no  real  cause  for  alarm.  The  ark  of  God  is  not 
in  danger,  though  the  oxen  seem  to  shake  it.  Christianity 
has  survived  the  attacks  of  Hume  and  Hobbes  and  Tindal, 
of  Collins  and  Woolston  and  Bolingbroke  and  Chubb, 
of  Voltaire  and  Paine  and  Holyoake.  These  men  made  a 
great  noise  in  their  day,  and  frightened  weak  people  ;  but 
they  produced  no  more  effect  than  idle  travellers  produce 
by  scratching  their  names  on  the  pyramids  of  Egypt. 
Depend  on  it,  Christianity  in  like  manner  will  survive  the 
attacks  of  the  clever  writers  of  these  times.  The  startling 
novelty  of  many  modern  objections  to  Eevelation,  no 
doubt,  makes  them  seem  more  weighty  than  they  really 
are.  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  hard  knots  cannot 
be  untied  because  our  fingers  cannot  untie  them,  or  that 
formidable  difficulties  cannot  be  explained  because  our 
eyes  cannot  see  through  or  explain  them.  When  you 
cannot  answer  a  sceptic,  be  content  to  wait  for  more  light ; 
but  never  forsake  a  great  principle.  In  religion,  as  in 
many  scientific  questions,  said  Faraday,  "the  highest 
philosophy  is  often  a  judicious  suspense."  We  can  afford 
to  wait. 

4.  In  the  last  place,  I  have  a  word  for  all  true  believers 
who  lament  the  spread  of  unbelief,  though  their  own  faith 
is  unshaken.  What  shall  I  say  to  them  ?  What  advice 
shall  I  offer  ?  Listen,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

I  must  plainly  say,  and  I  say  it  with  sorrow,  that  we 
who  profess  faith,  and  are  never  troubled  with  unbelief,  are 
not  altogether  free  from  blame.  Too  often  our  faith  is 
little  better  than  a  mere  "otiose  assent"  to  certain 
theological  propositions,  but  not  a  living,  burning,  active 
principle,  which  works  by  love,  purifies  the  heart, 
overcomes  the  world,  and  brings  forth  much  fruit  of 


460  PRINCIPLES    FOR    CHURCHMEN. 

holiness  and  good  works.  It  is  not  the  faith  which  made 
primitive  Christians  rejoice  under  Eoman  persecution,  and 
made  Luther  stand  up  boldly  before  the  Diet  of  Worms, 
and  made  Kidley  and  Latimer  "  love  not  their  lives  to  the 
death,"  and  made  Wesley  give  up  his  position  at  Oxford  to 
become  the  Evangelist  of  England.  We  are  verily  guilty 
in  this  matter.  If  there  was  more  real  living  faith  on 
earth,  I  suspect  there  would  be  less  unbelief.  Scepticism, 
in  many  a  case,  would  shrink,  and  dwindle,  and  melt 
away,  if  it  saw  faith  more  awake,  and  alive,  and  active, 
and  stirring.  Let  us,  for  Christ's  sake,  and  the  sake  of 
souls,  amend  our  ways  in  this  matter.  Let  us  pray  daily, 
"  Lord,  increase  our  faith."  Let  us  live,  and  move,  and 
have  our  being,  and  deal  with  men,  as  if  we  really  believed 
every  jot  and  tittle  of  our  creeds,  and  as  if  a  dying,  risen, 
interceding,  and  coming  Christ  were  continually  before  our 
eyes.  We  may  depend  on  it  the  old  saying  is  true, — "  The 
inconsistency  of  believers  is  the  infidel's  best  argument." 

This,  I  am  firmly  convinced,  is  the  surest  way  to  oppose 
and  diminish  unbelief.  Let  the  time  past  suffice  us  to 
have  lived  content  with  a  cold,  tame  assent  to  creeds.  Let 
the  time  to  come  find  us  living,  active  believers.  It  was  a 
solemn  saying  which  fell  from  the  lips  of  an  eminent 
minister  of  Christ  on  his  death-bed, — "  We  are  none  of 
us  more  than  half  awake ! "  If  believers  were  more 
thorough,  and  real,  and  whole-hearted  in  their  belief,  there 
would  be  far  less  unbelief  in  the  world. 

The  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  which  I  referred 
in  the  beginning  of  this  paper  contain  a  mine  of  truth, — 
"  Every  tree  shall  be  known  by  its  own  fruit."  If  the  tree 
of  Christianity  bore  more  fruit,  the  axe  of  infidelity  would 
never  harm  it,  and  would  be  laid  to  its  root  in  vain. 


PRINTED  BY   MORRISON   AND  OIBB  LIMITED,   EDINBURGH 


OCTOBER,    1899. 
SELECTIONS   from    the 

NEW    PUBLICATIONS  of 
CHAS.  d.  THYNNE. 


LONDON : 
Wycliffe  House, 
6,  Great  Queen  St., 
Lincoln's  Inn,  W.C. 


WORKS 

BY  THE 

LORD   BISHOP  OF   LIVERPOOL 

(RIGHT  REV.  J.  C.  RYLE,  D.D.). 

PUBLISHED  BY 

CHAS.    J.    THYNNB 

(Successor  to  WM.  H0NT  &  Co.), 

"WYCLIFFE   HOUSE,"   6   GREAT   QUEEN  STREET, 
LINCOLN'S  INN,  LONDON,  W.O. 

N.B.—All  Prices  are  Nett. 


Expository  Thoughts  on  the  Gospels. 

Designed  for  Family  and  Private  Reading,  with  Text  complete,  and 
Copious  Notes.  A  New  and  thoroughly  Revised  Edition,  well  printed  on 
specially  prepared  paper,  complete  in  Four  Volumes.  Crown  8vo,  dark 
blue  cloth,  lettered  in  gold,  uniform  with  the  "  Wycliffe"  Series  of  the 
Bishop's  Works.  Price  10s.  It  can  also  be  supplied  in  the  following 
leather  bindings: — Half  calf,  gilt  edges, 24s. ;  half  morocco,  gilt  edges, 
26s. ;  whole  morocco,  38s.  the  set. 

This  work  consists  or— 

I.    The  text  of  the  Authorised  Version  of  the  Gospels  divided  into  short  sections. 
II.    Short  Expositions  of  each  section,  specially  intended  for  reading  aloud  at  family 

worship,  for  pastoral  visits,  or  for  private  use. 

III.  A  full  and  complete  Commentary  of  the  Gospels,— critical,  explanatory,  exegetical, 
and  illustrative,  containing  many  interesting  quotations  from  authors  little 
known,  both  ancient  and  modern,  and  full  examinations  of  many  leading  topics 
under  discussion  in  the  present  day. 

ALSO  A  SEVEN  VOLUME  EDITION  OF  THE  ABOVE  AS  FOLLOWS  :— 
ST.  MATTHEW,  complete  in  One  Volume. 
ST.  MARK,  ,,  „          „ 

ST.  LUKE,  „  Two  Volumes. 

ST.  JOHN,  ,,  Three     „ 

Prices — in  black  cloth,  gilt  binding,  8s.  per  Volume, 
in  half  morocco,  gilt  edges,          7s.          „ 
in  whole    „  „  9s  6d. 

Short  Expository  Readings  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  John. 

A  Selection  designed  for  Families,  Mothers'  Meetings,  District  Visitors, 
etc.  With  the  Text  complete.  Crown  8vo,  dark  blue  cloth,  gilt. 
Price  2s. 

••This  volume  is  intended  to  meet  the  wants  of  those  who  do  not  require  critical  dis 
cussion  of  the  difficulties,  and  'things  hard  to  be  understood'  in  Scripture,  but  plain 
exposition  of  God's  word."— Extract  from  Preface 

* 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR 


All  Prices  are  Nett. 

The  "Wtfcliffe"   Popular  Scries 

or 

BISHOP  RYLE'S  COLLECTED  WORKS. 

All  bound  in  uniform  dark  blue  cloth,  lettered  In  gold,  large  post  8uo. 

Light  from  Old  Times;  or,  Protestant  Facts  and  Men. 

With  an  Introduction  for  Our  Own  Days.    Price  2s.  6d. 
CONTENTS. 


Introduction  for  Our  Own  Days. 

John  Wyoliffe. 

Why  were  our  Reformers  Burned  ? 

John  Rogers,  Martyr. 

John  Hooper,  Bishop  and  Martyr. 

Rowland  Taylor,  Martyr. 

Hugh  Latimer,  Bishop  and  Martyr. 


John  Bradford,  Martyr. 

Nicholas  Ridley,  Bishop  and  Martyr 

Samuel  Ward. 

Archbishop  Laud. 

Richard  Baxter. 

William  Gurnall. 

James  II.  and  the  Seven  Bishops. 


"This  work  is  '  partly  historical  and  partly  biographical.1 

11  Under  the  head  of  'facts'  the  reader  will  find  some  account  of  the  three  most  remark- 
able  events  in  the  history  of  the  Reformed  Church  of  England.  The  first  of  these  events 
is  the  ferocious  attempt  which  was  made  by  Queen  Mary  to  destroy  the  work  of  Reforma 
tion  which  was  begun  in  the  reign  of  Edward  the  Sixth.  The  second  event  was  the  blind 
and  abortive  effort  of  Archbishop  Laud  to  unprotestantise  the  Church  of  England,  which 
resulted  in  his  own  execution,  and  well  nigh  ruined  the  Church  and  the  monarchy  for 
ever.  The  third  event  is  the  daring  attack  on  English  Protestantism,  which  was  made  by 
James  the  Second,  when  he  persecuted  the  seven  bishops.  These  three  events  ought  to 
be  familiar  to  every  Englishman. 

"  Under  the  head  of '  men '  the  reader  will  find  In  this  volume  some  accounts  of  the  lives 
and  opinions  ot  eleven  remarkable  men.  At  the  head  of  the  eleven  I  have  placed  John 
Wycliffe,  the  Morning  Star  of  the  Reformation.  I  believe  that  English  Christianity  owes 
him  a  great  debt  which  has  never  been  fully  paid.  Among  them  I  have  placed  Arch 
bishop  Laud.  He  is  a  man  who  did  such  indelible  harm  to  the  Church  of  England,  and 
yet  is  so  generally  over-valued  and  misunderstood  that  I  have  felt  it  a  plain  duty  to  put 
him  before  my  readers  in  his  proper  colours.  Six  of  the  eleven  were  Reformers  who  were 
burned  alive  in  Queen  Mary's  days,  because  they  would  not  abjure  their  Protestant 
principles.  Three  of  the  eleven  were  Puritan  divines,  who  lived  in  the  seventeenth  CCD 
tury,  and  made  a  deep  mark  in  their  day  and  generation." — Extract  from  Preface. 

The  Upper  Room:  ft 

Being  Truths  for  the  Times.     Price  2s.  6d. 

"  This  volume  contains  a  very  miscellaneous  collection  of  papers  which  I  have  sent  forth 
from  time  to  time,  in  one  shape  or  another,  during  a  forty-five  years'  ministry.  Some  of 
these  papers  are  not  known  beyond  a  small  circle  of  kind  friends.  Not  a  few  of  them  are 
the  substance  of  pulpit  addresses  delivered  on  important  public  occasions,  and  composed 
with  more  than  ordinary  pains.  All  of  them,  I  venture  humbly  to  think,  will  contain 
some  useful  truths  for  the  times,  and  words  in  season." — Extract  from  Preface. 

Principles  for  Churchmen. 

A  Manual  of  Positive  Statements  on  Doubtful  and  Disputed  Points. 
Price  2s.  6d. 

"This  volume  consists  of  papers  on  subjects  of  deep  interest  to  all  Churchmen  in  the 
present  day.  About  some  of  these  subjects  a  wave  of  most  unsatisfactory  opinion  is 
spreading  over  the  land.  About  all  of  them  there  is  a  painful  amount  of  ignorance  and 
uncertainty  in  many  minds,  and  myriads  of  Churchmen  seem  unable  to  say  what  they 
think  and  what  they  believe.  On  each  of  them  this  volume  will  be  found  to  contaL' 
some  plain  and  positive  statements  based  on  Scripture  and  the  authorised  formularies  • 
the  Church  of  England." — Ejttractfrom  Preface, 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 


All  Prices  are  Nett. 

The  "Wjjcliffe"  Popular  Scries— continued. 

Knots  Untied : 

Being  Plain  Statements  on  Disputed  Points  in  Eeligion.  Thirteenth 
Edition,  Enlarged.  Price  2s.  6d. 

A  SPECIAL  EDITION  OF  THIS  WORK  quite  unabridged  is  issued  in 
h*ndy  volume  form  (size  1\  x  5),  and  good  clear  type.  Price  2s.  This  Edition 
is  admirably  adapted  for  distribution. 

"  This  volume  consists  of  eighteen  papers  on  subjects  which  are  matters  of  dispute 
among  English  Churchmen  in  the  present  day,  systematically  arranged.  A  moment's 
glance  at  the  table  of  contents  will  show  that  there  is  hardly  any  point  of  theological  con 
troversy  belonging  to  this  era  which  is  not  discussed,  with  more  or  less  fulness,  in  these 
papers. 

"  The  doctrinal  tone  of  the  volume  will  be  found  distinctly  and  decidedly  '  Evangelical.' 
I  avow  that,  without  hesitation,  at  the  outset.  The  opinions  expressed  and  advocated 
•bout  the  matters  discussed  are  those  of  an  Evangelical  Churchman.  They  are  the  only 
opinions  which  I  can  find  in  the  Holy  Scripture,  in  the  Thirty -nine  Articles,  in  the  Prayer- 
Wok  fairly  interpreted,  in  the  works  of  the  Reformers,  or  the  writings  of  pre-Caroline 
divines." — Extract  from  Preface. 

Holiness : 

Its  Nature,  Hindrances,  Difficulties,  and  Hoots.  With  Preface,  Intro- 
ductory  Essay,  and  Supplementary  Extracts  from  Old  Writers.  Price 
2s.  64 

"  I  venture  to  think  that  the  papers  contained  in  this  volume  will  be  found  helpful  by 
all  who  take  an  interest  in  the  subject  of  scriptural  holiness.  I  am  much  mistaken  if  they 
do  not  throw  broad  light  on  the  real  nature  of  holiness,  and  the  temptations  and  difficulties 
which  all  must  expect  who  follow  it.  Above  all,  I  hope  they  will  help  to  bring  forward 
the  grand  truth  that  union  with  Christ  is  the  root  of  holiness,  and  will  show  young 
believers  what  immense  encouragement  Jesus  Christ  holds  out  to  all  who  strive  to  be 
holy. " — Introduction. 

Old  Paths : 

Being  Plain  Statements  on  some  of  the  Weightier  Matters  of  Christianity, 
from  the  Standpoint  of  an  Evangelical  Churchman.  Price  2s.  6d. 

11  This  volume  consists  of  a  series  of  papers,  systematically  arranged,  on  the  leading 
truths  of  Christianity  which  are  'necessary  to  salvation.'  .  .  .  Such  truths  are  the 
immortality  of  the  soul, — the  siufulness  of  human  nature, — the  work  of  Christ  for  us  as 
our  Redeemer,— the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  us,— forgiveness,— justification,— con 
versation, — faith, — repentance, — the  marks  of  a  right  heart, —  Christ's  invitations, — 
Christ's  intercession, — and  the  like. 

"  To  open  out  and  explain  these  great  necessary  truths, — to  confirm  them  by  Scripture, 
—to  enforce  them  by  home  appeals  to  the  conscience  of  all  who  read  this  volume,— this  ia 
the  simple  object  of  the  series  of  papers  which  is  now  offered  to  the  public." — Extract  from 
the  Preface. 

Practical  Religion. 

Plain  Papers  on  the  Daily  Duties,  Experiences,  Dangers,  and  Privileges 
of  Professing  Christians.  Price  2s.  6d. 

"  This  volume  is  intended  to  be  a  companion  to  two  other  volumes  which  I  have  already 
published,  entitled  'Knots  Untied,'  and  'Old  Paths.' 

"  It  contains  a  series  of  papers  about c  practical  religion,'  and  treats  of  the  daily  duties, 
dangers,  experience,  and  privileges  of  all  who  profess  and  call  themselves  true  Christians. 
Read  in  conjunction  with  another  work  I  have  previously  put  out,  called  '  Holiness,1  I 
think  it  will  throw  some  light  on  what  every  believer  ought  to  be,  to  do,  and  expect."— 
Extract  from  Preface. 

This  and  the  preceding  Volumes  of  this  Series  are  also  supplied  bound  in 
half  morocco,  gilt  edges,  4/6  extra;  whole  morocco,  gilt  edges,  6/6  extra. 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR— Continued. 


All  Prices  are  Nett. 

Popular  Re-issue  of  HOME  TRUTHS.  Being  the  Miscellaneous 
Writings  of  BISHOP  BYLE,  Revised  especially  for  this  Work.  In  Eight 
Volumes,  foolscap  8vo.  (size  6|  x  4),  bound  in  dark  blue  cloth, 
uniform  with  the  Bishop's  other  Works,  Is.  6d.  each  ;  paper  cover, 
9d.  per  Volume.  Each  Volume  or  Series  is  complete  hi  itself,  and 
the  handy  size  is  well  adapted  for  distribution. 


CONTENTS  OF  FIRST  SERIES, 


Are  you  Free? 

Are  you  Asleep? 

Is  thy  Heart  Right? 

What  think  ye  of  Christ  T 

The  Whole  Family. 

Is  it  Real  ? 

Have  you  Charity? 

Your  Election. 

The  Lord's  Supper. 

This  is  the  Finger  of  God. 

Have  you  a  Priest? 

Boys  and  Girls  Playing. 

CONTENTS  OF  SECOND  SERIES. 


Consider  your  Ways. 

Living  or  Dead? 

Are  you  Forgiven! 

Are  you  Holy? 

Only  One  Way. 

Christ  and  the  Two  Thieves. 

Faith's  Choice. 

Remember  Lot. 

Assurance. 

CONTENTS  OF  THIRD  SERIES. 


I  have  Somewhat  to  say  unto  thee. 

Shall  you  be  Saved? 

How  Readest  thou? 

Have  you  the  Spirit? 

Rich  and  Poor. 

Peace !  Be  Still. 

All  in  All. 

Watch. 

CONTENTS  OF  FOURTH  SERIES. 


Are  you  Ready? 

Have  you  Peace? 

Occupy  till  I  come. 

What  Time  is  it? 

\  Word  to  the  Churches. 

Prove  all  Things. 

What  is  the  Church? 

How  should  a  Child  be  Trained? 

Young  Men  Exhorted. 


CONTENTS  OF  FIFTH  SERIES. 


Do  yon  want  a  Friend? 

Are  you  Happy? 

Strive. 

Lot's  Wife. 

Never  Perish. 

Keep  it  Holy. 

St.  Peter  at  Antioch. 

The  Reading  which  is  Blessed. 

Seeking  the  Lord  Early. 

Children  Walking  in  Truth. 

CONTENTS  OF  SIXTH  SERIES. 


Your  Soul. 

What  is  your  Hope? 

None  of  His. 

Beware  1 

Idolatry. 

Little  and  Wise. 

Baptism  and  Regeneration. 

An  Example  in  Word. 

Neglect  not  the  Gift. 

Spiritual  Songs. 

CONTENTS  OF  SEVENTH  SERIES. 


The  Cross. 
Where  art  thou! 
Are  you  Regenerate! 
Do  you  Pray? 
Wheat  or  Chaff? 
Are  you  an  Heir? 
Be  Zealous. 
George  Whiteneld. 

CONTENTS  OF  EIGHTH  SERIES 


Where  are  your  Sins? 

Repent  or  Perish? 

Do  you  Confess? 

He  whom  thou  Lovest  is  Sick. 

Scattered  and  Gathered. 

Able  to  Save. 

No  more  Crying. 

The  True  Church. 

Not  Corrupting  the  Word. 

Give  thyself  wholly  to  them. 

What  is  our  Position! 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR-Continued. 
All  Prices  are  Nett. 


Bethany. 

Being  Expository  Thoughts,  with  Notes,  on  the  Eleventh  Chapter  of 
St.  John's  Gospel.  "  The  heart  of  the  wise  is  in  the  house  of  mourning  " 
(Eccles.  vii.  4).  Small  4to,  cloth  gilt,  Is.  6d. 

Thoughts  on  Baptism. 

For  the  Use  of  Churchmen,  and  Candidates  for  Confirmation.    Limp 

cloth,  4d. 

CONTENTS  :— Thoughts  on  Baptism— The  Nature  of  Baptism  :  What  is  it?— In  What 
Way  ought  Baptism  to  be  Administered  ?— To  Whom  ought  Baptism  to  be  Administered  T 
— What  Position  Baptism  ought  to  hold  in  our  RsUgion. 

Questions     and    Answers     ab&ut     Regeneration     and 

Baptism.    32  pp.,  in  tinted  wrapper,  price  2d. 

What  is  Written  about  the  Lord's  Supper  P 

An  Address  delivered  at  the  Annual  Islington  Clerical  Meeting,  1889. 
Cloth,  9d. 
Of  this  Work  a  Special  Edition  for  extended  circulation  is  now  prepared 


in  smaller  type.  This  Edition  may  be  obtained  on  direct  application  to 
the  Publisher  in  quantities  of  one  dozen,  2s. ;  or  12s.  per  hundred,  nett. 

Thoughts  on  the  Supper  of  the  Lord. 

For  Present  and  Future  Communicants.    Limp  cloth,  4d. 
CONTENTS  :— Thoughts  on  the  Supper  of  the  Lord— Why  was  the  Lord's  Supper  Ordained? 
— Who  ought  to  be  Communicants? — What  may  Communicants  expect  from  the  Lord's 
Supper?— Why  do  many  so-called  Christians  never  attend  the  Lord's  Supper?— Some 
Warnings. 

Questions  and  Answers  about  the  Lord's  Supper. 

Being  a  Manual  of  Information  for  Churchmen  about  Points  in  Dispute  at 

the  present  day.    Limp  cloth,  4d. 

This  work  consists  of  fifty  questions  about  the  Lord's  Supper,  with  special  reference 
to  points  which  are  the  subject  of  dispute  and  controversy.  It  supplies  fifty  answers  to 
these  questions,  chiefly  drawn  from  the  New  Testament,  and  the  Articles,  Communion 
Service,  and  Catechism  of  the  Church  of  England.  It  contains,  in  addition,  some  valuable 
extracts  from  the  writings  of  standard  English  divines. 

Thoughts   on   the    Prayer-Book    and  on  Church  and 

Dissent.    Limp  cloth,  4d. 

Thoughts  for  Parents. 

Being  a  few  words  on  Proverbs  xxii.  6.    Limp  cloth,  4<L 

Thoughts  and  Questions  about  Holiness. 

Its  Nature  and  Questionable  Modern  Ideas  examined.     Cloth,  6d. 

Thoughts  on  Sickness. 

For  Invalids  and  their  Friends.    Limp  cloth,  4d. 

Thoughts  on  Worldly  Conformity. 

What  it  is,  and  What  it  is  not.     Limp  cloth,  4d. 

Thoughts  about  Sunday. 

Its  Institution,  Privileges,  and  Due  Observance.    Limp  cloth,  4d. 

Church  Reform. 

Being  Papers  on  the  Subject,  Revised  and  Enlarged,  with  full  Notes  and 
Introduction.  Crown  8vo,  extra  cloth,  Is.  6d.  The  Papers  without  Intro 
duction  and  Notes,  limp  cloth,  9d. 

CONTENTS  : — Our  Dioceses  and  Bishops — Convocation — Cathedral  Reform — Public 
Worship— The  Ministerial  Office— The  Position  of  the  Laity— Practical  Conclusions. 

"  My  plan  in  writing  these  Papers  has  been  broad  and  simple.  I  have  laid  my  finger  OB 
six  leadinr  Defects  in  our  present  condition,  and  then  suggested  remedies."— From  Preface 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR— Continued. 


All  Prices  are  Nett. 


Visitation  Charges,  Diocesan  Addresses,  &c.    1881  to  1898* 
Dark  Blue  Cloth,  lettered,  2s. 

HYMNS  FOR  THE  CHURCH  ON  EARTH. 

Tenth  Edition.  Containing  Three  Hundred  Hymns,  for  the  moat 
part  of  modern  date.  Selected  and  Arranged  by  BISHOP  RYLK. 
In  large  type,  for  Invalids.  Small  8vo,  limp  cloth,  2s.  6d. 
Morocco,  gilt  leaves,  8s.  6d. 

"  The  comfort  of  invalids  and  the  edification  of  Christians  in  private  have  been  the  two 
principal  objects  ~I  have  had  in  view  in  preparing  this  collection.  I  hold  strongly  that 
holy  thoughts  often  abide  for  ever  in  men's  memories  under  the  form  of  poetry,  which  pass 
away  and  arc  forgotten  under  the  form  of  prose." — Extract  from  Preface. 

Spiritual  SongS.     Colossians  in.  16. 

Being  One  Hundred  Hymns,  not  to  be  found  in  the  Hymn  Books  most 
commonly  used.  Selected  by  BISHOP  BTLB.  Fifteenth  Enlarged  Edition. 
Limp  cloth,  9d. 

The  Additional  Hymn-Book. 

Being  Three  Hundred  Hymns  for  Public  Worship,  most  of  them  not  to 
.  be  found  in  the  Collections  commonly  used.  Selected  and  Arranged  by 
•'*  BISHOP  KYLE.  Fourth  Edition.  In  limp  cloth,  6d. 

Is  All  Scripture  Inspired  P 

An  Attempt  to  Answer  the  Question.  With  copious  Notes.  Second 
Edition.  Cloth,  9d. 

"We  very  heartily  commend  this  little  book.  It  merits,  and  we  believe  it  will  have, 
the  largest  possible  circulation." — Record. 

"Bishop  Ryle  answers  with  power  and  clearness  a  question  which  is  to-day  exercising 
many  minds." — Christian. 

Thoughts  for  Young  Men. 

From  many  Points  of  View.    Sixth  Edition.     Cloth,  9d. 

Thoughts  on  Immortality. 

With  some  Remarks  on  Eternal  Hope,  and  Kindred  Subjects.    Cloth,  9d. 

Simplicity  in  Preaching. 

A  few  short  Hints  on  a  Great  Subject.     Cloth,  9d. 
Assurance.     2  Timothy  iv.  6,  7,  8. 

With  Notes  and  Extracts  from  Writers  of  the  Seventeenth  Century. 
Cloth,  9d. 

Regeneration. 

What  Regeneration,  or  being  Born  Again,  means ;  its  Necessity,  Marks 
and  Evidences,  and  Objections  met  With  copious  Notes.  104  pp.  fcap. 

8vo,  cloth,  9d. 

Dogma. 

A  Paper  for  the  Times,  on  the  Importance  of  Distinct  and  Definite  Viewi 
of  Religious  Truth.  Crown  8vo,  with  tinted  wrapper,  2d. 

Higher  Criticism. 

Thoughts  on  Modern  Theories  about  the  Old  Testament    Limp  cloth,  id. 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR— Continued. 
All  Prices  are  Nett. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  AND  HISTORICAL 

WORKS. 
Light  from  Old  Times;  or,  Protestant  Facts  and  Men. 

With  an  Introduction  for  Our  Own  Days.     Large  post  8vo,  dark  blu« 
cloth,  gilt,  ?s.  6d. 

For  Contents  see  page  2. 

The  Christian  Leaders  of  the  Last  Century;  or,  England 
a  Hundred  Years  ago. 
Crown  8vo,  dark  blue  cloth,  gilt,  3s 

This  book  gives  in  a  comprehensive  form  an  account  of  the  lives,  characters,  and  work 
of  the  Wesleys,  Whitefield,  Berridge,  Romaine,  Fletcher,  and  the  state  of  religion  in 
England  a  century  ago. 

Bishops  and  Clergy  of  Other  Days;  or,  The  Lives  of 
Two  Reformers  (Bishops  Hooper  and  Latimer)  and  Three  Puritans 
(Samuel  Ward,  Richard  Baxter,  and  Wm.  Gurnall). 

With  Introduction  on  the  Real  Merits  of  the  Reformers  and  Puritans. 
Crown  8vo,  dark  blue  cloth,  gilt,  2s. 

John  Hooper  (Bishop  and  Martyr). 

His  Times,  Life,  Death,  and  Opinions.    Grown  8vo,  tinted  wrapper,  64 
pages,  4d. 

George  Whitefield. 

His  Life  and  Times.     Crown  8vo,  8d. 

Archbishop  Laud  and  His  Times. 

Paper  wrapper,  6d. 


Coming  Events  and  Present  Duties. 

Being  Miscellaneous  Sermons  and  Addresses  on  Prophetical  Subjects. 
Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d. 

Boys  and  Girls  Playing. 

And  other  Sermons  for  Children.    With  Six  Illustrations  by  Dalziol  and 
others.     Cloth  gilt,  2s. 

The  Two  Bears. 

And  other  Sermons  for  Children.    Illustrated.    Cloth,  9d. 

Young  Men  Exhorted. 

An  Address  to  Young  Men.    Thirteenth  Edition.    *«  Young 
Exhort"  (Titus  ii.  6).    68  pp.  fcap.  8vo,  tinted  wrapper,  4d. 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR-Continued. 


All  Prices  are  Nett. 
CHARGES  AND  SPECIAL  SERMONS. 

btand  Firm.     A  Charge  delivered  at  the  Fifth   Triennial  Visitation,  in  St. 

Pater's  Cathedral,  Liverpool,  on  10th  November  1893.      Large  post  8vo, 

48  pp.,  in  wrapper,  price  4d. 
Our  Diocese :  Our  Church :  Our  Times.  An  Address  at  the  Opening  of  the 

Diocesan  Conference  at  Liverpool,  November  1889.     Revised,  post  8vo,  4d. 
Church  Discipline.     A  Few  Thoughts  on  the  Subject.     Tinted  wrapper,  3d. 
Church  Principles  and  Church  Comprehensiveness.     With  Introduction  and 

Appendix.  Crown  8vo,  9d. 
For  Kings.  1  Timothy  ii.  2.  A  Sermon  preached  at  Liverpool  Cathedral  in 

Commemoration  of  the  Jubilee  Year  of  Queen  Victoria's  Reign.     Tinted 

wrapper,  4d. 

Can  They  be  Brought  In  ?    On  the  Neglect  of  Public  Worship.    2d. 
A  Word  to  the  Churches.     A  Tract  for  the  Times.    Id. 
The  Church  on  the  Rock.     Thoughts  on  Matthew  xvi.  18.    Id. 
What  is  the  Church  ?    A  Question  for  the  Times.    2d. 
Who  is  the  True  Churchman  ?  or,  The  Thirty-nine  Articles  Examined.    Crown 

8vo,  40  pp.,  with  wrapper,  3d. 

Our  Diocesan  Conference.    What  good  is  it  likely  to  do  ?    Id. 
The  Charge  delivered  at  the  Second  Visitation,  in  St.  Peter's  Cathedral,  on  21st 

October  1884.   Large  post  8vo,  tinted  cover,  6d.   Also,  The  Primary  Charge, 

1881,  limp  cloth,  6d. 
A  Charge  delivered  at  the  Third  Triennial  Visitation,  in  St.  Peter's  Cathedral, 

27th  October  1887.     Large  post  8vo,  tinted  cover,  6d. 
What  is  Evangelical  Religion  ?    An  Attempt  to  Answer  the  Question.    Id. 
Hold  Fast.     A  Charge  delivered  at  the  Fourth  Triennial  Visitation,  in  St. 

Peter's  Cathedral.    Third  Edition.    Large  post  8vo,  72  pp.,  in  wrapper, 

price  6d.     Also  a  Special  Edition  for  distribution,  2s.  per  doz. ,  or  12s.  per 

hundred,  nett. 
Brotherhoods.    A  Paper  read  at  the  Church  Congress,  1890.    Demy  8vo,  in 

wrapper,  2d. 

The  Position  of  the  Laity.    2d. 
Our  Position  and  Our  Dangers.    Tinted  wrapper,  4d. 

'The  Outlook."   An  Opening  Address  at  the  Liverpool  Diocesan  Conference.  4d. 
The  Church  and  the  Rural  Populations.    4d. 
Thoughts  for  the  Times.    An  Address  at  the  Liverpool  Diocesan  Conference, 

November  1891.     Revised  for  general  circulation.     Price  Id.,  or  7s.  per  100. 
What  is  Truth  ?    The  Spital  Sermon  preached  at  Christ  Church,  Newgate 

Street,  London,  before  the  Lord  Mayor   and    Corporation  of    London. 

Tinted  wrapper,  4d. 
Seest  thou  these  Great  Buildings  ?    A  Sermon  preached  at  the  consecration  of 

St.  Dunstan's  Church,  Liverpool.     Tinted  wrapper,  4d. 
The  Upper  Room.     A  Consecration  Sermon.     Tinted  wrapper,  2d. 
The  Present  Crisis.     Some  words  about  the  Privy  Council  Judgment  and  Old 
Testament  Criticism.     The  Diocesan  Address,  October  1892.     Large  post 
8vo,  48  pp.,  in  wrapper,  4d. 
What  is  Wanted  ?    An  Address  at  the  Liverpool  Diocesan  Conference,  1895 

Revised  and  Corrected.  2d. 
About  our  Church  in  1896.  3d. 
Thoughts  for  Thinkers.  An  Address  for  1897.  4d. 

"  The  Present  Distress."    An  Address  for  1898-99.    Popular  Issue,  Id. ;  or 
7s.  per  100. 

A  Complete  List  of  Bishop  Eyle's  Tracts  and  Smaller  Work* 
may  be  obtained  of  the  Publisher, 


SELECTIONS    FROM 

RECENT  &  STANDARD   PUBLICATIONS 


OF 


All  prices  are  net. 

A  CHURCHMAN  TO  CHURCHMEN.  A  Series  ot  Lectures  on 
Matters  of  Controversy  at  the  Present  Day.  By  the  Rev.  A.  E. 
BARNES-LAWRENCE,  M.A.,  with  Preface  by  the  Rev.  H.  C.  G. 
MOULE,  D.D.  Fifth  Edition.  Cloth,  is.  Cheap  Edition  for  distribu 
tion,  8d. 

"ACCOMPLISHED  AT  JERUSALEM."  A  Brief  Memoir  of  the 
Life  and  Work  of  the  Rev.  SYDNEY  GIBBON,  late  Missionary  of  the 
C.M.S.  at  Jerusalem.  By  the  Rev.  W.  J.  L.  SHEPPARD,  M.A., 
Assistant  Secretary  C.M.S.  Crown  8vo,  limp  binding,  is. 

A.  L.  O.  E.  —  Living  Jewels.  Diversity  of  Christian  Character,  suggested 
by  Precious  Stones  ;  with  Biographical  Examples.  By  A.  L.  O.  E. 
Illustrations.  New  Edition.  Small  post  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  is.  3d. 

An  Exposition  of  the  Lord's  Supper.     New  to  the  Nineteenth  Century. 

By  a  Presbyter  of  the  Church  of  England.     400  pp.       Crown  8vo, 

cloth,  35.  6d. 

"  A  trenchant  and  cogent  polemic  against  all  sacerdotal  views  of  the  Lord's  Supper."— 
British  Quarterly  Review. 

At  Home  with  Jesus.  Loving  Memorials  of  the  Rev.  John  Christian 
Reichardt,  Missionary  to  the  Jews.  By  C.  A.  GODFREY.  With  Photo 
Portrait.  Cloth,  is. 

Bateman—  Short  Sermons  for  the  Sick  Room  (34).  By  the  Rev.  CANON 
BATEMAN,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  With  appropriate  Hymns  to  each 
Exposition.  In  very  large  type.  8vo,  cloth,  is.  3d. 

BAYLEE,  Rev.  Principal,  D.D.—  Christ  on  Earth  ;  from  the  Supper  at 
Bethany  to  His  Ascension  into  Glory.  By  the  late  Rev.  JOSEPH  BAYLEE, 
D.D.,  Principal  of  St.  Aidan's  College.  Small  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

-  The  Intermediate  State  of  the  Blessed  Dead.  A  Series  of 
Meditational  Expositions.  Second  Edition.  Small  8vo,  cloth,  2s. 

BELL,  Rev.  Canon.—  The  Roll-Call  of  Faith;  or,  the  Heroes  of 
Hebrew  Story.  (Hebrews  xi.)  By  the  late  Rev.  C.  D.  BELL,  D.D., 
Rector  of  Cheltenham.  Third  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Crown  8vo, 
cloth,  2s.  6d. 

Bomford.  —  Divine  Ambassadors  from  Earth  and  Heaven.  By  LAURENCE 

G.  BOMFORD,  M.A.     Paper  cover,  6d.  ;  cloth,  is. 
"  Small  in  size  but  great  in  value."—  Pentecostal  Powtr. 

Branfill.  —  The  Question  ;  or,  the  Bridegroom's  Offer.  Being  an  abridg 
ment  of  Brownlow  North's  "  Yes  !  or  No  !  "  and  other  Papers  by  B.  A. 
BRANFILL.  Leather  binding,  is.  6d. 

Bryan.  —  Seven  Sermons  on  the  Sacraments,  Confirmation,  and  the 

Two  Cardinal  Points  of  the  Christian  Faith.     By  the  Rev.  WILMOT 
GUY  BRYAN,  M.A.     Fcap.  8vo,  cloth  limp,  is. 

BURBIDGE.—  Half-hours  with  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress.  By 
JOHN  BURBIDGE,  Hon.  Canon  of  Liverpool.  Second  Edition.  432  pp., 
8vo,  cloth  gilt,  33. 


ALL  PRICES  ARE  NET. 


Bullock.— Track  of  the  Light ;  or,  Christ's  Footsteps  followed.  By  the 
Rev.  J.  G.  BULLOCK,  M.A.  Cloth,  gd. 

Christ  our  Example, — By  CAROLINE  FRY,  Author  of  "The  Listener,"  &e. 
With  Preface  by  Rev.  CANON  CHRISTOPHER,M.  A.  Twenty-fifth  thousand. 
Fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  is.  $d. 

CALTHROP,  Rev.  GORDON,  M.A.— Megiddo  and  the  Spanish 
Armada,  and  other  Sermons,  chiefly  on  Special  Occasions.  Crown 
8vo,  cloth  gilt,  33.  6d. 

Castle    Building.      Lectures    on   Home   Subjects.     Crown  8vo, 

cloth  gilt,  2s. 

CONTENTS.— Castle  Building— Family  Duties— Little  Things— Newspapers  and  Novels 
— Manliness — Hugh  Miller — Two  are  better  than  one — Gossip — Gautama  the  Buddha- 
Luther— Religious  Belief— Working  Men  and  their  Difficulties. 

Discipleship ;    or,  The    Second    Door.      Counsels    for    Young 

Christians  and  Confirmation  Candidates.     Limp  cloth,  100  pp.,  gd. ; 
cloth,  gilt  edges,  is.  3d. 

Pulpit    Recollections  :  being  Sermons  on  the  Lord's  Supper,  The 

Second  Advent,  &c.,  Preached  at  Cheltenham  and  Highbury  New  Park. 
Post  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

THE    CHILDREN'S    PULPIT.      Addresses  to  Children. 

New  Edition.     In  two  Series. 

Series  i. — The  Twin   Brothers,  and  other  Addresses  to  Children. 

Cloth,  is.  3d. 

„       2.— The  Lost  Sheep  Found,  and  other  Sermons  to  Children. 
Cloth,  is.  3d. 

COLLETTE,    C.    H.— Illegal  Ecclesiastical   Territorial    Titles   as 

assumed  by  Priests  of  the  Italian  Mission.     Paper,  6d. 

Transubstantiation  and  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass.    Critically 

examined,     is. 

Pope  Joan— (The  Female  Pope).    A  Historical  Sketch.    Cloth,  is. 

CRAMPTON,  Rev.  J.  F.  T.— The  Thirty-Nine  Articles  of  the 
Church  of  England.  With  Scripture  Proofs,  and  Questions  with 
Answers.  By  the  Rev.  J.  F.  T.  CRAMPTON,  A.B.,  Rector  of  Aughrim. 
Second  Edition,  enlarged,  cloth,  is. 

Delight  in  the  Lord.  A  Manual  of  Private  Devotion  adapted  to  the 
varying  experiences  of  the  Christian  Life.  By  HENRY  MORRIS.  Cloth,  gd. 

EVERARD,  Rev.  GEORGE,  M.A.— Edie's  Letter ;  or,  talks  with  the 
Little  Folks.  With  Four  full-page  Engravings  by  the  Baroness  Helga 
von  Cramm.  Second  Edition.  Small  4to,  cloth,  is.  6d. 

Home  Sundays;  or,  Help  and  Consolation  from  the  Sanctuary. 

Designed  especially  for  those  prevented  from  attending  the    Public 
Services  of  the  Church.     Third  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  2s. 

Elliott.— Morning  and  Evening  Hymns  for  a  Week.  By  the  late  Miss 
CHARLOTTE  ELLIOTT,  Author  of  "Just  as  I  am."  47th  Thousand. 
Limp  cloth,  gd. 


CHAS.    J.    THYNNE. 


ENGLISH  CHURCH  TEACHING  on  Faith,  Life  and  Order.  By 
Rev.  CANON  GIRDLESTONE,  Rev.  H.  C.  G.  MOULE,  D.D.,  and  Rev. 
T.  W.  DRURY,  M.A.  Third  Edition.  Cloth  gilt,  is. 

Fausset,  Rev.  Canon  A.  R.,  D.D.— A  Guide  to  the  Study  of  the  Prayer 

Book.     Cloth  gilt,  as. 

The  Record  says : — "  This  '  Guide '  will  be  found  fruitful  and  true,  and  the  more  extended 
circulation  which  we  hope  it  will  have  in  this  popular  form  will  undoubtedly  do  good." 

Forlong. — Inspiration  of  the  Bible.  Considerations  addressed  to  the 
Deist  and  the  Agnostic,  and  a  Manual  for  the  Young  Believer,  by  Pastor 
GORDON  FORLONG,  formerly  of  the  Talbot  Tabernacle,  Bayswater,  W. 
White  cloth,  is.  6d. 

GARRATT,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.— A  Commentary  on  the  Revelation 
of  St.  John,  considered  as  the  Divine  Book  of  History,  in  which  God 
has  delineated  what  is  now  Past,  Present,  and  to  Come.  By  the  Rev. 
SAMUEL  GARRATT,  M.A.,  Hon.  Canon  of  Norwich.  Third  Edition. 
Demy  8vo,  enlarged,  cloth  gilt,  6s. 

Coming   Conflict  of  the   Church ;    or,  Present  Truth  for  the 

Present  Day.     Post  8vo,  paper  cover,  6d. 

First  Steps  Upward.    Lessons  on  Foundation  Truths.    A  Plain 

Manual  on  Christian  Doctrine  for  Confirmation  Candidates  and  others. 
Cloth,  gd. ;  paper  cover,  6d. 

The  Discipline  of  Suffering ;  or,  Job's  History.  Crown  8vo,  cloth 

gilt,  35.  6d. 

"The  book  of  Job  contains  a  great  abundance  of  teaching  suitable  to  all  ages,  and  to 
none  more  than  our  own.  For  the  doubtful,  the  inquiring,  the  afflicted  of  every  kind,  in 
mind,  or  body,  or  estate,  it  is  a  storehouse  of  instruction,  guidance,  and  consolation.  It 
is  in  this  point  of  view  I  wish  to  throw  light  upon  it."— Extract  from  Preface. 

World  Without  End.    Second  Edition,  enlarged.    Post  8vo,  cloth 

gilt,  35.  6d. 

The  subjects  of  this  book  are; — Time  and  Eternity — The  Mystery  of  Suffering  in  the 
Animal  Creation,  and  its  Future  Deliverance  from  it— The  Destiny  of  Earth  and  the 
Human  Race — Heaven  and  its  Inhabitants,  and  the  Resurrection  of  the  Body — The 
Purposes  of  Everlasting  Punishment,  and  its  Compatibility  with  Everlasting  Mercy. 

Rest — Conflict — Victory ;  or,  Lights  and  Shadows  of  the  Inward 


Life.     Small  8vo,  cloth,  is. 

GU I DE  to  Ecclesiastical  Law,  A.  For  Churchwardens  and  Parishioners. 
With  Plates  illustrating  the  Romish  Vestments.  Cloth,  is. 

HARCOURT  (The  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  Wm.  V.,  M. P.) -Letters  to 
The  Times,  on  Lawlessness  in  the  National  Church.  Reprinted 
by  permission.  The  complete  Series  irom  July  16,  1898,  to  Feb. 
4,  1899.  Paper,  is.  Cloth,  is.  6d. 

Hoare. — Sanctification.    A  Course  of  Parochial  Sermons.    By  the  late 
EDWARD    HOARE,   M.A.,   Hon.   Canon  of  Canterbury.     Fourth  and 
Cheaper  Edition,  Enlarged.     Cloth,  is. 
CONTENTS. — Separation  unto  God— Legal  Cleansing — Personal  Holiness — God's  Name 

Sanctified— Expository  Notes— Doctrinal  Notes. 


ALL  PRICES  ARE  NET. 


Hughes-Games. — Evening  Communion. — The  Argument  for  the  Practice 
stated  and  Objections  against  it  answered.  By  the  Rev.  JOSHUA 
HUGHES-GAMES,  D.C.L.  Popular  Edition,  cloth  is.  6d. 

"  The  practice  vindicated  most  fully,  and  in  the  most  complete,  temperate,  and  con 
vincing  manner a  work  which  I  earnestly  commend  to  the  calm  and  dispassionate 

study  of  all  who  still  entertain  a  prejudice  against  Evening  Communion." — Bishop  of 
Worcester,  Primary  Charge,  1895. 

Hunt,  Rev.  Alfred  L.— Ruth  the  Moabitess.  A  short  Commentary, 
Critical  and  Expository,  on  the  Book  of  Ruth;  intended  principally 
for  Sunday  School  Teachers.  By  ALFRED  LEEDES  HUNT,  M.A. 
Fcap.  8vo,  limp  cloth,  gd. 

Unto  Life's  End ;   or,  Before  and  after  Confirmation.     In  small 

book  form,  paper  cover,  3d. ;  limp  cloth,  6d. 

Indictment  of  the  Bishops,  An,  showing  how  the  Church  of  England  is 

being  corrupted  and  betrayed  by  some  of  them.     Paper  cover,  is. 

Cloth,  is.  6d. 
Karney,   Rev.  Gilbert.— Pater- Noster :    Studies  on  the  Lord's  Prayer. 

By  Rev.  GILBERT  KARNEY,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  St.  John's,  Paddington. 

Small  8vo,  cloth,  is.  6d. 

Laurie,  Rev.  Sir  Emilius.— The  Christian  Life  viewed  under  some  of  its 
more  Practical  Aspects.  Fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  is.  6d. 

LESSONS  FROM  THE  ORDINAL.— The  Ordained  Minister  as  a 
Preacher;  as  Pastor  ;  His  Inner  Life  before  God  ;  His  Outer  Life  before 
Man.  Papers  read  at  the  Islington  Clerical  Meeting,  1898.  Cloth,  6d. 

Life  in  the  Ghetto  ;  or  the  Jewish  Physician.  By  the  Author  of  "  Doing 
and  Suffering,"  &c.  Crown  8vo,  with  Frontispiece,  cloth,  as. 

Light  on  an  Eastern  Shore :  The  Story  of  a  Mildmay  Mission.  By  A.  U. 
With  a  Preface  by  the  COUNTESS  OF  MEATH.  In  emblematic  cloth,  is. ; 
extra  binding,  silvered  edges,  is,  6d. 

LILLINGSTON.— Scriptural  Marks  of  a  True  Believer.  By  the 
Rev.  F.  A.  C.  LILLINGSTON,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  St  James',  Clapham. 
Crown  8vo,  cloth,  is.  6d. 

MARSH,  Miss.— Seed  Scattered  Broadcast ;  or,  Incidents  in  a  Camp 
Hospital.  Edited  by  the  Author  of  "  The  Memorials  of  Captain 
Hedley  Vicars."  New  Edition.  Post  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  edges,  2s.  6d. ; 
cheap  edition,  limp,  is.  6d. 

Neil.— The  Fallacy  of  Sacramental  Confession.    Discourses  delivered 
at  St.-Matthias,  Poplar,  by  the  Rev.  CHAS.NEIL,  M.A.,  Popular  Edition, 
with  Notes  appended,  paper  cover,  6d. ;  cloth  gilt,  is. 
"Clear,  cogent,  and  scriptural. '" — Dean  Lefroy,  D.D. 

NORTH,    BROWN  LOW.— Ourselves:    A  Picture  sketched  from  the 

History  of  the  Children  of  Israel.      By   BROWNLOW    NORTH,    B.A. 

Cloth,  is. 
The  Rich  Man  and  Lazarus.    A  Practical  Exposition.    Second 

Edition.     Square  i8mo,  cloth,  is. 
Yes  !  or  No  !  or  God's  Offer  of  Salvation.     (Gen.  xxiv.  58.)     New 

Edition.     Cloth,  Qd, 


CHAS.  J.  THYNNE. 


PURTON,  Rev.  W.  O.— TRUST  IN  TRIAL;  or,  Lessons  of  Peace 
in  the  School  of  Affliction.  Meditations,  with  Prayers  and  Hymns  for 
the  Sick  and  Suffering.  By  the  Rev.  W.  O.  PURTON,  B.A.  New 
Edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  is.  3d. 

—  SONGS  IN  SUFFERING  ;  or,  The  Voice  of  Trust  and  Praise 

in  Sickness  and  Sorrow.     New  Edition.     Cloth,  is.  3d. 

Rachel  Long-ford  ;  or,  Home  and  its  Teachings.  By  the  Author  of,  and 
uniform  with,  "Sir  Evelyn's  Charge."  Fifth  Edition.  Crown  8vo, 
cloth,  35.  6d. 

ROMAN  MASS,  THE,  IN  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH.    Illegal 

services  described  by   Eye-witnesses.      First    Series.     Reprinted    by 
permission  from  The  Record.     Second  Edition.     8vo,  cloth,  is. 

ROMANISM  IN  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH.  Illegal  services 
described  by  Eye-witnesses.  Second  Series.  Reprinted  by  permission 
from  The  Record.  8vo,  cloth,  is. 

Tomlinson,  J.  T.— The  Prayer  Book,  Articles  and  Homilies:  Some 
Forgotten  Facts  in  their  History  which  may  Decide  their  Interpre 
tation,  viii.  +  320  pp.,  with  Photozincographic  Illustration?  taken 
from  the  "  Durham  Book."  Cloth,  53. 

Lay  Judges  in  Church  Courts.    An  Examination  of  the  Primates' 


Ecclesiastical  Procedure  Bill.     Paper  is. 
—  Collected  Tracts  on  Ritual.    8vo,  cloth,  2s. 


E.  A.  W.(Mrs.  E.  A.  WALKER).— OLD  ENGLAND  :  Pictures  from 
English  History.  Crown  4to.  Second  Edition.  Handsomely  bound, 
and  with  numerous  full-page  and  other  Illustrations.  33. 

— Womanhood ;  or,  Thoughts  for  Young  Women.     Second  Edition. 

Limp  cloth,  price  gd. ;  cloth,  gilt  edges,  is. 

CONTENTS.  —  Character  —  Liberty  —  Health— Self-Education — Amusements — Sorrow — 
Employers  and  Employed — Marriage — Ruin — Unbelief— Roman  Catholicism — Salvation — 
London— On  going  Abroad— Emigration. 

WALDEG RAVE.— New  Testament  Millenarianism ;  or,  the  King 
dom  and  Coming  of  Christ,  as  taught  by  Himself  and  His  Apostles. 
(Bampton  Lecture.)  By  SAMUEL  WALDEGRAVE,  D.D.,  late  Bishop  of 
Carlisle.  Second  Edition.  Cloth,  8vo,  53. 

WHATELY  (the  Late  Archbishop).— Apostolical  Succession  Con 
sidered  ;  or,  the  Constitution  of  a  Christian  Church,  Its  Powers  and 
Ministry.  Edited  by  Miss  E.  J.  WHATELY.  i2mo,  172  pp.,  with  new 
Explanatory  Preface  by  Rev.  L.  G.  BOMFORD.  Cloth,  gd. 

Cautions  for  the  Times.    A  Series  of  Papers  on  the  Romish  and 

Ritualistic  Controversy,  edited  by  ARCHBISHOP  WHATELY.  Third 
Edition.  600  pp.,  cloth,  2s. 

THE  SECRET  HISTORY  OF  THE   OXFORD   MOVEMENT. 

By  WALTER  WALSH.  Sixth  Edition.  42nd  Thousand.  With  new 
Preface  containing  a  reply  to  Critics.  8vo,  cloth  gilt.  Price  33.  6d. 
Cheap  Edition  (unabridged).  Crown  8vo,  paper  cover,  is. ; 
cloth,  is.  6d. 

YOUNG  (Rev.  H.  Lindsay).— The  Ritualistic  Crisis.  A  popular  ex- 
planatjon  of  the  objects  and  danger  of  Ritualism.  Paper  8d, 


ALL  PRICES  ARE  NET. 


SMALL    BOOKS    &    PAMPHLETS    ON 
RITUALISM,    &c. 


SIXPENCE    EACH. 

Auricular  Confession,  tested  by  Holy  Scripture,  the  Formularies  of  the  Church  of 

England  and  the  Voice  of  Christian  Antiquity.    By  the  Rev.  Gilbert  Karney.  • 

Letter  on  Ritualism,  A,  as  read  by  the  Injunctions  of  the  Bishops  in  the  reign  of  Queen 

Elizabeth.    By  the  Rev.  W.  H.  E.  M'Knight. 
Of  the  Names  Protestant  and  Catholic,  and  the  Principles  involved  in  them.    By 

Rev,  N.  S.  Godfrey,  F.R.A.S. 
Tractarian  Sisters  and  their  Teaching. 

Mary  Worship  propagated  by  False  Miracles.    By  J.  P.  Fitzgerald,  M.A, 
Systematic  Idolatry  of  Rome.    By  the  same  Author. 
The  Crisis  in  the  Church.    By  the  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  Wm.  V.  Harcourt,  M,P.    Being  Letters 

to  the  Times.    Authorised  reprint. 
CONFESSION  AND  ABSOLUTION.      By  the   late  Dean   Plumptre,   with    an 

Excursus  on  the  Power  of  the  Keys. 

FOURPENCE  EACH. 

Objective  Presence,  The.    By  the  Rev.  E.  Biley,  M.A. 

BRETT,  S.  W.— FABLES.    "  Cunningly  Devised  Fables." 

Extreme  Ritualism.    By  Rev.  Canon  Garbett. 

The  LAW  OF  RITUAL  at  a  Glance.     By  Daniel  Warde,  Barrister. 

The  Papal  Plea  for  Re-union,  tried  in  the  balance  of  Truth  and  History. 

The  Spiritual  Aspects  of  the  Roman  Controversy.    By  Canon  Garratt. 

THREEPENCE    EACH. 

Apostolic  Absolution.    By  the  Rev.  W.  C.  Moore,  M.A. 

Frequent  Celebrations  and  Frequent  Communions.    By  Rev.  M.  Hobart  Seymour. 

Words  of  Institution.    Are  they  to  be  understood  literally  or  figuratively? 

Wright,  Rev.  W.,  D.D.— The  Power  behind  the  Pope. 

The  Bread  of  Life.    Thoughts  on  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

The    Breadth,    Freedom    and    yet    Exclusiveness    of  the    Gospel.     By    the   late 

Canon  Hoare. 

The  Meaning  of  the  word  Church.    By  Archdeacon  Kaye. 

The  Ornaments  of  the  Church  and  the  Ministers  thereof.     By  Archdeacon  Taylor. 
Salvation  already  accomplished  and  how  you  may  know  it.    By  Rev.  L.  Price. 
The  Ritualistic  Conspiracy.    By  Lady  Wimborne. 
Thou  shalt  not,  or  God's  Thought  on  Idolatrous  Worship.    By  the  Rev.  E.  K.  Elliott. 

TWOPENCE    EACH. 

Bourn,  Rev.  Henry.— A  Protest  against  Ritualism  and  its  Unscriptural  Teachings. 
Constant  Presence,  The.    By  Rev.  W.  J.  Bolton. 
God's  Confessional  or  Man's.    By  Rev.  G.  Everard. 
Farrar,  Dean.— Sacerdotalism. 

Undoing  the  Work  of  the  Reformation. 

The  Bible  and  the  Ministry. 

Beddow,  Rev.  J   J.— Evening  Communion— A  Divine  Institution. 
Ryle,  Bishop.— What  is  Written  about  the  Lord's  Supper. 

Questions  and  Answers  about  the  Lord's  Supper. 

Preston,  Rev.  W.,  D.D.— Anti-Ritualism.    A  Catechism  on  the  Communion  Office. 
Sinclair,  Yen.  Archdeacon.— The  True  Minister. 

What  England  owes  to  the  Reformation.    By  Edward  Hull,  M.A.,  LL.D. 
Evening  Communion :  Scriptural,  Lawful,  and  Expedient.    By  the  late  Archdeacon 

Bardsley,  D.D. 

The  First  Step  on  Romanism.    By  Rev.  J.  P.  Fitzgerald. 
Lawlessness  in  the  Church  of  England.    Speech  by  Samuel  Smith,  Esq.,  M.P.,  in  the 

Hpuse  of  Commons.    Feb.,  1899.    3rd  Edition,    issth  thousand, 


CHAS.  J.  THYNNE. 


TWOPENCE    EACH— continued. 

The  Mass  and  the  Confessional  in  the  Church  of  England.    The  Popular  Report  of 

the  Great  Albert  Hall  Demonstration,Tune  sist,  1899. 

A  Pastor's  Warning  Words  against  Ritualistic  Innovations.    By  Rev.  S.  C.  Baker, 
THE  TWO  CATHOLICS.    An  Exposition.    By  A.  H.  Foster. 
The  Secret  Work  of  the  Ritualists.    By  Walter  Walsh. 
How  Rome  Treats  the  Bible.    Bv  the  same  Author. 

The  Rights  and  Duties  of  Lay  Churchmen.      By  the  Right  Rev.  Bishop  Ryle,  D.D. 
Speeches   of  Samuel   Smith,   Esq.,  M.P.,  and  of  the  Right  Hon.    Sir   William 

Harcourt,  M.P.,  in  the  Houae  of  Commons,  June  i6th  and  2ist,  1898,  on  Illegal 

Services  in  the  Church  of  England  and  Romish  Teaching.    Sixtieth  Thousand. 
The  Teaching  of  the  Church  of  England  concerning  the  Lord's  Supper  or  Holy 

Communion. 
What  Ritualists  Teach  the  Young.    An  Address  by  Samuel  Smith,  Esq.,  M.P.,  on 

Ritualism  and  Elementary  Education,  with  an  Appendix  of  Extracts  from  Ritualistic 

books  for  Children. 
The    Bible.      The  True  Charter  of  British  Liberties.     By  the  late  Canon  Hugh 

Stowell. 
What  Ritualists  Teach  and  What  The  Church  of  England  Teaches  concerning 

Absolution  and  Confession.    By  Rev.  W.  Preston,  D.D. 


PRICE  ONE  PENNY  EACH,  OR  SEVEN   SHILLINGS  PER 
HUNDRED. 

The  Atonement ;  a  Witness  against  Sacerdotalism.  By  the  Rev.  H.  C.  G.  Moule,  D,D. 

The  Position  and  Rights  of  the  Laity.    By  the  Rev.  Canon  Jenkins,  M.A. 

Shall  I  Fast  ?    By  the  Rev.  W.  B.  R.  Caley,  M.A. 

Shall  I  Confess?    By  the  Rev.  W.  B.  R.  Caley,  M.A. 

The  Teaching  of  the  Catacombs.    By  the  Yen.  Archdeacon  Sinclair. 

By  the  same  A  uthor.— Benefits  of  the  Reformation. 

Is  Ritualism  in  the  Church  of  England  Popular? 

The   Position  of  Protestant   Churchmen   in   the   Present   Crisis      By   the   Rev. 

J.  B.  Mylius. 

Shepherd  or  no  Shepherd.    A  plea  for  the  Christian  Ministry.    By  a  Layman. 
To  Whom  shall  We  Confess,  and  Why?    Bv  Rev.  C.  H.  Gibson,  B.A. 
The  Due  Limits  of  Ritual  in  the  Church  of  England.     By  the  Right  Rev.   Lord 

Bishop  of  Sodor  and  Man. 

The  Papacy  as  prefigured  by  Daniel.    By  Rev.  W.  B.  Sandford. 
Some  of  the  Main  Causes  of  Alienation  from  the  Church.  By  the  Rev.  H.  C.  Wisdom. 
The  Life  and  Work  of  Pastor  Chiniquy.    Illustrated. 
The  Last  Look.     A  Tale  of  the  Spanish  Inquisition.    4to.  Illustrated. 
The  Martyr  of  Brentwood.    isSth  Thousand.    4to.  Illustrated. 

St.  Mary's  Convent;  or  Chapters  in  the  Life  of  a  Nun.  ii2th  Thousand.  4to.  Illustrated. 
The  Crisis  in  the  Church  of  England.    By  the  Rev.  F.  C.  Burrough. 
The  Alcuin  Club  and  the  Ornaments  Rubric.    By  Rev.  E.  M.  Townshend. 


BY    BISHOP    RYLE.      One   Penny   Each. 


His  Presence  :   Where  is  it  ? 
Let  us  Hold  Fast  our  Profession. 
Perilous  Times. 
Are  you  Fightin 


ghting  ? 
Hold  Fa 


Prove  and  Hold  Fast. 

The  Position  of  the  Laity. 

What  is  Evangelical  Religion? 

Buy  a  Sword. 

What  do  we  owe  to  the  Reformation  ? 


Are  there  Few?  A  Question  for  the 
Times. 

Is  it  Peace  ?    A  kind  enquiry. 

The  City !  Or  the  sight  which  stirred 
St.  Paul. 

Which  Class  ?  A  question  for  every 
body. 

Are  you  Weary  ?    A  kind  enquiry. 

Looking  unto  Jesus.    Heb,  XII.  2, 


