CORNELL UNIVEHSITY LIBRARY 



924 10 



104 804 



CORNELL ' 
UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 





Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104804 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 



EDITED BY THE 



VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER; 



AND BY THE 



REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



WITH 



INTRODUCTIONS 



BY THE 



VEX. ARCHDEACON F. W. PAEEAE, D.D., P.E.S.— EIGHT BEV. H. COTTEEILL, D.D., E.E.S.E. 
-VEET EBV. PEINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.-EEV. CANON G. EAWLINSON, M.A. 
— EEV. A. PLUMMEE, M.A., D.D. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New Yobk and Tobonto, 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 



EDITED BT THB 



VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 



DSAB or SLODOESTaB; 



AND BT THB 



REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



P S ALM S. 

Sxpostifon 
Bt rev. G. RAWLINSON, M.A., 

CANON OF OANTEBBUBY. 

^omfUtics 
By REY. W. CLARKSON, B.A. 

l^omiKes by Fatfous autfiotg. 

BBV. S. CONWAY, B.A. BBV. B. TUCK, BJ. 

BEV. C. SHORT, M.A. 

70L. UL 



yUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New Yoke and Toronto, 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



BOOK Y. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM cvn. 

A aom of thanksgiving, flrst foT deliver- 
anoe from the Babylonish captivity (vers. 
1 — 3), and then for other deliverances (vers. 
4 — 32), passing into a general account of 
Qod's providential dealings with mankind, 
both in the way of chastisement and of 
loving-kindness, but especially the latter 
(vers. 33—42). The composition closes with 
a single gnomic reflection on the wisdom of 
pondering such matters as those brought 
forward by the writer. 

Formally, the psalm falls into seven 
divisions : (1) a thanksgiving for the return 
from Babylon (vers, 1 — 3); (2) one for 
deliverance from the perils of travel (vers. 
4 — 9); (3) one for deliverance from prison 
(vers. 10^-16): (4) one for recovery from 
sickness (vers. 17 — 22) ; (5) one for esciipe 
from the perils of the sea (vers. 23 — 32) ; 
(6) a general account of God's dealings with 
men (vers. 33 — 12); and (7) a commenda- 
tion of the entire subject to the considera- 
tion of God's people. Parts 2, 3, 4, and 5 
are terminated by a refrain. 

Yer. 1. — give thanks unto the Iiord, 
for he is good (comp. Pss. ovi. 1 ; cxviii. I ; 
ozxxvi. 1). For his mercy endureth for 
ever (see the comment on Fs. ovi. 1). 

Ver. 2. — let the redeemed of the Lord 
say so, " The redeemed of the Lord " in 
this place are those whom the Lord has 
jnst delivered out of exile and captivity 
(oomp. Isa. xliv. 22 — 24; li. 11; Jer. xxxi. 
11; Zeoh. x. 8, etc.). Tlie writer calls on 
them to give voice to the thanksgiving of 

F8ALM8. — III. 



ver. 1. Whom he hath redeemed from the 
hand of the enemy ; i.e. of Babylon. 

Yer. 8. — And gathered them out of the 
lands (compare the prayer of Ps. ovi. 47 ; and 
for the expression, " the lands " — i.e. the 
foreign countries — see Ps. cvi. 27 ; Ezra ix. 
1). From the east, and from the west, from 
the north, and from the south. The present 
Hebrew text has D;a, "from the sea" — 
and so the LXX., Siri Sa\d(rtnis — but it is 
thought that probably tfO is a corruption 
of yoys (Oheyne), which would mean " from 
the south." 

Yers. 4 — 9, — ^The form is historical, but 
the intention is to describe a recurrent 
event. Men from time to time wander — 
lose their way — either literally, or in the 
wilderness of life, grow faint and weary, 
and are ready to perish. But if they cry 
to God, God gives them aid, succours them, 
saves them. Then let them praise and 
thank him. 

Yer. 4. — They wandered in the wilderness 
in a solitary way; they found no city to 
dwell in. It is, perhaps, best to divide this 
verse as was done by the LXX., who at- 
tached -fn, "way," to the latter clause. 
So Cheyne, who translates, "They wan- 
dered in the wilderness, yea, in the desert ; 
they found no road to a city of habitation." 
So also Bosenmiiller. 

Yer. 5. — Hungry and thirsty, their soul 
fainted in them. Either actual hunger and 
thirst, or dissatisfaction with life, may be 
intended. 

Yer. 6. — Then they cried nnto the lord in 
their trouble (oomp. Ps. cvi. 44, and the 
comment ad loc.). And he delivered them 

a 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[pB. ovn. 1 — 43. 



out of their distresBes. "Distresses" may 
be a plural of amplification, or it may point 
to the triple suffering — hunger, thirst, 
faintness. 

Yer. 7. — ^And he led them forth by the 
right way ; or, " by a straight way " — a way 
in which there was no cioukedness. That 
they might go to a city of habitation. The 
same phrase as in ver. 4. A city suitable 
for habitation is meant, 

Yer. 8. — Oh that men would praise the 
Lord for his goodness! Here the refrain 
occurs for the first time. Note its repetition 
in Ten. 15, 21, and 81. It is an earnest 
call on those who hare experienced God's 
mercies to be thankful And for his won- 
derful works to the children of menl or, 
" his wonderful doings." 

Yer. 9. — ^For he satisfieth the longing 
Mral, and filleth the hungry soul with good- 
ness. The " satisfaction " intended seems to 
be spiritual rather than material (comp. Fs, 
xxziT. 10; Luke i. 53). God alone can 
satisfy the cravings of man's spiritual nature. 

Vers. 10 — 16. — ^There are others aflSioted 
differently — struck down by some grievous 
calamity, imprisonment, earthly ruin, down- 
fall of their hopes, a sense of their bondage 
to sin — who suffer perhaps even more than 
the dissatisfied wanderers. They too may 
cry to God in their trouble ; and when they 
do, they experience his mercy. Let them 
join in the chorus of praise. 

Yer. 10. — Suoh as sit in darkness and in 
the shadow of death (comp. Job xvi. 16; 
xxxvi. 8). The expressions used are 
purposely vague, being intended to cover 
various sorts of misery. Being bound in 
afBictiou and iron; t.e. "in an affliction 
which holds them like bands of iron " 
(comp. ver. 17). 

Yer. 11. — Because they rebelled against 
the words of God. Suoh deep affliction as is 
here spoken of scarcely ever comes upon 
any but those who have offended God by 
resisting his will. Andcontemned the counsel 
of the most High (comp. Frov. i. 25). The 
" counsel of God " is the course of conduct 
which he has prescribed to man, whether 
through the reason and conscience that he 
has implanted in him, or through hia 
revealed Word. 

Yer. 12. — ^Therefore he brought down 
their heart with labour ; rather, with misery, 
or with sorrow. They fell down ; i.e. 
collapsed — sank to the earth. And there 
was none to help. They were like Job ; no 
one gave them any help in tlieir affliction. 

Ver. 13. — Then they cried unto the Lord 
in their trouble, and he saved them out of 
their distresses (comp. ver. 6, and see also 
Ters. 19 and 28). 



Yer. 14. — He brought them out of dark- 
ness and the shadow of death. Wherein 
they sat (ver. 10). And brake their bands 
in sunder. Freed them from their fetters 
(ver. 10), whatever they were. 

Yer. 15.— Oh that men, etc. I A repetition 
of ver. 8. 

Yer. 16. — For he hath broken the gates of 
brass. God completely liberates the un- 
happy ones who turn to him ; removes every 
restraint that confines and galls them; 
breaks on their behalf, as it were, " gates of 
brass." And cut the bars of iron in Bunder. 
Snaps fetters and prison bars. 

Yers. 17 — 22. — A third class of persons 
under God's displeasure are punished by • 
grievous sickness, and brought to the Tery 
verge of the grav&. They, too, in many 
cases, turn to God, and, " crying to him," 
are delivered from their peril. It is foi 
them, under such circumstances, to make 
a return by means of praise and thanks- 
giving. 

Yer. 17. — Fools becanse of their trans- 
gression, and because of their iniq[uities, 
are afflicted. Some read o'Vin, "sick 
men," for D'^W, "fools," here. But the 
ctiange is not necessary. Folly and sin are 
regarded as two aspects of the same moral 
condition by the sacred writers, and sickness 
is spoken of as an ordinary punishment for 
them (Job xxxiii. 17 — 22 ; 2 Kings v. 27 ; 
2 Chron. xxi. 15; xxvi. 16 — 19; Acts xii. 
23). 

Ver. 18. — Their soul abhorreth all manner 
of meat (comp. Job xxxiii. 20 ; Ps. oii. 4). 
And they draw near unto the gates of death. 
See Fs. ix. 13 ; and compare "Hicai veKpav 
KevBij,mva Kai aK6Tov iriKas Kiirdv (Burip., 
'Heo.,'l). 

Yer. 19 — Then they cry unto the Lord in . 
their trouble, and he saveth them out of 
their distresses (see above, vers. 6 and IS). 

Yer. 20. — He sent his word, and healed 
them ; rather, he sends his word, and heals 
them (see the Eevjaed Version). The 
" word " intended may be a niessage sent 
by a human messenger, like the " word " 
sent to Hezekiah in his sickness (2 Kings 
IX. 4; Isa. xxxviii. 4); or it may be a 
thought suggested to the mind either 
directly by God, or by an angel, like that 
spoken of in Job xxxiii. 23, 24 ; or, lastly, it 
may be the nctual Word of God (John i. I), 
the Son, sent by tlie Father. But this last 
sense can scarcely liave been in the writer's 
mind. And delivered them from their de- 
structions ; or, " from their grave- pits " (Kay, 
Oheyne). The word used occurs only here 
and in Lam. iv. 20, where it is translated 
"pits." 



PB. ovii, 1 — 43.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



Ter. 21. — Oh that men, etc.l A repetition 
of veTS. 8 and 15. 

Ver. 22. — And let them saorifloe the 
■aorifices of thanksgiving ; compare the ex- 
pression, " the calvei of our lips" (Hob. xiv. 
2), and see also Heb. xiii. 15. And declare 
his works with rejoicing ; i.e. joyfully pro- 
claim the great tilings that God has done 
for them. 

Vers. 23 — 32. — ^Finally, there are cases 
among those whose business requires them 
to traverse the sea, where the danger is 
great, and death seems imminent. Let such 
persons cast themselves upon God, and 
"cry to him in their trouble," and they too 
will be heard and delivered. Must it not 
be their duty also to give thanks f 

Ver. 23.— They that go down to the sea 
in ships. That many of the Israelites en- 
gaged in maritime pursuits appears from 1 
Kings ix. 26—28 ; x. 22 ; xxii. 48 ; 2 Chron. 
XX. 36 ; as also from Judg. v. 17 ; Ps.^ xlviii. 
7 ; Prov. xxiii. 34 ; xxx. 19 ; and from many 
pasBages of the Apocrypha. Joppa was at 
all times an Israelite port, from which 
trade was carried on by the re.-idents (2 
Chron. ii. 16; Ezra iii. 7; Jonah i. 3). 
That do business in great waters; t.e. 
trade in fish. The " great waters " of the 
Mediterranean are spoken of in contrast with 
those of the small inland seas of Palestine, 
the sea of Galilee and Lake Murom. 

Ver. 24. — These see the works of the Lord, 
and his wonders in the deep. Storms, 
tempests, and sudden deliverances are the 
"wonders" especially meant (comp. Aots 
xxvii. 14 — 44; 2 Cor. xi. 25). 

Ver. 25. — ^Forheoommandeth, and raiseth 
the stormy wind (comp. Fs. cxlvii. 15, 18 ; 
Jonah i. 4), The operations of nature are 
constantly spoken of in Scripture as God's 
direct doing. Which lifteth up the waves 
thereof; or, "the waves that are liis" 
(compare, in Fs. cxlvii. 17, 18, "hit ice, hit 
cold, hit wind "). 

Ver. 26. — They monnt up to the heaven, 
they go down again to the depths. Tossed 
on the foaming billows, now carried up until 
they seem almost to touch the sky (see 
Gen, xi. 4), anon sinking into the trough of 
the sea, and as it were swallowed up in its 
depths. Their soul is melted because of 
trouble ; or, " their soul melteth away in 
the trouble " (Gheyne). 

Ver. 27.— They reel to and fro, and 
stagger like a drunken man. The oldest 
sailor "loses his sea-legs," and staggers 
about the deok like a landsman, or like one 
drunk. ■ And are at their wit's end ; lite- 
rally, as in the margin, and aU their 
witdom it twallmced. But the English 



idiom of the Authorized Version is a very 
happy one, and exactly expresses the writer's 
meaning. All tlie seaman's intelligence is 
at fault, and can suggest nothing. 

Ver. 28. — Then they cry unto the Lord in 
their trouble, and he bringeth them out of 
their distresses. Praotioally identical with 
vers. 6, 13, and 19. 

Ver. 29. — He maketh the storm a calm; 
i.e. he causes the wind to drop, and to be 
succeeded by a *' great calm " (comp. 
Matt. viii. 26). Such sudden changes, do 
sometimes occur, not only in inland seas, 
but on the Mediterranean (see Jonah i. 15). 
So that the waves thereof are still ; literally, 
the waven of them; ie. of the great waters 
(see ver. 23). 

Ver. 30. — Then are they glad because 
they he quiet ; or, " because they be at rest," 
>'.e. no longer tempest-tossed. So he bringeth 
them unto their desired haven; literally, 
the haven of their desire ; i.e. the haven 
where they desire to be. 

Ver. 31. — Oh that men, etc. ! Bepeated 
from vers. 8, 15, and 21. 

Ver. 32. — Let them exalt him also in the 
congfregation of the people. The psalmist 
holds it to be not enough for men wlio have 
received deliverances to thank God in their 
hearts, or secretly in their chambers. He 
requires them to make public profession of 
their thankfulness " in the congregation of 
the people." The Christian Church main- 
tains the same attitude. And praise him 
in the assembly of the elders. The elders 
led the congregation and presided in it 
(Ezra ui. 9—11; vi. 16—22; Neh. viiL 
4—9; ix. 4, 5; xii. 27—43, eto.). 

Vers. 33— 42.— Professor Oheyne finds In 
this passage — which he views as an " ap- 
pendix " to the psalm — a falling off from the 
earlier portion of the psalm, and a set of 
"sentences strung together without much 
reflection." But to others the transition 
from special deliverances to God's general 
dealings with mankind seems an enlarge- 
ment and an advance in the thought, 
although the language may be less graphic 
and more commonplace than in the former 
portion of the composition. 

Ver. 33. — ^He tumeth rivers into a wilder- 
ness. God can, and does, by the operation 
of his providence, turn lands naturally 
fertile — lands abounding with streams — into 
arid wastes, either by such a physical 
catastrophe as that which blasted the cities 
of the plain (Oen. xix. 24, 25), or by such 
moral changes as have turned Babylonia 
from a garden into a desert, a miserable 
howling wilderness (comp. Isa. xiii. 15— 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. cvH. 1 — 43 



22; 1. 2; Jer. 1. 13—15, 38—40; IL 13, 
37 — 13, etc.)- And the watersprmgs into 
dry gronnd. The phrase is varied, but the 
meaning is the same. God has full control 
oyer nature, and can either take back his 
blessings, or render them of no avail. 

Yer. 84. — A fruitful land into barrenness ; 
literally, into eaUnei-s. The judgment npon 
Sodom and Gomorrah is probably in the 
writer's mind. For the wickedness of them 
that dwell therein. God does not capri- 
ciously withdraw his blessings from a land. 
If he turns a fruitful land into a barren 
one, we may be sure that the inhabitants 
have provoked him by their sins. 

Yer. 85. — He tnrneth the wilderness into 
a itanding water; rather, a wUderneti 
(oomp. Isa. zxxy. 7; zli. 18). And dry 
ground into watersprings. The entire verse 
is antithetical to ver. 33. 

Yer. 36.— And there ho maketh the 
hnngry to dwell. God gives the land, 
which he has thus blessed, to some pre- 
viously famishing people ; as he did Canaan 
to Israel after they had had but scant fare in 
the \vildernesB. That they may prepare a 
city for habitation; literally, and they 
■prepare. It is naturally their first thought 
to prepare themselves a settled dwelling- 
place (comp. Gen. iv. 17; xi.4; zxv. 16, 
etc.). 

Ver. 37. — And sow the fields; literally, 
and $ow fields — the first act of a settled 
population. And plant vineyards. The 
second act in a wine-producing country. 
Bread and wine were recognized in the 
East as the prime necessaries of life (see 
Gen. xiv. 18; Judg. ix. 13; xix. 19; 2 Sam. 
vi. 19; Neb. v. 15; Ps. civ. 15; Dan. i. 5, 
etc.). Which may yield fruits of increase; 
rather, and get them ; literally, make them. 
The expression, " fruits of increase," poiots 
to the abundance of the harvest and vintage. 

Yer. 38. — He hlesseth them also, so that 
they are multiplied greatly. With in- 
creasing prosperity comes increase of popu- 
lation, naturally — i.e. by God's ordinary 
providence. This increase is, however, only 
a blessing within certain limits. And 
snffereth not their cattle to decrease. This 
modest under-statement suggests an enor- 
mous increase (comp. Job xlii. 12). 

Yer. 39.— Again. There is no "again" 
in the original, but merely the usual vaw 
coniunotive. Still, in the thought, there is 
no doubt an abrupt transition. The writer 
turns to the darker side of the picture. 
They are minished and brought low. God 
^ liows his providence, not merely in blessing, 
but also in cljastising. Even the very 
nation which has been the most highly 
favoured may, by misconduct, fall under 



his displeasure and suffer at his handt 
Tlieir population is diminished; they are 
"bowed down" (Eevised Yersion), or 
» brought low." Calamities of various kinds 
befall them. Sometimes their decline is 
brought about through oppression, which 
may be either the cruel rule of a native 
monarch, such as Saul, or the still heavier 
yoke of a foreign power, like Egypt or 
Babylon. Sometimes it comes from such 
an afSiction as bad harvests, plagues of 
locusts, or pestilence. Sometimes it is 
brought about by sorrow — ^the death of a 
good ruler in the flower of his age, the 
extinction of a royal stock, the destruction 
of a nation's best and bravest on battle-fields, 
and the like. But in all calamities alike 
it is God's hand that deals the blow. 

Yer. 40. — He poureth contempt npon 
prinoes. A direct quotation from Job zii 
21, but not therefore to be regarded as 
spurious, since the sacred writers often quote 
one another, and the psalmists especially 
are very much in the habit of citing, or 
referring to Job (see, in this very psalm, 
besides the present passage, vers. 10, 18 
(6t«), 20, 34, 41, and 42). And oauseth them 
to wander in the wilderness; rather, a 
wildernesa (comp. Job xii. 24). Where 
there is no way. " Wandering in a wilder- 
ness without a way denotes helpless em- 
barrassment " (Hengstenberg). 

Yer. 41.— Yet setteth he the poor on high 
from afSiction, Even in such dread 
calamities, when a whole nation is punished, 
God's providence protects the poor and 
needy — ^not of course in all, but still in very 
many, cases. The mower's scythe passes 
over the humblest flowers. And maketh 
him families like a flock (comp. Job xxi. 11). 
Those whom God thus preserves he collects 
into " fiamilies," and looks after as carefully 
as a shepherd looks after his sheep. 

Yer. 42. — The righteous shall see it, and 
rejoice. Experience will justify God's ways 
to man. "The righteous" — his people — 
will see that the general course of God's 
providence is sucli as described (vers. 33 
— 41), and will " rejoice " that it is so. And 
all iniquity shall stop her mouth The gain- 
sayers, unable to impugn the righteousness 
of the Divine proceedings, shall have no 
resource but to sit still and hold their 
tongues. 

Yer. 43. — Whoso is wise, and will obserre 
these tilings; rather, let him obaene the$e 
things. It is assumed that they are open to 
be observed by all ; they are the patent 
facts of human life. Even they; rather, 
and thm/. Shall understand the loving^ 
kindness of the Lord ; literally, Imnng'kiti^ 
neetea ; ie. many acts of loving-kindness. 



». ovn. 1— 43.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 32. — Deliverance and indebtedness. We can never measure what we owe 
to God for his daily loving- kindness. Indeed, it is only the wise who observe and take 
account of the Divine source of all human blessings, that at all undertitand how great 
is our debt of gratitude (ver. 43). But we are too apt to overlook God's goodness to 
us even in the more striking events of life. How often in the course of our life are we 
cast upon the kindness of the Divine Bedeemer I 

I. Thb MANIFOLDNE88 OP otTE NEED. 1. Our necessity takes various temporal or 
bodily forms. It maybe: (1) Distance from home; sometimes in the land of the 
alien and the enemy (vers. 3, 4) ; sometimes in oppressive and depressing; solitude 
(ver. 4); sometimes in pecuniary straits. (2) Cruel and almost intolerable restraint — 
in the home, in the school, in the institution, in the prison (vers. 10 — 12). (3) Bodily 
evil — sickness, pain, prostration, dependence on the ministry of others (vers. 17, 18). 
(4) Perils of travel by sea or by land — e.g. the journeys of Paul and all missionaries 
(vers. 23 — 27). 2. Our necessity often takes the much more serious aspect of spiritual 
evils. These may correspond to those of the flesh. They may be : (1) Distance from 
God. (2) Spiritual bondage, in which we sigh and struggle for a freedom which 
seems beyond our reach. (3) Unsoundness of soul, loss of all appetite for the heavenly 
and the Divine. (4) Inward commotion, profound unrest. 

II. Thb true accodnt of oub distress. Its origin is to be found in ourselves — 
in our own folly, in our own iniquity, in our wilful departure from God; and in the 
consequent penalty which God's rifjhteousness exacts (see vers. 11, 12, 17). 

III. The one Rbfuge of the hbabt. Men that forget God at eveiy other time 
remember him in the hour of trouble and of danger. When they are brought very 
low, when there is " none to help " (ver. 12), when the gates of death are seen (ver. 18), 
" then they cry unto the Lord." The refrain nf the psalm is the habit of the heart of 
man when his case is desperate, and his soul it, "faint within him," Nothing but the 
dark night will brint; out the heavenly star. 

IV. UiviNB iKTEBVENTiON. (Vers. 7, 13, 16, 20, 29, 30.) Sometimes very markedl>, 
sometiines indirectly and through various agencies or instrumentalities, God makes 
his delivering power to be felt. But in whatever way, directly or indirectly, it is in 
the exercise of his power and by forces which he has ordained, originated, and main- 
tained, that the wanderer finds his way home, that the fever abates and the patient is 
healed, that the door of escape is opened and the prisoner comes forth. It is of him 
and through his grace that the prodigal returns, that the tyrannous habit is broken, 
that the soul is made pure and sound, that peace and rest come back to the troubled 
heart, that the light of heaven shines clear on the pilgrim's path. 

V. The place of gratitude in the heart and life or man. (Vers. 1, 2, 8, 15, 
21, 22, 31, 32.) This should be a very large place. The redeemed of the Lord should 
" say so." They should sing his praise with joyful lips ; they should daily offer the 
sacrifice of thanksgiving ; they should carry with them everywhere a sense of deep 
indebtedness ; they should feel that for the special temporal mercies of God, and also 
for his restoring and reconciling grace in Christ Jesus, they owe a continual, an 
unbroken, an abounding gratitude — a gratitude that should find vent in sacred song, 
in blameless conduct, in cheerful submission, in earnest and persevering labours. 

Verg. 33 — 43. — Divine revolution. The wheel of providence "goes full circle," 
lifting up the lowly and abasing the proud. God turns'the rivers into a wilderness, 
and the wilderness into standing water, etc. (vers. 33, 35). 

I. The Divine overthrow. He cast out the guilty inhabitants of Canaan, and 
planted in their place the children of Israel ; but when these rebelled against him, he 
rejected them, and sent them forth into a strange land. Thus has God humbled 
nations age after age; thus has he humiliated Churches — both great ecclesiastical, 
organizations, and such Churches as those we read of in the Apocalypse (Bev. ii., 
iii.). And thus may we expect that he will bring down all communities that forget 
their Creator, that are false to their Beileemer, that are unlaithful to their mission. 

II. The Divine cpbuildikg. (Vers. 35 — 38, 41.) A people, a Church, a society. 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [i-s. cvn. 1— 43. 



may be very low, there may be but a spark of life in it ; yet it need not despair. There 
is a hand which can kindle the faintest spark into a noble flame ; there is One who can 
turn the sterile desert into the fruitful field. Par above sU means and measures is 
the consideration — Is Ood's favour gained 1 Our expectation is from him. "Let Israel 
hope in the Lord." There are three things which avail to secure his gond pleasure and 
his restoring power. 1. Peoitence for past misdeeds and present unworthiness. 2. The 
faith which leads to earnest prayer for his blessing. 3. The appropriate, devoted action 
to which he calls ur. Under these conditions we may look for a Divine revolution — 
evil and sorrow overturned, righteousness and prosperity restored. 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1—43. — Wherefore men should praise the Lord. Such is the theme of this 
glorious psalm. " It contains the thanksgiving of exiles (ver. 3) apparently not yet 
returned to Jerusalem, but already escaped from the thraldom of Babylon." Note — 

I. Itb genebal lessons. 1. It tells of present earthly trouble. They were such 
as the returning exiles had met with, for Babylon was not the alone place of exUe. 
There had been weary wanderings in the barren, waterless, and burning deserts; cruel 
and hopeless imprisonment; sickness nigh unto death; perils by sea (cf. Jer. xvi. 15; 
xl. 12 ; Dan. ix. 7). And it repeatedly declares the real cause of human troubles — 
the wickedness of men. 2. It warrants our praying for deliverance from tiieh troubles. 
It tells how all the troubled ones did this. And, indeed, it is an instinct in man to thus 
pray. 3. It promises that Ood vjUI answer such prayers. "He delivered them" is 
four times affirmed (vers. 6, 13, 19, 28). 4. It demands that therefore men should 
praise the Lord. It expresses a longing desire that men should do this, but also a 
tacit confession that many of them would not. These are the lessons that lie on the 
surface of the psalm. But are they true? Consider, therefore — 

II. The question of their tbuthfclness. 1. The psalmist had no doubt cibout it. 
But in our day many doubt it much. They say all these troubles come to men now, 
and instead of deliverance such as is here affirmed as ever taking; place in answer to 
prayer, there is in the majority of such cases no deliverance at all. 2. CaZutre argues 
(see Perowne, in loc.) that no doubt the most do perish, but, then, all deserved to ; 
therefore if any are saved it is by the great mercy of Grod : God was not bound to 
save any of them. But how can any thoughtful soul be satisfied with such reply ? 
It is like Calvin, but all unlike the teaching of Christ. 3. The true reply is, that God 
answers prajer in different ways. He will ever give the best thing — of which he only 
can be the Judge — but that may not be the thing we cry for. And when he does 
literally deliver, it is rarely by interfering with natural laws, but rather is it by 
suggesting to men's rainds how they may work out their own deliverance. He teaches 
them here to use the laws of nature so as to win what they desire ; but he does not 
miraculously set those laws aside. It is true God ever answers sincere prayer, but not 
that he does so in the literal, direct way which the psalmist believed. But if we 
allow ourselves, as we surely may, to regard these distresses as patterns and images 
of spiritual distresses, then the declarations of the psalm are absolutely true. Therefore 
consider — 

HI. Its spiritual suggestions. 1. l%at in these earthly troubles we have such as 
are spiritual faithfully represented. 2. l%it we may and should pray for deliverance 
from them. 3. That such prayer shall be surely answered. 4. ITiat t?ien it ts our 
boundm duty to praise the Lord. " Whoso is wise will consider these things, and," 
etc. (ver. 43).— S. C. 

Yer. 8. — Praise, its desirableness, absence, and source. This psalm one of those 
many Scriptures which show God's mindfulness of the needs, not alone of one land and 
age, but of all. For see what variety of condition, character, occupation, experience, 
are portrayed in this one psalm — the desert, the city, the sea, the prison, the traveller, 
the exile, the sailor, the disease-stricken, the captive, the storm-tossed, the rescued. 
And thus it is that all men, of all ages and all lands, may find, whatever their condition, 
in I his blessed book that which meets their case, which seems written for just such as 



PS. cvn. 1— 43.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 7 

they. But the psalm mainly contemplates God's great deliverances, and is a summons 
to all men to praise the Lord for his goodness. This is the burden of the text, and it 
plainly teaches that for men thus to praise the Lord is — 

L Infinitely desirable. The psalmist longs that they should do this; he seems 
eagerly waiting for that outburst of praise which he feels ought to be forthcoming. 
And it is thus to be desired : 1. Because it is so right. If this could not be said of it, 
nothing else that might be urged could justify such longing after it. But this can be 
said. For God's goodness deserves men's praise. Think how great, how varied, how 
con.stant, how all undeserved, how costly, is the goodness of God to men, and how it 
follows them continually all the days of their life here, and then goes with them into 
the eternal life. If a fellow-man have shown to us, when in distress, great kindness, 
we are not slow to acknowledge it ; or if we were, the verdict of our fellow-men would 
at once condemn us. 2. It so brightens ottr life. That which darkens life is the 
dwelling on its unhappy events, or on those which we think unhappy. But if we 
would brighten life, we have to reverse this process. Collect the happy facts of life, 
and let memory recollect and ponder them. It will be found that hovyever great the 
sum of our sorrows may be, the sum of our joys is greater. 3. It gives us courage in 
the conflict with the social evils of the day. There are many such. They are demanding 
men's attention more and more. The bitter cry of multitudes of our fellow-men can 
be no longer stifled or ignored. And good men are setting themselves to see what can 
be done to remedy these wrongs. But every one knows that it is much easier to point 
out a wrong than to find a remedy. For there are so many who profit by the wrong, 
that they will never, it' they can help, let go their hold of it. All man's selfishness 
rises up to guard it, and its defences are strong indeed. But what can so encourage us 
to assail these strongholds of wrong as the conviction, wrought by the habit of praising 
the Lord for his goodness, that he whom we know to be good cannot but be against 
such wrong, and with those who seek to remedy it ? There will be heard in their souls 
the ancient stirring cry, " Deus vult I " and like as that emboldened men in the days 
of the Crusades, so for this far more important and difBcult crusade it will serve the 
same blessed office of emboldening the hearts of those who undertake it. But such 
custom is — 

II. LauentabIiT absent. The text is both a confession and a bitter complaint of 
this fact. But why is this f Wherefore is it that men act towards God in a way 
which would cover them with shame were they to act so in regard to their fellow-men ? 
The very words of the text suggest not a little of the answer. 1. Many do not believe 
in the Lord. They will not absolutely deny his existence, but they are not at all 
certain of it. And such uncertainty paralyzes praise. They, of course, believe in some 
" force," some efficient power, which produces what they see. They cannot help 
believing in that. But what it is they do not pretend to say. They are materialists, 
evolutionists, agnostics, but no more. 2. Others question the "goodness^ for which 
men should praise the Lord. They are bewildered at many aspects of the natural 
world and of the social world, that seem to throw grave doubt on that goodness. And 
when they look within and see what they themselves are, how evil and wrong ; and 
when they listen to what not a few theologians tell them of God, and the doom he 
destines for the mass of men, a very sea of doubt and misgiving surges over them, not 
to say swallows them up. 3. And others deny any " wonderful works." They do 
not believe in the supernatural, and aU miracle is but myth. They believe only in the 
reign of law, and that things happen not in any " wonderful " way, but according to 
fixed, orderly, and ascertained law. They have a natural explanation for everything, 
and need no Divine intervention to account for aught that has occurred. They believe 
in," wonderful works " done ^ " the children of men," by their genius, skill, daring, 
but not in any done for them. Such are some of the silencers of men's praise and 
gratitude. But, whatever the cause, the effect is most sad, Man's own self becomes, 
to him who believes not in God, the greatest and most important being he knows, and 
what but hideouj selfishness can follow? And he who doubts — as, alasl so many do-^ 

" That he and we and all men move 
Under a canopy of love 
As broad as the blue .-.ky alinve," 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. ovii. 1—43. 



— whtt is there for him but to sink down into a wretched pessimism, a despair of good, 
such as may be met with in wide regions of the thought, speecli, and writing of this 
unbeliering age ? Pride, miserable atheistic pride, is another of the Dead-Sea fruits 
which grow on the tree of unbelief in the supernatural. Believing that man is self- 
made, he has a wonderful respect for his maker, but no gratitude to God. What, then, 
is to be done? for surely the spirit of praise — 

III. Is BABNB8TLY TO BE BOUGHT AFTEB. But how may men be made to praise 
the Lord for his goodness — how ? This is, indeed, an important question, and almost 
as diCBcult as important. Not, we think, by their simply going over the mercies they 
have received, because, unless they believe them to be God's mercies, the mere enume- 
ration will do no good — will probably only foster pride. But we believe that St. John 
supplies the true answer. He says, " We love him, because he first loved us." This is 
the genesis of the spirit of praise, its true point and spring — our seeing and believing 
God's love to us in Christ our Lord. So, then, would we quicken this spirit of praise in 
ourselves, let us get back whence it first began ; and would we awaken it in otliera, the 
best, we believe the only way, is to 

''Tell them the old, old stoiy 
Of Jesus and his love." 

8.0. 

Yen. 4 — 32. — Fowr portraits of one toul, I. Inquibe as to this bottl. 1. The 
pgalm tellt of ransomed exiles, of redeemed Israelites, and recounts the sad but varied 
experiences through which they had passed. Some had been wanderers, some captives, 
some stricken with mortal sickness, some all but lost at sea. 2. But in all ages of the 
Ohurch this psalm has been taken as telling not merely of the literal facts which it 
records, but as setting forth in vivid and varied way the history of every soul as yet 
unsaved. It is, then, of the soul not yet saved that this fourfold portraiture is given. 

n. Look at the fobtraitb. 1. ITtat of the wanderer. Out of the right way, in the 
wilderness, and going astray there ; very miserable since he can find no home or rest ; 
famine stares him in the face, and his soul faints within him. Is not this a true 
description of such as are unsaved? Every detail answers to his experience and 
condition. " All we like sheep have gone astray." Wanderers from God, and weary 
because of it, — such is the unsaved soul. 2. That of the captive. He is shut up in 
some dark dungeon, fettered hand and foot, doomed to die ; he has brought it all on 
himself by bis rebellion ; the weight of his trouble has utterly cast him down ; he lies 
prostrate on the ground, without help or hope. Here, again, the real resemblance 
between this portrait and the unsaved soul can be readily seen. Mauy such can bear 
testimony that they have been through it all. Christ speaks of such as captives, held 
fast behind prison doors and bound (Luke iv. 18). Then : 3. That of the man stricken 
with mortal disease. Fools are they, and not simply unhappy, for these also have 
brought their misery on themselves ; they are sinners as well as foolish. But now, so 
stricken with sickness are they, that they turn from all food, and are at the point of 
death. Sin is such a disease, and they are fools who bring it on themselves ; and the 
effects of it are just what is said, and there is but a step betwixt them and death. 
4. The storm-driven mariner ready to perish. Again we have a portrait of the soul, so 
driven and tossed by the tempests, trials, and storms of life, that he has almost made 
shipwreck. We may be going on in our ordinary pursuits when these dreadful tempests ' 
rise ; and then, at our wit's end, not knowing what to do, our soul is melted because of 
trouble. Out of Christ, we are ever exposed to such storms ; for his word alone can 
still the tempest, and bring us to the haven where we would be. 

III. Observe the points op difpebenoe and bebemblanoe. 1. Of difference. 
'i'he first tells of the unrest and failure of the soul to find satisfaction apart from God. 
The second, of the awful power, oppression, and cruelty of sin. " wretched man that 
I am 1 who," etc, ? (Bom. vii. 24> The third, of the paralysis of all spiritual energies, 
and the drawing ever nearer death of all the faculties of the soul, which sin causes. 
The fourth, of the liability to sudden and overwhelming des' ruction of the soul 
unpiloted by Christ. 2. 0/ resemblance. All such souls have to suffer. That suffering 
reaches extremity ere succour comes. Nor does it come then until prayed for ; but 
then it does come, and according to the need of each. The Lord alone sends it. The 



PS. ovii. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 9 

effect of it is ever to wake up praise ; to make the Boul long that others may praise, 
and to grieve that they do not. — S. 0. 

Ver. 30. — The Pilot, the passage, and the port. " So he bringeth them to their 
desired haven." These three themes are suggested by the words. Therefore consider — 

I. The Pilot. He is the Lord Jesus Christ. We need his aid. Some think they 
can manage well enough without him, and hence refuse his aid ; but no ship ever yet 
came safe to port without that aid. Beceive him, therefore. His knowledge is perfect. 
His wisdom never errs. His power is omnipotent. His terms are such as all can 
comply with — trust and obey. His authority is from God. There are many pretended 
pilots ; he alone is sent of God. He never fails. 

II. The passaob. " So he bringeth them," etc. How ? 1. By his Holy Spirit 
he guides the soul. 2. By his Word. " Thy Word is a lamp unto," etc. (Ps. cxix. 105). 
3. By his gracious providence, sending now one influence and now another to further 
our course. 4. By the ministries of his Church — the means of grace, prayer, sacra- 
ments, etc. 

III. The fobt. It is our desired haven. Desired because there is : 1. Best. 
2. Safety. 3. Joy and happiness. 4. Reward. — S. 0. 

Ver. 43. — The loving-kindness of the Lord. I. What is it ? 1. " These things " 
here spoken of are not merely the gracious deliverances which were granted in answer to 
the people's cry, but the terrible troubles which led to that cry unto the Lord. The 
deliverances are but parts of these things. 2. And often there is no deliverance. The 
weary wanderer sinks down on the sands and dies ; the captive perishes in his dungeon ; 
the man stricken with mortal sickness enters those gates of death to which he had 
drawn near, and does not come back; the storm-beaten ship goes down with all on 
board. 3. Deliverances are the exception, not the rule. In these cases is there nu 
loving-kindness of the Lord? Some say there is not, and they further say God is not 
either. 4. But these things are part of what we are to observe. No doubt they do make 
the loving-kindness of the Lord difficult to understand. It seems as if the observing 
of them were just the thing which would hinder, not help, that understanding. But 
we are to look at the psalm as a whole ; not at the deliverances only, nor the troubles 
only, but at all together. 6. So looking, we shall see that the loving-kindness of the 
Lord is his bringing our heart, our will, to be at one with himself. This is his great, 
his blessed, and most loving gift. When it is wanting, there comes rebellion and sin of 
all kinds, and following close after that, trouble and sorrow ; but when it is present, 
then these things depart. When it is absent, no amount of earthly good satisfies or 
can make really blessed ; when it is present, no amount of earthly sorrow can rob the 
soul of its peace and trust. This, then, is the loving-kindness of the Lord — the heart 
that always says to God, " Thy will be done." 

II. What this lovin(}-eindne3s demands. 1. That the rebellious heart should be 
brought down and humbled. (Of. ver. 12.) In each of the scenes so vividly portrayed 
this is what is seen : the stout self-trusting and self-satisfied heart has disappeared, 
and a meek and lowly one has come instead. 2. God must insist on this ; for until it 
is brought about, there is no way open for peace with God. Will we not see this at 
once, and take on us the Saviour's yoke, and learn of him who was meek and lowly in 
heart, and so find rest in our souls ? 

III. What it will subely do. It will take measures for the accomplishment of 
that which is so essential. There are two methods by which God's loving-kindness 
brings down the proud heart. 1. By his Holy Spirit. He convinces of sin, withers 
up the pride and self-sufficiency which lurk within us, and leads ns in all humility to 
the feet of the Lord. He is ever striving to do this. Happy are they who yield to 
him. But this may fail. Therefore : 2. His providence is set to work. The con- 
suming fire of God's terrible punishments burns up the rebelliousness which nothing 
else wUl purge away. The stout heart is made to yield, and the obstinate will to give 
way. 3. But the ordeal is fearful. Nothing but the loving-kindness of the Lord will 
hold men down to it. Let us not compel him thus to deal with us. Let us accept the 
yoke of wood, lest he put upon us the yoke of iron. 

CoNOLnsiON. 1. Love orders our live*. That is the meaning not only of the gentl , 



10 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. ovn. 1—43. 

but also of the awful, ways of God. 2. Lovt must have the obedient h-art. 3. The wise 
only win see all this, and they must " observe these things " in order to understand. 
It was the secret of Christ's peace, for he understood the loving-kindness of the Lord. 
-S.C. 

Ver. 2. — ITie Lord's people are a redeemed people. "The ransomed of Jehovah " 
(Perowne). This has been well called " the psalm of life." While its figures are partly 
suggested by the history of Israel, it is a meditative rather than historical psalm. " It 
presents to us, first, a magnificent series of pictures of various crises of huinan life—of 
the distress which throws men at such times on God in prayer, and of his gracious 
answer of deliverance ; and next, a more thoughtful contemplation of God's goverriment 
of the world by blessing and chastisement, by exaltation of the meek and humiliation 
of the proud." It is evidently composed by one of the returned exiles, and represents 
the pious feeling of a man who is rejoicing in some new and wonderful redemption of 
God. In the light of the new experience he reads his own life, and the story of his 
race, and he can see that God has always been, in every sphere, the Redeemer, Deliverer, 
and Ransomer. God has a fourfold claim to be called the " Redeemer " of his people. 

I. God'B claim on the OEOtTND OF THE GKBAT EEDEMPTION. That waS the 

deliverance of Israel from the Egyptian bondage. Of it Israel was ever kept in mind 
l)y the Passover rite; by Divine revelations ; by appeals of psalmist and prophet. It 
was a greai redemption in view of (1) the distress from which it delivered ; (2) the 
wisdom and power displayed in it ; (3) the issues to which it led. Israel was bound to 
regard Itself as a redeemed people, bound in allegiance to its Redeemer, who is to be 
served by thankful, loving obedience. 

II. God's claim on the ground of the mant bedemptions. 1. These appear 
to view in the wilderness-journey, when again and again God delivered the people from 
their circumstances, their enemies, and themselves. 2. They appear to view in the 
period of the Judges, when God graciously responded to penitence and prayer, and 
raised up national deliverers. 3. They appear to view in the period of the prophets, 
when God held back again and again his threatened judgments. The true reading of 
each individual life shows the same ever-delivering, rescuing, redeeming God. 

III. God's olaiu on the ground of his latest redemption. That, to the 
p;.almist, was the rescue from the Babylonish captivity. A wonderful restoration con- 
sidered as to (1) its time, (2) unexpected manner, (3) important issues, (4) fulfilment 
of promises. The feature of it that most pleased the psalmist was the gathering of the 
scattered Israelites, and the uniting of representatives fi:om all the tribes to form the 
new nation. 

IV. God's claim on the ground of his spiritual redemption. That which 
was wrought by the agency of the Lord Jesus Christ. The soul-redemption, of which 
all other redemptions cuuld be onlv the foreshadowing and illustration. Jesus reveals 
God the Redeemer.— R. T. 

Vers. 8, 9. — A fourfold view of God's relations. This point is illustrated fi-om the 
first thirty-two verses of the psalm, the verses taken as text being the refrain closing 
the first section. Summing up God's relations with his peojile, Delitzsch suggestively 
says : 1. God gave them the lands of the heathen (see Ps. cv. 44). 2. God scattered 
them in the lands (see Ps. cvi. 27). 3. Gud gathers them from the lands (see Ps. 
ovii. 3). The thirty-two verses, or rather those from ver. 4 to ver. 32, contain four 
mental pictures : (1) of pilgrims in a barren land of thirst and distress; (2) of captives 
languishing in a captivity, which is the punishment of sin ; (3) of foolish men smittea 
by God's hand with sickness, even unto death; (4) of sailors in extremity of danger 
on the sea. God is seen in his general relations to all, and in his special relations to 
each. 

1. God the Rbfreshee ; or, the pilgrim's Provider and Guide. Two sources for his 
figures are before the mind of the psalmist. 1. The old wilderness-journey of the 
Israelites. 2. The recent desert-journey of the exiles from Babylon to Jerusalem. Both 
presented peculiarities of difiBculty, trial, and need. In both Go5 had most graciously 
overcome difiSculties, and secured all needed supplies. In neither had his people wanted 
any good thing. This will readily be illustrated by details of these journeys. 



n. ovn. 1—43.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 11 

II. God the Liberator ; or, the captive's Deliverer. Here the same two sources 
provide the figures. Once Israel was captive in Egypt, and then God brought his 
people out " with a high hand and outstretched aim." Recently they had been captive 
in Babylon, and the interweavinga of Divine providence, which led to their return to 
their own land, were no less wonderful and no leas gracious. There is a higher sense 
in which God, through his Son Jesus Christ, now gives "liberty to the captives." 

m. God the Healer ; or, the wilful man's Saviour. The association of this figure 
is not so easy to trace. There is very probable allusion to those times of pestilence in 
the wildemes»-joumey which followed on the people's sin ; and the people were led into 
Bin by foolish, wilful individuals, such as Korah or Dathan. But even when suflfering 
was direct judgment on sin, God magnified his mercy in healing and restoring. 

IV. God the Controller ; or, the sailor's Preserver. Israel seems to have had no 
mercantile associations with the sea before the time of Solomon ; but in the time of 
captivity the Israelites were scattered abroad, and engaged in commerce in all lands, so 
sea-figures had become familiar. But the reference here may be typical ; the perils of 
the sea picturing all kinds of human peril that are beyond man's control, but within 
God's control. For what he is to his people, we are bidden to thank and praise the 
Lord.— R. T. 

Ver. 13. — Prayer for temporal good. The trouble was trouble in their outward 
circumstances. The cry was a prayer. The answer was a gracious Divine dealing with 
these troublous circumstances. Whatever may be urged against its reasonableness, the 
fact cannot be gainsaid that Bible men and women did pray to God about their material 
needs, and did find those needs supplied after prayer. The philosophy may be beyond 
us ; the fact is plain. " This psalm teaches us not only that God's providence watches 
over men, but that his ear is opeo to their prayers. It teaches us that prayer may be 
put up for temporal deliverance, and that such prayer is answered. It teaches us that 
it is right to acknowled°;e with thanksgiving such answers to our petitions. This was 
the simple faith of the Hebrew poet." 

I. Pbateb fob teuforal good is natubal. It is a natural impulse which every 
one feels ; even the atheist feels it in the time of shipwreck. It is natural to man 

(1) as a creature, having creature-wants for which it cannot itself secure the supply ; 

(2) as a child, who has a stronger impression of material than of spiritual need. All 
natural impulses have a sound basis. There is that in Gpd which responds to them. 

II. Pbateb fob temporal oood is reasonable. Because we can see that forces 
are continually acting upon and modifying forces (as when I raise my arm, and make 
vital force counteract the natural force of gravitation) ; and no man has any right to 
say that prayer is not a higher force, which can modify, or lead to the modifying, of 
both vital ami physical forces. Prayer may set moving the Divine forces which control 
and readjust the working of the material forces. It is often said that natural law never 
changes ; but it needs to be seen that natural laws are always cross-working, and even 
preventing each other's working. It cannot be unreasonable to conceive of the Divine 
will as a controlling law, working in material spheres. 

III. Prayer foe temporal oood is acceptable. This may be shown by several 
considerations. 1. God, in every age, has asked it of man. Referable to outward 
needs, he says, " For all this will I be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for 
them." 2. Man, in every age, has prayed about such things. Illustrate by instances 
taken from each period of Bible history. There are supreme cases in which men have 
even given up working, prayed and waited for God to act. It is unfair to give such 
cases no consideration. 3. God has, in every age, interfered in men's lives, in order to 
answer their prayers. " This poor man cried, and the Lord heard, and saved him out 
of all his troubles."— R. T. 

Ver. 17. — Bringing affliction on ourselves. " Foolish men," so called "because of the 
moral infatuation which marks their conduct. Men of earthly, sensual, selfish minds, 
who turn a deaf ear to warning, and despise counsel." The "fool" of the Bible is 
usually the strongly self-willed man, who accepts no guidance or control, but persists 
in following the " devices and desires of his own heart." Such a man is sure to bring 
trouble upon himself. It is true that all men are tempted into self-will at times ; but 



12 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [w. ovn. 1— 4& 

the case introduced here is that of men who are persistent in their self-will, and let it 
fashion their course of conduct, their habit of life. 

• I. Afflictions abb the natural conbequenob of wiLFnuntBS. Because the 
wilfal spirit is sure to lead to acts which involve trouble. The world is ordered accord- 
ing to the will of God ; and it keeps the order when man's will is in_ harmony with 
God's will. Illustrate by the peace of a country, and welfare of all its inhabitants, 
when the will of the people and the will of the governing body are in harmony. Every 
self-willed citizen spoils the harmony for the whole, and brings trouble on himself. _ So 
in God's kingdom. The self-willed (foolish) man is a disturbing element ;_ and the king, 
all law-abidcrs, and all the arrangements of the kingdom, must be against him. He 
cannot get his own way ; he must " bring affliction on himself," and not on himself 
alone. It is a searching and humbling inquiry — How many of our earthly afflictions are 
the direct result — the natural consequence — of our wilful persistence in wrong-doings? 
The humiliation of the review of life is the discovery of how many troubles were our 
owp f 'ult, and might have been avoided by mastering our self-will. " Many sicknesses 
a^e the direct result of foolish acts. Thoughtless and lustful men, by drunkenness, 
gluttony, and the indulgence of their passions, fill their bodies with diseases. Men, 
by a course of transgression, afflict themselves, and are fools for their pains." 

II. Afflictions ARE the Divine agency fob bringino wilful ones to beason. 
Perhaps it is true that God's afflictions are never " judgments," in the sense of mere 
vindicatory punishments. But they are not always "judgments" in the sense of 
"chastisements." They are — certainly they are for the persistently wilful — ^"judg- 
ments " in the sense of " humiliations." Their design is to break men away from their 
self-confidence. And therefore the affliction is so directly connected with the sin, and 
men are compelled, humiliatingly, to admit that they have brought their troubles on 
themselves. — R. T. 

Ver. 22. — Thanksgiving when praytr it answered. Men are much more ready to 

pray than to give thanks ; to express their desires than to recognize the response made 
to their desires. Men fail in gratitude rather than in petition. Therefore do the 
apostles specially urge this grace, and require its cultivation by the Christian 
disciples (see Phil. iv. 6 ; Col. iv. 2 ; Heb. xiii. 15). The call to thanksgiving is the 
refrain of the psalm. Man is sern to gain no blessing save through the ministry of 
him who is the "Author and Giver of every good and perfect gift." And man's 
sin is seen to be restraining his lips, and failing to make due recognition of "grace 
abounding." A life full of God's benedictions should be a life full of God's praise. In 
this text the general duty is presented under two figures. 

I. Thanesoivino as a sacrifice. The peculiarity of a sacrifice is that it is a tilent 
act. It is something a man does which has its own voice, and need not be accompanied 
with any words. When the old Jew brought his animal to the priest, according to the 
rules of the Mosaic ritual, he did not need to say anything by way of explanation. 
The priest perfectly understood what he meant. Some act of Divine mercy was filling 
him with thankfulness, and his ofiering found for it expression. Philip Henry puts 
this sharply : " TJianksgiving is a good thing, thanksliving is a better." The self 
offered in sacrifice speaks our gratitude to the listening ear of God. A man can show 
himself grateful by his manner of life. Bonar prays — 

"Fill thou my life, O Lord my God, 
In ever; part with praise, 
That my whole being may proclaim 
Thy Beiug and thy ways. 

"Not for the lip of praise alone, 
Kor e'en the praising heart, 
I ask, but for a life made np 
Of praise in every part" 

"I beseech you therefore that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice;" lo aaju St. 
Paul. And it is to be a sacrifice of thanksgiving, 

II. Thanksqivino as a testimony. " Tell out his works with gladness," Here 
thanksgiving is a voice/id act. " I will not refrain my lips, Lord, thou knowest." 



PS. ovn. 1—43.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 13 

" Praise is the only employment in which self finds no part. In praise we go out of 
ourselves, and think only of him to whom we offer it. It is the most purely disinterested 
of aU services."— B. T. 

Ver. 30. — The desired Aoven. " So he hringeth them nnto the haven where they 
would be " (Prayer-book Version). The picture of the sea connected with this text is 
" painted as a landsman would paint it, but yet only as one who had himself been 
exposed to the danger could paint the storm — the waves running mountains high, on 
which the tiny craft seemed a plaything ; the helplessness of human skill, the gladness 
of the calm, the safe refuge in the haven." It is difiSoult for those who love the sea to 
enter into the feelings with which Eastern people in olden times, and especially tlie 
Israelites, regarded it. That feeling of mystery and dread must have been intense 
before Solomon's time, when a commercial navy was employed in both the Mediter- 
ranean and Eed Seas. For the severity of a storm in the Mediterranean, the story of 
Jonah, and of St. Paul's shipwreck, may be studied. What seems more especially to 
have influenced ancient minds was the constant unrest of the sea. This is reflected In 
many of the Bible references to it ; and this has always struck both poetic and pious 
minds. 

I. The fascination of best. To man it is the supreme idea of heaven ; it is the 
perfection of bliss on earth. That not so much because of toil, as because of change aad 
trouble. The rest man seeks is not rest from work, but rest from worry. The activity 
of work is, for healthy minds and bodies, the truest rest. But uncertainty, change, 
anxiety, make us long for the moral rest, which can only come when God's will is no 
longer checked by man's. It is not the rest of the grave man wants ; it is the rest of 
the " desired haven " — the rest of the moral issue of life. Every man is, accorditig to 
his own idea, moving towards and into rest. Alas 1 that so many make shipwreck. 

II. The symbol of kest. A " desired haven." Harbour after a long and stormy 
voyage. " In the fierce gales of November or March, when the shrieking blasts drive 
furiously up the channel, and the huge mountain-billows, green and white, open 
threatening graves on every side, how welcome would be a safe harbour, easy of access, 
and placed at a part of the coast which else would be unsheltered for many leagues on 
either side 1 " (Gosse). " The stately ships go on, to the harbour under the hill " 
(Tennyson). The point suggestive of practical teachings is thrown out by the Prayer- 
book Version. Our " desired haven " is, " the haven where we would be." It is the 
realization of our life-objects, of our hopes ; and so we are led to discuss men's life-aims. 
Their rest, when they gain it, too often proves to be no rest. He only reaches rest 
that is rest indeed, who has voyaged life's seas in hope of entering at last the harbour of 
God.— R. T. 

Vers. 33 — 39. — God's commonplctce mercies. The difference in the style and contents 
of the latter part of this psalm has been noticed by almost every writetr. The pictures, 
with their closing refrain, cease ; and in a hurried way instances of God's providential 
government are given. It has been thought that the psalm was completed by another 
poet; but in that case the structure of the psalm would have been closely imitated. 
The peculiarity of this portion may be explained by showing that the psalmist had 
spoken of God's gracious relation to special forms of trouble ; and he might leave the 
impression that God was only in them. And men might be feeling very deeply ho\* 
oommonplcux their life was. Without such special experiences they might take up the 
notion that they were out of the spheres of special Divine mercies ; and so the didactic 
psalmist puts in a word for these: in a few skilful sentences he sketches ordinary, com- 
monplace life, and shows God's relation to it. The things briefly mentioned suggest— 

I. The oomhomplaoe advgbsitieb of life. Such are the difficulties of the seasons, 
the rains, the floods, the drought, in their relation to agricultural life. 

II. The commokflace entebpbises of life. Working for a. living, tillage, 
building, planting, tending cattle, etc. 

III. The cohmonflace disastebs of life. Accidents, diseases, plagues, etc 

IV. The commonplace enmities of life. For few men pass through many years 
without suffering from the mischief-making schemes of those who, by reason of envy or 
masterfulness, make themselves their enemies. The psalmist urges that God is ^uite 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. ovn. 1—43. 



as truly in the commonplace as in the unuaual. He is working through onr everyday 
life-experience Bome high and gracious moral end. And therefore every man should 
be quick to observe the " loving-kindness of the Lord," and ever ready to " praise the 
Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men." — R. T. 

Ver. 43.— 2%« wise observance of Ood's loving-kindness. The Prayer-book Version 
reads, " Whoso is wise will ponder these things ; " will think about them ; will brood 
over them. The signs of God's active and gracious working, in men's lives, is clear 
enough, but only to the "wise," who "thoughtfully ponder what the thoughtless 
pass by." 

L The loving-kindness or God is not appaeent to evbbtbodt. Many are 
stumbling over the severities of God's dealings, and, indeed, over the presence of evil, 
in the senses of wrong and calamity, in his world. How can the God of love stand 
aloof, and permit the misery of the earth ? How can the doom of vast masses of 
humanity be consistent with Divine love and Fatherhood ? We venture to say that 
these difficulties are felt because men are carried away by surface appearances, and do 
not ponder. They look upon the events of a limited time and space, and do not try to 
estimate God's dealings in view of all time and all space. Mistake follows studying 
parts; it is relieved by studying wholes. It is not ea.sy to appraise aright passing 
things ; we cannot see how they Jit. A bird's-eye view sets things in places and 
relations, and so explains a great deal. 

II. The LOViNO-EiNDNess of God is bevealed to the unbiassed. And they 
only are the " wise." Every bias, prejudice, preconceived opinion, is a limitation of 
faculty, a misdirection of judgment. And if man would understand God's ways, it is 
of supreme importance that he should clear his mind, and come with the simplicity of 
true wisdom, to such studies. 

III. The lovino-eindness of God is bevealed to the THonsHTFUL. Here the 
idea is that mistake is made by coming to a too hasty decision or judgment. The 
thoughtful man is the man who is content to keep on thinking ; who wants to see 
things all round and all through before he makes up his mind. Quietly wait to see 
the loving-kindness. It is often only revealed when the ends of God's dealings are 
reached. 

IV. The lovtno-kindnbss of God is bevealed to the exfebienoed. It is the 
man who only observes it who is so often misled. The man who /eels it will be sure to 
realize the loving-kindness at last, if not at first. — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 43. — God's watchful care. " Whatever the circumstances under which the 
psalm was written, there can be no doubt as to the great lesson which it inculcates" — 
that G^d watches over men, and his ear is open to their prayers. Look at some 
illustrations. 

L God had .answered the cbt of the Jews in exile, and bestobed them 
TO theib own countby. (Vers. 2,8, 9.) They were called on to give thanks for those 
wonders, and to remenjber that " he fiUeth the hungry soul with good." God is 
working toward the deliverance of all enslaved nations. This thought is amplified in 
vers. 10—16, with special reference to tlie sius that had plunged them into such helpless 
affliction, and thereiore how much they should praise God for loving-kindness ! 

II. The emphatic thought in veeb. 17—22 is that God delivebs wicked men, 

WHEN they call upon HIM, OUT OF THE VEBT SHADOWS OF DEATH. God pitieS 

transgressors, and loves them with an infinite compassion in their terrors and sufierings. 
He sendeth bis word — the message of his mercy — and healeth them ; delivers them 
" from their graves." 

III. Another example ; He delivebs the bailob fbom the stobms of the bea. 
(Vers. 23 — 32.) Wonderful description of a storm and its subsidence. "Then are 
they glad because they be quiet, and he leadeth them to their desired haven." The 
psalmist is writing poetry under the inspiration of a devout faith ; and not science, dis- 
cnssing the unchangeable laws of material nature. The preacher must do his utmost 
to reconcile poetry and science in the theology he teaches. 

IV. Niiw the current of thought changes its direction, but only for a moment. Qoj> 

SOMETIMES MAKES THE WICKED AN EXAMPLE OF HIS TEUPOBAL JUDOMBNTS. (Vers, 



PS. ovm. 1 — 13.] 



THK BOOK OP PSALMS. 



16 



33, 84.) But this thought is uncongenial, and is soon changed again for the thought 
of God B mercy. The wilderness is crowned with cities ; aud the poor and humble are 
raised to the condition of princes, and the rich and the proud overthrown. The question 
at the close most suggestive — that it is only the observant and the wise that can 
understand the loving-kindnesses of God ; only they that can approach to the solution 
of the gre«t problems of God's providence. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM ovm. 

This is a oomposite psalm, made up of 
portions of two Davidical psalms, viz. Ivii. 
7 — 11, and Ix. 5 — 12, but not (prohalily) put 
into its present shape by David. It is 
difficult to imagine what was the occasion 
which was thought to call for tlie union 
of two such distinct and unconnected 
passages. The text, moreover, has suffered 
in the transfer. 

Yer. 1. — My heart is fixed. In the original 
form (Ps. Ivii. 7) this emphatic phrase was 
reiterated, which much increased tlie force 
of the declaration, I will sing and give 
praise, even with my gloiy. It is difficult 
to assign any distinct meaning to the last 
clause, which has nothing parallel to it iu 
Pb. Ivii. 7. 

Yer. 2. — ^Awake, psaltery and harp: I 
myself will awake early. Fs. Ivii. has, 
"Awiike, my glory; awake, psaltery and 
harp," which is intelligible and forcible. 

Yer. 3. — I will praise thee, lord, among 
the people : and I will sing praises unto thee 
among the nations, Identical with Fs. Ivii. 
9, except that "O Lord" is expressed by 
"Jehovah" instead of " Adonai." 

Yer. 4. — for thy meroy is great above the 
heavens : and th; truth reacbeth unto the 
clouds. Identical with Fs. Ivii. 10, with 
the exception of one preposition, which 
occurs only in si ime manuiioripts, 

Yer. 5. — Be then exalted, Ood, above the 
heavens : and thy glory above all the earth. 
Absolutely identical with Pa. IviL 11. 



Yer. 6. — ^That thy beloved (or, thy Moved 
onet) may be delivered : save with thy right 
hand, and answer me. Absolutely identical 
with Fs. Ix. 5; but with a change in the 
connection which give tlie words a somewhat 
different bearing. 

Yers. 7, 8. — &od hath spoken, eto. Com- 
pletely identical with Fs. Ix. 6, 7. 

Yer. 9. — Moab is my washpot ; over Edom 
will I oast out my shoe. Identical with the 
first two clauses of Pu. Ix. 8. Over Fhilistia 
will I triumph. In Ps. Ix. 8 the expression 
used is different. There we have, "Fhi- 
listia, triumph thou over me," or, " because 
of me." Apparently the compiler has not 
understood David's irony, and has therefore 
changed the form of the verb. 

Yer. 10. — Who will bring me into the 
strong city t A slight change occurs here, 
1K3D taking the place of niSD, but there is 
no difference in the sense. Who will lead 
me into Edomt Identical with the last 
clause of Fs. Ix. 9. 

Yer. 11. — Wilt not thou, God, who hast 
cast us offi and wilt not thou, God, go 
forth with onr hosts 1 Identical with Fs. 
Ix. 10, with the exception that there, in the 
first clause, "thou" is expressed by nns 
The meaning is probably that assigned in 
the Revised Yersion, " Hast not thou cast 
us off, O God? and thou goest not forth, 
O God, with our hosts " (see the comment 
on Ps, Ix. 10). 

Yer. 12. — Give us help from trouble: for 
vain is the help of man. Completely identical 
with Ps. Ix. 11. 

Yer. 13. — Through God we shall do va- 
liantly, eto. Also completely identical with 
Ps. Ix. 12. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — Triwnph in trouble. The words of which this psalm is composed 
were written after a reverse, or in the midst of strife, but also after a Divine promise 
(ver. 7) which was the assurance of success; they breathe a spirit not merely of 
serenity, but even of triumph ; and they bear with them the lesson, that in the time 
of tronble we may be so sustained by the Word of God that we may even exult in the 
prospect before us. 

I. Thb PEE8BNCB OF ADVEEBITT. Behind US is defeat (ver. 11); before us is 
difBculty, apparent impossibility (ver. 10) ; the ordinary, visible resources have failed 
US (ver, 12) ; " vain is the help of man." This adversity may be either outward or 



16 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [fs. ovni. 1— 13. 

inward, in circumstance or in the soul. 1. We may be beaten in the battle of life, oi 
at any rate temporarily overcome. We may sustain a serious reverse ; we may be 
reduced in our holding and our position ; we may suffer in our reputation ; we may be 
sadly disappointed in some venture ; we may fail to secure some coveted post or honour. 
2. We may fall far short of our endeavour and our expectation in the spiritual struggle. 
This may be either on the arena of our own spiritual nature, or on the broad field of 
conflict with error and evil. We may find ourselves much further from the goal than 
we expected by this time to be, or we may be surprised and grieved at the comparative 
fruitlcssness of our Christian labour. It is the hour of defeat. 

II. Thb bgfuoe of tbe human heart. There always remains one thing that can 
be done when all others fail : we can go in prayer to God, we can " pour out our 
heart" unto him (ver. 6). If we are God's children, we can urge this plea as the 
psalmist does here ; we can call on our heavenly Father to hear and to save his own. 
We are warranted to look for Divine attention, sympathy, succour. And, apart from 
the desired intervention, the very act of filial approach and appeal to God brings with 
it refreshment and relief. But there is — 

IIL The Divine peomisb. " God hath spoken," etc. (ver. 7). However God 
spoke to the psalmist, we know how he has spoken to ns. He has spoken " in his 
holiness," in his faithfulness, the word upon which we can build. By holy men of old 
whom he inspired, and by that Holy One himself who was "the Truth," whose words 
cannot pass away without being fulfilled, God has given us strong assurances both for 
oar present eartlily life, and also for our own spiritual course, as well as for the coming 
of his kingdom. We know that to the upright there will arise light in the darkness , 
that all needful things will be added to those who seek and serve Christ ; that the 
Spirit of God will be granted to those that ask earnestly for his presence ; that our 
labour will not prove to be in vain in the Lord ; that we shall dwell with our Lord in 
his glory. Our hope, our confident expectation, rests on the immovable rock of the 
faithfulness, the holiness, of the eternal and immutable One. 

IV. OuB HOLT CONFIDENCE IN GoD. " I will rejoicc, I will divide Shechem," etc 
(vers. 7 — 9) ; " Through God we shall do valiantly," etc. (ver. 13). David, when he 
wrote these words, felt as strong an assurance that he would carry out his purpose and 
subdue his enemies, as if he had seen them flying from before his army; he realized 
the unseen. It is for us, by a strong and living faith, to foresee the issue of our efforts ; 
to be thoroughly convinced that provision will be made for us; that our name will be 
cleared ; that we shall gain the victory over our spiritual adversaries, and be conquerors 
through Christ ; that our work shall be rewarded, and result in real spiritual success ; 
that we siiall reach home and heaven at last ; that we shall one day understand that 
which sorely perplexes us now. 

Y. OuB SPIRIT OF THANKFCTLNESB. It is not Only that the psalmist is calm and 
peaceful ; he is more than that. His lips are full of praise, though the " strong city " is 
not yet entered, and Bdom is still unsubdued. His heart is fixed ; he is unwaveringly 
confident of victory; his mouth shall be full of praise. He does not wait for the 
moment of success ; he pours out his joy in God ; he ascribes to him, at once, the 
attributes of truth and mercy ; he exults in him, and " extols him with his tongue " 
(vers. 1 — 5). It is the triumph of faith. Thus it may be true that God's " praise is 
continually in our mouth ; " not only when the sun is shining, and the corn is ripening, 
but when the rain is falling, and the corn is rotting in the field ; not only when the 
church is crowded, and the converts are passing into the fold, but when the message 
of truth is rejected, and there are but few results to chronicle. Let us praise G«d 
" with our glory;" with the glorious agent — this thinking, trusting, loving, rejoicing 
human soul ; with the glorious instrument — this tongue, which sings the grace and 
speaks the truth of Jesus Christ. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers, 1 — 13. — " This psalm is a compilation formed by combining the last five verses 
of Ps. Ivii. with the last eight verses of Ps. Ix., the latter being itself a compilation." 
It ia ascribed to David because the original passages both occur in psalms ascribed to 



n. OTin. 1-ia.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. IT 

him. But Bishop Perowne thinks that some later poet probably adapted them to 
droomstances of his own time ; possibly wishing thus to commemorate some victory 
vrer Edom or Philistia. For homiletic treatment, see the above-named psalms. — S. 0, 

Ver. 1. — Ood Jionoured ly fixed resolves. " My heart is fixed ; " " My heart is ready " 
(Prayer-book Version) ; " My heart is steadfast " (Perowne). This psalm is clearly • 
compilation from two earlier psalms, and was probably arranged for liturgical woiship. 
It represents the kind of experience which we properly asbociate with David. The 
references are such as suit his endeavour to extend and consolidate his kingdom ; but 
the expression in ver. 11 suggests that the psalm was rewritten by a returned exile, 
to whom the Captivity wasa " casting off" of the nation by God. What we now se« 
is, that the mood of mind in which David first composed it is one eminently charac- 
teristic of him; and it is a mood eminently suitable for a restored exile, who was under 
the persuasion of the restoring mercies of God. What is the most striking tbing in 
David's career is his fixity for Ood, the steadfastness of his purpose to live for God. 
He may have stumbled, made mistakes, acted unworthily, and openly sinned. And 
iflso, of woman bonk, has yet lived such a perfect life that he can venture to throw • 
stone at David? But from the beginning to the ending of his life David never heart- 
swerved from God. "His heart was fixed." Fixed to trust; fixed to serve; fixed 
to praise^ 

L FixTTT m PBINOIPLE IS THE BEOBET OF FREKDOM. Illustrate by the tree, which 
is only free to spread and wave its branches, and put itself forth in flower and fruit, 
when the roots go well into the grouml and hold firm. A man is not free who has no 
established principles, no fixed laws of conduct. He seems free, but really is a slave 
to his senses, and to all who have skill to offer sense-gratifications. True freedom is 
liberty to do right, and to do wrong, when a man is fixed that he will not do wrong. 
Sin enslaves those who are not fixed for God. 

n. FiXITT IN PUBFOBE IS THE 8E0BBT OF BTBENOTH. Hlust. i Joshua. * As for 

me and my house, we will serve the Lord." That resolve inspired a strong, unfiagging 
life of service. Or take St. PauL His resolve is, "To me to live is Christ; " so he 
exclaims, in conscious strength, " I can do all things through him that strengtheneth 
me." The man who knows what he means can gather up and unify his forces ; hold 
them in restraint, and use tbem wisely. 

III. Fixity in habit is the becbet of defence. Here reference is to the habit of 
praise. This is the Christian's guard against depression and against temptation. What 
can the tempter do with a man whom he finds rejoicing in God ? — B. T. 

Ver. 1. — The best work of a man's lest. " I wUl sing and give praise with the best 
member that I have" (Prayer-book Version). A man's "glory" is his soul — tha 
powers and faculties which belong to him as a rational and spiritual being. A man 
may join in singing praise, and only do it mechanically. A man may give praise him- 
self as the mere performance of a duty. A man only praises God aright, or acceptably, 
when he praises with his glory ; as a real and sincere expression of his feeling. True 
praise is the utterance of a man's individuality. 

I. The olobi of a uan is that which distinoxtisbes him fbom the animals. The 
beasts of the field have no uplooking eyes or yearning hearts. No mere animal can 
sing. It is only in a figurative sense that birds are said to sing. They express nothing 
intelligent to men in the sounds they make. Man can think ; can receive impressions ; 
can discern qualities in things done for him and to him ; can feel emotions of love and 
admiration and gratitude. So with his glory as a man, he can sing and give praise. 
Man can lead the choir of creation ; but man's song differs from all other songs. The 
tone and meaning in it is put by man's glory. 

II. The gloet of a man is that which distinqotshes him fbom otheb men. It 
may be true that all men are alike. The bodily limbs, organs, faculties, etc., are the 
same. But it is even more true that men differ from one another. Bach one is strictly 
an individuaL A man may have much in common with his fellows; he has some- 
thing which is peculiar to himself — some faculty, or taste, or preference, or influence^ 
or experience, which is strictly perronal. And that, whatever it may be, is bis glory. 
And it is the placing of that ou the aliar of service to God u hich is the real " presenting 

psalms — III. 



18 THE BOOK OP PSALMS Fpb. ovm. 1—13. 



of a man's self as a living sacrifice." The Prayer-book Version leals thii in it* 
rendering, " with the best member that I have." — E. T. 

■Ver. 2. — Morning religion. "I myself will awake right early " (Revised Version). 
The idea seems to be, that the anxiety to be praising God is so strong in the psalmist 
that it actually wakes. A man wakes early when he has a mind burdened with busi- 
ness or family cares ; the psalmist wakes early because his mind is burdened with its 
Bense of indebtedness to God, Perhaps but few of us can say that we shorten our self- 
indulgent sleep for the sake of praise and prayer. Our Lord lived a crowded, bustled 
life ; but as he must have, for soul-refreshing, daily communion with his Father, he 
was wont to "rise a great while before day." According to the Eastern use of the 
figure, waking early to do a thing was the sign of being thoroughly in earnest in the 
doing. A man has his heart in the thing which he gets up early to accomplish. _ 

L MoENiNG KBLiQioN IS BBFEBSHiNa TO THE SOUL. Bccause then_ thought is free 
and emotion lively, and there is a bright and cheerful tone on all that is said and done. 
When wearied with the day and its toils and care, religious meditation easily becomes 
gloomy, the fatigued body flinging its shadows over all the expressions of the spirit. 
Give the freshness of morning thoughts to God, and that service will surely come back 
on you as refreshing. 

II. MoENiNG BELiGioN IS ACCEPTABLE TO QoiK Because it shows him that _W8 
are in earnest in his service, and hold our very best as the fitting gift to offer to him. 
" The flower that's ofiered in the bud is the best sacrifice." That is as true of the day 
as of the life. And God may be expected to estimate our gifts in the light of what 
they cost us to present to him. That is our way of appraising the gifts which we 
receive, and we may be sure that it is God's way. What, then, is God's estimate of 
our daily praise and thanksgiving ? Does it really cost us much ? It does if, for it, 
we awake early ; preventing the day lest we should lose our holy opportunity, or be 
beneath our best and freshest in our communions. 

UL MoBNiNO BELioioN IB INFLUENTIAL ON OTHEBB. It is One of the most effective 
and impressive examples ; and it has a special influence on the young, helping them 
to form good life-habits. Many of us can gratefully remember the influence of the 
early morning devotions of our parents. Let us g^n the power on others which they 
have gained on us. — B. T. 

Ver. 6. — ffope and prayer inspired by praise. In this verse we trace the influence 
which the spirit and utterance of praise has upon the psalmist. It leads to prayer, 
and gives him confidence in prayer. 

I. Pbaising God bbinos home to vb Goo'b belations to us, and oub relations 
TO God, Praising God for what he has done convinces ub of his kindly feoling toward 
us and interest in us, so that we may even think and speak of ourselves as God's 
heloved. This may be regarded as David's way of thinking of himself; but a similar 
appropriation of the Divine love we may make. It is the realiz.ation of our Father's 
persoual love to us that fills us with hope, and gives us confidence to pray. We never 
think of putting God under any constraint of prayer. We pray as children make their 
requests of parents who love them. 

IL Pbaisenq God becomes an inspiration to fbatee fob further blessings. 
1. It gives ua argument. For we only praise because we know that God has answered 
our prayers. It \a really for those answers that we offer prayer. Once let it be estab- 
lished in our hearts that God is the prayer-hearing and prayer-answering God, and we 
have the all-sufScing groimd on which to seek him in every form of new distress and 
need. Praise is only possible when we fully recognize reasons for praise. 2. It gives 
us the feeling that makes us long to pray, and so gain yet more reason to piaise. 
Praise and prayer are indissolubly linked together. No man will pray long who gives 
up praising, and no man will keep up his praise who neglects his praying. If we find 
ourselves hesitating about praying for what we newly need, the best thing to do is to 
set about praising for the blessings we have received. Just as it was with the psalmist, 
BO it will be with us. Let praise do its work, and it will be sure to lead in prayer. — B. T. 

Ver. 7. — Cottteious itrength through God's pledge. The construction of this and the 
three following verses is somewhat difScult to trace. It may be that the verses are 



n. ovm. 1—18.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 19 

the things that Qod "spoke in his holiness." But it is simpler to treat the rerses as 
expressions of what the psalmist feels he can do, and means to endeavour to do, basing 
his confidence on the fact that " God has spoken in his holiness " — has made promise 
and pledge to him ; and God's pledges, he is sure, are holy, inyiolate, certain of fulfil- 
ment. In relation to David, the promise to secure for him the full sovereignty of the 
nation is probably referred to (2 Sam. vii.). " In his holiness " means, " in the immu- 
table integrity of his heart," which was an infallible guarantee for the fulfilment of his 
promise. The key-note of this portion of the psalm is the fact tiiat the [)romiseB of 
God sent by Nathan to David ensured the establishment of the Davidic dynasty over 
the kingdom of Israel. But when the original of the psalm was composed, David had 
all the work before him. The northern portion of Canaan had to be won ; neighbour^ 
ing nations had to be subdued, or put under tribute. But the promise gave him con- 
scious strength, made him feel superior to his responsibilities; able even to speak 
lightly, almost scornfully, of those whose conquest wotdd involve hard toil and fighting 
(see figures of ver. 9). 

I. PiBM HOLD OF God's FBOMISE GIVES DB CONSOIOUB BUFEBIOBITT TO LIFE's DIFFI- 
CULTIES. This is true, whether our difficulties come from our circumstances or our 
sins. We have Divine promises that we shall finally master both our surroundings 
and ourselves, winning the whole kingdom of our being for righteousness. What keeps 
us full of good cheer ? Not our evident successes, bat our grip of the Divine promises. 
In Gh>d's word and pledge, we rise above our circumstances and above our sins. We 
feel no sort of fear ; we shall " come off more than conquerors." 

II. FlBM HOLD OF God's PROMISE OITEB US CONSCIOUS 8TBEN0TH TO OABBT OUT OUB 

RESOLVES. David meant to win Moab, Edom, Philistia, etc.; and he knew he coidd 
because God had spoken. There is no sense of strength to accomplish life-purposes 
ever comes to a man like that he knows when he feels GK)d is at his back. — B. T. 

Ver. 11. — Ood with us assures confidenee and victory. What "casting off" is here 
referred to by the psalmist no one seems to have satisfactorily explained. The best 
suggestion, perhaps, is that the sentiments of a returned exile are here interwoven with 
the sentiments of David. The idea of God, as one who had cast off his people for 
■while, is quite suitable to a returned exile, but quite unsuitable to David. The 
thought is, however, found in the original of this psalm (Ps. Ix. 1) ; and if we must 
connect it with David, it is necessary to assume that he suffered some temporary 
repulse in the beginning of his national wars, and that, in a gloomy, poetic way, he 
regarded this as " GoA casting ofif his people." A good writer on Ps. Ix. says, " From 
the first five verses we should gather that the country had been crushed by some great 
national disaster." One is forcibly reminded of two scenes in the national history. 

I. The anxiety of Moses about God oonio with Isbael. Becall the expressions 
of Divine indignation in the matter of the golden call The purpose was, as it were, 
half formed, to cast off a people who were showing themselves so unfaithful to the 
trust reposed in them. Moses interceded. The evident burden on his heart was the 
possibility that God might not himself go with them; and he passionately pleaded, 
"If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence." Well he knew that " God 
with us assures confidence and victory." 

II. The akxiett of Joshua about God aomo with Isbael. When the covenant 
was broken, through the covetousness of Achan, God for a time withdrew his defence 
and help, cast off his people, with the result that the army was defeated, and the whole 
expedition placed in jeopardy. Joshua was terribly distressed. It seemed to him (not 
knowing the real cause of the disaster) that the very Name of God was being dis- 
honoured, and he passionately pleaded for that restoration of God's presence and power 
which alone could give confidence and victory. The history of God's people furnishes 
abundant illustrations of the same truth ; and it was sealed for ever, as the truth of 
truths for helpless man, when the ascending Jesus gave his assurance, " Lo, I am with 
you all the days."— B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — This psalm consists of portions of two others, the first half of it being 
taken from the fiftj-seventh psalm (vers. 7 — 11), and the latter half from the sixtieth 
fvers. 6 — 12). The notes on these two other psalms may be consulted. — ti. 



ao 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. oix. 1 — 31« 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM CIX. 



The title of this psalm— "To the cTiief 
mnaician, a psalm of David " — ^is thought to 
be not inappropriate. We may have here 
David's own appeal to God against his per- 
secutors, and especially against a chief per- 
secutor, who may be Saul, or Doeg, or 
Abithophel, or Shimei. The psalm opens 
with mingled complaint and prayer. The 
adversaries are spoken of in the plural (vers. 
2 — 5). They have abused and maligned the 
writtr, have returned evil for the good that 
he has sought to do them, and given him 
katred for his love (ver. 5). The psalmist, 
in return, utters against them, or rather 
against bis chief persecutor, a series of male- 
dictions (vers. 6 — 15) which constitute a 
stuiding difficulty to all biblical apologists. 
They are certainly entirely alien to the 
Christian, though not perhaps to the Jewish 
■pirit (comp. 2 Kings i. 10 — 12; Luke ix. 
Si — Sti). It is impossible to read or re- 
hearse them without pain. The attempt 
made to explain them as the utterances of 
David'sadverearies(Eennicott,MendeIs3ubn, 
Westcott) is unsatisfactory. We must ad- 
mit that they are the psalmist's own ana- 
themas, and judge them from this standpoint 
(see the comment on vers. 6 — 15). They 
are followed by an analysis of the evil tem- 
per in the adversaries which has led them 
into their evil courses (vers. 15 — 20). The 
psalmist then turns to God in prayer, en- 
treating his help, and setting forth his own 
necessities (vers. 21 — 29). Finally, he winds 
np with u short burst of praise, since he is 
confident that his prayer is heard, and that 
he will he delivered from his persecutors 
(Ters. 80, 31); 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The initial prayer and com- 
plaint. The prayer occupies one verse only 
Ter. 1); the oomplaiut four verses (vers. 
2-5). 

Ver. 1. — Hold not thy peace, God of my 
praise (comp. Pss. xzviii. 1; xxxv. 22; 
xxiix. 12). If God makes no sign when men 
•re grievously persecuted, he seems to be 
indifferent to their sufferings. Surely he 
will not thus treat one who praises him con- 
tinually (Pss. xxii. 26 ; Ixxi. 6). 

Yw 2.— 7or the mvuth of the wicked and 



the mouth of the deoeitful; literally, i^ 
deceit — the ahstraot for the concrete. Are 
opened against me ; literally, have thej/ 
opened upon me (Kay, Oheyne, Revised Ver- 
sion). They have spoken against me with a 
lying tongue (comp. Pss. xxviL 12 ; xzxr. 
11). Calumny and misrepresentation are 
ever the portion of the children of God. 
David was calumniated by Sanl (1 Sam. 
xxii. 7—13), by Absalom (2 Sam. xv. 3, 4), 
by Shimei (2 Sam. xvi. 8), and others. One 
more perfect than David was even more 
calumniated (Matt. xi. 19; zii. 21; xxvL 
61 ; Luke xxiii. 2, eta). 

Ver. 3. — ^Ihey eompassed me shout also 
with words of hatred. The hatred of the 
wicked for the good is a plain fact of his- 
tory, and quite indisputable. " Wordi of 
hatred " are less patent, since they are often 
restrained from prudential considerations. 
But sometimes free vent is given to them (see 
2 Sam. xvi. 5 — 8). And fought against ma 
without a cause (comp. Pss. xxxv. 7, 19; 
Ixix. 1; oxix. 161). Saul's hatred towards 
David WHS markedly of this character — un- 
provoked by either act or word from its 
object. 

Ver. 4. — ^For my love they are my adver- 
Baries. The tenderness and kindness of the 
good towards wicked men does not soften 
them. Bather it provokes them to greater 
hostility. This was seen clearly in the 
instance of Sauh But I give myself unto 
prayer; literally, hut I prayer; i.e. "but I 
am wholly prayer," " I do nothing during 
their attacks on me but pray for them." 

Ver. 5. — And they have rewarded me evil 
for good, and hatred for my love ; or, " thtu 
they rewarded me." The verse is a corollary 
from what has gone before, not anything 
additional. 

Vers. 6 — 15. — The imprecatory portion of 
the psalm now begins. It is no donbt true 
to say, with Tholuck, that " no passion is 
discernible in the imprecations, dreadful as 
they are." Clearly the writer is not moved 
by personal feelings of hostility, bat by a 
spirit of justice, and an intense abborrenoe 
of sin. He delivers a calm judicial sentenoe. 
Still, the spirit of Christian love must ever 
shrink &om such utterances, which belong 
to an earlier and less perfect dispensation 
(oomp. Lake ix. 51 — 56). 

Ver, 6. — Set thou a wicked man over him ; 
<.«. to judge him (see ver. 7). A persecutor 
deserves to be himself persecuted, an op- 
presusnr to be himself oppressed, " Neo 
lex jnutior nlla est, Quam uecis artiflees 



PI. oix. 1 — 31.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



21 



arte peiire sna." And let Satan stand at his 
right hand; rather, an adversary, ht an 
accuser. In courts of justice the accuser 
■tood at the accused person's right hand. 

Ver. 7. — When ho shall be judged, let 
him he condemned; liti-ial\j,let him go forth 
condemned ; i e. let him quit the court under 
•entence. And let his prayer become sin. 
The most terrible of all the imprecations. 
" Let him even be unable to pray to God ac- 
ceptably," and so let any prayer that he offers 
when he is brouglit low be an additional sin 
(comp. Prov. xy. 8 ; xxviii. 9 ; Isa. i. 12—15). 

Ver. 8. — Let his days be few. There were 
Divine promises that "bloodthirsty and 
deceitful men" should not "live out half 
their days," which might naturally be 
regarded as justifying this wish (see Ps. 
lv.23; Prov. x. 27; Ecolea vii. 17). And 
let another take bis offioe. i^y iirurKOTt^v 
aiiTov, LXX. Applied by St. Peter to 
Judas (Acts i. 20). 

Ver. 9. — Let his children be fatherless, 
and his wife a widow. Necessary conse- 
quences of his own oondemnation to death. 

Ver. 10. — Let his children be continually 
vagabonds, and beg. If it be just that the 
sins of the fatiiers be visited upon the 
children, the psalmist may be regarded as 
justified in this wish. Still, it is not one 
that a Christian will readily echo. Let 
them seek their bread also out of their 
desolate places. Professor Cheyne corrects 
vify) into ^vi^^3,, and translates, "Let them 
be driven from their desolate houses." 

Ver. 11. — Let the extortioner catch all 
that he hath; rather, the creditor, or the 
usurer; i.e. the man from whom he has 
borrowed money. And let the strangers 
(rather, let foreigner!) spoil his labour ; i.e. 
plunder his lands, carry off his crops, and 
leave him destitute. 

Ver. 12. — Let there be none to extend (lite- 
rally, continue) mercy unto him. In bis need, 
let none of bis neighbours continue to show 
him mercy and loving-kindness. Let them 
stand aloof, and remain passive, wliile 
punishment overtakes him. Neither let 
there be any to favour his fatherless children. 
Let them too be suifered to endure the woes 
which come naturally upon them (see ver. 
10) through their lather's fault, without 
any one thinking it necessary, because they 
are fatherless, to show them favour. 

Ver. 13, -Let his posterity be cut off. 
If he have oliildren ; let them die without 
offspring ; literally, let them be /or extinc- 
tion. And in the generation following 
let their name be blotted out. This would 
be the natural result if the preceding wish 
were accomplished. The family having 
come to an end, their very name would be 
soon forgotten (comp. Job xviii. 18; Ps. 
xxxvii 28; Prov. x. 7). 



Ver. 14. — Let the iniquity of hii fathert 
be remembered with the Lord. Let the 
threatening of Exod. xx. 5 take effect in 
bis case, and the sins of his forefather! 
be remembered by God, and visited upon 
him. And let not the sin of his mother be 
blotted out ; i.e. erased from God's remem- 
brance. Let it also be visited on him, as 
Jezehel's was on her children. 

Ver. 15. — Let them be before the Lord 
continually; i.e. let these sins be present 
to the mind of God constantly, that he may 
visit for them constantly, even to the bitter 
end; and so may cut off the memory of 
them (i.e. of the original sinners) from the 
earth (comp. ver. 13). 

Vers. 16 — 20. — ^A portraiture of the wicked 
man, who was David's chief adversary at 
the time, is now given, in explanation, and 
perhaps in justification, of the numerous 
and severe anathemas. He was merciless 
(ver. 16), a persecutor of the poor (ver. 16), 
given to cursing (vers. 17, 18), aud one who 
spoke evil against the innocent (ver. 20). 

Ver. 16. — Because that he remembered 
not to show mercy. Saul certainly was a 
persecutor of this kind —implacable ; nne 
whom compassion never touched ; who, after 
he had once become David's enemy, never 
under any circumstances sliowed him mercy. 
But otherwise the description scarcely seems 
to point to Saul. But persecuted the poor 
and needy man (see 1 Sam. xviii. 10: xix. 
1, 10, 11; XX. 31; xxiii. 8, 14, 25; xxiv. 2; 
xxvi. 2 — 20 ; xxvii. 1, etc.). That he might 
even slay the broken in heart; literally, 
and the broken in heart (or, yea, the broken 
in heart) to tlay him. It was certainly Saul's 
object to slay David (1 Sam. xviii, 11 ; xix. 
1, 10; XX, 1, etc.). It was probably also 
Ahithophel's (2 Sam, xvii. 2), 

Ver. 17. — ^As he loved cursing, so let it 
oome unto him ; rather, so it came upon him 
(Revised Version), or so it shall ernne upon 
him (LXX., Cheyne). The one of David's 
enemies who "loved cursing" most was 
Shimei (2 Sam. xvi. 5 — 12). As he de- 
lighted notin blessing, solet it befarfromhim; 
rather, so it was, or su it will be, far from him. 

Ver. 18. — As he clothed himself with 
cursing like as with his garment (comp. Pss. 
X. 7 ; lix. 12 ; Ixii. 4). Extreme malevolence 
vents itself in curses, which tend to become 
frequent, and, so to speak, habitual. So let 
it oome ; rather, so it camv, or so it will come. 
Into his bowels like water. Dr. Kay sees 
here an allusion to the " water of cursing" 
which was drunk by the woman whose 
husband taxed her with unfaithfulness 
(Numb. V. 22) ; aud so also HengstenberR. 
But this is doubtful. Perhaps the mere 
penetrative powtn of waier is alluded to. 



22 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. oix. 1 — 3L 



See the next clauBe. And like oil into his 
bones. The oil, wherewith it was usual to 
anoint the frame, was bclieveil to penetrate, 
not only into the tissnes, but into the very 
bonf 8 and marrow. 

Yer: 19. — Let it be nnto him as the 
garment which covereth him. Let it cling 
to liim both outwarcily and inwardly — 
inwardly, as the penetrating oil ; outwardly, 
as the everyday dress. And for a girdle 
vherewith he is girded continnally. The 
" girdle " or " waistcloth " vi as even more 
inseparable from the wearer than his beged, 
his " cloak " or " wrap." 

Ver. 20.— Let this be the reward of mine 
adversaries from the Lord ; rather, thi> ie 
the reward, or the ieage». This is what their 
conduct lias earned, and what they have 
received, or assuredly will receive. And of 
them that speak evil against my sonl (see 
above, ver. 2). 

Vers. 21 — 29. — The psalmist now turns 
to God in prolonged prayer, setting forth 
his needs (vers. 22 — 25), and entreating for 
help (ver. 26), deliverance (ver. 21), blessing 
(ver. 28), and triumph over his enemies 
(ver. 29). 

Ver. 21. — But do thou for me; or, "deal 
thou with me" (see the Revised Version). 
God the Lord; literally, Jelumah the Lord, 
as in Fss. Ixviii. 20 ; cxl. 7 ; cxli. 8 ; Hab. iii. 
19. "Box thy Name's sake ; i.e. suitably to thy 
Name — according to thy historically mani- 
fe.'-tcd attribute!. Because thy mercy is 
good, deliver thou me. A variant echo of 
the precedins clause (comp. Ps. Ixix. 16). 

Ver. 22. — ^For I am poor and needy (comp. 
ver. 16). David was "poor and needy" 
both when hunted upon the mountains by 
Saul, and wlien forced to flee from Absalom. 
And my heart is wounded within me. 
The wound to David's heart was, on the 
former occasion, from the maMgnity of Saul; 
on the latter, especially from ihe desertion of 
his "own familiar friend whom he trusted." 

Ver. 23. — I am gone like the shadow when 
it declineth; rather, lilte a shadow (comp. 
Ps. ciL 11). When sliadows " decline," they 
are just about tn cease and disappear. I 
am tossed up and down as the loonst ; or, 
"I am carried away" — swept off, t.«., or 
just ready to be swept off^ from the face of 
the earth (see Exod. x. 19; Joel ii. 20; 
Nab. iii. 17). 

Ver. 24. — Uy Icnees are weak through 
fasting. I have brought myself down to 
extreme weakness by penitential fasting for 
my sins (comp. Pss. xxxv. 13; Ixix. 10). 
And my flesh faileth of fatness ; literally, of 
oil. In my state of mourning and penitence I 
have abstained fiom anointing myself (2 Sam. 
xiT.2),whiab has still further weakened me. 



Ver. 2.5. — I became (rather, am htcome) 
also a reproach nnto them; t.e. to my enemies. 
I am an object of their reproach and scorn. 
When they looked upon me they shaked 
their heads. In derision (comp. Pss. xxii. 
7; xliv. 14; Matt, xxvii. 39). 

Ver. 26. — Help me, Lord my God. 
Connect with ver. 21. save me according 
to thy mercy; t.e. "as thou art wont to 
show mercy, show mercy now to me." 

Ver. 27. — That they may know that this 
is thy hand (comp. Ps. lix. 13) " Deliver 
me," prays the psalmist, "in some signal 
way, BO that my enemies may be forced to 
recognize thy hand in my deliverance, and 
to confess that thon. Lord, hast done it." 

Ver. 28.— Let them curse, hut bless thon; 
i.e. "Let them curse, if they will. What 
matters it ? Provided only that thou 
blessest." When they arise. When they 
attempt to put their malevolent designs in 
act. Let them be ashamed ; or, " they shall 
be ashamed" (Eevised Version); ».e. they 
shall fail so utterly, that they shall be 
covered with shame. But let thy servant 
rejoice ; rather, hut thy servant shall rejoice, 
"Thy servant" is the psalmist himself 
(comp. Pb. Ixix. 17). He will rejoice at 
their failure, which secures his safety. 

Ver. 29. — Let mine adversaries be clothed 
with shame ; rather, my adversaries shaU be 
clothed with shame. " The prayer is now, 
in conclusion, changed into a confident 
expectation" (Dean J<ihnsoii). And let 
them (rather, and shall) cover themselyes 
with their own confusion, as with a mantle 
(comp. ver. 18). Insteail of the " cursing " 
with which tlie wirkeil lidi^jhted to clothe 
themselves, they si i all be forced to wear 
a covering of shame and confusion of face. 

Vers. 30, 31.— The psalm terminates with 
a short burst of praise, the writer f eling 
assured that hie prayer is granted, and that 
he will shortly triumph over his enemies. 

Ver. 30.— I will greatly praiso the Lord 
with my mouth. The expressinn " greatly 
praise" does not occur elsewhere in the 
Psalms. It is indicative of an unusnally 
strong feeling of thankfulness. Yea, I will 
praise him among the multitude ; i.e. in the 
congregation. 

Ver. 31.— For he shall stand at the light 
hand of the poor. God will always come to 
the assistance of the poor and ueedy, when 
unrighteous men oppress them, and will 
give them help and deliverance. To save 
him from those that condemn his sonl. The 
salvation is not always from the deatli of 
the body, or there conld have been no 
martyrs; but in rll cases -t is a deliverance 
of thesoaL 



PS. oix. 1—31.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 23 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vera. 1 — 31. — Explanation, ioaming, eneowragement. This psalm of David con- 
tains— 

I. An explanation to be soitoht. How came these strong imprecations to be 
used by the servant of the Lord ? Are they worthy to find a place in the pages of 
Holy Scripture? Two things, at least, have to be considered in defence of them. 
1. Bavid identifies his own cause with that of GK)d, and therefore his own enemies 
with God's. He is animated by the spirit which breathes in the words, " Do not I hate 
them that hate thee ? . . . I bate them with perfect hatred : I count them mine enemies " 
(Ps. cxxxix. 21, 22). So that his bitterness is not so much personal as public ; it is 
moral indignation rather than individual and personal resentment. He speaks as one 
who feels tiiat what is said and done against himself is aimed at the cause of Jehovah ; 
there is more of righteousness than rancour in his soul. But if, as maybe fairly urged, 
this does not provide a full explanation, it must be further considered : 2. That David 
could indulge wishes and take action against his enemies which are impossible to us, 
without injury to his conscience. He had not sat at the feet of Jesus Christ. He had 
not read, " Te have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt . . . hate thine enemy. 
But I say unto you, Love your enemies," etc. (Matt. v. 43). He felt that he was well 
within the limits of the Law, if indeed he was not eagerly and dutifully championing 
the cause of God and of righteousness, by uttering these maledictions. 

II. A WARNING TO BE HEEDED. It did not need that David should imprecate thus 
in order that his adversaries should be humbled. 1. Evil would certainly overtake 
them. They were guilty of unprovoked assault (see vers. 4, 5) ; they were utterly 
heartless in their course of cruelty (see ver. 16) ; they would inevitably meet with the 
condemnation of a righteous God, and with the visible and tangible tokens of his 
displeasure. All sin has to pay its penalty sooner or later ; and it is certain that they 
who wantonly injure the people of God, and mercilessly afflict the poor and the unbe- 
ftiended, will have to meet their doom (Ps. xxxiii. 16). 2. The penalty which the 
wicked have to pay answers closely to the character of their crimes (vers. 17 — 19). He 
that curses others will himself be cursed of man, as well as condemned of God. " With 
what measure ye mete," etc. The hard-hearted and close-fisted will have no pity 
shown them in their hour of need. He that taketh the sword may expect to perish by 
the sword. To none are we so apt to be uncharitable as to those who have no charity 
in their hearts towards others. Every one is inclined to excuse cruelty when it is 
shown to the cruel. Whatsoever we sow, that shall we reap. 

III. An example to be followed. Not, indeed, in these imprecations ; we have 
not so learned Christ ; we have been taught the much more excellent way of pitying 
those who are wrong (even when they have wronged us), and of seeking to turn their 
hearts, that they may be saved from the consequences of their own sins. But : 1. In 
maintaining innocency in the midst of transgression. The psalmist had the peace- 
bringing consciousness that the wrongs inflicted on him had not been provoked by him ; 
his hands were clean. In the darkest' hour of our distress it is a priceless consolation 
that we have preserved our own integrity, that nothing has left a stain upon our souL 
" Poor and needy, and wounded in heart," we may be (ver. 22), but we are true and 
pure, and our heart is right with God. 2. In looking to God for Divine succour (vera. 
1, 4, 26 — 28). We, too, must " give ourselves to prayer," and look to the Strong for 
strength. Let who will curse us, if Gtod bless us we shall be blessed indeed. 3. In a 
joyful assurance that all will be well at last (vers. 30, 31). Whatever the situation 
now, the future will show a Divine Redeemer at our right hand, rescuing and 
exalting ua. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1 — 31. — The dreadful psalm. It is by no means easy to imagine the whole 
nation of Israel singing such dreadful imprecations as those contained in vers. 6 — 19. 
" Thousands of God's people," says Mr. Spurgeon, " are perplexed by it." Not a few 
would like to be rid of it altogether. KoA the explanation given by many of the 



24 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oix. 1— 31. 

old commentators, that these fearful curses are those of the Lord Jesus Christ on 
Judas, who betrayed him, has only made the diflSculties connected with this psalm 
eyer so much worse. What is to be said ? The solution we have to offer is that given 
by a learned theological writer, Mr. J. Hammond; and it is this — that these frightful 
cursings are not David's at all, but Shimei's (see 2 Sam. ztL). They are what he 
heaped upon David, not David upon him. For — 

I. SncH cnBSiNG is unlike David. No doubt David was capable of saying and 
doing terrible things. Still, such brutal malignity, such diabolic depths of cruelty, M 
are reached in these cursings, are not what David's life, even where the worst has been 
said of it, would lead us to expect. He was not himself, though passionate, a 
vindictive man. And if David's dying injunctions concerning Joab and Shimei be 
cited, we venture to say that, deplorable as they were, they are mildness and meek- 
ness itself compared with what we find here. They do not take in the parents and 
innocent children, nor stretch into the far future, as these delight to do; they are 
limited to the individual criminal and to the present life. But this cannot be said of 
the curses of this psalm. No, they are not like David ; we do not believe they could 
have come from him. 

n. And they abb ihconsistent with the fsalu irsELr when taken nf itb 
KKTIBETT. There are three plainly marked divisions in the psalm. The first, vers. 
1 — 6; the second, containing these imprecations, vers. 6 — 19; and the third, ver._20 
to the end. Now, nothing could be in greater contrast than the central, the cursing 
portion, and that which both precedes and follows. The first and last sections tell of 
" adversaries," many of them ; but the central one points to one solitary individual : 
" Let him be condemned ; " " Se loved cursing," etc And not in form only, but how 
utterly different in spirit I See the frequent references to God in the first and last 
sections ; but they are scarcely to be found in the central one. In ver. 4, in the first 
section, David meekly says, " I give myself unto prayer ; " which assuredly be did not, 
but to something very different, if vers. — 19 are the utterances of hi$ mind. Is it 
likely that all at once, as by a leap, he would pass from the spirit of meek devoutness 
and lowly trust in God, to the very spirit of hell, which breathes and bums in vers. 
6 — 19 ? And if such were his spirit, would he at ver. 20 suddenly return to the bitter 
spirit of the beginning of this psalm ? We think not. 

UL Theib authobship can be settled onlt bt the CONTEXT, and that is in 
favour of the view we have maintained. Note: 1. That in Hebrew there are no 
quotation marks. Such contrivances as inverted commas and the like, to make clear 
when the words of another are given, were unknown to Hebrew writers. You can tell 
only by the context and the general sense when such quotations occur. Hence : 2. 
Our translators continually add some word or words to mark them. (Of. Pss. ii. 2 ; 
iiiL 7 ; xxvii. 8 ; xli. 8 ; lix. 7 ; cv. 15 ; cxxxvii. 3, and many more.) 3. And there 
are numbers of passages where such signs should be given but are not : e.g. Pss. ii. 6 ; xiv. 
4 (XX. and xxi. (liturgical psalms); xxii. 22;' xxxix. 4; and the writer I am indebted 
to for these references says, " I have counted a score of passages in Perowne's transla- 
ticoi of the Psalms where he employs either the one or the other." And then : 4. 77te 
reproaches of enemies are cited frequently : e.g. Pss. x. 6 ; xxii. 8 ; xxxv. 21, etc. Now, 
may we not ask, that seeing the Hebrew has no quotation marks, and that the context 
•nly can decide when they should be inserted, could any context more plainly indicate 
that these vers. 6 — 19 form an instance in which our translators should, as they have 
(tone elsewhere, have given such signs ? 

rV. In David's own histobt we have ample explanation of this psalu, and 
confirmation of the view we have maintained. The correspondencies between the 
history and the psalm are clear, constant, and minute, as well as obvious. The history 
i* in 2 Sam. xvi. Take the vers. 1 — 5, and what could more faithfully depict the 
condition, the spirit, and the enemy of David at the time of Absalom's revolt, and 
when he was cursed by Shimei ? And if, as we believe we should, we introduce the 
word " saying " after ver. 6, then do we not get a vivid representation of the curses that 
Shimei heaped upon him? And the imprecations themselves are juat those that would 
btTe been spoken. They indicate the fact that he against whom they were directed 
lid<l some great o£Sce ; ver. 8 shows this. Ver. 14 points to facts told of in the Book 
•( Bttth. David's ancestors were Israelites, but they had committed the great lin of 



fs. MX. 1— 31.J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



marrying Moabitish women. This was " the iniquity of his fatherg." Then yer. 16, 
which at first sight seems not to coirespond with David's character, finds its warrant 
in that dark page of his history when he slew Uriah, having first taken from him his 
wife. Nathan distinctly charged him with having " no pity." What wonder that the 
foul-mouthed Shimei should exaggerate and enlarge this with the charge which ver. 16 
contains? But in the closing section of the psalm how exact the correspondences are 
with the moral history I The earnest pleading of ver. 21 seems but the echo of the 
words in the history, " It may be that the Lord will look upon mine afiliction, and 
that the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day " (2 Sam. ivi. 12). Thus, 
then, from first to last the psalm " fits into the folds of the narrative of David's flight ; 
the key turns without the slightest strain in the wards of the lock," and the whole of 
these correspondences go to show that the impious speeches in vers. 6 — 18 are not those 
of David against Shimei, but his and others against David. 

V. But, it will be said, St. Peter dispbovbs all that has been maintained. 
And doubtless the common interpretation has been upheld by his words in Acts i. 16. 
But "the Scripture" (not "this" Scripture, see Revised Version) which "it was 
needful should be fulfilled ' is not that in Pss. Ixix. 25 and cix. 8, but that in Ps. xlL 9 
(see reference), which is plainly concerning Judas ; and the quotations further down 
in ver. 20 are not concerning Judas, but are simply applied as apposite to him — just as 
we constantly quote texts and sentences when they suit any particular case, without 
any idea that they were designed specially for such case. And even if this be 
questioned, and it be said, " the quotations do refer to Judas," it does not follow that 
David actually spoke the words. The psalm was his, and as a whole it is assigned to 
him — the part which belonged to his enemy, as well as those bitter portions which 
undoubtedly belonged to him. But we do not believe that they do refer to Judas in 
any other way than that which we have said ; for if so, then the dreadful denunciations 
upon him must be attributed to our Lord Jesus Christ I But that he who when on the 
cross prayed for his murderers, " Father, forgive them," etc., should utter such cursings 
as these, is altogether and horribly unbelievable. 

VI. And the inteepeetation is well buppobted. It is that of many Jewish 
rabbis, of Mendelssohn, of Kennicott, Lowth, etc. (see Mr. Hammond's article) ; and, 
above all, it must commend itself to the heart and conscience of those who love Ck)d'i 
Word, and desire that others should love it too. The view we have combated lays a 
burden grievous to be borne on those who believe that in the Scriptures " holy men of 
old spake as they were moved by the Holy Glhost." And this burden we have thus 
tried somewhat to relieve. — S. 0. 

Ver. 31. — TheSelptrofthepoot. I. The foob. Who are these? Not alone those 
that are poor in this world's fiood, for such may often be rich in heavenly wealth. 
But the poor are those of whom Christ says, " Blessed are the poor in spirit " (Matt. v.). 
Nor is it those only who are spiritually poor, for many such, like the people of 
Laodicea, do not think themselves poor, but the reverse. But those of whom we speak 
know and feel and confess themselves to be poor. They disclaim all merit, goodness, 
righteous I, ess, of their own. Their only hope is in Christ. 

II. Those who condemn them. 1. There is the Law, the strength of sin. 2. Their 
own indwelling sin and its deeds. 3. Their miserable unbelief. 4. Those whom, ere 
they were saved, they led astray. 5. Those whom, since then, they have failed to pray 
for and warn as they should. All these have just accusations to bring ; but there are 
others which are unjust. 

III. The Lord who helps them. " He shall stand at his right hand to save him.*" 
As a friend, close at hand, full of love and power through his sacrifice and his 
Spirit— S. 0. 

Ver. 4. — Complaining to God. " I am for prayer." " I find refuge in prayer, com- 
mitting myself and my cause unto thee." The point of the psalm which seems to be 
missed is tiiis — the psalmist, deeply moved in his feeling by the treacherous wrong done 
to him, nevertheless does not express his feeling to hia fellow-men, nor act revengefully 
toward his enemies, but lets out his heart to God, speaking quite freely to him all that 
he thought and felt. It may, indeed, be said that the psalmist should not have felt 



26 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. oix. 1—31. 

■o bitterly under any provocation. But we can clearly see that, if he did feel thus, he 
did what was altogether the wisest and most hopeful thing, when he spoke his bad 
feelings to God rather than to men. It is generally agreed that David was the author 
of the psalm, and that the treachery and wickedness of some individual is the cause 
of David's extreme anger and distress. Doeg, Gush, Shimei, and Ahithophel have been 
suggested. The treachery of his trusted triend Ahithophel perhaps affected David 
more than any other wrong done to him. But Shimei was brutal in his emnity. The 
expressions David uses must be judged in the light of his age. 

I. Acting in vindication of self may bb wrong. And acting includes speech 
and deed. In David's case — if the association is the rebellion of Absalom — he could 
not act; he was helpless to defend himself. But if he had been able, it was clearly 
wiser not to attempt such defence, 'ihure are many forms of trouble to which men 
are subject which they must leave alone. Attempted vindications only make matters 
worse. Men often make grave mistakes through over-anxiety about self-vindication ; 
and their own heat of feeling, and the public prejudice excited, make the methods of 
vindication imprudent, and the results ineffective. "Avenge not yourselves." On 
David's side it should be urged that he did not attempt to avenge himself. 

II. Appealing to God for vindication is always eight. And he who goes 
to God may be, and should be, genuine with God ; and if he does fuel strongly, he should 
Bay what he feels. Illustrate by the way in which a mother encourages her boy to 
tell everything to her when he is in a passion. The boy tells how he hates, and 
wishes evil done to, the person who has injured him. The mother does not misunder- 
stand, and her work is to get the hoy soothed and calmed. We may freely speak out 
our bad feelings to our Father-Gud. That very unreserve he uses to bring us to our 
right minds. We may show how wrongly we feel by what we say to God, as David 
did ; but the saying it to God is certainly right. Take your very anger to God in 
prayer. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 6. — Committing our enemies to the judgment of Ood. It should be borne in 
mind that David was not a merely private person, and that he does not write this 
psalm as a private person. He was a king, placed in an ofBcial position, responsible 
to his people for the due punishment of all wrong-doers. And the treachery and 
wickedness of which he complains was committed again.st him as king. (This is 
clearly seen if the association of the psalm be with either Shimei or Ahithophel.) And 
there is another thing. David was not an independent king. He was the anointed of 
Jehovah — the true king. When David had a case of unusual difficulty, one in which 
personal feeling was likely unduly to influence him, every way the wisest thing for 
him to do was to refer the matter to the supreme Sovereign, and let him decide. The 
psalm is to be regarded as the appeal of a vicegerent to his superior. This view 
relieves the psalm of its burden, because we can see that the superior will only take 
the representations of his subirdinate into due consideration. He will be sure not to 
be unduly influenced by them. He will act on the eternal principles of righteousness. 

I. BvBET MAN HAS A powEB TO PUNISH. Presently David would have been able 
to punish these men of whom he complains. When a man wrongs us we can punish 

(1) by slighting him ; (2) by speaking of him so as to take away his character ; (3) by 
injuring him in his circumstances. It is a fatal power — one of the most dangerous 
trusts a man has. Man seldom uses it well. See the uncertainty, and frequent 
injustice, of magistrates' decisions. Feeling guides rather than judgment. Custtm 
tends to exaggerate sins, and so exaggerate judgments. As in the case of poaohin'r. 
The Christian spirit puts strict limitation on the desire to punish. 

II. EvEEY MAN SHOULD LEAVE GoD TO PUNISH. That is what David does. 
And that is the good side of the psalm. True, he seems to prescribe what God onght 
to do, but that we may put down to the intensity of his feeling. He leaves God to 
punish both his own enemies and the enemies of the kingdom. That is precisely 
what we ought to do always. And we may be quite sure (1) that God will punish ; 

(2) will punish justly ; (3) will punish efficiently ; (4) will punish meicifully ; (5) will 
vindicate us by the punishment. — B. T. 

Van. 0, 10. — The vicariovs feature in judgments, " Let his children be orphans. 



PS. cix. 1— 31.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 27 

and his wife a widow.*" There are few Bihie difficulties more perplexing than that 
which is created by the fact, that a man's punishments are recognized as righteously 
aflecting, not himself only, but also his children, and those dependent on him. We 
naturally resist tnis, and say, " Every man ought to bear his own burden," and a man's 
punishmect should bb limited to himself. It is not so: it never has been so; it ncTer 
can be so^ because men are so closely bound together, and related, that if " one member 
suffers, ail the membeis suiftii with it." While this has a trying side, involving a lad 
extension of suffering, we should never forget that it has also a bright side, involTing 
a most glorious extension of our privileges and pleasures. The vicarious feature in 
lif<; is the sweet secret of thie« parts of its blessedness. 

L ViOABiouB BCFFEBiKO IS THE UNIVEB3AL FACT OF LIFK. Diseased pwents 
involve their children in disease. Sinful parents convey evil tendencies to their 
children. Unthrifty patents bring their children into misery. Unfortunate parents 
lead all belonging to them into misfortune. So unworthy kings bring woe on all their 
people. The consequences of wrong-doing never can be circumscribed. Every man 
that lives is the victim of some vicarious disability. However we may explain it, we 
must take the principle into account. 

II. YioABiona suffebino is taken up, anv used, bt beuqioh. It is recognized 
in the Divine pimishment of the first act of self-will ; and in the first act of murder. 
Cain's posterity suffer for Cain's sin. It is declared as a principle in connection with 
the Decalogue (Exod. xx. 6). It Is illustrated in the judgments on Eorah and 
Datban and Achan ; and also in the family of King Saul. It is seen on its brighter 
side in the Christian baptism of a man and hit household ; as see Acts xvL 31 — 33. 

in. VlOABIOnS BUFFEBnra is FLAOED DNDEB STBIOT CbBIBTIAN UMrrATIOKB. It 

Is seen to concern only physical and temporal disabilities. And the Christian role o( 
life ever tends to limit the conveyance of bodily evils. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 17. — Suffering that which we make others suffer. " As he loved cursing, so let 
It come to him." We have a popular sentence which illustrates. When a man suffers 
what he planned to make others suffer, he is said to be " hoist with his own petard ; " 
and human nature, in every age, ie specially pleased with cases of retributive justice, 
such as that of Haman, who was hanged on the gallows which he had prepared for 
Mordecai. "The psalmist felt that he wai> praying in accordance with the Divine 
will, when he prayed that the ungodly might fall into their own nets together, while 
he ever eiicaped them. So again with his prayer that the mischief of their own lipi 
might fall upon the heads of them that compassed him about. For it was a matter 
at once of faith and of experience with the psalmist, that the evil-deviser and evil-doer, 
travailing with mischief, conceiving sorrow, and bringing forth ungodliness, who had 
graven and digged up a pit, was apt to fall himself into the destruction he made for 
other. ' For his travail shall come upon his own head, and bis wickedness shall fall on 
hie own pate.' " 

I. A iian's pukibhmeht dobs OFTEN COMB IN THIS WAT. See the punishment of 
those who arranged the den of lions for Daniel, " Owen Felthain delights to recall, 
irom the stores of ancient and mediaeval story, how Bagoae^ s Peiefan nobleman, having 
poisoned Artaxerxes and Artamenes, was detected by Darius, and forced to drink 
poisoE himself J hew Diomedes, for the beset? he had feci on human flesh, was by 
Hercules made food; and how Pope Alex«iidei VI., having designed ihe poisoning of 
his friend Cardinal Adrian, by his cup-bearei'K mistake of the bottle, took the draught 
himself, and so died by the same engine which, he himseli had appointed to kill 
another." Many other illnstrationa may be fcund. 

II. StBCNO IHPBESSIONS of a man's sin AJB3 MADE BY THIS FOBM OF PUNIBH- 

KENT. There is something striking and arresting in it; it takes public attention. 
There is often the element of humour ii» such judgments. But a sin which would 
otherwise have been passed over, is shown up in all its baseness when the wrong-doer 
suffers his own designed wrong. He feels the wrong ; and others see it. — B. T. 

Vers. 30, 31. — l%e power of prayer to change our moods. There is clearly a different 
tone in the closing portion of this psalm. It may not be so evident as we should like 
It to have been, but it is there. The storm of angry feeling dies down, and we only 



28 



THE BOOK OB" PSALMS. 



[ps. ox. 1 — 1 



hear mutterings after the loud thunder-peals. There is gradually more earnest praj'er 
for himself, less concern about his enemy, and a fuller coaSdence that God will answer 
his prayer, and, in his own wise way, bless the good and shame the evil. It is hia 
praying on that has wrought this change of mood. He has prayed himself into • 
better mind, by the very saying out so freely all the bitter things he had thought 
and felt. 

I. Prayeb ohanoes our moodb bt EXBAUSTiMa THE BAD HOODS. Here is a most 
lingular thing. Saying out all our bad feelings to a fellow-man would only intensify 
the badness. We should excite ourselves even to plan revengeful things. But if we 
say out all our bad feelings to God, we find they get exhausted. Somehow, in hii 
presence, we cannot keep them up. We soon come to the end, and the very Divine 
silence seems to be waiting until we have said it all; and presently we feel as if there 
was nothing more we could say. Another mood must come, as tears come when 
passion has expended itself. So prayer helps by finding us the opportunity for safely 
saying out all that is in our hearts. 

II. Pbayeb helps 17S BT ENCouBAaiNS NEW AND BETTEB MOODS. Gradually, as 
we pray on, the sense of God's presence makes us feel kinder. We cease to want our 
enemy punished, we want ourselves vindicated ; and then presently we feel as if we 
could just leave our enemy in the hands of God. The Judge of all the earth will 
•urely do the right. At last we find ourselves filled with pity for them ; it comes to 
us, as we pray, that it is far sadder to be a wrong-doer than to be a wronged one ; the 
injurer is much more to be pitied than the injured. So mood after mood changing for 
the better, we come at last to the Christian mood, and do as the Lord Jesus did, and 
as St. Stephen did — pray for our enemies. In all the strain-times of life we may prove 
the soothing, correcting, and comforting power of prayer. — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 31. — ^This is a psalm of the most awfid imprecations, in which the writer 
unrestrainedly pours forth the fiercest hatred of his enemy, and pleads with Ck)d to 
load him with the most dreadfiil curses. He justifies his vindictiye spirit by pleading 
that his enemy had fought against him without a cause ; had rewarded his good with 
evil, and his love with hatred. He says he will give himself unto prayer ; but the 
words which follow breathe a spirit such as we wonder that a man dare utter before 
God — the God of mercy. The best commentary on the whole psalm would be » sermob 
on Matt. V. 43 — 16, and another on Bom. zii. 17 — 21. — & 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OX. 



AoooBDiNO to the recent criticism, which 
calls itself "advanced," this psalm is the 
composition of an unknown prophet, ad- 
dressed to iiis earthly sovereign, communi- 
cating to him certain Divine utterances, or 
oracles (vers. 1, 5), of great weight and 
strangeness, and promising him complete 
victory over all his enemies. The king is 
snpposed by some to be David ; by others, 
a Davidic monarch; by others, again, a 
Maccabee prince or king. According to its 
" title," it is " a Psalm of David ; " according 
to our Lord's comment upon it (Matt. xxii. 
43—45; Markxii.35— 37; Luke xx. 4 1 -44), 
it is an address of David to the Messiah ; 
according to every Christian commentator 
fur filteen centuries, it is Messianic and 
Davidic. Even Professor Oheyne, who in- 



clines so strongly to the sceptical school, 
grants that " it may perhaps refer to the 
ideal or Messianic King himself," though 
he thinks it "equally possible to explain 
it of some historical ruler." The style 
and language are generally allowed to be 
Davidic, and many, even of the " advanced " 
critics, refer the composition to his time. 
Ewald suggested that Gad or Nathan might 
have been the author. Recently, Canon 
Gore has embraced the sceptical view, and 
has suggested that our Lord either did not 
know who was the author, or did not mean 
to touch the question of the authorship 
('Bampton Lectures,' pp. 196 — 200). But 
the expressions, " David calli th him Lord," 
" David himself saith in the Book of 
Psalms, The Lord said unto my Lord," 
are difficult to explain away. 
There seem to bo no sufficient grounds 



PS. ox. 1 — 7,] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



29 



for rejecting the traditional views of tlie 
authorship and the interpretation. The 
psalm belongs to the same class as Ps. ii. 
It is wholly Messianic. David has had 
revelations made to him concerning the 
kingdom, the priesthood, and the ultimate 
victory of the Messiah over the entire power 
of evil. In a grand burst of song, rough 
and rugged, no doubt, but full of energy 
and genius, he addresses Messiah, and sets 
forth his praise and glory, the mighty ofiSoes 
which he holds, and the wonderful triumph 
which awaits him. 

Metrically, tlie psalm consists of two 
stanzas — one of three, and the other of four 
verses (vers. 1 — 3, 4 — 7). 

Yer. 1. — ^Ihe Lord said unto my Lord. 
Jehovah said unto him who is my Lord and 
Master, i.e. to Messiah, who is my liege 
Lord, although about to be, in some myste- 
rious way, my descendant Sit thou at my 
right band. An exaltation too high for any 
merely human personage (comp. Acts ii. 33; 
vii 56; Heb. 1. 3). Vntil I make thine 
•nemies thy footstool. To place the foot 
upon the neck or body of defeated enemies 
was a common practioe of Oriental con- 
querors. 

Yer. 2. — The Lord shall send the rod of 
thy strength out of Zion. " The rod of thy 
strength," or " thy strong sceptre," is the 
■ame thing as "thy ruling power" (see 
Jer. zlviii. 17; Ezek. zix. 11). The ruling 
power of Messiah was to go tbrth from 
Jerusalem (Acts i. 4 — 8; ii. 1 — 4). Bale 
thou in the midst of thine enemies. Ac- 
cording to Professor Cheyne, these are the 
words of Jehovah — a continuation of tlie 
address in ver. 1 ; but they are more gene- 
rally regarded as the words of tlie writer 
ot the psalm, t'.e., according to our exegesis, 
of David. He calls on the Messiah to take 
his power and reign. 

Yer. 3. — Thy people shall be willing in the 
day of thy power. In the full suuse of the 
word, Messiah can only rule over " willing " 
hearts. In the day of his power, his people 
will offer themselves gladly to be his sol- 
diers and servants, and flock to liis banner, 
as the Israelites to ttiat of Deborah and 
Barak, when "tlie people willingly offered 
themselves" (Judg. v. 2, 9; comp. Isa. 
xlix. 18—23; Ix. 1—5; Ixvi. 19— 23). In 
the beanties of holiness. At once warriors 
and saints, meet for the service of One who 
was at once Priest (ver. 4) and King. From 
the womb of the morning thou hast the dew 
of thy youth. This is the division of the 
clauses now generally adopted; but the 
intention of this List clause is very doubtful. 
Some understand it of Messiah himself, and 



explain, "As the dew of the morning, 
abundant, refreshing, spreading far and 
wide, miraculous, so is the might of thy 
perpetual youth" (' Speaker's Commentary,' 
vol. iv. p. 428); others, and the larger 
number, interpret it of Messiah's army, 
"As dew out of the early morning dawn, 
descending by a silent, mysterious birth 
from the star-lit heaven, so comes to Messiah 
his mighty host of followers " (comp, Isa. 
ixvi. 19). 

Yer. 4. — The Lord hath sworn, and he will 
not repent. " A fresh revelation " (Cheyne). 
David, admitted int > the councils of the 
Most High, has been made aware that the 
Messiah is, by God's decree, to be both King 
and Priest. God has "sworn" this, and 
will certainly not draw back from his oath. 
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of 
Melchizedek, Not, like ordinary priests, a 
prit'st for a few years, or for a lifetime, but 
a priest for ever and ever (ahiyh') — seeing 
"he ever liveth to make intercession for 
us" (Heb, vii. 25). And a priest "after the 
order of Melchizedek." Not, that is, after 
the order of Aaron, who was a priest and 
nothing more, but after that of Melchizedek, 
the older priesthood, which combined the 
ofSces of priest and king (see Heb. v. 6 — 10; 
vii. 1—10, 20— 28> 

Yer. 5.— The Lord at thy right hand shall 
strike through kings in the day of his 
wrath. " Adouai" here is certainly Jehovah 
(Cheyne). He stands at Messiah's right 
hand (oomp. Pss. xvi 8 ; cxxi. 5) to protect 
and defend him, and give him victory in 
the battle. Yer. 5 carries on the descrip- 
tion of Messiah's triumph begun in ver. 3. 
The kings to be "struck through" are 
those that resist the progress of the gospel — 
Herod Agrippa, Galerius, Julian, and the 
like. 

Yer. 6. — He shall judge among the 
heathen; t.e. execute the royal office not 
only over Israel, but over the nations of 
the earth generally (compi Pss. vii. 9 ; ix. 9 ; 
xcvi 10, etc). He shall fill the places with 
the dead bodies ; rather, he thall fill the 
earth with dead bodies; ie, with the corpses 
of those whom he has slain while executing 
judgment. He shall wound the heads over 
many countries. Thus translated, the 
clause merely repeats ver. 5. Perhaps a 
better rendering is that of Dr. Kay, " He 
shall smite him that is head over the wide 
earth" — either Satan or "the central power 
of the whole confederacy of evil." 

Yer. 7. — He shall drink of the brook in 
the way. Primarily, the action described 
is that of pausing in the pursuit of enemies 
to refresh oue'^ self with a draught ot water 
from a brook by the wayside ; but, if we 
interpret the passage of the Messiah, we 
must understand the refreshing draughts 



30 



TUE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. ox. 1—7. 



which he ever draws from the well-spring 
of truth and righteousness as he advances 
on his career of victory. Therefore (i.e. 
because of these draughts) he shall lift np 
the head. Ele shall never faint nor be 
wear; (Isa. xL 28), but shall continiie tha 



pnrsnit of his enemies nniemittingly, m 

Bishop Perowne says, "with renewed 
ardour, with head erect and kindling eye," 
ne^er resting until at length aU things ihall 
have been put in «abjeotioii uud-a hia leet 
(Heb. it 8> 



H0MILBTI03. 

Vera. 1 — 7. — The victorious King. New Testamant paferesicea !e»v» no dotibt as to the 
Messianic character of this psalm. " The ima^e of » wamOT destffoying his foes may 
seem a strange representation of the establishmeat upon aarth of Ohkst's spiritual 
dominion. But David described Messiah's Tictory over his snamies b/ images familiar 
to him as a warrior ; so Ezekiel drew his images ant of ibe fonns of tka Assyrian 
world." Here, in prophetic vision, we see Christ ©w LokI— 

I. HoLDmo THE HOST EXALTED STATION. He Is at the right hsjA of Gh>d (ver. 1). 
This is he who is " highly exalted ; " who has " sat dowa at the right hand of God ; * 
who receives the adoration of the heavenly host along wi& '* him tbaii sitteth on the 
throne"(Rev. V. 13). 

II. WiBLDiNO THB HI3HE8T AUTHOBiTT. (Ver 2.) He is io Bway the aceptre, to 
receive the commission, " Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies." 

III. Exerting iRBESisTiBLE POWER. (Yer. 2.) His is "the rod of strength," and "ths 
Lord at his right hand shall strike through kings," etc. (ver. 6). Who shall measure 
the power of Christ to-day ? What forces are there in the world that are cot Christian 
in their origin and in their character? The name of Christ, the truth ».ud principles 
of Christ, the spirit of Christ, — this is leavening the literature, the laws, the institu- 
tions, the habits, and customs of the world. Other great forces have disappeared or 
are waning, but the power of Jesus Christ not only survives the changes of eighteen 
centuries, but it is spreading and deepening from year to year. 

IV. Working through a beautiful and holt willinghood. (Ver. 3.) The 
people (the subjects) of Messiah are to be " willing," or to be free offerings ; they will 
offer themselves to him ; they will serve under him with cheerful self-surrender. No 
forced, reluctant levies will win his victories, but they who hasten to his side, who 
loijg to strike bravely and earnestly in hi.s cause, who rejoice in his watchwords, who 
are prepared to lay down their lives in his cause. When "the day of his power" 
comes, the day of battle, they will be found eager to obey the summons. And these 
subjects of his will be clothed with the beautiful garment of holiness. With no 
tawdry finery, in no massive and burdensome armour, will they be clad ; they will be 
invested with purity, piety, love, patience, unselfishness, all-consuming zeal ; fairer 
in the sight of truth will they be than the most splendid pageantry — the army ol 
goodness, the hosts of Christ, separated in space but united in aim and spirit. 

V. Possessed op an inexhaustible energy. " Thou hast the dew of thy youth * 
may refer to Christ's soldiery or to himself. In either case, it is an ascription at 
unfailing vigour to his cause. 

" Ever new and ever yonri<t. 
And firm endures tho' endless years 
Their everlasting circles txin," 

may be affirmed of the cause of Christianity. It is always morning ; there is no sign 
of sunset. It knows nothing of decline. It absorbs the new forms of activity and 
association, and employs them. It uses the latest knowledge, the latest arts. Instead 
of crumbling with age, it gathers strength and energy with time. 

VL Meeting the deeper necessities of mankini. (Ver. 4.) The warrior and 
the priest do not ordinarily meet in one person. Our Lord, however, is a Conqueror 
who subdues, and also a Saviour who cleanses and redeems. He is more to our race 
than cau be indicated by an image drawn from one vocation ; so much more that the 
unity of the sacred poem must be disregarded. His Priesthood, after the order of 
Melchizedtk, cannot be omitted. On that heavenly throne is he who once pave 



P8. 0X.1— 7.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 81 

Ijimself as a sacrifice for us, and redeemed us from sin and death ; an unchanging and 
eternal Priest, in whom to trust so long as time endures. 

VII. Cbowned with QLOBI0TJ8 viOTOBr. This once crucified Oue, exalted to the 
right hand of God, who completed his redeeming work when amongst us, and who has 
such fullowers to fight beneath his banner, will one day have his enemies beneath 
his feet (ver. 1). Great conquests have been won already. Immeasurably greater 
these would have been if his people had adhered to his truth and done his bidding. 
Bat now they hear the call of their Leader and the cry of their brethren, acd ar« 
hastening to the field. To-day the triumphs of the cross are vastly gr&ifcer thaa they 
were a century ago ; and at the present rate of advance, with such signs of progreM 
as have never been known before, tliere is every reason to expect that, a hundred years 
hence, the gospel will have covered and conquered a very large part of heathendom. 
Nor will the glorious struggle end until the whole world is won, and the orown of 
Tictory is placed on the Divine Sovereign's head. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOBa 

Ver. 3. — 2%e day of Christ's power. Luther calls this psalm " the true high msbt 
psalm of our beloved Lord Jesus Christ" Our Lord himself attests that it is inspired 
of the Holy Ghost, and there is no other Scripture in the Old Testament that is so 
frequently quoted in the New. The occasion of the psalm seems to have been the 

freat festival of the bringing up of the ark of God from the house of Obed-Bdom to 
erusalem. On that day David assumed tlie double function of priest and king, for he 
was vested in priestly raiment, and fulfilling the priestly office, whilst at the same time 
he was the victorious king. But this double character which in this day David bore 
became the prefigurement and type of the twofold character of him who was to be in 
all respects a King infinitely more glorious than David, and a Priest whose office should 
never faiL It is of the vision of him that this psalm tells. The sacred poet pictures 
our Saviour as a mighty monarch surroundi d by his youthful warriors, bright and 
numberless as the dew-drops on a summer's morn, willing to shed their heart's blood 
in his service, each one rated as a priest, each one a soldier of God. That is what is 
foretold of Christ. Let us speak of — 

L Thb DAT OF Christ's poweb. His resurrection-day ; Pentecost ;. all days when 
Christ is vividly realized by tho soul ;— such are days of his power. And there is yet 
a future day which will emphatically deserve to be thus called. Then the vision of 
this psalm finds fulfilment ; there is the glad rush of the young to his standard, and their 
willing surrender to his service. And in the history of the Church there have been from 
time to time such blessed days. Eternal things became real to his people, the old words 
and truths shone out with a new lustre. Christ drew near to his people's souls, and they 
welcomed him as their Lord. Such days have come to scattered congregations and to 
individual believing souls. The secret of all real revivals of religion with which the 
Church has once and again been blessed has been this— that Christ came to them, as 
at Pentecost, in power. And if his presence were more hungered after, there would be 

more of such days, , .„. ... i-i^i , 

n. Its CHAEAOTEBISTIOB. 1. The spontaneity and Willingness vnthwhtch t^e peopM 
offer themselves. They have not to be dragged to his service, forced to do his wiU. 
2 Their sanctity. They are vested "in the beauties of holiness." Theyaietobe 
priests of God as well as his soldiers. When this is the case with the Cimrch, then 
mdeed it will be a day of Christ's power. It is what the world waits to see, aud insists 
upon it that it as yet cannot see. 3. Their numbers ; as the drops ol dew on a summer 
morning, innumerable; and heaven-born, and for the earth's refreshment and fertility. 
Not a solitary convert here and there as now, but they shall come in muliitudes. 
4 Their youth/ulnesa. Not worn-out lives and faded energies are offered, but ' (he dew 
of thy youth." Do we not long to see such a day? Fervent, believing, persevering, 
and obedient prayer shall surely bring such days.— S. C. 

Ver ^.—Melchizedek. This name meets us first in Gen. liv. 18; then in the text,; 
then it U referred to in Zech. vi. 13, where it is said Messiah shall be a pnest upon hu 



aa THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. ox. 1— 7. 

I • 

throne, and then in Heb. viL The record in Genesis is but brief, but the recurrenca 
of the name leads to the inquiry as to the meaning and significance of that early 
record. The Epistle to the Hebrews supplies the answer. Note — 

L The facts connected with Melchizedbk, He is mentioned in the account of 
Abraham's intervention on behalf of the inhabitants of the district in which Abraham's 
nephew Lot lived. He was probably a Canaanitish chief, lived at Salem — that is, 
Jerusalem ; was evidently a man of much distinction. He was "great" because of the 
combined high office he held ; he was both priest and king. But yet more from his 
character — peaceful, riahteous. 

II. His kelationship to Christ. Prom this psalm and from Heb. vii. we learn 
that he did bear such relationship. He was a type of Christ : 1. In the mystery of hi$ 
person. We read of uo predecessor or progenitor, nor of any successor. Human 
records are silent on all these points. And so with our Lord — " great is the 
mystery of godliness." 2. In his priesthood. It is to this that the writer of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews mainly refers, and argues from Christ being a Priest after the 
Older of Melchizedek, that therefore his Priesthood was far superior to that of Aaron ; 
for Melchizedek was like Christ, and greater than Aaron in antiquity, catholicity, 
independence, perpetuity, and spirituality of his priesthood. 3. In hit hingly character. 
No king could be a priest, no priest a king, in the Jewish dispensation ; but Melchizedek 
and Christ were both. 4. In the effects of his administration. Bighteousness and 
peace. 5. In his ministry of llessing. 

Conclusion. Abraham shows us our duty to Christ, in self-dedication; this the 
meaning of the tithe offering. — S. 0. 

Ver. 7. — " The hroolc hy the way." This psalm tells of the glory of the Lord Jerae 
Christ, but all that it tells of has not yet been fulfilled. But the Church is still con- 
fidently assisting the glory of the Lord. Our text is difficult of completely satisfactory 
explanation. Three chief interpretations have been given. 

I. That it tells of cub Lobd's BEma made a cubse fob vs. The wrath of 
God running in the channel of the curse of the Law was " the brook by the way " of 
which our Saviour drank, and concerning which he said, " The cup which my Father 
hath given me shall I not drink it?" Calvin, Hengstenberg, and Matthew Henry 
thus explain this verse. And then the glorious triumphs of the cross of Christ, past, 
present, and yet to come, are the lifting up of the head which is said to result. 

IL That it denotes bib intentness and eagerness in the fubbuit of hu 
obeat end, which was the destruction of the works of the devil. He would not turn 
aside for refreshment or rest, but like Gideon (Judg. vii.), though faint, he kept 
pursuing. Like as the chosen soldiers of Gideon were known by their eager lapping 
of the water as distinguished from the mere leisurely lying down to drink of the rest, 
so our Lord was intent on his work, and nothing could stay his pursuit (cf. Luke xiL 
60). He would drink of the brook by the way, and tliea on again. 

III. That it sets fobth the humiliation of Cheist, in that he placed himself 
on a level with u:; by stooping to need and to partake of those spiritual refreshments 
which in this life Qoi provides for us. He humbled himself to need and share these 
with men. This is the interpretation which we prefer. What, then, for our Lord, 
were these brooks 1 They were such as these — prayer ; fellowship with kindred minds ; 
affection and sympathy firom those who loved him; the "joy set before hiin;" the 
Holy Scriptures. 

IV. Thus undbbstood, the text applies to Christians now. For brooks by 
the way are provided for us by means of which we shall be, as was our Lord, 
strengthened and refreshed. And ours are as his, even as his were as ours. — S. C. 

Ver. Id — War-figures applied to Messiah. It is remarkable that the prevailing 
political and national associations always colour both the literature and the religious 
sentiments of an age. Our associations provide our figures and illustrations, and these 
vary and change according to the altering of associations. This may be shown by 
comparing the age of Cromwell with this latter half of the nineteenth century. War 
associations prevailed then ; peace associations prevail now. The sterner views of God 
prevailed then; the milder views of God prevail now. Redemption was then mainly 



PS. ox. 1—7.] THE BOOK OP PSALMa 



S3 



egarded as a vindication ; redemption is now regarded mainly as a moral force. It is 
qmte natural that the conceptions of the promised and coming Messiah should vary at 
different times, according to the varying conditions of the Jewish people. In Moses' 
days he was thought of as a " Prophet" like Moses, an inspired Teacher, Eevealer, and 
Leader. In David's days we find both the earlier warlike associations, and the later 
suffering associations, colouring the anticipations of Messiah. In the prophets the 
suffering idea is prominent, and Messiah is thought of, largely, as a "Servant of the 
Lord, who succeeds no better than the prophets did. The Book of Daniel, and more 
especially the careers of the patriotic Maccabees, bring back strongly the war asso- 
ciations and king-figures. 

I. Thb wae-figdees ABE BUGQBSTiVB AND HELPFUL. We should be Weak in our 
conceptions of Messiah if we had not these war-figures. Loving peace as we do, it is 
astonishing how interesting to everybody the associations of war are. Everybody is 
excited when a regiment comes into a town. The "Salvation Army" appeal to a 
sentiment which seems universal in human nature. To young and old the literature of 
war is fascinating. And war-figures may be used in connection with Messiah, because 
sin is properly conceived of as an active hostile force, which man has to oppose, but ii 
helpless to overcome. Messiah is well thought of as the Champion that undertakes 
man's cause, and leads man in the figlit. Those two ideas, of Champion and Captain, 
suggest the two Important sides of Messiah's work. He acts /or us. He acts with us. 
n. The wab-figdbes blend with othbb figuees. So much mistake has been 
made by taking them exclusively : then a one-sided theological system is constructed. 
They must always be treated as giving only a portion of the Messianic representation, 
and illustrating only certain sides and aspects of the Eedeemer's work. He is the 
King, and he is the Lamb, and he is the Teacher. Blended figures alone bring 
apprehensions of the full truth. — B. T. 

Ver, 2.—Ood in world-ituxem. Messiah does but illustrate universal human experi- 
ence. He is successful, but it is God who gives him his success. " The Lord shall 
send the rod of thy strength out of Zion." This inmost truth of things is too often 
disregarded. The pious soul fully rt cognizes it and rejoices in it. His refrain in all life's 
toils and successes is this, " The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge," 

L WoBLD-BUCCBSB 18 LABGELif DUE TO GOOD FOBTUNB. Some men Seem bom to 
succeed. We can find no reason, in either their ability or their character, why they 
should succeed when others fail. We speak of their " good luck." Take any depart- 
ment of life, business, or profession, and we plainly see that some are the children o\ 
fortune. They seem born favourites, and they are the world's favourites as long as 
they live. This may, indeed, be an incorrect view to take ; we only note that it is 
the common and usual view. There may be reasons, in character and in entrusted 
mission, which are simply beyond our discernment and appraisement. Now men may 
look on the success of Messiah, and say of it, " It is only a piece of good fortune. He 
just happened to fit to the needs of his age." 

II. WoBLD-snccESs IS LABOELY DUB TO ENEBOT. Many a man, by the force of his 
own vitality, and by the concentration of his powers, has mastered disabilities and 
difSculties, and gained for himself a place. The energy that is quick-witted to seize 
opportunities, skilful to use opportunities, and persistent in carrying out resolves, 
seldom fails to win world-success. And it may be said of the success of Messiah — ^It 
is sufficiently explained by the vital force that was in him, by his energy and enter- 

Erise. The boast of Nebuchadnezzar has many and many a time been repeated since 
is day, " Is not this great Babylon whuA I have builded f " 

m. WOBLD-SUCOESS IS BEALLY DUE TO DiVINB FEBMISSION, ABBANGBMENT, AND 

AID. But the discernment of this comes only to those whose eyes have been spiritually 
opened. The success of Messiah really has this explanation, " The Lord sends the rod 
of his strength out of Zion." L There is no such thing as good fortune. Everything 
stands in Divine adjustment. A man's "destiny" is the arrangement of infinite 
wisdom. 2. Back of a man's energy is the Divine vitalizing. A man's bodily health 
and mental power are absolutely in God's hands, and are God's providings. Man 
plans, but he must lean on God for power to execute his plans. God may say, " This 
night shall thy soul be required of thee," — E. T. 

rsALUB — in. D 



M THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. ox. 1— 7. 

Ver. 8. — The power of recognizing power. " The people shall be willing in the day 
of thy power." Power to submit, power to accept, power to respond, power to offer 
allegiance, come to the people when they recognize Messiah's power. Illustrated on 
the Day of Pentecost, when Messiah's power was so couviocingly displayed. " They 
then that received Peter's words were baptized ; and there were added unto them in 
that day about three thousand souls." In common history and commoa life, the 
principle is seen working. As soon as a man is successful, as soon as Mb power is 
manifest, the crowd will flock to him. This is put into the motto, " Nothing succeeds 
like success." An illustration may be found in the time ot the Judges. When the 
people were convinced of the power of Deborah and Barak, " they willingly offered 
themselves for the avenging of Israel" (Judg, v. 2). 

L BEOooNizmo foweb. There is much power that is unrecognized; and there are 
many persons unable to recognize power. 1. Power may be undeveloped, and so not 
efSciently showing itself. The most we can see is the promise of what is yet to be. 
We do not feel the impulse of power that is only in its unfolding. 2. Power may take 
forms that surprise. As it doei when we expect material power, and that presented 
to our view is spiritual power. This was the case with Messiah's power. 3. Power 
may crosa our power, and then our pride may prevent recognition, as in the case of 
the Pharisees of our Lord's time. Certain moral conditions must he attained before 
moral power can be rightly valued. There is a spiritual vision which alone enables us 
to discern moral power. 

n. Thk hobal infldbnob of having BECoaNizBD powBE. " The people offer 
themselves willingly." This point may be illustrated by the effects of our Lord's 
word on certain sufferers. A man was before him who had a withered hand. Jesui 
said, "Stretch forth thy hand." The man recognized his power; that gave him 
power, and he did stretch it forth, and it was made whole. So in Bethesda Jesus saw 
a helpless cripple, and said, " Take up thy bed, and walk." The man felt our Lord's 
power ; it exerted a mighty influence on him ; he took up his bed and walked. la 
the higher regions of the spiritual life this truth finds further illustration. It is a matter 
of experience that it was the discernment of Christ's power to save which brought us 
conscious power over sin, which persuaded us to yield ourselves to him. It is every 
fresh apprehension of his power to sanctify that brings us power to wrestle with evil. 
— R. T. 

Ver. 4. — The priesthoods of David and Messiah. It cannot be safely asserted that 
this psalm belongs exclusively to Messiah. Every Messianic reference in the Old 
Testament probably has a first and local application. This psalm refers, then, to 
David, and through him to Messiah. If this be so, the application of the Melcliizedek 
type of priest to David may help us in tracing the application of the same type to 
Messiah. The points dwelt on by the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews (vii. 1^ 
22) are not prominent in this psalm. The point here is, that the Aaronic priesthood 
was only a priesthood; but the priesthood of Melchizedek was a royal priesthood. 

I. David's priesthood was of Melchizbdbk's kind. Priesthood is but ministry ; 
only it is ministry in sacred and Divine things. The essential idea of a priest is one 
who represents God on earth in some particular sphere. So a king who is loyal to 
Jehovah, and represents him in the political and national spheres, is properly a priest ; 
just as the man who represents Jehovah in the moral and religious spheres is called a 
priest. Evidently Melchizedek was the Divine representative for his day and his 
country, just as Abraham was for his tribe ; and so he is called a king-priest. It ia 
noticed that David, and perhaps all the kings of Israel, assumed certain priestly 
functions. " David himself, as at the bringing up of the ark, and Solomon, as at the 
consecration of the temple, had some shadow of the priestly oflBce." 

II. Messiah's peiesthood vas of Melchizbdbk's kind. It was united with king- 
ship, as it was in the case of Melchizedek; ond we only regard Messiah aright when 
we fully recognize his authority to atone, and his authority to rule ; his relation to the 
whole sphere of our worship, and his relation to our entire commonplace life and 
relations. 1. See the likenesses between Melchizedek and Messiah as priests, or as 
Divine peacemakers, ministrants of Divine reconciliation (2 Cor. v. 18 — 21). Of Jesus 
it is said, " He is our Peace." 2. See the likenesses between Melchizedek and Messiah 



P8. CXI. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 86 



as kingt, or as Divine rulers, ministrants of Divine order, in the commou family, social, 
political, and national relations of life. Perhaps it may be said with truth that, in 
regard to Messiah, as in regard to David, the governmental priesthood is more promi- 
nent than the sacrificial priesthood. The royalty of Melohizedek is certainly the chief 
point of reference to the psalmist. The Lord Jesus is our King-Priest for ever. — R. T. 

Ver. 7. — Spiritual refreshment for spiritual work. " He shall drink of the brook in 
the way : therefore shall he lift up the head." The literal meaning of the figure is 
easy to trace. " The victorious leader, who has made so terrible a slaughter that the 
field of battle is covered with corpses, is now seen pursuing his enemies. Wearied with 
the battle and the pursuits, he stops for a moment on his way to refresh iiiin^elf by 
drinking of the torrent rushing by, and then ' lilts up his head/ derives new vigour 
to continue the pursuit" (Perowne). But tlie war-figures only paint for us the 
spiritual work and the spiritual triumphs of Messiah; and this particular figure only 
suggests two things : (1) that Messiah, in doing his spiritual work, needs refreshment ; 
and (2) that Messiah, in his anxiety about completing his spiritual work, scarcely 
stops to attend to his refreshment. To this a third thought may be added — that God 
provided refreshment for him who was so earnestly doing his work. It may be 
noticed that Eastern people have a very skilful way of drinking from a flowing stream 
without stopping in their running. They throw the water up into the mouth. An 
Eastern traveller writes, "In an excursion across an Arabian desert, some of the 
Arabs, on coming to water, rushed to it, and stooping sufficiently to allow the right 
hand to reach the water, they threw it up into their mouths so dexterously, that I 
never observed any of the water to fall upon the breast. I often tried to do it, but 
never succeeded." Applying the verse in a general way to all who, with Christ, are 
engaged in spiritual work, we may say — 

L Spiritual work is exhausting to the bodily pbame as well as to the 
BPIBITUAL NATUBE. It is enough to recall the fatigue of Jesus on some memorable 
occasions, such as at Jacob's well, in the boat, or at Gethsemane. 

n. God pbovxdes befbeshmbnts fob exhausted spiritual workers. Represented 
by the " brook in the way." Illustrate by God's gracious treatment of exhausted 
Elijah. He refreshed him, bodily, with food; he refreshed him, spiritually, with 
visions. Water is the type of soul-refreshings. 

III. The earnest spiritual worker will not let even neoessabt spiritual 
refreshings unduly detain him from his work. He will take only a passing drink. He 
will be " faint, yet pursuing." — R. T. 

Vers. 1 — 7.— Christ the Divine King and Priest. Many difficulties in the inter- 
pretation of this psalm. Let us accept it as, in the main, a prophecy of the Jewish 
Messiah. Then we find the two main features of it fulfilled in the Christ of history. 

L He has been raised to the Divma thbonb of kingly poweb. (Vers. 1-— 3.) 
1. Tlie power by which he subdues the world is spiritual and Divine. His cross " the 
rod of his strength." 2. His servants are willing soldiers in the holy war. (Ver. 3.) 
Numberless as the drops of the morning dew. 3, He vnll reign till he has obtained 
a universal victory. 

II. The Priesthood of Cheist. 1. Priest by direct Divine ordination. " The Lord 
hath sworn." 2. A universal Priesthood. Not of the Jew only, but of the Gentile 
also, like Melchizedek. 3. A Priest not for a time, but for ever. i. The lacrifiae he 
offers is — himself. — S. 



EXPOSITION, 
PSALM OXL 



Anotheb " Hallelujah psalm," and at the 
same time an ** alphabetic psalm." It has 
been called a "twin psalm" with the one 
whioh follows (Pb. cxiL), and beyond all 



doubt closely resembles it Both begin 
with " Hallelujah ; " both are alphabetio ; 
both consist of twenty lines, arranged into 
ten verses. The one is the complement of 
the other; while Ps. cxL "sets forth the 
greatness, mercy, and righteousness of God," 



36 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. OH. 1—10. 



Pb. oxii. is concerned with " the reflection 
of these in the happinet^s, beneficence, and 
righteousness of God's servants" (Kay). 
The two together seem to have been in- 
tended to form an introduction to the 
"Hallel," or chant sung at the Passover, at 
Pentecost, and at the Feiist of Tabernacles, 
which consisted of Pss. oxiii. — cxviii. 

Ver. 1. — Praise ye the Lord. Scarcely a 
part of the psalm — rather a heading or in- 
troduction. I will praise the Lord with my 
whole heart (oomp. Pss. ix. 1 ; cziz. 31, 58, 
69). "With my wliole heart" replaces the 
" greatly " of Ps. cix. 30. In the assembly 
•f the upright, and in the congregation. 
Professor Cheyne translates, " in the coun- 
cil and assembly of the upright;" and it 
seems to be generally allowed that two 
distinct assemblies are not spoken of, bnt 
that the one congregation of the faithful 
is designated by two names. Thus the 
Prayer-book translation is wrong. 

Ver. 2. — The works of the lord are great. 
Not his material works, but the doings of 
his providence (see vers. 3 — 9). Sought out 
of all them that have pleasure therein. 
Searched into and carefully studied by all 
who take an interest in such things. Deru- 
thim, "objects of study," is etymologically 
connected with madrasa, a college, a " place 
of study and research." 

Ver, 3. — His work is honourable «nd 
glorious; literally, honour and glory} but 
our translators have rightly paraphrased. 
And his righteousness endureth for tTer; 
t.e. his just and righteons dealing with all 
his creatures. 

Ver. 4. — ^He hath made his wonderful 
works to be remembered; literally, a me- 
morial hath he made for his wonden; i.e. he 
has so done them that they cannot cease to 
be had in remembrance. Memorial institu- 
tions, like the Passover, are scarcely glanced 
at. The Lord is gracious and fall of com- 
passion; or, "compassionate" (comp. Ps. 
ciii. 13). 

Ver. 5. — He hath given meat unto them 
that fear him. The manna may be pri- 
marily in the writer's mind, but he is also 
thinking of the " food given to all flesh " 
(Ps. czzzvi. 25) continually. He will ever 
be mindful of his covenant. The covenant 
with Abraham, made " to • thousand gene- 
i»tions"(Pa.CT. 8> 



Ver. 6.— He hath showed hie people the 
power of his works, that he may give them 
the heritage of the heathen ; rather, in giving 
them. God manifested his power to Israel 
very specially by causing them to overcome 
the many strong Canaanitisli nations, and 
to take their lands and labours in possession 
(Ps. cv. 44). This was one of the greatest 
of his " works," or " doings." 

Ver. 7. — The works of his hands are verity 
and judgment. All that Ood does is right 
and just — "done in truth and uprightness" 
(ver. 8). All his commandments are sure ; 
t.e. firm, unchangeable — being based on 
trnth and right. 

Ver. 8. — They stand fast for ever and ever. 
This is ezegetical of the " sure " in ver. 7. 
In the sense in which they were given — the 
spiritual sense underlying them — not one 
jot or tittle of God's commandments ever 
passes away (Matt. v. 18). And are done 
in truth and uprightness ; rather, being 
done. It is the intrinsic truth aud equity 
of the commandments that render them ever- 
lasting and unchangeable (see Oudwortli 
on ' Immutable Morality '). 

Ver. 9. — He sent redemption unto his 
people. The "redemption" from Egypt 
(£xod. vi. 6) is perhaps especially in the 
writer's mind, but he may be thinking also 
of other deliverances. He hath commanded 
his covenant for ever (comp. Oen. ix. 12 ; 
zvii. 13 ; Exod. zzxi. 16, etc.). Holy and 
reverend is his Name. Intrinsically " holy," 
and therefore " reverend," or to be reverenced. 

Ver. 10. — The fear of the Lord is the 
beginning of wisdom (oomp. Fiov. L 7; 
ix. 10 ; Ecclus. i. 16 ; and also Job zzviii. 
28). The meaning seems to be that "the 
beginning of wisdom is not found in keen 
insight, nor wide experience, nor the learn- 
ing of the schools, but in the temper of 
reverence and awe. The fear of the finite in 
the presence of the Infinite, of the sinful in 
the presence of the Holy, self-abhorring, 
adoring, as in Job's confession — this for the 
Israelite was the starting-point of all true 
wisdom " (Dean Plumptre). A good under- 
standing have all they that do his com- 
mandments ; literally, (^at do them; but the 
" commandments " of ver. 7 are, no doubt, 
intended. His praise endured for ever. 
The praise " of him," not " of it," as in the 
Prayer-book Version. As he had begun 
(ver. 1), so the psalmitt ends, with Jehovah's' 
praise. 



HOMILETICa 

Vers. 1 — 10. — The work of God and the wisdom of man. The uniting thought in 
the psalm is the work of God. It is evident (see vers. 5, 6, 9) that the writer has in 
view those special manifestations of Divine power by which the people of Gk)d were 



M. oxi. 1—10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 87 

deliyered and preserved. But wo may well give a much wider application to tha 
thought ; we therefore think of — 

L The fourfold work of God. 1. In the broad field of nature ; in the creation 
and formation of the earth and the heavens ; in the agency of the sun and moon, of 
light and h«at, of rain and dew, etc. 2. In the spiritual nature of men ; in the 
instincts, aspirations, affections, capacities of man. 3. In the guidance of our individual 
life, and in human history. 4. In the redemption of the world by Jesus Christ. 
Everywhere, in the heii^lits and the depths, around us and within us, all along the 
course of our human history, we see the handiwork of God : most, and best of all, in 
the redeeming death of his Son, our Saviour, and in the life-giving energies of the 
renewing Spirit. 

II. Pour Divine attbibutbb of which it speakb, " His work is honourable and 
glorious " (ver. 3). It speaks of: 1. Divine power (see ver. 6). In this sense God's 
works are " great " (ver. 2) ; immeasurably surpassing our puny eflurts. 2. Divine 
wisdom. They are " wonderful " (ver. 4), The keeping of the planets in their orbits, 
the covering of the earth with fertile soil, the life and growth of tree and flower and 
fruit, the organization of the animal, the expansion of the human mind, the fitness of 
the gospel for the large and deep necessities of the human soul, — what depths of Divine 
wisdom are herel 3. JimnQ faithfulneas ^vers. 5, 7, 8). All that God promises he 
does; be gave food to eat and water to drink in the wilderness; he has not allowed 
" seed-time or harvest to i'ail." He adds all needful things to those who seek first his 
kingdom. He is with us in the deep waters of a£9ictioD, and does not allow them to 
overflow us. It is the unvarying testimony of the good in every age that "God is 
faithful;" that he is "mindful of his cuveDant." 4. TH^vae goodness (ver. 4). God 
has so ordered our human life that fatherly kindness, motherly tenderness, friendly 
affection, filial attachment, philanthropic pity and beneficence. Christian compassion, 
enwrap our souls, and shed their radiance on our life; and surely these are not the 
least of his " works." 

III. The fourfold response it evokes. 1. Inquiry. The works of the Lord are 
"sought out" (ver. 2). There is no worthier, no happier, no more elevating pursuit 
than the study of the works of God. In whatever field we are engaged we reap 
valuable fruits for our toil ; more especially do we gather good to ourselves when we 
search those Scriptures which record his government of the world and the redemption 
of our race. 2. Reverence. We cannot study God's work in any sphere that is open 
to us without concluding that " holy and reverend is his Name ; " that " the fear of 
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom" (ver. 10). If "the undevout astronomer is 
mad," it may be truly said that the irreverent geologist, physiologist, historian, 
philosopher, is mad also. A hasty or a one-sided inquiry may lead to atheism, but a 
prolonged and unbiassed search conducts to reverence and awe. As " knowledge 
grows from more to more," there will " more of reverence in us d.welL" 3. Obedienoe. 
" A good understanding," etc. (ver. 10). Men who make no response to God for all 
his goodness and love to them may be very " smart " and clever, but they outwit 
themselves; they are continually declining the one thing — devotion, obedience to 
God — which hallows, enlarges, and enriches human life. On the other hand, men may 
be very simple, unlikely to rise to eminent positions, and ill adapted to conduct great 
affairs of the city or the state, but they may have that reverence for Gx)d and that 
readiness to do and bear his will which make any and every human life both beautiful 
and blessed. The fear of God is the very foundation of wisdom, and they who do his 
will have a soundness of understanding which the most learned and the most astute 
may envy. 4. Praise. (Ver. 1.) Thanksgiving (1) filling the heart ; (2) uttered in the 
more domestic gathering, the assembly ; (3) sounded forth in the congregation. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0B8. 

^ers. 1 10. " The works of the Lord." This is the theme of the psalm. These 

works are named six times in this short psalm. They are the occasion and cause of 
the fervent praise, and exhortation to praise, with which the psalm begins. It is one 
of the nine alphabetical psalms; that is, psalms so arranged for aiding the memory. 



38 THE BOOK OP PSALMS, [w. on. 1—10. 

Pg. cxix. is the mo8t conspicuous instance of this. In the psalm before us the alphabet 
IB not complete. An interesting and instructive study is to reproduce in English this 
same structure, being careful not to alter the sense. It has often been done. The 
psalm opens with a summons to all to praise the Lord, and declares the psalmist's 
purpose to do so himself, both amongst those who sympathized with him — " the 
assembly of the upright " —and amongst those, many of whom did not — " the congre- 
gation." It is easy to praise the Lord amongst people who are all of the same mind 
as ourselves, but not so easy where there is indifference or hostility. But the psalmist 
declares that amid both he will praise the Lord. And the inspiration of his praise is 
the works of the Lord. He makes six affirmations concerning them. 

I, Tbet ABE GBEAT. (Ver. 2.) There can be no question as to this, whatever true 
test of greatness we adopt — motives, methods, spirit, results. Especially is this true 
of God's chief work in the redemption of man by our Lord Jesus Christ. But it is 
ti-ue everywhere, in nature, providence, grace. The question for us to consider is — Are 
they great to us? Too many men despise them, "make light of it." 

n, " Sought out of all them that have pleasure theeein," Those who have 
pleasure iu any study are the first to welcome any fresh light on their particular 
department of inquiry. And so in regard to the work of God in our own souls ; if we 
know that work truly, then the study of like work of God will ever be pleasing to us. 
If we do not care for such study, it is an argument to prove not only that we have no 
pleasure, but also no part therein. Thus may we test ourselves. 

III. " EoNOCBABLE AND GLOBious." (Ver. 3.) This is how God's works may ever 
be recognixed. What is otherwise is not his work. It is as the psalmist here affirms, 
both in regard to God and man, in regard to righteousness and mercy alike. The 
motive from which it sprang, the manner in which it was accomplished, and the result 
that follows, all deserve the praise here given. 

IV. They abb teeabured up in mbmoet. (Ver. 4.) 1. 2%i» is so in regard to 
his work of mercy. Probably some great manifestation of God's grace led to this 
psalm. But especially God's great work of mercy in Christ — that is remembered and 
told of everywhere, 2. And so in regard to his Judgment-work. Such as the Flood, 
the overthrow of Pharaoh at the Bed Sea, the fall of Jerusalem, and other such awful 
displays of God's judgment. Because the Lord is gracious and full of compassion, he 
makes them to be remembered, that so we may not bring like judgment on ourselves. 
3. His work of grace. If that has been done in our soul, we can never forget it. 

V. The poweh of them he hath showed to his people. (Ver. 6.) The Divine 
power, that they may have strong confidence in God, and go courageously forward to 
possess the heritage of the heathen. 

VI. Thby are works of veeitt and JunaMENT. There is no crooked, insincere 
policy about them, no lack of righteousness or equity. Let our works be as his. 
— S.C, 

Ver. 5. — Meat given to them that fear the Lord. L Litbrallt, the dsolabation 
OF THE TEXT IS TBUE. Each harvest as it comes round, the daily supply of needed 
food, all are in evidence to support the declaration. Three facts are noted concerning 
this, 1, It is the Lord who is the Oiver. To speak as so many do about nature and 
law, as if they were the producers of our food, is merely an evasion, and a not always 
creditable one, of the real truth. 2. The gift is the special mark of the Divine favour 
to his people. At once the reply arises — But are not the wicked fed as well as, and 
often better than, the good? Yes, this is so; but as Sodom would have been spared 
had there been found ten righteous men in her, so the world of the godless is spared 
and fed for the sake of the people of God, the salt of the earth. Without these, 
wherefore should God keep the world going? Therefore, though the ungodly do 
share, and more than share, these Divine supplies, they do not take them as gifts from 
G^ at all ; still less do they believe what is the truth, that It is not for their sake, 
but for the sake of "them that fear him," God vouchsafes these supplies. "All 
things are yows," said St. Paul to the believing people of God ; and his word but 
echoos the truth before us now. 3. They are proofs of God's faithfulness and truth. 
He never fails to do his part, though at times, by the cruelty and mismanagement of 
men, the portion of meat designed for some of his children gets terribly diminished 



H. 0X1. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 89 



and oven intercepted altogether. But it is the duty of them that fear God to do their 
best to bring such wrong to an end. 

II. Spibituallt also it 18 TBiJB. We are authorized by our Lord to take the 
food of the body as symbol of the food of the soul ; and so read, the text is still true, 
and, indeed, more so than read literally. 1. Christ is that living Bread. (John vi.) 
And as bread is that one food which all partake (if because it ministers to the physical 
needs of all ; so Christ, the Bread of life, meets the deeper spiritual needs of all, of 
every age, clime, rank, character, condition. 2. And how freely and abundantly it it 
given, and how indispensable is it likewise I 3. But as the bread for the body, so this 
Bread of life must be eaten, not merely talked about, if it is to do us any good. We 
must receive Christ into our hearts by a true faith, and we must do this day by day 
continually. If we do this we shall know how true the text is. — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — TOe duty of loitnessing in public for God. The terms used seem to 
include the narrow and the wider spheres in which our witness for God may be, and 
should be, made. The Prayer-book Version brings out this point. " Secretly, among 
the faithful, and in the congregation." It is a point with the psalmists that God's 
praise can be no private thing merely, no personal indulgence or enjoyment only. 
If a man feels thankful to God, if a man recognizes his indebtedness to God, if a 
man is impressed with the greatness of God or the goodness of God, he lies under the 
solemn obligation to say so to somebody. If he is a sincere man, he feels the impulse 
to say so to somebody. He will even want to speak of these things to everybody 
whom he can reach. The sentences of the fortieth psalm may be taken as characteristic 
of the psalmists, and there is something guileful in the man who is unable or unwilling 
to recognize this duty of publicly witnessing for God. " I have not hid thy righteous- 
ness within my heart: my talk hath been of thy truth, and of thy salvation. I have not 
kept back thy loving mercy and truth from the great congregation." 

I. Each man has a public sphebe op his own. A circle outside himself, of 
which he is himself the centre. Every man, in his own particular public sphere, is 
bound to make his witness for God. It is the same thing to say that every man must 
come into relationship with others outside himself; and these relations constitute his 
first public sphere. It may be a friendship. It may be the marital relation. It may 
be a family. It may be a business or social circle. If a man is for God, he must be 
active and voiceful for God in those first spheres. Illustrate by the stone thrown into 
a pond: it influences the waters that touch the shores only through influencing the 
little circle of waters just where it fell, and so on and on, through ever-widening 
circles. (1) Personal influence, (2) family influence, (3) social influence, must be used 
for the convincement of the claims and goodness of God. 

II. Each uan has a place in the general public sphere. The congregation 
is made up of individuals, and the enthusiasm of each goes to make the enthusiasm 
of the whole. The congregation is no mere mass of receptivity. That mistaken notion 
spoils much of public worship. The congregation, as an aggregate of individuals, should 
make common witness, by praise, thanksgiving, and testimony. But the testimony 
that is healthy, and inspiring to others, is testimony for Qod and concerning Ood ; 
not that weak and enervating thing, testimony concerning individual feelings and 
experiences. — R. T. 

Ver. 2.— Good will towards God guiding the search /or God. " Sought out of all 
them that have pleasure therein." "The pleasure in God's works is in germ the best 
incentive to thoughtful search, and in fuller measure its sufficient reward." In regard 
to man's search for God, it may be properly said that what he finds depends on what 
he seeks, and the spirit in which he seeks. This, indeed, is true even of scientific 
research. A man must know what he is looking for, or he will find nothing intelligent 
in the revelations of telescope or microscope. A man writes, "I have searched the 
heavens for God during fifty long years, and have never found him yet." He did not 
believe there was a God, and so he never would find him. Let a man want to find 
God, and his search will be fully responded to. God is revealed, God reveals himself, 
to moral moods, and not to mere intellectual research. Souls find God, not eyes 
or minds. 



40 THE BOOK OP PSALMa [pb. too. 1—10. 

I. God's works are beyond the ebaoh of wise intellects. Men by their 
science can find out things, and account for the forms of things. But they cannot 
explain the meanings of things, or the relations of things. Nothing in the world is 
more uncertain aud untrustworthy than wise men's theoiizings. The most humiliating 
book could be written on the ' History of Exploded and Worn-out Theories.' Illustrate 
by referring to "certain cruel and loathsome practices of the animal world — as, for 
example, those of apes, dogs, frogs, the barbarity of the cat to the mouse, the thefts 
of the eagle from the fish-hawk, the rapture of nests by stronger birds who turn out 
their original tenants to die of cold and slow starvation, the enslaving of the black ants 
by the red, and, sundry other habits which shock our sense of justice or of decency." 
The intellect of man, without guidance from the sense of God, has never found the 
meaning; of such things. The key to them is hid from the wise, who in fact blind 
themselves by refusing to carry to the consideration of such things those truths con- 
cerning (rod which are " spiritually discerned." Nature in only an open secret to the 
God-fearing man. 

n. God's wobes abz witbin the beaoh of loyino hearts. These only are 
prepared to think kind things, loving things, trustful things. When we have right 
apprehensions of the infinitely wise and gracious Doer, such apprehensions as enable 
us to set our love upon him, we simply refuse to accept explanations of nature-mysteries 
that are dishonourable to him. They cannot be true. We pass them by. There is 
something better to be " sought out." Our good will toward Grod will keep us frum 
resting content with anything that is unworthy of him ; and we search on, assured 
that mystery will yield at last to love. — B. T. 

Ver. 6. — The excdkncy of the Divine memory, "He will ever be mindful of his 
covenant." To the Jewish mind it was a source of constant satisfaction that Jehovah 
was actually under covenant-pledge to his people. Every lo6k-back over the history 
of his race brought to view the fact, again and again, that Jehovah kept his covenant 
in mind. This, no doubt, seemed the more striking to him, because that same review 
of the history of the race revealed the fact that Israel had not kept in mind his 
covenant-pledge; but Jehovah's mindfulness of his covenant stood out in strong 
contrast with the people's unmindfnlness of their covenant. See how this Divine 
memory of covenant becomes a ground of consolation and strength to the psalmist, 

L The Divine memory bnsdrbs prompt and BrFiciBNT help in our times of 
NEED. It is memory of a solemn pledge to defend and succour. Illustrate by the 
influence which a vow, or pledge, or covenant has upon us. Illustrate by the free- 
mason, who so solemnly pledges brotherly help to his brother freemasons wherever 
he may meet them. Long years after, and in distant lands, he meets a needy brother, 
remembers his covenant, and at once gives help and comforting and guidance. 
Whensoever his people are in need, God may be thought of as remembering what he 
lias pledged. For his pledge we must look back to his entering into covenant with 
Abraham, and his renewing covenant with Isaac, Jacob, and Moses. What Jehovah 
promised to be to Israel, the Father of Jesus has promised, in the new covenant, to be 
to us. To see the importance of the Divine memory, we should conceive what OJir 
condition would be if our God were forgetful, and willingly disregarded his promises, 
on which we are permitted to hope. It would be sad and hopeless indeed if we were 
left to keep God in mind of what he has given us to rely on. There is always rest in the 
confidence we have in his faithfulness. He ever " remembers his word unto his servants." 

II. The Divine memory implies Divine triumph over human unfaithfulness. 
The old covenant was broken by Israel, and so God was relieved of his pledge. No 
one could have complained if God had refused to recognize any further obligations. 
That he does remember his covenant is a triumph of Divine love, which will not be 
frustrated, in its beneficent designs, even by man's sin. Man may forget, God will 
not. The glory of Jehovah, and of Jehovah-Jesus, lies in this triumph of persistent 
redeeming love over all our failure, neglect, and transgression. — ^R, T. 

Ver. 8. — 2%e distinction between truth and uprightness. "Are done in truth and 
equity" (Prayer-book Version). The usual contrast to equity is "justice." Justice 
represents the absolute right according to standard; equity represents the practical 



PS. oxi. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 41 

application of justice with due consideration of circumstance. Or we may say that 
justice is right in the sight of God, equity is right between man and man. This 
distinction seems to be expressed in the words of the text, " truth " and " uprightness." 
Truth stands for the absolutely right. Uprightness stan'ls for the practically right. 
Truth God appraises, who can read heart and motive. Uprightness man appraises, 
who can only estimate conduct. 

I. The works of God judged by the absolute standard. " They are done in 
truth." There is no standard of truth or of righteousness separate from and inde- 
pendent of God. God himself is the Standard. We learn it by observing the things 
he has done. He has made his own standard. It is far above, out of reach, beyond our 
criticism. It embodies and expresses every virtue that we can imagine, and we look 
to find that all God's works are up to the standard which God himself has set. But 
this comes to bewilder men. It is vague, speculative. Men cannot grasp any absolute 
things ; and God's standard for himself is beyond intellectual grasp or imaginative 
setting. Therefore the absolute standard of truth and right is shown to us in the Person, 
words, and works of the Divine Son, the " Man Christ Jesus." And we can take that 
standard, apply it to the various works of God wrought in all the ages, and concerning 
everything we ma^ say, " All his works are done in truth." It is so with the great 
work of redemption. 

II. The works of God judged by the pbaotical standard. The practical 
standard is the conception of righteousness and right, as between man and man, which 
is entertained in each particular age and nation. It is never perfect; but it always 
represents the highest and best. thought attainable. Now, the psalmist is confident 
that all God's works, in their age, and in all ages, will even bear the testing of men's 
standards. They are done in " equity " as well as in " truth." — K. T. 

Ver. 9. — Bwerencefor the Name. " Holy and reverend is his Name." "Reverend " 
here means "worthy of reverence." Horace Bushnell has a striking sentence: "This 
age is at the point of apogee from all the robuster notions of Deity." And therefoi e 
this age is an irreverent age. Even in the shaping of religious beliefs there are signs 
of undue familiarity with God. And that undue familiarity explains much of the 
weakness of Christian living, and lightness of Christian worship. The nineteenth 
century lacks awe of God. 

L Jewish reverence fob the Name. Explain that in older times a name was 
supposed to gather up, and suggestively express, the attributes of a person. Moses 
asked for a name which would express God — stand for God — to the people. And 
though the word given him was, properly, a declaration of (act rather than a name, 
it came to be treated as God's Name, and such a superstitious reverence for it grew 
up, that the Jewish people persisted in altering the vowels of it, so that never, by 
any accident, should they pronounce the hallowed Name. There was at least the 
danger of their coming to reverence the Name, rather than the Divine Being who was 
represented by the Name. If they did, their honouring of God was but a helpless and 
degrading formalism. A proper reverence for the sacred Name was enjoined in the 
third commandment (Exod. xx. 7) ; and such reverence was characteristic of all loyal 
and saintly souls. See Abraham (Gen. xviii. 22—23); Jacob (Gen. xxxiL 29); Moses 
(Exod. Hi. 13, 14) ; Joshua (Josh. vii. 9) ; and also the psalmists and prophets. It 
may be said that reverence for the sacred Name was the key-note of the Jewish system. 
Of nothing were they more jealous. And if in this they were sometimes wrong, they 
were mostly right ; for " holy and reverend is his Name." 

II. Christian reverence for the Name. The Name of God revealed in 
Christianity is not the same as that revealed in Judaism. To the Jewish Church God 
a the one Existence, unique, spiritual ; absolute Being. To the Christian Church God 
exists in relations, and only the highest and dearest of human relations is fitting to 
represent him. He is our Father. But that is the most reverend of all names. And 
the filial feeling ought to triumph over the superstitious. Show the reverence that is 
due from us in all our relations with the heavenly Father, the holy Father, the 
righteous Father. The Father-Name must never be •' taken in vain." — B. T. 

Ver. 10. 37ie starting-point (f human wisdom. "The fear of the Lord is the 



42 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P8. oxu, 1 — ^10. 



begitming of wisdom." This is the familiar statement of the Book of Proverbs (see 
Prov. i. 7 ; ix. 10). " Here the fear of God, keeping his revealed commandments, ii 
the key of ' wisdom,' which is the knowledge of the true end and purpose of life." The 
" fear of the Lord " is the Old Testament term for piety. The fear is not dread, but 
loving reverence, which finds its expression in ready and hearty obedience. It includes 
belief in God, knowledge of God, recognition of the claims of God, awe of the power 
and holiness of God, and the cherished sense of the presence of God. The fear of piety 
is a glorified fear. 

I. FlETT 18 THE INSFIBATION OF THEOBETIOAL WIBDOU. It alwayS aWakcUS S tUrBt 

for knowledge. It has been constantly observed that when a man becomes pious he 
begins to become iutelligent. His eyes are opened to the supreme mystery, and he wants 
to know all mysteries. He who becomes interested in God is sure to become interested 
in God's works and God's Word. And it may further be urged, that wisdom cannot 
be limited to the knowledge of material things which the senses can give us. There 
is a spiritual world apprehensible by those spiritual faculties which are only quickened 
by the revelation of God to the soul. The scientific man who ignores the spiritual 
cannot attain true wisdom. Belief in God is the absolute foundation on which alone 
can rest a complete knowledge of the world, of facts that are both sensible and spirituaL 
" Spiritual knowledge — the knowledge of self, the universe, Christ, and God — is the 
true knowledge. This grows out of piety — grows out of reverent love." 

II. PiETT 18 THE INSPIRATION OF PRACTICAL WISDOM : which is, obediencc. Every 
man has the practical ordering of a human life, and human relations. A man of him- 
self can only shape his life under the impulse of what he finds pleasing to himself. 
And no life can be ordered wisely under that rule. Man cannot act wisely if he be his 
own king, because he is created as a dependent being ; and can no more bear fruit by 
leaning on himself than can the trailing vine. Dependent man must /ear God. He 
must cherish the sense of duty ; must carry out the designs of his Creator. Practical 
wisdom is taking our lives to God day by day, and saying, in filial love, to him, " Lord, 
what wilt thou have me to do?" Life is only ordered aright when God orders 
it.— E. T. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — " The worJca of the Lord." L God's work claims oce kaenest 
STUDY. 1. Eis work in nature. Presents three aspects. (1) The poetical. (2) The 
scientific. (3) The religious. 2. His work in providence. God in history is work- 
ing out a righteous government of the world. 3. His work in redemption. This 
the manifestation of his grandest power — the power of God unto salvation. Three 
kinds of power. (1) Physical. (2) Intellectual. (3) Moral or spiritual. 

II. God's works abb a revelation op the Divine thotjoht and nature. 
1. They reveal his infinite greatness. (Vers. 2 — 4.) 2. They reveal his unchanging right- 
eousness. (Ver. 3.) 3. They reveal his grace and compassion to the sinful. (Vers. 4, 5.) 
4. They reveal his laws for the government of our lives, (Ver. 5.) They show thcU 
obedience is the highest wisdom. (Ver. 10.) — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM oxn. 



In this "complementary psalm " the writer 
sets forth the blessedness of the true wor- 
shipper of God. He is blessed in his seed 
(ver. 2), in his possessions (ver. 3), in his 
unchanging goodness (vers. 3, 9), in the 
light vouchsafed him (ver. 4), in his many 
virtues (ver. 4), in his management of affairs 
(ver. 5), in his great trust and confidence 
in God (vers. 6 — 8), and in liis attainment to 
honour (ver. 9). The ungodly man is cou- 
lumed with envy at the sight of him (ver. 10). 



Ver. 1. — ^Praise ye the lord. Again a 
" heading," or "introduoiion " (see the com- 
ment on Ps. oxi. 1). Blessed is the man 
th^t feareth the Lord. (Connect this with 
Ps. cxi. 10. The closing thought of Ps. oxi. 
is taken up and expanded in Ps. cxii That 
delighteth greatly in his commandments 
(comp. Pss. L 2; cxix. 16, 17, 24, 70, 77, 
etc.). " True obedience can only come from 
pleasure in the commandments of God" 
(Hengsteuberg). 

Ver. 2. — His seed shall be mighty upon 
earth. The phrase used of Nimrod in Gen. 
X. 8, but not neeessirily to be taken in 
exactly the same sense ; rather as gibbor liail 



n. oxiu 1—10.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS, 



43 



In Ruth It 1 and 1 Sam. ix. 1, " wealthy, 
prosperouB," The generation of the upright 
■hall he hleBsed; i.e. shall receive blessing 
&om the Most High, and shall therefore 
prosper. To be blessed in one's seed was, 
under the old covenant, the highest of 



Ver. 8.— Wealth and riches shall he in 
his house. Bishop Butler has well shown 
how, in God's moral government of the 
world, virtue tends to accumulate to itself 
the good things of this life, and yice to 
disperse and dissipate them ('Analogy,' 
pt. i oh. iii. ; oomp. 1 Tim. iv. 8). And Us 
righteousness endureth for ever. Human 
goodness — here called "righteousness" — 
ia a thing which does not change, since 
character is formed by habits, and habits 
•re " a second nature." 

Ver. 4. — ^Unto the upright there ariseth 
light in the darkness. God's Word is " a 
lantern unto their feet, and a light unto 
their paths" (Ps. oxix. 105)— sufficient 
under most circumstances to guide their 
steps aright When this is not enough, he 
vouchsafes an inward light to them (Fss 
xxvii 1 ; xxxvi. 9 ; Isa. Iviii. 10 ; xlix. 6, 
etc): He is gracious, and full of compas- 
sion, and righteous. It is a very forced 
interpretation to understand this as said of 
Jehovah. The entire subject of the psalm 
is the righteous, God-like man. In him are 
reflected shadows of all the Divine qualities. 

Ver. 5. — A good man showeth favour, and 
lendeth ; rather, well is it vritli the man that 
tkoweth, eto. T'be verse is exegetical of 
the latter clause of ver. 4, and shows how 
the righteous man's compassion works. It 
makes him " show favour," or " kindness," 
to men generally, and " lend " to those who 
are in necessity (comp. Ps. xxxvii. 26 ; and 
for the duty of lending to the needy, see 
Deut. XV. 8, 11). He will guide his affairs 
with discretion; rather, perhaps, wi<A equity. 
Scarcely, as Professor Oheyne suggests, " in 
courts of justice." 

Ver. 6. — Surely he shall not be moved for 
ever. God's blessing shall abide with him, 
and make his happiness sure and stable, 
(On stability as a necessary element in 
happiness, see Aristotle, 'Eth. Nio.,' i. x. § 
7, 8.) The righteous shall be in everlasting 
remembrance; i.e. everlastingly remembered 
by God. 

Ver, 7, — He shall not be afraid of evil 
tidings. Confident in God's goodness to- 



wards him, he will not anticipate mtsforii 
tunes. They may come, as even the best 
man is not exempt from them; but he will 
not meet them half-way. His heart is fixed ; 
i.e. firmly established (see ver. 8)— settled 
on a sure basis — trusting in the Lord — ^the 
one basis that is solid and immovable. 

Ver. 8.— His heart is established. Almost 
a repetition of the phrase in ver. 7, "his 
heart is fixed " — seemingly, therefore, super- 
fluous, but really emphasizing the point, 
which is of great moment (see the com- 
ment of Hengstenberg, and compare the 
"just man" of Horace, 'Od.,' iii 3, 11. 
1—8). He shaU not bo afraid. "Perfect 
love casteth out fear " (1 John iv. 18). He 
who feels himself always and altogether in 
the hands of a loving Father cannot be afraid 
of what is about to befall him. Until he see 
his desire npoa his enemies. He knows that 
his enemies have no real power to harm 
him, and that ultimately he will "see his 
desire upon them ; " i.e. will triumph over 
them (see Pes. liv. 7; lix. 10, etc.). 

Ver. 9. — He hath dispersed, he hath given 
to the poor. There is no virtue in mere 
" dispersing," since spendthrifts " disperse " 
even more lavishly than virtuous men. The 
only laudable "dispersing" is that which 
has for its object the relief of distress, and 
which (it may be added) is wisely directed 
to that object. His righteousness endureth 
for ever (see the comment on ver. 3). His 
horn shall be exalted with honour. The 
esteem of men, on the whole, follows upon 
goodness, and the righteous obtain more 
honour than others. 

Ver. 10. — The wicked shall see it, and be 
grieved. The wicked hate the righteous 
5's, ov. 25), and are naturally " grieved " 
to see them prosper. " When shall he die, 
and his name perish?" is the thought of 
their heart against the godly man. He shall 
gnash with his teeth (comp. Job xvi. 9; 
Pss. XXXV. 16; xxxvii. 12; Lam. ii. 16; 
Acts Til 54), Civilization represses these 
emotional displays, but the feeling remains 
nevertheless. And melt away; or, "con- 
sume away " — " waste away " — through envy 
and hate. The desire of the wicked shall 
perish (oomp. Ps. i. 6). " The desire of the 
wicked " — that which they earnestly long 
for, which is the downfall and destruction 
of the righteous — does not cnme to pass, but 
falls to the ground, "feiishes," comes to 
nought 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — The promise of piety. Li Bacon's celebrated Baying that "prosperity 
is the blessing of the Old Testament, but adversity of the New," there is a measure of 
truth ; but it is far from covering all the ground. We may set against it the apostolic 
declaration that " godliness hath the promise of the life that now is," And though we 



44 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [m. oxn. 1— 10, 

may not press the senteoces of this psalm to any nice exactitude, yet it is substantially 
as true of the good man, and as applicable to his life on earth now, as it was at the hour 
when it was written. Piety, a reverence for God which shows itself in ready obedience 
to his will, has these solid advantages : it ensures — 

I. The blessedness of holt sebviob. (Ver. 1.) The man who fears God "delights 
greatly in his commandments." Others may be tasting the bitter fruits of self-will, 
may be reaping the sad consequences of disobedience, but his heart is filled with the 
peace and with the joy of holy service. He finds a pure, elevating, lasting happiness 
in doing everything unto God his Saviour, even in bearing his will. Languor and 
dissatisfaction are bauisbed from the life of devotion, and in their place are serenity of 
spirit and gladness of heart. " I delight to do thy will, my God." For us to live is 
Christ — to be engaged every hour in his blessed service. 

II. The efficient tkainino of the touno (ver. 2), and all which that includes. 
Not from the home of the holy do there go forth sons and daughters unprincipled, 
vicious, mischievous, short-lived. Taught God's truth and trained in Christian 
principles, young men and women leave the home of the godly prepared for the battle 
of life. It is they who are most ready for serious duties, for responsible positions, for 
ofBces of trust; it is they who are most likely to rise to power and to honour. 
Exceptions being excepted, it is distinctly true that " the generation of the upright 
are blessed." Even from a temporal standpoint, it is a very great advantage for 
any son or daughter to be trained in a Christian home. 

III. WoKK THAT WILL LAST FOR LIFE. (Ver. 3.) If the Upright man does not 
obtain " wealth and riches " — though the virtues which are the fruit of piety are the 
root of much material success — he has the far more precious wealth of moral and 
spiritual worth, and " tiis righteousness endureth." It is not a brief flash that goes out 
and is lost ; it is a steady light that shines through all his days. He has the favour of 
God, the esteem of his neighbours, actual intrinsic goodness, for his possession. And of 
this no accident or misfortune can rob him. 

IV. Dblivebance IK THE DARK HO0B. (Ver. 4.) He does not expect to go through 
life without bis share of trial. If he were wise he would not choose such a dubious 
exemption (see Heb. xii. 5 — 11). But he knows he will not. "Many are the 
afBictions " even " of the righteous," and they will surely come to his door. He, too, 
will know something of " the power of darkness." But to him there wUl " arise light." 
1. Present deliverance will come. He will patiently and devoutly pursue his course of 
integrity, and of waiting upon God, and God will give him his heart's desire ; his name 
will be cleared, his health restored, his property regained, his friendship renewed, his 
work prospered. 2. Divine support will be so abumiantly bestowed that his soul will 
be filled with peace even in the midst of his trouble (see 2 Cor. xii. 10). 3. After 
bearing the burden of earthly trial, and passing through a long night of temporal 
adversity, there will gleam the bright light of the heavenly home. 

V. The blessing of endubino gratitude. (Vers. 4 — 6, 9.) He is gracious, com- 
passionate, generous, full of practical kindness, just to others (guidmg his affairs with 
a due regard to what is owing to other men) ; the result will be that he will earn the 
esteem and the thanks of many hearts, and he will live lung in their grateful remem- 
brance. The unholy and consequently self-centred maii passes through life without 
awakening any aHection or evoking any appreciation, — he is disregarded, perhaps 
denounced ; men either forget or disparage him when he is dead ; but the holy and 
unselfish man lives in the love of his fellows, and when he dies leaves a fragrant 
memory behind him. 

VI. Devout confidence in face op the future. (Ver. 8.) Unaccompanied, 
undefended, by a heavenly Friend, we may well fear as we look before us. Who can 
tell what the next turn in the road will reveal to us? Who can say what losses and 
disappointments await us ? Who can count on continued health or prosperity ? Who 
can be assured against calamity or sudden death ? But the Christian man, who is well 
assured that all events are in the hand of God, that the life and death of his saints are 
precious in his sight, that all things work together for good to them that love God, 
that in the saddest sorrows there may be disguised the truest love and the greatest 
blessing, that death itself is but the sombre gateway of eternal glory, — he need not fear. 
His heart is established ; he will not be afraid. All will be well with him; everything 
will conduce to spiritual good and to a lasting heritage. 



Ki. CM. 1—10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 46 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — The blessed life. This psalm, like the previous one, begins with 
" Hallelujah," and is also an alphabetical psalm. That one gave glad thanks because of 
what the Lord God himself, in his ways and works, was declared to be. Now this one 
gives like thanks for what, by the grace of God, his servant is enabled to become. 
" The one sets forth God, his work and his attributes ; the other tells us what are the 
work and character of those who fear God." So that the same affirmations are made 
both of God and of his servant (see Pss. cxi. 3 ; cxii. 3 ; also cxi. 4 and cxii. 4). In 
Ps. cxi. God's faithfulness is celebrated ; in this, man's faithfulness. The whole psalm 
is a continued reiteration of the blesseduess of God's service. But — 

I. Afteb the manner of the Old Testament, that blessedness is told of 

AS BEINO SHOWN IN PBE8BNT EARTHLY AND TEMPORAL REWARD. The Seed of God's 

servant is to become both mighty and blessed. Health should be his, and, yet more, 
righteousness. Mercy shall go forth from God to him, and from him to bis fellow-men. 
He encourages those who need a helping hand, showing favour and lending; ; and his 
enemies, for he will have enemies, he will overcome in the judgment. He shall be 
long and lovingly remembered, and his trust in Gud sihall deliver him from all fear. His 
enemies he shall meet in the might of confident faith, and see his desire upon them. 
He is generous to the poor ; he maintains his righteousness and rises to great honour. 
The ungodly see this with rage and vexation, and perish in his sight. Such was the 
form which God's recompenses to his faithful people took in the days of old. 

II. But eveb since the oospel of Cebist has been published, the blessed- 
ness OF God's service is not less, but it comes in a fab different manneb. 
For serving God may mean, and lias meant to myriads, the loss, not the gain, ot all 
earthly good (cf. 1 Cor. xv. 19). So that if we had no other than earthly good to hope 
for, we should be miserable indeed. But we have. Take the suggestions of this psalm, 
referring them to that form of blessing which the servant of God realizes now. 1. His 
seed thoM he mighty and blessed. Is it not so ? Are not the most effectual influences 
which are now bearing on men those which stream forth from the Church of God ? 
Slow, no doubt, is their operation, but ever svure and increasing. And as to being 
blessed — ask the faithful themselves. 2. Spiritual wealth is hit. The treasure store 
of Christ is opened to him, and his part therein is seen in the maintenance of holy 
character and standing before God and man. 3. The consolations of the Lord are his, 
and they make him a son of consolation likewise (2 Cor. i. 4). 4. Se is endued with 
kindly dispositions, and his fair fame his enemies cannot traduce (cL Revised Version, 
ver. 5). 5. Se abides in the love of God, and when he departs hence his memory is 
sacred and perpetuaL 6. Se is kept in perfect peace. (Ver. 7.) He shall be kept trusting 
in God, and shall see his soul's enemies destroyed. 7. Selfishness is not in him, but 
a generous loving heart, for which all men bless him (ver. 9). 8. Eis life eonvids the 
wicked mam, of his miserable folly, and robs him of all power to do him harm (ver. 10). 
Is not all this the blessed life ? — S. 0. 

Yer. 4. — Light arising in darkness. L Light does so abise. Morning by morning, 
if only we were astir to see it, the light arises out of the darkness. There comes the 
paling of the dark, and then the gradual dawn. And the method of it is full of 
suggestion as to like times of darkness. The light comes because the earth swings 
itself round into the light. The earth, unlike the people who dwell upon it, is 
obedient to the Divine law concerning her; and hence, though she be in darkness, 
she comes out of it in due time by obeying her Creator's will, and turning towards 
the light. 

IL This is tbub of otheb forms of DABBaJESs. 1. That of mental perplexity and 
doubt. This is very prevalent All thoughtful minds seem doomed to pass through it. 
The getting at the real truth of things, especially in the matter of religious faith, is 
not easy. And if doubt be the prompting only of a sincere love of truth, then it is 
right, and it will be dispersed ere long. But then it often is not so prompted, but 
springs from quite other motives. The liking to be thought intellectual and mentally 
capable is often the pure origin of so-called doubt. If a man owns himself a believer, 



46 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxii. 1—10. 

he incurs the risk, in many circles, of being regarded as weak, credulous, and more or 
less foolish and ridiculous. Yet more, the plea of doubt absolves a man from taking 
a decisive stand for God. He knows he ought to, but he gets out of the obligation, or 
thinks he does, by pleading his doubts. And doubt condones sin. Hearty belief 
brings obligation to self-restraint along with it, but doubt is free from s\ich incum- 
brance, and is therefore welcomed by the sinful heart as a friend. Light will not arise 
to such, but the darkness will deepen more and more. But to the upright, the sinceie 
seeker for truth, and who is not doubting because of any lurking liking for wliat is evil 
and self-pleasing to liim, in due time the liglit will arise. 2. The state of soul-darkness 
also. How much of tliis there is ! The faith of Christ ought to maka men happy, to 
fill their souls with light and joy. But it very often fails to do this. The gladness of 
God's love seems only conspicuous by its absence in the case of all too many Christians. 
They are not sure tliat they are forgiven ; they are certain they are very far from being 
holy ; their sanctification is anything but complete ; they cannot realize the love of 
God to them ; they walk in darkness, and have little, if any, light ; and death is still a 
terror to them. But are they sincere, true-hearted seekers after God? If bo, their 
light shall arise, in spite of temperament, ill health, bad teaching, earthly care and 
trouble, and any other of the many causes of soul-darkness. Only let them rest in the 
Lord, and wait patiently for him. 3. And so, too, when the child of God is in darkness 
as to the conduct of life. How often we seem unable to make out the right way, to 
know the right thing to do 1 It is so in the home, the business, the Church. But 
again the promise holds good. 

IIL The condition is eveb the same. As the earth would ever be in the dark 
if it did not turn round to the light, so will men be unless they turn to the light. Do 
this in thought, in prayer,- in practical obedience, and ere long the darkness will have 
passed, and the light will shine. — S. 0. 

Ver. 7. — Not afraid of evil tidings, I, Most PEOPiiB abb. The postman's knock, 
much more a telegram, will often set their hearts palpitating. They realize how 
precarious is the tenure by which they hold their good things; they have many times 
had experience of the instability of that in which they have most trusted ; and hence 
they are afraid, etc. 

II. But of the servant op God it is said, " He shall not bb afbaid ov evil 
TiDiNOS." 1. As a fact, real religion does ensure this. See Daniel, when he knew the 
decree was signed (Dan. vi. 10). See Paul's letters in his imprisonment. See Nehemiah, 
etc. 2. It does not mean that evil tidings do not come to them as to others. They do, and 
often of a disastrous sort, affecting them in body, mind, and estate. 3. Nor does it mtan 
that such tidings have no effect upon them. They do, saddening and distressing them 
much. Jesus wept. 4. But they are not afraid of them. They do not recognize 
such things as having power to touch them where their real treasure is, or as having 
any power in themselves at all; they are but God's ministers, and the ultimate 
issue of them cannot but be good. And those foreboding fears which so often precede 
them, God's servants are delivered from ; for they believe the words, " As thy d«y so 
shall thy strength be." 

III. The seckbt of this blessed fearlessness. It is plainly pointed out in our 
text. 1. '^ His heart is fixed ; " that is, he has come to a settled conviction as to his 
relation to God, and as to God's mind to him. He is as certain of God's good will and 
all-sufiScient power and grace as a dear child is of his mother's love. His feet are on 
a rock ; he has come to be fixed in heart as to the Lord's leading him in the right way ; 
be does not merely think it, he is fully persuaded of it, he knows in whom he has believed 
(Isa. xxvi. 3). 2. This fixedness of heart, which is so blessed, is the result of habitual trust. 
" Trusting in the Lord." We can form habits of trust, as of any other act of the mind. 
It is not a single act of faith, or a spasmodic intermittent trust, which will ensure this 
fixedness of heart. But it must be perpetually repeated uutil the habit is formed. We 
must put our will into it, and we must abandon everything which would render such 
trust impossible, as all allowed sin will and must. — S. C. 

Ver. 2.-~Ooodnass repeated in new generations. It has been very luggestively said 
" that God is, from the first, looking for a godly seed ; oi, what is nowise different 



PS. can. 1^10.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. « 

inserting such laws of population tliat piety itself shall finally over-populate the world. 
There are two priacipal modes by which the kingdom of God among mea may be, and 
IS to be, extended. One is by the process of conversion, and the other by tiiat of family 
propagation ; one hy gaining over to the side of faith and piety, the other by the popu- 
lating force of faith and piety themselves." Bushnell coins words in which to express 
this, and calls it " the out-populating of the Christian stock." The modern doctrine of 
heredity is usually seen in its application to bad things : men deal with the laws which 
preside over the propagation of physical diseases and moral dispositions and bodily charac- 
teristics ; but Christians are interested in the working of the laws in relation to good 
things. They equally — perhaps in even a more effective way — preside over the propaga- 
tion of physical health and vigour, of moral virtues, and of bodily beauty. It may even 
yet be shown that there is a propagation into new generations of the new and Divine life 
in Christ ; a deeper fulness of meaning than has yet been discovered in the expression, 
" Instead of the fatiiers shall come up the children." Bible language even suggests 
that heredity works more strongly on behalf of the good than on behalf of the evil, for 
while judgment on sin continues for three or four generations, reward of virtue keeps 
on its benedictions unto thousands of generations. 

I. Pabental goodnbss gives childbkn a ohanob. Think how many children 
ana born into the world over-weighted with disabilities. For extreme cases, take the 
▼iciouB and criminal classes. But the fact is for us move effectively illustrated by 
cases of self-indulgence in youth, which involve weakened health and lowered moral 
tone. Good parents give their children a fair chance in the struggle of Ule. The 
children are not burdened with low vitality, self-indulgent appetite, or inability to find 
pleasure in pure things. Sometimes good people's children fail, but reasons for the 
exceptional cases can usually be found. 

II. Parental goodness is eboognized bt blessings on theib ohildben. And 
this is the form of reward that parents best appreciate. They live over again in 
honourable, successful, and pious children. Therefore Easterns desired families. No 
nobler ambition possesses humanity than the passion to make the coming generation 
wiser, stronger, and better than the passing one. 

IIL Fabental goodness is the one qbound of hope fob the baoe. Napoleon 
was asked what one thing France supremely needed. His reply was almost an 
inspiration. He said, " Better mothers." — E. T. 

Ver. 3. — A man's righteousness. " Eighteousness " has come to be a sort of exclu- 
rirely religious word ; a theological word, with a connotation fitting to a particular 
creed, over which learned men long have wrangled. Why cannot we let common 
■ense win it .for common, everyday uses ? " Eighteousness " is rightneu. It is being 
right — right with God, and right with man, and doing right because we are right. 
How to become right, and how to be right, are the supreme questions for til moral 
beings. Every great teacher who has arisen in any age or any nation has set himself 
to answer these two questions ; and our Lord Jesus Christ, with Divine authority, 
answered them in his Sermon on the Mount. He did a prophet's work in recalling 
men to the spiritual conception of righteousness as heart-rightness inspiring life-right- 
ness, i.e. rightness of conduct and relations. Possibly, in our text, the main idea of the 
word is beneficence, kindness to others. But this only presents righteousness on its 
side of relation to man ; it has also a side of relation to Ood. Both h»ve to be 

included. xtt v u ■. j j 

L A han'b BiOHTBOUSNBSfl AS MAN CAN ESTIMATE IT. We have a human standard 
of rightness. It varies in expression ; it is really everywhere the same. It is the 
standard of the best man of our nation or race. The psalmist said his goodness could 
stand the test of the " saints that are in the earth," but not the test of God, Man s 
idea of rightness includes purity, energy, and charity. 

U. A man's KIGHTEO0SNES3 AS THE MAN HIMSELF CAN ESTIMATE IT. ihCPe 18 a 

oonsciousness of rightness, a conscious will for the right and love of the right, which 
are a man's dignity and strength; which a man has a perfect right to cling to as his 
chief treasure. Job firmly says, " Till I die I wiU not remove my integrity from me. 
My righteousness 1 hold fast, and will not let it go." David said, "Judge me, O Lord 
according to my righteousness, and according to mine integnty that js m me. And 



48 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. cxu. 1— Itt 

our Divine Lord, as a man, said, " The prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing 
in me." A man's rightness is no sufficient basis for his acceptance with God, but it is 
good so far as it goes. 

III. A mak'b BiGHTEonsNESB AS GoD ESTIUATES IT. He knows the distinction 
between its accidental and its essential features. He distinguishes the thing which 
appears from the foundation on which it rests. Rightness, judged by human standards, 
may rest on a basis of self — self-pleasing and pride. Some men respect themselves too 
much to do a wrong thing. But the highest type of rightness is built upon the 
recognition of God as the standard righteousness, who requires those who would do 
right to be "all glorious within." He asks for " truth in the inward parts." — K. T. 

Ver. 4. — Advantages of the good in times of calamity. " Unto the upright there 
ariseth light in the darkness." The illustration is taken from the beneficent and 
charitable man. Everybody is ready to help him when trouble assails him. But a 
widely operating principle is illustrated in his case. The good man always has the best 
of it in the dark times of life. Spurgeon says, " He does not lean to injustice in order 
to ease himself, but, like a pillar, stands erect ; and he shall be found so standing when 
the ungodly, who are as a bowing wall and a tottering fence, shall lie in ruins. He 
will have his days of darkness ; he may be sick and sorry, poor and pining, as well as 
others; his foimer riches may take to themselves wings and fly away, while even his 
righteousness may be cruelly suspected ; thus the clouds may lower around him, but 
his gloom shall nut last for ever, the Lord will bring him light in due season, for as 
surely as a good man's sun goes down, it shall rise again. If the darkness be caused by 
depression of spirit, the Holy Ghost will comfort him ; if by pecuniary loss or person^ 
bereavement, the presence of Christ shall be his solace ; and if by the cruelty and 
malignity of men, the sympathy of the Lord shall be his support." The advantages ot 
the good in times ot calamity may be thus indicated — 

L He cannot be left alone. The self-contained man, who wishes to be left alone 
in his prosperity, must nut wonder it' he finds himself alone in his adversity. The 
dependent man, who leans on God in bis success, will surely find that GK>d is there, to 
be leaned upon, when his time of trouble arises. He who joins himself to God finds 
himself everywhere wiih God. 

IL He cannot lose what he values most. All that human calamity can do is 
to affect our possessions and our circumstances — the things that we have ; it has no 
injurious power on the things that we are. Trouble cannot take away our faith in 
Gud, our loyalty to God, our joy in God. " The Lord is the Portion of mine inherit- 
ance," and no earthly calamity can take him away. " When heart and flesh fail, the 
Lord is the Strength of my heart, and my Portion for ever." 

111. He can see light and oheeb when others cannot. Many were distressed 
about Daniel in the lions' den, but there was light in the darkness for him. St. Paul and 
Silas were dark enough in the inner prison at Philippi, but there was light in the 
darkness, and, in the joy of it, they " prayed and sang praises unto God." St. Paul sees 
such a shining forth on the darkness of his life-troubles, that he can speak of " this 
light a£Qiction, which is but for a moment, and worketh for us a far more esoeeding 
and eternal weight of glory." — B. T. 

Ver. 6. — The Bible use of the word " everlasting." This word is one which is used in 
common speech. Every one who speaks intensely is apt to speak extravagantly, and 
figures of speech are always capable of larger usage than the person who tirst employs 
them intended. Bound the words " eternal," " for ever," and " everlasting," Christian 
doctrines have gathered ; the words have thus gained a precision of meaning ; and it 
is difficult now to recover for them the simpler, colloquial meanings which belong to 
their common use in all languages. It is necessary to consider how we use the terms, 
if we would apprehend how the Bible-writers use them. We vow eternal friendship. 
We say we will never do things. But man has no right to use such terms, save as 
expressions of intense feeling. 

I. " Eveblastino " IB a fiocbb fob a fbolonoed pebiod. " For eternal remem- 
brance," t.e. for all future time, as long as man can remember anything, " the memory 
of the just is blessed ; but the name of the wicked shall rot." When a thtng goes or 



PS. ran. 1—10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 49 

and on till we can no longer see it, and can think of no agency that can stop it, we call 
It " everlasting." An illustration may be taken from the familiar garden flower which 
we call " everlasting," because, in cua jast with other flowers, it wUl last, in our vases, 
all the winter. 

II. " Eteblastino " 18 a fioube fob the Divine. It helongs to the thought of 
God, because we cannot conceive any causes which brought about his existence, or 
imagine any forces, or combination of forces, which can make his existence to cease. 
The word is applied by Moses to GKid, " The eternal God is thy Befuge, and underneath 
are the everlasting arms." Mere continuity cannot be the thought. That can only 
be the figure in the word. What must he be who was, and is, and is to come ? 

III. " EVEBLASTINO " IS A FIQUBE FOB THE SPIRITUAL. It is whcU it is applied to 

men and to men's future. Everlasting life is spiritual life, (if which one feature is 
continuity. Eternal death is spiritual death. And this is explained by the associations 
of the figure. One. of our chiefest " notes of value " is the length of time that a thing 
will last. The gnat that is born and dies in an evening is esteemed of small value ; 
the cedar tree, that outlasts the generations, is esteemed of great value. In order, then, 
to bring to us the sense of its supreme value, tne spiritual life is spoken of as lasting 
for ever. We raise the value of that which lasts for centuries ; we reach the highest 
value in thinking of that which lasts for ever. — B. T. 

Ver. 7. — Trust-triumph overfea/rt. " He will not be afraid of any evil tidings ; for 
his heart standeth fast, and believeth in the Lord." The good man of this psalm is 
evidently also a rich man, and a man in high position, who can exert a wide influence. 
Such men are more especially exposed to the influence of evil tidings. Illustrate by 
the case of Job, to whom the messengers of evil came one after another. Or give cases 
of merchants whose whole fortune is embarked in some ship, and who receive tidings 
of its loss. Explain how sensitive the Stock Exchange is to the slightest rumour of 
eviL They who have nothing to lose are not affected by news of calamities, save in 
the way of sympathy. But the psalmist points out that the godly man is freed from 
undue fear concerning his earthly possessions, because he has a heavenly treasure which 
is in every way more precious to him, and concerning the safety of that treasure he 
need never have a fear. 

I. Evil tidings uat dibtbebs the godly uan. Piety never either changes or 
deadens natural feeling. It would be true to say that it even made natural iieeling 
more keen and sensitive. Loss of money, place, influence, and health do distress pioui 
men; and the triumph they may gain over themselves should never be allowed to 
deceive us. Their victory is seldom, if ever, an easy one. 

IL Etil tidings cannot ovebwhelu the godlt man. Because he never stakes 
his all on any venture. Come what may, he has a reserve, and an abundantly 
satisfactory reserve. " Moth and rust may corrupt, thieves may break through and 
steal," but they never yet found the godly man's " heavenly treasure." It is not only 
that, take everything away, and he still has God. It is that, in haTing God, he 

Eotentially has evejything ; what he has lost is restored, if that is best; but certainly 
e has the " supply of all his needs." 

III. Evil tidings dbive the godly man oloseb to God. He has learned the 
lesson of trust ; and he is sure to practise it in the time of need. His heart is fixed. 
Tra«ble does not make it waver, but binds it closer, fixes it firmer. Just as the little 
child sits close by father in the train, but presses closer when the train rushes into the 
dark timnel. " His heart being fixed in solid reliance upon God, a change in his 
circumstances but slightly affects hun. He can be patient, waiting for the salvation 
of God."— B. T. 

Ver. 9. — Giving as a sign of character. " He hath disprsed abroad, and given to 
the poor " (quoted in 2 Cor. ix. 9 ; see Prov. xi. 24, 25). The exact translation of the 
word suggests, not occasional or impulsive giving, but constant and systematic giving, 
frequent and customary giving. The temptation of riches is to love them for their 
own sake, and to hoard them in order to be proud of them and to rejoice in them. The 
Christian triumph over the temptation of riches is found in regarding them as a trust 
to be used in Christ's service. A man goes wrong wheu he thinks — These riches are 

PSALMS — in * 



so 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[fs. oxnx. 1 — 9. 



mtTM. A man keeps right bo long as he feels — I am one of Christ's stewards, and it ia 
" required of stewards that they be found faithful." The good man is " God's reservoir, 
and forth from his abundance flow streams of liberality to supply the needy." " Bene- 
volence of heart, when displayed in the benefaction of the hand, is the surest mark and 
fairest accomplishment of a moral and religious mind." 

L Giving is a sign of bebvioe to God. It is a way of working for him. The 
man who gives acknowledges himself to be a servant, an almoner. ITone of the things 
he possesses are regarded as his own. Everything is a trust for use. 

IL GiviKa IB A BioK OF SYMPATHT WITH UAN. " The poor " (in some sense poor) 
" we have always with us." Civilization tends to make very rich and very poor. 
Calamities bring sorrow ; many are bom with disabilities. Sentiment concerning the 
poor is a sign of poor character, unless it be conjoined with self-denying and wise efforts 
for their well-being. When the man said he felt for a poor sufferer, the Quaker replied, 
" I feel half a crown, friend ; bow much dost thou feel? " 

III. Givmo IS A BiON OF LiHiTED BOLD OF THE woBLD. Compare the miser and 
the generous Christian in their grip of the world. The miser grips the world hard ; he 
can have his treasure only as long as he lives. The Christian is but passing through 
the world, and wants to do as much good as he can while he passes along. 

IV. GiviHO IS A BioK OF A han's like-hindedness WITH OoD. " He giveth to 
all men liberally, and upbraideth not ; " " He so loved the world, that he gave his only 
begotten Son." (See our Lord's teaching in his Sermon on the Mount, especially 
Matt. V. 42, 45 ; vL 1— 4.)— R. T. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — The hUssedntst tf the tminentty good. " That delighteth greatly in 
his commandments." 

L His ohilobek beau, be blessed. (Ver. 2.) " Mighty " in a warlike sense here. 

II. Shall fbosfeb in octwabd oibodkbtanoes. (Ver. 3.) " Godliness is profit- 
able unto all things," etc. 

UL Shall enjot the uoht of God'b pbebenge, and of his owh cwmpabsionati 
DEEDS n times of ADVXB8ITT. (Vers. 4, 6.) " Gracious, full of compassion and 
righteous ; " these attributes will irradiate his darkest hours. 

IV. Beino biohteods, he is muoTABLT OBouNDED IN GoD. (Ver. 6.) Fixed in 
his trust and hope, and ia all the principles of his character. 

V. HaVINO a CLBAB OONSCIENOE, he IB BAIBED ABOVE ALL FKAB. (Yen. 7, 8.) 

Delivered from the terrors that beset the guilty. 

VL Ha VINO AN INNEB BIOHTEOUSNESS, HE ENJOYS THE BIQHESX BONOUB TBOH 

God and man. (Ver. 9.) — & 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM cxin. 



This is the first of the " Hallel" psalms, or 
of those BUDg at the Feasts of the Passover, 
Penteoost, and Tabernacles. It is a " Halle- 
lujah psalm," like the two preceding, bnt is 
nut alphabetic. As a most joyful hymn of 
praise, it is selected by our Churoh to be 
one of the psalms for Easter Day. 

The compositioii falls into three stanzas 
of three verses each. In the first (vers. 1 — 3) 
the servants of the Lord are called upon to 
praise him. In the second (vers. 4 — 6) 
God is praised in the heavens, with respect 
to his glory there. In the third (vers. 7 — 9) 
he is eulogized in respect of his great doings 
upon the earth. 



Ver. 1.— Praise ye the lord (comp. Pas. 
civ. 35; cv. 45; ovi 1, 48; cxi 1 ; ciii 1). 
Praise, ye servants of the Lord, praise 
the Name of the Lord. By "ye servants 
of the Lord," all faitliful Israelites are 
certainly intended; bnt the phrase need 
not be absulutely limited to them foomn 
ver. 3). ^ ^ 

Ver. 2.— Blessed be the Name of the Lord 
from this time forth and for evermore. The 
prayer here is that God may be praised 
through aU time, as in the next verse it is 
that he may be praised through all space. 
In connection with the praise of God, limits 
of time and place are unsuitable (comp. Pss. 
oxv. 18; oxxi.8; cxxv. 8; cxxxi. 3; Isa. 
lix. 21 ; Micah iv. 7). 

Ver. 3.— From the rising of the sun nntt 
the going down of the same (comp. Mai. i. 
11); i.e. all over the worl. 1, from the furthest 



w. oxin. 1 — ^9.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



SI 



east to the furthest west. The lord's Name 
is to be praised ; or, « praised be the Name 
of the Lord" (Kay). 

Ver. 4. — The Lord is high above all na- 
tions. As being " the great King over all 
the earth" (Pa. xlvii. 2). And his glory 
above the heavens. "The heaven, and 
heaven of heavens, cannot contain him" 
(2 Ohron. vi. 18). It is a "humbling of 
himself" to " behold the things tliat are in 
heaven and earth " (see ver. 6). 

Ter. 5. — Who is like unto the Lord onr 
Bod? (oomp. Ps. Ixxxix. 6; Isa. xl. 18, 25). 
The highest created being does not approach 
within anything but an immeasurable dis- 
tance of Gtod, Whodwelleth on high; or, 
*• who sitteth enthroned on high." 

Ter. 6.—VIA0 hnmbleth himself to behold 
tne things thatareinheaven, and in the earth. 
It is a condescension in God to regard even 
" the things that are in heaven," since the 
very " heavens are not clean in bis sight " 
(Job XV. 15). Much more is it a conde- 
Boension in him to behold the gross material 
things of earth. Tet he gives them his 
constant care and attention, since otherwise 
they wonld cease to be. 

Ter. 7. — He raiseth np the poor out of the 
dut. Heaven is full of his glory, earth of 



his ihercy and loving-kindness. The words 
of 1 Sam, ii. 8 are, consciously or nncon- 
ecionsly, quoted. And lifteth the needy out 
of the dnnghill ; rather, from the dunghill 
(Revised Version), 

Ver. 8. — That he may set him with princes 
The words of 1 Sam. ii. 8 are still followed, 
(For the sentiment, see also Job xxxvi. 7.) 
Historically, the statement is illustrnted by 
the examples of Joseph, Saul, David, Daniel, 
Mordecai. Even with the princes of his 
people. Not merely with heathen princes, 
but with those who exercise sovereignty 
over Israel, as Joseph with Pharaoh, Daniel 
witli Nebuchadnezzar and Cyius, Mordecai 
with Ahasuerus or Xerxes. 

Ver. 9. — He maketh the barren woman to 
keep honse. Hannah's song is still in the 
psiiliuist's thoughts, and suggests this illus- 
tration (see 1 Sam. ii. 5). But it must not 
be restricted to a literal interpretation. 
The true " barren woman " was Israel (Isa. 
liv. 1), whose curse of barrenness was ulti- 
mately removed, and who became, as here 
prophesied, a joyfnl mother of children 
(comp. Isa. xlix. 12, 18, 20 ; liv. 2, 8 ; Ir. 5; 
Oal. iv. 27). Praise ye the Lord (comp. 
Pes. civ., ov., ovi., oxv., ozvL, czvii., oxxxv., 
cxlvi. — 1., which terminate linilarly). 



HOMILETICS. 

Ters. 1—9. — BeasoM for reverential praise. The force of the pBalmist'g summona 
in the opening verse is felt as we proceed through the psalm itself, and when we reach 
the end of it ; for there are brought out — 

I. The constancy of Qod'b goodness. In no less than three verses (1 — 3) the 
Lord's Name is put for himself. This is significant of the Divine constancy. The 
name of the Lord is never dissociated from the same class of thoughts and deeds. It 
is 80 invariably connected with these that one stands for the other. His name and his 
character are inseparable; utter his name, and there instantly rise to our tliought the 
attributes which distinguish him ; to sing of his Name is not to praise an imaginary 
or ideal one, but the very Lord God himself. We worship him « with whom is no 
variableness nor shadow of turning." 

n. The OBBATNE88 OF HI8 OLOBT. He manifests his presence, exercises his power, 
and makes known his goodness (1) through all ages (ver. 2) ; (2) over all the earth 
(ver. 3) ; (3) in the highest heavens (ver. 4). 

III. The fact of his condescension. (Ver. 6.) "He humbleth himself; "who 
casts looks so low ; " " and looketh down so deep." However we read it, the idea is 
that the " Most High God " interests himself in the children of men. He not only is 
concerned with the progress of our race geuerally (as a great emperor may occasionally 
bestow his attention upon the afifairs of a distant province as reported to him by its 
representative), but he occupies his eternity with the intimate knowledge and practical 
government of each nation, province, family, individual soul. To the Infimte One 
nothing can be too small for his regard. „, . , . u » i. 

IV. His uPLiFTiNa poweb and ohaoe. (Ver. 7.) Obviously it could not be 
expected that every godly man would rise in woridly position ; that involves an ac^l 
impossibility; nor would that, if it were possible, be a desirable reward of piety. But 
the good man— who is the faithful, thrifty, reliable man— is very often raised from 
obscurity to eminence, from lowliness to power. And the constant tendency of Christian 
worth and virtue is to convert poverty into competence, want into comfort, misery into 



52 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ra. oxin. 1— Q, 

cheerfulnesg, despair into peace. Indeed, this last is one of the ordinary and continual 
effects of piety. In the gospel of Christ, God is lifting up thoie that have been brought 
down into a sense of condemnation and shame to the holy and blessed heights of hope 
and joy. Christianity is everywhere and always an uplifting power. 

V. His enbichino kindness. (Ver. 9.) We do not sufficiently realize the goodness 
of God in the domestic enrichment with which he blesses us ; in all the love and all the 
happiness that come from the conjugal, parental, filial, fraternal relationships which 
his heart has conceived, which his hand is working for us. All these things bring 
into view — 

VL His stbonq claim on oub bevebknce and fbaisb. As the psalm begins and 
ends with a " hallelujah," so should our lives, in every part, be encircled with the utterance 
of heartfelt gratitude. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 7, 8. — 3%e overflowing gratitude of the saved soinL. How intense is the fervoni 
of praise with which this psalm is full 1 The soul of the psalmist can scarce contain 
Itself, and we are inevitably led to inquire into the reason and occasion of such 
gratitude. It is told of in the verses before us. No doubt the salvation spoken of was 
primarily a national one ; it was Israel who had been so visited of God. It was Israel 
who was sunk so low in misery and degradation — sunk down to the dust and the 
dunghill, BO poor and needy, so lonely, sad, and filled with reproach, like a woman to 
whom had l>een denied the gift of children. But by the grace and condescending 
compassion of QoA, she had Wn lifted up, and set among princes, and she had become 
joyful, like as a mother over her children. From Egypt's slavery to the glories of the 
time of David and Solomon ; from the misery and shame of the days of the destrnction 
of Jerusalem, when they were carried into captivity, to the brighter times of the return 
and restoration ; — such deliverances as these it was which called forth the psalmist's 
and the nation's enthusiastic, grateful song. And the lesson for every nation or com- 
munity which has been blessed of God with great prosperity, as our own nation has, is 
to remember the small beginnings, the humble place we once filled, and to give Gk>d all 
the praise for what he has wrought on our beh^f. But we take our text as descriptive 
of spiritual deliverance — of God's salvation of the souL The gratitude of such soul is 
uttered here. And it rests on these grounds — 

I. The depths fbom which it has been dflifted. They are described as the 
dust, the dunghill, the state of the barren woman. These images present an accumu- 
lation of shame, degrailation, and distress. And the soul that has known the Holy 
Spirit's conviction of sin will know that such images are fit and true. St. Paul called 
himself, to the last, " the chief of sinners." Guilt, bondage to sin, vileness of heart 
and, perhaps, of life too, hopelessness, helplessness, and a fearful looking for of judg- 
ment, — facts like these justify the strong images of the verses before us as telling of 
the soul unsaved. 

II. The heights to which it has been baised. Sue again the images employed. 
And they are true. They express the ideas of honour, wealth, joy, strength, iruitfnl- 
ness; and they are all realized in the experience of the saved soul now, and are to be 
realized infinitely more hereafter. 

III. The infinite condescension of God in all this. The unbeliever has 
objected that it is monstrous to suppose that the gieat God, who controls the 
universe, amid which this earth of ours is a mere shred and insignificant fragment, can 
lie concerned with the petty affairs of man, especially of a poor individual, worthless, 
and sinful man. But is it not true that he who governs the vast universe, worlds 
upon worlds, has yet been at the pains to paint and fashion the wing of the meanest 
insect in most exquisite and perfect manner? If be will stoop to that, he will stoop 
to me, poor wretched sinner though I be. I own it is wonderful; but it is true, 
llallelujahl— S. C. 

Ver. 1. — Servant-reasons for praise. " Praise, ye servants of the Lord." This 
I ^alm is the first of the series called the " Hallel," which was sung in connection with 
(he annual Jewish festivals, and especially at the Passover and Feast of Tabernacles 



M. oiln.l— 9.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 63 

This and the following psalm were sung before the second cup. Wo need not think, 
however, that these psalms were compoaed for use at the feasts with which they were 
afterwards assooiated. Only Jewish minds could recognize any particular fitness for such 
scenes. To us they are simply praise psalms. Here we notice that praise of the Divine 
Master ia properly claimed from all the servants of the Divine Master. 

I. Praise is pboperly claimed fbom all God's oebation. "All thy works 
praise thee, in all places of thy dominion." Poet-souls and pious souls find voice for 
Nature, and utter forth the joy in the Divine wisdom and goodness which all things 
seem to feel. Many of the psalms are nature-psalms. When man is praiseful, he feels 
that everything around him is praiseful too. 

II. Pbaise is fbopeslt claimed fbom the mobal beings God has mads. Inani- 
mate things praise by answering the ends for which they are made, and meeting the 
conditions in which they are set. But moral beings praise by recognizing qualities and 
character in the Divine arrangements. They do not only see goodness, they see that 
only from a good and gracious Being can such goodness come. Man, as man, in dis- 
tinction from man as sinner, or man as in special relations with God, is called to praise, 
as he recognizes the Divine providing, ruling, and overruling. 

III. Praise is properly claimed from the servants who do God's will. 
There may be a special call intended here to the ofBcials of the temple — priests and 
Levites ; but the term " servant " is used by the Prophet Isaiah of the whole people, 
of every person called to a ministry, and of Messiah. And the Apostle Paul delights 
to speak of himself as the servant, bond-servant, .slave, of Jesus Christ. All God's 
people who have come into personal relations with him, and have received his regene- 
rating grace, think of themselves as consecrated to his service, as having become his 
servants. It may be shown that they, in a special way, feel the duty of praise, and 
find reasons for praise. Servant-praise is based : L On knowledge. The intimacy with 
the Master is a continually fresh revelation. 2. On experience. The servant never 
forgets the grace that brought him into the servant-relation. 3. On o£Sce ; for it is 
servant-work to secure the honour of the Master. — B. T. 

Yer. 3. — Universal praise. " From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the 
same, the Lord's Name is to be praised." These figures may be taken as representing 
two notes of universality. 1. From morning to evening, covering all time. 2. From 
east to west, covering all space. Note that the two conditions of human thought are 
" time " and " space.' All space is filled with reasons for praise. All time should be 
filled with the spirit of praise. 

L Time filled with pbaise. It cannot be expected that our whole days should 
be occupied with formal acts of worship ; though such a pious soul as David will evtn 
envy the priests of the temple, who spend all their time in praise. We need to sm 
clearly that " praise " is a cherished spirit of trustfulness, obedience, and holy joy In 
God ; that this can be with us, abiding with us, while we are occupied with our com- 
monplace, everyday avocations ; and that this spirit of praise ever gladly seizes fitting 
opportunities for formal expression. In this sense the good man's praise is universal j 
it covers all his time. It is cherished always ; it is expressed often. And the relation 
of the frequent expression to the constant feeling may wisely be pointed out. Neglect- 
ing expression means fading feeling. Restraining the lips means losing the heart s joy 
and gratitude. If a good man's praise is not universal, as including all his time, it will 
soon become only weak impulse and sentiment. 

II. Space filled with pbaisb. East and west are broader, larger suggestions than 
north and south. They cover all the zones in which man, in his multitudes, can dwell. 
So they include all humanity. It may be noted that this was a strange conception for 
the exclusive Jew; but in the time of the restoration from the Captivity the diffusion 
of the knowledge of God among the heathen had already begun. God's work is in all 
space. God's appeal is made to every man. God's goodness hallows every life. God 
therefore rightly claims universal praise. But there is an element in the redeemed 
man's praise which makes him the fitting leader of the universal choir. All the world 
over, man, should (1) extol his character ; (2) magnify every high and sacred attribute ; 
(3) glory in all his mighty and gracious works ; and (4) honour the Name by which be 
is known. — B. T. 



54 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxni. 1— ». 

Ver. 5. — Likenesses to Ood. "Who is like unto the Lord our God?" The precisa 
point here may be thus expressed: " Who as he combines majesty with condescension?" 
Both heaven and earth, glorious andwnnderful though they are, are alike immeasurably 
below the majesty of God. The psalmist evidently has the idolatry in mind which 
seeks for Buggestions of God's figure either in heaven or in earth. No fitting ones can 
be found. They are all made things ; and the maker is always grander than the things 
he makes. No manufactured article can ever do more than suggest something about 
the man who designed or made it ; it can never give an adequate and complete impres- 
sion of him. Think of the sun as the sublimest of all created things, but it is no more 
fitting to represent God, it is no more worthily a likeness of God, than the images, 
hideous or beautiful, which idolatry or paganism may design. God absolutely refuses 
to permit any likeness to be m»de of him after anything in heaven, or earth, or under 
the earth. Nothing material must be permitted to limit our large, free, spiritual 
thought of him. 

L Likenesses to God in the heavens. Men naturally look up into the heavenf 
first, becatise that is the sphere of mystery, and that inspires awe and leads to adora- 
tion. It does 80 to the uncultured, but how much more it does to the cultured, who 
know that the seemingly little star Uranus is eighty times larger than the earth, 
Neptune a hundred and fifty times larger, Saturn more than veven hundred times 
larger, and Jupiter more than fourteen hundred times larger I The general sentiment 
of humanity bai foimd in our sun the best likeness of God ; but, though this should 
bring to men sublime ideas of grandeur, purity, and power, even the sun is unworthy 
to represent God. 

II. Likenesses to God in the earth. The apostle regards it as a degrading 
descent, that men, unsatisfied with sun-figures, "changed the glory of the incorruptible 
God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, 
and creeping things." It is an impressive proof of the uselessness of the material to 
represent the immaterial, that men who once look to the material fur figures of God 
always tend to go lower and lower in the scale. Nowadays, though we are not likely 
to worship the sun or manufactured idols, there are still though t-iden Is, thought- 
idols, which may be as unworthy to represent the eternal God as the images of otir 
heathen brothers. — R. T. 

Ver. 6. — 27je relative valva of earthly things. There is no absolute value in them. 
God cannot be thought of as interested in them for their own sakes. He humbles 
himself to regard them because of the relation his people bear to them, and because of 
the influence they have upon his people. Of him it has bien suggestively said, "He 
stoops to view the skies, and bows to see what angels do." This we say of God, because 
we have the revelation of him as a Moral Being, with moral as well as natural attri- 
butes. Once let a hi ing take a moral view of things, and the material can never 
afterwards be the all-important thing to him. Once let us take the moral view, and 
we must always take it; fur us the moral must have eternal precedency. 

I. God cannot be thought of as interested in events for their own bakes. 
There is no quality in things. Even we men are not supremely interested in the things 
we make ; we are concerned about the purposes for which we make them, and the uses 
to which they may be put. We go, in thought, past the things themselves. Even 
when God is pictured as calling each day's work of creation "very good," we are 
reminded that his eye was upon the moral beings tor whom he was arranging it all. It 
would help us in, gaining right views of God if we would clearly see that material 
creation is not his end, hut his means to secure a higher end. 

II. God most be thought of as interested in events fob the sake of his 
PEOPLE. Material thino;s, earthly events, human relations, do variously influence the 
moral beings that God has made ; and these various influences we may think of as 
God's sujireme concern. It is not right to say — God made everything for the sake of 
man. This only fills man with pride. It is right to say that God made everything 
for the sake of his purpose in man and through him. Illustrate from the parental 
relation to the mere incidents and events of the boy's life. Parents would not turn 
aside to consider the events if the boy were not in them. It is the boy they consider, 
not the events. All their concern is the influence of the events on the character and 



ps.oxni.1— 9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 65 

life of the boy. Transfer this to the larger, sublimer family sphere of the heavenly 
Father, and then our point comes out clearly. God concerns himself with his world 
for the sake of hia purpose through his people. — B. T. 

Ver. 7. — Ood the Remover of disabilities. " He raiseth up the poor out of the dust." 
The expressions used in this and the following verse are taken from the song of 
Hannah (see 1 Sam. ii. 1 — 10), and similar expressions are found in the song of the 
Virgin Mary (see Luke i. 51 — 53). Historical illustrations of the passage may be 
found in the careers of Gideon, King Saul, and David. The psalmist may hare in 
mind the restoration of the nation from the Babylonish captivity, which was an extreme 
national humiliation. As a fact of Divine dealing, this removing of disabilities may 
be illustrated from the preacher's own experience and observation. But we can so 
fully recognize the Divine wisdom in such dealings in general as to remove all thought 
of Divine favouritism or mere sovereignty. Two of the reasons guiding Divine conduct 
may be considered. 

L God obaoiouslt becoonizeb anp bewabds ohabaoteb. Some of the best 
features of human character can only gain expression and culture under the pressure of 
poverty, burdens, and disabilities. It is the misfortune of many men that they cannot 
be noblest-typed characters because they have never known trouble and strain. There 
are qualities of character in the favoured ones which the poor and tried ones cannot 
attain ; but they are not so important as the qualities of the humbled and suffering 
ones, which the favoured few cannot attain. Since God is specially interested in 
character, he is concerned for the poor and needy, and finds in them persons who are 
fitted for responsible positions. The rise of men of lowly station to ofiSces of influence 
is mainly due to the power of character, and the Divine recognition of character. It 
may be shown that, though this is largely true, it must be taken with some qualifica- 
tions, seeing that men do sometimes rise through force of mind, or characteristic 
qualities, which are quite distinct from moral and religious character. 

II. God finds in those under disabilities fitting pebsons fob his bebtick. 
Here it may bo pointed out that times of disability are often the schooling of the men 
God wants for his work. Poverty, toil, strain, burden, make the training-ground for 
the Lord's heroes. And the man who is placed under any special form of disability 
may comfort himself u ith the assurance that the Lord is needing him, and so needs to 
have Urn disciplined, polished, furbished, by this trying experience. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 9. — The mission of the children. Here is an evident allusion to the Joy of 
Hannah, when her prayer was heard, and Samuel came as the firstborn of a umily. 
*• The Lord visited Hannah, so that she bare three sons and two daughters," and her 
adversary could provoke her no more. It is remarked that the Babbins actually speak 
of a man's wife as his house ; and the same form of speech is current at the present 
day among the Arabs. This joy men have in children, which is characteristic of 
every age and nation, which is, indeed, the imiversal sentiment, leads us to consider 
the mission of the children. Why do they come in helplessness, and take so long 
growing up to their manhood and womanhood ? 

L Childben are sent to oultdbb ohabactbb. This is the other side of the 
truth with which we are familiar — that children have characters which we must 
culture. There is a good sense in which children are sent into the world to " train 
their parents." What they can do is seen in the immediate effect their coming has 
Vipon their mothers. It changes them from thoughtless, self-centred maidens into 
thoughtful, self-denying women. And an equal influence, though not quite so evident, 
is seen in the father. Family life cultures all the graces, the stronger ones no less 
than the milder; and it lays the burden of personal example upon the parents; for a 
child makes demand of father and mother that they will show him the ideal goodness. 
Each element of refined and Ghristly character may be dealt with, and special stress 
may be laid upon " patience " and " charity " in the sense of going outside ourselves 
for our interests. . i , 

II. Children abe sent to keep up our intebest in mobals. This pomt ii 
seldom dwelt on. Yet it is evident that the children come just at the time in our livei 
when material interests— business, society— become so absorbing. Moral and religious 



56 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. OXIT. 1 — 8 



interests would pass out of our thought if it were not that every day brings to us con- 
cern for the children, and that must be a moral concern. The children break into the 
monotony of material middle-life associations. Everyday morals for every parent, and 
morals and religion for most parents, are brought closely to mind. The children are 
God's voice reminding man of eternal things. — B. T. 

Ters. 6 — 8. — Uie Hvine nature and eharacter. " Who is like unto the Lord our GM," 
etc. 7 The views we form of G-od's nature and character are of the highest importance. 

L God's incoupabablb majebtt. (See the fortieth chapter of Isaiah.) But his 
moral greater than his physical greatness. 

IL God's oondescension. " Humbleth himself to behold the things that are in 
haaven and in the earth." Displays a deep and everlasting interest in the works of bis 
hands. 1. Oreat men ttoop to inferior things for the purposes of sdenee. But God has 
a perfect knowledge of all things. 2. Men ttoop to the wants and miseries cf others, 
but do not relinqimh their rank and station. But God in Christ came in the form of a 
servant (Phil. ii. 6—8). 3. Oreat men die for their anmtry or their friends, Intt net 
for their enemie*. " God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet 
unners [and enemies], Christ died for us." 

m. God's BSDEEiuNa coufassion. 1. Man's cha/raeter as a sinner is described. 
He is called poor and needy. Poor and needy indeed 1 As a sinner, he has no real 
ti«aBUTe, and not even any hope. 2. Sis misery is indicated. In the dust and on the 
dunghill — a miserable outcast. 3. His glorious elevation by the redeeming love of Ood. 
Q. &km. iL 8.) He is translated to a seat with princes. " Who hath made us kings 
and priests unto God." — S. 



EXPOSI-nON. 



PSALM OXIV. 
A FBAUi of reminiscence, designed to en- 
cooiage the exiles on their return from 
Babylon, daring their " day of small things " 
(Zeoh. iv. 10; comp. Ezra Ui 12). If God 
had done so much for them when he brought 
them out of Egypt, if such glorious pro- 
digies had marked that epoch, might they 
not be sure that his hand would be stretched 
out for them now ? Formally, the psalm is 
more like a modem poem than most. It 
divides into four stanzas of four lines each, 
very evenly balanced, and perfect in its 
metrical arrangement. " The psalm is evi- 
dently by a skilled artist " (Cheyne). 

Ver. 1.— When Israel went out of Egypt ; 
literally, at the going forth of Israel 
from Egypt; iv i^6Stj: 'IirpilTiA, LXX. The 
"going forth from Egypt" was the only 
thing parallel in Israelitish history to the 
going fortli from Babylon. The nation 
should learn what to expect in the future 
by what occurred in the past. The house of 
Jacob (compare the more common " house of 
Israel," Pss. xoviii. 3; oxv. 12; cxxxv. 19) 
from a people of strange language; lite- 
rally, from a Hammering people; but a 
people of foreign speech is no doubt meant 
(compare the Septuagint, (k AaoS Papfidpov). 

Yor. 2. — Jndah was his sanctuary; or. 



"became his sanotnaiy;" Jnddh— 1.«. flie 
land of Judah — received the speoial hononr 
of being chosen for the seat of God's sano- 
tuary. And Israel his dominion. While 
all the rest of Israel was accepted as consti- 
tuting his kingdom or dominion. The 
whole people came under God's speoial pro- 
tection. 

Ver. 3.— The sea saw it, and fled. "The 
sea" is the Bed Sea. It "looked," and 
saw God leading his people (Exod. xiv. 
19—24), and then at once "fled," and left 
a dry channel as " a way for the ransomed 
to pass over." Jordan (Uterally, the Jordan) 
was driven back (comp. Josh. iiL 13 — 17). 
These two marvels "marked respectively 
the beginning and the end of Israel's long 
journey " (Cheyne). They were parallel facts, 
and are naturally alluded to together (comp. 
Hab. iii. 8). 

Ver. 4.— The mountains skipped like rams, 
and the little hills like lambs. The poet 
sees in the earthquake that shook Sinai 
(Exod. xix. 18) a general commotion of the 
entire region, in which both tlio gruatorand 
the lesser elevations take part (cnmp. Fssi 
xxix. 6; Ixviii. 8, 16). 

Vers. 5, 6. — What ailed thee, thou sea, 
that thou fleddest 1 thou Jordan, that thov 
wast driven back 1 ye monntains, that ye 
skipped like rams ; and ye little hills, liKe 
lambs t Most poetically, the psalmist apo- 
strophizes the sea, the Jordan, the mountains, 
and the lesser hills, inquiring of them fot 



PS. oxiv. 1 — 8.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



67 



what reason they had foraaken their nature 
and done auoh atriinge things; or rather, 
addressing them as present, and as if the 
scenes were heing enacted before his eyes, 
and asking why they are su strangely em- 
ployed — wliat is causing the rommotion 
and disturbance (see the Revised Version, 
where the present tense is used throughout 
the two verses). 

Ver. 7.— Tremble, thou earth, at the 
pretence of the Lord. The answer is given, 
but only indirectly given, in these words. 
Nothing less than "the presence of tlie 
Lord" — a miraculous and abnormal presence 



— can have produced the strange phenomena. 
The earth has felt the presence of God, and 
has trembled, and has done right to tremble ; 
but Israel may take comfort from the theo- 
phauy, for it is a manifestation on her 
behalf. The presence tliat has made itself 
felt is the presence of the Ood of Jacob— the 
God who watche.s over Jacob, and will 
succour and protect him constantly. 

Ver. 8. — ^Which turned the rook into a 
standing water, the flint into a fountain of 
waters (see Exod. xvii. 6 ; Numb. xx. 11). 
Miracles of mercy, showing at once God's 
almightiness and his care for Israel. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — God with us. This psalm, which is bo full of fine poetry, is also 
charged with spiritual suggestiveness. In the few verses of which it is composed, it 
brings before us the nearness of God to us, and the power he is exerting on us. We 
have — 

I. His dwellino-plaoe in vs. " Judah was his sanctuary " (ver. 2). God dwelt 
in Judah in a sense in which ho dwelt nowhere else. There was his manifested presence, 
and thither the tribes came up when they wanted to offer sacrifice, to make suppli- 
cation, to hold high and happy fellowship. It was the place of his abode. Now God 
dwells not merely with, but in, his people. We are " the habitation of God through 
the Spirit." Our human hearts are bis earthly home. To the pure, obedient, believing 
heart that seeks his presence (see Luke xi. 13) God will come, and in that heart he will 
abide. " If any man lore me ... we will come unto him, and make our abode with 
him" (John xiv. 23). 

II. His DtHEBiTANCE IN US. " Israel was his dominion " (ver. 2). The kingdom 
of Israel, i.e. the people who dwelt within it, were God's inheritance (see Ps. xciv. 6 ; 
Jer. ii. 7). If God "rejoices in his works," in those things which he made and 
" pronounced good," much more does he rejoice in his own children — ^in those who 
know, who worship, who trust, who love, who serve, him. More precious than all 
fruitful fields, than " all the cedars of Lebanon," is one human heart that, redeemed by 
his Son and renewed by his Spirit, reciprocates his Fatherly affection, is gladly subject 
to his will, and labours heartily in his cause. How great, then, is his mheritance in 
all his people, in all those of every age and beneath every sky who have returned to 
him, and who are rejoicing in him ! Are we such, in spirit, in conversation, in life, 
that our God can find a part of his Divine heritage in ust 

III. His ENEEOiziNO PBE8BNCB. (Vers. 3 — 7.) What was it that moved the 
mountains, that rolled back the river, that made the waters of the sea to stand np like 
a wall? It was the operative presence of God himself; it was the working of the 
unseen hand. What is it now that makes the tides of the ocean to keep their time, 
the streams and the rivers to fertilize the soil through which they flow, the seed to ger- 
minate in the soil, the corn and the fruit to ripen in the sun? When we have reached 
the ultimate physical cause, we have not obtained the explanation that we seek. We 
come finally to the great fact of God's presence, of the energizing power which he 
supplies, without which there could be no life, no growth, no motion, no result. What 
the psalmist ."ays in fine poetic language, our intelligent piety confirms ; the answer to 
our questions How? and Whence? is this — The presence of the Lord, " without whom 
nothing can be made that is made." "The Lord of hosts is with us;" "My Father 
worketh." 

IV. HiB CONVERTING POvraiK. (Ver. 8.) The " turning of the rock into standing 
water " was a Divine, a wonderful action. But the spiritual and the supernatural are 
as Divine as the miraculous. Equally wonderful as, and more gracious and more 
benignant than, such physical transformation is the changing of the flinty heart into 
the water of penitence, into the fountain of piety and purity. God is doing daily, 



58 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxiv. 1— 8. 

through his people, in his Churches, that which "calls for loudest songs of praise." 
But this, his greatest work, is not on rock, or soil, or sea, or river; it is on the hard 
tahlet of the human heart, and on the sinful habits of the human life. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — The souVs exodus. The psalm is a wonderfully vivid ana beautiful 
description of the deliverance of Grod's people from Egypt. In all ages of the Church 
this has been looked upon as the pattern and type of the soul's deliverance by the 
redemption of Christ. Much of that history is suggested here. We are'shown — 

I. Fbou whence the 80DL WAS BET FREE. 1. From Egypt, the true type of the 
world. At first so pleasant, so prosperous, so Goshen-like, so free from care, life so 
easy and secure. 2. But at length its true character is revealed. Ther are a strange 
— a barbarous, or tyrant, so the word is variously rendered — people. And the redeemed 
soul has found that out. 

II. What happened at this exodus. (Ver. 2.) 1. There was the indwelling of 
Qod. The soul became his shrine. He was worshipped, beloved, tnisted day by day. 
2. There was vnlling obedience. God was the Lord of their life. The soul becomes 
the dominion, the domain, of God. 3. Things heforehand impossible, happetied. 
(Vers. 3, 4.) The sea, symbol of the whole power of spiritual death, saw and fled. 
" You hath he quickened who were dead," etc. It is a true picture of what takes place 
at the real conversion of a soul. Old things pass away. The strt^am and course of life 
are turned in an opposite direction, as was the Jordan. On and on, rapidly flowing 
downwards to the Dead Sea, so was it with the Jordan ; so is it with the soul till its 
redemption comes. But then there is a conversion, a complete turning round, in the 
aims, principles, and motives of the life. The fixed habits and propensities — flzed like 
the mountains and hills of Sinai — the pride, unbelief, selfishness, love of sin, all which 
seemed firmly settled in our nature, are shaken, plucked up by the roots. The rock- 
like heart, so hard and barren and lifeless, becomes transformed as into a standing 
water, a very fountain of waters (cf. John vii. 37, 38). The soul is blessed, and becomes 
a blessing. 

IIL How IS ALL THIS TO BE EXPLAINED ? Men will ask this, and no answer, will 
they find save that it is the presence of the Lord (vers. 5—7). It is the standing 
miracle of the Christian Church. — S. C. 

Ver. 2. — Man is God's temple. " Judah became his sanctuary." Though neither 
the author nor the occasion of this psalm can be definitely known, it clearly belongs to 
the time of the returned exiles, when the remaking of the nation was the matter most 
prominent in the interests of the people. It was quite a familiar thing to compare the 
remaking of the nation with the first making of it; and to get the comforting assur- 
ance that God was presiding over the remaking, by realizing, in as forcible a manner as 
possible, how he had presided over the making. In the making there had indeed been 
very remarkable, truly miraculous, outward and visible signs of the Divine presence — 
the dividing of the Red Sea at the beginning, the quaking mountains in the earlier 
part, the smitten rock and flowing water in the latter part, the divided Jordan at the 
end. After these signs had fixed their impressions, the people could act as a nation. 

I. Odd's presence and power wbbe the glories of the nation from the first. 
This truth was impressed by the marvels which were wrought in connection with theii 
(leliveiance from Egypt. The plagues were indeed judgments; but they were, even 
more truly, teachings, sanctifying impressions made upon the people of Israel. They 
laught them God, and helped them to reahze what God with them would involve. The 
1 luth was impressed by such signs as dividing the sea ; but this only illustrated 
i.od's presence as the Ruler, Rewarder, and Judge of the people. From all material 
>i;;ns of the Divine relations, we should rise to discern the far more important moral 
-i^ns. God himself moulding the national life; God himself directly ruling the moral 
iiimI religious life of the nation ; — these are the marvels of grace and wisdom which ths 
iivvs never tired of contemplating. 

II. Guu'S PRESENCE AND POWER WERE THE GLORIES OF THF RESTORED NATIOK, 



PS. cxiv. 1—8.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 60 



But what a moral advance had been made when men could discern God's working 
in ordinary providences, and no longer needed mlracleB of astonishment! To the 
reatoied exiles common providences became signs of direct working on their behalf. 
And they were right in so thinking. God was making things work together to work 
out the fulfilment of his promise. 

in. God's presence and poweb abb the gloeies of the Chubch to-day. But 
we have risen above the reach of the restored exiles. To us God is present and working 
— ^not in miraculous act, not specially even in providential orderings, but in the 
spiiitual indwelling of the Holy Ghost. Then we may be reminded that there are con- 
ditions of this abiding in us, and that jealousy of our supreme possession is our fitting 
attitude of mind and feeling. — B. T. 

Vers. 3, 4. — Natwre made to serve OocTs purposes. These verses are poetical repre- 
sentations of three actual facts which are recorded in the history of God's people. We 
may see facts in their bare, bald nakedness, or we may see them with the colour on 
them which poetical genius can put. It may be disputed whether bald history or 
suggestive poetry is really the truer to nature, just as it may be disputed whether the 
realistic or the idealistic picture is the truer to life. If natuie is to suggest thoughts 
to men, then men only see Nature aright when they know what she says as well as 
what she is. The poet tells us what Nature says. In these verses we are made to 
understand that the sea felt God working in it, and yielded to his touch. Jordan felt. 
God working in it, and stopped its flowing. Sinai felt God working in it, and responded 
with a trembling of reverence and holy joy. The response of Nature is a lesson for 
man. God would work in his higher powers and his higher spheres; and his response 
should be more prompt than the hurrying waves, more complete than the check of the 
river's flowing, and more joyous than the trembling and dances of the divinely honoured 
hills. The pt<almist was the moral teacher of his times, and had a definite purpose 
before him in thus recalling the most impressive events of the national history. His 
point may be thus briefly stated : Nature does respond to God and serve his purposes, 
— and man should. 

I. Natube does BE8F0ND TO GoD AND SEBVE HIS PUBFOsES. This may be illus- 
trated from the usual and the unusual. Pagans peopled the woods and streams and 
hills with fairies; Wordsworth poetically conceived of Nature as a living being. 
Religion finds God working out bis thought everywhere, and everything responsive to 
his use. Nature is not God ; it is distinct from him. But it is so kin with him that, 
unhindered, bis thought finds expression in it. And so responsive is Nature to Gh>d, 
that it readily yields itself to the unusual, to the miraculous, when these are necessary 
to God's purposes. Seas will part, rivers will stop, mountains will tremble, in response 
to him. " The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof." 

II. Man SHOULD bespond to God and bebve his pubfobes. He should, because 
he is a part of Nature, and ought to be in harmony with her. But man is a higher 
being than any thing or being in Nature — a being with a will, a being made in God's 
image. It is his willing response, it is his loving and obedient outworking of the 
Divine purposes, that God asks of restored exiles and of us. — H. T. 

Ver. 8. — The natural and the supernatural. " Which turned the rock into a pool of 
water, the flint into a fountain of waters " (Revised Version). WoUaston tells us that 
" on the north-eastern face of Mount Sinai (Jebel Sufsafeh), in the Wady Shubeib, is 
a protruding mass of rock, about fifty feet in diameter, much water- and weather-worn, 
and presenting a smooth and striking appearance. It forms a part of the solid 
granite cliff which rises twelve hundred feet above it. In the lower part of this 
protuberance is a fissure of a semicircular, or rather horse-shoe, shape, about fom feet 
long and four inches wide. Out of this fissure, inside which a small shrub is growing, 
runs a perpetual stream of the purest spring water, clear as crystal, and of delicious 
coolness and flavour, which, according to the testimony of the Arabs, has never been 
known to fail. The water thus flowing out ol the very heart of the living rook of 
Sinai is received into an artificial basin, thence it descends to a succession of small and 
rudely constructed terraces, where the Bedouins cultivated a few fruit trees and vege- 
tables, and is ultimately absorbed in the gravelly hollow at the base of the mountain," 



80 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [w. omt.1— 8. 



The incident is, no doubt, thus poetically recalled to the mind of the restored exiles, in 
order to assure them that God, in his power to provide, and his power to meet emer- 
gencies, was all that he had ever been ; and this suggests a very suitable subject of 
meditation, which may be very effectively applied to our times and needs. But a less 
U8\ial topic is suggested by the discovery of what is probably the very spring that 
Moses brought to light. As our knowledge advances, we are coming more and more 
fully to apprehend that the natural and the supernatural are inextricably blended in 
human life, and that in God's working out of his purposes the natural and the super- 
natural are one. See how this is suggested by the smiting of the rock and the result 
which followed. Ko one would suggest that God put the water into the rock specially 
and on purpose for the Israelites. It was there. It was its natural habitat. Ihe 
fountains of water, the pools into which the waters drain, are always in the rocks. 
Miners have to be careful lest they let in upon them the floods of waters that are 
stored in the rocks. Our towns are often supplied with water that is pumped np from 
the reservoirs of the rocks. It was quite natural for the water to be in the rock. And 
man brings the water out of the rock by smiting the rock. Just now the workmen of 
our town have been engaged in tunnelling the chalk lock to get a fresh supply of 
water ; and the other day a workman, smiting with his pick, opened a fissure, from 
which a stream is pouring abundantly. To get water out of the rock by smiting the 
rock was also quite natural. It is fancy that makes Moses only give the rock a 
gentle pat. He imote it ; on the second occasion he even roughly smote it twice before 
the fissure opened. So far the provision was natural, and the method of obtaining it 
alio natural. But how evidently the supernatural was blended with the natural! 
Direct Divine direction fitted the time and the place. No mere human wisdom could 
have thus immediately discovered the exact spot where the rock would yield to a single 
smiting, and send forth its treasures. Only a divinely ordered man would think of 
such a way of relieving the necessities of a caravan. The supernatural character of the 
incident comes at once to view if we think of the leader of an ordinary caravan in that 
Sinaitic district going about tapping the rocks, hoping to meet with a fissure in which 
was a water-store. QoA directed Moses, and he went straight to the place. And the 
marvel that grows ever greater to devout souls, as they pass through the experiences 
of life, is not the mere presence of supernatural forces, but the way in which the super- 
natural blends with the natural, until the deepest feeling is that the natural is lost in 
the supernatural and God, working everywhere, in everything and throi^h every- 
thing, becomes the most cherished thought. Men make sharp lines of distinction 
between the natural and the supernatural. When men come experimentally to know 
what God can do in their own souls and in their own lives, they cease to feel any 
interest in those sharp lines of distinction, for their sphere is the sphere of GkxL To 
them there is no natural. God is in it all, and his presence and actual working makes 
it <dl supernatural. — E. T. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — ITie spiritual exodus. I. Wb hake oub eboapb from a btatb of 
BONDAGE — EoTFT. 1. A life of sin is a life of spiritual hondage. (Bom. vi. 16.) 2. 
Such a life of bondage brings us into "strange " and unnatural rdationa. (Ver. 1.) 
Egypt was not the home of the Israelites. 

II. The spiritual exodus brings ds dtto our true, or Divine, relations. 
(Ver. 2.) 1. We become consecrated temples for the indwdling of tiod. (Ver. 2.) 
" Judah was his sanctuary." 2. We are kingdoms over which Ood reigns. " And 
Israel his dominion." 

III. This exodus is accompanied bt great exoitembntb. 1. There it a grand 
revelation of the presence of Ood. (Ver. 7.) 2. A wonderful proclamation of the Law 
of God. Sinai is shaken by it, and so is the soul of man. Moses said, "I exceedingly 
(ear and quake." 3. There is a revelation of the abundant mercy of Ood. (Ver. 8.) 
This manifestation of God " turned the rock into a atanding water, the flint into t 
fountain of waters." — & 



P8. OXT. 1—18.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



6! 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXV. 
A LTrrBQiOAL psalm, in which a divided 
choir, together with a leader — a priest or 
precentor — take separate parts. The occa- 
sion is one of danger (ver. 2), but, at the 
same time, of confident hope and trust (vera. 
S, 9 — IS). A portion of the choir begin 
with an appeal to God for help against the 
heathen, whose vain worship of idols they 
cover with scorn (Ters. 1 — 8). The leader 
then exhorts to trust in God in the first 
olauie of three consecutive verses (vers. 9, 
10, 11), half the choii responding in the 
■eoond clause. The whole choir raises a 
joyful strain in vers. 12, 13, the leader re- 
sponding in vers. 14—16, and the choir 
and congregation together concluding the 
whole with a final burst of praise in yen. 
17, 18. 

Metrically, the psalm falls into four 
stanzas or strophes — the first of three 
verses (vers. 1 — 3), and the other three of 
five Teraes each (yen. 4 — 8; 9 — 13; and 
14—18). 

Ver. 1. — Not nnto ns, Lord, not unto us, 
bat onto thy Name give gflory. Qod is 
prayed to help Israel, but not for their 
Bakes, not to cover them with glory — rather 
for his own sake, that glory may rest on 
hit Name, and himtelf, among the nations. 
For thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake. 
In order to be true to his qualities of merci- 
fulness and truthfulness. 

Ver. 2. — Wherefore should the heathen 
say, Where is now their Ood ? (comp. Pss. 
xlii. 3, 10; Ixxiz. 10). If Israel is un- 
helped, the heathen will triumph, and ask 
scornfully what has become of Israel's Grod ? 
Is he uiiable, or is he unwilling, to deliver 
them? 

Ver. 8. — But — ratlier, and — as though he 
would say, "and all the wtiile, as the 
heathen scorn and question" — our Qod is in 
the heavens ; in his place, where be always 
is, watching over us. He hath done what- 
loeTer he hath pleased. He has the will to 
help us, and he has the power to do what- 
soever he pleases. 

Yen. 4 — 8. — ^The scorn of the heathen is 
retaliated. They scoff at the God of Israel 
What, then, are their own gods ? Silver and 
gold indeed (ver. 4), but thu work of human 
bands. Fashioned into a human shape, as 
if tliey were sentient beings — but absolutely 



devoid of all sense and intelligence. The 
satire is somewhat roughly worked out 
(vers. 5—7), but idolatry provokes rough 
speaking; and the tone here adopted is 
imitated in Ps. cxxxv. 15 — 18, and echoed 
in Isa. xliv. 9 — 20. The inspired writers 
seem to have felt, that, when idolatry came 
under consideration, the criticism should 
be brief and trenchant 

Ver. 4. — Their idols are silTer and gold. 
At the best — often mere wood and stone 
(Deut. iv. 28); but the idols of the Baby- 
lonians were mostly of the more precious 
materials (Herod., i. 183; Dan. iii. 1 ; Ep. 
Jerem., i. 4, 11, etc.). The work of men's 
hands (Ps. cxxxv. 15; Isa. xliv. 12—17). 
To avoid this reproach, some images were 
said to have fallen down from heaven (Acts 
xix. 35). 

Vers. 5—7. — They have mouths, but they 
speak not : eyes have they, but they see not : 
they have ears, but they hear not : noses 
have they, but they smell not: they have 
hands, but they handle not : feet have they, 
but they walk not: neither speak they 
through their throat. Possessing a sem- 
blance of every organ of human sense, they 
are wholly nnable to perform any of the 
functions. That men should worship them, 
or believe in their power to help, is an utter 
absurdity. 

Ver. 8. — ^They that make them are like 
unto them. Equally vain, futile, and power- 
less (comp. Isa. xliv. 9 ; Jer. ii. 5). So is 
every one that trusteth in them. To " trust " 
in an idol is an almost inconceivable folly. 
Yet tiiere is abundant proof that the heathen 
actually did so trust (see Herod., v. 80 ; viii. 
64, 83). 

Vers. 9 — 11. — The idols and the idol-wor- 
shippers having been sufficiently scorned, 
the latter especially, for their " trust " in 
idols, Israel is exhorted to trust in the only 
sure Object of confidence, Jehovah. Three 
several times the leader of the choir gives 
forth the call—" Trust in the Lord "—and 
three several times the choir responds with 
the acknowledgment that he, and he alone, 
» is their Help and Shield." The exhorta- 
tion seems to be addressed, first, to the lay 
people generally (ver. 9) ; then to tbe cleri- 
cal order (ver. 10) ; finally, to all, whether 
laity or clergy, wlio are true Israelites at 
heart (comp. vers. 12, 13). 

Ver. 9. — Israel, trust thou in the Lord. 
Follow not the example of tbe heathen 



62 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. OXT. 1 — 18. 



who trust in idols. Bather, be an example 
to them. He is their Help and their Shitld 
(comp. Ps. xxxiii. 20). The change of per- 
son implies a cb;mge of speaker. 

Ver. 10. — house of Aaron, trust in the 
Lord. God's ministera were yet more bound 
than his people generally to trust in him. 
He is their Help and their Shield (comp. 
ver. 9). 

Ver. 11. — Ye that fear the Lord, trust in 
the Lord. Professor Cheyne explains this 
of proselytes, the a-e^ifiwot of tlie Acts ; but 
sorely the order followed is one of climax — 
first, ordinary Israelites; next, those o£Sci- 
ally holy, the priests ; finally, those actu- 
ally holy, the truly faithful Israelites. He 
is their Help and their Shield. It would 
have been better in every case to have kept 
the Hebrew order of the words — "Their 
Help and their Shield is he." 

Vers. 12, 13. — The whole choir, or perhaps 
the whole congregation, expresses its confi- 
dence in God. He has always been mind- 
fill of his people, and, in response to their 
threefold expression of trust, will bestow on 
them a threefold blessing. 

Yer. 12. — The Lord hath been mindful of 
ni (comp. PsB. xcviii. 4 ; cxxxvL 23). He 
vill bless us; he will bless the honse of 
Israel (comp. ver. 10). He will bless the 
house of Aaron (comp. ver. 11). 

Yer. 13. — He will bless them that fear the 
Lord (comp. ver. 12). Both small and 
great ; literally, the imall with the great ; 
i.e. all, without any exception. 

Yers. 14 — 16. — Again the leader raises 
his voice and announces special — no longer 
general — blessings: (1) increase of their 
numbers (ver. 14) ; and (2) inheritance of 
the earth (ver. 16). 

Yer. 14. — The Lord shall inorease you 
more and more. This was the original 
blessing bestowed on Abraham (Gen. xiii. 
16 ; xvii. 4 — 6), and continually reiterated 
(Gen. xviii. 1 8 ; xxii. 17 ; xxviii. 14, 
etc.). It is much dwelt upon by Isaiah 
(xlix. 8—12, 18—23; liv. 1—3; Ix. 3—12, 
etc). The main fulfilment of the promise 



was through the conversion of the Gentiles, 
who, when converted, leoame the true 
"Israel of God." But, even apart from 
this, the lineiil descendants of Abraham 
have "inoieased more and more," to an 
extent whicli is most extraordinary. Ion 
and your children. You yourselves shall 
increase ; but your children shall yet more 
increase. The multiplying would begin at 
once, but would be greater and more strik- 
ing afterwards. 

Yer. 15. — Te are the blessed of the Lord 
which made heaven and earth ; i.e. of the 
true Lord and God, the Creator of all things, 
visible and invisible. 

Yer. 16. — The heaven, even the heavens, 
are the Lord's; literally, the heavent art 
heavens of Jehovah. They lielong to him — 
he dwells there; bnt it is otherwise with 
the earth. Bnt the earth hath he given to 
the children of men. For man God framed 
this fair world ; to man's use he adapted it 
with minutest care ; and certainly not least 
for his own people, who are " the salt of the 
earth " — ^the human laoe by lepresentation. 

Vers. 17, 18. — Once more the choir and 
congregation speak. The mention of 
" heaven and earth " (ver. 15} reminds them 
of the third place — Sheok In Sheol is no 
praise of God, but only "nlence." They, 
at any rate, while they remain on earth, 
and have the power to praise God, will 
praise him without ceasing. 

Yer. 17. — The dead praise not the Lord 
(comp. Pss. vL 5; xxx. 9; Ixxxviii. 11; 

Isa. xxxviii. 18). Neither any that go down 
into silence. The notipn of SUeol as a place 
of silence occurs inPs. xoiv. 17, and strongly 
in Isa. xxxviii. 18 (see the 'Pulpit Commen- 
tary on Isaiah,' vol. ii. p. 39). 

Yer. 18. — Bnt we will bless the Lord; 
literally, we will blesii Jah — the shortened, 
and perhaps more emphatic, form of Jehovah. 
We, BO long as we have any being, will sing 
pi-aises unto our God (Ps. cxlvi. 2)— we will 
bless him, praise him, give thanks to him, 
from this time forth, and for evermore— not 
an absolute assertion of immortality, but a 
strong instinctive anticipation ot it. Praise 
iihe Lord (see Pss. oiv. — cvi., cxiii., etc.). 



HOMILETICS. 

Yers. 1 — 11.— True and false worship. In strong, nervotis language we have here 
presented to us — 

L The majesty and the poweb or God. (Ver, 3.) The heathen, in their ignor- 
ance, want to know where Jehovah is ; they cannot see him. The reply is that he 
does not dwell in temples made with hands ; that he is not confined to one building, 
larger or smaller; that no rarthly trappings or grandeurs in any sacred city give any 
notion ol his state. " Our God is in the heavtns; " he dwells in celestial glory ; he is 



PS. oxv. 1—18.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 63 



high above us; his throne is not found here or there, but everywhere; beneath every 
sky you may look up and say, " God reigns on high." But not only does majesty 
belong to him, all power is his. " He hath done whatsoever he hath pleased." The 
psalinist does not state, but he suggests, that everything the idols could not do was 
within the power of the living God. He was speaking to men everywhere and at all 
times — in the sunshine and in the storm, in the dew and in the snow, in the con- 
sciences of men, in the words of his prophets, in the divinely given Law. He saw all 
things and all men : " Eis eyes beheld, and his eyelids tried, the children of men." He 
heard everything ; to his ears came the faintest whisper that proceeded from the lips 
of the lowliest, as well as the songs of the great congregation. He wrought every- 
thing; his hands fashioned us ourselves, and made all things about and above and 
beneath us : he " lays his hand upon us," to inspire and renew us. And though it 
never pleases God, and never can please him, to do anything that is unholy or unjust 
or onmnd, yet is there no limit to his power. " All things are possible " to him. 
The spheres of nature, providence, and grace supply ample evidence that apparent 
impossibilities give way before his Divine wisdom and overcoming might. 

IL The follt and the doom of the idolateb. (Vera. 2, 4 — 8.) 1. He thinks 
that God cannot be anywhere because his eyes have not rested on his form (ver. 2). 
2. He continues to worship an image which owes its existence to his own cunning 
(ver. 4), and which cannot use its own organs (vers. 4 — 7), which are heljjless and 
powerless (see Isa. xliv. 9 — 20). 3. He is destined to be miserably disappointed in 
the object of his trust; he will gain no help in his time of need, and, being thus unbe- 
friended, he will himself lose heart and strength ; the impotence of the idol will be 
conveyed to its deluded worshipper. 4. He will become like his idol in the moral 
character he ascribes to the deity. " Like priest, like people " is not so true an adage 
u ** Like god, like people." Men always tend to become such, in character and life, as 
is the deity they adore. 

nL The pbivileoe and the duty op the devout. (Vers. 9 — 11.) The wor- 
shippers of the true aud living God : 1. Have at their right hand an Almighty Friend, 
one who (1) will enable them to spend their powers and their life in usefulness and 
happiness, — QoA is their Help ; (2) will be their Defence in time of trouble, guard- 
ing them from evil, or sustaining them in sorrow, — God is their Shield. 2. Should 
place in him an unraltering trust. It becomes all the people of God (ver. 9), especi- 
ally all those who hold any position of prominence in Israel (ver. 10), and particularly 
those who know and who declare themselves to be his servants, to put their trust in 
him. It is a painful spectacle when the avowed children of God begin, even at the 
veiy outbreak of trouble, to show signs of agitation and alarm. That does not " become 
the gospel " (Phil. i. 27) ; it does not " become saints " (Eph. v. 3). It ia unworthy 
of those to whom Christ has spoken such words as those he uttered (Matt vL 25 — 34 ; 
xxviii, 20; John xiv. 1, 2, 21—23). 

IV. PiOTV IS its matubitt. (Ver. 1.) We may begin our Christian life by an 
earnest craving for the salvation of our own souL Later on, when we have learnt some- 
thing of the wisdom which is in Christ, we make our personal hope second and subor- 
dinate to the glory of Christ. We pray that his great and holy Name may be magni- 
fied. We are willing to be nothing, that he may be all in alL 1. Because of all that we 
have experienced of his mercy and his truth — the mercy that redeemed and restored 
us, the truth that has nourished and strengthened us — we long and pray for this. 2. 
In order that his mercy and his truth may be extended to every land and every home, 
this it our prayer. We may test the progress we have made in our Christian course by 
the nnselfishness, the Christwardness, of our devotion. 

Y^g, 12 18. — Ood't practical kindness, past and future. Much as is said in ver. 

12 more is implied. Written in full, it wotUd read thus: " The Lord has been mind- 
ful of us : he has blessed us ; he will still be mindful of ns, and will still bless us." 

We have— 

L Qov'a OBEAT KINDNESS IN THE PAST. 1. Hls thoughtfuluess of US. He has had 
us in his mind, has " remembered us in our low estate," has been concerned for our 
true welfare, has rejoiced in our well-being, has sympathized with us in our sorrows. 
2. His action on our behalf. He has blessed us ; he has given to us a great estate — 



64 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [m. oxt. 1—18. 

this earth — for our use (ver. 16). He has blessed us with material bounties, with the 
happy hoods of kindred and friendship, with the treasures that feed and satisfy the 
mind, with all sacred privileges. 

XL Its oontindanoe in teaks to cohe. " He will bless us," will " increase " us. 
The guarantees of this continuance are found : (1) In his own unchangeableness — ^he 
is the same for ever. (2) In the fact that we are his own people, those whom his Son 
haa redeemed with his own blood. If Israel, if the house of Aaron, might count on his 
kindness by reason of their relationship to him, much more may we, who are his 
children by faith in Jesus Christ I (3) In the loyalty and obedience we intend to main- 
tain : those who " fear him " (ver. 13), who worship and serve him, will, as his servants, 
draw down his benediction and his blessing ; the humblest as well as the highest of 
these may claim his mercy and his grace. But is there not — 

III. a" TIME-LIMIT TO BIS BEBVIOE. "The dead praise not the Lord" (ver. 17). 
We have it in oui heart to seek and serve the Lord ; and we believe that, so long as we 
do, we may reckon on his abounding kindness. But how long will that last? At any 
moment " death may interrupt these songs." A flash of lightning, an engine off the 
nuls, a puff of poisonous air, a chill, may bring the holiest and the wisest to the grave. 
And there is perpetual silence — ^no more song, no more service, no more rejoicing in 
that " long home." That is so; but then we have — 

IV. The tbueb and the labgeb outlook. Coming after Christ, we can give to 
the " evermore " of ver. 18 a meaning which goes beyond the psalmist's thought. We 
think not of our departed as silent in the grave ; we think of them as blessing and 
praising Christ in the heavens, as spending their powers in his higher service there, 
as taken out of, and not doum into, the shadows of time, and introduced into the 
blessed light and un&ding glories of eternity. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — ^18. — The heathen taunt, and what came of it. To Israel, recently returned 
from exile, that taunt still seemed to sound in their ears. In this psalm, apparently a 
liturgical one, and used at high festivals in the service of the second temple, the mock- 
ing question of those who had held them in captivity — " Where is now their (Jod ? " — 
was yet audible, through the keenness with which it was remembered. The sting and 
anguish of it stUl rankled in their hearts ; and this psalm is the result of it. Consider, 
then — 

I. The hooeinq question of the heathen, "Where is now," etc.? This, no 
doubt, was often asked. They had heard of the ancient glories of Israel, and the won- 
derful works God had done lor them ; but what a contrast was now presented — the 
abject condition into which Israel had fallen I And the character of the people also, as 
a whole, won scant respect. It was but a remnant, an elect few, that cherished the 
sacred memories of the past, and who were prepared, when opportunity came, to go 
back to their own land. But to the faithful few the question was full of pain. And 
Lere, in this psalm, we see — 

IL The effect of it upon the minds of the faithful. 1. it humbled them 
he/ore God. Yer. 1 is a confession of their own unworthiness, that no glory was due 
to them. And to-day, when the world mocks and scorns as it does, the people of God 
may well make like confession and similar disclaimer of all merit. Had the Church 
been different, the world would not have mocked as it does. 2. It led them to Ood to 
$eek his aid, that this mockery on tlie part of the heathen should cease (ver. 2). 
They desired that God would manifest his glory, and so silence the heathen scorn. 
And this is the need of the Church to-day. Let God be seen in our midst, and the 
taunt of the world will sink into silence. 3. Submission to God's will. (Ver. 3.) They 
knew that God was in the heavens, possessed of all power, wisdom, holiness ; and 
whatever he pleased could ouly be right. It was not fur them to dictate, but only to 
submit. They could trust him, that in due time he would interpose. 4. Scorn o/ 
idols and those who worshipped them. (Vers. 4 — 8.) The very brightness of their 
conception of Qoi showed up all the more the darkness of ignorance in which the 
heathen lived. And the psalm pours out its sacred scorn of these mtre dolls before 



PS. oxv. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 65 



which the heathen howed down. Hence the scathing sarcasm and concentrated con- 
tempt of these memorable rerses. But has the day passed when men's " idols are 
silver and gold " ? Is not that the exact description of ourselves as a nation ? Do not 
we worship silver and gold ? Would that we could but catch the contagion of the 
contempt which pervades these verses for our idols of to-day 1 We need to, and shall 
have to ; and if we will not learn by gentle means, God will have to purge us of our 
idolatry by methods sharp and terrible, like as those by which Israel was brought to a 
better mind. 6. Earnest endeavour to arouse one (mother to trust only and altogether 
in Ood. (Vers. 12 — 15.) Would that the world's contempt of Christians to-day led 
them thus earnestly to stir one another up to a more completely God-surrendered life ! 

6. Beneioed assurance of the grace and goodness of the Lord in his faithful people. 
(Vers. 12 — 15.) This follows on — ^it always does — earnest endeavour to deepen the 
hold of God on the hearts of others. Our own hearts come to be filled with deep and 
blessed sense of God's love, and the witness of the Spirit is heard full and clear within. 

7. Fresh consecration to Ood. This seems to be the force of the concluding verses of 
the psalm (vers. 16 — 18). The Lord in the heavens is sure to do his part ; but we are 
here to do ours. Our time, however, is but short, for we are hastening to the grave 
where the dead are, and where none can praise God ; therefore let us use our time 
well ; and, Qoi helping us, we will (ver. 18). 

III. Lessons for oubselves. 1. How completely was the heart of Israel turned 
round I Their besetting sin before the Exile had been idolatry and departure from God. 
But nowl God knows how to turn our hearts altogether to bimself. 2. The contrast 
qfthe Christian's faith as to the life after this with the faith of Israel. Theirs is dark, 
ours is bright. — S. 0. 

Ver. 12. — Looking back and looking on: a new year's sermon. There never has 
been a year in which, when we look back, we have been unable to say, " The Lord 
hath been mindful of us." And we may be sure there never will be a year of which, 
when we look forward to it, we may not say, " The Lord will bless us." The psalmist 
is quite sure about this : may we be so likewise I But — 

I. Let uti LOOK back along the ooubse of the old teab. 1. We affirm our 
conviction that we all should make thankful confession of the Lord's mindfulness of tu, 
2. But many wUl look back in far other ways. (1) Some in self-congratulating spirit, 
but with no thankfulness to God. They will say to themselves, that what good they 
have won has been all their own doing. But for their own mindfulness of them- 
selves, there would have been but little to be glad about. (2) Others will deny that 
the Lord hath been mindful of them ; it seems to them that be has forgotten them, if 
he has not turned against them. They point to their lessened, much lessened, 
-esources. They were ever so much better off at the beginning of the year than they 
are now. Or here is a widow mourning bitterly the loss of her husband and the 
father of her now helpless children. Or a husband, whose home is darkened by 
bereavement of his beloved wife. Or others, who are kept prisoners on beds of weak- 
ness, hopeless disease, or pain. " What 1 " say these, " hath the Lord been mindful of 
us ? It does not at all seem like it." 3. Well, ux reply, if he has not, then it is very 
unlike him. (1) For his mindfulness of us is certainly not a recent thing ; he says to hia 
people that the kingdom has been prepared for them from before the foundation of the 
world. (2) And all around us are proofs of his loving forethought. See in the history 
of creation how all our needs were thought of before man was placed on the earth. 
You cannot do so simple a thing as put some coal on the fire without being reminded 
of this. Where did that coal come from ? Was it not got ready for our use long ere 
we could need it ? (3) And in the kingdom of his grace this mindfulness of us is con- 
■picuously seen. Christ was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. God 
was not taken by surprise when sin entered our world and began to do its deadly 
work. God had reckoned with it, and had determined that where sin did abound, 
grace should much more abound. The two arms of Christ's cross embrace — one, all 
the sinners of the past ; the other, all J;hat shall be to the end of time. " The mischief 
is more than met by the remedy, the malady by the medicine, and the plaster is as 
wide as the wound" (M. Henry). (4) And it is true also in God's personal dealings 
with ufl. Reckon up your mercies — spiritual, temporal, personal, relative — and set 
psalms — ^m. *■ 



68 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxt. 1— 18. 

them over against your sorrows, and see whicli are most numerous. (5) And think, 
too, of what our deservings have been. Then see if you can deny any more that God 
has been mindful of you. 

II. Let ub look on thbouoh the new tbae, and be assueed that God will 
HELP vs. 1. It is an argument drawn from what has gone he/ore — and it is valid. 
We reckon, in regard to men, that what has been will be. The law of habit ensures 
this. And we may reverently say that God himself conforms to this law. Hence 
we may reason from what he hath done to what he will do. 2. Furthermore, he has 
known aM along what reasons there wre why he should not bless us. No one can tell Otod 
anything worse of us than he already knows. 3. And we are in Christ by faith in 
him. Therefore we are accepted in Christ. Shall not, then, God with him freely 
give us all things? 

CoNOLUBioK. 1, We will believe that he will bless us. 2. Inasmuch as his blessing 
is given into the hands outstretched in prayer and faith, and that move in obedience 
to him, so shall our hands be, and thus will we confidently exjiect his blessing. 3. 
And we wUl tell others of this. — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — Honour in Jumouring Ood. This psalm evidently belongs to the time when 
the restoration from Babylon was only partially accomplished. The little colony settled 
in Jerusalem and the district immediately round the city, were the scorn of the 
neighbouring petty nations, which were all heathen, and of the Samaritans, whose 
assistance in building Jehovah's temple they, perhaps unwisely, had refiised. This 
psalm in a way meets scorn with scorn. Jehovah's people scorn the idol-worship of 
the nations, and the idol-nations scorn the insignificance of the company that talked 
BO grandly about restoring the kingdom of David. But that is the darker side of the 
psalm. It is better to see that the scorn was but an unworthy expression of a state 
of mind and feeling that was good and right. Among the restored exiles there was 
great zeal for God, great jealousy for the honour of Jehovah ; and it was this that made 
them refuse association with the semi-heathen Samaritans, and think so scornfully of 
the idol-worshippers. Not limiting ourselves to the state of mind of him who wrote, 
and those who sang, this psalm, let us regard the psalm as expressing generally the 
humble, loyal, zealous feeling of all true Jehovah-worshippers, and then three things 
are suggested. 

I. PoTTiNO ODB H0N01TB ABIDB. " Not unto US , . . givc glory." It is a universal 
experience that when God is really apprehended, self goes into the second place. It 
must be so. God can be in no place but the first. In the sphere of morals it is true 
that the most miserable of men is he who is anxious about his own dignity. He will 
turn everything into offence. In the sphere of religion it is true that the first sign of 
regeneration is the humility that claims nothing for self. " Not by works of righteous- 
ness which we had done ; " " Not of works, lest any man should boast." 

II. Seeking God's honoub. " Unto thy Name give the praise." Dr. Chalmers 
Bpoke of " the expulsive power of a new affection." It is fully true of the soul's affec- 
twn for God. It expels self and everything else, and compels a man to set God's 
honour first, to live for God (compare St. Paul's exclamation, " To me to live is Christ "). 
God's honour is sought by leing good and by doing good ; in relations, worship, and 
work. This aim glorifies all forms of life. 

in. Pmraua that we gain oue honoub in seeking God's. In two ways. 1. The 
very effort to seek Chxl's honour cultures us in the character that wins for us 
honour. 2. And God makes the honour of men come to us as his benediction 
on our loyalty. — E. T. 

Ver. 2. — The taunt of the unbeliever, " Where is now their God ? " (compw Ps. 
xlii. 3). The expression is to be understood by the help of the associations of the psalm. 
It is always trying to be despised; always hard to work on faithfully under jeers and 
taunts. The neighbours of the restored exiles did not dare actually to interfere with 
them, because they were under the protection of the Persian authority ; but they could 
taunt them and laugh at them. And it must be admitted that there was apparent 
occasion. The exiles were poor and lew. They had been stopped in buiWing .heir 
temple, and there were nothing but foundations to be seen. It might be said — If your 



.■s. oxv. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 67 

Qod can do anything, he surely can get his own temple built. They dare not attempt 
to nuse the walls and fix new gates and enclose the city ; for every attempt would be 
checked. It might be said — If your Qt)d really cared for you, he would help you to 
defend yourselves. The pious souls were deeply hurt by this reproach cast on their 
God, and could only find rest in assuring themselves that if his will was a sovereign 
wilt, it wag influenced by covenant promises. We can always turn from our doubting* 
as to what God does, and find our satisfaction in what OmA is. 

I. The stbain involved in incompleteness. We start out with a distinct life 
aim and purpose ; but the years pass by, and all we have, as the result of labour and 
wsitrng, is an unfinished building, like some of the cathedrals. Then we are apt to 
lose hope, and to say — ^Not done now, it will never be done. So the years had passed 
for the exiles, and the new nation was still in a most incomplete state. No walls, no 
temple, no real freedom, no independent native government. It was a big strain on 
fiuth to Bee the nation's hope ever realized. 

II. The intensifying op the btbain through misconceptions. It was hard to 
see and to feel the incompleteness ; but it was harder still to be told about it, to 
have it pointed out, and to be taunted with it. Those enthusiastic Jews who came ont 
from Babylon expecting at once to accomplish great things, could see well enough the 
mere foundations of the temple, and the heaps of the ruined walls ; but it was bitter- 
ness indeed to have some one come up as they were looking, and whisper in their ear, 
" Where ie now thy God?" 

in. The belief of the strain bt chebishino tbustful thoughts of God. 
(Yer. 3.) The check on our work God puts. Incompleteness is his permission. Failure 
is his discipline. If God is in them, and their state pleases him, then our incomplete 
things are blessings in disguise.— B. T. 

Ver. 4. — 37l« inefflcieimsy of idolatry. " The work of men's hands." Denunciation 
of the idolatry of the heathen is characteristic of the psalms of the restoration. With 
this passage may be compared such passages as Isa. zliv. 9 — 20. In treating of idols 
it should be borne in mind that they are di£ferently regarded by their intelligent and 
unintelligent worshippers. The mystical Hindu will tell us that his idols are to him 
nothing more than are to us the pictures of absent or dead friends. They are helps to 
memory and imagination. But to the great mass of heathen the idol-figure is the 
actual god worshipped, the embodiment of the god, the shrine of the god. So Scrip- 
tare is justified in its scorn of the idol-deities. The point presented here is the 
helplessness of idols, in that they have organs of sense, but no sensibility. There is 
an argument in the simple statement that they are " the work of men's hands." 

I. Man's handiwork is inferior to his best thought. No man ever yet reached 
with his hands what he had conceived in his mind. The artist's idea is better than 
his picture. It is inferior to the artist himself. The sculptor's figure is better than 
the model he produces. The literary man never writes as good a book as he intends 
to write. It is the imiversal fact that a man is always greater than anything he creates, 
or anything he accomplishes. And this must be true when a man attempts to mould 
with his hands the figure of his thought of God. He cannot imprison in gold, or silver, 
or clay, or wood, his whole thought. And he himself remains a nobler being than the 
god he creates ; and so the god should worship him, and not be thegod. 

IL Man's best thought must be inferior to deitt. This is true of the Je«< 
man's hest thought. But what guarantee can we have that the idol-maker is a iest 
man, and that best man at liis lest f Grant that the primary creations of Baal or 
Vishnu were the best conceptions of best men, still we face the fact, that, necessarily, 
the conception was short of the reality. No man by searching can find out God ; and 
no man by imagining can find him out so as to represent him. Then this follows : 
God himself must give to men the earth-pattern of himself. He has done it. But the 
earth -pattern is no Mng, no likeness of any thing in heaven and earth and sea. It is the 
Uviug Being, the " Man Christ Jesus," " express Image of his Person." — B. T. 

Ver. 6. — Like god, like people. "They that make them shall be like unto them." 
This suggests a topic in the line of the previous homily. It is a law which works in 
a twofold way. As is the god who is worshipped, so are the people who worship. As 



^^ THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps, oxv. 1— 18. 



is the people who worship, so are the gods whom they create for worship. It is, indeed, 
the very essence of the idea of a God worthy to he worshipped, that he shall be revealed 
to man, not created by him ; that he shall be in the sphere of man's thoughts, and so 
apprehensible ; but beyond the reach of man's thoughts, and so a perpetual inspiration 
to him. The reproach which Jehovah makes to his people is that they have not kept 
him beyond them, but have reduced him to their level. - " Thou thoughtest that I was 
altogether such an one as thyself." We have seen that what men attempt to embodv 
when they make their owq gods is themselves ; the gods are like the people. The 
• baracteristics (jf any nation can be known by a study of its gods ; and the characteristics 
of any particular age of a nation can be known by its relation to, and treatment of, the 
national gods. Therefore the history of the nations is so largely the history of the 
Qational religions. 

I. Let men make their own gods like themselves, and thet will never hake the 
O0D8 LIKE THEMSELVES AT THEIR BEST. Whatever may be thought about the formu- 
lated doctrine of original sin, the fact of universal moral deterioration is bound to be 
generally accepted. And the sign of it is that man is not interested in his best ; 
perhaps not even able to set before himself the image of himself at his bt;st possible. So 
there never yet was an idol-god made that even represented its maker at his noblest. 

IL Let men make their own gods like themselves, and they will be sube to 
MAKE the gods LIKE THEMSELVES AT THEiB WORST. Thls Can be effectually illus- 
trated by the Kali, Sarasvati, Juggernaut, of India; the Baal and Ashtaroth of 
Phoenicians ; the Moloch of Amorites ; and even the refined and ai tistio creations of 
Grecian genius ; for these represent man sensual, which really is man at his lowest. 
And this fact, that if man makes his own gods he makes them like himself at his worst, 
may be shown to be equally true of those immaterial, mental, figures of God which 
men now make as the idols of an inttllectual age. They are no more worthy of God than 
the hideous figures of India, and this is the serious feature of the case. Let man make 
his god after the pattern of himself at his worst, and the god he makes and worships 
will inevitably debase him lower and lower. — B. T. 

Ver. 9. — The call to trust implies imperilled trust. This and the following verses 
were, apparently, sung as responses. This explains the repetition of the same idea. The 
scornful taunts of the surrounding peoples might have had a seriou.s influence on 
Jehovah's servants. It might have taken all heart out of them. Probably many of 
the weaker ones did flag under the discouragements, and so there was a real need of 
this pleading of the psalmist for full and even rejoicing trust in God. The confidence 
lelt by one man will often inspire the confidence of others. When one man can see 
God plainly working as Helper and Defender, he, in a very wonderful way, opens the 
eyes of others to see the same signs of Divine presence and power. Our trust in God 
passes from one to another, even as does an epidemic disease. And it may also be 
shown hiiw oiten psalm and song help us to fetch back imperilled trust. Treating the 
case of the restored exiles as illustrative, we may see how our trust in God may now 
be imperilled — 

I. By God'b unfctlfilled promises. Some of God's promises really belong to our 
future, and we have no right to look for their present fulfilment ; but such is the 
restlessness of man, that he persists in thinking he ought to have everything now. 
And as he cannot, he readily regards some of God's promises as unfulfilled. So through 
long ages men expected the promised Messiah, and often lost their faith and dimmed 
their hope because be did not come. But God's promises never are unfulfilled. It is 
only this — ^he has our whole lives to work in, he has all the ages to work in. Compare 
our Lord's saying, " My time is not yet come, but your time is alway ready." Trust 
Biiould make a treasure of the promises. 

II. By God's incompletely fulfilled pbomibes. It is harder to keep trust when a 
promise has begun to be fulfilled, and has been checked in the fulfilment, than when 
it is altogether delayed. It was harder for the exiles to look on the new foundations 
of the temple than on the old ruins. There is no feature of Divine discipline that so 
severely tries our power to keep on trusting, as this checking of blessings that have 
begun to be bestowed ; this asking us to accept of incomplete fulfilments. 

III. By God's misunderstood promises. So often we take God to promise what 



PS. oxT. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 69 

we mish him to promise, rather than what he does promise. Then we raise unreason- 
able expectations, and get unreasonably depressed when they are not fulfilled. God 
may test and try our trust, but he never puts it in peril ; we do that when we cannot 
wait, and persist in misunderstanding. — B. T. 

Ver. 12. — The certainty of the Divine benediction. "He will bless us." The 
repetition of the word " bless " adds great effect to this passage. The Lord has many 
blessings, each one worthy to be remembered — he blesses, and blesses, and blesses again. 
Where he has once bestowed his favour, he continues it, his blessing delights to visit 
the same house very often, and abide where it has once lodged. Blessing does not 
impoverish the Lord ; he has multiplied his mercies in the past, and he will pour them 
forth thick and threefold in the future. He will have a general blessing for all who 
fear him, a peculiar blessing for the whole house of Israel, and a double blessing for 
the sons of Aaron. It is his oature to bless, it is his prerogative to bless, it is his 
^lory to bless, it is his delight to bless ; he has promised to bless, and therefore be sure 
of this — he will bless, and bless without ceasing. The subject dealt with should be 
this — The past is the pledge of the future. A nation makes a fatal mistake when it 
separates itself from its past; though it misuses the past when it binds itself with 
precedents, and so destroys its own freedom and individuality. A man makes the 
gravest mistake when he separates himself from his past, but he makes as grave a 
mistake wheti he persists in forcing his present life and relations into the old moulds. 
What is always safe to do is, keep in mind what God has been to us in the past. Our- 
selves in our past seldom teach us much. In regard to human expeiience, Fronde's 
word is a wise one, " Experience is like the stern-lights of a ship, which tlirow their 
rays on a way which has been taken." God in our past always teaches us much, seeing 
that we have no very definite aim in working for ourselves, and he has a very definite 
aim in working for us. 

L God has blessed ns. How true this is seen to be in a review of the history of 
God's people Israel 1 Especially if we take, as the chief idea of God's blessing, over- 
ruling/or Ood. The more clearly we understand our own lives, the more fully we shall 
realize that as our best idea of God's blessing. Certainly it is what would most come 
home to the restored exiles. 

II. Goo IS BLESsiNO ns. This is a fact of observation ; a conviction of feeling; and 
an argument from the nature of God. We cannot conceive of him as beginning to do a 
good, and leaving it off ; and the blessing we need is blessing that we continuously need. 

IIL God will blebs us. Since we are well assured that our conditions, relations, 
and needs will remain much the same, and call still for his merciful overriilings and 
blessings. — K, T. 

Ver. 17. — The responsiblity of being alive. " The dead praise not the Lord." Joy 
in life is the characteristic of every healthy, right-minded person. Pining for death is, 
altogether and always, a sign of a morbid condition of body or of mind. It is a delusion 
to imagine that religion requires of us an indifference to life, and a yearning for heaven. 
The psalmists and kings ot the old Israelite times loved life and dreaded death. One 
says, " I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. The Lord hath 
chastened me sore, but he hath not given me over unto death " (Ps. cxviii. 17). 
Hezekiah expresses but the universal sentiment of the good men of his day when he 
says, " The grave cannot praise thee ; death cannot celebrate thee ; they that go down 
into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as 
I do this day ; the father to the children shall make known thy truth " (Isa. xxxviii. 
18, 19). But if we have life, we must take it with all its responsibilities, and the 
first of these is that we acknowledge the God who made us, on whom we are wholly 
dependent, and who lays his righteous claintis upon us. One of those claims is indicated 
by the psalmist. God calls for praise. All his works praise him in their order and 
fitness, in the precise fulfilment of the end for which they were designed. But God 
seeks that higher praise which can be offered by intelligent and free-willed beings. 
And the time in which they can offer the praise is the time of their lives amid terres- 
trial things. It is the praise of the living that God wants. It is praise while living 
that man can alone render. 



70 



THE BOOK OF PSALMi 



[rs. cxn. 1 — 19. 



L PBAlSE-mtE IB THE PBE8ENT TTME. It is never a mere duty that has heendone ; 
a demand that has been met. The praise that is God's due can never be paid, so that 
we can get a receipt in fall for all our obligations. It is never a duty that can be put 
off to some by-and-by, something that we can promise to do some day. It is the duty 
of the hour. It is immediate response to God's present blessings. 

n. Praise-time is a liuited time. It is limited to life, and life is always short 
and always uncertain, so that a man's call to praise is a call of the moment. For 

C'se "now is the accepted time." No man has any to-morrow until God gives it to 
, and then he must call it to-day. Only by doing just the duty of the hour can 
any man meet his human obligations. 

IIL The ocoasions of pbaise belono to the present time. It is true that 
there is call to praise for God's past dealings with us ; and call to praise in view of the 
promises on which we are permitted to hope ; but we can always find, if we will, calls 
to praise in the things actually around us ; God's good hand is ever on us for good. 
— E.T. 

Vers. 1 — ^18. — The honour due to Ood. A call to the God of Israel, the living God, 
to rescue the honour of his Name from the reproach of the heathen. 
L God is wobtht of the hiqhest honoub. In contrast to heathen idols. 

1. Because of his loving-kindness or mercy. (Ver. 1.) 2, Because of his truth or faith- 
fulness. (Ver. 1.) Emphatically " truth and grace came by Jesus Christ." 3. Though 
invisible, he reigns and rules from the exalted heaven. (Ter. 3.) The idols are earthly 
things, and have no power. 4. God is omnipotent, able to execute his own will. (Ver. 3.) 
The idols are dead things, with no will ; and their worshippers become as dead as 
they are. 

II. God is worthy of trust. (Vers. 9 — 14.) 1. Because he is the Helper and 
Defender qf those who trust in him. (Vers. 9 — 11.) 2. Because hLi past goodness is the 
pledge for future blessing. (Vers. 12 — 14.) He will bless and multiply both the great 
and the small together. 

III. God is worthy of praise and worship. (Vers. 15 — 18.) 1. .4s thu Creator 
of heaven and earth. (Ver. 15.) And the heavens are for the dwelling-iilace of Jehovah. 

2. Because he hath given the earth to men for their possession. 3. God must be praised 
now and for ever — before we go down into the silence of Hades. (Vers. 17, 18.) " The 
Old Testament," says Delitzsch, " knows nothing of a heavenly exclusion that praises 
God without iuteiinission, consisting not merely of angels, but also of the spirits of all 
men who die in the faith " (but see Ps. ciii. 20—22). — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXVI. 



A FBALH of thanksgiving on deliverance 
from an imminent peril, placed in the mouth 
of an individual, but possibly intended for 
liturgical use on some occasion of a national 
deliverance. Hengsteuberg regards it as 
composed for use at a festival service shortly 
after the return from the Captivity. Others 
adhere to the old Heiirew tradition, which 
ascribed it toHezekiah, and considered it to 
have been written on the' occasion of his 
deliverance from death, as narrated in Isa. 
xxxvlii. Many resemblances are traced 
between the phraseology of the psalm and 
expressions attributed to Hezekiah in lea. 
xxxvii., xxxviii. 
Vers. 1, 2. — An introduction, in which 



the writer declares his love to God, and bis 
resolution to call on him continually, on ac- 
count of his having been delivered from an 
imminent peril. 

Ver. 1. — I love the Lord, because he hath 
heard; literally, I looe, because the Lord 
{Jehovah) hath heard. The object of this 
love is not expressed, but can only be 
Jehovah. Still, the grammatical construc- 
tion is unusual, and has caused the sug- 
gestion of an emendation. For 'nans Pro- 
fessor Cheyne would read 'n:DKn, as at the 
beginning of ver. 10. My voice and my 
snpplloations ; literally, my voice, my sup- 
plications — the latter expression being exe- 
getioal of the former. 

Ver. 2. — Because he hath inclined his ear 
unto me (compare the expression of Hezekiah 
in Isa. xxxvii. 17, " Incline thine ear, Lord., 
and hear "). Therefore Till I call upon him 



P8, cxvi. 1 — 19.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS, 



71 



•f long as I live ; literally, in my days — 
another expressinn attributed to Hezekiah 
in the history (Isa. xxxix. 8). Lifelong 
gratitude and praise are promised by Heze- 
kiah to God in Isa. xxxviii. 20. 

Vers. 3 — 9. — The psalmist desoribea his 
trouble (ver. 3), his prayer for deliverance 
(ver. 1), and his actual deliverance (vers. 
5—9). 

Ver. 3. — The sorrows of death compassed 
me ; literally, tlie cords of death (oomp. Ps. 
zviii. 4, where the same expression is used). 
Death is pictured as seizing his victim and 
binding him with cords. And the pains of 
hell gat hold upon me ; or, " the ttraiU of 
hell" (comp. Ps. cxviii. 5; Lam. i. 3). 
Death and hell (iheol) are closely connected 
together in the prayer of Hezekiah (lea, 
xxiviii. 10, 18). I found trouble and sorrow ; 
or, "anguish and woe" (comp. Isa. xxxviii, 
12—17). 

Yer. 4. — Then called I upon the Name of 
the lord, " Hezekiah turned his face toward 
the wall, and prayed unto the Lord" (Isa. 
xxxviii. 2). Lord, I beseech thee, deliver 
my soul (compare the words of Isa. xxxviii. 
3, " Bemember now, O Lord, I heteech 
tte»"> 

Ver. 5.— Gracious is the Lord, and light- 
eouB. God's answers to prayer show him to 
ba both "gracious" and "righteous"— 
gracious, because it is of his mercy that he 
listens to men ; righteous, because, having 
promised to hear prayer, he is bound to 
keep his promises. Yea, our God is merciful ; 
or, " compassionate." 

Ter. 6.— The Lord preserreth the simple ; 
l.«. "the simple-minded" — those who are 
without guile or artifice (comp. Ps. xix. 7). 
I was brought low. The same verb is used 
here as in Isa. xxxviiL 14, where it is trans- 
lated " fail " ("mine eyes fail "), It expresses 
extreme weakness, or exhaustion. And he 
helped me; or, "saved me" (oomp, Isa. 
xxxviii. 20). 

Ver, 7.— Eetum unto thy rest, my souL 
" Beturn," ».e.,« to thy state of tranquillity, 
the condition iu which thou wast before the 
imminent danger showed itselfl" For the 
lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. If 
Hezekiah is the writer, the " bountiful deal- 
ing" will be the addition of fifteen years to 
his life (Isa. xxxviii. 5). If a pbet just re- 
turned from the Captivity, the return and the 
reoccupation of the Holy Land will be espe- 
cially in his thoughts (comp. Ps. Ixixv. 1) 

Ver. 8.— For thou hast delivered my soul 
from death. This verse is exegetieal of the 
last clause of ver. 4. The expressions are 
taken from Ps. Ivi. 13, and suit a personal 
better than a national deliverance. Mine 
eyes from tears. Hezekiah, w ben told that 



his death was approaching, had "wept 
sore " (Isa. xxxviii. 3). And my feet from 
falling ; literally, and my foot from slipping. 
When man is greatly tried, there is always 
danger lest his foot should slip. Whether 
the trial befall an individual or a nation, 
there is the same temptation to rebel and 
murmur. 

Ver. 9. — ^I will walk before the Lord in 
the land of the living; rather, landt of the 
living ; i.e. my deliverance will enable me 
to walk at leisure, unhurried and free from 
care, in the broad regions of earth inhabited 
by the living. 

Vera. 10, 11. — Parenthetic and obscure. 
Both the connection and rendering are 
doubtful. Professor Cheyne translates, " I 
was confident that I should speak thus ; " 
i.e. even while my affliction was going on, 
I felt confident that relief would come, and 
that I should one day speak as I have just 
spoken, I was, however, too sorely afSicted 
to give utterance to my feeling. Instead of 
so doing, I vented my unhappiness in abuse 
of my fellow-men. Thus understood, the 
words are an apologia. 

Ver. 10.— I believed, therefore have I 
spoken. So the LXX,, 'Eiriirrfvira, tih 
i\<i\n<ra. But many other meanings are 
suggested. See the preceding paragraph. 
I was greatly afflicted (comp. ver. 3). 

Ver. 11. — ^I said in my haste, All men are 
liars. The counection of the thoughts is 
not apparent, unless God's faithfulness (vers. 
5—8) suggests man's unfaithfulness. 

Vers. 12 — 19. — The psalm doses with a 
thanksgiving for the deliverance vonchsafed. 
What return can the psalmist make ? First, 
he will accept the blessing joyfully j next, 
he vrill ever continue to call upon God (ver. 
13; comp. vers, 4, 17); thirdly, he will pay 
his vows openly in the temple, in the pre- 
sence of the whole congregation (vers, 14, 
18) ; fourthly, he will ofiier continually the 
sacrifice of thanksgiving (ver, 17) for the 
benefits vouchsafed him. The enumeration 
of his pious intentions is itself a song of 
praise to the Almighty 

Ver. 12.— What shall I render unto the 
Lord for all his benefits toward me 1 Natural 
piety suggests a return for favours received. 
What shall this be ? the psalmist asks, and 
then proceeds to give the answer. 

Ver. 13.— I will take the cup of salvation. 
It has been usual to explain this of actual 
participation in the contents of a cup offered 
at a sacrificial meal, and then passed round 



72 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PB. oxvi. 1 — 19. 



to the worshipperg. But there is no clear 
evidence of any such usage, except in con- 
neotlon with the Passover, which cannot 
liere be in question. Hengsteiiberg there- 
fore proposes to regard the phrase as a mere 
metaphor, like the " cup of trembling " (Isa. 
li. 17, 22), and undertitands the psalmist to 
mean that he will gladly and thankfully 
receive God's mercy vouchsafed to him, and 
thus show his gratitude for it. And call 
upon the ITame of the Lord (comp. vers. 4 
and 17). 

Ver. 14.— I will pay my vows nnto the 
Lord now in the presence of all his people 
Ccomp. vers. 18, 19, where the thought is 
repeated, and lengthened out). We are not 
told in Isaiah or 2 Kings that Hezekiah 
made any vows when he lay on his sick- 
bed, but he may probably have done so. 
He certainly intended, as soon as his cure 
was complete, to "go up to the house of the 
Lord" (2 Kings xx. 8; Isa. xxxviii. 22). 

Ver. 15, — Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of his saints (comp. Ps. 
Ixxii. 14). It is not a matter of indifference 
to God, when and under what circumstances 
eaoh of hia saints dies. Bather, it is a 
matter of deep concern to him. " In him 
are the issues of life and death " (Ps. Ixviii, 
20), and he appoints to eaoh man the day 
and attendant circumstances of his demise. 

Ver. 16. — Lord, truly I am thy servant; 
rather, even so, O Lord, for I am thy servant. 
Bntitled, therefore! to thy oaie and oousidera- 



tion. I am thy servant, and the son of thine 
handmaid (comp. Ps. Ixxxvi. 16). "Thine 
handmaid" — the Cburch; or, if the writer 
is Hezekiah, " thy handmaid, Abiyah, the 
daup;hter of Zeohariah," who " had under- 
standing in the vision of God" (2 Ohron. 
xxvi. 5; xxix. 1). Thou hast loosed my 
bonds. The "cords of death" (ver. 3} are 
probably intended. 

Ver. 17. — I will offer to thee the saorifloa 
of thanksgiving. Scarcely an actual sacri- 
fice. Bather, simple thanksgiving, which, 
from a sincere heart, is the best saorifloe 
(see Ps. 1. 14 and Hos. xiv. 2). And will 
call upon the Name of the Lord (comp. vera. 
4 and 13). 

Ver. 18. — I will pay my vows unto the 
Lord now in the presence of all his people. 
Compare the comment on ver. 14, whereof 
this is a repetition. 

Ver. 19.— In the courts of the Lord'i 
house. Thanksgiving was always most 
appropriately offered in the temple courts, 
where close at hand dwelt the mysteriona 
presence of God, and where God had ap- 
pointed that his worshippers should appeu 
before him. In the midst of thee, Jeru- 
salem. This expression and the preceding 
suit well with Hezekiah's authorship of the 
psalm, as Dr. Kay well argues. Praise ye 
the Lord. The writer calls on all those 
present (see ver. 18) to join him in singing 
praise to God (comp. Pss. air., or., eri, nxjH ,, 
cxv., oxvii.). 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1 — 19. — Danger and deliverance. It is probable that the danger to which the 
psalmist was exposed was due to a very serious illness, threatening to end in death 
It is certain that this is the most common danger we have to confront now. We look, 
therefore, at — 

L A EEcuEEmo EVIL IN ouB MOBTAL LIFE — SICKNESS. With SO Complicated a 
structure as the human frame, and so intricate a system as that which has to be kept 
in working order, if we are to be in perfect health, it is no marvel that there should be 
frequent disorder within. And though improved sanitary conditions and the advance 
of physiological and medical science are favourable to health and long life, yet the 
increasing artificiality and luxuriousness of our age are counteracting forces ; so that 
It may be fairly questioned whether serious sickness, in more varied forms than ever, is 
not as often a recurring feature of life as it was in the psalmist's day. 

II. Its common attendants. These are: 1. Pain, to which no reference is 
made in the text, though it may be included in " trouble and sorrow " ^ver. 3). 2. 
Depemdence ; being so reduced that the feet would fall (ver. 8) without help from a 
friendly hand ; the strong man, accustomed to sustain others, is brought down in a few 
days, or even hours, to depend on the ministry of the servant or the chUd. 3. Dis- 
placement. The most serious " trouble" (ver. .3) which worries and perplexes the busy 
man is found in being laid aside from his activities; it is nothing less than "sorrow" 
to him to feel th^t his work is undone, and that he does not know how provision is to 
be made for his home. Many and bitter are the tears (ver. 8) of anxiety and distress. 
4, The apparent approach of death. ("V ^ r. 3.) How bitter to the soul is the vision of 
death, when it comes in the midst of life, is well exemplified in the grief of Hezekiah 
(Isa. xxxviii.) ; so also Epi^hroditus (Phil. ii. 26 — 27). It is not the bodily sufferinp 



PS. cxvi. 1— 19.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 73 

endured at death which men fear; it is the departure from kindred and friends, the 
laying down of work and leaving a happy sphere of usefulness, the going away from 
so much that is fair and good, leaving the light and joy and hope that our soul has 
loved below. Eveo to him who is looking for so much that is better beyimd, this deep 
feeling of regret is not unnatural or unbecoming. 5. Despondency. (Vers. 10, 11.) 
As with the psalmist, so is it often with us : when the strength is feeble, the spirits 
are low; we are distrustful; we begin to doubt those in whom we did confide; we 
come, hastily and without ground, to unfavourable conclusions; we think we are 
forgotten, ill-treated, abandoned. 

III. Its always present and most peecious bgfdge. "Then called I upon the 
Name of the Lord," etc. (ver. 4). Him whom we are apt to overlook in the light, we 
remember when the shadows fall. To him who, though unperceived, is ever at our 
right hand we gladly turn, when human helpers and our own resources fail us. God 
is "our very present Help in trouble." We are sure of his pity, and we may ask for 
the exercise of his power. We know that he, who is interested in the flowers of the 
field and the birds of the air (Matt, vi.) will not suffer one of his own children to die 
until his honr has fully come ; that " precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of 
his saints" (ver. 15). Who shall estimate the measure of comfort and relief which 
afSioted humanity has found in submission to the will and prayer for the succour of 
the heavenly Friend I 

IV. Its mebcifol removal. (Vers. 5 — 8.) Recovery from illness, though a very 
ordinary and larailiar thing, is a reason for reverent wonder. How is it that the organ 
which is impaired, after getting worse and worse and becoming less and less effective, 
lecovers its efficiency, and begins to do its proper work agnin? This we do not under- 
stand. We can only say that the Divine Lord of our life has implanted recuperative 
powers within us which bring about recovery, and make us well and strong. We 
supply the ascertained conditions, but the unseen Hand does the work. Gud is the 
Healer of our sicknesses. It is not only piety, but truth, to say, "I was brought low, 
and he helped me " (ver. 6). 

V. Thk gladness and qratitudb of oonvalbscbnob. (Vers. 1, 2, 5, 7 — 9, 13, 14, 
16 — 19.) There is a tone of great gladness of heart — perhaps we may detect some 
exuberance of spirit — in this outpouring. Is not the affliction amply repaid by the joy 
of returning strength and the .sense of newness of life and power ? Let such gladness 
always take the form of gratitude and praise; let it "lift up its eyes to heaven and 
say, Father, I thank thee." There should be; 1. Gratitude; the distinct reference of 
the good received to God himself, " Thou hast dealt bountifully with me " (vers. 7, 
8). 2. ProMB— offered in the sanctuary as well as in the home (vers. 17 — 19). 3. 
Lmie. The hearing and answering of our prayer may well deepen our attachment to 
our loving and faithful Lord (ver. 1). 4. Beconsecration. (Vers. 2, 16.) The best 
spiritual result of this experience of sickness and recovery is the solemn renewal of 
the vow by which we first yielded ourselves to the Person and the service of our 
Saviour. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — "Hove the Lord, because " L Wb might fill up the text ih many 

WAYS. As St. John does, " because God first loved us." Or because of what he is in 
himself. Or because of what he has done for us, is doing, and will do for us or for 
others dear to us. And there are other ways still. 

II. How IT 18 FILLED DP. " Because he hath heard my voice," etc. God's hearing 
of our prayer is the reason given for loving him. 1. Now, can we say this t Not if 
we never pray. Not if we do not look out for the answers in the right way — believing 

and in the place where they are to be looked for. 2. But many, like the psalmist, 

can say this. 

III. And how reasonable is this filling up! It is fitting that we should " love 
the Lord, because," etc. If we think of the sad characteristics of our prayers. How 
unworthy! How slow we are to pray! Wiiat a number of desires we have! What 
unbelief mingles with them ! How trivial! How impatient! How misused! What 
his answering of our prayers has cost ! 



74 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [w. oxvl 1— 19. 

CoxcLDSioN. 1. If he hears our prayer, he shall hear our praise, and we will hear bis 
word. 2. And we will tell others of this. — S. 0. 

Vers. 3, 4. — The experience of a deeply distressed soul. The psalm is the utterance 
of the glad gratitude uf some devout Israelite on his deliverance from mortal sickness. 
But it is capable of many applications. In the temple service it was used as a psalm 
of thanksgiving fur God's deliverance of Israel from their exile. Many have seen in it 
the setting forth of the sufferings of our Lord, and have applied the psalm generally to 
him. Others, again, take it, as do we, as describiag, in vivid, impressive way, the 
experience of a soul that has known deep distress, but has been delivered therefrom by 
God's exceeding grace. Therefore note — 

I. Teb dibtbess. It is told of: L As the sorrows of death and the pains ofheU, or 
ike grave. Some render it " the snares," others, " the cords," of death. But the meaning 
is much the same, however the word be rendered. It must be remembered that the 
psalm was written in the dim light of the Old Testament as to the believer's condition 
after death. And, compared with our own, that light was very dim. To the faithful 
servant of God now, who " dies in the Lord," there are no sorrows of death, Christ 
hath abolished death ; and still less are there any pains of hell. But the writer of this 
psalm did believe in them, as did all the saints of his day. And they meant for him, 
not burning flames or purgatorial fires, but exclusion from the presence of God (see 
Pss. cxT. 17, and parallels ; xxxi. 22, etc.). These were the sorrows they dreaded. In 
death they would no more see — so they feared — God's power and glory as they had 
seen them in the sanctuary (Fs. Ixiii. 2). The grave was to them the pit, the land of 
darkness and the shadow of death. These were the sorrows of death and the pains of 
hell, and they caused the deepest spiritual distress. 2. And there are the like of these 
still. When the soul feels itself shut out from God; when it has no hope; when 
nothing but the Divine condemnation seems possible to it ; when it knows and feels 
itself to be utterly and hopelessly wrong ; when it gazes wistfully upon the blessed 
iroraises of God, but is in abiding despair as to ever realizing them — is certain it never 
shall ; and that for it there is nothing but the fearful looking for of God's indignation 
and of his fiery wrath. Souls not a few have passed, and are passing, through 
experience like that. 3. It is caused in various ways. Sometimes through deep con- 
viction of sin when first the soul is awakened. And it is well for the after-life of the 
soul that there should be deep conviction wrought by the Holy Spirit, for then there 
is likely to be a permanent work done, and not a mere ephemeral and superficial one, 
such as is all too common. And oftentimes this experience is the result of back- 
sliding from God (see Peter after his denial ; Judas after his betrayal of the Lord). 
" Keep me, Lord, as the apple of thine eye," let every Christiaa pray. At other 
times it is through a perverse habit of mistrust and doubt. The melancholy mass 
of miserable Christians are nearly all begotten of this wretched and God-dishonouring 
habit. And sometimes it is the result of disease in mind or body, or both. Then 
it is a pure afiliction, and has to be accepted as such. But this is not often the 
case. 

II. The deliverance. 1. See how thorough it was. (Ver. 8.) " My soul from 
death." Sin is death, and until we are not free from that, whatever else we may be, 
we are not saved. " Mine eyes from tears." There has come peace and joy in God 
instead of anguish of soul. " My feet from falling." I not ooly begin the better life, 
but go and keep on in it. God's salvation means this for us. 2. How it was won. 
Through prayer (ver. 4). How direct, definite, and to the point, this prayer was I So 
is all real prayer. 3. And how evident. (See vers. 9, 13.) When we are saved, 
people will know it. Walking is a very visible act. So is the walking before the 
Lord. There is no invisible religion. 

III. The Divine teaching foe va all in all this. 1. If till now you have 
never been convicted of sin, he thankful for your soul-distress, remembering its gracious 
intent. 2. If you are in Christ, pray that you may never come into the soul-agony that 
the backslider knows. 3. If from any cause such distress be on you, despair not, but 
turn to Ood in prayer, earnest and definite, and persevere in faith till the deliverance 
comes. 4. Ifyoa hwve been delivered, go and declare to others what Ood hat done for 
your MouL 6. And let your l^i thow your lov» to Ood.—S. G. 



P8. oxvi. 1— 19.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 76 

Ver. 7. — Eest. These well-known words show — 

I. That best is one of the siaHTFUL possessions of the sonii. It was designed 
for the soul. God would not have created a soul to be the perpetual victim of fret, 
worry, and distress, as we see many souls now are. It must have belonged to the souL 
Hence it is called " thy rest." In the primal paradise, in which our first parents were 
placed, they enjoyed this rest. Theirs was the repose of the intellect, of the affections, 
of the will ; all were at rest in God. 

II. But the soul has got awat from this best. What need to labour any 
proof of this? 1. Tou can read the. fact in men's very looks — the careworn countenance, 
the anxious mien, the sad, disappointed air. 2. In their vsords, whether spoken or 
written ; weariness is written on them all. 3. In the frantic hut futile efforts they 
make to find a substitute for what they have lost. 

IlL That it can, if it will, bbthrn unto its best. Yes, in forsaking eln, 
surrender to Christ, and trust in him, rest is still attainable. — S. 0. 

Ver. 7. — Ood, the Rest of the soul. Text is addressed to those who have already 
known God as their Best. Before we can return, we must have turned to God. But 
arguments for the one are the same as for the other. Hence let believers take the text 
as it stands ; let others read it as if it were " turn " instead of return. It teaches — 

I, These is a best fob the soul — God. He is so by virtue of bis atonement, 
his Spirit, his Word. And this for the individual soul. 

n. But we foolishly leave that best. By neglect of communion. By 
unbelief. By disobedience. 

IIL Neveethblbss, we abb bidden betubn. We do so as we first of all turned to 
him — in penitence and prayer and trust. 

IV. Wb have a miohtt ABonuENT FOB THIS. " He hath dealt bountifully with 
thee." Thus he meets us. 

V. Wk must each do THIS FOB otrBBELYEB. " Betum unto thy rest, my soul I " 
VL Hb is oebtain to beoeivb us. — S. 0. 

Ver. 12. — JTie inquiry of the grateful heart. Many are the blessed spiiita that 
worship God— penitence, faith, reverence, hope, and others. But none are more 
acceptable than the spirit of gratitude. It is that spirit which speaks here in our text. 
The following verses contain the answer which the same spirit gives. The inquiry 
before us implies remembrance of — 

L The benefits which the Lobd hath oonfebred upon trs. 1. It is diffieutt 
because of tlieir number, character, variety ; and because of Satan's never-ceasing 
endeavour to hinder us herein. 2. But is full of advantage. More glory comes to 
God. Our own soul is blessed. We become able to help others. S. It is a hdUt 
which we should cultivate. 

XL The eesponsb which these benefits deuand. That of a grateful heart, first 
and chief of all. God is ever seeking to make up this response ; and the devil is ever 
seeking to prevent it. 

III. The Lobd who pbompts the inquibt will enable us to qitb thk 
bbbponse. — S. C. 

Vers. 13, 14. — The emswer of the grateful heart. That answer is threefold. 

I. He will accept God's salvation. This the meaning of the words, "I will 
take the cup of salvation." God has designed salvation for each one of us ; he puts it 
before us as the master of a feast was wont to hand the cup to each guest. And the 
grateful heart here says, " I will take thy salvation, Lord, the pardon which is in 
Christ, the sanotification of the Holy Spirit, and eternal life." No worship or service is 
pleasing to God until this is done. 

II. He will call xn-ON the Name of the Lobd. Thus, by fervent prayer, will 
he keep in communion with God, and look to him day by day for all needed grace. 

IIL He will openly AOXNOWLBDaB God. "I will pay my vows," etc. What 
has gone before has been transacted between God and the soul ; this should be before 
all men. If there be these three things, all holy obedience will follow; there will be 
the consecrated life. — S. C. 



76 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [«• <^^ ^—^^■ 



Ver. 16. — The Divint estimate of the iainfe death. The text is one of the precious 
words of the Bible— one of the instances in which the Bible sheds bright light over the 
darker facts of life. Sorrow, temptation, disappointment, sin, and, as here, death, are 
all irradiated by the light the Bible sheds upon them. Our text calls death " precious." 
This a strange epithet for death — one we should never have given to it. But it ia true, 
nevertheless, as here used. Therefore note — 

L The meaninq op the word " PRBoiona." It is used frequently in a like sense, 
and means : 1. Ood will not suffer death to come to his saints save as he permits ; and 
never shall his saints cease from oflf the earth. The fact of the old age to which they 
commonly attain seems to confirm what the text affirms. But : 2. 2%e word "precious " 
denotes aiso the mind of Qod in contemplating the death of his saints. He delights in 
all their life — in its beginoing, its progress, and now its end. This is the last step of 
the saint, and our text tells with what loving regard the Lord looks down upon it. 

_IL The bbason op this Divinb estimate. 1. Because of his love and sympathy 
His saints are dear to him. 2. At the time of their death there is more than ever a 
response of trust and desire made to the heart of Ood. In the full vigour of life we are 
apt to forget, or to think but seldom and slightly, of God ; we do not feel our dependenCL' 
upon him as we should. But when heart and flesh fail — ^when all our strength is gone, 
tlien there is that utter casting of the soul upon God in which Gbd delights. 3. 2%e 
wondrous witness to others on hehalfof God which the death of many a taint has home. 
See how Paul never forgot the dying speech of Stephen. The blood of the martyrs ha.s 
been ever the seed of the Church. And in calmer deaths than these witness for God 
has also been borne, and with power unknown before. 4. The precious blood of Christ 
is glorified. For at such times that is all their trust. During life we discuss all 
manner of questions, doctrines, and beliefs ; but when we come to die, it is, " Thou, 
Christ, art all I want I " 5. It is the moment of their safe ingathering. Till then, 
they have been, as the sheep in the wilderness, liable to wander, exposed to peril, 
watched for hungrily by the wolves of hell, often all but lost. But death is God's 
angel gathering them safe within the eternal sheep-fold. Such are some of the grounds 
wherefore " precious in the sight," etc. 

III. But note the conclusions this WABBANTS OONCEBNINa THE PUTDBE OF THE 

PEOPLE OF God. 1. Death cannot end all. How could such death be " precious " ? 
2. Nor can it introduce us into a state of mere unconsciousness. Death for God's saints 
is not a sleep, but the entrance on fulness of life with Christ. 3. Still less into any 
purgatory. Scripture has nothing to say of such condition for Gh>d'B sunts. But : 
^Itisa departing and being with Christ, which ia far better. Surely we may " comfort 
one another with these words." 

IV. The one limitation of this statement. 1. It is not at to time. We may 
die at any moment. 2. Nor as to place. It may be anywhere. 3. Nor as to manner. 
It may be in deep peace or dreadful pain. 4. But it is at to character. Of the 
saints of God alone is it said that their deaths are " precious in," etc. Therefore, by 
surrender to Christ, be one of God's saints. — S. C. 



Ver. 16. — UTie Lord^s service com/mended. It is i 

L Bt Sobiftube. (See text.) The one trouble of the psalmist seems to be lest he 
should not be owned by the Lord as his servant. Hence : 1. He asserts with emphasis, 
" Truly I am thy servant." Here is not a mere make-believe, as so many professed 
servants of the Lord are. 2. And he reasserts it. " I am thy servant," not was, or will 
be, but I am, here and now, this day, thiue. 3. And he dies a fact which unanswer- 
ably proves his assertion. I am " the son of thine handmaid." Slaves born in the 
house, home-bom of another slave, were regarded as the property of their master, even 
more than those gained by purchase or taken captive in war. The meaning, therefore, 
is, " I am thy very own." Thus completely and altogether does the psalmist dedicate 
himself to God. 4. And he brings forward the mighty motive which had led him thus 
to do. "Thou hast loosed my bonds.*' He was speaking, probably, of the bonds of 
death, from the very gates of which he had been delivered (ver. 8). In his over- 
whelming gratitude for this deliverance, he yields himself entirely to God. What a 
contrast does the psalmist present to the ordinary run of men 1 They cars nothing for 
God's service. If they begin it, they soon forsake it ; or if perchance they seem to 



PS. cxvt 1— 19,] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 77 

continue in it, with what sloth and slackness is it pursued 1 But the psalmist feels 
that no service he can render is too great ; his one desire is to be coufessed as the 
servant of the Lord. 

IL And riqht bbason endobses this commendation. 1. We cannot escape 
service of some sort ; some lord will have rule over uS. Where is one whose rule is 
righteous and reasonable as is that of the Lord ? 2. Eos he not all claim t He is our 
Creator, Preserver, our Redeemer, and daily Benefactor, our heavenly Father. 3. The 
noblest of mankind have been the first to confess this. 

in. So ALSO DOES EXPEEIENOE. Who ever repented of having served the Lord too 
well, or thought he had done so sufficiently ? The best of his servants are eager to 
have all those they love, and all whom they can influence, in his service. It brings 
here and now such rich recompense of reward, and promises eternal reward by-and-by. 
Our happiest hours are those spent in serving him. " He has loosed my bonds, and 1 
must and will serve him." — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — T%e various lases on which love rests. A tradition associates this psalm 
with the serious sickness of Hezekiah. It may not be a trustworthy tradition. The 
Aramaisms of the language suggest that it belongs to the time of the restored exiles. 
It is a psalm of one who passed through a similar sickness to that of Hezekiah ; and 
we are justified in illustrating the psalm from the experiences of the good king. The 
writer was evidently a man who had been brought through a sickness which had 
imperilled his life. He feels and sings as one who has just stepped up from the " border- 
land." He is in the first flush of restored life, deeply feeling what God has done for 
him, and realizing a new personal affection for Grod, which is bringing to him a thrill of 
holy joy. Compare Hezekiah's psalm on his recovery. One thing especially seems to 
be present to thought, and it is made the basis of new love. That restored life was a 
direct answer to prayer. It therefore indicated God's personal interest in him. God 
loved him ; and love surely begets love. 

L God heabiko is a basis of lots. " He hath heard my voice and my suppli- 
cations." Then God is a living Being ; in his image we are made ; and he is responsive 
to hie children. Contrast the feeling of the heathen, who prays to the stone figure 
of his god. He can only vaguely fear or vaguely hope, for there is no response from 
the stone face ; and if he gets what he asks he cannot associate it with the action of 
the god, — it is but a happy accident. We can only love living persons. We use the 
term " love " in a very secondary sense when we apply it to things. God bearing is God 
living ; and the living God can be the Object of human love. 

II. GoD LOViNo TO HEAB 18 A FDBTHEB BASIS OF LOVE. "He hath inclined his 
ear unto me." Inclining the ear is a sign of disposition, even of personal feeling and 
regard. When we do not care for those who make requests of us, how short and sharp 
we are with them I When we have personal regard for them, how patiently we listen I 
how we bend down to attend to them I how we incline our ear I The psalmist read 
personal interest and affection in that inclining of the Divine ear ; and it was precisely 
fitting that he should respond to love with love. 

III. God's aotino on what he heabs becomes a fubtheb basis of love. He 
may incline his ear, and so show his interest in us, but go no further. Then he would 
but be like so many of our earthly friends, who sympathize with us, but can or will 
do nothing for us. For God to hear is for God to heed, and for God to heed is for God 
to bless and help. And new love to him is kindled as we experience his deliverances 
and salvations. From every man God asks worship. From his healed, restored, 
redeemed ones he asks the worship of love. — R. T. 

Ver. 3. — Depression attending sickness. There is a most subtle connection between 
the body and the mind. This was recognized by the psalmist, when he found such 
comfort in saying of God, " He knoweth our frame ; he remembereth that we are dust." 
It is embodied in the familiar idea of the healthy man — Mens sana in corpore sano. 
The mind can only work through the body as its agent, and is as dependent on its 
condition as the workman on the state of his tools. The influence of body on mind is 
fully recognized in certain forms of sickness. When the nerves or certain vital organs 
are affected by disease, fits of depression are characteristic features, and extremely 



78 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxvi. 1— 19. 

distressing features. When life is imi erilled, there is often a bodily prostration which 
acts upon the mind, and produces sumetbing approaching despair. It is often hard to 
get sick folk to see the " bright light in the cloud." We are in danger, however, of 
making two mistakes in connection with this subject. We may make too inuch of the 
influence of the body on the mind, and so unworthily excuse bad mind-conditions. 
We may make too little of the influence of the body on the mind, and so unduly dis 
tress ourselves about our mental conditions. Both extremes should be avoided. 

L The diverse ikfluenoe of sicknesses. Different diseases have different effects. 
And the influence of any disease depends on the bodily organization, mental disposition, 
and even religious sentiments of the man in whom it works. It has different effects 
according to the season of the year, and the state of the atmosphere ; and it varies even 
according as the patient is well or badly nursed. All these things man cannot esti- 
mate, but we may be sure God does. 

IL The bpeoial effect of some diseases. They directly affect the brain. They 
make a man become a sort of double self, as did the devil-possessions of our Lord's 
time. There is the man of Christian trust and hope, and at the same time a man say- 
ing all sorts of bitter and unreasonable things against himself, and so a distress to him- 
self and to all who have to deal with him. 

HL The mental conflict occasioned bt sioenebses. When this dual life is 
created, there must be conflict between the man of trust and the man of despair. The 
soul's love to God struggles bard to hold its own. It persists in hoping on. And its 
persistency is seen at every moment when the tight grip of the disease is loosened. It 
IS the constant conflict of the flesh and the spirit. 

IV. The conditions of soul-tiotobt undeb sioenebses. To use a business expres- 
sion — ve must discount the influence of the body. We must keep from thinking about 
our spiritual state till we are free to Judge it fairly. We must cling to what God b, 
and is to us. — B. T. 

Yer. 6. — Simple a* opposed to guUefvU. " The Lord preserveth the simple." This 
is not the "simple" of the Book of Proverbs — the young, inexperienced, susceptible 
souls, who are only too easily led astray. " Simple " here rather means gentle, sincere, 
genuine, inoffensive, guileless, not ordering conduct by the subtlety of this world's 
wisdom ; this very simplicity, which lays them most readily open to attack, is in 
itself an appeal for God's protection. Compare our Lord's commendation of the pasave 
graces in his Beatitudes, especially this, " Blessed are the poor in spirit." 

L The simple man lets God wobe. " The Lord preserveth the simple." He has 
no confidence to make his own plans ; he waits to know and fit in with God's plans for 
him. This nay seem weakness; and it sometimes is weakness. But it need not be. 
It should only be the simplicity of the child-spirit, which depends on the father, and 
has the fullest confidence in the fatherly wisdom and ways. He has no confidence 
in his own working out of the plan. So he leans on Divine help continually, ever say- 
ing, " What I know not, that teach thou me ; " " Hold thou me up, and I shall be 
safe." This, too, may seem to be weakness, but it is not; it is only man meeting 
fully the conditions of his being, for man is as a climbing plant, only strong and able 
to attain his best when he leans upon the strung. It is the problem of life, and the 
simple man most easily solves it — How can humanity reach its best ? The simple man 
says, " By being always open to God's working in us." 

IL The oniLEFnL man does his own wobe. He is quite satisfied with his own 
plans. They are such as will bring the best possible to himself. He has an eye to the 
" main chance" always, and means to secure it — straightforwardly if he can, otherwise 
if he cannot. And he is quite satisfied with his resources. There is nothing that he 
cannot do, or thinks he cannot do. Life is to him the sphere in which things have to 
yield to his wishes. The guileful man has no particular need of God, and, indeed, he 
sometimes finds him in his way, and so is aroused to an active antagonism. " God is 
not in all his thoughts." There is no place in him for humility — self-confidence fills 
all the space. There is no call to prayer, for he wants no help. He is sufiUcient unto 
himself, or thinks he is. The guilefid man will not have it that he is a dependent 
creature. 

IIL TBI OUILEFini MAM BIAOHBS FBESENT BESULTS; THS 8I1IFLK HAH BKACHKB 



PS. oxvi. 1— 19.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 79 

ABiDiNO RESULTS. This is precisely the difference which having Qod makes. With- 
out him there is nothing that abideth. With him everything worth having ahideth 
for ever.— R. T. 

Ver. 7. — Best won and re-won. I. A problem to solve is given to every dependent 
moral creature, and to the human race. It is this ; Where, in what, or in whom, 
WILL YOU FIND YOUR REST? A husband finds rest in home. A thinker finds rest in 
truth. A woi'ker finds n st in the products of his toil. Israel found rest in Canaan. 
The saint hopes to find rest in heaven. Where does the soul find its present rest ? 
As the psalmist uses the expression, " Return," we infer that he had solved the problem 
and found his rest. He must have found it in God, and in personal relations with Gk)d. 
The soul's rest comes iu the voluntary uniting of the soul with God ; it comes when 
the soul goes out of itself to trust God fully ; or, more precisely, rest comes by winning 
the character that can trust. And that character is gained only by discipline, which 
roots out the self-reliance. This rest is no mere idling quiescence. It is not destroyed 
individuality. It is such rest as the " Man Christ Jesus " knew all the while he was 
going to and fro on the earth's highways. M-iny, looking over the conflicts of their 
early life, can remember how they won rest. They can recall their soul-struggle. 
They can remembar how it ended in a glad surrender, which brought them peace. 

II. The soul's rest, when won, needs provincj. It must be tried. It may 
have to be tried "so as by fire.'' In Birmingham there is a "proving-house." The 
gun-barrels are skilfully made, but there is no security in their use until they have 
been tested and proved. The bridge may be completed, but trafSo cannot be per- 
mitted until it has been proved. Young people go from country homes with good 
characters, but the full strong manhood does not come until those characters have been 
submitted to stem city-tests. Our earthly life, more especially, perhaps, the early years 
of our manhood, are the proving-house of the soul-rest that we have gained. 1. Our 
soul-testings often come in the way of enlarged faculties and increasing knowledge. 
Perhaps there never was a time when our discipline in this way was more severe. 
The man must grow out of his childish notions. Every year is bringing us richer 
stores of knowledge. Much of it is antagonistic to our previous knowledge ; more of it 
is felt to be incompatible with it. We are half tempted to associate ignorance with 
faith, and knowledge with doubt, and then to wish that we need not know. But the 
trouble passes when we can see that this is a part of the soul's proving-house, one 
feature of the discipline through which alone can come virtue and strength. " Let 
knowledge grow from more to more : " what matter, if only " more of reverence in us 
dwell"? 2. Our soul-testing often comes in the self-activity demanded in order to win 
world-success. Many a godly man has, for a time, lost his soul in the all-absorbing 
business, and civic, and political strain. There is no pressure put on men equal to that 
of heaped-up daily responsibilities. Under it their souls are flattened right down, 
silenced, stifled, crushed. 3. Our soul-testing often comes in the discipline of disap- 
pointment and failure. This we find represented in the psalms of Asaph. Such 
experiences made him feel uncertain about God — whether he really was on the side of 
the good. But these provings need but have a passing and temporary influence. 
Bunyan shows his pilgrim sleeping in the arbour, and letting his roll drop out of his 
bosom, losing it thus for a while. Only when lost soul-rest becomes a permanent state 
does it become fatal. 

III. The soul's rest, though temporarily lost, mat be regained. God is 
always watching for the first opportunity to give it back ; and the soul that has once 
had it is keen enough to seize the first occasion to get it back. Here is the peculiarity 
of the psalmist— he had lost his soul-rest, but he was troubled hy the loss. 1. All 
through the dark time in the proving-house he wanted to keep trust if he could. That 
made all the difference. 'There are two attitudes which we may take. We may want 
to doubt, if we can. We may want to trust, if we can. And though the false notion 
prevails that doubting — wanting to doubt — is the more intelligent, it is surely more 
reasonable that dependent creatures should want to trnst. 2. All through the dark 
time in the proving-house the psalmist kept that love to God on which his tru'^t was 
based. The trust was no mere intellectual conclusion, which could be upset by enlarg- 
ing knowledge. He had gained his soul-rest by self-abandonment. He gained it 



su I OIL BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxvi. 1—19. 



by entering fully into the songhip which is based on affection. There is no fear of 
love-relations with God. Love may have its faded times. Other iuterests may seem 
to come in, and for a time push love aside. It will never consent to be pushed aside 
very long; it will soon say, " Return unto thy rest, my soul I" — ^E. T, 

Vers. 7, 8. — God works in our human lives. It seems as if God had not done some- 
thing for the psalmist which he wanted him to do ; and this troubled the psalmist, and 
filled him with doubts. He found consolation in thinking how much God had done 
for him. If he could not see God in a particular circumstance, he could see God in his 
life. The varied movements in a factory are quite bewildering to us, but the master 
knows, and guides them all to ends of his fashioning. 

I. God's deliverance from bodily perils. " Soul from death." The " soiil " 
here is the animal lile. Spiritual need is not, here, in the psalmist's mind. We all 
have had perils of death — ^from drowning, accident, or disease. lUust. : Hezekiah. 
Man walking in the dark, stopped at very edge of quarry. Do we keep the memory 
of God's restorations of imperilled life ? In this God has "dealt bountifully with us." 
And we are bound to God by the claims (1) of life given ; and (2) of life restored. 

II. God'b deliverance from human sorrows. " Eyes from tears." The thought 
here is of the trouble that causes grief-tears. We can look back over trials that 
were distresses, anxieties. Dlustrate by the pathetic picture of David going up Olivet 
weeping, when fleeing before his wilful son Absalom. Cannot bear to see a man dis- 
heartened unto tears. It is always a Bad sight. It has been such to God. For us he 
has " wiped the tears away." Illustrate by the fact that, in our family discipline, we 
lot the child cry ; but it is very hard to us to see it cry; and all the while we mean to 
wipe the tears away. See the lx>UDtifulness of God in dealing with us thus. 

III. God's delivbbanoe from moral temptations. "Feet from stumbling." 
Who can look over life and fail to see times when the " feet were almost gone, the 
steps had well-nigh slipped " ? We are liable to falL " Prone to wander." Exposed to 
temptation. We may learn a lesson from the spread of infectious diseases. Every- 
thing depends on the measure of inward susceptibility. Then, should it not be our 
unceasing wonder that we have not fallen? Why have we not? There can be but 
one answer : " The Lord hath dealt bountifully with us." There is, then, a threefold 
memory-bond binding us to God, and ever setting us upon asking, " What shall we 
render unto the Lord for all his mercy to us?" There is one fitting answer: "I will 
pay thee my vows." We can just he God's servants, in all holy love and obedience. 
— B.T. 

Ver. 11. — Hasty thought and hasty speecJi. " I said in my haste. All men are s lie" 
(Revised Version). The idea is not .-imply that all men tell lies. It is that men con- 
stantly disappoint our expectations ; and no security can come by reliance upon men. 
This kind of feeling comes to the good man still at times, especially when friends fail, 
and human reliances prove as broken reeds. It is so easy for a despondent soul to 
argue that since one trusted friend has failed, all must be untrustworthy. But the 
argument is a hasty one, and is quite unfounded, since one instance can never suffice to 
establish a rule. This also has to be taken into account — men are constantly ready to 
undertake and promise more than they can possibly perform. Then their failure ought 
not to surprise us ; it is a natural and necessary failure. The fault, indeed, is in part 
ows, seeing that we put an unreasonable trust in them. Before we complain of men's 
disappointing us, we should question and criticize our trust in them. Dr. Barry 
explains the term, "in my haste," thus: " in that sweeping and precipitate generaliza- 
tion of bitter experience, despairing of humanity, which is a sign of our own human 
frailty." We are all liable to hasty thinking ; but it is a special temptation to those 
who, like the Apostle Peter, are of an impulsive disposition. They form ideas on first 
impressions ; and before there is any opportunity of weighing them and criticizing them, 
they speak them out, and act them out. Only the discipline of life cultivates wise 
self-restraint and careful reserve. 

1. Hasty thought is best kept as thought. It is not always clearly recognized 
that suggestions made to the mind are not sin. They may be made by circumstances, 
or made by our fellow-men, or made by the spirit of evil. So far as they only awaken 



PS, oxvi. 1—19.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 81 



thought in us, no sin has been committed ; oar will has not been concerned in the 
matter. There is no more than response to suggestion according to the ordinary work- 
ing of mental laws. So far there is something which we cannot help. If left alone, 
it will soon pass away. Only that is kept in memory on which the attention is fixed. 
Passing thought passes Into oblivion. And this is the best fate for such a hasty 
thought as this of the psalmist. 

IL Hasty thought dobs mischief when it sets into bfeeob. So our Lord 
taught that the things which come out of a man defile him. It takes an act of will tc 
give expression to a thought. That act of will makes the thought our own. If it is 
a bad thought, it must do a bad work by getting expression ; for that expression starts 
bad thoughts in others. The psalmist's hasty word sowed the seed of mistrust, which 
spoils the relations of human society. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 13. — The only return Ood looks /or. "I will take the cup of salvation." 
yisltlng MuUer's Orphan House at Ashley Down, Bristol, some years ago, we were 
shown into, a room where, ranged on a gallery, were some seventy or eighty infant 
orphans of from three to five years of age, fatherless, if not motherless too. They 
sang to us a little hymn, and the pathetic refrain of it, as sung by those infant voices, 
we hear still in our souls — 

" What shall we render, O heavenly Friend, to thee^ 
For care so tender, for love so &ee 7 " 

It is the feeling of all pious souls, the ever-growing feeling of the deepening experience, 
that no fittini; return can be made to God, and that the only possible return we can 
make is to let him do all his work of grace in us — to take his " cup of salvation." We 
know how, sometimes, in the ordinary associations of life, the gifts of our friends 
altogether overwhelm us. We oannoc keep pace with them in returning their gifts. 
At last we give up attempting to do so, and just let them spend their love on us as 
they will. This may help us to understand the psalmist's feeling concerning Gk>d. 
Possibly there is a reference to the " cup of blessing " in the observance of the Pass- 
over, which may have been Introduced after the Exile ; but It is better to regard it 
simply as a poetical figure, and as meaning, " I will accept thankfully and with devout 
acknowledgment the blessings which God gives me as my portion." The Christian can 
fill the term " salvation " with higher and holier meanings. 

I. The Hopelessness op finding ant way o* beturning God's goodness. 
Because he wants nothing of us. When we would return a gift, how anxiously we try 
to find out what our friend wants I But it is hopeless to think of finding out any thing 
that God wants. Illust. by the reproachful plea through the psalmist (Ps. 1.), " Every 
beast of the f >rest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. If I were hungry, I 
would not tell thee : for tlie world is mine, and the fulness thereof." And because we 
could find nothing that he wanted, if he did want. Things are not in our possession or 
control. How can we give when we have nothing? and all the things we seem to have 
are his. 

II. The hopefulness of besfonding to God's way fob our BEcoGNiziNa his 
GOODNESS. What he asks of us is to let him bless us — to be willing recipients of his 
benedictions, to take his cup of salvation ; he wants not things, but thanks ; not gifts, 
but love ; not ofiFerings, but praise. " Offer unto God the sacrifice of thanksgiving" 
That we can do.— B. T. 

Ver. 14. — Voia-malsiTig and vovspaying. An important duty of Christian life is 
keeping ever fresh and vivid the memory of God's saving mercies to us. Constantly 
throughout their history the Israelites were reminded of their deliverance from the 
house of bondage, and of the vows and pledges involved in that deUverance. The 
efiect of every quickened memory should be a new examination of our vows, that we 
may discover what of them we are failing to pay or to keep. God does expect a return 
from us for all his mercies towards us. That return is put in three forms. 

L "I WILL TAKE THE CUP OF SALVATION." It honours God for US clieerfuUy to 
accept the blessings which he sends. It may be proper to refuse gifts offered by our 
fellow-men. It is never a true and worthy humility that hesitates to act upon God's 
F8ALU8 — ra. a 



82 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. oxw. l—lft. 



promises, or to accept what God offers. And yet that we find beginners in the 
Christian life, and even experienced Christians, often do, especially when what God 
provides is not just " according to their mind." Note also how the very freeness of 
God's gifts makes them unacceptable to human pride. We like to have things on our 
conditions, and at our price. 

II. " I WILL CALL UPON THE Namb OF THE LoBD." That is, In the spirit and act 
of thankfulness. Thankfulness should be regarded (1) as an important Christian 
obligation ; (2) as an enjoined Christian duty j and (3) as a most real help to the 
brightness, the joyfulness, and the steadiness of the Christian life. The utterance of 
thankfulness is a public testimony of our recognized and happy dependence on God. 
" I have set the Lord always before me." 

O, " I WILL PAT MY vows UNTO THE LoBD." Qive Bome account of Jewish vow- 
making in times of special thankfulness ; as when recovering from a serious sickness. 
1. Sincere and right-intentioned, yow-making is acceptable and pleasing to God. 2. 
The earnest endeavour at \ow-paying is much more acceptable. Our resolves match 
the ancient vows ; and our lives have witnessed many resolves made and few resolves 
carried out. lUust. : resolves in times of conversion, of success, of sickness, of trouble, 
of rescue from peril. Try to think what unpaid vows or resolves of yours Gk>d has 
on his record. Vow, but be sure to " pay your vows unto the Lord." — ^B. T. 

Yer. 16. — Consolationi for the hereaved. Health and sickness, joy and sorrow, life 
and death, are strangely intermingled in the stories of human lives. They are the 
threads, the warp and the weft, of which the web of life is woven. Until sin is gone, 
it is better for us to keep the sorrows and the sicknesses and even the dyings ; for 
these are God's agents for stamping upon sin its true character, and he makes them to 
be but the anguish of our deliverance from sin's power and dominion, in our times of 
bereavement we ought to know — 

L That the death of cub beloved ones is a fbeoious THnia to Gk>D. These 
" deaths " are certainly very precious things to tw, whether they come as a sudden 
call or follow upon many days of weary watching. There is peculiar sacredness in a 
time of death for a family. The family bond never seems so closely knit as then. 
Each member makes so much of each other member in those hours of common sorrow. 
Our text says that the dying of our friends is so precious to God. We may think of 
Qod as our Father ; as one of our family, the very Head of our family, and therefore 
the one on whom the heaviest part of the burden falls. No one feels so deeply as the 
father and the mother; and in calling himself the great Father, he unveils a heart of 
infinite sympathy, that " bears our griefs, and carries our sorrows." How God feels 
toward us finds its illustration in the manifested God — Christ Jksus. The sympathies 
cf Nain, the tears of Bethany, show us our God. The death of the saint is so precious 
to God : 1. Because the trust of the dying is so severely tested. What the mysterious 
conflicts of the time of death are none of us can know, perhaps none of us can imagine. 
In perilous disease we may have been to the " border-land ; " but, then, the border-land 
is a very wide space, and we have not really felt what it is for the soul fully to face 
the eternaL The strugi^le must be a great and sore one, for even the best of men, 
when they come to die, have a time during which their faith seems to fail, and their 
hope to die out. It is a most " precious " thing to God for a human soul to be in 
struggle. 2. Because the living who are left are so overwhelmed with sorrow. Of the 
heavenly sphere it is said, " And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes." That 
means that the sympathy felt by God in their tearrbringing sorrows will by-and-by be 
able to express itself without limit or hindrance. Our teard are precious things to our 
heavenly Father, though, fur the holiest enHs, ho may bid them flow on while we 
tarry here below. 3. Because through death Gud brings his children home to himself. 
To him death is precious ; he thinks about it, is anxious about it, rejoices in the 
anticipation of that which follows it, looks on it much as the parent looks on the 
perilous journey which brings his absent child home. If we could always think of our 
beloved as gone home to our Father and theirs, their death would become precious to 
us. We think of them as dead, gone from earthly love and fellowship. Better think 
of them as having found the true love and the eternal fellowship. 

II, That the death or oub friends fits in with God'b perfect and lovino 



n. cxvi. 1—19.] THE BOOS OP PSALUa. 88 



PLAS FOB UB. When we look over otir past lives we often can see the wisdom and 
gooduess manifested in isolated scenes and incidents ; but we fail to see the wondeifiil 
ways in which the various experiences fit in together. It is not always an easy thing to 
discern what the common things have to do with the special things, or how the special 
things have become necessary in order to teach more effectively the lessons learned 
from the common things. We fail to discern the plan. God's plan in our life is not 
at present offered to our comprehension. It is offered to our faith. Our life is a 
worked pattern of various colours; the pattern is large, and it scarcely comes out 
until it is nearly complete. Our life is a complicated mosaic, and each day new 
shapes and new colours are added. God makes the pattern complete, but keeps it for 
a heaven-view. 

III. That the mystery hanoino about the death op oub beloved wiu. asm 
DAY BE DISPELLED. Familiar as we are with death, its ways always seem strange to 
as. We think it has stricken the wrong person ; it has come at the wrong time; or it 
has done its work ' . the wrong way. Sometimes Death comes too suddenly. In a 
moment our friend went in, and all left to us was the outer robe flung off as he passed 
through. Sometimes Death tarries wearyingly. Sometimes Death gathers about him 
circumstances which add peculiar painfulness to the death-sceaes. We incline to say, 
" It is all wrong." And yet it is QoA who arranges it. The wise God. The faithful 
Creator. The loving Father. It is precious to him. " Thou shalt know hereafter." 
Let us wait. We all have some mysteries to keep until the time for unfolding mysteries 
shall come. By-and-by " we shall know aa we are known." — B,. T. 

Yer. 17. — Spiritual tacrijices. "Sacrifice of thanksgiving." Acceptable to Ck>d, 
the great Spirit, not as thanksgiving, which may be as much a formality as a sacrifice, 
but as the sign of the thankful, loving heart, which gives itself to God in the thanks- 
giving. The story of Caio and Abel, in the earliest age, stamps this truth. They did 
not merely bring their offerings as expressions of their thankfulness for temporal 
prosperity. The story clearly indicates that they looked for the Divine acceptance of 
themselves, in some sense, for the sake of their gift. Abel's humble, earnest, grateful, 
trusting heart can receive God's favour ; from Cain's formalities God's favour must be 
withheld. Beligion is not acts, but it can express itself in acts. Iteligion is heart- 
feeling. It is the devotion of a man's self to God. Formal sacrifices are but the 
representation of the spiritual sacrifices for which God calls ; and their value depends 
on the spiritual sacrifice being offered through them. " They that worship the Father 
must worship him in spirit and in truth." " Not sacrifices, not temples, not services, 
not prayers, not good deeds, not steadfast morality, not generous giving, can of them- 
selves ever gain Divine favour. The Spirit-God asks for spirit-worship. Because man 
is a spirit, it is beneath his dignity to offer, and it is beneath the dignity of God to 
accept, other than spirit-worship." 

L Spieittal BACK1FICE8 AS THAHKSGiviNos. The formality of thanksgiving was 
strikingly illustrated in the great national services held when the Prince of Wales was 
restored to health. It was an appropriate national act ; and to many devout souls it 
was also a spiritual sacrifice. The worship of the Church is a sacred duty to be 
formally done ; but it only rises to its highest when the souls of the worshippers are 
fully in the praise. The spiritual element in formal .worship is an unceasing care to 
all devout souls. God asks to bear men's souls sing when their voices raise the 
psalm. 

II. Spibituaii baobipioes ab ADOEATioNB. Calling upon the " Name."_ There is a 
feature in the early Jewish ritual which it is difficult to retain in the Christian. The 
Jew had sublime, reverent, oppressive views of the majesty and holiness of God. So 
there was an element of adoration in the worship, ami an element of adoration in the 
psalms. The truth of the Divine Fatherhood is misapprehended if it is allowed to 
%hten the soul's august impressions of the Divine glory. 

IIL Spibitual 8ACRIFI0E8 AB FBAYEBS. Our Lord spoke against "vain repeti- 
tions." Prayer is soul-dependence and soul-desire. It may be spoken out, but it may 
not QoA reads hearts. — R. T. 

Yen, 1 ^9. — Ood tb* Deliverer. L Cxlebbateb a obgat deuvebanob. (Vers, 



84 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[fs. oxtil 1, & 



S— S.) 1. From threatened death. (Jet. 3.) 2. Frim the pains of the unseen world 
«r of death. (Ver. 3.) S. Eis whole nature is troubled and sorrowful. (Ver. 3.) . 

II. The means oe instruments of his delivbbanob. 1. Prayer. (Vers. 1— 4.) 
2. The goodness and mercy of Ood. (Vers. 5, 6.) 

III. The effects of this deliveeanob. 1. An (nerease of love. (Ver. 1.) 2. 
An increase of obedience to the Divine wUl. (Ver. 9.) 8. A more untroubled rest i» 
Qod—the rest of faith. (Ver. 7.)— S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXVIL 



It bas been doubted whether this exceed- 
ingly short psalm can ever have been in- 
tended for a separate composition, and was 
not rather written as a conclusion to Ps. 
•xvi. or an introduction to Ps. cxviii. In 
Hebrew maDuscripts it is often attached to 
one or other of these two psalms ; but in the 
versions and in the best manuscripts it is 
always separate. The writer calls upon all 
the nations of the earth to land and praise 
Jehovah, on the ground of his great mercy 
and faithfulness to Israel. The solidarity 
of the rest uf mankind with Israel is assumed 
(oomp. PsB. zlvii. 1; Izvi. 1, 8; zcviii. 4; 
«. 1, eto.). 



Ver. 1.— praise the Lord, all ye natioiu; 
or, "all ye Gentiles," as in Bom. xv. IL 
The goim are especially the heathen nations 
of the earth (comp. Fss. ii. 1, 8 ; ix. 5, 15, 
19, 20, etc.). Praise him ; rather, laud him 
(Revised Version). The verbs in the two 
clauses are difierent. All ye people ; rather, 
aU ye peoples. 

Ver. 2. — Vox his merciful kindness (or, 
his mercy) is great towards ns; literally, 
has been great over us. The appeal is to 
history, and the mercy intended is that 
shown in God's continnal protection of 
Israel. And the truth of the Lord endureth 
for ever. God's " truth " is here, as so often, 
his faithfulness to his promises, the promises 
being especially those made to Abraham 
and David. His "mercy and truth" to 
Israel were an indication of what the Gen- 
tiles might expect of him in his dealings 
with them (comp. Bom. zv. 8, 9). 



H0MILETIC3. 

Vers. 1, 2. — The kingdom of Ood. The psalmist, conscionsly or unconsciously, 
anticipates the glories ot the kingdom of God, as that is now being eslSblished under 
the reign of Christ. We have — 

I. Its stbonq foundation. It is founded on mercy and truth. Not on irresistible 
power, not on unchangeable law, but on Divine mercy and truth. 1. God's mercy to 
mankind, secured by the redeeming work, and promised by the unchanging word, of 
Jesus Christ, is one stone of that foundation. 2. The other is the wliole body of truth 
spoken by him or by hia apostles under his inspiration. Those who go everywhere 
preaching " the gospel of the kingdom " are charged to make known God's abounding 
grace to all men, from the best to the worst, Irom those " near " to those that are 
" afar off." They are also charged to declare the will of God in the righteousness, the 
truthfulness, the purity, the charity, the peacefulness, of those who give themselves 
to his service. These two great principles may never be disjuineil. With the message 
of mercy carried to the worst of the children of men must be closely and inextricably 
associated all that utterance of God's mind and purpose which requires holiness, 
wisdom, love. 

IL Its boundless banok. " Praise the Lord, all ye nations," etc. (ver. 1). It is 
difficult to understand how a Jew, under the Law, could expect all the heathen to be 
worshippers of God. The psalmist's must have been a pious wish rather than a serious 
expectation. Not such is the Christian's hope; he looks forward to the time when 
God will be honoured under every sky, and his praises sung in every language. Ue 
sees islands, communities, nations, that were once barbarous and idolatrous now con- 
rerted to the truth ; he sees the hoary systems of antiquity honey-combed with doubt 
and distrust; he sees groups and companies of men and women, as well as individuals, 
Inquiring at the feet of Jesus Obiist. fie sees the Churches of Christ " putting on theif 



PB. cxvii. 1, 2.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 86 

beautiful garments " of faith and zeal, and sending out their messengers to the ends 
of the earth. He sees the truth and mercy of Ood printed in every known language 
on the globe ; he sees the prophecies of the Old Testament and the New in the very 
act of fulfilment ; he has reason to say, with a heart full of hope and joy, " Praise 
the Lord, all ye nations." 

in. Its perpetuity. •' To all generations ; " or, " for ever.'' At least seventy 
generations have come and gone since this psalm was written, and eighteen centuries 
have passed since Jesus Christ brought "grace and truth" to the world in his own 
Person. And this Divine wisdom shows no other signs of age than those of maturity 
and advancement. There is no fear as to its future ; for it comes from God, and it 
meets the deep needs of man. It brings pardon for his sin, peace to his burdened 
heart, comfort in his sorrow, sanctity to his joy, steadfastness for the time of temp- 
tation, nobility to his life, hope in the solemn hour of death. With whatever humanity 
can dispense, it cannot do without the mercy and the truth of God aa these are 
revealed aad secured by the gospel of Jesus Christ. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Yen. 1, 2. — The doxology. This is the shortest psalm, but it is long enough to 
show — 

I. That there ib one bupbemb Object of wobship fob all men. It is Jehovah, 
the Lord. He and he alone. Three times in this short psalm is this affirmed. 1. The 
atfieism — by whatever name it is called — of the day denies this, saying, either God does 
not exist, or, if he does, we cannot know it. 2. False ideas of the Trinity practically 
deny this. Many Christians are tri-theists, though unconsciously. But such error 
is not the less harmful on that account. 3. The doctrine of Qod as §iven in the whole 
Bible never teaches other than the unity of Qod. " Hear, Israel, the Lord our God 
is one Lord." The human race ig one in its moral condition — sin; in its need — a 
Saviour ; in its consciousness of both these facts. One God, one Saviour, should be 
worshipped by alL 

II. That thbbe is onk duty djoumbent on am. — the pbaise of thk Lobd, It is 
not in many things that all can unite ; but they can, and one day will, in this. And we 
shoiild seek to begin this now. It is due to God ; he deserves as well as desires and 
demands it. It is full of blessing to ourselves. Prayer is good, but praise is better 
still. And it blesses others. The spirit of praise is winsome, for " praise is comely." 
In the walls of the city of God its gates are praise (Isa. Ix. 18). We go in that way, 
and draw others to go in with us. 

in. That there is one aboument and motive which will oonvinoe all — what 
OUB God is. He has not merely kindness, but merciful kindness. And it is great ; no 
insignificant and occasional thing. And it is " toward us ; " not a mere abstraction, 
but a positive reality. And he is ever faithful and true ; his righteousness endureth 
for ever. Not mercy without truth, nor truth without mercy. Alone, neither would 
have saved us. But together they constitute the salvation of Qod. They who know 
it will praise the Lord. — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — God in national life. "Laud him, all ye people" (Revised Version). This 
psalm was called by the Puritans the " Dunbar Psalm," because Cromwell, the lord- 
general, when at the foot of Doon Hill, after the battle of Dunbar, made a halt, and 
sang this psalm, " till the horse could gather for the chase." It is agreed that it is 
a kind of doxology, and was used either at the beginning or at the close of a liturgical 
service; somewhat as we use, "Glory be to the Father," etc. It was the one mist 
distinctive characteristic of the Jews that they were keen to recognize the presence 
and working of God in their national life. The tendency of nations is to distinguish 
between politics and religion. The tendency of sentimental religion is to keep aloof 
from politics. The true idea is exhibited in the Jewish national life at its best. The 
freest scope for all individual statesmanship and patriotism, combined with the ever- 
cherished conviction that God was in all, using all, inspiring all, and overruling alL 



86 THE BOOK OF PSALM& ["• "^^^ 1. ^ 

Jewish politics and religion were one thing. Moses' revelation from Ood was as truly 
national as religious. So far as the Jews had a universal mission, a witness to make 
to " all peoples," it was of the one and only God in their national life, who ought to 
he recognized as the God of every national life. We can trace God in tlie history that 
is past ; we may find him in the history that is now in the making. To that recognition 
of God in the present this psalm calls men. "The God of the whole eaith shall he 
be called." Monotheism involves (I) the universal claim of God to be every nation's 
God; (2) the determined opposition to every form in which the notion of deity is 
localized. The one God is all men's God. The psalm declares that this should be the 
occasion of universal rejoicing ; because, being what he is, this one God meets every 
conceivable need of all men. 

L Men need an infallible Dibbctob of coNDncr. This one God is the Buler of 
all, guiding all " with his eye." 

n. Men need a Vinsicatob of biohteousnebs in whom they may have absolute 
confidence. This one God is the Judge of all, the l)oly Avenger of all the wronged. 

III. Men need a Bescueb asd Delivebeb to whom in every sense of sin and 
peril they may fiee. This one God is the Saviour of all. These are universal human 
peculiarities found in every nation. So every nation wants the one God. — ^R. T. 

Ver. 2. — OocFs merciful dealingB with nations. The psalmist, no doubt, refers to 
the character of God's dealings with Israel, but he implies that they dc but present 
a model of God's dealings with all nations ; and he calls upon those nations to examine 
and see what God's dealings had been with them, so that they might find cause for 
praise. The early Jews realized monotheism as a special possession of their nation. 
The later prophets and psalmists realized monotheism as a trust, concerning which 
the Jews were to make witness to all nations around them. What we still do is what 
the psalmist here calls upon us to do. We study the records of God's dealings with 
his ancient people, in order that, seeing his mercy, loving-kindness, and truth to them, 
we may come to know him better, understand his ways with us more perfectly, and 
praise him with the praise that comes of perfect trust. 

L It is quite true that we can learn God's faithfulness and considerateness (merciful 
kindness) in nature, which, if it be a system of law, is a system of varying and opposing 
laws, whose relative working must be in some restraint and presidency. And in 
providence, which is thi' adjustment of nature-workings to meet the needs of individuals, 
and implies a Divine Director, who knows the individuals, and has power over every- 
thing, and, with infinite kindness can fit the two together. 

IL But the term "merciful kindness" suggests something better and deeper than 
this. True, the people of Israel were men, even as we are men. And what QoA did for 
them as men illustrates what God can do for us as men, and even assures us what he 
it doing. But we must never lose sight of this point — God dealt with Israel as sinful 
men ; and the merciful kindness is so impressive because it was pitiful and com- 
passionate dealing with sinful men. But that is precisely what we are, and therefore 
God's merciful kindness to Israel is so interesting to us. It reveals him who is also 
our God. When the idea is once in our mind, we can read our lives, individual and 
national, aright, and speak of his merciful kindness to us also.— B. T. 

Ver. 2. — Truth regarded as rdidbility. "The truth of the Lord endureth for ever." 
The term " truth " is constantly employed without a well-defined and precise meaning. 
Truth sometimes only means that which seems true to a particular individual at a 
particular time. Sometimes it only means " veracity," or the correspondence between 
a proposition and a man's belief. Truth is the correspondence of the proposition with 
fact. There is a standard truth. It is close kin with eternal righteousness. The love 
of truth is the love of realities; the determination to rest upon facts and not upon 
semblances. But when the psalmist spoke of the " truth of God," no such abstract 
or critical ideas were in his mind. He thought of the truth or righteousness of God 
as seen in his faithfulness to the promises on which he has ever made his people to hope. 
To him the truth of God was not his verity, but his rdiabUtty, His truthfulness, his 
dependableness, regarded as a basis of trust. His reliability has never failed his 
people i we may be absolutely confident that it endureth, and will endure for ever. A 



w. oxvm. 1 — ^29,] 



THE BOOK OF FSALlia 



87 



man's truth is the basis of our trust in him. God's truth is the basis of onr reliaace 
on him. 

I. Tbuth, ab a featube of ohabagteb, is a BIOS OF BTABILITT. When «s 
speak of a man as a man of truth, we know that we describe a firm, steadfast man ; 
a man who can make up bis mind, and stand to his mind when it is made up. There 
is no wavering, no " shilly-shallying," about the man. He is a prop fixed firmly into 
the ground, and can bear a good strain. To some men there seems to be no snoh 
thing as truth, only varying opinion, nothing worth suffering for, worth living and 
dying for. Such men easily bend this way or that, swayed by every passing wind. 

II. Tbuth, ab a feature of obabaoteb, is a bisn of cokbibtenct. Consistent^ 
is keeping strictly to a Udb of conduct which we have marked as right. But onlj 
a man of truth will ever look on a line of conduct as right, for only such a man has 
an absolute moral standard. And only the man of truth will have any anxiety aboat 
deviations from the line. 

III. Tbuth, as a feature of oharaoteb, is a sign of febmanenob. No dis- 
integrating forces can ever destroy it. By the necessity of things the truthM 
character endures ; nothing can ead it. These things may be applierl in their sublimest 
forms to God, in whose image man is made. Because he is truth, and his truth endure*, 
we may trust in the Lord for ever. — R.' T. 

Ver, 2. — Fraise. " Praise ye the Lord." It may be interesting to inquire what 
" praise " is ; and what are the proper forms and features of human praise as offered to 
God. What praise does God reasonably demand? And what praise is man, at his 
best, able to offer? But those considerations may lead us into somewhat familiar 
lines. There may be some freshness in considering what the response to this call, 
what the offering of this praise, is to men. It is a glorifying of God ; but it is also 
a benediction of men. We may not offer our praise for the sake (/getting the benediction; 
we may only offer the praise for the glorifying of God. But we may keep the comfort- 
ing assurance in our hearts, that God does make it return upon us in benedictions. 

L Praise as boasting. Boasting is a part of the human character. It is the 
natural expression of the energetic, confident, and hopeful disposition. Boasting is 
a good thing as well as a bad. He is but a poor soul who does not boast, or cannot. 
The question is — Does the boasting concern self, or some one else ? Boasting about self 
is offensive ; blasting about some one else may be most noble. And praise is that 
noble and ennobling thing — boasting about Ood. That lifts us wholly away fi-om sell 

II. Praise as ministbt. A man never offers praise to God without morally and 
spiritually helping some one beside him. That praise declares his faith in God; his 
sense of the claims of God ; and his experience of the mercies of God. So praising is 
not our dutv, it is part of our service. This is too often lost sight of, and then pnblio 
praise is easily neglected. 

III. Praise as relaxation. The religious life is no continuous strain of wearisome 
duties that must be done. It is full of relief-times. And the praise-times of religions 
life are precisely simUar to those resting and refreshing times which we all value so 
much as relief from business strain. Therefore the j>rats«-feature of all religious 
services should have the most careful attention, that fnll efiSciency may be secured. 

IV. Pbaibk as cultube. By "culture" we mean the complete and harmonious 
development of all a man's bodily and mental powers. When used in relation to 
nligion, it means the complete and harmonious development of all a man's spiritual 
powers. There is a praise-side to every man's religious nature, and that can only be 
cultured by fitting and continuous exercise. So man is blessed, and God is glorified, 
by the offering of praise. — ^B. T. 

EXPOSITION. 



PBALU oxvni. 

Ak antiphonal hymn, composed for a Joyfnl 
oecasion, when there was to be a procession 
t» the temple^ a welcoming of the procession 



by those inside, and the solemn offering of 
a sacrifice upon the altar thaie. Dr. Kay's 
conjecture, that the occasion was the joyful 
Paasover which followed the dedication of 
the second temple in B.a 516 (Ezra vi. 19— 



88 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. cxvm. 1 — 29. 



22), is not improbable, tboagh it cannot be 
regarded as more than a reasonable hypo- 
thesis. 

The first eighteen verses are the song of 
the procession as it winds its way slowly 
up the hill to the great gate of the temple, 
sung alternately, as it would seem, by the 
two halves of the procession. Ver. 19 is 
the utterance of the leader, in the name of 
the whole band, on their arrival before the 
gates. Yer. 20 is the reply made to them by 
those inside. The procession, as it enters, 
aings vers. 21 — 24 antiphonally as before, 
all joining in ver. 25. Those already inside 
sing ver. 26 in welcome of thbir friends. 
Ter. 27 belongs to the leader of the pro- 
cession, and initiates the actual sacrifice. 
Vera. 28, 29 are then sung, either by the 
whole congregation or by the two parts of 
the procession. 

Ver. 1. — give thanks unto the Lord ; for 
he is good : because his mercy endureth for 
ever (oomp. Ps. cvL 1, and the comment 
ad Zoo.), 

Yer. 2. — Let Israel now say, that his 
mercy endureth for ever. (For the triple 
division of the peuple made in this and the 
next two verses — (1) Israel, (2) house of 
Aaron, (3) those who fear the Lord — see 
Ps. ozv. 9—11, and 12, 13.) The nature of 
the division is considered in the comment 
on Pb. cxv. 11. 

Ver. 3. — Let the house of Aaron now say, 
that his mercy endureth for ever. Let the 
priests endorse what the people generally 
have declared, that God's mercy is ever- 
lasting. 

Yer. 4. — Let them now that fear the Lord 
say, that his mercy endureth for ever. Let 
the real Israel, the true worshippers of 
Jehovah, those who worship him in spirit 
and in truth, set their seal also to the great 
confession, and solemnly sanction what the 
people and the priests have done. 

ver. 5. — I called upon the lord in dis- 
tress; literally, from the strait place; i.e. 
firom the straits in which I was. It is 
generally agreed that the Babylonian cap- 
tivity is intended. The nation had called 
to God in its distress by the mouth of 
Daniel (ix. 4 — 19) and of other holy men. 
The Lord answered me, and set me in a 
large place; literally, the Lard answered 
me on the open plain. The idea is, " The 
Lord gave me enlargement " — took me out 
of my straits — " set my feet in a large room" 
(Pa. xxxi. 8). 

Ter. 6.— The Lord ia on my side. "At 
thia point the speaker transfers his point 



of view into the past ; he is once more fear- 
less in the midst of foes " (Cheyne). I will 
not fear (comp. Pss. xxiii. 4 ; xxvii. 1 ; Ivi. 
4, etc.). What can man do unto me 1 Man 
is powerless against God. " If God be for 
us [i.e. on our side], who can be against us?" 
(Bom. viii. 31). 

Yer. 7. — The Lord taketh my part with 
them that help me ; literally, the Lord i$ 
on my side among my helpers (comp. Ps. liv. 
4). Therefore shall I see my desire upon 
them that hate me (oomp. Pss. liv. 7; lix. 
10). 

Ver. 8. — It is better to trust in the Lord 
than to put confidence in man (comp. Ps. 
Ixii. 8, 9). Israel, on its return from the 
Captivity, had begun by putting a good deal 
of trust in its human helpers, as Oyms and 
the other friendly heathen mentioned in 
Ezra i. 4—6; iii. 7. But this help, after 
a little time, had failed them (Ezra ir. 1 — 
24), and they had found themselves in great 
difficulties. 

Ver. 9. — It ia better to trnat in the Lord 
than to put confidence in princes. The 
" princes " after Cyrus had proved " broken 
reeds," and, instead of favouring Israel, had 
favoured Israel's enemies (Ezra iv. 6—24), 
At last Darius had done them justice, but 
it was felt that no sure dependence could be 
placed either on him or on his snccessors. 
Jehovah alone was Israel's safe ground of 
confidence. He " would not &il them, noi 
forsake them " (Josh. i. 9). 

Yer. 10. — ^AU nations compassed me abont. 
This is, of course, hyperbole. But it was a 
a fact that all, or almost all, the nations 
among whom the Israelites dwelt were at 
all times hostile to them, and sought theil 
destruction. Bat in the Name of the Lord 
will I destroy them; or, <* I will mow them 
down " (comp. Job xxiv. 24). 

Yer. 11. — They compassed me abont; yea, 
they compassed me abont (comp. Ps. Ixxxviii. 
17). The special compassing about alluded 
to is probably that in the time of Nebu- 
chadnezzar, when not only the Babylonians 
but the Syrians, the Moabites, the Am- 
monites, and the Edomites took part in 
hostilities against Israel (2 Kings xxiv. 2 ; 
Fs. oxxxvii. 7). But in the Name of the 
Lord I will destroy them. The threefold 
repetition of this trenchant phrase (vers. 
10, 11, 12) lends it vast additional force. 
It is no casual utterance, no mere wish, or 
thought begotten of a wish, but a deep 
and firm conviction. 

Yer. 12. — ^Ihey compassed me abont like 
bees; i.e. in vast unuibers, and with intense 
energy, and a furious desire to injure (comp. 
Deut. i. 44 ; and the powerful description of 
Virgil, 'Georg.,' iv. 236—238). They are 
quenched as the fire of thorns. Their fury 
dies away and goes out anddenly, like a fire 



PS. cxviii. 1 — 29j 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



89 



kindled among thorns, which blazes up 
vith yast lieat and noise, but in a short 
time dies down and disappears. For in the 
Kame of the Lord I will destroy them (see 
the comment on ver. 11). 

Ver. 13.— Thou hast thmst sore at me 
that I might fall; rather, thou didet thruet 
(Revised Version). The psalmist recalls 
the past, and throws himself, as it were, 
once more into the midst of the struggle. 
Thou — mine enemy, Babylon — didst make 
• desperate onset upon me, fully intend- 
ing my destruction. But the Lord helped 
me. Frustrated thy purpose — preserved tlie 
life, the national life, which thou aimedst 
at destroying, and so did most eflfectually 
"help me." 

Ver. 14. — ^The Lord is my strength and 
my song, and is become my salvation. The 
deliverance was such that no words but 
those of the Song of Moses (Exod. xv. 2) 
could fitly celebrate it. 

Ver. 15. — The voice of rejoicing and sal- 
vation is in the tabernacles of the righteous 
(oomp. Ezra vi. 16, 22). "Tabernacles," or 
"tents," is continually used by the sacred 
writers as a synonym for " dwellings." Tlie 
nse of the expression here by no means 
implies that the Israelites of the time were 
actually living in tents. The right hand 
of the Lord doeth valiantly (comp, Exod. 
XV. 6, 12). God's right hand was at the 
time stretched out to protect and preserve 
Israel. 

Ver. 16. — ^The right hand of the Lord is 
exalted (compare the parallel expression 
in Exod. XV. 6, "Thy right hand, O God, 
ii become glorioua in power "). When God's 
right hand effects a deliverance, it gets, as 
it were, additional glory to itself. The 
right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. So, 
already, in ver. 16. Bepetition is a special 
characteristic of this psalm (see vers. 1, 2, 
3, 4; vers. 8, 9; vers. 10—12, etc.). 

Ver. 17.— I shall not die, but live. The 
psalmist speaks, not in his own person, but 
in the name of his nation. They had been 
brought very near to extinction ; but now 
the danger was past. God had given them 
"a reviving" (Ezra ix. 8, 9); :'"d they felt 
that henceforth they would '-..ve." And 
declare the works of the Lord. They would 
employ the new life granted them in " de- 
claring God's works" (see Pss. xl. 5, 10; 
xcvi. 3 ; cxlv. 4 — 6) ; i.e. they would witness 
to all men of " the might of his marvellous 
acts," and " abundantly utter the memory 
of his great goodness." 

Ver. 18. — The Lord hath chastened me 
■ore. By the long sufferings of the Cap- 
tivity. But he hath not given me over unto 
death (see the comment on ver. 17). 

Ver. 19. — Open to me the gates of right- 
eousness. The great gate of the temple 



being now reached, admission to the interior 
is requested. The gates are called "the 
gates of righteousness," (1) as gates which 
none but the righteous ought to enter (see 
the next verse) ; and (2) as gates through 
which access is gained to the sanctuary of 
him who alone is truly righteous, and the 
source of all righteousness in others. I 
will go into them, and I will praise the 
lord. Praise could be given to God any- 
where ; but it was most appropriately offered 
"in the courts of the Lord's house, even 
in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem" (Fs. 
oxvi. 19). 

Ver. 20. — This gate of the Lord, into 
which the righteous shall enter; rather, 
this i» the gate of the Lord: the righteous 
[and they alone] ehall enter by it. "This 
verse seems to stanrl apart — a solo, chanted 
by a voice out of the temple gate " (Kay). 
Though sinners doubtless sometimes entered 
(2 Kings xi 13; 2 Chron. xxvi. 16-20; 
John ii. 14), none but the righteous had any 
right to enter, 

Ver. 21.— I will praise thee ; for then hast 
heard me. The chant of the procession as 
it enters — a prolongation of the strain begnu 
in ver. 19. And art beoome my salvation 
(comp. ver. 14). 

Ver. 22. — The stone which the builders 
refused is become the head stone of the comer. 
The primary and literal meaning seems to 
be — ^"Israel, which the great of the world, 
those who think to arrange the world ac- 
cording to their ovm ideas, have rejected 
and would fain have cast a«ide, has, never- 
theless, despite their rejection, attained to 
eminence, and been advanced, by the conise 
of events, into such a position, that it may 
be regarded as the head comer-stone— the 
most important of all the nations of the 
world." Any Messianic reference is second- 
ary and subordinate. 

Ver. 23.— This is the Lord's doing; it is 
marvellous in our eyes. This fresh eleva- 
tion of Israel to importance — especially to 
such great importance— can only be attri- 
buted to the work of Divine providence. 
It is " the Lord's doing " — literally, " from 
the Lord" — and is one of the most mar- 
vellous events of history. 

Ver. 24. — This is the day which the Lord 
hath made. The thanksgiving day is one 
which has been fore-ordained of God, and 
brnught into existence by him for a special 
purpose. We will therefore carry out God's 
purpose, and rejoice and be glad in it. 

Ver. 25. — Save now, I beseech thee, 
Lord; or, "we beseech thee." The inter- 
jectional k:m is as suitable to the several 
speakers as to one. Lord, I beseech thee, 
send now prosperity ; i.e. continue to save, 
continue to send prosperity. Israel feels 
its constant dependence upon Gud, and that 



90 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. oxvin. 1 — 2a 



If the Divine care were lemitted for a day, 
or for an hour, all would be lost. Tears, 
as Professor Oheyne observes, continually 
mingle with Israel's laughter. 

Ver. 26. — Blessed be he that cometh 
in the Name of the Lord. Once more 
a voice issues from the interior of the 
temple (comp. ver. 20). The priestly choir 
there stationed to receive the procession, 
blesses it as coming " in the Niime of the 
Lord ; " i.e. for a religious purpose, and with 
pious intentions. We have blessed you, they 
say (or, rather perhaps, we bless you) out of 
the house of the Lord. " The house of the 
Lord is the fountain and the treasury of all 
blessing " (Hengstenberg). 

Ver. 27.- God is the Lord, which hath 
ihowed us light. Having received the 
priestly benediction, the processionists re- 
sume their strain. They have entered 
within the courts; they are approaching 
the altar of ^acrifice ; they have brought 
their offering. "Jehovah," they say, "is 
God, and hath given us light " (see the Ee- 
vised Version). That is, he has enlight- 



ened our spirits to see and acknowledge his 
mercies ; or, perhaps, lie has led ns, as he 
did the people, by a pillar of fire in the wil 
derness ; and now we stand before the altar 
with our offering— receive it at our hands, 
ye priests — and bind the sacrifice with cords, 
even unto the horns of the altar. So shall 
the act of thanksgiving be complete, and 
the solemn service ended. Tlie fanciful 
exposition of Luther, lately revived by Pro- 
fessor Cheyne, wUl scarcely approve itself 
to critics generally. 

Ver. 28.— Thou art my Sod, and I will 
praise thee : thou art my God, I will 
exalt thee. This is the acknowledgment 
made by each and all, and probably repeated 
many times, while the sacrifice is being oon- 
sumeil upon the altar. 

Ver. 29. — give thanks unto the Lord, 
for he is good : for his meroy endureth for 
ever. The psalm ends, as it began, with 
the usual thanksgiving refrain (comp. 1 
Ohron. xvi. 34 ; 2 Chron. </. 13 ; Ezra iii 11 ; 
Pss. oyi. 1 ; ovii. 1 ; cxviii. 1 — 4 ; cxxxvL 
1—26). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1—21. — Opposition, deliverance, thanksgiving. The ppalmist (or the nation) 
is passing, or has just passed, through great distress. He (it) has been the object of 
m^ignant and determined attack ; he has been surrounded by enemies, and been in 
peril of his life; he has then, as always, sought help from above; and he has been so 
graciously relieved that he has the sense of deliverance in his soul, and the song of 
triumph on his lips. 

I. Human opposition. This begins in : 1. Hatred ; or a hostile feeling (ver. 7). It 
is bad enough that men should cherish a spirit of enmity toward us, that they should 
wish us evil. But this passes into : 2. A hostile attitude. Those who are opposed to 
us " compass us about " (vers. 10 — 12). They quietly surround us with the network 
of their intrigue. They go beyond this ; they bring to bear on us : 3. Active opposi- 
tion. They "thrust sore at us" (ver. 13); their voice is raised in accusation, in 
detraction, in opposition ; they take active measures to defeat, to distress, even to ruin 
us. It may be that their efforts conduct to: 4. The most grave results. Positive 
disaster may impend (vers. 17, 18). It may be war «' unto death." 

n. The hope of the afflicted. When thus engirt with enemies, our health, or 
our peace, or our position being seriously threatened, we have a refuge in Chjd. 1. 
This trouble is lofar of him that he has permitted it, and he has it under his controL 
Our appeal is therefore rightly directed to him. 2. His power against our adversaries 
is unquestioned and unbounded; let him lift his hand, and they are discomfited (ver. 
16). With Grud at our side, animating and inspiring us, we ourselves shall prove wiser 
and stronger than they (vers. 10 — 12). 3. Conscious of our own integrity, with dean 
hands and a pure heart, assured that we are not seeking our own interests but those 
of the kingdom of Christ, we count confidently on his sympathy and succour 
(vers. 6, 7). 

in. Divine EELiEr. We call on God, and he answers ns, and sets us " in » large 
place" (ver. 5). He takes us out of the straits in which we were hemmed in, and 
places us where we can breathe freely and can act happily and fearlessly. He has 
beciracie "our salvation'' (ver. 14). Our liabilities are met, our enemies disarmed, our 
reputation cleared, our position secured, our friends reconciled and restored, our path 
!■ made plain ; we " return unto our rest." Theu comes the bl'-ssedness of — 

IV. Thanksqivino. 1. In the heart. (Vers. 1 — 4.) Let every one that has been thus 



PS. cxvin. 1— 29.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 91 

delivered, to whaterer tribe he may belong, say that the pity of the Lord " endureth 
for ever," that it never fails. 2. In the home. (Ver. 15^ The voice of praise should 
be heard beneath every roof where God is known and his goodness has been felt. 
3. In the sanctuary. (Vers. 19, 20, 21.) In the psalmody which is heard in the 
Church there is many a note, detected by the ear of God, which is the outpouring of 
a rescued and relieved human spirit. 

Vers. 22 — 29. — Z%« great reversal To whomsoever these words (vers. 22, 23) 
primarily referred, we have the highest authority for applying them to our Lord 
himself. In his case we have — 

I. The great beveesal. (Vers. 22, 23.) No reversal of fortune in human affairs 
can be comparable to his experience. Consider : 1. His course on earth — the circum- 
stances of his birth, of his youth, and of his manhood ; his claims disowned, his truth 
rejected, himself insulted, ill-treated, condemned, smitten, crucified I 2. The nature of 
his position now as the Divine Head of the Church. He may be said to be both the 
Foundation-stone and also the Corner or Top-stone (the " epistyle ") ; for his Church is 
built upon his truth and, still more truly, upon himself; and, at the same time, it 
looks up to him as the most conspicuous One on whom its eyes rest with reverence and 
love. 3. The exaltation he enjoys in the heavenly world (see PhiL iL 9 — 12; 
Rev. V. 13). 

II. The lono bbioht day op qbaoe and gladness. (Ver. 24.) The position of 
Jesus Christ as " Prince and Saviour, giving redemption and remission of sins," is a 
long, bright day, succeeding the darkness of heathendom or the twilight of " the Law;" 
it is a day which " the Lord has made " for the nations of the earth. We may well 
" rejoice and be glad in it ; " not thinking and speaking and singing of it as if it were 
a dispensation of dreariness and gloom, but realizing that it is one of close fellowship 
with God, of holy and happy service, of ever-brightening hope (see Phil. iii. 1; iv. 4; 
Eph. ii. 6; iii. 19; Rev. i. 6). "The joy of the Lord" is that which becomes tis; it 
is our duty and it is " our strength." Yet is there — 

IIL The need fob eaenest pbateb. (Ver. 25.) 1. That the individual soul may 
be " saved," strengthened, comforted, sanctified. 2. That the Church, the society, the 
institution, may be " prospered ; " that its officers may be inspired and directed ; thatits 
action may be pure in motive and high in aim ; that its efforts may be crowned with 
true and lasting success. 

IV. The place of saobifiob. (Ver. 27.) Jehovah, through his prophets, so 
enlightened his people that they brought to his altar the acceptable sacrifice. The 
great Teacher has, so enlightened us by his Divine truth, that we have reached the 
place of purest and most well-pleasing sacrifice — the dedication of the entire nature, the 
mind, the affections, the will, and of the whole life, at home, in business, in society, 
to the service of the Lord. . „ ,, 

V. The soul's delight ik Qoo. The contemplation of Grods goodness, and 
especially of his grace to us, may well lead us into an atmosphere of exultation, and 
call forth from us the language of fervent praise. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 16. JTie valiant right hand of the lord. The hbtory of Israel was full of 

illustrations and evidences of this. The occasion of this psalm was one of them. 
But apply the thrice-repeated declaration of the text — 

L To OUB LoBD Jesus Christ. For: 1. See how he overcomes Satan. He was 
tempted in all points like as we are, and again and again, and yet Satan found nothing 
in him. 2. Sm. He was holy, harmless, and undefiled ; he did no sin. 3. The Law's 
condemnation. " He was just, and yet the Justifier of him who," etc. " He magnified 
the Law, and made it honourable." 4. Death. By his resurrection and ascension. 5. 
AU the wm-ka of the devil. (Cf. 1 Cor. xv. 24.) , v /,u v .. 

II. To THE TBIUMPHS OF THE GOSPEL. Read the history of the Ohurcb, trace its 
growth and increase, see its onward march still. 

VI. To THE illDiviDnAii BELIBVINO SOUL. What hindrances we put, and still put, lu 



92 THE BOOK OP PSALMS, [ps. cxviii. 1— 29. 

our Lord's way 1 what prlle, unbelief, love of gin, and all the rest I and yet one after 
anuther he beats them all duwn. — S. C. 

Ver. 17. — " I shall not die, hut live." I. This psalm has been well called thb 
" Hymn of Deuvebancb from Exile," as the song of Moses was the " Hymn of 
Deliveraace from Egypt." It is such a Te Deum as was possible when as yet the gospel 
had not been revealed. The enemies of Israel had done their worst. They had com- 
passed Israel " about like bees " (vers. 10 — 12) ; they had " thrust sore at him," that he 
might Tail (ver. 13). But with this recollection, and with the consciousness of bitter 
enmity still existing, there is mingled the glad confidence, the buoyant hope, that their 
enemies shall be "quenched as the fire of thorns." "I shall not die, but live" (vers. 
14 — 17). The psalm pictures Israel keeping high festival, probably at the dedication 
of the new teiuple. The day itself was solemnly set apart (ver. 24), and a joyous 
procession is seen advancing towards the sacred edifice. As it nears thu entrance, the 
warders of the gates are summoned to opeu them (ver. 19), that the people may go in 
to praise the Lord. " And then, as the throng passes within, the psalmist notes a 
circumstance which forms a leading feature in his poem. In building the new temple, 
some block of stone had been, at first, laid aside as useless, and then, on fuller 
consideration, it had been lifted up to fill one of the most important positions in the 
structure." The sacred poet fastens on this incident, and sees in it the striking 
suggestion of Israel's own history — a suggestion which our Lord himself takes up and 
applies to himself as being the most complete fulfilment of its prophecy. Israel had 
seemed useless, impossible of recovery, unfit altogether for the high purposes for which 
God had at first designed her. Carried off and apparently lost in the sweltering mob 
of nationalities in which she had been swallowed up, what good was she capable of? 
what useful part in the upbuilding of the kingdom of God could she serve ? So all men 
thought, and with apparent abundant reason. But the festival which the psalm 
celebrates contradicted all that, and the stone, once rejected, but now filling so 
important ft place in the new temple, was the type and prophecy of the high service 
which yet, and in spite of all past and present obstacles, Israel was called to render in 
the accomplishment of the good will of God to man. So that she could say, as here she 
does, " I shall not die, but," etc. 

II. It was adopted by dub Lord fob himself. Not alone the special part of the 
psalm (ver. 22), which tells of the rejected but exalted stone (cf. Matt. xxi. 42), but 
the whole tone and spirit of the psalm. It looked, as the day of bis death drew near, 
as if he were for ever the " Bejected of men." But the words of our text were his 
convictinn (cf. Luke xviii. 31 — 33). He, though humbled even to death, and that the 
death of the cross, yet should he conquer death and live for evermore (Bom. vi. 10 j 
Eev. i. 18). The exile of Israel and their glad return were but shadows of the dark- 
ness of the cross, and the glory of Easter Day. 

III. It has been evee tbde of the Chubch op God. She has been plunged into 
deepest woe, ami limuttht down to death. 1. By fierce persecution. Let the martyr 
ages tell. 2. By the growth and spread of false doctrine. The faith once delivered to 
the saints has been tampered with, perverted, so that its true character has been lost. 
3. And worse still, moral corruption has once and again seized on her, and made her 
a thing of horror to all holy souls. But in each case it has been possible for the 
faithful remnant to lift up the exultant chant, " I shall not die," etc. 

IV. It is the well-waebanted hope and confidence of eveby Chbistiak boitl. 
1. Sometimes thi text comes literally true. Life has all but gone ; the powers of the 
body seemed incapable of recovery; but restoration has been given. Let such restored 
life be given up to the declaration of the works of the Lord. 2. In the hour of terrible 
temptation. How many a soul has been all bat lost, but, grasping the hand of the 
Lord, has yet been saved I 3. At the hour of death. The body dies, but not we. — S. C. 

Ver. 19.—" 2%e gates of righteousness." We can have little doubt that this psalm 
was composed for the dedication of the new temple built by the exiles after their return 
from Babylon (see Ezra iii.). The events alluded to in the psalm correspond with the 
history. They had been compassed about by enemies (see ver. 10, etc.). They were 
dwelling in tents (ver, 15). Nationally they had been near unto death (ver. 15), and 



PS. oxvin. 1— 29.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 93 



had been chastened sore (ver. 18). There were those that helped them (ver. 7). They 
were beginning a new work (ver. 25). For all these reasons the psalm has been 
assigned to the events told of in Ezra iii. They had been in bitter exile, exposed to 
fierce persecution (see histories in Daniel), But at length the Persian power under 
Cyrus advances, Babylon is overthrown. It is probable that the Jews sympathized 
with the Persians because of the similarity between the religions they each professed; 
and the Persians also with them. At any rate, Cyrus favours them. Under Zerub- 
babel, Joshua, and Zechariah, a vast throng of them — near fifty thousand — return to 
their desolate land. They are exposed to the attacks of their old enemies, Moabites, 
Ammonites, Amalekites ; but the power of Persia helps them. At length they reach 
Jerusalem. Their first step is to build the altar (Ezra iii. 3), thus declaring their 
allegiance' and confidence towards God. Afterwards the building of the temple is 
proceeded with, and in connection with that this glorious psalm was written. The 
priests with a vast multitude approach the temple, and, standing before the gates, they 
cry, " Open to me the gates of," etc. Now wherefore are these gates and all such gates 
so called ? It is because — 

I. The tbde wobshippebs beooqnizb what God bequibeb in those who wobbhip 
HIM. (Cf. Pss. XT., xxiv.) Israel, through what they had suffered, had come to see 
that righteousness was the one demand cf God. Hence now they declare that it is 
only a righteous nation that can enter tuem. And so it is in the Church to-day. We 
may call ourselves members of the Churob ; but that we are not, save as we are 
righteous. And so it will be in the temple of the Lord on high. 

" Those holy gates for ever bar 
Pollution, sin, and shame ; 
None can obtain an entrance then 
Bnt followers of the Lamb." 

n. What Gk>o ik hiubelf is — the Bisuteous One. The temple is his, and there- 
fore the gates; and therefore, because God is righteous, the gates are gates of righteous- 
ness. Zechariah says, " He shall be called. The Lord our Bighteousness." The 
distinction of Israel was that they worshipped a holy God. " The Lord our God is 
holy." Other gods connived at sin, and set the example of it. But Israel was taught 
by all the institutions of their Law that God was righteous, and of too pure eyes to 
behold iniquity. How, then, can any one think that he will tolerate and condone it, 
that, in fact, he does not mind it ? or how can any one pervert the gospel of Christ — as 
thousands do — and make his righteousness not the pattern, pledge, and form of their 
own, as it is, but a substitute for it? 

IIL What God will give to his people — biqhteousnbss. Those gates lead the 
true worshipper straight to this gift. It is by the way of the altar, telling of the blood 
which cleanseth from all sin. All the motive forces of holiness — repentance, faith, love, 
hope — all gather round the cross of Christ, the place of sacrifice. There we find life, 
and that life more abundantly. 

IV. The tbde wobshippeb pubposes that this is what he will bendeb to 
God— A LIFE OF bighteousness. He has heard the call, " Be ye holy," and he has seen 
whence and how this holiness can be his, and now it is his fixed resolve to lead that 
righteous life which God desires, deserves, and demands. Hence he says, " Open to 
me the gates of righteousness. 1 wUl go in to them, and I will praise the Lord." — S. 0. 

Ver. 24 The day the Lord hath made. The words primarily point to that joyful 

dedication day of the new temple. Perhaps Israel had been directed specially to 
observe the day; or, more likely still, the psalmist meant the day of joy and gladness 
of revived national and religious life. " This is the day the Lord," etc. 

L Wk mat apply it to oub Lobd's Eesurbection-day. That has been called 
the day of days, as indeed it was and is to the Church of Christ. That first Easter 
Day was " the day in liis life which he made his owu beyond all others. Not his 
birthday ; for that meant his entrance on a life of sorrows. Not his ascension day j 
for that was the closing scene of a triumph already achieved. Not his transfiguration- 
day ; for that was a momentary Hash of glory in a career of piirx. Not the day of his 
crucifixion ; that was a great day for a ruined world, but for him it marked the lowest 



94 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxym. 1— 2a 

stage of umiliation and woe. The day of days in the life of Christ was the day of his 
resurrection. ' And to the firsit disciples especially, and to the believing Church still : 
L This day has the joy of deliverance from a great dread. They thought they had 
but their Lord, and that the redemption of Israel was now but an unfulfilled and 
impossible dream. But that dread departed, driven forth by the joy of the day of 
resurrection. 2. And the day brings also the Joy qf/uU conviction as to the gospd 
we believe. Our Lord and his apostles base all belief of that gospel on the Besurrection ; 
they held it, as do we, as an infallible proof. 3. The Joy ofreneioed and radiant hope. 
"Christ ever liveth : " what now is not possible? For all such reasons the words of 
the text may be fitly applied to the Easter joy. 

II. To THE Lord's day — the sabbath. Who can over-estimate to man's body, 
mind, heart, and soul what the blessed Sunday brings? Fools and blind are they who, 
for any reason or by any means, would rob weary-hearted men of this priceless boon. 

III. To THE DAY OF OUB CONVERSION. It is not all that can, nor is it indispensable 
for any to remember the exact day when that great spiritual change passed upon 
them. But some have vivid recollection of it ; they can tell the time, place, circum- 
stances, and all connected with the day on which they were born again and passed 
from death unto life. And it may be they are to be envied who can do this, which 
assuredly many cannot. But they will not hesitate to take such words as these in 
our text, and apply them to this by them never-to-be-forgotten day. 

IV. To THE DAY OF REVIVAL AND BEUQIOnS FBOSFEEITY. HoW bleSSed BUCh 

seasons are 1 God gives them to his Church from time to time. Spring-tide seasons, 
when there is an energy and quickening and force in the general life of the Church, 
such as has long been unknown. It was so for Israel when this psalm was first sung, 
and it has been so many times since. And let no one wait for the whole Church to be 
thus revived; the blessed time may come— will come, if really longed for— to the 
individual soul. And that will be a time of joy. — S. 0. 

Ver. 26. — Church prosperity, I, What ib it? 1. Not mere numbers. Crowd- 
winning is not soul-winning. 2. Still less mere rank, wecdth, and talent in the Qhureh, 
He is a fool who despises these things; but he is a still greater one who claims 
them to be identical with true prosperity, or a substitute for it. 3. But it consists in 
the presence and power of the Holy Spirit of Qod, This will be seen in the conversion 
of sinners ; in the holiness and zeal of believers ; in their increase of unity and love. 

IL Weenob is it ? It is from God. We are to look to him. We are terribly apt 
to look elsewhere. 

III. How IS IT obtained? By waiting upon God with earnest, importunate prayer. 
" Lord, I beseech thee," etc. And one such earnest seeker caa do much to gain tills. 
It is the prayer of one man — " /beseech thee " — that we have here. 

IV. When may it be had ? Now I The earnest longing for it is an omen of its 
approach. The prayer of faith works marvels. 

V. Why should we seek it? For our own sake; for the Church's sake ; for the 
woild's sake; for Christ's sake. — S. 0. 

Vers. 27, 28. — Th« song of the saved soul. Thus also may this psalm be regarded. 
It is fabehood when sung by the godless and unsaved ; but if we are Christ's by willing 
consent, then this song is ours. 

I. God shows us lioht. As at the Creation the Holy Spirit's first work was the 
giving of the light, so is it in the new creation of the soul. L Light as to its real 
condition — ^lost, helpless, guilty, condemned. 2. Revealing the Lord Jesus Christ as 
the Saviour of the lost. 3. And as our Keeper and Upholder when saved, by the power 
of his Holy Spirit. 4. Light as to his will-forces, and our capacity for and obligation 
to serve him. Has God thus showed us light ? 

n. The bodl pbbsentb itbelf in baobificb. This is ever so. Christ is not onr 
sacrifice, unless we are his. If his is for us, ours is unto him. The instinctive utter- 
ance of the soul is, " What shall I render unto the Lord ? " 

HL But this saobifioe which wb bbhto needs to be bound to the altab. 
It used to be said by the Jews that no animals were so restive as those which were 
btoiv'ht for sacrifice to the altar. Certainly our sacrifice needs to be bound with cords 



PS. xovin. 1— 29.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 96 

to the altar. Do we not find how our hearts would go off to the world again ? What 
tendency to tnrn from Christ there is ! The down-drag of the world, the flesh and the 
devil are terrible indeed. Do we not find this in our prayers ? How our minds wander I 
how difficult to fix our attention I Satan is ever busy with suggestions and oemptatioris 
to make us take back our sacrifice. 

IV. But thebk are cords, trusty and btbono, with which wb mat bind thk 
8A0BIFICE TO THK ALTAB. As it was with Our Lord — to whom this whole psalm is for 
ever pointing us — there were cords which bound him, and the same will bind us. 1. 
The cord of love. This was his motive, and must be ours. Not fiar, not the goadings 
of conscience, not mere sense of duty, but love. " The love Of Christ constraineth me," 
said St. Paul. This is one chief cord. 2. Faith. Not mere creed, but trust, reliance. 
This was one of Christ's cords. His enemies mocked him on the cross, " He trusted 
in Qtoi, that he would deliver him 1 " They were right ; he did ever trust in God. He 
was sure that his Father's will was right, and that the path ordained for him was the 
right one. And so must it be with us. We have to walk by faith, not by sight. If 
we let go our trust, we shall certainly take back the sacrifice we have brought. But 
trust keeps it on the altar of consecration. 3. Obedience. This was the lidbit of our 
Lord's life. He did always that which pleased Glod. And so with us. Let us form 
the habit of obedience, and we shall find that the very idea of a contrary course becomes 
alien to the mind. To do God's will becomes almost instinctive with us. 4. Delight, 
not mere duty. (Cf. our Lord's words, Ps. xl. 8.) It is good to do God's will, even when 
we feel no delight ; but how much happier and more effectual is our service when we 
do 1 And if we persistently serve the Lord, we shall find delight in his service. These 
are the cords which held our Lord to his sacrifice, and will hold us to ours. — S. 0. 

Ver. 3. — Family experience of Divine mercies. This is evidently a liturgical psalm, 
and on the whole it seems best to associate it either with the dedication of the second 
temple by the returned exiles, or with their keeping of the Feast of Tabernacles. 
The personal expressions in it need not be misunderstood. The speaker is a typical 
individual representing the nation. (For the probable occasion, see JSTeh. viii. 13 — 18.) 
" The psalm is vividly dramatic, representing the leader of Israel with his train coming 
to the temple, calling for the gates to be opened to his triumphal entrance, and going 
in to worship the Lord. The psalm is dramatically distributed to different actors. In 
vers. 1 — 4 we have (o) the opening chorus of thanksgiving fi-om the train of the king 
or leader without and the priests within ; then (6) in vers. 5—9 the king thankfully 
records his deliverance and confidence in the Lord, and his thanksgiving is taken up by 
a response of like trust ; next (c) in vers. 10 — 16 he again exults in his sure victory 
overall nations in the Lord's Name, in spite of fierce opposition and danger, and is 
answered similarly by utterance of triumph from the people j on this, (d) in vers. 16 — 
20, follows his summons to open the gates, answered by consent from within ; then 
(e) in vers. 21 — 24, entering the temple, he pours out his thanksgiving, and all alike, 
priests and people, glorify the Lord on ' the day that he has made ; ' finally, (J) in vers. 
26—29, he prays, ' Save, I beseech thee ' (fibsanno), and is ' blessed as coming in the 
Name of the Lord; ' and the whole psalm ends with a chorus of universal praise to 
God " (Barry). " One or two writers have thought this psalm to be too legal in its 
constant dwelling upon the idea of duty. But duty is the fly-wheel of the spiritual 
machinery. It does not inspire the noble life, it regulates it, and the psalm ia for the 
use of those who have already received inspiration from the sight of the city of God." 
We fix attention on the flrst sphere of the enduring Divine mercy. For his goodness 
in family life our thanks are continually due. The house of Aaron was the type and 
representative of the houses (families) of Israel. And God's dealings with it suggest 
his dealings with them, . . 

L God's family mbboies appeab as Divine SEiiBcxiONS. We are familiar with 
the idea that God, in his wisdom and mercy, selects individuals for particular 
ministries, and honours them with the trust of such ministries ; and it is but an 
enlargement of the truth to see, that in a similar way he selects families and com- 
munities and nations. The selection of the house, or family, of Aaron for priestly 
services, and of Heman for musical services, and of David for kingly services, are 
illustrations. And it is well when families can realize that the mercies of God to them 



86 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. oxviu. 1—29. 

are not merely comfortable provisions, or business successes, but their selection for high 
and holy trusts and responsible services. 

II. God's family meeoies appeab as Divine ooeeeotionb. This is very strikingly 
illustrated in tbe record of the " house of Aaron." We may even say that the visitations 
ol Divine love in judgment vrere frequent and severe, as may be illustrated in the deaths 
of Nadab aud Abihu ; the liniitatiun of Aaron's own life ; the shifting of the priestly 
order in Inter years, etc. They who read their life-stories aright — their family life- 
stories — never hesitate to praise God most of all for the mercy in discipline that was 
hard tu bear. 

III. God's family mercies appear as Divine deliverances. Family life has 
its perils, its disasters, its wilfulnesses, and its mistakes. These variously affect the 
heads of the family as well as the members. Every family story is made up of sick- 
nesses, .^orruws, follies, and sins, and God's mercies come into the family life at every 
point of need as redemption, as deliverance. This the psalmists constantly recognize. 
This we too recognize who fully believe that God is in our family life. He is ever 
delivering the family from its bad self, from untoward circumstances, and from 
active foes. 

IV. God's family mercies appear as strenqtheninq for sebvioe. In the case 
of the " house of Aaron " we liave unusually solemn service ; but that is only typical of 
the service which every family has to render, and which it never can render well save 
as it realizes the strengthening and sustaining mercy of God. Under priestly burdens 
a man may say, "0 Lord, I am oppressed; imdertake thou for me." But that is 
precisely what every man should say in'the bearing of his ovm lurden. 

V. God's family mercies appear as helpings of one another. The clinging 
together anl mutual helpfulness of family life are usually traced as due to family 
dispositions, paternal or maternal characteiistics. It is altogether a higher and more 
inspiring view to see in family brotheriiness the signs of the Divine mercy.— 
R. T. 

Ver. 4. — Personal experience of Divine mercies. " Let them now that fear the Lord 
say, that his mercy endureth fcr ever." The term " fear the Lord " suggests personal 
apprehensions of God, personal dealings with Gud, and personal relations with him. 
It is inconceivable that there can have been these ciose personal associations with God 
without their having left a deep impression of the abundance, adaptation, and continu- 
ance of the Divine mercy. Ko man can look over his life, and trace God's manner of 
dealing with him, without being disposed to say, " To the Lord our God belong mercies 
and forgivenesses;" "Also unto thee belongeth mercy, for thou renderest to every man 
according to his works." What impressions of the Divine mercies come to us out of 
our personal experience ? 

I. The mercy of God has taken shape ab a Divine patience. That may 
well be put first, for, when the heart is tender, it is that comes to us most affectingly. 
When anything like a fitting sense of our own wilfidness and waywardness comes upon 
our hearts, it is the marvel, over which we never tire of brooding, that God has been 
so patient with us. Never offended with us, as our fellow-men have easily been; 
never " dealing with us after our sins, nor rewarding us according to our iniquities." 
It is not only that he has quietly waited, it is that he has so gently home with us. 
Divine patience is never to be thought of as a mere sitting down and waiting. It is 
best suggested by a mother's ways with a sickly babe ; or the doctor's ways with an 
irritable, fractious patient. There be many to whom God's mercy always appears as 
his patience and long-suffering, and they praise him for that. 

II, The mercy of God has taken shape as a Divike discipline. This is the 
thought that comes to us as life advances, and the events of the past gain their true 
perspective. At the time things seemed to be afiSictions, calamity, needless strain, and 
we fretted ourselves weary in trying to 6nd why such hard things were put into our 
lot. Distance from them increases, and we find they look quite differently. Things 
are related which we thought had nothing to do with each other. We see how our 
cultured power came out of our stern experiences ; and then we see that God's mercy 
is the way in which he has made the hard things of life train aud discipline characters 
meet for the heavenly spheres. — R. T. 



P8. oxvm. 1— 29.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 97 



Vers. 5, 6. — God's power in a human life. The figure in ver. 5 is very striking and 
suggestive. The Hebrew is, " I called upon the Lord from the straitness ; " or, " From 
the narrow gorge I called upon Jah, and Jah answered me in the open plain." It is 
not necessary to fix any historical associations to the psalm in order to see the point of 
such a figure. It does but poetically represent a common experience. Continually in 
human life we come upon times of straitness ; our way is hedged up; it is as if we 
were In a narrow gorge, full of fears lest the overhanging rocks should fall on us, and 
seeing no way out. Who has not thus felt hemmed in ? •' All these things are against 
us." Human wisdom, energy, and persistency alike are baffled and beaten back. " We 
cannot do the things that we would." Every one and everything seems to be against 
us. And at such times we easily think hard things of our lellow-men, and think that 
they are actively against ut, when they are only indifferent. What can the psalmist 
say of such times ? 

L Fbom the nabbow ooboe he galled upon God. That at least we can always 
do. No circumstances of human life need ever prevent the soul's uplook, or silence the 
soul's cry. Banyan pictures his pilgrim in sore straitness, picking his perilous way 
through the Valley of the Shadow. Weapons are of no use there. Human care and 
skill and watching are of small avail there. But there is one thing the pilgrim can do, 
and that one thing is everything — he can pray ; he can " call upon the Lord." It is 
well to fix that truth of fact, and to illustrate it fully. There is no perplexity, worry, 
disaster, or depression can ever come to any man, and destroy his power to pray. 
Oppress and alarm a man how you may, in any narrow gorge of life, he can always 
pray. Nothing can overwhelm a man while he can call upon Ood. 

II. In the open plain he had the besponse of God. The figure is kept up. 
The pilgrim-soul, with the uplifted eyes, presses forward through tlie darkness or the 
mist, winch permits him to see but one step at a time; and then suddenly the dawn 
breaks or the mist lifts, and he is filled with a joyous surprise. He is in the gorge no 
longer ; behold, it is the " open plain ; " there is plenty of space all around, and the 
restful blue sky up above, and a clear way before his feet ; God has heard his call ; he 
is on his side. Neither man nor things can hurt him now. And such is the experience 
of all the saints.— B.T. 

Vers. 8, 9. — The really better may not be the apparently better. It may truly be 
said that the object of the discipline and experience of life is to deliver us from the 
fascination of what seems, and to get our conduct and relationships swayed and 
charactered and toned by what is. This, indeed, is presented in Eastern religions in 
extravagant forms (sec the notion of Maya, illusion, from which men have to deliver 
themselves). But we never need refuse to accept a truth, because somebody, some- 
where, has exaggerated it into a mischievous untruth. Creatures conditioned by 
senses, and placed in sense-relations, as we are, must live in a world of appearances ; 
we can only know what our senses present to us, and they can only present the 
accidents of things. Beflection, working on the things which the senses offer to us, 
gradually helps us to the apprehension of that which is — the substance and reality of 
things. The psalmist here is expressing this fact of life in one of its forms asd 
relations. Man is always disposed to trust in his fellow-man, and especially in those 
of his fellow-men who may occupy positions of authority and power. We all incline 
to trust in man, especially in princes. We can see them. We have sense-estimates of 
them. We can sensibly apprehend what they can do for us. We fly to, and lean 
npon, human helpers in every emergency of life. 

L Leaning upon man mat be good. It is not necessary to think or speak as If 
men were always untrustworthy. True, there is always an element of uncertainty in 
man, and an absolute reliance is not possible. But it would be wholly untrue to say that 
men always fail us. We have all proved, over and over again, how loyal, constant, 
and faithful the friends of our life have been. Some of the purest and most satisfying 
joys we have ever had in life have come out of our human fellowships. The psalmist 
is therefore true to fact when he speaks of something bettor, and implies that this 
confidence in man may be good. 

II. Leaning upon God must be betteb. Just what advancing life and experience 
bring home to us is that the unseen li the real and permanent. And the very heart 
psalms — HI. " 



98 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxvra. 1— 29. 

and essence of tbe unseen is God. All reality is unseen ; it takes on appearance for 
the Bake of the senses. We are passin,!; on into the unseen ; and we reach rest and 
satisfaction in the measure of our apprehending the unseen as we move towards the 
consummation. It is better to keep in the sphere of the " real." It is better to " trust 
in God."— R. T. 

Ver. 10< — Acting in the Divine Name. " In the Name of the Lord I will cut them 
off." The idea in the mind of the psalmist may be illustrated by the old custom oi 
going into battle in the inspiration of some motto. Thus Gideon gave his heroes this 
battle-cry, " The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon I " Down to quite modern times it 
was the custom for generals to give their armies a motto, a word, or a name, under the 
inspiration of which they were to fight ; and it does not take much observation of 
human nature to enable us to recognize the value of such mottoes or names in kindling 
enthusiasm, and inciting to heroic endeavour or endurance. The psalmist is using 
martial figures ; he is thinking of enemies, and cheering his soul for the conflict with 
them by looking again and again at his banner, and seeing the Jehovah-name inscribed 
thereon. 

I. AoTiNe IN THE DrvitiE Nahs is the bight of Jehotah'b bebyants. The good 
man — from the Christian point of view we say the renewed man — is a self-consecrated 
man to Qodi'a service, and a graciously accepted man as God's servant. Then he 
becomes everywhere an ambassador for God, a messenger from God, and has the 
absolute right of acting everywhere in his Master's Name, So the apostles persistently 
call themselves the " servants," bond-slaves, of Jesus Christ, and claim the right of 
speaking and acting in his Name. This opens up the question — What is the nature of 
the authority which can be claimed for the Chnstian teacher? He has authority so 
far only as be speaks and acts, genuinely and wholly, in the Name of his Master. 
Illustration may be taken from the pope's assumed infallibility in his er ecUhedrd 
utterances. 

n. AoTiNa IN THE Divine Name ib i'he btbenoth of Jehovah's beeyantb. 
This may be opened in two ways. 1. The Name acts upon a true-hearted man as a 
reviving, inspiring, strengthening force, much as the queen's name does on a field of 
battle. 2. God actually gives strength for warfare and service to all who loyally act 
in his Name. Illustrate by 1 Sam. zvii. 46. 

IIL Aotino in the Divine Name is the yictobt op Jehoyah'b bebvantb. 
Because Ck>d is jealous of the honour of his Divine Name, and cannot permit it to be 
associated with failure. Let our enemies encompass us as bees do their combs (see 
LXX.), they can do no harm. They flare up, as does the fire of thorns ; but they die 
down at once. The Divine Name has never been dishonoured by any permanent 
defeat; nor has he ever been who loyally acted in the Divine Name. — B. T. 

Ver. 18. — What God seem* to be and what God is. We are constantly oppressed 
with the mystery of God's permissions. He permits afflictions to visit us, and often- 
times to take very trying forms. We can say, "He hath chastened me sore." But it 
is a great relief to find that our experience is but the experience of the saints of all 
ages. It is the old and age-long trouble of all who will live godly in this sinial world. 
God must put them into discipline, and the forms it takes must, of necessity, sometimes 
seem strange. Divine dealings would nut always do their appointed work if we 
thoroughly understood them. There is no call to trust when we have perfect tight. 
" What I do thou knowest not now." In the olden days, and still, there appear, to 
the godly man, most oppressive differences between what God seems, and what God 
is. We are distressed while we do but look at what God seems, and we gain rest when 
we look at what God is. 

I. What God bbbms. Illustrate from the mists of mountain-lands. " Clouds and 
darkness are round about him " (Ps. xcvii. 2). 1. See what God seems in nature. 
Take single things, and we "may easily get wrong impressions. Look at nature as a 
whole, and it becomes clear that all things are working together towards issues that are 
right and good. 2. See what God seem^ in human lives. Take single incidents — an 
untimely death ; a sweeping pestilence; a crushed enterprise; a wasting sickness ; and 
it seems as if there were nothing but " cloud and darkness," the mystery of a strange 



WL OTvm. 1^29.] THE BQO^OF PSAJiMa «9 

and unreasoning sovereignty round God and Ms ways. But look, at life as a whole, 
and it soon comes into view that this thing is working in with that, aad all are working 
togetlier for good, througl^ the controlling of him who is Ipve and who loves. Only, 
if we would see things clearly, and apprehend them aright, we must keep two things 
in mind. (1) That God's good is not circumstance ; it is character, which finds 
expression in varying circumstance. (2) Fpr some of us God's idea may be our 
Ticarious suffering for the sake of others. And of this the Lord Jesus affords the 
sublime example. Affliction is often an insoluble mystery (as was Job's afiBiction), nnt^ 
it is seen to be Divine agency for working good to others. And God graciously 
honours some to suffer as his agents. 3. See what God seems in Divine revelations. 
Here again single things are often most perplexing, because their form acd shaping are, 
in the first instance, precisely fitted to times and seasons, and we find it so difficult to 
separate the form from the thing, the kernel from the husk. Single things can only be 
" parts of God's ways." But to us, in these latter days, the revelations of all the ages 
have been given, duly set in order and relation. We ought to be able to fit so many 
things of Divine revelation together, as to fully convince ourselves that all do Jit. 

II. What God is. This we find out through personal experiences. " He hath not 
given me over unto death," though he seems to be a " sore chastener." Experiences 
correct appearances. " I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear ; but now mine 
eye seeth thee." "We walk by faith" — soul-vision, which reveals what it — "not by 
right " — ^bodily vision, which only reveals what seems. To some the clouds atout 
Sinai were God ; just as to some travellers the mists hanging about the mountain are 
the mountain. We want to know what God is. " This is eternal life, to know thee, 
the only true Otoi." And it is infinite satisfaction to discover that he is right.eomnem. 
And righteousness involves and includes love, as certainly as it does holiness and 
wtsdotn. When we find for oiuselves what God is, we can describe him thus : " The 
Being who is always right ; " or, as a psalmist expresses it, " Bigbteousness aad 
judgment are the foundation of his throne." He is right in himself, "just; "and right 
in hie doings, ever doing justice — and justice is not justice unless mercy is at the heart 
of it. When this is well fixed into our very mind and soul, then we get above and 
beyond all the evil influence of the things that seem ; we begin to get vision of the 
things that are. , Bight may still seem stern ; but we know it must be kind. Bight 
may still seem strange; but we know it must be wise. We cannot stop with this— 
" He hath chastened me sore." We must go on ; we must say what else — what is the 
full fact, what ist And then we have to say, " But he hath not given me over unto 
death."— E. T. 

Ver. 19. — Public praise for persotutl deliveranee. The psalm may be. taken as 
expressing individual experiences or sentiments, or the psalmist may be regarded as 
representing the nation, and expressing national feeling. There is distinct recognition 
of past trouble and suffering, as God's well-deserved chastening. The returned exiles 
looked on their humiliating captivity in Babylon as such a time of chastening. Then 
our text will associate with the dedication of the new (Ezra) temple ; and we may 
pioture the nation in procession, with the governor at the head, advancing to the gates 
of the temple, and then, in formal Eastern style, making loud public demand for admits 
tance. But it is even more directly practical for us to think of the psalmist as using 
these public events to help his own private meditations. Certainly we may use the 
psalm in this way, when we have recovered from some Divine chastisement, which 
imperilled life, and feel that we want to go into the house of the Lord, to give thanks 
unto the Name of the Lord. 

L OtJB DELIVEBANCBS FBOM OANOEB SHOULD HAVE PBIVATE BBCOQNITION. Ou 

this it would be too familiar to insist. He who receives is honourably bound to thank 
the giver, and feels a natural impulse so to do. Bui; a man may fairly urge that his 
duty is done when he has thanked the donor personally and privately; and that he 
is under no obligation to talk about it to everybody, or to send a notice of his thankful- 
ness to the newspapers. On this line men plead when more than the private recognition 
of God's goodness to them is demanded. They have thanked God, and that is enough, 
IL Odb delivebanob pbom danger should have public ekoognition. Because 
he from whom we have received the blessing is a public Being,, who sustains relations 



IW THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pa. oxvia. 1— 29. 

to others as well as ourselves ; and whose direct acts in relation to one are desijgned to 
inspire confidence in the others, and therefore must he made known. If our donor is 
the BovereigD of the land, it is a right feeling that impels us to make known her good- 
ness to us. When the prince was brought back horn the gates of death, the right 
feeling of the nation demanded a national service of thanksgiving, and this psalm may 
be efficiently illustrated by the great service at St. Paul's. In this matter Christian 
sentiment needs to be directed. In communities where the element of worship is not 
prominent, public acts uf praise and thanksgiving are sadly neglected. True feeling 
says, " I will take the cup of salvatioo, and call upon the Name of the Lord." — B. T. 

Ver. 22. — The stone in the corner. " The stone which the builders rejected is become 
the head of the coraer." This may be the rejoicing of the leader of the procession, when 
it is admitted within the gates of the new temple, and advances towards the great 
altar. We must remember that we have here poetical figure, and we must nut 
endeavour to force the language, as if it were descriptive iacX. The figure is a very 
familiar one. God constantly makes the " weak things of this world confoimd tbe 
things that are mighty." Israel, as a nation, was like a despised stone in Babylon ; 
now that it had again its sacred temple, it might easily be thought of as having become 
(he comer-stone of the temple of religion for humanity. " This saying was true of 
David, the despised one among the sons of Jesse, but raised to be the ruler of Israel 
and the progenitor of Christ. It was true of his descendant Zerubbabel, the head of 
the returning Israelites after the Captivity, whose person and work were despised 
(Zeoh. iv. 10), but who began and finished the building, and who ' brought forth the 
liead-stone with shoutings, cryiug, Grace, grace unto it I ' (Zech. iv. 7). But it was to 
be fulfilled in the largest sense by Messiah, as the Jews themselves acknowledge." 
" Israel is this stone, rejected as of no account ia the political plans of those who were 
trying to shape the destinies of the Eastern nations at their own pleasure, but in the 
purpose of God destined to a chief place in the building up of history." " The emblem 
applies with the fullest meaning to our Lord Jesus Christ, who, though rejected by the 
Jewish authorities, was nevertheless destined to unite both Jews and Gentiles in one 
vast and glorious spiritual building." 

I. The elevations and benedictions of God abe always a buefbisb to thx 
MODEST AND HUMBLE SOUL. Their natural feeling leads them to wonder why God 
has dealt so graciously with them. They contrast their insignificancy in themselves 
with the diguities to which God lifts them ; aud feel the surprise of Divine grace. 

II. Modest and humble souls abb the ones best fitted to beoeive Divimb 
ELEVATIONS AND BENEDICTIONS. The man who glories in what he attains, as if be had 
obtained it himself, is proved uuwortliy of the elevation, and is not likely to make the 
best of it. The David-mood is always more hopeful than the Solomonic. In what 
mood do we regard the triumphs of Divine grace ia our lives ? — B. T. 

Ver. 24. — The Ood-made day. Jesus, rejected by the whole Hebrew nation, and 
put to death, but raised from the grave, may be taken as tbe subject of these verses. 
In our variable climate we often have a cold and dark day followed by one full of 
sunshine kud warmth. Such was the last sabbath of the old dispensation, when 
Jesus was in his grave. Suddenly the clouds disappeared, and God made another day — 
the first day of the week — a holy and joyful sabbath to all Christians. The first 
sabbath was desecrated by the Crucifixion; the Lord's day was hallowed by the 
Resurrection. 

L ThB LOBO'b DAT IB OOlOIBliOBATIVB OF THB aSBAT VIOTOBT OF JbBDB OVEB 

his ENEMIES. Apparently everything had succeeded that idmed at ending the life and 
career of Jesus. The Corner-stone was rejected by the chief builders of the day. Jesus 
was in his grave ; the disciples were disheartened ; and Jerusalem was exulting over 
the temporary triumph of Friday. The contest, however, was not decided; on the 
morning of tbe first day of the week, Jesus rose from the dead; his disciples spraug to 
their feet, and the Resurrection sealed every word that he had uttered, and every deed 
that he had accomplisiitd. It was the confirmation of his life. 1. It was a victory 
over calumny and misrepresentation. He came forth the Son of God. 2. It was a 
victory over the weakness and faithlessnebs of his disciples. The Crucifixion made them 



re. oxviii. 1— 29.] THE BOOK OF PSALMB. 101 

cowards, the Resurrection mRde them heroes. 3. It was a victory over death and the 
grave. He who rose has " the keys of Hades and of death." 

II. In the Lord's day wb have the consummation ok all obeat datb. The 
day of creation here finds its consummation. Had not the Lord made this day, we 
might think that Gcd had made all things in vain. The sahhath at the end of creation 
was only a symbol of the Lord's day. God then rested from all his works ; but that 
rest was disturbed by the entrance of sin. The day Israel was delivered from Egyptian 
bondage ; the day the tabernacle of Moses was consecrated ; the day the promised land 
was reached; the day Solomon's temple was dedicated; the Day of Atonement; the 
birthday of Jesus ; and even the day of final judgment, point to, and derive their 
significance from, the Lord's day. 1. Here we realize the end of created things. 
2. Here we find the bond of union between time and eternity. 3. The significance of 
all religious festivals is found in this day. 

III. The Lord's dat is the Christian festival. Not only is it a sabbath of 
rest from manual labour ; it is also the token of spiritual peace and blessmg. 1. A day 
of communion with God. 2. A day of association with the saints. 3. A day of 
fellowship in the home circle. 

rV. The Lobd'b day is the poroh of immortality. The light shines from the 
tomb. 1. The day that promises the absence of all mental darkness. The Sunday 
disperses the gloom and doubt of the week. A little while ago we had snow and aleet 
for several days ; but one bright warm day came, and swept away the snow. 2. The 
day whose light dies into the light of immortality. The sabbath of time dissolves into 
the peace of heaven. 3. The day that will bring everlasting praise to the Name of 
Jesus. (From Weekly Pulpit.)— H. T. 

Ver. 27. — Sacrifice as a sign of devotion. "Bind the sacrifice with cords, yea, even 
up to the horns of the altar." The various interpretations of this difficult passage are 
given elsewhere in this work. There is a various rendering, "up to the altar," instead 
of " unto ; " and a various reading, " with willows," instead of " with cords," which are 
very supgestive. From Lev. xxiii. 40 we learn that tree branches and willows were 
used as decorations for the Feast of Tabernacles, and therefore " willows " may stand 
for decorations as expressions of rejoicing. We have then to picture the procession, 
representing the nation, advancing to dedicate the new temple, and join in the first 
public service of thanksgiving. It is certain that they would have with them, in the 
procession, the representative national sacrifice, the bullock which was to be the 
burnt offering for the nation, and, in the most solemn way, carry the full consecration 
of the nation to GoH. When the procession has reached the court near the great altar, 
and the leader has spoken his words of humble and reverent rejoicing and thanksgiving, 
what is more natural than that he should call out to bring forward the burnt offering ? 
" Deck it gaily ; cover it with boughs ; bring it on ; lead it right through the crowd ; 
bring it right up to the altar; fasten it to the very horns." In this light the difficult 
passage becomes simple au'l natural, and suggests the following : — 

I. Genuine devotion wants to give something. Pious and devout minds never 
can content themselves with words of trust, thankfulness, or worship. There is a kind 
of inward suspicion that words are not enough, and may cost little, and be insincere. 
Let a man be really thankful, and he will want to make some outward and visible sign 
of his feeling. 

II. Genuine devotion seeks a gift that can fittingly represent itself. 
And so it always takes form as Bocriflee, a gift that costs something, some self-denial. 
If devotion is at its fullest, it is a whole consecration of ourselves to Go'l ; and just this 
is the thing represented by the " burnt offering " of Mosaism. But when full devotion 
seeks to represent itself in its gift, it counts it essential to the worthiness of the gift 
that it should be offered willingly and cheerfully. It always wants to give its burnt 
offering gaily decked with flowers and willows — as beautiful as it is complete. — R. T. 

Ver, 25. — A sermon on religious revival. What is a revival of religion ? In general 
terms it is synonymous with the prosperity here prayed for ; or the wider salvation 
implied in the " Save now, I beseech thee 1 " If this was a psalm composed for the 
opening of the second temple, as is likely, after the return from exile, we can sea 



102 



THE BOOK OF PSALMSk 



[P8. oxix. 1 — 176. 



plainly' what the <• saving "and "prosperity" mean — a renewal of mdre than the 
faith and heroic words of the patriarchs, warriors, psalmists, and prophets of former 
days — a renewal that should embrace the whole of the people. 

1. A EEVIVAL, WHETHER INDIVIDUAL OB NATIONAL, BtJPPOSES AN ANTECEDENT 
BELIGION, THE POWER OF WHICH HAS DECLINED OB BEEN LOST. The spirit of OUT 

relation to Christ has evaporated, and left little but the forms of Christianity. " I have 
somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love ; " " Thou hast a name that 
thoU livest, and art dead ; " " Thy works are not perfect before God ; " "I know thy 
works, that thou art neither cold nor hot, but lukewarm." And all this may be con- 
joined with a complacent satisfaction with ourselves. " Thou sayest, I am rich, and 
increased with goods, and have need of nothing," etc. 

IL A BEVIVAL DOES NOT MEAN SIMPLY A BECOVEBT OF WHAT HAS BEEN LOST, 
BUT OF HIOHKB AND 8TB0NOEB QUALITIES IN ADVANCE 07 THE FREVIOUB STAGK. 

Such as will preserve us from future declensions. Much of the power of our early 
religion is immature, and needs recasting in a higher mould. Our first love decays 
because it is not pure enough to live — ^has so much selfishness mingled with it ; our 
eaxXyfaiih encountered few doubts and difBculties, and, till it has been tiled in many a 
fiery ordeal, it is only superficial impression, and cot the power that overcometh the 
world, the flesh, and the devil. The first toorks are only partial and imperfect 
obedience ; the sacrifice of the whole being to Christ comes later, if it comes at all. 

III. TbUE BEVrVAL DOES NOT MEAN, THEBEFOBE, SPASMODIC EXCITEMENT, BUT 

BTEADT CONTINUOUS QBOWTH OF THE SPIRITUAL LIFE. True nianhood is not the 
recovery of our youth, but a development into a greater, nobler life ; an increase of 
acquired power for thinking and doing greater things than the youth could ever 
conceive or do. It is the symmetrical, harmonious development of the spiritual 
faculties of our nature — the reason, the heart, the conscience, and the imagination. 
And all such growth means the culture of the whole man ; religious discipline— • 
discipline by means of faith that realizes the invisible, of prayer that realizes our 
relations with the power of God, and of the will and the affections teaching us whera 
the true seciets of our power lie. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM CXIX. 



This is an "alphabetic psalm" of a more 
stringent character than any other. It con- 
■ists of twenty-two slanzas, each of eight 
verses, every verse in each stan/a beginning 
with its own proper letter — those of stanza 
1 with aleph, the first letter of the Hebrew 
alphabet; those of stanza 2 with beth, the 
second letter; and so on. The writer, 
having tlius fettered himself, moves witli 
some difficulty, but etill has produced what 
has been justly called "a sweetly mono- 
tonous meditation " (Cheyne). He takes 
the Law for his one and only subject, and, 
further, seems to have bound himself, almost 
absolutely, to introduce the word "Law," or 
something which he regards as a synonym 
of " Law," into every verse. The synonynjs 
are nine in number — 

1. ToEAHj "the Law" itself; but not 
merely the Law given on Mount Sinai; 
rather, Uod's law in the widest sense, all 



whereby he has intimated his will to 
man. 

2. 'Edvoth, or 'kdoth, "testimonies." 
God's commands, considered as witnesses to 
his chai'ucter, and as attesting his will. 

3. MisuPATiM, "judgments." Judicial 
pronouncements by act or word against par- 
ticular lines of conduct. 

4. KiiCQQiM, " statutes " — once translated 
" ordinances " (ver. 91). Enactments of God 
as Legislator, but not confined to the written 
Law. 

5. Dabab or Debabim, " God's Word " or 
"Words." His actual spoken or written 
utterances. 

6. PiQQCDiM, "precepts." Instrnctiona 
given to men to direct their conduct. 

7. MiTSROTH, "commimdments." Only 
slightly differing from piqqudim — rather 
wider. 

8. Imbab, properly " promise," but used 
rathir as a vuriitnt, instead of dabar, and 
extending to all God's utterances. 



ifB. oxix. 1—176.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



103 



9. Dabks or DBBAKiM, " way " or " ways." 
Piesoribed lines of oouduct (reiy seldom 
used). 

The synonyms from 1 to 8 oconr, each 
of them twenty times, or oftener, in the 
psalm. Darek (derakim) occurs only four 
times. Emunah, which has been called a 
synonym CKay), ecaroely deserves to he so 
considered. It is only wanted as a synonym 
once (yer. 90). 

The excellence of "the Law" is con- 
sidered in almost ever}' poasible'aapect. 

K Alefh. 

Ver. 1. — Blessed are the nndeflled in the 
way; rather, the perfect, or those thai are 
perjeet (Bevised Version). The " way " 
intended is, no doubt, " the way of righteous- 
ness" (Fsa. L 7; zxiii. 3, etc.). Who walk 
in the Law of the Lord. Compare the in- 
troductory paragraph for the meaning of 
"Law" in this psalm. This clause is 
exegetical of the preceding. 

Ver. 2. — Blessed are they that keep his 
testimonies. A variant expression for keep- 
ing th3 Law, rather than the specification 
of a particular part of it. And that seek 
him with the whole heart. This is the 
emphatic portion of the verse. An obedi- 
ence " &om the heart " is alone acceptable 
to Ood (see Pes. xxxvi. 10 ; Ixiv. 10 ; cxix. 
34, 58, 69, 145). 

Ver. 3. — They also do no iniquity: they 
walk in his ways. Positive righteousness 
includes negative. Those who walk always 
in God's Law (ver. 1) will, a fortiori, keep 
clear of all iniquity. 

Ver. 4. — Thou hast commanded us to keep 
thy precepts diligently; rather, thou hast 
ordained thy precepts for diligent obeervanoe, 
or for men to observe them diligently. Men 
sometimes give precepts which they do not 
care to have obeyed; but God's precepts 
are intended for careful, diligent, and con- 
tinual observance. The "thou" at the 
beginning (attah) is emphatic. 

Vei. 5. — Oh that my ways were directed to 
keep thy statntei I The first four verses of 
the stanza are eonoemed with the Law 
in itself; the last four treat of the writer's 
relation to it. He begins by expressing the 
wish that he, at any rate, may always 
observe it. 

Ver. 6. — Then shall I not he ashamed, 
when I have respect unto all thy command- 
ments. In that case I shall not be asliamud, 
either before God or man. Shame follows 
transgression : I shall escape shame, if my 
obedience is perfect. 

Ver. 7; — I wUl praise thee with upright- 



ness of heart, when I shall have learned thy 
righteous judgments. But, before the Law 
can be observed, it must be known and 
understood. This, then, is the first thing. 
Then obedience and acceptable praise will 
follow. 

Ver. 8.— I will keep thy statutes. This 
is my will and wish (see ver. 5); but, that 
I may be able to carry it out, forsake 
me not utterly. Without thee I hare no 
strength to do aright 

a Beth. 

Ver. 9. — Wherewithal shall a young man 
oleanse his way t It does not follow fimm 
this inquiry that the writer is a "young 
man" — rather the reverse. He is anxious 
to give advice to young men, which is 
naturally the part of one somewhat ad- 
vanced in life. By taking heed thereto, 
according to thy Word. This is the answer 
to the question raised in clause 1. By look- 
ing to God's Word, and guiding Itimselt 
thereby, the young man may "cleanse his 
way " — ^not otherwise. 

Ver. 10. — With my whole heart have I 
sought thee (comp. ver. 2). let me not 
wander ttom thy commandments ; i.e. " let 
me not accidentally and through ignorance 
stray from the right path." 

Ver. 11. — Thy Word have I hid in mine 
heart, that I might not sin against thee ; 
rather, thy promise (imrah'). To liave Ood's 
word of promise laid up in the heart is the 
only security against being surprised into 
sin. 

Ver. 12.— Blessed art then, Lord: teaoh 
me tbj statutes, God's statutes are really 
known to those only whom God teaches. 
By nature we have but a faint glimmer of 
their meaning. God must teach us by his 
Spirit ere we can apprehend them aright. 

Ver. 13.— With my lips have I declared 
all the judgments of thy mouth. " Out ut 
the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh." The " word " hid in the psalmist's 
heart (ver. 11) could not but rise to his lips 
on fit occasion, and be set forth before the 
people for their edification — more especially 
as there was an express command binding 
upon all Israelites to teach the Law to their 
children and dependants (see particularly 
Deut. vi. 7). 

Ver. 14.— I have Kjideed in the way of 
thy testimonies, as much as in all riches 
(comp. ver. 72). God's Wor4 is a treasure, 
beyond expression precious, caloulated to 
rejoice the heart of all such as possess it 

Ver. 15.— I will meditate in thy precepts. 
Tlie full force of the Divine precepts is not 
to bo grasped except by prolonged medita- 
ti<in on them. God's commandments are 
"e.-i'Tcliig broad" (ver. 96> And hare 



104 



THE BOOK OP PSALM& 



[ps. oxix. 1— 1W> 



respeot unto thy ways ; or, " consider them," 
"reflect uiK>n them." 

Ver. 16.— I will delight myseU ii tuf 
statutes (com p. vers. 24, 40, 47, 70, 77, etc. ; 
and see also Ps. i. 2). I will not forget thy 
Word. That which is " laid up in the heart " 
(ver. 11) can never be forgotten. 

i OlMEL. 

Ver. 17.— Deal bountifully with thy ser- 
Tant, that I may live, and keep thy Word ; 
rather, grant unto thy servant that I may live. 
Give me the blessing of a long life, that 
so my keeping of thy Word may be long. 
The psalmist seems to be praying especially 
for himself ; but the argument of his prayer 
will extend to all "servants of the Lord." 

Ver. 18. — Open thou mine eyes. Since 
the Fall, men's eyes are naturally blinded, 
or, at any rate, have a veil over them, which 
God must remove before they can see 
clearly (compare tlie commeut on ver, 15). 
That I may behold wondrous things out of 
thy Law. Wonderful spiritual truths that 
lie hidden, even under the very simplest pre- 
cepts of God's Law (comp. Matt. v. 21 — 37). 

Ver. 19. — ^I am a stranger in the earth ; 
or, "a sojourner" (Cheyne, Kay, Bevised 
Version); comp. Ps. xxxiz. 12; Heb. zi. 
IS — 16. Earth is not our true home. We 
all " seek a country." Hide not thy com- 
mandments froili me. God "hides" things 
from the wise and prudent which he reveals 
to "babes." The psalmist prays that the 
true meaning of God's Word may not be 
kept back from him. 

Ver. 20. — My soul breaketh for the long- 
ing that it hath unto thy judgments at all 
times. This is given as a reason for the 
prayer of ver. 19. 

Ver. 21. — Thou hast rebuked the proud. 
It is difficult to connect this with the pre- 
ceding. But perhaps the link may be 
found in the double sense of mishpatim, 
"judgments," which includes verbal sen- 
tences against sinners delivered in the Law, 
and also actual sentences upon them in deed 
and fact. . These last are in the writer's 
mind in the present verse — such judgments 
as those upon Pharaoh (Exod. xiv. 23—31), 
Zerah (2 Chron. xiv. 9— 15 J, and Senna- 
cherib (2 Kings xix. 32—37). That are 
cursed. This clause is questioned, as me- 
trically redundant. But Hebrew metrology 
is scarcely as yet an exact science. And 
the clause liucls its justification in Deut. 
xxvii, 26. Which do err from thy com- 
mandments. Such error brings under a 
curse those who commit it. If it be a 
blessed thing to walk in God's Law (ver. 1), 
it must bo a cursed thing to tratfsgress 
against it. 

Ver. 22. — Bemove from me reproach and 



contempt. God's servants almost necessarily 
incur the reproach and contempt of the 
worldly, to whom their conduct seems folly 
or madness. Christ himself was " despised 
(Isa. liii. S) and reproached (Matt xl 19), 
For I have kept thy testimonieB (comp. 
vers. 31, 51, 87, etc.). 

Ver. 23. — ^Frinoes also did sit and speak 
against me. The great of the earth too 
often take part against the righteous, and 
join in persecuting them and calumniatiog 
them (comp. ver. 161). But thy servant did 
meditate in thy statutes; i.e. I took no 
heed of their calumnies — they did not 
trouble me. I gave myself to meditation 
on thy commandments. 

Ver. 24. — ^Ihy testimonies also are my 
delight (comp. vers. 16, 47, 70, 77, etc.) and 
my counsellors; i.e. my best advisers. I 
learn from them — better than in any other 
way — how I ought to act (comp. ver. 105). 

*| Dauith. 

Ver. 25. — My soul deaveth unto the dust. 
My soul is greatly depressed — ^liea, as it 
were, in the dust of death (comp. Pa, 
xliv. 25). Quicken then me according to 
thy Word. Baise me up to life and health 
and vigour. 

Ver. 26. — I have declared thy ways, and 
thou heardest me ; t.e. " I have opened my 
griefs to thee, O God, and poured forth my 
heart before thee. I am confldent that 
thou didst listen to me." leacli me thy 
statutes. That I may show my gratitude 
by keeping them (comp. ver. 33). 

Ver. 27. — Make me to understand the 
way of thy preoepts. Exegetical of the 
last clause of ver. 26. What the psalmist 
longs fur is to have a perfect knowledge of 
God's Law in all its breadth (ver. 96) and 
depth (Ps. zcii. 5) and fulness. So shall I 
taUc of thy wondrous works ; rather, «o tmll 
I muse upon thy marvels (so Kay, Oheyne, 
and the Bevised Version). The " marvels" 
spoken of are "the wondrous things of 
God's Law " (ver. 18). 

Ver. 28. — Uy soul melteth for heaviness 
(comp. Ps. oviL 26 ; and, for the sentiment, 
see ver. 25). Strengthen thon me according 
unto thy Word ; i.e. according to thy promise 
to help thy faithful ones (comp. vers. 25, 41, 
49, 58, 76, etc.). 

Ver. 29. — Bemove from me the way of 
lying; i.e. the way of apostasy, or irreligion, 
of departure from God. And grant me thy 
Law graciously. Make it known to me by 
a Diviue illumination. 

Ver. 30. — I have chosen the way of truth. 
The converse of "the way of lying" 
(ver. 29), the path of true religion, of faith- 
fulness and steadfastness to God. Xhy 
judgments have I laid before ma. Thy 



PS. cxix. 1—176.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



106 



eommandments have I set before my eyes 
as rules to be observed constantly. 

Ver. 31. — I have stuck unto thy testi- 
monies; or, "cleaved" (ver. 25); i.e. kept 
firm and steadfast to them. Tbe writer 
does not mean to assert sinlessness, but only 
sincerity of intention, and a general en- 
deavour to do right. Lord, put me not to 
shame. Suffer me not to fall from thee in 
such sort that I am put to an open shame. 

Ver. 32. — I will run the way of thy com- 
mandments, when thou shalt enlarge my 
heart. The phrase used in the second 
clause is ambiguous. It may mean, " For 
thou hast enlarged my heart." 

n Hk. 

Ver. 83. — Teach me, Lord, the way of 
thy statutes. This is thu main prayer of 
the psalm — a prayer for spiritual enlighten- 
ment. It ocuurd eight tnues (vers. 12, 26, 
33, Hi, 68, lOti, 124, and 135). And I shall 
keep it unto thj end. Either " to the end of 
my life," or (as Dr. Kay thiuksj " to the 
uttermost." 

Ver. 31. — Give me understanding, and I 
shall keep thy Law ; i.e. make me fully to 
understand thy Law, and then I shall as- 
suredly keep it. If I fail now, it is from 
lack of wisdom, not of will. Yea, I shall 
observe it with my whole heart (cojiip. 
ver. 69). 

Ver. 35. — Hake me to go in the path of 
thy commandments. Keep me, i.e., from 
straying out of the right path, through 
ignorance or negligence. For therein do I 
delight (eomp. vers. 16, 24, 47, 70, 77, 111, 
174). 

Ver. 36. — Incline my heart unto thy tes- 
timonies. The writer recognizes that the 
right inclination of the heart, which he 
claims to have (vers. 7, 10, 32, 34, etc.), is 
itself the gift of God. And not to covetous- 
aess ; or, "to gain" (comp. ver. 72). 

Ver. 37. — Turn away mine eyes from be- 
holding vanity. Let me not be distracted 
from thy service by the " vanities " of the 
world — wealth, honour, power, glury, and 
the like ; rather, quicken thou ma in thy 
way. Give me increased lile, strength, and 
vigour, to walk continually in the way of 
thy commandments. 

Ver. 38.— Stablish thy Word unto thy 
servant ; or, " make good thy promise unto 
thy servant" — thy promise of aid and sup- 
port in all times of temptation and difficulty. 
Who is devoted to thy fear ; raiher, wkieh 
beUmgeth unto thy fear. The antecedent tu 
the relative is " word" or "promise," and 
not " servant ; " and the prayer is that God 
will make good to his servant that piojuise, 
which lies at the root of all reverence and 
godly fear (comp. Ps. cxxx. 4, "There is 



forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be 
feared"). 

Ver. 39. — ^Tnm away my reproaoh, whioh 
I fear ; i.e " turn away from me the only 
reproaoh of which I am afraid — the reproach 
of transgressing against thy Law " (comp. 
ver. 31). For thy judgments are good, i 
Right in themselves, and conducive to 
man's happiness, 

Ver. 40.— Behold, I have longed after thy 
precepts (comp. vers, 20 and 131). There 
are those — few, it may be, but truly blessed 
— who "hunger and thirst after righteous- 
ness " (Matt. V. 6). Quicken ma in thy 
righteousness (comp, ver. 37). Help my 
efforts to walk in thy righteous ways. 

1 Vau. 

Ver. 41. — Let thy mercies oome also onto 
me, Lord; rather, and let thy mercies 
O'rme unto me. Each verse of Ihis stanza 
begins with tie vau conjunctive. Even thy 
salvation, accordiag to thy Word; or, "thy 
promise " (imrah). God's Word was pledged, 
that lie would grant mercy and salvation to 
all his faithful servants (Deut. xxviii, 1 — 
13). 

Ver. 42. — So shall I have wharawith to 
answer him that reproacheth me (comp. ver. 
22). If God's favour were manlfestlv shown 
him, his enemies would be sufficiently 
answered. For I trust in thy Word. This 
is wliat he luuks for, since he has a full 
trust in God's promises to his servants. 

Ver. 43. — And take not tha word of truth 
utterly out of my mouth. "The word of 
truth " here is the " well-grounded answer " 
that the psalmist looks to make to those 
who reproach him (Hengetenberg). (See 
the preceding verse.) If God does not grant 
him " mercy and salvation " (ver, 41), this 
answer will be " taken out of his mouth." 
For I have hoped in thy judgments, I have 
trusted in thy vindication of my character, 
and in thy judgments upon my foes. 

Ver, 44, — So shall I keep thy Law con- 
tinually for ever and ever. God's mercy 
will draw forth the psalmist's gratitude, and 
make his obedience perfect and perpetual 

Ver, 45. — And I will walk at liberty. 
Bekhabah is literally " the open square of a 
city," hence " a wide, open, free space." In 
obeying God's commandments the psalmist 
will not feel himself under constraint, but a 
wholly free agent. For I seek thy precepts. 
Inclination, not consiraint, makes him obey 
God's precepts — he "seeks" tliem, "loves" 
tliem (ver. 47), " delights in " them ^ vers. 16, 
24, 47). 

Ver. 46. — I will speak of thy testimonies 
also before kings. -If occasion offer, I will 
bear my witness to the excellence of thy 
Law, even before kings. And will not be 



106 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. era. 1—176. 



ashamed ; i.e. will not allow shaicv to stop 
. my moutli. The writer is evidently not a 
king himself, probably not among the great 
onea of the earth (see vers. 51, 69, 78, 85, 
<-tc.). 

Ver. 47. — ^And I will delight myself in thy 
conuuaudmeitts (oomp. vera. 14, 16, 24, 35, 
77, etc.). Wbioh I have loved (see below, 
vers. 48, 97, 113, 119, 127, 159, 163, 167). 

Ver. 48.— Uy hands also will I lift np 
onto thy commandments, whioh I have 
loved. In a sort of qualified worship (comp. 
Gen. xiv. 22; Pss. xxviii. 2; cxxxiv. 2; 
cxli. 2 ; Lam. iii. 41). And I will meditate 
in thy statutes. Almost a repetition of 
ver. 15a. 

T ZAnr. 

Ver. 49. — Bemember the word unto thy 
servant ; i.e. " the word spoken to thy ser- 
vant." Some speoiul Divine communication 
made to the writer is perhaps meant. Upon 
which (rather, because) thou hast caused me 
to hope (oomp. vers. 74, 81, 147). 

Ver. 50. — This is my comfort in my afUo- 
tion. Nekhdmah, "comfort," occurs only 
here and in Job vi. 10; but the meaning 
is well ascertained. For thy Word hath 
quickened me; or, "thy promise," The 
" word," whatever it was, referred to in ver. 
49. This had given the psalmist new life. 

Ver. 51. — The proud have had me greatly 
in derision; rather, proud men. There is 
no article. (For the "derision" to whioh 
the righteous are always exposed, see Job 
XXX. 1, 9; Pss. XXIV. 16; iliv. 13, 14; 
Lam. iii. 14 ; Jer. xx. 7, etc.) Yet have I 
not declined (or, $iDerved) from thy Law 
(see the comment on ver. 31). 

Ver. 52. — I remembered thy judgments of 
old, Lord. Not merely thy aenteuces upon 
wluked men, but all the course of thy pro- 
vidential government of the world, includ- 
iug thy deliverances of thy servants. And 
have comforted myself. Have found comfort, 
i.e., in calling them to mind, and dwelling 
upnn them. 

Ver. 53. — Horror hath taken hold upon 
me because of the wicked that forsake thy 
Law. The Revised Version has "hot in- 
dignation " inatead of " horror ; " and ao 
Bosenmiiller, Hengstenberg, Cheyne, Pro- 
fessor Alexander, and others ; but Dr. Ivay 
well defends the Authorized Version (' The 
Psalms,' Appendix i. pp. 462, 463). The 
feeling inteuded probably resembled that 
desoribed by Ezra (ix. 6). The aev/iia of 
the LXX. does not ill express it. 

Ver. 54. — Thy statutes have been my songs 
la the house of my pilgrimage ; literally, 
loitgt have thy etatute» been to me in the house 
of my wjoiurnings. 1 have marie thy statutes 
the theme of my songs, as they are of this 



present one. "Thehouseofmy sojoumlngs" 
ia either this present world, where all men 
are " strangers and pilgrims " (Heb. _xl. 18), 
or perhaps some foreign land in whioh th< 
writer had been a sojourner. 
Ver. 55. — I have remembered thy Kame, 

Lord, in the night (oomp. Pas. Ixiii. 6 ; 
cxlix. 5 ; and Job xxzv. 10). And have kept 
thy Law. The night is the time when wicked 
men do their most wicked deeds (Job xziv. 
14 — 16). I keep thy Law both night and 
day. 

Ver. 56.— This I had, because I kept thy 
precepts ; rather, (hit I have, that I keep 
thy precepts ; i.e. this one thing I have, and 
it is my best and dearest possession, tlutt I 
keep thy commandments. 

n Obeth. 

Yer. 57.— Thorn art my Portion, Lord 
(see Pss. Ixziii. 26; oxlii. 5; and comp. 
Numb. zviiL 20; Josh. ziii. 83). I have 
said that I would keep thy words; or, "I 
have resolved " (Cheyne). 

Ver. 58. — I intreated thy favoTii with my 
whole heart; literally, I have supplieaied 
thy face (comp. Ps. zlv. 12). Be merciful 
snto me, according to thy Word. A repe- 
tition of the prayer of ver. 41. 

Ver. 59. — I thought on my ways; {.e. I 
examined my conduct in the past, considered 
it, and passed judgment upon it. And turned 
my feet unto thy testimonies. When I fonnd 
my conduct amiss, 1 altered it, tnrning my 
feet into the way of thy oommaudments. 

Ver. 60. — I made haste. Men are apt to 
put off their repentance — to delay it to a 
more "convenient season" (Acts xxiv. 25). 
The psalmist was not so foolish — ^he " made 
haste," he says; and delayed not to keep 
God's commandments. This was wise, for 
" now is the accepted time " (2 Cor. vi. 2). 

Ver. 61. — ^The bands of the virioked have 
robbed me ; rather, the itnaret of wicked men 
entangled me (comp. vers. 23, 157, 161). But 

1 have not forgotten (or, I did not forget) 
thy Law. 

Ver. 62. — At midnight I will rise to give 
thanks unto thee (comp. ver. 55). Because 
of thy righteous judgments (see the comment 
on ver. 7). 

Ver. 63. — I am a oompanion of all them 
that fear thee ; t.e. I do not consort with the 
ungodly or the careless, but only with those 
who love and reverence thee. It is well to 
live " separate from sinners " (oomp. Ps. i. 1). 
And of them that keep thy precepts. Obedi- 
ence necessarily follows on reverence and 
godly fear. 

Ver. 64.— The earth, lord, is fall of thy 
mercy (comp. Fs. xzziii. 5). QoA'i mercy 
ia " over all hia works " (Ps. ozlv. 9). The 
whole world is full of it. Pessimistio views 



M. oxix. 1—178.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



107 



areopposed to the entire tenor of Scriptnre. 
Teach me thy statutes (oomp. vers. 12, 26, 
33, 68, 108, 124, 135). 



B Teth. 

Yer. 65.— Then hast dealt well with thy 
•ervant, Lord. Notwithstanding all that 
he has suffered from the " persecution " of 
princes (ver. 161) and the "contempt" (ver. 
22) and " derision " of the wicked generally 
(ver. 51), the psalmist feels that God's deal- 
ings with bim have, on the whole, been 
good and gracious. Aooording nnto thy Word. 
As thou hast promised in thy Word to deal 
with thy servants (comp. vers. 41, 58, 170). 

Ver. 66. — Teaoh me good judgment and 
knowledge; i.<. give me sound judgment 
and wisdom, to discern right from wrong. 
For I have believed thy commandments. I 
have looked to tliem, and truuted in them 
as my guides in the way of righteousness 
(comp. ver. 105). 

Yer. 67. — Before I was afCiioted I went 
astray. " Sweet are the uses of adversity." 
The psalmist feels and confesses that the 
afflictions, which he has suffered (see com- 
ment on vei. 65), have been good for him. 
They have made him less apt to ** go astray " 
than he was (oomp. ver. 71). But now have 
I kept thy Word (comp. vers. 51, 56, 87, etc.). 

Yer. 68. — Ihon art good, and doest good. 
Even chastening is a proof ot thy goodness. 
By it thou "doest good" to thy servants 
(see Hob. xii. 10, 11). Teach me thy statutes. 
Impress thy Law upon me, even though it 
be by chastening. 

Yer. 69. — The proud have forged a lie 
against me; literally, patched up a lie 
against me (oomp. vers. 22, 23, 42, 78, eio.). 
But I will keep thy precepts with my whole 
heart (comp. vers. 2, 10, 34, etc.). "The 
connection of the clauses is — that all the 
craft and malice of his enemies should only 
lead him to obey God with a more undivided 
heart than ever" (Professor Alexander). 

Yer. 70. — Their heart is as fat as grease ; 
i.e. dull, gross, insensible to spiritual things 
(see Ps. xvii. 10 ; Isa. vl. 10). But I delight 
in thy Law. My heart is unlike theirs. 
Thy Law is a " delight " to it (comp. vers. 
16, 24, 35, etc). 

Yer. 71.— It is good for me that I have 
been a£9icted (see the comment on ver. 67). 
That I might learn thy statutes. The whole 
nation "leamt God's statutes" by the 
affliction of the Babylonish Captivity. In- 
dividuals "learnt" them equally by their 
special chastisements. 

Yer.' 72. — The Law of thy mouth is better 
nnto me than thousands of gold and silver; 
<.e. I value it more than any amount of 
earthly riches. 



♦ Tod. 

Yer. 73. — ^Ihy hands have made me and 
fashioned me (comp. Pss. o. 3 ; cxxxviii. 8 ; 
czxxix. 14). The " fundamental passage " 
is Deut. xxxii. 6 ; but the present psalmist 
seems to follow Job z. 8. Give me under- 
standing, that I may learn thy command- 
ments. If thou hast done so much for me, 
wilt thou not do more? Without "under- 
standing" tills body that thou hast given 
me is nothing wurth (comp. ver. 34). 

Yer. 74.— Thejr that fear thee will be glad 
when they see me ; literally, will see me and 
he glad. I shall be a fresh proof to them 
that God does not forsake bis servants. 
Because I have hoped in thy Word. I have 
not fallen from grace — I have continued to 
trust in thy promises. 

Yer. 75. — ^I know, Lord, that thy judg' 
ments are right ; literally, are righteousneu 
— have in them nothing that is not just and 
good. And that in faithfulness thou hast 
afElcted me. The Prayer-bouk Yersion 
brings out the full sense of the words, 
" And that thou in very faithfulness hast 
caused me to be troubled " (oomp. vers. 67, 
68, 71, with the comment furnished by Heb. 
xii. 5—11). 

Yer. 76. — Let, I pray thee, thy meroifnl 
kindness be for my comfort (oomp. ver. 41 
and Ps. xc. 15). After affliction man feels 
the need of " comfort," and longs for some 
manifestation of the Divine "kindness." 
According to thy Word nnto thy servant 
Recording to the general tenor of thy pro- 
mises. 

Yer. 77. — Let thy tender mercies oome 
unto me, that I may live. The psalmist's 
afflictions have brought him near to the 
gates of death. God must visit him with 
his " tender mercies " for him once more to 
" live." For thy Law is my delight His 
renewed life will be an exercising of himself 
in God's Law, since that Law is his "d» 
light" (comp. vers. 16, 24, 47, 111, 174). 

Yer. 78. — ^Let the proud be ashamed; {.«, 
put them to shame (comp. Pss. xxxv. 4, 26; 
xl. 14 ; Ixx. 2 ; Ixxxiii. 17, etc.). For they 
dealt perversely with me without a cause ; 
rather, /or loith lies they subvert me (comp. 
ver. 69). But I will meditate in thy pre- 
cepts. Bepeated from ver. 15. 

Yer. 79.— Let those that fear thee turn 
unto me ; or, " return to me ; " «.«. recover 
their confidence in me, when they see that 
I am not forsaken of thee (see vers. 76, 77), 
but am tlie recipient of thy " tender mercies." 
And those that have known thy testimonies ; 
or, according to another reading, "and let 
them know thy testimonies;" j.e. "let them 
learn from my experience to know thy pre* 
oepts better." 

Yer. 80.— Let my heart be sound la thy 



108 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. oxix. 1—176. 



statutes J or, " perfect in thy statutes " — in 
the kno\rle(1ge and in the practice of them. 
That I be not aihamed (see yei. 31) 

3 Oafh. 

Ver. 81. — Uy soul fainteth for thy salva- 
tion (comp. Ps. Ixxxiv. 2). The phrase 
used expresses the most intense desire pos- 
sible. But I hope in thy Word. (So also ver. 
74.) While almost faintiug, the psalmist is 
sustained by bis hope and trust in Goil's 
promises. 

Ver. 82. — Mine eyes fail for thy Word, 
Yet even here bis "eyes fail" — he has 
looked so long for the aid promised, and it 
has not come. Saying, When wilt thou 
comfort me? "Lord, how long?" is the 
constant cry of God's servants under afflic- 
tion or persecution. When will relief come 
and the tyranny be overpast ? 

Yer. 83.— Tor I am become like a bottle 
in the smoke. Keble's paraphrase brings 
ont the true sense — 

" As wine-skin in the smoke, 
My heart is sere and dried." 

Wine-skina were smoked to tonghen and 
harden them. Yet do I not forget thy 
statntes. The severity of the discipline 
does not alienate me from tbee, or cause me 
to depart from thy Law (comp. vers. 23, 51, 
161). 

Yer. 81. — How many are the days of thy 
servant 1 i.e. How little of my life is left I 
If thou delayest much longer, my days will 
all be gone. When wilt thou ezeoute judg- 
ment on them that persecute me ? (see the 
comment on ver. 826). 

YoT. 85. — The prond have digged pits for 
me ; 2.e. " have set traps to catoh me " (comp. 
PsB. vii. 15 : ix. 15). Which are not after 
thy Law. God's Law is opposed to all under- 
hand and treacherous dealing — ^therefore to 
all traps and snaied. 

Yer. 86. — All thy coaimandments are faith- 
ful ; literally, are faithftdneM. This is 
said in respect of tho promises attached to 
them. They (i.e. my enemies) persecute me 
wrongfully ; or, " with lies " — lyingly(comp. 
vers. 69, 78). Help thon me ; i.e. help me 
against them, so that their " lies " may do 
me no harm. 

Yer. 87. — They had almost consumed me 
upon earth ; or, " made an end of me," " de- 
stroyed me." But I forsook not thy preoepts 
(eomp. vers. 69, 78, 83). Persecution made 
the psalmist cling the more to God's Law. 

Yer. 88. — Quioken ma after thy loviug- 
kindness (comp. vers. 25, 37, 41, 107, 149, 
156, 159). So shall I keep the testimony of 
thy mouth (compare " the law of thy mouth," 
in ver. 72). It is God's " quickening "—i.e. 
his life-giving grace — which alone enables 



his servants to obaerre and keep hia com 
maudments. 

7 IlAUXD. 

Yep. 89.— For ever, Lord, thy Word is 
settled in heaven. God's Word, or Law, is 
eternal and unchanging — fixed and estob- 
lished for ever in the heaven of heavens 
(comp. Ps. Ixxxix. 2 ; Jas. i 17). 

Yer. 90. — Thy faithfulness IB onto all 
generations. God "keepeth his promise for 
ever" (Ps. exlvi. 6, Prayer-book Yersion). 
If his "Word" generally is unchanging, so 
especially must be liis promises. Thou hast 
established the earth, and it abideth. Even 
God's physical laws have a character of 
perpetuity about them. " The constancy of 
God in his works is an argument for the 
faithfulnessof Godin his Word" (Chalmers). 

Ver. 91. — They continue this day accord- 
ing to thine ordinances. Heaven and earth 
continue to observe the ordinances given 
them by God at the first (oomp. Jer. xxxi. 
35, 36 ; xxxiii. 25). For all are thy ser- 
vants ; rather, all things, or all ereaturee. 

Yer. 92. — Unless thy Law had been my 
delights, I should then have perished in 
mine affliction (comp. vers. 16, 24, 35, 47, 
70, 77). Only a real love of God's com- 
mandments can sustain men under severe 
affliction. 

Yer. 93. — X will never forget thy precepts 
(oomp. vers. 16, 61, 83). For with them thou 
hast quickened me (comp. ver. 50, "Thy 
Word hath quickened me "). 

Yer. 94, — I am thine, save me, "Save 
me," t.e., as being thine own — thy true ser- 
vant and follower. For I have sought thy 
preoepts. And thus shown my fidelity. 

Yer. 95. — The wicked have waited for me 
to destroy me ; or, " laid' in wait for me " 
(oomp. Ps. Ivi. 6, where the same verb is 
used). But I will consider thy testimonies 
I will look to thy word of promise, and so 
sustain their assaults upon me. 

Yer. 96. — I have seen an end of all per- 
fection; i.e. to all other perfection I have 
seen, and see, a limit ; but there is no limit 
to the perfection of thy Law. Thy com- 
mandment is exceeding broad. Unlimited 
— measureless in its range. It inouloates 
on man an absolute perfection. 

O Mem. 

Yer. 97.— how love I Thy law I (comp. 

vers. 47, 48, 113, 119, 127, etc.). As the 
psalmist goes on with his meilitation he be- 
comes more and more lilled with a deep love 
of the Law of God, wliicli is not to nini a 
restraint or a burden, but a solace and m 
" delight." It is my meditation aU the da; 
(see vers. IS, 23, 48, 78, etc.). 



PS. cxix. 1 — 176,] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



109 



Ver. 98. — Thou through thy command- 
ments hast made me wiser than mine 
enemies (comp. Deut. iv. 6, 8). Tlie know- 
ledge of Qod'a Law gives a wisdom and an 
understanding infinitely above the cun- 
ning and craft of worldly men. If to the 
knowledge is added a faithful and habitual 
obedience, a wisdom is attained which can 
be reached in no other way (see ver. 100). 
Tor fhey are ever with me. Always present 
to my thoughts, as my rule of life. 

Ver. 99. — I have more understanding than 
all my teachers : for thy testimonies are my 
meditation. Teachers of secular know- 
ledge are intended, wise in their special 
brandies of learning, but not " wise unto 
salvation." Such "teachers" have often 
no spiritual knowledge or discernment. 

Yer. 100. — I imderstaud more than the 
ancients ; or, " the aged." Advanced age 
does not necessarily give wisdom (see Job 
zxxil 7 — 9). " Antiquity is no help against 
stupidity " (Luther). Because I keep thy 
precepts (comp. ver. 101 and John vii. 17). 

Yer. 101. — I hare refrained my feet from 
every evil way. This had been the psalm- 
ist's intention and endeavour, but he had 
not always succeeded in carrying it out 
(see vers. 67, 176). That I might keep thy 
Word. Gtod's Word is not kept by such as 
allow themselves in any evil way. 

Yer. 102. — I have not departed from thy 
judgments (comp. vers. 30, 31, 51, 157, 168, 
etc.). For thou hast taught me. Thy 
teaching, thy guidance, thy help, have kept 
me straight. 

Ver. 103. — How sweet are thy words unto 
my taste I (comp. vers. 14, 16, 40, 47, etc.). 
The metaphor is new, but the sentiment one 
which pervades the psalm. Yea, sweeter 
than honey to my mouth. So David, in the 
nineteenth psalm, speaking of the judg- 
ments of God, says that they are " sweeter 
than honey and the honeycomb." 

Yer. 104.— Through thy precepts I get 
understanding (see the comment on vers. 
98 and 100). Therefore I bate every false 
way, A " false way " is one that leads to 
error and sin (oomp, vers. 29 and 128). 

3 Nra. 

Ver. 105, — Thy Word is a lamp unto my 
feet» and a light unto my path. It sliows 
me the way wherein I should go, both night 
and day (oomp. Prov. vi. 23), 

Yer. 106, — I have sworn, and I will 
perform it; rather, 1 have sworn and am 
iteadfofUy purposed (see tlie Prayt-r-bouk 
Version), That I will keep thy righteous 
judgments; literally, the judgments of thy 
righteousness; i.e. the judgments which thy 
righteousness has caused thee to put forth. 

Ver, 107. — I am afflicted Tery much 



(comp. vers. 23, 28, 50, 51, 61, 71, 78, etc.) 
Spoken ag.iiust by princes, reproached b_v 
the proud, persecuted without a cause, the 
psalmist felt his " affliction " to be grievous, 
almost intolerable. Being brought nenr 
to death, he prays for a "little reviving." 
Qoicken me, Lord, according unto thy 
Word (oomp. vers. 25, 37, 40, 88, etc.), 

Ver, 108. — Accept, I beseech thee, the 
freewill offerings of my mouth, Lord; i.e. 
my prayern and praises. The lifting up of 
the hands to God is a kind of sacrifice 
(Ps. cxli. 2). And teach me thy judgments. 
And, in return, make me to understand thy 
statutes (comp. vers. 12, 26, 33, etc.). 

Ver. 109. — My soul is continually in my 
hand ; i.e. my life is in constant jeopardy 
(comp. Judg. xii. 3 ; 1 Ham. xix. 5 ; 
xxviii. 21). Tet do I not forget thy Law 
(comp. vers. 16, 83, 93, etc.). 

Vtir. 110. — The wicked have laid a snare 
for me (comp, vers. 85, 95). Tet I erred 
not from thy precepts. I have not allowed 
their machinations to interfere with my 
obedience. 

Ver. 111. — Thy testimonies have I taken 
as an heritage for ever. I regard thy Law 
as my best and most valuable inlieritance — 
one with which I am resolved never to part. 
For they are the rejoicing of my heart 
My chief joy and delight (comp. vers. 16, 
24, 35, 47, etc.). 

Ver. 112, — ^I have inclined mine heart to 
perform thy statutes alway (oomp, vers, 34, 
44, etc.). Even unto the end. The end of 
life is probably meant, as in ver. 33. 

D Sameob. 

Yer. lis. — I hate vain thoughts; rather, 
unstable or double-minded men (Kay, Oheyne, 
Bevised Version) ; i.e. " those who are un- 
decided in religion" (Cheyne). But thy 
Law do I love (comp. vers. 97, 119, 127, 159, 
16b), There is nothing ~" unstable " or 
" double-miuded " iu thy Law, It is dear, 
direct, unmistakable. 

Ver. 114. — Thou art my Hiding -plaoe 
(comp. Pss. xxvii. 5; xxxil 7; xci 1). 
And my Shield; i.e. my protection (see 
Pss. iii. 3 ; zviii. 2, 30, etc.). I hope in thy 
Word. The promises contained in thy Word 
are my only sure hope (see ver. 43), 

Ver. 115, — Depart from me, ye evil-doers. 
There is no fellowship between light and 
darkness, between righteousness and un- 
righteousness (2 Cor. X. 16). Good men 
must separate themselves from those who 
are manifestly workers of iniquity (comp. 
Ps. vi. 8). For I will keep the command- 
ments of my God (see ver. lOG). Association 
with the wicked hindeis men from keeping 
God's Law. Not only is there the danger 
of corruption (1 Oor. xv. 33); but, at the 



110 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. OXIZ. 1 "llOk 



best, attention is distracted, and energies 
weakened. 

Yer. 116. — TTphold me according unto th^ 
Word, that I may live; or, "according to 
thy promiie." God's snataining grace, 
alwayi needed to " uphold " the rigbteona, 
ii graoionsly "promised" them. Their 
"life" depends upon God's faithfulness to 
his promise. And let me not be ashamed 
of my hope. As he would be, if God's 
promise were not kept. 

Yer. 117.— Hold thou me up, and I shall 
be safe; >.e. from falling away. And I will 
hare respeot unto thy ooznmandments con- 
tinually (comp. Ter. 112). 

Yer. 118. — ^Thoa hast trodden down all 
them that en from thy statutes; rather, 
thou derpiieit all them tkitt go astray from 
thy ttatute$. Thou makest light of them. 
The LXX. have, liovSivaxras. For their 
deceit is falsehood. "Their subtle policy 
is bat A lie" (Kay). It rests on lies, and 
ends in disappointment. 

Yer. 119.— Thoa pattest away all the 
wkked of the earth like dross. The wicked 
are ultimately separated from the righteous, 
and oast away " as dross," since they can 
serve no good end (comp. Matt. ziii. 30, 
49, 50). Therefore I love thy testimonies. 
Not because the wicked suffer, but because 
tbey are preyented from injuring the 
righteous. 

Ver. 120.— Uy flesh trembleth for fear of 
thee (comp. lea. vi. 5 ; Jer. xxiii. 9 ; Hab. 
iii. 16). And I am afraid of thy judgments. 
Thy "judgments " upon the wicked cause 
me to shudder with fear. 



V Ara. 

Yer. 121. — ^I have done judgment and 
justice (comp. yers. 30, 31, 55, 56, eto.). 
Iieave me not to mine oppressors; rather, 
thoa viilt not leave me to mine oppreisore. 
The nexus of the thought seems to be, 
"As I have not oppressed any, so wilt 
thou not suffer me to be crushed by 
oppression." 

Yer. 122.— Be surety for thy servant for 
good (comp. Job xvii. 3; Isa. xxxviii. 14). 
" For good " means " so that it may be well 
with him." Let not the proud oppress me 
(comp. vers. 61, 69, 78, 85, eto.). 

Yer. 123.- Mine eyes fail for thy salva- 
tion ; i.e. through looking for it, and vainly 
expecting it (comp. vers. 81, 82). And for 
the word of thy righteousness; i.e. and 
through looking for the fulfilment of thy 
righteous promises. 

Yer. 124. — Deal with thy servant accord- 
ing unto thy mercy (comp. vers. 41, 77). 
And teach me thy statutes. Tliis phrase 
occurs BO often that it becomes a, sort of 



refrain (comp. vers. 11, 26, 33, 64, 68, 108| 
135). 

ver. 125. — I am thy servant; give me 
nnderstanding, that I may know thy testi- 
monies. As thy servant (see vers. 17, 23, 
38, 49, 65, etc), I have a claim upon thee 
for thy help. What I ask is discernment — 
to understand the full meaning of thy Law 
(comp. vers. 34, 66, 73, 144). 

Yer. 126. — It is time for thee, Lotd, to 
work; or, "to act;" i.e. to lay aside 
quiescence, and come forward as the active 
Buler of the universe. For they ha^s 
made void thy Law. The wicked have 
oast thy Law behind their back, and, so &r 
as lay in their power, "made it void" — 
repealed it, cancelled ii 

Yer. 127. — Therefore I love thyeommand- 
ments. Because the wicked * make void " 
thy commandments and cast them aside, 
"tiierefore" I all the more "love" them. 
Above gold; yea, above fine gold (comp. 
yer. 72). 

Yer. 128.— Therefore I esteem all thy 
precepts concerning all things to be rijght. 
I do not pick and choose among thy com- 
mandments which I will neglect and which 
I will obey, but esteem them all as perfect, 
and obey tliem all. " Eclecticism of every 
kind in reference to the Word of God is 
rejected" (Hengstenber^). And I hate 
every false way (comp. vers. 104, 163). All 
ways are " false " except the way of God's 
commandments. 

B FiL 

Yer. 129. — Thy testimonies are wonder- 
ful; literally, wonder$; Le, prodigies of 
moral excellence. Therefore doth my sonl 
keep them. I obey thy Law, not only 
because it is thy Law, but still more 
because it is intrinsically " holy, just, and 
good" (Bom. vii 12). 

Yer. 130. — The entrance of fhy words 
giveth light; rather, the opening (qi opening 
up) of thy morda. Their full exposition and 
interpretation (comp. vers. 98-^100, 104, 
105, etc.). It giveth nnderstanding to the 
simple (comp Fs. xix. 7 ; Prov. i 4). 

Yer. 131. — I opened my mouth, and panted 
(comp. Ps. xxxviii. 10). The idea intended 
to he expressed is that of earnest and eager 
desire. For I longed for thy commandments 
(see Vers. 20, 40). 

Yer. 132.— Look then Open me; rather, 
(urn thee unto me, but in the sense of " turn 
round and look upon me." And be merciful 
unto me (comp. vers. 41, 58, 76, 77, etc.). 
As thou usest to do unto those that love thy 
Name ; literally, at thy rvle is with those thai 
love thy Name. 

Yer. 133.— Order my steps in thy Word; 
perhaps rather, estafMih my etept by thy 



P8. cxix 1—176.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



Ill 



Word (oomp. Ps. xl. 2). And let not any 
iniquity (i.e. any wicked peraonB) have 
dominion over me. The praver is not for 
deliverance from internal corruption, but 
from the external oppression of enemies 
(see the next verse). 

Yer. 134. — Deliver me from the oppression 
(tf man : bo vill I keep thy precepts. Out 
of gratitude for thy interposition. 

Yer. 135. — ^Make thy face to shine upon 
thy servant (comp. Fss. iv. 6 ; xliv. 3, etc.). 
And teaoh me thy statutes (see the com- 
ment on ver. 121). 

Yer. 136. — Rivers of waters mn down mine 
eyes; literally, mine eyet run down [with] 
riven of water (oomp. Lam. ilL 48 ; and see 
also Jer. ix. 1 ; xiv. 17). Because they keep 
not tiiy Law (comp. ver. 53). 



V Tz.iDDI. 

Yer. 137.— Bighteons art thou, Lord 
(oomp. PsB. vii. 9; xi. 7; xxv. 8; cxvi. 5; 
oxlv. 17). And upright are thy judgments 
(Bee vers. 106, 160, 164). 

Yer. 138.— Thy testimonies that thou hast 
commanded are righteous and very faithful; 
literally, righteousness and very faifhfulneea 
(see the Berised Yersion). "Harsh and 
■evere as thy testimonies may seem, they 
•re all thoroughly for man's highest good " 
(Kay). 

Yer. 139. — ^Uy ceal hath consumed me 
(comp. Fb. Ixix. 9). Because mine enemies 
have forgotten thy words (see above, vers. 
53, 136). The psalmist was at once grieved 
and angered by man's disobedience to God's 
oommandments (comp. Ps. cxxrix. 21). 

Yer. 140. — ^Thy Word is very pure; or, 
"is pnrged, assayed, tried in the fire." 
God's "promises" are especially meant, 
which the course of events tests. Therefore 
thy servant loveth it (comp. vers. 97, 113, 
119, 127, 159, 163). 

Yer. 141. — I am small and despised (oomp. 
vera. 22, 51). Some translate, " I am young." 
But the writer can scarcely have been really 
• young man. His thoughts are the thou<;hts 
of one who has had much experience sf life. 
Tet do not I forget thy precepts. As do 
those that persecute me (see ver. 139). 

Yer. 142. — Thy righteousness is an ever- 
lasting rightetosness. With God there is 
"no variableness, neither shadow of turn- 
ing" (Jae. i. 27). His righteousness (npTx) 
la pure abstract right (pnx), one and the 
same always — not shifting, like human 
ideas of justice. And thy Law is the truth. 
An embodiment of that immutable morality 
wbieh rests upon a basis of absolute eternal 
truth. 

Yer. 143.— Trouble and anguish have taken 
hold on me (oomp. vera. 22, 23, 28, 50, 51, 61, 



67, 69. etc.). Yet thy commandments art 
my delight. I am happy in the midst o( 
my troubles, for the joy that I have in thy 
Word (see vers. 16, 35, 47, 77, 174). 

Yer. 144. — The righteousness of thy testi- 
monies is everlasting (comp. vera. 138, 142, 
152). Give me understanding, and I shall 
live; {.a. "give me full understanding of 
thy commandments, of their depth and 
breaiUh and exceeding excellence." Then 
shall I truly " live." Hy spirit will shake 
off its torpor, and be quickened into a " life " 
that will deserve the name. 

P EOFH. 

Yer. 145. — I cried with my whole heart ; 
hear me, Lord. "Earnest and patient 
prayer for grace" (Kay) seems to be in- 
tended, not mere prayer for deliverance. I 
will keep thy statates. If thou hearest and 
answerest my prayer, I shall have both the 
will and the power to keep thy command- 
ments, 

Yer. 146.— I cried unto thee; save me, 
and I shall keep thy testimonies. The 
thought of ver. 145 is repeated in other 
words, 

Ver. 147. — ^I prevented the dawning of the 
morning, and cried (comp. ver. 62). Even- 
ing, morning, and noonday were the three 
usual times of prayer (Pa. Iv. 17). The 
writer could not wait for morning. Either 
he woke up to pray at midnight, or at any 
rate he anticipated the dawn, and began his 
morning prayer while it was still dark. I 
hoped in thy Word. Hope was so strong in 
him that it did not suffer him to rest. 

Yer. 148.— Mine eyes prevent the night 
watches. As ver. 146 ia a repetition of ver. 
145, so this verse is very nearly a repetition 
of ver. 147. The only change of idea is in 
the second clause — ^that I might meditate 
in thy Word; or, "on thy promise " — which 
makea meditation rather than prayer the 
psalmist's object in his early rising. 

Yer. 149. — ^Hear my voice according unto 
thy loving-kindness ; i.e. " hear me, and, 
according to thy mercy, grant my prayer." 
Lord, quicken me acoording to thy judg- 
ment ; or, " according to the rules that thou 
aettest thyaelf " (comp. ver. 132). 

Yer. 150. — They draw nigh; i.e. come 
near me to threaten me. That follow after 
mischief; or, "after wiokedneaa." They are 
far from thy Law (comp. vers. 21, 53, 118, 
126, 136, etc.). 

Yer. 151. — Thou art near, Lord. If 
" Oiey draw nigh," atill more near art tjiou, 
ready to succour and defend and save (comp. 
Ps. cxlv. 18). And all thy oommandmentf 
are truth (comp. ver. 142, "Thy Law ii 
the truth;" and see the comment on that 



112 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. oxix. 1—176. 



Ver. 152.— Coacerning thy testimonies, I 
havo known of old that thou hast foun'^ed 
them forever; latber, /rotn thy tealinwiu'ei. 
The study of God's commandments has 
long ago convinced the psalmist that they 
are no passing or temporary enactments, but 
eternal laws, decreed and laid down for 
ever. The " testimonies" spoken of are, of 
course, the moral precepts of the Law, not 
its economical or political enactmenta, 

t Bbsh. 

Ver. 153. — Consider mine afOiction (see 
above, vers. 50, 67, 71, 75, 92, etc.). And 
deliver me. The "affliction" intended is 
that which the psalmist suffers at the hands 
of his enemies, who " reproach " him (ver. 
22), "deride" him (ver. 61), and otherwise 
" persecute " him (ver. 161). For I do not 
forget thy Law (oomp. vers. 16, 83, 93, 109, 
HI, 176). 

Ver. 154.— Plead my cause (comp. Pss. 
XXXV. 1; xliii. 1; Micah vii. 9). God 
" pleads the cause " of his servants when 
bb takes up their quarrel, and avenges 
them upon their enemies. And deliver me ; 
Or, "rescue me" (Oheyne). Quicken me 
according to thy Word (comp. ver. 25). 

Ver. 155.— Salvation is far from the 
wloked: for they seek not thy statutes. 
"Salvation" is only attainable by man 
through obedience to the commandments of 
God. If men will not even " seek " to know 
and do his commandments, they put " sal- 
vation " from them. 

Ver. 156.— Great are thy tender mercies, 
Lord ; rather, many (comp. Ps. xxv. 6, and 
note the antithesis between this verse and 
the next, " Many are thy mercies : " " Many 
aie my persecutors "). Quicken me accord- 
ing to thy judgments (comp. ver. 149). 

Ver. 157. — Many are my persecuiors and 
mine enemies. Hitherto this had been 
implied (vers. 22, 23, 51, 61, etc.) rather 
than expressed. Now the thought of Ps. 
xxv. 18 comes over the writer, "CJonsider 
mine enemies, for they are many." Yet 
do I not deoline from thy testimonies. 
Bepeated from ver. 51. 

Ver. 158. — I beheld the transgressors, 
and was grieved; literally, the treaoherout 
dealers — thosu who dealt treacherously 
against the Divine covenant. Because they 
kept not thy Word (comp. ver. 136). 

Ver. 159. — Consider how I love thy 
precepts (comp. vers. 97, 113, 119, 127, 163). 
Quicken me, Lord, according to thy loving- 
kindness. Slightly varied from ver. 149. 

Ver. 160. — Thy Word is true from the 
beginning ; rather, the mm of thy Word i» 
truth. (So Hengsteiilierg, Kay, Cheyne, 
and the Eevised Version.) " After examin- 
ing the Divine Word, and estimating the 



value of its several parts, the psalmist 
found that the final sum was ' truth'— ■puie, 
absolute truth" (Kay). And every one of 
thy righteous judgments endureth for ever. 
An emphatic repetition of the statement 
made in ver. 144. 

IT Shot. 

Ver. 161. — Princes have persecuted me 
without a cause. The "princes" may be 
either foreign or native; but from ver. 23 
it would rather appear that native princes 
are intended. But my heart standeth in 
awe of thy Word, Yet I do not fear them, 
or heed what they say. Of nothing do I 
stand in awe, except " thy Word." 

Ver. 162. — I rejoice at thy Word, as one 
that flndeth great spoil. We must not 
limit this to the promises contained in 
God's Law. The psalmist views the pre- 
cepts of the Law as a real treasure (vers. 
14, 72, 127), since they make him wise unto 
salvation. 

Ver. 163. — ^I hate and abhor lying; or, 
" falsehood." False systems of religion are 
in the psalmist's thoughts ; or, at any rate, 
false moral teaching. He is not speaking 
of the habit of lying. But thy Law do I 
love (see the comment on ver. 159). 

Ver. 164. — Seven times a day do I praise 
thee; i.e. repeatedly, an indefinite number 
of times (oomp. Pss. xii. 6; Ixxix. 11 ; Prov. 
xxiv. 16). Because of thy righteous judg- 
ments (comp. vers. 137, 160). 

Ver. 165.— Great peace have they which 
love thy Law (comp. Prov. iii. 1, 2; Isa. 
xxxii. 17; Jas. iii. 18). There is always 
disquietude where there is sin. A sense of 
perfect peace and rest belongs to those who 
love and keep God's Law. And nothing 
shall offend them; rather, and they ehaZl 
have no stumbling-bloek. Nothing shall 
cause them to stumble, much less to fall 
away from grace. 

Ver. 166.— Lord, I have hoped for thy 
salvation (comp. vers. 81, 123). I have 
waited for thee, continually expecting thee 
to come to my aid, and save me from my 
enemies. And done thy commandments; 
kept them, <.«., as far as human frailty 
wonld allow. 

Ver. 167. — ^My sonl hath kept thy testi- 
monies. In will and intention I have 
always been faitiiful unto tliee; 1 have 
striven to keep all thy commandments. 
And I love them exceedingly (comp. vers. 
97, 127, 159, etc.). 

Ver. 168. — I have kept thy precepts and 
thy testimonies (comp. vers. 166, 167). The 
assertion is made more broadly than tt 
Christian would make it. But there is ne 
intention to claim absoluto perfection (see 
I vers. 67, 71, 116, 117, 133, 176, etc.). Tot 



PS. cxix. 1 — 176.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



113 



all my ways are before thee. Knowing 
that nothing wliioh I do, or say, or think 
ia hidden from thee, I have striven to 
keep thy Law in thought and word and 
deed. 

n Tau. 

Yer. 169. — let my ory come near before 
thee, lord. The " cry." ig probably for 
deliverance from his enemies (see ver. 166) ; 
but this, he feels, depends upon his own 
faithfulness. Hence the prayer in the 
second clause. Give me understanding ac- 
cording to thy Word (comp. ver. 144). 

Ver. 170, — ^Let my supplication come 
before thea A repetition of the " cry " in 
the preceding verse, which ia distinctly 
ahown by the next clause to be a ory for 
deliverance— Deliver me according to thy 
Word; or, "according to thy promise" 
(imrathka). Qoi had " promised " to 
deliver all tliose who in the day of trouble 
should call upon him (Pss. 1. 15; xoi. 15). 

Ver. 171. — My lips shall utter praise, 
when thou hast taught me thy statutes; 
rather, ht my Up» pour forlh praise, for thou 
teiicheet me thy elatutet. The psalmist feels 
that his prayer for enlightenment (ver. 
1696) is answered, or just about to be 
answered, and that therefore it behoves him 
to gush forth with praise like a fountain 
(comp. ver. 7). 

Ver. 172. — Uy tongue shall speak of thy 
Word; or, "let my tongue respond to thy 
promise " — ^return praise, i.e., for the fulfil- 
ment of thy promise. Tw all thy oom- 



mandments are r:ght3CUEn}ss. And there- 
fore are worthy objects of praise. 

Ver. 173.— let thine hand help me; 
literally, 6<! to help me ; i.e. be ever ready to 
help me. For I have chosen thy precepts. 
1 have cast aside all other helpers, and have 
pinned my faith on thee and thy Word. 

Ver. 174. — I have longed for thy salvation, 
lord (comp. vers. 81, 166). And thy law 
if my delight (see vera. 16, 35, 47, 70, 77, 111). 

Ver. 175.— let my soul live, and it shall 
praisa thee; i.e. "quicken me; give me 
true life in my soul and spirit— my real 
self — and then my praise shall be ever of 
thee." And let thy judgments help me. 
Let the course of thy providence be such as 
to help me to praise thee, 

Ver. 176. — I have gone astray like a lost 
sheep (comp. ver. 67). Some see in this 
verse nothing but a reference to the out- 
ward circumstances of the psalmist's life. 
But this is certainly not the idea generally 
attached in Scripture to the image of the 
" lost sheep " (see Isa. liii. 6 ; Jer. 1. 6 ; 
Luke XV. 4—7; 1 Pet. ii. 26). Dean 
Johnson's exposition is probably correct, 
" I have wandereil far from thee and from 
home, as a sheep lost and ready to perish 
in the wilderness," Seek thy servant. 
" Seek him, lest he be not able of himself to 
seek thee ; and bring him again to thy fold." 
For I do not forget thy commandments. In 
my worst wanderings 1 have not fallen 
away wholly from thee. Thy Law has been 
ever in my thoughts. I have not "for- 
gotten " it, bat meditated on it and longed 
for it (vera. IS, 20, 40> 



HOMILETICS. 

Thb difficulty of treating this "alphabetical psalm" by any arrangement of its 
subject-matter must be apparent. An attempt has been made to gather its lessons 
around the more prominent doctrine in its successive sections, and to give a separate 
treatment of those subjects which cannot be so well included in this way. 

Vers. 1 — ^24 — The blessedness of obedience. The first two verses of the psalm leave 
DO mistake as to the nature of true Obedience ; it includes : 1. Integrity of heart. 
Sincerity, being "undefiled," seeking the favour and entering the service of God " with 
the whole heart " (ver. 10), with a spirit in which " is no guile." 2. Consistency of 
conduct. " Walking in the Law," " keeping his commandments ; " it is " he that doeth 
righteousness that is righteous " (John). 3. Patient continua/nce in well-doing. Making 
an earnest and sustained endeavour to do the will of (Sod (ver. 4). Such genuine 
obedience is attended with great blessedness. 

I. It involves pukitt of heart and life. " They do no iniquity : they walk in 
his ways " (ver. 3). Obedience is its own reward, apart from any recompense It may 
secure. To be pure-hearted, to be true and faithful, to be unselfish and helpful, to bis 
like our Lord in spirit and in character, to be living a life that is worthy and honourable 
in the sight of QoA, — is not this the truest and the largest blessing ? 

II. It brings saltation from evil. 1. From sin itself, whether in the heart or 
the life (ver. 11). 2. From the shame to which sin constantly conducts (ver. 6). 8> 

TSALMS — m. I 



IM THE BOOK OF PSILMS, [ps. oxix. 1—176. 

From Divine condemnation (ver. 21). 4. From the rebuke which comes from the lips 
of the Lord himself. 

III. It is the sbkviob op saoeed jot. (Vers. 14, 16, 24 ; see also vers. 35, 47, 
54, 103, 111, 127, 162.) Sweeter than honey to the taste, more precious than gold in 
the heart's esteem, is the Word of God, " the mind of Christ." The sweet substance 
will soon pall, the spoil will soon be spent, the much-prized wealth may become a 
snare ; but the study of God's will, meditation upon the truth and grace of Jesus Christ, 
the welcome given by the heart to the heavenly hopes and the Divine consolations 
with which the pages of Hojy Writ are studded, sitting at the feet of the great Teacher 
and learning of him, — this is the source of pure, unfailing, ever-deepening joy. The 
acquisition of any kind of knowledge is pleasant to the mind, but the enrichment of 
the soul by the reception of Divine wisdom means deep " delight," an intense 
satisfaction to the spirit. If such is the blessedness of obedience, we learn : 1. The 
excellency of steadfastness (vers. 5 — 10). How needful to have our feet " firmly fixed " 
in the way of life; to be saved from "wandering" first into byways and then into 
highways of evil I Hence ! 2. The wisdom of keeping an open mind (ver. 7), of realizing 
that there is something more to learn. Hence also : 3. The need for serious, strenuous 
effort (vers. 4, 16), of being " diligent " in duty and of keeping the will of our Lord 
always before our mind, of continually refreshing our memory from his Word. Hence 
also : 4. The need for prayer (ver. 10). 6. The duty of teaching as well as learning 
(ver. 13). Such true and pure blessedness as we ourselves have gained, we shoold seek 
to pass on to other souls. 

Vers. 25 — 48. — Spiritual enlargement. Throughout our whole life, as godly men, 
we have to recognize — 

I. A DOWNWARD TENDENCY. "My soul cleavcth to the dust" (ver. 25). Our eyes 
are Inclined to " behold vanity " (ver. 37). There is that within us and that around 
us which constitute a temptation to put our trust in man rather than in God, to seek 
our portion in worldly advantage rather than in the service and friendship of Christ, to 
allow ourselves to decline from a wise moderation to an unwise and even guilty 
indulgence, to set our hearts on the things which are below and to be too little affected 
by the inheritance beyond. 

II. The Divine power to quioken. "Quicken thou me" (vers. 25 — 40). God 
can " enlarge our heart " (ver. 32). By the incoming and indwelling of his Holy Spirit 
he can raise the thoughts and the hopes that are beginning to droop or to settle ; he 
can so "enlarge" our sympathies and our affections that we lovd the best and take 
deep delight in the highest ; he can so revive us that our spiritual languishing and 
despondency pass into full acquiescence and cheerful hope (ver. 28), and we become 
strong for waiting and for action; he can so continuously affect us, and thus so 
establish us, that we shall abide in reverential service all our days (ver. 38). By these 
holy influences instilled into our soul, acting quietly but effectually on the hidden 
springs of our nature, God " grants us his Law graciously " (ver. 29). Left to ourselves, 
we sink and suffer ; upheld, quickened by God's renewing power, we walk in wisdom 
and in piety, nay, we rise Ohristwards, heavenwards. This is — 

III. The spiritual enlargement which ensues. It is found in many forms ; it 
is active in many spheres. It includes : 1. Salvation from the worst evils. " Salvation " 
generally (ver. 41) from spiritual declension, which is an insidious and dangerous 
adversary ; also from any sudden fall into sin and shame ; and more particularly from 
" covetousness " (ver. 36), that evil spirit of selfishness which craves what God has not 
given, and issues in the strivings of an injurious ambition or in the mutiny of a dis- 
contented heart. 2. Whole-heartedness in obedience (ver. 34). All the powers and 
instincts of our nature leagued in a holy alliance of obedience to God. 3. Promptness 
and cheerfulness of obedience. We should not only walk, but run in the way of God'» 
commandments (vers. 32, 60). Readiness and quickness to obey, in the little child, is 
the acceptable thing to the human parent : is it not equally so to the Divine ? 4. Stead- 
fastness in holy service (vers. 31, 33, 34). 5. Liberty (ver. 45). Sin at its worst means 
utter slavery ; godliness at its best means perfect freedom. When we so love Goil'a 
Law, when we are so filled with the desire to do the will of Christ and to please him, 
that we find his Word no sort of restraint upon us, that we move happily along those 



PS. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 115 

lines in which we are free to go as far and as fast as we please, then we are " at liberty." 
Liberty is only found in its i erfection when, as in God, inclination is perfectly parallel 
with duty. God's statutes are not our bonds ; they are our songs (ver. 54). 6. 
Utterance (vers. 27, 43, 46). When the heart is enlarged the mouth is opened, and 
free, fearless speech comes forth. At fiist, indeed, there may be the hesitation of 
inexperience and self-distrust ; but when this initial stage is past, there is fulness and 
fearlessness of utterance. We declare, with joyful lips, the grace and the truth which 
have enlightened ami emancipated ourselves. Bat we must not overlook the fact thaf, 
while God's promises are great, there is — 

IV. The condition to be fulfilled — prater. The psalmist frequently reminds 
us of our duty and privilege in this respect. In confession or supplication he calls 
our attention to it in vers. 23, 25, 20, 37. We may not expect the spiritual 
enlargement which comes from God's visitation unless we are daily, earnestly, 
expectantly, asking God to come to us and dwell within us, in all his gracious, 
victorious power. 

Vers. 49 — 72. — Oom/ort in affliction. Those who construct a philosophy of human 
life, or who criticize any religious creed that claims their attention, are bound to 
recognize — 

I. The berioub pact of affliction. For it is a very large element in our life, and 
powerfully affects our character. There is not one that has not occasion again and 
again to say, "in my affliction" (ver. 50). Most of us have, at times, to go much 
beyond this, and speak of being "afflicted very much" (ver. 107), or are even con- 
strained to say, " Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me " (ver. 43). 1. Some- 
times, often indeed, it is due to the injustice, or the cruelty, or the inconsiderateness 
of men (vers. 51, 61, 69, 78). The very worst suffering is the consequence of the 
betrayal and the hostility of those we once trusted and loved (Ps. xli, 9). 2. Affliction 
may spring from our religious earnestness (vers. 53, 136). The unbelief, indifference, 
impiety, immorality, and violence we see or read of constitute a heavy burden upon 
our soul. 3. God's apparent delay is another source of trial (ver. 82). " How long, 
Lord, how long ? " has been the painful cry of all generations of the persecuted and 
troubled children of God. Beside these are the common, everyday afilotions of sick- 
ness, loss, straitness, disappointment, bereavement. Then comes — 

XL The appeal to God. (Vers, 58, 107.) While prosperity abounds we may 
forget God, but as soon as adversity comes we remember him. And those who walk 
with God in health and joy instantly and naturally look to him when they enter the 
dark shadows. " Remember me, my God, for good I " " Deliver me I " — these are the 
instinctive cries of the burdened heart. We may, as the psalmist does here, plead 
our close, spiritual relationship to him as a ground of appeal (ver. 153). 

III. Cub befuob in time op trouble. 1. We rest in God's promise — the " word 
on which be has caused us to hope " (ver. 49 ; see Pss. xli. 1 ; xlvi. 1 ; xc. 15 ; Isa. 
xliii. 2 ; John xiv. 18 ; Heb. xiii. 5, 6, 8). 2. We find, in God's goodness to us in the 
past, an assurance of his pity at the present time, and his blessing in the future (ver. 
65 ; Ps. xxiii.). 3. We find great comfort in the knowledge we have of God's character, 
assured that One so kind (ver. 68) and so faithful (ver. 75) must be leading us by 
the right and wise way, however strange the path may seem to us. 4. Whatever be 
taken from us, we always have left to us our God, our Saviour himself; and he is our 
portion (ver. 57) ; he himself is " our exceeding great reward.'' No loss, no discomfiture, 
no betrayal, can take away from us the inestimable treasure of the favour and the 
friendship of Jesus Christ. 

IV. Its issue. (Vers. 67, 71.) There are some lessons which we cannot learn in 
the light, but can learn in the darkness. When all other means fail to affuct us, the 
strong rod of affliction arouses us, and awakens us to the neglected truth. Then we 
see that to which we had been strangely blind ; then we turn from the evil track and 
the fatal precipice, and enter once more the way of wisdom, the path of life. In^itead 
of a dangerous indulgence is a wise self-restraint ; instead of an increasing worldliness 
is a deepening joy in devotion ; instead of questionable companionships is the society 
of the holy ; instead of slackness in service is the steady flame of seal ; instead of half- 
heartedness is whole-heartedness in our Christian life. 



1 1« THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. cxix. 1-176 

Yen. 73 — ^96. — Euman need and the Divine sufficiency. These verses bring out — ■ 
L The oekatnbsb of oub humak need. The psalmist lingers over: 1. The evils 
which we suffer from persecution. The proud "deal perversely with us"(ver. 78); 
"they had almost consumed me" (ver. 87); "they persecute me wrongly" (ver. 86). 
The expressions cover all kinds or cruelty and injustice, as well as that which we 
understand by " persecutor," making us to suffer for our religious convictions. Man 
is the chief enemy of man, everywhere and always. 2. He indicates the extremity to 
which we may be reduced ; his soul " faints for God's salvation " (ver. 81) ; he 
wonders at the long delay (ver. 82) ; his very life is endangered (ver. 77) ; he ia ready 
to perish (ver. 92). S. He is concerned lest he be put to shame, lest he fall into sin or 
into despair, and cause the enemy to triumph (ver. 80). 4. He finds that even the best 
prove to be in some respects unworthy (ver. 96). Our need is great, but we turn to— 
IL Thb buffioienoy which IB IK God. 1. His perfect knowledge of us, and his 
power over us. He who made us must know our nature and its needs, must be able 
to minister to us (ver. 73; see Ps. xciv. 9, 10). He "knows what is in man." 2. 
His promised help (vers. 76, 81; see preceding homily). 3, His succour granted 
through his people (ver. 79). Let the troubled servants of God turn to one and another 
who are known to honoar him, and they will not seek a brother's sympathy in vain. 
If man is our enemy, man also is our friend. " A man shall be a covert " (Isa. xxxii. 
2). 3. His fsuthfulness (vers. 75, 86). God is not forgetful of us ; he is not indifferent 
to our distress ; he is not unmindful of our service (ver. 94) ; he does not overlook the 
fact that we are his own children, closely related to hiin in his Son (ver. 94) ; but he 
is seeking our highest good ; he is caring for our spiritual advancement ; he is purify- 
ing us from all dross ; he is preparing us for higher service in a nobler sphere. He is 
redeeming his Word at the very time when, and by the very treatment in which, he 
seems to be breaking it (vers. 128, 138). 4. The uncbangeableness of his Word (vers. 
89 — 91). We may quote for our own and others' support any word of encouragement 
God has ever spoken at any time ; lor " the counsel of the Lord standeth for ever, the 
thoughts of his heart to all geuerations " (Ps. xxxiii. 11). What he was to our fathers 
iu distant days, and has been to all those who came before us, he will be to us (see 
Ps. xc. 1 ; Heb. xili. 8 ; Jas. i. 17). 5. The breadth of his Law (ver. 96). While the 
fact that his Law covers the entire range of human thought aud action thus brings us 
into condemnation, on the other hand, the fulness and amplitude of his promises 
cover all our possible errors and wrong-doings, and leave the gateway into the kingdom 
wide open to all who approach it in the spirit of penitence and faith. 

Vers. 97 — 120. — Knowledge and action. Of God's Law these verses treat, calling 
our attention to — 

L Study that leads to love. (Vers. 97 — 103.) A cursory view of Ckid's Word 
may have no result ; but a serious study of it, a continuous and prayerful meditation 
upon it, will end in a strong attachment to it. It will become the source of perennial 
enjoyment ; it will be prized above all price (see vers. 1 — 24). Indeed, so close will 
the heart cling to it that even the greatest danger will only suggest its truths (ver. 
109). Sickness will bring it near; death will torn towards it. As the value of other 
treasures lessens, its worth will be enhanced. 

II. Knowlbdqe. rVers. 98, 99, 105.) The study of the Word of God, of the will 
of Christ, will make the disciple to understand (1) what his enemies are ignorant of; 
(2) what is of greater intrinsic value than any science, or art, or language ; (3) what 
transcends all traditionary lore, however venerable that may be (vers. 98 — 100). But 
of more account than this mental superiority is — 

III. Pbaotioal WISDOM. 1. This begins in hatred of evil (ver. 104), having a 
sincere aversion to the various forms of iniquity. 2. It proceeds to perception of what 
is right and good (ver. 105), undeistanding the true character of human life, and know- 
ing what is the way in which to walk. 3. It continues in deliberate avoidance of evil 
(ver. 101). 4. Then determined loyalty to the truth and will of GK)d under all prx>- 
vocations to err (vers. 102, 110 — 112). However strong the pressure or clever the 
intrigue, the man who loves God's Law is constant in obedience, and refuses to leave 
the King's highway; he goes straight to the goal. 5. This ends in immunity from 
tlie sad penalties of sin which the guilty liave, sooner or later, to pay (vers. 118 — 120). 



Pd. cxtt. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 117 

6. And its issue is a blessed fulfilment of the good man's hope (ver. 116). This 
practical wisdom rests upon — 

ly. A RBVBBENT PUBP08B OF HEAKT. (Vers. 106—115.) Enlightened by the 
Divine teaching, understanding what is the wise and what the foolish course, perceiving 
who are his friends and who his enemies, the disciple of the great Teacher (1) solemnly 
resolves that he will give himself, heart and life, to the pursuit and practice of right- 
eousness ; (2) dismisses, without reserve, any evil companions he may have admitted 
to his friendship; (3) makes a formal and solemn vow, before God and man, that he 
will walk in the way of life. Then come — 

V. Pbayeb and pbaisb. 1. Daily supplication for the upholding hand of God, 
without which the fairest and strongest resolutions fail (vers. 116, 117). 2. Daily 
thanksgiving — the sacrifice of grateful speech and sacred song (ver. 108). 

Vers. 121 — 136. — Looking to Ood. A. very large part of our Christian life is found 
in the uplifting of our heart to God in silent or vocal prayer. We look up for — 

L His mekciful regard. (Vers. 124, 132, 135.) We ask God to regard us as 
those who have humbled themselves before him, who trust in his mercy, who are his 
children in Jesus Christ ; and we know that we shall not appeal in vain. To all such 
he has promised his merciful regard, the light of his coimtenance, his abiding favour, 
his Divine friendship. 

II. Spieitual discernment. (Vers. 124, latter part, 125 — 135.) It is the con- 
tinually recurring note, " Teach me thy statutes." In the words of the awakened 
apostle, " Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ? " In our own ignorance, and in the 
confusion caused by so many contending voices, each purporting to be the truth, 
we may well cry, "Give me understanding," etc. (ver. 125). We want to know 
with whom, in the Church and in the world, we should be associated ; what is the 
true meaning and what the real message our Master delivered by his own lips or 
through the writings of his apostles ; how we can best serve him in the field of active 
work, etc. We want to be able to distinguish between the plausible and the true, 
between the attractive and the wise, in all the counsels that are uttered in his Name. 
There is npthing we more need than spiritual discernment, when so many lights are 
shining of which we may be sure that some are not kindled at the altar of heavenly 
wisdom. 

m. His FBOTBonoN. (Vers. 121, 134.) Oppression is not so rampant now as it 
has been, but it still exists in many places and in many forms. So that there is still 
need for the psalmist's prayer ; and it may be that many a heart, in loneliness and 
suffering, finds relief in this appeal to God, " Leave me not to my oppressors." The 
psalmist goes further ; he asks for — 

IV. Thb asbubanoe of his fboteotion. (Ver. 122.) Such as Gk>d gave to Moses 
when he sent him to Pharaoh, and to David and Solomon when he gave them their 
thrones ; such as Christ gave to Paul when he was in Corinth and was shrinking in 
qnrit before his stupendous task (Acts xviii. 9, 10). Our Lord gives us the assurance 
that no harm shall happen to us which he does not permit, which he will not control 
ind overrule for good (Matt. v. 11, 12 ; x. 29 — 31). 

V. Thb prbsebvation of oub spiBiTUAii integeitt. (Ver. 133.) Our first and 
chief obligation is to continue in that path of holy service in which the grace of God 
has placed us, and to maintain our freedom from everything that degrades and enslaves 
us. But this is a great thing to do ; many have set forth on their Christian course 
confident of success, and they have been defeated. They have wandered from the way 
of wisdom ; they have become the victim of some degrading habit. They did not 
look up to God daily and earnestly, or they would have been upheld. If there be any 
signs, however slight, of moral entanglement, let " our eyes be ever unto the Lord, and 
he will pluck our feet out of the net " (Ps. xxv. 15). 

VI. His intervention. (Vers. 126, 136.) Grieved at heart, perplexed in spirit, 
overwhelmed by the forces of evil and the temporary triumph of iniquity, what can we 
do ? We may not cease to bear our testimony to the truth, but we may bring our 
burden to the Lord ; we may plead that the cause of righteousness is not ours, but his, 
and pray, hopefully and even confidently, for the manifestation of his power. " It it 
time for thee. Lord, to work." 



118 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [fs. oxix. 1—176 

Vers. 137 — 160. — Earnestness. Much is said in this psalm about seeking and 
serving " with the whole heart." This is, indeeil, the secret of real success, of ultimate 
victory. Many will fail to reach the goal and to wear the prize because they set out 
in a languid, half-hearted spirit, or because they started with nothing more than 
religious excitement. What is needed is genuine earnestness of soul. This — 

L Inoludbb a profound eeoard for the will and Word op God. To this the 
psalmist gives utterance here (vers. 137, 138, 140, 142, 144, 151, 152, 159, 160). 
1. It is the truth itself. 2. It makes perfectly just and righteous demands. 3. It 
offers only that which is certain to be granted, and requires only that which is truly 
necessary; it is "very faithful." 4. It is free from everything that would wound 
sensitiveness or hurt the conscience, and it makes for absolute goodness and virtue ; 
it is very pure. 5. It blesses and sustains throuo;h all the changes of a human life, 
and it outlives the changes of the centuries. It is as needful now as it ever was, and 
it will be the stay an.l strength of human souls for ever; it is "everlasting." 6. It 
is worthy of our deep and true affection ; it is something we " love." 

II. Triumphs over oue sense of personal iNsiaNiFioANCE. (Ver. 141.) Religious 
earnestness does not dwell upun, and is not arrested bj', a sense of personal obscurity. 
Every human soul is great, because related intimately to God, and because bound to 
duty and capable of holy service. The most despised individual soul can hold in its 
mind the thoughts and illustrate in its life the truth and principles of God himself 
(see Ps. xl. 17). 

IIL Triumphs over the depression of great sorrows. (Ver. 143.) Troubles 
may accumulate, heavy burdens may weigh down the soul, saddest losses may darken 
the way, but the earnest spirit that trusts in God and looks to him for help will not 
be overwhelmed. 

IV. Involves devotedness to the cause of God and truth. (Vers. 136, 139, 
158.) The reverent study of God's Word will make us increasingly conformed to the 
likeness and deepeningly interested in the cause of God. Hence there will be growing 
in our hearts a prof ^und grief as we witness the sins and tlie consequent sorrows and 
miseries of mankind. This will rest on our heart and sadden our life, even as it did 
with our Lord. The woe of the world will be our trouble ; and the cause of Christ, 
BO often defeated and so lung arrested, will be the source of great and lifelong solicitude. 
Of ourselves, as of our Master, it will be relatively true that " our zeal has consumed 
us," has worn us out (Ps. Ixix. 9 ; John ii. 17). 

V. Shows itself in a strono sense of God'b near presence and qrgat aooDNEas. 
(Vers. 151, 156.) 

VI. Shows itself in continual delight in Divine truth. (Ver. 148.) Whether 
taken hyperbolically or literally, the text indicates a deep unbroken delight in medi- 
tating on the revealed truth of God ; even weariness and sleep give way to the eager- 
ness and interest which is taken in these high themes, in tliese precious promises. 

VII. Shows itself in fervent prater. (Vers. 145 — 147, 149, 154, 156, 169.) 
The psalmist tells us how much and how earnestly he cried and pleaded with God; 
he continually breaks into the strain of his song with the prayer, " Quicken thou me I " 
If we are in earnest in the service of Christ, we shall : 1. Realize that we have urgent 
need of constant Divine influence from the Holy Spirit. 2. Have our regular times of 
public and private devotion, which we shall not permit business or pleasure to invade. 
8. Maintain intercourse with Heaven by the abiding sense of God's presence and the 
frequent, ejaculatory prayer. 

Vers. 161 — 168. — True things. Here we have — 

I. The true dread. (Ver. 161.) 1. Not the displeasure or the opposition of man ; 
though this may be incurred without cause, and we may feel that the suspicion, or 
the ill feeling, or the attack is altogether wanton and unprovoked. 2. But the dis- 
pleasure of God. Undisturbed by human ill will or intrigue, we " stand in awe " of 
Divine disapproval; we shrink from thinking the thought, cherishing the feeling, 
takint; the course, which Christ would condemn ; we are afraid of leaving undone or 
unattempted that 1 1 whicli he is calling us with his severe gn voice. 

II. The true treasure. (Ver. 162.) 1. Not the "spoils" of wealth, or rank, or 
power, or learning, or a round of pleasurable excitements ; these soon lose their relish. 



M. (mx. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 119 

and they too often leave a hitter taste behind. 2. But the revelation of God's graoe_ 
of his mind, of his purpose and promise, as made known in his Word. 

III. The tkue word. (Ver. 163.) Falsehood is utterly offensive to God, and it ia 
most hurtful to ourselves ; it spells spiritual ruin to him that indulges in it ; it is an 
evil weed that grows with saddening rapidity. Truthfulness in utterance is a large 
and essential part of all spiritual worth. 

IV. The true spirit. That of thankfulness. (Ver. 164.) It is not, of course, the 
number of times we offer praise that is acceptable ; for mere mechanical thanksgiving 
is worthless, though rendered a hundred times a day. It is the spirit of gratitude 
which is everything — the recognition by the mind that it is by God's grace we are 
what we are, and the feeling of thankfulness dwelling in the soul ; it is the inner sense 
of God's goodness, carried with us everywhere, uttering itself simply and unaffectedly. 

V. The true sec0BITT. (Ver. 165.) In the orderins; of our life, we want these 
two things among others — peace and integrity. The love and the practice of Divine 
truth will yield buth of these. 1. It will save us from stumbling (nothing will " offend ". 
us) ; we shall not fall into the vices or faults which lead down to shame and self- 
reproach; we shall not give way to the contentiousness which ends in feuds and 
separations. 2. Hence we shall have peace — the approval of our own conscience, the 
good will of men, the " well done " of God. 

VI. The true hope. (Ver. 166.) The final " salvation " for which we hope (see 
Eom. xiii. 11) is the true hope for man. The " peace of the grave " is not a true peace, 
but a false one. Mere unbroken unconsciousness is not a thing to be desired by us. 
But the hope of eternal life, based on the firm promises of God, and secured by " doing 
his commandments," by fidelity to the end (see Heb. iv. 1 ; 2 Pet. i. 10, 11 ; Eev. 
iii. 11), by being " faithful unto death." 

VIL The true Source of banotitt. (Ver. 168.) If we would maintain our 
obedience everywhere and always, we must realize the truth that " all our ways are 
before God." We must " stand before God," must " walk with God," as the saints of 
olden time did. We must take with us everywhere the truth that we think our 
thoughts, speak our words, live our life, in the near presence and under the approving 
or disapproving eye of our Lord himself. 

Vers. 169 — 176. — OocCs salvation. These verses may bring before us the successive 
stages of salvation. 

I. Seeking after God. (Vers. 169, 170, 174.) The heart "longs for salvation; " 
it " cries for deliverance ; " it looks to God under a deep and strong sense of danger 
and of need. 'J hen comes — 

II. Our choice. (Ver. 173.) The decisive hour comes when we have finally and 
fixedly to determine whether we will or will not accept Jesus Christ for our Divine 
Lord and Saviour; whether or not we will spend our days and our powers in his 
service. The crisis of our cause is past when we can say, " I have chosen thy precepts ; " 
I have chosen to do " the will of God in Christ Jesus." 

III. A LIFE OF 8C8TAINED DEVOTION. As the psalmist's prayer intersperses his 
other utterances, so should devotion blend with our outward life, sanctifying and 
ennobling it. Especially should we be constantly looking for Divine help (ver. 173), 
that we may be enabled to do our duty faithfully, to bear our burden meekly, to resist 
temptation manfully and successfully, to use our opportunity wisely and devotedly. 

IV. Our confession of partial failure. (Ver. 176.) This wandering (of the 
text) is not the first departure of the soul from God, the going away into the " far 
country " of estrangement or rebellion ; it is rather the deviation of the good man from 
the straight line of holy service, calling for recognition and return to the favour of 
God. " If we (Christian disciples) say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the 
truth is not in us." If, when we thus err, when we "go astray," we "confess our sin, 
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sin, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." 
" For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee " (Ps. xxxii. 6). It is a very 
great point in Christian life to understand and to acknowledge our error, our partial 
failure, our need of the Divine hand to lead us back into the path of righteousness and 
wisdom. 

V. B STUDY OF God's will as revealed in his Word. (Vers. 174, 175.) 



120 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxix. 1—176 

VL OuB 8ERVI0E or SPEECH AND BONO. (Vers. 171, 172, 175.) 1. Becognizing 
the supreme excellency of Divine truth, its intrinsic worth, and its power to save and 
heal, "our tongue will speak God's Word." From the sustained and prepared discourse 
to the humble dialogue and the parting word of warning or encouragement, true service 
may be rendered to our Lord. 2. Taught God's will by his Spirit as well as his Word, 
our soul as well as our body alive because quickened by Divine power, our heart and 
our mouth will be filled with praise. Prayer and praise will be the two accompani- 
ments that will never fail, along all the path of life, until the witness is borne, and the 
work is done, and the reward is ready. 

Sdpplbmentabt ! Vers. 15, 23, 80, 48, 59, 78, 97. — Meditation: its place in 
Christian culture. In these days and in this country we may speak of meditation as 
a lost art, if not, indeed, as a lost faculty. We have become incapable of sustained 
thought, of prolonged consideration of Divine truth. Even with the aid of a well- 
itttdied and well-spoken discourse, and the presence of sympathetic fellow-listeners, it 
is found difficult to maintain continuous attention for more than half an hour once or 
twice a week. The psalmist again and again recurs to this sacred duty ; he speaks of 
it as a much-prized privilege. The best men of Old and New Testament times were 
men of ftieditation as well as of action — Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Samuel, David, 
Elijah, Nehemiah, John Baptist, St. Paul, John the apostle — all of these illustrate the 
truth. Our Lord himself sought the mountain fold for solitude and communion with 
his own heart and with his Father. The best men that have lived and wrought 
during this Christian era have been men that found time for contemplation, and for the 
devotion in which that reaches its highest point. In a time and a land where action 
is felt to be everything; where there is a multitude of distractions; where every hour 
may easily be occupied with some lawful or even laudable activity ; where a positive 
effort has to be made to secure a quiet hour ; — there is serious danger lest our Christian 
character suffer from want of earnest and devout meditation. 

L The two things on which to dwell. These are God's Word and our own 
"ways." We should meditate on God's statutes or precepts; we should "think on 
our ways." What a field for thought is here I The nature and the character and tlie 
work of God as revealed in sacred history and in Jesus Christ ; the truth spoken to us 
by our Lord, and written for our learning by inspired men ; the ways in which Divine 
truth has been illustrated and enforced in human history ; the path along which God 
has led us ; the witness we have borne, and the work we have done ; the failure to 
become and to effect what we might have been and have done; the lessening distance 
before us this side the grave ; the immortal life beyond, etc. 

II. The state ob act in which it culuinateb. In prayer. Meditation is the 
best friend of devotion ; it is its source and safeguard. There is much that passes for 
prayer which, in the absence of meditation, is only mechanical repetition ; there is no 
real meditation which does not pass into genuine, acceptable, fruitful prayer. 

III. Its practical issub. " I turned ray feet," etc. (ver. .59). To be nothing at 
all but a thinker, or even a student, is a sad mistake. We must come forth from the 
chamber of communion to the field of conflict. But there is little danger now of too 
much seclusion. Much serious consideration, passing into prayer, is the best prepara- 
tion for the " world's broad field of battle," for the dangers to be dared and the duties 
to be done. 

Vers. 2, 4, 10, 34, 68. — Wlwle-heartedness. Success in every sphere of action is 
attained by thoroughness, by concentrating our forces, and working " with our whole 
heart." Many a man has allowed his life to be a failure because he has dissipated his 
strength. He " has done a great many things badly." But in no sphere of thought or 
action is thoroughness so much demanded as in that of religion. Surely we should 
offer the very best, our whole self, to our Creator, to our S.vviour. This applies to— 

L OUB APPROACH to HIM AND PURSUIT OF HIS FAVOUR. (Vers. 2, 10, 58.) To 

engage in the worship of God, or to read his Word, or to seek his friendship and 
forgiving love, in a formal and ceremonious fashion, with little seriousness and no 
earnestness of spirit, is to make a sad mistake ; it is to lose the battle. Our relation to 
God is immeasurably higher than any other relation can be; his claims are absolutely 



re. cxix. 1—176,] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 121 

supreme; our interest in hia merciful regard is surpassingly great ; and there cannot 
possibly be any engagement of the soul that demands such strenuousness, such concen- 
tration of powers, such fixedness and fulness of soul, as prayer, as devotion, as the 
seeking after God. 

II. OnB UFE SEBVIOB. (Yers. 4, 34.) The languid and listless efforts which some 
" religious " men make in the service of God must be wholly unacceptable, as they are 
altogether unbecoming. " Worthy is the Lamb to receive riches " — the riches of our 
remembrance, our obedience, our submission, our service. To make a few feeble efforts 
to subdue our temper, to quell our repining, to preserve a sustained tranquillity or 
cheerfulness of spirit, to show friendliness to Christian brethren, or to speak words of 
guidance or warning, but to give up the attempt because we do not immediately 
succeed, — this is not to keep God's precepts " diligently," to observe his will " with our 
whole heart." It is to relegate religion to the second or third place in our esteem. 
Christ claims the^r«(. He tells us that if we love any one or anything more than him, 
we are not worthy of him. He promises us that if we subordinate aU other things to 
him and to his service^ we shall receive a large reward at his hands (see Matt. x. 37 ; 
Mark x. 28—30). 

Vera. 6, 22, 31, 42, 80, 110.— Coi'* Word and shame. There are— 

I. The three kinds of bhaue. 1. The shame of which we need not be ashamed ; 
of which we may be proud — " the " reproaches of Christ; " being disregarded and even 
despised because we are loyal to our Lord, and true to the convictions we have learnt 
of him ; the reproach which purity sometimes suffers at the hands of laxity, and 
integrity from the lips of dishonesty, and devotion from the ribaldry of ungodliness. 
This is all to our credit, and does us honour. But then there is : 2. Self-reproach, the 
accusation of our own conscience. There is also : 3. The condemnation of the good ; 
that strong and sometimes stern reprobation with which an instructed society visits 
the crime, the vice, the cruelty, the selfishness, the wrong-doing which comes before its 
tribunal, and calls for its verdict. 

II. Cub true suppoet in honoubable shame. This is found in what QoA'b 
Word tells us of: 1. Our Lord's esteem and strong approval (Matt. v. 10 — 12). 
2. His own example. He " suffered the contradiction of sinners against himself," and 
stooped to the lowliest shame, "even to the death of the cross." 3. Our hope. 
" Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness." 

nL The true preservative fbom the shame we should feab. This also 
God's Word affords us, for it supplies : 1. The constant, the eternal principles which 
save from sin and wrong — truth, probity, purity, temperance, faithfulness, etc. 2. The 
strongest inducements to integrity — that fear of God and love of Jesus Christ which 
will make us shrink sensitively from all that grieves his Spirit, and which will lead us 
to pursue that path which ends in his large reward. 

Vers. 9, 63, 74, 113, 115. — The way of life : the young. Our attention is called to— 

I. The way of life ; especially as it presents itself to the young. It is interesting 
to look forward to a long journey ; to anticipate the scenes that will be witnessed, the 
companionships that will be formed, the memories that will be gathered for years to 
come, etc. But how much more interesting to look forward to the journey of life still 
in prospect ; to anticipate its joys, it successes, its triumphs ; to hope for its friendships 
and achievements ; to guard against its dangers and its mistakes! The uncertainties 
of the future in the case of the young, the jiossibilities of failure or of victory, make 
the earlier years of life to be fraught with the deepest interest, 

II. The secret of bdccess. This is twofold. 1. It is found in numly thought- 
fulness. How shall a young man make his course sweet and clean and pure ? " By 
taking heed thereto ; " by refusing to treat his life with levity, to let things take their 
own course, to make his "way" nothing but a "chapter of accidents ; " by determining 
that it shall be a njatter of intelligent, deliberate choice ; by devoting to that most 
serious subject his most earnest consideration, and bringing to bear upon it the full 
faculties of iiis nature. 2. It is found in Divine guidance — " according to thy Word." 
And this "Word" (1) counsels the a j plication oi holy principlet — those of truthfulness, 
purity, temperance, honesty, generotity, etc. ; (2) lays great stress on right companion- 



122 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxix 1—176. 

ships. Here is: (a) Rejection of some — the resolute refusal to admit to our confidence 
those who are unwi rthy of it. I hate " vain thoughts," or " doubters, sceptics, double- 
minded men " (ver. 113) ; the peremptory dismissal from friendship of those who are 
unprincipled (ver. 115). (b) Admission of others. (Vers. 63, 74.) Very few things go 
BO far to decide the way of life as the choice of CDmpanious. Associate with the 
frivolous or the sceptical, and the path of life leads downward to folly, unbelief, ruin; 
walk with the wise, the earnest, the godly, and that path leads upward to wisdom, 
virtue, usefulness, heaven. 

Vers. 29, 30, 128, 163. — The false way and the false word. The love of Divine 
truth cannot coexist with the tolerance of any kind of falsity; they are mutually 
exclusive. We have — 

I. The false way and the false word. 1. The false way. This may be the 
way of (1) religious error, involving the miserable falsities and the dark immoralities 
of heathenism ; (2) religious Rffectation, the making pretence of conviction which is 
not held, and of feelings which are not felt ; (3) vice, which cheats by promising con- 
tinued pleasure and yielding dissatisfaction, pain, shame, and death ; (4) vanity, which 
also fails to keep its promise, holding out high hopes at the start, but ending in 
disenchantment, dreariness, and disgust; (5) procrastination, which beguiles and 
betrays. 2. The false word. This may be either (1) falsehood itself — the open, 
unblushing lie ; or (2) ialse suggestion — keeping to the truth in word, but conveying 
an essentially false idea; or (3) exaggeration, which is one part truth and one part 
falsehood, the former being often just enough to float the latter without excusing or 
even extenuating the wrong. 

II. The holt and wise hatred op evil. "I hate;" "I hate and abhor." 
These strong words are not too strong. We are " to abhor that which is evil ; " to turn 
towards it a spirit of uttermost aversion. This is: 1. Holy; for it is God-like. 
"Lying lips are an abomination'' to him. It is Christ-like. We know what he 
thought of the pretentiousness of an unreal and worldly pietism (see Matt, xxiii.). 
2. It is wise ; for falsity of thought and speech undermines character, dissociates from 
the true and good, leads down to spiritual and eternal death. 

III. The bight affection. It is well, indeed, for those who can say, " Now love I 
thy Law ; " it is everything to delight in the loving, cleansing, upholding truth of Gbd; 
and, more especially, to love and therefore follow him who himself is the Truth and 
the Wisdom of God (John xiv. 6 ; 1 Cor. i. 24). 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 176. — Introductory to whole psalm. L Whom was it wbittkn by? 
1. Some assert that it is David's work. They profess to be able to find proofs of his 
style and manner, and there is no limit to the laudations they pass on this psalm; but 
extravagant rhetoric proves nothing. 2. But all the chief and most reliable qf expositors 
refuse to admit the Davidic authorship. The style is far later thun that of David. In 
the Lamentations of Jeremiah there is a similar alphabetical composition. It is alto- 
gether an artificial and didactic composition, widely different from that which we have 
most reason to assign to the age and pen of David. Moreover, so far as we know, that 
general reading of the Law, which this psalm presupposes, could not have been without 
the wide circulation of copies of the Law. But of such circulation we have no evidence 
until the time of Ezra. Moreover, the life of David, as it is portrayed in the Scriptures, 
seems quite out of keeping with the tone, spirit, and allusions of this psalm. 3. It is 
not possible to name any individual person as the author. But we gather from the 
psalm that it was written by a devoted servant of God, whoever he may have been ; 
that he was probably a young man — one of those of whom St. John would say, " I have 
written unto you young men, because ye are strong, and have overcome the wicked 
one." Vers. 9, 99, 100, warrant the supposition that he was young. But, never- 
theless, deeply taught of God to love the Word of God, and to continually feed upon it. 
Very lowly minded and humble before God. See the general tone of the psalm, and 
especially the last eight verses. He seems to have been much tried (yers. 21, 23, 36, 37). 



PS. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 123 

His one fear being lest he should prove unworthy, and be ashamed (vers. 6, 7, 22, 31). 
'If we were to look for one in whom the various conditions of authorship meet, we should 
turn to the Book of Daniel; either he himself, or one of those three noble Hebrew 
youths his book tells of, might well have been the writer of this psalm. 

II. Wherefore it was written. 1. Perhaps as a memoir of the writer's ovm 
experience, and for his own help. 2. But yet more probably for the instruction of 
others. Hence the alphabetic, acrostic style, which was adopted as an aid to memory ; 
just as preachers now divide their sermons into various heads. 3. And fur the glory 
of Ood — that his grace might be praised. 4. For the commendation of the Word of God. 
The psalmist would bear his emphatic testimony to the preciousness of that Word. 
6. And for the stirring up of those who should read the psalm to diligtnt search for the 
treasures of that Word. Personal testimony such as is so largely given in this psalm 
has ever great power over the minds of others. 

III. Its general ohabacteeistics. 1. It is from a believer to believers. The 
infidel and scoffer are not contemplated in the design of the psalm. 2. It is for the 
edification and growth in holiness of the people of God. 3. It is intensely spiritual. 
Bites and ceremonies and appeals to the mere reason are absent from it ; it speaks to 
the soul. 4. 2t is universal in character. Limited to no one period, to no one land, 
to no one nation, but for all. 5. Its spiritual force and power are witnessed to by the 
God-fearing of all ages. — S. 0. 

Vers. 1 — 176. — Characteristics of the Word of God as declared by the various names 
given to it in this psalm. There are eight such names. 

I. It is called the " Law." (Vers. 1, 18, 34, etc.) The word implies that which 
rules guides, directs, therefore a rule of conduct. And this was evidently the psalmist's 
meaning, God's Word was not something to be merely talked about, praised, or argued 
over, but it was to order a man's life, and be his constant guide. 

II. " Testimonies." The word signifies that which bears witness to. And the 
Word of God is this. 1. It bears witness to us of God, and of his will concerning us ; 
and : 2. It bears witness to our hearts of the acceptableness or wrong of our lives and 
conduct in the sight of God. It will ever bear true testimony, which it is at our peril 
if we neglect. By it God's sentence upon us will be determined. 

III. " Precepts." This expression comes from a word which signifies " that which 
is entrusted to us." And so God's Word is the deposit of faith, which we are to keep 
and guard. St. Paul declared, at the end of his career, " I have kept the faith ; " and 
he exhorted Timothy to "keep that which was committed unto" him. We shall be 
asked at the last what we have done with this precious entrustment. God's words 
to us are the talents which, whilst he is absent from our sight, we are to " occupy," 
that is, trade with, until the Lord comes. 

IV. " Statutes." The term is derived from a word which tells of that which ia 
engraved, definitely and clearly drawn, as a chart, a map, and so prescribes the way 
that is to be taken. And is not this true of the Word of God ? Is it not ever saying 
to us, "This is the way, walk ye in it"? How clear and plain is the course it marks 
out for us I And, perhaps, the psalmist thought also of the depth and clearness with 
which this word is written on the human heart, and especially on the believing heart. 
There God has engraved deeply and definitely his will for us. Christ, the Word, is the 
Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. 

V. "Commandments," That which is ordained, as the commander of an army 
orders what is to be done, God's people are the army of the living God, and in 
this holy war success is only to be gained by strict and diligent obedience to his 
commands. 

VI. " Judgments." This expression is used of the verdict in a court of law, that 
which has legal sanction, and which governs the sentence of the judge. And so the 
Word of God is the Divine sentence, and is in accordance with the law of nature, of 
reason, and of righteousness. Who are we to set up our flimsy ideas against the 
precedents, principles, and judgments of the righteous Judge ? 

VII. " Word." (Vers, 9, 11, 17, etc.) This answers to that sacred name of Christ, 
who is the Word of God. It tells, not of a written letter, a series of documents drawn 
up by men j but it is that inner word of God which the spirit of man hears — it may be 



124 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [Ps. cxix 1—176 

through the written or spoken Word, but it may be also inilependently of either. It is 
I hat Wiird which, if nut heard, no preaching or teaching of man is of any avaiL This 
is the Word we need to hear. 

VIII. " Wat." The road, the course, the path, along which God himself walks, 
and that in which he would have us walk. And that the Word of God is. It is the 
way of holiness, the King's highway, and blessed are they that walk therein. — S. 0. 

Vers. 1 — 8.—Whole-heart«d service of God. I. The dbsoription given ov such 
A8 EENDBB IT. 1. They are undeflled in the way. They are not merely in the way, 
but keep themselves undeflled. How difficult this I 2. They walk in the Law of the 
Lord. It is the habit of their live?, and its pleasure. 3. They keep his testimonies 
Keep them in their memory, their affection, and their conduct. 4. They seek him with 
the whole heart. This sadly rare. The mass of Christians are of a divided heart; bui 
whole-hearted service, how rare this is I 5. They do no iniquity. It is possible not tu 
sin, and to keep a conscience void of offence both towards God and towards man. 

II. Thbt ABE DECLABBD TO BB " BLESSED." And that they are so let all experience 
telL Cei'tainly half-hearted service can lay no claim to such blessedness. Such have 
just enough religion to spoil them for the world, but not near enough to give them the 
blessedness here spoken of. Theirs is a miserable round of sinning and repenting, 
falling down and rising up again, a life under the perpetual rebuke of conscience and 
the sense of God's displeasure. But the life told of here in this psalm is lived in the 
sunshine of the love of God, and in the possession of that loving-kindness which is 
better than life. 

III. StJCH 8BBVI0E IS THE ONLY ONB THAT ANSWBB8 TO God's COMMAND. (Vcr. 4.) 

It is that which he has specially enjoined. Anything less would be dishonouring to 
him and disastrous to us, whilst this gloriSes him, and is for us most blessed. 

IV. The believee knows this and longs fob it. (Ver. 5.) The vision of the 
true life has been shown him, and he desires it with a great desire. He would be holy 
as God is holy. And he has good reasons ; for : 1. This only will give him confidence 
be/ore men, and, what is more important, before God. If he has it not, he must " be 
ashamed." 2. It will enable him to offer worthy praise — upraise with uprightness of 
heart (ver. 7). Insincerity, balf-heartedness, vitiates and destroys all praise such as 
God can accept. He turns from it. 

V. ThEREFOBE in deep H0MILITT HE CONSEOBATEB HIMSELF TO GOD. 1. " i WHI 

keep thy statutes." It is a sacred vow. He knew that only in the path of obedience 
coidd he hope to realize what he so longed for. 2. But he says this in deep humility. 
" Ob forsake me not utterly 1 " He knows that God might justly do this, but he 
trembles lest he should. — S. C. 

Ver. 5. — Longing after holiness. L Thb fbatbb o» oub text eisbb 0p fbom 
MAinr HEABTs. 1. From even the careiess and the worldling. They, not seldom, have 
to eat of the fruit of their own ways, and it is nauseoiis to their taste. They often 
realize how wrong they are, and then there rises up from their hearts such prayer as 
this. Only, alas I these desires fade away so soon. 2. From the beginner in the Divine 
l(fe — the newly regenerate. This is the holy, healthy appetite of such a soul. Not 
alone desire for being saved from hell or admitted to heaven, bi\t to be made like God, 
and so, well-pleasing to him. 3. The backslider. No more miserable soul can live on 
the earth than the backslider. Again and again is he made conscious of his wretched 
folly in leaving the ways of God, and he mourns and yearns for the better way. It ii 
God who will not liglitly let them go : it is his call; let such listen to it and obey, and 
that at once. Then this good desire may be as the slender thread which draws up the 
cord to the prisoner in the dungeon, and that the trusty rope whereby escape is gained. 
So this desire, if well used, may draw to you other gifts of God's grace, and they yet 
more, and so, blessed deliverance shall be yours. 4. 7%e earnest believer. For he sees 
defects in himself where others do not, and is conscious of failure where others only 
praise his goodness. But he has an ideal, a vision of God, after which he is for ever 
panting, and hence this prayer, " Oh that my ways were directed," etc. 1 

II. The beabon of tuis. 1. It is the way in which Christ walked. Every place 
where he has been is invested "iih a o'larra and delight to those who love him. 



PS. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 126 



"Those holy fields, 
Over whose aorea walked tliose blessed feet." 

How many love to walk there likewise ! But it la not many who can do this literally ; 
V et in the holy ways of love to God, and obedience and faith, in which he ever walked, 
we may walk if we will. 2. It is the way for which we were designed. Nothing works 
well in that for which it was not intended. The delicate instiunients of the mathe- 
matician will not serve for the coarse work of the artisan. And so with mau's nature — 
it ia made for God, and in his obedience finds its real welfare. 3. It it the way of peace. 
1. And of eternal life. 
IIL But fob this wx need God's direction. — S. 0. 

Ver. 6. — How to steer dear of shame. L We all shrink from bhaub. Whether 
,t be: 1. Before our own conscience. An inward blush, though unseen by any 
■'ellow-man, is to many, and to all who are capable of it, a source of pain, and to some 
)f very real pain. To be ashamed of one's self is the reverse of pleasant. 2. Tet mm-e, 
\efore our fellow-men. That has often driven men to self-destruction, so intolerable has 
It been. Or : 3. Before Ood. (See Pa. xL 12.) And who has not known, by reason 
of ingratitude and sin, what this shame is? And there is the last awful shame — that : 
i. Before the Lord at his coming. (1 John ii. 28.) May he keep us from that I 

II. The sure way of avoiding it. By having "respect unto all thy command- 
ments." 1. But can any one have respect unto all ffod's commandments f Not so as 
to merit salvation thereby ; for " by the works of the Law shall," etc. And even if 
ve could for the future, what about the past? People often talk of turning over a new 
eaf, but what of the old ones? The new leaf will not blot out those old ones. If a 
-<uui has broken the law of his country in the past, the plea that he will never do the 
uke again will not avail for his pardon. 2. But in reference to OotPs commandmmits 
ii iipomble (ver. 3) to " do no iniquity.'' Christ will keep the soul that daily, hourly, 
trusts in him. As the pebble that lies in the bed of the stream is ever kept bright and 
clean by the constantly flowing water that passes over it, so he who will " walk in the 
light," that is, honestly strive to live in such wise as that his whole conduct will bear 
God's light, and who will, so to speak, keep touch with Christ, continually looking to 
him for grace, he will find that the blood of Christ does, as a fact of experience, cleanse 
him, keep cleansing him, from all sin. There are thousands that can attest this. 
And : 3. This is what we should desire. Not out of dread of wrath, but out of love 
for God (Ps. Ixiii.), has come to be our deep longing. 4. Such desire will lead to conduct 
very different frma that of most. For most men do not have respect unto all Gkid's 
commandments. They may be public duties, but not private ones. So the commands 
of the first table, but not those of the second, or it may be vice versa. Or in great 
matters, but not in the little ones of daily life. The agreeable duties, but not the 
disagreeable. 

in. But he who will hate bespeot unto all God's oohuandments, ihaia 

NOT only avoid shame, BUT BE FILLED WITH THE LOVE OF GoO. — S. 0. 

Vers, 9 — 16. — Sanctified through the truth. We have here — 

I. A DIFFICULT QUESTION. " Wherewithal shall a young man," etc.? (ver. 9), 1. The 
very word " wherewithal " implies this. It seems to suggest that all manner of means 
had been tried, but found inadequate. 2. It is also implied that the way is already 
defiled. And this most true, as most sad. The young man starts with an evil bias, 
and he has made this stronger than before by frequent compliance with it. So that it 
is not a clean way that has to be kept clean — that is difficult enough, but a defiled way 
that has to be made clean. 3. And youth is so open to temptation. The passions and 
appetites of the body clamouring like a set of foul harpies for indulgence. The mind, 
impatient of control, giving heed to all manner of unbelief and doubt and denial of the 
truth ; the heart inexperienced and untaught, ready to be ensnared with the varied 
deceits of the world, the flesh, and the devil. Here is the fuel ready and the lire, and 
they come together in youth. What can prevent the conflagration? 

II. Bur IT IS NOT A QUESTION THAT CANNOT BE ANSWERED. It has been again 
mit\ a^ain. See the history of Joseph ; of Daniel and the noble Hebrew youths in exile 



126 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. cxix. 1—176, 

with him ; see the young men to whom St. John writes (1 John ii. 13, 14). And there 
are many such to-day, glory be to God 1 

III. Here we are told how the question ib answered. "By taking heed 
thereto," etc. (ver. 9). 1. There must be taking heed to the way : thought and care 
given to it. It will not come right by chance, or when we are asleep, but it will need 
strenuous endeavours. 2. And this must he according to Ood's Word. For that Word 
supplies the pattern and model of such cleansed way ; especially in Christ, " who did 
no sin," who was " holy, harmless, and undefiled." And it supplies the all-constraining 
motives — the love of God, the cross of Christ, the beauty of holiness, the eternal 
reward. And it gives the wisest counsel as to all holy living ; there the right road is 
marked out for us. God's Word is a sure guide (ver. 105). And it points to the one 
source of help — the Holy Spirit of God, by whom God causes us to will and to do 
according to his good pleasure. 3. And all this he had done. See the following verses 
in this section. He tells how he had sought God with the whole heart, had hidden 
God's Word in his heart, etc., so that he had come to rejoice therein ; and this, doubtless, 
because of their help. — S. 0. 

Vers. 17 — 24. — TJie soul's longing unto God's Word. Such seems to be the theme of 
this third section of this psalm. This longing is shown — 

I. In his desire fob God's chief meboieb only that he mat keep GJod's Word. 
If most of us were called on to fill up this ver. 17 after the word "and," what should 
we insert V Most desire to live and have God's bounty, that they may get rich and 
become prosperous or achieve some other earthly good. But the psalmist desires God's 
bounty and life only that, etc. What an estimate of that Word does such prayer show ! 

II. In his peateb for open vision. (Ver. 18.) He desires this because he is 
certain that there are wondrous things in God's Word which a* yet he has never seen, and 
which he never will see until God doth open his eyes. And this is true of us all. To 
how many the Bible is all dark and dull, incomprehensible in many parts, and void of 
interest in others ! It is because the films of sin and prejudice have rendered their 
eyesight dark and dull. Let their eyes be but opened, and they will behold, not, as 
now they do, mere words, but wondrous things out of God's Law. 

III. In his piteous plea that God's Word mat not be hidden from hem. " I 
am a stranger in the earth." Hence homeless, friendless, helpless, with none to 
sympathize or succour, lonely, unused to the ways of those around him, desolate in 
heart, and often in all else. Therefore thou who hast commanded thy people to show 
kindness to strangers, will not thou do so for me? Hide not thy commandments from 
me, for they are to me as home and friends and all needful help. Illust. : Eobinsoa 
Crusoe's joy on finding a copy of the Bible when on his desert Island. The joy of the 
persecuted Malagasy in the Scriptures they had managed to preserve. 

IV. By his deep distress when God's Word is withheld from him. (Ver. 20.) 
He may have had the letter of the Scriptures, but what he wanted was to find God in 
those Scriptures. Until this longing was satisfied, " all times " were alike sad to him. 
They who have known the joy of God's manifestations through his Word will know 
no joy until they are thus blessed again. 

V. By his deprecation of the doom of those who despise God's Word. (Ver. 
21.) Misery, shame, and ruin are along the path they trt-ad — a path which he would 
ever shun. It is well for us to look steadily on to the end of the sinner's path — the 
broad road — that we may the more steadily adhere to the ways of the Lord. 

VI. By his conviction of the sure deliverance there is for him in God's 
Word. 1. From reproach and contempt. (See homily on ver. 6.) He had kept God's 
testimonies, and he knew that therefore re|)roach and contempt in all their power to 
distress or harm him would be taken away. 2. From all fear of man. (Ver. 23.) 
Princes may, and probably did, strive to browbeat and terrify him — as with Paul, 
Luther, and many such another ; but the memory of God's Word mused and meditated 
ipon made his aoul strong. How true is the verse I — 

" Fear him, ye saints ; and you will then 
Have nothing else to fear: 
Make you his service your dellghti 
Your wants shall be liis care." 



re. fflox. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PSALM3. 127 

Vll. By his confession of the oood he had sot out of it. (Ver. 24.) I. God't 
testimonies had heen his delight. See how our Saviour delighted in God's Word. 2. ffis 
counsellors. No one finds God's Word his delight unless he first makes it his 
counsellor. But if we will, then, etc. — S. 0. 

Vers. 25 — 32. — Clinging to God. Such seems to be the tone and spirit of this 
section. There has heen the waking up to a great peril, and hence there has come the 
lightening of the grasp on God, the clinging to him with the greater tenacity hecauso 
of the one peril seen and felt. 

I. The penitent confession and prater. (Ver. 1.) The psalmist owns that the 
world is getting too much and terrible power over him ; that his soul, instead of 
mounting up to God in holy aspiration and endeavour, cleaves to the dust ; and he 
dreads lest he should fall away altogether, and therefore prays, " Quicken thou 
me," etc. 

II. He ENConBAOEB himself bt recallino God's answers to his praters in the 
PAST. When before he bad made like confession and supplication, it had not been in 
vain. 

III. He PRATS DEFINITELT for what he feels will really help him. 1. That Ood 
should teach him his statutes. (Ver. 26.) That God should do this ; he cannot teach 
himself, others cannot teach him, but G'ld can. This is what we all want. 2. That 
Ood should make him understand his Word. He had heard it, read it, but he wanted 
that deep realization of it which only a true understanding of it could supply. 3. And 
he wanted this that he might bear effectual testimony. " So shall I talk," etc. (ver. 
27). Such testimony would not only bless others, but would react on himself, as it 
ever does, and would be one of the effectual ways in which God would quicken him. 

IV. He TELLS THE LoKD HOW GREAT HIS TROUBLE IS, and prays and pleads for help. 
1. His trouble was that he /eared he was losing hold of Ood. He was breaking his 
heart over it, for, to a godly man, there is no greater trouble than to feel as if every 
good in him, all that God had given him of his grace, were falling away from him. 
That is trouble indeed. 2. Ee prays for help. " Strengthen thou me." As if he 
would say he could not hold on much longer ; unless help came, he must give way. 
3. Se pleads the Word of Ood. " According to thy Word " (see homily on ver. 25). 

V. He CONFESSES AND PKAYS AGAINST THE EVIL WAT INTO WHICH HE HAD FALLEN 

" the way of lying." Not — so scholars say — the habit of falsehood and lies in common 
speech, but rather of unfaithfulness, falseness to God. Uttering vows and never 
fulfilling them, making holy resolves and forgetting and breaking them. How many 
do this ! How easy it is to fall into this way 1 We use strong impassioned expressions 
in hymns and prayers, and when we look for the corresponding acts they are not to be 
foimd. And this, like the veriest vice, does, as Burns says— 

** . . . hardens all within, 
And petrifies the feeling." 

Well, therefore, may he pray, " Remove from me," etc. He asks for two things : 1. 
The taking away of the old evil. In all spiritual reformation this must come first. 
Repentance is just this. Then : 2. The imparting of Ood^s Law. The forming and 
fashioning of the soul after that Law. 

VI. He makes PROTESTATION. 1. That his will is ever on Qod's side. (Ver. 30.) 
" I have chosen," etc. His deliberate choice and preference is, not the way of lying, 
but the way of truth, and. hence he keeps ever before him God's judgments. 2. That 
he has acted according to his resolve. He has stuck unto God's testimonies. He had 
held on, clung tightly. He could appeal to the Lord's knowledge of this, and plead that 
he should not be put to shame. 3. That he will live the quickened life if God will 
enlarge his heart by shedding abroad therein his own love and the knowledge of his 
will.— S. 0. 

Ver. 25. — " Quicken thou me." I. The deplorable condition that called foe 
THE answer to THIS PRATER. It was a Very sad one; for consider: 1. What it was 
that the psalmist confesses that his soul cleaved to. " The dust." By this contemptuous 
phrase he means thp things ol this world generally. And he is right in thus speakinji^ 



128 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxn. 1—174 

Not that in themselves the things of this world are no better than dust. Health, 
wealth, success, reputation, power, pleasure — the things that men strive after — these 
have their value, and that is far higher than mere dast. But it is when these things 
are put in opposition to, and too often preferred before — as they are — things that are 
spiritual and eternal, and that have to do with the destiny and character of the soul, 
that then they are rightly called " dust." And they are like the dust, not only by 
their comparative worthlessness, but for other reasons — their power to defile the soul. 
Even the believer, though, by the blood of Christ, he is made clean, yet needs — so 
Christ tells us — that he wash his feet (John xiii. 10). Contact with the world's dust, 
inevitable though it be, involves the continual need of the washing of the feet, that is, 
that portion of our spiritual nature that is exposed to the world's defiling power. And 
how blinding is this dust I Men can see nothing as it really is, when thus blinded. 
And how suggestive as to the destiny of the soul that cleaveth to it — ^to be driven 
away " like tlie chaff which the wind driveth away " 1 Its proper place is under our feet ; 
but how terrible that the soul should cleave to it ! 2. And that the soul should do this. 
For think of what the soul of man is. Its nature — formed in the image of Q-od. Its 
capacity — able to commune with God, to become like God. Its destiny— eternal blessed- 
ness or woe. The cost of its redemption — nothing less than the precious blood of Christ. 
The strife that is ever going on for its possession — between the gracious powers of 
heaven on the one side, and the awful powers of hell on the otiier. Can that be of small 
account concerning which all this can be said ? And yet it is this soul which, too 
often, cleaves to the dust 3. And that the soul sho^tld cleave to it. Tiie attractions 
of this world we cannot but see, and their fascination we cannot but feel, and the dievil 
is ever busy to make that attraction more fascinating still. But that we, the redeemed 
of the Lord, the temples of the Holy Ghost, should yield to this, and not only yield, 
but be so mastered as to deave thereto, as the limpet cleaves to the rock, spite of all 
efforts to detach it, — ^how deplorably sad all this is ! And yet our consciences must own 
how deplorably common a fact this is. Blessed be God, if we are led to see it, to mourn 
over it, to confess it, as here ; and, best of all to turn to the sure remedy. For note — 
IL The help that is obaved. " Quicken thou me." 1. The psalmist was wont 
to pray this prayer very often. Seven times over in this psalm does it occur (vers. 25, 
37, 40, 88, 149, 150, 159). 2. What does he mean hy it t Not the bestowment of 
spiritual life — ^he had this already, or he would never have made this confession and 
prayer ; but " more life and fuller," tlie enlivening and reinvigoration of the soul, — this 
is what he craved. 3. And he titrns to Ood for this. It is God's work ; he alone can 
answer this prayer. Man does not even know what life in its meanest forms is, much 
less is he able to create it. How, then, should he be competent when it is the highest 
form of life that is needed ? 4, But this does not mean that we are to he ahsoluUHy 
passive in the matter. We are not. We can and we must pray for it, as does the 
psalmist here. 5. And never does God refuse such prayer when coming from a sincere 
heart. See the miracles of our Lord — how he quickened into life again the child- 
daughter of Jairus ; the young man, the widow's son ; and Lazarus, on whom corrup- 
tion had already fastened. Nothing can bar his power. 

III. The plea that is ubgbd. " According to thy Word." This answers to our 
" through Jesus Christ our Lord ; " for he was the Word, the means by which we read 
the heart of God. He was the Word incarnate. But in the days before his advent, 
the Word which is here told of served the same end ; not so much the written Word 
as that message of God to the soul which came through the written or spoken Word. 
Now, according to that, in harmony with the love, truth, wisdom, power, of that, so is 
it prayed, " Quicken thou me." 

IV. Let ns pbat this prater. Maybe we need it, though we do not think bo. 
Dislike of prayer and holy service, fret and anxiety, worry and continual care about 
earthly things for ourselves or for our children, — such are some of the signs that we 
need thus to pray. And think of the barm that such cleaving to the dust must ever 
involve. — S. 0. 

Ver. 31. — Tenacity. I. Wb have here an illustration of it. «*I have stuck 
unto," etc. If, as we believe, this psalm is the production of one who in the days ot 
Israel's exile was pressed upon by ail manner of inducements to renounce his faith in 



PS. oxa. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PBALM8. 12« 

God, but who, like Daniel and his oompanionB, stuck onto Qod'a testimonlei^ then 
hiB history would justify the assertion here made. And there have been many 
such. 

n. Tenacity will always be tbied. 1. li could not the be known. It might 
be professed, but could never be proved. Hence : 2. Oar Lord was wont to teat the 
tineerity of all who came to him. And he does so still. See the history of the Syro- 

Ehoenician woman. How terrible was the strain and test to which she was subjected, 
ut which, as the Lord knew she would, she triumphantly endured I 
IIL It IB A VERT BLESSED GIFT. Fof, as this verse suggests : 1. It delivers from 
thame. The shame of a rebuking conscience ; of men's contempt ; of God's being 
ashamed of us ; and of our dishonouring God. The want of such tenacity involves all 
this shame ; and a terrible thiug it is. 2. It secures great blessing. Inward peace and 
confidence towards God; the respect and admiration of our fellow-men; they cannot 
help themselves; they must admire such steadfastness; they ever have done so, and 
thus the blood of the martyrs has become the seed of the Church. It receives also 
God's great reward (Matt. x. 32), and brings glory to him now. 

IV. It 18 ATTAINABLE BY ALL. This may seem an exaggerated, if not an untrue, 
Btatement, but it is neither. No doubt there are men, who by their temperament and 
physical constitution, their sound health and well-balanced and not too susceptible 
nervous organization, seem incapable of fear ; but there are others, and these the majority, 
who seem constitutionally weak. But, nevertheless, this blessed enduement of strength 
all may have. See St. Peter giving way and cowardly denying his Lord at the challenge 
of a servant-girl ; and that same man, when emptied of his self-confidence and baptizol 
with the Holy Spirit, dauntless and firm as a rock. Out of weakness he, as myriads 
more, was made strong. God is able to strengthen us with all might by his Spirit in 
the inner man. Let self-trust go, his love come in, and the Spirit fill us, and so this 
great gift shall be ours.— S. 0. 

Ver. 32. — Bwming the way of OooTt eommandmentt. L What thib is. 1. It ii 
not a common thing. In ordinary men you do not see it at all ; they very often run, 
and at headlong speed, but it is the reverse of the way told of here. And even when 
we have become Christians, there is too often only a creeping along, a very slow 
walking, and that interrupted by many a halt, and sometimes by positive turning back; 
but how little of this running I 2. For running meant increased energy in Oo(P$ 
ierviee. The very word implies that. It is the very opposite of listlessness, taking 
our ease, and of all indifierence. Go along by the side of a country mill-stream in the 
hot summer months. As you come to the mill you hear no sound. The pleasant beat 
of the wheel, the murmur of the grinding, and the cool plash of the water on the far 
side of the stream, are all missing. You draw near, and you see the cause. The 
stream has well-nigh disappeared ; the muddy banks are steaming in the heat ; there 
is but a small dribble of water at the bottom; the mill-wheel is motionless and 
blistering in the sun. But come that way again after the spring or autumn rains, or 
during the wet winter months. How the water rushes along I how it whirls the mill- 
wheel round 1 how it compels the miller to find an overflow, lest its force do serious 
damage 1 Now, the contrast between the miserable, scant supply of water in the hot 
■ummer months, and that other full, rushing flow, is no greater than that between the 
common life of too many Christians and that running in the way of God's command- 
ments of which the psalm here tells. 3. And ca/reftd laying aside of hindrances. 
Many of our hindrances allow of quiet walking, but not of running (cf. Heb. xiL 1). 
4. More steadfast looking to the end of the way. " Looking unto Jesus." If we look 
aside, we linger, swerve, and slacken our pace. 5. Greater joy in God's service. 
Running is a symbol of joy (Acts iii. 8). 

IL It is vebt desieaule. 1. For its effects on our own spiritual life. 2. For its 
influence on the world. 3. And on the Church. 4. And, above all, for the honour of 
Christ. Note — 

III. Its condition. "When thou shalt enlarge my heart." That is: 1. The 
understanding; that we may see and know the truth. 2. The affections; that we may 
feel it. 3. The conscience ; that we may be aroused. 4. The will ; that we may resolve. 
-S.0. 

PSALIIB HL K 



180 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxn. i 176 

Vers. 33— 40. — " Teach me, Lord." The verses of this section contain, apparently, 
an enumeration of various facts which rendered it essential that the Lord should teach 
him, if ever he were to learn. As it has been said, the man who wrote thb psalm 
knew two things — first, that there was something he must and would learn, for all his 
well-being depended upon it; and this something was the Word of God, which he 
calls now by one name and now by another. But he knew a second thing, and that 
was — he could never teach himself ; God must teach him. This is the burden of his 
prayer, not only in this section, but throughout the psalm. For the difficulties in the 
w«y of his acquiring this knowledge were many and great. He suggests some of them 
here. 

L Lack of febsbvebance. What knowledge he already had gained was sufficient 
to make him set out on the way ; but soon he became ready to halt, and did halt, God 
must instruct him if he were ever to continue steadily on to the end. " Ye did run 
well; who did hinder you?" So said St. Paul to some of his converts: and how often 
the like has to be said still (cf. the seed on the stony ground. Matt, ziii.) I 

II. Half-beabtedness. (Ver. 34.) Here was another difficulty, as it is to this 
day. People can be got to keep part of the Law of Q<A, but not all of it— they will 
make some reserves. And if they are not conscious of this, they know that it is not 
with the "whole heart" that they serve God. The psalmist confesses his failure here, 
and prays that God would so give him understanding that he may observe God's Law 
with his whole heart. 

IIL Inabilitt to do what he would. He delighted in the path of God's com- 
mandments (ver. 35), but yet was unable " to go " therein. No doubt he could talk 
•bout it, pray about it, feel warmly, speak fervently, and desire sincerely about it, but 
then came this miserable powerlessness which he asks GK>d to overcome, and to makt 
him " go in," etc, (Bom. viL 14—19). Here is another reason for seeking the help of 
God, and it exists stilL 

lY. CoVETOUSNEBs. (Ver. 36.) If the Lord does teach the soul, then there will 
follow "understanding" (ver. 34) — power of will (ver. 35) and inclination of the heart 
to Ck>d'B testimonies (ver. 36), so that all these requests are but different forms of that 
with which the section begins, " Teach me, Lord." And here in this thirty-sixth 
verse he names another hindrance — covetousness, St. Paul speaks of it as " the root of 
all evil," as indeed it is (cf. 1 Tim, vi, 9, 10 ; Col. iiL 5 ; Matt. xiiL 22). It so drags 
the heart away from God, that only he can turn it back again. 

V, Love of vanity. (Ver. 37.) The runner in the race that does not keep his eye 
fixed steadily on the goal, but turns his eyes now to this side and now to that, whenever 
they are attracted by some vanity, will indeed need quickening in God's way. This 
wandering gaze of the soul, how many failures in the Christian race is it answer- 
able for I 

VL Instabilitt. Here it is again, as in vers. 35 and 40 — delighting in the path of 
God's commandments, yet needing power to go ; so now here is the soul devoted to 
God's fear, but yet needing to be establislied. The Word of God is not insecure and 
unstable, but the soul is so in regard to it. As to its truth, as to its value, as to its 
power. Lord, make it sure to us 1 

VIL Feab of bepboaoh. This does, indeed, bring a snare. How many know God's 
Judgments are good, but yet fear " reproach " I 

Vni. Lack of bpibitual enebot. (Ver. 40.) Longing, yet unable to attain. 
Longing without God's quickening will not avail. — S. 0. 

Vers. 41—48. — What Ood't salvation does for a man. This section begins with 
fervent prayer for the coming of God's salvation unto the psalmist. He wants to have 
a personal realization of it. And he proceeds to tell wherefore he thus prays. His 
reasons may well be ours. 

I. It enables him ahd nEOES him to answer him that bepboacheth. (Ver. 42.) 
If a man knows that God's salvation has come to him, he has that in his conscious 
possession which will make him despise, as mere idle tales, all and every reproach of the 
scoffer and the unbeliever. They may as well deny or decry the light of the sun as to 
do the like for that salvation in which the soul rejoices. His only fear is lest he should 
not be able to give clear testimony — ^lest, whilst he feeU it in his heart, he should b« 



M. oxnr. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 131 



nnaUe to declare it with his lips ; hence he prays (ver. 43), " Take not . . . out of my 
month." God will not take it out of his heart, hut he may out of his mouth, hy 
refusing him power or opportunity of utterance. He longs to bear hold testimony for 
Qod and his salvation. 

II. Endues him with persevebino obaoe. (Ver. 44.) He will never desire to 
forsake the Law of Qod, but will go on therein continually for ever and ever. Its ways 
are ways of pleasamtness (Prov. ill. 17). 

III. Causes him to walk at libebtt. (G^L ▼. 1 ; John viii. 36.) Ghrist'a yoke 
will give rest ; but then we must have it really on, not half on and half off, for then 
it frets and chafes and galls. How could it be otherwise? The liberty of the children 
of God is glorious. 

IV. Gives him fearlessness. (Ver. 46 ; cf. Matt. x. 18 — ^20.) 

V. And pubb delight. (Ver. 47.) There is such delight as is here told ot 
(vers. 16, 35 ; Ps. xxxvii. 4). This delight was "the meat to eat which ye know not of," 
of which our Saviour spoke (John iv. 32 — 34). And what servant of God is there that 
has not known this delight ? It is " the peace of God, which passeth all understanding " 
(Phil. iv. 7). 

VI. And holt besolve or oonseobation to God. (Ver. 48.) The lifting-up of 
the hands tells of solemn vows made to QoA (cf. Gen. xiv. 22). So here the psalmist 
takes his solemn oath — his acuiramentum — that he will be true to God. How often, 
when the sense of the infinite love of Qod has come into the soul, has the like vow 
been made t 

VII. Makes him to be eveb meditatino upon Qod. The run of his thoughts Is 
ever after God and his ways. — S. G. 

Vers. 49—56. — " Songs in the night." The comfort of God in time of trial Is ihe 
theme of this section. As to these songs, we are told — 

I. God gives them. (Ver. 49.) The Word which it is prayed the Lord would 
remember is God's own Word ; and it is told what that Word has done — " caused me 
to hope." This God's Word ever does. 

II. Thbt abb oub comfort in affliction. (Ver. 50.) And what a number of 
these precious words there are I There is no conceivable stress of soul which is not 
thought of and provided for by some fit and sure word of the comfort of Gud. 

III. They hold us fast in the right way. (Ver. 51.) To be held up to scorn 
and derision is more than most can bear ; they give way, yield, and swerve beneath its 
pitiless power ; but not so he to whom the comfort of God is known. The sense of his 
approval, the gleam of the crown of life, the anticipation of his " well done," aud of the 
joy of the Lord, hold fast the heart, and steady the wavering will. It has ever been so, 
and will ever be so. 

IV. Thbt bring to memory the vebdiot of God. (Ver. 52.) This : 1. When 
man's verdict has been dearly and cruelly given against us. (Ver. 51.) They deemed 
him a miserable fooL 2. When thinking of how Ood will Jtidge them who are now 
judging him. He can leave them to his tribunal, whence righteous judgment will go 
forui. 3. When contemplatiTig the high-handed wickedness of those that forsake OotPs 
Law. (Ver. 58.) Burning indignation and horror take hold of him at the sight of 
them, but again the memory of Gud's judgments has been his comfort. The history 
of Israel had recorded many such judgments. 

V. Thkt had bbightened the weabt joubnbt or thk day and thi dark 
HOUBS or BioBT. (Veia. 64, 55.) 

<* Snch songs have power to quiet 
The restless poise of oaie^ 
And come like benediotion 
TbaX follows after prayer. 

•And the night shall be filled with mnsk^ 
And the cares that infest the day 
Shall fold their tents like the Arabs, 
And as silently steal away." 

(H. W. LongfeOow.) 



132 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [f8. oxix. 1—176 

VI. But only the fatthpdi. oak hayb thbsx eosos. (Ver. 66.) How true 
this t The joy of the Lord couea not to the half-hearted and the compromiser and 
the unfaithful. But to him who keeps God's precepts they do come.— S. Gl 

Vers. 57 — 64. — Ood the Portion of his people. This may be understood either way : 
as the portion which God gives his people — he bestows himself upon them ; or the 
portion which they choose and claim. Probably the latter is the meaning here. They 
have turned their backs on the world as a portion, and have resolved that as for them 
they will he the Lord's, and he shall be theirs. Accordingly, we have given here 
sundry signs and effects of God being his people's Portion. 

I, AppKOPEiATioN. The word " my " denotes that. Until our faith in Gk)d advances 
to this personal appropriation of him, it will not do much for us. We must believe in 
Qod, not only as a Portion for his people, but each one of us must be able to say, " He 
is my Portion " (cf. Ps. xoi. 2). 

IL CoNBBCBATiON AND CONFESSION. " I havo Said that I would," etc. (ver. 57). Not 
only is there the inward resolve to live the life of obedience, but the open avowal 
thereof. Wonderful is the increased hold of God which confessing him gives to the soul. 

in. Supplication. " More of God " is the soul's craving and cry ; with the whole 
Wrt his favour is entreated (ver. 58). The hunger after God grows by what it feeds 
on. God ia the one only satisfying Portion of the soul (cf. Ps. Ixiii. 1, 2). His 
loving-kindness is deemed better than life. 

IV. Consideration. There will be the thinking on our ways. We shall consider 
them, examine them, hold them up to the light, so as to see if they be what God would 
have them be. And such consideration will be followed by its proper consequence — ^it 
will not stop short with itself, but will go on, and that speedily (ver. 60), to the 
practical result of turning "our feet unto," etc. (ver. 69). There is much consideration 
which never advances so far as this, much thought which never bears this blessed 
fruit. Then there will be— 

V. Consolation. This ever follows, never precedes, such practical consideration as 
that just spoken of. But it does follow. There will be trials to be met, and burdens 
to be borne, and many temptations; but there will be support and consolation abundant 
(vers. 61, 62). 

YI. Association. The instinct of the regenerate soul is to find others like itself. 
They will asjociate. let the cost be what it may. 

VII. Aspiration. The soul recognizes how full the earth is of God's mercy. It 
would enjoy more for itself. — S. 0. 

Vers. 65 — ^72. — The hlesHd effectt of affliction. L Thet abe confessed. (Ver. 65.) 
Did not the following verses tell us, we should hesitate to say that the frank confession, 
" Thou hast dealt well with thy servant," referred to afSictions that he had suffered. 
But such is the reference. Many a child of God has made the confession here on earth ; 
all will make it in heaven. 

IL We need the teaohino of God ere wb bee theu. (Ver. 66.) This is what 
is implied ; it is as if he bad said, " Unless thou dost teach me, I shall never be able to 
see that it is good for me that I have been afflicted." He would have the teaching, that 
he may yet more clearly see how well God hath dealt with him. But it is so ; for — 

III. Affliction often bebtobes and restbainb the boul. (Vers. 67, 71. See 
history of Manasseh, 2 Chron. xzxiij.) The burnt child dreads the fire. " Lord, with 
what care thou hast begirt us round 1 If the way of transgressors was not hard, we 
should all go that way. The meaning and intent of affliction is to keep us near and 
to draw us nearer to God. Happy are they who, when the storm of life beats hedvily, 
bide the more closely within the sure shelter of the love of God I And this is what 
G'ld would have us do. And what a holy restraint the memory of past affliction exer- 
cises upon us I The sin which before was very attractive has now, because branded 
with the dread marks of God's displeasure, lost most, if not all, of its attraction. And 
this is another end God designs. 

IV. Riohtlt bead, it pboveb the goodness of God. (Ver. 68.) It is because 
it is so often wrongly read that unbelief, pessimism, and a'helsm so largely prevail. 
But submission, prayer, trust, will ever lead to the right reading. 



P8. czix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 183 

V. They rendkb the praotioes op the pboud powerless to bo us harm. 
(Vers. 69, 70.) They would shrink from no falsehood to injure the godly, but they 
cannot separate him from the God in whom he trusts and delights. 

VI. They make God and his Word very precious. (Ver. 72.) We say, " A 
friend in need is a friend indeed." But if when in deep affliction Q-od came to our 
help, and sustained us under it, and sanctified us through it, and comforted us con- 
tinually, must not that God be precious to our soul ? Assuredly yes I — S. 0. 

Vers. 73 — SO.— The sustaining power of the Word of Ood. The psalmist has just 
come forth from some heavy affliction ; but all through it God's Word has been his 
stay; and some of the results of such God-sustained aiSiction are shown iivthis section. 
They may be classed under the three heads of— 

I. Conviction. This relates : 1. To the fact that his life has been M-dered of Qod. 
(Ver. 73.) " Thy hands have," etc. He is speaking not merely of his body, that 
Gbd created that, but rather he speaks of that as proof that all else conceroiug him had 
been made and fashioned of God — ^his life was according to the settled purpose and 
plan of God. " He knoweth the way that I take." Blessed is it when we come to 
recognize this truth ; for then shall we know that we are not the sport of mere caprice 
or blind chance, but are under the control of GnH, who cannot err, and who, " like as 
a father, pitieth his children." 2. That in righteousn-ess and faithfulness God had 
afflicted him. (Ver. 75.) Men find it very hard to say this now ; they never do s»y 
it of themselves; but God's grace can enable a man to say it, as here and hereafter in 
heaven we shall say it. But it is good to be able to say it now. 

II. Assurance (ver. 74) that his trust in God under his affliction would win for him 
the glad welcome of those who feared God. The warm welcome of the people of God 
is one of the many recompenses with which those who for Christ's sake suffer will be 
met (Matt. ux. 29). 

IIL Pbayerfui.kess. Note his petitions : 1. For understanding, so that he might 
learn, etc. (Ver. 73.) This is a petition he is perpetually offering (see vers. 31, 126, 
144, 169, 27, 100, etc.). It implies that if men did but understand, their hearts would 
tiim to God (Fss. xiv. 2 ; IxxxiL 5 ; Isa. vL 10). And, undoubtedly, it would be so. 
The failure is not in the intellect, but in the heart. 2. For more knowledge of Qod^t 
promised mercy (vers. 76, 77) ; so that he may be comforted thereby, and that be might 
live (ver. 77). Life without the realization of God's tender mercies would not be worth 
having. 3. For the bringing of the proud to shame, if so be God's will ; if it were not, 
then he would not be without help, for he would meditate in, etc. (ver. 78). 4. For 
the friendship of the good. How blessed to have this (ver. 79) I 6. For soundness of 
heart in God's statutes. The heart is the all-important thing. — S. Gl 

Vers. 81 — 88. — " Persecuted, hut not forsaken," L Persecuted. That he was so is 
clear from the verses before us. For he says : 1. " My soul fainteth" etc. (Ver. 81.) 
He was heart-sick at the long delay of the hoped-for help. Year after year, generation 
after generation, it has been at times the lot of God's people to suffer persecution. 
And then the piteous confession of these verses is heard. 2. " Mine eyes fail^ etc. 
(Ver. 82.) As one who steadily gazes out into the distance, looking for aid promised, 
expected, but does not come, at length his eyes become weary and dim, and his 
sorrow finds utterance in the plaintive words, " When wilt thou comfort me ? " Hard, 
indeed, is the lot of such. 3. Sis very countenance and his body generally showed the 
marks of his distress. (Ver. 83.) Like as a wine skin-bottle hung up in the smoke 
of the fire would blacken and shrivel, become dry, patched, wrinkled, and useless, so 
the deep lines and the wasted look and the shrunken form told of the inward anguish 
of the soul. 4. It was near the close of his life, and his persecution, so wrong and unjust, 
still continued. (Vers. 84 — 86.) They sought to trap him as if he were a wild beast 
(ver. 85). So did the ungodly deal with him. Persistent, cruel, cunning, unjust, ever 
seeking his life — ^how piteous such a condition 1 5. He was "almost consumed." (Ver. 
87.) As a brand blackened and charred, and all but burnt up and reduced to ashes. 
It is an emblem of uttermost distress. Yes; he was persecuted, and it was hard 
to bear. 

IL But he was not fobsaeen. 1. For the promises of God were his stay, H« 



134 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxix. 1—176, 

hoped in taem still (ver. 81). DM not forget God'a statutes. Forsook not bis precepts 
(vers. 83, 87). 2. He was sure that Ood wou^d fulfil his Word. (Ver. 84.) It was 
only a qupstion of " when ? " 3. His soul stiU turned to Ood. Praying for help 
(ver. 86). For quickening, so that he might keep hold of God's testimonies. Believing 
absolutely in the loving-kindness of God (ver. 88). Now, a man who can do all this, 
persecuted he may be, as this man was, but forsaken he is not. Oh the blessedness 
of real faith in God ! Life is often terribly stem. Gethsemane and Calvary are along 
the way God's people often have to take, though never can they be to us so awful aa 
they were to our Lord. But as unto him, so to us, light arisetb out of darkness; for 
such is the blessedness of the people of Gud. — S. C. 

Vers. 89 — 96. — A grateful confession of Divine aid. How fitly this section follows 
on the foregoing one I There was darkness, indeed ; but here is light. The psalmist 
celebrates — let us do so with him — the help of God. 

I. It is settled ra heaven fob EVEB that such aid shall be FOBTHCOMIKa. 

(Ver. 89.) Therefore: 1. No power of man can hinder it. It is "settled." 2. Nor 
any lapse of time. Generations may come and go, but that matters not. God's promise 
abides, even as the earth which he has established. 3. Nor any events or changes what- 
soever. (Ver. 91.) Divine decrees have ordained them, and all have to serve and 
minister thereto. Here is great consolation for the tried soul. 

II. It bubtainb the sebvant of God in uttebmost pebil. (Ver. 92.) But for 
God's settled love, which was full of delight for his servant, he could not have lived. 
God has ways and means by his Holy Spirit to so write his Word on our hearts, that 
they shall be filled with delight, and all the power of hell cannot destroy us. So was 
it here ; so will it be with all like-minded men. 

III. The expebience of its power makes it impossible fob the hemobt to 
LET IT GO. (Ver. 93.) If we have been "quickened" by it, as was the psalmist, 
memory and heart and will cleave to it with a tenacity which never relaxes, but 
ever tightens its bold. Nothing but the experience of religion in the heart will do 
this. Creeds and rituals and sacraments, reli°;ious profession and work, have all been 
proved frail and feeble in this respect; but he who knows by actual experience how 
Gud can quicken his soul will simply never leave him. 

IV. And leads to absolute self-sdbeendeb and confident tbost. (Ver. 94.) 
" I am thine." The man is no longer his own. " Save me" — I know thon wilt; such 
is the implied meaning. 

V. Is AN antidote to ALL FEAB. (Ver. 95.) What matters it that the wicked 
wait, etc. ? He will consider the testimonies of God, those borne to him by redeemed 
souls, those borne by them in the psalmist's own soul. Such considering banishes fear. 

VI. Thebe is nothing like it. All human schemes aud teachings are nought 
compared with thy commandment. — S. C. 

Vers. 97 — 104. — " how love I thy Law 1 " Then follows a series of reasons why. 

I. It FUBNI8HES HIM WITH HAPPY THOUGHT ALL THE DAT LONG. (Ver. 97.) It 

is good to cultivate the habit of turning our thoughts to the tilings of God as they are 
told of in his Word. The habit is not natural to us, but God, by his Spirit, will help 
us to cultivate it. And how full of help and blessedness it is, none but those who 
have acquired it can declare ; but such have declared this, as the psalmist here, again 
and again. 

IL With fbaotioal wisdom, so that he oan obdeb his way abight. This ii 
what is meant here by " wisdom " and " understanding." By means of it be can : 1. 
Outwit hit enemies (ver. 98), no matter how crafty their policy. 2. Become wiser than 
his teachers. They may be full of sound doctrine, but the soul that is partaker of God'i 
grace is wiser than they. 3. Understands more than the men of olden time. " Under- 
standing gotten by the precepts of the Word is better than that gotten by long 
experience." 

III. Holds him back fboh bin. (Ver. 101.) He has come to love righteousness 
and hate iniquity ; but be knows that if he is to keep in this mind he must refrain, 
etc. He that will go into sin grieves and banishes from his soul the Spirit of God. 
Many people desire to be holy, but they desire ever so many other things along with it^ 



M. cxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 135 



this, for example, that occasionally they may allow themselves in some evil way. 
And so they never attain to holiness ; such double-hearted ones never can. God naust 
teach us this (ver. 102). 

IV. Becomes his delight. (Ver. 103.) This is the meaning of the metaphor of 
this verse. 'I'lie soul has its relish as well as the palate. And it is a blessed thing 
when the soul has a real relish for the things of God. Christ said, " I delight to do 
thy will, my God." So was it foretold of him (Ps. xl.). And he himself said, 
" My meat and my drink is to do the will of him that sent me." The religion of fear, 
of conscience, of sense, of duty, of hope, of reward, is feeble — must be so — but tlie 
religion tljat delights in God is strong for all things. 

V. Gives holy hatred of all sin. (Ver. 104.) He whom God has taught so 
to understand will thus hate all sin. Blessed hatred is this.— S. 0. 

Vers. 105 — 112. — The ill aminafed path. We have here — 

I. A BLESSED FACT, WITNESSED TO BT THE EXPEBIENOE OF MYRIADS OF God's 

PEOPLE. (Ver. 105.) There has been no age of the world since God's revelation has 
been given, no period of life whether in youth or age, no rank of society from the 
lowest to the highest, no condition of life in which men have been placed, but what 
they have found tliis Word true. God's Word has counsel for every difBculty, comfort 
in every trouble, guidance in all perplexity. Men go wrong, not from want of knowledge 
of the right, but from unwilliugaess to follow the right. 

II. Notable results that follow. 1. A steadfast resolve to keep to this path. 
(Ver. 106.) The soul has seen how well it is to abide in God's way, and here declares 
that what it has seen and resolved upon it will also do. And this is the secret of the 
perseverance of the saints. They have known by experience hoV blessed the ways of 
the Lord are — that nothing will induce them to depart from them. Their one desire is 
to be found walking in the ways nf God more steadfastly and more vigorously. 2. The 
tout will turn to it in troiible. (Ver. 107.) Even the ungodly, when they are afflicted 
very much, will send for the minister, take down the hitherto neglected Bible, and 
begin to read it, under the influence of a conviction they have never been able to 
shake off, that here, after all, are to be found the words of eternal life, which can alone 
help them. But the godly soul at once turns to them. They are his songs in the 
night, the joy of his heart. 3. Unbounded gratitude. (Ver. 108.) For what, when 
we look back on our way, can we find that more makes up our grateful acknowledg- 
ments than the fact that God has so illumined our faith by his Word that we have 
been kept in the right way, and have not fallen ? Oh, the joys of this 1 May we all 
know it, as we may, if we will! Of course, it leads to the insatiable longing to know 
more of God's judgments, 4. Perpetual peril cannot drive him off from it. (Ver. 
109.) Such condition — " my soul continually in my hand " — ^by its distracting, .alarm- 
ing, depressing influence, is apt to banish all holy thought and all recollection of God's 
Word. Men have been known to become very beasts under such circumstances — 
selfish, sensual, brutal ; the sort of spirit which the sauve qui peut is ever seen to 
engender in the ordinary run of men. But how diSerent what is said herel^the calm, 
holy, soul-sustaining remembrance of God's Word. 5. 2%e traps and gnares which the 
imc&ed plant/or the soul utterly fail. (Ver. 110.) Keep in that illuminated path, and 
you may laugh at these snares. For they are never placed where the light shines on 
them, but where there is no light. 6. Desire that it may be the heritage ^ himself and 
his children after him. (Ver. 111.) He who knows the blessedness of what is here 
told of longs for it, not for himself alone, but for a heritage for those who shall come 
after him. 7. Steady guard upon t?te restless heart that would wander from thi$ path. 
fVer. 112.) Strenuous care must be taken — watchfulness and prayer— or else the 
deceitful heart will wander away. Who knows not this? 

III. How this blessedness mat be REALIZED. If the Word is to thus illumine 
our path, we must take the Word, keep it continually, and bring it to bear on the path 
we are to take. Many turn the light of the Word skywards, or backwards, or on the 
right hand or left. Hold it down on your path. — S. C. 

Vers. 113 — 120. — Deceit denounced and detested. The thoughts spoken of here are 
not mere idle thoughts, but deceitful and doul.le-niimled ones. We learn — 



13« THE BOOK OF PSALM& [f& oxn. 1— 17«i 

L Holt souls hate theu. (Ver. 113.) They constitute and create that luke> 
warmnesg which is so nauseous in the esteem of Christ (Rev. iii. 16). He would prefer 
that men were cold altogether rather than this (cf. also Elijah, 1 Einga XTiiL 21). 
This double-mindedness, ever seeking to serve QoA and mammon, compromising and 
tampering with tmth, well may it excite the hate of holy souls. For : 1, It dishmoun 
Ood. The man makes profession of religion, and men judge by what they see in him, 
and, instead of God being glorified, he is dishonoured day by day. 2. The OhwrA <^ 
Ood it weakened. Such men spread an awful contagion in a Oharch ; they chill the 
ardour of fervent souls, they encourage those who are like themselves. 3. The man 
himedf it in /ear/td peril. He is for ever saying, " Peace, peace," when there is no 
peace. The publicans and faarlots go into the kingdom of heaven before him. And who 
IS to arouse and waken him? 4. Se enjoyt rume (if the great hlessedrtese which evet 
aecompanies real religion and single-minded service of Ood. Such as peace of conscience: 
the Spirit never beareth witness to such that they are saved, and there is often a terribla 
misgiving, especially at the hour of death. Purity of heart ; that cannot be theirs. 
Calm amid trouble. Power to bless others, etc. For all these and other reasons such 
double-mindedness cannot but be hateful to all holy souls. 

n. But it 18 a condition yeby fbbvalent, nevebthelebs. Men like it ; it avoid* 
extremes; they would not be altogether without religion — that would be very sad; 
but yet they do not want to be considered as enthusiastic or fanatical ; it enables 
them to get on very well with the world, and to maintain a pleasant religious reputation 
at the same time. No wonder, therefore, that it is common. 

in. We ABE SHOWN HEBE HOW TO OAIN DELIYEBAKOE FBOU FT. 1. Let Ood Ic OUT 

Hiding-place and our Shield. When such thoughts assail us, as they often will, let 
us turn to God. It is not enough to drive away the wrong ; we must bring in the 
right. Therefore " with thoughts of Gkid and things Divine " let ns occupy our minds, 
and BO will deliverance come. And we should habitually cherish such thoughts, for 
so they will serve as a shield to ward off thoughts of an opposite nature. 2. Keep 
away from eviMotre. (Yet. 116.) For they are ever tempting us to such deceitful 
serving of God : they will inevitably, if we make companions of them, lower the tone 
and sap the fidelity of our thoughts. 3. Commit yourselves to the Lord for xtfely, to 
that you may not ie ashamed. Ask him day by day and hour by hour to uphold you 
and keep you true (vers. 116, 117). 4. CaU to mind the dreadfvd end of tveh dovibU- 
mindedness. (Vers. 118, 119.) They are trampled down, they are rejected like droaa. 
6. Cherish a holy fear lest you should incur a Uke doom. (Ver. 120.) Therefore bare 
your heart before him, and pray him to help you always and everywhere to hate all 
such deceitful aud double-minded thoughts.— -& 0. 

Vers., 121 — 128. — An appeal of the righteoiu to the righteout CM agahut tht 
unrighteous. The psalmist — 

L Pleads his innooenob and lUTEOBrrT. (Ver. 121.) "If I will not oppreM 
others, I may hopefully pray that others may not oppress me " (1 John iiL 20). It 
was a great thing in those days of old, when might stood for right in well-nigli all 
men's estimation, when — 

" They should take who hare the powers 
And they should keep who oan " 

— ^was conBldered " the good old rule, the simple plan." At such time for a man to 1m 
able to say, " I have done justice and judgment," was indeed a rare and remarkable 
thing. But if, by the grace of God, this has been true of ns, and we know it, there 
is no wrong in the afBrmation of it when pleading before Gbd. 

n. Implies God's pboteotion. (Ver. 122.) "Be Surety;" that Is, "be mjr 
Champion, my Defender." He knows the righteous Lord loveth righteousness, and 
therefore he confidently appeals to him. Nothing so secures the putting forth of the 
Divine power as the consciousness and confession of the littleness of our own. 

in. Depbeoates its lono delay. (Ver. 123.) " He wept, waited, and watched ' 
for its coming, until from very weariness his eyesight began to give way. It is good 
to tell the Lord our trouble, to pour it out before him as the psalmist does here. 
Trouble is like water; it gets less by being poured from one vessel into another. 



PS. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 137 

IV. Confesses his need of mercy. (Ver. 12i.) Before men he could hold up hii 
head, and declare that he was guilty of no wrong, as in ver. 121 ; but before God it is 
mercy that he implores, for he, as all who know themselves, knew full well his need 
thereof. 

V. Fob the third time avows that he is God's " sebvant." (Vers. 122, 124, 
1?5.) Why this repeated avowal V Burely it is: 1. A confession of Ood's cAsolute 
right to deal with him as he pleases. He is the absolute property of God by creation, 
redemption, preservation, and personal choice. But : 2. A profession of confident trust 
that the Lord will be mindful of his own, will not give him over unto the will of his 
enemies. 3. It is a renewal of his self-devotion. He does not want to renounce his 
service, to take anything back, but rather, under the oppression of his enemies, he 
would all the more consecrate himsijlf to God. Where God gives a spirit like this, it 
is the sure harbinger and herald of the speedy coming of the needed help. It lays 
hold upon God. 

VL Calls attention to the pbevailino cobbuption. (Yet. 126.) How often 
God's servants have said, "It is time for thee. Lord, to work I and when they have 
been made deeply sensible of the sins and sorrows of men, so that their hearts grieve 
over them (see ver. 136), then it is a token that the time for the Lord's interposition 
is at hand. " Where the carcase is, there will the vultures be gathered together." 

VII. Pbotbsts that, however it be with men generally, he loves and esteems 
the Lobd's commandments as altooetuer RiauT AND PRECIOUS. (Cf. John xxi. 15— 
17.) Such are the appeals and the apijellants that have favour with God and prevail — 
righteous, lowly, earnest, devoted, grieved at sin, true, believing. — S. 0. 

Vers. 129 — 136. — " Thy testimonies are wonderful." The tone and spirit of this 
section are much brighter than those of the foregoing one. Something had happened. 
The plaintive and heart-broken appeal of those verses is followed by the joyous con- 
fession with which these, in this section, begin. Believing that there is a real connec- 
tion in these sections, and that they are not so many disjointed and disconnected 
sayings, we infer that help had come to the psalmist — had come through God's Word, 
and had come in wonderful way and power. 

I. These words declabe a fact. 1. In the psalmisfa own experience. He had 
found God's testimonies wonderful. They had lifted him up from the depths of sorrow to 
blessed calm, confidence, and delight in God. Not that his outward circumstances appear 
to have been much changed, but the mood of his mind about them, and the thoughts 
of bis heart, had greatly changed. 2. And this was because of the light-gioing power 
of Ood^a Word. (Ver. 130.) Light reveals what was hidden before — truths that had 
remained in obscurity, and which had great bearing on his condition, he could now 
see. His mind had been illuminateJ, and he was as in a new world. And light cheers 
and gladdens the heart. By means of the Word of God such light had come to him, 
and with such power, that he could only exclaim, " Thy testimonies are wonderful." 
3. And the like experience has been reproduced in all men like-minded to the psaimist. 
Wonderful is the book of Holy Scripture, for its ai;e, preservation, interest, adaptation 
to all, for its inspiration, for its spread, for its blessed and ever-increasing power, for 
the revelation of God given in it, and for many more and personal reasons beside. 

n. They beveal the iNFiiUENOE and effect they eveb have. 1. They explain 
the tenacity with which the soul clings to Ood's Word. (Ver. 129.) Of course, the soul 
which has had such experience of its power will "keep them." Do we fling gold 
away ? Neither will such soul the testimonies of God. 2. They produce deep humility. 
Ver. 139 is a plea for mercy. The psalmist knew that he needed that. These wonder- 
ful testimonies had made that clear to him, as they ever do. But as one of the 
company of them that loved God's Name, he pleads for the mercy he needs. 3. Made 
him long for complete rectitude in God's sight, (Ver. 133.) He would have his every 
step, not merely his general walk, ordered in God's Word, and he would that no 
iniquity should have, etc. This is a constant result of such a realization of the power 
of God's Word. Nothing less than complete obedience will serve. 4. Gives renewed 
force to his prayers for grace to obey. Hence he prays (1) that man's oppression may 
cease (ver. 134). How often such oppression does hinder the keeping of Gfod's precepts I 
Not entirely, but largely. How many would openly serve God, but are cruelly 



138 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxix. 1—178, 

forbidHen or held back by fear I God's people have to hide away; they cannot do 
the things that they would. Also he prays (2) that God's face may shine upon himj 
for that is like the warm sliining of the sun upon the plant-world, causing it to spring 
and grow as otherwise it could not. 5. Made him deeply grieve over itien^* tin. 
(Ver. 136.) We do not grieve over what we do not value. B, therefore, we do not 
value the grace of God, we shall not, etc. 
III. The oonditiok of bealizino all this. Fervent desire (ver. 131). — S. 0. 

Vers. 137—144. — The righteous Lord and Word. In this section we have, mainly, 
a further eulogium of God's Word. Righteousness is the key-note of these verses, even 
as the initial letter with which they all begin is the first and prominent letter in the 
Hebrew word for " righteousness." But the remembrance of the righteousness of the 
Word of the Lord sends his thoughts to the righteousness of the Lord himself. The 
name of Jehovah does not often occur in this psalm, but here it is openly and 
emphatically given. For the most part the psalmist has been praising the richness and 
volume and preciousness of the stream, which, of course, could not be done without 
implicitly praising the fountain whence the stream issued. But here that fountain — 
the righteous Jehovah — is explicitly uamed and glorified. It is good to rise up from 
the gifts to the Giver of all. Note — 

I. Jehovah is righteous. (Ver. 137.) To receive, retain, and hand on this 
foundation-truth was Israel's great function. To no other nation had (}od so revealed 
himself. It was not merely the unity of God that Israel was commissioned to teach, 
but, what was yet more important, the righteousness of God. But no other nation 
knew either the one truth or the other. When we remember that men become like the 
gods they worship, it is evident that the truth of the righteousness of Jehovah cannot 
be over-estimated in its practical power. And to-day, amongst ourselves, it is the 
foundation and stability of all our national life. We cannot understand all we see, but 
we can and do believe in a righteous Gk>d. 

n. Hi8 RIGHTEOUSNESS IS EVBRLA8TINO. (Ver. 142.) In days when the oppression 
of ungodly men was rampant and raging ruthlessly against the righteous, what coidd 
sustain their soul but this immovable conviction that the Lord's righteousness was 
everlasting? It might be for a while obscured, but it should surely shine out again ere 
long. Men die, but God liveth (Ps. xc. 1). 

III. He has given to us testimonies of himself. (Ver. 138.) The Scriptures 
in a very real sense are God's Word. They contain, embody, and enshrine it for all 
generations. To assert that tliey are of purely human origin, as are the poems of Homer, 
the works of Shakespeare, or any other product of human genius, is to be insensible to 
iheir distinguishing characteristic as a revelation of God. The treasure is often in 
earthen vessels, but it is there all the same, and is ever to be distinguished from the 
vessel that contains it. 

IV. These testimonies are themselves biqhteoub. (Vers. 138, 140.) Compare 
them with any, even the purest of human laws, or philosophies, or sacred literatures, 
and let honest verdict be given : will not their righteousness shine out as the light? 
There are few who will now dispute this. 

V. Their righteousness, like his who gave them, is everlasting. The lapse 
of ages, the increased light of science and experience, the testing to which they have 
been and yet are perpetually subjected, has not lessened, but rather heightened, the 
estimate of their righteousness (ver. 144). 

VI. The results of these convictions upon the believing soul. 1. Intenst 
teal. (Ver. 139.) 2. Ardent love. (Ver. 140.) 3. Affectionate retention of God'$ 
Word in the memory. (Ver. 141.) 4. Rejoicing in tribulation. (Ver. 143.) 5. Long- 
ing to understand more. (Ver. 144.) — S. C. 

Vers. 145—152. — The cry. Very much are we told of it. 

L Its earnestness. It was "with the whole heart" (ver. 145). The very word 
" cry," repeated in this section so often, is full of suggestion as to what kind of seeking 
God this is. It denotes not only earnestness, but also sense of helplessness : if a man 
could do anythinK he would not " cry." It indicates, too, humility, simplicity, trust. 
It is the kind of prayer that has prevailing power. 



K. oxix. 1—170.] THE BOOK OF PSALMa 1S9 



II. Its petition. " Save me " (ver. 146). We know not what the nature of the 
peril was in which he then was, but it was evidently very great. This petition, though 
very concise, is very complete and direct and definite. We have many such prayers 
recorded. Blessed is it when the soul seeks to be saved — seeks with a cry like this told 
of here I If we knew our need of salvation, there would be more such crying unto 
the Lord. 

III. Its seasons of tttteranob. (Vers. 147, 148.) Very untimely they seem. 
Sleep, surely, should have claimed such seasons. Very early in the morning, in the 
dim twilight, and through the silent watches of the night. " The kingdom of heaven 
suffereth violeace," etc. (Matt. zi. 12). Here was one of these violent ones. Blessed 
is the soul that is stirred to such intensity of earnest seeking as this man was I 

IV. Its teustbd plea. "Thy loving-kindness," (Ver. 149.) As suppliants foi 
mercy, not as demanders of right due to us, must we come to God. As the publican, 
not the Pharisee. 

V. Its pbomftikq Monva. (Ver. 150.) The drawing nigh of ungodly men. When 
we are going into the company of such, as we often have to do, we should specially 
seek for grace to be faithful and true. Here is a fit preparaaon for such a peril. 

VI. Its EKCX)UBAaEMENT. (Ver. 161.) True, they that follow after mischief are 
drawing nigh, but then, thou, Lord, art nigh likewise. Blessed recollection is this. It 
has helped God's people many a time, and ever wilU 

VII. Its unbbblyino conviction and support. (Ver. 162.) He who possesses 
this will go to God, not as one who thinks his prayer may possibly do some good, there 
is just a chance — what a vast deal of prayer is of this sad sort 1 — ^but as one who knows 
that he cannot seek the Lord in vain. 

VIIL Its supreme and constant aim — holiness of heart and life. See in 
every verse of the section how this aim is directly or indirectly avowed. To be right 
with Ck)d was his abiding desire. — S. 0. 

Vera. 163^160. — Ood'» quickening grace fhe rtcA help tn afflietion. It b evident 
from these verses that — 

L Affliction was abundantly present. (Vers. 153, 154, 157.) He prays God to 
consider it, to deliver him from it, and he tells how that it was caused by many persecutors 
and enemies. Hence, here as throughout the psalm we have presented to us the case 
of a man much troubled, but also much helped of God by means of his Word ; and 
who can over-estimate the worth of this portraiture to the troubled childreo of God, 
who have needed his comfort in all the ages of the Church's history (2 Cor. L 4)? 

II. The besort op the afflicted soul was to God. He prays God to "con- 
sider," etc., that is, as of old he considered the affliction of Israel when iu Egypt, and 
in many like distresses since, for such considering ever led to his delivering them. 
The psalmist trusts to no stratagem, or clever policy,' or armed force for his help, but 
to God alone. 

III. That which he especially desired of God was his quiokenino obaob. 
"Quicken me" is the repeated prayer of this section, as indeed of the whole psalm, 
where it occurs nine times, three of which are in these verses before us (vers. 154, 156, 
159). 1. Jt does not imply that there was no spiritual life. He was not dead in 
trespasses and sins, so that he needed to be quickened from that ; unconverted, unre- 
generate men do need this, but the psalmist was not such as they. For he possessed 
a true and deep spiritual life, as all this psalm testifies (see here, vers. 163, 157 — 159). 
2. But what he craved was a renewed and intensified life. More, far more of what he 
had already — that " more abundant life " which our Lord said he came to give : he 
would be " filled with the Spirit." 

IV. This desire most reasonable. For if it were granted : 1. He would he 
strong for his burden. It would not matter how heavy that burden, if he had — as he 
would have if this quickened life were given him — the strength to sustain it. 2. He 
would he able to rise above his affliction. His soul would mount up on wings as eagles, 
he would be able to run and not be weary, to walk and not faint. This is one of the 
choice present privileges of the soul that is filled with the Spirit of God. Often and 
often has it been proved (cf. Rom. viii., at end). 3. He would be able to enjoy Ood 
in the midst of it. Many such a one as himself had done so. God and his Wonl had 



140 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pa. oxix. 1— 176. 

never been so precious, nor so clearly seen and understood. 4. He wnuld he able to 
comfort others as he could not have done before. Then his words would come witli 
power, for he himself would know not merely what deep affliction was, bnt how God 
can sustain the soul beneath it all. 5. This very affliction would prove a means oj 
heavenward ascent — a ladder reaching from earth to heaven, up which his goul would 
surely mount. 6. And God would be glorified. His persecutors would see how God- 
sustained he was, and they would be compulied to confess the mighty power of God. 
How reasonable, therefore, was ao'l ever is this prayer ! Let it be our own.-^S. 0. 

Vers. 161 — 168. — The ever-blessed Word. Here, again, there seems to be the joyful 
acknowledgiuent of answered prayer, 'i'he longing cry of the former section was for 
God's quickening grace ; here there seems to be the proof and evidtnce that that cry 
had been heard. And the answer of God had come through his Word, that ever-blessed 
Word which he here so lauds and magnifies. For — 

L By it he had been delivered fbom the feab of man. (Ver. 161.) Princes, 
with "the awe and majesty of kings," had persecuted him, innocent though he was; 
but instead of being abashed and afraid, the greater holier fear, the awe of God's Word, 
came to liis help and drove out all other fear. It is ever so; bat only by the fear of 
God is it sa 

II. His jot in it wab that op one who findetu great spoii,. Sometimes 
spoil ia found unexpectedly, as by the lepers in the Syrian camp (2 Kings vii.); or as 
by the man who found the treasure hid in the field (Matt. xiii.). But the finding here 
spoken of seems to be that of the warrior who, after stern struggle and the hard conflict 
of battle, has at length conquered, and is rewarded by the great spoil which he now 
takes possession of. And it is in such way that the great spoils of the Scriptures are 
won. Doubt, indolence, distraction, love of sin, the world's clamour, and much beside, 
have to be met and overcome by faith and earnestness, toil of brain and heart, and by 
persevering prayer. To those who will thus strive, the Scriptures will open up to them 
its reachcst treasure, and they shall rejoice therein, as is here said. 

III. Imparts a holt and deep detestation of all decf.it. (Ver. 163.) He 
who loves God's Law must hate and abhor lying. As the one comes in, the other goes 
out, and vice versa. And what a blessing this holy hatred of lying is i All society 
and commerce of man must be based on truth and honesty. Lying is destructive of 
all good both in the liar and those lied to ; but truth, the sure product of the love of 
God's Law, is for the blessing of us all. 

IV. Its praise is never wearisome to, him. (Ver. 164.) He means that he is 
always, on all pot^silile occasions, to praise Gcd because of his Word, so great is his 
delight in it. And the rea-on is not far to .'■eek. The sense of God's loving-kindness 
is the highest and purest joy of the soul (Ps. Ixiii. 3). But that is given only to the 
pure in heart and life. This purity, however, is the product of the Law of God loved 
and obeyed, and of this only. What wonder, then, that the instrument of such 
blessedness should be prized by him so highly ? 

V. Imparts a peace which nothing can destroy. (Ver. 165.) For such peace 
has its anchor in God, .and that anchor holds. Experience has proved this perpetually. 

VI. Sustains good hope of salvation. (Ver. 1C6; cf. Gen. xlix. 18.) The 
commandments of God obeyed create sunshine in the soul, part of which is this hope 
of salvation. The unfaithful and disobedient have it not. 

VII. The more it is kept the more it is loved. (Ver. 167.) When not 
alone, there is external obedience ; but that which is inward, of the soul, the love 
which led to this obedieuce, now becomes exceeding great. But all such keeping of 
God's Word is owing to his having set the Lord always before him (ver. 168; cf.'Pa. 
xvl. 8).— 8. 0. 

Vers. 169 — 176. — 77ie humility of holiness. We suppose no one can have gone 
through this psalm but must have come more and more to the conviction that the 
writer of it was a true saint of God. The signs and tokens of true holiness of character 
could scarcely bo more manifest than they are in this jisalm. But now that he comes 
to the close, instead of there being any note of exultation or glorying because of his 
attainments in holiness, there is the profoundest humility. We might have expeoied 



PS. oiix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 141 



H tone of triumph and elation, but it is quite the reverse that we find. There h 
impMdoned fervour in prayer, but no glorying ; there is the same constant longing for 
deeper understanding of God's Word, which we have met with all through ; but no self- 
congratulation that he has gained it ; there is the same confession of his need and 
prayer for deliverance, for help, for life ; and there is a lowlier confession still ; for in 
the last verse of the psalm he speaks not merely as an afiSicted soul, but as one who 
haa gone astray like a lost sheep, and who therefore craves that God should seek after 
him. And the different sentences of this prayer are all in keeping with this humility 
of heart which characterizes this great saint of God. He speaks of his prayer as his 
"cry," as his "supplication" — that which a beggar would present to one who could 
befriend him. He disclaims the possession of understanding of God's Word, but prays 
that it may be giveu him. He takes the position of one who has no right to come 
before God, and asks that he may " come near." He makes no plea of merit or good- 
ness of his own, but his hope is ever " according to thy Word." He deems himself 
powerless to praise God until taught of God. It is all of a piece, all the utterance of a 
profoundly humble soul. Now, concerning this humility, note — 

I. Whence it spRiNoa. 1. From the effect on the mind of his afflictiong. If we 
would have the grace of humility, we must be content to be humbled ; and so precious 
is this grace in God's sight, that he sends affliction for this very end. 2. From his 
advance in the knowledge of Qod. No human soul can thus perseveringly seek God 
without coming into very close contact and converse with him ; but the result of that 
ij ever the prostration of the soul in adoring humility (c'f. Isa. vi. ; Luke v. 8 ; Bev. i.). 
The vision of God's infinite holiness and glory bows down the soul of the beholder. 
But such vision had often been before the mind of the psalmist — seems to have been 
especially so here, when drawing to the close of this psalm. 3. From the longing after 
God's salvaii<m. Earnest desire is ever lowly. 

IL How BBAnTiFUL IT IS 1 1. Because it is Just and becoming to man in relation 
to Qod. It is what it should be. The opposite of it is revolting to the mind. 
2. Because we are made instinctively to admire it. 

III. And now desirable! 1. It has ever been a distinguishing mark of God's 
saints. 2. It is wdl pleasing to Qod. He delights in it; will dwell with him in 
whom it is. 3. It is such sure safeguard for all other virtues of holy character.— S. C. 

Ver. 176. — Man helpless as a lost sheep. Though in the foregoing homily we have 
spoken of this verse as a confession of sin, yet it is to be much questioned if the 
meaning of the metaphor in this verse, as in well-nigh all other places where it is 
found, be not that of helplessness rather than of sin. For in this entire psalm we have 
no confession of sin, no prayer for its forgiveness, though there be not a few for more 
of purity and knowledge of God. The prayer of the whole psalm is not that of a 
penitent returning to God from the paths of sin, but of one who has long known Qod, 
but yearns for yet deeper knowledge. We have many declarations of the psalmist's 
distress, and of the persecution under which he suffers, and of the extremities to which 
he has been reduced ; and we have protestations many of desire after God, of cleaving 
to God, of delight in God; but have no confession of sin. This is very noteworthy 
Not a few godly men deem it right, whenever they approach God, to make confession 
of sin and to bewail their wickedness. But there is none of this here in this protracted 
outpouring of the thoughts and desires of the great saint who wrote this psalm. Before 
he was afflicted he tells us that he had gone astray (ver. 67) ; " but now," etc. And 
the whole tone of the psalm is of one who had done with going astray, and was now 
faithfully walking in the ways of God. In this very verse he declares, "I do jut forget 
thy commandments." If he had been conscious of sin, he would surely have confessed 
it ere he came to this last stanza of the psalm. It seems, therefore, impossible to put 
upon the expression here the meaning of ver. 67, or that of the Lord's parable of the 
lost sheep in Luke xv. But the idea of weakness, defencelessness, helplessness, is 
meant (cf. Jer. 1. 6 ; Matt. ix. 36 ; x. 16). And so the psalmist protests that he is lost, 
as a stray sheep would be, unless the shepherd goes and seeks for him. There is no 
Pnarisaism in all this, no coming under the condemnation of 1 John i. 8, 10; but there 
is, what there ought to be far more of, a simple taking the Lord at his word. He had 
been sinful (ver. 67), but he had been led to repentance and faith ; and now he believed 



142 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxix. 1—176. 

that, accoidins: to God's Word, he was forgiven, even as he knew he was an altered 
man. Gud had pardoned him and renewed him. Why, then, should he think or apeak 
of himself as if neither of these blessed facts was true? And for ourselves, if the 
blood of Jesus Christ is keeping me cleansed from all sin — and if I am sincere and 
walking in the light, I am so cleansed, not once for all, but hour by hour. Then, if I 
assert this, and confess it, I am not, any more than the psalmist, condemned as a self- 
deceiver, and without the truth, because of such confession. And this psalm is a 
perpetual and precious protestation and assertion of deliverance from sin. This last 
verse, then, tells of his sad circumstances, and not of sinful character. But it implies 
these three facts — 

L Man's helplessness. We cannot make one hair white or black (Matt. v. 36). 
" We are crushed before the moth." 

II. God's lovino, buephebd-likb oabe of ub. He will be sure to come after ua 
when in peril, and see that we come to no real harm. " I am the good Shepherd." 

IIL The inwabd guabantee and pled(}b that God will do this fob us. 
" I do not forget thy commandments." God has begun a good work in us, or this 
would not be true. Therefore, etc. (Phil. i. 6) — 

"His honour is engaged to save 
The meanest of his abeep." 

6.0. 

Vet. 1. — Sincerity is per/ectness. The word " undefiled " in the Authorized Version 
is rendered " perfect " in the Revised Version ; and the terms " sincere " and " upright " 
are marginal suggestions. The term " perfect " includes a variety of meanings, and 
the Old Testament use materially differs from that of the New Testament. The 
apostles express the idea of wholeness, completeness ; their word is well represented by 
" entire," t.e. having every part and faculty according to standard, and every part 
and faculty in full health, vigour, harmonious development, and activity. The older 
writers have in mind rather what we understand by "simplicity," "genuineness," 
"sincerity." To the pious mind the supremo evil was doubleness, the divided heart, 
fearing God and worshipping other gods — the man whose body was in Gkid's temple, 
but whose soul was absorbed in self-interests. And therefore, to the pious mind, the 
perfect became the sincere — the man who was what he seemed to he. This readily 
becomes the "undefiled," the man who is not stained hy self-seeking motives or a 
spint of hypocrisy ; the man who pro/esses to walk in the Law of the Lord, and does. 
The psalm affirms, in its opening verse, the blessedness of walking genuinely in the way 
of Gh)d's Word, and thus gives the key-note of the whole psalm, with which may be 
usefully compared the composition of Tennyson's ' In Memoriam.' Like that poem, 
the psalm represents a variety of moods in which a poetic soul may meditate on some 
leading thought or fact. It is not only that the subject is dealt with all round ; it is 
that it is approached from a variety of points of view ; and the points are decided by 
the mental and spiritual moods of the poet. It has buen well said that in the first 
three verses we have described the three elements of obedience to the Law. (1) Purity 
of intention ; (2) reverence in treasuring up ; (3) ami, as a result, freedom from the 
power of sin. Absolute perfection, that is perfection tested by comparison with the 
sublime idea we have of God, is necessarily unattainable bv the creature. The perfec- 
tion of a creature must be in the range of possible attainment for the creature. We 
can think of a man reaching the standard or ideal of manhood. We know that the 
standard manhood has been presented to us historically in the life of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. And that life helps us to realize the point before us now — that, for the created 
being, man, who must stand in dependent relations to his Creator, per/eetum is 
uneuity. We may recall the saying of Shakespeare— 

"To thine own self be true, and it shall follow . . 
Thou canst not then be false to any man." 

L Irbinoebitt LimTS febfeotiok in the eight of uen. Some advantage ii 
gidned by putting the truth before us in this negative form, because we are so much 
quicker to discern the evil than the good, tu condemn iusinceiity than to piaise 



P8. oxii. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 143 

sincerity. The one supreme offence to man, and to our Divine Lord, the Son of man, is 
hypocrisy. The suspicion of it kills trust. Let a man have an apparently complete 
set of good qualities, if we suspect insincerity it is all spoiled for us, as is the good 
shield across which lies the " bar sinister." All the goodness will not sufBce to win 
confidence. And, on the other hand, if we are convinced of a man's sincerity, we are 
well able to deal with his iufirmj lies. This may be illustrated from iniaginative lite- 
rature even more effectively than from actual experience. The one thing we look for 
in the characters presented to us is sincerity ; and the most fascinating persons lose 
all charm for us if we are led to suspect that they are not genuine or true. Nothing 
so convincingly limits human perfection as the sense of two-facedness — the sense thai 
a man is not when away from us what he seems to be whpn before us. 

n. Insincisritt limits pebfectioh in the sight of men. Distinguish between 
God's idea of perfection for himself and his idea of perfection for man his creature. 
Qod looks for no perfection that is not within the range of possibility for the creature 
man, and for the particular man whose character he may be estimating. But, to use 
familiar language, God draws the line somewhere. He draws it at sincerity. A man 
must be true ; he must be what he seems to be. Ko profession can take the place of 
fact. Illustrate by the glass carefully ground for the telescope. It seems to be 
perfect. Nay, there is a flaw, and it must be rejected. The acceptance of God is 
absolutely conditioned upon this — the man must be "undefiled in the way" by any 
trace or suBpicion of insincerity. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 4. — Care in obedience. "Observe them diligently." There are possible 
obediences which cannot be acceptable to God. The things required are done, but 
there is no heart, and therefore no merit, in the doing. " Diligently " implies atten- 
tively, carefully, intelligently, persistently. And when we worthily apprehend God, 
we discover that what he accepts is the spirit in the doing, not the mere doing. It is 
not enough for God that he gets what he wants done ; he fixes attention on the gpirit 
that finds expression in the doing. This is made quite plain in the Mosaic persuasions 
to the keeping of the Law. " Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently ; " 
" Hear, Israel, the statutes and judgments, that ye may learn them, and keep and do 
them ; " " Ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the Lord your God, and his 
testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee." 

L DiLiOENCE IN OBEDIENCE AS A SIGN OF CHABACTEB. It is more especially the 
indication that a man has his heart in his work, and that is the condition of all good 
work. None so aggravate the business man as the servants who only get through their 
work. Character is revealed by the heartlessuess of it, and there is no disposition to 
put fuller trusts in the hands of such persons. Diligence is distinct from ability. And 
it is quite possible to trust ability and neglect diligence. Bat ability has nothing to 
do with character, and diligence has everything to do with it. Diligence is a sign of 
(1) self-control; (2) of a cherished sense of duty and obligation ; (3) of reverence for 
high things ; (4) of humility ; (5) of desire to win approbation. " Seest thou a man 
diligent in his business, he shall stand before kings." Diligence in the spheres of 
Divine obedience is precisely what it is in ordinary relations. 

XL Diligence in obedience as a condition of ACCEtTANOE. Is it conceivable 
that God's favour can rest upon a mere doing of what he requires? A father will 
accept such obedience, but he hardly cares to smile on the child who has only thai to 
offer. A business man accepts such obedience, and does nothing for the man who has 
only that to offer. God accepts it as bare duty, but he has no favour, no smile, for him 
who has but that to offer. We must put our hearts into keeping God's Law. Then 
we shall be diligent, and meet the conditions of full acceptance. — B. T. 

Ver. 6. — Qood habits confirming goodnest. "Oh that my ways were established tc 
observe thy statutes I " The importance of settling good habits in the religious life is 
seldom dealt with in public teaching, and yet there are few subjects of more directly 
practical importance. It is quite true that perils attach to the fixing of habits; they 
are chiefly (1) the disposition to judge others by our own ways ; and (2) the loss of 
spiritual force througii tlie routine character of our doings. But we need never depreciate 
good things because it is possible to misuse them aud moke mischief out of them. In 



144 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. cxix. l—Vlt 

a thousand things of daily life we prove the usefulness of good habits. We do things 
again and again, or do things at the same time and in the same way day after day, 
until they become not so much easy to do as a joy to the doer. They make up the 
life, and provide the pleasure of the life. Let, then, any one purpose to live the godly 
life, and he must take due account of the helpfulness of well-formed habits. The 
subject may be illustrated in connection with both the culture and the expression of 
the religious life. 

L Good habits in bblation to the oultubb of ooodness. The gardener knows 
well the importance of regular habits in the tending of plants. The gndly life i8 
cultured by the Word of God, prayer, and pious conversation; and in each of these 
the formation of good habits early in life is singularly helpfuL The custom of devoting 
some time daily to Bible-reading may become a mere routine, and even to the liveliest 
Christian it is at times a formality; but its helpfulness is clearly seen when the 
negligences of those who have formed no such habit is duly contrasted. The best of 
us are constantly needing to be carried over our wilfulnesses and indispositions, as only 
good habits can carry us. 

II. Good habits in relation to the expression of ooodnebb. We have no 
right to permit any divorce between the cultured heart and the devoted life. If we 
have soul-life, it must find fitting expression in daily service. These may be classed 
under acts of worship and acts of ministry. Habits very materially aid in maintaining 
family worship, and in meeting the obligations of God's house ; and they exert an 
important influence on oar acts of charity and ministry. We all need to have oar 
"taays established," that we may thus he helped in "observing God's statutes." — ^B.T. 

Yen 9i — Cleansing ona't way. This should be a fanuliar text to us all— one of 
those that are enshrined in memory, and made an abiding power in the life. Occasions 
for its consideration and for its counsels are ever recurring, because : L Among uf 
are always boys coining out into the responsibilities of youth and young manhood. 
2. While phases of youthful sin may vary for each generation, Bible counsels fit to 
every age, because they deal with principle$. 

L The oboundb on which the inquibt of the text ib based. The moral 
perils to which the young are exposed. The text does not say that the way of tiie 
yoimg is actually unclean, but it views the young as just beginning to walk in a way 
that is miry and dangerous. To compass the whole truth we should consider : 1. The 
moral weakness of the young man himself. It partly lies in (1) the relics left of evil 
influences, and the imperfect and incomplete results of early training; (2) in an inex- 
perience of life which young people never estimate worthily ; (3) in susceptibility to 
influences that are merely attractive, not deeply true ; (4) in the intensity with which 
they enter on present pleasures, heedless of future issues and results. These make 
dangers on the side of tlie young man himself. 2. The evils actually lying in the way 
of the young. (1) The appeals of evil to the sensual side of human nature. See the 
warnings in the Book ot Proverbs. (2) The pride of independence loosening the moral 
restraints of education and home influence. (3) The false maxims that are attractive 
to opening mental faculties, and readily meet youthful dispositions ; such as " Youth 
is the time for pleasure ; " " Gaining wealth is the true end of life ; " " Beligion is a 
gloomy afiaiTjand awfully dull;" "No certainty — nothing that can be called ' knowledge,' 
is to be obtained about morals, or about spiritual things." Show the moral influence 
pxerted by such prevailing evil sentiments. 

II. The obounds on which a wise answbb to this inquibt vat best. 1. No 
■ther answer than that given in the text can fully meet the case. 2. The Word of 
God can become a deliverance from young men's moral weaknesses and perils. It can 
be a power of practical wisdom and self-restraint. Illustrate by our Lord's use of the 
Word, as a weapon, in the time of his temptation as a young Man. 3. The Word of 
God acts as do beacons and lighthouses and sign-posts — it points out the dangerous 
parts of the way, and indicates the safe and direct roads. 4. The Word of God delivers 
us from the mischievous influence of false maxims by its revelation of truth and duty. 

But the Word does not, ouce for all, cleanse any man's way. All through life the 
way in which we walk will be foul and full of perils, traps, and temptations. The 
Word enables us to pick our path safely amidst the dirt and the snares and the 



PS. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 146 

pitfalls that may be put in our way. " Not defiled their garments ; " " Unspotted from 
the world." Appeal thus : In view of life, do you think you can safely go all alooe? 
Can you certainly triumph over all the subtlety and all the strength uf evil in your 
own BufiSoienoy ? " Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." — R. T. 

Ver. 9. — The perils of youth. Because the psalmist refers to the " young man," we 
need not imagine that, at the time of composing the psalm, he was himself a young 
man. The stanzas represent a variety of moods ; and for this one the psalmist was in 
a mood of retrospection ; he was looking back over the past, and seeing what a help 
Ghxi's Word had been to him amid the perils and tem|itations of his youthful years. 
He had "ruled himself after God's Word," and rejoices iu having; come through his 
youth-time clean-souled and unspotted from the world. The Prayer-book Version 
suggests that no external defences will ever sufBce to keep the young man from " city 
snares and town traps." He will be kept if he keeps himself ; he will only keep him- 
self if he asks God to keep him ; and God will only keep him as he diligently seeks 
direction and counsel from Gx)d's book of instructions and warnings. " Even by tiding 
himself after thy Word." It is implied in the expression, " cleanse his way," that 
there are things surrounding the young man that may easily defile him. But that is 
true for old men as well as young meu. What is of special importance to young men 
is that (1) by bodily constitution, (2) by disposition, (3) and by inexperience, they 
are unusually exposed ,to defiling infiuences. 

L The young man wants a standard and a guide. The ship of a young life 
has to sail over unknown seas, and there must be culture for managing the vessel, and 
a chart for directing its course. This the young are not ready to admit. " Why not 
wait and gain power out of experience? " Experience is a dear school, and its lessons 
are only learned aright when the life is in tlie ordering of God's infallible guide. 
Experience is to a man according to what the man is. 

U. The iounq man cannot bafelt be a law unto himself. Can any man? 
" It is not in man that walketh to direct his steps." If any man can, it is the experi- 
enced and sanctified Christian. But he is the very man who is sure that he cannot. If 
he cannot, how can the youth ? What always happens when youth takes the ordering 
of life into its own hands ? 

III. The young man can go eight with the help of God's Word. Which is 
no mere set of rules, but the Father-God finding counsel and warning and help for every 
emergency. It is a strengthening of the soul to resist, as well as a clearing of the eyes 
to avoid all that would befuuL — B. T. 

Ver, 11. — Seripture-stares. " Thy Word have I laid up in mine heart." Another 
psalmist describes the righteous man in this way, " The Law of his God is in his heart; 
none of his steps shall slide " (Fs. xxxvii. 31). The point of the text lies in the 
assertion that the Word of God is in the man's heart because he had pui it in, and put 
it in carefMy. 

L Storing the mind with Soriftubb as the dutt of tbaohebs. It is a 
primary duty of all who have to do with children. Storing the memory with the 
material of after-thought comes before the cultivation of the mind for using its material 
And if we would have the after-thought of life inclusive of the highest things, we must 
take care that the mind is eaiiy stored with Scripture truth and fact and counseL It 
is not suggested that the child-mind should be crammed even with that which is good, 
nor should Scripture ever be made a task. But that child is in an especially effective 
manner equipped for life who has God's Word stored as a treasure in his memory. In 
modern times this iiiding of Scripture in the heart is sadly under-estimated. 

II. Stoking the mind with Scbiptitbe as a man's own duty. It will not, in his 
case, be a merely formal memorizing, as it must largely be in the case of the child. A 
nian will store what the Scripture says to him, and not merely what the Scripture says. 
This involves: 1. A personal interest in the revealed Word of God- 2. Well-formed 
habits in relation to its study. 3. Careful attention to the relations of the Word to 
personal life and needs. 4. Such persistent habits of meditation as press the Word in, 
and lay it up on the secret places of the soul. It is not necessary to say any strong 
things conceruiug the " criticism " of the Bible, because of that the psalmist knew 
PSALMS — IIL "^ 



146 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. oxix. 1—176 

notliing. To him the Word of God was a hook of practical directions for godly living. 
And we need to have its actual relation to life and conduct so deeply impressed on U8, 
that we should feel impelled to store its truths and counsels. 

UI, The ATAILABLGNESS or SoBIFTURE-STOBEB fob THB EMEROENOIEa OF LITB. 

From those stores our Lord readily fetched efleotive weapons in the time of his tempta- 
tions. We have often fetched our best comfortings in time of trouble ; our best waruingg 
in times of danger ; our best answers when the enemies of faith and righteousness 
assailed. " He who hides can find ; " and if the laying ufp has been carefully done, the 
recovery for use Is sure to be prompt and easy. — B. T. 

Ver. 16. — The treasurei of meditation. " I will meditate in thy precepts ; " " In 
his Law doth he meditate day and night." There would be no need to explain to an 
Eastern man what is meant by meditation, and wherein lies the pleasure of it. He can 
sit still and think ; both the physical and social atmosphere of the East encoiu-age 
quietness, slowness, broodiness, and these favour meditation. Perhaps the proper 
warning of Eastern religious persons would concern the exaggeration of meditation, 
which tends to give men sentiment rather than truth. They need to be aroused to the 
exercise of the intellectual powers in the study of God's Word. But in the West 
meditation is almost despised. It seems like doing nothing, and that is offensive to 
active and energetic Westerns, who are so keen for results. Consequently, meditation 
on God's Word has become almost a lost art. It has little or no place in the ordinary 
routine of a Christian life. The West has much to learu from the East, but it need 
not copy any of its exaggerations. Perhaps we are misusing the Bible, failing to make 
it in our lives what it was intended to be, because we do not meditate in the precepts, 
dwell on them long and lovingly, so as to realize their helpfulness. 

L Meditation is a neoessabt uethod of DEALma with the beyealed Wobd. 
It is necessary that we should see this clearly. There are some studies which only call 
for active mental application. Fiit your whole mind into them while concerned with 
them, and put them wholly out of your mind when you have done. But these lie 
outside the man himself, and are but matters of knowledge. The revealed Word gives 
truth in relation to men — truth for the sake of men ; and the relations will only appear 
in response to that kind of mental action which we call " meditation." 

II. Meditation depends huoh mobe upon heabt-moou than upon bbain-poweb. 
It is really moral faculty using brain-power as its agency, and carefully keeping the 
brain-power in subjection. Interest in meditation is found to be in precise relation to 
spiritual culture ; and it is akin with the spiritual insight that gets to the heart of things, 
and the deeper relations of things, and cannot be trammelled by the mere /ornu and 
settings of things. 

III. Meditation pbovideb the most satisfyino pleasures of the BELiaions 
LIFE. It unfolds the most precious truths, and gives them personal relaiions and 
personal interest. And it brings to a man the most satisfying sense of Divine com- 
munion ; for God speaks his best things to the soul that is still and open to receive 
Divine thought. — E. T. 

Ver. 17. — The largeness of Divine dealings. " Deal bountifully with thy servant;" 
Prayer-book Version, " Oh do well unto thy servant." The thought is expressed in 
another psalm (cxvi. 7), " Eeturn unto thy rest, my soul ; for the Lord hath dealt 
bountifully with thee. It reappears in the assurance of the New Testament, " He 
giveth more grace;" "He is able to make all grace abound." The psalmist felt 
straitened in his own circumstances, but he was quite sure that there was no straiten- 
ing of the sufficiency of God. His very straitness seemed to make large demauds on 
God ; but he felt that he might pray for large and bountiful dealings. 

I. The labgeness of the Divine dealings involves compkehensivenbss. A 
large thing covers M. No satisfaction can be felt in God unless we are sure that every 
feature of our life stands in relation to him. The author of Fs. cxxxix. puts this 
into poetical figure when he presents the hopelessness of ever getting from the presence 
of God. In heaven he is. On earth he is. In hell he is. Go where we may, God's 
hand is on us. Do wliat we may, God's grace and strength are there for our helping. 
Wo could not rest in God if we could, even mentally, fix any limit to the sphere of his 



PB. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 147 

operation. He would not be God to us if there was a single relation of life with which 
he was not dealing, or could not deal. 

II. The labobness op the Divine dbalinos involves adaptation. The charm 
of all human relationships lies in adaptation. A thing that fits us helps us much more 
than a far better thing that does not fit. We have a notion that largeness tends to 
make us indiSerent to adaptation. If it covers, it need not fit. But all the best things 
we possess are not quantities, but adaptations. And God's bountifulness is chiefly 
apprebendtjd in the surprise with which we find he can meet every form of recurring 
need. 

III. The labqeness of the Divine dealings involves oenerdsitt. The man 
who barely and exactly does for us what we immediately need gives us no impression 
of bountifulness. It seems to us that he has not much to give, so must carefully watch 
his giving. God shows himself in nature, pouring out a wealth of flowers and fruits, 
and going altogether beyond our need. He glveth spiritual grace and help generously, 
as if he would convince us of a sufficiency which should inspire us to " trust in him at 
aU times."— R. T. 

Ver. 18. — Eye-opening. " Open thou mine eyes." This flgure of speech is a familiar 
Eastern one. It is based on the observed fact that the eye, as an organ, is dependent 
on the mind and the will. Men have to be helped to see everything that is really worth 
seeing ; and if they are to apprehend Divine and spiritual things, it can only be with 
Divine illuminations. He who sees the unseen must have come into the eye-opening 
power of God. The servant of Elisha, with the partly closed eyes, could see nuthing 
but the chariots and horsemen of Syria. With opened eyes he saw all round the hills 
the chariots and horsemen of Gud. Our Lord opened the blind bodily eyes of men in 
order to illustrate his gracious work in souls. And the living Lord counsels his half- 
blinded Church at Laodicea, " Anoint thine eyes with eye-salve, that thou mayest see." 
The opening of the soul-eyes is a figure of speech for the quickening of the spiritual 
discernment. Nothing do we need more than keen seusitiveness to Divine and eternal 
tilings ; insight of the Divine will ; the sharp i ess of vision that can detect at once the 
pointing of the Divine finger. The prayer of the text implies— 

L A consciousness of the dimness of cob spiritual vision. Our Lord reproached 
the Pharisees because they were blind, yet thought they saw with unusual clearness. 
" Ye say, We see, therefore your sin remaineth." There is no prayer in the man who 
thinks he sees. There is no conscious want to find expression. It is not merely that 
the vision is distorted by the self-willed spirit ; it is that in the godly life things seen 
and temporal have the power to dim and darken the vision of thiDg>3 unseen and 
etemaL If humility proves mightier than self-satisfaction, the sense of dimness is a 
constant source of anxiety ; but that is an anxiety which is altogether healthy. 

II. A consciousness of oub depkndenoe on God fob the clbaeino of oub 
6FIBITUAL VISION. A man may feel the imperfectness of his soul-vision, but think to 
clear it himself. It is not always duly considered that the idea of self-help spoils the 
religious life as truly as it prevents our entering the religious life. It may have to come 
through a bitter experience, but it must come somehow, that we may discover the 
helplessness of self-help for clearing the soul-vision; and then we pray to God, " Open 
thou mine eyes." — R. T. 

Ver. 20. ZVle toul breaking through its forced watehings. " My soul breaketh out for 

the very fervent desire that it hath always unto thy judgments." This expression 
reminds us of our Lord's beatitude, " Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness." " True godliness lies very much in desires. As we are not what we 
shall be, so also we are not what we could be. The desires of gracious men aft^r 
holiness are intense — they cause a wear of heart, a straining of the mind, till it feels 
ready to snap with the heavenly pull. A high value of the Lord's commandment leads 
to a pressing desire to know and to do it, and this so weighs upon the soul that it is 
ready to break in pieces under the crush of its own longings." The idea seems to be 
that the psalmist is really trying to know God's will, and strictly and carefully watching 
himself, aud seeking to get what he knows to be God's will adjusted to his conduutw 
But he ia dissatisfied ; he wants to reach a freer and nobler kind of obedieuoe. It ia 



148 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxix. 1—176. 

all too formal for him. He wants to serve with a hound : to fly at the Lord's bidding 
His loving soul frets against all linaitations and restrainis. He would break out of his 
cage. He would get into the large liberty of unhindered service of Q-od. The apostle 
gives the answering Chrii>tiaa mood when, irettiug agniiist body-bonds, he flay8,"0 
wretched man that 1 am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death ? " 

L It is well to have the soul bigqeb than thk cibcumstakoeb. OoLcider 
this especially in relation to the obedience of God's Law which circumstances permit. 
Bodily conditions and earthly circumstances put limits on our obedience. It is a bad 
sign if a man keeps contentedly within his limits. We must want • higher, fuller, 
worthier obedience than we have ever attained. 

II. It is Well to have the soul actually pbbssinq out of thb uuts of 
ITS circumstances. What a humdrum life it would be if wu had always to keep within 
what we cM facts I We press beyond facts into the glorious world of imaginations 
and possibiliries. And so there is an imagined obedience to God, and joy in his Word 
and will, toward which we should ever be pressing, breaking bounds to get into that 
higher world of service. And a measure of triumph over circumstances limiting 
obeoience is attainable now, and it prepares us for the full liberty unto righteouaaess 
which is the glory of our by-and-by. — K. T. 

Yer. 25. — Quickening tlie exhausted. In this verse there is characteristic extravagant 
Eastern figure, which is difficult lor the calmer Western mind to appreciate. Such 
exaggerated descriptions of mental conditions seem to us untruthful. The presentation 
does not accord with the fact. But the Eastern would urge that his mode of speech 
tuggesta the fact, and does not pretend to state it. And that is strictly true which it 
suggests. We may think of the worm, laboriously creeping over the ground, and 
longing to become a butterfly, and be quickened into the higher life that is possible 
to it. It is possible to find allusion to the custom of sitting in sackcloth and ashes as 
an expression of mourning. Sitting in dust is the attitude of humiliation, and so it 
fittingly expresses the depressed and exhausted spiritual mood of the psalmist It may 
be that in the Christian life we ought never to be depressed; it is certainly the fact of 
Christian life that we often are. Depression does not always come as response 
to outward circumstances, but it ^ten does ; and we may thii^ of couditioni that 
encourage it. 

I. Depbession follows on the difficitlties and dibapfointmbnts of business 
life. " Souls cleave to the dust " of worldly care. When things will not go rightly, 
mind and heart are very full day and night, and brooding always tends to encourage 
fears, and to make the dark things grow darker. When the soul is full of care, better 
things are pushed out, and faith fails. At such times we need the prayer, " Quicken 
thou me" — give me life, new life, life of energy to battle with difBoulty; life of hope 
to keep me iu good cheer. 

II. Depbession follows on bodilt pain and vabying conditions of health. 
Then the "soul cleaves to the dust," self and feeling are made too prominent; they 
force themselves out of place and proportion; and all truth seems discoloured and 
distorted. Illustrate by the effect of looking through coloured glass. The self of 
feeling can never give other than distorted views of life. At such times we need the 
prayer, " Quicken thou me" — give me the life of strength to bear; give me to keep 
sure of the fatherliness of chastisement, and to cherish the trustful and patient spirit 
of a son. 

III. Depression follows on afflictions affecting those whom wk lots. We 
cleave to the dust of kindred, and are afilicted in their afSictions. Some of our worst 
times of depression are times of symp ithy. Tlien we need to pray, "Quicken me into 
the life of trusi^, that will enable me to commit all I love to God." True Christian life 
is a series of Divine quickenings into higher forius of life.— A. T. 

Ver. 32. — Strength to run. Running is to be distinguished from walking, as involving 
active determination and persistent energy. A man may walk in simple habit and 
routine ; a man only runs when he wills to run, and makes positive efforts. So the 
psalmist is not satinhed with a kinil of obedience to the Law of God which is a sort of 
regular thing in which be has beeu brought up; he cannot be content without having iat 



PS. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 149 



heart in it, putting energy into \t, and making a life-work of it ; and tliis he expresses in 
the figure of running. The Revised Version gives, " when thou shalt enlarge my heart." 
The Prayer-hook Version gives, " when thou hast set my heart at liberty." Putting 
these together, we learn that the "enlargement of the heart" is not so much any 
expansion of the faculties:, as deliverance from oppressing fears that prevent the free 
movement of the soul. The heart enlarged is the heart set in a large place, where 
there is room to run ; then run it will. So often, by reason of bodily conditions or 
hindering circumstances, our hearts are limited and confined — they can neither "fly 
nor go." It is a good sign if then the heart frets against the bondages, and is ready to 
run whenever God is pleased to set it free. The key-note of the whole psalm may be 
expressed in the words, " I would if I could : " and the whole prayer of the psalm is, 
"O God, let me." 

L It 18 WELL THAT WB SHOULD WANT TO RUN IN THE WAYS OF OBEDIENCE AND 

OODLINEBS. The peril of the godly life is drifting into ease and indifference ; the doing 
of religions duties as mere routine ; the meeting of religious obligations listlessly and 
without heart. It may be that we cannot run ; it ought always to be that we want 
to run. We must not rest without energy and activity in the religious life. A formal 
obedience should be as distressinir to us as it is to God. 

II. It 18 WELL THAT THE CHEEISHED WANT SHOULD KEEP US WAITIN8 ON GoD 

roE THE OPPORTUNITY. The want would soon die down if we trusted to ourselves for 
cherishing it. It never dies down if we keep turning it into the prayer of patient, but 
persistent, waiting upon God. . 

III. It is CERTAIN THAT GoD BESF0NB8 TO THOSE WHO IN THIS SPIRIT WAIT ON 

HIM. The liberties and enlargements always come. And God makes the waiting for 
them as true a blesring as getting them. — B. T. 

Ver. 33. — Man's purpose, and OocPs help. In multiplied forms the difficulty of 
reconciling God's sovereignty and man's responsibility, God's help and man's energy, 
is presented to us in Scripture. But the difficulty is always intellectual only. It 
is one that the heart solves with perfect ease. It knows well how the inspiration of 
unseen ones does ennoble and strengthen our human activity ; and its apprehension of 
Gh}d makes him to he nearer and dearer than any unseen friend of human fellowship. 
Ask the mind to explain how we can be " working out our own salvation " and God 
can be " working in us," and it is baffled into silence. Ask the heart if this twofolJ- 
ness of the religious life is ever actually realized, and it will say, " It is true, I know 
it to be true in the experience of my life," He who said, " I live, yet not I, Christ 
liveth in me," was at the very heart of the deepest truth. The psalmist, in his own 
way, arrives at the same conviction. Let the Lord teach him his will, and he will set 
all effort upon keeping it. Let God give understanding, and obedience shall be 
maintained. " I can do all things in him who strengtheneth me." 

L Man must cherish right purposes. Gk)d puts no force on any man ; he over- 
rides no man ; he does nothing for any man that the man can and ought to do for 
himself. Unless we resolve to live the godly life ; unless we set ourselves upon seeking 
first God's kingdom and righteousness, nothing can be done for us. God never comes 
with help until he is wanted. 

II, Man uust want Divine help in cabrtino them out. This sense of need is 
often a later experience, into which a man comes only on the failure of his self-effort in 
carrying out his resolves and purposes. But it must come before godly living can take 
on its higher and more hopeful forms. The earnest man comes at last to say," Lord, 
I am oppressed ; undertake thou for me." 

III. Man obtains Divine help when it is made evident that he wants it. It 
would be wasted on him he/ore; it is fully effective on him then. It is true that 
Qod " helps those who help themselves," but the point to dwell on is, that he who 
tries to help himself in Divine things is the man who most feels his need of God's 
help.— B. T. 

Ver. 35. — A path for our goings, "Make me to go in the path of thy command- 
ments." To $ro is to keep moving, to keep advancing. The earnest man wants to 
progress in the Divine life. The Christian stamp is put on this truth by the apostle. 



150 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [m. oxEt 1— 17& 

when he says, " I count n'lt myself to have apprehended ; " "I press toward the 
mark." The good man wants — 

L Peooress in thb appbehkksioh op God's commandments. All the command- 
ments of God cannot be made ckar even to the understanding of a child or of a young 
Ohristian. They concern spheres and things which are known only through the 
experience of life, and cannot be made plain to the child or the young Christian. And 
it is a deeper thought that only the formality and externality of Divine Law can erer 
come to any man at first ; he must grow into the spirituality of it. Contrast the 
spheres for which the young Christian needs Divine rules, with the spheres for which 
the advanced and experienced Christian needs the guidance of the Divine eye, and the 
progression wilt at once be manifest. 

U. Pboobess in fixing the belation of the comuandments to life. At first 
the commands seem outside us, and are interesting studies. As we "go in the path " 
of them we gradually rec<ignize their personal relations; they directly concern us; 
they fit to unfolding circumstances and conditions. Getting God's will applied to 
cherished moods of mind, to fixed habits of conduct, to unfolding relations and 
responsibilities, to unexpected times of strain, comes to be the most real work of the 
religious life. Life is the path which God's revealed will marks out for us, and it is 
our work to keep the path. 

III. Pboobess in the chabacter and spirit of the obedience offebed. At first 
the service of God, and obedience to his holy Law, is a strain. Perhaps not absolutely 
a( firtt, because the waves of early impulse bear young souls for a while into an easy 
obedience. Just after the first a rebound comes, a time of duluess, and then obedience 
is the strain of constant effort. The will battles with the feeling. But we go in the 
path, and gradually the strain passes, the love dominates the will, and bears it to 
an obedience that says, " I delight to do thy will, O God." — R. T. 

Ver. 36. — Qod's work in merCs hearts. " Incline my heart ; " " Quicken me in thy 
ways." There is marked difference between " being made " to go in the way of 
righteousness, and " wanting" to go in the way of righteousness. And creating and 
sustaining the want is precisely what is here called the "inclining" and "quickening" 
work of God's Spirit in men's hearts. He puts the laws into our hearts, and in our 
minds he writes them. When a child wants to obey, he ceases to need any formal 
law — he is a " law unto himself." With the inclined heart the life of obedience 
becomes easy, becomes even a delight. 

I. The condition of man's heart in which God works. By the heart here is 
meant the seat of motives and impulses by which the will is moved, and action inspired 
and directed. The heart is regarded as subject to outside influences, and as actually in 
the sway of influences both bad and good. It can be moved by the self-spirit to things 
that are evil. It can be moved by the Divine Spirit to things that are good. It 
can be inclined. If a thing is moving, the least deviation from the straight line 
involves an ever-widening depaiture. In man there is always a sort of centrifugal 
tendency to fly away, and the constant need of a centripetal tendency to restrain 
it, and keep it in the right line. " Covetousness " is named as the representative ol 
all the alien inclinations, because the very essence of covetousness is "getting for 
self." And that is a perpetual enticement to the natural man, which only the grace 
of God can enable him to dveroome. The point of this prayer is that the good man, 
in the experience of life, will be sure to find the old evil inclinations return upon him 
as temptations, especially when anything appeals to covetousness. So he finds that he., 
always needs the preventive, and the readjusting, inclinings of God. 

II. The kind of work wiiicn God dobs in men's hearts. This is often represented 
as quickening, the renewiiig of vitality, strength, right purpose, energy. What is here 
set forth is a more precise, and more unusually recognized, form of Divine dealing with 
men. The Spirit is the inward power that sways decisions, inclines to good judgments, 
by putting force into the good motives, reasons, and considerations. Or, to express it., 
in the mode of the psalmist, he inclines to righteousness by makmg God's testimonies 
more attractive and persuasive than our own covetousness. — K. T. 

Ver. 46. — The freedom of right-willednesi. " I will walk at liberty : for I have sought 



P8. oxix. 1— 17^ ] THE BOOK OF FSAI1II& 151 



thy precepts." The Apostle Paul earnestly contends that " we are called unto liberty," 
but he carefully distinguishes liberty from self-vrilledaess. ▲ man can never have 
his liberty save on the supposition that he knows what to do with it, and is able to 
d) what he knows. And so the godly man is a free man, he is able to do what he 
likes, but the distinct assumption is that his likes have come into the renewing grsce, 
and are still in the sanctifying grace, of God. He is free because he is right-willed, 
and can be trusted with his liberty. The phrase is signi6cant, " freedom ia righteous- 
ness." We get the idea illustrated if we observe our anxiety that our sons should be 
right-principled ere they gy forth to meet life's temptations. We are not afraid for 
them to have their freedom, if only they are right-wiUed. The psalmist may only 
mean freedom from special circumstances of constraint and intimidation, but we ckn 
use his words in a more comprehensive and more general sense. 

I. R1QHT-WILLKDNB8S AS A CONDITION TO BE GAINED AND KEPT. Here it IS the 

disposition to seek the guidance and help of God's precepts in every emergency of 
life. Wrong-willedoess is an undue tendency to trust in self for wisdom and guidance. 
Dependent man nevi r comes right until he wants God ; and he never keeps right unless 
he leans on God. The very essence of the example of the Lord Jesus lies in his 
right-willedness. No restraint had ever to be put on him, because he always wanted 
what God wanted for him. We only get our wills set in harmony with God's in the 
persuasion and power of God's Spirit; but we can set ourselves, and keep ourselves, 
opeti to his gracious leadings and iuspirings and inworkings. 

II, BlOHT-WILLEDNESS AS A CONDITION IN WHICH FBEEDOM CAN BE ENJOTBD. 

Where there is that disposition and purpose there is always sensitiveness to evil. 
It is detected at once. It is disliked. To it there is a natural resistance. It is 
illustrated in Joseph, who "could not do wickedly;" and in the Hebrew youths, 
who could not "defile themselves with the king's meat." These young people 
could be trusted anywhere, because they were set on doing right. The only man 
in God's world who is really free, and can be safely trusted with freedom, is the 
man who means to do right, who is resolved to do God's will as he may get to 
know it,— R, T. 

Ver. 47. — 2%e /oj^ 0/ obedience. " And I will delight myself in thy command- 
ments." It may be urged, and indeed it is sometimes urged, that "obedience is 
obedience by whomsoever it is done, in whatsoever circumstances and in whatsoever 
spirit. If a master or a king issues a command, he gets all he can expect to get if 
what he wishes to be done is done. It cannot matter to him whether it is done with 
a grumble or with a smile. And it must be the same with God. We may reasonably 
expect him to be sati.sSed if what he wishes to have done is done." It is easy to 
answ ttiat fi>i'mal obedience involves no personal relationship ; but as soon as that is 
rtciignized, the moral quality of the obedience becomes the true ground of acceptance. 
Wliai^ is really accepted is the man in the obedience, and not the mere act of obedience. 
The best figures of the Divine relations with men are taken from lamily life. A master 
may be satisfied with formal obedience, and so may a king (though the deeper truth is 
that both want to find willing love-service in the obedience), but a father never is. 
He wants his child to obey; but he never can rest content until bis child loves to 
obey, and is manifestly happy in his obedience. 

I. An obedience which causes btbain. 1. There is the strain which follows upon 
the feeling that we must. A power is compelling us — a power which we fear ; a power 
which can punish, " casting body and soul into hell." Much of the obedience of life has 
no higher range than this. Men obey, but there is neither credit nor joy in their 
obedience, for in their hearts they say, "We would not, if we dared not." Neither 
God nor man cares for such obedience as that. 2. There is the strain which follows 
upon the feeling that we ought. This is altogether higher and nobler. Duty is one 
of the most exalted inspirations. And yet it may keep the strain, and a man may but 
force himself to meet his duty. If man may be satisfied with that, God cannot. The 
troe obedience is out of the range of strain. God's acceptance waits until bearl and 
band go well together, and we love what we do. 

n. The obbdienob which knows no strain. It is no trouble to do what we wish 
to dok There is uo sense of straia when we love and choose and persist in finding 



162 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [w. oxix. 1— 17«. 

our pleasure in what we do. The soul moTes freely in its delights. Make A Joj ot 
your obedience, and the result is that obedience becomes your joy. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 49. — Man's trust a plea for securing Ood'i faithfidnest. " Because thou hast 
made me to hope." " Those that make Ood's promises their portion may with hnmbla 
boldness make tbem their plea." In ordinary life nothing so surely calls forth the 
best in a man as to be trusted. No persuasion acts on us more forcibly than this, "I 
must do it fur him because he trusts me." We may in everything that is good, or that 
works out good, rise from man to God, seeing that in God's image man is made. In 
another psalm the feeling of God towards the man who trusts him is precisely expressed 
(Pa. xci. 14), " Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him." 

I. Thb GBO0ND OF man'b tbust IS Gk>D's OWN PBOMiBEB. This needs to be opened 
up both in a liohter and in a deeper sense. 1. Man's trust rests upon God's spoken 
promises. " Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises." How 
God makes spoken words the basis of trust may be illustrated in a very precise way 
from the firomises to Adam (Gen. iii. 15) ; Abraham (Gen. xii. 2, 3); Mo8es(Exod.iiL7 
— 10) ; Joshua (i. 5, etc.). Later on, such Iwoksas Isaiah contain most gracious Divine 
promises. And the wonderful discovery of advancing religious experience, and of 
increasing knowledge of God's Word, is that promises in exact adaptation to the ever- 
varying disposition and circumstance of godly men have lieen given; so that a man 
can never be so circumstanced that he need fail to find a written promise on which to 
ground his trust in God. 2. Man's trust rests on him who gives the promises. And 
the promises never fulfil their true purpose unless they lead a man to this higher trust. 
If we seem to hope in God's Word, we reaUy hope in him who spoke the Word. When 
this is seen, it is further seen that if God found it best to change his word to as, that 
would not affect our trust in him. 

II. Man's tbust becombs an effective plea with God. Because the honour of 
God's Name is boimd up in response to trust. Illustrate by Joshua's plea (vii. 9). 
Beminding a man of his promise is the highest plea man can use with man. " Tou 
told me to trust you." That is just what God has done — ^told us to trust him for life, 
for redemption. He will rememlier his Word unto his servants. — B. T. 

Yer. 61. — Steadfast goodness may he exposed to misunderstanding, "The proud 
have had me greatly in derision." Throughout this psalm there is evidence that the 
writer was in circumstances of limitation and difficulty. He was evidently trying to 
live a godly life in depressing surroundings ; no one about him seemed to be in sympathy 
with him; and some even scorned the persistency with which he ordered his life in 
accordance with Chad's commandments. The condition may be represented by that of 
a godly prince in a godless court; but the thing is brought closer home to us if we 
take the position of a godly young man in a godless house of business. His com- 
panions will, as we say, " lead him a life ; " will misrepresent his doings and sayings ; 
<all him names ; point at him the finger of scorn. 

L Debision is onb of thb host potent fobces of the temfteb. We all want to 
■tand well with others. We all love praise. It is right that we should. Many a 
man can bear blame, reproach, and denunciation, who is quite mastered by scorn and 
derision. Let a man " make fun " of him, and hia amour propre is wounded. In this 
light, what a sublime triumph onr Lord won by his patience on the cross when the 
■comers were all about itl But the godly man more especially wants to stand well ' 
with others, because in that way he testifies to them of the grace of God that is upon 
him. To be derided then seems to spoil his witness. So derision does two things, 
and serves the tempter's purpose welL 1. It wounds the good man's sensibilities. 
2. It damages, and may even destroy, the good man's witness. Young men have stood 
strong faelore open temptation who have bent like reeds before subtle, yet strangely 
powerful, derision. And they who deride and misunderstand are the proud — a term 
which does not here suggest the " boaster," but rather the " self-confident." The 
man who relies on himself is ever ready to deride him who relies on God. Such 
reliance he cannot appreciate. 

XL Steadfast goodness hopefully Bxsisn this tuiftatioh. Steadfast goodness 
li iteadied goodness ; and the steadying that la speoially in mind in this psalm \a that 



P8. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 163 

which comes from familiarity with God's Word, love far it, and pcaotised skill fat iha 
use of it. And ttie supreme instance of this steadying power is found in the tan^to- 
tion-scene of the Lord Jesus. — B. T. 

Ver, 54. — A good man's tonga. " Thy statutes have been my songs." " When the 
Eastern traveller takes shelter from the scorching heat of noon, or halts for the night 
in some inn or caravansary, which is for the time the house of his pilgrimage, he takes 
the sackhut or the lyre, and soothes his rest with a song — a song, it may be, of war, 
romance, or love. But the poet of Israel finds his theme in the statutes of Jehovah. 
" These have been my pastime, with these I have refreshed my resting hours by tlie 
way, and cheered myself onward through the wearisome journey and across the 
scorching deserts of life. Not songs of old tradition, not ballads of war, or wine, or 
love, have supported me ; but I have sung of God's commaadments, and these have 
been the solace of my weary hours, the comfort of my rest." What is striking in this 
expression of the psalmist is that he makes his obligations appear as if they were, 
what he sincerely esteems them to be, his privilege. Here is surely an unusual thing ; 
the man is glad to be placed under restraint, only it must be clearly seen that it is 
Divine restraint. " Let me fall into the hands of God, and not into the hands of 
man." 

L A GOOD Han's sonos beab thsib own feouliab stamp. Song is the relief of 
life ; but it is one of the most genuine expressions of life. It may be said that a man 
can be judged by tlie songs that he loves to sing or to hear sung, 1. The good man 
always wants to sing. Joy is one of the necessary constituents of goodness. 2. The 
good man wants the singing to match himself. And since his joy is in God, his sing* 
ing must be about God. 3. The good man's supreme concern is loyalty and duty, 
and therefore his songs are about the statutes by which duty is controlled. 

II. A GOOD lian's sonqs ABE THE EVIDENCE OF BIS GOODNESS. They Surprise his 
fellow-men, who wonder how he can find rest and pleasure in what seems to them so 
dull. He could not but for that vital change through which he has passed, which wa 
recognize in calUng him "a good man." 

** I thirst, but not as once I did, 

The vain delights of earth to share." 

1. The delight in vulgar and comic songs evidences the low, uncultured man. 2. 
The delight in high-class music evidences the educated taste. 3. The delight in songs 
whose interest lies in their religious tone and suggestion rather than in their music, 
evidences the renewed man. The delight in songs that encourage and inspire obedience 
evidences a noble sense of the Divine obligations and responsibilities that rest on 
human life. — B. T. 

Ver. 59. — Self-examination. "I thought on my ways;" "Let a man examine 
himself;" "I called my own ways to remembrance " (Prayer-hook Version). There 
are two directions in which the important duty of sell-examination is abused and 
made mischievous. 1. It may be turned into introspection, which concerns itself only 
with moods and feelings. 2. It may be conducted in the light of fictitious human 
standards of goodness. The first is the error of sentimental religion ; the second is 
the error of ceremonial rehgion. Both are mischievous in the same way. They 
nourish untruthfulness. The one forces feeling, the other exaggerates frailties into 
sins. The true spliere and the true standard of self-examination need to be presented. 

L The tbue bfhebe of self-examination. It is that of a man's conduct in his 
relationships ; not that of a man's thoughts and feelings. It is that which a man lias 
beyond himself, which, nevertheless, bears the impress of himself, upon which he can 
look, which he can appraise. A man cannot eiiamine his own thoughts and feelings; 
but let thought find expression in act, and feeling put tone and character on the act, 
then the man can exercise judgment. Thought and feeling are too variable ever to 
be arrested for examination. They are the " secret things which belong only to God." 
lUust. : what weakness is brought into Christian lives by introspection I It makes a 
particular type of religious life, and leads in a subtle form ol trusting the se^ instead 
of trusting Oud. True self-examination is " considering our v^ays." We cau estimate 



154 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxix. 1—176. 

the cooduct of others ; we can estimate our own. We cannot estimate the feelings 
of others ; we cannot estimate our own. 

II. Thr true stanoaud of belf-examikation. There are three possible standards 
that are manifestly unworthy. 1. The priestly standard, provided for the confessional. 
2. The sectarian standard, which manufactures an experience through which all must 
pass. 3. The personal stanJard, which a man shapes according to bis particular 
disposition and temperament. The true standard is twofold. (1) The revealed idea 
of right conduct in the relations of life. That was the standard wholly for the psalmist, 
and in part for us. (2) The revealed model of right conduct in relations — the Lord 
Jesus. That is the standard especially provided for us ; and it was the full obedience 
of God's will.— B. T. 

Yer. 63. — 2%e good maiia friends, " I am a companion of all them that fear thee." 
The man who most entirely turns to God as his Helper is the man who most anxiously 
seeks, and most wisely uses, the help of godly associations and friendships. Men's 
help to one another in the godly life is brought before us in this verse. " How weak 
is human nature I Yerily there are times when the presence of one so great as the 
Almighty becomes oppressive, and we feel our need of one like ourselves to sympathize 
with us. And there have been provided for us, by the way, many kind, sympathizing 
friends, like Jesus. As we pass on, we get the human supports which the Lord bath 
provided. We get them for fellowship too " (Jno. Stephen). 

I. Tbe good man finds fbiends. Every living thing looks for something akin to 
it, and finds that God has always provided the answering thing. This is typified in 
the fact that God provided for Adam a "help meet for him." If a man is a good man, 
he will discover that he need n»t, and must not, live a lonely life. He is not ^he 
only good man, and his good life will only grow aright, grow healthily, when it grows 
in company. The individual and persoual relations of converted men to God are often 
presented in an exaggerated form. The true ideal is presented by Malachi, "Then 
they that feared the Lord spake often one to another." The ordinary laws of human 
friendship apply to religious friendship. For close relationship there must be felt 
kinship; but for ordinary relations the common object and common interest will 
BufBce. All who fear God, and obey him, can be true helpers one of another. 

IL The use the good man makes of fsiends depends upon himself. It depends 
upon the maintenance and culture of his own godly life. So une of the first signs of 
flagging Christian life is flagging Christian friendship. Loosen your relations with God, 
and you will soon hold loose relations with his people. The law of friendship is this, 
" He that would have friends must show himself friendly ; " and the friendliness of 
the godly man is bound up with the maintenance of his godliness. 

III. The use a good man can hake of his oodlt friends depends upon them. 
They must maintain their godliness. 'I'hey can be notliing to him as helpers unless 
they keep fearing God, and observing bis precepts. The good man soon fiuds hib 
friends cease to help him when they fail from the godly life. Let each be at his best, 
and then godly friendship becomes one of the truest and best helps in the godly 
life.— R. T. 

Ver. 67. — 2%« moroZ terwx of affiuslion. We are constantly dealing with the 
mission of afiSiction to the spiritual tile. It may come with some freshness to follow 
the thought of the psalmist here, and see that the experience of affliction tells directly 
on ihapraeli(xA life of duty and relationship. It masters that growing self-willednesa 
which leads the good man to try and take life into his own hands ; and brings to him 
the humility and self-distrust which incline to keep well within the limits of God's 
Word. " If any of us remember a time in which we had no trouble, we also probably 
recollect that then grace was low, and temptation was strong." As an illustiation in 
a larger sphere. Bishop Wordsworth's suggestion may be taken, " This was eminently 
true of the Hebrew nation. Before the Captivity, they had been torn by schisms — 
Israel against Judah, and Judah against Israel, and corrupted by idolatry ; but they 
were purified from these evils by their afflictions." 

I. Afflictions pbovidb times of meditation. They are to the moral life what 
■abbaths are to the bodily life. They stop the rush ; they affirm that there is some- 



P8. cxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. ISS 

thing more important than self-interest ; they compel quietness; they give opportunity 
for reviewing. When we can do nothing, we have a chance of thinking. Let life go 
on without changes or trials, and the self must assume exaggerated importance. How 
can a man keep nobly dependent on God, who finds everything prosper under the hand 
of his energy? Affliction comes, makes him stop and think, and look back and up. 

n. Afflictionb tone times of meditation. Distinguish between the tone of 
meditations in our holiday-times, and in our times of affliction. In the one case we 
have bodily health ; in the other, bodily weakuess. It is an element of importance 
that sufTering and pain should give tone to meditation ; but it is needful to bear in 
mind that affliction may make meditation exaggerated, one-sided, or unworthy. The 
meditation of such times needs Divine guiding and sanctifying. 

III. Afflictions pass into new oppobtunitt. When a man comes back to life 
from a sick-bed, it is as if he began life afresh ; with this difference — he had to grow 
into experience, now he has the opportunity to use experience. Uabita are broken. 
He can make a new way, ordered and shaped by the new resolves based on the 
meditations of his affliction. — B. T. 

Ver. 75. — 2%e faith/ulneis of the Divine Chastener, " In faithfulness thou hast 
afflicted me ; " " Thou of very faithfulness hast caused me to be troubled " (Frayer- 
book Version)— 7 

"Who guideth mortals to wisdom, maketh them grasp lore 
Firmly through their pain." 

(iEgch.,'Agam.,'17a.) 

It was the marked peculiarity of the Israelites that they recognized God in history. It 
is the marked peculiarity of the renewed man that be recognizes God in personal 
history. The same events happen alike to all men, and are the outworking of natural 
laws, but what events are to each man depends on his point of view. There is a moral 
significance in events when a man can see that God is working in them and through 
them his purposes of grace. 

I. God has cndebtaeen a wobk of obaoe in the renewed man. Ha has 
" begun a good work " in the quickening of a new and Divine life in the man. To 
begin a work is for God to pledge himself to carry it on to perlection. The work 
undertaken is to give man full share in the regeneration of the world, and complete 
personal deliverance from the particular form in which moral evil affects him. The 
deliverance from physical evils comes after deliverance from moral evils, and is of interest 
only so far as it is related to and follows on the ^igher work. Physical evil for man 
would only be what physical evil is for animals, if man were not a moral being. God's 
work in man is his deliverance from moral evil, and then from all the physical disasters 
and disabilities which have come from moral evil, or have followed in its train. 

n. That wobk of gbacb can only be oabbied on thbouoh affliction. We 
see plainly that when man works on character in the child he must use discipline, 
which involves chastening, correction, limitation, pain. It is, indeed, impossible to 
conceive of moral training, under human conditions, that does not require the agency 
of pain and suffering. A father cannot be faithful to his son unless he can be a 
chastener. Much more may we say that since God is pledged to the culture of the 
higher moral character, and that must even more certainly require discipline and 
affliction, it is only being true to himself, and faithful to his pledge, that he becomes in 
each individual life the Chastener for our profit. — R. T. 

Ver. 79. — Explirience can teach. It is said that " Experience is a dear school, but 
fools will learn in no other." The proverb is in a large sense true, but we want it now 
only to fix the point that experience is a school ; experience can teach, does teach. In 
a satirical spirit Frmde says, " Experience is like the stern-liglits of a ship, it casts its 
rays over a way that has been taken." But that is not in any large, or practical sense, 
true ; the actual experience must be a thing of the past, but the lessons learned by 
experience are available forces for the ordering of the life that we have to live. The 
distinction between animal and man, instinct and intelligence, is that man can profit 
by experience, the animal does not. 



156 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ts. cxix. 1—176. 

I. The experience which teaches in the bbligious life is experience relative 
TO Divine commandments. What the good man wants his past life for is the study 
of conduct in the light of what was known to be God's will. What has happened in 
our lives does not much matter, and of themselves events teach very little. How did 
what happened stand related to what we knew to be right? That is the supreme 
question ; and that alone reveals failures and frailties. That experience alone teaches, 
and provides forces for the endeavour to live a better life. In measure we have " known 
God's testimonies ; " but how has our actual life been ruled and toned by what we 
knew? 

II. The onb thino that experience teaches is our absolute need of Divinb 
SUPPORT. The one thing which the past has to show every hone»t and earnest-minded 
man is, that he has always failed when he trusted to his own judgment and strength, 
and ventured to neglect or to go aside of God's revealed will ; and that he has always 
succeeded when, in a spirit of true humility, he persistently endeavoured to know God's 
will, and shape conduct and meet emergencies in its gracious leadings. Experience 
when consulted has always the same teaching to give. It may be summed up in this 
way, "You have always needed God as your Helper and Guide { you need him now as 
much as ever ; yon always will need him." — B. T. 

Ver. 80. — What U a perfect heart f It is necessary to see that the term " perfect " 
varies its connotation according to the substantive word with which it stands con- 
nected. We speak of a perfect animal, and mean completely and healthily organized, 
according to the standard of that particular animal. We speak of a perfect machine, 
and mean one that entirely and efiiciently accomplishes everything that it is required 
to do. We speak of perfect conduct, and mean that which in every detail conforms to 
the rule. We speak of a perfect statue, and mean one that in all points realizes and 
satisfies our ideal. Then what do we mean by a perfect heart — ^using that term as 
meaning the will inspired by the emotions? Both the will and the emotions are such 
fluctuating things that it may not be possible to create an ideal, or to find a standard, 
by which every heart must be judged. Even here we cannot say of the Lord Jesus 
that he has presented an absolute standard. He has with his particular environment 
found a model expression for the highest principles ; but righteousness for each man 
must be the expression of the principles of right in his own particular environment, and 
with his own particular disposition. A perfect heart cannot mean a will always biassed 
to decision by particular considerations; and getting the bias by a particular condition 
of the feelings. Perfection when applied to the heart must mean genuineness, sincerity. 
But it means this made even more .distinct and precise. It n^eans unity, absolute 
agreement ; the whole being brought in and bound together in one purpose. And if 
taken in its fullest suggestiveness, it further means an instructed heart, not one carried 
into conduct by any accident, but borne to it by a deliberate choice, based on com- 
petent knowledge. Pei/ec^hearted may be apprehended as whole-hearted., <rue-hearted, 
and as opposed to Aa^-hearted. — B. T. 

Ver. 83. — The urine-skin in the smoke. The wine-bottles of the East were sliin$. 
Bosenmiiller tells us that it was a custom of the ancients to hang skins of wine in the 
smoke of a fire, for very much the same reason that we stand a bottle of claret on the 
hearth, in order to mellow the wine by a gradual and moderate warmth, and to bring 
it to an earlier perfection. And In that custom the psalmist finds an illustration of 
the meaning, and of the mercy, of the a£9ictions to which he has been exposed. They 
have been sent to act on him like the warm smoke on the wine — to refine, mellow, and 
ripen his character; and because, under them all, he has refused to part with his faith 
in God and duty ; because he has been true to God and God's statutes:, they have had 
their intended and proper effect upon him (S. Cox). This explanation gives a fresh 
suggestion to the text, but it may be doubted whether the mood of the psalmist is 
fairly represented by it. The older view seems more in harmony with the general tone 
of the stonza. Though, under the severe pressures of trial and affliction, the good man 
shrinks and wastes and blackens like a wine-skin hung in the smoke of the chimney, 
he still remembers the Divine statutes, and holds fast his faith in God and duty. What 
seems to be in mind is a long waiting-time, which was also a tim<> of suffering and 



PS. era. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 167 

strain. The watching for God was prolonged ; no response seemed to come ; much had 
to be borne while he was waiting ; he seemel to get dry, shrivelled, and blackened, like 
the wine-skin in the chimney that had waited so long (and seemed to get tired of 
waiting, even as he did) for the moisture and refreshing of being used, and filled again 
with wine. Bat the question of supreme importance was this — What was he doing 
during this hard waiting-time? He has the joy of this confident assurance — he was 
holding fast his integrity ; he was keeping; on his obedience and trust ; he was per- 
sistently ordering his life according to the Divine statutes. 

L Waitinq-timbs abb a part op the Divine afpliotivk dispensations. It 
sometimes seems as if God would do more for a man by making him wait tban by 
making him suffer. 

II, Waitihq-tiugs havb a PEonLiAB INFLUENCE ON A man's spibit. It may be 
represented by the effect of smoke on an empty wine-skin. 

in. Waitinq-times should throw us upon the comfobtino and btrbnqthbning 
OF THE Divine Wobd. Everything for us depends on the cherished moods of our 
waiting-times. — R. T. 

Vers. 85—87. — Leaving our enemies with God. The New Testament teachings con- 
cerning the treatment ot our enemies is a decided advance upon the Old Testament 
teachings, but this should not prevent our seeing that the godly men of the Old 
Testament were in advance of the prevailing sentiments of their day. 

I. If A UAK BELIEVES IN HIMSELF, HE WILL ALWAYS TR7 TO AVENOB HIUSELF 

Then s man's enemies are entirely in the self-sphere, and must be dealt with in that 
sphere. This essential idea of unregenerate and self-circumscribed humanity may be 
efficiently illustrated in the mission of the family blood-avenger. A man was expected 
to avenge himself upon his enemies. But if he was kilied, he could not avenge himself, 
and BO bis next of kin had to do this duty for him. Betaliation seems noble and right 
only BO long as a man is self-sphered, and thinks the ordering of life is wholly in his 
own control. Civil government does but make public this system uf dealing with our 
enemies ourselves. The state protects itself, provides its own sanctions and avenge- 
ments. And the individual and the state are constantly in peril of acting upon impulse, 
or in the unreasoning sway of vindictive feeling. 

II. If A MAN BELIEVES IN GoD, HE WILL LEAVK HIS ENEMIES WITH HIM. To 

believe in God takes a man out of the self-sphere, and consequently gives him another 
point of view from which to regard his enemies. To believe in God is to apprehend 
God's personal interest in a man's highest welfare ; and this must include concern for 
the influence which enemies and enmities may have upon a man. To believe in God 
is to be absolutely assured of his ability to defend from our enemies, and to punish 
them for their enmity. To believe in Grod is to be willing to let him undertake 
dealing with our enemies for us, and upholding us while we have to suffer their power. 
The godly man prays, " Help thou me." 

IIL If a man BELIEVES God in Chbist, he will, with thk Ocbibt-help, vns 
HIS ENEMIES. This leads into familiar topics. "If thine enemy hunger, feed him;" 
"Love your enemies;" "Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves." Let God in 
Christ undertake our enemies, and be will teach us how to save them from their 
enmity. — B. T. 

Ver. 88. — Divine quickening our supreme need. " Judged by his own, and, so far as 
we know, only work, the author of this psalm was a man wholly devoted to God and 
the Word of God. His confidence in that Word or Law, as the true rule of human life, 
bad been exposed to the severest trials. He had seen the wicked in authority, using 
and straining their power to oppress and destroy the righteous. He himself had been 
called to suffer a long agony of anguish and distress, in which his soul fainted within 
him, simply because he would obey the highest rule he knew. In the time of his 
tribulation he had besought the Judge of all the earth to do him right, to vindicate the 
Word in which he put his trust, to deliver him from his afflictions. And, though 
neither answer nor deliverance came, he held fast his integrity ; he refused to forget 
the statutes for his obedience to which he suffered, or to relinquish his trust in the God 
who did not save him " (S, Cox), But if such an attitude is to be maintained, the 



158 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxix. 1—176. 



good man will find he hag constant need of one thing — ^Divine quickening. It may at 
the first starting of a religious life seem as if our supreme need were the precise Diyine 
help in every detail of life and relation ; and so the prayers of young Christians are 
often exact and minute; they ask for particular things, and expect precise answers. 
Then they often mistake contingencies for prayer-answers, and are in peril of assuming 
that they stand in some special Divine favour. As experience enlarges, the one thing 
most impressed on the renewed man is the tendency of the Divine life in him to flag 
and fail. It is always dying down. And it always needs requickening. It comes to 
us gradually that God would rather leave us free in the movements of life, and expect 
to do the best work for us by " strengthening us with strength in our soul." And we 
at last see that this constant quickening and requickening and soul-vitalizing ia pre- 
cisely our supreme need. Even Christian experience can reach no higher prayer than 
this, " Quicken thou me." So prayer in the good man's life gradually loses its detailed 
character: it becomes simply a heart and life opening to the Divine quickening; and 
that is found to involve the supply of all our real needs. — B, T. 

Ver. 92. — The supreme strain of affliction. This verse Luther selected as the motto 
for his own Bible, which is now in the museum at Berlin. So long as affliction keeps 
in the sphere of a man's drcumstancea it is endurable. We make too much of human 
afflictions when we fix our attention on them, and miss estimating the ways in which 
men are affected by them. What affliction is to a man, what amount of strain it 
involves, depend on the man's emotional nature, the condition and character of his 
will and affections. We often observe that things are afflictions to one man which are 
no afflictions at all to another ; and that the same afflictions affect men difierently at 
different times. Here the psalmist recognizes that his afflictions would have altogether 
overwhelmed him, but for the condition of his heart, cheered as it was by the assurances 
and promises of the Divine Word. 

L The btb&in of affliction depends on its belativitt to m has's inwabd 
CONDITION. 'J'his can be shown by illustrating what affliction is to a man when he is 
in a normal condition of bodily, mental, and moral health. Then nothing seems to be 
overwhelming ; there is an activity of endurance and resistance which prevents a man's 
" perishing in his affliction." But man is seldom, if ever, found in this normal state. 
We can conceive it ; but it is seldom realized. Man is usually below it, and therefore 
affliction becomes such a strain. Sometimes below it through untrained natural dis- 
position; through temporary states of bodily liealth; or through neglect of spiritual 
life. So man is unfitted, and affliction overwhelms. Man may be above the normal ; 
and this he is by the infusion of Divine life through the Word. Then he is a nobler 
self. He has a consciousness of power which masters the strain. The power brings a 
joy and delight which put a man above himself. 

II. The grace of God bears relation to a man's inward condition. There- 
fore in it is found both the relief and the sanctifying of affliction. God makes and 
keeps the heart right, fills it with the joy of his Word and promise, and then man 
becomes master of all circnm stances. — B. T. 

Ver. 96. — The disappointment of human hopes. " I have seen an end of all perfection." 
" The true relation of the two parts of this verse to each other seems to be that of con- 
trast. No other relation brings out so clear and full a meaning. The meaning of the 
whole, therefore, must be something like this: Here is something called 'perfection' 
existing among men in a great variety of forms. ' But,' says the psalmist, ' according 
to my experience and observation, these are altogether too superficial, and too precarious, 
and too short-lived to make men happy, and the very best of them, the idealisms of 
human life, can never he attained. But thy commandment is exceeding broad,' and 
that will do, unless men hinder, what nothing else will do," The human hopes referrO'l 
to are a man's wholly self-centred purposes and ambitions. Let a man fashion some- 
thing for himself as a supreme aim of life; let it be something which he regards as 
" perfection ; " let it bear no relation to the blessing of his fellow-men, or to the will and 
honour of God, and there will surely be an end to all such perfection. Let perfection 
be humanly conceived success and happiness, and ere life closes the man will say with 
the " preacher," who had such a varied experience, " Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." 



PS. OXEL 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. .169 



I. Au. ABOUND US WB MAY SEE THE END OF PERrBOTioNS. The story of the ages 
is the story of weU-coDceived ideals in social and national life that were never realized. 
The story of individual lives that had only self-centred aims is this wail, " My purposes 
are broken off." It is even a large truth that no life ever was lived that realized its 
ideal, reached its perfection, or accomplished its purposes. And tliis must be so because 
perfection is foi the race, not for the individual, who has never more than a piece of 
the whole entrusted to him. And because, by man's very nature, be cannot rest 
satisfied with things, only with character, which finds expression in things, and is 
always below a possible attainment, while God is the supreme character, 

II. If wb cannot get perfection, we may wobk towards it. To do this we 
must get out of the human sphere into the Divine sphere. Man fails to reach his own 
perfection because it is so small. God's Wurd is large, broad, and towards its perfection 
man may move through all eternity, and get ennobled as be moves. — G. T. 

Ver. 97. — The inspiration of obedience. "Oh how love I thy Law!" There are 
three possible inspirations of the obedient life ; the psalmist presents the true and 
e£Scient one. 

I. We mat obey because wb must: there is the obedience of feab. 
Preachers seek to help men with this inspiration when they declare the " terrors of 
the Lord," testify of a coming judgment, and cry, " Prepare to meet thy God." And 
presumably there are persons to whom fear is an effective inspiration. All we need 
say is that they are not the nobler members of our race. A person amenable to the 
influence of fear is either uneducated, untrained, or un-selt-trained. As science destroys 
superstition, so knowledge and self-knowledge and Divine knowledge destroy fear. 
Fear God, and yon need fear nothing else. It is not yet worthily seen that Christianity 
has sometliing with which it intends, absolutely and entirely, to replace fear. 

IL Wb mat obey because wb ought : there is the obedience of duty. 
This is an altogether higher kind of inspiration. In it we still recognize a power 
above us ; but it is now a power personally related to us and interested in us — a power 
with which we are in sympathy, and whose authority to rule us we recognize. No 
man is his true self until he says, " I am not independent. I am under authority. 
There is something that I ought to be. It is the will of a Personal Divine Being, in 
whose image I have been made." The sense of duty has been the inspiration of the 
noblest things in every sphere of human life — ^in the family, the business, and the 
nation. Duty has often inspired heroism. Poets have sung its praise so much that 
it wonld hardly be unreasonable to regard it as man's highest inspiration. And yet 
we must see that its power is altogether surpassed. 

m. Wb may obey because wb wish to : thebe is the obedience of iate. 
" Oh how love I thy Law I " It is sometimes said that this is the Law " getting into a 
man," and becoming himself, so that when he obeys he simply expresses himsel/. And 
this is true. Even duty keeps law outside us ; it remains something which we must 
conform ourselves to. Love brings law in, makes it one with us, and so becomes an 
actual foroe of obedience in us. The inspiration of love is our best selves carrying our 
conduct into righteousness. — B. T. 

Ver. 100. — Human teachers and the Bible itself. " I understand more than the 
aged, because I have kept thy precepts." This is no mere boasting, no invidious com- 
parison. It is the recognition of the fact that the man who is taught of God knows 
what no human teacher can teach. The human teacher has a limited range ; the 
Divine Teacher transcends it. But the Word of God, the Scriptures of the Divine 
revelations, are the agencies God uses for imparting the higher knowledge. It is 
necessary to say that what God teaches is not a mere advance on what man teaches. 
It is other than man teaches. Man deals with the surface of things ; God deals with 
the inmost of things. Man keeps within the agency of limited human language ; God 
can teach through spiritual sensibilities. It is true that he uses the written Word ; 
but it is not true that he confines himself to the formality of ft** Word. He teaches 
through the spiritual feeling which the Word excites. There is much made of a com- 
prehensive, all-ronnd education, but it is not enough insisted on that this must include 
the Divine teaching. 



160 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxix. 1—176. 

L The neoessaby limits or human teachings. 1. They are limited by the 
mental capacity of those who teach and those who are taught. 2. They are limited 
by the imperfection of the vehicle by which humaa knowle-^ge is conveyed. No 
human word has the same connotation for every one who uses it, and few words keep 
the same conn' tation for one man through a long life. 3. They are limited by the 
variableness of the material at their commaDd. New facts are continually displacing 
old ones, and new theories condemning old ones. In science, a book ten years old is 
comparatively useless. 4. They are limited by the range over which they extend, 
which is compelled to keep away from all knowledge of God and the things of God. 
"Who by searching can find out God?" And yet it is in that higher range of 
knowledge alone that man's true nature can be unfolded. The queen of sciences is 
theology. 

IL The Divuns TEAOniNaa betond the human limits. Ib man only a mind? 
Many seem to think of him as having no more than a mental organization, A man ii 
a spiritual beiag, kin to God, having for his present agency aud use a body and a 
mind. The Divine range is the soul, which is the man himself. — B. T. 

Ver. 101^— DeoHing with hindrancet to obedience. " I have refrained my feet from 
ereiy evil way." The point here is that the man resolutely dealt with himself; and, 
being absolutely purposed to obey, he persisted in removing out of the way whatever, 
in his dispcisition, incliDation, habit, or circumstances, tended to hinder him in his 
obedience. How much goes along with obedieacel How much is involved in it I 
" Befraiued my feet " is a figure. The man recognizes the constant disposition to step 
over the line, or into the tempting side-walk, and he has again and again, by an effort 
of will, to pull his feet back, to hold them tight. Compare the figure of setting a 
watch on the door of the lips. " I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress." 

I. The hindrances to obcsdiencb mat be external to a man. 1. They may 
lie in a man's fiiendships. There are associations of life which a man can arrange for 
himself, and he can secure that these shall be helpful. But there are associations in 
life which are made for a man, and these may be biadering to his purposed obedience. 
lUust. : Juseph, Daniel. 2. They may lie in a man's circumstances. The straitened 
man is put upon guileful and self-trusting schemes to imi^rove his circumstances, and 
is thus hindered from obedience. The well-to-do man is in danger of being self-reliant 
and over-confident, and so made indifferent to obedience. Virtue is man's triumph 
over external hindraoces. Innocence only becomes virtue through its struggle with 
hindrance and evil. 

II. The hindbances to obedience may be in the man himself. These 
hindrances are in the mind of the psalmist. He found something wrong with his own 
feet. They did not stand firm ; they inclined to slide ; they seemed to have a bias 
outward ; if he was not careful, of themselves they carried him over the line. In this 
way he represented that carnal, self-seeking tendency with which the good man has 
continually to deal. He may will to obey; but he will find self-interest ever ready to 
resist good resolve. The hindrances that are in the man himself are never wholly 
mastered while a man lives, so that he caa fed safe. Indeed, to " feel safe " is to be 
In the gravest peril. Through a long life, if a man really means to live for God and 
obey, he will find that he must always be at work at his own hindrances, "refraining 
his feet from evil ways." — R. T. 

Ver. 105. — Heavenly light on tne earthly path. The Book of Proverbs has the same 
figure (Prov. vi. 23). For the "commandment is a lamp, and the law is light." And 
Wordsworth calls duty " a light to guide." The " lamp " is kindled specially for the 
hours of darkness ; the " light " is the natural light for all time. The need for the 
lantern on dark nights is well understood by those who live in country districts. A 
minister without a lantern, one dark night, got over a stile, intending to take a straight 
line across a most familiar field; but in a little while he found he had wandered round 
to the stile again. In the East the figure of the text is even more expressive. Ttie 
streets of the towns are narrow, uulighted, ill-kept, and specially dark at night, because 
of the high walls of the houses on either side. The causeway often has dangerous 
boles, and soft muddy places, and great loose stones ; acd if a man is to pick his way 



PS. cxn. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 161 

safely, he must not only have a lantern, but hold It right down to his feet, so that its 
light may guide his next footstep. That gives point to the text. God's Word is not 
just a general light for the guidance of our route; it is something to hold close, for the 
direction of each step in life that we take. 

I. Life is too full of perils tob a man to trust hib own etesioht. 
What can a man do with his eyesight in a dark Eastern street in the night-time ? He 
may have the best eyesight, but it will not serve him then and there. " It is not in 
man that walketh to direct his steps." Human life is dark relative to human expe- 
rience. " Ye have not gone this way heretofore." Human life is full of perils. Such 
as affect everybody, and such as affect particular dispositions. Every man is in danger 
of being taken at unawares ; tripped up by some stone of offence ; sore wounded by 
slipping into some hole of neglect. Some can manage life better than others ; but 
every man is beaten by life in the long run, if he undertakes it himself. 

II. LiFE-PBBILS CAN BE PASSED SAFELY THROUGH WITH THE HELP OF GtOD's LAMP. 

The Word of God is relative to all possible human experiences and dangers. Its light 
acts in two ways. 1. It gives the man general principles and moral strength, so that 
he is ready prepared for every testing-time. 2. It gives precise counsels guiding actual 
conduct in every emergency. It is the lantern held down close to the feet, so as to 
direct the next footfall. The adaptation of the Divine Word to a man's every 
circumstance and need ia the surprise of religious experience. — B. T. 

Ver. 106. — Confirming our pledges by keeping them. "I have sworn, and am 
steadfastly purposed " (Prayer-book Version) ; " have confirmed it " (Bevised Version). 
It is not enough that the light shines on our path ; it is necessary that we should 
steadfastly fix our gaze on that p»rt which the light illumines. The lamp shines in vain 
unless its holder looks intently on its shining. " Sworn " here only means made 
solemn resolve with myself and solemn pledges with God. There are times in every 
good man's life when he makes fresh and solemn resolves — new year times, birthday 
times, or times of convalescence, or of rescue from sudden peril. But every good man 
knows that these are often made upon impulse, and need confirming. There are two 
ways of confirming resolves. 

L By benewing the eesolve afteb "ooumtino the cost." For illustration of 
this we have our Lord's teaching. On sudden and untested impulse, a passionate 
movement of feeling, very many made the resolve to become his disciples, and in great 
excitement offered themselves to him. How well he knew human nature ! The fire 
that too suddenly blazes up soon fades. Our Lord showed no eagerness to receive them. 
He even somewhat coldly repressed them, setting them upon quietly thinking over 
what they were doing. He would have them "sit down and count the cost." He 
would have nobody upon an exclamation. He would have anybody whi) had resolved . 
again quietly. This needs to be remembered in view of the exciting missions of our 
day, which work towards an impulsive resolve to become Christ's disciples. That may , 
be good ; but it is only good when it is followed up by a second resolve, made quietly 
in view of thoughtful estimates of all disoipleship involves. 

XL By maeinq immediate effort to keep the bbsolvb. It is never safe to 
allow any gap between the resolve to do a thing and the effort to do it. That gap gives 
time for the impulse to die down, and for other interests to come in and fill up mind 
and heart. A man seldom keeps his resolve if he puts off beginning to keep it. It is 
carrying it out that keeps the resolve alive, and enables it to continue a moral force. 
Heart-rightness and life-rightness go together, and are mutually helpfuL Doing what 
we purpose renews the purpose, and works passing resolve into ever -controlling 
principle. — E. T. 

Ver. 107. — 8oul-li/e for suffering bodies. "I am troubled above measure; quicken 
me, Lonl, according to thy Word " (Prayer-book Version). The point here can best 
be seen in a contrast. The Apostle Paul had some severe bodily infirmity, which he 
calls a " thorn in the flesh." He prayed to God about it, and asked that he might lose 
his trouble ; have his circumstances changed ; have the " thorn in the flesh removed." 
The apostle in this was on a lower level than the psalmist. He too had some serious 
form of bodily trial, or temporal trouble, that almost overwhelmed him ; and he too took . 
PSALMS — in. *• 



162 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pa. oxix. 1—176. 

the matter to God in prayer. But he did not ask for any change of his circumEtances ; 
he asked to be quickened, soul-quickened ; to be so filled with Divine life, and made 
80 Boul-strong, that he could rise above his circumstances, however distressful they 
might be. And the apostle had to be taught by God the lesson which the psalmist 
had learned ages before. God's answer to his prayer was, " My grace is sufficient for 
thee. My strength is made perfect in weakness." Power to bear is a better Divine 
blessing than any mere removal of suffering from our bodies. The wonder of our 
Lord's bearing iu the judgment-halls and Calvary is the soul-strength that triumphed 
over circumstances. 

L Sonir-LiFK IS BETTEB THAN BBLiETED suFFEBiNO. But wc find this Very hard 
to believe. We only do believe it as we realize that God's idea for a man's life is not 
the providing of a pleasant time, but the providing of a scene which shall become a 
moral discipline, out of which spiritual character may be evolved. The suffering has in 
view the character ; and to remove the suffering may be the worst thing, that could 
happen to the man. The sign of the Divine using of the suffering for the highest ends 
is found in the imparting of soul-strength. It shows the suffering to be a blessing 
tons. 

II. Somi-LIFE BEAUiT HATES AND MASTERS THE STJFFERiNa. For the real measure 
of the suffering is the measure of power to bear which the sufferer has. Some can bear 
nothing ; some can bear anything. At one time we can bear what at another over- 
whelms. Then strength to bear — ^the soul-life of full trust in God — does actually lift 
us above our sufferings, and make them feel, as Christ's yoke is, easy and light. — B. T. 

Ver. 110. — God's Word the safety of the tempted. " The ungodly have laid a snare 
for me ; but yet I swerved not from thy commandments." Temptations are sonaetimes 
open and manifest, and we know what we are doing when we resist them. But often 
they sire secret and subtle, and we have nothing evidently to oppose. Then our safety 
depends on our moral and spiritual health and vigour, which in a natural way resists 
the encroachment of spiritual disease. The secrecy and trickiness of much of out 
temptation to evil is indicated by the psalmist's calling it a snare. Illustration may be 
taken from our phy^cal relation to infectious disease. A man may, in the way of his 
duty, have to go where there is infectious disease. Then he braces up his will to a 
positive resistance, and so is in great measure guarded. But a man may, in the ordinary 
course of life, without knowing it, be subject to infection ; theu his safety absolutely 
depends on the measure of his vitality. Vital force is resistance of disease. Fungus 
grows on the parts of trees in which the life is flagging. The psalmist here declares 
that the resolute will and persistent effort to keep God's commandments, had proved to 
he a power of moral health and life which had kept him from insidious temptations 
that were like snares. 

I. Evil oannot fitt its bnabeb m the good man's path. Not actually in the 
path. The highway of holiness God keeps, and makes a plain path. It is a well-kept 
road ; he allows no obstructions, and removes all perils. If a man will only keep in 
the way of righteousness, his path shall be clear right through, his life shall be like the 
light which "shineth more and more unto the perfect day." It is God's narrow way, 
and nobody and nothing can put obstacles or snares into it. 

XL Evil can put its bnabes just on one side of the good man's path. 
There is a line which it may not j^ass, but it puts its snares as near to the line as it 
possibly can. They are well in the good man's sight, and always most attractively 
disguised. But the good man must swerve a little from the right, and step over the 
line, before he can possibly fall into the snare. The man is in the wrong before he 
does the wrong. 

III. Thk good man's safety lies in going stbaioht on. Swerving is the peril; 
looking about is the mistake. We know God's will; then let us keep on doing it. 
" Let thine eyes look straight on." — R. T. 

Ver. 112. — Our power over our own hearts. "I have inclined my heart." "The 
sinful heart will run any way : upon earthly things, upon evil things, or upon imperti- 
nent and unseasonable things ; but it will not come to or keep upon that which it 
should mind ; therefore it must be taken as by a strong hand, and set upon spiritual 



PB. oxnt. 1-176.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 163 

things, set on musing and meditation of heavenly things. The psalmist took and bent 
hi§ heart <w a thing bending too much to other things ; set his mind on musing on it. 
He found his heart an<i tlie Law of God too far asunder, and so would continue, unlesi 
he brought them together and made them one. If he had not brought his heart to the 
Word, he had never meditated ; the object cannot apply itself to the mind, but the 
mind must bring itself to the object. Ko holy duties will come to us ; we must come 
to them " (Nathanael Banew, 1670). 

L Wb reooonize onB foweb oveb odb own liteb. We say that a man may 
make of his life what he pleases. He can set before him standards and rules of 
conduct, and compel his actions to conform to them. His power is indeed within 
limitations, so that he cannot always do the things thnt he would. There are limita« 
tions arising from (1) natural character, feebleness of will, etc. ; (2) imperfect mental 
and moral training ; (3) hindering circumstances ; (4) resistance of other wills. And 
yet every man knows that the dominion given to man in this world includes, and 
Indeed reaches, its higher forms in the dominion of his own conduct and relationships. 

IL Wx NEED TO BEOoaNizB OUB FOWEB ovBB ouB OWN HEABTS. Because a vague 
sentiment easily grows on us that our hearts are the sphere only of the Divine 
operations, and we can do nothing with them, but must leave thera wholly to the 
indwelling Spirit. This, however, is exaggerating and misrepresenting a most vital 
and precious truth. What we cannot do in the inclining and shaping of our hearts or 
affections should bring to view how much there is that we can do. We can put 
ourselves in the way of nourishing all good affections and emotions. We can keep out 
of the way of things that would unworthily bias or occupy our hearts. And we 
may keep ever fresh in our convictions that the power which we have to incline our 
own hearts is power on which God's power rests, and through which his power 
works.— B. T. 

Yer. 113. — The offence of the insincere. " I hate them that are of a double mind " — 
men who "halt between two opinions" (1 Kings xviii. 2). "Perhaps we are to think 
of those among the Jews who were for political reasons favourably inclined towards 
foreign customs and ideas, and who would not throw in their lot frankly and courage- 
ously with the national party." Compare St. James's "double-minded man" (i« 8). 
The good man has a natural repngnance to the " two-faced " man. He revolts &om 
him. He cannot trust him. He shrinks firom him as from the serpent, which is the 
type of subtlety in a Imd and perilous sense. When the ideal Man moved to and fro 
among men, this characteristic of the good man was most marked in him. He was 
keenly sensitive to insincerity; he most vigorously denounced the hypocrite; the two- 
faced man was ever an un> ndurable offence to him. 

L The insincebe abb an offence to bveet man. Genuineness is the basis of 
all human trust. The scherat-r undermines society. We can only deal with our feUow- 
men on the assumption that thi-y are what they seem to be. Home, friendship, 
business, society, nations. Churches, all are so seriously injured by the influence of the 
insincere, that they are always on the watch for them. To stand in any relation in this 
world, a man must be true to hiiftself. 

IL The insincere abb an offence to the good man. Everything that is 
characteristic of man is sharpened and polished (furbished) by his becoming a good man. 
And this may especially be observed in relation to truth and truthfulness. To appre- 
hend and know Qo<\ is to gain an altogether higher estimate of sincerity; for he 
" desireth truth in the inward parts." And to endeavour to live a godly life is to 
establish and confirm truth as the basis of character and relationships; and the man 
of truth requires truth in others. And he is keen to detect and to renounce that 
almost unconscious insincerity into which men fall whose lives are not ruled by high 
and noble principles. Their "permissions" are an offence to him.- 

III. The IN8IN0BRK ABE AN OFFENCE TO GoD. This can be illustrated from Old 
Testament character-studies, from Psalms, Proverbs, and Prophets ; but more fully 
from the relations of the God-Man, the Lord Jesus, with the hypocrite and the 
Insincere (Matt, xxiii.). — B. T. 

Ver. 116. — ITie nUtchievoua influence of the ditobedienL "Away from me, ye 



1«4 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. oxix. 1— lift 



wicked 1 " (Prayer-book Version). If we take the psalmist as representing the nation 
Israel establifihing itself again after the CaptiTity, then the verse expresses its determi- 
nation to purify itself from the leaven of evil influence ; from the power of every one 
who, and everything which, cnuld be a hindrance to the full and worthy re-establishment 
of the Jehovah-religion. We may somewhat enlarge on this so as to get a point that 
will give us practical and helpful applications. Here is a distinct apprehension of the 
evil influence exerted by the wicked, which rouses indignation, and impels the psalmist 
to say vigorously, " Away from me, ye wicked 1 " The wicked man, in the view of the 
psalmist, is the self-willed man, who refuses to shape his conduct by the rule and Law 
and will of God. And that sort of man is found in every sphere of human association 
—in the . home, the business, the social circle, the senate. And everywhere that 
man is, he must be, a mischief-maker. What is the mischievous influence that 
he exerts? 

I. He fbesentb am evil example. This is familiar, but point may be gained by 
showing that in every sphere of life there are the immature, who are specially susceptible 
to influence, and unable to resist the attractiveness of evil example. For instance, the 
insidious doubtings and questionings of the evil ones have no power on the matured, 
but seriously affect the immature. 

IL He BBEAE8 vp the unity of entebpbibe. He is always the other one, the 
ubjector, the one who pulls the other way, who wants something else. He is the 
drag on all good effort. This may be illustrated in relation to united prayer. He 
prays against the [)rayer, and so prevents the blessing which is promised to unity. 

III. He bbinss on the judoments of God whioh affect othebs beside himself. 
" The wicked shall not go unpunished," but it is not possible, under the conditions of 
human existence, to isolate the punishment to tlie evil-doer. Those in association with 
him must share in the effects of the judgment (see the cases of Achan, Korah, etc.). 
The evil-disposed persons in the new Jewish nation might bring judgments on the 
nation by their wilful doings. Therefore the psalmist is anxious for distinct and entire 
separation from them. — B. T. 

Ver. 116. — Self-distrust. " Let me not be ashamed of my hope." " A man would 
be ashamed of his hope if it turned out that this was not based upon a sure foundation." 
But here the psalmist evidently expresses a kind of fear of himself. He is afraid lest 
he should be ashamed of his hope, and so earnestly cries to God to save him from 
himself. 

L Self-distrust as a seobet of uobal foweb. It belongs to the normal condition 
of man as a dependent creature. He ought to distrust himself; if he does not, he 
cannot be reliant on a Power beyond himself. A self-confident man is making the 
attempt to be something that he is not. He is trying to transcend his normal condition; 
and in the measure of his success he becomes an unnatural being. He is a "law 
onto himself," and that a created being never can be. Further than this, a self- 
distrust kept within due limits is an element of moral power, because it leads him 
(1) never to act without due consideration and care ; (2) never to act without outlook- 
ing and uplouking for grace and help from a higber« power. And man is only the 
moral being that he can be, and was intended to be, when he is man inwardly guided, 
moved, restrained, inspired, by the indwelling God. Normal man says, "I cannot, 
but God can through me." 

II. Self-distrust as a wbakenikq of hobal foweb. And this it is when it 
is only in a small degree intellectual, and in a very large degree emotional. Self- 
distrust becomes perilous sentimentality in some forms of sectarian religious life. It 
is exaggeration of sentiment to assume that, in the matter of redemption, or in the 
ordering of the godly life, God must do everything and man can do nothing. So long 
as self-distrust holds itself ready to respond to what comes of its reliance on Ood, it is 
healthy. When self-distrust is fostered by introspection, by examination of variable 
feelings, or by attempting to match feeling with impossible human standards, it is 
unhealthy, and utterly weakening to the moral fibre. Self-distrust that makes a man 
miserable and idle is, by its influence, stamped as bad. Self-distrust that inspires 
trust, self-distrust that persists in keeping on doing active duty, is healthy and good, 
honouring to God, and every way hopeful for man. — R. T. 



PS. cxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 165 

Vers. 119, 120. — Confidence in God's judgments Ihndinq vaith fears. " Thou puttest 
•way all the ungodly of the earth like dross. . . . My flesh trembleth for fear of thee." 
The good man is variously affected by the ju<igments of Gtod. He is not always in the 
mood to view them aright. It is intended that he should be influenced by them. It 
is well to remember that Divine judgments never exhaust their mission in punishing 
wickedness, they are designed to warn the unwary, and to assure the perplexed of the 
living working of the great Vindicator. But good people sometimes niisuse Divine 
judgments. I'hey do when they exaggerate judgment as a feature of the Divine 
administration. They do when they dwell on the physical suffering that the judgment 
may involve, and pay little heed to the moral purpose which is at the heart of all 
Divine judgment. They do when they cherish the fear that the Divine judgments 
are indiscriminate, at least practically, and sweep away the righteous with the wicked. 
And when it seems as if, in a bodily and temporal sense, the judgment of the wicked does 
affect the righteous, the good man is full of fears lest his bodily calamities should destroy 
his heart-confidence in Qod. There are human calamities, such as epidemic disease ; 
natural calamities, such as storm and famine ; and national calamities, such as war and 
commercial panic, which the good and evil share together, and everything depends on 
the good man keeping the right attitude of mind in relation to such things. 

I. What the aooo man bees. In some moods — as that of Asaph — all he can see 
is the wicked prospering, and then he is tempted to question the justice of the Divine 
dealings. In other moods he can see how short is the tether of the wicked, and how 
certain and overwhelming are the Divine judgments. The difSculty is that the seeing 
is usually so unqualified ; it is exclusive and exaggerated on the one side or on the 
ether. 

IL What the oood uan feels. Based on what he sees. He seldom can tmst 
his feelings, because they respond to sense-conditions, and are inefSciently toned by the 
sanctified will. So he either feels as if Qod were neglecting him, or as if he would be 
borne away by circumstances. Then he needs the cheer of God's Word. — B. T. 

Ver. 125. — The cry for spiritual diseemmmt. "Oh grant me understanding." By 
this term is often to be understood that particular spiritual discernment which is a 
special power of the spiritual man ; of the man who looketh " not at the things which 
are seen, but at the things which are not seen ; for the things which are seen are 
temporal ; but the things which are not seen are eternal." It is scarcely possible to 
describe the spiritual man more sharply or more suggestively than is done by the 
Apostle Paul in these sentences (2 Cor. iv. 18). By " understanding " is said to be meant 
" a deeper knowledge of God's Law and dispensation," but this keeps us outside, on the 
surface of things ; and what the good man wants is inward discernment of the relativity 
of Divine counsels, warnings, revealings, and promises, to himself. We only understand 
moral things as we discern their relativity. The immediate connection of the verse 
may be the delay of God's judgment on the wicked. The good man often finds himself 
puzzled to explain God's ways with the wicked. " If our heart fail in its longing for 
speedy retribution, ' it is our own infirmity ; ' fuller conception of the mind of God 
would take away perplexity and impatience." 

I. SpJEITDAL discernment as one of the POWEBS of the 8FIBITUAI. LIFE. The 

Divine life in man involves two things : 1. A quickening of the powers of the soul 
that tave been dimmed and deadened by the service of self and sin. 2. A bestowment 
of freth powers, as trusts (gifts) for the ministry to which the renewed man is called. 
Spiritual di.soernment is one of the natural power.s that get quickened, freed from 
entanglements, and exercised. But it is a power whose vigour depends on the general 
culture of the spiritual life. It fades and revives with the variation of our soul-moods. 
So its renewal is a subject of prayer. 

IL Spiritual discernment as the work of the indwellino Spirit. This leads 
us into the Christian apprehension of the matter. In the renewed man the Holy Ghost 
abides. He works his work of grace in us through our faculties. These and especially 
our spiritual discernment, he quickens into power. — R. T. 

Ver. 126. — Making void OocPs Word. "For they have made void thy Law." 
Rendered it ineffective. Put it aside, as if it were some impossible, ineffective thing, 



166 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. cxix. 1—176. 

that wu all very irell as an ornament, but of no real use in this workaday world. 
There are many who still treat God's Word in this way. They di) not take the trouble 
to deny its claims, to oppose its demands, or to doubt its teachings; they simply 
"shunt it off on a side line," and along the main track their trains go hurrying to and 
bo, heedless of the Word of God on the siding. It may remain there for ever for all 
they care, and at least it is safely out of the way. They " make void God's Law." Can 
we set out some of the ways in which this is done ? First, however, it is necessary to 
present the claims of God's Word to direct and control man's life. It is no mere store- 
house of excellent sentiments ; it is an actual chart, guide, adviser, of a good man's 
conduct. It must come into closent relation to life and conduct. And it is pre- 
cisely this demand on its behalf which the man who would live unto the "devices 
and desires of his own heart" resists. It wants to be effective, he wants it to b« 
meffeetive. 

I. Meit make void God's Law bt bimplt negIiECTino it. And this is the moat 
successful way. It gains the end with the least trouble, and involves no conflict with 
conscience. The Bible on the shelf, only dusted, is void enough. It does nobody either 
good or harm. 

II. Men hake void God's Law bt misusing it. And this they do when they 
employ it for bulstering up their sectarian opinions ; regard it as a storehouse of material 
for doctrinal conflicts rather than as a guide to practical life. 

III. Men make void God's Law bt thbowino doubts upon it. Such doubts 
have been thrown in every age, and do but take on some new form for each new age. 
The mischief of the doubts is tiieir plucking away from us the sense of authority in the 
Word. It is the serpent's perpetual whisper, " Yea, hath God said ? " To which the 
proper answer is, " Yes, he has." 

IV. Men .MAKE void God's Law bt failing to do what it enjoins. The test 
of right treatment of God's Word is obedience. " Surely in vain made he it, the pen of 
the scribes is in vain," if men hear and do not ; know and obey not. For them the Law 
Is void.— R. T. 

Ver. 128.— The adf-wiRed treatment of OocTs Word. « Therefore hold I straight all 
thy commandments " (Prayer-book Version). " In the word ' therefore ' there is • 
peculiar beauty. The violation of God's Law by the wicked only brings out more 
intensely in his servants the sense of its preciousness, and the enthusiasm of devotion 
to it." It is not so much the wickedness of the wicked that is in the psalmist's mind, 
as the wrong and unworthy ways in which they twist and turn God's Word, so that 
it shall either excuse their wickedness or seem to have nothing tu do with it. He 
" hates every false way," every way of dealing with God's way which is not genuine and 
straightforward ; and for himself lie will persist in " holding straight " all the command* 
msnts, dealing honestly and sincerely with them. 

I. Self-will selects from God's Wobd what butts it. It is true that every 
one does and must select from God's Word what is most helpful ; and that all Bible- 
readers find different parts and portions helpful in difierent moods and circumstances. 
The Bible of each individual is a much smaller book than the Bible God has provided 
for the world. But the good man (1) recognizes the value and authority of all; 
(2) seeks relativity to his jiassing spiritual needs ; and (3) depends on Divine illumi- 
nation and guidance for the parts he finds ; giving due heed to them, whether he likes 
them or not. The self-willed man takes out only what he likes or what will serve 
his ends, and consequently his Bible is his own ; it is not God's. 

II. Self-will distorts even what it gets. Only the sincere, God-honouring 
mind sees in the Word what God put ttiere. If a man brings his own ideas to the 
Word, looking in it for what he wants to find, the mere language will easily take shape 
that satisfies him. He will loudly assert what it says, in entire indifference to what it 
means. This self-willeii distortion of God's Word to support preconceived doctrinal 
ideas is the treacherous basis on which all si ctariauism rests. But it is more important 
to rebuke the distortion of God's Word which is made to support practical unrighteous- 
ness. It has even been made the minister, and the excuser, uf man's sin. — R.'T. 

Ver. 129 — High estimates of God's Word. " Thy testimonies are wonderful." Dr. 



PS, cxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 167 

Barry's outline of this section is suggestive. " The key-note of this meditative section 
is struck in the first words. God's dispensation is wonderful : ' As the heaven is highei 
than the earth, so are his ways higher than our ways.' His Word gives light only to 
simple faith (ver, 130) ; it satisfies only those who long for it and love it (vers. 131, 132) ; 
it saves from oppression only those who rest on his promise, and are willing to be 
taught (vers. 133 — 135) ; for those who will not bow thoir hearts to it, there is no 
salvation ; over them we can but weep (ver, 136)." 8. T. Coleridge says, " All know- 
ledge begins and ends with wonder ; the first wonder is the child of ignorance ; the last 
wonder the parent of adoration." The Scriptures are " wonderful, with respect to 
(1) the matter which they contain ; (2) the manner in which they are written ; and 
(3^ the effects which they produce. The following outline is from T. Manton : 
Wonderful (1) in their majesty and composure ; which striketh reverence into the . 
hearts of those that consider. (2) They are wonderful for the matter and depth of 
mystery, which cannot be found elsewhere, concerning God, and Christ, the creation 
of the world, the souls of men, and their immortal and everlasting condition, the Fall 
of man, etc. (3) They are wonderful for their purity and perfection. The Decalogue 
in ten words compriseth the whole duty of man, and reaoheth to the very soul, and all 
the motions of the heart. (4) They are wonderful for the harmony and consent of all 
the parts. All religion is of a piece, and one part doth not interfere with another, but 
conspireth to promote the great end of subjection of the creature to God. (5) They 
are wonderful for the power of them. There is a mighty power which goeth along with 
the Word of God, and astonisheth the hearts of those that consider it and feel it. 
Wonderful, as a term, does much more than express admiration and appreciation. It 
implies unusualness ; the thing to which it is applied is other than we expected. And 
the otherwiseness suggests a higher and Divine source. The wonderful is the super- 
natural.— B. T. 

Ver. 133. — Ood praeticalU/ applying hit ovm Word. " Cider my steps in thy Word." 
It would seem as if the psalmist were asking God to do what he ought to do for bizn- 
Belf. Ordering footsteps, shaping conduct, is a man's own business. But that is to 
miss the point of the psalmist. He knew well enough that God only works with a 
man ; and that God will order no man's footsteps unless the man is ordering his own. 
It is not extravagant to see in the psalmist's plea an anticipation of the higher truth 
of Christianity, that God, as the living God, is actually in his Word, and working its 
work. God was in Christ, using for the redemption of man his human manifestation. 
Christ, risen, living, spiritual, is actually in his gospel, as it is proclaimed to men, 
using it for the carrying out of his redemptive mission. In this we have but the 
unfolding, the development, of what has been the truth concerning God's Word through 
all the ages. In whatever form it has come to men, it has been inseparable from G«d. 
■ God has been in it. We are always wrong when we try to make two things — God'a 
Word, and God. The Word is a living thing, and its life is God. Then when the 
psalmist is most anxiously seeking the counsels of the Word for the guidance of hia 
conduct, with the most resolute intention to shape his conduct by what he discovers 
to be God's will, he can most sincerely pray the prayer of this text, for God is in the 
Word, prepared to make all due applications of it, in the life that is freely and fully 
opened to him. When the genuine man takes God's Word into his mind and hear^ 
he takes Ood in, and he therefore has not knowledge only, but knowledge and power. 
He knows what he oiight to do; he feels what he wants to do ; but beyond and above 
this, he realizes what he can do. God is no distant Being communicating a rule for 
his guidance. God is with him, and in him, ^epared to order his footsteps, to help 
him in ordering his footsteps by the rule. — B. T. 

Ver, IM.— Freedom in order to le righteous. The tone of this entire psalm i» 
that of a man who is in some kind of bondage to his fellow-man, either material, 
mental, or moral. It may reflect the feeling of the exile in Babylon ; but perhaps it 
reflects better the feeling of the restored exile, whose endeavours to resuscitate the 
Israelite nation and religion were so variousl}' opposed by the neighbouring kingdoms, 
and by political parties. The restored exile, because of his joy in his new-found liberty, 
felt all the more deeply the way in which he vvaf ch-nked and hindered by fresh forms 



168 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [w. cxix. 1—176. 

of the " oppresBion of man." And true to the Jewish instincts, he saw the oppression 
chiefly as a hindrance to his hope of restoring the Jehovah-worship. 

L The value of fbeedom defends on the use we hake of it. A chUd had 
better not be free, because he dues not know what to do with freedom. He gradually 
gains the freedom as he gains the control of himself and the control of his circumstances. 
Seme men never can be free. They are not masters of themselves enough to have so 
serious a trust. Freedom is a ]iassionate desire of humanity everywhere, and in all 
its stages. It is God's gift to man, and his inalienable right. And yet with this 
passion for his own freedom there goes another passion to hold his brother in bonds. 
Man would use his freedom to take away his brother's ; or to satisfy his lower animal 
nature. There is dignity and peril in mental freedom and in moral freedom. They 
depend on the use we make of the trust. 

II. We use oue freedom abioht onlv when we put oitbselves in bonds. 
The psalmist wants his liberty in order that he may keep God's precepts. Liberty 
for man is but licence when it is simple freedom from restraint. It is a noble and 
intelligent thing only when a man uses it to fix rules for himself, or to put himself 
into the Divine rule. Men think of freedom as getting rid of the restraints of right- 
eousness, so that they may do what they like. But the true liberty, the only liberty 
a man can desire who looks aright on life, is gettiug rid of the restraints of evil, self- 
will, and self-pleasing, so that he may be free to do what Ch>d likes. He wants liberty 
to be righteous.— R. T. 

Ver. 135. — The shining face. The expression is clearly a figurative one, and the 
idea is suggested by life at court. The courtiers watch the expression on the counten- 
ance of their king. The sign of his favour and acceptance is given in his bright, 
smiling, " shining " face. If they are out of favour, they know it by the darkened look 
upon his face. It is a peculiarity of Eastern life that a master says as little as possible 
to bis servant, and expects that servant to watch his every movement, and to interpret 
every change in bis face, and do everything for him without his speaking k word. 
And Eastern servants gain a marvellous skill in thus comprehending their masters' 
wishes. 

I. God's bbinino face is the sign of Divine favoub. The face of God is con- 
stantly referred to in the Old Testament. To turn the back on a person is to show 
one's self angry with him. To turn the face towards a person is to show one's self 
favourable to him. "Thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled;" "Lord, lift 
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us ; " " No man hath seen God at any 
time." All man ever has had, or can have, is a spiritually realized presence. And if 
our spiritual senses are duly cultured, we do not need the help of bodily appearances. 
Soul-apprehensions become real and satisfying. And it comes to this with us — God 
gives us the inward feeling, the assurance of his Divine favour and acceptance, and we 
want to express what we feel, and plain prosaic language does not satisfy us, so we call 
it " the shining of his face upon us." But what must we be if God's face is to be ever 
shining on us ? 

II. God's shining faob is the inspibation to noble bndeatoub. There may 
be some who can never do right and good things unless they are kept up to duty by 
threatening and the whip. But the better-natured men respond to approval and 
encouragement. Their inspiration is their master's smile. Kindly praise, the cheer- 
ful word, a loving approval, will draw out a man's best. The good man will do any- 
thing for him who treats him kindly and trustingly. Let God's shining face be on 
us, and it is our joy to do his will. — B. T. 

Ver. 137. — Eesta in Ood'a righteousnesi. " The soul takes refuge in the sense of the 
eternity of righteousness, both against all transitory forgetfiilness and denial of it, and 
■gainst all contempt and persecution of those who love it. The Law is ' right for 
evermore ; ' its righteousness must shine out in the end." " The initial letter with 
which every verse (of this section) commences is the Hebrew te, and the key-word 
is ' purity.' " The expression, " Righteous art thou, Jehovah," we should express by 
saying, " Ideal, or standard, or absolute Righteousness art thou." 

I. BiGHTEonsNESs IB CONCEIVABLE. Man is able to create in his mind the idea of 



M. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 169 

absolute right — the moral straight line. But this suggests a philosophical difBculty. 
la that an innate idea, or is it dependent on acquired knowledge? Can man know 
right without knowing wrong ? Can man conceive perfect right without a revealed 
standard ? Man has the mental power of conceiving completion. Ko matter what he 
deals with, he can think of it in a perfect state. And this power can be applied to 
moral things ; he can conceive complete rightness. But the fact must be noted, that 
man cannot think without using the materials provided by God's revelation in natvire 
and in his own nature. Man knows nothing of himself, of the world, or of God, save 
through revelations made to him, which are the necessary materials of his thinking. 
God helps him to conceive righteousness. 

II. KiQHTEOusNEBS IB CONCEIVED AS PERSONAL. A philosophcr may conceive such 
a perfection of morals as he can call " righteousness," but his conception is absolutely 
ineffective to him. It lies wholly outside the man himself. The idea must be associ- 
ated with a person, and the person must be kin to the person having the idea, or it can 
be no power. Absolute perfection in morals, or righteousness, associated with a person 
kin with man, is Ood. " Righteous art thou, Jehovah." 

III. A BIOHTEOnS PEBBON CAN BECOME THE SOUL'S BEST. BecaUSB righteOUSUeSS 

then ceases to be an abstract thing. It becomes relative. The person may have a 
personal interest in making us what he is. " The Eternal, who makes for righteous- 
ness."— R. T. 

Yer. 141. — Self-estimiatet. " I am small, and of no reputation." It is pointed out 
that these words are very suitable to the struggling Israel of the Return, which was so 
much despised by the surrounding kingdoms, and had to keep up such a prolonged 
struggle with the Eastern powers. But we may take it as a remarkable revelation of 
one of the weaknesses of human nature. Precisely what men never can do wisely and 
worthily is " estimate themselves," appraise their own moral condition. Imperfection 
or exaggeration attaches to aU self-estimates. 

I. The bblp-estimateb of the wobldlt man. Except with the hypocrisy of a 
Pecksniff, or a Uriah Heep, the worldly man never talks like our text. If he feels 
small, he never tells anybody what he feels. He makes the most of himself, and is 
only too ready to see a strength and goodness which are not really there. But it is, 
perhaps, truer to say that a complete self-estimate a man never makes, because he does 
not take into consideration his moral and spiritual condition. And a man is, first of 
all, a moral being. And also because he has no adequate standard by which to judge 
himself. He can but make himself a law, judge himself by himself; and he cannot 
possibly reach any wise or worthy conclusions in that way. " Could an emmet pry into 
itself, it might marvel at its own anatomy. But let it look on eagles to discern how 
mean a thing it is " (Tupper). 

IL The sblf-bstimates of the godlt man. There is always grave danger of 
his erring on the side of undue depreciation. The good man is usually half afraid of 
his goodness. His religious life begins with a deep sense of sin and helplessness. He 
regards himself as a monument of grace. He wants to keep up absolute dependence 
on God, and so he is gravely afraid of every form of self-confidence. He dare not 
" think of himself more highly than he ought to think," and so his thinking is incom- 
plete, exaggerated on one side. 

And there is a further danger associated with particular sections of religious profes- 
sions. It is assumed that God is honoured and pleased by man's self-abasement, and 
even self-debasement ; and men think it is pious to " write bitter things against them- 
selves." But God always wants truth and sincerity. And it is neither truth nor 
sincerity to say that we are " small, and of no reputation," when, in fact, we are not. 
— R.T. 

Ver. 142. — All-round righteousness. " Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteous- 
ness." The psalmist uses the word "everlasting" in a figurative way. He would 
never take the trouble to say so small, and indeed so unnecessary, a thing as that 
God's righteousness would last for ever. That is a truism. All righteousness, God's 
and man's, lasts for ever: it can do nothing else. There are no forces that can stop it 
or kill It. Goodness is in its very nature eternaL And everlastingness is but one o' 



170 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxix. 1— lT6i 

the qualities or attributes of righteousness ; but in view of the limitations of human 
language, it may be used to represent all the qualities of it ; or, as we have expiessed 
it, everlasting righteousness may stand for complete, all-round rijjhtcousness. 

I. All-bocnd bighteocskess is the biohteousness of God. This is true not 
only of that abstract idea of righteousness which we connect with God, but also of that 
practical idea :f righteousness which concerns his relations with men and dealings 
with them. " Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" Find God where you 
may, he is always doing right. You never take him at unawares ; you never find him 
below himself. His righteousness is an alwayi righteousness, and "always" includes 
" everlasting," but suggests much more than " everlasting." We think of man as a 
dual being, having an internal life of thought and feeling, and an external life of 
action and relation. As man is made in the image of God, we may think of (jDi'i 
righteousness as including himself and his doings. There is no kind of failing harmony, 
but righteousness all round and quite through. A righteousness that never fails. 

II. All-bound biqhteousness is to be the biohteousness of man. Can man 
be satisfied with the assurance that the righteousness he may gain will last for ever ? 
Must he not say, " I am quite willing to leave that, if I can only be assured of the 
quality of the righteousness " ? The man who wants a present righteousness, and must 
have an all-round one, alone gains w&at is worthy to receive the everlasting stamp. 
All-round righteousness is the sublimest conception a man may form. It includes right 
thinking, right willing, right feeling, right acting. Righteousness within. Eight 
relations. And a bloom on all — the Christly bloom — wonderful and beautiful as t^at 
which lies on autumn fruits. — B. T. 

Ver. 147. — The plea of the prayerfal. So intent was the psalmist on devout medita- 
tion and prayer, that he arose before the dawn for that purpose. And in his prayer he 
pleaded his trust. " I hoped in thy Word." It is as if he had said, " I trusted thee, 
surely thou wilt respond to my trust." There are two great pleas which man may use 
when approaching God in prayer — God's promise, his own trust. And both are power- 
ful and prevailing pleas with God. 

I. Tbust dbaws out the best of evebt man. It is perhaps the mightiest of all 
moral forces. The parent gets the best out of the child by trusting him ; and the 
child gets the best out of the parents by trusting them. In common business relations, 
the keen man, who trusts nobody, is badly served; the man who trusts his fellows is 
indeed occasionally deceived, but usually he gets the best attention, the best goods, 
and the best services. The master who trusts his servants and employees puts them 
on their mettle, and secures their best of energy and devotion. Show little or no con- 
fidence in your fellow-men, and all you can get from them is drudgery. It is often 
noticed how positions of trust rapidly develop a man's powers. It would be a world 
full of poor characters but for the ennobling power of mutual trust. Society is built 
on mutual trust. 

II. Tbcst dbaws tbe most obaoious bebponses fbom God. "Because he hath 
set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him." 1. God is to be thought of as a 
Father, and his relations with us understood through our paternity ; and we have 
suggested what wonders child-trust works in family life. 2. God is to be thought of 
as a Master ; and we have seen what response the workman ii.akes to the trust of the 
master, and the master to the trust of the workman. 3. God is to be thought of as a 
King ; and we know how he is moved when any one relies upon his gracious Word. 
It is but using imperfect human language, based on human analogies, if we say, 
" Would we take Goil at his best ? " Then we must trust him fully, absolutely rely on 
him, take him at his word, commit ourselves to him. This is our all-prevailing plea, 
« I have hoped in thy Word."— R. T. 

Ver. 148. — The helpfulness of meditation. " Mine eyes prevent the night-watches." 
" Prevent " is here used in the sense of " anticipate." When the night-watches come he is 
wide awake ; he does not let them interrupt his meditations by their demand for sleep. 
Ue is not taken at unawares. According to tbe psalmist's thought, morning is the 
fitting time for earnest njsolves, and evening the time for quiet meditation. Medita- 
tion can be understood when contrasted with study. Study deals with something 



P8. oxix. 1—176.] , THE BOOK OF PSALMi Ml 

outside the mind, and presented to it. Meditation deals with the contents of the mind 
itself, and that which may be suggested by the indwelling Spirit. A panorama of the 
contents of our mind is continually moving before us. Usually we rapidly select to 
meet the need of the moment, according to the mental laws of associatiou. In medita- 
tion we let the panorama move by more slowly, pay more quiet heed to its varied con- 
tents, and so discover and enjoy much that usually escapes attention. Apply this to 
the panorama of our knowledge of God's Word, and we have rdigioui meditation. 

I. Meditation helps us bt makino ns enow uobb. Illustrate by the difference 
between the tourist who rushes through delightful scenery, getting no more than 
general impressions, and the tourist who tarries •while in one place, finding out ever- 
fresh charms, and seeing everything beautiful in new moods and settings. The man 
who only read God's Word may know much, but the man who quietly meditates 
therein knows more. 

II. Meditation helps us by UAEiNa ub know betteb. Illustrate by the stereo- 
scope. Just look into it, and you can see nothing unusual. Look fixedly, quietly, 
and everything in the picture seems to get place and relation. You realize vistas and 
distances, and the full charm is revealed. The Word of God has but little to give in 
response to a mere look ; all its best things come to view when the soul is quiet 
enough to fix its gaze, and look long and lovingly. — B. T. 

Ver. 149. — The cry fw more. The Revised Version has a marginal note which is 
suggestive, "Quicken me, Lord, as thou art wont;" but this is given also in the 
Prayer-book Version, and for ver. 156. The point suggested is, that when a soul has 
received spiritual blessing from God, it can never be satisfied unless that blessing is 
renewed. Or, to put it in another way, the good man can heartily rejoice in the gracious 
past, but he cannot be satisfied with what has been, or with what he has had — ^he 
always wants the past to become the present. v v 

I. A MAN MAY HAVE SINGLE BLES8INQ8 FBOM QoT>. We are accustomcd to think 
of "quickening" as a single Divine act, and to say, "Ye must be born from above." 
And if by quicliening we mean the imparting of new life, that must be a single blessing. 
But a life existing may need quickening; and in that seuse tlie blessing may be 
renewed. Life is full of single blessings from God, and these may unduly occupy our 
attention. They really are the only indications of the blessings that attend us every 
day in life. They are like the miracles of Jesus, which do but show what the Father 
God is doing for us, in healing and providing, every day. 

IL A MAN MAY HAVE CONTINUOUS BLB8SINQ8 FBOM GoD. If wc may uso language 
that properly applies only to man, we may say that God gets into the habit of blessing 
us with his dnily quickenings. He blesses us as he is wont to do. There is a ground 
of confidi nee in this. God in the soul's life is like God in nature. He is in such a 
way of making his sun rise day by day, that we have come to depend on it. But tiiere 
is a side of peril in this for w. God's regularity in blessing makes us either set up a 
claim, or miss the recognition of God's hand. He has sometimes to break the continuity 
in order to arouse our attention. 

III. A MAN MAY HAVE PRESENT BLESSINGS PEOM QOD. That IS, bleSSmgS rCOOg- 

nized as present; the soul awake to observe that they are present, and so responding 
aright to them. When the soul wants more it is prepared to recognize God s qmcken- 
ine grace actually with it to-day. What God has done, and what God usually does, 
are not enough. The soul cannot ruit unless it knows and feels what God m domg. 
— R. T. 

Ver. 155.— Conditions leyond self-help. "Oh, consider my adversity, and deliver 
me." Plainly the adversity is such that the psalmist feels he cannot deliver himself. 
Therefore he pleads with God to deliver him. Some of the trials and afflictions of life 
are within the man's own reach and control, if he has the help of God. But there are 
some forms of adversity which bring to a man an overwhelming sense of self-helpless- 
Then, if he be a good man, he maliee absolute committal of his case to God, and 



nesB. 



seeks Divine intervention in his behalf. Illustrate by the helplessness of Israel at the 
shores of the Red Sea. Then they were bidden " Stand still, and see the salvation of 
JehoTab.* Men, however, often seriously mistake if they ask Divine intervention, 



172 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. f"- o^cix. 1— 17«. 

when what they really need is Divine help ; not that God should do for them, hut should 
enable them to do. Apply this to the deliverance of the soul from sin. Here man is 
helpless. " God must save, and God alone." But usually the saved man must unite 
his labour and his dependence on God in every endeavour to live out the godly life. 
Only very occasionally has he to put down his tools and absolutely wait while God 
works for him. Bunyan's pilgrim only once in his journey had to put down his 
woapons, and betake himself to " All-Prayer." It is weak sectarian feeling that exag- 
gerates self-helplessness, and thinks thus to honour God. Here the psalmist shows his 
anxiety by two petitions. 

L "CoNSiDEB MY AFFLICTION." He wants God to consider it, estimate it, see what 
it really is, involves, and needs, because he feels how easily he might misapprehend it. 
It might not really be as serious as he thonuht it was. He might so easily read it 
through his feeling rather than through his judgment. So he wants God to take 
it into his consideration, and so find out what could best be done with it. Was not 
this what St. Paul wanted when he prayed about his " thorn " ? 

II. " Delivbk me." If God would give the matter consideration, he felt sure he would 
invent the wisest way of deliverance. He would be well content whichever way of 
deliverance God thought to be best. " Help me to do it, Lord, or do it altogether 
thyself."— R. T. 

Ver. 155.— Salvation /or tht obediently disposed. " Salvation is far from the wicked." 
Why cannot God save the wicked man against his will ? Because (1) such a salvation 
would do the wicked man no good ; and (2) because when God saves a man, what he 
saves is his bad will. Therefore the absolute first condition of salvation must neces- 
sarily be "repentance." And this truth has its further application in the life of the 
Bayed man, who is ever needing God's further salvations. He cannot have them if he 
is self-willed and rebellious. They can only come as he keeps the spirit of sonship, 
and is " obediently disposed." 

I. Salvation is far fbom the wilful. It is, and it must necessarily be. Illustrate 
by the paper which is to receive the photographic picture — it must be in a prepared 
state. The wilful man does not want the salvation. He has no intention of respond- 
ing to it. God's salvation is always a work in the man himself, not in his circumstances. 
The father, in the parable of the prodigal son, could do nothing for his boy so long aa 
he kept in his wilful mind. Hope for him dawned when " he came to himself." So 
penitence is the door of salvation. No man can ever have God's snul-salvation until 
he feels that he both needs it and wants it. There can be no waste in God's spiritual 
dealings ; and it would be waste to give salvation to a man who did not care for the 
gift, and would make no return for it. 

II. Salvation is near to the willing and obedient. These represent the atti- 
tude and mui d of mind with which (jod can work. Let a man want to ohey, God will 
help him to obey. Let a man want to get free from sin, and God will deliver and save 
him from sin. Let a man be in any kind of disability and distress, if he be a son of 
God, and cherishing the spirit of sonship, he may be sure of the Father's deliverance. 
So the preservation of right attitudes and moods of soul bears direct relation to the 
workings of the Divine Deliverer in our lives. — R. T. 

Ver. 159. — Love-inspired obedience. The psalmist "loved the precepts of God. 
Many there are who have a warm side towards the promises, but as for the precepts 
they cannot endure them. The psalmist so loved everything that was good and excel- 
lent, that he loved all God had commanded. The precepts are all of them wise and 
holy, therefore the man of God loved them extremely, loved to know them, to think of 
them, to proclaim them, and principally to practise them." As a matter of fact, what 
may, and what actually does, inspire obedience in the relationships of life ? 

L Patriotism mat inbi-ire obedience. There is a sentiment which possesses the 
soldiers of an army, which we call "patriotism," though it but poorly represents that 
term, and which makes the soldier a model of strict, exact, unquestioning, but, to a 
great extent, unintelligent, obedience. There are answering sentiments, in the religious 
sphere, which have similar and no higher powers of inspiring obedience. They carry 
us over into obedience as a big wave carries a boat over the bar. 



P8. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 173 

II. Feak mat inspire obedience. On this principle animals are, for the most 
part, trained to obey. And fear is effective on men just in the measure in which the 
animal in them is trained and the spiritual undeveloped. Fear has its moral influence 
— at least in its coarser forms — on those who occupy low and servile positions in society. 
Culture a man, and one thing yon do is deliver him from fear. 

III. DuTT liAT INSPIRE OBKDiENOE. Belatiouship involves duty; and obligation 
creates duty. And man is a higher being as the sense of duty grows in him. But a 
certain hardness, self-restraint, characterizes all obedience that is inspired only by 
duty. The man does what he must. 

IV. Love mat inspire obedience. Then the man is in the obedience. His feel- 
ing funs with it as well as his will. The whole man is borne into the service. There 
are no resistances to occasion distress. la obeying the man has the joy of doing just 
what he wishes to do. — H. T. 

Ver. 162. — Finding spoU. The contrast suggested is between the possible aims a 
man may set before him. He may want to g^ia material success, wealth, fame, posi- 
tion — things which the psalmist satirizes cleverly by calling them " spoil." He 
may want to gain that personal culture, that perfecting of character, which is the 
true end of life, and which God's Word is the supreme agency for attaining. " The 
profits made in searching the Scriptures are greater far than the trophies or spoils 
of war." 

I. The jot of finding this world's tbeabitre. This is indicated in our Lord's 
parable. " The kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field ; the which 
when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he 
hath, and buyeth that field." Worldly treasure is gained in two ways — ^by the persis- 
tent labour of a life, and by the accident of fortuitous circumstances. But the joy is 
chiefly felt when the treasure is found, lighted on, unexpectedly gained; as when 
success suddenly attends a business venture, a vein of precious metal or a spring of 
mineral oil is struck, or a fortune is left us. Then it is thought that we are to be 
specially congratulateil, and we heartily congratulate ourselves. A higher joy ought to 
be found in getting treasure as the result of a lifeloni labour; but then the capacity 
for enjoyment too often wears out with the labour. Treasure accidentally gained too 
often demoralizes. Treasure gained by force of will too often becomes temptation and 
a snare. Treasure gained worthily fails to satisfy the soul. 

II. The jot of finding the treasure of God's Word. Did we but think 
rightly, and get free from the enslaving power of the physical and the temporal, we 
should see that the treasures of character, of the interior life, of the soul, which is the 
self, are the treasures which should bring real joy to us. And the truths, counsels, 
promises, of God's Word are the treasures that enrich the soul, that alone satisfy, alonu 
meet the needs of the man, who is essentially a spiritual being, and alone bear relation 
to that continuity of life which is man's prerogative. — R. T. 

Ver. 163. — Self-serving and time-serving. By the term " lying " is specially meant 
" false faiths," deviations from, or misrepresentations of, the true religion, which i» 
" the truth." Compare the antichrist of Christianity. 

I. Falsehood in religion regarded as self-serving. It is necessary to keep in 
mind that to the Israelite the very essence of falsehood was idolatry. ?,epresent the 
unseen, spiritual Jehovah by any earthly form or figure, and to him the re [presentation 
was a lie. No form or figure could represent all God, or anything about God perfectly. 
But it was falsehood in another way, for it did but hide the fact that the man who 
made the image was really worshipping himself, his own idea, and that was acting a 
lie. In whatever way man constructs his own religion, and creates his own deity, in 
thought and imagination he is not only false to revelation, but he is false to himself; 
for he deceives himself with the idea that he is worshipping God, when all the while 
he is only projecting himself outside himself, in order to worship^ himself. Both formal 
and mental idolatry are phases of «eJ/'-worship ; and in them* both man is false to 
himself and false to God. 

n. Falsehood in reukion regarded as time-serving. The stronger man thinks 
for himself and makes his own religion ; the weaker man simply is carried along on 



174 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb, cxix. 1—176. 

the current of his age, and does aa his generation does. But he ie false to the responsi- 
bility under which his manhood lies, for he is bound to decide for himself whom or 
what he will serve. In the way of agreeing with what exists around him, common 
opinion and common worship, lie the ease and comfort of life. Resisting the age for 
the sake of truth means disability. So the man is willing to be false. And time- 
serving in religion is really the same thing as worshipping self. However it is done, 
it is always being false to God to say we are worshipping him when we, in fact, only 
bow in the temple of self^ — B. T. 

Ver. 165. — The steadying influence of Ood't Word. "They are not staggered or 
perplexed by anything which tliey meet with, either in Scripture or nature." " When 
God's Law is loved, instead of being struggled against, the conscience is at peace, and 
the inward eye is clear ; a man sees his duty, and does it, free from those stumbling- 
blocks which are ever occasion of falling to otliers." Marginal reading is, " They shidl 
have no stumbling-block." Compare our Lord's denunciation of those who " offend " 
— "put a Btumbling-block in the way of" — "one of his little ones." The point is 
that those who steady themselves by holding firm to God's Word have a sure support 
in every time of temptation or danger. There are two ways in which the knowledge 
and use of God's Word steadies us. It braces us up. It gives us something sure to 
lean upon. 

L God'b Wobd steadies bt BBAOiNa us UP. This may be illustrated by the 
careers of two youths, who leave their country homes for business city life, and the 
peril of " city snares and town traps." The one is braced up with good principles, 
and is able to resist temptation, and to throw off morally infecting disease. The 
principles of the other hang all lax and loose about him ; and he has no ready resisting 
force when the enemy "comes in like a flood." Just what familiarity with God's 
Word does is brace up our principles, brace up our moral nature, hold us together; 
nourish the vitality in every part of us, so that we are kept in health and energy. 
Mind braced up with knowledge ; heart braced up with right feeling ; will braced up 
with motive. " Let your loins be girded about." 

II. God'b Wobd steadies bt eiviNG nB soMETHma bubb to lean ufon. Dlustrate 
by the ship-captain who can always fortify his own judgment by appealing to his chart. 
It is of the utmost importance that we should preserve our sense of the authoritj/ of 
Ckxl's Word, as an absolute and final appeal ; a trusty staff on which we may lean. 
This form of the steadying power of God's Word was effectively illustrated in the 
time of our Lord's temptation. — B. T. 

Ver, 171. — Joy m OocPs responu. The metaphor in the Hebrew is " pour forth a 
stream of praise." "You have stood at the fountain-head of a stream of water, and 
admired while it bubbled up an<l ran down in a clear little rivulet, till at length it 
swelled into the mighty river. Such is the allusion here. The heart taught of God 
cannot contain itself, but breaks out in praise and singing. This would m the effect 
of Divine illumination, and this would be felt to be a privilege, yea, a high duty " 
(John Stephen), 

L Joy finds expression in praise. " Is any merry, let him sing psalms." There 
are natural expressions, by the body and the bodUy facidt>es, of all the various emotions. 
Let a man be unsuphisticated, and free from exteruai restraints, and bis body will 
respond to his moods. He will tear things if he is vexed. He will drop his head if 
he is convicted of doing wrong. He will flush if he is taken by surprise ; and so oa 
If a man is glad, he wants to sing. Send a party of young people out for a day of 
pleasure, and they must sing. The genuine religions man, who finds joy in Ghxi and 
in Ghid's Word, must praise; he cannot help it. He must bec(>me nngenuine in order 
to keep praise in. Our public services have so much of the eloment of praise, because 
it is expected that God's people will ever be full of the "joy of the Lord." 

II. Pbaisb finds BfiNEWAL FOB THE JOT. Many things live and grow through 
expression, and soul-joy in God is one of them. Silence joy, and it will fade and die 
down. Let It speak, let it sinu, and it will ever grow louder, stronger, worthier. We 
shall love to sing, delight in singing, and so the joy of our hearts will grow stronger 
and stronger. Praise has its aspect as a duty we owe to Qod. " Whoso offereth pnuse 



PB. oxix. 1—176.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 176 

gloiifieth me." But we need not miss seeing how much it does for us, in the renewing 
of our soul's joy in God. — B. T. 

Ver. 176. — ThefraUties of the dneere. "1 have gone astray like a lost sheep." 
Perowne says, " According to the accents, the rendering would rather be, ' I have gone 
astray ; seek thy servant as a lost sheep.' In wliat sense can one who has so 
repeatedly declared his love of God's Word, who has asserted that he has kept God's 
precepts, make this confession? The figure cannot be employed here in the same 
sense, for iLStance, in which it is employed in our Lord's parable. He who is the lost 
sheep here is one who does not forget God's commandments. The figure, therefore, 
seems in this place to denote the helpless condition of the psalmist, without protectors, 
exposed to euemies, in the midst of whom he wanders, not knowing where to find 
rest and shelter. But in the ' I have gone astray,' there is doubtless the sense of sin 
as well as of weakness." The exclamation of the psalmist is at once made clear when 
we realize the distinction which the good man makes between " fraUties " and " sins." 

I. SmS, AS ABBBBATIONS OF SELF-WILL, DO NOT DI8TBEBS THE SINCERE MAN. " He 

cannot sin, because he is born of God." The sincere man of the Old Testament is 
represented by the new man, the man born of God, the man in whom is the Divine 
life, of the New Testament. Let that man genuinely express his life, and he will not 
commit sin. Sin is the act and purpose of a man's wiU ; but his will is regenerate, 
and set on conformity to the will of God. The good man is " clean every whit ; " he 
does not tin with his will. 

II. FbAILTIES, as ABEBBATIONS due to INFIBMITT, do DIBTBEB8 THB 8IN0EBB HAN. 

He knows huw he needs to " wash his feet." He cannot help getting them soiled. 
The man with the renewed will has to make that will work through a biassed, 
enfeebled, physically weak body ; and by that body he finds himself led into mistakes, 
infirmities, negligences, and even into things that look like wilfulnesses. This is the 
sense in which a sincere man may mourn over himself as " prone to go astray," — B. T. 

Ver. 11. — 2%e preUse of QodHt Lam, " Thy Word have I hid in mine heart, that I 
might not sin against thee." 

I. The obandebt aim. " That I might not sin against thee." 1. This is the highest 
object of man's pursuit. IntrinsicaMy the greatest object of life, as calling forth the 
qreatest faculties, in the direction of the greatest object, for the grandest achievement. 
The assimilation of the human to the Divine mind. And we are bound to it by the 
greatest obligation. 2. Yet it is a practicable object. This proved from three considera- 
tions. (1) !niat we are responsible for it. That is, we can attain the fundamental 
principles of all obedience. Faith and love. And we are capable of continued effort 
and attainment in connection with it. (2) And that God's love furnishes sufficient 
and adequate motives to it. These motives are the strongest spiritual furces which 
can act on man's soul. (3) And that Qod helps man in his efforts by his Spirit. 3. 
Jt M the mast profitable object of human pursuit. In two ways. In the pure and 
ever-growing delight which the pursuit of it affords. And in the present and future 
rewards of every kind which are graciously connected with it. 

IL The means of its attainment. The hiding of God's Word in the heart. 1. 
Ood^s Word is to be the light and guide of our lives. In opposition to all conventional 
standards of conduct, and to the casuistic reasonings of our own minds. 2, That a 
tacred passion is to be cherished towards the Divine Law, God's Word is to be 
enthroned on the seat of the affections. " Oh, how I love thy Law I " He would hide 
it in his heart as the most valued treasure. 3. God's Ward is the nourishment of our 
spiritual nature. He would hide it in his heart as the vivifying principle of his nature, 
on account of its enlightening, strengthening, hope-giving properties. " I have inclined 
my heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the end." — 8. 

Ver, 18. — " Wondrous things." " Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous 
things out of thy Law." " Law" is the will of God expressed in man, in nature, and 
in history. 

I. The will of Goo is the law of man's life. 1. A law that reaches to every 
part of man's nature. To the inward and outward life, A law that claims to rule 



1T« THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. oxnc, 1—176. 

over reason and affection and conscience. 2. A law that guides hy aiming at the 
renetual ofournature. In this respect how different from all liuman law! "The Law of 
the Lord is perfect, converting the soul." This Law not merely bids us obey, but urges 
us by grand arguments of love and obligation. And helps us by the energy of the 
Holy Spirit, which it promises and gives. 

II. This " Law " contains wondrous things. 1. Wonders of doctrine. Forgive- 
ness through Christ. Demands the perfection of our nature. An immortal and blessed 
life. 2. Wonders of precept. Supreme love to God and man. No one can love God 
with all his soul and mind and strength without loving his neighbour as himself, any 
more than the earth can gravitate towards the sun without attracting toward itself 
the moon by the same force of gravity. 3. Wonders of promise. In personal union 
with Christ we find the fulBlment of all Divine promise. 

III. The Holt Sfibit must give us to disoebn these wokdebs. The best 
Christians feel that our perceptions of spiritual truth are infirm and obscure; bat 
things are greater than we see them — more wonderrul than they now appear. Hence 
this prayer, for the opening the eyes of the heart and soul. To be a philosopher, or 
artist, or orator, there must be two things — some genius for it, or natural capacity ; 
and training, or instruction and discipline. To be a Christian there must be spiritual 
eyesight — the gift of God's Spirit. " Open thou mine eyes." And trained and 
disciplined insight — the work also of the Spirit, our Teacher. — S. 

Ver. 82. — Liberty. The utterance of a man conscious of imperfect obedience to the 
will of God ; and one who deplores his weakness. Also the expression of hope and 
confidence. A time will come when God will enlarge his heart. Also the hungering 
of joyful purpose: "I will run," etc. Two main thoughts. 

I. Sfibitual mbbbtt is neoessabt to doing the will of God. 1. It it freedom 
from the bondage of worldly passions and appetites. There can be no spiritual active 
obedience to the will of God as long as we are under the dominion of worldly principles 
and affections. 2. Spiritual liberty is freedom from the fear that springs from a sense 
of guilt. We must be free from the terror of guilt before we can serve God with joy 
and freedom. Remove Jesus Christ and his doctrine from between God and ourselves, 
and we stand in the presence of terrifying law; and have the feeling of helpless 
weakness. Faith is the instrument of our freedom : What we can perceive and trtut 
in Christ hy the faculties of the mind. 3. The highest liberty is found in love. Love 
to God and love to man. Here we ascend beyond faith to the loftiest pitch we are 
capable of — to the development of the most perfect freedom, and we run in the ways 
of God. The profoundest aphorism of Scripture is that "love is the fulfilling of 
the Law." 

II. The production of this libebtt is a Divine wobe. " When thou shalt 
enlarge," etc. If God has laid upon us laws which his power must enable us to obey, 
how is our duty to be explained, and where lies our sin, if we fail in obedience? 1, 
Ovd is the First Cause of all life ; but man is a second cause. He " worketh in us to 
will and to do according to his good pleasure." It is his will and work that our will 
should coincide with his, and work towards the same holy ends, 2. But he does this 
by methods which impose duty and responsibility upon us. The principle on whioh 
God enriches men with increasing gifts of power and grace is — the use we make of them. 
The Divine teaching attributes to us the power of increasing the talents entrusted to 
us, BO that future bestowments are made to depend upon our appropriation of those 
that have gone before. — S. 

Ver. 59. — Religion under two aspects. I. As A wsntal exercise. " I thought on 
my ways." Beligion revives the past, rouses the moral memory. 1. The supreme 
interest of the past is of a religious nature. What we have been intellectually or 
socially is of great interest. But what have been our convictions and conduct 
religiously ? We thrill with joy or shiver with misery according to the answer we 
give to this question— What are our " ways"? what are we? 2. Sut to think upon 
our " ways " is difficult and repulsive. To think of good fortune in worldly specula- 
tion, success in business, formation of esteemed connections and friendships, tills us 
with complacent delight. But to think of a youth wasted in thoughtless frivolity 



PS. cxix. 1—176] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 17T 

or in impure pleasures, of manhood hardening itself against all religious Impression, 
of a past whose track has been fouled with the slime of the serpent, — we turn away 
from this as from lolly, loss, guilt, shaoie, and misery. 3. To think upon our "waya" 
is necessary and salutary. Necessary to realize our sin, to a change of life, and renewal 
of the soul. The connection there is between thought and practice. 

II. Religion as a fbaotioal pbinciplb. " And turned my feet unto thy testi- 
monies." 1. Practical resolves should be the result of earnest thought. Fits and 
impulses too often precede our resolutions and efforts. But thought, deliberate and 
earnest, summons up the grand motives, surveys the difficulties to be conquered, 
counts the cost, and prays for Divine help, and should go before every effort after a 
change of life. 2. S%e great end of religion is active obedience to the will of Qod, 
True understanding of our ways brings the grand conclusion — that man's " way " 
ought to be God's " way." We are forgiven in order to this. 3. If we are not led to 
tftis, we miss the end for which Divine intelligence was given. Reason is under an 
eclipse if it does not light us to this end. Conscience is a corrupted judge, bribed to 
betray us, if it does not pronounce this verdict. The whole nature of man suffers loss 
and ruin if we fail to turn our feet to the Divine testimonies. — S. 

Ver. 60. — " The whole duty of mon." " I made haste, and delayed not to observe 
thy commandments." 

I, A 03EAT PAST OF MAN'S IBRELIOION IS IN THE DELAY OF PRESENT DUTT. 1. 

Most rcen purpose turning to Christ tome time. 2. This purpose is one of man's 
greatest deceivers. It is the excuse for neglecting the present duty. 3. This purpose 
not fulfilled, progressively increases the difficulty of turning to Christ. 

II. OSEDIENOE TO ChBIST IB DUB IMMEDIATE IMPERATIVE DCTT. 1. The wicked- 

ness of trifling with our convictions is very great. 2. The claims of Christ upon us 
are before all others, both in time and in importance. 3. God sometimes sends special 
influences to turn us to Christ. To neglect these is the quenching of the Siorit. — S. 

Ter. 76. — The use of adversity. " I know, Lord, that thy judgments are right, 
and that thou in faithfulness hast afflicted me." 

I. A BBCOONITION OF AFFLICTION AS ONE OF God'b JUD8MBNTS. God's judgments 

are: 1. Remarhable punishments which Qod inflicts for sins. " Judgments are prepared 
for scomers, and stripes for the back of fools " (Prov. lix. 29). 2. The chasUsement 
which Ood brings upon his children for their trial and instruction. In a modified, but 
trie and deep, sense health and riches are judgments — tests and trials of onr fikith and 
character. 

II. An assueanoe of God's eightbousness in his judgments. His judgments 
are a great deep, and his righteousness like the great mountains. 1. Just. Though we 
cannot comprehend them. 2. Beneficent. Though they inflict suffering. He does 
not willingly afflict nor grieve the children of men. 

in. An asstjbance of God's faithfulness in his judgments. Faithfulness here 
means : 1. Wi'it he always purposes owr good. 2. Tliat he alv>ays keeps his promises. 

IV. The ground of this assuranob. 1. Our past experience. Personal history. 
2. Ou/r knowledge of what he has donxfor us in Christ. — S. 

Ver. 96. — The breadth of God's Law. I. Causes that wabbant cob thoughts of 
THE Divine Law. 1. Indulgence of sinful habits. 2. Tendency to Justify oursdves i» 
what we do — or self-love. 3. Deference to worldly maxims. 4. False views of its 
relation to our salvation. 

II. Illustbations of its breadth. 1. It applies to every relation we hear to God 
and Tnan. 2. It has to do with omitted duties as well as positive transgression*. 3. It 
it ^ritual — widening to owr view the higher we rise. 

Ill Lessons suogbsted. 1. It rebukes self-complacency. 2. It shows how impoisiU* 
it is that we can be justified by it. — S. 

Ver. 116. — " My hope." The prayer here may have its highest reference to our 
religious hopes. 
L What is the natube of the gbbatest hope which good men ghxbish? X. 

F8ALMS — III. " 



178 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[m. cxx. 1—7. 



That which relates to our everlasting state, 2, That which is based upon the revela- 
tion of God in Christ. 

IL How MAY 8U0H A HOPE TURN TO SHAME ? What brings disgrace upon men in 
relation to their hopes is that they cherish unreal objects ; that they expect too much ; 
that they fail in the attainment through want of rational calculation, indolence, 
self-indulgence, etc. It is not from the nature of the objects that our disappointment 
can come, if we are building upon the hopes of the gospel. We cannot expect too 
much, or draw too largely upon our imagination, as to the good that is to come. But 
we may fail — and there is the shame — and fail from various causes. 1. We may fail in 
perceiving the essential things, confounding the ritual with the spiritual, the eere- 
monial with the substantial. 2. Through careless contentment with our spiritual state. 
Not being assured that devotion to Christ, activity, and self-denial are indispensable. 

III. Some beabons fob every one to be apfbehehsive as to the fate of bis 
HOPE. 1. Present things may be absorbing so as to endanger the issue. 2. Tendency 
of our nature to flattering views of ourselves. 

IV. What measubes neobssaey to ensure the sdcoess of our hope ? 1. The 
maintenance of constant interest in it. 2. Fidelity towards ourselves in demanding 
the practical influence of piety. 3. Habitual reliaoce upon God for help and direction. — S. 

Yer. 136. — A greai sorrow. " Bivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they 
keep not thy Law." 

I. Chabactbeistics of this boebow. 1. It is the sorrow of only good men. (Phil, 
iii. 18, " Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you," etc.) It can 
be felt only by those who have wept over sin in their own hearts. Three ways of 
feeling towards the sins of others by men of the world — apathy, pride, mockery. 2. It 
is an unselfish sorrow. Most of our griefs are personal and selfish. When they are 
BO they often weaken and debase the mind. But this is a disinterested sorrow, akin to 
Christ's sorrow over Jerusalem ; it comes from the noblest sympathies, and braces the 
mind for the highest exertion. 3. It is inexpressible sorrow. 

n. The season of it. The transgression of God's Law is a subject of grief under 
two aspects. 1. As that transgression has reference to Ood. Sins of the Church and the 
■ins of the world. 2. As it has reference to man. A reasonable sorrow. This sorrow 
■hould lead to exertion. Sinnera should weep for themselves.— S. 



EXPOSITION. 



Tbi Bonos of Ascents. 



The next fifteen psalms have a common 
heading, which is translated "Songs of 
Degrees," "Songs of Ascents," or "Songs 
of Steps." They constitute together "a 
Little Fsalter," which contains indications 
of a formal arrangement. The central 
psalm — the only one ascribed to Solomon — 
has on either side of it a group of seven ; 
each such group formed of two psalms 
ascribed to David, and five anonymous ones. 
The ascribed psalms are separated one from 
another by the anonymous ones, in such 
sort that no two of the former ever come 
together. This is evidently not the result 
of chance. 

Of the title itself different explanations 
are given. Some regard the degrees 
{ma'alith') as " steps," and accept a rabbi- 



nical explanation, that the psalms were 
written for chanting upon fifteen steps, 
which led from the Court of the Women in 
the temple to the Court of the Men. Bat 
there is no snOScient evidence of the exist- 
ence nf these steps. Others, translating 
ma'aUth by "ascents,'' suggest that they 
are psalms composed for the Jews to chant 
on their ascent from Babylon to Jerusalem 
at the return from the Captivity. But the 
plural form is thus unaccounted for, while 
the ascription of five of the fifteen to David 
and Solomon is contradicted. Under these 
circumstances, recentcritics mostly acquiesce 
in the view that the psalms were written 
for the pilgrims, who annually went up to 
Jerusalem at the three great feasts, to chant 
upon their journeys. (So Ewald, Thenius, 
Hengstenberg, Dean Johnson, and Professor 
Alexander.) 



PS. oxx. 1 — 7.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



179 



PSALM OXX. 

Ver. 1. — In my distiess I cried nnto the 
Lord, and he heard me. The particular 
" distress " intended can only be conjectured. 
Some suppose it to be the Captivity itself 
others the opposition offered by the Sama- 
ritans, Ammunites, and others to the re- 
building of the temple (Ezra iv., v.) and 
restoration of the walls of Jerusalem (Neh. 
ii. 19, 20 : iy. 1—23 ; vi. 2—14). But these 
guesses are scarcely of much value. 

Ver. 2. — Deliver my soul, lord, from 
lying lips. Such as Sanballat's (Neh. yi 
6 — 8). And from a deceitful tongue; lite- 
rally, ■a tongue that U fraud — a mere variant 
of the expression in the preceding clause. 

Ver. 3. — What shall be given unto thee t 
mther, what shall he (i.e. God) give to thee 1 
Or, in other words — ^What punishment will 
God inflict on thee for thy false speaking? 
Or what shall be done nnto thee I literally, 
or what ihall he add to theel Compare 
the common phrase, " God do so unto me, 
and more also" (1 Sam. iii. 17; xiv. 44). 
Thou false tongue. The " false tongue ". is 
apostrophized, as if it were a living person. 

Ver. 4. — Sharp arrows of the mighty. 
The psalmist answers his own qnestions. 
Shup-pointed arrows of a Mighty One shall 
be given thee, and added to them shall be 
eoals of juniper. God, j.e., shall punish thee 
with extreme leTetity. 



Ver. 5. — Woe is me, that I sojoun ia 
Meseoh. This is scarcely to be understood 
literally. Israel never "sojourned in 
Meseoh," i.e. among the Mosohi, who dwelt 
in Cappadocia, nor dwelt among the tents 
of Kedar, a people of Northern Arabia. The 
writer means that he dwells among hostile 
and barbarous people, who are to him as 
Kedar and Meseoh. Possibly the Sama- 
ritans and Ammonites are intended. That 
I dwell in the tents of Kedar ; rather, among 
the tentt (see the Bevised Version), 

Ver. 6. — My soul hath long dwelt with 
him that hateth peace ; t'.'. with the tribes 
symbolizerl in the preceding verse by the 
names " Mesech " and " KeSstt," the tribes 
bordering upon Judaa. These were from 
first to last almost always at war with 
Israel. 

Ver. 7. — ^I am for peace ; literally, I am 
peace ; but the meaning is as given in the 
Authorized Veraon. But when I speak (i.e. 
wlien I speak to them of peace), they are 
for war ; i.e. they are utterly averse to peace, 
and are bent on continual hostility. The 
general history bears out this statement. 
There is only one apparent exception. When 
the Jews returned from the Captivity and 
began to build the temple, the Samaritans 
offered to join with them (Ezra iv. 2). But 
the Samaritan offer was, perhaps, insincera 
At any rate, when it was refused, they 
became the most bitter opponent* of the 
Jews. 



HOMILETIC& 

Vers. 1 — 7. — The perversion of power, etc This psalm, though " a difference of 
opinion exists respecting the interpretation of almost every verse and word of it," may 
■uggest valuable thoughts upon — 

I. The pbevebsion of power. It speaks of "lying lips," a "deceitful tcmgue," 
and of the " false tongue " (vers. 2, 3). We may say that sin is perversion ; it is the 
misdirection and abuse of our various faculties and organs; turning to a bad account 
all our opportunities of good. The Apostle James gives at some length the perver- 
sion of the power of speech (iii. 2 — ^13). Our words may be reverent, true, kind, 
instructive, considerate, helpful, wise; or they may be profane, false, cruel, communi- 
cative of evil, injurious. There is hardly a limit to the possible service we may render 
our Lord and our kind if we avail ourselves of every opportunity of speaking the wise 
and gracious word ; but it is impossible to estimate the evil which a man may do in a 
long life by a bitter, a false, an impure, a sceptical tongue. It becomes us to think that 
the power of speech is a great gift from the hand of God ; that it is a talent entrusted 
totis by our Divine Father for his glory and for the good of men. Whenever, therefore, 
we speak that which is hurtful to others or imworthy of ourselves we are guiltily 
abusing our power; we are turning that which was meant to be, and might constantly 
be made, a fountain of blessing into a stream of sorrow or even of sin. The same 
thought (respecting perversion) applies, in less degree, to the hands, the eyes, the feet ; 
it is also, of course, very markedly true of the capacities of the mind. 

II, A cHABACTEBisTio OF DiviNE PUNISHMENT. " What shall be given unto 
thee , , . thou false tongue? " " Sharp arrows of the mighty, burning coals," is tl^e 
reply. The punishment is suited to the offence. The tongue which itself is " a sharp 
■word " (Fs. Ivii. 4) is to be transfixed by the sharp arrows shot by a strong arm ; the 



180 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxx. 1— 7. 

tongue which is itself "a fire" (Jas. iii. 6) is to be consumed with burning coals. 
As is the sin, so is the sorrow and the shame. The king that had done grievous 
domestic wrong was to suffer in his own faniily (2 Sam. xii. 11). The traitor who 
betrayed his Master was to be deserted and thrown over by his own companions. The 
pitiless man goes unpitied in the hour of his own desolation. The miser who keeps 
back the blessings he might confer on others withholds all comforts and delights from 
his own heart and his own home. He who does not regard the sacredness of his body 
will live to suffer in the body ; he who neglects his mind will pay the penalty in 
intellectual poverty and feebleness. " Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap" 
^oss, Buffering, death, according to the nature of his sin. 

III. The misery of uncongenial sukeoundings. (Vers. 6 — ^7.) The psalmist 
bewails his ill fortune in that he has to dwell in places remote from the civilization 
and the privileges of his home ; he is surrounded by ungeuial assiociates whose spirit \» 
hostile, with whom he cannot live on terms of amity and good will. This " Mesech" 
of his is found in every latitude and longitude. It is the experience of a very, large 
proportion of men and women, especially in the earlier period of life, to find themselves 
living or labouring with the unsympathetic, and even with the unfriendly; with those 
whose views on serious and even sacred subjects are dissimilar or opposite. We may 
have much to do with those whose spirit and whose attitude are positively provocative, 
who invite and almost compel us to dispute. It is trying in the last degree. But : 1. 
It is a recognized and accepted part of our earthly lot, and it will not last very long; 
it will give place, in time, to the holy friendships and blissful intercourse of the 
heavenly world. 2. It is a necessary part of the discipline through which we pass, 
attempering and strengthening our character. 3. It provides daily opportunity for 
■elf-mastery, for submission to the will of God, for honouring the Name of Christ. 

IV. Que eefugb in God. (Vers. 1, 2.) Assailed by unjust or ungenerous attack, 
•urrounded by uncongenial companions, we can always realize the near presence of one 
sympathizing Friend, of the all-powerful God, who can extricate us from the worst 
situation, or sustain as in it, so that our souls will be at rest. 



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1—7.— in Mesech and Keda/r. This psalm is a piteous declaration of the 
unhappy lot of him who is surrounded by the false, the treacherous, and the crueL 
They of Mesech — the Moschi of Herodotus (see Exposition) — dwelt where now the 
horribly bloodthirsty Kurds have their habitation, who of late years have horrified 
all Christendom by their barbarous atrocities inflicted on the Christian Armenians. 
Amid men of such sort the psalmist is complaining that he has to dwell (ver. 5). It is 
a tale of treachery and cruelty that he portrays or rather suggests to us in this psalm. 
Concerning all such men of lying lips, we learn — 

L Thet ABE THE DisTBBBS OF THE ooDLY. How many a faithful missionary, amid 
similar hordes, lias felt his heart die down in hopeless despair as he witnesses their 
horrid cruelty and deceit I We at home forget too much this special trial of the 
missionary. Nothing but the abundant supply of the Spirit of all grace can pos8il>ly 
sustain him amid such sad and revolting circumstances. If he gets used to them, and 
so indifferent to them, he can no longer be a true missionary ; nor either if he fears 
them or yields to despair about them. And in less unusual form, God's servants may 
yet have to say, " My soul is among lions " (Ps. Ivii. 4). Many a God-fearing working 
man amid a crowd of godless mates, many a Christian servant-girl amid companions 
who have no love for God, many a young disciple of Christ in school or office, — these 
and others like them know by sad experience the treachery and cruelty of the 
ungodly. 

II. The AWFUL and ovbbwhelmikg wbath of God awaits these pebseoutobs. 
(Vers. 3, 4; see Exposition for meaning.) The false and lying tongue is often 
likened to fire, fire of hell, to sword and sharp arrow, and now here it is declared that 
what such tongue hath sown, that shall it also reap (cf. Pss. Ivii. 4 ; Ixiv. 3 ; Iv. 21 ; 
lix. 7; JaB.iiL 6; and especially Ps. cxl. 9, 10). Sometinieseven in this world we see 
tiw Divine vengeance poured out on those who have played the part of bloody and 



PS. C!xx. 1— 7.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 181 

deceitful men towards the people of God. In the persecuting ages it was not unusual 
nor unnatural for the persecuted ones to point out, as proofs of the Diyiae wrath, the 
fearful deaths which overtook many of their persecutors. True it is to-day that he 
who hlesses the servants of God is blessed, and he who curses them is cursed. 

III. It mat neveethbless be appointed fob God's people to dwell amid buoh 
BUBKODNDINGS. The great missionary command involved the possibility of such 
sojourn. If we are to go into all the world, we must expect to meet with what the 
world has to offer. And, in God's providence, we often have to go and dwell amid, not 
the friends but the foes of God. Tiie soldier in the field, the sailor, the boy at MhooL 
It may be God's will for us. But — 

IV. ThEIB enmity mat often seem to be excited by that which SHOUIiD MAKE 

IT ashamed. (Ver. 7.) Not all at once will the Spirit of peace prevail. 

V. But nothing can bob the believing soul of its blessed relief and befuos 
IN God. (Ver. 1.) The first verse relates what really follows on the facts told of 
in the other verses. Call upon, cry unto the Lord, and he will ever help. — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — A dark fact explained and illuminated. The dark fact is human distress ; 
the explanation is the prayer it leads to ; the illumination, the answer it brings. We 
have here^ 

I. A TOO BABE febsonaqe. " In my distress, I," etc. It is by no means every one 
who does this. 1. Some hlaspheme — curse God in their hearts. 2. Others cast off aU 
faith — ^say, " There is no God." Many have done this. 3. Others harden their heart*, 
as Pharaoh did. 4. Others plunge deeper into sin. (Isa. 1. 5.) In the distraction which 
for a while they gain, they drown the sense of their misery. 5. Others turn to human 
aid for deliverance and solace. 6. Tet others bestir themselves to get by their own effort 
what help they may. The psalmist's resource does not condenm, but will often include, 
these two last methods, and will further their usefulness. But to turn to God in 
distress is as wise as it is too seldom adopted. 

II. A SEAL season fob distbess. God sends it, or lets it come, that it may lead 
men to turn to him : that Is ever his intent. But for such distress we should scarce 
turn to him at all. 

III. A eight mannee of pbateb. " I cried." It tells of earnestness, of humility, 
of believing trust, of self-distrust. It has all those elements which go to make up 
acceptable and prevailing prayer. How little of our prayer is a crying unto Ck>d 1 It is 
decorous, reverent, formal, correct, and seeks true and worthy objects, but it lacks 
fervour, force, and the faith which will not let the Lord go unless he bless. No man 
ever yet " eried unto the Lord " and failed to find response. 

IV. A BEADT and eealized ebsponse. " He heard me." How promptly this 
confession comes after the statement, " I cried " 1 (Of. Caasar's " Veni, vidi, vicL") It 
is like that. And the psalmist knew that he was heard. The outward circumstances 
may not have much changed, but in his heart the light had risen, the Lord had come. 

Conclusion. Distress of one kind or another we all must know. Let us adopt this 
manner of prayer, and we shall surely find the ready response. — S, 0. 

Vers. 1, 2. — The misery made by the untruthful. This is the first of fifteen psalms 
that are called " Songs of Degrees ; " Revised Version, " Songs of Ascent ; " literally, 
" Songs of Going up." The association of them with the journeying of covmtry pilgrims 
to the feasts at Jerusalem is somewhat fanciful. These psalms are naturally explained 
as "Songs of Heart-uplifting." The key-note of them all is looking up out of some 

E resent distress, and seeking the help of God. "I will lift up mine eyes unto the 
ills ; " " Unto thee lift I up mine eyes ; " " Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, 
Lord." Two things are necessary to a " song of ascent : " some special form of 
present distress; a looking to God for help out of that distress. It is possible 
effectively to illustrate these psalms from the experiences of the returned exiles. 

I. The psalmist's distbess. It may be regarded as personal, and then we notice 
that it is a mental anxiety rather than a set of difficult circumstances. And though 
mental anxieties may seem to be unreal, and often are, they are our most serious and 
overwhelming distresses ; the ones we can least effectively deal with ourselves ; the ones 
in which God's help is most especially needed, and least frequently sought Or th« 



182 THE BOOK OP PSALMS, [ps. oxx. 1-7. 

psalmist may be regarded as personifying tlie nation, and speaking in its name. The 
restored exiles were much distressed by the malicious slanders of the surrounding 
nationalities, whom the psalmist likens to the barbarous tribes of the Moschi, and the 
nomad hordes of Kedar. Here also the distress is mental ; it was not outward injury, 
but woiry caused by the slanders spread abroad concerning them. We love to be 
thought well of, and are distressed when reputation is damaged. 

II. The cadbb of the psalmist's distrust. Men did not speak the truth about 
him. Slander has a mysterious power of growth and enlargement; and no man's 
reputation is safe when the gossip, the tale-bearer, and the slanderer attempt to deal 
with it. A man may never be afraid of the truth, nor need he fear the final triumph 
of his slanderers, but for a time the "lying lips" may cause him infinite misery. 

III. The BELiiiF OF THE psalmist's distress. He can turn to God, sure that 
he knows of his trouble — knows the untruthfulness of the accusations made ; is more 
jealous of his reputation than he can be of his uwn ; could stop the lying lips at once, 
if he thought it best to do so ; and permits them to keep on only because thus he can 
work out some higher good. — B. T. 

Ver. 3. — Sins of the tongue. " Thou deceitful tongue." Describing this tongue, 
the psalmist adds, " It is as the sharp arrows of the mighty man, as coals of broom." 
The sin specially in the view of the psalmist is that of the slanderer. What shall be 
done to him ? " The law of retaliation can hardly meet the case, since none can slander 
the slanderer, he is too black to be blackened ; neither would any of us blacken him if 
we could. Wretched being 1 He fights with weapons which true men cannot touch. 
Like the cuttlefish, he surrounds hiniseU with an inky blackness into which honest 
men cannot penetrate. Like the foul skunk, he emits an odour of falsehood which 
cannot be endured by the true ; and therefore he often escapes unchastised by those 
whom he has most injured. His crime, in a certain sense, becomes his shield; men 
do not care to encounter so base a foe. But what will God do with lying tongues? 
He has uttered his most terrible threats against them, and he will terrihly execute 
them in due time " (Spurgeon). " From gossips, tale-bearers, writers of anonymous 
letters, forgers of newspaper paragraphs, and all liemongers, good Lord, deliver us 1 " 
(1) A man may siu with his tongue against himself, and seriously injure his own success 
in life. (2) A man may sin with his tongue against God, misrepresenting him, his 
truth, his working, or his people. Or (3) a man may sin with his tongue against hi* 
neighbour. Then his wrong doings and sayings may be classed under the term slander, 
the peculiarity of which is that it has enough truth in it to carry it, and enough lie in 
it to make it mischievous. 

L The oenebib of slander. As a fixed disposition. It comes out of failing 
to teach the child always strictly to match statement with fact. It comes out of foiling 
to gain full self-control. It co.ntu from letting feeling rule language. It comes from 
the disposition which finds pleasure in the suffering of others (see cruelty of children 
to animals). It comes from envy at the success of others. 

II. The occasions of blander. These are often merely times of idle gossip. 
They may be times of jealousy or revenge. They may be only the delight a man has 
in mischief-making. 

III. The punishment of slander. It comes in the deterioration of the slanderer's 
own character; in the bst confidence and lore of his neighbour; and in the just 
judgment of God. — B. T. 

Ver. 3. — 3%e deceitful tongue. "Lips are soft; but when they are lying lips they 
suck away the life of character, and are as murderous as razors. Lips should never be 
red with the blood of honest men's reputes, nor salved with malicious falsehoods. 
Some seem to lie for lying's sake, it is their sport and spirit. The faculty of speech 
becomes a curse when it is degraded into a mean weapon for smiting men behind their 
backs. Those who fawn and flatter, and all the while have enmity in their hearts, are 
wicked beings ; they are the seed of the devil, and he worketh in them after his own 
deceptive nature." " Ungodly men will do mischief to other men purely for mischiefs 
sake; yet when once mischief is done it proves most mischievous to the doers of 
it; imd, while they hold their brethren's heaviness a profit, though they are neyer 



ra. cxx. 1—7.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 183 

the better, they shall feel and find themselTes in • short time much the worse* 
(Caryl). 

_ I. The tongue is bhakpbb than ah arbow. 1. It Is shot In private. 2. It ie 
tipped with poison. 3. It is polished with seeming kindness. 4. It is aimed at the 
tenderest part. 

IL The TONauB is mobb destbttotive than fire. 1. Its scandals spread with 
greater rapidity. 2. They consume that which other fires cannot touch. 3. They 
are less easily quenched. "The tongue," says an apostle, "is a fire . . . and setfeth 
on fire the course of nature; and it is set on fire of helL" A fiery dart of the wicked 
one. (Outline by George Rogers.)— E. T. 

Ver. 4.—" Coals of Juniper." This verse, and its connection with the preceding one^ 
may be explained in two ways. Ver, 4 may describe the " deceitful tongue," likening 
it to the sharp arrow of a mighty man, or to the fierce coals of the broom, which long 
keep their heat. Or it may indicate the swift and sure and overwhelming judgment* 
of God, which are sharp and piercing as an arrow, fierce and burning as a fira. 
"Wickedness shall be returned on the head of the wicked; for the lying tongue ia 
itself a sword or arrow (Pss. lii. 3; Ivii. 5), and bums like a fire (see Ps. cxl. 10, 11)." 
Burckhardt found the Bedouin of Sinai burning the roots of the juniper (desert broom, 
rithm, ritem, or genista) into coal ; and says that they make the best charcoal, and 
tlirow out the most intense heat, and hold the heat for an almost indefinite time. 

L The deceitful tonque is like abbows and coals. This explanation falls 
in with the general idea of the psalm. The writer complains that, loving peace him- 
self, he meets with nothing but hostility and treachery (see Pss. Ixiv. 3; Iv. 21; 
lix. 7). Both sharpened arrows are used, which pierce deeply ; and envenom(^d arrows, 
which leave a sting behind. Unkind words both pierce and sting. Similar ideas 
attach to the other tigure. Coals of fire burn at once, and give smarting pain at once, 
but they also leave misery and suffering behind; and so does slanderous speech. 

II. The punishment of the deceitful tongue is like aerows and coals. On 
the whole, this idea is to be preferred. It is in the manner of the psalms to burst forth 
with an imprecation of God's judgments on the head of such treacherous and slanderous 
neighbours. Swift, sure, and sharp shall be the judgment of slanderers. Their punish- 
ment is comparable to an arrow keen ia itself, and driven home with all the force 
with which a mighty man shoots it from his bow of steel. The woes that come on the 
slanderer shall be like "coals of juniper," which are " quick in flaming, fierce in blazing^ 
and long in burning." " It is better to be the victim of slander than to be the author 
of it. The shafts of calumny will miss the mark, but not so the arrows of God; the 
coals of malice will cool, but not the fire of justice. — B. T. 

Ver. 5. — Our uncomfortalU surroundings. " Woe is me, that I sojonrn in Mesech I " 
These names Mesech and Kedar are not to be regarded as literally descriptive. They 
poetically represent the very trying circumstances and associations in which at the 
time the psalmist was placed. The Mesech are only known as a half-barbarous people 
living towards the north, on the mountains south of Caucasus (Ezek. xxxviii. 9, 15, 16). 
Eedar is a term representing the warrior- tribes of Arabia far to the south-east (Gen. 
XXV. 13 ; Isa. xxi. 17 ; Ezek. xxvii. 21), There can be little question that the names 
are here used typically, because it was not wise to fix in a poem or psalm the actual 
names of the uncomfortable neighbours. 

I. We cannot help having unoomfobtablr bubbouhdtnob. It is only in a veiy 
small sense that a man can be said to choose his own lot. He cannot choose his 
parents, brothers and sisters, early home, schooling, and many other things. We speak 
of his making his way in life, but Providence is always overruling things, and putting 
men in unexpected places. Most men have to say, in looking back over life, "I never 
could have dreamed of being where I have been, or of doing what I have done." Onr 
culture largely comes through our life-associations, and we cannot help their sometimes 
being not at all "according to our mind." 

II. Wk cannot help feeling oub uhoompobtablb BUBBOUNDnrcM. It is indeed 
essential to discipline through them that we should fed them. The misery of trying, 
unlovely, mischievous neighbours is but like the pain of the surgeon who would heal. 



184 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. CXXL 1—8. 



God wants us to feel, because he wants to use the feeling. Indeed, keenness to feel 
may help him to do his gracious work. 

IIL Wb can help being mastered by imooMFOBTABLE suBRotrNDiNQs. They 
cannot hurt us unless we allow them to. If feeling is allowed to rule the will, they are 
sure to master us. If the will he made to rule feeling, they cannot. Just what God's 
grace does for us is so to strengthen the will that nothing can unduly or unworthily 
influence us. 

IV. We can wk the teiumph of the godly lite even amidst uncomfobt- 
ABLB bdrboundingb. We can, on the principle of the psalmist, who, out of his distress, 
persisted in " looking up," crying unto God for help, singing " songs of ascent." — B. T. 

Ver. l.—ITie misery of the war-spirit to peace-lover$. "I am for peace," is literally, 
"I am peace." This is my very nature; so I instinctively revolt from all this slander 
and quarrelling and contention. Associating the passage with the restored exiles, it 
may te noticed that the one thing absolutely essential to their well-being was a state 
of quietness and peace. They had plenty to do. Jerusalem, its houses, walls, and 
temple, to rebuild. Civil and ecclesiastical order to re-establish, and a national 
character to gain. External peace, as well as internal peace, were absolutely essential 
to the complete reoccupation of their land. So we too often think that peace is the 
one condition on which our spiritual culture depends, and God shows us, as he showed 
the restored exQes, that, spite of the misery it may bring us, it is better for us to be in 
the midst of contentions, conflicts, and perils. But, like the psalmist, we may freely 
■peak to God about this our trouble, and we need not change our spirit of peace-loving 
•nd peace-seeking under any external pressure. Distinguish between war and the war- 
tpirit. It is the latter which the peace-loving man flnds so trying. He can deal with 
•ctual war upon its merits, and he may be able to recognize its necessity and itt 
beneficent mission ; but the litigious, contentious, quarrelsome spirit, that is always 
inventing or manufacturing some occasion of difficulty, always disturbing the peace^ ia 
a painful distress to all peace-lovers. 

I. Misery comes from efforts to keep the peace being mibapfbehendes. 
The Prayer-book Version has, " I labour for peace, but when I speak unto them thereof, 
they make ready to battle." Thioking he meant to start a fight. 

n. Misery combs from efforts to keep the peace being defeated. We 
never like to fail in things we set our hearts upon. 

III. Misery comes fbom the moral atmosphere which the wab-spibit EisraENDEBS. 
Kothing morally beautiful can flourish in that atmosphere. 

rV. Misery comes fbom thk impossibility of doing the things which bequibk 
pkACEFUL 8URB0DNDINGS. This is illustrated in the case of the restored exiles, who 
wanted to get on with their national reconstruction work.— B. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSAIiM OXXt 



Trb preceding psalm is one of complaint ; 
the present, one of comfort and consolation. 
The pilgrim lifts up his eyes to the hills, 
and is satisfied that help is coming to him. 
He then proceeds to cheer himself with 
•sanranee* of God's sleepless care and pro- 
teetion. Metrically, the psalm falls into 
four stanzas of four lines each. 

Ver. 1. — ^I will lift up mine eyes nnto the 
kUll. The " holy bills," that stand round 
•boot Jenualem, are intended (Pss. Ixzxvii. 
1 ; cxxv. 2). There Qod had " promised his 



blessing, even life for evermore " (Ps. oxxxiU. 
S). From whence oometh my help. Most 
modern critics regard this clause as interro- 
gative, and translate, " Whence is it that my 
help shall come ? " But " the question is only 
asked to give more effect to the answer 
(Cheyne). 

Ver. 2. — My help oometh from the Lord ; 
literally, my help ia from the Lord. He 
alone has both the power and the will to 
assist me. Which mada heaven and earth; 
<.«. " which is omnipotent." 

Ver. 3. — He will not suffer thy foot to 
be moved. The psalmist addresses himself 
with consolatory assurances. God will not ' 
allow any evil to approach him, w af to do 



PB. OXXI. 1 — 8.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



186 



him hnrt. He that keepeth thee will not 
■Itimher. God does not sleep — Ma vigilance 
is unceasing (comp, Isa. xxvii, 3). 

Ver. 4.— Behold, he that keepeth Israel 
•hall neithei slumber nor sleep. The assur- 
ance rises from the particular to the general. 
It is not one Israelite alone over whom Ood 
will watch unceasingly, but the whole 
people of Israel. 

Ver. 5. — The lord is thy Keeper ; the Lord 
is thy shade upon thy right hand, " Thy 
shade" means "thy protection." "thy 
defence." Protection was especially needed 
on the right hand, as tlie side which no 
shield guarded. Latin writers call the right 
side " latus apertum." 

Ver. 6. — The son shall not smite thee by 
day, nor the moon by night. These were 
the chief dangers of travellers, whether 
pilgrims or others. Coup de eoletl was 
feared by day, and the deleterious influence 



of the moon's rays by ni?ht. This last has 
sometimes been doubted, bnt the observation 
of modern travellers seems to show that bad 
effects actually follow on sleeping in the 
moonlight in hot oonntries (see Onrzon's 
' Travels,' p. 36 ; Leopolt, ' India Missions,' 
p,7). 

Ver. 7. — The Lord shall preserve thee 
from all evil ; or, " keep thee." The same 
verb u used throughout. He shall preserve 
thy sonl ; or, keep thy soul. 

Ver. 8. — ^The Lord shall preserve thy 
going out and thy coming in (comp. Dent, 
xxviii. 6 ; 1 Sam. xxix. 6 ; 2 Sam. iii 25 ; 
1 Kings iiL 7; 2 Kings xix. 27), The 
phrase is an equivalent of " The Lord shall 
preserve thee in all thy ways " (Ps. xoi 11). 
from this time forth, and even for evermore ; 
%.e. so long as thoa hast " goings out " and 
" comings in," But the phrase used rather 
implies that these will never oeasok 



HOMILBTIOa 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Ood our Guide : a New Teat's psalm. In whatever tpecial eironm- 
■tances, or for whatever particular occasion, this psalm may have been written, it ia 
certain that it is admirably suited to suggest New Tear's thoughts to our minds. We 
shall best appreciate it if we consider — 

I. Tee gbeatness of oub need. We have sometimes to face the future, and then 
we confront : 1. Certainties ; duties, difficulties, vexations, trials, temptations, 
opportunities. 2. Uncertainties ; possibly some very great joy, or some overwhelming 
sorrow, or some very sore perplexity, or even the last experience of death. 

II. The iNSUFFiciENOT OF HUMAN HELP. We naturally and rightly look to owe 
kindred and to our friends for sympathy and succour. But : 1. 'I hey do not remain 
with us ; parents die ; brothers and sisters are scattered far and wide ; friends become 
estranged. 2. They cannot render us all the help we need. Our wants go so far, and 
strike so deep, that human sympathy does not avail; it falls short; we need more than 
it can bring. We must not only look around, but above, must " lift up our eyes to 
the hills, from whence cometh our help," for our " help cometh from the Lord " 
(vers. 1, 2). 

III. Oub help in God. 1. With him is all power. He who " made heaven and 
earth" (ver. 2) can do anything, everything, for us. There can come no difficulty, no 
entanglement, from which he cannot deliver us ; there can come no sorrow in which 
he wiU not be able to support us. 2. We can count on the constancy of his care. He 
' will not slumber," etc. (vers. 3, 4). Not for one small moment will he forget us; 

day and night we shall be the objects of his watchful love. 3. He will be present to 
defend us everywhere. He will be our Keeper, our Shade upon our right hand (ver. 5). 
His gracious power will overshadow us at every step we take. We cannot think of 
any place, however remote, or obscure, or humble, where he will not be with his 
defending, delivering hand. 4. He will guard us from all forms of evU. Evil takes 
many foims ; it comes to us in every guise. Now it is prdsperity, and now adversity ; 
it may be an intoxicating approval and adulation, or it may be a crushing depreciation 
•nd desertion ; it may be a strong and sudden assault on our integrity, or it may be 
the more perilous approach of that which very gradually undermines or disintegrates. 
But whatever be its form, oiu- God can "keep"' us true, pure, holy. The sun shall not 
imite by day, nor the moon by night ; " the Tjord will preserve us from all evil " 
(vers. 6, 7). 5. He will preserve us, ourselves ; not only our home, our fortune, our 
credit, our reputation, but ourselves: "He shall preserve thy soul." He will "not 
■uffer thy foot to be moved " (ver. 3) ; he will uphold us in the path of righteousness ; 



186 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. oxxi. 1— 8. 

and ir we have to walk " in slippery places," yet his right hand will hold as, and oar 
■oul will not be stained with the bid which injures and defiles. 6. He will attend us 
to the close of life (ver. 8). " This Grod is our Qod for ever and ever, he will be our 
guide even unto death " (Fs. zlviii. 14). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Kept from all evil. This is what the writer of this precious psalm looks 
for from God (see the first two verses), and this is what the psalm promises, and that 
with the utmost particularity. There shall not be even a slip of the foot, a thing so 
common in mountainous lands, and often so perilous, and the keeping shall be night 
and day alike, and close at hand (ver. 5). The Lord himself shall see to it, whether 
during the heat of the day or the chill of the night, it matters not. The Lord shall 
keep thee inwardly and outwardly soul and body alike, from all evil and in all thy 
ways. " But " — so ask not a few — " is all that true ? Are we so kept as this psalm 
promises — not the mere godless crowd, but the company of God's faithful ones : does 
the Lord keep them, as is here said, ' from all evil ' ? " And then there are brought 
forward the long array of facts which seem to make against the truth of this word. 
Disease, accident, death, the overwhelming by earthquakes, lightning, flood, stonn; 
by the ferocity or the folly of men, and by any of the ten thousand ills which flesh is 
heir to. As we contemplate the awful number of victims to such causes as we have 
named, and the yet worse ruin which comes from moral causes, it is not to be wondered 
at that some regard this psalm as rather a pious imagination than the declaration of 
actual fact. What are we to say? are we to give up our faith in the blessed guardian- 
ship of God, and to consign to the category of credulity the trust which this psalm 
encourages ? We will not do that, but we will reply — 

I. The peomise is not fob evert oommdnity, but for the people op Qod. The 
band of pilgrims who set out from Babylon to return to their native land and to 
re-establish the worship of God were a special and a holy company, and God did keep 
them as they journeyed on along the weary wilderness-ways. We must come within 
the circle of the covenanted people of God ere we can lay claim to the fulfilment of 
a psalm like this. It is not for the godless, but for the regenerated people of God. 
For them — 

II. Tee general rule of God's providential oabb is as here bet fobtb. 
Not the universal, but the general rule. There have been and there are exceptions, 
but taking the history of God's people in all ages, and looking at their average 
experience, may we not cry — It is well with the righteous; the Lord is their Keeper? 
God's people are, after all, the happiest people under the sun. 

III. Our idea of bbinq kept and God's idea may be vert different. 1. We 
think so much of the keeping of the body, and of a man's outward circumstances. But 
in comparison with the soul's well-being, God counts these things as of no importance. 
Hence God may preserve a man's soul when he lets his outward affairs go all to ruin; 
for the sake of his soul this may be needed. But if his soul has been kept, has not 
God been true to his word? 2. Ood takes eternity into view; we think only of the 
present. It', then, a man be eternally saved, does the fact that during a period unspeak- 
ably short in comparison with eternity the man's outward life was full of trouble 
invalidate the promise of this psalm and prove it false? 3. Further, we see only the 
tmface of things ; God looks at the reality. If, then, what we call disaster, and think 
to be so, be really amongst " all things which work together for [not merely precede, 
but produce the] miin's good," as is so often the case (see 2 Cor. iv. 17), then is God's 
permission or sending of that disaster a falsifying of the promise of this psalm? 

IV. The promise mat be true to the heart when its fulfilment is not 
APPARENT TO THE ETB. What is the Value of all God's providential mercies, his 
blessed keeping of us in health and external well-being — what is the value of it except 
for the effect it has upon our minds? It is the inward happiness and peace and joy 
which these things impart which ^ives them their value. Otherwise they are of no 
good at all, any more than the strains of sweetest music are to the deaf, or the most 



P8. oxw. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 187 

beautiful scenery to the blind. But if God be able — as he is — to impart that same 
and even greater inward hRppiness, peace, and joy hy other means, and does so, as, 
blessed be his Name ! he so often does, then again we ask — Has not God been true to 
his word ? is not this psalm actual fact ? Therefore we rest assured that the Lord will 
keep us fiom all evil, he will keep our soul. — 8. C. 

Ver. 8, — The sure keeping of Ood. It has been remarked by a learned Bible 
scholar that part of the couimon complaints which are often brought against our 
English Bible is really owing to the likes and dislikes as to the usage of words in 
which we English people allow ourselves. It is constantly complained of that where, 
in the original Scriptures, the sacred writers employ only one word, our translators have 
put for that one word, two, three, four, five, or even several more different English 
words, thus conveying to our minds several ideas, where it was the intention of the 
Scriptures to convey only one. No doubt our translators did their best to find 
synonyms — words, that is, which though, different in sound, have the same sense — still 
the senses so given are only similar, and may not be seen by ordinary readers to be so 
similar as it was thought they were. Hence such difference of rendering is often mis- 
leading, and rather a hiding than a setting forth of the Scripture's true meaning. Now, 
in this beautiful psalm we have a notable instance of such different rendering. We do 
not see that the sense is obscured in this instance, but we think the emphasis and force 
are lessened. The one prominent word in the psalm is " keep : " the whole psalm is 
about the Lord God's sure keeping of his people, and that this might be impressed on 
the mind, the writer six times over in the last five verses of the psalm repeats this 
word " keep." Now in the three former verses out of these five our version adheres 
to the word " keep," but in the last two it changes over to the less forcible word 
" preserve." Our English dislike of using the same word repeatedly accounts for this 
change, and causes the loss of impressiveness which the repeated reverberations of the 
one emphatic word " keep " were intended to produce. But to pass on to what is of 
more importance, the truth itself of God's sure keeping, let us — 

I. Take the promise liteballt. 1. Jt re/erred to IsraePa jowrneying* from 
Babylon to Judah, or from wherever their abodemight be, up to the great festivals. Now, 
even in this literal sense, the promise was no mean one. For those olden days were not 
days of settled law and order, in which life and property were secure, and evil-doers 
could scarce hope to escape punishment. But the very reverse was the truth. Might 
stood for right, and hence the " going out and coming in " of Israel in those days was 
ever attended with much peril. 2. And for ourselves the promise holds good. God has 
made our journeyings safe by means of what we call the inventions of science and the 
resources of civilization. They are but God's instruments for our good. And when 
some terrible catastrophe occurs, as from time to time is the case, still, if we be of 
God's Israel, we are kept: "He sliall preserve thy sold" Our real self is not harmed, 
the Lord is our Keeper, as he said. 

II. As APPLTiNfJ TO THE WHOLE OF OUB AOTIVB LIFE. Such is a frcquciit mean- 
ing of the expression, " going out and coming in " (see Deut. xxviii. 6, 19 ; xxiii. 20 ; 
Josh. i. 7 ; 1 Skm. xxix. 6). The general conduct and occupation of a man in his 
varied affairs are what is meant in all these passages. And how we need to be kept 
amid our daily woik and business ! How " the cares of this world" need to be guarded 
against, and " the deceitfulness of riches " also 1 How business life ti ndg to absorb all 
time, all thought, all energy, so that scarce any are left for God 1 Hence blessed are 
they who are in God's holy keeping in all the goings out and comings in of daily life 1 

III. To OUB EXPEKIBNCE8 OF SORROW AND OF GLADNESS. " Going OUt" WaS a 

synonym for sorrow ; " coming in," for gladness and joy. For Israel was a people that 
had known what it was to go out to drear and dreadful exile, and that more than once. 
Hence whilst the idea of "going out" suggested only what was sad, that of "coming 
in," the return from exile, was full of joy. " The redeemed of the Lord shall come 
with joy and singing," etc. And in the New Jerusalem, one of its sweetest promises 
was that its people should "go no more out for ever." Sorrow has its snares, and so 
has joy. We need to be kept of God. 

IV. To THE HOBNiNO AND ETENINO OF LIFE. " Man goeth forth to his work and 
to his labour until the evening ; " then he cometh in for rest. And if we truly desire 



188 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxxi. 1— & 

it, the Lord will keep our going out and our coming in in this sense also. " Our help 
Cometh from the Lord." — S. C. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Looking up. " Shall I lift up mine eyes unto the hills? Whence should 
my help come?" The precise associations of the psalm cannot be fixed with any 
certainty. Perhaps it is best regarded as a psalm of the Exile. It might have been 
written by a Daniel, as he sat at bis open window, and looked away over the broad, flat 
plains of Babylon toward the distant mountain-land of Israel. The writer is oppressed 
with the burdens and sorrows of exile ; he remembers Zion, and he sings his soul to 
quietness and peace by looking away from pieseut cares to the high hills of Grod, and 
cheers his drooping spirit by remembering liow, amid all the earth-changes, the ever- 
lasting hills abide. What a holy power upon us the mountains have I The grand, 
calm, strong, high things — they seem to be so near God ; they seem to be so full of 
God ; they bring us so near him, and fill us so full of him. One thing about them is 
suggested by our text — they make us look up. And is not that just what we need? 
Oh, to lose the downward look which has so grown upon us by the pressure of life- 
cares I The voice calls continually, " Lift up your heads, for your redemption draweth 
nigh!" 

I. WoEiiD-DBAWN, WE LOOK DOWN, AND BO ABE WEAK. We are In the world — ^in a 
thousand subtle ways we are kin with the world, subject to its influences, caught by 
its whirl of excitement, absorbed by its pressing claims, and easily we become of the 
world as well as in it. But everything the world presents to us is below us, beneath 
us ; and it so keeps us looking down that the habit of down- looking grows upon us, 
and we are almost unable to look up. How powerfully we are all drawn by world- 
interests I Business man is world-absorbed. Domestic woman is world-absorbed. 
The influence of the world begets a downward look, a sort of set of the eyes and heart 
downwards. The world-thoughts abide with us, and even when the sabbath day bringi 
God and heaven near, we find it very hard to get our eyes lifted up. Even in the 
sanctuary they drop on bills and stock and trade. To succeed in earthly things 
we must engage the whole heart and powers in them. It seems to be the one 
nniversal power that this sin-smitten world possesses over its creatures — it bends their 
shoulders, it bows their heads, it gives, it keeps, the downward look. And what do 
we see when we look down? Much of self, of man, and of things. The hurry and 
bustle of thousands who are hasting to be rich. And the shadow of God's curse on sin 
resting everywhere. It is this down-looking that makes us so weak. 

II. God-drawn, we look up, and bo gbow strong. For to men in this world 
God's voice is ever calling. It sounds from the bright bands of the morning, from the 
high silver-tinted clouds of noonday, from the splendour and glory of the far-off sunset, 
from the lofty trees and the hill-tops, and the soaring birds of song, and the winds that 
roam free, and the "jewel-powdered skies" of night. Would we but stop and hush 
awhile, we might hear it always near us, saying, "Look up I look upl" God has 
often refreiihed his fainting servants with the sight of his everlasting hills. Moses was 
sent to feel the inspirations of Sinai. Elijah was calmed, and made himself again, by 
the soothing influences of Horeb, the mount of God. Our Lord sought seclusion 
among the hills of Eastern Galilee, and entered into the Divine glory on a spur of 
Harmon. And the mountains still soothe and calm God's people. They teach us to 
look vp. 1. Looking up, you find nothing of man's — ^it is all of God up above. 2. 
Looking up, you feel how pure God's snow is, and think how much is in the promise, 
" They shall walk with me in white." 3. Looking up, you see how earth-clouds are 
glorified. 4. Looking up, listen ; you may hear the voices of the hills saying, " Be 
still! Hush the life-fever 1 Wait! In silence God doth speak." 5. Look up and 
listen, and again the voices of the hills will say, " The mists and the storms are all 
outside us; they are not us." Look up, and grow strong. Look up; you will feel the 
heaven-breath upon your face. Look up ; your brow will soon lose those wreathings 
of anxiety and care. Look up, and you shall prove how God " wipes away all tears 
from our eyes." — R. T. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Not mountains, but God. "From whence shall my help come?" This 
psalm i» best taken as expres.siiig tlio piuus confidence of an individual believer, wha 



M.OTXI.1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 189 

addresses his inner self in words of comfort which are framed as if proceeding from 
another person. The psalmist is, as it were, holding a colloquy with himself. It ia 
not that he expects help from the mountains — his hope is fixed on him who made the 
mountains. This comes out plainly in Perowne's rendering, " Whence should my help 
come ? My help (cometh) from Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth." 

L The mountains cannot give ns help and safety. Illustrate from the times of 
Lot. He fled to the mountains ; but God preserved him, not the mountain. From 
the times of David's persecution, he fled to the mountain country of Jud^a and the 
south; but God preserved him, not the hiUs. Covenanters and others found safety in 
the rocks and mountains in days of religious persecution; but their God was their real 
defence. So let mountains stand for the supreme self-efforts a man may make in his 
times of distress; he must be brought to the assured conviction that they cannot bring 
him safety. Beyond them he must look. Only when he looks beyond them do they 
become his security ; for then God makes them such. " Some trust in horses, and 
some in chariots," and some in mountains; " but we will trust in the Name of the Lord." 

II. The mountains can dibect us whbee to find help and safety. They appeal 
to both poetic and religious feeling. Buchanan, writing with the CuchuUin hills all 
about him, says— 

"Lord, art then here? far from the busy crowd. 
Brooding in melancholy solitude?" 

Moses was helped to realize the power of Jehovah by the daily impressions of the 
huge, craggy, awful mountain forms of Sinai. In quite an instinctive way men in all 
ages and in every land have inclined to build their altars on high hills, as if thus they 
did get nearer God. And it is the fact for most thoughtfully disposed persons, that 
more help is gained for pious meditation from mountain districts than from the change- 
ablenesB of the sea, or the varying but ever-gentle beauty of the landscapes. Mountains 
have a peculiar power to solemnize and to impress us all; and precisely what they 
bring to us is that sense qf Ood which assures of his love, and help, and lead.— B. T. 

Ver. 4. — ITie ever-watchful Watchman. "Shall neither slumber nor sleep." Th« 
words "slumber" and "sleep" are not climactic. Indeed, the Hebrew word for 
"slumber" is the stronger term of the two. There is no more in the setting of the 
two terms than poetical repetition. The one peril of the night-watchman is that ha 
might be overcome with sleep. The one duty of the watchman is to keep ever, 
through his watching-time, awake and alert. Yet at the best no absolute security 
can be placed in any human watchman. A man may be overpowered with sleep, and 
be physically unable to resist its advances. Absolute security of defence lies in God, 
and we may fully trust in him. It is inconceivable that we can be placed in any 
circumstances or conditions which are unknown to him. Illustrations may be taken 
from the wilderness-jovimey of Israel. The pillar-cloud of the Divine presence was 
always there, night and day ; and never anything could happen to Israel that was not 
divinely permitted. Or illustrate from the sick-bed of the sufferer. Worn out, the 
nurse may fall asleep, but the eye of the God of all consolation is never dimmed (see 
Ps. cxxziz.). 

I. The ever-watchful Watchman sees. This is more necessary in a watchman 
than keeping awake; he must be quick to observe, attentive, noticing everything. 
" All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do." 
God's sedng includes what is by man seeable and by man unseeable; it includes what 
it and what is to he. "In every place, beholding the evil and the good." 

II. The evee- watchful Watchman undekstands. He not only sees things, but 
sees the significance of things. Estimates the importance of what he sees. Becoguizes 
the relation of what he sees to his people. Makes what he sees the ground of his 
prompt and gracious action in their behalf. 

IIL The bveb-watchful Watchman helps. By his merciful defendings: "No 
plague shall come nigh thy dwelling." By his wise upholdings : " Will not suffer thy 
foot to be moved." By his wonderful overrulings, which constantly turn seeming 
evil into real and permanent good. If our life is thus within the constant Divine 
inspection, we may put away all fears, and simply " seek the kingdom of God, and hit 
ntjhti^ousnesB." — R. T. 



190 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [n.cxxi.1— 8. 

Ver. 6. — Types of peril hy day and ly night. The sun and the moon. To under- 
stand these figures, it is necessary to keep in mind, not only what the sun and moan 
actually are in Eastern countries, but also the sentiments which have gathered about 
them in those lands. 

I. The bun is the type of the open perils of the godlt life. The sun strike* 
openly, and is specially perilous when it strikes on the lower part of the back of the 
head. Men know this, and are duly warned to take all precautions. And so in life 
there are various temptations and dangers, which we all know about, which every man 
knows may come into his personal experience, and concerning which we all, in varioui 
ways and degrees, take precautions. Tet even in respect of these we need the 
assurance of an outside and Divine protection. So strange is the frailty of human 
nature, that men are over-mastered by the very things tliey know well, are warned 
against, and even think themselves strong to resist. It needs to be always kept in 
mind that the power of temptation depends on the physical, mental, or spiritual 
condition in which we are found when it assails us. And we need the assurance of 
God's defence even agMinst open and well-known evils, because he only can know the 
particular peril which lies in their relativity to us at any given time. Illustrate by the 
fact tiiat the sunstroke is only an occasional peril. The sun strikes the man who is in 
a physical condition to receive the stroke. But the man does not know the peril of 
his physical condition. God knows, and can help him to defend himself from the peril. 

II. The moon ts the type ok the becebt perils of the oodlt life. In the 
cloudless skies of the East, where the moon shines with such exceeding clearness, its 
effects upon the human frame have been found most injurious. It has been proved, 
beyond a doubt, that the moon smites as well as the sun, causing blindness for a time, 
and even the distortion of the features. The Arabs universally believe that the beams 
of the moon are noxious to the human body ; and therefore they carefully cover over 
their heads when they sleep in the open air. Meat, when exposed to the moonbeams, 
becomes quickly tainted. Mr. Martin says, " Of the effects of the moon on animal 
life Tery many instances could be cited. I have seen in Africa the newly littered 
young perish in a few hours, if exposed to the rays of the full moon. Fish become 
rapidly putrid, and meat, if left exposed, incurable or unpreservable by salt. The 
mariner, heedlessly sleeping on deck, becomes aCBicted with nyctalopia, or night- 
blindness ; at times the face is hideously swollen, if exposed during sleep to the 
moon's rays ; the maniac's paroxysms are renewed with fearful vigour at the full and 
change, and the coM, damp chill of the ague supervenes on the ascendency of this 
apparently mild yet powerful luminary. Let her influence over this earth be studied ; 
it is more powerful than is generally known." The moon may very well be taken as 
the tjrpe of the secret, subtle, insidious perils of the godly life ; and these are chieBy 
to be dreaded. As there are poison-germs in the natural atmosphere, which generate 
disease in us when our vitality and resisting power are low, so there are poison-germs 
in the moral atmosphere of our everyday associations, which only cultured spiritual 
life can enable us to resist. There are enervating influences, suggestive examples. 
Little slips into inexactness or untruthfulness. A thousand things in common life, 
that seem to have no more power of mischief in them than have the moonbeams. 
What, then, would be any man's hope of preserving moral health and safety, if we 
might not cherish the assurance of the psalmist, that God understands all secret perils 
that gather about us, and will not let the moon smite us by night ? " The darkness 
and the light are both alike to him." — B. T. 

Ver. 7. — Evil as Ood sees it. " All evil." All kinds of eviL We may not think 
that God estimates evil precisely as we do. la this " Gk>d*s thou°;hts are not as our 
thoughts." One important distinction may be pointed out here. We think evil to be 
that which injuriously affects our circumstances ; God sees evil as that which injuri- 
ously affects us. Consequently, some of the things which we call evil God does not 
so call, because their influence on «« is good. And if this be so, the mere change of 
our circumstances is not the thing for us chiefly to desire ; we should rather seek the 
Divine overruling, which includes defence from what God sees to be evil, and involves 
making " all things work togethet for good." 

L God misses what man bees. For man evU is calamity. This is true in the 



Pfcoxxi. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 191 

phyncal sphere. Disaster, disease, disappointment, defeat, occupy man's thoughts, and 
are, properly enough, from his point of view, classed as evils. But it is true also in 
the moral sphere. It is the calamity side of evil which ahsorbs man's attention. 
Drunkenness ruining a life is evil. Dishonesty found out is evil. Quarrelsomeness 
hrealiing friendship is evil. It is only as man's spiritual nature is quickened that moral 
evil, as distinct from moral calamity, is apprehended. But God does not call calamity 
eviL It has, indeed, no moral quality that he can recognize. It is only an agency 
for securing evil or good. It is a revelation to us to discover that God's supreme 
interest is not in events, as ours is. He is supremely concerned about us. 

IL God bees what man misses. The moral possibilities that are in all events. 
Man is profoundly interested in what happens, and is wont to stop there, and miss the 
meaning of what happens. God always sees in events that happen persons acting ; 
aad in their motives and moods and wills he sees evil or good. The spiritually 
awakened man sees evil as God sees it ; and, therefore, when he prays to be kept from 
all evil, he means kept from himself — from the evil that is in him. If he were but free 
from the answering of his moral evil, nothing that could happen would be a real 
calamity.— R. T. 

Ver. 7. — The safety of our life. "He shall keep thy souL" The term "soul" 
stands often in the Scriptures of both the Old and New Testaments for the animal life ; 
but we use it for that spiritual being which man is, as distinguished from that bodily 
form which man Acts. Taking the first idea, it may be shown that God's care of our 
natural life involves and includes all due provision for the thousandfold needs of that 
life. The greater includes the less. The daily renewed gift of life carries with it the 
gift of all the life will need day by day. This may be applied to the national life of 
Israel. The restored exiles may well gain and keep full confidence in God, seeing that 
he had kept their national life through such anxious and imperilling times. He had 
kept it; they might be sure that he would keep it. And this assurance carried with 
it the confidence that God's defence and blessing were still upon the restored nation. If 
God keeps us in being, and gives us new days, then we may confidently hold him to 
his promise, " As thy day so shall thy strength be." He is able and willing to make 
" all grace abound " unto " all-sufficiency." Taking the second idea, we come upon 
God's contiaued interest io, and care for, the new life he has quickened in our souls. 
His concern for the material life does but illustrate his care for the spiritual life 
(" This is the will of God, even our sanctification "). " Soul-keeping is the soiil of 
keeping. If the soul be kept, all is kept. The preservation of the greater includes that 
of the less, so far as it is essential to the main design ; the kernel shall be preserved, 
and in order thereto the shell shall be preserved also. Our soul is kept from the 
dominion of sin, the infection of error, the crush of despondency, the puffing up of 
pride — kept from the world, the flesh, and the devil; kept for holier and greater 
things, kept in the love of God, kept unto the eternal kingdom and glory." But we 
need not miss the important fact that God's soul-keeping runs along with, and works 
through, our own soul-keeping. " Keep thy heart with all keepings, for out of it are 
the issues of life."- R.T. 

Ver. 8. — 2%e safety of our days, "The Lord shall keep thy going out and thy 
coming in." This expression is evidently borrowed from the blessing on obedience 
given in Deut. xxviii. 6, " Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed 
shalt thou be when thou goest out." Clearly it is but a poetical way of saying, that 
the defence and guidance and benediction of Jehovah shall rest on the godly man in all 
the actions and relations of his everyday life. The protection vouchsafed extends to 
all a man is and all a man does. It might seem as if the salvation of the soul from 
spiritual death were all we need be anxious about ; but God never urges this point 
upon us. His salvation is not so limited. He saves the whole man, and bears as real 
a relation to man's temporal as to his spiritual needs. " With his dear Son he freely 
gives us all things." The true saving of a man for the life that now is involves the 
saving of the man for the life that is to come. 

I. The " ooms our " of life may indicate its activities and entebfbises. We 
go out in the morning refreshed, vigorous, full of conscious power, and in some peril of 



192 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PB. cxxn. 1 — 9, 



te?/-relianoe. " The Lord shall preserve thy going out." Keeping thee from wnatever 
form of temptation and moral evil may come through the putting forth of human 
energy in the daily duties of life. Man's enterprise may bring him into situations of 
bodily danger. God will keep him then. But the very force he puts into life may 
unduly magnify self; and it is much more to say that God will keep him fi-om 
ensnaring sdf. 

II. The "comino in" of life mat indicate its passivities and Q0ibt belatior- 
BHIFS. We come in tired. We come in to rest, enjoy ; we come in to home relation- 
Bhips and quiet occupations ; and we seldom suspect that there is a possible exaggerat- 
ing of self in our times of passivity, as truly as in our times of activity. There art 
luxuries, listlessnesses, selfishnesses, of our very resting-times ; and we need God for 
our ooming in, lest the self or self-indulgence should gain undue power over us, — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — The Source of help. " I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills," etc. 

L A BTRONO, DEEP SENSE OF DEPENDENCE ON GoD IMPLANTED IN DS. 

II, We must LIFT ODBSBLVES UP IN THE WHOLE POWEE OF OUB BEINS TO BEALEEI 

God's nearness to help us. He dwelt in the mountain-group of Zion at Jerusalem, 
and in the other mountains of Israel. We have been taught to renlize that God it 
Spirit, and dwells near us, as well as in the far-o£r mountains and in distant worlds. 
But we can see him only from the heights of the soul. 

III, The Creator or the univbbse is thk Pbovtobnoe of this world. (Ver, 2,) 
The Being who framed man's wonderful nature would naturally provide for its great 
wants — the wants he had himself created. " Your Father knoweth that ye have need 
of all these things." 

IV, The Cbeatob wotTLO not only hays the poweb, but the desibe, thi 
disposition, to help the child of his love. (Vers. 3 — 6.) " He that keepeth thee 
will not slumber." God's care for us will not suffer him to sleep or become indifferent 
tons. 

Y. God's eternal oarb is to keep thk boul frou evil — from all bbal ktil 
Many calamitous, or what appear calamitous, events to us are not evili in the sight of 
Qod, but, under his control, issue in our eternal good.— S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXXIL 



Tbb "title" assigns this psalm to David; 
and there seems to be no sufficient reason 
why his authorship should not be accepted. 
The description of Jerusalem exactly suits 
his day (vers. 3 — T). The " thrones of judg- 
ment, thrones of the house of David " (ver. 
6) would be his own throne and that of his 
■on Solomon, whom he associated. The 
" house of the Lord " (ver. 1) would be the 
tabemade which David set up (2 Sam. vi. 
17). The " tribes of the Lord," whioli were 
all united under David (2 Sam. v. 5), pro- 
bably began to "go up" to Jerusalem as 
soon as David removed the ark thither. 
The strong love for Jerusalem and for the 
Lord's house, which animates the writer. 
Is also very charaoteristio of David. 

Ver. 1. — I was glad when they said unto 
me, Let ub go into the house of the lord 
(oomp. Pss. V. 7 ; xxviii. 2 ; cxxxviii. 2). 



Ver. 2.— Our feet Bhall stand; rather, 
itand, or are itanding. The pilgrim-band 
has entered the city, and is on its way to 
God's house. Within thy gates, Jerusalem. 
Jerusalem has its " walls " (ver. 7) and iti 
" gates " set up, which suits the time of 
David, not tliat of Ezra or Zerubbabel. 

Ver. 3. — Jerusalem is bnilded as a city 
that is compact together ; rather, Jerusalem 
that art bvilded. The primary reference is 
probably to the compact shape and look of 
the anoient city, which, as Josephus says, 
was " one and entire," with no straggling 
suburbs, shut in on the north by a wall, and 
on the three other sides both by walls and 
by deep, rooky viilleys. But the material 
" compactness " was perhaps taken to sym- 
bolize the close internal union of the inhabi- 
tants one with another, whereby they were 
all knit together into one Church and 
people. 

Ver. 4.— Whither the tribes go up, the 
tribes of the Lord. This points to a time 
before the dispersion of " the tribes," which 
rendered such regular "going up" impos- 
sible. Unto the testimony of Israel ; rather, 
o« a teetiruony unto Israel— a witness to the 



pa. oxxn. 1 — 9.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



193 



whole nation that all Israelites had coTenant 
priyile^B at Jerusalem. To give thanks 
unto the Name of the lord. The three 
gieat feasts whereto Israel was bound to 
" go up " were all of them seasons of thanks- 
giving. 

Yer. 5.— Tor there are set thrones of jndg- 
ment, the thrones of the house of David. 
Jerusalem was the oivil, no less than the 
religious, centre. There David judged con- 
troversies, and Absalom when he usurped 
the throne, and Solomon when David asso- 
ciated him. But the plural may be "a 
plural of dignity." 

Ver. 6. — Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. 
Let all true Israelites " pray for the peace 
of Jerusalem," t.e. for her tranquillity and 
for her prosperity. They shall prosper that 
love thee. A covert threat, as well as a 
promise. "Such as love Jerusalem, and 
pray for her peace, shall prosper ; suoli as 
do not love her shall lack prosperity." 

y». 7w— Peaee be within thy walls, and 



prosperity within thy palaces. The prayer, 
which he would have others offer, the 
psalmist now offers himself. The prayer 
embraces, first, the whole community ; then, 
esprcially those who hare the direction and 
government of it. 

Ver. 8. — For my brethren and companions' 
sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee. 
The inhabitants of Jernsalem are the writer's 
"brethren and companum»," He is not a 
mere pilgrim on a visit to the holy city, 

Ver. 9. — Because of the house of the Lord 
our God I will seek thy good. The tabernacle 
set up by David in Jerusalem is called "the 
house of the Lord " in P»s. v. 7 ; xxvii. 4 ; 
lii. 8 ; and Iv. 14. God " dwelt there," as he 
dwelt in the tabernacle of Moses in the 
wilderness (Exod. xl. 31, 85) and in the 
temple of Solomon subsequently (2 Chron. 
V. 13, 14). The good of Jerusalem was tu 
be sought for two reasons : (1) because God's 
people were there ; and (2) because God's 
bouse was there (see Oalvin, ad loo.). 



HOMILETICS. 

Ten. 1—9. — The house of Ood and the Chwreh of Jetu* Christ. The " home of 
God " (vers. 1 and 9) may stand for the Christian sanctuary, and the " Jerusalem," of 
which this psalm is full, may stand for the Church of Jesus Christ. Thus regarded, 
we have — 

I. Thb HotrsK or God. 1. Z%e Divine Presence. God's house is the place where 
he dwells ; where, in the fullest sense, he is. And though the Omnipresent caimot be 
said to be in one place more truly than in another, yet is there a sense in which he is 
especially present in his own " house." (1) Going there expressly to meet and to 
worship him, we are more conscious of his nearness to us than we are elsewhere. (2) He 
will and he does manifest himself in his revealing truth and in his gracious influences 
as he does not elsewhere. 2. United worship. " Let us go into the house of the 
Lord." It is not enough for a man to say that he can pray and sing and read at home. 
Nothing will compensate for united worship. There is a fervour in prayer, and a 
heartiness in praise when many souls are outpoured in the one, and many voices are 
united in the other, which solitary worship does not know ; there is an influence in 
uttered truth, spoken in the sympathetic hearing of a hundred hearts, which no book 
can communicate in the sileut chamber. There is a sacred joy which gladdens the 
pure heart (ver. 1) in the anticipation and in the act of public worship, of which it is 
a serious mistake to deprive ourselves. 3. The duty of encouragement, " Let us go ; " 
" Let him that heareth say. Come." Those who are not able to enforce Divine claims 
or human obligations can graciously and effectually invite their neighbours to go where 
these great spiritual realities will be enforced by others. Andrew rendered his brother 
Simon, and the Church of Christ, an invaluable service when " he brought him to 
Jesus " to bear his word and to become his disciple. 

IL The CHnEOH of Jesus Cheist. Jerusalem was " the city of God." The " New 
Jerusalem " will be composed of the glorified spirits of men of every age and from 
•very land. The spiritual Jerusalem to-day is the multitude of unrecognized men, but 
beloved of Chiist, that, under every sky, are loving and serving him. 1. We must not 
be satisfied till we have been enrolled in this company ; till we can say, " Our feet are 
iUmding within thy walls." 2. To belong to this Church is our most sacred duty ; it 
was " a testimony " or ordinance " in Israel " to go up to Jerusalem (ver. 4). It is the 
clear, decisive will of Christ — and that is our "testimony" that constitutes our 
obligation — that we should become members of his Church on earth. 3. The strength 
of the Church is in the close association of its members ; it must be " compact together " 
PSALMS — ^m. " 



194 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. oxxn. 1— 9. 

(ver. 3) ; its forces not scattered, dissipated, lost, but united, well-ordered for defence 
and for aggression. Where there is unity of spirit, aim, and action, there is strength 
to withstand and to achieve. 4. A wise regard for onr own welfare and a true concern 
for others' good will make us love and serve the Church of Christ. (1) They will 
prosper that love it (ver. 6). Association with Christ and with his people is, if not 
a guarantee, a strong assurance of present and temporal well-being ; sufficiency, if not 
wealth ; all that is needful, if not all that is pleasant. (2) As we love our brethren 
and our companions, we shall wish well to the Church ; for as its holy influences extend 
and reach their hearts, and cover their lives, they also will be shielded from evil and 
enriched with good. 5. Christ calls for believing prayer and faithful labour. Pray for 
the peace, and for the prosperity, of Jerusalem (vers. 6, 7). It is a poor thing to pray 
for it if we do not strive for it, if we do not contribute to it. " I will seek thy good; " 
and it is a very imperfect method of seeking good if we do not bring our personal con- 
tribution to it. To do that for the peace and prosperity of the Church, we must 
command ourselves, be gracious and genial in word as well as in spirit, take our part 
in earnest work, labour till the Master himself takes the weapon from our hands. 



HOMILIBS BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1—9. — Jenisalem a type of the Church. That which is said or implied here of 
Jerusalem is appropriate in a symbolic sense to the New Jerusalem, the Church of the 
living God. 

I. Fob the Chuboh is as a citt. 1. Built. The result of thought and toil and 
care. 2. As Jerusalem, a captured city. It was once the home of all heathen abomina- 
tion, but by David it was won for God. So the Church is a captured city, a trophy of 
God's omnipotent grace. 3. Eax walls and bulwarks. Jerusalem had (ver. 7). So the 
Church (Isa. zxvi. 1). The Spirit, the Word, and the work of God in human hearts, — 
these are her defences. 4. And palaces. There were many of these in Jerusalem. 
The palaces of the Church are those spiritual privileges which those who are high in 
the favour of Gkxl are permitted to enjoy, 

II. Heb people. 'Those who love God's worship, who love to be asked to go to the 
house of the Lord, and also to ask others. These are they in whom the Spirit of God 
dwells, and who are the people of the city of God. 

IIL She is chabaotebized by unitt, order, btbength. (Ver. 3, "compact 
together.") For Jerusalem this was inevitably so by reason of the site on which 
she stood, which allowed no room for indefinite enlargement (see Exposition; and 
Stanley's • Sinai and Palestine'). And so when the Church of God has attained to its 
perfect form, the divisions and discords, the disorder and consequent weakness, which 
too much characterize the Church now, shall all have disappeared. And even now 
there are Christian Churches which by reason of their peace and unity and order, are 
strong — are as a city compact together. 

IV. She is the centre of unitt foe others. (Ver, 4.) Jerusalem and the 
temple were, in Israel's best days, the rallying-point of all her tribes. The strength 
which this gave them excited the jealousy of Jeroboam, and caused him to set up the 
rival worship of Samaria. And to-day the Church is the real bond of nations, and is 
becoming increasingly so. 

V. This dmitt of those who oatheb to her is a witness fob God, abb 
BENDERS HIM PRAISE. The gathering of the tribes of the Lord (ver. 4) at the great annual 
festivals bore testimony to all men that Israel was the covenant people of God, and 
that they rejoiced therein; thus they rendered praise to the Name of the Lord. And 
the united companies of believers bear a like testimony and render like praise. 

VI. Judgment just and righteodb goes forth from her. (Ver. 5.) From the 
juiigment-thrones of the princes of the royal house went forth the decisions which the 
people obeyed in all matters on which judgment had been given. So to-day, from 
the real Church of God goes forth that law which binds or looses the consciences of 
men. This is " the power of the keys " which Christ has given to his Church. What 
^he says to-day all peoples will sooner or later accept as right and true. They may 
1 esist, but ere long they will yield. God wills it so. 



PS. fljtxn. 1— ®.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 196 

VIL She ib to be devotedly loybd and fbated k>b. (Vers. 6 — 9.) For God 
the Lord dwells within her (ver. 9). All her excellence, authority, and strength are 
liecause of this, and only this. Do our feet stand within her gates? — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — Olad to go to the Aouw qf the Lord. The feeling expressed here is note- 
worthy, to say the least of it ; for— 

L ScoH QLADNEBB IB BABE. The proof of that is seen in the mnltitudes that never 
go at all. And of those who do, how many go as seldom as possible I — an hour and a hal f 
a week is considered ample for church-going. And of those who are more regular and 
frequent, can it be said that they are glad to go? Is it not the sense of duty, the 
necessity of upholding a religious reputation, desire to please friends, force of habit, 
wish to set good example, fear of a condemning conscience, or some other motive such 
as these ? But how seldom is there much gladness about it, except when it is all over 1 
What a contrast to the exuberant delight which is evident throughout this psalm t 
We often sing it, but how often do we mean it ? 

U. But bight. Ought we not to be "glad when," etc.? Surely yes. For: 1. It 
it " Divine urviot." But how should we like a child of ours to grndge rendering us 
service, to get out of it whenever he could, and, when he could not, to render it in as 
half-hearted a way as possible ? But this is just how we treat God in this service which 
he enj'iins upon us. 2. And it is Ood's chosen place of meeting with us. Ought we to 
be loth to meet him, or to avoid such meeting whenever we can find any sort of excuse 
to do so? We do not so deal with earthly parents or benefactors. 3. And it is the 
place where he blesses those who come. Mere gratitude should make us glad to " go into 
the house," etc. 

IIL And most seasonable. What led the psalmist to thus feel and speak? He 
does so oftentimes. 1. Hie remembrance of the revelationi of Qod he had received 
there. (Cf. Ps. Ixiii. 3, "To see thy power and thy glory, so as," etc.) His snul had 
been filled with holy rapture and joy in God. 2. The confident expectation of similar 
blessing. He went desiring God, which is ever the condition of blessing from God. 
3. His whole spiritual life had been so quickened and strengthened there. There the 
chains of sin had fallen off, the burden of guilt removed, the sorrows of his life soothed, 
and he had been filled with the Spirit of Gt)d. 4. The worship itself was beautiful, 
and the throng of worshippers, and all the associations and memories of the place, 
enhanced the joy of worship. 5. And like reasons are in force still. The age, place, 
forms, are all different; but the spiritual realities which the psalmist knew, the true 
worshipper knows still. He too has met with God, and God with him, as the holy 
Word has been preached, the fervent prayer offered, the hymn of praise sung, and the 
holy bread and wine of the Communion partaken of. Often and often has it been the 
ante-chamber of heaven. 

IV. And bbsultpdl. They who are glad to join in worship, to whom it is a real 
delight, are a very favoured people. And the results of their worship will be many. 
1. For themselves. It is a witness of the reality of their faith and love and acceptance 
with God. It is full of inspiration; such glad worship will not evaporate in mere 
feeling, but will become embodied in holy word and deed and life. It gives them 
heaven before they get there, and it is a mighty means, through the Holy Spirit, of 
their sanctification. 2. For the Church : they are the conservators and the promoters 
of its best life. 3. For the world : they are witnesses for the love of God and the joy 
of his service. 4. For Ood : he is glorified in them. — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — Joy in QoiPs service. "I was glad," etc. It is well agreed among 
Bible writers that this cannot be a psalm of David's ; it must belong to the time 
immediately before, or the time subsequent to, the Exile, but very different opinions 
are entertained concerning its immediate associations. Liddon says, " The pilgrim who 
composed tl)e psalm would have belonged to one of the ten separated tribes, but he 
had remained, after the general defection, true to the divinely ordered worship at 
Jerusalem, and this psalm may well have been composed on the occasion of his first 
visit. We observe in it his delight at the mere prospect of the journey ; his ecstasy at 
finding himself, or at the, very thought of finding himself, within the sacred gates ; his 
wonder at the aspect of the city lying before him as he stood, probably, on the Mount 



196 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [p«. oxin. 1— 9. 

of OliveB; his sense of its past glories and of its present titles to honour — ^the thrones 
of David and of Solomon, the sacred temple. But there are presages of comiog trouble 
in the air, and as the psalmist thinks of his brethren in the faith who live within Its 
wmlls, and of the house of God, which was its prominent and its most precious feature, 
he offers a prayer for the peace of the holy city which has so large a place in his heart" 
Perowne says, " The poet is living in the country. As the time of the feast draws 
near, his friends and neighbours come to him, inviting him to join them in their visit to 
Jerusalem. It is with this picture that he begins his psalm. He tells us how his 
heart 611ed with joy as they bade him come with them to the house of Jehovah." We 
see the procession starting; we see beaming eyes and happy faces, and hear the music 
of gladness with which the pilgrims beguile the tediousness of the journey. The next 
verse transports us at once to the holy city itself. " Our feet have stood within thy 
gates ; " the few words are enough. They have reached their journey's end ; they are 
in the city which they love. Then the poet tells us, first, the impression made upon 
his mind by her stateliness and her beauty ; and next, how there comes crowding upon 
his memory the scenes uf her earlier grandeur, the thought of all she had been as the 
gathering-place of the tribes of Jehovah, the royal seat of David and of his house. 
Filled with these thoughts, inspired by these memories, he bursts forth into hearty, 
fervent prayer — the prayer of one who loved his country as he loved his God, with no 
common devotion — ^for the welfare of that city so glorious in her past history, and with 
which all hopes for the future were so intimately bound up." The " Pour Friends " 
support the suggestion of Ewald, who thinks the psalm may be a blessing on a party 
of pilgrims, uttered by an old man returned from the Exile, himself unequal to the 
journey. " The departure of his friends reminds him of the alacrity with which he, 
too, had once obeyed a similar summons ; his spirit is fired by sympathy with their 
enthusiasm, and be pours forth the praises of that city which from the earliest times 
had been recognized as the key-stone of the national unity, the civil and religious 
metropolis of the tribes." We fix attention on the personal pleasure in the public 
worship of God which the psalmist expresses. Por him the sacred duty had come to 
be a sacred joy. And we never worship with full acceptance until we have entered 
into a similar experience. The attitudes of worshippers towards worship may be com- 
pared and illustrated. 

I. Therk IB couPABATivE NESLEOT. Presence at Divine service occasionally. 
Attendance interrupted on the slightest occasions. No evident heart in the service. 
A duty got through. 

IL Tbebe IB coMFABATivE INDIFFEBENOB. There may be fair regularity of attend- 
ance, but the " heart divided." The man there, but the heart elsewhere ; so the service 
but a routine, instinct with no mental attention, and no pious feeling. For such Divine 
service is as though it had not been. 

III. Thxbe is comparative INTEREST. That of the intellect and that of the 
aesthetic faculties, not that of the heart. Sermons may be intellectual treats, and 
services artistic gratifications, they are not what they should be unless the whole man is 
interested. 

ly. These ib bfibitital delight. But this must depend on the man's being 
spiritually quickened, and on having his spiritual tastes cultured. Then he finds his 
supreme joy in God, and therefore in acts of worship that bring near the sense of God. 
— B. T. 

Ver. 3. — Rdigioua attachment to places. " One thing that would have struck • 
pilgrim to Jerusalem who should approach the city firom its north-eastern side was its 
beauty. The stately buildings erected by Solomon on the south side of the temple 
area — Solomon's own house of judgment, the house uf the Forest of Lebanon, the palaces 
of the kings of Zion, the palaces of the princes of Judah around it, the circuit of the 
walls, above all, the temple, with its courts, with its burnished roof, with its lofty 
gates, with its tower, surrounded as all this was on three sides by deep ravines and 
olive-clad hills. Pi^sibly the pilgrim had seen Damascus, straggling out amid the 
beautiful oasis which surrounds it in the plain of the Abana; or he had seen Memphis, 
a long string of buildings, thickly populated, extending for some twelve or fourteen 
miles along the west bank of the Nile. Compared with these, Jerusalem had the 



P9. oxxii. 1— 9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 197 

compact beauty of a highland fortress, its buildings as seen from below standing out 
against the clear Syrian sky, and conveying an impression of grace and strength that 
would long linger in the memory " (Liddon). 'J'he attachment of Mohammedans to 
the sacred city of Mecca is well known, and almost every religion has its special centre, 
and every god his shrine. The realistic presentation of a divinity in some image 
involves the localization uf his worship to some place. An nnTamiliar instance of 
special interest in sacred places was given by Professor Minas Tcheraz to the " World's 
Parliament." Speaking of the Armenian Church, he said, " One result of the manifold 
persecutions has been to strengthen the attachment of the Armenians to the Church 
of St. Gregory the Illuminator. Etchmiadzin has become a word of enchantment, 
graven in the soul of every Armenian. The Armenians of the mother country bow 
down with love before this sanctuary, which has already seen 1591 summers. And as 
regards those who have left their native land, if it is far from their eyes, it is not far 
from their hearts. A Persian monarch, Shah Abbas, had forcibly transported into his 
dominion fourteen thousand Armenian famdies. Like the captive Israelites at the 
remembrance of Jerusalem, these Armenians always sighed at the recollection of 
Etchmiadzin. In order to keep them in their new country. Shah Abbas conceived the 
project of destroying Eichmiadzia, of transporting the stones to Djoulfa (Ispahan), and 
there constructing a similar convent. He actually transported the central stone of the 
chief altar, the baptismal fonts, and other important pieces, but the emotion of the 
Armenians was so great that he was forced to give up his project of vandalism." The 
sentiment of Christians in relation to the Holy Sepulchre may be compared with the 
sentiment of the .Jews in relation to the holy city and temple. And a subject 
whicli may be suggested for consideration is the value and the peril of this association 
of religion with places and buildings. 

L The value of the association of belioion with plages. That value lies 
in the help which material things can be to the spiritual life of beinss who have 
material forms. The wholly spiritual is at present unattainable by us. We are com- 
pelled to shape the spiritual in formal words, and to present the spiritual in material 
imai^es. The sacraments are based on this value of sensible helps to spiritual feeling. 
And* so historic and beautiful church-buildings cultivate reverence; familiar services 
nourish the spirit of worship ; the church we have attended since childhood, or in 
which we have felt the power of Divine things, readily quickens emotion and renews 
faith. The hermit who retires even from hallowing associations, does but make new 
ones for himself, for none of us can afford to neglect the help that sacred places and 
things may be to us. 

II. The peril that mat lie in the assooiatios of eemgion with places. 
It is the peril that always lies in the connection of the material with the spiritual. 
The material is always trying to encroach. In exaggeration we see this in tlie ignor- 
ant heathen who thinks of his image as a god, instead of as a help to the apprehension 
of God. This subtle peril lies in services, sacred buildings, sacraments, and even 
formal doctrines. They become absorbing in themselves, not agencies of the spiritual. 
— R.T. 

Ver. 3.— 2Vi« vmhlem of spiritual unity. "Compact together." Stanley thinks 
this term indicates the impression made on country visitors by the conformation of the 
ground on which the city of Jerusalem stood. " Those deep ravines which separate 
Jerusalem from the rocky plateau of which it forms a i art, and acted as ito natural 
defence, must also have determined its natural boundaries. The city, wherever else it 
spread, could never overleap the valley of the Kedron or of Hinnom. 1 he expression 
of compactness was still more appropriate to the original city, il, as seems probable, the 
valley of Tyropoeon formed in eailier times a fosse within a fosse, shuttmg m Zion and 
Moriah into one compact mass, not more than half a mile in breadth." This compact- 
ness is taken as a type of the higher national unity. The nation restored from the 
Captivity was regarded as a whole nation, the distinction between Judah and Israel 
being no longer recognized. The sign of unity was the gathering from all the tnbea 
of worshippers at the Jerusalem feasts. The crowds of worshippers pressed into the 
area of the temple seemed to be represented by the compactness of the city. 

I Spibitual unity is the unity of a common life. And the real sign ot liM 



198 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. cxxii. 1—9. 

is low. Those multitudes of Jews in the temple had one common love, and so one 
common life. They loved Jerusalem, they loved the God who glorified Jerusalem by 
his presence. And so the Christian unity is the unity of a common life, whose sign is 
• common love to the Lord Jesus Christ. Every Christian will join in saying, " Grace 
be with all them who love oar Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity and in truth." 

n. SFHtiTUAL UNiTT IS THB UNITY Of A oouMON INTEREST. And that interest 
for Jews was the honour of Jehovah, the nation's God ; it is fur Christians the honour 
of Jehovah-Jesus, the manifested God, How a common interest blends men together 
is seen in societies, clubs, conferences, etc. It is the secret of the unity of Churches. 

in. Spiritual unitt is the harmont of varied forus. Different-shaped hills 
made up the unity of Jerusalem. Difi'erent-coloured flowers make up the unity of the 
garden. Difiereut moods in worshippers make up the unity of a religious service. 
Different mental apprehensions of truth make up the unity of the Chrisiian doctrine. 
Reunion of mere samenesses is not a pleasing thing either to God or man. We do not 
care for things cut to an exact pattern, or pressed into one mould. In variety lies 
charm ; and variety is not only consistent with unity, it is a condition of unity if 
the unity is to go deeper than mere appearances. '' IhiA vast society in whose ample 
bosom the souls of Christian men from generation to generation find shelter and 
warmth and nourishment, is the reality of which the old Syrian city was a material 
type. This is the Jerusalem of the Christian Creed, 'I believe in one holy Catholic 
and Apostolic Church.' There may be controversies among Christians as to the exact 
extent and direction of its walls, just as there are controversies amoug antiquarians as 
to the extent and direction of the walls of its material prototype, but as to its place in 
the thoughts and affections of the true Christian man there should be no room for 
controversy. No other association of men can have such claims on the heart of a 
Christian as the Church ol God." " The true remedy for disappointment and sorrow 
(in the score of shortcomings and differences within the sacied city is to be found in 
such prayers as we offer in our holiest service to the Divine Majesty, beseeching him to 
inspire continually the universal Church with the spirit of truth, unity, and concord."' 
— E. T. 

Ver. 4, — Ute mission, of the great /eastt. " The pre-Mosaic festivals were pure nature- 
festivals. Ih the changes of the seasons, and of the phenomena of heaven, nature 
always displays a gracious adaptation to the needs of man, giving him special opportunities 
and intervals when he may rest for a considerable while from his ordiDary toil, and 
devote himself unreservedly to higher thoughts." The work of Moses in developing, 
and adai)ting to a purpose, these nature-festivals needs to be carefully studied. He 
gave them precisely historical and religious relations and suggestions. The " tribes of 
•Israel" is a phrase belonging to the old times of Israel's glory. (For the three 
{iseemblies, see Exod. xxiii. 17 ; xxxiv. 23 ; Deut. xvL 16.) These annual pilgrimiiges 
are spoken of as the subject of a Divine testimony or precept to IsraeL Without 
attempting to discuss elaborately the mission of these feasts, there are four things to 
which attention may be directed. 

I. Tbet were desioned to preserve the national unity. It should be kept 
in mind that Israel was not so much a tribe as a set of tribes, and there was always the 
danger of jealousies producing divisions. The times of the judges reveal how easily 
the national life could be broken up. Something in which the unity of the nation 
cuuld be publicly recognized was absolutely necessary. This something must be in 
the nature of a command from the central authority ; and it must take a regular and 
systematic form. Compare pilgrimages to Mecca, and even the country fairs and 
national holidays, which have their distinctly national uses. Show the moral influence 
of such bloiidings of people from different parts of the country ; and explain that the 
preservation of the unity of Israel as a nation bore direct relation to the testimony it 
made for Jehovah among the nations. Statesmen still make it their supreme aim to 
secure the essential unity of the composite sections that make up the nations they 
goTern. Their mottoes t^ ways are, "United we conquer; divided we fall." " Union 
is strength." A constantly repeated united national act is an important help to 
preserving national unity. 

IL They were desioned to freseqve the reliqious unity. Unity is the 



PB. oxxii. 1— 9.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 199 

key-note of the Jewish religion. It expresses the conception of God. " Hear, Israel, 
the Lord our God is one Lord." So unity must be the idea everywhere and in every- 
thing. The primary idea of the religion must get representation in every conceivable 
form. A multiplicity of conceptions of God is condemned. A variety of altars is 
regarded as distinctly mischievous. And even an extension of sacrifice and service 
beyond Jerusalem was not permissible. The whole nation was required to join in the 
most solemn acts of worship — the Passover, Day of Atonement, etc. Subject to all 
kinds of disintegrating influences in their tribal associations, the nation was recalled 
to what may be termed its doctrinal and ecclesiastical unity three times a year. The 
formal religions unity so jealously preserved for the Jews should not be thought of as 
requiring our formal imitation. It was the outward and pictorial illustration of that 
spiritual unity which is the true religious unity, the family unity of those who have 
one Father. 

III. They wbbb designed to oonbeevb the sreat national tbust. Israel, or 
the Abrahamic race, was called out from other nations to be the depositories of those 
primary truths concerning God which were imperilled by man's being left to his self- 
development. "To them were committed the oracles of God," which include the 
threefold conception of God as one, spiritual, holy ; and only to be served by righteous- 
ness. This was the national trust ; and it must be kept ever before the minds of the 
people. In the most solemn way they were reminded of it at the great feasts. 

IV. Thet were designed to sanctify the national holiday-times. The 
feasts of heathen religions are times of moral licence, only suggested by the drunken- 
ness and immorality of country fairs. Israel must realize that all life and relations 
are consecrated to God. They must see that the true relations and pleasures of life 
most be sanctified, must be kept within the holy restraints of religion. Their feast- 
times were their great holiday-times, and in them joy must blend with self-restraint 
and freedom with purity. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 6. — 2%e Mending of the dvil and religions. This subject need not be treated 
controversially. All are agreed that a vital union of the civil and religious, of Church 
and State, is desirable, and even necessary. There may be differences of opinion as 
to the formal ways in which such union may be represented. If we look for its 
realization in the ancient Jewish nation, we must bear in mind that it was based on 
the theocratic notion. The unseen Jehovah was as truly the Head of the State as he was 
Head of the Church. Modern difficulty arises from the apparent necessity for making 
an ordinary human being at once the head of both State and Church. What was 
possible when men could look past all delegated authorities to one unseen, spiritual, 
and supreme Being, in whom absolute authority rested, may not be possible under 
modern conditions. We mnst fully recover the theocratic sentiment before we can 
safely blend the civil and religious. Jerusalem was first the civil metropolis before it 
became the " city of God." It became the religious capital of the nation because it 
was already the civil capital (Deut. xvii. 8, 9). Israel, as the people of the revelation, 
was at once a civil society and a Church — the two were not then essentially distinct, 
as has been and is the case in Christendom. 

I. The civil and religious are the two bides or uan's relations. There is no 
conceivable antagonism between them ideally, whatever there may be actually. Man 
is a being who is set in relations with God and with his fellow-man. And one set of 
relations is as right s,xiA as necessary as the other. A man's relations with God are the 
concern of religion. A man's relations with his fellow-man are the business of civil 
governments. No man can meet his natural obligations by exaggerating the impor- 
tance of either one of those relations and neglecting the other. No man can be truly 
religious and neglect his civil duties. And this the apostles clearly taught the early 
Christians. 

II. The civil and the HBLioroOT oan be harmoniously blended. They always 
have been in the most manly and most Christian man. They have been in the 
repreJsentative nation of Israel. They have been in the healthiest and best periods of 
modem nal'.ions. They can be when the sense of God dominates both. — R. T. 

Vers. 6, 7. — Peace, prosperity, and prayer. Emphatically a pilgrim-song, and by 



200 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxxn. 1— 8t 

a poet who usually lived in the country. Describes the pleasure felt at invitation to 
join a party who were going up to one of the feasts. We have the joy and music of the 
journey ; then the impressions on arrival, the first passionate delight of being in the 
holy city — a city beautifully built, well compacted, adorned with palaces, and strongly 
fortified. Observe the intense feeling with which Jerusalem was regarded by Jews. 
Beautifully situated, it was the centre of national and religious interest. Belies of the 
national feeling remain in the desire of modem Jews to die within its walls, and in the 
scenes at the "Place of Wailing." Many of us can understand this. We have a 
Jerusalem round which our thoughts entwine — the church of our fathers and of our 
childhood. What associations we have with itl Three words are here connected- 
Peace, prosperity, and prayer. 

I. Peace vbey laboelt depends upon peospbritt. " Peace " is a word with an 
extensive, beautiful, and suggestive connotation. We, perhaps, cannot fully realize 
it by any aid of memory; we can only enter into it with the help of the familiar 
engravings of 'War' and 'Peace.' It is not possible to overrate the value of peace 
for nations, or for Churches, or for families. But it largely depends on prosperity. 
This may be illustrated by the inward life of the religious man. Devotion and work 
are allowed to flag, soul-prosperity fails, and at once doubts and fears come to 
spoil the soul's peace. It may be illustrated in the life of the Church. When work 
and zeal and spiritual life — the signs of Church prosperity — fail, then differences are 
sure to come, roots of bitterness spring up. 

II. Pbospeeity veey laegkly depends upon peayee. Show the natural influence 
of prayer. It lifts into strength the better nature. Show the supernatural influence 
of prayer in bringing to us spiritual power. Plead for renewal of interest in private 
and individual prayer; and for more frequent and earnest united prayer. Secret forces 
are the mighty ones. Men take little count of the atmosphere, but it holds up the 
clouds. Who is it, then, upholds the prosperity of the Churches? Who are the peace- 
makers and the peace-keepers? Look below the surface, and you will be sure to see 
the men and women of faith and prayer. They gain for us prosperity, which leads in 
peace. — R. T. 

Ver. 8. — The religious value of the patriotic tpirit. " For my brethren and com- 
panions' sakes, I will wish thee prosperity." This may be the expression of a pilgrim 
on leaving Jerusalem to return to his home. The love of the psalmist for his country 
was pati-iotism. Perowne says, "The last four verses of the psalm breathe a spirit of 
the noblest, most unselfish, patriotism. Not for his own sake, but for the sake of his 
brethren — the people at large — and for the sake of his God, his temple, and his service, 
he wishes peace to Jerusalem, and calls upon others to wish her peace. With love to 
Israel and love to Jehovah there is naturally united a warm affection for Jerusalem, a 
hearty interest in her welfare. 

I. The pateiotio spirit is kin with the belioious. The moral value of both 
is the same, and it lies in taking a man out beyond himself, and interesting him in some- 
thing other than himself. The patriotic spirit interests him in other people, the 
religious spirit interests him in God. They are also alike in their power to arouse and 
culture emotion, and to inspire self-denying acts. 

II. The patriotic spirit nourishes the eeligious. According to the principle 
laid down by St. John, " If a man love not his brother whom he hath seen, how can 
he love God whom he hath not seen ? " It is a delusion that religion claims isolation ; 
it is both expressed and nourished through the tempnraL Religion separated from 
life and its common claims and obligations is but weak and deluding sentiment. 
Patriotic Moses is pious Muiies. The separation of Christian men from political, civil, 
and social interests is entirely a sectarian delusion. The noblest and the healthiest 
Christian lives have ulvtiiys been, aud uic jiwayb bur» w be, in the truest sense 
patriotic. 

III. The PATHioTio etam: qualiities thjh uiiuaioiio. For while it is quite true 
that man it> uot all body aud human relations, it in also quitb irub that he is not all 
■oul and uoul- idialiouii. 'i'hb loligious side of man's uatiue can be exaggerated, and 
often is. The uni>!vrldly may becuuio a snare as well as the worldly. It is helplul to 
qualify the heavenly by the duties of the earthly. — B. T. 



PS. oxxii. 1— 9.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 201 

Ver. 9. — Piety hlessing national life. " Yea, because of the house of the Lord our 
God, I will seek to do thee good " (Prayer-book Version). Piety is seen in the tender, 
almost pathetic, interest the man has in the temple, where the worship of God is con- 
ducted ; the temple which is so rich with hallowed associations. That interest fills the 
psalmist with admiration for the city, and concern for the well-being of those who 
dwell in it, and the nation of which they all form parts. There is a possible injurious 
selfishness of piety, which all sectarianism tends to nourish. It localizes and narrows 
the interest ; encourages a kind of tribal jealousy. The sect should never be permitted 
to take our concern from the nation, whose moral and spiritual well-being should ever 
be the subject of our prayer and our service. The psalmist "prays for Jerusalem 
because of Zion. How the Church salts and savours all around itl The presence of 
Jehovah our God endears to us every place wherein he reveals his glory." 

L Piety gobs with good citizenship, and that blesses national urx. 
Character is power in city and in national life, and even the higher possibilities of 
human character belong to the religious life. The peace-loving and peace-seeking 
citizens are the truly religious. Those who plead for righteousness in business 
relations, and charity in human relations, are the truly religious. The examples of 
good citizenship — not of noisy citizenship — are the truly pious. Of old the blessing of 
a nation was conceived to be its numbers ; we know better than that now. " BighteouB- 
ness exalteth a nation," and righteousness depend; on righteous men, and righteous 
men are they who have the fear and love of God before their eyes. The heavenly 
citizens are the best earthly ones. 

U. Piety ooes with baobifioinq ministry, and that blesses national litb. 
It should never be lost sight of that the two key-notes of Christianity are righteousness 
and service. A Christian cannot be content without doing good. And so the Christian 
citizen is an active force for good. Wherever he is, he is doing some good, lifting some 
burden, helping some straggler, and his ministry therefore becomes • national benedio- 
tion.— R. T. 

Vers. 1 — 9.— TTorsAip. " I was glad when they said unto me," etc This beantiAil 
ode is supposed to have been by one dwelling in the country, who had been invited to 
join, and had joined, a company of pilgrims on their way to one of the feasts at 
Jerusalem ; on his return, this ode embodied the sentiments that had been inspired. 

L The jot of wobship. The delight of anticipation. (Ver. 1.) The brooding 
gladness which dwells on some anticipated great occasion. His imagination would draw 
pictures of Jerusalem and the temple on the way thither, and all their sacred historical 
and religious associations ; as we try to think of heaven and of the scenes in which our 
nature shall be perfected. 

II. The joy of KtiTBOSPEOTiON. (Vers. 2 — 5.) 1. Ee remembers with what awe 
and delight he was spell-bound within the gates of the city and temple. Think how 
II MohammeHan would feel at Mecca, or a Soman Catholic at St. Peter's in Borne, or 
a modern Christian in visiting Calvary, or Bethlehem, or the sepulchre where Christ 
lay. But the awe and delight of spiritual worship transcend all the emotions inspired 
by hallowed places — " in spirit and in truth." 2. Ee was greatly moved by the sight of 
the stateliness and beauty of the city, which had been rebuilt after the Exile. (Ver. 3.) The 
restoration of a national structure, or of the nation itself after forfeiting its glory, pr of 
a human life and character after loss and shame, greatly moves all sympathetic minds. 
The transition from darkness into light is very great. 3. The tribes gathered on such 
occasions, came up in obedience to the Divine law, to worship God with a national 
thanksgiving. (Ver. 4.) The author of the psalm was a grateful participant in the 
worship. The law of grateful worship is the law of all reasonable spiritual beings, the 
very necessity of their nature, and therefore full of delights. 4. The "thrones of 
judgment^ for the civil law were under the shadow of the throne of mercy, or "the 
mercy-seat." The supreme tribunal was to be in the same place as the sanctuary 
(Deut. xvii. 8, 9). Law and mercy, both in God and in the best man, are always 
closely related. 5. The highest result of true worship is to produce the spirit of peace. 

(Vers. 6 9.) Between God and man, among nations and Churches, and between man 

•nd man. — S. 



202 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PB. CXXIU. 1 ♦. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXXIIL 



Yer. 1. — tlnto thee lift I up mine eyes 
(oomp. Pb. ozxi. 1, where the psalmist " lifted 
up Ids eyea " to God's dwelling-place). Now 
the expreasion la bnlder. The eyea are 
lifted np to God himaelf. Oh thou that 
dwellest in the heavens (comp. Fas. ii. 4; 
zi. 4 ; Isa. Ivii. 15 ; Isvi. 1). 

Yer. 2. — Behold, as the eyes of servants 
look unto the hand of their masters. Watch, 
i.e., for the slightest sign that he may give 
ot hia will. Such signa were usually given 
by some movement of the " hand." And as 
the eyes of a maiden nnto the hand of her 
mistress. Masters were waited on by mule 
slaves ; their wives by handmaids — both 
equally anxious to do their will, and there- 
fore equally watchful of all the signs that 
indicated ii So our eyes wait upon the 



Lord our Ood, nntil tliat he have merey npcu 
ns. We wait for the leaet sign that he ii 
about to help and deliver us. 

Yer. 3.— Have mercy upon lu, Lord; 
have mercy upon us. The cry is repeated 
for greater emphasis. For we are exceed- 
ingly filled with contempt. This expression 
can scarcely be saiil to fix the date of the 
psalm, since hatred and contempt were the 
usual feelings wherewitli the Jews were 
regarded by their neighbonrs. But the 
time of Nehemiah would certainly be no 
unsuitable date (see Neh. iv. 4). 

Yer. 4. — Our sonl is exceedingly filled 
with the scorning of those that are at ease ; 
i.e. the careless and irreligious (comp. Isa. 
xxxii. 9, 11; Amos vi. 1). And with the 
contempt of the proud. This clause is exe- 
getical of the last, no t ad ditional. Translate, 
the scorning of those that are at ease — (h« 
contempt of the proud. 



H0MILBTIC8. 

YetB. 1 — 4.— Our refuge in trouble. Beside and beyond the ordinaiy cares and 
vexations of this present time, there are — 

L Times of feculiab tbial. It may be (1) the nation that has to pass through 
this period ; e.g. Israel in Egypt, and again the Jews in Babylon ; or, in modem times, 
Poland or the Italian Duchies, or the kingdom of the Two Sicilies ; or it may be (2) the 
Church of Christ, understanding by this tither the large aggregate community, or the 
body of believing men and women meeting in one place {e.g. the Church at Philippi, the 
Church at Thessalonica) ; or it may be (3) the individual man as he goes on his way 
through mortal life. Hard and bitter trial may come in one or more of many ways ; 
but the text points to that of oppression, the cruel treatment of the weaker by the 
stronger. This may come in the form of positive ill treatment— of imprisonment, of 
" despoiling of goods," of exile, of physical violence. But that which was in the 
psalmist's mind, and that which is most likely to be included in our experieoce, is 
contemptuous disregard, an arrogant assumption of superiority. We may find ourselves 
)>]aced under those of whom we feel that they have missed their way, and are in the 
darkness of error, while they are denouncing us as heretics; or those of whom we feel 
that they are a very long way from wisdom and worth, while they are treating us with 
disdain as if we were the enemies of Christ ; or of those who are superciliously ridiculing 
our most sacnd convictions, though they have no other or better proof of the rightness 
of their own creed than that it is the faith of a majority. And if we have to bear 
this " contempt of the proud " from day to day, if it is as the dropping of water upon 
the stone, which wears out the hardest substance, we may find it to be all but 
intolerable ; we may not only wince, but writhe under it ; our soul may be " exceed- 
ingly filled" with the scorning of th<> ". that are at ease. Whither, then, shall we 
turn? If there be no escape from it, as there often is not, we must find — 

II. OuB KBFUOB IN GoD. (Vcrs. 1, 2.) When we have vainly looked around for 
help from man, " we lift up our eyes " to God — to him that " dwelleth in the heavens." 
1. We recognize the fact that he has power to deliver us. 2. We believe that, in his 
Divine wisdom, he can interpose on our behalf without any disturbance of his system 
of Divine government. 3. We are sure that our suffering is not a matter of indifference 
to his heart, and that our cry enters hia ear. 4. We must not be impatient or distrustful 
if the time or method of our choice should not prove to be his chosen time or way of 
deliverance. 6. We do well to continue our prayer for relief " until he have pity upon 



M. oxxm. 1—4.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 208 



us " and rescue us. 6. Meantime we should (1) let our trouble draw us nearer to our 
Divine Friend in all hallowed fellowship; (2) loosen our tie to this present world ; 
(3) enable us to give to all that witness our course another illustration that the 
upholding grace of Ghxl can triumph over the enmity and cruelty of man. 



HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AXTTHORa 

Vers. 1 — 4. — " Unto thee lift I up mine eyes." These psalms are called " Songs of 
Degrees." For some thought that they were suns; on the steps that led from one court to 
another in the temple of the Lord, and so they were called the songs of degrees, or steps. 
But though this explanation has been long abandoned, nevertheless, in these psalms, 
thus far, there has been an ascent as from step to step. See the sadness of the first of 
them (Fs. csz.). That rises to trust in the blessed keeping of Q-od. That to joy and 
delight in drawing near to the house of Qod. Now this rises higher still, and lifts up 
its eyes unto God himself. The psalm reveals to us much concerning the writer. 

I. He 18 A MAN WHO BELIEVES IN GoD. God is as real to him as, and more than, 
any fellow-man could be. The atheistic doubts or the polytheistic imaginations come 
not near him : he is so sure that God is, that he turns his eyes to the heavens where 
he dwelt, as when he was speaking to a fellow-man he would turn his eyes to him. 
Strong faith in God is the only power which will cause any of us to lift up our eyes as 
does the psalmist here. 

II. A MAN WHO LONGED AFTEB GoD. For in thls Uplifted eye the longing look is 
clearly traceable. It is not merely that he believes that Qod is, but also that he is the 
Bewarder of them that diligently seek him (Jas. i.), and therefore he will diligently 
seek him. 

III. He IS A MAK OF HUMBLE HEABT. He likens himself to a slave w«tohing for 
the beckoning of his master's hand, to know what he would have done. Orientals do 
not speak to their attendant servants, as we do, but by beckoning and gesture they make 
known their will. The servants humbly watch and wait, continuously, patiently, and 
attentively, that they may miss no movement of the master's or mistress's hand which 
will signify their will. So does the psalmist wait, thus humbly, patiently, attentively, 
and in this case, it should seem, beseechingly, for the help needed. 

IV. HiB BEFUOE dNBEB DEEPEST DISTBEBS IS IN GoD. (Ver. 3.) HiS lot WaS 

hard to bear, almost unbearable ; but he could and did turn to God. May we not see 
Christ in this psalm? Let it tell of ourselves. — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — Our uphoh to Ood. This is the characteristic possibility for humanity. 
The cattle have no uplooking eyes, and no yearning hearts to find expression by 
uplooking eyes. Man can look up, pierce the veil of sense, and see the unseen, and 
realize relations with the Divine, indeed, he is not himself until he does. But to get 
the fixed uplook often is, and may well be, the issue of a lifelong moral discipline. 
The need for turning to God comes out of distressed earthly conditions. The restored 
exiles in Jerusalem were full of anxieties and perplexities; they could get no heart-rest 
by the worrying, which is represented by " looking down." They found it by looking 
up and away to the steadfast heavens — to him " that sitteth in the heavens." " The 
uplifted eyes naturally and instinctively represent the state of heart which fixes desire, 
hope, confidence, and expectation upon the Lord." Manton says, " The lifting up the 
eyes implies faith and confident persuasion that God is ready and willing to help ul 
The very lifting up of the bodily eyes towards heaven is an expression of this inward 
trust." R. Holrfsworth gives the following outline : There are many testimonies in 
the lifting up of the eyes to heaven. 1. It is the testimony of a believing, humble 
heart. Neither infidelity nor pride ever carries a man above the earth. 2. It is the tes- 
timony of an obedient heart. A man that lifts his eye up to God acknowledgeth this 
much, "Lord, I am thy servant." 3. It is the testimony of a thankful heart; acknow- 
ledging that every good blessing, every perfect gift, is from the hand of Q<xi. 4. The 
testimony of a heavenly heart. He that lifts up his eyes to heaven acknowledgeth 
thkt he is Weary of the earth ; his heart is not there ; his hope and desire are abova. 



204 THE BOOK OP PSALMS, tRi.cxxin.l--t. 

5. It is the testimony of a devout heart. There is no part of the hody besides the 
tongue that is so great an agent in prayer as the eye. 

I. Tbe nPLOOK TO God mat be but oooasional. And that is so far well. Man 
must be busy with earthly things ; but his heart should be as a metal spring tied down. 
It flies upward at every instant of release. 

II. The uplook to Ood hat be fixed and febuaneiit. A set of the eyes, 
because there is a set of the heart. The fixed level of human eyes, and of wul-eyes, 
varies most remarkably, — B. T. 

Yer. 2. — Watching for Divine favortr and direction. In the East orders are rarely 
given to an attendant in words, but commonly by signs. These are often so slight as 
to escape notice unless the eyes of the servants are kept fixed on the master or mistress. 
When waiting upon his master, the servant stands upon the farthest edge of the raised 
platform, having left his shoes at the door; his hands are folded, and rest upon the 
centre of his girdle ; and he watches closely every movement of his master, prompt to 
attend to all his wants, which are expressed by a nod or a sign. He fills his pipe and 
hands him his coffee; he sets his food before him, and it is his special duty to " pour 
water on his hands " to wash. Should he happen to be missing when wanted, his 
master will summon him by clapping his hands so efTectually that the sound is heard 
throughout the house, especially as the doors and windows generally stand open 
(Lennep). Kimohi suggests that the cry for mercy intimates that the slave is regarded 
as out of the master's favour, and anxiously watching for signs of returning acceptance. 
The simile suggests that there should be a threefold spirit in our watching for and 
waiting; upon God. 

I. The 8PIKIT OF ATTENTION. There is a servant-work which is merely a listless 
and careless doing of what we are told to do. But that kind of service brings no credit 
to master or servant. There is a sei'vant-work which involves the union of all our 
powers, and the active energy and interest of our minds. That service honours both 
master and servant. The man is alive. Vitality and vigour show themselves in 
attention. 

II. The spibit of obedience. The point of obedience which may gain special 
illustration is its taking the servant beyond himself, and filling him with concern for 
the will and well-being of another, even his master. True service therefore becomes 
our finest training in unselfishness. It is constant help toward losing ourselves in the 
interest of another. And this at the call of high principle and the sense of duty. 
Unselfishness is a main foundation of noble character. 

III. The spirit of humilitt. A man may have to take a servant's place; and 
may keep his self-confidence while in it. A man may love to take a servant's place ; 
then he expresses humility and dependence in it, and nourishes humility and dependence 
by it. This is sublimely true of our service to Christ. — B. T. 

Vers. 3, 4. — Contempt a sore trial. The returned exiles found the contemptuous 
treatment of their neighbours the hardest thing to bear. Contempt is always hard to 
bear; but it is hardest to bear when we have an inward and painful conviction that 
we are so weak and poor that the contempt is in no way unreasonable. Those are just 
the times when we want a kindly word and a sign of confidence and hope, and then 
we feel most deeply if, instead, we are scorned, made a laughing-stock, and disheartened. 
That was the case with our Divine Lord. Un the cross he needed the sign of love and 
word of sympathy; instead he had to bear the scorn and contempt \>'iiich the psalmist 
so suggestively anticipated for him (Ps. xxii. 6—8). The returned exiles had a similal 
experience. In their time of frailty a little neighbourly help would have been so much 
to them. It would have given them quietness, security, and the cheer of sympathy. 
Instead of this, contempt humbled them, made them anxious, plucked out hopefulness, 
and filled them with fear. Contempt is a moral atmosphere in which nothing good or 
beautiful ever grew yet, or ever will grow. Hope the best of men, and you help them. 
Despise them and expect failure for them, and you crush them. 

I. Contempt, when it is nNBEASONABLB, can be borne. It is sometimes a mere 
product of malice and envy. There is no real ground for it, and we may know that 
there is no ground. We may properly cherish the consciousness of our power and 



•». oxxiv. 1—8.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



205 



worth; and them we can appraise the contempt of the envious at its true value. It 
cannot hurt us. The contempt is weak, it is not we who are weak. And the contempt 
will fail, not we. " What can harm you if ye be followers of that which is good ? " 
The worl4 despises the gidly. It is no matter; the future is with the godly. 

n. Contempt, when it is keasonable, is painfollt dbpbessino. Because' it 
exaggerates our own sense of weakness, and so still further weakens us. Our sense of 
disability and insufficiency is oftentimes a great distress to us, and makes the struggle 
of life too hard for us. Precisely what we need is some sign of confidence, some kindly 
encouraging word, the cheer of some one who can see things more hopefully than we 
can. Consequently, we feel all the more deeply when our weakness is only despised; 
we hear loud and confident prophecies of our speedy failure, and men raise the laugh 
which crushes hearts more than open scorn. Then what can we do but turn irom 
mantoQod?— B. T. 

Vers. 1 — i. — I%e ultimate Befuge. " Unto thee lift I up mine eyes," etc. " This 
psalm," says J. J. S. Perowne, " is either the sigh of the exile towards the close of the 
Captivity, looking in faith and patience for the deliverance which he hoped was now at 
hand ; or the sigh of those who, having returned, were still exposed to the scorn and 
contempt of the Samaritans and others who harassed and insulted the Jews." God 
was their Befuge from such men, as ^ is the ultimate Refuge from all the ills and evils 
of this life. 

L The psalmist finds hope in God's supbemaot. Enthroned in the heavens — the 
Judge of all controversies among his creatures, who will vindicate the righteous cause. 
Greatest power of service to humanity under his control. 

II. The oBAOions mebct of Gk>D is his aix-suffioient befuok wbou thx 
contempt and pebseoution of man. 

III. Sense of dependence upon God neoessabt to bealizb his help. As the 
lower must always depend on the higher. 

IV. The vision and contemplation of Qod neoebbabt to the bensk of 
dspbndenok. Looking away from man up to God, as the servant studies the face of 
his master in order to read his duty. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXXIV. 



"A FBBSH, bright lyric" (Oheyne), com- 
posed of two stanzas — the first part (vers. 

1 5) recounting a danger and a deliverance ; 

the second (vers. 6— S), praising God for 
the latter. This is another of the psalms in 
this " Little Psalter," ascribed by its title to 
David. There is nothing in the style, or in 
the contents, that is inconsistent with the 
ascription. 

Yer. 1.— If it had not been the lord who 
was on our side, now may Israel say ; rather, 
now let leraa *ay (Kay, Oheyne, Revised 
Version). 

Ver. 2. — If it had not been the Lord who 
was on onr side, when men rose up against 
ns. The ** rising " intended may have been 
that of Saul and his aiders and abutters, or 
that of the Ammonites and Syrians (2 Sam. 
X, e— 8), or that of Absalom and his parti- 
sans (2 Sam. XV. 2—13). 

Ver. 3. — Then they had swallowed ns up 
'^niok; or, "alive." A common expression 



for sudden and complete destmotion (oomp, 
Pb3. Ivi 2; Ivii. 3; Prov. i 12; Lam. ii. 2, 
5, 8, etc.). When their wrath was kindled 
against as ; or, " blazed out against ns." 
The comparison of anger to fire is an almost 
ntiiversal commonplace. 

Ver. 4. — Then the waters had overwhelmed 
ns, A sudden and startling change of meta- 
phor. In the qiiiok transition of Oriental 
thought, the fire becomes a flood — an irre- 
sistible torrent-stream, carrying all before 
it (oomp. Fss. xviii. 4; cxliv. 7). The 
stream had gone over our sonl; «'.«. "had 
mounted up over our heads, and stifled our 
breath of life." 

Ver. 5. — Then the proud waters had gone 
over onr soul. " Proud " of effecting our 
destruction. 

Ver. 6. — Blessed be the Lord, who hath 
not given ns as a prey to their teeth. We 
are not devoured — we aie not " swallowed 
up " — thanks ' to the interposition of the 
merciful and gracious Lord, to whom there- 
fore praise and blessing are due. 

Ver. 7. — Our soul is escaped as a bird ont 
of the snare of the fowlers (oomp. Pss. xci. 



206 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. OXXIV, 1 — 8. 



8; ozL 5; oxli. 10). Another metaphor. 
We hare been like birds taken in the 
" snare," or net, of a fowler. But now we 
are escaped — not, howeTer, of onr own 
strength or of our own cleverness. The 
snare is broken for us by God's providence, 
and so we are escaped. 



Yer. 8. — Onr help is in the ITaitte of fha 
Lord. " Car help is," and has always been, 
" in the Name "—i.e. in the manifested might 
— "of the Lord." It is he that has been 
"on onr side," that has " helped " us, saved 
ns, and delivered us. Who made heaven 
and earth (comp. Fss. oxzi. 2 ; cxxziv. S). 



H0MILBTI08. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Divine deliveramee. The spirit which breathes in this psalm is one of 
keen thankfulness. Nothing calls out so deep and strong a sense of indebtedness to 
God (or to man) as a consciousness that we owe to him an esciipe from a great 
calamity. We bless the Lord with the most fervent gratitude as we realize that he 
has healed our disease and redeemed onr life from destruction (Ps. ciii. 1 — 1). We 
ought to be mindful of all his benefits, and accept them as they come, one after 
another, as gifts from his gracious hand. We should cherish a still stronger and 
profounder sense of his mercy to ns in the one supreme kindness shown us in the 
redemption of the world by Jesus Cbrist,in which we have our share. But that which 
most vividly impresses us is the delirerance which, in different ways and at various 
times, he has wrought for us — saving our life, preserving our character, restoring our 
freedom. 

L Two GBEAT EVILS FBOM WHICH WE HAT NEED, AND HAT HAVE, DELITEBANOE. 

1. Oppression. Such as Israel endured imder Pharaoh ; such as J udah was threatened 
with when Sennacherib came up against Jerusalem ; such as the Jews suffered under 
Antiochus; such as England faced and feared when the Armada left the shores of 
Spain ; such as, in our own individual life, we may experience at the hand of some 
one who has us at his mercy and is disposed to play the tyrant. A human spirit is 
sometimes exposed to a veritable storm of pruelty ; there are " overwhelming waters " 
of suffering to pass under ; the stream goes over the soul (ver. 4). Then nothing but 
Divine succour avails to save from complete collapse ; except the Lord show himself 
to be on our side by manifestations of his power, by the exercise of his goodness and 
his grace, we must break down utterly. But God is on our side. He will not forsake 
his children in the time of their distress. (1) He will rescue us, in his own time, from 
he power that oppresses us, and set us free, placing " our feet in a large room ; " or, 
(2) he will so effectually sustain us that we shall hold up our head in the midst of all 
uur afBictions (see Isa. xliii. 2). 2. Temptation. The psalmist speaks of snares 
(ver. 7) and of escaping from the fowler's hand. As we pass through life there are 
many of these that have to be avoided ; and it may be that in our unwisdom we permit 
ourselves to be partially ensnared ; we may allow our foot to be taken in the toils of 
unbelief, or of intemperance, or of impurity, or of covetousness, or of pride, or of vanity, 
or of extravagance and dishonesty. We may be in very serious danger of losing 
everything that is most precious — of parting, not only with our reputation, but with 
the very life of our life, with our moral and spiritual integrity. But God, in his 
abounding grace, interposes on our behalf. Directly or indirectly, by the immediate 
action of his Spirit on onr spirit, or through some instrumentality, he arouses us,8howi 
us the peril in which we stand, breaks the snare in which our foot is taken, and sets ub 
free. Then comes — 

IL Deep thankfulness of heabt. For, however great was the first gift of life, 
and however great the gift of the new life in Christ Jesus, this Divine deliverance is a 
mercy that may well be compared with these, and may well fiU our mouth with song 
and our life with praise. Then, too, must come — 

in. WAT0HFni.NE8B UNTO PBATEB, Constantly and carefully maintained. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ters. 1—8. — But for the Lord. The psalm is a contemplation of the distress that 
must have come upon God's people but for the Lord's timely help. 
L It IB TEE LANGUAOB TF Ibbael'b sbatitudb. We cannot tell what were the 



PS. oxxiT. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 207 



exact circumBtances which are referred to ; hut many times in Israel's history had there 
been the threatening of overwhelming calamity. In the old times, in Egypt, in the 
wilderness, in Judah and Jerusalem, as during the invasion of Sennacherib, "when they 
were carried off to captivity, and during that captivity (see the Book of £sther)i Israel 
had abundant cause for such grateful acknowledgments as we find here. But the 
special circumstances we do not and cannot know ; and this is well, for now we are left 
free to make application of them to any out of the many like circumstances which 
from time to time recur in the histories of nations. Churches, and individual souls. 

II. It is that or bedeemed humakitt. Mankind everywhere, as well as the 
redeemed in heaven, might well render praise like this. For the whole human race 
was in dire peril. When men turned out so ill, as they did and still do, so that the 
Lord repented that he had made man, wherefore should God have preserved any of 
them alive ? Their guilt, their wickedness, their subjection to the spirit of evil, — ^these 
were ready to swallow the race of man up quick. The might and malice of the devil 
were eager for the work. Why should it not have been? And the alone answer is — 
the love of God (John iii. 16). And still to-day we often all but despair of humanity ; 
the whole world, save a minute fraction, yet lieth in wickedness, dead in trespasses 
and sins, rushing ruinwards with headlong speed. But yet the race is spared, for the 
Lord is on our side. This is the gospel of man. God would not have created us had 
it not been true. 

III. It mat well be that op the Chuboh of God. For often and often in her 
history has it seemed as if there were but a step betwixt her and death. See that boat 
on the Lake of Galilee in the midnight storm : it contains the whole of the disciples 
and Jesus, and be asleep. One wave more, and they would all go to the bottom, 
swallowed up quick, the proud waters had gone over their soul (ver.3). But that wave 
never came. And so has it been again and again with the Church of God. Persecution 
for three long centuries did its worst ; false doctrine has many times, from the earlier 
centuries down to the present, threatened to submerge the faith we held ; worse still, 
corruption, vile and loathsome, has fastened on the life of the Church, so that religion 
has been hateful in men's esteem, as it was in the pre-Keformation ages. But the heart 
of the Church has remained sound amid all ; the Lord was on her side, and so she has 
escaped as a bird, etc. (ver. 7). 

lY. Nations, too, mat adopt this LANanAOS. See the times of the Armada : 
how fearful the peril seemed then ! And so in the days of the French Revolution, when 
the colossal power of Napoleon threatened the life of every independent nation. 

V. And how often individual bblievbbs have had cause thus to speak ! 
In regard to the power of temptation, they have been all but gone, their feet well-nigh 
slipped. But the Lord was on their side. So in regard to the malice of enemies, and 
the cruel power of disaster and distress. 

Conclusion. If the Lord has been thus on our side — as he has — we will, by his 
grace, be evermore on his. — S. C. 

Ver. 7. — The souPs hirdlike experiences. We have a number of objects presented to 
us in this verse. 

L The soul as a bird. We are often bidden consider the birds who, " without 
barn or storehouse, are fed," so that from them we may learn the lesson of trust. Even 
the ravens may teach us that. But the psalmist here bids us think of birds_ in 
perpetual peril of ensnarement, and actually taken, but, by rare good fortune, finding 
escape. That is the image of the soul which he here pictures. How true it is 
perpetual peril is our lot I 

II. The bnabes fob the soul. 1. Howmany there are/ And they are every where, 
and especially where we least expect them. Temptations to sin, to misbelief, to 
unbelief, to compromise with the world, to doubt, to pride, and to many other suoh 
things. 2. And the end and aim of them all is the same — to separate the soul from 
God, and so to destroy it. 3. And these snares are of various kinds. Sometimes the 
soul is captured by means of another that seems to be at liberty. A man who has a 
religious reputation, is much thought of by many — he is used to tempt, to decoy, others 
astray. Sometimes, indeed always, there is some attraction the force of which we 
cannot help feeling. And these baits are varied according to the character of each soul. 



208 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. ctxiv. 1-8. 

What will attract one will not another. Satan knows when to have ns — where and 
how we are most open to his assaults. What need we have to obey our Lord's words, 
"Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation"! 

III. The fowlbb that seeks to entbap the soul. It is he whom the Bible 
calls Satan. We dare not ignore his existence or his power. Our Lord had just come 
from fierce encounter with him, and bids us pray, " Deliver us from the evil one." 
Remember Christ has destroyed the works of the devil. 

IV. The capture of souls. The soul of the psalmist knew this bitter experience^ 
as have thousands more. Some subtle lure, some crafty bait, has wrought the harm. 
How many such ensnared souls we meet with every day I 

Y. But the snare may be broken. This too has often occurred. Some powerful 
word, some startlin;; providence, some gracious working of the Spirit of God, has led 
to it. 

YL The jot of escape. Are we free ? From the condemnation of the Law, the 
power of sin, the fear of sorrow and death, are we free? Then praise God, and seek 
to get others free. " I would say again to you netted ones — ^you that are really caught 
in the trap and held fast, ' Oh, that the Lord would come at once and set you freel' I 
think he will — yea, I am sure that he will if you cry to him to do so. t have heard 
of a saUor who had been in prison, that, after his release, he bad money in his pocket, 
and going over London Bridge he saw a man selling birds — thrushes, larks, and so on. 
' What do you want for that lot ? ' said Jack. I forget how much it was, but Jack 
found the money ; and as soon as the birds were his he opened the door and let them 
all fly away. The man called out, ' Whatever did you buy those birds for, and then 
let tbem all fly away ? ' ' Oh,' said the sailor, ' if you had been in prison, as I have, 
you would be sure to set everything free you could get a-hold of.' You and I ought to 
display the same kind of feeling towards all bondaged souls. I am sure that the Lord 
Jesus Christ is more tender-hearted than we are ; and therefore he will certainly come 
and set free all prisoners who beg him to open their cage-doors. He is the great 
Emancipator; show him your bonds, and beg for liberty, and he will grant it you" 
(0. H. Spurgeon).— S. 0. 

Yer. 1. — Jehovah for us. " The Lord who was on our side." It is well to bear In 
mind that, usually, in the Old Testament, the term " the Lord " would be better 
rendered " Jehovah," the covenant name for Qod. Many passages in which the term 
occurs gain new force when distinctly associated with the Israelite covenant. The tone 
of this psalm is altogether different from that of the preceding one. The historical 
association is uncertain. Taking the psalm as a whole, it would seem to be a rejoicing 
of the exiles in Babylon when the proclamation of Cyrus permitted them to return to 
their native land. But this association does not easily explain the precise figure of the 
snare in ver. 7. It is better to keep the psalms of degrees associated with the life of 
the returned exiles in Jerusalem, and to find the suggestion of the figures in their 
particular experiences. 

I. The eet-notb of the Israelite histort. "The Lord is on our side." 
Another psalmist gives it thus : " The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is 
our Befuge." The names of Goi imply the appropriation of God to themselves by 
Israel, " Jehovah- Jiieh," "Jehovah of hosts," "Jehovah Tsidkenu," etc. (compare 
Ebenezer). Note the one supreme lesson learned by the successes and failures of their 
wilderness-experiences. They were strong when God was with them. Failure came 
when God hid his face from them ; woe came when they hid their faces from God. 
The symbol of the presence was the Sbechinah-glory in the holy of holies; but we 
should not fail to see that the tabernacle and temple did but represent the people; and 
God's glory in them did but represent his abiding presence with his people. But it 
should further be noticed that throughout the Israelite history it is Jehovah, the 
covenant Qod, who is with them ; and that his keeping with them must be seen as 
his faithfulness to his covenant-pledge. It is a faithfulness which should inspire 
bithfulness. 

II. The key-note of the Isbaelite hope. The national life had always been in 
the special Divine care, and it always would. The one holy God, who could only be 
served in righteousness, whose uniqueness is gathered up into the term " Jehovah," had 



PS. cxxiv. 1— 8.J THE BOOK OP PSALMa 209 

chosen this people for his inheritance. Would, then, the nation abide even through 
what seemed an overwhelming discipline ? Was there a certain future for the nation, 
though now it lay low under the shadows? The answer is this — "The Lord is on ita 
side."— R. T. 

Vers. 2 — 4. — Jehovah's effective resistance. Perowne thinks that the figures of these 
verses remind of the earlier deliverance from Egypt. "The Egyptians did ' rise up' 
against them. Pharaoh and his chariots and his horsemen followed hard after them, 
and did seem as if about to swallow them up, when they were entangled in the wilder- 
ness. The waves of the Red Sea overwhelming their enemies might have suggested 
naturally the figure by which the might of those enemies was itself compared to 
swelling waters." An estimate of the tone of the psalm, however, leads us to recognize 
tuddenness as the characteristic of the calamity indicated. The waters suggested are 
rather those of a sudden mountain flood raging down one of the dried wadies, carrying 
all before it, but passing as swiftly as it came — the " spate " or " scaith " of mountain 
districts. If the sea is to be thought of, it is as suddenly swept up by high tide and 
strong wind, and lunging furiously against the rocks, so long as the strength of the 
tide continues. We may therefore more hopefully look at the experiences of the 
returned exiles, and find that the calamity in the mind of the psalmist was the sudden, 
fanatical, and desperate outburst of enmity on tbe part of Sanballat and his associates. 
That was a temporary trouble, but it was very intense, and almost overbearing and 
overwhelming while it lasted. 

L Jehovah's resistance mat be a pebmission. It need not be confounded with 
a prevention. God does not always save men by taking their enemies, or the schemes 
of their enemies, away. He does not turn back the floods. He lets them flow on just 
the same. He may not even remove the feeling and the fear which the floods produce. 
We should never lose the confidence that, if our enemies are in the floods, God is much 
more in the floods. They may seem to work our enemy's purpose ; they really do 
work out God's purpose. Divine permissions are the signs of Divine wisdom and love. 
And this St. Paul had to learn. 

IL Jehovah's besistance mat be a pbesbbtation. Only the shakable, ill- 
founded things are swept down by the mountain spate. The house founded od the 
rock makes effective resistance. And that is what God did for the returned exiles — 
held them safe through that time of strain and storm. Gcd in our circumstances we 
often find it very diificult to trace; God /or us we may always see clearly; and that 
guarantees preservation. — R. T. 

Vers. 6, 7. — God's delivering ways. " Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare 
of the fowler." The enmity of Sanballat and his party found expression in secret 
schemes, which may well be likened to the " snare of the fowler." The account of the 
peril is given in Neh. vi. The violence of the wild beast is illustrated by the threatenings 
of Neh. iv. ; the scheming of the hunter by Neh. vi. Speaking of Tobiah, Stanley 
says, " He it was who had constant intrigues with the cQsaffected party within the 
walls." Possibly Sanballat may represent the more open and violent ways of the wild 
beast, and Tobiah the more secretly scheming ways of the hunter. The "bird" here 
is a " little bird," such as a sparrow. MoMiohael vividly presents this figure. " The 
fowler has prepared his net in a skilful manner. The bird enters it, unconscious of 
danger; the net is thrown over it, and in an instant its libertv is lost. There it lies, 
the poor bird, its little heart throbbing wildly, and its little wings beating vainly 
against the net. It is completely at the mercy of the fowler, and escape is impossible. 
But again the Lord appears, and his presence is safety. He goes up to the net, lifts it 
from the ground ; the bird flies out, lights on a neighbouring tree, and sings among the 
branches. ' Surely he shall deliver thee from the snire of the fowler.' God rescues 
his people from the craft and subtlety of their enemies, as he does from their open 
violence." The point which is set forth prominently by the fii^ure of the snare is, that 
Gk)d often delivers his people by removing obstacles out of their way, and ^ving them 
the opportunity/ of delivering themselves. 

I. (S)D DELIVKEINO BT PBOVIDINO OPPOBTUNITIBS. The figUTO doCS Uot shoW S 

hand taking the bird from under the net, but breaking the net, making a hole in it, of 
PSALMS— ui ' 



210 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. oxxi ». 1— a 

which the bird can take advantage. The rescue from Egypt is the type iif God'a 
deliverances. God removed the obscacle of the sea ; but Israel had to take advantage 
of this, and show promptitude and energy in crossing. It may sometimes be best for 
God to do the whole redemptive work, but usually he does so much only as sets us free 
to io. In our deliverances we have to be " co-workers together with God." God saves 
man without humiliating or enfeebling him. 

II. Odb woek is eespondino to the oppobtunitibs peovidbd. As the ensnared 
bird does. The great deliverance from sin is no rescue without our wills. It is the 
lifting off us our bonds, and so leaving us free to live the Ufe of righteousness. We 
must respond to the freedom that we have in Christ Jesus. — B. T. 

Ver. 8. — What God has done, God ccm do. The stamp of " impossible" cannot rest 
upon anything if we are able to say concerning it, " It has been done." And that we 
are able to say concerning every kind of strain or calamity that " turns up " in a 
religious experience. " There is no temptation ever overtakes us but such as is common 
to man," and God has had to deal with just such things — .ind even with just such 
things in relation to just such people — before now. 

I. What God has donb. 1. Compassed all the features and forms of the common- 
vlace of lite. It is necessary to dwell on this, because of the frail human disposition to 
separate the thought of God from the little, and associate him only with the great. 
But life is in the main commonplace, ordinary, little. And we need to realize that God 
has had direct association with absolutely everything that can come into the common- 
place of life. In dealing with the first race of men, it may reverently be observed that 
God had no experience of what men would be and do, to guide his ways with them. 
Experience was in the making. It is made now. Enough generations of men in 
diversified relations have passed to cover the whole circle of human possibilities. Man 
can only repeat himself; he never surprises God. And God has adjusted his gracious 
help and guidance to every kind of ordinary human circumstance and need. Therefore 
is the Bible given to us so largely in the biographical form. We are to trace the 
working of God in lives that are essentially like our own. 2. Efficiently adapted hi* 
grace to the unusual of life. There is perhaps, strictly speaking, no unusual in life. 
From the Divine point of view there are no exigencies, no surprises. " The thing 
which is hath already been." But for instructive purposes we may point out that 
the unusual, though it may not be in things, may be in tlie relation of things to persons. 
God has to deal with the disposition of each one, and with the effect of events on each 
disposition. But here again we may see that his experience of adjustments is so 
extensive that a new and bewildering set of complications/or him is inconceivable. 

II. What God can do. Be to us the Help which he has always been to his 
people. Do for us what he has always done for his people. What has he done in owr 
lives ? That he can still do. What has he done in the lives of others t That he can 
do in our lives if need be. What has he done in the vicissitudes of the ages? That 
he can do for our age and for us. We are " not straitened in God," seeing that he can 
" supply all our need."— B. T. 

Ter. 8. — The help of the Divine Name. It is important to keep in view the condition 
and anxieties of the returned exiles. The previous psalm brought before us their 
distresses through the irritating conduct of neighbour enemies. It presented to us 
their attitude while the trouble was on — they were patiently waiting on God. This 
psalm is a joy-song, sung when they are safely through the time of strain. They joy 
in God who has so safely brought them through ; and this leads to the expression of 
confidence in God concerning whatever may have to be in the future. As a rule, 
poetical figures avoid minute descriptions of trouble. They are satisfied with su<;gesting 
them. The figures of this psalm recall to mind the Egyptian deliverance. The exiles 
were fond of referring to it, and comparing their experience with it. Note (1) a sudden 
and overwhelming peril ; (2) the figure of the swollen stream ; (3) the figure of the 
beast of prey ; (4) the figure of the spread snare. Indicate what of the historicnl 
conditions of the exiles is suggested by these figures. The point of the psalm is given 
in the sentence, " The Lord was on our side." That alune could account to them for 
their enemies' failure, and their triumph. And that conviction fixes for them the 



n. cxxT. 1 — 6,] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 



211 



rosolve, that In the Name of Jehovah they will ever trust. Help in a name I Why not 
Bay, help in Ood f Explain that the Jews had a special name for God, of which they 
were profoundly jealous. And they were in a covenant which was sealed with that 
special name. In Scripture it is usual to find a person's attributes or characteristics 
gathered up into and expressed by a name (see names of Adam's sons, Jacob, etc.). 
Notice some of the names for God. 1. Creator; general relation to everything. 
2. El Shaddai ; the Almighty One. 3. Jehovah ; the self-existent One. He is ; that 
is all you can say about him. 4. God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob ; known in actual 
daily relationships. 6. Jehovah Tsidkenu ; the Lord our Righteousness, or the Ideal 
for us of moral perfection. 6. The Faithful Promiser ; the trustworthy One, as proved 
by human experience. It is manifest what confidence of help we may have as we 
dwell on any of these names of God. Started on this line of thought, we inquire 
whether we should not show a fuller confidence in the help of God, who is revealed to 
UB, tn his Father-name, through the infinite winsomeness of the Divine Sonship of 
Jesus.— B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — The leHwer's safeguard. "If Jehovah had not been on our side," eto. 
The last psalm was the sigh of an exile in Babylon waiting upon God for deliverance. 
This psatm is the joyful acknowledgment that the deliverance has been accomplished. 
The next (cxxv.) describes the safety of the exiles restored to their native land, and 
girt round by the protection of Jehovah. 

I. God IB ON ODB bids when he beems most aoainbt ub. Aa he was on the 
side of the Israelites both in delivering them over to the Captivity and in breaking 
their bonds. Punishment and pardon have the same end in view — the redemption of 
the sinner. 

IL Otoj) IB ON. CUB BIDE WHEN MEN ABE HOST AOAINBT US. When the angry and 
destructive passions of men most threaten to overwhelm us (vers. 2—^). He takes out 
side always inwardly, if not always outwardly. God is uways on the side of the 
weakest, to help them to become strong. 

III. God helps ub to esoafb fbom the subtlest bnabeb which oiboumbtanoks 
HAVB WOVEN ABOUND UB — if WO are the victims and not the constructors of those 
snares. God will have no deceit in saint or sinner. 

IV. But though GU>d is the Cbeatob of all thinqs, he ib the Help, and 
NOT the Substitute, or hem. (Ver. 8.) The psalmists and prophets saw the 
Divine side of the moral work done in the world, but saw the human side also<— S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM oxxy. 



This is a psalm, mainly, of comfort ; but with 
eomfort, prayer (ver. 4) and threatening 
(ver. 5) are blended. God's people are 
always under CJod's protection. He will 
always " be good " to them. Bat the double- 
minded he will infallibly cast out. 

Yer. 1. — They that trust in the Lord shall 
be as Uoimt Zion; rather, are as Mount 
Zion ; i.e. are as firmly fixed and established 
aa "the mount of God," which cannot be 
removed, but abideth for ever (oump. Isa. 
xxviii. 16). 

Ver. 2. — As the mountains are round 
about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about 
his people. This is the true cause of his 
people's stability, whioh is like that of bis 



holy mountain. The nblqnitons God stands 
round about his people, and protects them 
on every side. The mountains thaf are 
" round about Jerusalem " are, on the east, 
the Mount of Olives ; on the south, the Hill 
of Evil Counsel ; on the west, the ridge 
beyond the valley of Jehoshaphat ; and on 
the north, the high ground about Scopas. 
All these are higher wan the platform upon 
which the city is built. From henceforth 
even for ever. Always round about his 
true people, though he may have to forsake 
those who have first tbrsnken him. 

Ver. 3. — For the rod of the wicked ; lite- 
rally, the sceptre of teiekednese. Shall not 
rest upon the lot of the righteous. The 
possession, or inheritanoe, of the righteous, 
•'.e. the land in which they dwell This 
may fall for a time under the tloainion of 
the wicked, but shall not " rest " — i.e. con- 
tinue — under such dominion. lest the 



212 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. oxxv. 1 — 5. 



rigMeovB pnt forth their hands unto Ini- 
quity; t'.«. lest their patience be worn ont, 
and they fall from grace. God will not try 
men beyond that they are able (1 Cor. x. 13). 

Yer. 4. — ^Do good, Lord, onto those that 
be good. Give them their deserving^. For 
their " goodness " repay them with " good- 
ness." And to them that are upright in 
their hearts. Exegetical of the preceding 
clause. Only the " upright in heart " are 
teally " good." 

Vei. 5.— As for such as tarn aiid* onto 



their orooked ways. The word translated 
"crooked ways" ooonrs only here and in 
Judg. V. 6. It means properly " by-paths," 
deviations from the straight path of right 
The Lord shall lead them fortii with the 
workers of iniquity. God shall give them 
no better portion than he assigns to the 
open evil-doers, since their heart is not 
really whole with him. But peaoe shall 
be upon Israel; rather, but peaat he upon 
Iirtiel. The psalmist winds np with • 
prayi^r, not a prophecy. 



HOMILBTICS. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — Divine providence. Does righteousness answer? Is piety rewarded T 
Is the good man much the better for his goodness ? That is the question, both old 
and new, suggested by the psalm. The reply is in the affirmative ; but the fourth 
verse indicates that the writer's mind is not altogether untroubled by what he has 
Been. Nor is ours. There is much that, at first sight, perplexes us. We may see the 
usurper break his oath, cut down his countrymen with the sword, seize the reins of 
ofSce, and reign for many years upheld by military power; we may see the statesman 
climbing by unscrupulousness and stratagem to the highest post in the kingdom, and 
maintaining himself there by the same devices ; we may see the fraudulent merchant 
or director, the oharlntan, the unprincipled adventurer, making himself rich at the 
expense of his dupes. Iniquity, impiety, ro°;uery, triumphs. On the other hand, we 
sometimes see the good man brought down from the place of honour and of influence, 
the devout man struggling hard with financial difficulties or domestic trials, the whole 
company of afflictions gathering at the door and saddening the heart of the holy. And 
we say — Does not the rod which belongs to the wicked rest on the lot of the righteous? 
Does Goi do good to those that are good? The answer is found in such truths ai 
these. We find when we look on and in, that — 

I. Snr, WBONO-DOINS, is bewabded as it desebveb to be. It is not only that : 
L High-handed wrortg is usually punished in the end ; that the guilty empire goes out 
in defeat and disaster; that the unscrupulous statesman falls from power and is 
dishonoured ; that the fraudulent merchant and scheming adventurer come to exposure 
and ruin. That is very frequently, perhaps ordinarily, the case ; for " the sword of 
Heaven is not in haste to smite, nor yet doth linger." But it is true that: 2. Sin i$ 
always tending dovmwurd. Vice, sloth, cruelty, fraud, falsity, — these lead down, step 
by step, to poverty and want, to sickness and suffering, to dishonour and disgrace, to 
early death. And : 3. Bin means misery. Unhappiness, arising not only from reduced 
circumstances, but from the condemnation and abandonment of the good, and from the 
stings and smarts of conscience. Moreover — and this is too often overlooked : 4. Sin 
means inward and spiritual ruin. Even if the human judge passes no sentence, and 
the guilty man enters no prison-door, is there no penalty paid ? There is — in moral 
and spiritual degradation; in the sinking of the soul into a condition in which all is lost 
that makes manhood a coble thing, in which the spirit bears nothing of the image of 
its Maker, in which nothing is left of a character but what is mean and base and ugly 
in the sight of heaven. The rod that belongs to the wicked rests on the wicked. 
Ouilt bears its penalty ; the soul that sinceth dies. 

II, Goodness, worth, is bewabded as it deserves to be. It is true that the good 
man is not always fortunate or successful, has not always abundance of gold and silver. 
Should we wish that he had? Should we wish that piety and purity, that unselfish- 
ness and nobility of spirit, that mercy and patience, were always paid in cash, or even 
in human honour or in high position? Should we like holiness to have its price in 
the market? No. Our God is too wise and kind to place it at that level. To do that 
would be to dishonour it and to injure us. What he does for his own is, nevertheless, 
very much and very great. CouRider : 1. The evils from which he saves them. The 
good man looks back and thanks God with fervent spirit for saving him from the worst 



fs. «xiv. 1— 6.] TfiB BOOK OP PSALMS. 213 



eTils into which he might have fallen ; not only from suffering and sorrow, hut from 
remorse and shame, from darkness and degradation, from the wreck and ruin into 
which he has seen many of his fellows fall. He has trusted in the Lord, and he has 
been as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed ; he has been preserved in his integrity. 
God's upholding power has been beneath him, his Divine protection has been around 
him, even as the mountains are round about Jerusalem, 2. The positive good which he 
doei them. (1) He ensures the necessaries of human life. He promises that his 
people shall " not want any good thing " (Ps. xxxiv. 9, 10), Jesus Christ assures us 
that to those who seek first the kingdom of God " all these [needful] things shall be 
added " (Matt. vi. 33), (2) He gives us great spiritual blessings. Peace is upon the 
Israel of God (ver. 5) ; joy is the inheritance of the holy (Rom. v. 11 ; Phil. iv. 4) ; 
hope is ia their hearts, an uplifting power that sustains under every burden, and sends 
the pilgrim on his way with cheerful heart and elastic step. (3) He give us himself. 
The Lord himself is round about his people ; his presence is with us everywhere. God 
is with us, guiding, guarding, befriending, enlarging, enriching us. We are glad in 
him. He is to us, as to Abraham, our "exceeding great Reward." It is well with the 
righteous now : what will it be when the glories of the future are revealed? 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS, 

Vers. 1— 6.— £ucft as cannot be moved. There can be little doubt, so it seems to me^ 
that these psalms, from one of which our text is taken, were all of them songs of the 
exiles returning from their captivity in Babylon. Their very name — "Songs of 
Degrees" — denotes that they were sung as the people went up towards their land, 
their city, and the sanctuary of the Lord. But the frequent allusions to the Exile, to 
its degradation and sorrow, to the almost complete destruction which had there all but 
overtaken them, and then to their preservation and restoration, all show that in these 
fifteen psalms we have the devout utterances of those whom God had once suffered to 
be in exile, but whom he had not only graciously preserved therein, but now had 
wonderfully restored. So that we may picture the long line of the returning captives 
as they journeyed on over the weary waste of rock and sand which stretched between 
the place of their exile and their beloved home. We listen to them refreshing and 
cheering their hearts from time to time by singing one or other of these holy psalms. 
After their return, these psalms appear to have been collected together, and to have 
formed part of their national liturgy, and were sung, as they well deserved to be, when 
their city and temple were again built and dedicated to the Lord. There is a beautiful 
progression in them — an advance in thought and expression, harmonizing with the 
commencement, progress, and completion of the return froui Babylon to the city of 
God. Ihe first tells how, in their distress, the exiles cried unto the Lord, and utters 
their lament over their long sojourn in the strange land. The next — the hundred and 
twenty-first — is one which, it is probable, formed the evening psalm, as the tents were 
pitched, and the whole encampment lay down to rest. Then did they lift up their 
eyes to the Lord — the Lord that kept Israel and who neither slumbered nor slept. The 
nea^ is a song of gladness in view of their once more standing in the house of the 
Lord — the gladness of those who had long been hindered in the enjoyment of any such 
privilege. The next recalls their prayer — their earnest, pleading prayer, which they 
offered up because of the contempt of the proud and the scorning of their luxurious 
stnnger-lords. And the next celebrates with joyous rapture the great deliverance 
which God gave them : " Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their 
teeth." Such is the spirit of the whole. And then comes the devout conclusion from 
all their experience — the blessedness of trusting in the Lord. Perhaps it was sung as 
the exiles drew near to Jerusalem and Mount Zion, and saw the mountains round 
about her, and the Mount Zion which abideth for ever. As those beloved heights, on 
which their fathers had gazed with delight, reared themselves on high, unchanged amid 
all the storm and tumult which had surged around and upon them, they seemed to 
the devout Israelites a type, not only of the Divine guard over Israel, encompassing 
his people even as these mountains " were round about Jerusalem," but a type also of 
the stabilityi the permanence, the immovability, of all those who trust in the Lord. 



214 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxxv. 1— 6. 

" They who trust in the Lord shall be," etc. No object was more familiar to the 
devout Jew than Mount Zion and the mouatains rouud about Jerusalem. As often 
as they went up to the house of the Lord, and day by day, all those who dwelt in or 
near Jerusalem, as did most of those who came back from the Exile, Ziou and the 
surrounding heights were conspicuous before them. And good was the use they made 
of them. They beheld in them a symbol of their God, and a promise of what they 
themselves should be if they put their trust in him. Thus did this familiar everyday 
scene speak to them. Happy are they who, from the common surroundings «f their 
everyday life, the many gifts of God's love which daily they enjoy, hear and listen to 
a voice which speaketh to them such holy truths as these! As one has well said, 
" Believing Englishmen, you may specially bless God that your country gives you an 
admirable picture of your own security, by dwelling alone, separated by the floods from 
all other nations. This is the security of our beloved isle." 

" He bade the ocean round thee flow ; 
Not bars of brass oonld guard thee so." 

They that trust in the Lord shall be as these happy islands, which shall not know tae 
rod of the oppressor, for the Lord has guarded them with a better defence than walls 
or bulwarks. Hebrew comparisons were most fit for Hebrew believers, but those 
nearer home should serve us as theirs served them. But now to turn to this blessed 
truth itself which our test declares — ^the ever-abiding, the immovable stability of them 
that trust in the Lord. 

L Consider this blessing here pbomisbd. To " be as Mount Zion, which cannot," 
etc. From the days of Melchizedek, in the early patriarchal ages, right on and down 
to our own, Jerusalem has been an historic place. It has never been moved. Other 
great cities, like that of Nineveh, Babylon, and the cities of Asia, we can now but 
faintly trace where they stuod. But Jerusalem has not only preceded, but has long 
survived them all. But in what sense can God's people be said to be as Mount Zion ? 
1. Of the Church of Ood it is hittorically true. If by violent persecution or other 
calamity she has beeu driven from one region — as from all North Africa — ^it has only 
been to settle more immovably in other and wider lands. There is no more reassuring 
argument to the mind anxious for the welfare of the Church of God than her history 
in the past. This psalm is truer of her than it was of IsraeL 2. 0/ the individual 
believer it ts also true ; for he cannot be moved. His feelings may be. He may, as did 
the psalmists oftentimes, imagine that " the Lord has cast him off for ever, and hath 
in anger shut up his tender mercies." But it is not so really. Bead the triumphant 
Challenge of St. Paul at the close of Bom. viii. That tells the real truth, as doth this 
psalm here. For the city of Divine grace lieth foursquare, like the city of God told 
of in the A pocalypse, and is defended with all those within it— ^s God's people are — 
by the mighty walls of God's omnipotence, righteousness, love, and grace— even the 
grace of the Holy Spirit working within us. Therefore is this psalm true. 

II. Those fob whom this blessing is designed. " They that trust in the Lord." 
Now, this trust is : 1. A very simple thing. Anybody can trust^ld and young, rich ' 
and poor. It requires no long study, nn store of learning. 2. And it may be a very 
imperfect thing. Not mature, not strong and mighty at all ; but yet it is trust, like 
him who cried, "Loid I believe: help thou mine unbelief." 3. It does not matter how 
or where we may have been brought to it. Blessed be God I 

III. The connection between this tbdbt and bo great blessing. 1, Because 
God so delights in our trust. 2. It is the transforming grace. 3. It identifies us with 
Christ in his life. 4. It devitalizes our connection with the first Adam, and grafts us 
into Christ. — 8. 0. 

Vers. 3 — 5. — " The lot of the righteous.'' The previous verses have told how secure 
it is ; these add other facts concerning it. 

I. The rod of the wicked shall not best upon it. 1. It may eomt upon the 
righteous. Often had done so ; but it should not continue. It has beeu tbought that 
reference is made here to the troubles of the lighteous Nehemiah, by reason of the 
opposition and treachery he had to meet with (see Neh. ii. 16 ; vi. 10 — 14, 17). It 
may be so; but the truth is ever applicable. 2. If it continue outwardly, it will not 



P8. oxxv. 1—6.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 215 

inwardly. With the wicked, when suffering comes, there is no alleviation, no bleised 
peace of Grod, no communion with him, no bright hope, no sustaining Holy Spirit. 
Jjut these are all in the lot of the righteous. God's saints have ever enjoyed them. 
Hence it matters liut little, if the inward grace be given, whether the outward rod be 
removed or no. 3. But it generally is removed both outwardly and inwardly. It is 
not suffered to be permanent. The troubles of the righteous are but as going through 
a tunnel; it may be very long and very dark and very drear, but it is only a tunnel, 
and ere long the light is reached again. 

XL God will not buffeb theu to be teufted above that thet abe ablk to 
BEAR. This is the reason given why " the rod of the wicked shall not rest," etc. 
1. 2%ere are other reason^. God's love for his people. He has no pleasure in their 
pain. No, hut in their affliction he is afflicted. Hence " he will not always chide,** 
etc. (Ps. ciii.). Then, because they are in Christ (cf. Rom. viii. 1). 2. But there it 
this reason also. It would defeat the very end God has in view. He desires his people 
to be perfected in righteousness. But if the " rod of the wicked " always " rested," 
etc. — that unmitigated, unalleviated rod — it would be more than our poor frail 
humanity could bear. The righteous would be discoura°;ed, and this would be fatal 
to them, as it ever is. The condition of fidelity is to be strong and of a good courage. 

III. Their lot will become brighter and BBiaHTEB. (Ver. 4.) The prayer 
simply states what is God's perpetual way. He is good to them that are good, aidding 
ever to his grace (Prpv. iv. 18). 

IV. But MUST never be departed from. To turn aside from it is certain misery 
(ver. 6). The most wretched souls on the face of the earth are those that have turned 
aside from QoA to wicked ways, such as are all the ways of sin. — S. G. 

Ver. 1. — Stability out of trust. The key-note of this psalm is a fear lest the 
restored Israel should again prove faithless and backsliding, as in the older time. 
" The pious psalmist trembles lest the blasts of foreign tyranny, which have swept 
upon the sacred nation with such protracted severity, should uproot it from its basis 
of true religion. The long domination of a heathen power during the recent Exile, 
and the present molestations of the semi-idolatrous Samaritans, must doubtless have 
had their effects on the weak-hearted among the psalmist's countrymen. In the 
present poem, therefore, words of consolation and of threatening are naturally blended. 
The faithful, says the psalmist, need not he terrified, for calamity shall not endure ; 
they have a firm foundation, which cannot totter, and Jehovah is to them a bulwark, 
deterring the oppressive foe who would pervert them from their holy faith." Mount 
Zion should not He confused with Mount Moriah. It represents the people as a whole, 
the nation as a natio'i, not exclusively regarded in its religious obligations and relations. 
The poetical conception of a mountain is firmness, because resting on broad and deep 
foundations. The earthquake is thought of as the most awful of forces, because it can 
even shake the mountains. The rootage of the mountains at the very centre of the 
earth is a figure of the rootage a nation or a soul has by its trust in God. Or as the 
cedar on the hillside, it is free to wave in the storm-win&, because it clasps and twines 
about the rock of God. 

I. Stability cannot comb out or oiroumstanoes. They do but shake us to and 
fro, and make us stagger up and down. Illustrate from the various experiences of the 
Israelite nation. No kind of restfulness can possibly he gained while we wait on 
circumstances. 

n. Stability cannot come out of knowledge. " For knowledge is of things we 
see,** anH these all lie in the range of the circumstantial. It is curious that men 
should have such confidence in the certainty of knowledge, when there is nothing in 
the world so fluctuating. What men stoutly affirm they know to-day they relegate 
to the list of exploded theories to-morrow. Being a creature, man*8 secret of rest must 
be the dependence of faith, and not the certitude of knowledge. A very striking 
illustration of the instability of the results of even advanced learning is given by Mr. 
H. L. Hastings. The following is a list of the discordant hypotheses of the so-called 
" Higher CritTcism,*' published since 1850, on the origin and authorship of the Old and 
New Testament books : " For Genesis there have been 16 theories. Exodus 13, Levi- 
ticus 22, Numbers 8, Deuteronomy 17; total for Pentateuch, 76 theories. For Joshua 



216 THE BOOK OF PSALMa [ps. cxxT. 1— 6. 

10, Judges 7, Ruth 4, Samuel 20, Kings 24, Chronicles 17, Bsdras 14, Nehemiah 11, 
Esther 6 ; total for histoi ical books, 113. For Joh 26, Psalms 19, Proverbs 24, Eccle- 
■iastes 21, Canticles 18 ; tutal for poetical books, 108. For Isaiah 27, Jeremiah 24, 
Lamentations 10, Ezekiel 16, Daniel 22 ; total for great prophets, 98. For all the 
minor prophets, 144. Total for the Old Testament, 539. For Matthew 10, Luke 9, 
Mark 7, John 15 ; total for Gospels, 41. Acts 12, Paul's Epistles 111, other Epistles 
44 ; total for New Testament, 208. Grand total of theories for the entire Bible, 747. 
Of these 603 have already gone into oblivion, and there is no reason to fear that manj 
of the remaining 144 may not soon follow them to the shelves of the libraries, to be 
dusted no more. Or illustration may be taken from scientific knowledge. So incom- 
plete and uncertain is even such knowledge, that a scientific book more than ten 
years old is now regarded as out of date and untrustworthy. We can never find 
security in our own particular knowledge, seeing that we are ever growing out of our 
own past of imperfection. 

III. Stability can only comb ottt of tbust. It may seem strange to say, but the 
most reliable thing is the human heart. " Many waters cannot quench love." Let it 
once get its grip, it holds tight, and will die rather than loosen that grip. But when 
we speak of trust, two things are in mind : (1) the stability which comes out of trust 
as an exercise of the whole force of a man's being ; and (2) the stability which comes 
by the trustworthiness of him on whom we rely. The grip may be strong, but that 
which is gripped may be uncertain and shakable. Our stability is guaranteed only 
when he in whom we trust is absolutely reliable, and the trust that we repose in him 
is wholly imdivided and entire. "Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord 
Jehovah b everlasting strength." — B. T. « 

Ver. 2.— The encircling of Divine defenct. " The Lord is round about his people." 
Bobinson lays, " The sacred city lies upon the broad and high mountain range which 
is shut in by the two valleys Jehoshaphat and Hinnom. All the surrounding hills are 
higher. On the east, the Mount of Olives; on the south, the so-called Hill of Evil 
Counsel, which ascends from the Valley of Hinnom ; on the west the ground rises 
gently to the border of the great wady ; while on the north the bend of a ridge which 
adjoins the Moimt of Olives limits the view to the distance of about a mile and a 
half" (comp. Zech. ii. 4, 5, "wall of fire round about her"), Delitzsch says, "The 
holy city has a natural circumvallation of mountains, and the holy nation that 
dwells and worships therein has a still infinitely higher defence in Jahve, who 
encompasses it round." Thomson says that " none of the surrounding hills, not even 
Olivet, has any relative elevation above the north-western comer of the city itself. 
But Jerusalem is situated in the centre of a mountainous region, whose valleys have 
drawn around it in all directions a perfect network of deep ravines, the perpendicular 
walls of which constitute a very efBcieiit system of defence." 

I. Defence "bound aboot" puts limits to attack. Illustrate by the fear of 
Ehsha's servant of the Syrian attack upon tbem. When he saw the encircling host 
of God, he knew that their power to attack was in actual Divine restraint. That 
defence frustrates plans. Or illustration may be taken from the raising of a siege by 
an army which covers the retreat of the invaders. All their schemes of attack fail, 
and it is as much as they can do to attend to their own security. So the good man 
may always have tbis confidence. He can never be subjected to an unawares attack. 
His enemies must always take count of the defence that is round about him. They 
must deal with our God, not only with us ; and our God will surely say, " Hitherto 
■halt thou come, and no further." 

II. Defence " bound about " oives completeness to oub bafett. What Elisha's 
■errant saw was an absolute unbroken circle. The distinction between human and 
Divine protections lies in just this completeness. The best circle human love draws 
round us is incomplete somewhere ; so it never can be wholly trustworthy. There is 
always some undefended place which makes us vulnerable. Gk)d's circle is drawn 
completely round. The foe cannot come in, and we cannot go out. Illustrate by 
•ncitcling walls of ancient cities. — B. T. 

y«r. 3. — Delivered in order to be righteove. " The power of the oppreaion, ths 



w.oSav. 1— 5.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 217 

enemies of God'B people, shall not abide upon the land. The trial is to prove faith, 
not to endanger it by a too sharp pressure; lest, overcome by this, even the faithful 
put forth a hand (as in Gen. iii. 22) to forbidden pleasuie, or (as in Exod. xxii. 8) to 
contamination ; through force of custom gradually persuading to sinful compliance, or 
through despair of good, as the psalmist (Fs. Ixxiii. 13, 14 ; see, too, Ps. xxxriL ; 
Numb. siii. 30) describes some in his day who witnessed the prosperity of wicked 
men." Observe what is the supreme anxiety of the psalmist : " That the righteous put 
not forth their hands unto iniquity." Israel had been redeemed from the Captivity, that it 
might be a " righteous nation," and its supreme anxiety ought to be keeping righteous. 

I. The P0RPO8B OF Divine bbdemption is not ebmoval of peril. Not entirely. 
This is not the main purpose. It is incidental. It is necessary as preparation. The 
great redemption has been much misapprehended, because its relation to the removal 
of penalty has been exaggerated. Save lor its moral influence upon him, to lie under 
a penalty is not one of tlie worst things that can happen to a man. 

II. The purpose of Divine redemption is not safety. It involves and secures 
safety, but this again is only incidental. It is not only a mistake, but an enfeebling 
mistake, to be resting in an assurance that we " are saved, and safe." That, after al^ 
is no more than a comfortable circumstance, which only too readily nourishes self- 
confldence and pride. 

IIL The purpose of Divine redemption is biohteousnesb. That is the absolute 
purpose, within which all others are embraced. Israel was redeemed from Egypt, to 
be a people holy unto the Lord. Israel was restored from Babylon, to be a righteous 
nation, God's thought, in undertaking a redemptive work in any man, is the witness 
that man will make by his righteousness. No profession, and no works, can ever take 
the place of this one thing. If called, we are called to be "saints." 

IV. What God's redemption makes us we ouoht to keep. It is the fear of 
Israel's falling from its high ideal that distresses the psalmist. He dreads "the 
righteous putting forth hii hand luto iniquity." " He that ia righteous must ba 
righteous still."— B. T. 

Ver. 4. — The claim of the upright, "Do good, Lord, unto those that be good, 
and to them that are upright in their hearts," The upright man has a right to plead on 
the ground of his uprightness. But observe that the right to plead is quite ditferent 
from the right to demand ; and that the claim of the upright is based on the Divine 
mercy, consideration, and promise. The man is what God would have him be. The man 
may claim God's promises of blessing to those who are what he would have them be. 

I. The claim of the upright is based on his eeobptivitt. The man wants God's 
blessing, is ready for it, and is open to receive it. But this is something new for self- 
satisfied, self-serving man. It indicates another spirit. This man will be prepared 
to make the best of God's blessings when they come. The hindrances of self-will, 
divided interests, and insincerity are taken out of the way. It is as if the photographic 
plate were now made sensitive to the Divine blessing. The real reason for the holding 
off of Divine blessing is usually our unfitness to receive. Therelore is the culture 
of our inward moods of such first and supreme importance. God is to us as we are. 

II. The claim of the upright is based on the nature of things. Like ever 
comes to like. Like is kiu with like. Just as friends and true lovers come together 
by a kind of natural affinity, so do things. Clean things come to clean. Intelligent 
things come to intelligent pei sons; Sincere things come to sincere persons. Truth comes 
to men ot truth. God's goodness comes to men of goodness. This is embodied in familiar 
sayings, such as this, "Virtue is its own reward." True, here are disturbances 
which break into the natural order; but we do well to keep in mind that the working 
of the natural order continues, nevertheless. " Righteousness tendeth unto life." 

III. The claim of the upright is based on the Divine promises. Here we may 
think of the special, but conditional, promises given to the restored Israelite nation. But 
the special thouiiht, running in the line of the previous suggestioiis, is (1) that tbe 
Divine promises assure to us the continued working of the natural oider ; and (2) that 
the Divine promises assure the intervention of Divine wisdom and love in those things 
which disturb, and tend to break up, the natural order. " To the uprignt thou wilt 
ghow thyself upright."— R. T. 



218 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxxvi. 1—6. 

Ver. 6. — Ood is against the toilfid. The Targura reads, " And thosfi that turn after 
their depravity, be shall bring them into Gehenna as their portion, with the workers 
of falsehood." Literally, the first sentence of the verse reads, " bend their crooked 
paths," i.e. so turn their paths aside as to make them crooked (Judg. v. 6). " The 
expression does not necessarily denote a going over to heathenism; it would describe 
the conduct of those who, in the time of Jeremiah, made common cause with the 
enemies of Israel." " The emphasis is on truth of heart and steadfastness, as against 
the turning back to the old wickedoess of idolatry, which had drawn down God's 
righteous anger. The backslider has desired to cast in his lot with the ungodljr ; that 
desire shall be fulfilled to his ruin." " The lukewarm and sly, false, and equivocal ones, 
are in no way inferior to the open, manifest sinner, as a source of danger to the 
Church." Carefully notice that it is inc^ient, not pronounced, wilfulness which ia 
here in consideration. The fixedly wilful are called the " workers of iniquity." The 
persons here are those who are wilful, but do not realize that they are. The figure is 
of persons who bend about, from this side to that, of the right road, though they do 
not step over into by-paths. They do not walk straight on, and steadily. "The 
wavering, unsteadfast, half-hearted disciple shall be as the hypocrite and rebellioug." 
Illustrate from the warnings of the Epistle to the Hebrews. 

L The spibit of wilfulness needs dealing with in its BBaiNNmas. Illustrate 
by the kindly warnings sent to King Saul, when the spirit of self-will began to be 
encouraged, and by the reproofs of the living Christ to the seven Churches of Asia. 
Dealing with it is difficult, because (1) its first germs in the character are not easily 
detected ; (2) its process of growth is secret and insidious. And yet it is in pulling up 
the first Hades of the weeds that the hope of the garden lies. 

II. The Divine aid is ready for jdst that stage of our work. It comes : L As 
the discovery of the beginnings of the evil in our hearts. Saul would have gone on 
selt-deluded, but for the Divine arrest and revelation. 2. As the warning of the real 
character of the eviL At first the blades of the tare are very like the blades of the 
wh^at. We need a Divine discrimination. 3. As the offer of help for immediately 
dealing with the evih When the cancer has threaded the tissue with its fibres the 
case is hopeless. — B. T, 

Vers. 1—6. — 2%e uifett/ of those who trust in Ood : a lesson from experience. " They 
that trust in the Lord are as Mount Zion, which cannot be moved, but abideth for 
ever," etc. (ver. 1). 

I. Thet best on an immovable foundation. " Cannot be moved, but abideth 
for ever." 

II. AbK 8UBR0UNDED AND PROTECTED AS BT A WALL OF MOUNTAINS. The distant 

mountains of Moab most probably alluded to, as Jerusalem was surrounded by no 
great mountains. God's protecting presence interposes immense insurmountable 
difficulties between us and our dangers. And this will be for ever so. " I will be 
unto her as a wall of fire round about." 

IIL God protects them against the evil consequence of FBOLONOED SUFFEBtNOS 

AT the hands of othebs. (Ver. 3.) From despair of God's succour, and being drawn 
away from a steadfast following of righteous courses. 

IT. The sense of God's protecting strength and goodness obeateb the pbateb 
FOB still greater GOOD. " Do good to them that are good ... to the upright in 
heart." The Christian will omit the fifth verse from his prayers. Prayer for good we 
cui all feel warranted in using, but prayer for evU we dare not utter before God.— S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM CXXVI. 
This pialm seems to be a joint thanksgiving 
and oomplaint, composed soon after the re- 
tnrn from the Captivity. It has been said to 



present an " enigmatical contrast " (Cheyne) 
in its two portions. But as the " complaint " 
is first subdued, and then merges into a 
joy-song (vers. 5, 6), there is really no want 
of harmony in the composition. The double 



w. cxxvi. 1 — 6.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



219 



aspect of the Betnrn — ^itB "bitter-sweet- 
neia" — impressed itself upon the nation 
flcom an early date (see Ezra iii 9 — 14). 

Yer. 1. — When the Lord turned again the 
captivity of Zion; literally, when the Lord 
turned again the returning of Zion ; i,e. 
** brought back those who returned from the 
Captivity." We were like them that dream. 
We could scarce credit our senses; we 
seemed to be in a happy " dream " (comp. 
Acts xii. 9). 

Yer. 2. — Then was cm month filled VTith 
laughter. The Orientals weep when they 
are disappointed, and, when they are pleased, 
laugh (Gen. xxi. 6; Job viii. 21) and shout 
for joy (Herod., yiii. 99). And our tongue 
with singing ; rather, with a cry of joy. 
Then said they among the heathen, The 
Lord hath done great things for them; 
literally, hath magnified to do with them. 
The heathen, among whom the Israelites 
had dwelt, marvelled at their deliverance. 
It was an event without a parallel. 

Yer. 3. — The Lord hath done great things 
fot ns. " What the heathen said was true 
— the Lord hath indeed done great things 
for OS." Whereof we are glad. For these 
great things we rejoice and give thanks. 
The first put of the psalm — ^the absolutely 



pure joy-8ong — ^here ends ; and the second 
part — the mixed joy and sorrow — begins. 

Yer. 4. — Turn again onr captivity, Lord. 
The work is not half done— not half the 
nation has returned. We, who occupy the 
land, are but "a remnant" (Ezra iz. 8; 
Neh. i. 3). Bring back, we pray thee, the 
rest of the captives. As the streams in th* 
south. As thou bringest back, after the 
autumn rains, ample streams to the dry 
water-courses of the Negeb, or aonth country. 

Yer. 5. — ^Ihey that sow in tears shall reap 
in joy. Then we, who are now " sowing in 
tears " (Ezra iii. 12, 13 ; Neh. i. 4), re-estab- 
lishing Israel in its own land amid grief and 
pain and liistress, shall " reap in joy," see 
the fruit of our exertions, and rejoice thereat. 

Yer. 6. — He that goeth forth and veepeth, 
bearing precious seed; literally, going he 
goes and weeping; i.e. weeping every step 
as he goes — " bearing the draught of seed, 
i.e. tliB seed which he has drawn forth from 
his bag, and is about to scatter on the earth. 
Thus it is that he " goes forth." How dif- 
ferently does he return I He shall doubtleii 
come again with rejoicing, bringing his 
sheaves with him ; literally, coming he eomei 
with a cry of joy, bearing with him his iheavet. 
He obtains in the end an ample return for 
all his labours. 



H0MILBTIC8. 

Yen. 1 — 4. — Spiritual bondage. In the Divine deliverance from spiritual captivity, 
of which the return from Babylon may bo regarded as a type, we have a crowning 
kindness from bis graciouB hand. It is said that there is do sensation so exquisitely 
delightful as that we experience when there is a sudden cessation of acute pain. 
Similarly, we may say that there is no spiritual joy which is quite equal to that of 
finding ourselves freed from an intolerable evil. Perhaps there is no moment of such 
surpassing pleasure as that when one who has lung lain in captivity comes out of his 
prison door and breathes once more the air of freedom. When the Jews found them- 
selves outside Babylon, actually on their way home to Jerusalem, they " were like 
them that dream ; " they were lifted up to such ecstasy that they could not believe it 
was a solid fact ; they would not have been surprised if they had awoke to find them- 
selves again in the hands of the heachen. It was too good to be believed, too great a 
blessing to be realized; it was the surpassing mercy of God, his crowning work of pity 
and of love. We have, therefore — 

1. The supbeme value of spiritual delivebanob. 1. We can see what it is for 
a man to be savel from some one enslaving vice. To what depths of misery and shame 
does the drunkard go down 1 in what hateful toils he is held by that cruel cravingi 
There is no object on earth so utterly pitiable as is a man who is bound in the hard 
bondage of any guilty and degrading habit. The man who is paralyzed at home, or 
he who is immured within four narrow walls, is a free man in comparison with such a 
slave. And when that Divine Redeemer, who came " to preach deliverance to the 
captives," breaks the bonds which hold him, sets him at large, gives him the victory 
over his evil passion, so that he is no longer " held in the cords of his own sins," then 
there is a brightness brought to the life, and a joy given to the heart, that cannot be 
told in words. " The Lord hath done great things for him," he feels to the depth of 
his spirit. " The Lord hath done great things for him," his kindred, his neighbours, 
his true friends, affirm. He will never have occasion for such profound gratitude again. 



220 THE BOOK OF I*SALM8. t^. oXxvl 1— 6. 

2. We may all experience what it is to be saved from the bondage of sin itself. Though 
we may never have known the bitter bondage of any one particular iniquity, yet we 
have known what it is to be under the power and pressure of sin itsdf. And sin itself, 
in its essence, is enslaving. It holds ub back from being what we wuuld be, and from 
doing what we would do in the service of Christ. It fetters the energies and hampers 
the activities of the human soul. When God, by the power of his Spirit, in the gospel 
of his Son, gives ns spiritual freedom (see 2 Cor. iii. 17 ; John viii. 36), we enter in, 
and we enjoy a precious and noble heritage. God has done great things for us, whereof 
we are glad. Our own souls rejoice in it. Our neighbours bear witness to it; for our 
freedom reacts on them ; they are the better for it in many ways. 

II. One invabiabls accomfaniuent. The fourth verse of the psalm naturally, if 
not necessarily, follows the third. Bow could the returning (or returned) exiles fail 
to remember those whom they had left behind in the land of bondage ? It was not a 
singular, perhaps not an uncommon, thing for a slave who had escaped from the 
Southern States, when he had experienced the joys of liberty, to go back again into 
the country where he might have been captured and held in bondage, running that 
terrible risk in order to help mother, or sister, or brother, to escape, and to share the 
blessings which his own soul had tasted. 1. With what holy yearning should we 
regard our relatives and Mends who are still in the bondage of sin I 2. What should 
we not be prepared to suffer, what toil should we not be willing to undertake on their 
behalf I 3. How fervently should we pray the prayer of these returning exiles I 

Vers. 6, 6. — Spiritwil farming. Our Lord told the apostles that he would make 
them " fishers of men." We may hear him telling ns that he will make xafarmen of 
men ; for there is much to be done in the way of sowing and reaping in spiritual 
husbandry. 

L The soil of the hukait boul. That in which the sacred seed must be cast is 
the soul of man : not any one special part of it. Our appeal must be made to the 
entire nature — to the understanding, with all its powers of spiritual discernment, of 
reasoning, of memory, of anticipation ; to the affections, which have gathered round 
objects that are unworthy of them, and that may be directed to the highest, even to 
God himself; to the vriU, which baa, in the last resort, to determine whether or not 
we will choose Christ for our Saviour, and bis service for our portion. We fail as 
Christian husbandmen unless we direct our efforts to mind, heart, and will, when we 
work under our Master in these sacred fields. 

II. The seed op Divine tbdth. The "precious seed" we have to bow is that 
truth which is distinctively Christian. We have to teach what Christ has taught us; 
we have to present him, himself, to the minds and hearts of men. The surpassing 
value of every human spirit in the sight of God ; the yearning of the Divine Father 
over his absent children, and his longing to welcome them to his heart and to his 
home ; the truth that Jesus Christ died for the sins of men, and now offers himself to 
all penitent sonis as their Saviour and Lord ; the great fact that every one who humbles 
himself before God, and heartily accepts Jesus Christ for all he offers to be, is imme- 
diately and absolutely forgiven, and taken up into the loving and abiding favour of 
God; the promise of eternal life to those who are faithful unto death; — these are 
the great truths which we are charged to deliver, to implant into the soil of the 
human soul. 

III. The bebvioe or sowma. 1. The spirit in which we should sow the seed is 
that of our Master himself — the spirit of tender interest, of brotherly affection, of an 
inexhaustible faith, of patient hope. 2. The methods we adopt are various ; we may 
converse, or we may write the friendly letter, or we may print the elaborate treatise, or 
we may teach the small group of boys or girls, or we may address the great congre- 
gation. 3. The conditions may be favourable or unfavourable. We may go forth 
hopefully, expecting great things ; for we may know that the spirit of inquiry and 
receptiveness is prevailing. Or we may " go forth weeping; " we may " sow in tears ; " 
we may be discouraged and disheartened, for we may feel that the hearts are hard, and 
the minds are dull, and the purpose is set against the truth and the claims of God. 

IV. The cebtaihtt and the joy of ebapinq. 1. We have the definite promise 
of God : " They that sow in tears shall reap in joy," etc. (see Isa, Iv. 10 — .\3 ; 1 Cor. 



PS. oxxvi. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 221 

XV. 68). 2. We know that the truth of Jesus Christ is perfectly adapted to the 
needs and cravings of the human soul, and that the Divine Spirit has power to break 
the stoniest heart and to bow the most stubborn will, as well as to enlighten the 
darkest understanding. 3. We remember that the seed of truth may slumber in the 
soul for many years, and may yet prove to be fruitful of life. 4. We look forward to 
the hour, beyond the horizon of time, when we shall know that our labour was not in 
vain in the Lord. The farmer sows his seed, looking for rain and wind and sunshine, 
hoping for the harvest in the autumn : but he may be disappointed ; there may come 
the blight, or the drought, or the flood, and his waggims may never " come again " 
laden with the golden grain. Bat we who labour earnestly and prayerfully in sacred 
fields of usefulness, shall not be disappointed. The Divine promise will certainly be 
fulfilled ; " our work shall be rewarded ; " " He that goeth forth weeping, bearing precioui 
seed, shaU doubUest come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — " Like them that dream." I. The dbgam. It was a delightful one. 

1. There are many of quite another hind — dreams full of trouble, terror, and distress. 
Many such are recorded in Scripture (Gen. xl. ; Dan. iL ; Job vii. 14 ; Matt, xxvii. 19). 

2. But this was full of joy and rapture. So unexpected, so wonderful, was Israel's 
redemption from exile. They could hardly realize how blessed they were. For it was 
a reality, not a dream. More often the daylight destroys our dreams ; but this joy 
remained. 3. And their joy was irrepressible. (Ver. 2.) How sadly little of such joy 
do we see in the redeemed people of the Lord to-day I If they had not beeu redeemed 
at all, they could scarcely be more sad. 4. Their Joy compelled the confession of Ood!t 
goodness to them on the part of heathen nations. A glad Church is ever a conquering 
Church. A realized redemption will be rejoiced in by the redeemed themselves, and 
recognized by others yet waiting to be redeemed. The world wants still to see a joyful 
witness-bearing Church. When such Church is seen, then, perhaps, the millennium 
will have come. But let each consciously redeemed soul bear its testimony here and 
now, not waiting for others. It is what ought to be. 

II. The dream modified by the daylight. (Ver. 4.) For : 1. Z%« company 
of exiles who had come back were but as a handful, as a tiny rill, the wonder of 
which was that it did not dry up, there was so little of it. Such rills generally did 
dry up, as the bare water-courses proved. And the company of those returned from 
Babylon, they were, oh, so few ; the great majority were in exile still, and they 
themselves were threatened with all manner of opposition (Ezra iv. 11 — 24). 2. Hence 
there rose up the prayer, " Turn again our captivity," etc. ; that is, «' Bring back our 
exiles, O Lord, in such strength and numbers, that it shall be with us as with the 
slender stream when, by the melting of the mountain snows, its waters are swollen into 
a full, rapid, mighty torrent, bearing all before it ; let there be such an increase for us, 
thy people." And is not this the very prayer the Church needs to-day ? for the com- 
pany of God's iiaithful people, are not they in this desert world but as a handful, a 
" little fiock," a tiny rill"? Let us each say our " Amen." 

III. But bbalizkd again by faith in the peomisbb or God. (Vers. 6, 6.) It 
might be amid drenching rains the sower went forth to cast into the ground his handful 
of seed, but the promises of God to such as he never failed, and in due time the glad 
harvest was given. So the devout psalmist looked now on himself and his little com- 
pany of fellow-exiles, no longer as a tiny rill ready to be dried up and perish, but as 
the sower's handful of seed which amid much toil he sowed ; but sustained by the sure 
confidence that the harvest would make amends for all. And for the Christian worker 
to-day, the lonely missionary in China, India, Central Africa, and elsewhere ; ah I with 
what tears these servants of Go'l often go forth 1 But they bear the precious seed, 
precious in itself, precious in their own experience of its power ; and they, too, are 
Bostained, as all true workers for God must be, by the faith that "doubtless," without 
any possibility of failure, they shall come again to God who sent them forth, bringing 
with joy the rich results of their present toil and prayer. Let us pray for such sowera. 
Let us be such ourselves. — S. C, 



222 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [w. oxxvi. 1— «. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The history of a soul. That which was written of and for the returned 
enles of Judah lends itself so accurately and beautifully to describe the history of a 
redeemed soul, that it seems as if that larger and higher history were meant as well aa 
that of Judah. The same words tell of both. 

L The boul was onoe a oaftiye. Not alone the people of Zion, but every 
redeemed soul. It was captive once : 1. To the Law of God. That Law which was 
holy, just, and good, the Law of God's household, and which for the good of all his 
children must be maintained ; but to that Law the soul was liable, for it had transgressed 
again and again. Unless, therefore, something was done, the sentence of the Law must 
be carried out. 2. 2b sin. The soul wrs carnal, sold under sin. It yielded itself aa 
a bondslave to serve sin (Bom. vi. 16). And this lust makes him captive; yet 
farther : 3. To death. Not merely the death of the body, but, what is far worse, the 
death of the soul. 

II. Its OAFTiyiTY was bboeen. From being a captiye, he became one of the 
redeemed of God. Consider : 1. What was done. Sin was forgiven, all the guilt of 
the past put away. The soul became regenerate, a new heart was given ; old things 
passed away, all things became new ; the soul passed from death to life, from the 
power of Satan unto God. 2. Who did this t It was the Lord's doing. True, as with 
Judah, there was co-operation on man's part. As Judah, so had we to avail ourselves 
of what God had done. The soul must repent and believe, and turn from dead works 
to serve the living God. Unless we do this, God's mercy is in vain for us. But all 
this does not make it the less true that it was the Lord who turned our captivity ; it 
was his Spirit who prompted all that was done by us; without him it had never been 
done at all, no part of it. 3. Eotn was it done t Perhaps in no two instances have the 
same instrumentalities been employed. God has many ways of bringing men to 
himself. He uses now his providence, now his Word, now his Spirit, and sometimes 
all of them together. Only the work is done. 

III. Notable besults followed. 1. Surprise. " We were like them that dream " 
(cf. Luke xxiv. 41). It seemed too good to be true. This a blessed experience, the 
rapture and delight of the soul when it realizes what God has done for it. 2. Exuberant 
joy. (Ver. 2, " laughter," " singing.") How reasonable this, whether we think of whence 
we have been saved, -from what terrible depths of woe ; or whither, to what heights of 
blessedness; or by what means, the infinite love of God in Christ! 3. Confession on 
the part of the unsaved world. (Ver. 2.) " Then said they among the heathen," et»s. 
Yes, the world will take note, godless men will see that a great change has come. 

IV. Bdt a mobb full salvatiok is tbt teabned fob. (Ver. 4.) What has 
been gained is blessedness, but the soul comes soon to see how much more yet is 
needed. The river of the water of life in him is such a slender stream ; he would have 
it full, flowing, in force and volume like the streams of the south when the mountain 
snows have melted. Hence the prayer for a second blessing, " Turn again our captivity " 
(ver. 4). The soul craves a complete salvation, a full deliverance. He would be 
cleansed from all sin, made pure in heart. 

V. And he is ekcoubaoed to seek this by the oonstakt exfebienoe of those 
TiXAT sow IN TEAE8. The pitiless rain and cold may render the toil of the sower hard, 
but his reward surely comes. So they who with real earnestness of heart seek the 
fulness of God's salvation shall surely obtain it. — S. C. 

Ver. 6. — The rejoicing reaper. Consider — 

I. What he was fobmbelt. That is told us in the first half of the text. 1. He 
was one who went forth to sow. He went forth, he was an active worker. In spiritual 
husbandry this is what is needed. There are many who will talk, some who will pray, 
but not all these really go to the work. If only the much talk and many prayers 
could be as they ought to be, and will be if they are sincere, translated into work, 
active, strenuous work, what a change would come over the Church and the world 
also 1 But would we be rejoicing reapers, we must be really workers. 2. 7Tu burden 
of the Lord is upon him. This is the meaning of the word " and weepeth." How 
perpetually in the prophetic Scriptures we meet with this expression, " the burden " I 
It tells of some message which the Lord had given the prophet to declare concerning 
some place, some person, some nation. It was a burden to the prophet ; he felt its solemn 



P8. oxxn. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 228 

weight and responsibility. And he who shall be a rejoidng reaper in the Lord's harvest- 
field is one to whom bis sacred toil has been the burden of the Lord to him. This 
burden is made up of a deep sense (1) of his own insufficiency for the work ; (2) of 
the urgent need for the work to be done; (3) of the shortness of time which remains 
for this work to be done ; and (4) of the heavy responsibility resting upon him to be 
faithful in the work (2 Cor. v. 11). There may or may not be tears upon his face, but 
there certainly will be in his heart. Often will he weep there. These are the men 
who do the Lord's work, and win men in throngs for him. 3. He hears preciout teed. 
The seed is the Word of God : that is settled for us by our Lord himself (Luke viii. 
6, 11 ; 1 Pet. i. 23). And it is as seed, because it has transforming power. The corn 
of wheat, when sown, lays hold on the elements of the soil around it, and transmutes 
them into its own substance, changes them into its own image and likeness. So does 
the Word of Qod in the heart of man. And it is "precious seed " because of what it 
is in itself. Who can calculate its value? And because he who sows it has found its 
value for himself; he has had experimental knowledge of its preciousness. Now, this 
seed he scatters in the furrows, as he has been bidden of the Lord to do ; and he does 
it in the confident belief that God will bless his work, and the harvest shall follow. 
Such is he who becomes the rejoicing reaper. 

II. What he now is. We see him coming "again with rejoicing," etc. 1. Ooming 
again. That is, coming back from the field homewards. So shall the faithful servant 
of Qtod., as he wends his homeward way, be seen, not with downcast, disappointed look, 
but with rejoicing, because of the good success of his toil. Such men, ere they reach 
home, find their way lit up with the sunset glow, the eventide light, which the harvest 
joy brings to them. 2. "With, rejoicing'' How many are the springs of that joy I — 
that he has been himself saved ; that he has been allowed to engage in the work ; that 
he has been kept faithful and persevering in the work ; that he has been made successful 
in the work ; that he is now going home to his Lord to enter into his joy for ever. Oh, 
joy unspeakable and full of glory I 3. " Bringing his sheaves with him." (Of. Rev. 
xiv. 18, " Their works do follow them.") Some of the com has got home before 
the reaper, but there is much he brings with him, and yet more that will follow. 

m. The sube connection between the two. "Doubtless." There is no con- 
tingency, no mere "perhaps;" his "labour is not in vain in the Lord." Faithful toil 
shall not fail of reward. God will see to this ; he ever has, he ever will. — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — Turning captivity into liberty. Is that always, altogether, and necessarily, 
a good thing? " When the edict of Cyrus went forth allowing the captives to return, 
it was BO unexpected, it was so miraculous, that we deemed the accomplishment of 
ancient prophecy a dream." "To turn again captivity" is to bring back God's 
redeemed ones. Perowne skilfully presents the points of thought and feeling in this 
psalm. " The first colony of exiles had returned to Palestine. But, after all, what 
was that little band of settlers which formed the first caravan? It was but as the 
trickling of a tiny rill in some desert waste. Hence the prayer bursts from the lips of 
the psalmist, 'Bring back our captives like mighty streams, which, swollen by the 
wintry rains, descend to fertilize the parched and desolate wilderness.' Then comes 
the thought of the many discouragements and oppositions which the first settlers bad 
to encounter; it was a time of sowing in tears. Still, faith could expect a joyful 
harvest. He who had restored them to the land would assuredly crown his work with 



L Caftivitt IB best while we chebish self-dependenoe. Because it means 
that we are under the Divine discipline. So long as we are wrong-minded — and to be 
self-trusting is to be wrong-minded — the saddest thing that could happen to us is for 
God to let us alone. That he is smiting us is the all-satisfactory proof that he is 
intimately concerned for our truest well-being. Until Israel had lost that self-reliance 
vhich had wrought such mischief for the nation, it was altogether best in captivity, 
heavy strain though that was to them. The time our captivity continues is always 
the Divine measurement of the time necessary for doing the work of our captivity. If 
true-hearted, we should not desire relief from affliction one moment before God's time 
has come. Far better to keep the humiliation and affliction than to keep the sell- 



224 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. cxxvi. 1— «. 

II. LiBEBTT 18 BEST WHEN WB HAVE LEARNED TO DEPEND ON GoD. And that ii 

the lesson to be learned in all captivities and afflictions. Liberty is then best, because 
the man or the nation knows what to do with it. The victim of the French Eevolution, 
apostrophizing liberty, said, " Liberty, what crimes are committed in thy name!" 
Liberty is but captivity of another kind, when man has no principle and rule for his 
use of it. Restored Israel could have its liberty, because it bad learned to lean on 
God.— R. T. 

Ver. 2. — 8ign$ of Joy. Polybius, in describing the joy of the Greeks when unex- 
pectedly rescued from the Macedonians, says, " Most of the men could scarcely believe 
the news, but imagined themselves in a dream as they listened to what was said, so 
extraordinary and miraculous it seemed to them." 

I. Jot and oladitess hat be fitting besponse to oiboxtmstances. There is a 
natural and proper response to every set of conditions in which we are placed. We 
need never restrain those responses. Religion tones them, but does not arrest or crush 
them. Joy and gladness were befitting to the restored captives. Laughter is the 
expression of joy ; and " Is any merry, let him sing psalms." Some phases of Christian 
life are too decorous, too restrained, too cold. True religion only flourishes in a warm 
atmosphere of feeling. And we should find abundant cause for joy and song, if we did 
but read our lives aright, and recognize the loving-kindness of the Lord, "The 
redeemed shall come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads." 

II. Jot and gladness uat be exagkiebated, and become a febil. There was 
a degree of extravagance in the joy of these returned exiles. They were over-excited. 
In their excitement they imagined a future which could never be realized ; and were 
tempted to play with their new-found liberty as with a toy, instead of being solemnized 
by its obligations, and urged thereby to high and noble endeavour. 1. Times of over- 
joy make the prosaic work of everyday life very trying and hard. The beginnings of 
religious life are often a skipping and dancing and singing of the soul, and it is almost 
overwhelming to discover that it must pass into a persistent, humdrum walking the 
pilgrim-path of righteousness. We cannot be always in ecstasy and song, either here 
or in heaven. Israel found the actual life in restored Palestine soon changed excited 
Bong for the quiet strain of daily service. 2. Times of over-excitement are followed by 
times of undue depression. Israel bravely sang on the shores of the Red Sea, and 
mnrmured, ere three days were passed, at what redemption involved. Overstrain of 
religious feeling in times of revivals and missions, is oftentimes a most serious peril to 
young souls, because it suggests a false idea of Christian life. And, to some dispositions, 
it is no less than absolute ruin. — R. T. 

Vers. 2, 3. — Our Joy in God a witness for Ood. " Then said they amon^ the 
heathen. The Lord hath done great things for them," Th", estimate which surrounding 
nations would form of them and of their circumstances was always a matter of interest 
and importance to Israel. From the first it was understood that the honour of Jehovah 
was bound up with the prosperity of this people. It is possible to fix our thoughts too 
entirely on the exclusiveness and the isolation of Israel, and on its mission as the 
treasury, for the world, of the primary truths of revealed religion. Its second mission 
was its witness to Jehovah, by its trust in him ; devotion to his service ; and safety 
and enrichment through his presence and blessing. Israel was, as it were, locked up 
in that little central land, away from the nations ; but it was so isolated that it might 
make its testimony, and be a beacon-light for God. We try to see what witness it 
rendered by one of its moods. 

I. Israel's jot in God witnessed to the Divine pity. We are dealing now 
with the joy of the restored exiles. They were largely the immediate descendants of 
men who had provoked Jehovah by their iniquity and rebellion, and had for years 
been enduring his righteous judgments. Looking at, and thinking only of, their 
calamity, other nations might easily come to think of their God as one who never 
forgives. But, in view of the joy of their restoration, such an idea could not be enter- 
tained. It is proved now that God pities even while he punishes; and is glad when 
his pity is free to work its gracious, restoring wnrk. 

II. Israel's jot in God witnessed to the Divine preservation. It declared 



PS. cxTvi. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 225 

that the "good hand" had heen on the nation all through its time of captivity. It 
had been in the purifying fires, but the silver had been kept safe throagh all the 
testings. And the brightness and joy of a Christian life always makes this witness for 
God. It sayek— 

"I have been apheld till now : 
Who conid hold me up but thou ?" 

in. Ibbael's joy in God witnessed to the Divine fubposbb. God restored 
Israel because be had something for Israel yet to do in the world. And Israel's joy 
seemed to say, " It is plain that God needs me." God's goodness always unveils God's 
purpose. — B. T. 

Ver. i. — A pha/or renewed Joyous experiences. In renewing prayer for the " turning 
again of captivity," the psalmist may but put into a figure his desire that God's full 
work of redemption may be completed, and some form of present limitation or peril 
may be likened to the old captivity, and even seem to be a sort of relic of it. Ttiere is 
a sense in which we may always be praying, " Turn again our captivity." But the 
figure may be one giving force to prayer for an immediate and unexpected Divine 
deliverance, such as the return from captivity had been. " Jehovah, relieve our 
misery suddenly, and, as it may well be said, miraculously; as streams in the wilder- 
ness, which one moment are dead and dry, and then suddenly become flowing rivers." 
It may be that in the mind of the psalmist was the fact that only a small portion of 
the nation had responded to the edict of Gyrus. And his prayer may be that the rest 
of Israel might be induced to flood the still desolate land. " Restore our captive com- 
patriots, just as water is restored by heavy rains to the water-courses of the parched 
district south of Palestine, to the delight of the inhabitants " (comp. Isa. xlix. 18, 
where the land, like a bereaved mother, waits for her children, whose return will fill 
her heart with joy). 

I. Tee past of God'b blessino mat be joyfully BEOoaNizsD. It should be. 
Israel loved to hear the story of God's ways with the fathers told over and over. We 
should never tire of going over our early experiences of deliveringand redeeming mercy. 

II. The past of God's blessino odqht neveb to satisfy us. It is past and 
gone; it is but a memory. "Things won are done." We continue, and we cannot 
rest without the assurance that God is doing for us what he has done. The restored 
exiles cannot rest with God's turning their captivity, and restoring a few of their 
number ; they must ask for a renewal of the blessing. " Turn again our captivity." 
From God's grace in the past we " draw a plea, to ask him still for more." We cannot 
be satisfied save with renewals of joyful experiences. 

III. The past of God's blessino is the plbdob of greater blessing. God 
never exhausts himself in any good he does. Instead, by a present blessing, he opens 
the way for, and prepares us to receive, a larger blessing. Giving, he does but make 
possible his giving still more. — E. T. 

Ver. 5. — Sad sowing-times. Thomson says, " I never saw people sowing in tears 
exactly, but I have often known them to do it in fear and distress sufficient to draw 
them from any eye. In seasons of great scarcity, the poor peasants part in sorrow 
with every measure of precious seed cast into the ground. It is like taking bread out 
of the mouths of their children, and in such times many bitter tears are actually shed 
over it." Compare the tears at the laying of the foundation of the second temple 
(Ezra iii. 12), and the joy when it was complete (Ezra vi. 16, 22). And keep in mind 
the strain and anxiety through which the first returned company of exiles had to pass. 

I. Sad sowing-times of scaboity. Such always followed on far^ine years, when 
the old corn stores were used up, and the harvest of the year allowed uo proportion to 
be reserved for seed, and, if reserve was made, the guality guaranteed no good coming 
harvest. Then the spring seed-sowing was an anxious time. It involved a serious 
loss of what was immediately needed. And experience of past famine made the harvest 
%rom this seed-sowing seem unusually uncertain. It is thus in Christian work. " We 
have toiled all night, and taken nothing," and it is hard to put down the net again. 
When the Church is cold and dead, even preaching the gospel comes to be sad and 
P8ALMB — in. Q 



226 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. oxxvl 1—8. 

heartless work. Yet it must not be given up. Weep we Tnay, but sow we must. We 
never know where God's showers of blessing fall. 

II. Sad bowino-timbs of inseodbity. Travellers tell of seeing sowers in the East 
sowing with one hand, and holding a musket in the other, for the Bedouin will steal 
the seed-cMrn, as well as rush in and sweep away the harvest. How anxious the farmer 
will be until his precious seed is safely in the mil I This may suggest those eircuin- 
ttances which so often hinder the success of our Christian work; things beyond our 
control which render our work fruitless. Spite of them, we must persist in Bowing, if 
it must be sowing in tears. 

III. Sowmo-TiMEs OF ATMOSFHEBio FEBIL. The Weather is but seldom just to the 
former's mind, and in some seasons the sowing seems hopeless : what can the seed do 
but rot in the ground? This may suggest the dispositions both of the Christian 
workers, and of those among whom they work. These often make a sort of atcposphere, 
in which the seed-sowing seems hopeless. Nevertheless, we must go on sowing, even 
if it must be in tears. — B. T. 

Ver. 6. — The law of giving in order to gain. " Though he goeth on his way weep- 
ing, bearing forth the seed, he shall come again with juy, bringing the sheaves with 
him." Our Lord declared the same principle when he said, " He that loveth his life 
shall lose it, and he that loseth his life for my sake shall save it unto life eternal." 
You can never secure any kind of harvest of anything, save by giving your seed-corn 
away. The miser keeps his gold, and he has what he keeps, and no more. " There is 
that scattereth, and yet increaseth ; and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, 
but it tendeth to poverty." 

I. Giving ut cedes to oain is the law of entbrpbisb. Here we treat it on its 
purely human and business side. Nothing could be done in trade and commerce if 
men were not willing to " risk," as we say — to give away what they have. The mar. 
with the one talent would not give it away in some business enterprise, and so he had 
no harvest for his master, when he returned. Human enterprise is closely kin to faith ; 
or, we may say, has in it a strong element of faith ; business would be paralyzed if 
men could not give themselves, and what they have, away to each other in mutual 
trust. But there is always the inspiration of anticipation. It is always giving in 
order to get, based upon the natural order of things as established by prolonged 
experience. 

II. Giving in obdeb to gain is the law of Chbistian service. Here we treat 
the law in its higher and Divine relations. And we observe : 1. That it is a law 
divinely established. It is no accident ; it is no resultant of experiences ; it is no mere 
possibility. It is definitely fixed by God, who requires the seed-sowing, and promises 
the harvest. Because it is the Divine law, the harvest is assured. 2. That it is a law 
experimentally proved. Not experimentally hased. Surrender for Christ's sake always 
is a seed-sowing that is followed by a harvest. Those who give up all for Christ's 
sake have a hundredfold more in this life, and in the time to come, life eternal. 
3. That it is a law sublimely illustrated in God himself, who gave his Son in view of 
the harvest of humanity. Give away your seed, even with tears, you will come some 
day from the harvest-field, carrying your sheaves. — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Alternations and contrasts in the experiences of life. " When the Lord 
turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream." 

I, Some ohanogs seem hobe like dbeams than realities. Seem too good or too 
bad to be true. 1. When they come suddenly. It takes time to adjust ourselves to 
them as facts and not fictions. And to realize the consequences they bring with them. 
2. When they bring or promise more than we ever expected. We sing and laugh as 
those who have come into an immense fortune. If the change be spiritual, we rejoice 
like an emancipated slave, and can understand the experience of a ZacLhasus, a Magdalene, 
or the Philippian jailor. 3. When we are able to trace the change to Ood. The sense 
of the presence of God with us always fills us with wonder. " The Lord has done 
great things for us, whereof we are glad." When strangers see the Divine hand in 
our history, there is a strengthening of our faith in God. " The heathen said. The 
Loid hath done great things for them." 



P* OXZ.TII. 1 — 5.3 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



227 



II. But no ohanob, however ore at, exempts us from toil and tears. (Ver. 4.) 
Begins another strain. 1, It is always incomplete. It does not put an end entirely to 
the past order of things, nor introduce a completely new order. A terrihle war to be 
fought between the old and the new. The return from Babylon at this time was only 
partial. 2. Every change for the letter or the worse exacts new endurances and trials. 
We have to go forth bearing piecious seed and weeping — to sow the seed of a near 
future, and to pass through the hopes and fears of the anxious husbandman. 3. But 
all aninoua and faithful labour now shall he rewarded with an abv/ndant recompense 
when Ood and man shall gather the harvest of the world. (Ver. 6.) " Blessed are 
those who mourn : for they shall be comforted." — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM CXXVU. 
A DiDAOno psalm, preaching a contented 
trust in God as more conducive to the pros- 
perity of a man, or a state, tbau any amount 
of fussy activity. The ascription to Bolomon 
is borne out (1) by the use of Solomonic 
words ; e,g. ^elseb, ne'unm, yedido ; and (2) 
by tlie agreement of the general sentiment 
with Prov. s. 22. 

Yer. 1. — Except the Lord bnild the honie ; 
rather, a house; i.e. any house whatsoever, 
Thejr labour in vain that buld it. They 
will effect nothing— no house will be built. 
Except the Lbrii keep the city; rather, a 
eiiy. The watchman wakeUi but in vain. 
Human watching is of no use unless accom- 
panied by Divine watching. 

Ver. 2i — It is vain for yon to rise up 
early, to sit up late (comp. Isa. v. 11); i.e. 
to be "careful and troubled" about your 
work in the world, whatever it is. To eat 
the bread of sorrows. To feed, as it were, 
on sorrow — and trouble and care — to make 
your lives a burden to yourselves through 
your carefulness. For so he giveth Us 
beloved sleep ; rather, swrely he giveth to his 
belcved in sleep; i.e. in their sleep. The 
teaching is similar to that of Ezod. xiv. 14 ; 
Isa. zxx. 7, 15; Matt, vi 23—31. God 



gives to men that which he knows they 
have need of, if they have only the faith to 
" sit BtUl" and "wait." 

Ver. 3. — Lo, children are an heritage sf 
the Lord. The teaching is enforced by an 
example. The prosperity, alike of states 
and of individuals, depends on nothing so 
much as on an abundant progeny of children. 
But children are manifestly the free gift of 
Ood. And the fruit of the womb is his reward. 
One of the ways in which he rewards his 
&ithful ones (see Dent, xxviii. 4, 11). 

Yer. 4. — ^Ag arrows are in the hand of a 
mighty man; so are children of the yonth; 
rather, the children 0/ youth; Le. children 
born to a man in his youth. Such children 
protect their aged parents as effectually as 
arrows in the hand of a warrior. 

Yer. 5. — ^Happy is the man that hath hii 
quiver fall of them. Happy the man whose 
quiver contains many such arrows, and who 
is thus sore of abundant protection. They 
shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak 
with the enemies in the gate ; rather, when 
they shall speaft (Hengstenberg, Kay, Cheyne, 
Revised Version). "The gate" was the 
place where judgment was given, and where 
consequently adversaries were apt to meet, 
as they pushed their respective causes. 
There might be collisions on such occasions; 
and, in any case, % man with several lusty 
sons to take his part would have an advan- 
tage. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — 77ie blessing of Ood. The psalm is in keeping with that prevalent 
piety which led the devout Israelite to trace God's hand in everything, and ascribe both 
good and evil, both joy and sorrow, to his directing power. 

L Unblessed labour. 1. We can do nothing at all without the Divine co-opera- 
tion. We constantly depend on the presence of his material, on the action of his laws, 
on the activity of the forces he keeps in play. We all recognize this in agriculture; 
that it is vain for the husbandman to sow his seed, unless God sends his rain and wind 
and sunshine, etc. It is also true of our other occupations. The sailor and the builder 
depend on the constancy and regularity of Divine laws and forces. We are always 
assuming their existence, though we may think nothing of their Author. 2. We can 
effect nothing without the Divine permission. If God means that the guilty city shall 



228 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pa. oxxni. 1— 5, 

fall, the watchman will wake and the soldier will fight in vain. If God intends to 
humble a man whose pride needs to be brought down, his utmost exertions in bis trade 
or in his profession will not bring success. Many a man has found, as be at first 
thought to his cost, but as be afterwards knew to hi$ great advantage, that when God's 
wise and faithful providence is against his prosperity, he wakes early and works hard 
in vain. But how much more blessed is he in a corrective adversity, than he would be in 
a hardening prosperity I We do well to ask that God's blessing may wait upon and 
crown all our activities ; we do well, also, to remember that it may happen that, for 
our own sake, God will not grant us our desire in the form of temporal success. 3. We 
find no blessedness in a prosperity which is not hallowed by devotion. It is a vain 
thing for a man to strive hard and to attain the immediate object of his pursuit, if 
he is not making his life a life of holy service. Even if the bread he eats is not 
" bread of sorrows " in the sense that it is scanty, yet it will be such in the sense that 
it yields no abiding joy ; for it is abundantly clear that a life of even prosperous labour, 
apart from the service and without the friendship of God, selfish and earthbound, is 
a life of dissatisfaction and practical defeat. The springs of pure and lasting joy do not 
rise on that lower ground. 

II. Needless auxiett. "It is vain that ye rise up early," etc.; "for he giveth to 
his beloved in sleep and without labour, 'so/ «.e. just as, even as to those who vainly 
harass themselves with labour and think not of him " (' Speaker's Commentary '). 
To those who serve God and are beloved of him he will grant sufiiciency, though they 
do not turn labour into hard toil, but take the rest they need. It is not godless 
struggle, but reverent activity, that attains the goal and receives the prize of happy 
life. The two elements of success are (1) a moderate and rational activity with nera- 
ful and appropriate rest; and (2) the enjoyment of God's favour bringing down his 
blessing on our work. Be diligent at your post, give to muscle and to brain the 
relaxation they demand, spend your days and powers in the fear of God, — then you may 
commit yourself to his promise and await its fulfilment. There is no need for anxiety 
if you are honestly and wisely laborious, and also prayerful and obedient (see 
Phil. iv. 6—7). 

III. The fulness add otebflow of Ditinb blesbiko. "So he giveth to his 
beloved in sleep." I. What great things God does /or our bodily wdl-l^ng in sleep! 
Every night he lays his restoring hand upon us, refreshes us, renews our muscular and 
mental powers, gives back to us the vitality and strength which had been exhausted. 
Every morning we owe to him a " new song " of praise. 2. What great things God 
does for us in the outside world during our unconsciousness I Our Lord reminds 
us that, while we are otherwise occupied, " night and day," the seed we have sown 
springs and grows, we " know not how." Many things God does for us when we are 
as unconscious of his action as if we were " in sleep." It is an unseen hand, working 
with such Bilence that no ear hears the sound, that is carrying on those wonderfiil 
operations by which he " satisfies the wants of every living thing." 3. What great 
thin°:s he does for us in the human world in which we take no part I His hand was 
working and overruling in all the toil and strife of the nations of the earth, leading the 
world up to, and making it ready for, the great advent of the Redeemer. Unknown 
to us, while we are practically "in sleep," he is directing all our strife and all our 
labour to a beneficent result. 4. We are hoping that God will make our past life 
efiective for good in many hearts and through many generations when we "fall on 
sleep." When our body rests in the grave, the influences he enablud us to exert in 
life will, under his gracious guidance, be telling and bearing fruit. To those who love 
and serve him now he will give the blessing of the workman whose labour ia producing 
and reproducing long after he has left the field. 

IV. The blessiko of rABESTAOE. (See next psalm.) 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The builder's psalm,. Our ignorance of the exact reference of this psalm 
enables us to apply it, as perhaps otherwise we might not be able, to aU builders 
whatsoever. Four such seem to be pointed at herAi 



w. oxxvii. 1—5.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 229 

L The temple-builders. 1. We know that this was one of the solicitudes of th/t 
returned exiles — to uprear ajaain the temple of the Lord. And in the books written after 
the return from Babylon we read about this and the difficulties they had to encounter, 
and the success they at length achieved. Continually they needed to remember that 
" except, the Lord build," etc. 2. And in the gathering together the living stones which 
are to form the Church of God, how we need to remember this same truth 1 Her 
builders are perpetually tempted, and some are all too prone, to try other methods in 
this work than those the Lord employe. We are apt to rely on wealth, eloquence, 
learning, talent, and all other such things, and to forget that it is the Lord alone can 
really make our work successful. 

IL Those of the citt. (Ver. 1.) Jerusalem is doubtless meant, and, surrounded 
as she was by relentless and ever-watchful foes, the sentinels and guards needed ever 
to be on the alert. But again the same reminder comes in. And it does so still. 
This is the age of great towns and cities, of municipal corporations who naturally and 
properly take pride in the cities over which they are placed. They cannot but know 
how much depends upon wise administration and rule, on the sagacity and wisdom which 
the citizens can supply. And they who know the history of municipalities know how 
eager corruption and vice are to assert their power. And often it seems that to pander 
to them would help on the city's prosperity. But the city-builders need to recollect 
the truth of this psalm. What is all man's wisdom apart from God ? 

IIL The bdsiness. (Ver. 2.) "Our house," "our firm," — these are well-known 
expressions for business associations — ^how many are hard at work to build such houses I 
And in the keen competition of the day, how difficult this often is I what temptations 
are on every hand, by tricks of trade, by what is called smartness, to get on, it matters 
not much by what means. How many succumb to such temptations, and try to keep 
one conscience for Sundays and quite another for weekdays I They have little faith 
in what this psalm says, " Except the Lord," etc. Their faith is in strenuous hard 
work, rising early, sitting up late, eating the bread of toil, and so to win rest and 
repose for themselves. But it is not so, the psalmist declares ; for all that toiling and 
moiling is " vain ; " the Lord giveth to his beloved that which they need without all 
that restlessness and anxiety; their souls repose in him; he keeps them in perfect 
peace (cf. Prov. x. 22, Revised Version margin). Let the Lord, then, be the pre- 
dominant partner in every firm; so shall the house be built. 

IV. The home. (Vers. 3 — 5.) People marry, and then begins the upbuilding of the 
&mily. What strenuous exertion does many a father put forth for the sake of his 
family I If the children be numerous, the parents are often very slow to appreciate 
the congratulations of these verses (3 — 5). The reason is that they are counting most 
precious for their children what the Lord scarcely counts precious at all. Of course, 
only a fool would despise secular advantages for his children, if they may be had ; but 
infinitely more impoitant for them is the grace of God possessing their hearts. Then no 
real ill can come to them, but eternal good shall be their portion.— S. C. 

Ver. 2. — The deep God gives. This psalm is, by its title in our Bible, ascribed to 
Solomon; in the Septqagint it is left without a title; in the Syriac Version it is 
ascribed to David. In structure it is like all the rest of these " Psalms of Degrees." 
Hence we are very much in the dark as to its date and authorship, and are shut up, as it 
is well we should be, to its religious teachings. What these are it is not difficult to see ; 
for its plain lesson is that all our defence and security are in the Lord alone. Hence 
reminder of this is given to the builders of the city, its watchmen and its toilers ; and 
of its greatest earthly defence, the numerous children that should be born, it is 
declared that the blessed gift of children is from the Lord alone. So that if we are to 
know the real sense of security without which men cannot sleep, the Lord must give it. 

L Now, THIS IS TRUE OF OUB LiTEBAL, NATURAL LIFE. Strong walls and vigilant 
guards are not enough ; the Lord must give one sleep. And he does so. 1. Think of 
the physical conditions, of sleep. They are part of that wonderful organization which 
God endued us with, and which is so constructed that at due times sweet refreshing 
sleep shall steal over our senses, and our tired bodies shall have rest. 2. Think of the 
terrestrial conditions. How this earth of ours swings itself round out of the light into 
the daikness. "Thoumakest darkness, and it is night" (Ps. civ.). The sound- ai.d 



230 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. cxxtil 1— 5. 

stir of the day are hushed, and the glare of light is gone for a while, and thus provision 
for sleep is made. 3. Of the social conditions. Strong governments, wise laws, 
skilful administration, security for life and property, all that which we call civilization, 
which God has been teaching men generation after generation, — all this, which gives that 
sense of security without which we could not rest, is part of God's methods whereby 
he bestows on vis the blessed boon of sleep. 

n. It 18 TET MORE TBUE OF THAT OALM AND SEBEMTY OF SOUL WHICH WE ALL 

WI8H TO ENJOT. It is the Lord who giveth that. The psalm is a reminder to many 
who were seeking this " in vain " ways (see former homily). It is he who giveth, etc. 
It is not they who gain it for themselves or in any way earn it ; nor is it given to all, 
but only to the beloved of the Lord. To them he giveth sleep, not the partial and 
unreal rest of soul which some seem to enjoy. To the builders, the watchmen, 3e 
toilers, the word is sent that apart from the Lord all is in vain. " Ccme unto me, all 
ye," etc. 

III. And teue, also, of the bleep of death. To those who die in the Lord, 
death is but a sleep prior to a glorious awakening : hence it is so often spoken of as 
a sleep. But the Lord alone can give this. 1. For it there is needed forgiveness 
of sin. But this can only come to those who bring the sacrifice of the contrite heart. 
Even God cannot forgive an impenitent man; for he who will not give up his sin 
cannot escape the suffering which ever goes along with it. 2. And the new heart. The 
regenerating grace of the Holy Spirit. " Without holiness shall no man see the Lord." 
He that is not meet for heaven cannot enter there. 3. And a continual and utter 
trust in the love of Qod in Christ. But aU these are his gifts. For them " Christ is all 
and in all." Seek them, and so will rest of soul be ours now, and when life is done we 
shall sleep in him. — S. C. 

Ver. 4. — Children as arrows. The psalmist takes far other than that pessimistic 
view, 80 common in our day, as to God's gift of children. Men now too often look 
upon them as so many misfortunes and incumbrances, and as compelling poverty 
and privation where else these evils had not been, and as so many channels through 
which trouble may come to the home in which they have been bom. How beautifully 
and blessedly different is the teaching of this and the following psalm on this matter I 
Of course, where social conditions are such that, let a man be ever so willing to work, 
no work can be found for him, and toil as he will he cannot make a living, then the 
fact of a large family is, at any rate for a time, but an increase of sorrow. But then, 
such social conditions ought not to be, and the fact that by them what God designed to 
be so great a blessing is made to be only a terrible calamity, is reason enough why 
men should strive for a better condition of things. And there can be no doubt 
that many of man's laws and, yet more, man's sins do turn God's blessings into a curse. 
But children, it is never to be forgotten, were designed to be God's blessings, and in 
myriads of homes they are so. The special blessing the psalmist has in his mind, as 
coming through our children, is that they are as arrows in the hand of a mighty man. 
The similitude is a suggestive one. 

I. Thet ABE 80 FOB PBOTEOTioN. Thosc children that are born when their parents 
are young will be of age to help and maintain their parents when these need such 
help. They defend their home from the attack of poverty and want. Long ere these 
have reached their home, these arrows have made them turn back. 

II. Foe help in the battle of life. The spur and stimulus which children 
impart to their parents, the pleasure they give, the love they awaken, the aspirations 
after good they arouse, — all these things are of vast help in life's battle, even "as 
arrows are," etc. 

III. Need to be oaeefullt prepabed. Arrows do not grow of themselves : they 
have to be wrought out with much thought and care. So our children. 

IV. And to be well aimed. What is our aim for our children? The arrows 
will go where they are sent. How many parents there are who have no worthy aim 
for their children 1 They will be glad for them to " get on," to become rich, and to take 
good positions in society. If they have aim, it is no higher one than that. And those 
who profess the higher aim, that their chiMren should be the Lord's, how badly, 
clumsily, carelessly, they seek that aim I 



w. oxxvii. 1— 5.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 231 

v. Sent fobth with all powek. See the " mighty man," how "he bends his 
bow and makes ready his arrow upon the string," and then draws it back to its full 
length, that it may speed with the more force on the way he would have it go ; that is 
a picture of the strenuous, careful endeavour we should make to urge our arrows, our 
children, in the right way. But what all too little strenuousness there Is in this 
luatter I 

VI. They are sure to wotruD, ir not kill, bomewhebb. The foes of the home — 
want, godlessness, evil reputation and character, strife and ill will, hopelessness and 
despair, the malice of men, and much else, the children should slay, and not suffer 
them to come near us ; and good children do this. But if wo have not so trained them 
to thus serve the home, then they will turn and wound and pierce their parents to the 
heart. Bad children do this. Yes, always, they are "as arrows." — S. C. 

Yer. 1. — The Ood of ths family life. "These pictures are mild and bright; human- 
izing are they in the best sense : they retain certain elements of Paradise, and yet 
more the elements of the patriarchal era, with the addition of that patriotism and of 
that concentration in which the patriarchal life was wanting. The happy religious 
man, after the Hebrew pattern, possessed those feelings and habitudes which, if they 
greatly prevail in a community, impart to it the strength of a combination which is 
stronger than any other ; uniting the force of domestic virtue, of rural, yeomanlike, 
agricultural occupations, of unaggressive, defensive valour ; and of a religious animation 
which is national as well as authentic and true" (Isaac Taylor). It is well to note 
that the very first associations of human beings over which God presided took the form 
of family life. Of Adam it is said, " which was the son of God," so the first relation 
of humanity was a family relation. When Adam and Eve bar) a child, earth held its 
model relationship — it had a family group. The patriarchs were but heads of families. 
The nation of Israel was Jehovah's family. And Christ came to restore for humanity 
its Divine family relationships. Man organized for himself fictitious social and citizen 
relations, Man made towns, governments, kings. All who are concerned in the welfare 
of humanity realize that everything depends on the healthy maintenance of family 
life. Napoleon was asked what could be done to restore the prestige of France. At 
once he replied, " Give us better mothers." 

I. God interested in family life. The " God of the families of his people," he 
is called. The interest belongs to his own paternity ; and we can partly realize it as 
we think of our interest in our children's children. It is possible to exaggerate in 
presenting God's interest in the individual. The plea for a family religion and a 
family altar is based on Goi's family care and blessing. 

II. God working in family life. Using its associations, cares, and mutual 
services for his work of character-culture. The commonplaces of family life only 
gain their diijnity when God is seen to be using them ; and the anxieties of family 
life become endurable when we feel sure that God is overruling. The Divine training 
of character for the life that is coming, by sanctifying family experiences, needs to be 
much more fully considered than it is. 

III. God workino through family life. That is, working his great work for 
humanity through the witness of family life. There is no mightier force used by God 
for securing the redemption of the race. — R. T. 

Ver. 1. — The true city watchman, " Except the Lord keep the city, the watchman 
waketh but in vain." This would come home very forcibly to the restored exiles if, 
as we may well assume, the psalm was written before Neheiniah restored the walls ol 
the holy city. Then the only protection of the city must have been the vigilance of 
the night-watohmen, which never could be depended on. And yet the city containing 
Gk)d's people was absolutely secure ; and would have been as secure if no watchmen 
had ever paced their ordered rounds. Their God was their defence. In older days, foes 
gathered round, but they never broke in, unless God gave them a commission oi 
discipline or judgment. The restored exiles were surrounded by active enemies, and 
exposed on every side. But it did not matter. The fiat of Divine love and power held 
them in strictest restraint. Scheme they might, but they could not overpass Jehovah'i 
limits, " Hitherto shalt thou come, and no further." The truth may be illustrated in 



232 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [re. cxxvn. 1— 5. 

all those human arrangements for mutual safety which have for their type the city 
watchman, and which we call national and local government. So elaborate is man's 
device lor securing the liberty of the person, the safety of property, and the 
health of the fimily, that there is grave danger of losing all sense of neeiiing God. 
Indeed, God in city life is but a sentiment. And yet we remove his direct relation from 
the various forms of human association at our peril. Be it government, or socialistic 
self-government, "unless the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain." 
Very remarkable is the way in which man's civilization brings mischief as well as 
good: and his seemingly perfect schemes leave loop-holes for the entrance of desolating 
evils. This may be illustrated from city sanitary schemes, and from the prevalence of 
particular types of diseases, and from the masterful spread of epidemics such as 
influenza. It may be shown that the true preservation of a city is an immaterial 
matter as well as a material; it is as closely related to morals and religion as to safety 
for property, healthy houses, and pure water. And if it could be so— which it cannot — 
that we succeed in separating God from the material, no one can delude himself with 
the idea that God is not concerned with the moral and religious. So, after all, it must 
be God who « keeps the city."— R. T. 

Ver. 2. — 2%e limited vaiue of self-exertion. The great lesson of this psalm is "that 
without God's blessing all human efforts and human precautions are in vain ; that man 
can never command success ; that God gives and man receives." It is suggested that 
the psalm was written to check self-congratulation and self-reliance on the part of 
those who were rejoicing in their national restoration. The sentence, "so he giveth his 
beloved sleep," may mean — so much as others gain by hardest toil and pains God gives 
to his beloved even while they sleep and can do nothing. While they are slumbering 
he is giving. " The pious, God-fearing man attains the same end without exertion of 
his own." Delitzsch well summarizes the points of the psalm: "The rearing of the 
house which affords us protection, and the stability of the city in which we securely 
and peaceably dwell, the acquisition of possessions that maintain and adorn life, the 
begetting and rearing of sons that may contribute substantial support to the father as 
he grows old, — all these are things which depend upon the blessing of God, without 
natural preliminary conditions being able to guarantee them, weltdevised arrange- 
ments to ensure them, unw'earied labours to obtain them by force, or impatient care 
and murmuring to get them by defiance." 

I. Sblf-exbbtion should be estimated. It has its value. It is not necessarily 
wrong. Human enterprise and energy, the impress of a man's self on his work, is 
requii'ed in every department of life. Human labour and watchfulness are never 
superfluous in their right spheres. It is no true piety to under-value self-exertion. 
Man must everywhere be his best possible. 

IL Self-exertion should be biohtlt estimated. It has no right to claim the 
first place in a man's confidence. That he must keep for dependence on God. A man 
may work in dependence on himself, and he may work in dependence on God. Self- 
exertion is only rightly estimated when it is seen as loyalty and service to God (comp. 
Phil. ii. 12, 13, and illustrate by the prophet's putting his hand on the king's hand when 
the king drew the bow). 

III. Self-exebtion should be divinely estimated. The question is not what 
men think of our energy and enterprise. It is — What does God think of it? Does he 
see it as a trying to push beyond him, and to be independent of him ? or does he see 
it to be loyal and loving working with him? If the latter, then his blessing is upon 
the righteous. — R. T. 

Ver. 3. — Children a man's reward. The picture presented is of the Hebrew man in 
mid-life, at rest in his country home, with his sturdy sons about him ; his wife is still 
young; her fair daughters are like cornices sculptured as decorations for a palace" 
(Isaac Taylor). The Jews at all times of their history esteemed a large family one of 
the chief of blessings. " The Oriental view interweaves itself with the religious creed 
of the Brahmins, according to which a son, by offering the funeral libation, is said to 
procure rest for the departed spirit of his father." By " reward " we may understand 
" sign of Divine favour." The reward of a whole life's goodness cannot come until the 



f8. oxxvii. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 233 

life is completed. Signs of Divine favour cheer and encourage as life progresses. Some 
married people do not have families, but we have no right to regard the withholding 
as a judgment. We need only say that, when children are sent, they are a sign ol 
Divine favour. And this is not saying that all children who come into the world come 
as a Divine reward. We are exclusively dealing with the families of God's people, and 
all we have said is stiictly true of them. There is a great compensation for persons 
who have no children, in the fact that they often have an unusual love for other people's 
children, and skill in ministering to them. This is illustrated in Sunday schools, 
ministers, orphan and outcast institutions, etc. 

I. Children bewabd a man in what thet theubelteb abe. A man has no 
pleasure in life that can equal his joy in his children, who bear his image, and in 
miniature reproduce himself. Their ways, their talk, their crudities, their innocence, 
their unfolding, their very frailties, are a perpetual interest, relief, and pleasure. 1'be 
child-ministry of childhood is seldom sufficiently estimated. Illustration may be taken 
from McLeod's ' Wee Davie ; * or the more recent story of ' Bootle's Baby.' 

II. Children bewabd a man in what thet become. For a man lives over 
again in the success of bis children. He is proud of their well-grown healthy bodies; 
of their developed and cultured minds ; of their honourable and useful positions. A 
man never feels to have lived in vain when he leaves a respectable and well-ordered 
family behind him. 

III. Children bewabd a man in what thet do fob him. This is especially in 
the psalmist's mind. The good man who has good children has a fortune laid up 
against old age and infirmity safer far than shares in joint-stock companies. His 
every need will be safely met by the response child-love will make to all bis sacrifices 
in ^ys gone by. — R. T. 

Ver. 4. — Children a man's power. "As arrows are in the band of a mighty man ; so 
are children of the youth." They are his effective agents in the battle of life. This 
is illustrated in many a business. The man is greatly helped as difficulties develop, 
and responsibilities increase, who has his own sons to share his burdens. The service 
of hirelings, however devoted and faithful, can never equal that of sons. A man 
gradually outgrows the toiling part of life. He may think and plan better than ever ; 
but the executive power fails ; and it is well if sons arise to be not only arrows, but 
even arms, for him. In the entire active sphere of life a man's sons may come to take 
bis place. 

I. Childben are a man's foweb when bioet belationb ABE maintained. The 
assumption of the psalm is that they are maintained. The godly man's God-fearing 
children alone are in thought. When children grow up wilful, wayward, unsonlike, 
they are a man's weakness. They are arrows bent from the straight, which may do 
more mischief than good. So on children the Word of God presses the duty of main- 
taining the family relation, and " honouring the father and the mother." And the 
relation must be preserved right up to the close of life. For long a son stands ivith 
his father; the time comes when he may have to stand ybr his father. Neglect of, and 
cruelty to, aged parents belong to heathenism, not to the religion of the etern-al Father. 

II. Children abe a man's foweb when bight ohabacteb is odltubed. What 
children are to their parents will uf necessity depend much on natural disposition. 
Even an affectionate disposition finds expression in various forms. But it depends 
very much more on home-training. Parents may make themselves too independent, 
and, seeking little help from their children, get but little when they sorely need it. 
True home-culture nourishes mutual service. Only out of the practice of a common 
service can the special ministries of times of strain be found to grow. — B. T. 

Ver. 6. — Children a man's security. The sons of a man's youth-time are specially 
mentioned, because they would naturally grow up to be a support and protection to 
their father in his old age, when he would most need their support. If he should be 
involved in a lawsuit, his stalwart sons would not suffer ikight to prevail against right. 
Some think the reference is to a battle fought with besiegers at the gates. But the 
peaceful association is better, " Unjust judges, malicious accusers, and false witnesses 
were shy and faint-hearted before a family so capable of defending itself." 



234 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxxvin. I— flu 

I. Children a sECtjRiTT aoaikst povebtt. How this comes round to the aged 
is Sillily illustrated by the number of old people who eud their days in a workhouse ; 
and by the number of cases in which business men keep too long in business, and 
fail to adjust their methods to new times. Many an old man has wrecked a good 
business simply by keeping it on too long. If there are children, they arrest the 
decaying process, bring in new life, and so keep away the poverty which would 
otherwise enter as an armeil man. 

II. Children a seoubitt against appliotion. There is nothing sadder than the 
aged man, in invalid condition, tended only by strangers. No matter what may be 
the form which the decay of nature takes, there is relief — the best relief — if the aged 
parent is tended and cared for by his own children. And there are annals of heroism, 
which relate the self-denying devotion of children, who have taken away well-nigh all 
the bitterness and strain of last months of afSiction. 

III. Children are a secdbitt against enemies. For a man may suffer, worthily 
or unworthily, through his own weaknesses, or throngh persistent malice, right up to the 
clof^e of his life. It makes one sad to think of David, not only groaning about enemies 
in his old age, but speaking bitterly about them. But they rage in vain, and must 
leave the old man in peace, if his sons are round him, and defending him. To him they 
may be "sons of peace." — E. T. 

Ver. 1. — The Divine Builder. (For the opening or reopening of a church.) " Except 
tho Lord build the house," etc. 

I. Our dependence upon God for all real prospeeitt. 1. Consider the 
material of the house we a/re huilding. " Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and 
that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" " Ye also as living stones, are built up a spiritual 
house," etc. The spiritual temple dwarfs the most magnificent material cathedrals. 
2. The Divine implements employed on the huilding. Spiritual men working with 
Divine truths — the gospel — to build up a spiritual edifice. But some conditions to he 
remembered. (1) That the qualifications for such work are God-given, " By tbe grace 
of God I am what I am." (2) Even then we are still dependent upon the co-operative 
blessing of God's Spirit. " So then neither is be that planteth anything [alone], neither 
he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase." The soul like an organ. The 
keys give no musical response to the touch of the most skilful player till the wind is 
passed to the pipes. 

II. How dependence upon God mat best be promoted. 1. By the most strenuous 
spiritual effort on our part. This no paradox; for the more we aim to do for God, the 
more shall we feel the need of God to give us true success. 2. By constantly thinking 
of the greatness of his work, and the littleness of our faculties in relation to it. Men 
succeed in grand material enterprises and intellectual achievements — construct mighty 
bridges and steam-engines — and write magnificent books und poems j but to win men 
to Christ a good life is the most ardnous work in life, demanding the highest inspira- 
tions of the mind. 3. We must realize the spirit of dependence hy the constant help of 
prayer. To know th« value of work we must put ourselves forth in constantly renewed 
endeavour ; but our highest work can be sustained only by the help of the devoutest 
prayer. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 
PSALM cxxvin. 



It Is not quite easy to see why this psalm 
ooours among tbe " Songs of Ascents." 
The sentiment of it is that true religion 
never loses its reward ; or, in other words, 
that whoever fears God shall be blessed. 
Five points of blessedness are enumerated 
(vera. 2, 3, 5, 6) ; but no one of them seems 



to attach especially to pilgrims visiting 
Jerusalem. The picture of domestic life is 
pleasing, and one scarcely touched by any 
other psalmist. 

Ver. 1, — Blessed is everyone that feareth 
the lord (eomp. Pss. oxii. 1 ; oxv. 13); that 
walketh in his ways. The psalmist nssumes 
that true reliKinus fear of God, and a good 
and holy life, will necessarily go together. 



w. oxxviii. 1 — 6.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



235 



The point on which he wishes to insist is 
tliat on every such case will rest God's 



Ver. 2. — ^FoT thon shalt eat the labour 
of thine hands. This is the first point of the 
" blebBedness." God's faithful servant shall 
enjoy the fruits of his own industry, and not 
have them devoured by strangers (comp. 
Deut. zxviii. 33; Lev. zxvi. 16; Ps. cix. 
11). Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be 
well with thee ; rather, happy tlum, and 
well is it with thee (comp. Deut. zxsiii. 
29). 

Ver 3. — Thy wife shall be as a fruitfal 
vine by the sides (rather, in the inner 
chambers ) of thine house. The second point 
of blessedness is a fruitful wife, content to 
dwell in the female apartments of the house, 
to keep at home (Titus ii. 5) and guide the 
household. Thy children like olive plants ; 
or, "olive shoots " — the vigorous ofifsets from 
an aged olive tree, which spring up around 
it, ready to take its place. Sound about thy 
table. Clustering around thy board, at once 
a source of cheerfulness and strength (see 
Pb. oxxvii. 5). This is the third point of 
bleuedneaa. 



Yer. 1. — Behold, that thus shall the man 
be blessed that feareth the Lord. The 
promise must not be regarded as universal 
and absolute, but as general and admitting 
exceptions. Still, even under the new 
covenant, "Godliness has the promise of 
the life that now is, and of that which is to 
come"(l Tim.iv. 8). 

Ver. S.— The Lord shall bless thee out of 
Ziou. To the Israelite all blessings came 
out of Zion, which he regarded as God's 
earthly dwelling-place. And thou shalt see 
the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life. 
The " good of Jerusalem " seems to mean 
here the " good fortune," or " prosperity," of 
Jerusalem. To see this would add still 
further to the blessedness of God's faithful 
servant. 

Yer. 6. — ^Tea, then shalt see thy children's 
children. This is mentioned as the crown- 
ing blessing granted to Job in his second 
period of happiness (Job xlii. 16). It is 
here promised to the faithful generally. 
And peaoe upon Israel. This is best taken 
as a detached clause, like the concluding 
clause of Ps. cxxv, and rendered, "Peace 
be upon laraeL" 



HOMILETIOS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Present recompense. It is quite certain that the true and loyal serrant 
of Ood will be abundantly rewarded ; it is not certain when or Junv he wUl receire his 
recompense. There are three spheres in which that reward may lie. It may be 
largely, almost wholly, m the future. Bitter and protracted persecution may make the 
present life nearly worthless, so far as happiness is concerned (see 1 Cor. xt. 19). Or 
it may be largely in the sphere of the spiritual — in the cleansed and pure heart ; in 
elevation of character ; in fellowship with God. Or it may be partly in the present 
and the temporal. Commonly, God rewards his children in all these ways. Our text 
deals with the last and least of these. If a man fears God and keeps his command- 
ments, he will, under ordinary conditions, have, as the token of Divine favour — 

I. The bbapino op the fbuit of his LABonR. He "eats the labour of his hands." 
The builder rejoices in the house which he has erected, the farmer in the fields he has 
made productive, the florist in the garden he has planted, the author in the book he 
has written, the state'sman in the measures he has passed into law, etc. A] art from 
the physical comfort it may bring us, we have a pure pleasure in the effect of honest 
and faithful work. And if a man cherishes a humble and grateful spirit, it is per- 
missible that he enjoys the success which he has achieved, and the honour or the 
pleasure he has earned by patient industry. 

II. Domestic delights. 1. Conjugal. (Ver. 3.) The wife to her husband, the 
husband to his wife, is a " goodly heritage " — a joy and a treasure which no prince can 
confer, no money will buy. True conjugal affection, the outgrowth of mutual esteem, 
is a source of lasting and elevating gladness of heart, for which all who have 
possessed it should give heartiest thanks to the Giver of all good. And with a sense 
of recipiency should be associated a sense of duty ; it becomes husband and wife to 
maintain through life the sweetness and excellency of this attachment ; to do this by 
mutual courtesy, self-sacrifice, concession, tender ministry in health and in sickness, 
united effort on behalf of others. 2. Parental. (1) Children should be welcomed as 
precious gifts from the kind hanii of God (see Ps. cxxvii. 3 — 5 ; Gen. xxxiii. 5). They 
■' bring love with them," we say ; but they do more than that — they open our nature 



236 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxxtoi. 1— C 

and call forth its best affections ; tiiey unseal fountains of purest feeling which other- 
wise would not have flowed forth ; they immeasurably enrich our souls and our lives 
by the love they evoke and by the love they return. They to whoiu children are not 
given will render themselves a most valuable service and give themselves the best 
opportunity of duing good, by adopting the fatherless and the motherless, and making 
them their own. Childien, if ordinarily affectionate, will soon excite tender feeling in 
the breast; and many are they who have learnt to love the child of th ir adoption with 
a warmth and with a depth of love that went far beyond their anticipation, and that 
greatly enlarged their heart and enhanced the value of their life. (2) Ctiildrcn should 
be treated as the most sacred charge placed in the hand of man by the hand of God. 
No one can tell the capacities and possibilities that are fulded in the form and hidden 
in the heart of a little child. (3) Children should realize how much they owe to those 
who have expended on them the wealth of a parent's love. It becomes them to be a 
constant source of joy at home, and to be a defence and protection against all that 
would invade its peace (see Fs. cxxvii. 6). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The secret of the happy home. I. The fbae of the Lord. 1. ThU U 
not a slavish/ear, but that reverent and loving regard tu the Lord's will, in all things, 
which will make a man shrink from transgression. 2. He has this blessed fear who 
himielf has known the loving-kindnens of the Lord, and whose love has been wakened 
up thereby. This fear of the Lord is the essential foundation of the tiuly happy home. 

3. Jt must be in the head of the household, and should be in the wife and children too. 
Indeed, if husband and wile are not uf one mind in this respect, it is difficult to see 
how their home can be happy. 

XL Where this is, the fatheb will himself be blessed. Every verse in this 
p.salm declares this, and constant experience endorses it. 1. The man shaU be blessed 
in himself. " Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee.'' The fear of God 
preserves him ; the Spirit of God rules him ; the love of God has redeemed him : he 
is happy in God. 2. He is blessed in his business, (Yer. 2.) He shall not live by 
begging, by knavery, by any unworthy means, but by God's blessing upon his honest 
toU. This is the happiest way of living, and it shall be to the man who feareth the 
Lord. 3. In his home. Dear wife and children shall make him glad ; no solitary, 
loveless abode shall his be, but a home in all the blessed meaning of that word. And, 
thank God, there aie myriads such — affectionate, well-ordered, healthful, pure, bright. 

4. Se shall be blessed through the Church's ministry and fellowship. (Ver. 5.) The 
blessing of the Lord in his Church was sought on the union of his wife and himself; 
their children, one by one, were brought and presented to, the Lord in baptism, and the 
Loid's blessing sought upon and won for them ; and in the holy services of the Church 
his household is trained to tnke part. And the influence of all this on the home 
happiness is great indeed. 6. He is blessed in the guarantees that such homes as his 
give for the peace and prosperity of his country. (Vers. 5, 6.) Such homes are a 
nation's bulwarks, and do more for the good of the nation and her peace and preser- 
vation than all the munitions of war. Where such homes are, the aged are cheered by 
seeing their children's children enjoy the blessings they have helped to secure, and by 
the prospect that when they are gone their descendants will enjoy like peace. Such 
are the ijlessinsjs of him that feareth the Lord. 

III. And the wife. (Ver. 2.) She shall be as the beautiful fragrant vine, and unt 
alone in its fruitiuluess. There will he that ; she will be the joyful mother of many 
bright, happy, and healthlul children, who cling to her as the clusters do to the vine; 
but also, like the vine, she will be for the comfort and adornment of the home, 
imparting gracious shade and shelter from the heat (cf. Micah iv. 4). It is not said, 
but it is implied all through, that the same blessed fear of the Lord that dwells in her 
husband dwells also in her. 

IV. And the children. " Like olive plants." It is a common sight, in the lands 
where the olive grows, to see the parent tree surrounded, and, as it were, sustained, by 
the young olive shoots that have sprung from its roots. As they have sprung from 



PS. oxxvin. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 237 

the parent root, so they are like their parent, and tliey gather round, as the children 
do round the tahle at home. Yes, the children are as the parent. The godly man 
will be blessed in his children : their father's Qod will their God; they will hie as their 
father, and will hand on the fear of the Lord which they first learnt from him. May 
our children be as these olive plants I — S. 0. 

Vers. 3 — 6. — ** Home, tweet home!" Apart from the plain teachings of Holy 
Scripture — 

L Thb hind of Ood ib eyident ik beoabd to family lifb fbom tee ndhebioal 
EQUALiTT OF MEK AND WOMEN. It is not alone that God, in the beginning, gave one 
woman to be the wife of one man ; but his will is still expressed by the equality wliich 
seems perpetual and universal in the numbers of each sex that are born. The histories 
of patriarchs and kings who departed from this monogamic law are recorded, not for 
imitation, but for warning. No blessing ever resulted from it, but everywhere and 
always misery, discord, and strife. So it always has been, and so it ever must be. 
Family life, in the true sense of the term, was impossible in the crowded harems of 
men like David, Solomon, and so many more. It is possible only where God's 
primffival law is obeyed. 

II. From the fact of parental love, ebfeoiallt the deep BELF-BACBiFioiiia 
UOTHEB-LOVE, into wbich it is God's will that children should be born. This is to be 
the beautiful and wholesome atmosphere of the home as it generally is. The children 
bring the love for them along with them. 

III. The PRESERVATION OF THB FAMILY INSTITUTION. What othcr institution, 
civil, ecclesiastical, political, has not had its day and disappeared ? But not this. 

lY. The tbeuendous influence of the home upon the ohildben. It is not 
alone their physical existence that they owe to their parents ; but their mental, moral, 
and spiritusd characteristics are, though not absolutely, yet almost entirely, dependent 
upon their parents. No child can escape the influence of its home. 

y. How blessed ABE, AS A BULE, THE BESULTS OF THIS DiVINB ABRANOEMENT I 

What a vast proportion of the whole sum of human happiness springs from it ! The 
very word " home " has a magic power in the hearts of most men. It summons up 
memories of delight. Our Lord himself portrays heaven itself to us as " my Father's 
house" — ^his home. 

YI. Its bufbeme pubpose. (Mai. ii. 15.) Can any one conceive of a more effectual 
and more beneficent and gracious method whereby the kingdom of God should be set 
up in the world ? The Divine wisdom and love are conspicuous therein. — S. C. 

Ver. 1. — Practioalfea/r. " Feareth the Lord; that walketh in his ways." "Let us 
cultivate thai holy tilial fear of Jehovah, which is the essence of all true religion ; the 
fear of reverence, of dread to offend, of anxiety to please, and of entire submission 
and obedience. This fear of the Lord is the fit fountain of holy living ; we look in 
vain for holiness apart from it : none but those who fear the Lord will ever walk in 
his ways" (Spurgeon). The rabbis explain the sentence in this way : " Abstains from 
breaches of the prohibitory commandments of the Decalogue, and performs the positive 
ones," True fear is linked with obedience and righteousness. 

I. The feab that fabalyzeb effort. This is the fear that takes form aa/right. 
Sudden alarm often renders persons absolutely helpless. There is a moral fear of 
persons which has a similar effect. We cannot be our true selves in their presence. 
Because of overstrained nervous condition, Elijah felt this fear when he received the 
threatening message of Jezebel. But, in its bad form, this paralyzing fear is best 
illustrated by the one-talent man of our Lord's parable, who excused neglect of duty 
with the plea, "I knew thee, that thou art an austere man. And I feared." The true 
Sear of God makes such unworthy fear of any one, or anything, else impossible. 

II. The FEAB that wastes itself is sentiment. There is a fear which belongs 
only to the emotions, and is but a matter of feeling. One of the great perils of modern 
religious life is making sentiment stand in place of righteousness. The answer of the 
modern religious man to every inquiry respecting his standing and his hope, is this, 
* I have/eW." The fear of sentiment has in it more awe than love, and it is only too 
ikely to grow into demoralizing superstition, th;it coven) and excuses self-indulgence 



238 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxxvin. 1—8. 

Sentiment and superstition are always satisfied with themselves ; make a centre of self; 
and feel relieved of all claims of duty and righteousness. 

III. The tear that inspibes endbavoub. He who fears aright finds the fear 
inspire walking in ways of obedience. This is indeed the test of all forms of fear. 
The true fear of God draws us nearer to him, and puts us upon a holy anxiety to 
please him. The fear of God excites to a threefold endeavour; we want (1) to 
obpy him : (2) to honour him ; (3) to serve him. And Buch practical fear is blessed. 
— B. T. 

Ver. 2. — 3%e link between labour and reward. Labour is not a part of the judgment 
on man's fall ; the conditions under which he has to labour may be. Labour is pre- 
supposed in the nature of man, and in his relations to the material world in which he 
is placed. There is a fixed, natural, and necessary connection between labour and 
reward ; but man's frailties and sins, with their consequences, make contingent what 
should be necessary. And so the reaping of reward for toil comes properly to be regarded 
as a sign of Divine working; an intervention and overruling of Divine providence. A 
very curious instance of the way in which nature illustrates even human wrong- 
doing is seen in the fish-eating bird, that will not fish for himself, but watches for 
and snatches away the prey for which another bird has laboured, thus coming in 
betweenlabour and reward, as evil men so often do. 

L The natural line. God has fixed, in the order of nature, th»t profit, increase, 
shall universally attend labour. The model is found in the harvest-field. Plant a 
seed in the prepared ground, and that labour shall be rewarded with thirty, sixty, or a 
hundredfold. There is always something wrong when no reward follows labour. This 
law is as fixed as the law of the sunrising, and therefore the confidence of reward is 
always acting as an incentive to labour. 

IL The inteubuftions of the natural link. For interruptions of the natural 
order there are in this as in every other sphere of nature. It is said, " There is no law 
without exceptions." It would be better to say, " without limitations and qualifi- 
cations." Some are (1) natural. Lack of rain, locust-plague, etc., may prevent reward 
following labour in the harvest-field. Some are (2) artifieM. They arise out of men's 
enmities or wrong-doings, as when Bedouins sweep away the harvest of the farmer's 
toil. 

in. The rebtobation of the natural line. In this way the work of Divine 
grace in godly lives may be presented. Even while recognizing Divine permissions 
of calamity, we may dwell restfuUy on the assurance of Divine overruling. Just what 
God is doing in every individual and every family life of which he approves ia, remov- 
ing or restraining the artificial, and restoring the natural. — R. T. 

Ver. 3. — Family joyt. This psalm is the picture of a God-fearing father, blessed 
with wealth and offspring, and with long life to see God's blessing upon Jerusalem. 
Dr. Barry renders this verse, " Thy wife, in the inner chamber, is like the fruitful vine." 
Vines in the East are not usually trained over houses, or on walls. The vine is an 
emblem chiefly of fruitfulness, but perhnps also of dependence, as needing support; 
the olive of vigorous, healthy, joyous life. " We see the father of the family, working 
hard no doubt, but recompensed for all his pains by an honourable competence, 
and the mother, instead of seeking distraction outside her home, finding all her 
pleasures in the happiness of her numerous children, who, fresh and healthy as young 
saplings, gather round the simple but ample board." " Olive plants " are illustrated 
thus : "This aged and decayed tree is surrounded, as you see, by several young and 
thrifty shoots, which spring from the root of the venerable parent. They seem to 
uphold, protect, and embrace it. We may even fancy that they now bear that load 
of fruit which would otherwise be demanded of the feeble parent." 

I. Pamilt jots come out of family toil. One idler in a family spoils the 
family joy. Each member must have his or her sphere, and love work. The self- 
indulgent member, the ne'er-do-well, the spendthrift, is the household anxiety. In 
common and united labour is found the family satisfaction. 

II. Family joys come out of bblativity. Baoh member is an individual with 
marked individuality. A puzzle-shaped piece. 'I'heie is trouble when the pieces do 



PB. oxxviii. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 289 

not fit to one another. The secret of family joy is each one getting shaped to the 
other, so that individuality is perfected in relationship. 

III. Family jots comb out of affectiom. There is a peculiar feeling toward 
each other cherished by members of one family. We call it family affection. Illus- 
trate by the joy of times of family reunion; and show how that affection helps family 
relations and sanctifies family fellowship. 

IV. Family joys come out of fiett. Which is the recognition of another and 
all-hallowing family life. For piety is no other than a realization of our family life 
with God. And the more worthily we respond to that, the more skilfully and succese- 
fully we meet the obligations of the family life on earth. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 4. — The present blessings of the pious. Dr. Binney, in his day, made some com- 
motion by his book on * Making the Best of Both Worlds.' And yet he did but write 
in the line of all Old Testament teaching ; in accordance with the teaching of our 
Divine Lord, " Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these 
things shall be added unto you ; " and after the firm declaration of St. Paul, " Godliness 
is protitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that 
which is to come." We ought to have outlived all possibility of misappreliending 
such teaching; and yet there are still among us those who see in religion only a 
safety for the world to come, which permits indifference to the interests of the present. 
"Living on high" is too often confused with "living on yonder." And it is too 
readily forgotten that this world is just as truly, and just as much, God's world as any 
other world can be. The devil talked about giving the world to Jesus ; but a good 
many people besides the devil have offered to give what never was and never will be 
theirs. " The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof ; the round world, and they 
ihat dwell therein." 

L The mobal influence of deferred blessing. It must be distinctly recog- 
nized that the immediate connection between happiness and piety is never guaranteed. 
The connection is, but the immediacy is not. If man was beyond the need of moral 
training, happiness and piety might have no break between them. But man has to 
learn to trust. It is a lesson that is only learned in the school of deferred hope. 

II. The moral influence of bestowed blessings. For, as a rule, the good man 
is happy in his goodness, and happy through his goodness. And that sign of Divine 
favour tends to nourish and culture humility and thankfulness. In true-minded 
persons to win may be a peril by nourishing pride ; but to receive never is a peril, for 
it nourishes humility. The wonder of the grateful man is the blessing of which he is 
the recipient. So God works his work of grace by his benedictions. 

III. The moral influence of promised blessings. If the present is bright, we 
look up rather than on. If the present is dark, we look on rather than vp. We do 
not always want the future ; it is suflBciently guaranteed by God's grace in the present 
But there are times of bodily frailty and trying circumstance, when hope dies down in 
the soul. Then it is we need the cheer of visions of the city of everlasting good, and 
love, and life.— E. T. 

Ver. 6. — Length of life a recognition cf famUy goodness. Notice that the welfare of 
the family and the welfare of the state are indissolubly connected. The expression, 
"children's children" is literally, "and see thou sons to thy sons." "Long life 
crowns all temporal favours." Solomon says that "children's children are the crown of 
old men." " The good man is glad that a pious stock is likely to be continued ; he 
rejoices in the belief that other homes as happy as his own will be built up, wherein 
altars to the glory of God shall smoke with the morning and evening sacrifice. This 
promise implies long life, and that life rendered happy by its being continued in our 
offspring. It is one token of the immortality of man that he derives joy from extend- 
ing his life in the lives of his descendants.'' 

I. Length of life is but a weariness under some conditions. In itself there 
is no special good in long life. When a man has done his work, he is ready for his 
work under the next set of conditions. Bunyan may picture a " Land of Beulah," but 
the years of retirement, after business life is over, are seldom an unmixed and unquali- 
fied joy. The " Preacher's " description of painful, wearying old age is often realized. 



240 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxxix. 1—8 

Godless old age, with its crushing burden of youthful sins, is a miserable business-, 
and even the godly man finds the waiting years wearily weighted with pain and 
suffering. And prolonged liCe is especially weary when a man outlives all his famil> 
and friends ; and, after having been wrapped about, all his life, with family love, is 
dependent on strangers. It is one joy of family life that this seldom happens when 
a man has his quiver full of children. 

II. Lenqth of life is but a blessing unseb some oonditions. There is nothing 
more beautiful in social life than reverent, honoured, upright old age. The value of old 
men's influence on ub is suggested by that pathetic interest we have in their lovely white 
hair. Let a man but keep healthy, and quick-minded to the changing interests of the 
passing age, and prolonged life can bo nothing but a joy to him. Under the same 
conditions, his continuance is nothing but a joy and blessing to his family, who make 
him the centre which holds them all in a loving and mutually helpful unity. And 
under the same conditions, old men are nothing but a blessing to the state, which is 
kept steady by the conservative goodness of its aged members. — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — A sunny picture of the life of a good man. " Blessed is every one that 
feareth the Lord," etc. 

I. The greatest, most influential, belioion is compounded of "the feab" 
OF the conscience and the trust and love of the heabt. "The fear" is the 
elevating tear of offending against the highest law, and the strongest, tenderest love — 
one of the holiest feelings that Christ has generated in the new life. 

II. Such a continuation eesults in the best, most obedient, life. "That 
walketh in his ways." The " walking " in the ways of God is the habitual life of 
God-iike ways — nut any occasional outburst of righteous impulses or endeavours. The 
walk of a man in his settled character. 

III. Such a life gives him a loftt independenoe. " He eats of the labour of 
his hands." He enjoys the satisfaction of living upon his own labour, and not upon 
what others have done for him. This entails health, competence, and the high$st 
prosperity. " Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee." 

IV. And FBODU0E8 also the happiness of the home life. The wife is the 
image of rich abundance ; the children, of vigorous health. This is supposed princi- 
pally to spring from the life and influence of the good man — his life is reproduced in 
the life of the wife and children ; and they depend upon him, as the vine depends 
upon that to which it clings. The whole passage is richer in what it suggests than in 
what it pictures. 

V. Such a man stands in useful and happt belations with the Chuboh 
AND the citt. (Ver. 6.) He is blessed out of Zion, and sees the good of Jerusalem. 
Individual character is the centre of all life, both in Church and State ; and when each 
is filled with the power of Christ in his personal life, he helps to flood the life of the 
Church and of the State with the only enduring elements of the highest prosperity. 

VI. He bejoioeb in a happt old age, and in the companionship of bib 
childben'b childben. The good man, whose affections and sympathies remain pure 
down to old age, takes great delight in children and grandchildren, and sees in uem 
the pledges of future peace to the Church and the country.— S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXXIX. 
This psalm consists of a retrospect (vers- 
1 — 4) and an anticipation (vers. 5 — 8). The 
retrospect shows lBr«eloppresBeil by enemies 
for a long term of years, but finally vindicated 
and delivered (ver. 4). The anticipation 
•hows her enemies afflicted in their torn, 



and niffering the Jost reward for their mis- 
deeds. 

Ver. I. — Kany a time have they afflicted 
me from my youth. Israel's recollection is 
one of frequent, almost constant, " affliction." 
She has been downtrodden beneath the feet 
of Egyptians, Moabites, Mesopotamians, 
Canaanites, Ammonites, Philistines, Syrians, 



PS. oxxix. 1 — 8.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



241 



AssyriaDB, Babylonians. Hor enfferings 
began in her extreme youth, aa soon as she 
was a nation (Exod L 11—22). May Israel 
now say; ratlioi, let Israel now tay. The 
psalmist directs his countrymen to look 
back upon their past history. 

Yer. 2. — Many a time have they afflicted me 
from my yonth. The repetition emphasizes 
the faot of Israel's long and bitter suffering. 
Tet they have not pievailed against me. 
Israel has not been given as a prey to the 
heathen's teeth (Pd cxxiy. 6). She is still 
B nation, unbubduod ; she holds her own ; 
the struggle is not ended. 

Ver. 3. — The plowers plowed npon my 
back. A strong metaphor, which does not 
elsewhere occur. The idea is perhaps taken 
from the cruel treatment of captives in 
those days, who, in certain cases, were " put 
under saws and harrows of iron " (2 Sam, 
xii. 31), or, as it is elsewhere expressed, 
"threslied with threshing instruments of 
iron " (Amos i. 3). They made long their 
furrows; i.e. "lengthened out their tor- 
tures." 

Ver. 4. — The Lord is righteous. Still, 
God is just. He allowed these sufferings 
to be inflicted on ns because we deserved 
them; and he interposed on our belialf 
when we had been sufficiently punished, 
and cut asunder the cords of the wicked 
Cut, i.e., the cords wherewith they had 
bound us. The "retrospect" here ends, 
and in the next verse the "antioipntion" 
begins. 

Yer. S. — Let them all he oonfonnded ; or, 



" they shall all be confounded," or " put to 
shame." And turned back. Made to turn 
their backs upon their foes. That hate Zion. 
That have shown themselves enemies to 
Israel. The main verbs are in the future 
tense, but maybe taken as expressive either 
of a wish or uf a confident expectation. 

Yer. 6.— Let them be as the grass npon 
the house-tops; literally, they shall be as 
the grass of house-tops. The flat roofs of 
Oriental houses are usually covered in early 
spring with a crop of bright-green grass. 
But the scorching rays of the sun soon burn 
this up, and it becomes dry and withered 
(see ' The Land and the Bnok,' p. 682 ; and 
comp. Isa. xxxvii. 27). Which withereth 
afore it groweth up ; literally, be/ore it is 
unsheathed ; i. e. before the blossom has left 
the sheath in wliich it is formed. 

Ver. 7. — Wherewith the mower flUeth not 
his hand. Wliich is so worthless that no 
one takes the trouble to mow it. Nor he 
that bindeth sheaves his bosom. Much less 
does any one bind it into sheaves and store 
it away. 

Yer. % — Neither do they whioh go by aay. 
The blessing of the Lord be upon you ; we 
bless you in the name of the Lord. Har- 
Testers were thus greeted (Bnth ii. 4), and 
still are to this day. " These expressions," 
says Dr. Thomson, " are most i efreshingly 
Arabic Nothing is more natural than for 
Arabs, when passing by a frnit-tree or corn- 
field loaded with a rich crop, to exclaim, 
Barak Allah! 'God bless youl'" ('The 
Land and the Book,' p. 682). 



HOMILBTIO& 

Vera. 1—8. — StK a failure. Neither the violence of sin agtunst others nor Its effort 
on its own behalf is successful. 

L The failuee of its violbnob. The enemies of Israel are regarded as the enemies 
of the Lord ; their attempts to despoil and destroy Israel were sins against God. They 
consequently proved to be utter failures. They were mercilessly cruel ; they " ploughed 
upon the back, and made long their furrows ; they strove to enslave with their strong 
cords (ver. 4), but " they did not prevail " (ver. 2); their cords were cut asunder (ver. 
4). Israel survived the hardships of Egypt and the captivity of Babylon. Many 
nations and communities have passed through similar afflictions and oppressions, but 
they have borne them bravely ; they may even have been the purer, the stronger, the 
more united, for all they haVe suffered. Many a man can speak in the same strain ; 
his history has been one of struggle and hardship in youth, of toil in mid-life, of deliver- 
ance and gratitude in later years. He has lived to see his oppressors humbled, to find 
that they who offend God by ill treating his servants come to shame and sorrow. The 
most striking lesson of the psalm is — 

II. 'The degenebaoy of sin. The psalmist prays (or states) that those who " bate 
Zion'' niay be like the grass which has no depth of earth, which withers before it 
attains maturity, which falls short of the blessing which the well-planted corn enjoys 
(vers. 6 — 8). Here are two evils which the unholy have to face. 1. Early wUheritig. 
(1) Sin often leads down to some form of vice, some evil habit which is at variance 
with the laws of our nature and the will of God. We know what that means. It 

PBALMS — m. * 



242 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxxix. 1— 8. 

means the drying up of the distinctively human resources; it means loss of physical 
vitality ; it means the fading of mental power ; it means the degeneracy of the soul. 
The end is not far off ; before it has fully " grown up," before the zenith of life is 
reached, the constitution is wrecked, the darkness of death has fallen. (2) Sin is 
selfishness, very often worldliness and vanity. And either of these ends in a sad 
spiritual withering. The heart closes up; there is no expansion, no ripening, no fruit- 
bearing under the gracious influences of Divine love and human pity aud holy fellow- 
ship. Long before bodily death arrives, spiritual destruction has come. 2. The loss of 
the higher good. The man who is living under the dominion of sin and selfishness 
misses all that is worthiest and best. In his life is no such scenery as that so beau- 
tifully sketched in the psalm. He has to go without the blessing of Grod and the 
benediction of his kind. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8.— 2%e Divine life. This psalm is capable of a threefold application. It 
tells of the Divine life — 

I. In Israel. 1. The existence of the chosen people was a lifelong strtiggle. The 
sounds of battle and war are never, save but for short intervals, absent from their 
history. From the oppression they had to endure in Egypt right down to the time 
when this psalm was composed, they never lacked enemies who "fought against" 
them, and did them all the harm they could. 2. But their enemies never altogether 
prevailed. (Ver. 2.) Sooner or later deliverance came. Such a deliverance had just 
now come, and hence this psalm. And the complete deliverance which is still needed 
for Israel we may well believe, from the records of the past, will, in God's good time 
be forthcoming. 3. The sufferings which they caused them were very great. (Ver. 3.) 
As the ploughshare tears up the soil, so the lacerating scourge tore their flesh. In 
these psalms we yet hear the wail of their lamentations and their exceeding bitter cry 
(see Pss. cxziv., cxxxvii., and many more ; comp. Isa. i. 6 ; 11. 23). 4. The Lord 
true to his covenant, put an end to their sufferings. As when the cords, the traces that 
fasten the oxen to the plough, are out, the plough comes to a standstill, so the dread 
plough of suffering, which ploughed such agunizing furrows in their souls, was brought 
to a standstill ; for the Lord cut asunder the cords. 5. But the hitter memory begot 
bitter prayers, (Vers. 6 — 8.) That those who bo dealt with them may be ashamed, 
defeated, despised as worthless, like the grass that springs up and at ooce withers 
because on the house-top there can be no depth of earth, and hence such grass is of no 
value at all (of. Isa. xxxvii. 27), and that they may be such as no blessing of the Lord 
ean rest upon (ver. 8). Before we condemn such prayers, we should put ourselves in 
the place of those who offered them. They may not be Christian any mtjre than war 
is always Christian, but they are very natural. They are not the utterances of personal 
revenge, but prayers for the overthrow of those who hated Zion, and who were the 
enemies of God as well as of Zion. Nevertheless, in spite of all, Israel was preserved 
of God. 

II. In the Chuech. Verse by verse the words of the psalm tell of her experience. 
Cradled in conflict, oppressed with suffering, " fought against " by enemies one after 
another, varied in kind, but all terrible, yet never really defeated — " they have not 
prevailed against me ; " go may the Church say. And long ago the Lord has out 
asunder, for the most part, the cords whereby the cruel ploughshare of persecution was 
dragged over the bleeding flesh of the peojile of God. Our freedom should kindle and 
keep glowing our sympathy with those Christians who, in the dominions of the 
" unspeakable Turk," are yet subjected to horrible atrocities. Oh that the Lord may 
soon cut asunder those cords, and set his people free I Nor are the prayers against the 
perpetrators of such atrocities with whicli this psalm closes improper for us''and still 
less for those who endure such wrongs. But God's Church ever lives. 

III. In the individoal soul. Again is this psalm the transcript of the history of 
the life of God, but now as existing in the soul of the individual Christian. The 
enemies now are not of flesh and blood, but spiritual, and, therefore, yet more terrible. 



PB. oxxix. 1— «.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 243 

For they who hurt the body soon have no more that they can do; hnt these can 
eternally torment us — they can destroy both soul and body in hell. Therefore we 
may well, as Christ bids us, fear them. Nor are the most terrible of the prayers in 
these imprecatory psalms out of place when we think of these foes. We are bound to 
hate tbem and pray against them, and by God's help we will. — S. C. 

Ver. 1. — Our seven sorrows. " Many a time have they afflicted me ; " so many times 
that it seemed useless to try and count them up. It is enough to represent them by 
one number, and that the representative nf completeness, seven times. Israel may be 
said, as a nation, to have had an all-round experience of affliction and discipline. 
Eliphaz the Temanite speaks rightly to Job for God when he says, " He shall deliver 
thee in six troubles ; yea, in seven there shall be no evil touch thee " (Job v. 19). 

I. A FACT OF THE NATIONAL HISTOBT. So far as the recofd reveals that history, it 
appears to be a series of calamities and distresses; some brought about by charac- 
teristic national frailties, some by individuals forcing their wilfulnesses, some by 
untoward circumstances, arid some by the active schemes of enemies. It would even 
seem that national sorrows are so well represented in this history that we may speak 
of its " seven sorrows ; " and we may find the mission of all forms of human trial 
illustrated in the moral influence of these calniuities and woes of Israel. But we need 
not assume that its experiences were unique. Every natinn is born of, and moulded 
by, similar troubles. The peculiarity of Israel does not lie in its experiences, but in 
the reading of its experiences. The Bible reads them in the light of Jehovah's relation 
to them. This is the only true reading of human history, and all history needs to be 
read in this light. God is in the sorrows of a nation. 

II. A FACT OF THE INDIVIDUAL HiSTORT. It do8s not matter where, or under what 
circumstances, or iu what relations, a man's life is lived. A man is " bom to trouble as 
the sparks fly upward." No man can escape it. It would be his curse if he could. 
A man can, as a moral being, become righteous ; but there is no school in which he 
can be trained for righteousness save the school of affliction. It is no ground of boast- 
ing to any man that his life has been free from trials. If a man may boast at all, be 
should boast over his " seven sorrows," because he may indulge the hope that God's 
grace has been mighty in him, and he has come into much sanctifying discipline. 
— E. T. 

Ver. 3. — The figure of the torn land. The expression, "They made long their 
furrows," can only be understood through the peculiar conditions of Eastern ploughing. 
The word "furrow " (jnaanah) signifies a strip of arable land which the ploughman 
takes in hand at one time, at both ends of which, consequently, the ploughing team 
always comes to a stand, turns round, and begins a new furrow. Since the ordinary 
ox of Palestine is smaller and weaker than ours, and easily becomes tired under the 
yoke, which presses heavily on its neck and confines its neck, they are obliged to give 
it time to recover its strength by frequent resting. This always takes place at the 
termination of a furrow, when ihe peasan' raises the unwieldy plough out of the earth, 
and turns it over, clearing off the moist earth with the small shovel at the lower end 
of the goad, and hammering the loosened edses and rings tight again, during which 
time the team is able to recover itself by resting. They do not, therefore, make the 
furrows of great length. The figure of this verse is explained by the over-exhaustion 
of the oxen, if the furrows through which they had to drag the plough were made 
overlong. The suggestion of the ' Speaker's Commentary' is less natural. It takes 
the verse as a figure of scourging. (Improving on this, Dr. Wordsworth finds anti- 
cipation of the scourging of Christ.) " The lashes inflicted upon the back of the 
writhing slave by a cruel master are compared to the long furrows pierced in the 
passive earth by the share of the plougher." The figure must be explained in the 
light of the memories cherished by the psalmist, as representing the nation just 
returned from captivity. And the nation is symbolized by the land in which the 
nation dwelt. 

I. Israel's sorrows had been like the work of a ploitgh in the land. Atten- 
tion is indeed fixed only on the tearing open and turning over (f the land; but we 
need not miss seeing that this stern dealing was the necessary preliminary to seed- 



244 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pe. oxxix. I— 8, 

sowing and fruitage. (Compare " No trial for the present seemeth to be joyous," etc.) 
Better be torn land than harvestless land. 

II. The AOENT8 OF Israel's soerows had overdone theib wobk. They had gone 
beyond their commission, had Increased the length of the furrow. So we often think 
of our sorrows when we try to estimate their moral value. But that is what we can 
never do wisely. They never do go beyond God-arranged limit8.^B. T. 

Ver. ii— Righteousness may involve Judgment. The cutting asunder of cords fignra- 
tively presents the liberating of Israel from the Babylonian captivity, and also the yet 
earlier ezperience of the nation, when Jehovah cut the cords of Egypt, and set his 
people free. This is the consideration which relieves the psalmist's strain in thinking 
how many Israel's trials had been, and how greatly her enemies had enjoyed inflicting 
them. " Jehovah is righteous." There is always security and rest in that conviction. 
" He will not suffer us to be tempted above ttiat we are able to bear." Men or cir- 
cumstances may put cords about us. Whenever he sees it right to do so, our Gkid 
can "cut the cords asunder." Men may "hate Zion," and gladly do her a mischief; 
but this we may always rely on — God can " confound them and turn them back," as 
he did the Syrians in the days of Elisha. "If God be for us, who can be against us?" 
Bighteousness is a many-sided and many-related thing. 

L BlQHTEOnSNESS BEARS BELATION TO THE WORLD AS A WHOLE. It mUSt be SUch 88 

every one sooner or later can recognize. It must have in view the well-being of the 
whole ; and this involves that it must not let evil go unpunished ; it must bring judg- 
ment on the wicked. For the world's sake the righteous God must be active against 
all unrighteousness. 

XL BiaHTEonsNESS bears relation to the iNDivinnAL. And in a life very various 
moral moods and conditions are represented. God must answer to all the moods if he 
is righteous; and this involves trial for reproof, and judgment for correction. Gkid 
smiting his people is not only God actins; in love, it is God acting in righteousness. 
" I know that in faithfulness thou hast afflicted me." 

IIL Riohteousnebb bears relation to the agents of national and xndividdal 
AFFLICTION. This is symbolically taught in God's prophecy concerning Egypt, as the 
oppressor of his people, " And also that nation whom they shall serve wiU I judge." 
And so Babylon, the agent of the Captivity, was to be judged. It needs to be seen 
that the fact of God's using Balaam, or Egypt, for his purposes does not relieve them 
from the re^ipoDsibility of their conduct. Hating Zion may lead to action which works 
out God's purposes ; but hating Zion surely brings a man or a nation into the judg- 
ment-vindication of the righteous God. — K. T. 

Ver. 6. — A new figure of the grass. Jowett says, "At Anata, the Anathoth of 
Scripture, I observed that the roofs of some of the houses were partially covered with 
grass — a circumstance which I noticed also in several other places. As the roofs of 
the common dwellings are flat, and, instead of being built of stone or wood, are coated 
with plaster or hardened earth, a slight crop of grass frequently springs up in that 
sitnation. Such vegetation, however, having no soil into which it can strike its roots, 
and being exposed to a scorching sun, rarely attains to any great height or continues 
long. It is a feeble, stunted product, and soon withers away. Hence the sacred writer* 
sometimes allude to the grass of the house-top as an emblem of weakness, frailty, and 
certain destruction " (Isa. xxxvii. 27). The meaning of vers. 7, 8 is this — ^There will 
be no reapers of such worthless grass as this; there will be nothing to elicit the utter- 
ance of those common formulas of benediction with which passers-by were wont to 
greet harvesters. It is better to associate these verses with the short-lived enmity of 
the Samaritans to the returned exiles, than with the more systematic dealing of an 
empire like Babylon. 

L The enuitt of the Samaritans was showt. After ndn, the grass on the 
house-top springs up in a very showy and boastful way, as if it were going to do great 
things. And so the Samaritans vaunted much and taunted much, and at first seemed 
to accomplish much ; for they put cords on the restoring work of the exiles, and stopped 
the building of the temple, and prevented the building of the wall. 

II. Thb xnmitt of the Samabitaks was shobt-lived. It was met with patience. 



w. oxxix. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 246 

Tresently the energy of an Ezra and a Kehemiah, li^e an east wind or a scorching sun, 
'lopelessly cut down the blades. Persecutora of God's people are never given a " long 
tether." God's people may always pray, " Come quickly." 

III. The gnhitt of the Samaritans brouoht tubu no oood. It only spoiled 
permanently their relations with Israel, and put them out of favour with Persia, The 
mower never filled his hand with any harvest of the grass that grew on that house- 
top. The harvest of all enmities to God's people is never anything else than "a heap 
in a time of desperate sorrow." Goodness is a harvest reaped from good. — B. T. 

Ver. 8. — Politeness in the harvest-field ; vr, right relations qf employer and employed. 
Dr. S. Cox writes, " It is a graphic picture of an ancient harvest scene. The field is 
thick with waving barley. The reapers cut their way into it with sickles, grasping 
the ears till their arms are full. The overseer is busy urging on the reapers. Vessels 
filled probably with the rough local wine are at hand, that the heated and thirsty 
labourers may refresh themselves at need. As the day advances, the master of the 
estate comes to see how the work goes on. With grave, pious courtesy he salutes his 
'young men' with the words, 'Jehovah be with you I' and they reply, 'Jehovah 
bless thee ! ' It is true that this was oftentimes a mere formality ; but, even if not 
altogether realized, it shows what the social relations should be." 

I. Emplotbbs and employed sebve eaob other. So much mistake is made, and 
so much confusion is caused, by the sentiment that only the employed serve the 
employer. Things would right themselves if it was fully apprehended that the service 
is mutuaU We think the rewards of service ought to come to the employed ; but if 
the employers also ^serve, the rewards of service ought to come also to the employer. 
If they come to either the one or the other in undue measures, there must be something 
wrong in the social system, which needs readjusting. 

II. Emflotebs and employed need to trust each other. The complications 
of modern labour problems arise from the mischievous work of demagogues, who set 
class against class. The spirit of Christianity encourages mutual trust, and tends to 
bring classes together, and helps each class to consider the claims and needs of other 
classes. The dream of a universal equality has delighted and amused humanity in 
all ages, and it will to the end of the age. But it will never be more than a dream. 
Nature makes classes, and will go on making them ; and Paradise can never be gained 
otherwise than by the labourer and his master realizing the Christly spirit of mutual 
service. The master must trust the servant to render his best of service ; and the 
labourer must trust his master to give a fair and relatively proportionate reward. — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Suffering and victory. "Many a time have they afBicted me from my 
youth," etc. The connection is shown thus— 

I. The psalmist saw thes redemptive righteousness of God as supreme. (Ver. 
4.) God's strength and justice surely prevail against all the devices of evil men. 

II. Good men prevail when they use their suffering as coebbctivb discipline. 
Some of the greatest lessons of life are learned from our severest sufferings. " For I 
reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy," etc. ; " Our light 
affliction worketh out . . . while we look not at the things which are seen," etc. 

III. The opposition of enemies calls forth their greatest energies. This a 
law that operates in the physical, the intellectual, and the moral life. Stem a torrent, 
and you increase its force. An intellectual difficulty rouses us to the greatest endea- 
vour, and moral obstacles call forth our most triumphant strength, 

IV. The unrighteous are ultimately defeated in their opposition to the 
GOOD cause. (Vers. 5, 6.) They are driven back, and made ashamed of their efforts 
and designs upon the righteous cause. The psalmist is not doubtful of the final issue 
of the conflict between good and evil. The evil will wither like grass on the house-tops. 

V. The eighteous will gather the harvest op their labours amid the bene- 
dictions OF Goo AND man. (Ver. 8.) No good seed that has been sown will fail of 
a harvest more or less abundant. God and man rejoice in all good work done, what- 
ever the extent of its consequences. " Well done, good and faithful servant ; " " Blessed 
is the man that walketh not in the way of the wicked," whose '* delight is in the Law 
of the Lord."— & 



246 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[pa. cxxx. 1 — 8, 



EXPOSITION. 



PSAtM OXXX. 



The cry of Israel in extreme distress — 
apparently a Captivity song. Israel has 
sinned and been punished ; it now acknow- 
ledges its sins, and prays for mercy and for- 
giveness. Towards the end (vers. 7, 8) the 
prayer rises into confident hope. 

Metrically, the psalm consist! of fonr 
■tanzas, each of two verses. 

Ver. 1. — Out of the depths have I cried 
auto thee, Li^rd (comp. Ps. Ixix. 2, 11 ; Isa. 
li. 10; Ezek. xxvii. 34). "The depths" 
are the lowest abysses of ealnmity. They 
have not, however, separated Israel from 
God, bat have ratlier brought him to God. 

Ver. 2. —Lord, hear my voice ; i.e. " hear 
and grant my request ; " or, as explained 
in the next clause, let thine ears be atten- 
tive to the voice of my supplications. 

Ver. 3. — If thou, lord, shouldest mark 
iniquities. The Prayer-book paraphrase 
gives the true sense, "If thou. Lord, 
shooldest be extreme to mark what is done 
miss." If tliou didst not " hide our trans- 
gressions," and " cover up " half our sins — 
then, Lord, who shall standi (comp. Ps. 
Ixxvi. 7, " Who may stand in thy sight 
when once thou art angry ? "). 

Ver. 4. — But there is forgiveness with 
thee (comp. Exod. xxxiv. 7; 1 Kings viii. 
80,34,36,39, etc.; Pss. xxv. 13; xxxii. 1, 
etc.; Dan. ix. 9; 1 John i 9, etc.). That 



thou mayest be feared. Milton makes hii 
Satan say, " Then farewell hope, and, with 
hope, farewell fear!" ('Paradise Lost,' 
canto i.). And certainly the true fear of God, 
which Scripture requires in us — a reverential, 
loving fear — could not exist, unless we had 
a confident hope in God's mercy and willing- 
ness to forgive us our trespasses, if we turn 
to him. 

Ver. 5. — I wait for the Lord, my soul doth 
wait. " Waiting for the Lord " is patiently 
bearing our affliction, whatever it may be, 
and confidently looking forward to deliver- 
ance from it in God's good time. The ex- 
pression, " my soul doth wait," is stronger 
than "I wait;" it implies heart-felt trust 
and confidence. And in his word do I hope ; 
i.e. his word of promise. 

Ver. 6. — My soul waiteth for the Lord 
more than they that watch for the morning : 
I say, more than they that watch for the 
morning ; i.e. more eagerly, more anxiously, 
than even the night watchman, tired with 
his long vigil. Again the repetition adds 
force. 

Ver. 7. — Let Israel hope in the Lord ; or, 
" O Israel, hope in the Lord ; " i.e. continue 
to hope, even though in the " depths " of 
calamity (see ver. 1). For with the Lord 
there is mercy (see above, ver. 4, and the 
comment ad 'oc). And with him is plenteous 
redemption (comp. Ps cxi. 9). Euoughand 
to spare for all (see Isa. Iv. 1). 

Ver. 8. — And he shall redeem Israel from 
all his sins (comp. Pss. xxv. 22 ; ciii. 3, 4). 



HOMILETIOS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Penitence and hope. We have the psalmist here in— • 

L The depth of some great distress. It may be some severe loss he has 
sustained, and consequeat loneliness of soul ; or it may be some great disappointment 
of his hopes or defeat by the enemy; or it may be the persecution of those who 
reproach him for serious inconsistency ; or it may be peril in which his cause or his life 
is threatened ; or it may be a sad sense of personal unworthiness. But, whatever it may 
have been, it calls forth — 

II. An appeal to God. When we are in any great distress, we look up to heaven ; 
our appeal is instinctive ; even the unbelieving and the profane cry to God "out of the 
depths." It may be inarticulate, with little or no I'oundation of intelligence ; it may be 
nothing more than the outburst of a suffering spirit, making its appeal to Divine power 
aud pity. But it is a relief even to the undevout. It usually and naturally takes the 
form of— 

ill. A HUMBLE CONFESSION OF SIN. 1. Sometimes the trouble is the direct and 
palpable oon-sequence of sin, as when vice ends in sickness, or extravagance in straits, 
or crime in conviction. 2. Sometimes the sorrow is the painful and piercing conviction 
of moral guilt, of transgression against God, and condemnation by him — it may be 
the publican in the temple bowed down with a sense of sin 3. Sometimes it is the 
deep and general conviction that all sorrow is ultimately due to sin, and that when we 
•re in a very pitiful condition it is both proof and reminder that we have sinned against 



PS. cxxx. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 247 

the Lord, and that we deserve whatever kind of distress we may be experiencing. 
Sorrow proceeds from sin and points to it. 

IV. The hope of the penitent. This is not in Grod's justice, but in his mercy. 
If God were to " mark iniquities," i.e. to mark them for immediate punishment, accord- 
ing to their desert, no man could " stand in his sight " (Ps. Ixxvi. 7). There must be 
withdrawal from his presence, banishment from his hand. But our God is a God of 
patience, of forgiveness; he gives opportunity to the penitent. While unqualified 
severity would drive us into abject terror and hopeless exile, Divine mercy draws us 
near in true and manly confession, in hope of restoration, in return to his service. 
There is forgiveness with him, that he may be feared, that he may be approached, and 
that we may he restored. 1. With God, as he is revealed to us in Jesus Christ, there 
is " plenteous redemption." No guilty man, however deep his stain, need remain in 
the distance ; he may draw nigh with a strong assurance of forgiveness and restoration. 
2. The hope of the penitent rests on the sure basis of God's inviolable Word (ver. 5). 
Heaven and earth may pass away, but not the word of Christ's promise. " Come unto 
me, all ye that labour ... I will give you rest ; " " Him that cometh ... I will in no wise 
cast out ; " — those assurances constitute an immovable rock on which the troubled soul 
may build. 3. The true attitude of the penitent and believing spirit is that of con- 
fident expectation. As surely as the morning comes after the night, so surely will 
God's delivering grace follow the earnest prayer of the penitent. Let there be the 
earnestness of the watching sentinel, or of the shipwrecked sailor as he longs for tlie 
light of the morning, and there may be perfect confidence that he will not seek or 
wait in vain. 

V, The blessed issue. Not merely recovery from sickness, or removal of trouble, 
but "redemption from all iniquity " (ver. 8; Titus ii 14). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers, 1 — 8. — De profundis. This psalm, whose date, authorship, and special refer- 
ence no one certainly knows, nevertheless presents to us three marked stages in the 
experience of the writer of the psalm. 

I. In the depths. (Vers. 1 — 3.) Undoubtedly he knew what these were ; and 
very deep depths they appear to have been. 1. Eis sad condition seems to have been 
brought about, not so much by any outward circumstances of his life, as by some inward 
spiritual distress. His soul was consciously separated from God ; some great gulf, into 
which he had falln, had opened between him and the God who had once been his 
delight nd exceeding joy. It may have been that the sense of guilt and condemna- 
tion lav heavily on him, or that he was in dread of some approaching calamity, or that 
he was plunged in grief and shame by the might and mastery of some sin. Sin had 
undoubtedly to do with it, as it has to do with like distressing experiences in our own 
lives. 2. And it is a matter for deep thankfulness when sin does cast us into such 
depths. Too many people regard sin as a mere trifle ; it never troubles them seriously 
at all. And the cause of the vapid, feeble, and ineffectual Christian life which so many 
professed Christians lead is that they have never had any real conviction of sin ; they 
have never been in any " depths " about it. Would to God all had ! for there seems no 
hope of a real, earnest, and devoted Christian life without it. But the psalmist was in 
the depths, and this explains the heights to which he afterwards rose. 3. -fle (Ties unto 
the Lord. It is an earnest, self-abasing, yet passionate, appeal. He implores the Lord 
to be attentive to his supplication. It is only people in such depths that thus cry unto 
the Lord. Others may say prayers; but these men "cry." 4. Ee is filled with fear. 
Jest the Lord should mark his iniquities. If the Lord did that, there could be no hope 
for him; and, remembering this, he seems to sink down deeper than ever. It is a 
vivid instance of the Holy Spirit's conviction of sin. 

II. RisiNO OUT OP THEM. (Vers. 4 — 6.) 1. The upward ascent begins by his laying 
hold of the truth that there is forgiveness with God. Faith has come ; and as he 
believes, he sees that God's forgiveness can alone ensure that state of heart in him, 
that fear, which God desires to see in us all. He feels that he will never get right, 



248 THE BOOK OP PSALMa [Ps. cxxx. 1— 8. 

gave as he believes in God's foTgivenesa. And this is undoubtedly true. 2. Then ht 
proceeds to pat that faith in practice, and to wait on the Lord. And this he does in no 
half-hearted way. He says, " I wait ; " then, " My soul waiteth ; " then he stays him- 
self on God's word of forgiveness, and hopes therein; then he likens his faith to the 
eager expectation uf those who are anxiously, but believingly, watching for the morn- 
ing — yea, with more than their desire and confidence does he wait I Of course, there 
can be but one response to faith like this — ^the man rises out of the depths, as such 
men ever wilL 

III. Cleab abotb tbem. (Vers. 7, 8.) 1. He has got what he desires — the assur- 
ance of God's forgiveness. 2. In the Joy of it he twrns to others, and exhorts them to 
hope in the Lord, and testifies that " with the Lord there is," etc. (ver. 7). 3. And 
then, in the conviction that the love which has so blessed him cannot fail for Israel, 
he confidently predicts that the Lord " mill redeem" etc. (ver. 8). All this earnest 
witnessing for God is the sure sign that he is now clear up above, and right out of 
those depths in which he at first was. la the depths we cannot thus witness, but out 
of them we must and shall. — S. C. 

Ver. 4. — The assurance of Qod^s forgiveness. The psalmist had this, and his history 
is recorded for our help — for the help of all those who desire this assurance. 

L Note to whom this blessed assubanob is given. 1. Not to every one. For 
many do not care for it — they think there is no need ; they persuade themselves that 
God is easy, and will readily forgive. But this presumption is not God's assurance, 
for it gives them no settled rest ; they have awful misgivings at times. It lasts only 
so long as their light notions of sin last. When they wake up to the reality of sin, 
then they are in despair. It awakes no love to God (cf. Luke viL 47) ; it produces no 
hatred of sin ; if it did, it would lead to that which St. John says, " He that hath this 
hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure." Others there are who will not 
believe. How hard it is to persuade distressed souls that God does forgive I 2. But this 
assurance is given to such as are described in this psalm. (1) They have had a very 
deep sense of sin — ^have been in " the depths." (2) They have cried earnestly unto the 
Lord. (3) They confess that God's judgment on sin is righteous, and that their con- 
demnation would be just. (4) They have come to believe that the love of God is 
deeper than his displeasure with the sinner. And (6) they have cast themselves in 
utter faith on that love. These are they to whom God's assurance comes. 

IL The evidence on which it bests. 1. It needs evidence; for conscience is 
i^ainst it; God's love is against it; the testimony of nature and science is against it; 
earthly governments do not forgive; we ourselves do not thus forgive. Therefore 
evidence for it is needed. 2. Such evidence is furnished hy many facte. (1) God has 
spared us thus far — ^that we are able and at times are willing to forgive those who have 
wronged us. But if we, then yet more God. (2) Chiefly the plain declarations of God's 
Word; the sacrifice of Christ; the experience of those that are forgiven, — they feel it in 
their hearts ; they enjoy the peace of God ; its influence is all-sanctifying on their own 
soul, — it binds them over to God. Such is the evidence for, etc 

in. The EK8ULT8 THAT FOLLOW. God will be feared, that is, with the fear which 
love begets in a dear child. Such fear springs firom no other source, bnt ever from 
this.— S. 0. 

Ver. 7. — " Plenteous redemption.^ The text declares that with the Lord there ia 
this, and we observe — 

I. It is UNDO0BTEDLT TBUK. 1. 2%« SMptures affirm it. It la not alone the 
declaration of this Scripture, but of many more besides. 2. And experience, that of 
myriads of believers in all ages, attests the same truth. They will tell us with one 
accord that they have found it so. 3. And it is plenteous because U ia redemption 
from all evil, (1) From the guilt and condemnation of sin. Utter and complete for- 
giveness is ours through the death of Christ our Lord. (2) From the power and 
tyranny of sin. The blood of Christ keeps cleansing the soul of the man who walks in 
uie light, and is ever trusting in Christ, from all sin (1 John i. 7). (3) From sorrow's 
crushing power ; for Christ is revealed to us as knowing all our sorrows, sympathizing 
with ua, helping us in them, and for us turning their evil into good. " All thinOT 



PS. raxx. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 249 

work together for good," etc. (Rom. viii. 28). (4) From the fret and worry of life ; the 
believer i8 taught the lesson of continued trust, and so to be anxious for nothing 
([Phil. iv. 6, 7). (5) From the power of death ; for the believer does not die in the Bense 
in which of old time death was understood, for he who believes enters no Hades, no 
intermediate state, but, as Jesus said, he never dies — his body may — but he himself 
departs, and is at once with Christ^ which is far better. Thus is there plenteous 
redemption. 4. And it is accessible to ail. (Isa. Iv. 1.) It is the free gift of God. 

II. But uant do not oabe fob it. They would like a redemption from pain and 
distress ; but they do not care for a redemption from sin, — they love and hold on to it 
too much ; holiness excites no desire in their hearts ; they love sin. 

III. And mant op those who do oakb can hakdlt be got to believe in it. 
They cannot realize that it is a free gift. For: 1. They keep thinking that they must 
do something in the way of righteousness and holiness if they are to be saved. They 
want to bring something of their own to God, in return for which they shall be saved. 
2. And there is much to foster this unbelief. (1) Free gilts out of pure good will are 
not the way of the world. You must bring your money and pay the price. (2) And 
all other religions demand the due tale of good works and meritorious deeds. (3) For all 
excellence — physical, artistic, intellectual, moral — we have to toil and do the needful 
work. (4) And our pride protests against an eleemosynary salvation. 3. But such 
unbelief cannot be true. (1) For think first of him with whom this redemption is. 
It is the Lord. But can we imagine him bargaining, haggling, coming to terms, over 
our salvation, as if he were a seller, and not a giver? (2) And of ourselves. What 
have we got that could by any imagination be supposed adequate for the purchase? 
What is all our righteousness ? (3) Of the gift itself. It is so great that it can only 
be ours by gift ; in no other way could we have it. 

IV. But this obace of God, in BESTownra oh va tbeelt this FLBircEotra 
BEDBMPTION, IS JUSTIFIED BY ITS EBSULTs. 1. It wakes Up in the recipient on over- 
whelming gratitude. But this is a mighty incentive to all holy obedience. 2. It enabkt 
us to go to the vilest of men and prodaim OocPs mercy waiting for them. We could 
not do this were it not all of grace. 3. It forbids alike both boasting and despair. 4. 
It shows a dear path to the fullest salvation the world can know, I can be holy as he 
is holy, because of this free gift received through faith. 6. It redounds to the glory of 

aod.—a. 0. 

Ver. 1. — Jlie cry of the humbled. The psalm belongs to the age of tme national 
contrition, when nothing would satisfy but deliverance from sin, as well as from its 
punishment (comp. Lam. iii. 65 ; Jonah ii. 2). When men are disheartened and 
depressed, overwhelmed with anxieties and troubles, we familiarly speak of them as 
" down in the depths." It is a natural and universal figure. " On the hills " repre- 
sents excitement and joy ; " in the depths " represents depression and anxiety. " This 
psalm is distinctly a song of ascent, in that it starts from the very lowest point of self- 
abasement and consciousness of evil, and rises steadily, and, though it may be slowly, 
yet surely, up to the tranquil summit, led by a consciousness of the Divine presence 
and grace." " The psalmist thinks of himself as of a man at tiie bottom of a pit, 
sending up to the surface a faint call, which may easily be unheard. He does not 
merely mean to express his sense of hnman insignificance, nor even his sorrows, nor 
his despondency. There are deeper depths than these. They are the depths into 
which the spirit feels itself going down, sick and giddy, when there comes the thought, 
' I am a sinful man, Lord, in the presence of thy great purity.' Out of these depths 
does he cry to God." 

I. The depths abe the place fob us all. Every man amongst us has to go 
down there, if we take the place that belongs to us. 

II. Unless tou have obied to God out of those depths, tou have nevbb 
obied to him at all. Unless you come to him as a penitent, sinful man, with the 
consciousness of transgression awakened within you, your prayers are shallow. The 
beginning of all true personal religion lies in the sense of my own sin and my lost con- 
dition. Whenever you find men and women with a Christianity that sits very lightly 
upon them, that does not impel them to any acts of service and devotion, and never 
rises into the heights of communion with God, depend upon it the man has never beea 



250 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [P8. cxxx. 1—8. 

down into the abyss, and never sent his voice up from it. "Out of the depths " he 
has not cried unto God. 

III. You WANT NOTHING MOBE THAN A CEY TO DBAW YOU PROM THE PIT. It ig 

not that your crying will lift you out ; it is that your crying will bring you help. 
The " infant crying in the night" does nothing for itself by its crying; but the cry 
brings its mother. And the cry means that hope of self-help is altogether abandoned, 
the soul having to say, " Myself I cannot save," cries after Christ, saying," Jesu, have 
mercy on me ! " (part Maclaren). — E. T. 

Ver. 3. — The fears of conscience. In pleading for her father's life before the first 
Napoleon, a poor girl said, " Sire, I do not ask for justice ; I implore pardon." The 
inward sense of our sin will never permit us to make a claim for anything before God. 
His love of forgiving, and triumph over all hindrances in the way of forgiving, are our 
only pleas, and our only grounds of hope. The searching character of the Divine 
inspection is indicated in Ps. cxxxix. and in Heb. iv. 12, 13. Conscience freely admits 
that the Divine examination of the life cannot be endured. "If thou, Lord, shouldest 
mark iniquities, Lord, who shall stand?" There need be no difficulty in under- 
standing what conscience is. Some, in(ieed, regard it as a separate and independent 
power, which acts in a man as a sort of sentinel, giving notice of the approach or 
presence of evil. But it is altogether simpler to regard it as the ordinary faculty of 
judgment exercised by a man concerning the quality of his own actions. That self- 
judgment inevitably brings a man into /ears. 

I. Conscience testifies both the good and the bad. This is often missed from 
view. Usually conscience is thought of as concerned only with the evU ; and so its 
power and witness are only dreaded. Conscience ought to be the cheer of life. A man 
knows when he has done right. Appraising his life, he can sometimes approve. 
" Conscience makes cowards of us all ; " but it is equally true that " Conscience can 
make brave men of us all." 

II. Conhoienoe testifies to the bad in the good. And that is the real ground 
of our fear. Self-esteem may see only good ; conscience never does. It finds the 
sinister mark everywhere, and always has to qualify its approval and praise. "Never- 
theless, I have somewhat against thee." A " bar sinister " on every escutcheon. 

III. Conscience testifies to the good in the bad. And tiiis keeps fear from 
becoming hopeless and despairing. The irretrievably bad is a conception that can only 
be associated with devils, not with man. And it is not a genuine conscience that judges 
in a blind, sectarian way, and makes a man accuse himself as hopelessly bad. 

IV. CONSOIBNOE PUTS BOTH BAD AND GOOD OUT OF THE SELF-LIGHT INTO THE 

Divine light. According to the sense a man has of God will be his conscience- 
judgment of hia own conduct. Right sense of God will make conscience-estimates 
induce fear. The conscience of good will bring a reverent and humble fear ; tlie con- 
science of evil will bring an humiliating and anxious fear. The self-estimate of iniquities 
is painful enough, but what shall we say of the Divine estimate of those same 
iniquities ? — R. T. 

Ver. 4. — Forgiveness generating fear. God's mercy is, with striking truth to nature, 
made a ground for godly fear. " In the sense of his mercy we know best the exceed- 
ing ' sinfulness of sin ; ' so far as we feel that sin is still cUnging to us, we must fear 
with godly fear ; so far as we feel its chains are broken, ' fear is cast out by love.' 
Thus the cross is to us at once the secret of penitence and of faith." These three 
points may be opened, illustrated, and enforced. 

I. God's fobgiveness revbalss our sm. Here a distinction can be made. God's 
denunciations, punishments, and judgments, which we may hear about or observe, 
bring us what may be called, and what are primarily, intellectual apprehensions of the 
evil of sin. Very many, indeed, only know sin through the teaching of its consequences. 
But it is certain that sin cannot be really or worthily known in that way. Its root is 
not in the intelligence, but in the will ; and the atmosphere in which it thrives is not 
knowledge, but feeling. It is a moral matter, and it is revealed in moral actions. 
God's forgiveness touches feeling, and feeling throws its own special light on that 
which is forgiven. The wrong of it comes to feeling j the peril of it comers to intelU- 



PS. cxxx. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 251 

gence. No man knows the hatefulness of his sin until he realizes that it is divinely 
forgiven. 

II. God's fokoivkness pboduoes a worthy fbab. That kind of fear which 
makes us anxiously watchful lest we should prove unworthy of such forgiveness, and 
even need that forgiveness again. The sense of forgiveness binds us to Q-od in such 
thankfulness and love that we fear to grieve him. And the forgiveness makes us so 
sensible of our own infirmities that we can but walk watchfully, as those who fear to 
fall. And we can never be quite sure that the sin forgiven was not rooted in a 
weakness which we still retain, and which is still to us a source of peril. So we fear 
for ourselves. 

III. God's foboiveness removes oub fbab. Because a forgiveness declares and 
guarantees an interest in us. God's forgiveness pledges continuous help and blessing. 
It reveals God to us so that we are able to cherish an absolute confidence in him. 
And while it puts us upon every endeavour not to sin, it keeps us from all despairing 
fear by assuring us that, even if we should be overcome by our frailties, " there is for- 
giveness with him." His forgivings do not exhaust his mercy, but pledge it for days 
to come. — B. T. 

Vers. 5, 6. — Our waiting is a watching, " In the year 1830, on the night preceding 
the first of August, the day the slaves in our West Indian colonies were to come into 
possession of the freedom promised them, many of them, we are told, never went to bed 
at all. Thousands and tens of thousands of them assembled in their places of worship, 
engaging in devotional duties and singing praises to God, waiting for the first streak 
of the light of the morning of that day on which they were to be made free. Some of 
their number were sent to the hills, Irom which they might obtain the first view of the 
coming day, and by a signal intimate to their brethren down in the valley the very first 
moment of breaking dawn." They " watched for the morning." The kind of watching 
that comes home to us is the anxious watching by the sick-beds of loved friends. 
Night-work is especially trying. Sentinel-watching may be also in mind. 

I. A WAITING THAT IS A WBABY COMPULSION. We do not want to wait. We are 
made to wait. And the watching for the end of the waiting-time is simply a prolonged 
agony. Man often deals with his fellow-man thus ; and God sometimes finds it needful 
to put his people into this hard discipline. Whether we like it or not, we must wait. 
Active man who would do something — must do nothing. lUust. : waiting for openings 
in life. 

II. A WAITING THAT IS A HOPELESS ENDUEANOB. The kind of Waiting that belongs 
to times of uncertainty. We watch vainly, at last almost hopelessly, for the daily 
post. Tennyson pictures this condition in his ' Mariana * — 

" She only said, ' My life is dreary : 
He Cometh not,' she said ; 
She said, 'I'm aweary, aweary; 
I would that I were dead I ' " 

Even at such times the hopelessness would pass, though the enduring had to remain, 
if only the watching had its uplooh as well as its onlook. Its calm resting in the infinite 
wisdom and love that permits, as well as its peering away into the distant east for the 
first glimpse of morning. 

III. A WAITING THAT M A LOVING EXPBOTASOY. And that our Waiting may 
always be if we see it to be our Father-God's call to wait. There is his thought in it, 
his purposd in it. We may be sure of the " end of the Lord." It is well altogether to 
dismiss fro&i our minds all such ideas of Divine sovereignty as even suggist that he 
ever " afSibts willingly." We seem to be waiting for some change in our earthly 
circumstances, hut we are really waiting for God to change our circumstances ; and we 
may wait with the calm, and even joyous, expectancy that he wilL — E. T. 

Ver. 7. — The final Object of hope. Luther says the redemption is called " plenteous" 
because such is the straitness of our heart, the slenderness of our hopes, the weakness 
of our faith, that it far exceeds all our capacity, all our petitions and desires. Lord 
Bacon says, " Generous and magnanimous minds are readiest to forgive ; and it is a 



252 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. Ive. cxxx. 1—8. 

weakness and impotency of mind to be unable to forgive." The point on which we 
now dwell is the strong demand that Israel shall hope in Jehovah himaelf. The sense 
of personality in God is to be most jealously treasured. In India it is conceived that 
the personality of god is bnt a step towards the higher realization of him, or it, as an 
impersonal, uncaused, unrelated, absolute being. But this is an unreal dreamland. 
No fitting idea of God can fail to include an active, ever-working wiU, that is influenced 
by surroundings and swayed by feeling. But that is the characteristic of a person. 
The Word of God, while refusing to permit any representation of Gbd as a Person, 
nevertheless insists that we shall always deal with him as a Person. 

I. God himself is the Object of a binneb's hope. There is a distinction of the 
utmost importance, which is often missed, and often very imperfectly apprehended. 
A man can never have absolute confidence based on anything that God has ever done. 
His confidence must rest in God, who did those things, and has revealed himself as 
wholly trustworthy in doing them. For the nation to rely on what God did, in 
delivering it from Egyptian bondage, would be wholly unworthy. For it to rely on 
God, who then delivered, and so proved himself to be the Deliverer, was worthy and 
ennobling. So still, the work of Divine redemption is not the proper object of a sinner's 
hope, but Ood, who in such a glorious and Divine way has redeemed. The hope ia in 
no thing, though it may have the Divine stamp on it. The hope is in the Person who 
is revealed in and by the thing done. The apprehension of this involves the reforma- 
tion of very much of the imperfect theology that now prevails. 

II. ChBIBT himself IB THE AgENOT FOB BEALIZINO HIM WHO IS THE ObJEOI OF 

THE sinner's hope. St. Peter states this with admirable precision, " Who, hy him, 
do believe in God." Our faith is demanded, not for Christ's work, bat for Christ 
himself. And not for Christ other than as a mediary. Our hope as sinners is only 
rightly fixed on Christ when we apprehend that " Ooi vxu in Christ, reconciling the 
world unto himself."— R. T. 

Ver. 8. — Bedemption only complete in tanctifieation. " Plenteous redemption " is 
here described. It is a redeeming of Israel from all his iniquities. It is not a deliver- 
ing of Israel out of all his disasters. That might be important enough in its way ; 
but no kind of material redemption can ever be of supreme interest to God. To 
deliver Israel from his iniquities is the Divine thought. To deliver Israel from oZI his 
iniquities is the supreme Divine thought. When is a man saved? The answer 
depends upon a right idea of what the salvation or redemption of a man is. To save a 
drowning man and to save a city waif are not the same thing. You have done saving 
the drowned man when you have brought him ashore alive. You have not saved the 
waif when you have got him inside the doors of the Boys' Home. It needs to be set 
in the strongest and clearest light possible that the object of God's redemption is the 
man — not the man's circumstances, nor the man's perils. It is a fiction of man's 
theology that God's salvation is satisfied with removing penalty. When the penalty 
is gone, we hear the Divine voice saying, " And now what about the man t " 

I. Bedemption gets all hindrances out of the way of its wobk. Never 
confuse the preliminary with the real work. Getting hindrances out of the way may 
be quite necessary ; and it may be vigorous and prolonged work, calling for much 
energy and self-denial ; but it is God's pioneer work. It is God getting his sphere, 
clearing for himself the sphere in which he may do his true redemptive work. If this 
had been worthily apprehended, we should never have been worried by being called to 
believe in a worle, in a plan of salvation, in a removing of our penalty. Our faith is 
demanded for a Redeemer who, having done such and such things, is able to do what 
he now wants to do in our minds and hearts and lives; ijt. redeem u» from our 
iniquities. 

II. Bedemption works fbeelt in the space it has cleared. And a plentiful 
and most glorious work it has in view — deliverance from the power, fascination and 
snare of sin; redemption from all iniquities. Work like getting the threading 
weed-roots out of the soul, and making a lovely, clean lawn. Work like getting 
out every tiny fibre of the sjirpading cancer, and giving a clean and hopeful bill of 
health. No man is saved as God would save him until he is "clean every whit." 
^B. T. 



PS. oxxxi. 1 — 3.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



263 



Vera. 1 — 8. — A cry to Qod for the forgiveness of sin. I. The propound mibebt 
WHICH THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF SIN PRODUCES. (Vers. 1 — 3.) " Out of the depths. 
. . . If thou shouldest mark iniquities," etc. Other "depths" than the depths of 
poverty or hodily affliction. 

II. The stkongbst motive to the reverent feab of Qod. (Ver. 4.) " Qod 
freely forgives sin — not that men may think lightly of sin, but that they may magnify 
his grace and mercy in its forgiveness. ' For thy Name's sake pardon mine iniquity.' 
This a more powerful motive than any other to call forth holy fear and love and self- 
sacrifice." 

III. His faith waits in the expectation of God's forgiveness. (Vers. 6, 6.) 
1. Eis faith is full of hope — is expectant, opposed to unhelieving despondency. Hope 
supposes difficulties and uncertainties melting away or triumpheil over. 2. But it is 
patient and anxious at the same time. More than those who watch for the morning in 
the sick-room — whether the sick or those who watch with them. The faith, therefore, 
is connected with anxious exercises of mind battling with the delay. 

IV. He who is conscious of forgiveness can inspire others with hopb and 
tbust. (Vers. 7,8.) "Hope" — "plenteous redemption" — "will redeem Israel" — 
not this or that favoured man, but Israel, the nation — " from all his iniquities." Not 
merely from the punishment, but from the iniquities themselves. — S, 

Yer. 7. — Full redemption, " And with him is plenteous redemption." 

L The origin of redemption. "With him' — with Qod. The gospel bears the 
stamp of its Divine origin : 1. In what it reveals, 2. In what it proposes. It is not 
man's appeal to God, but God's proposal to man. 

II. The nature of bedbmpiion. 1. Z%« daoeryfrom which we are redeemed. 2. 
The price of our redemption. 3. The liberty bestowed, 

IlL The fulness of this redemption. 1. It it full for each. %, It it futt for 
alLS, 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXXXL 
This paalm has been said to be "like a 
string of a Christian ' Lyra InnoceDtium ' " 
(Bishop Alexander). It breathes the pro- 
foundest humility and submission to God's 
will (vers. 1, 2). At the same time, it en- 
courages the faithful to maintain a lively 
" hope" in God's sustaining grace (ver. 3). 

The ascription of the psalm to David is 
quite in accordance, both with the language 
and the contents. 

Ver. 1.— Lord, my iieatt is not haughty; 
or, " not lifted up" (comp. 2 Ohroii. xxvi. 16 : 
xxzii. 25). Not unduly elated by the 
prosperity that thou hast bestowed on me. 
Nor mine eyes lofty (comp. Ps. ci. 5), 
"Pride," as Hengstenberg says, "has its 
seat in the heart, and betrays itself especi- 
ally in the eyes." Neither do I exercise my- 



self in great matters, or is things too high 
for me ; literally, too wonderful (oomp. 
Ps. cxxxix. 6, "Such knowledge is too 
wonderful for me : it is high : I cannot 
attain unto it "). The speculative debates 
of so-called "wise men" concerning the 
deep tilings of God's moral government are 
probably glanced at (see Job xlii. 3). 

Ver. 2.-— Sorely I have behaved and qnieted 
myself; ratlier, 1 have ulilled and quieted 
my soul. I have broaght my soul into a 
state of peaccfulDesB and content. As a 
child that is weaned of his mother. The 
weaned child is quiet and content ; the 
suckling always impatient and restless. 
My soul is even as a weaned child. Another 
repetition for the sake of emphasis (see 
Ps cxxx. 5, 6). 

Ver 3. — let Israel hope in the Lord &om 
henceforth and for ever (comp. Ps. cxxx. 7). 
Israel is exhorted to have like confidence 
and trust in God as the psalmist. 



HOMLETICS. 

Yen. 1 — 8. — LowUnest of mind. This psalm may have been written by David so 

far as its subject-matter is concerned. For that lowliness of mind of which it treats is 
■)uite as compatible with a higli as witli a humble position in life. Royalty may be 



254 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pg. oxxii. 1— 3. 

very meek, and obscurity may be very proud. All moral qualities are independent of 
situations ; they are a question of character, not of circumstance. Of the sireatest One 
that ever bore our likeness it is said, " Thy King cometh . . . meek " (Matt. xxi. 5). 
But we have here — 

I. A COMMON TEMPTATION. There are souls that do not aspire to be or do what is 
beyond them in any direction ; but they are probably the exception rather than the 
rule. In all departments of activity men and women long for that which is out of 
their reach. The sailor is looking forward eagerly to a captaincy, or to be commodore 
or admiral. The soldier will not be satisfied until he is gazetted colonel of his regiment. 
The politician hungers for an office which is much higher up than the one he holds. 
And thus it is in every sphere. It is rigbt, indeed, that every one should seek and strive 
to put out all his powers, instead of allowing them to slumber in silence and inactivity. 
We are bound to be our best and do our utmost in a world that is crying for help and 
for redemption. But our temptation is to long and to labour for that which is beyond 
our capacity, for which we were not created and endowed, which would exalt us, but 
which we should not adorn. The student wants to master that which is " too 
wonderful for him," actually " unattainable " (Ps. cxxxix. 6). The servant of Christ 
wants to fill a post in the Church for which he is not mentally and morally qualified. 
The traveller thirsts to reach a latitude which is outside the range of practicable pursuit. 
Everywhere, in all classes and conditions, men are sighing and striving for that which 
they will never reach, or will only reach when they have exhausted their strength and 
cannot enjoy what they have gained. 

II. The lesson of experience. Experience is continually teaching us the folly of 
seel^ing to move in a sphere which is beyond us. It is constantly resulting in defeat, 
in disappointment, in mortification. The position sought is not won, and there is the 
deep discontentment of having toiled in vain; or it is gained, and is found to be full of 
difficulty that was not anticipated, and, instead of yielding the expected pleasure, it is 
productive of dissatisfaction and complaint, and it ends in serious, perhaps disastrous, 
fulure. They are wise men who, witnessing this in other people, or beginning to dis- 
cover it in their own case, reach the psalmist's conclusion ; this is — 

III. The pbaotical conclusion of the wise. To be contented with the sphere 
which God has assigned us, and to do our best therein. The psalmist has learnt the 
lesson. He has had to compose a disquieted spirit, and he has done so ; he was restless 
and passionate, like an unweaned child clamouring for its mother's breast. But he has 
" quieted himself," he has calmed his spirit ; he has withdrawn from a false position ; 
he has settled down permanently to the only true one. His heart is not lifted up ; his 
eyes do not look enviously and hungrily to the heights beyond him ; he does not dwell 
in anxious, wearisome thought on matters which are best left alone ; he concentrates 
his sympathies and his energies on that which demands his attention, and which is 
productive of good to himself and those around him ; he is perfectly contented to be 
just what God has made him, to go where his Master sends him, to do what is placed 
in his hands to do. He is so far from thinking himself essential to the prosperity 
of the Church and the redemption of the world, that he hopefully, and even confidently, 
leaves that in the care of the Supreme (ver. 3) 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1 — 3. — The souFs most blessed condition. That which the psalmist here affirms 
of himself is undoubtedly the spiritual condition which is nearest to heaven that here 
on earth we can know. 

I. He tells us what it is not. 1. Pride of heart is absent from it. "My 
heart is not hauo;hty." We may say this to our fellow-men, and deceive them by a 
■how of humility ; but it is quite another thing to afBim this, as is here done, before 
the Lord, "to whom all hearts are open, and from whom no secrets are hid." Happy 
are we if before him we can say this. For pride is destructive of all real happiness : 
it is continually meeting with rebuffs ; nothing people like so much as to take down 
the man who is haughty of heart. To humiliate him is the keenest delight. If the 



PS. oxxxL 1—3.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 255 

devil has planted pride in all men's hearts, as he has, God has so ordered the world 
that every man's hand shall he against such pride. 2. It is free/rum ambition. " Nor 
mine eyes lofty." The man's eyes are uot for ever fixed on and hankering after 
something higher up in the world than it has yet reached. Blessed is the man who 
is content with the lot God hath ordered for him, and is solicitous only to he found 
faithful there. 3. And from presumption. " Neither do I exercise myself," etc. 
(ver. 1). But how many there are who are for ever doing that which the psalmist 
here disclaims I David's brothers accused him of this, though wrongly, and blamed 
him for leaving his sheep to come to the battle-field. But though David was innocent 
of such fault, many are guilty of it. They want to know all mysteries, to be able to 
explain all that they see around them in God's providence, and all that they meet 
with in the Scriptures : they want to undertake work which is beyond them, whilst 
that which is within their power they refuse. They could sweep a crossing, but they 
want to rule a kingdom ; they could manage the one talent, but because they have 
not the five, the one they have they bury, to their infinite shame and loss. 

IL He tells us what it is. To have one's soul " as a child that is weaned from 
its mother." Therefore : 1. It is separation from what it once loved. It is a terrible 
time for the child when this separation has to be made : the. metaphor is as touching and 
beautiful as it is powerfully expressive. And the soul kno ws^how it once loved the world, 
not so much, perhaps, the evil things of the world as those that were not evil ; but it 
has come to give them all up, and to be content with what the Lord orders for him. 
Yet more is it separated from the sinful ways of the world. Once it loved them, but 
that time is past. 2. And it is not only separated from them, but has ceased to desire 
them. The child is happy and at rest, though no longer allowed that in which it 
once so delighted. The very desire is gone. 3. And this is not through any disap- 
pointment, chagrin, or disgust with the world. Some men rush from the world in 
anger because of the way it has treated them. But this is not the motive here : such 
are wrenched from the world rather than weaned from it. 4. Nor either is it the 
relinquishment which comes from satiety withthe world's pleasures ; — from having had 
so much that the soul has come to care no moie for it, its sweets clog and nauseate 
rather than give pleasure. 5. Nor from want of capacity to enjoy what the world has to 
offer. But it is a willing abandonment of that which once it delighted in — the world's 
pleasures, profits, honours, roniforts, as well as its more questionable belongings. 

IIL How WAS THIS BROUGHT ABOUT? 1. It wos not self-produced. No child 
ever weaned itself. 2. /* has been the Loris work. By his Holy Spirit and his 
providence he has wrought this wondrous change. Hence we have come to find that 
what once delighted us so much fails to do so now. The world has become embittered 
to our taste. Our God has separated us from what we loved and clung to ; there was 
no chance of our voluntarily giving it up, and so God took it away. And he has given 
us what is better far than that which we have lost (cf. Ps. Ixiii.). Higher, purer 
joys are ours. Also he has blessed our own endeavours a'ter self-denial and renun- 
ciation ; he has " worked in us to will and to do," etc. 3. And the result is most 
blessed. The calm quiet and stillness of the soul ; its freedom from fret ; its heavenly 
peace. 

IV. What this bxpbribnce leads to. A delight in God, and a conviction of 
his love and faithfulness, which make him call upon all his countrymen to hope in 
the Lord. When the soul has this experience, it cannot but commend the Lord to 
others. It must bear its testimony. — S. C. 

Ver. 1. — The sense of what is acceptable with God. This psalm expresses the meek 
humility of the pardoned and restored sinner. But taken as expressing the sentiment 
of the restored nation, it suggests the mood of cherished feeling that keeps us in right 
relations with God. It is not a mood of submission, or even of submissive obedience 
only. It is a mood of willing submission, of delighted obedience ; of submission that 
has ceased to be a strain, and has become the free, natural, joyous expression of the 
self. The " heart is not haughty ; " so there is no resistance to what is felt to be 
the duty. 

I. Submission that is still a strain can onlt be partially acoeftablb 
with God. And very much that is called submission is really only submission in 



256 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ra. cxxxi. 1— 3. 

the maJeing. Indeed, if we speak with absolute precision, we must say that sub- 
mission wholly free from strain can never be the experience of men while they are 
under human conditions and limitations. We have no instance of perfect submission 
save that of the Divine Man, the Lord Jesus Christ; and even in his case we have to 
notice that strain and struggle continued up to Grethsemane, and that absolute entire- 
ness of obedience was won only on Calvary, where even the very life was surrendered. 
We can, therefore, while we are on earth, never gain more than a qualified Divine 
acceptance. There is peace, and promise, and power, and joy in the measure of 
acceptance we can gain ; but it is always an inspiration, not a satisfaction. Very 
many good people never get above or beyond this apprehension of Christian life; 
" they submit because they must." They never can rise to get duty glorified. Indeed, 
there are many who try to persuade themselves that their submission cannot really 
be submission unless they feel the strain of it. But it is with this grace as with the 
digestive process — it is only healthy when we know nothing about it. 

II. Submission that has ceased to be a sxRAnr la fully acceptable to God. 
The will may persistently force attitudes and acts of submission. Then man is but 
a dual being. The goodness is forced. The man may submit with a reserve. He is 
willing to go so far. The man is wholly willing to submit sometimes and in some 
things. It is clear that none of these cases can be fully acceptable to God. When 
a man's heart is in the submission, then the man's will is rightly swayed, and a man's 
conduct is in harmonious order. The man is a unity in his submission ; strain of 
resistance is gone, and the full Divine smile can rest upon him. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 1. — On knowing owr spheres. Prayei^book Version, " I do not exercise myself 
in great matters : which are too high for me." The poet disclaims three distinct 
kinds of pride ; secret conceit of heart ; the ostentation of the man of lofty bearing ; 
and the presumptuous self-importance which intrudes. One of the things that can 
only be learned through the experiences of life is what we can do, and what we may 
do. Putting wise limits upon our undertakings and our spheres is one of the most 
important and anxious things that we have to do. And one of the chief modem sins 
is attempting too much, and not being willing to keep ourselves strictly within the 
limits of what we can do really well. The young man thinks he can do anything and 
everything; and it may often be the consequence that he does nothing really weU. 

L OOB SPHERES ABE DIBOOVEBED FOB US BT DiVINE PBOYIDENOE. Nothing is 

more remarkable in a man's life than the way in which he is led round to the occu- 
pying of spheres of which he had never dreamed, and to the undertaking of work for 
which he had never recognized a fitness. It may occasionally be the case that what 
a man has to do in life is shown him early, and he runs in the appointed rut from the 
beginning to the end of his days ; but in the majority of cases, even if a hint of the 
future is early given, the way round to its realization is a set of surprising experiences ; 
and often the life-work unfolds suddenly and unexpectedly, in the time of a man's 
maturity. The good man sees in this the leading of Divine providence. 

II. OuB 8PHEBES ABB DISCOVERED FOB US BY ouB AFFINITIES. There are things 
we have to do, and things we like to do. And, in the long run, life comes round to fit 
to our likings. We can do well what we enjoy doing, and we gradually drift into the 
spheres to which we are fitted by bias and inclination. Ideally life would be perfect 
if every man was placed according to his affinities. Towards the ideal perfection 
humanity is moving, though its progress is greatly hindered and confused by human 
self-will, and the exigencies of civilization. 

III. Cub SPHERES ABE DISCOVERED BY OUR ATTITUDES OP OBEDIENCE. TMs is 

taking the higher, the Divine view of life. When a man fully realizes life as service 
to Ood, he rests assured that his Divine Master appoints his sphere and provides his 
work ; and his Master will be absolutely sure to provide sphere and work for every 
servant who jealously keeps the attitude of obedience. — B. T. 

Ver. 2. — Bestraint of naturai ambitions. " Instead of fretting after what is too 
great for him, he quiets his ambition, and his spirit lies calm and gentle, like a child 
in its mother's arms, that, after the first trouble of weaning is over, is soothed and 
lulled by the maternal caress." The image is strikingly simple and true, of natural 



PS. cxxxi. 1— 3.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS 257 

deRire stayed and of a subdued quietness of rest rather than deli9;ht. Ferowne quotes 
the following as a mother's experience: "The weaned child has for the first time 
become conscious of grief , The piteous longing for the sweet nourishment of his life, 
the broken sob of disappointment, mark the trouble of his innocent heart : it is not 
so much the bodily suffering; he has felt that pain before, and cried while it lasted ; 
but now his joy and comfort aire taken away, and he knows not why. When his head 
is once more laid on his mother's bosom, then he trusts and loves and rests ; but he 
has learned the first lesson of humility, he is cast down, and clings with fond help- 
lessness to his one friend." 

L Natural ambitions abb not wbono in themselves. They do but express 
a man's individuality and energy. They are but the sign of the intelligence that can 
fix an aim and a purpose for a life. It describes a helpless, hopeless man to say, " He 
has no ambition." Such a man wants nothing, tries for nothing, and gets nothing. 
Beligious people often condemn ambition as an essential eviL All we need say is that 
it may be, but it need not be. 

II. Natural ambitions become wbono when thbt are self-centred. A man 
is a being in relations. There is a measure of health in every scheme he has for the 
uenefit of another. A man is a dependent being, and his first consideration has to be 
the approval of him on whom he depends. Ambition to secure purely selfish ends 
is sin against our relationship, and against our dependence. Ambition that is self- 
centred is only too likely to inspire unscrupulous means. 

III. Natubal ambitions need restraint when God's will i8 known. It is 
not that God's will is either antagonistic to, or out of harmony with, our natural 
ambitions ; it is that they are either exaggerated, or have become masterful. If we 
could read life aright, we should always find that God's will for our life is in strictest 
harmony with our own real and well-qualified ambitions. And precisely what the 
revelation of God's will does for us is help us in getting our ambitions into proper 
limitation and control. God does not want the service of men out of whom all heart 
and energy have been taken. It is not any crushing out of our individuality that 
honours God : restraint within wise limits means the retention of all good and 
right ambitions. — B. T. 

Ver. 8. — Man's personal experience may be the basin of his hope in Ood. " Let 
Israel hope in the Lord ; " let him, because he has such abundant reason for so doing, 
in the experience that he has had of the Lord's gracious working. This is the refrain 
of several of these " songs of degrees," which, we have seen, are essentially " songs of 
uplifting," or calls to put trust and hope in God. 

I. Man's personal experience is seldom, if ever, pbeciselt repeated. Proude 
suggests that experience is like the stern-lights of a ship, which show the way that 
rtos been taken. And he hints that experience is of practically little use for the 
guidance of the way that has to he taken. But this is a very partial view. It would 
not culture a man in the dependence and trust, which are the key-notes of his nobility, 
if his life were a mere succession of precise repetitions, so that he might know pre- 
cisely how to act in each recurring case, and the lessons of experience were a mere 
routine ; a fixed measure to be applied to every instance. Life with emergencies and 
surprises is alone a healthy life for a moral being in whom character is to be trained. 
It was a misanthrope who said, " The thing which hath been is, and there is nothing 
new under the sun." And every man will be prepared to say, on looking over his life, 
that nothing ever happened in his life which was a precisely imitative experience ; 
nothing that proved to be exactly what he expected it to be. Then it may be hastily 
said that experience is a delusion, and cannot really help us. Wbat we have to see 
is that it cannot, and never was intended to, help us as a yard-measure does. How, 
then, does it help ? 

II. Man's personal experience establishes principles and brings knowledge 
or WHICH MAN CAN MAKE PRACTICAL USE. Israel restored from exile had a new set 
of experiences, but his knowledge of Uod's adaptations of grace to all previous 
experiences established confidence in him. It was easy to argue that God, hnving 
made adjustments to their need in forty-nine cases, was not likely to be baflBed by the 
fiftieth. And we can always get that persuasion out of a life-experience And we 

PSALMS — II 1 



TEE BOOK OF FSALMa 



[n. oxzzn. 1— la 



can plainly see the force of this prindple— all human experiences, thoagh appatentlj 
unlike each other, go into dosses. We can always find something in past experience 
which belongs to the same class as our present experience ; and then, if we can fully 
apprehend the Divine intervention in some case that belongs to the class, we can 
confidently say to our soul, " Soul, hope thou still in God," — R. T. 

"Vers. 1 — 3. — Humility. " Lord, my heart is not haughty,'' etc. " The psalmist has 
learned from adversity the lesson of submission, and counsels the nation to fit itself 
in like manner for winning the blessings which are still in store." The authorship 
is uncertain ; but it was probably wiitten after the Exile. The writer had learned— 

L Humility. 1. Humility is exemplified in a lowly estimate of ourselves before 
Ood and man. Before God as well as before man. 2. In not aiming at things 
which are beyond owr powers of attainment. Some men's ambition is greater than 
their ability. And yet none of us uses his ability to the utmost. We ought to learn 
how much Gx)d will help us to do. 

IL Submission to the will of GK>d. 1. This implies the recognition of Ood's 
will as good. Not only as supreme, but as good. Only thus shall we be able to say 
from the heart, •' Thy will be done." 2. The overruling of all discontent with the 
changes of drcumstanees. As a child that has been weaned at length learns to rest on 
its mother's bosom. 

III. HUMILITT AND BUBMISSION ABB CONNECTED WITH PATIENT WAITINO AND 

HOPE. 1. Ood rewards the patient and humble. " Giveth grace," etc., " but knoweth 
the proud afar of." 2. All the deeper knowledge <f Ood, springing from humble patience, 
leads on to a greater hope in Mm, The deepest experiences lead to the highest hope 
in God.— a 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM ozxxn. 



Tbh present "Song of Ascents" is well 
■nited to be a "pilgrim-song" — snng by 
those who went up to Jerusalem to visit the 
temple, and revivify their faith in the God 
who had chosen Zion for his dwelling-place. 
It is conoemed almost entirely with the 
temple, which it sets before the faithfnl 
from the first conception of it in the mind 
of David to its final glory when visited by 
the Bedeemer. Vers. 1 — 5 are concerned 
with the birth of the idea in David's mind ; 
vers. 6 — 10, with its realization nnder Solo- 
mon; while vers. 11 — 18 point to the time 
when David's tme Son wonld be set upon 
David's throne, and the Lord himself wonld 
suddenly come to his temple, and make the 
glory of the second house greater than that 
of the first had ever been. 

Metrically, the psalm consists of four 
stanzas, each of ten lines : vers. 1— A ; 6 — 10; 
11—13; and 14—18. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — David's abasement and vow 
to God. The historical books give no 
account of this vow, wliioh, however, may 
have been recorded in one or other of the 



lost compositions spoken of so frequently in 
Chronicles (1 Ohron. xsix. 29 ; 2 Chron. ix. 
29 ; xvi. 11, etc.). 

Ver. 1. — Lord, remember David, and all 
his affliotions ; rather, rwiember to David 
all his affliction; i.e. reckon it to him, and 
reward him for it. The "affliction" in- 
tended is the distress that David felt at the 
thought that, while he dwelt in a house of 
cedar, the ark of God was unly lodged 
within curtains (2 Sam. vii. 2). 

Ver. 2. — How he sware unto the Lord (see 
the comment on vera. 1 — 5). And vowed 
onto the mighty God of Jacob ; rather, the 
Mighty One of Jaedb (see Gen. xlix. 24 ; Isa. 
lx.16). 

Ver. 3. — Surely I will not come into the 
tabernacle of my house, I will not take up 
my abode quietly and comfortably in my 
own solid and substantial house (see 2 Sam. 
V. 11). Nor go up into my bed. Indulge, 
i.e., in luxurious repose. (For a contrary 
feeling on the part of some Israelites, see 
Hag. i 4.) 

Ver. 4. — I will not give sleep to mine 
eyes, or slnmber to my eyelids. Exegetical 
of the last clause of ver. 3. 

Ver. 5.— Until I find out a place for the 
lord. The "place" which David desired 
to " find " was a permanent resting-place for 
the ark oi God, which he had already 



PB. cxxxn. 1 — 18.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALM& 



259 



"bronglit op from the honse of Obed-Edom 
Into the city of David with gladness " (2 Sam. 
Ti. 12), but which he had only eetablished 
in a temporary abode of the nature of a tent, 
or tabernacle (2 Sam. vi 17). God approved 
David's zeal, but did not allow him to 
accomplish his design (2 Sam. vii. 5—16). 
Au habitation for the mighty Grod of Jaoob ; 
rather, the Mighty One of Jacob (oomp. ver. 2 
and the comment ad fea.). 

Vers. 8—10. — ^The realization of David's 
design. The resting-place is, after a time, 
discovered and prepared. The ark is brought 
up and placed in it (1 Kings viii 1 — II). 
The " priests " are " clothed with righteona- 
ness," and the ** saints shout for joy." God 
** turns not away the face of his anointed," 
bnt accepts the costly offering. Ood him- 
self "arises into his rest," and makes his 
presence visible from the mer«y-seat(l Kings 
Tiii. 10, 11 : 2 Ohron. t. 13, 14). 

Ver. 6. — lo, we heard of it at Ephratah. 
* It " is probably " the ark " — ^not yet men- 
tioned, but a main object of the writer's 
thoughts : and ** Ephratah " is the district 
south and west of Jerusalem, in which both 
Bethlehem and Kirjath-jearim were situ- 
ated. And found it in the fields of the 
wood; rather, in (A«^2<i«o/ Jitutr. "Jaar" 
b a contracted and poetic name for Kirjath- 
jearim, where the ark remained from its 
return ont of the country of the Philistiaes 
till David transferred it to Jerusalem 
(1 Chron. xiii. 5—13). 

Ver. 7. — We will go into his tabemaoles : 
we will worship at his footstool. The trans- 
fer is regarded as accomplished, and the 
worship as re-established, which had been 
intermitted while the ark was at Kirjath- 
jearim. 

Ver. 8. — ^Arise, Lord, into thy rest. 
Another transfer, but into the place of final 
"rest." The words are a quotation from 
2 Ohron. viii. 41, and were uttered originally 
by Solomon at the dose of his long dedica- 
tion prayer. Thou, and the ark of thy 
strength. The quotation continues. Ood 
is regarded as entering the temple, and 
taking possession of it, in and with the ark. 

Ver. 9. — ^Let thy priests be clothed with 
righteousness. In 2 Chronicles the expres- 
sion used is "with salvation'' — salvation 
being the effect, whereof" righteousness " is 
the cause. And let thy saints shout for joy. 
2 Chronicles has, " rejoice in goodness," t.«. 
rejoice in Ood's goodness to them. There 
is no other sufSoient reason for great joy. 

Ver. 10.— For thy servant David's sake 
turn not away the face of thine anointed. 
Here the text diverges still more from that 



of Chronicles, which runs thus : " O Lord 
God, turn not away the face of thine 
anointed : remember the mercies of David 
thy servant." The meaning, however, is 
much the same in both passages: "For 
David's sake, to whom thou hast shown so 
many mercies, turn not away the face — i.e. 
reject not the petition, or the offering — ot 
his representative." 

Vers. 11—18. — God's oath of promise to 
David. This passage is based mainly on 
2 Sam. viL 11—16, but contains likewise 
expressions which seem taken from other 
psalms, as Pss. xlviii. 1, 2; Ixviii. 16; 
Ixxxix. 3, 4 ; czlviL 14. The chief promise 
is that of a special " fruit of his body" to 
be "set upon his throne" (ver. 11) and to 
reign in Zion for ever (vers. 13, 14). 

Ver. 11. — The Lord hath sworn in tenth 
unto David (comp. Fs. Ixxxix. 3, 35). He 
will not turn from it. So it is said of . 
another Divine oath, " The Lord swate, 
and mil not repent" (Fs. ex. 4). Of the 
fruit of thy body wUl I set upon thy throne 
(see 2 Sam. vii. 12; Acts iL 30). 

Ver. 12. — If thy children will keep my 
covenant and my testimony that I shall 
teach them, their children shall also sit 
upon thy throne for evermore (oomp. 2 Sam. 
vii. 14 — 16, where the conditional character 
of the promises made to David is also 
apparent)i 

Ver. IS. — ^For the Lord hath chosen Zion; 
he hath desired it for his habitation. Here 
we are brought back again to the temple. 
Zion, the city of David, was also "the city 
of the great King" (Fs. xlviiL 2)— the 
place where he had " set his Name " — which 
he was bound to protect an(^ cherish. " As 
truly as God had chosen Zion, and made 
his habitation there, so certainly must he 
also raise up for David a branch, through 
which to his people concentrated there he 
will impart salvation" (Hengsteaberg). 

Ver. 14. — ^Ihis is my rest for ever: here 
will I dwell; for I have desired it (comp. 
Ps. Ixviii. 16). 

Ver. 15. — ^I will abundantly bless her 
provision: I will satisfy her poor with 
bread. Literully, this seems to point to the 
blessing of abundance of food. Spiritually, 
it may be a promise of ample spiritual 
sustenance. 

Ver. 16.— I will also elothe her priests 
with salvation (comp. ver. 9). More is pro- 
mised than was asked for. And her saints 
shall shout aloud for joy. Here, too^ the 
promise goes beyond the request in ver. 9. 

Ver. 17.— There will I make the horn 
of David to bud. The "horn of David" 
budded most gloriously when " a rod came 



260 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[p8. cxxxn. 1 — 13. 



forth out of the etem of Jesse, and a branch 
grew out of hia roots, and the Spirit of the 
Ijord rested upon him" (Isa. xi. 1, 2)— in 
other words, when Messiah appeared, and 
re-estahlisherl the DaviiUan kingdom, which 
thenceforth has endured, and will endure 
for ever. I have ordained a lamp for mine 
anointed. The metaphor is changed; but 
the idea id the same. Clirist's comiog shed 
a glury on David's house, and on the temple, 
and on David himself, such as had uever 
previously illumined them. David is often 
promised "a lamp " (1 Kings xi. 36 ; xr. 4 : 



2 Kings viii. 19 ; 2 Chron. xxi. 7). In Christ 
the lamp was given. 

Ver. 18. — ffig enemies will I elothe with 
shame. David's " enemies " are those who 
oppress his " Seed," and will not have him 
to reign over tliem. All such will be "con- 
founded and put to shame " (Fs. xxxt. 4), 
"clothed with shame and dishonour" (Ps. 
XXXV. 26). But upon himself shall his crown 
flonrish. The true and the final Davidio 
representative is Christ, who " remaineth a 
King for ever " (Ps. xxix. 10). On him his 
crown will ever flouiiah. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 18. — The service of the sanduary. We are accustomed to think of devotion 
in connection with the house of the Lord. The two things are clearly, though not 
inseparably, associated with one another. There may be piety where there is no 
sanctuary; there may be a sanctuary where there is no piety. Practically, however, 
we find the two in very close alliance. We have in this psalm — 

I. The good man's anxiett. (Vers. 1 — 5.) David is represented as very seriously 
concerned about the sanctuary of God. It is a mark of devotion when wo are more 
willing to spend our time and our money on God's house than on our own ; when we 
would rather have our own dwelling out of repair than let his house be neglected. 

II. God's favoubino presence. (Vers. 7, 8, 13, 14.) God chose Zion as the place 
of bis manifested presence. There he could be worshipped (by sacrifice) as nowhere 
else. Though not actually more present in the sanctuary than elsewhere, he is so to 
OUT thought and feeling ; and there, if we gather in the spirit of devotion and reverent 
inquiry (Ps. xxvii.), we may confidently expect that God will manifest his power in the 
enlightening and renewing influences of his Spirit. 

III. MiNisTEBiAL EQUIPMENT AND BEWABD. (Yers. 9, 16.) The ministers of 
God : 1. Are to be clothed with righteousness. They must be men in whom is the 
Spirit, and in whose lives are found the principles of Jesus Christ. It is vain to 
commend him with the lip when the life bears no confirming witness ; but when Up 
and life speak the same truth, there is power and fruitage. 2. They will then he 
clothed with salvation. They will be men whose word will be of Divine redemption, 
whose work will be the healing, the strengthening, and the saving of the souls of 
men; and this plenitude of salvation vrill overflow to the life of those they serve. 
There is — 

IV. A coNBEQUENT BLESSING TO THK PEOPLE. "They shout for joy" (vers. 9 — 16). 
1. Where worship is rightly rendered, where the praises of a gracious God are sung 
with grateful hearts as well as tuneful tongues, where the glories and the graces of God 
in tJhrist Jesus are unfolded as they should be, and as they will be hy ministers who 
understand and magnify their mission, there will be pure and deep joy in the act of 
IMvine service. This is the true, the Christian note to strike ; not that of spiritual 
depression, but that of sacred joy ; for are we not " children and heirs of God " ? are we 
not "kings and priests unto God"? do we not "sit in heavenly places in Christ 
Jesus"? 2. When ministerial work has been faithfully discharged, it has led souls 
into the kingdom of God, which is " righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost." 
The psalm brings out, what we must never lose sight of — 

v. The CONDITIONAL CHABACTEB OF ALL DiviNE PROMISES. (Vers. 11, 12.) The 
promises of God usually, as here, have a condition attached to them ; but where it is 
not expressed it is understood. The wise and holy Father could not promise anything 
absolutely to his children ; that would be unworthy of his wisdom, and injurious to our 
true interests. Forgiveness is promised to repentance and faith ; the indwelling Spirit 
to purity of heart ; peace of mind to believing prayer ; the crown of life to faithfulness 
unto death, etc. 



PS. cxxxii. 1—18.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 261 

VI. The great fclfilmbnt. The psalm is Messianic (see Luke i. 69). 1. An availing 
plea. If for David's sake God is asked not to send the suppliant away unblessed, how 
much more confidently may we plead the Name of the Son of David, and ask that for 
Christ's sake he would not send us away without forgiveness and spiritual refreshment I 
2, 2%e hope of truth and victory. Christ, the Light of the world, the victorious Prince 
and Saviour, was ordained, and in due time he came (vers. 17, 18). 



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The power of a holy soul. 1. That David was buoh wb abb bound 
TO BELIEVE, notwithstanding the Hagrant and most grievous sins which are recorded 
against him. They stagger ub when we read of them, and we wonder how such a man 
could ever have been called " the man after God's own heart." But in this psalm, aa 
so constantly throughout the Holy Scriptures, we come across statements which prove 
that, in the estimation of the people of his day, and of those who knew him best, he 
was held most dear. A passionate enthusiasm of honour and affection gathered round 
his name and memory, the evidence of which is met with simply everywhere. How 
could this have been if he were only what many in our day say he was, and who hold 
him up, not for warm approbation, but for severe reprobation V We are bound to judge 
of a man, not accoiding to the standards of our own age, but of his, and to accept their 
testimony and not our inferences from statements which it is impossible for us iu this 
age fully to understand. His own people loved and honoured him, and that is enough. 

IL As SUCH HE WAS DEAB TO THE HEABT OF GoD. For his descendants felt that 
they might plead his name as an argument in their prayers. They believed that they 
might call upon God to " remember David." There is no hint here or anywhere that 
they were wrong in this. Doubtless they were right. There is no saint-wurship in 
this, and no seeking David's intercession with God ; but there is the valid plea that 
Gtxi would re ID ember the prayers and sorrows of his faithful servant — sorrows which 
came to him in consequence of his love and zeal for God. The people of God knew 
bow God had remembered Noah, and taved. him and his from the Flood ; how he had 
remembered Abraham, and for his sake had saved Lot out of Sodom ; and now they 
believed he would remember David, and would bless them as David had prayed. 
Such is the power of a holy soul to bring down blessing upon his children and upon 
tiis people. 

III. What made him thus deab to the heabt of God? 1. Becaiae dishonour 
to Ood vas distress to him. It was a grief of mind that the ark and service of God 
thould be so ill cared for (c£ 2 Sam. vii. 2). It was to him a public dishonour done to 
God to allow such a thing to continue. How few there are who I'eel like this I All 
people seek their own, nut those things that are God's, It was an a£9iction to David 
that God was not honoured. Oh that it may be so to us I 2. Because he not only 
grieved for the dishonour, htt earnestly sought to remove it.. See how intense was his 
desire that God should have a fit habitation (ver. 5). He would not rest in his house, 
nor lie down, etc. (vers. 3, 4), until, etc. (ver. 6). Oh for zeal like this I What a 
witness for God it would be! And how solemnly he bound himselt' over to thi'i work 
(ver. 4) I And it was ever his anxious concern ; this the meaning of " his af9iction " in 
ver. 1. Now, because of this, though he was a man of su many faults, and though he 
never did build the Lord's temple, yet was he beloved of the Lord. 

IV. The result that followed, and still follows, from what David was. 
1. His name became a valid plea with Ood. 2. An inspiring memory for all time, and 
especially to those who succeeded him. 3. A perpetual encouragement to all who 
work and suffer for God. 4. A call to us to cherish holy zeal for the honour of God. 
S.O. 

Ver, 5. — " A 'place for the Lord." L To skcukb this should be the object of 
OVR IKTENSE DESIRE AND ENDEAVouB. 1. Because the Lord so des ret it. See his name 
here, " the mighty God of Jacob." What a poor mean wretch Jacob too often was 1 
And yet how God compassionated, pitied, uplifted, and saved him! What does not 



262 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxxxn. 1— la 

such a redeeming God deserve and demand 1 2. For the sake of our fellow-men. It i« 
the world's great and crying need — ^that the Lord God should dwell among them. 
It is heaven where " the tabernacle of the Lord is with men." 3. For our own sake. 
For God's "loving-kindness is better than life." God is the soul's exceeding Joy. 

IL Whebe we sbould hake this ENDBATonB. 1. In our own heart. Until he 
have a place, a habitation, there, it is no good our trying to find him a place elsewhere. 
2. In ovr homes. Let our own family be the scene of our first aggressive work. 3. In 
the branch of the Church to which we belong. The Church should be God's rest for 
ever ; he would have it so (ver. 13). But it too often is not. And until the Church is 
right, the world will remain wrong. To have a better world we mnst have a better 
Church. 4. In our own neighbourhood. All who dwell around ought to be the better 
for our dwelling in their midst. "Let your light so shine," etc. 6. Throughout 
the world. The missionary cause should be dear to our heart. 

III. How WE SHOULD GO TO WORK. 1. Bff personal self-surrender to Christ. This 
stands at the threshold of all our work. Nothing can be dune till this is done. 2. By 
believing prayer, importunate and persevering, and by holy example and faithful 
testimony. 3. By consecration of our substance to this work. 4. By continual self- 
denial. 5. By perpetual trust in Christ. 6. By firm, holy, and abiding resolve. 
(Vers. 2—4.)— S.C. 

Vers. 6, 7. — Led of the Lord. We do not know for certain what " it," in ver. 6, 
means. Probably the ark of the covenant — " the ark of thy strength " (ver. 8). Nor 
do we know exactly where Ephratah was, and " the fields of the wood " (see Exposition 
for • possible interpretation). But we may suffer the expressions used in these verses 
to suggest to us the progress of the soul led by the Lord in the ways of life. We 
only take " it " as telling of the grace of God, the Word of life. And concerning this 
we may note — 

L That God pbefabeu the heabt that ib to beoeive his obace. See how it 
was with David, how his soul was stirred in connection with the object he had in view. 
And so God ever deals with men. By one means and another he gets them ready for 
what he is going to give them. 

II. Then his obace is heabd of. The Ephratah stage is reached. When the 
soul has been got ready, the seed is sown, the Word is heard, and it has fallen into good 
ground. 

III. Teen it is sought afteb and found. The search may he a long one, and 
the discovery made at last in some seemingly very unlikely place — some fields of the 
wood, as it were, where no one would have thought of going to look for it. In what 
unthought-of places and ways God is found ! 

IV. Then come the open confession of it, and fellowship with them who 
ABE LIKE-MINDED AND HAVE ALSO FOUND GoD. " Wo Will go into his tabemacles." 
They have found what their soul desired, and they will proclaim it before all by going 
to the house of God with the people of God. 

V. This followed by the life of waiting upon God. "We will worship at 
his footstool." So the Divine life in us is matured and sustained. At what stage in 
this progress are we ? — S. 0. 

Vers. 8, 9. — The Church the rest of the Lord. This is the only place in the Psalms 
where the ark is mentioned. And it is only described aa here in 2 Chron. vi. 41. 

I. The Chubch the Lobd'b eesting-plaoe. (See Numb. x. 33 — 36.) When the 
ark set forward, it was " to search out a resting-place for them." And where they 
were, God would be (ver. 13). It is not the magniticence of the shrine, the numbers or 
the rank or wealth of the attendants, but it is the spiritual character of the people, 
that God looks at. His Church consists of those who believe, love, and obey him. 
They are the objects of his love and care and choice. They shall have his presence, 
and his delight shall be with them. 

II. The Chuboh cannot pbospeb without the pbesence of God in Christ. 
This is the meaning of the words, " Thou and the ark of thy strength." For though 
we had the presence of God, we could not know it apart from Christ. " No man cotneth 
unto the Father but by me;" "This is life eternal, to know thee, and Jesus Christ 



w. OTXxn. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 263 

whom thou hast sent." Our knovrledge of God is dependent on our knowledge ot 
Christ. The ark was the ark of Ood's strength. Before it the waters of Jordan parted 
asunder ; the walls of Jericho fell down ; the idol-god of the Philistines, Dagon, was 
shattered. It was the symbol and pledge of strength from Qod for all Israel's need. 
Hence the consternation of Eli when he heard that the ark of God was taken. But so 
is our Lord Jesus Christ the strength of God. For through him God wins as, keeps 
us, inspires us, strengthens us. God can do anything with us and through us when 
Christ is our Life. Revealed to our hearts in Christ, we are utterly his. 

III. The Chubch is blessed ikdebd when this pbateb is answebed. 1. Her 
priests are clothed with righteousness— endued with the spirit of holiness. The being 
clothed tells of manifested character, the habit and garment of the soul. And what a 
joy and a power to the Church is a holy ministry I Nothing can compare with it, nothing 
can compensate for its absence. 2. Her saints are filled with Joy. Gladness and 
sanctity go togethei, as they ever should. Let us ever pray, " Endue thy ministers 
with righteousness, and make thy chosen people joyful." 

IV. The Chubch, would she be thus blessed, uust bees fob the blbssino 
IN PBATEB. "Arise, Lord," etc. Then the Lord will dwell in her; she will be 
his rest (vers. 14— 18).— S.O. 

Vers. 13 — 15. — " Zion of the Lord beloved." I. She is the object or the Lobd'b 
choice. 1. We cannot get rid <^ the trutho/OocPs election. Many would like to do so. 
It calls up in their minds thoughts of a very painful kind. It clouds for them and to 
them the face of God. 2. But we see it everywhere. Are not we ourselves a chosen 
people? With whom hath God dealt, in the way of privilege, as with us? 3. And 
we act upon the principle ourselves. If we want some work to be done, we elect the 
best instruments we can find for it. We do not send just anybody, but we choose 
whom we shall send. 4. And this fact shows us how to regard the chctrine of election. 
The election is to service for the sake of others, not to their exclusion, as is so commonly 
thought ; for their good, and not for their ill. Thus God chose Abraham and Israel, 
that his " way may be known upon earth, and his," etc. (Ps. Ixvii.). Not that others 
may be left out of the Divine blessing, but brought into it. If we are rendering no 
service to our brethren, then we are not of God's elect, for all his elect seive. 

II. She is his best and desibed habitation fob eveb. 1. Allusion is, no donibt, 
made to the ark of the covenant. Its shiftings and migrations had been many ere it was 
finally fixed at Jerusalem. It went from Shiloh to Bethel (Judg. xx. 27) ; then to 
Mizpeh (Judg. xxi. 5) ; then, for twenty years, it was at Kirjath-jearim, in " the fields 
of the wood ; " then, for three months, in the house of Obed-Bdom ; and finally at Zion, 
where the psalmist thought it would rest for evermore. 2. But what was not strictly 
true of the ark and Zion is true of God and his Church. He ever dwells there ; for 
his people have been chosen in Christ from the foundation of the world. He has 
already done so much for them, both in providence and in grace. Amongst ourselves 
nothing so hinds us over to render further help as help we have already given. And 
certainly it is so with God. He begins his good work, and therefore he goes on 
(Phil. i. 6). Then, God has promised to be ever with his people (see John xiv. 
16 — ^23 ; Bph. ii. 21, 22). Amid his people only is he honoured, loved, and obeyed ; 
other men grieve, dishonour, and despise him and bis Law ; but his people count him 
their " exceeding Joy." And then he is beginning already to reap his blessed harvest 
in them. Our Lord himself was the Sower who went " forth weeping, bearing," etc. 
(Ps. cxxvi. 6); and already he is beginning to "come again with rejoicing," etc For 
amid his people he finds even here and now — how much more by-and-by 1— sympathy, 
love, holiness, devotion, those things in which he delights because they are of and like 
himself. 3. And what is true of the Church at large is true of the individual tovil. Are 
we, then, members of God's Zion, enrolled in the fellowship of his Church ? 

IIL The fbovision shall be abundantly blessed. Her praises, her prayera, 
her initructions, her ministers, her sacraments, her assemblies, — these are her provisions ; 
and Gnd shall, does, abundantly bless them to the securing of those happy results for 
which they were designed. 

lY. The foob shall be satisfied with bread. In his Church the poor are the 
lieh, and the rich the poor. For the poor are those who know it and long for the Bread 



264 THR BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxxxn. 1— 18. 

of life, and bo get it and are rich. But the rich desire not, and so have not and are 
poor. And Zion's poor shall he satisfied. Oh to be of these poor I — S. C. 

Ver. 18. — The shame of Chrises enemies and the glory of his crown. That part of 
the Old Testament history to which this psalm refers is in all probability the dedica- 
tion of the temple which Solomon had built. Part of it forms the conclusion of the 
prayer which Solomon offered on that occasion (cf. vers. 8 — 10 and 2 Chron. vL 41, 
42). And the whole of it is appropriate to that event. Its first portion expresses the 
earnest anxiety of God's people ibr his presence amongst them, and the second recounts 
those facts and promises on which their faith that G-od would come amongst them 
rested. David had been full of concern about the building of the house of the Lord. 
It was a real distress to him until he had found a place, etc. (ver. 6). And all his 
conduct had been in keeping with this holy desire. Now, this the psalmist prays the 
Lord to remember. And what an example such holy anxiety is to us all when we are 
seeking the presence of the Lord in our midst I Such holy longing after himself God 
will never disappoint. The latter part of the psalm proves this, and our text is the 
closing promise of a series, all of which assure the people of God that Christ shall lira 
and reign and triumph in their midst. So, then, let us consider— 

I. Tee shame of Christ's enemies. 1. It is strange that he should have any 
enemies, so good and gracious as he was. 2. But some of these enemies do not think them- 
selves to be such. Those that are openly and flagrantly against Christ all can recog- 
nize; but there are a number of others who, though not with Christ, would protest 
against being regarded as his enemies. But such protest will not avail. To be not 
with Christ is to be against him — his enemy. 3. And for his enemies there awaits open 
shame. They shall be clothed with it. (1) There will be the shame of defeat. They 
cannot, shall not, have their way. The Church they would despoil the Lord will 
keep. (2) And of contempt. For think what it is they oppose ; not some tyrannous 
oppression, but a just, holy, and most beneficent rule. And how inexcusable such 
opposition, for God's Word was all against them, and the testimony of the best and 
wisest of men, and conscience, when suffered to speak, condemned them I but, never- 
theless, they persisted in their sin and folly. What but the shame of contempt can 
come to them ? What else should come ? (3) And of the profound moral condemna- 
tion of all the good. For these opponents of Christ have violated all their better 
naturCi have incurred the guilt of deep ingratitude, and have wrought widespread 
evil ; they have dragged down with them many precious souls, and they have done 
foul dishonour to God. May he keep us from all such shame 1 

IL The olobies of the Savioub's obown. " Upon himself," etc. None of us are 
capable of adequately speaking of these glories, but we are able to see some of the 
sources whence these glories spring. As: 1. From the nature (f Christ's rule.. It is 
supreme, universal, eternal, attained at vast cost and in infinite wisdom, righteousness, 
and love. 2. From the universal and glad response which it shall receive. " His saints 
shall shout aloud for joy." His rule is their delight. 3. From the results of his ru2e. 
See the numbers of his subjects, their happy condition, their spotless purity. These 
are some of the results of our Saviour's rule. 

Conclusion. In which shall you and I share — in these glories, or in the shame with 
which his enemies shall be clothed i One or the other it must be. Before God let as 
settle this question. — S. C. 

Ver. 1. — Anxious purpose delayed may prove afflictive, " Remember for David [<.e. 
•o as to fulfil the promise made to him] all his trouble " (see 2 Sam. vi. 8 — 16 ; 1 Chron. 
xxii.). This psalm may belong to the period of Solomon, but it is better to read it in 
the light of the memories and feelings and hopes of the restored exiles. It is a plea 
for the fulfilDient of the promises made to David in the experiences of the restored 
nation ; and it is a poetical way of saying that the anxieties of the exiles for the honour 
of Jehovah and Jehovah's worship were only fitly represented by the anxiety of David 
in the olden time. The key-note of the psalm is given in the first sentence, " Lord, 
remember David." " Fulfil in us thy promises to him ; for we are like-minded towards 
thee and thy service." The point immediately before us is, that affliction is a com- 
prehensive term, and may include providential hindrances. It should be borne in mind 



PS. oxxxii. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 265 

that, as David purposed to build a temple for God, and could not accomplish his 
purpose, so the restored exiles purposed to rebuild the temple, and could not accomplish 
their purpose because of the opposition of the Samaritans. The psalm represents the 
fretting of the pious part of the nation at this enforced delay. 

I. Divine bindbances, oa using delay, mat be keoessabt. It is true that God 
deals with the individual, and has personal interest in each individual ; but he is the 
Father of & family, and must keep supremely in view the interest of the whole. The 
wish of one is always considered, but delay may be necessary in order to get things 
worked round so that the wish may be met without injury to others. Man's purposes 
are formed without full knowledge, so they often must be qualified. 

II. Divine HiNniiANOBS, oausinq delat, mat be afflictive. That depends greatly 
on the disposition of those who form the purposes. A king, like David, who was 
constantly getting his own way, would find it especially hard to be hindered. The 
exiles, who were full of enthusiasm for God's house, must have found it very hard to 
have their work arrested. All the harder because their purpose was such a manifestly 
good one. It may be urged that no severer strain ever comes into a good man's life 
than enforced delay in accomplishing bis pious purposes. In agony a man may say, 
" God will not let me do the good I would." 

III. Divine hindbanoes, oausing delay, may be educative. They may educate 
hvmility, by convincing us that we are not absolutely necessary ; and tuhmission, by 
compelling our wills to wait on God's will ; and hope, by assuring us that God being 
in the delay will surely be in the issue to which it leads. — B. T, 

Ver. %.—The Mighty One of Jacob. Every man hag — should have — ^his own appre- 
hension of God, and name for him.' (For this name, see Gen. xlix. 24.) It does not 
appear that Jacob called him " The Mighty One." This is the name which those find 
for Jacob's God who can read aright the story of God's dealings with the great patriarch. 
But it is more than probable that there is poetical allusion to the revelation that was 
made to Jacob at the Jabbok. The nameless one who wrestled with him prevailed to 
leave on him the permanent mark of his power. So he may properly be figured as thu 
" Mighty One." This name for God is also found in Isa. i. 24 ; xlix. 26 ; Ix. 16. 

I. A MAN MUST USE THE NAMES THEBK ABE FOB GOD UNTIL HE CAN MAKE ONE 

FOB HIMSELF. Mothers give the first conceptions of God, and teach the first name for 
him. As the boy unfolds into the man, he will have changing, enlarging, ideas of God, 
and want other names for him. Israel fixed a variety of names in association with 
particular incidents. The earlier names chiefly embody the idea of power. Presently 
they enlarge to express character. But only refined minds need names that express 
personal relations. It may be well to illustrate what a variety of names there are in 
the Old Testament for God, and further, to show what differences of conception are 
embodied in the names for God in different nations and religions. Teut, Allah, Theos, 
Deus, Buch, As, Istu, Bain, Magatal, Fussa, Goezur, Yannar, etc. It may be that a 
man can never really get to fill the Divine name Father with its proper meaning until 
he realizes his own paternity ; but this is getting a name out o( an experience. 

II. A MAN MAY GET HIS OWN NAME FOB GoD OUT OF HIS BXPERIENCKS OF LIFE. 

And a man does not really know God, or come into right personal relations with him, 
until he gets his own name by which to call him. It may, of course, be an old and 
familiar name ; but the man must make it his own. The experiences of life may bring 
to a man a great awe of the Divine majesty ; or a lear of the Divine power ; or a 
wondering over the Divine mystery ; or a tenderness on account of the giaciousness of 
Divine dealing. In each case we want a name ; and we put our own special meaning 
into the name for God that we use. It means more to us than it does to any one else. 
And when once we have fixed our own name for God, it becomes a sort of test by which 
we appraise and understand all God's further dealings with us.^B. T. 

Ver. 6. — Housing OocPs symboU. The fitting old place was a temple; the fitting place 
now is a heart. The old economy was an elaborate picture-teaching of spiritual 
truths and relations. It is urged that, as man is a composite being, and can never 
transcend his bodily conditions, his religion must always be as composite as himself. 
It miut have its visible symbols, and they must have their fitting earthly, material, 



266 THE BOOK OF PSALMa [pb. oxxxn. 1— 18. 

gurroundings. On the other hand, it is urged, as by the Hindus, that precisely what 
man lias to do, precisely what has to be the issue (if life, is full deliverance from the 
sensible and material, from all reliance on form, symbol, sacrament, or other outward 
help ; and absolute absorptiou in, and satisfaction with, spiritual and eternal realities. 
To many this must seem a dream ; and it may confidently be affirmed that the 
majority of mea will never transcend their dependence on mateiial symbols. Religion 
for humanity will always have its shrines, its sacraments, and its services. And if this 
be so, then adequate and efficient material helps will be sought by all devout souls. 
And this is illustrated in David's anxiety. 

I. The fitting place for Divine btmbolb. David had to deal with a sacred 
ark, which was the symbol of Jehovah's presence as the supreme King of the nation. 
Clearly what was befitting to the King was a dwelling-place. But David had restored 
that ark to a nation that bad at last gained settled permanency. The sense of security 
led to the idea of building a palace for David. How natural that David should think 
of building a palace for his supreme and sovereign Lord 1 A movable tent was no 
longer in harmony with the national lite. The houses built for God, the churches and 
chapels of to-day, ought to represent that sense of God and of God's presence which 
they have for whom they are built. If the house holds the symbols which God gives, 
it is the symbol of God which man cieates. It represents his thought of God. 

II. The fitting place fob the bkalitt bepbesented by symbols. For symbols 
are never realities, and never must be thought of as such, or treated as such. They are 
only symbols. The Divine presence is a tpiritval reality. And that must have its 
shrine. That shrine is a human heart. " To that man will I look, and with him will 
I dwell, who is humble and contrite in heart." The heart-temple must be worthy of 
its real presence. — B. T. 

Yer. 6. — The history of the ark atomizing the history of the nation. If Ephratah 
is to be treated as the ancient name of Bethlehem, we must not understand this Terse 
to affirm that the ark was ever there; but, putting himself back into the olden days, 
the poet represents David as having heard about the ark when he was living at 
Bethlehem. But it is more simple to take Ephratah as a general term for the district 
in which the ark was found. Historical or geographical precision is not necessary in 
a poem or a psalm. It should also be noticed that this psalm is arranged in answering 
sentences for chanting. In saying that the ark was the symbol of the Divine presence, 
we are hardly precise enough. The Divine presence was a wondrous light that shone 
above the cover of the ark, and between the guarding cherubim. The ark itself repre- 
sented the nation of Israel, and in it the tables of the covenant were put, as in the 
heart of the nation God's laws were settled. God's symbolic light resting on the 
representative ark signified God's acceptance of, and favour toward, the nation. So 
the history of the ark becomes the suggestion of the history of the nation. This may 
be illustrated in four stages. 

L The abk bepsbsentino the nation's tbainino-tiub. It was for a time in the 
making, according to Divine instructions, and during the wilderness- period, a ritual 
and religious associati ms were growing up aroimd it. It is not always clearly seen 
that the religious system was being developed, as well as a national and governmental 
system, during the years of the desert-wanderings; and the system grew round 
the ark. 

II. The abk BEPBESENTiNa ths nation's self-willed thus. Every nation, 
during its formation, has a self-willed time, such as is represented by the period of the 
Judges ; and the fate of the ark during that period singularly answers to the up-and- 
down experience of the people. We have the ark dishonoured; used for wrong 
purposes; lost; preserved by God; and partially restored. And these are evident 
BUggestions of the national life of the period. 

ILL The abk befbebentino the nation's pbosfebocb tiue. Under David it was 
brought to represent the nation before God, and the light shone again on its cover, 
signifying full restored relations. And under Solomon the ark and the glory gained 
permanent location, signifying the nation's religiously founded prosperity. 

IV. Ths abk befbusentins the nation's decayinq time. It ceased to represent 
the teJiole nation — ten tribes neglected it. Then it became ill used, and at last it was 



P8. oxxxn. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 267 

carried away and lost, as the nation was ill used by encroaohing Baalism, aad carried 
away by Babyloniaa force.^B. T. 

Ver. 7. — God^s footstool. " Worship at his footstool." By the " footstool " is meant 
the cover of the ark, on which the Shechinah-light was regarded as resting. Bound the 
top of the ark ran a crown or wreath of pure gold, and upon it was the mercy-seat, of 
the same dimensions as the ark, made, not of wood overlaid with gold, but entirely of 
pure gold. At either end of the mercy-seat rose two golden chembim, with outspread 
wings, and faces turned towards each other, and eyes bent downwards, as though the 
Bhecbinah-glory were too dazzling to look fully'upon. It would appear to be a special 
idea of David's, for in his last address to his people he said, " As for me, I had in mine 
heart to build an house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and for the 
footstool of our God " (1 Chron. xxviii. 2). The Eastern idea of a footstool to a throne 
is seen in Solomon's ivory throne. " There were six steps to the throne, with a foot- 
stool of gold" (2 Chron. ix. 18). The man whooffered homage, or presented a petition, 
might approach no nearer to the king than his footstooL In a more general sense 
heaven is said to be God's throne, and the earth his footstool ; then anywhere on earth 
is a fitting place for offering our worship (see Isa. IxvL 1 ; Matt. v. 35 ; John ir. 
20—24). 

L WoBSHiFPiNo AT God's footstool srraoESTS the Divinb condescension. He 
lets us come into bis presence, and even to come so near to him, so directly into 
personal communion with him, as is indicated by approaching his footstool. But he 
permits no presumption, no irreverence. And it is well to remember that, if Christianity 
permits of familiarity with God, it must never be other than a holy familiarity. The 
Christian must keep at the footstooL The surprise at the Divine condescension in 
permitting us to come so near as this is well indicated in 1 Kings Tiii. 27 ; Isa. 
Ixvi. 1, 2. 

IL WoBSHippiNo AT God's FooTSTOot suqoests the mood of the wobshippebb. 
A royal presence is always afiecting, and a man who enters it is always set upon securing 
the best preparations and attitudes. There is lacking from much of our worship and 
prayer that sense of coming to a King who is so glorious that we may not get nearer to 
him than his footstool. The proper mood for the Divine presence may be elaborately 
unfolded and illustrated. We only suggest that the proper mood is a holy blending of 
humility and confidence — the humility that says, "I dare not," with the confidence 
that says, " I may."— R. T. 

Ver. 9. — The holy clothing. The allusion is to the way in which the priests of God, 
in discharging their sacred functions, set forth his righteousness in the salvation of his 
people. The white garment of the priest is the symbol of the clothing of righteous- 
ness (see Zech. iii. 3, 4 ; Bey. xix. 8). " Fitting attire, figuring the inner still more 
glorious attire which they should wear, of holiness and obedience to him whom they 
serve " (' Speaker's Commentary '). Dr. Bushnell remarks on dress as being the " out- 
ward analogon, or figure, of character ; dress relates to the form or figure of the body, 
character to the form or figure of the soul — it is, in fact, the dress of the soul. The 
option we have in one typifies the grander option we have in the other. The right 
we have in one, above the mere animals, to choose the colour, type, and figure of the 
outward man, foreshadows the nobler right we also have to cast the mould, fashion or 
despoil the beauty, of the inward man. On the ground of this analogy it is that the 
Scriptures so frequently make use of dress to signify what lies in character, and repre- 
sent character, in one way or another, as being the dress of the soul. Thus they speak 
of the 'wedding garment," the garment of praise,' that 'of cursing,' that 'of pride; ' 
• the robe of righteousness,' and ' of judgment,' and ' the white robe,' and ' the best 
robe' given to the returning prodigal, and 'the robe that has been washed,' and 
'judgment put on as a robe,' of 'white raiment' and 'white apparel,' of 'glorious 
apparel,' of ' filthiness,' or ' righteousnesses that are filthy rags,' of ' filthiness in the 
skirts;' and, more inclusively and generally still, of being 'clothed with salvation,' 
•with strength and power,' 'with humility,' 'with majesty,' 'with shame,' 'with 
fine linen, clean and white, which is the righteousness of saints.' All the figures of 
dress and clothing are used up, in this manner, by the Scriptures, to represent the 



268 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxxxn. 1—18. 

forms of disgrace and filthiness, or of beauty and glory, into which the inner man of 
the soul may be fashioned — wearing Heaven's livery, or that of sin. As character is 
the soul's dress, and dress analogical to character, whatever has power to produce a 
character when received, is represented as a dress to be put on." In the references of 
this psalm to the white clothing of the priests, that clothing is said to represent both 
" righteousness " and " salvation," It may very well be that these are only two terms 
to represent the same thing, but, at least, they are the same thing seen from different 
points of view ; and we may be right in seeing distinct but related things. 

I. The holy olothino of the priests symbolizes salvation. The white 
garments on the cleansed body were associated with the great sacrificial acts, which 
bore the closest relation to the recovery, restoration, ceremonial redemption, of the 
people. At the great Day of Atonement, the symbol of all the Divine salvations, the 
high priest was required to " put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the Uneu 
breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen 
mitre shall he be attiied : these are holy garments; therefore shall he wash his flesh in 
water, and so put them on " (Lev. xvi. 4). 

II. The holy clothing of the pbiests symbolizes biohteousness. Which is 
the basis, ground, and condition of salvation on man's side. A man who seeks 
salvation must want to be what is represented by the priests' white garments. A man 
who seeks Christ's salvation can never have it unless he wants to be as pare, as 
righteous, as Christ. The priest can atone for nobody and nothing unless he is, repre- 
sentatively at least, righteous. And nobody can be atoned for unless he is representa- 
tively — and in resolute will and purpose — righteous. Man's righteousness is no ground 
of acceptance with God, but man's wish to be righteous is the condition on which alone 
a sacrifice can be made for him. So when the restored exiles longed and prayed for the 
renewal of the glories of David's time, they wanted their priests who represent them 
clothed with salvation and clothed with righteousness; clothed with righteousness 
because clothed with salvation, or in order to effect salvation. It will easily be seen 
how the formal teaching of the " holy clothing " found its spiritual realisation in our 
great High Priest, who, in his righteousness, represents what we would be to the 
eternal Father, and gains the power and right, through his obedience, sacrifice, and 
'exaltation, to come into our spheres of character, and make us what we would be, and 
what he is. — R. T. 

Ver. 12. — Conditional promises. "If thy children will keep my covenant." Is an 
unconditional promise, either human or Divine, conceivable ? And if conceivable, is it 
reasonable, and could it ever be wise ? It certainly could never be, as the promise of a 
man, who could never see all rouud a thing and all through it, and so never have a 
sufficient basis on which to make the promise. And we cannot think of an uncon- 
ditional promise as ever befitting for Crod to make, because he must make it to moral 
beings, whose continuance in the same mood can never be guaranteed. The folly, and 
possible mischief of all unconditioned promises is indicated in the promise of excited 
and half-drunken Herod to the dancing-girl Salome, which tricked him into taking the 
life of Christ's foierunner. It may seem as if, by removing the unconditional element 
from God's promises, we removed our confidence, and brought in the possibility of his 
breaking his word. But his doing the very best for us is more important than his 
keeping any particular promise ; and doing his best may mean not keeping his word ; 
only we must clearly see that the ground of his change is change in us — is our failing 
to meet his appointed conditions. That conditions, affixed to promises, are a blessing 
to us may he readily shown. 

I. CoNDiTioKB TEST OBEDIENCE. While we are here on earth we never transcend 
the dependent child-spheres. We are under what is represented hy family rule; and 
that always tests obedience by putting conditions to promises. " If ye be willing and 
obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land." 

IL Conditions cultdbe trust. Because they keep up relations with the promise- 
maker, and preserve our sense of dependence on his good will. If a promise were 
absolute, it would tend to separate us from the promiser. It would be something 
distinct from him. And it would be fatal to our trust in God if we could rely upon his 
word as distinct from himself. We must trust the "Faithful Promiser." 



PS. oxxxii. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. ?69 

IIL Conditions act as warnings. Illustrate from the constancy with which the 
nation Israel was warned of the covenant-conditions of its promises. The Divine " if" 
stands ever before ub. We lose all claim on the cromises if we fail to meet the 
conditions ; and the loss is our own. — B. T. 

Ver. 14. — Limited permaneney. For the changed locations of the ark, see Bethel 
(Judg. XX. 26, 27), Mizpeh, Shiloh, Eiijath-jearim, house of Obed-Edom, Jerusalem. 
We are often disturbed hy the fact that God's promises have a sound of permanency, 
but that permanency has not been realized, at least in the way in which the realization 
was expected. There are two things which need to be taken into consideration. 1. The 
Bible is largely poetry, and the poetry is of the Eastern type, in which there is always 
an element of intensity and exaggeration. In dealing with all poetry we have to use 
an answering imagination to that of the writer of it, and so get at what he suggests 
rather than what he says, 2. It is to be borne in mind that, strictly speaking, the idea 
of absolute permanency can never be applied to anything created, for every created thing 
must be dependent on the good will of its Creator. To these considerations a third may 
be added. The introduction of sin, as human self-will, into the world, has introduced 
frailty and brevity into everything related to the sinner. The promise of permanence 
for David's royal house, or for the temple which his son built, was certainly not 
formally realized. David's dynasty ceased ; the Babylonians destroyed the temple. 
And it was not that the promises were conditional ; it was that they were never 
intended to be permanent. It would not have been the best blessing for the world for 
David's dynasty or the Solomonic temple to have continued /or ever, in a literal sense. 

L A THIKO IS BEALLT PERMANENT THAT CONTINUES BO LONO AS IT IS BEALLT 

NEEDED. A thousand things are better passed away when they are done with. Mere 
length of endurance in time is no necessary blessing to anybody. True permanency 
is fitting to use. "A man is immortal until his work is done." Then it is best for 
bdm to be mortal. 

IL A THINO 18 BEALLT PBBMANBNT THAT PASSES INTO WHAT IT FBBPABED FOB. 

For everything is a matrix, forth from which something comes which is to live and 
be a matrix in its turn. In one sense everything is destroyed ; in another sense 
nothing is destroyed. We live for ever in the great succession of things. Our living 
force goes into the stream of time, flows on to the ocean of eternity, and can never be 
lost.— R. T. 

Vers. 1 — 18. — Spiritual worship. " The psalmist, filled with the memory of many 
an ancient oracle in praise of David and his city Zion, unable to bear the thought that 
this ' beauty of all the earth,' for which David had toiled, should remain sunk in misery 
and ruin, prays to God to remember bis promises, and to return once more to his chosen 
dwelling-place ; " that the temple may be rebuilt, and the national worship restored. 
Some of the principal thoughts suggested are — 

I. That the qbeatest wore a man oan do is to help to bring Qod neabeb 
TO MEN. In this case David toiled with unwearied efforts " to find out a place for the 
Lord," where the ark might at length rest. But there are many ways besides of 
bringing God nearer to the thoughts of men. Public worship is only one means. A 
Ufe divindy lived ; works ; conversation. God is made known best by the living 
temple. 

II. God will, howeyeb, in dub time bewabd the laboctbb of his faithful 
bebvantb. " Lord, rememher David, and all his laliour and trouble." " Turn not away 
the face of thine anointed." Do not deny his prayers. Seeming delay on God's part 
is no real delay. 

ni. It IB God's will to beveal himself and be found of men. "The Lord 
hath chosen Zion ; he hath desired it for his habitation," etc. He has created men for 
the fellowship of himself and of one another. " This is my rest for ever; " as the 
father finds rest at home. 

rV. God has hade abundant pbovibion fob the wants of oub bfibitual abo 
PHTBIOAL natube. " I will clothe her priests with salvation, and her saints shall shout 
for joy . . . ordained a lamp for mine anointed," eta " I will bless her provision with 
increase, and satisfy her poor with bread." — S. 



270 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PB. OTxxni. 1 — 3. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM CXXXIIL 



A iHOBT psalm in praise of unity and 
brotherly harmcmy. As Dr. Eay observes, 
"The preservation of this unity was the 
object of the selection of one place, to which 
the tribes should go up on pilgrimage three 
times a year." And the intercommunion 
with each other, which the pilgrimages 
fostered, was certainly one of the chief 
meani by which a unity of feeling and 
sentiment was kept up among the scattered 
member! of the nation century after century. 
The pilgrimages were to the Israelites what 
the meetings at the Olympic and other 
games were to the Greeks — at once witnesses 
to a belief in ethnic unity, and a strong and 
efficient bond of union. This psalm was 
ilierefore admirably fitted for a "pilgrim- 
song," which it is allowed on all hands to 
have been, and must have greatly helped 
the various classes of pilgrims — the spiritual 
and seoular authorities, the rich, the poor, 
the citizen, the peasant, and the widely 
divided members of the Great Diaspora — ^to 
feel themselves united with each other and 
with Jehovah (see Professor Cheyne's Intro- 
duction to the psalm in his ' Book of Psalms,' 
p. 841). 

Yer. 1. — Behold, how good and how plea- 
sant it is for brethren to dwell together in 
unity 1 The unity described appears to be 
existent, and to present itself to the psalmist's 
vision. Hence the opening, " Behold I " All 
may see it, and see how blessed and pleasant 
a thing it is. "Brethren" is used in the 
wide sense of descendants of a common 
ancestor (Gen. ziii. 8; Exod. ii. 11; Acts 
vii. 26, etc.). 

Yer. 2. — ^It is like the precious ointment 
upon the head. The anointing oil of the 
sanctuary was an ointment composed of 



many "precious" ingredients, as myirh, 
cinnamon, sweet calamus, and cassia, be- 
sides oil olive, which was its basis (Ezod. 
XXX. 23, 24). Not only Aaron (Lev. viii. 
12), but all later high priests, were anointed 
with it (Exod. xxx. 30). That ran down 
upon the beard, even Aaron'si heard. This 
would be the natural result of a copious 
"pouring" of the oil upon the top of the 
head. Though not mentioned historically 
in Leviticus, it presents itself to the eye of 
the poet, on whose mental vision the whole 
scene rises. That went down to the skirts 
of Ids garments. Streamed even to the 
lower fringe of his long vesture (Kay). The 
high priest at his consecration was a type 
and symbol of unity. He bore on his breast- 
plate the names of the twelve tribes, so that 
the holy oil, typical of the grace of God, 
when it was poured upon him, flowed down 
on all the tribes, diffusing everywhere ma 
odour of fragrance. 

Ver. 3. — As the dew of Hermon, and as 
the dew that descended npon the moimtains 
of Zion. The interpolation of the words, 
" and as the dew," is quite unwarrantable, 
and spoils the sense. It substitutes duality 
for unity, and destroys the parity of the 
two illustrations. Translate, " As the dew 
of Hermon, that cometh down upon the 
mountains of Zion." The psalmist sees the 
moisture which fertilizes the Holy Land, 
and makes it the fertile land that it is, all 
given forth from Hermon, the one great 
mountain at its head. As Dr. Kay well 
observes, " Physically, Hermon was to 
Canaan what Aaron was ceremonially to 
Israel — ^its head and crown, from which the 
fertilizing stores of heaven descended over 
the land. For not only does the one great 
river of Palestine, the Jordan, issue from 
the roots of Herman, but the giant mountain 
is constantly gathering and sending off 
clouds, which fioat down even to Southern 
Zion." For there ({.e. in Zion) the Lord 
commanded the blessing, even life for evei>> 
more. The reference is to Lev. xzv. SI, 
and perhaps to Dent xxviii. 8. 



H0MILETI03. 

Yers. 1 — 3. — Unity in the Ohurch. Applying the words of the pBtilm to a Ohrlstiau 
community gathered together for the worship and the work of our Lord, we may 
regard — 

I. That in which unitt oonmbts. This we find in: 1. The acceptance of the 
same truth in the same sense. It is not enough that all subscribe to the same Oreed, 
or agree to use the same words in prayer or sacred song, — that is only a formal and 
outward unity ; there must be a substantial, intelligent agreement. Not necessarily, 
not indeed possibly, the acceptance of Christian truth in all its particnlars in the same 



PS. oxxxni. 1— 3.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 271 

sense; but the reception, in the mind, of the fundamental doctrines of the Christian 
faith hy all professed believers. 2. Essential oneness in aim and spirit; all being 
animated by the same desire to promote the glory of Christ and the elevation of man- 
kind; all having the same spirit of earnestness and holy expectation. 3. Readiness 
to concede and co-operate. There can be no good work without hearty union of forces, 
and there can be no such combining without a cheerful readiness to concede to one 
another. Each must "esteem other better than himself." 4. Mutual esteem and 
affection. This can only be attained by a disposition to recognize and to honour all 
that is best in other people, and a determination to make the least of anything that is 
unceasing or even unworthy. 

n. Itb attbactiveness. (Ver. 2.) As fragrant as the sacred oil used in priestly 
consecration is the odour of brotherly love. And as an exquisite fragrance attracts 
whilst anything offensive repels, so the presence of unity in the Church is a constant 
invitation, unformed and voiceless, but influential and effective. No one will come to 
the community where discord is the prevailing state ; many hearts will be won, many 
feet will repair to the circle where peace and concord dwell. 

III. Its BEAiTTT. (Ver. 3.) It is as benuiiful in the moral realm as the dew on 
which the sun is shining is exquisite in the material. We admire unity when we see 
it. It shows the presence of the finest moral and spiritual qualities. It is the fair 
product of self-control, of obedience to the Word and will of God, of the study of the 
character and spirit of Jesus Christ. It is the reproduction of his own life. It is a 
spiritual result on which the eye of the soul rests with a pure and keen delight. 

IV. Its value as vital to all tkue buooesb. (Ver. 3.) "There the Lord 
commanded the blessing," etc. There may be the appearance of success without it, 
but not the reality. Other, human qualities may command great congregations, large 
contributions, elegant and commodious premises; but without the unity which our 
Lord requires in his people, there will be no Divine blessing, there will not be the 
communication of the " life for evermore," the eternal life which is born of his Spirit. 
No leader or teacher can over-estimate the value of the spirit of unity in the Church 
of Christ. No surrender of our own preferences can be too great to secure it. For 
nothing should we pray more earnestly : " Pray for the peace of Jerusalem ; " Jesus 
himself prayed that " they all may be one." They who cannot achieve any great 
things in utterance or in organization may render essential service by breathing and 
diffusing a peaceful spirit, by promoting the imity which is the unvarying condition of 
all real success. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1 — 3. — Unity. This most delightful little psalm summons our attention to the 
exceeding excellence of this grace of unity, and by so doing it invites us to consider 
what are its elements and conditions. Now, we all of us have a general idea of what 
unity is ; we need not labour after an exact definition, and we are ready to subscribe 
our assent to the declaration of the psalm, and say of it, " Behold, how good and pleasant 
it is I " These two qualities do not always go together ; there are many things that are 
good but are not at all pleasant, and we know that there are many things which are 
pleasant which are not at all good. But of the grace of unity, both can be afiBrmed, 
Now, this will be seen as we consider — 

I. What, hebk, this obaoe of twitt is likened to. To the sacred consecrating 
oil with which the priests of God were anointed (cf. Ezod. xxx. 22 — 33). And also 
to the dew which descended on Mount Hermon. 1. Take these two similitudei together. 
That which is common to them both is their so descending, flowing down, that, as in 
the case of the holy oil, the whole person of the priest is sanctified by it; it descended 
from the head to the beard, and thence to the borders of the priestly garment, so that 
his whole service was consecrated, and all his members. And so with the dew on the 
lofty Hermon ; it stayed not there, but descended — the word " descended " is used in each 
case, it is the key-word of the psalm, like the word "keep" in Ps. cxxi. — to the lower 
heights, and thence to the plains, so that the whole land, from Hermon in the north to 
Zion in the south, was blessed thereby. Now, the grace of unity is in this respect 



272 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [fs. orsxni. 1— 3, 

like the holy oil and the dew — it is a blessing for all and every one ; for all our service 
and ministry, for all the people, the lowly as well as those of high station, and for all 
the land. North and south in Palestine had been torn by discord, strife, and war ; but 
when this psalm was wri'ten they were all "as one man," gathered and bound together 
in the unity of their national life and of their one faith (Ezra iii. 1 ; Neh. viii. 1). 
Happy the nation, happy the Church, happy the home, where this blessed spirit of 
unity comes and abides I 2. Take them separately. And : (1) The holy oil. It was 
commanded of God (of. Bxod. zxx.). It was very precious and fragrant. Its com- 
position and character were due to God. It consecrated all service, and no service 
could be rendered without it. But all this true of this grace of unity. (2) The dew. 
It gave fertility and beauty and health to all the land, which would have been bare and 
sterile without it. Again, this is true of this grace. That nation, Church, home, where 
unity reigns shall be good and pleasant to look upon and to be associated and identified 
with. It shall render glory to God, and be for the blessing of men. 

II. What are its condttions. 1. Association. We must come together; there 
can be no unity in solitariness. We are many members, but one body. It condemns 
all separatism for separatism's sake. 2. Variety. There is no unity in the mere 
repetition of the same things, as in a heap of sand, a flock of sheep. But unity requires 
harmonized varieties. Music is not a monotone, but a harmony. Acts of Uniformity 
cannot secure it. In a true Christian society there must be variety of thought, feeling, 
and opinion, of age, position, character. 3. Liberty. There is no unity where there 
is no freedom. No real agreement exists where none is allowed to disagree. A lump 
of ice binds together a whole mass of most discordant things, but there is no unity in 
such a mass. They are fettered together by the frost force ; let that be loosed, and 
each goes its own way at once. 4. Life. There is no strife in a graveyard ; dead things 
do not quarreL A dead Church is peaceful enough. 5. Intelligence. The unity that 
is produced by piiestcraft and superstition, where education and intelligence are lacking, 
where if light came it would at once be dissolved, — that is not true unity. But without 
these conditions (vers. 1 — 3) unity is not. 

III. What its real bocroe. The Holy Spirit of God. Like as one life animatei 
our bodies and makes them one, one common feeling the passion-swayed multitude ; 
so when the Spirit of God comes into a community, then, as at Pentecost, there is one 
body, " one Lord, one faith, one baptism " (Eph. iv.). 

IV. What the fruit it bears. " There the Lord commanded the blessing," etc. 
(ver. 3). It is ever so. — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — Possible unities. The topic of the psalm is the joy felt in the reuniting of 
the nation in its restoration from the scattering and depression of the Captivity. 
Strictly there is no Hebrew equivalent for the words rendered " in unity." The 
Hebrew simply means, " How pleasant a thing it is for (those who are) brethren to 
dwell together also ! " The idea has been thus expressed, " How good it is for those 
who are united by the ties of kinmanship to be united yet closer by the possession of 
one common place of abode I " A race in possession of a common country merges 
individual in national interests. The two illustrations represent the pervading influence 
of this sympathetic spirit. The anointing oil which reached to Aaron's feet. The 
dews of Hermon, which were wafted over all the land. 

I. There is the possible unity op similarity. The oneness of a common life ; 
common pleasures ; a common love. The similarities may concern very simple things, 
and yet be deeper than all diversities, and may gain triumph over everything that may 
tend to separate. Similarities in language, art, scientific interests, political principles, 
skill in games, suffice to unite men. How much more should religious feeling, and 
share in Christian work ! Illustrate by the uniting bond of Freemasonry. 

II. There is the possible unity op diversities. There is no necessary /orm in 
which any life is bound to express itself. However life genuinely expresses itself, the 
expression will be found in harmony with every other expression. The pictures in the 
Academy are set, oftentimes, in painful colour-contrasts one with another. The flowers 
of a garden are always harmonious. True unity consists in each being his best alon" 
his own line. 

IIL There is the possible uhitt of heeskebs. Meeknest means voluntary 



P8. oxxxiii. 1 -3.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 273 

pattiog one's own interests aside in order to fit ourselves to the service of otheni. 
And, in this sense, meekness is the deepest secret of unity. That kind of unity we 
should get in (1) family life; (2) Church life; (3) social life. For that, however, we 
need special grace, in order to triumph over sinful self-pleasiog. The triumph of the 
Christian relationship is the unity that comes through altruistn, for Christ's sake. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 2. — Fragrance of the brotherJwod, " True concord is a holy thing, a sacred oil, 
a rich perfume which, flowing down from the head to the heard, from the beard to the 
garment, sanctifies the whole body." We get a better idea of the figure if we think 
of scent, or perfume, rather than oil, which Western people dislike, save for special uses. 
There can be little room for doubting that the psalm is a rejoicing over the restored 
unity of the Jewish nation. " Ephraim no longer vexed Judah, or Judah Ephraim." 
The mutual jealousies of the tribes had ceased ; and those who returned to Jerusalem 
belonged to all the tribes. " That at this time there was a real unity of heart and 
mind in the nation may be inferred from the narratives in Ezra and Nehemiah" 
(Ezra iii. 1 ; Keh. viii. 1). The point of comparison does not lie in the preciousness of 
the oil, or in its all-pervading fragrance ; but in this — that, being poured on the liead, 
it did not rest there, but flowed to the beard, and descended even to the garments, and 
thus, as it were, consecrated the whole body in all its parts. All the members participate 
in the same blessing (for the composition of the anointing oil, see Exod. xzx. 22 — 33). 
The point to unfold is that the consecration of God, which binds the Church in unity, 
secures the uniti/ of a common fragrance. 

I. The bsothebhood is not a unitt of bamekess. God never makes the brothers 
of a family alike ; and when he remakes men, he does not shape them to a pattern, he 
gives them a new common life. 1'he oil is represented as not stopping with intellectual 
people, who are as the head ; it goes on to the strong people, who are as the beard ; 
and to the useful people, who are as the limbs. All the members of the body retain 
their individualities. 

II. The bbothebhood is a xrsm of obaoe beoeived. The new bond uniting 
all the members of the body, and all the relations of the life (which are represented by 
the garments) is the oil of Divine grace which reaches to aud sanctifies them all. 

in. The bbothebhood is a ukitt of common bespokse. Every part gives forth 
fragrance, and it is everywhere the same fragrance— the fragrance of that godly character 
and godly living which grace sanctifies. Scents are dependent on the substances on 
which they lie. Some absorb and destroy fragrance. Others freely give it forth. The 
unity of the Church is the fragrancy of the holy living of each one of its members. — B. T. 

Ver. 3. — Lessons of the dew. Palestine is a land of dews. It is very dependent on 
them. Destitute of rains for many months at a time, it relies for securing crops on 
the heavy fall of dew which is secured nightly by its multitude of mountains. Hermon 
is no more conspicuous in the sight than in the peculiar abundance of its dews. They 
become rain for the thirsty land. Mr. Porter says that one of its hills is appropriately 
called " Father of the Dew," for the clouds seem to cling with peculiar fondness round 
its wooded top. Dr. Tristram says, " We had sensible proof at Basheiya of the copious- 
ness of the ' dew of Hermon,' spoken of in this psalm, where ' Zion * is only another 
name for the same mountain. Unlike most other mountains which gradually rise from 
lofty table-lands, and often at a distance from the sea, Hermon starts at once to the 
height of nearly ten thousand feet, from a platform scarcely above the sea-level. This 
platform, too — the upper Jordan valley, and marshes of Merom — is for the most part 
an impenetrable swamp of unknown depth, whence the seething vapour, under the rays 
of an almost tropical sun, is constantly ascending into the upper atmosphere during the 
day. The vapour, coming in contact with the snowy sides of the mountun, is rapidly 
congealed, and is precipitated in the evening in the form of dew, the most copious we 
ever experienced. It penetrated everywhere, and soaked everything. The floor of our 
tent was saturated, our bedding was covered with it, our guns were dripping, and dew- 
drops hung about everywhere. No wonder that the foot of Hermon is cltid with 
orchards and gardens of such marvellous fertility in this land of droughts." Dr. Geikie 
gives quite a fresh explanation of the ordinary dew of the country. " There is no dew, 
properly so called, in Palestine, for there is no moisture in the hot summer air to be 
rsALHs — ui. * 



274 , THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxxxm. 1— a 

chilled into dew-drops by tbe coolne68 of the night, as in a climate like ours. From 
May to October rain is unknown, the sun shining with unclouded brighttiess day after 
day. The heat becomes intense, the ground hard, and vegetation would perish but foi 
the moist west winds that come each night from the sea. The bright skies cause the 
heat to radiate very quickly into space, so that the nights are as cold as the day is the 
reverse. To this coldness of the night air the indispensable watering of all plant-life 
is due. The winds, loaded with moisture, are robbed of it as they pass over the land, 
the cold air condensing it into drops of water, which fall in a gracious rain of mist on 
every thirsty blade. In the morning the fog thus created rests like a sea over the 
plains, and far up the sides of the hills, which raise their heads above it like so many 
islands. At sunrise, however, the scene speedily changes. By the kindling light the 
mist is transformed into vast snow-white clouds, which presently break into separate 
masses and rise up the mountain-sides, to disappear in the blue above, dissipated by 
the increasing heat." Dew seemed to the Israelites a mysterious gift of heaven, as 
indeed it is. (For Bible associations of the dew, see 2 Sam. i. 21 ; xvii. 12 ; 1 Kings 
xvii. 1 ; Job xiix. 19 ; xxxviii. 28 ; Ps. ex. 3 ; Pro v. xix. 12 ; Cant. v. 2 ; Hos. vL 4; 
Hag. i, 10 (Gideon's dew on the fleece is familiar, Judg. vi. 36 — 40) ; Isa. xviii. 4 ; 
xxvi. 19, etc.) Gkid's blessing is like the dew in these particulars — 

I. In its mystebiousness. The dew differs from the rain in this, that we feel as if 
we understood the rain, but we never seem to understand the dew. We can see the 
clouds that distil in rain; we cannot see the moisture of the atmosphere which distila 
in dew. It is God working in secret for our good. Then, too, it is not always what it 
geems. It seems to be a cold night mist, that chills us, and we think must chill every- 
thing. It is (God's blessing always is, whatever form it takes) the very thing that 
vegetation most pressingly needs. 

II. In its fbomisouousness. No one can keep the dew wholly for himself. It will 
bless his neighbour too. Nobody can limit or imprison Qod's blessings. They come 
on evil and on good. 

III. In its oentleness. Contrast the deluges of rain in Eastern rainy seasons. 
The blessings of God are often missed by us because they come so silently, so unex- 
pectedly, and so gently. The psalmist says, " Thy gentleness hath made me great." 

lY. In its ooino to the boots of things. Dew is no surface-blessing. Its 
refreshing goes to the roots of the plants. God's blessings are often unobserved ^cause 
they do not change our circumstances, but refresh and renew us; they give us new 

Ver. 3. — Old Testament "eternal Ufe.^ "Even life for evermore." There is a 
curious legend attaching to the dew of Hermon. " An old pilgrim narrates that every 
morning at sunrise a handful of dew floated down from the summit of Hermon, and 
deposited itself upon the Church of St. Mary, where it was immediately gathered up 
by Christian leeches, and was found a sovereign remedy for all diseases." This legend 
suggests one of the connotations of the term " life for evermore." 

I. It means always available. The natural processes which form the dew of 
Hermon will go on as long as there is a Hermon ; and God's blessing will be prepared 
for bis people as long as he has a people. Dew and blessing are always available, so 
long as they are needed. But everything depends upon our using what is available. 
The dew of Hermon practically fails when the leeches neglect to gather it. The 
blessing of God practically ends when men no longer care to seek or receive it. Man's 
Messing from God is " life for evermore ; " but man can himself put the limit to God's 
'Evermore." 

IL It MEAN8 BEALiTT, NOT MEBELY AFPEABANOE. We think chlefly of God'i 
blessing as a prosperity of our circumstances, and that can never be, and had better 
never be, continuous. It is altogether better to have that kind of blessing from God 
changeable, because our circumstances cannot remain long the same, and the relation of 
circumstances to us, and the influence of circumstances on us, are constantly varying. 
If God were to imprison and fix one set of circumstances for ever,and give us to choose 
which we would have thus fixed, we should be hopelessly puzzled, and God would be 
doing us no kindness. People talk about " for ever " and " everlasting," without 
thinking to what alone those terms r'an be applied, if they are to represent any real 



F8. OZXXIV. 1 — 3.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



275 



blessing to us. The entire aphere of the sensual cannot be " for evermore." It is of 
its very nature that it begins and ends. The " fashion of this world passeth away." 
It is life that is for evermore. It is the spiritual being that man is that lives for evar. 
It is the spiritual character that man wins that abides for ever. And helping him to 
win that character is the blessing — the " life for evermore " which Qod bestows. — B. T. 

VerB. 1 — 3. — Unity. Herder says of this exquisite little song that " it has tho 
fragrance of a lovely rose." Nowhere has the nature of true unity — that unity whiok 
binds men together, not by artificial restraints, but as brethren of one heart — been 
more faithfully described, nowhere so gracefully illustrated, as in this short ode. Trne 
concord, we are here taught, is a holy thing, a sacred oil, a rich perfume, which, flowing 
down from the head to the beard, from the beard to the garment, sanctifies the whole 
body. It is a sweet morning dew, which lights not only on the lofty mountain-peaks, 
but on the lesser hills, embracing all, and refreshing aU with its infiuence. 

I. Tbub unity. 1. Is the unity of hreihren. They feel that they have a common 
Father, and are children of the same household. 2. But it is unity in variety. Variety 
of thought, but unity of heart. A unity of the utmost extremes — from the head to th« 
edge of the garments of society. From the heights of Hermon to the humbler hill 
of Zion. 

IL Its goodness and jot. 1. Unity can come only from love. And love is the 
greatest goodness, and the highest, deepest joy. 2. 2Vue unity it the most fragrant 
and rrfrahingfaet of l^e. In the individual, and in the Ohuron, and in society.— 8. 



EXPOSITION. 



FSALH OZXXIV. 



Tn •• little Psalter " of Songs of Absents " 
terminates here with a ihort psalm, due 
ptofaably to the oompilei — a psalm of four 
lines only. It ooDsista of two poitiona: 

(1) A call honk those without the temple, 
npon God's servants, who oondnct bis 
service within his bouse during the night 
seaiOD (1 Chron. ix. 33), to praise and 
thank the Lord in their name for his mer- 
eies vouchsafed to them (vers. 1, 2); and 

(2) a response from those within the temple, 
who ask God to " bless out of Zion " those 
who have addressed them. The psalm is 
very suitable for pilgrim-bands arriving, as 
they commonly would, late in the day at 
the temple gates, and announcing their 
arrival to those within, who would be ex- 
pecting them, and would call on God to 
bless their pilgrimagu to them (ver. 3). 

Ver. i. — Behold. The word calls atten- 



tion to an Immediate need — something that 
is to be done, and to be done at once. Bless 
ye the Lord. This must mean " for ns" — 
"on our behal£" Thank God for having 
brought our journey to a prosperous en(L 
All ye servants of the Lord, whieh by night 
stand in the honse of the Lord; i.e. ye 
special servants of the Lord, priests and 
Levites, now standing within bis courts, 
and engaged in his worship. The temple 
was never left without a body of priests and 
Levites, to keep it and sing praises in it. 

Ver. 2. — Lift np your hands. The altitude 
of prayer and praise (Pss. Ixiii. 4 ; oxix. 48; 
cxli. 2). In the sanctuary ; rather, towards 
the sanctuary} i.e. towards the holy of 
holies. Others render, "in holiness." And 
bless the Lord (compare the first clause of 
ver. 1). 

Ver. 3.— The Lord that made heaven and 
earth (oomp. Gen. i 1 ; Fas. oxv, 15 ; cxxi. 
2; cxxiv. 8; cxlvL 6). Bless thee out of 
Zion. God was regarded as dwelling in 
Zion, and therefore as giving his blessings 
out of Zion (oomp. Pss. xx. 2; liii. ft; 
cxxviiL 5). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — Ood and man; reciprocal relations. "It must needs be a matter of 
conjecture who the sjeakers are" in this short psalm; but these three verses bring 
before us the reciprocal relations existing between our God and ourselves, particularly 
•s those engaged in his worship. " Bless ye the Lord . . . the Lord bless thee." 



>276 The book of psalms. [ps. okxxiv. i— a. 

' I. In approach and nearness of spirit. We draw nigh unto him, and lie draws 
nigh unto us (2 Chron. xv. 2 ; Jas. iv. 8). We come up to his house to " seek his 
bee " (Ps. zxvii. 8), and he seeks us ; he finds us ; he makes us conscious of his 
presence. He manifests himself unto us as not unto the world. And when we leave 
•the sanctuary, and (partly through the help we have gained there) cherish the sense 
of God's near presence, and feel that we are " with him " everywhere, then is )ie " with 
'us," not only in nearness of spiritual presence (Fs. csz^x.), hut in fiilnesi of Divine 
sympathy and the putting forth of Divine power on our behalf. 

IL In pbateb on our part, and in communication op truth on his part. We 
speak to him in prayer (ver. 2). With uplifted hands, in reverent adoration, we pour 
but our heart in humble, earnest supplication, or in renewing before him and unto him 
our solnmu vows. We may do well to put it to ourselves in these simple terms — ^that 
we are together, that with one voice and one thought and hope we may "speak to 
Qod." Then we listen as be speaks to us. As we listen to the reading of his Word, 
we may feel — Surely this is nothing other than God speaking' to our hearts. Such a 
thought should make him that reads and those who hear feel that this is not the least 
important part of Divine worship, and is not undeserving of our best effort and atten- 
tion. The preacher in the sanctuary should set before him as his high aim, as his 
noble and holy function, so to declare his message, that, through his human voice, God 
will be speaking to the people of his charge. Thu^, before le^vihg the house of God, 
We shall have reverently spoken to him ; he will have graciously spoken to ug. 

■III.- In BLEssiNa. "Bless ye the Lord -, , . the Lord bleSs thee."- 1. We bless God as 
we offer him out lowly but sincere adoration ; as we ascribe to him all power, wisdom, 
faithfulness, holiness, mercy, patience ; as we present to him the tribute of our praise 
for all his past kindness to us, and especially, for his grace to us in Christ Jesus; as we 
thank him for all he has promised to us in the near and in the further future. 2. He 
hlesses us as he lifts on us the light of his reconciled countenan(;e ; as he enlightens 
our understanding, and enables us to perceive new and fuller tru^, of recognize familiar 
truth more clearly or vividly ; as he kindles incur waiting heart a ^stronger fliime of 
gratitude and love; as he stabliRbes and strengthens our soul- in our purpose of devo- 
tion ; as he draws out our sympathies with all that suffer and are in need; as he sends 
us forth from his presence confirmed and enlarged in heart, rejoicing in himself and in 
his service. It may be added that : (1) If we honqur^hinii, he wilL honour us (1 Sam. 
iL 30). (2) If we love him, he will love us (John xiv. 21). . (3) If we crown him Lord 
of our heart and life, he will crown us with the crown of eternal lifeu 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1 — 3. — The songs of degreed doxologtf. This series of psalms ends, as all 
service of worship should, with the voice of praise and thanksgiving. It is iU if oar 
prayers and varied waiting upon God do not bring us into the spirit which would bless 
the Lord, and bid all others do the same. That spirit is present in this psalm. Npt?^ 

I. The exhortation herb given. " Behold, bless ye the Lord." Now, this psalm,, 
being placed here at the end of the series, bids us look bach and trace, in the psalms 
that have gone before, the manifold reasons wherefore we should bless the Lord. The 
first of these psalms, Ps. cxi., tells of deliverance from cruel enemies ; Ps. cxxi., of 
God's continual preservation of his people ; Ps. cxxii., of joy and delight realized in the 
worship of the Lord ; Ps. cxxiii., of. waiting continually upon God. in times of trouble ; 
Ps. cxxiv., of deliverance from fierce foes ; Ps. cxxv., of experience of God's guardian 
care ; Ps. cxxvi., of the joy of God's salvation; Ps. cxxvii., of the Lord alone being our 
sure Keeper; Ps. cxxviii., of God's grace and goodness sweetening the home; Ps. 
cxxix., of afBictions many, but of preservation in them all ; Ps. cxxx., of God's blessed 
uplifting ; Pfi. cxxxi., of the soul kept in the peace of God ; Ps. cxxxii., of the pros- 
perity of the Church ; and Ps. cxxxiii., of her unity ; and now in Ps. cxxxiv. there is, as 
there well may be, the command to bless the Lord. Whata long list it is of mercies,' 
and help, and deliverances, and blessings imspeakablel If men wlil look back along 
(heir lives, they too will bless the Lord. ■> 



PS. oxxx,iT< l-r-3.]! THE BOOK OPi PSALMS.' 277 



n. To WHOM IT IS ADDRESSED. 1. To aU sBTvantt of the Lord. For there is none 
that has not good reason lor obeying it. But especially:. 2. To them "who by night 
itand in the^ house of the Lord." Now, !here allusion is n^ade, bo it seems, to those 
whose office it was to minister before, the Lord during the night itfatches-^there were 
priests and Levites who had duties by night as well as by day (1 Ohron. . ix. 33):. 
There was "a night watch of choristers who kept up tiie^ worship 'of Godr through the 
silent hours." Two Terses of the psalm seem /to have .befen the salutation of the congre- 
gation addressed to them, and yer.; 3, is theiores^nse. -3, And Gpd has yet many tervcmts 
whose duty is to serve him through fke night .hours. The.sleepless ones — those who 
from one cause and another have to say, ";Thou boldest mine .eyes waking." Well is 
it for such to employ those hours ip the prai^a of. the. Lord (cf.; Ps. Ixiii. 5, 6)t :And 
■uch as the sailor pacing the deck in the night watch, the sentry on guard, the nurse 
in her ward, — well is it for them in the night to bless the Lord. . 4. Or, we may take 
the night at telling of the night of sorrow — those times of darkness and depression 
through which we all have to pass (see Paul and Silas in the dungeon at Philippi, 
at midnight siDgin°; praises unto God). How often have these psalms been used by 
God's people at such hours, and with what rich results in the! quickening of faith and 
hope and joy in God I 6. A,ni if, as some maintain, there was no later service in the 
temple than the evening sacrifice, then the many, evening congregation* gathered together 
may take these words as addressed to them. 

III. How IT IS TO BE OBETED. They Were to "lift up their hands to the sanctuary." 
The body should bear its part ; posture and gesture. help the spirit. 

IV. What comes of sncH obedience. The Lord will bless us (ver. 8). Ha who 
bath all power, who made heaven and earth, he will bless the soul that worships him 
(of. Ps. cxxxy. 3). All who have thus drawn near to G«d have, found, that he draws 
new to them. — S. 0. 

Ver. L — Representative worshippers. From a Targum wo learn that "the onstom 
in the second temple appears to have been this : After midnight the chief of the door- 
keepers took the key of the inner temple, and went with some of the priests through 
the small postern pf the Fire Gat^. . In the inner court this watch divided itself into 
two companies^ each carrying a burning torch; one compiirry turned west, the other 
east ; and so they compassed the court to see whether all were in readiness for the 
temple service on the foUowipg morning. In the bakehous^,' where the mincha (meat 
offering) oT the high priest was baked, they met with the 6ry^ ' All well I ' Meanwhile 
thC; rest of the priests arose, bathed themselvdS, and put'on their' garments. They 
then went into the stone^hamber (one half of which was the hall of session of the 
Sanhedrim),., and. there, lunder the superintendence of' the officer who! gave 'the watch-- 
word and one of the Sanhedrim, surrounded by the priests clad in their robes of office,> 
their sevisral duties for the coming day were assigned to each, of the priests by .lot." 
It should be always borne in mind that, in the Divina idea,' the entire people of/ Israel, 
made up a nation of priests. Every man was regarded as a consecrated man, separated 
unto the honour, worship, and service of t[ehovah. What ^ver^ cabled the actual priests 
were only representatives of these universal priests, and th6y Were onl^ daily doing 
materially what every man-priest pf the nation was pledged to do^ and if he was a true 
and worthy, man, was trying to do spirituaUy. If this point can be clearly seen, a 
new interest will be found to attach to the various doino;8 o^ the representative priest- 
hood. Men are always learning from them what they should be and what they should 
do in a spiritual sense. One thine; is set prominently in this^ psalm. . 'i'he work of the 
priests is to "bless Jehovah." This they do in a formal manner by lifting up their 
bands and voices, waving the censers, etc. Let an Israelite see «r hear a priest blessing 
God, and his heart ought at once to respond, sayinig, *' That is just what /ought to be 
doing; with heart, and lip, and deed, and above all by the thankful, trustful, devoted 
spirit of my life."— R. T. 

Ver. 2.— "Holy hands", (For the high-priestly benediction, see Numb.,yi. 2i.) Baising 
suppliant hands is the formal, bodily sign of earnest prayer. Every mental or moral 
state h^ its correspo.nding natural bodily attitude or. mpyemient ; ai;td raising and 
stretvhipg forth the .opened hands in a,receptive;attitude is ths natoral ^tly attitude, 



278 



THE BOOK OP PSALMa 



[ps. oxxxv. 1 — 21. 



accompanying petition. There is an important alteration in this sentence. It should 
be, " Lift up your hands to the sanctuary ; " and the figure is of the priests taming 
towards the holy of holies, where the symbol of God's presence rested, and stretching 
forth hands of Bupplication towards it (see Solomon's attitude at the dedication of the 
temple). 

I. Thube IB AH KLSHENT OF PBATEB IN ALL BLEBSINO OF GoD. There is for man ; 
there may not be for angels. Man can never offer even his praise without a sense of his 
unworthiness. So he must always mingle a prayer for pardon and for pitying mercy 
with his thanksgivings. And he can never draw near to the Divine presence without 
a sense of need. So say what he may of God, or to God, in his praises, he finds that 
he always has something to ask for. His dependence always wants to find expression. 
We are always wrong if there is no prayer in our praises. 

U. The element of pbater finds expression in uplifted hands. Kneeling in 
prayer is to a great extent a modern device. Easterns stand to pray. So did our 
forefathers. And so do those who now lead prayers at prayer-meetings. Stretching 
forth the hands is now regarded as the act of beoediction, as in the Catholic and Scotch 
Protestant Churches. But it is such a universal and natural expression of suppli- 
cation that it might very wisely be restored to use in private as well as public acts of 
prayer and praise. The apostle bids us " lift up holy hands, without wrath and 
doubting." 

III. The uplifted hands uust be holt hands. The priests had to wash their 
hands, as a sign of their putting away all self-indulgence and self-will and all gathered 
evil before engaging in the praises of Jehovah. And it is the absolutely universal 
law, " Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord." The symbol of the soul-cleanness 
which goes with sincerity and gains for us acceptance, is the washed and holy uplifted 
hands.— B. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXXXV. 



A bono of praise to God (vera. 1 — S, 19 — 21) 
for : 1. His mercies to Israel (vers. 4, 11). 
2. His greatness in nature (vers. 5—7) and 
in history (vers. 8 — 12). 8. His infinite 
superiority to idols (vers. 15 — 18). Metri- 
cally divided into three stanzas of seven 
verses each (vera. 1 — 7; 8 — 14; and 15 — 
21). A " Hallelujah psalm " (vers. 1, 21). 

Ver. 1. — Praise ye the Lord (oomp. Pes. oiv. 
35 ; cv. 45 ; cvi. 1,48 ; czL 1 ; cxii. 1 ; cxiil. 1, 
etc.). Fraise ye the Name of the lord (conip. 
Fs. cxiii. 1). Fraise him, ye servants of 
the Lord; rather, prai$e it; i.e. the Name. 

Ver. 2. — ^Te that stand in the house of the 
Lord, in the courts of the house of our Ood. 
The " servants " are not here the priests and 
Levites only, as in Ps. cxxxiv. 1 ; but the 
priests, the Levites, and the people — all 
those who throng the "courts" of the 
ten' pie (oomp. vers. 19, 20). 

Ver. 3. — Fraise the Lord ; for the Lord is 
good (comp. Pss. Ixxxvi. 5 ; cxix. 68). Sing 
praises unto his Kame ; for it is pleasant ; 
fir, " lovely " (oomp. Pss. lii. 9 ; liv. 6). 

Ver. 4. — For the Lord hath ohoseu Jacob 
nnto himself. This is the first reason why 
Israel should praise God. Israel is his 



people, his chosen people, selected bv him 
out of all the nations of the euth to be his 
own, his inheritance (Dent. iv. 20; vii. 6; 
xiv. 2, 21, etc.). And Israel for his pion- 
liar treasure (see Exod. xix. 5). 

Ver. 5. — For I know that the Lord is 
great, and that our Lord is above all gods. 
Here is the second reason why Qod should 
be praised — he is great, greater far than 
any other being — " above all gods " — »« more 
to be feareil than all gods" (Ps. zcvL 4). 
This greatness is shown, firstly, in his power 
over nature, which is the subject of vers. 7, 
8 ; and secondly, in his dealing with man- 
kind, which form the subject of vers. 8 — 12. 

Yer. 6. — Whatsoever the Lord pleased, 
that did he (comp. Ps. oxv. 3). God's power 
is only limited by his own attributes of trntb 
and goodness. He cannot contradiot his 
own reason, or his own moral qualities. 
Otherwise he can do anything and every- 
thing. In heaven, and in earth, in the seas, 
and all deep places. This is intended as 
a complete division of space : (1) tlie 
heavens above the earth; (2) the earth 
and seas, in the middle sphere; and (8) 
the abysses, or depths below the earth, as 
far as they can be conceived of as extendiiig. 

Yer. 7. — He eanseth the vapours to ascend 
from the ends of the earth (comp. Jer. z. 13 ; 
11. 16). By God's contrivance vapour ia 



M. oxxxv. 1—21.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



279 



continually rising from the remotest regions 
of the earth, to hang in clouds, desoend in 
rain, and spread abroad fertility. He maketli 
lightnings for the rain. To accompany it, 
perhaps to give it its fertilizing qualities 
(aee Dr. Kay'a comment 'The Psalms,' p. 
428). He bringeth the wind out of his 
tnaenries (see Job xxxviiL 22, where God's 
** treasuries " for the snow and the hail are 
spoken of; and comp. Virgil, ' Mn.' ii. 25). 

Ver. 8. — Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, 
both of man and beast (comp. Exod. xii. 29). 
The most stupendous of the plagues of 
Egypt is girenthe first place in the account 
of God's wonderful dealings with men, and 
especially with his people. It gave them 
the deliverance out of Egypt, which made 
them a people (Exod. xii. 31 — 33). 

Ver. 9. — Who sent tokens and wonders 
Into the midst of thee, Egypt ; or, " signs 
and wonders " (comp. Exod. iv. 9, 21 ; Keh. 
iz. 10; Ps. Ixxviii. 48). Upon Pharaoh, 
and npon all his serrants; i.e. "upon all 
his irjgects." The plagues fell npon the 
whole people of Egypt (Exod. vii. 21 ; viii. 
4, 11, 17, 24 ; ix. 6, 11, 25 ; x. 6, 15 ; xii. 80). 

Ver. 10. — Who smote great nations (see 
Exod. xiv. 27, 28; xvii. 8—13; Numb. xxi. 
24—30, 33—35; Josh. yliL 21—26; i. 10, 
11; Judg. iv. 10—16; vii. 19—28; xi. 32, 
83 ; 1 Sam. vii. 10—13; 2 Sam. viii. 1—14; 
X. 8—19; 1 Kings xx. 1—30; 2 Kings iiL 
4—27; xiv. 25—28; xviii. 7, 8; xix. 35; 
2 Chron. xiv. 9—15; xx. 1—25, etc.). And 
•lew mighty kings (see Josh. xii. 9—24; 
Jndg. vii. 25; viii. 21 ; 1 Sam. xv. 83, eta.). 

Ver. 11. — Sihon King of the Amorites 
(comp. Numb. xxi. 24 ; Dent. ii. 33). And 
Og King of Bashan (see Numb. xxi. 85; 
Deut. iii. 3). And all the kingdoms of 
Canaan. Joshua destroyed thirty-one Ca- 
naanite kingdoms (Josh. xii. 24). 

Ver. 12. — And gave their land for an 
heritage, an heritage nnto Israel his people 
(see Exod. vi. 8; Fss. Ixxviii. 55; cxxxvi. 
21). 

Ver. 18. — ^Thy Name, Lord, endureth 
for ever. The result of God's marvellous 
doings (vers. 6—12) is that "his Name 



endureth for ever" — can never be forgotten 
— attracts to itself eternal praise and hononr. 
And thy memorial (or, " thy remembrance ") 
throughout all generations (oomp. Fs. oii. 
12). 

Ver. 14.— For the Lord will judge his 
people ; i.e. will right them whenever they 
are wronged (see Exod. ii. 23—25 ; iii. 7—9 ; 
Ti. 6; Ps. liv. 1—8). And he will repent 
himself concerning his servants. God " will 
not keep his anger for ever" (Ps. ciii. 9). 
When he has sufficiently chastised his sin- 
ful servants, he will " repent," or " relent " 
(Kay, Oheyne), with respect to them, and 
receive them back into favour. The history 
cnutaiued in the Book of Judges strongly 
illustrates this statement (Judg. iii. 6 — 11, 
12—80; iv. 1—3, 13—16; vi. 1—16; x. 
6—18 : xi. 4—83 ; xiii. 1— S, etc.). 

Vers. 15— 18.- The idols of the heathen 
are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. 
They have months, bnt they speak not ; eyei 
have they, bnt they see not. They hay* 
ears, bnt they hear not; neither ii there 
any breath in their months. They that 
make them are like nnto them : so is every 
one that trnsteth in them. A condensed 
recitation of Fa. cxv. 4 — 8 (oomp. Jer. x. 
3 — 5). In its present place it is • sort of 
exposition of ver. 56. 

Ver. 19. — ^Bless the Lord, honse of Israel. 
The concluding strain corresponds to the 
opening one, and is a simple hymn of praise. 
Israel generally, the priestly order, the 
Levites, and the devout worsliippers of God, 
of whatever clasS) are called upon in sno- 
cession to praise and bless Jehovah (comp, 
Ps. cxv. 9 — 11). Bless the Lord, house of 
Aaron (see Pes. oxv. 10, 12 ; oxviii. 3). 

Ver. 20.— Bless the Lord, honse of Levi: 
ye that fear the Lord, bless the Lord (oomp, 
Ps. cxv. 11, 13). 

Ver. 21. — Blessed be the Lord ont of Zion. 
As God gives bis people blessings "out of 
Zion" (Ps. cxxxiv. 8), so they praise and 
bless him most appropriately out of the 
same place. Whioh dwelleth at Jerusalem 
(comp. Fss. Ixxyi. 2 ; xlviii. 1^). Frail* 
ye the Lord (see the comment on rer. 1), 



HOMILBTICS. 

Vers. 1 — 21. — Betuotu for the worship and terviee of Qod. The pialm suggests 
to us — 

I. Two REASONS FOB FBAiBiNa GoD. (Vers. 1 — 4.) 1, God is worthy of our 
utmost reverence.^ " The Lord is good." The truth is too familiar to us to strike us; 
but if we contrast the character of the God whom we worship with that of the deities 
of heathen lands (see vera. 15 — 18), we see and feel how great is our privilege, how 
excellent a thing it is to pay reverent homage to One who is absolutely pure and true 
and kind — who is " good " in every attribute, whom we can worship, not only without 
loss of self-respect, but to our highest spiritual advantage. 2. Praise is pleasant. It 
is not merely that, in the "service of song," human art may be called into play, Mid 



280 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [M. oxxxv. 1— 21. 

the exercise be tuneful and grateful to the cultured ear, but that to pour out ourhearti 
in united thanksgiving and praise is an act which may fill the soul with pure and 
elevating joy. 

II. God's distinguishino qoodness. "The Lord hath chosen Jacob ... for Us 
peculiar treasure." "Ye have not chosen me," said our Lord, "but I have chosen you" 
(John XV. 16). God did show especial kindness to Israel. Jesus Christ conferred a 
very peculiar honour on his apostles. Our heavenly Father does not treat all hia 
children alike. He is bountiful to us cdl. He gives to us all more than we deserve, he 
fills our cup even to overflowing ; but he gives to some that which he does not bestow on 
others. It would be a far less happy world than it is, and there would be far less 
opportunity for discipline and growth, if there were a dead level of power and privilege. 
We should not be envious of the special good which others are enjoying, but glad and 
grateful on their account ; we shomd be observant of and thankful for every peculiar 
gift granted to ourselves. It is certain that God has " chosen " ns for a puce in his 
kingdom and a post in bis service. 

IIL The exercise ov Divine foweb. (Yers. 6—11.) God is great; he does what 
he pleases. He refreshes the earth ; he smites kings and peoples in the day of his 
wrath. 1. He uses his Divine power to fertilize and enrich. God might bare been 
" pleased " to make this earth a dreary and desolate place, bnt it pleased him to enrich 
and to adorn it, to give to us large resources for our use, so that, if we are only fru^ 
and Industrious, we can live in comfort and abundance. 2. He also uses his power to 

Sunish. When nations are guilty, as they have been, he " smites " and scatters and 
estroys ; then " great nations " perish, and " mighty kings " are bumbled. Families 
also, and individual men, are made to know that sin brings down punishment and 
penalty from God. 

rV. The action of Divine fttt. fVer. 14.) Though €kid sends his people into 
exile, yet he will take pity upon them; he will "judge them;" he will vindicate their 
cause; he wiU "repent himself concerning his servants," i.e. he will reverse Us 
decision concerning them— he will change penalty into mercy, he will turn banishment 
into restoration. " God will not always chide, neither will he keep his angei for ever." 
He sends trouble and afiBiction, but " not willingly " (Lam. iiL 33) ; he wounds that 
he may heal, and, healing, restore to newness of ufe. 

v. OuB DUTT AND ouB WISDOM. (Vers. 16 — 21.) It is sad to think of the vast 
numbers of men that have spent their powers and their means in vain, on idols that 
could not hear or speak, on gods that had no existence apart from the darkened imagi- 
nations of men. They are wise indeed who worship the true and living God, the holy 
and the loving Saviour, who put their trust, " not in uncertain riches, but in the living 
God" — in the Father who will guide and guard them along all the path of life, in the 
Divine Friend who will sympathize With them and sustain them in all the trials of 
th«r eoursa. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOHa 

Vers. 1 — ^21. — 2%« march of mercy. This psalm traces the progress of God's meiqr 
to his people from its source in the Divine nature on to its complete fulfilment In 
their loving, glad allegiance, the expression of which begins and ends the psalm. 

I. It beoinb in the inhebbnt nature of God himself. (Ver. 3.) " The Lord 
is good." From this proceeds all the rest, and in this all that follows finds its explana- 
tion. That " God is love " is, after all, the key which fits the wards and unlocks the 
difficult problems of life as none other does or can. On other suppositions many 
things — ^indeed, we may say most things, and these the most blessed facts of all — ^that 
we find in life are inexplicable ; but with this, not even the darkest facts need be 
left out. 

II. It advances on to the election op hib people. (Ver. 4.) Back in the 
counsels of eternity the Divine love decreed tha method of its working; and this 
inTolved the election of Israel to the especial service which they were to render. That 
purpose is not all worked out yet; but much of it has been — and who is there 



PS. oxxxv. 1— 21.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 281 

can dispute its righteousness, or wisdom, or love? How could the work have been 
better done ? 

III. The BEaiNKiNa op its accomplishment seen in the creation of th^ 
WORLD. QVers. 6 — 7.) The material universe was formed, and is continued, not for 
its own sake, but for the sake of that which is mora) and spiritual. This earth was to 
be the arena on which God's gracious purposes were to be developed and perfected. 
Hence was it created, adorned, and fitted to be, not only the dwelling-place, but the' 
training-place, of intelligent and moral beings, who should ultimately, when made 
perfect, become the intimate friends, companions, and ministers of the Lord Grod himself. 

IV. It went on in the triumphant and wonderful preservation of hib 
OBOSEN people. (Vers. 8 — 12.) The purposes of God, after a whilcj came into col-' 
lision with the sin and selfishness of man ; they ever do, and sometimes man's rage' 
causes sore trouble to God's people ; but his purpose is indestructible, and his enemies' 
must perish. ' 

V. In his sore punishment of his people when they sinned, and until TdET' 
REPENTED. (Vers. 13, 14.) This portion of his dealing with them seems to have mo8t| 
of all impressed the psalmist's mind. He declares that it will cause the memory of the 
Lord to endure for ever, " throughout all generations." We know how stem, how' 
long-continued, were those disciplines, and how oftentimes the mercy of God in them 
was hidden from the sufferer's view. But it was part of that mercy all the same, as 
God's punishment of sin is ever part of his mercy. And it goes on uutil the sinner' 
repents ; and then God " repents himself concerning his servants." 

VI. In the reality of the repentance and reformation wrought therebt. 
(Vers, 15 — 18.) Who would ever have thought that idol-living Israel — for it was their 
besetting sin — ^would ever have come to speak thus contemptuously of idols and their ' 
worshippers ? But God's disciplines accomplished this. " Our God is a consuming 
file," blessed be his Name I 

VII. In the perfect harmony or will and gladness of heart in beoabd to 
HIMSELF, WHICH GoD AT LENGTH SECURED. This was his aim all through — to have 
a people like himself, filled with his love, animated by his Spirit, obedient to his will, 
and so a joy to themselves, their fellow-men, and to their God. Such is the meaning 
whicli lies underneath the exuberant expression of praise and love with which the 
psalm opens (vers. 1 — 3) and closes (vers. 19 — 21). — 8. 0. 

Ver. 3. — The pleasantness of the Divine Name. " God is love," and this absolute 
fact concerning him is embodied in the Divine Name. This is especially true for us to 
wliom the Divine Name of names is " our Father." The word used here is elsewhere 
used in the sense oi propitious or gracious; and it is the graciousties's,pitiftilness, long- 
suffering of God which man thinks ol as making his Name so lovely. In Ps. liv. 6 we 
find the expression, " I will praise thy Name, Lord ; for it is'g'tforf.'" Some think the 
meaning of the psalmist is, that the work of offering praise is pleasant'; but it is fresher, 
and an indication of deeper feeling in the psalmist, that te should associate pleasant- 
ness even with the sound of the Divine Name. ■ .. . I ; 

I. The PLEASANTNESS OF THE DiVINE NaMB, BECAUSE OF WHAT IT BE0ALL8. 

There Ls a whole history of Divine dealings embodied in the Namej Illustrate from the 
way in which some special intervention of God was put Into a special form of the 
Divine Name, such as Jehovah-jirch, Jehovah-nifesi,' Jeh'ovah-tsidkenu, etc. The 
whole story of the Divine patience, intervention, and tedemption is gathered up into 
the general name Jehovah, and is recalled by it.' Sothe spiritual redem|)tion is recalled 
by the name given to God manifest in the flesh— Jehovah-JesuSj Jehovah-EmmanueL 
How pleasant, the names which recall such gracious things ! • 

II. The pleasantness op the Divine Name because of what it contains. 
It is familiar to point out that a name, embodies and' expresses the attributes or 
characteristics of a person. The early Bihle names have distinct meanings; they 
describe persons. The Divine Name is lovely- because it describes our ideal of every- 
thing true, pure, kind, gracious, wise. It describes Mm who is the " chief among ten 
thousand, and altogether lovely." The satisfaction and rest of the human heart cannot 
come only out of what God say, or out of what God i^oes ; it comes out of what God-' 
•»; and what God is is embodied in his Name, ■ ' ■' 



282 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [m. oxxsv. 1—21. 

in. The pleasantness of the Divine Name bboausb of what it suaaESTS 
OB ASSURES. When we have absolute conSdetice in a person, and seal that confidence 
by fixing our own name for him, all our future relations with that person are guaran- 
teed. So the name Jehovah (FeAweA), "I am that I am," seals our absolute confidence 
in God, and suggests entire trust in him, and the certainty of Divine help and blessing 
in all that may unfold before us. He ia the " same yesterday, and to-day, and for 
ever."— R, T. 

Yer. 4. — The lehction xf Israel. " Peculiar treasure " is a special covenant-name 
for Israel (Exod. xiz. 6 ; Deut. vii. 6). As used in the Scripture, " election " is not a 
theological term. It is not what it has been made, a doctrinal term, on which a sec- 
tarian system can be based. It stands for a fact or method of Divine dealing. It does 
not apply exclusively to any one thing, or any one people. God is always working in 
this way, electing, or selecting, the best agencies for carrying out his various purposes, 
now of wisdom and mercy, now of judgment and destruction. It is a poetic setting, 
and a comfortable self-glorifying, for the psalmist to speak of Jehovah as having 
" chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure." The sober fact is 
that this particular nation was selected to carry out a particular Divine mission in the 
world ; and it would have done better if it had thought more of its responsibility, and 
legs of its privilege. Dr. T. Arnold wrote of Home, Athens, and Jerusalem as repre- 
senting the three people of God's election — two for things temporal, and one for things 
eternal. Since his time we have learned to extend his thought, atid to see in every 
nation a distinct Divine election to some ministry for the blessing of the whole of 
humanity. To us the election of Israel is no more than a representative and suggestive 
election. 

I. If WE TAKE THE TEBU "ELECTION," WE THINK OF A FBIVILKaK. The old 

Jews did this, regarding themselves as a petted nation, standing in the favour of QtA 
in an altogether unique manner. Consequently, they presumed on their privilege, and 
let it encourage self-pleasing. Those do it in modem times who make the sovereignty 
of their election the foundation of their religious hope. Antinomian presumptions 
always attend on the conception of Ghnl's election as privilege. Frail man easily turns 
privilege into favouritism. 

II. If we TAKE THE TEBH " BELECnON," WE THINK OF DUTT AND BESF0N8IBILITT. 

And this is in every way healthier for us. God wants co-workers, agents in the sense- 
spheres, the human spheres; and he is always looking for such, always selecting such, 
always separating such. It is indeed an honour unspeakable to he elected ; but if we 
think of ourselves as such, we almost forget the honour and the privilege, because we 
are so fully urged to noble endeavour by the burden of our responsibility. — B. T. 

Ver. 6. — Oo^s power can catry out OocCs luill. " All that Jehovah willeth he hath 
done." Observe the contrast with idols. If it were conceivable that they had the 
power to iviU, it is manifest that they have not the power to carry out, or execute, 
their wilL Observe the contrast with men. They, undoubtedly, have the power to 
will, but the inability to perform oppresses them continually. " I would, but cannot," 
is the constant cry of man's feebleness. But a limitation on God's power to execute 
what he wills is inconceivable ; and if we could conceive it, we should find we had lost 
all worthy ideas of God, " With God all things are possible " that are not ridiculous 
in the statement. Calvin says, " The specification of Jehovah's doings according to 
his pleasure, in heaven, earth, sea, and all deep places, puts before us in a graphic 
manner his particular care always and everywhere." 

L The connection between God's will and God's foweb. That can be seen 
in all the three spheres of God's relations. 1. In the material world of things. It 
always was, and it always is, true that " he spake, and it was done ; he commanded, and 
it stood forth." Laws in their working may seem to cross other laws; but they cannot 
hinder the outworking of what God wills. 2. In the world of people. God " doeth as 
he wills among the armies of heaven, and inhabitants of the earth." 3. In the spiritual 
world. Because that world is so difficult to apprehend, the connection between God's 
will and power escapes our attention, though it is as sure as anywhere else. 

II. The hindkanoes pot in the way of the oomnbotion. They never come 



PS. axxxY. 1—21.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 283 

trom things. The disturbances of nature are not real ; they only represent human con- 
ceptions based on what is humanly observed. Tempests, earthquakes, etc., are in the 
Divine order. The hindrances can only come from intelligent creatures, to whom is 
entrusted a limited self-will. Man has this awful possibility given to him ; he can 
come in between God's will and the carrying out of that will. 

m. The triumph oveb the hindrances. That must sometimes be accomplished 
by the putting forth of Divine power ; but it is the marvel of Divine grace that it is 
usually done by persuading the human will, bringing it into full harmony with the 
Divine will, and so getting the man himself to take the hindrances out of the way. 
— R.T. 

Ver. 10. — The Lord is a " Man of tuar." 1. So thoroughly has CSiristianity filled 
the modern mind with the love of peace, that the older associations of Jehovah with 
times and scenes of war have become positively painful to us. Taking advantage of 
this feeling — perhaps we should say this weakness of feeling — the infidel makes easy 
attacks upon the Old Testament Jehovah as an altogether unlovely and even blood- 
thirsty conception. Are we to be unduly alarmed, and to attempt e^lanations and 
excuses ? or are we to take a firm stand, and say that, as the experience of war is one 
of the commonplaces of humanity, the association of Jehovah with war is inevitable ; it 
mist be made in every nation and in every generation, and according to the idea a 
nation has of war must be its notion of God as associated with war. In the last hun- 
dred years there have been a great variety of wars, right ones and wrong. Men cannot 
help it ; they must associate their God with their wars. The thing to seek is a right 
association. Wars are dreadful things ; but it is not possible to read history intelli- 
gently, and say that they have always been wrong. But if they have ever been just 
and right, God cannot be dishonoured by being thought of as connected with them, 
and working out his purposes by means of them. 2. Then, ^ain, wars belong to 
that liberty with which God has entrusted his creatures. It is a liberty over which ha 
watches, and which he holds in due restraints. But he would not be fair to men 
nnlesB he gave them a good length of tether. Man must have liberty enough to fight 
for his ends. 3. Again, if the self-defence of an individual man be right, and even 
aggressive action under some conditions, — self-defence in an aggregate of individuals, in 
a nation, need not be wrong. We must distinguish between the misery of it and the 
sin of it. A nation has no way of aggressive or defensive action, in relation to the 
aggressive or defensive action of another nation, save by war. 4. And lastly, God may 
use nations, as well as natural forces, for the execution of his judgments. Naturu 
forces are pestilence, famine, and convulsions, as we call them, of nature. The only 
national executive force is war. Reasonably, as well as poetically, God may be called 
a''Manof war."— B. T. 

Ver. 13. — Authoritative records of the Divine ways. " Thy memorial, Lord, from 
one generation to another." The " memorial " may be but another word for the 
" Name ; " but from one point of view the " Name " is but gathering into a single term 
the records of the Divine dealings ; and it does but express that conception of God 
himself which bis Divine dealings have produced on us. So we may say that the 
memoricd of his doings fills with meaning the Divine Name, and assures us that what 
God has ever been to his people, he ever will be. Once on a time learned men were 
sorely puzzled by certain irregular holes on the front of an ancient temple. One, more 
sagacious than the rest, suggested that these indentations might be the marks of nails 
used to fasten Greek characters to the stone. Lines were drawn from one point to the 
next, when they were found to form letters, and the name of the Deity unexpectedly stood 
disclosed. What is known as a " zikr," or memorial service, is repeated by Moham- 
medans, at stated intervals, at the graves of those long dead, if they have left a reputation 
for holiness. The word " zikr " is closely connected with the Hebrew word for " a 
memorial," or '• remembrance," indeed, one may say identical with it. The subject 
suggested is the Divine arrangement that the Divine dealings should be held in men's 
memory through all the generations, and be a permanent moral force in every age. 
The Bible is the memorial. 

L Thx Bible ib a book of histobt. It is more than this, but it is this; and 



284 THE BOOK OP psalms: [ps.cxxxv. 1— 2L 

this to a very great extent. It is a collection of records of events that have happened.' 
Take history out of the Pentateuch (or Hexateuch), out of the so-called historical 
hooks, out of the prophets, and take the references to history out of the Psalms, and 
what would he left ? The fact is not sufiSciently considered. The records in the book 
are memorials, reminders, of actual events. 

II. The subject of the Bible is God in histobt. This brings to view the 
contrast between ordinary history and Biblical history. Scripture everywhere brings 
to view the direct relation of God to events. And so the records become memoridU of 
God to every: generation. Suggestive nlemorials, showing that history never is read 
aright unless God is seen in it. — B. T. 

Ver. 14. — The Divine repentances. The explanation is <iften niade that the Changes 
of Divine plans are responsive to changes in the circumsta/nces of God's people. It U 
seeing deeper into the heart of truth to see that the Divine repentances even answer to 
the changing moods of God's people. His " repenting himself concerning his servants " 
is really his " having compassion on them ; " and that is responding to their moods. 
The separate meanings of the word " repentance " have often been presented, aud the' 
very limited senses in which the term can be applied to God have been variously 
shown. It represents the Divine responsiveness, which is as perfect as any other 
Divine attribute. It greatly helps us to see clearly that the Divine repentance is a 
perfect thing, because repentance, though it maybe a right thing in man, is closely 
associated with frailty and eviL Bepentance involves change of plan ; and this must 
be based on change of mind. But we have constantly to change our minds and 
change our plans, in order to meet new conditions; and we never dream of such 
changing 'being wrong. They are not made vyrong by calling them " repentances." 
It is the association of sin with the change which brings in the element of regret which 
characterizes human repentance ; but as there is no sin in God, there can be no regret; 
and we must eliminate these features from repentance when we apply the term to God: 

I. The Divine bepentance is BEiiATiVE to man. There is no such thing as 
change in God, as repentance in God relative to the world of things. This theological 
truth science does but express by the " invariability of natural law." There is no 
created thing that has independent action, so nothing can ever make new conditions 
for God to adjust himself to. Man alone can do this, because he can act independently^: 

n. The Divine eepentangb is relative to man's circumstancbs. There is » 
sense in which man is ever putting himself into fresh circumstances. What should we 
have to say of the helplessness of God, if he could not adjust hinself to new conditions ? 

III. The Divine bepentance is bblative to man's moods. For the Divine 
relations: are spiritual; they mainly concern the man himself. And changing spiritual 
moods require wise and gracious adjustments on the part of God.— ^-R. T. 

'Vers. 15— :-17. — Unresponsible idols. (See Ps. cxv. 4 — 8.)' As a 'psalm' of the 
restored nation, this expresses the strong feeling cherished concerning the idols of sur- 
rounding small kingdoms; and the feeling was all the' more bitter because those 
kingdoms were distressing the returned exiles by their active enmity. In denouncing 
their gods, the exiles intehded covertly to denounce them. The following sentences are 
found in the Koran (ii. 2) : " The unbelievers are like unto one who crieth aloud to 
that which heareth not so much as (his) calling or the sound of (his) voice. (They 
are) deaf, dumb, blind, therefore do they not understand." In a Chinese village, in a 
time of drought, a' missionary saw a row of idols put out in the hottest and dustiest 
part of the road. Be inquired the reason, and the natives answered, " We prayed 
our gods to send us rain, and they won't, so we've put them out to see how they like 
the heat and the dryness." 

I. The material fiocbeb that cannot bespond. It is not easy to speak with 
proper care and precision in relation to the figures which men make to represent their 
gods. To the Israelites those figures were their god^ and.from their pointof view they, 
were quite right in vigorously denouncing their helplessness. But to those who made 
the figures they were but sensible realizations of abstract ideas, imprisonments in form 
of spiritual conceptions. And yet we are coaipelled to admit, that the figures wereonly 
this to the thoughtful, to the philosophic mind.' To the mass of men idols,. that^is, 



P9. oxxxv. 1-21.] . THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 285 

.figures of gods, pmeti6ally take the place of the gods whom they really represent. Th» 
.plea of the psalm, that idols are helpless, is effective against the sentimeat of the 
ordinary idolrworshipper; but the refl,ective idolater regards it as altogether beside the 
mark, because the figures are but the reminders of some incarnation of his spiritual 
deity. 

IL The iuhaterial bbality behind the fiocbgs that oan besfons. Let the 
figures be the agency we use for our dealing with the unseen One ; then, though still we 
may not think of bodily organs or senses, we can be sure of response in the spiritual, 
and, if necessary, also in the material spheres. We also have the figure of the human 
Christ to help us. tor^lize the eternal Father, who is the Hearer and Answerer of 
prayer. — B. T. 

Ver. 21.— (?o(Fs eariMy dioeHUng-plaee. As in Ps. cxxviii. 5, Jehovah blesses the 
^covenant people out of Zion, so here they bless him out of Zion — that is the place 
where, the reciprocal relation is best and chiefly realized. What ideas can be properly 
associated with God's having a permanent abode on earth ? We must be careful to 
distinguish between ideas that may be cherished, and ideas that must be dismissed as 
un worth jf. 

L God's babthlt dwgliino-plaob oentbalizeb the beligion and thb nation. 
" In Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship." Under some circumstances 
it may be a good thing to have religion localized ; but advancing development makes 
such localization a hindrance and an evil. " The time now is when neither on Gerizim 
nor at Jerusalem' s^U men worship the Father." The material help is only wanted 
until ihe spiritual has come. Then man himself is God's dwelling-place. 
. II. God's eabthlt dwbllino-plaoe deolabes God's belativitt to man. We 
often think of man as in God's image ; but there is an answering truth — God is in 
man's image. That God should want an earthly dwelling-place convinces men that he 
b one bf themselves, seeing he wants what they want. So God's temple dwelling- 
place was the foreshadowing of, and preparation for, his incarnation in his Son, and 
for the spiritual indwelling by the Holy Ghost. 

IIL God's eabthlt dwellino-place oonvinoeb of the imiiediaot or his know- 
ledge. God absent in heaven is thought of as knowing by report. God actually and 
always present knows at once, is immediately interested, and can instantly act. 
Illustrate Tay the moral effect of the absence of an earthly king, and the moral effect of 
the sense of his presence. 

IV.. God's eabthlt dwellino-flaoe becomes a fbbpetttal call to dutt, and 
INSFIBATION OF GOODNESS. The scnse of service is quickened when that service may 
be called for at any hour; and the hope of winning the King's approval renews holy 
endeavour. God's dwelling with men is real, but unseen. No Jew would doubt that 
God was in his holy temple. But no Jew ever saw him. That unseen presence 
helped to the later conception of God dwelling unseen in the temple of man's soul, 
apprehended as the Holy Ghost. — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — ^21. — QocTs praises. " An exhortation to the priests and Levites who 
wait in the sanctuary to praise Jehovah, both because of his goodness in choosing 
Israel to be his people, and because of his greatness, and the almighty power which he 
has shown, in his dominion over the world of nature, and in the overthrow of all the 
enemies of his people. Then his abiding majesty is contrasted with the nothingness of 
the idols of the heathen." 

L The obnrral obounds of the pbaise of God. 1. Because he t* good. (Ver. 
3.) 2. Because his name or nature is heautiful, or lovely. 

IL Special OROnNDS of praise. 1. Becauae he has chosen Israel to he his people. 
When God has bestowed great privileges he seems to have chosen such a people, as in 
the case of the Jews and the other great peoples of the world. 2. Because of the greats 
nessof God in the works of nature. His will is absolute and irresistible in all the 
material world. But man has free will, and can oppose God, though God's will i« 
supremely good and ought tp be obeyed. 3. Because of the greatness and goodness of 
God in redemption. (Vers. 8, 9.) In both temporal and s|iiritual rederaptit)n. He 
ijave his people the promised land. 4. The righteousness of Ood. (Ver. 14.) He 



286 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[fb. oxxxvl 1 — 26. 



judgeth his people, and has pity upon them. Bighteoiisness and mercy make the per- 
fect God worthy of all praise-worship. 5. Ood^s infinite sympathy compared toith the 
idols of the heathen. They cannot speak, or Bee, or hear. God is in contact and »Tm- 
pathy with the meanest of his creatures. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXXXVl. 



A PSALM with a familiar refrain (comp. Pa. 
cxviii. 1—4,29; 2 0hTon.v. 13; Ezraiii.ll) 
at the end of each line. In the main Ps. 
czzxvi. follows the line of Ps. oxxxv., calling 
upon Israel to praise Ood, Rnd basing the 
call upon his glorious manifestations of him- 
self in nature (vers. 5 — ^9) and history (vers. 
10 — 24), repeating in the lutter case the 
very same facts. Metrically, the psalm is 
arranged, till near the end, in a series of 
triplets, but concludes with two stanzas of 
four lines each (vers. 19 — ^22 and vers. 23^ 
26). It is conjectured to have been written 
as the anthem called for in Pa. cxzxv. 19 — ^21 
(Kay> 

Yer. 1.— Oh give thanks unto the Lord ; for 
he is good : for his mercy endureth for ever. 
Identical vith the first verse of Ps. cxviii., 
which is probably a very ancient formula, 
and one naed at the erection both of the 
first (2 Chron. v. 13) and of the second 
tenmle (Ezra ill. 11). 

Ver. 2. — Oh give thanks unto the Ood of 
gods: for his mercy, etc. The phrase, "God 
of gods," occurs first in Dent. z. 17. It was 
one very familiar to the Assyrians and Baby- 
lonians (* Keligions of the Ancient World,' 
pp. 56, 60, 68, etc.). In the Bible it is used by 
Joshua (Josh. zzii. 22), Nebuchadnezzar 
(Dan. ii. 47), Daniel (xi. 36), and this psalm- 
ist. It sanctions a secondary use of the word 
" God," such as is found also in Pas. Izxzii. 
6; zcvi 4; xcvii. 7, 9; cxxzviii. 1. 

Ver. 3. — Oh give thanks to the Lord of 
lords. " Lord of lords " occurs also first in 
Dent. z. 17. It is used likewise by St. Paul 
(2 Tim. vi. 15) and St. John (Bev. zvu. 14; 
zix. 16). 7or his mercy, etc. 

Yer. 4. — To him who alone doeth great 
wonders (comp. Pa. IxziL 18). For his 
mercy, eto. 

Yer. 5. — To him that by wisdom made the 
heavens. Creation is the work, not only of 
God's power, but of his wisdom also. Things 
were made as they are by the exertion of 
his forethought and uniierstanding (comp. 
Prov. iii. 19; Eph. L 11). For his mercy, 
eto. 



Yer. 6.— To Um that stretched ont tho 
earth above the waters (comp. Isa. xlii. S; 
xliv. 24; Ps. xxiv. 2). 7or his mercy, 
eto. 

Yer. 7. — ^To him that made great lights 
(see Gen. i. 14—16). For his mercy, eto. 

Yer. 8. — The sun to rule by day (comp. 
Gen. i. 16). 7or his mercy, eto. 

Yer. 9. — ^The moon and stars to rule by 
night (Gen. i. 16, 18). For his mercy, etc. 

Yer. 10. — To him that smote E^^t in 
their firstborn. The parallelism with Ps. 
oxzzv. here becomes very dose, and so con- 
tinues till the end of ver. 22. Five verses, 
however, are expanded into thirteen. Tot 
his mercy, etc. 

Yer. 11.— And brought ont Israel from 
among them (see Exod. ziL 51 ; xiv. 19— SI). 
For his mercy, eto. 

Yer. 12.— With a strong hand, and with a 
stretohed-ont arm (comp. Exod. vi.6; Dent, 
vii 8, 14 ; Neh. L 10, eto.). For his meroy, 
eto. 

Yer. ISl— To him which divided the Bed 
Sea into parts; literally, into teetums—eat 
it, as it were, in two (see Ezod. ziv. 21). 
For his mercy, eto. 

Yer. 14. — And made Israel to pass through 
the midst of it (see Exod. ziv. 22, 29; xv. 
19). For his meroy, etc 

Yer. 15. — ^Bnt overthrew Pharaoh and Us 
host in the Bed Sea (see Exod. xiv. 27, 28 ; 
XV. 1 — 10). That the Pharaoh's death in 
the Bed Sea is not necessarily implied has 
been shown in the comment on Exodua. 
For his meroy, etc Severity to their ad- 
versaries was " mercy " to Israel, who oould 
not otherwise have been delivered. 

Yer. 16. — ^To him which led his people 
through the wilderness (Exod. ziii. 20—22 ; 
zl. 36—38 ; Dent. viii. 15). For his meroy, 
etc. 

Yer. 17. — To him which smote great kings 
(see the comment on Ps. czzxv. 10). For 
his meroy, etc 

Yer. 18. — And slew famous kings. Oreb, 
Zeb, Zeba, Zalmunna, Agag. For his meroy, 
eto. 

Yer. 19. — Sihon King of the Amorites 
(comp. Ps. cxzxv. 11). For his meroy, etc. 

Yer. 20. — And Og the King of Bashan 
(Numb. xxi. 33; Ps. czxzv. 11). For his 
meroy, etc 

Ver. 21. — And gave their land for an 



M. OXXXYl 1—26.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



287 



heritage (see Josh. zU. 1 — 6), For Us 
meroj, eto. 

Yer. 22. — ^Even an heritage unto Israel 
hia servant (comp. Pb. oxxxt. 12). For his 
meroy, eto. 

Yer. 23. — ^Who remembered ns in onr low 
estate. When we were brought low. The 
time meant is probably that of the Baby- 
lonian captivity, which is the subject of the 
next psalm. For his meroy, eto. 

Yer. 24. — And hath redeemed us from 
onr enemies; rather, and redeemed ui — or, 
" snatched as "—from our enemies. For his 
meroy, eto 



Yer. 25.— Who g^veth food to all flesh. 
Has a care, i,e., not only for man, but also 
for animals (oomp. Pss. civ. 27; cxlv. 15; 
ozlvii. 9; Jonah ir. 11). For his meroy, 
eto. 

Yer. 26. — Oh give thanks nnto the Ood of 
heaven. " The Ood of heaven " is a favourite 
designation of God in the Books of Ezra, 
Nehemiah, and Daniel (Ezra i. 2; v. 11, 12 ; 
vi. 9, 10 : vii. 12, 21 ; Neh. i. 4, 5 ; ii. 4, 20; 
Dan. ii. 18, 19, 37, 44). It was a phrase 
known to the Assyrians, the Babylonians, 
and the Persians. For his mercy endnreth 
for ever. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Yers. 1 — ^26. — 2%e Divine constancy. The refrain of each verse of the psalm may 
supply us with a guiding thought in our treatment of it. From the first beginnings 
of creation (as we are affected by them) to the last hour of human experience, we have 
evidence of the goodness, the "mercy," of the Lord. It has endured through all 
generations, is with us now, will attend our race (we are sure) to the end of time. 
We find it— 

L In thb Divine pbovision. God gave us sun, moon, and stars at the first. These 
have been giving light to men everywhere and in all ages. They have been regulating 
the seasons of the year and the tides of ocean, and they have been counting time for 
us with unbroken constancy. Seed-time and harvest have not failed ; food has been 
given to all flesh, to man and beast, through all the centuries (ver. 25). If the earth 
has been barren in one part, it has been fruitful in another. Nothing has been needed 
to supply all mankind with the necessaries and the comforts of life but man's own 
diligence, enterprise, and economy. God has supplied his part. His kindness is 
constant. 

IL In Divine betbibution. (Yers. 10 — 15, 17 — ^20.) No doubt this recurring 
sentence, " His mercy endureth for ever," is written by the psalmist from Israel's point 
of view. That is quite obvious from the words with which these verses are connected. 
The destruction of Israel's enemies meant the deliverance, in mercy, of Israel itself. 
But we may pause to remember that all righteous retribution is a part of Divine good- 
ness. No greater calamity could befall us than Divine indifference to sin and unlimited 
permission to indulge in it; no more serious injury, therefore, could be done us than 
the withholding of Divine penalty when sin and wrong are done by us. That would 
inevitably issue in the loss of all real reverence for God, and of all respect for ourselves. 
It would mean the simple annihilation of human character, of human worth, of the 
distinctive excellency of human life. God's abiding hatred and punishment of sin is 
an element of his constant kindness to our race, as well as a permanent feature of his 
own Divine character. 

III. In Divine ooupassion and bedemption. God has ever been pitiful, and his 
compassion has called forth his power to save. 1. There are two notable instances of 
this in Hebrew history — the deliverance from Egyptian hardship and bondage (Exod. 
iii. 7, 8), and the restoration from captivity in Babylon (Ezra L). God " remembered 
them in their low estate," and "redeemed them from their enemies." 2. There was 
one culminating and transcendent illustration of this in the advent of our Lord. He 
saw us in our " low estate." The world was sunk in superstition, in vice, in violence, 
in misery, in spiritual death. No "estate" could be lower than that of the human 
world when Jesus Christ came into it; and then he accomplished that work which is 
to issue in its "redemption." 3. We have individual illustrations of it now. The eye 
that looked down in pity on the earliest sorrows and struggles of his children regards 
to-day with tender commiseration the sufferings and the trials of his people. In all 
Mtr afiliction he is afflicted. He is " touched with the feeling of our infirmities" (Ecb. 
Iv. 15). He is mindful of our danger when in the midst of temptation, and, in answer 



288 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxxxvi 1—26. 

to our prayer, redeems ns from the power of our adversary. To the latest hour of 
individual life, to the last hour of time, we shall be able to look up with holy con- 
fidence for sympathy and succour ; " for his mercy eudureth for ever. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — ^26. — 'Repetitions many, but rwt vain. Over and over again the refrain 
oomes, " His mercy endureth for ever." But it is never a vain repetition, unless the 
mind, by its heedlessness, makes it so. It is like the German piece of music which is 
called 'The Fremensberg,' which tells one of the old legends of the region — how ""a 
great noble of the Middle Ages got lost in the mountains, and wandered about with 
his dogs in a violent storm, until at last the faint tones of a mouastery-buU, calling 
the munks to a midnight service, caught bis ear, and he followed the direction the 
sounds came from, and was saved. A beautiful air runs through the music without 
ceasing, sometimes loud and strong, sometimes so soft that it can hardly be dis- 
tinguished, but it is always there. It swung grandly along the shrill whistling of 
the storm-wind, the rattling patter of the rain, and the boom and crash of the thunder; 
it wound soft and low through the lesser sounds, the distant ones, such as the throb- 
bing of ihe convent-bell, the melodious winding of the hunter's horn, the distressed 
hayings of bis dogs, and the solemn chanting of the monks ; it rose again, with a 
jubilant ring, and mingled itself with the country songs and dances of the peasants 
assembled in the concert-hall to cheer up the rescued huutsman as he ate his supper, 
imitating all these sounds with marvellous exactness. The solemn chanting of the 
monks was not done by instruments, but by men's voices, and it rose and fell and rose 
again in that rich confusion of warring sounds and pulsing bells, and the stately swing 
of that ever-present enchanting air, and it seemed to me that nothing could be more 
divinely beautiful " (Mark Twain). So the sweet refrain of this psalm is heard amid 
all variety of circumstances, and is never absent, but investing with its own charm 
every one of the manifold statements which the psalm contains. But wherefore all 
this repetition ? 

I. Because we abe bo aft to foboet tee tbuth it tells or. Is not this so ? 
" The ox knoweth its owner," etc. (Isa. i.). 

IL Bboaube it IB A tbuth 80 unspeakably impobtant. We repeat messages to 
those who we know are liable to forget, and we do so the more according to the impor- 
tance of the message. And none can be more important than this, consider it how we 
will. Who is there that does not need to remember it, that is not every way the 
better for the remembrance of it? 

UI. Because, when it is beuembered, believed, and bealized m the heabt we 
CANNOT KEEP SILENCE ABOUT IT. " I beliBveii, therefore have I spoken," said St. Paul ; 
and it has ever been so. He who wrote this psalm believed this most blessed truth of 
God's mercy enduring for ever, and he could not keep silence ; nor shall we when we 
in like manner believe. — S. 0. 

Vers. 1 — 26. — Does his mercy endure for ever 7 How many voices there are that 
seem to deny the blessed declaration which is repeated in every verse of this psalm, 
and in so many other psalms and Scriptures beside! 

I. The voice op eabthlt sobeow seems to dent rr. " What I " says one, " his 
mercy endureth for ever ? And I, once so happily placed, and to wiiom all life was 
bright, and now so utterly poor, a ruined man : how can his mercy endure for ever ? 
I cannot believe it" And here is another who has been bitterly bereaved, the light 
of his home gone out. And another whose heart smarts within him from a sense of 
cruel wrong which has been inflicted on him, and which has embittered all his life. 
And another whose existence is one long pain. And another racked with anxiety. 
Ob, how many Such there are to whom the talk of God's mercy seems as an impossible 
and an idle thought I 

II. And the voice op the populae theology has fbactioallt denied it. For 
it represents God as a moral Governor who has attached a tremendous penalty to sin^ 
a penalty at the very thought of which the heart shudders, and who would inflict this 



PS. cxxxvi. 1— 26.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 289 

on mankind generally, for that all have einned, only that mercy interposes, and by the 
sacrifice ut' Curist opens a way of escape for all who will believe. Now, in this repre- 
sentation tliere is very much that is scriptural and true, but it errs in representing the 
foundation of the Divine character as that of the magistrate rather than of the father. 
As if his great purpose were to maintain a law rather than to train and to teach, to 
restore and to redeem. And hence, they limit this salvation to the baptized, or to the 
elect, or to those who dwell ic Christian lands. And they limit it likewise to the 
present life. Thus, practically, they seem to deny the ever-enduring character of God'i 
mercy. 

III. And there is much m Sceiptubb that seems to suppoet this denial. 
Certainly there are no diiect statements that teach that outside the limits of faith in 
Christ, and of the present life, there is yet salvation, and there are many which seem 
to distinctly say there is not. 

IV. And there abb awful faotb in life which point in the same dibeotioh. 
Men, many of them, do, so far as we can see, die in their sins, having no part nor lot 
in the kingdom of Grod. 

V. But, in spite of all this, God's mebot endubeth for evbb. 1. It must he to, 
because of his declared character. God is love. He is our Father. His mercy is not 
an attribute external to himself, something that he has assumed ; but it is what he is 
in his own inherent nature. Therelore so long as God exists, bis mercy must exist 
likewise, that is, must endure forever. 2. Because of Ms declared purpose. He has 
no pleasure in the death of him that dieth. He will have all men to be saved. He 
gave his only begotten Son to die for us all, and to him every knee shall bow. " The 
Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works of the devil." Can his 
purpose, then, be for ever thwarted ? 3. Hie manifest design of all his dealings with 
us. His perpetual goodness. The afBictions and sorrows he sends, they are lor good, 
not ill; for healing, not harm. And the punishments lie inflicts, tliey are not in 
vengeance, but to subdue the perverse will. Love is at the heart of things, the 
ultimate reason of them all. 4. What Ae has already done. The most stubborn wills 
he has subdued, and does subdue day by day. The resources of his mercy are not 
exhausted or exhaustible. — S. C. 

Vers. 1 — 26 (every verse). — The Church's antiphon. There can be no doubt that 
this psalm was sung antiphonally in the Jewish temple, some of the priests reciting or 
chanting the first portion of each verse, and then the whole congregation respouding, 
" For his mercy endureth for ever." But this oft-repeated declaration belongs not to 
the Jewish Church alone, but to the whole Church of God throughout all the ages and 
in all the world. " One February night, a.d. 358, the great church at Alexandria was 
bright with lights far into the night, and still the congregation did not disperse. The 
Biiibop Athanasius was there, and the service was to be prolonged till murning ; for 
next day the Holy Communion was to be celebrated, and it was the frequent custom 
among the early Christians to spend the preceding night in prayer and singing hymns. 
All knew that further troubles were hanging over their beloved bishop, and that the 
time of his presence with them would probably be very short. Suddenly a clashing noise 
broke the stillness. The church was surrounded by armed men. With calm presence 
of mind, Athanasius rose and gave out the hundred and thirty-sixth psalm, which has to 
every verse ihe response, ' For his mercy endureth for ever.' The whole congregation 
joined iu thundering forth those grand words, when the door was burst open, and the 
imperial envoy, at the head of a tx>dy of soldiers, walked up the aisle. For a moment 
the soldiers drew back in awe at the solemn sound of the chanting, but again they 
pressed on, and a shower of arrows flew through the church. Swords flashed, arms 
rattled, and rough shouts interrupted the music. Athanasius retained his seat till the 
congregation iu^ dispersed, then he too disappeared in the darkness, and nu one knew 
where he was gone. He found a refuge among his old friends the hermits of Egypt " 
(quoted from Ferowne). The blessed truth it declares is — 

L The explanation of all that God is and does. After each recital of what Gkid 

it or of what he has done, it is added, as if by way of explanation, " For his mercy," 

etc. And it is declared, not in connection alone with statements as to the holiness, the 

greatness, the majesty, and the love of God. not alone in connection with his acts of 

PSALMS — III. n 



290 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. isxxvj. 1—26. 

creation and of beneficence, but with those of judgment and awful punishment as well. 
All are included. And they all must hare some explanation. The psalm gives this, 
" For his mercy," etc. Can any one find a better, or one that so meets the manifold 
aspects of the problem of human life ? Even his judgments, his " strange work," have 
mercy at the heart of them, as a little reflection will perceive. 

n. The clamant iosed of all the ohildben of God. For who is there of woman 
born that does not need mercy, that can say he has no sin, that God has nothing to 
accuse him of? Where, but for God's mercy, should any of us have been ? And not 
only do we need mercy, but enduring mercy. We can give God no guarantee that if 
he forgive us we shall need his forgiveness never more. Alas I it is our daily need. 
Even as we are taught to ask day by day for daily bread, so also are we to pray daily, 
" And forgive us our sins." 

III. The IN8PIBATI0N OF ALL THE BEBVANTB OF GoD. " The love of Christ oon- 
Btnuneth ns," said St. Paul ; and as it was with him so is it with all God's servants. It 
U not the lack of fear, the goading of conscience, the command of duty, that impel the 
servant of God, but the inspiration of the love this antiphon declares. 

IV. The olao confession of all the bedeemed of God. They confess it here on 
earth ; in heaven, " Worthy is the Lamb," which is but another form of this same 
blessed truth, is the perpetual theme of the ransomed there. 

v. The encoubaqeuent fob all who debibe to betubn to God, See the 
prodigal. It was the memory of his father's house that determined him on returning 
home. He felt sure that his father's love would not fail him. And so still, it is the 
proclamation and the belief of the mercy that endureth for ever which emboldens the 
contrite heart to cast itself upon God (Ps. li. 17). 

VL That WHICH the believeb eeefb telunq oveb and oteb again unweabiedlt. 
See in this psalm how perpetually it is repeated, and this is but an example of what 
the heart of God's redeemed people ever delights in. What are the favourite hymns, 
the most blessed portions of Scripture, but those which tell most clearly and fully of 
the mercy that endureth for ever 7 And when we come to die, there is nothing else 
that so soothes and strengthens the departing soul as this same truth as it is seen in 
Jesus Christ our Lord. — S. C. 

Ver. i.—ITie great wonders of Ood. I. What abe thet? They are seen in 
nature; in providence; and especially in grace. The whole purpose, plan, and 
accomplishment of man's salvation is full of them. 

II. God IB EVEB DoiNO GREAT woNDEBB. It is not that he once did them and has 
now ceased, but he is ever doing and will continue to do them. Hence we may expect 
them in regard to others and to ourselves. 

III. Ko ONE ELBE DOES THEM. 1. In Nature we see this plainly. No one thinks 
that he can do her works. 2. In providence we see this partly. Men are apt to think 
that they themselves are the authors of the good that comes to them. 3. In grace 
men are slow to see this at all. They persist in thinking they must bring something, 
do something, or else they cannot be saved. They haggle over God's free gift. 

IV. And thet are great wondbbs. Not common and ordinary. 1. It was to he 
expected that they would be. For they are the works of God. 2. It was ntcessary they 
$lumld be. For how else was man to be saved? 3. They have all the conditions ^ 
greatness. Barity ; transcendent power ; wisdom ; grace. 

y. Thet desebte and demand oub fbaise. Of the heart, the lip, the life. — S. C. 

Vers. 10 — ^25. — From Egypt to Canaa/n. Almost every reader of Israel's history 
has seen, as surely it was intended that there should be seen, the pattern and picture 
of the soul's journey out of the misery and bondage of sin into the glorious liberty 
wherewith Christ doth make his people free. It is a long and arduous journey, but 
blessed are they which take it. These verses imply or state its chief stages. 

I. The preparation fob this journey. This is not stated, but implied. We 
know the weariness and distress, the hard bondage and the cruel oppression, whiqh led 
Israel to cry out unto the Lord. And the like of it the soul knows in its more than 
Egyptian bondage and oppression through sin. And ere the actual deliverance comes 
there has been the cry unto the Lord. 



pa. CTxivi. 1— 26,] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 291 

n. Itb diftebekt btefs. 1. Believivg in Ood. This was shown by their obedience 
to the command as to the Passover. Unbelief might have cavilled and objected, but 
the spirit of faith was given, and all Israel kept the Passover. And ere deliverance 
comes to the soul, there is and must be faith in Christ our Passover ; the definite trust 
in him as our Saviour. 2. The breaking of the oppressor's power. (Ver. 10.) That 
which in the consciousness of the redeemer) soul corresponds to what this verse tells 
of is the suspension of the power of sin. Whether permanently or not, for a time that 
power seems paralyzed, as was the power of Pharaoh when the firstborn were smitten. 
We are under its cruel compulsion no longer. 3. Hie actual deliverance. (Vers. 12, 
13.) They went out of Egypt ; so does the soul abandon its old ways, and start for 
the promised possession. 4. Complete consecration. It seemed as if Israel were to be 
dragged back again into slavery thereat Pi-bahiroth — as if the old misery were to come 
over again. How often the soul has found the lilje of that I But the command came 
to Israel to " go forward." It seemed impossible, but they obeyed, and lo I the Bed 
Sea parted asunder (vers. 13, 14). St. Paul speaks of this as their being " baptized 
nnto Moses in the cloud and in the sea." It was the type of the soul's complete con- 
•ecration. It will obey God, cost what it will ; though it be like plunging into the 
lea, yet it will obey. That is what we must do. Then comes : 6. Further and cont- 
plete deliverance. (Ver. 15.) When the soul thus resolves to obey God at all costs, 
even if it be like going straight to death, then, behold ! the way will be opened, and 
what seemed like death will prove to be life, and our enemies trouble us no more. 
The soul's self-surrender to God is the destruction of its foes, 6. The wilderness trial 
and training. (Ver, 16.) The Law was given, and then came the tests of obedience. 
Israel was tried by providential circumstances, by evil example, by fierce attacks of 
mighty kings. The redeemed life must be a tried life ; but, if we be really of God's 
Israel, it will be an overcoming life, 

III, Its blessed end. (Vers, 21, 22.) And so the soul shall come into its heavenly 
places in Christ (see the Epistle to the Ephesians). It shall gain its inheritance »nd 
keep it, in the rest which remaineth for the people of God, of which Oanaan wu the 
earthly type. — S. 0. 

Ver. 23. — Eememlered of Ood. We were so ; for— 

I. We were all is "low estate." 1. By inherited nature inclining im to tin. 
2. By ow oum actual sin, 3. By ow subjection to ea/rthly care and sorrow. 4. By 
death overtaking us all. 

II. But God bemembebed us. 1. Ee might have acted far otherwise. Condemned 
us all to death, or forgotten us and left us to go our own ways. 2. But he rememhered 
us. Indeed, though it seemed to our eye as if we had but just come into God's mind, 
we had, in fact, never been absent from his mind. (See the evolution of man's redemp- 
tion from the first purpose of grace in God down to our own individual redemption.) 
On and on the blessed work proceeded. 3. And he remembers us still. 

III. The explanation of this is the neveb-pailin» meboy of God, 1. For 
think of God. Could he, being so great and gracious as he is, do other than give this 
redemption to us ? 2. Of the gift itself. Could we by any acts of our own purchase 
or procure it? Was it not utterly out of our reach? 3. Of ourselves. Not only are 
we lacking in great amount of merit, but in all merit. How but by God's mercy can 
we be saved ?— S. C. 

Ver. 1. — The enduring mercy. This is very evidently a psalm arranged for alter. 
nate singing in the temple service. One section of the singers gives the sentences, and 
the other section answers with the ever-recurring refrain of the psalm, "For his mercy 
endureth for ever." It is a refrain which has peculiar point and interest when regarded 
as sung by the returned exiles iti their restored temple. They felt very deeply what 
it was to be " monuments of God's mercy," and that sense of God's mercy to them 
enabled them to read aright the story of the ages old and hoary, and to anticipate 
aright the ages that were yet to be. God's mercy evidently had been upon his people 
from everlasting, and that was the best of guarantees that it would be unto everlast- 
ing. Let any man worthily apprehend God's mercy to him, and that man will Im 
well assured that God's " mercy endureth for ever." 



292 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxxxyi. 1—26. 

L The pbbsonal sense or God's herot. There are some things, perhaps mauy 
things, which cannot be learned intellectually, which no man can know until he 
knows experimentally. He may know about them, and may be able to talk about 
them, but the kni)wled;;e is a surface-matter ; it is not real, not spiritually efiective, 
until it comes through personal experience. God's mercy is one of these things. 
There are elements in mercy which we can mentally apprehend, such as tendeiness, 
consideratencss, gentleness, pity ; but thei'e is an element which we can only realize by 
feeling in relation to it. A man must feel undeserving before he can know what God's 
mercy is. Then he gains a right sense of the " pitifulness of thy great mercy." The 
self-satisfied Pharisee never thinks that God's mercy concerns him. In that mercy 
the penitent publican finds refuge. 

II. Its bats thrown back on the past of Divhhe DEALnra. Let a man feel thus 
in relation to God's mercy, and then he can look back over his own past, and back 
over the past of history, and find God's mercy, as bearing and forbearing, everywhere. 
So the returned exiles would be able to read their old history as a nation. What 
shone out to view everywhere was God's mercy. Man's waywardness and wilfulness, 
and God's pitifulness and gentleness. 

III. Its bays thrown forward on the futube of Divine dealino. It is alona 
on the basis of what God is to us that we can rest our confidence of what he is going 
to be. Our soul's argument takes this form, " This God m our God for ever and ever ; 
he ivill be our Guide even unto the end." Because his mercy m our portion, we are 
sure that "his mercy endureth for ever." — ^B. T. 

Ver. 2. — God and other gods. " Oh give thanks unto the God of gods." This expres- 
sion appears to recognize other gods in order to make comparison with them of the 
One only, living, and true God. It is necessary to keep in mind that there are gods 
for whom their worshippers claim that they are verily and indeed gods. True, " the 
gods of the nations are idols (helpless vanities), but the Lord (Jehovah) made the 
heavens ; " but that is the view which the worshippers of Jehovah take, not the view 
which the nations that serve these gods take. For us there is no comparison between 
God and the gods. And yet Scripture invites us to make comparisons. Some fresh- 
ness may be gained by taking one point of view ; but it must be regarded as a point 
of view, and in no sense a complete setting of truth in relation to this subject. Qodi, 
as distinct from Ood, are always wrongly treated when they are regarded as distinct 
and independent deities. It may be the fact of history that to the mass of the people 
they become such ; but that is their delusion. They never really are such; they are 
always either incarnations of God, in order to bear direct relation to human and 
earthly things, or they are guardian angels or patron saints. This may be clearly 
illustrated from the Hindu religion. Brahma is the one living god ; but there are 
five cults of Brahma, according as he is presented incarnate in Yishnoo, 'Siva, 'Sakti, 
Gane'sa, or Surya. It might be said that these are gods, but the deeper truth is that 
they are po more than sensible helps to the apprehension of Brahma, and to right 
relations with him. This suggests interesting points of reflection. 

I. The spirituality op God is of supreme impobtanoe for man. Leave man 
alone, and anywhere and everywhere lie will inevitably materialize God and give him 
some formal shape, either in act or thought. And then man deteriorates, because he 
puts the stamp of superiority on his bodily investiture instead of on his spiritual self. 
His god becomes a body, with passions to be indulged. Therefore God so jealously 
guards for the Israelites his unseen, spiritual Being, and forbids every attempt to make 
a likeness of him. 

II. The spibituality op God is pkesebved in the one inoabnation in which 
HE HAS SHOWN HIMSELF. The "Man Christ Jesus" is the One and only true incar- 
nation 3f God. It was a simple and genuine man's life, which soon gave place to a 
presence spiritually realized. The Christ we worship is no figure of a God. It is the 
God who was unseen passing by us and for a moment removing his hand and letting 
us see, and then passing into the unseen again. — B. T. 

Ver. 4. — Wonders of creative power. " Who alone doeth great wonders." " JeYovah 
is the great Thaumaturge, the unrivalled Wonder-worker. None can be likened unto 



P8. oxxxvL 1—26.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 293 

him ; he is alone in wonderland, the Creator and Worker of true marvels, compared 
with which all other remarkable things are as child's play. None of the goda or the 
lords helped Jehovah in creation or in the redemption of his people." As the theme 
of this psalm is the Divine mercy, we must find the merciful in the wonderful. This 
psalm recalls to our minds the first chapter of Genesis, which declares the absolute 
Greatorship of God. It does not consist of a precise, definite, and detailed account of 
the processes of creation, but contains a series of distinct and repeated affirmations of 
God's supreme relations to all forms of existence, in all their order, all their origin, all 
their growth, all their relations. It is designed to impress on us that the world was 
not created by chance, by self-regeneration, by impersonal powers of nature, or by 
many agents acting either in harmony or in antagonism. God is distinct from that 
he has made. God is the one primal Source of all things. God's will is represented 
in all laws that rule. God's good pleasure shapes all ends. This chapter impresses on 
mind and heart the existence, independence, and personality of one Divine Being, the 
universality of his rule, the omnipotency of his power, and the eternal persistence of 
his relationship to the world he has created. 1. The chapter declares God's unique 
relation to every part of creation. We may conceive of no created thing, no existing 
thing, to which the assurance is not attached — God made it, God ordained it, God 
arranged it. The chapter includes all the components of the earth's crust ; all the 
treasures of the mighty deep; all the elements of the atmosphere; all the hosts of 
heaven, from the ruling sun to the faintest distant star ; all the multiplied forms of 
vegetable life; all the higher forms of animal life; and all the yet higher forms 
of human life. And the declaration of God's creation includes all the natural laws and 
forces that act in creation. These things maybe illustrated. 2. The relation of God 
as Cause and Arranger to all the changes of creation. One living God is at the begin- 
ning of all chanties, desi>>mng all change, and presiding oyer all change. 3. The rela- 
tion of God as Cause and Controller to the entire range of development in creation. 
Tell us of millions of bygone ages : God was there. Show us a thing : God made it. 
Describe a change : God ordered it. Talk of immeasurable distances, in which the 
stars swing free : God set them there. — B. T. 

Vers. 10, 11. — OodPs judgments a/re two-sided. " To him that smote Egypt in their 
firstborn ; . . . and brought out Israel from among them." Much misapprehension of the 
Divine dealings follows from fixing attention too exclusively on one side of the Divine 
judgments. We readily see what they are to those who suffer under them, but we do 
not sufSciently see what they are to those who are delivered through them. God 
smote Egypt, but the smiting was a delivering of his people; and if we would under- 
stand his doing we must see it on both its sides. Suppose that God designs to dis- 
cipline a particular race for a great world-mission which he purposes to entrust to it, 
then the presence of Israel in Egypt is explained. And when the time has come for 
that race to go forth and accomplish its mission, the ordinary difficulties of getting a 
great part of a nation's population safely away had to be dealt with, and the special 
complications arising had to be mastered. So deliverance had to take the form of 
judgment. There are two possible explanations of Divine judgments. 

I. The basieb explanation : they vindicate the Divine eiohteousnbss in the 
PUNISHMENT OF WBONQ-DOEBS. Thisis familiar truth. Some time or other the cup of 
a man's, or a family's, or a city's, or a nation's iniquity becomes full, and then the 
Divine judgments must descend. The world before the Flood, the cities of the plain, 
the Egyptians, the Israelites, Nineveh, and Babylon illustrate this. Egypt was smitten 
for its national sins. We see one special feature of that sin ; it was I'haraoh Meneph- 
thah's treatment of God's people, in spite of all warnings that were given him. •' Is 
God righteous who taketh vengeance?" Certainly he is. He would be no righteons 
God if he did not. 

II. The deepeb explanation : the law op vioabious buffebino applies even 
IN THK CASE of Divine judgments. We have yet to apprehend that all moral and 
spiritual laws are as absolute, universal, and unchangeable as all natural laws. Vicarious 
Buffering is absolutely universal. Nobody ever gets any good without somebody suffer- 
ing loss. Egypt must suffer if Israel is to be delivered. An adequate impression of 
the Divine power must be made on Israel as a basis of its belief in God, and Egypt 



294 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. osxxvl 1— 2a 

must Buffer that God's power may be sTiown. It is a thrillingly interesting vtew of 
one of the supreme mysteries of human life, that on one side of them G-od's judgments 
should be apprehended as vicarioug sufferings for the sake of others, — B. T. 

Ver. 13. — Overcoming natural ohstaeles. "Divided the sea in sunder." The 
peculiarity of the account given us of this miracle wrought for the deliverance of Israel 
is that it gives so distinctly the natural agencies by which it was wrought. A certain 
natural obstacle had to be overcome, and it was overcome by such forces as man would 
have used if he had had the nature-forces in his control. We can distinctly recognize 
the 8uit«bility of the agencies. But here the true miracle comes in. There was no 
manufacture of new forces ; there was absolute control of existing forces. There was 
no accident of wind and tide ; there was the Divine using of wind and tide. When 
God made natural forces he did not loosen them from his control. He is always 
controlling them, and we are made to feel sure that he is, by some such extraordinary 
cases of controlling as we have in this crossing of the sea. Geikie says, "Ebb and 
flood tide, in the narrow northern ford especially, are greatly affected by the wind 
prevailing at any given time. ... A violent north-east gale blew all night, and drove 
the waters before it, at ebb-tide, into the south-west ford, till the sandy ridge of the 
ford was laid bare, the shore-waters thus becoming a wall or protection to the Hebrews 
on the right, and those of the open sea on the left hand. The storm prolonging the 
ebb, delayed the flow of the tide, and thus before morning the whole of the Hebrews 
were able to reach the east shore." 

I. Natural obstacles still hindeb God'b people. Such natural obstacles as are 
related to the circumstances of God's people nowadays. They often appear as bodily 
frailty, or as sickness of those to whom we are bound in duty, or in limitation of 
means, or insufiSciency of premises for Christian work, or hindering distances from fields 
of labour, or strange enmities that seem to check us in every enterprise. And it is 
not altogether easy to associate God with such material things, and to realize that he 
is actually working for us in the control or removal of them. And yet just that is the 
lesson for the ages to be learned from God's removal of the hindering Bed Sea. 

II. Natural obstacles do but represent the spiritual obstacles of God's 
PEOPLE. " We wrestle, not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and 
powers." The spiritual weaknesses of ourselves, the spiritual forces of evil. Of our 
spiritual enemy we may say, " We are not ignorant of his devices." Nor is God. 
Nor does he fail to master these obstacles or to counteract his devices. — R. T. 

Ver. 16. — Providential guidance. " Which led his people," The addition, " through 
the wilderness," is significant ami suggestive, because a wilderness is distinctly a 
pathless region, in which mere human skill is baffled. Aud it reminds us that Israel 
was provided for aud guided for thirty-eight long years in such a region. Surely Israel 
oagbt to have said, " God's providence is mine inheritance." Is it a gain or a loss 
that we have ceased to recognize or to speak much of God's providence t It was a 
very real thing to our fathers ; it is not very real to us. At least, this might appear 
to be the fact. We are, however, disposed to argue that the truth and fact are as 
truly preserved and valued as ever they were, only they have gained a new setting 
and new shaping. 

I. The idea of pbovtoenoe fitted the older conobption of God. It belongs to 
the apprehension of God as Creator, Sustainer, Ruler. He is Lord of the whole world 
of things, and is thought of as controlling all things in the interest of his own special 
people. He is the Universal Provider, and our fathers delighted in stories of remark- 
able providential interpositions, guidances, and arrangements. And still no man can 
read his own life, or watch the lives of others, without being impressed with the 
wonder-working ways of Divine providence, which make the " unexpected " the thing 
that happens. Constantly in life we find things are brought round for us which we 
could in no way have mastered or arranged. 

" There's a divinity that sliapes our ends. 
Bough-hew thtm how we will." 

IL Thb kbweb conception of God gloiui'-ie-* his ru vi^ience, Christ has bronght 



P8. cxxxvi. 1—26.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 295 

to men a comprehensive name for God. It inoliides the very essence of every previous 
conception and name, but puts man into a new and more directly personal and affec- 
tionate relation with God. He is our Father. And his providence is his fatherly care 
of our every interest. Has a child any such providence as his father is to him ? And 
yet a child never thinks of, or speaks of, his father as providence. And in the measure 
in which we can enter into the idea of God as owr Father, we shall find that we lose 
out of use the term " providence," but keep all the reality of it, and indeed glorify it, 
as we lose the impersDnal and therefore cold element, and see it to be the wisdom and 
power and activity of our Father, which is beautified and sanctified by his love for us 
his sons. — E. T. 

Vers. 21, 22. — Fulfilment of race-missions. " And gave their land for an heritage." 
The Amorites had their race-mission; when it was fulfilled they had to pass away, 
and their land had to be occupied by another race, which also had its peculiar mission. 
It has been pointed out that no absolutely original and independent race ever existed 
on the face of the earth. No race has a simple beginnino;, and no race can unfold 
without streams of life pouring into it from outside and modifying its character. This 
may be strictly true, but nevertheless the fact remains that distinct races of men can 
he discerned in actual existence, as well as in the records of ancient history. Explain 
it how we may, qualify the statement how we may, it remains the fact that God has 
been pleased to separate humanity into races ; and this division Is even more important 
ithan that into nations. Families and races are Divine divisions ; nations are purely 
human arrangements, which God may be pleased to use, but cannot be said directly 
to arrange. Eaces are differentiated with a Divine purpose, and each race should be 
regarded as entrusted with a Divine mission. It is well to bear in mind that by Gk)d 
everything is done or borne with a view to the ultimate well-being of humanity. God 
always has the whole in view, and deals with every part in the interests of the whole. 
The Israelitish race attracts great attention, but it was not the only race placed under 
Divine commission. What we so clearly see was true of it — was true of every other 
race, and its mission was but an illustrative mission. The better we understand the 
peculiarities of the races that have had their day and ceased to be, and the more fully 
we understand God's educative purposes for humanity, the more clearly shall we 
apprehend that every race has had some imperilled truth to preserve, and some active 
witness to make. God has commissioned them all, and worked by means of them all, 
just as truly as by the Hebrew race ; and every race is immortal till its work is done ; 
then it passes and gives place to the new race with the new mission. — B. T. 

Ver. 23. — 2%e Divine dealing with the humiliated. " Who remembered us In our 
low estate." This closing portion of the psalm proves its association with the restored 
exiles. That long time in Babylon was ever thought of and spoken of as the great 
time of national humiliation. Never before had the national life been broken up, the 
national capital been in the hands of the enemy, and laid in ruins, or the temple, as 
the centre of the religious life of the nation, destroyed. Humiliation expresses precisely 
the experience through which the nation had been called to pass. But a condition 
of humiliation never puts either a man or a nation out of the Divine regard. Such 
conditions belong to the Divine discipline, and that means the immediate and direct 
Divine interest. And this the psalmist recognizes. God had remembered his people 
in their low estate ; and how practical that remembrance was is seen in the fact that, 
in due time, he redeemed his people from out of the hands of the enemies that humiliated 
them. 

I. The DrviNB dealino with the humiiiIated mat be an endubanoe. He may 
let it continue. He may seem to hold aloof, and to restrain himself. But endurance 
is altogether different from lost interest or forsaking. Endurance means knowledge, 
watchfulness, and sympathy. It is only " biding his time," patiently waiting until 
the best time has come, and so supremely seeking the highest well-being of the 
humiliated, that no limitation of the stem discipline can be permitted. There are 
conditions of life— religious life— in which God can only carry out his purposes of 
grace by our humiliation. It is the marvel of his love that he will even do a thorough 
work of humiliation. 



296 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. OXXXTH. 1 — 9. 



II. ThB DiVINI! DBALINO with the HITMILIATED is 8ITBB TO PASS INTO A BEDBMPTION. 

God's endurings have no stamp of permanency. They are only agencies working with 
a view to some issue. And God's final issues are always redem[)tions. God's people 
cannot be humiliated for ever in any Babylonian slavety. Maa may humiliate his 
fellow, and never loosen the humiliation. The overruling God never does. There is 
always somethiug good and gracious towards which the humiliation is moving. Sooner 
or later, the humiUated will be redeemed. — R. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



FSALM CXXXVn. 
"Thb most direct and striking reminis- 
cence of the Babylonish exile in the whole 
Psalter " (Professor Alexander). The psalm 
divides into two parts. First, we are given 
• picture of the nnhappy condition of the 
exiles, drawn so evidently from the life, 
that almost every commentator has felt it 
most have been painted by one of those 
who had experienced the reality (vers. 1 — 
i). Then the writer lays bare to us the 
predominant feelings of his own heart. 
These are two — ^intense love for Jerusalem 
(vers. 5, 6) ; and intense hatred of Israel's 
and Jehovah's principal foes, Edom and 
Babylon (vers. 7 — ^9). The two parts are 
strongly contrasted. " The plaintive sweet- 
ness, which (in the Srst) melted ns into 
tears, is overpowered (in the second) by a 
orash of discords" (Oheyne). 

Ver. 1. — By the livers of Babylon. The 
Euphrates and the canals derived from it, 
which were many, and filled with running, 
not stagnant, water. These would present 
themselves to the exOea as " rivers." There 
we sat down, yea, we wept, when we 
remembered Zion. The exiles had their 
leisure hours — they were not kept by their 
masters at hard work oontiuuaUy. During 
these leisure hours they natmaJhi '*8at 
down " by the rivers of Babylon, as the 
most pleasRUt and attractive places. They 
brought their harps «ith them (ver. 2), 
with some idea, perhaps, of indulging in 
mournful strains. Grief, however, over- 
powered them — Zion came to their recol- 
lection— and they could do nothing but 
weep. 

Ver. 2. — We hanged our harps upon the 
willows in the midst thereof. The super- 
fluous "harps" were "hung" up upon the 
trees that grew by the watercourses. Tliese 
are called " willows," or, according to some, 
"poplars," but were probably of a different 
species from any of tlie trees that grew in 
Palestine. The chief Babyloniiin tree was 
L c palm, which giew in tlie greatest luxu- 



riance along the oonrses of all the streams 
(Herod., i. 193; Amm. Man., xxiv. S; 
Zosim., iii. pp. 173—179). Tamarisks, 
poplars, and acacias were also common, but 
true " willows " hardly appear to have ever 
been a product of the country. The 'airaJltdh 
of our author was probably either a poplar 
or a tamarisk, 

Ver. 3. — Per there they that carried ns 
away captive required of ns a song; lite- 
rally, v>ot3» of tong. The oppressors break 
into the retired gathering ut their captives, 
and "require of them a song" — demand 
roughly and rudely to be entertained with 
the foreign music, which is perhaps sweeter 
than their own, or at any rate more of a 
novelty. And they that wasted us required 
of us mirth. Not only was "s song" 
wanted, but a joyous song — one that would 
wake feelings of mirth and gladness in those 
wito heard it. Saying, Sing us one of the 
songs of Zion ; literally, ting uifrcm a long 
of Zion. The captives had, no doubt, spoken 
of the joyous strains which they had been 
wont to pour forth in their own city upon 
festive occasions. Their conquerors demand 
a specimen, but are repulsed with the words 
of the next verse. 

Ver. i. — How shall we sing the lord's 
song in a strange landt The "songs of 
Zion" are Jeiiovah's songs, used in his 
worship, suited only for religious occasions. 
It would be desecration to sing them "in a 
strange land," among strange people, not 
to call forth devotional sentiment, but to 
gratify curiosity. 

Ver. 5. — If I forget thee, Jemsalem, let 
my right hand forget her cunning ; literally, 
let my right hand forget; but the words 
supplied in the Authorized Version are 
necessary to bring out the sense, wliich is, 
" If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, so far as to 
desecrate thy sacred songs by making them 
an entertainment for the heathen, may I 
never have power to strike a note again ! " 

Ver. 6. — If I do not remember thee, let 
my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. 
Let me be deprived of the power of Bo?ig. 
What was wished in the preceding verse 
with respect to the power of instrumental 
performance is here wished with respect to 
the vocal organs. If I prefer not Jerusalem 



w. cxxxvii. 1 — 9,] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



above my chief joy. This «eoms to be the 
tme sense, and is equivalent to " If I prefer 
not Jerusalem above aught else.'' 

Ver. 7. — Bemember, Lord, the children 
of Edom in the day of Jerusalem ; rather, 
remember, Lord, to the children of Edom 
the day of Jerusalem. "The day of Jeru- 
salem " is tlie day of her fall, when Edom 
took part with her enemies, and rejoiced at 
her destruction (see Lam. iv. 21, 22; Ezek. 
XXV. 12; XXXV. 5; Obad. 10—14). The 
psttlmist prays God to "leraember" this to 
Edom, and requite it upon her (comp. Ps. 
cxxxii. 1, where the .i-ame expression is used 
in a good sense). Who said, Base it, rase 
it, even to the foundation thereof ; i.e. " de- 
stroy the city utterly — leave not one stone 
upon another." The enmity between Biiom 
and Israel was of the intensest otiaraoter 
(see 1 Kings xi. 15, 16 ; 1 Ohron. xviii. 12 ; 
Jer. xlix. 7—22; Amos L 11, 12; Mai. i 
3—5). 

Yer. & — daughter of Babylon; *.e. O 



nation of the Babylonians (comp. Isa. xItIL 
1, 5; Ps. ix. 14, etc.). Who art to be de- 
stroyed ; literally, thou desolated one. The 
desolation of Babylon began with its cap- 
ture by Cyrus, but was not completed for 
many centuries. In the Archnmenian 
period it was one of the chief cities of the 
empire. Even under the Partliians it was 
still a flouriBhing town. But from the time 
of Isaiali's prophecy (laa. xiit. 1 — 22) it 
was a doomed city, and in the eyes of a 
devout Jew already "desolate." Happy 
shall he be, that rewardeth thee as thou 
hast served us ; <.e. happy shall he be that 
completes thy destruction, and the destruc- 
tion of thy people. He will be the instru- 
ment for carrying out Goii's vengeance. 

Ver. 9. — Happy shall he be, that taketh 
and dasheth thy little ones against the 
stones ; i.e. that brings on thee the worst 
calamities of war (see 2 Kings viii. 12 ; Isa. 
xii. 16—18; Hos. x. 11; xiii. 16; Nah. iiL 
10). 



HOMILETIC& 

Vers. 1 — ^.—Incongruity in religion. The psalm brings before us in very ^^d 
colour — 

I. The dark shadow oast bt a obeat good. Patriotism is an excellent thing, 
and we are all of us glad and thankful to belong to a land of light and liberty. We 
would not, on any account, forego so great an advantage, so valuable a privilege. But 
how much suflforing that blessing may entail 1 Who can meisure the intensity of the 
humiliation and distress which the children of Israel endured when they were torn 
from their native land, or when they were made to feel their subjection in the streets 
or the fields of Babylon ? They " wept when they remembered Ziou." The very 
beauties of its situation (Ps. xlviii. 2), as contrasted with the dreary levels before their 
eyes ; the very fulness of its privileges, as contrasted with the privations to which they 
were then submitting, filled their souls with grief. The richer our treasure, the severer 
our loss; the deeper and stronger our love, the keener and the more sustained our 
sorrow. " Our aflfections bring great afflictions, but they are well worth the cost." If 
we are wise we shall be more than content to pay that price for so great a good. For 
these sorrows are sacred ; they are softening, and they are purifying ; they provide the 
best opportunity for filial resignation ; they draw us to God in hallowing communion, 
and in the prayer which brings down a large blessing from his Holy Spirit. 

II. The limits op the Mosaic civilization. No doubt the Law given by Moses 
was a civilizing institution, and made Israel much wiser and worthinr in every way 
than that people would otherwise have been. But it left much to be desired. Among 
other things it left its disciples unredeemed from the cruelties (or many of them) 
practised in war. No Christian writer could, with any sort of propriety or consistency, 
have written the last verse of this psalm. It pains and i-hocks us as we read it. We 
conclude that the world wanted another Teacher, whose spirit should inspire, and whose 
principles should guide and control, his disciples in their treatment of friend and foe. 
It is not, indeed, that passages could not be found in the Law enjoining mercy ; it 
is that there was needed One who by his own life, and by his gracious Spirit, and by 
his sovereign power, should be able to influence and inspire his followers with his own 
thought, and be able to lead them along a higher and nobler way. 

III. SoUE MASKED iNCONeRCiTiES IN CUB EXPERIENCE. " How shall we Sing the 
Lord's song in a strange land ? " How shall we sing the happy songs of Zion when we 
are in the power of the enemy, away from the city that we love, the sanctuary which 



298 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxxxvn. 1— 9 

is our spiritual home ? There are " strange lands" to the Christian man, in which the 
sounds that are native to the soil cannot be expected to be heard, 'I'here are spiritual 
conditions in which the graces of Christian character will not flourish, but will die 
away. Of such are pride, selfishness, covetousness, self-indulgence, uncharitaVileness. 
It would he quite an incongruous thiug for thankfulness, helpfulness, piety, forbearance, 
anticipatioD of the heavenly kingdom, consecration to the cause of Christ and man, to 
abound in such " strange lands " as these. When we are called upon to practise the 
graces of Christian character, and when we find ourselves quite indisposed to do so, 
when any one of these is uncongenial to us, we should seriously inquire of ourselves 
where we stand. Are we on Immanuel's ground ? Are we on the King's highway ? 
Or are we in some strange land which belongs to the enemy? Is there good reason 
why we should return, promptly and penitently, to the kingdom from which we have 
been carried away captive? This is Oiofirit thing to do ; and the way home ii open 
to all earnest soulib 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vers. 1 — ^9. — Fruits of exile from God. It was Israel's, or rather JudaVs, exile from 
Zion and Jerusalem that this psalm commemorated ; but the fruits that exile bore, and 
which are here told of, set forth the fruits of the yet sadder exile from God which 
many a soul has known. 

L The mbmoet of what has been lost ib fitll oir sorrow. (Ver. 1.) " Tea, 
we sat down and wept." And if, as with God's ancient people, we through sin are 
banished from God, then, when we remember, we too shall weep. 

n. Mnsio, uiBTH, AND SONG ARE IMPOSSIBLE. (Vers. 2 — 4.) How could Israel 
sing ? How can we under like conditions ? He who has once known, yet more if he 
has lived for a long time in, the joy of (rod's love, when he loses that, loses all joy 
along with it. How can he sing the Lord's song, etc. (ver. 4) ? 

III. Passionate devotion and DEsraB towards what has been lost fill the 
SOUL. (Vers. 5, 6.) His one desire is to return back ; his most fervent vows that never, 
never will he again forget. 

IV. Burning hatred op those who have wrought this wrong takes fosbesbion 
OF hiu. (Cf. 2 Cor. vii. 10, 11.) In this sense we may use language which towards 
earthly enemies woidd be contrary to the spirit of Christ. — S. 0. 

Ver. 4. — " 2%e Lord's song in a strange land." What a wonderful mixture this 
psalm contains of tears and tragedy, of pathetic sorrow and fiery patriotism I We can 
almost certainly fix the time when it was written. The first party of exiles had just 
returned from Babylon, and had come to Jerusalem, where everything on which their 
gaze rested — the universal desolation and ruin — reininled them of what the spoiler had 
done, and brought baik to their memory the horrors of those dreadful days when 
Jerusalem was besiogerl, and at length captured and destroyed. The psalm tells also 
of the land of their exile — their widespread plains watered by the artificial canals and 
rivers, in the construction and maintenance of which it is probable that many of the 
exiles were employed. These were the rivers of Babylon, by which they sat down and 
wept. And he speaks of the exiles themselves; how their captors bade them sing one 
of those songs for which their land was famous ; but they would not. Their capton 
wanted to be amused, and thought that these Jews should help them by their song. 
But the sorrow and shame of their exile had smitten their hearts too terribly, and 
stifled all tlieir power of song. All that there they were capable of was the fierce and 
almost frantic prayer for revenge with which the psalm concludes. But the text has 
wider application than merely to those sad circumstances which first called it forth. 
Hence — 

I. Inquire what is meant by "the Lord's song." Not only one inspired utterance, 
however beautiful or sacred, but all such psalms and hymns as they had been wont to 
sing in their happy homeland. And the Lord's song includes those many sweet songs 
which may have no words, but are sung in the heart of God's people, to their great joy 



PS. oxxxvu. 1— 9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 299 

and help. And in every case, whether with or without words, it is a song of the heart ; 
the lips alone can never sing the Lord's song, for such song is not alone to the Loid, 
hut from the Lord, inspired hy his Spirit and taught hy his grace. 

IL Whgbefore cannot this bono bb buno m a. stbanob laitd? It was not 
from mere sullenness that the exiled Jews refused to sing; nor from that pride in 
which the unhappy uften entrench themselves ; nor because they had lost all hope 
in God: they had not. But it was because of what Babylon itself was to them. 
1. Babylon was "a strange land." In its merely physical aspects it was utterly 
different from all they bad been accustomed to ; but how much more in all its moral, 
social, and spiritual character 1 Hence there settled down upon them the deep depression 
and sadness which the sense of complete isolation and loneliness ever produces. Tears, 
but not songs, abound in such circumstances. It is ill to be separate, to stand apart, 
especially by our own will. 2. There wot no sympathy, hut a chill, designed contempt 
and dislike of all they held most precious. Let any one choose such surroundings, the 
Lord's song will be quickly silenced. 3. Babylon was the embodiment of the world- 
spirit. Splendid, proud, magnilicent; but hard, cruel, godless. That spirit and the 
Lord's song canaot coexist. 4. Was fvil of idols. See the prophet's scorn of them 
(Fs. cxxxv. 15, etc.). And human hearts are yet haunted by idols not a few; but if 
so, then the Lord's song cannot be sung. 6. Was/ull of sin, corrupt to the core. But 
the heart that holds to sin, any sin, silences the Lord's song. — S. C. 

Ver. 9. — A horrible kind of happiness. Can the sentiments of our text, and of these 
verses, and the many like them in these psalms, be justified ? Are tbey not wicked, 
cruel, unchristian, and so to be utterly condemned by all good men? Such questions 
are continually asked. But let it be remembered — 

I. Oppbebsion dbives even wise men mad. These terrible utterances are the 
product of a cruelly oppressed and suffering people. Let us put ourselves in their 
place. 

II. That it ib the lanquaoe of the Old Testament, not or thb New. 
Now, the Old Testament taught : 1. 2%af Ood's retributions, both to the good and evil, 
were given Itere and now, in temporal blessing or the reverse. They had no clear know- 
ledge of a future life, still less of any judgment to come. 2. J%xt the Divine character 
was to be known by these retributions, and God's honour maiotained, and the tiue religion 
upheld by tliem. 3. Hence they were told to invoke curses on the wicked, and they 
would feel it wrong not to do so. How else could God be glorified ? 4. The prosperity 
of the wicked was a great trial to them. It seemed so to dishonour God and to imperil 
his truth in the world. Hence : 6. We are not justified in attributing these utteramces 
to mere personal spite and revenge. Their motive was far other and higher. 

III. That all wab is the pbactioal oabbying odt of the pbinciples of the 
Old Testament. Even with all the alleviations and mitigations of modern and more 
Christian days, war does the very things which in these psalms many think so wrong. 

IV. That it is possible to do dbeadful things without beino possessed of 
A DBEASFITL BFIBIT. Mauy men deem war to be at times necessary and just; and 
surely it can be so, and ofteu has been ; and they have urged such war as in the sight 
and under the fear of God. The magistrate is not to bear the sword in vain, but to 
remember that he is the minister of God. 

V. BscoaNizE ouB INDEBTEDNESS TO THE GOSPEL OF Chbist. And rejoice in it 
and spread it far and wide. For this gospel not only takes away all excuse for the 
vindictive spirit, but ever tends to lessen the occasions which provoke it. Let it but 
spread, and there shall be no more such horrible happiness as that which our text 
seems to contemplate and approve.— S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — 2%e tears of memory. " Tea, we wept, when we remembered Zion." The 
rivers of Babylon and the district were the Euphrates, the Tigris, and the branch 
streams of those rivers. The writer of the psalm is not in Babylon, but is recalling 
to mind what happened when he was there. It is not easy to recognize the mood of 
the psalmist when he composed this psalm. Usually it is assumed that there was first 
a gentle and plaintive mood, and then a fierce and revengeful mood ; but perhaps it is 
tnu to the weaknesses of bumaa nature to regard it throughout as a bitter retrospect. 



300 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxxxvn. 1— 9. 

The mood is one of intensity, excitement, and anger in the remembrance of sufferings 
and humiliations that had been endured. There is a weeping of anger and of remem- 
bered sufferings and humblings ; as there is a weeping when enduring humiliations in 
the thought of bygone joys, relations, and privileges. 

I. Memory mat apfectinoly recall lost privilbqbs. The psalmist seemi to 
himself to be again in Babylon, again oppressed with the burden of the lost national 
liberty and the present national bondage. He no longer belonged to a nation. He 
ni) longer had any capital city. He no longer had any centre for the religious life. 
The kingdom was broken up, the city was desolated, the temple lay in ruins, the 
nation was scattered, and the people were virtual slaves to severe and even cruel task- 
masters. Some sullenly endure! their fate ; but to some every remembrance of the old 
days was a cntting pain — it either made them angry and forced bitter tears, or in 
Bofter moods it broke them down and caused tears of regret. How often the memory 
of the past still brings pain and tears! There is so much in it that might have been 
otherwise. Olten our memory-tears are bitter. Only in good moods are they gentle 
and tender. They may be, they should be, tears of thankful, trustful love. 

II. Memory may apfeotinoly recall the cause of lost PRiviLEaES. It was 
only an imperfect memory that recalled a desolated Zion. There was something more 
than loss and woe to remember — there was the sin of the nation that caused the loss, 
and was punished in the woe. And it is only when memory of past sorrows includes 
the sin that brought the sorrows, that memory brings worthy and healing tears. — E. T. 

Vor. 2. — Willow-types. It is remarked that there are rww no willows in Babylon. 
The name erei is also applied to the tamarisk and poplar. But the drooping form of 
the willow branches and leaves is specially suggestive of tears. It is clear that a tree 
growing on the river-banks, and hanging over the stream, is meant. The weeping- 
willow is known as the Salix Babylonica. Of this tree Evelyn says, " Its branches 
being long, slender, and pendulous, makes it proper to be planted upon the banks of 
rivers and ponds and over springs ; the leaves, also, are long and narrow ; and when 
any mist or dew falls, a drop of water is seen hanging at their extremities, which, 
together with tlieir hanging branches, cause a most lugubrious appearance." 

I. The WILLOW is a type op the weeping op humiliation. There is a weeping 
of fcwe, and a weeping oi joy ; but these imply an uplifted face. Love looks through its 
tears into the face of its loved one. Joy lifts up its head, and mingles smiles with 
tears. Neither of these looks down, so neither can be fairly represented by the down- 
drooping willow. There is a weeping of simple yrief and sorrow, that has in it no 
sense of sin, and this does not look down, because there is always trust and hope in the 
heart, anii behind the tears; and the soul is not afraid to let the merciful Father see 
the tears. The weeping-willow is no fitting type of that holy or sympathetic weeping. 
But there is a weeping of conviction, of humiliation under God's judgment on^sin, and 
of penitence, whose essential feature is down-looking ; the whole man is bent down, 
flagging in shame and hopelessness and fear. He dare not look up. That kind of 
weeping is well represented by the willow, which is wholly bent down, branch and leaf 
ever 'hanging down. 

II. The willow is a type of the weeping of insincerity. A poet-souled man 
has pointed out that the willow, which looks so meek, as if always in tears, is really 
beholding itself and admiring itself in the mirror of the water. And much religious 
weeping is no better than sentimentality and self-seeking. It is attitude tu attract 
attention, and win praise of piety. Our Lord warned us of such insincerity when he 
said, " Thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head and wash thy face, that thou appear 
not unto men to fast." Sincere weeping looks out and looks up ; it tries not to look 
down. — R. T. 

Ver. 3. — A reasonable call for songs. We fix attention on the fact that the people 
of Babylon expected the religion of Jehovah to be a joyous religion. They may have 
asked for a song partly as a taimt, but below the taunt must have been the association 
of the Jehovah-relifiion with harp and song. And men were right in this. 'J'he religion 
of Jehovah, and of Jehovah-Jesu», ought to make hearts glad: we should "sing on 
our heavenward way." Dr. Barry thinks the call for a song may have meant "an 



M. cxxxvii. 1—9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 301 

exhortation to forget a lost home, and make the best of a new country ; " but the psalmist 
was in no mood to respond to such an exhortation. 

I. The captives might have bung even in captivity. They would if their 
faith in God had mastered their circumstances. It is not much to say for them that 
they were bo overwhelmed by their sorrows, and so crushed by their humiliations, that 
they could not even sing a song. True, their Zion was a desolation ; but God, their 
God, still lived. True, they were under his chastening hand; but then he only 
chastens for our profit. True, a long waiting-time was before them; but then God's 
promises never fail. It was not praiseworthy that they should hang up their harps on 
the willows for the wind to make melancholy music through them. They had better 
hava kept them in their hands, and cheered each other with enlivening strains of trust 
and hope. And as to the people of Babylon, they wouUi have honoured Go^ much 
more if they had responded to the request brightly and cheerfully, put their own 
feelings aside, and suag them songs of high confidence and joy and hope. These 
captives who refused a reasonable request did nothing praiseworthy. A Christian's 
harp has no business on the willows. 

II. The captives would have been able to sino if thry had thought less 
OF their own affairs. Their patriotism was self-centredness ; and that always 
makes people feel weak and miserable. It led these captives to neglect their duty. 
They were put in Babylon to witness for God to the Babylonians ; and instead, they 
made themselves miserable and helpless by brooding over their miseries, so that when 
a song was asked for iii honour of Jehovah, they could not sing. If they had thought 
about God, and less about themselves and about their country, they would have found 
the joy of serving even by " singing the Lord's song in a strange land." — R. T. 

Vers. 5, 6. — Sanctified patriotism. " Let my right hand forget," i.e. be numbed 
into deadness. The psalm expresses the feelings of an exile who has but just returned 
from the land of his captivity. He is oppressed with the desolation around him. His 
heart is heavy and bitter with the memory of wrong and insult from which he has but 
lately escaped. " He takes his harp, which he could not sound at the bidding of his 
conquerors by the waters of Babylon ; and now with faltering hand he sweeps the 
strings, first in low, plaintive, melancholy cadence pouring out his griefs, and then 
with a loud crash of wild and stormy music, answering to the wild and stormy numbers 
of his verse, he raises the paean of vengeance over his foes " (Perowne). " Jerusalem 
is still the centre round which the exiled sons of Judah build, in imagination, the 
mansions of their future greatness. In whatever part of the world he may live, the 
heart's desire of a Jew is to be buried in Jerusalem. 

I. The love of country may take the place of love of God. Not all patriots 
are personal servants of God. Indeed, it is curious to observe that, as a matter of fact, 
active patriots have seldom been actively religious men; and interest in God has 
tended to shunt men aside from interest in country, some pious sections even going 
so far as to withdraw altogether from political and even social life. It is, however, the 
other side of the matter to which attention is now drawn. Supreme interest in the 
material things of patriotism tends to loosen the hold on a man of spiritual things. 
The patriotism of the returned exiles seems very beautiful ; but it was a most serious 
peril to them, and proved so engrossing that patriotism, not Divine service, became the 
great national characteristic during the age of the Maccabees. Men fought for Jerusalem, 
not for Ood. 

IL The love of country may express the love of God. Of this it is possible 
to take David as an example. There could not be a worthier instance of patriotism, 
but back of the patriotism, and its inspiration, was the love of God. His country was 
God's country ; and service to his country was service to God. And this relation he 
kept up right through his life, and so he stands, in the historic page, the supreme 
example of " sanctified patriotism."— R. T. 

Vers. 7 — 9. — The had moods of good people. The psalm closes with what must be 
regarded as tlie unrestrained utterance of over-excitement. The psalmist was in a bad 
nuKid; perhaps it did him good, and relieved un(Uie strain, for him thus to utter his 
bad feelings. But no devices of explanation should be allowed to relieve our couviction 



302 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. cxzxvin. 1 — 8. 



that they were very bad and unworthy feelings ; and for us the record can hut be a 
warning against cherishing sentiments of vengeance. "Vengeance is mine; I will 
repay, saith the Lord." If we have the spirit that Christ taught us to cherish, we 
shall not e\enpray against our enemies, we shall only pray /or them. The last verse 
of the psalm is wholly repulsive to one who can take the Christian standpoint. With 
this denunciation of Edom should be compared the Book of Obadiah, and especially 
vers. 10—15. " It is a fierce outburst of natural resentment, which borrows almost s 
grandeur from the religious fervour, the devoted patriotism, from which it springs. 
The psalm is a wonderful mixture of soft melancholy and flery patriotism." 

I, Good peoflf. mat have bad uoods. It is a fact that they do have such moods, 
and we must make the best that we can of the fact. We should read the Psalms much 
more sympathetically, and he much less distressed by some of their intense expressions, 
if we simply accepted the fact. We never judge our friends fairly unless we take into 
account their bad moods, and slip kindly over what they say at such times. 

II. Good feofle may be believed by bfeakino out when in theib bad moods. 
It is better to speak out, even dreadful things, than to keep brooding over them in our 
hearts. Kot only is feeling thus relieved, but pitifulness and considerate gentleness is 
called forth from others. We kindly say, " Poor fellow I he is not quite himself; bear 
with him awhile." And oftentimes speaking out reveals a man to himself, and becomes 
the very best cure of his bad mood. One fully expects that the psatmist must have 
been ashamed of himself when he had said out these dreadful things. How pitiful 
towards him Gkid must have been I 

ni. Good people must never keep loso in theib bad moods. It is precisely 
there that men so often go wrong. Storm-times ought to pass. Passionate moments 
leave but a light impress. But keep bitter feeling; brood over wrongs; cherish 
revenge, and the soul must inevitably be deteriorated, and the vision of God must be 
darkened. We must never forget that he loves our enemiei. — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — " Sy the rivers of BoibyUm," etc " The psalm expresses the feelings of 
an exile who has but just returned from the land of his captivity." 

I. The lobs of libebty temporal and bpibitual. 1. Brings after it the Tnost 
despondent sorrow. They hung their harps on the willows, and sat down and wept. 
2. Blights the exercise of the highest gifts. They could not sing the joyful songs of 
Zion — the songs of the Lord. An enslaved people lose the power, as a rule, which 
they had when they were free. 3. Converts the world into a place of exile. Home is 
lost, and the world becomes a " strange," mysterious place. 

II. Fidelity to the holiest memories and hopes. " If I forget thee." We 
cannot blot out from the heart the holiest things, however much they may be mutilated 
and injured by ourselves or by others. The most eloquent writings in all languages 
have been pleas for liberty and religion, when nations have been struggling to recover 
or attain their liberty. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM cxxxvin. 

AoLVBTBBof Davidical psalms(Pss. czxxviii. 
— ozIt.) here follows. It is not easy to trace 
any single line of thought connecting them 
all, or to explain how they cume to be so 
entirely separated from the great bulk of 
the Davidical psalms. The first two are, in 
the main, psalms of praiye ; the next four, 
psalms of supijlication (Pss. cxl. — cxliii.); 
in Pb. cxUt. praise ^nd Bupplication are 
blended ; while in Ps. cxlv. praise again 
forms the main, if not the sole, topic of the 



composition. It is a fanciful exegeris which 
sees in all the eight psalms reflections upon 
the promise made to David in 2 Sam. vlL 

Ver. 1. — I will praise thee with my whole 
heart (comp. Pus. ix. 1 ; cxi. 1). Before the 
gods will I sing praise nnto thee. Some 
suppose the expression, "before the gods," 
to mean "before the great ones of the 
earth," and quote Ps. cxix. 46 as parallel. 
Others think that the imaginary vain gods 
of the heathen are intended. 

Vei-. 2.— I will woiship toward thy holy 
temple. The term "temple" here must 
designate the tabernacle (comp. Ps. t. 8). 



PS. oxxxvm. 1 — 8.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



303 



And piaise thy Ifame for thy loving-kindness 
and for thy truth. " Mercy " and " truth " 
are God's two highest attributes (Bxod. 
xxxiv. 6). They worn especially shown to 
Israel ia Ood'a promises and his fidelity to 
them. For thou hast magni&ed thy Word 
above all thy Xame. Some wouUI amend 
the text, and read ■^noN, "thy truth," for 
■=imDt<, "thy Word." But if we keep the 
text, and understand '^niax as "thy pro> 
mise," the sense will not be very different. 
God has magnified his promise, and his 
faitlif ulness to it, above all his other revealed 
attributes. 

Ver. 3. — In the day when I cried thou 
answeredst me. Thy answer came to my 
prayer almost as soon as it was out of 
my mouth. And strengthenedst me with 
strength in my soul. The promptness of 
thy answer gave my soul fresh strength. 

Yer. 4. — All the kings of the earth shall 
praise tTa.ee, Lord. The world bhall be 
converted to thy worship when it is seen 
how promptly and fully thou answerest 
prayer (comp. Pss. Ixviii. 31, 82; cii. 15). 
When they hear the words of thy month. 
The promises that thou makest, and thy 
performance of them. 

Ver. 5. — ^Yea, they shall sing in the ways 
of the Lord. They, «.e. the kings, shall 
sing, no longer in their own misguided 
heathen ways, but in the ways of the Lord, 
in the mode prescribed by his Law and 
practised in his temple (comp. Isa. xlix. 22, 
23 ; Ix. 3—5, etc.). For great is the glory 
of the Lord. (So Isa. Ix. 1—3; Ixvi. 18.) It 
is this "glory" which attracts "all nations 
and tongues." 

Yer. 6. — Though the Lord be high, yet 
h»th he respect unto the lowly. Notwith- 



standing all God's glory and greatness, lie 
condescends to look upon the lowly, to con- 
sider their netda, and to supply them (comp. 
Isa. Ivii. 15). Hence David f'euls sure that 
he will not be overlooked (see vers. 7, 8). 
But the proud he knoweth afar off. Qod 
keeps proud men at a distance, does not draw 
near to them, much less make his abode 
with them, but leaves them to themselves 
until they are ripe for punishment. 

Yer. 7. — Though I walk in the midst of 
trouble, thou wilt revive me (comp. Ps. 
xxiii. 4). David " walked in the midst of 
trouble " during the greater part of hie life. 
When the persecution of Saul was over, he 
had trouble from foreign enemies (2 Sam. 
V. — xii.); when these were subdued, his 
domestic troubles began (2 Bam. xiii. — 
xix. ; 1 Kings v. 53). God, however, from 
time to time " gave him a reviving." Thou 
Shalt stretch forth thine hand against the 
wrath of mine enemies (comp. Piss. iii. 7: 
ix. 3—6 ; xviii. 14—17, etc.). What God 
had so often done for him, David is con- 
fident that he will do again. He will break 
the power of bis enemies, and deliver him 
from their machinations. And thy right 
hand. The symbol of strength. Shall save 
me ; or, " deliver me " (comp. Fss. xviii. 35 ; 
Ix. 5 ; Ixiii. 8 ; cviii. 6, etc). 

Ver. 8. — The Lord will perfect that which 
concerneth me; i.e. will complete what he 
has begun for me — will not leave his work 
un6nished (comp. Ps. Ivii. 2; Phil. i. 6). 
Thy mercy, Lord, endureth for ever. Does 
not suddenly break off and stop. Forsake 
not the works of thine own hands. This is 
probably more than a mere personal request. 
David sees in God'e care for himself a por- 
tion of his great providential loheme for 
the redemption of tiie w^rld. 



HOMILETIOS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — The goodness of Ood. There are very few psalms where so much is 
crowded into a very small compasB as in this. The writer in a very few strokes brings 
out those features in the character of God which make him to be the One who is 
worthy of our deepest reverence, of our fullest confidence, of our most grateful pruse. 
We have — 

I. His LOVINQ-KINDNE88. (Ver. 2.) 

II. His faitufitlnebs. (Ver. 2.) The psalmist gives thanks for " thy truth," and 
goes on to say that God has done that for him which more than fulfils his word of 
promise (see Josh, xxiii. 14). It is not only in the ordering of our outward life, but 
in his dealing with us in the gospel of his Son, that " God is faithful " (1 Cor. L 9). It 
is "ho that is true" who speaks to us from heaven (see Rev. iii. 7), and summons 
us to his service and to his friendship. It is the unvarying testimony of Christian 
men, as their course closes, that their Divine Lord has been faithful to them, working 
in them and doing for them all that he had promised to them. 

III. The conditioks of his fiu.lowship. (Ver. 6.) There is nothing more 
explicitly revealed, both in Old Testument and New, than this doctrine of humility. 



304 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxxxvni. 1— «. 

Thronghout Scripture, pride is presented to us as the insuperable obstacle blocking 
the way to the farour of God : humbleness of heart is held before us as the very 
gateway of his kingdom. We can see the reason why it should be so. 1. It is the 
truth. When we take a high viewof ourselves, we see ourselves in a false light; when 
a lowly view, we see ourselres as we are. 2. It is the one way to the admission of 
Divine wisdom. The haughty heart will not listen when God speaks ; the humble 
heart is open aud receptive. 3. It is the necessary condition of receiving Jesus Christ 
as our Divine Saviour. He came " not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." 
It was the complacent Pharisee who sfood aloof from him, and who rejected his doc- 
trine ; it was the consciously unworthy who "drew nigh unto him for to hear him" 
(Luke XV. 1), and who "went into the kingdom" before the self-righteous and the 
respectable. Hence we find our Lord beginning his public teaching with the Beatitude, 
"Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven " (Matt. v. 3); 
hence we have his word, " He that humbleth himself shall be exalted " (Matt, xxiii. 12 ; 
and see Matt, zviii. 3). 4. To be lowly minded is to be like our Lord himself (Matt. 
xi. 29 ; Phil. ii. 7—9). 

rV. His scsTAEsnNO AND BBViviNQ OBAOE. (Vers. 3 — 7.) In the day of our 
trouble we "cry unto the Lord." It is an instinct of our religious nature (see Ps. cvii.). 
It is the natural refuge of the devout (Ps. xlvi. 1). It is in accordance with the 
Divine desire (Ps. 1. 15). His promise (and his performance) is to sustain our spirit, 
to " strengthen us with strength in our soul." We think that we cannot possibly 
endure the weight of the afSictions that press upon us ; but he makes us to know " the 
exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe ; " he " revives us," he renews 
our hope, our confidence, our courage ; he " girds us with all-sufficient grace " for the 
task we have to undertake, for the suffering we are called to bear. The " morning of 
joy " which is promised us may be a long way off; many dark hours may have to pass 
before that will dawn ; but during the night of sorrow he will " give us songs, he 
will sustain our spirit, he will make us to glory in infirmity," because " Christ's own 
power rests upon us." There is a more signal proof of his Divine power and goodness 
than that which, perhaps, in human weakness, we prefer, viz. — 

V. His DELIVERING OEAOB. (Vcr, 7, latter part.) For God does sometimes, and 
indeed often, interpose on behalf of his children. His "right hand," the right hand 
of his power and of his righteousness, is laid, not then and there on our souls to revive, 
but on the enemy to subdue him, or on the tangled events to undo them, on the 
reduced circumstances to raise and restore them. One touch of that wise, strong hand 
— the touch of a link in the chain far out of sight — and the trouble is over. It is 
right for us to a^ this of God, whatever be the trial through which we are passing ; 
but we must ask reverently, and in the spirit of obedience, quite ready to find that 
he will not take away the cross, but give us strength to bear it. 

"VI. The CONTINUO08NBSB AND COMPLETENESS OP HIS WORK WITHIN US. (Ver. 8.) 

1. We are God's workmanship (Eph. ii. 10; 1 Cor. iii. 9; 2 Cor. v. 5). It is he that 
hath made us what we are "in Christ Jesus." It is his Spirit that has " renewed us 
in the spirit of our mind." Our repentance, our faith, our peace and rest of heart, our 
hope of heaven, our interest in the work of God, our readiness or eagerness to serve in 
the vineyard of Christ, — all this is, we gratefully own, the work of God within us. 

2. We may count on its continuance. God will not forsake the work of his own hands. 
If he " pronounces good " the objects in nature, which are the product of his skill aud 
power, how much more will he be pleased with the cleansed heart, with the renewed 
will, with the obedient spirit of his own child I He will not leave that to be lost on 
the waste ; he will not abandon tliat to the mercy of wind and wave. We may and 
miist ask bis continued care of us, his guardianship and guidance and replenishment; 
but, thus asking for it, we may count confidently upon it. 3. We may look with a 
firm hope to the completion of his work in us; he will "perfect that which concerneth 
us." His interest in us, his kindness toward us, will not lessen as we live our life in 
him and before him. As we grow into his image, and as we do his work more faith- 
fully and effectively, his love will not lessen nor his grace slacken. This will " endure 
for ever." It will follow us all the way, until we are " perfected in Christ ; " until we 
are " meet for the Master's use " in a higher and larger sphere. For that post in his 
heavenly kingdom which he will have ready for us we may feel sure that he is fitting 



PS. cxxxviii. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 805 

us, not only by abounding privilege and vise discipline, but by gracious influences from 
his Holy Spirit. 

The goodness of God has large issues. 1. Its effect on the enlightened mind is 
whole-hecvrted praise (vers. 1, 2). A deep sense of all that God is to us, and of all that 
we are to him, fills our heart and constrains us to fervent and to public devotion. 
Whatever is miant particularly by the words, " before the gods," we may be sure that 
the psalmist intended to speak of public worship. He would not be satisfied with a 
thankful and loving spirit, good and right as that was ; he would proclaim to all his 
sense of the loving-kindness and the faithfulness of Jehovah, full and fearless 
expression is one part of sacred duty. 2. Its effect on those who stand without is 
correspondingly great. " The Lord hath done great things for them," said the Baby- 
lonian witnesses (Ps. cxxvi. 2). If we will so submit ourselves to Divine influences 
that our lives bear the mark and impress of Qod's hand, there will be excited in the 
minds of those outside the Church of Christ a wondering admiration of the powwr of 
the gospel, and they, too, will join in praising God 1 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Exultation in God. What a contrast between this psalm and the 
previous one I There the sad-heai-ted writer asks, " How can we sing ? " Here the 
psalmist can and will do nothing but sing. The effect of this spirit is seen throughout 
the psalm. 

I. It will opeklt confess God. (Vers. 1, 2.) " Before the gods," meaning, 
we think, those high princes and potentates — god-like in their majesty, power, and in 
the abject homage and deference that men paid to them — under whose authority and 
oppression they had so long lived. The den of lions, the burning fiery furnace, had 
hitherto been the penalty which had to be paid, did any man dare to praise Jehovah 
in the presence of these mighty kings. But it had been done all the same; and here 
the psalmist declares he will do it again. And, indeed, the spirit of praise is irre- 
pressible. It must tell out its gladness in God. 

II. A»D WILL DECLARE THE BEA80N WHY. 1. Because of tJte LorcPs "loving- 
kindnes»." (Ver. 2.) We do not know what special instance of this called forth the 
praise here expressed ; but he whose eyes are opened of the Lord to mark his loving- 
kindness will never lack loving-kindness to mark. 2. Hie "truth." The Lord's 
fidelity to his Word. What he promised he performed. How unbelieving we too often 
are I Yet those who have trusted the Lord have never had cause to regret their doing 
so. 3. And this in so emphatic and extraordinary a manner. " Thou hast magnified 
thy Word," etc. The Lord's name and renown for fidelity were great already, and had 
led to high expectation; but what the Lord had done had surpassed all expectation — 
it had been '• above all thy Name." 4. And this had been a matter of the psalmist's 
own personal experience. (Ver. 3.) Whether or no the particular burden, for relief from 
which he had cried unto the Lord, had been taken away, we do not know ; but if, as 
is so often the case, it had not, there had been given strength to bear it — " Thou 
strengthenedst me," etc. One way or the other, the cry of the believer is heard, and 
either the trouble its*lf is removed, or grace sufficient, not only to bear it, but to 
enable us to glory in it, is given instead ; and this, surely, is the better of the two. 
And all this the psalmist had himself experienced (^i Cor. xii. 9). 

III. Will confidently expect gebat blessino as the besult of bib testi- 
mony. (Vers. 4, 5.) Kings, not merely common people, but kings — a very 
unlikely class— shall be moved by it. They shall come away from the_ paths of sin 
into the ways of the Lord ; they shall be really converted. And, what is more, they 
shall "sing in" those ways; they shall rejoice and be glad. And such confident 

xpectation will ever result from this spirit. 

IV. Will disclaim all wohth and goodness of its own. (Ver. 6.) He con- 
es that lie is one of the lowly ones, and that it is all of the Lord's condescension 

be has been noticed at alL 

PSALMS — III. ^ 



306 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. oxxxviu 1—8 

V. Will go forward ■without pear. (Ver. 7.) 1. Of trouble ; even though he 
walk in the midst of it ; for God will revive him. 2. 0/ his enemiet ; for God will save 
him. 3. Of personal failure ; for (ver, 8) " the Lord will perfect," etc. He might, 
and probably would, fail ; but God will not allow of that. 

VI. But will not, therefore, presume. Instead of this, the psalm ends with 
the humble prayer, " Forsake not the works," etc. Such are some of the blessed 
fruits of the spirit of exultation in God. Let us cherish it more by confession, by 
trust, by personal experience. — S. 0. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — Valiant for the Lord. The Septuagint ascribes this psalm to Haggai 
or Zechariah. It can hardly be s^ T/avid. But it was by some greatly tried but 
triumphant saint. 

I. See how he stands up fob God. Note his boldness. Not only would he 
praise God with his whole heart, but he would do this in the very face, in the teeth 
as it were, of the heathen gods ; so would he defy and scorn them whilst honouring 
the Lord in whom he trusted. So would he strengthen his faith and love, as by such 
valiant confession they ever are strengthened. Compare Daniel worshipping towards 
the temple. 

II. And VINDI0ATE8 God's insulted attributes — ^his lovino-kindnesb and his 
TBUTH. These were insulted when Israel was in exile ; the heatben would laugh at 
the idea of these Jews being the objects of God's loving-kindness, as they affirmed 
they were ; and where was the truth of God, seeing that they were so very far from 
realizing the promises of God ? But this saint of God declares that he will praise the 
Lord for these very things ; he declares that God had helped and strengthened him, 
and shown to him his loving-kindness, etc. And this beyond all that even the great 
Name of Grod had led him to expect. For next he — 

III. AssEBTB THE HONOUB OF HIS WoRD. Many aver that God is glorious in 
nature, in the visible works of his hands ; but that his Word often seems to have 
foiled. But the psalmist says, No; so far from failing or falling short, God has 
" magnified his Word above," etc. True, there is glory in nature (Ps. xix.}. But there 
is more in God's Word. For It speaks with clearer voice, with no need of interpreter, 
as nature needs ; its revelation is far more complete and effectual. 

IV. And obatefullt declares wherefore he does all this. For he has put 
his faith in God to practical test. He cried unto the Lord, and then and there, that 
very day, "the Lord answered him, and strengthened," etc. This was matter of 
actual experience. He knew this, did rot dream it, or tell of it as a mere theory. 
Oh the power of personal testimony I We cannot be valiant for the Lord unless we 
have it. But why should we not ? We may. — S. C. 

Ver. 2. — The Word and the Name. In order to understand the declaration of otir 
text, let us — 

I. Inquire the meaning of the Word and the Name. 1. 2%e Name. AVhat 
is the import of this? The expression is one that perpetually occurs in Scripture, 
and generally it has mnch the same meaning. In Rom. i. 19, 20 it is spoken of as 
" that which may be known of God ; " and he refers to " the things that are made " as 
a source of such knowledge. Thus St. Paul declares that ever since the Creation the 
unseen God has revealed himself by means of the works of his hands, Tlie Name of 
God, therefore, means all the manifestations of Gt)d, howsoever made; but in the Old 
Testament it means more commonly the manifestation of God through his works, 
whether in creation or in providence. Then : 2. 2%e Word. This has a threefold 
signification. (1) The written Scripture — the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms— and 
now, since Christ came, the Scriptures of the New Testament. These contain the 
Word of G«d, and hence commonly receive the title of the Word of God. But (2) 
the Word means also that spiritual communication firom God to the heart of his 
servants. Hence we often read, " The Word of the Lord came," etc, God speaks to 
the soul by different means ; but it is what God says that is his Word. (3) And 
chiefly, there is OotPs revelation o^ himself in Christ. He is "the Word," whiuh was 
in the beginning, which became flesh, and dwelt amongst us, so that we could behold 
him, and, in seeing him, see the Father also. The Word of God, then, means God's 



w. oxxxvm. 1—8.] THE BOOK OP P8ALM& 807 

revelation of himself through the Scriptures, the Spirit, and through his Son Ohriit 
our Lord. Either and all are God's Word. 

n. God's Name and Word have much in comuon. For: 1. Both reveal Ood. 
His existence, greatness, power, wisdom, unity, nnchangeableness. We do not add 
his love, because there are those who deny that the love of God is to be seen in the 
natural world. They apeak of " Nature, red in tooth and claw ; " they see only her 
ruthlessness and frequent ferocity ; stem law, but little love. 2. Neither ever wear$ 
out the patience or the love of those who study them. The more they search into God's 
works or Word, the more they find in them. Both seem to be inexhaustible mines, 
whose riches never fail. 3. And both have a perpetual freshness. No human works 
or words can be compared to them for this. 

m. And God has magnified both. He has revealed himself to men by both, 
and drawn them nearer to himself. It is foolish and wrong, therefore, for any to dis- 
parage one at the expense of the other. Some there are who boast of the study of 
nature only ; others have no patience with such study, but insist that the Word alone 
is to have our regard. But both are wrong, for God hath magnified his Word and his 
Name. 

IV. Still, he has put the qbeateb honoub oh his Word. 1. 3%e revelation 
of nature is dependent on that of his Word for its comprehension. The Word is the 
key of his works : without it, men cannot interpret his works. 2. His Word declares 
higher truths tlian his works ever can. The love of God ; the whole plan of salvation ; 
life eternal; holiness; the truth of the Trinity, etc. 3. His Word accomplishes far 
more for man's highest interests than his works do. See this in man's knowledge of 
God, and whence it came ; in the instruction which we derive from his works ; we 
could not have had this Ijut for his Word (see Ps. xix.). In the understanding of 
God's providence ; in showing us God's will concerning us ; in revealing his grace ; 
in the subduing of our will to himself; — whatever the teachings of God's work may 
have done for us in these respects, his Word, we must all own, has done far more. 

V. The spreading of the knowledge of his Word is, thebbfobb, oub highest 
interest and ddtt. Men are saying to-day — Educate, teach art, science, philo- 
sophy; provide for men better homes, surroundings, and opportunities; and much 
more to like efi'ect ; and only a fool will despise wliat they say. But the real need of 
man is for some povfer which will touch his heart and change his nature ; and this 
only the Word of Gcd can do. Therefore let us prize that Word for ourselves, make it 
known to others, and ever maintain the truth that it and it alone can meet man's 
universal, greatest, and constant need. — S. C. 

Ver. 8. — " The Lord will perfects L Let us look at the speaker. He is a 
man like ourselves ; but as we look on him, we note how bright his eye, how radiant 
his countenance, how calm yet how joyous his tone, how happy in his conviction he 
seems to be, as he keeps saying to himself, " The Lord will perfect that which con- 
cemeth me." Thea he pauses a moment, as if some doubt or question had entered his 
mind, and he adds, '"Thy mercy, O Lord, endureth forever;" and then, with an 
upward look of intense devotion, addressing his words to the Lord, he prays, " Forsake 
not the works of thine own hands." Now, as we thus in thought craze upon the man, 
and feel that assuredly he has got hold of a secret that too many of us do not possess, 
some les.s-favoured one than the speaker comes up to him with wonder, wistfulness, 
perplexity, and desire written plainly on his countenance, and begins to — 

II. Ask him a few questions. He asks : 1. " What do you mean when you say, 
•The Lord will perfect that which concerneth me'? You seem quite sure and very 
happy about it ; but what do you mean ? " The man replies, " I mean that whatever 
really concerns me the Lord will see after, and bring it to a perfect issue, whether it 
be what has to do with my outward circumstances, or with what is of far more 
importance — my standing in his sight, the condition of my soul. There are many 
things which concern me; but what they are I leave to the Lord to determine; for 
I often find, as many others have told me is true of them likewise, that I much con- 
cern myself about things which, after all, do not really concern me, and about which, 
therel'ore, I need not trouble. But whatever does really concern me, and especially 
my booI'b full salvation, I am sure the Lord will perfect." 2. " But how do you know 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxxxvin. 1-a 



dn, this 1 " so his questioner asl?s ag,aia ; and tVie psalmist is at no loss for reply. " Well," 
he Bays, " I know the Lord has begun his work in me. I am as certain of this as I am 
that I am alive; he has given me new tastes, dispositions, and desires; the sins I once 
loved I now hate, and the holiness which heretofore I had no care for I now long 
aft»T ; hence I am sure the Lord has begun his work in me. And it is not bis way 
to leave off what he once begins. Why shoul(i he ? Is he lacking in power or love 1 
Further, what strong guarantees I have thus to believe ! The honour of the Divine 
Name is pledged to keep those who trust in him ; the atonement of the Lord Jesns— 
for will he not ' with him also freely give us all things'? — the power of the Holy 
Spirit, which worketh in me now ; the promises, so many, so great, and precious, con- 
tained in the Holy Scriptures ; and my own experience thus far, and that of many 
others; — all encourage and establish my faith that 'the Lord will perfect that,' etc." 
3. " But are you not a/raid f" it is further asked ; " for while all must admit the force 
of the arguments you have urged, yet there are facts which it seems to us may reason- 
ably lead you to feel less confident than you now seem to be. Are we not perpetually 
warned against departing from the living God, grieving and quenching the Holy Spirit ? 
How many are the Scriptures which bid us, by direct precept or by actual exansple, to 
_ fear lest we should come short of eternal life I And have not many actually made 
•hipwreck of faith and a good conscience ? Think of all those who, on the night of 
the Passover, came out of Egypt, but yet never entered into Canaan; their carcases 
fell in the wilderness, because of their unbelief. And have not you a corrupt nature, 
an evil bias, a heart prone to evil, and loving it all too well ? And are not temptations 
everywhere, and so many of them subtle and strong, and before which many souls 
have fallen ? And do yon not know that you, as do even the best of men, often sin, 
often transgress God's commandment by thought, word, or deed?" Then we notice 
that he looks sad for a while, as if he cannot deny what has been urged ; but 
presently he looks up, and his eyes are turned not to us, but lifted heavenward ; and 
we hear him say, "Thy mercy, Lord, endureth for ever;" and he adds the prayer, 
"Forsake not the work," etc. So we cannot but — 

III. Note the book on which he bests. It is the erer-enduring mercy of the 
Lord on which he stays himself by means of continued faith and prayer. It is not 
his own strength or good resolves, but that ever-enduring mercy which fortifies him 
against all the risks and perils which he knows beset him ; and he will abide in that 
mercy through continual prayer and trust. 

IV. Tet to lbabn his secret. Why should not we have like confidence? Of 
course, ere ever this be possible, the Lord's work must have begun in us ; we must 
have yielded ourselves up to him in real repentance and faith ; but if we have done 
that, why, instead of our too common misgiving and fear, have we not this glad per- 
suasion that is expressed in our text ? 1. How it would honour OodI For it would be 
all through simple and utter trust in him — through nothing whatever of ourselves, 
but all of him. 2. And how it would bless us / What sunshine of the soul we should 
enjoy 1 our lives would be radiant with joy, and our lips filled with piaise; the joy of 
the Lord would be our strength. 3. And how, through us, others would he hlessedt 
The writer of fs. li. says if but the Lord will restore to him the joy of his salvation, 
and uphold him with liis free spirit, "then will I teach transgressors," etc. (ver. 13). 
And, withi'ut doubt, it is only as we are confident in the Lord that we render effective 
service and become channels of blessing to others : which God grant we may 1 — 8. 0. 

Ver. 1. — Unity, entireness, amd sincerity in worship. " With my whole heart." The 
tenor and tone of the psalm suggest the authorship of Zembbabel or of Nehemiah. 
Some important success had evidently been just gained ; but there was still grave 
cause for anxiety. Some work of pressing need was seriously impeded. We can 
easily fit this into the times and experiences of Nehemiah. There was, consequently, 
the temptation to mingle fears with trust, and offer to God thanksgivings and praises 
that were imperfect, incomplete, the cxpressicjn of the "divided heart." And often- 
times in life the godly man is placed in such a position as is represented in this psalm. 
He has received some sipn of the Divine favour which calls for praise and encourages 
trust; and yet he cannot shut his eyes to the fact that this intervention of God has 
only lifted the fringe nf his liifficulties. They hang heavy about him still ; and be 



PS. cxxxviii. 1—8.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 809 

can hardly keep back the repining that God does not deal with the hig thing$ that 
trouble him. So his praise is in danger of being half-hearted. The psalmist indicates 
what the good man should do at such times. He should fully learn what God would 
teiush by the single blessing, and, letting trust blend with thaiiksgiving, praise Gh>d 
with his whole heart. 

I. Fbaibb with the whole heart is peaisb without resebvb. How reserve 
may spoil prayer we are often pointing out. It is illustrated in St. Augustine's prayer, 
" Lord, convert me, but not yet I " It is not so often seen that reserve may spoil 
praise. We may praise for something ; but feel we cannot praise for everything. We 
may praise formally, and reserve heart-feeling. We may praise as duty, and yet keep 
doubts and questionings as to God's perfect wisdom and gooiiness in our hearts. Our 
praises are usually left to take their chance. We do not assure ourselves that we have 
praise-feelings, and worthy ones, before we offer praise or unite in offering it. And 
jret praise needs culture quite as truly as prayer. 

It Pbaise with the whole heabt is PBAisE without auiLB. Conscious guile 
absolutely spoils praise; makes it unwortliy and even offensive to God. The con- 
icioasly insincere man is rejected. " Thy heart is not right with God ; " and there can 
be no acceptance of thy worship. But what the godly man has to fear is " uncon- 
scious, unrecognized " insincerity ; a guile tbat he does not suspect, and so lets go, 
lets it do its evil work in spoiling his praise. — R. T. 

Ver. 1. — rAe term " gods " as a synonym for "great ones.'' The allusion may be to 
the rulers of Israel (Ps. cxix. 46). The ' Speaker's Commentary,' however, thinks 
the meaning can only be this, " Before, or in presence of, the gods of the heathen, 
i.e. in scorn of, in sight of, the idols, who can do nothing, I will praise Jehovah, who 
does miracles for me and his people." Jennings and Lowe prefer the rendering, 
"before the national elohim," or great men ; meaning that, even before persons high 
in ofiSce, in whose presence he would be naturally abashed, he will declare the praise 
of his Deliverer, Jehovah. It is not easy to fit these words into the experience of an 
Israelite among his own people. Such a man was not in the least likely to speak of 
the elders, princes, and statesmen of his own nation as gods. That term does not suit 
the Hebrew mind or association. But if we could fix the psalm as Nehemiah's, and 
connect it with his success in securing the permission of the king to go to Jerusalem 
— and this he regarded as a remarkable answer to his prayer — then the term " gods " 
may well enough be applied to the princes, councillors, courtiers, and great men of 
Babylon, to whom Nehemiah's commission would be known, and before whom he 
would testify that God had heard his prayer, and made the way plain for him. 
Nehemiah would call the princes of Judah his brethren; he might well call the princes 
of Babylon, with a tinge of satire, " gods." 

I. WhBBBVBB a man is, there he IB TO WITNESS POR GOD BT_ PBAI8IN(> HIM. 

It is an absolute and ever-working law that there can no more be religious life without 
outward expre.ssion than there can be life in the seed without a blade thrusting through 
the soil. And the natural, necessary, and ever-influential expression of the religious 
life is ^aise— the praise of God. That (1) tells the sincerity of the religious life j 
and (2) tells the character of the religious life j and (3) tells the worthiness and win- 
someness of him who is both the Love and the Life of the godly man. So praise is 
testimony, and the most persuasive of testimonies. 

II. Wherever a man is, there can bb no conditions allowed to bestbain 
PBAISE. He may be among great men and fear. But then he must praise,^ only he 
must be wise in his praise. He may be among scoffers. Still he must praise,_only 
he must be judicious in his praise. There is in relation to praise a being " wise as 
serpents, and harmless as doves," — R. T. 

Ver. 2 Ood acting beyond expectation. The term " word," in the last clause of 

this verse, means " promise." So great are God's promises, and so faithful and com- 
plete is his performance of them, as even to surpass the expectations which the 
greatness of his Name has excited. The psalmist often speaks of Jehovah's Name, 
or reputation, or honour, being at stake. Here the poet can say that the praise won 
is beyond anything that could have been anticipated. Generally, the Name of God 



310 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxzxviii. 1- 8. 

stands for the whole manifestation of himself. Or we may render thus, " For thon hast 
magnified thy characteristic of fidelity to promises above all the other characteristics 
implied in thy Name Jehovah." 

L God'b Name is the basis of dub expectations. A name gathers up the 
characteristics of the person to whom it is applied, whenever it is a true name, and 
not a mere fanciful appellation, as names given to children now are. A true name 
embodies our apprehension of a person, fixes our relation to him, expresses the grounds 
of our confidence in him, and becomes a basis on which we rest our expectations of 
him. And so we give our own special names, pet-names, to those whom we more 
especially love and trust. And in the same way Grod's Name gathers up into a term 
his attributes; not, however, as intellectually conceived only, but also as personally 
experienced and apprehended in the experiences and relationships of the individual, 
and of the race. On that Name we build our expectations. " This God is our Gtod 
f* ever and ever; he will be our Guide even unto the end." But this has to be taken 
into careful account — man never raises expectations that compass the possibilities of 
the Name. 

II. God himself ooes beyond the expeotattons based upon his Name. " Thou 
hast magnified thy Word above all thy Name." God does not go beyond himself; 
but he does go beyond our expectation. He does for us more tlian we can ask or 
think. In special emergencies of life this is precisely what the godly man feels. He 
was sure God would help him ; but when the help has come, he has found that God 
surprised him with the fulness and the grace of his arrangements. This we can asso- 
ciate with Nehemiah. We can realize his almost overwhelming delight and surprise 
when God overcame his difficulties for him in such a quick and gracious way. — B. T, 

Ver. 3. — Becognized answer to prayer. " In the day that I called thou answeredst 
me ; thou didst encourage me with strength in my soul." Here prayer had evidently 
been offered for some special thing ; what it was we are not told, nor does it greatly 
matter. Our attention is fixed on the fact that the answer came at once, and was 
recognized as the answer. We have ways in which we expect answers to come ; and 
because they do not come in the expected ways, we fail to recognize them as answers 
at alL But it cannot be becoming for us to fix conditions to the prayers we offer. 
There can be no " making terms" with God. 

I. Tee answer in this case was immediate. " In the day when I called." We 
need not press the word " day." It is but equivalent to " at the very time." Com- 
pare the experience of Daniel (Dan. iz. 21), and that of our Divine Lord (John xii. 
27, 28). It is true that there is sometimes delay in the answer to our prayer; but, 
in that case, delay is the answer. The fact is that the answer is always immediate; 
and of this we can be siu-e, because the attention is always immediate. Illustrate 
by the orderliness of the business man, who sees to everything at once. Serioui 
injury is done to Christian life by suggesting that 6t)d is very likely to dday. He 
is much more likely to answer at once. 

II. The answer in this case was not a shaping of cibcumstances. It often 
was in the Old Testament days ; and this is strikingly illustrated in the prayer of Abra- 
ham's servant (Gen. xxiv.). The higher truth comes into view in the New Testament. 
St. Paul prays for a, change of circumstances — the removal of the "thorn in the flesh." 
The answer did not change his conditions. 

IIL Thb answbb.in this case was a Divine inward strekothenino. "Thou 
didst encourage me with strength in my soul." To St. Paul the answer was, " My 
grace is sufficient for thee." The cry of genuine and heartfelt prayer is the expression 
of conscious weakness. It is, therefore, really a cry for strength. And the best answer 
k itrength. But that is not what we seem to ask for, or think we ask for, and so w 
mistake the answer. 

IV. The answer, in this case, involved mastery of circumstanoes by the 
BTBENQTHENBD SOUL. Strength received in Gethsemane prayer-time enabled pur 
Lord to endure Calvary ; and so the triumph of the cross was the answer to his prayer, 
thbngh it came as inward strengthening. What we should watch for is the immediate 
aaswer to our prayer for soul-strengthening. Answers in our circumstances may be 
Wt to follow.— B. T. 



M. oxxxvni. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMaL 311 

Ver. 3. — 77ie provision of inward strength, "And strengthenedat me with strength 
in my soul." Whether this precisely renders the thought of the psalmist may be 
doubtful. It certainly presents a suggestive thought to us. The statement is certainly 
true of Qoi's iroys with us. His best blessings come to the inward, spiritual self— to 
the true individuality, the real us. The various rendering is, "Thou madest me 
proud;" the Revised Version gives, "Thou didst encourage me with strength in my 
soul ; " the Prayer-book Version has, " and enduedst me with much strength." 
God does, as he may see fitting, make provision for the needs of our life, by altering 
and mastering our circumstances. But if he does not work for us in this way, we may 
be quite sure that he will " strengthen us with strength in our soul ; " answering ns 
as he did St. Paul, saying, " My grace is sufficient for thee." Inward strength to bear 
is a far higher provision than any mere mastery of the ills and troubles of life. In 
recalling sorrows, for the bearing of which we had inward peace, because our mind was 
stayed on God, we are conscious of recalling the noblest times of our past experience, 
and the times when we were most truly master of our circumstances. The Patriarch 
Job mastered Sabseans, and Chaldeans, an<l lightnings, and the four winds, and a 
tempting wife, and Satan himself, by being soul-strong, and able to say, " Shall we 
receive good at the hand of Gud, and shall we not receive evil ? " We are accustomed 
to say that a man is not utterly lost until he has lost heart. But if God supplies 
inward strength, we never shall lose heart, and so never shall be lost. God b prepared 
ever to make a man's soul triumphant over his circumstances. He may be very poor ; 
God can make his soul very rich. He may be very full of troubles ; God can make 
his soul quiet and calm with Divine peace ; God can comfort him with the support 
of " the everlasting arms." Outwardly a man may be tossed about, worn, wearied, 
wounded, almost broken ; yet inwardly he may be kept in perfect peace ; he may be 
" strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might." — R. T. 

Ver. 6.— The Divine regard for the lowly. "Lowliness and humility are the court- 
dress of God ; he who wears them will please him well." " Bespect unto." Bends 
down to look on them ; draws them near to communion with him ; gives them office 
and place beside him ; entrusts them with honourable commissions for him. There 
is sharp contrast with God's treatment of the proud. Them, too, he knoweth ; but 
them he knoweth afar off; he keeps them at a distance ; he has no intimacy with 
them, and could have no pleasure in their company. The proud man is the self- 
sufficient man, who is his own centre. He does not want God, and would not know 
what to do with him if he had him. And there is no reason why God should want 
him, or trouble to find a place for one who does not want any place found for him. 

L God has regard fob the: lowly BEOAnsB thbt want him. All good persons 
are fully responsive to frail, weak things, that are entirely dependent on them. See 
the motlier with a sickly child; or the teacher with a backward but loving child. 
Lowliness is a noble quality. It must not be confused with timidity, or self-conscious 
humiliation. It is that kind of estimate a man has of himself, when he has set before 
himself a worthy standard. But what is here more especially in view is that lowliness 
is the consciousness of want ; and, in its best form, the consciousness of want which 
only God can supply. The lowly man is " not sufficient of himself; " " his sufficiency 
is of God." It is of the very nature of God to be the " Friend of the friendless and the 
faint." 

n. God has beoabd fob the lowlt beoausk he wants them. Ckd ever alone, 
in solitary and isolated grandeur, is a totally inconceivable idea. God is Love ; and 
love wants somebody to love. And the lowly ones are precisely those whom God can 
love, whose love he can enjoy, and on whom his love can be wisely expended. Bonar 
has a striking hymn, beginning, " Thou needest me, even me." 

III. God has begabd fob the lowly because they abb like him. It may 
be difficult to recognize lowliness as an essential of the Divine character, but it is of 
the essence of goodness ; and it is plain enough in (iod. manifest in the flesh. Einness 
in this brings man and Christ, man and God, into loving fellowship.— R. T. 

Ver. 7. — Walking in trmMe. " Though I walk in the midst of trouble." This 
suggests a particular phase of human experience. Sometimes troubles come upon us, 



312 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxxxvm. 1— 8 

crash after crash, until we are, like Job, utterly crushed; and can but clothe our 
■elves with sackcloth, and sit in ashes. But the text indicates a more frequent, 
if less readily recognized, experience. The tune is gentler ; there is no crashing of 
sudden calamity, no bursting of wild and desolating storms. The man is moving to 
and fro in the ordinary scenes of life, meeting his obligations and doing his duties. 
But everywhere things seem to go wrong ; on all sides trouble, anxiety, worry, seem 
to attend him. He cannot get free night or day. These dog his steps continually. 
He VKiJks in the midst of trouhU, How true to universal experience all this is 1 

I. Walking is tbouble is a host depbesbino exfebience. The constant wear- 
ing produces a fixed weariness ; the constant worry produces a fixed fretfulness ; the 
constant fear of some new anxiety produces a fixed hopelessness. Because nothing 
goes right, we are too ready to say nothing ever w&l go right. And then the heart is 
taken out of us ; we become unfitted for battling with difficulty, and so largely increase 
our troubles ; we make them for ourselves, as well as have them made for us. And 
those we make for ourselves are always the worst to deal with. There is one striking 
illustration of this depressed mood in the life of David. He walked in the midst of 
various and well-nigh overwhelming troubles, and in a hopelessness that was both 
pitiful and sinful, he exclaimed, " I shall now one day perish by the hand of Saul I " 
It may further be shown that such depressed moods, responsive to surrounding worry, 
very much depend on natural disposition, especially on that neiT 3U8 irritability which 
can always see, or expect, evil. 

IL Walking in tbouble makes tjs obt fob Divine bevivino. "Thou wilt 
revive me." The state of mind induced by the circumstances is much more important 
in the sight of God than the circumstances. And this the good man recognizes. His 
hope is in Ood's soul-cheering, God's inward reviving, God's keeping from despair, and 
freshening trust and hope. And God does lead the walker out "into a large place," in 
his own good time. — R. T. 

Ver. 8. — Ood completes what he undertake!. (See PhiL L 6.) " The Lord will carry 
to an end all things that concern my welfare." Man lives and moves through life 
surrounded with unfinished things. He has constantly to say, " My purposes are 
broken off 1" He is always attempting what he cannot accomplish, beginning what 
he cannot carry through. God must be thought of as always having a distinct 
purpose in whatever he undertakes, and as active until that purpose is realized. 
Illustrate by reference to 2 Sam. vii. 25 — 29. 

I. God always has a fubfose. Thoughtless action, unpremeditated action, can 
never be associated with God. Men drift into things without knowing where they 
are going to. God never does. Men may talk about " waiting for something to turn 
up." God never does. He is the Infinite Mind; and mind is put into everything he 
does. He knows the end from the beginning. We have always this consolation- 
there are no accidents to God. He is never surprised, never taken at imawares. He 
has a meaning in everything he does, a purpose in every design he forms. " Through- 
out the ages one unceasing purpose runs." 

II. God's pubpose is neveb fobootten. Man so often crowds his life with 
interests that he forgets what he intended to do. He is carried away with new attrac- 
tions, and quite forgets what he meant to do. So man's path is beset with the " young 
lions " of unfinished schemes — things dropped and forgotten in order to take up some 
new thing. God never forgets. To us he may seem to; and this may be vur 
explanation of his delay. His purpose is kept ever in view. 

III. God's pubpose is neveb fbustbated. Man's often is. He proposes to him- 
self too much, and life beats him. Or what he proposes crosses what somebody else 
proposes, and the opposition beats him. God never proposes to himself what is beyond 
himself; for he can do what he will. God permits no rivalry of human purposes to 
eiois or frustrate his perfect plan. — R. T. 

Ver. 2. — The greatnett of the Word of God. "For thou hast magnified thy Word 
above all thy Name." 

L Ood's Wobd is gbeateb than his hatebial wobk. His word of command 
was the cause of creation. " Let there be light ; " " He commanded, and it stood fast." 



PS. oxxxviii. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 813 

II. God's Word expresses more than his work. God's Word is his uttered 
thought, and expresses more than the utmost science of nature can utter. Goes 
heyond all the teachings of chemistry, electricity, etc. 

III. God's Word oak regenerate his work. In man and in all intelligent 
beings, when it has been injured and partly destroyed. Christ, the Word of God's 
regenerating power. 

IV. God's Word abides unohangeablt, while some of his work alters and 
PASSES many. " Wax old, as doth a garment ; but thou remainest," etc. 

V. God's Word op promise is greater than antthino he has done. That 
Word furnishes not only the pillars on which the present order of things rests, but is 
the ground of all the new and future. Of whatever is to come, in the outward and 
inward universe of man. — S. 

Ver. 8. — God's perfecting. "The Lord will perfect that which concemeth mo : thy 
mercy, Lord, endureth for ever : forsake not the works of tliine own hands." 

L The psalmist's conviction. Wurds such as these are said only in the strongest 
grandest moments of a good man's life. David, St. Paul, St. Peter, St. John, could say 
them ; but the majority of believers in Cbrist cannot say them at all times ; only at 
certain priyileged moments of their lives. And the reason is — they see their own imper- 
fections more strongly than God's unchangeable love towards them ; that salvation has 
a multitude of convictions as well as a multitude of promises. Look at some of the 
words of Christ and the apostles, and ask what they mean (John x. 27 — 29) ; Paul 
(Rom. Tiii. ; Phil. i. 6; 1 Pet. v. 10). I think it may be said that the meaning of 
these uniform utterances is that the strength of God's faithful love to us, and not the 
strength of our love to him, is the pledge of our salvation — the guarantee that we 
shall not be left to perish in our sins ami weakness. We may unfold ttiis in two par- 
ticulars. 1. T%at Qod wUl do for ua towards this end what we are unable to do for 
ourselves. Some think little of their sins. Forgiveness, renewed day by day, extend- 
ing to the new sins I commit. I have not the right nor the disposition (often) to 
pardon myself. He will give grace — that is, help and strength — according to our 
needs. " But my God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by 
Jesus Christ." He will permit no temptation to assail as for which he does not 
furnish the means of resistance. He can do no more. In dying, we shall be utterly 
helpless in ourselves ; but he will be with us to save and preserve — to lead us through 
the dark labyrinth. He will raise us up at the last day. 2. Ood will do for us what 
we are not willing to do for ourselves. A great part of our danger arises more from 
want of will than want of strength. He will institute purifying processes. " Every 
branch in me that beareth fruit he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit." 
We are averse to this — to trials and afflictions and discipline. The clay does not 
know into what beautiful shapes it may be wrought by the hand of the potter. Gold 
when it is in the ore does not know its need of the furnace, to be separated and refined 
from the dross. We are disinclined, naturally, to love him supremely, and to employ, 
the means that will lead to it. He conquers our aversion by successive revelations of 
his love. " He worketh in us the willing and the doing " by his own sovereign will. 

II. The grounds op this glorious conviction. 1. God's enduring, unchanging 
mercy. His disposition to pardon— his delight in saving. Can it be a question, even 
for a moment, whether God would rather save you or allow you to perish ? " His mercy 
endureth for ever ; " " He delighteth in mercy ; " " Who is a God like unto thee ? " _ Then 
he will endure you and save you, though yon have many sins in your heart — if you 
do not love the sins so that you cannot be se| arated from them. He will endure many 
backslidings, till he has healed you of them. Will endure your cold eartMiness of mind, 
till he has made you heavenly minded, etc. 2. Qod will not forsake the work of his 
own hands. Has not forsaken the earth, or the sun, or any work in the material 
universe, much less the most precious work he ever began. " The mountains may 
depart, and the hills be removed ; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither 
shallthe covenant of my peace be removed.!' The sculptor may leave his statue 
unfinished, the artist his picture, and the poet his epic ; but God the Ever-Living will 
not forsake the work of his hands. 

OoxoLVBioir. 1. Take courage. 2. Be diligent to make calling and election sure. — 3, 



314 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 



[ps. cxxxix. 1 — 24 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXXXIX 



A 80KO of praise to God for his omniscienoe, 
his omnipresence, and his marvellona powers, 
ending with a prayer for the destruction of 
the wicked, and for the purifying from evil 
of the psalmist's own heart. The psalm 
divideB into four stanzas of six verses each — 
the first (vers. 1 — 6) dealing with the omni- 
science of God ; the second (vers. 7 — 12), 
with his omnipresence ; the third (vers. 13 — 
18), with his omnipotence; and the fourth 
(vers. 19 — 24) containing the supplication. 

Yer. 1. — Lord, thou hast searched me ; 
rather, hatt learched me out ; i.e. examined 
into all my thoughts and feelings (cump. 
Fs. xvii. 8). And Icnown me; i.e. arrived 
at a full knowledge of my spiritual con- 
dition. 

Yer. 2. — Thou knowest my downsitting 
and mine uprising. All that I do from one 
end of the day to the other. Thou under- 
standest my thought afar off; t.e. while it 
is just forming — long before it is a fully 
developed thought. 

Yer. 3. — Thou compassest (rather, ti/lest) 
my path and my lying down; literally, my 
path and my couch — the time of my activity 
and the time of my rest. And art aoi^uainted 
with all my ways(oomp. Ps. cxix. IBS, "All 
my ways are before thee "). 

Yer. i. — For there is not a word in my 
tongue, but, lo, Lord, thou knowest it 
altogether. What has been already said of 
deeils and thoughts is uow extended to 
" words." God hears every word we speak. 

Yer. S.^Thon hast beset me behind and 
before ; i.e. " thou art ever close to me, and 
therefore hast complete knowledge of me. 
Thine omniscience arises out of thy omni- 
presence." And laid thine hand upon me. 
To uphold me, and at the same time to 
restrain me (comp. ver. 10). 

Yer. 6. — Such knowledge is too wonderful 
for me ; it is high, I cannot attain unto it. 
The psalmist does not say, " such know- 
ledge," but simply "knowledge," t'.e. real 
true knowledge, such as deserves the name. 
"The thought of God's omniscience makes 
him feel as if real knowledge were beyond 
his reach " (Kay). 

Ver. 7. — 'Whither shaU I go from thy 
ipiritt or whither shall I flee from thy 
presence t The transition is now made from 
God's omniscience to God's omnipresence, 
ver. 5 having paved the way for it. God's 
presence is not to be escaijed ; his spirit is 
everywhere. " In him we live, and move, 
ftnd have our being " (Acts xvii. 28). When 



Jonah sought to flee from his presence, he 
only found himself brought more absolutely 
and more perceptibly into his presence 
(comp. Jer. xxiii. 24). 

Yer. 8. — If I ascend np into heaven, thou 
art there ; t.e. " if I were to ascend up into 
heaven, if I could do so, thou wouldst still 
be there — I should not find myself where 
thou wert not ; no, nor even if I went down 
to hell (Shedl), should I escape thee — thou 
wouldst be there also." If I make my bed 
in hell means, "if I go down anil take my 
rest in hell " — the place of departed spirits. 
Behold, thou art there; literally, behold, 
thou I 

Yers, 9, 10.— If I take the wings of the 
morning. If I were to speed across the 
earth on the wings of the dawn, and, having 
dune so, were then to dwell in the utter- 
most parts of the sea — the extreme west, 
where the sun sets — even there shall thy 
hand lead me. In that distant region I 
should still find thy guiding hand. And 
thy right hand shall hold me. Thy strong 
right hand would uphold me. 

Yers. 11, 12.— If I say, Surely the dark- 
ness shall cover me; even the night shall 
be light about me. If I think to escape 
thee by plunging into darkness, and say to 
myself, " Surely the darkness shall screen 
me, and night take the place of light abont 
me," BO that I cannot oe seen, even then 
my object is not accomplished ; even tlie 
darkness hideth not from thee; but the 
night shineth as the day. Thy eBsential 
light penetrates every dark place, and makes 
the deepest gloom as radiant as the brightest 
sunshine. The darkness and the light are 
both alike to thee ; literally, as the Aarkaen, 
to the light; but the paraphrase of the 
Autliorized 'Version gives the true sense. 

Yer. 13. — 7or thou hast possessed mj 
reins, Thou knowest me and seest me 
always, because thou madest me. Thy 
omniscience and thy omnipresence both rest 
upon thine omnipotence. Thou hast oovered 
me (rather, woven me) in my mother's womb 
(oomp. Job X. 11). 

Ver. 11. — I wUl praise thee. The note 
of praise, which has rung through the 
whole poem iti an undertone, is here openly 
struck. Beflections upon God's wonderfiil 
works must overflow into praise; and the 
phenomena of man's creation and birth are, 
at least, as oaloulated to call forth praise 
and adoration as any other. For I am fear- 
fully and wonderfully made. The wonder^ 
fulness of the hnman mechanism ia so great 
that, if realized, it produces a sensation of 
fear. It has been said that, if we oould see 
one-half of what is going on within ui, we 
should not dare to move. Uarrellou an 



M. oxxxix. 1 — 24.] 



TIE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



316 



thywoiks; i». thy doings generally. And 
that my aonl knoweth right well. The 
extent of the marvellonsness I may not be 
able to comprehend ; but at least I know 
the fact that they are marvellous. That 
fact I know " right welL" 

Yei. 15. — Uy substance was not hid from 
thee, when I was made in secret. The 
formation of the embryo in the womb seems 
to be intended. This remains as much a 
mystery as ever, notwithstanding all the 
pryings of modern science. And curiously 
wrought ; literally, and embroidered, or woven 
taith threads of divert colourt (comp. ver. 
132); and note that modem science speaks 
of the various "tissues" of the human 
frame, and calls a portion of medical know- 
ledge " histology "). In the lowest parts of 
the earth. TMs is scarcely to be taken 
literally. It is perhaps only a variant for 
the "secretly " of the preceding clause. 

Yer. 16. — Thine eyes did see my substance, 
yet being vnpeifect ; or, •' my embryo." 
The Hebrew text has bnt the single word 
•D^J, which probably means, "the still un- 
formed embryonic mass " (Hengstenberg). 
And in thy book all my members were 
written ; literally, all of them ; but the pro- 
noun has no antecedent. Professor Cbeyne 
and others suspect the passage to have suf- 
fered corruption. But the general meaning 
ean scarcely have been very different from 
that assigned to the passage in the Autho- 
rized Version. Which in continuance were 
fashioned, when aa yet there was none of 
them. Modern critics mostly translate " the 
days," or "my days," "were fashioned, 
when as yet there was none of them ; " t.e. 
"my life was planned out by God, and 
settled, before I began to be." 

Ver. 17. — How precious also are thy 
thoughts unto me, God ! If God's works 
are admirable, and, therefore, precious, so 
still more are his thoughts — those deep 
counsels of his, which must have preceded 
all matiil'estation of himself in act or work. 
How great is the sum of them ! Were they 
all added together, how immeasurable would 
be the amount ! What a treasure of wisdom 
and knowledge 1 

Ver. 18. — If I should count them, they 
are more in number than the sand (comp. 
Ps. xl. 5, "Thy thoughts which are to 
nsward cannot be reckoned up "). When I 
avake, I am atUl with. thee. I meditate 



on thee, both sleeping and waking, not 
ever find the subject of my thought ex- 
hausted. 

Ver. 19. — Surely thou wilt slay the 
wicked, God ; or, " Oh that thou wouldst 
slay the wicked 1 " (comp. Pas. v. 6, 10; vii. 
9—13; ix. 19; x. 15; xxi. 8—12, etc). 
Depart from me therefore, ye bloody men 
(comp. Ps. oxix. 115). There is no fellow- 
ship between light and darkness, between 
the wicked and the God-fearing. 

Ver. 20. — For they speak against thee 
wickedly; literally, who epeak of thee for 
wickednet; i.e. use thy Name for the accom- 
plishment of wicked ends. And thine 
enemies take thy Name in vain. The text 
must be altered to produce this meaning. 
As it stands, it can only be rendered, 
" Thine enemies lift up [their soul] to 
vanity " (comp. Ps. xxiv. 4). 

Ver. 21.— Do not I hate them, Lord, 
that hate thee ? and am not I grieved with 
those that rise up against thee t Those who 
love God must hate God's enemies. The 
psalmist claims to be of this number. 

Yer. 22.— I hate them with perfect hatred ; 
i.e. with pure, absolute, intense hatred — a 
hatred commensurate with the love that he 
felt towards all God's saints. I count them 
mine enemies; t.«. I regard them as my 
private foes. I have the same feeling to- 
wards tbem as I have towards those who 
are at open enmity with me, and seek my 
destruction. The command had not yet 
been given, "Love your enemies" (Matt. 
V. 44). 

Ver. 23. — Search me, God, and know 
my heart : try me, and know my thoughta 
Examine me, and see if I have not repre- 
sented my feelings as they really are. Keep 
on always searching me oat (comp. ver. 1), 
and "trying my reins and my heart" (Ps. 
xxvi. 2). My desire is to be proved and 
tested. 

Ver. 24. — And see if there be any wicked 
way in mej literally, any may of grief. 
"Ways of grief" are ways which lead to 
grief, which involve either bitter repentance 
or severe chastisement. And lead me in 
the way everlasting; te. either "the way 
that learieth to everlasting life," or "the 
good old way, the way tliat endures — the 
way of rigliteousness." David, with all his 
faults, is one of those who "hunger and 
thiri>t after righteousness" (Matt. v. 6). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1— 6.— ffoePs hnowledge of «■!. 1. We Bometinips say that «we know" s 
certain man who is a neighbour. By this we may mean nothing more than that we 
can distinguish him from his fellows, and give him his proper name. That is a slight 
acquaiatanoe indeed. 2, Sometimes when we make suph an affirmation we mean th4t 



316 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [W. oxxxnc 1— 24. 

we have a, general knowledge of his occupation and his more outward and formal 
habits. That goes a very little way. 3. Sometimes we mean more than this — we 
intimate that we know what a man's principles are, what he belieTes, after what 
manner he worships, what are his tastes and his companionships. Here we may think 
that we have arrived at something very definite and solid. 4. We do not really know 
what a man's spirit is, and what is his real character, until we have seen him (as the 
apostles saw our Lord) both in public and in private— at those times when he is 
conscious of our observation, and when he is perfectly unrestrained, and expresses 
himself with unchecked freedom. 6. Even then, how imperfect is our knowledge of 
one another I how often and how greatly we mistake one another I how frequently we 
ascribe to one another deeds that were not done, or words that were not spoken, or 
feelings that were not oheiished ! how different we know ourselves to be — in character, 
in spirit, in motive — from the conception of ourselves which our neighbour has formed 
of usl 6. And, yet again, bow far from being absolutely true is the estimate we form 
of ourselves I how possible and how practicable it is for us to over-estimate our virtues 
and under-estimate our weaknesses, our follies, our guilt! So rbuch so that it is a 
question whether a man knows himself as well as his discerning neighbour does. We 
are convinced that it is often the case that the verdict of a man's intimate friend is 
much nearer the mark of truth than is his own. 7. The conclusion to which we are 
driven is that One, and only one, " knows us altogether." Only God knows us as we 
are. Guided by the text, we think of God's knowledge of us thus. 

L All thinqs abe ofen to his view. (Ver. 1.) He " searches " us through and 
through. There are inward recesses and remote points that escape our eye, but not 
one that escapes his penetrating, his far-reaching glance. We may conceal some things 
from man and elude his keenest search ; we can hide nothing from God ; he searches 
and knows all things, even the most secret chambers of the soul. 

II. He obsebvss all cub ways. (Vers. 2, 3.) From morning till evening, from 
evening till morning, everything is done before him. He is the Lord " before whom 
we stand," as the old prophets used to say. There is no action of ours that is too 
slight for his notice; he is the Infinite One, and infinity reaches downwards as well as 
upwards. 

III. He is famillab with bvbbt uttebed wobd and unuttbbed thouoht. 
(Vers. 2, latter part, and 4.) It is not difScult to think of our shouted sentences or of 
our formal addresses being heard and noticed by God; it requires some effort of 
thought to realize that the casual conversation, the interjected remark, the whispered 
secret, — that these are heard and heeded by him. Yet it becomes us to remember that 
they are. This is the thought of Christ when he said, " Of every idle [casual] word 
shall njea give account," etc. (Matt. xii. 36, 37). Nay, the unspoken sentence, the 
half-formed thought, the rising feeling, that has not found expression, the " thought 
afar off," is understood by that omniscient Spirit I What reason here for purity of 
mind, for the " clean heart and the right spirit " 1 

IV. He touches us at evbby point. " Thou hast laid thine hand upon me." It 
has been tlie unseen and unfelt touch of the Divine hand that has : 1. Preserved our 
spirit in being from moment to moment ; for all earthly forces have been the working 
of his power. 2. Restored us every uight, and renewed to us the vigour of body and 
mind we have needed for the labour and endurance of another day. 3. Quickened our 
mind and enabled us to think, to reason, to reply, to invent, to devise, to direct. 

4. Brought us back from sickness and the shadow of death to life and health again. 

5. Made our suuls to be refilled with love and hope and sacred joy, so that we have 
lived the life of holy service and of spiritual growth. The explant^tion of all our power, 
our excellency, our success, is found in the simple words, " Thou hnst laid thine hand 
upon me." 



Vers. 7 — 16. — ZKe domain of Ood. The main thought of these noble words i 
L Thk BOUKDLBB8NE8B OF God's DOMAIN. Wherever we are, whithersoever we go, 
we are always within his charge. Cuuld we reach the highest heavens, he is there; or 
the lowest depths of Hades, he is theie ; and could we wing our way to the far horizon, • 
where sea and sky meet, he is there. In vain should we seek the shelter of the 
darkness, ibr darkness and light are alike to him. Even before the light of life 



PS. cxxxix. 1— 24.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 317 

stone upon us, when our members were unformed, everything about us and before ua 
was within his knowledge. There is absolutely no remotest or darkest corner of this 
wide world which is not included in God's realm — the realm of his presence, hia 
observation, his pction. Everywhere his hand leads us ; everywhere his right hand of 
power upholds and restrains us. Since God is everywhere, we infer — 

II. The follt op obddbact. The psalmist is not the man who wishes to escape 
from the presence and the power of God, but his words bring out very forcibly the 
impossibility of so doing. There are too many souls who would gladly " flee from his 
presence" if they could. 1. Many try to escape from the consciousness of it by 
immersing themselves in some form of activity, or burying themselves in excitement, 
but they are very partially and only temporarily successful. Beneath all and after all 
that they do rises up the unextinguishable thought, " Surely God is in this place I " 
2. Many try to escape the remorse of a rebuking conscience by taking their own life, 
but they only pass from one part of God's domain to another. Whithersoever they 
go, " his right hand holds them." If it be possible, they only enter his nearer presence, 
and come into closer contact with his power than ever. The one wise thing to do is to 
draw near to God in penitential prayer, to seek and find reconciliation to him by faith 
in the Divine Saviour, that there may be no need and no desire to hide from his face, 
to shun his voice, to fear the touch of his hand. 

IIL The confidence of Christian sonship. That thought which is a terror to 
the guilty is a comfort and a security to the good. It is a strong assurance to the 
heart to feel that whithersoever its path may lie it must be where the Father is at 
hand to guide and bless. 

* I know not where bis islands lift 
Their fronded palms in air ; 
I only know I cannot drift 
Beyond his love and care." 

It must be well with us ; for we shall be with God, we shall be with Christ, in whatever 
part of the universe we may be. Anywhere, everywhere, his hand will be laid upon us, 
his arm will he around us. 

Vers. 17 — 24. — Thoughts, Divine and human. With some apparent abruptness, the 
psalmist calls our attentinn to — 

I. The thodghts of God. 1, Their rmnifoJdnest. 2. Their preciousnesa. Every- 
thing we see and hear and touch is a manifested thought of (lod ; it must have existed 
in his mind before it took shape, colour, substance. It adds deep interest to all natural 
scenery to think of sea and sky, of flower and tree, of the wooded glen and the snow- 
clad mountain, as thoughts of God. So also of ourselves, of onr wonderful, complex 
nature, of manhood and womanhood in their strength and beauty, in their intellectual 
and spiritual maturity. And so also of the profoundest, of the loftiest, of the most 
beautiful and entrancing thoughts we have ever entertained in our minds. They are 
there because they were first in the mind of God. They are thoughts that have passed 
from the Divine to the human intelligence. How elevating and enriching must it be 
to be daily receiving the thoughts of God into our souls ! What a new aspect is given 
to all study, in every sphere of knowledge, by looking at all objects and processes in this 
Bghtl How near it brings God to us! We are never far from him whose uttered 
thoughts are around us on every hand — shining in the sun, singing in the song of 
birds, eta At all times we are with him — as we walk, and as we work, and as we 
rest ; and " when we awake we are still with him." 

II. Cub thought about him. (Vers. 19—22.) The psalmist cannot tolerate the 
ideaof men living to deny, to blaspheme, to disobey, to grieve God. His anger is 
stirred against them ; they are an offence to him; he would like to have them removed 
from the earth. Jesus Christ has taught us a "more excellent way " than that of 
destroying such men. He bids us go forth and win them ; conquer their disobedience, 
their rebelliousness ; capture their will for wisdom and worth ; bring them into that 
captivity to truth and righteousness which is freedom itself and lasting joy. But the 
root-thought of the psalmist is true. It is deep sympathy with the Divine; it is the 
ideutifyin" of ourselves with the Divine Object of our love. We love them that love 



318 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxxxix. 1—24, 

bim ; we bate (are grieved with and are opposed to) those that hate him. The 
Christian man regards all things as they affect Jesus Christ and his kingdom ; he looks 
with a profound dissatisfaction and sorrow on lives that are dissociated Irom the service 
of Jesus Christ. He feels that something vital is wanting to those who do not call 
Jesus Lord and Friend. He is separated by an immeasurable distance from those who 
speak ill of his Master. His soul is stirred to its depths by conduct or language which 
is irreverent or antagonistic toward him. His prayer is for their conversion ; he hopes 
that such may be convicted and ashamed. 

IIL A WISE THOuaHT FOB OTJESELVBs. (Vers. 23, 24.) "Who can understand 
his errors?" There is no maxim more difficult to obey than that which Feems the 
simplest of all, " Know thyself." P'or we are all of us subject to the law which makes 
familiarity blunt the sense of importance ; and we are all of us liable to form the habit 
of excusing ourselves those duties which are disagreeable, and lessening the guilt of 
those sins to which we are inclined; and the result is that our measurement of 
ourselves is often very far from being the true one. We do not see ourselves as others 
(who judge without prejudice or passion) see us, or as God sees us. There may be 
within us, awakening and arising to power, some " wicked way," some evil habit, some 
strong craving, which, if not eradicated or subdued, will gain a mastei'y over us, and 
will destroy us. Or if not that, there may be within our heart, or in our life, some 
distinct imperfection or inconsistency which goes far to diminish our worth and to 
nullify our influence for good ; and we may he unconscious of it. We do not know 
ourselves. We may be making a very serious, if not fatal, mistake about ourselves. 
Hence the wisdom of accepting, modestly and even gratefully, the counsel of the wise 
and true; hence the wisdom of asking the Searcher of hearts to try us and to cleanse 
us, and to lead us in " the way everlasting." If we do thus honestly and earnestly ask 
God's interposition, we must be prepared for his answer. That may take a different 
form from what we expect or desire. It may come in the shape of trouble, of loss, of 
affliction, of humiliation. But however it come, it is infinitely better to be led back 
into the way of everlasting life than to be allowed to go ou and down in the path of 
sin and death. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 24. — "Lord, thou hnowest altogether'' This psalm, one of the most sublime 
of them all, is of unknown authorship. It seems to be the composition of some saint 
of God who lived after the Captivity. If so, what proof it gives of the blessing of 
sanctified sorrow (cf. the probably companion psalm, Ps. cxix., vers. 67, 71, 75) ! The 
furnace of the Exile, the husks of the far cotmtry, did bring prodigal Israel to himself; 
and this psalm is one clear evidence thereof. And so, we believe, God will do with all 
like prodigals. They may seem set against him — they very olten are ; but his resources 
are not exhausted, and he will find ways and means to bring them to a better mind. 
The psalm is divided into four stanzas, of which — 

L The first tells of the impossibility of conobalino antthino from God. 
(Vers. 1 — 6.) 1. Here is a fact asserted. " Lord, thou hast searched me," etc. The 
word originally means "to dig," and is applied to the searching for precious metals 
(Alexander). God had penetrated far below the surface of the psalmist's acts and 
words, BO that he knew him perfectly. And he knows our time of rest and of going 
forth to active work (ver. 2). He winnows or fans — such the meaning of the word 
rendered " compassest " — so as to sift our whole life, separating the evil in it from the 
good, as the chaff is separated from the wheat. And this is true of the night-life as 
well as of the day (ver. 3). He knows not only the words that we 60 speak, but those 
that we are going to speak (ver. 4). The past and the future — that which is behind 
and before — are all known to bim, and under the control of his hand (ver. 5). We 
cannot understand all this, but so it is (vers. 6, 6). Thus emphatically is the truth 
asserted. 2. And altogether credible. (1) For reason would infer it (comp. Ps. xciv. 9). 
The maker of a machine would surely know how his machine would work ! Much 
more must the Lord know our nature and the workings of man's mind and will. He 
knows our nature (twice) as one kuuws the dwelling in which he has lived, for be 



M. oxxxix. 1— 24.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 819 

tabernacled in it and dwelt among us (John i.). He was the Son of man, and he knowi 
what is in man. (2) And there is the testimony of conscience. The very etymology 
of_ that word implies the knowledge of some one with us ; and what we call " con- 
science" is our recognizing that God sees and judges all we are and do. "Thou God 
seest me " is not a mere text, hut the confession of every soul. (3) And then there ia 
the testimony of our Lord's life on eartli. He revealed God in his holiness, power, and 
love ; but he revealed this also — God's knowledge of our inmost heart. Again and 
again do we meet with statements that assert this superhuman knowledge of our Lord. 
Seehow he knew Nathanael, Peter, Judas. Others did not thus know themselves or 
their fellow-men, but he knew them perfectly. Tliis also was a revelation of what ia 
ever in God. 3. And Messed. For it shows that we are not under the rule of a 
stranger. The rule of a stranger is ever a hard and irksome rule. And it shows how 
gracious he is ; for, though he knows all about us, yet this does not stay his blessing. 
And how holy ; for, though with us the knowledge of evil and the continual contact of 
it defiles, or at least tends to deaden our sense and horror of evil, and so to lessen our 
own holiness, it is not at all so with God. See this in Christ. He w n^ surrounded 
always by sin, but yet was himself " holy, harmless, and undefiled." Ai:d because he 
thus knows us, he must know what is best for us, so that we maybe well content with 
his ordering of our lot. What a holy restraint this truth exercises upon the believing 
soul I Indeed, it is only to such soul that this truth is or can be welcome ; to the 
ungodly it is all unwelcome, and they seek to cast it out of their minds. God forbid 
that we should do this ! 

IL The second declares the impossibilitt of escafino raoii the fbesenob 
OF God. (Vers. 7 — 12.) The height of heaven cannot transcend him ; the depth of 
hell cannot hide firom him ; flight, rapid as the rays of the morning sun, cannot outstrip 
him; distance, like that of the uttermost parts of the sea, cannot separate firom him; 
darkness, deep as midnight, cannot conceal from him. It used to be said of ancient 
Borne that the extent of her empire rendered it impossible for any one who had incurred 
the displeasure of her emperors to escape their vengeance; yet more truly is it 
impossible for us to do what Jonah vainly tried to do^to flee from the presence of the 
Lord. But this perpetual presence is a perpetual joy to the people of God. Our Lord 
cheered his disciples ere he left them, by promising that he would be with them always. 
He had said before that " wherever two or three are gathered together in my Name, there," 
etc. He is a God " at hand, and not afar off." " At thy right hand, therefore, I shall not 
be moved." But this perpetual presence, unescapable, is the terror of the wicked man, 
for he knows he cannot get away from God. How needful that we should acquaint 
ourselves with God, and so be at peace I So shall the terror be turned into joy. 

IIL The third sets forth the ground of God's perfect enowledoe of us. 
(Vers. 13 — 16.) " The mysterious beginnings of life which none can trace, the daya 
all of which are ordered before the first breath ia drawn, — these are fashioned and 
ordered by the hand of God." How, then, can it be otherwise than that he should 
know us altogether ? And how reassuring is this truth of God's knowing us from the 
very start of our being, because he is the Author of that being 1 

IV. The fourth shows the effect of this truth os the devout soul. 
(Vers. 17 — 24.) 1. It gives rise to a vast throng of precious thoughts within him. He 
calls them (ver. 17) " tiiy thoughts," which may refer either to God's thoughts about 
us, or to our thoughts about God. Probably both are meant; for God's thoughts 
about us are precious, for they are thoughts of good, and not evil. And how great and 
undeserved and freely given is that good! And our thoughts about God are precious 
also, if indeed we be reconciled to God. None others can think about God and find 
delight in such thoughts. But if we be his servants, we think of what God ia in 
himsehF, of what he has done and will do, in things temporal and in things spiritual, 
for ourselves, for others dear to us. How vast the sum of these thoughts, and how 
precious I 2. Sis soul is filled with a My hatred of the ungodly. Not because of 
what they had done to him, though tliat was bad enough, and could not but wake up 
the apilit of resentment, but because they were the enemies of God (vers. 19 — 22). It 
is good to hate evil, first in ourselves, then in others ; and if those others will cleave 
to it, then they and their sin cannot be separated, and we must " count " both our 
"enemies." "Ye that fear the Lord hate evil." Would to God we all did (cf. homily 



320 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [Ps. cxxxix. 1—24. 

on Ps. xovii. 10) I 3. An intense longing after entire holiness. (Vers. 23, 24.) The 
psalmist yearned to be free from all sin, not only from some sins. Therefore he would 
lay bare his soul before God — would come into the full light of God, that the Divine 
scrutiny might be thorough and complete. He kuew that after all his own search sin 
might yet lurk in unthought-of places, and hence he prays God to search, and try, and 
know, and see, and show him the wrong, and then lead him " in the way everlasting." 
Such is the effeot of this faith : " Lord, thou knowest me altogether." — S. 0. 

Ver. 14. — The mystery of man't leing. The psalm shows that the knowledge of 
God brings peace. It appeals to God's omniscience, that which would confound him 
if he were not at peace with God. They who are not hide away Irom God, and dread 
the truth the psalm declares. But let us listen to the patriarch Job (xxii. 21). The 
psalmist had done so, and hence he is able now to challenge even the all-searching eye 
and the absolute knowledge of God, to attest his sincerity and the integrity of his 
heart. No hypocrite or pretender to piety could possibly do this, or ever can. Our 
text tells how God had known man from the beginning of his life — must know hlce, 
for he had created him. This leads to reflection on the mysiery of man's being. 
Note— 

I. The tbuth op the psalmist's assertion. "I am fearfully and wonderfully 
made." Kow, this is true : 1. As regards the hody. This is what the psalmist had 
mainly in his thoughts. Now, our corporeal structure is wonderful, whether we regard 
it as a whole or in its separate parts. But it is " fearful " also ; there is an awe am 
mystery about it, as his soul knew right well. That it should be subject to pain am 
disease ; that it should be so often a clog to the spirit and a hindrance to our highsi 
life rather than a help; and that it should be ever hastening death wards, and be at last 
a prey to corruption. And yet God made it — ^not man. 2. As regards the soul. It is 
marvellous, whether, as with the body, we consider it in its entirety or in its several 
parts — intellect, imagination, affections, judgment, conscience, will. How wonderful 
it is I But how fearful also 1 That it should be born with a fatal bias and tendency 
towards evil ; that thus it is in continual peril, and is often in bondage to sin ; and it 
can perish, and, so far as we can see, it often does. And yet God formed the soul as 
he did the body. How true that we are " fearfully and wonderfully made " I 

II. Thb spibit in which wk abb to beoabd this tbuth. Withpraise. " I will 
praise thee." So speaks the psalmist. 1. Many wonder how he or any one could 
possibly do this. Some even dare to censure and blame the Creator that he has made 
man so; and they audaciously assert that the coming judgment will not be so much 
God calling us to account for what we have done, as man calling God to account for 
what he has done. Far enough are such from the spirit of this psalm. 2. But we 
cannot but ask — What was the ground of the psalmist's praise f Now, it was not in 
spite of evil, defying and scorning it; nor ignoring it, for none were more sensible of 
it ; nor by minimizing it in comparison with the superabundant good. And, in com- 
parison with the good gifts of God, evil' is as the small dust in the balance — not worthy 
of account, though to us here and now it looms so large. But not for such reasons is 
this praise. ' But because by means of this strange and fearful mingling of evil in our 
constitution we come to know, as otherwise we could not, the highest good. Gi)d has 
caused that sin should be as a foil to make more manifest his grace. The devil meant 
only our barm. God turned it round to good. Thus we come to know evil and hate 
it; we come to know God in Christ, and to love him as we never else should have 
loved him ; the unfallen angels cannot love him as we may and will and do. And 
we come to know good — holiness, purity, truth, and to hunger for them, and to rejoice 
in them as else we had not done. 

III. The lessok to be leabnt. If God turns the greatest ill into good, be sure 
he will all lesser ones. But it is only by the knowledge of God that evil is thus 
transformed. Praise him evermore 1 — S. C. 

Vers. 23, 24. — Ood^s searching desired. In these verses we seem to be standing by 
a fair river, a very river of the water of life — full, flowing, beautiful, fertilizing; a joy 
to all beholders and all who dwell by it. And as we look back at the former parts of 
this " crown of the psalms," as it has been called, we see the lofty spiritual heights 



P8. cxxxix. 1— 24.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 821 

from whence this river has flowed down ; we realize the glorious truths about God — 
his omnipresence and omniscience — which are the source from whence this prayer we 
are to consider has sprung. But such thoughts about God have not always such results. 
They are terrors to the mind of the godless, and of all who are not walking in the light 
of the Lord. Hence the truths taught in this psalm serve as a test of our own spiritual 
condition. Are they welcome to us, or the reverse? Tiiey cannot be welcome to an 
ungodly soul, but they are to such as him who wrote this psalm. Now, in our text, 
note — 

I. What ib implied. 1, That there ?uis heen a previoui searching of ourselves. 
Here is one great excellence of this prayer — it compels sincerity. For how can the 
sin-loving man pray, " Search me, Godl " when he can see quite plainly himself what 
he is ? And how, " See if there be," etc., when there is no " if at all ? It is only 
those who, like Peter, can lay bare their hearts, and say, "Lord, thou knowest all 
things ; thou knowest that I love thee," that can thus pray. We do not say that a 
man must be sinless, but he must be sincere. Can we pray this prayer? 2. UTuit our 
searching is not sufficient. It is implied, what all experience proves so surely, that none 
of us can understand his errors ; and we ever need God to cleanse us from our secret, 
hidden, and so, to us, unknown faults. " The heart is deceitful above all things ; . . ■ 
who can know it ? " None but God can. 

II. The BEaioNB where God's searchtno ib felt to be needed. 1. In the 
heart. Our life is visible to others and to ourselves, and our words audible, but our 
hearts are neither. The seeds of conduct and character are so minute, so seemingly 
insignificant, our motives are of such mingled, mixed nature, so chameleon-like, that 
we are ba£9ed. 2. In the thoughts. " Try me . . . thoughts." They need to be tried ; 
they often seem right when they are not so, Judas wa», no doubt, self-deceived in this 
way, thinking his thought to be right when it was all evil. And God does try them ; 
he is ever applying his tests and revealing us to ourselves, as the moonlight reveals 
the ship that crosses its path, as the lightning reveals the unseen precipice. And he 
does this for gracious purposes, that so we may be led to betake ourselves to this 
prayer. 8. lUe ways. " See if . . . way in me." The prayer confesses that a man's 
ways are in him before he is in them. There were evil ways he knew — behind him, 
and he had gone in them ; around him, many were going in them ; before him, seeking 
to attract him. But all this did not matter so long as they were not in him. That 
the ship should be in the water is all right ; but for the water to be in the ship I It 
is what is in us which is all-important. 

III. The ultimate object of this fbateb. That he might be led " in the way 
everlasting." 1. TTiere is such a way — the way of the everlasting God. 2. And the 
ways of Ood are fitly so called. Other ways may go on for a long distance, but they 
are cut short at last. 3. All joy, goodness, and strength are in these ways ; all that 
the heart can desire, all that can bless our fellow-men, and that can glorify Christ. 
4. And in these ways we need to be " led," not merely have them shown to us. Many 
see them, but do not walk in them; and none ever will unless the Lord leads them. 
But this he is most willing to do. If sincerely we pray this prayer, his leading has 
begun. — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — The Divine inspection. " Searched;" the figure is " winnowed ' or " sifted." 
" Before men we stand as opaque bee-hives. They can see the thoughts go in and out 
of us, but what work they do inside of a man they cannot tell. Before God we are as 
glass bea-hives, and all that our thoughts are doing within us he perfectly sees and 
imderstands " (Beeoher). How near the ancient poets of India could get to the thought 
and feeling of this psalm is indicated in the following hymn taken from the Atharva- 
Veda : " 1. The great lord of these worlds sees as if he were near. If a man thinks 
he is walking by stealth, the gods know it all. 2. If a man stands, or walks, or hides ; 
if he goes to lie down or to get up ; what two people sitting together whisper, — King 
Varuna knows it : he is there as a third. 3. This earth, too, belongs to Varuna the 
king, and this wide sky with its ends far apart. The two seas (the sky and the ocean) 
are Varuna's loins ; he is also contained in this same drop of water. 4. He who shonld 
flee far beyond the sky, even he would not be rid of Varuna the king. His spies 
proceed from heaven toward this world ; with thousand eyes they overlook this earth. 

PBALMS — in. T 



322 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxxxix. 1— 24 

5. King Varuna sees all this, what is between heaven and earth, and what is beyond. 
He has counted the twinklings of the eyes of men. As a player throws the dice, he 
settles all things, 6. May all thy fatal nooses, which stand spread out seven by seven 
and threefold, catch the man who tells a lie I may they pass by him who tells the 
truth!" 

L The Divine inspeotiom is an observation. All outward things related to as 
are " naked and open unto tlie eyes of him with whom we have to do." Illustrate by 
the regiment inspected by the colonel. Everything— health, bearing, dress, weapons, 
etc. — is carefully observed. God knows all about us. 

II. The Divine inspbotion is a spibitual testing. It concerns the inner man. 
It deals with cherished thought, fixed motive, passing mood, varying feeling. There 
is BO much that never gets expressed in word and act, which nevertheless makes up 
our real selves; and all this God knows. — B. T. 

Yer. 6. — The oppression of the Divine omniscienee. "Such knowledge is too 
wonderful for me." " Nowhere are the great attributes of God — his omniscieace, his 
omnipresence, his omnipotence — set forth so strikingly as they are in this magnificent 
psalm. Nowhere is there a more overwhelming sense of the fact that man is beset and 
compassed about by God, pervaded by his Spirit, unable to take a step without his 
control ; and yet nowhere is there a more emphatic assertion of the personality of man 
as distinct from, not absorbed in, the Deity " (Perowne). A philosopher was asked 
by a monarch about God, and he desired a day for his answer. He then asked for 
another day in which to give his answer. The more he thought about God, the more 
he seemed unable rightly to describe him. At last the monarch asked the philosopher 
why he bo often delayed to tell him what he knew about God ; and he replied, " The 
more I think about God, the more incomprehensible he seems to be." The kind of 
oppression which comes from feeling that God knows even the very minutest things 
about us, and even everything that will come to us, may be illustrated by the oppressed 
feeling that the persons skilled in palmistry give us. Looking at our hands, they seem 
able to read our character and our destiny ; and we shun them with a kind of fear, lest, 
knowing so much, they become mischief-makers. It really is an awe-ful thing that 
God should know us altogether. This is seen in Hagar's oppressed exclamation, " Thou 
Goii seest me 1 " and in a better way, io Jacob's devout utterance, when he had seen 
the ladder of God's care, " How dreadful is this place 1 " Notice — 

I. How PEBFEOT THE DiviNE OMNISCIENCE IS I The psalm illustrates the Divine 
knowledge, not of things in general, but of us — " Thou knowest me,'" my doing this or 
that ; (1) my imaginations ; (2) my designs and undertakings ; (3) even my retire- 
ments and hidings ; (4) my sayings ; (5) my entire history ; (6) every part of me 
(" Beset me behind and before "). 

II. How OPPBESSIVE THE DiviNE OMNISCIENCE IS I Even when we are in right 
relations with God, it is oppressive. It is an awful feeling that we can never be alone. 
We can never escape the eye. The only relief comes by the knowledge that it is our 
Father's eye. He knows only that he may help. What is Divine omniscience to those 
who neither know nor love God ? — R. T. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — Omnipresence a fear and a satisfaction. Calvin says, "The word 
•Spirit' is not put here simply for the power of God, as commonly in tlie Scriptures, 
but for his mind and understanding." Milton, as a young man, travelled much abroad. 
Years afterwards he thus expressed himself : " I again take God to witness that in all 
places where so many things are considered lawful, I lived sound and untouched from 
all profligacy and vice, having this thought perpetually with me — that though I might 
escape the eyes of men, I certainly could not the eyes of God." 

I. Omnipeesenoe a fear. This term is not here used in a sense that applies to 
the ungodly man. Indeed, such a man will in no way apprehenrj or encourage the 
idea of God's omnipresence ; it has no practical reality to him. The omnipresence of 
God is a reliijious man's idea, and we have to think of its influence upon him. It fills 
him with a holy fear, which is a mingling of awe and reverence and anxiety. That 
presence brings the perpetual call to worship; it keeps before us the claims of 
obedience ; and it shows us continually the model of righteousness. "Be ye therefore 



fB. oxxxix. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF PSALMa 823 

perfect, even as your Father in heaven is perfect." It has been sidd that • " Ohriitlan 
■honid go nowhere if he cannot take God with him ; " but that presence would make 
him afraid to go to many places where he does go ; and it is a weakness of Christian 
life that the holy fear of the sense of God's presence is not more worthily realized. 
The fear to offend or grieve is a holy force worung for righteousness. 

II. Omnipbesbnce a satisfaction. When we really love a person, and are quite 
■ure of their response to our love, we want to be always with them. Separation is pain; 
presence is rest and satisfaction. And it is in the fullest sense thus with God. " We 
love him because he first loved as." And since there is this responsive love, we cannot 
be happy away from him ; and we are permitted to think that he cannot be happy 
away from us. And so the psalmist says, " I will dwell in the house of the Lord for 
ever, to behold the beauty of the Lord." And the Lord Jesus satisfies the longing of 
his people with his promise, " Lo, I am with you all the days." — B. T. 

Vers. 13, 14. — 7%« mystery of being U with Ood. The expression translated, "hast 
covered me," really is, " thou weavest me," as boughs are woven into a hedge. The 
* reins " may denote the sensational and emotional part of the humaa being. It is not 
possible to deal with the detailed expressions of this psalm in a public ministry. 
Reticence in regard to the human origin and birth, and in regard to the inner mysteries 
of bodily life, is characteristic of our times. Eastern people are still accustomed to 
talk freely of such matters ; and conversation was much less delicate at the time our 
Bible was translated. It must suffice for us to set before our minds the great truth 
concerning God which is thus illustrated. 

L The design of a human beino is the thouoht of God. Here we may be 
met by the doctrine of evolution, which teaches that the bodily organization of man 
is a development out of some lower forms of life. But this in no way a£fects our 
position. It does not say that man is an accident; — made without any design ; it only 
explains to us what the design was ; it unfolds for us the particular method in which 
the Divine design was out-wrought and accomplished. Because God's design took 
ages to complete, it did not cease to be God's design. God thought a man. But a 
man is much more than a body. Man is not the fulfilment of God's design until God 
has got him into his image, breathed into him the breath of life, and even requickened 
him with a spiritual life. But what a thought that design of God was ! It embraced 
all the complicated and delicate organs of man's frame, all the subtle relations of body 
and mind, and all the varying response which body and mind must ever make to 
Rurroundiog circumstances. A man designs a house or a machine, and his work is 
within limits that can be grasped. God designs a man, and the complications are 
beyond us ; we can only wonder and adore. 

IL The woBEiKa our of his design is in the hands of God. A man may 
give his design into the hands of a fellow-man, and entrust him with the duty of 
working it out. God can never trust his design to anybody ; for there is nobody who 
could understand or grasp it. He must work it out himself. Aud to us the great 
glory of the complex story of humanity is this — humanity is God's thought and God's 
purpose, and that thought and purpose God himself is working out. — B. T. 

Vers, 15, 16. — What a man can be and do God knows. The latter clause of ver. 15 
has been well rendered, " When I was wrought with a needle in the depths of the 
earth." There is an evidence of allusion to the sacerdotal robes, and the undescribable 
texture of the human system is compared to the exquisite needlework of the high 
priest's garments. Every man is a bundle of possibilities ; but no man has precisely 
the same possibilities as any other man. Each man can be what nobody else can be ; 
each man can <2o'wbat nobody else can do. This does not mean that any man can 
transcend the sphere and limitations of man, only that there is a very wide variety 
within the limitations. There are, indeed, general powers and faculties, and general 
elements of character and disposition, so that men can be classified ; but within the 
classes there is what may be called an infinite individuality — remarkable varieties of 
ability, and even more remarkable combinations of ability and disposition and sphere. 
Nothing oppresses so much as to think what we should do if it were laid on us to find 
their right places for «very man and every woman. 



824 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. oxxxix. 1— 24. 

L God knows evert man'h individuality. Science may trace that individuality 
to heredity, to the bodily and mental condition of parents, to food and atmospheres, 
or anythin"; else; it remains the fact that the estimate of the individuality is possible 
only with Qod. Man must have the actual story of another man's life and experience 
ere he can discern his individuality, God alone can know it anticipatively from the 
beginning. A man's individuality is not shown in any one thing; it is the stamp on 
thu life, and the life must be lived before it can be seen. God knows the end from the 
beginning, because he knows what man essentially is. Of Christ it is said, " He 
kuew what was in man." 

II. God oan fbeside oveb the adjustment of man's flaoe ass wobk to ms 
INDITIDUALITT. Oftentimes the surprise of life is the place in which Qod puts men, 
and the work he gives them to do. Men always err when they force themselves to do 
what they think they would like to do. We are only on safe lines when we do what 
God gives us to do. He knows us; he knows all places, all work, all circumstances ; 
so he can fit things and people together, and make both work together for good. " My 
times are in thy hands." — B. T. 

Yer. 18. — 3%e abiding seme of the Divine presence, " I fall asleep^ exhausted with 
the effort of counting thy thoughts or desires ; and when I awake I find myself still 
engaged in the same spiritual arithmetic, which is my dearest delight." 

I. It is the saooESTioN of delightful thoughts. The psalmist exclaims, " How 
precious are thy thoughts unto me I" This may mean, "my cherished thoughts of 
thee," or, " thy loving thoughts of me, of which I have the most comfortable assurance." 
Probably the psalmist meant the former. " Thy presence wakens in me such loving, 
tender, trustful thoughts concerning thee." " We cannot conceive how many of God's 
kind counsels have been concerning us, how many good turns he has done us, and 
what variety of mercies we have received from him." The sense of God's presence 
excites meditation; and what is lacking in modern Christian life is that which 
meditation can supply. 

n. It is the assubanok of Divine beoubitt. Compare the absolute confidence 
sf the psalmist when he sings his refrain, " The Lord of hosts is with us ; the God of 
Jacob is our Befuge." Compare apostolic assurances : " If God be for us, who can be 
against us?" "For he hath said, I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee." If Gk>d 
IS with us, we can always have this confidence — whosoever would deal adversely with 
OS must take account of God, and deal with him ; and 

"He is safe, and must succeed. 
For whom the Lord vouchsafes to plead." 

III. It IB THE INSPIRATION OF NOBLE ENDEAVOUR. It IS UOt jUSt a Cold doing of 

iCtual duty, " as ever in the great Taskmaster's eye." The loving child-soul never 
lalks about the " great Taskmaster." It is a parental presence that wakens everything 
Qoble and beautiful in the child. And God's presence is peculiar in this, that it brings 
to US the sense of power. It makes us feel that we can do whatever he inspires us to 
do. " I can do all things in him wlio stren^theneth me." 

IV. It is THE OOMFOBT OF EVERT TROUBLE. The hardest thing in trouble is to 
have to bear it alone. It is eased if another sympathetically shares it with us. We 
ire never alone in trouble-bearing if we cherish the sense of God's presence^ — B. T. 

Yen. 23, 24. — Ow thoughts. "Enow my thoughts." This psalm contains the 
finest utterance of human feeling about the Divine omiuscience that has ever come 
frum human lips. God sees everything and everywhere. He sees the hidden mystery, 
man's secret thought and purpose. To the God-fearing man that is no trouble; it is 
rather a source of satisfaction and holy joy. 

I. The imfortanue of oub thoughts. The wise man says, " As a man thinketh 
in his heart, so is he." A man is as his thoughts. Man cannot rightly judge the 
thoughts of his t'ellow-man ; but God is the "Discerner of the thoughts and intents of 
the heart." Many religious people cherish the nution that they have no control over 
the suggestions that »re made to their minds, no responsibility for the contents of their 
tliougbts — only for cherishing thougiit, only for letting thought inspire conduct. This, 



PS. cxxxix 1—24.] THE BOOK Of" PSALMS. 325 

however, is only true within certain narrow limits, which need to be very carefully 
defined. 1. The importance that attaches to our thoughts we may realize from our 
observation of men. We have to do with them, but we cannot be said to know them 
until we come into such relations as reveal to us their thinking. We can only be said 
to know our friends, in whom is the "mirror of an answering mind." 2. The 
experience of Christian life impresses us with the importance of our thoughts. It is 
difficult to restrain and mould aright our conduct and conversation ; but the supreme 
difficulty is to control and purify our thoughts. There are two hard things we have 
to do — " patiently continue in well-doing ; " and " keep the heart with all diligence." 
And the latter is the hanier of the two. Its hardness has driven men and women into 
convent and hermit-cells, as providing the only hopeful conditions. The scheme of 
redemption is really a heart-regeneration, a purifying of the very springs of thought 
and feeling. It does deliver us from outward foes ; but its supreme interest lies in iti 
going right down to the very root of the mischief in man. It proposes to deliver man 
from his own evil self. It reaches to the very fountains of our thoughts, and cleanses 
them. 

II. The contbol which wb bhoitld have ovbb cub thouqhts. We must have 
some measure of control over them, or we could have no responsibility in relation to 
them. 1. We have control over the material of our thoughts. It is commonly 
assumed that thoughts and suggestions are absolutely put into our minds either by 
God or by Satan. But thought is really the comparison, selection, and asFiociation of 
the actual contents of our mind in the power and activity of our will. All that has 
impressed us during our lives, by the eye, the ear, or the feeling, has passed into our 
mental treasury. It is all there, and all linked together by the most subtle connections. 
The contents of each of our minds to-day is the sum of past impressions and associa- 
tions ; and we are adding to that sum day by day. What we call " thinking " ii 
taking up a portion of these contents, and recombining and rearranging them to form 
new ideas. Then we must be, in some measure, responsible for the contents of our 
minds. Not wholly, because we have been placed in circumstances and under influences 
over which we had no control. We can, however, put ourselves where we shall receive 
evil impressions, and we can put onrselves in the sphere of good impressions. No man 
needs to fill his mind with evil things, which soonw or later must become the material 
of evil thoughts. We need not choose evil companionships, or read demoralizing 
Ijooks. Our lives are so far in our hands that we can to a large extent settle what 
shall be the materials of our thoughts. We might fill up our souls with good things. 

2. We have control over the course and the processes of our thought. We can 
deliberately choose to think about evil things or about good things. If our will ii 
a renewed and sanctified will, then we ought to expect it to gain presidency over oar 
thoughts. 

IIL The help which Ood is eteb beadt to give ns nr the exeboise of buoh 
OONTBOL. This help the psalmist sought, " Try me, and know my thoughts." Our 
self-trusting attempts to regulate our thoughts are sure to bring us a feeling of 
depression, almost of hopelessness. The work proves to be beyond us. It ia not 
beyond us when Ood is oiu: Helper. And his gracious response ever fireshly comes to 
the trustful, up-looking soul. He does "cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the 
inspiration of his Holy Spirit." — B. T. 

Ver. 6. — Wondeiful knowledge. " Thou hast laid thine hand upon me." Aben Eera 
called this "the crown of all the psalms." Man is completely in God's power- 
physically, intellectually, and morally. 

I. Look at the pboofs. 1. Man's spiritual nature. Sense of sin and responsi- 
bility; conscience; instinct of prayer; sense of Divine omniscience. 2. 2%e Divine 
providence. God's omnipresence; our lot appointed and mysteriously controlled. 

3. In the provisione of the gospel. Cannot wholly throw off the power of the Divine 
love or Divine Law. God's hold of us through Christ much greater that our hold of him. 

II. Fob what purpose does God exeroisb his powbb over man? Not to 
destroy his freedom of will and action. 1. To assert his property in us. 2. 2b make 
man conscious of his calamity and his hope. By the remedy in the gospeL 8. 2b draw 
man to himself as tlte exclusive Bedeemer. — S. 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS, [ps. cxxxix. 1— 24. 



Vers. 7 — 10. — God everywhere. "Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or tt hither 
•hall I flee from thy preBence ? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there ; if I make 
my bed in hell, behold, thou art there," etc. 

I. God is present evebtwhebb. Let us try to fill ourselves with this great 
thought. 1. God is in heaven. There have been atheists on earth — fools who have 
said in their hearts that there is no God. Let me tell you what an atheist is like. He 
is like a man going to hear an oratorio — the ' Messiah ' or the ' Elijah' — performed by a 
hundred musicians, and who says that all those wonderful harmonies that intoxicate 
the soul were not previously arranged and designed by Handel or Mendelssohn, but 
were the accidental result of those hundred men playing at random upon a hundred 
instruments. But if an atheist could be taken to heaven, he would be an atheist no 
longer. He would be overpowered with the proofs, not only of God's existence, but 
with the tokens of his presence. What and to whom are those mighty hymns the 
angels sing? Who commands those mighty works which they perform ? Not a God 
whose existence is argued out or doubtfully apprehended. Why has the city no need 
of the sun or of the moon to shine on it? Because the glory of God lightens it, and 
the Lamb is the Light thereof. Why is there no temple ? Because the Lord God 
Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it. The throne of God and of the Lamb 
is in it ; and his servants serve him, and they see his face, and his Kame is in their 
foreheads. 2. God is in hell — Sheol, Hades. The devils believe in God, and tremble. 
There are no atheists in hell. God will be felt in the consciences of lost spirits. This 
is one of the most powerful ways of feeling God's presence. Hell is the carrying out 
of the Divine law. The Law-giver is known in the carrying out of his law. As in a 
jail the power of the state is felt. 3. God is in every part of this world. The meaning 
of the text is that God is in the most distant, even the uninhabited, places of the earth. 
The thought of the psalmist was that God could be found amongst the solitudes of 
nature. And it is not in crowded cities that we can most strongly feel the presence of 
God. On the sea, on the mountain-top, down in deep glens and valleys, in the morning 
or at midnight, studying the smallest or sublimest of God's works. But God is to be 
found amongst men, only so often face to face with the devil. Gk> on the Exchange, 
into the street, into the gin-palace, and there the world seems without a God, or without 
a God that cares for it. But go into that sick-room where the Christian is dying, or 
into that closet where the saint is wrestling with God, or where a sorrowing mother is 
pouring out a broken heart before God over a profligate son or daughter, or into 
that family where there is a daily altar before which all devoutly kneel, or glance 
into the dark cell of the prisoner, and you exclaim, "The darkness hideth not from 
thee." 

II. The belation of this truth to several classes or men. 1. To those who 
wish to escape from God. " Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take 
them ; though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down." In no part 
of any world can you fly Irom him. If, therefore, you cannot fly from him, there are two 
things which you may try to do^elther to make yourself blind and deaf and dead to 
his presence ; or to awake up more intent-ely to him, and welcome his presence. The 
former you cannot do for ever ; the latter you might do. 2. To those who depfnd upon 
God for support. " If I take the wings of the morning, . . . even there shall thy 
hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hnld me." God is present everywhere, not 
only to judge the wicked, but to reward the righteous. The Bible tells me I have 
begun a very long jouiney ; that I shall often become footsore and weary, often miss 
my way ; but also that God will be with me ; that a» my day is so my strength shall 
be; that "they that wait upon the Lord," etc. I., tells me that I shall die; that I 
must go into a far-distant country which eye hath not seen. 3. To those who are 
seeking the everlasting way. There are many ways leading to honour, pleasure, wealth, 
but none of them is the everlasting way. We are guided in them and to them by false 
lights which will go out and leave us in darkness. But God is always present, and 
be can light us and guide us into the one everlasting way. He is a Lamp and a 
Guide. 

" Nearer, my God, to thee I . . . 
E'en though It be a cross 
That raisetli me : 



IB. CXL. 1—13.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



327 



Still all my Bong thall be. 
Nearer, my God, to thee, 
Nearer to thee." 

If Ckid could or would come to me only at times, what should I often do ?— S. 

Vers. 23, 24. — Bequest for OocPs searching. " Search me, O God, and know my 
heart : try me, and know my thoughts : and see if there be any wicked way in me, and 
lead me in the way everlasting." 

I. Some things implied in the text. 1. 7%e imperfect knowledge of his own 
character. Though it lies so near to us — not a far-off country. Though it is the most 
important of all knowledge. Knowledge of the body important; but that we can trust 
to another — not this. Sin creates darkness. 2. That he was aiming at the perfeetion 
of hit nature. It is only such as be who want to know themselves better. This is 
the idea of a Christian ; and all other aims are poor and selfish. 

II. Some things stated in the text. 1. That he was mlling to know the word 
ofhimsdf. Men generally are afraid to know themselves. If we think our child is in 
danger from some disease, we ask to know the worst ; and so of our own bodily disease. 
But not so with the soul. Men try to keep out of sight and forget their true selves. 
2. That he was willing to he triec^to submit to the means by which this knowledge 
could be gained. Put me to the proof. Few know what they are asking for in using 
this prayer. " Try me, so as to show me what I am." The axe willing to be proved is 
put on the grindstone, and then takeu into the forest. The wheat — " try me " — ^is 
bruised; the gold is cast into the furnace. Christ tried the rich young man in the 
Gospel. 

III. Tee pbateb of the text. Founded on the conviction : 1. That Ood alone 
is able to show us what we are. We want a revelation from heaven for that. It is not 
self-developed knowledge, nor is it a sudden, but a gradual, revelation. No man knows 
himself till he has known Christ, his true and better Self. 2. That Ood, and not 
himself, is his Baviow. " Lead me in the way everlasting." Ways that last — Gtod 
leads us into them, keeps us in them, and draws us onward along these ways.— .8. 



BXPOsrriON. 



PSAIiM CXL. 



Haihlt a psalm of supplication. David is 
in ^eat straits, threatened by violent and 
maUgnant enemies (vers. 1—5), against 
whom he prays to God for aid (vers. 1, 4, 6, 
8). At the same time, he praises God for 
his protection in past dangers (ver. 7), and 
expresses his confidence that judgment will 
overtake the wicked (vers. 9 — 11), and the 
cause of the righteous be vindicated (vers. 
12, 18). The ascription to David is home 
out by the contents. 

Ver. 1.— Deliver ma, lord, from the evil 
man. The prayer is not directed against an 
individual, but against David's enemies 
generally. They are "evil" or "wicked" 
men, and especially " men of violence " (see 
the next clause, and comp. ver. 4). Preserve 
me from the violent man; literally, from 
the fltan of violences (comp. 2 Sam. xxii. 49; 
Ps. xviii. 48). 



Ver. 2. — Which imagine misoUefa In their 
heart (comp. Pss. xxviii. 3 ; xxxvi. 4 ; liiL 
S). Continually are they gathered together 
for war ; rather, contimiaUy do they tUr up 
uars (comp. Pss. Ixviii. 80 ; cix. 7). 

Ver. 3. — They have sharpened their tongaei 
like a serpent (comp. Pss. lit 2 ; Ivii. 4 ; lix. 7 ; 
Ixiv. 3). Adders' poison is under their lips 
(comp. Ps. Iviii. 4; Bom. iii. 15). The 
meaning is that their tongues inflict wounds 
wliich are us painful as poisoned wounds. 
The panse-sign, " selah," marks off the first 
stanza. 

Ver. 4.— Seep me, Lord, from the hands 
of the wicked ; preserve me from the violent 
man. A repetition of ver. 1 in a modified 
form. The fact of iteration indicates the 
extremity of the psalmist's need. Who have 
purposed to overthrow my goings; i.e. to 
bring me to destruction (comp. Ps. xvii. 5). 

Ver. 5. — The prond have hid a snare for 
me, and cords. An instance of the figur. 
hendiadys. What is meant is a snare com- 
posed of cords. Such snares, when laid for 
animals, were " hidden " in long grass, or 



328 



THE BOOK OP rSALMS, 



[PS. OXL. 1 — 13. 



low shrubs, or rough ground. They have 
spread a net by the wayside ; they have set 
gins for me (oomp. Pss. xxxi. 4 ; xxxv. 7 ; 
Ivii. 6; cxix. 10; cxli. 9; cxlii. 3). A 
second pause-sign marks off a second stanza. 

Yer. 6. — I said unto the Lord, Thou art 
my God: hsar the voioe of my suppUoa- 
tious, Lord (oomp. Pss. xxxi. 14 ; cxliil. 
1). The expressions used are markedly 
Dayidical. 

Ver. 7. — God the Lord. In the HoBrew, 
"Jehovah Adonal" — a comparatively rare 
address. The strength of my salvation, The 
solid strength upon which I ground all my 
hopes of salvation (comp. Fs. Ixxxix. 26). 
Thou hast covered my head in the day of 
battle. In past combats thou hast protected 
me, as with a shield (Pss. xviii. 2 ; xxxiii. 
20), wherefore I put the greater trust in 
thee for the future. The "head" is men- 
tioned as one of the chief vital parts. 

Yer. 8. — Grant not, Lord, the desires of 
the wicked. The "desires of the wicked" 
are hurtful both to themselves and others. 
It is in his mercy that God does not grant 
them. Further not his wicked device; 
lest they exalt themselves. So the LXX., 
/liliroTe ii^aSiiatv. Others translate, "Or 
how they will exalt themselves I " The 
third stanza here terminates. 

Yer. 9— As for the head of those that 
compass me about. The " bead " of David's 
enemies is put in contrast with his own 
"head" (see ver. 7). While God shields 
and protects his head, theirs has no pro- 
tection, but the mischief of their own lips 
which cavers them, but with confusion, 
rather than with defence or safety. 

Yer. 10. — Let burning coals fall upon 



them; or, "burning coals shall be thrown 
upon them." Let them be oast (or, "they 
sliall be cast") into the fire, into deep pits, 
that they rise not up again. The clausea 
are declaratory rather than optative. The 
psalmist sees the wrath of God poured out 
upon his enemies, who are at the same time 
God's enemies — they are cast into the Are 
prepared to receive the wicked — and plunged 
into deep pits whence they find it impossible 
to extricate themselves. 

Yer. 11. — Let not an evil speaker be 
established in the earth; literally, a man 
of tongue »hall not he eatahlished in the land 
— a man, ('.«., of pretence and seeming, who 
talks grandly, but effects nothing. Snch 
a one shall not obtain permanent establish- 
ment as a power in the land. Evil shall 
hunt the violent man to overthrow him; 
literally, to detlrtietioni — a plural of com- 
pleteness. 

Yer. 12.— I know that the Lord will main- 
tain the oanse of the afflicted. The psalmist 
is confident, not only that the wicked will 
be punished, but also that the righteous, 
whatever sufferings may come upon them, 
will ultimately be delivered out of their 
afflictions (comp. Ps. ix. 4, 9, 12, 18, etc.). 
And the right of the poor. It is not to be 
supposed that "the right" is always with 
"the poor;" but, when it is, God will 
assuredly be their champion. 

Yer. 13. — Surely the righteous shall give 
thanks unto thy Name; the upright shall 
dwell in thy presence. The result of God's 
punishment of the wicked, and deliverance 
of the righteous is naturally that the right- 
eous give him thanks, frequent his courts^ 
and " dwelL" as it were, " in bis presenoe." 



HOMILETICa 

Yers. 1 — 13. — In danger. The position of the psalmist is that of a man in danger. 
His enemies are strong and cunning ; they are bent on his destruction, and spare no 
pains to accomplish his ruin. At such a time the godly man has one resource which 
never fails him. The psalm speaks to us of — 

I. The PERiiiB WHICH SURBOUND US. These are twofold. 1. ITiat of videnoe. 
(Vers. 4, 11.) Not the violence of the sword and the spear, but that of fierce, forcible 
temptation, coming down upon us suddenly, and likely to overthrow us in one fateful 
and fatal hour ; that which attacks and overwhelms the soul " between the morning 
and the evening." 2. That of deceit. (Ver. 5.) We think we are secure, we are not 
aware that any evil awaits us, we are like the man in whose path the secret pit is 
digged ; but in truth we are going on in the direction of some serious sin — selfishness, 
wurldliness, pride, vanity, intemperance, impurity, unbelief, or some other moral or 
spiritual calamity — and if we are not arrested in our way, we shall fall in and be 
destroyed. It is the unseen and unsuspected peril which is most to be dreaded in the 
path of life. 

II. A SENSE OF PAST DELivBRAKCE. (Yer. 7.) As We look back we see that our 
strong Deliverer, " the stiength of our salvation," has put forth his power on our behalf, 
has " covered our head in the day of battle." There were times when our virtue or 
our piety was energetically assaulted; but, in the strength of God, we stood firm and 



PS. oxL. 1— 13.J THE BOOK OP PSALMS, 829 

were unmoved. There have been more ways than one in which our moral and spiritual 
integrity has been in Handier of being undermined, but the peril is past ; we are true, 
we are free, we are pure ; we have " kept the faith ; " the Lord has been on our side ; 
the aim of the enemy has been turned aside. 

III. Our befcgk in God. David makes his appeal to God (vers. 1, 4, 6, 8 — 11). 
He prays God to preserve him while he brings his enemies to destruction. In his 
position as aspirant to, or occupant of, a throne, assailed by unscrupulous aud sanguinary 
enemies, and in his day when war was regarded as a natural, if not necessary, element 
in a nation's life, it is perfectly comprehensible that David would desire, and would 
ask God to accomplish, the ruin of his foes. To him with his measure of enlightenment, 
not to have done this would have been positively irreligious, for he would then have 
failed to bring to God what he regarded as his first duty as well as his pressing need. 
It is otherwise with us. In the light which shines on our path, it becomes us : 1. To 
ask daily and earnestly for God's help against our spiritual adversaries, that we may 
defy and defeat them. 2. To pray for our individual opponents, that they may be won 
to all that is wise and good. The " burning coals " we, as Christian men, desire should 
fall on the heads of our enemy, are those of Rom. xii. 20 — the complete triumph of 
magnanimity, in which hatred is converted to love, and cruelty to kindness. 

IV. Odb assurance of victory. (Vers. 12, 13.) Our confidence is in the God of 
righteousness. He will not regard with indifference either the arrogance and assumption 
of the proud and strong, or the suffering of the poor and weak. Divine Providence is 
not "on the side of the strongest battalions; " it was /or the small band under Gideon, 
and against the mighty host of the Midianites ; it was /or the hundreds under Judas 
Maccabeus, and against the thousands under Antiochus of Syria; it was/or the small 
vessels of England, and against the great galleons of Spain. God is " for the right," 
and that very often means for the poor and the despised ; and they who fear him and 
do his will and live his life will not seek his help in vain. The night of adversity 
may be long, but " the morning cometh," and " joy cometh in the morning." " Surely 
the righteous shall give thanks " unto him. The upright will dwell before him now, 
conscious of his favour and his blessing ; they will dwell in his nearer presence soon, 
partakers of bis gloiy and hia joy. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — Owr adversary and our Defence, Some there are who unhesitatingly 
ind strongly condemn this psalm : they say it moves only on the low plane of bodily 
needs ; it never mounts up to holy, spiritual desire at all. Further, it is wholly personal , 
not to say selfish ; it is all for " me," no one else, throughout the psalm ; also, it is aflame 
with the " burning coals " of fierce revenge, and is, at the same time, saturated with 
self-righteousness. Such are the charges brought against this psalm, and a protest is 
entered against its being used in Christian worship, or regarded as Christian at alL 
But, to take a present and pressing matter : how do we Christians feel in regard to the 
unspeakable Turk, now inflicting such awful cruelties on the Armenian ? Is there a 
sentence in this psalm that we would hesitate to apply to that detestable oppressor ? 
If in an Armenian church this psalm was sung just now, as probably it often is, would 
we unohristianize them for it ? Surely not. Then let us, ere we condemn its writer, 
try and place ourselves in his oppressed and persecuted condition, then we shall be 
able to judge more fairly and to speak less rashly. But the psalm has its use and 
application for ourselves ; for we have, if not earthly, yet assuredly, spiritual enemies, 
above all, our " adversary the devil," and of him and of his agents all may be said that 
is here said, and all prayed that is here prayed. Therefore consider — 

L OuE GREAT ADVERSARY. 1. Is he not evU 7 Do not the manifold manifestations 
of evil around us and within us prove the existence of a prince of evil, as do the like 
manifestations of goodness prove the existence of One whom we call God our Father? 
2. And violent. With what cruel might does he often assault our souls I Z. And even 
aiming at our hurt. " Going about as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour," 
Are not the declarations of vers. 2 — 5 absolutely true — so incessant, so subtle, w 



830 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxl. 1— 13. 

malignant, 80 yenomoas, so hidden and unexpected, are his snares? Let those who 
have been his victims tell, and the many who still are perpetually oppressed by him. 

II. OuE ONLY BUT suKB Defenob. It is God the Lord. No power of our own, or 
of our fellow-man, or of any religious rite, but all and only in God. So do his delivered 
ones with unanimous voice declare. 

III. This defence made oue own. How may we avail ourselves of the deliverance 
which God assures us of ? Well : 1. Our peril must be clearly seen. See how In this 
whole psalm, especially vers. 1 — 5, the writer, whoever he was, is vividly conscious of 
the formidableness of his foe. And so must we be, as, unhappily, too many are not. 
Many see no peril, feel no anxiety, are wrapped in profound indifference. Such fall an 
easy prey to the tempter's power. True, the world is not the devil's world — it was one 
of his lies when he told our Lord that all the kingdoms of the earth and their glory 
were given to him ; it is not so ; but still he is here in the world, and we ever need to 
be on our guard. 2. We must betahe ourselves to prayer. Prayer brings the unseen 
and the eternal near to us, so that they become visible and tangible to our spirits, and 
as living realities exercise their mighty inSuence upon us. As the earth gets out of 
the darkness by swinging itself round to the light, so by prayer we turn to where God 
and all the power of his blessed Spirit are, and so deliverance comes. 3. SvU must he 
intenady hated. (Vers. 9 — 11.) Ho matter whether it be that embodiment of evil 
external to us, which is called the devil, or whether it be that inward corruption and 
wicked disposition which we find still lurking in our souls. We cannot curse it too 
bitterly or hate it too intensely. " Ye that fear the Lord hate evil " — so are we com- 
manded, and any less intense feeling towards it is incompatible with the true love of 
God. 4. Personal appropriation (f Ood. We must be able to say unto the Lord, 
" Thou art my God." A mere abstract creed will not help us ; we must each one 
know God as *' the Strength of my salvation." 5. Itememhrance of former mercies will 
greatly help us. " Thou hast covered," etc. (ver. 7). 6. Let there be confident faith. 
(Vers. 12, 13.) The faith of Israel was shown by their believing shout as they com- 
passed the city of Jericho. The walls had not yet fallen, but they knew they would, 
and so they shouted. So the psalmist says, " I know " (ver. 12), and " surely " 
(ver. 13). We must come to God, expecting that he will answer our prayers (Jas. 
i. 6). Such are some of the suggestions of this psalm as to God's way of delivenmce. 
May we be able to avail ourselves of them I — 8. 0. 

Ver. 2. — The mischiefs of evil-disposed men. " Mischiefs " is a very suggestive and 
comprehensive term. It is frequently used in the Psalms in the singular form, and 
always suggests scheming, underhanded plotting, to do some evil. In the plural form 
there are only two passages in the Scriptures, hesides our text, in which the word is 
employed : Deut. xxxii. 23, " I will heap mischiefs upon them ; I will spend mine 
arrows upon them ; " Ps. lii. 2, " Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs ; like a sharp razor, 
working deceitfully." 

I. Regard mischiefs as malicious intention. " The wicked plotteth against the 
just, and gnasbeth upon him with his teeth;" "How long will ye imagine mischief 
against a man?" It is the characteristic of the evil-hearted, evil-disposed man, that 
he " deviseth mischiefs upon his bed." It is his pleasure to plan an injury ; he delights 
in making misery, and ruining reputations. Any man may do a mischief on impulse 
or by accident. The evil man cherishes malicious intentions. 

II. Beoabd MiscHiBrs AS INJUBI0U8 SPEECH. " They have sharpened their tongue 
like a serpent." There is speech that cuts and wounds by its bitterness ; that injures 
by its untruthfulness ; that destroys reputations by its slanderings. There is no surer 
sign of the evil heart than the evident pleasure felt in saying mischievous things. 

III. Reoabd MISCHIEFS AS VIOLENT ACTS. (Vers. 4, 5.) It is the peculiarity of 
evil-disposed men that cherished evil thoughts inspire evil deeds. The good man 
checks unkind and evil thoughts, lest they should get expression in acts. But the 
evil man nourishes them, enjoys them, puts himself into their power, and is by them 
ur<'ed on to violent and injurious deeds. Cherish malicious thought, and you put 
yourself into its power; and it may lead you on to shameful deeds. But the mischiefs 
of evil men never transcend the Divine limitations. God has his hand on them, and 
we may be absolutely assured that he says, " Hitherto shalt thou come, aid no further ; 



ts. CXL 1— 13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 331 

here shall thy proud waves be stayed." And we may even see deeper into the heart of 
DiTine dealing, and say that tlie mischiefs of evil men become ministries of the Divine 
purpose of grace concerDing God's people. — R. T. 

Ver. 6. — 27ie rest of personally appropriating Qod. " I said unto the Lord, Then 
art my Gbd" (comp. Ps. xvi. 2, "I have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord ; I 
have no good beyond thee ; " Ps. xxvii. 1, " The Lord is my light and my salvation ; " 
and many other places). Indeed, a characteristic feature of the Psalms is this personal 
appropriation of God. It is an essential feature of spiritual religion. There must be 
this sense of kinness with God, and actual relationship to him. So St. Thomas 
exclaims, " My Lord and my GodI " And our Divine Lord, as model and representative 
Humanity, said, even in a time of overwhelming darkness and distress, " My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" From this psalm we learn how such personal 
appropriation of God really comes to us. 

I. It comes fbom God been in oub past. " Thou hast covered my head in the 
day of battle." Some one thing was in the psalmist's thought, but it would be sure to 
lead on a great panorama of Divine defences and interventions. The one thing was 
like the first star seen in the evening sky. It is " the glorious token of millions more." 
God has always been on our side. He is our God. 

II. It comes rBOM God eealized in pbesbnt relations. We express this when 
we call him the living God. It should always be clearly seen that " living " involvea 
present activity. Silent and inactive Buddha does not live, does not sustain personal 
relations, is only an object of contemplation, God lives ; is active ; is in relations ; as 
thise relations are seen to be directly present and personal ones, we call him our God. 
Our God is here now ; he is for us now ; he is ours now. 

III. It comes fbom God felt as the Loted and Lotinq One. We can appro- 
priate a thing in a cold mood of acquisition. We can only appropriate a person by 
the act of affection. And herein is a remarkable thing. We cannot appropriate • 
person unless he is willing to be appropriated. He must love ub, or our love to him 
only keeps us at a distance ftom each other. We may appropriate God in our love 
because he appropriates ua in his love. — B. T. 

Vers. 8 — ^11. — TTie intervention of Ood sought. We need not fix oloie attention on 
the intensity of the language which the psalmists use concerning their enemies, or 
even concerning the enemies of God. AU that unrestrainedness belongs to the (tme* 
and the race. Eastern people use language which to the Western mind appears 
extravagant and unworthy. We feel, under persecution and calamity, precisely as 
they felt, but we know how to express our feelings more guardedly. Only in moments 
of passion do we ever permit ourselves to say or to wish such things as these psalmista 
utter 80 freely. The topic suggested here is this — What is to be done by the godly 
man when he finds himself in the midst of malicious foes? 

I. He is tempted to iNDDLaE BEVENQEFUL FEELING. Such feelings at once come. 
They are the natural, or we may more truly say the unnatural, response of our hearts. 
Indeed, if we do not watch ourselves well, we at once answer lack. It ii not our sin 
that revengeful feeling is aroused. It is sin when revengeful feeling is tneouraged ; 
our grievous sin when it is enjoyed. 

II. He IB TEMPTED TO VINDICATE HIMSELF BT A0T8 OF BETALIATION. " Rendering 

evil for evil." Taking the avenging of his injuries into his own hands. Children do 
that. Uncivilized and unorganized uations do that. Each one avenges his own 
wrongs. But from the Divine standpoint that is always and altogether wrong ; for 
one supremely good reason — that a man can never avenge himself without seriously 
injuring himse^ in so doing. The worst thing that can happen to a man is to get his 
revenge. That dims the fine gold of character. 

III. He is febbuaded to leave vcnoeanoe to God. And this he may safely 
do, becanse whosoever touches God's people touches God — touches the " apple of his 
eye." Moreover, God never lets the wicked go unpunished; but as he loves the 
wicked and seeks his good, he alone can adjust the punistiment to the individual, and 
to the securing of wise and gracious ends. God can be calm in judgments. 

IV. He is moved to ask Gk>D to undertake the vengeanob fob him. And 



332 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. cxl. 1—13. 

then he is altogetVier relieved from tho pressure of responsibility, and is free to bear 
the burden quietly and calmly. — R. T. 

Ver. 13.— The inward sense of right is an assurance (^safety. The "upright " man 
is the man of integrity. And the consciousness of integrity gives, and properly gives, 
confidence and security. A man may cherish a sense of right, of uprightness, of 
sincerity. He may be sure that this puts him into the sympathy and favour of God. 
The psalmist — who may well have been David — may properly plead before God and 
say, "Judge me, Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to mine 
integrity that is in me." When the psalmist made this plea, he was suffering from 
unjust suspicions and unworthy accusations, very much as was the writer of the psalm 
now before us. But these terms, " uprightness," " integrity," " righteousness," need 
very careful consideration. They can be applied to a man. It is certain that man 
can be said to have a righteousness. " Except your righteousness shall exceed the 
righteousness of the fcribes and Pharisees." We have known men and women of 
integrity who were right-hearted and sincere, and gained our confidence because they 
were. Sometimes, in the Scriptures, the word " righteousness " means right-hearted- 
nei<s, sincerity ; it shows a man who is, at heart, centred on God ami virtue. We have 
a way of speaking of men as being " good at bottom." If we say that as any excuse 
for men's sins, we are altogether in the wrong. If we say it in recognition of human 
frailty, and with discernment of life as the conflict of the human will over the disabilities 
that surround us, then it is a true and worthy speech. 

L A MAN MUST HAVB ESTABLISHED GOOD PBIfTCIPLES IF HB IS TO HAVB AN INWARD 

SENSE OF BiQHT. When there is driiting and uncertainty as to what is right, there 
can be no restful inward conviction that we are right. 

II. A MAN MUST HAVE GOOD CONTROL OF HIS LIFE IF HB IS TO HAVE AN INWARD 

SENSE OF BIGHT. There must be harmony between the conduct and relations of the 
life and the cherished feelings nf the hea't, or the sense of sincerity will be destroyed. 

III. A MAN MUST BE SCBE OF DiVINB DEFENCE IF HE IS SURE OF HIS OWN 

BINCERITT. God is true ; he must be on the side of the true. God is served by the 
sincere ; he surely defends bis servants. — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — ^13. — The holy war. The speaker is a king, in danger from crafty and 
violent and rebellious subjects, who prays for deliverance from them. The situation 
may be generalized and taken as an account of the struggle for ever going on between 
the righteous and the wicked. 

L The nature of the wab op the wicked against the righteous. 1. A 
war carried on by hrute strength. " Violent men" (vers. 1 — 4). When men have not 
reason and justice on their side, thev resort to the employment of physical force — 
Nihilism, dynamite, insurrection. 2. Slander. (Ver. 3.) Poisonous reports, full 
of lies and libels, and foul imaginations of a wicked heart, are propagated without 
scruple, with a view of taking away the character. 3. Crafty plots. (Ver. 5.) When 
open warfare is unsuccessful, they resort to traps and plots that sliall surprise the 
unwary, and seek to ruin a man by secret means. 

II. The riguteous man's secubitt. Commits his cause to God; he cannot defend 
himself by retaliations — by using their means in reply. The grounds of bis hope. 
1, Ood was his ; therefore Ood would hear and answer him. (Ver. 6.) God the 
Almighty and All-suffirient was his, and he was God's. 2. His past experience. 
(Ver. 7.) God had aleaiiy defended him in scenes of danger. 3. Ood rannot favour 
the wicked cause. (Ver. 8.) Therefore God would appear for him, on his side. 

III. His faith in Gud bises into the strongest assurance. 1. There it a law 
of retribution at work. (Vers. 9 — 11.) The imprecations of the ninth and tenth verses 
emerge into the prophecy of the eleventh. 2. An assurance that Ood is pledged to tht 
righteous cause. (Ver. 12.) 3. The righteous shall ultimately rejoice in the manifested 
pretence nf Ood. (Ver. 13 ; see Pss. xi. 7 ; xvi. 11.) — S. 



n. oxLi. 1 — 10.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



333 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM CXIjL 



AuiosT wholly a psalm of STipplication. 
David ia ugaia ia danger, and needs a 
prompt deliveranoe (ver. 1). This time the 
danger seems to be that he may fall away, 
and be absorbed into the company of the 
wicked. He therefore prays : 1. That 
prayer may be with him a settled institu- 
tion (Ter. 2). 2. That he may be saved 
from sins of the tongue (ver. 3). 3. That 
he may be saved from sins of thought or 
act (ver. 4). 4. That he may be given 
grace to welcome reproof (ver. 5). The 
circumstances of the time are then shortly 
touched. There has been a severe judg- 
ment on the rulers of the people (ver. 
6), and a great national calamity (ver. 7), 
with the result that the people arc touched 
hi their hearts, while David's confidence in 
God ii in no way diminished. This is fol- 
lowed by a renewal of prayer: (1) for his 
own deliveranoe (ver. 9); and (2) for a 
further punishment of the wicked (ver. 10). 

Ter. 1. — Lord, I ery unto thee; make 
haste unto me. Tiie need is pressing and 
urgent. Ood is therefore entreated to 
"hasten" (comp. Pss. xzii. 19; xzxi. 2; 
xxzviii. 22 ; xl. 17, etc.). Oive ear unto my 
voice, when I cry unto thee (comp. Ps. oii. 2). 

Ver. 2. — Let my prayer be set forth (or, 
'•established") before thee as incense; i.«. 
with the regularity of the incense, and with 
its acceptableness. And the lifting up of 
my hands as the evening sacrifice. The 
hands were "lifted up" in prayer, which 
iras reckoned a sort of sacrifice (Hos. xiv. 2). 

Ver. 3.— Set a wateh, Lord, before my 
mouth; keep the door of my lips (comp. 
Pb. xzxiz. 1). David's was a hasty, im- 
petuous temper, which required sharp cod- 
tioL He strove to "keep his own mouth 
with a bridle " — to " be dumb with silence, 
and hold his peace" — but this was not 
always possible for him of his own unassisted 
strength. He therefore makes his prayer 
to Gi^ for the Divine help. 

Ver. 4. — ^Incline not my heart to any evil 
thing ; t.e. let not my heart be inclined to 
any form of evil. To practise wicked works 
(rather, uiicked practicet) with men that 
work iniquity ; and let me not eat of their 
dainties. Let me not be drawn in to their 
life of sinful luxury. 

Ver. 5.— Let the righteous smite me ; it 
shall be a Idndness; rather, let the rigMeous 



tmite mo kindly, as In the margin. And let 
him reprove me; it shall be an excellent 
oil, which shall not break my head ; rather, 
whinh mil head shall not refuse. The 
psalmist will prefer the reproof of the 
rigliteous to the dainty allurements of the 
wicked. He will regard tl leir words as an 
oil of welcome, such as was poured upon the 
head of favoured guests (Luke vii. 36), and 
his head will not refuse it. Tor yet my 
prayer also sh:ill be in their calamities; 
rather, their wiolcednesses This healing oil 
will strengthen him to continue to pray for 
his enemies, even though they still continue 
in their " wickednesses." 

Ver. 6. — When their judges are overthrown 
in stony places, they shall hear my words. 
Calamity opens the heart to receive instruc- 
tion. The "judges" — i.e. the leaders — 
among David's enemies are visited with a 
grievous calamity, expressed metaphori- 
cally by their being dashed upon rooks. 
This disposes them to listen to David's 
words, which are well worth listening to, 
since they are sweet. 

Ver. 7. — Our bones are scattered at the 
grave's month. The calamity is not con- 
fined to the "judges." The bones of the 
people generally lie scattered at hell's month 
— unburied, i.e., but ready to go down to 
Hades. As when one cutteth and oleaveth 
wood upon the earth; rather, as when one 
cleavet and breaks up the earth. " The bones 
of Ood's servants were strewn as thickly 
over the ground as stones over a newly 
ploughed piece of soil, so that the Holy 
Land looked as if it had become an ante- 
chamber of Hades " (Kay). 

Ver. 8. — But mine eyes are unto thee, 
Ood the Lord. I, however, tlie psalmist says, 
do not despair — I look to thee, O Jehovah 
the Lord (comp. Ps. xl. 7) — in thee is my 
trust; leave not my soul destitute. The 
last clause is, literally, poitr not out my 
soul ; i.e. destroy me not— do not spill my 
life on the ground (comp. Isa. liii. 12). 

Ver. 9. — ^Eeep me from the snares which 
they have laid for me, and the gins of the 
workers of iniquity (comp. Ps. xl. 4, 5). 

Ver. 10. — Let the wicked fall into their 
own nets (comp. Pss. vii. 15 ; xxxv. 8 ; Ivii, 
6; Prov. V. 22). The moral sense is alwavs 
satisfied when the wicked man falls into his 
own trap, or is " hoist with his own petard." 
Even a heathen poet could say — 

" Neo lex justior ulla est, 
Quam necis artifices arte perire ■na." 

Whilst that I withal escape ; literally, until 
thai J pa»s over ; i.e. whilst I puss over the 
nets, or traps, in safety. 



334 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. oxli. 1— la 



HOMILBTI08. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Acceptable sacrificei. The more digtinotive teaching of this psalm 
respects — 

I. The bacbifioe of fbaybb. (Vers. 2, 8, 9.) When the sacrificial services of the 
tabernacle (or temple) could not be rendered, it was open to the devout Israelite to 
"lift up his hands " in referent, believing prayer. And this, we are sure, was acceptable 
to " him that heareth prayer." The essence of all sacrifice was an appeal to God by 
the spirit of man, the going forth of the human spirit to the Divine Spirit; it was this 
that was symbolized by the incense or slain lamb. The presentation of the visible 
meant and expressed the offering of that which was invisible — the grateful, or the 
penitent or the dedicatory thought and feeling of the worshipper. Prayer, therefore, 
was of the essential nature of a true sacrifice. We cannot offer, at any altar, anything 
which is more well pleasing to God than the prayer which "goeth not forth from 
feigned lips," which rises from the heart — the morning sacrifice of supplication for 
guidance and protection throughout the duties and difficulties and temptations of the 
day; the evening sacrifice of thanksgiving for the blessings that have been bestowed, of 
prayer for the forgiveness of imperfect service, and of trustful surrender of body and 
spirit to the Divine keeping for the coming night. 

II. The saoeifice of speech and silence. (Ver. 3.) The psalmist prays God 
to "keep the door of his lips" (see Psa. xxxiv. 13; xxxix. 1; Jas. iii. 3 — 12). It is 
well to ask God to do this, but it is also well to recognize that he requires of us that 
we should do this also. The use we make of our tongue, that member which is "our 
glory " (Pss. XXX. 12 ; Ivii. 8), and too often is our shame, is a very serious and important 
feature of our Christian life. 1. By a determined silence when we are tempted to 
speak and to strike, we may sa^'e ourselves and others from a " fire" (Jas. iii. 6) which 
might desolate and destroy. He that "ruleth his spirit" and holdeth his tongue is a 
true conqueror (Prov. xvi. 32). 2. And when we use our tongue to utter words of con- 
ciliation, to express regret for inadvertent error or omission, to excuse unintentional or 
pardonable faultiness, to pardon wrong, to encourage weakness, to enlighten ignorance, 
to impel to duty or devotion, to lead men in prayer to God, we are offering a very 
acceptable sacrifice — "the calves of our lips" (Hos. xiv. 2). 

in. The 8A0EIFI0E OF SEPARATION AND ABSTINENCE. If WO pray (see ver. 4) to 
be delivered from an inclination to join the wicked in their evil courses and in their 
ungodly revelries, we must exercise in ourselves a strong restraint ; we must resolve to 
"enter not into the path of the wicked," to "turn from it and pass away" (Prov. iv. 
14, 16). The duty of declining invitations from the unholy, of keeping away from the 
hearth and the table where nothing virtuous or valuable is to be gained, and where much 
that is most precious may be lost or injured, is a duty, a sacrifice, very needful to the 
yoimg. Regard or disregard of it may make all the difference between life and death. 
A wise separateness from sin (2 Cor. vi. 17) will be a very acceptable sacrifice to him 
, who is our thrice-holy Lord, will save us from a peril which has meant ruin to many 
who imagined themselves strong and safe, and will place us by the side of him who 
himself was "undefiled, separate from sinners" (Heb. vii. 26). 

IV. The SAOEIFICE or docility. (Ver. 5.) " It is allowable to learn from an enemy." 
It is much more obviously right to learn from " the righteous ; " and, though they 
speak reprovingly and reflect on what we have said or done, their words should be well 
received. 1, The correction of man may be, in truth, the guidance of God. He may be 
speaking to us through his servants ; it has often been the case with others, and it may 
well be so with us. It may be a Samuel, or an Elijah, or a Nathan, or a Paul that is 
speaking in God's name. 2. We acknowledge ourselves to be in error, to be at fault, 
generally s why should we be unwilling to learn when we are so in particular instances f 
8. The docile reception of rebuke may save us from much graver sorrow that we should 
otherwise suffer; it may result in an improvement of conduct and enlargement of 
niefolness for which we shall give Qod heartiest thanks. 



PS. oxtT. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 336 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — "Keep me from the snares." This difBoult psalm seems to be the cry 
of a greatly tempted soul. And the temptation now did not arise so much from the 
persecutions of the ungodly as from their seduoiug favours — what he calls " their 
dainties" (ver. 4). And he seems to have found this even harder to resist than their 
cruelty and harshness. Consider — 

L The spirit of this praybb. 1. Note ita impassioned earnestness. (Ver. 1.) 
" Lord, I cry unto thee." No mere formal, ordinary prayer, but a plending cry. 2. He 
pleads for haste on the part of the Lord. He can bear no delay. 3. ThoU his cry may 
find much a^xeptance. (Ver. 2.) The burning of incense was one chief part of tha 
evening sacrifice, and the meaning of it was to set forth, by its fragrance and sweet 
odour, the aoceptableness of sincere believing prayer. Hence the psalmist here seekf 
that his cry may be thus acceptable before God. 

II. Its substance. His enemies, by bribes, favours, and blandishments of one kind 
and another, are seekins; to lead him astray from God. Hence he prays: 1. That he 
may not commit himself hy rash and unguarded speech. (Ver. 3.) What a peril and 
a snare this is to many 1 How often have they found themselves entrapped and entangled 
by some hasty utterance, which should never have passed their lipsl These doori 
open too quickly and too easily, and let out what should be kept in; they need 
a watchman to guard them and to determine when they shall or shall not be opened, 
and only the Lord can set that watch. Happy the man for whom he does this I 2. That 
his heart may be kept true. (Ver. 4.) It is a blessed thing when our external conduct is 
kept right, when our hands are tied by God's providence, and so held in from mischief; 
but it is better far when our hearts are made right, so that they will have no desire for 
evil things. And God will do this for us. " The blood of Jesus Christ . . . cleanseth from 
all sin." 3. That the dainties of the wicked may not seduce him. Thus do they persuade 
men of unstable mind to practise wicked works. The way is smoothed, made to seem so 
attractive and right, just as our first parents were tempted, for theirs was the pattern 
of all successful temptetion. The devil has great store of these " dainties;" he knows how 
to suit all tastes and to please all palates. 4. That he may not lack a faithful reprover, 
(Ver. 6.) There are plentiful prophets who will prophesy smooth things for the sin- 
loving soul ; but faithful Micaiahs (1 Kings xxii. 8) are few and far between. But the 
psalmist here prays that he may never want for such. Let us pray the little prayer. 
How many go wrong just for want of such faithful reproof 1 Those who should reprove 
often shrink from their duty, for it is the reverse of pleasant. 6. That his sovi may not 
perish. (Ver. 8.) That its life may not be poured out, — such is the meaning of the 
word ; emptied as a vessel. He was in sore peril ; his enemies by " their dainties" were 
devising all manner of stratagem against him — snares, gins, nets. 6. That in spite of 
all, he may escape. 

ni. His CONFIDENT HOPE. (Ver. 6.) That when the leaders, the rulers and judges, 
who led the way in wickedness, — when they were hurled down the rouk (cfc 2 Chron. 
xzv. 12; 2 Kings ix. 33), then their followers would hear his words and welcome 
them. Let the ringleaders be got out of the way ; the rest would gladly listen to godly 
counsels. And these leaders in evil deserved such doom; for they had been cru^ 
persecutors of the people of God (ver. 7), whose bones were scattered along the borders 
of the grave in vast numbers, like so many furrows made by the plough. And for such 
turning of the hearts of the people and for his own escape from his present trial he would 
continually wait on God, for God was his trust (ver. 8). Hence he confidently hoped 
to see the wicked leaders destroyed, their followers converted, and his own soul kept by 
the grace of God. Such prayers will ever inspire such hopes. — S. 0. 

Ver. 3. — "Keep the door of my lips." How needed is a sentinel and guard at the doorl 
For lack of it, what mischief has been wrought I Who can recount all the ills of 
unguarded speech ? 

I. LiF-siNs : THEIB CAUSE. 1. Impulsive temperament. Like as a stroke from 
the whip, which would only make the common cart-horse slowly shake his head, but 
would send the thorough-bred flying over the hedge in a very tornado of rage, so there 
are men who are never roused to hasty speech, they never get into trouble that way ■ 



336 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxii. 1-10. 

whilst others, quick-witted, agile-minded, swift to see what can be said on any given 
subject, — they are apt to think that all that can be said must be said, and with sad 
unwisdom they haste to say it. These are the "good talkers," unhappy ones, they 
should rather be called. 2. Vanity. A liking to show off, coupled with the consciousness 
that they can do so if they choose. 3. Want of self-control. There are times when 
even cautious, well-balanced men are driven out of their wonted self-restraint, so great 
is the provocation they have received ; but there are others who never seem to put any 
check upon themselves, but yield to every impulse and follow at once every prompting 
of their uncontrolled thoughts ; they need no great provocation, but will pour out their 
multitude of words on any and every occasion, whether wise or otherwise. 4. MvU 
temper and mere thoughtlessness are other causes of much of the unguarded and hasty 
speech with which the world is afflicted ; and so is : 5. ITie lack of real religion, of the 
fear of God, and of the sense of the seriousness of life and conduct. 

II. Their consbquencbs. 1. To the speaker himself. (1) "In the multitude of 
words there wanteth not sin." The man who lets his tongue run on unrestrained is 
sure to say something that will bring guilt on his soul and burden on his conscience. 
(2) Weakening of the character and will. The invaluable blessing of strength of will 
is only won by diligent self-restraint and watchful self-recollection; but it is sapped 
and wasted by unguarded and multitudinous speech. (3) Loss of reputation. Men 
reckon one another up, and a man of many words never wins their confidence ; they 
almost instinctively distrust him. Thus the man may do himself real harm, and lessen 
his influence, and misrepresent his own character. (4) Such loose unrestrained talk 
rarely bears reflection ; it is generally followed by much regret and sadness and repent- 
ance. 2. To the hearer of such unguarded speech. Great harm may be done. "You 
drop, in the thoughtlessness of conversation, or for the sake of argument or wit, some 
irreligious, sceptical expression ; it lodges in the memory of a child or a servant ; it 
takes root in a soil favourable to such seed ; it gradually springs up and brings forth 
fruit in disregard of religious duty, neglect of the means of grace, and the various steps 
of s downward course, the end of which no one can tell. This is all too common 
a case. But there is a Being who knows where it begau." We little know what great 
things from little ones may rise. And how often, in loose unrestrained speech, we 
inflict cruel and needless pain I We did not think to do harm, bat it is done all the 
same. And what an ill example we set to those who hear us ; and one so apt to be 
followed I 3. And to those spoken of. They are likely to be misrepresented. From 
careless good nature we may commend some who, if we do not censure and warn 
against them, we, at least, should be silent concerning them. Or, on the other hand, 
and a more likely case, those of whom we speak so carelessly are likely to be injured, 
and perhaps seriously, and a false impression given of them, which they by no means 
deserve. Hnw repeatedly the Scriptures give warning on this subject (see Prov. xviii. 
21; XV. 2, 7; Matt. xiii. 36, 37; Jas. i. 26, etc.)! 

III. Its cube. 1. Prayer. The text is a prayer. It will be God's special grace 
that alone can conquer this too common sin. 2. Cultivate the habit of thoughtfulness 
and self-recollection. Lift up your heart to God for his aid in this matter, when you 
go into company where temptation to this sin is likely to beset you. 3. Vows of 
silence for given periods. These will tend to strengthen the habit of self-control. 
4. Seek and cherish love to your fellow-men — to do to them as you would they should 
do to you. 5. And because as the tree is so will be its fruits, therefore seek the grace 
of God, that you yourself may be possessed and sanctified and kept of the Holy Spirit. 
Then shall ways and works and words be alike good. — S. C. 

Ver. 6. — The excellent oil of reproof; or, kindness sm'ting. Much may be learned 
from this verse concerning the very difficult and delicate task of reproving others. 
We learn — 

L That BEPBOor may be so administered as to be even welcomed. " Let 
the righteous smite me," etc. ; and further down in the verse, " Let not my head refuse 
it;" such is the truer rendering of the Revised Version in the clause which our 
Authorized Version reads, " which shall not break my head." It is evident, therefore, 
that the reproving told of here was not hated and resented, as reproof commonly is, 
bat even gratefully accepted. Generally, as we know, reproof is amongst the most 



PB. cxLi. 1—10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 83T 

unpalatable of things (see an admirable sermon by 0. H. Spurgeon on Job vi. 6). And 
we know this, and therefore needed rebuke and admonition are not given as they 
should be. We too often see our brother go wrong, and out of craven fear we hold 
back the warning and the reproof. 

II. And this, notwithstandino it mat bb bevebi:. The psalmist calls it a 
smiting : " Let the righteous smite me." And on the head also ; for he says (Bevised 
Version), " Let not my head refuse it." A blow on the body would be far less injurions, 
painful, and ignominious than one on the head, such as is contemplated here. But 
■till it is welcomed. This is difficult when " the righteous one " is God, who, as some 
expositors affirm, is here meant (see 2 Sam. vii. 14, 15). To humble ourselves under 
even his mighty hand (Heb. xii. 5 — 11), to whom we should "much rather be in 
subjection," is often found far from easy by our rebellious hearts ; but if " the righteous" 
spoken of be our fellow-men, then it is more difficult still. But here such smiting is 
not only submitted to, but welcomad. This is a very unusual thing indeed. 

III. FUBTHERMORB, IT SHALL BB DEEMED "KINDNESS," AND GBATEFUL AS " THE 

OIL OF JOY." For this is wliat is here referred to (cf, Pss. xxiiL 5; xlv. 7; Matt. vi. 
17). U.is soul is glad becnuse of it ; he counts himself happy and fortunate to have 
received it. How is ail this to be understood V Therefore note — 

IV. The EXPLANATION OP SUCH BARB RECEPTION OP BEPBOOP. 1. Certainly it is 
not because the man is mean-spirited and lies down like a slave or a stricken dog to be 
beaten. It is no "Uriah Heep" kind of humility. If we thought that such language 
as we have here would be nauseating, we should, as we ought, despise it. 2. But the 
evident explanation of it is that the man's whole soul longed after holiness and purity, 
and loathed sin with a great loathing. He so dreaded being betrayed into sin, that he 
welcomed with joy any rebuke, no matter how severe'and shameful, that restrained 
him from it. Thus is this strong, strange speech explained. 3. And what a revelation 
of the grace of Ood in a mcm's soul it is I Oh to so hate sin that we shall be glad of 
any suffering, yea, death itself, rather than come under its power 1 Happy the heart 
that can say " Amen " to the psalmist's prayer 1 

V. The bepboveb and the reproof. 1. The reprover. He must be righteous and 
felt to be so by him whom he reproves. It is not, " Let anybody reprove me," but 
"the righteous." Beproof from others would be of no avaiL But the righteous 
reprover is one who knows that what he says is true, that reproof ought to be 
given, because a brother's soul is in peril. Also he is one who feels deeply the dread 
evil of sin ; it is no trifle to him, whether in himself or others ; the honuur of God is 
dear to him, and so is his brother's soul. For he not only feels, but loves. That is the 
motive which urges him, apart from which he would have said nothing. Such are the 
characteristics of the righteous reprover. 2. And then, the reproof. The similitude 
here employed — the fragrant, refreshing, healthful anointing oil — suggests much. As to 
the gentleness of the reproof. Though the psalmist says he would welcome it though 
it were as a smiting on the head, it need not, should not, will not, be like that (see our 
Saviour's reproofs of his disciples. Matt. xxvi. 41). And as to its insinuating, pene- 
trating power, not by its harshness, but the very reverse. And as to its being much 
mingled with love and evident kindness of heart. Kjjjrove so; for such reproof will 
not repel, but rather bind yet more closely to you the heart of him whom you reprove. 
See what he says, " For yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities." We prefer 
this rendering; it tells how the psalmist loved the righteous ones who had reproved 
him, and would still pray for them amid their sorrow : they might say anything to 
him, it would not sever his soul from theirs. — S. C. 

Ver. 6. — Praying for others. The psalmist here says he will do this. We need not 
trouble about the right rendering of this difficult verse, but may take it as it stands. 
It says that the calamities of the righteous shall stir the psalmist's soul to pray for 
them. He loved them much, even though they severely rebuked him, indeed, because 
they did so. 

L It 18 A BEAUTIFUL EXAMPLE. We pray for ourselves, and it is right we ihoald, 
for unless we ourselves are right with God we shall care but little for the highest good 
of others, and we shall be disqualified for iuterceding for them. How ungodly parents 
who, nevertheless, love their children very dearly, should remember this I They cannot 

PSALMS III S 



838 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. oxll 1— Ift 

render their children the highest service of all until they themselves are reconciled to 
God. Bat we ought not to pray only for ourselves. We can he selfish even in prayer; 
it ii to be feared we very often are. But selfishness is as wrong there as elsewhere. 

II. It has the highest sanction. Our Lord Jesus Christ now at the right hand 
of God " ever liveth to make intercession for us." Moreover, he has taught us to pray, 
" Our Father, which art," etc. It is not " my : " our Lord would have us be inter- 
cessors for others when we pray for ourselves. 

III. These abe innumebable reasons fob it. 1. If is part of our obedience to 
Christ. We are to love our neighbour as ourselves. Surely this includes prayer for 
him. 2. It unites us vnth Christ. We cannot " redeem our brother or give to God 
a ransom for him ; " but we can pray for him. 3. It does such good. (1) To those we 
pray for. We may he sure that God never draws forth our hearts in fervent prayer 
tor others, and then disappoints that prayer. See Abraham's intercession for Sodom. 
How much do not we ourselves owe to those that have prayed for us 1 Saintly fathers 
and mothers, holy men and ministers of God, asked for our salvation, and it has been 
given. What a motive this for like prayer on our own part! What faithful preacher 
does not know that his congregation's preparedness to receive the Word is largely in 
proportion to the fervency of his prayen ! (2) And to ourselves who pray, such prayer 
is blessed. It clears our minds of ill will ; it prompts ua to kindly, helpful thought, word, 
and deed ; it wins the smile of God on our own souls. 4. It is a work we can dU engage 
in, though ve may not be able to do much else. What do not the ministers of God 
owe to poor bed-ridden people who pray for them as they minister I — S. C. 

Vers. 1, 8. — The victory of faith. In these verses two contrasted scenes are let 
before us. We are shown — 

L As UTTEBLT H0FELES8 CONDITION. 1. The psalmist seems to be eontemplatiag 
the mournfvl state of the people of Ood, of whom he rejoices to be one. He represents 
them as being not merely a defeated company, but large numbers of them destroyed, 
and their bodies in long lurrow-like heaps left in dishonoured and horrible neglect to 
be the prey of the vultures and the wolves. Overwhelming destruction has come upon 
them ; they seem fallen, to rise no more. It is a piteous sight for the survivor to con- 
template ; for they are his own people, he identifies himself with them. " Owr bones," 
he says, "are scattered," etc. He might well cast himself down in despair. 2. Aiid 
how often in the history of the Church of Ood, and in the Uvus of individual men, suck 
seemingly sad and hopeless conditions are met with 1 The Bible gives us instances not 
a few. See Al)raham when called on to offer Isaac as a burnt offering; how dark the 
prospect seemed then I Moses, when sent to deliver Israel from Egypt. Gideon, when 
the Midianites were ravaging the land. David before Goliath. How reascmable it had 
been if despair had fastened upon them and upon many other such tried souls ! And 
many a child of God is to-day brought into like circumstances, his soul smitten down 
to the gates of death, even as our Lord in Gethsemane. 

IL A viBTnons faith notwithstanding. (Ver. 8.) True, there lay his hopes, 
scattered, overwhelmed, destroyed, like the bones of a defeated, destroyed, dead but 
tmburied army. Nevertheless, the soul of the psalmist is up unto God. " Mine eyes 
are unto thee, God the Lord." The more hopeless the state of things seemed, the 
more steadfastly was his gaze fixed on God, the more emphatically was his confession 
given. " In thee is my trust ; " and the more confidently ascended his prayer. It is 
a beautiful spectacle, the soul holding; on to God in spite of all the buffetings of dis- 
astrous circumstances, and all " the slinks and arrows of outrageous fortune," in spite,' 
too, of the apparent abardonment of his career by God. O glorious faith, what hast 
thou not done ? what canst thou not and wilt thou not do ? 

III. Some reasons wherkfore theso things are so. 1. As to the sad and 
seemingly hopeless conditions in which Qod's people often find themsdves. They are 
terrible trials to a man's faith ; often men have utterly broken down under them, and 
fallen into the depths of atheism and irreligion. Faith is not universally yictorious, 
sometimes far otherwise. Wherefore, then, are such trials sent? Well, sometimes 
to give opportunity for bearing the most emphatic testimony for God that a human 
soul can give. One chief reason of the cr"ss of Christ was that he might there, as, 
blessed be his Name I he did, give such mighty testimony to the all-sustaining power 



Fs. OTLi. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 339 

of the love of God. Those whom he came to save had fearful sorrows to hear, and on 
the cross he showed them that God was the great Burden-hearer, the never-failing 
Solace and Stay of the soul. And for like reason his people now are often called upon 
to bear burdens heavy indeed. Then aDOthor reason is that there is no other way 
whereby the innate and inveterate earthliness of the human heart can be overcome. 
God has to let men see that this world will not satisfy them, no, not even when its 
pleasures are of the fairest and most innocent kind. We are so apt, so certain, to think 
they will, that God has not seldom to " scatter our bones at the grave's mouth," ere we 
will 8ee our mistake. The earthly cords that hold the soul down have to be cut. And 
also to compel men to take refuge in God, to drive them to the shelter and shadow of 
hig wings. And God deals thus with individual souls, that others through them may 
learn that this is not our rest, but that God is. 2. Then m to the blessed victoiuyiu 
faith, its explanation is: (1) The grace of God. Bunyan tells of the picture seen by 
Christian of the fire which would burn on in spite of water perpetually and profusely 
poured upon it, and when he wondered how this could be, he says that he saw a man, 
unseen by others, continually pouring oil on the fire, and so it burnt on in spite of the 
water. That is ever the explanation of victorious faith — the grace of God secretly 
keeps it alive. (2) The power of prayer. " Mine eyes," etc. His soul looked to God 
continually. (3) The habit of trust. " In thee is my trust." The will more than 
the reason is needed. " I will trust, and not be afraid. This blessed habit can and 
should be zealously cultivated. 

IV. What enscbs. 1. Ood is glorified by euch faith. How could it be otherwise ? 
2. Our goffering brethren are greatly helped by the testimony we give. 3. Z%e peace of 
OodJUh our oivn gout. — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — 2%e plea of former prayer. Associating this psalm with David, Spnrgeon 
thinks we have here " David under suspicion, half afraid to speak lest he should speak 
unadvisedly while trying to clear himself; David slandered and beset by enemies; 
David censured even by saints, and taking it kindly ; David deploring the condition 
of the godly party, of whom he was the acknowledged head; David waiting upon Ood 
with confident expectation." The point before us now is brought out by the Bevised 
Version, which renders thus: "Lord I have called upon thee; make haste unto me: 
give ear unto my voice, when I call unto thee." The psalmist uses as a plea the fact 
that he hcul called upon God. But his precise thought seems to be, that the prayer he 
had ofTered still remained unanswered, and he must therefore offer it again, and even 
more earnestly. So there are two topics which may be unfolded and illustrated. 

I. Answered foruek pbatebs abs an effective flea. And a store of these 
every good man holds iu loving memory. " This poor man cried, and the Lord heard, 
and saved him out of all his troubles;" "Verily God hath heard me." Every true 
life, when looked back upon, is seen to be full of Jehovah-jireh pillars erected as 
memorials of answered prayer. These become a plea in fresh prayer, because they are 
(1) God's pledges of his personal interest in us ; (2) God's illustrations of what he can 
and will do for us ; and (3) the best influence toward nourishing in us that spirit of 
trustfulness, and humble but confident hope, which is the acceptable spirit of all 
prayer. We trust God to heed us because he has heeded us; and his ways with us 
have revealed to us what he is, the " prayer-answeiing God." 

IL Unanswebed formeb fbaters abb an effective plea. The psalmist has 
prayed about some particular need. The prayer is still unanswered. On some this 
might act depressingly, and they might pray no more. This psalmist watches unto 
prayer. Delay does its intended work, and excites importunity. Because the answer 
has not come, he must pray again, and even plead that he is anxiously awaiting the 
answer. Illustrated by the Syro-phoenioian woman. — E. T. 

Ver. 2. — Prayer as incense. From tho mention of the evening sacrifice we may 
gather that the psalmist is actually praying in the evening. Incense was offered when 
the lamps were trimmed in the morning, and when the lamps were lighted "between 
the evenings," after the evening sacrifice. Incense, offered after sacrifice, is the 
symbol of the worship of the soul already reconciled to God. The evening sacrifice is 
the regular burnt offering of self-dedication. "As incense is carefully prepared, 



340 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxli. 1—10. 

kindled with holy fire, and devoutly presented unto God, so let my prayer be.'' There 
are two things about incense which may be taken as suggestive — its steady ascending 
as smoke ; and its pleasantness. 

I. The ascending op incense as a suggestion of prater. The smoke, richly 
laden with perfume, rises steadily up, in a quiet and gentle, yet persistent way, untU 
it is lost to sight in the high air. It should not be lost sight of that incense appeals 
to sight as well as to smell. And prayer is really the soul's ascending to God. It is 
as the smoke laden with the soul's perfume of dependence, desire, and trust. It is the 
man who is continually either looking on the level, or looking down, looking up, nay 
going up, getting soul-wings and rising to God. It implies getting, at least for the 
time, free from earthly entanglements. It is leaving the baser self, as the incense 
smoke leaves the wood of the spices ; it is carrying up the sublimer self, as the incense 
smoke carries up the very essence of the spices. We do not apprehend prayer until we 
see it as the soul's going up to &od. 

II. The pleasantness of incense as a suggestion of prayer. Using the figure 
of a man, God is said to have ' ' smelled a sweet savour " from the smoke of Noah's sacrifice. 
Smoke of incense is not pleasant to us, but Easterns love strong and unusual scents. 
We note that the smoke was full of perfume, and that God is well pleased with. Then 
there must be perfume in our prayer that ascends to him — perfume of trust, humility, 
love, fervent desire, and confident assurance. Can we think of God as enjoying our 
prayers ?— R. T. 

Ver. 3. — Our Up-watehman. Our lips are poetically presented as the door of our 
mouth. A man's heart is not to be trusted as an inspirer of speech. Every man 
needs to have the speech examined and tested before it is let pass the door of his lips. 
The psalmist feels that he cannot trust himself to examine, criticize, qualify his own 
speech, especially in times of excitement. And yet he must do this work himself. 
No one but himself can know what he is inwardly urged to say. In asking God to set 
a sentinel at the door of his lips, the psalmist does but, in a figure, ask God to give 
him quietness and self-control, so that he may be able to judge the wisdom of what he 
is moved to speak. For if any man asks God to " set a watch at the door of his lips," 
God will answer the prayer by making the man his own sentinel, and giving him that 
most valuable power, the power of self-criticism. Why do we need a watchman ? 

I. Because of oue natural dispusitions. Many are nervously excitable ; over- 
sensitive; quick to reply; impulsive; ready to suspect evil; or passionate. And 
many have no keen sense of the befitting or the becoming. Some are talkative, and 
readily carried by excitement beyond the bounds of prudence. What all such persons 
lealJy need is not to be put into bunds and limitations, but by Divine grace to be 
helped to °:ain control of themselves. Their life-work is in their own dispositions ; and 
God's araoe is ready for the strain and conflict of that life-work. 

II. Because of oue paeticulae ciecumstancbs. The psalmist was suffering 
persecution ; be was mi-iunderstood and slandered, and was afraid of himself lest he 
should speak, under excitement, rash and bitter words. Our circumstances of peril 
are: 1. When anger rises within. 2. When those we address are angry. 3. When 
speaking of those against whom we are prejudiceil. 4, When in the presence of those 
•who may wrongly report us. 5. When we have reasoD to fear that the innocent may 
be injured. 6. When we have reason to doubt our own motives. In this matter of 
watching speech, God helps those who help themselves. — R. T. 

Ver. S.^JTle power of human speech for good and evil. There is, perhaps, no 
other power given us by God » h ch more evidently distinguishes us from the biaasts, 
than the power of intelligent speech. And perhaps we have no power that can do more 
to help and bless others. And yet this alsi is true — no other faculty is more degraded 
by sin. One is led even to exclaim, " What shall be done unto thee, thou deceivful 
tongue, thou lovest all devouring words ! " 

I. TJoi FOWEB OF man's spbe'JH for good. Describe the power of Demosthenes 
to BWiqr an Athenian audience to patriotic enterprise; or Peter the Hermit calling 
for a Omsade; or Father Mathew pleading the temperance claims. Show what a 
gentl^-TOiced, sympathetic woman can do at the bedside of the sufferer 



M. oxLi. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 841 

" Words, Bweet words ; 
A blessing comes softly from kindly lipa." 

. n. Thx foweb of man's sfbech fob injoby. The few words of a king, a ruler 
a statesman, have often loosed the dogs of hateful war. The lecturer can persuade 
young souls to deny Gbd and righteousness and truth. Men, and women too, can by 
the blandishments of speech, become tempters, drawing others into sin. The Bible has 
metaphors suggesting the good and evil of our speech. " The words of a man's mouth 
are as deep waters ; " "A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in framings of silver ; " 
"A wholesome tongue is a tree of life ; " " My speech shall drop as the rain, and distil 
as the dew; " "There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword; " "Their tongue 
is an arrow shot out, it speaketh deceit ; one speaketh peaceably to his neighbour, but 
in heart he layeth in wait." The Apostle St. James makes the bad tongue to be 
a " spark of hell, lighting upon earth the flames of perdition." Everything else may 
be tamed, but the " tongue can no man tame ; " it is an unruly evil, full of deadly 
poison. 

III. The practical power of Cheistianitt on man's speech. 1. The founda- 
tion of the restraint of speech is a change and renewal of the heart. 2. Then there 
should be formed a very resolute and sincere purpose to win the rule of it. The matter 
should come forcibly before us. The habits we have formed must be considered ; the 
indulgences of the tongue must be tested ; our life in the light of our speech must be 
judged. And there must be constant watchfulness, with keen recognition of occasions 
of failure. Prayer may well be directed to winning power over our tongue. — ^B. T. 

Ver. 4.— ffotTs preventions. This prayer, " Incline not my heart to any evil thing," 
should be compared with the clause in the Lord's Prayer, "Lead us not into tempta- 
tion." In neither case can God be thought of as the direct cause of evil or temptation ; 
but in both cases he may be thought of as the indirect occasion. God does place men 
in circumstances in connection with which temptation may come to them ; and the 
circumstances may even induce an evil inclination to yield to the temptation. It 
belonged to the intense Hebrew conception of God, and of God's relations with men, 
that the distinction between God as cause and God as occasion was hopelessly confused. 
" Incline not my heart " can only mean, " Do not put me into such circuntstances as 
must incline my heart to evil." Here is^ 

I. A DEEP SENSE OF THE CONNECTION BETWEEN OIBOUMSTANOES AND FEELINGS. 

" Oh that nothing may arise in thy providence which would excite our desires in a wrong 
direction I " We are creatures of circumstance. Inward moods answer responsively to 
outward conditions. 1. There are circumstances which excite evil feeling in ui 
always. 2. There are circumstances which excite evil in us when we are in 
particular states of body or of mind. These, being the more subtle mischief, send us 
the more earnestly seeking the Divine defending and help. 

II. A DEEP SENSE OF THE OONTBOL WHICH GoD CAN HAVE OF OUB FEELINO 

THROUGH THE MASTEBT OF OUB ciBcnMSTANCES. "Our times are in his hand," and 
through our times he can effectually control us. It is often left as an impression on 
religious minds that something called "natural law" is ruling in the sphere of things; 
and that God's operations are confined to the sphere of hearts. That impression needs 
to be removed. God does work in hearts in a spiritual way, but it is also true that 
he is ever active in the sphere of events and circumstances, in order to use them for 
his higher work in feeling and in souls. So the good man asks God to be in th* 
circumstances in order that he may have control in the feelings.— B. T. 

Ver. &.— Reproof amd kindness. "Let the righteous man treat me with any amouni 
of ignominious reproach for my sins, yet I will prefer him to the ungodly, however 
prosperous, my prayer being ever that I may be saved from the evil deeds of the 
latter." Bead, " Let the righteous smite me ; it shall be a kindness : let him reprove 
me ; such oil for my head let not my bead refuse." Boberts tells us that in the East 
" certain oils are said to have a most salufary effect on the head ; hence, in fevers, or 
any other complaints which affect the head. Eastern medical men always recommend 
oil. I have known people who were deranged cured in a very short time by nothing 
more than the application of a peculiar oil to the head. Thus the reproofs of the 



342 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxli. 1— Itt 

righteous were compared to excellent oil, which produced a most salutary effect on the 
head." What seems plain, and what gives the b^t key to the allusions of this difiScult 
psalm, is that the psalmist had done something which was very doubtfully right, 
perhaps even manifestly wrong. He was not, however, disposed to admit this to him- 
self, though at times he felt painfully uncertain. Other people were in no doubt at 
all as to the impropriety of his action, and his enemies made it the occasion of bitter 
scorn, while his friends, in their grave anxiety for him, sought to reprove him, and 
liberate his conscience so that it might render its free testimony. The psalm may 
very well be illustrated by the moods of David when he had sinned in the matter of 
Uriah. 

I. ScoBN OF A HAN IN BIN DO£B BUT HABDEK HIM. Many a man hag gone into 
greater lengths of sin simply because he failed to get sympathy and help in his first 
gtumbling. 

II. Bepboof of a uan in bin MAT BBiNO HIM TO BEPENTANCE. A man in sin 
must not be left alone. But reproof, to be effective, must have love, as well as 
righteousness, for inspiration. " Faithful are the wounds of a friend." 

J II. Response to the bepboof of the good betealb a man. There is hope if 
he is receptive to the personal persuasions of those whom be can esteem, and counts 
reproof a kindness. — R. T. 

Ver. 8. — Soxd-destitution. " We have been bo harrowed and torn that we are 
brought to the brink of the grave." "To be destitute in circumstances is bad, but to 
be destitute in soul iB far worse; to be left of friends is a calamity, but to be left of 
God would be destruction. Destitute of God is destitution with a vengeance. The 
comfort is that God hath saiii, 'I will never leave thee, nor forsake tbee.'" The 
margin is, "Make not my Boul bare;" strip me not of every hope; leave me not 
completely naked ; abandon me not to nature's beggary and misery ; let me not go 
down to the pit with all my sins upon my head ; leave not my soul destitute of pardon 
and peace. The mood is well indicated in David's sense of being left alone of God for 
long months after his sia in the matter of Uriah. A comparison may be made between 
this prayer, " Leave not my soul destitute," and the confident as!-urance, " None of 
them that trust in him shall be desolate." 

I. The soul in bighteoubnbss feels befriended. That is, the soul that is in 
riyht relations, and has right desires inspiring right endeavours. That man can always 
say, " The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge." Aud that 
befriending makes him superior to all surroundings of distress, and all consciousnesB of 
frailty. 

II. The soul in bin feels destitute. He is conscious that he has put himself 
out of the atmosphere in which alone the God of love and righteousness can reveal 
himself. The prodigal son felt destitute as soon as "he came to himself," and realized 
that no love wrapped him round. When a man sius, and persists in his sins, it is his 
soul that feels destitute. His surroundings may not immediately change, but his soul 
does. That loses what is its supreme tieasure, the sense of God. "Man was made for 
God, and can find no rest till it gets rest in him." When man sins, and keeps his sin, 
he must lose his treasure. But soul-destitution may set man seeking after God's 
return with a passionate intensity. — R. T. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — A comprehensive prayer. The psalm has some peculiar difficulties, due 
to the extreme abruptness with which the thoughts follow one another, and the great 
obscurity which hnnirs over the allusions. Let us try and select the principal thoughts. 
L The psalmist was threatened with some immediate danger which could brook n» 
delay. (Ver. 1.) Like the disciples in the storm on the lake. If relief comes at all, 
it must come at once. 2. He seeks that his prayer to this end may be as acceptable as 
the incense of sacrifice. (Ver. 2.) True prayer more effectual than sacrifice. 3. But, 
though danger it close at hand, he would be preserved from hasty words. (Ver. 3.) 
Religion should help us to be self-contained in the presence of danger. 4. Though 
wickedness may seem to prosper, we must not be tempted by its success. (Ver. 4.) If 
men become rich in evil-doing, we must not be seduced by the prospects of similar 
gain. 5. The wounds of a friend are better than the kisses of an enemy. (Ver. 6.) 



n. oxLiL 1 — 7.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



843 



It is good to welcome reproof from the righteous, even though it seems harsh. 6. Proffer 
it a hetter defence against persecutors tlum retaliation. (\er. 6.) If we cannot oonqaer 
wickedness, we have still the resource and the comfort of prayer for our enetmea. 

7. WTten the leaders of insurrection are overthrovm, then their foUotoers should hear 
words of forgiveness. (Ver. 6.) A true sovereign will delight more In amnesty than 
in punishment. His words will be sweet to the guilty. So also in private relations. 

8. The hones of those straitened in a righteous cause are as seed cast into soU that has 
been ploughed. (Ver. 7.) "The blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church." 
The allusion here is obscure ; but the above would make a good meaning. 9. But do 
not give up my life to destruction ; hut rescue me. (Ver. &— -10.) This the repetition 
of the prayer at the beginning of the psalm. How much all prayer is a repetition, 
because the some wants and desires are continually recurring !— o. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM CXLH. 
David onoe more cries to God for protection 
and deliverance. The " title " says that the 
prayer was composed by him " when he was 
in the cave," by which we must understand 
"the cave of AduUam" (see 1 Sam. xiii. 
1,2; and corap. Ps. Ivil., "title"). The con- 
tents and style of the psalm are thoroughly 
DavldicaL 

Yer. ]. — I cried nnto the Lord with my 
voice; with my voioe unto the Lord did I 
make my supplication. " With my voice " 
means aloa>l, and therefore earnestly and 
pressingly (comp. Pss. iii. 4 ; xxvii. 7 ; Ixiv. 
1 ; lxxvii.,1 ; cxxx. 1, 2, etc.). 

Ver. 2. — I poured out my complaiut before 
him ; I showed before him my trouble (comp. 
Psa cxl., cxli., and cxliii.). 

Ver.3. — When my t pir.t was overwhelmed 
within me; or, "fainted within mii." Tiien 
thon knewest my path, I had not to tell 
thee becatisL' thou ilidyt not know, but to 
relieve my own feelings. In the way 
wherein I walked have they privily laid a 
snare for me (comp. Psa. cxl. 5; cxli. 9, 10). 

Ver. 4. — I looked on my right hand, and 
beheld, but there was no man that would 
know me. I looked about, t.e., for human 
aid, but there was no one who would so 
much as know me. I was utterly deserted 
in my trouble. Befuge failed me. I had 
nowhere to flee unto — no safe and sure 
abiding-place. The "cave of Adullam" 
was but a miserable spot to hide in. No 
man oared for my soul; or, "looked after 
my soul " (comp. Jer. xxx. 17). 



Vei. S. — ^I eiied nnto thee, Lord : I lald, 
Thon art my Sefage. When men's fathers 
and mothers forsake them, tbe Lord taketh 
them up (Ps. xxvii. 10). David looked to 
Ood as a sure Befuge at all times (Pas. ix. 
9; xviii. 1, 2; Ivii. 1; lix. 9, 16, 17). And 
my Portion in the land of the living; or, 
"my inheritance" (comp. Pss. xvi. 5; 
Ixxiii. 26). 

Ver. 6. — Attend nnto my cry ; for I am 
brought very low (comp. Fs. Ixxix. 8 ; and 
see also Dent, xxviii. 43 ; Judg. vi. 6 ; Pa. 
oxvi. 6). In the cave of Adullam David 
had but four hundred outlaws to defend 
him against Saul, who was at the head of 
all the thousands of Israel (1 Sam. xxii. 2). 
Deliver me from my persecutors. Saul, 
Doeg, the Ziphites, and the armed bands 
with whom Saul "bunted David in the 
mountains" (1 Sam. xxvi. 20). Vox they 
are stronger than I; or, "too strong for 
me." 

Ver. 7. — Bring my soul out of priioa. 
The word "prison" is need symbolically, 
as a metaphor for trouble and distress (comp. 
Pss. Ixxxviii. 8 ; ovii. 10—14). That I may 
praise thy Name; or, "that men may praise 
thy Name." David's deliverance from his 
enemies wonld cause the godly generally to 
" praise the Lord." The righteous shall 
compass me about; rather, in me shall ths 
righteous trivmph (Kay, Cheyne). Viewing 
my cause as their own, they will glory in 
my deliverance (comp. Pss. xxxv. 27; xL 
16). For thon shalt deal bountifully with 
me; i.e. thou wilt assuredly "hear my 
cry " and " deliver me " (see the preceding 
verse)L 



H0MILBTI08. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Ottr resource in extremity. Pew passages in Scripture more aptly 
illustrate the words, " They learn in suffering what they teach in song," than does thif 
psalm. In a few strong sentences we have placed before i 



344 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxliI. 1—7. 

I. The extremity of human tbouble. David is "brought very low." His 
persecutors are too strong for him (ver. 6), too numerous ; moreover, they are very 
wily, their stratagems are clever, and tbey involve him in great peril (ver. 3). He is 
abandoned by his friends; he is placed outside the reach of kindly sympathy and 
succour (ver. 4) ; nay, he is so shut up and surrounded that there seems no way of 
escape for him (ver. 7) ; he feels as if he were defeated, and he is a disheartened man 
(ver. 3) ; the waves of misfortune go over him. We may find some correspondence to 
this desperate position in our own case : 1. In very serious sickness, when the husband 
and father is stricken down in the midst of his life and of his responsibilities, and there 
does not open any way for the maintenance of his family ; or when the student, who 
has spent many years in preparation for the Christian ministry, breaks down in health 
as the door of usefulness is about to open. 2. In the loss of reputation ; whoa i true 
man is, through the " wicked devices" of some heartless neighbour, charged with a sin 
or crime of which he cannot possibly prove himself innocent, and he has to meet the 
averted looks and cold address of those who were once his cordial friends. 3. In 
desertion ; when some pure and tender heart has trusted one that " smiles and smiles, 
and is a villain," and is by him betrayed and deserted, and all human "refuge fails," 
and no one seems to " care for the soul " of the sufferer, and the heart is indeed " over- 
whelmed," 4. In the bitter disappointment of some noble and generous hope ; when 
the toiling evangelist or the lonely missionary makes no way, and the heathenism at 
home or abroad appears to be as dense and as dark as ever. 5. In some moral or 
spiritual entanglement (ver. 7); when the mind is imprisoned in some inextricable 
difSculty, in some harassing doubt, or even in utter disbelief; or when the life ia 
darkened because the will is ensnared by some unworthy and, it may be, even degrad- 
ing habit, and the soul is in a bondage compared with which that of stone walls and 
iron locks is as nothing; or when the spirit finds itself in the hard and cruel fetters 
of selfishness, or worldliness, or pride, and is therefore a long way off from the favour 
and friendship of Jesus Christ. In all such cases as these — and the moral are far more 
serious than the material — we are "broughtvery low; " we may well be "overwhelmed 
within us." 

II. Our one eesoubce. Our refuge is in God ; he is o«r Portion. 1. We go to 
our Divine Lord for refuge, that we may hide ourselves in him, to oast ourselves on 
his nnfailing friendship, to rest in his deep and perfect sympathy (Heb. iv. 15, 16). 
2. When everything else is lost, when we are abandoned by our human friends, we 
have a heritage in God ; we have still a heavenly Father to trust and love, and a holy 
service and filial submission to render; we have fellowship with God. 3. We ask and 
we hope for Divine deliverance. We know that an almighty arm is on our side ; we 
believe that the All-wise can and will sliow to us a way of escape from the very midst 
of our difficulties ; we are assured that God can break the net in which our soul is 
taken, and can enlarge us and give us a blessed spiritual freedom. Has not a Saviour 
come to "preach deliverance to the captives"? and "whom the Son makes free, ate 
they not free indeed " ? 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — " When my spirit was overwhelmed." This is said to be one of David's 
cave psalms. There are some seven or eight which, according to their inscriptions, 
have to do with David's persecution by Saul. What cave is meant, whether Adullam 
or Bngedi, we do not know. 

I. Hebe is a most distbessful condition set fobth. It is described : 1. As being 
overwhelmed. (Yer. 3.) As if some fierce flood had rushed down upon him and his, 
and with sore difficulty they could bear up against its cruel might. 2. As leing in 
great need of refuge, hut utterly failing to find it. (Ver. 3.) He had looked round on 
the right hand and the left, but in vain. 3. As refected by men. " No man would 
know me." They had cast him off, would have nothing to do with him, would 
eertainly render no help. 4. As " brouglit very low." (Ver. 6.) All hope and joy had 
fled from him ; he was utterly cast down. 6. As one shut up in prison, (Ver, 7.) 



PB. cXLH. 1— 7.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 846 

Now, all this sets forth what is often true in the experience of God's people. We are 
told also — 

IL How THIS CONDITION WAS BROUGHT ABOUT. 1. By the uMret of the taieked. 
(Ver. 3.) The snare was secretly but surely laid, and the psalmist seems to have 
fallen into it ; it was laid alung the path wherein he was wont to walk. He had not 
wandered off into strange or forbidden ways, but iu his own proper and accustomed 
path, there the snare was secretly set. " The daily round, the common task," may 
become to us not only the path of life, but the evil one knows how, in the midst of 
them, to lay, and often too successfully, snares for the soul. 2. By the indifference and 
apathy of his fellow-men. " No man cared for my soul." It is a thought full of pain 
and sorrow to many a Christian heart that, by neglect, they have suffered so many 
bouIb to go astray. We have not oared for them as we should. When we think of it, 
we can only say, " Enter not into judgment with thy servant, Lord." But let us 
also forsake the sin we confess. 3. By persecution. This does often bring the soul 
" very low." Even our blessed Lord cried out, " My God, my God, why hast thou 
forsaken me ? " But it matters not, so Ions as we cleave to God. 

III. What to do under these oibcumstanoes. 1. Turn to the Lord in fervent 
prayer. Lay before him all your trouble. Keep well in mind that the Lord who 
loves you, and whom you love, knoweth the way you take. 2. Call to mind what Ood 
has heen to you in the past. 

IV. What shall come op it. The Lord will deal bountifully with us. We shall 
praise the Lord. All the righteous will rejoice. — S. 0. 

Ver. 4. — " No man cared for my soul." It may be that the psalmist was thinking 
only or chiefly of his life ; but more commonly the soul refers to that which is of far 
more worth than the body — ^to that in us which is spiritual, immortal, and made in the 
image of God. And thus we shall understand the word here, and speak of " the evil 
and danger of neglecting the souls of men." See Dr. Boddridge's great sermon on this 
theme. The psalmist declares, "No man cared for my souL" 

L Is the assertion true ? 1. It often seems so. How many there are to whom no 
one ever speaks, for whom no one makes any direct effort to win them for God 1 They 
are just let alone. And it is not because they would resent such endeavour. Often 
they greatly desire that some one would speak to them ; for they know they are wrong, 
and need help to be other than they are. But it seems as if no one cared. 2. But, 
strictly speaking, it is not universally true. For there have never been any periods of 
time when there were not some faithful workers for God, and earnest intercessors for 
sinful men. And often it has been that, unknown to the soul that thinks itself 
uncared for, fervent prayers have been going up to God for that soul. And if not 
specially for that soul, yet for all such souls, that God would have mercy upon them, 
and lead them into the way of truth, for that they have erred and are deceived. When 
do God's people ever gather together without such prayers being offered ? 3. 8till,it 
is far too hm/ely true. The neglect of souls on the part of those who should care for 
them is a terrible and distressing fact. 

II. Who are to blame ? 1. All Christians generally. For if we be saved by the 
compassion and grace of God ourselves, we are bound by every motive to try and get 
others saved likewise. If we do thus try, prayerfully and earnestly — let meu call us 
by any ill name they please —the consciousness of Christ's approval and benediction 
will become surer and fuller of holy joy and help every day we live. If we make no 
such endeavour, the salvation we have will dwindle and starve, and, ere long, utterly 
disappear, and our last state will be worse than the first. 2. But more especially those 
who are nearest to such souls, and who have, therefore, most influence over them. 
Fathers and mothers first and chief of all. As they are, so the children will be, 
Then teachers, especially teachers in Sunday schools. What is the good of such 
schools if the teachers do not, above everything else, care for the souls of those they 
teach ? And ministers : theirs, beyond moat others, is the cure of souls. How awful, 
if they to whom this charge has been especially given, should be found faithless! 
What will such answer, when asked by the "chief Shepherd and Bishop of souls," as 
they will be asked, what they have done with those entrusted to their care ? 

IIL How COMES THERE TO BE SUCH NEOLEOT? The causes are many. 1. With som» 



848 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. oxlu. 1— 7. 

H i> unbelief. They doubt almost every truth which the Church teaches. Soma 
actually deny, others do not more than half believe. 2. With others it is misbelief. 
They pervert the doctrine of the BacramentB, of the eternal mercy of God, of final 
perseverance, and, on such grounds, sav, " Peace, peace," when there is no peace. 3. 
With more it is that they are not saved themselves. Their belief, whatever it is, does 
nothing for them, gives them neither peace, purity, strength, nor joy. They profess, 
but do not posse-^s, and therefore cannot impart to others what is not their own. 4. 
Fear of man,. How many, who should be directly and avowedly caring for souls, are 
ensnared here! And they salve their consciences by thinking that such work belongs 
to the clergy or the ministers — ^not to such as they. We shall never do anything until 
we are willing to be thought " fools for Christ's sake." 5. Dread of doing harm rather 
than good. But duty is ours, not consequences ; and if God, by his Spirit, prompts 
and bids us speak for him, as he very often does, all we have to do is to obey. He will 
take care of the consequences. Such are some of the causes of this sad lack of care 
for souls. 

IV. The evil op it. 1. The glory due from us to Christ is not rendered. The 
martyrs whom St. John saw overcame "by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word 
of their testimony." Christ claims our confession of him. 2. Men are hardened in 
sin. They say, " If thete people believed what they profess, they would not leave us 
alone as they do. They don't believe it, and we won't." 3. Our own souls perish; for 
we are guilty of our brother's blood. 

V. How IS IT TO BE KBMBDiED? What is involved in the caring for souls? L 
Belief in the existence of the soul. In its worth; its peril; in the willingness of God 
to save it, 2. Solicitude for its salvation. 3. Open, active, and definite endeavour to 
secure this. 4. Be sure that we are saved ourselves. 

Conclusion. To those who bring the charge, " No man careth for my soul," we 
would .'■ay ; 1. If others do not care, see to it that you care yourself. It is your concern, 
after all. 2. If others care ever so much, and you do not, you will ie only worse off 
than before. 3. But if you care, then, whether others care or not, you will certainly he 
saved. — S. 0. 

Ver. 5. — Pleading what we said to the Lord. This is what the psalmist is here 
doing ; he is putting the Lord in remembrance of his servant's earnest vows. 

I. What was said. 1. He reminds the Lord how he had " cried unto " him. His 
coming was with all earnestness and sincerity of soul ; and he tells the Lord this, as 
much as to say, " Lord, thou knowest that my prayer went not forth out of feigned 
lips, but it was with true heart that I turned to thee." Such is the prayer the Lord 
loves, and which alone has power and prevails. 2. He had said, " Thou art my Refuge 
and my Portion." First, the Lord was his Eefuge. Many were his distresses ; some of 
them inward, others outward. But from them all he found refuse in God. And he 
was but an example of what all may do, for where he found reiuge from the sense of 
guilt, the power of sin, the cares of life, the fear of death, the craft and cruelty of men, 
there also may we. Blessed is he who hath sincerely said to the Lord, " Thou art my 
Eefuge." And, further, he had said, " Thou art my Portion in," etc. He had chosen 
the Lord before all else. Many there were who were saying, " Who will show us any 
good ? " but his prayer was, " Lord, lift thou up the light of," etc. He could gay, 
" Whom have I in heaven but thee ? and there is none upon earth," etc. Thus had he 
taken the Lord for his Portion, for his chief good. Blessed are they who have done 
the samel 3. And he had said this. To the Lord himself. He had made this 
confession and profession to him repeatedly, deliberately, solemnly; he was even 
declaring it when speaking to the Lord. And hehad said it to himself, had habitually 
kept before his mind that he was not his own, but the Lord's. And he had said it 
before his fellow-men. He was openly and avowedly the Lord's ; he made his boast 
in God. 4. And here he pleads this fact before Ood. For he felt sure that God would 
not cast off such as he was, but would assuredly hearken to him when, as now, he was 
"brought very low." And he was right. 

II. How IT WAS SAID. Very earnestly. In no light mood, in no formal way, but 
he had " cried," etc. And he said it, in spite of opposition and persecution ; and he 
means, by thus reminding the Lord of what he had said, to affirm His adherence theret(^ 



M. oxi.li. 1— 7.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 347 

and that he would by no means go back therefrom. And the obligation such avowal 
involved he was ready to meet ami fulfil, God helping him. We are wont to make all 
manner of profession, but is it with this sincerity and resolve of heart? 

III. Why it was baid. 1. Why did he make such profession at all f He had felt 
his need of the Lord to ba his Refuge and Portion. He had been brought to that 
conviction, as many are now. And he believed that God was both able and willing to 
be what he desired of him ; hence he had sought the Lord on the matter, and he had 
actually found that the Lord was his Eefuge and his Portion, his God and his exceed- 
ing Joy. Having found that, he could not do otherwise than avow it : " Come and 
hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare," etc. 2. Why does he recall to hit mind 
this that he had said* Doubtless it was, as such a thing ever is, a great delight to 
him. Thus to recall it, to have said such things sincerely, is one of the facts in one's 
life that emphatically does bear recollection. It is not so with all life's facts. Then, 
by such recall, he would tighten their hold upon his own heart, engrave them there 
yet more deeply. Such is ever the effect of so doing. Every way it helped him. 
The Lord became more precious. It held him off from other proffered refuges and 
portions, of which the world pretends to have large store ; it quickened in him the 
resolve to fulfil the obligations of his vow — such as abstaining from all sin, following 
after holiness, ever looking to the Lord. And he pleads what he had said, because he 
believed the Lord would allow its force, and let it be availing. 

CONCHTSION. 1. Let us take the Lord for our Eefuge and Portion. 2. Openly avow 
it. Say out before the Lord ami before all men what you have done. 3. And then, 
as here, often recall to memory what you have said, and that the vows of the Lord are 
upon you. — S. C. 

Ver. 2. — Prayer as complaint. " I pour out my complaint before him." " Before 
God we may speak out our minds fully, and name the persons that afflict, affront, or 
trouble us." True religion must be genuine. What a man really does feel he ought 
to be able to express. Reserve is the bane of friendship ; it is of our friendship with 
God. A friend should be free to tell his friend precisely what he is feeling, even when 
the feelings are neither good nor right. It is healthy and hopeful when there is such 
confidence between child and mother that the child can tell its had thoughts and 
wishes as well as its good. When there is absolute confidence in the love of God to 
us, there can be free utterance before him of our bad moods as well as of our good. And 
seeing that the best of men are subject to human frailties, are influenced by bodily 
states, affected by changing circumstances, and mastered by peculiarities of disposition, 
he could be no God to us at all who could only bear relations to conditions and moods 
which represented us at our best. 

I. A SPIRIT OF ooHPLAiNiNO NEED NOT BE WRONO. It ofteu is the proper and natural 
response to surrounding conditions. As natural as the response we make to things 
that are pleasing. To be tempted involves us in no wrong. To be set upon complain- 
ing need not involve us in wrong. To complain is a part of our complex human nature. 
The man is below his full manhood who is unable to complain. He does not feel in 
response to his circumstauces as he ought to. 

II. A CHEEISHING OP THE SPIRIT OF COMFLAININQ MUST BE WBONG. When the Spirit 

is awakened in us, we have to deal with it. And everything depends on bow we deal 
with it. If we keep it, nourish it, brood over it, it exercises a mischievous influence on 
us, it grows into an evil far worse than itself, it excites to envious and unworthy 
conduct towards others. Keep to ourselves the complaining spirit, and a spiritual 
"dry rot" will be sure to get into our souls. 

III. PUTTINO COMPLAINT INTO PBATBE PROVIDES SAFETY AND BELIEF. It is evident 

that prayer must include more than petition. Prayer is really the expression of the 
soul's confidence in God. And there is no fuller sign of confidence than telling freely 
our complaints. And yet doing so is a request for the Divine intervention and help ; 
only in telling our trouble we wholly leave with God the way in which our circum- 
stances shall be dealt with. — B. T. 

Ver. 3. — 2%e confidence of the crushed heart. Literally, " In the muffling of my 
spirit upon me." When my spirit was so wrapped in trouble and gloom, so muffled 



34d THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxlh. 1— 7. 

round with woe, ^hat I could not see the path hefore me, was distracted and unable to 
choose a line of conduct, thou (emphatic) knewest my path. We are often placed in 
circumstances in life which baffle intellect and power of judgment. We are over- 
whelmed because we cannot understand, and cannot steer our way through conflicting 
conditions, so as to form a safe judgment as to the course we should take. But the 
condition of the psalmist, as indicated in this sentence, was altogether more serious. 
Intellect and judgment remained to him, but they were silenced, crnshed, overwhelmed, 
with a weight of feeling; his "spirit was overwhelmed within him." 

I. The mastery op cub soul-moods is our deepest distress. We cannot watch 
for it to guard against it. We cannot account for it so as to excuse it to ourselves. 
We cannot deal with it so as to gain security out of our experience. Every man knows 
that, any day, he may be beaten by the mastery of his soul-moods. And the strange 
thing is that the peril is greater the more spiritually sensitive a man becomes. The 
more worldly a man is, the/ewer soul-moods he has. The more spiritual a man is, the 
more sonl-moods he has. Olten in life we are placed in circumstances that are not 
really very anxious, but which we make overwhelming by the response of our souls to 
them. And this explains how little we understand one another in the perplexities of 
life, because we cannot know how differently souls answer to things. 

IL CoNFiPENCE nr God's ovERRUiiiNG relieves odb deepest distress. "Then 
thou knewest my iiath." At such times there is always something to do. And the 
psalmist is close near to the very heart of truth when he shows that God relieves 
feeling by leading into duty. Keep feeling, and the hands will hang down. Take 
feeling to God, and he will lead into active service, and so bring relief to feeling;. We 
may be so blinded by feeling that we cannot see the way we should take. We may 
be sure that our feeling does not represent God's. He never is so blinded. He always 
sees our way, and will lead us if we put our hand in his. — R T. 

Ver. 4. — Uncared-for souls. This expression may very properly be associated with 
David, or at least may be illustrated by certain experiences in his life. When he was 
hunted by Saul among the hills of the south country, he seems to have fallen into a 
desponding mood, and to have thought that nobody cared for him (see 1 Sam. xxii. 1 ; 
xxiv. 3). And as regards the help of man, he certainly then did seem desolate. But 
in God there still was hope. We may think of those who, with some measures of 
truthfulness, may nowadays say these words, "No man careth for my soul." 

I. The bo-oalled heathen. It would, perhaps, be well if we could give up using 
this term, which makes of those who have other thoughts of God than we have a 
distinct and lower class of beings. We have no right to put upon them the slur of a 
bad name. They are our brethren of this humanity, and God is both their Father and 
ours. They are the vast multitude of men. They are in mental bondage, and in 
moral degradation. Each one of them is kin with us in nature and destiny. Each 
one has intense inward desires, of which his particular religion is the wild, wandering 
expression. We have many interests in them that lie in the range of civilization and 
commerce, but how little and limited is our concern for their souls I 

II. Multitudes nr oub own neighbourhoods. Everywliere we are surrounded 
with those who do not know God, or do not hold him in personal and saving relations ; 
and, alas 1 even with those who are living in the wretchedness of sin and vice. Do you 
think that their souls are altogether silenced ? Do not they excuse their degradations 
by bitterly saying, "No man careth for my soul"? And in the B&ily unaggressive 
character of very much present-day Christian life and labour, have they not a right to 
•ay it? 

in.. Many of oub nearest and dearest fbiends. Who among us has no unre- 
generate friends? Who should care for them? Are not some hindered because we 
have not shown our care for them? They question the worth of our professions if 
they do not inspire activity in winning and saving others. 1. Cultivate a deeper sense 
of the worth of souls. 2. Suspect that God's work for us to do will begin with what lies 
close to onr hands. — B. T. 

Ver. 4. — Caring for srmls tie work of the Church. "Refuge failed me; no man 
cared for my soul." For present purposes associate the psalm with the anxious time 



M. oiLii. 1—7.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 849 

of David's life, when he was persecuted by Saul. The point of his sadness was that 
nobody seemed to care for him. That was likely to maike him restless. If he had 
further said, " and even God d.ies not cave for me," he would have grown desperate, 
and exclaimed, " Why should I care for myself? Why should I try to be true and 
good and faithful?" By his word "soul" David meant "life;" but we mean spiritual 
«nd eternal interests. 

I. Cabino foe souls is not the world's work. We use the term " world " in 
many senses. Sometimes for the evil element in the midst of which we are set. So 
far as men come together in mutual interest and service, men as men, apart from any 
such distinctions as godly men, their interest in each other is limited to moralt. 
There is such a thing as the welfare of the race. There is an "enthusiasm of 
humanity." But see what it embraces, and where are its limits. Trace through an 
ascending scale. 1. Physical well-being; bodily development, conditions of health. 
2. Social well-being; all that pertains to the relationships which men sustain. 3. 
National well-being; tlie attainment of the highest civil liberty consistent with stable 
government. 4. Intellectual well-being; education in elementary, middle, and 
advanced stages. 6. Moral well-being; the general conception of virtue as the 
moderate and harmonious use of all facvdties, or emotional culture. But there the 
world stops. Even the best men who care for the race seem to recognize no bouU, 
no spiritual natures. (The spirit of modern philosophy may be thus expressed: 
Dismiss noumena, and deal only with phenomena.) And if men did recognize souls, 
they would be incompetent to render the care that souls need. They bave not the 
suitable powers or agencies at their command. Cbemistry, electricity, and education 
will not touch souls. So far as men are souls, they may look abroad over the world 
and say, " I can get much for body and mind, but ' no man careth for my soul.' " And 
yet the part that men miss caring for is the chief part. They care for the box and 
the setting, but they neglect the jewel. Consciousness testifies that we are souls. 
Revelation deals with us as souls. God cares for souls. Christ cares for souls. The 
true care for man is care for his soul ; and this includes care for all leiser things that 
are interesting to him. 

II. CABINa FOB SOULS IS FBECISELT THE WOBE 07 CbBIST's CHUBOH. Phycdcal, 

intellectual, and moral good is not the Church's first work. The Christian is, of 
necessity, also a philanthropist. 1. The Church exists to give testimony to the worth 
of souls in the sight of God. 2. The Church exists to devise and carry out schemes 
for the salvation of souls. This is indeed the work of every regenerate individual ; but 
it is especially the duty of the Church as an organization. In it men are banded 
together for the care of souls. 

III. In manipestino its oark fob souls, the Church will have ▲ sfboial oabe 
FOB THE YOUNo. Why ? 1. Apprehending the peril of souls, the Church will want 
to keep the young from temptation, rather than to deliver them when overcome by it. 
2. Apprehending the hardening influence of sia, the Church will try to deal with it 
in its initial stages. Youth is the plastic time when men may be fitted to good life- 
moulds. 3. Apprehending the nobler possibilities of a godly life, the Church seeks to 
secure for it the earliest possible beginning. Every godly life is rich in blessing; but 
those who serve their generation best as Christ's servants are those who began the 
service in early youth. — R. T. 

Ver. 6. — 2%e soul's rights in Ood. " Thou art my Refuge, my Portion in the land 
of the living." This apprehension of God's relations belongs to a man who was placed 
in distressing circumstances, which were all the more distressing because he looked 
this way and that for human helpers, and found none. It is not that, disappointed in 
man, the psalmist turned to God. It is that, having linked together God's help and 
man's, he has had to learn that there are times in life when a man must turn from the 
help of broliier man, and nse for his entire help his soul's rights in God. For the soul 
has rights in God which God will acknowledge. 

L Thb soul's BIGHTS IN GoD ARI8INO OUT OF ITS VEBT BEING. We Speak of man 
as a spark from God, the Eternal Fire ; of man, the spiritual being, as made in God's 
image. The relation is absolute. In God we " live, and move, and have our being." 
If in a sense, man is a soul put forth from God in some sort of separateness, that 



850 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxlh 1—7. 

Beparatenesg involves no independence. " All 80uls are mine." God never puts from 
himself his rights in souls, and souls can never put from themselves their rights in 
God. He is, by virtue of their very being, the Befuge and Portion of souls, whether 
they know it or not. 

II. The soul's rights in God abe eecognized in the Divine covenant. This 
psalmist speaks within the covenant, and bases his confidence on covenant pledges. 
It may seem as if the formal Abrahamic covenant concerned only a particular people, 
and pledged, on either side, merely material things. But we must always regard the 
covenant as representative of the spiritual covenant into which God enters with all 
men. It is picture-teaching of spiritual things. God makes covenant with souls, 
pledging himself to be, what they feel him to be, their "Befuge" and "Portion." 
Our rights in God are secured by his covenant. 

III. The soul's eights in God abb becoqnized in the Divinb eedemption. It 
should never be lost from view that, however formal and outward was its setting, the 
redemption wrought by Christ was a spiritual redemption — a redemption of so»Zi. It 
was really the response of Divine love to the soul's rights in God as its Befuge, when 
that soul had come into conditions of disaster and distress. Souls never can lose their 
rJghtB in God.— B. T. 

Ver. 7. — Ood!» bounUfulnest. " Thou shalt deal boimtifnlly with me." The point 
here seems to be that an unusual experience of the Divine goodness, in one particular 
case, excites the attention of others who trust in God, and becomes, for them, an 
inspiration to increased confidence in God. 

I. God's BonNTiFULNEss as oub impbession of God's dealings with us. It is not 
the constant impression. Sometimes we have to say, " My purposes are broken off; " 
" He hath hedged up my way with thorns." Sometimes what strikes us is the narrow 
limitations within which God puts his answer to our needs and desires. But there is 
no good man's life into which, at some time, the almost overwhelming impression of 
God's bountifulness has not come. He has surprised us with his benedictions ; alto- 
gether gone beyond our expectations and our prayers. The times he has chosen, the 
deliverances he has wrought, the guidance he has given, the provisions he has made, 
have altogether astonished us. His bountiful goodness has called forth our songs. But 
the cases of bountifulness illuminate all his dealings with us. We know what he can 
do, and what he will do sometimes, and so light is thrown on all his dealings. He is 
never short of the bountiful, save for good reasons. He is always as bountiful as he 
can wisely be. It is helpful to read all our life in the light of those times when God, 
as it were, went beyond his usual in blessing. The infinite resources are open to us. 

II, God's bountifulness as othee people's impbession or God's dealing with 
us. St. Paul thought of himself as a monument of grace, on whom other people 
might look, and from whom other people might gain confidence in the grace of God. 
The unusual in our lives sets us in the world's eye, makes us spectacles unto men. 
If the unusual is manifestly God's unusual, God's bountifulness in dealing with us, 
it has a most gracious impression on those around ns. They learn " what almighty 
grace can do." And if ours is a Divine triumph over extraordinary difficulties and 
depressions, it is the assurance to others that God can make his grace abound unto all 
sufficiency. — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 1. — A eryfor deliverance. " The last of the eight psalms to be referred to 
David's persecution by Saul. Supposed to describe his thoughts and feelings when he 
was in the "cave," though whether of AduUam or of Engedi is not clear. It expresses 
the cleaving of the heart to God, the deep sense of loneliness, the cry for deliverance, 
the confidence that that deliverance will call forth the sympathy and the joy of many 
others." 

I. Impobtunatb pbayeb uttered aloud with voice and W0BD8. (Vers. 1, 2.) 
Not mere inward communion with God, but with audible prayer pours out his dis- 
tracting trouble, and lays open before him the burden and the distress of his heart. 
Uttered prayer more soothing and strengthening than mere silent desire, though both 
are effectual with God. 

II. In CUB dabkest, most dangerous times God is well acquainted with the 



PS. oxLin. 1—12.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



SSI 



WHOLE EXTEHT OF oiTB TROUBLB. (Ver. 3.) God, therefore, can listen with the moro 
sympathy to prayers, iiecause he can understand how to estimate the depth and 
meaning of our complaints. This a source of great comfort — that God is not ignorant 
of our circumstances till we inform him of them. His interest is awakened by his 
own knowledge previous to our prayer. 

III. God's all-seeing ete becoqnizes his loneliness and helplessness. (Ver. 
4.) No human being will recognize him, nor afford him any help, tior take any 
sympathetic interest in his affairs. All this is perfectly open to the knowledge of God. 

IV. Despairino of human help, he uroentlt cries to his only Refuob. (Ver. 
5.) Jehovah is his " Kefuge " and " Portion " — the only possession that suffices and 
satisfies him, and guarantees his continuance " in the land of the living." He cannot 
die, he cannot perisli, though abandoned of all human friends and helpers. 

V. His own feebleness and thb superior strenqth of his enemies is another 
PLEA FOB DELIVERANCE. (Ver. 6.) He has the calm assurance that this plea will be 
answered, and the Divine Name glorified. 

VI. His delivbrance will call forth the sympatht and tot of others. (Ver. 
7.) He is not, therefore, so entirely aluue as he once thought; there are other 
righteous persons besides himself whose destiny is interwoven with his own. In this 
numner Qtxl deals bountifully with him.— S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXLin. 



Almost entirely a psalm of eupplication, 
partly general (vers. 1, 7), partly special 
(veis. 2, 8 — 12). Vers. 3—6, however, give 
the grounds upon which the supplicutions 
are made ; vers. S, i describing the psalmist's 
wretched condition ; and vers. 5, 6 his be- 
haviour under his afflictions. Again, there 
ii no reason to doubt the superscription, 
which assigns the psalm to David, Almost 
all the phrases used are found in other 
Davidical psalms. The composition divides 
itself Into two stanzas of equal length (vers. 
1—6, and vers. 7—12). 

Ver. 1. — Hear my prayer, Lord, give 
ear to my supplications (comp. Fss. xxviii. 
2 ; xxxiz. 12 ; liv. 2 : Iv. 1, etc.). In thy 
faithfulness answer me, and in thy right- 
eousness. In tliy faithfulness to thy pro- 
mises, since thou hast promised to hear 
prayer, and in thy mere righteousness, since 
it is right and just that tbon shouldest do 
■o, hearken unto me. 

Ver. 2, — ^And enter not into judgment 
with thy servant. The psalmist, having 
touched the point of abstract justice, shrinks 
&om pressing it. He knows that he is not 
"righteous before God," and tliat his life 
and conduct " cannot endure the severity of 
God's judgment " (Art. XII.). He therefore 
" deprecates a Btrictly retributive treatment " 
(Cheyne). For in thy sight shall no man 
Uvingbe justified (comp. Ps, cxxx. 3; and see 
also Job iv. 17 — 19 ; ix. 2 ; xv. 14 ; xxv. 4). 

Ver. 3. — Por the enemy hath persecuted 



my sonL "The enemy" may be Saul, but 
is more probably an abstract expression — 
for " ray enemies " generally. He hath 
smitten my life down to the ground; or, 
" crushed my life to the ground " — brought 
me, i.e., very low (comp. Ps. xlii. 6). He 
hath made me to dwell in darkness (comp. 
Pa. Ixxxviii. 6). As those <^t have been 
long dead. I have dwelt in a darkness like 
that of Skedl ; i.e. in gloom and unhappinew 
(comp. Lam. iii. 6). 

Ver. 4, — Therefore is my spirit over- 
whelmed within me ; or, " faint within me " 
(see Ps. xlii. 3). lly heart within me is 
desolate (comp. Ps. xL 15). 

Ver. 5. — I remember the days of old. 
Still, in the midst of all my troubles, I do 
not despair — " I remember the days of old " 
— the great things which God has done for 
me in the past (comp. Ps. Ixxvii. 5, 10, 11). 
I meditate on aU thy works ; or, " on all thy 
doings." I muse on the work of thy hands 
(comp. Ps. Ixxvii. 12). 

Ver. 6. — I stretoh forth my hands unto 
thee. These recollections draw me to thee, 
O God, and make me stretch forth my hands 
in prayer to thee (Ps. cxli, 26), and entreat 
thee for succour. Uy soul tbirsteth after 
thee, as a thirsty land. As a parclied and 
withered land seems to look up to heaven 
and long for rain, so does my soul long for 
thee, U Lord, " and tliy refi eohing grace " 
(comp. Ps. xlii. 1). The " pause-ujark," 
" selah," at the end of the verse, at once gives 
time for secret prayer, and makes a division 
of tlie psalm into two parts. 

Ver. 7. — Hear me speedily, Lord. Here 
the direct supplication of ver. 1 is taken up 
and pressed. " Hear me, O Lord ;' and not 



S62 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[pS. CXLIII.l — 12. 



only hear me, but that speedily. It is a 
time for haste" (oomp. Ps. cxli. 1). My 
spirit faUeth; or, " fainteth " (LXX., 
^(Aiire). Hide not thy face from me 
(oomp. PsB. xxvii. 9; Ixix. 17; cii. 2). 
lest I be like unto them that go down into 
the pit (see the comment on Ps. xxviii. 1). 

Ver. 8. — Cause me to hear thy loving- 
Idndness in the morning ; i.e. early, speedily 
(oomp. Pss. xlvi. 5; xc. 11). For in thee 
do I troBt. His utter trust in God gives 
him a claim to be heard and helped. Cause 
me to know the way wherein I should walk ; 
i.e, illumine me, so that I may perceive the 
course which I ought to follow (comp. Ps. 
T. 8, "Make thy way straight before my 
face "). For I lift up my soul unto thee. 
Again, a sort of claim seems to be urged, as 
in clause 2. 

Ver. 9. — ^Deliver me, Lord, from mine 
enemies (comp. Pss. czL 1, 4 ; cxlii. 6). I 
flee unto thee to hide me ; literally, to thee 
I hide tnyielf, but probably witli the mean- 
ing expressed in the Authorized Version. 

Yer. 10. — Teach me to do thy will (comp. 
Pss. XXV. 4, 5 ; oxzxix. 24). For thou art 
»j Ood. Therefore my Guide and Teacher. 



Thy spirit is good ; i.e. gracious and merci- 
ful. Lead me into the land of uprightness; 
rather, along a land of tmoothneai. Some 
critics unite the last two clauses, and trans- 
late, " Let thy good Spirit lead me along a 
land of smootliness" — "conduct me," i.»,, 
over smooth ground, where I need not 
stumble. 

Ver. 11.— Quicken me, Lord, for thy 
Name's sake; i.e. give me fresh spiritual 
life (oomp. Ps. cxix. 25, 37, 50, 88, 93, etc.). 
For thy righteousness' sake bring my sonl 
out of trouble. To show how righteous thoa 
art, i.e. how good and gracious. 

Ver. 12. — ^And of thy mercy out off mine 
enemies. In thy goodness towards me, re- 
move those enemies wliose conduct towards 
me has been described in vers. 3, 4. And 
destroy all them that afflict my souh This 
is David's ordinary (jrayer with respect to 
his enemies, whom he counts as God's ad- 
versaries, and the persecutors of faithful 
Israel (see Pss. v. 10 ; vii. 9 ; x. 15 ; xxviiL 
4, 5; XXXV. 4—6, 8, etc.). For I am thy 
servant. Entitled, therefore, to thy special 
care and protection (comp. Pss. xxviL 9; 
Ixix. 17; IxxxvL 2, 4, 16; oxvi 16, etc). 



HOMILETIOS. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Hm roul'$ appeal to God. The groundwork of the psalm ia that 
of great affliction. The psalmist is in very sore trouble ; the strongest expressions 
an used to convey the idea of complete outward disaster and inward dejection (vers. 
3, 4). There is only one respect in which things could be worse than they are- 
death itself, and the going down into the dark land of forgetfulness (ver. 7). But, as 
in the preceding psalm, his dire extremity is the very occasion for holy trust in the 
almighty power and unfailing righteousness of Jehovah. His refuge is in God. 
Here, indeed, is a strong Rock in which to hide in this dark night of trouble. We 
have — 

I. His reliance on ali, that he knows of God. 1. He remembers what God 
has been to him and has done for him and for others in | last days ; what " doinss," what 
"works," what deliverances he wrought in "the days of old " (ver. 5). " Thou hast 
been my help," etc. (Ps. xxvii. 9). 2. He relies on the known character of God ; his 
loving-kindness (ver. 8); his fnith fulness, his perfect trueness to his word of promise; 
bis righteousness, his constant readiness to rewad those who seek him and serve him, 
and his determination to punish the wicked. These recognized and steadfast attri- 
butes of God are to him a strong security. God cannot be inconsistent with himself. 

II. HiB CONSCIOUSNESS OF INTEGRITY. The writer would not dare to make his 
appeal to the Holy One if he himself were living in sin. He knows well that the man 
who purposes to continue in rebellion against God, or in rejection of his offered mercy, 
has no ground on which to stand (see Pss. Ixvi. 18 ; 1. 16). Not, indeed, that he 
claims absolute inerrancy or perfection ; he knows that such purity is beyond him 
(ver. 2); but at the same time, he is conscious of moral and spiritual integrity ; he is 
God's servant (ver. 12). The purpose ol his heart is toward God and the keeping of 
his commandments. He intends to walk uprightly and liolily before God, to the full 
height of his strenuous endeavour. His God is the Lord, and no other lord shall have 
dominion over him. 

IIL The fulness of his appeal. 1. He prays God to " quicken " him, to reani- 
mate him, to till his soul with courage and with hope, that he may play a brave 



PS. oxLiii. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 863 

aad manly part. 2, He prays for deliverance from his evil estate ; for the confusion 
of his enemies ; for restoration to peace and joy (vers. 9, 11, 12). 8. He prays to 
be led forward in his rectitude, that he may fulfil all God's holy will concerning him 
(ver. 10). We cannot hope to rise higlier than the spirit shown in this devout desire. 
It is riglit to wish and to ask, with all filial deference, for recovery from sickoesg, or 
for rescue from bondage, or for deliverance from anxiety or poverty ; but it is a loftier 
.\oA worthier aspiration to long to be led by the good Spirit of God into " the land of 
uprightness," into a state of full acquiescence with the will of God, into a spiritual 
condition in which the doing or the bearing of the will of God is the supreme aim and 
endeavour of the soul. 

IV. His earkestnesb. (Vers. 6—8.) There is every indication here of great 
earnestness of spirit. His soul thirsts for God's interposition as a parched land for 
water; he cries for a speedy response to his appeal ; he yearns to hear God's loving- 
kindness " in the morning," and " lifts up his soul " unto God. Everything is to the 
earnest. Lukewarmness is offenuive to God, as we learn from the risen Saviour. 
A spasmodic piety, a fitful enthusiasm, will accomplish nothing for ourselves or for 
the world. It is steadfast purpose and sustained devotion that lisea to the high table- 
lands of exalted worth and abounding fruiifulness. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Yen. 1—12. — The cry of the overwhelmed $pirit. I. Its chabaotebistios. 1. Bow 
eamtst it is I The psalmist was not in any light, indifferent, or formal spirit when he 
uttered this prayer. Its intensity is evident all the way through. 2. And believing, 
" la thy faithfulness answer me " (ver. 1). He believed the promises of God, and 
clums their fulfilment, expects that what God has promised he will make good. Such 
expectation is all too rare ; and its rarity accounts for the many unanswered prayen 
over which we mourn. 3. And sincere. " And in thy righteousness " (ver. 1). If 
he had regarded iniquity in his heart, he could not thus have prayed, for he would 
have known that the Lord would not hear him ; but he could appeal to him who was 
the righteous Searcher uf all hearts, that with true heart he prayed. Heuce he could 
appeal to the righteousness of God, because " the righteous Lord loveth righteousness, 
and his countenance doth behold the upright." 4. Eumhle. (Ver. 2.) For whilst he 
could appeal to God to attest bis innocence and sincerity of heart, that did not prove 
him to be faultless in the sight of God. St. Paul said, " I know nothing against 
myself; yet am I not hereby justified." And similar to this is the psalmist's con- 
fession here. He might be, and he was, innocent before men, and sincere in heart 
toward God; but yet there were many a trangression and fault and failiue, the 
remembrance of which made him pray, "Enter not into judgment," etc. (ver. 2), 
Such were the characteristics of this prayer, and should be of all prayer — indeed, must 
be, if our prayers are to avail. 

II. Its complaint. The psalmist tells what his enemies had done against him 
(ver. 3). 1. They had persecuted his soul. He had, no doubt, some outward, present 
persecution in his thought ; but in reading this psalm we may transfer his words to 
those spiritual persecutions which we often have to suffer at the hands of our great 
enemy ; and, thus applied, the whole psalm answers to all too frequent experience of 
the people of God to-day. For the enemy doth by all manner of temptation persecute 
our soul — ^he suggests doubt, he stirs up evil thoughts, he assails our faith, he darkens 
our mind, and in every way seeks to loosen our hold on God. 2. And soine have to 
confess, " He hath smitten my life down to the ground.^ There have been periods in 
the history of God's servants — there were in David's — ^when the Divine life in them 
has been all but non-existent, when they could not pray, nor witness for God, nor 
give him praise, nor render any service of a spiritual kind. They have been terrible 
seasons — the enemy hath come in like a flood, and the overwhelmed ones were unable 
to pray that " the Spirit of the Lord would lift up a standard against him." 3. And 
then, in consequence, there has been the " dwelling in darkness, as those that have been 
long dead." Oh, the darkness of that time 1 it was as the gloom of the grave. The 
■Old that the enemy hath so smitten is conscious of his awl'ul loss ; that the life of 
psAiiUS — in. 2 A 



854 THE BOOK OP PSALMa [ps. oxun. 1— 12. 

God in him is seemingly gone ; and he seems ahandoned to the ntter corrnption of sin 1 
No wonder that his spirit is overwhelmed and his heart desolate (ver. 4). How could 
it be otherwise ? He is simply and utterly miserable. 

III. The coming of belief. 1. God leads him to remember the days of old. To 
hunger after those blessed times when God came to his soul, and was his Helper and 
Deliverer. Full of help are memories like these. 2. 2%e» to " meditate on aM thy 
works." To see the wisdom, power, and love displayed in them, and so to hope that 
for him, too, there should be wrought some gracious work of God. As he thus mused, 
the fire of love and desire and faith would begin to burn, and then his musing thought 
would take form and action ; for : 3. He would stretch forth his hands tmto God. His 
soul was athirst for God, and now forth go his hands in prayer. ,YeB, relief was 
coming ; for there are its near harbingers, everywhere and always. 

IV. The kingdom op heaven taken by foecb. (Vers. 7 — 12.) What a crowd 
and rush of prayers, protestations, cries, and pleadings, these verses contain! One 
after another they come, in hot baste and eagerness, that will take no denial. It is 
a very besiegement of the throne of grace. But the chief burden of all is, not for 
deliverance Irom enemies, but for a closer knowledge of God; the consciousness of his 
favour, the speedy hearing of his loving-kindness; the being made to know the way 
wherein Gx>d would have him walk. Then come prayers that God would teach, would 
lead, would quicken, ami would bring his soul out of trouble. There is prayer for 
deliverance from calamities ; but the great longing is after the doing of God's will, 
and the quickening of his soul in righteousness. Prayer helps him in attaining that sub- 
missiveness of will which is essential to his gaining that unspeakable blessing on which 
his heart is set. And in proportion as a man is taught of God, this is the supreme 
desire of his souL If he gains this, it matters not much whether the outward calamities 
go or stay. If God's face shines upon him, man's may frown as it will. He has heaven 
within him, even though bell be outside of and all around him. What can any 
enemy do unto him, since God is on his side ? He bas won the kingdom of heaven, 
and no man can take it from him. Blessed is any sorrow when such reaction as this 
psalm reveals follows from it I The light aiHiction which was for the moment is now 
working out the " far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." The travail of his 
soul has issued in the glorious birth of the life of the love of God. And this is ever 
God's intent in all our sorrows ; for this he lets the enemy smite our soul down to 
the ground, and make us dwell in darkness. He desires that we should flee unto him 
to hide us. And, blessed be his Kame 1 he ever will; and far more than that will 
he do.— S. 0. 

Ver. 7. — Becoming " like unto them that go dotim into the pit," Such was the 
psalmist's horrible dread, the extreme terror of his soul. 

I. What does this mean ? The dead were they who went down into the pit. 
1. Z%e expression is one of those which mark the intense repulsion with which the 
Old Testament saints regarded death. Listen to David's piteous cry, " Oh, spare me 
that I may recover strength," etc. (Ps. xxxix. ; of. also Pss. Ixxxviii. 1 — 7, 10 — 12 ; 
cxv. 16 — 18; and passim throughout the Old Testament). They regarded the grave 
with feelings of the deepest gloom — as a dark pit, a prison with bars (Job xvii. 16). 
See also Hezekiah's entreaty that he might not die (Isa. xxxviii.). The grave was 
the land of destruction, of darkness, where they could not praise God nor eiijoy his 
favour ; where they would be utterly forgotten ; and whence they should never 
return. Because of its dread associations, our translators have often rendered the 
Hebrew word into our word "hell," as in the well-known passage, "The wicked shall 
be turned into hell, and all," etc. But it is the same word as is used by Jacob when 
he says, " Ye will bring down my grey hairs with sorrow to the grave." The souls 
of the pious Jews shrank from death with an unutterable repulsion ; and hence, when 
the psalmist here would express the extremity of spiritual distress, he describes it as 
becoming " like unto them that go down into the pit." Life and immortality are 
brought to light by the gospel ; but those ancient saints had not that light. Contrast 
St. Paul's courageous " I am ready to be offered up," and the mournful moan of the 
psalmist, " Oh, spare me I " the joy and hope of the gospel with the gloom of the Old 
Testament (c£ Job xir. with John xiv. and the whole of the Kew Testament). 2, 



n. oxLiii. 1—12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 35B 

But, where/ore — so it will at once he ashed — was this hope vnthheld from the psalmists 
and such as they 1 And we reply that probably one reason was that they might learn, 
as they did learn, to put all their trust and find all their delight in God. He iras to 
be everything to them ; their God and their exceeding Joy ; and, when this was so, 
they could leave to him to determine what their future should be. They were to 
have, and to teach us to have, a present salvation, and to trust in God for all the rest. 
And this, in our best moments, is what we do. It is not the thought of the future 
life that most of all influences the true believer, but the present realization of God. 
If be has that, it is well with him; but without that, even the hope of the future life 
waxes dim. '.Vhat the soul of man wants is a salvation here and now; and it is what 
we may have, aud many have, and all should have, and then the soul will be at rest 
as to all the future may bring. And to teach this was, we think, one of the reasons 
why the clear promise of the future life which we enjoy was not given to them. But 
to return to the text, we inquire — 

II. Whence scoh distress of soul ab the text indicates abibes? 1. Som^ 
timu it is owing to the presence of earthly sorrow, and the cruelty of men. Such was 
the case, evidently, with the writer of this psalm. " Man's inhumanity to man " will 
not seldom smite the " soul down to the ground," and make the spirit faint. It has 
done such cruel and cursed work again and again. 2. Belayed answers to prayer. 
How frequently do these psalms show the terrible strain upon the faith of God's people 
which such delayed answers to their prayers has caused (Pss. xxii. 2 ; Ixxxviii. 9, 
and parallels) 1 3. The sense of sin. (See Pss. xxxii., li. ; and the penitential psalms 
generally ; also the publican's prayer, " God be merciful," etc. I) Where no relief 
comes, sometimes, as in the case of Saul and Judas, men have rushed to self-destruc- 
tion. The agony of this sense of sin is to the soul like that of broken bones Co the 
body (Ps. li. 8). Think of what the prodigal's home-journey must have been, what 
bitter thoughts must have filled his mind. The conviction of sin has no comfort in 
itself, though it should lead thereto. 4. And sometimes Qod lets his bdoved ones fail 
into such deep depression. See our blessed Lord in Gethsemane, and in the darkness 
on the cross. He knows what such soul-agony means; in this, as in all points, he has 
been tried like as we are. 

III. Whbbefore is it febmitted ? 1. For the Mai and to the strengthening of 
trust in Qod. See the Syro-phoenician woman — how her faith was tried 1 But she 
stood the test, as the Lord knew she would ; and she rose thereafter and because of 
it to a glorious height of faith, such as even made the Lord himself to marvel, and to 
pronounce on her a benediction which otherwise she would never have gained. Hence 
it is that St. James bids us count it all joy when we fall into such trials. They are 
the opportunity for the soul's winning the high prizes of the kingdom of God ; and 
when God sends to us such trials, he is but entering us for the glorious contest. There- 
fore count it all joy I 2. For the working in us <f a holy hatred of sin. That is the 
reason of the Holy Spirit's convicting work. Burnt children dread the fire; therefore 
God lets sin burn the sinner. 3. For the helping of others. He who endures trial 
witnesses for God as none other can. He declares in the face of an unbelieving world 
—not to say Church — that God's grace is sufiBcient, and that therewith he can do and 
bear all things. That testimony is needed, and is fruitful of blessing. It was thus 
that always and everywhere the blood of the martyrs has been the seed of the 
Church. What heart-cheer it brings to tempted yet timid souls 1 See to it that w» 
thus witness for God. It was thus our Lord witnessed. 

IV. Whbscb belief C0ME& " Hide not thy face from me " — so the psalmist prays, 
and thus plainly declares that what would certainly bring him relief would be the face 
of God shining upon him. When God thus blesses his servants, then it is that he 
gives them quietness, and none then ran make trouble (Job xxziv. 29) ; for then, man 
may be as cruel as he will, the specific answers to our prayers may be delayed as long 
as God sees fit, the sense of sin will be swallowed up in the certainty of God's pardon- 
ing love, and we are able to say, " Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him ! " 

Conclusion. 1. Cwn Ood's face shine upon us t Not if we are refusing to let go 
our hold of sin. If we will not renounce that, God's face cannot shine upon us. 
Therefore, be now, at once, reconciled to God. 2. Will it shine upon us * Yes, it 
ever does ; though, as with the sun, clouds may obscure its brightness. We patiently 



356 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [w. oxliii. 1-12. 

wait till the doudt dear. That is what the believer has to do — " wait patiently for 
him."— S.O. 

Ver. 8. — " 2%« way wherein I should walk." The tone and language of this psalm 
lend colour to th« general belief that it was written by David, and, perhaps, as the 
LXX. adds, when he was a fugitive from before the rebellion of Absalom. He bad 
very great need of help. He could not plead that he had done no wrong ; on the con- 
trary, he virtually confesses that he has (ver. 2). But his present distress was very 
great ; and we can well believe that he turned to his accustomed arms of prayer and 
supplication. His prayers, however, do not seem to have, thus far, much aided him ; 
he is still in desperate straits — his spirit overwhelmed, his heart desolate ; he was 
nigh to becoming " like them that go down into the pit." And amongst his other 
troubles, there was this one — that he was in utter perplexity as to the way he should 
take. He did not know what that way was ; and hence he prays, as in this eighth 
verse. But he feels that if only it were well with his soul, if the life of God there 
could but be revived, then most of his difficulties would clear away. Now, this per- 
plexity of the psalmist teaches us — 

I. There is a way in which men should walk. 1. There are some wayi in 
which a man cannot walk ; as e.g. the way which would reverse the past, which would 
undo or alter that which is past. How much we should like to be able to do this I But 
it is impossible. What is done cannot be undone: even Qod cannot make that not to 
be which has been. Nor can we walk so as to retrace our steps. We cannot put back 
the clock of life, so as to recall the years that are gone. Forward our path lies ; back- 
ward we cannot go. What urgency this fact gives to the Preacher's charge, " What- 
soever thy baud findeth to do, do it with thy might ; for," etc. (Eccles. is. 10) 1 But : 2. 
There are some along which we must walk. Those which lead to the grave and to the 
judgment- seat of God. If death did end all, even then the squanderings of life's 
opportunities would be miserable folly and grievous wrong ; but when we read and 
know that " after death the judgment," then the seriousnesB and responsibility of life 
become vastly greater — so great that we cannot over-estimate them. And there is 
yet another path in which we must walk — that which leads to the formation and fixing 
of our character. We are for ever building up the fabric of character — building in the 
wood, hay, stubble, or the gold, silver, and precious stones. We are forming habits 
which are the garment of the soul. No day leaves us without having added its contri- 
bution to the final character we shall bear. But : 3. We have to speak of the way in 
which we should walk — the way we should deliberately choose and decisively prefer 
and cleave to, as the only right way. There can be no doubt of there being such a 
way (see Isa. xlv. 6). There is a life- plan for each of us, a definite will of God. 
(1) Nature attests this. There, everything from the minutest atom up to the most 
magnificent star, the drop of water as well as the wide ocean, have each and all of 
them their course marked out, the way they are to take. Nothing is left to chance or 
haphazard. Is it likely, then, that man, the highest creation of God, should be sent 
purposeless and without definite course in the world ? (2) And experience and obser- 
vation confirm this belief. See the history of Joseph (Gen. xlv. 5—8). And of Moses 
and many more. We can see how God ordered their lives, and fitted them for the 
work he had for them to do. And for us there is no joy greater than to know that we 
are in the way God appoints. All difficulties and sorrows of the way can be borne 
if we know we are where God would have us be. 4. But man can refuse to walk 
in this way. How often he does refuse, and turn aside to his own self-chosen 
wayl It seems right to him, but it ends miserably. It must do so. How terrible 
is this power of choice! Happy the man who has said to God, "Choose thou 
forme"! 

II. This way is often difficult to discoveb. Who does not know that very 
often the doing of what is right is far less difficult than the discovering of what the 
right is ? Many causes may contribute to this difficulty. It may be part of God's 
discipline for us. Earthly sorrow and trouble may bewilder. The faculty of deal 
seeing in such cases may not be ours. Self-will may pervert judgment. 

III. God causes men to know this way. By angels, visions, pillar of cloud and 
fire, by dreams, by Urim and Thummim, — so in ancient days he guided his people. 



PS. oxuii. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 867 

And he guides them now : his Word, his pro^dence, his Spirit, acting on our mlnda, 
reveal his will. 
IV. Hb ooeb this fob those who lift up theib boul urto hu. — S.0> 

Yer. 9. — " J flee unto thee to hide me." Thus does the psalmist set forth the aool's 
swift flight to its sure shelter in God. The man who wrote this psalm was evidently 
one who had heen greatly tried ; hut when we see the blessed help that has come to 
myriad souls through the records of hig experiences, we are taught thereby one reason 
at least for the trials of the people of God. Now, here— 

L We have a goodly example. That in all our troubles we should flee to God 
to hide us. Now, in order to this : 1. We must see our need of such shelter. We shah 
never do as did the psalmist, unless, like him, we see and feel the great danger we 
are in. Our text is the language of one who realizes his peril. This, in regard to 
things of the soul, is what so many fail to do. They cannot he got to believe that 
there is any need wherefore they should trouble themselves. Hence, as in the days of 
Noah, men went on in their wonted ways, although solemnly and repeatedly warned, 
until the Flood came and swept them all away. And thus indifferent and unbelieving 
the mass of men are still. But he who is awakened by God's grace to the reality of 
things will clearly see his need of shelter from the guilt of his sin, from its terrible 
power, and from the cruel oppression of this world's calamities and sorrows. He sees 
this, and therefore says, "I flee unto," etc. 2. Be sees also his own weahness. He 
would not flee if he could fight with any hope of success ; or if he knew how to protect 
himself from the evils which he fears, or had resources of which he could avail himself. 
But it is because he knows all this is impossible to him, therefore he flees unto God. 
3. He has implicit and unlimited confidence in Ood. Hr believed that God was both 
able and willing to save him, and that God would be well pleased that he should flee 
to him, which he might do if he would. He felt that all would be well with him 
were he once sheltered within the cleft of the Book, hidden in the secret place of the 
Most High. He was quite sure that to betake himself there was his truest wisdom, 
even as it was his settled resolve. 4. He realizes that his need is urgent. "I flee unto 
thee," etc. No time was to l>e lost ; he might not delay having recourse to God. 
" The Name of the Lord is a strong tower : the righteous runneth into it, and is safe." 
So would he run into the strong shelter of God. S. His trust in Ood is real and 
active. Thousands of men talk of flnding refuge in God, but they never set out to 
find it. But the psalmist's religion was a reality to him ; he got real Messing and 
help out of it ; he had evidently often found a sure retreat and hiding-place from all 
evil in God. Ah I how much we lose by not doing the things that we say I by letting 
professions serve instead of practice I This man actually fled away to God. 

IL The snaoESTED and badlt too common contrast. Every word in the text 
reminds us of the different conduct which is so commonly seen. For example : L 
Many will recommend others to flee unto Qod ; but they never do so themselves. They 
cannot say, " /flee unto thee." This is why so many sermons are so ineffectual. The 
people who hear them feel that the preacher knows nothing experimentally of what 
he is talking about. 2. Or, if they do not refuse to go, their going is very slow. There 
is all too little of fleeing unto God. We take things far too easy for that. John the 
Baptist might preach, " Flee from the wrath to come 1 " but how few heeded what he 
said I And so it is still. Men do not believe that there is any need to escape as for their 
life ; and hence, with all leisure, and often listlessness, they proceed in regard to their 
salvation. 3. And many when in troiMe flee away from, rather than unto, Qod. 
They plunge into business, into pleasure, into sin ; they harden themselves in unbelief : 
they set themselves deflantly against God. 4. Others flee to all manner of suhstitutei 
for Ood. " Take away her battlements ; they are not the Lord's I " so said tht 
Prophet Jeremiah, concerning the many refuges of lies behind which so many of his 
countrymen were thinking that they would find shelter. And so still, how many are 
thinking that in priests and sacraments, in Churches and Creeds, in religious rites and 
observances, they shall find help, when such help is in God alone I 5. And many will 
seek from Ood, not deliverance from spiritual evil, hut rather comfort in it. They ilc 
not mind the sin so much as its discomfort, and they want God to take that away. 
If he will do that, they will not mind the evil thing itself. All they want is comfort 



368 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. cxmii. 1— 12. 

But God's will and way is to sever us from our sin, and to place us where it cannot 
reach us. This should be our desire, as it was his who wrote this psalm. Then alone 
are we blessed. 

in, OuB SUPREME WISDOM. For to do as is here said is nothing less; we then are 
wise unto salvation. For : 1. Ood is honoured when we thus flee to him. How did 
the king in the parable feel when he bad made the great supper, and all things were 
ready, but the invited guests began with one consent to make excuse ? And God has 
provided for all our need. Will he not feel dishonoured if we refuse, but glorified if 
we take what he has offered ? 2. And our fellow-men will he encouraged to follow our 
example, " No man liveth unto himself." If any one travel truly the road to heaven, 
he will not want for companionship. 3. We ourselves shall be hlessed indeed. Having 
fled unto God to hide him — guilt, sin, sorrow, death, are powerless to really harm him 
even now ; and soon they will be unable to reach him at all. He dwells " in the secret 
place of the Most High, and abides under," etc. — S. C. 

Ver. 1, — Man's hope in prayer lies in what Ood is. Bighteousness is, from one 
point of view, that side of Divine justice which is turned towards good men ; hence it 
comes to mean " beneficence." There is some good reason for associating this psalm 
with the experiences of David in the time of Absalom's rebellion. Delitzsch says, 
" The psalms of this time of persecution are distinguished from those of the persecution 
by Saul, by the deep melancholy into which the mourning of the dethroned king was 
turned by blending with the penitential sorrowfulness of one conscious of his own 
guilt." " It is to God's own character that the appeal is made. It is there first, and 
not in his own misery, that the sinner finds the great argument why his prayer should 
be answered." " Faithful and just to forgive us our sins " (1 John i. 9). The relation 
between the two terms "faithfulness" and "righteousness" may be thus indicated : 
Faithfulness is God's strict keeping of all those covenant terms to which he has pledged 
himself. Bighteousness is his vindication of the oppressed, as is witnessed both by 
history and by experience. 

I, Man's hope based on what God has done cannot suffice. Because man 
must take into account all that God bas done, and then he is sure to be bewildered. 
If a man takes out all the manifestly mighty and apparently kind things that God 
has done, and attempts to base his hope in prayer on them, he is always in danger of 
having his foundations destroyed by some one who will remind him of things God has 
done which seem strani^e and cannot be explained. It is not that God is ever other 
than himself. It is that man cannot safely read the ineaaing of all God does ; and some 
of his doings excite in some men doubt and mi^trust rather than confidence. 

II. Man's hope based on what God is will always suffice. It is true that 
we can only know what God is by what he says and what he does. But everything 
depends on our willingness to let these things teach us God himself — teach us what he 
is. The point may be illustrated by our relations with our fellow-men. In whom is 
our confidence fully placed ? In those of whom we only know what they have done? 
Nay, it is reserved for those whom we know personally, whose characters have made 
a profound impression on us. We trust God fully only when we know him worthily. 
— B.T. 

Ver. 2. — Prayer cannot le hased on man's rights. Tlie prayer of a being who had 
kept his rights can be. We are able to conceive that the prayers of the Lord Jesus 
Christ were acceptable to God when presented on the ground of his own right to be 
heard. He never prayed in any other name than his own. 

I. Man has, in a sense, lost his eights. It is necessary to deal with this point 
carefully. Things are virtually lost when they are undervalued, put aside, and unused. 
They remain, but are as treasures left in the lumber-room, while the house is filled 
with other interests. Man has rights in Go i, riglits of prayer, by virtue of his very 
being and primary lelatious with God. And these he can never absolutely lose. 
They aie part of him — part of his necessary being. But he may undervalue them, 
and put them out of consideration, so that tliey may be virtually lost. He has, tiiere- 
fore, as a practical fact, no righis to plead in prayer. He cannot plead his creation; for 
he has come to neglect or defy his Creator, lie i aiiuut plead his suuship; fur he is not 



n. 0X1,111. 1—12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 359 

offering the oberiience of a 8on. He cannot plead the Divine promises; for he is not 
meeting the conditions on which the promises depend. 

II. Mak has, in fact, put his wrongs in place op his eights. And man's 
wrong is his wilfulness. The dependent being has tried to force himself into inde- 
pendence. The son has become a self-willed prodigal. And now, if man wants to 
pray, he cannot do it without carrying his wrong into the presence of God; and, 
whether he knows it or not, that wrong is the plea which alone God can hear. The 
thoughtful man feels this ; it is the fact for every man. " If I regard iniquity in my 
heart, the Lord will not hear me." God would hear a man's prayers if the man had 
his rights. He cannot hear when a man only brings his wrongs. 

III. Man must, in obdeb to pray acobptablt, have his bights restobbd to 
him. That is, restored to active power and use. It is an important and suggestive 
aspect of the redemptive work of Christ, that it is the mastery of man's self-willed 
wrong, and the recovery, into active power, of man's natural rights. Christ is making 
men what God meant them to be, and what he is; and such men may base prayer on 
their rights.— E. T. 

Ver. 4w — Our worst trials are in the sphere of feeling, " Is desolate ; " or, is full of 
amazement; astonies itself; seeks to comprehend the mystery of its sufferings, and 
is ever beaten back upon itself in its perplexity ; is dispirited. " How poor a judg- 
ment can be formed of a man's state from the considerations of comfort only 1 " There 
are trials which are wholly kept in the physical sphere. There are aches and pains of 
body, and disabilities of bodily organs, which have no direct connection with sin, and 
so no bitterness through witnessing conscience ; and which arouse no feeling save the 
simple feeling of enduring. There are trials which have no relation to the outer world 
of circumstances ; they belong wholly to the inner world of feeling. 

I. Teials that keep in the bodily sphebes have many beliefs. Especially 
may be noticed those that come by sympathy. Others can understand and estimate 
these trials. The comfortings they present are kin with the trials. There is no 
secrecy about these trials ; they who suffer under them need not be lonely. And of 
God it can be said, " He knoweth our frame," and can be in closest sympathy with us. 
A grief that we can tell to another is not our worst grief. 

II. Trials that get into the sphebe of feeling have few beliefs. So 
mysterious is human nature; so complex are the relations of body and mind; so 
strangely possible is it for a man to live an interior life distinct from bodily conditions 
and relations, — that it is possible for a man to have trials wholly in the sphere of feeling. 
And these are the worst trials, because for them we can get little or no human sym- 
pathy. They put us apart from our fellow-men in loneliness. Our Lord suffered 
bodily on the cross ; but the sufferings in feeling were his real sufferings. Yet even 
in these worst trials we are not separated from God. Indeed, as these belong to the 
spirit-region, they belong more especially to the sphere in which God works most 
freely. When the " heart " is desolate, there is the more need for its filling and com- 
forting with that sense of God which may be so fully realized. — B. T. 

Vers. 6, 6. — Ood our first Hope and owr Last. The hunger and thirst after 
righteousness is ultimately a thirst fur Gx)d. "Observe how he binds himself to God 
alone, cuts off every other hope from his soul, and, in short, makes his very need a 
chariot wherewith to mount up to God." "I remember the days of old; " "I spread 
forth my hands unto thee." 

I. God always has been our Hope. A good man is here speaking in the name 
of good men. They can never look back over life, and estimate its scenes of trial and 
strain, without clearly seeing that their hope was in God, and that God had ever met 
and satisfied their hope. One thing man has to learn over and over again in the 
experience of life. It is the un trustworthiness of things and people, and the safe 
ibundation of hope that a man has in God. It is not usually long after a man enters 
on what may be called a personal experience that he discovers there is no hope to be 
placed in man. One of the most humiliating and depressing experiences of life is 
finding our most trusted friend fail us in the hour of need. Then we learn that God 
is our first and only Hope. Then God does not fa'l. We may trust him. We find 



360 THE BOOK OF PSALMS, [ps. oxtin. 1—12. 

him the "Strength of our heart and our Portion for ever." That experience ii repeated 
again and again as life unfolds. 

IL God always will be oub Hope. Estimate aright the painful experiences 
through which we may now be passing; times when our life-erections seem to lie in 
ruins ahout us ; times when trusted friends fail us ; times when the outlook before us 
is dark ; times when the sense of loneliness oppresses us, we lo»k to the right hand and 
to the left, but there is no helper ; — they are all times in which we are recovering and 
re-establishing our hope in G-od. It is well to remember that we always have that. 
The soul's deep rest is in him who is " the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever ; " 
always the " Friend of the friendless and the faint." Life rightly viewed is a liberating 
us from every bond that would keep us from restful, strengthening hope in Ood. 
— R. T. 

Ver. S,r—The fear of not doing right in times of stress. The people of Israel, on 
coming to the banks of the Jordan, and facing a time of great strain and difSculty, 
were called to stop and consider, and estimate their needs, and their sources of strength. 
They were reminded, " Ye have not passed this way heretofore." They were even 
more forcibly reminded, " The living God is among you." If they responded aright to 
this call, they would pray the prayer of this text, " Cause me to know the way wherein 
I should walk." 

I. Tbk bpikit wb otjght evbbt day to CHEBI8H. A man's heart is revealed in 
every true prayer that he offers. This prayer shows (1) a great sense of Qod'a nearness 
and personal interest. Contrast the renewed man's cherished ideas of God, and God's 
relations, with those of the unrenewed man. (2) A true humility under Gtod's mightj 
hand ; not merely the impression that God is great, but the feeling, too, that we are 
wholly dependent on him. (3) A happy trusting of all our interests to God's care. 
Power and wisdom do not satisfy reliant, trustful hearts. They find rest only in 
personal affection, interest, and service. Tenderly beautiful are the words, "Thou 
knowest, Lord 1 " when upon the humble, quiet-minded, loving Christian's lips. 

n. The peatbb we ought daily to offeb. Offer each day anew, and as freshly 
as if then offered for the first time. The promise comes to us anew every morning', 
" As thy day so shall thy strength be." 1. Cause me to see the way. We always walk 
In twilight ; sometimes in utter darkness. " In thy light we shall see light." 2. Cause 
me to choose the way. Because even when we know the right, we will not accept it 
or do it; so we want the Divine strength in our will and decisions. 3. Cause me to 
understand the claims of the way. For it must be full of duties and responsibilities. 
He is the truly happy man who can see clearly what God's work for him is, chooses it 
for himself, is satisfied with it, and wants to do it. 4. Cause me to meet the claims of 
the way. We need grace first in order to know the right way, and then grace to act 
aright in the way. So this prayer cover" the whole field of the religious life. — B. T. 

Ver. 9. — Fleeing from God : fleeing to Ood. Literally, " Unto thee have I hidden 
myself; " or, " my sorrow." 

i. What is eevbalbd by the mood op mind that flees feom God. That 
mood is suggested by the experience of Adam, who hid himself from the presence of 
the Lord, when the holy voice was heard in the garden, when the evening breeze 
was felt. 1. A mood of dissatisfaction with self is revealed. There is a good sense in 
which a man may be at peace with himself — satisfied with himself; feeling no abrupt 
division between his doing and his sense of right doing. In that state the man loves 
the thought of God, and cherishes the sense of his nearness. God is kin with him. 
If a man is (iissatisfied with himself, not sure of his own rightness, that man will get 
away from God, put away the thought of him. 2. A mood of fear is revealed. A 
man knows how much he is dependent on God, and how closely he is related to God ; 
if he wants to get away from God, he must have some reason to fear what those Divine 
relations must involve. The fear is based on either (1) taking up wrong thoughts of 
God ; or (2) conduct which must offend God. Fear, as alarm that compels a man to 
hide, reveals cherished sin as exciting fear. (3) Sometime.*! it reveals an iudependence 
which persists in doing without God. This is the mood which is most hopeless. The 
man is satisfied with himself on wrong grounds. 



13. oxLiii.l— 12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 861 

II. What m revealed by the mood of mind that flees to God. 1. A right 
apprehension of God. Wholly consistent with reverent thought of God is a restful 
confidence in him. No man apprehends God aright who only knows him as good ; 
he must know that he is good to him. His knowing this is seen in his fleeing to hide 
in him. 2. A right apprehension of self. This involves cherished assurance of 
dependence, and absence of all desire to be other than dependent. Only to the depen- 
dent soul can God ever reveal himself. 3. A full conSdence of safety in the defenrc 
of God. That full confidence involves the assurance of safety from perilous self as 
well as from treacherous foes. — B. T. 

Vers. 11, 12. — Vindications left with, Qod, "Whatever of human frailty may 
attach to the desire of vengeance, yet the fact remains that to smite the oppressor of 
righteousness is a part of ' the goodness ' of God." " It is worthy of observation that 
the psalmist pleads God's righteousness as the foundation on which he bases his suppli- 
cation for the deliverance of his soul out of trouble ; and God's loving-kindness or 
mercy as that on which he grounds his prayer, or his conviction, that God will destroy 
his enemies." 

I. What a man may " do with his enemies. Submit and suffer ; or oppose and 
suffer. A man may take dealing with his enemies into his own hands ; and spend his 
life in seeking opportunities for crushing them and avenging himself. But then one 
of two things will happen. (1) He may fail, and bring ruin upon himself by his 
attempts. Or (2) he may succeed, liut only at the cost of his own moral ruin ; for he 
t'atally injures his own character by cherishing hateful, revengeful feeling through 
ihe long years. Can a man ever safely avenge himself? The answer is an emphatic 
No. He cannot do it wisely. He cannot help injuring himself in the doing. " Dearly 
beloved, avenge not yourselves." 

II. What a man had betteb do with his enemies. Leave them with God. 
But that may involve keeping the slur upon our reputation. Never mind, God can 
vindicate us in his own time and way. His own approval of us is the pledge that 
everybody else will approve of us sooner or later. " Vengeance is mine ; I will repay, 
saith the Lord." We may always be sure of two things. (1) In the economy of 
life punishment works out for the wrong-doer; and (2) God will surely see that the 
outworking is not interfered with. But leaving our enemies with God means praying 
to God cAout them. Not praying to God against them. Not telling God what we 
wish him to do with them. Only commending them to his consideration in such a 
way that we shall be wholly relieved of the burden of dealing with them. — R. T. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — A complaint and a prayer. This the last of the penitential psalms. 
The authorship and occasion of it uncertain. Pervaded by a deep tone of sorrow and 
anguish and a deep sense of sin. Roughly divided, theirs* part (vers. 1—6) contains 
the complaint ; and the sec<ynd (vers. 7 — 12), the prayer founded on that complaint. 

I. The complaint. 1. Eis enemies overwhelmed with a sense of desolation. (Vers. 
3, 4.) " His life was smitten down ; " he dwelt as in the darkness of death ; his 
heart was desolate. No friend was left ; no protection from the cruel injustice of ' 
men. He was as if forsaken of God. All this was the means of revealing the sinful- 
ness and misery of his own heart. 2. The contrast between his past and present 
experience. (Ver. 5.) This embittered his anguish and added to the sense of his 
desolation. 3. ffe stands as one imploring help. (Ver. 6.) But to whom, as yet, help 
has not come. As parched land thirsts for rain, so he pants for the help of God. 

II. The prayer. The petitions in vers. 7 — 12 may be thus grouped : 1. Prayer 
for speedy loving-kindness and direction. (Vers. 7, 8.) 2. For deliverance from 
enemies and fuller knowledge of God's will. (Vers. 9, 10.) And for power to obey 
that will when thus made known. 3. For new life and deliverance from the sufferings 
caused by his enemies. (Vers. 11, 12.) A new internal and external life — a complete 
change. 4. The ground of the several petitions is the personal relation of thepstdmist 
to Ood. " Thou art my God ;" " In thee have I trusted ; " "I am thy servant ; " etc. 
Man is God's child. These the strongest appeals that could he made. — S. 



362 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. cxiiiv. 1 — 15. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXLIV. 



A PSALM in which praise and piayer are 
commingled. Almost certainly Davidic: 
1. From the title. 2. From the style. 
3. From the way in which David is men- 
tioned in ver. 10 (comp. Pss. IxL 6; Ixiii. 
II ; and especially zviii. 50). 

Ver. 1. — ^Blessed be the Lord my strength ; 
or, "my rock" (comp. Pss. xviii. 2, 46; 
zxzi. 3 ; Izii 7, etc.). Which teacheth my 
hands to war, and my fingers to fight (comp. 
Pi. zviii. 34). 

Yer. 2, — Ily goodness, and my fortress; 
my high tower, and my deliverer ; my shield, 
and he in whom I trust. The general re- 
semblance to Ps. zviii 2 is striking, but 
there are peculiar and original touches 
which indicate the author, not the copyist. 
For instance, the expression, "my good- 
ness," occurs nowhere else. Who subduetii 
my people under me. Another reading 
gives, " Who subduetb peoples under me." 
Either reading suits the circumstances of 
David, who had to subdue a great portion 
of his own people under him (2 Sam. ii. 8 — 
31 ; iii. 6 — 21), and also conquered many 
foreign nations (2 Sam. viii. 1 — 14). 

Ver. 3. — Lord, what is man, that thou 
takest knowledge of him! (comp. Job vii. 
17, 18; Pb. viii. 4). Or the sou of man, 
that thou makest account of him ! It en- 
hances our estimate of God's goodness to 
consider the insignificance and uuworthiness 
of the creatures on whom he bestows it. 

Ver. 4. — Man is like to vanity ; or, " to a 
breath " (comp. Pss. xxxix. 6 ; Ixii. 9). His 
days are as a shadow that passeth away (see 
Pss. cii. 11 ; cix. 23). And yet God has 
regard to this weak creature ot an hour. 

Ver. 5. — Bow thy heavens, Lord, and 
come down. The strain clianges. From 
praise ot God's loviug-kiudness and might, 
the psalmist proceeds to invoke his aid. 
Taking liis metaphors from Ps. xviii. 9, 
" Bow thy heavens, Lord," he says, " and 
come down " to earth — appear in thy might, 
to the discomfiture of thy enemies and the 
relief of thy faithful ones. Touch the moun- 
tains, and they shall smoke. Do as thou 
wert pleased to do at Sinai, when thou 
Bhowedst thyself — " Touch the mountains, 
aud let a smoke go up from them " (see 
Exod. xix. l(j, 18; Deut iv. 11; Ps. xviii. 
7 — 14) — a consuming fire, tliat shall burn 
up the ungodly. 

Ver. 6. — Cast forth lightning, and seatter 
them: shoot out thine arrows, and destroy 
them (comp. Ps. xviii. 14). 



Yer. 7. — Bend thine hand from above; lite- 
rally, reach out thy handt from on high. 
Bid me ; rather, rescue me. And deliver ma 
out of great waters. "Great waters," or 
"deep waters," is a common metaphor in 
the Psalms for serious peril. David's peril 
at this time was from the hand of strange 
ohildren ; literally, sons of ibrangen ; Le. 
foreign foes. 

Ver. 8. — Whose mouth speaketh vanity; 
rather, fraud (com^. Ps. zviii. 45). A 
feigned submission of some foreign enemy 
is probably glanced at. And their right 
hand is a right hand of falsehood. The 
right hand was lifted up in the taking of 
a solemn oalh (see Ezek. zz. IS). 

Ver. 9.— I will sing a new song unto thee, 
Ood. Another change of strain. The 
psalmist returns to his original theme of the 
praise of God (see vers. 1, 2), and promises 
a "new song," as in Ps. xl. 3. Upon a 
psaltery and an instrument of ten strings 
vnll I sing praises unto thee ; rather, upon 
a psaltery of ten strings (see the Bevised 
Version, and comp. Ps. xzxiiL 2). Assyrian 
harps had commonly, in the earlier ages, 
either eight, nine, or ten strings (' Ancient 
Monaroliies,' vol. 1. p. 530, 2nd edit.). 

Ver. 10. — It is he that giveth salvation 
unto kings,' There iias always been a be- 
liet, especially in the East, that "a divinity 
doth hedge a king." Saul himself was 
regarded by David as sacrosanct, aud to kill 
him, even at bis own request, was a sacrilege 
(2 Sam. i. 14-16). Who deUvereth David 
his servant from the hurtful sword. David 
speaks of himself by name, not only here, 
but in Ps. xviii. ."iO ; 2 Sam. vii. 26. 

Ver. II. — Bid me, and deliver me from 
the hand of strange children, whose mouth 
speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a 
right hand of falsehood (see above, vers. 7, 
8). Tne passage is made a refrain, to ter- 
minate stanzas 2 and 3. 

Ver. 12. — That our sons may be as plants. 
The stanza which these words introduce is 
a very remarkable one, having nothing at 
all corresponding to it in the rest of the 
Psalter. It lias been thought by some to be 
an antique document, quoted by the writer 
of the psalm, as suited for a festal occasion. 
Our translation makes it a picture of the 
condition to which the writer hopes that 
Israel may one day come ; but the best 
recent critics see in it a description of 
Israel's actual condition in the writer's day. 
Professor Clieyne translates, " Because our 
sons are as plants ; " and Dr. Kay, " What 
time our sons are us plants." Gvowa up in 
their youth ; literally, groum large. The 
sons are uumpared to ornamental trees oi 



PS. OXLIV. 1 — 15.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



S63 



Blirubs, growing outside a building. That 
our daughters may be as cornor-stones, 
polislied (or, "carved") after the similitude 
of a palaoe. Tlie daugliters are like oarrod 
pillars, lighting up the angular recesses of 
the structure. 

Ver. 13. — That our gamers may be full, 
affording all manner of store; or, "while 
our garners are full," etc. That our sheep 
may bring forth ; rather, and our sheep bring 
forth. Thousands and ten thousands in our 
streets ; rather, in our fields. Khuttdth 
(rtxin) is rendered " fields " by our trans- 
lators in Job V. 10 and Prov. viii. 26. 

Ver. 14. — ^That ooi oxen may be strong 



to labour ; rather, and our oxen are heavily 
laden. A sign that an abundant harvest is 
being gathered in. That there be no break- 
ing in, nor going out ; literally, and there is 
no breach and no removal; i.e. no breach 
made in our walls, and no removal of our 
population into captivity. That there be 
no complaining in our streets ; rather, and 
no wailing in our streets. Here the descrip- 
tion of a happy time ends, and a burst of 
congratulation follows (see the next verse). 
Ver. 15. — Happy is that people, that is in 
such a case ! yea, happy is that people, 
whose God is the Lord ! The cause of Israel's 
prosperity is their faithfulness to Jehovah. 



HOMILETICa 

Vers, 1 — ^16. — National piety and prosperity. The latter part of this psalm seems 
hardly to belong to the former ; but looking at it in the light of the last verses, we 
regard it as an utterance which has in view, from first to last, the well-being of the 
nation. Thus considered, we have — 

I. The one true bouece op national seoubitt. (Vers. 1, 2, 10.) The writer 
is presumably David. He takes the position of a leader, of a warrior-king. And 
though we do not look upon war as the principal activity of nations, we must remember 
the times to which the psalm belongs, and must take into account the fact that national 
independence and prosperity were then determined by the sword. We need not be 
surprised or shocked that the psalmist thanks God for teaching him to be a successful 
soldier ; that he calls God " his Strength, his Goodness, his Portress," etc., in this 
connection. We, too, may thank God heartily for the great soldiers who achieved or 
preserved our national independence ; for the courage and the patriotism which made 
us secure from all assault from without, and from all attempts to infringe liberty 
within our borders. We pray for " peace in our time ; " we work and strive (if needful) 
for the maintenance of peace ; we may be prepared to make some sacrifices for peace ; 
but we shall not shrink from asking God to " go forth with our armies " when they 
defend our liberty ; nor will we fail to ascribe their victories to him who is our Strength 
and Fortress, as he was Israel's under David and Hezekiah. 

II. The constituents of national prosperity. Some of these are mentioned 
here. Let it be assumed that there is perfect security; that there is no danger of any 
breach being made in the wall of the city, or any crossing the border of the country — no 
" breaking in ; " nor yet of any being led forth into captivity or exile — no " going out." 
Then there will be, or should be : 1. Industrial activity, with its full reward (vers. 13, 
14). Agricultural and pastoral pursuits are here mentioned; but, while including 
them, we naturally think of manufactures, of trade, of commerce, of mining— of all those 
fields of labour and sources of wealth which are familiar to ns. The wise king (ver. 10), 
the wise government, will give its first concern to the promotion'of all kinds of activity, 
in which every one of its citizens may have his share. 2. The peaceful home. (Ver. 12.) 
That country^ whatever be its pastoral or mineral wealth, is poor indeed whose sons and 
daughters are not growing up in health, in wisdom, in virtue, in piety. However full 
the garners, or well stocked the fields, the great question is that of the home-life and 
the character of the young. We want our sons to be as plants or trees — strong, living, 
fruit-bearing, with power of growth, obedient to the laws of Heaven ; and our daughters 
to be as " corner pillars " — fair with the beauty of holiness and kindliness, helping to 
sustain, useful in the house in which they dwell. Where the children and the young 
people are declining, there the country is on its downward course ; but where they are 
pure and beautiful and strong, there the country is secure, and its future is assured. 
3. True, acceptabh worship. " Whose God is the Lord " (ver. 15). The service of 
God is not only the source of national prosperity ; it is an integral and important part 



364 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. cxlit. 1—15, 

of it. Then are the activities of a people most worthily employed, and then is its 
happiness of the best and truest order — when its citizens are engaged in worshipping 
the living God, in learning of the great Teacher, in communicating his holy will to the 
children in the home and in the school. 4. Happiness. (Ver. 15.) 

III. The WAT TO secure it. (Vers. 1, 5.) Praise and prayer. " Bless the Lord," 
etc. " Buw thy heavens and come down." As tlie king blesses God and prays for his 
presence, so also must the people. The recognition by all of the hand of God in past 
and present mercies, and the continual prayer for future blessing, — this is the condition 
of Divine favour and the way to permanent enlargement. 

IV. OtJB INSIGNIFICANCE NO BAR TO OUR PRAYER OR OUR HOPE. (Vers. 3, 4.) 

" Will God in very deed dwell upon the earth ? " Will he " bow the heavens and 
come down "? Will he take note of us on this small earth? Will he care about one 
section, one nation, on its surface? Is not frail man, who passes away like a flitting 
shadow, beneath his regard ? The answer to that natural and repeated question is in 
the historical fact of the manifestation at Sinai; it is also in the much less imposing 
but immeasurably more affecting and convincing fact of the birth at Bethlehem. 
Then God came to visit us, to dwell with us, to show us how much he cared for us, to 
fill our hearts with the truth that not only every nation, but every human soul, is 
de«r to the Father in heaven. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vera. 1 — 15. — What the goodness of Ood does for me and in me. This psalm to a 
string of quotations, mostly from Fs. xviii., as any reference Bible will show ; and as 
that psalm is almost undisputedly one of David's composition, therefore this, whioli 
owes so much to it, may be called his likewise. It is also one of the war-psalms, 
breathing the fierce and sometimes the truculent spirit, the jresenoe of which in 
these psalms has su often perplexed the Christian reader. In onier to understand such 
psalms, we need ourselves to live in war-times ; to be strenuously engaged in it, and 
a<;ainst an oumy who has done u8 much wrong, and whom, therefore, our souls abhor. 
There have been many such times; and when they come, psalms like tiiis one, and 
many more, are easily understood and readily adopted as utterances both natural and 
justifiable. But when all that is said, we still feel, and ought to feel, that such |>salms 
and the spirit ot Christ are lar removed from one ano'her. We may, however, gain 
much help from these psalms if we transfer their thouiihts and words to the spiritual 
conflict — those wars of the Lord in which we all have to engage. There its language is 
felt to be true, because in haimony both with Scripture and experience alike. Thus 
reading it, we may note what the psalmist tells of — 

I. The great goodness and mercy of God. He praises and blesses God : 1. Fw 
what Ood is to him. (Ver. 1.) "My Strength." Perpetual demand arose for 
strength. Fierce foes were all around, and as formidable as they were fierce. No mere 
weakling could possibly stand against them ; strength was imperatively needed, and 
he found it in God. All this which was true of the psalmist is true of the spiritual 
warrior still. " My Goodness." Whatever good there was in him, it was all of God. 
In the rough hurly-burly of war, character and all moial excellence had but hard 
times; deterioration was apt to set in. Therefore, if there were any goodness in him, 
it was from God. And is it not true of ourselves? Will any one dare say that his 
goodness is sell-derived, liis own pioiluction, due to his own power alone? "My 
Fortress" (cf. 1 Sam. xxiii. 29 for local allusion). Uavid knew well the value of such 
safe retreats. He had availed himself ot them again and again. And for us all there 
is "the secret [ilace of the Most High." " My high Tower." As in Central Europe, 
as you traverse its rivers, you see on the summits of the lofty hills, commanding the 
entrances and exits from the valleys beneath, the lofty towers and castles, mostly now 
in ruins, which warlike chieftains in hygone days erected, and within which they 
dwelt secure from attack, and from which they sallieil forth to attack others. Such 
loftily placed towers were frequent in the hill-oountry of Palestine also, and were places 
of great strength. Now, ot such advantage was tiie help of God to David, and so it is 
to-day to all who make the Loid their Ketuge. From that high tower the movements 



PS. oxLiv. 1— 15.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



of the enemy can be clearly discerned, guarded against, and aggression made upon 
them in a most successful way. " My Shield." That which wards off from me the 
stroke of sword, the thrust of spear, the point of dart and arrow. So is God to the 
souL Well may he say of the Lord, " It is he in whom I trust." 2. For what God 
hat done for Mm — as his Teacher. (Ver. 1.) " Which teacheth my hands to war, and," 
etc. Literally, this has been true again and again. See Gideon before the Midianites, 
David before Goliath, etc. And wherever there has been warlike skill and the wisdom 
which commands success, devout men have confessed that it was Gk>d from whom all 
the wisdom and skill came. And yet more is this true in the holy war — the conflict 
we have to wage with the world, the flesh, the devil. Never was there a successful 
wairior there but xwned at once and always that it was the Lord who taught him. 
" My Deliverer." So was he, sn is Le, so will he be. David could recall instances not 
a, few ; and what servant of God, in looking back over his spiritual life, does not own, 
as he tliiiiks of one trial and another that has befallen him, "Yes, the Lord was my 
Deliverer "? " Who subdueth luy people under me." This a yet greater mercy. Life 
might have been deUvered, but enemies might have remained enemies still, ready to 
break out against him at the first chance that came. Bat over and above deliverance, 
there has been given the submission of the people. And God tbus deals with his 
servants. Not only will he deliver them from their spiritual foes, but these foes he 
will subdue. The lawless passions, the evil propensities, the unhallowed temper, the 
uncontrolled craving, — these God will subdue, so that the very desire for sin will cease. 
So great is Gud's mercy, and so full his salvation. 3. For that Qod has done all this 
for the weak and unworthy. This seems to be the connection of vers. 3 and 4 with 
what precedes. It is not for the great and good, the worthy and the strong, but for 
such as man, who is like to vanity and whuse days are as a shadow. Truly it is 
wonderful that God should take knowledge of such a one, or make account of him at 
all. It is of a piece with our Lord's declarations, that he had come to call, not the 
righteous, but sinners ; to seek and to save, not the ninety and nine safe in the fold, 
but the wanderinij sheep away and lost in the wilderness. " God so loved the world " — 
the mass of the unworthy. 

II, I'he confidence that God's mbeoy creates. (Vers. 5 — 8.) The psalmist is 
encouraged by what God has done to ask for yet greater things. Hence he asks: 
1. That Ood would manifestly apptar on his 6eAaZ/' against his enemies. Reminiscences 
of the old Hebrew history float before his mind: the terror and discomfiture of 
Pharaoh; the awful display of God's majesty at Sinai — the thunder-roll, the lightning- 
blaze. 2. He feels that only God can give him victory, or deliver him out of the great 
waters of trouble by which he is woll-nigh overwhelmed. (Ver. 7.) The barbarous, 
cruel, and lying strangers who were against him were too many for him, and hence he 
turns to God (vers. 7, 8, 11). But what God has done for him encourages him thus 
to pray. 

IlL The gbatitudb it inspibes. (Vers. 9, 10.) 

IV. The bbioht hope which it fosters and sustains. (Vers. 11 — 15.) Many 
regard these verses as belonging not to this psalm at all; but it seems better to look 
on them as declaring the motive both of its gratitude and its prayers. The hope which 
it expresses was cherished with longing desire, and underlaid the whole psalm. The 
verses point to the golden age of Hebrew history, and pray for its return. 1. It 
concerns their children — that they might be vigorous, strong, goodly. 2. The prosperity 
of their land. 3. Freedom from invasion and capture. Then happy should thpy be, 
for God would be their Lord. — S. C. 

Vers. 11, 12.^0hildren who are a sorrow and shame, and those who are our 
unspeakable Joy. In these verses we have contrasted the children concerning whom 
we pray, " Rid and deliver us," with those who are such as every godly man desires 
and craves of God that his own sons and daughters may be. The prayer of our text, 
it has been repeatedly remarked, is the prayer which may well come from every prince, 
patriot, and parent. The interests and well-being of each depend upon its being 
answered. As is the character of our sons and daughters, so will be the happiness of 
the throne, the nation, the home. But especially is it the godly parents' prayer. 
Comdder — 



366 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxliv. 1— 1& 

I. The strange children here spoken op. (Ver. 11.) Prom them the psalmist 
prays, " Rid and deliver us." 1. Who are they f (1) The children of foreigners, or the 
foreigners themselves; the heathen peoples around them, and especially those with 
whom they were in conflict ; — these may be meant, (2) Or the evil children of God- 
fearing parents. There are, alas 1 such children, and many a home is saddened and 
shamed by them. X%ey are rightly called " strange children." Literally they are so, 
if the children of strangers ; but rightly too, if they are the offspring of saintly parents. 
For they are strangers to their fathers God, their father's thoughts and ways, their 
father's joys and blessed anticipations, their father's holy character. They are out of 
sympathy with the spiiit of their home, and their influence in it is of a hostile and 
most hurtful nature. (3) Or wicked children generally. 2. TTieir characteristics art 
given, "Their mouth speaketh vanity." No wholesome, helpful speech is beard from 
their lips, but only that which is worthless or worse, and which comes from and leads 
to no good. What a miserable amount of such speech there is in one day, heard or 
read, spoken, written, or printed I and what incalculable mischief it has worked, and 
must ever work I The strange children, the foreign speech as read in their literature — 
what an amount of uncleanness and ungodliness is not that responsible fori And 
" their right hand is a right hand of falsehood." This is another of the characteristics 
of the "strange children." The meaning seems to be that they are unfaithful to 
their covenants, false in their dealings ; they cannot be trusted or relied upon at all. 
Further, their conduct is such as, by its influence upon men, leads to the denial of 
God's existence, authority, and Word, and to the belief of the falsehood that this 
world is everything, and is alone worthy of our care. They are utterly ungodly 
both in speech and deed. 3. Bible instances of such strange children. Cain, Bsau, 
Jacob's sons, Absalom, and apparently all David's sons, and many more. 4. Th« 
motives that shmM lead to the prayer in our text concerning them. We would not have 
such children, for we remember what their end must be ; what the sorrow they bring 
upon those who love them (see David's sorrow about Absalom) ; what the disastrous 
influence they exert upon others; what the dishonour they bring upon God, Let all 
this quicken our prayers, as parents, for our children's real conversion to God, and our 
endeavours to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. 

II, The children that are like the trees and thb polished pillars ob 
COBNEB-STONES. (Ver. 12.) Q'hese are the sons and daughters that the psalmist 
longed to behold and to possess ; and such may well be our longing likewise. Note 
the imagery employed. In both, the metaphors here, though they are manifestly 
unlike, as a stone is unlike a plant, yet they have some common characteristics, and 
these seem to have been in the psalmist's mind. 1. The grown-up plant. As such, 
so it is prayed, may our sons be in their youth — that is, whilst yet young. It is the 
grown-up plant, not the root ; because that is out of sight, and the psalmist would 
have their godly character a visible thing. And not the tender plant, for that would 
be wanting in strength, and strength of character is another blessing desired. Hence 
the ideas suggested by the metaphor seem to be these — that, as the grown-up plant, 
the moral character of their sons may have root. Rootless plants never abide or come 
to full maturity; therefore there must be the inward principle and spring of life. 
Then, visibility. All can see the grown-up plant ; it attracts attention — is evident to 
all. So should our son's character be — not only inward, but outwaid and visible. 
Beautiful, too, as the grown-up plant, whether tree, or herb, or flower. There should 
be about the godly character what too often is conspicuous only by its absence- 
symmetry, attractiveness, loveliness, and spiritual beauty. The matured flower, how 
beautiful it is 1 " So," etc. Then, further, there should be strength. The vigour of the 
plant is when it is grown up. And how essential is it that our children's character 
should be strengthened with all might by the Spirit in the inner man (Eph. iii. 16) I 
" Be strong " is a perpetual charge in the apostolic writings, and they ever point us to 
the one Source of strength. And there is yet one other idea suggested — that of Ood, 
The plant is no man-made or man-matured thing ; it is of God, And so with that 
character which we so crave — it must be of God. He must create, he must sustain, 
he must perfect it. Character that is simply man-made, that relies on self alone, what 
a sad contrast it offers to that which is depicted here I how much it always and inevi- 
tably lacks I 2. The polished pillar or corner-stone. This is the other metaphor. 



P8. oxLiv. 1— 15.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 367 

In tbe courts of the Lord's house we know there were trees. Josephua plainly tells us 
BO, and Ps. Ixxxiv. implies it when it speaks of the home of the birds there. And in 
the palaces of the great, in the quadrangles around which they were built, there were 
generally many beautiful plants ; and there would be also conspicuous the beautifully 
worked and decorated stones, placed at the angles of the building, or the polished 
]>illarg on which they rested. So, prays the psalm, may our daughters be. Here the 
same ideas are suggested by this metaphor as by the other. The corner-stone rests on 
its fuundation as the plant springs from its root. St. Paul speaks in Eph. iii, as if he 
had these verses in his memory, of " being rooted and grounded in love ; " rooted like 
the plant, grounded as is the foundation of a building. So must character be — based 
on firm foundation. Then the idea of visibility is common both to the matured plant 
and the polished pillar. Beauty also is even more suggested by this second figure than 
by the first. St. Paul teaches the same lesson when he speaks of our comprehending 
" with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height." It is t^he fair 
proportion and the beautiful comeliness and completeness of the Christian character 
which he desiderates so earnestly. Strength, acrain, is in this metaphor, as in the 
other. Both pillar and corner-stone would alike need to be strong. Some have 
regarded the word as pointing to " the Caryatides, the exquisitely sculptured forms of 
maidens which adorned the corners of some magnificent hall or chamber of a palace" 
(Perowne). But, with all their beauty, these pillars supporting the angles of the 
building must have strength. But inasmuch as the Prayer-book Version, and other 
authorities beside, give the meaning of "temple" rather than "palace," and as such 
rendering is more in harmony with this devout utterance, we accept it, and find in it 
that suggestion of God in the character here spoken of which is also found in the 
emblem of the plant (Ps. xoii. 13). Added on to the idea of strength and beauty 
which belonged to the temple of God there is that of godliness — consecration and 
devotion to him, without which no character is perfect and complete. 

III. How WHAT IS 80 DESIRED MAT BE BECUBED. 1. Parents, and all who have 
charge of children, must pray for it; and the prayer must be endorsed by appropriate 
action, 2. Believe in Ood's ivillingness to bestow this. He would not have inspired 
such prayer else. 3. Our young people must yield themselves up to God. They must 
renounce sin, and surrender their all to him, and then continually trust and expect the 
blessing sought. 

IV. The geeat Example of this bbautifdl oharacteb. Our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

V. Why tou, our sons and daughters, should thus peat. 1. For the sake 
of the Lord, who calls you to this blessed life. 2. And for the sake of those who love 
you, and long that you may be the Lord's. 3. And of those whom you must influence 
for good or ill. 4. And for your own sake. Oh, how many have mourned, and are 
mourning now, that they have not lived this true life I But never one who did so 
live has done other than be profoundly grateful for God's grace that led him thereto. 
— S. 0. 

Vers. 1, 2. — War-figures of God^s relations. "The psalmist recounts glorious 
victories in the past ; complains that the nation is now beset by strange, i.e. barbarous, 
enemies, so false and treacherous that no covenant can be kept with them; prays for 
deliverance from them by an interposition great and glorious as bad been vouchsafed 
of old ; and anticipates the return of a golden age of peace and plenty " (Perowne). If 
it ever has been right, the manifest duty of the hour, for a man to engage in war, it 
must be right to associate God with that doing of duty. No man would venture to 
say that it never has been right to engage in war. Till human nature is wholly 
renewed and sanctified, war will probably continue to be one of the forces which help 
collective humanity to make right triumph over wrong. And God may be thought of 
as the Trainer of soldiers for the wars of righteousness. 

L He who tbains foe war trains only fob wars of which he can approve. 
It is usual to say that defensive wars may be necessary, but offensive wars never are ; 
but this is to take a very limited view of life, facts of history, and Divine dealings with 
men. God has commissioned nations to carry out his purposes of judgment and mercy 
by offensive wars. War as a scourge of organized societies, of nations, has been, and 



368 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [Ps. cxliv. 1—15. 

may still be, used by God in execution of Lis judgments, and even in the moveinent oi 
the locations of men to different parts of the globe. Old Testament history distinctly 
associates God with aggressive war. Israel invaded Palestine for God. Assyria invaded 
Palestine as God's servant. Mere dynastic wars are selfish wars, and wholly wrong. 
Wars that are really race-movements may be right. There is a good end in all war 
of which God approves. 

IL He who trains foe wae pukishes those who use trained fowebs poe 
THEIB OWN ENDS. And this is the thing to which nations, and rulers of nations, are 
continually tempted. It is illustrated by God's dealing with Assyria, which was the 
rod to execute his anger against his people, but proceeded to serve its own endt, and so 
brought upon itself the judgments of God. — E. T. 

Vers. 3, 4. — The transitoriness of man. "The occasion of the introduction of these 
sentiments here is not quite clear. It may be the humility of the warrior who ascribes 
all success to God instead of to human prowess ; or it may be a reflection uttered over 
the corpses of comrades ; or, perhaps, a blending of the two." 

I, The vanity or man creates buepeisb at God's oabe. " Lord, what is man, 
that thou takest knowledge of him ? " This is an exclamation of surprise, which is 
repeated by every devout soul when the fjailty of man is brought impressively before 
him. It is not merely the brevity of life that is in view, nor its uncertainty ; it is the 
smallness of all human doings and aims. Belative to the size of the globe, the highest 
mountain is but a slight and scarcely perceptible ridge. Belative to the mountain, a 
single man is scarcely as big as a pin's head. And what can man accomplish? His 
mightiest achievements are but as the triumphs of the ants whose work he despises ; 
and he is seldom permitted fully to achieve anything, for he is usually cut off before 
the thing he intended can be completed. Man is a smaller being than some of the 
animals, and it is hard to conceive of his doing anything that is really worthy of 
Divine notice. And yet God does care for man as he cares for nothing else that he 
has made. We can only wonder over the fact, glory in it, and let it bring home to 
our hearts the mystery — " God is love." 

IL The vanity of han bhoitld lead him to put himself into God'b oabe. 
For it is not enough that God should care for us. The joy of that tare is not realized 
until we care that God should thus care. It may be a fact, but It is no helpful, 
comforting fact until we respond to the fact, accept the care, aad voluntarily put 
ourselves entirely into it. The psalmist here speaks as one who had mastered the 
depressing influence of his own sense of frailty, by assuring his heart of God's personal 
care. That brings to man a sense of dignity which more than matches the sense of 
frailty. Man may be " crushed before the moth ; " but it is also true, he is only " a 
little lower than the angels," for God — yes, the great, eternal God — is mindful of 
him.— B. T. 

Yer. 6. — God's intervention it his condescension. "Bow thy heavens, and come 
down." This prayer follows on the acknowledgment of man's frailty and transitoriness. 
His sphere is altogether below God, who must stoop down to help him. God's inter- 
vention involving his condescension may be illustrated in several spheres. To create 
material things ; to remedy the disturbance of things ; to provide for the wants of 
things; to recover self-ruined things; — all involve the Divine condescension. 

I. To create mateeial things. We want the mind of a Hindu philosopher in 
order to conceive of God as an absolute, uncaused, unrelated, independent existence ; 
eternally and infinitely happy in himself, without what we c^l " personality," because 
without relations. Just in the measure in which we can conceive such a being, we 
can realize his condescension in coming out of the abstract into the concrete, and 
making, and putting himself into relation with, a world of things. 

II. To EEMEDY THE DI8TUEBAN0E OP THINGS. Oncc let things be in any sense 
separate from himself; once let there be forces (which we call laws) in nature, and 
free-will in man, and God's order will be sure to get disturbed. But he may be 
sublimely indifferent to the disorder in his creation. It is his condescension that he 
is the couBtant Rectifier of the difiSculties and disasters which come in his creation. 

III. To FEOViDE FOB THE WANTS OP THINGS. What impresses ui so greatly ii the 



PS, oxuv. 1— 15.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 869 



minuteness of attention which creation daily needs. We bow ourselves to do a 
thousand insignificaut but necessary things in our households. How God must bow 
himself to guard the life uf every grass-blade, and to feed every gnat that hums in the 
summer evening! 

lY. To RECovEB BuiNBD THiNos. This brings to view the havoc which man's sin 
has made in individual lives and in God's fair world of things. For there is a luin of 
the world which answers to the self-ruin of man. Why should not God let things go, 
and leave men to ruin themselves, and the world in which they dwell, if they please 
to do so ? He is not bound to intervene. If he does, it can only be in condescending 
loTe.— R. T. 

Vers, 7, 8. — The known Ood and the unknovm foe. " Stretch forth thine hand 
from above ; rescue me out of the hand of strangers." This is but saying, " I do not 
know those who trouble me, but I do know thee." 

I. AiiL AROUND us IS THE UNKNOWN. 1. There Is 80 little that we can understand. 
Spite of all the attainments of science, the " known " to-day bears no comparison at 
all to the "unknown." 'I'he philosopher has but scooped up in his shell a little of the 
water of the great ocean of truth. The more a man knows, the more ho feels how 
little he knows. We need not be philosophers, and argue that man never does know 
more than phenomena, the accidents of things ; it is enough to see that, cuiicerning 
almost everything, a child can ask questions which the wisest man cannot answer. 
2. There is so much that never comes into the field of human thought at all. For we 
have no right to say that the laws which we apprehend as controlling the movements 
of nature are the only laws that control them. We are constantly biffled by intima- 
tions of the working of laws of which we know nothing at all. 3. And the human 
experience through which we have to pass is hopelessly unknown to us. Known to 
no man are his coming positions, relations, friends, or foes. Every day every man has 
to say to himself, " I have not gone this way heretofore." It just has to be accepted 
as the fact for every life, " We are of yesterday, and know nothing." 

II. Up above us is the Known. In a recent exhibition there was a very touching 
picture of an old farm-labourer, dressed in his smock-frock, and with a lined, wearied 
face that told of a long life of troubles, but over the seams and lines seemed to spread 
a soul-smile as, looking away through the clouds, he said, " Up beyant is the blue sky," 
It may be thus with every man. For the mind there is no rest; there is nothing 
but a fretful worrying with the surrounding unknown. But for the soul there is rest. 
It does not look around; it looks up, and knows God — ^knows as love can know, 
knows as trust can know. And that is the only satisfying knowledge, A man 
can only be an agnostic till his soul finds God ; then he knows as souls only can 
know.— R. T. 

Ver. 10. — ITte first stage of lalvation is ddiveranee. " Who rescueth David his 
servant from the hurtful sword." This describes what is involved in "giving 
salvation unto kings." An act of deliverance is always the beginning of salvation ; 
but such act of deliverance is only a beginning. 

L An act of deliverance is the bbginnino of salvation. This is the truth 
of a fact that is once for all illustrated in the history of Israel. God would save that 
Jeople in a large sense of saving. He must begin by a formal act of deliverance, in 
Kinging his people out from bondage in Egypt, That truth once presented in so large 
t way, is afterwards presented again and again in more limited spheres. In the time 
of the Judges, when God would save his people, he began the salvation by a formal 
act of deliverance, as is seen strikingly in the case of Gideon. When God would save 
his people Irom captivity in Babylon, he began by the formal act of liberation made 
by Gyrus. And it was the same with the great spiritual salvation of men. Its 
1 eginning is that sublime act of sacrifice which is man's rescue from the thraldom of 
sin. The formal act of surrender made on the cross was Christ's triumph over man's 
sin, his " leading captivity captive." And so in personal experience salvation begins 
in that act of consecration to Christ which we make, and which is met by Christ's act 
of delivering us from the power of self and sin, 

II. Such an act of delivbbasck is onlt a beoinnino. The deliverance of 

PSALMS— III. 2 ■ 



370 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pa. oxlit. 1—16. 

Israel from Egypt was only a beginning of God's dealings in their salvation. Gideon's 
OTerthrow ot the Midianites was only a beginning. Cyrus's decree was only a 
beginning. Our Lord's sacrifice was only a beginning. Our consciousness of accept- 
ance is only a beginning. The salvation of a nation is a large and comprehensive 
thing ; so is the salvation of a man. But in every case God's beginning is the pledge 
that he will carry on the work and perfect it.^B. T. 

Vers. 12 — 15. — True national prosperity. "It is only a narrow and one-sided 
religion tiiat can see anything out of place in this beatitude of plenty and peace." " Ai 
plants : this figure marks the native strength and vigour and freedom of the youth 
of the land. As corner-pillars : marks the polished gracefulness, the quiet beauty, of 
the maidens ; who are like exquisitely sculptured forms (Caryatides) which adorned the 
comer of some magnificent hall or chamber of a palace." (It does not, however, seem 
probable that at any time sculptured figures were allowed in Hebrew houses or palaces.) 
Ornamentation and various colouring of pillars may be referred to. Three things make 
up temporal prosperity. Family joys; business success; social security. The sense 
of God's gracious relations sanctifies all three. 

I. Family jots. From Eastern points of view, large families were desirable; but 
usually in the East daughters are despised. Two things are noticeable in these verses. 
1. Daughters are spoken of as honourably as sons. 2. It is the growing up, developing 
character of children, that is the chief source of family joy. 

II. Business success. Dealt with in the psalm from the strictly agricultural point 
of view. The figures employed all belong to farm-life. This may give indication of the 
date of the psalm ; but we may take it as illustrative of all the ways in which men 
work for their living. Harvest is the key to the prosperity of the year, and that is 
in God's hand. Times of confidence and enterprise bring national prosperity. 

III. Social security. This is suggested by the sentence, "That there be no 
breaking in nor going out." Security is the condition of business enterprise. Men 
will not work for what they have no hope of keeping when it is gained. Social 
security is imperilled by fear of attack from national foes, and also by the restlessness 
of sections within the nation (nihilists, and extravagant socialists, e c). But family 
joys, business success, and social security are, in a way, merely material things. 
Back of them all there must be this secret of happiness — the " nation's God is the 
Lord."— R. T. 

Vers. 12 — 15. — A golden age. "The psalmist recounts glorious victories in the 
past; complains that the nation is now beset by barbarous enemies, so false and 
treacherous that no covenant can be kept with them ; prays for dcliveiance from them 
by an interposition great and glorious as had been vouchsafed of old ; and anticipates 
the return of a golden age of peace and plenty." The people who have Jehovah for 
their God, who obey his will and are governed by his laws, will be distinguished in 
the following ways. 

I. By the chaeaotbb of its youno men and women. (Ver. 12.) 1. They will 
he beautiful. In body and mind. Like plants, the young men, with vigour and 
freedom and beauty. Like polished corners, the maidens — or corner-pillars, with 
exquisitely sculptured figures. 2. They will be vigorous. As a consequence of their 
purity and health. 3. I'hey will be free. The plant has the freedom of all the air of 
heaven ; nothing between it and heaven. 

II. By the wealth op its possessions. 1. Rich in meirchandise. (Ver. 13.) 
Full gamers. A free, healthy, pure people are bound to prosper. 2. Etch in agricultural 
and pastoral possessions. (Ver. 13^ Sheep and oxen multiplied. 

ILL Blessed with thb pbobpbbities of peace. (Ver. 14.) "No sallying forth 
from onr walls, and no cry of battle in out atreets." A state of war destructive of all 
kinds of prosperity.—^ 



n. oxLT. 1 — 21.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



871 



EXPOSITION. 



PSAIiM OXLV. 



With another hymn of praise, this late 
ooUeotion of Davidioal paalms, previously 
omitted from the Psalter, termiuates. Like 
Psa. XXV. and xxsiv., also Davidioal, this 
paalm is alphiibetio, and also, like them, it 
is incomplete, the letter nun being omitted. 
Like most of the other alphabetical psalms, 
it consists of meditations on a single theme, 
which is here the righteousness and good- 
ness of Ood (1) to men in general ; (2) to 
his own people ; and (3) and more especially, 
to those that suffer. The metrical ariauge- 
ment of the psalm is into three stanzas of 
seven verses each. 

Yer. 1.— I will extol thee, my Ood, King ; 
rather, my Ood, the King ; i.e. the one and 
only King of heaven and earth. And I will 
bless thy Name for ever and ever. An 
internal conviction of the writer's immor- 
tality is implied in these words. 

Yer. 2. — Every day will I bless thee ; and 
I will praise thy Name for ever and ever. 
An emphatic repetition of the second clause 
of ver. 1. 

Yer. 3.— Cteeat is the Lord, and greatly to 
be praised (oomp. Pss. xlviii. 1; xcvi. 4). 
And his greatness is unsearchable ; literally, 
and of hie greatnesi there is no lea/reh (comp. 
Bom. xi. 33). 

Yer. 4. — One generation shall praise thy 
works to another, and shall declare thy 
mighty acts. Tlie handing down of God's 
mercies and deliverances from age to age is 
always regardec 1 in Scri pture as the principal 
mode whereby tbey are kept in remembrance 
(Bxod. xii. 26, 27; xiii. 8—10, 14; Deut. 
xxxii. 7; Pss. xliv. 1 ; Ixxviii. 3—7, etc.). 

Yer. 5. — I will speak of the glorious 
hononr of thy majesty, and of thy woadrous 
works (comp. Pss. xxvi. 7; Ixxi. 17). It 
was the duty of every faithful Israelite to 
set forth God's majesty, and to " declare his 
works with rejoicing" (Ps. evil. 22). David 
proclaims himself ready to perform this 
duty. Then, he thinks, others will join 
in. 

Yer. 6.— And men shall speak of the might 
of thy terrible acts. Men will "speak of 
the might of God's terrible acts," which are 
those that attract them most — the plagues 
wionght in Bgy pt, the overthrow of Pi i araoh's 
host in the Bed Sea, the earth swallowing 
up Dathan, and the like. And I will de- 
clare thy greatness (see above, ver. 3). 

Yer. 7. — The; shall abondantly utter the 



memory of thy great goodness; literally, 
they thall pour forth — as a strong: spring— 
the memory of thy great goodnest; i.e. 
the tale of all the mercies that thou hast 
vouclisafed them. And shall sing of thy 
righteousness; t'.e. shall sing hymns of 
praise for thy righteous dealings with them. 
Yer. 8. — The Lord is gracious, and full of 
compassion; slow to anger, and of great 
mercy. Professor Cheyiie compares the 
epithets in a Babylonian hymn to the sun- 
god ; but a closer parallel is to be found in 
Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7, "The Lord God is 
merciPnl and gracious, long-sufFering, and 
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping 
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, 
and transgression, and sin " (see also Ps. 
Ixxxvi. 15). 

Yer. 9. — The Lord is good to all ; and his 
tender mercies are over all his works. " The 
Lord is good to all ; " he " maketli his sun to 
rise on the evil and on the good, and send- 
eth rain on the just and on the unjust" 
(Mutt. V. 45). He " wouldeth not the death 
of a sinner, but rather tliat he may turn 
from his wickedness and live." And his 
"tender mercies," or "compassions," are 
not only over his human creatures, but " over 
all his works" — all that he has made — 
animals as well as men, "creeping things," 
zoophytes, all that can feel. 

Yer. 10. — ^AU thy works shall praise thee, 
Lord (oomp. Ps. cxlviii. 2 — 13, where all 
creation is called on to praise the Lord). 
And thy saints shall bless thee; or, "thy 
loving ones" — those who are devoted to 
thy service. 

Yer. 11. — They shall speak of the glory 
of thy kingdom (comp. Pss. xxiL 28 ; xlv. 6). 
The "glory" of God's kingdom is such that 
the faithful are naturally drawn to " speak " 
of it. " His kingdom is an everlasting king- 
dom, and his dominion endureth throughout 
all ages " (ver. 13). " His kingdom ralelh 
over all" (Pa. ciii. 19) — heaven and eurth, 
and hell, and all space, and whatever spaoo 
contains. Tliere is no limit either to its 
extent or its duration. And its "glory" 
trHuacenda all human thought — much more 
all description. " Eye hath not seen, nor 
c:ir heard," etc. And talk of thy power. 
" Power " is of the essence of kingship, and 
cornea naturally to the front whenever the 
character of a kingdom is spoken of. 

Yer. 12. — To make known to the sons of 
men his mighty acts. It is a part of the 
duty of " saints " (ver. 10) to make known 
as widely as possible — ^if possible, to all 
men — the " mighty acts " and glory of God ; 
primarily, for God's glory ; and seuoiidarily, 
to bring about their conversion (o God'* 



372 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. OXLT. 1 — 2L 



senrice. And tbe glorious majesty of Ms 
kingdom (conip. vers. 5, 11). 

Ver. 13. — Thy kingdom is an everlasting 
kingdom (comp. Dan. iv. 3, 31). It is in- 
ooDceivable that Qod'e kingdom should 
oome to an end. He cannot will it to cease, 
and so dethrone himself. Much less can 
any other, and necessarily inferior, power 
overthrow it. And thy dominion eudureth 
thronghont all generations. This is rather 
an anti-climax, since the generations of men 
will one day cease : but it was a customary 
phrase (Pss. xxxiii. 11; xlv. 17; zlix. 11; 
Ixi. 6; Ixii. 5, etc.), and brought home to 
men the thought that his special " dominion " 
was over them. 

Yer. 14.— The lord npholdeth all that 
fall. Lifts them up, t.e., and again " up- 
holds " or supports them (comp. Ps. xxxvii. 
24). And raiseth up all those that be bowed 
down (comp. Ps. cxlvi. 8). 

Yer. IS. — The eyes of all wait upon thee ; 
and then givest them their meat in due 
s<mson (of. Pss. civ. 21, 27; oxxxvi. 25; 
ojJvii. 9). The constant supply of all living 
oi-vatures with their necessary food is little 
Imb than a standing miracle. 

Yer. 16. — Then openest thine hand, and 
satisfiest the desire of every living thing. 
Kot only are they given what is necessary 
for them, but every desire which they enter- 
tain is satisfied. 

Yer. 17.— The Lord is righteons in all his 
ways, and holy (rather, graeinui, or mereifvl') 
in all his works. Mercy and truth meet in 
God (Ps. Ixxxv. 10). He is at once per- 
fectly just, and absolutely tender and com- 
passionate. " All his works " experience 
both bis justice and his tenderness (comp. 
Pss. ixv. 8 ; cxvi. 5, etc.). 

Yer. 18. — The Lord is nigh unto all them 



that call upon him (comp. Dent. iv. 7 ; Pss. 
xxxiv. 18 ; xlvi. 1 ; cxix. 151, etc.). God 
draws near to those who draw near to him ; 
t.e. he makes his presence (which is always 
everywhere) felt by them. To aU that 
call upon hun in truth. A limiting clause. 
Mure formal prayer is useless, does not 
lessen the distance between God and man, 
rather augments it. If we really desire to 
enjoy the consciousness of his presence, we 
must call upon him "in truth," <.e. sin- 
cerely, with earnest desire and strong con- 
fidence. 

Yer. 19.— He will fulfil the desire of them 
that fear him (comp. ver. 16). What he 
does for "every living thing," he will do 
more especially for men, if they truly " fear " 
him, and love him (ver. 20), and draw near 
to him in sincerity and truth. He also will 
hear their cry, and will save them; t.e. 
deliver them out of their troubles. 

Yer. 20. — The Lord preserveth all them 
that love him (comp. Pss. xxxi. 23; xcvii 
10). But all the wicked will he destroy. 
The " severity " of God is always set against 
his " goodness " in Holy Scripture, lest men 
should misunderstand, and think to obtain 
salvation though they continue in wicked- 
ness (see Exod. xxxiv. 6,7; Bom. iL 2 — 11 ; 
xi. 22, etc.). 

Yer. 21. — Uy month shall speak the praise 
of the Lord. The " psalm of praise " (title) 
ends as it began (vers. 1, 2) — ^with the strong 
determination of the psalmist that he at 
least will praise Jehovah. Others, he hopes, 
will join with him, and all flesh bless hii 
holy Name (literally, the Name of hit holineu) 
for ever and ever ; but for this result he can 
only wish and hope and pray — he cannot 
ensure it. But he can, and does, fulfil his 
own duty in the matter. 



HOMILBTICS. 

Vers. 1 — 3, 7, 21. — Otir response to God. What feeling should the greatness and the 
goodness of God caj} forth from us, and how tshould we utter it ? We will praise God 
in every way that ft open to us. 

I. Continually. (Yer. 2.) " Every day " will we bless him : his praise shall be 
" continually " in our mouth (Ps. xxxiv. 1). Not that a man is necessarily more 
devout because the Name of Goil is always on his lips, but that the spirit of thankful- 
ness should be always in the heart, and should spontaneously and freely rise for 
utterance. 

n. CoNTiKUOUSLY. (Yers. 1, 2.) " For ever and ever." Through all the days and 
the years of life — and beyond. Many things eagerly undertaken will be allowed to 
drop out, but this, never. The tongue may well forget its office before it ceases to 
praise God. There is no eni to which language can be put which is worthy to b< 
compared with that of rendering praise to the Giver of all good, the God of our 
salvation. We will bless God — 

** While life and thought and being last, 
Or imniortftlity eiidurea." 



re. oxLT, 1— 21.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 873 

m. Heartily. This may well be included in the "abundant" utterance of ver. 7. 
For thanksgiving is fundamentally lackiog if it does not come from the heart as well 
M from the lips. Praise should be abundant even to overflow, because the cup of the 
heart is full of intense gratitude, of filial love and joy. 

IV. Intelligbktlt. Those who only recognize the more superficial blessings may 
be content with thanking God for his "benefits," for his bestowments, for those things 
that gladden the heart and enrich the life ; bnt they who look deeper and judge more 
wisely will "sin'; of his righteousness" as well as of his kindness (ver. 7; see also 
Ps. ci. 1). For we have the deepest interest in God's righteousness, and should extol 
him for that quite as earnestly as we do for the multitude of his mercies. 

V. IssTEnMBNTALLT. (Ver. 4.) It should be our hope, our prayer, and our 
endeavour that our own praise of God be extended, through us, to our neighbours, and 
be carried down, through us, to our children and our children's children. It may 
depend on us, on our devotion and on the conduct of our lives, whether the praises of 
Christ shall be sung by lips that have so far been silent, by those who are now scarcely 
able to speak his Name, and by those who are still unborn. How much may a wise 
and earnest spirit do to enlarge and to perpetuate the praises of his Bedeemer I 

VL Indibeotlt. If all God's works praise him (ver. 10), even those which are 
unintelligent and insensible, surely we may say that the pure and beautiful lives of 
the good, the kind, the generous, are ever unconsciously, but most effectively, praising 
God. 

Vers. 3, 5, 6, 10 — 13. — The greatneii of God. In this exquisite psalm the greatness 
and the goodness of God are celebrated, and the writer passes so freely from one to 
another, that it is very difficult to keep them separate. Nor is there much need to do 
so; for God's greatness, his glory, is m his goodness (Exod. zxxiii. 19), and the two 
•le really inseparable. Endeavouring, however, to look at them apart, we are here 
reminded of — 

L His MAJESTT. We read of " the splendour of the glory of his majesty " (ver. 6). 
The inanifestations of God's presence, given in the earlier times, were those of radiant, 
insupportable efTulgence ; those who witnessed them shrank from them. God dwells 
in the " light inaccessible, to which no man can approach." The splendour of his glory 
ia such as would dazzle and bewilder our mortal sight. 

IL His POWER. We have *' the might of his terrible acts," " his wondrous works," 
" his mighty acts." From the time when David looked up into the heavens and was 
•wed by the tokens of Divine power shining down upon him from above, to our own 
time, when we first sang of him whose power " made the mountains rise," " spread the 
flowing seas abroad," and " built the lofty skies," men have been affected and subdued 
by the " almighty power of God ; " and they always must be while the wonderful 
&bric of nature lasts. 

III. His niFiKiTY. The kingdom of God is " everlasting ; " it endures " throughout 
all generations." Nations rise and fall, dynasties appear and disappear, centuries 
begin and end, but God's dominion knows no bound at all. It continues from genera- 
tion to generation. There is something which powerfully affects us as we think of that 
which lasts, and will last, while every other thing fades and vanishes away. 

IV. HiB HOLIKBSS. (Vers. 6, 17, 20.) The psalmist speaks of God's " terrible acts," 
and he says that he " will destroy the wicked." History, sacred' and profane, is full of 
proofs that the holiness of God is as great as his majesty and his power. " The face of 
the Lord is against them that do evil." " By terrible things in righteousness " God 
makes us to know that sin is hateful in his sight, that continuance in it will result in 
ruin, in shame, in death. On the other hand, God's greatness in righteousness is seen 
in the rewards he gives to the upright, in lifting up the lowly, in abundantly blessing 
the true and pure and good. Who would not fear God who is of such majesty, power, 
infinitude, holiness ? Who would not worship him ? How foolish and how guilty to 
refuse to listen when he speaks, to come to him in willing subjection when he calls ua 
to his service I 

Vers. 7 — 9, 14 — 16, 18—20. — The goodness of God. As the years increase we are 
inclined to review the past rather than forecast the future. What shall we dwell upw 



3T4 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cklv. 1— 21. 



as we look backward ? We should cherish not the recollection of past trouWes »nd 
difficulties, but " the memory of G.id's great goodness " (ver. 7). And we do well to 
extend the field of observation beyond our own experience, and regard — 

L The vast bbbadth of his beneficence. " All his works praise him," for he is 
" good tc all, and his tender mercies are over all his works." On whom doth not his 
light ari^e ? He makes his sun to shine on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain 
on the just and the unjust. " The eyes of all wait upon him," etc. (vers. 15, 16). To 
his care the insect owes its hour of pleasure, and to his goodness the strong beast of 
th9 forest its strength and swiftness, and to his skill and his remembrance the bird of 
tba air its flight and its song. We, too, ascribe our life, our health, our comforts, our 
domestic joys, our social happiness, our intellectual delights, our spiritual satisfactions, 
to the bounties of his hand and the kindness of his heart of love. There is no living 
thing whose powers and whose pleasures do not testify of the goodness of the beneficent 
Creator. " All his works praise him " (ver. 10). 

II. His PITIFULNES8 AND HIS TENDERNESS. (Vers. 8, 14.) 1. " The Lord is 
gracious, and full of comfiassion." This is another utterance of that invaluable truth 
contained in Fs. ciii., " Like as a father pitieth bis children, so the Lord pitieth them 
that fear him " (see Bxod. iii. 7 ; Joel ii. 18). It is one of the truest comforts in 
suffering and in sorrow that we are pitied by our Divine Saviour ; that he feels with 
us in our grief; is " full of compassion" for us. The presence of pure and strong 
human sympathy is, in itself, an assurance of the Divine ; but we are thankful for this 
clear and express statement of it. 2. The Lord is gentle toward us. He looks upon 
those that have fallen into error, into fault, into disgrace, into defeat, and he " upholds 
them ; " he regards those that are " bowed down " in sorrow, in weakness, in dis- 
couragement, that can " in no wise lift themselves up," and he " raises them up " (see 
Luke xiii. 11). The compassion shown by our Lord during his earthly life, his pity 
for those who were faint and hungry, and for those who were diseased, and for the 
children of sorrow, is the best assurance, as it is the perfect manifestation of the com- 
passion of the Father himself; while "the gentleness of Christ" in all his treatment 
of those that were down and that were despisid is, and will ever be, the most exquisite 
illustration of " the gentleness of God " (Ps. xviii. 35 ; 2 Cor. x. 1). 

III. His patience anu hOROivENESs. (Ver. 8.) He is " slow to anger, and of great 
meicy." 1. The patience of God wag illustrated in his forbearance with his rebellious 
people in " the days of old; " the patience of Jesus Christ was shown in his treatment 
of his disciples who were so " slow of heart to learn," not only what the prophets had 
spoken, but what their own Master taught them (Matt. xv. 17 ; xvi. 9). The patience 
of our Lord is exemplified in his bearing toward us, whom, notwithstai/ding all our 
imperfections, he regards as his friends and fellow-labourers. Now, as befoie, he ia 
"slow to chide, and swift to bless." 2. He is of " great mercy," pardoning those who 
have done the worst things, who have gone the furthest or stayed the longest away 
from him. 

IV. His RESPONSIVENESS. (Vers. 18 — 20.) 1. He is very near in spirit and in 
sympathy to those who reverently and inquiringly draw near to him, so that those 
who seek him may feel that he is not afar off, but " very present" with them ; nearer 
to them than they to one another. 2. He hears and answers his people's prayers; he 
interposes on their' behalf. He gives them their hearts' desires ; he saves them from 
all spiritual, evil;"he causes them to triumph; he preserves those who love him in 
their faith and in their love, and therefore in their joy and in their hope. He gives to 
them the heritage of the holy, here and hereafter. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1-^21. — 2%e Te Deum of the Old Testament, So this glorious psalm has been 
fitly named, and it is the germ of that great Christian hymn. " It is one, and the last 
of the acrostic, or rather the alphabetic psalms, of which there are eight in all. Like 
four other of these, this bears the name of David, although some are of opinion that in 
this case the inscription is not to be trusted " (Perowne), One letter of the fiebrevr 



M. oxLv. 1—21.] THE BOOK OP PSALM& 876 



alphaliet — nun — is omitted; how this came to be, we cannot tell; the Septuagint, 
however, and other ancient Tereions (with one Hebrew manuscript) supply the omission 
thus : " The Lord is faithful in his words, and holy in all his works." The Jews were 
accustomed to say that " he who could pray this psalm from the heart three times 
daily, was preparing himself best for the praise of the world to come." It is the first 
and chief of the piaise-psalms with which the whole Book of Psalms terminates. We 
have left the region of sighs and tears and piteous entreaties, and are, as one says, in 
the Beulah land, where the sun shineth night and day. How like it is to the life of 
many a child of God 1 There have been many long and weary years of vicissitudes and 
trials, and sorrows of all kinds, but at eventide there is light. As life went on it was 
a mingled strain that was heard, but now at its close it is all joy and peace. So is it 
in this Book of Psalms ; so is it with many of God's beloved ones ; so, when our eventide 
comes, may it he with us 1 And now let us notice— 

I. The vAEiotJs elements which enteb into thu high praise of God which 
this psalm sets forth. Note : 1. Jits different forms. (1) " I will extol thee ; " that is, 
lift up. He meant that he would do this by his song, by his words continually ; he 
had found God to be his God, his Saviour, his ever-bounteous Benefactor and Helper, 
and he meant that he would proclaim all this, that all men might hear and know. 
How good it is for a man to act thus 1 (2) " I will praise thy Name." The Name of 
God continually stands for all that God is, and by which he is known to his people. 
We extol God, or should do so, for what he is to us, as the psalmist does ; but praise of 
his Name means praise for all that he is. This is a more difficult work than the former, 
for in that we had God's gracious aspect turned towards us ; in this, other aspects of 
his character are included — the mysterious and the stern. It is, indeed, the grace of 
God when the soul can praise God for all that he is. (3) " I will bless thy Name." 
This is something yet higher, and of it we may say, that whilst to extol God is good, 
and to praise his Name yet better, that which is best of all is to blesa his Name. For 
blessing as distinguished from praise involves the grateful, loving, and heart-adoring 
element. There are those whom we praise, but do not bless ; we may praise men for 
genius, skill, integrity, righteousness, but we do not bless them unless, not only is 
their character admirable, but also we have been brought into contact with them, and 
have had personal knowledge and realization of their goodness ; then we bless as well 
as praise. Lower down in this psalm it is said, " All thy works praise thee, but thy 
saints shall bless thee." May this he our portion I 2, The object of all this high praise. 
(1) It is none other than God. Not to man, nor to angels, nor to any being less and 
other than God is rendered this devout and adoring homage of the heart. We are very 
apt to be so taken up with the achievements of the agents and instruments God uses that 
we are in danger of forgetting him, or of putting him in a too subordinate place. For 
it is he, and none other, who is the real Author and Accomplisher of all. But the 
writer ul tliis psalm falls into no such error, but lifts up his praise solely to God. (2) 
And to God whom he has by faith personally appropriated : " my God." God was to him 
no distant, abstract, or mere ideal Deity, but One whom he had so found to be his 
perpetual Benefactor and Helper, that his heart clung to him, and he called him " my 
God." It is such personal appropriation of God that gives vigour and intensity to our 
praise ; without it our praise is poor work. (3) And confessed as King : " my God, 
King." His faith had grasped the blessed truth that God ruled over all; none 
could withstand his power. " The Lord reigneth, he the nations never so unquiet." Oh, 
the joy and peace that come from this faith 1 It was delight to the psalmist's heart to 
be assured, as he was, that the Divine King, whom he gladly obeyed, was King over 
all. 3. Fixed resolve. Four times in these two opening verses we have the words, " I 
will ;" and so again (vers. 6, 6). Praise, like faith, is very much a matter of the will. 
We are prone to make it dependent upon the emotions. If we feel happy, then we 
sing praise easily; but if we do not thus feel, then praise falters and dies. But let ns 
remember that the dominant faculty in our nature is not feeling, but will. When God 
says, "My son, give me thine heart," he means not the feelings, hut the will, and if 
that be ever on God's side, everything else will soon fall into its proper position. Let 
the will be right, the feelings will soon give way. 4, Its continuousness and permanence. 
" Every day will I," etc. Not only the bright days, but the dark ones. Praise, like 
prayer, must be a habit, a constant practice, or we shall fall out of both its use and 



m THE BOOK OF PBALlia [W. oxiv. 1— 21. 

blessiDg altogether. And this habit must be permanently maintained. "For erer 
and ever " (vers. 1, 2). Here is the real test and trial of the religious life. Many are 
induced to begin, but, alas, how many show that they have do staying power I They 
get cold and indifferent, and after a while break away altogether. But the earnest, 
impassioned soul of the psalmist resolved that his praise of God should be every day, 
and for ever and ever. 

11. The gboukds oh whioh this fbaibe ib based. There are three divisions in 
this psalm, and each one tells of one special reason for this fervent praise of God. 1. In 
the first seven verses it is the greatness of the Lord. (Ver. 3.) And when one thinks of 
the seemingly irresistible might of the manifold forces of evil, our hearts are apt to die 
down ; but how greatly are they cheered and strengthened when we call to mind and 
do firmly believe in that greatness of God against which all these forces hurl them- 
selves in vain ! 2. Then next (in vers. 7 — 16), the tender mercies of the Lord art 
celebrated. When the soul thinks of them, what can it do but perpetually praise and 
bless the Lord ? 3. And last of all (from ver. 17), the righteousness of the Lord is the 
theme of thanksgiving. Without this even his tender mercies would be shorn of well- 
nigh all their preciousness. It is because we have a righteous salvation that our heart 
is glad. 

lU. Its exoeedino blessedness. 1. Many forget this. They pray to God, but too 
often fail to praise him. We say our prayers more often than we sing our praises. 
But this is wrong. 2. Ood deserves and delights in our praise. Love ever loves the 
response of love ; and in regard to God, such response takes the form of praise. 3. And 
it is powerful in its influence utith others. If they see that our God is one who fills 
our heart with joy, will not they be led to desire and to seek him ? 4. And for ourselves 
its effect is as Messed as it is powerful. It gives us confidence before God, joy in the 
heart, drives away fear, prepares us for heaven, cheers us in all the work of life and 
amid its dankest trials. — S. C. 

Ver. 4. — The charge of the generations. How are we to understand these words ? 
We may take them in either one of three ways. 

I. As A PKBDicTioN THAT HAS BEEN ABtiKDANTLT FULFILLED. One generation has 
handed on to its successor its treasiu-e store of knowledge and wisdom. We are the 
heirs of all the ages; it is their accumulated knowledge that has come down to us, and 
which we, with the fresh additions we shall make, are to hand on to those who come 
after us. And amongst the varied indebtedness under which we lie to those who 
have preceded us, chief of all is this — for the knowledge of God's ways. The Word of 
the Lord has proved to be an imperishable seed, which liveth and abideth for ever. 
It has seemed at times to die out in some regions ; but in others it has sprung up and 
borne fruit ; and there have never been lacking those who stood ready to hand on the 
itorch of truth to others who would keep it burning and then hand it on again. 
> n. As A PROMISE OF MOST HEABT-cHGEBiNa NATDEB. Por what would have been 
onr condition now, had not God been mindful of this promise ? Wo might have 
inherited vast wealth, and succeeded to chief place amongst the nations of the world ; 
in the eyes of men we might have been exalted to the highest summits of earthly 
greatness and glory ; but if we had lost, through the unfaithfulness of those that went 
before us, or from any other cause, the blessed knowledge of God, what pledge or 
guarantee should we have that even our earthly blessings should long continue ours? 
and what would have guarded ns fi:om the doom which has come on other nations 
who have not known God, or cared not to retain his knowledge ? But so it will not 
b« with us or ours ; for as the past generations have declared to us God's mighty 
deeds, and praised his works, so likewise shall this generation, in regard to that which 
■hall follow. There may be sad unfaithfulness here and there, and sore suffering must 
ensue; but God will not suffer himself to want for faithful witnesses who shall 
transmit that knowledge of himself, which is life eternal, to the generation that 
receiveth it. We need not tremble for the ark of God. We have many such blessed 
promises as this before us now, and we may rest confident that our generation, evil as 
mu^ comprising it may appear, shall yet " praise God's works to another, and," etc. 

TTT. A FBEOEPT THAT EACH OENEBATION IIUST DILIOENTLT OBSEBVB. Many read OUT 

toxt aa a command; and it is a command, though a prediction and a promise as well. 



PS. oXLv. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF PSALMa 877 

As a command, it enjoins : 1. That this service shall he undertaken, not ly one hert and 
there, but by the whole of the existing generation. It is to be a public — a uniTenal 
service. It is a frightful condition of things for the coming generation if the present 
be_ carele.-s about, or opposed to, such transmission of God's truth. Better that 
children should be brought up in any form of the Christian faith, than in no religion 
at all. God help our land, if the secularists of our day have their will in regard to our 
national education 1 The people at large are to care for the children at large, that they 
may be tau.;ht the truth of God. 2. But it is especially the business of the parentg. 
This evidently is in the mind of the psalmist, that fathers to sons should teach the 
works of God. Nature, their own love for their children, regard for their own comfort ; 
for what more rends the hearts of parents than ill-bred, ungodly children ? Justice 
and right demaud it ; for what parents are there that do not transmit much evil to 
their children ? Therefore let them see to it that they teach them that which ahall 
blessedly counteract the evil. And God plainly commands it. All these motives, and 
yet others, enloioe this duty. 3. And the duty is v/rgent. We have not much time. 
One generation cometh, another goeth ; ouropi'Ortunity will soon be gone. 4. If we do 
not obey this cmmand, no one else will. After all, if parents fail in this plain duty, 
none can really supply their lack of service or take their place; what the home Is, 
that will, well-nigh always, the children be. 

Conclusion. Let children, whose parents have obeyed this command of God, 
remember how great is the responsibility that rests upon them. " To whom much is 
given, of the same," etc. — S. 0. 

"Vers. 5> 6. — The one and the many. It is interesting to note the alternations in 
this psalm, as in numerous others, of the one and the many. The psalmist declares 
what he himself will do, and then he tells also what the people at large will do. So 
it is here. The psalm opens with a personal declaration, " I will extol," etc. ; " Every 
day will I bless," etc. Then in ver. 4 he speaks of all the generations of men ; then 
(ver. 5) he retums to himself and his own purposes; ver. 6 asserts both the general 
conduct and his own, and then again speaks of men at large. Then at the end the 
declaration is made, both as to himself and " all flesh." Now, what do such alter- 
nations as these suggest? Surely the relations in which the one and the many may 
stand to each other in regard to God's service. 

I. As HERB, THERB MAY BB BOTH. The psalmist is cot left alone, but his joy in 
God aud his praises are sympathized with and shared in by a goodly company of 
others. How rarely can this be said of any nation? Some there will be who will 
be on the Lord's side ; but they are very far frum being all the people. It will be, as 
in this psalm, when we reach the heavenly world; there there will be universal 
praise. But rarely is it so here. Still, there may be, aud there are, oftentimes, approxi- 
mations to this blessed condition, when not one here and there only, but when the people 
generally praise the works of the Lord. Let it be our prayer and endeavour to bring 
about such condition. It is the prayer of Ps. Ixvii. Would that it were that of all the 
people of God ! 

II. But there mat be neither. Not only are the voices of the many silent as to 
the praise of God, but not one solitary voice is heard anywhere. So will it be amid 
the abodes of those who have finally rejected the grace of God, and are therefore lost. 
And there are, alas I utterly godless communities even now ! When Noah was taken 
from hia generation, all the rest could not furnifh a solitary servant of Go I. So at 
Sodom and Gomorrah. And when the Christian Church had left the doomed Jerusalem, 
and betaken themselves to Pella, there remained such another godless people. Thank 
God, amongst mankind at large, he has never left himself without witness in some 
region or another ; but in different localities it may be that there are neither the many 
nor even the one on the Lord's side. If any servant of God knows of such a locality, 
that is where at once he should go and bear his testimony, and extol the Name of hia 
God and King. The dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty ; 
but woe betide that Church or that individual Christian who cares not for it, or seeks 
not to enlighten that darkness 1 Let us all remember that we are day by day fitting 
ourselves either for the abode where all men praise the Lord, or where none do, and 
each day sees us nearer the one or the other. 



878 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. oxlv. 1—21. 

III. Ob tiiebe mat be only the one. There have been scenes where but one 
■olitary voice has been lifted up for God, whilst all the rest have been either indifferent 
or his declared foes. Elijah thought he was such a one : " I only am left alone." 
And our blessed Lord foretold that it would be so with him : " Ye shall leave me 
alone," he said to his disciples. And sometimes it is so with faithful servants of God, 
as St. Paul before Agrippa and before Nero, when he said, " No man stood by me." 
And many a faithful missionary has known this awful loneliness ; and had not God, for 
whom they alone witnessed, come and revealed himself to them, they could aot have 
borne it. But this is the encouragement of the faithful yet solitary servant of God, 
that God will never let him be really alone, because the Lord himself will come and 
manilest himself to such servants, and thus fill them with his own joy. " My grace is 
sufficient for yoa." So spake Christ to the much-tried Paul; and so he speaks still to 
every one of his lonely witnesses, wherever they may be. 

IV. Ok there mat be the mant, and not the one. The one may live in a very 
atmosphere of worship and service, and yet stand aloof from it himself. Have we not 
known families where every member is an avowed and faithful servant of Christ, and 
yet some one of their ntmaber stands separate and apart from all the rest? How is 
this ? Sometimes such sad facts occur because, half unconsciously, but yet really, the 
reserved one is trusting to the godliness of the rest, and reckoning that that will serve 
for him without his becoming as they are. But let such remember that not one of us 
" can by any means redeem his brother, or give to God a ransom for him ; " each one 
of us must persoiially and individually give himself to God. There is no praising in 
a crowd. There was but one at the wedding-feast that had not on the wedding- 
garment ; but when the king came in to see his guests, he was at once detected, and 
cast out into the outer darkness. That is a never-to-he-forgotten fact. And what 
makes the sin of such the greater is that they were so favourably placed for gaining 
eternal life. Everything is in favour of an individual soul, if all those around him are 
pressing into the kingdom of God. He has but to go with the stream — not against it, 
as so many have to. How much increased, therefore, is their responsibility! Be 
thankful for such hallowed, helpful surroundings, and avail yourselves of them, as 
you should. — S. C. 

Ver. 7. — Lovis full-flowing tpring. This is what is meant by the abundant 
utterance told of in this verse. It is as the waters bursting out from a full spring — 
irrepressible, perennial, abundant; so when the memory of God's great goodness 
possesses the soul, it leads to such outpouring of grateful expression as the psalmist here 
tells of. Now let us speak — 

I. Of the spring itself. It has two great sources. 1. God's great goodness. The 
psalm tells much of God's providential goodness — how "the eyes of all wait upon 
thee, and," etc. (vers. 15, 16). And what a theme for never-failing praise this is I 
Who can reckon up the mercies of God given to us here and now, for the supply of 
our temporal wants, and for the comfort of our lives? Since this life is brief, earthly, 
inferior, of comparatively little worth ; and yet how doth God care fur it I He crowneth 
it with loving-kindness and tender mercy. But his " great" goodness has to do with 
the eternal life ; and when we think of what he has done for that, we can see that 
his goodness is indeed great. Whether we contemplate the depths of sin and misery 
firom which his grace has brought us up ; or whether we tell of the glorious heights of 
joy, sanctity, and service, to which he is bringing us; or of the pure beauty and 
grace which prompted him thus to deal with us so utterly undeserving; or of the 
fearful cost at which he purchased us — even the precious blood ; or of the present 
blessed help of his Holy Spirit, which we daily enjoy, and by which we are enabled to 
serve and glorify him, and to become channels of blessing to others ; — when we think 
of all this, or of any part of it, our souls are lost in wonder as we gaze with awe and 
unspeakable gratitude on his great goodness. 2. The other source of this spring is 
Gcxf ( righteouinesa, " They shall sing of thy righteousness." To the guilty soul, 
trembling with fear of God's condemnation, God's righteousness is a source of terror 
rather than joy. But to him who has leceived God's salvation aright, it causes his 
■oul to sing for joy. For deep down in the heart of man is the conviction that nothing 
bat righteousness can endure for ever ; it is the permanent element in all things that 



PB, oxLT. 1— 21.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 376 

do endure. Without it that which seems most stahle, fixed, and sure will ere long 
perish and disappear. And even the poodness of God — his great gooilness, unless there 
were righteousness at the heart of it, could not jiive the soul rest. It is hecauae 
Christ is the Lord our Righteousness, as well as the Lord our Bedeemer, that therefore 
we believe he is our Redeemer. In him we see how God can be just, and yet the 
Justi6er of him who believeth in Jesus. And the rig' teousness of God is our soul's 
support amid the manifold and many sorrowful mysteries of life. "Shall not the 
Judge of all the earth do right?" That is our deep conviction, though we cannot 
understand all that he does. We are sure that in good time all will he seen to be 
right, which now often seems to us most wrong. And there is yet another element of 
joy in God's righteousness — that it is sure to reproduce itself. " Good and upright is 
the Lord, ther^ore will he teach sinners in the way." Then he will teach me, he will 
satisfy my soul's hunger after righte jusness. 

II. Its channels. They are pointed at in ver. 6. 1. Men have been convinced of 
Ood's righteous judgments. They " speak of the might of thy terrible acts." A solemn 
fear of God takes possession of them, they tremble with deep alarm, they are pricked to 
the heart. " When thy judgments are abroad, then the inhabitants of the earth will 
learn lighteousness." Like the men of Nineveh under Jonah's awful preaching, and 
like many a sinful soul since. Deep conviction of sin is wrought by the Holy Spirit, 
and it is along this channel God's great goodness flows. 2. The proclamation of Ood's 
exceeding grace. "I will delare thy greatness." The psalmist sees and seizes the 
opportune time; and now, when the conviction of the Holy Spirit has prepared the 
way, sets forth the grace ; for that is the greatness of God. Of the greatness of his 
justice and his power they already know ; now they are told of the greatness of his 
mercy and of his readiness to forgive. Well is it when the Christian teacher can 
find hearts thus prepared ; for then it is speedily seen that God's Word does not return 
to him void. 3. For there follows the reception into the heart of the truth of Ood's 
great goodness. They could not have afterwards abundantly uttered the memory of 
that great goodness, unless first they had believingly received it. Thus along these 
channels of conviction, proclamation of the grace of God, and believing reception of it, 
we come next to— 

III. Its besebvoib. Its storage in the memory. The truth of God's grace had not 
merely glanced on the minds of those here spoken of, but it had come to stay. Hence 
it was treasured up in the reservoir of memory. Well is it when our minds are thus 
stored with memories of the grace of God — his great goodness to our souls. 

IV. Its ouTiPiiOW. 1. In abundant utterance. Some keep a wretched silence, and 
say never a word for God ; others, if they do speak, do so in such a half-hearted way 
that they might almost as well be silent. But those who have known the grace of 
God in truth, and realize the greatness of the salvation they have experienced, they 
will "abundantly utter," etc. Not alone their lips, but their lives, their look, their 
whole spirit and temper, will tell forth the vividness of their memory of God's great 
goodness. And : 2. In song. " They shall sing of thy righteousness." The utterance 
will be a joyful one — a glad sound, — not a dirge or any other such mournful strain, 
but a song befitting the glad tidings of great joy which have been made known to 
them. May we learn this song 1—S. C. 

Ver.. 9. — " The Lord is good to all." I. Never was it more nbcbssabt than now 
TO INSIST upon this BLESSED REVELATION OF GoD. 1. For One main characteristic of 
the davs in which we live is men's sensitiveness to human suffering. From one cause 
and another they have become open-eyed and tender-hearted in regard to the terrible 
distresses which afflict such vast portions of the human race. And this sensitiveness 
and compassion are unquestionably from God, and are the product of that good sud 
blessed Spirit of God, who " like as a father pitieth his children." He has been, so we 
believe, moving upon the minds of men, and has caused the bitter cry of human 
sorrow to pierce and penetrate, and rouse to practical help, many who before were but 
little con8ci«U8 of, and less concerned about, the dark and deplorable facts that lay all 
around them. Here and there we find those who regard these sad conditions of 
society, as inevitable, and therefore hopeless, and who look on with cynic doubt and 
disparaging suggestions ; whilst others are bestirring themselves to find some sort of 



aeO THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxlv. 1—21. 

remedy. 2. But this very sensitiveness needs to he soothed and sustained, strengthened 
and guided, by the faith of the love of God. For else it will rush into vrild schemes, 
which can do no good to those in distress, and -will only recoil in many sad and 
terrible ways on those who devised them. Or else it will settle down into a hopeless 
despair, and to vain, frantic protests against what it deems the cruel laws under which 
men are condemned to live. 3. Nothing hut confident trust in the love of Ood wiM 
avail. For all efforts to ameliorate the lot of our fellow-men demand patience and 
energy, and a hopefulness that nothing can quench. To face the gigantic evils of 
human life is no child's play, no holiday sport, but real, serious, earnest work, from 
which all but the true-hearted will turn away. Apart from this, men cannot and will 
not persevere in the often apparently hopeless task of lightening the burdens which 
oppress so terribly so many of their fellow-men. 

II. Fob thb foes op this faith arb found, fob the most pakt, in thb falsb 
OPINIONS OF MEN. Opinions which they seldom express openly, but which, neverthe- 
less, paralyze their power for good, and hinder all the efforts which they make to mend 
or end the evils around them. These false opinions confront the truth of our text, 
and fight agtiinst it, and too often seem to get the better of it. 1. Now, one of these 
false opinions is this — that chance rules all. Life, according to this opinion, is as a 
mere chip on a stream, caught now by this eddy, now whirled about by that, driven 
by this current in one direction, and then by another in a different one ; borne hither 
and thither, from side to side, the sport of every breeze and of every stray force that 
may bear upon it. Life, they say again, is a labyrinthine puzzle, the clue of which 
no man has found ; and so men go groping on, hoping always to find the right turning, 
but quite as likely to take the wrong. The poor and the distressed are simply unlucky, 
the prosperous are but the favourites of Fortune, the fickle goddess who, they say, 
governs all our lives. Now, no doubt, there is much in human life that looks as if it 
were the result of mere chance. For it could not be foreseen, nor influenced by any- 
thing within our power; as, for example, of what parents we should be bom, the 
kind of home which we should have, the circumstances amid which we should be 
trained, what constitution we should inherit, by what teachers we should be instructed. 
And many more and all-important elements in determining what our lives shall be, 
are, without doubt, beyond both our knowledge and controL Any hour of any day, in 
a moment, something may happen utterly unexpected by us, and which we could 
in no wise have helped or hindered, but which may have the effect of entirely alter- 
ing, for the better or the worse, our whole future. Just as by one puU of a lever 
the pointsman shunts the entire train on to a different line, the effect of which will be 
to take it the whole breadth or length of the land apart from where it would have 
gone had that lever not been pulled. And so often is it with the effect of some seem- 
ingly insignificant and unforeseen event upon our lives. When, some years ago, the 
huge reef of rocks which' barred one of the entrances to the harbour of New York 
was removed, who that did not know of the arrangements that had been made, would 
have imagined that there was any connection between the tremendous upheaving and 
shattering of those massive rocks, and the mere moving of a handle by a little girl on 
shore some miles away? But we know they must have been connected, and that, 
without the insignificant antecedent, the great result could never have followed. And 
similarly slight are many of the causes which make or mar a man's life. Observing 
such facts, the old Greeks came to believe in the doctrine of chance. The universe, 
according to them, was but the fortuitous coming together of the atoms which compose 
it. And still there are those who, if not professedly, yet really, do believe that chance, 
good luck, fortune, and mere accident govern all things. But the doctrine is horribly 
and utterly false. It is only our ignorance of the connection between events that 
makes us judge as we do. In any manufactory, our ignorance of the relation of one 
process to another never leads us to deny that there is such' relation. We are sure 
there is, though we do not know what it is. Why cannot we reason in the same way 
in reference to the various processes which go to make up our lives ? We are not the 
sport of mere haphazard or blind chance, but we are under the wise, firm, loving rule 
of our Father in heaven ; he is ordering, directing, and controlling all our affairs, and 
causing all things to work together for good to them that love him. 22. Another 
foe to the faith that " Ood is love" is the doctrine of destiny. It teaches that our lives 



M. oxLV. 1— 21.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 881 

are all governed by irresistible Divine decrees, and that we are happy or miserable, 
good or bad, saved or lost according to Divine determinations made concerning ua 
from the beginning, and entirely irrespective of our merit or demerit, or any choice or 
will of our own whatsoever. A vast theological system has been formed upon this 
basis, and is still upheld by many. It wag first sketched out by St. Augustine, in the 
fifth century ; but it was elaborated and developed into a rigid system by the great 
Protestant leader Calvin. According to this system, the human soul is helpless. 
From the foundation of the world it has been elected either to eternal glory or to 
eternal damnation; and to this latter awful doom the great mass are predestined, 
whilst only the few elect souls are ordained to eternal life. The author of this fright- 
ful system himself says of it, that it is " decretum horribile fatem attamen verum," 
Such is Calvinism, this doctrine of destiny. It is marvellous how men with human 
hearts in them, men who had ever known a mother's love or a father's care, could have 
come to entertain and maintain dogmas so horrible and so heart-crushing as these. 
The stern and awful days iu which both Au<;ustine and Calvin lived may partly 
account for it; for they were such as stirred the darker and fiercer moods of men's 
minds into terrible activity. And men, forgetting the whole spirit of the Bible, and 
oblivious of the great love of Qod in Christ, and failing amid their terrible days to see 
the innumerable proofs of God's grace and goodness, set up their poor logic and their 
interpretations of particular texts, and they heeded not the gentler teachings of their 
own hearts, and so they forged and fashioned that dark creed which has saddened and 
bewildered and injured in many ways all those on whom its grim shadow has fallen. 
But it is a false creed, and to be scouted and abhorred of every truth-loving soul. It 
must be false ; for it has the whole of the deepest instincts of the human heart against 
it, as well as the spirit of the whole Bible and the revelation of Gud in Christ. 
Furthermore, it is Buicidal to the very aim and intent of God's dealings with us, which 
is that we should love him with all cur heart, etc. But no man who really believes 
what this dreadful creed teachee can love God. If it were true, God would be a 
Moloch, and not our heavenly Fatber; a monster to be dreaded, and not the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. A creed that has such result is thereby proved to be 
false, and it is therefore to be condemned by all good men. 3. The ielief that we are 
the creatwres of circumstances. 

III. "Man's inhumanity to uan." Here is another fruitful cause of men's doubt 
of the love of God. Also^ 

IV. Cub 80BB0W8, and tbt mobe, cub sinfulness. These stand — must do so— in 
the way of our faith. The sinful heart is ever an unbelieving heart. It is only when 
" our hearts condemn us not," that we have confidence towards GKxL But let Christ 
take away our sin, and then we shall readily believe, — S. 0. 

Ver. 10. — 2%e inner circle of God's worshippers. This psalm brings before as the 
glorious picture of universal homage rendered to God, and the reason of such homage, 
and the effects thereof. How vast the choir which celebrates this high praise I How 
varied the notes of their song I How high the value at which God estimates their 
praise, and how great is its volume 1 — it is as " the sound of many waters." In this 
verse we are shown both the inner and outer circles of this choir of God's worshippers, 
and the intent is that we may be led to find and claim our place, not merely among all 
God's works which praise him, but also among his saints who bless him. Consider — 

I. The outeb cibcle of the choib. It is very large j for it includes all Oud's works. 
1. Siich as are inanimate — the outspread earth, the mighty mountain masses, the 
great and wide sea, the heavens, and all the stars of light. 2. And such as have l\fe. 
Prom its lowest vegetable forms up to the most lofty of all the creatures of God; from 
the meanest insect that for one brief summer day flies through the air, up to man 
made in the very image and likeness of God. 3. And such as have intelligence and 
will and a moral nature capable of knowing good and evil ; for these also are among 
the vorks of God, though at the head of them all. And they all praise him in so far 
as they are his works. This cannot be said of our works. Too many of them discredit 
and disgrace us, and the less seen or said of them the better. But of God we can say, 
"All thy works praise thee." Examine them how we will, subject them to the 
■(Bverest scrutiny, and tbe verdict of the psalmist will remain uuchiillenged. The 



382 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [w. oxlv. 1— 21. 

power, the wisdom, the skill, the goodaeaa of God, are evidpiit in them alL And this 
not alone in the greater works of God, but in those that are less known and are on a 
smaller scale. Most of them hare no power or choice in the matter, others act on the 
impulses of mere animal instinct, and yet others who have intelligence and will, but, 
alas! a conupt heart likewise, even they, in those regions of their nature where their 
evil will has no power, are compelled to render their tribute of praise. As it has been 
said, the ungodly are creatures of God, even if they be not of his new creation ; and all 
that is in them that is of God in the structure of their body, mind, and will, unites, 
and cannot but unite, in the universal chorus with which all God's works praise him. 
It matters not whether we survey his works in nature, in providence, or in grace. Of 
them all, wheu rightly understood, the same may be said — they all praise him. But 
all these — magniticent as so many of them are, and radiant with beauty and with ever 
manifold proof of the power, the wisdom, and goodness of God — ^these are yet but the 
outer circle. Consider, then — 

II. The inner cibcle of this oloriods choib, who ever worship God. This consists 
of the saiuts uf God. " Thy saints shall bless thee." But : 1. I^o art Qod't saints t 
The name has fallen into ill repute. It is a term of scorn, of contempt, of dislike, in 
the mouihs of not a few. They hold and affirm that if a man is called a saint, it is 
because he is either a hypocrite or a fool. It is because the world has seen too many 
sham saints, tliat it thus speaks of all saints. Hence no one now would dare to say 
of himself, however much he might hope it in bis heart, that he was one of God's 
saints. The Church of Rome professes to be able to make saints. Her canonization ia 
held to entitle any deceased individual to a right to a place amongst God's saints. But 
will any one take upon himself to show that the saints of the Roman calendar are all 
of them thus entitled? We hope they are; but we cannot say there is no room for 
doubt. Man-made saints are ever of a questionable kind. Nor is it essential to be 
numbered amongst God's saints that we should no longer live here upon earth. Those 
of whom the psalmist speaks were not dead, hut living people. They might be poor, 
tried, troubled, tempted ; but amid all such circum.'itances they lived here on earth as 
God's saints. Nor were they absolutely perfect. Some of thtm were very far from 
that ; and we do not know where to find any such now. There have been self-deluded, 
though well-meaning people, who have professed perfection; but to other eyes their 
perfection has not been evident. They have been good, devout, kind-hearted, and 
truly religious people; but flawless, faultless, they have not been. And where are 
there any such ? But if the name of saint belongs only to such, then there are no 
saints, and there never have been. But they are those of whom it may be said that 
the whole trend and aim of their lives is to do God's will. They trust him, they love 
him, they worship him, they seek ever to obey him. It is the steady aim and honest 
endeavour of their lives, and in the main and increasingly they do walk with God and 
are well-pleasing in his sight. And, blessed be God I there have been, and there are, 
many such — the good Lord make all of us such I — and these are the saints of God. 
Not flawless, immaculate, perfect people, but those who come nearest to it of all people 
living. They are the salt of the earth, the light of the world, the elect Church, God's 
best gift to our world. They are found in every Church, they are confined to none. 
No Church is without them ; none has them all. 2. These form the inner circle of 
Ood's worshippers. Their prerogative and privilege the highest of all. For they are 
more than others. God has not dealt with any others as he has with them. To them 
be has opened the treasure-store of his grace, and blessed instalments of what shall be 
fully theirs one day, they both here and now enjoy. They are the temples of the 
Holy Ghost; they are inheritors of eternal life. And they glorify God more than 
others. It is the aim and bent of their lives. Through them many other precious 
jewels of God are taken up out of the mire of sin, in which they have been long lying, 
and they witness for God amid the world of the un£;odly. God is their exceeding Joy, 
and they are his beloved. For them God orders his providential government. They 
are as the apple of his eye, and for them God's well-beloved Son was given up to die, and 
the Holy Ghost was sent and yet abides in the world. " And it doth not appear what 
they shall be." 3. And they render special worship. The other works of God praise 
him, but his saints bless him. That is more than praise ; for though we praise that 
which excites our admiration — as do skill, genius, wisdom, power — ^yet we only bless 



PS. oxLV. 1—21.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 883 

where our love is stirred. Admiration ia good, but lore is that in which Ood delights, 
and only his saints can render him that. Admiration, that which excites our praiso, 
may leave our heart cold and uncheered; but love enkindles a blessed inward fira, 
which illuminates and cheers the heart wherein it burns. Those who bless the Lord 
are blessed of him, and blessed they are. 

III. The transition fbom one to the otheb. From the outer circle to the inner. 
1. For men it is possible. For it has often been accomplished. Every regenerated 
heart has been translated from the one to the other, and the transition is eTer taking 
place. And the whole Bible is full of declarations and directions on the matter. To 
bring it about is the aim of all God's dealings with us. 2. And the means are plainly 
thown. Let there be the desire to enter into this inner circle, then the steps are the 
renunciation of all known sin; for it is sin alone that keeps us back. Then the 
surrender of the will to God, that which he means when he says, "Give me thine 
heart." This will involve obedience to God's commands, and then, for the maintenance 
of all this, and for the full entrance into the state of grace, let there be continual trust 
in Goil to do his work in your soul. 3. And how infinitely desirable all this is I For 
our own sake, for that of others, and for the honour of Christ. — S. C. 

Ver. 14. — For the fallen and the falling. How different are the ways of him whose 
everlasting kingdom and enduring dominion are told of in the previous yerse, from the 
ways of the world and of hard and selfish men I Vm metis ! is the world's verdict, and 
the facts of life too often confirm it ; but the Lord, he is the Saviour of the unsuccessful, 
the Speaker of heart-cheering words to the crushed ones in life's stern conflict, and the 
Performer for them of corresponding deeds. 

I. CONSIDEB THE TWO CLASSES OF PERSONS HERB SPOKEN OF. 1. Them that foU. 

How many of these there are in the secular struggle 1 The fight for mere life is not 
seldom so severe that many are beaten down, and unless men have some upholder, 
some strong support and prop, there would be no hope for any of them. And in the 
iocial struggle : there is the perpetual effort to advance in position ; but there are 
many who are not only utterly unable to raise themselves to a higher social grade, but 
are unable even to maintain the position in which tliey now are; they are on the verge 
of a precipice, and they are in constant peril of falling over and down. And in the 
inteltectiuil struggle : how the eager scholar strives, but the contests seem to get harder 
every day, and the overtaxed brain too often threatens to give way altogether 1 And 
there is the physical struggle: the conditions of life are often so destructive to health 
that they render full vigour of body an unattainable thing, or, if at first preserved, 
inevitably and speedily lost, and then what can a man do? And, above all, there is 
the spiritual struggle, to keep the garment of the soul unspotted, and the heart pure, 
and the will steadfast and true to God. Ah, how difBcult is all this ! How often we are 
compelled to confess, " My feet had well-nigh slipped " I How many are there of these 
fallen or falling ones 1 2. And then, there are " those that be bowed down." They do 
not fall, but it is with bent form and weary feet and burdened spirit that they stagger 
on as they best can. How frequent are the cries and complaints of such bowed-down 
ones heard in these Psalms (see Fs. xlii., etc.) I 

II, See what the Lord does fob them. 1. He upholdeth the falling ones. 
Illusti ati( n : the woman taken in adultery (John viii. ; Luke vii. 37, etc.). He does 
this by, as in these cases, gracious words; or through human ministries of sympathy 
and help; or by the kindly ordering of his providence; or, and yet more, by the 
ministry of the Holy Spirit shedding abroad in our hearts the love of God. 2. Ee 
raiseth up them that are bowed down. (Luke xiii. 16.) The world says that the 
weakest must go to the wall; but the Lord's thoughts concerning them are far other- 
wise. And su, also, have been and are his deeds. The saints on earth and in heaven 
attest this. 

■IIL Wheeefobe God thus deals with them. Because God is love. So he wins 
trophies of his grace; and his most devoted servants, and successful workers; and 
thus he encourages all men to trust in him. 

IV. In what way should wb respond i By rendering heartfelt praise ; by imitating 
his example; by turning to and trusting him tor ourselves; by making known his 
grace. — S. C. 



S84 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. oxlv. 1— 21. 

Ver. 16. — The opening of OocCs hand. We are wont to admire much in our fellow- 
men the open hand, the free, generous impartation of wl.at we have to those who have 
not. It is by no means too common a sight, but a very pleasant one when it can be 
Been. Close-flsterlness is much more the rule than open-handedness. But God is the 
God of the open hand ; the bounteous Benefactor of all, of good and bad alike. And 
not alone the love of God is shown, but his power likewise. With what toil and stress 
do we accomplish our works ! what strain of effort we put forth I But God has but to 
open his hand : he speaks, and it is done ; he commands, and, etc. All the processes 
and products of nature are but the opening of his hand ; thus simply, and with the 
augui!t and Divine spontaneity of omnipotence, he supplies and satisfies the innumerable, 
varied, ever-recurring, and vast necessities of all his creatures. 

L How ARE WE TO UNDERSTAND THIS? Certainly the broad declarations of this 
Terse need explanation. Hence we remark : 1. JTiat the desires which Ood will thin 
iatisfy do not mean all desires. Those of the wicked God does not satisfy. He may 
at times seem to; but ask the wicked themselves whether even then they are satisfied. 
They are not, and never can be. And there are many foolish and mistaken desires of 
good men which God does not satisfy; it would be ill for us if he did. 2. But they 
are the desires which he himself purposed that they shtndd he satisfied. He created 
them, and designs that they should be met ; they belong both to the body and the 
■onl ; they have to do with time, and with eternity likewise. 3. The univertaKty of 
the text must not be insisted on even for these. For it declares only what is the general 
order of God's dealings with his creatures; it is his rule, but that rule has many 
exceptions. The lower and lesser purpose of satisfying our desires may have to give 
way to one that is higher and greater. This is the meaning of all the afflictions of the 
righteous. 4. Nevertheless, the rule holds good. God does open his hand, etc. We 
are apt so to gaze on the exceptions as to lose sight of the rule ; this is wrong and hurt- 
ful every way. 5. And Ood acts in varied ways, not in any one way only. For all 
creatures other than man he ministers directly to their need ; but for man he employs' 
our own faculties, and thus only indirectly are our desires satisfied. 

II. What is its proof? Many think in their hearts, and some openly say, that 
it is their own elTorts that secure to them the satisfaction of their desires. God does not 
give to them their daily bread — they earn it ; man is his own provider. Hence they 
demur to sucli declarations as in this verse. But a little reflection will show the 
fallacy of such thoughts; for: 1. Does not God provide both the tools — powers of mind 
and body — with which we work, and the material on which we work J Hence, were 
there only our work, where would our satisfied desires be ? And the energy, too, the 
living force without which we could not work at all — is not this also from God? What 
a mere fraction of all that needs to be done is that which we do I 2. And were it much 
greater, what would that le in view of the magnitude, variety, and urgency of need that 
meets us on every hand ? If God did not do as is here said, what could man do ? How 
idle, then, is it to attribute to any other than God the supply of all our wants I 

III. What does it sat to us ? Very much indeed ; God help us to give heed ! 
And : 1. "Bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him forever." That surely is the 
first claim which this-truih makes upon us. 2. " Oh, put thy trust in the Lord." Does 
not that woid come to us from all these bounties of our God? 3. " If Ood thus cares for 
my body, will he not much more care for my soul i " Will he thus minister to the short- 
lived, material nature, and neglect or forget the eternal and spiritual ? It is impossible. 
4. What must the abominableness of sin be that compels a God so gracious to inflict on 
us, because of it, so great and awful distresses ? Not for a little thing would man have 
to suffer as we see he has. 5. If the opening of his hand be so blessed for us, what must 
be the result of the shedding of the blood of his well-beloved Son f Let us not be content 
with the lower gifts, as too many are, but seek those highest ones which are the 
purchase of the blood of Christ. 6. Let us be open-handed ourselves, (Altered and 
abridged from A. Fuller.)— S. C. 

Ver. 20. — Preservation and destruction. One or other of these lies before us all ; 
the Bible gives no hint of a third condition or destiny. How important, therefore, to 
know whither we are tending, and what awHits us at the hand of God ! 

I. The truth here declared. 1. As to those that love Ood. He will preserve 



w. cxLV. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 886 

them. He does this : (1) In the order of his providence. It is generally well with 
those that love him. (2) In their spiritual history it is certainly true (see Rom. viiL, 
at end). (3) In his eternal kingdom. No harm can reach them there. 2. As to the 
wicked. He will destroy them. (1) Now and again we see such doom come upon 
individual transgressors. History recounts the destruction of nations, and their sin 
has ever been their destroyer. Where are the great empires of olden time ? (2) But 
often and often, blessed be his Name I he destroys the wicked by destroying their 
wickedness, turning their hearts to himself. The Kins^'s arrows are sharp in the hearts 
of the KiUi^'s enemies. (3) But God's final doom on the ungodly is what is mainly 
meant in this Scripture — that awful sentence of "everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord," which must come on all those wlio will not allow that God 
should separate them from their sin. And this is no arbitrary sentence ; for note — 

II. The needs-be for it. 1. In the preservation of those that love Ood. It la 
so for the Lord's own sake; his love could not otherwise be satisfleci, nor his promises 
fulfilled. And for the world's sake ; they who love the Lord are the salt of the earth, 
and are his witnesses to men. And for their own sake, that they may be eternally 
blessed. 2. In the destruction of the wicked. If it be only a temporal destruction, it 
is needed for the vindication of the Divine Law ; for the reformation of the guilty (o£^ 
1 Cor. xi. 32) ; for witness to men that verily there is a God who judgeth. And if the 
destruction be other than temporal, it is still necessary, for how else can heaven be 
heaven? Earth is the sad place it too often is only because of the presence of sin. Is 
Bin, then, to have place in heaven, as it will if the wicked come there ? 

III. Its word of holt counsel. 1. Pray: for so is our will strengthened to 
choose the right and refuse the wrong. 2. Act: break away from wickedness and 
commit yourself on the side of God. 3. Trust: day by day, yea, continually, give 
yourself up " to him who is able to keep you from falling, and to pieseut you 
faultless," eto. 

"Help, Lord, that we may come 
To thy saints' happy home. 
Where a thousand years 
As one day appears ; 

Nor go 
Where one day appears 
As a thousand years. 
In woe." 

(Amdi) 

8. a 

Ver. 4. — The praise of succeeding generations. In the old times kingjs forwarded 
their despatches by running footmen, of whom there were relays (see Job ix. 25; Jer. 
li. 31 ; 2 Chron. xxx. 6 — 10 ; Esth. iii. 13 — 15). The statutes, ordinances, etc., of the 
Bible are the despatches of the great King. The generations, as they succeed each 
other, are the running footmen. The despatches are words of love and mercy, 'i'he 
nmnera read and publish as they advance. 

I. This work or PRESERVXNa and handing down the truth is amongst the 

VERY WEST religious DUTIES THAT OONOEBNBD THE MIND AND HEART OF MAN. 

1. Oral teaching. A patriarch's household (Gen. xviii. 19). It was a divinely enforced 
duty (Deut. vi. ; Isa. xxxviii. 19). 2. Presently the pen of the historian, etc., employed. 
Moses, Samuel, etc. 

II. This work is no less important than an(3ient. 1. Human happiness 
involved (Ps. Ixxviii. 1 — 8). 2. Glory of God advanced. 3. Hence Providence has, 
at different times, raised up supplementary aid to ensure its performance. To the 
father of each family was added the prophet, scribe, eto. ; and to these, in modern times, 
various organizations. 

III. This work, so ancient and important, is an ever-present uutv. 1. It 
belongs to the present generation, no less than to those of the past. 2. Trie world's 
progress in morality is built up by the workers of all ages. We must lay a stone or 
two. We owe it to the past. 

IV. This wobk, being religious, has to overcome great difficulties. 1. Various 
phases of scepticin*. 2. Folly in the heart of children. 3. Home influence often bad. 

HAUU — HI, 2 



886 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. cxlt. 1— 21. 

V. This work ebquirbs special qualipicationb in the wobkeb. Not so much 
mental as moral. 1. Love of God and Christ (John xxL 15). 2. Love of the truth. 
3. Love of souls. 

VL Thb wobk is accompanied bt special encoubaoements. 1. The promises 
of God, 2. The help of God. 3. The improved moral tone of society. 4. The 
glorious future present to the eye of faith. (After Gray.) — B. T. 

Yen, 6, 7. — QocFs greatness it goodness. " God's ' majesty ' is his inherent greatness ; 
his 'glory ' is the manifestation of that majesty; and its 'splendour' in the bright- 
ness of this manifestation is seen by the eyes of men." " God declares his almighty 
power most chiefly iu showing mercy and pity. The contemplation of simple majesty 
breathes awe ; the sense of graciousness in majesty adds to it the glow of thankfulness." 
" If philosophy is to be believed, our world is but an outlying corner of creation ; 
bearing, perhaps, as small proportion to the great universe as a single grain bears to all 
the sands of the seashore, or the small quivering leaf to the foliage of a boundless forest. 
Yet even within this earth's narrow limit, how vast the work of Providence I how soon 
is the mind lost in contemplating it I How great, then, must the Creator of all be, if 
his works are so great I Truly ' his greatness is unsearchable ' " (Guthrie). 

L Thk oppbession or the mebe sense op powee. Only an overwhelming feeling 
attends the working of the great forces of nature, in tempest, flood, earthquake, etc. 
Only a crushing humiliation follows on the masterful workings of great conquerors — 
Alexander, Attila, Napoleon, etc. And oftentimes the almightiness of God is so 
presented, the majesty of his creation, his control, his judgments, that the mind and 
heart of man are simply crushed before him. See the sentiment we have in relation 
to giants, who are nothing but embodiments of physical power. There is no rest for 
man in God if all we can know of God is that be is almighty, " none can stay his 
hand." Illustrate by the slavish submission of Isl^mism before a God conceived as 
absolute power only. 

IL Tee bestfdlnesb of a sense of goodness behind poweb. Dlustrate by the 
different feeling we have toward the giant when we see him tenderly toying and 
playing vrith a helpless babe. There is a character behind the power, which puts 
limitations on, and quality into, the acts of power. The giant is good. It is thus with 
God. We find no rest in the mighty things he has done, or does, until we see that 
love to us, and planning for our good, tones, quali&es, and directs all the forthputtings 
of his power. — ^B. T 

Ver. 8. — The slowness of the Divine anger. "Slow to anger, and of great mercy." 
In former homilies it has been shown that the term " anger " can only be applied to 
God with extreme caution and precision. Anger is a part of the possibUities belonging 
to man as a moral being. He would not be a man if he could not be angry. Anger is 
the proper response which man makes to a certain class of related circnmstances. And 
as man is made in the image of God, we must think that everything essential to man 
has its answering essential in God. Then there must be the possibility of anger in 
God. But man is suffering from the influence of wilfulness and sin, continued through 
long generations. And one of the most decided influences has been a loosening of 
control over the possibilities of anger, so that a man responds too quickly, and anger 
degenerates into passion. Such anger must never be associated with God, who must 
never be thought of as losing self-control under any pressure of outward circumstances. 
Then he is " slow to anger." 

L The slowness of Divine anger is man's opportunity. The type of man's 
anger is Cain, who, in a moment of passion, slew his brother, and gave that brother no 
opportunity of putting things straight. God waits, and in that waiting-time man 
gets his opportunity of recovery and repentance. He has the chance of " coming to 
himself." It may never be thought that God's slowness is the sign of his indifference. 
He feels responsively quicker than man does, but action on feeling is subject to judg- 
ment, and delayed by compassion. The slowness is mercy. The history of God's 
ancient people provides abundant illustrations of the opportunities given by the delaying 
of Divine anger. 

n. Thb slowness ov Divihs anoeb m van's pebbuasion. There i* somethinv; 



PB. oxLV. 1—21.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 887 



In man which instantly convicts him of his wrong-doing, and as instantly fills him 
with fear of God's anger. When that anger is held in, the man wonders. If he 18 a 
bad man, it leads him to presume. If he is a good man, it becomes to him a persuasion. 
It reveals to him Gud's anxiety about him. He feels to be in God's thought and 
patience, and he is moved to recover himself from that wrong state of mind and heart 
which brought on him the Divine anger. — R. T. 

Ver. 9. — Becognizing Ood's universal goodness. "We who recognize the loving- 
kindness, as well as the power of God, in what may seem llie harsher and more 
forbidding agencies of Nature, ought not to be weary and faint in our minds if over our 
warm human life the same kind pitying hand should sometimes cause his snow of 
disappointment to fall like wool, and cast forth his ice of adversity like morsels, know- 
ing that even by these unlikely means shall ultimately be given to us, too, as to 
Nature^ the beauty of Sharon and the excellency of Oarmel" (Hugh Maomillan). 
"The sun does not shine for a few trees and flowers, but for the wide world's joy. The 
lonely pine on the mountain-top waves its sombre boughs, and cries, ' Thou art my 
•on.* An<l the little meadow violet lifts its cup of blue, aad whispers with its perfumed 
breath, ' Thouart my sun.' So God sits, effulgent in heaven, nut for a favoured few, 
but for the universe of life; and there is no creature so poor or so low that he may not 
look up with childlike confidence and say, • My Father, thou art mine '" (Ward Beecher). 
Our Lord taught concerning the heavenly Father, " He maketh his sun to rise on the 
evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." 

I. God's uiiivebsal goodness is not the appeabanob of things. Prom man's 
point of view the world is full of things that he cannot call good. And he often 
wonders why God made things as they are. How can he call calamities and disasters, 
bloodshed and war, pain and death, signs of Divine goodness? He can only see the 
appearance; and with that limited vision it is wholly impossible for man to realize the 
universal goodness of God. And in moral spheres he is equally puzzled. Orime con- 
stantly goes undetected and unpunished. The wicked succeed and the righteous faiL 
How can God be good to all when so many live lives of misery ? 

IL God's univebsal goodness is the fact of things. But it can only be seen 
from proper points of view, and with the properly cleared vision. God's world is not 
Ajnaterial, it is a moral world, and a material only for the sake of the moraL Qoi'a 
universal goodness is clearly seen in the measure in which we can apprehend God's 
moral end in everything that he does and permits. — B. T. 

Ver. 10. — Praising and hlessing. Matthew Henry indicates the distinction between 
these terms, and the appropriateness with which each is used. " All God's works shall 
praise him. They all minister to us matter for praise, and so praise him according to 
their capacity; even those that refuse to give him honour he will get himself honour 
upon. But bis saints (beloved ones) do hless him, not only as they have peculiar 
blessings from him, which other creatures have not, but as they praise him actively, 
while his other works praise him only objectively. They bless him, for they collect 
the rent or tribute of praise from the inferior creatures, and pay it into the treasury 
above. All God's works do praise him, as the beautiful building praises the builder, 
or the well-drawn picture praises the artist ; but the saints hless him as the children of 
prudent tender parents rise up and call them blessed. Of all God's works, his saints, 
the workmanship of his grace, the firstfroits of his creatures, have most reason to 
bless him." 

L Fbaisiko is oomuon to all being. Because all being is creation, and has its 
satisfaction in being what it was designed to be, and doing what it was designed to do. 
We must distinguish between what creation does, and what the poetic and the pious 
Biiul thinks of creation as doing. It is true that (perhaps) everything, animate and 
inanimate, has in it the capacity of sound ; and its sound may be its voice of praise. 
But the praise is what man hears in his soul. It is the voice of nature translated by 
man. So marvellous, so perfect, and so mutually adapted, are all the creations of God, 
that every existing thing can be conceived of as praising God for its very being, because 
it finds pleasure in being. 

II. Blessing is special to has. Because it indicates the intellectual apprehension^ 



883 ILE BOUK OF PSALMS. [n. out. 1—21. 

and tbe heart-feelings, of a living moral being ; one who can reason, feel, and bear 
relations. To bless a person is to recognize gratefully something which that person has 
done /or us, and done as a sign of his love to us. And it is thus that we blesi Qod. 
It is our recognition not of common good, but of special interventions, arrangements, 
and adaptations /or tis ; and these as signs and proofs of his gracious and loving personal 
feeling toward us.— B, T. 

Ver. 13, — God's everlasting kingdom, " What is infinite in greatness must be infinite 
In duration." " Thy kingdom is a kingdom of all eternities." On the door of the old 
mosque in Damascus, which was once a Christian church, but for twelve centuriei 
has ranked timong the holiest of the Mohammedan sanctuaries, are inscribed these 
memorable words : " Thy kingdom, Christ, is an everlasting kingdom, and thy 
dominion endureth thro;ughout all generations." It is evident that the psalmist is 
endeavouring to find the most comprehensive and expressive of all terms to associate 
with God's kingdom and we must therefore notice the all-inclusiveness of thb term, 
" everlasting." 

I. God's EiNanoM is spiBirirAL. It is not the kingdom of things, created things, 
of which the psalmist writes. It is Ood's kingdom oT men, and man is essentially a 
spiritual being. The glory of an earthly king is not material possessions, but the 
loving service of free-willed peoples. God's kingdom is the rule of God's will over 
men's wills. And so we pray, " Thy kingdom come ; thy will be done." It is a sublime 
thought of God that he is the spiritual Being ruling over spiritual beings. " King of 
saints, the holy." 

II. God's kingdom is all-hallowino. It can never be identified with any earthly 
kingdom. It covers and includes them all. It is as absolutely universal as the 
spiritual being man ; and is consistent with, but independent of, all the varieties of 
forms in which men organize themselves into nations, and arrange governmental con- 
ditions. God's kingdom must not be confused with his Church, unless we make the 
Church coextensive with the kingdom. Every man, being a spiritual man, is a 
member of God's spiritual kingdom. Everything for him depends on what sort of a 
member he is. 

III. God's kinqdou ib pebmanent. It belongs to all generations, because the 
generations repeat spiritual beings, and God rules such, as long as, and wherever, they 
exist. The permanence of the kingdom is simply the necessittf o( it. It is not possible 
for us to conceive of any disintegrating forces that can possibly affect it. — B. T. 

Ver. 15. — The universal d^endenee and expectation. "Man is master. But there 
is a great deal in this world besides man. Nature takes a thousand darlings to her 
bosom. Every evening motherly Darkness puts to bed myriads of unnamed children 
of the sod, of tbe leaf, of the tree, bush, moss, and stone. Every morn she sends again 
to awaken her brood, and troops them forth to their dewy breakfast. We sometimes 
get nearer to God in proportion as we get far from men. These neglected treasures of 
Nature are a book of Divine things, and if we do not read, the Creator does " (Ward 
Beecher). It is full of a sweet significance that the same woid should be used con- 
cerning God that we use to express the anxiety and pressure under which we so often 
groan. The Apostle Peter says, " Casting all your core upon him, for he careth for 
yoiL" God cares for his possessions and his family, even as we care for ours. But 
how complex, vast, and wonderful his possessions and family are 1 and how sublime 
must be his care I 

I. God's oabb of his obbatubes been in adjustments. All his creatures are 
put in their proper places, and kept in their proper places. The distribution of 
animate life, and the adjustment of creature to environment, and ministry of each 
creature where it is put, keep up, for thoughtful minds, unceasing wonder at God's 
ever-watchful care. 

II. God'b cabe of his obeatubbb been in limitations. This point is not often 
presented. In order to be effective, the reproductive power in vegetable and animal 
life is bound to be so full and strong that there comes to be everywhere danger of 
over-production. Illustrate by the devastation wrought by rabbits when their growth 
ia exempt from limitationa. How seldom we think of God's goodness and ova in 



PB. oxLV. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 889 

keeping everything limited to strict efficiency; and providing destructive sgenoiea to 
keep growtliB within safe bounds I 

III. God's care of his creatures is been in PROviDiNaa. This brings to as 
very familiar considerations. But point may lie gained by dealing witli some sample 
cases : e.g. the gnat of the summer evening ; caddis-worm ; or those insects that are 
unpleasant to us ; dangerous serpents, etc. Gk>d " gives to them all their meat in dne 
season." — R. T. 

Ver. 17. — The absoluteness of the Divine righteousness. "The Lord is righteous in 
all his ways, and gracious in all his works." This is not the impression every man has 
of Q-od ; it is not the impression even the good man has of God at all times. It is the 
good man's thought of God when he is at his best ; raised by holy emotion above 
himself. He can say, " The Lord is righteous in all his ways " — 

L When he tries to read the histobt of the past. The story of the ages 
is kept for us in order that we may find in it what God has been, and therefore what 
God is. History as a series of facts is but a poor affair. The philosophy of history is 
its intere-t, and the Divine philosophy of history (God in history) is the supreme 
interest of it. But it is difficult work, because man can never fiilly take the Divine 
standpoint about anything. He is always obliged to get his faith to help his judgment. 
And yet, what is ever coming out more and more clearly to the devout student is the 
righteousness of God's ways. He sees how God has made things come right. 

II. When he tries to read the mysteries of the present. This is always 
per|ilexing work, because of the disturbing influence of feeling and prejudice. God's 
ways are not always what we like, and then it is very easy to say that they are not 
right. The good man has constantly to fall back upon his absolute knowlerlge of what 
God is, and upon his deep, experimental conviction of God's righteous goodness, in 
order to undo the tangle in which things seem to have got, and to put things into an 
order and relation that bring to view the Divine righteousness. 

III. When he tries to read God's dealings with himself. Under previous 
divisions we have had in mind the 'macrocosm, the whole world of things and people. 
Now we have in mind the microcosm, the limited sphere of the individual life. And 
the personal element so seriously influences a man that it takes a whole long life before 
an adequate impression of the absolute righteousness of God can be gained. And yet 
it is there, in every man's life. To see it, and live in the joy of it, is heaven. — R. T. 

Vers. 1 — 21. — Oo(^s greatness, goodness, and glory. " Every one who repeats the 
Tehillah of David thrice a day, may be sure that he is a chiW of the world to come." 

I. God's greatness. (Vers. 1 — 6.) 1. Unsearchable. (Ver. 3.) No searcliing can 
reach its bottom (Isa. xl. 28 ; Job xi. 7). 2. It is, nevertheless, heirig continually 
revealed in history. (Ver. 4.) One generation declares it to anotlier, through all the 
successive ages. 3. That which is so great and manifest cannot but be spoken of and 
honoured. (Vers. 5, 6.) The eternally great things of God, revealed to our conscious- 
ness, cannot be regarded in silence. 

II. The goodness or love of God. (Vers. 7 — 10.) 1. It is full of compassionate 
tenderness towards the needy and sinful. (Ver. 8.) " Wrath is only the background 
of his nature, which he reluctantly, and only after long waiting, lets loose against those 
who spurn his great mercy." 2. God's righteousness and love embrace all his creatv/ret, 
whatever their character. (Vers. 7, 9.) All must praise God ; but the saints will bless 
God with their grateful love. 

III. The glory of God's kingdom. (Vers. 11 — 13.) 1. It is a kingdom of power 
and majesty, God will at length accomplish all his will and all his purpose. 2. It is 
an everlasting universal kingdom. (Ver. 13.) All things in heaven and on earth, and 
throughout the whole universe, shall for ever and ever reflect and accomplish the 
infinite plan and purpose of God. 

IV. ^B glory of God's peovidenob. (Vers. 14 — 21.) 1. He supports the weak 
and falling. (Ver. 14.) 2. Be provides for the wants of all beings, great and small. 
(Vers. 15, 16.) 3. Ee is righteous and holy in all his gifts. (Ver. 17.) 4. Ee is near 
to all who truly pray, and wUl accomplish thwr salvation, (Vers. 18 — 20.) — S. 



390 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[n. oxLTi. 1 — 10. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXLVL 



The psalter ends with a olnster of " Halle- 
Injab Psalms," five in number, all of them 
both beginning and ending with the phrase. 
In the Hebrew none of tliem has any " title ; " 
but it is generally considered tliat the 
Septuagint title of the majority — 'A'yyofoii 
Koi Zcxip'ov— -embodies a true tradition, 
and that they are the " Songs of the Beturn 
from the Captivity," added to the Psalter by 
the Prophets Haggai and Zechariah. They 
form a portion of the daily morning service 
of the Jews. Ps. cxivi. praises God as 
the only tme Helper. Metrically, it falls 
into two portions — a short opening strophe 
of four verses (vers. 1 — 4), and a second 
longer strophe of six verses (vers. 5 — 10), 
getting forth the blessedness of those who 
take God for their Help. 

Ver. 1. — Praise ye the Lord (comp. on Ps. 
oxL 1). Praise the Lord, my sonl (see 
FsB ciii. 1, 2; oiv. 1, which only differ in 
the verb used — "bless" for " praise "). 

Ver. 2. — While I live will I praise the 
Lord. Nearly identical with Ps. civ. 33a. 
It is our duty towards God to be always 
praising him, if not with the lips, at any 
rate with the heart. I will sing praises 
unto my Ood while I have any being. Iden> 
tical with Ps. civ. 336. 

Ver. 3. — Put not your trust in princes 
(comp. Ps. cxviii. 10). Israel was always 
apt to trust in human rather than Divine 
help. Now it was Egypt (Isa. xxx. 2 ; 
xxxvi. 6), now Assyria (2 Kings xvi. 7), 
now their own kings or nobles. At the 
time of the return from the Captivity, too 
much was expected from Zcrubbabel and 
the other "princes." Nor in the son of 
man, Tlie Prayer-book paraphrase, "nor 
in any child of man," brings out the sense. 
Coniidence in hniuan aid of whatever kind 
is forbidden. In whom there is no help; 
or, "that hath no saving power " (nVW'n). 

Ver. i. — His breath go 3th forth, he re- 
tumeth to his earth ; or, " when his breath 
goes forth " — i.e. when he breathes his last 
— "he returns to his earth," i.e. to the 
earth of which he was made (Gen. ii. 7, 19). 
In that very day his thoughts perish. All 
his schemes and projects i'enhtonoth, a word 
not occurring elsewhere) come to an end — 
are nipped in the bud — perish. So weak is 
he, and not to be depended on. 

Ver. 5. — Happy is he that hath the God 
of Jacjb for his Help. "God of Jacob" is 



a favourite expression in the later psalms, 
where it almost supersedes the phrase, 
" God of Israel " (see Pss. Ixxvi. 6 ; Ixxxi. 

1, 4; Ixxxiv. 8; xciv. 7; cxiv. 7; cxxxii. 

2, 5 ; and the present passage). It is rare 
in the historical books and in the prophets. 
Whose hope is in the Lord his God (comp^ 
Pss. xxiL 9; xxxix.7: Ixii, 5; IxxL 5, 
etc.). 

Ver. 6. — ^Whioh made heaven, and earth, 
the sea, and all that therein is. Who is, 
therefore, an omnipotent Help, the very 
opposite of " the son of man, in whom is no 
help" at all (ver. 3). Which keepeth truth 
for ever; i.e. who keeps all his promises, 
and has promised his help to all such as 
call upon him faithfully (Ps. cxlv. 18). 

Ver. 7. — ^Whioh ezeonteth judgment for 
the oppressed (comp. Ps. ciii 6, " The Lord 
executeth righteousness and judgment for 
all that are oppressed"). Israel's history 
was an ample comment on this text. Which 
giveth food to the hungry (comp. Ps. cxlv. 
15, 16, and the comment ad loo.). The Lord 
looseth the prisoners. Either captive 
nations, as Israel; or individuals, as Jere- 
miah from his dungeon (Jer. xxxvii. 16, 17X 
Daniel from the lions' den (Dan. vi. 23), 
Peter from his prison-house (Acts xii. 7 — 10), 
and the like. Deliverance from the banoi 
of sin may also be intended. 

Ver. 8. — The Lord openeth the eyes of the 
blind (comp. Isa. xxxv. 5). The spiritually 
blind would seem to be meant, rather than 
the physically blind, since there is no record 
of any restoration of physical sight in the 
Old Testament. The Lord raiseth them that 
are bowed down (see Ps. cxlv. 14). " Bowed 
down," i.e., under the hand of oppressors. 
The Lord loveth the righteous. This lies 
at the root of all, and shows that the varioni 
deliverances spoken of in vers. 7 — 9 are to 
be understood as deliverances of the right' 
eons out of their troubles. 

Ver. 9. — The Lord preserveth the stran- 
gers. God's goodness leads him not only 
to protect the righteous, but als>) to lend bis 
special help to the weak and afflicted classes. 
"The stranger, the fatherless, and the 
widow" are constantly mentioned in the 
Old Testament as peculiar objects of the 
Divine care (Exod. xxii. 21, 22 ; Lev. xix. 
33, 34; Deut. x. 18; Job xxix. 12; Ps. 
Ixxxii. 3 ; Isa. i. 28 ; Jer. vii. 6, etc.). He 
relieveth the fatherless and widow; or, 
" upholdeth " (see the Bevised Version). 
But the way of the wicked he tnmeth up- 
side down (comp. Ps. cxlv. 20). His merci- 
ful protection of bis saints leads him to 
overthrow the goings uf the wicked, who are 
their enemies. 



PS. CXLVt. 1 10.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



391 



Ver. 10.— The Lord shall reign for ever 
(oomp. Ps*. X. 16; cxlv. 13). Even thy 
&od, Zion, unto all generations. Go the 
restoration of Israel to its own land, Jehovah 
beoomes emphatically once more " the Qod 



of Zion" (see Zeoh. li. 10; viii. 3). And 
this he remains "to all generations," since 
the Ohuroh of Christ is now the true Zion 
(Heb. xii 22). Fraise ys the Lord (see 
ver. 1). 



HOMILBTICa 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Three fulfilments. There are three ways in whtoli these verses (or 
most of them) have been or are fulfilled. 

I. In Divini! pkovidenoe. In God's dealing with his people Israel. 1. Israel 
found, again and again, that it was not in human alliances, but in the living God, thut 
its true help was found (vers. 3 — 5). Princes and powers proved to be but broken 
reeds ; but while Jehovah was sought and served, everything was secure. 2. Israel in 
captivity found its true hope and help in the living God. Though they were strangers 
in Babylon, yet they were not unkindly treated, and some of them rose to high places 
in the kingdom (ver. 9). Afflicted with "judicial blindness," they pained enlighten- 
ment in the land of exile, and learned truth there (respecting the Divine unity) which 
they never lost (ver. 8). God's word of promise was fulfilled, and he proved himself to 
he the Lord of truth and faithfulness, and the Lord of all power and might (ver. 6). 
Qod "lifted up" their hearts when " bowed down; " he gave them the precious hope of 
restoration; he opened the prison door and set the captives free (ver. 7). Thus he 
executed judgment for the oppressed (ver. 7), as he had done more strikingly when 
Israel groaned under the bondage and hardships of Egypt. 

II. In the life and wobk or Jesus Cbbist. In the course of his ministry our 
Lord wrought these wonders, conferred these very blessings with a kind and bountiful 
hand. He fed the hungry in their need (Matt, xiv., xv.). He set free the poor lepers 
who were bound fast by stem prohibitions, and let them return to their own home, 
and released those who were enslaved still more sadly by demoniac possession. He 
opened the eyes of those who had lost their sight, or were actually born blind. He 
raised up the prostrate paralytic, and straightened with gentle hand the woman that 
was so " bowed down that she could in no wise lift herself up" (Matt. ix. ; Luke xiii.). 
He showed kindness to " the stranger," to the Samaritan leper, to the Syro-phoenician 
woman. He was most gracious to those who were " bowed down " under the weight 
of social hatred and contempt; he "raised" the publican and sinner, and gave them a 
place by his side in bis kingdom. 

III. In oub own spiritual bxpbbienob. The Lord Jesus Christ now, by the 
means of his sacred truth and by the power of his Divine Spirit, does " greater things 
than those" at which men marvelled when he lived on earth. 1. He satisfies the 
hungry and thirsty souls with heavenly wisdom. We earnestly, perhaps intensely, 
crave the truth which, try how we may, we cannot discover by our own efforts — the 
truth about our God and ourselves, and the way to life eternal. He who is himself 
" the Way, the Truth, and the Life " can and does minister to our hungering hearts, and 
gives us the bread of which he that eats never hungers more. 2. He breaks the bonds 
of those who have been bound down ; he looseth the prisoners — those enslaved by vice 
and sin, held fast in the cords of their own iniquity, needing a Divine hand to release 
them (John viii. 36). 3. He enlightens our understanding, he illumines our soul, so 
that we see that, to which we had been blind before — our own sinfulness, the freedom 
and fulness of the grace of God, the blessedness of his salvation, the liberty of loving 
service. 4. He gives rest and peace to the burdened spirit. We have been " bowed 
down" under the weight of conscious guilt; but in Jesus Christ we have peace — deep, 
true, lasting ; the peace of God — Christ's own peace (Rom. v. 1 ; Phil. iv. 7 ; John 
^v. 27). 5. He ofiTers his friendship to the obedient; he "loveth the righteous." We 
are his fHends if we keep his commandments; he " will love us and manifest himself 
to us if we keep his Word." 



392 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxltl 1—10. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 4. — Thoughts that perish. It has been remarked that whilst in so large a part of 
the Bible we have the history of the Church, in the Psalms we have the voice of the 
Church. And a very varied voice it is — varied as are the vicissitudes and manifold 
experiences of the people of God. But here, at the close, the tremulous tones of sorrow 
aud distress, of fear and anxiety, and of piteous pleading, which we have so often met 
with, are all hushed, and instead, we have one jubilant note of praise — at eventide 
there is light. It is with this Book of Psalms as it is with those who love it most, 
that both for it and them there is this bright and gladsome ending. Bat it is for them 
only. Here, in the words which are before us, a very different termination is contem- 
plated. The enemies of God and of his people are spoken of; and concerning them and 
their utter extinction, the psalmist declares that not only do they die — their " breath 
goetb forth" — but their bodies orutpble into dust — " he returneth to hi« earth " — and 
even their very thoughts perish. They may have boasted loudly of what they would 
do— have breathed out threatening and slaughter; but death comes, and in that very 
day their thoughts perish. Now, in considering this declaration, let us — 

L Explain its meaninq. 1. It tells of men's thoughts. Thoughts are the rulers 
and real governors of men. The power of thought is man's noblest faculty, and its 
results are more far-reaching than that of all his other powers. By it he is distinguished 
from, and raised above, all the rest of the creation of God ; and upon the use of this 
faculty depend his character and condition now, and his eternal destiny beyond Hue 
grave. 2. But it is said that men's thoughts perish. This is not true of all thoughts 
of men, for many of them do not perish, but live with a vigour and vitality, after the 
death of him in whom they originated, far greater than ever they possessed during bis 
lifetime. And this has to be said even of many of those thoughts which it were we'] 
for men that they should perish ; for embodied in books, imprinted on the hearts and 
nature of children, transmitted from one generation to another, it is all too plain thni 
evil thoughts may live on, and work wide mischief, though the men whose minds firnt 
conceived them have long passed away. Happy would it have been for us if their 
thoughts had perished with them ; but they have not, and in a very real and awfr) 
sense, " he that is unholy is unholy still, and he that is filthy is filthy stilL" Ad i 
assuredly good thoughts do not perish. What is the Bible, but the record of holy an i 
precious thoughts, which have by no means perished, and which are fruitful of good 
now, perhaps, more than at any previous period since they were given to the minds <\t 
the holy men of old who spake or wrote them down ? And what do we not owe to th « 
recorded or remembered thoughts of good men now no more ? How the deep convif - 
tions of such men, expressed not only in words, but in their lives, have influenced thor/ 
who have come after them, even to many generations! It is, therefore, certain that aL 
men's thoughts do not perish in that very day on which they die. But our text is true 
of all unembodied thoughts. Like as it was needful for God to become incarnate if 
men were to fully know him, or, indeed, to know him at all, so those spiritual products 
of our minds — our thoughts — must take form and substance, body and shape, if they are 
to have any influence upon ourselves or others. And they do this in many ways. 
They are seen in character. " As a man thinketh ... so is he ; " so that we can reason 
back from a man's character to the nature of his thoughts. And in the character of 
others. Now, a man's children reveal not seldom what he is ; what his main thoughts 
have been are shown by the impress they have left on them, and this both for good 
and evil. And they are heard or read in his words — in a man's letters, or books, or dis- 
course—and thus their influence is made permanent. And in deeds. These stereotype 
thought, and make for it an abiding power. Now, such thoughts do not perish with a 
man's earthly life ; they continue, and often increase in power. But all other thoughts 
perish — all such as are merely thoughts, and have never been embodied in character, or 
word, or deed. And there are a vast number of these. Mere purposes and intentions 
that remain such. The psalmist is comforting himself with the reflection that the wild, 
cruel purposes of the foes of God's people will all come to nouc;ht when those who have 
formed them die. And for the blessing of the Church of God, what a host of these 
thoughts have perished! And so, too, with good intentions, if they are not acted on. 
The road to hell is paved with such. Death comes, and " in that very day," etc 



PS. oxLVi. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 393 



_ n. Illustrate its truth. The endeavours against Israel in Egypt. The destruc- 
tion of Sennacherib. Human's wrath and disconifiture. Deliverances of the Church 
in the age of the martyrs, through the death of persecuting emperors. Destruction of 
the Armada, etc. And there have been illustrations also oq the side of those who had 
cherished good purposes, but put off fulfilling them. Felix, who said to St. Paul, " Go 
thy way, and at a more convenient season," etc. Herod, who heard John the Baptist 
gladly, but ended by putting hira to death. And the sad but large army of the waverers 
and unready ones, who are found in every rank and order of society, in the Church and 
in the world, in public positions and in such as are obscure. All these furnish proof 
and illustration of our text. And there was that rich fool to whom Q-od said, " This 
night thy soul shall be required of thee," etc. (Luke xii. 16, etc.). 

III. Point out its lessons. They are such as these: 1. Of thankfulness; that 
God so puts an end to the evil purposes of evil men. 2. Of diligence. " What thy 
hand findeth to do," etc. Have done with the halting, wavering, fruitless thinkings, 
and do what God would have thee do ; and at once, lest thy thoughts perish with 
thee. 3. Seek to have thy mind filled with thoughts that will not perish, but that shall 
live and bless thee and many moie besides. 4. Commit thine heart into Ood's keeping ; 
" for out of it are the issues of life." 5. By surrender to Christ hasten the day when all 
thine evil thoughts shall perish from out of thy mind, and Christ's thoughts shall take 
their place. — S. 0. 

Vers. 5 — 10. — 3%e happiness of him that hath the Ood of Jacob for his Help and Hope. 
These verses are a statement of the solid reasons of that happiness. 

L The Lord's infinite foweb. (Ver. 6.) He is the Creator of the heavens and 
the earth, " the sea, and all that therein is. He is the mighty God, and infinite in 
power. 

II. His eternal truth. He is faithful to his Word ; he " keepeth truth for ever." 
None ever trusted in him and found his Word to fail. Contrast this with human help. 

III. His boundless compassion. See what an array of poor, helpless, and miser- 
able ones are here enumerated as the special objects of his goodness. 1. The oppressed. 
(Ver. 7.) For them, when none else can or will, he executeth judgment, and avenges 
them of their adversaries. 2. The hungry, the starving poor ; to them he giveth food. 
3. The prisoner ; those immured in the tyrant's dungeon, or shut up in rigid captivity, 
1. Hie blind. In all ages, in the lands of the Bible, blindness was a calamity as 
common as it was terrible; to give them sight was, therefore, one of the chiefest 
mercies of God, and declared his bounty and goodness as great indeed. 6. 7^ bowed 
down. What a vast company of these human experience has ever furnished I The 
burden of care, the weight of responsibility, the crushing power of sorrow, — these are 
ever at work to recruit the ranks of the bowed down. But it is the Lord's special 
office — an office to the fulfilment of which not only the psalmist here, but myriads of 
God's people in all ages, bear their testimony, to raise up them that be bowed down 
(Luke xiii. 10 — 17). 6. The strangers. In our day, in Christian lands, the stranger 
is not so forlorn a being as he undoubtedly was in the days of the psalmist. Then, to 
live on the other side of a river flowing between one territory and another, made s 
man a rival, a foe, as the very etymology of the word "rival" tells, and bound you to 
treat him as. your deadly enemy. Hence, for a man to be a stranger in a strange land 
was to be exposed to all manner of insult and wrong, and to be in continual peril of 
life itself. Israel had been such a stranger, and knew all the miseries of such a lot ; 
but he here bears his testimony that "the Lord preserveth the strangers." 7. The 
desolate by bereavement. The fatherless and the widow are selected as types of the 
most desolate of all. Remember the parable of the importunate widow as showing the 
peril of oppression on the part of cruel adversaries, and of neglect and injustice on 
the part of a corrupt and unscrupulous judge. If God did not interfere for these de.so- 
late ones, none other would. But " he relieveth," etc. Such is the compassion of the 
Lord our God ; and when a man knows this, not merely by hearing of it, but by actual 
experience, how can he keep from rendering praise to the Lord? The very stones 
would cry out if he were silent. 

IV. His perfect righteousness. Hence it is that he executeth judgment for the 
oppressed. He will not suffer wrong to prevail ; but " the way of the wicked he turneth 



394 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxlvi. 1—10. 

upsule down," for " the Lord loveth the righteous." It is delightful to think of the 
compassion of God; but even that would not so stir our hearts were it not that it is 
all based on righteousness. Man's great longing is for justice — right between man and 
man — but as yet be has never fully attained to it j and he never will until the righteous 
Lord, who loveth the righteous, is recognized and rejoiced in as our Lord and King. 
But even here and now God gives us to see his righteousness; for have we not read and 
beard of and seen, and that again and again, "the way of the wicked " turned "upside 
down "? Here, again, is another full-flowing fountaiu of praise. 

V. His perpetual beion. (Yer. 10.) Even could we attain, as one day we shall, 
to the joy of witnessing the Lord's righteous, loving, and holy rule thoroughly and 
universally established, his kingdom actually come, and his " will done on earth, even m," 
etc. ; yet, if it were but a passing and temporary dominion, destined after a while to 
come to an end, how that would sadden all our hearts, and silence the praise that would 
otherwise rise perennially towards God the Lord ! But " the Lord shall reign for ever 
. . . unto all generations." Well, therefore, may we, and will we, praise the Lord. — S. C. 

Ver. 5. — " The God of Jacob." There is true blessedness in the service of Gk)d. 
Listen to the oft-repeated declaration of joy in God with which these psalms are full 
" As the hart panteth," etc. — such is the constant theme. And the like declaration is 
found throughout the Old Testament. And in the New Testament likewise. If we 
had a Book of Psalms in this, as in the former part of the Scriptures, we should find 
that the joy of God's people in him was realized in no less degree, and sung of in no 
less exalted strains. For we have the record of Christ's servants, who, though mourn- 
ful, were yet always rejoicing. We see SS. Paul and Silas in their dark prison cell at 
Philippi, and we hear the psalms in which they sang aloud their praises unto God at 
that midnight hour, amid all the pain and outward misery of their lot. And we read 
St. Paul's letters, written during his imprisonment at Borne — such as that to the Church 
at Philippi, the key-note of which is joy. And we clearly gather from all this that the 
service of God was no less blessed in the days of the New Testament than it was in 
those of the Old. And we find our Lord beginning his first great sermon with the 
eip^i-times-repeated declaration of blessedness for his followers. And when in the 
depths of his own sorrow, when the shadow of the cross enshrouded him, and its dark- 
ness was such as could be felt, even then he told of his joy, and prayed that his dis- 
ciples might share therein. And the universal consciousness of men attests that God 
is the soul's true Solace and Strength ; the widespread profession of religion in our day 
is but the confession of the human heart of its need of God ; man's weak, wayward 
will too often hinders from full obedience to what conscience declares, but it has not 
hindered nor destroyed the declaration itself. The young ruler went away sorrowful, 
but his sorrow was the confession of the blessedness he had lost. But his conduct, and 
that of those numerous ones who cannot bring themselves altogether to reject God's 
call, alike show the conviction within them that, as our text declares, " happy is he 
that hath the God of Jacob for his Help," ere. But if those who never heartily act 
u|i0Ti it nevertheless have this conviction, how much more deeply is it felt by those 
who yield to it, and who seek and find that God whose service is ever blessed ! But 
heru the happiness of God's service is es| ecially connected with the fact that God is the 
God of Jacob, and that the Lord was his God. The reason of this was because — 

L The God of Jacob is One who combs near to us, so that wb mat khow 
HIM. It was so with Jacob. See in his history how often God came near to him — at 
Bethel, when serving with Laban ; at Peniel ; and at yet other times and places ; so that 
there is left upon our minds the conviction that it was the continual privilege of Jacob 
to enjoy this communion with God. God was Jacob's God because he was thus willing 
to come near to Jacob, and to be known by him as his God. Now, such knowledge oi 
God as this must minister to the happiness of a man. Where should we be, in the 
midst of all the bewildering confusion of affairs, as it seems to us, unless we had the 
faith of God? What a cage of wild beasts this world would quickly become were 
the faith of God to disappear from men's minds I In times of ease and prosperity, when 
men have more than heart can wish, and fare sumptuously every day, they may 
imagine that they can do without God ; and, so far as any acknowledgment of him on 
their parts is concerned, they do deny him altogether. But in the dark hours of life, 



P8. OXLVI. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 395 

and when heart and flesh fail — as sooner or later they will — then the need of God is felt 
and confessed as it ought always to have been ; then it is seen that " happy is he that 
hath the Otoi," etc. And it is seen by him who hath such Help not in dark hours 
only, but at all times. Who can tell the quiet of mind, the holy strength, the calm 
patience, the unquenchable hope, the unfaltering trust, that are begotten of this most 
blessed Help? And as he was willing to reveal himself to Jacob, so will he to us; and 
in Jesus Christ our Lord he has revealed himself, and promised to be with us always. 
"God made us for himself, and our heart has no rest until it finds rest in him." 

II. Not onlt mat wb enow Sim, but he is One who knows us. " He knoweth 
the way that I take." With what constant interest does God appear to have watched 
over all the way along which Jacob had to go 1 When Jacob did not think God was 
near him, he was so, as at Bethel. And at the end of his life he tells of God as " the 
God who fed me all my life long . . . the Angel which redeemed me from all evil." 
He was not to Jacob, he need not be to us, any mere abstract, far-away Being, but one 
God. It is true of us who trust him that he interests himself in our concerns. In all 
that affects his people he takes a living and a loving interest — not alone in their 
religious life, but in their secular, business, everyday life as well. Do let ua believe 
this. We are very apt to forget it, if not question and almost deny it. But God is 
called the God of Jacob for this very reason, that we may joyfully know him as the 
God who careth for us at all times. 

III. And because Jacob so bei'resents us all. God is often spoken of as the 
God of Abraham and of Isaac. And so he was ; but they lived on so lofty a plane — were, 
especially Abraham, such heroes of faith, that we, poor, feeble, imperfect, stumbling, 
falling people that we are, fail to get much consolation out of that name. But when 
we are told that he is the God of Jacob, then we come to see that he is just the God such 
as we all need. We want a God who will be gracious, and will not cast us off and 
throw us over because of our sins. He will punish us for them, as he did Jacob, and 
hold us down to the punishment until we will let the sin go ; but he will not cast us 
off. No ; he is the God of Jacob, and we are all of us far more Jacobs than we are 
Abrahams. And he will ever keep before us bright hope. All along through the 
weary way that the patriarch had to take he was cheered by the promise of God which 
be had received at Bethel. He never forgot it ; it shone like a beacon-light before him, 
and its good cheer never left him. The opened heavens, the throne of God, the ladder 
uniting earth and heaven, the angels ascending and descending, — this vision, ratified 
with repeated promise, was the mainstay of his soul, and enabled him to go forward on 
the way God had appointed for him. 

IV. And it is thus God- deals with us. We -have "the hope set before us," 
and, " looking unto Jesus," we are strong to run the race set before us. And meanwhile 
we have given to us blessed instalments of what hereafter we shall abundantly receive. 
We have, or may have, the sense of God's forgiveness, the blessedness of the pure in 
heart, the joy of God's presence, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit; and each of 
these precious gifts serves but to confirm and intensify our hope. But the all-important 
question is — Have we the God of Jacob for our Help? We may not have, but yet we 
may have, very much that is good and fair. God may fill your veins with health, 
your coffers with gold, your rooms with all things of beauty, and your whole life with 
comfort and outward ease. " But you are like in such case to those trees which in the 
winter-time are called Christmas-trees. One feels a kind of pang at the first sight of 
such a tree. No doubt it is beautiful in its way, with the little lights twinkling among 
the branches, and the sweet gifts of affection hanging from every spray. But the tree 
itself — are you not sorry for it? Booted no longer, growing no more. No more circu- 
lation of the living sap, no more sweet discoursing by its means between air and soil, 
between soil and air. The last waves of its life are sinking, and the more you hang 
upon it and the more you gather round it, the faster it will die " (Dr. A. Baleighji 
And if our hope be not rooted in the God of Jacob, we are like one of those trees. 
Loaded, it may be, with all manner of pleasant things, and surrounded with affection, 
but dying all the while. Let it not be so with \is, for it need not. — S. 0. 

Ver. 3. — 77ie vanity of human tnuti. " Rely not even on pious princes, they are but 
men, and many princes will be arrayed against you ; but trust God. This lentiment 



396 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. oxlvi. 1—10. 

was naturally awakened by the circumstances of the period of return from the Captivity, 
to which these psalms belong." " This psalm was evidently composed for a time of 
great national depression, when the community, sick of dependence on the favour of 
foreign princes, turned more and more to the thought of the eternal righteousness and 
fiiithfulness of Jehovah." 

"Oh, how wretched 
la that poor man that hangs on princes' favours I " 

" The word employed, n'dibim, means primarily free-will givers or beneractors, so that 
it is not the capriciousness of earthly poti ntates that is in view, but their inability, 
willing or not, to render substantial assistance." 

I. This is the lesson which the back has to lbabn. In the light of it may be 
read the story of humanity. That story begins with the safety and innocence of free- 
willed, voluntary dependence. It passes into the peril and disaster of self-rdianet. 
Ages unfold a thousand forms in which man vainly tries to remedy the disaster into 
which he has brought himself by relying on the aid of his fellow-man. The universal 
hopelessness of such reliance, however tried, will bring round the race at last to the 
safety and virtue of full and entire and obedient trust in God. 

IL This is the lesson which the individual has to learn. It is the lesson to 
be learned in every life that is lived ; and yet some never seem to learn it. The more 
marked instances of the untrustworthiiiess of man, which sometimes bring about our 
material ruin, are but prominent and impressive illustrations of an insufBciency which 
belongs to humanity, and is found in some degree affecting every form of human 
relation and alliance. Measures of trust in men are permissible, and bring much of the 
restfulness and joy of life; but absolute trust in man is never safe. Even from our 
dearest and best friends of earth we learn to turn to God, and find in him, and in him 
alone, our soul's refuge and rest. — E. T. 

Ver. 5. — " The Ood of Jotcoh" It is suggestive that Jacob should be thus singled 
out, and God shouM be presented in the special relations that he bore to that particular 
pHtriarch. God is tlie God of Abraham and of Isaac; but while there is much to be 
learned of God from his rel^ti ns to them, there was — and in an unusual sense there 
was fur the returned exiles — something special to learn about God from his relations 
with Jacob. The point of interest seems to lie in these contrasts. 

I. Abbaham and Isaac lived, on the whole, restful, quiet livbs; Jacob lived 
A LIFE OF strain AND CHANGE. The Impressiou left on us by the lives of Abraham 
and Isaac is that of peaceful careers. Their movements were quiet tribal migrations, 
and the troubles they passed through were only family experiences and neighbourly 
quarrellings. From them we learn what God is in relation to the usual and commnn- 
place in human experience. But Jacob was a man who was tossed about from the 
beginning to the end of his days. A quiet, home-loving man, who was never permitted 
to be quiet. He had a life fiUl of stern experiences ; the strain was on him right up to 
life's close. We cannot wonder that the returned exiles, who found they had entered 
upon a very hard experience, should think of Jacob, and comfort themselves by 
recalling what God bad been to him. The "God of Jacob" is the Ood of the 
chequered life. 

II. Abbaham and Isaac had, on the whole, good natural dispositions ; Jacob 
BAD A TAINT OF EVIL IN HIS NATURAL DISPOSITION. God is the God of those who are 
born amiable, as Samuel was ; and the most beautiful flowers of character are those in 
which grace is triumphant in sanctified amiability. And yet most of us turn anxiously 
to inquire what God was to Jacob, who was not born amiable, who carried from his 
mother a guileful, grasping, and over self-reliant taint of evil. God could be the God 
of Jacob. True, a man with such a disposition will mnke for himself a hard, stem 
life. And it is well for him not to have that easy life which would only nourish his 
evil. But God is in full and direct relations with the man in whom principle is 
struggling for mastery over frailty. But that just describes Jacob, and may just describe 
u».-^T. 

Yen. 6 — 8. — Satj%/aet{on in the ictivity of Ood. Herein Is a marked oontian 



P8. oxLVi. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 397 

between Jehovah, the God of revelation, and all the gods which men have of them- 
selves createil. Man always Imagines his supreme God as quiescent, impassive, 
eternally still. Revelation presents to us God as ceaselessly active, never still, every- 
where working. All creation, involving susteaance, involves the constant energy 
and enterprise of God. Brahma is the infinitely sUent one. The figures of a Buddha 
embody the perfection of listlessness and indifference. The Lord Jesus Ohrist gave 
us our primal and essential thought of God when he said, " My Father worketh 
hitherto, and I work." 

I. Man is surbounded with the activities op evil. More than surrounded, for 
there is the more serious activity of evil within, him. What has to be taken into full 
account is that evil is a ceaselessly and energetically active force. That tin h is 
embodied for us in the description of evil as "a roaring lion, walking about, Cvking 
whom he may devour." It is on account of that activity that we are biddiu to 
" watch." When men sleep, the enemy is active, and goes sowiug tares in their fields. 
One thing often surprises men. Temptation takes them at unawares ; sometimes in 
their times of conscious strength, sometimes when they are unconscious of their weak- 
ness. Morning, noon, and night we have to take account of ever-active, evil. 

II. Man needs the assurance op the sdperior activity op God. Illustrate by 
the way in which this need was felt by Persians, and met by Zoroaster, who taught 
the si\perior activity of Ormuzd over Ahriman — a superior activity which assured a 
continuous as well as a final triumph. This psalm brings on us an answering impres- 
sion of the activity of our good God. And it is an activity (1) in the sphere of the 
things that affect man, and (2) in man himself. Fur it is the chief charm of the 
activity of God that we may think of it as the sanctifying activity of the Holy Spirit, 
who " dwelleth with us and in us." — B. T. 

Ver. 9. — Types of the helpless. The stranger, the widow, and the orphan are con- 
stantly presented in the Law as objects of compassion and beneficence. " God obtains 
right for the oppressed, gives bread to the hungry, and consequently proves himself to 
be the Succourer of those who suffer wrong without doing wrong, and the Provider for 
those who look for their daily bread from his gracious hand." 

I. The orphan is the common type op the helpless in all lands. Before powers 
of self-help are developed, he is deprived of both the father who earns for him, and the 
mother who cares for him. The God of the helpless is at once revealed when he is 
called the "Father of the fatherless," and when it is said, "In thee the fatherles* 
findeth mercy." 

II. For the widow as a type of the helpless, it is necessary to think op the 
widows of Eastern lands. Illustrations may be taken from India. There the widow 
is not allowed to marry again ; she is unable to work for her living, and would not be 
permitted to do so if she could ; and, worse than all, at home she is only tolerated, for 
her husband's death is regarded as a judgment on some sin of hers. It is of the 
tenderest significance that God is called the " Judge of the widow," and that he is 
represented as saying, " Let the widows trust in me." 

III. The btbanoee is an Eastern type op helplessness. Modern civilization 
has destroyed personal concern for the welfare of strangers. It has provided its hotels 
and institutions, and shifted on to public bodies its individual concern. But in the 
East the stranger arriving at any place was freely offered hospitality; every home was 
open to him. He was recognized as temporarily helpless, because lor the time away 
from home and friends. 

Think, then, how the good man is influenced by these three types of helplessness. 
And from the good man rise to think of God as moved by the pitiful sight of the 
widow, the hopeless outlooking of the orphan, and the anxious inquiring (jf the denolato 
stranger. They, and all helpless ones, may be sure of two things : 1. God will help 
them to help themselves. 2. God will help them when they cannot help themselves. 
" Friend of the friendless and the faint."— B. T. 

Ver. 9. — Divine judgment in the confusion of plans. " Tumeth upside down," or 
"bends aside." "The Divine providence, when the wicked man has laid out his 
plana, and looks as it were along a plain and level road of prosperity, bends the 



898 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [w. oxlth. 1— 20. 

prosperous course aside, makes the path crooked instead of straight, full of irouble and 
calamity instead of prosperous and sure." " That which happens in the course of 
God's providence, and as the inevitable result of his righteous laws, is usually ascribed 
in Scripture to his immediate agency." " Turneth upside down." " He fills it with 
crooked places ; he reverses it, sets it down, npsets it. That which the man aimed at 
he misses, and he secures that for himself which he would gladly hare avoided. The 
wicked man's way is in itself a turning of things upside down morally, and the Lord 
makes it so to him providentially. Everything goes wrong with him who goes wrong" 
(0. H. 8.). 

I. Plans made without God will have, booneb ob lateb, to take God into 
ACCOUNT. The bonest truth is that man can never safely make any plans without 
taking QoA, and God's relation to things, into consideration. And yet this must be 
acknowledged as a truthful description of the wicked man — " God is not in all his 
thoughts." But all man can ever do is, strong-willedly persist in putting God out of 
consideration. And God may respond by leaving him alone for a while. But the man 
cannot keep up his self-willedness long, and God will not keep aloof for ever. When 
Gkxl puts himself into consideration, man's schemes are confused, and man's plans fall 
about him in ruins. Man proposes ; God disposes. 

IL God will simELT ovebbide all man's self-willed flans in the lono run. 
Asaph and the psalmists of his class are full of iretfulness because the plans of the 
wicked seem to succeed. "He bringeth wicked devices to pass." But Asaph goes 
into the sanctuary of God, and then he understands their end. Wait but a while. 
God is sure to "arise and shake terribly the earth," and shake down the most 
apparently stable erections of self-willedness. — B. T. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Ood alone worfhy of tnut. " Bears evident traces of belonging to 
the post-Exile literature ; and the words of vers. 7 — 9 are certainly no inapt expression 
of the feelings which would naturally be called forth at a time immediately subsequent 
to the return from the Captivity." 

I. Even the mightiest of mankind aee unwobtht or tbust. 1. Z%ey cannot 
save in our greatest extremities. " In whom is no help." From want of ability and 
often from want of will. 2. 2^ plans and projects of man soon come to on end. (Ver. 
4.) His purposes perish, and he passes away. The masters of one age are deposed by 
those who come after them, and their systems are exploded. 

II. Those onlt abb happt who tbust in Jehovah. (Vers. 6 — 10.) 1. God is 
the (^mighty Creator. (Ver. 6.) Of the heavens, the earth, the sun, and all living 
things. This is power, spiritual and physical. 2. Ood imchangeably adheres to the 
ful/Ument of his promises. (Ver. 6.) " Keepeth truth for ever." Men easily change 
their mind, and do not keep their word. 3. He obtains right for the oppressed. (Ver. 
7.) Cannot allow unrighteous men a final triumph over the weak and unprotected. 
Succours those who suffer wrong without doing wrong. 4. Provides daily bread for 
the poor and needy. (Ver. 7.) God is a bountiful God, "who giveth to all men 
liberally, and upbraideth not." 6. Is beneficent and gracious, as the Ruler of men. 
(Vers. 7 — 9.) " Looseth the prisoners " (Isa. Ixi. 1). " Openeth the eyes of the 
Uind " — both of the mind and the body. " Raiseth up the fallen, and upholds th« 
fainting." "He loveth the righteous," but he is tender towards all the naturally 
defenceless — the strangers, the widow, and the fatherle.-s. 6. Ood's kingdom endiireth 
for ever. (Ver. 10.) The eternal duration of his kingdom is the guarantee for its 
future glorious completion, and for the ultimate victories of love. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 
PSALM CXLVIL 



This psalm is generally assigned to the 
time of the dedication of the city wall 
(Neh. xii. 27 — 43), when the gate-towers 
bad been set np, and the gates and bars 



put in their places (see ver. 13 ; and onmp. 
Neb. vii. 1 — 3). It is, more manifestly than 
any of the others, a Retnm joy-song (vers. 
2, 12 — 14). Its delicate appreciation of 
the grandeur and beanty of nature, and of 
God's closeness to nature (vers. 4, 8, 9^ 14, 



PS. OXLTO. 1 — 20.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



899 



16 — 18), is almost peculiar to it. Metri- 
cally, it seems to divide into three stunzas 
or Btrophea— one of six (vers. 1 — 6), one of 
five (vers. 7 — 11), and one of nine verses 
(vers. 12—20). 

Ver. 1. — Praise ye tbe lord: for it is 
eood to sing praises unto our God (comp. 
Ps. xcil. 1). For it is pleasant (see Fs. 
cxxxv. 3). And praise is comely; rather, 
becoming, or seemly — suitable, that is, to 
such a Beins as we know God to be. 

Ver. 2. — The Lord doth hnild up Jeru- 
salem. The rebuilding of Jerusalem nfter 
the return from the Babylonish captivily 
covered a space of above ninety years, from 
B.C. 538 till B.C. 445. First the temple was 
built (B.C. 538 — 515); tiien the city ; finally, 
the walls and the gates (b.o. 445). It was 
in connection with this last portion of the 
building that the present psalm seems to 
have been written. He gathereth together 
the outcasts of Israel. The exiles returned 
gradually — some with Zerubbabel (b.o. 5H8) ; 
some with Ezra, in B.o. 457 ; others, doubt- 
less, with Nehemiah, in b.o. 445 ; and again 
in B.O. 434. 

Ver. 3. — He healeth the broken in heart 
(comp. Ps. li. 17; Isa. Ivii. 15). Israel in 
exile was broken-hearted, wretched, miser- 
able (see Ps. cxxxvil. 1 — 4 ; Isa. Ixiv. 6 
— 12). Their restoration to their own land 
"healed" them. And bindeth up their 
wounds (oomp. Isa. Ixi. 1, " He hath sent 
me to bind up the broken-hearted "). 

Yer. 4. — He telleth the number of the 
stars. Nothing escapes God's knowledge. 
He knew the number of tlie exiles, and the 
place and name of each, just as he knows 
the number of the stars and their names 
(comp. Isa. xl. 26). He calleth them all by 
their names (see Job ix. 9 ; Isa., Z.«.d.). 

Ver. 5. — Great is our lord, and of great 
power; or, "miglity in strength" (comp. 
Nah. i. 3). His understanding is infinite. 
He is at once omnipotent and omniscient. 

Ver. 6. — The Lord lifteth up the meek 
(oomp. Pss. oxIt. 14 ; oxlvi 8). He casteth 
the wicked down to the ground (comp. 
Ps. cxlvi. 9, and the comment ad !oo.). 

Ver. 7. — Sing unto the Lord with tiianks- 
giving. God is not only to be praised for 
his greatness (ver. 5), but also to be thanked 
for his loving-kindness (vers. 2, 3, 8, 9). 
Sing praise upon the harp unto our God. 
The glad sound of the harp should accom- 
pany his praises. 

Ver. 8.— Who covereth the heaven with 
clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth. 
In the parched and sultry East "clouds" 
and "rain" are a boon that we of the 
temperate West can scarcely appreciate. 
The cruel heat of the solar lays in a clear 



sky for weeks or months together causes 
a longing of the intensest kind for sliade 
and moisture. Man and beast alike re- 
joice when the time of the autumn rains 
draws near, and the cloudless blue of the 
summer heaven gives place to a sky that is 
grey and overcast (comp. Job xxxviii. 25 — 
41; Ps. civ. 13). Who maketh grass to 
grow upon the mountains. The "moun- 
tains," and even the plains of Palestine, are, 
with rare exceptions, completely burnt up 
at the close of summer, and show no verdure, 
but merely an arid sapless, brown or buff 
vegetation. When the " former rain" begins, 
a great change begins. Tender green blades 
of grass at once sprout up, and in a little 
time the whole country shows a tinge of 
verdure. 

Ver. 9. — He giveth to the beast his food 
(oomp. Pss. civ. 27; oxlv. 15, 16). The 
constant supplies of their own proper food 
to ail classes of animals are among the 
principal proofs of God's power and good- 
ness. And to the young ravens which cry. 
Even the unclean raven, with his harsli 
croak and inelegant form, is not neglected 
(comp. Luke xii. 24, " God feedeth them "). 

Ver. 10. — He delighteth not in the strength 
of the horse. In a certain sense, God no 
doubt "delights" in the glory and excel- 
lency of all liis creatures ; but their physical 
endowments do not give him the sensible 
pleasure which he derives from the moral 
qualities of his rational creation (see ver. 
11). The negation is not absolute, but 
relative (compare "I will have meroy, and 
not sacrifloe"). He taketh not pleasure 
in the legs of a man; (.e. in his strength 
and swiftness, 

Ver. 11. — The lord taketh pleasure in 
them that fear him (comp. Ps. cxlix. 4). 
The "fear" intended is, of course, that 
which includes trust and love (see the 
next clause). In those that hope in his 
mercy ; or, " that wait for his loving-kind- 
ness." 

Ver. 12. — ^Praise the Lord, Jerusalem. 
The other exhortations to praise in the 
psalm are general (vers. 1, 7) ; now a special 
call is made on Jerusalem to give him 
praise, since Jerusalem has lately expe- 
rienced special mercies (vers. 13, 14). Fraise 
thy God, Zion (comp. Ps. oxlri. 10). 

Ver. 13.— for he hath strengthened the 
bars of thy gates. The strength of gates 
in the ancient world depended wholly upon 
their bars, which were generally strong 
beams of wood passed across from side to 
side of the gateway, about midway up the 
gate, having their ends inserted into strong 
iron hooks or clamps, whioh were let into 
the stonework of the walls. The " bars " of 
the gates of Jerusalem are mentioned in 
Nehemiah repeatedly (oh. iii. 3; G, IS, 1^ 



400 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P8. OXLVII. 1 — 20. 



19 ; Tii. 3). He hath blessed thy children 
within thee. Under Nebemiah's govern- 
meiit, when he hnd firmly established it, 
Israel enjoyed a period of repose and of great 
prosperity, which, at the date of the psalm, 
was probably just commencing. 

Yer. 14. — He maketh peace in thy borders. 
The completion of the walk and gates of 
Jerusalem brought to an end the troubles 
caused by Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem, 
and established general peace and tran- 
qnillity in Israel. And fiUeth thee with tke 
Qnest of the wheat ; literally, with the fat •/ 
wheat; i,e. wheat in abundance and of good 
^nality. The prosperity of Nebemiah's 
time appears in Neh. x. 28 — 39; zii. 44 — 
47 : xiii. 12—15. 

Yer. 15. — He sendeth forth his command- 
ment upon earth. Heavy crops, good 
harvests, abundant food, result from Ood's 

Erovidential ordering of bis world, to which 
e gives commands that are obeyed in- 
stantly, since his word rnnneth very swiftly. 
Yer. 16. — He giveth snow like wool. The 
loveliness of new-fallen snow has evidently 
been felt by the psalmist, to whom it has 
seemed like a spotless robe of whitest wool 
spread upon the earth. Snow, though rare 
in Palestine, does occasionally fall, and is 
■aid to " cover the streets of Jerusalem two 
winters out of three. It generally comes 
in small quantities; but there are some- 
times very snowy winters." In 1879, for 
instance, sdow lay in Jerusalem to a depth 
of seventeen inches (Geikie, 'The Holy 
Land and the Bible,' vol. ii. p. 58). He 
Bcattereth the hoar-&ost like ashes. The 
metaphor is less appropriate, and was 
selected, probably, on account of the near 
resemblance of the two words, TtSphor and 
kaepher. 

Ver. 17. — He oasteth forth his ice like 
morsels; or, "like crumbs;" (.«. in pro- 
fusion, as men feed birds. The "ice" 
intended would seem to be that of hail- 
stones. Who oas stand before his ooldl 



Though the thermometer rarely shows 
more than six or seven degrees of frost in 
Palestine, yet the Orienbil is as much 
chilled by such a temperature as the Eng- 
lishman by one twenty degrees lower. He 
shivers in his light attire, and la very 
reluctant to leave the shelter of his house 
or tent, 

Yer. 18. — ^He sendeth out his word, and 
melteth them (comp, ver, 15). God has 
only to "speak the word," and all trao^ of 
winter disappears — hoar-frost, hail, snow, 
melt away, and the atmosphere is once more 
soft and genial. He causeth his wind to 
blow. The change nsually comes with a 
change of wind, which, as with ourselves, 
is commonly cold from the north and east, 
warm from the west and south. And the 
waters flow. A thaw sets in, and soon all 
the watercourses are full of rushing streams. 

Yer. 19, — He showeth his word unto 
Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto 
Israel, Beyond and above all the physical 
blessings which God bestows on man are 
the gifts of spiritual enlightenment and 
direction. These also Israel may count on 
receiving from him, who has already given 
them a written revelation — "statutes and 
judgments" — while he also enlightens and 
directs them from time to time by his 
prophets. 

Yer. 20.— He hath not dealt so with any 
nation. Though the Word of God, to a 
certain extent, "lighteth every man that 
Cometh into the world" (John L 9), yet 
this light of nature is not to be compared 
to the revelation vouchsafed to brael, 
Israel was God's "peculiar people," and 
bad peculiar privileges, which Involved 
special responsibilities. And as for his 
judgments, they ((.e. the nations) have not 
known them (comp. Amus iii. 2, " You 
only have I known out of all the families 
of the earth: therefore will I visit upon 
you all your iniquities"), Fiaise ye th* 
Lord (oomp. ver. 1). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — ^11. — Foundation-truth*. We are summoned by the psalmist to praise God ; 
we are told that praise is " pleasant " and " comely " (ver. 1) ; it is an act which is 
congeninl and fitting, because the God we worship is one who is worthy of all the 
homage we can pay him; he is "greatly to be praised" (Ps. cxlv. 3). The grounds 
on which we are invited to bless God are very familiar, but they are very sound and 
strong ; we can never dwell too much upon them. 

I, His infinitude in undebbtandino, (Ver, 5.) " There is no searching of his 
understanding " (Isa. xl. 28 ; see Rom. xi. 33 — 36). When we consider what must 
be the understanding of him who created and who sustains this marvellous framework 
of nature, who guides and upholds all things throughout the vast universe, every 
■mallest thing as well as the greatest being subject to him and dependent upon him, 
we get some faint idea of the absolute boundlessness of the Divine wisdom. 



P(i. cxLvir. 1— 20.] THE BOOK OF PSALM& 401 

II. His ALMIQHTINB88. " Of great power " (ver 5). 

III. HiB BKNEFiapNOB. (Vers. 8, 9.) It would be a terrible thing, indeed, for all 
created beings if almighty power were under the control of malevolence, or even of 
selfishness. We see what happens when exceptional human power is directed by 
unscrupulousness ; we see what suffering, what desolation, is the result. We are so 
familiar with the thought of God's goodness that we are not much affected by it ; but 
we ought to be profoundly stirred by the truth that omnipotence, exercised every- 
where in God's vast domain, through every sphere, is put forth to feed, to clothe, to 
shelter, to help, to relieve, to brighten, to bless, 

IV. His oondescbnbion. (Ver. 4.) God "humbles himself to behold" every 
particular star that shines in the heavens, every single event that happens on the 
earth, every individual human soul that thinks, that feels, that struggles, that endures. 
Christ " oalleth his own sheep by name " (John x. 3). He not only cares generally 
for his flock, but particularly for each member of it. 

V. His rightboubnesb. (Ver. 6.) Those who are content to accept his ruling, and 
to take cheerfully the humblest sphere he has assigned them, he " lifts up ; " to them 
he gives honour, satisfaction, joy, life. The meek are made to " inherit the land " 
(Matt. V. 5), to spend peaceful, happy, useful days. But the wicked that exalt them- 
selves unjustly and unscrupulously, he " casteth to thp ground." God makes pride, 
violence, vice, to lead downwards, and to end in shame. 

VI. His tenderness. (Ver. 3.) When our spirit is very sorely wounded, when 
our heart bleeds after some specially hard blow, then we shrink from the rough handling 
of conventional condolence ; we feel that we cannot bear the touch of any hund but 
the gentlest of all. There is often the truest kindness in silent sympathy, for speech 
would be hurtful, and make the wound bleed again. Only Christ can help us then. 
He can render us the ministry we need — can heal the broken heart, and bind up its 
wounds. There are deep places through which, now and again, we have to pass, of 
which it has been truly said, " That is a mighty baptism, and only Christ can go down 
with us into those waters." But he can, and he does. His Divine tenderness " soothes 
our sorrows, and heals our wounds." 

VII. His good pleasure. (Vers. 10, 11.) €h)d's regard is not given to any of 
those outward and visible things, in beholding which we take pleasure, and on which 
we rely for safety ; his regard is granted to the human spirit that is reverently turned 
to him in lowly worship, to the heart that is trusting in his promised mercy. The 
Divine Saviour is not approving the Church that is boasting of its wealth, or its 
numbers, or the compactness of its organization ; he is well pleased with the little 
company of souls that are realizing his presence, having true fellowship with him, 
sharing his suffering and sacrifice, leaning on his Word. 

VIII. His salvation and restoration. (Ver. 2.) He who brought back the 
exiles from Babylon, redeeming them from servitude and dishonour, and who " built 
up" Jerusalem, ia the God who now brings home to himself those that have been 
afar off; and is he who now builds up his Church in the face of its enemies. 

Vers. 12 — 20. — National wdl-leing. Piety and patriotism, that go so well together 
and were so intimately bound together in the mind of the Jews, are here very closely 
associated. We, too, are convinced that the future of our country will be determined 
by its faithfulness or unfaithfulness to the Lord whom it professes to serve. There 
are four features of national well-being here. 

I. Security. (Ver. 13.) " He hath strengthened the bars of thy gates. Jerusalem 
was surrounded by its protecting walls (Neh. ii. 12), and its citizens could work in 
safety and rest in peace. In our island home, which has known no shadow of fear of 
invasion for eighty years, we cannot realize how great a blessing is freedom from that 
great national evil, or from the dread of it. The thought hardly enters into our minds. 
But we have, if we would think about it, all the more occasion for gratitude^ that we 
abide in such continuous safety and security ; we have " peace in our borders." 

II. Prosperity. (Vers. 14 — 18.) The wealth of a country depends very largely on 
the industry, the frugality, and the forethought of its people. If they do not carefully, 
systematically, and (we may add) scientifically cultivate its fields, spare and plant its 
trees, penetrate its mines and its waters, save their resources for renewed fertilization 

PSALMS — ni ^ '* 



402 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oXLvn. 1— 20 

and for enterprise of various kinds, the country will, in these times of competition 
more especially, certainly decline. But its prosperity also depends on the bounties of 
Divine providence : on the fall of rain and snow ; on the regular return of the seasons 
in their order; on the cold winds of winter, and the warm airs of summer; on the 
pulverising frosts and tlie ripening sunshine. It is the bountiful hand of Heaven that 
gives the rich harvest, and fills the garners with the " finest of the wheat." 

III. Homes and home-life. " He hath blessed thy children within thee " (ver. 
13). No product of field or mine can be compared wilh that of the homes of the 
people. Happy is the nation that dwells in homes of purity, peace, love, piety 1 

IV. BELiQioca PBiviLEGE. (Vei's. 19, 20.) The distinguishing blessing of Israel 
was its knowledge of the true God, and its consequent training in all personal, domestic, 
and social virtues. The people of Israel were acquainted with the " word," and there- 
fore with the will of God, and their life was, to some large extent in their better days, 
ordered according to his "statutes" and "judgments." In their worship, in their 
pursuits, and in their homes, they rejoiced before the Lord, and they walked in his 
ways. This is the crowning blessing. Perhaps we may think that we in this country 
may adopt the language of the psalmist, and apply it to ourselves : " he hath not dealt 
so with any nation." That might be the exaggeration of a complacent patriotism, 
but would it not rather be the right feeling of a grateful piety 'i With all our sacred 
edifices, our Christian ministry, our evangelizing and philanthropic institutions (healing, 
preserving, remedial), our educational advantages, our preservation of the seventh day 
as a day of rest and worship, have we not received, and do we not retain, a measure 
of privilege which calls for intense gratitude, which also lays us imder very serioug 
obligation? For, from those to whom much is given much will be required; " exalted 
to heaven " in privilege, let us see that we are not ** cast down to hell " in condem- 
nation for not availing ourselves of it, and " knowing the day of our visitation." 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Ver. 1. — In praise qf praise. This psalm carries on and gloriously sustains the 
great Hallel of adoring gratitude and glad thanksgiving with which the Book of Psalms 
ends. This first verse contains a threefold laudation of the Lord^s praise. 

I. Beoadse " it 18 GOOD." And this is most true. 1. In reference to God. For it 
ministers pleasure to him. Do not the experiences of many a parental heart bear 
witness to this truth? Are not we delighted with the loving utterances of our children 
by which they testify their heart's affection towards us ? It may be but the prattle 
of childish lips, or the lispings of such as are hardly more than babes, but it is 
delightful all the same ; and our children's affection, when it has become older and 
more thoughful, — what would our homes be without it? And right sure are we that 
our poor praise delights the Lord to whom it is rendered ; he recognizes in it that 
response to his own love, for which all love, and emphatically his, cannot but crave. 
And it is good in his sight, further, because it wins lum glory from men. 

II. Beoaube "it is pleasant." 

III. Beoaube " it ib comely." — S. 0. 

Ver. 1. — Hie pleasantness of praise. When the poet Carpani inquired of his friend 
Haydn how it happened that his church music was always so cheerful, the great com- 
poser made the following reply ; " I cannot make it otherwise ; I write according to the 
thought I reel. When I think upon God, my heart is so fuU of joy that the notes 
dance and leap, as it were, from my pen, and siuce God has given me a cheerful heart 
it will be pardoned me that I praise him with a cheerful spirit." Reli<nous life and 
relations are often wrongly toned through the influence of the strange sentiment that 
what is acceptable to God must be a strain and trial to us. This strange sentiment 
rests on the mistaken idea that matter itself is evil, and, as man is material, his work 
is, at every cost, to master and crush the material element. This is at the root of 
Hinduism and Buddhism ; it inspires the hermit ; it fills nunneries and monasteries • and 
it explains the bodily austerities of good men, such as Henry Martyn, who walked about 



?«. OTLvn. 1— 20.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 403 

with pebbles in his shoes, as if to make himself miserable anrl so make himselT acceptable 
to God. This notion is far more widespread, and far more mischievous, than is usaally 
recoguized. Constantly we fimi good people suspecting themselves of insincerity, or 
quite sure that something dreadful is going to happen, if they find themselves happy, 
and really enjoying their religious duties and exercises, 

I. To FEEL THE PLEASANTNESS OF PBAISE IB A 8I0N OF CHERI8RINO RIGHT THOnOHTS 

OF God. What he recognizes is the aood of bis creatures, and that includes their 
happiness. And this characteristic of God is in no way affected by the fact that man 
has sinned. God is still anxious for his happiness, and helps him out of the bondage 
of sin that he tray he happy. Long faces, miserable tones, depressing anticipations, 
and exaggerate ' and constant waitings about sin, do not honour or please God. He 
wants even hi» sinful children to find and feel the pleasantness of the praise they offer 
to him. It is comdy to enjoy our religion. 

n. To FEEL THE FLEASAKTNES8 OF PRAISE IB A BIQN OF CHEBISHINa RIOHT THOUOHTB 

OONOEBNiNO OUBSELVEB. There are times when a man ought to cherish a due sense 
of his sinfulness and sin, but to be always wailing over it nourishes formality and 
insincerity. A man is a sinner, but he is a child of God nevertheless, and does well to 
remember his sonship oftener than his sin. — R. T. 

Ver. 3. — Qod's help for the suffering ones. " It takes a brave soul to bear all this 
so grandly," said a tender-hearted doctor, stooping over his suffering patient. She 
lifted her heavy eyelids, and, looking into the doctor's face, replied, " It is not the brave 
soul at all ; God does it all for me." " He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up 
their wounds." The second clause of this sentence may but repeat the first with a 
slight variety, according to the Hebrew fashion of composition which we have had 
several times to observe. But we may meditatively recognize a distinction between 
the clauses, referring the first to the heart-sphere, and the second to the bodily. 

I. Man's buffebings belong to two spheres. Answering to man as a dual being. 
He u a spirit. He hat a body. So he has the possibility of suffering in the spirit that 
he is, and in the body that he has. Bodily wounds bring before us the whole sphere 
of sufferings which relate to the bodily organization and relations. It may be true 
that bodily pain directly aflects the spirit, but it is equally true, if more subtle, that 
pain in the spirit affects the body. Still we can keep the two separate in thought. 
What an accumulation and variety of pains and woes can affect the human body ! 
How tempted we are to think that these are the supreme woes I They are not. The 
broken heart is the woe of woes. The distresses of the spirit are the supreme 
distresses. AfBict a man's body, and body-sphere, even as Job was afflicted, the man 
does not know what suffering is until he suffers in his soul. This is impressively seen 
on Calvary, where was the very height of bodily woe. There we see the transcendent 
woe of the suffering soul. 

n. God'b help belongs to THE TWO SPHEBEB. " Who forgivoth all our iniquities, 
and healeth all our diseases; " " He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their 
wounds." This is no less true, because for his healings in the bodily sphere God 
uses agencies that we can recognize. He uses agencies also for his healings in the 
spirit-sphere, though they often are such as we cannot recognize. Even when we 
are willing to pray to God for the healing of our bodily pains, we are mournfully 
unwilling — or it may be we do not think it right — to seek God's help in our suffering 
mental and spiritual states. God for our woes of feeling we all but very imperfectly 
reaUze.— R. T. 

Ver. 6. — The Lord's ways with the meek. This term often means " the afflicted," 
This word '• meek " has several distinct meanings as used in the Word of God, but its 
loot-idea seems to be "lowly feeling about ourselves." This associates with both 
" humility " and " disinterestedness." Sometimes the bad side of the word comes into 
view, and it expresses the feeling of the crushed man, who has become heartless, 
spiritless,, who is broken down, who has wholly lost his energy ; who, like David in 
his time of distress, wails out bis faithless fear, " I shall now perish one dav by the 
hand of Siiul I " There is something of that lieartlessness and hopelessuess indik*t^ 
in this text. . \ 



404 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. oxLvn. 1— 20. 

I. The Lobd is not altoqetheb indifferent to them. He might be. ^ey 
tnnst be to him somewhat as the wayside beggar is to us. How often we pass him by 
with utter indifference I and whcm we have any feeling at all, it is only a revulsion 
from the miserable object. Yet when we thintc of it, that state of mind distresses us. 
We cannot be really good ; for if we were, no form of humiliation or distress would fail 
to touch us with the tenderest pity. Grod cannot be indifferent to the meek. 

IL The Lord does not pity them, and stand aside. As the priest and Levite 
(lid when they came and looked on the stripped and wounded sufferer. Too often man 
pities, and does nothing ; comforting himself with the thought that he pitied, and so 
was evidently tender and sensitive in feeling. Situations presented in novels excite 
our pity, but they do us no muial good, because we have no chance of putting oui 
pity into helpful action. We could have no heart-rest in God, if all we could be sure 
about him was that he pitied us. 

in. The Lord oraciuusly helps those whom he pities. As did the good 
Samaritan, spending himself to relieve the man whose distress awakened his pitiful 
feeling. The help G.id gives is put into a word which precisely matches the word 
" meek," He upholdeth. The crushed, humbled, heartless man is in danger of falling 
and fainting. He can hardly hold himself up. So precisely what he needs is steady- 
ing, upholding, everlasting arms put about him until he can feel his feet, recover his 
strength, find li e flow freely agdn, and smile Into God's watching face the smile of 
recovered hope. — E. T. 

Ver. 8. — God's care of the mountain grasses. The following extract from Hugh 
Macmillan's 'Bil'le Teaching in Nature ' suggests bnth sermon-topic and illustration, 
and the peculiarities noticed are fresh and unfamiliar: "The mountain grasses grow 
spontaneously; they require no cultui-e but such as the rain and the sunshine ot 
heaven supply. They obtain their nourishment directly from the inorganic soil, and 
itre independent (if (>r°anic njaterials. Nowhere is the grass so green and vigorous as 
on the beautiful slopes of lawn-like pasture high up on the Alps, radiant with the 
glory of wild flowers, and ever musical with the hum of grasshoppers, and the tinkling 
of cattle-bells. Innumerable cows and goats browse upon them ; the peasants spend 
the summer months in making cheese and hay from them for winter consumption in 
the valleys. This exhausting system of husbandry has been carried un during untold 
centuries ; no one thinks of manuring the Alpine pastures ; and yet no deficiency has 
been observeil in their fertility, though the soil is but a thin covering spread over the 
naked rocks. It may be regarded as a part of the same wise and gracious arrange- 
ment of Providence that the insects which devour the grasses on the Euh and Schaf 
Alpen, the pasturages of the cows and sheep, are kept in check by a predominance of 
carnivorous insects. In all the mountain meadows, it has been ascertained that the 
species of carnivorous are at least four times as numerous as the species of herb-eating 
insects. Thus, in the absence of birds, which are rare in Switzerland, the pastures 
are preserved from a terrible scourge. To one not aware of this check, it may seem 
surprising how the verdure of the Alpine pastures should be so rich and luxuriant, 
considering the immense development of insect-life. The grass, whenever the sun 
shines, is literally swarming with them — butterflies of gayest hues, and beetles of 
brightest iridescence ; and the air is filled with their loud murmurs. I remember 
well the vivid feeling of God's gracious providence which ]iossessed me when passing 
over the Wengern Alp, at the foot of the Jung Fran, and seeing, wherever I rested on 
the green turf, the balance of nature so wonderfully preserved between the herb which 
is for man's food, and the moth before which he is crushed. Were the herbivorous 
insects allowed to multiply to their full extent, in such favourable circumsiances as 
the warmth of the air and the verdure of the earth in Switzerland produce, the rich 
pastures which now yield abundant food for upwards of a million and a half of cattle 
would speedily become bare and leafiess deserts. Not only in their power of growing 
without oultivatioD, but also in the peculiarities of their structure, the mountain 
grasses proclaim the hand of God. Many of them are viviparous. Instead of producing 
flowers and seeds, as the grasses m the tranquil valleys do, the young plants spring 
from them perfectly formed. They cling round the stem, and form a kind of bloMom. 
In tbii state they remain until the parent stalk withers and falls prostrate OB the 



M. oXLVii. 1— 20.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 405 

ground, when they Immediately strike root and form independent grasses. This is a 
reinarkable adaptation to circumstances ; for it is manifest that were seeds, instead of 
liTing plants, developed in the ears of the mountain jjrasses, they would be useless in 
the stormy region where they grow. They would be blown away, far from the places 
they were intended to clothe, to spots foreign to their nature and habits, and thna thu 
species would speedily perish." Ruskin says, " Loois up to the higher hills, where 
the waves of green roll silently into long inlets among the shadows of the pines, and 
we may perhaps know the meaning of those quiet words of Ps. cxlvii. 8."— B. T. 

Vers. 16, 17. — 77ie lessons of the winter. "What can be lovelier than the glitter- 
ing jewels with which the hoar-frost bedizens every leaf and spray of the woodland? 
Or the translucent azure of the glacier crevasses with their long pendants of lustrous 
ice? There are beautiful thegs ij winter as well as in summer; and we neod the 
cold, unearthly splendours of the one as much as ihe glowing, living charms of the 
other to educate our sense of God's greatness in his works. But beauty is every- 
where in nature the flower of utility; and in the realms of frost this quality is most 
strikingly displayed " (Hugh Macmillan). There is a short, but sharp winter-time in 
the Holy Land, extending from the middle of December to the middle of February. 
There are severe winds from the north and north-east, with heavy rains and frosts. 
Kings often had " winter houses." Even the seasons God has made to fit in with 
man's highest needs. Winter is the stillness and re-rooting of the year. It is as 
truly a busy time as any other time of the year, but the activities go on in secret, 
underground. So in man's religious life. He needs re-rooting times. Seasons when 
activity must give place to culture, in preparation for further and higher activities. 
Times of stillness, sickness, trouble, are the great winter-times for soul-rooting. The 
actual winter-time is a time of great opportunities for our religious life. 1. It may be 
a time of personal soul-culture. 2. It may be a time of intellectual nourishment. 
3. It may be a time of social intercourse. 4. It may be a time of Christian work. 
It is the Church's best time for work. When telling what the Lord Jesus did in 
Solomon's porch, John says, " It was winter." He did not suffer himself to be unduly 
affected by outward conditions, or hindered in his work by them. In winter he was 
still "about his Father's business." He mastered the cold to carry out good plans. 
Winter is, for us, full of temptations to self-indulgence. Are we mastering the 
temptations, and winning our winters for God ? — B. T. 

Ver. 16. — The mission of the frost and the snow. " He wraps the earth in snow as 
in a warm white woollen "arment, and scatters the frost so that the trees, etc., appear 
as if powdered with (wood) ashes blown about by the wind." The rain, the frost, and 
the snow are all forms of moisture. Winter is God's timeior putting things to rights. 
Three things especially want renewing and replenishing — the earth, the air, the water, 
and to do this replenishing is the mission of the frost, the snow, and the rain. But 
everything that Gud does is beautiful as well as useful; and so we find the hoar-frost 
makes an exquisite silvery world ; the snow hangs in festoons of wonderful glistening 
whiteness ; and the rain makes the lovely cascades leap from crag to crag down the 
hillsides. We think now chiefly of their usefulness. The frost breaks up the ground, 
checks the too abundant growth of insect-life, and keeps the air cool to check vege- 
tation, and make the sap in the trees wait for its due time. The snow penetrates the 
soil, and nourishes it both with warmth and moisture ; and it carries to the ground 
some of the chemical elements it needs to flt it for its new year's work. And the 
rain refills the secret springs whence our fresh water comes, and washes down from 
the hillsides new soil with which to fertilize the valleys. God does grandly in his 
winter-time what we see the farmer doing in his little way — ploughing, manuring, 
hedging, ditching, road-repairing, etc. ; getting ready for summer's life and growth. 
And the frost and the snow may carry this as their message to our hearts concerning 
God's dealings with us. •' We have apparently very severe and hard things to do for 
God; but we try to do them cheerfully, and we try to do them well, and, after all, 
they are really very kind things, only the gracious severities of the infinite love. — R. T. 

Vers. 1—6. — Jehovah the infinitely Mighty and Omniscient One, in the creation and 



406 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8, CXLTin, 1-^14 



in the human world, worthy, theri-fwe, of all praise and worship. "Celobrstes God's 
almighty and gracious rule over his people, and over the world of nature, but mingles 
with this a special commemoration of his goodness in bringing back his people from 
their captivity, and rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem." 

I. God 18 ALMIOHTT IN THE WORK OP THE MATERIAL UNIVBBSB. 1. He Created the 
heavenly worlds. (Isa. xl. 26.) 2. He has a perfect knowledge of them. (Ver. 4.) 
He knows all the innumerable multitude : " telleth the number of the stars." And 
knows each one of them in particular : " and calleth them all by their names." " Not 
one faileth." God is great in power, and great in knowledge ; " there is no searching 
of his understanding." The inference from all this is only suggested, not stated. 

n. God 18 ALL-GOOD AS WELL AS ALMIGHTY AND OMNISCIENT. (Vers. 2, 3, 6.) He 
must know and be able to succour human woe to whom it is an easy thing to create 
and count and guide the stars. 1. He can recover from slavery and restore to freedom. 
(Ver. 2.) Those who have been taken captive, and dispersed abroad. Slaves are 
those fit for slavery. 2. He can restore men from the depths of suffering and despair. 
(Ver. 3.) The broken in heart, and most deeply wounded. 3. Ood's justice is perfect 
in its retributive work. (Ver. 6.) He exalts the righteous above their afflictions, 
and casts down the prosperous wicked. — S. 

, Vers. 7 — 11. — God worthy of praise, " A fresh burst of praise because of Gh>d'8 
Fatherly care, as shown in his provision for the wants of the cattle and the fowls of 
the air. And as he feeds the ravens, which have neither storehouse nor bam, but 
only cry to him for their food, so amongst men his delight is not in those who trust in 
their own strength and swiftness, but in those who look to him, and put their trust 
in his goodness." God is to be praised — 

1. Because he provides fob the febtilitt of the material world. Clouds 
temper the heat of the sun as well as pour forth rain to fertilize the earth, and make 
it productive of food for man and beast. The chain of connection between God and 
man bountifully set forth in Hos. ii. 21, 22, " I will hear the heavens," etc. 

XL Because of his bounty towards all orders of the animal oeeation. Grass 
upon the mountains where the herds and flocks feed, and which the plough and 
labours of man cannot reach. God is the Shepherd of all inferior as well as superior 
life. The young ravens, which are forsaken and cast off by their mothers very early, 
unconsciously cry to him for food, and are fed. The great and the small equally 
provided for by his bountiful, universal care. 

III. Though God is the Source of all strength, he has only an infbbiob 
pleasube in physical strength. (Ver. 1(X) " The strength of the hills is his also ; " 
"Strong in power; not one faileth." He must delight in power of all kinds, 
intellectual and moral, as we do. But neither for himself nor for man is mere strength 
his chief delight. 

IV. God's oloby is in dispensing help to those who trust and hope in him. 
His delight is in goodness. Gives confidence and courage to those who fear him. 
Gives strength and riches to those who hope for his loving-kindness. Gives to them 
his mercy.-— S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM OXLVIII. 



This psalm has been well called " the joy- 
■ong of creation." Israel, having received 
a signal manifebtation of the Divine power 
(ver. 14), calls on all things in heaven and 
earth to praise Jehovah. In respect of 
heaven, oommenoement is made with the 
angels, from whom the writer descends to 



the sun and moon, the stars, the spaciona 
firmament, and the clouds that float in it 
and above it (vers. 2 — 4), In respect of 
earth, the writer begins with the luwest 
parts — the deep sea, and the monsters 
dwelling therein — ^whence he makes a sud- 
den ascent to the highest parts — the atmo- 
sphere and the manifestations peooliar to 
it — lightning, hail, mow, Taponr, itoimy 



M. OXLVIII. 1 — 14.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



407 



wind; hence he again comes back to eolid 
earth — mountains, hills, trees, beasts, creep- 
ing things, and flying fowl (vera. 7 — 10). 
Lastly, the discourse tonchea on man, and 
oalli on him to join in the chorus of jubi- 
lation (vera. 11 — 13). Profesaor Cheyne 
remarks that "in this psalm and in the 
De Frofundit we seem to touch the opposite 
enda of the gamut of emotion." In the one 
we have the dirge of the Church ; in the 
other, its "Hallelujah Chorus." Metri- 
cally, two strophea of aix verses each (vers. 
1 — 6, 7 — 12) are followed by one of two 
(vers. 18, 14), assigning the motive for the 
entire psalm. 

Ver. 1. — Praise ye the Lord. Fraise ye 
the Lord from the heavens ; i.e. beginning 
at the heavens, making them the primary 
bource from which the praises are to be 
drawn (comp. ver. 7). Praise him in the 
heights ; in excdtis (Vulgate). In the upper 
regions, or the most exalted regions of his 
creation. 

Ver. 2.— Fraise ye him, aU hit angels 
(comp. Pa. oiiL 2U, 21). As the angels 
occupy the first rank in creation, and have 
the most to praise God for, they are fitly 
called upon to commence the song of jubi- 
lation. The praises of God must form their 
chief occupation through all eternity. Praise 
ye him, all his hosts; rather, all his hoet. 
In the " host of God " are included beings 
of inferior rank to angels — " ministers of 
his that do his pleasnre " (Ps. ciii. 21). 

Ver. 3. — Fraise ye him, sun and moon. 
Objects of worship to most heiithen nations, 
but here called upon ti join in tlie chorus 
of priiise to (ind. Fraise him, all ye stars 
of light ; i.e. ye brilliant stars, that light 
up the eaveu at night. 

Ver. 4. — Praise him, ye heavens of 
heavens ; t e. " ye highest heavens " (comp. 
Dent. X. 14 ; 1 Kings viii. 27 ; Ps. Ixviii. 
33). And ye waters that be above the 
heavens (comp. Gen. i. 7). The clouds are 
probably intended. 

Ver. 5. — Let them praise the Name of the 
Lord. Frequent changes of person, when 
no doubt can arise as to the meaning, are 
a sort of Hebrew idiom. They give live- 
linesa and variety. For he commanded, and 
they were created (Gen. i. 3, 6, 9, 11, 14, 
15, etc.). All creation sprang into being 
at the word of God (Ps. xxxiii. 8). 

Ver. 6.— He hath also stablished them for 
ever and ever (comp. Ps. Ixxxix. 37). The 
expression, "for ever and ever," must not 
be pressed. It means " for all time " — while 
heaven and earth endnr'> — but does not 
imply an absolute perpetuity. He hath 



made a decree wl)ich shall not pass ; rather, 
which shall not pass aviay (see the Beviaed 
Version; and comp Gen. viii. 22; Jer. 
zxxi. bS, 36; xxxiii. 25). 

Ver. 7. — Praise the Lord from the earth. 
The counterpart of the clause in ver. 1, 
"Praise ye the Lord from the heavens." 
Earth must join with heaven in the praise 
of God. Ye dragons ; or, " ye sea-monsters " 
(comp. Ps. Ixxiv. 13, where the same word 
ia nsed), Hengstenberg translates by 
" whales;" but all the greater sea-animala 
are probably included. And all deepi. The 
extreme " ocean deptha " are meant — " lower 
deeps," in certain parts of what waa com- 
monly known as "the great deep" (Pa. 
xxxvi. 6). 

Ver. 8.— lire and hail. By "fire," in 
this combination, we must understand 
"lightning," or rather the various elec- 
trical phenomena accompanying storma in 
the East, which are eometimea very strange 
and terrible. Snow and Tapoura; rather, 
va'powr. The mist so often accompanying 
snowstorms is prubably the "vapour" in- 
tended. Stormy wind falfilling hii word 
(comp. Ps. ovii. 25). 

Ver. 9. — MountaiES, and all hills. The 
later psalmists are great admirers of " moun- 
tains." Perhaps the flat and monotonous 
Babylonian plains led them to appreciate 
the beauties of a landscape like that of 
Palestine (comp. Pss. Ixxxiii. 14; cxiv. 4, 6; 
exliv. 5; cxlvii. 8). Fruitfnl trees; rather, 
fruit trees; literally, trees of fnUt. The 
Babylonian palms may have swept across 
the writer's remembrance ; but probably 
the vine, the olive, and the fig, which were 
among the chief glories of Palestine, were 
in his mind principally. And all cedars. 
Babylonia had had no "cedars." When 
the exiles returned, the beauty of the cedar 
broke upon them as a surt of new revela- 
tion. 

Ver. 10. — Beasts, and all cattle. There 
is a gradual ascent — from inanimate to 
animate things, from the "beasts" of the 
field to domesticated animals; from anoh 
animals to man (vers. 11, 12). Creeping 
things (comp. Gen. i. 24, 25, 30 ; Ps. oiv. 25). 
And flying fowl; literally, hird of wing. 
The intention is to include, under a few 
heads, all animate creation. 

Ver. 11. — Sings of the earth, and all 
people ; rather, all peoples ; or, all nations. 
Princes, and aU judges of the earth. 
"Kings," "princes," and "judges" repre- 
sent the upper classes of aociety ; " peoples," 
or " nations," nil the remainder. Together, 
they include the whole race of mankind. 

Ver. 12. — Both young men, and maidens ; 
old men, and children. All mankind, i.e., 
of each sex and of every age. The obli- 
gation to praise God lies upon ofi. 



408 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. oxLvni. 1 — ^14- 



Yer. 13. — Let them praise the Name of 
the Lord. This is the burden of tlie entire 
pealm (see especially ver. 5, and comp. 
vers. 1—4, 7, and 14). For his Name alone 
if excellent; or, " exalted "(oomp. Ps viii. 
1 ; Isa. lii. 4). The exaltation of God'g 
Name is effected mainly by the praises 
which hia rational creatures render to him. 
His glory is above the earth and heaven. 
(On God's " glory," see Pss. viii. 1 ; xix. 1 ; 
Ivii. 5, 11; Ixiii. 2; Ixxxix. 17, etc.) 
" Earth and lieaven " is an unusual phrase ; 
the terms are commonly inverted. Here, 
perhaps, the order may be accounted for 
by the law of climax. "His glory is not 
only above the earth, but even above the 
heavens." 

Ver. 14, — He also exalteth the horn of 
his people. Great as Gud is, his greatness 
does not separate him from his human 
oreaturei. On the contrary, it makes the 



union between himself and them eloaer. 
His might enables him to confer benefita 
on his people — to " exalt their horn ; " JA 
to increase their glory and their strength, 
and set them up above their enemiei. The 
praise of all his saints. The construction 
is doubtful. Some regard "praise" as in 
apposition with "horn," and understand 
that God, by exalting the "horn" (power) 
of his saints, exalts also their " praise " or 
"renown." Others imagine an ellipse, and 
translate, " Praise belongs to all bis saints " 
(Kay); or, "Seemly is praise for all his 
saints " (Cheyne). Even of the ehilaren of 
Israel, a people near unto him. The " chil- 
dren of Israel " are nearer to God thtn 
others, since he lias taken them to hionelt 
as his own peculiar people, and both " draws 
nigh" to them (Ps. Ixix. 11), and draws 
them near to him (Jer. xxx. 21). Praise ye 
the Lord (comp. ver. 1\ 



H0MILETI(3S. 

Vers. 1 — 14.— J%« tribute of creation. The psalmist writee In a very jubilant strsin ; 
his mood is that of exultation. The sunshine of prosperity is on his path, and con- 
sequently the spirit of sacred joy is in his heart, and words of praise upon his lips. He 
calls upon the whole universe to pay its tribute of praise to Jehovah. This includes — 

I. The HEAVBiTLY INTELLIGENCES. (Ver. 2.) It is in full accord with all that we 
read in both the Old and the New Testament that we think of the angels of God of 
every rank and order (Col. i. 16) as uniting in the high offices of adoration and thanks- 
giving. They, with their loftier intelligence, their nearer access, and their larger 
experience of the Divine goodness, must have a deeper and fuller sense than we have of 
the greatness and excellency of God. 

IL All inanimate creation. Things in heaven (vers. 3, 4), and things on earth 
(vers. 7 — 10). All these things were created by his power (ver. 5), are sustained at 
his word (ver. 6), are regulateci and kept within their bounds by his laws (ver. 6), dis- 
charge the varied offices he has given them to fulfil (ver. 8), and thus they speak his 
praise. Even the fire and hail, which seem to be principally destructive, and even the 
stormy wind, which seems to be uncontrolled and capricious, do the Divine bidding and 
contribute their part in the service of nature. 

III. All mankind. (Vers. 11, 12.) (1) Those who are accustomed to receive 
honour rather than to bestow it (ver. 11) — kings and judges of the earth ; (2) those 
whose hearts are full of earthly liopes and loves, and whose lives are crowded with all 
pleasurable activities : (3) those who have tasted the sweets and enjoyed their portion 
of earthly lite, to whom little is left but quietude and endurance; (4) those whose 
minds are only just opening to the thought of the spiritual and the Divine, young 
men and maidens, old men and children ; — all mankind should look up from earth to 
heaven, from those about them to the Father of their spirits, and sing his praise with 
reverent lip. No human life is at all complete without praise; no human character 
deserves esteem in which reverence and gratitude do not form an essential part. But 
above all others, so far as our knowledge goes, are to be counted^ 

IV. His redeemed ones. (Ver. 14.) Israel had been humbled; its "horn" had 
been degraded to the very dust; it had lost its heritage; it had dwelt in a "strange 
land " of servitude, far from the house and the home of (Jod. Now it had been restored. 
Jerusalem had been rebuilt; its walls a>;ain surrounded it; its worship had revived; 
the ransomed of the Lord had returned ; it was once more a people " near " to Jehovah, 
gathering in his house, and realizing his near presence with them. Let Israel lift 
up its voice of praise above every other. We, too, are God's redeemed ones. From tha 



pa. oXLviii. 1— U.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 409 



bondage of sin we have been restored ; we have been redeemed not with silver or gold, 
but " with the precious blood of Christ ; " we have been brought out " into the glorioui 
liberty of the children of God ; " we have been raised up to "sit in heavenly places in 
Christ Jesus" (Eph. ii. 6); we have such hopes in our heart as the psalmist sang not 
of; we are a people " near " in every sense to our God and Saviour, having freest access 
to his presence and very dear to his heart. What praise should come fi:om our lipi, 
from our souls, from our lives 1 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — Nature's praise-voices. In this psalm, as in aU the poetry of the Old 
Testament, there is nothing of the idea of something Divine in nature, or even of 
a Divine voice speaking through nature ; all beings are simply creatures, knowing and 
praising him who made them. All nature has reason to praise the Creator who called it 
into being, and gave it its cider so fair and so established, and poetically the universe may 
be imagined full of adoring creatures. With the psalmist's pi)int of view that of Words- 
worth should be carefully compared. To a Hebrew the conception of a spirit in nature 
would have been at least germinal idolatry. What we have to keep in view, in reading 
the nature-psalms, is that kind of impression which high and sublime things universally 
make on all simple souls — on ordinary men, not on the unusual poet. In these verses 
the nature-things that are above us are wholly in the psalmist's view. And the great 
things of the firmament — sun, moon, stars, clouds,lightnings, etc. — produce an impression 
on men everywhere which is unique. The same impression is never produced by any- 
thing on the earth ; not even by awe-inspiring mountains, or wild wind-driven seas. 
There is a quietness of impression from nature's above things. The movements are so 
restfuUy sublime, so steadily continuous. Nothing ever disturbs them ; sun and moon 
and stars go on their way, no matter what happens in the earth-spheres. In all ages, 
and still, the impression of nature's above things is the impression of GroA. The untutored 
savage feels it as truly as the devout Christian. That impression made man find in 
the Bun the presentation of Gkxl to human apprehension. But it is to be specially 
noticed that the impression of God which nature's above things bring to us, excites 
us to praise him. The awe it brings draw us near to him; the revelation of him 
that it makes to us satisfies us in him, fills us with joy in him, so that we mnst 
praise. — R. T. 

Ver. 6. — 2%e permanence of natural law. "He hath also stablished them for erer 
and ever." The permanence of natural law is not really any scientific discovery of 
modern date. It is the commonplace of thoughtful apprehension of facts in all ages. 
It is the biisis of confidence on which man's enterprises have always rested. What is 
peculiar to modern times is the persistent effort to get law separated from God, to prove 
that law exists, but that it never had a lawgiver, and that now, for its working, there 
is no law-controller. Old Testament saints saw in the permanence of natural law the 
considerate working of the living God for the good of his creatures. 

I. The permanence of all natural laws. The truth is only true when per- 
manence is seen to apply to the entire sphere of natural law. It is here that the 
philosopher constructs an imperfect argument. He affirms that permanence attaches 
to all laws that are cognizable hy the senses. But have we any right to say that the 
sphere of natural law is limited to what we can, under our present conditions, and with 
our present faculties, apprehend ? This may be tried by conceiving that we had seven 
senses instead of five. The other two senses would reveal to us the working of natural 
laws which we are wholly unable to apprehend under our present conditions. And the 
operation of those natural laws may explain what we now have to call the miraculous. 
And this has fuither to be seen: The permanence of natural law is consistent with 
the interworking of law; the action of one qualifyinir the action of another, as when 
by my will I raise my arm, which gravitation wnuld pull down. The unknown natural 
laws are continually crossing and modifying the known, but always harmoniously. 

IL The peemanencb op all moral laws. It has yet to be taken into full 



410 THE BOOK OF PSALMS, [p8. oxLvra. 1— 14. 

account that the natural laws include the moral; and that nature can never be 
explained until the influence on it of God's will and man's is recognized The moral 
is as natural for man as the natural is for nature; and the moral is as permanent and 
absolute as we can conceive the natural to be. But all law is in the adjustment and 
harmonizing of the law-controller. — B. T. 

Vers. 7, 8. — T^e praise-voices of nature-forces. How poet^ouls recognize the roioei 
of nature may be illustrated by Milton's lines — 

" His praise, ye winds, that from four quarters blow. 
Breathe soft or load ; and wave yonr tops, ye pinei^ 
With every plant, in sign of worship wave I " 

What is peculiar to the psalmist is his recognizing signs of tuill in nature. He conceires 
of "stormy wind fulfilling his Word," voluntarily fulfilling it, and so an image of him- 
self. It is a blending of poetic and pious feeling that thus leads man to make ot 
nature a mirror in which he sees himself. 

L Man puTTiifo himself into things. When we are impressed with anything in 
nature, we, in a sort of unconscious way, say to it, " If I were you, how should I feel, 
and what should I do?" And then we represent it to ourselves as actually feeling 
what we should feel, and doing what we should do. In this way the psalmist calls on 
the winds to praise God, because that is what he would do if he were the wind; and he 
calls on the wind to fulfil God's Word, because that is what he would do if he were the 
wind. This is man's interpreting of nature, which is never any more than interpreting 
himself in the terms of nature. But manifestly this putting of ourselves into things 
belongs exclusively to the poetic and the pious souls. To most men nature is but a 
satisfaction of artistic sensibilities : all that can be observed is the beautiful in form 
and colour. It is but the sublime side of this truth to say that God puts himself 
into nature to show himself to us, as we put ourselves into nature to show ourselves 
to him. 

II. Man ikflcencing himself by BEEma himself in thinos. Introspection is 
neither healthy nor effective. A man must put himself outside himself; must find 
a mirror of himself, and see himself in the mirror. And what he thus sees is always 
himself as he should be. So the projection of himself is an inspiration to himself. The 
psalmist sees this in the one matter of obedience. Projecting himself into the stormy 
wind, he is inspired to the "fulfilling of God's Word." — R. T. 

Vers. 11 — 13. — The leaders of the nature-choir. The Church appears as the choir- 
leader of the universe. " Both sexes and all ages are summoned to ihe blessed service 
of song. Those who usually make merry together are to be devoutly joyful together ; 
those who make up the ends of families, that is to say, the elders and the juveniles, 
should make the Lord their one and only End. Old men should, by their experience, 
teach the children to praise ; and children, by their cheerfulness, should excite old men 
to sing. There is room for every voice at this concert ; fruitful trees and maidens, 
cedars and young men, angels and children, old men and judges, — all may unite in this 
oratorio. None, indeed, can be dispensed with : for perfect psalmody we must have 
the whole universe aroused to worship, and all parts of creation must take their parts 
in devotion" (O.H.S.). 

L Man belongs to nature. That wondrous inbreathing through which man 
became a "living soul" did not separate man, or make him a distinct being from 
nature. This mistaken conception is too often encouraged, Man belongs to nature. 
His senses bear relation to this nature-sphere. He is subject to all the nature-conditions 
of the creatures around him. Shares pleasure and pain with them. Needs food 
as they do. Has the passions they have. He can lead the nature-choir as one of 
the choir. 

II. Man leads nature. It is in the line of modem evolution teachings to point 
out that man bodily is the crown of creation ; and that man, when his possibilities are 
all fully developed, will be tiie crown of creation in the highest and most sublime sense. 
In praise-power man is supreme. In every choir there are leading voices; in every 
orchestia leading instruments. This place lotp jccupies. As the chorus of creation 



P8. cxLViii. 1—14.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 411 



rises to God, he hears the thrilling tones of those who were made in his image and 
redeemed by his grace. 

III. Man finds voice fob nature. And so puts intelligence, character, tone, 
heart, into it. As some exquisite solo that seems to carry to our soula all the body of 
orchestral sound, so man— redeemed man — finds voice for God, voice in which is pathos, 
praise, devotion, love, which translates for God the whole mass of praise that rises from 
all creation. — R. T. 

Ver. 14. — Praise inspired hy personal experience. " And he hath lifted up the horn 

. of his people, the praise of all his saints." The figure of the horn is a familiar one, and 

need not be again explained. What is noticeable here is that the supreme subject of 

praise for man is_ God's personal dealing with him in the sphere of his moral and 

religious life. This we refer to as a man's personal experience. 

I. Pbaisb inspired by the personal expebienob or God's pbovidbnob. In thi$ 
man's praise is common with the praise of all creation and all creatures. All have their 
being from God; all are sustained in their places in God; all have their movements 
directed by God; all have their wants supplied by God ; all are helped to fulfil their 
mission by God. " All thy works praise thee, in all places of thy dominion." And 
yet here man stamls out in front of all creation, because he knows that he is, in his 
wilfulness, a disturbing element in God's providence, and so has an altogether fuller 
sense of the wonder-working of a providence which can remedy and restore, as well as 
sustain and provide. And besides this general view, each man should have such a 
particular impression of God's workings and overrulings in his actual life-experience^ 
as would bo for him the constant inspiration of fre.sh praise and trust. And the 
experiences of the individual may be illustrated by the experience of Ood't people 
Israel, whose horn he had so often " lifted up." 

II. Fbaise inspibed bv the pebsonal experience of God's obace. Illustrate 
by John Newton, who, when reproved for his testimony and his joy in Christ, replied, 
" How can the old blasphemer be silent I " It is here that redeemed man passes out of 
the sphere of nature, and out of the sphere of ordinary humanity. God has " brought 
him out of the miry pit and horrible clay, and put a new song in his mouth." And to 
him all life is but a repetition of the restorings and deliverings which is ever calling 
forth fresh songs to him who "redeemeth our soul from destruction."— R. T. 

Vers. 7 — 14. — 27le Creator and his creatures. "The psalmist calls upon the whole 
creation, in its two great divisions of heaven and earth, to praise God. Things with 
and things without life, things rational and irrational, are summoned to join the mighty 
chorus. The psalm is an expression of the loftiest devotion, and embraces the most 
comprehensive view of the relation of the creature to the Creator." 

I. IbRATIONAL CBEATnBES OF THE BEA, LAND, AND AIB ABE BIDDEN INTO THB 

OHOBUS OF PRAISE. (Vers. 7, 10.) From the monsters of the sea to the creeping 
things of the earth. All life, in its various forms, owes itself to the creative life of God. 
All Creatures, after their own manner, are an echo and reflection of the glory of God ; 
and by sympathy we link them with us in the praise of God. 

II. Material things pbaise God by their obedience to the Divine law 
(Vers. 8, 9.) " Stormy wind," that seems far from the control of law, is really obedient 
to it ; like all the other elements — " fire and hail, snow and vapour " (Ps. cvii. 25). All 

fruifful life, "and all cedars" — examples of majesty and beauty — testily to the power 
and goodness of God. All things are alive to the man of religious sympathies. 
UL All banes of human beinos are summoned to praisb God. 

" Kings and all their subjeots. 
Princes and judges of the earth; 
Young men and maidens. 
Old men and childreD." 

Baoh rank, each class, has its own theme and reason for praise and worship. 

IV, The obounds of pbaise. 1. General. His Name is greater, more exalted, than 
the heavens and the earth. 2. Special. God has raised his people from deep degrada- 
tion, and filled them with powers and exultation. " A people near unto him." — S. 



412 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. OXLIZ. i— 9. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM CXLIX. 



A ' Hallelnjah FBalm," combining the praise 
of God for mercies already receiyed with 
anticipations of future vengeance, through 
Gh>d'8 help, on heathen enemies that are 
■till bent on persecuting God's "loving 
ones." The tone is that of Ps. cix., though 
the expressions used are less fierce. Metri- 
cally, the psalm seems to divide itself into 
three stanzas of three verses each (vers. 1 — 
3, 4—6, 7—9). 

Ver. 1. — Praise ye the Lord. Sing nnto 
the Lord a new long. A "new song" on 
account of a new deliverance (comp. Fs. 
xxxiii. 3). The deliverance may have been 
one of those under Nehemiah (ir. 7 — 23; 
vi. 2 — 16> And his praise in the con- 
gregation of saints. The psalm would 
seem to have been composed for a special 
thanksgiving service. 

Ver. 2. — Let Israel rejoice in him that 
made him ; or, " in his Maker " (comp. Ps. 
zcv. 6). This ground of thankfulness 
Iirael possesses in common with all the 
rest of mankind; but he has also another 
exclusive grouud — ^let the children of Zion 
be joyfnl in their King (comp. Judg. viii. 
23; 1 Sam. viii. 7; x. 19; xii. 12, etc.). 
God, by covenant with Israel, had con- 
stituted himself in an especial way their 
King (Hos. xiii. 10). 

Ver. 'A. — Let them praise bis Name in the 
dance (comp. Ps. cl. 4). (On the employ- 
ment of dancing by the Hebrews as a reli- 
gious exercise, and in their most solemn 
acts of worship, see Exod. xv. 20 ; 2 Sam. 
vi. 14 — 16.) Let them sing praises nnto 
him with the timbrel and harp. (On the 
toph, or " timbrel," see the comment upon 
Fb. Ixviii. 25.) It was used to accompany 
a hymn of rejoicing by Miriam (Exod. xv. 
20), by Jephthah's daughter (Judg. xi. 31), 
and by David (2 Sam. vi. 5). 

Ver. 4. — For the Lord taketh pleasure in 
his people. God had shown by the mercy, 
whatever it was (ver. 1), recently vouch- 
safed to bis people, that he was well pleased 
with them, and inight be counted on to 
support and sustain them. He will beautify 
the meek with salvation. Those who pa- 
tiently submit to his chastisements God 
will ultimately "adorn," or "beautify," 
with his salvation. 

Ver. 5,— Let the saints be joyful in glory. 



Therefore let God's saints at the present 

time — his restored people, who have just 
had a fresh deliverance — rejoice in the 
" glory " that covers them — ^rejoice and give 
God thanks for it. Let them sing aloud 
upon their beds. Not, as in former days, 
weeping through the long night (Pss. vi. 6 ; 
Ixxvii. 2 — 6), and watering their oouches 
with their tears, but, like Paul and Silas 
(Acts xvi. 25), singing hymns of praise to 
God " at midnight " as they rest npon their 
beds. 

Ver. 6. — ^Let the high praises of Ood be 
in their mouth; literally, in their throat 
(comp. Isa. Iviii. 1). And a two-edged 
swotd in their hand. Some understand 
this metaphorically. But the weapons of 
Jewish warfare in Nehemiah's time were 
thoroughly carnal (Neh, iv. 13, 16, 17, 18) ; 
and againb^t adversaries such as Sanballat, 
Gesbem, and Tobiah, u nation threatened 
with extermination is certainly entitled to 
use the sword. 

Ver. 7. — To execute vengeance upon the 
heathen. Not private revenge, but the just 
vengeance which a threatened nation has, 
from time to time, to execute on its perse- 
cutors in self-defence. And punishments 
upon the people ; rather, upon the peojaUi. 
A variant of the phrase in the preceding 
clause, without any serious modification of 
the meaning. 

Ver. 8. — To bind their kings with chains. 
Even royal captives were thus treated in 
the ancient world. Assyrian and Baby- 
lonian monarchs always represent their 
captives, even when kin>:8, as fettered. 
Nebuchadnezzar " bound Zedekiah with 
fetters of brass" (2 Kings xxv. 7). Partbia, 
and later Persia, and even Rome, followed 
the same practice. And their nobles with 
fetters of iron. On the monuments, cap- 
tives below the rank of kings are not often 
seen " fettered." Their arms, however, are 
frequently tied together with a cord, and 
they are fastened one to another by a stout 
rope. 

Ver. 9. — To execute npon them the judg- 
ment written. The allusion is probably to 
Deut. xxxiL 41, 42, where God announces 
the judgments that he will execute npon 
the oppressors of his people. This hononr 
have fill his saints ; rather, a glory it thit 
to all hii taiiUt. "The victories of their 
Lord reflect glory on all his faithful and 
devoted servants" (Kay), fmise j» th» 
Lord (comjj). ver. 1\ 



P8. OTLix. 1— 9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 413 



HOMILBTIOS. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Qoc^s pleamire in us, and owrt in him. The more particnlarly Inriting 
passage is found in the fourth verse ; but those before and after are also suggestive. 
Taking them first, and that last, we have — 

L The constancy op occasion fob pbaisino God. (Ver. 1.) The "new song" 
of the psalmist is surely not a fresh composition, though we may well be thankful for 
the new hymnologist, and consider him a very valuable gift of God to the Church ; 
but it is rather the song which rises fresh from the heart at the consciousness of some 
fresh mercy received at the hand of God, whether uttered in a familiar or an original 
strain. And if our hearts are as full of thanksgiving as our lives are crowded with 
blessings, we shall be always ready to sing " a new song " unto our God. " Moments 
come fast, but mercies are more free and fleet than they." They who are quick to see 
loving-kindnessL's will not be loug before they find a fresh reason for lifting up the 
heart in praise. 

II. Public worship. Private and public worship are the com|ilement of one 
another ; neither is complete without the other. We praise God " in the congregation 
of saints" all the more happily and heartily because we bless him for his goodness in 
the home. We worship him more reverently in the home because we sing his pnise 
with his people in the sanctuary. 

III. God's claim on us as oub Cbeatob and ottb HnLEs. (Ver. 2.) We cannot 
too often or too earnestly recall the great fact that our God called us into being, gave 
us our Teiy selves, made us all that we are, with all our immeasurable capacities and 
possibilities. He also is the indisputable Sovereign to whom we bring our loyal 
allegiance, in whom, as our righteous and gracious Ruler, we rejoice. 

IV. The triumph of the truth. (Vers. 6 — 9.) The psalmist saw in his vision 
the people of God mingling the praises of their lips with brave and strong blows from 
their hand dealt against their enemies and the Lord's. We see in our vision another 
and better warfare. We see the ministers and missionaries of the gospel assailing 
error and superstition with "the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God;" 
doing battle earnestly and devotedly with all forms of sin and wrong, their one weapon 
being the revealed truth of God. And we see, not kings in chains and soldiers 
slaughtered on battle-tields, but heathen temples in decay, the ashes of old idols that 
have been "utterly abolished," peoples clothed and in their right mind, nations 
walking in the fear and love of God. 

V. God's oood pleasure in ub, and our hope in him. (Ver. 4.) 1. His heritage 
in tM. (1) God is deeply interested in all his children, is concerned for their well-being, 
is seeking those that are atar off, is prepared to welcome them home; but while they 
are rebellious, obdurate, indifferent, he regards them with a Divine regret and even 
displeasure. (2) He is looking with deepest interest on those who are inquiring their 
way home to him (see Mark z. 21). (3) He receives the repenting and believing one 
with every sign ol parental joy (see Luke xv.), (4) He is accepting the service, loviug 
though imperfect, which his returned children are rendering him. (5) He looks with 
tenderness and joy on all earnest endeavours to grow in wisdom and u ortb, to extend 
his kingdom, to bless and save others. His people are his heritage, and in their service 
he finds a Divine pleasure. 2. Our heritage in him. The proud and the contentious 
find little satisfaction anywhere; but "the meek," who are willing to learn and to 
receive, are adorned or crowned with "salvation." To them are given the peace, the 
ioy, and the hope, which the gospel of Christ confers on the humble-hearted. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — The ever-repeated call for a new song. " A new song (as in Pss. xzxiii. 3 ; 
xcvi. 1 ; cxliv. 9) is the old song of praise, made new by newness of hcai t and newness 
of air." " New as expressive of all the new hopes and joys of a new era ; a new spring 
of the nation; a new youth of the Church, bursting forth into a new life." 

1. A NEW BONO IS WANTED BKOAUSE THEBE ARE ALWAYS NEW OCCASIONS, A SOHi! 



«4 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. cxLix. 1— 9. 

was sung by Israel, under the lead of Moses and Miriam, when the people were safely 
on the further shore of the Red Sea. It was well to keep that song in remembrance, 
and it was wisely repeated when the great deliverance was recalled. But there came 
occasions in the national history when that song was unsuitable, and a new song on 
the old lines had to be made. Illustrate by the song of Deborah ; the songs of David 
on bringing up the ark ; of Solomon on dedicating the temple ; of the exiles on return 
from captivity; of the Maccabees on recovering the holy city; of Mary on receiving 
the visit of the angel. So in a single life there are recurring occasions when the heart 
is inspired to make a new song. 

II. A NEW SONG MAT BE THE OLD BONO PUT IN A NEW FORM. Ferhapg it WOUld 

be true to say that there really is no new song ; for man there can never be anything 
more than the old song put into a new form. For man's song is always a loving and 
grateful recognition of God's goodness. And yet how much importance attaches to 
the fact that the old song does get set in ever-varying forms I The old song would lose 
interest, would become formal; its old form would become too strait, unsuitable, 
repressive of feeling. The song of Muses will not always satisfy. It will need to 
have much more put into it, and then it will appear as the " song of Moses and the 
Lamb." 

III. An old soNa is new when a new sfibit is put into rr. And that is the 
spirit of a man's individuality. Everything is new to me that is actually mine — a 
genuine expression of myself. It may be as old as the hills ; it is new to me ; it is the 
output of my feeling, the creation of my experience. It is like nothing else, for on it 
rests the stamp of my individuality. — B. T. 

Ver. 2. — The Maker of nationt. The expression seems to refer rather to the selection 
and constitution of Israel us the people of Jehovah than to the act of creation. By the 
restoration from Babylon, Israel had been appropriated anew in this special character ; 
made or constituted a nation. It was in the restored and renewed national life that 
the people so greatly rejoiced. 

L God hakes families. It is well for us to see distinctly what is the Divine 
order for humanity. God made man in his image as a Father ; gave him a helpmeet, 
through whom a family was to gather round him. That family was to be trained by 
personal influence for an independent family life, into which its members would pass ; 
and so families would reproduce families, and by means of families the whole earth 
woulfl be peopled, and the moral perfection of the entire family of God attained. This, 
God's ideal, man's self-will and passion have spoiled. 

n. Man-made nations. Cowper says, " God made the country, and man made the 
town." It is answering fact to say, " God made the family, and man made the nation." 
It is full of significance that the aggregi^tion of men for mutual protection, out of which 
nations and civil governments have been evolved, was a device of the sons of Cain; 
i.e, of those who, in some sense, had been "driven out from the presence of the Lord." 
It is easy to s<e that, lad God's family idea been preserved, no schemes for mutual 
protection would have been necessary, no walled cities, no government, no army, no 
police ; for brothers in a family would never think of injuring brothers, and the family 
feeling would also save the relations of families. 

III. God overbules the making of nations. He, in a way, accepts as facts, and 
uses for his purposes, the conditions in which man has set himself. He lets man have 
what has been called a " free experiment ; " and as it pleases man to create nations, 
Ood is pleased to deal with nations as such, using them for his purposes, even as he 
uses individuals. And nations really are aggregations of men in which personal 
individualities are sunk in order to construct a composite individuality. God deals 
with that individuality, and uses it. We call it the " national genius." — R. T. 

Ver. 4. — God's pleasv/re in his people. The peculiarity of religion is that it gives us 
pleasure in the thought of God, by removing the fear of him which is common to sinful 
men. This is seen in the joy-songs of the psalmists. When we cherish the thought 
of God, we find our hearts are incited to praise him (1) for what he is in his own 
glorious nature ; (2) for what he is in the ordering of his gracious providences; (3) for 
"hat he is in covenant relations wiih his people. Whether we are finding pleasure in 



n. oxux. 1-9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 415 

the thought of God is one of the surest and best tests of our religion. In the verse 
before us, our joy in God and praise of God are demanded on two very sufficient and 
suggestive grounds. 

I. God's pbbsbnt fleasube: ik his people. That ought to be a constant pleasure 
and joy to us. It is not only that he cares for us — that may be but a cold considera- 
tion. It is not only that he loves us — we may feel almost lost among the many .whom 
he loves. , It is that he finds pleasure in us, and that necessarily Involves some form 
of personal relations. But what can there possibly be in us in which God can find 
personal pleasure ? 1. We are to him as children. 2. We are the objects of his great 
redemption. (Illustrate by the interest of a doctor in his patient.) 3. We may reflect 
his image. There is a strange pleasure in discovering our characteristic self in another 
person. 4. We may lean upon his grace. And there is great pleasure felt by the good 
man in simply being relied on. What gave Christ his pleasure in his disciples ? Take 
home the thought of God's pleasurable interest in us, and then see under what 
obligations we lie never to spoil his pleasure, but do all we can to increase it. 

XL God's futube fubpose fob his people. His pleasure in them makes him 
work for them. And those for whom he works are indicated by their chief character- 
istic — meekness. " I will beautify the meek." For such God has : (1) Salvation in its 
fullest, deepest senses. (2) Help for every emergency, constant as their need, anil 
adapted to it in its ever-varying forms. (3) Final emancipation from the evil which 
has been all along marring and spoiling our beauty. Illustrate how beauty returns 
when encroaching and enfeebling disease is at last mastered and dismissed. It is 
important to dweU on the point — that the salvations of God which are going on in us 
and for us, because he takes pleasure in us, are adornments to the Christian. God's 
grace to him and in him tends to " beautify him." It may be shown how they tend 
to beautify (1) his very face ; (2) his character ; and (3) his relationships. What, 
then, will be our beauty in the sight of God when his salvation work in us is fitlly 
complete?— B. T. 

Yer. 4. — Ood^s pleasure In his people. In what respects does the Lord take pleasure 
in his people? 

I. He takes pleasure in them, inasmuch as he deliohts in the exebcibeb of 
THEiB QBACES TOWABDS HIM. They all faelievc in him, and have faith in his Word 
and promises ; they rely oa his truth and power ; they hope in his mercy ; they fear 
his displeasure j they love his Person and Name. 

IL He takes pleasure in the sebvtoes of his people. They can do but little 
for him, and he regards their services, not with an eye to their intrinsic value in 
themselves, but for the sake of the willing mind from which they flow. 

III. He takes pleasure in the pbospebitt or his people. His Name is love ; his 
nature is goodness. And can we doubt that he loves to see his people happy? 
Ejven in those dispensations which in themselves are grievous and painful, he is seeking 
their good, and in the end promoting their happiness. (After 0. H. S.)-— B. T. 

Ver. 6. — Song and stroke. " Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a 
two-edged sword in their hand." " The age when such a psalm was most likely to be 
produced was undoubtedly that of the Maccabees, and the coincidence between this 
verse and 2 Mace. xv. 27 may indicate the very series of events amid which, with 
hymns of praise in their throats, and a two-edged sword in their hand, the chasidim in 
battle after battle claimed and won the honour of executing vengeance on Jehovah's 
foes." Illustration may be taken also from Nehemiah's providing the workmen 
engaged on the wall with a weapon as well as a tooL But in that case the weapon 
was for defensive purposes only. The point here is that the sword was for active and 
aggressive woik against the foes of God and the nation; such foes as were the Syrians 
in the days of tlie Mdcoabees. 

L God's wobk in the wokld calls fob stuokb as well as bong. It is quite 
true that the weapons of our warfare are " not carnal ; " but they are weapons, and they 
are for a warfare. There is some danger of overdoing the peaceful and submissive side 
of the Christian religion. There are many evils, and especially those of a. private and 
pergonal character, which can best — ^peniaps can only — be met and conquered by 



416 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. cxlix. 1— » 

Bubmisgion. But there are other evils, and especially those of a public character, which 
must be utively dealt with in a spirit of war. For them the servant of God must 
have strokes — stroke upon stroke. The two injunctions can be, and must be, observed — 
" Resist not evil ; " " Resist the devil." The spirit of the soldier should he in every 
Christian. (Illustrate by F. W. Robertson of Brighton.) 

II. God'b work 01' "stroke" is never biqhtlt done save as we keep the 
SOUL OP BONG. That keeps us from a wrong spirit in doing what so easily arouses a 
bad spirit. Thi- song in our soul shows we are only God's servants ; and it keeps us 
reminded that even in doing stern things we are only doing good, trying to waken 
gong in other souls. — R. T. 

Ver. 9. — The limitation of all human vengeance. "To execute upon them the 
judgment written." " It was the thought that vengeance was the righteous retribution, 
written in the hook of God, which made Israel glory in inflicting it." " The psalmist 
probably desires to fire the broken-spirited despondency which the history shows to 
have weighed so heavily on the returned exiles." Just in one thing humanity has 
always failed — it has overdone its vengeance. Vengeance may be duty, but whenever 
man tries to do that duty, his passions come in and spoil his work. IllustMte by the 
treatment of the conquured in Old Testament wars ; by the horrors of the Roman siege 
of Jerusalem ; by the awful scenes at the sacking of besieged cities io modern warfare. 
Christianity has wrought a great blessing for humanity in putting strict limitation on 
vengeance. And it puts as strict limitations on the vengeance which an individual 
man may take on a fellow-man who has wronged him. Works of fiction often present 
the exaggerated vengeance taken by men who are under no restraint of Christianity. 
The Christian limitations are twofold. 

L Human vengeance is limited by the pact that those on whom we take 
IT STAND IK THE LOVE OF GoD. The Mohammedan can freely slay the "infidels" in 
propagating his doctrines with the sword, because in his view they are altogether out 
of the love of God, and these vengeance-lakers think they are executing the vengeance 
of God. We can do nothing of the kind, for that love of God in which we live 
embraces every fellow of our humanity. To strike a man is to strike one whom God 
loves. This checks our taking vengeauce. 

II. Human vengeance is limited by the necessity op keeping in view the 

WELL-BEING OF THOSE ON WHOM THE VENGEANCE IS TAKEN. The Servant of GKjd 

must never do anything but goud to anybody. He may do seeming injury in order to 
r^h ends of good ; but he must alvvays have in view the salvation — in the large sensa 
—oi those with whom he deals. — R. T. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The voice of praise. " Breathes the spirit of intense joy and eager hope 
in the period which suocee'lcd the return from Babylon. The poet saw in their return 
so signal a proof of the Divine favour, that lie regarded it as a pledge of a glorious 
future yet in store for the nation. But language like that of vers. 6 — 9 is no warrant 
for the exhibiti' n of a similar spirit in the Christian Church." 

I. A NEW ERA IN THE LIFE OP THE NATION OB INDIVIDUAL FURNISHES NEW 

MATERIAL FOB PBAiSE. (Ver. 1.) Escape from a miserable captivity and the return 
home was a new national experience, if they had not lost the spirit of freedom. 
How many eras in our individual life correspond to this ? A long sickness recovered 
from, or a long habit of sin escaped from, 

II. Social worship is most congenial to the spirit of praise. (Ver. 1.) 
The people were summoned to rejoice in the congregation. Enthusiasm uf any kind 
more easily inspired in a multitude than in an individual, and more easily propagated, 

III. We are to rejoice in cub Gbeatob and King as oub Redebmeb. 
(Vers. 2, 3.) Such a King will not leave them subject to alien rule, but redeem them. 
1, For Ood rejoices in his near relation to hit people. (Ver. 4.) Takes pleasure in 
his fellowship with them and in their welfare. 2. He ddights to amy th^m in hmowr 
and glory. To put beauty and glory upon the outcast and afflicted. 

IV. The joy of the redeemed will utter itself in private as well as in 
public. (Ver. 6.) " Upon their beds." In their most restful moments they will exult 
in God's favour now, and in hope for the future, — S. 



IB. OL. 1 — 6.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



417 



EXPOSITION. 



FSALH Oli. 
OniHBNTATOiw generally are agreed that 
thli ia a most noble psalm, a fit conolasion 
to the noble collection which here termi- 
nates. Professor Cheyne says, "Ps. el. 
closes this Hallelujah group(PBa. cxivi. — ol.) 
not less worthily than the whole group con- 
dades the Psalter. It is the finale of the 
■piritual oonoeit." Hengstenberg observes, 
"We haTe here a fnll-toned call to the 
praise of Ood, quite appropriate to the 
close of this psalm-oyole and of the whole 
Psalter." The " Four Friends " say, " With 
these grand words the Psalter closes." Dr. 
Mason Good points out, as the speciality of 
the psalm, that it sets before ua in detail 
the various elements of the temple music. 
"The enraptnied minstrel," he remarks, 
"now rises upon the full stretch of his 
pinions, and addresses himself to all the 
powers and faculties of his symphonions 
brotherhood: to the enchantment of flowing 
nnmhera, and the overwhelming ecstasy of 
•n harmonions peal, poured forth in all its 
strength, firom pipe and string and shell of 
every kind, each, with devotional rivalry, 
striving to surpass each in pealing forth 
his praise, &oiu whom they derive breath, 
vibration, and sound." No psalm rises more 
grandly from verse to verse, or terminates 
in a nobler or grander climax, " Let every- 
thing that hath breath praise the Lord." 

Ver. 1. — Fraies ye the Lord. Praise Qod 
In his sanotnary, Tliis is the right render- 
ing, and not that of the Prayer-book Ver- 
sion, " Praise God in his hoUneu." Israel 
is called upon to give God praise in his 
holy temple. Praise him in the firmament 
of his power; {.«. in the broad expanse of 
heaven, the sign and seat of his power. 



Yer. 2. — ^Praise him for his mighty aoti ; 
i.e. for the great acts of his providence, 
especially for his deliverances of Israel. 
Praise him aocording to his excellent great- 
ness ; rather, Ail abouiiding greatneia(K&y); 
or, his manifold greatnesa (Cheyne). 

Yer. 3. — Praise him with the sound of the 
trnmpet (On the use of the trumpet in 
Divine service, see Lev. xxiii. 24 ; xxv. 9 ; 
Numb. X. 10; 2 Sam. vi. 15; 1 Oljron. xiii. 
8 ; XV. 24 ; xvi. 6 ; 2 Ohron. v. 12, 13 ; vii. 
6 ; xxix. 27 ; Pss. Ixxxi. 3 ; xoviii. 6.) Praise 
him with the psaltery and harp (comp. Pss. 
Ivii. 8 ; Ixxxi. 2 ; cviii. 2 ; 1 Chron. xv. 16 ; 
2 Ohron. v. 12, etc.). 

Yer. 4. — Praise him with the timbrel and 
danoe (comp. Ps. cxlix. 3). Praise him with 
stringed instruments and organs ; literally, 
with ttring$ and pipe. " Organs " are, of 
course, out of the question. The " pipe " 
intended is probably the double pipe so 
often represented on the monuments of 
Egypt, Assyria, and Phoenicia. 

Ver.5. — Praise him npon the loud cymbals; 
praise him upon the high-sounding cymbals. 
"We can hardly," says Professor Cheyne, 
" venture to distinguish two kinds of cym- 
bals on the ground of these two epithets." 
The mention of "cymbals" is reserved to 
the last, as being the instrument of musio 
most expressive of joy and jubilation. It 
completes the musical climax, as ver. 6 
completes the ideal one. 

Ver. 6. — ^Let every thing that hath breath 
praise the lord ; literally, the whole of breath 
(comp. Bev. v. 13, "And every creature 
which is in heaven, and on the earth, and 
under the earth, and such as are in the sea, 
and all that are in them, heard I saying, 
Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, 
be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, 
and imto the Lamb for ever and ever ; " see 
also Ps. cxlviii. 7, 10 — 12). Praise ye the 
Lord. " As the life of the faithful, and the 
history of the Church, so also the Psalter, 
with all its cries from the depths, runs out 
in a hallelujah " (Hengstenberg), 



HOMILETICa 

Ten. 1 — 6. — ffaHelufah ; our life a pialm. There is no distinctive truth taught 
here ; each verse gives utterance to that which has been sung before (see especially 
Ps. cxlviii.). But the strain of the psalm is that of an earnest summons to make the 
praise of God the prevailing note of our life. Let life be charged and crowned with 
praise. 1. If regidarly at the sanctuary, there in order that it may be offered else- 
where, everywhere. 2. If on the sabbath day, then that it may be presented every 
day. 3. If with trumpet and cymbal, thus that it may be sounded on every instru- 
ment that can make music unto the Lord. 4. If rendered for his " mighty acts " 
especially, it is not to be withheld for his daily and hourly loving-kindnesses. 5. Praia* 

PBALHB — m. 2 E 



418 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. ol. 1— «. 

should, in its fulness and sweetness and heartiness on our part, answer to " the abun« 
dance of his greatness " — " his excellent greatness " (ver. 2). 6. Praise should proceed 
from every lip, from every life (ver. 6) ; from the youngest who is old enough to lisp 
his Name, and from the oldest who has strength enough left to make mention of his 
grace ; from the sick on their couch as they anticipate the time when there will be 
" no more pain ; " from the bereaved as they realize all that their departed friends 
were to them through years of health and service, and as they look forward to the glad 
day of reunion, and from the strong and active in the midst of the strife of life ; from 
those who study, and from those who "labour, working with their hands;" from 
those who rule, and from those who serve. A life of praise is a life of holy fragrance^ 
acceptable to Qoi and well-pleasing to man. It is excellent in itself, and it is pro« 
motive and prophetic of the time when "the whole earth shall be filled with bia 
glory." 

HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTH0B8. 

Ver. Ir—Plaeei to praise Ood in. " This psalm is a rapture. The poet-prophet 
is full of inspiration and enthusiasm." Lamartine says, " In this closing psalm we 
see the almost inarticulate enthusiasm of the lyric poet ; so rapidly do the words press 
to his Ups, floating upwards towards God, their Source, like the smoke of a great fire 
of the Boiil wafted by the tempest." " In former times, when the casting of chnrch- 
bells was more of a religious ceremony, this psalm was chanted by the brethren of the 
guild, as they stood ranged around the furnace, while the molten metal was prepared 
to be let off into the mould ready to receive it." 

I. The sanotuabt. Not " his holiness," as in the Prayer-book Version, nor merely 
" his temple ; " but the whole earth, as the sphere in which he has displayed his power 
and his grace. It is quite true that praise is to be offered in those buildings which are 
set apart for God's worship ; but we must always regard them as representative of God's 
great temple ef nature and of human history. The old tabernacle represented wander- 
ing Israel as the dwelling-place of Gcd. The temple, later on, represented the 
organized nation as the dwelling-place of God. But such localization and limitations 
only represented and taught the truth that the whole earth is the sanctuary of God. 
In tabernacle, temple, church, whole earth, where God is, God's praise must be 
sounded forth. He says, " Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me." 

n. Thb firmament of his foweb. This is usually taken to mean " heaven," but 
it is more in accordance with Hebrew repetition to see in it another figure for what is 
called the " sanctuary." " Firmament " simply means sphere. Every place becomes 
a holy place if God's power is put forth in it ; then the whole earth, and the entire 
range of history, become a sanctuary in which God's praise is properly called forth. 
If we are to praise God in the spheres in which he has put forth his power and grace, 
we shall have to be praising him everywhere. — B. T. 

Ver. 2. — ITtings to praise Ood /or. For " excellent greatness," read " muchness of 
greatness." Praise is to be offered in recognition both of God's inherent power, and 
of its manifestation in mighty acts, 

I. Pbaibe is called fob bt Pivike foweb. He who knows God knows him 
through a series of mighty, wonderful acts, interventions, provisions, deliverances, 
punishings, all of which produce overwhelming impressions of almighty power. BluB- 
tration may be taken from (1) the Divine creations; (2) the Divine maintainings ; 
(3) the Divine redemptions. Divine power is seen in God's ordering and controlling 
''be gigantic forces of nature and the lawless wilfulness of man. Modern artistic and 

oetic feeling, perhaps responding to the revelations of the microscope, can find Divine 
lower in the gentle and the minute ; but Hebrew genius dealt almost exclusively with 
the august, tremendous, and awful in nature ; so powtr in God was the thing most 
impressed on the Hebrew mind as the inspiration of praise. And still a necessary 
ground of entire confidence in God is a conviction of his absolute and unquestionable 
almightiness everywhere, and in relation to everything. We praise him because we 
feel sure that our God is mightier than the mightiest. 

II. Pbaise is called for bt Divine chabacteb behind powbb. "Excellent 



PS. OL. 1—6.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 419 



greatness. An adjective is applied which directs us to moral quality. God must 
never be thought of as we think of giants. We are altogether absorbed by thinking 
of their bodily size and strength; it does not matter to us whether they have either 
mental faculty or moral character. Some think of (Jod as a mere embodiment of 
august and awful power. He is not known aright, nor can he be praised aright, until 
the character inspiring the exercise of his power !■ apprehended. Then we realize 
that he stands in relation to ia, and for his gracious relations we praise him in the 
highest.— B. T. o i- 

/^OM. 3, ^.—Ingtrvmentt to praise Ood with. Bishop Wordsworth notes that all 
kinds of faculty are engaged in the work of prMse. The breath is employed in blowing 
the trumpet ; the fingers are used in striking the strings of the psaltery and the harp ; 
the whole hand is exerted in beating the timbrel; the feet move in the dance. The 
introduction of various musical instruments, as well as choirs of human voices, into 
the regular worship of the tabernacle and temple, is traceable to the time and probably 
to the personal influence of David. "David did so much for the public worship of 
God in that he brought it so near to men ; he gave it so much interest to them ; and 
he lifted it out of mere duty into pleasm-e by adding the features of music and of song." 
It is interesting, but only a matter of curiosity, to identify and describe the different 
instruments mentioned here. We need only see that they include aU the musical 
instruments— wind, string, and clanging. The point to fix attention on is that, when 
a man wants to praise God, he may bring into his service every kind of power that he 
possesses, and every agency through which he can find expression for his power. 

L AiiL KINDS OF iNSTBnuENTS KAT BE USED IN PRAISE. Only Sentiment ever puts 
limitations on the instruments that may be used for Divine worship. Sentiment 
imagines some kinds to be more solemn and reverent than others. Cmioudy, those 
which some regard as specially solemn, e.g. the organ, are wholly repudiated by others 
(the Scoteh). Ko instrument is in itself unsuitable. The kind of use man makes of 
it, and the kind of associations man causes to gather round it, may make an instrument 
unsuitable. In this matter the good sense of Christian people must decide. 

IL ThS FBAISK is not in THB INBTBUMENT, but in what the HAN XXPBEBSBS 

THBOUOH THE INSTRUMENT. With OUT temptation to rest in things, we need this 
reminder for every age. The pruse is in the man's sonl. And the most exquisite 
musical expression is worthless as praise if it is souHesa. — B. T. 

Yer. 6. — Persona and things that should unite in God^s praite. "It is difficult to 
conceive how any man who believes in God can need to be reminded of the duty of 
praise. In every age and country the adoration of the Supreme Being has risen with 
the illumination of the human mind, and borne a very exact proportion to its restora- 
tion in the Divine image." " Our whole life should speak forth our thankfulness." 
" Let all the breath [i.e. the entirety of animate creation] praise Jehovah." If a com- 
prehensive view of God be taken, and it is seen that " his tender mercies are over all 
his worker" and that " the eyes of all wait upon him, and he giveth them their meat 
in due season," this call to the entire animate creation to join man in his praise will 
become to us more than poetry and sentiment. It is to be noticed that the Hebrew 
poet had no glimpse of the idea of Wordsworth, that a living soul animates the 
inanimate creation. The Hebrew limits his call to creatures that have breath and 
can make sounds; and of this great choir man is the leader. They may be likened to 
the great band of musicians in a chorus, who never utter an articulate sound, yet are 
in perfect harmony with the singers whose intelligent voices lead the chorus. " As 
well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there." 

L EvERTTHiNa AND EVERYBODY OUGHT TO PRAISE GoD. Ought to harmouiously 
unite Id praising GhxL And this is only possible when each does what he can, and 
does it in the best way he can. The grand song of redeemed nature and man is well 
given in PoUok's ' Course of Time,' pp. 189—191. 

II. We ouoht to praise God. For the last exclamation, " Praise ye the Lord I " 
should be taken as a personal call and application. It can never be enough to ua that 
praise is being offered. Nor can it be enough to offer formal praise with ours. It 
must be ow praise — our soul-praise, and our praise at its best. — B. T. 



HOMILETICAL INDEX 



TO 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



VOLUME m. 



PSALM cvn. 

rmnfE 

Deliverance and Indebtedness ». 

Dirine Be volution ... ... 

Wherefore Men should praise the 

Lord ... 
Praise, its Desirableness, Absence, and 

Source... 
Four Portraits of One Soul 
The Pilot, the Passage, and the Port 
The Loving-kindness of the Lord ... 
The Lord's People are a Bedeemed 

People 
A Fourfold View of God's Belationa 
Prayer for Temporal Good ... ... 

Bringing AfiSiction on ourselvei ... 
Thanksgiving when Prayer U an- 

■wered ... ... •«. 

The Desired Haven ... ... 

Ood's Oommonplace Mercies ... 

The Wise Observance of God's Loving^ 

kindness ... ... m. 

God's Watchful Oare ... ... 

PSALM ovin. 
Triumph in Trouble ... m. 

Ood honoured by Fixed Besolvei ... 
The Best Work of a Man's Best 
Morning Beligion 

Hope and Prayer inspired by Praise 
Conicion* Strength through Ood'i 

Pledge 
Ck)d with vm aosoies Oonfldence aai 

Tletoy M* M* M. 



rAOB 

6 



8 
9 
9 

10 
10 
11 
11 

12 
13 
13 

14 
14 



IS 
17 
17 
18 
18 

18 

19 



PSALM OIX. 




THK1R 


TAMU 


Explanation, Warning, Encourage- 




ment ... ... ... M. 


23 


The Dreadful Psalm ... ... 


23 


The Helper of the Poor ... ... 


25 


Complaining to God ... ... 


29 


Committing our Enemies to the Judg- 




ment of God 


26 


The Vicarious Feature in Judgments 


26 


Suffering that which we make others 




suffer ... 


27 


The Power of Prayer to change our 




Moods... ... ... ... 


27 


Awful Imprecations ... m. 


28 



PSALM ex. 

The Victorious King ... „. SO 

The Day of Christ's Power... m. 81 

Melcbizedek ... ... ... 31 

" The Brook by the Way " 32 

War-figures applied to Messiah ... 32 

God in World-success ... „. 83 

The Power of recognizing Power ... 34 

The Priesthoods of David and Messiah 34 
Spiritual Befreshment for Spiritual 

Work... 35 

Christ the Divine King and Prieat ... 85 

PSALM OXL 

The Work of God and the Wisdom of 

Man ... ... ... ... 86 

« The Works of the Lord " ^ 87, 42 



INDEX. 



THBHE rAOS 

Meat given to them that fear the 

Lord ... ... ... ... 88 

The Duty of Witnessing in Public for 

God 89 

Gtood Will towards God guiding the 

Search for God ... ... ... 89 

The Excellency of the Divine Memory 40 
The Distinction between Truth and 

TJprightness ... ... ... 40 

Beverence for the Name ... ... 41 

The Starting-point of Human Wisdom 41 



PSALM OXIL 

The Promise of Piety ... m. 43 

The Blessed Life ... ... ... 45 

Light arising in Darkness ... ... 45 

Not afraid of Evil Tidings ... 46 
Goodness repeated in Xew Genera- 
tions ... ... ... ... 46 

A Man's Highteousness ... ... 47 

Advantages of the Good in Times of 

Calamity ... ... ... 48 

The Bible Use of the Word "•Ever- 
lasting " ... ... ... 48 

Trust-triumph oyer Fears ... ... 49 

Giving as a Sig;n of Character ... 49 

The Blessedness of the Eminently 

Good ... >•• ... ... 50 



PSALM oxra. 



51 



Beasons for Beverential Praise 
The Overflowing Gratitude of the 

Saved Soul ... ... ... 52 

Servant-reasons for Praise ... ... 52 

Universal Praise ... ... ... S3 

Likenesses to God ... ... 54 

The Bolutive Value of Earthly Things 54 

God the Bemover of Disabilitiea ... 55 

The Mission of the Children ... 55 

The Divine Nature and Charaotei ... 66 



PSALM OXIV. 

God with ns ... m. m. 57 

Tke Soul's Exodns .« *>. 68 

Man is God'i Temple ... ... 68 

Nntore made to serre God's Pnrposet 59 

tte Natural and the Supernatural ... 69 

Xha Bpiritnal Eudui m« m. 60 



PSALM OXV. 

THEHl Wkei 

True and False Worship ... m. 62 
God'i Practical Kindness, Past and 

Future ... ••• «■. 63 
The Heathen Taunt, and what came 

of it 64 

Looking back and looking on : a New 

Year's Sermon ... ... ... 65 

Honour in honouring God ... ... 66 

The Taunt of the Unbeliever ... 66 

The Inefficiency of Idolatry .« 67 

Like God, like People ... ... 67 

The Call to trust implies Imperilled 

Trust ... ... ... ... 68 

The Certainty of the Divine Benedic- 
tion ... ... ... ... 69 

The Besponsibility of being alive ... 69 

The Honour due to God ... •« 70 



PSALM CXVL 

Danger and Deliverance ... ... 72 

"I love til e Lord, because " ... 73 

The Experience of a deeply Distressed 

Soul ... ... ... ... 74 

Best ... ... ... ... 75 

God, the Best of the Soul ... ... 75 

The Inquiry of the Grateful Heart ... 75 

The Answer of the Grateful Heart ... 75 
The Divine Estimate of the Saint's 

Death 76 

The Lord's Service commeided ... 76 
The Various Bases on which Love 

rests ... ... ... ... 77 

Depression attending Sickness m. 77 

Simple as opposed to Guileful m. 78 

Best won and re- won ... ... 79 

Ghid's works in our Human Lives ... 80 

Hasty Thought and Hasty Speech ... 80 

The Only Betum God looks for ... 81 

Vow-making and Vow-paying ... 81 

Consolations for the Bereaved ... 82 

Spiritual Sacrifices ... ... 83 

dod the Deliverer m< ••. 83 



PSALM CXVIL 

The Kingdom of God ... m. 84 

The Doxology ... ... »• 85 

God in National Life ... ... 85 

God's Merciful Dealings with Nationa 80 

Truth regarded as Beliabilitj „. 8G 

Pnuae «. —* ~* •« 67 



INDEX. 



iii 



psAiiM oxvm. 



Opposition, DeliTeTanoe,ThankBglviiig 90 

The Great Beversal ... ... 91 

The Valiant Bight Hand of the Lord 91 

•• I shall not die, but live "... m. 92 

"The Gates of BighteonBnesB" ,- 92 

The Day the Lord hath mads m> 93 

Ohtsrch Frosperity ... — 91 

The Song of the Saved Soul ... 91 

Family Experience of Divine Mercies 95 

Personal Experience of Divine Mercies 96 

God's Power in a Human Life ... 97 
The Beally Better may not be the 

Apparently Better ... •.. 97 

Acting in the Divine Name ... 98 
What God seems to be and what God 

is ... ... ... .*• 9^ 

Public Praise for Personal Deliverance 99 

The Stone in the Comer ... ... 100 

The God-made Day ... m. 100 

Sacrifice as a Sign of Devotion m. 101 

li Sermon on Beligioos Bevival .m 101 



PSALM asis. 



«. 113 
... 114 



115 



The Blessedness of Obedience 
Spiritual Enlargement .m 
Comfort in AfiSiction ... 

Human Need and the Divine 

ciency... ... ... ... 116 

Knowledge and Action ... ... 116 

Looking to God ... ... m. 117 

Earnestness ... ... ... 118 

True Things ... .» ... 118 

God's Salvation ... ... ... 119 

Meditation: its Place in Ohrihtian 

Culture ... ... ... 120 

Whole-heartednesB .» m. 120 

God's Word and Shame ... ... 121 

The Way of Life: the Young ... 121 

The False Way and the False Word ... 122 

Introductory to Whole Psalm ... 122 
Characteristics of the Word of God as 

declared in the Various Names given 

to it in this Psalm ... ... 123 

Whole-hearted Service of God ... 124 

Longing after Holiness ... ~. 124 

How to steer clear of Shame m. 12? 

Sanctified through the Truth ... 125 

The Soul's Longing xmto God's Word 126 

Clinging to God ... ... ••• 127 

"Quicken thou me" ~. •«• 127 

Tenacity... ~. .~ ♦•• 128 



THEME M«I 

Bnnning the Way of God's Command- 
ments ... ... ... ... 129 

"Teach me, O Lord" ... ... 180 

What Gtod's Salvation does for • Man 180 

"Songs in the Night" 181 

God the Portion of his People m. 182 

The Blessed Effects of Affliction ... 182 
The Sustaining Power of the Word of 

God 183 

"Persecuted, but not Forsaken* ... 188 

A Grateful Confession of Divine Aid 184 

"Chow love I thy Law!" 184 

The Dluminated Path ... ... 185 

Deceit denounced and detested ... 185 
An Appeal of the Bighteous to the 
Bighteous God against the Un- 
righteous ... ... ... 136 

» Thy Testimonies are Wonderful " ... 137 

The Bighteous Lord and Word ... 188 

The Cry 188 

God's Quickening Grace the Beal 

Help in Affliction ... ... 139 

The Ever-blessed Word ... m. 140 

The Humility of Holiness ... m. 140 

Man Helpless as a Lost Sheep m. 141 

Sincerity is Perfeotness ... ». 142 

Care in Obedience ... ». 143 

Good Habits confirming Goodness m. 143 

Cleansing one's Way m* — 144 

The Perils of Touth m* m. 145 

Scripture-stores ... m. m. 145 

The Treasures of Meditation ... 146 

The Largeness of Divine Dealings ... 146 

Eye-opening ... ... ... 147 

The Soul breaking through its Forced 

Watchings ... ... ... 147 

Quickening the Exhausted... ... 148 

Strength to run ... ... ... 148 

Man's Purpose, and God's Help ... 149 

A Path for oar Goings ... ... 149 

God's Work in Men's Hearts ... 150 

The Freedom of Eight-wUledness ... 150 

The Joy of Obedience ... ... 161 

Man's Trust a Plea for securing God's 

Faithfulness ... ... ... 152 

Steadfast Goodness may be exposed 

to Misunderstanding ... ... 152 

A Good Man's Songs _ „. 153 

Self-examination ... ... ... 153 

The Good Man's Friends ... „. 154 

The Moral Service of Affliction ... 154 
The Faithfulness of the Divine 

Chastener ... m. ... 165 



INDEX. 



TBElm rAGB 

Experience can teach „. ... 155 

What is a Perfect Heart? ... ... 166 

The Wine-skin in the Smoke ... 156 

Leaving our Enemies with God ... 157 

Divine Quickening our Supreme Need 157 

The Supreme Strain of Affliction ... 158 

The Disappointment of Human Hopes 158 

The Inspiration of Obedience ... 159 

Human Teachers and the Bible itself 159 

Dealing with Hindrances to Obedience 160 

Heavenly Light on the Earthly Path 160 
Confirming our Fledges by keeping 

them ... ... ... ... 161 

Soul-life for Suffering Bodies ... 161 

God's Word the Safety of the Tempted 162 

Onr Power over our own Hearts ... 162 

The Offence of the Insincere ... 163 
The Mischievous Influence of the 

Disobedient ... ... ... 163 

Belf-distrust ... ... ... 164 

Confidence in God's Judgments blend- 
ing with Fears ... ... ... 165 

The Cry for Spiritual Discernment ... 165 

Making Void God's Word 165 

The Self-willed Treatment of God's 

Word 166 

High Estimates of God's Word ... 166 
God practically applying his own 

Word 167 

Freedom in Order to be Bighteous ... 167 

The Shining Face ... ... 168 

Bests in God's Bighteonsness ... 168 

Self-estimates ... ... ... 169 

AU-round Bighteonsness ... ... 169 

The Plea of the Prayerful 170 

The Helpfulness of Meditation ... 170 

The Cry for More 171 

Conditions beyond Self-help ... 171 

Salvation for the Obediently Disposed 172 

Love-inspired Obedience ... ... 172 

Finding Spoil ... ... ... 172 

Self-serving and Time-seiving ... 173 
The Steadying Influence of God's 

Word 174 

Joy in God's Besponse ... ... 174 

The Frailties of the Sincere ... 175 

The Praise of God's Law ... ... 175 

"Wondrous Things" ... ... 175 

Liberty ... ... ... ... 176 

Beligion under Two Aspects ... 176 

"The Whole Duty of Man" ... 177 

The Use of Adversity ... ... 177 

The Breadth of God's Law 177 



THKn 

"My Hope" 
A Great Sorrow 



177 
178 



PSALM OXX. 

The Perversion of Power, etc. m. 179 

In Mesech and Eedar ... ... 180 

A Dark Fact explained and illnmi- 

nated ... ... ... ... 181 

The Misery made by the Untruthful 181 

Sins of the Tongue ... ... 182 

The Deceitful Tongue ... ... 182 

"Coals of Juniper" ... ... 183 

Onr Uncomfortable Surroundings ... 183 
The Misery of the War-spirit to 

Peace-lovers ... ,« m. 184 

PSALM OXXL 

God onr Guide: a New Tear's Psalm 185 

Kept from All Evil ... ... 186 

The Sure Keeping of Gkid ... ... 187 

Looking up ... ,„ „. 188 

Not Mountains, but Grod ... ... 188 

The Ever-watchful Watchman ... 189 

Types of Peril by Day and by Night 190 

Evil as God sees it ... ... 190 

The Safety of our Life ... ... 191 

The Safety of our Days m< •.. 191 

The Source of Help .» m. 192 

PSALM CXXIt 

The House of God and the Chnroh of 

Jesus Christ ... ... ... 193 

Jerusalem a Type of the Church ... 194 

Glad to go to the House of the Lord... 195 

Joy in God's Service ... ... 195 

Beligious Attachment to Places ... 196 
The Emblem of Spiritual Unity ... 197 
The IVliBsion of the Great Feasts ... 198 
The Blending of the Civil and Beli- 
gious ... ... ... ... 199 

Peace, Prosperity, and Prayer ... 199 
The Beligious Value of the Patriotic 

Spirit ... ... ... ... 200 

Piety blessing National Life m. 201 

Worship... ... ... M. 201 

PSALM OXXHL 

Our Befuge in Trouble ... ... 202 

" Unto thee lift I up mine Eyes " ... 203 

Our Uploob to God ... ... 208 



INBBX. 



Waiohing for Divine Favour and 

Direotion ... ... ... 204 

Contempt a Sore Trial ... ... 204 

The Ultimate Befuge ... ... 205 

PSALM OXXIV. 

Divine Deliverance ... m. 206 

But for the Lord ... ... ... 206 

The Soul's Birdlike Experiences ... 207 

Jehovah for ua ... ... ... 208 

Jehovah's Effective Besistanoe ... 209 

God's Delivering Ways ... ... 209 

What Qod has done, G-od can do ... 210 

The Help of the Divine Name ... 210 

The Believer's Safeguard ... ... 211 

PSALM OXXV. 

Divine Providence ... m. 212 

Snoh as cannot be moved ... ... 213 

" The Lot of the Bighteous " ... 214 

Stability out of Trust 215 

The Encircling of Divine Defence ... 216 

Delivered in Order to be Bighteona ... 216 

The Claim of the Upright 217 

God is against the Wilful ... ... 218 

The Safety of those who trust ia Gk>d : 

• Lesson from Experience ... 218 



PSALM CXXVL 



... 219 

... 220 



Spiritual Bondage ... 

Spiritual Farming ... 

"Like them that dream" ... ... 221 

The History of a Soul ... ... 222 

The Bejoicing Beaper ... ... 222 

Turning Captivity into Liberty ... 223 

Signs of Joy ... ... ... 224 

Our Joy in God a Witness for God ... 224 
A Flea for Renewed Joyous Experi- 
ences ... ... ... ... 225 

Sad Bowing-times... ... ... 225 

The Law of Giving in Order to gain 226 

Alternations and Contrasts in the 

Experiences of Life ... ... 226 

PSALM CXXVIL 

The Blessing of God ... ... 227 

The Builder's Pualm ... ... 228 

The Sleep God gives ... ... 229 

Children as Arrows ... ..• 230 

The God of the Family Life ... 231 

The True City Watchman ... ... 231 



The Limited Value of Self-exertion ... 232 

Children a Man's Beward ... ... 232 

Children a Man's Power ... ... 233 

Children a Man's Security ... ... 233 

The Divine BuUder ... ... 234 

PSALM OXXVUL 

Present Becompense ... m. 235 

The Secret of the Happy Home ... 236 

"Home, Sweet Home I" 237 

Practical Fear ... ... ... 237 

The Link between Labour and Beward 238 

Family Joys ... ... ... 238 

The Present Blessings of the Fiona ... 289 
Length of Life a Becognition of Family 

Goodness ... ... ... 288 

A Sunny Picture of the Life of ■ 

Good Man ... ... m. 210 



PSALM CXXIX. 
Sin a Failure ... ... 

The Divine Life ... ... 

Our Seven Sorrows ... 

The Figure of the Tom Land 



«. 241 

... 242 

... 243 

... 243 



BighteousnesB may involve Judgment 244 

A New Figure of the Grass ... 344 

Politeness in the Harvest-field; or. 
Bight Belations of Employer and 

Employed ... ... m. 245 

Suffering and Victory ... m« S45 

PSALM OXXX. 

Penitence and Hope ... ... 246 

De Profundit ... ... ... 247 

The Assurance of God's Forgiveness 248 

" Plenteous Bedemption " ... ... 248 

The Cry of the Humbled ... ... 249 

The Fears of Conscience ... ... 250 

Forgiveness generating Fear m. 2S0 

Our Waiting is a Watching ... 251 

The Final Object of Hope ... ... 251 

Bedemption only Complete in Sanoti- 

fication ... ... ... 252 

A Cry to Ood for the Forgireness of 

Sin ... ... M. ••. 25S 

Full Bedemption ... m. m. S53 

PSALM OXXXL 

Lowliness of Mind ... ... 253 

The Soul's Most Blessed Condition ... 254 
The Sense of what is Acceptable with 

God ... ... ••• >•• 255 



INDEX. 



On Knowing our Spheres ,., «• 256 

Bestraint of Natural Ambitions ... 256 
Man's Personal Experience may be 

the Basis of his Hope in Qod ... 257 

Humility ^ ^ M. 258 

PSALM OXXXIL 

The Service of the Sanctuary ,„ 260 

The Power of a Holy Sonl 261 

"A Place for the Lord *» „. ... 261 

Led of the Lord ... 262 

The Church the Best of the Lord ... 262 

" Zion of the Lord Beloved " ... 263 
The Shame of Ohrisf s Enemies and 

the Glory of liia Oiown ... ... 264 

Anxious Purpose delayed may prove 

Afflictive ... ,„ „. 264 

The Mighty One of Jacob .„ m. 265 

Housing God's Symbols ... ... 265 

The History of the Ark epitomizing 

the History of the Nation ... 266 

God's Footstool ... M* M* 267 

The Holy Olothiag «. „. 267 

Conditional Promise! .^ m. 268 

Limited Permanency m« m. 269 

Spiritual Wotahip... m m 269 

PSALM OXXZnL 

Unity in the Ohuioh „, ... 270 
Unity ... M. M. 271,275 

Possible Unities ... ... m. 272 

Fragrance of the Brotherhood ... 273 

Lessons of the Dew ... ... 273 

Old Testament "Eternal Life" m. 274 

PSALM CXXXIV. 

God and Man ; Beoiprocal Belatioas 275 

The Songs of Degrees' Doxology ... 276 

Eepresentative Worshippers m. 277 

"Holy Hands" ... ^ ... 277 

PSALM OXXXV. 

Beasons for the Worship and Service 

of God ... ... ... 279 

The March of Mercy ... ... 280 

The Pleasantness of the Divine Name 281 

The Selection of Israel ... ... 282 

God's Power can carry out God's Will 282 

The Lord is a " Man of War " ... 283 
Authoritative Beoords of the Divine 

Ways ... m ... ... 283 



iHEm 

The Divine Bepentances m« 


•M 


rum 

284 


Unresponsible Idols ... 


M. 


284 


God's Earthly Dwelling-place 


•M 


285 


God's Praises ^ ^ 


•M 


285 


PSALM OXXXVt 






The Divine Constancy 


M* 


287 


Bepetitions Many, but not Tain 


•«. 


288 


Does his Mercy endure for Everf 


... 


288 


The Church's Antiphon .m 


•M 


289 


The Great Wonders of God 


M. 


290 


From Egypt to Canaan m 


•M 


290 


Bememhered of God m« 


M. 


291 


The Enduring Mercy .„ 


— 


291 


God and Other Gods m 


W* 


292 


Wonders of Creative Power 


M. 


292 


God's Judgments are Two-sided 


M. 


293 


Overcoming Natural Obstaclea 


•M 


294 


Providential Guidance 


... 


294 


Fulfilment of Bace-missions 


... 


205 


The Divine Dealing with the Humi- 




liated M> ». M 


«. 


29S 


PSAT.M oxxxva 






Incongruity in Beligioa n» 


M* 


297 


Fruits of Exile from God ^ 


— 


298 


- The Lord's Song in a Strange Land " 


298 


A Horrible Kind of Happiness 


••• 


299 


The Tears of Memory ... 


— 


299 


Willow-types ... ... 


—» 


800 


A Beasonahle Call for Songs 


••• 


300 


Sanctified Patriotism 


M* 


301 


The Bad Moods of Good People 


••• 


801 


« By the Bivers of Babylon," eta 


«. 


S02 


PSALM OXXXVTTT. 






The Goodness of God ... 


••■ 


303 


Exultation in God ... 


••• 


305 


Valiant for the Lord ... 


••• 


306 


The Word and the Name ... 


••■ 


306 


•• The Lord will perfect" ... 


••• 


807 


Unity, Entireness, and Sincerity 


in 




Worship 


• •• 


808 


The Term « Gods " as a Synonym fop 




"Great Ones" 


■•• 


809 


God acting beyond Expectation 


••• 


309 


Eecognized Answer to Prayer 


■•• 


310 


The Provision of Inward Strength 


••• 


311 


The Divine Regard for the Lowly 


••• 


811 


Walking in Trouble 


••• 


311 


God completes what he undertaket 


... 


312 


The Greatness of the Word of God 


... 


312 


God's Perfecting ... m. 


*— 


318 



INDBX. 



PSALM OXXXIX. 

FAOB 

God's Knowledge of ui m< »• 815 

The Domain of God „. „. 816 

Thoughts, Divine and Human ... 817 

"Lord, thou knowest altogether" ... 818 

The Mystery of Man's Being ... 320 

God's Searching desired ... ... 820 

The Divine Inspection ... ... 321 

The Oppression of the Divine Omni- 
science ... ... ... 822 

Omnipresence a Fear and a Satisfao- 

tion ... ... ... ... 822 

The Mystery of Being is with God ... 823 
What a Man can be and do God 

knows... ... ... ... 823 

The Abiding Sense of the Divine 

Presence ... ... ... 824 

Our Thoughts ... ... ... 824 

Wonderful Knowledge ... ... 825 

God Everywhere ... ... ... 826 

Bequest for God's Searching ... 827 



PSALM OXL. 

In Danger ... ... •.. S28 

Our Adversary and our Defence ... 829 

The Mischiefs of Evil-disposed Men... 830 
The Best of personally appropriating 

God 831 

The Intervention of God sought , ... 831 
The Inward Sense of Bight is an 

Assurance of Safety ... ... 832 

The Holy War ... ... ... 832 



PSALM OXLL 

Acceptable Sacrifices ... m. 834 

"Keep me from the Snares" ... 335 

" Keep the Door of my Lips" ... 835 
The Excellent Oil of Beproof; or. 

Kindness smiting ... ... 836 

Praying for Others ... ... 337 

The Victory of Faith ... „. 838 

The Plea of Former Prayer ... 839 

Prayer as Incense ... ... 839 

Our Lip-watchman ... ... 840 

The Power of Human Speech for Good 

and Evil ... ... ... 840 

God's FreTentions „, „. 841 

Beproof and Kindnesi m. •.. 841 

Soul-destitution ... .m «• 842 

A Oompreheniire Prayer .„ m. 842 



PSALM OXLn. 

Our Besonroe in Extremity ... 843 

" When my Spirit was Overwhelmed " 844 

" No Man oared for my Soitl " ... 845 

Pleading what we said to the Lord ... 846 

Prayer as Complaint ... ... 847 

The Oonfidence of the Crushed Heart 847 

Uncared-for Souls... ... ... 848 

Oaring for Souls the Work of the 

Church ... ... ... 348 

The Soul's Bights in God ... ... 349 

God's Bountifulness ... ... 850 

A Cry for Deliverance ... m. 850 



PSALM CXLTIL 

The Soul's Appeal to God ... ... 852 

The Cry of the Overwhelmed Spirit... 858 
Becoming "like unto them that go 

down into the Pit " ... ... 854 

« The Way wherein I should Walk " 356 

"I flee unto thee to hide me" ... 357 

Man's Hope in Prayer lies in what 

God is... ... ... ... 358 

Prayer cannot be based on Man's 

Eights S!58 

Our Worst Trials are in the Sphere of 

Feeling ... ... ... 359 

God our First Hope and our Last ... 359 
The Fear of not doing Bight in Times 

of Stress ... ... ... 360 

Fleeing from God : fleeing to God ... 360 

Yindications left with God... ... 361 

A Complaint aad a Prayer... ... 861 



PSALM OXLIV. 

National Piety and Prosperity ... 863 

What the Goodness of God does for 

me and in me ... ... ... 364 

Children who are a Sorrow and Shame, 

and those who are our Unspeakable 

Joy ... ... ... ... 365 

War-figures of God's Belations ... 367 

The Transitoriness of Man... ... 368 

God's Intervention is his Condescen sion 368 
The Known God and the Unknown 

Foe ... ... ... ... 869 

The First Stage of Salvation is 

Deliverance ... ... ... 369 

True National Prosperity ... ... 370 

A Golden Age ... ... .., 870 



tUI 



INDEX 



PSALM OXLV. 

VA«I 

Out Beiponse to God ... m. 872 

TheOreatnesBofOod .„ ... 873 

The Ooodnees of God ... ... 878 

The 2V Deum of the Old Testament ... 874 

The Charge of the Generationa ... 376 

The One and the Many ... „. 377 

LoTe'fl Full-flowing Spring „, 878 

« The Lord is Good to All " ... 879 
The Inner Oiicle of God's Woiship- 

pers ... .•> ... ••• 881 

For the Fallen and the Falling „. 883 

The Opening of God's Hand „. 884 

PreBervatlon and Destruction ... 884 

The Praise of Succeeding Generations 885 

God's Greatness is Goodness ... 888 

The Slowness of the Divine Anger ... 886 

Beeognizing God's Universal G oodnesa 887 

Praising and Blessing ... ... 887 

God's Everlasting Kingdom m. 888 
The Universal Dependence and Ex- 
pectation ... ... ••• 888 

The Ahsolutenesa of the Divine 

Bighteonsness ... ... ... 889 

Ood's Greatness, Goodness, and Glory 889 

PSALM OXLVI. 

Three Fulfilments ... m— 891 

Thoughts that perish ... ... 892 

The Happiness of him that hath the 

God of Jacob for his Help and Hope 893 
« The God of Jacob " ... 894, 396 

The Vanity of Human Tmati ... 895 

Satisfaction in the Aotivity of God m. 896 

Types of the Helpless ... ... 897 

Divine Judgment in the Oonfiision of 

Plant... ... ... — 897 

Gold alone Worthy of Trust m. 898 

PSALM OXLYH. 

■toonSBtion-truths m. m* 400 

Nattonal Well-being «• •• *01 

In Praise of Fiaiso m* w iU2 



The Pleasantness of Praits... m> M2 

God's Help for the Suffering Ones m. 403 

The Lord's Ways with the Meek ... 403 

God's Oare of the Mountain Grassei 404 

The Lessons of the Winter ... ... 405 

The Mission of the Frost and the Snow 400 
Jehovah the infinitely Mighty and 
Omniscient One, in the Creation and 
in the Human World, Worthy, there- 
fore, of All Praise and Worship ... 40S 
God Worthy of Piaisa ... «. 400 



PSALM OXLVIIL 

The Tribute of Creation ... m. 408 
Nature's Praise-voices ... m. 409 
The Permanence of Natural Law ». 409 
The Praise-voices of Nature-forces ... 410 
The Leaders of the Nature-choir ... 410 
Praise inspired by Personal Experi- 
ence ... ... ... ... 411 

The Creator and his Creatures •» 411 



PSALM CXLIX, 

God's Pleasure in ns, and ours in him 418 

The Ever-repeated Call for a New 

Song ... ... ... ... 413 

The Maker of Nations ... ... 414 

God's Pleasure in his People 414, 415 

Song and Stroke ... ... ... 415 

The Limitation of All Human Ven- 
geance ... ... ... 416 

The Voice of Praise „. m. 416 

PSALM CL. 

Hallelujah : onr Life a Psalm m. 417 

Places to praise God in ... h. 418 

Things to praise God for ... m. 418 

Instruments to praise God with ... 419 
Petsoiis and Things that should unite 

in God's Praise... «• —• 419 



