CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 





The original of tinis book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31 9241 01 1 04937 



THE 

PULPIT COMMENTARY, 

EDITED BY THE 

• VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ; 
AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY THE 



VEN. AECHDEACOx"«f F. W. FAEEAE, D.D., F.E.S.— EIGHT REV. H. COTTEEILL, D.D., F.E.S.E 
-VEEY EEV. PEINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— EBV. CANON G. EAWLINSON, M.A. 
— EEV. A. PLUMMEE, M.A., D.D. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
Nev/ York and Toronto. 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY 



EDITED BY THE 



REV. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, M.A., 

nCAM. AND RURAL DEAN OF ST. PANCRAS, AND EXAMINING CHAPLAIN TO THE U> 
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER AND BRISTOL ; 



AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



JUDGES. 



(Sxpoeition arib fotniletics: 
RIGHT REV. LORD A. C. HERVEY, D.D., 



BISHOP OF BATH AND WELLS. 



^omilies bs t)arions ^ntl)ors: 

REV. A. F. MUIR, M.A.; REV. W. F. ADENEY, M.A. 



FUNK & "WAGNALLS COMPANY 
Nbw Yoke and Tokonto. 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



INTRODUCTION. 

Thb Book of Judges, called in Hebrew Q>t33ia7,> in the Septnagint Ebitai, and 
in the Vulgate Libeb Jttdicum, or Jttsices, takes its name, like the other his- 
torical books, — the five Books of Moses, the Book of Joshua, the Book of Ruth, 
the Books of Samuel and of the Kings, the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah, and the 
Book of Esther,— from its contents, viz., the history of certain transactions which 
took place in Israel under the judges. The judges were those extraordinary civil 
and military rulers who governed Israel in the interval between the death of 
Joshua and the foundation of the kingdom of Israel; except only that the judge- 
ship of Samuel was a kind of connecting link between the two — Samuel himself 
being a judge, though of a difiEerent character from those that preceded him, and 
his government merging in the latter part of it into the kingdom of Saul ; so 
that the times of Samuel occupy a middle place between the Judges and the 
Kings, belonging partly to both, but wholly to neither. 

The age of the world in which the transactions recorded in the Book of Judges 
occurred was somewhere between the years b.o. 1500 and 1000. It was one 
marked by the same peculiar features in different parts of the earth It was the 
dim twilight of history ; but, as far as we can judge from those mythological 
accounts which precede the existence of true history, it was a time of much 
movement, of the birth of heroic characters, and of the incipient formation of 
those nations who were destined to be foremost among the nations of the earth. 
The mythologies of Greece tell of exploits of heroes which imply unsettled and 
disturbed times, the clashing of race with race, fierce struggles for the possession 
of lands, terrible conflicts for dominion or existence. And as far as such mytho- 
logies contain, as they doubtless do, some shreds of historical truth, and reflect 
something of the character of the men of the period, they are in accordance with 
the picture contained in the Book of Judges of the times which were more or less 
contemporary. Instead of a comparison of the Greek mythologies leading to the 

• This is the same word as the Carthaginian Suffetes, as their chief magistrates are called 
(Liv., Hist., xzvii. 37). The Tyrians had a similar naqie for their magiatratas, translated bj 
foiephus (App., i. 21) Jixa^ra}, 



INTBODUCnON TO 



conclusion that the history in the Book of Judges is mythological also, it rather 
lends a valuable confirmation of that historical character which the internal 
evidence of the book so abundantly claims for it The features which are 
common to the Greek mythologies and the Hebrew history, the wars of new 
settlers with the old inhabitants, the recklessness of human life, the fierce cruelty 
under excitement, the heroic deeds and wild adventures of a few great leaders, 
the taste for riddles, the habit of making vows, the interference of gods and 
angels in human affairs, the frequent consultations of oracles, and so on, are the 
products of the same general condition of human society at the same epoch of the 
world. The difference between the two is, that the Greek traditions have passed 
through the hands of countless poets and story-tellers, who in the course of 
generations altered, added, embellished, confused, distorted, and invented, accord- 
ing to their own fertile fancy and their own creative imaginations; while the 
Hebrew records, by the special providence of God, have been preserved some 
3000 years and upwards oncorrupted and unchanged. 

Chbonologt. 

The first thing one looks for in a scientific history is a careful and aeenraite 
chronology. But such is entirely wanting in the Book of Judges, for the reason 
that it is not a scientific history, but a collection of narratives having a moral and 
religious purpose; illustrative, that is, of the evil of idolatry, of God's proyi- 
dential government of the world, and of his special rule over the chosen race of 
Israel We are obliged, therefore, to construct our chronology out of the indications 
which every true history contains in itself of the sequence and connection of 
events. But these are necessarily inexact, and cannot always be made to deter- 
mine the time within a century or more, especially when there is no accurate 
contemporary history. There are also special circumstances which increase the 
diflSculty in the case of the Judges. The date of Joshua's death, which is the 
terminua a quo of the book, is uncertain by about 200 years. Then the time 
occupied by the elders who outlived Joshua, which intervened before the action of 
the book commences, is indefinite ; it may mean ten years, or it may mean thirty or 
forty years. Again, the point of junction of the close of the book with 1 Samuel 
which follows it is uncertain ; we do not know certainly how far the latest events 
in the judgeship of Samson ran into the judgeships of Eli and Samuel. But 
there is another element of uncertainty which largely affects the chronology of 
the Book of Judges. The history is not the history of one kingdom or common- 
wealth, but of several almost separate and independent tribes. Except on great 
occasions, such as the national gathering at Mizpeh (and that was very soon after 
the death of Joshua), Gilead, i. e. the tribes to the east of Jordan, had little com- 
munication with Western Israel ; and even on the west of Jordan, Ephraim and 
the northern tribes were divided from Judah and Simeon and Dan on the south. 
The great tribe of Judah is not so much as mentioned in the enumeration of the 
tribes wbich fonght under Barak, nor in the victories of Gideon. Hence it is 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



apparent that it is at least very possible that some of the events narrated may be 
not consecutive, but synchronous ; that wars may have been going on in one part 
of Israel while another part was at rest ; and that we may possibly be led into as 
great a chronological blunder by adding together all the different servitudes and 
rests, as a reader of English history would be if he made the reigns of the Anglo- 
Saxon kings of the heptarchy consecutive instead of simultaneous. 

And there is yet another cause of uncertainty as to the chronology. Long 
periods of eighty and forty years are named without a single event being recorded 
in them. Now it is notorious that numbers are peculiarly liable to be corrupted 
in Hebrew manuscripts, as, «. ^., in the familiar example of 1 Sam. vL 19; so that 
those numbers are very uncertain, and not to be depended upoiL 

On all these accounts an accurate and certain chronology is, in our present state 
of knowledge, impossible. There is, however, one source, though not in the Book 
of Judges itself, from which we may fairly look for some more certain help, and 
that is from those genealogies which span the time occupied by this history. 
The chief of these is the genealogy of David appended to the Book of Ruth, 
repeated in the First Book of Chronicles, and again reproduced in the Gospels of 
St. Matthew and St. Luke. This genealogy gives three generations between 
Salmon, who was a young man at the time of the occupation of Canaan, and 
David. These three are, however, about equivalent to five, when we take into 
account the age of Boaz at his marriage with Euth, and the probable age of Jesse 
at the birth of David. They may also admit of some further extension, if 
Salmon, whose exact age at the entrance into Canaan we do not know, did not 
beget Boaz tiU ten or more years afterwards, and if Jesse was a younger son of 
Obed. Reckoning, however, the generations as five, and allowing thirty-three 
years for a generation, we get 5 X 33 = 165 as the approximate length of the 
period from the entrance into Canaan to the birth of David ; and, deducting 
thirty years for the time of Joshua and the elders, 135 years from the beginning 
of the times of the judges to the birth of David. But this is probably rather 
too short, because, if we turn to other genealogies covering the same period, we 
find that the generations between those who were grown men at the entrance into 
Canaan and those who were David's contemporaries were six or seven, as in the 
genealogy of the high priests given in 1 Chron. vi., where there are seven gener- 
ations between Fhinehas and Zadok the son of Ahitub. Again, the list of 
Edomitish kings in Gen. xzzvi. and 1 Chron. L 43, &c., gives eight kings as 
having reigned before Saul was king of Israel, the last of them being Saul's 
contemporaiy, and one of them being king at the time of the exodus. If he was 
the first king, that would give six between the entrance into Canaan and David. 
The genealogy of Zabad (1 Chron. ii 36, Ac.) gives six or seven between the 
entrance into Canaan and David. 
And it may be said on the whole, that of nine^ genealogies, eigU agiaa in 

' The nine genealogies are those of Zadok, Heman, Ahimotb, Asaph, £tb«ii, Abittkar, 
Ssnl, Zabad, and the Kdomitisb kings. 



INTKODOUTION TO 



requiring the addition of one or two generations to the^w indicated by David's, 
while not one requires a larger number. The genealogy of Saul is of the same 
length as David's. If sir is the true number, we have a period of 198 years 
between the entrance into Canaan and the birth of David. If leven is the trne 
number, we get 221 years. Deducting thirty years for Joshua and the elders, and 
(say) ten years for the interval between the close of the times of the judges and 
the birth of David, we get in the first case 158 years as the time of the judges 
(198—40), and in the second 191 (231 — 40). But the consent of all the genealogies 
seems to preclude the possibility of such long periods as 400, 600, 600, and even 
700 years, which some chronologists assign to the interval between the entrance 
into Canaan and the building of Solomon's temple.* 

As regards the age in the world's history to which the events of the Book of 
Judges belong, we get at it by reckoning backwards from the birth of David. 
This may be assigned with some confidence to about the year b.c. 1083. If then 
we assume ten years to have elapsed between the close of the period of the 
judges and the birth of David, we get the year B.C. 1093 as the date of the end of 
the period of the judges ; and if we then assume 168 years as the duration of the 
times of the judges, we get 1093 + 168 = 1261 as the date of the commencement 
of the times of the judges ; and if we then add thirty years for Joshua and the 
elders, and forty years for the sojourning in the wilderness, we get (1251 + 30 
+ 40) 1321 for the date of the exodus, which is within eight years of the Jewish 
traditional date B.C. 1313, and brings us to the reign of Menephthah, or 
Menephthes, who is the most probable Pharaoh of the exodus who has been 
proposed. This is a considerable support to the system of chronology here 
advocated. 

Bteuotitee and Contents op the Book. 

It haa already been remarked that the history is not that of one united people, 
but of several separate tribes. The truth of this remark will appear if we con- 
sider the great length and detail of some of the narratives, quite out of proportion 
to their importance relatively to the whole IsraeUtish nation, but quite natural 
when we look upon them as parts of the annals of particular tribes. The preserv- 
ation of Deborah's magnificent ode, the full details of the history of Gideon, the 
long story of Abimelech's reign, the highly interesting narrative of the birth and 
adventures of Samson, the detached accounts of the expedition of the Danites, 
and of the fall of the tribe of Benjamin, which close the book, are probably all 
due to the fact of their being taken from existing records of the several tribes. 
These were all brought into harmony and unity of purpose by the compiler, who 
selected (under the guidance of the Holy Spirit) those portions which bore upon 
his main purpose, which was to denounce idolatry, to confirm the Israelites in the 
service of the Lord the God of their fathers, and to illustrate the faithfulness, the 

> Keil ncokes 533 years from the eatrance into Canaan to the building t/t SoUmion'i 
temple, untming the 300 years of Judges zi. 26 to be a real date. 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



mercy, and the power of their covenant God. And certainly if anything could 
confirm a fickle people in their faith and obedience to the living and tnie God, the 
exhibition of such deliverances as those from the Canaanite and Midianite and 
Ammonite invasions, and of such examples of faith and constancy as those of 
Barak, Gideon, and Jephthah, were well calculated to do so. 

And this leads us to observe a very important feature which the Book of Judges 
has in common with the later historical books, viz., the union of contemporary 
narratives and documents with late editorship. The method of the Hebrew 
historical writers seems to have been to incorporate into their work large portions 
of the ancient materials without altering them, only adding occasional remarks of 
their own. The method of modem historians has usually been to read for them- 
selves all the ancient authorities, and then to give the result in their own worda 
The information got from a variety of authors is all welded together, the unim- 
portant details are omitted, and a harmonious whole, reflecting the author's mind 
perhaps quite as much as that of the original authorities, is presented to the 
reader. But the Hebrew method was different. The ancient records, the Book of 
the wars of the Lord, the Book of Jasher, the Chronicles of the kingdom, the 
visions of Iddo the Seer, the Book of the Acts of Solomon, the Chronicles of the 
kings of Judah, and so on, were searched, and whatever was required for the 
author's purpose was inserted bodUy in his work. Hence in the Book of Kings 
the lengthened episodes concerning Elijah and Elisha, the great length at which 
the reign of David is given in the Books of Samuel, and so on. This same method 
is very apparent in the Book of Judges. It seems scarcely open to doubt that the 
mass of the book, consists of the original contemporary annals of the different 
tribes. The minute and graphic details of the narratives, Deborah's song, Jotham'a 
fable, Jephthah' s message to the king of Ammon, the exact description of the 
great Parliament at Mizpeh, and many other like portions of the book, must be 
contemporary documents. Then, again, the history of Samson the Danite, and 
that of the Danite expedition to Laish, indicate strongly the annals of the tribe of 
Dan as their common source ; while the importance attached to Gilead in chs. 
X, xL, and xiL points to annals of GUead. But at the same time the presence of a 
compiler and editor of these various documents is distinctly visible in those pre- 
fatory remarks contained in ch. ii 10 — 19 ; iii 1 — 7, which review, as it were, 
the whole subsequent narrative, as well as in casual observations thrown in from 
time to time, as at ch. xviL 6; xviii 1; xix, 1; xz. 27, 28; xxL 25, and in the 
general arrangement of the materials. 

This sketch of the structure and contents of the Book of Judges must not be 
concluded without mentioning the light thrown upon the condition of the neigh- 
bouring nations, the Canaanite tribes, Mesopotamia, the Philistines, the Moabites 
and Ammonites, the Amalekites, the Midianites, and the Sidonians. Nor must a 
brief reference be omitted to the repeated angelopham'es, as in ch. IL 1 ; vL 11— 
23 J xiii. 3, <fcc. Again, we find the great institution of prophecy existing, as in oh- 
It. 4 ; vi 8, and, in a certain sense, wherever the Spirit of the Lord came t^on a 



INTBODUCTION TO 



judge, as ch. iii. 10; TL 34 ; zi. 29, &o. In other passages where the word of Qod 
comes to men it is not clear whether it is through prophets, through an ephod, af 
by direct operation of the Holy Ghost (see ch, ii 20 ; vi. 25 ; x. 11 ; &o.). 

It is also worthy of observation that there are in this book many direct rofer- 
ences to the law and the books of Moses. The inquiry of the Lord (ch. L 1 ; xx. 
27) ; the mention of the commandments " which God gave by the hand of Moses '' 
(ch. iii. 4); the allusion to the exodus, and to the very words of Exod. xx. 2 (cL vL 
8, 13) ; the dismissal by Gideon of all that were fearful according to Dent xx. 8 
(ch. vii. 3) ; the lengthened reference to the historyin Numb, and Deut. (ch. xi 16 — 
26); the institution of Nazarites (cLxiii. 6; xri 17); the mention of the tabernacle 
and the ark (ch. xviii; 31 ; xx. 27, 28) ; the reference to the high priest and to the 
Levites as the ministers of God (ch. xvii 13 ; xix. 18 ; xx. 28), are among the 
many proofs that the law of Moses was known to the writer or compiler of the 
Book of Judges. 

We must look, therefore, to some other cause for the singular silence in this 
history concerning the services of the tabernacle, and the high priests after 
Phinehas, and that change in the Une of the high priests which must have taken 
place in the time of the judges between Phinehas of the Une of Eleazar and Eli of 
the line of Ithamar. There must have been in all probability two or three high 
priests between Phinehas and Eli, whose names are not recorded, at least not as 
high priesta Josephus, however, says that Abishua (whose name is corrupted 
by him into Josepus) waa high priest after Phinehas, and that Eli succeeded 
Josepus, being the first high priest of the house of Ithamar, and that the other 
descendants of Phinehas named in the genealogy of the high priests (1 Chron. vi. 
4—8) remained in private life till Zadok was made high priest by David. How- 
ever this may be, it is certainly strange that not a single allusion to a high priest 
occius in the whole book except that one in ch. xx. 28, while Phinehas was still 
alive. Perhaps the explanation is, that in the de-centralisation of Israel above 
spoken of the central worship at Shiloh lost its influence (as Jerusalem did after 
the ten tribes had revolted from the house of David) j that in the troubled times 
that followed each tribe or cluster of tribes set up its own worship, and had its own 
priest and ephod ; and that the descendants of Phinehas were weak men who 
could not make the priesthood respected, or even retain it in their own families. 
Add to these considerations that the narratives are all taken from tribal aimals • 
that apparently not one is taken from the annals of the tribe of Ephraim (in which 
Shiloh was), seeing that in them aU the great tribe of Ephraim appears to dis- 
advantage ; and, lastly, that we have in this book not a regular history of Israel 
but a collection of narratives selected on account of their bearing on the author's 
main design, and we have perhaps a sufficient explanation of what at first appears 
strange, viz., the absence of aU mention of the high priests in the body of the book. 

The book consists of three parts : the preface, cL i to cL iii 6 ; the main 
body of the narrative, from ch. iii. 7 to the end of ch. xvi ; the appendis, containing 
the separate a»d isolated narratives coaceming the settlement of the Danites and 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



the civil war with Beivjamin, and belonging chronologically to the very beginning 
of the narrative, very shortly after Joshua's death. The preface dovetails in an 
extraordinary manner into the Bt/dk of Joshua, — ^which, or the materials from 
which it was composed, the compiler must have had before him, — and probably also 
into 1 SamaeL 

DaTB of CoMPILATIOir. 

Then is nothing peculiar in the language (except some strange architectural 
terms in cL iii. in the part relating to Ehud, and some rare words in Deborah's 
song. La cL v.) from which to gather the date of compilation. But from the phrase 
in ch. xviii. 31, " all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh," and that in 
ch. XX. 27, " the ark of the covenant of God was there in those days," and from 
the description of the situation of Shiloh (cL zxL 19), it is quite certain that it 
was made after the removal of the ark from Shiloh. From the repeated phrase 
(ch, xviL 6; xvuL 1 ; xix. 1 ; xxi. 25) that "in those days there was no king in 
Israel," it seems equally certain that it was made after the foundation of the 
kingdom by Saul ; while the mention of the Jebusites in ch. L 21 as dweUing 
in Jerusalem '' unto this day " points to a time prior to David. On the other 
hand, the phrase (ch. xviii 30) " until the day of the captivity of the land " would 
make it probable that it was written after the deportation of the ten tribes, when 
it is likely the settlement at Dan was broken up by the Assyrian conqueror. This 
might be in the reign of Jotham or Ahaz. There does not seem to be any other 
special mark of time in the book itself. 

But, on the other hand, the aflusions to the Book of Judges, or to events which 
are recorded in it, in other books of the Old Testament must be taken into account. 
In 1 Sam. xii. 9 — 11 there are not only allusions to the events which form the 
subject of Judges iii, iv., vi., vii, viii. ; x. 7, 10 ; xi., but verbal quotations which 
make it morally certain that the writer of 1 Sam. had before him the very words 
which we now read in Judges iii 7, 8; iv. 2 ; x. 10, 15, and probably the whole 
narratives as they are now contained in Judges. It necessarily follows that either 
the Book of Judges was already compiled when Samuel spake these words, or 
that Samuel had access to the identical documents which the compiler of Judges 
afterwards incorporated in his book. The same argument applies to 2 Sam. xi. 
21, where the verbal quotation is exact. In Isa. ix. 4 ; x. 26, spoken in the 
reign of Ahaz, the reference is more general, though in the last passage there is the 
production of three words from Judges vii. 25 — upon, or at (Heb. 3), the rock Orel. 
Again, in Ps. bcxxiii 9 — 11 there is a distinct reference to the narrative in 
Judges vii., viii. ; and in Ps. Ixxviii. 56, <fcc., and cvi. 34, 45, there is a general 
reference to the times of the judges, as to one the history of which was well 
known. Taking, however, into account the fact that all the three psalms are of 
uncertain date, no very distinct argument can be brought to bear from them on the 
date of Judges. On the whole then it would meet all the requirements of the pas- 
gages in the Book of Judges (except the reference to the captivity of the ten tribes), 
4o4 IP the other boois is which reference is made to Judges, if we were to aasi|ai 



viH INTRODUCTION TO THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 

the compilation to the reign of Saul, the separate contents of the book being 
knotm even earlier ; but it must be confessed that this conclusion is uncertain, and 
that there is much to be said in favour of a much later date. 

The Book of Judges has always been contained in the canon. It ii referred to 
in Acts riii. 20, and Heb. zL 32. 

NiOt. — ^The chronology indicated in Judges zL 28 hu not been taken into account tat thi 
teaaons given in the note on that passage ; that in 1 Kings vi. 1 because it is generally 
given np by critics and commentators as an interpolation, and is unsupported by the Book ol 
Chronicles and by Josephus ; and that of the A. V. of Acts ziii. 20 because the true read- 
ing, " happily restored by Lachmann from the oldest MSS., A. B. C, and supported by the 
Latin, Coptic, Armenian, and Sahidic "Versions, and by Chrysostom " (Bp. Wordsworth in 
{. e. ), gives quite a different sense : "he divided their land to them by lot in kbout 460 yean " 
— from the time, i. $,, when he made the promise to Abraham. 



LETEBATURE OP THE BOOK. 

ComntNTABIBB ON THE BoOK OF JUDSEB, AND OTHEB NoTIOn. 

BosenmOlleb'b ' Scholia,' in Latin (1835), are very useful both for the Hebrew 

icholar, and generally for exegesis, and historical and other illustrations. He speaks 
yery highly of the Commentary of Sebastian Schmidt. Db Wbtte's ' Introduction to 
the Old Testament' (English translation, 1858) contains some valuable remarks, but 
must be used with caution. He refers to the commentaries of Sohnurrer, Bonfrere, 
Le Clerc, Maurer, and others. Bbrthbau, in the ' Kurtzgefasstes Exegetisches Hand- 
buch ' (1845), is, as always, very able, very learned, and exhibits much critical acumen. 
The commentary of Keil and Delitzsch (English translation, 1865) is useful, and 
orthodox, but deficient in critical discernment. It frequently differs from Bertheau. 
It has the advantage of acquaintance with the discoveries of the most recent travel- 
lers. Hengstenbbrg (' Dissertation on the Pentateuch ') may also be consulted. Poole's 
Synopsis gives the views of the earlier commentators. Of English commentators it 
may sufiSce to mention Bishop Patrick, Bishop Wordsworth, and the ' Speaker's Com- 
mentary.' Bishop Wordsworth's list of the chief commentatoVs among the Fathers 
contains the names of Origen, Theodoret, Augustine. Prooopius, Isidore, and Bede ; 
and among the Jewish commentators those of Kimchi, Aben Ezra, and Jarchi. Of 
other books most useful in helping to understand the scenes where the dramatic 
action of the Judges took place, may be mentioned especially Stanley's ' Sinai and 
Palestine ; ' also Eubinson's ' Biblical Researches,' and the geographical articles in the 
' Dictionary of tlie Bible ; ' Van de Velde's map, and especially the new ' Great Map of 
Western Palestine' by the Palestine Exploration Committee, from the recent survey, 
on the scale of an inch to a mile. For historical purposes Josephus's ' Jewish Anti- 
quities ' should be studied throughout, thougli he does not throw much additional 
light upon the narrative. Stanley's ' Lectures on the Jewish Church ' contribute much 
vivid and picturesque description of the persona and scenes, nnd give great reality 
and fulness to the narrative. The historical articles in the ' Dictionary of the Bible ' 
may also be consulted with advantage. Bishop Lowth, on Hebrew poetry, has some 
striking remarks on the song of Deborah, and Milton's ' Samson Agonistes,' besides its 
beauty as a poem, is a really good commentary on the history of Samson. For the 
very difBcult chronology of the times of the Judges the reader may consult, besides 
the above-named commentaries, Jackson's 'Chronological Antiquities,' and Hale's 



tians,' and the present writer s chapter on ' The Discordance between Genealogy i 
Chronology of Judges,' in his work on the genealogies of onr Lord Jesus Christ. 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



EXPOSITION. 



GHAPTEB I 



▼«r. 1. — After the death of Joshua. The 
events narrated in chs. i. and ii. 1 — 9 all 
occurred before the death of Joshua, as ap- 
pears by ch. ii 8, 9, and by a comparison 
of Josh. xiv. 6—15 and xv. 18—20. The 
words, and it ca/me to pass after (he death of 
Jyiima, must therefore be understood (^ 
the text is incorrupt) as the heading of the 
wh ole book, just as the Book of Joshua has 
for its heading, "Now after the death of 
Moses the servant of the Lord it came to 
pass." Asked the Lord. The same phrase 
as cb. xviii. 5 ; zx. 18, where it is rendered 
asked eoimsel of. So also Kumb. xxvii. 21, 
where a special direction is given to Joshua 
to make such inquiries as that mentioned in 
this verse before Eleazar the priest, through 
the judgment of Urim and Thummim (cf. 
1 Sam. zxiii. 10, 12). A still more common 
rendering of the Hebrew phrase in the A.y. 
is " to inqniie of God " (see, <. g. ch. zz. 27, 



28 ; 1 Sam. zzii. 18, 15 , zziiL 2, 4 ; zzriii. 

6, and many other places). Such inquiries 
were made (1) by Urim and Thummim, (2) 
by the word of the Lord through « prophet 
(1 Sam. ix. 9), or (3) simply by prayer, 
(Gen. XXV. 22), and improperly of false gods 
(2 Kings i. 2, 16), of teraphim, and aemi- 
idolatrous priests (eh. xviii. 5, 14). 

Ver. 5. — Bezek. The site of it is un- 
known ; it is thought to be a different place 
from the Bezek of 1 Sam. xL 8, Adoni- 
bezek means the lord of Bezek. He was the 
conqueror of seventy petty kings. 

Ver. 6. — Cut off his thumbs, &c. These 
cruel mutilations, like the still more cruel 
one of putting out the eyes (ch. xvL 21 ; 
Numb, xvi 14 ; 1 Sam. xi. 2 ; 2 Kings 
XXV. 7), were intended to cripple the warrior 
in his speed, and to incapacitate him from 
the use of the bow, or sword, or spear, while 
yet sparing his life, either in mercy, or for 
the purpose of tstaiuing his services for the 
conqueror. 



Vera. X—l.—Inquii 
which we shall do wel 



HOMILETICS. 

y of God. Three lessons stand out from the abeve sectioA 

[to consider in the order in which they present themselves. 



I. 'Sho first is, that befoee taking in hand any important business we ought 
TO SEEK God'b dibkction. Distrust of our own wisdom, misgivings as to our motives, 
and the feeling that the issues of all events are in the hands of God's unerring 
providence, should always prompt us to look to God for guidance. Even when we 
Jo BO no little care is needed to be sure that our interpretations of God's will are not 
biassed by our inclinations. We read in Jer. xlii. that the captains of the forces of 
the remnant of the Jews went to Jeremiah after the deportation of their countrymen 
to Babylon, and said to him, " Pray for us unto the Lord thy God, that he mny show 
us the way wherein we may walk, and the thing that we may do," and even bound 
themselves by a solemn oath to obey tlie voice of the Lord, and do whatsoever he 
should command them by the month of Jeremiah. But when, after ten days, God's 
answer came, bidding them abide in the land of Judah, and condemning in distincrt 

JUDfiES. B 



THE BOOK OF JUDGEa [ch. l 1—7 



terms the conree on which their hearts were Bet, viz., to go down to Egypt, they 
boldly accused Jeremiah of falsehood, and went down to Egypt in spite of his pro- 
phetic message. And so it too often is. Men ask God's direction, hoping that the 
answer will be in accordance with their own inclinations, and do their best to twist it 
into such accordance. But if this is impossible they act in bold defiance of it. In 
seeking God's guidance, therefore, especial care should be taken so to mortify oui 
self-will that we may be ready to act upon the answer of God, however contrary it 
may be to the dictates of onr own hearts. This may be applied to cases where 
pecuniary loss, or sacrifice of worldly advantages or pleasures, or self-humiliation 
and self-denial, or mortification -of enmities, resentment, jealousy, pride, vanity, 
love of praise, and so on, are involved in an entire obedience to the dictates of the 
word and Spirit of God given in answer to prayer. As regards the ways in which a 
Christian now can " ask the Lord " concerning the course he ought to pursue on any 
particular occasion, we may say, following the analogy of the inquiries to which our 
text refers, that — 1. He may inquire or ash counsel of Holy Scripture. He may 
seek light and truth from that word which is the expresdion of the mind and will of 
God. There is no state of darkness, or perplexity as to the true path of duty, to 
which Holy Scripture, wisely and prayerfully interrogated, will not bring satisfactory 
light ; no question of morality or conduct on which it will not shed the ray of truth. 
The old superstition of the sortes Virgilianoe applied to the Bible, so that the page 
opened at random should supply the answer required, had this much of truth in it, 
tliat the Bible has an answer for every question of an inquiring soul. But this answer 
must be sought in intelligent, prayerful study, and not as a matter of blind chance, 
or in the presumptuous expectation of a miraculous answer. The answer may be 
ibtained either from the example of some eminent saint under similar circumstances, 
as of Abraham giving up his right in order to avoid strife with Lot (Gen. xiii. 8, 9), 
Elisha refusing Naaman s gifts, Job blessing God in the extremity of his affliction, 
and the numerous examples in Luke vi. 3; Heb. xi. ; James v. 17, &c. ; or by impreg- 
nating the mind with the teaching of the word of God, such as Deut. vi. 5, or the 
Sermon on the Mount, or the precepts in Bom. xii., xiii. ; Gal. v. 22, 23 ; Ephes. iv. 22, 
xqq., and 1 Pet. throughout. And either way the answer will be sure if it is sought 
faithfully. 2. A Christian may inquire of the Lord by seeking the cownsd of a wise 
and. Jumest friend, who will give him impartial advice. The prophets were dis- 
tinguished for their faithful boldness in speaking unwelcome truths as much as for 
their inspired knowledge. Nathan speaking to David, Isaiah counselling Hezekiah, 
Daniel reproving Nebuchadnezzar or Belshazzar, Jeremiah advising Zedekiah, are 
instances of snob faithfulness. Let the Christian then who is in doubt or perplexity 
as to the course which he ought to take seek the counsel of a wise and faithful friend, 
whose mind will not be biassed by passion or prejudice, and let him act according to 
it. 3. Cro^s guidance may he sought by simple prayer. Just as Hezekiah in his 
great perplexity and distress spread Sennacherib's letter before the Lord, and betook 
himself to earnest prayer, so may a Christian man spread out before God all the par- 
ticular oircnmstances of his case, and all the doubts and difficulties by which he is 
harassed, and in simple-minded earnestness ask God to direct and guide him aright. 
And the answer will doubtless come, either by the Holy Spirit suggesting to his mind 
the considerations which ought chiefly to influence him, or strengthening feeble con- 
victions, and confirming uncertain opinions and hesitating reasonings, or clearing 
away the clouds which obscured his path, or in some providential interference barring, 
BS) it were, the wrong course, and throwing open the gates of the right one for him 
to pass through. "The opportune arrival of Eebekah at the well while Abraham's 
servant was in the very act of payer (Gen. xxiv. 16) ; the arrival of the messengers 
of Cornelius while Peter was in doubt what the vision which he had seen might 
mean (Acts x. 17) ; the dream which Gideon heard the Midianite tell to his fellow, 
just when he was hesitating whether he ought to attack the Midianite host, are 
examples, to which many more might be added, how providential circumstances come 
in to give to the servant of God the guidance which he asks. It is obvious to add 
that these three modes of inquiry may he combined. 

II. The second lesson is the advantage in all impoetant undebtakings of co- 
OPEEATIOH AND THE MimjAL ASSISTANCE OF FBiENDS. The answer &om God to the 



o«. I. 1—7.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



inquiry, Who shall go up first? had come. "Judah shall go np : behold, I hava 
delivered the land into his hand." Yet none the less did Judah say to Simeon his 
brother, " Come up with me, . . . and I likewise will go with thee into thy loti" 
It is not enough then even to have the help of God : the laws under which humanity 
is placed by God require that man have also the help of man. " As iron sharpeneth 
iron, so a man's countenance his friend." Our Lord sent out the seventy " two and 
two before his face." "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I 
have called them," was the saying of the Holy Ghost. The strength of two is 
greater than the strength of one. The wisdom of two is better than the wisdom of 
one. In co-operation one can supply what the other lacks. One has courage, 
another has prudence. One has knowledge, another knows how to use it. One has 
wealth, the other has the wit to use wealth. One has wisdom, but is " slow of speech ; " 
the other " can speak well," but is foolish in counsel (Exod. xxxii.). No man has all 
the qualities which go to make up perfect action, and therefore no man should think to 
do without the help of his fellow-man. It is a presumptuous state of mind which makes 
a man seem sufficient to himself, and an uncharitable state of mind which prompts 
him to withhold help from his fellow. A beautiful lesson may be learnt &om the 
co-operation of the blind with the deaf and dumb in institutions where they are 
trained together. What the blind learn by the ear they communicate to the eye of 
the deaf, and what the deaf learn by the eye they communicate to the ear of the 
blind. And so it should be in everything. A man should seek help from his neigh- 
bour, and should be equally ready to give help to him in return. " Come up with me 
into my lot, . . . and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot," should be the law 
of human fellowship running through all the transactions of human life. But yet not 
so as to weaken individual responsibi lity, or to destroy just independence of character ; 
but so as to give to each the full help towards the performance of duty which God 
has provided for him, and to nourish man's care for his neighbour by listening to his 
neighbour's calls for help. 

III. The third lesson may be briefly stated. Different parts are assignbd to 

DIFPERKNT PERSONS: MORE SHOWY ONES TO SOME, MORE HUMBLE ONES TO OTHERS. 

But the humbler part may be as really useful and as acceptable to God as the more 
showy one. To some the lot is assigned of merely helping others to rise to theii 
destined eminence, and then being forgotten. And yet they really have a share in 
all that is well done by those whom they helped to raise, and who' could not have 
risen without their help. Thus Simeon helped Judah to take possession of his lot, 
and Judah ever after took the foremost place among the tribes of Israel ; but Simeon 
almost disappears from view. In like manner Andrew first brought his brother 
Simon to Jesus ; but it is Simon Peter to whom were given the keys of the kingdom 
of heaven, and who occupies the first place among the twelve. Barnabas took Saul 
and brought him to the apostles, and again went to seek him at Tarsus, and brought 
him to Antiooh ; but the place filled by St. Paul in the Church of God as far tran- 
scends that of Barnabas as the place of Judah among the tribes transcends that of 
Simeon. This should give encouragement to those whose work is humble and out of 
sight. Let the servant of God do " what he can. ■" Let him not envy the talents, 
the brilliant gifts, the powers, the fame, the glory of others. But let him be content 
if by the g^ace of God he can in any way help forward the work of God's Church on 
earth, although his name be not mentioned till he receives his rewaid before the 
judgment-seat of Christ. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Transfer of authority. Periods when supreme power passes from 
tulors to their descendants are always of critical importance. It is then that the 
greatest constitutional modifications take place. Partly from the differences of dis- 
position and view, partly from the force of new circumstances, partly from the 
failure or creation of peculiar official sanctions and_ dignities, the legislative or 
executive function seldom remains wholly unchanged in passing from one holder to 
another. In this case, as the dignity and authority of Moses did not entirely pass to 
Josbua, so the office the latter filled must have greatly altered with its occupancy by 



* THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. i. 1—7. 

the numerous body, " the sons of Israel," or elders and trihesmen. More frequent 
deliberation, the consultation of competing interests, &c., had to precede any national 
action against the common enemy. The great Lawgiv&r had passed away, the 
Soldier- Dictator had also been gathered to his fathers, and now it devolved upon ii 
simply appointed but sacredly authoritative constitutional assembly to carry into 
efEect the purposes of their predecessors. Compare with this the rise of parliamentary 
influence in Europe, and especially in England. 

L The modification op government. Sometimes this is sudden, sometimes 
gradual. Here it does not affect the essential principle of the theocracy. There is 
something very pathetic in the spectacle of an orphaned nation appealing to the 
"God of their fathers." It was not an extraordinary outburst of reverence and 
religious humility, but the beginning of a habitual and necessary practice. The 
voice of Jehovah through his authorised representatives was the supreme law for 
Israel. 1. It behoves all nations and individuals to ash God for wisdom and direc- 
tion, espedally at such timet of transition. The altered conditions of life ; the 
transfer of legislative authority ; the attainment of mature years ; a youth's leaving 
4iome; the death of parents, guardians, rulers, &c., are reasons for a closer walk 
with God, and a more attentive heed to his word. 2. Responsibility is inemtahly 
transferred with authority. A sacred war is the legacy of the fathers of Israel to 
the children. If they are disposed to lag in its carrying forward, untoward events 
prick them on, and discomfort and disorder increase the necessity for action. 
" Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown." The peasant envies the king, the child 
the parent, only to be in turn regarded with a greater envy by those they assume to 
bo fortunate and happy. Authority tempers and chastens power. The assumption 
of the latter without regard to its obligations is a profane and wicked thing, and 
must in the end defeat itself. Responsibility is the moral and religious side of 
authority; duty of right. In no case has a ruler or government lightly to regard 
inherited responsibilities. Freedom'is not the result of violent changes, but " broadens 
slowly down from precedent to precedent." That one has had no part or'choice in 
the making of an agreement or the inauguration of a policy is no reason by itself 
for repudiation. What is wrong must be put right, and false steps retraced , but the 
practicable policy of the present is generally a modification of the former and 
traditional one, rather than entire departure from it. The oneness of responsibility 
in past and present ought to be carefully observed, and acknowledged even where 
changes are introduced. None of us makes his own circumstances. Most of them 
are inherited. Our duties are often bom before ourselves, awaiting us in the 
appointed time. 3. The advantages and disadvantages of a plurality of rulers are 
here illustrated. (1 ) Where there are several or many in power there is a representa- 
tion of popular views and interests, (2) the advantage or collective and deliberative 
wisdom, and (3)_ mutual stimulus and emulation. On the other hand, (1) they are 
liable to jealousies and envies, (2) it is difficult to preserve a good understanding, 
(3)^ they are more sfuJyect to popular panics, and (4) are unlikdy to take a hold 
initiative. 

II. Unohangeablenesb of the Supreme Aijthoeitt. Under all circumstances the 
ideal government for Israel must ever be the theocracy. Moses, Joshua, the elders, 
the judges, the kings — these are but the human representatives of the absolute and 
Divine ; they are but the stewards of a heavenly mystery, holding authority from 
the Supreme, and liable at his bidding to restore it again. Paul (Rom. xiii. 1 — 5) 
summarises the general aspects of this principle : — " Let every soul be subject unto 
the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are 
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, reeisteth the ordinance 
of. God : and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. . . For he is the 
minister of God to thee for good. . . . Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only 
for wrath, but also for conscience sake." 1. This must be recognised by human 
delegates. The elders immediately and publicly "asked Jehovah." The force of 
the original expression is that no time was lost. Only as he led them could they be 
preserved from error. 2. To make men subject to the Supreme must ever be the 
goal of their efforts. Their whole policy will be, therefore, in a wide sense evan- 
geliofd, viss., to bring men to God, to deepen their reverence for truth, righteousness, 



OH. 1. 1—7.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



purity, and to encourage a personal attachment to Christ as the embodimon^ of 
these. — M. 

Ver. 1. — Spiritual initiativai. The one stem fact facing every Israelite is God^a 
command to uproot the Canaanite. There must be at least one land wholly conse- 
crated to Jehovah and freed from idolatry. The warfare is an inheritance, even as 
the land is. There is a common obligation to fulfil this task ; but it is not to be done 
severally, at haphazard. United action being diflScult on account of the loss of the 
great captain, representative action is the next best. Now upon one tribe, and now 
upon another, will the honour devolve of carrying the war into the ranks of the 
enemy. It is a kind of conscription of the tribes, the honour of the burden being 
borne in turn by one for all. In this case no lot is cast. Jehcvab is the disposer of 
the forces of his kingdom. 

I. The leadership is made known through prayer and inquiry. As yet no tribe 
had premier rank amongst its fellows. God must decide who shall go up first. He 
is the fountain of honour, and he must be approached by the wonted avenues. 
Accordingly, tha priest or the prophet is called upon to exercise his functions. There 
is something very beautiful and pathetic in this united asking of Jehovah by the 
tribes. Where God is acknowledged as the Supreme Arbiter, harmony is certain to 
prevail. It is well for Christians to submit all their anxieties to their Divine Father. 
So we find the early disciples prajdng after their Master's ascension. And the 
Church at Antioch observed a like rule ere it sent its missionaries forth to the region 
beyond. Spiritual work must ever be prefaced by prayer ; and although God may 
not declare the leaders of it by a special utterance, tokens will be given which will 
enable them to be discovered. 

II. It is rendered obligatory by a "call." We are not informed as to the 
precise manner in which the will of God was made known. Probably the Urim and 
Thummira were consulted. Joshua is never mentioned as doing this ; like Moses, he 
receives the word of God directly. The leaders of Israel receive the word of God 
£rom the priest, and the response is not oracular, but clear and definite. A twofold 
advantage pertained to this decision. It obtained for the chosen one the recognition 
of his brethren, and confirmed his own faith. An articulate supernatural " call " is 
not always required for undertaking God's work, but we have a right to demand of 
those who assume the lead in spiritual things that they shall have clear and unmis- 
takable proof of a vocation. And it stands to reason that one who feels a " neces- 
sity laid upon him " to do certain spiritual work shall be more likely to succeed in it. 

III. The Divine choice is justified by the character and past career ov its 
SUBJECT. This is not to say that these furnish a reason for it. With regard to all 
Divine work it may well be asked, "Who is suEBcient for these things?" But 
frequently human insight and experience justify Divine measures, so far as they go. 
It was Judah who delivered Joseph from the pit. He confessed his sins (Gen. xzxviii. 
26). Jacob intrusted Benjamin to his care, and blessed him in the words — "Thy 
brethren praise thee; the sceptre shall not depart from Judah." His tribe became 
the most numerous and warlike (Numb, ii.) ; and of the commissioners appointed to 
allot the land, the representative of Judah is first mentioned (Numb, xxxiv. 19). But 
above all, it was Judah and Ephraim alone who furnished the spies that gave a faith- 
ful account of the land— Caleb and Joshua. The former still lived, chief of the tribe 
of Judah. Ephraim, the tribe of Joshua, being already settled, Judah's turn cornea 
next. We see therefore that although human merit cannot be said to determine 
Divine appointments, the latter will often be found to run in the same line. — M. 

Ver. 3.— Alliances in the holy war. The lots of Judah and Simeon were closely 
united. The former's prerogative of leading off is therefore shared with the weaker 
tribe, which in all things is carefully considered by its " brother." It was impossible 
completely to separate the interests of these two ; the understanding was honourable 
V» both sides. 

I. In spiritual undertakings the greater should ever consioek the less. It 
IB in this way that our Saviour's injunction, "Let him that would be chitif among 
TOO be as him that nerveth,' is often best interpreted. The onus of brotherlji 



• THE BOOK OF JUDGEa [oH. 1. 1—1. 

consideration and charitable construction is with the stronger because of the advantage 
they already possess. It is also the more to be admired in them because of the 
rarity of its exercise. On this occasion Judah lost nothing, and Simeon secured a 
powerful ally, and an opportunity of distinction. Besides this, the kindliest sentiments 
were encouraged on either side. 

II. By commencing in this spirit it is thb more likely that moral elevation, 

MAGNANIMITY, AND BROTHERLY AFFECTION WILL BE PRESERVED ALL THROUGH. The 

waiving of personal precedence is not only graceful, it has a tendency to perpetuate 
itself. Our future work takes its character from the first step. 

III. It is AN EXAMPLE TO OUR BRETHREN, AND A WITNESS BEFORE THE WORLD TO THE 

UNITY OF God's people. Spiritual men above all others should not first ask, " What 
is our right?" but, "What is our obligation, and how can we best illustrate the 
spirit of the Master?" The tone was set to all the other tribes, and jealousy either 
at Judah or one another checked ere it appeared. True unity was the strength and 
safety of Israel. That the neighbouring nations were impressed with the spirit of 
brotherhood and unity in Israel there is abundant proof. They felt they were dealing 
not with a mere aggregate of numbers, but with a whole inspired by common senti- 
ment and religious enthusiasm. It is this spirit which most perfectly realises the 
aim of Christ's kingdom, and his prayer " that they all may be one ; "• " that they 
may be made perfect in;.one." — M. 

Ver. 7. — Correspondence of crime and requital. The crime of Adoni-bezek was 
against not any special national law, but humanity. It was one calculated to 
create and foster the most cruel disposition, the moral sense being rendered callous 
by habituation to a spectacle of abjectness and suffering dishonouring to our 
common nature. Frequent amongst the heathen nations of the Bast, it was all the 
more necessary that it should be punished in an emphatic and exemplary manner. 
" Thumbs were cut ofE to incapacitate the hand from using the bow ; great toes to 
render the gait uncertain." The circumstance stands forth here as an ancient 
"instance " of an eternal law, which may be thus expressed : — 

I. There is a close conneci'ion between every sin and its punishment. This 
may be taken as a conviction more universal in its influence than religion itself. Yel 
it is not wholly reducible to experience. It is as truly rooted in faith as any other 
axiom of the spiritual life. In order to reinforce it we have (1) what may be 
termed pictorial illustrations of it The traditions and histories of the world are 
full of these. Neoptolemus murdered at the altar, and at the altar he was murdered 
(' Pausanias,' iv. 17, 3) ; Phaleris roasted men in a brazen bull, and in like manner was 
he himself punished (' Gesta Rom.,' xlviii.). Bajazet carried about by Tamerlane in 
an iron cage, as he intended to have done Tamerlane. Cardinal Beaton, upon whom 
Wishart's sufferings were avenged in a violent death, &c., &c. This affects the 
popular imagination more powerfully than any direct proof ; and hence the crowd 
of real or fancied instances that have been recorded. It is in the light of this con- 
ception probably that Exod. xviii. 11 is to be interpreted. (2) The principle reveah 
itself in the history of nations and individuals. Ishmael is the grand type of this. 
The story of the mutineers of the Bounty is still fresh in memory. And how 
many family records would show the family likeness of sins and their Nemesis, and 
the natural connection and development of the one from the other I In Judas the 
betrayer it shines with tragic grandeur. (3) The confessions of sinners themselves 
strengthen, the belief. 

II. The justice of God is faithful and exact. " When the Olympian," says 
Homer, "does not speedily punish, he still does it later" (' Iliad,' iv. 160). "The 
Almighty may not punish this week or next, my Lord Cardinal," said Anne of Austria 
to Richelieu, " but at the last he punishes." In the incidents of human life we seem 
to see links of an almost invisible chain connecting sin with judgment, as cause with 
effect. And if in the few cases we know the punishment is so finely, even dramatic- 
ally, adjusted, are we not justified in believing that beneath the surface there is even 
a finer and more inevitable equivalency observed ? It is here too we have another 
tvidence of the superior moral influence of the doctrine of providence as compared 
with fate. Both are inevirable, but tlie former rationally and rectorially so. 



o«. I. 1—7.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 7 

III. But bt awaking beflection and repentance our punishment may eecomb 
OUK salvation. There is a gleam of something more than fatalism in Adoni-bezek'a 
confession. It is just possible that it betrays an unfeigned repentance. The higher 
law of grace may step in to rescue us from the law of vengeance. Many a soul 
has drawn back before the hideous vision of " sin when it bringeth forth." — M. 

Vers. 1, 2. — The death of the great. The circumstances which accompanied and 
followed the death of Joshua are suggestive of the common diiBoulties which arise 
on the death of great men, and the conduct of Israel is an example of the right spirit 
in which to face these difBoulties. 

I. The most useful men are often called away befoee their work is finished. 
The measure of work which God requires of them may always be accomplished, for 
he sets no task for which he does not supply all needful talents and opportunities. 
But the work which a man aims at accomplishing, which he sees needing to be done, 
which men trust him to achieve for them, is commonly greater than his time and 
powers allow of perfect performance. 1. This fact sliould teach the most active 
workers (1) diligence, since at the best they can never overtake their work, and (2) 
humility, in the thought of the little that the ablest can accomplish compared with 
what he aims at. 2. This fact should lead all men (1) not to lean too much on any 
one individual, (2) to be ready to welcome new men, (8) to train children to take 
the places of their parents. 

II. The death of great men should inspire us with a desire to continue their 
UNFINISHED WORK. 1. It is fooHsh to be content with idle panegyrics, as though we 
could Uve for ever on the glory of the past. Life must not be spent in a dreamy 
contemplation of the sunset, however brilliant this may be. While we gaze the 
radiance fades ; night will soon fall. We must be up and preparing for shelter under 
the darkness, and for work in a new day. 2. It is weak to sink into mere regrets 
and despondency. We do not honour the dead by wasting our lives in barren grief. 
When the great and good are gone the future may look blank and hopeless ; but God 
is still with us, and he will still provide for us. Therefore we should do as Israel 
did. Not satisfied with the glory of Joshua's victories, nor stunned by the blow of his 
death, the people look forward, seek for guidance for the future, and endeavour to 
continue his unfinished work. The richest legacy we can receive from the great is 
the unfinished task which drops from their dying hands. The noblest monument we 
can erect to their memory will be the completion of that task ; the most honourable 
epitaph we can write for them will be the story of the good works for which their 
lives and examples have inspired their successors. 

III. As posts of RESPONSIBILITY BECOME VACANT, IT IS WISE TO SEEK THE GUIDANCB 

OF God in the choice of hew men to occupy them. After the death of Joshua Israel 
consulted " the Eternal." It is a blessing that the loss of our most trusted earthly 
friends should drive us to the refuge of the great heavenly Friend. In the present 
case new leaders do not now arise by selfish ambition, nor are they chosen by popular 
election. The selection of them is referred to God. Israel thus recognises its 
constitution as a theocracy. Every nation should consider itself under a supreme 
theocracy. Political leaders should be chosen by a Christian nation only after 
prayer for Divine guidance. Much more evident is it that the selection of men 
for service in spiritual things, as ministers, as missionaries, &c., should not be left to 
the mere inclination of the individual or the unaided human judgment of others, but 
determined after the most earnest prayer for Divine light (Acts i. 24). Note — such 
a method of election implies a willingness that the chosen leaders should be called 
to do God's will, not merely to humour the popular caprice. 

IV. When great men are taken away it is often the case that no men of 
EQUAL ability ABB FOUND TO SUCCEED THEM. Joshua was not equal to Moses, but he 
was still well able to take the stafE of leadership from his master's hand. But 
Joshua left no successor. Nothing but anarchy faced the nation " after the death 
of Joshua " — it seemed as though there could be no " after." There are advantages in 
the absenc? of great men. The multitude may become indolent, trusting toomuch 
to the work of the few. When these are removed men are thrown back on their own 
Twouices ; thus the courage and energy of the whole people is put on trial. Yet 



« THE SOOK OF JUDGES. [ch. i. 1—1. 

on the whole we must feel that it is better to have the great among us. The death 
of Joshua is the signal for the decadence of the nation from its ancient heioic glory. 
Therefore let us pray that God will continue the race of good and great men, and 
seek to educate and discover such among the young. Let us be thankful that our 
Joshua — Christ — will never be taken from his people (Matt, xxviii. 20). — A. 

Ver. S.— Mutual help. I. In the absence of nNiTT of authority we should 
BEEK FOK UNION OF SYMPATHY. After the death of Joshua the loss of leadership 
endangers the national unity of Israel. In the text we see how two tribes, no longer 
united by a common government, draw together for mutual help. The union of free 
attraction is nobler than that of external compulsion. The highest unity of Chris- 
tendom is to be found not in the Roman Catholic organisation of a central authority 
and uniformity of creed and worship, but in the spiritual conception of common 
Bympathies and common aims. 

II. Brotheiily kindness is a peculiarly Christian grace. Love of the brethren 
is a proof of regeneration (1 John iii. 14). The law of Christ as contrasted with the 
barren Levitical law of ordinances is characteristically summed up in the obligation 
to " bear one another's burdens " (Gal. vi. 2). 1. This implies active help. Simeon 
and Judah went to battle for an inheritance. Mere feelings of sympathy are wasted 
sentiments unless they lead to active and fruitful service. 2. This implies sacrifice. 
The Simeonites and men of Judah risked their lives for the benefit of one another. 
Cheap charity is worthless charity. Our brotherly kindness is of little value till it 
costs us something — involves pain, loss, sacrifice. Christ is the great example of 
this. It is our mission to follow Christ here if we would be his true disciples (Phil, 
ii. 4 — 8). 3. This implies mutual help. Judah helps Simeon ; Simeon in turn helps 
Judah. Charity is often too one-sided. The poor and needy can often make more 
return than appears possible if invention is quickened by gratitude. A miserable 
penitent could wash the feet of Christ with her tears (Luke vii. 38). 

III. The work of life is best done by union and co-operation of wobkbrb, 
Judah and Simeon conquer their two possessions by union. Both might have failed 
had they acted singly. " Union is strength." The advantage of mntual help is seen 
in trade, in manufactures, in education, in the advance of civilisation generally. The 
spirit of Cain is fatal to all progress (Gen. iv. 9). The same applies to Christian 
work. Therefore Christ founded the Church. Though Christianity is based on 
individualism, it works through social agencies. The society of Christians, the 
Christian family, find means of useful effort which private Christians could never 
attain, e. g. in the Sunday school, foreign and home missions, the work of Bible and 
tract societies. Simeon and Judah united to conquer their several lots successively. 
So it is sometimes wisest for us to unite and do together one work well at one time, 
rather than to spread our divided energies over a wide field of weak agencies. 
The river which runs out over a broad plain may be swallowed up in the sands of 
the desert, while that which flows in a narrow channel is strong and deep, — A. 

Vers. 6, 1.—2{etribtUion. I. There is a law of betribdtiom. 1. The desire for 
retribution is instinctive. It is one of the elementary ideas of justice. To those 
who have no vision of a higher law, the execution of this is not a cruel crime of 
vengeance, but a righteous exercise of justice. 2. The fitness of retribution is not 
affected by the motive of those who accomplish it. It is possible that the Israelites 
were ignorant of the old crimes of Adoni-bezek, and may have been guilty of wanton 
cruelty in treating him as they did. If so, his wickedness was no excuse for their 
barbarity. But then their harsh intentions did not affect the justice of the king's 
sufferings. God often uses the crime of one man as a means of punishing the crime 
of another. He does not originate or sanction the retributive crime, but he over- 
rules it, and so turns the wrath of man to the praise of his righteous government. 
Thus Nebuchadnezzar was no better than an ambitious tyrant in his conquest of 
Jerusalem ; yet he was the unconscious agent of a Divine decree of justice. 3. 
Sin teill surely bring retribution. (1) No rank will secure us against this. The 
sufferer in this case was a king. ^2) No time will wear out guilt. It is likely that 
Adoni-bezek had committed his crimes in bygone years, as he referred to them in a 
way which suggests that the memory of tiiem was suddenly aroused by his owa 



OB. I. 8—20. 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



expenence. 4. Retribution often hears a resemblance to the crimes it follows. The 
lex talionts seems to be mysteriously embedded in the very constitution of natures 
The intemperate slave of bodily pleasures brings on himself bodily disease ; cruelty 
provokes cruelty ; suspicion arouses distrust. As a man sows so will he reap (Gal. 
vi. 7, 8). 6. One of the most fearful elements of future retrihuticm will he found in 
an eml memory. Men burj; their old sins out of sight. They will be exhumed in 
all their corruption. The justice of the retribution will then increase the stinff of 
it (Luke xvi. 26). ^ 

II. The higher Christian law op lovb. Christianity does not abolish the terrible 
natural laws of retributive justice, but it reveals higher principles which can counter- 
act the disastrous effects of those stem laws, and a more excellent way than that of 
zealously advocating the execution of them. 1. The Christian is bound not to 
desire vengeance. He is called to forgive his enemies (Matt. v. 38, 39). If retribu- 
tion must fall, let us leave it to the supreme Judge (Bom. xii. 19). 2. The highest 
purpose of punishment is seen to consist in the preservation and the restoration of 
righteousness — not in the mere balancing of sin with pain. Punishment is not an 
end in itself. The vengeance which seeks satisfaction to outraged honour in the 
humiliation of its victim is as unworthy of the character of God as it is foreign to 
the principles of Christian duty. Punishment is a means to an end, and that end is 
not mere revenge, but the deterring of others from evil, and, where possible, the 
restoration of the fallen (Heb. xii. 5, 6, 11). 3. In the gospel forgiveness is offered 
for all sin. The law is not evaded ; it is honoured in the sacrifice of Christ. Now 
he has borne the sin of the world he can also release the world from its fatal effects. 
Therefore, though the thunder-cloud of retribution may seem as dark as ever, if we 
only look high enough we shall see the rainbow of God's mercy above it promising 
peace and f orgiTeness to all who repent and trust in his grace (Acts ziiL 38, 39)ir— A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 8. — Bead Fought against Jerusalem, 
avd took it, and smote it. It is the continu- 
ation of the narrative of the exploits of 
Judah and Simeon in conquering their re- 
spective lots. 

Ver. 9. — The valley, i. e. the Shepheldk, or 
lowlands, between the mountains and the 
coast of the Mediterranean, occupied by the 
Philistines. 

Ver. 10.— Hebron. See Numb. xiii. 22; 
Josh. xiv. 13—16 ; xv. 13 — 19. Hebron 
was the burial-place of Abraham and Sarah 
(Gen. xxiii. 2, &c. ; xxv. 9), of Isaac and 
Rebekah, and of Jacob and Leah (Gen. 
XXXV. 27—29 ; xlix. 31 ; 1. 13), and the 
mosque, within whose massive walls the 
tombs of Abraham and the other four above 
mentioned are still preserved with the ut- 
most reverence, is the most remarkable 
object in the modem city, which is called 
El-Khalil (the friend), after Abraham, the 
friend of Ood. A very interesting account 
of the Prince of Wales's visit to the Mosque 
of Hebron in 1862 is given in Dean Stanley's 
'Sermons in, the East.' David reigned in 
Hebron seven years and six months before 
he translcned the seat of power to Jeru- 
salem (see 2 Sam. ii. 1, &o. ; v. 1 — 5). 

Ver. 13. — Caleb's younger brother. See 
Bote on ch. iii. 9. 
V«r, 14. — She moved him, *c There is 



some obscurity in this versa, which seemi to 

tell us that Achsah, on her wedding-day, 
when she was going to her husband's hcLse, 
persuaded him to ask of her father Ou fidd, 
viz. that in which the springs of water were, 
and which were not included in her original 
dower ; and then goes on to tell ua that 
Achsah herself made the request. The 
Septuagint reads, " Othniel urged her to 
ask the field of her father," and the Vulgate 
has, "Her husband told her to ask her 
father," and then it follows naturally, " and 
she lighted from off her asa," &c But the 
Hebrew reading may be right, and it may 
be that when her husband, brave in storm- 
ing a city, but timid in asking a favour, 
hung back, she, with the tenacious will of 
a woman, sprang off the ass herself, and 
successfully preferred her request. Dean 
Stanley identifies (though not with absolute 
certainty) the "field" thus obtained by 
Achsah with an unusually green valley 
amidst the dry, barren hills of the south 
country, lying south or west of Hebron, 
called Wady Nunkur, through which Caleb 
and Achsah must have ridden on their way 
from Hebron to Debir or Kirjath-sepher. 
This valley breaks into a precipitous and 
still greener ravine, and both the upper and 
lower pastures are watered by • dear, bub- 
bling rivulet, which rises In die appei 



10 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[CH. I. 8—20, 



meadow, and flows to the bottom of the 
ravine below. The name of a village, Dewvr, 
seems to represent the ancient Debir. 

Ver. 16. — The children of the Eenite, && 
It appears from this verse that the invitation 
given by Moses to his "father-in-law," or 
rather " brothw-in-law," Hobab, to accom- 
pany him and the Israelites to the land of 
promise, though at first rejected (Numb. x. 
25, 30), was eventually accepted. Hobab 
and his tribe, a branch of the Midianites, 
called Kenites, from an unknown ancestor, 
Kain, at first settled in the city of palm 
trees, i c. Jericho (Deut. zxxiv. 3) ; but it 
seems that when Judah started on his expe- 
dition with Simeon to conquer the south 
land, the Kenites went with him. A subse- 
quent migration of a portion of this nomadic 
tribe is mentioned (ch. iv. 11). Dwelt among 
the people, i.e. the people of Judah. For 
Arad see Numb. xxL 1, 

Ver. 17. — Judah went with Simeon. In 
ver. 3 Simeon went with Judah, because the 
places which follow were all in Judah's lot ; 
but now we read, Judah went with Simeon, 
because Zephath or Eormah was in Simeon's 
lot (Joah. xix 4). For Hormah, identified 
by Robinson (ii. 181) with Es-sufeh, see 
Numb.xxi. 8. The Hebrew verb for "they 
utterly destroyed " is the root of the name 
Hormah, i. e. utter destruction. 



Ver. 18. — Gaza, &c. Gaza, Askelon, and 
Ekron, were aU cities of the Philistines. 
But though Judah took these cities, it seems 
he was not able permanently to expel the 
inhabitants. 

Ver. 19. — Chariots of iron. The chariots 
of the Canaanites were very formidable to 
the Israelites, who had no means of coping 
with them. Thus we are told of Jabin, king 
of Canaan, who reigned in Hazor, that he 
had 900 chariots of iron, and mightily 
oppressed the children of Israel. They were 
later an important part of King Solomon's 
army (1 Kings x. 26). See too Josh. xvii. 16, 

Ver. 20. — They gave Hebron, &c. Caleb, 
the son of Jephunneh, the Kenezite, an 
Edomitish tribe, was one of the spies sent 
up to spy the land, and in doing so he came 
to Hebron, and there saw the giants, the 
sons of Anak (Numb. xiii. 22). When all 
the spies brought up an evil report of the 
land, and by doing so raised a rebellion 
against Moses and Aaron, Caleb the Kenezite, 
alone with Joshua, stood firm, and, as a 
reward of his faithfulness, received the 
promise that he and his seed should possess 
the land on which his feet had trodden. 
Accordingly Hebron became the inheritance 
of Caleb the Kenezite (see Numb, xiii., 
xiv. ; Deut i 86 ; Josh. zir. 6 — 16 ; zv. 
13, 14). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 8 — 20. — Faith. The principal incident in this section is the conquest of 
Hebron by Culeb (see note, ver. 20), and in it we have a most striking illustration (l) 
of the nature of faith, (2) o£ the triumph of faith, (3) of the faithfulness of God's 
promises, and (4) of the extension of God's covenant to men of every nation and 
kindred. 

I. The nature of taith. When the Israelites were in Kadesh Bamea, near the 
borders of Canaan, in the second year of the exodus, it was determined on their own 
suggestion, with the full approval of Moses, to send spies to search out the land, and 
t» bring back word what road they ought to take, and into what cities they would 
come. Thus far there had been only a due exercise of human wisdom and caution. 
But when the spies returned after forty days they brought back a mixed report. On 
the one hand they reported that it was indeed a goodly land. Its fertile soil, its 
genial climate, its beauty and its richness, were attested by its abundant produce. 
As they held up the heavy bunch of the grapes of Eshcol, a burden for two men to 
carry upon a staff, as they showed them the luscious figs and the juicy pomegranates, 
who could doubt that it was a land worth possessing ? It was rich too in its pastures 
and in its cattle, and its wild-flowers were as good as the thyme of Hyraettns for the 
bees that swarmed amongst them. It was a land flowing with milk and honey. But 
here their good report stopped. This good land was guarded, they said, by a mighty 
people. It was a gigantic race that possessed it, and they dwelt in fenced cities with 
Cyclopean walls rising up to heaven. How could the children of Israel hope to 
wrest their land from thera? It would be a vain enterprise, and could only end in 
their own discomfiture and death. Those men of great stature would crush them 
like grasshoppers under their feet. At these unbelieving words the hearts of the 
whole congregation melted within them, and anger against Moses filled every breast. 
The suggestion ran from mouth to mouth to choose a captain and return to Egypt. 
The promises of God were all forgotten. The mighty wonders at the Bed Sea. kt 



OH. L 8—20] TEE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



1] 



Sinai, in the wildernesa, were lost sight of, and their hearts sunk through unbelief. 
Then Caleb's faith shone out, and spoke out before the people. " Let ua go up at 
once and possess the land, for we are well able to overcome it." "Fear not tha 
people of the land ; for they are bread for us : tlieir defence is departed from them, 
and the Lord is with us: fear them not." "If the Lord delight in us, then he will 
bring us into this land and give it us." That was faith, laying hold of God's pro- 
mises and God's almighty power, and making no account of apparent difficulties, or 
of human weakness. Just such was Abraham's faith, who " staggered not at the 
promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, and 
fully persuaded that what he had promised he was able also to perform " (Rom. iv. 
20, 21). Such has been the faith of saints at all times, piercing through the mists 
and clouds of the present, and seeing the bright sun of the future ; despising the 
visible because, like Elisha in Dothan, it sees the invisible (2 Kings vi. 13 — 17) ; cal- 
culating truly, because it takes into account the power and faithfulness of God which 
are left out of the calculations of the unbelieving. 

II. The tkiumph op faith. And we see here the triumph of faith. The whole 
congregation of the unbelieving, of those who in their hearts turned back to Egypt, 
and dared not face the sons of Anak, had all perished in the wilderness. They died 
and were buried, and never saw the land of promise. But Caleb was alive, and in the 
full vigour of his strength he marched against the stronghold of the Anakim, and 
took it, and slew the sons of Anak in spite of their great stature, and took possession 
of their city in spite of its lofty walls, and it became his possession for ever. That 
was the triumph of faith, that faith which disappoints not, and maketh not ashamed. 

III. The faithful pbomises. We have here too an eminent illustration of the 
faithfulness of God's promises. Caleb's triumphant possession of Hebron chimes in 
in exact harmony with all the records of God's ^performances as compared with his 
promises. " He hath holpen his servant Israel as he promised to our forefathers" 

!Luke i. 54). " He hath remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel " 
Pb. xcviii. 3). " He hath visited and redeemed his people, as he spake by the mouth 
of his holy prophets, ... to perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to 
remember his holy covenant ; to perform the oath which he sware to our forefather 
Abraham " (Luke i. 68 — 73, Pr. B. Version). " He is faithful that promised ' 
(Heb. X. 23). "Blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord " (Luke i. 45). " There failed not 
aught of any good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the house of Israel ; all 
came to pass " (Josh. xxi. 45). A thorough appreciation of faithfulness to his Word 
as one of the prominent attributes of God is the inevitable result of a full knowledge 
of the Scriptures, as it is most conducive to the. stability of the Christian character. 
" For ever, Lord, thy word is settled in heaven ; thy faithfulness is unto all genera- 
tions " (Ps. cxix. 89, 90). 

IV. A GLIMPSE OF THE MYSTERY. But we must also notice the illustration here 
given of God's purpose to extend his covenant to men of all nations. Caleb was not 
an Israelite by birth. He was a Kenezite, i. e. a descendant of Kenaz, whose name 
is a clear proof of Edomite origin (Gen. xxxvi. 15, 42). And accordingly we are 
told, " Unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh hr gave a part among the children of 
Jvdah " (Josh. XV. 13) ; and again, " Hebron Decame the inheritance of Caleb the 
son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, because that he wholly followed the Lord Ood of 
Israel" (Josh. xiv. 14), language clearly pointing to Caleb's foreign origin. We 
have here then the breadth of God's grace and love breaking out in the narrowness 
of the Jewish dispensation ; we have a glimpse of the mystery, which St. Paul spoke 
of so rapturously, that it was God's good pleasure in the dispensation of the fulness 
of times to gather together into one all things in Christ, and that the Gentiles should 
be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the 
gospel (Ephes. i. 9, 10; iii. 6). Caleb, possessing his inheritance in the midst of 
Judah because he wholly followed the Lord the God of Israel, was the forerunner 
of that great multitude of all nations and kindreds and peoples and tongues who 
shall stand before the Lamb clothed in white robes and palms in their hands, and 
Mhall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in tlm kingdom of God. 



H THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [CH. i. 8—20. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 11 — 16. — The public spirit of Caleb. He ofEered his daughter to the soldiei 
who should be succeaaful in destroying the inhabitants of Debir. It was of supreme 
importance that this stronghold should be taken, if the rest of the disliict was to be 
peaceably held. But some reward was required in order to stimulate the heroism of 
his followers to face the hazard and danger of the enterprise. We have here theo — 

I. An identification of himself with the interests op his teibe. Caleb was an 
Edomite, and might have enjoyed his own lot without such special effort or sacrifice. 
He is evidently deeply interested in the welfare and honour of his adopted tribe. This 
might be called a signal illustration of public spirit. And yet it is probable that Caleb 
himself was quite unconscious that there was anything singular in his action. As the 
greatest blessings to a nation arise from the public spirit of its citizens, so the greatest 
curses are frequently entailed by the want of it. As in warfare every soldier, however 
insignificant, is an influence that tells upon the success or failure of the campaign, 
so in a government, with representative institutions whose action binds the nation and 
measures its progress, it is requisite that every citizen should actively interest himself 
in electing and supporting the legislative authority. The free play of an intelligent, 
generous, and enthusiastic public criticism will tend to the health of the whole body 
politic, and vice versa. Even more cogent is the need for public spirit in the church. 
Its honour and dishonour are ours, its success or failure. And it represents interests 
of the most tremendous importance. " England expects every man to do his duty " 
is a sentence of historic importance. Although not called upon to preach, or even 
to pray in public, the private member of the church ought to regard the affairs of 
Christ s kingdom with enthusiasm, and be prepared to make great sacrifices for its 
advancement : 

II. His pboof or this in bestowing one of his most fbecious fossessionb. We do 
not know much about Achsah, but probably she was very beautiful. Her forethought 
and carefulness are described in the fourteenth and fifteenth verses. She was his only 
daughter, bom to him in later life (1 Chron. ii. 49). That she was dear to her father 
we may take for granted. How much a daughter may be to a father history has 
frequently and strikingly shown. The grief of Jephthah for the consequences of 
his rash vow is recorded in this very book. Apart from the personal attractions of 
Achsah, the influence which might be obtained by intermarriage with the family of 
Caleb is not to be ignored, 

III. It was a sacrifice which had in it the secdritt fob its own bewabd. 
An offer like this was an appeal to the chivalry of the tribe. It suggested vividly 
that on account of which the bravery of the warrior is bo necessary. The soldier 
who stormed such a fortress was sure to possess the noble and manly qualities and 
the religious zeal calculated to make a good husband. So in political and spiritual 
matters, generous offers and challenges appeal to what is noblest in the nature of men, 
and secure a loftier and more heroic response. — M. 

Vers. 14, 16, — Compensation*. Of the wisdom and carefulness of Achsah we 
have here abundant proof. They were nobly and honourably exercised. She is the 
daughter of a rich man, and becomes the bride of a brave soldier who had evidently 
little but his sword and his reputation to boast of. She is jealous lest he should be 
rewarded with a mere titular distinction. He has been nobly oblivious of material 
rewards, she shall be proportionably watchful over his interests. She therefore 
urges her husband as he passes in triumph to Hebron to ask for the field through 
which they march. The thoughts of the hero are not to be directed into any such 
sordid channel. But she, taking advantage of the occasion as she lights from off 
her ass, asks her father in symbolic language to compensate her for the poverty to 
which he had consigned her. " Thou hast given me a south land (t. e. married me to 
• poor younger son) ; give me also springs of water." To this reasonable request 
Caleb makes generous response. " She slides from her ass, suddenly, as if she fell, so 
that her father asks, ' V\'liat is the matter with thee ? ' Her answer has a doable 
sense, ' Thou gavest me away into a dry land ; give me also springs ' " (Cassel). 



OH. 1. 8—20.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 1» 

I. A BLESSING WITH A DRAWBACK. Of the bravery of Olhniel there could be no 
question ; of his poverty there could be as little. It might be honourable for her to be 
his wife, but she would have to suffer many sacrifices in leaving the wealthy home 
of her father, and her husband would have an additional burden to sustain. Are 
not the dispensations of providence, even when we judge them on the whole to be 
best for us, frequently as mysteriously qualified and limited ? No man would probably 
care to exchange his life for another's, but " there's a crook in every lot." Material 
blessings generally contain within them elements of discipline, and sometimes even 
of punishment. But they are alike the gift of a loving father, and are to be accepted 
in the spirit of trust and affection. 

II. Compensations. Is the gift of Achsah's father open to grave drawbacks ? It 
is not therefore unalterable. Something may be done to lessen its inconveniences, if 
not entirely to remove them. Her father is reasonable, and she at once makes appeal 
to his sense of what is fit and proper. Her request is granted. So with ourselves. 
Our heavenly Father who apportioned our lot is surely as reasonable and affectionate 
as any earthly one. It is for us to exercise the same wisdom as Achsah, and request 
that God will give us such alleviations to our portion in life, or reveal to ns those 
that already exist. Sometimes there are compensations latent in the very circum- 
stances of which we complain : springs of water to moisten a sun-parched soiL In 
any case God is able to bestow upon us exceeding abundantly above all that we can 
ask or think. — M. 

Ver. 19. — Divine help versus nwterial obstacles. The statement of this verse is 
perplexing ; hardly softened if we render " there was no driving out," &o. On the 
one hand, apparently, infinite power is on the side of Judah ; on the other, there are 
sharply-defined limits to his success, and singular reasons for his failure. (Describe 
inhabitants of mountain and valley.) One would suppose that if God had really 
been with Judah, the chariots of iron would be neither here nor there in the question. 
" If God be for us, who can be against us ? " But the difBculty arises from looking 
at the problem wholly from the Divine side. The same diflBculty faces us to-day. 
"But this temptation was so great I " " But was not the Lord with you ? " Injmite 
power may be on our side, but we may be debarred by failure of faith from makitig 
full use of it. 

I. Uneealised SPiniTiTAii power. Many of the brutes have power greater than 
man, but they cannot bring it to bear. Is man never similarly^ unfortunate ? In 
what sense can the power of God in the saint be unrealised ? It is not power wasted 
or lying idle, but simply like a cheque unused. Our spiritual nature is not developed 
enough. 

II. IN80FFICIENT EEAS0N8 FOB FAILURE OB SUCCESS. These arise from the same 
cause as the preceding. The tool in hands of tyro and master. _ The true panoiily of 
a Church is spiritual ; and its material advantages may sometimes be as Goliath's 
armour to David ; and so may the spiritual advantages, if we do not realise them, 
keep ourselves in continual communion with them, and test their virtue by continual 
exercises of faith. 

III. Wats in which man limits God. By failure of faith. By neglect of the 
means of grace. By personal unholiness. " God's arm is not shortened," &o., "but 
jre are straitened in your own selves." — M. 

Vers. 19— 21.— .4 title to be made good. Each of these— Judah, Caleb O** ^e 
same tribe), and Benjamin— had received their portion at the hands of the Lord ; but 
they had to conquer it. Judah partially succeeded, Caleb wholly succeeded, ma 
Benjamin had a grievous drawback to his success. This is suggestive of the blessed- 
ness to be attained by Christians. . 

I. The promise is complete and absolutb to every Cheistiam. " Inis is tbe 
rictory that overcometh the world, even your faith." The least Christian is assured 
of this splendid triumph. m. ^ m. 

IL Its realisation will depend upon the measure of his faith, &o. ine estate 
with a mortgage. Judah had already " fought agninst Jerusalem " and subdued it, 
at least the southern portion abutting upon, or included in, their boundary. But they 



14 THE BOOK OF JUDGEa [oh. i. 8—20. 

did not subdue the citadel, which was in Benjamin's lot. The latter, on the othei 
band, are too careless, unwarlike, or indisposed to make good their possession. — M. 

Ver. 19. — The presence of God in the battle of life. The most reinarkabl* circum- 
stance connected with the wars of ancient Israel is the religious faith which guided 
and inspired the people for battle. In this respect the conduct of those wars is 
typical of the Christian method of spiritual warfare. 

I. God is with his people in the battle of life. God is not only the Refuge in 
distress and the Father of peaceful mercies ; he is the Source of strength and of 
oourage, and the Inspirer of the masculine virtues of the Church militant — he is 
with us in battle. God does not grant his aid from a distance, through messengers, 
&c. ; he is present in the active ezercise of his power. 1. When God calls people 
to any task, he will follow and help them, in it. God had chosen Judnh for the work 
of conquering the Canaanites. He also followed Judah to battle. Divine election 
was followed by Divine power. God never expects us to undertake any work in 
which he will not aid us. If he calls ub to any difficult task, he will go fireft, and 
prepare the way for us, and then will accompany us in it, as our Guide and Protector. 

2. They who are united in the service of God have peculiar reason for expecting the 
presence of God. Judah and Simeon were uiiited, and God aided them in their com- 
mon task. God does not desert the solitary : e. g, Hagar (Gen. xvi. 13), Jacob (Gen. 
xxviii. 16), Elijah (1 Kings xix. 9). But we have a special right to expect his 
presence when we co-operate in brotherly sympathy. Christ is present where two or 
three are met together in his name. The Holy Ghost came on the day of Pentecost, 
when the whole Church was assembled together (Acts ii. 1). 

II. The presence of God is the chief soukce op success in the battle of life. 
God was with Judah, therefore he obtained possession of the mountains. If God is 
with his people in their time of toil and difBoulty, his presence is a security of active 
aid. He is with us not merely to approve, but to help. The victory comes from 
him. It is not all who have faith and spiritual insight to discern this truth. God 
does not come with a visible host and with " chariots of iron ; " but his presence and 
aid are felt in the providential control of events ; in the inspiration of strength and 
courage ; in the enlightenment of Divine wisdom. The best human securities for 
success will not justify us in neglecting the help of God. Simeon and Judah were 
nnited, and were the stronger for their union ; yet it was not the human strength 
thus obtained, but God's presence, which brought victory. There is a danger lest we 
should trust too much to imposing human arrangements, large societies, elaborate 
organisations, &c. The most splendid Christian army will be miserably defeated 
if it ventures to enter the field without the leadership of the " Captain of 
salvation." 

III. The presence of God will not alone secdrb peefect and immediate success. 
Though God was with Judah, still Judah could not drive out the inhabitants of the 
valley. 1. God's presence and aid do not dispense with human effort. It is Judah, 
not God, who fails. We may fail on our side of the work while God is not wanting 
on his. 2. God! s presence does not make us entirely independent of earthly dreum- 
ttances. God did not annihilate the chariots of iron. We must not expect God to 
work such violent miracles as shall liberate us from all the inconveniences of life. 

3. Human weakness may still linger about us after we have been blessed with the aid 
of God! s presence. The Israelites were too weak to overcome the inhabitants of the 
valley. Possibly they feared to face the chariots of iron. The measure of help we 
have from God is not limited in itself, but it is limited by our faith. If we had 
perfect faith we should have perfect success. But when we look away from God to 
the iron chariots of our foes, or, like Peter, from Christ to the threatening waves, we 
may fail from fear and human weakness, and God's almighty power will not then 
save us from defeat. — ^A. 



OH. I. 21—36.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



15 



EXPOSITION. 



yar. 31. — Thia yeim Is identical mth 
Josh. zy. 68, except that there we read 
"the children of Judah" instead of "the 
children of Benjamin," as in this verse. 
The houndary line between Judah and 
Jerusalem passed through Jebtts or Jebttsi, 
as Jerusalem was anciently called (see Josh. 
XT. 8 ; xviii. 28 ; Judges xix. 10, 11 ; 1 Chron. 
li. 4, 6). Jebus was not finally held by the 
Israelites till the time of David (see ch. six. 
10, note.) 

Ver. 22. — The honse of Joseph, i. e. 
Ephraim, hut probably here spoken of as 
"the house of Joseph" because in the 
original document, &om which both this 
chapter and Josh. xv. 63, and xvi., xvii. are 
taken, the mention of "the lot of the 
children of Joseph " occurs, embracing both 
Ephraim and Manasseh. See Josh. xvi. 1 
and XV. 23, with which the twenty-first and 
twenty -second verses of this chapter are 
manifestly identical. 

Ver. 23. — ^Bethel, now Beitin. The name 
(house of God) had been given by Jacob 
(Gen. xxriii. 19), but obviously would not 
be likely to be adopted by the Canaanitish 
inhabitants, by whom it was called Luz. As 
soon, however, as the Ephraimites conquered 
it, they reimposed the name, in memory of 
their father Jacob. The Saxon charters 
exhibit an analogous change in such tran- 
sitions of name, as that from Bedericksworth 
to Biiry St. Edmwnds, which took place 
after the transfer of St. Edmund's body to 
the church there, the old name continuing 
for a time along with the new one, but at 
last disappearing. 

Ver. 24. — We will show thee mercy. 
Compare the saving of Bahab alive, with 
all her honse, at the taking of Jericho 



(Josh. vi. 23). This history is not preserrad 

in the parallel place in Josh. xvi. 

Ver. 28. — Put the Canaanites to tribute, 
or made them tributaries, as in vers. 30, 33, 
i.e. imposed forced labour upon them, as the 
Gibeonites were made hewers of wood and 
drawers of water (Josh. ix. 21, 27 ; see 1 
Kings ix. 21). 

Ver. 32. — The Asherites dwelt among the 
Canaanites. In verses 29 and 30 it was 
said that the Canaanites dwelt among the 
Israelites ; but here we read that the Asher- 
ites, and in ver. 33 that Naphtali, dwelt 
among (he Canaanites, which seems to imply 
that the Canaanites were the more numerous 
people of the two, yet the Israelites were 
able to keep them in subjection. 

Ver. 36. — The going up to Alaabbim. See 
Josh. XV. 3, Maaleh-a(yrabHm. In ITumb. 
xxxiv. 4 "the ascent of Akrabbim." The 
whole name, put into English, is "the 
ascent, or going up, of Scorpions," a moun- 
tain pass so called from the abundance oi 
scorpions found in the whole region. The 
exact locality is uncertain, but it is thought 
to be the pass El-Safeh, immediately to the 
south of the Dead Sea. The neighbourhood 
to Mount Hor and Petra is indicated by its 
connection here with "the rock," in Hebrew 
has-selah, which is the distinctive name o£ 
the rocks or cliffs on which Petra is buiJt, 
and the name of Petra (the rock) itseli. 
Speaking roughly, a line drawn westward 
from El-Safeh to the Mediterranean Sea, 
near the "river of Egypt," formed the 
southern boundary of Judah, and of the 
Amorites whom they displaced. The battle 
with the Amorites (Deut. i. 44), in which 
the Israelites were discomfited and pursued, 
is thought to have been at El-Safeh. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 21 — 36. — Weak faith prodticing weak action. This aection, contrasted with 
the preceding, gives us an instructive picture of a weak faith — not of absolute unbe- 
lief forfeiting the whole promise of God, but of a weak faith — coming short of the 
fulness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ. Caleb's faith, we have seen, was 
■trong, and so his success was full. The faith of the tribes here enumerated was 
weak, and so their success was only partial. In the career of those who are of weak 
or little faith we may notice the following features which usually belong to them :^ 

I. The ^VANT of a high aim. These tribes did not rise to the full purpose of God 
to give them the land for their possession. They were content with a partial posses- 
sion. So many Christians do not aim at perfect obedience to the law of God, or a 
perfect conformity to the mind of Christ, but are content with a conventional 
standard of Christian morality, very far below the measure of the stature of the 
fulness of Christ. They do not aim high enough in knowledge, or in character, ot 
in works, or in godliness, or in the victory over sin, or in self-control, or in heavenly- 
mindednesB. 

IL Tbs oymt-BBTiuATB or DirFicuLXiEB. These tribes thought the iron chariots 



16 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [««■ i- 21-36. 

invincible, shrunk from encountering them in the valleys, and slunk away into the 
hills and fastnesses out of their way. So to those of little faith the difBculties in 
the way of a thoroughly godly life seem insuperable. The fashions and customs of 
the world, the adverse opinions of men, the possible losses in trade or worldly 
advantage, or in useful friendships, the sacrifice of inclinations or interests, cannot 
be got over. Their hearts quail before difficulties and obstacles, and they are evef 
of a fearful and doubtful mind. 

III. The disposition to compromise. These tribes could not or would not drive 
the Canaanites out, but they would make them tributaries. That was something done, 
if not all that ought to be done. So the weak in faith compromise in respect to their 
Christian duties. They do not yield a bold, whole-hearted obedience at any cost, 
but they will go half-way, and stop. They will curb the flesh, but not crucify it ; 
they will check, but not destroy, the body of sin ; they will follow Christ's directions 
up to a certain point, and then, like the young ruler, go away sorrowful. And this 
want of thoroughness is as fatal to the peace and comfort of a Christian's walk with 
God as was the compromise of the Israelites to their enjoyment of the promised 
land. In their case the enemies whom they failed to destroy were constant thorns 
in their sides — rising against them whenever they were weak, always ready to join 
their enemies, taking advantage of every opportunity to harass and distress them. 
And so in the case of these Christians of little faith : the sins which they spare, the 
affections with which they compromise, the habits which they will not utterly break 
off, and the unfinished victories at which they stop short are continually marring 
their peace, and even threatening their hold on the kingdom of God. And the result 
is seen in the general condition of the Church of God : one of compromise instead of 
mastery, of hollow truce instead of decisive victory. 

IV. An underrating of the power and grace op God. This is the cause 
of all the evil, and is of the very essence of a weak faith. When God's power and 
goodness and grace are underrated, all goes wrong. Low aims, fear of difSculties, 
base compromises are sure to prevail. But with the due sense of all-sufficient grace 
all goes well. " My grace is sufficient for thee," saith the Lord to his believing 
servant. " I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me " is the servant's 
answer. Let us make a due estimate of the glorious grace of God in Christ Jesos oar 
Lord ; ao shall we be " strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 22 — 26. — An unwUUng hdper of the cause of God. Into the motives that 
actuated him we need not pry. Chief of all was tne great one of self-preservation. 
Was it honourable ? Was it right for the soldiers of God to make use of such an 
instrument ? There may have been other considerations that had weight with him. 
It might have been virtuous to resist the offer : was it necessarily vicious to yield 
to it? 

I. There are many who help the truth from lower motives who might do 
so from higher. Expediency ; public benefits of religion ; ties of relationship ; 
reputation. How great the blessing to Christ's cause if the same things were done 
from higher motives I 

IL They are blessed, but not as they might otherwise have been. A better 
service would have secured a higher reward. 

III. They cannot be relied upon, and therefore may not become part of God's 
PEOPLE. The conquering host could not trust the traitor whose help had won them the 
city. He must go forth with his reproach. Many churches contain the elements 
of weakness and ruin because they have failed to exercise a wise censorsl.ip over 
those admitted to their communion. The true Church is composed of those who serve 
God from the purest motives. — M. 

Ver. 28. — Human wisdom versus Divine. _ No option was_ left to the Israelites ■■ 
to the mode in which they were to deal with the Canaanites. Even if they were 
unable to subdue the Canaanites because of their own weakness, it would not be with- 
out fault ; for had they not to sustain and direct them ? But the sin of Israel was 



OH. I. 21— S6.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



17 



the greater that, when they were able to obey God's direction, they set it aside in 
favour of a policy of their own. This was direct disobedience, however it might be 
disguised by the name of prudence or expediency. In the end they had to rue 
their own folly. 

L PbOPLE in PE08PER0DS CIRCUMSTANCES ABE PEEQUENTLY TEMPTED TO FOLLOW A 
■WORLDLY INS1EAD OF A HEAVENLY LINE OF CONDUCT, AND TO QUALIFY TEE DICTATES 
OF OBVIOUS DUTY BY CONSIDERATIONS THAT ARE PURELY SELFISH AND PRESUMPTUOUS IN 
THEIR NATURE. 

II. When men thus shirk obvious duty, they do it from a twofold misconcep- 
tion — (1) of their own power and wisdom, and (2) of the true character of that with 
which they tamper. 

III. In the end theib folly will manifest itself in disaster and ruin. — M. 

Vers. 34, 35. — The failure of duty of one an occasion of inconvenience to another. 
Joseph, strong enough to have destroyed the Amorites, made them tributaries. The 
same people a little further away were thereby enabled to afflict and annoy a com- 
panion tribe. " The Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain," &c. 
The cause of Dan ought to have been the cause of Joseph. The latter was therefore 
guilty of intense selfishness. 

I. It is a sin for Christians to reap advantage at the expense of loss or 
inconvenience to their brethren. 

II. God of'jen makes the unworthiness ob fault op one of his children a 

DISCIPLINE to another. 

III. But this does not free the latter from the responsibility of doing his 
BEST. Dan might be annoyed, and justly, at the indirect help given to liis oppressors, 
but all the same he ought tn have invoked the aid of Jehovah and gone forth to do 
battle against them. He might have delivered himself from the inconvenience to 
which he was subject. And so with all the indirectly produced ills of life ; a heroic 
faith is certain to overcome them, or render them comparatively innoxious. — M. 



EXPOSITION 



CHAPTER IL 



It is often extremely difficult to make out 
the sequence of a Hebrew narrative, the nar- 
rator going back and travelling over the 
same ground in respect of time which he had 
already traversed, in order to introduce 
some circumstances which had been omitted, 
(see ch. vii. 26, note, and "iii. 4, note). This 
appears to be the case with this section. 
The mention of Gilgal in ver. 1 seems to 
point distinctly to the early time of the 
entrance into Canaan under Joshua, be- 
cause it was quite in the beginning of the 
Israelite occupation that the camp was at 
Gilgal, and it was there that the angel of 
the Lord spake to Joshua (Josh. v. 9, 10, 
13 — 15). We find the camp still at Gilgal 
in Josh. X. 9, 43, and it was from the camp 
at Gilgal that Caleb went forth to his con- 
quest (ch. xiv. 6), and also that Ephraim 
and Manasseh went forth to take their in- 
heritance (chs. xvi, xviL); but in ch. xviiL 
1, 9, 10 we find Shiloh, in the hiU country 
JtTDGES. 



of Ephraim, the place of the national 
gathering of " the host," and the tabernacle 
pitched there ; and the same in ch. xix. 51 ; 
XXL 2 ; xxii. 9, 12. Josephus tells us that 
Joshua moved his camp from Gilgal to 
Shiloh in the hill country at the close of 
the fifth year (' J. A.' v. i. 19). This ascent 
of the angel from Gilgal in the plains of 
Jericho to Bochim in the hUl country 
would seem, therefore, to have been about 
the beginning of the sixth year of the 
occupation of Canaan, and the rebuke in it 
to apply chiefly to Ephraim and Manasseh, 
though in part to Judah also. The place of 
this section chronologically would be be- 
tween ver. 29 and ver. 30 of ch. i. It 
should be noticed also that this section is 
very closely connected with Josh. xxiv. ; 
for, first. Judges ii 6 is identical with Josh, 
xxiv. 28, and the verses that follow Judges 
ii. 6 are also identical with those that follow 
'osh xxiv. 28. It is likely, therefore, that 
what immediately precedes Judges ii. 6 should 
be very closely connectf^d with what immedi* 



18 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



[oh. n. 1— «. 



ately presedes Josh. xxiv. 28, and shonid 
relate to the same time. Now the discourse 
of Joshna (xxiv. 1 — 16) is only an ezpon- 
sion of the brief address of the angel in 
Judges u. 1 — 8. The expostulation ahout the 
strange gods in Josh. xxiv. 14, 28, is in exact 
accordance with the complaint of the angel 
in Judges ii. 2; and the warm protestation 
of the people, "We will serve the Lord," in 
Josh. xxiv. 18, 21, 24, is in full accordance 
with what is said Judges ii. 4 : " The people 
lifted up their voice, and wept" Again, the 
mention in Josh. xxiv. 1 of the people pre- 
senting themselves "before God," and of 
"the sanctuary of the Lord" (ver. 26), 
agrees with what is said Judges ii. 5 : " They 
sacrificed there unto the Lord." And lastly, 
the somewhat mysterious words in Josh. 
xxiv. 27, " This stone . . . hath heard all 
the words of the Lord which he hath spoken 
to us," would have an easy solution if the 
message of the angel (Judges ii 1 — 3) had 
been spoken before it. The inference is that 
Joshua's address in Josh. xxiv. was delivered 
immediately after the transaction recorded 
in thisMotioii. 



Yer. 1. — An angel of the Lord. Bather, 
the angel of the Lord, i. e. the angel of hil 
presence, whose message consequently U 
delivered as if the Lord himself were speak- 
ing (see Gen. xvi. 7, 9, 11, &c.). A good 
example of the difierence between a message 
delivered by a prophet and one delivered by 
the angel of the Lord may be seen by com- 
paring ch. vi. 8 with ch. vi. 11 — 16. 
Bochim, i.e. weepers (vers. 4, 5). The site is 
unknown, but it was probably near Shiloh. 
The phrase " came up denotes that it was 
in the hill country. 

Yer. 3. — ^I said, i. e. I now declare to you 
my resolve. It was this that made the 
people weep. Thorns in your sides. This 
IS not a ^anslation of the Hebrew text, 
which only has " for sides," but a partial 
adaptation of Josh, xxiii. 13, where the 
phrase is " scourges in your sides and thorns 
in your eyes." Either the words for 
" scourges in " have fallen out of the text, 
or the word here rendered " sides " should 
be rendered, as some think, "enemies." A 
snare. See ch. viii. 27, note. 

Ver. 6.— They sacrificed. A clear intima- 
tion that they were near Shiloh, where the 
tabernacle was. 

Ver. 6. — And when Joshua, &c. The 
same words as Josh. xzii. 6, marking the 
identity of timcb 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — B,—7%e expotiulatioti. We have here an extraordinary messenger, the 
angel of the Lord, but the message is one which in its spirit might be addressed to 
men at any time, and at any place. For it speaks of God's flowing mercy arrested 
by man's stubbornness. " I made you to go up out of Egypt — I have brought you 
into the promised land. I have faithfully kept my covenant, but you have altogether 
failed to do your part. Ye have not obeyed my voice." The one requirement of 
God that, when they took possession of the land, they should make no league with 
its inhabitants, but should throw down their abominable altars, they had neglected to 
fulfil. They had thought of their own interest and convenience, and not of the 
honour of God. They had taken God's earthly gifts, but had rejected his word. 
They had shown themselves to be self-seekers, greedy, carnal, and forgetful of him 
from whom they had all. It was the old story of self slipping into the place of God 
— self as the supposed giver, and self as the person for whose glory the gift was to 
be used. " My power and the might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth," and 
therefore I will use it to my own ends. " Is not this great Babylon that I have 
built for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honour of 
my majesty ? " This is the spirit that is constantly slipping in, in a greater or less 
degree, even in the Church of God, and frustrating the purposes of his unbounded 
grace. For it is just as in the case of Israel. When they used the gift of Canaan 
not for God' a purposes but for their own, which were quite contrary to God's — for 
God's purpose was the extirpation of idolatry ; their purpose was the enjoyment of 
vineyards which they had not planted, and wells which they had not digged — ^they at 
once closed up the fountain of God's grace. " I will not drive them out from before 
you ; they shall be as thorns in your side, and their gods shall be a snare unto you." 
And their future history was the history of the fulfilment of this threat. So it was in the 
history of the Church . The grace of God bestowed io such rich abundance upon the 
early Church at Pentecost and afterwards, that those who named the name a£ Chrut 



OH.n. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. If 

might be patterns to an evil world of love and purity and unselfish service, was soon 
stayed and checked by strife and discord, by worldly ambitions, by compromises with 
sin, and by fellowship with the corruptions of heathenism. So too it is with individual 
Christians. We check God's grace by not using it to the full ; we hinder his mercy 
by not appropriating it, and not valuing it ; we stop the flow of his good-will to us 
by setting up the objects of our own carnal desires and pursuing them, while wo 
neglect the things which make for the glory of God. And just as the entire conquest 
of the Canaanites was not stopped by any deficiency of power in Almighty God, nor 
by any failure in love or faithfulness on his part, but simply by the sin of Israel, so 
now we may be quite sure that there is an infinite fulness of grace in Christ Jesus 
for all the Church's needs, and all the spiritual wants of each individual disciple, 
if only the hindrances of man's selfish disobedience are tiiken away, and an open 
channel is kept for God's free mercy to flow unimpeded in its gracious course. But, 
be it ever remembered, the disobedience to God's word, whatever it be, must be 
taken away. It is not enough to lift up the voice and weep over the consequences 
of sin past ; it is not enough to sacrifice unto the Lord in hopes of averting his 
threatened punishments ; there must be an entire return to the path of obedience, to 
walk with a whole heart in the way of God's commandments, and to obey bis voice. 
For that is the end for which God bestows his grace " Elect unto obedience and 
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ." Let the Church, let the individual disciple, 
throw themselves unreservedly into this path of obedience, and God will fulfil in 
them all the good pleasure of his goodness, and their peace shall flow like a river. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1 — 5. — BocMm. Who this "angel of the Lord " was we do not, probably 
were not meant to, know. He might have been Phinehas, the same who, according 
to Rabbinical interpreters, was the mouth-piece of Jehovah after the death of Joshua 
(ver. 1). But the probabilities are decidedly against such a supposition. It is "an 
angel," or messenger. At any rate the personality of the messenger (surely no 
celestial visitant, else why the journey and apparently public discourse?) is kept in 
the background. He is nothing, a mere " voice," but a voice giving utterance to 
Israel's consciousness of ofEending, and addressing and rousing it. The mere cir- 
cumstance that he came from Gilgal, the first spot touched by Israel in Canaan, 
gave significance to his message. Bochim was probably at Shiloh, the appointed 
meeting-place of the tribes. 

I. A PLACE or SOLEMN BECOLLECTION AND KE-STATEMBNT. Shiloh, the place o£ 

Israel's worship and sacrifice, is also the place of Israel's repentance. A name, 
Bochim, is given to it. " They named the place from their tears." So the house of 
God becomes the monument and memorial of our deepest religious experiences. No 
new revelation is here made. The simple facts of the Divine deliverance of the 
people, their perfidy and faithlessness, are recited ; in contrast with which God's 
steadfastness is mentioned. The foundation article of the covenant is rehearsed, 
and the question asked, " Why have ye done this ? " And then the connection of 
their punishment with their sin is set forth. 

II. A PLACE OP INQUIEY, EEMONSTBANCE, AND SORROWFUL APPEAL. The tone of this 

address is sympathetic and yet severe. The question, " Why have ye done this?" 
suggests to the people how foolish and profitless their conduct has been. How 
fitting would such a question be to many sinners of to-day. We too have broken 
plain precepts and sinned against the light of truth. What reason has there been 
in the conduct of God, in the nature of the duties neglected, or in the advantages we 
supposed we should secure ? An appeal to conscience like this is of infinitely more 
value than a speculative disquisition. He is a true angel who bears such a message. 

III. A PLACE OF REPENTANCE. Israel is invited to change its rnind. God is solicit- 
ous for its repentance. He has sent " an angel " to produce this result. The tears 
that flow so freely are precious in his sight, and may avail, if followed up, to recover 
his favour and to reinstate them in their lost possessions. How great a privilege 
was this ; not that it was a place of tears only, but that it might become a place 
of repentance, a turning-point in Israel's history. This Esau found uot, thongh he 



20 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. ii. 1—6 

sought it carefully with tears. Let it therefore be seized as a blissful augury that 
God wills not the death of a sinner, but that all men may turn to him and live. 
Such experiences are not to be artificially produced. A faitliful recalling of God's 
real dealings with us in the past ought to make tears flow from the most hardened 
of sinners. But let the next step be taken, and beyond the tears, even beyond the 
ostentatious sacrifice, let reformation commence at once with his help and blessing. 
Then shall we have reason to recall our tears with gratitude when we discover that 
our repentance is not to be repented of. — M» 

Vers. 1 — B. — The pi-eaching of repentance. I. The mission. 1. A special mes- 
senger is sent to preach repentance. There are men whose peculiar gifts and position 
mark them out as called to this difScult work, e. g. Elijah, John the Baptist, 
Savonarola, John Knox. 2. This man was sent by God. It needs a Divine call and 
inspiration to speak rightly to men of their sins as well as to preach the gospel ol 
peace. He who is thus called must not shrink from fear or false kindness to men. 
3. The preacher is simply commissioned to convey a message/rom God. The voice 
is a man's, but the words are God's. The true preacher must always regard himself 
as the messenger of God, not at liberty to indulge in his own speculations, or to 
claim authority for his own judgment, but simply to declare, and interpret, and 
apply, the truth which God has entrusted to him (1 Tim. i. 11). 4. The preacher 
carries the message to the people. He does not wait for an audience to assemble 
about him ; he does not wait for a spontaneous repentance. He journeys from Gilgal 
to Bochim. They who most need the preacher are least likely to come to hear him. 
Therefore he must go after them. The visitor, the city missionary, &c., have here 
a special work to reach those who will never enter the church, but all preachers of 
tepentance must learn to seek their hearers. 

II. The message. 1. This commences with a review of God's goodness and faith- 
fulness. If we have been sinful he has still been merciful to us. He has kept his 
side of the great covenant, so that if we miss the good fruits of it this must be 
because we fail on our side. It is well to call attention to these facts before pointing 
out the sin of men, (1) that this may be felt more deeply in contrast with the good- 
ness of God, (2) that tlie purpose of frod in calling to repentance may be recognised 
as gracious, not vindictive (Eom. ii. 4). 2. The message contains a defnite charge 
of sin. This must be definite to be effective. All admit they are imperfect. The 
difiicult and delicate task of rebuking consists in making men see their special guilt 
in regard to particular sins. (1) In the present case the sin consists in guilty toler- 
ance of evil. Religion should be aggressive. The Church is called to separate her- 
self from the world (1 Cor. v. 11). (2) The root of the sin is disobedience. All sin 
is disobedience to the written law, or the law in our hearts ; it is the setting up of 
our will against God's will. 3. The message closes with a warning of punishment. 
This punishment was to be a direct consequence of their tolerance of evil. Punish- 
ment is a natural fruit of sin. 

III. The results. We see the preaching of repentance producing the most varied 
results. Some turn a deaf ear ; some hear and resent it ; some hear and approve, 
but apply the message to others ; some hear and admit the truth of the rebuke, but 
have no feeling of the sting of it ; some feel sorrow under the rebuke, but do not 
rise to the active repentance of will. In the present instance the people heard 
meekly, humbly, and penitently, and the word bore fruit in genuine repentance and 
reformation. 1. They wept. Sorrow for past sin is natural and helpful towards 
future amendment, though if left to itself it will be a barren sentiment. 2. They 
saerijked. Thus they acknowledged guilt, sought forgiveness in the mercy of God, 
and reconsecrated themselves to his service. It is not repentance, but faitli in Christ, 
the sacrifice for sin, following this, that secures to us God's forgiving mercy. 3. 
They served the Lord. This is the final outcome, and certain proof of genuine 
repentance. The depth of our repentance must be measured not by the number oil 
tears we shed, but by the thoroughness of our amendment of life, and the faithfut 
1 of our subsequent service of God (Luke iii. 11). — A. 



OH. n. 7—13.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 7. — ^And the people served, &o. This 
Terse is the epitome of the religious history 
of Israel from the time of the expostulation 
of the angel till the dying off of all those 
who had been elders in the time of Joshua. 
It probably includes some forty or fifty 
years from the entrance into Canaan, viz., 
about thirty years of Joshua's lifetime, and 
ten, fifteen, or twenty years after Joshua's 
death. The record of the people's continu- 
ance in the service of the Lord connects 
itself with the promise made by them in 
Josh. xxiv. 21, 24. All the great works, 
&e. Scarcely those prior to the crossing of 
the Jordan, though some might remember 
some of the events in the wilderness when 
they were mere children (Numb. xiv. 31), 
bnt the victories in Canaan. 

Vers. 7 — 9. — These three verses are identi- 
cal With Josh. xxiv. 29 — 31, except that the 
order is slightly varied. 

Ver. 8. — An hundred and ten years old. 
Caleb was eighty-five years old, he tells us 
(Josh. xiv. 10), when he went to take pos- 
session of Hebron, forty-five years after tha 
spies had searched Canaan from Kadesh- 
Bamea, and consequently some time in the 
seventh year of the entrance into Canaan. 
Joshua was probably within a year or two 
his contemporary. 

Ver. 9. — Timnath-heres. Probably, though 
not certainly, the modem Tibneh, six miles 
from Jifna. It is called in Josh. xix. 50 
and xxiv. 80 Timna^h-serah, the letters of 
which are identical, but the order is in- 
verted. Timnath-heres is probably the 
right form. It means "The (lortion of 
the Sun." We have Mount Ileres in ch. 
1. 35, near Ajalon. Ir-shemesh (city of 
the sun) and Beih-shemesh (liouse of the 
sun) are other instances of places called 
from the sun. Some have supposed some 
connection between the name Timnath- 
heres, as Joshua's inheritance, and the 
miracle of the sun standing still upon 



Gibeon at the word of Joshua (Josh. x. 12, 

13). The neighbourhood of Timnath-heres 
to Ajalon (ch. i. 35) may give some counten- 
ance to this. The hill Gaash is only else- 
where mentioned as the birthplace of Hiddai 
or Hurai (2 Sam. xxiii. 30 ; 1 Chron. xi. 32), 
but the exact site is unknown. 

Ver. 10. — Which knew not the lord, &c. 
The memory of God's great works gradually 
faded away, and with this memory their 
influence upon the hearts of the people. 
The seductions of idolatry and the influence 
of heathen example were ever fresh and 
powerful. Had the people obeyed the voice 
of the Lord, the idolatry and the idolaters 
would have been out of the way. We may 
notice by the way the value to the Church of 
the sacrament of the Lord's Supper in keep- 
ing alive a perpetual memory of ChTists 
precious death until his coming again, 

Ver. 12. — They forsook the Lord, &o. 
Here again there is a manifest allusion to 
Josh. xxiv. 16, 17. 

Ver. 13. — Baal and Ashtaroth. Ashtaroth 
is the plural of Ashtoreth, the goddess of 
the Zidonians (1 Kings xi. 6, 33), just as 
£aaUm (ver. 11) is the plural of Banl. The 
many images of Baal and Ashtoreth are, in 
the opinion of some, indicated by the plural ; 
but others think that different modifications 
or impersonations of the god and goddess 
are indicated. Thus we read of Baal-ierith, 
the god who presides over covenants ; Baal- 
zebid, or Zebuh, the god who presides over 
flies, who could either send or remove a 
plague of flies, and so on. " Baal (lord or 
master) was the supreme male divinity of 
the Phoenician and Canaanitish nations, as 
Ashtoreth (perhaps the star, the planet 
Venus) was their supreme female divinity. 
Baal and Ashtoreth are frequently coupled 
together. Many Phoenician names — Hanni- 
bal, Asdrubal, Adherbal, Belua, ko. — are 
derived from Baal." 



H0MILBTIC8. 

Vers. 7 — 13. — Influence. Joshua holds a distinguished place among the worthies 
of the Old Testament. As the faithful minititer of Moses, as the servant of God, as 
the bold and believing spy, as the successor of Moses, as the captain of the hosts of 
Israel, as the conqueror of Canaan, as the type of the Lord Jesus, whose name he 
sore, he stands in at least the second rank of the great men of the sacred hi.story. But 
in nothing is he more conspicuously great than in the influence which he exercised 
npon others by his authority and example. We learn in this section that his weight 
and influence with the Israelitish nation was such that for a period of not much less 
than half a century it sufSced to keep the fickle people steadfast in their allegiance 
to th« God of their fathers. By his own influence while he lived, and after his death 
by the influeni* of those whom he Lad trained during his lifetime, the contagion of 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. ii. 7—13 



idolatry was checked, and the service of God maintained. It is not all great men 
who have this faculty of influencing others, but it is a most invaluable one. 

I. The qualities which seem necessary to give it abb — (1) Force of character. 
There must be a firm and steady will, moving always in the orbit of duty, and pro- 
pelled by inflexible principle, in those who are to influence others. (2) There must 
be also a quick discernment, a sound judgment which makes few or no mistakes, and 
a high range of morals and of intellect. (3) There must be a lofty courage to cope 
with difiioulties without flinching, to inspire confidence, and to break down obstacles 
(4) There must be unselfishness, and a noble, generous purpose soaring high above 
petty worldly objects, so as to piovoke no rivalries and to excite no suspicions. (5) 
There must be the qualities which attach men — kindness, geniality of disposition, 
fairness, considerateness, love ; and the qualities which excite admiration, and make 
it a pleasure and an honour to follow him that has them. (6) There must be an 
absence of vanity and self-conceit and love of praise, and a genuine simplicity of 
aim. (7) And above all, to make a man's influence strong and lasting, there must 
be in him the true fear and love of God, and the conscious endeavour to promote 
his glory in everything. Joshua seems to have possessed all these in a high degree, 
and his influence was in proportion. That he not only possessed but actively exerted 
this influence for good we see by his address to the people recorded in Josh. xxiv. 
And this perhaps should make us add, (8) as one more quality necessary in those who 
are to influence others largely, that moral courage which makes a man speak out 
boldly what he knows to be true for the express purpose of persuading and guiding 
others. 

II. While, however, influmce on the scale in which Joshua exercised it can be 
possessed by few, every Christian man ob woman, whatever may be their station, 

CAN AND OUGHT TO BE EXEECISING A HEALTHY INFLUENCE IN THEIB OWN IMMEDIATB 

circle. The light of a genuine Christian life is a light which will make itself seen 
wherever it shines. In the home, be it palace or cottage, in the village street, in 
the town court, in the shop, in the factory, in the camp, in the ship, in the social 
circle, be it humble or be it exalted, be it rude or be it refined, be it unlettered or be 
it literary and scientific, the influence of a pure, humble, vigorous, devout Christian 
life must be felt. It must be a power wherever it is. The object of these remarks 
is to stimulate the reader to desire and to endeavour to exercise such an influence for 
good, and to supply a motive for checking any action, or course of action, which 
may weaken or impede such influence. An outbreak of temper, a single grasping or 
unscrupulous action, a single step in the path of selfishness, or uncharitable dis- 
regard of another's feelings or interests, may undo the efEect of many good words 
and good works. A conscientious desire to influence others for their good and for 
God's glory will supply a strong motive for watchful care to give ofEence in nothing. 

III. But this section supplies an important caution to those who are influenced. 
When Joshua and the elders were dead, the children of Israel did evil in the 
sight of the Lord. They had no selbstandigkeit, no independent strength, no 
power to stand firm by themselves. Their religion, their good conduct, depended 
upon another. He was the buttress that supported them ; when the buttress was 
taken away they fell. Hence the caution not to trust in mere influence, but to look 
well to the foundations of our own faith. The influence of another man is no sub- 
stitute for a converted heart, and for soundness in faith and love. St. Paul well 
knew the difference in some of his followers when he was present and when he 
was absent, and so would have their faith stand not in the wisdom of men, but in the 
power of God. It behoves us all to take care of our real principles of action, to 
examine ourselves, to prove our own selves, whether we be in the faith, whether 
Christ be really formed in us, whether we are seeking only to please those who have 
influence over us, or to please God. Else that may happen to us which happened to 
the Israelites, our upright Christian walk will last as long as we have the support 
of the good and strong, and no longer. We shall serve the Lord for a while onl^ 
wd end by serving Baalim and Ashtaroth, The sober Christian life will be exchangeq 
Cor folly and diasipatiou, and the pure creed degenerate into superstition or unbelief* 



OH. n. 7—13.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 28 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 6 — IB. — T/ie force of personal testimony and influence. Tliese verses art 
•n expknation of how the evils came about which Israel deplored at Bocliim. They 
explain, too, the fact that idolatry had not yet made much way amongst the people. 
" They described the whole period in which the people were submissive to the word 
of God, nlthough removed from under the direct guidance of Joshua. The people 
were faithful when left to themselves by Joshua, faithful after his death, faithful still 
in the days of the elders who outlived Joshua. That whole generation wliich had seen 
the mighty deeds which attended the conquest of Canaan stood firm. Our passage 
says, 'for they had sem,' whereas Josh. xxiv. 31 says, 'they had hnoton.' ' To see' 
is more definite than ' to know.' The facts of history may be known as the acts of 
God without being witnessed and experienced. But this generation had stood in the 
midst of events ; the movements of the conflict and its results were still present in 
their memories " (Cassel). A new generation arises which " knows not Jehovah, nor 
yet the works which he had done." The " elders" — Joshua and his contemporaries — 
did this service; not only were they themselves faithful to God, but they kept alive 
the recollection of his mighty deeds and the national piety of Israel. 

I. Testimony is op greatest effect when it is that op those who have 
SEEN AND KNOWN. St. John makes this claim for himself and his fellow apostles (1 
John i. 1), and even St. Paul declares that Christ was manifested to him also as unto 
one that was born out of due time. It is a law of our nature upon which this pro- 
ceeds. The nearer we are to our own personal experience, other tilings being equal, 
the more are we impressed with the reality of events. It was as if the people 
themselves had seen the miracles of the exodus when they had still amongst them 
Joshua and the elders. This advantage may be realised by Christians to-day. The 
gospel facts must become a real experience in the heart of him who would seek to 
influence others. By faith it may be so. We too may see our Saviour face to face. 
The preacher's vivid realisation of the supernatural and the Divine often exercises 
an overwhelming effect upon the hearer; whereas, on the other hand, to speak of our 
Saviour and his works as if we were telling an idle tale is to expose ourselves to 
certain failure, A Church that could relive the heroisms of the cross would be 
irresistible. 

II. It receives pbesh confirmation in the BEHAvionR OP THE WITNESSES. They 
were holy men. They lived in the constant remembrance of those awe-inspiring 
scenes. This was the most efEeotive way of conveying to others their own impres- 
sion and enthusiasm. Witness like this is within reach of all, and does not require 
scholarship to make it possible. 

III. Death and time are the great impairers of this influence. With each 
good man who dies a witness disappears. The further we get in years from the 
actual scenes of miraculous power, the less effect are they calculated to produce. But 
the word of God liveth and endureth for ever, and God repeats spiritually the signs 
and mighty acts of his salvation in the experience of every true believer. — M. 

Vers. 11 — 13. — Israel's apostasy. The repeated apostasy of Israel and the conse- 
quences of it furnish the ever-recurring theme of the darker pages of the Book of 
Judges. It may be well, therefore, to look at the subject generally, apart from 
ejiecial instances. 

I. The nature of the apostasy. 1. It consisted in forsaking God. All sin 
begins here, because while we live near to him it is impossible :for us to love and 
follow evil. If we cannot serve God and mannnon, so long as we are faithful to 
God we shall be safe from the idolatry of worldliness. The guilt of forsaking God 
is great because it involves (1) disobedience to our Father, (2) ingratitude to our 
Benefactor, (3) the f;ill from devotion to the Highest to lower pursuits. 2. This 
apostasy consisted in the worship of other gods. The shrine of the heart cannot long 
be empty. Man is a religious beii'g, and he will have some religion ; if not the 
highest and purest, then some lower form of worship. We must have a master, a 
God. 3. There was nothing inventive in the apostasy of Israel. The people only 



24 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oh. n. 14—23. 



worshipped the old deities of the native population. They who give up Oiristiaiiity 
for supposed novel forms of religion generally find themselves landed in some old- 
world superstition. 4. The guilt of the apostasy was aggravated by the character ol 
the worship into which the people fell. This was (1) false — the worship of supposed 
gods which possessed no Divine power ; (2) mntPiinlistic — the worship of idols ip 
place of the unseen spiritual God ; and (3) immoral — the worship of impure deities 
with impure rites. 

II. The causes op the apostasy. 1. Defective education. So long as Joshua 
and his contemporary elders lived the people remained faithful. Apostasy arose in 
a new " generation which knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he had done 
for IsraeL" But if the former generation had trained its children aright they would 
not have been thus ignorant. The Church should feel the supreme importance of the 
religions education of the young. Her continued existence depends on this. Children 
do not inherit their father s religion by natural succession. They must be trained in 
it. 2. Circumstances of ease. While the people were surrounded with the perils 
of the wilderness they displayed a moral heroism which melted beneath the sun of 
peaceful prosperity. Worldly comfort brings a great inducement to religious negli- 
gence. 3. Tolerance of evil. The earlier generation had failed to extirpate the 
idolatry of Canaan, and now this becomes a snare to the later generation. Indifference 
and indolence in regard to the wickedness which is around us is certain to open the 
door of temptation to our children, if not to ourselves. 4. The worldly attractions 
of the lower life. The service of God involves high spiritual efforts, purity of 
life, self-sacrifice, and difiScult tasks (Josh. xxiv. 19). The service of the world is 
more agreeable to the pleasures of sense and selfishness. Regarded from the low 
ground of sense and with the short sight of worldly wisdom, it is easier to worship 
Baal than to worship the Eternal. — ^A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Vers. 14, 16. — Th,e anger of the lord, &c. 
These verses contain an awful view of the 
wrath of God excited by wilful sin, and are 
a practical illustration of Exod. xx. 5 : "/ 
am a jealous God." Compare Ps. Ixxix, 5, 
which shows how closely allied the notions 
of anger and jealousy are in Hebrew. He 
•old them. A forcible expression, implying 
the handing over of the people into the 
hands of their enemies, as if God had no 
more any property in them or concern about 
them ; as if he said, " Ye are not my people, 
and I am not your God;" as if he said to 
the heathen, "Take them, and do as you 
will with them ; they are yours, not mine " 
(see Levit. zxvi. and Deut. xxviii.). As the 
lord had sworn, &c., showing that God 
fulfilled his threatenings as well as his 
promises. 

Ver. 16. — Baised up judges. Hence the 
name of this book, which recites the names 
and exploits of those whom God raised up 
to deliver them out of the hand of their 
•nemiea. The title Judges (Hebrew, shqpAe- 



tvm) is, as is well known, identical with the 
Carthagenian suffetes. Mark the riches of 
God's mercy. 

Ver. 22. — To walk therein. The Hebrew 
has in, them. Probably for way we should 
read ways, as Deut. viii. 6 ; x. 12, &c. This 
verse does not seem to be part of what the 
Lord said, but to be the comment of the 
writer. The A. V. — that through them I 
may prove — inserts an / which is not in the 
original. Ver. 22 depends upon ver. 23. 
The literal rendering is. For the sake of 
proving Israel, bo., ... the Lard left those 
nations. The writer, after rehearsing the 
Lord's reason for not completing the extir- 
pation of the nations after the death of 
Joshua, adds the further information why 
they had not been delivered into Joshuas 
hand in his lifetime (cf ch. ill 1, 4). In 
Exod. xxiiL 29, 30 ; Deut vii. 22, an ad- 
ditional reason is given for the gradual 
extirpation of the Canaanites — " lest (hi 
leasts of the field increase ujion thee." 



HOMILETICa 

Vert. 14 — 23. — The goodness and severity of God. To know God as he is relativelj 
to man — not as the absolute, which is impossible to be known, but such as he is 
relatively to man — isthe highest of all knowledge which man can attain, and the 
■lost important for him to possess. Accordingly, one main purpose of revelation ia 



OB. II. 14—23.] THE BOOK OF JUDGEa 



to give us such knowledge. And this is given in two ways. One is by description! 
of God's character, as, e. g'., that in Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7: "The Lord God, merciful and 
gracious, long-sufiering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for 
thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means 
clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children," &o. The 
other is by the authentic record of God's acts, specially in the gift of his only be- 
gotten Son to be the Saviour of the world, and in the Saviour's work as related in 
the Gospels, and also generally in his providential dealings with his people Israel, 
lis set forth in the Old Testament. Of the latter method the Book of Judges, cA 
which this section is an epitome, is a striking and instructive specimen. In it we 
have represented to us in vivid colours two characteristic features of the mind of 
God. 

I. God's hatbbd of sin. With the usual anthropomorphism of Holy Scripture, 
we are told that when the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, tliey 
" provoked the Lord to anger." " The anger of the Lord was hot against them," it 
is twice repeated, and " liis hand was iigfiinst them for evil." Here, then, we see 
God's hatred of sin. And if God is infiin'lely good and holy, and if he knows the 
full misery that sin Ijas brought into his creation, with what other sentiment can he 
regard sin but witli that of hatred and indignation ? Sin excites a holy anger in his 
mind, and his hand iimst be stretched out to punish and to check. If we reflect 
calmly, we must see that both of these are inevitable. God must look upon sin with 
displeasure, and he must art upon that displeasure. Evil must excite displeasure in 
one that is perfectly good ; and in the moral Governor of the universe such displeasure 
cannot be quiescent and impotent, it must be active and effective. Reason teaches 
us so, and revelation sanctions, enlarges, and enforces the lesson. 

II. God's exceeding and tender mercy. To use the same anthropomorphism as 
before, we see God ever relenting, ever yearning over the miseries of his people, ever 
repenting of the evil that he had brought upon them, when he heard their groanings, 
ever forgetting their provocations and offences, and stepping forward to deliver them. 
It is impossible to have mercy, forgiveness, benevolence, and love, depicted in more 
vivid colours. Anything more remote from the idea of a vindictive, hard, unfor- 
giving nature it is impossible to conceive. And when we go on to inquire what are 
the conditions in man which, so to speak, draw out these not opposite, but different 
sides of the Divine character, we find that it is against persistent sin that the wratb 
of God burns, and upon which his heavy hand falls to smite ; and that it is to the 
contrite and penitent who forsake their sins that his quick and willing mercy is 
extended. And ihen a little further reflection seems to show that just as in nature 
different forces are found ultimately to resolve themselves into one common force, 
80 these two attributes of God, hatred of sin, and mercy, may really be expressed by 
one term — goodness, or love. Goodness or love relatively to persistent sin is right- 
eous punishment ; relatively to penitent sorrow it is mercy and foj^iyeness. And 
the reason of this is plain. Sin involves the misery of all who are subject to it, and 
of all God's creation, if it is suffered to continue and grow in it. It nmst therefore 
be the part of a good and loving God to extirpate sin, and that doubtless is the 
purpose of punishment, which is only another way of saying that punishment is 
remedial: remedial, if possible, to the being punished, that is, if it brings him to 
repentance ; but anyhow remedial to creation, which in the continued punishment 
of the impenitent sees the evil of sin, and avoids. it. The further doctrine of the 
ATONEMENT docs not arise here, but it may just be observed how entirely it agrees 
with what we see here of God's character, since in it, as made by the death of the 
only begotten Son upon the cross, the two attributes of hatred of sin, and ineffable 
mercy, stand out with marvellous force and briglitness. We conclude then that 
while mercy is goodness acting towards those who are not beyond the reach of 
goodness, severity is goodness acting with a view as far as possible to the happiness 
of the whole creation. And we see in the atonement a provision of infinite wisdom, 
by which the risk of injury to the many by mercy to the few is removed and done 
•way with, and by which the severity and the mercy infinitely enhance and magjiify 
each other. Sin when it is finished bringeth forth death. Other important lessons 
of the PBADLY FRUIT OF SIN, and of the inveterate pebverseness of man, recurring 



M THE BOOK OF JUDGES. (m. il 14— 2a 

to Bin again and again, in spite of bitter experience, like a moth flying into the 
candle, and of the barriers which man's stubborn disobedience sets up against the 
coming in of all the good things which God's love had prepared for him, flow spon- 
taneously from the narrative in this section. So also does the lesson of the use of 
trouble as the trial of faith (1 Pet. i. 7) and the test of obedience. In fact it 
opens a large and comprehensive chapter on the providential government of th# 
Ohurch and of the world. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 14 — 18. — Mercy in the midst of judgment. As the sin of Israel continues 
and multiplies, the anger of the Lord waxes hot. As the misery of his people 
deepens, his compassions fail not. There is no contradiction in this. The mercy of 
God is not a weakness, it is the minister and lionourer of his law. The judges, Who 
represented the mercy of God, by whom they were raised up in faithless times, were 
also witnesses of his righteousness, and living embodiments of his kingdom amongst 
men. 

I. The mebct of God does not consist in altering the laws of his kingdom, 

BDT IN LEADING MEN TO CONFORM MORE PERFECTLY TO THEM. The Covenant is Still 

felt as a living power even when it is ignored. The evils foretold come to pass, and 
in ever-increasing force. But God pursues a plan of restoration. This plan is never 
one of destruction or reversal Not one jot or tittle of the law has to pass in order 
that the gospel may have effect. God seeks to change the hearts of his erring chil- 
dren, and by the punitive operation of the laws of his kingdom to make them loyal 
subjects. "The law that curses will also, when obeyed, be found to bless. The 
judges were a continuous witness to righteousness and protest against sin, and by 
the prestige of their mighty acts and the constant influence of their lives they led 
men back again to God and goodness. They were the embodiments of his mercy. 

II. The vicioRiBs of sin are never considered by him as irreversible. It 
was said in praise of English soldiers that they did not know when they were beaten. 
How much truer is this of God and his people 1 The most appalling apostasy has 
not daimted our Heavenly Father, or driven him utterly away from his world. 
"Where sin abounded, there did grace much more abound." Some of the best of 
Tnen and most comforting of doctrines were born in ages of spiritual darkness. 
He has never left himself without a witness. The course of revelation is never 
stopped. The succession of prophets, apostles, and martyrs is never interrupted. 
The servants of God in Old Testament times might be driven away or destroyed, but 
they, being dead, yet speak, and in the fulness of time he sends his Son ; he, too, may 
be crucitied, but nevertheless the Father will send the Comforter in his name. And 
so in the individual life this law will be found to operate. The darkest conscience 
lias not been without its light. 

III. On THE whole THIO :.rlRITUAL GAINS OVER THE CARNAL IN THE PROGRESS OF THE 

kingdom of God amongst men. One judge passes away and another rises. The 
apostasies which they have to correct may become darker and more terrible ; but 
greater deeds are forthcoming. The testimony is more and more emphatic. The 
principles of God's kingdom arc illustrated and honoured, and Israel gradually eman- 
cipated from its ignorance and inexperience. — M. 

Vers. 21, 22. — Tested by temptation,. The pagan nations of Canaan were a con- 
stant source of temptation to idolatry and immorality. If they were left in the land, 
the fidelity of Israel would be tried by the way in which this temptation was met. 

I. Temptation is not immediately sent by God. Israel had been commanded to 
expel the Canaanites; it was owing to the indolence and weakness of the invaders 
that their work was not completed. Having failed on their side, they now find that 
God will no longer secure them victory over their enemies. The temptation which 
thus resulted from the presence of the heathen in their midst grew out of their own 
conduct. God never tempts us (James i. 13). Temptation often arises out of 
negligence, indolence, needless pleasure, wilful presumption. It is vain ^o pray. 
" Lead u« not into temptation," while we are creating temptations for ourselves. 



OH. m. 1 — 6.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



27 



II. Temptation must often be eegarded in the light op a punishment. 1. It 
frequently comes as the consequence of former sin. The memory of sin the con- 
tracted habit of sin, the associations of sin, and the weakness resulting from sin are 
all sources of new temptation. 2. Temptation is one of the most painful conse- 
quences of sin. If we have any love for goodness, one of the saddest results of 
our sin must be the consciousness of new temptations to which it renders us liable. 
For a good man to suffer temptation is to suffer pain. 3. We must therefore coii- 
clude that all the temptations we meet with are not unavoidable and necessary. We 
bring them oil ourselves ; we might have escaped them ; they are dangerous calami- 
ties which we must deplore. We need not wish to be tried. If temptation is often 
a punishment, it is better to rest humbly ignorant of our own weakness than to court 
trial which will reveal the extent of it. 

III. Temptation is used by God as a test of fidelity. The people of Israel 
would be proved by theteni|)tation arising out of the presence of immoral idolaters 
in the midst of them. 1. Fidelity consists (1) in care and firmness,— "to keep the 
way of the Lord," — and (2) in diligence and progressive activity—" to watt therein." 
2. Tliis fidelity is tested by the attractions of evil ways. We cannot be said to keep the 
way simply because we are found in it. But when the way is contested, or a more 
pleasing path opens out near to it, the strength of our fidelity will be put to the test. 
Some men need the test of temptation more than others. If they have already 
shown weakness, the punishment which comes in the form of a temptation may be a 
useful means of self-revelation. This need of proof, however, is a humiliation. It 
is better to be so clearly true as neither to invoke the punishment of temptation nor 
require the test it affords. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER in. 



Ver. 1. — Now these are the nations, &c. 

We are now told in detail what was stated 
in general in ch. ii. 22, 23, after the common 
method of Hebrew narrative. To prove 
Israel. This word to prove is used here in a 
somewhat different sense from that which it 
bears in ver. 4 and in ch. ii. 22. In those 
passages it is used of their moral probation, 
of proving or testing their faith and obedi- 
ence ; but here it is rather in the sense of " to 
exercise," or " to accustom them," to train 
them to war. A considerable period of rest 
had followed Joshua's conquest, during 
which the younger Israelites had no experi- 
ence of war ; but if they were to keep their 
hold of Canaan, it was needful that the 
warlike spirit should be kept up in their 
breasts. 

Ver. 8.— The five lords, &c. The title 
teren, here rendered "lord," is one exclusively 
xpplied to the lords of the five Philistine 
cities enumerated in Josh. xiii. 3 ; 1 Sam. 
vi. 17, 18, viz., Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, 
Gath, and Ekron. It occurs repeatedly in 
ch. xvi ; 1 Sam. v., vi., xxix., &c. The 
word means an axle-tree. The entering in 
of Hamath. There are two theories in 
regard to Hamath. Some, as Professor 
Rawlinson in the ' Dictionary of the Bible,* 
identify it with Hamah, a large and im- 
portant city on the Oroutes in Upper Syria, 
and consider that the kingdom of Hamath, 



which was overthrown by the king of Assyria 
(2 Kings xviii. 34 ; xix. 13), and of which 
Hamath was the capital, was for the most 
part an independent Hamitio or Canaanite 
kingdom (Gen. x. 18), hut occasionally, as 
in the days of Solomon and Jerolioam 
(1 Kings viii. 65 ; 2 Kings xiv. 28 ; 2 Chron. 
viii. 4), suliject to Israel. Others, however, 
justly considering the great improbability 
of the Israelite dominion having ever ex- 
tended so far north as the valley of the 
Orontes, and observing how it is spoken of 
as an integral part of Israel (1 Kings viiL 
65), look for Hamath much further south, in 
the neighbourhood of Beth-rehob (see ch. 
xviii. 28, note). As regards the phrase 
" the entering in of Hamath," the identical 
Hebrew words occur seven times, viz.. 
Numb. xiii. 21 ; xxxiv. 8 ; Josh. xiii. 6 ; in 
this passage ; 1 Kings viii. 65 ; 2 Kings xiv. 
25 ; 2 Chron. vii. 8, and are variously 
rendered in the A.V. ; "as men come to Ha- 
math;" "unto the entrance of Hamath;" 
"the entering into Hamath ;" "the entering 
in of Hamath" (three times); and "the 
entering of Hamath." The exact meaning of 
the phrase seems to be " the approach to 
Hamath," some particular spot in the valley 
from whence the direct road to Hamath be- 
gins ; very much like the railway term for 
certain stations which are the nearest to, 
though at some little distance from, tha 
place from which they are named, as, e. g. 
Shapwick Road, Mildenhall Road, jce. Tht 



38 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



[OH. m. 1—6 



latter words of the verse describe the terri- 
tory of the Hivites, which reached from 
Mount Baal-hermon in the Lebanon range as 
far as the point where the road leads to 
Hamath. 

Ver. 5. — The Canaanites, &c. The same 
enumeration of the tribes of the Canaanites 
as in Exod. xxxiv. 11. 

Ver. 6. — They took their danghters, &c. 
Here is a further downward step in the dis- 
obedience of the Israelites. Intermarriage 



with the Canaanite nations had been ex- 
pressly forbidden (Exod. xxxir. 15, 16 ; Deut. 
vii. 3 ; Josh, xxiii. 12), and the reason of 
the prohibition clearly stated, and for some 
time after Joshua's death no such marriages 
appear to have been contracted. But now 
the fatal step was taken, and the predicted 
consequence immediately ensued : " they 
served their gods ; . . . they forgat the Lord 
their God, and served the Baalim and the 
Asheroth. 



HOMILETIOa 

Vers. 1 — G. — Ungodly marriages. The distinctive lesson of tlifs seciion seems to 
be the fatal influence of an ungodly marriage. And this lesson ia one of such daily 
importance to Christians in every station in life, that we shall do well to concentrate 
our attention upon it. On entering upon the history of that troublous and calamitous 
time for the tribes of Israel which intervened between the triumphant governments 
of Moses and Joshua and the glorious reigns of David and Solomon, — the time of 
the Judges, — we find it initiated by the intermarriage of the Israelites with the idol- 
atrous Canaanites. No sooner was that shameful alliance contracted than the national 
apostasy followed instantly. " They forgat the Lord their God, and served Baalim 
and Ashtaroth." And the connection between this religious apostasy and the first 
servitude by which they lost their national independence was no less close. " The 
children of Israel served Chushan-rishathaim." If then we read Scripture with a 
view to our own admonition, our attention must be arrested by this striking example 
of the danger of ungodly unions. And the example does not stand alone. The 
marriage of Esau with the daughters of Heth, in connection with the loss of liis 
birthright and his blessing ; the degradation and death of Samson in spite of his 
splendid gifts and powers ; the tarnished fame of Solomon's old age, and the break-up 
of his kingdom after his death ; the dynastic ruin and destruction of Ahab and all Jiis 
house from his marriage with Jezebel, — these and many other examples in Holy 
Scripture convey a solemn warning against the peril of ungodly marriages. And it 
must be so in the nature of things. The marriage union is so close and intimate, it 
gives the opportunity for such constant influence, it makes continual resistance to that 
influence so irksome and tedious, it gives such advantage to the working of influence 
through the afEections, that no man with a due regard for his own soul's salvation 
would expose himself to such peril. Moreover, the true notion of the partnership of 
marriage is a fellowship in heart, in thought, in afl^ection, in interest ; an identity of 
aim and purpose in life, each helping the other, each contributing a portion to the 
common aim ; a joint action in all that relates to God and man ; united counsels in 
fulfilling the various duties of the home, of the human society, of the Church of God. 
How could the Israelite, seeking the glory of Jeliovali, wrapped up in the tiiuniphs 
of his own favoured race and pure creed, and hating the detestable abominalions of 
heathenism, so insulting to God, and so injurious to man, have such fellowship with 
the daughter of an Amorite or Canaanite ? And how can any true servant of the Lord 
Jesus Christ have such fellowsliip with one whose heart is wholly given up to the 
world, and has no concern for the kingdom of heaven. " Marriage is not to be taken 
in hand unadvisedly, lightly, or wantonly by any Christian man or woman, but 
reverently, discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God." And it is the 
object of these remarks to induce young men and young women, in deciding upon 
marriage, to take into consideration the probable influence of their partner upon their 
moral and religions life, and the aid or the hindrance they are likely to have in the 
fulfilment of their Christian duties. The life-long loss of domestic happiness, the 
blighting of affections, and a heavy crop of trouble and vexation, the sure fruit of 
an ill-assorted union, is a heavy price to pay for the momentary gratification of ■ 
mere fancy ; but the permanent loss of moral tone, and forfeiture of one's place in 
the kingdom of God, is aa unspeakably heavier one. 



CH. lu. 1—6.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 29 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — The proving of Israel. The general lesson of the Book of Judges is 

here repeated. There is shown to have been a Divine providence prevailing through 
and above the defections of Israel. God uses the consequences of their neglect as 
a means of grace. The nations that had not been rooted out became in turn their 
tempters and their tyrants ; and thus they outlive their minority, and are prepared 
for the great place'they have to take in the history of the kingdom of God. 

I. It was a result op parental neglect. The fathers had left much of their 
task undone. A determined attitude on their part, and vigorous measures, would 
have rid the land of the nuisance. One generation may do much good or evil to iti 
successors. We never reap all the results of our own misdoing ; a great portion is 
left for the children of after generations. The neglect of the laws of health, of the 
canons of a moral life, of educational institutions, social and political progress, may 
entail grievous disadvantage upon those who come after us ; as much that comes in 
this way, comes in this way alone, and cannot be produced suddenly. And so it is 
with the growth of theological truth, and the habits and usages of the spiritual life. 

II. But the children too were to blame. The oracle of God at Shiloh could 
have been consulted still. God's will could easily have been ascertained. Thorough 
and absolute trust in Jehovah, and devotion to his service, would have rid them of their 
enemies. They vf ere therefore the children of their fathers in this also, viz., that they 
were not wholly given to God's service and the desire after righteousness. How much 
of human guilt consists in mere letting alone, or in supinely submitting to evils as if 
they were inevitable or incurable I 

III. It was an instance of evil divinely utilised. A probation. To call forth 
the courage and faith of the new generation. To prevent them accepting the situation 
as a final one, or calmly submitting to and acquiescing in the wicked customs and 
idolatries of their neighbours. Some natures find the way of transgression harder than 
others. They are finer, more susceptible, have more deeply-set longings after good- 
ness. They feel the inherent contradictions of evil more acutely ; its penalties press 
more heavily upon them. This is not an injustice on the part of their Maker ; it is 
a mark of his goodness and mercy. He would have them fenced in by the sanctions 
of righteousness ; driven back into his fold. He has meant them for a better life. 
So it was with his elect people then. They and their heathen neighbours were upon 
a different footing. It was the destiny of Israel not to be let alone. A later experi- 
ence in order to the comprehension of an earlier experience. One of the most valuable 
uses of experience — to throw light backward. It reveals the true value of an inherit- 
ance, and renders precious things more precious. Otherwise the younger Israelites 
who entered into the conquests of the first warriors would not have known the severity 
of their toils, or the mighty hand of God which wrought their deliverance. There 
are some lessons every man must learn for himself. A true appreciation of God's 
saving grace is a personal and, for the most part, an incommunicable thing. " To 
teach them war" i. e. to inure them to it as a necessary discipline, and as the pre- 
liminary work that had to be done ere the kingdom of God could be brought in ; and, 
as above, to show them how much spiritual privileges cost, and how diflScultand yet 
how honourable it was to defend and secure them. Still it was — 

IV. An instance of a provisional allowance of comparative imiiobalitt. The 
world was not ripe for the morality of Jesus. The self-contradiction of a continual 
state of warfare was to be their schoolmaster to bring them to Christ. The state of 
peace is not of itself more moral than that of war. It is " the things that make for 
peace," the spirit of brotherhood and Christian charity, that are the aim of the righteous 
mind. The world must first be righteous ere it can be peaceful, — M. 

Vers. 6 — 7. — The forbidden covenant. When Israel entered the land it was ont:.e 
express condition that no terms of marriage or intercommunion should be entered 
into with the aboriginal tribes of Canaan (Deut. vii. 1 — 3). This seems either to have 
been forgotten or deliberately ignored. I'lie consequences predicted came to pass, 
and the hearts of the people were led away from the worship of the true God. 

L Thb limits of communion between tbs children of God and the woun 



BO 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[OH. III. 1 — 6 



The law of extermination prescribed to Israel made the path of duty very clear. H 
was God's purpose to disentangle the national and individual life of his people from 
the perversions, corruptions, and self-contradictions of idolatrous worship. He 
desired to separate tliem entirely to himself. Severe and uncharitable as this rule 
might at first appear, it was true mercy to the world as yet unborn, and to the future 
that was to be redeemed to God. Some comforts and conveniences, a few really 
valuable fruits of pseudo-civilisation and the contact with the currents of thought 
and life in the great world of men, had to be sacrificed, but the advantage was more 
than worth them all. The same problem presents itself to-day to the Christian. 
How far is it allowable for the life of a child of God and a child of this world to 
intermingle? What relations of this life are to be kept apart from the world, and 
to subsist only between Christians, and what relations may be shared with the world ? 
The letter of the ancient prescript is of course obsolete, but the spirit must still be 
binding. Evidently, however, the rehitions of what are strictly religious communions 
can only be sustained between true Christians. And many of the higher relations of 
our natural life, as, for instance, marriage, can onlj'be worthily sustained by Christians. 
The spirit of the old law was, immediately, severe, but, ultimately and more largely, 
merciful. So ought the disposition of the Christian to be. Of course the extent and 
direction in which we observe this law of heavenly prudence must be left to every 
man's conscience in the sight of God. It ought to be remembered that often when it 
seems to act against others it is really for their good. 

II. How INTIMATE ASSOCIATION WITH THE WOELD AFFECTS THE TONE AND QUALITY 

OF THE SPIRITUAL LIFE. 1. Habit blunts the conscience to unlawful customs. 2. 
Personal attachments and friendships lend attraction to social and religious observ- 
ances which are really unrighteous. 3. The relations of civil life create entanglement 
and perplexity. 4. The peculiar, intimate, and profound relations of marringe add to 
the force of all influences that afEect the religious nature and the spiritual life. — M. 



EXPOSITION. 



This section introduces ns into the actual 
narrative of the Book of Judges, the prefatory 
matter being now concluiled. The whole 
book proceeds on the same model as this 
section does. The apostasy of Israel ; their 
servitude under the oppressor sent to chastise 
them ; their cry of distress and penitence ; 
their deliverance by the judge raised up to 
save them ; the rest which follows their 
deliverance. There is infinite variety in the 
details of the successive narratives, but they 
are all formed on the same pVin. 

Ver. 7. — The groves. The Askerolh, here 
and elsewhere (ch. vi. 26, 26 ; Deut. xvi 
21, &tO wrongly rendered groves, were large 
wooden images or pillarf in honour of Ash- 
toreth, and so are properly coupled with 
Baalim. This verse is in fact identical in 
meaning with ch. ii. 13, of which it is a repe- 
tition (see note to ch. ii. 13, and ch. viii. 23). 

Ver. 8. — Chushan-rishathaim, i. «., as 
usually explained, Chushan the victorious, 
or the wicked. His name, Chushan, or 
Cushan, points to Gush, the father of Nim- 
rod (Gun. x. 6—8), and the seat of liis king- 
dom in Aram-naharaim, or Mesopotamia, 
•^ees with Nimrod's kingdom in " Babel 



. . . in the land of Shinar" {'^nd. ver. 10)i 
An earlier invasion of Palestine by con- 
querors from Mesopotamia is mentioned Gen. 
xiv. 2, where Amraphel, king of Shinar, is 
one of the five kings who invaded Sodom. 
Bela, son of Beor, king of Edom, seems by 
his name to have been clearly from Mesopo- 
tamia, as Balaam the son of Beor was (Numb, 
xxii. 5 ; xxiii. 7) ; and in the time of Job we 
read of bands of Chaldeans looting in the 
land of Uz (Job i. 17). Chushan, as the 
name of a people, is coupled with Midian in 
Hab iii. 7 ; but we have no accounts of 
the state of Mesopotamia at the time of 
Chushan-rishathaim. 

Ver. 9. — ^A deliverer. Hebrew, Saviour, as 
ver. 15 (see Neh. ix. 27). Othniel, &c. 
Mentioned ch. i. 13; Josh. xv. 17, and 1 
Chron. iv. 13, where he is placed under "the 
sons of Kenaz," and seems to be the father 
of Hathath and Meonothai. According to 
Judith vi. 15, he had a descendant, Ghdbris, 
living in the time of Holofernes. The He- 
brew, though gi'ammatically it favours the 
view that Othniel was the brother of Caleb, 
does not absolutely exclude the rendering 
that Kenaz was his brother, and so Othniel 
his nephew. Compare Jer. xxxii. 7, where 
the words " thine uncle " apply to Shallum, 
not to Hanameel, as is clear from ver. 8i 



BH. III. 7 — 11.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



SI 



A.nd as the chrnnology seems to make it 
impossible that Othniel should be Caleb's 
brother, since Caleb was eighty-five years 
old at the time of Othniel's marriage, and 
Othniel therefore could not be less than fifty- 
five, an improbable age for his marriage ; 
and since, again, Othniel could not well 
have been less than eighty at Joshua's dpath, 
which, allowing only ten years for the elders, 
and reckoning the eight years for Chushnn's 
dominion, would make him ninety-eight 
when he was raised up to deliver Israel, it 
b a lesser difSculty to take Othniel as the 
nephew of Caleb, by understanding the words, 
Caleb's ycnmger brotTier, to apply to Kenaz. 
But perhaps the least objectionable escape 
from the difficulty is to take the phrase in its 
most natural grammatical sense, but to un- 
derstand the word brother in its wider and 
very common sense of kinsman or fellow- 
tribesmam. They were both sons of Kenaz, 
or Eenizzitea Caleb was the head of the 



tribe, and Othniel was next to him in tribal 
dignity, and his junior in age, but probably 
succeeded to the chieftainship on Caleb't 
death. This would leave the exact relation- 
ship between Caleb and Othniel uncertain. 

Ver. 10. — And the Spirit, &o. This mirkg 
Othniel as one of the extraordinary Shoplie- 
tim, or judges. Divinely commissioned to 
save Israel (see ch. vi. 34 ; zi 29 ; ziii. 2S ; 
xiv. 6, 19). 

Ver. 11. — ^And Othniel, &c. The arrange- 
ment of this verse suggests that Othniel 
lived through the whole forty years of rest, 
but this is highly improbable. The first 
part of the verse only belongs to the pre- 
ceding section, which it closes quite natur- 
ally. The result of Othniel's victories was 
a rest of forty years (cf. ver. 30 ; v. 31 ; 
viii. 28, &c,). The latter half of the verse — 
And Othniel the son of Kenaz died — begins 
a new section, and is introductory to the first 
i apostasy, which followed after bis death. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 7 — 11. — God's scourge. In a remarkable passage (Deut. xzxii. 8) Moses 
tells us that when the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, he set 
the bounds of the peop'e according to the number of the children of Israel. In like 
manner the sacred history teaches us how the movemeiits of the nations and the 
restless invasions and conquests of heathen kings and warriors had a special relation 
to the chosen race. They indeed did not mean so. They were actuated merely by 
ambition, by the lust of conquest, by the appetite for plunder and dominion. But 
in the wonderful providence of God they were made instruments for chastening and 
correcting, or for saving and delivering, his people, as the case might be. Here we 
find the unsettled state of the Mesopotamian tribes, which led them beyond the 
borders of their own land, bringing them to P.i'estine at the very time when the 
Israelites in the wantonness of their fickle hearts had fallen away from the service 
of the living and true God to that of the idols of Canaan. There they were living 
at ease, having partly extirpated the Ganaanites, and partly entered into league and 
amity with them. Seduced by their vices, captivated by their sensuous religion, they 
had forgotten all the works of God, and no longer trembled at his word, and did not 
feel their need of his favour. Yet a little while and their apostasy would have 
been complete, and the very end of their election would have failed. But this was not 
to be. So Chushan-rishathaim, who had perhaps never heard of their names, and knew 
nothing of their religion or of their apostasy, mustered his hosts, marched his army, 
and at the critical moment fell like a rod upon the peccant people. We are left to 
imagine the misery of those eight years of servitude under a heathen tyrant : the 
injuries and indignities, the terror and unrest, the grinding servitude, the hard bondage, 
the bitterness of soul, the wasting and oppression of spirit. The crops for which 
they toiled eaten by another; their goodly houses tenanted by their foes, and tliem- 
■elves turned into the street; their wives and daughters bondwomen, and their sons 
made slaves; their national glory turned to shame, their cherished hopes withered 
into despair. And we are left to imagine how that misery bent the iron sinew of their 
neck, and brought them back to God. No doubt their self-confidence was broken 
down. Their illusive dreams of pleasure had ended in an awakening to their self- 
inflicted pain ; sin appeared in its true colours as an enemy and betrayer; the false 
gods were found to be no helpers. Why not turn to God ? He had been very good 
to them. Why had they ever forsaken him? He and he nlone could save them, as he 
liad saved their fathers from the hands of Pharaoh. But would he ? They wou J 
tiy. They would turn to him in penitence and prayer ; they would confess theii 



•2 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. in. 7—11. 

•ins ; they would humble themselves in his sight ; they would call upon his blessed 
name; they would plead his covenant, his promises, the glory of his own great 
name. And they did so. Nor did they call in vain. Their cry of distress entered 
into the ears of the Lord of hosts. His wrath turned to pity ; he who chastened 
when they sinned, now comforted when they prayed. He had sent a scourge ; he 
now sends a deliverer. Chushan was invincible wlien his mission was to strike ; but 
when his mission was ended his arm fell broken at his side. Otbniel the deliverer 
went forth in the might of God's Spirit, and Chushan's power was gone. The waters 
of the Euphrates which had overflowed their banks were dried up again, and the land 
of Israel had rest for forty years. And so has it ever been. The obscurer movements 
of Philistines, and Ammonites, and Midianites, as well as the grand historic drama of 
Assyria, and Egypt, and Babylon, and Persia, and Greece, and Rome, have alwayi 
had one special design in the correction or deliverance of God's people. And though 
we have no inspired interpreter to expound to us the later movements of the peop'es, 
yet may we be sure that the great events of modem history have been appointed to 
work out the purposes of God with reference to his Church, either for correction or 
deliverance, and that the rise and fall of empires, the ambition of kings and states- 
men, the conquests of warriors, and the revolutions of peoples, will in the end be 
found to have been overruled for the glory of God, and for the extension of the 
kingdom of Jesus our Lord. And in this confidence the Church may rest and be at 
ease in her integrity, while she is careful not to provoke God's anger by turning 
•side from his truth, or growing weary of his blessed service. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 8. — Idolatry and its Nemesis. The effects of this communion with idolatrous 
peoples speedily appear. It was no accident that Israel became the subject of a 
heathen power, nor are we to suppose it an arbitrary exercise of the right of Divine 
providence. 

I. As FAITH BTEBNGTHENS, SUPERSTITION DESTB0T8, MORAL POWER. In all these 

punishments the external and physical disadvantage appears to be the first perceived. 
But the real loss was sustained beforehand, when faith in the one God was lost. The 
whole moral life which this dogma encouraged and sustained was thereby under- 
mined. Monotheism was the foundation of the moral life, correcting and purifying 
it ; idolatry pandered to the worst passions, and chained the spirit of man to the 
outward and sensuous. 

II. Moral ENTHnsiASM is the essence and inspiration op heroism and the rul- 
ing QUALITIES. The reverence of Israel in the worship of Jehovah was called forth 
towards qualities that were truly noble and admirable. The sustaining force of an 
Israelite's piety was absolutely righteous and super-sensuous ; and it had appeared 
superior to all that the arm of flesh could bring against it. The Israelite was taught, 
therefore, to despise the material, the outward, and the merely human. His faith, 
therefore, became heroic. And as the influence of the Divine Being repressed the 
passions and developed ^he spiritual power, it enabled him to restrain himself, to 
pursue after distant and vast aims ; and, in making him heedless of the attractions 
of sense and penalties which only affected the outward man, it made him influential 
over others. Hence the religion of Israel marked it out for political superiority and 
power. 

III. The " SERVICE " that ib wasted on worthless objects is avenged bt k 
" SERVICE " THAT IS SEVERE AND INVOLUNTARY. This was the result of a special ap- 
pointment, and also of a Divine law. The people that had become effeminate by 
idolatrous indulgence were an easy prey to any military and ambitious power; and' 
so that which had been a weak yielding, or a choice, became binding and imperative. 
National liberty was lost ; the purest and noblest traits of national character were 
repressed. What a special political power did in this instance evil habit itself may do ; 
•nd there are other influences whose yoke waits upon the loss of moral power. — M. 

Vers. 9, 10. — True deliverance must ever come from God. It is a curious fact in 
the histoiy of Israel that it is never until they have acknowledged Ood as the soarM 



OH. in. 7—11.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 8S 

of salvation that they achieve any permanent Buccess. It is as if this people were to 
learn that only by supernatural means is it ever to fulfil its destiny. 

I. He inspires true heroism. Of Othniel we. have already heard; he stands as 
a representative of early Israelitish chivalry. But on the occasion on which he dis- 
tinguished himself formerly, the inspiration was hardly so lofty as to mark him out 
as especially the servant of God. He is, however, on the threshold of the great life 
of self-denial and generous self-sacrifice which characterised the judge of Israel. 
He is a vessel chosen of God for better service. Of the particular influences which 
marked him out for the high office to which he was called we are not informed. All 
that we know is, that the Spirit of the Lord came upon him. That he was well 
qualified otherwise for warlike exploits we know ; but the merely human traits of 
character which he has displayed are nothing without this distinctive inspiration. 
God finds the man for the hour. 

II. The moral authority is Divinely created. Israel gravitates towards 
Othniel as its moral centre. By a kind of moral necessity he becomes its judge, and 
there is no one to dispute his ascendancy. The prestige which he gains in his 
magistracy is not injured by military failures. We are to look upon all this as 
proof that God was with him, preserving and increasing his reputation, and develop- 
ing the powers which he possessed. When it is said (ch. ii. 18), " And when the 
Lord raised them up judges, then the Lord was with the judge, and delivered them 
out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge," we are invited to behold 
no series of merely human successes, but that which is directly due to his presence 
and help. And so with all whom he inspires for special service ; he will make 
their moral influence his care, sustain their strength and secure uninterrupted suc- 
cess if they put their trust in him. — M. 

Natural advantages and endowments perfected and crowned by consecration. I. 
The best channel for Othniel's abilities was that indicated by thb Divine 

GALL. 

II. In obedience of God's Spirit he secured the most commandinq influence. 

III. As servant of Jehovah he attained endurino renown. — M. 

Vers. 10, 11. — The secret of individual and national greatness. It was as a judge 
of Israel that Othniel first attained influence. This necessitated a righteous life and 
• consistent character. In this way he obtained command over his people, and was 
able to transfer their attachment and respect to the battle-field. So it was, as Israel 
learned to obey the servant of Jehovah in civil aifairs, and learned to_ respect the 
law of righteousness, that it was able to face its enemies with an irresistible front 
It is righteousness that exalteth a nation and a man. 

I. To maintain and advance a righteous cause we must begin at home. 

II. The victory oveb ohb enemies consists more than half in the victory oveb 
ourselves. 

III. Habitual EEOTiruDa ikd a good oonscibnck prep are for sudden and abiding 

•DCOSBB. — ^M. 

Ver. 11. —"And the land had rest"— the true peace. L It m A reward of 

consecrated effort and self-denial. 

II. A preparation for higher conceptions and realisations of EIGHTEOUSNESa 

III. A sabbath of CONSECRATED TIME AND SERVICE TO THB HIGHEST. — M. 

Vers. 9, 10.— Great men. The Book of Judges brings before us the heroic age of 
IsraeL The multitude of the people are in a condition of moral and political degra- 
dation, but great men appear from time to time whose individual heroism secures the 
salvation of their nation. Othniel, the first of the judges, may serve as a type of 
the rest. The characters and mission of these men may throw some light upon 
the function of great men in the economy of Providence. 

I. Great men owe their greatness to God. Many of the judges sprang from 
obscure families ; they were not hereditary rulers, but men sent of God with in- 
dividual vocations. Othniel belonged to the honourable family of Caleb, and shared 

nmeu. o 



84 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



[OH. in. 7 — It 



in the fame of that family, perhaps, partly in virtue of hereditary qualities. But 
even he is described as owing liis greatness to God. 1. Great men are sent by God. 
When the people " cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised up a deliverer." There are 
men who are bom heroes — men whose great qualities are owing to their nature, not 
to their culture or their conduct. He who believes in providence will recognise that 
such men are "raised up" by God. 2. Great men derive their highest powers 
directly ixom God. "The Spirit of the Lord came upon Othniel." The military 
and political ability of Othniel as warrior and judge are ascribed to a Divine inspira- 
tion. All truly great men are inspired by God. Not only are they originally formed 
and sent by God, but they owe their powers to the constant influence of God within 
them. Bad men of genius receive their genius from God, and are therefore guilty of 
prostituting the noblest Divine gift to evil purposes. Such men attain to no more 
than an earthly greatness. In the sight of God their low aims destroy the character 
of heroism which their abilities rendered possib'e. On the other hand, all Christians 
may attain to a measure of greatness in proportion as they receive the Spirit of God; 
yet we must distinguish between the graces of the Spirit, which are for all Christians, 
and the gifts of the Spirit, which are special, and bestowed on individual men. 

II. Great men have a mission to theie fellow-men. 1. Great men are intrusted 
with great talents for the benefit of others. To devote these to selfish ends of ambi- 
tion or pleasure is a mark of gross unfaithfulness. We are members one of another; 
and that member which has the highest capacities will produce the largest amount 
of harm if it refuses to perform its functions in promoting the welfare of the whole 
body. 2. Great men are needed hy the world. The heroic age has passed, and there 
is now more power in the general thought and life of men than in primitive times. 
The work of individual men has often been overrated when compared with the deep, 
silent strength of public opinion, and the slow, steady movement of national progress. 
Yet it is real and large. Christianity would have lived if Paul had never been con- 
verted ; the Reformation would have come without Luther. But these movements 
would have taken a different form, and probably would have made much slower 
progress without the help of their leading spirits. Great inventors, legislators, 
reformers have left a distinct individual stamp on the history of our race. Chris- 
tianity is not a product of the spirit of its age ; it owes its origin to the life of the 
greatest of men. 

III. The mission of great men varies acooeding to the needs of their age. 
In the heroic age of Israel the great men are warriors who deliver the people from 
the yoke of invaders ; later they appear as kings who lay the foundations of constitu- 
tional government, e. g. David and Solomon ; later as prophets, &c. Perhaps the 
gifts for all varieties of excellence exist in every ago, but a natural selection brings to 
light only those which are suitable for each particular age. But possibly there is a 
providential economy which shapes the great man according to the needs of his age. 
In either case it is clear that there is a breadth and variety of Divine inspiration, so 
that we cannot limit it to any one form of manifestation, nor deny that it may be 
found in some novel and startling shape as the requirements of the world assume new 
features. — ^A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. IS. — The children of Ammon. The 
technical name of the Animonito people (see 
Gen. xix. 88 ; Deut. ii. 19, 37 ; Judges x. 
6, 11, 17, &c.). Sometimes, however, they 
are called Amman, or Ammonites (see Deut. 
xxiii. 3 ; 1 Sam. xi. 11, &o.). Anialek, or the 
AmMehites, were the hereditary enemies of 
Israel (see Exod. xvii. 8 — 16 ; Judges v. 14 ; 
vi. 3, 33 ; vii. 12 ; 1 Sam. xv. 2, &c.). The 
Amalekites appear, from Gen. xxxvi. 12, to 
have been a branch of the Edomites, and the 
latest mention of them in the Bible finds » 



remnant of them in the neighbourhood of 
Mount Seir in the days of Hezekiah (1 
Cluon. iv. 41 — 43). The city of palm trees, 
i. e. Jericho, asDeut. xxxiv. 3 ; Judges i. 16. 
Jeric'.io was the first city in Canaan which any 
one crossing the fords of the Jordan would- 
covie to (see Josh. il. 1 ; vi. 1, &c.). Though 
no longer a fenced city, it was important from 
WiO ferl ility of the plain, and from its com- 
manding the fords. 

Ver. 15. — Left-handed. It was a pecu- 
liarily of the warriors of the tribe of Beuiamia 



en. III. 12—31.] 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



U 



to be left-handed (see ch. xx. 16; 1 Chron. 
xii. 2). A left-handed man wearing no sword 
or dagger on his left side, and using his right 
hand for other purposes, would naturally 
throw a man off his guard. Thus Joab took 
Amasa by the beard with his right hand to 
kiss him, and then smote him with the 
sword in his left hand (2 Sam. xx. 10). A 
deliverer. Hebrew, a saviour (ver. 9). A 
present, i. e. their tribute. 

Ver. 19. — The quarries. It is uncertain 
whether this is the meaning of the Hebrew 
word. Its common meaning is images, as 
Deut. vii. 25, and elsewhere. 

Ver. 20. — For himself alone. It seems to 
have been Eglon's habit to sit quite alone 
in this summer parlour for coolness sake, his 
attendants waiting in the adjoining ante- 
chamber. On this occasion he appears to 
have dismissed them from the antechamber, 
for greater privacy, while Ehud spake to 
him. 

Ver. 22.— The haft, &c. Ehud, feeling 
the necessity of killing Eglon at one blow, 
plunged the dagger into his body with such 
force that the handle went in with the blade, 
and he was unable to draw it out. Leaving 
it, therefore, buried in his fat, he went out 
at once into the parshedon, or antechamber, 
for so it is best to render the last words of 
the verse, and thence into the misederon, the 
outer porch, having first looked the door of 
the summer chamber. The words parshedon 
animisederon occur only here, and the former 
is very variously rendered. 

Ver. 24. — Covereth his feet, i. e. is asleep 
(see 1 Sam. xxiv. 3). The servants, finding 
the door locked, and all quiet within, con- 



cluded that he was taking his lieaia in th« 
heat of the day. 

Ver. 26. — The quarries. See above, ver. 
19. Seirath, or rather has-seirah, is not 
known as the name of a place. It seems to 
mean the roicgh or woody district, the forest 
in the hill country of Ephralm, where there 
was good shelter to hide in. 

Ver. 27. — He blew a trumpet. Like 
Alfred in the marshes of Somerset, he gather- 
ed a host around him in the shelter of the 
forest , and then, full of faith in his Divine 
mission, '' strong in the Lord, and in the 
power of his might," dashed down boldly 
into the plain, and, seizing the fords, cut 
off all communication between the Moabites 
at Jericho and their countrymen east of the 
Jordan. They could neither escape into 
Moab nor get help from Moab. Thrown 
into confusion by the death of their king 
and the suddenness of the attack, the Moab- 
ites fell to the number of 10,000 men ; and 
so ended the second servitude, to be followed 
by a rest (if the numeral in the text is 
sound) of eighty years. 

Ver. 31.— Of the Philistines. This is an 
isolated movement of the Philistines, alluded 
to in ch. X. 11, but of which we have no 
further details. In ch. x. 6 we read of 
Israel worshipping the gods of the Philis- 
tines, and of an alliance between the Am- 
monites and Philistines to vex Israel ; but 
the precise connection between the events of 
the two chapters, or the exact time when 
either occurred, cannot be determined with 
certainty. Nothing more is known of Sham- 
gar, except the mention of him in Deborah's 
song (ch. V. 6). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 12 — SI.— Miscellaneous Thoughts. Sin and punishment, repentance and 
ready mercy, prayer and answer to prayer, and tlie providential government of God, 
ordering all things after the counsel of his own will, are the general subjects which 
the course of the narrative still sets before us. But other questions of considerable 
difficulty arise from the history of Ehud to which we shall do well to direct our 
attention. To avoid repetition the analogous case of Jael recorded in ch. iv. may 
be considered at the same time. 

I. Moral problems. Ehud and Jael are both represented to us as signal 
deliverers raised up by God to save Israel from his oppressors. Ehud holds a oon- 
■piouous place among the judges, and Jael is declared in the song of Deborah to be 
" blessed among women." But if we try this hero and this heroine by the standard 
of morality set up by Christianity and by modern Christian civilisation, we find that 
they were both guilty of acts of assassination coupled with deceit and treachery. 
Ehud deceived Eglon into his confidence by pretending to have a message to deliver 
to him from God, and then stabbed him ; and Jael enticed Sisera into her tent with 
the offer of hospitality that she might murder him in his sleep. Some commentators 
on this history have justified both these actions on the dangerous ground that they 
were done by God's special command, and that what would in themselves have been 
crimes became virtues under the dispensing power of God's sovereign will. But such 
i«n explanation is neither warranted by Scripture nor satisfactory in itself. The true 
explanation is to be found in deeper views of God's providential goyemiaent of th« 

d2 



86 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oH. ni. 12—81. 

world, by which man'B free will is reconciled with the sovereignty of God. It is mani« 
fest that, given the existence of evil in the world, and given the truth that the Most 
High doeth according to his will in the army of heaven and among the inhabitants of 
the earth, it must be that bad actions as well as good ones subserve and bring about 
the purposes of God. That Jacob's deceit obtained his father's blessing, or that the 
malice of the Jews brought about the great sacrifice of the death of Christ, are no 
proofs that God approves either deceit or malice, but are merely instances how man'a 
free-will, whether choosing good or evil, brings about the will of God — a truth 
which, however unfathomable to our reason, we can see to be necessary to the exist- 
ence of the government of the world. This view, too, while it does not disturb our 
trust in the perfect righteousness of God, confirms our trust in the absolute sovereignty 
of his power, it leaves to the righteous a sense of perfect security amidst the 
perplexmg spectacles of wrong and wickedness triumphing for a time. 

II. Good and evil in the same human will. But are we then to set down 
Ehud and Jael among the wicked of the earth ? By no means. But we must turn 
to another difiicult problem, the co-existence of good and evil in the same human 
will. It is a simple fact, borne witness to by profane as well as sacred history, that 
in individuals the main bent of whose character is towards good, a great amount of 
evil may remain, when such evil is countenanced by the public opinion of their day, 
and by the practice of their contemporaries. Just as even wise men retain many 
gross popular errors in science till they are refuted and exploded by the light of new 
discoveries, so even good men remain unconsciously under the dominion of special 
•vils till some new light has shined upon them and exposed their real nature. The 
cruelty of our penal laws down to the present century, the existence of the slave- 
trade and of slavery within our own memory, persecution unto cruel deaths for 
religious opinions, the severities of arbitrary governments till exploded ir the light 
of freedom, are familiar examples how things evil in themselves may be approved by 
good and humane men when they are sanctioned by prevalent custom and by public 
opinion. And the observation of these and numerous analogous facts teaches us the 
folly as well as the injustice of judging men of one age by the standard of another. 
Turning then to Ehud and Jael, we know that in their days human life was not more 
valued than it is in Afghanistan to the present hour. We know that the life of an 
enemy was looked upon as a lawful and desirable prey to be seized whenever possible. 
We know that, in times when the weak have no protection from the strong by the 
action of law, the only weapon of defence that remains to them, that of cunning 
and deceit, becomes sharpened by constant use, and is habitually worn at their side. 
Guile in communities where there is no justice is not the exception but the rule, and 
feigned blandishments have a tendency to increase the fierceness which they were 
intended to conceal, when the time for concealment is past. When, therefore, Ehud 
and Jael in their respective times saw the people of God whom they loved trampled 
underfoot by cruel tyrants and oppressors ; when they saw the glory of God in whom 
they believed profaned by the triumphs of idolatry ; when they heard the cries and 
groans of those who were reduced to bondage and were plundered of their lands ; 
when indignation burnt in their hearts, and the blush of shame rose to their cheek, 
for the indignities which the people suffered at heathen hands — can we wonder that 
their generous hearts planned vengeance and deliverance, and that they accomplished 
their purpose by such weapons as came to hand. Violence was no crime, deceit was 
no sin in their eyes. They had not, it is true, the grace to wait in jatieiit faith, and 
to say, " How lojig, Lord ? " but they had the fervent zeal and the heroic courage 
to take their lives in their hands and risk it freely for their country and their God. 
They had the noble spirit of self-sacrifice, seeking nothing for themselves, ready to 
give all they had on the altar of religion and patriotism. They had the faith in God 
which marks the saint, and the disdain of danger which marks the hero. And so he 
who in his compassionate estimate of human conduct accepts a man according to 
what he hath and not according to what he hath not, accepted their virtues and 
covered their sin, even as we hope he will accept us when we act up to the light 
given to us, even though our best deeds are mixed up with sin, and our holiest worki 
tall immeasurably short of the purity and holiness of God. * 

lU. The CONCLUSION which wb thus arbive at is, that Gop'b fubfosb or sbuteR' 



DB. m. 12—81.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 3? 

AHCB TO HIS Church may be accomplished by bad men as well as by good, and 
by bad as well as good actions ; that the degree in which good men fall short of th« 
glory of God varies widely according to their opportunities ; and that God graciously 
accepts the thoughts and intents of loving and faithful hearts in spite of sin com- 
mitted in ignorance of his will, dealing with men's souls through the infinite merits 
of the death of his dear Son, and with respect to the full satisfaction of his atoning 
blood — ^to whom be glory and praise for ever and ever 1 We learn also to take a 
juster view of the great figures which are set before us in Holy Scripture. They are 
not ideal figures or perfect characters. They are faithful delineations of the real 
lives of men and women who lived two or three thousand years ago ; who stood up 
head and shoulders above their contemporaries in certain great gifts and qualities, 
but who necessarily partook of the character of the age they lived in , While we try 
to emulate their faith, we must judge of their actions by the light o;£ the perfect law 
of God. 

HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTHORS. 

Vera. 12 — 14. — Continued and repeated offence entails more signal punishment. 
Jehovah is spoken of here as if he had become the God of heathen nations. He 
takes the side of the enemies of Israel, and strengthens them for the subjugation of 
his own people. 

L The instrument of chastisement ib specially prepared by God. 

II. A VISIBLE sign of disgrace existed in the conquest of Jebioho. 

III. The period of oppression was more than doubled. — M. 

Vers. 15—26. — Ehud. There is no grandeur of character about Ehud, nor can he 
boast of an illustrious descent ; yet he is sufBcient for the purpose of delivering 
Israel. The defectiveness of the instrument makes the Divine agent the more con- 
spicuous. We see here : — 

I. God'b use of obscure agents and instrumentalities. He was of the less 
important tribe ; personally obscure ; physically defective. So God uses the weak 
things of this world to confound the mighty, &o., that the praise may be given to the 
true source of power and wisdom. On the present occasion the choice was sm- 
gularly felicitous, as it emphasised both subjection and deliverance as Divine. The 
left-handedness of Ehud also becomes curiously and instructively prominent. His 
very defect proved his fitness for the special task he had to accomplish. Is his 
power but a one-sided one, and hardly available for regular service ? If he be in 
earnest an opportunity will be given for its effective use. It is exacted by God s 
servants that they do what they can ; the rest is to be left with himself. 

II. Defective powers and character restricted to theie proper sphere. We 
can see from the history that the moral character of Ehud is not high. His success, 
humanly speaking, depended on duplicity, boldness, sleight of hand. He has 
decision enough to improve upon the advantage which he has thus obtamed, and to 
weaken the enemy by a terrible blow. But there is no sign of the judicial faculty, 
nor even, of great military skill. He rendered a signal service, and then apparently 
retired into obscurity. He held no high office, or great public responsibility.— M. 

Ver. SI.— Shamgar. A long interval has elapsed. The moral efEect of Bhud'i 
feat is beginning to lessen. Another warning is required. It is given from the 
opposite side of Israel in the incursion of six hundred Philistines. These are not 
many, but they may be spies, pickets, the vanguard of great armies. If anv effect 
is to be produced upon those who are behind them it must be by a sudden and 
decisive blow. The example of Ehud is a precedent. Another hero rises to deliver 
Israel at a stroke. And by a rude and apparently ill-adapted weapon, bhamgar 

illustrates: — . , _, , . . „, 

I. The influence of example. " After him "—an Ehud inspires a Shamgar. 
II Of the great effects which may be produced by imperfect means when 
BBALOUSly and seasonably used. The slaying of the six hundred deterred perhap* 
a whole series of invasions. It lent itself easily to poetic treatment, and appealed 



«i THE BOOK OF JUDGES [oh. hi. 12— SI. 

to popular imagination. The inspiration of the deed was unmistakable. A com- 
mon man, a rude implement used by Jehovah at a set time for the deliverance of his 
people. 

in. Of the significance and value of a single great deed. We hear notliing 
of Sliamgar before or after. 1. Its greatness lay in the agent rather than the 
means. Previous preparation of character was required. 2. The moral effect was 
sudden, wide-spread, and decisive. God used it for a greater purpose than was 
inmiediately contemplated. 3. But it did not qualify for permanent ojicial useful- 
ness. It was followed up by no spiritual witness, or succession of services. It 
might be that Shamgar outlived his fame, or obscured it by unworthy life, &o. The 
constant service ought to supplement the individual exploit. — M. 

Ver. 16. — A man left-handed. The left-handed man may be regarded aa a type 
of the abnormal, the eccentric The existence and position of such people deserves 
notice. 

I. The providential goodness of God permits peculiar variations from the 
KORmal type of humanity. God does not form all men according to one exact 
pattern. There is great variety in the nature, capacity, position, and vocation of 
men. While most are more or less near to the central type, some are far removed 
from it. _ 1. Such people should be treated with delicacy and consideration. In the 
present instance the variation is too slight to be an affliction, but in more severe 
cases the sufferers are likely to be painfully conscious of their peculiarity. Christian 
courtesy will devise means of making this as little apparent as possible. 2. The 
common human likeness which beloi'gs to all men should be recognised beneath the 
few discrepancies which strike us forcibly just because they contrast with the multi- 
tudinous points of agreement. The peculiarities are suporficial. The deeper nature 
is true to the normal type of the great human family. The left-handed man has the 
same heart as the right-handed man. If we had more breadth of sympathy, more 
care for real and deep human qualities, and less regard for superficial and trivial 
points, we should recognise more genuine humanity in the most eccentric people. 
3. Peculiarities of constitution should be borne with calm faith in the wisdom and 
goodness of God. They may be severe enough to constitute a heavy cross. Yet 
they come from the hand of our Father who will not wiUingly afflict. It is well 
therefore to proceed to see how they may be turned to good account, or how the 
evil of them may be ameliorated. 

II. Direct advantages may be derived from the peculiarities of abnormal 
constitutions. Ehud is able to effect his terrible purpose the more securely through 
the surprise occasioned by his unexpected action (ver. 21). It is foolish to aim at 
eccentricity, because such an aim would result in abnormal habits without abnormal 
capacities. But where the peculiarity is natural it must be regarded as providential, 
and we should then cast about to see if it may not be turned to some advantage, so 
that the thing which appears at first as notliing but a hindrance may be found a 
source of some special aptitude. If the peculiarity be a positive affliction, it may 
enable those who suffer from it to sympathise with and help their companions in 
similar affliction. Thus the blind may have a mission to the blind. If the peculiarity 
compel an unusual manner of acting it may be the means of accomplishing some 
special but much-needed work. 

III. Peculiar disadvantages in one direction are often compensated fob bt 
peculiar advantages in ANO'i'HER. The man who is weak in the right hand, is left- 
handed, i. e. he has special strength and skill with his left hand. The blind often 
have a rare skill in music. Muscular weakness is often accompanied by intellectual 
strength, deficient health by fine spiritual powers. Therefore instead of complaining 
of the peculiarity with which he is tried it would be well if the person who suffered 
under it were to be thankful for the special advantages with which he may ha 
favoured. No peculiarity which may seem to exclude from the advantages of human 
•ociety will sever from flie love of God or from the sympathy of Christ the Good 
Physician. — A- 



01. IV. 1—22.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Y(.T. 2.— Sold them. See ch. ii. 14, nots. 
7atin king of Hazor. The exact site of 
SazorhsLS not been identified with certainty, 
but it is conjectured by Robinson, with 
great probability, to have stood on the Tell 
now called Khv/raiheh, overlooking the 
waters of Merom (now called Lake Hdleh), 
where are remains of a sepulchre, Cyclopean 
walls, and other buildings. In Josh. xi. 
1 — 14 we read of the total destruction by 
fire of Hazor, and of the slaughter of Jabin, 
the king thereof, with all the inhabitants of 
the city, and of the slaughter of aU the 
confederate kings, and the capture of their 
cities ; Hazor, however, " the head of all 
those kingdoms," being the only one which 
was " burnt with fire. It is a little sur- 
prising, therefore, to read here of another 
Jabin reigning in Hazor, with confederate 
kings under him (ch. v. 19), having, like 
his predecessor, a vast number of chariots 
(cf. ch. iv. 3, 13 with Josh. xi. 4, 9), and 
attacking Israel at the head of a great force 
(cf. ch. iv. 7, 13, 16 with Josh. xi. 4). It 
is impossible not to suspect that these are 
two accounts of the same event. If, how- 
aver, the two events are distinct, we must 
suppose that the Canaanite kingdoms had 
be-jn revived under a descendant of the 
fonncr king, that Hazor had been rebuilt, 
and that Jabin was the hereditary name of 
its king. Oentiles, or nations, or Govm, as 
Josh. xii. 23, and Gen. xiv. 1. Whether 
Goim was the proper name of a particular 
people, or denoted a collection of different 
tribes, their seat was in Galilee, called in 
Isa. ix. 1 ; Matt. iv. 15, Galilee, of the 
nations, or Gentiles, in Hebrew Goim. 

Ver. 5. — The palm tree of Deborah. The 
tree, which was probably still standing in 
the writer's time, was known as " the palm 
tree of Deborah," just as a certain oak tree 
in the forest of Hoxne, in Suffolk, was known 
for many hundred years as King Edmund's 
oak. 

Ver. 6. — Kedesh-naphtali, i.e. Kedcsh 
in the tribe of Naphtali (Josh. xix. 37), as 
distinguished from Kedesh in the south of 
Jadah (Josh. xv. 23), and others. It still 
keeps the name of Kades, and lies four miles 
narth-west of Lake Huleh. There are 
namerous ancient remains. Hath not the 
Lord, &c. She speaks as "a prophetess," 
mnouncing God's commands, not her own 
opinions ; declaring God's promises, not 
merely her own ho|'es or wishes. 

Ver. 10. — Called, or rather gathered to- 
gether, as the same word is rendered in ver. 
13. yfent up, viz., to Jtount Tabor, as in 



vers. 6 and 12. Translate the verse. Thert 
went up ten thousa/nd men at his feet, i. e. 
following him. 

Ver. 11. — Translate, Now Heber the Xeii- 
ite had severed himself from, the Kenites, 
viz., from the sons of Holdb, to. The 
Kenites, as we read in ch. L 16, had 
settled in the wilderness of Judah, south of 
Arad, in the time if Joshua. Heber, with 
a portion of the tribe, had migrated later to 
Naphtali, probably at the time when th« 
Philistines were pressing hard upon Judah, 
in the days of Shamgar and Jael (ch. iii. 31 
and v. 5). 

Ver. 13. — TTnto the river (or brook) ol 
Eishon, now the Nahr Mukfitta. In the 
plain of Esdraelon, through which the 
Kishon flowed into the Mediterranean, there 
would be room for all his chariots to come 
into action. 

Ver. 14. — And Deborah, &c. Observe 
how throughout Deborah takes the lead as 
the inspired prophetess. 

Ver. 15. — The Lord discomfited, &a 
Deborah had announced that the Lord was 
gone out before the host of Barak, and so 
the victory was not man's, but the Lord's. 
"Not by might nnv by power, but by my 
Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts." "The 
Lord is a man of war, the Lord of hosts is 
his name." Sisera lighted down off his 
chariot, &c., and— 

Ver. 16. — Barak pursued after the 
chariots. Barak, supposing Sisera still to 
be with the chariots, pursued after them, 
and seems to have overtaken them, as tliey 
were embarrassed in the rotten, boggy ground 
which had been suddenly overflowed by the 
swollen waters of Kishon. Many were swept 
away by the flood and drowned, the rest put 
to the sword while their horses were flounder- 
ing in the bog (ch. v. 21, 22). But Sisera 
had meanwhile escaped on foot unnoticed, 
and fled to the tents of the friendly Kenites. 

Ver. 18. — With a mantle. Rather, "with 
the coverlet," such as was always at hand in 
the noninil tent. 

Ver. 19.— A little water. Faint and 
thirsty as he was, he did not ask for strong 
drink, but only water. 

Ver. 21. — Then Jael, &o. Sisera, having 
taken every prcc^ntioii, had lain him down 
to rest ; not, like David, trusting to the Lord 
to make him dwell in safety, but confiding 
in Jael's friendship and his own crafty 
directions. But no sooner hud he fellen 
into a deep sleep, than the crafty and 
courageous woman, into whose hands Sisera 
was to be sold, took a tent pin and the heavy 
hammer with which they drove the pin 
into the ^ound, arid with » desperate blov 



m 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oh. IV. 1—2 



forced it through his temples, and pinned 
him to the ground. Without a struggle, he 
swooned and died. Instead of and fastened 
it into the ground, it is better to translate, 
that it (the pin) came dovm to the grownd. 
It is the same word as is translated lighted 
Josh. XV. 18. In the last clause put the 
foil-stop after caleep, and read, So he swooned 



cmd died. It is impossible for us to view 
Jael's act in the same light as her contempo- 
raries did, on account of its treachery and 
cruelty ; but we can admire her faith in the 
God of Israel, her love for the people of 
God, and her marvellous courage and strength 
of mind in carrying out her purpose, and 
make allowance for the age in which she lived. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — The variety of God's instruments. The weakness of God!» instru- 
ments. Notliing is more remarkable in the history of God's pruviilential den lings 
with his people, whether under the Old or New Testament dispensations, than the 
great variety of instruments by which he carries out his designs. And amidst this 
variety a marked feature often is the weakness in themselves of those instruments 
by which the greatest results are accomplished. "God," says St. Paul to the 
Corinthians, "hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and 
God hath chosen the weak things of the world to conCound the things which are 
mighty, , . . that no flesh should glory in his presence" (1 Cor. i. 27 — 29). "We 
have this treasure," he says again, " in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the 
power may be of God, and not of us " (2 Cor. iv. 7). These two featukes of. 

VARIETY IN THE CHOICE OP INSTRnilEN'JS, AND OP THE WEAKNESS OFTTIMES OP THK 

INSTRUMENTS THEMSELVES, RUN THROUGH THE BiBLE. To look only at the deliverances 
in the Book of Judges, — Othniel the Kenite, a stranger and a foreigner ; Ehud, the 
left-handed Benjaraite ; Shamgar, the son of Anath, armed with an ox-goad ; Barak, 
the timid, hesitating Naphtalite ; Gideon, one of the least of a poor family of Manasseh, 
threshing his wheat secretly for fear of the Midiimites, and then rushing upon the 
Miflianite camp with liis 300 followers, armed with lamps and pitchers and trumpets : 
Jephthah, the wild outcast Gileadite ; and Samson, the man of supernatural 
strength, with his impulsive actions and his unrestrained passions, — what an infinite 
variety do they display of character, of circumstance, and of resource. And 
so the manna in the wilderness, the drying up of the waters of the Red Sea, the 
flight of quails, the falling of the walls of Jericho at the blast of the trumpet, the 
ministry of Samuel, the character and kingdom of David, the grand episode of Elijah 
the Tishbite, the deliverance of Hezekiah from the army of Sennacherib, the suc- 
cession of the prophets, the great figure of Daniel, and the countless other incidents 
and personages which stand out in the pages of Holy Scripture, how largely do they 
exemplify the manifold resources of the power of God, working out his ends with 
unerring wisdom and unfailing certainty. The present chapter supplies another 
striking example. Here we see the Israelites in extreme distress : their independence 
gone; a great heathen power overshadowing and oppressing them by militiiry violence; 
all means of resistance at an end ; their princes slaves ; their wariiors cowed ; 
their leaders dispersed. But their time of deliverance was come. And who were 
they that should break that iron yoke, and let the oppressed go free? who were 
they before whose might the heathen hosts should melt away, the iron chariots be 
burnt with fire, and the invincible chieftain be laid low in death ? Two women 1 
One known only for her prophetic speech and her skill in civil judgment; the other 
' an alien, belongingto a weak and broken tribe of foreigners. The one, filled with the 
spirit of God, awakens the sleeping spirit of a captain and 10,000 of her countrymen, 
and urges them to battle and to victory ; the other, alone and unaided, with her single 
hand slays the leader of unnumbered hosts. The people are set free from their 
•ppressors, and have rest for forty years. The lesson then which this chapter im- 
presses upon us, in addition to those which it teaches in common with the preceding, 
IS the variety and the strangeness of the methods of God's deliverances, and especially 

THAT god's STRENGTH IS MADE PERFECT IN HUMAN WEAKNESS. He Ordoins Strength in 

the hands of weak women, as well as out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, 
"Fear not, thou worm Jacob; I will help thee, saith the Lord," is an exhortation 
which under every possible circumstancie is made easy to comply with by the 
'onollection of these wonderful acts of Oorl 



a. IT. 1— S2.J THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — Temporary infltiences and a permanent tendencff. In this section 
»re presented several influences, such as afEect the life of man in every age — the 
personal influence of Ehud, the material or physical influence of Sisera, and the 
spiritual influence of Deborah. In judging of conduct we must take into account 
all the circumstances that are brought to bear upon a person or a nation. The 
penalties inflicted will then appear reasonable or otherwise. 

I. The pekmanent tendency to evil. " When Ehud was dead " should be "for 
Ehud was dead." The eighty years of " rest " which the land enjoyed, and during the 
whole or most of which Ehud had ruled, now came to an end. But not causelessly. 
The " children of Israel again did (continued to do) evil in the sight of the Lord." 
The interval of comparative piety is over, and the under-current of distrust and 
idolatry again resumes its influence. The spiritual fidelity of Israel is an occasional 
thing ; the apostasy is the result of a permanent tendency, often checked, but ever 
recovering its sway. " The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth " (Gen. 
viii. 21). "And God saw that . . . every imagination of the thoughts of his heart 
was only evil continually " (ibid. vi. 5). Israel is described as " a people that pro- 
voketh me to anger continually " (Isa. Ixv. 3), &c. The best of men have been the first 
to confess their inherent depravity. At a religious meeting held in Florence, when 
the lowest and vilest of the city were present, the question was asked, " Is there one 
here who is not a sinner ? " Only one man dared to say in bravado, " I am not I " 
but he was speedily silenced by the jeers and condemnation of the audience. The 
duty and wisdom of all is, therefore, not to question the existence of this tendency, 
but to guard against it. Unbelief is " the sin that doth so easily beset us " (Heb. xii. 
1). Nor are we only the passive subjects of improving influences in the providence 
of God and the order of the world. We are to be " fellow-workers with God," " to 
work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, for (or because) it is God that 
worketh in us," &c. (Phil. ii. 12). In dealing with our fellow-men or ourselves we 
must ever reckon upon this, the force of inborn corruption. 

II. Tempoeahy mobal influences. That these have such weight at one time or 
another is a strong proof that salvation is not from within, neither, on the other hand, 
can it be wholly from without. We see here — 1. ffow much is involved sometime! 
in a personal influence. Ehud, by the moral ascendancy he had acquired, is for the 
time the bulwark of his people's faith. Such power is a precious gift. In measure 
like this it is the possession of the few. But every one has some moral influence, 
either for good or evil. " None of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to him- 
self " (Rom. xiv. 7). It ought to be our care so to behave that our influence shall be 
increasingly for righteousness. But there are limits and imperfections in this: 
Although " the memory of the just smells sweet, and blossoms in the dust," it ia 
present influence with most of us that is most vividly impressive and practically 
eflEective. Still we can never gauge the extent of our influence. In God's hands it 
may be multiplied indefinitely. In Christ we see the most glorious instance of per- 
sonal, spiritual ascendancy. And his power shall never fail. 2. The moral effect of 
a material advantage. The presence of Sisera in " Harosheth of the Gentiles "— 
'probably Harethieh, a hill or mound at the south-eastern corner of the plain of Acca, 
close behind the hills that divide this plain from that of Jezreel, on the north side of 
the Kishon, ye' so near the foot of Carmel as only to leave a passage for the river' 
(Thomson, 'The Land and the Book,' ch. xxix.) — with "nine hundred chariots of 
iron " overawed the Israelites (cf . ch. i. 19) ; and " twenty years he mightily oppressed " 
them. This force powerfully affected their imagination, and rendered them all but 
helpless. They forgot that God is able to break the chariots in pieces, and to make 
all their massive strength a disadvantage and a difficulty, as when the Egyptians 
laboured heavily in the Bed Sea sand and waves ; that the spirit that animates an 
army is greater than weapons or fortifications. But this cowardice of Israel just 
corresponds with the fear that so often unmans Christiana of to-day, when confronted 
with great names, popular prejudices, and the shows and forces of the world. Nothing 
it easier than to over-estimate opposition of this sort We hav« to learn in atiennoiif 



« THE BOOK OF JUDGEa [oh. iv, 1- 22, 

contest that •• greater is he that is in ns than he that is in the world " (1 John iv. 4). 
8. Spiritual power vindicating itself amid external weakness. Amidst the universal 
decay of religion there are ever a few who "have not bowed the knee unto Baal." 
God never entirely deserts even his unfaithful ones. Some are left from whom the 
new era may take a beginning. (1) Jehovah does not leave his people without a 
witness. As at other times of national misfortune a judge is raised up, " Deborah, a 
prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time." Her authority is 
recognised, for "the children of Israel came up to her for judgment." A certain 
negative and secular respect is accorded to her. Divine ideas have no active power 
over the lives of the people ; but Divine officials and institutions are still acknow- 
ledged in the general government and social life of Israel. She herself, however, is 
evidently full of the Spirit of Jehovah, and magnifies her office. The singularity of 
a woman exercising judicial functions lias a powerful effect upon the national mind. 
Even the leading men and mighty soldiers obey her. (2) This witness is an instance 
of strength in weakness. The witness is only a woman. A sign this of the decay 
of the heroic spirit. But she initiates a bold and warlike policy. Evidently rising 
above the weakness of her sex, like Joan of Arc, she is determined to break the 
spell of the " nine hundred chariots of iron." The moral power she has obtained is 
seen in the obedience of Barak to her call and her instructions, the general answer of 
the nation to her summons, and the refusal of Barak to go against the enemy unless 
she accompanied them. So in the Messenian war (' Paus.' iv. 16) " the soldiers 
fought bravely because their seers were present." We are not to understand Barak's 
insistency as cowardliness or perversity, but as a further tribute to the presence of 
God in his servant. The Ironsides fought bravely when they went into battle from 
praise and prayer. As the exigency is great so the instrument of restoration is most 
insignificant and humiliating. — M. 

Vers. 12 — 17. — The battle of the brook Kishon, or material force versus spuifunl. 
The armies are a contrast in respect of resources, numbers, strategic position, pres- 
tige, and skilled leadership. In all these respects the army of Sisera had the advan- 
tage of that of Israel. But the Canaanite force was a mercenary one, probubly of 
mixed nationality (hence term " Gentiles "), and enervated with luxury and domin- 
ance ; whereas Israel was represented by men desperate through long suffering, 
familiar with the strategic possibilities of their country, and fired with new-found 
repentance, patriotism, and Divine inspiration. Instances of the impotence of 
inequalities like these when so compensated for on the spiritual side, to decide results, 
have been frequent in the history of the world, especially so in that of Israel. Here 
we see that — 

I. He who depends upon material kesouecbs will be subject — 1. To sudden 
alarms. It reads like a surprise. They were at ease, relying upon military strength 
and prestige, when the news of Barak's march upon Mount Tabor came to their 
ears. But how disproportionate the force Sisera so suddenly summons to arms I It 
is ignorance trying to cope with experience and skill ; scanty equipment confronting 
all that a great and powerful nation could invent and provide for military defence 
and offence. Yet already it was a point in favour of Israel that it had aroused such 
apprehension for so slight a cause. The conscience of the wicked is never easy. 
The least sign of danger is sufficient to rouse it, and to occasion the most dispropor- 
tionate exertions. 2. To rash exposure of his resources. " All the chariots of iron," 
the military power and glory of the oppressor, are at once called into exercise. This 
was unwise. A little more consideration would have suggested a better and more 
prudent disposal of his forces. It is evidently feeling, and not far-seeing military 
prescience, that dictates the pompous demonstration. How often do the oppressors 
of God's " little ones " drive their tyranny too far, and defeat their own end by over- 
eagerness and domineering imperiousness ! The heart that God has inspired will 
look upon such things — the threats, &c. — as of little moment. 3. To utter collapse. 
The suddenness of the levy was adverse to its efficiency. Subject as Eastern troops 
are to panics, and difficult as it must have been for such cumbrous vehicles to deploy 
upon such varying levels, it was only necessary for the handful of Israelites to be 
led by • skilful general for them to produce confusion and dismay in the unwieldy 



OL IT. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 48 

host. And when once the huge army began to yield, its own size and bulk would 
make its defeat the more disastrous. And all was risked at once. There was nothing 
more upon which, quickly enough, to fall back. So in the hour of the Church's peril 
and extremity God has found his opportunity. The Pope's bull is burnt, and the 
Reformation commences boldly and decidedly. " Fear not, I am with thee," has 
been the voice that has made the turning-point in niany a career. All the pomp and 
show of the world is brought to bear upon the saint ; he sees through it ; a step, a 
stroke, and it melts like the " airy vision of a dream," and he is free ! 

II. He who depends upon God will — 1. See opportunity and hope against over- 
whelming odds. " Up, for this is the day in which the Lord hath delivered Sisera 
into thine hand. ' So David — "The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the 
lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this 
Philistine " (1 Sam. xvii. 37). So Gideon. This is the insight of faith. 2. Make 
careful preparation. "Trust in God, and keep your powder dry." The means, 
however inadequate, the best means at our disposal, must be employed. " God 
doesn't require my knowledge." " No more does he require your ignorance." It is 
a sign of respect to God, and a mark of thorough-going faith in him, that we make 
scrupulous use of the means he dictates. Often the " means of grace " are despised, 
to a Church's loss, to a Christian's loss, and sometimes destruction. " They that wait 
upon the Lord shall renew their strength," &c. 3. Confide in the Divine presence and 
promises. Abraham is sure that " Gud will provide himself a lamb ; " David sings, 
" Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no evil ; " 
and the Hebrew children were confident that the " God whom they served was able 
to deliver them." Faith as a grain of mustard seed " will remove mountains." — M. 

Vera. 11—12.— Vide ch. v. 24— 27.— M. 

Vers. 8, 9. — Deborah and Barak. I. They who undertake to advocate dipfiotlt 

TABES SHOULD BE WILLING TO SHARE THE RESPONSIBILITY OP THE EXECUTION OF THEM. 

Deborah urges Barak to fight ; Barak will raise the standard only on condition th it 
the prophetess will accompany him. There are prophets who sit with Deborah under 
the palm tree and advise noble deeds while they excuse themselves from facing the 
danger of achieving them. In the spiritual warfare of the Church we find critics who 
can see the defects of the work others are doing, and advise great improvements, 
yet who will never encounter the perils of the mission-field or the drudgery of more 
homely work. It is well to devise good measures, but it is better, like Deborah, to 
help in the execution of them. 

II. In THE BATTLE OF LIFE A |GREAT VARIETY OP SERVICE IS REQUISITE FOE FINAL 

SUCCESS. Deborah cannot lead the army, but she can inspire it. Barak cannot 
prophesy, but he can fight. Thus Deborah cannot secure victory without Barak, 
nor Barak without Deborah. We are members one of another, and all the members 
have not the same office. There is work for the seer and work for the warrior. The 
world always needs its prophets and its heroes. The worker without the thinker will 
blunder into confusion ; the thinker without the worker will fail for want of power to 
execute his designs. Brain work is at least as important as mechanical work. It is 
therefore foolish for practical men to despise the men of thought as mere theorists, 
■nd foolish for the thinkers to treat the active men of business with philosophical 
contempt. It is peculiarly woman's work to cheer and encourage those who are 
called to the dangerous tasks of life. Wives and mothers who dissuade their hus- 
bands and sons from their duty because it appears to be dangerous are indulging in 
a weak and foolish affection. The highest love will seek to encourage those who are 
loved in all that is great and noble. 

III. In THE SERVICE OF GOD THE FIRST REQUISITE FOR SUCCESS IS THE INSPIRING AID 

OF THE Spirit of God. Deborah is a prophetess. She is gifted with the wisdom and 
enthusiasm of direct inspiration, and thus becomes the inspirer of Barak and his 
troops. Barak feels that if Deborah goes with him God's counsel and encouragement 
will be given him. Do we not trust too much to the mere machinery of our Church 
organisations in the execution of our work V One prophet in our midst is worth a 
thousand dull, earthly-minded men The great need of the Church in her battle with 



44 THE BOOK OP JUDGES. [oh. iv. 1— 2i 

the evil of the world is the presence of the Spirit of God in light and power, to gaid* 
«nd to energise her dark and weak efforts. It is foolish to go up to our spiritual war- 
fare without seeking the presence of God to accompany us (Exod. xxxiii. 16). If 
God go with us we shall need no special order of prophets, for then every soldier of 
Christ will be a prophet (Joel ii. 28). — A. 

Ver. 21. — Patriotic treachery. I. Oppression houses the darkest passions of thb 
OPPRESSED. Jael' s treacherous murder of Sisera did not occur in an age of peace and 
comfort, but after her nation had been terribly crushed by the Canaanite power. The 
worst evil of tyranny is not found in the mere distress which it brings on those 
who suffer from it, but in the bad passions which it provokes. The oppressed are 
degraded morally; they grow revengeful; unequal to open resistance, they become 
treacherous ; misery blinds them to the claims of humanity Slaves are too often 
cruel and trencherous. This fact, instead of excusing slavery, is its heaviest 
condemnation. 

II. Cruelty may expect to be rewarded with treachery. Sisera was no innocent 
soldier falling in the discharge of loyal service to his country. He had " mightily 
oppressed the children of Israel." Harshness may appear to silence all opposition, 
but it really provokes the most dangerous enmity — secret and treacherous enmity. 
Sisera meets with a just doom. Thereiis something cowardly in- brutal oppression ; 
it is fitting that the man who descended to practise it should not fall in honourable 
warfare, but meet his miserable fate at the hands of a deceitful woman. 

III. The quilt op a crime must be measured by the motive which instigated it. 
A cold-blooded crime committed for low ends of personal profit is far more wicked 
than the same deed done in the heat of provoked passion. The act which is com- 
mitted for the good of others is lest wicked than that which is entirely selfish in its 
motives. The motive of Jael was patriotic. She anticipated no danger to herself 
from Sisera, but she thought to rid her country of a great and cruel enemy. So far she 
was brave and noble. 

IV. The utility op the end will never excuse the wickedness of the means 
employed to secure it. Jael was no vulgar murderess. Her patriotic motive 
mitigated the guilt of her crime, but it did not destroy that guilt. She was guilty 
of a breach of the sacred rights of hospitality. Did she meditate murder when she 
welcomed Sisera into her tent ? Possibly not. It may be that the sight of the sleeping 
man suggested the temptation to an easy way of delivering her nation from a great 
enemy. If so, her treachery was so much the less guilty. But the very warmth of 
her ostentatious hospitality offered to such a man as Sisera suggests oidy too forcibly 
that she-meant treachery from the first. That grim scene — the weary soldier trusting 
himself in the hands of the murderous woman, while she lavishes her hospitality on 
him with fearful schemes working in her brain — is surely no picture of womanly 
glory, in whatever age we set it, with whatever provocations we mitigate its dark 
horror. Jael is plainly guilty of a gross breach of trust. We must not shut our eyes 
to her criminality because she did a deed on the side of the Jews which we should 
have condemned with loathing if it had been committed by a less enlightened, heathen, 
Canaanite woman. Reverence for the teaching of Scripture does not require us to 
excuse the faults of the Jews. — (Jael the Kenite was practically a Jewess.) It is 
most degrading to the conscience to rend the dark pages of Hebrew histor with 
the understanding that we must condemn nothing done by an Israelite. It is 
also false to the intentions of Scripture. In the Bible we see the failings of good 
men and the personal wickedness of some who took their stand on the right side. 
The merit of their cause does not destroy the guilt of their individual conduct 
Deceit and cruelty have sometimes been practised in the interests of Christianity, of 
liberty, of humanity ; but the only service God will accept must be fair, and true, 
and pure.^A. 



n. V. 1—31.] 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



41 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER V. 



Ver. 1. — Then sang Deborah, &o. 'rhe 

ode which follows was doubtless the com- 
position of Deborah the prophetess, and was 
sung by her (as the gender of the Hebrew 
verb indicates), assisted by Barak, who per- 
haps sang the antistropne (of. Exod. xv. 
1, 21). It is a song of wonderful beauty 
and lyric power, somewhat difficult, as all 
Hebrew poetry is. 

Ver. 2. — Her first feeling was one of patri- 
otic joy that her countrymen had been roused 
to the venture of war, and of gratitude to 
God that it was so. " For the bold leading 
of the leaders of Israel, for the willing fol- 
lowing of the people, praise ye the Lord." 

Ver. 3.— Her song was worthy to be 
listened to by kings and princes. She calls 
their attention to the tale she had to tell of 
the great acts of the Lord. 

Vers. 4, 5. — The recent victory recalled 
the glories of those days when God brought 
np Israel from Egypt into Canaan. She 
specifies the march from Seir or Hor, and the 
day when Mount Sinai was altogether on a 
smoke, and the whole mount quaked greatly. 

Ver. 6. — From what misery God had saved 
the people ! In the days of her predecessor 
Shamgar, when the Philistines overran the 
country, when Heber the Kenite still dwelt 
in the south of Judah, all traffic ceased in 
the land. The caravans were stopped, and 
travellers slunk into the by-ways. 

Ver. 7. — Instead of The inhabitants of the 
Tillages .ceased, some render the leaders 
teased. Till Deborah arose and stirred up 
Barak, there was no one to put himself at 
the head of the people. 

Ver. 8. — The cause of this misery was not 
fet to seek ; it was the idolatry of the people 
which provoked God to anger. Then their 
enemies were let loose upon them, and they 
dared make no resistance. 

Ver. 9. — What a contrast with that faint- 
hearted submission was the recenttriumphant 
rising I Exultation and thanksgiving for 
the devotion of the people break out again, 
kB in var. 2. 

Ver. 10. — She appeals to the nobles who 
ride on white (or roan) asses, and sit on rich 
saddle-cloths (not sit in judgment), and to 
the people who walk by the way, alike to 
■peak of the great deliverance. 

Ver. 11. — A very difficult verse, and very 
variously rendered. For archers some give 
the interpretation (fwwie™, i. e. men sharing 

THE BOOTY THEY HAVE TAKEN ; Or, SINUING 

IH ALTBKNATB VEESES. For they that are 
keUvered from, some render far away from. 
Others again take the preposition /rom in 



the not uncommon sense of more them, mean 
ing here louder than. The chief different 
senses which emerge are — (1) that of the 
A. V. : "Those that can now draw water 
from the wells without being molested by 
the hostile archers shall sing praises to God 
in the very spots where they were wont to 
be attacked." (2) "Far from the noisff 
and tumult of those that divide the spoil 
among the water-troughs, there shall they 
sing,'*^&o. (3) "With a louder voice than 
that of the shepherds who sing among the 
water-troughs (while they are watering their 
flocks), there shall they rehearse," &c. Or, (4) 
combining (2) and (3), " With a voice louder 
(and more exultant) than that of those who 
divide the spoil, there shall they rehearse," 
&c. The inhabitants of his villages. Ben- 
der his leaders, as in ver. 7. Then shall 
the people . . go down to the gates of the 
cities for judgment, or to the bazaars, as in 
old times, without fear of their enemies. 

Ver. 12. — Awake, &c. She seems to go 
back in thought to the moment when she 
received the Divine callr to her mission of 
deliverance, and executed it by the voice of 
her stirring prophecies. Then she lashed 
her soul into action, and roused Barak from 
his lethargy by the promise of spoil and 
victory. 

Ver. 13. — Then he gave dominion to • 
mere remnant of Israel over the powerful 
among the people of Canaan, the Lord gave 
me dominion over the mighty men of Jabin. 

Ver. 14. — They who spring (whose root is) 
from Ephraim went against Amalek, follow- 
ing thee, Benjamin, with thy people ; 
from Manasseh (Machir, son of Manasseh, 
Gen. 1. 23) came down governors (literally, 
lawgivers: cf. ver. 9), and out of Zebulun 
they that handle the baton of the com- 
mander, i. e. the military chiefs. 

Ver. 15. — He was sent on foot into the 
valley. It was a mark of extraordinary 
valour that he rushed down from Mount 
Tabor on foot against the 900 iron chariots 
in the plain (oh. iv. 14). For the divisions, 
&c. Or, among the water-brooks, i. e. the 
Reubenites, dwelling amidst their flocks 
among the water-brooks, were much per- 
plexed with doubts whether they should stay 
?till or join their countrymen. 

Ver. 17. — In ships. The celebrated har^ 
bour of Joppa (Jonah i. 3), now Jaffa, was 
in the tribe of Dan. His breaches. The 
creeks and bays where they kept their fishing- 
boats. 

Ver. 19. — The kings came and fonght 
(cf. Josh. xi. 1, 2, 5). They took no gain 
of money. These words may mean, (1) they 
did not stop to plunder, they were intent 



46 



THE BOOK OF J0DGE8. 



toH. T. 1—31 



only upon slanghter ; or, (2) they took no 
ransom for their enemies' lives ; or, (3) they 
got nothing by their fighting, for they were 
all killed themselves. 

Ver. 20. — According to Josephns, a great 
storm in the face of the Canaanites led to 
their utter discomfiture, and also swelled the 
Kishou to overflow its banks. 

Ver. 21. — Ancient. The word so rendered 
Is only found here. The brooJc of ancient 
days, or things, probably means the brook 
celebrated from of old by the warlike deeds 
done on its banks, 

Ver. 22.— Their mighty ones. Applied 
to bulls, Ps. xxil 12, &e. ; and to horses 
(A. v., his strong ones), Jer. viii. 16 ; his 
strong horses, Jer. xlvii. 3. 

Ver. 23. — Heroz, in the time of Jerome 
Memis, a village otherwise unknown, twelve 
miles from Samaria. The mighty. Not the 
same word as that so rendered in ver. 22, 
but that usually rendered a mighty man, or 
a man of viar. 

Ver. 24. — Blessed above women, &c. 
With the selfish indifference of the men of 
Meroi she contrasts the valorous enthusiasm 



of Jael the Eenite, and blesses her for it as 
emphatically as she curses the inhabitants nl 
Meroz. 

Ver. 26. — ^A lordly dish. A dish fit for 
princes ; perhaps one reserved for the most 
illustrious guests. 

Ver. 26. — With the hammer. These words 
are not in the Hebrew, and should be omitted. 
She smote (not smots off), yea, she wovmded 
(Psalm Ixviii. 21); she pierced through hit 
temples. 

Ver. 30. — Sped, i. e. come across some 
booty. For the necks of them that take 
the spoil. Literally, for the pecks of spoil. It 
is a difficult and obscure expression, 2%e 
spoil may mean the camels, horses, or mules 
taken from the enemy, and the articles de- 
scribed may mean the housings and trap- 
pings for their necks. Or the neclcs of spoil 
might mean the necks of the beasts of burden 
laden with spoil. 

Ver. 31. — A fine application of the whole 
sulijeot ! Each such victory was a foretaste 
of the final victory over sin and death, and 
of the glory of the redeemed Church. 



H0MILETIC8. 

This splendid ode, so full of poetic fire and vivid dramatic effect, with its startling 
contrasts, its picturesque descriptions, its glowing eulogiums, its burning patriotism, 
its striking characters thrown into high relief by the stroke or two of genius, its 
passion and its pathos, is not deficient in ethos. We will single out two or three 
ethical lessons from their surroundings. 

I. Self-sacrifice foe the good of others. The ninth verse is an awakening 
call to voluntary sacrifice on the altar of the public good. While men in general are 
hanging back from exertion and danger in sloth or timidity, unwilling to run any 
risk, or to make any effort, there are those who, with high-minded zeal for their 
country's or their Church's weal, burst asunder the restraining bonds of selfishness, 
and, with their life in their hands, offer themselves willingly for the common cause. 
Deborah's burst of generous admiration toward those who did so in her time is a 
stirring call to us to imitate their example. But let us not imagine that such self 
sacrifice is confined to extraordinary occasions, or can be executed only on the plat- 
form of great emergencies. Unselfish efforts for the good of others find room for 
their, exercise in the common round of every-day life. He who works when he is 
weary, who overcomes his natural shyness or timidity, who lays aside his own 
schemes or tastes and takes up work which is distasteful to hira, who risks losses in 
money, in consideration, in convenience, in comfort, in ease, in leisure, that he may 
do something which he believes will be useful to others, is treading in the steps of 
these " willing governors," and deserves like them the warTi approval of all generous 
hearts. 

II. Worldly hinpranoes. But we may see in the examples of Eeuben and Gad 
what are the hindrances to such self-sacrificing work. There is a counter-call to the 
call of duty and of love, and that call is too a louder and a more persuasive one — 
the call of gain and worldly interest. When Deborah's message came to the 
Reubenites and Gileadites, and the blast of Barak's trumpet sounded in their ears, 
calling them to the help of the I ord against the mighty, the bleatings of their flucks 
and the lowing of their herds among the rich pastures of Jazer and Gilead seemed 
to tell them a dilferent tale (see Numb, xxxii.). How could they leave those peace- 
ful pastures, and exchange them for the battle-field? Jabin's iron chariots were 
nothing to them. What would become of their flocks ind herds while they were fai 



OH. ?. 1—31.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 4? 

away ? As their eyes ran through the sheep-folds, and they reckoned up in tho'ighl 
the wealth which they contained ; as they thought of the lambing, and the sheep- 
shearing, and the sheep-market, and told the increase which they might expect, they 
Beemed tied to those sheep-folds by bonds which could not be broken, and by a spell 
which could not be loosed. After a few doubts and hesitations they abode among 
the folds, and left their brothers across the Jordan to fight by themselves. And so it 
was with Dan and Asher. The movements of Sisera had not interfered with the 
trade of Joppa, or the fishing-bouts of the sea-coast. The ships of Tarshish were 
coming and going as of old, laden with merchandise from all parts of the world ; 
some touching there on their waj' to Tyre, others supplying the markets of Palestine 
with wrought iron, and cassia, and sweet Ciilahius. Already perhaps the silver and 
iron, the tin and the lead, brought by the ships of Tarshish from the Cassiterides, 
found their way to the fairs of Joppa ; and the wheat of Minnith, and the oil and 
honey and pastry {H.ehTe-w,pannag) of Judah, went out through its harbour to Tyre 
and Sidon (Ezek. xxvii. 12, 17, 19). And the men of Dan were all busy by that 
sea-side. Lading and unlading the ships, carrying the bales of merchandise on their 
strong backs, giving and receiving orders, piloting the foreign ships into harbour, 
plying to and fro as they handled the oar, stopping the leaks or mending the sails of 
ships that had come out of rough waters — there was no end of business tc be done, 
and of money to be made. Why leave these peaceful gains and rush mland to 
perish by the sword ? Surely they might be excused if they remained in ships, and 
continued on the sea-shore, enriching their country by their industry, while they left 
it to others to jeopard their lives in the high places of the field. And they did so ; 
and in doing so have left us an instructive warning as to the hindrances which the 
world continually places in the way of high-minded action and generous self- 
sacritice. "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world," if you 
would be free to serve either God or man, is the precept that settles upon the 
thoughts as we consider the gaps in the muster-roll of Israel at the battle by the 
waters of Megiddo. 

III. The enmity of neutrality. But ver. 23 reads us a yet sterner lesson. 
There are occasions when not to act for God is to act against God. There are 
occasions when a man cannot be neutral. When the Lord calls for help against the 
mighty, he that withholds that help is cursed. By so doing he is helping the 
enemies of God, and among the enemies of God he will fall. Here was Meroz in 
the very thick of the fight. Bphraim and Benjamin, Issachar and Manasseh, 
Zebulun and Naphtali, were pouring out their thousands to defend their altars and 
their homes. The honour of God, the freedom of God's people, the cause of truth 
against heathen error, the kingdom of God against the tj-ranny of Satan, were 
trembling in the balance. A few hundreds more or less might turn the scale. All 
Israel was awake and alive to the noble task before them. There was music in the 
tramp of the thousands of devoted men marching to the war which might have 
aroused the dullest soul and kindled the faintest spirit. It did not move the men 
of Meroz ; they hung back in sullen indifference ; they skulked behind their 
walls. No zeal for the glory of God, no sympathy with their brethren, could pierce 
through their heartless selfishness. As the angel of the Lord looked out from the 
windows of heaven, he saw their cowardice, he marked their back-drawing, he 
pronounced them cursed. There are times, our own times are such, when the enemies 
of the cross of Christ are imusually active against the truth. At such times Satan 
musters all his forces, and would fain overthrow the Church of God. Infidelity 
stalks through the land. The leaders of sceptical opinion join hand in hand, 
ocience and literature, wit and intellect, the press and the platform, fashion and 
numbers, are pressed into the service, to cast discredit upon the everlasting gospel 
of the grace of God. At such a time to be neutral and indifferent is to be a traitor 
to the Lord Jesus Christ. At such a time he calls to his help against the mighty all 
who believe in him, who love him, and who hope in his salvation. " Who is on the 
Lord's side, who ? " is his appeal to his redeemed. Let no believer hold back from 
giving what help is in his power : the help of word and deed ; the help of bold con- 
fession and of unflinching countenance ; the help of tongue and pen ; the help, if 
nend be, of snffering and of martyrdom ; the help of a devoted life, and of a holj 



«8 THE BOOK OP JUDGES. [ch. v. 1—31. 

Christian walk, in all humility, and purity, and faith, knowing whom he has believed, 
and fully assured that faith will be crowned with victory. 

IV. The end of the ungodly (ver. 31). All the enemies of the Lord will 
surely perish. The day is not far ofE which will mark the difBerence between the 
righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him 
not. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in 
flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the 
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ ; and then they that love him shall be as the sun 
when he goeth forth in his might. The righteous will shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father, and they who confessed Christ before men will be con- 
fessed of him before the angels of God. Such are the fuller prophecies of the New 
Testament, confirming the obscurer prophecies of the Old, and encouraging ua to 
hold on our faith without wavering, in the certainly of the great reward. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. ^.— Self-sacrijice and its Inspirer. There are two other renderings of tMg 
verse, viz., " That in Israel wild'iy waved the hair in the people's self-devotion,^ 
praise God" (Cassel) ; and, " For the leading of the leaders in Israel, for the free 
self-offering af the people, praise Jehovah " (Stanley, after LXX. ). It is immaterial 
which of these we prefer ; the chief thought is evidently that which appears in all. 
It is the key-note of this heroic song, as it is the essence of heroism and true religion 
always — self-sacrifice to God. 

I. The spirit in which great deeds are wrought. The outburst has its source 
in Divine patriotism or religious enthusiasm. A consciousness of a representative 
character and destiny animates the Israelites. Religious devotion binds them into 
complete communion. Private aims and interests are forgotten. 1. It is this spirit 
which rescues the war of deliverance f ran ohjectinns to war simply as such. As an act 
of self-devotion it was a trnly devout, and therefore religiously legitimate, war. No 
hope of personal gain animates the host of Israel. It is patriotism in its noblest form. 
Tliese soldiers are all volunteers ; they obey a Divine voice. How many wars would 
cease were iuch feelings consulted I The saints' contest with evil should be con- 
ducted from a like principle. We should know what " manner of spirit " we are of. 
2. It was this spirit which made so effectual the struggle in which they were engaged. 
They were desperate, devoted men. No half-measure would be tolerated. Having 
counted the cost, they were willing to carry it on d outrance. God's battle with error 
and wickedness has suffered because of the half-heartedness of those who wage it. 
8. It was this spirit which conferred upon the deed its aesthetic beauty and epie 
grandeur. It is a fine question to determine what that is that gives the essential 
character to the noble, chivalrous, and religious enthusiasms of men. A careful survey 
of any considerable number of them will show that not only unselfishness, but self- 
sacrifice, is their fundamental principle. Selfish aims, or the impulse of self-aggrandise 
ment, vitiates the deed, however externally magnificent ; and vice versd, the mag 
nanimous forgetfulness of self, the conscious foregoing of personal ends and aims, 
will give nobility and piety even to works externally indifferent or apparently ignoble. 
The sentiment of a deed is its true character. Here it assumes a dignity and glory 
that command the admiration of the poet and the artist. It is part of the excellence 
of noble deeds to inspire. There is nothing so inspiring as self-devotion. But this 
is the vital breath of all true religion. Religious enthusiasm is contagious. The 
pious hero cannot long remain alone. True worship is the praise of the cross, where 
the power of darkness sustained its signal, final defeat. " By the obedience of one 
shall many be made righteous." If we are truly religious our lives also will blossom 
forth in acts that poets might sing and orators extol. 

II. The Inspirer of great deeds. That they are not a spontaneous outgrowth 
of our nature is the general confession of those who have wrouf^ht them. The object 
of Israel's admiration and obedience was Jehovah. It was in the inspiration derived 
from him the deliverance was wrought. God in Christ, as embodying the highest 
excellency in sympathetic relation with ourselves, is an even more powerful stimulus 
to heroism and piety. " For Chrisf s sake " ia a formula that covers a vast proportion 



oa. ▼. 1-81.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 41 

oC " whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things an 
just, and pure, and lovely, and of good report," in the world's history. — M. 

Vera. 6, 7. — National ruin and the true deliverer. The mighty deed of Shamgar 
did not avail to reduce the interior of Israel to a state of order and security. Who- 
ever Jael (the Helper) may have been, whether Ehud, Shamgar, or some other hero, 
even he was unable to restore confidence to the dwellers in the country, or to rendei 
communication between the towns and villages easy and secure. The description here 
reminds one of Germany in the tenth century, or Sicily and Greece in our own times. 
A strong hand and a central government are required in order to inspire confidence 
and to render the conditions of life uniform and reliable. A country may be great 
in military strength, and yet, socially and politically, at a standstill because of the 
absence of due internal administration, of public institutions, and zeal for the public 
welfare. We have here — 

I. A VIVID PicTDRB OF NATIONAL DECAY. 1. The means of inter-communication 
were rendered useless. " The highways were deserted." Main thoroughfares have 
ever been requisite for the proper inter-communication of the different parts and 
towns in a country. They are therefore one of the first means employed for opening 
up internal resources and developing commerce and civilisation. All really great 
gov«Tnment8 have distinguished themselves in road-making ; as, for instance, the 
Incas of Peru, the Chinese, and the Eomans. It was the boast of the Roman writer 
that the circuit of the empire could be made through Europe, Asia, and Africa, with- 
out risk to life or property, by a private traveller. The sight of deserted highways 
suggests the collapse of commerce and social intercourse. It is more striking than 
the complete absence of roads would be. And highways that continued in disuse 
would soon get out of repair and be rendered impassable. In the present day a similar 
state of things prevails over a large part of Palestine and Asia Minor. Travellers 
make their journeys by night, and avoid the villages and public roads. The wandering 
Arab brings the desert with him wherever he goes. 2. The country districts depopiir 
lated. This would rapidly reduce the country to barrenness, and render the support 
of the nation more precarious. A mere tithe of the population could then be 
supported, and the nation would be kept in a state of weakness. 

if. Thi secret of national eegeneration. Deborah was a mother in Israel. 
The military hero played his part, but failed of highest success. It was for her, by 
wise and statesmanlike measures, internal administration, and a strong central govern- 
ment, to bring to the peof<le's doors the fruits of inilitiiry success. She fostered a 
national spirit, encouraged a respect for law, and rendeied it as safe to dwell in the 
country as within the walled city. The continuous policy of Deborah achieved the 
reoonstitution of the land and its freedom from internal lawlessness. — M. 

Ver. 8. — The perU of national irrdigion. The conscience of Israel is here 
addressed. The coincidence of new idolatries with " war in the gates " was strikingly 
suggestive It could not be accidental. There was nothing in which Israel had had 
more continued experience than in the connection of idolatry with national weakness 
and misery. 

I. Decline commences with the first DErARTUEB from the worship of Jehovah. 
It was as they trusted in Jehovah and acquainted themselves with him that they 
were able to drive out their enemies. The weakening of this religious principle 
undermined the moral character and strengthened the force of sensuous influences. 
It is only as the soul anchors itself on the Eternal that it is able rightly to regard the 
outward and temporary affairs of life. 

II. The adoption op other gods is punished as a culminating affront. In this 
we see not so much the indirect results of idolatrous practice as the immediate 
chastisement of Jehovah's own hand. The apostasy is deliberate; punishment must 
be proportionately stern and extreme. Those who have known his character and 
will, and yet deliberately despise them, deserve the more condign punishment. _We 
see this principle at work in many a life. There are sins which seem to invite a 
terrible vengeance. Do we provoke God's anger? Let us remembei that he can be 



50 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. t: 1—81. 

a consuming fire. Deliberate rejection of God is a direct invitation and challenge t« 
his wrath. 

III. The final result of idolatry is effeminacy and abject helplessness. 
This is proved by an appeal to history. The Israelites had an instance of it in their 
own experience. There may have been weapons in Israel, but the idol worshipper 
had lost the courage to wield them. Idnl.atry, as a degraded conception of God, 
degrades its votaries. It has ever been linked with licentiousness and vice. The 
conscience is gradually destroyed, and with it all moral strength disappears. — M. 

Vers. 10, 11. — Testimony and ihariksgiving the duty of the redeemed. The classes 
here addressed are representative of the entire nation — nobles, judges or elders, and 
common people. The deliverance affected all, and those specially benefited are 
called out. The hand of God is to be publicly acknowledged and celebrated in 
song ; and this was seemly and right. So it is the duty of the redeemed of Christ 
to rehenrse his marvellous works and ways with them. 

I. This odght to be done severally and in particulab. In the case of each 
tliere is some peculiarity. It will illustrate afresh God's manifold mercy. "This 
poor mim criod, imd the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles." 

II. It ought 10 be done publicly and collectively. The natiotuil recognition 
of ftod is a most impressive and instructive spectacle. It becomes the more so if 
spontaneous, and not the result of legislative enactment or meaningless tradition. 

III. The reasons for this are manifold. 1. It is due to him. The work o^ 
Christ is very great, involving vast effort nnd suffering. It is full of love and wis- 
dom, adapted to ourspecial need. And in all the work of redemption no credit is to 
be takep to ourselves ; the merit is wholly his. " By the grace of God I am what I 
am." To withhold the praise is therefore worse than theft. 2. It is the highest and 
most blessed exercise of the religious nature. Man was bom " to glorify God, and 
to enjoy him for ever. In so doing his nature attains its highest end and complete 
spiritual development. The harmony of praise and prayer has its rrflpx influence 
upon the utterer, and as God in Christ is the most glorious object of adoration, the 
heart is expanded, uplifted, strengthened, and purified. There is nothing we are so 
liable to as forgetting God's mercies, and our dependence upon them ; and therefore 
it is well to rehearse them. 3. It is a benefit to others. The world is full ui miscon- 
ceptions and low thoughts of God, and indifference towards the Divine. By such 
rehearsals the true character of God is vindicated. Men are taught to trace all 
blessings to their real Author. Doubters, &c. are counselled and directed towards 
clear, healthy, and health-giving ideas of God. Thus the gospel of the grace of 
God is preached most effectively. Others catch the contagion. Are we silent ? 
What is the cause ? Ingratitude ; or it may be we are strangers to the grace of God. 
Let us yield ourselves to it now. Perhaps we too shall sing in a higher realm "unto 
him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood." — M. 

Vers. 14 — 23. — National defence a common respoimbility. We have here an interest- 
ing glimpse of the behaviour of the various tribes in the war of freedom. Not all 
were summoned to battle ; but of these only two answered to the call. 

I. Who are summoned to the great war? All the tribes whose interests were 
threatened in the first place ; but the others might have come from a feeling of 
brotherhood. Through Christ the solidarity of the race is revealed. We nave 
nearer and further claims, a more and a less imperative call, yet the interest of each 
is involved in that of the whole. The debt we all owe to Christ binds us henceforth 
" not to live to ourselves." "Am I my brother's keeper?" 

II. Who res^pond? Two trihes and a friendly ulii n. This showed a lack of 
public spirit, and of a true national conception. The Captain of our salvation calls. 
Who are willing? "Will ye also go away ? " A few, a 1 over. In every Church one 
or two have to bear the burden and heat uf the day. Is this r-glit ? 

III. The excuses and occupa'iions op those who holi hack. Very picturesque 
is the description — not a little satirical. How sorry the I gure cut by those who 
tarry at hi>me when the battle rages I th^ ejtcuses qf those whf were asked to 
Mlow Christ I 



OB. ▼. 1—31.] THE BOOK OP JUDUES. 61 

IV. Strict account will be taken of the conduct of each, and the bewabd 
WILL BE GIVEN ACCORDINGLY. The sharp eyeof the prophetess sciinned the host she 
•ccompanied. To each is apportioned the praise or blame. God sees the heart. — M. 

Ver. 20. — The hopelessness of opposition to God. This verse is variously inter- 
preted as an astrological allusion — as descriptive of a thunder-storm, accompanied by 
wind, hail, and floods, producing confusion (Josephus) ; or as suggestive of the delay 
which lost Sisera the opportunity. The explanation of Berthau, referring it to tha 
Divine intervention, appears more reasonable and spirituiiUy sufficient. All through 
the mind of the prophetess dwells upon God as the Helper and Avenger. But there 
is room for an intermediate idea. The stars are symbols of an unvarying law and 
uj.iversal destiny. Generalise upon the great contest between right and wrong. 
The combatants are not only men ; the whole universe is involved. Angels join in 
the fray. God himself is against the sinner. The latter must be vanquished. 

I. The ultimate character op the contest of the wicked with the righteous. 
An accidental circumstance may excuse it ; a temporary character may be assumed by 
it We may not divine the whole scope and drift of the quarrel. Truth may not be 
wholly on one side or the other. Sometimes a prophetic insight assures us that we 
are with God, or against him. Ultimately the question is one of right and wrong. 

II. The combatants involved. Not human opponents merely ; the question too 
large for this. The laws of the universe ; the angels of God ; destiny ; God himself 
— visibly contending in the person of his Son, invisibly in the councils of eternity. 

III. The certainty of the issue. — M. 

_ Ver. 23. — The curse of Meroz. The site of this city or district not verified. A 

singularity about the people's conduct. Others had withheld as well as they ; but they 
had either (1) special reasons for fidelity, or (2) aggravaling circumstances con- 
nected with their inaction. The consequence was that they inherited the primacy of 
the curse. Was it that the ban destroyed the very name and memory of the place 
from the face of the earth ? It became a " locus classicus in Talmadic expositions 
of the ban against persons and things" (Cassel). 

I. There are circumstances in which indifference and inaction with respect 
TO TEE cause of God in the world constitute a fearful crime. The nation 
they belonged to represented for them the kingdom of God. It was suffering from 
grievous servitude. When the short, desperate struggle for freedom took place, 
everything might depend upon the faithfulness of those situated as they were. 
They hung back, or co-operated with the enemy. This was a sin against the Divine 
brotherhood and the cause of God. Indifference at any time is wicked ; but the 
habit may some time or other suddenly reveal itself in tremendous heinousness. 
Special efforts to promote the kingdom of Christ, to prevent the dying out of 
religious institutions or movements, critical periods in individual lives, ought to call 
forth our most generous and self-denying aid. It might just be otir help that was 
needed in order to success ; our indifference that sealed the fate of a soul turning 
towards God, or a religious movement upon which depended important results. 

II. Greater responsibilities and privileges entail a greater curse upon 
unfaithfulness. Terrible vengeance was taken upon the erring city. Of how 
much greater punishment shall Christian apostasy be thought worthy? (Heb. x. 
28 — 30). We sin against greater light. How great is our debt to grace ! What 
issues depend upur\ our being found faithful I Remember Christ's warnings (Matt. 
si. 23 ; xviii. 6 ; xxiii. 37).— M. 

Ver. 24. — The conduct of Joel. A moral perplexity to modern times. This 
•rises from the advance, amounting almost to a revolution, in the spiritual sentiment 
of the world. It is from the higher platform of the New Testament that we see the 
deed in its true relations and proportions. 

I. Its justification. There are several grounds, upon any or all oi which the 
deed may be defended. 1. That of a relative and imperfect morality Morality 
in that age was not perfectly revealed or realised. With increasing ligh*- of revela- 
tMn and spiritual experience come new moral levels and tests. A thin; nw^ be 

(2 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. v. 1—31. 



comparatively or relatively right which is not absolutely so. The fact that wa 
condemn the action is not due to our superior natural light, but simply to the teach- 
ings of Christiiinity, the outgrowth and perfecting of the crude morality of the Old 
Testament. 2. On the jirinciple that the ohligation to tell the truth depemh upon the 
existence of a normal and friendly relation between men ; the permission to hill 
carrying with it that of dissimulation (Mozley). 3. Because Joel followed as a 
mere instrument the impulse of the Absolute. Is it not credible that persons may be 
moved by a superior reason to do things justifiable from the standpoint of that 
superior reason, but which, if they fully realised what they were doing, would be 
utterly unlawful for them to do ? 

II. Its bearings upon inspiration, &o. op Holt Scripture. The inspiration 
of Scripture cannot be affected by the inspired sanction of such a deed. Inspiration 
does not necessarily involve a knowledge of the " whole counsel of God." It has its 
degrees, and is reliable so far as it goes. A merely human production would have 
avoided such apparent self-contradictions. That there are moral mysteries and 
difSculties in the Bible, which are nevertheless seen to have possible solutions 
beyond the immediate knowledge of man, is a strong presumption in favour of its 
heing Divine. 

III. How FAE IS Jabl an example to be imitated? In no wise. This is an 
exceptional case, all of whose circumstances must be taken into account. She is, 
like many whom a special destiny seems to isolate from their fellows, almost to be 
pitied, save for the thought that she acted as the servant of God. The instincts 
Dy which we condemn her deed are evidently of God, and must therefore be fol- 
lowed. — M. 

▼er. 31. — The tuvMke lift. CI Prov. iv. 18. A beautiful simile. Many points 
of resemblance between the course and nature of the sun and the character and life 
oC the Christian. 

I. Progress. Steady. By gradual, regularly increasing advance. The hours 
and days and years can be measured by it. We can calculate upon it. Continual. 
Not by fits and starts. Ever forward, even when not seen. Culminating. Noon 
is splendour and strength ; sunset is fulfilment. 

II. Illumination. Id the Christian life nothing need be concealed. We are 
"children of the light, and of the day." Openness, honesty, actions of simplicity 
and good report. Knowledge is light, and it is by knowing the Eternal that we live. 
The spiritual are the light of the world. Christ is so par excellence ; but all Chris- 
tians shine with his brightness, and exhibit his character. We are so to live as that 
others can take knowledge of us that we have been with Jesus, and that they may 
follow us as we follow him. The figure also suggests that Christians may become 
clear, and bright, and free from darkness as light itself is. Spiritual illumination is 
not ever a borrowing from without. We may have light and life in ourselves. The 
sun is independent of circumstances, and shines on even when half the world is 
dark. It is also a figure for vindication and triumph. The day shall declare how 
much I The glory and beauty of the spiritual man shall then be revealed. — M. 

Ver. 7. — A mother in Israel. The position and character of Deborah and her 
mission to Israel are suggestive of the Scriptural teaching concerning women and 
their work. 

I. God raised up a woman fob the deliverance op his people. Deborah 
appears in the line of deliverers. The others are all fighting men. In the present 
instance a warrior, Barak, is associated with the prophetess ; yet if is not he, but the 
woman, Deborah, who secured victory, for she tells us that the hamlets were deserted 
until she arose. The Bible assigns great honour and high privileges to wumen. In 
Jewish history they are often prominent and famous for noble services. Women 
were among the most honoured of the discijiles of Clirist. In spite of the narrow 
views regarding the rightful positisn of women with which St. Paul is credited, that 
great apostle was ready to recognise the valuable work of women in the Church 
(Phil. iv. 8). Women nave peculiar powers for such work as requires sympathy and 
MM gendenees which is »t the root of true greatness (Ps. xviii. 35). And many 



CH. T. 1—31.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 63 

women who are not called to imitate the heroic career of Deborah may take example 
from the compassion of Pharaoh's daughter, the hospitality of Abigail, and the 
charity of Dorcas. 

II. The woman chosen fob the deliverance of Israel was a mothbb. The 
peculiar virtue of celibacy is a late invention which finds no basis in the Bible. There 
marriage is honourable (Heb. xiii. 4), and to mothers a peculiar honour is given 
(1 Tim. ii. 15). The joys and cares of maternity deepen the nature of women and 
develop the noblest and most Divine of all affections — a mother's strong, tender, 
devoted love. A true mother will not have the less afEection for others because her 
first duty is to her own children. She is no perfect mother, even, whose whole 
affection and care is confined to her family. With her maternal afEection is little 
more than a form of selfishness, the ofEspring being regarded as an enlargement of 
the personality of the parent. The true mother is motherly in her nature, and shows 
her motherliness in all relations of life ; so that to her friends, her nation, and the 
needy, her thought and care partake of the- mother's fond, self-sacrificing devotion. 
Therefore patriotism is not antagonistic to" maternal afEection, but ofEers a field for its 
noblest efEorts. 

III. Though a mother is chosen fob the work of delivering Israel, shb 

IS NOT CALLED TO SACRIFICE ANY WOMANLY GRACE IN PERFORMING THE TASK. 

Deborah -nas no Amazon. Hers was not the fierce fighting of Barak. She was a 
prophetess. 1. Her mission was to inspire and encourage. This is one of woman's 
noblest works. Women are unfaithfuf when they check their sons or husbands in 
the performance of dangerous duties. 2. Her mission was also to utter God's praise* 
after victory had been secured. Women, more sensitive than men, should be able to 
arouse songs of thanksgiving, while men may be slower to awake to the full feeling 
of gratitude. In leading the praises of the Church women have a truly womanly 
mission. — A. 

Ver. 9. — Self-dedication. Deborah's heart turns in motherly afEection to those 
rulers of Israel who have willingly ofEered themselves to the service of their God 
and their country. It should be the aim of the Christian to emulate such self-devo- 
tion in the cause of Christ and of humanity. 

I. The offering was to God and the countrt. 1. It was to God. Though 
this fact is not expressly named here, as in the case of Jehoshaphat's captain, Amasiah 
(2 Chron. xvii. 16), it is plainly implied, inasmuch as the people had been incited by 
a Divine messenger and were living under a theocracy. God was the King, and 
the soldier's fidelity to his king was fidelity to God. Men devote themselves to 
business, pleasure, art, literature, science. The highest object of devotion is to live 
to God. This may be pursued through the necessary earthly occupations, elevating 
and consecrating them by making them part of God's service. 2. The devotion was 
also to the country. Patriotism is a Christian duty. But the Christian is called to 
oare for the large human world. We are called upon to live for the good of others, 
to aim at increasing their happiness and spiritual welfare. This aim is not divergent 
from that of serving God. We render him service by working for the good of 
others according to his will, and so as to render him honour. 

II. The OFFERING OF the GOVERNORS WAS OF THEMSELVES. God is not satisfied 
with our gifts ; he asks for our hearts (Prov. xxiii. 26). The true preachers of 
God's will will say, " We seek not yours, hut you " (2 Cor. xii. 14). No gifts will be 
acceptable to God until we have first given our own selves to him (2 Cor. viii. 5). 
The sacrifice of self-dedication, which was symbolised to the Jew in the whole burnt 
offering, is a sacrifice still looked for under the Christian dispensation, not as a pro- 
pitiation for sin, but as a thank ofEering. This, and no less, constitutes our reasonable 
seivice (Bom. xii. 1). We ofEer ourselves to God when wc render him the homage 
of our hearts in love, when we sacrifice our wills to his will in submission and obedi- 
ence, when we make it the object of our life to please and serve and honour him. 
We cannot compensate for lack of personal devotion by payment, as in some countries 
the conscript can do in regard to military service. Our gifts will not take the place 
of our work. We cannot serve God by proxy. The work of the missionary or of 
any professional agent of the Church must not be regarded as a substitute for the 
wrork of the private Christian. God claims the personal service of all of lu. 



54 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. ▼. 1—31 

III. Thr offering was voluntary. Deborah rejoices in the fact that the governors 
offered +hemseives willingjly. 1. The mdy acceptable service of God must be willing 
service. God leaves us free to accept or reject his service, he uses no violent com- 
pulsion to drive us into it. There is no conscription for recruiting the regiments of 
the kingdom of heaven ; all soldiers in that glorious army are volunteers. This is 
important, becpuse (1) only voluntary service can come from the heart, — God values 
devotion of the heart more than work of the hands, — and (2) only voluntary service 
will be vigorous and enthusiastic and inspired with the devotion which insures success. 
2. We have every motive to render this willing service. We are free from compulsion, 
but we are not free from obligation. We are to blame if we do not freely offer our- 
selves, and if we persist in refusing it will go ill with us at the last. (1) Duty 
requires the service. The people were summoned by a Divine messenger. We are 
summoned by the preaching of the kingdom. They were living under the rule of 
God ; God is our King and Lord. They were bound to defend their country in its 
need ; we are bound by nature and Christianity to help our fellow-men in their distress 
and sin. (2) Gratitude makes the service one of love. The Jews had seen mighty 
Divine deliverances ; we have the sacrifice of Christ for us and his love constraining 
us (2 Cor. V. 15). 

In application of these truths it may be noticed that some are waiting to be called 
into the Church or for service. Such waiting is a mistake. Christ is waiting for us. 
He has called us ; he expects our free self-dedication. Let us not wait to be sought 
or asked, but freely offer ourselves to his service. — A. 

Ver. 14. — Literary occupations. Whether these men of Zebulun were poets, 
chroniclers, or only merchants' clerks, their occupation was distinctly different from 
that of their brethren, and the peculiar duties attaching to it may serve to illustrate 
those which belong to a corresponding class of men in our own day. 

I. Literature is a field op HONonRABLS industry. It is a foolish misnomer which 
characterises handicraftsmen as the only " working men." Men can and do work 
•t least as hard with their brains as with their hands ; and such work is not the most 
unworthy of honourable effort. We cannot make a greater mistake than to confine 
the epithet " manly " to the exercise of brute force, an exercise in which a Hercules 
would be out-matched by a gorilla. True manliness is the right development of all 
the noblest powers of a man, among which the intellectual must take a high place. 

II. Literature may be made a source of the highest good to mankind. Writing 
is a means of expressing, preserving, and disseminating ideas. This means has been 
chosen by God for the promotion of religion, viz., in the Bible. Therefore it is foolish 
to despise literature as unpractical ; it may be the most useful instrument for benefit- 
ing mankind. This should be remembered by those who have literary power, and 
should prevent them from wasting their talents on the selfish enjoyment of intellectual 
luxury. Literary ability is, like the gift of tongues, a Divine gift bestowed on men 
lor the good of the whole world. 

III. In order that literature may effect the greatest good, it must bb 
BNLISTED IN THE SERVICE OP GoD. They who " handle the pen of the writer " must be 
among those who " willingly offer themselves " to the service of the Lord. God claims 
our best for his work. Men who have literary gifts should understand that they are 
not at liberty to write simply for occupation, for amusement, for money, or for fame, 
but for the honour of God and the good of men. Such considerations should secure 
more conscientiousness in writing ; the observance of the great literary duties of 
truthfulness, fairness, purity, and charity ; and the pursuit of elevating themes. 

IV. They who are called to literary duties must not feel themselves ex- 
onerated FROM more general OBLIGATIONS. The literary man must sometimes lay 
down the pen and draw the sword. The danger of sedentary and literary occupations 
is that they should lead to indolence and an unpractical habit of life. It will not do 
for any of us to Uve in the delicious seclusion of dream-land. There are stem taaki 
and serious burdens which all true men will have to encounter if the terrible realities 
of the world's wickedness and misery are to be faced as the claims of God and 
humanity demand of us. While the trumpet sounds to war it is treason fur the men 
of Zebulun to linger behind in learned leisure ; and while Ood calls his people to do 



ca. V. 1—81.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 66 

battle for him against the ignorance and sin of the world, there is no excuse for th* 
most gifted, the most fastidious, or the most occupied to shirk their share of the 
dangers and toils of hard warfare. — A. 

Ver. 16. — Indolent indecision. The men of Eeuben who refused to obey the call 
to arms appear to have indulged at once in questioning criticism and in selfish 
inactivity, and thus they illustrate the close association of indolence and indecision. 
Indolence encourages indecision by checking the energy requisite for choice, and 
indecision encourages indolence by closing all doors of action. The situation of 
indolent indecision may be considered from the point of view of indolence and from 
that of indecision. 

I. The situation eegarded on the side of indolence. 1. Private business was 
one excuse for negligence of public duty. People often make their business an 
excuse for not undertaking the work Christ calls them to (Matt. xxii. 6). But this 
results either (1) from idleness, since more energy would make time for Christ's 
service, or (2) from selfishness, inasmuch as we have no right to devote our whole 
time to our private interests. 2. Love of ease led to negligence of public duty. It 
was less arduous to tend the flocks than to assemble for war. 3. Love ot peace may 
have had the same effect. The Reubenites may have been peculiarly men of peace, 
while the Ephraimites were men of war. There are times, however, when the peace- 
ful habit is sinful, and when we are only hiding our indolence under the cloak of 
peace, and when it is our duty to take up the cross, which is involved in facing the 
confusion and harshness of conflict. It is wrong to refuse to maintain the right 
and to rebuke falsehood and wickedness out of the love of peace. 4. Pleasure may 
have inclined to indolence. That was no time for dreaming pastoral idyls when the 
nation was in jeopardy and a Deborah was sounding the war-trumpet. Music and 
poetry, and the love of nature and art have their place among the innocent amenities 
of life ; but when restheticism becomes a religion, and the graces of life take the 
places of its duties, the harmless pleasures which allure us from stem tasks become 
positive sins. The wretchedness, the vice, the crime which darken the very atmo- 
sphere of Christendom leave none of us free to luxuriate in soft dreams of imaginary 
bliss, instead of doing our utmost to conquer these hideous monsters. 

II. The situation regarded on the side of indecision. 1. Indecision is often 
the effect of directing intellectual energy to negative criticism r&thei than to practical 
contrivance. Criticism is most valuable in its place ; but when it is carried to the 
point of fastidiousness it becomes nothing less than a fatal, paralysing influence. 
Reuben was divided in counsel, uncertain as to the best course to pursue, and there- 
fore did nothing. So there are people who waste their energies in exposing the 
defects of all plans of action, and yet have not the inventiveness and strength to 
discover and pursue better plans. But it is better to work in an imperfect method 
than not to work at all, 2. Indecision can only be conquered by cultivating strength 
of will and convictions of duty It is the will that decides. When the intellect is 
cultivated at the expense of the will, moral paralysis is the result. Strength of will 
can be best attained in its right form by the exercise of what will we already have 
under convictions of duty. We should remember that our chief mission in the world 
is not criticism, but work. God calls us to action, and even if we work imperfectly 
and often fail, he will be better pleased at our well-meant, though perhaps mistaken, 
efforts to do what we believe to be right than at the inactivity which refuses to do 
anything from fear of committing the smallest error. — A. 

Ver. 23. — The curse of Meroz. I. The oursb was fob inactivity. Meroz had 
committed no offence, but is solely to blame for failing in action. Innocence of 
positive guilt is not enough to secure us from condemnation in the judgment of God. 
We shall be judged by what we have left undone as well as by what we have done. 
In Christ's vision of judgment, those who are made to stand on the left of the throne 
and are then condemned to outer darkness are not offenders against the moral law, 
but simply persons who have neglected the active duties of charity (Matt. xxv. 45). 
It is a very common error for people to suppose that they are blameless so 'ong aa 
they keep themselves unspotted from the world, forgettiug that the first duty vi 



S6 THE BOOK OP JUDGES. [oh. t. 1—81. 

religion is the energetic exercise of charity (James i. 27). Better to have some fault! 
and mucli useful service than to be faultless and useless. The soldier who retum» 
from war with scarred face and stained garments is nobler than he who fears to entei 
the battle lest he shall soil his raiment or mar his countenance. 

II. Thk curse was for inactivity in regard to public duty, Meroz was un- 
patriotic. Possibly the men on whom the curse fell were diligent farmers and kind 
and careful parents. But they neglected their duty to their countrj'. We must 
beware of the narrowness of the parochial mind. The congregation which studies 
its own edification alone, and has no care for the evangelising of the nation and for 
mission work among the heathen, brings itself under the curse of Meroz. In the 
faithful payment of taxes, in the conscientious use of the franchise, in the right use 
of influence in public matters men have a constant call to patriotic duty. But we 
have all larger duties to men as men, and so long as misery, ignorance, and wicked- 
ness prevail none of us can escape condemnation until we have done our part to 
remove those evils. 

III. The curse was for iwACTXViTr in a time of war. 1. It was the time of 
the nation's greatest need and danger when Meroz was discovered to be indolently 
unpatriotic. Great emergencies reveal the evil which has existed unobserved in 
quieter times. If we are not faithful in that which is least we shall be proved 
unfaithful in that which is greatest. The evil which may be fatal to our nation in 
times of danger may be lurking among us unseen in these more quiet times. There- 
fore the shameful failings of those who are held up to the reprobation of history 
may be no worse than the mean selfishness which pervades the lives of multitudes 
who meet with no blame, simply because the day of trial has not yet made their 
character apparent to the world. 2. The danger in which the unfaithfulness of 
Meroz was revealed brought a call to aggressive action. Meroz was found wanting 
in a time of war. We are called to resist evil. If we permit others to be oppressed 
by injustice and cruelty when we might deliver them by any sacrifice and toil of our 
own, we bring ourselves under the curse of Meroz. Christianity is aggressive. It 
is the duty of Christians not merely to promote purity, and charity, and truth, &c., 
but to expose and attack the vices and wrongs of the world. — A. 

Ver. 31. — The triumph of the Church. The triumph of Israel after the overthrow 
of the Canaanites is an illustration of the ultimate triumph of the Church. 

I. The pact of this triumph. We have encouragements to think that the 
Church will not only be saved, but will be saved with honour — will triumph. 1 . This 
implies the destrwAion of her enemies. We need not look for that in violence, after 
the manners of the Crusades or of the Inquisition. (1) Spiritual foes, such as sin, 
temptation, death, will cease to exist. (2) Human foes will' cease to be foes by the 
turning of enmity into submission to Christ. 2. It implies the bestowal of honour 
on the Church. She shall shine like the sun, no longer despised. 3. It implies the 
enjoyment of great happiness. Darkness represents sorrow ; sunlight represents joy. 
4. It implies the gift of power. No influence on earth is so powerful as that of the 
sun. The people of God will have opportunity for noble service and for the exercise 
of large faculties. 6. It implies the exercise of benevolence. The sun scatters light, 
warmth, life. He brings new life out of the death of winter, and spreads beauty and 
glory over the face of the earth. The triumph of the Church will not be like that of 
old tyrannies, marked by bloodshed and misery, but a source of life and joy and gloiy 
to all within its reach. There is healing in the wings of the Sun of righteousness. 

II. The source of this triumph. 1. It is accorded by God. Deborah speaks of 
it in prayer. It was not the courage of the warrior, but the unseen help of God that 
secured the victory to Israel. We grow fearful as we see the raging might of evil, 
and compfire this with the trembling weakness of our own hearts. But God is with 
us ; he makes the cause of the Church his own. Christ has already conquered, and 
now he calls us only to meet defeated foes. 2. It is secured through devotion to God. 
The enemies of God perish. These are not men whom God treats as enemies, but 
such as set themselves in enmity against him. They who triumph are the lovers of 
God. The essence of religion is love to God, and this is here the ground of the 
■ssursnce of victory given by hiuf- 3. It is attained by tUewt and gradual meana. 



Tl. 1—10.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



m 



The sun does not burst out suddenly, he makes no noise to announce the coming 
day. 80 the triumph of the Chuich is gradual as the growing diiwn, silent as the 
spreading light. Yet, like the light, it will be recognised by its visible presence and 
ito bountiful fruits. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER VI. 



Ver. 1. — Midian. In Numb. xxii. 7 we 
read of the Midianites as allied with the 
Moabites in their hostility to the eliildren 
of Israel, and we find them willing agents of 
Balaam's iniquitous counsels (Numb. xxv. 6, 
17, 18 ; xxxi. 7, 8), and suffering a terrible 
chastisement from the Israelites in conse- 
quence. An abiding national feud was the 
natural consequence ; and this, added to 
their love of plunder, no doubt led to the 
present invasion in company with the Amale- 
kites (ch. iii. 13, note). Observe the contrast 
between the victory described in Numb. 
xxxi. and the defeat narrated in this 
chapter. 

Yer. 2. — The dens . . . and caves. In the 
writer's time certain hiding-places called by 
the above names were traditionally knowa 
as the places where the Israelites took refuge 
during the terrible Midianite invasion. The 
limestone hills of Palestine abounded in 
such caves. 

Ver. 8. — Children of the east. We first 
find this term in Gen. xxix. 1, where it is 
applied to the people of Haran. Comparing 
the analogous phrases, "the east country 
(Gen. xxv. 6), " the mountains of the east" 
(Numb, xxiii. 7), "the men of the east" 
(Job i 8), " the east " (Isa. ii 3 ; Matt u. 1), 



we gather that the country lying (o the eas* 
of Palestine as far as the river Enphratei 
was called the east country, and that thi 
various tribes of Arabs and others who 
peopled that desert were called "the chil- 
dren of the east" (see ver. 33 and ch. vii. 
12 ; viiL 10). 

Ver. 4. — Left no sustenance, &o., t. «. 
neither grass, nor corn, nor fruit It is 
added, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass. 
These all either died for want of food or 
were seized by the Midianites. The next 
verse explains that the enormous multitudes 
of their cattle and camels consumed the 
whole produce of the ground. 

Ver. 5. — As grasshoppers. See the strik- 
ing description of the destruction caused by 
locusts in Joel iii. I have heard travellers 
in India describe the sudden darkening of 
the sky by a flight of locusts. 

Ver. 8.— A prophet. Literally, a man, 
a prophet, just as Deborah was described as 
a woman, a prophetess (ch. iv. 4). It is 
interesting to observe the flow of the spirit 
of prophecy in those early days between 
Moses and Samuel, before the dispensation 
of the prophets had risen to its height I 
brought you up from Egypt. Note the 
constant reference to the exodus as a fixed 
point in their national and religious life 
(see ver. 18 ; ch. ii 1). 



HOMILETICa 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Hie fruit of ingratitude. What a condemnation of Israel there was 
in the simple statement of facts by the mouth of the prophet, without exaggeration 
and without comment. God had brought them up from the land of Egypt with a 
mighty hand and a stretched-out arm ; when they were in bondage he had broken their 
yoke ; when they were oppressed he had set them free ; when the multitudes of 
Moabites, and Ammonites, and Midianites, and Canaanites, had opposed their entrance 
into the land of promise, God had brushed them all away and given their land to the 
Israelites. He had accompanied these acts of grace and power with a simple com- 
mand not to worship the idols of Canaan, but to remember that Jehovah was their 
God, but they had not obeyed his voice. 'They had forsaken God, to whom they owed 
all they had, and they had turned to heathen vanities. What need to say any more? 
They were now reaping what they had sown. They were helpless because they had 
cast off him who had helped them so wondrously, and who would have been their 
help in every time of need if they had not so wantonly forsaken him. And in like 
manner how often will a bare statement of facts be enough to overwhelm us with 
guilt and shame! Let any man be his own prophet, and with unflinching truth 
record the incidents of a year or a day of his own life. " God in his abounding grace 
and love redeemed me by the blood of his dear Son ; he freely forgave me my tres- 
passes and sins ; he received me into the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, unto 
himself ; he sealed me with the Holy Spirit of promise ; he crowned me with loving^ 



M THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. vi. 1—10. 



kindneaa and tender mercy ; he showed me the kingdom of heaven, and bid me enter 
into it ; he showed me the deiidly evil of sin ; he showed me the beauty and loveli- 
ness of goodness ; he said to me, Abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which 
is good. But I have not hefirkened to his voice ; I have forgotten his love, and 
despised his grace ; 1 have disbelieved his word, and have believed the lying promises 
of sin ; I have loved the world ; I have been the slave of my own lusts, and the 
subject of my own passions ; I have turned aside with the multitude of evil-doers, 
and I am now eating the fruit of my own doings ; I have forsaken God, and so God 
has forsaken me." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — IsraeVg extremity- With repeated defection a severer punishment is 
needed and inflicted. Midial io not only a neighbour, but one who encircles Israel 
on south, south-east, and east It was a name given to the great Arab tribes living 
east of the Red Sea, and soutn and east of Canaan. Unlike a comparatively civilised 
nation, they are not satisfied with receiving tribute ; they render husbandry and the 
arts of civilised life impossible by lawless raids, ceaseless devastation, and wanton 
destruction. It is a new terror. Israel may be overwhelmed and stamped out if this 
curse of the wilderness be not restrained. 

I. Israel's abandonment of Jehovah is punished by an apparent abandon- 
ment OP Israel by Jehovah. It seems a light punishment ; really there could 
scarcely be a harder one. Let the sinner and the backslider consider what their con- 
dition would be were GoAjust to treat them as they treat him. Even the mildest phase 
of such discipline could not be long bearable. Simply to be left to oneself — let alone 
— what tragic possibilities does that suggest I But when enemies of the most 
ruthless description overrun our land, and have us at their mercy, how much does 
abandonment mean I It is in such times we learn how much we owe to Divine inter- 
position hour by hour. The moral consciousness of Israel was consequently lowered. 
So of all in like cases. 

II. The manner and extent op their discipline are suggestive op the hein- 
OUSNESS OF THEIR OFFENCE. Things had come to such a pass that only a full experi- 
ence of the worst of their heathenish and idolatrous neighbours would avail. There 
is little or no love of God left ; let the consequences of their unbelief teach them a 
bitter hatred of evil ; in time it will drive them back to the doctrine and practice of 
truth for very life. By and by they will learn to love it again. We have but to 
think of God's loving nature and infinite tenderness to see how desperate such a 
measure is. If forbearance failed, no other remedy would suflSce but this. AU 
unbelief is this potentially. It was a glimpse of the horror of a godless world. 

III. It was a SALUTARY DISCIPLINE, BECAUSE IT LED THEM TO REPENTANCE AND 

PRAYER. God had no pleasure in this long agony ; but neither, on the other hand, 
would he shorten it until due cause appeared. The result justified the severity. 
Saints often regard their calamities amongst their greatest mercies. How roughly 
handled have been some of God's dearest ones I But the worst is not onrs to bear, 
since Christ died. There is no calamity we cannot take to him. He will distil sweet- 
ness from wormwood itself, and give us help in time of sorest need. " Whom the 
Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth." He may 
be nearer to us in the affliction than in the prosperity. — M. 

Vers. 7, 8, 11, 34. — Divine mercy: its adaptation and sufficiency. The cry of 
distress is heard instantly by Jehovah, and tlie answer begins to come at once. But 
only as is best for the sinning nation. As there was discipline in the misery to which 
Israel was reduced, so there is still discipline in the succession and several instal- 
ments of the mercy of God. The aim is not merely nor so much to deliver from the 
material evil to which they were subject, but to root out the unbelief and develop the 
spiritual life and moral heroism of the people. 

I. The IMMEDIACY of God's meecy. " It came to pasi, when the children of Israel 
erted, . . . that the Lord sent a p/rophet." There appears to be no interval. God 
bee^ni to readjust his relations with Israel at once. But the material boon is nvl 



OH. VI. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 69 



granted then. The sting must rankle until true repentance is forthcoming. Deliver- 
ance would have been a very questionable blessing under the circumstances. Free* 
dom and independence are responsibilities as well as birthrights. So God hears the 
cry of the sinner always. " Not what we wish, but what we want," that in the end 
what we wish may be rendered spiritually advisable and blessed. The measure of 
comfort here was that God was not silent, prayer was not unavailing. There is hop« 
in the opening of mercy's door, even though it be in reproof. 

II. The successions oC God's mercy. First the cry of desperation and repentance, 
then the outward reproof, then the direction, encouragement, and training of a 
deliverer, then the recovery of national freedom, prosperity, and prestige. Flower* 
like. So God adapts his blessings to the moral and spiritual capacity of his people. 
The Divine view of our misery and its requirements is the reverse of the human ; wa 
think of the material suffering, God of the moral defect and sin. These mercies as 
they come in train are manifestly education, that the work of grace may be effectual. 
" Grace for grace " is a law of his kingdom. And the dignity of God is never lost. 

III. Meuct in its culmination. God did not stop short of ultimate deliverance, 
although it was not achieved at once. So " he crowneth us with his loving-kind- 
ness and tender mercy." It is no mere secular and vulgar deliverance. It ia 
national re-creation. The chivalry of Israel is called forth. It is even more a 
religious than a military triumph. So the salvation of the soul has its splendours 
and glories. It is absolute, complete, and magnificent, crowning the life of the 
faithful. " An abundant entrance will be ministered " into the kingdom of his Son. 
" We are more than conquerors " through him. — M. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — Merciful reproof. The answer to prayer begins in reproof. An 
anonymous messenger is sent, a prophet probably from amongst the Israelites them- 
selves. In such a season of distress and seclusion they would become strangers even 
to themselves. No biography is given of the prophet. He is raised for the occa- 
sion. His message is simple. But it is the utterance of the people's own national 
and individual conscience. He ia a "voice crying in the wilderness," and saying, 
"Repent!" 

I. There is encoueagement even in God's chidings. For — 1. They are better 
than absolute and fnal silence. 2. They are meant, to bring us bach to him, and not 
to drive us away. 3. His severity is to prepare us for his gentleness. 

II. It is often as necessary and profitable to be impressed with what we 
already know as to receive new truth. Eevelation is not primarily intended to 
satisfy intellectual cravings, but to stimulate and enrich the moral nature. A sermon 
may be a mere exhortation, an impressive resunvi of acknowledged truth, and yet 
more valuable than if it were full of theological discoveries. Knowledge of God 
becomes religious and living when it is realised and acted upon. In this connection 
notice — 1. How impressive the personality of the prophet. 2. The heightening oj 
the conscience of sin by contrast with remembered and recited mercies. 3. The 
tone and style of the discourse. It was short, direct, spoken to the conscience. Its 
chief message and its sting is in the conclusion. No word of comfort is uttered. 
The people are left with their consciousness of sin. But this in itself is a gracious 
work, and preparatory for everything that is good. Thorough repentance is the 
condition of deep and lasting piety. — M. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — God sought and found in times of trouble. 1. Trouble drives men 
TO God. The people forsook God in their prosperity, and neglected his service so 
long as they enjoyed their comfortable homes in peace. But now they are miserable 
fugitives hiding in wild mountain caves, they remember his goodness and cry to him 
for help. This is a common experience. It is to our shame that it must be confessed. 
We ought to seek God for his own sake, to worship him in the beauty of holiness, 
not merely to obtain b'essings for ourselves. In prosperity we should recognise 
tokens of his love, and so lift up our thoughts to him in grateful recognition of his 
goodness. To turn to God only in the hour of our need is a sign of base selfishness. 
Nevertheless it is better to seek him then than not at all. And if it is disgraceful in 
as that trouble should be needed to drive us to God, it is merciful in him to send the 



•0 



THE BOOK OP JUDGB«. 



[oh. ti. 1—10. 



trouble for that object. The calamity which leads to this residt is the greatest bless- 
ing. Herein we may see the end of many of the most severe forms of adversity. 
They are sent to us in our indifference to rouse us to our need of God, and lead us t< 
seek him. Hence we may conclude that if we sought God aright in happy circum- 
stances we migkt be spared some of the troubles which our spiritual negligence 
renders necessary to our soul's welfare (Hosea v. 15). 

II. If God is truly sought in trouble he will certainly be found. As soon 
as the people cried God heard them, and sent them first a prophet and then the 
deliverer Gideon. If we forsook God in our prosperity it would be reasonable that 
God should forsake us in our need. But he does not deal with us according to our 
sins. Our claim does not lie in our merit, in our obedience and fidelity, in anything 
of ours, but in his nature, and character, and conduct. Because God is our Father 
he hears us not out of consideration for our rights, but out of pity for our distresses. 
Therefore we need not fear that he will not respond to our call. To doubt is not to 
show our humility, but our distrust in the mercy of God and influence of Christ's 
sacrifice and intercession (Jer. xxix. 11 — 13). 

III. When God is found in trouble he does not always bbinq immedutb 
deliverance. Israel called for help in need. God did not send the help at once. 
The people expected a deliverer, God sent a prophet. No word of promise is given 
by the prophet that relief will be accorded to the temporal distress of tlie nation. He 
speaks only of sin, and shows the ingratitude of the people, that they may feel how 
richly they deserve the calamities which have fallen upon them. They think most 
of their distresses, God of their sins. They cry for deliverance from the yoke of 
the Midianites, God wishes first to deliver them from the yoke of iniquity. There- 
fore the prophet of repentance comes before Gideon the deliverer. So we must 
expect that when God visits us in our sins he will deal with us so as to save us 
from spiritual evil before relieving us of physical distress. Christ bore the sick- 
nesses and infirmities of his people, but his great work was to save them from their 
sins (Matt. i. 21). 

IV. The consciousness op sin which must precede delivebanck is PBODncBD 
BY A prophet's message in the midst of TROUBLE. The trouble is necessary to 
soften the hearts of the people, and make them willing to listen to the prophet 
Yet the trouble does not produce repentance. For this a prophet is needed. The 

rophet does not make any prediction, nor does he give any revelation of God ; 

e simply reveals his hearers to themselves. We need prophets to show to us our 
own true character. Much of the Bible is a revelation of human nature which 
would not have been possible without the aid of prophetic inspiration. The call 
to repentance consists (1) in recounting the ancient mercy of God, for it is in the 
light of God's goodness that we see most clearly -our own wickedness ; and (2) in 
directly charging Israel with ingratitude and apostasy. All sin includes the sin of 
ingratitude. Till we feel this it is not well that God should show us more mercy. 
Therefore the stern John the Baptist must precede the saviour Christ ; but as Gideon 
followed the prophet, full salvation will follow repentance and submission. — A. 



I 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 11. — An angel, &c. Rather, the 
angel of the Lord, otherwise called " the 
angel of his presence" (Isa. Ixiii. 9). In 
vers. 14, 16, 23, for the angel of the Lord 
we have simply the Lord (see ch. ii, 1, note). 
An oak. Eather the oah, or terebmth, as it 
should be rendered. It was doubtless a 
well-known tree still standing in the writer's 
time (see ver. 19). Compare the mention of 
the oak (terebinth) at Sheohem (Gen. xxxv. 
i) ; the great oak (terebinth) in which Absa- 
lom was caught (2 Sam. xviii. 9) ; Deborah's 
palm tree (ch. iv. 6, where see note). Observe 
the simple way in which the ministration 



of the angel is introduced, as if. it were s 
matter of course in the eyes of him who is 
the Lord of the millions of the heavenly 
host, those ministers of his who do his plea- 
sura. Human scepticism, the twin sister of 
human selfishness, would blot out all crea- 
tion except itself. To hide it, &c. These 
graphic touches give a lively picture of the 
straits to which the Israelites were reduced 
by the Midianite occupation. 

Ver. 12. — Appeared. Angels were not 
always visible when present (see Numb, v-rq , 
31 ; 2 Sam. xxiv. 17 ; 2 Kings vi. 19, &c). 

Yer. 18.— If the Lord be with sa, kc 



cH. VI. 11—24.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



61 



The ntter dejection cansed by the Midian- 
ite oppression breathes in every word spoken 
by Gideon. But how reassuring the angel's 
words were. Which our fathers told us of. 
This is a distinct reference to the national 
traditions, which are elsewhere alluded to 
(of. Exod. xii. 26, 27 ; Ps. xliv. 1 ; Ixxviii. 
8—6 ; Jer. »vi. 14). 

Ver. 15.- -Wherewith shall I save Israelt 
&c. ComfJire the unwillingness of Moses 
(Exod. iii. 11 ; iv. 10, IS), of Saul (1 Sam. 
X. 21, 22), of Jeremiah (Jer. i. 6), of Amos 
(Amos vii. 14, 15), and of St. Peter (Luke 
v. 8). A'iFO in ecclesiastical history that of 
AmbroiB, Gregory the Great, and others. 
The least fit are usually the most forward, 
the most fit the most backward, to under- 
take great offices (ch. ix. 8 — 15). True 
humility is the usual companion of true 
greatness (see 2 Cor. ii. 16 ; lii. 5). 

Ver. 17. — A sign that thou talkest with 
me — that it is mdeed thou thyself that 
speakest to me, even God, and that there is 
no illusion. 

Ver. 18. — My present. Minchak means 
sometimes a present made to man, as in ch. 
iii. 18 ; but it more commonly means a 
sacrificial ofiiering (Gen. iv. 3 — 5), which 
seems to be. its meaning here, as explained 
vers. 19, 20. When coupled with zevach, 
the animal sacrifice, mincJiah means the meat 
and drink offering. 

Ver. 19. — Unleavened cakes (Gen. xix. 
3 ; 1 Sam. xxviii. 24). The necessary haste 
gave no time for the use of leaven, which is 
one explanation of the unleavened bread at 
the passover (Exod. xii. 33, 84, 39). Pre- 
sented it. A word specially nsed of sacri- 



fices and offerings (Amos v. 26). 

Ver. 20. — lay them upon this rock, as 
npon an altar, and pour out the broth, ai 
a drink offering or a libation (see ch. xiii 
19). 

Ver. 21. — There rose up fire, &o. The 
consuming of the sacrifice by fire from heaven 
was the tolcen of its being accepted (cf. ch. 
xiii. 20, 23 ; also 1 Kings xviii. 23, 33, 38 ; 
1 Chron. xxi. 26). The angel of the Lord 
departed, &c. In the very similar case of 
the angel who appeai'ed to Manoah (ch. xiii. 
15 — 20), the angel ascended in the flame of 
the altar. It is probable that he did so in 
the present instance, though it is not ex- 
pressly stated how he disappeared (cf. Acta 
viii. 39). 

Ver. 22. — Gideon peroeived, &c. Gideon'i 
suspicious were now turned into a certainty. 
It was indeed God that had spoken to him 
by his angel (ver. 17). Alas, &o. Gideon 
speaks thus in terror of the death which h« 
thought must be the penalty of seeing th« 
angel of the Lord (see ch. xiii, 22, and note). 
Because. Rather, therefore, at to this end, 
viz., that I should die. 

Ver. 23.— Peace, &c. Cf. Dan, x. 19, and 
John XX. 21, 26; Luke xxiv. 36 — 39. 
Hence the name of the altar, Jehovah- 
shalom — " The Lord is peace," is at peaca 
with me. 

Ver. 24. — For naming altars built in -.oin- 
memoration of particular events see Gen. 
xxii. 14 ; xxxi. 47 — 49 ; zxxiii. 20 ; Joah. 
xxii. 34, &c. 

_ Ver. 25.— The grove. Sck ch. iii, 7. The 
size of the ashercm is indicated by the order 
in ver. 26 to use it for the altar fira. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 11 — 24. — The preparation. God's agents, whether kings, or judges, or 
prophets, or apostles, are reasonable agents. They are not inanimate machines or 
blind instruments ; they are living, thinlung, feeling, reasonable, men. When they 
are called to great and heroic works they must be endued with great and heroic 
thoughts. A high sense of justice (2 Sam. xxiii. 3), a noble contempt of gain (I 
Sam. siii. 3), wisdom with lofty courage (Ezek. ii. 6, 7), the enthusiasm of love 
with the moderation of prudence (2 Cor. vi. 3 — 10), are the qualities that must bo 
found in them respectively. The sword which is to pierce must first be sharpened ; 
the intelligence which is to guide must first be enlightened ; the arm which is to 
prevail must be strengthened ; the spirit which is to triumph over difficulties and 
obstacles must be awakened, and fed, and sustained. The work to wliicli Gideon was 
called was no common work. A nation to be upheaved from the lowest vassalage of 
spiritless slaves and dejected helots into victory and freedom ; another nation to be 
dragged down from power, and possession, and sujiremacy, and dominion, with no 
apparent instruments with which to effect it. And who was Gideon ? The least con- 
sidered member of a poor family, of a divided tribe, of which no name was famous 
in the annals of his country ; a man unknown and unheard of, whose occupation 
was to thresh corn stealthily, lest the Midianites should take it ; a man thought nothing 
of by his own countrymen, and contemptuously overlooked by his foreign masters. 
But he was the chosen instrument fcr delivering Israel. He must then bk peb- 
PABED. And two things were necessary in the first place : one to awaken in him * 



•t THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. vi. 11—24. 

tkorongh trust in God ; the other to inspire him vdtk a proper trust in himself, 
springing from his trust in God. And so the angel began at once with the starlling 
words, " The Lord is with thee." And the answer of doubt and despair from the lips 
of Gideon was met by a look of God — a turning of God's face upon him, a lifting 
up of the light of God's countenance upon him, with a power of unutterable grace, 
and a word of further encouragement : " Go in this thy might ; . . • have not I sent 
thee? " and again he said, " Surely I will be with thee ! " And the scene that followed — 
the tarrying of the angel till his return with the kid and the unleavened cakes ; the 
solemn sacrifice on the altar of rook ; the outstretched staff in the angel's hand touch- 
ing the flesh and the cakes ; the bursting forth of the fire from the rock ; the word of 
comfort, Peace be unto thee I and the disappearance of the angel as mysteriously 
as he came^ — was all directed to the same end, to work in Gideon's mind the deepest 
possible conviction that God was with him, and that the whole love and power of the 
Almighty was on his side. 

But it was also necessary to inspire him with a proper trust in himself. As long 
as he thought of himself only as the drudge of the family, a thresher of wheat, a 
skulker by the wine-press ; as long as he felt himself one of a degraded caste, as long 
as he had no hope, no spirit, no sense of having a mission, he would and could do 
nothing great. The man, the warrior, the captain, the deliverer, the hero, the martyr, 
must be aroused within him. And so the voice of God addresses him, "The Lord ia 
with thee, thou mighty man of valour. Go in thy might, and thou shalt save Israel 
from the hand of the Midianites. Surely I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite 
Midian as one man." And if these words fell, as no doubt they did, upon a spirit 
already chafed with a sense of his country's degradation ; if burning thoughts of 
shame and humiliation were smouldering in his mind as he threshed his wheat in 
secret, trembling at every sound, and casting suspicious glances on every side, for 
fear some Midianite should be near, how would these words of homage and respect 
from the mysterious stranger awaken his soul to a new estimate of his place in the 
world. It was no longer a time to hide, and despair, and complain, and whine, and 
use the weapons of the weak, guile and subtlety, it was a time to rise, and act, and 
dare, and risk, and he was the man to be at the head o£ this new movement. This 
was Gideon's preparation. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOHa. 

Vers. 11 — IS. — The call of Gideon. Unexpected by himself and undreamt of by 
the nation. The whole land is given over to idolatry and wretchedness, but God ia 
at no loss to find his servant. A strong man — a hero, ignominiously concealed, he is 
a symbol of Israel's helplessness. 

I. The pbrsonalitt and relations op Gideon are a rebuke to Israel, a vindi- 
cation OP THE SOVEREIGN WILL OF GOD, AND A REVELATION OF THE SOURCE OF ALL 
TRUE POWER. He is the youngest scion of an insignificant family in a secondary 
tribe. Not only has he had no special religious or political training, he is an 
idolater, or at any rate belongs to an idolatrous family. And he is addressed whilst 
acting in a manner of which he must have felt ashamed. Hidden, helpless, a sceptic 
regarding Divine existence or intervention. The culture and religion of Israel are 
ignored. So God always chooses whom he will to act, to preach, to sufEer. There 
was no danger that Gideon would be credited with the work of deliveranc« as an 
achievement of his own originality and innate power. 

II. The occasion was significant ok the help God intended to give. He 
comes when things are at the worst. It was a sign that he would work out a 
radical deliverance. Not partial help, but complete salvation would be due to him. 

III. Gideon is an instance of the power of_ religious knowledge. He haa 
heard in some way or another of God's works in his nation's history. Evidently his 
thoughts have been occupied with them. A rough interpretation has been arrived 
at, helping him to grasp the meaning of the situation. His was not total ignorance, 
but a knowledge preparing for higher revelations and corresponding achievements. 
Truth smoulders in the mind until it bursts into flame. Inward impressions and 



flB. Ti. 11—24.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. •• 

realisations of sacred knowledge prepaie for the Divinely-arranged circumstances of 
life, critical moments, and heavenly visitations. 

IV. God's manner of dealing with the difficulties and objections of his 
INTENDED SERVANT IS VERY INSTEUOTIVB. He accommodates himself to the thoughts 
passing through Gideon's mind. By his words he drives the brooding mind into 
distressful paradox. The past achievements of Gideon are remembered, and a 
corresponding respect shown him. The revelation of himself is gradual. He is 
considerate, gracious, and painstaking with the heart he intends to make his own. 
" Have not I sent thee " is sufficient guarantee for God's servant. There ought to be 
no misgiving when that assurance has been given. — M. 

Vers. 12, 13. — The paradox of the Divine presence. It has ever been the case that 
spiritual blessing is hard to be realised in the absence of material prosperity. There 
is something almost ironical in the contrast between the assertion " Jehovah is with 
thee," and the actual condition of the person addressed. It was the more inconceiv- 
able because of the external nature of the religious sanctions and rewards of the age. 
Mosaicism abounds in material and temporal blessings. A natural question, then, 
for Gideon was, " Where are these? " There are many who think very similarly to- 
day. Are they right or are they wrong ? If God be with a man ought he not to 
prosper ? Notice first — 

I. The difficulty op Gideon. It was to reconcile the assurance of God's presence 
with the signs of actual weakness and distress all around him. There is something 
very ingenuous in the identification of himself with his people. " Thee " is altered 
by him to " us." It is full of promise for the future of the hero. He knows of no 
blessing in which his country does not share. And that is the riglit temper in which 
to face all such problems. The glorious past of Israel rose up before his mind's eye. 
How different from the days in which his lot had fallen I Had God any favour to 
his people ? Why, then, this utter inaction ? this absence of all miraculous interven- 
tion ? If the old records were to be credited God had delivzered his people with a 
" high hand and an outstretched arm ; " now to all appearance the heavens had 
" withdrawn, and become astronomical." And yet how great and immediate the 
need for God's help ! Day by day deeds were wrought under the sun that could 
not be spoken of. So there are times in these days when crimes are committed, 
nascent movements of religious and secular moment are withered, and the dial of 
civilisation is set back. The great calamities of war, pestilence, earthquake, &c., 
seem to call to heaven, but it is silent. Is it indiSerent ? Has the hope of man 
been a dream ? 

II. How it may be answered. Other things being eqttal, the blessing of God 
ought to make rich, and happy, and prosperous. But tnat is not its chief end in 
the present. It is first to make right. And God is in the seed as much as in the 
plant. He has many ways of fulfilling his promises. The blessing of Gideon was a 
potential one. It began even then in him, but it was to be communicated to others. 
It was as really a blessing for Israel as if the oppressor had been driven from her 
borders, &c. Spiritual influences begin deeply, secretly, and mysteriously ; but they 
are ere long known by their fruits. God was with Israel repentant in the moment 
of her repentance. And yet the external evils of her condition were as yet un- 
checked. God can be with a man in fulness of blessing and help, evei when he is 
poor, and wretched, and helpless ; but he will not continue so if he be obedient to 
the heavenly will. Spiritual blessing then should be expected to show ituelf, at least 
first, spiritually and inwardly ; and an individual may be the holder of it vicariously 
for a nation or the race. — M. 

Ver. 14.— I%e assuring thought of Go&s servant. "Have not I sent thee?" 
This is one of those words by which the saint has often been "strengthened with all 
might in ttie inner man." It lifted the heroes of Israel, the reformers, the men of 
the commonwealth of England, above the common weaknesses of their age and racn. 
" A man, a woman, with a mission " — why not ? Some careers are wholly explained 
by it; some simple achievement critical in history ; and many unostentatious, secret 
services rendered in the Master's name, under the influence of overpowering impulses, 
more or less transient or permanent. 



64 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. vl 11—24 

I. The life is thereby consecrated and directed. A man is not at liberty to 
follow his own private aims when the heavenly voice speaks thus within him. A 
higher plane of life and action is thereby created. An unseen influence isolates and 
consecrates him. This usually imparts greater definiteness to his conduct. Ho doei 
not " beat the air." 

II. The most difficult duties are in this faith rendered practicable. " If 
God be for us, who can be against us ? " " All things are possible to them that 
believe." The fatalists of history — Caesars and Napoleons — have left their mark and 
proved the strength of a ruling idea. But this conviction is reasonable and of 
infinite power. The greatest changes the world has seen have been wrought under 
its influence — apostolic mission, reformation, missionary enterprise at home and 
abroad, Sunday school origin and extension. And so in the things of the individual 
life and private sphere. 

III. Through its influence a present consolation and an eternal reward are 
SECURED. Has God sent us ? Then he will take note of our behaviour, and sustain 
our flagging strength. Has God sent us ? our service cannot be for earthly gain. 
He is our Master; and as he sends no man "a warfare at his own charges," so the 
■aint is sustained by the hope of the "crown of glory that fadeth not away." — M. 

Ver. 17. — Asking for a sign. The stranger said, Have not I sent thee? I will be 
with thee. Gideon wanted a proof that he was one who had authority, &c., to use 
such words. That he was a supernatural visitor he suspected; he wanted to be 
sure. But it was rather to ascertain the reality of his own heavenly calling, which at 
first he could hardly believe. There was no other evidence open to him ; and he 
asked the evidence peculiar to his epoch. He was altogether different therefore 
from the Jews of Christ's time, who required a sign, but no sign would be given 
them, save the sign of the prophet Jonas. They had signs enough already, but had 
no spiritual perception. 

I. This bequest arose not from want of faith, but from self-distrust. Might 
not this all be a dream ? And who was he himself ? It is the doubt of a mind 
suspicious of its own sanity, &c. All this argues a deep humility than which nothing 
could fit him better for the work he has to do. God forgives a desire like this, and 
answers it ; but doubts as to himself and his character, &o., are of another sort. 

II. God encourages all true servants by some token of his presence and help. 
Moses at Horeb; Paul in the temple in his trance — "Depart: fori will send thee 
far hence unto the Gentiles " (Acts xxii. 21). Many holy men have had such inward 
urgings and impulses. And all earnest service is accompanied by tokens of the 
Divine blessing. We are enooui'aged, therefore, to look for these signs. Their 
absence ought to cause no concern. Their nature will depend upon the kind of work 
we are doing. — M. 

Vers. 18 — 21. — The sign — the present turned int» a sacrifice- The narrative speaks 
for itself ; it is a picture of Eastern hospitality. Gideon's sense of the extraordinary 
nature of the visit expresses itself in his taking upon himself the duties of servant 
as well as host, to keep it secret. As the angel said to Manoah, " I will not eat of 
thy bread " (ch. xiii. 16), so the visitor betrays his true character as an angel of 
Jehovah in abstaining from the food. Of the phrase " and they did eat " in Gen. 
xviii. 8, the Targum gives the gloss, "they seemed to him to eat." Angels, not 
having a corporeal nature, do not require mortal sustenance. But the most striking 
incident in the narrative is the touching of the flesh and cakes with the angel's stafE, 
and their being consumed by fire from the rock. This circumstance betokened not 
rejection of the gift, but its acceptance in a higher sense ; the present becomes • 
Bacrifice. 

I. All best gifts are sacrificial. That which is given in order to a return; 
from gratification of self-love, ostentation, vanity ; from custom ; or without any 
real sense of loss, sacrifice, &c., is not accounted great by generous minds, howevM 
intrinsically precious it may be. As the sentiment enhances the value of the gift, 
even trifling in oar eyes, so that which has cost pain, effort, loss of loving hearts, io 



OH. Ti. 11—24.] THE BOOK OF JUDaES. 69 

"above rubies." Personality often thwarts the purpose of a well-intended gift J 
therefore it has often to be effaced ere the true end is attained. 

II. How God oftensdeals thus with the gifts op his servants. It is not in a 
few isolated miracles that this has taken place. The mode of procedure is a principle 
of his kingdom, and is seen in every true life. 1. In carrying on a spiritual work to 
unforeseen developments, and so that demands are made the agent did not at first 
contemplate. Some kinds of spiritual effort are like sinking a shaft for a mine, the 
ultimate expenditure of labour and means is not ascertainable. That which was 
almost a pastime becomes a serious task. Consequences are evolved that call for 
heroism and generous self-devotion. 2. Results which were aimed at in the first 
instance are withheld, and the labourer has to continue steadfast amidst apparent 
want of success. 3. The labour itself becomes dear, and enthusiasm makes the 
greatest efforts easy, and the heaviest burdens light. At first it is "our" work; 
by-and-bye it is " God's " work. We lose ourselves in the presence of the " not 
ourselves that maketh for righteousness," who accepts our feeble labours and turns 
them towards infinite and inconceivable purposes. 

III. What is subeebved by this conversion. 1. It is educative. The subject of 
it is being taught a nobler life. He is wooed gradually out of the narrow shell of 
self into the larger atmosphere and arena of Divine love. At first God provokes us 
to the disinterested passion for himself, then he surprises us into fitting expression of 
it. The bridges of retreat are cut. 2. Our vague intention is interpreted to our 
spirits, and is set free. The alchemy of Divine love turns our dross into gold, our 
water into wine. 3. The permanent utility of man's work is thereby secured. Like 
the devotion of Christ, it receives an absolute worth in perfected sacrifice. — M. 

Vers. 22 — U. — Jehovah Shalom, or tpi/ritual forebodings stilled. The religious 
experience of one is often of help to others. At all times has the commerce of man 
with the unseen taken place ; it is a necessary element in his spiritual life. The test 
of true religion is the sentiment thus awakened. 

I. The natubal feab of God, and its cause. The sentiment expressed by Gideon 
a general one, but peculiar to Israelites. The Greek knew not this fear, because his 
conception of the nature of the gods was different. They were but as men, only 
more glorious and powerful. To the Israelite God was the Supreme in holiness 
and authority. Reverence for the character of God deepened into fear, because ol 
the tradition that a visitation such as he now received meant death, either immediat* 
or near at hand, and because of the sense of sin. No man could see God and liva 
We have the remnant and echoes of this belief still among uSj in the fear of supep 
natural appearances and intimations. It is the dread of the simple, absolute holinesi 
and goodness of God, deepened by our sense of sinfulness. The culprit trembles in 
presence of the judge. Had Israel rightly served God, this dread would have dis- 
appeared. Were men's hearts right with him, they would welcome his presence and 
prize his visitations. 

II. The whisper op peace. It is a token of good- will. The terror which overcame 
the strong man is allayed. Christ gives a deeper tranquillity. He fills the breast 
with the sense of spiritual reconciliation — " the peace of God which passeth all 
understanding." And this is felt in the trial hours of life, and in the agony of dying. 
It steadies and evens the spirit amidst the most afilicting circumstances. In conver- 
sion the fear of the sinner under conviction is often intense. But who shall tell the 
rapture when peace is found ? 

III. The memorial. How fitting that it should be commemorated, and by such a 
symbol I The altar is the meeting-place of man and God. The monument. The 
church. It told to others of an individual, secret transaction and experience. Here 
was won a victory over self, a triumph of duty more signal than Maratlion,_Bannook- 
burn, or Morgarten. It is well to tell men of God's mercies to us ; and this intimation 
was an eloquent appeal to men to draw near and receive a like blessing. — M. 

Vers. 11 — 14. — Diffidence. Gideon was a great and gifted man who distrusted his 
©wn powers, and was in danger of failing to follow his true vocation through modest 
difSdence. When the angel accosted him as a " mighty man of valour," the expre» 

JUDGES. " 



M 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[CH. n. 11—24 



Bion overwhelmed him with astonishment. It came upon him as a new revelation. 
While there are conceited persons who value themselves too highly, and are oven 
ready to undertake rash enterprises for which they are quite incompetent, there are 
also good and able men like Gideon who are not aware of their own powers, and are 
in danger of neglecting the high trusts God has committed to them from Belf-distraBt 
and modesty. 

I. The gkounds of diffidence. 1. Adversity/. Gideon could not believe in the 
presence of God and the possibility of relief for his country, because the troubles of 
the time seemed to preclude all hope. We are tempted to distrust while the prospect 
is dark. Yet God is often nearest to us when the distress is deepest. 2. The absence 
of any sign of God' s presence. Gideon saw no miracle, and he could not discern the 
presence of God in less striking events. As sensationalism in religion is a dissipation 
which unfits the soul for quiet, natural modes of worship, so the habit of depending 
on marvels and prodigies for faith in Divine truth weakens the sense of the Divine 
in the calm and orderly movements of nature and providence, 3. Lowly circum- 
stances. Gideon considered himself the least important member of a poor and obscure 
family (ver. 16). Possibly he was despised in the household for his retiring habits. 
Men are often taken at their own estimate of themselves until their true character is 
put to the test. A man's own relatives are sometimes the last to recognise his merits. 
We are all more or less influenced by surrounding circumstances, and given too much 
to judge by appearances. 

II. The means fob overcoming diffidence. 1. God knows Ms servants' true 
nature and powers. He takes no note of outward appearances. Rank, riches or 
poverty, family honour, count for little with him. He seeks out the light man 
wherever he is to be found — at the threshing-floor, by the sheep-fold, in the fishing- 
boat. God never calls any man to any task for which the man does rot possess the 
requisite talents. 2. God is with his servants when they are obeying his voice. He 
never calls a man to a special task without giving him special grace to perform it. 
If he commands his servant to undertake a difficult mission, he is certain to go with 
him and stand by him in the time of need. Diffidence comes from regarding self ; 
true confidence from looking away to God. So Moses was diffident as he thought of 
his own weakness, but made brave to face Pharaoh by the assurance of God's presence 
(Exod. iii. 11, 12) ; and Paul dared to stand alone before Csesar with confidence 
because " the Lord stood with " him (2 Tim. iv. 17). 3. God sometimes uses special 
means to confirm the faith of his servants. Gideon asked for a sign, and it was given 
him. To Borne no sign can be granted (Matt. xii. 39). If no special signs are granted 
us now, we should remember (1) we are not called to Gideon's work, and (2) we are not 
left in the religious obscurity of G ideon'a age, but have the revelation of God in 
Christ, the greatest of " aigna." — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 26.— The same night, &o. The iron 
was hot ; it was time to strike. As regards 
what follows, there are two ways of under- 
standing the verse. One, that of the A.V., 
supposes that only one bullock is spoken of, 
and that " the young bullock " belonging to 
Joash is further described as "even the 
second bullock of seven years old ; " to 
which it is objected that a bullock of seven 
years old is not " a young bullock," " the 
bullock of an ox," as the Hebrew phrase is, 
and that there is no explanation of the 
meaning of " the second bullock;" and that 
the Hebrew manifestly describes two bul- 
locks : (1) Joash's young bullock, and (2) the 
bullock of seven years old. The other 
■upposes two bullocks, and instead of even 
has the more natural rendering amd. The 



only objection to this, by ftir the most 

natural rendering, is that Gideon is not told 
what to do with the first bullock. But it is 
a simple explanation that the two bullocks 
were used in the laborious work of demolish- 
ing the altar of Baal, and removing the 
earth and the stone to build the altar of the 
Lord, and that when the work was finished 
one of the bullocks — the seven-year-old — 
was sacrificed. For the grove see eh. iiL 
7, note. 

Ver. 26.— This rook. Rather, the keep or 
stroiighold of Ophrah, where also the high 
place was ; just as the temple was in the 
stronghold of Zion, and the hold of the 
house of Baal-Berith at Shechem was in 
the citadel of the place (ch. ix. 46). In tilt 
ordered place. The meaning of this phrase 



OH. yi. 25— 32.J 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



67 



is uncertain. It may either be rendered an 
in the A.V., meaning on the levelled rijund 
ordered and prepared for the build'ug of ''he 
altar ; or it may njore probal ^y be rer 'ered 
with the a/rr(mged material, L e. the stones 
which were laid in order at the bottom, 
and the wood which was laid in order upon 
the top of the altar (cf. Gen. xxii. 9) The 
material may either refer to that taken from 
the altar of Baal, which had been thrown 
dftwn, and which was then ord'-voJ to be 
used in building the altar „£ the Lord, or 
to its own arranged material ot supers', ue- 
tare, the wood of the asherah. 

Ver. 27. — Then, i. e. the nest nin;lit. He 
would have done it the next day ; but even 
his father's household, as well as the men of 
Ophvah generally, were so infected with the 
idolatry of the times, that he was afraid of 
being interrupted by violence. 

Ver. 28.— The grove. See ver. 25. The 
second bollock. There must be some special 
meaning in this description, the second. Can 
it refer to his place in the team, the young 



bullock being the leader, (he first, and tha 
seven-year-old the wheeler, the second t 

Ver. 29. — They said, Gideon hath, &c 
No doubt one of the ten servants (ver. 27) 
employed by him had spoken about it. 

ver. 31. — Stood against him. The words 
describe their liostile, menacing, attitude, 
clamouring to have Gideon brought out that 
they might kill him. Will ye plead, &c. 
Tiio -mphasis is on the ye. Joash met and 
silenced their pleading by threatening death 
to any that should plead for Baal. Baal shall 
plead for himself. Joash's courage was rising 
undei- the influence of his son's brave deed. 

A'er. 32. — Jembbasl, L e. Jarov Baal, let 
Bral plead. In ch. viL 1; viiL 29, 3S ; 
\x. 1, &c., Jemhhaal is used as the synonym 
of Gideon, just as in English history Coeur 
dt Lion is used as a synonym for Eichard. 
T1.3 name /en«5JaaZ appears as Jerublesheth ; 
besL'th or bosheth, meaning shame, i. e. a 
shameful idol, being substituted for Baal, as 
in the name Ishhosheth, for Eshiaal (see 
2 Sam. ii 8 ; 1 Chion. viiL S3). 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vera. 25 — 32. — The action commenced. Idolatry was the evil which Israel had 
done in the sight of the Lord. Idolatry was the sin which had brought upon Israel 
the terrible Midianite servitude. The hour of deliverance had come, but it must be 
the hour of repentance too. And repentance must be in deed, not in word. Baal must 
be cast off before the Lord would go forth with their armies. The first blow in the 
great contest that was coming on must be a blow struck against Baal-worship, and 
then the Lord would strike a blow against Midian. And so we see the mighty man of 
valour, who had been prepared for his work by his interview with the angel of the 
Lord, and who was to sweep the Midianite locusts from ofE the soil of his beloved 
country, commence his work as a bold religious reformer. How could he fight the 
battles of Israel while the altar of Baal crowned tlie heights of his native city ? bow 
could he call upon the Lord to help him while the shameful abomination stood up 
to testify against his own flesh and blood ? And so his action began with a deed as 
bold as that of Luther when he burnt the Papal bull in the sight of all the people. 
While men were asleep, little dreaming of what was about to happen, he rose from 
his bed, called ten of hia servants to him, and, marching straight up to the altar 
of Baal, surrounded as it was with awe and superstition, he threw it down. He 
cut down the statue or pillar of Ashtoreth, and before the morning light shone 
upon Ophrah, the altar of Jehovah was smoking with its whole burnt oifering as 
openly and as conspicuously as the altar of Baal had done. It was with amazement 
that the men of the city saw the great altar of their god levelled to the ground, and 
a new altar standing in the sacred inclosure. Bat Gideon nearly paid for his holy 
boldness with his life, and his great work was well-nigh nipped in the bud ; for 
when it transpired that he had thrown down the altar, there arose a cry for his blood. 
The angry idolaters surrounded the house of Joash, and demandedthat Gideon should 
be brought out to them, that they might slay him and avenge the insult done to their 
god. It was a critical moment, and Gideon's life hung upon a thread. But God had 
a work for him to do, just as he had for Peter when Herod put him in prison and 
sought to kill him. and so he was not sufEered to fall into their hands. His father's 
happy word, Let Baal plead for himself, was caught up by the people, and all 
thoughts of punishing Gideon seem to have gone out like a candle before a pufE of 
wind. He was now free to pursue his great enterprise. But here we may pause fol 
% moment to read some great lessons to ourselves. We dare not enter upon an/jf 

r 2 



6§ THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. vi. 25—32. 

work /or God while any known tin is casting its deadly shade upon «». Are yon 
seeking to do something for God ? begin .by plucking out the right eye tliat offends, 
by throwing down the altar of the false god within you. Lay the axe to the root of 
the tree, and at any risk or cost clear yourself of complicity with sin. Then you 
may begin your work. Again, be bold in a right cause ; do not quail before risk 
and danger, because no great work was ever done without it ; and if our work is of 
God, dangora will fade away before his Almighty help. God can brush away the 
difficulties and hindrances that threaten us, like cobwebs. Again, remember that 
nothing creates enthusiasm and attracts companions so much as courage and daring. 
The timid may work single-handed all their lives; but a leader "bold and brave" 
never lacks followers. There is excitement in bold action, and courage commands 
confidence. Beyond a doubt "the boldness of Peter and John" (Actsiv. 13) was 
one of the things that helped to build up the Church in those days of danger and 
persecution. St. Paul's unflinching courage in the face of Jews and Gentiles was a 
great power in bis missionary work. The fearless attitude of Luther and of the 
English Reformers before all the power of Pope and priests and the civil sword 
breathed a spirit of untameable resolution into the hearts of their followers. And so it 
always has been, and always will be. Boldness of action springing from deep con- 
viction of truth is the surest presage of success. Let us learn to be courageous 
in every good thing ; not flinching from dangers, or shirking consequences, or hang- 
ing back in cowardly delay, when once our judgment is clear of what is right to be 
done. Then may we hope to lead others and to stir up many to help in the good 
cause o£ truth and righteousness. Enthusiasm, decision, and courage, coupled with 
a sound mind, are among the great wants of our day. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 26— SO. — 7%e jfrrf work. The training of Gideon has now fairly com- 
menced, and it is not allowed to lag. There is no interval between command and 
execution. The growth of Gideon's spiritual character is gradual, and there is a 
beautiful fitness in each step ; but it is also rapid and decisive. 

I. It IB A BELIGIOnS WORK OF INDIVIDUAL AND NATION AL- CONSEQDENCE. An idola- 

trous altar to be razed, an altar to the true God to be reared. The plan of the altar 
of Baal was different from that of the altar of Jehovah, and could not be mistaken 
for it. The whole neighbourhood knew. How many such substitutions are taking 
place every day — the symbol of wickedness and unbelief giving place to that of 
faith. Our works are our true words to men. Much of the Christian religion con- 
sists in witnessing. There cannot be too marked a contrast, if it be real. _ A 
religious revolution of the most radical description took place. The whole question 
of religion was once more raised, and settled otherwise. 

II. It was a comfI/GTK wobk. Not only destruction, bat construction ; negative 
and positive. All true witnessing should be such. Negative criticism merely is 
mischievous. It is not enough to declare ourselves by abstention and inaction, or 
by rebuke and captious judgment ; we must do the works of God. We must build 
as well as destroy, 

III. It was a test of his sincerity. 1. It committed Gideon. There could 
be no drawing back. It was a challenge to the whole people. The hill-top was 
seen from afar. 2. It required energy. No slight task even as a manual labour. 
Organisation, leadership, vigorous and timely effort were necessary. 3. Courage 
was demanded. A new beginning, a great reform, had to be made. Difficult to 
take the initiative. Many reasons could have been found for conformity to estab- 
lished usages. The most rancorous hatred would be at once aroused. Only high 
faith and clear, Heaven-informed purpose could have secured his success. 

III. It was a peesonal, immediate, and domestic work. Joash, infirm as his 
faith in Baal was, was responsible for the erection and maintenance of the altar of 
Baal. The worship was popular, and he patronised it. That had to be publicly 
retracted. How near at hand was the field of Gideon's first work 1 His own life had to 
be openly changed ; his home had to witness his zeal for God. There are many 
wbo profess to be at a loss for something by which to testify theii love for Ood and 



SB. Ti. 26—82.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 61 

righteousness. Let them do righteously, love mercy, and walk humbly before Q-od, 
and there will soon be disturbance and persecution. Our own homes are to be the 
scenes of our first obedience. What have we done there ? And although, apparently, 
a day intervened between the vision and the work of demolition, yet no time was lost. 
The first fitting opportunity is sought and utilised, and the interval is occupied with 
the necessary preparations. So God expects prompt obedience from all his children. 
The smoke of that new altar — how much it signified 1 Are we yet his ? Let ns lose 
no time in giving our hearts to him. What is our record ? Let our deeds speak for 
OS. Time is short. — M. 

Vers. 29, 30. — Who Juvth done this thing 1 A frequent inquiry. A natural 
curiosity — to trace up to causes ; a religious rancour — ^to visit punishment upon the 
author. 

I. The world takes note of the actions and lives of the bighteous. The 
effects of religion are ever an astonishment, a delight or a vexation. There is some- 
thing in them that piques curiosity and rouses interest. Men tried to explain 
Christ. Religious questions ever the most keenly discussed. 

II. The reason op this is in the vital importance of the qitestions involved. 
Temporal convenience and interests are compromised. The craftsmen of Ephesus. 
Life and death eternal depend upon our conduct here. Christians are a reproof to 
the unfruitful works of darkness. 

III. It is well when our deeds are inquired about that they should bb 
GOOD, AND NOT EVIL. The detective usually tracks the criminal. How much better 
80 to act that we shall not fear when men discover our works. So act that when 
revelation comes " they may be ashamed who falsely accuse our good conversation 
in Christ." To our own Master we stand or fall. In that day we shall not heed 
the judgments of men. — M. 

Vers. 31, 32. — Jeruhhaal, or, Is an idol anything f How mighty the work was 
Gideon had wrought at once appeared from its effects. His father is won over, and 
so argues for him that the Abi-ezrites are first silenced, and then converted. The 
nickname of Gideon showed the process of the change. 

I. The grand argument against idolatry. Isaiah (ch. xliv.) expresses the 
contempt of the true Israelite for idols. But no one has formulated the argument 
better than Joash. It is as forcible to-day in India and Africa as in the days of 
Gideon. The same is true of the world-powers and principles idols represent. 

II. The living witness to the force of this argument. No monument could 
equal himself. It was an instance of a man against a god — yea, against all the gods 
of heathenism. A heathen convert is such a witness. And the heroes of faith are 
the grand arguments against the evil principles and influences they overthrew and 
■urvived. The gospel reveals an extended view of the same question, beyond death 
and the grave ; " Fear not them which kill the body," &c. — M. 

Vers. 25, 26. — Gideon the iconoclast. L Reformation must precede deliver- 
ance. As the prophet of repentance appeared before Gideon the deliverer, so even 
Gideon did not undertake the work of fighting the Midianites until he had first 
effected a religious reformation among his own people. It is vain to treat symptoms 
when the radical seat of a disease is untouched. Spiritual apostasy had brought on 
Israel national humiliation. The distress could not be safely relieved till the sin waa 
destroyed. God will not deliver us from the trouble into which sin has brought us 
before we begin to turn from the wicked course which made the trouble a necessary 
chastisement. It is true that under the gospel we are not made to_ wait for the 
return of Divine favour until all sin is destroyed. On the contrary, it is one great 
characteristic of this new dispensation of mercy that restoration to the favour _ of 
God does not wait for, but precedes, and is the chief cause of, a perfect reformation 
of life. Nevertheless, (1) this is only possible after repentance, which is the turn- 
ing from sin in desire, and (2) when accompanied by faith in Christ as both 
Master and Saviour, which implies submission to his will, and carries the ^ropheqy 
of a new life inseparably connected with the spiritual fruits of faith (Acts iii. 26). 



70 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[CH. VI. 83 —40 



II. Eeformation begins with the destruction op evil. Gideon's first work 
is to destroy the altar and idol of false worsliip. To wrench out the stones of the 
massive altar of Baal and tear up the " Asherah " was no easy work ; yet it was 
necessary. It is pleasant to prophesy smooth things, and we should prefer to trust 
entirely to the power of light to dispel the darkness, of life to overcome death, of 
the gospel of peace to supplant all forms of evil. But it is not possible to succeed 
by this means alone. Evil must be exposed, challenged, resisted, overthrown. Sin 
must be rebuked ; wrong practices must be directly thwarted and frustrated. This 
implies aggressive action on the part of the Church, and long, arduous, united efforts 
to throw down the great structures of sinful institutions, and uproot inveterate 
habits of vice and crime. Intemperance, commercial dishonesty, religious hypocrisy, 
&o., must be directly met and fought by practical agencies suited ',o cope with the 
strength and size of great national sins. 

III. EefOEMATION is not complete without the 8UCCESSFIJL EflABLISHMENT OF 

A NEW AND BETTER ORDER. Gideon's reforming work is not complete when he has 
thrown down the emblems and instruments of idolatry. This is but half his work. 
He must next erect an altar to the true God and sacrifice thereon. The danger of 
every attempted reformation is lest it should stay with the work of destruction — ^lest 
the iconoclast should not be also a reformer. It is more easy to throw down than to 
rebuild. The passions of the destroyer are not always joined to the patient, calm 
wisdom and energy of the renovator. Yet it is vain to cast out the evil spirit unless 
we fill the place of it with a better spirit (Matt, xii 43 — 45). Mere negative Protest- 
antism, negative temperance, negative anti-war movements are likely to lead to 
abortive issues unless they are supplemented by influences which promote and 
establish positive good. Conviction of sin must be followed by the creation of a 
new heart if the future life is to be pure (Ps. li. 10). — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Yer. 88.— The Uidianitet, &c. See ver. 8, 
note. The valley of Jezieel. Bather, the 
plain, " the great plain of Esdraelon," as the 
Book of Judith styles it (Judith i. 8 ; see 
ch. iv. 13, note). The great plain of Jezreel, 
or Esdraelon (which is the Greek form of the 
name), through which the Kishon flows, is 
tight hours in length from east to west, and five 
hours (twelve miles) in breadth from north 
to south. It is described as " a very exten- 
sive and fertile plain shut in between the 
mountain ranges of Samaria and Mount 
Carmel on the soutli, and of Galilee on the 
north," and extending from the Mediteira- 
nean at the Gulf of Caipha, or Haipha, to the 
valley of the Jordan. The access to it from 
the fords of Jordan in the neighbourhood of 
Bethshan (or Beishan, called by the Greeks 
Scythopolis) made it the natural place for 
invasion by the wild tribes east of Jordan, 
as it is to this day. Particular parts of this 
great plain are called "the valley of Me- 
giddo " and " the plain of Samaria." For a 
full account of the jilaiu of Esdraelon see 
Stanley, ' Sinai and Palestine,' ch. ix. Went 
over, i, «. crossed the Jordan. It appears 
from vers. 3 — 5 that these invasions were 
repeated at certain seasons. When they had 
plundered all they could get, and eaten up all 
the produce of the land, they would go back 
for a while to their own country east of Jor- 
dan, and then return again. So they did 



now, but they met Trith s different neeptioa 
this time. 

Yer. 84.— The Spirit of the Lord, &c. See 
ch. iii. 10 ; xi. 29 ; xiii. 25 ; xiv. 6, 19 ; ct 
Isa. xi. 2 ; Ixi. 1 ; John xx. 22 ; Acts xiii. 2 ; 
XX. 28 ; and 1 Cor. xii. 4. Ahi-ezer. His 
own family (ver. 11 ; see Josh. xviL 2). 
In Kumb. xxvi. 80 the name appears as 
Jeezer, by a very defective transliteration — 
Aiezer represents the Hebrew letters. The h 
has probably fallen out by accident. Here we 
have the immediate fruit of Gideon's daring 
in the cause of God. The whole family <3 
Ahi-ezer, numbering probably thousands, 
sprang to his side. 

Yer. 85.— He sent messengers, &o. Ma- 
nasseh, Asher, Zehulun, and Naphtali were 
the adjacent tribes — Manasseh (i. e. the half 
tribe of Manasseh, west of Jordan) on the 
soutli, Asher on the west, and Zebulun and 
Naphtali on the north. Three of these 
were the very tribes who had fought under 
Barak, and it is pleasing to see Asher now 
joined with them instead of abiding in his 
breaches. This ready compliance with the 
call was the consequence of the Sp'Vit of the 
Lord bning upon Gideon. Came ap. No 
doubt Gideon was encamped upon oue of the 
southern hills that overlooked the j)iahi, pro- 
bably Gilboa, just as Barak was on Mount 
•Tabor (see ch. viii. 8 — 12). To meet them. 
i. e. Gideon and the Abi-ezrites. 



CH. VI. 33—40.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGEft 



Tl 



Ver. 36.— If thou wilt save, &o. There 

is something touching in Gideon's difiBdenoe 
of himself, even now that he found himself 
at the head of a large force. The thought 
that he was " the least in his father's house " 
seems still to possess him, and he can hardly 
believe it possible that he is to save Israel, 
In his humility he craves a sign that he is 
indeed chosen and called. 

Vers. 37— 40.— It is difficult to guess what 
led to this somewhat quaint sign which 
Gideon asked. Possibly the dews were usually 
heavy upon the hill of Gilead (oh. vii. 8, 



note) where Gideon was encamped, aa thej 
seem to have been on Mount Gilboa (2 Sam. 
i. 21) and on Hermon (Pa. cxxxiii. 3), and 
sheep-skins may have been a common pro- 
tection against the cold nights, as in Afghan- 
istan ; and he may have noticed how often 
in the morning both the skin that covered 
him, and the ground around, was wet with 
the heavy dew. And this may have sug- 
gested the double test, by which his faitn 
was, throiTgh God's condescending mercy, 
confirmed and established. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 33 — 40. — The Divine side of human history. This Bection reveals m 
extraordinary change in the whole aspect of things in IsraeL At the beginning 
of the chapter we see the people utterly cowed before their enemies, skulking in 
caves and dens and hiding-places, while their insolent masters take possession 
of their land, their food, their substance, and all that they had. For seven years 
had this state of things endured. It had become a matter of course that, when 
the season came, the Midianites and their allies should swarm across the Jordan, 
cover the land, devour everything, stay as long as they pleased, and then return 
unresisted to their own country. But at the close of the chapter a change, like 
the sudden melting of the snow in the spring, has taken place. There are 
indeed the same Midianite hosts, "like grasshoppers for multitude, and their 
camels without number, as the sand by the sea side for multitude" (ch. vii. 12); 
there are the same kings in all their pride of power, and the game princes as greedy 
as ravens for their prey, and as hungry as wolves in pursuit of the spoil (ch. vii. 25, 
note). But when they have reached the well-known plain of Jezreel, instead of 
tame submission, instead -of the frightened people running like rabbits to their holes, 
they find a nation in arms. Manasseh was up and in the field ; Naphtali and Zebulun 
had flocked armed to the national standard ; Asher had answered the call of the 
trumpet; and 32,000 men were at the feet of their leader. Instead of running, 
hiding, and yielding, there was arming, and combining, and defiance throughout the 
land. Now what was the cause of this great change? The respective numbers of 
the Midianites and Israelites were the same, the respective qualities of the nations 
were the same, the shape of the ground was the same, the resources of the two peoples 
were the same ; whence the difference ? The difEerence lay in the motive power of 
the will of God. Before, his will was to give Israel up into the hands of Midian to 
punish their idolatry ; now, his will was to deliver them on their true repentance. 
It is just the lesson taught by the prophet Isaiah in the sublime message which he 
delivered to Sennacherib : " Hast thou not heard long ago, how I have done it ; and of 
ancient times, that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass that thou 
shouldest be to lay waste fenced cities into ruinous heaps. Therefore their inhabit- 
ants were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded : they were as the 
grass of the field, and as the green herb, as the grass on the house-tops, and as com 
blasted before it be grown up." What regulates the world is the motive power of 
the will of God acting upon and through the wills and the capacities of men. There 
are in the men virtue, courage, sagacity, ability, prudence, wisdom, counsel, on the 
one hand ; or meanness, cowardice, blindness, weakness, rashness, folly, inconseqaence, 
on the other ; and these qualities have each their own proper force and momentum ; 
but it is the will of God which gives to tliem their direction and their results. It is 
to be noted too that God in his providence raises the instruments and gives the 
qualities which are to accomplish his will. As was observed before, God's agents are 
reasonable men, and it is by their great qualities that they accomplish the work 
committed to them. But who gives them those great qualities ? How came Abraham, 
ind Joseph, and Moses, and Samuel, and David, and Judas MaccabeuB to appear on 
^ world's stage just when they did ? It in very true that Abraham's faith, tai 



n THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. vi. 88—40. 

Joseph's prudence, and the wisdom of Moses, and the integrity of Samuel, and the 
heroism of David and Judas accomplished those great results at critical moments in 
their country's history which have made their names famous for ever. And if wa 
are looking at events on their human side, it is quite true to say that Abraham founded 
the Hebrew race, and that David founded the Jewish monarchy, and Judas rescued 
his country from destruction. But it is of supreme importance, if we would see God 
in history, and in the history of our own times in particular, to recognise in the sages, 
and heroes, and reformers, and also in the philosophers, and discoverers, and inventors, 
whose several labours have changed the aspect of the world at particular epochs, 
God's special instruments sent for that very thing ; and to recognise in the changes 
brought about, not merely the action of those instruments, but the results of the will 
of God. As long as God is pleased to preserve a nation in greatness and power, he 
continues to raise up among them warriors, divines, men of genius, and statesmen. 
When the set time of decadence is come there arise no great men among them ; their 
mighty men become as women (Jer. li. 30), and counsel perishes from the wise 
(ibid, xviii. 18). In applying Dhese truths to our own Church and country it behoves 
us to remember that we owe all our own national prosperity, both in spiritual and 
temporal things, to the undeserved mercy of God ; that the continuance of that pros- 
perity depends upon the continuance of his favour ; and that the only way by which 
to preserve that favour is to walk in righteousness and godliness. Unless God wills 
to maintain our power and greatness among the nations, all the courage and policy 
in the world will not suffice to do so ; and even courage and policy may cease to 
grow among us. The example of Gideon further teaches us that boldness on God' s 
side is the prelude of triumph over foes, and that what makes leaders of the right 
Btamp Ib their investiture by the Holy Spirit of God. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOEa 

Vera. 83 — 40. — The crisis and the confirmation. Gideon's first task demanded 
moral rather than physical courage. It was restricted in its sphere. It witnessed to 
the principle that sin must be removed ere national or individual calamities can be 
permanently cured, or God's help vouchsafed. The stage now clears for the larger 
life and wider influence. 

I. The enemy presents himself in sudden, overwhelming FORCa. A remark- 
able juncture. Esdraelon, the battle-field of Canaan. Here thrones and kingdoms 
had been lost and won. To the heart of flesh it would have been the death-knell 
of hope. There was no proportion between the extent of his possible preparation 
and the magnitude of the crisis. Many would have advised a policy of temporizing 
inaction. To the sent of God the circumstances pointed all the other way. Elijah 
at Horeb. Paul at Athens. The Son of man longing for his " hour." Are you in a 
minority ; the only Christian in your ofiSoe ; with everything to discourage and tempt 
you? "Let not your heart be troubled." Outward difficulties are balanced and 
overpowered by spiritual reinforcements. " The Spirit of the Lord came upon him." 

II. Gideon's summons to arms meets with unexpected success. " He blew a 
trumpet," t. e. he used the means. But probably he did not expect anything like the 
result. He was touching chords that vibrated in unforeseen directions. He didn't 
know the moral power he had acquired by his first work. We never can gauge the 
extent of our moral influence. Jerubbaal is the magnet. Strong in God, in himself, 
at home, throughout the nation. We are all guilty herein ; we think God's people 
fewer and worse than they are. How much one steadfast, heroic soul can effect; 
how many others he can fire with enthusiasm and endue with courage by his example 
and actions ! 

III. Sudden success occasions humility and doubt. Clearly this man is not as 
others. He becomes strong against odds and vast oppositions, weak and hesitating 
when all goes well. Adversity and difficulty are plainer in their problems to the 
spiritual man than prosperity. But perhaps it was the quality of his soldiery he mis- 
trusted. They did not seem of the right stuff for a duel a outrance. Perhaps th« 
▼ery suddenness of his power terrified him. 

IV. H> BBKK8 FOB WISDOM AND CONFIRMATION OF THE HEAVENIY OIUOI. 1. /V* 



. H. VII. 1—8.1 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



71 



bahlv the very scene of Ms Jirst vision. Association helps an imaginative spirit, 
Spintual associations are mightiest. 2. ffe proposes a sign that shall reveal his duty. 
Under ordinary circumstances this is dangerous and misleading. But the whole 
background of Gideon's career is miraculous, and he had a warrant to expect 
miracles. We have a complete revelation and a Divine example. The dew abundant 
in Canaan ; the wetting of the fleece a rustic idea. The doubt is then suggested, 
What if all this be natural ? Therefore— 3. The proof is reversed. As in experimental 
science the test of variations is employed, so here m spiritual divination. God ac- 
commodates himself to our weakness that he may vanquish it. Henceforth the path ia 
clear and his mind is made up. Have we done all that conscience and revelatioE 
have made plain and obligatory ? Have we gone to the Divine footstool for the 
wiadom and strength we required ? — M. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEE VII. 



Yer. 1. — Jerubbaal. The mention of this 
name seems intended to keep before our 
minds that it is emphatically the servant of 
the Lord who is going forth to victory. The 
well of Harod, i. e. of tremilmg, so called, 
no doubt, from the incident recorded in ver. 
3, that every one who was afraid (Hebrew, 
hatred) departed from Mount Gilead. The 
well of Earod is not mentioned elsewhere, 
though two of David's mighty men are 
callett Harodites (2 Sam. xxiii. 25) ; but it is 
thought to be identical with " the fountain 
which is in Jezreel " (1 Sam. xxix. 1), on the 
slope of Mount Gilboa, and now called Aim 
Jahlood, the spring of Goliah. On the north 
side, &c. Gideon and his Abi-ezrites were 
naturally on the south side of the plain, on 
the hill, apparently Mount Gilboa, which 
there shuts in the plain. The Midianite host 
was encamped to the north of him (so it is 
in the Hebrew), in the valley, i. e, the plain 
of Jezreel (ch. vi. S3, note). _ By the hill of 
Uoreh. Nowhere else mentioned ; probably 
only a hillock, of which there are many in 
that part of the plain. 

Yer. 2. — And the Lord said, &c. It must 
be remembered that this whole movement 
was essentially a religious one. It began 
with prayer (ch. vi. 6, 7), it was followed up 
by repentance (ch. vi. 27, 28), and the great 
purpose of it was to turn the hearts of the 
nation back to the God of their fathers. 
The Lord himself, therefore, graciously for- 
warded this end by making it plain that the 
deliverance from their oppression was his 
work, and his only. For the general senti- 
ment compare Dent. viii. 10—18 ; Ps. xliv. 
8 — 8 ; Zech. iii. 6, &c. 

Ver. 3. — Depart early. The Hebrew 
word so rendered only occurs here. Its 
exact meaning is uncertain, but the old 
Torsions generally give the meaning of " de- 
part," " go back." Some, with much proba- 
■ility', connect the word with the Hebrew 
Im s apuiow, and give the sense of " fly- 



ing," i, e. returning In haste. The Mnsa af 
"early" expressed in the A.T. does not 
seem to be any part of the meaning of the 
word. See Deut. xx. 8 for the form of the 
proclamation. From Uount Gilead. These 
words cannot be explained with certainty. 
The conjectures are — 1. That there may have 
been a Mcxmt Gilead on the western side of 
Jordan, on which Gideon's army was en- 
camped, though it is not elsewhere men- 
tioned. 2. That Gilead is a transcriber's 
error for Gilboa, which only difiers by one 
letter in Hebrew. It is pret^ certain that 
Gideon was encamped on Mount Gilbo% 
3. That the phrase was th.e formula used by 
the whole tribe of Manassen, on the west aa 
well as on the east of Jordan, although pro- 
perly applying only to those on the east. 4. 
Some (reading maher, in haste, for meJiar, 
from the mount) render " let hua return in 
haste to Gilead," i. e. to his home. 

Vers. 6, 6.— The water, viz., of the well or 
spring of Harod, That lappeth, &c. It 
showed a much more soldierly and self- 
controlled spirit just to quench the thirst by 
lapping the water out of the palm of the 
hand, than to kneel down and drink without 
stint out of the spring itself. The Lord saw 
the difference of character indicated by the 
two actions, and chose his instruments ao- 
cordingly. 

Ver. 7. — By the three hundred, &o. 
Compare the saying of Jonathan, " There is 
no restraint to the Lord to save by many or 
by few" (1 Sam. xiv. 6). The same principles 
which run through the choice of God's instin- 
ments on other occasions appear here. The 
instruments are to be such in quality or in 
quantity as to make it quite manifest that 
the excellency of the power is God's, not 
man's ; and yet the instruments themselves 
are to be conspicuous for their rare excel- 
lence. The shepherd boy who sat on the 
throne of Israel was manifestly made to sit 
on that throne by the appointaient of God ; 
but what a ruler, what a noUo chaiaotH 
David waat It hai always bean i 



74 



THE BOOK OF JUUGES. 



[CH. VII. 1 — 8. 



9f the proofs of the Divine origin of Christi- 
mity that its 'apostles were men of such 
hmnble station, and yet were able to change 
the whole religion and morality of the world ; 
and yet what noble stuff Peter and John and 
Paul were mads of I And so here the over- 
throw of the hosts of Midian by three 
hundred Israelites was manifestly the effect 
of the power of God fighting on their behalf. 
But yet what marvellous heroism was there 
in those three hundred I what strength of 
purpose, what iron-firmness of nerve, to see 
above thirty thousand of their comrades 
leave them in the face of the myriads of 
their foes ; to remain quietly at their post, 
and, when the time came, to leave their camp 
and pour down into the plain. Their self- 
possession and self-restraint and absence of 



self-indulgence in the matter of the watei 
was a true index of the unequalled qualities 
which they displayed in the sequel. 

Ver 8. — So the people took, &c. It ii 
almost certain that the passage ought to be 
rendered, " And they took the victuals of the 
people in their hands, and their trumpets," 
t. «. the three hundred took or borrowed 
what provisions they needed for a few days, 
and the trumpets, which were to play an 
important part in the stratagem, from the 
people who were about to return to their 
homes. And the host of Uidian, &c. The 
writer repeats this to give a perfect picture 
of the situation. The whole army returned 
to their homes ; the three hundred alone 
with Gideon in the camp ; the Midianite host 
in the plain beneath. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — The sifting. When vre consider the extraordinary reduction of 
Gideon's army from 32,000 to 300 by a process of winnowing, not merely as an 
isalatod fact, but as a portion of the instruction of God's word, we are at once struck 
with its analogy, in principle, to other broad teachings of the same Scriptures. Let 
us first consider the case before us, and then compare with it the analogies to which 
we allude. 

I. In a great emergency, at the call of Gideon, 32,000 men with much apparent 
devotion flocked to his standard. Leaving tlieir homes and their families and their 
substance, they came forward willingly to meet danger and to endure hardship. To 
all outward appearance they were all animated by the same spirit, and might alike be 
credited with a resolution to die for their country and for their JEaith. But by and 
by a test was proposed : " Whoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart ; " 
and forthwith more than two-thirds of that band shrank from the undertaking. Their 
hearts failed them ; they thought of their homes left unprotected, they thought of the 
dreadful Midianites and Amalekites and children of the East, so numerous, so fierce, 
and so irresistible ; their faith in God was a dead letter ; the shame of deserting their 
comrades was not sufficient to restrain them ; they left the camp and returned, 22,000 
in number, to their own homes. But 10,000 remained true to the cause. These faced 
the danger and stood firm. Another test was then proposed, which should go much 
deeper, and sift the very choicest spirits from those of more ordinary mould. Of 
the 10,000 that remained, only 300 were found whose rigid self-denial, and stern self- 
discipline, and self-possessed presence of mind, showed them to be of that stamp 
which was necessary for a hazardous undertaking requiring boldness, endurance, 
watchfulness, and perseverance to insure success. And these 300 elect were accord- 
ingly retained to do the work alone ; and they did it. 

II. Now this is in accordance with the analogies both of nature and of Holy 
Scripture. Take the creation of mankind viewed as intended to glorify God by the 
proper exercise of the splendid gifts bestowed upon them. Sift them first through a 
coarse sieve which will only separate the grossly wicked and ungodly, and yet 
what a large number will thus be found to come short of the purpose for which tlify 
were created. If all the irreligious, all the evil livers, all the impure and violent and 
unjust among mankind, stand separate, what a comparatively small number will remain 
who seem true to the end of their being, even in outward appearance and in the 
rough I But if we go on further to sift with a finer sieve, so as to separate tlie careless, 
and the selfish, and the worldly, and the hypocrites, and the lukewarm, and so on, 
and so as to isolate the true saints of God, the little flock, the faithful followers of 
the Lamb, those who shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father, and be 
to him for a name and a praise, alas, how will the number be reduced I Apply the 
game method to Israel. The seed of Abraham were separated from the rest of man- 



OB VII. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 7| 

kind to be God's peculiar people, to fulfil a special purpose in the world as witnesses 
for God's unity and truth. But, as St. Paul teaches us, " they are not all Israel, which 
are of Israel : neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children : 
but, In Isaac shall thy seed be called." There be many called but few chosen. There 
were the multitude, a disobedient and gainsaying people; and there was the 
remnant according to the election of grace, who believed the gospel, and who trusted 
in the promised Messiah and obeyed his voice. Or take the parable of the sower. 
One lot of seed falls by the wayside, and the fowls of the air devour it ; another lot 
falls on the rock, and is soon burnt up by the scorching sun ; a third is choked by 
the thorns, and brings no fruit to perfection ; it is only one quarter of the seed sown 
that falls on good ground, and brings forth fruit with patience. Any one looking at 
the whole sample would have thought it all destined to be fruitful ; but lo ! only one 
fourth part comes to anything. 

Now it is important to note this: — 1. With a view to ourselves, that we may sift 
owselves before any mnnowing of God comes unawares upon us. There are states 
of the world, or states of society, or conditions of outward circumstances, when the 
grain and the chaff, the wheat and the tares, the good fish and the bad, all pass 
muster, and there is no marked difference between them. Gideon's 32,000 all pass 
for good men and true. There come changes of circumstances, there comes a win- 
nowmg of God, events and situations which try men, which test their character, 
which put their faith, their integrity, their sincerity, their conscientiousness, their 
principles, to the proof, and presently of the 32,000 only 300 stand firm. Now it is 
a matter of infinite moment that we should examine our own selves and prove our 
own selves before such a sifting takes place. Just as workmen try the strength of 
the iron which is to support a certain weight, and do not leave it to chance whether 
it shall be found strong enough or not, so ought we carefully to try our own religious 
principles, whether they are of a kind that will stand the day of temptation, or of 
the kind that will break down. It is not enough to come to the front like Gideon's 
thousands for a moment ; are we prepared to stick to our post like Gideon's 300 in 
the day of conflict and danger ? It is not enough to be on the Christian side with 
the world's multitude for a time ; we want that strength and perseverance which will 
■ecure our standing with the few when the multitudes fall away. It is important — 
2. To notice this lesson of sifting with a view to forming a correct estimate of the 
probable issues of events. Look at any number of men engaged in any work, secular 
or religious, that requires steadfastness, tenacity of purpose, fixedness of principle, 
fortitude to brave danger and meet difficulties, and the probability is that only a 
small proportion of them will go through with what they have begun. Faint-heart- 
edness, weariness, fickleness, inconstancy, and clashing considerations, will stop the 
many midway, and the work, if accomplished at all, will be the work of the few. 
Especially in work done for our Lord Jesus Christ, for the advancement of his king- 
dom and for the good of his Church, we must look to the few. The men of prayer, 
the men of earnest faith, the cross-bearing men, the men whose conversation is in 
heaven, and who are waiting for Christ, are the handful ; but they are the men who 
will fight the real battle, and who, by grace, will win the real victory. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Divinely-ordained tests. What a contrast the present position of 
Gideon as Israel's leader, within a few hundred yards of the dreaded foe, from that 
in which we first find him, threshing wheat in the wine-press secretly 1 Thus far 
has the Lord brought him, but much has to he done ere the soldiery he has shall 
be rendered efficient. Both leader and men have to pass through an ordeal such as 
must try them to the utmost. Not yet is the onset to be made that shall defini- 
tively retrieve the fortunes of Israel. Truly God's thoughts are not as men's 
thoughts. Everything is in apparent readiness, but delay is observed, and two 
mysterious tests are enjoined. 

I. The design op these tests. Although they must have seemed arbitrary, if 
not capricious, to many concerned, there is evidently " method in the madness." A 
partial explanation is given in the words, " The people that are with thee are too 



76 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. vii. 1— h, 

many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselvM 
against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me." The tests are meant, there> 
fore — 1. To check the unbelief and self-conceit of men. The vast multitude is 
reduced to a few that men may give the praise to God, and his power be manifest. 
It is easy to suppose that such a tendency would show itself amongst the miscellaneoiu 
crowd. God could do the work by " many or by few," and it was well for them all to 
know it. 2. To secure efficiency. This would consist, first, in the tried courage and 
discipline of those who remained ; and, secondly, in their faith and inspiration. 

II. Their adaptation to this design. By the adoption of the first expedient w« 
are not to suppose that so many as left were lacking in ordinary courage. But they 
were not all heroes, and it was the heroic spirit that was needed. The anxious, irre- 
solute, and timid wwe got rid of, and those who remained were men in earnest. The 
second test revealed the presence or absence of rarer qualities. This seems to 
bo its rationale : the Israelites were close to the camp of the Midianites, who must 
have been watching the singular manoeuvres of their foes. The water where they 
drank must have been within easy reach for a demonstration, but they remained 
inactive. This created carelessness, a spirit of bravado in most. When they came to 
the water, therefore, they thought only of their thirst, and either forgot or despised 
the enemy. Flinging themselves down, they abandoned themselves to the luxury of 
quenching their thirst, and by their attitude exposed themselves to surprise and panic. 
But the three hundred stood up whilst drinking, and so had to lap. In this way 
they kept themselves alert, and showed that duty, not self-indulgence, was upper- 
most in their minds. It is the combinalion of prudence and self-denial with courage 
which is the most valuable thing in a soldier. The soldiers so tried are kept for the 
special effort, and the others who had not gone away are held in reserve to follow up 
the first blow struck. But over and above the special aim of each test, there was a 
discipline in the compulsory waiting and observing all that they involved — the loss of 
time, the trial of temper by apparent folly and arbitrariness, and the insignificant 
handful surviving the tests. So were Israel and its leader prepared. Is not all this like 
the discipline of life? God is so dealing with his children. The revelation and 
guardianship of great truths are committed only to the tried few ; the signal move- 
ments and heroic duties of his kingdom are the care of elect souls, who when tested 
have been found true. The qualities requisite for a critical movement in a campaign 
•re just those most valuable in life — ^f aith in the leader, dauntless courage, superiority 
to self-indulgence, and constant prudence. We are to endure hardness as good 
soldiers of Jesus Christ. We know not what faults have to be corrected, what high 
service lies before ub. — M. 

Ver. 2. — " Mine oton hand hath saved me." Nothing more impressive than the 
secrecy observed by God in bringing on his kingdom. He is not lavish of signs and 
wonders. Sufficient for the occasion, and no more. Not always asserting himself. 
So unobtrusive, that vain and empty minds are ready to conclude him non-existent 
or inoperative. " Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the 
Saviour." The place of God at the beginnings of things — the springs and roota ; 
and the spiritual nature of God accounts for much of this. He loves to work by 
despised instruments and obscure agencies. " Thy gerMemess hath made me great." 

X How PRONE THE NATURAL MIND IS TO THIS IMPRESSION. Israel, as here stated, 
was constantly imagining it. The moral systems, ancient and modern, social ana 
political nostrums and panaceas, of men show this. The glorification of courage, 
intellectual gifts, material resources. 

II. Its MISCHIEVOUS effects. Egotism ; materialism ; intellectual and moral pride. 
" For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish theit 
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God " 
(Bom. X. 3). " Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life " (John v. 40). 

III. Proofs that man cannot be his own saviour. 1. The miraculous deUver- 
*nces of Israel. The weakness of luxurious and materially enriched times. Th« 
i;rovidenoes of life. The soul's inner experiences. 2. The true conception oftalvor 
ttbn. A spiritual more than a material fact. Our relation to the law of God. " Not 
by worke of righteousnesB which we have done," Ac. (Titus iii. S). " And be found 



•R. Til. 1— A] THE BOOK OP JUDGBa 



in him, not having mine own righteousness," &c. (Phil. iii. 9). Inward witness — 
» Bv the grace of God I am what I am " (1 Cor. xv. 10). — M. 

Ver. 2. — Success not dependent on mmibers. One of the first objects of a general'i 
anxiety is to see that he has a sufficient number of men under his command. But 
Gideon is made to understand that he has too many, and must reduce his hosts before 
going to battle with the sanction and assistance of God. In Christian work the 
tendency is to rely on external appearances of strength manifested by a great array 
of workers rather than on the inconspicuous spiritual sources of real power. While 
remembering the need of more labourers of the right kind for God's field (Matt. ix. 
37, 38), we must also understand that the work may be suffering through excess in 
numbers of those labourers, whose character and method of work are not of the 
highest order. 

I. The poweb op God le far moeb important than ant human agenot. In 
all Divine work the real energy is centred in God. We are but the instruments in 
his hands. The temptation is to forget that the true power and blessing come 
wholly from him (Deut. viii. 17), and to think so much of our labour in planting 
and watering as to ignore the one most important thing, God giving the increase (1 
Cor. iii. 7). A gardener can only minister to the spontaneous life of nature ; and 
if he becomes so infatuated with his skill as to attempt to manufacture a plant, his 
total reliance on his own resources will, of course, only reveal folly. So anything 
which leads us to magnify human agencies at the expense of Divine power will as 
surely produce failure. 1. The imposing appearance of too great numbers may 
lead us to neglect the aid of God. When we are few we feel our helplessness, and so 
learn to turn to God for strength ; when we are many we imagine ourselves strong, 
and thus while we are (apparently) strong in ourselves we are really most weak. 
Presumption takes the place of faith, and human agency is relied on instead of 
Divine energy. The numbers of the Church, the elaborate organisation of her 
societies, the gifts and genius of individual men are all snares if they tempt us to 
neglect the one supreme source of success. The danger of the Church in the present 
day is to rely too much on the machinery of her institutions, instead of seeking the 
vital power which can alone inspire the energy of spiritual work. 2. The character 
of too great numbers may he such as to hinder the bestowed of the help of God. God 
cannot bestow his spiritual gifts on a people who are not spiritually-mmded. If we 
gain numbers at the expense of spirituality, we do this also at the expense of Divine 
•id. Better be few, and constituting such a worthy temple that the Holy Ghost can 
dwell and work in us, than numerous, but possessed by a worldly spirit which 
degrades the temple into a house of merchandise. 

U. The quality of ant human agenct is moke important than the size of 
IT. It has been well said that it would be better for the cause of Christianity in the 
world "if there were fewer Christians and better ones." Xerxes found thci vast 
numbers of his Asiatic hordes a hindrance to effective warfare with the disciplined 
Greeks, The great want of the Church is not more labourers, but better ones — 
better ministers, missionaries, teachers ; not more sermons, but more able preaching ; 
not a more ponderous library of Christian literature to meet the attacks of unbelief, 
but a few more powerful works (one book, ' Butler's Analogy,' was probably more 
effective in counteracting the influence of Deism than all the rest of the voluminous 
apologetic writing of the eighteenth century). It would be well if Church discipline 
were a reality, and Christian workers selected with conscientious care. The workers 
should be sifted by tests applied to their character and abilities. 1. Tests of courage 
and zeal are useful ; so Gideon dismissed the timid, and only willing men were 
retained. The only valuable soldiers in Christ's army are the volunteers who 
delight in his service. 2. Slight incidents will often reveal character, and serve M 
tests of the quality of God's servants (ver. 7). — A. 



IS 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oh. vu. ft— 2& 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 9. — Get thee down, &c., i. e. attack 
the camp at once with thy 300 men. But 
if thou art afiaid to do so, go down first 
alone with Phurah thy servant, and hear what 
tk«y are saying in the camp. 

Ver. 11. — The armed men. The exact 
meaning of the word here rendered armed 
men (chamushim), and which occurs Exod. 
ziii. 18 ; Josh. i. 14 ; iv. 12, is a little un- 
certain, but it is generally thought to be 
Bynonymoua with another word (ahalutsim), 
also rendered armed (Numb, xxxii. 82 ; Deut. 
lii. 18), and to mean literally girded, i. e. 
prepared to fight. These fighting men, as 
distinguished from the numbers of the no- 
mads who were with their camels and cattle 
scattered all along the plain, were aU col- 
lected in the camp, to the edge of which 
Gideon and Phurah crept stealthily in the 
dark. 

Ver. 13. — A cake. The Hebrew word 
occurs nowhere else. Of barley bread. The 
commonest kind of bread, the food of only 
the poorer classes, indicating, therefore, the 
humble origin and station of Gideon. A 
tent. Rather, the tent ; what in a Boman camp 
would be the pretormm, the general's tent. 
The words at the end of the verse are heaped 
np to indicate the total and entire upsetting 
and overthrow of the tent, symbolic of the 
rout and destruction of the Midianite host. 

Ver. 14. — This is nothing else, &c. The 
dream and the interpretation are striking 
evidences of the terror which Gideon's name 
had already inspired among the Midianites. 
Because, although both the dream and the 
interpretation were of God, for the encou- 
ragement of Gideon in his great undertaking, 
yet they followed the cotfrse of nature and 
the laws of psychology. The presentiment 
that God had delivered Midian into Gideon's 
hand is exactly like the terror in the minds 
of the Canaanites which preceded the arrival 
of Joshua (Exod. xxiii. 27 ; Deut. ii. 25 ; 
xi. 25 ; Josh. ii. 9 — 11). 

Ver. 15. — It was so, &c. The effect upon 
Gideon was like magic. He not only learnt 
the state of panic in which the Midianites 
were, but he had a further certainty that 
God was with him. His simple piety and 
kdoring gratitude threw him at once upon 
his knees to thank God, and to cast him- 
self anew upon his stiength with nn- 
doubting trust. His hands were indeed 
strengthened, and he lost not a moment in 
returning to his 300, relating in a few words 
the incident of the dream, and bidding them 
follow him. The Lord hath delivered, &c. 
Cf. 1 Sam. xiv. 20. 

Ver..l6. — Trnmpett, which had been col- 
laoted &om the whole army (Ter. 8, note). 



lamps. Bather, as in the margin, torcha, 
within the pitchers, so as not to be seen till 
the pitchers were broken, when the torches 
would flare with a sudden blaze. The pU- 
chers were vessels for drawing water, as 
appears from Gen. xxiv. 14, 16, 18, 20. 
They were doubtless of earthenware, as they 
were so easily broken. 

Ver. 18. — The sword of the lord, &c. 
The word sword is not in the original here, 
though it is in ver. 20. It has either dropped 
out of the text accidentally, or what we have 
here is the shorter form of the war-cry. It 
is observable how careful Gideon is to put 
the name of Jehovah first. It was his cause 
against Baal, and the battle was to be fought 
in his strength, and the glory of the victoiy 
was to be his. The cry, "The sword of 
Gideon," would be peculiarly terrible to the 
many who had heard of the dream, of which 
the fulfilment was come so quickly. 

Ver. 19. — The middle watch. The ancient 
Israelites divided the night into three watchei 
of four hours each, from sunset to sunrise, 
i. e. from six p.m. to six a.m. The first 
watch, from six to ten, is not mentioned in 
the Old Testament ; but we have the middle 
watch mentioned here (from ten to two), and 
the morning watch (from two till six) : Exod. 
xiv. 24 and 1 Sam. xi. 11. According tc 
this, Gideon's attack would have taken place 
soon after ten p.m., or towards eleven, the 
time when the sleep would be the deepest, 
the watchmen of the first watch having 
lately fallen into their first sleep. The later 
Israelites adopted the Boman division of the 
night into four watches (Matt. xiv. 25 ; 
Markvi. 48; cf. Lukexii. 38 ; Markxiii. 35). 

Ver. 21. — They stood, &c. Gideon's men 
did not advaiice, but stood, each company 
in the place assigned to them, at different 
sides of the camp. This had the effect of 
awakening the whole camp simultaneously, 
and they started to their feet and ran hither 
and thither in confusion, shouting as they 
went. Undisciplined troops, especially ex- 
citable Orientals, are very liable to be thus 
thrown into a panic. Fled. The Cethib 
has, caused to fly, i. e. either "put to 
flight," or " carried away," as in ch. vi. 9 ; 
Exod. ix. 20. In the former case the 
nominative must be <Ae Israelites; in the 
latter, th,eir tenis, herds, stuff, &c., must be 
understood. Both are very awkward. The 
Keri, fled, is probably right, unless amted 
to fly has the sense of " bid them fly," in 
which case the preceding word, cried, might 
be taken in its common sense of they sounded 
am, dlarm. The whole clause would then 
run thus : And all the ca/mp ran; amd they 
sownded a retreat, and bid Aemflee, 



OH. VII. 9—25.] 



TAB BOOK OP JUDGES. 



79 



Ver. 22. — Blew the trumpets, &c. Hear- 
ingthe confusion, the three companies blew 
their trumpets, probably more loudly than 
before, to give the impression of a hot pur- 
suit being at hand. The Midianites, think- 
ing the enemy were upon them, and not 
being able in the dark to distinguish friend 
from foe, mistook their flying comrades for 
pursuing Israelites, and fell upon and slew 
one another. In like manner the Philis- 
tines had done when attacked by Jonathan 
and his armour-bearer (1 Sam. xiv. 20), and 
the Ammonites, Moabites, and Edomites 
when attacked by Jehoshaphat (2 Chron. 
XX. 23). Beth-shittah. House of acacias. 
The exact situation of it, and of Zererath 
and Tabbath, is unknown. They must have 
been villages lying on the route from the 
plain of Esdraelon to the banks of Jordan, 
probably between Little Hermon on the 
north and Mount Gilboa on the south, where 
there was a very ancient high road from 
Jezreel to the Jordan by Beth-shan. Indeed 
it is highly probable that Shutta, a village 
mentioned by Robinson, marks the site, as 
it retains the name of Beth-shittah. For 
Zererath some read, with some of the old 
versions and manuscripts, Zeredath (r and 
d being scarcely distinguishable in Hebrew), 
and identify it with Zarthan near Succoth, 
mentioned Josh. iii. 16 and 1 Kings iv. 12 ; 
vii. 46. Ahel-meholah (the meadow of the 
dance) was the birthplace of Elisha (1 Kings 
xix.l6), and is mentioned in conjunction with 
Beth-shan, Jezreel, and Zartana in 1 Kings 
iv. 12. Eusebius tells us that in his time 
Ahel-meholah was called Beth-maiela, and 
gituated ten miles below Beth-shan, or Scy- 
thopolis. There was also, he says, close by 
an Ahel-maiela. 

Ver. 23.— The men of Israel, &c. Gideon's 
disbanded army got together again very 



quickly when they heard of the ilight of thi 
Midianites. Zebulun is not mentioned. 

Ver. 24. — Mount Ephraim. Eather, tht 
hill cowntry of EphraAm. For some reason 
Gideon had not invited the Ephraimites to 
join in the war before (ch. viii. 1) ; but now, 
seeing the extreme importance of seizing the 
fords of Jordan, so as to stop the escape of 
the Midianites, he sent messengers in all 
haste to the men of Ephraim, who accord- 
ingly " took the waters unto Beth-harah and 
Jordan." The waters seem to mean a number 
of streams running from the hill country of 
Ephraim into the Jordan, and which had to 
be crossed by tlie Midianites before they 
could reach the Jordan fords. The site of 
Beth-barah is unknown. It is not thought 
to be the same as Bethahara beyond Jordan, 
where John was baptising (John i. 28). Beth- 
bardh must have been on the west of Jordan. 

Ver. 25. — Oreb, a raven, and Zeeh, a wolf. 
The rock known afterwards as the rock of Oreb 
(Isa. X. 26), and the wine-press (see ch. vi. 
11) known as the viine-press of Zeeb, were so 
called from being the places where these two 
princes were taken and slain by the Eph- 
raimites. In like manner the well of Hcurod 
is called by the name it afterwards received 
(ver. 1), and the palm tree of Deborah in 
like manner (ch. ii. S), and Lfshi (ch. xv. 9). 
These are valuable indications (to which 
many more might be added) of a living tra- 
dition older than the written history. The 
capture of Oreb and Zeeb is celebrated in 
Fs. Ixxxiii. 11 and Isa. x. 26. On the 
other side Jordan, i. e. the east side of the 
river, which Gideon had now crossed, as is 
related in ch. viii. 4. The narrative runs on 
here to con^lete the history of the doings of 
the men of Ephraim, and goes back at ch. 
viii. 4 to take up the thread of the history 
of Gideon (see ch. IL 1 — 6, note). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 9 — ^'S.—Faith. The whole Book of Judges is bo full of lessons of faith, 
as the author of tlie Epistle to the Hebrews teaches us when he refers to " Gideon, 
and Barak, and Samson, and Jephthah " (Heb. xi. 32), that we cannot help recurring 
to the subject of faith if we would honestly draw the instruction which each portion 
of Scripture is intended to convoy. But though the same general lessons of faith — 
its nature, its triumphs, its sure rewards — reour in the succesBive histories, yet 
each has some proper lesson peculiar to itself. Referring then to the remarks on 
ch. i. 8 — 21 for such general lessons, we will notice some peculiar trials to which the 
faith of Gideon was subjected. 

I. Thb sacrifices of faith. Let us put ourselves in Gideon's place. Suddenly 
called out of insignificance and obscurity, he had played the part of a statesman, a 
leader, and a general. As the result of his well-concerted measures, he found himself 
at the head of 32,000 men. As he reviewed this great force, so unexpectedly got 
together, how must his heart have swelled with pride and hope 1 No doubt that great 
army was the instrument by which he was to deliver Israel, and he could but feel 
some self-gratulation at the success of his plans. To a man of an eager spirit as he 
must have been, no greater disappointment could have occurred than to be told to 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oH. vn. »— 28. 



dismiss that army without striking a blow. Just when he was about to acquire 
immortal^ fame to himself, and to save his country, and establish the great religions 
reformation which he had begun, by their means, to see them, and all his own pros- 
pects with them, melt away like a heap of snow before the sun, and that by his own 
act, must have been a trial indeed. But Gideon's faith stood the trial. Before God's 
»^iear command all his natural feelings and wishes gave way at once. He mighthave 
said with St. Paul, " What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ ; " 
for he acted in that self-same spirit. His faith prompted him to obey, at whatever 
sacrifice of inclination and natural desire. That places him on a very high pedestal 
among believers. But let us look again at the extraordinary singleness of eye with 
which Gideon's faith led him to act. The loss of the first 22,000 men was indeed a 
heavy one, but still they went away of their own free will. But the 10,000 who 
remained had given proof of a brave and constant spirit, and how could he put upon 
them the afEront of sending them away, after a test of an arbitrary kind, as men unfit 
to face the enemy? It was now not Gideon's ambition only, not his amour-propre, 
which would rise in rebellion against a hard command, but his feelings as a solmer, 
as a comrade, as one who desired to retain the good opinion of his countrymen, and who 
wished to be popular amongst them. Dismiss the 9700 men who had left home, and 
were come to share the danger with him, and who had refused to leave him when they 
might have done so I Expose himself to the charge of fickleness and folly — ^to be 
thought like a man who builds a house and then plucks it down with his own hande ; 
to be liable all his life to the hatred and resentment of those whom he had so 
affronted ! (See 2 Chron. xxv. 10.) How could he obey such a hard command ? But if 
Gideon's natural man spake thus, the voice of his faith spake in contradiction to such 
thoughts, and spake with authority. His faith still prompted him to obey, and he did 
obey, because he looked with a single eye to the will of God, and took no count of 
eonsequences to himself or others. Here again then his faith was of a veiy high 
quality. 

II. The risks of faith. But we may look at Gideon's faith in d little different 
light, and mark the immense risks that he ran, having all human probabilities against 
him, and only the promise of God for him. Here was a vast host of 135,000 men 
within less than an hour's march of him. His position was anyhow one of the utmost 
danger. To weaken his force even by 1000 men must seem an act of great impru- 
dence. To denude himself of his whole force except a handful of 300 men was like 
courting destruction, like putting his head in the lion's mouth. Humanly speaking, 
Gideon and his 300 would be crushed like insects under the feet of the Midianite 
host. And yet he deliberately reduced his force to 300 men, and then marched down 
from his stronghold into the enemy's camp. He set the word and promise of God 
on one side, and all the fearful risks and dangers on the other, and these last were in 
his eyes as nothing in comparison with the former. He went down with his 300 in 
full confidence of the victory which he won. In this too his faith was worthy of all 
praise and imitation. 

III. Verification of the worjo of God. But here perhaps a caution is necessary, 
lest we mistake what faith is. Faith is such an entire trust in the word of God that 
it produces obedience to that word, whatever it requires of us. But we must not 
mistake our own fancy, or our own wishes, or our own opinion, for the word of God. 
Had Gideon rushed down upon the Midianite host upon the impulse of his own 
courage, or in reliance on his own stratagem, or under an unfounded belief that God had 
sent him, instead of admiring his faith, we should have had perhaps to blame him for 
foolhardiness, or to accuse him of foolish vanity, or to pity him for his fanaticism. 
It was because his course was founded upon the clear and distinct word of God that 
it is held up to us as an object of admiration and imitation. And it is worth observing 
in this connection what abundant assurance was given to Gideon that the very word 
of God was his warrant for what he did, and how cautious Gideon was to obtain such 
assurance. The distinct appearance and words of the angel at first, his tarrying by 
the terebinth tree at Gideon's request^, the fire which consumed the sacrifice at toe 
touch of tht> angel's staff, the vanishing of the angel out of his sight, his reappear- 
ance'that sa^e night, the sign, twice repeated, of the fleece of wool, the reiterated 
communieations by the word of the Lord, and the dream that he heard in the Midianite 



OH. vn. »— 26.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. M 



camp are so many proofs upon proofs, like our Lord's appearances after his reaurreiv 
tion, given by God to make Iiis revelation certain, and so many evidences of Gideon'l 
wise caution in ascertaining beyond a doubt that it was the word of God which was 
directing him in this terrible enterprise. In trying to take Gideon's faith as a model 
of our own, we must first imitate his care in ascertaining what the word of God really 
does require otus. The sad mistakes that have been made by misguided men in all 
ages, confo'inding the passions of their own hearts, or the hallucinations of their own 
brains, with therequirements of the written word of God, and even in their heated 
fanaticism imagining that special revelations were made to them by the Holy Ghost, 
confirms thejeason, given us by Gideon, of not accepting anything as the word of 
God upon light or insufficient evidence. To accept as the word of God without 
sufficient evidence any impression, or impulse, or vision, or dream, or interpretation 
of Scripture, is not a proof of a strong faith, but an evidence of a weak, and rash, and 
credulous mind. We may place, therefore, as first in order of importance, as well as 
the first that rises to the surface from the history of Gideon, the lesson of taking all 
due care and caution in verifying the word of God. This implies, circumstanced as 
we are, diligent and prayerful study of Holy Scripture, so as to be imbued with its 
true spirit, and to know thoroughly what it requires of us under the various circum- 
stances of life. But when once the requirements and meaning of the word of God 
are plain, then a true faith will obey it, in spite of any sacrifice of worldly interest or 
self-pleasing which such obedience may incur, and in spite of any risks of worldly 
evil which may ensue. And the reason is obvious. Faith rests upon the perfect 
goodness and infinite power of God. If once, therefore, we know that God commands 
ns to do such or such a thing, or to leave such a thing undone, we are certain that it 
is really for our good to do it, however much appearances may be the other way. 
We are certain too'that the power of God is sufficient to bear us harmless through all 
dangers, however insuperable they may seem to us. It is of the very essence of faith, 
therefore, to give more weight to the unseen power and love of God than to the visible 
losses and dangers which threaten to be the result of obedience to God's word, and 
to make light of sacrifice of worldly advantages, or of selfish interests, in view of that 
closer communion with God which comes of obedience to his commandments. So 
Gideon acted, so Abraham acted, and so Moses acted, and thus must we act if we 
would be reckoned with them. The sacrifices we are called to make and the risks 
we are called to run by a conscientious obedience to the word of God in all its 
breadth will probably be much smaller than theirs were ; perhaps only the sacrifice 
of some gratification to our vanity, or some addition to our self-esteem, the risk of 
some loss to our gains, or some check to our haste to get rich ; but every such sacri- 
fice made in the spirit of a true faith, and every such risk run in simple trust to the 
promises of the word of God, will be accepted of God in his Fatherly love, and will 
help to make us rich in faith, and to secure our place among the heirs of that kingdom 
which God hath promised to them that love him. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vers. 9 — 15. — The crowning sign. All through this drama the spirit of Gideon 
was being trained for a decisive service. His faith bar) been tried to the utmost. 
Alone of all that host had he borne the responsibility of reducing it to 300 men, 
God's influence upon Gideon was from beginning to end moral and spiritual. 

I. God justifies his ways to i'hose who put theik trust in him. It was • 
grace that this additional sign should be given. The patience and faith of the servant 
of God are recognised by a spiritual reward. The deep harmony, hitherto unsuspected, 
of the steps he had taken at the Divine instance with the process going on and 
assisted by God's influence in the minds of his enemies must have, when combined 
with the circumstances, — the still night, the darkness, the vast host in whose dangerou» 
neighbourhood he lay, — produced a profound impression upon his mind. In such a 
revelation there is communion ard spiritual rapture. It was a reward for all he had 
passed through. The wisdom of everything was plain. There are times like this in 
every true life. They come unexpectedly, as a grace from our heavenly Father. , H« 
leads us into his counsels, and confirms us. Obedience leads on to knowledgo. 
••XJJWB8. • 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES [CH. vii, 9^25. 



II. Suggestion is given how to perfect odr sebvicb. In every ssict's life 
there is something wanting — an indefinite incompleteness and crudity. Such revela- 
tions and providences remove this. Their practical utility is evident. Here wera 
several matters made known to Gideon he had not probably dreamt of. 1. The 
carelessness of the watch, arising probably from the notion that Israel had disagreed 
and dispersed. 2. The liability of an army so composed, &c., to panic. 3. The 
influence of his own name (the use he made of this we know by the cry). 4. The 
secret fear in the hearts of his adversaries. 

III. It is by the moral influence op God's people the world is overcome. 
Christians are too much afraid of the world. Fear not, says the Master, /or I have 
overcome the world. Vivid realisations of this are sometimes afEorded us. The whole 
stress of attention ought therefore to be laid upon character, obedience to God's will, 
and submission to his leadership. Though few and weak, the " little flock " wil! 
receive the kingdom. It is Christ in us of whom the wicked and the demons are 
afraid. Of what consequence all their multitude and array? Secretly the world 
respects and fears the self-denial and faith of Christians. 

IV. A gracious revelation like this has to be recognised adoringly and by 
immediate practical obedience. Gideon " worshipped " Jehovah. It was a time 
when every obstacle had been removed, and his way was clearly revealed. He could 
now sympathise with God and admire his consummate wisdom. For himself too 
he must have felt grateful. God was better to him than he had hoped. Victory was 
potentially his. No wonder that his heart poured itself forth in such unrestrained 
and adoring emotion. But the lesson of the sign was not lost. Practical advantage 
was at once taken of it. He " returned unto the host of Israel, and said. Arise," &c. 
Do not allow God's gracious revelations in our lives to be a dead letter. Act upon 
them, that our lives may be brought into subjection and harmony with his will. — M. 

Vers. 15 — 22. — Inspired tactics. The strategy of Gideon is one of the military 
marvels of antiquity. It seems simple and well adapted to its end ; but that did not 
appear at first. In truth he was taught of God, inspiring his mind and illuminating 
his common sense, his experience, and his spiritual faculties. From the " lamps, 
pitchers, and trumpets " we learn — 

• I. How THE ENEMIES OF GoD ABE TO BE DEALT WITH. 1. The mtans to be em- 
ployed are of Divine appointment. Not what human wisdom would devise, nor as 
appealing to material aid. " Gideon overcame Midian with unarmed soldiers, bearing 
only trumpets, torches, and pitchers. So Christ overcame the world by unarmed 
apostles, bearing the trumpet of preaching and the torch of miracles " CTheodoret). 
2. Prompt and intelligent advantage is to be taken of the opportunities presented. 
What served at this juncture would have been entirely useless at another time. 
Knowledge of men is of immense advantage to the Christian worker; tact, and per- 
ception of the capabilities of the several means of grace. The power of Christian 
truth can never be overrated, but it may he misapplied. 3. Unity and co-operation 
should be shovm by God's servants. Nothing could be finer than the device, save the 
manner in which it was carried out. Greater works than these shall be done when 
all Christ's servants are of one heart and one mind. 

II. In WHAT LIGHT THEIR POWER I.' TO BE REGARDED. Gidcon began his enter- 
prise with the conviction, which he communicated to his followers, "The Lord hath 
delivered into your hand the host of Midian." The victory is already potentially 
ours if we use the right means in the right spirit. All the pomp and influence of 
sin ought not to daunt us. It is a house divided against itself, and subject to a 
thousand alarms. The least saint, in God's strength, may put an " army of aliens " 
to flight. 

III. Upon whom the soldier of the truth ought to depend. Gideon is filled 
throughout with a profound trust in Jehovah. It is that which gives the moral 
character to his plans. Although he saw how potent his own name was amongst 
the Midianites, he did not content himself with the war-cry, " The sword of Gideon," 
but preferred "The sword of the Lord (Jehovah) and of Gideon." Christians can 
rely implicitly upon spiritual means and methods, because they believe in God, who 
informs and directs all earnest effort. The Israelites stood still and tbe Lord fought 
for them. — M. 



OT. vn. 9-26.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 81 

Ver. 22—ch. viii. 4, 10—13. — Follovdng up advantage. A model of diplomati* 
skill, judicialsteinnesB, and soldier-like hardihood and resolution. Far from home, 
amid hardship in strange regions, he tracks the enemy even into the inaccessible 
Hauran. There is a Syrian proverb, He fied into the Wa'r of the Sofa, i. e. into an 
unassailable refuge. 

I. The co-operation is sought of all Israelites who can be of help. He 
had reasons for keeping the glory to his own trusty band. But there is no selfishness 
in hisdisposition. The advantage of his nation and the glory of Jehovah is upper- 
most in his mind. He finds work, therefore, for all. All are engaged, that it may be 
a national victory. Some have to lay the foundations, begin the work, sow the seed ; 
others can then carry out. The least Christian has something he can do. It is a 
duty of leaders to make and indicate fitting work for all. "The harvest truly ia 
great, but the labourers are few." Ephraim can do one part of the work best ; he 
another. And having hitherto abstained, they were quite fresh now. 

II. A SAGACIOUS AND KINDLY FORBEARANCE IS SHOWN TO THE JEALOUSIES 01 

BRETHREN. No word of rebuke is spoken to the tribes that held back. Persuasion 
is used, opportunity for usefulness is presented, the patriotism of the tribes is relied 
upon. It was no time for questions and wranglings. Well would it be for the 
different branches of Christ's Church did they follow a similar policy. Would that 
we were all so busy that we had no time for doctrinal disputes and questions of 
precedence and apostolic authority I 

III. No PAUSE OR REST IS OBSERVED UNTIL THE TASK IS COMPLETED. The deserted 

Midiaiiite camp with all its nches does not tempt. Hunger and thirst and weariness 
are endured rather than lose the advantage. Only a determination to follow up the 
surprise with thorough and exemplary vengeance could have sustained him. So the 
conflict with sin and the world is to be conducted. Better to wear out than to rust 
out. Evil habits, unholy practices, false principles have to be tracked out to theii 
last refuges and finally disposed of. It is harder work to live out Christianity than 
to be converted to it ; harder work to follow out in detail, and into the practice and 
life of every day, the great doctrines of righteousness than to understand and explain 
them intellectually. There is a loud call for vigour, thoroughness, patient continuance 
in well-doing. The day is Christ's ; let us make it wholly his. — M. 

Vers. 16 — IS.— Gideon's ruse. I. The assurance of success is a help towards 
ATTAINING it. Gideon had feared to attack the hosts of Mldianites and Amalekites 
till he had discovered that they feared him ; then he took courage and energy to 
devise the plan of victory. Too much diffidence is dangerous. Hope inspires with 
ingenuity as well as with courage ; it is a brightness, an influence that enlivens 
thought. Therefore hope has its place in the first rank of Christian graces (1 Cor. 
xiii. 13). The promises of the Bible are not only comforting, they are inspiring. 
Our great encouragement should be that the powers of evil feiir Christ and his army. 

II. Thought is sometimes more needful than force. Gideon's victory was a 
triumph of thought, of contrivance. The right disposition of our energies is more im- 
portant than the mere sum of them. It would be well if Christians practised on behalf 
of the cause of Christ the same wisdom which men of the world display in business, 
in politics, &a., so far as this is not inconsistent with perfect honour (Luke xvi. 8). 
Christ requires us to be wise and harmless (Matt. x. 16). Dulness is not holiness. 
Intellectual gifts should be consecrated to God, not despised as unfit for his service. 
The diplomatist and the tactitian may find work in the service of Christ. In mission 
work organisation, economy of strength, ingenious adaptation of means to ends 
should be carefully studied, and the gift of wisdom sought in addition to that of zeal. 

III. Moral influence is beiter than physical force. Gideon had conquered 
before he had struck a blow. The dismay he created and the confusion this produced 
in the hostile camp secured him victory. Though we cannot be justified in descend- 
ing to deception, we may aim at influencing others by thought and feeling rather 
than by direct physical means. Christianity is a triumph of ideas. It is a sign ot 
intellectual and spiritual failure when the Church desires to effect by the aid of the 
law what she should have done by the influence of moral suasion, aa in restraining 
Immorality, Ac. 



■4 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oh. Tin. 1—3 



IV. Ignoeancb is weakness. The Midianites and Amalekites were ignorant of 
the number of Gideon's army, or they would not have been deceived. They were 
too »elf -confident to inquire, as Gideon had done, concerning their condition. Ignor- 
ance and superstition create imaginary foes. An evil conscience is quick to imagine 
danger (Prov. xxviii. 1). The terrors which surround us are worse in imagination 
than in reality. Darkness and ignorance make men their own worst enemies (ver. 
22).— A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER VIIL 



Ver. I. — The men of Xplualm. It is 

possible that the transfer of the birthright 
from Manasseh to Ephraim (Gen. zlviii. 
13 — 19) may have produced some estrange- 
ment between the tribes. It is also possible 
that Ephraim, in view of their great tribal 
power, and the distinction conferred upon 
1 hem by the judgeship of Joshua the son of 
Nun (Numb. xiii. 8), and the possession of 
his grave (Josh. xxiv. 30), may have grown 
haughty and domineering, and perhaps more 
disposed to rest upon their former glories 
than to embark in fresh undertakings. Any- 
liow Gideon did not consult them, nor ask 
their aid, in the first instance. Now that 
the war had been so successful, the men of 
Ephraim were much displeased at not having 
been consulted. 

Ver. 2. — What have I done, &c. Gideon's 
character comes out splendidly in this answer. 
Humble and unassuming (ch. vL 1 6, 36, note), 



and indisposed to glory, he was willing to 
give the Ephrairaites full credit for their 
share in the great victory ; prudent, and a 
lover of his country, he saw the immense 
importance of union among themselves, and 
the danger of intestine divisions and discord, 
and so at once met Ephraim's taunts by the 
soft answer which turneth away wrath 
(Prov. XV. 1). The grapes. The insertion 
of the word grapes, which is not in the 
Hebrew, rather spoils the proverb. It would 
run better, The gleaning of Ephraim is better 
than the vintage of Abi-ezer. The word 
vmtage sufficiently shows that the gleaning 
meant was a gleaning of grapes. Ephraim, 
who came in at the end of the fight, like the 
gleaner when the vintage is finished, had got 
more glory by the capture of Oreb and Zeeb 
than the Manassites, who had gone through 
the whole campaign. The passage above re- 
ferred to in Isaiah (ch. x. 25) implies that a 
great slaughter of the Midianites took place 
at the rock of Oreb. 



EOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — S. — 2%« blindness of self-love. Nobody admires pride, envy, jealousy, and 
petulance, when they see them pictured in the character and conduct of other men. 
Everybody, on the contrary, recognises the beauty of humility, gentleness, and for- 
bearance, and admires self-control and patience under provocation, and the postpone- 
ment of private feelings to the public good. How is it that we so often yield to the 
passions which we condemn in others, and so seldom and so imperfectly practise those 
graces of which we see the beauty and excellence ? Lord, help us to put ofE the 
old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and to put on the new man, 
which after thee is created in righteousness and true holiness. Help us to be what 
we approve, and to leave o£E in ourselves what we disapprove in others. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1—9, 13 — 17. — Dealing with obstructives. Ephraim, Succoth, and Penuel. 

I. They ought not to be buffered to interfeeb with the chief ends and 
PEESSING CLAIMS OF DiviNE SERVICE. Gideon hastens after the routed and retrnating 
foe. The sullen apathy of Ephraim, the refusal of Succoth and Penuel to meet the 
demands of patriotism and humanity, do not turn him aside. When the last blow 
has been struck and the power of Midian is laid low he will return and mete out to 
each according to their deserts. This is an illustration of liow side issues maj of^^^en 
arise, and of the manner in which they are to be dealt with. It is seldom thitt the 
difiiculties and oppositions of life, however annoyii g and restraining they may he, 
can utterly prevent the graver duties or excuse dilatoriness. Frequently the petty 
nature of the opposition is revealed by steadfast continuance in the path of duty, »nd 
wlitaiy resolution. We most do what we can, leaving with others the responri'^'^U^ 



VIII. 4—12.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



U 



for their own conduct. The greatest workers in CShrist's vineyard have had to labour 
and live on amidst misanderstanding, obloquy, and hindrance ; but their work has 
been achieved nevertheless, and its moral effect has been all the greater. 

II. When the pkopeb time abkives they must be dealt with according to the 
KATURE AND DEGREE OP THE OPPOSITION. A wise discrimination is needed. Where 
gentleness will avail, harsh measures are to be avoided. Gideon knew the haughty 
character of Ephraim, the wound their ambitious spirit had sustained when the 
leadership was wrested from their hands, and so he exercised forbearance, and waa 
gentle and pacific. Civil war was averted when it might have involved national 
ruin, and the generous aide of Ephraim was appealed to. " A soft answer tumeth 
away wrath." After all, Ephraim had atoned for past misbehaviour by the timely 
and efEective service rendered even in the face of an unexplained misunderstanding. 
It is wise to credit our opponents with the best motives, and to speak gently and 
reasonably, abstaining from self-glorification. But where the hindrance had been a 
national crime and a violation of the first principles of humanity a difEerent course 
was pursued. Here the functions of the judge were called into exercise. The pun- 
ishment was stern and exemplary, but carefully meted out. Succoth and Penuel are 
visited with prompt and terrible recompense. But the princes and elders are punished, 
as being the chief culprits ; the common people, who were helpless, were spared. All 
heresy and schism, unholinesa of life, spiritual opposition, &c., is not to be regarded 
in the same light. Gentleness may win a brother. A little blame may rest with 
ourselves. Allowance is to be made for the failings of human nature. But we are 
to have no fellowship with the profane, the blasphemer, the unbeliever, &c. Differ- 
ence of opinion may co-exist with real co-operation and fellowship. — M. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 4. — Came to Jordan. The narrative 
goes back to eh. viL 24, to follow up the 
personal history of Gideon, from which the 
writer had been diverted to relate the result 
of Gideon's message to the Ephraimites, 
which is told in vers. 24 and 25, and ch. 
viii. 1 — 8 (see ch. vii. 25, note ; ii 1 — 6, 
note). 

Ver. 6. — Succoth. On the east side of 
Jordan, as appears plainly from the narrative 
in Gen. xxxiii. 17, 18 ; for we read there 
that Jacob journeyed from Mount Gilead to 
Mahanaim, thence to Penuel, and from Pe- 
nuel to Succoth, so called from the looths ot 
tabernacles which he made for his cattle ; 
and that after leaving Succoth he came to 
the city of Shechem (called Shalem), " in the 
land of Canaan," showing that Succoth was 
not in the land of Canaan. In Josh. xiii. 
27 we are also distinctly told that Succoth 
was in the trans -Jordanic tribe of Gad 
(which lay south of the Jabbok), in the 
valley of the Jordan, where its proximity to 
Mahanaim (vers. 26, 30) shows it to be the 
lame place as Jacob's Succoth, which was 
•Iso near the Jabbok (Gen. xxxii. 22). The 
identification of Succoth with any modern 
representative is very uncertain. Jerome 
mentions a trans -Jordanic place named Soc- 
hoih, in the region of Beth-shan, or Scytho- 
polis ; and Burkhardt also mentions a place 
described by him as " the ruins of Sukkot," 
two hours from Bysan (Beth-shan), and on 
the east of Joidan. But this, as well as the 



j Sakut or Kobinson and Van do Velde. on 
the west of Jordan, about ten miles south of 
Beth-shan, is too far north for the Succoth 
of Jacob, which is shown to be the same as 
the Succoth of Gideon by the connection of 
the latter with Penuel (ver. 8), and which, 
as above noticed, is shown to be the same as 
the Succoth of Josh. xiii. by its proximity 
to Mahanaim. We must await some further 
light before we can decide the exact position 
of Succoth. 

Ver. 6. — And the princes of Succoth, &c. 
Nothing could be more selfish, cowardly, 
and unpatriotic, than the conduct of the 
chief men of Succoth. Instead of aiding 
Gideon in his gallant enterprise for the 
deliverance of his country, they refused even 
food to his weary followers, for fear of the 
possibility of incurring the anger of the 
Midianites in case Gideon should fail. Their 
conduct and that of the men of Penuel is 
perhaps one among many indications how 
little real union there was between the tribes 
on the opposite sides of the Jcrdan (see ch. 
V. 16, 17). 

Ver. 7. — I will tear your flesh, &c These 
words breathe a fierce and vindictive spirit ; 
such, however, as cannot surprise us in the 
age and country of which we are reading 
(cf. vers. 9 and 21). The provocation, it 
must be allowed, was very great, but still 
the spirit was very different from that which 
dictated the prayer under far greater provo- 
cation, " Father, forgive them, for they knon 



ss 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



[CH. VIII. 4 — 12 



not what they do." Thorns of the wilder- 
ness. The nature of the punishment here 
threatened, and the execution of which is 
related in ver. 16, is uncertain. The word 
here rendered tear means literally to thresh. 
Hence some suppose that the punishment 
here spoken of was a severe kind of capital 
punishment inflicted by threshing instru- 
ments with sharp iron points, called here 
"thorns of the wilderness," and "briers" 
(though some again understand literally 
thorns and Iriers) ; and they compare 2 
Sam. xii. 81, where the word rendered 
harrowa means threshing instruments, as 
also Isa. xzviii. 27 ; xli. IS. But others, as 
Bertheau, Keil, and Delitzsch, do not think 
it was a capital punishment at all, and take 
the word thresh figuratively in the sense of 
punishing severely, and think that literal 
thorns and thistles were the implements of 
punishment. 

Ver. 8. — He went np thence to Fennel. 
When Jacob was returning from Padan-aram 
to Canaan he reached Penuel first, and Suc- 
coth afterwards (Gen. zzxii. 30 ; xxxiii. 17). 
Gideon, travelling In the opposite direction 
from Canaan, naturally reaches Succoth first, 
and Penuel afterwards. Going from Succoth 
to Penuel too, he went up out of the Jordan 
valley towards the mountains on the east. 
Penuel appears to have been a place of im- 
portance, since Jeroboam repaired its forti- 
fications vtith a view of retaining his hold on 
trans-Jordanic Israel (1 Eings xii. 25). The 
t(nver here mentioned shows it was a strong 
place, but its exact situation is unknown. 

Ver. 10. — Earkor. Or, rather, ths Karlcor. 
Vfe are stiU on unknown ground. The 
situation assigned to it by Eusebius and 



Jerome, as being the same as a castle called 
Carcaria, near Petra, is quite out of the ques- 
tion, as being greatly too far south. As an 
appellative it suggests the idea of a walled- 
in space {Tcir = a wall ; hir-kir = a space 
walled all round ; cf. the Latin career, a 
prison) ; possibly an enclosed sheep or cattle 
fold on a large scale (see Numb, xxxii 36 : 
"built . . . folds for sheej)"), affording 
some protection to the Midianite soldiers. 

Ver. 11.— Gideon went up. See ver. 8, 
note. Implying that his direction was east- 
ward away from the Jordan valley. Nobah 
was in the half-tribe of Manasseh. Nobah, 
who gave his name to the city, which was 
before called Kenath, seems to have been of 
the family of Machir (Numb, xxxii. 42). 
Jopbehah was in the tribe of Gad (Numb. 
:.xxii. 35). These two cities appear to have 
been on the eastern frontier of their respective 
tribes, but the exact site of them is utterly 
unknown. It is a conjecture that possibly 
Kunawat may be Nobah, retaining its ancient 
name of Kenaih. East of these cities was 
the desert, inhabited by nomads dwelling in 
tents, where Karkor was, and where Zebah 
and Zalmunna had encamped out of reach, 
as they thought, of their pursuers. But 
Gideon, falling suddenly upon them, routed 
the host, and took the two kings prisoners 
(see Ps. Ixxxiii. 11). 

Ver. 12. — He discomfited. Bather, as in 
the margin, he terrified. Those who were 
not killed in the first onslaught, when " he 
smote the host," were so terrified that they 
fled without further resistance, and many 
probably escaped, as all Gideon's efforts were 
directed to the capture of the two kings. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 4 — 12. — " J'om^, ytHjmrsmng. " We do wrong in looking to the Scriptures only 

for spiritual lessona ; they teach us also lessons of conduct in the affairs of this life. 
And it is a matter of great moment that we should conduct ourselves well and wisely 
in all the business of life. That lessons of worldly wisdom are not beneath the scope 
of Holy Scripture the whole Book of Proverbs teaches us, as does Solomon's prayer 
(2 Chron. i. 10) for wisdom to rule well and judge rightly, and the whole body of the 
law of Moses. The biographies of remarkable men given in the historical book' 
teach us the same thing if we would use them rightly. But the exaggerated habit 
of allegorising and spiritualising the Old Testament has somewhat interfered with 
their usefulness in this respect. 

I. The lesson which this portion of Gideon's history seems to teach us is thb VAtUK 
OF PERSEVBBANCB ; of doing thoroughly whatever we take in hand, of going through 
with it to the end, and not leaving ofE till it is completed. Joash king of Israel was 
rebuked by Elisha the prophet on his death-bed because he only smote upon the 
ground thrice, and then stayed, satisfied with an imperfect result. The example of 
Gideon shows us one who was not satisfied with imperfect results, who had formed 
a complete conception of what he had to do, and did it. He was not stopped in his 
career by either successes or difficulties. True, he had driven the children of the 
east across the Jordan. There had been a great slaughter at the rock Oreb, the kingi 
were fugitives, the power of Midian was broken. Some might think enough had been 



OH. viii. 4— IS.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. §7 



done. But Gideonno doubt had the future as well as the present moment in view. 
The wrongs and misery of his country during the Midianite oppression, seven long 
years of grinding, cruel servitude, were fresh in his memory. He would not have 
the plain of Jezreel again the prey to those locusts from the east. And so Midian 
must be crushed. But could his strength and the streiigtli of his 300 hold out any 
longer ? The long and hurried march, Ihe hand-to-hand fights, the heat, their hunger 
and thirst, the weight of their arms, which they had doubtless taken in lieu of the 
pitchers and trumpets, had nearly exhausted their powers ; even their own country- 
men would not help them ; they were weary and faint ; might they not now stop and 
rest ? No, their work was not complete ; so, though faint, they must still pursue. 
Methinks that as we read this stirring tale of energy and perseverance we must feel 
ashamed of our own faint-heartedness ; we must feel rebuked at our own readiness 
to succumb to hindrances, or to be content with half successes ; we must resolve that 
we will put a little more energy into our own daily work, or extraordinary tasks, and 
that, in spite of weariness and discouragement, in the face of hindrances and oppo- 
sition, we will persevere and cari-y through to the end whatever work we have in 
hand, of which we are convinced that it is right to do it. This is the first lesson 
given to us by Gideon — faint, yet pursuing. 
II. But we may no doubt also spiritualise the lesson, AND apply it TO CUB bpihitual 

WAEFABB, AND TO THE STRnGGLES OF THE SOUL FOR THE MASTERY OVER SIN. Here the 

importance of doing our work thoroughly, and persevering, in spite of successes and 
hindrances alike, till our task is complete, is certainly not less than in the afEairs of 
this life. In resisting temptations, in resolutely subduing fleshly lusts and unruly 
appetites which war against the soul, in determined self-conquests, in perfecting 
holiness in the fear of God, in encountering the opposition of the world, and the 
contradictions of sinners, and the wiles and assaults of the devil, we must expect to 
be often faint. It is so easy to give up the struggle, to be content with imperfect 
results, to seek for rest and ease in giving up the close pursuit which we had begun. 
But this is not the spirit of Gideon. If we would be in our spiritual warfare such as 
he was in his conflict against his earthly foes, even when we are faint and weary we 
must be still pursuing ; we must persevere to the end, and never slack our hands nor 
rest our feet till we have gained a complete and final victory throuo'hthe e^race of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. To him be glory for ever. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0E3. 

Ver. 4. — " Faint, yet pursuing." A splendid and really /orc«ci march. Humanly 
speaking, it was the real battle. The grandest qualities were called forth, and the 
greatest results secured. A picture of the Christian life. 

I. God often suffers his servants to endure hardship in doing his will. 

II. Those who are doing important service under circumstances of hard- 
ship OUGHT TO BE ENCOURAGED AND SUPPORTED. 

III. Duty and the high calling of Christians ought to tbiumph oteb weak- 
ness, HAEDSHIP, AND OPPOSITION. 

IV. The greatest results often depend dpon persistency svbn amidst dib- 

ADVANTAGBS. — M. 

Ver, 4. — " Faint, yet pursuing." The faintness of Gideon's troops may illustrate 
the spiritual faintness of Christians, and the influence of this on their conduct in life. 

I. Faintness may overtake us while pursuing the Christian course. 1. Note 
the characteristics of this faintness. It is (1) loss of strength, so that we are not 
able to attain so much nor to progress so fast as we should otherwise do ; (2.) a 
sense of distress, making every movement a pain, and robbing the Christian life of 
its bright hopefulness and cheerful enthusiasm. 2. Note the existence of this faint- 
ness in the pursuit of the Christian course. Though still pursuing the righi way, _we 
may experience faintness. It is not the deviation to bye-path meadow alone which 
brings distress. We may grow weary in well doing (Gal. vi. 9). Therefore (I) let 
OS not be over confident because we are in the right, and ^2) let usnot be dismayed 
at the experience of faintness, as though this were a sign of spiritual defectioa 



t8 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



[CH. TUL IS— 21, 



B. Note the causes of this faintness. (1) These may be observed in the circumstancet 
of life: — in the length of the course ; the great difficulty being not to nerve ourselves 
for a few heroic actions, but to continue pressing on through the long hot day, 
through the long weary night : — in the speed of the pursuit ; life is a race swift and 
stem, and the difSculty often is to overtake the duties which accumulate so fast that 
those who, bo to say, " take things easily " must always find themselves behindhand : — 
in the impediments of the way, leading through tangled thickets of prejudice and 
error, and «p craggy heights of noble attainments. (2) The causes of faintness may 
also be traced to our own habit and condition: such as want of nourishment — the soul 
which is always working, and does not seek renewed strength in spiritual feeding 
upon the bread of life, in prayer, in the reading of Scripture, in meditation, in 
communion with Christ, will surely grow faint ; want of rest — there is a spiritual 
Insomnia, a habit of restless activity, which invariably results in faintness. Christ 
required rest, and called his disciples apart to rest (Mark vi. 31). 

II. Faintness need not stat us in the puesuit of the Christian codrse. Though 
the troops of Gideon were faint, they still pursued. 1. Faintness is not death. If 
our strength is slight, this is a good reason for making the best use of it. If faintness 
reduce our talents to one, we have no excuse to bury that one. 2. God expects our 
aitainmenis to he no rnmre than proportionate to our strength. He knows our weak- 
ness (Ps. ciii. 14). He is no hard task-master, expecting us to make bricks without 
straw ; so we need not despair of pleasing God because our faintness permits of but 
slight service. 3. The real source of victory is not our strength, but God's might. 
When we are most faint, God's strength made perfect in our weakness may be most 
effective (2 Cor, xii. 9). The little one may chase a thousand, because God is with 
him. When we are most faint we are least self-confident, and in our humility and 
helplessness driven to the mighty for strength, so that our faintness may be the 
means of leading us to the real strength which alone can accomplish great things. 
4. Faintness can be overcome. Faintness is not necessarily the precursor of death. 
It may be but temporary. We may find in God a sure remedy for spiritual faintness, 
because " they that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength " (Isa. xl. 31). 5. If 
we are faithfully pressing on in spite of present faintness, we shall be rewarded with 
future rest and triumph- Gideon's troops were well recompensed for their brave 
pursuit. The short race of life will end in a haven of rest, in a home of honour. Let 
us then be brave and true, remembering that in proportion to the weariness of present 
toil will be the sweetness of future rest (2 Cor. iv. 16 — 18). — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 18. — Before the sun was up. There 
is a wonderful diversity in the renderings of 
this verse. Some of the old versions and 
Jewish Eabbis interpret it before sunset. 
Many of the best Jewish commentators, 
however, understand the phrase as the A. V. 
does — " Before the going up of the sun," i. e. 
before sunrise ; supposing Gideon's attack 
on the MiJianitiah camp to have been a 
night attack, and Succoth to have been so 
near to Karkor that he was able to reach it 
by sunrise. But others say that the word 
here rendered sun (heres) is only used in 
poetry, and that the word rendered up is 
never used of sunrise, but, as in the phrase 
" the going up of AkraWiim " (ch. i. 36), of 
an ascent up a hill. They therefore take 
heresus a proper name, and translate "from 
the going up of Heres." Others again, by an 
almost imperceptible change in the last letter, 
read "the mountains" mstead of Heres. 
But the A. y. may be well defended, and 



gives an excellent sense. In ch. xiv. 18 

the same word for the sun is used in the 
very similar phrase, " before the sun went 
down." In Gen. xix. 15 the phrase, "the 
morning arose," has the verb from which 
the word here rendered up is derived ; and a 
note of time here exactly suits the context. 
It marks the celerity of Gideon's move- 
ments that he was actually on his way back 
to Succoth at sunrise, after having routed 
the Midianites and taken their two kin 
prisoners. 

Ver. 14. — He described. Rather, A««)f 
dovm, i. e. gave him a list of the prin 
and elders. 

Ver. 15. — The men of Succoth. Meaning 
the princes and elders. 

Ver. 16. — He taught, i. «. corrected, 
punished. It is, however, very probable 
that the true reading is he threshed or tort 
{yadash for yadah, the final letters B" and |f 
being very similar). AVe have then the fulfil 



OH. VIII, 13—21.] 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



ment of Gideon's threat in ver. ' recorded 
in the same words with regard to Succoth, 
just as the breaking down of the tower of 
Penuel in ver. 17 is in verhal agreement 
with ver. 9. The Septuagint and Vulgate 
both seem to have found he threshed in their 
copies. 

Ver. 17. — He slew the men of the city. 
This makes it probable that the threshing of 
the men of Succoth was a capital punish- 
ment, as there is no reason why the men of 
Penuel should be more severely punished 
than the men of Succoth. 

Ver. 18.- — What manner of men, &o. 
An incident not before related is here brought 
to light, viz. , that on some unknown occa- 
sion, possibly as soon as the rising of the 
Israelites under Gideon became known, or 
when, as related in ch. vi. 2, they had 
sought to hide themselves in Mount Tabor, 
but had been caught, Zebah and Zalmunna 
had put to death Gideon's brothers. We 
may observe in passing how characteristic 
this is of a true narrative in which every- 
thing that happened cannot possibly be re- 
lated (see ch. x. 11, 12, note). The word 
here rendered what manner of, i. e. of what 
sort, means, in every other place in which it 
occurs, where f and the sense of what sort is 
only inferred from the answer, As thou art, 
so wefte they. But it is not safe thus to 
change the universal meaning of a common 
word. It is better to take the words of 
Gideon, Where are the men whom ye slew 
at Tabor f as an upbraiding of them for the 
snurder of his brethren, and a threat that 
where they were their murderers would soon 



he. The answer of Zebah and Zalmunna, 
which is not given in its entirety, was n« 
doubt intended to he soothing and depreca- 
tory of Gideon's wrath. They pleaded the 
necessity they were under in self-defence to 
slay them ; they were men of such royal 
stature and prowess that their own Uvea 
would have been in danger had they spared 
them. But Gideon turned a deaf ear to their 
plea. He must avenge the death of his own 
brothers, his own mother's sons. He would 
have spared them as prisoners of war (2 
Kings vi. 22), but he must do his part as 
goel or a/oenger (Numb. xxxv. 12). Observe 
the stress laid on their being not merely Ma 
father's sons by another wife, but his own 
mother's sons, a much more tender relation 
(cf Ps. 1. 20). 

Ver. 20. — He said nnto Jether, &c. These 
marks of savage life are painful to contem- 
plate in such a man as Gideon. But it is 
well for us to be made aware how the best 
and gieatest men cannot rise above the man- 
ners and received maxims of their age ; and 
it teaches us to make due allowance for the 
faults of uncivilised men with whom we 
have to do, whether Afghans, or Zulus, or 
others. 

Ver. 21. — The ornaments. Literally, little 
moons, crescent-shaped ornaments of gold 
and silver, which as well as " chains " (ver. 
26) were hung as ornaments on their camels' 
necks (cf. ch. v. 30). It would seem from 
ver. 26 that the kings themselves also wore 
these ornaments ; and in Isa. iii. 18 they are 
enumerated among the articles of female 
attire — rotmd tires like the moon, A. V. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 13 — 21. — The complete revenge. If any man ever Btood on the very apez ol 

success and triumph, it was Gideon on his return from the pursuit of the Midianitea. 
He had saved his country ; he had set a whole people free from a foreign yoke ; he 
had restored the worship of the true and living God in his native land, and uprooted 
a vile and debasing idolatry ; he was the conqueror of « vast host with most inade- 
quate means ; he had subdued and taken prisoners two powerful kings ; he had 
avenged the death of his own brothers upon those who, in pride and wantonness, had 
slain them ; and he had chastised the insolent, cowardly, and unpatriotic conduct of 
his own countrymen who, at his time of greatest need, had insulted instead of help- 
ing him ; and he stood in the proud position of having undertaken an almost im- 
possible task, and having succeeded beyond his utmost expectation. But in the 
very height of this success we seem to see an overbalancing towards a falL It is 
very slight ; there was still a wonderful moderation of mind (as seen in vers. 22, 23) ; 
but the weak human heart had a stronger draught of success than it could bear. 
As long, indeed, as his eye was quite single, and it was only the glory of God that 
he sought, and the welfare of his country, all went well (see ver. 2). But Gideon 
was not perfect. Had he been without the pride of fallen humanity, he would not 
have slain the captive kings, he would not have put to death the msolent men of 
Succoth and Penuel, richly as they deserved punishment. But it is here that we 
seem to see the first clouding of the singular brightness of Gideon's disinterested 
Mai. When we have made every allowance for the customs and opinions of the age, 



*0 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



[oh. vtii. 22-^ 



we cannot help feeling that something diflferent from zeal and love for God was at 
work within him when he took away those lives, Zebah and Zalmunna had slain Mi 
brothers, and so had done an injury to him, and put a slight upon him ; the men 
of Succoth and Ponuel had taunted and affronted him, they had undervalued his 
power, they had taken advantage of his momentary weakness to put him to shame. 
He must have his revenge. In his hour of more than human greatness the little- 
ness of humanity started into birth. It was no doubt true that the law of the 
avenger of blood justified the slaughter of the kings, and the base conduct of the 
Suooothites and Penuelites would secure a universal acquiescence in the justice of 
their punishment. But still we cannot help seeing that the pride of self, albeit 
unperceived by Gideon, had a hand in these actions, which cast a distinct shade 
upon Gideon's shining path, and which we cannot read of even at this distance of 
time without a pang of regret. How glad we should be if that noble spirit, in the 
very flush of victory, had risen sufficiently above the spirit of his age and above his 
own anger to spare his prostrate foes ; and if in the height of his glory he had de- 
spised the meanness of the men of Succoth, and left them to the punishment of their 
own shame, and the contempt of their fellow-men I (see 2 Sam. xiz. 23). But it 
could not be. And perhaps the lesson of human weakness is more valuable to ub as 
it is ; for it leaves us a warning not to seek a complete revenge for ourselves under 
any circumstances, but to be content to commit our cause to God : and that it is 
better for man to be thwarted and humiliated than to have everything hiB own 
way. He cannot bear it 



EXPOSITION. 



Vers. 22, 23. — Eule thon, &c The gratitude 
of Israel to their great deliverer, added to a 
sense that it would be for their own security, 
and to a desire, already perhaps beginning to 
be felt, to be like the nations around them 
(1 Sam. viii. 5), naturally led to the offer, 
' ' Rule thou over us." But the time predicted 
by Moses (Deut. xvii. 14, 15) was not yet 
come. And so Gideon returned an answer 
replete with moderation and piety : " 1 will 
not rule over you, neither shall my son rule 
over you: the Lord shall rule over yon" 
(cf. 1 Sam. viii. 7 ; x. 19 ; xii. 12). 

Ver. 24. — I would desire a request of you. 
Again human weakness breaks out in this 
great man, and we seem to see the effect of 
great prosperity in stirring up selfish desires 
in his heart. It was perhaps not without 
significance that mention was made in ver. 
21 of his taking the ornaments that were 
on the camels' necks in connection with the 
slaughter of the kings. Anyhow we have 
now a second instance of a love of spoil. It 
seems to have been a national custom with 
the Ishmaelites, among whom the Midianites 
are reckoned (see Gen. xxxvii. 25 — 28), to 
wear golden rings ; hence when they came 
to strip the slain there was a vast booty of 
gold nngs. These Gideon asked for as his 
share, and the people readily agreed to the 
request. Ear-rings. The word is singular 
in Hebrew, which agrees with its more proper 
signification of noae-ring, an ornament often 
worn by both men and women in the East. 
Gesenius mentions having seen at Leipsic 
•ome Indian dancing women with nose-rings. 



It is distinctly marked as a nose-ring in Gen. 
xxiv. 22, 30, 47, because in the last verae 
Abraham's servant says that he "piU ilte 
ring {han-nezem) upon her nose " (face, A,V.). 
Again, in Ezek. xvi. 12 the Hebrew is, "i 
placed a ring upon thy nose " (I put a jewel 
upon thy forehead, A.V.). So also Job xlii. 
11, "one ring of gold," implies that it was 
a nose-ring, and not an ear-ring. In other 
passages, however, as Gen. xxxv. 4 ; Exod. 
zxxii. 2, it is expressly said that these rings 
were worn in the ears ; while in others, again, 
there is nothing to mark whether they were 
worn in the ears or in the nose, as Prov. 
XXV. 12 ; Hosea ii. 13, except that in the 
latter passage the singular number in the 
Hebrew is more favourable to the nose-ring 
than to the ear-rings, as the A.V. translates 
it. It is thought by many, with some pro- 
bability, that the nose-ring did not pierce the 
gristle of the nose, but hung down upon the 
nose from a fillet round the forehead. In 
every case they were of gold. 

Ver. 25. — ^A garment. Rather, the cloak. 
Probably Gideon's military cloak (see Isa. ix. 
5), which lay in his tent ready for use as a 
cloak by day or a coverlet by night (Deut, 
xxii. 17). 

Ver. 26. — A thousand and seven hundred 
shekels — equal to about fifty pounds weight, 
and probably to above ^3000 worth of out 
money, reckoning a shekel of gold at £\ 16s. 
6d. If the rings, like that given to Rebekah 
(Gen. xxiv. 22), weighed each half a shekel, 
they would be the spoil of 3400 dead bodies. 
If they each weighed less it would of conm 



OH. VIII. 22—36.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



n 



imply a larger number of slain. The orna- 
ments, as in ver. 21, the collars. The word 
BO rendered seems rather to mean drops or 
pendants. When worn by women (Isa. iii. 
19, chains, A.V.) they were often of single 
pearls. The purple raiment, the famous 
Tyrian purple, made from the juice of a shell- 
fish which is found in the Meditenanean, 
which was the distinctive colour of royal 
and imperial raiment. Chains. Perhaps the 
ornwn^emts mentioned in ver. 21 as on the 
camels' necks were suspended to these chains. 
In Cant. iv. 9 the chain is mentioned aa 
an ornament of a woman's neck ; in Prov. 
i. 9 of a man's neck. Many interpreters 
understand these last-mentioned articles as 
not being part of Gideon's spoil, but being 
the people's portion. But it seems much 
more probable that the spoil of the kings 
should be Gideon's portion, as indeed ver. 21 
implies. It is best, therefore, to take all 
these articles as being the property of the 
kings, and to understand the writer to tell 
us that Gideon had the rings, which were the 
people's spoil, in addition to all the spoil 
which naturally fell to his own share. 

Ver. 27.— Gideon made an ephod thereol 
There is great difference of opinion among 
commentators as to the significance of this 
statement. The ephod (Exod. zxviii. 4, 6 — 
30) was that part of the high priest's dress 
(1 Sam. xiv. 3 ; xxi. 9) which covered the 
breast in front, and the upper part of the 
back behind, the two parts being clasped 
together by two large onyx stones, one on 
each shoulder, and kept together by the 
curious girdle, just above which was fastened 
the breastplate of judgment. In a modified 
form the "linen ephod" was worn by all 
priests ; but it was especially worn by the 
high priest when he inquired of God by 
UrimandThummlm (ISam. zxiii. 9 ; xxx. 7). 
Hence it was also connected with idolatrous 
worship, as we see by ch. xvii. 5, and Hosea 
iii. 4, being probably used for purposes of 
divination, as we know that idolatrous kings 
of Israel, instead of inquiring of the Lord, 
inquired of the false gods (2 Kings i. 2, 3). 
'Vhat, then, was Gideon's purpose in making 
'. his costly ephod ? We may infer from his 
proved piety that at all events his intention 
was to do honour to the Lord, who had given 
him the victory. Then, as he was now at 
the head of the State, though he had de- 
clined the regal office, and as it was the 
special prerogative of the head of the State 
to "inquire of the Lord " (Numb, xxvii. 21 ; 
1 Sam. xxii. 13 ; xxiii. 2, 4, &c. ; xxviiL 6, &e. ), 
he may ha re thought it his right, as well as a 
matter of great importance to the people, that 
he should have the means ready at hand of 
inquiring of God. His relations with the 

Seat tnbe of Ephraim may have made it 
convenient to go to Shiloh to consult the 



high priest there, and therefore he would 
have the ephod at his own city of Ophrah, 
just as Jephthah made Mizpeh his religioun 
centre (ch. li. 11). Whether he sent far 
the high priest to come to Ophrah, or 
whether he made use of the ministry of 
some other priest, we have no means of 
deciding. The people, however, always 
prone to idolatry, made an idol of the ephod, 
and Gideon, either because it was a source of 
gain or of dignity to his house, or thinking 
it was a means of keeping the people from 
Baal-worship (ver. S3), seems to have con- 
nived at it. This seems to be the explana- 
tion best supported by the little we know of 
the circumstances of the case. A snare, i. e. 
as in ch. ii. 3, that which leads a person to 
eventual destruction. See Exod. x. 7, where 
Pharaoh's servants say of Moses, How long 
shall this man he a snare unto us f See also 
Exod. xxiii. 33 ; xxxiv. 12 ; Dent. vii. 16 j 1 
Sam. xviii. 21, &c. Observe in this verse how 
the narrative runs on far beyond the present 
time, to return again at ver. 28 (see note to 
ch. ii. 1 — 6 ; vii. 26 ; viii. 4). 

Yer. 28. — Lifted np their heads no more. 
Thus showing the wisdom of Gideon's per- 
severance in pushing on his victory to com- 
pleteness (see HomUetics on ch. viii. 4 — 12). 
The narrative goes back to ver. 26, or per- 
haps rather to ver. 21. 

Vers. 30 — 32. — Gideon had threescore and 
ten sons, &c. This notice helps us to fill 
up the picture of Gideon's state after the 
Midianitish victory. He had indeed nobly 
refused the kingdom, as a Pericles would 
have refused to be tyrant of Athens. But he 
did not return to poverty and obscurity, as 
L. Q. Cincinnatus, in the Boman legend, 
returned to his plough after his victory over 
the Volscians. He was judge over Israel for 
forty years, with a household and a harem 
like a great prince, living in his paternal 
city, with the ephod set up there, himself 
the centre round which the powers of Church 
and State gathered ; directing the affairs of 
his country, both civil and ecclesiastical, 
with eminent success, so that the country 
was at peace for forty years (a peace as long 
as that which followed the battle of Water- 
loo), and the detestable Baal-worship was 
effectually suppressed. And having lived in 
wealth and honour, he died in peace, and 
was buried in the sepulchre of his father at 
Ophrah in a good old age. He remains to 
us as one of the most remarkable characters 
of the Old Testament, not indeed without 
faults and blemishes, and not whoUy un- 
spoiled by prosperity, but still a great man, 
and an eminent servant of God. 

Ver. 31. — ^Whose name he called. This is 
badly translated ; it should be, he game him 
the name of Ahimelech — literally, he set hit 
name Ahvmelech. There are two phrases ia 



M 



THE BOOK 01' JUDGES. 



[or. nu. S2— 36 



Hebrew. The one, he called his rw/me Seth, 
Noah, Ishmael, Isaac, Esau, Jacob, &c., as 
the case may be. And this is the phrase 
always, though not exclusively (see, e. g.. 
Gen. XXXV. 10; ch. vi. 32), used of the 
name given to a child at its birth or circum- 
cision. The other is, he gave or set him the 
nwme, or, he gave or set his name so-and-so, 
and this phrase is only used of additional 
names, or surnames given later in life. The 
examples are ch. xiii; 31 ; 2 Kings xvii. 34 ; 
Neh. ix. 7 ; Dan. L 7 ; v. 12. The infer- 
ence is that the name of Abimelech, which 
means father of a king, and was the name 
of the royal family of Gerar, was given to 
Abimelech as a significant surname, and was 



perhaps one of the causes which induced him 
to seize the kingdom. A third phrase ii 
found in 2 Eings xxiii. 34 ; xxiv. 17 ; 2 
Chron. xxzvi. 4 : he twmed his name Ut 
Jehoiakim ; changed his name to Zedekiah. 
The Hebrew is the same in all these passages. 

Ver. 33. — And it came to pass, &c. Of. 
ch. ii. 11, 12, 19 ; iii. 7 ; iv. 1 ; V. 1 ; I. 6 ; 
xiii 1. Baal-berith. See ch. ii. 13, note. 
He was Like the Ztvt 'Opmo; of the Greeks, 
the god of covenants. 

Ver. 35. — Neither showed they kindness, 
&c. Forgetfulness of God is often the parent 
of ingratitude to men. The heart oilstone 
which is not touched by the love of Christ ii 
also insensible to the kindness of man. 



H0MILETIC8 

Vers. 22 — 85. — Prosperity. God has two ways of trying men : one in the furnace 
of affliction, that the trial of their faith, being much more precious than of gold that 
perisheth, may be found unto praise and honour and glory at the appearing of 
Jesus Christ ; the other in the fining-pot of prosperity, and this is much the harder 
trial of the two. Affliction tends to humble and soften and subdue ; but in pros- 
perity, self-esteem, self-reliance, self-satisfaction, self-will, pride, and security, are 
prone to spring up with a rank luxuriance. Disregard for the rights and feelings of 
others strengthens with the inordinate estimate of the regard due to a man's self. 
The Scripture lessons as to the dangers of prosperity, and the snare which the 
possession of unbounded power is to men in general, are very many and very strik- 
ing, culminating in our Saviour's saying, " A rich man shall hardly enter into the 
kingdom of heaven" (Matt. six. 23). The latter part of David's reign compared 
with the first part of his life, the latter part of Solomon's contrasted with the begin- 
ning, Uzziah (2 Chron. xxvi. 16), Joash king of Judah (2 Chron. xxiv. 22), Amaziah 
after his successful campaign in Edom (2 Chron. xxv. 14 — 16), even good Hezekiah 
(2 Cliron. xzxii. 27 — 31), all teach us the danger of prosperity, and the inability of 
the human heart to drink a fuU cup of success without intoxication. If we turn to 
secular history it is still the same story. Men of diverse characters and temperaments 
have all alike deteriorated under the influence of too much success in life, and shown 
themselves unfit to be trusted with unlimited power. Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander 
the Great, Nero, Constantine, Charlemagne, Louis Quatorze, Napoleon Buonaparte, 
men of the most different characters, may all be cited as having shown in different 
ways and degrees how hard it is for man to pass through the fining-pot of prosperity 
without bringing to light more or less the dross of a corrupt heart. It is an interest- 
ing and instructive inquiry how far Gideon passed through this fining-pot uninjured, 
and with his religious character undimmed. We have already glanced (Eomiletics, 
ch. viii. 13 — 21) at the brilliancy of Gideon's success, and at the great qualities by which, 
under God, he obtained it. \Ve had occasion too (Eomiletics, ch. vii. 9 — 25) to notice 
the singular strength and perfectness of Gideon's faith, and the excellent fruiti 
which it bore in practice. The humility and simplicity of purpose displayed by him, 
the docility and trustful obedience, the entire surrender of himself into the hands of 
God, without a thought for himself or a fear of the result, which marked his course, 
were of the highest calibre of human excellence guided and informed by the Holy 
Spirit of God. It is_ not, as we have already seen (Homiletics, ch. viii, 13 — 21), 
till his wonderful victory was consummated by the capture of the two kings 
that we can see any flaw in his character at all. The fining-pot had not yet begun 
to do its work. But when we come to the incident of the severe punitsiment of 
the men of Succoth and Penuel, to the slaughter in cold blood of the captive kings, 
and the plunder of their spoils, even when we have made every allowance for the 
manners and opinions of the times, and given due weight to the circumstances of 
the cage, it is impossible not to feel that certain dormant passions of pride, and 



SB. VIII 22—36.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



resentment •f injuries, and " insolent joy," bom of overmuch prosperity, had been 
aroused by his successes. His request for the gold rings which formed a portion of 
the people's prey, and the making therewith a costly ephod, without any direction 
from God or knowledge that he was doing what would be acceptable to him, showed 
a prtssumption far removed from the trustful docility which had been so beautiful a 
feature in his previous conduct ; and we see a departure from the simplicity of his 
early life in his many wives and concubines, and in his connivance at the irregular 
concourse of the Israelites to Ophrah for a semi-idolatrous worship before the ephod, 
which conduced to his own worldly dignity, and was perhaps a source of emolument 
to him. These things are undoubtedly blots in Gideon's fame. On the other hand, 
his pious moderation in refusing the hereditary kingdom offered to him, the persist- 
ent " goodness which he showed to Israel " to his life's end, as we may safely con- 
clude from the last verse of the chapter, the good government by which he gave 
rest to the land for forty years, and the continued repression of Baal- worship as long 
as he lived, are all evidences that he maintained his integrity before God, and never 
forfeited his claim to be a servant of God ; and it is in entire agreement with this 
view that we read that he " died in a good old age, and was buried in the sepulchre 
of Joash his father," words by which the sacred historian evidently means to set 
before us the picture of one who, under God's favour, was happy in his death, as 
he had been in his life. Nor can we doubt for a moment what it was which held 
him up in the slippery path of worldly greatness. If God left him, as he did 
Hezekiah, "to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart," he did not 
leave or forsake him wholly. The faith in God which had carried him down to the 
Midianite camp, though it may have been dimmed, was never extinct. The com- 
munion with God, if less fresh and less constant, was never wholly interrupted. 
His belief that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, once so 
deeply graven upon his heart and confirmed by his experience, never, we may be 
sure, departed from him. " Faint, yet pursuing," may probably describe the war- 
fare of his soul at the most unfavourable times of his life. For ourselves, let us rise 
from the contemplation of Gideon's career with the firm determination to shake off 
those things which may be a snare to us, and not to slacken our pace in the pursuit 
of those things which are above. It is by constant prayer that our faith must be 
kept alive ; it is by resolute resistance to those manifold lusts which war against the 
soul that our spirit must be kept free for holy obedience, and the eye of our mind 
kept clear to discern between the precious and the vile. We must keep a close 
watch against the first buds of those sinful dispositions in our hearts which are 
stimulated into growth by objects of carnal desire, or by wrongs or insults or taunt- 
ing words, and we must nip them in the bud by crucifying the flesli with its affec- 
tions and lusts. And if we find ourselves prosperous in this world, if riches increase, 
if friends multiply, if all goes well with us, if the world smiles upon us, if we are rising 
in consequence, in power, in the estimation of men, if new sources of gratification are 
opened to us, and life puts on its gayest, gaudiest colours for us, then above all it 
behoves ub to be on our guard, and to maintain the supremacy of the love of God 
within us. Then let us humble ourselves before the cross of Christ ; then let us 
bring the glories of the kingdom in full view, till the glories of earth pale before 
them ; then let us strive more earnestly than ever to feel how immeasurably the 
pleasure of doing the will of God rises above the pleasure of pleasing ourselves, and 
how far the happiness of obedience to God's law transcends the happiness of yielding 
to our own desires. Such a victory over ourselves will be far more glorious than the 
conquest of ten thousand Midianites, and ours will be a richer booty than the richest 
spoils of kings. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 22 — 11.— Noble self-abneciaiion. The whole situation naturally described. 
In the flush of victory the impulse is to honour Gideon, and secure a permanent 
connection with the glory of his name by establishing a hereditary monarchy in hii 
family. This honour he refuses. We have here — 

L Gknebous but mistaken geatituds. It was a natural impulse in the soldienL 



84 THE BOOK OF JUDGEa [oh. viu. 22—35. 

But their mistake was twofold — (1) in exalting man instead of God, and (2) in seek- 
ing to put an end to the theocracy. The natural mind acts always thus, in the face 
of the plainest signs of Divine intervention and authority ; building itself out from 
the Unseen by human authorities and institutions. The chain of connection with 
God is weakened by lengthening it. The plainest commands of God are disobeyed 
in mistaken self-interest. The human agent is depended upon because the perception 
of the Divine is weak. Exalting one of themselves was but a species of self- 
glorification. The motive of Gideon too is misunderstood. 

II. Disinterested service. The honour is refused. If prudence aided the 
decision, it was chiefly due to unaffected faith and reverence for Jehovah. He may 
have felt that his " might " and success were solely individual, and due to direct 
inspiration ; and the incapacity and disagreements of his children may have already 
betrayed themselves. He thereby vindicates his own patriotism and disinterestedness. 
His humility and magnanimous loyalty to God as only Sovereign for Israel outshine 
all his exploits. 1. How hard it is for men to believe in the disinterestedness of 
benefactors 1 2. God, who imparts might and inspiration, can also purify the heart 
from worldly ambitions and weaknesses. 

III. Devout recognition of Divine aid and authoritt. The ephod is explained 
and described in Exod. xxviii. It is the priestly garment, with breastplate attached 
to it, worn in the sanctuary. The Urim and Thummim were also used in connection 
with it for oracular consultation. It meant, therefore, a tabernacle and its service 
wherever it was placed. 1. So far as this was to the honour of God and commemor- 
ation of his mercy, it was a pious act. 2. By using the spoils of the people for its 
construction, a national sacrifice was effected. 3. But by placing it in Ophrah he 
encouraged schism, gave his own family undue importance, and tempted his country- 
men to superstitious practices. — M. 

Vers. 24 — 27. — The mistake of a good man. I. Originating in motives foe the 
MOST part noble AND HONOURABLE. (1) Desirous of a national testimony to God's 
gracious deliverance, and a commemoration of it to future ages, he (2) persuades the 
Israelites to make a national offering, and (3) increases the means of grace in his 
own district. 

II. Reflecting the defects of his character and betraying its latent vice. 
In his zeal for the religious reformation of Israel he did not snflBciently consider the 
bearings of the step he had taken. It was a hasty and crude expedient, from which 
greater experience or sage advice, or, above all, God's Spirit, would have saved him. 
And therein lay the root of the mischief. He relied on his own wisdom, and forgot 
to ask God's guidance. In getting to look upon himself as in a special sense the 
re-introducer of the Jehovah-worship, and the exponent of the mind of Jehovnh, he 
forgot that it was only as he was taught of God that he could be preserved from 
error. Of all inventions, religious ones are to be most carefully scrutinised. And 
in the background of this assumption there lay a secret tendency to self-esteem 
because of his spiritual endowments and character, and the great achievements of 
the past. Pride because of his own humility — is it not a failing that many tave 
shared ? By this mistake he sowed the seeds of grave evils : schism, superstition, 
hero-worship. But — 

III. The substantial good done was not wholly destroyed. Whilst he lived — 
a quiet, steadfast, righteous life — the people observed the true worship of Jehovah. 
His own example was a guide and a deterrent. And when at his death superstition 
ran riot, and the old licentious idolatry flowed back in an obliterating wave over the 
land and the institutions of Jehovah's worship, there were some things that could 
not be destroyed, remaining as germ ideas in the spiritual consciousness of Israel — 
the immediate obligation of the moral law upon every one, the direct responsibility 
of every one to God, and faith in the personal help of Jehovah. (1) God super- 
intends the development of his truth, and (2) restrains the evil that nungles with the 
good in men's works. — M. 

Vers. 29 — 32. — The afterlife. It is interesting to watch the afterlife of great 
men. In some it is a continual progress, in others a growing weakness of character 
and faeultjr. Gideon's was — 



an, VIII. 22—36.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. N 

I. A BBWABD AND CONSEQUENCK OF PAITHFOTi SBEVICB TO JbHOVAH. Long life, 

quietness, prosperity, honour. 

II. Kept on 'ihe whole right, and made a blessing bt the geace of God. H« 
had begun well. His youth was a consecrated one ; his old age was its true outcome. 
And yet not by natural virtue, but by the blessing of God. 

III. Containing the gebms of national evils. He was not ever on the heights of 
spiritual excitement. Perhaps his was a nature that required g^eat difficulties to be 
surmounted in order to keep it right. At any rate he fails to rise above the laxities 
of his age, and he enters into connection with the Canaanites. How much too of 
his after-life could be explained as a living on the memory of a glorious past, and a 
growing estimation of the part he himself had played. The ephod, the natural 
son by the Canaanitish woman, the conflicting interests of the many heirs to his 
influence and renown — ^these were the occasions of untold eviL — M. 

Vers. 33 — 35. — The consequence of the imperfect recognition of Jehovah. I. An 

IMPUEB, DEFECTIVE WORSHIP OF THE TRUE GOD PKEPABED FOR THE WORSHIP OF FALSB 

GODS. " False worships make way for false deities." 

II. Undue magnifying of human importance at the expense of the honoub ddb 
TO God alone, diverted from the worship of Jehovah, and so cut the boots of 
THE personal respect in WHICH HIS SERVANT WAS HELD. True religion is the found- 
ation and safeguard of all the esteem and respect due from one to another. The 
heavenly Father is the key-stone of the whole house of life. — M. 

Vers. 22, 23. — Gideon and the theoeraq/. This incident may be regarded in rela- 
tion to the conduct of the men of Israel, to that of Gideon, and to the historical fact 
of the theocracy. 

L The incident begabded in relation to the conduct of the men of Iseael. 
1. These men assumed a power which they did not rightfully possess. They had no 
authority to revise the constitution, no right to elect a king. The election of Gideon 
was an act of rebellion against " the Eternal." 2. These men were so dazzled by the 
splendour of human achievements that they ignored the Divine influence which v/as 
the source of them. Gideon's campaign was especially designed to avoid the danger 
of the people attributing to men what was really the work of God (ch. vii. 4). Yet 
they regarded Gideon as the sole hero, and forgot to glorify God. We are all too 
ready to recognise the human instrument only, and ignore the Divine power which 
is the source of all that is good and great The very richness with which God has 
endowed a man of genius may tempt us to make this mistake. Yet the more gifted 
a man is, the more reason have we to attribute his greatness to the Giver of every 
good and perfect gift. 3. These men were drawn aside from trust in the Unseen to 
a desire for earthly greatness. The glory of Israel was its government by the 
unseen King. This implied faith. But the temptation often was to lose this faith 
and the holy life and simple state it required, and desire a human kingship and the 
pomp of an earthly court, such as that of the heathen nations. There is always great 
difficulty in living in the power of the spiritual. Tangible force and visible display 
tend to allure us from the serene spirituality of life in the unseen. 

II. The incident regarded in relation to the conduct of Gideon. 1. Gideon 
proved himself to be an unselfish patriot. True patriotism is incompatible with 
personal ambition. A nation has no greater enemies than its ambitious men of 
genius. The worthy statesman is he who aims at his country's good to the neglect 
of his own aggrandisement. 2. Gideon showed himself strong in resisting the popu- 
lar wish when he knew this was unwise. We must not mould our character simply 
in obedience to the dictates of public opinion. The wish of the people is no excuse 
for doing wrong. There is no more difficult feat than to resist successfully the mis- 
taken kindness of those who are seeking to promote a man's own honour and great- 
ness, though in a way which he believes to be wrong. 3. Gideon proved himself 
firm in fdelity to God. Here lay the secret of his resistance. He had been called 
from the threshing-floor by God. He held himself throughout to be the servant of 
God. It is better to be a servant and faithful to God than a king and in rebellion 
■gainst him. 4. Gideon showed his discernment at once (1) ef the existence and 



w4 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. vui. 82—86 

poi«'er of the theocracy which his contemporaries appear to have ignored, and (2) of 
its suitability for the happy government of his nation. 

111. The incident regarded in relation to the theocracy. 1. It is not wise 
to propose a revolution of government except for great and necessary ends. It is 
easy to overthrow the present order ; it is not so easy to be sure that what we sub- 
stitute will be better. We cannot calculate on the possible uses to which the new 
power we create may be appropriated. 2. The best method of government is that 
which is best suited to the condition of a nation. There came a time when a human 
kingship was necessary for Israel. The attempt to force this on before the country 
was ripe for it only ended in disaster (eh. ix. 6). 3. No government can be bettei 
than a true theocracy. This must be distinguished from the rule of priests and 
prophets which is sometimes falsely named a theocracy, although it is as much a 
human government as the rule of kings and soldiers. Nothing can be better than 
for a people to be guided by the thought of God to do the will of God. The govern- 
ment of the Church is a theocracy. The Papal assumption is therefore treason to 
Christ. " One is our Master " (Matt, xxiii. 8). To substitute any human authority for 
the direct guidance of Christ is to fall back to a lower state, like the conduct of Israel 
when the people were willing to abandon their Divine King for a human monarch. — A. 

Vers. 34, 35. — Forgetfulness and ingratitude. As we pass through the historical 
records of the Bible we must often be struck with the stem faithfulness with which 
Jewish chroniclers describe the wicked and shameful deeds of their own nation. 
This fact is not only valuable as a proof of the unvarnished truthfulness of the 
narratives ; it gives to the history of the Bible a universal character by making it a 
mirror of human nature. Thus the forgetfulness and ingratitude here recorded are 
unhappily typical of the too common conduct of mankind generally. 

I. The prevalence of this conduct. Unnatural and monstrous as it appears in 
the narrative, it is so common in experience as to be scarcely noticed. It was con- 
stantly repeated in the history of Israel (Ps. Ixxviii. 11, 42). It is prevalent in 
Christian communities. 1. It is not limited to atheism. The atheist denies the 
existence of God. The godless man believes that God exists, yet ignores his existence. 
The atheist is rare. But is there not something pharisaical and hypocritical in the 
horror with which he is regarded, as though the great multitude of men were far 
better than he, though so many of them forget the God of whose existence they are 
champions, and never render him worship or obedience. 2. It is not limited to 
open irreligion. We must not suppose that all people who do not go to church are 
utterly godless ; but neither can we believe that all who do engage in public acts of 
worship really acknowledge God in their hearts. It is possible to forget God in the 
house of God, and to be guilty of ba^e ingratitude while singing his praises. 3. It 
is not limited to total godlessness. There are those who, like the Jews, have known 
God, but have since forgotten and neglected him, and those who live nearer to him 
£or a season, but are tempted at times to forsake him. 

II. The causes of this conduct. 1. Sin. The people of Israel went after Baalim, 
and the result was that they forgat the Lord. We cannot have two supreme gods. 
Immorality is fatal to religion. 2. Worldly distraction. When no special fall into 
great sin has been experienced the mind may be drawn aside from Divine things, and 
so engrossed in business, politics, or the cares and pleasures of life, that no time or 
energy is left for spiritual thoughts (Matt. xiii. 22). 3. Unspirituality. Even when 
there is no great worldly distraction we may sink into a low, unspiritual habit of 
life, in which the thought of God becomes faint and feeble. It does require some 
spiritual elEort to preserve the memory of God fresh and bright, because (1) he is 
invisible, and can only be apprehended in the inner life, and (2) his action is gentle, 
and does not rouse our attention by sensational methods (Hab. iii. 4). 4. Loss oj 
love to God. We remember what we love. Indifference of heart creates negligence 
of thought. 6. Selfishness. Israel remembered God in the time of need and forgot 
him in the season of prosperity. Selfishness inclines us to remember God only when 
we want bis aid. 

III. The ouilt of this conduct. 2. It implies disloyalty to the rightful avihoritt 
»/ God. If we forget God we forget his will and neglect his service. We are not 



OH. n. 1— ff.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



9T 



free to do this, for we are naturally subjects of his supreme sovereignty. 2. It implies 
indifference to his Fatherly nature. He is our Father, and we are bound to him by 
ties of nature (Deut. xxxii. 18). 3. It implies an unworthy return for his goodness. 
Thankfulness is closely associated with thoughtfulness. The unthankful forget; 
those who do not take the trouble to think fall into gross ingratitude. Ingratitude to 
Ood is joined to ingratitude to his servants. The same spirit is seen in both sins. 
We are not likely to be true to man until we are first true to God. — A, 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER IX. 



Ver. 1. — The son of JernbbaaL Through- 
out this chapter Gideon is spoken of by the 
name of Jerubhaal. There must be some 
cause for this. The simplest and most pro- 
bable cause is that this whole histoiy of 
Abimelech is taken from some other source 
than the preceding chapters. And a con- 
siderable difTerenoe in the style of the nar- 
rative, which is feebler and more obscure, 
seems to bear out this inference. Went to 
Shechem. This revolt from the house of 
Gideon in favour of Abimelech seems to 
partake of the nature of an Ephraimite rising 
against the supremacy of Manasseh. It was 
doubtless galling to the pride of the great 
tribe of Ephraim (ch. viiL 1, 2 ; xli. 1—6) 
chat Ophrah of the Abi-ezrites should be 
the seat of government, and Gideon's ephod 
the centre of religion for the tribes of Israel. 
And so they seem to have taken advantage 
of Gideon's death, and of Abimelech's con- 
nection with Shechem, to make a league 
with the Hivite inhabitants of Shechem (see 
vers. 27, 28) to set up Abimelech as king, 
and to restore the worship of Baal, under the 
title of Baal-berith (ch. viii. 33 ; ix. 4, 27, 
46), at Shechem for all Israel to resort to. 

Ver. 2. — All the sons, . . . which are 
threescore and ten persons. Mark the evils 
of polygamy — producing family discord, ex- 
tinguishing natural affection, causing civil 
strife, multiplying pretenders, and producing 
an ignoble and contemptible herd of helpless 
princes. 

Ver. 8. — His mother's brethren. Pre- 
sumably the Hivite population of Shechem. 

Ver. 4. — ^Threescore and ten of silver, 

1. e. shekels, which is always understood. 
Equal in value to about seven pounds ; quite 
enough with which to hire a band of " vain 
and light persons," who would afterwards 
maintain themselves by plunder. Out of 
the house of Baal-berith. The custom of 
collecting treasures at the temple, both that 
of the true God and of idols, whether they 
were offerings and gifts for the service of 
the temple, or treasures deposited there for 
safety, was very general (see Josh. vi. 19 ; 
1 Kings XV. 18 ; 1 Chron. xiii. 8 j Dan. i. 

2, &c.). The treasures belonging to the 

jtmnER. 



temple of Apollo at Delphi were yeij 
great, and excited the cupidity of Xerxes, 
who sent an army to plunder the tem- 
ple, but was foiled in the attempt. The 
Phocians are related to have seized 10,000 
talents from the treasury of Delphi, nearly 
two and a half millions sterling. The temple 
of Diana at Ephesus had considerable trea- 
sures in money, as well as other valuable 
articles. Many other notices of the riches 
of temple treasures occur in classical writers. 
Vain and light persons. Cf. Judges xi. 3 ; 
1 Sam. xxii. 2 ; 2 Sam. xv. 1 ; 2 Cbr jn. 
xiii. 7. Vain, literally, empty ; light, 
literally, boiling over. Applied to the false 
prophets (Zeph. iii. 4). In Geima,u, sprudel- 
kopf is a hot-headed, hasty man. 

Ver. 5. — Upon one stone. Used as a 
block, on which the victims were executed 
one after another. Compare the similar 
wholesale murders of the seventy sons of 
Ahab by order of Jehu (2 Kings x. 7), of the 
seed royal of Judah by Athaliah (2 Kings 
xi. 1), of the whole house of Jeroboam by 
Baasha (1 Kings xv. 29), of the whole house 
of Baasha by Zimri (1 Kings xvi. 11, 12). 
Timour, on his conquest of Persia, is said to 
have destroyed the whole male family of the 
king. At the conquest of Bagdad he is said 
to have made a pyramid of 90,000 human 
heads. In Persia and Turkey in modem 
times it has been a common practice for the 
sovereign to slay or put out the eyes of all 
his brothers and cousins. So dostmctive of 
natural affection is polygamy, and so cruel 
is power. 

Ver. 6. — The house of Millo. MiUo must 
have been some strongly fortified post in the 
neighbourhood of Shechem, and no doubt 
the place where the tower was, mentioned 
in vers. 46, 47. At Jerusalem we read of 
Millo as a part of the city of David in 2 Sam. 
V. 9, apparently so called by the Jebusites, 
and the strengthening of it was one of Solo- 
mon's great works (1 Kings ix. 15, 24). It 
is called the house of Millo in 2 Kings xii. 
20, where it is mentioned as the scene of the 
murder of King Joash. Here, therefore, th,e 
house of Millo probably means the citadel or 
keep of Shechem, a fortress analogous to the 
Bala-hissar in relation to Cabul, though pos- 
sibly at a distance of a mi e or two (ver 46. 



d8 



THE BOOK OP JUDGBa 



[oh. IX. 1—6, 



not«). The phrase, all the home of Millo, 
means all the men who dwelt in the house 
of Millo, probably all men of war. Made 
Abimelech king. We seem to see the hand 
of the Canaanite population in this term 
Jcing, which was proper to the Canaanites 
(Josh. XL, xii.), but was not yet domesticated 
in Israel The plain of the pillar. This 
translation is clearly wrong. The word 
translated plain means an oak or terebinth 
tree. The word translated pillar ia thought 
to mean a garrison, or military post, in Isa. 
xxix. 3 (A. v. mound) ; but, according to its 
etymology and the meaning of other forms 
of the same root, may equally well mean a 
monument, or stone set up and this is pro- 
bably the meaning here. The translation 
will then be the oak of the momiment, a sense 
supported by the modern names of the 
mosc^ue there, of which one is " the Oak of 



Moreh," and another "the Saint of the 
PUlar" (see Stanley's 'Sermons in the 
East,' p. 182). And we are very strongly led 
to this conclusion by the further fact that 
there was a famous oak at Shechera, men- 
tioned Gen. zxxv. 4 as the place where 
Jacob hid the idols of his household ; and 
that Joshua took a great stone and " set it 
up under the oak that was by the sanctuary 
of the Lord " at Shechem (Josh. xxiv. 1, 25, 
26). It marks a sad declension in the con- 
dition of Israel at this time, as compared 
with the days of Joshua, that the Shechemite 
Abimelech should be made king with a view 
to the restoration of Baal-worship on the 
very spot where their fathers had made a 
solemn covenant to serve the Lord. It is 
remarkable that the narrative in this chap- 
ter gives us no clue as to the relations of tna 
rest of Israel with Abimelech. 



HOMILETICS, 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Self-aggrandisement. If we study the characters of men famous 
either in profane or sacred history with a view not merely to their capacity, but to 
their moral worth, we sliall observe one very marked distinction between them. 
Some, the few, evidently used their great powers and their great opportunities with 
entire disinterestedness, with singleness of purpose to promote God's glory and the 
happiness and welfare of their country, and not in any wise for self-aggrandisement. 
Such men, for example, as Moses, and Joshua, and Samuel, though they wielded all 
the power of the state, were entirely above the littleness of self-seeking. They had 
each a great mission, and they fulfilled it to the utmost of their ability with unswerving 
fidelity ; they had each a weighty task intrusted to them, and they executed it with 
unflagging perseverance ; but the idea of enriching themselves, or exalting their own 
families, seems never to have entered into theii heads, or, at all events, never to have 
influenced their conduct. We can say the same of a few great names in profane 
history. It was true to a certain extent of Charlemagne ; it was true pre-eminently 
of Alfred tlje Great ; it was true of some of the early patriots of Rome, like Scipio 
Africanus, or Cincinnatus ; of Washington, of Pitt, and of the Duke of Wellington. 
But in the bulk of the great men of history we cannot help seeing that the motive 
force which called forth their energies and stimulated their powers was ambition, the 
lust of conquest, the desire of wealth and greatness — in a word, self-aggrandisement. 
The career of such men of might as Alexander the Great, Julius Coesar, Louis 
Quatorze, Napoleon Buonaparte, whatever eminent qualities of head or heart they 
may have displayed, gave unmistakable signs that they were really pursuing their 
own greatness as the end of their performances in the cabinet or in the field. We 
may trace the same distinction between men who have filled much less important 
places in the world. Compare, for example, Dunstan with Wolsey. The first, 
though we may think him mistaken, pursued a disinterested purpose with concen- 
trated energy ; the second had constantly in view the royal favour or the Papal 
throne. A comparison of Gideon and Abimelech presents the same sharp contrast. 
Gideon was roused by the call of God to seek his country's deliverance from a galling 
yoke, and to restore the worship of the true God in his native land. With the self- 
devotion of a Hofer, and the unflinching enthusiasm of a Luther, he gave himself 
to his double task, and accomplished it at the risk of his life without a thought ol 
himself or any selfish ends. Abimelech, seeking power for himself, pretended to have 
in view the people's interest, and, to secure their favour, restored an abominable 
idolatry. His kingdom, founded in bloodshed, abetted by falsehood, and fostered by 
a base and cruel policy, had no end or motive but self-aggrandisement There ia 
exactly the same difference in the characters and conduct of men in the eommonest 



OH. n. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 9» 

affairs of every-day life. Some men have high aims, and pursue them by righteous 
paths. Others have selfish ends, and pursue them in unscrupulous ways. Be it ours 
to aim at doing the will of God in the commonest as well as in the greatest actions 
of onr lives. Let us steadily set before us the thing that is right as the end which 
we are to seek. Let us consider that our powers, be they great or small, are given 
to us that in the exercise of them we may give God glory and do good to man. 
Without calculation of selfish interests let us follow God's call, devote ourselves to 
diihis good pleasure, seek ourneighbour's welfare, and trust to God's loving-kindness 
M order for us what seems best to his godly wisdom. In so doing wo shall be meet 
for the kingdom of God. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Ambitious usurpation. Nothing shows the extent and significance of 
Gideon's influence so much as the anarchy that f oUot. ».d his death. The presence of 
one may check, restrain, direct, &c. in a degree wholly i explicable until its removal. 
The retrogression of peoples — how diflScult to compr lendl Sometimes a single 
individual (at most a few) concentrates in himself aH le highest tendencies of his 
time, the only original of what appears a common possen ion. The weakness — mental, 
spiritual, political, and religious — of the nation now reveals itself. A time like that 
following upon Gideon's judgeship tries men and declares their real motives. Of 
the usurpation now attempted, notice — 

L The aim. Worthy men seek to emulate the moral and intellectual excellence of 
the great deceased ; unworthy, merely to succeed to their oflioe and to enjoy their 
honours. It was a splendid opportunity which now presented itself to carry on, and 
to higher issues, the work initiated by Gideon. Instead of this, personal aggrandise- 
ment is the all-absorbing aim. Unscrupulous advantage is taken of the interregnum 
in the judgeship. And the more utterly base appears the project, inasmuch as it is 
not only what Gideon enjoyed that is sought, but what he rejected, as considering 
himself unworthy. 

II. The spirit. 1. Irreligious. No betaking of himself to the oracle ; no recog- 
nition of God as Supreme Arbiter and Judge-maker. 2. Immodest. Personal fitness is 
not questioned, nor is the superior qualification of others considered. 3. Selfish. The 
rights of others are trampled upon, human blood is spilled like water, and the nation 
is regarded only as a corpus vile for political exj)eriments and ambitious aims. 

III. Thb means and methods. Arguments. Falsehood and sophistry. The 
alternatives presented — "Whether is better for you, either that all the sons of 
Jerubbaal, which are threescore and ten persons, reign over you, or that one reign 
over yon ? " — are not real. Charging others with the same aims as his own. Appeals 
not to the nation's sense of right, but to expediency, and kinship, &c. Its occasion 
is the misfortune and weakness of others. Its instrumentality/, wahaWowed gold and 
a mercenary soldiery. Its method, a series of wrongs culminating in murder._ 

IV. The bdccess. Apparently sudden, complete, absolute ; really hollow, involv- 
ing constant distrust and fear, and ever new outrages, and having in itself the 
elements of ultimate judgment. — M. 

Vers. 2, 3. — Unrighteous claims of kindred. A great force in the arrangements 

and promotions of human life. The unrighteousness of it often felt when it cannot 
be explained. As much to be deprecated in the endeavour to secure the ordinary 
advantages of life as in the competition for its great prizes and honours. Let us look 
closely at this plea, " He is our brother." 

I. It is the EXAGQEBATION and PBOSTITnTION OF A NATURAL AND PBOPBB AFFECTION. 

Of the true claims of " our brother" how much might be said 1 A basis for moral 
obligations, and rights, and duties seldom fairly acknowledged. But to the desirable 
things of the world and " out in the open" there are many claimants whose title has 
to be weighed. The fond mother, desirous of such things for her son, may be asked, 
" Why your son, and not another's ? " 

II. It ignobes and tbamfles upon general interests for the sake of mpiviDtiAi, 
ADVANCEMENT. Nextto the absolut* appointment by God, and often indicative of it, 

ait 



100 THE BOOK OP JUDGED [oH. n. 1— & 

is the " greatest good of the greatest number." The king or other public officer ii 
f(yr ihe people, not vice versd. Although absolute right may bo sometimes waived 
because of general advantage, when both are wanting the claim is weak. 

III. The tbiie title-deeds to advancement ahe not kecoqnised ob affbalbd to. 
Divine appointment ; unique capacity ; desire for the good of others rather than 
the advantage of self ; service rather than office ; duty than right. — M. 

Ver. 6. — Shortcomings o/wnacrupulom schemes. That there are instances of seem- 
ingly complete and permanent success cannot be denied. But the cases in which the 
act just falls short of success are too frequent and dramatically striking not t« be 
pondered. 

I. A MORAL GOVERNMENT OF THB WORLD IS WITNESSED TO. 

n. If evident in some oases, mat not the same law exist wbbbb hot 

CLEARLY visible? 

III. In this is illustrated the essentially moral charaoteb of hiohebt 
REASON. The wicked always leave something unconsidered or unprovided for. The 
lives and schemes of the wicked are based on fallacies. Truth and righteousness 
coincide. — M. 

Ver. 6. — Abimdeeh. The character and life of Abimelech furnish ns with a terrible 
picture of ambition in its bad origin, wicked character, temporary triumph, and fatal 
issues. 

I. Tbb bad origin of ambition. This is illustrated in the circumstances which 
were associated with the early days of Abimelech. 1. Irregular social hahits. The 
parentage of Abimelech would (1) stir in him a sense of injustice, and (2') incline 
him to lawless conduct (ch. viii. 30). Loose morals undermine the peace of society. 
Whatever desecrates the sanctity of the home tends to derange the order of the 
state. 2. Parental vanity. The high-sounding name of Abimelech is significant as 
an index to the character of his mother, and the thoughts she would instil into his 
mind. The vanity of the parent may be the curse of the child. 

II. The wicked character of ambition. Abimelech displays some of the worst 
features of ambition. 1. Selfishness. The ambitious upstart has no thought of his 
nation's prosperity, his sole aim is his own aggrandisement. 2. Deceit. Abimelech 
deceives his brothers and the men of Shechem. True greatness is simple and frank ; 
the bastard greatness of ambition is mean, false, treacherous. 3. Grudty. The 
new king soon abuses the confidence of his brethren, and develops into a murderous 
tyrant. Ambition inclines to cruelty (1) because it isolates the ambitious man, and 
destroys the safeguard of the sympathy and influence of equals, and (2) because it 
creates dangers from which there seems no escape but by violence. 

III. The temporary triumph of ambition. Abimelech reaches the throne at 
which he aims. 1. We must not be surprised at the temporary success of wicked 
ness. It is easier for the unscrupulous to obtain a low worldly triumph than for the 
conscientious to reach their more noble goal. The irony of providence is apparent 
in the fact that these men "have their reward" (Matt. vi. 2). 2. We must not 
judge of conduct by worldly success. Success is no vindication of character. Bad 
conduct is not to be justified because it proves to have been expedient The syco- 
phancy which flatters triumphant ambition, while it execrates the ambition which 
fails, is one of the meanest characteristics of popular opinion. 

IV. The fatal results of ambition. 1. To the people who shamefully counten- 
ance it it brings disaster. Israel was the worse for tolerating Abimelech, and 
Shechem, which accepted and encouraged him, suffered the heaviest calamities at his 
hand. Instead of securing strength and peace, the new throne only flung disorder 
and misery into the nation. 2. To the ambitious man his conduct brought ultimata 
defeat, shame, and death. Greed of power is punished by • triumph ox wea knw fc 
Pride and vanity meet with humiliation and ridicule. — A. 



CH. IX. 7—21.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



101 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 7.-^11 the top of Konnt Serizim. 
Mount Gerizim rises on the south-west side 
of Samaria or Shechem as a sheer rock about 
800 feet in height, facing Mount Ebal, 
which is separated from it hy the narrow 
valley, " some 500 yards wide," in which 
Samaria, now Nablus, is built. It was 
from Mount Gerizim that Joshua, in accord- 
ance with the directions given by Moses in 
Pent. xi. 29, caused the blessings of the 
law to be proclaimed, after the capture of 
Ai, while the curses were proclaimed from 
Mount Ebal (Josh. viiL 33, 35). Some 
explain the name to mean " the mount of 
the Gerizzites," or Gerzites (1 Sam. xxvii. 
8) ; but the absence of the article makes 
this doubtful. Lifted up his voice. Imply- 
ing that a considerable effort was necessary 
to be heard by the people below. The 
narrowness of the valley, however, and the 
rocky nature of the cliffs there largely in- 
crease the sound. I have myself heard the 
human voice utter an articulate word at a 
measured distance of one mile one furlong 
and seventeen yards ; but it was in a pecu- 
liar state of the atmosphere. The experi- 
ment has been made in recent years, and it 
has been proved that a man's voice can be 
distinctly heard in Nablfis, and also upon 
Ebal, from Gerizim. It is thought that 
Jotham, having emerged from one of the vast 
caverns, overhung with luxuriant creepers, 
which are in the mountain's side, "stood 
upon a huge projecting crag of Gerizim" 
just above the ancient site of Shechem, and 
thence addressed the people who were as- 
sembled beneath him. The rich vegetation 
of that well- watered spot, " unparalleled in 
Palestine," supplied the materials of his 
fable ; for the olive, the fig, the vine all 
grow in that rich valley ; while the bramble, 
which creeps up the barren side of the 
mountain, and which is still used to kindle 
the fire to roast the lamb at the Samaritan 
Passover, was to be seen there in abund- 
ance. 

Ver. 8. — The trees, &c. This is the earli- 
est exampTe of a fable in Scripture ; indeed 
the only one except that in 2 Kings xiv. 9. 
It is remarked that in the Indian and Greek 
fables the animals are the d/ramatis personce, 
the fox, the lion, the ass, &c. ; whereas in 
the only two specimens of Hebrew fable re- 
maining to us, the members of the vegetable 
kingdom, the olive, the fig, the vine, the 
bramble, the cedar, the thistle, are the actors 
■nd speakers. The parable, of which Isa. v. 
1 — 7 is a beautiful example, is quite different 
in its structure. Like the inimitable parables 
of our Saviour in the Kew Testament, it sets 
forth Divine truth under an image, but the 



image and all its parts are in strict accord- 
ance with nature. In the Scripture alUgori 
real persons and their actions prefigure tha 
actions and the persons which they are in- 
tended to represent (see Matt. xii. 39, 40 ; 
GaL iv. 21—31 ; Heb. xi. 19). Allegorical 
personages may, however, be fictitious, as in 
the ' Pilgrim's Progress.' The general mean- 
ing of this fable is clear. The trees worthy 
to reign for their intrinsic excellence refused 
the proffered kingdom one after another. 
The vilest and most unworthy accepted it. 
The result would be that a fire would burst 
out from the despicable bramble, and set fire 
to the lofty cedar tree. Thus Gideon refused 
the kingdom, and his sons had virtually 
refused it likewise. The base-born Abime- 
lech had accepted it, and the result would 
be a deadly strife, which would destroy both 
the ungrateful subjects and the unworthy 
ruler. 

Ver. 9.— They honour God and man: God, 
by the frequent ofierings of oil with the 
meat offerings (Levit. ii. 1 — 16, &c.) ; and 
man, «. g. , by the solemn anointing with oil 
of kings, priests, and prophets (1 Sam. xvi 
12, 13 ; 1 Kings xix. 16 ; Ps. Ixxxix. 21). 
To be promoted, literally, to wave, or nwee, 
over, i. e . to rule, in the case of a tree. 

Ver. 13. — Which cheereth God and man. 
The wine is said to cheer, or make to rejoice, 
God because the drink offering which ac- 
companied the meat offering consisted of 
wine (Numb. xv. 7, 10), and God was well 
pleased with the offerings of his people (o£ 
Gen. viii. 21 ; Phil. iv. 18 ; Heb. xiii. 16). 
The idea in this verse, as in vers. 9 and 11, 
is, that while the olive, the fig, and the vino 
were occupied in waving their branches over 
the other trees, in token of their superiority, 
they would necessarily be neglecting their 
own proper gift and office, which was to 
produce oil, and figs, and grapes. 

Ver. 1 4. — The bramble. A prickly shrub ; 
in Greek pa/ivog, Rhamnus, "the southern 
buckthorn " (Gesenius). The same plant as 
is mentioned in Ps. Iviii. 9 (thorns, A. 
V.) as used to make fires with (see note to 
ver. 7). 

Ver. 15. — If in truth, i e. truly, as the 
same phrase is rendered in vers. 16, 19, with 
integrity of purpose and sincerity of heart. 
The English would be less ambiguous if it 
ran, "If ye anoint me king over you in 
truth. " The speech of the bramble indicates 
the grounds for suspicion already existing 
between Abimelech and the men of Shechem. 
Let fire come out, &c. — ^keeping up the pn>- 
priety of the image, as the natural function 
of the bramble was to kindle a fire, and ai it 
had no other use ; showing, too, how n base 



102 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oh. IX. 7—21. 



bramble oonld destroy a noUe cedar, and 
the base-born Abimelech could bring min 
upon the lords of Shechem. 

Vers. 16— 20. — Now therefore, &c. The 
fable being ended, now comes the forcible 
and bitter application. The simple refer- 
ence to Gideon's great actions, and the 
juxtaposition of the base and bloody deed 
In which the Shechemites and the men of 
the house of Millo had made themselves 
accomplices by choosing Abimelech for their 
king, formed an indictment which could not 
be answered. With lofty scorn and irony 
he wishes well to them if they had acted 
honourably ; but if not, he predicts the 
inevitable Nemesis of an alliance founded in 
bloodshed and treachery and wrong, viz., the 
mutual hatred and destruction of the con- 
tracting parties. Observe how "the house 
of Millo" is consistently spoken of as a 
separate commumly from "th« men of 
Shechem." 



Ver. 21. — Totham ran away. Being closi 
to the top. of Gerizim, Jotham had the open 
country before him. It would take the men 
of Shechem twenty minutes to ascend the 
hill, by which time Jotham would be out of 
sight, and two or three mUes on his way. 
Seer, to which he fled, is thought to be 
cither the same asBeeroth, among the heights 
of the tribe of Benjamin \Josh. iz. 17), now 
El-Bireh, ' ' the first halting-place for caravans 
on the northern road from Jerusalem" 
('Sinai and Palestine,' p. 210) ; or a place 
called by Eusebius Bern, now El-Bireh, 
eight Boman miles from Eleutheropolis 
(now Beii Jibrinj, and possibly the same 
as the place of the same name described by 
Maundrell as four hours from Jerusalem, 
and two hours west of Bethel ; or, as Ewald 
thinks, 5eer beyond Jordan (Nmr.b. xxi. 16). 
It is impossible to decide which, or whether 
any, of these is the place deaignated u 
Jotham'i place of lefaga. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 7 — ^21. — The handvrriting on the wall. Among the many dramatic scenes 
which invest the pages of Holy Scripture with such singular interest, and give them 
such a hold upon the minds of all who read them with intelligence, perhaps none is more 
striking than that depicted in the fifth chapter of the prophet Daniel. A gorgeous 
spectacle is there presented to our view. The monarch of one of those mighty 
Oriental monarchies, which were a fearful embodiment of irresponsible human power 
over the lives and destinies of millions, was sitting in high estate in the palace of his 
kingdom ; around him were a thousand of the highest nobles of his empire ; the 
walls of the banqueting hall were adorned with the symbols of his royal power, and 
the emblematic images of the Babylonian and Assyrian gods. Upon the king's table 
were placed the golden and silver vessels which had once been used in the temple 
of the Lord at Jerusalem — trophies of past victory to feed his own pride with ; 
trophies of the triumph of Bel and Nebo over the God of the Jews, with which to do 
homage to the gods of gold and silver, of brass and iron, of wood and stone. The 
wine sparkled in the goblets ; the halls rang vrith hymns of blasphemous praise ; 
insolent mirth, and voluptuous luxury, and security of power, and pride of domin- 
ion kept their high revel with audacious pomp. AH faces were flushnd with wine, 
all hearts beat high with self-confidence and arrogant success. One would have 
thought they held a lease of their power and pleasure for the term of eternity. The 
revel was at his height, when suddenly but noiselessly there came forth the fingers 
of a man's hand, and upon the wall just opposite the king's throne, on which the 
lamps were throwing the full glare of light, wrote the fatal words, Mene, Mene, 
Tekel, Upharsin. The agony that passed over the king's face, the tumultuous terror 
of his heart, the smiting of his trembling knees, the frightened cry for the astrolo- 
gers and magicians, the impotent honours to the servant of the living God, the break- 
ing up of the festival, the consternation of the company, were but the prelude to 
what the sacred writer records with such pithy brevity. " In that night was Belshaz- 
zar the king of the Chaldeans slain, and Darius the Median took the kingdom." Not 
very different in its spirit, though dressed in such a different garb, is the moral of 
the history in the verses which form the subject of our present meditation. By 
treachery, by wholesale fratricide, and by the help of the vainest and lightest in the 
land, the worthless Abimelech had risen to that place of kingly power which his 
great and patriotic father had refused to occupy. He had sought and obtained the 
co-operation of the idolatrous party among the people, he had appealed to the self- 
ishness of the Shechemites, he had freely scattered bribes, and by such means he 
had obtained the desire of his heart. All seemed safe and prosperotu, when from 



OH. IX. 7—21.] THE BOOK OF JUDGEa 108 

the heights of Gerizim a voice of ill omen — it might Beem a prophetic voice, certainly 
a voice big with unwelcome truth — rang in the streets of Shechem. The paasers-by, 
the throng in the market-place, the base adherents and flatterers of the new-mad« 
king, were startled by the sound, and looking up to the rock which overhung theil 
town, saw Jotham, the youngest son of their great benefactor and deliverer Jerub- 
baal, of him who had saved their country from slavery, and their people from Baal- 
worship, and the one member of his f amil3' who had escaped from the murderer's 
hand, standing upon the rocky ledge. With ready eloquence he caught their ear and 
fixed their attention, while he uttered his cutting rebuke, and poured out his prophetic 
curse. Surely the sweet morsel in the mouths of the successful conspirators must 
have turned to gall and wormwood as their own base ingratitude and treachery and 
the vileness of their worthless king were thus gibbeted before their eyes. Surely 
their guilty hearts must have sunk within them as the sure consequence of their mis- 
deeds was held before their eyes with such marvellous power of conviction. It is this 
inevitable Nemesis, this certainty that men will reap what they have sown, this 
exposition of the naked hideousness of wrong-doing, this vileness of sin, breaking 
through all the glitter of success and all the glare of present prosperity, wealth, or 
power, in a word, the just judgment of God written by the finger of God upon the 
wall, or declared by the voice of God from the pulpits of his truth, that men so 
obstinately close their ears and shut their eyes to, but which the word of God so 
resolutely declares. It is the teacher's office to proclaim it, to enforce it, to urge it, 
to insist upon it, whether men hear or whether they forbear. But there are certain 
bye-truths connected with this central one of the ultimate bursting of ungodly pros- 
perity which we shall do well also to consider. One is the absence of cohesion in the 
various elements of evil. There can be no real lasting friendship between bad men ; 
they are incapable of love. The bonds of interest and of some common evil purpose 
may bind them together for a time, but the shifting of these interests bursts those 
bonds asunder, and real hatred succeeds to seeming love. Unscrupulous ambition 
may coalesce with base ingratitude, but it is only for a moment. The only real and 
lasting union is that of love in Jesus Christ ; and here is the security of the Church 
of God. The divers instruments of the powers of darkness may combine against 
her, and harm her for a moment, but they have no principle of cohesion in them. 
But the love which unites the saints to one another and to Christ is indissoluble 
and eternal. Thus, for example, infidelity and superstition may combine to destroy 
the faith, but they will soon turn against each other with deadly hatred as exasper- 
ated foes. They that are Christ's will be one in Christ for ever and ever. The fable 
has also some striking touches of character which are very instructive. The for- 
wardness and levity of empty self-conceit, the love of power just in proportion to a 
person's unfitness to wield it, the utter unscrupulousness of a selfish ambition, the 
meanness of personal pride, the fickleness of men who have not the ballast of 
integrity to steady them ; and, on the other hand, the humility of true greatness, the 
true dignity of being useful to others rather than of being exalted ourselves, the 
propriety of mind which enables a man to discern his right place and to perform his 
proper duty — these and many other traits of character which it is most profitable to 
discern come out spontaneously from the sharp imagery of the fable. It is no mean 
part of personal religion to perfect a man's character in these and such like respects. 
The neglect of the lessons of Scripture in such practical details has sadly lessened 
the influence of religious men in the society in which they live. It has diminished 
their usefulness and lowered their happiness, while it has deprived the world of the 
full evidence which it might have had that God was in them of a truth. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES. 

Ven. 7 — 20. — Jotham's fable ; or, popular election, its dangers and abuse» 
The earliest instance in Scripture of this literary form. Proneness of the Eastern 
mind ,to apologue. Advantage of vivid, picturesque personification of principles 
and of natural objects. Cryptic teaching and political suggestion may be thui 
embodied. Christ's parables instances of noblest use of this vehicle of thought 
The following principles are taught by Jotham :-^ 



tW THE BOOK OF JUDGES. |.cH. a. 7—21. 

I. Nations mat be actuated bt oafbice and false gratings, as well as bt 

MORAL OBLIGATION. 

II. Good and wortht men will refuse to be the platthings and tenal 

INSTRUMENTS OF OTHERS 

III. There are saorifices for which political advancement does hot com- 
pensate, AND WHICH IT DOES NOT JTJSTIFT ONE'S MAKING. 

IV. The character of a people is REFLECa'ED IN THEIR POLITICAL BEPRB- 

sentatives. 

V. High position magnifies powers of mischief as of blbbsino. 

VI. The trust that has been won bt unwortht acts will be as babklt 
betrated. — M. 

Ver. 21. — Strength in weakness. How ridiculous does it sound: "Jotham ran 
away I " The bodily presence and outward achievements of really great men ar« 
often contemptible. But Jotham, like many another, b not to be estimated from 
without. 

I. The conscience of the nation was appealed to through its imagination. 
He had shown himself to the whole people. The literary »implicity and charm of 
his fable would rivet the attention of men upon the essential wrong committed, 
and the folly. 

II. The moral forces of the world are its strongest, and will in the end 
prevail. The "case" had been portrayed by a stroke of genius, so that no craft 
or sophistry could ever justify it. The claim of Abimelech, &c. was stripped of all 
its pretensions. To leave a matter with the conscience of men and with God is often 
harder than to contest it by force of arms. Christ yielded to the physical force and 
perverted authority of the Jews, but by his bearing at the judgment and by the 
matchless clearness of his statements he put his persecutors for ever in the wrong, 
and became the mightiest Buler the world has known. — M. 

Vers. 8—15. — Jotham! s parahle. By casting his ideas in the form of a parable, 

Jotham not only makes them grfipUic and striking, he exalts them into the light of 
general principles, and thus teaches lessons which are applicable in all ages. 

I. Men are too ready to shelter themselves under the influence and 
responsibility of leaders of their own choosing. The trees combined to elect a 
king ; but this was contrary to their natural functions. They fulfilled their vocation 
perfectly in their individual life and fruit-bearing. So Israel resolved to have a king, 
though in opposition to the simple form of government which a realisation of the 
idea of the theocracy would have shown to be the noblest and happiest. Men trust 
too much to organisation ; but organisation is injurious without wisdom and strength 
to use it aright. There is a common temptation to throw upon others the responsi- 
bility which should be borne in common. Thus in the kingdom of Christ the Church 
is inclined to leave to ministers and ofBcial persons the work which belongs to all her 
members. Men generally fear to be independent, though they are proud of their 
boated liberty. The usual habit is to repose under the leadership of others. Such 
conduct implies unfaithfulness to our supreme King and the neglect of our own 
responsibility. 

II. Positions of honour demand sacrifice from those who can rightly occupy 
them. Each of the fruit trees sees that it must sacrifice its own peculiar advantages 
in undertaking to rule over the forest. Rank and power involve loss of opportunities 
for private usefulness, anxiety, danger, responsibility. The quieter life is the happier. 
Nevertheless, it will be wrong to p'ess these personal considerations to the neglect of 
public duty. For the good of others we should be willing to suffer personal incon- 
venience. It might have been better if one of the fruit trees had accepted the crown 
instead of letting it fall on the bramble. The selfishness which allows public ofSces 
to come into the hands of inferior men is a sin on the part of the more capable. 

III. Usefulness is better than rank. The olive, the fig, and the vine ai« 
fruitful. Unless they were absolutely needed as kings, the world would be th« 
poorer by their forsaking their useful vocations lor the glory of royalty. It is bettei 
to fael that we are doing good, however obscurely, than that w« are reaping burer 



CB. IX. 22— 57.J 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



lOS 



Aonours. God is glorified not oy our fame or rank, but by our fruitfulness (John xv. 
8). To bear good fruit we must be rooted like the tree — be content, patient, willing 
to fill a small space if God be glorified. There is nothing bo fatal to Christian 
fruitfulness as ambition. 

IV. The lowest natures aeb the most ambitious. The bramble alone coveta 
the crown. Ambition aims at greatness, but it arises out of littleness. The ambition 
of great men is their weakness, the smallest, meanest thing in them. True greatness 
will perceive the hoUowness of the rewards of ambition, and the true glory of honest, 
faithful work in whatever sphere it is done. We must not therefore be deceived 
into judging of the fitness of a man for any post by the eagerness with which he 
seeks it. For ourselves we should learn that self-seeking in all its branches is a low 
and despicable habit of life. 

V. The exaltation of the mean will end in disaster. Weakness is better 
than ill-lodged power. Better have no king than a bad king. As a good govern- 
ment is the first blessing of a nation, so a bad government is its greatest curse. They 
who enter blindly into needless obligations will have their eyes opened when these 
begin to work them harm. It is easier to confer power than to withdraw it. Ther» 
is one King under whose shadow all can rest secure (lea. xi, 1 — 5). — ^A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 22. — Had reigned. The Hebrew 
word here used is quite a different one from 
that in vers. 8, 10, 12, 14, and elsewhere, 
where the reign of a king is designated. It 
means to exercise dominion, to be a chief or 
japtain over a people. The use of it here 
suggests that though, as we read in ver. 6, 
the Cauaanite men of Shechem and the 
house of Millo had made him their king, 
yet he was not made king by the tribes in 
general, only he exercised a kind of domin- 
ion over them, or over a sufficiently large 
portion of them to warrant their being called 
lirael. 

Vers. 23, 24. — These two verses contain 
the summary of what is related in detail in 
the rest of the chapter, and we are told that 
it all happened providentially, that the mo- 
lence done to the eons of Jerubbaal, and 
their blood, might come to he laid (Hterally, 
for some one to lay) upon AMmeUch, &e. 
Which aided him — literally, strengthened his 
hands, by giving him money, and encour- 
aging him to make way to the throne by 
WTllifig his brothers. 

Ver. 25. — The men of Shechem, &c. The 
narrative now gives the details of that 
"treacherous dealing" on the part of the 
Shechemites which was spoken of in the 
gross in ver. 23. Their disaffection first 
showed itself in acts of brigandage "against 
the peace of their lord the king," to use the 
language of our own mediaeval lawyers. The 
road t* Shechem was no longer safe; lawless 
freebooters, in defiance of Abimelech's au- 
thority, stopped and robbed aU travellers that 
passed that way, probably including Abime- 
lech's own oflScers and servants. For him. 
It may have been their intention even to 
lay violent hands upon Abimelech himself 
•hoTild ho come to Shechem. 



Ver. 26.— Gaal the sonof Ehed. Who he 
was, or of what tribe or race he and his 
brethren were, we have no means of know- 
ing ; he seems to have been an adventurer 
who sought to turn the growing disaffection 
of the Shechemites to his own advantage 
by offering himself as a leader of the mal- 
oontents. Several MSS. and editions and 
versions read Eber for Ebed. 

Ver. 27. — And they went out, &c. The 
next step forward in the rebellion was taken 
at the time of the vintage, probably when 
they were inflamed with wine; for, after 
they had gathered in and trodden the grapes, 
they kept high festival in the temple of 
Baal-berith, on occasion of offering to their 
god the solemn thank offering for the vin- 
tage. And then, speaking freely under the 
influence of wine, they cursed Abimelech. 
The whole talk of the company was of his 
misdeeds, and seditious and rebellious words 
were freely uttered on all sides. Had* 
merry. Bather, offered their thank offeringa. 
The same word is used in Levit. xix. 24 : 
" In the fourth year aU the fruit thereof 
(i. e. of the vineyard) shall be holy to praist 
the Lord viithal " — ^literally, ^aise offerings to 
the Lord. These offerings were made by the 
Shechemites to Baal instead of to God. 

Ver. 28. — And Gaal, &c. Gaal now saw 
his opportunity, and encouraged the revolt. 
Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, 
that we should serve him 1 The meaning 
of these words, though somewhat obscure at 
first, becomes plain if we compare the two 
simUar passages, 1 Sam. xxv. 10 ; 1 King! 
xii. 16. In the first we have the contempt- 
nous question, "Who is David? '" and in the 
second the analogous one, "What portion 
have we in David 1 " but in both we have th« 
isme person described by difiaient temu^ 



106 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oh. IX. 22—67. 



"Who b David t and who is the aon of 
Jesse!" and, "What portion have we in 
David ! neither have we inheritance in the 
son of Jesse." Here, therefore, it is clear that 
Shechem is merely another name for Abi/me- 
lech ; and it is easy to see why, Abimelech's 
mother was a Canaanite bond-woman, a 
Shechemite ; and the plea for making 
Abimelech Kng was, " for ne is our brother " 
(vers. 2, 8). Shechem, or the son of Shechem, 
was therefore a natural description of Abime- 
lech. But, adds Gaal, is not he the son of 
Jernhbaal ! and (is not) Zebnl his officer ? 
i. e. he is not a real Shechemite ; he is the 
son of Jerubbaal ; and what right has he to 
reign over you Shechemites? And why 
should Zebul lord it over you ? He is only 
Abimelech's officer. No ; serve the men of 
Hamor the father of Shechem. Fling off 
the yoke of the Abi-ezrite stranger, and set 
up a real Canaanite government from the old 
race of Hamor, the true founder and head of 
Shechem (cf. 1 CSiron. ii. 60—52). 

Ver. 29. — And wonld to God, &c., i. e. 
" If you will only trust me as your leader, I 
will soon remove Abimelech, and then you 
can have a national government." It seems 
that the people at once closed with his offer, 
and, thus emboldened, he sent a challenge 
to Abimelech to eome out and fight him. 

Vers. 30,31.— AndwhenZebnl,&c. Zebul, 
it appears, was governor of the city under 
Abimelech, and when the words of Gaal 
were reported to him, he privately sent off 
messengers to the king to tell him the state 
of affairs at Shechem, and urge him to come 
in person. Zebnl meanwhile temporised, 
not being strong enough to resist Gaal 
openly. Privily. The word only occurs here. 
It probably means a little more than privily, 
— ^viz., imth subtlety or deceit, — because he 
pretended all the while to be a friend of GaaL 
Some make it a proper name, " In Bumah," 
taking it for the some place as Animah 
(ver. 41) 

Ver. 86. — ^And Oaal, &c. It does not 
appear certain whether Gaal, who, as is 
clear from ver. 86, was accompanied by 
Zebul, went out of the city gate with his 
men in consequence of any intelligence of 
Abimelech's movements, or any alarm or sus- 
picion of danger, or merely upon some other 
enterprise, But whatever the cause was, as 
soon as he was there, Abimelech, according 
to Zebul's advice in ver. 33, had begun to 
descend from the mountains into the valley 
to "set upon the city." Gaal's quick eye 
detected them in the morning light. 

Ver. 86. — Saw the people, i. e. Abime- 
lech's followers. He said to Zebul, whom 
he looked npon as a friend and confederate. 
Zebnl said to him, &c. Partly to give 
Abimelech time, and partly to conceal his 
•wn complicity ia Abimelech'i movemeati, 



Zebnl affected not to see the men, and ex- 
plained the appearance as being merely the 
shadows of the mountains cast before the 
rising snn. 

Ver. 87. — Oaal spaka again, ftc. Oi 
course, as the men got nearer, it was impos- 
sible to mistake them for anything but men. 
Gaal could see two bands distinctly, one 
coming down the hiU-side, the other march- 
ing by the road of the soothsayers' oak. The 
middle of the land. The word rendered 
middle only occurs again in Ezek. xxxviii. 
12, " the midst of the land," A. V. It is so 
rendered from the notion of the old inter- 
preters that it was connected with a word 
meaning ' ' fhe nwvel. " It is usually explained 
now to mean the height. There may have 
been soma particular height in the ridge 
called Tabbur ha-aretz. The plain of Ueone- 
nim. Bather, the oak (or terebinth tree) 
of the soothsayers, some large terebinth oi 
turpentine tree under which the soothsayers 
used to take their auguries. Dean Stanley 
would identify it with the oak of the pillar in 
ver. 6, where see note. 

Ver. 38.— Then said Zebnl, &c Zebnl 
now throws off the mask, and dares Gaal to 
carry out his boast in ver. 28. 

Ver. 39.— Before the men of Shechem, 
i. e. at their head, as their leader, as the 
phrase not uncommonly means (Gen. xxxiii. 
3 J Exod. xiii. 21). 

, Ver. 40. — Were overthrown and wonnded. 
The simple translation of the Hebrew is, and 
there fell many slain even unto the entering of 
the gate, showing that Abimelech's men pur- 
sued them to the very gate of the city. 

Ver. 41. — Arumah. A place not other- 
wise known, but apparently (ver. 42) very 
near Shechem, and possibly the same place 
as Bumah, the birthplace of Queen Zebndah 
(2 Kings xxiii. 36), and, from its name, 
apparently among the mountains. Zebnl 
thrust out, &c. Gaal was so much weak- 
ened by his defeat that Zebul was now strong 
enough to expel him and the remainder of 
" his brethren " from the city. 

Vers. 42, 43. — And it came to pass, *c. 
The Shechemites, believing Abimelech to 
have retired, and hoping that he would be 
satisfied with the chastisement inflicted upon 
them in the battle of the day before, left the 
protection of their walls next morning to 
pursue their usual avocations in the field. 
Abimelech's spies in the city being aware of 
their intention immediately reported it to 
him. Upon which he hastily took his army, 
divided them as before into three companies, 
lay in ambush In the field till the Shechem- 
ites were well ont in the coimtry, then 
attacked the Shechemites in the field with 
two of the companies, and himself at the 
head of the third rushed to the city gats t« 
intercept their ratnat. 



oa. n. 22—670 



TflE BOOK Of JUt)GJ!8. 



101 



Ver. 44.— Tie company. The Hebrew 
has companies, bat the sense requires the 
singular. 

ver. 45. — ^Abimelech fonght aifainst the 
city, &o. When all the Shechemitea in the 
field were smitten or dispersed, Abimelech 
stormed the city, weakened as it was by the 
previous loss of so many of its defenders. 
The city made an obstinate defence not- 
withstanding, _ but was taken before night, 
and all the inhabitants were put to the 
sword. The walls were then razed to the 
ground, and the site was sown with salt to 
express the wish that it might be barren 
and uninhabited for ever (cf. Ps. oviL 84, 
marg. ; Jer. xvii. 6). This action of sowmg 
with salt is not elsewhere mentioned ; but it 
is well known that salt destroys vegetation, 
and is used by gardeners for this very pur- 
pose. Pliny (quoted by Kosenmiiller) says, 
Omnis locus in quo reperitur sal sterilis est. 

Ver. 46. — The men of the tower of 
Bhechem. The tower of Shechem is no 
doubt the same fortified building as was 
spoken of in vers. 6 and 20 by the name of 
the house of Millo (see note to ver. 6). An, 
or rather the, hold. The word so rendered 
occurs elsewhere only in 1 Sam. xiii. 6, where 
it is rendered high places, and is coupled 
with ca/ves, thickets, rocks, and pits, as one of 
the hiding-places of the Israelites from the 
Philistines. It was probably some kind of 
keep built on an eminence, and the place 
where the treasure of the temple was kept 
(ver. 4). It appears from the narrative that 
the tower of Shechem, or house of Millo, was 
not actually part of Shechem, nor imme- 
diately contiguous, since the report of the 
capture of Shechem had to be carried thither. 
The god Berith. It should rather be El- 
berith, the same as Baal-berith in ver. 4 — 
El, i e. god, being substituted for Baal. 

Yer. 48. — Mount ZaImon, i. e. the shady 
mount, so called from the thick wood which 
grows upon it. It was in the neighbourhood 
of Shechem, and is perhaps the same as that 
mentioned in Ps. bcviii. 14 as famous for 
its snow-storms. An aze. The Hebrew has 
tuxes. If this is right, the phrase in his 
hand must be rendered with Mm, as 1 
Sam. xiv. 84 : Each one his ox m Ma 
hand, i. e. toith him ; Jer. zxxviii. 10 : Take 
thirty men in thy hand, i. e. with thee ; and 
elsewhere. 

Ver. 49. — Set the hold on Are — thus 
literally fulfilling Jotham's curse in vers. 15 
and 20. It is thought by many that those 
who thus perished miserably by suffocation 
and fire in the hold of the temple of Baal- 
berith had taken sanctuary there, not occu- 
pied it for the purposes of defence. 

Ver. 60. — Thebez. A place so called still 
•siated in the time of Eusebius between 



Neapolis (». e. Shechem) and ScythopolJi 
(i. e. Beth-shean), about thirteen miles from 
Shechem. It still survives in the large and 
beautiful village of Tubas, which, Robinson 
tells us, is on the Boman road between 
Nabulus and Beishan. Thebez had evidently 
joined the rebellion against Abimelech. 

Ver. 51. — They of the city. In Hebrew 
{baaley) the men of the city, i. e. the owners 
or citizens, the same phrase as is used 
throughout the chapter of the tr^m of Shechem 
(cf. Josh. xxiv. 11 ; 1 Sam. xxiii. 11, 12). 
The English phrase master, or my masters, 
is very similar. The A.V. has here para- 
phrased it they of tlie city, to avoid the repe- 
tition of the word men. The top — the flat 
roof or hofuse-top. 

Ver. 52. — To bum it with fire — en- 
couraged by his success at the tower of 
Shechem. 

Ver. 63. — A millstone. The word here 
used means the upper millstone, which rides 
as it were, or moves, over the fixed nether 
stone. All to brake his skull. This obsolete 
English phrase has been the subject of a 
recent controversy. In the older English ot 
Chaucer and his immediate successors such 
compounds as to -break, to -burst, &c. were 
very common, and were frequently preceded 
by the adverb all. Hence, some English 
scholars would read the phrase here, and all 
to-brake his skull. It is, however, certain 
that before the time when the A. V. was 
made the compounds to-break, to-burst, &c. 
had become entirely obsolete, and the com- 
pound all-to had come into use. The right 
way, therefore, in which to read the present 
phrase is, and all-to brake his skull, i. e. 
smashed it, dashed it in pieces. The prefix 
all-to gives intensity to the verb. 

Ver. 64. — ^His armour-bearer — an office 
of trust, entailing much intimacy. Saul 
loved David greatly, and he became his 
armour-bearer (1 Sam. xvi. 21). Compare 
the similar incident of Saul and his armour- 
bearer in 1 Sam. xxxi 4 — 6. , 

Ver. 56. — The men of Israel — Abimelech'i 
followers (see ver. 22). 

Ver. 56. — ^WMch he did unto his father. 
It is remarkable that the sacred writer, in 
calling attention to the righteous vengeance 
which fell upon the head of Abimelech, 
marks especially the conduct of Abimelech 
as undutiful to his father (see Exod. xxi. 17 j 
Matt. XV. 4 ; cf. also Gen. ix. 24—26). 

Ver. 57. — The men of Shechem. Not here 
baaley, but simply nwra. Each such evidence 
of the righteous judgment of God is a pre- 
sage of the judgment to come, and encourages 
the reflection of the Pjalraist : " Verily there 
is a reward for the righteous ; doubtlesa 
there is a God that judgeth the eartb" (Fa, 
Iviii. 10, Pr. B. vers.). 



108 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oH. ix. 22-^7. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 22 — 57. — Be sure your sin will find you oui We are living under the 
government of God, and though many things happen in the world which seem 
■trange and inexplicable to us upon the theory of God's righteous rule over mankind, 
yet we have but to be patient, and to observe impartially the end of things, in order 
to see by many infallible proofs that God is good to those who are of a clean heart, 
and that the end of the ungodly is that they shall perish. Nor can we afEord to lose 
the evidences of God's righteous judgment. The immediate present fills such a 
large space in our view ; ungodly mirth, successful wickedness, prosperous iniquity, 
bold blasphemy, the triumphs of sin, the rewards of selfishness, the impunity of evil 
livers, parade themselves so ostentatiously in the world, that the steps of our faith 
in God might easily slip if we did not keep steadily in mind the lessons taught us by 
the providence as well as by the word of God. Now it may be safely afllrmed that 
the whole course of this world presents to the impartial observer continuous evidence 
that "the way of transgressors Is hard," and that "there is no peace to the wicked;" 
while, on the contrary, the " way of the just is as the shining light, which shineth 
more and more unto the perfect day." It is quite true that this evidence is from 
time to time, as it were, crossed and checked in its flow by puzzling phenomena of a 
different character. But just as the ebbing or flowing tide is apparently interrupted 
by single waves which exceed or fall short of their expected place, and yet for all 
that is steadily receding or advancing ; or as the temperature of the advancing spring 
for a time declines, or that of the advancing autumn increases, and yet a sure 
advance is being made towards summer heat or winter cold, so it is with the righteous 
judgment of God. Under it, in spite of apparant exceptions and temporary diver- 
sions, the righteous are advancing in the way of peace, and the ungodly are biinging 
upon themselves a righteous retribution. Fasten the eyes of your mind then upon 
these truths ; observe them working themselves out in the daily lives of men before 
your eyes, and in the career of nations as delineated in the page of history. See 
how the sins of a man are continually finding him out in the most unexpected ways, 
and at the most unexpected times. Mark how evil deeds, unpunished at the time, 
nay, apparently successful, forgotten by the doer, and thought by him to be for ever 
passed away, yet come back to him, stand in his way, become thorns in his sides, 
frustrate his hopes, mar all his purposes, break out into deadly consequences, cast a 
dark shadow upon his life. Look at the life of nations. The barbarians of the 
North avenging the abominations of imperial Eome ; the Turkish empire withering 
away because of its bloody deeds, its cruel oppressions, its detestable sensualities; 
the expulsion of the Jews ; the wrongs of the Indians ; the butcheries of the 
Inquisition, still wasting away the life and power of Spain ; the French nation, 
receiving in bloody revolutions and still more bloody wars the just reward of the 
adulteries and unblushing vices of her monarchs and nobles ; and, most striking of 
all, the Jewish race, sufBering through eighteen centuries of slaughter and pillage 
and persecution and wandering, without a home and without a country, the vengeance 
which they called down upon themselves for the blood of the Son of God, whom they 
crucified and slew. Or learn the same lesson in another way. Observe how in the 
very nature of things the tendency of wickedness is to defeat its own ends, and to 
bring sorrow upon them that work wickedness. The successful lie when found out 
works distrust and suspicion in all with whom a man has to do. The deed of violence 
and blood arouses hatred and abhorrence in the breasts of those cognisant of it. 
The act of unscrupulous power awakens fear and jealousy and resentment in the 
beholders. The wrongs of women raise up avengers among men. The avarice 
which plunders and wrings treasures from their possessors leaves a sting of resent- 
ment behind it; and when a man has surrounded himself with distrust and suspicion, 
and hatred and abhorrence, with envies and jealousies, and resentment and fierce 
revenge, what room is there left for happy enjoyment or quiet possessions? His sin 
finds him out in the very midst of his success, and he reaps according to what he has 
sown ; so that in the very operation of the natural laws which attach to right and 
wrong we see the just judgment of God. In the marvellous pages of Holy Scrip- 
ture &eae natural lessons are illustrated, exemplified, and enforced with a clearness 



CH. ix. 22— «7.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. lOS 

and a vigour unequalled and unapproached in any writings of man. They culminat« 
in the declaration of the coming of the day of judgment, when God will reward 
avery man according to his works. The ohserved tendencies of good and evil will 
then be fully confirmed. Every work will then have its proper recompense of reward : 
all inequalities will be redressed, the temporary exceptions will disappear, the jusl 
procedure will be vindicated to the utmost. In the full court of heaven and earth 
God will show himself a righteous judge, when all men shall stand before the judg- 
ment seat of Christ. The flood which drowned the world of the ungodly, the fir«i 
which burnt up the cities of the plain, the miserable end of the tyrant Abimelech, 
the_ dogs which licked the blood of Ahab by the vineyard of Naboth, the flames 
which devoured the temple at Jerusalem, and the instances which every day brings 
before us of shame and sorrow springing out of sin, are but prophetic voices, to 
which we shall do well to take heed, confirming the announcement in the word of 
God of that great and terrible day when God will judge the secrets of men by Jesus 
Christ, and will reward every man according to his works 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 22 — 67. — The Nemesis of usurpation. The quick succession of events shows 
that the political situation is one of unstable equilibrium. The movement of afEairs 
is rapid, as if the stage were being cleared for the real and important action that is 
to follow. 

I. A NATURAL ELEMENT. The instruments of usurpation soon display their untrust- 
worthj' and turbulent character. Their help to Abimelech was chiefly in the interests 
of disorder. When the hard rule of the tyrant (force of word " reigned ") was felt they 
became restive. The accession to their ranks of Gaal the marauding chieftain gives 
them the requisite stimulus toward open rebellion. So in time the drunken revels, 
the highway robberies of Shechem move irresistibly onward toward open revolt, and 
its consequence, overwhelming destruction. In this way the perpetrators of the coup 
d'etat are made the agents of the Divine vengeance upon each other. In punishing 
the rebels a seeming accident made Abimelech the victim of a woman's hand. Blood 
for blood. " Without shedding of blood there is no remission." The tragic element 
in human history, 

II. A Divine ordering op events. So natural does the development of events 
•ppear, that there is danger of overlooking the overruling providence of God. What 
may be termed the " poetic justice " of the political movements of the time and their 
results renders it impossible to credit the sublimely neutral forces of nature with the 
working out of the issues. God wrought through the natural forces and the compli- 
cations of the political sphere. His people have to be led onward in the pathway of 
national progress and religious illumination, therefore such obstacles must be swept 
out of the way. Yet all this is consistent with the moral freedom of those whose 
actions and end are bo promotive of the Divine purpose. What was done in one 
development of events might equally have been secured by another. This principle 
that " maketh for righteousness " is evident to every careful and devout student of 
history. It may be detected in the individual private life, and in the history of a 
nation. How far the evolution of events which we esteem secular and blind is so 
informed by the Divine purpose we shall not discover in this life. But enough is 
laid bare to encourage the holy and righteous, and to awaken in the breast of the 
wicked "a fearful looking for of judgment and of fiery indignation, which shall 
devour the adversaries." — M. 

Vers. 30 — 33, 36 — 38. — A worthy servant oj a worthless master. Zebnl Mrved 
Abimelech faithfully according to his lights. His devotion appears strangely 
misplaced. 

I. God relates the lives op the good and the bad fob wise ends. " Never any 
man was so ill as not to have some favourers : Abimelech hath a Zebul in the midst 
of Shechem" (Bp. Hall). Every situation has its moral complications. 

IL The wobthlessness and immorality op a supbeiok do kot bxoneeatk from 

■XTBBNAL RESPECT AND FAITHPCL DUTY^ UNLESS HIS AUTHORITY IMPOSES DNRIGHTEOUl 



no THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [cs. ix. 22—6?. 

TASKS. Much of the routine of life is neutral from a moral point of view, otherwise 
it would be impossible for the righteous to live amongst men. We must fulfil our 
bond until the conduct of our employer renders it impossible for us to serve God in 
serving him. So with natural duties, as of a child to a parent. 

III. On the other hand, faithfulness in details will not atone foe neg- 
lecting TO STUDY THE MOBAL DBIFT OF THE WHOLE SITUATION OF WHICH THESE 
DETAILS ABE A PART. The judgment of Abimelech involves Zebul. There comes a 
time when we share the guilt of the master in continuing to serve him. An honour- 
able quittance should be sought at once in such a case. " The Lord will provide." 
Otherwise we shall be involved in the same judgment. — M. 

Ver. 55. — Without a leader. Nothing is more striking than the contrast between 
the conduct of mercenary or coerced soldiers in such circumstances and that of mer 
inspired by noble enthusiasm and great principles. 

I. There are times when the death of sovereigns, &a appear as natioitai 

JUDGMENTS, OVERAWING MEN's HEARTS AND SEARCHING THEIR CONSCIENCES. Did not 

Israel feel now what a fool's errand it had been going ? What better could it do in 
its irresolution and dismay than retire into privacy, and there in penitence and prayer 
await the new unf oldings of God's purpose ? 

. II. Only a great cause can keep together those who have lost theib 
NATURAL BOND AND AUTHORITY. Self-interest, fear, absence of common enthusiasm, 
scattered the army of the dead Abimelech. So shall misfortune and Divine judg- 
ments break up the confederacies of the wicked. " The stars in their courses f ught 
against Sisera." But the Church of Christ can never be leaderless. " Lo, I am with 
you alway, even unto the end of the world." 

III. The influence of the wicked soon perishes. There is no talisman in the 
name of the son of Shechem now that he is dead. His body is left to the wolves and 
vultures. Only " the memory of the just smells sweet, and blossoms in the dust." 
The saintly departed rule us from their graves. The name of the Crucified an eternal, 
infinite power. — M. 

Vers. 63, 64. — Seputation. In the moment of his death Abimelech is anxious to 
save his reputation, which he thinks would be dishonoured if it could be said that a 
woman slew him. 

I. Reputation amongst men is sometimes valued more highly than innocenck 
IN THE sight of God. Abimelech is anxious about the opinion of the world, he cares 
nothing for the judgment of God, He is concerned with what will be said of him, 
he is not troubled about what he really is. He is dying after a most wicked life, yet 
he has no thought about his evil nature and his vile misdeeds, but only anxiety about 
his fame. So we constantly see people much more occupied in securing a fair 
appearance than in living a true life. Yet how hollow is this pursuit! After our 
death it matters nothing to us what men may say, but everything turns on what God 
will do. A man's future state will depend not on the splendour of the fame which 
he leaves behind in this world, but on the character of the revelation which will be 
made of his life in the other world. An epitaph is no passport to heaven. 

II. Reputation amongst men is often determined by a false standard of 
character. Abimelech knows that his misdeeds have been blazed through the 
country, yet he has no concern for the judgment of men on these, but very much 
concern for their opinion of the accident of his death. He sees no dishonour in 
cruelty and treachery, but great dishonour in death from a woman's hand. The code 
of honour difEers from the code of God's law. Public opinion is too much formed 
on artificial points of merit and superficial appearances. Thus cowardice is commonly 
felt to be more disgraceful than cruelty ; yet it is at least as bad not to be just and 
generous as not to be brave. Men commonly think more of masculine excellences 
than of saintly graces. Both are good, but the first obligation lies on the more 
Christian. Among the Christian duties which a consideration of merely worldly re- 
putation leads men to neglect in comparison with lower obligations, are — (1) purity 
on the part of men, (2) humility, (3) forgiveness of injuries, (4) charity. 

III. The influence of bifdtation phows the importance op cultivatms A 



(;ii. X. 1—6.] 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



Ill 



HKALTHT_ PUBLIC SENTIMENT. Whilst BO many are governed by the opinion of tht 
world, it is imperative that this should be purified as far as possible. There is some- 
thing natural in respect for reputation. The bad man who has lost this proves him- 
self to be utterly abandoned. Next to the fear of God, shame before men is the 
strongest safeguard for conscience. A healthy social atmosphere is an immense aid 
to goodness. The society of the Church is helpful for the preservation of the faith- 
fulness of the Christian. A pure Christian home is a most valuable security for the 
character of its members. It is dangerous to stand alone ; therefore, while regarding 
right and God's will first, and rising above the fear of man which bringeth a snare, 
let us reverence Christian public sentiment, and seek to keep it pure. — ^A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER X. 



Ver. 1. — Tola the son of Fnah, the son of 
Sodo. Nothing more is known of Tola 
than what is here told us, viz. , his name, his 
parentage, his dwelling-place, his office, the 
length of time which he held it, and the 
place of his burial. Who were the enemies 
from whom Tola was raised up to save Israel 
we are not told. There was probably no 
great invasion or grievous servitude, but per- 
haps frequent border wars requiring an able 
and watchful chief to maintain the independ- 
ence of IsraeL Tola and Puah (otherwise 
written Puvah) were both names of families 
in Issachar (Gen. xlvi. 13 ; Numb. xxvi. 23). 
Shamir in monnt Ephraim, to distinguish it 
from Shamir in the hill country of Judah 
(Josh. XV. 48). Both are otherwise unknown. 

Ver. 8. — Jair. We read of Jair the son of 
Segab, the son of Machir's daughter by Hez- 
ron, in 1 Chron. ii. 21—23, and are there 
told that he had twenty-three cities in the 
land of Gilead (called Havoth-jair), which 
wero included in the territory of the sons of 
Machir. The same information is given in 
Numb, zxzii. 40—42, and in Deut. ili. 14, 15, 
in both which passages Jair is styled the son 
}f Manasseh, and is stated to have called the 
cities after his own name, Havoth-jair. In 
the present verse we are also told that Jair 
the judge was a Gileadite, and that he had 
thir^ sons who had thirty cities in Gilead 
called Havoth-jair. The question arises, Can 
these two be the same person ? If they are, 
Deut. iii. 14 must be a later parenthetical 
insertion, as it has very much the appearance 
of being. The notice in Numb, xxzii. 41 
must also refer to later times than those of 
Moses, and we must understand the state- I 



ment in 1 Chron. ii. 22, that " Segub begat 
Jair," as meaning that he was his linea' 
ancestor, just as in Matt. i. 8 we read that 
" Joram begat Ozias," though three genera- 
tions intervened between them. If, on the 
other hand, they are not the same, we must 
suppose that Jair in our text was a descend- 
ant of the other Jair, and may compare the 
double explanation of the name Havoth-jair 
with the double explanation of Beer-sheba 
given Gen. xxL 31 ; Gen. xxvL 31 — 33 ; the 
threefold explanation of the name Isaac, 
Gen. xvii. 17 ; xviiL 12; xxL 6 ; and the 
double explanation of the proverb, " Is Saul 
among the prophets?" given in 1 Sam. x. 
11, 12 ; xix. 23, 24. The Hebrew name Jair 
is preserved in the New Testament under 
the Greek form of Jairus (Mark v. 22), 

Ver. 4.— Thirty ass colts. The number 
and dignity of these knightly sons of Jair 
shows that Jair himself, like Gideon (eh. viii 
80), assumed the state of a prince. The 
word in Hebrew for ass colts is identical 
with that for cities, as here pointed, and 
this play upon the words belongs to the same 
turn of mind as produced Jotham's fable and 
Samson's riddle (ch. xiv. 14). 

Ver, 5. — Jair. . . was bnried in Camon. A 
city of Gilead according to Josephus, and 
probability. Polybins mentions a Co/mown 
amongother trans-Jordanio places, but its site 
has not been verified by modem research. 
Eusebius and Jerome place it in the plain ot 
Esdraelon, but without probability. The 
careful mention of the place of sepulture oi 
the judges and kings is remarkable, beginning 
with Gideon (ch. viii. 32 ; x. 2, 5 ; xii. 9, 10, 
12, 15 ; xvi 31 ; a Sam. xxxL 12 ; 2 Sam. 
a 10, &0.). 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The lull. In the affairs of nations, as in the lives of men, there are 
occasional periods of uneventful quietness, when the storms and winds of stirring 
interests and aggressive actions are lulled, and a monotonous rest succeeds to exciting 
change. At such times no great characters stand out from the historic canvas, no 
activity of mind producing a clashing of opinion agitates the surface of society, no j^eat 



tM THE BOOK OF JUDGE8. [oh. x. l—i. 

measures are called for, no striking incidents of a prosperous or of an adverse kind 
diversify the scene. It is bo likewise sometimes in tne Church. Heresy is still ^ 
persecution is still ; aggressive movements of parties are still ; controversy is 
hushed ; Christianity folds her wings and takes no flight into distant lands ; there are 
no reformers at work. Fanaticism is asleep ; the uniformity of slumber supersedes 
the diversities of energetic religious life. Such periods of stillness may have their uses 
in Church and State, but they have their evils likewise. And they are only temporary ; 
often only the lull before the storm. Such were the forty-five years of the judgeships 
of Tola and Jair. In their days we read of no invasions of their foes. No Gideon 
comes to the front with the strong life of unquenchable faith and indomitable courage. 
The only events chronicled are the peaceful ridings of Jair's sons upon their asses' 
colts amidst their ancestral cities. But troublous times were at hand. It was the lull 
before the storm. Would the storm find the people prepared ? The sequel will 
show. Meanwhile the reflection arises, Be it our aim in quiet times not to fall 
asleep ; in times of excitement not to lose the balance of a sober mind and the calm- 
ness of a deep-rooted faith. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0E8. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — 27ie calm after the storm. Partly exhaustion, partly consciousness of 
Divine judgment, restrains the spirit of Israel. The punishment of its unfaithful- 
ness had come from within itself, and was the more felt. The pendulum now 
swings slowly back. 

I. It was a "peace of God." The hand of Jehovah was seen. The con- 
sciences even of the wicked had been touched. So in the lives of individuals and 
nations there are times given of God after judgments in which to repent and amend ; 
and these are not of their own creation, but a result of a gracious Providence. But 
as they are each a calm after a storm, so, being unimproved, they may be but the 
portentous lulls before greater judgments. The enemy from without is restrained, as 
if to say that the real danger could only arise from within. 

n. Its character. Undistinguished by great individual exploits ; but showing a 
general advance in civilisation, the arts of peace, and external respect for government 
and religion. The solid monuments of the people's industry and foresight (the cities 
of the circle of Jair, &c.) remained. A happier generation lived and throve over 
the ashes of the guilty past ; and some steps were taken towards the more settled 
and permanent type of government, the monarchy. 

III. Its import. God's punishments and judgments are intended to prepare for 
peace. The siimer can never say he has had "no room for repentance." Butthiswas 
only external and temporary peace — a truce with an unreconciled Heaven. It is 
precious, therefore, only as making for and typifying the kingdom of Christ, and the 
peace of believers, which follow upon storm and overturning and Divine chastise- 
ments, but confer unspeakable blessings and make happy. — M. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Quiet times. I. The best men are not always best known. We 
know nothing of Tola and Jair in comparison with what we know of Abimelech. 
Yet the very fact that little is said of them is a proof that they were good and honest 
men. We are too ready to mistake notoriety for fame and both for signs of greatness. 
They are not the greatest men who make the most noise in the world. It is some- 
thing if this censorious world can say no ill of us. Aim at doing well rather than at 
striking attention. 

II. Quiet times are happy times. Israel was now expieriencing the happiness of 
the people whose annals are dull. It is generally a miserable thing to be the subject 
of an interesting story; the more full of incident the story is, the more full of distress 
will be the person to whom it relates. Happiness generally visits private lives in 
their obscurity, and forsakes those which are protruded into the glare of vulgar 
curiosity. David's happiest days were spent with the sheep on the hills of Bethlehem. 
Christ found more happiness at Capernaum than in Jerusalem. 

III. Quiet times are often healthful times. There is a quietness which betokens 
the stagnation of death, and there is a condition of ease which favours indolence 



CH. X. 6—18.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



113 



luxiiry, and vice. But there is also a quietness of healthy life (Isa. xxx. 15). The 
flowers grow, not in the noisy storm, but in soft showers and in quiet sunshine. In 
times of quiet a nation is able to eflEect legislative improvements, to open up its 
internal resourcesj to develop commerce, to cultivate science, art, and literature, and 
to turn its attention to the promotion of the highest welfare of all within its borders. 
In tim_es_ of quiet the Church is able to study Divine truth more deeply and to carry 
out missionary enterprises with more energy. In times of quiet rightly used the 
soul enjoys the contemplation of God and grows under the peaceful influences of 
his Spirit (Ps. Ixxii. 6). 

_IV. QniET TIMES ARE MORE FRBQTJENT THAN WE COMMONLY SUPPOSE. HistOry 

directs inordinate attention to scenes of tumult, and necessarily so. Hence we are 
likely to magnify the range of these. In times of war there are vast areas of peace. 
The terrible seasons which attract our attention are separated by long intervals of 
quiet which pass unnoticed. Thus it was (1) in the history of Israel, which is really 
not so dark as it appears because so many generations were spent in peaceful obscurity ; 
(2) in the history of our own country, of the Church, and of the world ; and (3) in 
our own lives, since we commonly recollect the troublesome times (which are striking 
partly just because they are abnormal), and ungratefully ignore the long, quiet seasons 
of unbroken blessings. — A. 



EXPOSITION 



Ver. 6. — Did evil again, We may con- 
clude that Tola and Jair had used their 
influence to maintain the worship of Jehovah ; 
but at their death idolatry broke out with 
more virulence than ever. Not only were 
the many altars of Baal and Ashtoreth hon- 
oured, as In former timee, but new forms of 
Idol-worship, according to the rites of all the 
neighbouring nations, were introduced among 
them. The gods of Syria, i. e. Aram, who 
are not usually named, but whose worship is 
spoken of (3 Chron. xxviii. 23), and whose 
altar attracted the attention of Ahaz (3 
Kines xvi. 10), and one of whom was 
Kimmon (2 Kings v. 18) ; the gods of the 
Zidonians, Baal and Ashtoreth, probably 
with rites somewhat differing from those of 
Canaan ; Chemosh, the god of the Moabites ; 
Milcom or Moloch, the god of the children of 
Ammon ; and Dagon, the god of the Philis- 
tines—all were worshipped, while the service 
of Jehovah was thrust aside (see 1 Kings xi. 
5-7). 

Ver. 7.— The anger of the Lord, &c. See 
ch. li. 13, 14. Into the hands of the Fhilis- 
tiaes. Probably the same Philistine domina- 
tion as is described more fully in the history 
of the judgeship of Samson (chs. xiii. — xvi.). 
But now the writer confines his attention 
first to the oppression of the Ammonites. 

Ver. 8. — That year. It does not appear 
clearly what particular year is meant. 
Jarchi explains It as the year In which Jair 
died. It may mean the very year In which 
the idolatries spoken of in ver. 6 were set 
up, so as to mark how closely God's chastise- 
ment followed the apostasy from him. They, 
i. e. the children of Ammon. Eighteen 
years. The same length as that of the Moab- 
Ite servitude (ch. iii. 18). The land of the 

JUDOBS, 



Amorites, i. e. the territory of Sihon, king 
of the Amorites, and Og, the king of Bashan 
(Numb.xxxii. 83). In Gillead — in its widest 
acceptation, including;, as In Deut. xxxiv. 1 ; 
Josh. xxii. 9, 13, 15; Judges xx. 1, the 
whole country held by the Amorites on the 
east of Jordan, and given to Reuben, Gad, 
and the half-tribe of Manasseh. But in its 
narrower and stricter sense Gilead was 
bounded on the north by Bashan proper, and 
on the south by the Mishor, or plain of 
Meileba, which lay between the valley ol 
Heshbon and the river Arnon, thus exclud- 
ing that part of the territory of Reuben from 
Gilead (see Josh. xiii. 9—11). Originally, 
as we learn from ch. xi. 13 — 33, the terri- 
tory bounded by the Arnon on the south, 
by the Jabbok on the north, by the wilder- 
ness on the east, and by tnc Jordan on the 
west, had belonged to Moab, but the 
Amorites had taken it from them before the 
conquest of Sihon by the Israelites. 

Ver. 9. — The children of Ammon, &c. 
It would seem that at this time the king of 
the children of Ammon wa? also king of the 
Moabites, since he laid claim (ch. xi. 13, 24) 
to the land which had once lielonged to Moab. 
If we may trust the king of the Ammonites' 
statement, the object of the war was to re- 
cover that land, and he carried the war across 
the Jordan into the territory of Judah and 
Ephraim in order to compel the Israelites to 
give it up. 

Ver. 11. — Did not I deliver you, &c. 
These references to former deliverances are 
of great historical value, and not the least 
so as they allude to events of which the exist 
Ing records give no account, or a very imper- 
fect one. They show the existence of a real 
history in the background of that which has 



114 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oh. X. «— ISi 



been preserred in the Bible (see ch. viii, 13, 
note), from the Egyptians, iis related at 
large in the Book of Exodns ; from the 
Amorites, as related in Numb, xii 21 — 35 ; 
from the children of Ammon, who were con- 
. federate with the Moabites under Ehud, as 
we learn from ch. iii. 13 ; from the Philis- 
I tines, as is briefly recorded in ch. iii. 31. 

Ver. 12. — The Zidonians also. This allu- 
sion is not clear ; it may mean the subjects 
of Jabin king of Canaan, as the northern 
Canaanites are called Zidonians in ch. xviii. 
7 ; and this agrees with the order in which 
the deliverance from the Zidonians is here 
mentioned, next to that from the Philistines, 
and would be strengthened by the conjectuiB 
that has been made, that Harosheth (ch. iv. 
2) was the great workshop in which the 
tributary Israelites wrought in cutting down 
timber, &c. for the Phoenician ships ; or it 
may allude to some unrecorded oppression. 
The Amalekites, who were in alliance with 
the Midianites (ch. vi. 3, 33), as previously 
with the Moabites (ch. iiL 13) and with the 
Canaanites (ch. iv. 14), and whose signal 
defeat seems to have given the name to the 
mount of the Amalekites (ch. xii. 15). The 
Maonites. It is thought by many that the 
true reading is that preserved in the Septua- 
gint, viz., the Midianites, which, being the 
greatest of all the foes of Israel, could 
scarcely be omitted here (see chs. vi., vii., 
viii.). If Maonites or Maon is the true read- 
ing, they would be the same people as the 
Mehumm, mentioned 2 Chron. ixvL 7 (Maon, 
sing. , and Meunim, plur.). 

Ver. 16. — And they put away the strange 
gods. Here at length were " the fruits meet 
for repentance," and " the returning to the 
Lord their God ; " the intended result of the 
severe but loving correction (see Homiletics, 
ch. vi. 25—32). Cf. Gen. xxxv. 2 ; 1 Sam. 
viL 3, in which passages, as here, the phrase 
the strange gods is the correct rendering ; 
not, as in the margin, gods of strangers. 
The Hebrew phrase here rendered his soul 
wag grieved occurs Numb. xxi. 4 ; Judges 
xvi. 16 ; Zech. xi. 2 ; it means was impatient 
— literally, was shortened, L e. he could bear 
it no longer. A somewhat similar descrip- 
tion of the Divine relenting is contained in 
the beautiful passage Hosea xi. 7 — 9. 

Ver. 17. — This verse ought to begin the 
new chapter. The preliminary matter of 



Israel's sin, of their oppression by the Am> 
monites, of their repentance and return to 
the God of their fathers, and of God's merci- 
ful acceptance of their penitence and piayer, 
was concluded in the last verse. The iiis- 
toiy of their deliverance by Jephthah begins 
here. And the children of Ammon, Ac, 
i. e. they encamped, as they had done during 
the previous seventeen years, in Gilead, 
either to cany off the crops or to wring 
tribute from the people, or in some other 
way to oppress them, expecting no doabt to 
meet with tame submission as before. But 
a new spirit was aroused among the Israel- 
ites. By whatever channel the bitter re- 
proach in vera. 11 — 14 had been convey- 
ed to them, probably by the same channel, 
whether angel, or prophet, or high priest, 
had an answer of peace come to them on their 
repentance, and so they were roused and en- 
couraged to resistance. As a first step, they 
encamped in Mizpeh (see ch. zi. 11, 29, 34). 
Mizpeh, or Mizpah of Gilead, is probably the 
same as Mizpah in Gilead where Laban and 
Jacob parted (Gen. xxxi, 25, 49) ; asBamoth- 
Mizpeh (Josh, xiil 26), called simply Ba/moth 
in Gilead (Josh. xx. 8 ; 1 Chron. vi 80) ; and 
as the place well known in later Israelite 
history as Ramoth-Oilead (1 Kings iv. 13 j 
zxii. 3, 6), situated in the tribe of Gad, and 
a strong place of much importance. It was 
the place of national meeting for the whole 
of Gilead. Mizpah means the watch-tower, 
and would of course be upon a height, as the 
name Bamoth-Mizpeh, the heights of Mizpeh, 
also shows. It almost always preserves its 
meaning as an appellative, having the article 
prefixed, ham-mizpah, which is its usual 
form ; only once himn-mizpeh (Josh. xv. 38), 
and Mizpeh (Josh, xi. 18 ; Judges zi. 29 ; 1 
Sam. xxii. 3), and OTmeMizpali, (Hosea v. 1). 
Whether Mizpeh in ch. xx. 1 — 3 is the same 
will be considered in the note to that pas- 
sage. The modem site is not identified with 
certainty ; it is thought to be es-Salt, 

Ver. 18.— Gilead. See note to ver. 8. The 
people and princes. There is no and in the 
Hebrew. It is perhaps better, therefore, to 
take the words in apposition, as meaning. 
And the assembly of the chiefs of Gilead. The 
first step was to find a competent leader, and 
they agreed to appoint such an one, if he 
could be found, as their permanent head and 
captain. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 6 — 18. — The Ethiopian^t unchanged skin. Among the invaluable lessons of 
Holy Scripture, not the least valuable ia the insight given by its hietories into the 
true nature of the human heart. "The heart is deceitful above all things, and 
desperately wicked," is the prophet's description of the heart of man, and the history 
of the Israelites is a signal illustration of its truth. We are apt to think that if wa 
h.'vd passed through the waters of the Bed Sea, and seen Mount Sinai on a blaze, and 



CH. X. 6—18.] THE BOOK OP JUDQB8, 111 

eaten the manna from heaven, and drank the water out of the stony rook, and been 
led to victory hy a Joshua, a Barak, a Deborah, or a Gideon, we never could hava 
forgotten such signal mercies, could never hare been unfaithful to thegr.ciou* 
Author of them, could never have preferred the vain idols of the heathen to the 
living God. Still more do we think that if we had seen the only begotten of the 
Father, full of grace and truth, had heard his wondrous words and seen his mighty 
Works, or had been witnesses of his cross and passion, and talked with him after hia 
resurrection, we should not be the worldly, lukewarm disciples we now are But we 
are wrong in thinking so. The image of the human heart reflected in the history of 
the Israelite people is a more true and faithful one than that portrayed by our own 
self-love. And that image is one of the depraved human will constantly deflecting 
from rectitude, constantly drawn aside from truth and godliness by the power of 
selfish afEections and corrupt lusts ; occasionally, as it were, turned back toward 
God, either by strong influences from without, as stirring events, heavy chastise- 
ments, striking deliverances, powerful examples, faithful warnings ; or by strong 
emotions from within, as fear, or gratitude, or hope ; but as soon as these influences 
begin to cool, regularly returning to their old habit of thinking and acting, and 
falling back into their own evil ways. The particular kind of sins to which the 
heart is most prone varies indeed in different ages of the world, and with the different 
conditions of the human society. With the Israelites it was idolatry. The fascin- 
ation of the heathen idols was incredibly strong. In spite of reason, in spite of 
experience, often of the most bitter kind, they were attracted to the rites of heathen- 
ism by the strongest sympathies of their own pers-erse hearts. While they shrunk 
from the lofty obligations of the holy service of God, they abandoned themselves 
with willingness of mind to the base servitude of the idols, consenting to their 
shameful requirements, and gloating in their abominable rites; The desire to be like 
the nations, the influence of example all around them, the mysterious power of super- 
stition, the agreement between their sensual hearts and the sensual rites of idolatry, 
were force's steadily turning them away from God, and constantly prevailing over 
the temporary influences which from time to time had moved them to repentance. 
But it is just the same with other kinds of sin which strike their roots deep into the 
hearts of men, and find a ready consent in the diseased moral conditions of those 
hearts. For a moment perhaps their power may be weakened by some opposite 
force, but, unless the fountain of the will is really renewed and sweetened by the 
indwelling Spirit of God, the same spectacle will be exhibited, as in the case of the 
Israelites, of the character which had been forced back returning surely and steadily 
to its natural bent ; of the old influences of pride, selfishness, and lust resuming their 
former sway ; and of the previous tastes, and manners, and ways of life being 
restored to their old supremacy. And it will be found that neither reason, nor 
experience, nor common sense, nor even self-interest, are able to prevent this. The 
Ethiopian cannot change his skin, nor the leopard 'lis spots. No more can they do 
good that are accustomed to do evil (Jer. xiii. 23). The evil bent of a corrupt nature 
will ever be towards evil. It is the knowledge of 1 e evil that is in us, and the con- 
sequent distrust of ourselves, which is the first reui step towards a lasting change. 
Not till tliis evil is experimentally felt do the two great doctrines of the gospel, 
atonement for sin by the sacrifice of JesuB Christ, and regeneration by the Holy 
Spirit of God, assume real significance and value in our eyes. When it is known and 
felt, the inestimable blessing of forgiveness of sin is known and valued too. So is 
the all-sufficient grace of the Holy Ghost. Then too comes watchfulness against 
the deceit and treachery of the heart ; then a steady striving against sin ; then a firm 
resolution not to open the heart to the subtle influences of sin, but rather to crucify 
the flesh with its affections and lusts ; and so what was impossible to unassisted 
nature becomes an actuality through God's all-sufScient grace. The Ethiopian skin 
is transformed to a holy whiteness, the leopard's spots are done away, the corrupt 
heart is renewed in holiness after the image of God, and the old man becomes • new 
creatur* in Christ Jesus the Lord. 



IS 



11« THE BOOK OF JUDGES. |_ch. x. 6—18, 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 6. — Recurring habits of evil. The external peace and order do not break th» 
entail of evil habit — "they continued to do evil." 

I. ObSEBVANOB of EXTe'bNAL decencies OV life is no SAFEGnARD AGAINST INBRED 

DEPRAVITY. Only the hearty love and service of God. Probably the " whoring after 
other gods " began beneath the cloak of an orthodox worship. For a certain tima 
material pro«perity may consist with religious laxity. 

II, Besetting sins, dnrepented op, assume more aggravated phases. Like the 
man out of whom the devil had been cast, which, returning from the " dry places," 
and finding his heart "empty, swept, and garnished," "bringeth seven other devils,'' 
&c. It was an idolatrous confusion ; there could be no rationale of these systems, 
harmonising them with the conscience, or even with one another. All sense of nice, 
ness has deserted Israel. It plunges heedlessly into a sea of obscurity and filth. — M. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — Immediate and efectual retribution. I. In the punishment in- 
flicted THE calamity WAS CLEARLY CONNECTED WITH THE SIN. 1. The sin Committed 
is at once followed by penalty. 2. The punishment lasts whilst the transgression is 
utvrepented of. 3. The seducers become the instruments of punishment. 

II. The dnhelpfulness of idolatry was exposed. The Ammonites, whose unholy 
practices they had copied, take advantage of their weakness, and pitilessly despoil 
and harass them. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Of all the gods they 
had served, Baal, Molech, Astarte, &c., not one could deliver them. Only Jehovah 
can hear, and to him they are at last driven. Even Gilead — the heroic land — is 
rendered helpless before the despised Ammon, as if to show that real bravery is a 
moral quality. And the old " fear of Israel '' which kept the heathen nations back 
was gone. The Ammonites wax bold, and cross the Jordan even into Judah. — M. 

Vers. 10 — 14. — God answering hardened transgressors. He seems to deny the 
petition. Is this capricious ? There is surely not only cause for it, but a purpose 
working through it. 

I. The aim of the severity is to awaken true repentance. Inconvenience, dis- 
comfort, distress, humiliation may all be felt without true repentance. The latter 
arises from sorrow for and hatred of sin as sin. 

II. This is secured by — 1. An appeal to memory of manifold deliverances and 
mercies. 2. Holding the sinner under the yoke of his own choosing when he no 
longer chooses it. 3. 2%e temporary horror and despair of ryedion. "I will 
deliver you no more." — M. 

Vers. I5j 16. — " Works meet for repenianee." A wonderful summary; an evan- 
gelical anticipation. 

I. In what THESE CONSIST. 1. Heartfelt sorrow and confession of sin. 2. Abso- 
lute ^yielding of oneself into the hands of God. 3. Forsaking the sins thai have 
deceived and destroyed. 4. Serving Jehovah ivith new obedience and zeal. 

II How THESE APPEAL TO THE MIND OF GoD. " His soul was grieved for (literally, 
endured no longer) the misery of Israel." The alternate hardening and melting of 
God's soul an accommodation to man's conceptions and feelings ; yet with a reality' 
correeponding to them in the Divine nature. They have a disciplinary efEect, and 
their succession is impressive. So God "repents." To our heavenly Father the 
proofs of our sincerity are an irresistible petition. He welcomes the first signs of 
true repentance, and leads it forth into saving faith. The truly repentant were 
never yet rejected. In working this repentance in their minds he began to answer 
their prayer even whilst rejecting it. — M. 

Vers. 17, 18. — Faith restoring courage and might. I. By promoting the unity 
OF God's people. The worship of Jehovah is the ucitii.g and inspiring principle. 
All other worship disunites and weakens. The very site of their camp w«8 instinct 
with solemn, Divine associations. 

II. Enabling them to face besolutely the greatest troubles of life. Israel 
it in th« field against Ammon, a circumstitnce full of meaning. When the Spirit oi 



OH. X. 6.-18.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. IIT 

God enters a man he looks upon difficulties with a new resolution. It enables him 
" to take arms against a sea of troubles, and by opposing, end them.'' 

III. Rendering them willing to accept the leader God shall indicate. It is 
no lusting after a king now. The only King is Jehovah. But a leader and judge is 
Bought. So the true Christian will reverence and follow all who are inspired and 
appointed by God. — M. 

Ver. 10. — Frcrni God to Baal. I. Man must have some eeligion. If God is 
forsaken, Baal is followed. The soul cannot endure a void. This temple must 
always have some deity in it. If the higher religion is rejected, a lower superstition 
will take the place of it. The decay of the national religion of old Rome was accom- 
panied by the adoption of strange Oriental cults, and by the spread of a religion of 
magic. Modem scepticism gives birth to extraordinary forms of superstition — 
religions of nature, of humanity, of spiritualism. Accordingly, the efEort to attain 
freedom by escaping from the restraints of Christianity is a delusion, and ends only 
in the bondage of some lower influence. The soul must have some master, and if it 
rebels against God it will serve Baal, mammon, the world, the flesh, or the devil. 
True liberty is only found in willing obedience, in the submission of love, in sym- 
pathy with the mind of God, in delighting in his law. Perfect freedom of will arises 
from perfect harmony between our will and God's will, so that we gladly desire what 
he requires (Ps. x\. 8). 

II. Sin has two leading featdbbs, a positive and a negative. It is forsaking 
God and serving Baalim ; omission and commission. The tendency is to regard one 
of these two much to the neglect of the other. Over-scrupulous people are very 
sensitive about the minutest act of positive wrong, but sometimes indifferent in 
regard to the neglect of duty. Energetic people often make the opposite mistake, 
and show great anxiety to do good service, while they are not sufficiently careful to 
avoid hasty acts of a questionable character. These two sides of sin are elf sely con- 
nected. Devotion to God is the great safeguard to purity ; when this grows cold 
the soul is open to the attack of temptation, leading to direct transgression. On the 
other hand, positive sin is poison to religious faith. The commission of evil deeds 
inclines us to the omission of duties. Impurity paralyses zeaL We cannot serve 
God while we are serving Baalim. 

III. Conduct always tends to eun into extremes. * We serve God or Baalim, 
light or darkness, good or evil. There is no middle course. There appears to be 
more variety, gradation, and mixed character in life than is allowed for in Scripture 
(e. g. 1 John iii. 8 — 10). But life is only yet beginning to develop, its true nature 
will be seen in eternity. Two seeds may look much alike, and the first sprouts from 
them may not be very dissimilar, yet the gardener who knows the natural history of 
the plants, judging by their whole growth, may pronounce them to be very different. 
In this early growth of the soul's life on earth, the great question is, What tendencies 
does it show? The twilight of sunrise looks very like the twilight of sunset, yet the 
one is the prophecy of day and the other the portent of night. Two streams which 
flow from one watershed are at first near together, yet if one is running east and the 
other west, they may come at last to be divided by a whole continent, and to end 
in two separate oceans. We must be moving in one or other of two directions. The 
question is. Are we going to the light or from the light, to God or from God ? The 
tendency determines the character of the life, and this must be justly estimated by 
the full issues involved in the tendency, not by the present early stages of it. Thus 
■«re are all children of the light or children of the darkness, ripening into saintly 
servants of God or corrupting into wretched slaves of sin. — A. 

Vers. 13, 14. — The test of trouble. I. We all need a refuge for trouble. 
Life is so mixed that even to the happiest it is full of disappointments and anxieties. 
Though it may be smooth at present, we know that it cannot continue so for ever. 
The storm must fall at some time on every soul that is making the voyage o£ life. 
" Man is born to trouble " (Job v. 7). The self-assurance that suffices us in proaperitj 
will not be enough when the tribulation comes. Some refuge every soul must then 
seek. 



11« THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. x. «— 18. 

II. The great refuge for trouble is in religion. _ This is not the sole function 
of religion. It is also a light, an inspiration, an authority. But all men who have a 
religion turn to it as their supreme haven when the storms drive. We are naturally 
religious. Instinctively we look up — if not to the light, then to the darkness, the 
mystery, the unknown above us. 

III. The value of bbliqion is tested by its efficacy as a refuge in trouble. 
The breakwater is tested by the storm ; the armour is tried by the combat ; the 
medicine is proved by the disease ; the consolation is revealed by the distress. If 
the lamp of our religion will only burn while the sun of prosperity shines, and goes 
out when the night of adversity closes in, it is worthless. Men make gods of their 
pleasures, their business, their science. What can the husk of old pleasures do in 
the "winter of discontent," when no new pleasure can be evoked? What will the 
idols money, fame, knowledge avail in the agony of the wreck of a life's hopes, in 
the mystery of death and eternity ? How foolish to be engrossed in pursuits which 
will leave us destitute in the-hour of our greatest need I 

IV. If wb have not submitted to the true religion in prosperity we have 
NO bight to expect to enjoy the refuge of it in adversity. There are men 
who postpone attention to the claims of Christ till the time of trouble, and find no 
way to him when they most need him. They will "make their peace with God " on 
their death-bed. But this is not so easy as they suppose. Apart from the wicked- 
ness and insult to God which such conduct implies, it is also the height of folly, and 
is based on a complete misconception of the first elements of true religion. It is 
true that God is willing to receive us whenever we honestly return to him in repent- 
ance ; but (1) the selfish terror of approaching calamity is not repentance ; (2) genuine 
repentance, involving a change of desire, is not easily created by selfish fear ; (3) it 
is not well that men should too readily escape from all the consequences of theii- 
sins. — A. 

Vers. 15, IB.—Eepentance. L Repentance involves confession of bin. The 
people admit their guilt to themselves and declare it frankly to God. 1. We must 
eon/ess sin. We cannot turn from sin till we are conscious of sin. God will not 
forgive our sin till we confess our guilt. These two things, the self-knowledge and 
the self -revelation before God, which are implied in confession, must be found in true 
repentance. Pride would simply forget the past, but this cannot be forgotten till it 
is forgiven, nor forgiven till it is confessed (1 John i. 9). 2. The confession must be 
to God; because (1) it is against God that sin is committed ; (2) he alone can forgive 
sin ; (3) we have no warrant for believing that he delegates this Divine prerogative 
to any human deputy. 

II. Repentance involves submission to God. No repentance is complete which 
does not involve self-renunciation. This is necessary, (1) because, since sin arises 
from self-will and rebellion against the will of God, the return from sin must be 
marked by a return to obedience ; (2) because the penitent is conscious of his utter 
ill desert, and of his absolute dependence on the mercy of God, so that he dares claim 
nothing but what God may think fit to give him, and knows that at the worst this can 
be no harder than what he merits ; and (3) because repentance involves the admission 
that while we were sinful and foolish in forsaking God, he was always good to us, 
and will never do for us anything short of what is best. Repentance thus recognises 
again the despised fatherhood of God, and willingly trusts to his grace. 

III. Repentance involves practical amendment. The children of Israel put 
away the strange gods from among them, and served the Lord. If repentance il 
genuine it will show itself in conduct — it will bring forth fruits (Matt. iii. 8). This 
does not imply — 1. That we must complete the reformation of our own lives before 
God will forgive us, because (1) that is impossible ( Jer. xiii. 23) ; and (2) the very 
object of the gospel is to do this — i. e. to save us from our sins (Acts iii. 26). 2. 
Neither does it imply that any measurs of reformation will be regarded as penance 
as sacrifice, as a meritorious work securing forgiveness, since the essence of forgive* 
ness lies in its f reeness. But it implies that the genuineness of repentance must be 
tested by its effects. Repentance is not a mere feeling of grief ; it is not seated in 
the emotions, bqt in the will. It is a change of desire, and the wish to do better. 



OT. XI. 1—28.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



11« 



This is active, and must manifest itself in conduct. The conduct will be twofold: 
(1) the giving up of old evil way<«, and (2) the commencement of the service of God. 
IV. Eepkntance is followed by tokens op God's mercy. When the people 
repented God could no longer endure their misery. He never willingly afflicts (Lara, 
iii. 33). He only waits for our repentance to show his compassion. It is possible 
then because (1) there is no longer the necessity for continued chastisement ; (2) 
the justice and righteousness of God no longer require him to look upon us in wrath ; 
and (3) we shall not be injured by the kindness which falls upon us in our humilia- 
tion, but rather healed and strengthened for a better life by the influenoe of Grd'i 
love. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XL 
Vers. 1 — 11. — ^The narrativehere goes back 
probably some yesns, to explain the antece- 
dents of Jephthah, who was about to play 
so prominent a part in the ensuing history. 
Jephthah we learn was a bastard son of 
GUead by a foreign harlot, an Aramitess, if 
there is any connection between this verse 
and 1 Chron. vii 14 ; and when the sons of 
GUead's wife were grown up, they expelled 
Jephthah, and refused to let him have any 
share in the inheritance of their father, 
because he was the son of a foreigner ; Jeph- 
thah therefore fled from Gilead, and took up 
his residence in the land of Tob, apparently 
an Aramean settlement (2 Sam. x. 6, 8), and 
presumably the land of his mother's birth, 
where he gathered round him " vain men " 
(ch. ix. 4), and became a famous freebooter. 
There he was at the time of the Ammonite 
invasion mentioned in ch. x. 17, and thither 
the Gileadites sent for him to come and be 
their captain, after the consultation in ch. x. 
18, with the promise that if he came he should 
be the head or prince of all the inhabitants of 
Gilead. After some demur he agreed, and 
came, and was installed as head of the State 
at the Gileadite metropolis of Mizpah (ch. x. 
17, note). 

Ver. 1.— Jephthah the Gileadite. Gilead 
has two meanings : it is the name of the 
country so called (ch. x. 8, note), and it is the 
name of the son or descendant of Machir 
the son of Manasseh (1 Chron. vii. 14, 17 ; 
Numb. xxvi. 29, 30). Oileadite also may be 
explained in two ways : it may mean an in- 
habitant of Gilead (oh. x. 18), or it may mean 
a member of the family of the Gileadites, 
either an actual son or a more remote descend- 
ant of Gilead (Numb. xxvi. 29) — two mean- 
ings which would usually coincide. Crilead 
begat Jephthah. Here Gilead must mean 



the person so called, A & the son or descend- 
ant of Machir, from whom the family, in- 
cluding Jephthah, were called Gileadites ; 
but whether son or descendant cannot posi- 
tively be affirmed. All that is certain is 
that he was that one of Hachir's descend- 
ants who was the head of that division oi 
the Manassites who were called Oileaditea. 
Again, when it is said Gilead begat Jephthah, 
we cannot be certain whether it is meant 
that Gilead was Jephthah'a father, or merely 
his ancestor (see ch. x. 3, note). 

Ver. 2.— And Gilead'a wife. Whenever 
Gilead lived, besides the son by the foreign 
harlot, whom Jephthah represented, he had 
sons and descendants by his legitimate wife, 
who claimed to be his sole heirs, and who 
therefore drove Jephthah from the inherit- 
ance of their father's house. They might, 
as far as the language used is concerned, have 
been Gilead's own sons, or they may have 
been his grandsons or great-grandsons, and s« 
either the brothers or the cousins and fellow- 
tribesmen of Jephthah. 

Ver. 3.-!-The land of Xob. This is cer- 
tainly the same country as is spoken of in 
Ish-tob, i, e. the men of Tob, of whom 1 2,000 
were hired by the children of Ammon to 
fight against David. They are thus named 
side by side with the men of Beth-Rehoh, 
and Zoba, and Maacah, other small Aramean 
or Syrian states (2 Sam. x. 6, 8). Tob is 
again mentioned in all probability in 1 Mace. 
V. 13 ; 2 Mace. xii. 17, and the Thauba of 
Ptolemy agrees in situation as well as in 
name with Tob, but no identification with 
any existing place has been hitherto effected. 
Vain men, as in ch. ix. 4. 

Ver. 4. — This verse brings ns back to ch. 
X. 17, and reunites the two streams of nar- 
rative. 

Ver. 5. — The elders of Gilead. The same 
as the princes in ch. x. 18. 

Ver. 6. — Our captain. A military term, 
as in Josh. x. 24 . It is also used in Isa. 1 
10 for the rulers of Sodom. 

Ver. 7. — Sid not ye hate me, &c. Jeph- 
thah's reproach to the "elders of Gilead" 
strongly f a vouiB the idea that "his brethren" 



120 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oh. k. I— M. 



in ver. 3, and the " father's house " in ver. 
2, are to be taken in the wider sense of 
fellow-tribesmen and "house of fathers," 
and that his expulsion, was not the private 
act of his own brothers turning him out of 
the house they lived in, but a tribal act 
(taking tribe in the sense of hoitse of fathers), 
in which the elders of Gilead had taken a 
part. If this is so, it removes a great diffi- 
culty about Jephthah being Gilead's son, 
which it is very hard to reconcile with 
chronology. 

Yer. 9.— Shall I be, &c. There is no 
interrogative in the Hebrew. The words may 
be taken as the laying down of the condition 
by Jephthah, to which in the following verse 
the elders express their assent. 

Ver. 11. — ^Head and captain. Both civil 
niler or judge, and military chief. Uttered 
all his words before the Lord. The ex- 
pression " before the Lord " ia used in Ezod. 
xzxiv. 84 ; Levit. i. 3 ; Judges xxL 2 [before 
Ood), and elsewhere, to signify the special 

Sresence of the Lord which was to be found 
1 the tabernacle, or with the ark, or where 
there was the pfiest with an ephod. And 
this must be the meaning of the expression 
here. Jephthah was installed at the na- 
tional place of gathering and consultation for 
GUead, viz., at Mizpah in Gilead, into his 
ofSce as head of the State, and there, as in 
the capital, he performed aU his duties under 
the sanctions of religion. Whether, how- 
ever, the ark was brought there, or the altar, 
or a priest with an ephod, or whether some 
substitute was devised which the unsettled 
times might justiiy, it is impossible to say 
fi?om want of information. There seems to 
be some reference in the words to Jephthah's 
vow, in ver. 31, as one of such utterances. 

Ver. 12. — And Jephthah sent, &c. His 
first attempt was to make an honourable 
peace by showing that there was no just 
cause of quarrel What hastthoutodo with 
me 1 or, rather. What Jnmness, what cause of 
quarrel, is there between you and me! (he. 
speaks in the name of Israel, as head of the 
State) what is it all about ? 

Ver. 13. — And the king, 4c. The Am- 
monite king stated his ground of quarrel 
very distinctly. He claimed the land between 
the Amon and the Jabbok as Ammonitish 
or Moabitish territory, and demanded its 
surrender as the only condition of peace. It 
appears from Josh. xiii. 25 that part of the 
land of the tribe of Gad, that, namely, " on 
the western side of the upper Jabbok," had 
once belonged to the Ammonites, but had 
been conquered by the Amorites, from whom 
Israel took it, together with that which had 
formerly belonged to the Moabites. 

Ver. 16. — When Israel came up, &o. In 
this and the following verses there is a dis- 
^ct reference to the history in Numbers 



and Deuteronomy, and in some instancea 
verbal quotations. Thus in this verse the 
words below which are put in italics are found 
in Fumb. xiii. 26 ; xiv. 26 : Israel . . walked 
through the wilderness unto the Bed Sea, 
and came to Kadesh. 

Ver. 17 — Then Israel sent messengers 
unto the king of Edom,, saying, Let me, 1 
pray thee, pass through thy land (amnt/ry in 
A. V. Numb. XX. 17). The words in italics 
are found in Numb. xx. 14, 17. And Israel 
abode in Eadesh. These words are in 
Numb. XX. 1 ; see also Deut. i. 46. The 
king of Edom would not hearken. This is 
related in substance in Numb. xx. 18 — 21. 
And in like manner they sent unto the king 
of Moab. There is no mention of this in 
the Mosaic narrative. The knowledge of it 
must have been preserved either by tradition 
or in some other now lost writings ; perhaps 
in the Book of the Wars of the Lord (Numb, 
xxi. 14). It is in itself very probable that 
such a message should have been sent to the 
king of Moab, whose territories Israel was 
forbidden to meddle with (Deut. ii. 9, 19). 

Ver. 18. — Then they went along, &o. 
The narrative here follows Dent. ii. 1. For 
they compassed the land of £dom. Deut. 
ii. 1 has, "we compassed Mount Seir;" but 
Numb. xxi. 4 has, "to compass the lamd of 
Edom." By the east side — literally, by the 
sun-rising side, as in Numb. xxi. 11. They 
pitched on the other side of Arnon. _ The 
identical words occur in Numb. xxi. 13. 
For Arnon was the border of Moab. The 
identical words of Numb. xxi. 13, where it 
is added, " between Moab and the Amorites." 
South of the Amon belonged to Moab, and 
north to the Amorites. The route taken by 
the Israelites is carefully traced (Numb. xxi. 
11—20). 

Ver. 19.— And Israel, kc The text here 
foUows Numb. xxi. 21 — 24 almost verbatim; 
but the expression, " the king of SesKbon," 
is from Deut. ii. 24, 26, 80. 

Ver. 20.— In Jahaz. Otherwise Jahazah 
(Numb. xxL 23 ; Deut. ii. 32 ; Isa. iv. 4 ; 
Jer. xlviii. 21, 34). It seems to have lain 
immediately to the north of the Amon. 

Vers. 21, 22. — These verses are an epitome 
of Numb. xxi. 24—32. Cf. also Deut. ij. 38— 
36. The wilderness is the country lying 
east of Moab up to the hill country (see ch. 
X. 8, note). From the Amon to the Jabbok 
is the measurement from south to north ; 
from the wilderness to the Jordan, from east 
to west. 

Ver. 24.— Chemosh. The national god of 
the Moabites (cf. Numb. xxL 29 ; 1 Kings 
li. 7, 33 ; Jer. xlviU. 7, 13, 46, *o.). Thy 
god. The phrase indicates a very close con- 
nection between Moab and Ammon at the 
present time, both possibly being under one 
king. Chemosh, rather than Holocli, if 



OH. xi. 1—28.] 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



Itl 



mentioned because the territory had be- 
longed to the Moabites, but Chemosh had 
not been able to save it from the Amorites. 
The Lord oni God. Jehovah was the God 
of Israel as truly as Chemosh was the god 
of Moab, in one sense. Possibly Jephthah 
had not risen to the conception of Jehovah 
OS the God of the whole earth. 

Ver. 25. — Art thon anything better, &c. 
Jephthah now advances another argument 
to prove the justice of hia cause and the un- 
reasonableness of the Ammonite claim. If 
the territory in question was Moabite pro- 
perty, how came it that Balak laid no claim 
to it I He was an enemy of the Israelites, 
and yet when Israel took possession of the 
land, and dwelt in Heshbon, its capital, and 
the daughter cities or villages thereof, and 
in Aroer and her daughter cities or villages, 
and in all the cities on the banks of the 
Amon, Balak never strove about them with 
Israel, or went to war to recover them— a 
plain proof that he did not look upon them 
as his property. If they were his, that was 
the time to claim and recover them, but he 
had not done so. 

Ver. 26. — The occupation of the cities 
and villages referred to is related in Numb. 
xxi. 23 and following verses, and in Deut. 
ii. 36 ; see too Josh. xii. 2. Aroer is not 
mentioned among the cities of Moab taken 
by the Amorites m the ancient book quoted 
in Numb. xxi. 27 — 30, and it has been con- 
jectured that it may have been built by the 
Amorites to secure their new frontier. It is 
described by Eusebius and Jerome in the 
' Onomasticon ' as built on a hill overhanging 
the bank of the Amon, and a ruin called 
Arair has been found on the very spot so 
described. The Aroer mentioned in ver. 33 
(where see note) is probably a different 
plac& By the coasts of Amon, i. e. on the 



banks. The Septuagint for Arnon readi 
Jordan, which was the western boundary, as 
Arnon was the southern (ver. 22). The cot- 
responding description in Deut. n. 86 is, 
From Aroer, which is by the brink of the river 
of Amon, and frorn, the eity thai is by the 
river, even unto Gilead, there was not one city 
too strong for us : the Lord our God delivered 
all unto us. Three hundred yean. These 
words seem quite uninteUigible and out of 
place. They are also chronologically im- 
practicable. One expects the number of the 
cities, as in ver. 33, rather than the number 
of years ; and it is remarkable that the 
whole number of cities taken by the Israel- 
ites on the east of Jordan must have been 
just about 300, since the half- tribe of 
Manasseh had sixty. If Gad and Reuben 
had the same proportion, it would be exactly 
300 (5 K 60). ■Within that time. The 
Hebrew phrase, which occurs about seventy 
times, invariably means at that time, and 
here can only refer to the time of the first 
settlement in the days of Balak, of which he 
had beeu speaking — another proof that the 
enumeration three hundred years is out of 
place here. If the reading years is not, as 
above suggested, an error for cities, the whole 
sentence, three hundred years, may very pro- 
bably be an interpolation by a professed 
chronologist. The adding up of all the 
numbers of the servitudes and rests given in 
the book gives 301 years from the com- 
mencement of the oppression by Chushan- 
rishathaim to the death of Jair. But this 
method of reckoning gives the impossible 
period of 600 years from the exodus to the 
building of the temple. 

Ver. 27. — Jephthah now asserts his own 
entire blamelessness, and appeals to the 
justice of God to decide between him and 
the Ammonitea, 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 28. — The corUrovereif. The first element of peace, whether in private or 

in national controversies, whether in civil or religious disputes, is the genuine desire 
to be fair. When men have that spirit of justice that they do not desire to claim 
anything which is not really theirs, or to withhold from their opponents anything 
that is their due ; when their aim is to ascertain what is true, and not to overbear 
truth by force ; when they strive for truth, and not merely for victory — there is a fair 
chance of both sides arriving at the same result, and so being at peace. The first 
step in any dispute, therefore, should be a calrri and careful examination of the facts 
of the case. It should not be taken for granted that the views which self-interest, 
or personal predilection, or party prejudice, incline us to are the right ones, but we 
should remember that our opponents have equal rights with ourselves, and that it is 
at least possible that their predilections and prejudices may rest upon as good grounds 
as our own. A fair and impartial examination of the facts of the case is therefore 
the first step in every controversy ; and that the examination may be fair, we should 
patiently allow our opponent to state his own case in his own way. The same fact 
may wear a different aspect according to the mode of stating it, and according to the 
tide of it which is brought prominently into view. Thus Jephthah acted fairly 



tS2 THE BOOK OP JUDGES. lau. Xi. l-2a 

when he asked the king of the sons of Ammon to state the grounds on which h( 
invaded Israel, and when on his side he refuted that statement by an historical retro- 
gpeot of the transactions in question. Though, however, the spirit of fairness give* 
the best chance of an amicable settlement of controversies, it does not always lead 
to such a settlement. Often fairness on one side is met by prejudice and unfairness 
on tiie other. But even when both parties are actuated by the like desire of getting 
at the rights of a question, it may happen that there is that measure of doubt in some 
matter on which the controversy hinges, that honest minds may differ about it, and 
that it it inevitable that men's different interests, prepossessions, and prejudices, 
should incline them different ways. Thus in Jephthah s controversy with the Am- 
monites there was room for doubt how far the defeat and dispossession of the children 
of Ammon by the Amorites had for ever extinguished the claim of the former to the 
ownership of the land. That Israel had not taken the land from the children of 
Ammon, or displayed any hostility towards them, was undoubtedly true. But it did 
not necessarily follow that the Ammonite claim was wholly unrighteous. The ques- 
tion how long a time it takes to establish or to invalidate ownership is obviously a 
debateable one, in the decision of which personal feelings will carry much weight. 
In the Franco-German war of 1870 the Germans no doubt felt about Alsace and Lor- 
raine that even 200 years possession by France had not wlioUy abrogated the German 
rights. And so it may have been with the king of the children of Ammon. He may 
have thought that he was justified in claiming the land which had once belonged to 
liis people ; and the matter could only be decided by the arbitrament of war. The 
practical lesson, however, to be learnt is, in all the business of life, whether in 
politics, or commerce, or in social intercourse, or in religion, to cultivate a spirit of 
fairness. In religious controversies especially the value of fairness, with a view to 
truth, and to the peace of the Church, cannot be overrated. It is as humiliating 
to our Christian character as it is prejudicial to the real interests of religion, when 
men approach religious questions in a spirit of heated partisanship, seeking only 
to crush their opponents by ridicule, or abuse, or vehemence, and treating them 
with insult and indignity. It is no less painful to see falsehood, and suppression 
of truth, and pious frauds, imported into controversies, the professed object of 
which is to vindicate the glory of God and the truth of his holy word. If religious 
controversialists would approach all subjects of difference in a spirit of thorough 
fairness, would look at their adversaries' arguments with a sincere desire to under- 
stand and appreciate them, would g^ve due weight to them, and would believe it 
possible that they may have reason and justice on their side, there would be a good 
chance of agreement on many points which now keep Christians hopelessly asunder. 
And if there should remain some points on which temperament, or education, or 
habits of thought, in different men, were too diverse to admit of unanimity on 
doubtful points, then heavenly charity would step forward and maintain that agree- 
ment in love which could not be attained in opinion. The unity of the spirit would 
not be broken, the peace of the Church would not be violated, and the enemies of 
the gospel would not find their way to victory through the divisions and hatreds of 
the servants of one Lord. May the Spirit of God come as • Spirit of fairness upon 
til that name the name of Jesus Christ I 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vers. 1 — S. — 3%e shaping ir^tteticet of life. These different in their nature from 
that of which the poet speaks — " There s a divinity that shapes our ends, rough-hew 
them how we will" {Hamlet, V. ii.). It is an anticipative part they play. In 
many lives the manner in which tliey are thus influenced is apparent; but even when 
otherwise the effect is none the less powerful and lasting. It has been questioned 
whether this be not the most important part of the work of creation. Of these in- 
fluences, notice — 

L How BTBONO AND VABIBD THGT ABE. 1. In Jepkthah't birth. He was a child of 
■hame, the fruit of an age of licentiousness and idolatry. He receives the title 
Gileadite, yet it is said Gilead was his father ; he must therefore either have bad ■ 
father with such a name, a member of the tribe of Manasseh, living in Gilead, oc 



OH. XI. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 128 

having no clear proof of his paternity, have received the tribal name in that relation. 
A foundling, with a shameful mystery lying behind his life. 2. In the behaviour oj 
men towards him. Those who were his brethren according to the flesh acted a most 
unbrotherly part. Either from selfishness or a false feeling of shame, they expelled 
him from_ his father's house, closing the door of peaceful, honourable toil, and com- 
pelling him to resort to a career of bloodshed and irregularity. The very men who 
might, any of them, have committed a like sin to that of Jephthah's father are 
forward to rid themselves of its results. The world judges of men rather from 
their, misfortunes than from their personal misdeeds. And where nature has been 
unkind, "man's inhumanity to man" is only the more signal. A social stigma is 
worse to bear up against than many of the greatest calamities which do not involve 
it. 3. In the force of his drcumatanees as they arose. He is compelled to take up 
his abode in a far off border town, near to Ammon, the hereditary enemy of Israel, 
and surrounded by the conditions of a desert life, where he had to be " a law unto 
himself." A life of guerilla warfare, with its comparatively loose morale, is thrust 
upon him. Men of like misfortune and disposition, all more or less compromised 
with their tribes or nations, gather about him, and look to him for direction and 
initiative. But — 

II. Nevekthblkss, they do not dbtbbminb destiny. He has somehow managed to 
preserve a measure of morality and religious observance, even in that wilderness 
stronghold. The worship of Jehovah is maintained, and the heart of the chieftain 
beats true to all the traditions of Israel. His personal inilaence and warlike prowess 
are at its service. His greatest exploits are not those of the private marauder, but of 
the patriot. It is character alone that determines destiny, and character is in our 
own keeping. One is continually meeting with such people — people who in difficult 
circumstances are yet kept on the whole pure and faithful. Such were " they of 
Csesar's household." And — 

III. If rightly encodntebed they may redound to advantage and honour. In 
the hour of Israel's need, repentant and humble, its elders approach the outlaw whom 
they had expelled. The man himself is not prepared for the singular conversion. 
He questions them suspiciously, nay, with all his magnanimity, reminds them of 
their different behaviour in years gone by. They admit all ; but they are too humbled 
to make evasion and to conceal their real motive. He is master of the situation. 
His whole previous training and reputation now stand him in good stead, and he 
understands a little of God's dealings with him. The Bible is full of instances of 
men who have gained power and fame through the overcoming of difiBoulties. Time 
and God are on the side of them who, notwithstanding temptation, are found faithful. 
And is there not One who outshines all others in this ? " The stone which the builders 
rejected is become the head stone of the comer." His career "is our incentive and 
example (Phil. ii. 6—11). Have not all rejected Christ? In our need let na go to 
him, • nobler than Jephthah. — M. 

Vem. 4 — 11. — Magnanimity of patriotism. In the behaviour of Jephthah on 
this occasion we have a noble illustration of the blending of the religious and the 
patriotic spirit. 

I. Personal wrongs are forgiven. He might have brooded over them, sulked, 
and rejoiced over the elders in their trouble. But he felt that his country's distress 
was not a time or occasion for revenging the contumely and wrong that were past. 
This is the true spirit of the patriot. The individual is lost in the commonwealth. 

II. His country's need is generously responded to. What an opportunity for 
an unprincipled, irreligious man I He might have turned Israel's loss to his own 
gain. 

III. His own fortunes are lost sight op in the greater ambition of being the 
SAVIOUR OF HIS COUNTRY. Rank he does not value. He refuses leadership until it is 
shown that he is the Divinely revealed leader. He gives all the honour to Jehovah. 
Prom that momeilt he was at the service of his people, and the unselfish " servant of 
Jehovah." Men are .found who will behave thus for earthly fatherlands and temporal 
attachments. Often the human tie and the Divine conflict. Jephthah was serving 
God and country at once. The Christian will serve his friends and his country best 



124 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. «. 1—28 

by ierving God first. How dear should the Church and kingdom of God on earth b« 
to ua I All other considerations should be lost sight of in the zeal for our Master') 
?loiy. — ^M. 

Ver. 11. — Recogwiion of God in positions of honour and responsibility. How 
many would have at once swollen with self-conceit 1 &c. It is a test of the inner 
life of Jephthah. We may all be more or less tested in this way. 

I. He bntbrbd upon his gebat task with a sense of solemn eesponsibilitt to 
God. Mizpah was the reminder of an ancient covenant, and its associations are 
honoured. • 

IL Hb made public confession of Jehovah. 

III. Hb looebd to Jehovah fob guidance and help. — M. 

Vers. 12—28. — The model diplomatist. I. Thi pbofound bagaoitt and bikbs of 

INTEKNATIONAL COURTESIES AND OBLIGATIONS DISPLAYED BY JBFHTHAH. An historical 

site is chosen, which had significance to all the nations neighbouring upon it. At 
Mizpah had Jacob and Laban made solemn covenant To their descendant nations 
the place could not but possess a religious interest. It was a distinct advantage, 
therefore, to take up his head-quarters there. All his soul is possessed by the old 
associations of the place. It appears even in his language (vers. 10, 11). This per- 
sistent reference to the place was a guarantee of good faith and brotherly feeling. 
He speaks of the gods of Ammon and Israel from a neutral point of view. 

II. His APPEAL TO HiSTOBY. It is sacred history, with the seal of God upon it. He 
recounts the details of the conquest by Israel, so far as they are relevant ; shows that 
their own land is held by that title, and asks why for 300 years Israel's occupancy 
of the disputed territory had not been contested. The example of Balak, who saw 
that it would be destruction for him to contend with Israel, and forbore, is quoted 
aptly. The geographical limits are carefully indicated. 

III. All this was worth while, even with a heathen adversary. It stated the 
case upon broad, intelligible grounds ; it raised no irrelevant questions, but was con- 
ciliatory ; and there was no attempt at compromise. It is a moral gain when a point 
in dispute is thus clearly and dispassionately argued. It did not avert war, but it 
justified it. And Israel were strengthened and encouraged: The people could grasp 
the outlines of this great claim. They could go forward with confidence that their 
cause was righteous, and therefore the cause of God. Disputes between individuals 
and nations should be settled — (1) upon common grounds and associations ; (2) 
courteously and kindly ; (3) with careful regard to facts ; and (4) God should be 
the great Witness. — M. 

Ver. 7. — The friend in need. I. The valub of a true friend is seen in_ the 
time of adversity. Jephthah was hated by the elders of Israel in prosperous times, 
but when trouble came he was discovered to be their best friend. The wise_ man will 
endeavour to cultivate the friendship of the good and great. It is foolish to let 
valued friends pass away from us through negligence or slight ofEence. There are 
few forms of earthly riches more valuable than that of a treasury of friendships. 
We may be careless of this in circumstances of ease ; but if so, trouble will reveal 
our mistake. Christ is a Friend who sticketh closer than a brother, too often neg- 
lected in prosperity, but found to be the one needed Helper in the hour of darkness 
CIsa. xzxii. 2). 

II. The best friend is not always the most popular. He may be poor, un- 
pretending, eccentric, or dull. It is foolish to choose our friends by the superficial 
attractions of social amusement. The boon companion may prove a shallow friend. 
Sterling qualities of fidelity, self-denying devotion, &c. are not always accompanied 
by brilliant conversational gifts and such other pleasing characteristics as shine in 
festive scenes. Christ, the best of friends, was despised and rejected of men. It 
may be that the very excellency of the friend is the cause of his unpopularity. He 
will not lend himself to low pursuits, and so is considered morose ; he refuses to 
flatter our weakness, — perhaps bravely and disinterestedly rebukes our faults, — and is 
therefore thought censorious and offensive ; he aimo at raising us to what is worthy 



CH. XI. 29—40.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



\ta 



of our efforts, and is voted "a bore." The time of trouble will destroy this unjust 
estimate, but it would be more wise and generous in us to value our friends at all 
times for their best qualities, even though the sobriety of them may appear dull. 

III. The true friend will not refuse help in need, although he may havh 
RECEIVED UNWORTHY TREATMENT IN PROSPEROUS TIMES. Jophthah naturally reproaches 
the elders of Israel, but he is too noble to refuse to come to their help. True friend- 
ship is generous, unselfish, and forgiving. It does not stand " on its rights," " on 
its dignity." It is more concerned with the welfare of those in whom it is interested 
than with their deserts. The patriot will not let his country suffer because he is per- 
sonally piqued at the conduct of its leaders. The Christian should learn not to injurs 
the cause of Christ through the pride and offence which the wrong conduct of re- 
sponsible persons in the Church may excite. Israel is larger than the elders of IsraeL 
The Church is greater than her doctors and ministers. Jephthah is a type of Christy 
who does not refuse to help us though we have rejected him in the past. — ^A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 29. — Then the Spirit of the Lord 
eame upon Jephthah, as upon Othnlel, 
upon Gideon, and upon Samson (ch. iii. 16 ; 
vl 84 ; xiii. 25 , xiv. 19 ; xv. 14). He 
passed over, i. e. he went all through, Gilead, 
and ManasBSh, — for the purpose, no doubt, 
of collecting forces,— and passed overMizpeli. 
It should be to Mizpeh. Mizpeh was the 
capital and mustering place of his army, and 
his base of operations (ch. i. 17 ; xi. 11, 
note). Having organised his forces at Mizpeh 
of Gilead, he passed over to the children 
of Ammon, i. e. commenced his attack upon 
the invaders, as it is stated in ver. S2, which 
takes up the thread of the narrative. 

Vers. 30, 31. — And Jephthah vowed a 
vow. This verse and the following go back to 
relate something which preceded his passing 
over to the children of Ammon, viz., his 
rash and unhappy vow. This is related, as 
80 many things in Scripture are, without 
note or comment, and the reader must pass 
his own sentence upon the deed. That 
sentence can only be one of unreserved con- . 
demnation on the part of any one acquainted 
with the spirit and letter of the word of God. 
Many attempts have been made to show that 
Jephthah only contemplated the offering of 
an animal in sacrifice ; but the natural and 
indeed necessary interpretation of the words 
shows that he had a human victim iu mind. 
He could not expect any but a human being 
to come forth &om the doors of his house, 
nor could an^ but a human being come forth 
" to meet hmi " — a common phrase always 
spoken of men (Gen. xiv. 17 ; rdv. 6S ; 
Exod. iv. 14 ; xviii. 7 ; Numb. xx. 20 ; 1 
Sam. XXV. 34, &c., and below in ver. 34). 
Obvionsly, in the greatness of his danger 
and the extreme hazard of his undertaking 
(ch. xii. 3), he thought to propitiate God's 
favour by a terrible and extraordinary row. 
But if we ask how Jephthah came to have 
such erroneous notions of the character of 
God, the answer ia not far to seek. Jephthah 



was " the son of a strange woman," probably, 
as we have seen, a Syrian (ch. xi. 1 — 11, 
note), and had passed many years of his life 
as an exile in Syria. Now it is well known 
that human sacrifices were frequently prac- 
tised in Syria, as they were also by the 
Ammonites, who made their children pass 
through the fire to Moloch, and it cannot 
surprise us that a man brought up as Jeph- 
thah was, and leading the life of a freebooter 
at the head of a band of Syrian outlaws, 
should have the common Syrian notion of 
the efficacy of human sacrifices in great 
emergencies. His language, indeed, about 
Jehovah and Chemosh in ver. 24 savoured 
of semi-heathenism. Kor is it any valid 
objection that we are told in ver. 29 that 
" the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jeph- 
thah." The phrase does not mean that 
thenceforth he was altogether under the 
guidance of the Holy Spirit, so that all that 
he did was inspired by the Spirit of truth 
and wisdom, but that the Spirit of the Lord 
inspired him with extraordinary strength 
and power for the great task of leading Israel 
to battle against the Ammonites. And I 
will offer. The rendering suggested by 
some, or I will oSer, meanmg, if the first- 
comer is a human being he shall be th* 
Lord's, or if it is an animal I will ofier it 
as a burnt offering, is wholly inadmissible. 

Ver. 32. — So jephthah. The narrator 
takes up again the thread of the narrative, 
which was mterrupted at ver. 29, the words 
he passed over urUo tht children of Ammon 
being repeated. 

Ver. 33. — ^From Aroer ... to Jlinnith. 
The Aroer here mentioned seems to be that 
in the tribe of Gad (Numb, xxxii. 34 ; Josh. 
xiiL 25), now Nahr Ammdn. Minnith ia 
thought to have been situated four Kiman 
miles from Heshbon, on the road to Babbah 
of the children of Ammon, afterwards called 
Philadelphia. It was called Manith in th* 
time of Eusebins. The plain of the 



1S« 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



[CH. XI. 29 — 40 



jardl, better taken as a proper name, Aiel- 
eeramim. The site is not certainly known. 
Eusebius speaks of two Abels, both fertile 
in rineyards, one seven Roman miles from 
Rabbah, which is probably the one here 
meant. 

Ver. 84. — Tohishonse. Seever. 11. His 
only child (Je'hid) — the same term as is ap- 
plied to Isaac (Gen. xxii. 2). Eusebins says 
that Cronus sacrificed his only son, who on 
that account was called Jeoud, which in the 
Phoenician tongue means an only son (' Prep. 
Evang.,' iv. 17). 

Ver. 35. — Thou hast brought me very 
low— literally, tJiou hast (horoughly lowed me 
down, i. e. with sorrow. I cannot go back. 
A forcible illustration of the evil of rash 
vows. He who makes them is so placed 
that he must sin. If he breaks his vow, he 
has taken God's name in vain ; if he keeps 
it, he breaks one of God's commandments. 
So it was with Saul (1 Sam. xiv. 24, 39—45), 
with Herod (Mark vi. 23) ; so it has often 
been since with those who have made unau- 
thorised vows, and who in attempting to 
keep them have fallen into deadly sin. 

Ver. 36. — My father, &o. See Numb, 
zxzii. 2. The touching submission of 
Jephthah's daughter to her unnatural and 
terrible fate, while it reveals a most lovable 
character, seems also to show that the idea 
of H human sacrifice was not so strange to her 
mind as it is to ours. The sacrifice of his 
eldest son as a burnt offering by the king of 
Moab, some 300 years later, as related 2 
Kings iii 27 ; the intended sacrifices of 
Iphigenia and of Phrixus in Greek mytho- 
logy ; the sacrifices of children to Moloch, so 
often spoken of in Scripture ; the question 
in Micah vi. 7, " Shall I give my first-born 
for my transgression, the fruit of my body 
for the sin of my aoult" the Phoenician 



custom mentioned by Sanchoniatho (quoted 
by Porphyry), of sacrificing to Saturn one of 
those most dear to them in times of war, 
pestilence, or drought; the yearly sacrifice 
at Carthage of a boy chosen by lot ('SU, 
Italicus,' 4, 765), and many other examples, 
prove the prevalence of human sacrifices in 
early times, and in heathen lands. This 
must be borne in mind in reading the history 
of Jephthah. 

Ver. 37. — And bewail my Tirginity. It 
is a striking evidence of the strong desire 
among Hebrew women to be mothers, aa 
seen in Sarah, Rachel, Hannah, and others, 
that it was the prospect of dying unmarried 
which seemed to Jephthah's daughter the 
saddest part of her fate. So in Ps. Ixxviii. 
63, their maidens were not given to marriage 
is one of the items of the misery of Israel 
(see too ver. 89). 

Ver. 39. — Who did with her according to 
Ms vow. Kothing can be more express than 
this statement. In fact, except the natural 
horror we feel at a human sacrifice, there is 
nothing to cast the least shade of doubt upon 
the fact that Jephthah's daughter was offered 
up as a burnt offering, in accordance with 
heathen notions, but, as Josephussays, neither 
" conformably to the law, nor acceptably to 
God." Most of the early Jewish comment- 
ators and all the Christian Fathers for ten or 
eleven centuries (Origen, Chrysostom, Theo- 
doret, Jerome, Augustine, &e.) held this 
view. Luther's comment is, "Some affirm 
that he did not sacrifice her, but the text is 
clear enough." She knew. 'Ra.ther, she liad 
known. 

Ver. 40. — ^The daughters of Israel, &c 

No other trace of this custom, which was 

probably confined to Gilead, remains. !• 

'lament. The word rather means to praise, or 

celelrrcUe, u in cb. T. 11 {rehearu). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vera. 29 — 40. — Human perverseness emhittering the sweet cup. The tragic histoiy 
of Jephthah and his daughter is one of the saddest in the Bible. It forms a drama 
full of pathos, and with terrible contrasts of joy and sorrow. Indeed the whole life 
of Jephthah was one of startling incident. Driven from bis home in youth to become 
a fugitive and an exile ; leading the wild and exciting life of a captain of free- 
booters till middle age ; then recalled to his father's house to take his place as head 
of the State with all the pomp and power of a great prince, a great warrior, a con- 
queror, 'and a judge ; in the height of his joy and triumph struck to the ground by a 
sorrow of the intensest bitterness, which must have blighted the few remaining years 
of his life — his whole life was one of strange vicissitudes and sensational events. 
The stain of his birth was not, of course, any fault of his ; but it led to that irregular 
course of lawlessness and violence which must have laid the seeds of many faults of 
character — recklessness, impulsiveness, and indifference to human rights and human 
Bufferings — which were mingled with many great and heroic qualities. Especially 
we see how the habit of fighting for plunder, and for the purely selfish ends of a 
livelihood for himself and his followers, produced that lower type of greatness which 
bartered hu own energi^a and prowess for placo and power, instead of the generona 



OB. XI. 29—40.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 127 

■elf-aacrifice for the good of his country which marked the career of Ehud and 
Gideon. What, however, ia here especially to be remarked and treasured up in our 
minds is, that the cup of prosperity and joy which God's goodness had mixed for 
Jephthah was turned into a cup of bitterness by his own perverse folly and rashness 
and ignorance of God's grace. See what great things God had done for him. He 
had delivered him from his life of lawlessness ; he had placed him in a high and 
honourable estate; he had brought liiin from banishment to the land and house of 
his fathers ; he had filled him with his Spirit, and mightily strengthened him for his 
great task ; he had gone forth with his army, and driven his enemies before his face, 
and crowned him with victory. Jephthah returned to his home as the deliverer of 
his country, the restorer of peace to the homesteads of Gilead, all glittering with 
success and glory. Nor was he wanting in sources of a softer and tenderer happiness. 
A bright and loving spirit, full of affection and joyous sympathy, overflowing with 
dutiful pride and beaming sympathy, was awaiting his return. His daughter, the 
light of his home, the solace of his cares, was there to welcome him and to double 
his happiness by sharing it. And as he looked forward to the future, he might hope 
to see her the mother of children who would perpetuate his name and his race. Such 
was his lot as God had prepared it for liiiii. His own rash and perverse act, springing 
from a culpable ignorance of the character of God, and directed by heathen super- 
stition and cruelty instead of by trust in the love and mercy of Jehovah, poured an 
ingredient of extreme bitterness into this cup of joy and poisoned his whole life. 
The hour of triumph was turned into desolation, the bright home was made a house 
of mourning, what should have been years of peace and honour were turned into 
years of trouble and despair, and Jephthah had no one but himself to blame for this 
lamentable reverse. Alas, how often we can match this scene by similar instances 
of human perverseness embittering the sweet cup of life ! A nation's career is 
checked by crime, or cruelty, or treachery ; an individual's life is marred by some act 
of ungodliness which entails a life-long harvest of bitter fruits ; domestic enjoyment 
is destroyed by the sins of selfishness and self-willed folly. Bountiful gifts of a 
gracious Providence, wealth and abundance, splendid opportunities for good, intel- 
lectual endowments, rare talents, or, in humbler life, openings for advancement 
and usefulness which might have led to distinction, are through the perverse folly 
of their possessors worse than wasted, and dark shadows are thrown across what 
should have been the brightness of a happy life. And then men speak of their 
bad luck, and murmur against the providence of God ; as if one could sow the wind 
and not reap the whirlwind, or cut off the shadow of sin, remorse and shame and 
death. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 29 — 33. — The spirit of sacred warfare. There is much at which the modern 
leader stumbles in the stories of Old Testament warfare. The pitilessness, the 
assumption that all the right of the question between the belligerents is on one side, 
the carnage even to extermination, are all repugnant to modern feeling. It is well 
to look at the Divine background and relation of these wars : therein, and therein 
alone, will be found their apology, if apology be forthcoming. In the Ammonite war 
of Jephthah — 

I. Justification is found in that, on the lowest grotjnp, it was a war of selp- 

PKESERVATION ; AND, ON THE HIGHEST, ISRAEL WAS DEFINITELY AND AOTHOMTATIVELT 
identified with the CAUSE OF GOD'S TRUTH AND RIGHTEOUSNESS, AND APPOINTED THE 

INSTRUMENT OF HIS JUDGMENTS. In a sense there was " no quarter " in these wars. 
The claims of the foes of God's people were of the most extrfeme and exacting 
character. The barbarians had no pity. It would have been of small moment to 
them to have " utterly cut ofE " every man, woman, and child. The greatest crimes 
were perpetrated by them on the smallest provocation ; and they could not be 
trusted. There was one argument, and one alone, that could be understood— the 
■word. But there were also weightj' interests represented by Israel, for the sake of 
which it was pre-eminently important that it should continue to exist, and that under 
conditions of freedom and religion. It was its mission to reveal the will of Qod to 



IW THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. xi. 29—40 

men, not only as a verbal communication, but as a law illustrated in life and conduct. 
These interests were the highest interests of the world, and Israel was custodian of 
them for all future ages. There is a humanitarianism that discounts truth, and 
would reduce all duty to the nearer and more external utilities of life. The Bible, 
whilst not ignoring the brotherhood of men (no book guards this so jealously), is 
careful to ground it upon a Divine fatherhood, and to secure its true observance by 
enforcement of morality and righteousness. Israel, too, was not at liberty to exercise 
forbearance. "The iniquity "of these nations "was full." They were guilty of 
unnameable crimes, rejecters of Divine revelation, and oumberers of the ground yet 
to be occupied by God's gracious purposes. 

II. All through Jehovah was recognised as thb true Arbiter. Nothing 
could be more impressive than the attitude of Jephthah. He is anxious to obtain a 
just settlement without recourse to arms. He sets forth his statement of the case 
with the utmost courtesy, exactitude, and forbearance. Every opportunity is given 
for peaceful understanding ; but Ammon turns a deaf ear. Solemnly then, under the 
peculiar dispensation in which they lived, they put the question in the hands of God. 
Jehovah is to witness between the disputants, and the war is no longer a confused 
strife, but a punitive judgment. Israel, under such circumstances, was not at liberty 
to waive its moral claims, and to grant a truce ere the enemy had yielded the point 
at issue. Israel is the instrument of Divine vengeance upon a wicked and obstinate 
nation. It is an anachronism of the gravest consequence to judge of the wars of the 
ancient world by the ameliorated conditions of modem life. 

III. The leader of Israel received his commission directly from the hahds of 
God. Nothing else can be meant by " then the Spirit of Jehovah came upon 
Jephthah." Divine impulse. Divine wisdom, Divine obligation are all implied. It 
is no longer a war whose main issues and movements are subject to fallible human 
conditions ; it is really in God's hands. He bears the blame, so far as his commands 
are observed. If the mode of warfare, &c. appear inhuman, it will be because oui 
minds fail to grasp the tremendous importance of that righteousness of which they 
were the slow precursors and rude witnesses. 

IV. The war is carried on in the spirit of self-sacrifice and implicit devotion. 
The vow of Jephthah shows this. He anticipates his return in victory, and the 
people's enthusiastic welcome to him as their deliverer. Like Gideon, he wiU not 
accept this ; it is Jehovah's alone. To Jehovah, therefore, he vows of his own 
"whatsoever cometh forth (out) of the doors of my house to meet me." No grati- 
fication of self, therefore, could be the motive of such a campaign. If, on the other 
hand, there is not that repugnance to bloodshed displayed by Jephthah that might 
be looked for in a Christian leader, we must remember that the religious nature 
developed slowly in human history, and God chose his instruments not because they 
;vere perfect, but, such as they were, to bring on higher possibilities and a better 
time. — M. 

Vers. 30, 31 , 34^40. — JephthaVs vow. What it involved has been much disputed. 
But the wording of the vow certainly admits of an interpretation consistent with the 
highest humanity. The object is expressed neutrally, as being more comprehensive; 
but there is a distinction introduced into the consequent member of the sentence 
which shows that regard is had to a dual possibility, viz., of the object being either 
personal or otherwise. If the former, he or she was to be " Jehovah's," an expression 
unnecessary if it was to be made a burnt offering, and which could only mean 
" dedicated to perpetual virginity or priesthood." If the latter, he would " offer it 
for a burnt offering." It bears out this that his daughter asks for two months " to 
bewail her virginity." The inference is imperative. It was not death, but perpetual 
virginity, to which she was devoted. In this vow we observe — 

I. The spirit of consecration it evinced. Its meaning was evident. Jehovah 
was the true Judge and Deliverer of Israel. His, therefore, should be the glory when 
Israel returned in victory. There was to be no diverting of honour from him to 
Jephthah. A sacrifice, therefore, should be made before all men to acknowledge this. 
But as Jephthah is the person most in danger of being tempted to forget God's claim, 
he himself gives anticipatively of his own, and of his own, especially, which might 



CH. XI. 29—40.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 129 

be considered as specially for his honour. It was a " blank form " to be filled up by 
Providence as it would. 

n. The unexpected fobm the sacrifice assumed. How it astonishes men when 
God takes them at their word ! Not that they do not mean what they say, but they 
do not realise all it implies. God ever does this that he may educate the heart in 
loving sacrifice, and reveal the grandeur and absoluteness of his own claim upon us. 

IIL The grace that invested it from— 1. The mutwil love of parent and child. 
They both sorrow because she is an only child, and they are all in all to one another. 
It was a keen, real sacrifice. 2. The unquestioning and cheerful obedience of the 
child. Like Isaac and Christ. 3. The unwavering fidelity of Jephthah to his vow. 
It was the wisest course, and the one that proved best the fidelity and infinite love of 
God. There was sorrow, but who will say that there was not a compensating blessed- 
ness in the act, and a " more exceeding weight of glory " in the ages to come ? This 
is what God expects. Have we ever vowed to him ? If so, have we paid our vows ? 
Negligence in this matter will explain much that distresses and perplexes us. 
Honesty towards God — ^how few practise it I Yet this is the true proof of him 
(Mai. iii. 10). 

IV. How an absolute personal sacrifice may become a national ideal and 
ATONEMENT. The circumstances were such that all Israel sympathised with the act 
of self-devotion. It fell in with the national mood and carried it to heroic pitch. 
The " custom in Israel " shows how profoundly the spirit of the people had been 
touched. The maiden offered to Jehovah is adopted as the offering of her people, a 
vicarious sacrifice of their repentance and faith. So does the Lord Jesus, the Son of 
God, become the world's atonement (2 Cor. v. 14, 15). — M. 

Ver. 29. — The Spirit of ike Lord. I. The Spirit op the Lord is not a merb 
INFLUENCE, but A LIVING PEESBNCE. It is taught throughout Scripture that God does 
not only bestow graces, but also comes personally into our souls (John xiv. 16, 17). 
This Divine presence may not be perceived by the senses, as in the visions of the 
dove (Matt. iii. 16) and of the cloven tongues of fire (Acts ii. 3). It need not give 
rise to any ecstasy or visible excitement, as in the case of the Corinthian Church (1 
Cor. xiv. 2). It may be without the immediate consciousness of the subject. But 
it will be proved by its efiects. 

II. The Spirit op the Lord comes upon a man to inspire him foe service. God 
does not simply inhabit a man as a temple ; he infuses his life into the very being of 
the man ; transforms, elevates, enlightens, strengthens. Thus Jephthah found the 
Spirit to be the source of his power for battle. God's Spirit is always the spring of 
the Christian's highest energies. It is foolish to attempt to do any good work with- 
out the aid that is given by the indwelling power of God. 

III. The special form op the influence op the Spirit of God will be deter- 
mined BY THE capacities OF THE RECIPIENT AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF HIS WORK. 

There is a variety of gifts. 1. God's Spirit aileots us differently, according to our 
natural differences. To the thoughtful man he is a spirit of understanding. To him 
who hungers and thirsts after righteousness he is a spirit of holiness. To the sym- 
pathiser, the comforting friend, he is a spirit of love, Tc the active worker he is a 
spirit of power. 2. God's Spirit also affects us differently according to the needt of 
the times. God does not waste his influence ; he adapts it to requiremecte. There- 
fore we must not think that his Spirit is less with us than with men of old because 
the manifestation is different, nor that he is less niih those who have not the form 
of spiritual influence which we esteem most than with those who possess it (1 Cor. 
xii. 6). 

IV. The Spirit op the Lord does not annihilate the individual characters op 
MEN. Jephthah retains his natural characteristics, and still shows them. 1. God's 
Spirit does not supersede natural talent, but enlightens, purifies, and strengthens. 2. 
God's Spirit does not destroy human weakness. Jephthah has the Spirit of the Lord, 
yet he may be rash and may err. The spirit of wisdom does not necessarily accom- 
pany the spirit of strength. We may have the presence of the Spirit, and yet not be 
filled with the Spirit, so that human weakness may linger by the side of Divine 
power. — A. 

JUDGES. K 



190 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [ch. xi. 29—40 

Vers. 30—40. — JephthaKs vmo. Jephthah's conduct should be viewed in the light 
of his age and of his own conscientious convictions, and not judged by the clearer 
light and changed convictions of Christendom. Measured by modem standards, it 
may appear superstitious, cruel, insane ; but measured by the only standards to 
which Jephthah could bring it, his conduct was noble beyond expression. From the 
incident generally we may gather the following lessons : — 

I. The hand of God should be becognised in odb good and FEtnTFtJL wobks. 
The elders had called upon Jephthah to deliver them from the Ammonites. Yet 
the warrior saw that his own right hand could not secure the victory ; if this came, it 
must be from God. Such conduct shows humility — a difficult grace for a popular 
hero to practise in the midst of his triumph ; imA faith in discerning the secret of 
success in the presence of God, and trusting to this before entering the battle. 

II. It is bight that we should eecognisb God's claims in bet den fob the eecbp- 
TiON OF his geacb. The thank ofiering belongs not to the Levitical law alone, but to 
all religion (Kora. xii. 1). It is foolish to think to buy the help of God by promising 
him devotion in return (Gen. xxviii. 20 — 22). But itmay be helpful to our fulfil- 
ment of the duties of gratitude if we recognise the obligation of thankfulness even 
before we receive the special blessing of God, as we are more likely to realise it fully 
then than after we are relieved and satisfied. It should always be remembered that 
we have already received such great bounties from God that we are under constant 
obligations to him, that he claims our hearts, our possessions, our all, and that our 
true blessedness is only found in perfect surrender to him. 

III. It is generally foolish and weonq to make a vow the consequences of 
WHICH WE DO not FORESEE. There may be an occasional advantage in the vow to 
bind the soul by a solemn recognition of its obligations; but we are equally 
required to give God our all whether we make a vow or no. Nothing is more weak 
than to vow at a time when we are not called to make a sacrifice, and then to prove 
unequal to the sacrifice when this is required. It is better to count the cost and 
refrain from making the vow if necessary (Luke xiv. 28). The vow is often only a 
sign of presumption. It would be well for us to turn our vows into prayers, and 
instead of promising that we will do some great thing, to ask God to give us grace to 
do it. Still, viewed from the standpoint of devotion, there is something noble in 
the perfect surrendering of self, and the brave trustfulness of Jephthah's vow. 

IV. Wb should considee ourselves bound to keep those vows which wb hakb 
to our own hurt so long as we do not feel this to be wrong. Our own incon- 
venience is no excuse for declining to fulfil an obligation, just because we did not 
anticipate the trouble in entering into the obligation (Ps. xv. 4). But our con- 
victiop of wrong is a reason for not keeping our promise. A promise to do evil 
is void from the first. It is wrong to make such a promise ; to fulfil it is to add a 
second wrong. We can never bind ourselves by vow to do that which it would not 
be right for us to do without the vow. Therefore for us, with our Christian light, it 
would be sinful to fulfil such a vow as Jephthah's, Nevertheless, the great Hebrew 
hero clearly felt that it was his duty to fulfil it, and therefore to him the vow was 
binding. If we blame him, it must be (1) for the rashness which allowed him to 
contract himself into an obligation which he would never have entered with his eyes 
opened, and (2) for the ignorance of the character of God which is shown in his 
supposition that God could be pleased with the sacrifice of his daughter. Even the 
imperfect revelation of God then vouchsafed should have prevented such a frightful 
misconception if it had been rightly used (Gen. xxii. 12). But we may find mora 
of good example than of warning in the whole incident. Pathetic as is the error 
of Jephthah, his magnificent fidelity is a model of religious heroism. — ^A. 

EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XII. 

Ver. 1. — Korthward, or, otherwise ren- 
dered, to Zaphon, a city of the Gadites men- 
tioned in Josh. xiii. 27 together with Succoth, 



and thought to be the modem Amateh on thi 
Wady Rajlb (see Vanderveld's map). It is 
difficult to say with certainty which render- 
ing is right, but on the whole the latter 
seems most probable. Although Gileaddoei 



OH. XII. 1 — 7.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



131 



lie north-east of Epbraim, it hardly seems a 
natural description of the Ephraimite move- 
ment to say they "went northwards;" 
whereas if they marched to Zaphon the 
phrase would be precise. The jirevious 
phrase, gathered themselves together, means 
mtistered for battle, as in ch. vii. 23, 24. 
We will bum thine house, &c. — the same 
savage threat as the Philistine youths made 
use of to induce Samson's wife to discover 
and reveal his riddle (ch. xiv. 15), and as the 
Philistines actually put in practice upon her 
and her father in revenge for the destruction 
of their com (ch. xv. 6). Fassedst thou over, 
as in ch. zL 29, 82 ; xiL 8. 

Ver. 2. — ^When I called you. Thisincident 
is not mentioned in the previous narrative. 
Probably Jephthah asked the help of Ephraim 
when he was first made chief of the Gileadites, 
and they refused partly because they thought 
the attempt desperate, and partly because 
they were offended at Jephthdi's leadership. 

Vers. 4, 6. — The Enghsh version of these 
somewhat obscure verses is obviously wrong, 
and devoid of sense. The obscurity arises 
partly from verses 6 and 6 being merely an 
amplification, i. e. a narrative in detail of 
what is more briefly related in ver. 4 ; and 
from the insertion of the explanatory words, 
" Gfilead lies in the midst of Ephraim and 
in the midst of Manasseh," in ver. 4. The 
literal translation of the two verses is as 
follows : — And the mem, of CfiUad smote 
Ephraim (at the fords of Jordan), for, said 
they, ye are fugitives of Ephraim. (Oilead 
lies in the midst of Ephraim a/nd in the midst 
•>f Mamasseh, i. e. between Manasseh and 
Ephraim, so that in coming from Manasseh, 
irhere they had taken refuge, to return to 
Ephraim they were obliged to pass through 
Gilead, and the Gileadites had taken the pas- 
sages of Jordan before the Ephraimites ; and it 
was so, that when the fugitives of Ephraim 
said. Let me pass over, thai the men of 
Oilead said. Art thou am, Ephravmitet If he 
said. Nay, then said they unto him. Say now 
Shibboleth, &o., i. e. they put him to the test 
of pronunciation ; and if they found by his 
pronunciation of the word Shibboleth, viz., 
Sibboleth, that he was an Ephraimite, in spite 
of his denial, then they took him and sleu) 
him (killed him in cold blood) at the passages 
of Jordan. ) And there fell at that time, &c. 
The direct narrative goes on here from ver. 4. 



Omitting the long explanatory parenthesil 
&om the latter part of ver. 4 to the lattel 
part of ver. 6, the narrative runs (ver. A), 
And the «i«re of Oilead smote Ephramti, for, 
said they, ye are fugitives of Ephraim ; amd 
there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty 
a/nd two thousand. The parenthesis explains 
why the Ephraimites had to pass through 
Gilead, and how the Gileadites ascertained 
in each case whether a man was an Ephraim- 
ite or not. 

Ver. 6. — Say now Shibboleth, &c. We 
have thus, as it were, accidentally preserved 
to us a curious dialectical difference between 
the Ephraimites and theinhabitantsof Gilead. 
A similar diflerence exists at the present day 
between the pronunciation of the inhabitants 
of different parts of Germany. What the 
Hanoverians call steim, a stone, the other 
Germans call shtein. Shibboleth means both 
a/n ear of com and a stream, Forty and twc 
thousand. It is possible that the war be- 
tween Jephthah and the Ephraimites may 
have lasted a considerable time, though only 
the single incident of the slaughter at the 
fords of Jordan is mentioned, so that the 
large number of 42,000 men may be less im- 
probable than it seems at first sight. There 
IS, however, always some doubt as to the 
correctness of numbers (see 1 Sam. vi 19). 

Ver. 7. — Six years. Perhaps his sorrow 
for his daughter shortened his life. Then 
died Jephthah the Gileadite. Better, And 
Jephthah the Gileadite died. In one of the 
cities. His exact burial-place was perhaps 
unknown, and therefore the general phrase 
in the cities of Jvdah was used, as in Gen, 
xiii. 12. Lot is said to have dwelt m the 
cities of the plain, and in Neh. vi 2 San- 
ballat asked Kehemiah to meet him in the 
villages of the plain. Still the phrase is not 
what you would expect here, and it seems 
unlikely that Jephthah's burial-place should 
be unknown. The Septuagiut, Vulgate, 
Syriac, and Arabic versions read, " in his city 
Gilead," as if Gilead had been the name of 
Jephthah's paternal city. Another conjec- 
ture is that there might have been an Ar of 
Gilead as well as the well-known Ar of Moab, 
or there might have been a collection of 
towns called Arey - Gilead (the towns of 
Gilead), after the analogy of Havoth-jair (ch. 
X. 4), but there is no evidence in support of 
these conjectures. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — The envg of the tmall great at the great deeds of the tmatt. The 
detection of faults of character is useful to those who wish to correct and perfect 
their own, and for this reason the observation of the tendency of particular positions 
to produce particular faults is very valuable. The particular vice of the human mind 
which the shameful and unpatriotic arrogance of the Ephraimites towards the deliverei 
of their country brings to light, is the tendency on the part of those in high places tv 



132 THE BOOK OP JUDGES. [oh. xii. 1—7. 

resent and envy the great deeds and successes of those whom they look upon a* verj 
inferior to themselves. Ephraim was the largest and most powerful of the tribes oi 
Israel. The great leader, Joshua, was of that tribe, and they seem to have thought 
that they had an hereditary primacy among the tribes. We have already seen this 
spirit breaking out fiercely in their strife with Gideon (ch. viii. 1 — 3), and now again 
in their hostile attack upon Jephthah. Nay, even in Joshua's time something of the 
same arrogance drew down upon them the rebuke of their great captain (Josh. xvii. 
14 — 16). They seem to have thought that, being the chief tribe, they were entitled 
to be considered first in everything ; that their advice was always to be sought, their 
wishes always to be consulted ; and that the maintenance of their dignity ought to 
be the first consideration of all the other tribes. And yet we do not find them main- 
taining their claims by pre-eminent zeal for the public service, by a spirit of self- 
Bacrifice for the public good, nor by furnishing the most eminent men to take the 
lead in civil or military afEairs. They were not the first to risk life and Umb against 
the Midianite hosts ; they were not the first to repel the invasion of the children of 
Amman. Their own dignity, and not their country's good, was their chief concern. 
Hence, when an unknown Gideon, of one of the inferior houses of Manasseh, or a 
half-caste Jephthah on the other side Jordan, rose to the first rank as saviours of 
their country, the envy of Ephraim burst out into a flame. What business had such 
as they to do great things ? It was an invasion of the prerogative of the "great 
people." It was presumption ; it was a slight put upon Ephraim. No punishment 
was too bad for such insolence. " We will bum thine house upon thee with fire." 
This history then illustrates the pride of caste. It shows us men, having a g^eat 
opinion of themselves, not influenced by that good opinion to do as much ss possible 
for others, but only to exact as much as possible for themselves. It showi us how 
an overweening estimate of themselves induces men to envy others, whom they 
think inferior, if they distinguish themselves, and rise superior to them in public 
estimation. It was very much the same spirit which showed itself in the Pharisees 
when our Lord's fame as a teacher drew such multitudes to hear him. They thought 
they had the monopoly of teaching, that no doctrine which did not emanate from 
their schools ought to be listened to, that knowledge could proceed from no mouth 
but that of a Eabbi. And so when the carpenter's Son opened his mouth and poured 
forth his lessons of exquisite wisdom and power, and enchained the attention of the 
multitudes, and was acknowledged as a prophet, their envy was excited. Instead of 
rejoicing that God had sent them a teacher mighty in word and deed, they only 
plotted how they might silence the eloquent tongue. Instead of .sitting at his feet 
and learning at his mouth the true will of God and the way of life, they were only 
roused to hatred, and persuaded the multitude to say, Let him be crucified. The 
same spirit is common in our own days in every profession. The small great envy the 
great deeds of the small. But God's gifts are not confined to any caste or class ; and 
they only are truly great who rejoice in great qualities wherever they are found, 
and view without envy the career of those who outstrip them in the race of doing 
good and advancing the glory of God. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. I— S.~ Ingratitude the frequent reward of henefactvfi. The triumph of 
Jephthah is marred by another incident. Ephraim, the most powerful tribe west or 
the Jordan, confronts him in hostile array. His experience must have been bitter 
and hard to comprehend. But he is not alone in the results which his good deeds 
brought upon him. Benefactors in every age have met with a like reception. 

I. Theik good deeds aeb THEMSBLVB8 AN OFFENCE. This has its TOot and ground 
in the incapacity of the natural mind to perceive and appreciate spiritual motives ; 
but it seldom takes the form of direct, simple objection to the good deed. Other 
forms of excuse for opposition are easily discovered. 1. The spirit vn which they 
are wrought is misunderstood or misinterpreted. The key to our judgments of others 
is in ourselves. If then we are evil, our judgments will be perverted. All through 
the history of God's Church this influence is apparent, from the old ill-natured query, 
" Does Job serve God for nought? " to the culminating wickedness described in tha 



m. xn. t— 7.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 183 

gospel : " The light ahineth n darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. . . . 
He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him noi 
He came unto his own, and his own received him not " (John i. 5, 10, 11). " To the 
pure, all things are pure," and vice versd. 2. They present an unwelcome contrast to 
the conduct of others. Every good deed is as a light which brings to view things of 
like kind, and inspires similar behaviour ; but also reveals the hideousness and hate- 
fulness of the ordinary life of man. This is an ofEence against the amour propre 
of the sinner, and therefore unpardonable ; it is also an exposure of hypocrisy, and 
sadly inconvenient. It makes the heart of good men ache to see this, and to cry, 
" When will goodness not be the exception, but the rule ? " 3. The honour they 
acquire for their authors is coveted. To minds not actuated by the spirit of good- 
ness, the only thing that can be desired in good works is the outward fame and 
advantage they bring. The exclusion from this is keenly resented. Hundreds are 
eager to share the crown of the righteous who are far nrom breathing his spirit or 
emulating his example. 

II. How HARD IS IT FOB EVEN GOOD MEN TO UNDERSTAND THIS I Jephthah argues 

his case, and asks, " Wherefore are ye come up unto me this day, to fight against 
me ? " The law of Moses promised temporal advantages to those who fulfilled it. 
Occasionally these were not enjoyed, and there was a consequent perplexity. But 
we are not to suppose that this wonder and mental trouble were confined to that dis- 
pensation ; they are deeply human characteristics. Our Saviour himself experienced 
them when he asked, " Many good works have I showed you from my Father ; for 
which of those works do ye stone me ? " (John x. 32) ; and again, " Are ye come out 
as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me ? I sat daily with you 
teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me " (Matt. xxvi. 65). The key to 
this mystery is furnished by the beatitude of the persecuted for righteousness' sake 
(Matt. y. 11, 12), and realised ia the spirit of Christ's sacrifice. — M. 

Ver. 4. — The reproach of the righteotts. " Ye Gileadites are fugitives of Bphraim 
among the Ephraimites, and among the Manassites." 
I. Those who are opposed to tedth and goodness often objeot to the cibohm- 

6TANCES IN LIFE AND THE CHARACTER OF THOSE WHO ARE KBPDTED TO DO GREAT WORKS 

IN God's service. " Fugitives " is a term of social reproach. It suggests vile reasons 
which made it convenient for them to leave their own home. So it was said, " Is not 
this Joseph, the carpenter's son?" and, "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?" 
So John ix. 24, 29. 

• II. This objection is inconsequent. It ignores the real authorship of goodness, 
and the method of his working, and character of his instrumentalities m all time. It 
is self-contradictor}/ (John ix. 31). — M. 

Vers. 5, 6. — Shibboleth : — The importattee of little defects, faults, Ac. Thif not 

absolute, but relative. 

I. Wherein this impobtauoe consists. 1. In what they suggest or reveal. A slip 
in accidence, or a blunder in the statement of matter of fact, may discredit the pre- 
tended scholar. A difEerence in tone or manner may mean indifference or enmity 
or hypocrisy. Temporary neglect of a child may prove want of real parental 
afEection. Neglect of private or public prayer may be little in itself, but it may 
spring from the alienation of the soul from God. The glib utterance of a 'J white 
lie " may make us doubt the whole moral character of the speaker. Grave diseases 
often declare themselves by comparatively slight symptoms, as leprosy, paralytic 
ataxia, &c. 2. We see tt in the order of life as a whole. In the vegetable and 
animal world the law of the " survival of the fittest " often works through compara- 
tively slight organic adaptations. In human life the advantage and ultimate success 
of men often depends upon their slight superiority to other competitors.^ A little 
ignorance, extravagance, carelessness, &c. may work ruin. " A stitch in time saves 
nine." " Beady, aye ready,'' is a noble motto. Great discoveries have been made by 
men who were just a little in advance of their fellows. 3. A critical occasion may 
give a trifle an unlooked-for importance. The cackling of geese saved Rome, ac- 
cording to the myth. Peter's uncouth accent occasioned the observation of the maid. 



134 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. xn. 1—7. 

and his emphatic denial of Christ. Vessels have been wrecked because of a little 
carelessness in taking observations when mists have suddenly arisen, or rocks were 
in the course. Souls have been lost through impressions produced by the incon- 
sistencies of professing Christians. 

II. Cub duty with respect to them. " Of course it is to correct them, to get rid 
of them," you say. Yes ; but how ? Sometimes they are so related to us that we 
cannot remove them. It is necessary then that we should do all iii our power to 
compensate for them by cultivating other qualities, &c., or to neutralise their influence 
by timely explanations and clear proofs of our real intention, spirit, character, &c. 
Mere punctilio, or the scrupulosity of the martinet will not do. We must beware of 
the folly of those who " strain at a gnat and swallow a camel." Let the whole life 
be emphatic in contradiction, and let the spirit of Christ so shine through us that 
men will learn to know us in spite of those failings and defects which give us the 
lie. " Not far from the kingdom of heaven " may be worse than entire alienation 
from it. 

Tests : their good and evil. As a Means of discovering the Ephraimite, the device 
was highly natural and ingenious. In the main and roughly it was successful Some 
such method was evidently required. There was no time to enter into minute detail 
or examination. But, on tVie other hand, it was quite possible that some who were 
not Ephraimites were slain by mistake. So in determining fitness for Church 
membership, office, or spiritual responsibility — 

I. Tests mat be necessary. There are times when it is of the ntmost importance 
for us to know who are God's people and who are not. We are to " have no fellow- 
ship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them." From the 
unholy, disorderly, unbelieving we are commanded to withdraw ourselves. But this 
injunction were impossible of fulfilment were the distinction between saints and 
sinners not capable of being made. Christ has happily supplied a test — " By their 
fruits ye shall know them." The confession of the lips is another element, but it 
must not be dissociated from the former. So in the life of every day we require to 
know men, and accordingly have to form our opinions and judgments of them. This 
is so vital and necessary to safety and happiness, that we do it almost automatically, 
unconsciously. The honest and the dishonest, the true and the false, the friend and 
the enemy, we learn to distinguish by actions and words, and the course of their 
conduct. It is foolish, therefore, for persons to object to tests — they are necessary 
throughout the whole range of life, temporal and spiritual. But — 

II. They may mislead. In the nature of things they must be superficial, local, 
accidental, &c. They are observed and interpreted by fallible men. Trifling differ- 
ences may acquire factitious importance. A man is not to be condemned for a word ; 
a careful study should be made of the whole conduct and character of the man. The 
Christian life has many " notes," and where one is not forthcoming another may be 
present. The Epistles have, therefore, a variety of points upon which Christians 
may test themselves and others. God alone jinoweth the heart, and in Christ he will 
judge the world by infallible judgment. It is better to err on the side of leniency to 
offenders than on that of severity. It matters not how we may commend ourselves 
to men, our condition In the sight of God is of chief account. — M. 

Vers. 1—6.—" Vaulting ambition," which "o'erleaps itself." This was not the first 
time of such offence on the part of Ephraim. Gideon had to bear with their un- 
reasonableness, and was gracious enough to permit their co-operation in securing the 
results of his victory. But now the "cup of their iniquity is. full." Not for 
Ammon's destruction alone is Jephthah raised up ; he has a punishment to mete out 
to Ephraim. They knew it not, but this pride of theirs was on the ver^e of its fall. 
They presumed on former exemption from evil consequences, and blindly rushed 
upon their chastisement. We see here — 

I. Pride in its development and career. Past kindness and consideration only 
hardened and strengthened it. Past achievements and the prestige acquired through 
them are relied upon instead of present obedience to God, &c. Ephraim cared mora 
for its own position and advantage than to serve the commonwealth. By its inaction 



CH. XII. 1—7.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. IM 

in the past and its hostile attitude to Jephthah on the present occasion it plays the 
traitor. It despised its brethren, and refused to recognise the leader God had chosen, 
and now it threatened to overthrow the advantage acquired by the Ammonite victory. 
It became a public nuisance and a political danger. 

II. Pride in its Divine chastisement. In the various details of its punishment 
it is hard to repress a certain measure of sympathy for it. There is something 
always in the humiliation of a proud nature that commands our sympathy. And yet 
it was necessary and right that Ephraim should be taught a terrible lesson. 1. Thai 
very tribe, membership vrith which had been their boast, they would now fain deny. - 
2. The taunt of being "fugitives," which they had used against the Gileadites, is now 
turned against themselves. 3. The martial strength upon which they had relied is 
now effectually and suddenly reduced. So will it be with all who set themselves 
against Christ and his kingdom. " Upon whomsoever this stone shall fall, it will 
grind him to powder." If God is against us, or, what is the same thing, we are 
against God, we may expect patient forbearance, and at first gentle chidings ; but, 
if we persist, a terrible retribution. Sin is pride ; it refuses to bow to God's will, or 
to accept the methods of his salvation. — M. 

Ver. 1. — Jealousy. The men of Ephraim are angry with Jephthah because he hM 
repulsed the Ammonites without their aid. 

I. Great men are commonly assailed by the jealousy of their rivals. 1. This 
is no proof of any failing on the part of those who are thus attacked. While some 
of the noblest of men have brought trouble upon their own heads through want of 
consideration for the petty weaknesses of their inferiors, the best and most con- 
ciliatory of men have not been able to avoid the envy and misjudgment of meaner 
natures. It is impossible to please all classes in doing a work of any magnitude and 
value. They are not always the worthiest men who have the fewest enemies. Christ 
had more foes than friends. 2. This is no proof of the claims of the rivals of great 
men. People who cannot improve a work can criticise it. 

II. They who are backward in encountering the danger of battle abb 
EAGER IN COVETING THE HONOUR OF VICTORY. There is no reason to believe that 
the men of Ephraim showed any willingness to join with Jephthah till after his great 
success. Weak and selfish people who will not enter into any enterprise until they 
see it has succeeded are plentiful enough, but they are worthless. The true men 
are they who will advocate the right cause when it is at a low ebb, when it is 
unpopular, when it seems doomed to failure, when the service of it involves risk and 
loss. 

III. The task from which men shrink beforehand looks baby after it has 
BEEN successfully PERFORMED. Now that Jephthah has defeated the Ammonites, 
the men of Ephraim think his work was only a safe road to honour in which they 
would gladly have accompanied him. When we see the master of some art working 
with deft skill and unerring accuracy, nothing looks more easy than to do as he doee. 
His very triumph destroys the appearance of the difficulties which lie in its way. 
Thus the honours of the artist and the orator, and, in religious matters, of the 
martyr and the missionary, inspire jealousy in men who think they are cheaply won 
just on account of that very excellency which conceals the necessary sacrifice, suffer- 
ing, or toil by the perfect conquest of it. 

IV. Selfish people are more concerned about their own share in the honoui 
OF A great enterprise than about the success of it. The men of Bphraimdo 
nothing to encourage Jephthah ; they are only anxious to share his honour. We see 
in public life personal ambition overcoming public spirit, in Christian work the 
honour of the agent exalted above the success of the work. But the patriot should be 
supremely anxious for the welfare of his country, no matter by whom this is secured, 
and the Christian should be simply desirous of the triumph of Christ and the extension 
of Christianity, though he may not share the honours of victory. The_ jealousy 
which would hinder the good work of others because we have no share in it is treason 
to Christ. It is unworthy for the Christian to covet or to hold a post which he knowt 
Uiather will occupy better than himself, — ^A. 



186 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



£cH. XII. 8 — 15. 



V«r. 6. — Shibboleth. I. If a man's profession is false to his chabactib, this 
WILL BB MADE MANIFEST BY THE HABITS OF HIS LIFE. The Ephraimite who denied 
his tribal relation was betrayed by his dialectic pronunciation. Thus Peter was con- 
victed of falsehood (Matt. xxvi. 73). It matters little what we say if our conduct 
belies our words. No man can ultimately conceal his character ; it will come out in 
his countenance, it will colour his speech, it will shape his action. If a man would 
completely suppress his character, he must destroy it, because while it exists it must 
obey its nature, which is to be the source of all conduct. You cannot quench a vol- 
cano by building over its crater, nor stay the flow of ti stream by walling it in. Our 
true nature, whether it be good or bad, must reveal itself (1) in great critical epochs, 
when it can endure no restraint ; or (2) in casual accidents, when we are ofE our 
guard and do not consider the occasion sufficiently important to demand much con- 
cern ; or (3) in the general course and colour of our life (Matt. vii. 16). 

II. Small superficial signs may indicate great fundamental distinctions. 
The test of the " Shibboleth " has been much misunderstood, as though it were an 
instance of the importance which is sometimes unduly given to mere trivial distinc- 
tions. The test was simply a means of discovering the tribal relations of men. The 
Gileadites cared nothing for the difEerence of pronunciation in itself. They simply 
used it as a means for determining a really important point — the truth or falsehood 
of the profession of those who said they were not men of Ephraim. The same 
mistake was involved in Gibbon's famous sneer about the great division of Christen- 
dom on the question of a diphthong. It was not a diphthong, but the fundamental 
truth of the perfect Divinity of Christ that Athanasius and his friends were contend- 
ing with the Arians about, and the use of the diphthong was simply a convenient 
form in which to bring the question to a definite point So the recent controversies 
about vestments have been ridiculed as though they were questions of " ecclesiastical 
millinery," while both parties know quite well that these outside and apparently 
trivial differences are the signs of fundamental questions concerning priestly authority 
and sacramental grace. 1. We must beware of judging of the magnitude of a 
question by the comparative insignificance of its external indications. 2. We must, 
nevertheless, be careful not to assume that trivial external distinctions are signs of 
deep and important differences until we have proved the fact. We may erect the 
test of a " Shibboleth " to separate people who have no such fundamental distinctions 
as those of the men who had been true to Jephthah and the men who had enviously 
opposed him. The danger is that we should thus magnify the importance of the 
" Shibboleth " itself, and so become narrow and sectarian. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver, 8. — Ibzan of BetWehem. It is un- 
certain whether Bethlehem of Judah is 
meant, or Bethlehem in the tribe of Zebu- 
lun, mentioned in Josh. xix. 15. Josephus 
says that Ibzan was of the tribe of Judah, 
and of the city of Bethlehem, and some have 
supposed a connection between the namea of 
Boaz and Ibzan. But aa Bethlehem of the 
tribe of Judah is generally called Bethlehem 
of Judah, or Bethlehem-Ephratah, and aa 
Eloti and Abdou were judgea in North-Kast 
Israel, it is perhapa more probable that 
Bethlehem of Zebulun ia meant. Dr. Robin- 
Bon has identified it with a village — a " very 
miserable one " — called Beit Lahm, six miles 
west of Kazareth. 

Ver. 9. — He had thirty sons, &c. From 
no record of Ibzan's judgeship being pre- 
■erved, except this domestic moident, we 
may infer, aa in the case of Jair, that no 
important eraiita took place in bis time. 



Yer. 10. — Then died, &e. Sender, And 

Ibxan died. 

Ver. 12. — In Aijalon. Not Aijalon in the 
tribe of Dan, mentioned Josh. x. 12 ; xix. 
42, but another city, only spoken of here, 
whose name is probably preserved in the 
ruins of JalUkn, four hours east of Akka. It 
is remarkable that the two names EJtm and 
Ai^aUm are identical in Hebrew as far aa 
the consonants are concerned. It looks as 
if Aijalon, which is not mentioned among 
the Zebulonite cities in Josh. xix. 10 — 16, 
was named from Elon, its possessor. 

Ver. 13.— A Pirathonite, i. e. an inhabit- 
ant of Pirathon in the tribe of Ephraim, in 
the mount of the Amalekites (ver. 16), after- 
wards famous aa the birthplace of Benaiah, 
one of David's mighty men (2 Sam. ixiii. 
30). The Pharathon which ia mentioned ia 
1 Mace. ix. 50, and by Joaephua, following 
its authority, as fortified by Jonathan tiw 



OH. xn. 8 — 15.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



1ST 



brother of Judas may have been the same, 
though its collocation between Timna and 
Tekoah rather suggests a more southern 
position ; and the Ferata found by Eobinson 
between two and three hours from Samaria, 
south-south-west, on the way to Jerusalem, 
seems certainly to represent Piratlum. 

Ver. 14. — ^Nephews. Rather, grandsons. 
Hebrew, mm's sons. The number of his family, 
and their being all mounted on asses, are 
indications of his wealth and state (see 
above, ch. viiL 30 ; x, 4), and perhaps also 
of peaceful and prosperous times. 



Ver. 15. — The mount of the Amalekitea. 

This name points to some incident of which 
the memory is lost, though, with the usual 
tenacity of names, the name which once re- 
corded it survives. It may have been some 
ancient settlement of the Amalekites, who 
were a very wandering, wide-spread race, 
which gave the name ; or it may have been 
some great defeat and slaughter which they 
suffered from the Israelites, whose land they 
invaded (eh. vi 3, 33), just as the rock Oreb 
and the wine-press of Zeeb (ch. vii. 25) com- 
memorated the victory over those princes. 



H0MILETIC8. 

VeiB. 8 — 16. — The calm, after the storm. JephthaVs day of life had been a stormy 
one indeed. The strife with his own brethren ; the strife with the children of 
Amnion ; the strife between nature and superstition, and the throbbinga of a distracted 
heart ; the strife with the tribe of Ephraim, and the strife with a premature death 
under which he sunk, marked him as a " man of strife " (Ver. 2 in the Hebrew, and 
Jer. XV. 10) all his days, both him and "his people." But now there came quiet, 
uneventful days both for Israel and his rulers. There is no mention of foreign foe 
or of domestic discord. Scenes of family life take the place of the martial muster 
and the bloody fight. There is nothing to record save how long the judges judged, 
when they died, and where they were buried. We infer, indeed, from the fact that 
there were judges the continual care of God for his people, and from the absence of 
invasion and servitude we infer that the people did not forsake God. But more than 
this we do not know, nor over how great a part of Israel these judgeships did extend. 
But the reflection cannot but arise that it is not good for a people to be in continual 
strife. Struggles for supremacy over enemies without, and conflict for the settlement 
of government at home, should have their term, and give way to enjojrment of 
prosperity and peace. The happiest times in a nation's life are not always those that 
shine the brightest on the page of history. And so in the life of the individual. 
Though the surface of his life be not ruffled, nor its tenor varied by any startling 
changes, there may be a hidden work of God going on in this soul more momentous 
than the gain or lose of fortunes, or any vicissitudes of sickness and of health. Faith 
may be waxing stronger, and love may be burning brighter ; patience may be per- 
fecting her work, and the spirit of meekness may be steadily gaining ground over 
the spirit of wrath and intolerance ; the knowledge of Jesus Christ may be filling the 
field of the soul's vision, and the kingdom of heaven may be drawing nearer to the 
soul's embrace, and yet the outward life may be monotonous and uneventful. Any- 
how let us use the calm and untempestuous moments of our life to make undisturbed 
progress in the great business of our salvation ; and in the assurance of God's 
unwearied love let us pursue our own quiet round of meditation, and prayer, and 
praise. Great events and mighty deeds figure on the page of history, but the soul's 
progress in holiness is worthy to be recorded by an angel's pen. 

V«i* 8— 16.— Of . on ch. x. 1— 5.— M. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XIIL 

Ver. 1. — Sid evil again. It by no means 
follows from this phrase that this chapter is 
in direct chronological sequence to the pre- 
ceding, The scene is shined to the tribe of 
Dan, and to the Philistines on the west, and 
then is nothing to goid* us as to the exact 



time when the things narrated occurred. 
But the end of the forty years probably 
coincided with the judgeship of Samuel ; 
for there was no complete deliverance in 
the time of Samson, only occasional checks 
to the Philistine domination (see ver. 5). 
It was not tUl the days of Samuel that th« 
Philistines were really smitten (see 1 Stai, 



138 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[OB. ZIIL 1— 2& 



tK. S — 14). We may suppose the date of 
the ensuing narrative to be somewhere in 
the first decade of the Philistine oppression. 

Ver. 2. — Zorah. Enumerated among the 
cities in the tribe of Dan in Josh. xiz. 41, 
but ascribed to Judah, ibid. xv. 83 (there 
transliterated Zoreah) and in 2 Chron. zl 
10. Probahly the boundary passed through 
the city, as that of Judah and Benjamin did 
through Jerusalem. In Neh. zL 29 it is 
transliterated Zoreah, and also ascribed to 
Judah. It is almost always dbupled with 
Eshtaol, as in ver. 25 of this chapter. It 
was situated in the Shephelah, or plain 
country, and was fortified by Rehoboam 
(2 Ohron. zi. 10). It is supposed to be 
represented by the modem Surah, at the 
entrance of the Wady Ghurab. The family 
of the Sanites. It appears from Numb. 
xxvi. 42, 43 that there was only one family 
in the tribe of Dan, so that in this case tribe 
and family were co-extensive. 

Ver. 3. — Thou shall . . . bear a son. It 
is obvious to compare the promise to Abraham 
and Sarah (Gen. ivii. 19 ; xviii. 10, 14), to 
Hannah (1 Sam. i. 17), to Elizabeth (Luke 
i 13), and to the blessed Virgin (Luke L 
81). 

Ver. 5; — The child shall be a Kazaiite, 
&<:. So it was said, though not in the same 
words, concerning Samuel (1 Sam. i. 11) 
and concerning John the Baptist (Luke i. 
15). A Nazarite (or, more correctly, a Nazi- 
rite) means one separated, and specially dedi- 
cated to God. The law of the Nazarites is 
contained in Numb, vi., where, however, 
only Naxarites of days, i. e. Nazarites for a 
demiite time, are spoken of. Samson, 
Samuel, and John the Baptist were perpetual 
NazaHtea, Nazarites of for ever, as the 
Hishna classifies them. Abstinence from 
strong drink, and from anything made of 
the grape ; letting the locks of the head 
grow unchecked by the razor ; and keeping 
Ignite dear of any pollution from a dead 
body, even in case of the death of his nearest 
relations, were the chief articles of a Nazarite's 
vow. St. Paul took the vow of a Nazarite 
of days, and offered the prescribed sacrifices, 
together with "the hair of the head of his 
i^aration," as we read in Acts xviii. 18 ; 
zxi. 23—26. He shall begin, &c. This is 
an exact description of what Samson did. 
He did not "deliver Israel" as the other 
judges did ; but he began to shake the 
Philistine power, and prepared the way for 
the deliverance of Israel in the time of Ul 
wortlier successor Samuel. 

Ver. 6.— A man of God, i. e, a prophet, 
applied to Moses, Samuel, David, Shemaiah, 
Elijah, Elisha, and other prophets, and to 
Timothy in the New Testament. Manoah's 
wife applies it to the angef, not being sure 
that he was not human. It would not be 



improper to apply to an angel, seeing that 
Gabriel means mam. of God, I asked him 
not, &c. No doubt from awe. Jacob, on the 
contrary, asked the angel with whom he had 
wrestled, "Tell me, I pray thee, thy name" 
(Gen. xxxii. 29). See vers. 17, 18. In the 
Septuagint (Cod. Alex.) and Vulgate the not 
is omitted. " I asked him, but he did not 
tell me." 

Ver. 10. — ^And the woman . . . ran, &c. 
Acting in the true spirit of a loving and 
trustful wife, and showing that she felt that 
neither angel nor man of God stood befon 
her own husband in the claim to her con- 
fidence and obedience. 

Ver. 12.— let thy words come, &c. The 
verb is singular in the Hebrew here and in 
ver. 17. Possibly the true reading is word, 
as in the Septuagint. If the text is correct, 
words must be taken collectively, as making 
one promise. The saying marks Manoah's 
earnest desire for a son. Some, however, 
construe it, ^ thy words come. How shall 
we order, &c. — literally, JVhai mil be the 
manner of the child, and what will be hia 
doing ! i. e. either. What will be his manner 
(cf. 1 Sam. viii 11, and following verses), 
and what will be his action or work I or. 
What will he his proper treatment, and what 
shall be done to himt The former is the 
most natural rendering of the words, and 
though the latter seems at first more suitable 
to the angel's reply, yet if we take the angel's 
reply as referring Manoah to what he had 
said before in vers. 4 and 6, we have a dis- 
tinct answer to the questions. His mariMr 
will be to live as a Nazarite, and his action 
or work will be to begin to deliver Israel 
(cf. Gen. xvi. 12, where both the mamner 
and the actions of Ishmael are foretold). In 
fact, Manoah's question refers directly to 
vers. 4 and 5, and is a request to have a 
confirmation of what was then said ; just as 
David asked again and again, What shall be 
done to the man that killeth this Philistine t 
(1 Sam, xvii. 26, 80). 

Ver. 14.— She may not eat of anything, 
&o. Nearly the identical words of Numb. 
vi. 4. 

Ver. 16.— £et vb detain thee, Ac. He 
wishes to detain him as a guest tiU he has 
had time to cook a kid for him (cf. Gen. 
xviii 7). Per thee. The Hebrew ia before 
thee. The phrase is elliptical. The full 
sentence would be, until toe heme dressed a 
hid and set it before thee, as in Gen. xviii. 8. 

Ver. 16,-1 will not eat of thy bread, 
' && The angel refuses to eat of his meat, 
but suggests that if he would offer the kid 
as a burnt offering, he must offer it to the 
Lord. The angel, perhaps perceiving that 
Manoah was in doubt as to who he might 
be, had a holy dread lest he might offer the 
kid to him, just as the angel whom St. Joba 



OH. XIII. 1—26.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGElS. 



1^ 



was about to worship said, " See thou do it 
not" (Bev. zzii. 9); and Barnabas and Paul 
ran in among the people of Lycaonia to 
restrain them from offering sacrifice to them 
(Acts xiv. 14 — 18). The order of the words, 
which is rightly given in the A. Y. , makes it 
> clear direction to offer the sacrifice to no 
one but the Lord. 

Ver. 17.— What ii thy name t See note 
to yer. 6. The phrase is very peculiar, 
literally, Who is thy namef as if he bad 
been going to say. Who art thmi f and then 
changed the form to is thy name. The 
Hebrews seem to have attached great import- 
ance to names, a circumstance due, in part, 
to every name being significant in the spoken 
language (see Gen. iv. 1, 25 ; v. 29 ; xvi. 5, 
&c. ; xviL 19 ; xxv. 25, 26 ; xxix. and xxx. ; 
1 Sam. L , XX. ; Isa. ix. 6 ; Ixii. 4 ; Jer. xxiii. 
6 ; Ephes. i 21 ; PhiL ii. 9, 10 ; Rev. xix. 16, 
&c., and many other passages). Compare 
also the phrase, th^ name of the Lord (Isa. 
xxx. 27 ; Exod. xxiii. 21 ; xxxiii. 19 ; xxxiv. 
5, 6, 7). Manoah had certainly some sus- 
picions as to the mysterious character of his 
visitor, and expected the name to reveal his 
true nature. AVe may do thee honour. 
Manoah seems throughout to use ambiguous 
language, suitable either to a man, if he was 
speaking to a man, or to a celestial visitant, 
should he be angel or God. 

Ver. 18. — ^It is secret. The Hebrew word 
does not mean searet, but wonderful, as it is 
rendered in Isa. ix. 6, and elsewhere. His 
name was one which, as St. Paul expresses 
it, it is not lawful, or possible, for a man 
to utter (2 Cor. xii. 4), it was so transcend- 
ently wonderful. The feeling of the Hebrews 
in abstaining from uttering the name nin' 
was akin to this. Some take the angel to 
say that Wonderful is his name, but the 
A. v. is right in prefixing seeing — seeing it 
is wonderful. 

Ver. 19. — Offered it, &c. He had the 
angel's sanction for doing so in ver. 16. 
But we must not look for strict compliance 
with the Levitical law in the lawless days of 
the Judges, though we find many of its pre- 
scribed ordinances in use, as, for instance, the 
institution of Nazarites, and here the offer- 
ing of the meat offering with the burnt 
offering (Levit. ii. 1, &c.). And the angel. 
These words are rightly inserted, to give the 
sense of the original, as more fully explained 
in the following verse.. Did wonderously — 
literally, was wond/rous in his doing. The 
verb here is the same root as the substantive 
or adjective wowrfer, or wonderful, in ver. 18. 
Compare the similar account m ch. vi. 21. 

Ver. 20. — Looked on it. There is no 
occasion for the italic it, the phrase is iden- 
tical with that at the close of ver. 19 ; but 
the rendering would be better. And when 
litMuah and nit wife saw it, they fell, ftc. 



Ver. 21. — ^But. It is better rendered and, 
in close sequence to the preceding words. It 
follows. Then, i. e. when they saw him go 
up, they knew that he was an angel. 

Ver. 22. — We shall surely die, &c. Simi- 
larly Gideon (ch. vi. 22, 23) expressed his 
alarm because he had "seen an angel of the 
Lord face to face," but was assured, " Thou 
shalt not die." And so Isaiah said, " Woe is 
me I for mine eyes have seen the King, the 
Lord of hosts" (Isa. vi. 6). So again the 
Lord said to Moses, "There shall no man 
see me and live " (Exod. xxxiii. 20). The 
name of the well, Beer-lahai-roi, is also 
thought to mean the well of him that is 
alive after seeing God (Gen. xvi. 14). And 
Jacob called the name of the place where he 
wrestled with the angel Peniel, "for I have 
seen God face to face, and my life is pre- 
served " (Gen. xxxii. 30). See too Exod. xx. 
19. The same belief also prevailed amongst 
the heathen, that seeing a god without his 
special permission was visited by death or 
some grave calamity, as Callimachus, quoted 
by Grotius, says— 

" The laws of Saturn thus decree, 
Who dares immortal gods to see 
Shall suffer loss, whoe er he be. " 

Ver. 23.— But his wife said, &c. The 
woman's faith saw more clearly than the 
man's fear. With the acceptance of the 
sacrifice the conscience was cleared from 
guilt. The ascent of the angel in the flame 
of the altar was to her the same evidence of 
an accepted sacrifice as the resurrection and 
ascension of the Lord Jesus are to us. 

Ver. 24. — Called his name Samson, l^o 
doubt the name was significant of what the 
child should be (see note to ver. 17), but 
the etymology and meaning of the name are 
doubtful. Josephus ( ' Antiq. , ' V. viii. 4) says 
the name means " a strong one," but he doe? 
not say in what language, and it does not 
appear to have such a meaning in any 
Semitic dialect It is commonly inter- 
preted to mean like the sun, from shemesh, 
the common word for the sun ; and so 
Jerome in his ' Onomasticon ' expounds it as 
<A« sum's strength, possibly with an allusion 
to ch. V. 31. Others make it equal «Aim- 
shom, from the Pilpel conjugation of shamem,, 
to devastate. Another possible derivation is 
from the Chaldee shemash, to minister, speci- 
ally in sacred things, a root from which th« 
Nestorian, Syriac, and Arabic names for a 
deacon are derivei If this were the deriva- 
tion, it would be a reference to his dedication 
to God as a Nazarite from his mother's womb, 
the only thing his mother knew about liim 
when she gave him the name. 

Ver. 25. — The Spirit of the Lord, fto. 
See ch. iii. 10, note. To move him — to 
urge and impel him to strange actions by ftti 



140 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[cH. wii. 1—26 



•nd starts. It is an uncommon expression. 
In Gen. xli. 8 the passive of the verb means 
to be troubled or agitated, and the substantive 
is the common word for a time in the phrases 
time after time, twice, thrice (according to 
the number specified), other times, &c. ; also 
a footstep ; and its derivatives mean an 
a/n/oil, a hell. The idea is that of sudden, 
single impulses, such as are described in the 
following chapters. In the eamp of Dan, 



or, as in eh. xviii. 12, Mdhaneh-Dan, wlien 
the reason of the name is explained. Fol 
Zorah see ver. 2, note. Eshtaol has not 
hitherto been identified with any eziatine 
place, but it ought to lie east or north ol 
Mahaneh-Dan, since this last was between 
Zorah and Eshtaol (see note on oh. xviii. 12). 
Kitstul, a conical hUl one hour west of 
Jerusalem, has been suggested. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1 — ^25. — Married life. Many deep and valuable teachings may be gathered 
ont of this chapter. The ministry of angels to the heirs of salvation, and, connected 
with it, the sublime conception of the countless hosts of heaven ; for the presence of 
one angel upon earth brings tidings, as it were, from distant spheres of principalities 
and powers, of thrones and dominions, of angels and authorities, of cherubim and 
seraphim, peopling the realms of space, filling the heavens with intelligence and 
praise, and having a community with mankind in the grace and love of God ; and 
one converse of an angel with men suggests a future intercourse of inconceivable 
wealth of enjoyment, and unbounded variety of interchange of thought, and a 
fellowship in adoration and praise with unnumbered worlds of holy and mighty 
intelligences. The mysterious nature of the angel of the Lord, baffling all human 
attempts to explain it — at one moment seeming quite separate from the Godhead 
itself, and next moment seeming to be one with it, as if a kind of anticipation of the 
incantation were taking place, and God himself were speaking by the angel's mouth. 
And then there is the predestinating grace of God, calling into being whom he will, 
assigning to his creature his proper work, and marking out his future course before 
he was bom ; endowing him with great and singular gifts, pouring freely and fully 
upon him his Holy Spirit, and yet leaving his free will unshackled, and his responsi- 
bility unimpaired. And there is the floctrine of sacrifice, and of answers to prayer ; 
and there is the question of temperance, and total abstinence from the fruit of the 
vine ; and the duty of hospitality, and of gratitude for kindness received ; and that of 
giving honour to whom honour, and worship to whom worship is due, and other 
lessons besides. But the one lesson; which stands out above the others and runs 
through the whole chapter is that of the cot- jugal relation of man and wife, which is 
set forth with inimitable simplicity and force, and which we shall do well to study 
for a few minutes as one that bears with singular influence upon the happiness and 
well-being of mankind. It is obvious to notice in the first place that Manoah was 
the husband of one wife, according to the institution of marriage in paradise. Such 
mutual confidence and help as we here see could not have been found in Gideon's 
harem, or in the households of Ibzan and Abdon. The real conjugal union of 
interests, and oneness of aim, and transparent openness of intercourse springing from 
having nothing to conceal, can have no existence where polygamy exists. Nor is it 
in the nature of things that a woman's entire love and trust should be given to the 
man who has only a fraction of affection to give in return. If Christianity had done 
nothing else for mankind than restore the primitive law of marriage, and guard it 
with the highest sanctions of religion, it would have conferred upon our race an 
inestimable boon. The holiness and happiness, the peace and union, of countless 
homes, is due to the marriage law of the gospel of Christ. But then this law must 
be kept in the spirit as well as in the letter. The conduct of Manoah's wife after her 
first interview with the angei is a beautiful exemplification of this spirit in the wife : 
" Then the woman came and told her husband. Many things might have moved 
her to secrecy. The fear of exciting her husband's suspicions, the risk of being 
disbelieved, the possibility that the stranger had deceived her with false hopes ; or, 
on the other hand, a feeling of pride and self-sufBciency at the marvellous apparition 
and revelation made to herself, not to her husband, and a spirit of independence 
engendered by such a distmction — such feelings as these, had they existed, or had 
they ruled her conduct, might have led her to conceal the mysterious interview. But 



m. XIII. 1—26.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. Ul 

the wife's instinct led her straight to the mark: "she came and told her husband.*' 
He was her husband, her natural, legitimate, only counsellor and adviser. His was 
the ear into which to pour her strange confidence. What she knew, he ought to know, 
and her conduct must be guided by his counsels. So she came at once and told her 
husband. But the lesson has peculiar force from the supposed office of the stranger. 
She took him for "a man of God," and his very announcement of what was to 
happen hereafter invested him with a sacred and awful character, which was likely 
to affect powerfully the sensibilities of a woman. But not for one instant was " the 
man of God " allowed to stand between her and her husband. She had no secrets 
for the " man of God " which were to be hidden from her husband, nor had the angel 
•ny counsel to give which her husband was not to know of. It was on the second 
time of his appearing as on the first : " she made haste, and ran, and showed her 
husband, and said unto him, Behold, the man hath appeared unto me." It is a very 
forcible lesson to the effect that no pretence of spiritual authority can justify inter- 
ference with the laws of nature, which are the laws of God. If the mutual love and 
mutual confidence between man and wife in the holy estate of matrimony is the 
ordinance of God for the happiness of man, the secret influence of another man 
which is to override the influence of the husband is not, and cannot be, according to 
the will of God. If the wife is to obey her husband, no other man can of right exact 
a higher obedience ; if she is to trust her husband, she may not keep secret from him 
what she reveals to others ; she may not receive counsel from others which is to be 
hid from him. The function of a confessor and spiritual director is incompatible 
with the Christian law of marriage, as it is with the "first commandment with pro- 
mise," when it stands between children and their parents. Nor is Manoah's trust in 
his wife less conspicuous than her trust in him. Not a shadow of doubt as to the 
truth of her statement crossed his mind, not a shade of jealousy that the message 
came to her rather than to him. In the desire for further information his wisdom 
suggested prayer that the Lord would send again the man of God ; but the language 
of his prayer was beautifully expressive of the union that was betwixt them two. 
"Let the man of God come again unto «s, and teach iis what we shall do unto the 
child." And when the second time the angel appeared to the woman alone, he took 
it as the answer to his prayer. As she came quickly to him, so he quickly followed 
her. With manly courage he asked the questions which her feminine modesty had 
not dared to put, and appeared at once in his proper place, ordering and directing 
what was to be done with regard to the rites of hospitality and piety ; and yet when 
his own fears were excited by having seen the angel of God, he sought counsel from 
his wife, and readily acquiesced in her pious trust in the mercy and loving-kindness 
of the Lord. And exactly the same perfect union between them appears many years 
afterwards, when Samson was grown up (oh. xiv. 2 — 5), so that the whole passage 
is a beautiful idyll of conjugal love and concord. They both fulfil their proper 
parts with the utmost simplicity and propriety ; they both contribute to the common 
stock of wedded happiness what each had to contribute ; neither of them had one 
word of reproach or bitterness to the other ; neither of them attempted to usurp the 
other's place, or shrunk from occupying their own. And they have left for our study 
and imitation as beautiful an example of the mutual help and harmony of married 
life as is to be found in the whole range of Scripture. May it find its counterpart in 
every Christian family in the land I 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 2 — 6. — A natural desire and its gracious fulfilment. In the East it is a 
reproach to be childless, and the gieatest anxiety is displayed by married people to 
have a son. In ancient times the possibility of becoming the mother of the promised 
Messiah was a hope which greatly influenced this, but it had its root in the natural 
longing to continue one's name and influence after death. This " will to live," which 
is so strong in the natural man, God sanctified by religious sanctions. It is ever a 
healthful and law&l desire when the " chief end '' of man is respected. 

" 111 fares the land, to hastening ills a prey, 
Where wealth accumulates and men decay.'" 



142 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [ch. xul 1—25, 



The natural life of man or woman is incomplete apart from the married state, and 
children are the blessing and crown of marriage. But they may also be its curse. 
It is only as God shapes their destiny and moulds their character, only as he 
"builds the house," that happiness and prosperity can be insured. Improvident 
marriages and parental neglect have been amongst the greatest causes of misery and 
vice in all ages. As in later ages we have learnt that there is no virtue in being a 
mother, so we have discovered that the single life is not the only possible one for 
the saint. 

I. God deliohtb in gbatifting oub legitimate natural desires. It is but fitting 
that he who made us as we are constituted should supply, or place within our reach, 
that which shall satisfy our natural cravings. To do otherwise would be a refined 
and terrible cruelty. But our sin has forfeited for us this claim upon his pro- 
vidence. It would be perfectly lawful for him to withdraw natural supplies, and 
leave a rebellious world to perish, because of a broken covenant. But it has been 
far otherwise. The providence of God has been extolled by the heathen as by the 
Christian, by the sinner and the saint. He makes his sun to rise and his rain to fall 
upon the just and the unjust. Save his grace, there is no more pathetic and won- 
derful thing in the doings of God than this persistent and impartial providence. 
And in visitations like this to Manoah's wife we have glimpses of the feeling which 
inspires it. A real pleasure is felt by our Father in helping and gratifying his 
children. The mother has no more pleasure in giving suck to her infant than God 
has in making it possible for her to do so. Care and interest like this prepare us for 
the grander exhibitions of his grace in the gift of his only begotten Son. It could 
only be sustained in the breast of one who " so loved the world." A part of this 
Divine love is due, doubtless, to the possibility of some of those he fosters becoming 
his spiritual children and heirs of his kingdom. 

II. He does it in such a manner as to impress upon the subject of the blessing 

THE SACBEDNESS OP THE GOD-GIVEN LIFE, AND THE TRUE GLORY OP MOTHEEHOGD. The 

child promised is to be devoted to God from his birth. His whole life is to be a 
Divine service. A special commission is to be given him for the deliverance of God's 
people. To this end a life of self-denial — a Nazarite life — is to be his. This con- 
ception of Samson's future is typical and representative. Every first-born in Israel 
was so regarded. And every child should be so regarded, and taught so to regard 
himself or hei'self. There is nothing so beautiful under the sun as a life wholly and 
from beginning to end devoted to God. And this, though it may seem a hard and 
difficult thing to realise, is the shortest and truest way to happiness. The mother of 
such a child — every mother — is therefore called upon to sanctify herself, that her 
offspring shall receive from her no evil tendencies or desires. Hereditary influence 
is everywhere recognised throughout Scripture. 

III. The offspring thus granted is made thb instrument of blessing ind 
DBLIVEBANCE TO HIS PEOPLE. There are always considerations for and against grant- 
ing a boon outside and independently of the ordinary course of nature. Consecration 
of the gift thus bestowed is the surest way of avoiding injustice to others, and 
justifying our own super-abounding good. What a thought this for every mother to 
ponder I In lesser proportion and degree hers may be the wonder and forethought 
of Mary, the mother of our Lord, when " she hid these things in her heart." — M. 

Ver. 6. — The difficultrj of salvation. " And he shall begin to deliver Israel." 
There is a parsimony of expression here that is highly expressive. It is not said, 
" he shall deliver," as of a complete work, but only " he shall begin " to do so. How 
many reasons were there for this I Do they not also hold good for the grander work 
of human salvation ? 

I. Hindrances to the complete salvation of Israel. 1. It was a work which 
required to he, in the first place, and mainly, spiritual in order to its being thorough- 
2. In order to this the penalty of past transgression had in greater measure to be felt. 
The transgression had been great, repeated, and habitual. A stem lesson had to be 
read to the guilty. It was an evil inflicted in order to induce repentance. The mora] 
depths of human nature were being sounded and discovered to itself, that in the 
fulness of time a Divine Saviour might be sought. 3. Meanwhile the nature and 



CH. XIII. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 141 



character of the deliverer did not admit of such a work being completed. He was but 
a man : his consecration was merely or chiefly external ; the faults of his character 
were glaring. His deeds, accordingly, are those of physical heroism and sti^ength. 
Only once or twice do any hints of more than human wisdom occur. 

IL Consolations attached to this incomplete salvation. 1. It was actnally 
begun. 2. God had undertaken it, and provided the instrument. 3. As being a 
professedlp partial undertaking, it showed a far-reaching and thorough schema. 4. 
The conditions of its ultimate accomplishment were with themselves. — M. 

Vers. 2 — 5. — GodPt use of unlihely means for gracious ends. The crisis was 
grave, relief being, humanly speaking, impossible. The family chosen for the 
experiment an ordinary one, of no social standing. The mother of the promised 
child barren. The sustenance enjoined of the most meagre description, not likely to 
produce strength or furnish artificial stimulus. No inward holiness is shown by 
Samson. 

I. It shows a purpose' of engaging the sinner, either personally or represent- 
ATIVELY,_ IN THE TASK OP HIS OWN SALVATION. The humblest transgressor cannot be 
saved without his own self-surrender and willing co-operation. 

II. The higher spiritual principles, faith, hope, &a., are evoked in those who 
ABE THUS SAVED. The human agent is thus put in his right place. He secures the 
sympathies of his fellow-countrymen. Their hopes rise or fall as he prospers or is 
hindered in his task. The blessing of God must therefore be invoked, and the pro- 
mise of God implicitly believed. 

III. All the gifts of our nature are shown to be Divine in their origin, and 

THEIR consecration IS ENCOURAGED. 

IV. The saving grace op God is thus vindicated as his own, and he himself 

DECLARED THE ONLY SAVIOUR.— M. 

Vers, \— 6.— -Divine punishm.emt and preparation of deliverance timultaneous. 
The heaviest judgments in human history have been secretly charged with such 
merciful provisions. This circumstance alters the character of the infliction; it 
ceases to be mere vengeance, and becomes discipline. 

I. Instances of this in sacred history. The Fall and promise of the Seed. In 
Joseph's sale and slavery we see the anticipation of an evil not yet experienced. 
Esther is raised up in the Persian captivity. The age of the destruction of Jeru- 
salem was the age of the gospel. 

II. What this proves. 1. God does not " afflict willingly '' and for the sake of 
afflicting, but for ultimate good. 2. The wrath of God exists at the same time as his 
love, and is penetrated and overruled by it. 3. The mercy of God is far-seeing, viist, 

' ■ ' ■ -M. 



Vers. 8 — H. — Repetition of Divine favourt. There are visitations of God and 
signs of his favour that are not fully comprehended the first time, and their repetition 
alone can satisfy the cravings of the heart and the wonder of the spiritual under- 
standing. And God is considerate of our human weakness. "In the mouth of two 
or three witnesses shall every word be established." The blessing is then realised in 
absolute certainty, and a communion of faith. 

I. God's promises are so precious that we wish to be assured op them. His 
words, so mysterious and far-sent, are like clouds full of rain for the thirsty soil, if 
we can only secure the blessing. When he condescends to visit thus the home of 
men it is for good, and not evil. And the blessings which he promises are not such 
as the world can give. The spiritual understanding can alone discern their true 
worth, and alone yearns for their fulfilment. The mere repetition of the terms and 
words is soothing and confirming. And to the faithful they will be spoken again ae 
a token of favour, and the signs will be repeated ; but to a " faithless generation 
shall no sign be given," save that, which plunges in deeper wonder or increases the 
certainty of doom. 

II. How ABE God's promises to be realised? 1. By interested attention to 
them. Manoah's mind is full of the message received by his wife. He does not 



144 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [CH. xiii. 1—25. 

dismiss it from mind and memory as a trifling thing. It is this pondering and waiting 
and searching spirit that is blessed. " How shall we escape if we neglect so ^eat 
salvation ? " 2. By invplicit faith. He does not question the reality of tiie Divine 
message He is eager to hear it, so that all its significance may be understood. He 
speaks even at first of " the child that shall be bom." 3. By believing prayer. 
How earnest is this man I " Manoah entreated Jehovah." There is no unnecessary 
delay: " God hearkened to the voice of Manoah." He loves to hear the voice of 
praying men. He loves to be " inquired of," and " entreated," and " wrestled ' 
with. "The effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much." 4. By 
expectation, and diligent watching for the answer. The reality of our prayer is thus 
shown. How often is prayer but an idle word uttered thoughtlessly when in a devout 
frame 1 Let us look for what we ask, and God will not weary our patience or betray 
our confidence. Ask, seek, knock (2 Tim. iv. 8 ; Titus ii. 13). — M. 

Vers. 12 — 14. — Parental arvidety and its satisfying. Questions of great import- 
ance, which every parent ought to study. Circumstances may occur that render 
the responsibility of the parent peculiarly heavy. 

I. All pahbnts, or those about to be parents, should bring their parental 
CARES TO God. 1. It loill relieve anxiety. 2. The sense of moral responsibility will 
be deepened and confirmed. 3. Direction vdll be given for duty and usefulness. 

II. The BEST SAFEGUARD OF THE CHILD IS THE CONSECRATION OF THE PARENT. 

To regard the child-blessing as a trust. To seek the benefit of others through that 
which is a joy and gratification to oneself. To keep oneself pure and temperate, that 
no taint or evil tendency may pass to one's posterity, and that in oneself, as in one's 
children, God may be glorified. — M. 

Vert. 16—21.-01 on oh. vi. 17— 21.— M. 

Vers. 17, 18. — Thewonderftd name. The balance of critical authority is infavoui 
of the rendering "wonderful," or wonder-working, and not that of " secret." It is 
to be taken as expressive not only of the general character of God as mysterious, 
glorious, and inefEable, but as doing wonders, i. e. mighty deeds of manifestation and 
salvation. This characteristic of God is to be studied as — 

I. Provocative of cdeiositt. The Divine element has ever maintained ite 
presence in human life, has kept the horizons of human consciousness wide apart 
and constantly extending, and has exercised the counteractive and saving influence 
required by the action of the world-spirit upon the nature of man. God has never 
left man alone. Ere a single page of inspiration was penned he dwelt " in the con- 
scious breast," and drew reverent eyes and feet after his marvels in the physical 
world. Man is, perforce of his moral constitution being linked and blended with his 
physical, a being " between two worlds." The gate is ajar, and no mortal can ever 
effectually close it. Led by this " presence of the threshold," the fathers of faith 
began that religious movement that received its loftiest impulse and satisfaction in 
Christ. There were partial and progressive revelations, each new "wonder" laying 
firmer hold upon the imagination and the heart. Jacob at Bethel and at Penuel 
(Gen. xxxii. 24 — 30), Moses at Horeb, Elijah in the cave of the desert, and David at 
the threshing-floor of Araunah, are grand typical figures, milestones in this spiritual 
pilgrimage. And there is no individual life, even of this secularised modern world, 
that is not the theatre of "even greater works than these," speaking in it of • 
heavenly Father, and keeping it within sound of his voice. If we are true to our 
own inner selves and to our spiritual history we must be worshippers of him whose 
name is Wonderful. 

II. In process of revelation through miracles. "And the angel did won- 
drously," ». e. true to his name, he acted miraculously. Creation, providence, the 
unfolding work of the world's salvation, are so many series of revelations in act and 
work. The general impression produced upon the mind by the scheme of the 
universe is enhanced and led up into religious fervour by these miracles, of which 
our latest physical science does not well know how to dispose. The moral and spiritual 
lessons they teach, and the impression they produce upon the human heart, run 



OH. XIII. 1—26.] THE BOOK OP JUDQBa 140 

parallel ■with, but indefinitely above, the ordinary lines of (so-called) " natural religion," 
and constitute a distinct revelation, of which the core is reached in the miracles of 
Jesus Christ. As this moral or Divine side of miracle is increasingly studied, the 
riohes of the Word made flesh will grow upon us, fascinate and convert the soul. 
At the tribunal of Jerusalem the old, old question is asked anew, and again in effect 
is the answer returned, " My name is Wonderful." 

III. Assertive of Jehovah ab the supernatural causb op the dehyerancb 
OF Israel. It is not Moses, or any judge, or David even, who is able to save. 
Jehovah is the great Deliverer, and he works above nature in a realm in which he can 
have no co-worker. Samson even is a " child of the promise," and no product of the 
influences of his time. His strength is to be from above, and its great exercises and 
feats are distinctly miraculous. 

IV. Preparing men for the Messiah, in whom it was most perfectly mani- 
fested. The depths of the world's consciousness, in seer and saint, are ceaselessly 
stirred until the look of the ages fastens itself on him whose name is " Wonderful, 
Counsellor, mighty God, everlasting Father, Prince of Peace" (Isa. ix. 6). And as 
we look back on the brief episode of his life, ever new wonders declare themselves, 
and we feel that his example, his suilerings, his sacrifice, his resurrection, and ascen- 
sion are potent to save and to sanctify, &c. Trulj' "his name is Wonderful." — M. 

Vers. 22, 23. — Reassurance of Divine favour. Manoah is now uncertain whether 
to consider himself blessed or miserable. He has the deep-rooted superstition of a 
fleshly age strong within him, and is alarmed. But this arises from a defective 
spiritual education. He does not consider sufficiently the method and the manner of 
God's approaches to him. 

I. Fear regarding God's visitations is a natural feeling. The consciousness 
of sin is easily roused to alarm, and the unknown is ever awe-inspiring. Our own 
littleness too is made the more manifest: " What is man, that thou art mindful of 
him ? and the son of man, that thou visitost him ? " (Ps. viii. 4). 

II. How it may be overcome. Considering, 1. The character of God; 2. His 
continuous scheme of redemption ; 3. The blessings he has already bestowed; 4. The 
voice of Christ (" Fear not "), and the witness of the Spirit ('• Abba, Father"). 

III. God will not leave his child in uncertainty of his meaning. " Two 
are better than one." How often in life is the husband, wife, parent, child, brother, 
sister, or friend, close beside us, the witness of God and the spiritual help-meet I 
The simple soul teaches the more complex and experienced, being itself taught of 
God. And so, somewhere or other, he is never without a witness. — M. 

Vers. 24, 25. — Fulfilment of promise. The history of this promise to the worthy 
pair reads like an unbroken tale. Outwardly it was with them only as it was with 
numberless others of their neighbours. The circumstance is woven into the web of 
contemporary village life. The birth is as any other, the child as any other, up to a 
jertain point ; and then the true character and destiny begin to declare themselves, 

I. The ordinary aspect of Divine fulfilments in their beginnings. 

II. Private joy and satisfaction accompanying the gift of a public bkme- 
FACTOR and fulfiller OF THE DiviNB PURPOSE. "The Lord blessed him." 

III. The gradual differentiation of thb Divine agent from the merely 
human relation. It soon appears that the lad is not meant for the mere solace of 
his parents' age and light of their home. " The Spirit of the Lord began to move 
him at times." Like Christ, the time comes when he "must be about his Father's 
businesB." — M. 

Ver. 6. — Samson the Nazarite. I. There arb men whom God calls to his 
SBKVICE from their BIRTH. This is seen in the fact that the earliest events of their 
lives are made to train them for their subsequent mission in the world. Parents 
should consecrate their children to God in infancy, and not wait for later years before 
using those means which will fit them for the work of life in God's service. Manoah 
and his wife are taught these lessons with special reference to the condition of a 
Nazarite. Other vocations may require external varieties of training, but the essen- 
JUDQBS. !• 



146 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. xiu. 1—25, 

tial characteristicB which fit us for the service of God are the same in all cases, so 
that it is not necessary to know the exact form of service to which God will call • 
child, in order to lay the foundations of his character in the main principles which 
devotion to God's service in any form involves. 

II. AbSTEMIOUSKESS 13 FAVOnHABLE TO THE DEVELOPMEKT OP TiaOTJB. 8elf-in- 

dulgence is enervating. Self-restraint both husbands and enlarges strength. That 
which is apparently most helpful to us may prove in reality to be a hindrance. 
Appetite and desire are neither to be regarded as masters nor as enemies, but as 
servants. As wine excites rather than strengthens, so there are influences of a mental 
character which add nothing to our power for work, although they appear to do so by 
rousing excitement. The soul will not grow strong on the heating, but not nourishing, 
diet of religious sensationalism. 

III. Devotion to God beqdibes pubitt op life. The Nazarite was to touch no 
unclean thing. Unhappily Samson was satisfied with this ceremonial purity, and did 
not cultivate purity of soul, as the spirit of the Nazarite's vow plainly required him 
to do ; hence his moral weakness and failure to attain perfect success. Samson 
" began to deliver Israel," he was not able to finish. Only the spotless One could 
say, "It is finished." In proportion to our holiness will be our spiritual strength. 
lieligious devotion without moral purity cannot be accepted by God (laa. i. 
11—15). 

IV. Fulness op lifb belongs to those who livb to God. No razor, no iron 
(the symbol of death), was to come upon the Nazarite. Consecration to God involves 
self-denial, but it brings a deeper joy and a fuller life than a self-seeking course will 
secure. 1. Religion does not require the destruction of any part of our true human 
nature, not even to the injuring of one hair of the head. 2. Religion requires the 
consecration of our whole being unmaimed, even to the not severing of one hair of the 
head from the perfect sacrifice 

V. CONSECBATION TO GOD IS A SOUECB OF USEFULNESS TO MEN. Samson WSS a 

Nazarite ; he was also a deliverer of his people. God calls as not to the hermit's 
life of useless devotion, but to the servant's life of devotion practised in active good 
works. The religiousness which forbids useful work in commerce, in politics, in 
literature is a false sentiment. The Christian can best lerve God by labouring far 
the good of his fellow-men. — ^A. 

Ver. 8. — The training of children. I. Childben need trainino. 1. Children do 
not attain to the best character and conduct gpontanenusly, by natural growth and 
development. Left to themselyes they would make little progress and many errors. 
But they cannot be thus left. If good influences are not brought to bear upon them, 
they cannot be entirely shielded from evil influences which will prove fatal unless 
they are counteracted. Training is necessary (1) to assist and promote the natural 
development of the good which is already in children, (2) to check and eradicate 
hereditary tendencies to sin derived from parents, e. g. the inclinations to intemperance 
likely to be felt by the children of the intemperate, and (3) to counteract the effect 
of the temptations of the world, 2. Children do not attain to the best character and 
conduct without care and effort. They need specific training. Example does much ; 
the atmosphere of a Christian society is also effective. Yet these general and vague, 
though real and powerful, influences are not sufficient without definite teaching and 
personal discipline. Christianity must be taught, and it cannot be learnt from any 
■pint of Christianity in the air. 

II. The teainino of children should beoin earlt. The danger accompanying 
the process of intellectual forcing which results in unnatural precocity is not so great 
in moral training. The intellect need not be taxed with complex dogmas, nor the 
feelings stirred with unhealthy emotions, and yet children may be trained in integrity 
and unselfishness, in love to God and man — the great fundamental princip'.es of the 
highest moral character. It is foolish to postpone this training. It is most easy 
when the mind is plastic. A natural economy would teach us that it is better that 
the whole life should be right from the first, than that there should be an early time 
of mistakes and faults and a subsequent conversion to better things. 

III. Thb sufbemb bnd op th> tbaininq op children should bb to fit tbeu 



OH. xni. 1—26.] THE BOOK OP JDDGB8. 147 

FOB THB SKSvics OF GoD. Samson is to be trained for God. Parents are too negli- 
gent of the highest ends of their children's lives. Careful to preserve their health 
and develop their natural powers of body and mind, anxious to instruct them in useful 
and liberalising secular knowledge, energetic in securing them a prosperous career in 
the world, parents often forget the real purpose of life, and fail to nt their children 
for the great mission of serving God. Children should be regarded as God's from 
their birth, and as only lent by him. The significance of baptism, as implying God's 
claim on the children and their dedication to him, should be remembered in all the 
subsequent training of them. 

IV. The chief responsibtlitt or the tbainino of children rests on their pa- 
rents. This cannot be delegated to teachers. Though the work may be largely done 
by special teachers, the responsibility still remains on the father and mother, and can 
never be shifted. They too have the most influence by the constant intercourse of 
home, the force of parental example, authority, and affection, their knowledge of 
their children and interest in them. 

V. Guidance fob the training of children bhould be sonoHT from God. 
Manoah and his wife show their humility, their faith, and their devotion in praying 
for guidance. This is necessary for many reasons. The issues of the work are 
supremely important ; error may lead to fearful disaster. The execution of the work 
is exceedingly difficult. The ideal to be aimed at is great and high. There is mystery 
in the character of every soul, mystery in the will of God as to its destiny, mystery 
in the innumerable subtle influences which play upon it. He who' realises these 
things will seek light as to the end of the training of the children and the method of 
pursuing it. — A. 

Vers. 17, 18. — The mystery of a name. Names denote persons and describe 
characters. The nameless one wraps both his individuality and his nature in 
mystery. Naturally Manoah, like Jacob, desires to solve such a mystery (Qten. 
xxxii. 29), and in response to this wish, unlike " the traveller unknown," the angel 
reveals a name, though one of partial mystery. 

I. Manoah's qnESTioN (see ver. 17). 1. Manoah does not know that his visitor it 
an angel of the Lord (ver. 16). Divine visitations are not always recognised. The 
true nature of Christ was unknown to most of his contemporaries. We cannot 
always trace the band of God in bis providential action. Heaven is about us un- 
noticed ; unseen ministries attend our lives ; God is nearer to us than we suspect. 
2. Manoah desires to know the name of his mi/sterious visitor — (1) from natural 
curiosity, (2) from a desire to strengthen his faith in the message of the unknown, 
(3) from a wish to give him thanks when his promise should be fulfilled. The thirst 
to solve the strange questions which surround our spiritual life is natural, and not 
inconsistent with humility nor with faith. It would be better if we were more 
anxious to inquire for indications of God and of his character in the experience of 
life. 

II. Thk ANQEl's beflt (see ver. 18). 1. ffe begins his reply mth a question. We 
should not assail heaven with unjustifiable prayers, but should be ready to give a 
reason for our petitions. Revelation is not intended to quench human thought, but 
to stimulate it. Every new voice from heaven, while it answers some questions, 
starts new questions. 2. The angel implies that Manoah's re(juest was needless, 
either (1) because he ought to have recognised the nature of his visitant from the 
character of his message and conduct, or (2) because it was more important to con- 
sider the meaning of the message than to inquire into the nature of the messenger. 
We sometimes pray for more light when we only need better eyes to use the light 
we have; not a fresh revelation, but discernment, reflection, spiritual feeling to 
appreciate the revelation already received. God's truth is more important than the 
person of the prophet, apostle, or angel who brings it to us. 3. The angel give* 
Manoah a name. He is " Wonderful." This was a partial answer to Manoah's 
question. (1) It carried his thought to God, who is the supreme mystery, and sug- 
gested the greatness, the wonder, the awe of all that pertained to him. Thus it was 
a revelation of the Divine. (2) Nevertheless the name was but a partial explanation, 
as ita very meaning suggested the unknown. The deepest questions cannot be solveii 

t 2 



148 THE BOOK OP JUDGES. [oh. xiii. 1—25. 

on earth. But it matters little that the rdys of revelation seem to melt into the dark< 
ness of the Infinite if only they shine bright and clear on our path of duty. — ^A. 

Vers. 22, 23. — The fear of the vision of God. The Divine vision was connected 
with s blessing to Manoah and his wife. The vision of God by the soul is itself the 
highest blessing ; yet, as in the case of Manoah, it fills men with fear. 

I. The cause of the feah. 1. Myit&ry. We naturally dread the unknown. 
Darkness hides possibilities of danger. Superstition peoples the unseen with horrors. 
8. Guilt. "Conscience makes cowards of us all.'" So Adam and Eve hid them- 
selves from God in the garden (Gen. iii. 8). Because we are all sinners before God 
we have a natural shrinking from him (1) who knows our secret hearts, (2) against 
whom we have ofEended, (3) who is holy to hate sin and (4) just to punish it. 3. 
Unbelief. We do not sufficiently understand the character of God nor trust his 
grace. K we did, we should feel safer with all our guilt in his hands than we are 
when left to ourselves and to the world. Men fear God because they do not know 
him. 

II. The eemedies of the feab. Manoah's wife encourages her husband. Though 
men may be brave before physical danger, women sometimes show more courage in 
Bpiritual difficulties. This moral courage is nobler than the brute courage which man 
Bnares with the lower animals. It has its source in true excellences of character. 
1. Self-posBession. Manoah is confused and dismayed by terror beyond the power of 
reflection ; but his wife is calm and collected, and thus able to see indications of 
mercy in the vision. 2. Eeflection on the character of the vision. God has given 
to us powers of observation, discernment, reasoning. Superstitious terrors more 
commonly haunt the minds of those people who have neglected to use those powers, 
while weakly yielding to foolish emotions. Eeligion to be healthy must be thought- 
ful. God has given us sufficient indications of his character in the Bible, in Christ, 
in life, to deliver us from slavish fear, if only we consider and reflect on these. The 
more we know of God, the less shall we be afraid of him. May not the most fearful 
learn to reason with Manoah's wife — " If God had meant harm to us, would he have 
blessed us as he has done hitherto ? " The Christian may go further, and be sure 
that after the great gift of his Son, God must wish well lo us in all lesser things 
(Bom. V. 10). 3. Faith. We cannot see perfect evidence that God is blessing us in 
•very mystery ; but if we know his character we ought to trust his actions, even 
when they seem most alarming, as they cannot be contrary to his nature. 4. The 
acceptance of sacrijice. God had accepted Manoah's sacrifice, therefore he could 
Bot regard him with disfavour. He has accepted the sacrifice of Christ, and accord- 
ingly our guilt need not make na fear God if we rely on the atonement Christ haa 
•ffected. — ^A. 

Vers. 24, 25. — 7%« young Samson. I. His name. Samson — ^the sun. This was a 
great name, full of inspiring significance. It is well to have a good name, one which 
is a constant appeal to a man to be worthy of it, and to live up to its meaning. 

XL His GBOwth. Samson the hero was first a child at the mercy of the weakest. 
The grandest river springs from a little streamlet. The noblest man enters life, as 
the meanest does, in helpless infancy. So the spiritual life of the saint, the martyr, 
the apostle is seen first in him as in a babe in Christ. It is therefore no dishonour to 
have a small beginning, but it is a dishonour to remain small. The one question is, 
Do we grow mentally, spiritually, in knowledge, in holiness, in power ? There is 
more to be expected of the minute growing seed than of the dead stump, which is at 
first vastly larger. Better be a growing child of the Lord than a dwarf adult Chris- 
tian man, 

III. Hib blessing. "The Lord blessed him." We are not told how ; this matter*. 
not. Perhaps he did not recognise the blessing. God blesses us silently, with no 
formal benediction, and perhaps in ways which to us seem hard and injurious. Still 
better than health, riches, pleasure is the fact God does give a man the thing that is 
for his highest good, which is what we mean by " a blessing." 

IV. His inspieation. " The Spirit of the Lord began to move him.'' 1. Samson's 
heroic strength was an inspiration of God, not a m»re brute muscular force. We set 



CH. xiy. 1 — 9.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES, 



14S 



how in great crises men are nerved to do what is beyond their power in ordinary life. 
The abnormal strength of insanity is an instance of the same principle, applied in 
circumstances of disease. 2. Inspiration assumes various forms. To Samson it 
brought neither the grace of purity nor the gift of prophecy ; but it gave him the 
special gifts which he needed for his special work. He would have been a nobler man 
if he had sought the Spirit of God also to help him in more spiritual ways. Samson 
had a supernatural gift of the Spirit with little of its ordinary grace of holiness. It 
is better to have this grace first, though, if God will, we may receive the gift also. 

V._ His imperfect possession by the Spirit. He was moved at times. 1. God's 
special gifts aie'limited to occasion. There is an economy of Divine power. When 
we need extraordinary grace he will give this, but only then. 2. The receipt of 
spiritual gifts depends on the condition of our spirit. Samson was only rightly dis- 
posed to receive the Spirit at intervals. Our spiritual life fluctuates ; we are not long 
at our best 3. We are only moved when we respond. God may have visited 
Samson more often than Samson profited by his visit We can resist the Spirit. We 
are helped only when we willingly yield to it. — A. 



EXPOSmON. 



CHAPTEE XIV. 



Ver. 1. — Tismatli, or, more correctly, 
ThimTUtChah, as in Josh. xix. 43, a town m 
the tribe of Dan, the name of which sur- 
vives in the modem Tibneh, about three 
miles south-west of Zorah (ch. xiii. 2, note). 
It may or may not be identical with Timnath 
in Gen. xxxviii. 12 — 14, and with Timnah 
in Josh. xr. 10. It appears to have been in 
the possession of the Philistines at this time. 

Ver. 2. — Get her, &e. Rather, take her. 
It is the technical phrase (1) {oi a. ma.Ti taking 
a wife for himself, as Gen. iv. 19; vl. 2; 1 
Sam. XXV. 89, 43, and vers. 3, 8 of this chap- 
ter ; (2) for a man's parents taking a wife for 
him, as Exod. xxxiv. 16 ; Neh. x. 30. The 
parents of the bridegroom paid the dowry 
agreed upon (see Gen. xxxiv. 12 ; 1 Sam. 
xviii. 25). 

Ver. 3. — Uncircumcised. Cf. Gen. xxxiy. 
14. A term of reproach here added to deter 
Samson from the marriage. It is particu- 
larly applied to the Philistines (see ch. xv. 
is : 1 Sam. xvii. 26, 36 ; xviii 29 ; xxxi. 4 ; 
2 Sam. i. 20, Sec). 

Ver. 4. — It was of or from the Lord. It was 
the method decreed by God's providence for 
bringing about a rupture with the Philistines. 
That he sought. Rather, because he sought. 
The writer explains the purpose of the pro- 
vidence. It is doubtful whether "he" refers 
to Samson or to the Lord. Most comment- 
ators refer it to Samson ; but it is contrary 
to the whole tenor of Samson's impetuous 
course, and to all probability, that he should 
have asked for the Timnathite damsel merely 
for the sake of miarrelling with the Philis- 
tines ; whereas the statement that Samson's 
obstinate determination to take a Philistine 
wife was the means which God's secret pur- 
pose had fixed upon for bringing about the | 



eventiul overthrow af the Philistine domla- 
ion is in exact accordance with other declar- 
ations of Holy Scripture (cf. «. g. Exod. vii 
8, 4; Josh, xi 20; 1 Sam. ii. 25; 1 Kings 
xii 15; 2Chron. x. 15; xxii. 7; xxv. 20). 
An occasion. The noun only occurs here; 
but the verb, in its several conjugations, 
means, to happen at the right time; to bring a 
person or thing at the right time (Exod. xxi. 
13, deliver, A. V.) ; to be brought at the right 
time (Prov. xii. 21, happen, A. V.) ; to seek 
the right time for injuring any one (2 Kings 
V. 7, seeketh a quarrel, A. V. ). 

Ver. 5. — ^Went down, showing that Tim- 
nath was on lower groimd than Zorah; it 
was in fact in the Shephelah. The vineyards 
of Timnath. The valley of Sorek (oh. xvi. 
4), so famous for its vines (Isa. v. 2 ; Jer. ii. 
21), from which it derived its name (Sorek, 
translated in the above passages tJie choi-cest 
vine, and a noble vine), is thought to have 
been in the immediate neighbourhood. 
Probably the whole district under the binw 
was a succession of vineyards, like the coun- 
try round Bordeaux. Samson had left the 
road alQng which his father and mother were 
walking, at a pace, perhaps, too slow for hia 
youthful energy, and had plunged into the 
vineyards. Of a sudden a young lion, — a term 
designating a lion between the age of a cub 
and a full-grown lion, — brought there, per- 
haps, in pursuit of the foxes or jackals, 
which often had their holes in vineyards 
(Cant. ii. 15), roared against him. 

Ver. 6. — The Spirit of the lord, &c.— as 
a spirit of dauntless courage and irresistible 
strength of body. Came mightily. Hebrew, 
fell upon him, or passed over upon him, as in 
ver. 19; xv. 14; 1 Sam. x. 6, 10; xviii. 10, 
&c. He rent him, &c. He "hadnothing in 
his hand," no weapon or knife, nor even a 
stick ; but he rent him with aa much ease m 



190 



THE BOOK OF JDD(iES. 



[OH. XIV. 1—9. 



tne kid ia rent. The Hebrew has the hid, 
w'lth the definite article, which is not pre- 
&<ed unless some particular kid is meant, as 
in Gen. zzzviii, 23. Perhaps the kid means 
thrf one about to be served, which the cook 
rends open either before or after it is cooked. 
ITbless some such operation is alluded to, it 
is ikot easy to understand what the rending 
of the kid means. He told not his father, 
&c. This is mentioned to explain ver. 16 ; 
but it shows that Samson had wandered 
some distance from his parents among the 
vine} ards (see note to ver. 5). 

Ve], 7. — Went down, as in ver. 1, where 
see n&te. 

Ver. 8. — He returned to take her. All 
the prUiminaries being settled between the 
parents, \6 returned to Timnath to take his 
bride by «be same road which he and his 



parents had travelled by before, and, n- 
membering his feat in killing the lion, very 
naturally turned aside to see what had be- 
come of the carcase. And, behold, there wai 
a swarm of bees, &c. This has been ob- 
jected to as improbable, because bees are 
very dainty, and would not approach a 
putrefying body. But as a considerable 
time had elapsed, it is very possible that 
either the mere skeleton was left, or that 
the heat of the sun had dried up the body 
and reduced it to the state of a mummy 
without decomposition, as is said to happen 
often in the desert of Arabia. 

Ver. 9. — And ... he went on eating, ke. 
Compare the account of Jonathan finding 
and eating the wild honey (1 Sam. xir. 8fi, 
and following verses). 



HOMILETIC& 

Vers. I- -2.— The link of the chain. A swarm of bees light one day in tbe OBroase 
o£ a lion vhich had been killed in the vineyards of Thimnathah, They constnict 
their hive tHiere, and make their honey. It was no doubt an unusual circumstance 
that the bet>j should form their hive in such a place rather than in a hollow tree, oi 
the cleft of a rock, but beyond its interest as a fact in natural history nobody would 
have attached any importance to it. But this action of the bees was linked to curious 
antecedents, and to peculiar consequences. The lion had been slain by Samson, that 
mysterious pt»/son of gigantic strength, whose life is such a remarkable episode in 
the history of Israel ; and Samson had been led to the spot where the lion was by hia 
ill-regulated love for a daughter of the Philistines, who were the masters and oppress- 
ors of his country. And as to what happened after the swarming of these bees, the 
marriage of Samson to his Philistine bride took place after an interval just sufScient 
for the bees to have filled their hive with honey, and Samson on his way to the wed- 
ding, impelled by a natural curiosity to see the lion which he had killed, had turned 
aside from his path, and had eaten the honey which was strangely found there. It 
was the custom of the time and of those people to beguile the long hours of the idle 
wedding feasts with curious questions and strange riddles. In the gambling spirit 
which is such a frequent accompaniment of insufficient occupation, whether among 
the lazaronis of Naples or the wealthy nobles of modern society, such riddles were made 
the occasion of wagers, and such wagers often led to deadly quarrels. In the present 
instance Samson's double adventure with the lion suggested to him the riddle, " Out 
of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness." Baffled 
in their attempts to guess the riddle by fair means, they set on Samson's wife to 
worm the secret out of him and divulge it to them. Samson at once perceived the 
treachery, broke with his wife, slew thirty Philistines, and took their spoil wherewith 
to pay the lost wager, and followed up the feud by successive slaughters of his 
enemies, thus preparing the way for the eventual overthrow of the Philistine domina- 
tion. The point for our special remark is that a swarm of bees lighting on a 
particular spot was an important link in the chain of providence by which the 
destinies of a great people were guided to independence ; and the observation is not 
only a curious one, but- has an important bearing upon the difficult subject (see 
Homiletics, ch. iii. 12 — 21 ) of the use made of men, and of men's actions, in the provi- 
dential government of the world. Samson in slaying the lion, and the bees in swarm- 
ing in its carcase, did things which were links in the chain of events which God 
foresaw, or fore-ordained, as he did also the effects of Samson's marriage with the 
Philistine. But just as the bees only followed their instinct in building their hive, 
ao bamson, in fixmg his affections on the Timnathite, and in attacking the lion, and 
in eating the honey, and in propounding the riddle, and in avenging himself for hii 



BH. XIT. 1—9.] THE BOOK OF JUDQBa 161 

wife's treachery, was merely following the bent of his own inclinations and th« 
leading of his own will, though in so doing he was bringing about God's purpose for 
the deliverance of Israel. What, however, we have here to notice is the wonderful 
way in which God brings about his own purpose, and also the infinite foreknowledge 
of God. We look back, and we can trace the successive steps of causation, as one 
follows the other, like wave upon wave. But God looks forward from the beginning 
foresees the effect of each cause in endless succession, and so orders them as to 
accomplish his own will. The most trivial events may be necessary links in the 
great chain ; and while men are blindly following their own inclinations, with little 
thought and no knowledge of what will come of them, God is making use of them 
with unerring wisdom to work out his own eternal purposes, for the good of his 
people and for the glory of his own great name. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — i. — ffuman desire overruled/or Divine ends. This incident in the life 
of Samson has a universal human interest He no sooner comes to manhood than 
his destiny begins to determine itself. He sees a woman of the Philistines, and at 
once his fancy is captivated, and the strong natural desires of the young man over- 
leap all the traditional restraints of God's people. He manufactures a law for him- 
self; " she pleaseth me well " may mean, " it is pleasing, or right, in my own eyes." 
The perplexity and distress of the parents, unaware of the meaning of this strange 
freak, so opposed to the future they had been led to imagine for their son. Notice — 

I. The fatality of desire. A sudden, unreasoning, and unreasonable passion is 
scarcely the augury one would expect for the career of a promised deliverer. A 
crisis in his moral history, a pivot upon which his whole subsequent life must turn. 
Sexual attachments are amongst the determining factors of human character and life, 
and the bases of society. Yet there are no circumstances of our life so independent 
of mere reason, and the power of the subjects of them. Still as a rule the outward 
realisation of such attachments is within the control of the individual. Recognition 
should be made of God's share in producing them, and the matter should be laid 
before him. He has been blamed for " heavily loading the dice " in this matter for 
his own universal ends, and for wantonly subjecting the subject of passion to misery 
and disadvantage. Moral and intellectual progress are thus, it is said, indefinitely 
hindered. If it could be written, how full of light upon the moral and intellectual 
history of the race would be an account of the intermarriages of nations, the 
mesalliances of individuals I &c. 

II. The entanglement and perplexity it occasions. Here it meant connection 
with the idolatrous and sensual life of the Philistines. The relatives on both sides 
could not be cordial. A relaxation of moral principles must ensue. Children would 
bring a fresh discord. How could a man so related lift up his hand against the 
Philistines ? An instance like this throws strong light upon the traditional objection 
of God's chosen people to intermarriage with neighbouring tribes and nations. It is 
not for nothing that it is written of Noah, and of one and another beside, "And he 
was perfect in his generation." " The daughters of Heth " are ineligible in the eyes 
of the patriarch'" wife for other than mere social reasons. There can be no doubt 
but that the same caution ought to characterise Christian parents in the alliances they 
encourage their children to make. 

III. The fubthbb and higher ministry of desire. Behind and beyond all this 
sinister appearanre was the Divine purpose, — "For he {Jehovah) sought an occasion 
from the Philistines." God's will is fulfilled in many ways, and by alternatives. 
When sin refuses to be put under then it can be utilised ; and the end more com- 
pletely served, albeit not to the immediate happiness or advantage of the guilty 
agent. How often " by a way they knew not " have the sons of men been led by an 
unseen providence to gracious ends. An ill-assorted marriage is a great calamity, 
but it may be the determining cause of important spiritual results, and by arranging 
a new relationship and set of conditions, prepare for a higher and nobler, though less 
immediately happy, development, of inward character. Thus the whole question of 
the deteimining force of sexual desire, which has been a matter of grief and despaii 



tea THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. xit. 1—9 

to the pessimist, is capable of another interpretation. The past histonr of oar race 
shows that " where sin abounded, there did grace much more abound. Let ns not 
therefore despair before these mysterious fatalities and complications, but commit 
the way of ourselves and children into the hands of him " who seeth the end from 
the beginning," and who makes " all things work together foi good " to them that 
love him. — M. 

Vers. 6. 6. — 77ie lion in the way. Very natural is this description. The wild 
beast in the vineyards, the weaponlessness of the hero, &o., are all in keeping with 
the character of the times. Local names still extant prove the former existence of 
lions in Palestine ; the particular district was a border one between militant nations, 
and therefore likely to be less thoroughly brought under ; and Israel as temporarily 
subdued had been deprived of arms. The young lover, full of his mistress, and not 
on the best terms with his parents, prefers to keep by himself, a little apart. All 
this is highly suggestive of parallel circumstances in the spiritual life : e- g. — 

L Youth is often subjected to geeat and sodden temptations. Our streets, 
the social circle, sexual relations, &c., all abound with concealed perils. These 
threaten the destruction of the soul. 

IL These abb, fbom their natube, geneballt bncountebed alone and in secbet. 
Bulwer Lytton says somewhere, that boys learn many things at school of great value 
to them through life, that were never bargained for by their parents, or represented 
in the school-bill. The youthful sense of growing power, and assertion of independ- 
ence, creates a little world of which guardians are but dimly coneoioijB. There is, 
too, the inability of age to sympathise with youth ; and the natural reticence con- 
cerning matters of affection, &o. Every youth is centre of a number of invisible 
but potent influences that may make or mar him for life ; and he ought therefore to 
be frequently commended to the care of his heavenly Father, and to be treated with 
gentleness and consideration by those in authority. 

IIL Thb Spieit of the Loed can bendeb timely and effectual help. The 
phrase^ " came suddenly upon him," expresses opportuneness. 

The fearlessness and modesty of the spiritual hero are here strikingly illustrated. 

I. If eabthlt affection will make men bbavb gbeat dangees and inconvkni- 

KFCES, HOW MUCH MORE OUGHT THE LOVE OF GOD I 

II. With the Spibit of God nothing is impossible, and he hakes all THnos 
■ASY and simple to them that believe. 

IIL Humility is the ohaeacteristio of the spiritual hbbo. — ^M. 

Ver. 6. — The mystery of spiritual might. " And he had nothing in his hand." 
This is typical of the Christian. Christ's injunctions to the seventy. In Samson's 
case it was probably due to the regulation imposed by the Philistines upon a con- 
quered people. Christians are commanded not to put their trust in earthly equipment 
or the arm of flesh. 

L That oub conflicts with Satan may bb tbue spibitual kxeeciseb and not 

MERELY OUTWARD TRIUMPHS. 

U. The INFLUX and withdrawal of the Holy Spirit limit the authobity and 
BECUBB the humility OF THE AGENT. How helpless even a Samson but for the 
Spirit I Temptations of our own seeking may be left to our own resources. No 
enterprise ought to be undertaken without the aid of the Holy Spirit, and the Divine 
blessing. What God brings upon us he will help us to overcome. 

III. The faith of the Chbistian boldiee and woekeb must be wholly in God. — M. 

Vers. 8, 9. — Recalling past deliverances. In this case Samson is led to do so either 
by curiosity or the impulse of God's Spirit. He revisits the scene of the exploit, 
and meets with welcome but unexpected refreshment. There are various ways of 
recalling spiritual experiences of God's saving power in the past. Sometimes an 
accident (?) may bring up vividly some forgotten circumstance of Divine grace, and 
we are overwhelmed with the recollections that crowd upon the mind. Soldiers whd 
bave fought side by side in famous battles have their anniveraaries of fellowship and 



CH. XIV. 10 — 20.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



16S 



celebration. Are there no circumstances that justify these amongst Christians ? It 
is a spiritual education and confirmation to recall circumstances and revisit scenes 
of God's saving mercies. 

I. The duty of thankful eecoliection of Divinb interpositions. 

II. The skcbet and unshared communion of the bdbjeot-of obaob with his 
Saviour. 

III. Its advantage and blessing. — M. 

Vers. 6, 6. — Samson and the lion. I. The danger. 1. It came unsoiigJit. It is 

foolish for the bravest to couit danger. We have only ground for meeting it bravely 
when we have not rashly provoked it. 2. It was unexpected. Had Samson expected 
to encounter the lion he would probably have chosen another path, or have armed 
himself against it. One of the worst features of the great dangers of life is that we 
can rarely foresee and provide against them. 3. It was when Samson was on a 
pleasurable journey. He went to seek a wife, and met a lion ! The greatest trouble 
may spring upon us at the moment of highest elation. Earthly joy is no safeguard. 
4. It was when Samson was acting in a questionable manner. He was seeking a wife 
among the Philistines. His parents disapproved of this course though their affection 
sought an excuse for it (ver. 3). His conduct was contrary to the law of God 
(Exod. zxxiv. 16). We may meet with trouble in the path of duty, but we must 
expect to meet with it in the way of transgression (Jonah i. 4). 

II. The triumph. 1. It was effected in the might of the Spirit of the Lord. Herein 
is the distinction between Samson and Hercules. The Jewish hero does not trust to 
his own muscular strength. Strongman as he is he can only do great things in God's 
strength. This is the redeeming feature of his character. It shows him as one, 
though amongst the lowest, of the heroes of faith. If Samson needed the strength 
of inspiration, how much more do we weaker men need to be clothed in the panoply 
of God's might before we can face the dangers of life I 2. The Spirit of God came 
upon Samson in especial force in his greatest need. God gives us strength according 
to our requirements. In our hour of weakness it seems impossible to face the future 
difficulty, but when this comes how wonderfully is the new strength bestowed to 
meet it (Deut. xxxiii. 25). We must not, however, abuse this truth and neglect 
natural expedients. Samson would have been wrong in going unarmed if he had 
expected to meet the lion. We have only a right to believe that God will help us in 
sudden emergencies when we are not rashly and negligently increasing the danger of 
them. 3. The Spirit of God helped Samson by inspiring him to an extraording exer- 
cise of his natural powers. It was to Samson the strong, a spirit of strength. God 
works in us through our natural faculties and helps us differently according to our 
various gifts. Though the might is God's, the daring, the will, the effort must be 
ours. God gave him strength, yet Samson slew the lion with his own hands. 
4. After victory, Samson modestly concealed his triumph. It is better to be more 
than we seem than to seem more than we are. If the source of our victory is God's 
■trength we have no ground for boasting. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 10. — Bo Us fether went down. It 
Is not clear what is meant by this mention 
of his father alone ; but it was probably 
some part of the wedding etiquette that the 
father should go to the bride first alone ; 
perhaps, as Kimchi says, to give her notice 
of the bridegroom's approach, that she might 

fet ready. Among the preparations may 
ave been the selection of the thirty young 
men to be " the children of the bride-cham- 
ber " (Matt. ix. 15). As these were all 
Philistines, the inference is that tliey were 
■elected by the bride, just as with ua the 



bride has the privilege of ehoo^^ the 

minister who is to ofiSciate at the marriage. 
Ver. 11. — When they saw him, i. e. 
when the father and mother and friends of 
the bride saw him approaching, they went to 
meet him with the thirty companions who 
had been selected. We still see a strong 
resemblance to the wedding arrangements 
referred to in Matt. ix. 15, and zxv. 
1 — 12 ; only in this case they were young 
men instead of young women who went ont 
to meet the bridegroom. We may observe, 
by the way, that the scale of the wedding 



154 



THE BOOK OF JUDGBS. 



[oh. xit. 10—201 



fcast, aa regards nnmbers and duration, indi- 
cates that Samson's family was one of wealth 
•nd position. 

Yer. 12. — Biddle. The Eebraw word 
is the same as that which is rendered hard 
tfuestioTU in 1 Kings z. 1, and dark guestimu, 
Knmb. xiL 8, and occurs also in Ezek. rriL 
2, where the phrase is the same as here and 
in ver, 16, as if we should say in English, / 
will riddle you a riddle. In English, how- 
ever, to riddle, as a verb active, means to 
solve a riddle, not, as in Hebrew, to propawrtd 
one. The derivation of the Hebrew word 
and of the English is the same as regards 
the sense — something intricate and tvristed. 
Thirty sheets, or rather, as in the margin, 
ihirts, a linen garment worn next the skin. 
In Isa. iii. 23 spoken of the women's gar- 
ment, "the fine linen," A.V., as also Prov. 
zzxi. 24. The word (sadtn, Sanscrit sindu) 
means Indian linen. Change of garments — 
the outward garment of the Orientalist, 
which was part of the wealth of the rich 
and great, and was, and is to the present 
day, one of the most frequent presents on 
all state occasions (see Gen. zlv. 22 ; 2 Kings 
T. 6, 22 ; Isa. iii. 6, 7 ; Matt. tL 19, &c.). 

Ver. 16. — On the seventh day. "There is 
some apparent difficulty in understanding 
how to reconcile this statement with what 
was said in ver. 14, that they could not in 
thru days expound the riddle ; and also with 
what is said m vers. 16 and 17, that Samson's 
wife v>ept be/ore him, the seven days of the 
featt And several different readings have 
arisen from this difficulty : viz., in this verse, 
the reading of the fourth day for the seveiUh, 
and the omission of the words, And it came 
to pass on the seventh day ; and, in the latter 
part of ver. 14, seven days for three days. 
But all difficulty wiU disapppear if we bear 
in mind the peculiarity of Hebrew narrative 
noticed in note to section vers. 1 — 6 of ch. 
ii. , when we come to consider ver. 1 6. Entice 
thy husband. Cf. ch. xvi. 6. That he may 
declare unto oi. If the text is sound, they 
must mean to say, declare it wtto you, that 
you may declare it vmio us, L e. declare it 
unto us through yon. But it is simpler 
either to read with the Septuagint, that he 
may declare unto yoni, &c., or to read, and 
({ecWeimto us, in the imperative mood. Bum 
with fire. See ch. zii. 1, and zv. 6. Have 
ye called ns, &c., i.e. Did yon invite us to 
this feast in order to impoverish us, to plunder 
us of our property ? We shall conclude that 
you did so if you do not disclose to us the 
riddle. 

Ver. 16. — And Samson's wife, &c. This 
statement does not follow ver. IS, but is a 
parallel narrative to that beginning in ver. 
14, " And they could not in three days," &c., 
down to the end of ver. 16, bringing the 
■toiy down to the same point of time, viz., 



the seventh day. One stream of the narrativa 
tells ns what the young men did when Samson 
had propounded his riddle ; the other tells 
ns what Samson's wife did. From the very 
first, no doubt, she had wished to be in the 
secret, not perhaps from treacherous motives, 
but firom curiosity, and the natural desire 
to be in her husband's confidence, and she 
pressed her request with cqoleiy and petu- 
lance. The young men at Hie same time 
had tried to find out the riddle by fair means. 
But on the seventh day they threatened to 
bum her and her father unless she found 
out the riddle for them, and under the terror 
of this threat she extracted the secret from 
Samson and divulged it to the Philistine 
young men. The only difficulty is to ezplain 
why a gap of four days occurs in the account 
between vers. 14 and 16. The most likely 
thing is, that after three days' vain attempt 
to find out the riddle, they began to tamper 
with Samson's wife, offering her money, as 
the Philistine lords did to Delilah (ch. xvi 
6), though the narrative does not mention 
it ; but that on the seventh day, becoming 
desperate, and thinking that the woman was 
not doing her best, they resorted to the 
dreadful threat of burning her. 

Yer. 17. — She lay sore upon him. In ch. 
zvi. 16 the same word is rendered pressed 
him. It came to pass on the seventh day. 
This is the confluence of the two streams of 
narrative. 

Yer. 18. — The men of the eity — the same 
as were spoken of in ver. 11 as Sanson's 
companions. Before the snn went down— 
just in time, therefore, to save the wager, ai 
defined in ver. 12. This is the uncommon 
word for the sum used also in ch. viii IS, 
where see note. What is sweeter, &c. They 
put their answer in a form to make it seem 
as if they had guessed the riddle ; but Sam- 
son instantly perceived his wife's treachery, 
and showed that he did so by quoting the 
proverb of plowing with another pers(Hi's 
neifer. They had not used their own wit to 
find out the riddle, but had learnt the secret 
at Samson's cost, through his wife. He 
insinuates that had they acted fairly he 
would have won the wager. 

Yer. 19.— The Spirit of the Lord, &c.— as 
in ver. 6 and ch. xiii. 2S, where see notes. 
The verb here, came upon him, is the same as 
in ver. 6. Thirty men — the number of the 
companions to whom he felt bound to pay 
the thirty changes of garment. Ashkelon 
(ch. i. 18) — one of the five Philistine cities, 
but the least often mentioned, owing, it it 
thought, to its remote situation "on the 
eztreme edge of the shore of the Mediter- 
ranean, far down in the south." It still 
preserves its ancient name, and was &moui 
ui ine time of the Crusaders. " Within th* 
walls and towers now standing Bichard 



OH. XIT. 10—20,] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



16fi 



(Cobut de Lion) held his conrt." The onion 
called eschalot, or shallot, is named from 
Eshkalon, or Ashkalon. Their spoil — that 
which was stripped from thep*. His anger 
was kindled — against the riiilistines in 
general, and his wife in particnlar, so that 
he went bock to his father's house without 
her. 

Yer. 20. — His eompanion — ^no doubt his 
" best nun," the " firiend of the bridegroom. " 



The parents of the Thimnathite, having no 
doubt obtained Samson's dower, and sup- 
posing him to hare finally broken with hia 
treacnerons wife, proceeded to give her in 
marriage to the Philistine young man who 
had been Samson's friend — ^perhaps the man 
to whom she had told the riddle. The sad 
end of this unhappy alliance fully justified 
the opposition of Samson's parents to it in 
ver. 8. 



HOMILETICa 

VerB. 10 — 20. — Atio^^' view of married life. The lessons which we drew from 
the married life of Manoah and his wife seem to receive a striking confirmation, by 
contrast, from the unhappy union of their son with the daughter of the Philistines. 
Here everything was against a reasonable prospect of happiness. Their religion was 
different, one might say opposite. Samson had been brought up in the faith of the 
LoBD God of Israel. He was in covenant with him by circumcision. His creed was 
that there was one true and living God, the Lord of heaven and earth, and that all the 
gods of the heathen were but vain idols. His religious duty was to love the Lord his 
God with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, and to serve him 
alone. His wife did not believe in the Lord, nor love him, nor fear him, but was a 
worshipper of Dagon, whose temples were at Gaza (ch. xvi. 21 — 30) and at Ashdod (1 
Sam. V. 1 — 6). There could therefore be no union for them in that great bond of union 
which is the living God. Righteousness can have no fellowship with unrighteous- 
ness, nor light with darkness, nor the believer with an infidel, nor the temple of God 
with idols. Then again the interests of their respective peoples were opposite. To 
break off the Philistine yoke from the neck of Israel ; to set his people free from a 
shameful bondage ; to rescue his native towns, and fields, and vineyards, from the 
nsurped possession of the uncircumcised invader ; to drive out the foreigner from the 
land which God gave to his forefathers ; was Samson's natural aim, and the use which 
he must needs make of his supernatural strength. But his wife's sympathies were 
all with the children of her people. Her heart would swell with pride as she thought 
of their conquests over Israel, of Dagon's conquests over the people of Jehovah. 
She would look with scorn upon the subject race, and be proud of her kindred with 
the conquerors. Every movement of either people must at once put them on opposite 
tides. What was joy to him would be grief to her ; and what made her glad would 
make him sorry. Their language was different, their tastes were different, their 
habits of thought and life were different. They had nothing in common to cement 
their hearts and interests together, and to bind their life into one. He was pleased 
with her beauty, and she was gratified by his admiration. That was all. And how 
long would that last ? What strong temptation, what powerful motive of action, 
what great provocation, would those influences be able to withstand ? What promise 
did they give of unity of sentiment, and harmony of conduct, amidst the difficulties 
of troublous times, and the intricacies of conflicting duties ? One week in their case 
was sufScient to supply the answer to these questions. A betrayed husband, a 
deserted wife, discord, strife, bloodshed, were the fruit of seven days of this ill- 
assorted union. The wife married to another husband is cut off by murderous hands 
in the prime of her youth and beauty. The husband married to another wife is again 
betrayed and given np to his enemies to be mocked, and blinded, and to die. The 
man of splendid gifts, but irregular passions, lives a stormy life, and dies a violent 
death. He has no gentle, clear-sighted woman to restrain and guide him ; no sym- 
pathising wife to share his sorrows, and by sharing to lighten them. He only knows 
what is bad in woman, because he only seeks them on the bad side. And that one 
week of disappointed love in an unhappy and unholy wedlock casts its shade upon a 
whole life which might have been a most happy and glorious one. We seem, therefore, 
to be taught by the ill-starred marriage of Samson with the Thimnathite, as forcibly 
as by the blessed union of his father and mother, what to seek and what to avoid 
in ohoosing a partner for life. The imion of two souls in the love of God and in 



156 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. xit. 10-20. 

the faith of the Lord Jesus Christ ; the union of two minds in all rational and Bob«i 
pursuits, whether intellectual, political, or social ; the identity of interests ; the 
community of purpose to make the most of what God has given to each for the com- 
mon stock of happiness ; the care of each for the other as the first human duty, and 
the faithfulness of each to the other in the whole series of actions, from the least to 
the greatest — this is the ideal of Christian wedlock to which we are led by the failures 
of the one as well as by the virtues of the other. It is sad to think hovir frequently 
happy married life is an idea only, and not a reality, from the entire failure on both 
sides to carry out the conditions upon which happiness depends. A foolish choice at 
first, based only upon beauty and vanity, upon wealth and position, upon whim and 
fancy, without consulting religion, or reason, or true affection, is followed up by 
independent and selfish action, by each crossing the other's wishes, by mutual neg- 
lect, by mutual reproach, by mutual violation of the spirit of the marriage contract. 
There follow in difEerent cases various degrees of unhappiness and disorder accord- 
ing to the various measures of temper, and violence, and self-will, and disregard 
of solemn vows, and contempt of God's word, of the parties concerned. In one 
home it is the constant jarring of antagonistic wills, and unloving tempers ; in another 
it is the coldness of distant and reproachful spirits ; the constant sense of injury from 
unfulfilled duties ; in others, the man having failed to find in his wife the kindness, 
the solace, the help, which he expected, seeks to indemnify himself in the flatteries 
and cajoleries of other women ; and the wife, wounded in her pride, and hurt in her 
affections, looks for balm and for revenge in the attentions of the profligate, and the 
admiration of the licentious. In both cases true manhood and womanhood are marred 
and crushed, and the whole life is distorted, and like a building in ruins. Public 
duties in the cabinet and in the field may indeed be performed by men of gifted 
minds and transcendent powers, in spite of their aberrations from moral rectitude ; 
but the delicate organisation of affections and faculties which were given to make up 
the charm and beauty of private and domestic life cannot live in an atmosphere of 
vice ; and when there is a breakdown of the love and obedience due to God, there is 
a breakdown also of the dignity and happiness of man. The careful study by married 
people, in a spirit of true Christian philosophy, of what is necessary to make wedlock 
the blessing God intended it to be when he " made the woman and brought her unto 
the man," and the careful daily endeavour, in the spirit of saintly obedience, to per- 
form each his or her part in the mutual contract, in spite of difficulties and hindrances, 
would be a large contribution to human happiness, and to the beauty of the Church 
of Gud. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 14. — Samson's riddle. A strong impression had been produced by the dioum- 
stance upon the mind of Samson. This was one of the means used by God to pene- 
trate and awaken the moral nature of his servant A certain Divine wisdom is given 
for its interpretation, and for its suitable statement to the world, the heathen of his 
day. The form which the circumstance assumes when declared to the Philistines is 
a favourite one to this day amongst Eastern and primitive peoples. It constituted a 
distinct portion of God's great revelation of himself to man, but for many and 
weighty reasons it was not a plain declaration, but the '• wisdom of God in a mystery." 

I. The phenomena of the natubal wohld link themselves with, and bboomb 
SYMBOLS OP, SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE. Thus the deepest things of the spiritual universe 
may be uttered by those who are but dimly conscious of their meaning. And no 
man is wholly destitute of spiritual teaching. The teachings of revelation thus 
become indefinitely enriched and extended. 

II. To the awakened spirit of man the Divine meanings of life and the world 
ABB ALONE IMPORTANT. How vast is the relationship of the truth thus generalised I 
For many days will such food sustain the soul. Trials may become the sources oj 
spiritvat consolation if overcome in 6od!s strength. Death is the gate of lAfe. 

IIL To the UNBELIEVING IS THE TROTH OF GOD SPOKEN IN PARABLES, THAT 8EBIHQ, 
THEY MAY NOT PERCEIVE, AND HEARING. THEY MAT NOT UNDERSTAND. This might be 

called the " gospel of the Philistines." It is a miehtv revelation. How near were 



OH. XIT. 10—20.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. t57 

these heathen, if they had known it, to the wisdom and kingdom of God I So is it 
to-day with the preaching of the gospel to unbelievers. The moral character, and 
not the mere intellectual power, of men is tested in this way. What the Spirit of 
the Lord inspires the same Spirit can interpret. God will bestow illumination upon 
those who seek it. How often has God spoken through striking incidents to those 
who would not care to hear the preaching of his word, or to whom it has not been 
granted I Do lot let any one hastily say, " I never heard." Do not let Christians 
despair of those who have not heard, and who will not hear the preaching of men. 
God has his own way to every heart. — M. 

Vers. 15 — 20. — Unlawful methods of interpreting Divine mysteriet. Samson ia 
betrayed into revealing his riddle, ft was a mean subterfuge, and the fraud ia 
promptly avenged. 

I. There are illegitimate ways of getting at Divine tehth. False prophets. 
Unwilling prophets, as Balaam. Mercenary attempts at obtaining a peculiar know- 
ledge, as of Simon Magus (cf. Acts viii. 9 — 24 ; xix. 13 ; Col. ii. 17, 18). 

II. The essential meaning op the tbdth cannot be thus discovebed. The 
Philistines only learnt the historic circumstance ; they were still in outer darkness as 
to the evangelic significance of the parable or riddle. So it is with those who 
" intrude into those things which they have not seen or heard, vainly puffed up in 
their fleshly minds." God will deliver them over to strong delusion, and the belief 
of a lie. 

III. This is full of dangeb, and will be peomptlt avenged. Partly in the 
apparent illumination, but real ignorance, of such men ; and partly in the consequences 
attending an incomplete or garbled gospel. Here the vengeance was both spiritual 
and physical. How sorry the gain that involved their fellow-countrymen in such a 
death I — M. 

Ver. 18. — Ploughing with another'B hdfer. The saying derives itself from the 
occasional discovery of hidden treasure by the plough, and the superstitious belief 
that the homebred heifer knew where the furrow ought to be drawn, because it has 
been shown the way before, when the treasure was hid. 

I. So Satan and his servants betbat men THBonaH their habitual tbmfira- 
MENT OR BIAS — THE WEAKNESS PBCULIAB TO THEM. The Weak place in Samson was 
his sensuality. His enemies speedily discovered this, and were unscrupulous enough 
to take advantage of it. 

II. Saints should be distbustful of unholt confidences, and should leatb 

" NO UNGUABDED place " IN THEIB SPIRITUAL CHARACTEB OB RELATIONS. All habitual 

relations or companionships with worldly persons are dangerous. Our sin will find 
us out, to our confusion. Safety can alone be found in perfect consecration — putting 
on the whole armour of God. Relations in life which, when both parties are holy, 
are full of comfort and help, when they involve ns in close fellowship with tho 
wicked may be our destruction. — M. 

Ver. 20. — Hoiw eonfdence in wicked men is rewarded. The world is full of snch 
instances of misplaced trust. The fable of the viper and the husbandman. It is 
hard to persuade men of the utter folly of worldly friendships and alliances. Only 
the most severe warnings and painful consequences will suffice to disabuse the mind. 
At the same time that the carnal nature of God's servant draws him towards the 
enemies of his country and his faith, God's providential dispensations are working 
out an effectual divorce, and preparing Samson for deadly hostility to bis quondam 
friends. 

I. The confidence we place in the wicked will oebtainlt betbat ds. 

II. God seeks bt btebn lessons to sbfabate bis people fbom the wobld. 

III. None abb so opposed to the chabactebs and pbaotioes of thi wiokko if 

those who HATB been betrayed bt THEM. — M. 

Ver. 14. — Samson's riddle. The first intention of Samson's riddle is plainly, as ha 
■hows in the interpretation, to wrap up in mystery a simple event of his own ecperi* 



118 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[OH. xiT. 10— 2a 



ence. But, with the Eastern instinct for imagery, Samson may well be supposed to 
intend also to set forth general principles which he sees illustrated in that event. 
The words seem to suggest the beautiful truth that things harsh and destructive may 
be found to contain within them sources of happiness and life. 

I. SouBCES OF LIFE MAY BB FOUND IN POWEES OF DESTB0CTION. Out o£ the de- 
stroyer came forth food. 1. The destroying agencies of nature prepare the way 
for fresh life. Geological catastrophes renew the face of the old earth with virgin 
fields of fertility. The products of decay are the food of new life ; the rottingleaveg 
of autumn nourishing the blooming flowers of spring. 2. National revolutions 
■ometimes introduce a better order. Out of the corruption and disintegration of the 
Roman empire the separate nationalities of modern Europe sprang into being. 3. 
Religious destructive agencies prepare the way for new religi'--« institutions. The 
wort of the Hebrew prophets, of Christ and his apostles, — especially St. Paul,— of the 
leaders of the Reformation, was largely destructive, and only after a certain amount 
of ruthless breaking up of old revered habits and doctrines was it possible to intro- 
duce the good things they were ultimately destined to establish. We may be too 
fearful of needful but painful destroying agencies, and by joining the new cloth ta 
the old garment may only increase the final rent. 4. Destructive influences in 
private life are overruled by God's providence to produce fruitful issues. Our 
cherished hope is dashed to the ground ; for the moment we are in despair. But 
in time out of the grave of the past God makes a purer, nobler hope to spring. 6. 
The death of Christ is the source of the Christian's life. In his broken body we see 
our bread of life (1 Cor. xi. 24). 

II. Sources of quiet blessedness mat be found in movements of violent 
STRENGTH. Out of the strong comes forth sweetness. 1. It is only in strength that 
we can find true gentleness. While gentleness makes us great, greatness is necessary 
to the perfection of gentleness. Soft weakness is not gentleness. Self-control, for- 
bearance, quiet work in the midst of diflSculty are signs of gentleness, and they all 
imply great'strength of soul. Christ's shadow shelters us because he is a great rock 
(Isa. xxxii. 2). 2. Violent exercises of strength are sometimes required to remove an 
unsettled, restless condition of things, to establish an equilibrium, and so secure more 
peace. Storms clear the air and bring about a more stable calm than that which 
preceded them. The troubles of life subdue our passions, rebuke our wilfulness, 
shasten our affections, and thus prepare us to receive the peace of God. 3. A healthy 
exercise of strength is the means of bringing happiness to others. Sentimental 
sympathy is of little use. If we wish to sweeten the lot of the most miserable 
classes of men, we must be prepared for active measures of improvement. 4. In 
proportion to the violence of earthly triaW will be the sweetness of the heavenly 
re$t.—A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XV, 



Ver. 1.— Witliiii a while— the same ex- 
pression as that in ch. xiv. 8, rendered 
"after a time," and in ch. xi. 4, rendered 
' ' in process of time. " In the time of wheat 
harvest — about the month of May. The 
harvest, as appears from ver. 5, had begun, 
some com bemg already cut, and in shocks ; 
the rest still standing, and, being ready to 
be out, of course extremely dry and inflam- 
mable. With a kid, as a present, intended 
no doubt to make peace (Gen. xzxviii. 17). 
His anger (ch. xiv. 19) had now passed 
away, and his love for his wife had returned. 
He was little prepared to find her married 
again to his friend. 

Vei. a.— Ii not hai yoimger filter, ke. 



Samson's father-in-law might well have 
thought that Samson had forsaken his wife, 
and would never forgive her treachery. 
Possibly too he was a covetous man, and 
glad to get a second dower. Anyhow, his 
answer was conciliatoiy ; but Samson was 
not in a mood to accept excuses, or be soft- 
ened by conciliation. 

Ver. 8.— I shall be more blameless than 
the Philistines. The phrase rather means, 
/ shall be blameless (or guiltless) before Qm 
Philistines, i e. in relation to tlie Philistines, 
— they will have nothing to lay to my chaige; 
my revenge will be a just one, — as in Numb, 
xxxii. 22 : Then shall ye he guiUlesa before 
the Lord, amd before Israel. He meani that 
. so grievous an injury as he had receifed in 
I navm^ his wife taken from him and given 



XT. 1— «.3 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



lfi« 



to a Philistine will justify any requitals on 
his part. 

Ver. 4. — Foxes. The word here rendered 
fm (shu'al, in Persian ihagal, which is ety- 
mologically the same word as Jackal) in- 
cludes the jackal, which is as common in 
Palestine as the fox. Here, and in Ps. 
Iziii. 10, the gregarions jackals, the coma 
aureus, are undoubtedly meant. Caught. 
The Hebrew word means especially caught 
in nets or mares. See Amos iii. 5 (have taken 
nothing at all) ; Ps. xxxv. 8 (let his net catch 
himselO ; Jer. xviiL 22 ; Isa. viii. 14 (taken), 
he. And it is in this sense that the A. V. 
uses the word catigJU. A clever sportsman, 
as no doubt Samson was, would have no 
difficulty whatever iu netting or snaring 300 
jackals, which always move in packs, and 
would be attracted by the vineyards of 
Thimnathah, for which their partiality is well 
known ^see ch. xiv. 5, note). The writer of 
the additional article Fox in Smith's ' Dic- 
tionary of the Bible,' states that he had tried 
the experiment of throwing grapes to the 
foxes, jackals, and wolves in the Zoological 
Gardens. The wolves would not touch them, 
the others ate them with avidity. Took fire- 
brands, Sk. Many cavils have been directed 
against the truth of this account, but with- 
out the slightest reason. The terrified 
animals, with the burning torches and the 
blazing straw behind them, would neces- 
sarily run forwards. Samson would, of 
course, start the couples at numerous dif- 
ferent points, and no doubt have a number 
of Hebrews to assist him. To the present 
day the corn-fields in that part of the Shephe- 
lah extend continuously for twenty or thirty 
miles. 

Ver. 6. — The shocks and the standing com. 
See ver. 1, note. With the vineyards and 
olives. The Hebrew text has the orchards of 
olive trees — the word cherem, usually trans- 
lated vineyard, meaning also any orchard ; 
but the Septuagint in both codices supplies 
<md, as does the A. V., which gives the 
more probable sense, vmeyards and olives. 
It is unlikely that the vineyards should not 
be mentioned, in a district abounding in 
them. 
Ver. 6. — ^And the Philistines . . . burnt 



her and her father with fire. See ch. xiv. 16. 
It appears from Gen. xzxviii. 24 ; Levit. xx. 
14 ; xxi. 9; Josh. vii. 15, 25, that burning with 
fire was a judicial punishment among the 
Hebrews. Possibly the Philistines, in their 
fear of Samson, and perhaps also from a 
rude sense of justice, inflicted this punish- 
ment upon the Thimnathite and her father 
as the real authors of the destruction of their 
corn-fields, by giving Samson so unheard-of 
provocation. Kote the fact of the identical 
fate overtaking Samson's wife which sho 
had sought to escape by base treachery (cf. 
John xi. 48 with what actually happened). 

Ver. 7. — ^And Samson said, &c. There 
are two ways of understanding Samson's 
speech: one, with the A. Y., as meaning to 
say that though the Philistines had taken his 
part, and repudiated all fellowship in the 
shameful deed of the Thimnathite and her 
father, yet he would have his full revenge 
upon them ; the other, translating the par- 
ticle in its more common sense of if, makes 
him say, " If this is the way you treat me, 
be sure I will not cease tiU I have had my 
full revenge." This is perhaps on the whole 
the most probable meaning. It still leaves 
it uncertain whether the Philistines meant 
to do Samson justice, or to do him an ad- 
ditional injury, by putting his wife and her 
father to death. 

Ver. 8. — He smote them hip and thigh, 
&c. A proverbial expression, the origin of 
which is uncertain ; it means, he smote 
them with a great and complete slaughter. 
It is reasonable to suppose that he had 
gathered a few Hebrews round him to help 
him. He went down, &:c. This shows that 
JStam must have been situated lower than 
Timnath, and seems to preclude its identifi- 
cation with Vrtas, in the hill country of 
Judah, between Bethlehem and Tekoah, 
which apparently represents the Etam of 3 
Chron. xi. 6. But there is another Etam in 
the tribe of Simeon (1 Chron. iv. 32), which 
may possibly be the Etam of our text. In 
the top of the rook. Rather, the cleft or 
fissure of the rock — some narrow and in- 
accessible ravine. The site has not been 
identified. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Theprogrees of the fend. In tracing the steps of any quarrel which 
has gone on to the bitter end, we can usually see that there were moments when recon- 
ciliation was very near, but was hindered by the hasty action of one party, and that 
after such failure the enmity becomes more fierce and bitter than ever. Thus in the 
quarrel between Samson and the Philistines. After the first burst of anger at his 
rwie's treachery, Samson's impatient nature had cooled down, his love for his wife had 
fevived, and he returned to her house with a present intended as a peace offering, 
hoping no doubt to find her penitent, and to receive a warm welcome from her. Him 



160 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. xt. 1— » 

it been so, bis breach with the Philistines might Lave been healed, and his whok 
future career would have been changed. But this was prevented by the intemperate 
haste of Samson's father-in-law. Instead of waiting to see whether Samson^ just 
anger would subside, and keeping the door of reconciliation open, he gave Samson's 
wife to his friend. When Samson returned in a spirit of generous forgiveness, he 
found the false woman on whom he threw away his love already wedded to another, 
and the door closed against him. His fury knew no bounds. Everything Philistine 
was hateful ji his eyes. The former wrong was lost in the glare of the far greater 
wrong which succeeded it. The Philistines were made to pay dearly for the insult 
and injury they had done him. And then, as so often happens in embittered resent- 
ments, even the attempt to pacify him only added fuel to the flame. His wife's 
adultery had been a cruel blow ; the punishment of that adultery by a honible death 
was a still deadlier one. The burning of corn-fields had been a sufScient revenge 
for the one ; the slaughter of the Philistines was the only expiation, for the other. 
And so the quarrel went on from bad to worse ; the enmity became more deadly, the 
strife more embittered. It went on through bloodshed and captivity, till Samson and 
his enemies perished together under the ruins of the temple of Dagon. If quarrels 
are to be healed, there must be patience on both sides. Neither side must credit the 
other with an unappeasable hatred or with an inextinguishable wrath. Hasty insnlta 
and hasty overtures of peace must alike be avoided. Time must be given for resent- 
ment to cool and for the sting of the wrong to be forgotten. Otherwise things will 
grow from bad to worse ; the petty insult or annoyance will be succeeded by the 
mortal wrong, and the melancholy spectacle will follow of two human beings, who 
ought to love one another as children of the same heavenly Father, using all their 
powers and opportunities to wound each other's feelings, and to inflict injuries upon 
one another. But the only real remedy for enmities is to be found in the true spirit 
of Christian love : " Be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, 
even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." In the presence of the cross 
enmities and hatreds are crucified. The bitterest offence given and wrong suffered 
will only provoke the prayer, " Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Atonements of the unrighteous. A great wrong had been done. An 
act of warfare against the country of Samson's wife is punished by domestic treachery 
and wrong. For fear of the Philistines, Samson's wife is given to another. The fear 
of Samson takes the place of the fear which inspired the unrighteousness. Suggested 
atonement does not allay the wrath of the wronged, but magnanimously he turns his 
wrong into an occasion of renewed hostility to the Philistines. A national calamity 
thus springs from a private offence. 

I. Gebat wrongs are committed under the influence of feab. 

II. The atonements and excuses op the unrightbous but enhance theib quilt. 

III. The consequences of evil actions cannot be fobesebn ob adequatblt 

WARDED OFF BY THE OFFENDER {vide Ver. 6). 

IV. Private wrong may be punished by nationai dibastbb. — ^M. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — God's servant set free hy the jrrovidences of life. The entanglements 
into which Samson fell were brought upon himself. God by painful circumstances 
destroys these. Samson then felt that he was at liberty to carry on war against the 
enemies of his country. 

I. God's servants are frequently hampebid by theib own impbodbncts and 

rOLLIEB. 

II. The purpose of the discipline of life ib to remove thesb bntanglbmbntb 
and turn them into a stronger incentive towards his service. Entanglement 
and re-entanglement, deliverance beyond deliverance, is the history of Samson's 
career. — M. 

Vers. 4, 6.— Foxes and JirebraiuU. This ciroumstanoe has become clasria U 
vividly illustrates — 



CH. V. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 161 

I. The ingenuity of inspired tenobanob. 

II. Little causes of mischief and obeat consequences. 

III. The mischief God's enemies entail upon themselves. It ia unexpected, 
overwhelming, and vital. The year's produce, upon which the life of the people 
depended, was swept away at a single stroke. No one knows how to punish the 
rebel against his kingdom as God himself does. — M. 

Vers. 6 — 8. — Those who have occasioned evil punished for those who caused U. Of 
this policy amongst individuals and nations the world is full. 

I. Wicked men are often wiser than their actions would indicate. It was 
well to inquire, " Who hath done this ? " but when the agent was discovered, they 
were too afraid of him to punish him, so they wreaked their vengeance upon those 
who could not defend themselves. Greater care is shown by men in removing occa- 
sions of evil than in curing the source of it. 

II. Human injustice may unconsciously effect the ends of Divinb justice. The 
father-in-law and wife of Samson deserved punishment, but hardly from those 
through dread of whom they had done Samson wrong. 

III. By actinq as test did the Philistines only bbouobt upon themseltib 

GREATER DISASTERS. 

IV. One wkonq leads to another. — M. 

Vers. 8 — 16. — Requiting evil for good, and good for evil. It was truly unhand- 
some conduct on the part of the men of Judah. They had received aid and service 
from Samson, and their enemies had been put to shame ; and now, when they are 
threatened with consequences for harbouring him from their foes, they are ready to 
betray him. 

I. Those who have received the greatest benefits often betray their bene- 
factors. Wallace was betrayed by a Scotchman ; Christ by Judas, and rejected by 
the Jews. This arises partly from failure to comprehend the work done by great 
men ; partly from ignoble nature, that fails to attain the level of heroic action. 

II. A MAGNANIMOUS MIND WILL BATHER SUFFER EVIL THAN BE THE OCCASION OF IT 
TO OTHERS. 

III. Men injure themselves when they evade duty in compromise. These 3000 
men of Judah might have driven the Philistines before them, and delivered their land, 
had they been inspired by a heroic spirit. They afterwards discover that the work 
is done in spite of them which might have been done by them, and thus lose the 
credit and blessing that might have been theirs. Samson is thus completely detached 
from the nation he was raised up to deliver. So Christ stands alone as the Saviour 
of the world. 

IV. God may overrule hen's misdoings to their ultimate advantage. 'Grace 
can extract a blessing even from sin. But atonement has been made, and the spirit 
purged from its mean and unholy disposition. The crucifixion of Christ, the work 
of men, is the means of the salvation of men. 

V. External bonds cannot effectually bind the servant or Qod. 

"Stone walls do not a prison make, 
Nor iron bars a cage." 

Perseontiona tend to further the influence of truth. God breaks the bands with 
which men confine his servants and his word. — M. 

Vers. 4, 5. — Ingenuity and originality. I. Ingenuity is often as effective as 
btrenqth. Samson is not merely the hero of brute force ; he shows wit, intelli- 
gence, inventiveness. We constantly see how eflEective these faculties are in business, 
in war, in politics. The Christian needs the wisdom of the serpent (Matt. x. 16). In 
many of our Christian enterprises the requisite for greater success is not more money, 
more workers, nor even more zeal, but wiser methods. Samson's ingenuity was 
wholly on the aide of destruction. Would that the soldiers of Christ's army of sal- 
TStion showed as much intelligence and wisdom in conducting the campaigns of the 
JCDOES. w 



162 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oh. XV. 9—20 



Church militant for the saving of men as the soldiers of the armies of ambitious 
monarchs display in their warfare, which brings little else than death and misery I 
Ingenuity is quickened by interest. If we had a more practical sense of the end of 
the Christian battle with the evil of the world, more earnest desire to effect real results, 
more heart in the whole work, we should be more wise and thoughtful It is the 
half-hearted who are dull and sleepy soldiers of Christ. 

II. Originality of method is often one GRonND of success. Samson showed 
great originality; consequently his enemies were not provided against the novel 
attack he made upon their land and its produce. Mere novelty is little recommenda- 
tion. But we are all too much wedded to old habits of life. Novel methods in the 
work of the Church are sometimes advisable, (1) because the old may be efEete, (2) 
because the old may have lost their interest or be well provided against by oppo- 
nents, (3) because there is room for variety of work even when the old ways of work- 
ing are successful, (4) because, though the old style may be good, we should always 
be seeking for improvements till we attain to perfection, and (6) because new cir- 
cumstances require new treatment. We need no new gospel, no new Christ ; but we 
do need fresh applications of the gospel, new adaptations to the wants of the times. 
There is room for the richest originality in those who have the most loyal attachment 
to the ancient truths of Christianity. — ^A. 



EXPOSmON. 



Ver. 0. — ^Went op, i. t, from their own 
country in the Shephelah to the hill country 
of Judah. As Samson had avenged his 
wrongs on the whole Philistine people, so 
they now came up to Judah to take venge- 
ance for Samson's injuries. In Lehi, or, 
rather, hal-Lehi, (he Lehi, the place after- 
wards so called, as related in vers. 17 and 
20 (see ch. vii. 25, note). Lehi has been 
identified by some with Tell-el-Lekhiyeh, four 
miles above Beer-sheba ; and by others with 
Beit-LiMyeh, in the Wady Suleiman, two 
miles below the upper Beth-horon, and so 
within easy distance of Timnath and other 
places mentioned in the history of Samson. 
But no certainty can at present be arrived at. 

Ver. 11.— Men of Jndah. It is rather 
three thousand men wemi dovm from Judah, 
showing that the rock Etam was below. The 
top. It should be the cleft, as in ver. 8. 
Knovest thou not, Ac. The language of 
these cowardly men shows how completely 
the Philistine yoke was fastened upon the 
necks of Judah. The history gives no ac- 
count of the Philistine conquest, except the 
brief allusion in ch. z. 6, 7 ; but Samson's 
story brings to light the existence of it. The 
abject state to which they were reduced is 
shown by their complaint of Samson, " What 
is this that thou hast done unto us ?" instead 
of hailing him as a deliverer. As tbey did 
unto me, &c. It is instructive to read Sam- 
son 's defence of himself in the very words used 
by the Philistines in ver. 10. " An eye for 
an eye, and a tooth for a tooth." There is 
no end to rendering " evil for evil." 

Vers. 12, IS. — We are come down to bind 
thee. There is something very base in this 
deliberata agreement with their Philistine 



masters to deliver up Samson bound into their 
hands. But it is not very unlike the spirit in 
which the Hebrews looked upon Moses when 
he first began to work to rescue them from 
tneir Egyptian bondage (Exod. iL 14 ; Acts vii. 
25 — 28). Samson's forbearance towards his 
own countrymen is commendable. Brought 
him up — ^from the deep ravine or cleft in 
which he was hid. His place of concealment 
was probably unknown to the Philistines, or 
may be they had quite a superstitions fear 
of Samson from their experience of bis 
prowess. 

Ver. 14. — When he came, <. «. as soon 
as he was come to Lehi, where the Philistine 
camp was (ver. 9). Shouted against him. 
Rather, shouted as they ran out to meet him. 
It expresses concisely the double action of 
their aU going out to meet him, and shouting 
with joy when they saw him bound and, as 
they thought, in their power. 

Ver. 16. — A most vivid and stirring de- 
scription I The Spirit of the' Lord (ch. xiv. 
19), with that suddenness which marks his 
extraordinary movements (1 Kings zviiL 12; 
2 Kings iL 16 ; Acts ii. 2 ; viu. 89, Ac.), 
came upon Samson, and mightily strength- 
ened him in his outer man. The strong 
new cords snapped asunder in an instant, 
and befoie the Philistines could recover from 
their terror at seeing their great enemy free, 
he had snatched up the heavy jawbone of 
an ass recently dead, and with it smote the 
flying Philistines till a thousand of them had 
fallen under his blows. 

Ver. 16.— And Samson said, fte. Thi 
exploit gave birth to one of Samson's punning, 
enigmatical, sayings : " fTUh thtjmebons tj 
the€us,07ieheap,tu>oheapiottia.m. 'Ecmtr, 



CH. XV. 9—20.] 



iUE BOOK OF J0DOE8. 



161 



an ass, means also on heap. If one were to 
imitate the passage in English, supposing 
that the jaw of a sheep had been the imple- 
ment, it might run something like this — Sy 
the jcm tjf a sheep they /ell heap vpon heap. 
A lAtin imitation is, Maxilla cervi, acervwm 
aeercos (Bochart). He adds, as if in explana- 
tion, With the jaw of an ass have I slaim a 
thousamd men. So the women sang, Saul 
hath slaim his thousands, and David his 
ten thousands (1 Sam. zviii. 7). And a Latin 
song is quoted, in which Aurelian is made 
to say after the Sarmatic war — " Mille Sar- 
mataa, mille Francos, Semel et semel occidi- 
mus, Mille Persas qnserimns" (Bp. Patrick 
on Judges! v.). 

Ver. 17. — Hade an end of speaking, i e, 
of reciting the song about the heaps of slain. 
It is singular that the word rendered speak- 
ing might also he rendered destroying, as in 
2 Chron. xxii. 10. Called that place Bamath- 
leoU, i.t. the height o/Lechi, or of the jaw- 
bone, or, rather, the throwing away of the 
ja/wbane. He commemorated the exact spot 
where the slaughter ceased and the weapon 
was thrown away by giving it the name of 
RamuUh-Leehi, or, as it was called for short- 
ness, Ledii (or hal-Lechi). 

Ver. 18. — He was sore athirst. The in- 
credible exertions which he had made in pur- 
sning and slaying the Philistines put him in 
danger of his life from thirst. He thought he 
shoSd die, and be found and abused by his 
uncircnmcised foes. His only resource was 
prayer to Gk)d, who had helped him hitherto. 
We may note by the way that the more God 
gives, the more he encourages us to ask. 

Ver. 19. — But (or, amd) God clave, &c 
Cf. Exod. xvii. 6 ; Numb. xx. 8, 11. The 
A. V. (as the Septuagint and Vulgate seem 
to have done, and Luther and others) has 
quite misconceived the statement in the 
text, as if God had cloven a hollow place in 
the jawbone, and brought out the water 



thence ; ifrhereas the statement is quite dear 
that God dame the hollow place which it 
in Lehi (hal-Lehi, ver. 9, note), and that a 
spring of water came out, to which Samson 
gave the name En-hdkkoreh, the spring of 
him that called upon God, which name con- 
tinued till the time of the writer. The spring 
apparently continued till the time of St 
Jerome, and of other later writers, in the 
seventh, twelfth, and fourteenth centuries ; 
but Eobinson was unable to identify it with 
any certainty ('B. B.,' ii 64). The word 
translated the (not a) hollow place (ham" 
maktesh) means a mortar; also the camty in 
the jaw from which the molar teeth grow. 
The hollow ground from which the spring 
rose, with which Samson quenched his 
thirst, from its shape and from the connec- 
tion with hal-Zedtd (the jawbone^ was called 
ham/maktes?k In Zeph. i. 11 it is also • 
proper name, apparently of some spot near 
Jerusalem. The name thereof, i. e. of the 
fountain, with which thereof, which is in the 
feminine gender, agrees. Which is in Lehi 
onto this day. This punctuation does not 
agree with the Hebrew accents, which put a 
strong stop after Lehi. The Hebrew accent* 
rather convey the sense that the name Mt- 
hahkoreh continued to be the name of the 
well unto the day of the writer. 

Ver. 20. — And he judged Israel, fte. 
See ch. zvi. 31, It looks as if it had been the 
intention to close the history of Samson 
with these words, but that ch. xvi. was sub- 
sequently added, possibly from other sources. 
Compare the close of chs. xx. and xxi. of the 
Gospel of St. John. A possible explanation, 
however, of this verse being placed here is 
that it results from the statement in ver. 19, 
that Samson's spirit came again, and he re- 
vived, or came to life again, after being on 
the very point of death ; and, adds the 
writer, he judged Israel after this for twenty 
years. 



HOMILBTICa 

VeiB. 9 — 20. — Man mthoul God, and man wUh God. These 3000 men of Judah 
u£ whom we read in ver. 11 present us with a pitiable view of man's spirit crushed 
by misfortune, when it is not upheld by trust in Almighty God. These men of 
Judah were among those who did evil in the sight of the Lord, and were in conse- 
quence delivered into the hand of the Philistines. But this chastisement, instead of 
leading them to repent of their sin and folly in forsaking God and putting their trust 
in false gods, only led to a kind of sullen despair. They said in their hearts, " There 
is no hope : no ; for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go " (Jer. ii. 25). 
Utterly unmindful of their high privileges and vocation as the people of God, they 
acquiesce in their own degradation ; " The Philistines are rulers over us." They had 
railier not be distnrbed. Let us alone, they said. Let us be as we are, fallen, sunken, 
degraded. All good within them was blunted and quenched. Self-respect was gone ; 
love at country was gone ; aspiration after all that is good and high was gone ; 
courage, honour, enterprise, love of freedom, pride in their own matchless institutions, 
remembrance of s glorious past, hope tor • glorious future, all was crashed withia 

m2 



164 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [cH.xv. >-20. 

them because they had no trust in God. The elevating, ennobling, sustaining feeling 
that they were God's chosen people, and that the unohanpfing love and power of 
God were on their side to sustain them in every virtuous efEort, and give effect to 
every good and holy desire, was extinct within them. Their calamities and injuries, 
not being mixed with confidence in God, and prayer to him for deliverance, had only 
trodden out their manhood. It was the sorrow of the world working death. Now 
such a state of mind as this is a very common effect of unsanctified misfortunes. 
Sorrows, brought on perhaps by misconduct, which do not send men to God in peni- 
tence and prayer only harden and depress. They produce sullenness, and they 
destroy the spring of hope. Men sink on to a lower platform even in regard to theii 
fellow-men. They are not humbled, only lowered. They take a lower, darker view 
of human life and human responsibilities. Virtue, truth, love of neighbours, kind- 
ness, generosity, and the charities of life bum very low and dim within them, if they 
are not wholly extinct. A cold, hard selfishness, and even that not an aspiring self- 
ishness, wraps itself around the centre of their being. Every appeal to the highei 
qualities of human nature is resented or scoffed at. "Leave me alone," is the silent 
language of their attitude towards humanity. " Trouble me not," is their answer to 
every call upon them for virtuous effort. And as to the still higher and nobler calls 
of religion, every invitation to rise toward God, to act in the spirit of his holy word, 
to follow the 'leading of his Holy Spirit, to walk in the steps of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
is received with s cynical sneer ; and even those who, in better days, seemed to be 
actuated by religious hopes and feelings, under the pressure of such unsanctified 
cares and sorrows fall into a thoroughly low region both of religion and of morals. 
Now contrast with those men of Judah the feelings and the conduct of Samson. 
Conscious of Divine aid, and of having unfailing strength in God, his courage never 
drooped in the darkest days of the Philistine oppression. Conscious of his own high 
calling, and of the election of Israel to be the people of God, he could not brook the 
notion of being ruled over by the uncircumcised, nor did he lose the hope of some 
great deliverance. He was ready for the service of God and of his country. And 
even the feeling that he stood alone did not quench his spirit. He did not lose sight 
of hope, because he did not lose sight of God. The weight of the great national 
calamity, in which he also was involved, did not utterly depress and crush him, 
because he believed in the mighty hand of God, which could lift up that weight in 
• moment, whenever it seemed good to him to do so. And so all the natural resources 
of his mind were kept alive and ready for action, as well as his great supernatural 
strength, whenever the opportunity should arise. And Samson's supernatural strengfth 
is only a type to us of that invincible spiritual strength which they have who are 
the faithful servants of the Lord Jesus Christ. " I can do all things through Christ 
which strengtheneth me," is the truth embodied in Samson's exploits. In the 
Christian's steady, unwearied, resistance to evil, in his patient continuance in well 
doing, in the quiet, hopeful endurance of sufferings and afSictions, in the undaunted 
spirit which quails under no dangers, and faints under no adversities, and in the faith 
which eventually triumphs over all the powers of the world, we have the spiritual 
counterpart of Samson's great bodily strength. The brave, hopeful struggle of such, 
ending in victory, is in striking contrast with the desperate succumbing to evil of 
which we have spoken. And we may see it on a large scale in the Church herself. 
Often has the Church of God seemed weak and helpless before the powers of dark- 
ness, even while she had in herself the secret of an invincible strength. Often would 
her professed friends bind her in the fetters of worldly compliances, and hand her 
over to be shaped according to the fashion of this world, lest she should overthrow 
the accustomed sway, and break down the traditionary rules. But as often has the 
Spirit of the Lord come mightily upon her, and she has awakened as a giant refreshed 
with wine, and gone forth with irresistible might. The most trivial instruments have 
been in her hands weapons of supernatural power ; her fiercest foes have sunk before 
her victorious progress ; God has raised up refreshments to her in her hours of need j 
when she called upon God for help she was helped ; and many a monument of God's 
saving g^ace and helping hand has deserved to be inscribed as En-hdkhoreh — the 
supply granted to the cry of faithful prayer. O Lord, let thy Spirit come upon us 
now, in this our day of trial ; hear thy Church's prayer, and let her cry conns unts 
thesi 



0H.XV.9— ao.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES, 16t 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers, 14 — 16. — Imperfect meant made ^ectual hy Bimne inspiration. It wae 
but the jawbone of an ass, yet it slew as many as might have fallen in a battle. 

I. In thb conflicts of tbdth it is of chief consequence that wb be on the 
BIDE of teuth, and animated by the Spirit of God. 

II. Through God's blessing the grandest results have been pboduced by 
the rudest and simplest means. The preaching of the gospel by unlettered 
fishermen. " The solitary monk that shook the world " with the disused weapon in 
God's armoury. The " simple gospel " and the evils of our age. 

III. Notwithstanding outward advantages, the enemies of God are certain 

IN THE END to BE DISCOMFITED. 

IV. Thb ABSOLUTENESS AND SPLENDOUR OF SPIRITUAL ACHIEVBMBNTS. PenteOOgt ; 

missionary triumphs ; the song of Moses and of the Lamb. — M. 

Vers. 17 — 19. — The sel/-re/reshm,ent of Divine service. After his great exploit 
Samson was exhausted and athirst. The zeal for the glory of Jehovah is upon him, 
and he cannot brook the tarnishing of his glorious victory by a base surrender to 
the Philistines, He immediately calls upon God, and is answered in the very scene 
of his warfare, 

I. In MOMENTS OF GREATEST EXALTATION AND POWER THE SAINT IS REMINDED OF HIS 

WEAKNESS AND DEPENDENCE UPON GoD. Paul and the "thorn in the flesh." The 
great deed and heroic uplifting of soul accompanying it are a Divine gift — a treasure 
in an earthen vessel. "By the grace of God I am what I am." 

II. Thb true saint will frankly acknowledge this, and betake himself to 
PRAYER fob Divine help. The faith that made Samson irresistible in battle now 
makes him prevail with God. A sense of spiritual fitness forbids the notion that 
God will suffer such an anti-climax. The victories that spring from acknowledged 
weakness are more glorious than those which proceed upon our fancied independence 
and self-suflBciency. " AVhen I am weak, then am I strong." 

III. The CONDITIONS of an effectual prayer. 1. Sincerity arid faith God had 
helped him already ; he is convinced, therefore, that he will still help. 2. Because of 
wants and hardships necessitated by Divine service. He is immediately answered, 
and in the very scene of it. No earthly hand is suffered to help. 3. Zeal for the glory 
of God. The idea of neutralising his triumph by yielding through physical distress 
is obnoxious to him. He asks God to preserve the splendour of the exploit which 
brought such glory to his name. — M. 

Ver. 16. — The jawbone of an ass. I, It was a novel weapon. Samson again 
shows his inventiveness and originality (see ver. 4). To succeed in sudden emerg- 
encies, we must have presence of mind to choose and act rapidly and foeshly. 'The 
slave of routine is helpless in every critical moment of life. 

IL It was thb most convenient weapon available. If Samson could have 
laid his hand on a sword he would not have picked up the bone. It would be foolish, 
rash, and presumptuous to reject the better means in order to make a display of 
strength or originality in the use of inferior means. But when the only thing avail- 
able is a comparatively poor expedient, it is better to use this than nothing. While 
we are waiting for the perfect weapons to be forged the opportunity for victory 
passes. Thus inferior men and inferior methods must often be used for want of 
better ones. It is wrong for us to refuse to do any work for Christ because we have 
not the best possible natural powers or cultivation. It is better to serve as we are 
than not at all. ' 

III. It was a simple weapon. Many would have despaired with such a prospect 
as Samson's. But difficulty is the inspiration of genius. In spiritual warfare God 
■ometimes blesses the poorest means when faith and zeal are making the best use ol 
them. God's strength is thus most perfect in our weakness, because then we most 
need it, are most likely to seek it trustfully, and will be most inclined to use it 
^bedieatljr. 



166 THE BOOK OP JUDGES. [oh. xt. 9—20 

rv. It was a ridiculous weapon. The hero would seem to be humiliated as h< 
condescended to use such a weapon. But he was great enough to despise ridicule. 
It is weak and wrong to decline to use the only available means of rendering God 
good service because we fear they are undignified. True dignity is found not in 
pedantry and pomp, but in simple, brave independence. Great needs conquer foolish 
vanity. When the Philistines are on us we are in no mood to ask or to care whether 
our conduct will excite the laughter of the idle. If Christians realised more fully the 
awful depth of the world's sin and misery, they would be less sensitive to the trivial 
ridicule with which men may regard their work. How many promising lives have 
been poisoned by the narcotic of a false respectability 1 

V. It was a successful weapon. This is the one matter of consequence. Success 
refutes all objections. Eidicule is now turned into admiration. The very simplicity 
and folly of the means increases the glory of the result. So the great question in 
the Christian warfare against evil is that this is effective. If so, all the world's 
foolish criticism will be drowned in the triumph of victory. — ^A. 

Vers. 18, 19. — Distress after triumph. I. One qheat deliveeanct is ho 
SECURITY AGAINST ALL FUTURE TROCTBLE. Samson is surprised and vexed that a new 
trouble should fall upon him after his great victory. There is a danger lest we 
should rest contented with past triumphs. The Christian warfare can only end with 
the final victory over death. Till then we are in the enemy's land, and must expect 
that one battle will only be succeeded by another. Though we may have a season 
of calm, an oasis in the desert, a quiet resting-place, " this is not our rest." Let us 
beware of the confident self-elation which often follows the conquest of a tempta- 
tion ; it may be an introduction to a new and more dangerous one. 

II. Slight evils may prove more dangerous than great ones. Samson feels 
it humiliating to be in danger of dying of thirst after his victory over a much more 
imposing enemy ; but he had means to meet the greater foe, and none with which to 
face the smaller one. Evils are injurious not so much in proportion to their simple 
magnitude as in proportion to our susceptibility to them. The force of a particular 
temptation depends on a man's special disposition and peculiarity of character, not 
■imply on its inherent alarming or alluring qualities. It should humble us to learn 
that Mter escaping the greatest dangers by the help of God we may succumb to very 
small dangers if left to ourselves. 

III. Seasons of triumph are often followed by seasons op depression. Samson 
is despondent and querulous after his victory. So was Elijah (1 Kings xix. 4). No 
doubt this common experience is partly the result of nervous reaction. Excitable 
people oscillate between the extremes of ecstasy and despair. It has also moral 
grounds. We grow over-confident, we expect too much, we forget that life cannot 
always be pitched in the heroic mood. The career of the loftiest souls is not one, 
unbroken epic ; even this has its seamy side, its stale and unprofitable moments. 
There is a Divine purpose of discipline in this painful experience to keep us humble 
and in tiustful submission. 

IV. God helps us in cub depression as well as in our elation. God came 
to the rescue of Samson. Though he murmured, God had compassion on him. God 
understands our weakness, and, understanding, pities it. He does not treat his 
servants as heroes, but as children (Ps. oiii. 13). The depression of feeling which 
destroys our consciousness of assurance does not destroy God's grace. It is import- 
ant to observe that the faith which is the condition of God's help is not our confidence 
in our own salvation, but the simple trusting of ourselves to God's care, so that 
when we least expect his help this may come upon us and surprise us, if only we 
thus oast ourselves upon his mercy. — A- 

EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Ver, 1. — Then. It should be otu^. There Is 
nothing to show when the incident occurred. 



Itmay have been many years after Us victor; 
at hal-Lechi, towards the latter part of his 
twenty years' judgeship. Gaza, now Ohmaeh, 
one of the five chief cities of the Philistines, 



OH. XVI. 1—22.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



167 



once a strong place, but now a large open 
town. It was the last town in South-West 
Palestine on the road from Jerusalem to 
Egypt (Acts viii. 26, 27). It played an im- 
portant part in history in all ages — in the 
times of the Pharaohs, the Seleucidse, the 
Maccabees, the Romans, the Ehalifs, and the 
Crusaders. It was within the limits of the 
tribe of Judah (Josh. xv. 47). It is first 
mentioned in Gen. z. 19, as the south-west 
border of the Canaanites. Its real trans- 
literation from the Hebrew is 'Azzah, as it is 
actually expressed in the A. V. of Deut. ii. 
23, and 1 kings iv. 24. Gaza is the Greek 
form. 

Ver. 2. — And it was told. These words 
have no doubt nocidentally fallen out of the 
Hebrew text, but they are necessary to the 
sense, and are expressed in all the ancient 
versions. "We have no clue as to the motive 
of Samson's visit to Gaza, whether he was 
meditating its conquest, or an assault upon 
its inhabitants, or whether he came merely 
in the wild spirit of adventure, or upon civil 
business. We only know that he came 
there, that, with his usual weakness, he fell 
into the snare of female blandishments, that 
the Philistines thought to have caught him 
and killed him, but that he escaped by his 
•upematural strength. Gaza is about thir- 
teen hours' march from Thimnathah. They 
eompassed him in. The Hebrew does not 
express this idea, nor is it what the Gazites 
did. It should be rendered, They went about 
and lay in wait for Mm. Instead of attack- 
ing him directly, they took a round-about 
course, and set an ambush for him in the 
city gates, probably in the guard-room by 
the side of the gate, intending when he came 
forth unsuspectingly in the morning, at the 
hour of opening the gates, to rush upon him 
and kill him. 

Ver. 3. — Samson arose at midnight. 
Possibly the woman had learnt the plot, and 
gave Samson warning, after the manner of 
Bahab ; or she may have been his betrayer, 
and reckoned upon retaining him tiU the 
morning ; anyhow he arose at midnight, 
when the liers in wait were sleeping securely, 
and tearing up the two gate-posts, with the 
gatss and the cross-bar attached to them, 
walked off with then. " as far as the top of the 
hill that is before Hebron." Took the doors, 
tus. Bather, laid hold of. For went away 
with them, tianslate plucked them wp. It 
is the technical word for plucking up the tent 
pins. Bar and all, or, vnth the bar. The bar 
was probably a strong iron or wooden cross- 
bar, which was attached to the posts by a 
lock, and could only be removed by one that 
had the key. Samson tore up the posts 
with the barred gates attached to them, and, 
putting the whole mass upon his back, walked 
off with it The hill that is before Hebron. 



Hebron "was about nine geographical, oi 
between ten and eleven English, miles front 
Gaza, situated in a deep, narrow valley, with 
high hills on either side." It is approached 
from Gaza over a high ridge, from the top of 
which Hebron becomes visible, lying in the 
valley below at fifty minutes' distance. This 
spot would suit very well the description, 
"the hill that is before Hebron." Some, 
however, think that the hill called el Montar, 
about three-quarters of an hour from Gaza, 
on the road to Hebron, is here meant, and 
that the plain before Hebron merely means 
towards, as in Gen. xviii 16; Deut. xxxii. 49. 

Ver. 4. — Sorek. See ch. xiv. 5, note. 
The name has not yet been discovered as 
applied to any existing spot ; but Eusebius 
in the ' Onomasticon ' speaks of a village 
Caphar-mrek as still existing near Zorah. 
The term valley (nachal) describes a wady, 
i. e, a narrow valley with a stream. 

Ver. 5. — Lords. See ch. iii. 3, note. His 
great strength lieth — literally, wherein (ol 
by what means) his strength is great. They 
guessed that it was through some charm oi 
secret amulet that his Herculean might waa 
nourished. Eleven hundred pieces, or 
shekels, of silver. The whole sura promised 
by the five lords would be no less than 
S500 shekels, equal to about ^620 of our 
money. The curious notation, ele/oen hv/n- 
d/red pieces, occurs again ch. xvii. 2. The 
reason of it is unknown. 

Ver. 7. — As another man — literally, as ona 
of mem, i, e. of mankind, not different from 
other men. As regards the word rendered 
withs, it is not certain whether strings of cat- 
gut are not meant. In Ps. xi. 2 the same 
word is used of a bow-string. The word 
rendered green means fresh or new, and 
might be equally applied to catgut strings 
or withs. 

Ver. 9. — There were men lying in wait — 
literally, and the liers im wait were abiding 
for her im, the chamber. She had hid some 
three or four men in the chamber unknown 
to Samson, that they might be ready to fikll 
upon him should his strength really have 
departed from him. The word for liers in 
wait is in the singular number, but is to bo 
taken collectively, as in ch. xx. 33, 36 — 38. 
In ch. XX. 37 it is joined to a plural verb. 
It is to be presumed that through some con- 
certed signal the liers in wait did not dis- 
cover themselves. 

Ver. 10.— Wherewith, or rather, aa in 
rer. 8, by what means. 

Ver. 11. — Bopes — literally, twisted things ; 
hence cords or ropes, as Ps. it 3; laa. T. 
18. Occupied — an old obsolete phrase, fel 
which we should now say itsed. 

Ver. 12. — Took new ropes. She had them 
by her, apparently, or could easily procure 
them, as it is not said that the lotia brought 



IM 



THE BOOK JF JUDGES. 



[CH. XVI. 1—22 



Aem to her. And there were liers. Rather, 
as before, amd the liers im, wait were abiding, 
&c. Each time she had persuaded the lords 
that Samson had divulged his secret, and 
that she would deliver him into the hands 
of the men whom they sent. 

Ver. 13. — The seven locks, by which we 
learn that his mass of hair as a Kazarite was 
arranged in seven locks or plaits. His re- 
sistance was becoming weaker, and he now 
approached the dangerous ground of his 
unshorn hair. With the web. This must 
mean the warp, which was already fastened 
in the loom, and across which Samson's 
locks were to be woven as the woof. 

Ver. 14. — And she fastened it with the 
pin. The Septiiagint and many comment- 
ators understand that she used the pin (it is 
the common word for a tent pin) to fasten 
the loom or frame to the ground, or to the 
wall. But a good sense comes out if we 
understand the phrase to mean, So she sbnick 
with the shuttle, i. e. she did what Samson 
told her to do, viz., wove his locks into the 
warp which was already prepared. This was 
done by successive strokes of the shuttle, to 
which the hair was fastened. To strike 
with the peg or shuttle may have been the 
technical phrase for throwing the shuttle 
with the woof into the warp ; and it is a 
strong argument in favour of this interpreta- 
tion that it makes her action the simple ful- 
filment of his directions. He said, " Weave 
my locks into the warp. So she struck with 
the shuttle." With the pin of the beam, 
and with the web. The Hebrew word 
'ereg cannot mean the heam, as it is here 
translated ; it is the substantive of the verb 
to weave in ver. 13. Its obvious meaning, 
therefore, is t}ie woof. The pin of the woof, 
therefore, is the shuttle with the woof at- 
tach ed to it, t. «. Samson's hair, which was 
firmly woven into the warp. He went 
away with. This is the same word as was 
applied in ver. 3 to his plucking up the gate- 

Eosts. Now, with the strength of his neck, 
e tore up the shuttle which fastened his 
hair to the warp, and so dragged the whole 
solid frame along with it. However, as we 
do not know the technical term of the art of 
the weaving among the Hebrews and Philis- 
tines, nor the precise construction of their 
looms, some obscurity necessarily attaches to 
this description. 



Ter. 16.— Thy great strength Uttli— m 
before, ver. 6, thy strength is great. 

Ver. 16.— So that. Omit«o. The mean- 
ing is, that in consequence of her daily 
solicitation his soul was vexed (ch. z. 16) to 
death — ^Uterally, was so short, so impatient, 
as to be at the point to die. 

Ver. 17. — That he told her. This begins 
a new sentence. Bead, And he told her. 
Any other man. Rather, liJce all rrun. 
Man, though singular in the Hebrew, is 
collective as in ver. 7, and as the lier in wait 
in vers. 9 and 12, and is properly ren^^ 
men in English. 

Ver. 18. — He hath showed me. So the 
Eeri ; but the written text has her instead 
of me, which is favoured by the tense of the 
verb came up. If her is the true reading, 
these words would be the addition of the 
messenger, explaining why she told them to 
come up once more, or of the narrator, for the 
same purpose. Bronght money. It should 
be (he money, the stipulated bribe (ver. 5). 

Ver. 19.— She called for a man. It is 
she called to the mam, — the man whom she 
had secreted in the chamber before she put 
Samson to sleep, that he might cut off the 
locks. She caused him to shave. In the 
Hebrew it is she shaved, but it probably 
means that she did so by his instrumentality. 
She began to afflict, or humble, him. His 
strength began to wane immediately his 
locks began to be shorn, and it was all gone 
by the time his hair was all cut ofL 

Ver. 20. — And shake myself, t. e. shake 
off the Philistines who encompass me ; 
but when he said so he knew not that the 
Lord had departed from him, and that he 
was indeed become weak like other men (see 
a fine sermon of Robert HaU's from this 
text). 

Ver. 21. — ^Pnt out his eyes. One of the 
cruel punishments of those times (see Numb, 
xvi. 14 ; 2 Kings xxv. 7), and still, or till 
quite lately, practised by Oriental despots 
to make their rivals incapable of reignmg. 
So King John, in Shakespeare, ordeied 
Arthur's eyes to be put out with a hot iron 
(King John, Act IV. scene i.). Herodotus 
(Help. iv. 2) says that the Scythians used to 
put out the eyes of all their slaves. He did 
grind — the most degrading form of labour, 
the punishment of slaves among the Greek* 
and Romans (see too Isa. xlvii 2). 



HOMILETICa 

Veri. 1 — 22. — Presumption leading to a fall. One of the most instructlT* 
observations we can make with a view to our own guidance is that of the extreme 
danger of self-confidence. Humility is of the very essence of the Christian character, 
and the moment that presumption takes the place of humility the danger to the sonl 
commences. Now humility is not necessarily an underrating of our own powers oi 
oqt own gifts Our powers are just what the^ are, and our gifts are of • certain 



OB. ZTI. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 16t 

value, neither more nor less, and there is no reason why we should not appraise 
them at their true value. Samson did not overrate his strength when he submitted 
to be bound by the men of Judah, nor when he put the gates of Gath upon his 
shoulders, and carried them to the hill over against Hebron. But the transition to 
presumption commences as soon as we forget that we have nothing which we have 
not received, and begin to use what we have for our own purposes, and not for 
Ood's glory, and reckon upon its continuance, whatever use we make of it. When a 
gift or power generates self-conceit, as if it originated with ourselves, presumption ' 
has begun ; the use of it for our own glorification is the next step ; security in its 
continuance, however much we abuse it, is the third stage of presumption. We 
■eem to see this in the history of Samson. He was the child of prayer, and of great 
expectations. From his mother's womb he was consecrated to God in the bonds of 
a special covenant. From his birth he had the special blessing of God resting upon 
him. From his youth he was moved in an extraordinary manner by the Spirit of the 
Lord. Before his birth he was announced as the deliverer of Israel. To enable him 
to fulfil his grand destiny, he was endowed with supernatural strength ; and to mark 
how entirely that strength was God's gift, it was tied to the outward sign of his 
Nazarite vow, his unshorn locks. But very early he began to show a certain unfit- 
ness for his great task. His marriage with the Timnathite was a distinct downward 
step from the platform of heroic self-consecration to the service of God. That God 
designed to make use of that act in forwarding his own purposes does not in the 
least affect its nature as a subordination of high spiritual resolves to self-will and 
oamal lusts. Again, in his assaults upon the Philistines we see much more of a 
wayward resentment of personal injuries than of enlightened patriotic efforts to 
deliver his country from a degrading foreign yoke. His wife betrays his secret, so 
the Philistines of Ashkelon are slaughtered and plundered ; his wife is given to 
another man by her father, so the whole country is wasted with fire to avenge the 
wrong; she is put to death, and he avenges her death by a great slaughter of her 
countrymen. His visit to Gaza, and the extraordinary feat of carrying away the 
gates upon his shoulders, savoured more of the wanton display of g^at powers for 
self-glorification than of a sanctified use of them for God's glory. But it is in the 
painful transaction with Delilah that wn chiefly see that presumptuous abufie of great 
gifts which precedes a g^eat fall. Unwarned by the previous treachery of Philis- 
tine women, unmindful of previous deliverances from imminent peril by the mercy 
of God, he gave himself up to the wantonness of self-confidence. Either not seeing 
or despising her designs for his destruction, he went on step by step toward his ruin, 
as an ox goeth to the slaughter ; he tampered with his solemn vow as a Nazarite, 
which hitherto he had respected, and placed it at the mercy of a heathen harlot, and 
never woke from his delusion and presumption till he found himself a helpless cap- 
tive in the hands of his enemies, deprived of his eyesight and of his liberty, an object 
of scorn, and, still worse, an occasion of blasphemy against God. The lesson is a 
striking one in every way, and it is one much needed ; for nothing is more com- 
mon, or more fruitful in falls and failures, than a selfish misuse of God's gifts, and a 
presumptuous confidence in the possession of them. We see it in men like Napoleon 
Buonaparte. A giant in abilities, but those abilities were used only for self -exalta- 
tion. Success led him on to blind self-confidence. He thought his power was his 
own, and could never be taken from him. He fell at last into the wantonness and 
fatuity of presumption, acting with incredible folly, and bringing upon himself an 
utter ruin. But we see the same thing with regard to spiritual gifts. The possession 
of spiritual discernment, or of eloquence in expounding the word of God, or of 
influence over men, begets conceit. The sense of having only what God has g^ven 
us, and of being tenants at will of his mercies, becomes weakened, and spiritual 
pride is permitted to grow. Then men begin to use their gifts unfaithfully, ». e. 
not with a single eye to the glory of God and the good of men'ssouls, but ■'or thein- 
selves. 'They use them and display them to feed their own vanity, to increase their 
own consequence and importance. They use them to gather parties around them- 
selves of which they may be the heads and leaders. Sometimes they use them for 
gain, for filthy lucre, seeking the advancement of their own worldly interests, while 
they •!• ostensibly working for God. Every kind and degres of such a spirit nesds 



m THK Boot OP .rtTD&fiS. Lo»- *«• ^—^ 

to be carefully guarded against and nipped in the very bud. That simplicity of aim 
and purpose which was so sublimely apparent in the words and works of the Lord 
Jesus should be the mark which his disciples should constantly strive to attain. The 
work which is done partly for a man's self is only half done. The work which is 
done entirely for God is done whoUy. The thorough practical feeling that all our 
gifts and powers, be they great or small, are given to us by God for his service is a 
great help towards such pure and righteous use of them. But we must not forgot 
that there is a further stage of this abuse of spiritual gifts which can only end in a 
grievous fall. God is very patient and long-suffering, and puts up, maybe, with our 
lesser ofiences in this respect, only gently rebuking us, and giving us significant 
warnings of our danger. But if these warnings are neglected, the state of pre- 
sumption may grow till there is no remedy. In this state of mind men rush mto 
temptation as if there could be no danger for them. They repudiate or neglect 
prayer, as if prayer was not needful for them. They lose all the marks of a gracious 
soul, and yet they are not frightened at their absence. And then comes a fall, may- 
be into the gross darkness ait unbelief, maybe into the abyss of sensual sin, which 
to the world seems sudden, but which had really been steadily advancing through the 
successive stages of presumption and self-confidence. The Spirit of the Lord departs 
from them, and Satan enters into them. Gifts vnthout grace unprofitable. But we 
cannot dismiss the sad history of Samson without the reflection that gifts, however 
splendid, and powers, however eminent, are useless without the grace to use them 
aright. What might not Samson have effected for his country and his generation if 
his extraordinary strength had been used humbly, wisely, and consistently in the 
service of God and for the good of Israel ! If his own passions of lust, and anger, 
and revenge had been under the control of that Holy Spirit which so wondrously 
strengthened his body, and his single aim had been to walk with God and do good 
to man, what a career his would have been I But as it was all went to waste. 
Desultory actions leading to no lasting result, mighty efforts followed by shameful 
weakness, and heroic courage defeated by his own imbecility of purpose, made a 
life all marred and blotted, aimless and purposeless — a brilliant disappointment, a 
splendid failure, a glorious shame. But it has left this further lesson to be weighed 
and pondered by us all, and especially by those who are most richly endowed with 
intellectual or spiritual gifts, that while God can accomplish his own designs through 
our abuse as well as our use of his good gifts, and through our failures as well as 
through our successes, it rests with ourselves to improve each talent committed to 
us, and so to use them that they may be found unto our own honour and praise and 
glory at the appearing of Jesus Chrbt. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOSa 

Vers. 1 — S. — God redeeming the error of his servant. The visit to the "harlot" 
is not to be explained away. The character of Samson explains its nature. This 
was the side where he was weak, the love of women. His sensuality betrays him 
into a g^eat danger. God shows his affection for his servant, and for Israel whom he 
had delivered, by granting strength for a signal and unexpected escape, which was 
marked by trophies covering his enemies with shame. 

I. We ought to beware of a one-sided horality. External morality, like 
Samson the Nazarite's, is almost certain to be of this kind. The saint should 
leave no unguarded place. Only the indwelling of the Holy Ghost can deliver 
from besetting sins. The blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son, cleanseth from tUl sin. 

II. A SINGLE BIN HAT UNDO THE FAME AND SUCCESS OF A LIFETIME. 

III. When saints fall into sin the wicked triumph and abe confident of 
THBIB RUIN. The conception which the world has of sainthood is one of perfect 
external blamelessness, the least infraction of which is hailed as utter failure. When 
one failing like this is discovered, many more are imagined. How sure are these 
cowards of the capture of their foe I Or do they only seem to be so, using words of 
confidence and procrastination to conceal their inward fear ? Is there not an un- 
Bonnded mystery, &c., that cannot be calculated upon, in the defections of Ood i 
people ? What and if Peter be restored again ? "The awaking of him whom God 



*. XVI. i-^3 TfiE BOOi OJ- JtJDQfia Itl 

rouses from fleshly slumbers will ever take the wicked by surprise. The evil is that 
the Churoh too often shares the world's view about the irrecoverableness of backsliders. 
now often have God's saints been able to shout, " Rejoice not over me, mina 
enemy ! " 

IV. Thb obacb of God sometimes delivers his servants prom the coNSBQUENCEa 
OP TBEIB OWN FOLLY AND SIN. Sometimes, but not always. Frequently enough for 
hope, but not for presumption. But the victory will be wholly his own. The trophy 
of deliverance will reflect no credit upon the delivered one. He would rather deliver 
us from our sin itself. He has promised that he will heal our backslidings. 

V. The temporart triumphs of sin are swallowed dp in the eternal bk- 
DEMPTIONS OF God. The gates of Gaza, the chief city of Philistia, are lifted ofE and 
carried to the top of the hill beside Hebron, the chief city of Judah. Every Israelite 
could see them in their exalted place of exhibition. So shall it be with the victories 
of the Lamb. He in whom was no sin, but who waa made sin for us, shall deliver 
from all sin, mnd make us " more than conquerors." The seed of Abraham was to 
" possess the gate of its enemies " (Gen. xxii. 17 ; cf. xxiv. 60). The gates of bell 
shall not prevail against the kingdom of Christ. — M. 

Veni. 4 — 21. — Samson's betrayal and faU. The long-suffering of God, which the 
saints are exhorted (2 Pet. iii. 16) to account salvation, is in Samson's case presumed 
upon, and the besetting sin at last finds him out. The sin is single, but it is not the 
first of its kind, nor is it isolated. The years of self-indulgence were preparing for 
this — a mad revel of voluptuousness and a deliberate denial of Jehovah. The scenes 
of this tragedy have a typical interest, and they are sketched lightly but indelibly 
by a master hand. In the gradual but deliberate breaking of tus vow we have a 
parallel to Peter's threefold denial of his Lord. 

I. SeNSHALITT lulls the soul into a fatal slumber, and DE8TR0TB ITS SENSE 
OP DUTT AND ITB CAPACITY FOR USEFULNESS. 

IL Companions in guilt may do us more harm than our worst enemies. Here 
the serviceablenesi of Delilah is at once perceived by her fellow-countrymen, and 
they hasten to make use of her. The bribe offered, not necessarily ever paid, not 
only shows the importance of Samson in their eyes, but the value they set upon the 
influence of this lustful woman. How much mischief can a single transgressor do, not 
only directly, but through influence t Here it was not only a man betrayed to his 
enemies, but a soul undone. " What shall a man give," &o. " He knoweth not that 
the dead are there, and that her guests are in the depths of hell " (Prov. ix. 13 — 18). 
The harlot's house, and what it introduces to. 

III. The ungodly misapprehend the secret and nature op spiritual strength. 
The Philistines evidently thought Samson's power lay in the eflioacy of some charm. 
It is this they seek to obtain. They are incapable of thinking of a higher influence. 
Samson accordingly plays with this superstitious fancy, giving at the same time in 
each of his answers a parabolic or riddle-like shadowing forth of the true secret So 
Satan and his servants tempt the Christian by altering the outward circumstances 
of life, associations, habits, &c., through which the life works, but of which it 
is independent. Until the saint yields it up, the secret of his life with God is 



IV. Even ni thb moment and crisis of spiritual downfall there are Divine 
interpositions, retardations, and occasions fob eepentance. The Spirit of God 
was evidently working through the mind of Samson, and suggesting the evasive 
riddles, parables, &c., that "seeing they might not see," &c. The question of his 
downfall is thereby brought several times before himself ere it actually takes place. 
So Peter and the cock-crow. In how many lives is this providential method illus- 
trated ' Temptation is played with until, constrictor-like, it springs upon its prey. 
Becollections of childhoods lessons, early scenes, &c. are very potent at such 
times. 

V. When thb saint's vow to God is broken, all is lost. The secret u out, 
and the charmed life is helpless. A wreck of a man. Nothing left but the memory 
of an ineparable past and the burden of self-wrought helplessness. There are n« 
mills 10 pitiful as uiose of men who once were saints and Christian workers, Sunday- 



Hi THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [ch. xvi. 1—22. 



school teachers, ministers, &o. How dark is the world and life when the soul's light 
has gone out 1 With God the weakest is strong, tdthout him the strongest is weak. 
" His eyes, blinded by sensuality, saw not the treason ; soon, blinded by the enemy, 
he should see neither sun, nor men, but only God. That done, he turned back, and 
God came beck to him " (Lange). — M. 

Ver. 20. — "And he toiat not that the Lord (Jehovah) VKU departed from him,.''' 
A common state with many in Christ's Church. They are useless, helpless, and 
miserable, and they do not realise its significance. They try the customary methods, 
duties, &c., but fail to produce the looked-for results. They " go out as at other times 
before," but still is the spirit bound. Hitherto the Philistines knew not the secret of 
his strength, now he does not realise the secret of his weakness. 

L Spiritual iqnobance iiEsnLTS feom spiritual downfall. This is a partial 
converse of " he that doeth the word shall know of the doctrine." A mark of those 
in whom the truth is not, is that they deceive themselves ; they fancy they are still 
the same as formerly. How subtle yet infinite is this distinction — with Ood, without 
Gcdl 

II. The loss sustained bt the fallen doUL is gbbatbb than it realises. 
Only gradually does the experience work itself out, in a Judas's remorse or a Peter's 
repentance. Samson thought his strength merely had gone — it was God, the Giver 
of his strength. " Whoever has God knows it ; whomsoever he has left knows it 
not " (Lange). — M. 

Vers. 15 — 17. — Savnsotii wedknett. Samson's weakness is twofold. Through lack 
of moral strength he reveals the secret of his physical strength, and is thus betrayed 
into the loss of this also. 

L Samson's moral weakness. This is the man's great failing, apparent through- 
out his history, but reaching a climax in the present incident. Physical endowments 
are no guarantees for spiritual graces. Must not some of our young athletic bar- 
barians of the aristocracy, adored by the multitude for chest and muscle, be con- 
demned by true standards of judgment for contemptible weakness of character? 
Such weakness is far more deplorable than the bodily weakness of palsy and paralysis. 
St. Paul was considered miserably deficient m physical power and presence (2 Cor. 
X. 10), yet his strength of soul exalts the apostle immeasurably above Samson. The 
moral weakness of Samson is illustrated by the circumstances of liis great defeat. 
1. Sin. Samson was neglecting his duty and degrading himself with those evil 
communications which corrupt good manners. There is nothing so enervating as tlie 
conscious pursuit of a guilty course. 2. Pleasure. Instead of toiling, fighting, and 
sacrificing himself for his country, Samson was wasting his hours in pleasure. Apajt 
from the wrongness of this conduct, the lax, self-indulgent spirit it engendered wns 
weakening. In seasons of pleasure we are oflE our guard. 3. The allurements of 
false affecticm. Samson can resist a host of Philistine warriors, but he cannot resist 
one Philistine woman. Strong against rude violence, he is weak before soft per- 
suasion. Pure love is the loftiest inspiration for self-sacrificing devotion ; but love 
degraded and corrupted is the deadliest poison to purity of character and vigour arid 
independence of action. How many saints and heroes have found their humiliation in 
the same snares which caught the strong Samson and the famous St. Antony I 4. The 
self-confidence of strength. Samson plays with the curiosity of Delilah, sure of the 
power which will come to his aid in the moment of danger, till by degrees he is per- 
suaded to betray the secret of that very power. Had he been less strong, he would 
have been less rash. Presumption is more dangerous than conscious weakness 
(1 Cor. x. 12). 

II. Samson's physical weakness. This resulted from his moral weakness. In 
the end the faults of the inner life will bear fruit in trouble to the outer life. 1. 
Samson's strength was a Divine gift. He had not attained it by self-discipline nor 
merited it by service. It was a talent intrusted to his care to be used for God. 
What God gives God can withhold. 2. Samson's strength was derived from spiritual 
sources. Samson was not a mere prodigy of brute force. He was one of God's 
heroes, and the glory of his strength lay in this fact, that it was the outcome of aa 



CH. xvl. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF JDDGES. 173 

inspiration. The most exalted powers we have for earthly work are derived from 
spiritual sources. If these sources are cut off, the energies which issue from them 
will be exhausted. Samson grows weak through the departure of the Spirit of the 
Lord. 3. Samson's strength depended on his observance of the Nazarite'$ vow. 
When the vow was broken the strength fled. God has a covenant with his people. 
He is always true to his side, but if we fail on ours the covenant is void and thp 
blessings dependent on it cease. (1) The vow of the Nazarite implied consecration 
to God. God bestows graces on us so long as we live to him, but our departure 
from him necessitates the just withholding of those graces. (2) The vow required 
obedience to certain regulations. These were trivial in themselves ; but the obliga- 
tion of obedience is determined not by the importance of the commands given, but 
by the authority of the person giving them. Disobedience is shown not to the law, 
but to the authority. A small test may be sufficient to reveal this. Disobedience to 
God is the fundamental element of all sin, and, as in Samson's case, it will be the sure 
cause of our ruin. — A. 

Ver. 20. — Go(Fs departure from the tout unreeognited. " He wist not that the 
Lord was departed from him. 

I. The fact. 1. T!hme axe vaenyihora God has forsaken. No man is utterly for- 
saken by God ; our continued existence is an evidence of the continued presence of 
him in whom we live and move and have our being. But the fuller presence of God, 
that which secures strength and blessing, may depart. 2. His departure is the 
greatest curse which can fall upon a man. The consequences of it are weakness. 
shame, ruin. The conscious realisation of it is hell. 3. The cause of this departure oi 
God is in the conduct of men, not in the will of God. Samson forsook God before 
God forsook him. God does not visit his people casually, and only for seasons ; he 
abides, and will never leave them (Isa. xli. 17) till they wilfully depart from him. 
4. A past enjoyment of God's presence is no guarantee against his future departure. 
God IS not only absent from those who never knew him, he departs from some in 
whose hearts he has once dwelt. If the Christian has left his first love, he will find 
that all his previous experience of God's blessings will not secure him against the 
dreary night of a godless life. 

II. The ionorancg of the fact. Samson was unconscious of the fearful loss 
he had sustained. So there are men who retain their honoured position in Christian 
society and in the Church while, even unknown to themselves, the source of the life 
which gave it them is ebbing away. The causes of this ignorance should be traced. 
1. The presence of God is spiritual, inward, silent, secret, and his departure makes 
no outward sign. 2. Old habits continue for a season after the impetus behind them 
has ceased, as the train runs for a while after the steam has been shut oS. 3. God 
may leave us gradually/ as we forsake him by degrees. The fall is not sudden and 
violent, rather it is a quiet gliding back ; and the loss of Divine grace is not often (as 
in the case of Samson) sudden, but little by little it leaves us. 4. One of the worst 
effects of God's departure is that it leaves us in a state of spiritual iTidifference. As 
with the death which follows extreme cold, the very fatality lies in the fact that the 
more dangerous our condition is, the more numbed are our faculties to any feeling of 
distress. The man from whom God has departed has neither the keenness of con- 
science to discern the fact, nor the feeling of concern to take any notice of it. 6. The 
tests of God's absence are not always immediately amlied. The rotten tree stands 
till the storm strikes it ; the corpse mocks sleep till corruption ensues ; Samson 
does not know of God's departure till the Philistines are on him. But though post- 
poned for a season, the revelation must come in the end. How much better to discover 
the evil first by self-examination I (2 Cor. xiii. 6). — A. 

EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 28. — Oatbered them, i. t. themselves. 
lo rejoice. The Hebrew is for a festimty, 
OI merry-makmg, or fecut There wag to be 
a great feast upon the sacrifices ofiered to 



Dagon their Ood. Dagon (&ora dag, a fish 
in Hebrew), the national male god of the 
Philistines, as Atergatis, or Derceto, wai 
their goddess. Both the malr nnd femals 



1?4 



ME BOOK oJ- Judges. 



tuH. tvt 23—31. 



divinities seem to have had the head and 
bieast and hands human, and the rest of the 
body fish-shaped (see 1 Sam. v. 6). The 
fish was a natural emblem of fertility and 
prodnctireness, especially to a maritime 
people. The fish-shaped idol is found upon 
old Phoenician coins, and also on the monu- 
ments of Khorsabad, and on some Assyrian 
gems in the British Museum. One of the 
chief temples of Dagon was at Gaza. Several 
towns bore the name of Dagon, as Belh-dagon 
in Jndah (Josh. zv. 41) and in Asher (Josh. 
ziz. 27), Capha/r-dagon near Diospolis, &c., 
showing that the worship of Dagon was wide- 
spread. 

Yer. 24. — And when the people, &c. The 
people, as distinguished from the lords in the 
preceding verse, to show how universally 
the capture of Samson was ascribed to 
Dagon. Bnlers and people alike praised 
Dagon. Saw him. Not on the occasion of 
his being brought into the temple as men- 
tioned in ver. 25, but after his capture, and 
whenever they saw him grinding or elsewhere. 
It was this universal ascription of praise to 
Dagon that led to the celebration of this 
great feast. This praise of Dagon is also 
dwelt upon to show that God, in what hap- 
pened, vindicated the glory of his own great 
name, which was blasphemed by the servants 
of Dagon when they thus made him superior 
to Jehovah. So Milton makes Samson say, 
"All the contest is now 'Twixt God and 
Dagon. . . . <He, be sure, will not connive 
or Unger, thus provoked, bnt will arise, and 
his great name assert." Generally, the 
' Samson Agonistes ' is an excellent comment- 
ary on the nistoty of Samson. 

Ver. 25. — When their hearts were merry. 
They would not have acted so imprudently 
as to bring Samson out of his prison had not 
their judgment been clouded with drink. 
That he may make na sport. And he made 
them sport. The two verbs are not the 
same in Hebrew, but they have much the 
same meaning. It is not certain whether 
the idea conveyed is that of the A. Y., that 
Samson was brought there to be as it were 
baited by the populace, jeered and jested at, 
reviled and reproached, perhaps struck or 
pelted ; or whether the words do not simply 
mean to datux with music, which is certainly 
the meaning of the latter verb {he made sport 
htfore them, A. Y. and margin) in 1 Sam. 
xviii. 7 (played, A. Y. ; see ver. 6) ; 2 Sam. 
tL 6, 21 ; 1 Chron. ziii. 8 ; xv. 29. Xhey 
■et him between the pillars, t. e. when he 
had done dancing ; because he must have 
been dancing outside the house for the people 
on the roof to see him. 

Yer. 26. — Suffer me, or it may be ren- 
dered. Lit me ra<. He pretended to be tired, 
and uked to be allowed to rest* few minutes 
and lean against the pillan. That I may 



feel, or, literally, and muke me feel. E« 
adds his motive for making the request — 
that I may lean npou them — to rest himsell 
after the severe exercise of dancing. 

Yer. 27. — Now the house was full, &c. 
We do not know what was the construction 
of Philistine temples or houses of amusement ; 
but from the description here given it seems 
that the interior was ranged Uke an amphi- 
theatre, with seats for the lords and principal 
people, and with an open &ont, so as to 
command a view of the stage just outside, 
and that front supported by pillars on which 
the beams of the roof, both the transverse 
beam and the longitudinal ones running 
into it, rested. The roof itself was flat, 
and had the weight of 3000 people upon 
it, throwing a great strain upon the beams' 
which rested npon the pillars. The sudden 
removal of the pillars would bring the 
roof down at that end, crowded as it was 
with the people, and would inevitably drag 
the whole mass in the same direction one 
over another, while the swaying of the 
people would bring the whole roof down 
upon the heads of those beneath, who would 
be crushed by the heavy timbers and stones 
and bodies of men falling upon them. 

Yer. 28. — ^And Samson called unto the 
Lord. This is the first mention we have of 
Samson praying since the memorable occa- 
sion when he gave the fountain the name of 
En-hakkoreh (ch. xv. 19, note). Perhaps we 
may see in this an evidence that his affliction 
and shame had not been without their effect 
in bringing him back to God humbled and 
penitent. The language is very earnest. " 
Lord, Jehovah, remember me, . . . strengthen 
me only this once, God ! " The threefold 
name by which he addresses the Almighty 
implies great tension of spirit. That I may 
be at once avenged. Meaning ai one stroke 
— he would take one vengeance so terrible 
that it would be sufficient for his two eyes, 
which makes very good sense if the Hebrew 
will bear it. The literal translation would 
be, that I may be avenged with a vengeance of 
one stroke. Others take it, that I may be 
amenged with a vengeance for one of my two 
eyes, which it is not easy to understand the 
meaning of. 

Yer. 29.— The two middle pillars. There 
may have been, say, four pillars in the front ; 
the two middle ones standing near together, 
and the other two nearer the sides. 

Yer. 30. — Let me die, or, my life shall 
perish leith the Philistines. He knew it was 
certain death to himself, but he did not 
shrink from it. His last act should be to 
destroy the oppressors of his country. So 
the dead which he slew, &c. The words 
sonnd like the snatch of some song or pro- 
verb IB which Samson's death was described. 

Yer. 31. — ^His brethren, &c. Some inte 



oa. tVL 23— 31. j 



TSE book of JUDGES. 



Itl 



from this that Samson's mother hare other 
children after the hirth of Samson. But 
the Hebrew use of the word brethren, is so 
wide, applied to cousins, or members of the 
same house of fathers, or of the same tribe, 
that it is by no means a certain inference. 
Here hia brethren might mean the Danites 
generally, and all the house of his father 
those who were more nearly related, as be- 
longing to the house of his father. His 
father was probably dead, and indeed the 
mention of his father's bwrymg-place, or 
»ather sepulchre, makes It certain that he 
was, so that Milton was in error in making 
him alive. Zorah and Eshtaol. See above, 
ch. xiii. 2, 25, note. And lie judged IsraeL 
See ch. xv. 20. The parallel between Samson 
and Hercules is in many respects very re- 
markable, and has been drawn out by 
Serdrius and others. The supernatural 
strength of each, the slavery to women 
(" Quem non mille fer, quem non Sthenel- 
lius hostis, Non potuit Mavors vincere, vioit 
amor. " Ovid), the tearing asunder of the Uon, 
the violent death of each, partly voluntary 
and partly forced, are all points of strong 
general resemblance. But one of the most 
remarkable is the connection of Hercules 
with two pillars. The " pillars of Hercules " 
on each side the straits of Gibraltar, Mount 
Abila and Mount Calpe, were said to have 
been rent asunder by the strength of Her- 
cules' arms. And Herodotus relates that in 



the temple of Hercules at Tyre were twc 
remarkable pillars, one of refined gold, th» 
other of smaragdus, some green stone like 
an emerald (ii. 44). But the account 
given of a visit of Hercules to Egypt is still 
more remarkable, as compared with the 
history of the binding of Samson and the 
slaughter of the Philistines, as related in 
ch. XV. The following are the words of 
Herodotus : — " The Greeks say that when 
Hercules went down to Egypt, the Egyptians 
surrounded him, and led him in a procession 
to sacrifice him to Jupiter; that he kept 
quite still for a time, but that when they 
were commencing the sacrifice at the altar " 
(the first act of which was cutting off the 
hair) "he turned in self-defence, and by his 
prowess slew them all." On which Herodo- 
tus remarks, " How was it possible for him, 
being but one, and being only a man, to 
slay many myriads ? " The prevalence of 
the worship of Hercules among the Phceni- 
ciaus, as, e. g. , at Tyre and Thasos, a Phoeni- 
cian colony, and the close connection of 
Egypt with Gaza, where the prowess of 
Samson was so well known, are points not 
to be omitted in considering the probability 
of some of the legends of Hercules being 
drawn from the history of Samson. So also 
is the title of the Phcenician Hercules, the 
saviour or deliverer, as compared with ch. 
iL 16, 18 ; xiii. 6. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 23 — 31. — The short-lived triumph. One of the severest trials to which the 
faith of the people of God is exposed, is that triumph of evil over good, and of the 
enemies of Christ over his Church, which from time to time is permitted by God, 
and which in truth is one of the features of this disjointed age. The most signal and 
most awful triumph of the powers of darkness over the kingdom of light was when the 
only-begotten Son of God, Jesus our Lord, in the midst of his life of perfect goodness 
and hiB service of perfect obedience to the will of his Father, was betrayed into the 
hands of sinners, and given up to sufEer death upon the cross. When he hung in 
shame upon the cross, helpless and forsaken ; when he bowed his head and gave up 
the ghost ; when he was laid in the silent tomb, and the light of the righteous One was 
quenched in the darkness of the grave, then indeed the triumph of sin was at its 
height, and the hope of the servants of God was brought very low. But when on the 
third day the doors of that grave were burst open, and the prisoner of hope came 
forth in the power of an endless life, and he that was crucified ascended up to heaven, 
and sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high, from thenceforth expecting 
till his enemies be made his footstool, that brief triumph of the powers of darkness 
was turned into the far greater triumph of the kingdom of light ; the enemies of 
Christ were put to shame, the servants of Christ were enabled to rejoice, and the 
joyful hope was exceedingly revived and established, that in due time there will be a 
final deliverance from evil, and that the kingdom is God's, and the power and the 
glory for ever. In the light of the resurrection the Church looks forward with 
unmoved confidence to the time when the Son of man shall come in the clouds of 
heaven with power and great glory, and shall take to himself his everlasting kingdom 
of righteousness, and reign with his ancients gloriously. But meanwhile the Chuicb 
must expect many ihort-lived triumphs of evil over good, and of darkness o'ver light 



176 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [cB. xn. 2S— SL 

There will be many occasions on which the world will sajr, Let lu rejoice, for cm 
god hath delivered our enemy into our band. We may expect that many an isolated 
aSair, or even a connected chain of events, will take that turn that the servants of 
Christ will be put to shame, and ungodliness and irreligion will seem to have it all 
their own way. It may even come to pass that the champions of the gospel shall 
seem fit only to make sport for an unbelieving and self-sufficient age. Nor ia it the 
least part of the trial that some of these discomfitures are brought on by the errors 
and failures of the servants of God. The presumption and self-confidence, the 
blindness and moral weakness, of some like Samson ; the intemperate, fiery spirit of 
others like the Boanerges ; the fear of man in others like Peter, and so on, provoke 
defeat by putting religion in a false light in the eyes of those who are always looking 
out for occasions to bring it into contempt. But in the midst of these trials of faith, 
whether they take the form of private discouragements, or of public checks to the 
progress of religion, and public triumphs of the spirit of ungodliness, it is the Church's 
unfailing comfort to know that the triumphs of evil are short-lived, and the triumph 
of truth is eternal. Magna est Veritas et prcevalet. We should never forget for one 
moment that behind the passing cloud there is shining the unchanging sun. The 
faith and patience of the saints are indeed required, sometimes more, sometimes 
less, but are always required in this present age. The depression of the truth, the 
insolent aggressions of the yarious forms of evil, the discomfiture for a time of the 
champions of the cause of Christ, and the temporary victories of Antichrist, are very 
painful episodes in the history of the world and of the Church. But the pages of 
Holy Scripture, and even the pages of the experience of centuries, continually testify 
that the triumphs of falsehood and evil are but for a moment, the victory of truth 
•nd righteousness will be for ever. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Tens. 21 — 31. — A hero's exodus. The blind captive, led by a boy, and degraded 
to the ofiSce of a bufEoon in the idolatrous services of the Philistines, is a sad spectacle. 
But inwardly he was nobler than when carrying the gates of Gaza. His soul's eye 
has opened, and he repents. The locks that had been shorn grow again, and witli 
them, gradually and, apparently, unconsciously, his strength returns. The Divinely- 
ofEerea opportunity. The last act an atonement. 

I. God often suffebs his enemies to overleaf themselves. Here they are 
exultant. They rejoice as over a foe utterly vanquished. They do not know that 
their festival, blasphemy against God, is to be the occasion of their destruction. 
" The green bay tree " may be noarer to the axe than insignificant fruit tree. 

II. ThEEB is an " UNKNOWN QUANTITY," NOT TO BE CALCULATED UPON, IN THE 

REPENTANCE OP THE BACKSLIDEB. Even the ruin of a believer may be the temple of 
the Holy Ghost. A short time with God's blessing may suffice to retrieve the errors 
of a lifetime. " Faith as a grain of mustard seed " can " remove mountains." How 
often has Satan been disappointed of his prey I Some of the greatest of God's 
servants have been won back from backsliding. Let the wicked beware then of their 
companion and laughing-stock, and let the believing Church work on ; the poor use- 
less wreck over which we despairingly weep may yet become a man again, a blessing 
and a comfort to many souls. 

III. The pbayeb of repentance and faith may retrieve a soul's euin. Can 
God give ear to this heart^touching cry, and shall he not listen to his captive chil- 
iren in the dungeons of sinful habit or the temples of superstition ? " This once," 
'' only this once." One prayer, one look at the Crucified, one grand efEort in God'l 
strength, how much it may do I 

IV. Even the weak ones of God abb hiohtibb than the obeat ones or tbi 
WOBLD. — ML 

Vers. 28 — 30. — Samson's heroic death. The death of Samson was more honourable 
to the man and more useful to his nation than any event in his previous career. Th« 
iMToism of his death followed the return of God's strength. 

L The return of stbenqth. 1. It followed a great/all. We may learn 1« 



CH. XVII, 1 — 13.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



177 



from onr own faflnies. ^rongh onr veiy weakness we may ducem the secret of 
strength. The hnmilitj^ which should accompany failure is one of the first steps 
towards wiser conduct 2. It came in a season of distress. Samson was a prisoner, 
defeated, insulted, mutilated. Sorrow is one road to God's grace, (1) as it teaches 
us the folly of the evil conduct that produced it, (2) as it leads us into a mood of 
serious and heart-searching reflection in which true wisdom is found, and (3) as it 
teaches us our helplessness, and compels us to turn to God for deliverance. 3. The 
return of strength followed a return to obedience. This was suggested by thegrow- 
ing of Samson's hair and the return to fidelity to his vow. It was gradual. We are 
received into God'8 favour immediately we return in penitent faith ; but we only 
conquer evil consequences of sin and regain lost powers and position by degrees. 
4. The return of strength was realised through prayer. Samson now knows his 
weakness. In hia own soul he is weak. Strength must come from above. There is 
nc prayer which God will more certainly hear than that m hich invokes his aid in 
our performance of some great self-sacrificing duty. 

IL Thk hergio death. 1. Samson uses his new strength for the deliverance of 
his nation. It is not given him merely for the amusement of the Philistines. IE 
God gives us any special powers, he does so for some high purpose. We must not 
waste these in idle amusements, but put them to practical service. 2. Samson can 
only accomplish the greatest feat of his life by means that bring death to himself. 
(1) This was partly a result of his sinful weakness, which had betrayed him into the 
hands of his enemies, and brought him to such a position of bondage that his own 
death must be involved in that of the Philistines. Thus sin leaves consequences 
which produce suffering even after repentance and a return to a better life. (2) It 
was also an instance of that strange law which makes the greatest good to men 
depend on the sacrijice of the benefactor. It has thus something in common with 
the death of Christ, though with many points of difference, Samson's death involv- 
ing the destruction of his enemies, while Christ's death is expressly designed to give 
salvation to his enemies. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEB XVIL 



Ter. 1. — "We here light upon quite a dif- 
ferent kind of history from that which has 
preceded. We no longer have to do with 
judges and their mighty deeds in delivering 
Israel from his oppressors, but with two 
detached histories, which fill up the rest of 
the book, relating to the internal affairs of 
IsraeL There is no note of time, except that 
they happened before the time of Saul the 
king (ch. xvii. 6 ; xviii 1), and that Phinehas 
the son of Eleazar was alive at the time of 
the occurrence of the second (ch. zx. 28). 
Both, no doubt, are long prior to Samson. 
The only apparent connection of the history 
of Micah with that of Samson is that both 
relate to the tribe of Dan, and it may be 
presumed were contained in the annals of 
that tribe. Compare the opening of the 
Books of Samuel (1 Sam. i. 1). Uount 
Ephraim, i. e. the hill country of Ephraim, 
as in ch. iii. 27 ; vii. 24, &c. 

Yer. 2. — The eleven hundred. See ch. 
xvL 6, note. Thou onrsedst. The Cethib 
and the Alexandrian Codex of the Septuagint 
read, Thmt ewrsedst, i. e. adjuredst me, 
which is a better reading. There is a direct 
Kid verbal reference to the l»w contained in 



Levit. T. 1. The word thtu enriedit kere 
and the voice of swearing in Leviticus are 
the same root. It was m consequence of 
this adjuration that Micah confessed his 

Eiilt. Compare Matt, xxvi 63, when our 
ord, on the adjuration of the high priest, 
broke his silence and confessed that he was 
Christ, the Son of God. In Achan's con- 
fession (Josh. vii. 19, 20) there is no distinct 
reference to Levit. v. 1, though this may have 
been the ground of it. 

Yer. 3.— I had wholly dedicated. It is 
not clear whether the words are to be ren- 
dered as in the A Y. , had dedicated, express- 
ing the dedication of them before they were 
stolen, or whether they merely express hei 
present purpose so to dedicate them. But 
the A. Y. makes very good sense. Her 
former purpose had been that the money 
should be given for her son's benefit to 
make his house an house of gods. Now that 
he had confessed, she resumed her purpose. 
Kow therefore I restore it unto thee — 
that is, in the shape of the graven and 
molten images, as it follows in the next 
verse. The narrative gives a curious ex- 
ample of the semi-idolatry of the times. ' A 
graven image and a molten imagre. Thern 
IS a good deal of difficulty in assigning th« 



178 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[CH. XVIL 1— la 



exact meaning of the two words here used, 
and their relation to one another in the 
worship to which tliey belong. The molten 
image (massechah), however, seems to be 
pretty certainly the m£tal, here the silver, 
image of a calf, the form which the corrupt 
worship of Jehovah took from the time when 
Aaron made the molten calf (Exod. xxxii. 4, 
called there 'egel m/issechah, a molten calf) 
to the time when Jeroboam set up the 
golden calves at Dan and Bethel (1 Kings 
xii. 28, 29). And that massechah means 
something molten is certain both from its 
etymology (nasach, to pour) and from what 
Aaron said in Exod. xzxii. 24: "I cast it 
into the fire, and there came out this cal£" 
Here too Micah's mother gives the silver to 
the fovmder, i. e. to the fuser of metals. 
The pesel, or graven image, on the other 
hand, is something hewn or graven, whether 
in wood or stone, and sometimes overlaid 
with gold and silver (Deut. vii 25). One 
might have thought, from the language of 
ver. 4, and from the mention of the pesel 
alone in ch. xviii. 30, 31, that only one 
image is here intended, which was graven 
with the chisel after it was cast, as Aaron's 
calf seems to have been. But in ch. xviiL 
17, 18 they are mentioned separately, with 
the ephod and teraphim named between 
them, so that they must be distinct From 
the above passages the pesel or graven 
image would seem to have been the most 
important object, and the difficulty is to 
assign the true relation of the massechah or 
molten image to it Hen.cjstenberg thinks 
the massechah was a pedestal on which 
the pesel stood, and that the ephod was 
the robe with which the pesel was clothed, 
and that the teraphim were certain tokens 
or emblems attached to the ephod which 
gave oiacnlar answers. But this is not 
much more than guess-work. Bertheau 
considers the ephod, here as elsewhere, to 
be the priest's garment, put on when per- 
forming the most solemn services, and 
specially when seeking an answer from God. 
And he thinks that the massechah formed a 
part of the ornament of the ephod, because 
in ch. xviii. 18 the Hebrew has " the pesel 
of the ephod." The teraphim he thinks are 
idols, a kind of Dii minores associated with 
the worship of Jehovah in this impure wor- 
ship. But there does not seem to be any 
means at present of arriving at any certainty. 
The massechah might be a rich gold or silver 
overlaying of the wooden image, possibly 
movable, or it might bo the separate image 
of a calf supposed to belong, as it were, to 
the pesel, and to symbolise the attributes of 
the Godhead. 

Ver. 4.— Tet he restored. Kather, So he 
restored, repeating what was said in ver. 3, 
and adding th* consequence, that his mother 



took two hundred shekels and gaye them to 
the founder. It is a great puz^e to e^lain 
why two himdred shekels only are here 
spoken of, and what became of the other 
nine hwndred. Berthean thinks the tuia 
hundred were different from the eleven 
hundred, -and were the fifth part of the 
whole valne stolen, which the thief, accord- 
ing to Levit. tL 5, was bound to give in ad- 
dition to the principal. He therefore trans- 
lates ver. 4 thus : "So he restored the money 
to his mother (and his mother took two 
hundred shekels), and she gave it (the money 
= 1100 shekels) to the founder," &o. Otters 
understand that two hundred only were 
actually made into the graven and molten 
image, and the other nine hundred were 
devoted to other expenses of the worship. 
In the house of Uicah. This explains. Now 
I vnll restore it unto thee, and, for my ton 
to make, &a., in ver. 3. 

Ver. 5. — And the man Uicah, &a It is 
impossible to say for certain whether the 
state of things here described in respect of 
Micah preceded the events narrated in the 
preceding verses, or was consequent upon 
them. If it preceded, then we have the 
reason of his mother's vow : she wished to 
make her son's "house of God" complete 
by the addition of a graven and molten 
image. If it was consequent upon his 
mother's vow, then we have in the opening 
verses of this chapter a history of the cir- 
cumstances of the foundation of Micah's 
"house of God," which was to play an 
important part in the colony of Danites, 
whose proceedings are related in the follow- 
ing chapter, and for the sake of which this 
domestic history of Micah is introduced. 
House of gods. Rather, of God (Elohim) ; 
for the worship was of Jehovah, only with 
a corrupt ana semi-idolatrous ceremonial. 
An ephoi. See ch. viii. 26, 27, note. Tera- 
phim. See Gen. zxxL 19 (images, A. T. ; 
teraphim, Heb. ) ; 1 Sam. xv. 23 (idolatry, 
A. v. ; teraphim, Heb.) ; xix. 13 (an image, 
A. V. ; teraphim, Heb.) ; Hosea iii 4, &c. 
They seem to have been a kind of Penates, 
or household gods, and were used for divina- 
tion (Ezek. xxi. 21 ; Zech. x. 2). Became 
his priest. One function of the priest, and 
for which it is likely he was much resorted 
to, was to inquire of God by the ephod (ch. 
xviii. 6, 6). What his other duties mi^t be 
does not appear. 

Ver. 6.— There was no king. This must 
have been written in the days of the kings of 
Israel and Judah, and perhaps with reference 
to the eiforts of such kings as Asa (1 Kings 
XV. 13) and Jehoshaphat (1 Kings xxii. 48) to 
put down idolatry. 

Ver. 7.— Of the family of Judah. Thest 
words are difficult to explain. If the man 
was a Levite he could not be of the family 



OH. XVII. 1—13.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



179 



01 tribe of Judah, Some explain the words 
to be merely a more accurate definition of 
BetMehem-judah, as if he would say, I 
mean Bethlehem in the tribe of Judah. 
Others explain them to mean that he was 
one of a family of Levites who had settled 
in Bethlehem, and so came to be reckoned 
in civil matters as belonging to Judah, 
Others, that he was of the family of Judah 
on his mother's side, which might be the 
cause of his settling at Bethlehem. But 
many commentators think them spurious, 
as they are not found in the Septuagint 
(Cod. Vat.), nor in the Peschito, nor in No. 
440 of De Rossi's MSS. The Septuagint has 
Bethlehem of the family of Judah. 

Ver. 8.— From Eethlehem-jndah. Rather, 
out of. The whole phrase means, out of 
the city, viz., out of Bethlehem. Uount 
Ephiaim — the hill country of Ephraim, as 
ver. 1, where see note. 

Vers. 10, 11.— A father. This is not a 
common application of the word father in 
the Old Testament. The prominent idea 
seems to be one of honour, combined with 
authority to teach and advise. It is applied 
to prophets (2 Kings ii. 12 ; vi. 21 ; xiii. 14), 
and to Joseph (Gen. xlv. 8). The idea is 
implied in the converse phrase of son, applied 
to those to whom the prophets stood in the 
relation of spiritual fathers (see 2 Kings viii. 
9 ; ProT. iv. 10, 20, and frequentlyelsewhere). 
The abuse of the feeling which dictates the 
term as applied to human teachers is reproved 
by our Lord (Matt, xxiii. 9). It has been 
freely used in the Christian Church, as in 
the titles papa or pope applied to bishops, 
abbot and abbas, father m God, fathers 
of the Church, &c. Here there is perhaps a 
special reference to the function of Micah's 
priest to ask counsel of God, and then give 



that counsel to those who came to inquii'j 
(see note to ver. 5). It may be added that 
the idea of counsdlor seems to be inhereDt 
in the word cohen or priest, as in 2 Sam. 
viii. 18 ; 1 Kings iv. 6, &c. Ten shekels — 
a little over a pound of our money, but pro- 
bably equivalent to £20, when considered 
relatively to articles of consumption. A 
suit of apparel. There is great doubt as to 
the exact meaning of the word rendered suit 
in this connection. The word means anything 
arranged, i. e. put in a rank, or row, or 
order. In Exod. xl. 23 it is applied to the 
shewbread : " He ordered the bread in 
order," Thence it came to mean the esti- 
mation or worth of a person or thing — some- 
what as we use the word rank. From this 
last sense some interpret the word here to 
mean the worth or price of his clothes. 
Others, including St. Jerome and the 
Septuagint, interpret it a pair of vestments, 
meaning summer and winter clothing. But 
perhaps the A. V., suit, meaning the whole 
set of under and upper garments, is after all 
the best interpretation. The Levite went 
in. The Hebrew is went, i. e. according to 
the common use of the word, went his way. 
And such is probably the meaning here. He 
went his way to consider the proposal made 
to him. The result is given in the next 
verse: And the Levite was content, &c. 

Ver. 13. — Then said Uicah, &c. We 
may notice this incidental proof that the 
Levites in the time of Micah held the re- 
ligious position which is ascribed to them in 
the Pentateuch. I have a Levite. Rather, 
the Levite, meaning the particular Levite of 
whom it is the question. A Levite would 
be without the article, as in ver. 7, or would 
be expressed as in ch. zix, 1 (Heb.), a man a 
Levite. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — The mperstUious worship of the true God. The natural history of 
religion is a very curious one. There is first the broad division between worship 
given to false gods and that which is given to the one true and living God, Creator 
of heaven and earth. The heathen of old, like the heathen of to-day, worshipped 
those that were no gods. Either they had no existence at all, and were the creatures 
of man's imagination, divinities supposed to preside over the various powers of 
nature and the affections of the human heart ; gods of the weather, of the earth, 
and sea, and sky ; malignant spirits supposed to iniiuence human destiny, and 
requiring gifts to propitiate them ; personifications of light, or death, or even of 
criminal human passions ; or else they were beings who had indeed a real existence, — 
sun, moon, stars, stones, animals, angels, demons, or the spirits of dead men, — but 
who were not God. This worship of false gods we know from Holy Scripture, 
and from the annals of all nations, was prevalent over the whole ancient world, and 
we know that it exists in heathen lands to the present day. But that is not the form 
of corrupt religion to which this chapter calls our attention, nor is it that into which 
there is any probability of Christians falling in this nineteenth century. We turn, 
therefore, to the varieties of the worship offered to the one true God. And first t« 
look at the particular case before us. 'The mother of Micah seems to have been in 



180 THB BOOK OF JUDGEa [oh. zvn. 1—13, 

her way a devout woman. The scraping together 1100 shekels was probably not 
effected without considerable effort and self-denial, for it was a large sum (more than 
£110), eleven times the yearly wages of the Levite. She meant to consecrate it to 
Jehovah, the God of Israel. She seems too to have been a good mother, for she 
intended this consecration to be for her son's benefit, and her language and conduct, 
when her son confessed hjs guilt, were pious and forgiving. And yet we find her 
disobeying the express corainand of God, and making a graven and a molten image 
to be used in his worship and service. In like manner we find Micah giving signs 
of a tender conscience and of the fear of God in confessing his sin when adjured 
according to the law ; we find him anxious for the favour of God, and looking to 
him to do him good ; we find him liberal and large-hearted in providing at his own 
expense for the worship of God ; and yet, with a strange inconsistency, we find him 
doing the very things which God's word forbad, and setting up images, and teraphira, 
and a superstitious ephod in a " house of God " of his own devising, and under • 
priest of his own consecr^ition. In like manner again we find even Aaron making a 
golden calf for the people to worship, and saying (Septuagint), or encouraging the 
people to say, " This is thy God, Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of 
Egypt," and" building an altar before it, and keeping a feast in its honour. We read 
of the golden calves of Jeroboam, and we read too of the high places and the 
Baorifices upon them even under the pious kings. These then are distinct examples 
of the superstitious worship of the true God, and lead us to the anxious question, 
how we are to worship God. Under the Old Testament this was not left to chance 
or human choice. In the nonage of the Church, before the coming of Christ, all the 
ordinances of Divine service were prescribed with minuteness and exactness. The 
sanctuary itself, the Aaronic priesthood, the Levitical ministrations, the feasts of the 
Lord, the gifts and offerings and devotions of the people, were all ordered by the 
authority of the word of God. But under the New Testament, when the fulness of 
the time is come, and the Church has entered into the full possession of the privileges 
of adopted sons, it is so no longer. Besides a few general principles and broad 
rules, and the institution of the two sacraments, and the Lord's Prayer, the Church 
has received from Holy Scripture no form of Divine service. She has to frame her 
rules and canons of Divine worship according to the light and wisdom vouchsafed to 
her by the Holy Spirit of God. In doing this she must have regard to two things. 
1. The character and mind of God, so that the worship may be of a kind that will be 
pleasing and acceptable to him. 2. The nature and character of man, so that the 
worship may be of a kind to assist the worshipper to raise his heart to God, and 
impress him with a sense of the majesty, and holiness, and goodness of God. _ With 
regard to the Jlrst, the general intimations of him who alone knows the things of 
God, even the Holy Spirit of God, are very clear. " God is a spirit, and they that 
worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth." " The sacrifices of God are a 
broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart, God, thou wilt not despise." "Let us 
offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving 
thanks to his name." "To do good and to communicate forget not: for with such 
sacrifices God is well pleased " (see too Micah vi. 6—8). Every attempt to substi- 
tute costly gifts, or gorgeous ceremonies, or showy processions, or lights, or music, 
or gestures, or anything bodily and sensuous, for the ritual of repentance, faith, 
fear, love, and self-consecration — consecration of the will and affections — ^to the 
service of Almighty God can only be made in ignorance of his character and mind 
as revealed to us in Holy Scripture. It is as truly superstitious as were Micah's 
images, and teraphim, and ephod, and house of God. With regard to the second, the 
oulward accessories of worship must be of a kind to assist the worshipper in his 
endeavour to dtaw near to God and worship him with all the powers of his soul. 
Under the pretence of purely spiritual worship, it is very easy so to get rid of all 
outward acts and circumstances as to get rid of worship itself. The light of religion 
in the soul cannot burn unless in an atmosphere which feeds the fiame. Reverence 
and awe, prayer and praise, forgetfulness of the world, and thoughts of heaven 
need to be quickened and encouraged by the posture of the body, by the words of 
the lips, by sights and sounds expressive of those invisible things which the soul 
seeks to handle in its approaches to the throne of God. It is therefore a legitimats 



CH. XVII. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 181 

iubject of consideration what forms of worship are most calculated to increase and 
heighten the devotion of the worshippers. Forms which tend merely to please the 
senses are worthless ; forms which tend to soothe the conscience of the impenitent, 
and to stifle its questionings by creating a feeling of duty performed and of satis- 
faction made to God, are pernicious; and forms which so fill the thoughts as to the 
manner of performing them as to leave no room for thoughts of God are injuries 
rather than benefits to the sou!. Forms, again, which leave the soul self-satisfied, 
which convey a false impression of God's favour and grace being given when he is 
really displeased and offended, and which comfort and encourage those who ought 
to be horribly afraid and trembling for fear of God's judgments, are manifestly 
destructive of the souls of those for whose benefit they purport to exist. A faithful 
Church will root up all such as dishonouring to God and as very hurtful to man. 
One other characteristic of superstitious worship must be noted. It is compatible 
with vice, and with the dominion of sin in the heart. Superstition has no tendency 
to correct the principles of action, or to purify the thoughts and affections of the 
inner man. The sequel of Micah's history supplies a notable instance of this. The 
Danites, in their superstitious desire to possess the images of Micah's chapel, and the 
religious services of Micah's priest, scrupled not to break the commandments of God 
by stealing, and, if need were, by committing murder. Stealing sacred relics and 
transporting them by guile or violence from one religious house to another is a well- 
known form of medisBval superstition. The brigands in the mountains of Italy have 
been often known to kneel before an image of the Virgin, and ask the blessing of the 
priest or bishop, and then return to their work of plunder or murder. Superstition 
is no check upon the passions, and no bar to the reckless pursuit of what men deem 
to be their interests or know to be their desires. There is no gulf between super 
stitious worship and immoral conduct. The man who mistakes the aspect of God 
towards superstitious vanities is prone to mistake also his aspect towards moral dis- 
order and sin. But he who really enters into the tabernacle of God. and communis 
with God in spirit, comes forth with his face shining with inward righteousness, the 
reflection of God's glory in the face of Jesus Christ. His life is a continuation of 
his prayers, his praise culminates in good works. In the interests of moral gopdness, 
as well as for the honour of God, it is of supreme importance that the worship of the 
Almighty be free from superstition. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — 2%« history of a man-made ministry:—!. Its gmem. It belong* 
to the main design of the book to show how the various disruptive tendencies 
of a religious and social nature increased unchecked when " there was no king in 
Israel." The book begins with a note of unity — " the children of Israel asked 
Jehovah." Repeated idolatrous defections are chronicled, and mention made of the 
setting up of an ephod in Ophrah, the city of Gideon, and its evil consequences. In 
one respect the schisms from the national religion were even more dangerous than 
complete departure from it. The unity of Israel was thus destroyed in its chief 
sanction and sign, the universal sacrifice and confession at Shiloh. Another of these 
schismatic points of departure is here related. The description is full of realistic 
force and is governed by the dogmatic purpose of exposing the imnoral motives 
of it' and thus discrediting it in the eyes of 6very true Israelite. It is exposed as 
the private and selfish appropriation of a national blessing. As the political unity 
of Israel depended upon maintaining a central religious authority and a uniform 
ritual and priesthood, the setting up of a house of gods was in itself, irrespectively ol 
its motives, a crime of the first magnitude. The New Testament idea of Church and 
ministry is different. There the unity of the Spirit is the prevailing aim. But 
whenever separation originates in similar motives to those here depicted, the sin of 

schism equally exists. ... .c j- ,. i. t> u 

I. The chabaoter of its acthobs. Avaricious mother, dishonest son. Both 

superstitious. Not honesty, but fear of a curse, actuates Micah to restore the " elevea 

huadred shekels." The jretting back of the money is the chief concern of the 



182 THE BOOK OP JUDGES. [ch. xvii. 1—13. 

mother, and so she straightway blesses whom she had cursed (cf. James iii. 10). 
Only 200 shekels are actually appropriated to the end proposed. 

II. Its motives. Apparently the warding off of the curse is the first concern with 
both. But an equally powerful motive was the securing of the gain resulting from fees 
and gifts. In this way they would become rich. Where the aim is selfish and 
impure, the character of the worship becomes of secondary consequence, and the 
latent tendency towards idolatry begins to show itself. It is the motive that is of 
chief concern in questions of religion. Everything else will be dominated by this: 
" Is it for self, or is the glory of God my chief aim ? " Founders of churches and 
religious institutions, and candidates for the ministry, should examine themselves ere 
they are committed to the work upon which they have set their hearts. 

III. The complexion op the worship. It is a "house of gods," containing a 
" graven image and a molten image," an ephod, and ternphim, which is the outcome 
of their religious or superstitious zeal. In its nature eclectic, in the crudest sense 
of the word, this system of religious worship is on the face of it a sacred means to 
a vulgar, secular end. The house became a place of irregular worship, of sooth- 
saying and divination. 

IV. The instrument or their designs. A son is the first expedient in the 
direction of a priesthood; but this is not considered safRciently authoritative. 
Accident throws in the way a young Levite of Bethlehem-judah, who appears to 
have taken to a wandering life through discontent, curiosity, idleness, or restlessness. 
A shiftless, unscrupulous, easily impressible character, in a needy condition, and with 
the Levitical status, just the fitting occupant of such an office. The undue influence 
of Micah is thus secured permanently. Promising that he should be a " father and a 
priest," and receive clothing, board, and "ten shekels" wages, to the needy ad- 
venturer ''making his way" he thus becomes patron; and the promised standing of 
the priest relatively to Micah is soon reversed — he " was unto him as one of his sons. " 
The consecration too is from Micah. The good and the evil of patronage, private 
and otherwise, in religion; the dependence of the ministry — "like people like 
priest ; " the question of " consecration " and " orders." 

v. The superstitious presumption of false religion. There is the more care as 
to the external ritual, the priestly " succession," &c. in proportion to the earthliness 
of the underlying motive. 1. Where the heart is wrong undue reliance is placed 
upon externals in religion. The priest's advantage of descent was vitiated by his 
becoming a mercenary and a schismatic. Bites and ceremonies are multiplied in 
default of the " Presence " at Shiloh and its simple service. The error is in placing 
the virtue in the external observances instead of the reality of worship, purity of 
life and motive, and the presence of the Spirit of God. Romanism has been 
defined as " a system of position and imposition, or of posture and imposture." 2. 
Jehovah is supposed to countettance a religion which is essentially opposed to him. 
God cannot take rank or be associated with other gods. His glory most be the 
chief object of the worshipper, the priest, and the patron. Selfish aims, disobedience 
to his clearly-revealed will concerning his service and Church, can never receive his 
blessing. Yet observe the self-deception of Micah. He does not see all this, or the 
evils soon to come upon him. On the other hand, " the jmre in heart " shall see 
God. His presence is independent of the external completeness, &o. of ritual. 
True priesthood is a Divine unction, and not a human monopoly. — M. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — Avarice and superstition. The story of Micah and his mother illui" 
'.rates the strange blending ol avarice and superstition which may be observed in 
those people who have lowered themselves to a worldly habit of life without entirely 
losing the influence of religion. 

I. When religion sinks into supbrstition, its unworldly spirit is qubhohbd 
AND AVARICE is UNRESTRAINED. The religion of Israel is now most degraded, and one 
result of its degradation is seen in a correspondnig lowering of morality. Great 
devotion to a superstitious religious system is not incompatible with a very low tone 
of moral life. 1. This is seen in the avarice of Micah's mother, (1) Tempting to 
deception, if not complete dishonesty, on the part of the son, (2) giving rise to 
anseemly temper and blind cuning on her own side, and (3) to a mean and unworthy 



OH. XVII. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. ISS 

attempt at restoring family peace by a compromise between selfish greed and religious 
devotion — 200 shekels only are devoted to the image, and, though Micah had intended 
all to go to this object, the remaining 900 shekels are retained by the mother. 2. 
The same degradation of morality is seen in the unworthy conduct of the young man. 
He shows no confidence in his mother. He thinks he can honour God with the 
proceeds of deception. It is only under a dark religion of superstition that we 
can suppose the end to justify the means — a sacrificial object to excuse domestic 
fraud. 

II. Ween, under the influence op a worldly bfibit, avarice is unresteainbd, 
RELIGION TENDS TO SINK INTO SUPERSTITION. Covetousness is idolatry (Col. iii. 6). 
The habit of setting the affections on earthly things blinds the soul to the perception 
of pure spiritual truth. This is seen in the story of Micah and his mother. 1. 
Micah displays a dread of his mother's curse, but no consciousness of guilt. His con- 
fession and restitution are not the result of repentance, but of superstitious fear. 2. 
His mother shows no grief bX the revelation of his conduct, but only delight at seeing 
the money, and a desire to remove the effect of her curse by pronouncing a blessing 
on her son. 3. Subsequently the young man dreads to touch the money which is 
affected with his mother's curse, though she offers it to him, and she feels bound to 
use it, or part of it, in the service of God. 4. Religious feelings do not seem to 
affect the moral conduct of either person, but only to incline them to tTnage-making. 
Thus worldly greed drags down religion till this becomes merely a worldly habit of 
gross idolatry and magic spells. We may see in the present day religions of mere 
ritual and superstitious practices attracting the most worldly people, and not restrain- 
ing, but rather shaping themselves into the mould of their low and earthly affec- 
tions. — ^A. 

Ver. 6. — No Idng. The writer of the Book of Judges more than once attributes 
the social disorders of Israel to the want of a king. This idea has its bearings on 
national interests and on private conduct. 

I. The NEED OP A KING IN CONNECTION WITH NATIONAL INTERESTS. 1. A Centre of 

avthority is essential to tlie peace and prosperity of a nation. As the first duty of a 
government is to maintain order, so the need of authority and organisation for the 
maintenance of order makes the establishment of a government essential to a nation. 
This is necessary, (1) to punish violence and crime, (2) to restrain the unjust 
encroachment of one man upon the rights of another, (3) to arbitrate between the 
conflicting claims of individual men and of great classes of the community, (4) to 
promote national objects which are too large for private enterprise, and (6) to cement 
the unity of the nation and organise this for defence against foreign invasion. 2. 
When a nation is not prepared for self-government it is best for it to be ruled by one 
strong hand. Apart from political requisites, certain moral conditions must be ful- 
filled before a people can practise self-government. There must be unity of sym- 
pathy and self-control. Neither of these conditions was fulfilled by the tribes of 
Israel in the days of the Judges. Mutual jealousy and antagonism prevailed among 
them, and violent measures were too common for the minority to submit peaceably to 
the will of the majority. The spiritual vision of the Divine King which had main- 
tained the unity of the nation in the days of Moses was fading away, and now thai 
sublime and unearthly government was nearly lost, there was no hope for the people 
but in the establishment of a human monarchy. It is foolish to maintain in words 
an ideal which is too high for practice. Better confess our degeneracy and shape our 
conduct according to the means within reach. 

II. The NEED OP A KING IN CONNECTION WITH PRIVATE CONDUCT. The soul needs a 
king. We are bom to obey. We need some authority above us to keep us right. 
1. It is not sq/e for every man to do what is right in his own eyes, because (1) we 
are swayed by passion and selfish greed, and (2) in our best moments we are liable 
to prejudice, and are too short-sighted to see what is best. The anarchy of universal 
self-seeking without restraint would bring the world to ruin. For the good of all it 
is necessary that each should not he at liberty simply to please himself. 2. It is not 
right for every man to do that which is right in his own eyes. We are members one 
of another, and are morally bound to resoectthe rights, and needs, and wishes of oui 



184 



THE BOOK Oj» JUDGES. 



[oh. xvil 1—13. 



neighbours. We are children of the great King, and under a supreme obligation tc 
respect his law. The Church is not a republic ; it is a Icingdom. The Christian is 
not free to follow his fancy ; he is required to submit to and to obey the mind and 
will of Christ. Christian liberty is not found in the license of self-will, but in the 
willingness of obedience and the love which delights to fulfil the will of God and to 
do to others as we would that they should do to us. — A. 

Ver. \^.— Faith in the priest. I. Faith in the peiist implies a desiee for God's 
BLBSsma. The priest is trusted for his influence with God. He is sought after 
because God's blessing is desired. So far the faith in the priest indicates good 
qualities. It is a sign of religious ideas, though these are vague and perverted. 
'There is something pathetic in Micah's utterance. Now at last he may expect bless- 
ing. His mother's graven image did not secure this ; his temple and its elaborate 
worship left him dissatisfied ; but he can have no rest till he is assured that God is 
blessing him. He is wealthy, but wealth will not satisfy him without the blessing of 
God. So he presses on to find this one source of true peace. How many men are 
ready to mock at Micah's superstition who have no gleam of his true faith I It is 
better to be seeking the blessing of God, though in mistaken ways, than, while discern- 
ing the folly of these ways by the light of a cold rationalism, to be dead to any 
yearnings for the supreme good. 

II. Faith in the peiest implies a conscious need op an inteeceesob. All priestly 
religions spring out of a true instinct of conscience. They are not simply the 
fabrications of a tyrannical priestcraft. Religion requires a priest. It is right to 
feel, like Micah, unworthy and unable to obtain God's blessings for ourselves, and, like 
him, to look for an intercessor. Christianity is based on these ideas ; it is the religion 
of a mediator, a priest. Christ satisfies this desire to seek God's blessing through the 
help of another, through the work of a priest (Heb. vi. 20). 

III. Faith in the pkiest implies sdtbestitiods trust in religious officialism. 
The error is to be found, (1) in choosing a merely human priest, and (2) in placing 
a wrong kind of trust in him, and not simply in believing in the idea of priest- 
hood. 1. This priestly superstition expects blessings irrespective of the character of 
the priest. Micah has had a priest before — his own son. He has no reason to 
believe that the Levite is a better man. He only knows that he belongs to the sacred 
tribe of temple officials. This is characteristic of the superstition of priestliness. It 
supposes that the office sanctifies the man, not the man the office. It looks for good 
from the priest simply through his official functions. Christ is a priest not by 
reason of birth or anointing (he was not of the tribe of Levi), but by reason of 
nature, and character, and work. 2. This priestly superstition expects blessings apart 
from ike religious character of the recipient. Micah believes that the mere presence 
of the Levite in his house will benefit him. He does not think of the Levite influ- 
encing his character for good. So there are people who imagine the priest can do 
them good apart from their own character and conduct. But Christ, the true Priest, 
only brings to us the blessings secured by his sacrifice and intercession when we 
■abmit to him so as to receive a new birth to a holy life. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



Ver. 1.- In those days, &e. See oh. xvii. 
6. The tribe of the Danites songlit them an 
inheritance, &c. This does not mean that 
the whole tribe of Dan were still seeking 
their intieritance. The bulk of the tribe, as 
we read in Josh. xix. 40 — 48, did receive 
their inheritance by lot before the death of 
Joshua {ihid. ver. 49) and Eleazar {ibid. ver. 
61). But as long as any part of the tribe was 
not settled, the tribe as such, in its unity, 
waa gtill seeking a settlement. The land 



for their inheritance had not yet fallen to 
the tribe in its integrity. This is in part 
accounted for by what we read ch. i. 84, 
that the Amorites would not suffer the chil- 
dren of Dan to come down to the valley, so 
that those who could not get possession of 
their land there would be crowded into 
other parts of the tribal territory. These 
Danites, of whom we are here reading, were 
dwelling in Zorah and Eshtaol (ch. xiij, 1, 
25), as we see by vers. 2, 11. TTnto that 
day, &c. Translate this clause. For vmta 
that day the land (meaning the whole landf 



OH. XVIII. 1—81.] 



THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 



18» 



had not fallen unto them in the midst of 
the tribes of Israel for an inheritance. The 
words the land must be supplied after the 
analogy of Numb, xxxiv. 2. What follows 
In this chapter is a more detailed account of 
what was briefly mentioned in Josh. xix. 47, 
where, however, the A. V. went out too little 
for them is not a translation of the Hebrew 
text, which is very difficult to explain. 
Houbigant, by an ingenious conjecture, gives 
the sense was too narrow for them- From 
the mention of this migration in the Book of 
Joshua, it is probable that it took place not 
many years after Joshua's death. 

Ver. 2. — They came to Uount Ephraim 
(ch. xvii. 1, 8). The hill country of Eph- 
raim would be on their way to the north 
from Eshtaol. They would naturally avoid 
the plain where the Amorites and Fhuistines 
were strong. 

Ver. 8. — ^When. Rather, while. By the 
house. Rather, m or a< the house. They knew 
the voice, having, as some think, known him 
before he left Bethlehem, or perceiving a 
southern accent. But it may merely mean 
that they discerned his voice as he was sing- 
ing or reciting prayers in the house of God. 
Micah's house seems to have been a collec- 
tion of houses (vers. 14, 22), approached by 
one gateway (ver. 16), in one of which the 
Levite dwelt. They turned in thither. This 
seems to have been next morning, when they 
were starting on their journey. Hearing the 
Levite's voice, they turned aside into his 
house. What makest then, &c. Rather, 
Whatdoest thou in this place? and what is 
thy business here? 

Ver. 4. — ^And I am his priest, or, to be 
his priest, 

Ver. 5. — Ask counsel of God, or simply 
Ask God, as the identical phrase is rendered 
in ch. L 2, where see note. 

Yer. 6. — And the priest said, &c., having 
first, it is to be presumed, put on the ephod 
(see ch. viii. 26, 27, note ; xvii. 5). Before 
the Lord is your way, i. e. he looks upon it 
with favour, has respect unto it, and will 
make it successful, as it is said in Fs. xzxiv. 
15 : "The eyes of the Lord are upon the 
righteous." " Whether," says Bishop Patrick, 
"he had any answer from the teraphim, or 
feigned it ont of his own head, ia uncer- 
tain." 

Ver. 7. — To Laish. Called in Josh. xix. 
47 Leshem, which is perhaps a corruption 
caused by the statement that they called it 
after the name {Ke-shem) of Dan, or it may 
be only another form. The name is strangely 
corrupted in the Septuagint of ver. 29 of this 
chapter into Oulamais, and in Josh. xix. 47 
into Lasen-dan. St. Jerome, misled by the 
Septuagint, has Lesem Dan. Laish was 
lituated four Roman miles from Banias, on 
the load to Tyret on one of the sources 



of the Jordan. Robinson identifies it nn- 
hesitatingly with Tell-el-Kady, "the mount 
of the judge " (where Kady has the same 
meaning as Dan), close to the great fountain, 
" one of the largest fountains va. the world," 
called el-Leddan, which is the source of the 
lesser Jordan (Josephus), and which may 
very possibly be the ultimate form of ed- 
Dan, corrupted into Eddan, el-Eddan, Led- 
dan, el-Leddan, by successive incorporations 
of the article el into the word itself, of which 
there are other examples. The remainder of 
this verse is exceedingly obscure ; a probable 
translation is as follows: "And they saw 
the people that was in the midst of it dwell- 
ing in security after the manner of the 
Zidonians, '■quia and secv/re, and none 
doing any injury to any one in the land, 
possessing wealth;' and they were far &om 
the Zidonians, and had no business with 
any man." The words in italics are probably 
a poetical quotation, descriptive of the people 
of Laish, which would account for the pecu- 
liar diction and the grammatical changes ; 
for whereas the word dwelling is ia the 
feminine gender, agreeing with peoj)le, the 
words quiet and secure and possessing are 
in the masculine, which can be readily ac- 
counted for if they are a quotation. This 
would also account for the tautology, "dwell- 
ing in security," "quiet and secure," and 
for the poetical character of the phrase "pos- 
sessing wealth, " and for the unusual form of 
the word here rendered wealth {'etzer with 
an ain, instead of the usual otzar with an 
aleph), in accordance with the Septuagint 
and Vulgate and Gesenius, who derive the 
meaning of wealth from collecting, from 
which the common word atzereth derives 
its meaning of a collection or congregation 
of people. 

Ver. 9. — To go, and to enter. The exact 
meaning is. Be not slothful to go {i. e. to go 
on your way from hence), so as to enter in 
and possess the land. This would be ex- 
pressed by leaving out to before eiUer — to go 
and enter. 

Ver. 10. — Translate, "When ye come, ye 
shall come unto a people secure ; and the 
land is very large (for God hath given it 
into your hands), a place where there is no 
want," &o. The Hebrew of very large is, 
literally, wide on both hands. The paren- 
thetic for God hath given it inio yowr 
hands, merely explains why they speak so 
confidently about it (cf. Deut. viii. 9). 

Ver. 11. — The family — ^meaning the tr^e 
(see ch. xiii. 2, note, and cf. Josh. vii. 17). 
Possibly a reason for the use of the word 
family here and in ver. 2, as applied to Dan, 
may be that there was only one family in 
the tribe of Dan, that of the Shuhamites 
(Numb. xxvi. 42). Six hundred men. With 
their wives and sisters and children (see 



It6 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oh. xviil 1—31 



Ter. 21), the whole company must have 
•mounted to two or three thousand souls. 

Ver. 12. — Kirjath-jearim (city of forests), 
otherwise called Kirjath-Baal and Baalah, 
in the hiU country of Judah (Josh. xv. 60). 
It i lay on the border of Benjamin (Josh, 
xviii. 14, 15). Its modem representative 
in all probability is Kurit-et-enah, nine 
miles from Jerusalem, on the road to Joppa. 
The district is still very woody. Uahaneh- 
dan, i. e. the camp of Dan (see eh. xiii. 25). 
Behind, i. e. to the west of. The exact site 
of Mahaneh-dan has not been identified 
with certainty. Mr. WiUiams was shown a 
site called Beit-Mahanem in the "Wady Is- 
mail which answers well in position, but it 
has not been noticed by any other traveller 
(' Dictionary of Bible '). 

Ver. 14. — In these houses, showing that 
Beth-Micah, the house of Micah, was in fact 
a small village (see ver. 22). 

Ver. 15. —^ Even unto the house, &c 
Eather, at Beth-Micah. 

Ver. 17. — Went up, viz., into the upper 
chamber, where it appears the chapel was. 
So we read in 2 Kings xxiii 12 that there 
were altars on the roof of the v/pper chamber 
of Ahaz (of. Jer. xix. 13). .4nacamenp, and 
took. There is no and in the Hebrew, and 
the tense of the verb is changed. A fuUer 
stop must be put after went up. And then 
the account proceeds, with a certain solemn- 
ity of diction, They came in thither; they 
took the graven image, and the ephod, and 
the teraphim, and the molten image (fuU 
stop). The naiTative goes on, Now the 
pnest was standing in the entering of the 
gate, &o. But these five went into Mioah's 
house, &c., as just related, and of course 
brought them out to the gate where the 
priest was standing with the 600 Danites. 

Ver. 18. — The carved image. It should 
be the graven image, as elsewhere. The 
Hebrew text here has the graven image of 
the y[)hod, as was noticed in ch. xvii. 8, 
note. But it b very possible that the 
vav, and, has fallen out of the text by 
accident, and it does not seem likely that 
a different phrase should be adopted m this 
one place from that followed throughout in 
the enumeration of the articles in Mioah's 
chapel, so that the A. V. is probably right. 
Then said the priest, &c. When he saw the 
idols and teraphim in the hands of the five 
men he cried out in alarm. It is remarkable 
that here and in the preceding verse he is 
styled the priest. 

Ver. 19. — Lay thine hand upon thy mouth. 
Cf. Job xxi. 6 ; xxix. 9 ; xl. 4. A father 
and • priest. See ch. xvii. 10, note. 

Ver. 20.— The priest's heart was glad, Ac. 
The prospect of greater dignity and greater 
emolument stifled all sentiments of grati- 
tude and loyalty to Micah, and made him 



cheerfully connive at an act of theft and 
sacrilege. 

Ver. 21. — ^They turned, i. e. . turned their 
backs upon Beth-Micah, and went on their 
way to the north. The little ones. The 
term necessarily includes the women of tht 
emigrant party. Compare Jacob's care foi 
his wives and children (Gen. xxxiii, 1 — 6) ; 
only Jacob expected an attack from Esau 
in frcnt, the Danites an attack from Micah 
from behind. The carriage. It is the same 
word as is translated in Gen. xxxi 1 glory; 
it might be rendered valuables. It would 
no doubt include the precious images and 
ephod which they had just stolen. 

Ver. 22. — The houses near to Mioah's 
house. See ver. 14, note. Near to, the same 
Hebrew word as is rendered by in ver. 3, 
where see note. 

Ver. 23. — That thou comest, &c. — liter- 
ally, that thov. art gathered together, the 
same word as in ver. 22. It is the idea of 
the clan, or family, or tribe which causes 
the phrase. Just as Israel or Judah desig- 
nates the whole nation, or the whole tribe, 
under the name of their patriarch, so here 
Micah would include all the clan who dwelt 
ill Micah's house ; and hence the Danites 
speak of Micah being gathered together. 

Ver. 24. — My gods, or, as some render it, 
my god. But the plural is probably right, 
as Micah was thinking of the molten and 
graven images, and the teraphim, and called 
them gods, without perhaps meaning to im- 
ply that there was any God but Jehovah. 

Ver. 25. — Eun upon thee. Rather, run, or 
fall, upon you; it is the plural pronoun, 
comprehending the whole party. The argu- 
ment of the Danites was the argument of 
the stronger. 

Ver. 26.— The verse teUs us what the two 
parties did, but not in the order in which 
an English writer would express it ; for no 
doubt the Danites, encumbered with their 
women, and chUdren, and baggage, did not 
go on their way till Micah and his party 
had turned back, though in English the 
contrary order is rather implied. The He- 
brew merely puts the actions side by side, 
and leaves the order to be inferred. 

Ver. 27. — And they. In the Hebrew tht 
they is emphatic. It would be better ex- 
pressed in English by repeating The children 
of Dan. The repetition of the epithets quiet 
and secure, as applied to the people of Laish, 
rather seems to indicate the writer's reproba- 
tion of the deed as cruel, like that of Simeon 
and Levi in slaying Hamor and Shechem. 
They smote them with the edge of the 
sword — a phrase denoting an exterminating 
slaughter (Eiod. xxxiv. 26 ; Josh. xix. 47 ; 1 
Sam. XV. 8, &o.). And they burnt the citj, 
&o. Perhaps they had made the people and 
I city a cherem, a devoted thing, and therefow 



OH. XVIII. 1—81.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



1« 



slew the one and burnt the other (cf. Numb. 
xxi. 3 ; Josh. viii. 19 ; xi. 11, &c.) ; or the 
burning of the city may have been one of 
the means by which they destroyed the 
people. 

Ver. 28.— Beoanse it was far, ftc. He 
reverts again to the description given in ver. 
7. That lieth by Beth-Kehob. It is liter- 
ally, which helongeth to Beth-Rehob, L e. the 
valley here spoken of was part of the terri- 
tory of the Syrians of Beth-Eehob in the 
time of David (and very likely earlier), as we 
read in 2 Sam. x. 6. It seems to have taken 
its name. House of Behob, from Rehob the 
father of Hadadezer, king of Zobah (2 Sam. 
viii. 12), and to have been called Stth-Behob 
very miich as Micah's settlement was called 
Beth-Micah. It was also called for shortness 
Behob, as Numb. xiii. 21 ; Judg. i. 81 ; 2 Sam. 
X. 8. It was situated, as we learn from ch. i. 
SI, in the bounds of the tribe of Asher, in 
the extreme north of the Holy Land, near 
the entering in of Hamath, the site of which, 
however, is unknown (see Numb. xiii. 21). 
The valley is that through which the Leddan 
fountain flows (ver. 7, note), and is the up- 
per part of the plain called d-Hulleh, which 
is the northern continuation of the Jordan 
valley. They built a city. Bather, they re- 
built the city. 

Ver. 29. — Howheit Laish was the name, 
^c. The strange form here given in the 
Septuagint, Oulamais, arises from their 
having taken the Hebrew word for howbeit 
(oulam) as part of the name, and left out the 
L of Laish (see ver. 7, note). 

Ters. 80, 81. — ^And the children of San, 
ftc. It was probably the long existence of this 
semi-idolatrous worship of the graven image 
at Dan that induced King Jeroboam to set 
up one of his golden calves at Dan, as we 
read 1 Kings xii. 28 — 30. And Jonathan, 
the son of Gershom, the son of Uanasseh. 
The Hebrew text really has the son of Moses. 
But a little n is written above the line be- 
tween the M and the S of Moses (Mosheh), 

N 

so as to be read Manasseh, as thus : MSH ; 
so that they avoided the pain of reading 
aloud that the grandson or descendant of 
Moses was an idolatrous priest, without 
actually altering the written text. It is 
indeed most sad that it should have been so, 
though like examples are not wanting, as, 
e. g., the sons of Eli and of Samuel. For 
Gershom the son of Moses see Exod. ii. 22 ; 
xviii. 3 ; 1 Chron. xxiii. 14 — 16. It does 
not follow that Jonathan, the priest of the 
Danites, was literally the son of Gershom. 
It may merely mean that he was of the 
family of which Gershom was the head. 
Until the day of the captivity of the land. 
There is great diversity of opinion as to the 
meaning of this phrase. Many understand 



it, as is the obvious meaning of the words, 
of the Assyrian captivity (2 Kings xv. 29 ; 
xvii. 6). But some of the best commentators, 
as Kimchi among the Jews, and many 
modems, think it refers to the taking 
captive of the ark by the Philistines in the 
days of Eli, because this is the time indicated 
in the next verse by the mention of the 
house of God in Shiloh. Tbe ark of God 
never returned to Shiloh after it was taken 
thence (1 Sam. iv. 8, 4) and captured by the 
Philistines {ibid. ver. 11). It is also noticed 
that the expression, The ark of God is gone 
into captivity (is taken. A, v.), occurs in 
1 Sam. iv. 21, 22. Itcertainly would bestrange 
that one verse (30) should speak of the wor- 
ship of the graven image lasting till the 
Assyrian conc^uest of the land, and the next 
verse (31) limit it to the time that the house 
of God was in ShUoh, some 800 years earlier. 
At the same time it should be noticed that 
ver. 80 speaks of the time that Jonathan's 
sons were priests to the tribe of Dan, and 
ver. 31 of the worship of Micah's image. It 
is quite possible that the descendants of 
Jonathan may have been appointed priests 
at Dan to Jeroboam's golden-calf worship, 
though the original graven image of Mieah 
may have been destroyed by Saul or David ; 
and in the interval between such destruction 
of Micah's image and the setting up of 
Jeroboam's calves they may have been the 
priests of an irregular worship on a high 
place at Tell-el-Kady. And this would en- 
able ns to give what is certainly its natural 
meaning to the words, " the captivity of the 
land. " But no certainty can be arrived at 
without more actual knowledge. Many 
commentators adopt Houbigant's conjecture 
to read ark for land at the end of ver. 80 
{,ar6n for aretz). Others think that some 
deportation of the Danites by the Syrians or 
other neighbouring people not recorded in 
history is here spoken of. All the time the 
house of Sod, &c. This must have been 
written not earlier than the time of Samuel, 
and possibly much later. The house of 
God, i. e. the tabernacle, was in Shiloh from 
the days of Joshua (Josh, xviii. 1) till the 
days of Eli (1 Sam. i, 3), after which we have 
no account of where the house of God was 
till the ark was brought up to Jerusalem by 
King David from the house of Obed-edom 
the Gittite (2 Sam. vi. 12), and placed in 
the tabernacle that David had pitched for it 
(2 Sam. vi. 17) ; but whether this was the 
tabernacle that had been pitched at Shiloh 
or a new one does not appear. It is not 
improbable that Samuel may have moved 
the tabernacle from Shiloh to Eamah (1 Sam. 
vii. 17). The ark had rested in the house 
of Abinadab at Baaleh or Kirjath-jearim foi 
twenty years (1 Sam. vii 2) previous to iti 
removal by David. 



IM THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. xvui. 1—31. 



HOMILBTICS. 

Vers. 1 — 81. — Society without a head ceasing to he society. The writer of the five 
last chapters of the Book of Judges had a painful task to perform. Writing the 
history of his people, and they the people of God, he had to tell a tale of violence, 
plunder, hloodshed, brutality, civil war, and extermination, on the secular side, and 
of superstition, schism, and idolatry, on the religious side of his story. And we may 
observe, by the way, that we have a striking evidence of the truthfulness and impar- 
tiality of the narrator in this merciless exposure of the sins and misdeeds of his 
countrymen. Nor are we at a loss to draw the lesson which he intended us to draw 
from the account which he has given ; for no fewer than four times in the course 
of his brief narrative does he impress upon the mind of his readers the fact that in 
the days when these shameful deeds were done " there was no king in Israel, but 
every man did that which was right in his own eyes " (ch. xvii. 6 ; xviii. 1 ; xix. 
1 ; xxi. 25). No doubt the writer referred particularly to that government with 
which he was acquainted, the government of kings properly so called, of whom 
Saul was the first, and David and his long line were the successors. But when 
we remember that in its best days the Israelitish nation had no king but God, 
and was governed under him by such rulers as Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Samuel, 
and the other judges, we shall perceive that the lesson to be learnt is not so 
much that of the superiority of monarchy over other forms of government (how- 
ever true this may be), as of the absolute necessi*'y, for the religious and civil 
welfare of a people, that a firm government should exist, to control by the force 
of law the excesses of individual will, and to compel within certain limits the action 
of individuals for the sake of the public good. Looking at their several influences 
upon the body of the Israelite people, how pernicious was the theft by Micah of his 
mother's hoarded treasure ; how injurious to the community was the idolatrous 
worship set up by Micah, and that for generation upon generation ; how disastrous 
to the commonwealth of Israel was the brutal outrage of the men of Gibeali ; how 
intolerable was the marauding expedition of the Danites, both to the quiet dwellers in 
the land and to peaceful neighbours beyond its border ; and what a complete loosen- 
ing of all the joints of social life do the several transactions display 1 Nowhere do 
we see any common aim for the common good, but each man's covetousness, super- 
stition, lust, anger, cruelty, pursuing private objects at the expense of public interests. 
The ideas of a society, a commonwealth, a Church, a nation, were lost in individual 
selfishness. Now this was in a great measure due to the want of a central supreme 
authority to repress, to direct, and to overrule. Just as material nature, if the power 
of gravitation were removed, would fall to pieces, and all cohesion would be gone, 
so, without a common authority wielding the power of law, human society would fall 
to pieces, and be reduced to chaos. Men are blinded by their own passions ; par- 
ticular sections of society can see nothing but their own fancied interests ; lawles* 
violence would plunder here ; impulsive zeal would rush onwards there ; a fanatical 
superstition would set up its altars where it ought not ; fierce rivalry would rise upon 
the ruins of its antagonist ; revenge would glut itself with destruction ; one trade 
would seek the suppression of all that stood in its way ; one interest would devour 
another, one class supplant another, one rank tread down another. It is the business 
of law wielded by sovereign power to look with an equal eye upon all the different 
interests of the State, to favour all by favouring none at the expense of others, to 
repress all individual action which would hurt the whole, and to regulate all the 
separate forces which would be injurious to the whole. Law, like the eye of God, is 
impartial in its look-out ; its end is to produce order, harmony, and peace. Under 
the even reign of law eccentric violence is unknown, and its steady but irresistible 
pressure gives consistency and strength to the whole fabric of society. Under its 
reign full scope is given to every energy for good, and all the scattered forces of the 
separate parts are concentrated for the benefit of the whole. Under its wholesome 
restraints the selfish passions of man are not allowed to injure themselves or_ others, 
and the folly of the foolish and the wickedness of the wicked are checked in theii 
injurious courses. Not that which is right in his own eyes, and which self-will 



OH. XVIII. 1-^1.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. IM 



desireg, but that whiob the law, the reflection of God's mind, commands, is the rule 
by which every man s actions must be squared. The perfection of a human polity 
18 one m which wise laws govern the whole social movement as surely as the laws ot 
nature govern the material world. It is the interest of all classes of the community 
to bow to this supremacy of law, and to unite in a firm compact to support the 
central authority in repressing every act of lawlessness, whether committed by an 
individual or by a company. It is only thus that social chaos can be avoided, and 
that civil cosmos, which alone is civilisation, can be maintained for the true liberty 
and welfare of mankind. It is just the same with the Church of God, which is the 
comnttonwealth of his saints. In it the word of God must reign supreme. In it 
individual opinions, sentiments, wishes, and feelings must all be subordinated to the 
Divine law. In it selfish eccentricities, ambitions, activities must all be restrained 
by a wise and even rule if the Church is to be the abode of order, peace, and love 
In the surrender of individual will to the discipline of the supreme authority the 
sacred commonwealth finds its perfect balance, and each member is enabled to yield 
that service which indeed is perfect freedom; because the unchecked power to do 
that which is right in his own eyes is not a man's liberty, but his bondage. Self-will 
is set in motion by sin; but law is the fruit of wisdom and justice moving for the 
happiness of all, securing right, and stopping up the gangways of wrong. From 
the spirit of lawlessness deliver thy Church, Lord I 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vera. 1 — 13. — The history of a manrmade ministry : — 2. Its abuse. A special 
instance of the manner in which it wrought mischief afEorded in the migration of 
the Danites. The proximity of Micah's house to the great northern highway made 
it a natural resting-place for travellers, and so the spies find their way there. By 
them the young priest, who turns out to be a previous acquaintance, is recognised. 
The existence of the " house of gods " is thus made known, and they desire him to 
consult the oracle concerning their fortunes. Although their adventure was a wicked 
and unscrupulous one, they are told, " Go in peace : before the Lord is your way 
wherein ye go." The visit of the spies to Laish, their report to their brethren, and 
the setting out of the 600 Danites, who arrive in the first stage of their march once 
more at Micah's house, are then narrated We see, therefore — 

I. How A MEECENABY PBIESTHOOD AND SHRINE MAY BE PKOSTITUTED TO BASE USES. 

The oracle at Shiloh was symbol and seal of the national unity, and its priesthood 
represented the national conscience. It would have been impossible for them to 
sanction such a crime. But it was otherwise with Micah's priest and " house of gods." 
The latter was a mercantile speculation, a private enterprise, and was therefore 
obnoxious to any temptation like this. A striking parallel to this is afforded by the 
Church of Rome, with its sale of indulgences, &c. 

II. How EAGER UNHOLY MEN ABE FOB EELTGIOUS SANCTIONS IN THEIR PBAUDDLENT 

AND MURDEROUS DEEDS. When religion becomes a matter of money, and its advan- 
tages are sold to the highest bidder, it ceases to be the judge of right and wrong. 
The contradiction between the errand upon which they were sent and the spirit of 
God's revelation ought to have struck them. Yet this is but one instance of an all 
but universal error. They imagine that true religion can call evil good and good evil. 

III. How THEBEBY A TURBULENT TRIBE IS ENCOUBAGBD IN ITS DESIGNS UPON A 

PEACEFUL DISTRICT, AND A PERMANENT WRONG IS INFLICTED. The moral latent in the 
incident is thereby sharply pointed. It must appear to all how mischievous, how 
subversive of human society and of religion, such an institution must be. The only 
safeguard against such evils is in the central authority at Shiloh being recognised, 
and that authority being enforced by a duly elected king. — M. 

Vers. 14 — 31. — 3. Its transfer and establishment in a lawless community. The spies 
had evidently taken counsel with the 600, for the theft of the gods is done in a cool, 
business-like way j and they have evidently a settled design concerning them. B veiy- 
thing that would encumber or be detrimental to them is sent on in front The 
real or feigned remonstrance of the priest, and his willing compliance with their 
desire, and the parsuit by Micafa, are realistic touches that add greatly to the inteiMl 



190 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [ch. xvin. 1—31. 

and naturalness of the narrative. That the slaughter, &c. at Laish was of the most 
horrible deBcription is suggested — " There was no helper." 

I. Those who subvert the principles of moealitt should not kxpkctt to bs 

TREATED ACCORDING TO THOSE PRINCIPLES. 

II. However apparently religious weonq-dobrs are, their conduct does hot 
LOSE ITS essential CHARACTER, AND_ WILL BE JUDGED. The record of the occurrence 
has preserved it for all time, and it is condemned before the bar of the righteous 
conscience. 

III. The greatest carb should be taken at the first indication of schism or 

EBROB, AS SUCH THINGS TEND TO PERPETUATE THEMSELVES. A regular priesthood is 

instituted, with its hereditary privileges and duties. 

IV. The real effect of such religious movements is to the detriment of 
TRUE religion. The " house of gods " at Laish is a rival to the " house of God " at 
Shiloh. During those early days of Hebrew nationalisation and religious training, the 
mischief and hindrance occasioned by it must have been enormous. True religion is 
ever opposed in the world. Its worst foes are those who most nearly resemble it in 
outward ceremony, but whose motives are impure. — M. 

Vers. 23, 24. — 4. The idolater's distrest. Micah has at one fell swoop lost gods and 
ephod and priest As his chief gains and his fancied importance were derived from 
this source, he was desolate. 

I. Those whose trust is in outward things, and whose heart is bound up in 

THEM, ARE EXPOSED TO GRAVE DANGERS AND DISADVANTAGES. The losses of life; 

the anxieties and dreads ; bereavement. The religion of external details, how easily 
disarranged I The whole " establishment " may be swept away I 

II. The spirituallt-minded arb freed from these cares, and although suf- 
fering SIMILAR deprivations AND LOSSES, ARE NOT WITHOUT COMPORT. " God is a 

spirit, and they that worship him," &c. The heart that rests on Christ is secure 
against all outward perils. Forms, externals, &c. are not essential to true religion. 
The " means of grace " are not to become an end in themselves, and where the end 
is reached otherwise they can be dispensed with. — M. 

Ver. 5. — The religion of convenience. I. Men who are unwilling to do the wil 
OF God are sometimes anxious to secure his help. These Danites are little better 
than freebooters ; they are determined to go their own way ; they have no wish to 
be guided by God ; they simply wish to be assured of success. So there are many 
who have sufficient religious faith to desire the blessing of God on their life, but not 
sufficient to submit to his guidance and authority. True loyalty to God will make us 
not merely consult him as to the success of our work, but as to its rightness, and not 
merely inquire whether the way in which we are determined to go shall prosper, but 
ask what way God would have us take. 

II. The prayer for prosperity unaccompanied by submission to God's will does 
NOT JUSTIFY THE COURSE OF ACTION TO WHICH IT RELATES. We have Superstitions 
about prayer. We are too ready to imagine that all is well if we have sought God's 
blessing upon our work. But we have only a right to ask for this when we are 
doing right. Prayer cannot sanctify a bad action. The Danites were not justified 
in their marauding expedition because they first consulted a supposed Divine oracle. 
Men seek God's blessing on their business while they conduct it dishonestly, on their 
country while they favour aggressive wars and national injustice, on their private 
lives while they pursue a worldly, perhaps even an immoral^ course. Such conduct 
rather aggravates than mitigates guilt, because it betrays blindness of conscience in 
the searching light of God's presence. 

III. An assurance of success is no proof op the favour of God. We are 
too ready to worship success as though it were a justification of themeans by which 
it was attained. In this world, viewed from a human standpoint, goodness often 
fails and wickedness often succeeds. Our own feeling of assurance is no ground of 
reasonable confidence. They who are on the best of terms with themselves are not 
therefore on the best of terms with God. The timid, diffident, despondent soul may 
be really regarded with favour by God, while the vain, self-elated soul may be living 



uH. xviii. 1—31.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 191 

under his frown. The faith which saves is not self-confidence nor the assurance of 
Bucoess, but submissive and obedient trust in a Lord and Saviour. 

IV. They who make a convenience of religion will find in the end that rr 
WILL BE THEIR CONDEMNING JUDGE. The priest told the Danites that their way waa 
before the Lord. God would watch them. They had invoked his name. They 
would see_ ultimately what his presMice involved. The recognition of God which is 
involved in seeking his blessing will increase our condemnation if we disregard hiH 
will. — A. 

Vers. 19, 20 —The mercenary priest. Greed and ambition sre the besetting sins 
of depraved priests. Both of tuese evil characteristics are apparent in Micah's 
Levite. 

I. The peiestlt office is degbaded by mercenary greed. Micah had adopted 
the Levite when he was homeless and destitute, and had treated him with the kindness 
of a father to his son ; yet as soon as he discovers a chance of better pay, the miser- 
able man deserts and robs his patron. No man can serve God truly if the money 
wages of his service are the chief consideration with him. Though he may take 
such just payment as is given to him if he is God's faithful servant, he will, like the 
faithful Levites, feel that his real portion is the Eternal (Josh. xiii. 33). Such a 
man should also consider himself bound by ties of affection and friendly obligation 
to the people among whom he ministers. If he seeks promotion simply for the sake 
of pecuniary advantage, and irrespective of the loss which may be sustained in his 
present sphere, and of his possible unfitness for a larger sphere, he is guilty of gross 
worldliness and wicked selfishness. 

II. The priestly office is degraded by selfish ambition. The Levite is 
tempted by the prospect of exercising his functions in a larger way as the priest of 
a tribe. Such an ofEer would only be possible in Israel under circumstances of 
religious decline and social disorder. Even then the Levite must have known that 
he was no priest at all according to the law of God, for he did not belong to tha 
family of Aaron. But ambition tramples on law for its own advancement. Of 
course there are occasions when a man may naturally endeavour to rise in the world, 
and if he can be sure that he will extend his usefulness, it is his duty to do so. But — 
1. The opportunitj' of enlarged service elsewhere is no justification for unfaithfulness 
to our present service. Plainly the Levite was treating his benefactor with unpardon- 
able ingratitude and treachery in deserting him for the service of the Danites. 2. 
It is only a culpable ambition which will lead a man to seek a higher position simply 
for his own honour and profit, and not for the good of those who are intrusted to his 
care. Tlie priest exists for the people, not the people for the priest. But the latter 
condition has been only too apparent in the course of the corruptions of Christendom. 
OflSce has been sought solely for the satisfaction of the greed and ambition of the 
aspirant. How contrary to the teaching of Christ, who said, " Whosoever will be 
great among you, let him be your servant " 1 (Matt. xx. 27). — A. 

Ver. 24. — The lost gods. Micah's distress at the loss of his gods and priest may 
be regarded on two sides — on the side of superstition and on that of genuine 
devotion. 

I. The superstitious side of Micah's distress. 1. The god that can be stolen 
must be no true God. Micah should have seen the folly of his idolatry in the 
catastrophe which had befallen him. If the idols could not protect their own shrine, 
what could they do for their owner's home ? 2. The man whose character is corrupt 
is worthless as a priest. Yet after the Levite had behaved in the vilest way Micah 
still felt the loss of him bitterly. This distress came from his superstitious belief 
In the efBoacy of the residence of an official priest in his house, no matter what was 
the baseness of the man's character or the emptiness of his services. 3. A religion 
which depends on any material things or human oSices for its efficacy is foreign to 
the character of the spiritual worship of the true God. It was a mistake for Micah 
to suppose that he would lose the presence of God by losing the images which he 
had made, or the blessing of God by losing his priest. Nothing that is done to a 
man's outside life can affect his religious blessings. God dwells in the shrine of th« 



IM 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[ca. XIX. 1—30, 



heart. No persecution can rob us of his presence. The Waldenses in their mountain 
cave had lost every earthly comfort, but they had not lost God. God's blessings are 
not dependent on external ordinances, though these arethe usual channels through 
which they flow. If we have no visible temple, altar, priest, or service, God can still 
bless us fully. 

II. The natural side of Micah's distress. There is much in it which speaks 
well for Micah. Micah is a religious man. To him the loss of what he believes to 
be the source of religious blessings is a great trouble. Are not they who can lose 
the real presence of God in their hearts without any feeling of compunction far more 
astray than this man with all his idolatry and superstition ? God is the light and 
life of the soul. How strange then that any should live without him and yet not 
know that anything " aileth " them 1 But whatever a man makes into a god for 
himself will interest him deeply. If he makes a god of his money, his art, his child, 
the loss of his god will plunge him into the darkness of despair. 1. Since we are 
thus deeply afEected by the object of our supreme devotion, let us see that this is no 
earthly thing which can be stolen or destroyed, but the true, eternal God who will 
never leave us. 2. God sometimes takes from us the earthly treasures of which we 
have made gods that we may see the mistake of our idolatry, and so leam to lift up 
our hearts to the ever-abiding presence. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XIX. 



Ver. 1. — "When there was no king (ch. 
xvii. 6 ; xviii. 1 ; xxi. 25). It appears from 
ch. XX. 27, 28 that the events narrated in 
these three last chapters of the Book of 
fudges happened in the lifetime of Phinehas, 
d,nd while the ark was at Shiloh (see ch. xx. 
27, note). Phinehas evidently outlived Joshua 
yjosh. xxiv. 29, 33), though there is no evi- 
dence to show how long. The events in 
these chapters must have occurred in the 
interval between the death of Joshua and 
the death of Phinehas. A certain Levite, 
&c. It is a curious coincidence that both 
the Levite whose sad story is here told, and 
the Levite the son of Gershom of whom we 
read in the preceding chapters, were sojourn- 
ers in the hill country of Ephraim, and also 
closely connected with Bethlehem -judah. 
Perhaps the legitimate inference (see ver. 18, 
«nd ch. XX. 26, 27) is that in both cases the 
Levites were drawn to Ephraim by the ark 
being at Shiloh, and also that there was 
a colony of Levites at Bethlehem -judah. 
Whether there was any connection between 
the presence of Levites at Bethlehem and 
the annual sacrifice at Bethlehem which 
existed in David's time, and which argues 
the existence of a high place there, can only 
be a matter of conjecture (see 1 Sam. ix. 13, 
and XX. 29). AU we can say is that there 
was the universal prevalence of high-place 
worship during the time of the judges, and 
that the services of Levites were sought after 
in connection with it (ch. xvii. 13). On the 
Bide. Hebrew, sides. In the masculine form 
the word means the hip and upper part of 
the thigh ; in the feminine, as here, it is 
applied ontyto inanimate objects, as a house, 



the temple, a cave, the north, a pit, aeonntiy, 
&c., and is used in the dual number (see 
1 Sam. xxiv. 4 ; 1 Kings vi. 16 ; Ps. xlviii. 
3 ; cxxviii. 8 ; Isa. xxxvil. 24 ; Ezek. xxxii. 
23, &c.). It means the innermost, hindmost, 
furthermost parts. Its applicatioB here to 
the northern side of Ephraim seems to imply 
that the writer wrote in the south, probably 
in Judah. A concubine. An inferior wife, 
who had not the same right for herself or 
for her children as the wife had (see Gen. 
XXV. 6). 

Ver. 2. — Played the whore, &c. Perhaps 
the phrase only means that she revolted from 
him and left him. Her returning to her 
father's house, and his anxiety to make np 
the quarrel, both discourage taking the phrase 
in its worst sense. Four whole montlu. 
Literally, days,f(mr months ; meaning either 
a year and fow months, as in 1 Sam. xxvii. 
7, where, however, the and is expressed ; or 
days (i. e. many days), viz., fov/r months. 
For the use of days for a year see Exod. 
xiii. 10 ; Judges xvii. 10, &c. 

Ver. 8. — To bring her again. So the 
Keri. But the Cethib has to bring him, ». «. 
it, again, viz. , her heart. But the phrase to 
speak to her heart is such a common one for 
to speak friendly or kindly to any one that it 
is not likely that it should here be used 
otherwise, so that the pronoun should refer 
to heart. If the masculine is here the right 
reading, it may be an archaism making the 
suffix of the common gender like the plural 
suffix in ver. 24, which is masculine, though 
applied to women, and like the masculine 
pronoun itself, which is so used throughout 
the Pentateuch and elsewhere (see also ch. zxi. 
12 ; Exod. i. 21). A couple of asses. One for 
himself and one for her. He rejoiced. N« 



CH. XIX. 1—80.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



193 



doubt, in part at least, because the expense 
of his daughter's maintenance would be trans- 
ferred from himself to his daughter's husband. 

Ver. 4. — Betained him. See the same 
phrase 2 Kings iv. 8, where it is rendered 
slu constrained, him. The full phrase is in 
Gen. xxi. 18, hold him in thy hand. 

Ver. 6. — Comfort thine heart, &o. Com- 
pare Gen. zviii. 5. 

Ver. 6. — For the damsel's father had 
said, inc., or rather. And the damsel's father 
said. He had not at first intended to stay 
on, but to go on his way after he had eaten 
and drunk (ver. 6). But when they had 
prolonged their carousal, the father of the 
damsel persuaded him to stay on another 
night. 

ver. 7. — He lodged there again. Literally, 
he returned and lodged there. The Septuagint 
and one Hebrew MS. read, And he tarried 
and lodged there. 

Ver. 8. — And they tarried. It should 
rather be rendered in the imperative mood : 
And tarry ye until the afternoon. So they 
did eat both of them. The imperative com- 
fort thine heart is in the singular beoauso 
only the man and the father-in-law are repre- 
sented throughout as eating and drinking 
both of them together. The imperative tarry 
ye is in the plural because it applies to the 
wife as well as the man. 

Ver. 9. — Sraweth toward evening. Tho 
Hebrew phrase, which is uncommon, is, Thi 
day is slackening to lecome evening, i. e. the 
heat and the light of the day are becoming 
slack and weak, and evening is coming on. 
The day groweth to an end. Another un- 
usual phrase ; literally, Behold the declining 
of the day, or, as some render it, the encamp- 
ing of the day, as if the sun after his day's 
journey was now pitching his tent for the 
night. Oo home. Literally, to thy tent, as in 
ch. XX. 8. So the phrase. To ymr tents, C 
Israel, means. Go home (see 1 Kings xii. 16, 
&c.). 

Ver. 10. — JebvLB. bee ch. i. 21, note. 
Jerusalem is numbered among Joshua's con- 
quests at Josh. X. 23 ; xii. 10. But from 
mis verse it would appear that the Israelite 
population had withdrawn and left the city 
to be entirely occupied by the Jebusites, who 
held it till the time of David (2 Sam. v. 6). 
Jerusalem is only about two hours from 
Bethlehem. 

Ver. 12.— Gibeah (or ha-Gibeah, the hiU). 
In the tribe of Benjamin (Josh, xviii. 28) ; 
Saul's birthplace. Its modem name is Jeba. 
It would be about two and a half hours' 
fcrther journey from Jerusalem. 

Ver. 13. — ^Ramah (ha-Ramah, the height). 
Now er-Ram, less than an hour's journey 
from Gibeah, both being about equi-distant 
ftom Jerusalem. 

Ver. 16.— A street of the eity. Bather, 
JUDGBB. 



the broad space or place near the gate, such 
as is usual in an Oriental city (cf. Ruth 
iv. 1). There was no man that took them 
into his house. This absence of the common 
rites of hospitality toward strangers was a 
sign of the degraded character of the men of 
Gibeah (see Gen. xviii. 3 — 8 ; xix. 2, 3 ; 
Rom. xii. 13 ; Heb. xiii. 2 ; 1 Pet. iv. 9. 

Ver. 16 — Which was also of mount 
Ephralm. The Hebrew is. And the man 
was from tJie hill coimtry of Ephraim. It 
does not mean that he also, as well as the 
Levite, was from Ephraim. 

Ver. 18. — The side of mount Ephraim. 
See ver. 1, note. I am going to the house of 
the Lord, i. e. to the tabernacle at Shiloh. 
But some translate the words Ifreqiteni, am 
coTvcersant with, wcHk in, the house of the 
Lord, i. e. am a Levite. But the former 
deems the best rendering on the whole. 

Ver. 19. — Yet there is both itraw, &c., 
i. e. he only wanted shelter, he had all hia 
provisions with him, it was but little that 
ho asked for, and yet no man would take 
him in. 

Ver. 20. — They washed their feet. See 
Gen. xviii. 4 ; xix. 2 ; Luke vii. 34 ; 1 Tim. 
V. 10, &c. 

Ver. 22. — Making their hearts merry— 
as in vers. 6, 9, and in ch. xvi. 25 ; Ruth 
iii. 7. But there is nothing in the expression 
implying any excess in drinking. Bring 
forth the man. The abandoned character of 
the men appears in this, that not only did 
they offer no hospitality to the stranger 
themselves, but were ready to violate the 
sanctity of the hospitality of the old man's 
house by their brutal violence. There must 
have been a fearful absence of all law and 
order and government when such deeds 
could be done without any interference on 
the part of magistrate or elder or ruler of 
any kind. The singular resemblance of the 
whole narrative to that in Gen. xix. suggests 
that the Israelites by their contact with the 
accursed Canaanites had reduced themselves 
to the level of Sodom and Gomorrah. Surely 
this shows the wisdom of the command to 
destroy utterly the workers of abomination. 
Sons of Belial. See ch. xx. 13, where the 
same Hebrew phrase is rendered children of 
Belial. Belial in this common phrase is not 
a proper name, but a noon meaning worth- 
lessness. Sons or men of Belial means 
worthless fellows. 

Ver. 23. — He pleads the sanctity of hos- 
pitality. 

Ver. 25. — The man took his concubine, 
&c. One's blood boils at such selfish_ base- 
ness and such cowardly cruelty. It is not 
quite clear whether the man means the 
Levite or the old Ephraimite. 

Ver. 26.— Till it was light, or, m Um 
words may mean, at i 

o 



1»4 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[CH. XIX. 1—^, 



Ver. 27. — The woman was fallen down at 
the door, &c. Poor thing 1 with her last 
breath she turned to the house where he was 
who should have been her protector, but who 
had deserted her in her hour of need. 

Ver. 29. —Compare 1 Sam. jd. 8. 

Ver. 30. — And it was so, &c. Some 
translate this verse quite differently. They 
understand the whole verse as what the 
Levite said when he sent the twelve pieces 
of the murdered woman to the twelve tribes. 



as thus: " Be sent her into all the coasts of 
Israel (ver. 29), saying, It shall come to pass 
that all who see it will say. There hath been 
nothing done and m)thvng seen like this from 
the day, &c. But the A. V. makes very good 
sense, and the Hebrew will bear it. Con- 
sider of it, &c. The general sense of the 
whole nation was to call a national council 
to decide what to do. The Levite had suc- 
ceeded in arousing the indignation of the 
twelve tribes to avenge his terrible wrong. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 30. — The downward progress. ^ It is certainly not without a pnrpose that 
we have in Holy Scripture from time to time exhibitions of sin in its most repulsive 
and revolting forms. The general rule which tells us that " it is a shame even to 
speak of those things which are done of them in secret " is, as it were, violated on 
these occasions, because it is more important that the depravity of which human nature 
is capable at its worst should be revealed, than that the blush of shame should be 
prevented by its concealment. Sin, in some of its forms, is so disguised, and toned 
down, and softened, that the natural mind of man does not shrink from it with 
abhorrence, or perceive its deadly nature, or its fatal consequences. But it is essential 
that sin should be known to be what it is, and especially that it should be made clear 
by what gradual descents a man may glide from one stage of wickedness to another, 
till, under favouring circumstances, he reaches a depth of vileness which at one 
time would have seemed impossible. The process by which this descent is reached 
is not difficult to trace. There is in every man a certain moral sense which restrains 
him from the commission of certain acts, whether of falsehood, dishonesty, cruelty, 
injustice, sensuality, or any other form of sin. And while that moral sense is main- 
tained in its vigour, such acts may appear to him impossible for him to commit. But 
this moral sense is weakened, and more or less broken down, by every action done 
in contradiction to its authority. At each successive stage of descent there is a less 
shock to the weakened moral sense by the aspect of such or such sins than there was 
at the preceding stage. The sin apoears less odious, and the resisting power is less 
strong. It is very true that in many instances, even after the moral sense is broken 
down, the force of public opinion, the sense of a man's own interests, habit, the 
authority of the law, and other causes external to a man's self, operate to keep him 
within certain bounds, and to restrain him from certain excesses of unrighteousness. 
But, on the other hand, it may and often does happen that these counteracting causes 
are not in operation. A man is placed in a society where public opinion counten- 
ances vice, where be does not seem to be in danger of any loss in reputation or in 
fortune by the basest acts of villainy, where the authority of law is in abeyance, and, 
in a word, where there is no barrier but the fear of God and his own moral sense to 
restrain him from the lowest depths of wickedness. Then the melancholy transition 
from light to darkness takes place without let or hindrance. Self-respect, honour, 
decency, kind feeling towards others, reverence for mankind, justice, shame, burn 
gradually with a dimmer and a dimmer light within, and finally the last spark of the 
light of humanity goes out, and leaves nothing but the horror of a great darkness, in 
which no crime or wickedness shocks, and no struggle of the conscience is kept up. 
The men of Gibeah had reached this fearful depth. Not suddenly, we may be sure, 
for nemo repente fiet turpissinvus ; but by a gradual downward progress. There 
must have been for them a time when God's mighty acts by theRed Sea, in the 
wilderness, in the wars of Canaan, were fresh in their thoughts, or in their, or their 
parents', memories. The great name of Joshua, the living example of Phinehas, the 
traditions of the surviving elders, must have set before them a standard of righteous- 
ness, and impressed them with a sense of being the people of God._ But they had 
not acted up to their high calling. Doubtless they had mingled with the heathen 
and learnt their works. Their hearts had declined from God, from his fear and 
Mivice. Idolatry had eaten as a canker into their moral principle. Its •hameful 



CH. XIX. 1—30.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 19S 



hcentiousness had enticed and overcome them. The Spirit of God was vexed within 
them. The light of his word was quenched in the darkness of a gross materialism. 
Utter callousness of conscience came on. They began to sneer at virtue, and to 
scoff at the fear of God. When the fear of God was gone, the honour due to man 
and due to themselves would soon go too. And thus it came to pass at the time of 
this history that the whole community was sunk to the level of the vilest heathenism. 
Hospitality to strangers, though those strangers were their own flesh and blood, there 
was none ; pity for the homeless and weary, though one of them was a woman, there 
was none either ; respect for neighbours and fellow-townsmen, common decency and 
humanity, and every feeling which distinguishes a man from a wild beast or a devil, 
had wholly left their vile breasts, and, people of God as they were by privilege and 
covenant, they were in their abandonedness wholly the children of the devil. The 
example thus recorded with unflinching truth is needed for our generation. The 
Israelites were separated from God by abominable idolatries. The attempt of our 
age is to separate men from God by a blasphemous denial of his Being. The result 
is the same, however it may be arrived at Let the fear of God be once extinct in 
the human breast, and reverence for man and for a man's own nature will inevitably 
perish too. Virtue cannot survive godliness. The spirit of man is fed by the Spirit 
of God. Extinguish the spiritual, and nothing of man remains but the corrupt flesh. 
And man withomt spirit is no man at all. It is in the cultivation of spiritual affections, 
in the constant strengthening of the moral sense, in steady resistance to the first 
beginnings of sin, and in steadfast cleaving to God, that man's safety lies. It is in 
the maintenance of religion that the safety of society consists. Without the fear of 
God man would soon become a devil, and earth would become a hell. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 
Ver. 1. — Cf. on ch. xvML 1 — 18. — M. 

Vera. 4 — 10. — Troublesome hospitality. There is no more vivid picture of this 
extravagance. The Levite is delayed beyond all his reckoning, and perhaps through 
this is exposed to the evils subsequently narrated. There is a latent purpose 
betrayed by the anxiety of his host, which robs the offer of its simplicity and true 
hospitality. Like all who simulate a virtue for other than the mere love of it, he 
overstep'^ the bounds of modesty and decorum, and becomes an inconvenience instead 
of a help. 

I. True hospitality should bk foe the sake op the guest, and not the host. 

II. Excess of hospitalitt mat entail inconvenience and weong upon oub 
guest. 

III. Whebb hospitalitt is offered fob some extbinsio pubfose, it loses its 
tbue charactbb. 

IV. Christ the grand example op the host. His moderation ; careful calcula- 
tion as to needs of bis guests ; fulness of human sympathy ; impartation of 
■piritual grace to the humbler viands. — M. 

Vers. 14 — 21. — Exceptional hoapiiality. How welcome t Few of ns but have at 
some time or other been belated in a strange place. We know nobody, and perhaps 
the people are reserved and suspicious. In such a case one friend, the only one, and, 
like this man, depending upon daily work for daily bread, becomes of inestimable 
service. The feeling of homelessness would be deepened in the case of the Levite 
when he recalled the good cheer from which he had come. 

I. Those who have been strangers themselves are best able to bympathisi 
with STRANGERS. " He «q/oMr»ed in Gibeah." 

II. The poor are often more hospitable than the rich. Their occupation often 
introduces them to persons in distress. " What would the poor do if it were not for 
the poor ? " Simplicity of life tends to cultivate true sympathy. 

III. There is no place so wicked and unloving as to be without bomb wit- 
MESS to truth and GOODNESS. What a hell this Oibeab t Tet in it "^n^ one " lika 

02 



IM THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. xk. 1—30. 

unto the Son of man." What judgments he may have averted from its guilty 
inhabitants I Exceptional piety like this is no accidental thing ; still less can it be 
the product of surrounding social influences. There are many ways in which we 
nay serve our fellows, if the love of God be in our hearts. Perhaps the people 
thought him eccentric ; many would despise him as poor and a stranger ; but he was 
the one man who did God's work at a time when it sorely needed to be done. Shall 
not such hospitality be remembered in the kingdom ? "I was an hungred, and ye 
gave me meat ; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink ; I was a stranger, and ye took 
me in," &o. (Matt xxv. 35, 40).— M. 

Ver. 80. — Unparalleled crime: the amrit and method in which its problems are 
to be met The narrative of the book has been gradually deepening in tragic 
interest and moral importance; it now reaches its climax. The sentence which the 
people themselves passed upon this crime is repeated, that public inquiry may be 
directed to the significance of it, to the causes of its production, and the means for 
preventing the recurrence of similar enormities. To the author the imity of the 
nation, publicly represented in the tabernacle at Shiloh and the throne of the new 
kingdom, as the outward symbols of theocratic government, is the grand specific, and 
the proof of this may be said to be the dogmatic purpose of his work. Studying the 
same problem in its modern illustrations, we are carried onward to a deeper and more 
radical cause, and, consequently, to the need of a more potent and inward influence 
of restraint and salvation. But do we study sufiiciently, from the higher philosophic 
and religious standpoint, the great crimes that startle us from day to day ? Would 
it not be a " means of grace " by no means to be despised were we to grapple with 
the spiritual and practical beKfings of such occurrences ? There could not well be 
a more judicious course in such events than that advised by the writer. It is terse, 
natural, philosophic. 

I. Pebsonal meditation. " Consider it." In all its relations ; our own aa well 
aa others. Let it show us the measure of public declension in morals and religion. 
Ask what neglect in the matter of education, social fellowship, or religious teaching 
and influence will accoimt for it. How far am I as an individual in sympathy with 
the ideas, customs, and whole cast of public life in my time ? How far am I my 
brother's keeper? Can anything be done to rouse the public conscience to a keener 
and more influential activity ? How easy or how difBoult would a similar crime be 
to myself? Prayers that I may be kept from such a tiling, and may lead others into 
a better way. 

II. CoNSOTiTATioii. Not at random, but of persons qualified to advise. The 
deliberations of the " Prisoners' Aid Society " would furnish a model for practical 
discussion. But " statistics " will never solve the problem. It is a question of 
human depravity, and a general repentance and alarmed attention is needed. 

III. JnDOUENT. A careful, mature, well-informed and advised opinion ; but, <u 
being the opinion of the nation, it must be carried into effect. Something must 
be done, as well as thought. How valuable and influential such a judgment I It 
carries within itself the seeds of reformation and the conditions of recovery. — M. 

Vers. 16 — 21. — Hospiitality. I. Though men who abe abandoned to sinful 

PLEASUBES MAY DELIGHT IN THE SOCIETY OF BOON COMPANIONS, THEY WILL SHOW 
THEMSELVES WANTING IN THE GENEROSITY OF TBUB HOSPITALITY. The men of 

Gibeah would unite in seeming friendliness for riotous wickedness ; but they were 
wanting in the almost universal Eastern kindness to the stranger. The intemperate 
and vicious may appear to be more generous in their boisterous freedom than persons 
of more strict habits ; but they are too selfish for real generosity. Self-indulgence 
is essentially selfish ; vice is naturally morose. 

II. We should endeavoub to do eight, though this may be contbaby to thb 
EXAMPLE OF oub Neighboubs. The old man was shocked at the inhospitality of the 
men of Gibeah. He was not a native of the place, and though he may have lived 
there long, he retained the kinder habits of his native home. When at Home we are 
Dot to do as Bome does if this is clearly wrong. Englishmen abroad may find it 
difficult to resist the bad social influences of foreign towns ; but if they are Christian! 



CH. XIX. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 191 

thejr will feel that the universal prevalence of a bad custom is no justification foi 
their adoption of it. Yet how dimcult it is to see our duty when this is contrary to 
the habits of the society in which we live, and how much more difficult to be inde- 
pendent and firm in performing it I 

I1I._ Kindness to strangers is a dutt obligatobt upon all oi vb. The 
graphic picture of the old man returning from his work in the fields at even and 
taking note of the houseless strangers is the one relieving feature in the terrible story 
of that night's doings. Modem and Western habits may modify the form of our 
hospitality, but they cannot exonerate us from the duty to show similar kindness 
under similar circumstances. From the mythical gentleman who excused himself 
for not saving a drowning man because he had not been introduced to him, to the 
Yorkshire native, who, seeing a strange face in his hamlet, cried, " Let's heave a brick 
at him I" how common it is for people to limit their kindness to persons of their 
acquaintance I The parable of the good Samaiitan teaches us that any one who needs 
our help is our neighbour (Luke x. 29 — 37). 

IV. Kindness to strangers mat be rewarded bt the discovebt of unknown 
riES OF FRIENDSHIP. The old man finds that the Levite comes from his own part of 
the country. Doubtless he was thus able to hear tidings of old acquaintances. The 
world is not so large as it appears. The stranger is often nearer to us than we sus- 
pect. Though true hospitality expects no return (Luke xiv. 12 — 14), it may find 
unlooked-for reward in newly-discovered friendly associations. — A. 

VerB. 22 — 28. — Monstrotts wickedness. Now and again the world is horrified bjr 
the news of some frightful atrocity before which ordinary sin looks almost virtuous. 
How is such wickedness possible? 

I. Monstrous wickedness is a fruit of selfishness. The men of Gibeah were 
abandoned to gross self-indulgence tilj they utterly ignored the rights and sufEerings 
of others. Nothing is so cruelly selfish as the degradation of that most unselfish 
afEection love. When selfish pleasure is the one motive of conduct, men are bUnded 
in conscience more than by any other influence. 

II. Monstrous wickedness is attained through successive degrees of deprav- 
ity. No man suddenly falls from innocence to gross licentiousness and heartless 
cruelty. The first step is slight ; each following step seems but a small increase of 
sin, till the bottom of the very pit of iniquity is reached almost unconsciously. If 
the wicked man could have foreseen the depth of his fall from the first he would not 
have believed it possible. Men should beware of the first step downward. 

III. Monstrous wickedness is most advanced in the society of many bad 
MEN. As fire bums most when drawn .together, vice is most inflamed when men 
are companions in wickedness. Baci tempts the rest by his example. Guilt appears 
to be lessened by being shared. Men excuse their conduct by comparing it with 
that of their neighbours. Thug ftie greatest depravity is most often seen in cities — 
in the concourse of many men. In the excitement of a mob men will commit 
excesses from which they would shrink in solitary action. Yet responsibility is still 
individual, and each man must ultimately answer for his own sins. 

IV. Monstrous wickedness is made possible by the very greatness op man's 
nature. Human nature has a wide range of capacities. Man can rise infinitely 
above the brute, and he can fall infinitely below the bmte. He can rise to the angelic, 
he can fall to the devilish. His originality of imagination, power of inventiveness, 
and freedom of will open to him avenues of evil as well as pathways of good which 
are closed to the more dull life of the animal world. The greater the capacity of 
Ihe instrument, the more horrible is the discord which results from its getting out of 
tune. Those men who have the highest genius have the faculty for the worst sin. 
So tremendous is the capacity of the soul both for good and for evil, that the wise 
and humble man, fearing to trust it alone to the temptations of life, will learn to 
" commit it to the keeping of a faithful Creator" (1 Pet. iv. 19). — A. 

Ver. 80. — The duty of considering painful siubjects. I. It is wbono fob the 
Church to ignore the wickedness of the world. The Church is not at liberty 
to enjoy the flowers and fruits of her " little garden walled around " to the neglect 



198 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[CH. XIX. 1 — 30. 



of the waste howling wilderness outside. She has no right to shut her eyes to the 
world's sin while she dreams fair dreams of the ultimate perfection of mankind. A 
good deal of foolish optimism is talked by people who will not take the trouble to 
inquire into the real state of society. That is a false fastidiousness which refuses to 
take note of dark subjects because they are revolting and contaminnting. True 
purity will be shocked not simply at the knowledge of evil, but more at the existence 
of it, and will find expression not merely in shunning the sight of it, but in actively 
overcoming it. Such action, however, can only be taken after the evil has been 
recognised. It is, therefore, the work of the Church to consider seriously the fearful 
evils of profligacy, intemperance, and social corruption generally. The duty of con- 
templating heavenly things is no excuse for ignoring the evil of the world, which it 
is our express duty to enlighten and purify by means of the gospel of Christ. 

II. MONSTEOUS WICKEDNESS SHOULD EXCITE DEEP AND SERIOUS CONSIDEBATION. It 

is easy to be indignant. But the hasty passion of indignation may do more harm 
than good. It may strike in the wrong place ; it may only touch superficial symptoms 
and leave the root of the evil ; and it is likely to die down as quickly as it springs 
up. Great sins should be visited not with the rage of vindictiveness, but with grave, 
severe justice. We should "consider and take advice," reflect, consult, discuss the 
cause and the remedy. Undisciplined human nature will express horror and seek 
revenge at the revelation of a great crime. It wants Christian thoughtfulness and a 
deep, sad conviction of duty to practise self-restraint in the moment of indignation, 
and to investigate the painful subject with care after the interest of a temporary 
excitement has flagged. 

III. It is cub dutt to speak out and take action in relatiok to painful 

SUBJECTS WHEN ANYTHING CAN BE DONE TO EFFECT AN IMPEOVEMBNT. Evils are 

allowed to go unchecked because a false modesty dreads to speak of them. The 
men and women who overcome this and bravely advocate unpopular questions should 
be treated with all honour by the Christian Church. If the Christian does nothing to 
check the vicious practices and corrupt institutions which surround him, he becomes 
responsible for their continued existence. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XX. 



Ver. 1. Went out, i. e. from their several 
homes to the place of meeting. The congre- 
gation. The technical term (not, however, 
found in Samuel and Kings, except in 1 
Kings xii. 20) for the whole Israelitish people 
(Exod. xii. 3 ; xvi. 1, 2, 9 ; Levit. iv. 15 ; 
Josh, xviil. 1, &c.). From Dan to Beer- 
sheba. Dan, or Laish (oh. xviii. 29), being 
the northernmost point, and Beersheba (now 
Bw-essaba, the springs so called) in the 
south of Judah the southernmost. It cannot 
be inferred with certainty from this expression 
that the Danite occupation of Laish had 
taken place at this time, though it may have 
done so, because we do not know when this 
narrative was written, and the phrase is only 
used as =t proverbial expression familiar in 
the writer's time.. The land of Gllead. In 
its widest sense, meaning the whole of trans- 
Jordanio Israel (see ch. x. 8; xi. 1, &c.). 
Mizpeh, or, as it is always written in Hebrew, 
ham-Mizpeh, with the article (see ch. xxi. 1). 
The Mizpeh here mentioned is not the same 
M the Mizpeh of ch. x. 17 ; xi. 11, 29, 34, 
which was in Gilead, but was situated in the 
tribe of Benjamin (Josh, xviii. 2fi). That it 



was a national place of meeting in the time 
of Samuel is clear from 1 Sam. vii. 5 — 12, 
and we learn from ver. 16 of that same 
chapter that it was one of the places to which 
Samuel went on circuit. We find it a place 
of national meeting also in 1 Sam. x. 17, and 
even so late as 2 Kings xxv. 23, and iu the 
time of the Maccabees (1 Maco. iii. 46). Its 
vicinity to Shiloh, where the tabernacle was, 
was probably one reason why it was made a 
centre to the whole congregation (see especi- 
ally 1 Sam. X. 17, 22, 25). Its exact site is 
not known with certainty, but it is thought 
to be that of Nebi Samuil, from which Jeru- 
salem is seen at about two hours' distance to 
the south-east. TTnto the lord, t. e. in the 
presence of the tabernacle, which was doubt- 
less brought there, on so solemn an occasion, 
from Shiloh (of. Exod. xxxiv. 34 ; Levit. i. 8 , 
Judges xi. 11 ; xxi. 2, and ver. 26 of this 
chapter). 

Ver. 2. — The chief. The word here used 
means the corner-stones of a building. Hence 
it is applied to the chief men, who, as it were, 
bind and keep together the whole people- 
Their presence at this great meeting is men- 
tioned to show that it was a regularly con- 
stituted assembly of all Israel. The same 



OH. XX. 1 — 17.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



IM 



phrase occnrs 1 Sam. xiv. 88, and Isa. xix. 
18 {the stay of the tribes, A. V.). The num- 
bers (400,000) are of course those of the 
whole congregation. The assembly of the 
people of God. So, Numb. xvi. 3 ; xx. i, 
Israel is called the congregation of the Lord ; 
and Neh. xiii. 1, the congregation of God. 
Not dissimilar was the first great council of 
the Church, consisting of the Church (r; IkkXij- 
aia, i. e. the assembly of disciples) and the 
apostles and elders (who were the corner- 
stones, the lapides tmgulares, thereof). See 
Acts xv. 4, 6, 12. Four hundred thousand. 
See Ter. 17. The enumeration in the wil- 
derness gave 603,550 (Numb. ii. 32 ; xi. 
21), and at the second numbering 601,730 
(Numb. xxvi. 51). In 1 Sam. xi. 8 a general 
assembly of the whole people, summoned 
by sending a piece of the flesh of a yoke of 
oxen "throughout all the coasts of Israel," 
amounted to 330,000. David's numbering 
gave of Israel 800,000, and of Judah 500,000, 
in all 1,300,000 ; but these were not as- 
sembled together, but numbered at their own 
homes. Jehoshaphat's men of war amounted 
to 1,160,000 according to 2 Chrou. xviL 14 — 
18. In the time of Amaziah there were of 
Judah alone 300,000 men able to go forth to 
war (2 Chron. xxiv. 6). 

Ver. 8. — The children of Benjamin heard, 
ko. This seems to be mentioned to show 
that the absence of the Benjamites from the 
national council was not from ignorance, but 
from contumacy. Tell us, &c. This was 
addressed to all whom it might concern. 
The lievite answered. 

Yer. 5. — And thought to have slain me. 
This was so far true that it is likely he was 
in fear of his life ; but he doubtless shaped 
his narrative so as to conceal his own coward- 
ice in the transaction. We have a similar 
example of an unfaithful narralion of facts in 
the letter of Claudius Lysias to Felix (Acts 
xxiii. 27). The men of Gibeah. The masters, 
as in ch. ix. 2, meaning the citizens. 

Ver. 7. — ^Te are all children of Israel. 
He appeals to them as men bound to wipe 
away the shame and disgrace of their common 
country. He speaks with force and dignity 
under the sense of a grievous wrong and a 
crushing sorrow. 

Ver. 8.— The people — with the emphatic 
meaning of the whole people of Israel, the 
assembly of the people of God, as in ver. 2. 
As one man. There was but one resolve, and 
one sentiment, and one expression of opinion, 
in that vast multitude. Not one would go 
home till due punishment had been inflicted 
npon Gibeah of Benjamin. To his tent, i. e. 
home, as in ch. xix. 9. 

Ver. 9.— We will go np by lot against it. 
The words we will go up are not in the 
Hebrew, but are supplied by the Septuagint, 
who very likely found in their Hebrew copy 



the word na'aleh, we will go up, which hat 
since (perchance) fallen out of the Hebrew 
text from its resemblance to the following 
word 'aleha against it. The sense will then 
be. Not one of us will shrink from the 
dangers of the war ; but we will cast lots 
who shall go up against Gibeah, and who 
shall be employed in collecting victuals for 
the army, 40,000 having to be told off for the 
latter service. And exactly in the same spirit 
(if indeed the answer was not actually given 
by lot) they inquired of the Lord who should 
go up first (in ver. 18), and, we may presume 
also, who should follow in the subsequent 
attacks, though this is omitted for brevity. 
Others, however, think the words against 
it ty lot are purposely abrupt, and that the 
meaning is that Israel would deal with 
Gibeah as they had done with the Canaanites, 
viz., destroy their city, and divide its terri- 
tory by lot among the other tribes, after 
the analogy of Josh, xviii. 8 — 10. But this 
interpretation is not borne out by what 
actually happened, nor is the phrase a likely 
one to have been used. 

Ver. 12. — Tribe of Benjamin. The Hebrew 
has tribes, meaning probably /omiZies, as the 
word is used Numb. iv. 18. Vice versd, 
family is used for tribe, ch. xvii. 7 ; xviii. 
11. What wickedness, &c. The message 
was perhaps too sharp and peremptory to be 
successful. It roused the pride and tribal 
independence of the Benjamites to resist. 
We must suppose the message to have pre- 
ceded in point of time the hostile gathering 
recorded in ver. 11. It was probably sent 
before the council broke up (see above, ch. 
vii. 25 ; viii. 4, and note). 

Ver. 13. — Children of Belial. See ch. 
xix. 22, note. There seems to be a reference 
here to Dent. xiii. 12 — 15. 

Ver. 14. — But the children of Benjamin. 
It should be And the children, &c. It is not 
dependent upon the preceding verse, but 
begins a new head of the narrative. From 
the cities, i. e. the different cities of the tribe 
of Benjamin, enumerated in Josh, xviii. 21 — 
28, twenty -six in number. 

Ver. 15. — Twenty and six thousand. The 
numbers of Benjamin in the wilderness were 
at the first numbering 35,400, and at the 
second 45,600 (Numb. i. 36 ; ii. 23 ; xxvi. 
41). It is impossible to account with cer- 
tainty for the falling off in the numbers by so 
many as near 20, 000 ; but perhaps many were 
slain in the wars of Canaan, and the unsettled 
times were unfavourable to early marriages. 
For the whole of Israel there was, as appeared 
by ver. 2, note, a falling off of nearly 200,000 
meu, or, to speak exactly (601,730 — 400,000 
-h 26,700), of 176,030. Which vrere num- 
bered. There is some obscurity in this lattei 
clause ; but, in spite of the accents being 
opposed to it, the A. V. seems certainly right. 



800 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[cH. rx. 1 — 17. 



fhe rendering according to the accents, " they 
(the Benjamites) were numbered, besides the 
inhabitants of Gibeah, seven hundred chosen 
men," makes no sense, and does not explain 
who the 700 were. The population of Gibeah 
would be about 5 x 700, i. e. 8500, according 
to this statement. 

Ver. 16. — Seven hundred . . men left- 
handed. It is curious that the tribe of 
Benjamin, which means son of the right hand, 
should have this peculiar institution of a 
corps of left-handed men. Ehud the Ben- 



jamite was a man Uft-handed (ch. iii. 15 ; see 
also 1 Chron. zil. 2). The Roman name 
Sccevola means Uft-hamded. For the use of 
the sling see 1 Sam. zvii. 40, 49. Diodorus 
Siculus (quoted by Eosenmliller) mentions 
the remarkable skill of the inhabitants of the 
Balearic Islands in the use of the sling, add- 
ing, in terms very similar to those of the 
text, that they seldom miss their aim. 

Yer. 17. — A repetition of the statement in 
ver. 2. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 17. — Temper. It is impossible to suppose that the whole tribe of Benja- 
min really sympathised with the foul deed of the men of Gibeah, or could have felt 
otherwise than that such a deed deserved the severest punishment that could be 
inflicted. We must seek the cause, therefore, of their desperate resistance to the just 
decree of the nation in some other motive than that of consent to their brethren's 
" lewdness and folly." Nor is such motive far to seek. We find it in that unreason- 
able movement of human pride and selfishness which we commonly call temper; a 
movement which sets up a man's own dignity, self-importance, self-will, self-esteem, 
above the laws of God, above righteousness, justice, truth, and the law of kind- 
ness, and yet so blinds him, that in vindication of his own dignity he does the most 
foolish and degrading actions, lowering himself where he sought to raise himself, 
making himself ridiculous where he thought to be an object of superior respect. Let 
us analyse the case of the Benjamites. Had the men of Gibeah belonged to the 
tribe of Ephraim or Judah, they would no doubt have been forward to join in theii 
punishment. Their natural perceptions of right and wrong, their right feelings of 
the dishonour done to the whole congregation of Israel, the congregation of God, and 
of the profanation of the holy name of Jehovah, would have led them to wipe out 
the stain by the punishment of the ofEenders. But because the offenders were Benja- 
mites, immediately all these right feelings were stifled, and in their stead the one 
selfish feeling that Benjamin would be dishonoured among the tribes, and that they 
themselves would be degraded in their fellow-tribesmen's shame, was allowed to 
prevail. Their pride was wounded and their temper was up. Possibly they had 
not been properly consulted in the first instance ; possibly the message sent to them 
was too peremptory and haughty ; possibly the other tribes, in their just indignation, 
had scarcely treated them with the deference due to brethren ; and if so, this was 
fresh fuel added to the flame of temper. But the result was that they were incapable 
of right feeling or of right judgment ; that they were blind to what duty and self- 
interest alike required of them ; and that, under the guidance of temper and stubborn 
pride, they rushed on to their own destruction, braving Ihe wrath of a body nearly 
sixteen times as powerful as themselves, and withal tarnishing their own reputation 
by identifying themselves with the basest villainy. We see exactly the same results 
of temper on a smaller scale every day around us. Men will not do the right thing, 
or the just thing, or the wise thing, not because they are wicked and unjust and 
destitute of good sense under ordinary circumstances, but because their tempers are 
up. Their false pride blinds and enslaves them. They see a personal humiliation 
in the way of acting rightly ; their resentment against individuals for insult or 
wrong done to them stiffens their necks and hardens their will. If doing right will 
please them, or promote their interests, they had rather do wrong. They will not do 
anything they ask, or submit to any of their demands, however just they may be in 
themselves. And as for their own interests, and even their own good name, they 
are ready to sacrifice them at the imperious bidding of temper. Much of human 
unhappiness is caused by temper, which is as injurious to the peace of those who 
yield to its dictates as to those who are exposed to its outbreaks. It ought not to 
exist, certainly not to have dominion, in any Christian breast. Fellowship with the 
croea of Christ is the great help in subduing human pride. Al real humility growSi 



OB. XX. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF JUDGEa 201 

Bs the mind -which was in Christ Jesus is more perfectly formed within, as the old 
man is crucified with Christ, and the desire to do the perfect will of God displaces 
more and more the self-will, and the glory of God becomes more entirely the aim 
sought, in lieu of self-glorification, the dominion of temper becomes enfeebled, till, 
like a flickering flame, it goes out, and is still before the rising power of the Holy 
Spirit of God. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Ver. 1. — National atonement. There are times when a nation is stirred to its 
depths. Its consciousness is then a religious one. A solemn unity of sentiment 
pervades it, and prevails over all lesser differences. It is then ready and effective 
u the servant of the Lord. Observe — 

I. The unifying influences. 1. A common detestation of the orinu. S. A 
common danger. 3. The Spirit of Jehovah. 

II. The measure determined on. Bp the council of the nation. 1. Immediate 
punishment of the criminals. 2. Failtn^ their delivery, the ptmishment of those 
who protected them and condoned their wickedness. — M. 

Ver. 11. — Union. I. The nature of union. 1. This implies conjunction. The 
individuality of the parts is not destroyed when these are united. Each of the 
separate stones retains its shape after it is built into the common structure, and the 
union is formed by cementing all close together. So union amongst men does not 
destroy the personality and character of each man, but, instead of acting separately, 
men in imion act in common. 2. This implies harmony. Conjunction without 
harmony brings not union, but confusion, and the nearer the conjunction, the fiercer 
is the internal conflict. Thus civil war is more cruel than war with a foreign nation, 
family feuds more bitter than quarrels with strangers. Harmony implies diversity, 
but agreement, as the several stones in a building, though each may be different in 
shape and size from others, fit in together, and fit the better because they are not 
all alike. 3. This implies the subordination of the individual to the whole. So far 
there may be a partial suppression of individuality ; but in the end this develops a 
higher individuality. The several organs of the body are made not to exercise their 
functions for their own sakes, but for the good of the whole body. Yet this differentia- 
tion of parts allows of the more full development of each organ, and so leads to a 
more complete individuality in its form and character. When men are working 
under a social system, each is able to contribute his part to the good of the whole by 
a more free exercise of his own special talents than would be possible in a condition 
of isolation. 

II. The advantages of union. 1. Union increases ^Arength. There is not only 
the gross force resulting from the addition of the units of force ; there is a multi- 
plication of strength, an economy of power. The nation can do as a whole what all 
its citizens could not do if acting separately. The Church can accomplish work for 
Christ which private Christians would fail to do. 2. Union promotes peace. When 
men are knit together as one they forget their private differences. Though we 
cannot attain the peace of uniformity, we should aim at securing the peace of harmony. 
8. Union favours orowiA and development. Israel suffered from her disintegration. 
Her national unification was requisite for any solid advance of civilisation. . This 
development of harmonised and organised union distinguishes civilised nations from 
savage tribes. As the Church learns to think more of common Christian charity than 
of narrow sectarian differences, she will advance in likeness to the mind of Christ and 
in the enjoyment of the graces and blessings of the gospel. 

III. The gbounds of union. Men need some cause to draw them together — some 
common ground of union. 1, This may be found in a great wrong to be removed. 
A fearful crime stirred the hearts of all Israel. In presence of this the tribes forgot 
their minor grievances. Should not the great sin of the world be a call to Christians 
to sink .their ceaseless quarrels in one united effort to destroy it with the power of 
Christ's truth ? 2. This may be found in the attack of a common enemy. When 
the invader is on our coast, Tories and Radicals fight side by side, moved by a oommon 



802 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[cH XX. 16 — 16 



instinct of patriotism. When the truth of Christianity is assailed by infidelity and 
her life by worldlinesa and vice, should we not all rally round the standard of oui 
one Captain for a united crusade against the power of our common enemy the devil? 
3. Tills may be found in a good cause of universally recognised merit. Fidelity to 
truth, love to mankind, devotion to Christ should unite all Christiaoi. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



Ver. 18.— The house of Ood. In this ren- 
dering the A. V. follows the Vulgate, which 
has in domum Dei, hoc est, in Silo. But the 
Septuagint has Baid^X, and all the ancient 
authorities, as well as modem commentaiors, 
generally agree in rendering it Bethel. The 
reason, which seems a conclusive one, for so 
doing is that the Hebrew ^^ J113 invariably 
means Bethel, and that (he hmise of God is 
always expressed in Hebrew by D*n?S?n JVZ 
(hah-ha-elohim). The conclusion is that at 
this time the ark of God, with the tabernacle, 
was at Bethel, which was only seven or eight 
mUes from Shiloh. Bethel would be eight or 
ten miles from Gibeah, t. «. about half way 
between Shiloh and Gibeah. Asked counsel. 
The same phrase as ch. i. 1, where it is ren- 
dered simply asked (see note to ch. i. 1, and 
vers. 23, 47). In following this precedent 
the Israelites put the men of Gibeah on the 
footing of the Canaanite inhabitants of the 
land. With reference to ver. 9, it is worth 
considering whether this is not the fulfilment 
of the purpose there expressed by the Israel- 
ites, to go up against Gibeah ly lot ; either 
by understanding that the answer asked was 
given by a Divinely-directed lot, according to 
which Judah's turn came first (see Josh. vii. 
14—18 ; 1 Sam. xiv. 41 ; Acts i. 24—26 ; 
&c.), or by taking the expression hy lot ia 
a wider sense, as meaning generally Divine 
direction. 

Ver. 20. — The men of Israel — ^meaning 
here of course the men of Jvdah. 

Ver. 21. — Came forth out of Qlbeah, &c. 
Gibeah (sometimes called Geba, literally, the 
hill) was doubtless very difiBcult to assault, 
and the steep approach greatly favoured the 
defenders. The men of Judah probably 
came up carelessly, and with an overweening 
confidence, and so met with a terrible dis- 
aster. The word destroyed here used is the 
same as is applied to the destroying angel 
(Exod. xii. 23 ; 2 Sam. ixiv. 16 j see also 2 
Chron. xxiv. 23). 

Ver. 23.— And the children of Israel went 
np and wept, &c. This verse must precede 
chronologically ver. 22, and explains the cir- 
cumstances under which the battle referred 
to in ver. 22 took place. The unexpected 
repulse they had met with had begun to 
produce ita intended effect. There was a 
humbling of themselves before (Jod, a broken- 



ness of spirit, a deepened sense of dependence 
upon God, and a softening of their feelings 
towards their brother Benjamin, All this 
was shown as they agam went to the taber- 
nacle at Bethel to ask the Lord (ver. 18). 

Ver. 24. — And, or so, repeating what had 
been said in ver. 22, but giving it this time 
as the result of God's answer recorded in ver. 
23. The second day. Not necessarily, or 
probably, the next day, but the day of the 
second battle. 

Ver. 25. — Of the children of IsrseL We 
are not told upon which tribe the lot fell, or 
the answer was given, that they should go 
up the second day. 

Ver. 26.— Then all the children of Israel, 
and all the people, jcc. Observe the word 
all, twice repeated, as showing how the 
whole congregation was roused and stirred 
to a man by this second reverse. The people, 
as distinguished from the men of Israel, the 
army, probably means the non- fighting 
people, the aged, the infirm, women, &c. 
The house of God. Render, as in ver. 18 (see 
note). Bethel. Sat there. Sitting with the 
Jews, especially on the ground, was the atti- 
tude of grief and mourning (Job ii. 13 ; Isa. 
xlvii. 1, 5 ; Lam. ii. 10, &c). The Jews at 
the present day often sit on the ground at 
the place of wailing in Jerusalem. Before 
the Lord, i. t, before the tabernacle (see ch. 
xi. 11, note). Fasted until evening. The 
u.sual time for terminating a fast among the 
Jews, as at the present day among Mahomed- 
ans. For similar fasts on solemn occasions of 
national guilt or grief, see 1 Sim. vii. 6 ; 2 
Sam. i. 12 ; Jer. xxxvi. 9 ; Neh. ix. 1 ; Joel 
i. 14, &c. Peace offerings. Usually thank 
offerings (Levit. iiL ; vii 11, 12), butapplic- 
able to any voluntary sacrifice of which the 
flesh might be eaten the same day, or the 
day following, by the offerer (Levit. vii. 15, 
16). Doubtless the people at the close of 
their fast ate the flesh of these peace offer- 
ings. 

Ver. 27. — Enquired of the lord. In the 
Hebrew, Asked the Lord, as in vers. 18, 23. 
For the ark of the covenant, &c A most im 
portant statement, defining the time of these 
occurrences, within the lifetime of Fhinehaa, 
and also giving a strong intimation that the 
writer of these words lived after the taber- 
nacle had been removed from Shiloh and iti 
neighbourhood to Jerusalem. Was theit. 



Bk. xi. 18— 4fi.] 



TtiE BOOS OF JuDQEia. 



20i 



Where f The natural answer to be given is, 
At Bethel ; for Bethel is the only place that 
has been named. But it is not in accord- 
ance with the other intimations given us 
concerning the tabernacle, that Bethel should 
be its resting-place under the high priest- 
hood of Phinehas. In Josh, xviii. 1 we 
hav« the formal pitching of the tabernacle of 
the congregation atShiloh ; in Josh. xxii. 12 
we find it there, and Phinehas the son of 
Eleazar the priest before it ; in 1 Sam. i, 
3 ; ii. 14 ; iii 21 ; iv. 8, we find it settled 
there till taken by the Philistines ; and in 
Fs. Ixxviii. 60 we find Shiloh described as 
the abode of the tabernacle tlU its capture 
by the Philistines, and there is no hint any- 
where of Bethel or any other place having 
been the resting-place of the ark before it feU 
into the hands of the Philistines. Neither, 
again, is the explanation of some comment- 
ators, that the words the wrk . . . was there 
in those days implies "that the ark of the 
covenant was only temporarily at Bethel," at 
all satisfactory. In tlwse days has naturally 
a much wider and broader application, like 
the expression (ch. zvii. 6 ; xviii. 1), In 
those days there was no king in Israel, and 
contrasts the time of Phinehas and the 
judges with the times of the monarchy, when 
the ark and the high priest were at Jeru- 
salem. Unless, therefore, we understand 
Bethel in vers. 18, 26, 31 to mean the house 
of God, which seems quite impossible, we 
must inteipret the word there to mean Shiloh, 
and suppose that the writer took no count 
of the temporary removal to Bethel for the 
convenience of consultation, but considered 
that it was at Shiloh in one sense, though 
momentarily it was a few miles off. Pos- 
sibly too in the fuller narrative, of which we 
have here the abridgment, the name of Shi- 
loh was mentioned as that to which there 
referred. 

Ver. 29. — Set liers in wait. Made wiser 
by misfortune, they now act cautiously. 

Ver. 30. — As at other times, or, this time 
at the other times (see the same phrase, ver. 
81, ch xvi. 20 ; Numb. xxiv. 20). 

Ver. 31. — The house of God. Here mani- 
festly Bethel, as in the margin. Gibeah in 
the field. The A. V. is the natural render- 
ing of the Hebrew words, which imply a 
Qiheah in the field different from Giheah, 
as the Septuaglnt seems to have understood 
them (ra^ad iv aypio). It is a happy con- 
jecture, borne out by the existing roads, 
that this Gibeah in-the-field is the same as 
Geba, now Jeia. Indeed it is almost impos- 
sible to conceive how the pursuers, coming 
out of Gibeah, could be described as coming 
to two highways, of which one led to Bethel 
and the other to the very place they had 
eome from. The latest explorers of the dis- j 



trict fUly concur in this identification ot 
Gibeah-in-the-field with Jeba. 

Yer. 32. — ^And the children of Benjamin, 
&c. This verse is parenthetical, being ex- 
planatorjr of the conduct of both parties. 
The Bonjamites pursued recklessly, because 
they thought the fight was going as on the 
two previous days ; the Israelites fled in order 
to draw them to the highways, and so to 
enable the ambushment to get between the 
Benjamite army and the city. 

Ver. 33.— Sose up out of their place. The 
narrative is singularly obscure and broken, 
and difficult to foUow. But the meaning 
seems to be, that when the Israelite army had 
reached Baal-tamar in then- flight, they sud- 
denly stopped and formed to give battle to 
the pursuing Benjamites. And at the same 
time the Hers in wait came out from their 
ambushment and placed themselves in the 
rear of the Benjamites on the direct road to 
Gibeah. Baal-tamar, a place of palm trees. 
The site has not been identified, but may 
possibly, or probably, be the same as the 
palm tree of Deborah, between Eamah and 
Bethel (ch. iv. 6). The meadows of Gibeah, 
Hebrew, Maareh-Geba, may very likely have 
been, as the Septuagint takes it, a proper 
name, denoting some locality outside Gibeah 
(here called Geba) where the ambush was 
concealed. The meaning of the word maareh 
is thought to be a bare tract of ground with- 
out trees — something like a heath or common. 
It may have had pits, or deep depressions, 
where the ambush would be hid both from 
the city itself and from the high road, or 
other facilities for concealment. 

Ver. 34.— Against Gibeah, i. e. against 
the army of Gibeah. The sense seems to be 
that the 10,000 Israelites who had been flee- 
ing before Benjamin, and drawing them away 
from the city, now faced them, and com- 
menced a resolute attack upon them, which 
at first the Benjamites, not knowing of the 
ambushment in their rear met with equal 
resolution, so that "the battle was sore." But 
the result, the details of which are given at 
length in vers. 36 — 46, was that 25,100 Ben- 
jamites fell that day (see ver. 46). 

Vers. 36 — 41. — The children of Benjamin 
saw that they were smitten. Not of course 
after 26,000 of them had been smitten, but at 
that period of the battle more fully described 
in vers. 40, 41, when the Benjamites, looking 
behind them, saw Gibeah in flames, and im- 
mediately broke and fled towards the wilder- 
ness. In the latter half of this verse and in 
the following verses to ver. 41 the writer reca- 
pitulates all the preceding circumstances, some 
of which have been already mentioned, which 
led to the particular incident mentioned in 
the beginning of the verse, that "Benjamin 
saw that they were smitten;'' viz., th» 
feigned flight of the Israelites^ the seionf 



idi 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



[oa. XX. 18—48. 



and burning of Gibeah by the liers in wait, 
the signal of a great smoke, and the turning 
again of the flying Israelites. It was then 
that " the men of Benjamin saw that evil 
was come upon them," and turned their 
backs and fled. Thus vers. 86 (latter half) — 
41 bring us back through the details to the 
identical point abeady reached at the begin- 
ning of ver. 36. In vers. 39, 40 there is 
another retrogi-ade movement in the narra- 
tive, in which the statement of vers. 31, 32 
is repeated in order to bring into close jux- 
taposition Benjamin's keen pursuit of the 
enemy with his terror when he saw the 
amoke rising in his rear. Hasted (ver. 37). 
This is an amplification with further par- 
ticulars of ver. 33. The liers in wait not 
only came forth out of their place, but they 
made a dash to get into Gibeah before the 
men of Gibeah, who were pursuing the flying 
Israelites, could be aware of their intention. 
Bushed upon. Perhaps better rendered fell 
upon- It is exactly the same phrase as 2 Sam. 
xivii. 8, there rather tamely rendered in- 
vaded and in ver. 10 made a road. Drew 
themselves along. Some take the word in the 
common sense of blmmng the trumpet, but it 
rather means spread themselves out (iitxiiSti, 
LXX.) through the defenceless city, so as 
to slay and bum in all parts simultaneously. 
That they should make a great Came with 
smoke, &c. (ver. 38). The Hebrew of this 
verge is difficult to construe, but the A. V. 
gives substantially the right sense. They 
seem to be the very orders given to the 
leader of the ambush. " Make them (the 
ambush) multiply to send up {i. e. send up 
in great quantities) the column of smoke from 
the city." It seems that the appearance of 
the smoke was the signal for the Israelites 
to turn (ver. 41). The flame, &c. (ver. 40). 
Rather, th^ colimin began to go up in {fix as) 
a pillar of smoke. The flame of the city. 
Literally, the whole of the city, meaning of 
course the whole city in flames. 

Ver. 42. — Therefore they turned their 
backs, &c. The narrative now at length 
advances one step. The result of the Ben- 
jamites finding themselves between the am- 
bushment and the army of Israel was that 
th6y took to flight in an easterly direction 
(ver. 43) toward the wilderness, i. e. the wil- 
derness described in Josh. xvi. 1 as " the wil- 
derness that goeth up from Jericho through- 
out Mount Bethel," where the direction of 
the wilderness relative to Ephraim is also 
described as being "on the east." In like 
manner Zedekiah fled towards the plain 
(arabah) or plains of Jericho — a term nearly 
synonymous with wilderness (2 Kings xxv. 4, 
B)- , Them which came out of the cities, &c. 
Tliis is a very obscure passage, and is very 
variously explained. Those which came out 
of the cities must be the same as are so de- 



scribed in ver. 16, and designates the Benja- 
mites who were not inhabitants of Gibeah. 
The simplest way, therefore, to understand 
the passage is to render it without reference 
to the accents : " And the battle overtook him 
and those that were from the cities (i. e. the 
men of Gibeah and the rest of the Benjamites), 
destroying him (the whole Benjamite army) 
in the midst of him," i. e. going right into 
the midst of them, and destroying right and 
left. Some, however, render it in the midst 
of it, 1. e. of the wilderness. The plural 
participle destroying agrees with the singular 
noun of multitude, the battle or war, meaning 
all the men of war. 

Ver. 43. — Thus they inclosed, &c. Another 
difficult passage, having all the appearance 
of being a quotation from some poetical de- 
scription of the battle. The tenses of the 
verbs and the absence of any conjunctions 
in the Hebrew makes the diction like that of 
ch. T. 19. The italic words thus and the 
two ands ought to be omitted, to give the 
stately march of the original. "They in- 
closed, &o. ; they chased them ; they trod 
them down," &c. They inclosed seems to 
refer to the stratagem by which the Benja- 
mites were swrrownded by the ambush in 
their rear and the Israelites in front. Then 
came the pursuit — " they chased them ; " 
then the massacre—" they trod them down." 
The three verbs describe the three stages of 
the battle. With ease. It does not seem 

Eossible that the Hebrew word mejiMcAoA can 
ave this meaning. It means sometimes a 
ploice of rest, and sometimes a state of rest. 
Taking the latter meaning, the words they 
trod them imto rest may mean they quieted 
them by crushing them to death iimder their 
feet, or in rest may mean unresisting. Some 
render it unto Menuchah, as if Menuckah was 
the name of a place, or from Nochah, as the 
Septnagint does. Others, at the place of rest, 
i. e. at every place where they halted to rest 
the enemy was upon them. 

Vers. 44— 46.— And there fell, &c. The 
account in ver. 35, anticipating the details 
of the battle, had already mven the gross 
number of casualties in the Benjamite army 
on this disastrous day as 26,100. We now 
have the items of the account, via., 18,000 in 
the pursuit, in the open plain ; 5000 in the 
highways, i. e. either the highways mentioned 
in ver. 31, or, as the expression gleaning rather 
intimates, the highways by which straggling 
bodies tried to reach any neighbouring cities 
after the great slaughter had taken place ; 
and 2000 more who were making for Gidom : 
in all 25,000, which is only 100 men short oi 
the reckoning in ver. 35. The rock of Eim- 
mon. See ver. 47, note. Gidom. Not else- 
where mentioned, nor identifled' with any 
modem name. 
Ver. 47. — But six hundred men turned. 



OH. XX. 18— 4S.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



208 



If these 600 survivors are added to the 26,000, 
or 26,100, enumerated as slain (vers. 35, 
44), it gives a total of 25,700. But the total 
numher of Benjamites, as given in ver. 16, 
was 26,700. There remain, therefore, 1000 
men unaccounted for. These may have been 
killed partly in the two first days' successful 
battles (vers. 21, 25), and partly in the differ- 
ent cities into which they had escaped, when 
the general massacre recorded in ver. 48 took 
place. The rock Simmon. There are two 
proposed identifications of this place. One 
makes it the same as Eii/rmnon, "a village 
perched on the summit of a conical chalky 
hiU," "ri.sing on the south side to a height 
of several hundred feet from the Wady Muti- 
y&h," and defended on the west side "by a 
cross valley of great depth," which lies three 
miles east of Bethel, and seven miles north- 
east of Gibeah (Tuleil el-Ful), and is situated 
in the wilderness between the highlands of 
Benjamin and the Jordan. This is advocated 
by Robinson (' Biblical Researches,' L 440), 
1^ Mr. Grove in the 'Dictionary of the 
Bible,' and by Lt. Conder (' Quart. State, for 



July 1880,' P. 173). The other is advocated 
by Mr. "W. F. Birch ('Pal. Expl., Quart. 
State, for April 1880'). This identifies it 
with the Wady er-Rv/mmon, discovered by 
Mr. Rawnsley, where there is a vast cave, 
Mughwret el Jai, about a mile and a hali 
from Geba, capable, according to the local 
tradition, of holding 600 men, and used to 
the present day by the villagers as a place 
of refuge from the government persecutions 
According to this view, the statement that 
they abode in the rock Rimmon is strictly 
correct. 

Ver. 48. — Turned again, not the same word 
as the turned of vers. 45, 47, but turned lack, 
came again by the way by which they had gone 
in pursuit of the Benjamites, and on their 
return towards Bethel (ch. xxi. 2) entered 
into all the B^jamite cities, which lay thick 
together east and north of Gibeah, and ruth- 
lessly put all the remaining population to 
the sword ; burning all the cities, and treat- 
ing the whole tribe of Benjamin, with all 
that belonged to them, as a 'herem, a thing 
devc^ed to utter destruction, like Jericho. 



H0MILBTIC8. 

Vers. 18 — 4S.—Pure and impure zeal. That the indignation of Israel was jnstly 
excited by the wickedness of the men of Gibeah who can doubt ? That tliey had a just 
cause of quarrel with the men of Benjamin for refusing to join them in the punishment 
of the offenders is no less certain. But that the merciless destruction of the whole tribe 
by fire and sword was a ferocious and cruel deed equally admits of no contradiction. 
A state of mind, therefore, was generated between the first rising of their wrath on 
account of the foul crime of their countrymen, and the final execution of the fierce 
vengeance, which calls for our notice and our reprobation. That state of mind was 
what the Greeks calle'd J^rjXog, a burning, unreasoning passion or heat, which hurries 
men on to words or actions of which in their cooler moments they repent and are 
ashamed. Under the influence of such passion, whether it be anger, or jealousy, or 
envy, or any other intemperate emotion of the mind, men are no longer their own 
masters. As in the case of that state of feeling which we lately considered under the 
name of temper (Homiletics on oh. xx. 1 — 17), reason ceases to guide and control the 
actions, and the voice of conscience cannot make itself heard. The man is like a 
ship without a rudder, driven by the storm whither he would not. Now when we 
consider that under the influence of passion we are liable to say and do things that 
are wrong, and that are very contrary to our own real feelings and opinions, and, 
maybe, very hurtful to our neighbours, it is obvious how watchful every Christian 
man should be to keep such passion under strict control, and to set a watch upon the 
various movements of his heart. This is doubly necessary, because, as we have seen 
in the history before us, what in its beginning is right is apt in its course to become 
wrong. It is not merely a question of degree. But for the most part the nature of 
the passion changes in its onward flow. 'Thus, in the case of the Israelites, the first 
feeling of indignation at a great wrong, the shame at the pollution of the name of 
Israel, their common inheritance, and their grief at the dishonour done to the name 
of Go^, were righteous and commendable feelings. There was no need to water 
them d\wn or to reason them away. It would have been base and wrong not to 
follow them out to their legitimate consequences in action. But in the course of 
doing so the pure stream became fouled by far baser passion. Anger at the contra- 
diction and opposition offered to themselves, wounded pride at the success of their 
adversaries in the first days' battles, the fierce determination to quell and destroy 
t' eir enemies, and the beat and blood-thirstiness which are the natural result of waf 



20* tHt: Book 0^ JUDGES. [eta. tx. iS-48. 



•nd strife, lashed them into madness. And so it is with ourselves. In war in 
politics, in private quarrels, though we may begin by being in the right, yet the 
original cause is often lost sight of in the progress of the strife, and new jealousies 
personal enmities, selfish resentments, and unwarrantable violence of feeling, which 
spring up, as it were, by the way, are allowed to get possession of us, and hurry us on 
to injustice and wrong. But especially does this painful narrative suggest a caution 
to those who take upon themselves to be the champions of right as against wrong to 
be very careful that no mere passions mix themselves up with their championship. 
We would say to every Christian brother. Be very zealous for right against wrong! 
Be very zealousf or truth against falsehood. HAVE NO EBSPBCT OP persons ; and be 
as firm in rebuking wrong when it is found in those nearest and dearest to you as 
when it is found in strangers or enemies ; and when it is found in the great and 
honourable, as when it is found in the meanest and lowest of mankind. But be very 
careful to keep your zeal pure. Let it be a simple zeal for God's honour and glory, 
•nd for his law and his truth. It will then never betray you into wrong speaking 
or wrong doing ; and, moreover, it will effect its purpose among men. It will be a 
real witness for God, and it will make itself felt While mere anger and passion are 
utterly feeble and worthless, and usually injure the cause they are meant to serve, 
the calm, steadfast opposition to wrong, by word or deed, will always have its 
weight. Such was the testimony of the words and life of the Lord Jesus upon 
earth. _ His zeal for his Father's honour was as a consuming fire ; but it went hand in 
hand with an inexhaustible patience and gentleness towards men. We always feel in 
reading the_ Gospels that his severest rebukes sprang from his hatred for sin, and 
were combined with infinite love for the sinner. His whole life wm a protest 
against wrong, but as gentle as it was firm, as winning as it was decided. Such 
should be the rebukes of his disciples — springing from principle, not from passion ; 
severe, yet tender ; unflinching, hut never given without necessity ; not unmixed 
with sympathy for the pain they cause, and anxiety to add the balm of love and 
forgiveness so soon as they have wrought repentance ; never aggravated by personal 
feelings or heat of anger ; never uttered in scorn, or with a sense of the rehuker's 
own superiority; but the outcome of an upright mind hating evil and zealous for 
God's honour, yet at the same time clothed with humility and tempered with 
heavenly charity. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOUa 
Ver. 18.— Cf. on ch. i. ver. 1.— M. 

Vers. 26 — 28. — The difflculty of punishing evil-doert. It is a desperate strife. 
The avei'gers are at first punished more than the guilty. Yet they continue stead- 
fast, and humiliate themselves before God. 

I. Private wkongs abe public misfortunes and dangers. It was a peril to all 
peace-loving citizens that one of their number should suffer outrage. Yet also was 
it a further trouble and loss to punish such transgressors. How many will rather 
suffer wrong than take the trouble to bring it to justice I This is treason to the 
commonwealth. 

II. How hard it is to root out an individuii, or national 8IK. How many 
are found to sympathise with or condone the deed, and to shield the transgressor! 
What ties connect the transgressor with ourselves I 

III. The SIN OP one is optbn dub to the general spirit and condition op 
THOSE around him ; THEY ALSO ARE GUILTY WITH HIM. Benjamin is but an 
exaggeration of the prevalent tone and manners of the time. Many crimes and sins 
of individuals may be traced up to wider influences. The sin or the righteousness 
of our brother is, in a measure, our own. Vicarious suffering and atonement. 

IV. The duty op righting wrong must be carried out at whatever expense 
OP trouule and loss. The humiliation of Israel. Defeat only nerves them to ■ 
higher and more heroic struggle. Eeliglous principle and feeling are more influen- 
tially present. The absolute claim of God's righteousness. Like Israel the Church 
has to right a great wrong ; but in a different way. Frequent discomfiturau The 



oft. ix. 1^-48.] tfli: BOOK Ot JDDOSS. SOT 

difficulty of evangelising one's own neighbourhood ; far less the world 1 Yet it hat 
to be done, and it can be done ; but not in our own strength. Only as we submit 
ourselves wholly to Grod and his Son can we fulfil the mighty task. Let us too 
wait upon God, and pluck wisdom and heroism from defeat. The Spirit of God is 
with us, and the promise of Christ is ours. — M. 

Ver. 34. — " They knew not that evU was near them." How descriptive this of all 
men ! Our misfortunes often overtake us unawares. There is no earthly security. 
The sinner especially should not encourage himself in fancied immunity. The Son 
of man cometh as a thief in the night, for judgment and for reward. 

I. The dncbetain nature of the future. 

II. The ignorance and heedlessness of sinnees ebspectinq God's judgments. 

III. How to be deliveked from fear and the ebai, evils of this ignorance. 
A righteous life the great safeguard. But how attained ? Christ's the only authori- 
tative " Fear not." External evils will through him minister to our eternal welfare 
and well-being. This trust in him should be implicit, and an active fore* in every 
life.— M. 

Ver. 23. — Lessons of defeat. The Christian sometimes encounters defeat in the 
enterprises of spiritual warfare — in the battle of the inner life, in efforts to destroy 
the wickedness and misery of the world, in missionary campaigns. 

I. Defeat should arouse reflection. The Israelites had acted hastily under 
the impulse of sudden indignation. In defeat they were thrown back to think of 
the object and methods of their war. This war against a brother tribe was a terrible 
undertaking. Was it necessary? No war should be undertakeli till it is absolutely 
necessary. It may be our duty to oppose our own brethren ; but this should he 
done only after serious reflection. We are sometimes allowed to fail that we 
may consider more deeply all that ia involved in actions attended with serious con- 
sequences. 

II. Defeat should induce humility and repentance. The Israelites had been 
too self-confident. Enraged at the wickedness of one town, they had not realised 
their own sin, nor how this wickedness was but one act of national depravity. They 
were now the champions of justice. The position thus assumed by them would blind 
them to their own failings and stimulate pride. When Christian men do battle 
against some monstrous evil, they too are in danger of falling into similar failings 
of pride and self-righteousness. Defeat is then a wholesome humiliation leading to 
repentance. If we are to testify against the sin of others, we too must not forget 
that we also are sinners. 

III. Defeat should lead us to seek counsel of God. 1. The Israelites had 
consulted some oracle, some " gods," before going to war. After defeat they turned 
to the true God, the Eternal. We often need to fail before we will learn to pray. 
Then we see that our wisdom is to follow God's will. 2. The Israelites did not 
simply ask for success. They asked whether or no they should go up to war. We 
should not pray for God's blessing on the enterprise which we are obstinately pur- 
suing irrespective of his will, but should first ask for light to teach us whether we 
should pursue it. 3. The Israelites did not ask for God's strength, but only for his 
guidance. Perhaps if they had invoked his aid they would not have failed a second 
time. We need trust in God and reliance on his help for perfect success. 

IV. Defeat should lead to renewed and improved effort. Through repeated 
defeats Israel persevered on to victory. So it is with the Christian. " Though he 
fall, he shall not be utterly cast down " (Ps. xxxvii. 24). — ^A. 

Ver. 47. — "An escaped remnant.'^ I. There is usually an escaped remnant 

FROM THE MOST SEVERE PROVIDENTIAL ACT OF JUDGMENT. So it WaS in the flood, in 

the destruction of the cities of the plain, in the captivity, in tne conquest of Jerusalem 
by the Eomans. God does not totally destroy. Mercy is mingled with judgment. 
Though this is some mitigation of the calamity, it is no reason for rash indifEerence 
to danger, because (1) the remnant may be but a small minority, (2) none can tell 
whether they will be included in it, and (3) the remnant, though escaping the worst 
fate, suffers great hardships. 



t08 



THE BOOK OF JUDQEa 



[oa. XXL 1—26 



n. The remnant does not necbssabily consist of bbtteb men than thobh 
WHO ABB DESTEOTED. If One is taken and another left, this diversity of treatment ia 
no proof of diSerence of character. As they who are subject to signal calamities 
are not to be regarded as especially wicked («. g. Job, the men on whom the tower of 
Siloam fell, &c.), so those who are favoured by remarkable delireranceB have no 
right to be considered especially virtuous. Their position is one to excite special 
gratitude, but not to encourage pride. Sometimes, indeed, it is dishonourable to 
them. It may be a result of cowardice, indolence, or falsehood. The traitor may 
escape while the true man falls. Barabbas escaped while Christ was crucified. In 
times of persecution the unfaithful are saved and the faithful suffer martyrdom. 

III. These is a fbovibeniial end to bk SEcnsED bt the fbbsbrvation of a 
REMNANT. The idea of "the remnant" is familiar to the reader of Scripture {e.g. 
Isa. i. 9). There must be some Divine purpose in it. Can we discover that purpose ? 
Possibly it is this — every nation, every tribe, every community of men which has 
special characteristics of its own has also a special mission to the world dependent 
on those characteristics. If, therefore, it is entirely blotted out of existence, the 
fruits of that mission will be lost to the world. A remnant is spared that the special 
gifts may be transmitted through a small hereditary line, and thus be preserved and 
turned to the continued service of the world. Israel had a mission to the world 
dependent on her peculiar endowments. If the remnant of Israel had not been 
delivered from Babylon, this mission would have been destroyed, and the human side 
of the origin of Christianity, such as we now see it, made impossible. Benjamin had 
a mission. From this tribe sprang the first king of Israel and the chief of Christ's 
apostles. If the 600 Beniamites had not been spared St. Paul would never have 
appeared. — A. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXI. 



Ver. 1. — How the men of Israel, &c A 

circumstance not mentioned before is now 
brought forward, as is another in ver. 5, on 
which the events about to be narrated in 
this chapter depend, viz., that the men of 
Israel had taken two solemn oaths at Mizpeh 
(ch. XX. 1) — the one that no Israelite would 
give his daughter in marriage to a Benjamite ; 
the other that whosoever did not come up to 
the national assembly there should be put to 
death. 

Ver. 2. — And the people, &c. The narra- 
tive now proceeds. After the people, i. e. the 
Israelite army, so described ch. xz. 8, 8, 22, 
4c.. had finished the work of destruction in 
the cities of Benjamin, they returned to 
Bethel (the house of God, A. V., here and 
in ch. XX. 18, 26, 31, where see notes), and, 
their rage having new subsided, gave way to 
violent grief on account of the destruction of 
Benjamin their brother. With passionate 
Oriental feelings they passed the whole day 
weeping, and probably fasting (see ch. xx. 26), 
before the tabernacle. Wept sore. Hebrew, 
wept a great weeping. The expression lifted 
ap their voices shows that it was s loud 
wailing and lamentation. 

Ver. 8. — And said. Better, And they 
laid. One tribe lacking. The existence of 
the twelve tribes was an essential part of 
their covenant existence as the people of God 



(Gen. zxxv, 22 ; zliz. 28 ; Ezod. zxlv. 4 ; 
Niunh. i. 6 — 15 ;.Josh. iv. 8, 4, &c; Matt. 
xix. 28 ; James i. 1 ; Rev. vii. 4, &c.). With 
one tribe missing Israel would be no longer 
IsiaeL 

Ver. 4. — OlTered burnt offerings and peace 
offerings. See ch. xx. 26, note. 

Yer. 6. — And the children of Israel said. 
The idea evidently occurred to them that 
they might supply wives to the 600 Benjam- 
ites in the way that actually came to pass, 
and they asked the question. Who t» there 
among all the tribes, &c. , with this view. 

Vers. 6—9. — And the children of Israel, 
&c. This versa goes back a little to explain 
why the children of Israel asked the question, 
viz., because they repented them for Ben- 
jamin, and wished to repair the mischief 
resulting from their rash oath not to give 
their daughters to a Benjamite ; therefore 
they said (repeating ver. 6), What one b 
there that came not up to Mizpeh I (ver. 8) 
and on numbering the people it was found 
that no one had come up from Jabesh-gilead. 
This is the first time that Jabesh-gilead is 
mentioned in Scripture. It comes up twice 
afterwards. First in 1 Sam. xi, on occasion 
of its being besieged by the Ammonites and 
rescued by Saul ; and secondly in 1 Sam. 
xxxi. 11 — 13, when the inhabitants of Jabesh- 
gilead took down the bodies of Saul and his 
sons from the wall of Beth-shan, and buried 
them at Jabesh, for which brave and 



3H. ZZL 1— S6.] 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



act David thanked them (2 Sam. H. 5). The 
name of Jaiesh is only preserved in the 
Wady TaMs, which deboucheB on the east- 
ern bank of the Jordan about lat. 32-24. 
Bobinson thinks the mins called ed Deir in 
this valley are the remains of Jabesh, which 
agrees exactly with the situation assigned to 
it by Eusebius in the ' Onomasticon.' 

Vers. 10, 11. — ^Te shall utterly destroy, 
ft«. Devote to destruction, as a 'Aerem, an 
accursed thing. They followed in the 
teverity of the punishment the precedent 
of the destruction of the Midianites (see 
Numb. xzxL 17), and even in the numbers 
sent to destroy them — a thousand from every 
tribe (Numb. zxzi. 5). Ee vol ting to our 
feelings as such wholesale massacres are, 
including women and children, it must be 
remembered iu mitigation that the 'herem 
was the solemn devotion of a thing or person 
to destruction under the sanction of an oath. 
Of the valiantest. The sons of vahur sim ply 
means vaMard men (2 Sam. xiii. 28 ; xvii. 
10). 

Ver. 12. — To Shiloh, whither it should 
seem they had now taken the tabernacle 
hack, the war with Benjamin no longer 
requiring its presence at Bethel. Them. 
It is masculine in the Hebrew, though it 
refers to the women. So again in ver, 22, 
their fathers and their brothers in the mas- 
culine (see above, ch. xix. 23, and vers. 
21, 22). It is perhaps an archaism. In the 
land of Canaan. This is inserted to contrast 
it with Jabesh in Gilead (Gen. xxxiii. 17, 18, 
and ch. viii. 5, note). 

Ver. 13. — Translate the whole verse thus : 
And the whole congregation sent and spake 
to the children of Benjamin, &c. , and pro- 
claimed peace to them (see Deut. xx. 10). 
They sent ambassadors or heralds to them as 
it were with a flag of trace. 

Ver. \i. — Benjamin came again, i. e. re- 
turned to their own homes in the tribe of 
Benjamin, as in ver. 23. Yet so they sufficed 
them not — or. Yet so they (the Israelites) 
did not provide enough for them (the Ben- 
jamites) ; or. Yet so they (the Benjamites) 
had notemonighfor themselves. 

Ver. 16. — Seeing the women. It is rather 
more in accordance with the Hebrew style to 
take the words as the narrator's explanation 
of the question. What shall we dot They 
said this because all the women of Benjamin 
had been destroyed. 

Ver. 17. — There must be an inheritance 
for them that be escaped of Benjamin. The 
passage is difficult to construe and to explain. 
If the words There must be are properly sup- 
plied in the A. V. , the sense will come out 
more clearly if we take the word inheritance 
to mean rather succession, which is the idea 
contained in the root. There must be a suc- 
eeutonfor the tteaped of Benjamin, i. e. there 

JUPGES, 



must be heira to succeed, and therefore we 
must find wives for them. The word peleytah 
without the article can hardly mean the 
remnant, as has been proposed, but must be 
defined by being taken with Benjamin. 

Ver. 18. — We are not able. Note again 
the evil of rash vows, and how often chicanery 
is necessary in order to evade their evU 
consequences. 

Ver. 19. — There is a feast of the Lord in 
Shiloh yearly. Compare the exactly similar 
description, 1 Sam. i. 3, 7. There is a great 
difference of opinion among commentators as 
to what feast is here meant. Hengstenberg, 
Eeil, Delitzsch, and others think it was 
the passover ; Bishop Patrick and others 
think it was the feast of tabernacles, a 
more joyous feast; Rosenmiiller and others 
think it was a festival peculiar to Shiloh, 
after the analogy of the yearly sacrifice of the 
family of Jesse at Bethlehem (1 Sam. ix. 
29), and more or less in accordance with 
Deut. zii 10 — 12. It is not easy to say 
which view is right, but the last seems not 
improbable. In a place which is on the 
north side, &c. The words in a place are 
not in the Hebrew, and do not seem to be 
implied by the context. Bui the description 
is that of the situation of Shiloh itself, which 
is veiy exact (see 'Palestine Exploration 
Fund, Map of West Palestine). Lebonah 
survives in el - Lubbun, about two miles 
north-west of Seildn, and to the west of 
the road to Shechem or Nablds. It seems 
strange that so particular a description of the 
situation of Shiloh should be given ; but it 
may probably indicate that the writer lived 
after the tabernacle had been moved to Je- 
rusalem, and Shiloh had relapsed into an 
obscure village (see ch. xx. 27, note). The 
situation of the descriptive words in the 
Hebrew, with the pronoun which, separated 
from Shiloh by the word yearly, indicates 
that they are an explanation added by the 
narrator. 

Ver. 21. — Come out. The verb is in the 
masculine gender, though the daughters of 
Shiloh is the subject (see above, ver. 12, 
note). To dance in dances. Bishop Patrick 
says that the feast of tabernacles was the only 
feast at which Jewish maidens were permitted 
to dance. Go to the land of Benjamin. 
The close vicinity of the high road leading 
from Shechem to Bethel on the border of 
Benjamin would facilitate their flight. 

Ver. 22, — Be favourable unto them for 
our Bakes. Eather, Grant us them as a 
favour, the masculine them referring to the 
daughters of Shiloh, as in ver. 12, and the 
verb gra/nt a fa/vov/r being followed by a 
double accusative. We reserved not to each 
man Ms wife, &c. These words are some- 
what difficult. If we may insert the word 
to, as the A. V. does, before each man, (for it 
P 



no 



THE BOOK OF JDDGES. 



[oh. XXL 1—25 



!s wanting in the Hebrew), the sense is good. 
The Israelites acknowledge their own fault in 
not reserving women enough to be wives to 
the Benjamites, and ask the fathers and 
brothers of the daughters of Shiloh to do 
them a favour by enabling them to repair 
their fault. But it is rather a strain upon 
the words. The omission of the to is not 
natural in such a phrase (Numb, xxvi 54 
is hardly to the point, nor is Gen. xli. 12, 
where the to had been expressed before the 
us), and reserved is a forced iaterpretation of 
the verb. If the words were spoken by the 
Benjamites, all would be plain and easy : 
" "We received not each man his wife in the 
war." Hence some put the speech into the 
mouth of Benjamin, as though the Israel- 
ites meant, We wUl say in your names, in 
your persons, as your attorneys, so to speak, 
" Grant them to us," &c. But this is rather 



forced. Othen, therefore, follow the Peschitoi 
and read, " 'beeaiat thet received not eaeli 
man his wife," &c,, which makes very good 
sense, bat has not MS. authority. Te did 
not give, &c., i. e. yon need not fear the 
guilt of the broken oath, because you did 
not gime your daughters, so as to violate the 
oath (ver. 7), but thw were taken from you 
by force. The A. V. gives the probable 
meaning of the passage, though it is some- 
what obscure. 

Ver. 23. — ^According to their number, i. a 
so as to provide the 200 with wives. Ih« 
cities, as u ch. zx. 16, 42. 

Ver. 24. — ^Every man to his inheritanoe. 
Compare the breaking up of the national 
assembly in the days of Joshua (Josh. zziy. 
28 ; Judges iL 6). 

Ver. 2S. — In those days, Ao.' Seech, zvii. 
6 ; xviii. 1, &o. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vera. 1 — 25. — War. Who can think of the flourishing tribe of Benjamin reduced 
to a handful of 600 men, clinging for life to an inaccessible rock, but having to mourn 
the loss of wives and daughters, and sisters and children, all ruthlessly slaughtered 
with the edge of the sword, and not shudder at the horrors of war? It is a distressing 
picture to bring before the mind, but the picture must be looked at in its details if 
we would form a right judgment on the subject. Well, then, in war there is first the 
snapping asunder of the bonds of neighbourhood and friendship which once existed 
between the parties. There is the exchange of hatred, and ill-will, and the desire to 
injure and destroy, for amity and kindness and benevolence. The word "the 
enemy " takes the place of that of " friend," and the change of conduct corresponds 
to the change of name ; for there soon follow the acts of destruction and venge- 
ance. Precious life, that mysterious gift of God, is spilt like water on the ground. 
The bleeding woimds, the mangled limbe, the lifeless corpse, take the place of the 
buoyant spirits, the active frame, and the healthful vigour, of youth and manhood. 
The happy home where affection and social mirth and bright hopes and schemes 
made happiness and light, becomes the house of mourning where all hope is put out. 
The husband, the betrothed, the brother, the darling son, is laid low in dust and 
blood ; and what is life any longer to the wife, to the expecting bride, to the sister, 
to the bereaved mother ? And in such a war as this with Benjamin there are still 
more revolting images to be contemplated. The ground strewed with innocent 
babes and little children unconscious of wrong, and unsuspicious of harm. Merry 
youths and laughing maidens cut down in the spring-time of their life. Homesteads, 
orchards, gardens, whole streets, whole cities, reduced to heaps of rubbish and 
ashes. All the works of men's hands, the fruit of their labours, the product of their 
skill, the ornament, the comfort, the very shelter and food needful for human life, 
spoiled, wasted, and destroyed ; human progress thrown back for a century, and 
seeds of hatred sown to bring- forth a crop of bitterness in times to come. Thank 
God, war has been shorn in our days of its savage cruelty. Soldiers no longer 
slaughter women and children and defenceless men, nor destroy in the mere wanton- 
ness of power. Most true also is it that in war some of the noblest qualities of men 
are developed, and that kindness, mercy, and generosity, are the frequent companions 
of daring courage, resolute endurance, and inflexible will. The brave leader of men 
is deserving of all the gratitude and all the enthusiasm of his fellow-men; and as 
long as war is a necessity, he who conducts it to a successful end for his country's 
good will always merit his country's praise. But for all that, it must be acknow- 
ledged that war, even in its mitigated form, is a blight upon humanity, and that its 
OOntinuanca Is a blot upon civilisation, and still more upon the national profeBsion ol 



OH. XXI. 1—25.] THE BOOK OP JUDGES. 21] 

Chriatianity. He would indeed be a benefactor of the human race who could dis' 
cover and eBtablish the machinery by which national quarrels and disagreementi 
could be settled by some other arbitrament than that of the sword. Viewed even in 
an economic point of view, how great would the gain be to nations if the half million 
or the million of men in the prime of life who are now supported in industrial idle- 
ness at the expense of their countrymen were, instead, contributing their own quota 
to the production and to the wealth of the country ! And if the vast sums of money 
now spent on a single war were devoted to useful works and to great social improve- 
ments, how greatly would the world be benefited, instead of being, as now, impover- 
ished and made desolate I How to get rid of war, and at the same time maintain the 
national dignity and not compromise the national safety, is indeed a problem difiScult 
to solve. The existence of force may be necessary for the maintenance of right. 
But for all that, the discovery of the means by which bloody wars might be exchanged 
for some binding code of national law, to which the strongest as well as the weakest 
should be subject, would be a signal blessing to mankind. The subject is well worth 
the consideration of every Christian philanthropist. Surely, too, we are encouraged 
to hope for success by the glowing words of prophecy. A day will come, we know, 
when " nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war a»y 
more " (Isa. ii. 4). The Psalmist saw a blessed vision of a time when there shall 
be " abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth " (Ps. Ixxii. 7). The Holy 
Ghost speaks of a time when "they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy 
mountain : for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters 
cover the sea " (Isa. xi. 9). And, even if in no other way we can hope to succeed, 
let us, at least, use our utmost endeavour to spread that knowledge of the Prince of 
peace at home and abroad which is the surest guarantee of peace. We know not 
when or how the kingdom of righteousness and peace shall be established. But we 
know that in proportion as the gospel of peace influences men's hearts, controls 
their passions, and incites them to brotherly love, the motives to war will be 
diminished, the motives to harmony and union will be strengthened. , May the time 
come quickly when in the love of Christ, whether present in glory, or still dwelling 
in the heavens, the love of man to man shall so abound that in the family, in the 
nation, and in the world, there may be only Peace 1 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — I* There shall not any of ws give his daughter unto Benjamin to viifeT 
A rule of justice, morality, and prudence. Benjamin represents the libertine, • 
character too common in our own day. Here is a method of dealing with such men 
that ought to commend itself to every parent. 

I. Parental kesponsibilitt in sanctioning harbiagi. 

II. The. consideeations that ought to govern it. The welfare of the child ; 
the possibility of greater happiness and usefulness ; and provision for the future. 
Moral soundness ought therefore to be a sine qvJot mm, in all aspirants to the hand of 
a Christian man's daughter. What security can there be for the wife of a licentious 
man, even if he be as wealthy as Croesus ? Eighteousness of life and a Christian 
character should be the first nnd indispensable qualifications of a son-in-law. 

III. Advantages of such a codrse as this. If parents would exclude from their 
homes, their drawing-rooms, and the society of their children persons known to be 
licentious, it would exert great influence — 1. In checking such conduct. 2. In pre- 
venting society from thinking lightly of it. — M. 

Ver. 26. — " In those days there was no king in Israel : every man did that which 
was right in his own eyes." This is the key-note, as it is the refrain, of the whole 
book. The point raised is one of great significance in dealing with the foundations 
of Society and the State. 

I. The evils arising from an excess of individualism amongst men. 

II. The nbcessitt iob some common external bond and sanction fob oobdor 

AMD LIFE.— M. 



«12 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [ch. xxi. 1—29. 

Vers. 2 — i. — Sorrow fw others. I. It ib natural to be distressed at thk 
TROUBLES OF OTHERS. 1. It is natural on personal grounds. We are members one 
of another, so that if one member suffer, all suffer. The Israelites felt that it would 
be a common calamity to the whole nation for one tribe to be blotted out. It would 
not only be a judgment on that tribe, it would be " a breach in the tribes of Israel." 
England suffers through the wars and famines and storms which devastate even 
remote countries. If adversity falls upon one great town, one trade, one class, the 
whole community feels the effect of it. It is foolish, on selfish considerations alone, 
for the rich and happy to ignore the distresses of the poor and wretched. 2. But it ia 
natural to be distressed at the troubles of others on unselfish grounds. When we are 
not hardened by sin we must naturally feel sympathy. The law of Christ require! 
us to bear one another's burdens (Gal. vi. 2). If Jews of old felt for their brethren 
in their trouble, how can Christians, who owe all their best blessings to the compassion 
and suffering of Christ for them, harden their hearts against the cries of the world's 
misery, when they in turn are expected to show the spirit of Christ in sympathy and 
vicarious sacrifice? 

II. If we are called to punish men for their sin, we should also pity 
THEM FOR THEIR DISTRESS. Israel had punished the tribe of Benjamin, but the sight 
of the ruin thus wrought filled all the people with grief. It is right and necessary to 
be firm in repressing wickedness ; yet this should not be done in hot hatred, in callous 
sternness, nor in complacent self-satisfaction, but with grief, mourning for the 
distress, and more for the sin occasioning it. So does God chastise, in grief, like a 
father loving his child, and therefore the more hating the iniquity which produces all 
the trouble. 

III. Distress for the troubles of others should lead ds to God on theib 
behalf. The people came to the house of God, and wept there before God. We 
should bring all our trouble before God, and, when we know not what to ask for, 
confide in him and relieve our souls by leaving the burden with him. If we are 
really and deeply grieved for others, we shall be constrained to do the same with the 
Borrow of sympathy. All Christians are called to be priests, intercessors for others. 
We should pray most earnestly for those who will not pray for themselves. We 
should humble ourselves for their sin, since the oneness of the human family brings 
shame upon all when any go astray. Such sorrow before God will incline us to 
fresh acts of self-sacrifice and dedication. As the Israelites offered burnt offerings, 
we shall consecrate ourselves to God, that we may be more capable of relieving thosa 
for whom we grieve. — ^A. 

Ver. 6. — The penalty of desertion. It was quite in accordance with the rude and 
cruel age of the judges that a whole town should be visited with the death-penalty 
for deserting the tribes in the assembly of war. The punishment was not so un- 
reasonable as it might appear at first sight, though there are circumstances in the 
whole transaction which reflect discredit on the Israelites. 

I. Desertion is a great crime. In war-time, even among civilised nations, 
desertion is punished with death. 1. Negative wickedness may be as bad as positive 
sin. If we know that an equally injurious result will follow inaction, this is equally 
guilty with an active offence. Thus the refusal of a ship's master to save a drown- 
ing man is morally equal to the guilt of murdering him. 2. We must not measure 
the value of our actions by their individual effects, but by the effects of the principles 
they express. One act of desertion may have no perceptible effect. But if one is 
justifiable, many are, and thus the principle of freedom to desert allows of total deser- 
tion resulting in total ruin. Desertion from the cause of Christ is a great sin. To 
refrain from obeying his call to action is as guilty as to actively disobey him. 3. The 
crime which is heinous when committed by one man is equally bad when committed 
by a whole community. We should not think of destroying a town for the crime for 
which we should execute an individual ; but this is because of our horror of wholesale 
slaughter, &c., and not because evil desert is lessened when it is shared by a number. 

II. Charitt is no excuse fob the neglect of duty. That was a terrible work 
to which the tribes were summoned — ^the slaughter of the Benjamites. Yet if they 
felt It to be a necessary act of justice sanctioned by God, as they evidently did f»el it 



.H. XXI. 1—26.] THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 212 

to be, they had no right to ehrink from it out of feelings of kindliness. It is terrible 
to be called to such a duty ; but it is brave and noble to accept the odium when the 
necessity is felt, and weak and selfish to avoid it. Charity is not honoured by the 
sacrifice of justice. It is more charitable to punish wickedness than to let it work its 
evil unchecked. Charity to the criminal often means cruelty to the victim. There 
is a danger lest we should become so mild that we should virtually punish the inno- 
cent in order to spare the guilty. 

ni. The purity op justicb is violated when pcnishment is administerd 
WITH interested motives. It appears that the great motive of the Israelites in 
executing the threat of their oath on the people of Jabesh-Grilead was not a regard 
for strict justice, but a desire to secure wives for the escaped Benjamites. This 
motive vitiated the character of their action. The difficulty of executing punitive 
justice lies in the danger of other motives than a simple regard for right entering 
mto our conduct. We desecrate the temple of justice when we convert it into a 
house of merchandise. — A. 

Ver. 24. — The return of peaeeful pro»perity.- I. Men find their most happy 

CONDITION IN THE PURSUIT OP PEACEFUL OCCUPATIONS AND THE ENJOYMENT OP HOME 

UPS. It is pleasing to see this concourse of war break up, and the Israelites return 
home to their farms and their families. War is unnatural, and should be treated as a 
monstrous evil. The nation which regards military exploits as the chief occupation 
for its energies is forsaking solid happiness for empty glory. 1. Politically a nation 
is prosperous when industry flourishes, trade is unchecked, literature finds patrons, 
science and art are pursued, and general education, morality, and religion are sedu- 
lously promoted by the leading men of the age. 2. Religiously a people is prosper 
ous when angry controversy gives place to the peaceful cultivation ot holiness, and 
practical efforts to conquer the sin of the world and spread the blessings of Christian- 
ity. 3. PenmuMy men are prosperous when they are at liberty to work in peace 
and enjoy the fruits of their labours without molestation. In proportion as war, 
controversy, jealousy, and competition give place to quiet home life and simple 
endeavours to do our daily duties will happiness be enjoyed as a solid, lasting human 
treasure. 

II. It is SOMETIMES NOT POSSIBLE TO ENJOY SOLID PEACE TILL AFTER THE FAITH- 
FUL PERFORMANCE OP THE DUTIES OP WARFARE. The peace which the Israelites now 
enjoyed was the reward which followed the faithful performance of painful acts of 
justice. The cry of " peace at any price " may be the ignominious utterance of 
blindness, indolence, cowardice, or selfishness. We can have no worthy peace 
while the wrongs of any who have claims upon us call for our active interference. 
1. N^ational peace must follow the establishment of order and justice. Better all 
the horrors of civil war than unchecked tyranny, unpunished violence, or outraged 
innocence. 2. Religious peace must follow the righteous maintenance of truth and 
right. We must not let false religions go unchallenged, or unholy conduct unre- 
buked, for the sake of preserving peace. Christ came to send a sword (Matt. x. 34), 
and his peace comes after the valiant overthrow of the lies and sins which oppose 
his rule. 3. Personal peace must follow the battle of the soul with its sins and 
doubts. That is a hollow peace which comes from stifling doubt. We must fight it 
down. No true peace is possible while sinful habits are unopposed ; these must be 
" resisted unto blood." True peace follows victory over evil. 

III. A PEACEFUL LIFE IS SECURED AND MAINTAINED THEOUGH THE EFFORT OF EACH 

MAN TO TAKE HIS OWN PLACE AND DO HIS OWN WORK. Trouble too often arises from 
our forsaking our post and interfering with other people. 1. Industry ia favourable 
to peaceful prosperity. The children of Israel went home immediately after settling 
affairs in the disturbed district. They went straight from war to work, and wasted 
no time in idle self-indulgence as a reward for victory. 2. Orderly arrangements 
promote peace. Every man went to his tribe. Let each of us find his own place in 
the world, and seek quietly to occupy that, and nothing else. 3. Domestic life inclines 
to peace. Every man went to his family. The home is the foundation of the mort 
■ohd blessings of the State. If we desire happiness and peaceful prosperity, let na 
eherish the sanctities of the hearth. 4. Property favours peace. The men went to 



214 THE BOOK OF JUDGES. [oh. xii. 1—26. 

their several inheritances. When a man has possessions he is reluctant to create a 
social disturbance. Therefore lovers of peace ■should promote thrift and efEorts to 
facilitate the acquisition of property by the people generally^ — of course as the fruits 
of honest industry. 6. Religious convictions form the most solid foundations for 
peaceful prosperity. The Israelites accepted their inheritances quietly' in obedience 
to a Divine distribution. We shall enjoy a peaceful life best if we believe that God 
chooses our inheritance, and accept our lot in contentment and trustf ulness^ from 
him, endeavouring to use it as his stewards, and hoping for the perfect inheritance 
of ttie everlasting home which he will give to hia £aithf ul people. — A, 



HOMILETICAL INDEX 



to 



THE BOOK OF JUDGES. 



CHAPTER L 






OHAFTEB nL^ 




nmrnn 




rAOB 


THBa 


ftm 


Inquiry of God ... . 


... 


1 


Ungodly Marriages ^ _ 


at 


Transfer of Authoriiy — 


... 


8 


The Proving of Israel .. 


29 


Spiritual Initiatives 


... 


6 


The Forbidden Covenant ... «. 


29 


AllUnces in the Holy War ... 


... 


fi 


God's Stourge' ... ... _ 


81 


OoRespondcQce of Crime and Reqnital 


6 


Idolatry and its Nemesis ... „ 


82 


The Death of the Great 


... 


7 


True Deliverance must ever come from 




Mutual Help 


». 


8 


God „ 


32 


Retribution ... .» 


••• 


8 


Natural Advantages and Endowments 




Faith - 


— 


10 


Perfected and Crowned by Consecra- 




The Public Spirit of Caleb .„ 


•M 


12 


tion ... 


S3 


Compensations 


• •• 


12 


The Secret of Individual and National 




Divine Help verms Material Obstacles 


13 


Greatness 


33 


A Title to be made Good ... 


... 


13 


"And the land had rest"— the True 




The Presence of God in the Battle of 




Peace ... ... ... „ 


83 


life 


.-• 


14 


Great Men ... _ 


83 


Weak Faith producing Weak Action ... 


15 


Miscellaneous Thoughts ... .„ 


35 


An ITnwilling Helper of the Cause of 




Continued and Repeated Offence en- 




God 


... 


16 


tails more Signal Punishment ... 


87 


Human Wisdom versus Divine 


.•• 


16 


Ehud _ 


87 


The Failure of Duty of One an Occasion 




Shamgar ... ^ ... 


87 


of Inconvenience to Another 


~ 


17 


A Man Left-handed m. mm 


88 


CHAPTER II. 










The Expostulation .. 


.M 


18 


CHAPTER IV. 




Bochim ... ... .« 


... 


19 


The Variety of God's Instmmmta 




The Preaching tf Repentance 


... 


20 


The Weakness of God's Instru- 




Influence 


... 


21 


ments 


40 


The Force of Personal Testimony and 




Temporary Influences and a Perma- 




Influence ... ... 


... 


23 


nent Tendency ... 


41 


Inael's Apostasy ... 


... 


23 


The Battle of the Brook Kishon, or 




The Goodness and Severity of God 


... 


24 


Material Force versut Spiritual ... 


4S 


Mercy in the midst of Judgment 


~ 


26 


Deborah and Barak „. mm 


41 


TertadbyTamptation 


... 


M 


Patiiotio Treaehery «. ^ 


4* 



INDEX. 



CHAPTER V. 

Self-Saorifioe and ita Inspirer ... 48 

Kational Rnin and the True DeliTeier 49 

The Peril of National Irreligion ... 49 
Testimony and Thanksgiving the Duty 

of the Redeemed ... ... 60 

National Defence a Common Responsi- 
bility 60 

The Hopelessness of Opposition to God 61 

The Curse of Meroz ^ ... 61 

The Conduct of Jael „. ... 61 

The Snnlike Life ... » _ 62 

A Mother in Israel „, _ 62 

Self-Dedication „. ... m. 63 

Literary Occupation* .^ m* 64 
Indolent Indecision _ ..65 

The Curse of Meroz ... .. 66 

The Trimnph of the Chnrch „. 66 

CHAPTER VL 

The Fruit of Ingratitude ... ... 67 

Israel's Extremity... ... ... 68 

Divine Mercy: its Adaptation and 

Sufficiency ... ... ... 68 

Merciful Reproof ... ... ... 69 

God Sought and Found in Times of 

Trouble ... ._ .„ 69 

The Preparation ... ... ... 61 

The Call of Gideon .„ ... 62 

The Paradox of the Divine Presence ... 63 

The Assuring Thought of God's Servant 63 

Asking for a Sign ... ... ... 64 

The Sign — the Present turned into a 

Sacrifice ... ... ... 64 

Jehovah Shalom, or Spiritual Forebod- 
ings stilled ... ... ... 65 

Diffidence ... ... ... 65 

The Action commenced ... ... 67 

The First Work ... ._ ... 68 

Who hath done this Thing t ... 69 

Jerubbaal, or, Is an Idol Anything ! 69 

Gideon the Iconoclast ... ... 69 

The Divine Side of Human History ._ 71 

The Crisis and the Confirmation ... 72 

CHAPTER VII. 

The Sifting ... ... ... 74 

Divinely-ordained Tests ... ... 76 

" Mine own hand hath saved me '* ... 76 

Success not Dependent on Nnmben ... 77 

Faith — 79 

The Crowning Sign >. .« 81 

Inspired Tactics ... «. »• 82 



THEHX 

Following up Advantage .« 
Gideon's Rnse .„ _ 


VASl 

- 88 
>. 83 


CHAPTER VIII. 






The Blindness of Self-Love .„ 


•M 


84 


Dealing with Obstructives ... 


M* 


84 


" Faint, yet pursuing " 

The Complete Revenge .. 

Prosperity ... ... 

Noble Self- Abnegation _ 
The Mistake of a Good Man 


86 


,87 
39 
92 
98 
94 


The After Life 


•M 


94 



The Consequence of the Imperfeet 

Recognition of Jehovah ... ... 96 

Gideon and the Theocracy .„ ... 9S 

Forgetfiilness and Ingratitnd* >. 96 

CHAPTER IX, 

Self-Aggrandisement ... ... 98 

Ambitious Usurpation .... .m 99 

Unrighteous Claims of Kindred ._ 99 

Shortcomings of Unscrupulous Scheme* 100 

Abimelech ... ... ... 100 

The Handwriting on the Wall ... 102 
Jotham's Fable ; or. Popular Election, 

its Dangers and Abuses ... ... 103 

Strength in Weakness _ ... 104 

Jotham's Parable ... .„ ... 104 

Be sure your sin will find you out ... 108 

The Nemesis of Usurpation .. . ... 109 

A Worthy Servant of a Worthless 

Master ... ... „ 109 

Without a Leader ... „. ... 110 

Reputation ^ .„ m. 110 

CHAPTER X 

The Lull ... ... «. Ill 

The Calm after the Storm ... ... 112 

Quiet Times ... ... ... 112 

The Ethiopian's Unchanged Skin ... 114 

Recurring Habits of Evil ... ... 116 

Immediate and Effectual Retribution 116 

God answering Hardened Transgressor* 116 

" Works meet for repentance " ... llf 

Faith restoring Courage and Might ._ 116 

From God to Baal ... ... 117 

The Test of Trouble ... „. 117 

Repeutanc* ... ... .» 118 

CHAPTER XL 

The Controversy ... ... ... 121 

Th* Shaping InflnenoM of Lift ... Ul 



INDEX. 



iHBm rAOs 

Magnanimity of Patriotism... ... 123 

Recognition of God in Positions of 

Honour and Responsibility ... 121 

The Model Diplomatist ... ... 124 

The Friend in Need ... ... 124 

Human Perverseness embittering the 

Sweet Cup ... ... .., 126 

The Spuit of Sacred 'Warfare ... 127 

Jephthah's Vow ... ... ... 128 

The Spirit of the Lord ... ... 129 

Jephthah's Vow ... .„ ... 180 

CHAPTER XIL 

The Envy of the Small Great at the 

Great Deeds of the Small ... 181 
Ingratitude the Frequent Reward of 

Benefactors ... ... .„ 182 

The Reproach of the Righteons ... 133 
Shibboleth ; — The Importance of Little 

Defects, Faults, &c. ... ... 133 

Tests : their Good and Evil ... 134 
"Vaulting Ambition," which "o'er- 

leaps itself" ... ... ... 184 

Jealousy ... ... ... .. 135 

Shibboleth ... ... ... 136 

The Calm after the Storm ... ... 187 

CHAPTER XIIL 

Married Life ... ... ... 140 

A Natural Desire and its Gracious Ful- 
filment ... ... ... 141 

The Difficulty of Salvation ... ... 142 

God's Use of Unlikely Means for Gra- 
cious Ends ... ... ... 143 

Divine Punishment and Preparation of 

Deliverance Simultaneous ... 143 

Repetition of Divine Favours ... 143 

Parental Anxiety and its Satisfying ... 144 

The Wonderful Name ... ... 144 

Reassurance of Divine Favour ... 146 

Fulfilment of Promise ... ... 145 

Samson the Nazarite ... ... 146 

The Training of Children ... ... 146 

The Mystery of a Name ... ... 147 

The Fear of the Vision of God ... 148 

The Yonng Samson ... ... 148 

CHAPTER Xiy. 

The Link of the Chain ... .„ 160 

Human Desire overruled for Divine 

Ends ... ... ... ... 161 

The Lion in the Way ... ... 152 



The Fearlessness and Modesty of the 

Spiritual Hero ... ... ... 162 

The Mystery of Spiritual Might ... 162 

Recalling Past Deliverances ... 162 

Samson and the Lion ... ... 168 

Another View of Married Life ... 166 

Samson's Riddle ... ... ... 168 

Unlawful Methods of interpreting Di- 
vine Mysteries ... ... ... 167 

Ploughing with Another's Heifer ... 167 
How Confidence in Wicked Man b 

Rewarded ... _ ... 167 

Samson's Riddle ... «. «, 167 

CHAPTER XV. 

The Progress of the Feud ... ,„ 169 
Atonements of the Unrighteous ... 180 
God's Servant set Free by the Provi- 
dences of Life ... ... ... 160 

Foxes and Firebrands ... ... 160 

Those who have Occasioned Evil pun- 
ished for those who Caused it ... 161 
Requiting Evil for Good, and Good for 

EvU 161 

Ingenuity and Originality ... ... 161 

Man without God, and Man with God 163 
Imperfect Means made Effectual by 

Divine Inspiration ... ... 166 

The Self-Refreshment of Divine Service 166 

The Jawbone of an Asa ... ... 166 

Distress after Triumph ... n. 166 

CHAPTER XVL 

Presumption leading to a Fall ... 168 
God redeeming the Error of His Ser- 
vant ... ... ... ... 170 

Samson's Betrayal and Fall ... 171 
"And he wist not that the Lord (Je- 
hovah) was departed from him " ... 172 
Samson's Weakness ... ... 172 

God's Departure from the Soul nn- 

recognised ... ... ... 178 

The Short-lived Triumph ... ... 176 

A Hero's Exodus ... ... ». 176 

Samson's Heroic Death ... ». 176 

CHAPTER XVn. 

The Superstitious Worship of the True 

God 179 

The History of a Man-made Minlitij : 

1. Its Genesis ... ... m. 181 

Avarice and Superstition m< »• MS 



INDEX. 



nmcB 

No King 

faith in the Priest 



FAOC 

183 
184 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

Sodetj withoat a Head (easing to be 

Society ... ... ... 188 

The History of a Man-made Ministry : 

2. Its Abuse .. ... ... 189 

Its Transfer and Establishment in ■ 

Lawless Commnnity ... ... 189 

The Idolater's Distress „ ... 190 

The Beligion of Convenieno* ... 190 

The Mercenary Priest ... ... 191 

The Lost Gods ... „ ^ 191 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Hie Downward Progress ... ... 194 

Tronblesome Hospitality .^ ... 19S 

Exceptional Hospitality ... ... 196 

Unparalleled Crime : the Spirit and 
Method in which its Problems are to 

be met ... ... ... 196 

Hospitality ... ... ... 196 

UoBatMM WioludaaM . ^ W 



The Dnty of considering PainM Sub- 
jects ... ... ... ^ 197 

CHAPTER XX. 

Temper ... ... ... ... 200 

National Atonement .« ». 801 

Union ... ... ... ... 20] 

Pare and Impure Zeal ... ... 205 

The DifScnIty of punishing Evil-Doeis 206 
"They knew not that evil was near 

them" ... 207 

Lessons of Defeat ... ... ... 207 

"An Escaped Remnant" .» ^ 207 

CHAPTER XXI. 

War ... ... ... ... 210 

"There shall not any of us gtn his 

daughter unto Benjamm to wife "... 211 
" In those days there was no king in 
Israel: every man did that which 

was right in his own eyes" ... 211 

Sorrow for others ... ... ■.. 212 

The Penalty of Desertion ... ... 211 

The Return of Peaceful Frosperily ... 211 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 



EDITED BY THB 



REV. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, M.A., 

ndUt AND R0RAL DEAN OF ST. PANCRAS, AND EXAMINING CHAPLAIN TO THE LOKD 
BISHOP OP GLOUCESTER AND BRISTOL; 



AND BY THE 

RET. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



RUTH. 

(S^tiosition ani i@omiletics: 
By rev. JAMES MORISON, D.D., 

UrmOR OF "COMMENTARY ON THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. UATTUSW," 1T& 

i^omilies bs tiarione ^nti)ors: 

REV W M. STATHAM; REV PROF. J. R. THOMSON, MA. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 

New York and Toronto. 



THE book: of euth. 



INTRODUCTION. 



§ 1. Thb Storc 

80HB time dnring that period of chequered Hehrew histoiy when the Jndgea 
niied, a famine prevailed over the whole land. There was "cleanness of teeth " 
everywhere. Even the most fertile districts, such as that of which Bethlehem 
(the house of bread) is the centre, suffered severely. Among the sufferers were 
a respectable family, consisting of Elimelech, a proprietor in the locality, his 
wife Naomi, and their two sons, Machlon and Chilion. This family, being 
hard pressed by the Hungersnoth, resolved to emigrate for a season to the 
adjoining country of Moab, where apparently there was exemption from the 
widespread agricultural calamity. Accordingly, setting out from the place of 
their nativity, they reached the place of their destination, and were> it would 
appear, hospitably welcomed by the inhabitants (ch. L 1, 2). 

Unhappily, however, Elimelech, subject it would seem to some constita- 
tional weakness, was prematurely cut off (ver. 3). 

After his decease his two sons married Moabitish wives, called respectively 
Oipah and Kuth, and all seemed to go well for a season. There was, however, 
no family, no mirth of little ones, in either home. And in the course of some 
ten years itom their entrance into the land of Moab, both Machlon and Chilion, 
in consequence apparently of delicacy inherited from their father, sickened and 
died (vers. 4, 6). 

The three widows were left behind, desolate and destitute. The mother-in- 
law, Kaomi, did not see how she could live in comfort, or maintain herself in 
respectability, in a foreign land. Still less could she see how it would be 
possible for her to stand between her daughters-in-law and want. Hence she 
resolved to return to Bethlehem. Her sorrowing daughters-in-law made up 
their minds to accompany her (vers. 6, 7). 

Naomi, however, felt that it would be too great « burden of leBponsibiUty 

*• 



INTRODUCTION TO 



for her to undertake to make her daughters-in-law comfortable in Bethlehem. 
Hence, after allowing them to give her a convoy for some distance, she insisted 
that they should return to their mothers' homes, warmly expressing her prayer 
and her hope that they might soon have sweet and restful homes of their own 
(yers. 8—13). 

The thought of leaving their esteemed and heloved mother-in-law was like 
a barbed arrow in the heart of both Orpah and Buth. But at length, after 
much pleading and remonstrance, Orpah yielded, and returned to her mother 
(ver. 14). Buth, however, would not give one moment's entertainment to the 
proposaL How could she allow the beloved old lady to pursue in solitude her 
weary way homeward ? How could she brook the thought of leaving her to. live 
in solitude after the old home should be reached) Her mind was made up 
firmly and inflexibly to accompany her much-loved mother-in-law as her com- 
panion and attendant. All the nobler feeUngs of her soul rose, as she thonght 
of her duty, into a heroic mood, while a spirit of deep poetical pathos seiied her 
ottennoei^ as, in nnconscious rhythm, she said — 

« Insist not on me forsaking thet^ 

To return from following thee : 

For whither then goest, I will go ; 

Aid wheresoeTer thou lodgest, I will lodgst 

Thy people is my people, 

And thy God my Grod : 

Wlieresoever thou diest, I will die, 

And there will I be buried. 

Bo may Yahveh do to me, 

And still more, 

If ought hut death part thee and me" (fm. 15— 17)« 

Ifaoml eonld Insist no more ; and the two widows consequently, with fheh 
hearts knit together for ever, wended their weary way toward Bethlehem, which 
at length they reached. On entering the city gate, travel-worn, and sore, and 
creeping along the streets in quest of some humble lodging, ITaomi was recog- 
nised, and soon there was quite a commotion among the matrons and others 
who had known her. of old. The news of her arrival, in the company of an 
interesting and pensive-looking young woman, flew from house to house, tiU 
wondering groups of excited females gathered in the streets, and exclaimed to 
one another, Is that ITaomi t The name Naomi, which brought up to the 
mind the idea of the sweetness of Jah, suggested for the moment a painful con- 
trast to the sorely-disheartened widow. And hence, in her anguish, she begged 
the people not to call her Naomi, as of old, but Mara, inasmuch as the Lord 
had been dealing very Utterly with her (vers. 18 — 21). 

It was fortunately just at the commencement of the barley-harvest that 
Naomi and Buth arrived in Bethlehem (ver. 22). Hunger was imminent. 
Perhaps it liad already seized on the two widows, gnawingly. Hence, without 
delay, Buth begged permission from her mother-in-law to go out in quest of 
gleaning. It was humiliating empbyment, but honest.^ The permission asked 



THE BOOK OP BUTH. 



was granted. And so Eutli went out of the house, passed out of the city gate, 
and, casting her eyes over the wide expanse of golden fields, right and left, ripe 
for the sickle, arid already alive with reapers and binders and gleaners, she was 
Inwardly, guided to a field that belonged to Boaz, a substantial yeoman, and, as 
it happened, near of kin to the late ElimelecL Buth knew nothing of his near 
relationship, but courteously requested from the overseer permission to glean 
(ch. iL 1 — 7). The overseer, perceiving that there was about this petitioner a 
certain air of superiority that he had never before witnessed in gleaners, got 
from her some particulars of her history, and made her heartily welcome to take 
her place on the field (ver. 7). So she went to work " with a wUL" 

By and by, as the dayspring advanced in the sky, the proprietor himself, 
Boaz, came out of the city to see how his reapers were getting on with their 
pleasant work. As he reached them and passed along, he courteously saluted 
them aU — Tahveh be toith you I The grave, kindly courtesy was heartily re- 
ciprocated by the workers — May Tahveh Hess thee t (ver. 4). 

His eye speedily caught sight of the elegant and diligent gleaner, and so he 
directed his steps to the overseer, and asked. Whose is this young woman f (ver. 
5). The overseer informed him, and praised her modesty and industry. Boaz, 
passing- back again along the row of workers, enjoined on the young men to be 
respectfiil to the stranger. Then he went direct toward her, and, addressing her 
as a father might speak to his daughter, he made her most heaftily welcome to 
continue in his fields as long as the harvest continued (ver. 8). He informed 
her that he had given strict injunctions to the young men to refrain from all 
improper freedoms ; and he graciously added that she was to avail herself at will 
of the water which was drawn for the workers, and carried into the field (vera. 
4—9). 

Buth was filled with wonder and gratitude for such unexpected favours, and 
bowed herself in obeisance to the ground (ver. 10). 

Boaz was stricken with admiration, and informed her that he had got, with 
much satisfaction, full particulars of her devoted attention to her mother-in-law. 
He prayed that she might receive abundant recompense from Yahveh the God 
of Israel, under the shadow of whose outstretched wings she had come to trust 
(vers. 11, 12). 

Aa Boai was about to turn away to attend to his affairs, Buth ventured, with 
beautiful respectfulness, to solicit a continuance for the future of that gracious- 
neas which he' had already showed to her, and which had brought comfort to hei 
heart (ver. 13). 

Then they; separated. But, at the time of the mid-day siesta and refreshment, 
Boaz returned to her, and conducted her to the booth, under whose cooling shade 
all the workers were wont to assemble at mid-day. He requested her to be seated 
beside the reapers, and to partake of the bread and vinegar which had been pro- 
vided. He likewise prepared for her a bunch of delicious " parched wan," of 



INTRODUOTION TO 



which she gratefully partook, reserring, after she was satlafied, a portion tat hu 
mother-in-law to give her a glad surprise (ver. 14). 

After the siesta was completed, and Huth had returned to her labour, Boas 
told the reapers to let her glean " even among the sheaves." And not only ao, 
he wished them now and again to. pull stalks out of the bundles, with ezpreaa 
design, and leave them lying about, that she might gather them. They were, 
moreover, to be most particular not to afi&ont her by any unkind insinuatioa 
(vers. 16, 16). 

The work went on merrily till near sunset, when Buth, collecting together 
her gatherings, and threshrag them, found that she had about an ephah of barley 
(ver. 17). She took up the welcome load, and made for her humble homa^ 
where she had a long story to tell, and many a long stoiy to hear, legaiding 
Boaz (vers. 18—22). 

AU the harvest through, Buth contlnned to glean in the fields of Boat (vec 
23). Bat after the reaping and gleaning were ended, and there were no more 
out-of-door engagements, and no more interviews day after day with Boaz, such 
a change came over her tender and desolate spirit that the keen eye of her 
mother-in-law saw that some other step required to be taken. She had had, 
apparently, interviews with Boaz, and clearly perceived that a mutual attachment 
had sprung up ; but for some reason or other a seal was on his lips. To remove 
that seal N'aomi contrived a plan, which would have been in the highest degree 
improper had there not been, on the one hand, a peculiar Oriental custom in 
vogue, and, on the other, absolute reason for absolute confidence in the incor- 
ruptible purity of both Boaz and Buth. The plan was for Buth to take the 
position allowed her by the Levirate law. That would at once put Boaz on his 
honour in reference to the deceased Machlon and the living widow (ch. iii 
1 — 4). Buth yielded to her mother-in-law's wishes, and the plan was carried 
into effect (vers. 5 — 7). Buth placed herself by night at the feet of her kins- 
man while he slept, and, when discovered, was not only heartily welcomed, but 
warmly commended, and thanked. He was indeed advanced in years, and he 
could not, for that reason, have ventured to offer himseU for her acceptance. 
But since his. age was not to her an obstacle, and she wished to show every 
possible respect to the deceased, it would be his joy to mingle his lot with hers 
(vers. 8— IIX 

There was, however, one obstacle in the way. There was an individual who 
was nearer of kin than himself to the deceased. According to the Levirate 
law, that individual had a prior claim on all the prerogatives attaching to 
priority of kinship j and with these prerogatives were bound up the duties of 
the nearest of kin. He consequently must, first of all, receive fuU considera- 
tion ; and if he insisted on performing the kinsman's part, why then the matter 
would pass out of the sphere of personal preference, and the result would be 
accepted as the outcome of the Will that is higher than man's. But if that 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



neaiest kinsman should have no desire to act the kinsman's part, then with joy 
would Boaz step into his place, and show respect to the ileceased (vers. 12, 13). 

The watches of the night passed rapidly on, no doubt amid many mutual 
consultations and explanations. And just as the first thinning of the darkness 
into dusk gave augury of the coming morning, Euth rose to return home. She 
bore a present with her, which would carry its own tangible meaning to Naomi. 
By and by home would be reached, and Naomi saluted her daughter-in-law by 
saj^g, with a peculiar interrogative significance. Who art thou 2 After the whole 
story was told, " Sit stiU, my daughter," said Naomi, " until thou know how the 
matter will end, for the man will not rest until this very day he have brought 
the afiair to its consummation" (vers. 14 — 18). 

It was as Naomi conjectured. Early in the morning Boaz took his place at 
the gate of the city, and made arrangements for transacting important business 
in the presence of elders and other witnesses. The near kinsman was passing 
by. Boaz requested him to be seated, as he had some business to discharge in 
which they both were interested. The kinsman complied with the respectful 
request, and ere long a full court of casual witnesses assembled. In the presence 
and hearing of these elders and others Boaz informed his friend that Naomi, who 
had lately returned from Moab, had determined, in consequence of reduced 
circumstances, to sell the property that had belonged to her deceased husband 
Elimelech (ch. iv. 1 — 3). He added, " Buy it before the inhabitants of the 
city, and the elders of the people, if thou art willing to act the kinsman's part." 
The kinsman intimated that he was willing (ver. 4). Boaz then added that the 
property would require to be purchased from the hand, not of Naomi only, but 
of Euth likewise, the prospective heiress, viho, moreover, was to go with it as a 
fifxed appurtenant, " in order that the name of her deceased husband might be 
raised up on his inheritance " (ver. 5). 

The anonymous kinsman, however, was not willing to acquire the estate on 
the terms offered (ver. 6). Hence, perceiving that Boaz was quite willing, he 
resigned his right in his favour, and puUing off his shoe, handed it to his friend 
(vers. 7, 8). AU the people were witnesses that the nearest kinsman had 
voluntarily surrendered his pecuUar prerogative. 

The story thenceforward hastens to its conclusion. Boaz, in presence of the 
people, acquired the estate, and along with it Euth, its living and priceless 
appurtenant (vers. 9, 10). "We are witnesses," shouted the assembled conclave, 
and then they lifted up their voices and prayed that showers of blessings might 
descend on the bridal pair (vers. 11, 12). Euth thus became the wife of Boaz, 
and Jsore him a son, whom the matrons who clustered around insisted on caUing 
Obed. Naomi took the child to her bosom, and nursed it with tenderness and 
care which no other care and tenderness could surpass. He was (1) the lineal 
descendant of Judah, the head of the royal tribe, and (2) the lineal ancestor ol 
David (vera. 13—22). 



INTEODtJCTION TO 



Taking a broad survey of the contents of the little Bookj we may say thftt 
it consists of a series of pen-and-ink pictures, or idyUs in prose, representing, 
firstly^ the remarkable attachment of a young Moabitish woman, herself a 
widow, to Naomi, her desolate Hebrew mother-in-law; and, secondly, the 
remarkable reward with which, in God's providence, her self-sacrifice was 
crowned. 

§ 2. Am OF THB Wbiteib. 

Edward Topsell, one of the Puritan commentators on the Book, gave, as the 
leading title of his exposition, ' The Eewabd of Eelioion,' in that way indi- 
cating what he supposed to have been the aim of the writer. 

The title is not entirely satisfactory, for certainly it is not the reZt^'on or 
religiousnesa of Buth that is the principal feature of character portrayed in the 
Book. There is not, it is true, the least shadow of reason for casting the least 
shadow of suspicion on the genuine piety of the heroine of the story. There is 
no room for taking exception to her theology. There is still less, if that be 
possible, for raising objections to her sweet and simple religiousness. Though 
probably no skilful theologian, she had come to Bethlehem-Judah, to put her 
trust " under the wings of the God of Israel" (ch. iL 12). She believed that 
He "is," and that He is "the rewarder of them that diligently seek Him" 
(Heb. xi. 6). 

StUl it is not Bnth's religiousness that is the outstanding feature of the 
character that is delineated in the Book. It is not her love to the great Divine 
Object, the God of Israel, that is portrayed. It is her love to a good and 
worthy human object, Naomi, her mother-in-law. Topsell was right in assign- 
ing to religion or religiottsness a higher pedestal than can be accorded to any 
other devotedness ; but he misled himself when, in his eagerness to do homage 
to that which ia highest, he assumed that it was the highest ideal of human 
character that is bodied forth in the succession of literary photographs which 
are found in the Book of Buth. 

Many have supposed that the true raison cCitre of the Book is a matter of 
genealogy. The ground on which this opinion is maintained is the fact that 
there is a little bit of genealogy in the five verses with which the Book is wound 
up. This bit of genealogy connects Pharez the son of Judah with David the 
son of Jesse. The line passed through Boaz, the husband of Buth. It is an 
important historical relationship, more especially to us Christians ; for as Christ 
was " the Son of David," he was the Son of Boaz too, and consequently the Son 
of Buth the Moabitess — a Gentile hnk. The fact is aU the more significant and 
suggestive as, in ascending the genealogical ladder upward to Abraham, the 
father of the Messianic people, we discover that there were other Gentile linlCB 
which connected the favoured descendants of the patriarch with the outlyinig 
" families of the earth," and which likewise show, in consequence of the moral 
peculiarity attaching to them, how wondrous was the boon conferred upon nun, 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



when the Lord of glory humbled himself to become the " kinsman " and the 
" friend " of those whose name is " sinners." 

But in the genealogy that is appended to the Book of Buth, the succession 
is carried no further down than to King David. The genealogy is thus, so far 
aa the discoverable aim of the genealogist is concerned, rather Davidic than 
Messianic. The interest in it that was manifestly felt by the writer, and that 
may have been extensively felt by his cotemporaries, was an interest that 
gathered round "great David" himself, rather than "great David's greatei 
Son." 

Yet it seems preposterous to assume that the whole graphic story of Buth 
was composed simply in consequence of this genealogical interest. The assump- 
tion looks like an inversion of the natural, and the substitution in its place of 
the unnaturaL 

Why not rather suppose that the writer wrote just because he was charmed 
with the facts of Euth's character, and because he rejoiced over the reward with 
which, in the providence of God, the heroine's devotedness was so signally 
crowned 1 Why not accept the narrative of the Book as being simply what it 
appears to be ! Why not suppose that the writer may have simply sought to 
reproduce, in the literature of words, the delineation of character and reward 
that had already been so charmingly executed in the literature of facts t Why 
hesitate to assume that he may have undertaken his task in the spirit of literary 
spontaneity, feeling a wide sympathy in his heart, seeing a meaning in every- 
thing, and resting assured that there must be a very peculiar meaning and lesson 
in all those things that are the outcome of noble effort, noble endurance, and 
noble love. 

The writer must, we conceive, have been, though perhaps nnconsciously, and 
in a comparatively limited sphere of activity, a true litterateur. He loved 
literature for its own sake, and had a true appreciation of its mission and 
responsibilities. Hence, though a Hebrew, he did not turn aside his eyes and 
his heart from beholding and admiring facts fuU of interest, and instruction, 
because they occurred in connection with an alien race. I^or did he make 
apologies for finding excellences in GentUes, and recording them with vivid 
zest and delight. There is a noteworthy absence of Hebrew bigotry in the 
spirit of the Book. 

The title which is given to his commentary on the book by Bichard Bernard, 
another of the Puritan expositors, brings out admirably what appears to have 
been the aim of the Hebrew writer — ' Buth's Beoompensb.' 

§ 3. The Book's Litbbart Chabaoteb. 

The Book of Buth is not a history ; nor is it a biography. It \a only ■ 
little biographical episode in a history. It is a story; but, without doubt, a 
trutitory. 



INTRODUCTION TO 



True T How is that evinced t What ia there even to suggest the story'i 
objective truthfulness or authenticity ? 

Much. The Book comes before us as a narrative of facts ; and, although 
making no parade of its veracity, it has, in its own inimitable simplicity and 
CTystalline transparency, all the appearance of being an honest representation of 
objective realities. 

The material of the story, moreover, is of such a nature that its unreality, 
if it had not been honest, would at once have been detected and exposed. The 
stuff out of which the story is woven consisted, so to speak, of very sensitive 
filaments. It had to do with the genealogy of the royal family. The principal 
personages in the story were the ancestors of King David. 

That there was a Moabitish link in the chain of his genealogy must have 
been well known to the king himself, and to all his household, and to a large 
proportion of the people of Israel in general. It must likewise have been well 
known that this Moabitish link did not lie far back in the line. The existence 
of Buch a link was too great a peculiarity to be treated with indifference. 
We cannot doubt that the whole history of the case would be a frequent topic 
of narration, conversation, and comment at once within and around the royal 
court. The probability, therefore, is, that the writer would be careful to do no 
violence to the facts of the case. Any alloy of fiction or romance on such a 
subject would have been at once resented, alike by the royal family and by the 
great body of the people, the devoted admirers of the king. 

It is, hence, one should suppose, in a mood of literary waywardness that 
Bertholdt contends that the Book is not a narrative of facts, but merely a " his- 
torical fiction " — a family picture painted on a canvas of romance.* The writer, he 
alleges, has himseK betrayed the fact of his work's fictitiousness. " He forgot 
himself for once," he says.t For although, according to one part of his story, ho 
represents Naomi, with her husband and sons, as reduced to such extremity of 
poverty that they required to abandon their mortgaged property and take refuge 
in Moab ; yet, in utter forgetfulness of this representation, he introduces Naomi, 
at a later stage of the story, as saying to the matrons in Bethlehem that " she 
went out full, and came back empty." A mere romance writer, Bertholdt alleges, 
might easily run into such a contradiction, and care nothing about it ; but a 
narrator of actual facts would speedily have detected the blunder, and have got 
it rectified. The blunder ! It is demonstrably Bertholdt's own. He has, in 
fact, committed a double blunder. (1) He has misunderstood what is said of 
the condition of the family before their departure, and (2) he has likewise mis- 
apprehended what Naomi said after her return. The family is not represented 
as reduced to absolute destitution before their emigration ; there was abundance 
of scope for much further descent And, on the other hand, there is not an 

* Section 551 of the ' Einleitung ' is entitled ** Das Buch enthalt reine Diohtnag." 
t ** Der Varfauer hat sioh einmal Tergewen." 



THE BOOK OF BOTH. 



atom of evidence to establish the ohjector's conjecture, that, when Naomi aftei 
hei retuin referred to her ' fulness ' before her departure, she had simply hat 
fiiumcial condition in view. 

§ 4. Datb op Compositioh. 

There b not the least likelihood that the little Book could have been 
written just immediately after the occurrence of the events narrated. For, in 
the first place, the writer, in the very opening sentence of the Book, comes 
down beyond the age of the Judges. He speaks of what came to pass " in the 
days when the Judges judged." It is implied that these days were, by his 
time, at some considerable distance in the pasi Then, in the second place, he 
speaks in ch. iv. of a custom that " in former time " obtained in Israel in refer- 
ence to important transactions, involving the transfer of property, or the 
surrender of property-rights, which custom was observed by Boaz and his kins- 
man. At the time when the writer lived the custom had become obsolete, so 
that a considerable period must have elapsed between the date of the events 
narrated and the date of the narrative of them in the Book of Euth. Then, in 
the third place, the genealogy at the close of the Book is carried down to David, 
and thus far beyond the time " when the Judges judged." 

It might be said indeed that the genealogical appendix may have been added 
by a later hand. True ; it may. And if it should ever be proved that it has 
been, then all the logical effects involved in the proof will be willingly con- 
ceded. Until, however, the desiderated proof be forthcoming, we may be 
excused for accepting the Book in its integrity. 

No opinion, on th« whole, wears a greater aspect of verisimilitude than that 
which assigns the composition of the Book to the reign of King David. That 
epoch was among the Hebrews a literary age. The king himself was a man of 
letters. He would draw literary men around his throne. He was a man, 
besides, of deep human sympathies ; and thus he would no doubt be intensely 
interested in the Moabitish incident. He would be master of all its details. 
They had come down to him only through a very limited succession of remem- 
brancers. " Boaz begat Obed ; Obed begat Jesse ; and Jesse begat David." 
No wonder that even the conversations and the salient sayings of Naomi, Euth, 
and Boaz should have been sharply imprinted on the brief succession of 
memories. 

King David, moreover, was free from many narrownesses of spirit that 
belittle multitudes of other minds. He recognised the gracious relationship 
of the God of Israel to all the families of the earth. He believed that there 
was a tide of goodness and tender mercy flowing from the inexhaustible depths 
of the Divine heart to all nations and peoples, even to the uttermost parts of 
the earth. Hence he would not be ashamed of the Moabitish link in bi« 
genealogy. He would be proud of it, and all the more, it is likely, because at • 



INTBODCCTION TO 



peculiarly critical period of his own history he had been on terms of amity, 
intimacy, and confidence with the coiemporary king of Moab. At the time 
when he had to flee for his life from the presence of Saul, and take refuge in 
the cave of Adullam, it is said, in 1 Sam. zxiL 3, 4, that he went to Mizpeh of 
Moab, " and said unto the king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray 
thee, come forth, and be with you, till I know what God will do for me. And 
he brought them before the king of Moab : and they dwelt with him all the 
while that David was in the hold." It would not be doing violence to veri- 
similitude were we to suppose that, in David's communication with the king of 
Moab, he made mention of the Moabitish link in his genealogy, and of the 
incidents connected with it. If Buth, an ancestor of his own, had been hospit- 
ably received in Judah, would it be asking too much if the grandson ei that 
ancestor might, with his wife, be hospitably received for a season in Moab t 

No other time, it would appear, can be fixed upon as furnishing a more 
likely date for the composition and publication of the Book. 

Not an earlier time ; for the custom of pulling oflf a shoe and giving it to the 
contracting party was observed in the days of Boaz, but had gone into desuetude 
at the date of the Book's publication. It could scarcely have died out much 
sooner than in two or three generations. 

Not a later time ; for the minute incidents recorded, and the minute con- 
versations and observations reported — all of them apparently unfictitious — 
would, if unpublished, have faded from the memories of the personages princi- 
pally concerned. Then the genealogy, at the close of the fourth chapter, is 
carried down to King David, and stops there. "Why should it stop there, and 
by stopping at that particular stage suggest and indicate a particular datel Had 
the writer some political object in view that required a false date to be given to 
his publication 1 There ia no trace of such a motif. Had he some distinctively 
theocratic object in view that could be best subserved in his judgment by indi- 
cating a false date t There is no evidence of such a tnoUf. Had he then some 
literary object in view that might be furthered by a fabrication, in the colophon, 
of the date of composition 1 There is not the sUghtest evidence of the presence 
in his mind of such a motif. 

Ewald, indeed, and Bertheau, following other critics of earlier date, and 
having themselves many followers of later date, conjecture that the Book is not 
nearly so old. They would ascribe it to the exilic epoch. Bertholdt asks if 
it should not be ascribed to the post-exiUc epoch.* This, their conjecture of 
postponement to a date far removed from the time of King David, is based for 
the most part on considerations that have to do generically with a large propor- 
tion of the Old Testament writings. It is hence a question which, falling 
to be discussed on its own wide arena, is, to a large extent, ruled out of thif 
■pecific Introduction. 

• "Ob e* tielleioht gar in dU Zeitcn aaeh dem Exil fehSrtb" i fiSS. 



THE BOOK OF BUTE. 



The specific reasons that are adduced in fiitTonr of the application of tha 
postponing theory to the particular Book of Euth are not to us of much or 
very -weighty significance. One is that there are some coincidences of expres- 
sion discoverable in Buth, on the one hand, and in the Books of 1 and 2 Samuel 
and 1 and 2 Kings on the other. These coincidences, it is contended, are 
evidences that the writer of the Book of Buth must have been acquainted with 
the Books of Samuel and Kings. For instance, it is said in Buth i. 17, 
" May Yahveh do so to me, and more also, if," &c. ; and the same formula is 
found in 1 Sam. iii 17 ; 1 Kings ii. 23 ; xz. 10 ; 2 Kings vL 31. Again, it is 
said in Buth L 19, "the whole city got into commotion ;" and the same expres- 
sion occurs in 1 Kings i. 46, where it is rendered in King James's version, " tha 
city rang again." Then in Buth iv. 4 we read, "I will uncover thine ear" (so 
as to give thee information) ; and in 1 Sam. xxiL 8, and elsewhere, it is written, 
" There is none that uncovereth mine ear " (to inform me). Ewald thinks that 
" we distinctly hear an echo from the Book of Job, not merely in the general 
style, but even in some single words and phrases" (' Geschichte,' voL L p. 165). 
He instances Job xxvii. 2, where the simple name " (the) Almighty " is used 
instead of the complex name " God Almighty " (see Gen. xviL 1, &c.). Ewald 
thinks that this shorter form of the name " was evidently rendered possible " in 
Buth i. 20 " only through the grand example of the Book of Job." He would 
infer, therefore, on the one hand, that the writer of the Book of Buth waa 
familiar with the Book of Job, and he assumes, on the other, that the Book of 
Job belongs to a late period of literary activity. With the assumption we have 
here nothing to do. But his inference in reference to the age of the Book of 
Butb, and the concurrent inference that is deduced by the advocates in general 
of exilic or post-exilic origination, from those coincidences of expression of 
which we have made mention, are surely extremely precarious, or rather abso- 
lutely baseless. The simple name " (the) Almighty '' occurs not only again and 
again in Job, but likewise in Gen. xlix. 25, and also in Num. xxiv. 4, 16. If 
the writer of the story of Buth must needs be held as borrowing, why might ha 
not have borrowed from Genesis and lumbers in place of Job. And is not tha 
whole argument reversible) Why not infer from coincidences of expression 
that the writers of the Books of Samuel and Kings borrowed from the Book 
of Both 1 And, besides, what is to hinder us from supposing that all of the 
expressions specified lived and moved and had their being for generations as 
part and parcel of the common idioms of the country, so that various writers 
of various ages might at pleasure make use of them as constituent elements of 
the unappropriated language of the people 1 Peculiar expressions, like peculiar 
single words, have their lifetime in a people's language. They are bom, they 
grow, they culminate, they wane, grow old, drop off, and are buried. Why 
might not all the expressions referred to by the critics of the Book of Buth 
be "llTing" at all the aocceasive epochs doing which the writers themsalTaa 



INTBODUCTION TO 



were living, from whose writings the coincident woids and phrases have been 
culled 1 

Ewald thought that he detected evidence of late exilic composition not 
merely in the echoes of earlier books, but likewise in the " antiquarian lore " 
that is characteristic of the writer. He refers in particular to the statement that 
is made in the fourth chapter, in reference to the antique custom of taking off a 
shoe, and presenting it to the contracting party, when rights of property were 
surrendered (see ver. 7). He thought, moreover, that such a custom, unearthed 
by successful antiquarian research, " could only have ceased with the national 
existence" (' Geschichte,' ut sup.). The argument is thus twofold. 1. One 
branch of it consists in the evidence of successful antiquarian research. 2. 
Another resolves itself into the peculiarity of the custom itself. It was of aaoh 
a nature, and manifestly so tenacious of life, that it could not have come to an 
end so long as the national existence continued. 

But surely both of these branches of argumentation are insufficient to carry 
much weight, or even any weight at all. One might know that a peculiar 
custom onoe prevailed, and yet be undistinguished for extensive and accurate 
" antiquarian lore." The word-of-mouth tradition that sufficed to convey to the 
writer of the Book of £uth the actions, and. conversations, and remarks of 
Ifaomi, Ruth, and Boaz respectively, would likewise suffice to be the vehicle of 
information regarding the old-fashioned symbolism that was observed when 
certain legal rights were readjusted. And is it not a matter of well-known fact 
"that legal symbolisms, connected with the transfer of rights of property, have 
changed in various nations whose national existence remains intact? In some 
nations, for instance, the delivery of land symbolically by the delivery of earth 
and Btones of the land, or other representative elements, though not so very long 
ago a binding formality, has now ceased to be imperative, or even customary. 
If there is to be evidence of the exilic or post-exilic composition of the Book of 
Ruth, it must be found elsewhere. 

Some have supposed that this evidence is found in several Chaldaisms of 
expression. In ch. i. 13, 20 ; ii. 8, 9, 21 ; iii. 3, 4 ; iv. 7, there are certainly 
some peculiar forms of words. Sanctius supposed that they might be Moabit- 
isms. Dereser conjectured that they might be Bethlehemitish provincialisms. 
They remind one undoubtedly of forms that are common in Chaldee. But it is 
at the same time to be borne in mind that there were no hard and fast lines 
separating, in the olden times, between the varioiis members of the Semitic 
group of languages. They overlapped one another in various details ; and as 
originally the fathers of the affiliated nations literally lived in one home, soj 
even after long periods of distinctive linguistic evolution, there were floating 
about, in waving lines of mutual intercourse, expressions that were in some cases 
survivals of original unity, and in others the direct result of subsequent famiUai 
contact. One thing is evident, that the Hebrew which is found in the Booki 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. xiu 



of the Bible, even the oldest of them, is comparatively modem. It is the sur- 
vival of a much older Hebrew. The manifold verbal abbreviations are evidence 
(see Baabe's ' Zuruckfiihrung des Hebraischen Textes des Buches Euth auf die 
urspriinglichen Wortformen '). And nothing is more evident than that the 
expressions in ch. ii. 8, 9, 21 j iii. 3, 4, called Chaldaisms, and not improperly 
80 called, are in reality Hebrew archaisms. 

We see then no reason whatever for postponing the date of the Book of Buth 
to exilic or post-exilic times. AU the weightiest evidence seems to be in the 
scale that assigns the composition of the Book to the literary age of King David. 
And yet, even with these strong convictions, we would bear in mind that the real 
interest of the story is independent of any chronological theory. The Book is a 
literary gem in ancient Hebrew literature ; and it speaks, by what Ewald calls 
" the pre-eminent beauty of its pictures and descriptions," not to the hearts of 
Hebrews only, but to universal man. 

g 5. Thb Authob. 

The anfhoTship is utterly unknown, and guesses need not be multiplied. 
Many attribute it to Samuel. Abarbanel ascribes it to the writer of Joshua. 
Others have imagined that Hezekiah, and others still that Ezra, is the author. 
Heunnnn thinks that King David himself was the penman. He conceives that 
any other writer would, in the genealogical table at the close, have given its 
royal honour to his name. It is too slender and too precarious a basis on which 
to establish his guess. It is in vain to guess, although we deem it probable 
that the incidents of the story would be preserved with interest in the family 
of David, and often narrated within the precincts of his home. 

§ 6. The Book's Plaob in thb Old Testament Canon. 

Editors of the Old Testament Canon have freely availed themselves of their 
right to hold their own opinions, and to act upon them. The Hebrew editon 
have relegated the little Book of Euth to the ' Hagiographa,' the group of 
' Sacred Miscellanies,' which comprehends, among other works, the Psalms, 
the Proverbs, Job, the Song of Songs, Lamentations, and Ecclesiastes. In the 
Hebrew Bibles in current use Euth stands between the Song of Songs and 
Lamentations, as if with sorrow on the left hand, and joy on the right. In other 
editions it stands at the head of the entire group. In the Septuagint, on the 
other hand, followed by the Vulgate, the Book is found at the close of the Book 
of Judges, as if it were a little biographical additament to that larger his- 
torical work. Origen expressly says that the Hebrews — he must mean the 
Hellenistic Hebrews — count Judges and Euth as forming one book.* Luther 
followed in the wake of the Yulgate, and so did Bishop Miles Coverdale and th« 

* Bm EnsebiuB'B ' Ecclesiastical History,' vi. 28. 



xlT INTRODUCTION TO 



Anthois of King James's English version. Hence the Book's position in oni 
English Bibles. We may doubtless assume that Josephus attached the Book 
to Judges as one parcel, as did Origen's Jews, for we could not otherwise make 
out his enumeration when, in his 'Cont. Apion.,' L 8, he says that the Hebrew 
•acred writings consisted of twenty-two books. 

I 7. Sttui of GoMFOBinoir. 

Tliere is no artistic elaboration in the style. There is not a vestige of aim 
at fine writing. Ko whip is laid on the imagination to impart gleam or lustre 
to what is said. Yet there are in the Book graces of diction that are the native 
and apparently unconscious outcome of ardent and devoted attachment on the 
one hand, and of kindly feeling and admiration on the other. The composition 
is simple, clear, transparent, and with quite a noticeable amount of that additive 
or aggregative and agglutinative method of joining thing to thing, that is a 
feature of Hebrew composition in general There are eighty-five verses in the 
Book, and yet there are only eight of them that do not commence with the 
conjunction and. Throughout the little Book this earliest of conjunctioDB occura 
about 250 times in alL 

§ 8. LlTBRATURB. 

Passing over those expositions of the Book of Buth which form part and 
parcel of serial commentaries on the whole, or on certain great sections, of the 
Bible, it will 8u£5ce, for our purpose, to take note almost exclusively of such 
exegetical, homiletical, and critical works as aie monographs, constituting a 
specialist literature on Buth. 

The annotations of Victorinus Strigel, 1571, and Feuardentiua, 1682, sre 
only of antiquarian interest. So, too, are the homilies of Rudolph Gualter, 
John Wolph, and Ludowick Lavater, who all fiourished in the second half of 
the sixteenth century. All three were famous in their day for Latin sermons, and 
were, to a remarkable degree, prolific in that kind of literature. Lavatei's book 
on Euth, for example, contained " homilias xxviil," and it had, as companion 
volumes, one on Joshua containing lxxiii. homilies, one on Judges containing 
ovii., one on Ezra containing xxxviii., one on Nehemiah containing lviii., one 
on Esther containing xlvii., and one on Job — enough to try a little his readers' 
'• patience " — containing oxLi. He was fortunate in finding, for his sermons on 
Euth, an English translator of the name of E. Pagett, who published his version 
in the year 1586. 

To these homilies may be added Alexander Manerba's volume, published 
in Venice, and entitled, ' Peregrinatio Ruth Moabitidis per Commentarium et 
Sermones descripta,' 1604; as also Didaous de Celada's 'Commentarii litteralei 
•t morales in Eutham,' with a twofold appendix, ' de Boozi convivio mysticoj 



THE BOOK OF BUTH. xt 



id eat, Eucharislioo, et de Maria virgine, in Buth figutata,' 1614. ScMeupnei'i 
little ' Explioatio,' 1632, need not be overlooked. 

To English students the works of Edward Topsell, Richard Bernard, and 
Dp. Thomas FuUer, all of the seventeenth century, will afford more interest. 
The first and second are conspicuous foi conscientious and earnest elaboration, 
the third for a delightful might, mastery, and sparkle of thought. Topsell's 
volume is entitled, ' The Beward of Beligion, delivered in sundrie Lectures upon 
the Eooke of Buth, wherein the godly may see their daily both inward and 
outward triaUs, with the presence of God to assist them, and his mercies to 
recompense them,' 1613. The author, in his 'Epistle Dedicatorie,' speaks 
humbly of his " slender studies, which are but as smoak, being compared with 
the burning coales of others' knowledge.'' There are certainly but few scintil- 
lations in the work. Bichard Bernard's work, a quarto, is entitled, 'Buth's 
Becompense ; or, a Commentarie upon the Book of Buth, wherein is showed 
her happy calling out of her owne country and people, into the fellowship and 
society of the Lord's inheritance, her virtuous life and holy carriage amongst 
them, and then her reward in God's mercy. Delivered in several Sermons, the 
brief sum whereof is now published for the benefit of the Church of God, 
1628. Elaborately earnest, and earnestly elaborate, like Topsell's volume, but 
with more mental grasp in it ; albeit, like Topsell's, of scarcely any exegetieal 
vain*. Bernard, unlike Topsell, could emit flashes, and he did emit many of 
them. But there is often something lurid in them, as when he takes occasion 
to strike out against " the roaring boys and damned crew " — " the tobacconists, 
the drunkards, the riotous,'' who " congee and compliment, or hunt and hawk, 
and then curse and swear as the furies of hell " (ch. iL 17). Dr. Thomas Fuller's 
' Comment on Buth,' 1650, unfortunately breaks off at the end of the second 
chapter. It bears evidence of having been hastily thrown off, but nevertheless 
it ia aglow with wit and bright felicities of illustration and practical applica- 
tion. The commentaries of both Bernard and Fuller were republished in 1865 
br James Mchol of Edinburgh. 

A different style of book altogether ia John Drusius'a ' Historia Buth, ex 
Ebraeo Latine conversa, et commentario explicata. Ejusdem Historise Tralatio 
Graeca ad exemplar Complutense, et notes in eandem,' 1632. The dedication 
to Archbishop Whitgift is dated Lambeth, 1584. This thin quarto ia a gem in 
ita way, so far as the sphere of grammar is concerned. Drusius said of himself, 
" I am no theologian, and I am not sure whether I am capable of sustaining the 
character of a grammarian ; but," adds he, " I am a Christian." 

An invaluable book to the student is John Benedict CarpzoVa ' Collegium 
Eabbinico-biblicum in libellum Buth,' 1703, published in Leipzig. It contains, 
on verse after verse — (1) the Chaldee Targum of Jonathan, in the original, and 
translated into Latin; (2) the notes of the lesser and larger Masora, with transla- 
tions and explanatory annotations; (3) the expositions of the great Hebrew 



xyi INTRODUCTION TO 



commentators Eashi and Ibn Esra, as also of Ibn Melech and others, all in tli« 
original, and translated into Latin ; and then (4) Carpzov's own elaborate expo- 
sition, in which he discusses the views of preceding expositors and critics. The 
author belonged to a literary family. He himself was John Benedict Carpzov 
the Second. The latter part of the work was compiled from the author's class- 
room notes by John Benedict Carpzov the Third, father of John Benedict Caipzov 
the Fourth, the famous Helmstadt professor of poetry and Greek, who wrote 
' Theological and Critical Strictures on the Epistle to the Bomans,' and ' Sacred 
Exercitations on the Epistle to the Hebrews, out of Fhilo of Alexandria.' The 
great scholar, Gottlob Carpzov — ^greater than all the Benedicts — was cousin to 
John Benedict the Third. 

Perhaps the best of all helps for such as have just begun to study Hebrew 
is Werner's 'liber Euth iUustratus, duplici quidem rnterpretatione, qnaram 
altera verba sacra in fonte exhibita de verbo ad verbum exprimit, altera se- 
cundum idiotismos lingua sancta,' &&, 1740. The book is full of sound, 
old-fashioned scholarship. 

To the same eighteenth century belongs G. A. Heumann's ' Spicileginm ad 
Historiam Euth,' 1722 — 1725. It was published in three successive parts of his 
'Poecile,' voL L pp. 177—187, 353—376; vol ii pp. 153—170. Heumann 
was a Free Lance, and of great capacity ; but he was too hasty, too self-asseit- 
atory and self-assured, too fond of differing, and too little aware that there is • 
moral element in literary taste. 

Toward the beginning of the same eighteenth century, in 1711, Outhofs 
' Exposition of the Book of Euth,' La Dutch, was published. It was much prized 
by his own countrymen for its profusion of erudition. Toward the end of the 
century, in 1781, John Macgowan's 'Discourses on Euth, and other important 
subjects, wherein the wonders of Providence, the riches of grace, the privileges 
of believers, and the contrition of sinners are judiciously and faithfully exem- 
plified and improved,' was published. The author, says Mr. Spurgeon, " is well 
known for originality and force." "The discourses," he adds, "are good 
reading." 

Coming down to the nineteenth century, there is quite a considerable group ot 
practical and homiletical works, such as Lawson's ' Lectures on the whole Book 
of Euth,' 1805; Hughes' 'Euth and her Kindred,' 1839 ; Macartney's 'Observ- 
ations on Euth,' 1842 ; Dr. Stephen Tyng's ' Eioh Kinsman, or the History of 
Euth,' 1856 ; Aubrey Price's ' Six Lectures on the Book of Euth,' 1869 ; B. 
PhUpot's ' Euth— Six Lectures,' 1872; Bishop Oxenden's ' Story of Euth,' 1873; 
and W. Braden's ' Beautiful Gleaner,' 1874. The oldest of these, viz., Dr. 
George Lawson's Lectures, is as fresh as the latest. The excellent author had 
the pen of a ready writer, and, guiding that pen, a large endowment of sanctified 
common sense. Two other recent works fall to be added to the same group, 
only the publishing firms from which they are issued desire them, for other than 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. ttB 



literary reasons and purposes, to be datelett. They are, firstly, Samuel Cox'a 
Book of Ruth, a Popular Exposition,' and Dr. Andrew Thomson's ' Home 
Life in Ancient Palestine, or Studies in the Eook of Buth,' both of them &esh 
and charming little volumes. 

A very different and much more scholarly group of works consists of such 
as the following : — ^Dereaer's ' Biichlein Bath, ein Gremalde hSuslicher Tugenden. 
Aus dem Hebraischen iibeiBetzt, erklart, und fiir Pfarrer auf dem Lande bear- 
beitet,' 1806 j Biegler's ' Das Buch Buth. Aus dem Hebraischen ins Deutsche 
ubersetzt, mit einer voUstandigen Einleitung, philologischen und exegetischen 
Erlauterungen,' 1812; Mezger's 'Liber Buth ex Hobraeo in Lat. versus per- 
petuaq^ue interpretatione iUustratus,' 1856. To these may be added ' Bath ein 
Familien-gemalde,' in Augusti's ' Memorabilien des Oriants,' pp. 65 — 96, 1802 ; 
and Umbreit's ' TJeber Geist und Zweek des Buchs Buth,' in the ' Studien und 
Kritiken' of 1834. In this group of works Biegler's volume, in particular, is 
conspicuous for its taste. The author had a good ear for detecting and appre- 
ciating the rhythmic element in the style of the ancient story, and in this respect 
he anticipated the judgment of Ewald, who takes special note of the rhythmic 
elevation of the composition in ch. i. 20, 21 for example (' Geschichte,' voL 
L p. 154, Eng. trans.). 

To this group of expositions we may add, as deserving of special notice for 
the interpretation of Buth, Bertheau's Commentary in the ' Kurzgefasstes exege- 
tisches Handbuch zum Alten Testament,' and the Commentary of Cassel, as 
contained in Lange's ' Bibelwerk.' The former appeared in 1845 ; the latter in 
1866. An excellent English translation of the latter, with valuable notes, by 
P. H. Steenstra, appeared in Ifew York in 1872, as part and parcel of the 
English reproduction of Lange's ' Bibelwerk.' 

A very important appendix to the more critical expositions of the Book of 
Buth consists of — (1) Charles H. H. "Wright's ' Book of Buth in Hebrew, with a 
critically-revised Text, various readings, &c., including a grammatical and critical 
Commentary ; to which is appended the Chaldee Targum, with various read- 
ings, grammatical notes, and a Chaldee Glossary,' 1864. (2) Baabe's 'Das 
Buch Buth und das Hohe Lied im urtext nach neuester Xenntniss der Sprache 
behandelt, Ubersetzt, mit Anmerkungen und einem Glossar versehen,' 1879. 
The former of these two works will be of the utmost value to young students 
of Hebrew, as an assistant and guide. The latter is of high philological 
■ignificance, resting as it does on the most recent lines of linguistic science. 



Abranobubnt of thb Book is Sbotions. 

For the purposes of this Commentary the following arrangement into sectiona has 
been adopted : — 

Section 1 (ch. i. 1 — 5). A certain Hebrew family, driven by stress of famine, 
miij^ated from Bethlehem to Moab, where still greater trials befell them. 



rvifl IKTBODUOTION TO THE BOOK OF BUTE. 

Seotion 2 (ch. i. 6 — 14). The widowed mother of the family, Naomi, reaolved to 
retam to Bethlehem. 

Section 3 (ch. i. 16 — 22). Buth, her Moabitish daughter-in-lsw, attaches henelf 
indissolably to Naomi ; and the two widows, sadly reduced in circumstances, journey 
on foot to Bethlehem, which they reach at the commencement of the barley-harvest. 

Section 4 (ch. ii. 1 — 9). Buth obtains permission from her mother-in-law to go 
out in quest of gleaning, and lighted on the fields of Boaz, a kinsman of her late 
husband. Boaz met her in the rear of his reapers, and took an instant interest in 
her. 

Section 6 (ch. ii. 10 — 17). Buth, profoundly affected by the kindness of Boaz, 
receiyed from him still greater attention and kindness, and gathered during the day 
about an ephah of barley. 

Section 6 (ch. ii. 18 — 23). In the evening she returned with her precious load to 
her mother-in-law, who informed her of the kinship of Boaz, and poured out her heart 
in themksgivings to Ood. 

Section 7 (ch. iii. 1 — 18). At the close of the harvest, Naomi, having watched the 
i^rowth of an attachment between Boaz and Buth, adopted tiie principle of the 
Levirato law to effect their complete union in heart and hand, and thus to secure a 
" rest" for her devoted daughter-in-law. The scheme was in all respects successful, 
and most agreeable to Boaz. 

Section 8 (ch. iv. 1 — 12). As there were, however, some technical obstacles in the 
wny of the union, Boaz took steps to have these honourably surmounted in the 
presence of the eldete of the citv, and he succeeded. 

Section 9 (ch. iv. 13 — 22). The bridal of Boaz and Buth was consummated, and 
Obed WW bam, the lineal oescendant of Judab, and the grandfather of King David. 



THE BOOK OE EUTH. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAFTEK I. I-*, 



Ver. 1. — BTow it oame to pass. Or, more 
literally, "And it came to pass." The 
"And is somewhat remarkable, standing 
at the commencement of the Book. But 
as it is also found at the commencement 
of Exodus, Leviticus, Kumhers, Joshua, 
Jnd^s, 1 and 2 Samuel, 1 and 2 Ein^, 
S C&onieles, Ezekiel, Esther, and Ezra, its 
use, though inartistic, must be amenable to 
some literary law. The Books specified, 
eren including Ezekiel, are historicaL They 
are parcels of history, each narrating erente 
that had their genesis in more or less sig- 
nificant antecedent occurrences. This his- 
torical genesis, so very different from an 
"absolute commencement" of things, is 
indicated, though probabljr in unreflective 
spontaneity, by the copulative "And." In 
the days when the judges ruled. Or, more 
literally, "when the judges judged." In 
primitive times there was no function that 
was more important for society than that of 
judiciously settling disputes between man 
and man. Every such settlement, besides 
conferring a benefit on society, and in par- 
ticular on the individuals at variance, would 
increase the moral influence and social ele- 
vation of the judge. By and by his moral 
and social superiority would, in favourable 
circumstances, grow into authority, speci- 
fically judicial on the one hand, and generi- 
cally political, or semi-political, on the other. 
When military prowess and skill in strategy 
were added, a ruler, champion, or leader 
would be the result. Many such leadera 
rose up among the Hebrews ere yet society 
was compactiv organised. They were vari- 
ously endowed ; but most of them were only 
very partially equipped for the judicious 
•dministration of the aflaiis of the common- 
wealth. All, however, were called judge$; 
BUTB. 



and the discharge of their high duties wai 
denominated judgi/ng, even when it wm 
entirely inconspicuous as regards judicial 
ability or judicious determinations. The 
Hebrew word ior judge is tS^DB' shofet; and 
it is an interesting evidence of the very 
close kinship of Hebrew and Phoenician, 
that in Carthage the chief magistrate, as 
we learn from Livy and other Eoman writers, 
was called sufes (originally, as we see from 
the inflection, mfef). That there was a 
famine. An admirable though free render- 
ing. In the original the structure of the 
whole statement is exceedingly primitive and 
" agglutinative " — And (I'i) was in the days 
of the judging of the judges, and {there) 
was a famine. In the land. Kamely, of 
IsraeL The non-specification of the parti- 
cular countiy referred to is evidence that 
the writer was living in it, as one at home. 
Josephns says that it was under the judge- 
ship of Eli, the high priest, that the famine 
spoken of occurred ('Antiquities,' v. 9, 1). 
But here the historian speaks "without 
book," and without any particular plausi- 
bility. Several expositors, such as Bishop 
Patrick, have antedated, by a very long 
way, the calculation of Josephns. They 
would assign the famine to the period when 
the Midianites and Amalekites came up, 
" as grasshoppers for multitude, to destroy 
the land," so that Israel was greatly im- 
poverished (see Judges vi.). But it is in vain 
to multiply guesses. The date of the famine 
is not given, and it is futile to make inqui- 
sition for it. And a certain man. The 
interpolation of the individualising word 
"certain" is quite uncalled for, and now 
quite archaic. The simplicity of the ori^nal 
IS sufficient, "And a man." Of Bethlehem- 
jndah. Or, as it might be still more literally 
represented, "of Bethlehem, Judah." Then 
ia no mch single name as Bethlehem-jndah. 



THE BOOK OF BUTE. 



[tB. Ll— A 



There is only the apposition, for discrimin- 
ation's sake, of one geographical name to 
another, just as we may say, in English, 
Boston, Lincolnshire, or Alexandria, Dvm,- 
bartonshire. The localisation of the main 
name is thus effectually indicated. There 
is another Alexandria in Egypt ; there 
is another Boston in the United States of 
America; and there was in Palestine an- 
other Bethlehem, namely, in the canton 
of Zebulun (see Josh. six. 16). Bethle- 
hem, Judah, lies about six miles to the 
south of Jerusalem. "Its appearance," 
■ays Dr. Porter, " is striking. It is situated 
on a narrow ridge, which projects east- 
ward from the central mountain range, and 
breaks down in abrupt terraced slopes to 
deep valleys on the north, east, and south. 
The terraces, admirably kept, and covered 
with rows of olives, intermixed with the fig 
and the vine, sweep in graceful curves round 
the ridge, regular as stairs" ('Syria and 
Palestine,' p. 199). The valleys below are 
exceptionally fertile, and have been so from 
time immemorial. Hence indeed the name 
Beth-lehiem, or Bread-house. Its modem 
name is Beit-lalum, or Flesh-house. Went 
to sojourn in the land of Moab. VTe have 
no word in English that exactly corresponds 
to the verb yn rendered sojourn. The 
cognate noun is uniformly translated, in 
King James's version, stranger, and means 
foreigner. The verb means to dwell as a 
foreigner, but its root-idea is yet unde- 
termined. The Latin peregrinari admir- 
ably corresponds. The man of Bethlehem, 
Judah, went forth from his own country to 
"peregrinate" (Greek, irapoiKrjaai) "in the 
land of Moab;" literally, "in the fields of 
Moab," that is, " in the pastoral parts of the 
territory of Moab. " It was not a very great 
way off, this laud of his "peregrination." 
Its blue mountains, rising up luridly beyond 
the silver thread of the Jordan and the 
gleaming expanse of the Dead Sea, are dis- 
tinctly visible from the Mount of Olives and 
the heights about Bethlehem. He, and his 
wife, and his two sons. The re.iumptive 
he is employed for the purpose of linking 
on to him, in his " peregrination," the other 
members of the little household. He emi- 
grated "along with his wife and two sons." 
He had fought hard to keep the wolf of 
hunger from his door, but was like to be 
beaten. One after another the props of his 
hope that better days would soon dawn had 
been swept from under him, and he saw no 
alternative but to leave for a season the 
land of his fathers. 

Ver. 2.^And the name of the man was 
Elimelech. That is, " God is King," not, 
as the older critics were accustomed to in- 
terpret it, "My God is King." The inter- 
mediate t is not the possessive pronoun, 



but the Towel of union. The name would 
be originally significant of strong religion! 
sentiments, perhaps mingled with strong 
political principle!!. The imposition of it 
on a son would be something like a mani- 
festo of the father's creed. And the nami 
of his wife Naomi. Or rather "No-o-mi" 
The precise import of the word is not abso- 
lutely ascertained ; but it is probable that 
it is somewhat abbreviated in its termin- 
ation, and means " God is sweet," or, very 
literally, "Jah is sweetness." It had been 
originally imposed as a name by some grate- 
fol and happy mother, who, by gracious 
providences, or by other gracious revelations, 
had been led to think that "sweet an the 
ways, sweet are the dealings, and sweet is 
the character of God." The word does not 
mean beautiful, as some suppose ; nor gra- 
cious, as others suppose ; nor my delight, 
as others still snppose. It was not intended 
to describe the character of the person who 
was to bear the name. It was mtended to 
signalise, in the spirit of a manifesto, a much- 
prized feature in the Divine character — that 
feature, namely, that is displayed when "he 
deals sweetly with men. " Gesenius is doubt- 
less right when he makes sweetness the 
fundamental idea of the whole group of 
affiliated words (see his ' Thesaurus,' im, voc. ). 
The cognate Hebrew adjective is rendered 
sweet in 2 Sam. xxilL 1 and Prov. xxiii 8 
(comp. Prov. xvi 24 and the margin of 
2 Sam. L 23). In the light of this inter- 
pretation, and of it alone, can the fiill signi- 
ficance of what Naomi said on her return to 
Bethlehem be apprehended ! " Call me not 
Naomi, call me Mara: for the Almighty 
hath dealt very Utterly with me " (ver. 20). 
And the name of his two ions. In our 
idiom we should say, "and the names of 
his two sons." The two sons, however, 
were for the moment regarded as a unil^ 
among the other units of the household. 
Mahlon, or rather " Machlon," and Chilion. 
We need not dip deeply into the etymological 
import of these names, or attach to them, as 
applied to EUmelech's children, any peculiar 
significance. The names, nnUke those of 
the parents, are devoid of theological tinge, 
and, in these modem times at all events, 
their import is liable to endless debate. One 
would at the first blush of consideration sup- 
pose that the one meant sickliness, and the 
other consumptiveness, or eonsumption — 
rather uninteresting and melancholy ideaa 
But they are peculiarly confounding when 
we' consider that the individuals, so named 
in our stoiy, had apparently inherited a deli- 
cate constitution, which developed in both 
of them into premature sickliness and deoaj/. 
The names have the aspect of being pro- 
phetic. And yet, even though we should 
assume that Elimelech, in virtne of i 



CB. I. 1—5.] 



THE BOOK OP RUTH. 



element of bodily delicacy, was afSicted with 
feelings of morbid despondency, it is hard 
to come to the conclusion that he would 
deliberately stereotype his most' hypochon- 
driacal anticipations in the names of his 
children. The probability is, that the 
names, as names, would originally have 
some other import. Dr. Cassel supposes 
that they meant, respectively, joy and 
omamemt ; but he trusts to impossible 
etymologies. Eaabe, taking his cue from 
Sanscrit roots, interprets the one thus — 
" He who brings gifts with him;" and the 
other thus — "He who conceals his wife in 
his house." Werner, taking his cue from 
Chaldee cognates, interprets the former of 
the two names as meaning ready to forgive, 
and the latter as holding forth the idea of 
hopefvl. All of them unlikely derivations. 
And yet something quite distinct from the 
ideas of sickliness and consumption, but 
lying so far on parallel lines of thought, 
may be conceived. The primary import 
of 7pD, the root of Machlon, is apparently 
to he tender. Thence the word came by one 
line of thought to mean to be pkysically 
tender, that is, to be sick; and by another 
that runs out in Chaldee it came to mean 
to be morally tender, to be mild or for- 
giving. Machlon may mean mildness or 
tender-heartedness. Again, the primary 

idea of il^JS, the root of Chilion, is to com- 
plete. But, besides the completion that is 
realised in oonsumina, consumption, or 
ending, there is moral completeness, the 
completeness or finish that is realised in 
perfection (see Ps. cxix. 96 : "I have seen 
an end of all perfection"). This idea of 
beautiful completeness, or perfection, is more 
likely to be the meaning of the name than 
the idea of eonsumptiveness, or consumption. 
Ephiathites of Bethlehem J'udah. It is 
not simply the two sons who are so desig- 
nated. It is the whole group. They were 
Ephrathites, that is, Bethlehemites, for the 
old name of Bethlehem was Ephrath, or 
Ephratha. As, however, the word Eph- 
rathite also meant Ephraimite (see Judges 
xii. 5 ; 1 Sam. L 1 ; and 1 Kings xi. 26), 
it gave precision to the designation, al- 
though at the expense of a little redund- 
ancy, to say "Ephrathites of Bethlehem 
Judah." And they came into the country 
offfioab. The Hebrew emigrants reached the 
fields or pastoral territory of Moab. And 
continued there. The phrase in the original 
is of primitive simplicity — ' ' and were there. " 
It has been asked by theological critics 
whether Elimelech was justifiable ia re- 
moving to an " idolatrous country " to avoid 
the inconveniences of a famine in the land 
of his nativity. It is enough to say in 
nply that there is no hint in the text itself 



that the step taken was blamable or blamed. 
" No man ought," says Lawson, " to be con- 
demned, whether dead or alive, withoat 
proofs of guilt ; and no certain proofs of 
guUt appear in the present case. "The 
beam of Elimelech's judgment," says Dr. 
Thomas EuUer, " is justly weighed down to 
go fromi Bethlehem, Judah, into the land of 
Moab." 

Vers. 8 — 6. — " In these words," says 
Fuller, "we have two marriages nshered 
and followed by funerals." 

Yer. 3. — And Elimelech Naomi's husband 
died. Apparently soon after the settlement 
of the family. No details, however, are 
given, as, on the one hand, no blame ia 
attached to the conduct of Elimelech, and 
as, on the other, the line of biographical 
interest runs in another direction. And she 
was left, and her two sons. Not only was 
the mother her husband's relict; they were 
all left behind. He had gone somewhither 
in advance, and they "remained." So the 
word is frequently rendered. 

Ver. 4.— And they took to themselves 
wives of the women of Moab. It was their 
own act. Josephus, reproducing the narra- 
tive from memory, represents the event as 
occurring in the father's lifetime, and as 
brought about by his arrangement. He saya 
of Elimelech, " Coming into the territory of 
Moab, he sojourns there, and, things pros- 
pering according to his mind, he gives in 
marriage to his sons {ayerai roTc wioif) 
MoabitiA wives." Theological critics have 
here again raised the question, Was it sinful 
in these emigrant Hebrews to take in mar- 
riage daughters of the land ? The Chaldee 
Targumist did not hesitate in his decision. 
He begins his paraphrase of the verse thus : 
"And they transgressed the edict of the 
word of the Lord, and took to themselves 
alien wives of the daughters of Moab." Dr. 
Thomas Fuller represents Naomi as passion- 
ately remonstrating with her sons. He says 
of himself, "My mouth denieth to be the 
orator of an unjust action. " " Nothing can 
be brought," he adds, "for the defence of 
these matches. Something may be sud for 
the excuse of them, but that fetched not 
from piety, but from policy." It is note- 
worthy, however, that in the text itself, 
and throughout the entire Book, there is 
nothing of the nature of condemnation, not 
the least hint of blame. There was a law, 
indeed, which laid an interdict upon msr- 
riages with Canaanites (see Dent. vii. 3). But 
these Canaanites occupied a pecuhar relation 
to the Hebrews. They were within the line 
of that Canaan which had become the land 
of Israel. Israelites and Canaanites were 
thus living within the same borders as rival 
claimants of the same territory. It was no 
wonder that the Canaanites' daim was not 
b2 



THE BOOK OF BUTH. 



[OH. L 1— & 



to be recognised by the Hebrews. The 
Moabites, however, liTing within the lines 
or " coasts " of their own distinct territory, 
stood in quite a different relation. And 
while, for purity's sake, great restrictions 
were to be laid upon all overtures for 
naturalisation (Deut xxiii. 3 — 6), yet the 
law could never be intended to apply to the 
families of Hebrews who were settlers in 
Moab, or to Moabitish females living in 
their own land, and rather awarding than 
seeking the prerogatives of natives. The 
name of the one was Orpah, and the name 
of the other Buth. Ko doubt native Moab- 
itish names. Much ingenuity has been ex- 
pended on that of the more interesting 
person. Some have unwarrantably assumed 
that Buth is a, contraction of the Hebrew 
word n-lU"! meaning a female companion or 
friend. Still more unwarrantable, though 
more captivating to the esthetic imagina- 
tion, is the signification which is given to 
the word by Werner and Eadie, namely, 
heavty. It is founded on an impossible 
derivation from the Hebrew nXl. Still more 
aesthetically captivating is the conjecture of 
Cassel, that the name is the ancient Semitic 
form of the Indo-European word rodon or 
rose. "At all events," says he, "the 
thought of Ruth as tlie Rose of Moab is in 
itself too attractive not to be proposed as a 
conjecture. " It is certainly most attractive 
and most admirable as a jeu d' esprit, but 
too imaginative to be vindicated on grounds 
of comparative philology. And they dwelt 
there. Or, " settled themselves there ;" liter- 
ally, "sat there." We stiU call a gentle- 
man's mansion his seat. About ten years, 



which, however, are treated by the writer ai 
8 mere blank in his story. He hastens on. 

Yer. 5.— And, to make a long story short, 
Machlonand Chilion died also both of them. 
" Like green apples," says Fuller, " cudgelled 
off the tree." But why " cudgelled " I Wiere 
is no evidence in the text of Divine dis- 
pleasure, and the Christian expositor, when 
going beyond the text in quest of principles, 
shoiild not forget the tower of SUoam, and 
the victims of Pilate's bloodthirstiness (see 
Luke xiii. 1 — 5). And the woman was left 
of her two children and of her husband. 
That is, "of her two children as well as of 
her husband." She became as it were their 
relict too. She remained behind after they 
had gone on before. If all sentiment were 
to be taken out of the expression, it might 
then be simply said, in very commonplace 
prose, she survived them. Poor woman I 
''Of the two sexes," says Fuller, "the 
woman is the weaker ; of women, old women 
are most feeble ; of old women, widows most 
woeful ; of widows, those that are poor, their 
plight most pitiful ; of poor widows, those 
who want children, their case most doleful ; 
of widows that want children, those that 
once had them, and after lost them, tkeir 
estate most desolate ; of widows that have 
had children, those that are strangers in a 
foreign country, their condition most com- 
fortless. Yet all these met together in 
I^aomi, as in the centre of sorrow, to make 
the measure of her misery pressed down, 
shaken together, running over. I conclude, 
therefore, many men have had affliction — 
none like Job ; many women have had triba- 
lation — ^none like Naomi" 



HOMILBTICa 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The emigrantt and their trials. We are introduced to the Hebrew 

family into which the Moabitess Ruth was married. 

I. The BBAHTIFUL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE NAMES of both the Hebrew parents. 

II. The wolf of hunger had comb pbowling to the Hebrews' doob. In 
those conditions of society in which there is little commerce to unite people to 
people, or when a city is in a state of siege, the consequences of famine are in- 
expressibly sad and harrowing. Examples : — ^The recurring famines in India ; the 
famine in Jerusalem when besieged by the Romans, and as narrated by Josephus ; 
the famine in Leyden, when that city was, in 1573, besieged by the Spaniards, and 
when one of the patriotic magistrates— a noble soul — said to the hungry and mutinous 
people, " Friends, here is my body. Divide it among you to satisfy your hunger ; 
but banish all thoughts of surrendering to the cruel and perfidious Spaniard." Aa 
commerce, however, grows under the fostering care of those Christian influences 
that aim at realising the brotherhood of all earth's nations, local famines become 
more and more amenable to control and neutralisation. 

III. The Hebrew family was constrained to emiobate. Many tender tie* 
get ruptured when emigration takes place. But the heart is pulled onward by 
new hopes. Consider the importance of emigration from old and over-crowded 
oountries to the numerous rich fields lying fallow abroad. These fields are just 
•waitiiig the presence of the cultivator to pour forth into the lap of induBtiy 



OB. 1. 1-4.3 TflE BOOK OF BUTH. 



overflowing riches of food for the teeming millions of mother countries, and 
corresponding riches of raw material for the skilled and skilful hands of manu- 
facturers. 

IV. The emigrants seem to have got a cobdial welcome in Moab. It was 
creditable to the Moabites. Kindness and sympathy should always be shown to 
strangers, and to all who are far removed from the sweet influences of home. 

V. Mortality soon sadly ravaged the Hebrew home. All are mortal. AD 
must die. But in Christ — "the Resurrection and the Life" — we may get the 
victory even over death. He has " brought life and immortality to light." He who 
believeth in Him " shall never see death " (John viii. 61 ; zi. 26). He " hath," and 
" shall have," everlasting life. ' 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

On the Booh of Euth. — That the Book of Ruth is included in the canon of Boilp- 
ture need excite no surprise. 

I. It is a chapter from the histobt of the human heart. Contrast it with 
the Book of Judges, to which it is a supplement, and which records feats of arms, 
deeds of heroism, treachery, violence, and murder. Here we are led aside from the 
highway of Hebrew history into a secluded by-path, a green lane of private life. 
Here are simple stories of heart and home. In human life, home, with its affectiong 
and relationships, plays an important part. In this Book we have a glimpse into the 
domestic life of Israel, with its anxieties, sorrows, and sweetness. Women and 
children, honest work and homely talk ; deaths, births, and marriages ; loves, 
memories, and prayers, are all here. The Bible ie the book of man as God has 
made him. 

II. It is a record of human virtue, and the Providential care and reward 
ASSURED TO VIRTUE. Human kindness, filial piety, afEectionate constancy, uncom- 
plaining toil, true chastity, sweet patience, strong faith, noble generosity, simple 
piety — are all here, and they are all observed by God, and are shown to be pleasing 
to him, who rewards them in due time. 

III. It is a PROOF OF THE SUPERIORITY OF HUMANITY TO NATIONALITT. The 

Hebrews are often blamed for intense exclusiveness and bigotry, yet no ancient 
literature is so liberal and catholic as the inspired books of the Old Testament. This 
narrative shows no trace of national narrowness ; it proves that " God is no respecter 
of persons ; but in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is 
accepted with him." A. pure and gentle Moabitess is welcomed into a Hebrew 
home. 

IV. It supplies a link in the chain of the genealogy of David, and of that 
Son of David who was David's Lord. Ruth was one of three foreign women 
whose names are preserved in the table of our Lord's descent from Abraham. — T. 

Vers. 1, 2. — A family of Bethlehem. This Book is precious as a record of domestic 
life. The peaceful, prosperous, happy home of the Ephrathite is rather suggested 
than described. 

I. The time and state of society. "The days when the judges ruled." The 
preceding Book enables us to picture what times of unsettlement, and occasionally of 
anarchy, these were. The customs of the time were primitive, and the habits of the 
people were simple. The elders sat at the gates of the little city. Business was 
transacted with primitive simplicity. The tranquil covu:se of agricultural life 
diversified by a feast at sheep-shearing, or a mirthful harvest-home. 

II. The scene. " Bethlehem-judah." The fields of Bethlehem, in the territory of 
Judah, are among the classic, the sacred spots of earth. 1. In Old Testament 
history. The home of Boaz ; the scene of Ruth's gleaning, and of her_ marriage. 
In these pastures was trained, in the household of Jesse, and among his stalwart 
sons, the youthful David, who became the hero and the darling, the minstrel and the 
king, of Israel. 2. In New Testament history. Between the pastures of Bethlehem 
and the stars of heaven was sung the angels' song of good-will and peace. Hera 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. [oh. l 1—6. 



was bom the Son of David, who was the Son of God. The visit of the shepherds 
and the wise men. Herod's massacre of the babes, &c. 

III. The PTJRsniTS of rural life. In Bethlehem-Ephratah Elimelech nad his 
inheritance. Here, for a time, he, like his fathers, tilled the fields and fed the flocks 
he owned in peace. Even in times of trouble and disorder some secluded spots are 
quiet ; the bleating of the sheep is familiar, and the shouts of war are unheard. In 
most men's breasts the scenes and pursuits of rural life are cherished ; perhaps it 
is hereditary. " God made the country." A simple and natural piety is fed by 
fellowship with nature, the work of God's own hands. 

rV. The PEACEFUL JOYS of home. In the sweet society of his wife Naomi (" the 
pleasant "), his young sons Mahlon and Chilion, growing by his side in stature and 
intelligence, the freeholder of Bethlehem passed the jocund days. How can we 
think and speak quite worthily of the family and the home 9 Here is the Divine 
nursery of the soul, the Divine school of life I Let us have no terms with the 
fanatics who would reconstruct society upon another basis than domestic life. The 
great lesson — ^gratitude to Providence for peace, congenial occupation, and a happy 
home.— T, 

Vers. 1, 2. — Famine and impoverishment. The former scene one bright and 

joyous. An honest Hebrew, of the tribe of Judah, living upon the land of his 
inheritance, with the wife of his heart and the children of his youth. Thus were 
formed the bonds which prosperity could not dissolve and adversity could not snap. 
Here were learned the hereditary and traditional lessons of faith, patience, forbear- 
ance, piety, and hope. A contrast follows. 

I. Famine. Probably from some incursion of the hostile forces of Midian into 
the vale of Bethlehem ; or, if not so, from a succession of bad harvests, or a failure 
of pasture, scarcity and famine invaded the abodes of plenty and of peace. 

II. Impoverishment. Upon Elimelech the pressure of the times was peculiarly 
severe, compelling him to break up his home, quit the modest but cherished inherit- 
ance of his fathers, and seek subsistence elsewhere. 

Lessons : — 1. Change of circumstances is a common incident in human life. Every 
person has either experienced some such change, or has witnessed such reverse in the 
condition of kindred or acquaintance. A fall from comfort, or even affluence, t^. 
poverty frequently happens among occupiers, and even owners, of land, and still 
more fcequently in manufacturing and commercial communities. 2. Religion teaches 
sympathy with those in reduced circumstances. When a neighbour is deprived not 
only of the usual conveniences of life, but of the means of educating his children 
and of providing for his old age, we should not offer reproach, or even cold, hard 
advice, but, if possible, substantial help, and always considerate sympathy. 3. 
Religion has consolation for those in adversity. A message from heaven bids them 
" be of good cheer I " Let diligence and frugality contend with circumstances I Be 
patient and uncomplaining, and avoid that sign of a petty and broken spirit, the 
dwelling fondly upon bygone prosperity 1 The sun of prosperity may yet break 
through the clouds. Even if it be not so appointed, there may still remain those 
blessings which are dearer than fortune's gifts — wife, child, a good conscience, health, 
fortitude, hope 1 If calamity has come upon you through your own fault, repent, and 
learn "the sweet uses of adversity." If through the fault of others, refrain your 
heart from malice and revenge, and your lips from cursing. Think rather of what 
Heaven has left than of what Heaven has taken. " Lay up for yourselves treasures 
in heaven." Remember that, if Christians, " all things are yours I " — T. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Emigration. Picture the removal of this family from the home they 
loved. Taking with them, it may be, the remnant of their cattle, they bade adieu to 
the familiar scenes where they had known content and plenty, where they had 
formed their friendships and alliances. The best prospect for them lay towards the 
east, and eastwards accordingly they travelled. Whether they struck southwards 
by the foot of the Salt Sea, or crossed the Jordan at the ford, they must soon have 
reached the verdant highlands of Moab. Here it was they were to seek a Bettlemeiif 
and make a home. 



OH. 1. 1—5.] THE BOOK OF RUTH 



I. These changes of abode are IK accordance with Pbovidential appointment. 
Migrations have at all times been common among pastoral, nomadic people. The 
tillers of the soil and the dwellers in cities have been more stationary. Emigration 
a great fact in the social life of Britain in our time. Owing to the increase of popu- 
lation, to geographical discovery, to the application of steam to ocean voyages, 
emigration common among our artisan and agricultural classes. Some become 
colonists through the pressure of the times ; others from love of adventure, and 
desire for a freer life. All of us have friends who have emigrated. Thus Ood 
replenishes his earth. 

II. These changes affect differently different persons. Naomi would feel 
the severance most keenly, and would look forward with least interest and hope to 
new surroundings and acquaintances. Her sons would not realise the bitterness of 
change ; the novelty of the circumstances would naturally excite and charm them. 
Picture the emigrants, the friends they leave behind, the scenes awaiting them, &c. 

III. These changes should be watched by Christians with wise and prayebfdi. 
INTBBEST. Remember that the undecided are yonder free from many restraints. By 
prayer and correspondence seek to retain them under the power of the truth. Guide 
emigration into hopeful channels ; induce colonists to provide for themselves the 
word of God, the means of education, the ministry of the gospel. — T. 

Ver. S. — Widowhood. In the country of Moab EUmelech and his family found a 
home. A period of repose seems to have been granted them. They learned to 
reconcile themselves to new scenes and associations. But life is full of vicissitude. 
" Boast not thyself of to-morrow." 0, to live as those whose treasure and whose 
heart are above 1 " BUmelech, Naomi's husband, died ; and she was left." A brief, 
pathetic record 1 

I. The widow's sorrow. The observation of all, the experience of some hearers, 
may fill up the outline. In every social circle, in every religious assembly, are women 
who have been called upon to part with those upon whom they had leaned for sup- 
3ort and guidance, to whom they gave their hearts in youth, to whom they had borne 
sons and daughters. 

II. The widow's LOT. It is often one of hardship and trouble. As in the case 
before us, it may be aggravated by — 1. Poverty. 2. Distance from home and friends. 
3. The charge and care of children, who, though a blessing, are a burden and 
responsibility. 

III. The widow's consolation. 1. The promise of God: "Thy Maker is thy 
husband." 2. Opportunity of Christian service. How difEerent the widow's con- 
dition in Christian communities from that of such among the heathen I The 
honour and the work of "widows indeed." 

Lessons : — 1. Submission and patience under bereavement. 2. Sympathy with the 
afOicted and desolate. — ^T. 

Ver. 4. — Marriage. The notes of time found in this narrative are meagre. It 
is not easy to decide to what the " ten years " here mentioned refer. After the death 
of EUmelech, the two sons were spared to be the occupation and the solace of the 
widow's life. Naomi saw them grow up to manhood. Then the young men " took 
them wives of the women of Moab." 

I. Marriage is lawful between persons of different nations. There was 
nothing in the law of Moses to prevent these young men from acting as they did; 
although the children of Israel were not allowed to intermarry with the Canaanites. 
Later in Jewish history Nehemiah interpreted the law as forbidding marriage with 
the children of Moab. But he seems to have acted with unjust severity. These 
Moabitish women were virtuous, kind, devoted ; conformed to the religion of their 
husbands, and one of them found a solid satisfaction in the worship of Jehovah. 
The conduct of the young men seems to have been natural and blameless. 

II. Mabbuqb should only be entered upon after serious and fbaybbful 
deliberation, and with a conviction of its acceptablbness to God. Sensible 
and Christian people should discountenance the practice of treating marriage with 
levity. Consideration should be given to time, to circumstances, and, above aU. t* 



THE BOOK OF EDTH. [oh. i. 1—6. 



character. Confidence and esteem must be, with afiection, the basis of wedded 
happiness; and these cannot exist in their completeness where there is dis- 
similarity of conviction and aim — where one party is living to the world, and th« 
other would live unto the Lord. Error here involves misery, and perhaps disastei 
and ruin. 

Lessons : — 1. Let elders inculcate just views of the marriage relationship upon the 
young. 2. Let the young avoid committing themselves to a contract of marriage 
until a fair experience of li£e has been acquired. 3. Let Christians marry " only lu 
the Lord."— T. 

Ver. 6. — Double desolation. In the happiness of her children Naomi would 
revive the happy years of her own early married life. But the bright sky was soon 
clouded over by the shadow of death. Perhaps inheriting their father's constitution, 
her sons died in early manhood. She became a childless widow. Three widows 
were in one house, each bearing in her silent heart her own burden of grief. 

I. SOMB ABB CALLED DPON TO BNDUEE REPEATED BEREAVEMENTS. Households 

there are which have been visited again and again by the angel of death. Touthfal 
lives are snapt asunder ; youthful hearts are left desolate. Some are called upon to 
endure prolonged age, whilst children and friends, the joy of their hearts, are taken 
from them. Here and there is one who can exclaim, "All thy waves and thy 
billows are gone over me." 

II. Fob sdch God has peomises of grace and pdbposes of mbbot. 1. The 
assurances of the Divine remembrance and kindness. " The mountains shall depart," 
&c. 2. The sympathy of the Divine High Priest. The miracle of the raising of 
the widow's son atNain is an illustration. 3. Grace of submission shall be imparted. 
" The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away ; blessed be the name of the Lord." 
4. Intentions of Divine wisdom shall be accomplished. Thus shall the heart be 
weaned from earth ; thus shall Christian character be matured ; thus shall saints be 
prepared for glory. How can the vicissitudes of life be borne by those who are 
strangers to Christian principles, to Christian consolations, to Christian hopes ? May 
ours be the happy lot of the Christian, from whom (as from all the children of men) 
the future is hidden ; but who knows himself to be the object of a Father's love 
and a Saviour's care, and to whose heart comes day by day a voice from heaven, 
saying, " I will never leave thee I I will never forsake thee I " — ^T. 

Ver. 1. — " In the days when the judges ruled." This is the age in which the stoiy 
happened which constitutes Ruth's history, beautiful as an epic, and touching as a 
pathetic drama of home life. The judges. Whether the earlier or later we know 
not. Whether in the days of Deborah or the days of Gideon. Probably, however, 
the latter, as history tells then of a famine through the invasion of the Midianites. 
The judges. Religion means law, order, mutual respect, and, with all diversity of 
circumstance, equality in the eyes of the law. A nation that perverts justice has 
undermined the foundations of the commonwealth. 

I. All judges abb bepresbntativbs and intbrpbbtebs of the law. They are 
not creators of it ; they are not allowed to govern others according to their own will, 
but they are to be fair and wise interpreters of the national jurisprudence. Law is 
a beautiful thing if it is founded on the Divine sanctions ; it means protection for 
the weak, safety for the industrious. 

II. The best administration cannot meet the want caused by wars. Famine 
came I The Midianites came up and "destroyed the increase of the earth.'' "And 
Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites." Here are the old border 
wars. Nature was as beautiful as ever, and the flowers of Palestine as fragrant, and 
the corn as golden ; but the enamelled cup of the flower was soon filled with the 
blood of slaughter, and the beautiful sheaves were pillaged to supply the overrunning 
enemies of Israel. Such is the heart of man. In every age out of that come forth 
wars ; and although modem legislation is enabled to fill file empty granary from other 
shores, yet in the main it still remains true, war means, in the end, not only bloodshed 
•nd agony, but want. 

III. a£l eabtelt bulebbhif IB tbb stuboii or A hiqhbb government. Aan* 



««. 1. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF RUTH, 



fatherly relationship is symbolical of the Divine Fatherhood, and the monarchical of 
the Divine King, bo the earthly judge is to be the emblem of a Divine Ruler, whose 
reign is righteousnesa, and who hath appointed a day in which he vrill judge the 
world. _ There are schools of thought that question human responsibility, mat teach 
a doctrine of irresistible law, the predicate of which is, that sin is not so much 
criminal or vicious, as the result of innate tendencies which come under the dominion 
of resistless inclinations. But it is to be noticed that these teachers would not excuse 
the thief who has robbed them, or the murderer who has slain thdr child. To be 
consistent, however, they ought ; for they object to punishment in the plan of the 
Divine government. Human instinct, however, and Divine revelation are at one 
in this ; alike they ask, " Wherefore should a man complain, a man for the punish- 
ment of his sin ? " In all ages and amongst all races where society is secure, and 
progress real, and innocence safe, they are " those where the judges rule." — W. M. 8. 

Ver. 1. — " There wm a famine in the land." Providence led Elimelecb, his wife 
Naomi, and his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, into the land of Moab, on the other 
side of Jordan. Whilst there was scarcity of bread in Israel, there was plenteous 
supply in Moab. So they left their fatherland and home in Bethlehem. We carry 
" home " with us when we go with wife and children. It is the exile's solitary lot 
that is so sad. It is when God setteth the solitary in families, and the child is away 
from home in a foreign land, amongst strange faces, that the heart grows sick. We 
ought always to remember in prayer the exile and the stranger. Sometimes, amongst 
the v«ry poor, a man has to go and seek substance far away from wife and child ; 
but in this case sorrow was mitigated by mutual sympathy and help. 

I. Thbbb are W0B8E FAMINES THAN THIS. It was famine of another sort that led 
Moses from Egypt, when he feared not the wrath of the king, that he might enjoy 
the bread of God ; and it was religious hunger that led the Pilgrim Fathers first to 
Amsterdam, and then to New England, that they might find liberty to worship God. 
In the day of famine we read Elimelech could not be satisfied. No. And it is a mark 
of spiritual nobility never to be contented where God is dishonoured and worship 
demoralised. The word " Bethlehem " signifies the house of bread ; but there was 
barrenness in the once wealthy place of harvest. And the name of Church cannot 
sufBce when the place is no longer the house of God, which the word Church 
means. 

II. In this FAMINE ElIMILEOH'S name WAS A GUAEANTEE OF GUIDANCE AND BDPPLT. 

It means, " My God is King." Beautiful that. He reigns, and will cause all things 
to work together for good. Mark the words, My God ; for as Paul says, " My God 
shall supply all your need." King ! Yes, " the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness 
thereof," and he will not let his children want bread. They go without escort, but 
the Lord goes before them. There are no camels or caravanserai behind them, but 
the Lord God of Israel is their rereward. So is Divine promise translated into 
family history. 

III. The trouble that seems least lieelt often combs. Bread wanting in 
Betllehem, "the house of bread." Yes I But have not we often seen this? The 
sorrows of life are often such surprises. They do not take the expected fonn of the 
imagination, but they assume shapes which we never dreamed of. The king not 
only loses his crown, but becomes an exile and a stranger in a strange land. The 
rich man in health loses all in a night. A sudden flicker, and the lamp of health 
which always burned so brightly goes out in an hour. 

IV. Be'jhlehem was a quiet, restful abode. Nestling in its quiet beauty, ten 
mileR or so from time-beloved Jerusalem, who would have thought that the golden 
ring of corn-fields which surrounded it would ever have been taken off its hand ? 
Very early in history it was productive. Here Jacob fed his sheep in the olden 
times. Famine in a city impoverished and beleaguered we can understand ; but famine 
in Bethlehem I So it is. The rural quietness does not always give us repose. Ther« 
too the angel -with the veiled face comes — the angel of grief and want and deatii, 
Happy those who have a Father in heaven who is also their Father and their Sing 
-W.M. & 



THE BOOK OF BUTa 



[OB. t 1--6. 



Yen. 4, 5. — A foreign land. "And they dwelled there about ten years." Memor- 
able years ! Marriages and births had given place to separation and bereavement. 
Elimelech the father died ; so also did the two sons Mahlon and Chilion. Thai wfl 
have the sad picture of three widows. 

L We can fly from famine, but not fkom death. We need not enter upon 
the argument of some expositors, as to whether P^limelech did right to leave Bethle- 
hem; whether by famine is not meant insufficiency of plenty rather than actual 
want. We must be content with the fact that he thought it prudent and wise to go. 
And now with fulness of bread came the saddest experience of all. How often it 
happens that when circumstances improve, those we hoped to enjoy them with are 
taken away. We climb the hill together, and then with new and fair prospect comes 
the desolation of death amid the beauties and blessings of earth and sky. , These are 
darker clouds than covered them in Bethlehem. We never know how dear are the 
living till they are gone ; then we see it was their presence that gave life and peac« 
to 80 many scenes, that gave inspiration to labour and sweetness to success. 

IL Troublbs often comb wave upon wave. Ten years I and lo, three out at the 
four pilgrims are at rest. No more fatigue, no more distress for them. True ; but 
those that are left I What of them ? It is often easier to go than to remain. It is 
all Bummed up in the consciousness, I have but to live, and to live without them. 
Nor is this a morbid feeling. It is a most sacred emotion. True, time will alleviate ; 
but there will always be graves in the heart, and men and women who have lost 
their beloved ones can never be the same again. Character will be softened, purified, 
elevated. Heaven will be nearer and dearer to the heart. Ten years 1 How fleetly 
they fly, and yet what a long volume of experience may be bound up in them. 

III. Every home is but as a tent life. They dwelled there. Got used to 
the new people, the new skies, the new ways. After a time, to a family removed to 
another shore, there are always some tendrils gathering round the place, and in time 
they feel in leaving that a sense of loss. Strange as it all seemed at first, in time 
touches of experience make it homelike to them. Still the old first home, the dear 
village of childhood and youth, nestles in the heart. How many in life's evening 
like to go back and live near the abode of the morning. We dwell I So it seems ; 
and we look at the picture of the world's life-pilgrimage as though, like some pano- 
rama, it was all outside us. But we pass onward too, and ere long grey hairs are here 
and there upon us, though we know it not. At times we look back. Ten years I 
And their experience is within us, as well as behind us. — W. M. S. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER I. «— 14. 



Yet. 6. — ^Theu— the conjunction in Hebrew 
is the common generic copulative and — 
she arose. She had been sitting, as it were, 
where her husband had settled, and she now 
rose up to depart (see ver. i). She, and 
her danghters-in-law. The word for "her 
daughters-in-law " — H * J!) ?| — ^is literally ' ' her 
brides," that is, the brides of her sons. 
That she might return — an admirable 
rendering into English idiom. The phrase 
in the onginal is simply " and she returned," 
that is, "and she began to return." From 
the country of Moab : for she had heard in 
the count^ of Moab how that the Lord had 
visited his people in giving them bread. 
Or, more literally, " for she heard in the 
country of Moab that Jehovah " — or, rather, 
"Tahveh," or, as Epiphanins gives it, 'lafSs 
— "had visited hispeople to give them bread." 
That ia no warrant, however, and no need, 



to add, with the Chaldee Targumist, that 
the news was conveyed hy the mouth of an 
angel. And the representation is not that 
Yahveh, in giving bread to his people, had 
thereby visited them ; it is that he had 
visited them ' ' to give them bread. " The word 
IJ?^, rendered visited, is quite peculiar, with 
no analogue in English, German, Greek, or 
Latin. Yahveh had directed his attention 
to his people, and had, so to speak, made 
inquisition into their state, and had hence 
taken steps to give them bread (see Exod. 
iii. 16 ; iv. 31). They had already got it, 
or, as the Septuagint translates, they had 
got loaves (aprovi). The Vulgate translates 
it meats (esoas). It is assumed in the tidings 
that the seasons and their products, and all 
beneficent influences ia nature, belong to 
Yahveh. It is likewise assumed that the 
Hebrews were his people, albeit not in such 
a sense as to secure for them more " bread " 
and "milk and honey" than other peoples 



OB. 



I. e— u] 



THE BOOK OF BUTH. 



U 



enjoyed. Their chief prerogatiTes were 
spiritual and mornl. Thei/ were his Messi- 
anic people. That is the key to unlock the 
secret of the whole Old Testament Scriptures. 
Ver. 7.— And so she went forth out of 
the place where she was. There is no 
attempt on the part of the writer to localise 
the spot. And her two daughters-in-law 
with her. They had kept, it seems, on 
terms of affectionate sympathy with their 
mother-in-law. The jealousies that so often 
disturb the peace of households had no 

Slace within the bounds of Naomi's juris- 
iction. The home of which she was the 
matronly centre had been kept in its own 
beautiful orbit by the law of mutual re- 
spect, deference, affection, and esteem — the 
law that insures happiness to both the loving 
and theloved. "If there were moreNaomis," 
says Lawson, " there might be more Orpahs 
and Ruths." And they went on the way to 
return to the land of Judah. Haviag left 
her Moabitish abode, and got into the 
fremiented track which led in the direction 
of ner native land, she journeyed onward 
for a stage or two, accompanied by her 
daughters-in-law. Such is the picture. It 
must be subsumed in it that her daughters- 
in-law had made up their minds to go with 
her to the land of her nativity. The sub- 
ject had been often talked over and discussed. 
Naomi would from time to time start objec- 
tions to their kind intention. They, on 
their part, would try to remove her diffi- 
culties, and would insist on accompanying 
her. So the three widows journeyed onward 
together, walking. Adversity had pressed 
hard on their attenuated resources, and they 
would not be encumbered with burdensome 



Ver. 8. — And Naomi said to her two 
daughters-in-law, Go, return each to her 
mother's house. She reverted, with deeper 
earnestness, to their theme of discussion. 
She acknowledged that most kindly had 
they acted toward her. Her heart was filled 
with gratitude. It was lifcewise agitated 
with grief at the prospect of bidding them 
a nnal farewell Nevertheless, she felt that 
it would be unreasonable and unkind to 
invite them to be, to any further degree, 
sharers of her adversity. Hence, thanking 
them for their loving convoy, she would 
remind them that every step further on 
would only increase the length of their 
return-journey ; and she said. Go, return 
each to her mother's home. There, in the 
females' apartment, and in the bosom of 
their mothers, they would surely find a 
welcome and a refuge. She judges of their 
mothers by herself, and she refers rather to 
them than to their fathers, partly, perhaps, 
because she bears in mind her own mother- 
hood, but principally, no doubt, because, in 



those Oriental countries, it ky very partica- 
larly within the province of mothers to mak* 
arrangements in reference to their daughters. 
May Tahveh deal kindly with yon, as y« 
have dealt with the deceased, and with me. 
It is beautiful gratitude, and at the same 
time -^ touching monument to the faithful- 
ness and gentleness that had characterised 
and adorned the young widows. Her simple 
Hebrew theology, moreover, comes finely 
out. She assumes that her own Yahveh 
reigned in Moab as in Judah, and that all 
blessing descended from him. There is a 
little peculiarity in the Hebrew pronouns in 
this clause. They are masculine instead of 
feminine. The influence of the stronger sex 
overrides grammatically, for the moment, 
the influence of the weaker. 

Ver. 9. — May Yahveh grant to you that 
ye may find rest, each in the house of her 
husband. Naomi again, when the current 
of her tenderest feelings was running full 
and strong, lifts up her longing heart toward 
her own Yahveh. He was the God not of 
the Hebrews only, but of the Gentiles like- 
wise, and ruled and overruled in Hoab. 
The prayer is, in its form, full of syntactical 
peculiarity: "May Yahveh give to you," 
and, as the result of his giving, "may you 
find rest, each [in] the house of her husband. " 
The expression, "the house of her husband," 
is used/ locatively. It is an answer to the 
suppressed question, "Where are they to 
find rest?" And hence, in our English 
idiom, we must insert the preposition, " in 
the house of her husband. As to the sub- 
stance of the prayer, it has, as truly as the 
grammatical syntax, its own tinge of Orient- 
alism. Young females in Moab had but 
little scope for a life of usefulness and happi- 
ness, unless shielded round and round within 
the home of a pure and devoted husband. 
Naomi was well aware of this, and hence, 
in her motherly solicitude for her virtuous 
daughters-in-law, she gave them to under- 
stand that it would be the opposite of a griel 
to her if they should seek, in the one way 
open to them in that comparatively unde- 
veloped state of society, to brighten the 
homes of the lonely. In such homes, il 
circumstances were propitious, they would 
find deliverance &om unrest and anxiety. 
They would find rest. It would be a posi- 
tion in which they could abide, and in which 
their tenderest feelings and most honourable 
desires would find satisfaction and repose. 
The peculiar force of the Hebrew HQ-lip is 
finely displaved by the texture of the associ- 
ated expressions in Isa. xxxiL 17, 18 : "And 
the work of righteousness shall be peace; 
and the effect of righteousness quietness and 
asswrmice for ever; and my people shall 
dwell in a peaceable hahUatwn, and ia 
sure dwellings, and in quiet rttting.places ' 



R 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



[OR. I. 6—14. 



(nrajp). And she kissed them, locking 
them lingeringly and lovingly in u farewell 
embrace. " Kissed them." The preposition 
to, according to the customary Hebrew idiom, 
stands before the pronoun. In kissing, 
Naomi imparted herself passionately to her 
beloved daugliters-in-law, and clung to them. 
There would be full-hearted reciprocation, 
and each to each would cling "in their 
embracement, as they grew together " (Shake- 
speare, Henry VIII. ). And they lifted np 
their voice and wept. The idea is not that aU 
three wept aloud. The pronoun "they" refers 
to the daughters-in-law, as is evident both 
&om the preceding and from the succeeding 
context. The fine idiomatic version of the 
Vulgate brings out successfully and unam- 
biguously the true state of the case^ — qxuB 
elevata voce Jlere ccepervM. The lifting up 
of the voice in weeping must be thought of 
according to the measure of Oriental, as dis- 
tinguished from Occidental, custom. In the 
East there is less self-restraint in this matter 
than in the West. 

Yer. 10. — And they said unto her, Snrely 
we will return with thee unto thy people. 
So King James's version. The expression in 
the original is broken at the commencement : 
"And they said to her. For with thee we 
shall return to thy people. " It is as if they 
had said, " Do not insist on our return to 
our mothers' homes, for with thee we shall 
retwm to thy people. " Note the expression, 
" we shall return," instead of "we shall go 
with thee in thy return to thy people. " For 
the moment they identify themselves with 
their mother-in-law, as if they had come 
with her from Judah. 

Ter. 11. — And Naomi said, Tnm back, 
my daughters. To what purpose should 
you go with me ? Have I yet sons in my 
womb, that might be husbands to youl 
According to the old Levirate law — a survival 
of rude and barbarous times — Orpah and 
Ruth, having had husbands who died with- 
out issue, would have been entitled to claim 
marriage with their husbands' brothers, if 
such surviving brothers there had been (see 
Deut. XXV. 5 — 9 ; Matt xxii 24—28). And 
if the surviving brothers were too young to 
be married, the widows, if they chose, might 
wait on till they reached maturity (see Gen. 
xxxviii. ). It is in the light of these customs 
that we are to lead Naomi's remonstrances. 
The phraseology in the second interrogation 
is very primitive, and primitively ' agglutin- 
ative.' "Are there yet to be sons in my 
womb, and they shall be to you for hus- 
bands I " (see on ver. 1). 

Ver. 12. — ^lurn back, my daughters, go; 
for I am too old to have a husband. But 
even if I could say, I have hope ; yea, even 
if I had a husband this very night; yea, 
•Tea if I had already given birth to sons ; 



(ver. 13) would ye therefore wait till they 
grew np ! would ye therefore shut yonrselvea 
up so as not to have husbands) nay, my 
daughters ; for my lot is exceedingly bitter, 
more than even yours, for the hand ot 
Yahveh has gone out against me. Most 
pathetic pleading, and not easily reproduced 
on lines of literal rendering. " Go, for I am 
too old to have a husband." A euphemistic 
rendering ; but the original is euphemistic 
too, though under another phraseological 
phase. "But even if I could say, I have 
hope." The poverty of the Hebrew verb, in 
respect of provision to express "moods, is 
conspicuous: "that," i. e. "suppose that I 
said, I have hope." Mark the climactic 
representation. Firstly, Naomi makes, for 
argument's sake, the supposition that she 
might yet have sons ; then, seaondly, she 
carries her supposition much higher, namely, 
that she might that very night have a hus- 
band ; and then, thirdly, she carries the 
supposition a great deal higher still, namely, 
that even already her sons were brought 
forth; " Would you therefore wait ? " Note 
the therefore. Ibn Ezra, the Septuagint, the 
Vulgate, and King James's version assume' 

that IpJ means for them. The feminine 
pronoun, however, as applied to Naomi's 
sons, is, on that supposition, all but inex- 
plicable. It is much better to assume, with 
the majority of modern critics, that it ii 
equivalent to J3?, whether we call it a Chal- 
daism or not. Certainly it was current in 
Ohaldee (see Dan. ii. 6, 9). But it may have 
floated in circles of Semitic society that were 
never included within Chaldaea proper. In- 
deed, there were no precise limits bounding 
off the Chaldee language from the kindred 
dialects, just as there are no such limits in 
English or in German, or in any member of 
a linguistic group. Idioms often overlap. 
In the two interrogative clauses, " Would ye 
for that purpose wait till they grew up! 
Would ye for that purpose sedude youi* 
selves, so as not to have husbands ! " there 
is a parallelism ; only, in the second clause, 
the representation rises. "For my lot i* 
exceedingly bitter, more than even yours ; " 
literally, " for it is bitter to me exceedingly, 
beyond you." The verb is used imperson- 
ally. Naomi means that her case was even 
more lamentable than theirs, so that she 
could not encourage them to hang their 
dependence on her help, or to hope for a 
retrieval of their circumstances in becoming 
partakers of her fortunes. The translation 
of King James's version, "for your sakea," 
though decidedly supported by the Septuagint, 
is unnatural Pagnin and Drnsius both give 
the correct rendering, "more than you." So 
do Michaelis and Wright. But Berthera 
and Gesenius agree with King Jamea'a tw> 



OB. L •— 14.] 



THE BOOK OP RUTH. 



11 



lion. The Syriac Peshito, strange to sav, 
gives both translations, " I feel very bitterly 
for you, and to me it is more bitter than to 
you." 

Ver. 14, — And they, the daughters-in-law, 
lifted np their voice in unison and unity, as 
if instead of two voices there had been but 
one. Hence the propriety of the singular 
number, as in ver. 9. And wept again. 
The " again " doubles back on the statement 
in ver. 9. With uplifted voice, in shrill 
Oriental wail, and amid streams of tears, 
they bemoaned their hapless lot. Then, after 
the paroxysm of grief had somewhat spent 
itself, Orpah yielded to her mother-in-law's 
dissuasives, and at length imprinted on her, 
reluctantly and passionately, a farewell kiss. 
Then, not waiting to ascertain the ultimate 
decision of Ruth, or rather, perhaps, having 
now a fixed presentiment what it would be, 
she moved regretfully and tearfully away. 
She was afraid, perhaps, that if she, as well 
as Buth, should insist on accompanying her 
mother-in-law, the two might be unreason- 



ably burdensome to the ^ed widow. Per- 
haps, too, she was not without fear that hel 
own burden in a foreign land, amid strangers, 
might be too heavy to be borne. There ii 
not, however, the slightest need for suppos- 
ing that she was, in any respect, deficient in 
atBichment to her mother-in-law. But, it 
is added, Buth elave to her motner-in-law, 
all reasonings, remonstrances, dissuasives 
on Kaomi's part notwithstanding. Buth 
would not be parted from her. "Clave." It 
is the same word that is used in the primitive 
law of marriage. " Therefore shall a man 
leave his father and his mother, and shall 
cleave to his wife, and they shall be one 
flesh " (Gen. ii 24). It occurs again in Pa. 
Ixiii 8: "My soul followeth hard after 
thee ; " and in Ps. cxix. 31 ; "I have stuck 
to thy testimonies." Joshua said, "Cleave 
unto the Lord thy God" (Josh, xxiii. 8); 
and many have had sweet, while others have 
had bitter, experience of the truth that 
" there is a Mend that sticheth doHT than 
a brother" (Prov. xviii. 24). 



HOMILBTICa 



Vers. 6 — 14. — Longing f<yr the old home. Brings to view (1) Naomi's resolution 

) return to the land of Ju 

at her departure. 



to return to the land of Judah, and then it records (2) a touching scene that occurred 



I. Naomi's besoldtion. No wonder that she formed it; for— 1. The ties that 
bound her to the land of Moab had been snapped by the hand of death. In the 
death of her husband there was the disruption of the house-hand. In the deaths of 
her two sons who had become husbands, the only other hands or bonds that could 
keep together for Naomi a home in Moab were burst. Matthew Henry says, " The 
land of Moab was now become a melancholy place to her. It is with little pleasure 
that she can breathe in that air in which her husband and sons had expired ; or go 
on that ground in which they lay buried out of her sight, but not out of her thoughts." 
2. Her heart had got sick for the home of her youth, that home which was now to 
her imagination and recollection " home, sweet home." " Heaven," she remembered, 
" lay around her " in her childhood. And such feelings as then thrilled within her 
are the stuff out of which, as years roll on, patriotism is woven. 3. She was 
reduced to absolute poverty. Diseases and death are costly, especially in a strange 
land, among strangers. And pitiable is the condition of those who, in a strange 
land and among strangers, are unable to "pay their way." 4. She would shrink, 
moreover, from the possibility of being burdensome to her daughters-in-law, who 
might, in consequence of their own widowhood, have diflBculty in lending eflBcient 
assistance. However much she wag pulled down in her circumstances, in her spirit 
her fine womanly independence stood erect. 5. She had learned that brighter days 
had dawned on the land of her early love. " The Lord had visited his people to give 
them bread." And "bread," as Dr. Thomas Puller remarks, "is a dish in every 
course. Without it can be no feast ; with it can be no famine." The Lord gave it. 
" The miracle of the loaves was a sudden putting forth of God's bountiful hand 
from behind the veil of his ordinary providence ; the miracle of the harvest is the 
working of the same bountiful hand, only unseen, giving power to the living grains 
to drink the dew and imbibe the sunshine, and appropriate the nourishment of the 
soil during the long bright days of summer. I understand the one miracle in the 
light of the other" (Macmillan's Bible Teachings in Nature,' p. 92). 

II. Scene at Naomi's depabtttre. 1. Her daughters-in-law, who had "dealt 
kindly " with their husbands, had likewise dealt kindly with her. What was to becom* 



i* THE BOOK OP BUTH. [oh. i. *-!*. 

of them? 2. They convoyed Naomi for some distance, and then, as they all halted, 
she reminded them that every step in advance took them further from their mothers 
homes, and she insisted on their returning. Not for her own sake, however, but foi 
theirs. In their own land their prospects would be brighter than in Judaaa. Their 
mothers were still living, and would no doubt be motherly. Their other relatives 
would be at hand. They themselves might each be the means of brightening some 
solitary home. She prayed that they might have " rest." This word, so sweet to 
the weary and the distracted, reveals one element that is essential to the comfort of 
a home, whether that home be a cottage or a castle. 3. Naomi's words overwhelm 
the hearts of her daughters-in-law. They passionately express their desire to accom- 
pany her to her old home. But she persists firmly, though tenderly and meltingly, 
in her dissuasives. It is a scene of weeping — a valley of Baca. At length Orpah 
yields, and tears herself away. But Ruth would not yield. She " clave to her 
mother-in-law." The character of both the young widows is beautiful, but that of 
Buth is heroic. This world is a constantly chequered scene of arrivals and de- 
partures. Looming in the near or more remote future, there is one departure which 
must be made " in solemn loneliness." Whither ? With what oonvoy ? 

HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTH0E8, 

Ver. 8. — Kindness. Tidings reached Naomi that peace and plenty had retnmed 
to Judah, and she resolved to return to Bethlehem. She acknowledged the Lord's 
goodness, who " had visited his people in giving them bread." Doubtless she sought 
the Lord's guidance with reference to her return It must have needed courage on 
her part to form and carry out this resolution. Her affectionate daughters-in-law 
accompanied her part of the way. Then came the hour of separation. As Naomi 
bade the young widows return, she uttered words of testimony to their kindness, 
words of prayer that Heaven might deal kindly with them. Coming from her lips, 
this witness was precious. They had dealt kindly with the dead — ^their husbands, her 
sons. They had dealt kindly with her, in her bereavements and loneliness ; they 
had sympathised with her, and now were willing to accompany her to the land of her 
birth and early days. 

I. The FOUNDATION of kindness. We must seek this below what is called " good 
nature ; " and, taught by Christianity, must find it in the brotherhood of man, the 
fatherhood of God. The sacrifice of Christ is the power and the model of true 
Christian kindness. 

II. The SPHEEB of kindness. The family, as in the passage before us, comes first 
" Kind " is related, as a word, to " kin." " Charity begins at home." But, as has 
been remarked, it does not end there. Kindness should be shown to our fellow- 
creatures, as Christians, as neighbours, as fellow-countrymen, as members of the 
human race. 

III. The DIFFICULTIES in the way of kindness. It is not always easy for persons 
of one nation to agree with those of another ; foreigners are often foes. It is not 
always easy for mothers-in-law to agree with daughters-in-law. Yet these difSculties 
may be overcome, as in this narrative. 

IV. The EECOMPENSE of kindness. Naomi's prayer was answered, and the Lord 
dealt kindly with those who had shown kindness. True kindness will breathe many 
a prayer. And the Lord's loving-kindness, condescending, unmerited, and free, is his 
people's most precious possession ; it is " better than life I " — ^T. 

Vers. 10 — 14. — Separation. These three women were bound together by the 
memory of common happiness, by the memory of common sorrows. The proposal 
that they should part, however reasonable and just, could not but reopen the flood-gates 
of their grief. Orpah found her consolation in her home in Moab, and Ruth found 
hers in Naomi's life-long society and afEection. But as the three stand before us on 
the borders of the land, as Naomi begs her daughters-in-law to return, the sorrow 
»nd tlie sanctity of human separations are suggested to our minds. 

L Separations between loving friends are often expedient and neckssabt. 



DH. I. «— U.] THE BOOK OF EUTH. U 

II. Separations are sometimes thb occasion of almost the bittbbbst sorrows 

or HUMAN LIFE. 

III. Separations mat, by God's grace, be made a discipline of the soul's health 

AND WELFARE. 

IV. Separations may bk overruled, by God's providence, for the real good, 

PROSPERITY, and HAPPINESS OF THOSE WHO ARE PUT APART. 

V. Separations remind us of him who has said, " I will never leave thek ; I 

WILL never forsake THEE I " — T. 

Vers. 6, 7. — Home returning. " Then she arose with her daughters-in-law, that 
she might return. . . . And they went on their way to return." Home again 1 The 
first step is everything I " She arose." It was all well with the prodigal when he did 
that. Not simply when he said, I will arise ; but when he arose and went to his 
father. Directly the eye and the heart and the step agree, then the whole is settled. 
We read nothing of the preliminaries of departure. Who does not know the power 
of the loadstone when it first begins to act ? When the breeze swells the sail from 
the foreign port, the sailor sees not the intervening waters, but the home cottage 
under the familiar cliffs. There are many beautiful home-retumings in the Bible, 
but the best of all is the son seeking the father's house. 

I. Hearts are united by common experiences. These daughters-in-law were not 
of her land, nor of her religion ; they were not Hebrews ; but they were widows I A 
common sorrow is a welding power, uniting hearts more closely than before. It is 
said that a babe in a house is a new clasp of affection between husband and wife. 
True ; but an empty cradle has done more than a living child. During the time of 
these ten years these two wives remained still heathen. We do not know what family 
they sprang from, or if they were sisters. We do know that Naomi exercised no 
control or domination over their religious principles. She respects their personal liberty 
and responsibility ; she even urges Ruth not to let natural affection for her override 
her religious convictions, but to go back to " her gods," as Orpah did. " Behold, thy 
sister-in-law is gone back unto her people, and unto her gods : return thou after thy 
Bister-in-law." What a sorrow it must have been to her that her sons had married 
heathen women. We can respect that sorrow. And we can see that Naomi did not 
tligM her own religion when she said these words, but used them as a test of the 
sincerity of Ruth. A common sorrow had brought them all very close together. 
" For," as Bailey says in Festus, " the world is one, and hath one great heart." 

II. Return journeys have a touching eloquence in their scenes. There were 
the places Naomi had traversed with her husband and her boys ; places of rest 
under the shadow of the rocks, and of refreshment at the wells. Much must there 
have been, to recall conversations touched with anxiety concerning their future in the 
land of Moab. So would many places speak to us to-day. There, care gazed at us 
wistfully, and we remember all the thoughts it suggested. There she heard the 
tinkling of the bells of the camels, as the little trading cavalcade passed by her. 
What reminiscences ! And they would all remind her of the good hand which had 
led her on, and never forgotten or forsaken her. 

III. Return journeys remind us of little episodes of life that abb over fob 
ever. We cannot in the ordinary course of an unbroken and unshifting home 
realise the flight of time so well as when we have marked changes, which by their 
very abruptness divide life into chapters, which, like volumes, have their commence- 
ment and close. A new nest has to be built, and new trees have to be sought to 
build it in. Thus with ordinary observation we may notice how those who have had 
to seek new homes find the pilgrim-nature of life more marked in their thought than 
those who are born and brought up and settled through the long years in one home. 
There is a dreamy sense of continuance unbroken in some lives ! " That she might 
return 1 " I3ut she would not, could not take all of herself with her. She would 
leave, as we all do, a memory of character, an influence of good or evil over those 
who had been associated with her in the foreign land. — W. M. 8. 

Ver. 8. — Benedictions. The Hebrews were fond of benedictions. '• The Lord bl«M 
thee and keep thee. " " And Jacob blessed Joseph, and said, The God which fed me all 



H THE LOOK OP BUTH. [oh. l 6—14. 

my life long unto this day, the angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lad*." 
"The Lord bless thee out of Zion." These Scriptures of olden time touch na so 
tenderly, because Ihey recognise the living hand, the loving heart of God. It is this 
which will make them never grow old. It is this which makes their inspiration 
living, and keeps their fountains of consolation open still. We are always meeting 
and parting, journeying forth and returning home. Our families are broken up, our 
churches have gates of entrance and departure, and the picture of life is always one 
of a tent-life. We are pilgrims and strangers, as all our fathers were. The key- 
note of all that I have to say to you from this text is in that word "kindly." The 
argument is this. We can understand kindness in the sphere of the himian, and 
rise from that to a prayer for the Divine kindness. No society in any age can be 
cemented together by force alone. Feudalism, for instance, in olden times, was not 
all terror. The baron could command his dependents in time of war, as he fed and 
housed and clothed them in times of peace ; but, as the old chroniclers tell us, there 
was often a rare hospitality, a hearty cheerfulness, a chivalrous affection in the some- 
what stem relationship ; nor will any political economy of government ever be able 
to preserve nations in allegiance to each other, or at peace amongst themselves, 
without the cultivation of Christian brotherhood. 

I. The Lobd knows best what kindness is. The Lord deal kindly with you. Has 
he been kind ? that is the question for us all. At times we should have been tempted 
to answer. No I The vine is blighted, the fig tree withered, the locusts have spoiled 
the green of spring, the little lambs have died. Kindly ? Yes, we shall answer one 
time when we stand in our lot at the end of days. For kindness is not indulg- 
ence. I am thankful that this once common word has dropped out of our prayers — 
Indulgent Father. No word in the English language describes a feebler state of 
being than the word indulgence ; it refers always to the weaker side of our nature ; 
that which is pleasant to us, that which eases us of pain and of discipline and 
efEort. Prayer like this goes to the heart ; more especially from the Naomis of the 
universe who have had so hard a time of it, to whom life has been so full of bereave- 
ment and battle. But if you study life, you will see it is the indulged who complain ; 
it is those nursed in the lap of luxury who whine and whimper if the sun does not 
shine, if the pomegranate, and the fig, and the grape do not supplement the bread. 
Indulgence breeds supercilious mannerism and contempt for common things in them ; 
and all seems so very strange if men, and women, and things are not ready for their 
comfort. God's kindness to us may take forms which surprise us. At the heart of 
his severest judgments there is mercy, in the bitter spring there is healing water, in 
the desolated altar there is the downfall of idolatry. Abba, Father, we cry, and he 
seems not to hear us. The wild winds seem to waft away into empty space our 
cries for help and pity, but he who sitteth in the heavens hears and answers accord- 
ing to the wisdom of his own will. The kindest things God has ever done for us 
have been, perhaps, the strangest and severest. So it was with Daniel, and Jacob, 
and Joseph, and Abraham our father. All God's ways are done in truth, and truth 
is always kindness, for the music of the universe is set in that key. The throne of 
the Almighty himself has its firm pillars planted on that. Away we go to business 
and duty. Farewell to son and daughter. Go thy way, pilgrim of life, with knap- 
sack and staff ; henceforth our paths are separate, and for you there will come battles 
when we cannot fight beside you, burdens we cannot help you to bear. To another 
hearth you will come at evening, when the day's work is done, and the anodynes of 
sympathy are needed for the worker's heart. " Go thy way. The Lord deal kindly 
with thee." 

II. The Lord alone will be with us all through cub FUTtrBE piLOBiMAaB. 
Aj^art from Divine power, which we have not to bless with, there is Divine presence 
which we all need. Christ will be with us to the end. Never will come a battle, • 
temptation, a solitude, a sorrow, a needful sacrifice, but the Lord will be at hand. 
The sceptre will never be laid in front of an empty throne. The Lord reigns. It 
is touching to see the struggles of modem thought in the minds of men who have 
drifted away from the incarnation and resurrection of our Lord. " The ocean en- 
croaches more and more each year " — to use a figure of one who has marked th« 
"•bb" of thought — "and he watches his fields eaten up from year to year." Yti 



CH. I. 6—14.] THE BOOK OP BUTE. 17 



says the same writer, who is depicting the drift : — " The meadow-land, whereon he 
pUyed in the innocent delights of childhood, has now become a marshy waste of 
sand. The garden where he gathered flowers, an offering of love and devotion to 
his parents, is now sown with sea-salt. The church where he offered up his childish 
prayers, and wondered at the high mysteries of which his teachers spoke, stands 
tottering upon the edge of a crumbling cliff that the next storm may bring down in 
ruin." And this is rightly called "an experience of spiritual misery." Pathetic, 
indeed, is this. The picture is most touching and saddening! Who can feel it 
more than those who suffer the eclipse of faith ? We, who worship here, trust in 
the living God, who as we believe revealed himself to our fathers by the prophets, 
and who in these last days has spoken to us by his Son, whom he hath made 
heir of all things, anhath given us this testimony, in that he hath raised him from 
the dead.— W. M. S. 

Ver. 8.— "As you have dealt with the dead and me." This beautiful analogy, 
which has its root idea in love and home, is very suggestive. 

I. The Lord knows best what others have been to us. " As you have dealt 
with the dead and me." You have been good and true to them, Naomi says, with a 
voice that trembles with remembrances of the old days gone for ever. It is a 
touching little sentence. The dead. So silent now. Never to come back for us to 
touch imperfectness into riper good ; never to charm away with pleasant thoughts 
the dull hours ; never to fill with deeper meanings of love the half-empty words ; 
never to make more Divine the common service of life ; never to put the best in- 
terpretation upon conduct ; never to lift the leaden crown of care from the anxious 
brow ; never to help to transfigure the mean and lowly with heavenly hopes and 
aspirations. Gone I What a world of vacancy, and silence, and subtle mystery 1 
Is it strange we should wish well to those who were kind to the dead ? And Naomi 
links her own being with them still. " The dead and me." And with true hearts 
they never can be disassociated. Anniversaries of remembrance make our separ- 
ations no more distant. They soften them. They give place for comforting rfe- 
membrances ; but the dead are near as ever. " The dead and me 1 " Who shall 
separate ? None. Christ died, yea, rather is risen again, and he will raise us up 
together to the heavenly places. What a blessing so to live, so to fill our place as 
sons and daughters, so to sweeten, sublime, and sanctify life that others may make 
our conduct a plea with that God who has known our heart and life, and say, " The 
Lord deal kindly with you, as you have dealt with the dead and me." 

II. The Lord has given us guarantees of his kindness. We are not left to 
meditate on rain and fruitful seasons only. Not the green of spring, nor the south 
wind of summer, nor the gold of autumn alone proclaim his goodness. So long 
as the story of the cross has Divine meaning for us, so long as we believe it, not 
alone as the spirit of a good man's life, but as the revelation of God manifest in 
the flesh, so long can we exclaim, " Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that 
he loved us." Nor can we exclude conscience from our argument; that, too, is a 
guarantee that the Almighty cares for us, that he will not let us sin and suffer with- 
out the very voice Divine awakening, alarming, and arresting us. None but a good 
Being would have put conscience there, and made it universal, and filled it with such 
sweet benedictions for the soul. We we surrounded by evidences of the Eternal 
pity. God who spared not his own Son, will with him also freely give us all things — 
for man is still his child, and he has a desire to the work of his hands. When we 
pray, therefore, "The Lord deal kindly with thee," we only ask him to be like 
himself, we only put him in remembrance of his promise to hear when we call upon 
him. Some would think God kind, indeed, i£ he were less severe on sin ; to them 
all law is baneful, and the sorest evils are only evidences of an imperfect brain, or 
an untrained mind, or an ungovernable power of impulse. How, then, should the 
law of God be other than dislikable — nay, detestable to them ; but he who prepared 
the light, prepared also the throne of his judgment, and he will by no means clear 
the guilty — ^for the love of God would be but a weak sentiment if it were not har- 
monised with a law which means order, truth, righteousness, and justice in all 
domains of his eternal empire. We only predicate that love is die root of law, as it 

BUTH. 



i8 THE BOOK OF RUTH. [ch. i. 6—14 

is also the essence of mercy, and how God's kindness even on the cross showi thai 
justice and mercy blend with each other. 

III. The Lord looks fob oue love to him im cub love to each othbb. H we 
love him we shall feed his lambs, forgive our enemies, and fulfil the whole law of 
love. How many there have been who, professing even an extreme sanctity, have 
robbed their partners, deluded their followers, and sometimes darkened for ever a 
brightly opening life. It is saddening to think what religion has suffered from those 
whose countenances advertise asperity and contempt, selfishness and pride, whilst 
they carry their Bibles under their arms, and seem shocked at the exuberance of a 
healthy joy. Deal kindly ? Not they. Their silken words are often the soft sheaths 
of dagger purposes, and their sham friendship is often only the occasion of stealing 
mental photographs of you to distribute among their friends. Deal kindly ? Why 
they sleep as well when they have wounded as when they have healed, and they do 
not understand what the plan of salvation has to do with a conscientious rectitude, a 
tender consideration, and a warm and loving heart. Deal kindly. Let the Church 
arise and shine, and put on her beautiful garments. Let the venerable Apostle John 
take his place once more in the midst of the Churches, and say, " Beloved, let us love 
one another, for love is of God ; and every one that loveth is bom of God, for God 
is love." " If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in 
us." " My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and 
truth." " He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is none occasion 
of stumbling in him." How true we feel all this to be, and yet how hard in such a 
world as this. God is light, God is love, but unless we walk in the light with him 
we know nothing of it at all. It is still more popular to discuss a mystery than to 
seek after a Divine ideal. It is still true that many appraise their goodness by their 
greater enlightenment on some disputable points of religion, and they greatly hope 
their friend and brother will come to see like themselves. Alas 1 alas I all the while 
we may perchance be so untrue to Christ, we may be experiencing no sensitive grief 
that we are unlike the chief Shepherd of the sheep, so worldly, so captious, so dull 
in all Divine sensibilities. Naomi's prayer, therefore, may teach us much to-day 
about God — our Saviour ; much, too, about ourselves. This, at all events, is true. IE 
the harvests of love come late, they are very real and very precious. Years alone 
can reveal character. We know what others are in times of test and trial, as Naomi 
did in a strange land. She was a mother-in-law, and that is a hard part to fulfil, 
often the subject of satire, too often, indeed, an experience which awakens slender 
sympathy ; she yet gained the crown of trust, and honour, and love. And now, how 
can she speak better for others than by speaking to God for them ? The God who 
has never left her, the God who hae been the husband of the widow, the God who 
sent her human solace in the trying hours of her bereavement in the far away land. 
"The Lord deal kindly with you." When once in the hush of death a girl stood at the 
threshold of the door, trembling, as childhood does, in the presence of death, the 
mother, bending over the quiet sleeper, beckoned her in. She regained confidence 
then, and taking up the cold hand kissed it, and said of her dead brother, " Mother, 
that hand never struck me." How beautiful I Can we say the same, that we never 
wounded the dead ? Can we say it of the Christ himself, that we never crucified the 
Son of God afresh ? And now we look up to the great Father of our spirits, and the 
God of our salvation, and pray him to bless all we love, to make them hia own now 
and evermore. His kindness is truer, deeper, wiser than our own. "The Lord 
bless them and keep them." "The Lord deal kindly with them." — W. M. 8. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER I. 16—22. 



Ter. 16.— And she aaid, Behold, thy 
■ister-in-law is gone back to her people, 
and to her gods: retarn thou after thy 
Blster-in-Iaw. The expression that stands 
in King James's version thus, "and to her 



fods," is rendered by Dr. Oasael " and to 
er God." The same interpretation, it is 
noteworthy, is given in tie Targum of 
Jonathan, who renders the expression, 

" and to her Fear " (Plfllpn'n nj!??). Such a 
translation assumes that the Moahites were 
not only theists, but monotheists. And yet 



CH. L 16—22.] 



THE BOOK OF BOTH. 



19 



in the mythology, or primitive theology, of 
Moab, we read both of Baal-Feor and of 
Chemosh. As to the former, see Kum. zxv. 
S, 6 ; Deut. ir. 3 ; Pa. cvi. 28 ; Hosea ix. 
10. As to the latter, see Judges xi. 24 ; 
1 Kings zi 7, 33 ; Jer. xlviii. 7, 13. In 
Numbers, moreover, iiL 29, and in Jere- 
miah xlviii. 46, the Moabites are called the 
people of Chemosh, and frequently b their 
national god called Chemosh in the inscrip- 
tion of King Mesha on the Moabitish Stone, 
■o recently discovered and deciphered. It 
is supposed, not without reason, that the 
two names belonged tc one deity, Chemosh 
being the old native name. Kevertheless, 
the tinnslation " to her god " is an interpret- 
ation, not a literal rendering, and, on the 
other hand, the translation "to her gods" 
would, on the hypothesis of the monotheism 
of the Moabites, be unidiomatic. The ori- 
ginal expression, "to her Elohim," does not 
tell anything, and was not intended by 
Naomi to tdl anything, or to hint any- 
thing, of a numerical tmaracter concerning 
the object or objects of the Moabitish wor- 
•hip. It wag an expression equally appro- 
pnate whether there was, or was not, a 
plurality of objects worshipped. It might be 
liberally rendered, and to her own forms of 
religious worship. The word elohim was a 
survival of ancient polytheistic theology and 
worship, when a plurality of powers were 
held in awe. "For," says Fuller, "the 
heathen, supposing that the whole world, 
with all the creatures therein, was too great 
a diocese to be daily visited by one and the 
same deity, they therefore assigned sundry 
gods to several creatures." The time arrived, 
however, when the great idea flashed into 
the Hebrew mind, The Powers are One/ 
and hence the plural noun, with its sub- 
tended conception of unity, became con- 
stmed with verbs and adjectives in the 
singular number. It was so construed when 
applied to the one living God ; but it readily 
retained its original applicability to a plur- 
ality of deities, and hence, in such a passage 
as the one before us, where there is neither 
adjective nor verb to indicate the number, 
the word is quite incapable of exact render- 
ing into English. Orpah had returned to 
her people and her Elohim. Beturn thou 
after thy sister-in-law. Are we then to 
suppose that Naomi desired Ruth to return 
to ner Moabitish faith S Is it with a slight 
degree of criticism that she referred to 
Orpah's palinode? Would she desire that 
Kuth should, in this matter, follow in her 
dster-in-laVs wake? We touch on tender 
topics. Not unlikely she had all along 
gOBTiected or seen that Orpah would not 
have insuperable religious scruples. And 
not unlikely, too, she would herself be free 
from narrow teii^ra bigotij, at least to the 



extent of dimly admitting that the true wor- 
ship of the heart could reach the true God, 
even when offensive names, and forms, and 
symbolisms were present in the outer courts 
of the creed. Nevertheless, when she said to 
Ruth, " Return thou after thy sister-in-law," 
she no doubt was rather putting her daughter- 
in-law to a final test, and leading her to 
thorough self-sifting, than encouraging her 
to go back to her ancestral forms of worship. 
"God," says Fuller, "wrestled with Jacob 
with desire to be conquered ; so Naomi no 
doubt opposed Ruth, hoping and wishin;> 
that she herself might be foiled." 

Ver. 16. — And Buth said, Insist not on 
me forsaking thee : for whither thou goest, 
I will go. Ruth's mind was made up. Her 
heart would not be wrenched away from her 
mother-in-law. The length of the journey, 
its dangers, and the inevitable fatigue accom- 
panying it, moved not, by so much as a jot, 
her resolution. Had not her mother-in-law 
the same distance to travel, the same fatigue 
to endure, the same perils to encounter ? 
Might not the aged traveller, moreover, 
derive some assistance and cheer from the 
company of a young, ready-handed, and 
willmg-hearted companion? She was re- 
solved. Nothing on earth would separate 
them. Wheresoever thon lodgest, I will 
lodge. A better version than Luther's, 
"Where thou stayest, I will stay" (wo du 
bleibest, da bleibe ich aueh). The reference 
is not to the ultimate destination, but to the 
nightly halts. \V^ is the verb employed ; 
and it is rendered "to tarry all night" in 
Gen. xxiv. 54 ; xxviii 11 ; xxxi. 54 ; Judges 
xix. 6, &c. It is the Latin pernoctare and 
the German iibemachten, the former being 
the rendering of the Vulgate, and the latter 
the translation in the Berlenburger Bibel. 
Thy people (is) my people, and thy God my 
God. There being no verb in the original, 
it is well to supply the simplest copula. 
Ruth claims, as it were, Naomi's people 
and Naomi's God as her own already. 

Ver. 17. — Where thou diest, will I die, 
and there will I be buried. She wished to 
be naturalised for life in Naomi's fatherland. 
Nor did she wish her remains to be con- 
veyed back for burial to the land of her 
nativity. So may Yahveh do to me, and 
still more, but death only shall part me 
and thee. She appeals to the God of the 
Israelites, the one universal God. She puts 
herself on oath, and invokes his severest penal 
dbpleasure if she should suffer anything 
less uncontrollable than death to part her 
from her mother-in-law. " So may Yahveh 
do to me." It was thus that the Hebrews 
made their most awful appeals to Yahveh. 
They signified their willingness to suffer soma 
dire calamity if they should either do th<> 
i 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



rcH. 1. 1&— 22. 



eTil deed repudiated or fail to do the good 
deed promised. So stands in misty indefi- 
niteness ; not, as Fuller supposes, hj way of 
'leaving it to the discretion of God Al- 
mighty to choose that aiTow out of his 
quiver which he shall think it most fit to 
snoot," but as a kind of euphemism, or 
cloudy veil, two-thirds concealing, and one- 
thiid revealing, whatever horrid infliction 
could by dramatic sign be represented or 
hinted. And still more — ^a thoroughly 
Semitic Idiom, arid so may he add {to ao) I 
There was first of aU a full imprecation, and 
then on additional ' bittock,' to lend intens- 
ity to the asseveration. " But death only 
shall sever between me and thee 1 " Buth s 
language is broken. Two formulas of impre- 
cation are flung together. One, if complete, 
would have been to this effect: "So may 
Yf^veh do to me, and so may he add to do, 
'if' (D|j) aught but death sever between me 
and thee 1 " The other, if complete, would 
have run thus : "I swear by Yahveh ' that ' 
(*5) death, death only, shall part thee and 
mel" In the original the word rfcafA has 
the article, death emphatically. It is as if 
she had said death, the great divider. The 
fall idea is in substance death alone. This 
divider alone, says Ruth, "shall sever between 
me and thee ;" literally, "between me and 
between thee," a Hebrew idiom, repeating 
for emphasis' sake the two-sided relationship, 
but taking the repetition in reverse order, 
between me {and thee) and between thee 
{a/nime). 

Yer. 18. — And she perceived. In our 
idiom we should have introduced the proper 
name, "And Naomi perceived." That she 
wag determined to go with her. She saw 
that Ruth was fixed in her resolution. And 
she left off speaking to her. She "gave in." 
Ruth, as Fuller has it, was "a fixed star." 

Ver. 19. — And they two went — they 
trudged along, the two of them — until they 
came to Bethlehem. In the expression 
" the two of them " the masculine pronoun 
(Dn for )p) occurs, as in verses 8 and 9. It 
mirrors in language the actual facts of rela- 
tionship in life. The masculine is some- 
times assumptively representative of both 
itself and the feminine. And sometimes, 
even apart from the representatire element, 
it is the overlapping and overbearing gender. 
And it came to pass, as they entered Beth- 
lehem, that the whole city got into com- 
motion concerning them, and they said, Is 
this Naomi % Naomi, though greatly altered 
in appearance, besides being travel-worn and 
weanr, was recognised. But who was that 
pensive and beautiful companion by her side f 
where was Elimeleoh ? Where was M»ch- 
lon and ChilionI Why are they not with 
their mother I Such wonld be some of the 



qnestions started, and keenly talked stwat 
and discussed. Then on both the way&ren 
the finger-marks of poverty, involuntary 
signals of distress, would be unconcealable. 
Interest, sympathy, gossip would be alive 
throughout the little town, especially among 
the female portion of the population, and 
loud would be their exclamations of suiprise. 
Th* verb they said is feminine in Hebrew, 
njIDNFll, a nicely which cannot be repro- 
duced in English without obtruding toe 
prominently the sex referred to, as in 
Michaelis'g version — "and all the women 
said." So the Vulgate. The verb which we 
have rendered got into commotion is fonnd 
in 1 Sam. iv. 5— "the earth rang again;" 
and in 1 Kings L 45—" the city rang again." 
Yer. 20. — And she said to them, Call me 
not Kaomi, call me Uara : for the Almighty 
hath dealt very bitterly with me. Salut- 
ations were respectfully addressed to her as 
she walked along in quest of some humble 
abode. And when thus spoken to by the 
sympathetic townspeople, she was called, of 
course, by her old swe^ name. But as it 
fell in its own rich music on her ears, its 
original import flashed vividly upon her mind. 
Her heart " filled " at the contrast which her 
circumstances represented, and she said, 
"Address me not as Kaomi, call not to me 

(v) Naomi: address me as Mara," — that 
is, bitter, — "for the Almighty has caused 
bitterness to me exceedingly " (see on vei. 2). 
The Almighty, or '3^, an ancient polythe- 
istic name that had at length— like D'j]v{? 
and '31)? — been reclaimed in all its ful- 
ness for the one living and true God. It 
had become a thorough proper name, and 
hence it is used without the article. In the 
Septuagint it is sometimes rendered, as here, 
o iKavSs, the Sufficient; in Job, where it 
frequently occurs, o Trairoicparcup, tAe Omni- 
potent. But it is one of those peculiar nouns 
that never can be fully reproduced in any- 
Aryan language. Naomi's theology, as indi- 
cated in the expression, " the Almighty hath 
caused bitterness to me exceedingly, ' need 
not be to its minutest jot endorsed. God 
was not the only agent with whom she had 
had to do. MuMi of the bitterness of her 
Idt may have been attributable to her hus- 
band or to herself, and perhaps to forefathers 
and foremothers. It is not fair to ascribe all 
the embittering element of things to God. 
Much rather might the sweetness, which 
had so ofton relieved the bitterness, be 
traced to the hand of him who is "the 
Lord God, merciful and gracious, abundant 
in goodness." 

Ver. 21.— I went forth fall, and Yahveh 
has caused me to return in emptiness. Why 
should you call ma Naomi, and Yahveh hM 



CH. I. 16—22.] 



THE BOOK OF BUTH. 



11 



testified against me, and the Almighty has 
brought evil upon me? She went forth 
" full," with husband and sons, not to speak 
of goods. She was under the necessity of 
returning in emptiness, or with empty 
hands. The Hebrew word Dip^H does not 
exactly mean empty, as it is rendered in the 
Septuagint, the Vulgate, and King James's 
version. It is not an adjective, but an 
adverb, emptily. This lamentable change 
of circumstances she attributed to the action 
of Yahveh. He had, she believed, been 
testifying against her by means of the trials 
through which she had passed. She was 
right in a certain conditional acceptation of 
her language ; but only on condition of that 
condition. And, let us condition her de- 
clarations as we may, she was probably in 
danger of making the same mistake concern- 
ing nerself and her trials which was made 
bjr Job's comforters in reference to the cala- 
mities by which he was overwhelmed. In 
so far as penal evil is concerned, it may be 
traced directly or circuitously to the will 
and government of God. " Shall there he 
evil — that is, penal evil — in a city, and the 
Lord hath not done it 1 " (Amos iii. 6). But 
there are many sufferings that are not 
penal. The evil that is penal is only one 
segment of physical evil ; and then there 
is besides, metaphysical evil, or the evil that 
consists in the inevitable imperfection of 
finite being. It is noteworthy that the 



participle of the Hlphilio verb iniU employed 
by Naomi is alwajrs translated in King 
James's version eml doer, or wicked doer, 
or evU, or wicked. Naomi, in using such s 
term, and applying it to Yahveh, was walk- 
ing on a theological precipice, where it is 
not needful that we should accompany her. 
Instead of the literal expression, and' 
Yahveh, we may, with our English wealth of 
conjunctions freely say, 'when' Yahveh. 
There is a charm in the original simplicity. 
There is likewise a charm in the more com- 
plex structure of the free translation. 

Ver. 22. — So Naomi returned. The nar- 
rator pauses to recapitulate his narrative of 
the return, and hence the recapitulatory so 
is, in English, very much to be preferred to 
the merely additive and of the original. 
And Ruth the Moabitess, her danghter-in- 
law, with her, who returned out of the land 
of Uoab. The cumulative and apparently 
redundant expression, " who returned out of 
the land of Moab," is remarkable at once 
for its simplicity and for its inexactitude. 
Buth, strictly speaking, had not returned, 
but she took part in Naomi's return. And 
they arrived in Bethlehem at the commence- 
ment of barley-harvest Barley ripened 
before wheat, and began to be reaped some- 
times as early as March, but generally in 
April, or Abib. By the time that the barley- 
harvest was finished the wheat crop would 
be ready for the sickle. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 16 — ^22. — Devoted attachment. I. Buth was iixed in her desire and deter- 
mination to CAST IN HEB LOT WITH HER DESOLATE AND DESTITUTE MOTHER-IN- 
LAW. The absolute unselfishness of this determination is noteworthy, for — 1. Be 
it noted that Naomi was not one of those who are always murmuring and complain- 
ing because they do not receive sufScient consideration. 2. Still less did she claim 
as a right, or urge as a duty, that her daughter-in-law should become her companion 
in travel, and wait upon her as an attendant. 3. On the contrary, she was careful to 
put Buth in an attitude of entire freedom, so that, if she had a secret wish to go 
back to her Moabitish friends, she could have gratified her desire without laying 
herself open to the imputation of coldness or ingratitude. 4. Buth was tested 
nevertheless, as all of us in our respective relations have either already been or will 
be. Eve, for instance, was emphatically tested. So was Adam. Abraham too. 
Joseph also. Very particularly the second Adam, our Lord Jesus Christ, when he 
was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness. Judas was tested when the demon of 
cupidity entered into his heart. So was Peter when he stood warming himself at the 
fire in the court of the liigh priest's palace. All who are <Wed are tested. And all 
men without exception have to endure tris\ and iri'als. It was as regards the strength 
of her attachment to her mother-in-law that Buth was tested. Not only did Naomi 
hold out no hopes of home-comfort in Judah, she expressly said, dissuasively, when 
Orpah had gone back, " Behold, thy sister-in-law has gone back to her people, and to 
her Elohim: return thou after thy aister-in-law" (ver. 15). 5. Buth stood the test. Not 
80 did Eye. Not so Adam. But Abraham stood it. So Joseph. Emphatically did 
Jesus stand it, so that he knows how to succour those who are tempted. Judas did 
not stand the test. Nor at first did Peter, though afterwards he repented, and, when 
noonverted, was able to strengthen his brethren, Buth, for love to Naomi, wm 



22 THE BOOK OF BUTH. [om. l 16—22. 



able to say in her heart, " Farewell, Melchom I Farewell, Cheniosh I Farewell, 
Moab 1 Welcome, Israel I Welcome, Canaan I Welcome, Bethlehem I " (Fuller) 
6. She witnessed a good and most noble confession of love and devotedness (see 
vers. 16, 17). She said, " Insist not on me forsaking thee ; for whither thou goest, I 
will go ; wheresoever thou lodgest, I will lodge ; thy people is my people, and thy 
■ God my God : where tbou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried. So may 
Yahveh do to me, and still more, if aught but death part thee and me." " Nothing," 
says Matthew Henry, " could be said more fine, more brave. " " Truly," says Dr. Kitto, 
" iho simple eloquence of the mouth that speaks out of the abundance of the heart 
never found more beautiful and touching expression than in these words of this 
young widow " (' Daily Bible-Illustrations '). " Her vow," says 8. Cox, " has 
stamped itself on the very heart of the world ; and that not because of the beauty 
of its form simply, though even in our English version it soimds like a sweet and 
noble music, but because it expresses in a worthy form, and once for all, the utter 
devotion of a genuine and self-conquering love. It is the spirit which informs and 
breathes through these melodious words that make them so precious to us, and that 
also renders it impossible to utter any fitting comment on them " (' Book of Ruth,' 
pp. 72, 73). Be it borne in mind that something of the same enthusiasm of love, 
that dwelt in the heart of Ruth, should be f oimd in the centre of every home. Where- 
soever a heart is swayed and dominated by the might and mastery of a great 
affection, the entire character becomes clothed with mingled dignity and beauty. 

II. The entry op the two widows into Bethlehem. There was no more talk, no 
more thought, of turning back. The hearts of the two widows were locked together 
for ever. Hence they travelled on from stage to stage, until, worn and wearied, they 
entered Bethlehem. 1. Note the effect on the citizens, especially the female portion 
of them (see ver. 19). Naomi, passing along through the streets, was recogsiBed. 
The news flew from individual to individual, from house to house, from lane to lane. 
There was a running to and fro of excited mothers and maidens. All were eager to 
see the returned emigrant, and her pensive Moabitish companion. Her old acquaint- 
ances, in particular, when they had seen and identified her, broke up into groups, 
and talked, and said. Is that Naomi ? That, Naomi I Is this Naomi ? This, Naomi I 
" So unlike is the rose when it is withered to what it was when it was blooming." 2. 
Note the effect on Naomi herself. As she looked on old scenes, and witnessed the 
excitement and commotion of old neighbours and acquaintances, her heart felt over- 
whelmed within her, and she said to the sympathising friends who clustered around 
her, " Call me not Naomi, call me Mara : for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly 
with me " (see vers. 20, 21 ). But it surely will be permitted to us not only to mingle 
our tears with those of the afflicted widow, but likewise to pause reverently ere we 
unreservedly accept or endorse her attribution of all her trials and woes to the hand 
and heart of the Lord. It should nevertheless be borne in mind that even those trials 
that come most directly from men's own acts or choices come to pass by the per- 
mission of the Almighty, and are so overruled by him that they will be made to work 
for good to them who love him (Rom. viii. 28). 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 16 — 18. — Constancy. For simple pathos and unstudied eloquence, this lan- 
guage is unsurpassed. " One touch of nature makes the whole world kin." Here is 
the fervent outpouring of a true heart. Love and resolution are at their height. 
Thousands of human souls have expressed their mutual attachment in these words. 
They are not words of extravagance or of passion, but of feeling, of principle, of a 
fixed and changeless mind. Constancy must be admired, even by the inconstant. 

I. There were infliiencbb opposed to Ruth's constancy. 1. Early associations 
and friendships would have tied her to Moab. 2. The entreaty of Naomi that she 
would return set her perfectly free to do so, if she had been disposed. 8. The 
example of her sister-in-law, Orpah, could not but have some weight. Orpah had 
been, like Ruth, kind alike to the living and the dead, yet she wept, kissed her mother- 
in-law, and returned. 4. The religion of her childhood could scarcely have beea 



«H. 1. 16—22.] THE BOOK OP BUTE. 



without attractions for her. Could she leave the temples, the deities, the ohserrances 
of her earliest days behind ? 

II. There ■were manifestations op pious constancy in Ruth's resolves. 1. Slie 
would go with Naomi, though by an unknown route. 2. She would dwell with 
Naomi, though in an unknown home. 3. She would die with Naomi, though to be 
buried in an unknown grave. 

III. There was a religious foundation for Ruth's constanot. 1. Apparent 
from the resolution — " Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God." 8. 
Apparent from the adjuration she employed — " 'The Lord do so," &c. 

IV. The triumph and recompense of Ruth's constancy. 1. Her fidelity and 
devotion were reciprocated by Naomi. 2. In the providence of God Buth was 
rewarded by an honourable position and a happy life. — T. 

Vers. 19 — 21. — Heart wounds reopened. Return after long absence to scenes of 
youth always affecting ; he who returns is changed ; they who receive him are 
changed too. Observe the reception which Naomi met from her former neighbours 
at Bethlehem. Their question, "Is this Naomi?" evinces — 1. Surprise. She is 
living I We see her again I Yet how is she changed 1 2. Interest. How varied 
has been her experience whilst absent I And she loves Bethlehem so that she returns 
to it in her sorrow 1 3. Compassion. " All the city was moved about them." How 
could those who remembered her fail to be affected by the calamities she had passed 
through ? Consider the sentiments expressed by Naomi upon her return. 

I. Her grief was natural and blameless. " I went out full," t. e. in health, in 
youth, with some earthly property ; above all, with husband and sons. " The Lord 
hath brought me home again empty," t. e. aged, broken down in health and spirits, 
poor, without kindred or supporters. " Call me not Naomi," i. e. pleasant ; " call 
me Mara," i. e. bitter. Her lot was sad. Religion does not question the fact of 
hnman trouble and sorrow. And she was not wrong in feeling, in the circumstances, 
the peculiar pressure of grief and distress. We remember that " Jesus wept." 

II. Her recognition of God's providence was right ; was a sign of piety. She 
attributes all to the Almighty, to the Lord. Observe that in two verses this acknow- 
ledgment is made four times. In a world over which God rules we should acknow- 
ledge his presence and reign in all human experience. If trouble comes to us by 
means of natural laws, those laws are ordered by his wisdom. If by human agency, 
that agency is the result of the constitution with which he has endowed man. If as 
the result of our own action, he connects actions with their consequences. Therefore, 
let us reverently recognise his hand in all that happens to us ! 

III. Her interpretation of God's providence was mistaken. " The Lord," said 
Naomi, '"hath testified against me." Men frequently imagine that if God could 
prevent afflictions, and yet permits them, he cannot regard the afflicted in a favour- 
able and friendly light. But this is not so. " Whom he loveth he chasteneth." The 
Book of Job warns us against misunderstanding the meaning of calamity. Christ 
has also warned us against supposing that Divine anger is the explanation of human 
griefs and sufferings. "All things work together for good unto those who love 
Qod." How often is it true, as the poet Cowper knew and sang— 

" Behind a frowning providence 
God hides a smiling face t " T* 

Vers. 16, 17. — "Entreat me not to leave thee." A mother and a daughter-in-law 
are to go together. The daughter wishes it, and petitions with most eloquent ardour 
that it shall be so. A mother-in-law is sometimes — alas, too often — the subject of 
criticism and satire. It is a difiScult position to fill, and many bitterly unkind and 
untrue caricatures have been made upon the relationship. In this case Naomi had 
made herself beloved by both Orpah and Ruth, and it was only through Naomi's 
words, " Turn again," that Orpah went back ; for they had both said, " Surely we will 
return with thee unto thy people." Ruth, however, remained firm^ and her fidelity 
has made these words quickening to many undecided souls. 

I. Entreaty may peovb too earnest. " Entreat me not" K is the language of 



24 THE BOOK OF RUTH. ^CE. I. 16—22. 

a heart that feels what limits there are to the power of resistance within us. Test 
may turn in unwise hands into overpowering temptation. Naomi knew where to 
stop, and Ruth remains to us a picture of heroic devotion. Orpah failed in courage, 
but was not destitute of afEection, for her farewell is accompanied with a kiss oi 
love. In her character we see impulse without strength. But "Ruth clave unto 
her." And it was no light sacrifice to leave fatherland and home. We can hardly 
call the test at first a religious one, for it is evident that Ruth's love for her mother- 
in-law was the immediate occasion of her cleaving to her, and leaving the Moabitisb 
gods. In time, doubtless, her nominal faith turned into a living heritage. 

II. Love creates the finest eloquence. There is no utterance in the Old Testa- 
ment more pathetic and melodious than these words. They are idyllic in their 
eloquence. There is nothing stilted or artificial in them, and they have in them a 
rhythm of melody which is more beautiful than a mere rhyme of words. Courage 
and sacrifice, love and devotion, breathe all through them. They condense too all 
that is prophetic of coming experience — the lodging and the loneliness, the weary 
pilgrimage and the grave in a foreign land. The mind cannot frame sentences like 
these without the glow of a sincere and sacrificial heart. We feel as we read them 
what grandeur there is in human nature when love evokes all its depth of power. 
It is not a skilful touch that can do this, but a soul alive to the calls of love and 
duty. 

III. No TRUE LIFE WAS EVER LIVED IN VAIN. It Was what Naomi had been to her, 
what she was in herself, that made this sacrifice possible. Love creates love. The 
charm of friendship may be merely intellectual, and then, after the feast of reason, 
all is over. But Naomi's character was rooted in religion. She did not carry 
the mere roll of the prophets in her hand ; she carried the spirit of the Holy Book 
in her heart. Ruth had never been in synagogue or temple ; she had listened to no 
Rabbi, and never sat at the feet of the doctors ; but as " the earliest piety is mother's 
love," so the character of a true mother is a stem around which the tendrils of the 
young heart climb to the mother's God. None of us liveth to himself. And so from 
the flower of piety, the seed drops into other hearts, and brings forth fruit after 
many days. — W. M. S. 

Ver. 18. — Moral steadfastness. " When she saw that she was steadfastly minded." 
"Then she left speaking." The test had done a true work, and we see the heroine 
who could stand fast. Yes; "having done all, to stand," is something in the great 
emergencies and temptations of life. There are times when to stand in the rush 
of the stream, as the river breaks into spray around us, is as much for the hour as 
we can do, and God knows and honours that. 

I. The steadfast mind gives the steadfast step. A double-minded man is 
unstable in all his ways. Veering here and there like the wind, there is no depend- 
ence on the direction he may take. The man or the woman is made by something 
within them invisible to the world. When Christ was led as a lamb to the slaughter, 
the great conflict had been fought out in Gethsemane, and then the steps were calm 
ana steadfast. What an hour is that in which, in common parlance, " the mind is made 
up," the resolution taken. This is firmness, as opposed to obstinacy, which acts with 
out reasons, and often in the teeth of them. The misery caused in this world by 
obstinate people is to be seen sometimes in the home, where sulkiness of temper 
makes the lives of others miserable Firmness is the result of the thoughtful 
decision of an enlightened mind and a consecrated heart. 

II. The steadfast mind makes the best companion. Ruth was ready for the 
companion journey back to Bethlehem. And in all our life journeys nothing is so 
precious as a steadfast heart. There are times of misinterpretation in all lives- 
times of disheartenment, times of shadow and darkness. In such hours a steadfast 
companion is God's richest gift to us. What consolation it is to know that even 
humanly every support will not give way, that there will always be one eye to 
brighten, one hand to help, one heart to love, one mind to appreciate. The fickle and 
irresolute may have a transient beauty and a winning manner, but these are pool 
endowments without a steadfast mind. 

III. ThS steadfast mind is freed from the INFINITUDK of I.B88BB WOBBIBL 



OH. I. 15—22.] THE BOOK OF RUTH. 26 

It is made up. It is not open to every solicitation. It is negative to doubt and dis- 
trust. This is the rigM way, and nought can move it. The feeble and irresolute 
have a restless life. They are constantly balancing expediences and advantages. 
Christ our Divine Lord set his face steadfastly to go to Jerusalem. The hardest 
journey of all to the shame and spitting, the awful darkness and the cruel cross. If 
we are firm and decided in our purposes we shall not be wasting either time or 
strength upon the solicitations of the popular or profitable. A voice within will amy 
" This is the way, walk ye in it."— W. M. S. 

Ver. 19 — " So they two went till they came to Bethlehem." " They two I " Some- 
times it is husband and wife. Sometimes it is two sisters commencing life together 
in the great city where they have to earn their bread. Sometimes it is two lovers 
who have large affection and little means, and who have to wait and work and hope 
on. Sometimes it is widow and child. " They two ! " What unrecorded histones 
of heroism there are written in God's book all unknown to us. 

I. Hebe is the commencement and close op a pilgrimage. They went. They 
came. So is it of the life history itself. All is enfolded in these brief words. 
What a multitude of figures in Scripture suggest the brevity of life. A tale that is 
told. A post. A weaver's shuttle. The morning flower. So indeed it is. What a 
multitude of incidents would be included even in this brief journey of Naomi's ; but 
these are the two clasps of the volume of life. They went. They came. " Every 
beginning holds in it the end, as the acorn does the oak." 

II. Here is the sight op a city. Bethlehem. Cities with them were not 
like cities with us. Even Bethlehem was called a city. But the old dwelling-places, 
after ten years, have a mute eloquence about them. Other feet come to the well. 
Little children who gathered flowers on the wild hills are now bearing pitchers to 
the well. But after a weary journey how refreshing to the Easterns was the glimpse 
of the white houses on the hills. We look for a city. A city which hath foundations. 
A city where our beloved are ; for God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. 
We do not think of it in health and strength and excitement of human interest, 
but cne day we shall look with qvuet longing for the city gates. The evening of life 
will come upon ua, and we shall pray, " Let me go, for the day breaketh." 

III. Here is a pilgrimage ended. Better is the end of a thing than the begin- 
ning, said the wise man. And so it is. " I have finished my course." How much is 
included in that. When the battered ship comes into harbour we take more interest 
in her than the spick and span new vessel with trim decks, and untom sails, and 
scarless masts. When the battle is over we think more of the shot-pierced flag than 
of the new banner borne out by the troops with martial music. We like to see th« 
pilgrim start. But some pilgrims turn back. We like to hear Ruth's resolve. How 
much better is it to see the resolve written in letters of living history. We can call 
no man hero, no woman heroine, till the march is over and the victory won. — W. M. 8. 

Ver. 19. — Never seemed there a sadder contrast. Naomi left Bethlehem in the full 
bloom of womanhood, with a husband and two sons. Elimelech, her husband, died, 
we read, "and she was left and her two sons." They took them wives, and, as 
mothers do, she lived in the hopes and honours of their new homes ; but, after dwell- 
ing in IVIoab about ten years, we read Mahlon and Chilion died also, both of them, 
and the woman was left of her two sons and her husband. A strange land is not to 
strange when we carry home with us ; but it is strange when all that made homt 
lu/me, is gone. We need not wonder, therefore, that not alone for the bread of 
harvest, but for the bread of love, she and her daughters-in-law " went on the way 
to return to the land of Judah." But, with a fine instinct, Naomi felt that what 
would be home again for her would be an alien land to them ; and the tender narra- 
tive tells us how she suggested they should remain, and find rest, each of them, in 
the place of their people. We well know the sequel to the words of Naomi, " Turn 
again my daughters ; " for Ruth has become with us all a beautiful picture of true- 
hearted womanhood, and a very houseliold name. But it is with the question, " Is 
this Naomi ? " that we now have to deal. She went out full. Not wealthy, perhaps, 
— ^though love it always wealthy, for it alone gives that which worlds want w«aU): 



26 THE BOOK OP RUTH. [ch. i. 15—22. 

to buy. She it coming home " empty," as many have done since Naomi did, in all 
the generations. Bent, and sad, and grey, her worn dress tells of her poverty, her 
garb bespeaks the widow. All in a few years ; all crowded into these few opening 
verses. The pathway of the past is an avenue now, along which she looks to the 
opening days, when the light flooded her steps, and she walked in the warm glow of 
companionship and love. Is this Naomi ? And have not we had this to say again 
and again concerning those whose early days we knew ? There we heard the merry 
shout of children, and there we saw manhood in its strength and prime. Naomi it 
cannot be : that the face we knew as a bride and as a mother t Never I Yet so it is. 
They went out full and came home empty. Yet not empty, if, like Naomi, they keep 
their fellowship with God. 

I. Naomi is a BETusNiNa filqbim. Home has been but a tent life, and the cur- 
tains have been rent by sorrow and death. She tells us the old, old story. Here 
have we no continuing city. Beautiful was the land to which she returned, and in 
that dear land of promise there never was a fairer time than barley-harvest. Many 
and many a harvest-time had come and gone since Naomi went forth, and many a 
reaper's song was silent evermore. As she passed the vines and the oleanders 
fringing the broad fields, bronzed and bright-eyed faces were directed towards her ; 
and here, in the distance, was Bethlehem, its little white houses dotting the g^en 
slopes, its well by the wayside. Bethlehem — home I Oh I that strange longing to 
live through the closing years in the country places where we were bom I It is a 
common instinct. The Chinese have it, and will he buried nowhere else. It is 
a beautiful instinct too — to look with the reverent eyes of age on the tomb- 
stones we used to spell out in the village, to hear the old rush of the river, the old 
murmur of the sea. Strange thoughts fill this woman's mind, as the old picture is 
there with a new peopling of forms and faces. Yet not all new. The workers turn 
to the passing figure, and a gleam of recognition, doubtful at first, lights up their 
eyes. And then the word passes from one to the other, Is this Naomi ? It is the 
same world in which we live to-day. There is also something to remind us that we 
are pilgrims and strangers, that unresting time will not wait one hour for ns. The 
unseen angels hurry us on through love and grief and death. Happy for us if we 
s&y plainly that we seek a country, for the only escape from the ennui of life is the 
satisfaction of the immortal thirst within us by the gospel revelation of eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

II. Naomi is a godly phqbim. Travel-worn and weary, with sandaled feet, she is 
coming to a city sanctified by the faith of her fathers. She had lived in a heathen 
country so devoutly, that Ruth could say, " Thy God shall be my God " — a beautiful 
testimony to Naomi's fidelity, to her victory over idolatrous usages, to her own 
personal influence over others. Thy God ! How serious the eye, how sober the 
mien, of this woman as she comes into the city. She has had a battle of life to fight, 
and she has fought it well. How brave and noble and faithful a woman she is I Is 
this Naomi ? If there is not so much sf what the world calls beauty in her face, 
there is character there, experience there. The young Christian starting on his 
pilgrimage is cheerful enough. His armour is bright and new, his enthusiasm is 
fresh and keen. He goes forth full of enterprise and hope. Do not be surprised if 
in the after years you ask, Is this Naomi ? How careful, how anxious, how depend- 
ent on God alone I What bright visions once filled his soul, how ready he was to 
criticise Christian character, how determined and unfiinching he looked I Well, it 
was a noble promise, and where would the world be without the enthusiasm of youth ? 
Be not surprised now if he looks worn and weary. He has had battles to fight that 
the world knows not of. He has made strange discoveries in the continent of his 
own heart; he has been well-nigh overcome, and casting himself entirely on hia 
Lord, he says, " By the grace of God I am what I am." Look at that weary heart. 
Is that Luther ? Look at that faithless spirit. Is that Peter ? Look at that worn 
soldier. Is that Paul ? But the Lord is with them I Empty, indeed, in a human 
sense was Naomi. Call me not Naomi, she said ; it has lost its meaning. Life is no 
longer pleasant. Cill me Mara, for life is bitter. True-hearted soul I She knew 
that it was bitter, indeed, though it was God's will ; " for the Almighty hath dealt very 
bitterly with mo." Very bitterly I And are we to cover over thsit ? Can we tan^ — 



iiH. 1 16—22.] THE BOOK OP RUTH. 27 

" Thy will is sweetest to me when 
It triumplis at my cost" ( 

We may ting it ; but it is hard to live it. It is glorious to believe in God at ■uoh 
times at all, and to bow with the pain all through our hearts, and to say, " Mu 
God."— W. M. 8. 

Ver. 22 ; it. 1 — 3. — Naomi's history may now be oarried on in the light of these 
texts. 

I. Naomi is an ancestral pilgrim. Ancestor of whom ? Turn to Matt. i. 6, 
and you will find in the genealogy of our Lord the name of Ruth. The earlier part 
of that Divine life, how fresh and beautiful it is — the advent, the angels, the shep- 
herds' songs I The mother, the first visit to the temple, the doctors I And beautiful 
ministry too. Power wedded to mercy, miracles of healing, mighty deeds of love, 
sermons amid the mountains and the cities. True 1 But stand here a moment. It 
is an earli/ evening of life, I admit ; but it is evening. Do you see in the blue 
distance One coming from the judgment hall ? Do you hear the wild cry of the mob, 
"Away with him 1 Away with him 1 Crucify him 1 Crucify him 1 " ? Do you mark the 
crush of the crowd round one fallen form, who fainted beneath the burden of that cross 
which he bore for us all ? Follow him on to the slopes, while Simon, the Cyrenian, 
helps to bear his cross. The soldiers mock him. The crowd insult him. They spat 
upon him, they smote him with their hands, they buffeted him. And now his hands 
and feet are nailed ; his pale face is bowed. Come nearer and gaze. Behold the 
man ! As the reapers asked, " Is this Naomi ? " so we ask, " Is this Jesus ? " Is this 
he whose sweet face lay in the manger ? Is this he whose bright inquisitive face was 
in the temple ? Is this he who passed the angels at heaven's high gate, and earne to 
earth, saying, " Lo 1 I come to do thy will, God." Yes ! Bowed, bruised, broken 
for us. The same Saviour, who now endures the cross, despising the shame. Well 
may we wonder and adore ! He saved others, himself he cannot — ^will not — save I 
More beautiful now than in the stainless infancy of the Holy Child. More beautiful 
now than when by the chores of Galilee's lake, he spake words which mirrored heaven 
more purely and clearly than those waters the gold and crimson of the sky. It is 
the bowed, broken, forsaken, suffering, dying Lord that moves the world's heart. 
He knew it. all In that hour, when his soul was made an offering for sin, he, being 
lifted up, had power to draw all hearts unto him. Is this Naomi? Well might 
angels ask, Is this the eternal Son of the Father ? Is this lie of whom the Almighty 
said, "He is my fellow." Is this he to whom command was given. Let all the 
angels of God worship him ? Yes ! It is he. It is finished. " Lift up your heads, 
ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall 
come m." 

II. Naomi is a pbovided-fob pilgrim. Back to Bethlehem ; but how to live ? 
how to find the roof-tree that should shelter again ? She knew the Eternal's name, 
" Jehovah- Jireh," the Lord will provide. A kinsman of her husband's, a mighty 
man of wealth, lived there : of the family of Elimelech ; his name was Boaz. We 
must not mind criticism when we talk of chance, or happening. The Bible does. 
It is simply one way of stating what seems to us accidental ; although in reality we 
know that the least secrets are in the good hand of him " to whom is nothing trivial." 
Ruth wants to glean 1 And Naomi says. Go, my daughter ; " and her hap — her 
chance — was to light on the part of a field belonging unto Boaz." We know that 
the same old love story, which is new in every generation begins again ; so Boaz 
took Ruth, and she was his wife. So that a new home begins, and a smile plays 
through the tears of the lonely widow. Naomi has some human light again in her 
landscape ; she will see the children's children, and take them by the hand into the 
coming barley-harvests ; she will have some appropriate hopes and joys and interest* 
still. Life to her will not be desolate, because she has still a God above her and a 
world around her to call forth interest and hope. Her sorrow was not greater than 
she could bear, and the summer over, even autumn had its tender beauties before 
life's winter came. So it ever is. Trust in the Lord, and you shall never want 
any good thing. Believe still in your Saviour, and provided for you will be witk 



28 THE BOOK OF BUTH. [oh. i. 16—22. 

all weapons of fence, all means of consolation, all prosperity that shall not harm 
your soul. So true, then, is the Bible to the real facts of human life. It is not a 
book of gaiety, for life is real and earnest, and its associations are mortal and mut- 
able. It consecrates home joy, and yet reminds us that every garden has its grave, 
every dear union its separation. But, on the other hand, there are no utterances ol 
unbearable grief, or unmitigated woe. It says ever to us, Jehovah-Jireh, the Lord 
will provide. And the facts of experience in every age endorse its truth. Aa 
the snows hide flowers even in the Alps, so beneath all our separations and sorrows 
there are still plants of the Lord, peace, and hope, and joy, and rest in him. Blessed, 
indeed, shall we be if we can rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him. We, 
too, shall all change. Time and sorrow will write their experiences on our brow. 
There will be hours in which we feel like Naomi, empty, oh 1 so empty. The cup 
of afEection poured out on the ground, the forest without ifa songsters, the garden 
without its flowers, the home without its familiar faces. We shall see these pictures 
every day, and wonder, more and more, how any hearts can do without a Brother 
and a Saviour in Jesus Christ. But if character be enriched and trained, all is well ; 
for this very end have we had Divine discipline, and the Lord will perfect that which 
concerneth us for the highest ends of eternal life in him. The baptism with which 
our Lord was baptised changed his face, altered his mien, enlarged even his Divine 
experience. He was made " perfect through suffering," and became the Author of 
eternal salvation to all who trust in him. Coming back even to Bethlehem is only 
for a season. As Naomi returns, nature alone remains the same ; the blue roller-bird 
would flash for a moment across her path, the music of the turtle-dove remind her 
of the melody of nature in her childhood ; — ^the peasant garb would tell her of the 
old unchanged ways ; and the line of hills against the sky would remind her that the 
earth abideth for ever. But for her there was a still more abiding country, where 
Elimelech, like Abraham, lived, and where Mahlon and Chilion waited for the 
familiar face that had made their boyhood blessed. And so we wait. The redemp- 
tion we celebrate here is a passover, a memorial of deliverance and a prophecy of 
home. Home where sorrow and sighing, night and death, will flee away ; where, 
no longer pilgrims, we shall no more go out, and where the worn face and the 
weary heart shall be transfigured into the immortal life. — W. M. S. 

Ver. 21. " I went out full, and the Lord hath brought me home again empty." 
It seemed, indeed, a via dolorosa, this path homeward. How expressive the 
words. 

I. Love makes life full. Why, I thought they went out poor ? Yes. Seeking 
bread ? Yes. Yet Naomi's description is true and beautiful. We are " full " when 
we have that which makes home, home indeed, and we are poor if, having all wealth 
of means, we have not love. Well, indeed, has it been said that " the golden 
moments in the stream of life rush past us, and we see nothing but sand ; the angels 
come to visit us, and we only know them when they are gone." We never know how 
empty life is till the loved are lost to us. 

II. The Lord is the Disposgp of all events. " The Lord hath brought me home." 
We talk of Providence when ^goes well with us, when the harvests are ripened, and 
the fruits hang on the wall. But we must not limit Providence to the pleasant. The 
Lord " takes away " as well as gives. It is said that, in the order of reading at the 
family altar, when the late John Angell James was about to conduct worship after 
a severe bereavement, the Psalm to be read was the hundred and third. The good 
man stopped, tears rolled down his face; and then, gathering up his strength, 
he said, " Why not ? It is the Father I " and he read on, " Bless the Loid, my 
soul I " 

III. The fullest home mat sooh be emptied. Yes I We too should feel it no. 
A husband and two sons gone I What converse there had been I what interest in each 
other's pursuits 1 what affectionate concern for each other's weal and happiness I and 
what a wealth of love for Naomi, the centre of all I We feel at such seasons that 
death would be blessed relief for us. The thought comes across us, " I have got to 
live ; " to live on from day to day, attending to the minutiae of duty, and coming hew 
and there so often on the little reUcs of the dead. Home again I That hag music in 



OB. n. 1—9.] 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



it for the school-children, who come hack to the hright home ; bnt to the widow, oh, 
how different I Home again, but how empty I Yet we may learn, even from Naomi, 
that rest and refreshment come to hearts that trust in God their Saviour; and we 
may learn too what mistakes we make. Naomi said, "Why call ye me Naomi, seeing 
that the Lord hath testified against me ? " Natural enough ; but life was Btill 
to have a pleasant side for her. — W. M. S. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER n. 1—9. 



It is by way of introduction to the re- 
maining narrative that the writer says — 

Yer. 1. — And Naomi had, on her husband's 
■ide, a friend. The C'tib reading VTD 
(absolute U,"!?!?) is much to be preferred to 
the K'ri V^O. But I'J^JP is ambiguous in 
import. It primarily means knovm, well- 
known, acquainted, an acquaintanoe (see 
Job xix. 14 ; Ps. Iv. 13 ; bcxiviii. 8, 18). 
But as intimate acquaintances, especially in 
a primitive and comparatively unwelded state 
of society, are generally found within the 
circle of kinsfolk, the word may be used, 
and is here used, in reference to a kinsman. 
The Vulgate translates it consanguineus. 
The translation is interpretatively correct ; 
but the original teim is less definite, and 
henae, in virtue of the ambiguity, there is not 
absolute redundancy in the appended clause, 
of the family or clan of Elvmdeoh. This 
niend of Naomi on her husband's side is 
said, in King James's version, to be a mighty 
man of wealth. But the expression so 
rendered has, in the very numerous passages 
in which it occurs, a conventional import 
that stretches out in a different and nobler 
direction. It is the expression that is so 
frequently translated " a mighty man of 
valour" (see Josh, i 14 ; vi 2 ; viii 3 ; x. 
7 ; Judges vL 12 ; xi 1, &c.). In only one 
other passage is it rendered as it is by King 
James s translators in the passage before us, 
viz. , in 2 Kings xv. 20. There it is correctly 
80 ti-anslated, interpretatively. Here there 
seems to be a leaning in the same direction, 
and yet it is not strongly pronounced. Cassel, 
however, takes the other cue, and translates 
"a valiant hero." "Probably," says he, "he 
had distinguished himself in the conflicts of 
Israel with their enemies." The expression 
originally means "strong in strength" 
{twaroQ laxii, Sept. ), but is ambiguous in 
consequence of the many-sided import of the 

latter word b)T\, which means originally, 
either strength, and then valowr; or, clan- 
nish following (see Raabe), and then military 
host, OT force, at forces; also, faculty or 
ability, and then, as so often "answering 
all things," riches or wealth. The idea of 
the writer leems to be that the friend of the 



widow's husband was a ttrong ami mbstan- 
tied yeoman. He was of the family or clan 
of Elimelech. The word family is conven- 
tionally too narrow, and the word clan too 
broad, to represent the import of iinst^ a» 
here used. The idea intended lies some- 
where between. And his name was Boaz. 
The root of this name is not fonnd, appar- 
ently, in Hebrew, as was supposed by the 
older philologists, and hence its essential 
idea is as yet undetermined. Raabe finds its 
original form in the Sanscrit bhuvanti, 
which yields the idea of prosperousness. 

Yer. 2.— And Ruth the Moabitess said to 
Naomi, Let me go, I pray thee, to the corn- 
fields, that I may glean among the ears 
after whosoever shall show me favour. In 
modem style one would not, in referring, at 
this stage of the narrative, to Ruth, deem it 
in the least degree necessary or advantageous 
to repeat the designation "the Moabitess." 
The repetition is antique, and calls to mind 
the redundant particularisation of legal 
phraseology — " the aforesaid Ruth, the 
Moabitess. She was willing and wishful 
to avail herself of an Israelitish privilege 
accorded to the poor, the privilege of glean- 
ing after the reapers in the harvest-fields 
(see Levit. xix. 9 ; xxiiL 22 ; Deut. xxiv. 
19). Such gleaning was a humiliation to 
those who had been accustomed to give 
rather than to get. But Ruth saw, in the 
pinched features of her mother-in-law, that 
there was now a serious difBculty in keeping 
the wolf outside the door. And hence, 
although there would be temptation in the 
step, as well as humiliation, she resolved to 
avail herself of the harvest season to gather 
as large a store as possible of those nutStions 
cereals which form the staff of life, and 
which they would grind for themselves in 
their little handmiu or quern. She said, 
with beautiful courtesy, " Let me go, I pray 
thee : " or, "I wish to go, if you will please 
to allow me." Such is the force of the 
peculiar Hebrew idiom. " There is no place," 
says Lawson, " where our tongues ought to 
be better governed than in our own houses." 
To the cornfields. Very literally, "to the 
field." It is the language of townspeople 
when referring to the land round about th« 
town that was kept under tillage. It wa. 
not customary to aeparate cornfield fiiam 



30 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



[cB. n. 1— » 



cornfield by means of walls and hedges. A 
simple furrow, with perhaps a stone here 
and there, or a small collection of stones, 
sufficed, as in Switzerland at the present 
day, to distinguish the patches or portions 
that belonged to different proprietors. Hence 
the singular word field, as comprehending 
the sum-total of the adjoining unenclosed 
ground that had been laid down in grain. 
"Though the gardens and rineyards, says 
Horatio B. Ha^ett, " are usually surrounded 
by a stone wall or hedge of prickly pear, the 
groin-fields, on the contrary, though they 
belong to different proprietors, are not separ- 
ated by any enclosure from each other. 
The boundaiy between them is indicated by 
heaps of smaU stones, or sometimes by single 
upright stones, placed at intervals of a rod 
or more from each other. This is the ancient 
landmark of which we read in the Old 
Testament" ('Illustrations of Scripture,' p. 
110). The word^Zd in Hebrew, niJE', de- 
notes radically, not so much plain, as 
ploughed hmd {me 'Sl;a»hf>' a 'Glossar'). In 
English there is a sU^htly varied though 
corresponding idiom lying at the base of the 
Teutonic term in use. A fidd (German Feld) 
is a clearance, a place where the trees of the 
original forest have been felled. The ex- 
pression, that I may glean 'among' the 
earl, proceeds on the assumption that Ruth 
did not expect that she would "make a 
clean sweep of all the straggled ears. There 
might likely be other gleaners besides her- 
self, and even though there should not, she 
could not expect to gather all. After who- 
soever shall shov me favour. A peculiarly 
antic^ne kind of structure in the original : 
" after whom I shall find favour in his eyes." 
Ruth speaks as if she thought only of one 
reaper, and he the proprietor. She, as it 
were, instinctively conceives of the labourers 
as "hands." And she said to her, 6o, my 
daughter. Naomi yielded ; no doubt at first 
reluctantly, yet no doubt also in a sprit of 
grateful admiration of her daughter-m-law, 
who, when she could not lift up her circum- 
stances to her mind, brought down her mind 
to her circumstances. 

Ver. 3. — Ruth, having obtained the con- 
sent of her mother-in-law, went, and came, 
and gleaned in the field after the reapers. 
That is, she "went forth," viz., from the 
city, "and came to the cornfields, and 
gleaned." "There are some," says Lawson, 
" whose virtue and industry lie only in their 
tongues. They say, and do not. But Ruth 
was no less diligent in business than wise 
in resolution." The later Jews had a set of 
fantastic bye-laws concerning gleaning, de- 
tailed by Maimonides. One of them was, 
that if only one or two stalks fell from the 
sickle or hand of the reaper, these should be 
left lying for the gleaners ; but if three stalks 



fell, then the whole of them belonged to the 
proprietor (see CarpzoVs 'Collegium Rab- 
binico-Biblicum,' p. 242). Happily for Ruth, 
her steps were so ordered that the field which 
she entered as a gleaner belonged to Elime- 
lech's kinsman, Boaz. And it so happened, 
runs the story, that it was the portion of 
the fields that belonged to Boaz, who was 
of the kindred of Elimelech. 

Ver. 4. — On the very day that the Moab- 
itess entered on her gleaning, Boaz, in ac- 
cordance with his wont, as a good and wise 
master, visited his harvest-field. And, he- 
hold, Boaz came from Bethlehem. The 
law of kindness was on his lips ; and while 
benevolence was beaming from his counten- 
ance, piety was ruling within his heart. 
He said to the reapers, Yahveh he with 
yon ! And they said to him, Yahveh bless 
theel Courtesy met courtesy. It is a 
charming scene, and we may reasonably as- 
sume that there was reality in the saluta- 
tions. Such civilities of intercourse between 
proprietors and their labourers are stiU, says 
Dr. W. M. Thomson, common in the East. 



"The Lord he with yov,! is merely the 
Allah niakuml of ordinary parlance ; and 
so too the response. The Lord bless theel" 
(' The Land and the Book,' p. 648). Modem 
Moslems are particular in the matter of 
salutations. " Abuhurairah reports that he 
heard Mohammed say. You wM not enter 
into paradise wntil you have faith, and you 
will not complete you/r faith until you love 
one another, and that is shown by making 
talaam to friends and strangers (Kitto's 
' Bible Illustrations,' in loc.). 

Ver. 6. — ^And Boaz said to the young 
man who was set over the reapers. Whose 
is that young woman T His eye had been 
instantaneously arrested by the handsome 
stranger. Perhaps, as Jarchi remarks, he 
took note of the modest and graceful carriage 
of her person while she picked up indus- 
triously the straggled stalks. It is too 
Rabbinic, however, and artificial, finical, 
bizarre, to suppose with the same Jewish 
annotator that Boaz would notice with 
admiration that, while she picked up zeal- 
ously all available couples of stalks, she left 
the triplets in the field unappropriated 1 
The question which he put to the overseer 
is not wh:0 but whose is that young woman f 
She had not the gait or air of an ordinary 

Eauper, and hence he wondered if she could 
elong to any of the families in Bethlehem. 
Ver. 6. — And the young man who was 
set over the reapers replied and said. She 
is a Moabitish young woman who returned 
with Naomi from the land of Uoah. The 
young man had already received, no doubt 
from her own lips, particulars regarding the 
attractive stranger. Instead of the free 
definitive rendering of Luther and King 



o«. II. 1—9.] 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



James's Englisli version, "the Moabitish 
damsel," it is better, with Michaelis, Wright, 
Raabe, to adhere to the original indefinite- 
ness, "a Moabitish maiden." Note the 
Zengmatic nse of the word returned as 
applied here, as well as In ch. L 22, not only 
to Kaomi, but also to 'RaXk. It is thus 
nsed on the same Zengmatic princ iple as the 
word die in Gen. xlvii 19: "wherefore 
shall we die before thine eyes, both vie and 
our landt" 

Ter. 7. — ^e steward continues his account 
of Bath. She hsd respectfully solicited 
leave to glean. She said, Let me glean, I 
pray thee, and gather in bandies after the 
reapers. The expression, "and gather in 
bundles," is In Hebrew D^p^}?.; »p9?«<1, 
and is rendered in King James's version, as 
also by Coverdale, Tremellius, Castellio, 
Luther, Michaelis, "and gather among" or 
" beside the sheaves." But such a request 
on the part of Ruth would seem to be too 
bold, the more especially as we find Boaz 
afterwards giving instructions to the young 
men to allow her, without molestation, to 
glean "even between the sheaves" (ver. 
16). Hence Pagnin's free version is to be 
preferred, "and gather bundles" {et congre- 
gaho mampuloi). Carpzov pleads for the 
same interpretation, and translates thus: 
" Let me, I pray thee, glean, and collect the 
gleanings into bundles" {coUigam ohteero 
spieas, coUectaigue eusaumulem in mani- 
miZos). Montanus too adopts it, and Raabe 
likewise {umd sammde su, Haufen). The 
steward praises Ruth's industiy. And she 
came, and has remained ever since the 
morning until just now. She had worked 
diligently, with scarcely any intermission, 
from early morning. Drusiua says that the 
following expression, rendered in King 
James's version that she tarried a little in 
the house, occasioned him critical torture 
(lo<yu» hdo et diu et acriter me torait). 
Coverdale also had been inextricably per- 
plexed. He renders it, "And within a litel 
whyle she wolde have bene gone home 
agayne." The word house troubled these 
and many other interpreters, as if the refer- 
ence were to Kaomi's dwelling-house in the 
town. The reference, however, is evidently 
to a temporary hut, shed, tent, or booth 
erected in the harvest-field for the siesta of 
the workers, and the accommodation of the 
master, when he was visiting by day, or 
exercising supervision by n^ht. We would 
translate the clause thus — "Her resting at 
the hut (has been) little." Her siesta in 
the shade of the hut was but brief. She felt 
as if she could not afibrd a long repose. 

Ver. 8. — And Boaz said to Ruth. We are 
to suppose that Boaz, having communicated 
with his overseer, and having given some 
instructions to his reapers, and likewise to 



the young women who bound the reaped 
com into sheaves, moved onward to the 
place where Ruth, keeping modestly far in 
the rear, was gleaning. He entered into 
conversation with her, and, among other 
things, said to her, Hearest thou not, my 
daughter I A grave antique way of drawing 
special attention to what is about to follow. 
"My daughter" is a fatherly expression, 
appropriate on the part of an elderly person 
\dien addressing a young woman. So not 
go to glean in the other field. Pointing, no 
doubt, as he spoke, to a 'parcel ' of adjoin- 
ing fields, belonging to a neighbour pro- 
prietor. Boaz's interest and sympathy went 
out strong, all at once, toward the daughter- 
in-law of his deceased relative. His heart 
was smitten with admiration for the modest 
and fascinating widow. He said farther to 
her, as he walked on along with her in the 
direction of the reapers, and also do not 
pass on hence. The expression is not a 
redundant repetition of the preceding utter- 
ance. It was intended, apparently, to direct 
Ruth to a particular line of gleaning-ground, 
probably right behind the sheaf-binders, 
which it would be advantageous for her to 
occupy. He would point it out with his 
hand. And so keep close by my young 
women. Their proximity would give the 
stranger a feeling of security, and her near- 
ness to them in their work would be mani- 
festly for her benefit. 

Ver. 9. — Boaz continues his talk, led on 
by an interest that was, probably, surprising 
to himself. Let thine eyes be oh the field 
which they are reaping. He feels increas- 
ingly anxious concerning the fascinating 
stranger, and gives her excellent counsel. 
" Let not thine eyes be wiled away, wander- 
ingly, fi:om the work on which thou art so 
praiseworthily engaged." And go thou be- 
hind 'them.' The reference is not to the 
same parties, who are indeterminately spoken 
of in the preceding clause — "which 'they' 
are reaping." A determinate feminine pro- 
noun makes it evident that the reference is 
to the maidens, who wero working in the 
rear of the reapers (in'';3D.^ post ecu). Have 
not I charged the yonng men not to touch 
thee ? A fine euphemistic injunction ; that 
was best obeyed, however, when most liter- 
ally construed. And when thou tUrstest, 
go to the jars, and drink of whatever the 
young men may draw. Most likely it would 
be from the well that was "by the gate " of 
the city that the young men would draw — 
that very well of which her illustrious 
descendant. King David, spake, when he 
"longed, and said, O that one would give 
me drink of the water of the well in Bethle- 
hem, which is \n the gate" (see 2 Sam. 
xxiii. 14, 15 ; 1 OiTon. xi 17, 18). When 
the water was drawn bj the young 



ftt 



THE BOOK OF EUTH, 



[oh. n. 1 — 9 



then the maidens wonld carry the filled 
jars upon their heads to the resting-place. 
Gleaners nould not be expected to get the 
freedom of the water which was uius so 
laboriously drawn, and then fatiguingly 
carried from a distance. But Boaz made 
Euth free, and thus conferred on her a dis- 
tinguishing privilege, that must have been 
at once most acceptable and most valuable. 
The Vulgate renders the last clause too 
freely—" of which the young men ' drink.' " 
The familiar well referred to "appears," 



says Dean Stanley, " close by the gate " ol 
the town ('Sinai and Palestine,' p. 163). 
Yet not very close. "It is," says Dr. John 
Wilson, " less than half a mile distant from 
the present village, and is in a rude enclo- 
sure, and consists of a large cistern with 
several small apertures" ('Lands of the 
Bible,' vol. i p. 399). Dr. Wilson has no 
doubt of its identity, though Dr. Bobinson 
hesitated to come to the same conclusion 
(' Researches,' voL ii p. 158). 



H0MILETIC8. 

Ven. 1 — ^9. — The harvest-Jidd. Ruth was eager to wobk (see ver. 2). 1. Woik 

is honourable ; it is wholesome ; inspiriting too ; the best antidote to ennui. If not 
immoderate, nothing is so efficacious in giving full development to Taa.VL's physique ; 
nothing is so potent to put reins upon passions, and a curb on the tendency to morbid 
imaginations. All great men and women have been diligent workers. Jesus worked. 
He who is his Father and ours " worketh hitherto." 2. Kuth did not hesitate to 
stoop to very lowly work. She was willing and wishful to glean in the harvest-fields 
(see ver. 2). She humbled herself, and was free from the pride which goes before a 
fall. She " descended asoendingly." It was in the school of adversity that she had 
been taught. All honest work is honourable. Dignity is lent to the humblest labours 
when they are undertaken in a spirit of magnanimity. 3. Ruth expressed her wish 
to her mother-in-law, and solicited her approval. " Let me go, I pray thee, to the 
cornfields, that I may glean among the ears after whosoever shall show me favour " 
(ver. 2). The request was put in a beautifully deferential way. Nowhere is courtesy 
BO precious as in the home. It is comely when displayed by juniors to seniors. It 
is charming when displayed by seniors to juniors. 4. Naomi yielded to Ruth's request, 
and said, " Go, my daughter. But we may be sure that it would cost her a pang 
to give her consent. The tears would start as she turned aside and said, " Is it come 
to this ? " of it. 6. " A Divinity " was " shaping Ruth's ends," and leading her by a 
way she knew not. She was unconsciously led, as if by a guardian angel sent forth 
to minister, until she lighted on a field belonging to Boaz, a near kinsman of her 
own. " And she went forth, and came to the cornfields, and gleaned, and it so 
happened that it was the portion of the fields that belonged to Boaz, who was of the 
kindred of Elimelech" (ver. 3). While the Divinity was thus " shaping her ends " for 
her, she was herself, to the utmost of her little ability, busy in " rough-hewing them." 
God's agency does not supersede man's, nor does man's supersede God'g. Each of 
us should be able to say, " My Father worketh hitherto, and so do /." 

Boaz enters on the scene. 1. He had some preparation for the part he wai 
about to act in the nearness of his relationship to Elimelech. In the absence of 
infinite comprehensiveness, it is right, as well as natural, for friends to take a special 
interest in friends. 2. Though not a " husband," he was a " husbandman." He had 
a house, and was a house-hand. He was likewise conspicuous for good husbandry. 
He was in some respects a model httshandman. Note his habit of personal inspec- 
tion and superintendence (see ver. 4, and ch. iii.3). Note his courtesy to his workers 
as he passed along : " Yahveh be with you I " (ver. 4). Note the hearty response 
which his courtesy elicited from his men: " Yahveh bless thee/ " Note his habit of 
making inquiries of his overseer in reference to the state of his affairs (ver. 6). 3. 
In position he was a substantial yeoman (ver. 1). Stout in person, we may suppose. 
Stout in principle. Substantial in those resources that make wealth contribute to 
weal. 4. The reason of his loneliness at home is not hinted at. Perhaps some great 
sorrow lay buried in his breast ; perhaps some bright, sylph-like form lay buried in 
the grave. 6. He was now, as regards years, an elder in Bethlehem. Most likely all 
hopes of a brightened home had been for long lying dormant in his spirit. As to hia 
age, it may be inferred from the fatherly way in which he addressed nuth: " Heaiest 
thou, my daughter f " (ver. 8). 



OB. II. 1-9.] THE BOOK OP RUTH. S8 

BoAZ AND Ruth. 1. Scarcely had Boaz entered his field, when his eye wag 
arrested by the vision of an elegant and beautiful gleaner, altogether unlike all the 
rest whom he saw in his field, or had ever seen before. He said to his steward, 
" Whose young woman is this ? " 2. His question was answered, and other inform- 
ation of a highly satisfactory description was communicated. The young woman 
was a Moabite, who had accompanied home Naomi, her unfortunate mother-in-law 
(ver. 6). She had, with unwonted respectfulness, solicited liberty to glean. " She 
said. Let me glean, I pray thee, and gather in bundles, after the reapers " (ver. 7). 
She had been peculiarly diligent since early morning. " She came, and has remained 
ever since the morning, till just now " (ver. 7). Nor had she availed herself much 
of the siesta-booth. " Her resting at the hut has been little " (ver. 7). She seemed 
to grudge every moment that was not devoted to work. 3. Having obtained this 
information, Boaz wended his way to Euth, speaking to the young men as he passed. 
When he came up to her, he was at once thrilled with admiration. He expressed to 
her his desire that she should continue on his fields all through the harvest season. 
" Hearest thou not, my daughter 1 Go not to glean on other fields." He showed her, 
moreover, where she could glean to the best advantage. " Pass not on hence ; keep 
close by my young women." He informed her that, in passing along, he had enjoined 
the young men not to annoy her. " Have I not charged the young men not to 
touch thee ? " He added that she was to be sure to make full use of the water that 
was drawn by the young men, and carried to the field by the maidens. " When 
thou art thirsty, go to the jars, and drink of what the young men have drawn " (ver. 
9). In all this we see the beginning of the reward which was, in the providence of 
God, conferred on noble, self-surrendering, self-sacrificing Ruth. The heart of Boaz 
was moving toward her. The blessing of the Most High was descending on her. 
So, in one form or another, will it descend on all who, in their different sphere^ 
carry with them, according to the measure of their capacity, the spirit that, in beau- 
tiful activity, stirred and heaved within the heart of the Moabitish gleaner. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ch. i. 22 ; ii. 3. — The gleaner. Bethlehem, " the house of bread," was famous for 
the pastures of its hills, and for the rich cornfields in its fertile valleys. The 
barley-harvest usually happened in April, and it was then that Naomi and Ruth 
returned to the village of Judah with which their names are associated. The Mosaic 
law sanctioned the practice of gleaning, commanded that the produce of the fields 
and vineyards should not be wholly removed, but that a portion should be left "for 
the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow." Ruth had, therefore, a right to glean. 

I. Ruth's gleaning indicates the poverty of her condition. None but the 
necessitous would undertake such an occupation. Naomi and she must indeed have 
returned empty. In our land, and in our days, happily for the poor, there is always 
more remunerative work to be had by the industrious poor than this, which accord- 
ingly has, with the growing prosperity of the country, almost dropped out of use. 

II. Ruth's ABSENCE OF PEiDS is Very apparent. The family into which she had 
married had owned some of the adjoining land ; but in changed circumstances she was 
not too proud to mingle with the gleaners, and in lowly guise to gather ears of com. 

III. We cannot but admire Ruth's viRTnous industry. Boaz afterwards said, in 
praise of her conduct, "Thou followedst not young men." She chose a blameless, 
though laborious, life. An example to all to avoid dependence, and to cultivate the 
habit of self-reliance and diligence. 

rV. Remark Ruth's filial love. She worked not only for herself, but for her 
niother-in-law, and found a pleasure in supporting her. 

V. Success attends Ruth's honest toil. She gathered barley with her hands ; special 
favour was shown to her ; a friend was raised up to assist her ; prosperity crowned 
her efEorta. " Thy bread shall be given thee, and thy water shall be sure." — T. 

Ver. 3. — Her hap. Words could hardly be more suggestive than these. They 
may be applied to circumstances in the life of every one of us. There have been 
tuniing-points in our history ; we took one path rather than another, and with results 
BUTE, D 



84 THE BOOK OF RUTH. Im. a. 1— ». 

(aB we now see) how momentous to ourselyes I So was it with Ruth of Moab, tha 
gleaner. 

I. Many of cue actions abk peefobmed without ant thought ob intention 
EEGARDING THEIR RESULTS. In Ordinary affairs how often do we decide and act 
without any special sense of the wisdom of one course rather than another I And 
there are positions in which our choice seems quite immaterial. It seemed of little 
consequence in which field this young foreigner, this friendless widow, went to glean 
a few ears of barley. So is it often with us. Shall we go to such a place ? shall 
we pay such a visit ? shall we form such an acquaintance ? shall we read such a 
book ? shall we venture on such a remark ? shall we write such a note ? 

II. Unforeseen and important issues may depend upon casual actions. Though 
it seemed of little consequence in which field Euth gleaned, " her hap was to light 
on a part of the field belonging unto Boaz," and from this fact sprang results of 
the greatest importance. " Her hap " determined her marriage, her wealth, her 
happiness and that of her mother-in-law, her union with Israel, her motherhood, her 
position as an ancestress of David and of Christ. In such seemingly insignificant 
causes originate the most momentous issues. Thus oftentimes it comes to pass that 
family relationships are formed, a professional career is determined ; nay, religious 
decision may be brought about, life-work for Christ may be appointed, eternal destiny 
ia affected. 

Lessons : — 1. Regard nothing as insignificant. 2. Look out for, and follow, the 
leadings of Divine providence. 3. " In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall 
direct thy paths 1 " — T. 

Ver. 4. — Salutationt. It is a pleasant picture of old-world life among the ancient 
Hebrews, this of the " mighty man of wealth " coming down from his house to his 
cornfields to watch the work of the reapers, the progress of the harvest. Boaz seems 
to have lived on friendly terms with those in his employment, and to have taken an 
interest in them and in their toils. A lesson for all masters and employers of labour. 
And how picturesque the scene when the proprietor meets his labourers, and they 
exchange the customary greeting of the East, sanctified by Hebrew piety 1 Balntir 
tions are — 

I. Sanctioned by Scriptubal usage. E.g. When the mower filleth his hand, 
and he that bindeth sheaves his bosom, " they which go by say, The blessing of 
the Lord be upon you : we bless you in the name of the Lord ! " (Ps. cxxix.). E. g. 
Angels are represented as greeting those they are commissioned to visit. Gideon was 
saluted thus : " The Lord is with thee ; " .and Mary thus : " Hail, highly favoured 
one I the Lord is with thee." E- g. Christ himself was wont to greet his disciples, 
saying, " Peace be with you ! ' E.g. The apostles closed their letters with greetings 
and benedictions. "The Lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means: 
the Lord be with you all 1 " 

II. Founded upon Divinely-implanted principles of human natubk. They 
presume our social existence and nature. They imply sympathy. They express 
friendly and benevolent feelings. 

III. Conducive to the easy and pleasant intercourse of human society. We 
kll feel the influence of courteous address, polite expressions, and the minor benevo- 
lences of life. Christians should not be offended or contemptuous when well-mean- 
ing persons accost them with hand-shaking and minute inquiries after health, &c. ; 
if well meant, courtesies should be kindly accepted. 

IV. In the case of pious persons, expressive op prayerful wishes foe good. 
How many of our common salutations have their origin in piety and prayer I So, in 
the text. The Lord be with you ! The Lord bless thee I So with such phrases as, 
Adieu ! Good-bye I Good morning 1 God bless you I Farewell 1 They all convey a 
desire, a prayer. Let our salutations be sincere, and let our language and onr 
conduct prove that they are so. — T. 

Vers. 6 — 14. — Filial piety and fdelity recognised and recompensed. As " tha 
whole city was moved " at Naomi's return, it is not surprising that the foreman over 
the reapers was able to answer the inquiry of Bo«a — " Whose damsel is this ? " 



•H. n. 1-9.2 THE BOOK OF RUTH. 81 

Though Boaz had not seen her before, he knew her story, and was evidently pleased 
to meet her. His judgments were just, his feelings were appropriate, his language 
was considerate, his conduct was generous. The character of Boaz commands our 
respect ; and his treatment of Buth, from beginning to end, was not only blameless, 
it was admirable. As we follow the simple and interesting narrative, we observe — 

I. Filial piety awakening interest. The beauty of the Moabitess, though in 
complexion or figure she was " not like unto one of the handmaidens " of Boaz, her 
modest demeanour and graceful movements, all excited remark and admiration ; but, 
probably, had he not known of her coming back with Naomi, and of all she had done 
unto her mother-in-law, he would not have addressed her. His interest expressed 
itself in kindly language and treatment, such as were very suitable in the circum- 
stances. In ver. 11 Boaz acknowledges, in appreciative language, her disinterested 
devotion. 

II. Filial putt pbompts an obsebveb's febvbnt fbayeb. In ver. 12 Boaz is 
recorded to have said, " The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given 
thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust." Who 
can contemplate a life of self-sacrifice, of affectionate devotion and service, without 
asking Ood to reward it with a recompense not in man's power to bestow ? No 
prayers are purer and more effectual than those presented for a devoted, dutiful, 
affectionately ministering daughter I 

III. Filial fiktt secubes a geneboub and fbactical becomfensb. Boaz was so 
gratified by what he heard of Ruth's conduct, and what he observed in her bearing 
and language, that he became the agent of Providence in rewarding her excellence. 
He bade her abide in his fields ; he charged the young men to treat her with respect ; 
he bade her take with welcome of the water, the wine, the bread, and the parched 
corn provided for the reapers. She found favour in his sight, and he comforted her 
by his friendly words. 

Lesson : — Divine providence does not overlook human virtue. Not that man has 
merit before God ; but the fruits of the spirit are pleasing to the Giver of the Spirit. 
And God will raise up ministers of recompense for l£e comfort of bis faithful 
children I— T. 

Ver. 4. — " The Lord be with you. And they answered him. The Lord bless 
thee." Nothing is more beautiful in national history than good feeling between 
masters and men. Religion alone can inspire this feeling. It fails before mere 
expediency, and can only be secured by mutual dependence on God and on each 
other. 

I. The living Pbbsbnce. The Lord with us means courage and consolation — 
courage to face diflSoulty, and consolation in all times of depression and dishearten- 
ment. Christ has given us his own gracious promise, " Lo, I am with you alway, even 
unto the end of the world." 

II. The habvest toil. " Said unto the reapers." It is hard work everywhere in 
the glaring heat to put in the sickle, and to gather up the sheaves. We may learn 
from the spectacle the blessed lesson of our duty in relation to others. Let us try 
to cheer and inspire. Some are full of cold indifference, and others of critical com- 

Elaint. We little know what a word of cheer does for others. Blame makes the 
ands hang down, and quenches that music of the heart which makes work pleasant 
and successful. Encouragement is like fresh strength to weary hearts. 

III. The kind besponsb. The benediction of Boaz awakens a corresponding bene- 
diction from the reapers. The harp answers to the hand that sweeps it. Men are 
to us very much what we are to them. " The Lord bless thee." We need never 
despair of this reward. Love begets love. Confidence begets confidence. Blessing 
awakens blessing. This is what we long and pray for — cessation of war between 
capital and labour, and mutual benediction. — W. M. S. 

Ver. 7. " I pray thee let me glean." In rural life no sight is pleasanter than the 

hour when the gleaners come in and " gather after the reapers among the sheaves." 
It bespeaks " something to spare." It is like the " commons " or the grass by the 
ivadaide for the poor man's cattle. We all like the spectacle of plenty ; we all lik* 



36 



THE BOOK OF BUTE. 



[CH. u. 10^17. 



the consciouBneas that the OTerflowings of the cap of plenty are to be tasted bj 
others. 

I. These is wobe for the humblest to do. We may not be permitted to take a 
leading part even in God's great harvest-field, but we can all do Bomething. We can 
glean words of comfort to carry to the bedsides of the sick and the homes of the 
poor. We can glean in the fields of Scripture lessons for the little ones, and promises 
for the broken-hearted. Thank God there is a place in the world for gleaners as well 
as reapers. 

II. There is work to be sought out. It is asked for. " I pray thee." How 
many complain that no one finds a service for them. They are waiters and idlers 
because no one gives them a commission, or secures them a suitable field. They wait 
to be sought out, instead of saying, " Here am I, send me." They wait to be 
besought, instead of beseeching for work. What a glorious day for the Church of 
Christ everywhere when men seek for the honour of service. 

III. All wore demands fersevehance. How constant Buth is I " She came, and 
hath continued from the morning until now." How much spasmodic energy there 
is ; how many ploughs are left mid-furrow ; how many begin and do not finish. It 
is not genius that wins the goal, but plodding earnestness. Ye did run well, glean 
well ; what doth hinder you ? — W. M. 8. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER 11. 10—17. 



Ver. 10. — ^RuTH did not seize the oppor- 
tunity for bewailing the hardship of the lot 
to which she had been reduced, and which 
now constrained her to undertake a species 
of work which at one time she little an- 
ticipated. With beautiful humility and 
modeaty, and in the profoundest gratitude, 
she accepted wonderingly the kindness of 
Boaz. And she fell on her face. A rather 
remarkable expression, physiologically viewed. 
Her face was part of herself. How then 
could she fall on it? It was part of that 
which fell, and yet she is said to fall upon 

(7V) it, as if it had been underneath the 
self-hood that fell. It was what was under- 
most as she bowed herself, so that the pres- 
sure of the sum-total of the body fell on it 
as she gracefully stooped. And prostrated 
herself to the ground. Thus completing, 
and doubtless in no sprawling or clumsy 
way, her respectful obeisance. Her face 
would be made, with sesthetic delicacy of 
movement, to touch the ground. Wherefore 
have I found favour in thine eyes I She 
was surprised, amazed, bewildered. So that 
thou takest notice of me, and I a stranger ! 
Boaz had done far more than merely take 
notice of her. But, with equal gratitude 
and felicity, she specifies not the culminat- 
ing acts of kindness, but the very first step 
that her benefactor had taken. He began 
by tahmg notice of her. There is an inter- 
esting paranoTnasia in the two words *JT?n 
and n^l?J. A foreigner, though unhtiovm, 
and just indeed because unkinovm, is natur- 
ally jurfed and noticed. 

ver. 11. — Boaz's interest and admiration 



grew. And Boaz answered and said to her, 
It has been fully showed to me, all that 
thou hast done toward thy mother-is -lav 
sinee the death of thy husband : and that 
thou hast left thy father and thy mother, 
and the land of thy nativity, and hast come 
to a people whom heretofore thou knewest 
not. When Boaz says, " It has been fully 
showed to me," he probably refers to the 
information which he had received from his 
overseer. The expression rendered "ftUly 
showed " is a fine specimen of a very antique 
idiom, showed-showed (H^H l^H). " Toward 
thy mother-in-law." The preposition which 
we render "toward" is literally "with," 
which, indeed, when laid side by side with 
the Hebrew preposition, looks as if it were 
organically identicaL {X\^z=.eth. Compare 
the old Hebrew etha with the Sanscrit it&h. 
See Eaabe's 'Glossar'). The expression 
which we render "heretofore" is literally 
"yesterday and the day before," a very 
primitive way of representing time past. 
It must have been like balm to the anxious 
heart of Ruth to hear from the lips of such 
a man as Boaz so hearty a "well-done." 
"Ruth," saysthevenerable Lawson, "showed 
no disposition to praise herself. She did 
not claim a right to glean from what she 
had done for Naomi, but wondered that 
such kindness should be showed by Boaz to 
her who was a stranger, and she hears the 
voice of praise from the mouth of one whose 
commendations were a very great honour. 
No saying was oftener in the mouth of Jesua 
than this. He that exalteth himself shall ht 
abased, and he that humhleth himself shMl 
be exalted" 

Ver. 12. — May Tahveh requite thy work, 
and may thy recompense be complete boa 



OB. n. 10-17.] 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



Tahyeh God of Israel, to trust under whose 
wings then art come. Already there were 
streaks of light shooting athwart Boaz's 
hoiizon. His very phraseology is getting 
tipped with unwonted beauty. He sees Ruth 
cowering trustfully under the outstretched 
wings of Him who is " good to all, and whose 
tender mercies are over all his works " in all 
lands (see Ps. xd. 1—4). The metaphor, 
says Fuller, "is borrowed from a hen, which, 
with her clucking, summons together her 
straggling chickens, and then outstretcheth 
the fan of her wings to cover them." " Who 
would not," says Topsell, "forsake the 
shadow of all the trees in the world to be 
covered under ' such ' wings ? " 

Ver. 18. — May I continue to find favour, 
sir, in thine eyes, for indeed thou hast 
comforted me, and cheered the heart of 
thine handmaid, and yet I have not the 
position of one of thy maidens. To be one 
of his maidens was, in her estimation, to be 
in a most desirable condition. She could 
not aspire to that. But as he had spoken 
so graciously to her heart, and soothed its 
sorrows, she trusted he would still befriend 
her. ^iVP^ should not be rendered, with 
the Vulgate, " I have found " (inveni) ; nor, 
with Tremellius and Junius, "I find" (in- 
venio) ; but, with Piscator, optatively, " may 
I find" (inveniam), that is, "may I still 
find, may I continue to find." So Luther, 
Coverdale, and Michaelis. The courtesy- 
expression, rendered in King James's version 
"my lord" (*p.■^^^ = ilfein-iferr or Mon- 
tieur), is used, as Carpzov remarks, in " hu- 
mility and civility." 

Ver. 14. — And Boaz, at meal-time, said 
to her, Come along hither. Luther, Cover- 
dale, and King's James's English translators 
took the expression " at meal-time " as part 
of the report of Boaz's words : "And Boaz 
said. At meal-Hme come along hither." 
But it is evidently to be taken, in accordance 
with the Masoretic punctuation, as the his- 
torical statement of the narrator: "At 
meal-time, Boaz said. Come along hither." 
At meal-time Boaz rejoined Buth, and said 
to her, "Come along hither." Then they 
would walk along in company, till they 
reached the siesta-hut. And eat of the 
bread, that is going, and dip thy morsel in 
the vinegar, or the tour wine that was 
quite a favourite beverage with out-door 
workers. It had a peculiarly cooling and 
refreshing effect. It corresponded to the 
posca used by the Roman soldiery, and 
would, according to circumstances and in- 
dividual taste, be taken either "neat" or 
diluted with water. And she sat by the 
side of the reapers. Probably along with 
the other young women, although the refer- 
MWe to them is accidentally overlapptc' by 



the specification of the male workers. And 
he prepared for her a bunch of parched 
corn. t33V'. is only conjecturally rendered 
"reached" in King James's version, and by 
many other translators. The rendering is 
given under the leadership of the Chaldee 
Paraphrast, who explains the word by t3*E'1X, 
which is a pure Chaldee word for " reached." 
But light is thrown on the old Hebrew word 
by both Arabic and Sanscrit cognates, as 
well as by the Septuagint version (k^oiviai). 
It meant to bind into a hunch or bunches 
(see Fiirst and Raabe). The word is illus- 
trated by modern Oriental usage. Dr. W. 
M. Thomson says, " Harvest is the time for 
parched corn. It is made thus : — A quantity 
of the best ears, not too ripe, are plucked 
with the stalks attached. These are tied 
into small parcels ; a blazing fire is kindled 
with dry grass and thorn bushes, and the 
corn-heads are held in it until the chaff is 
mostly burnt off. The grain is thus suffi- 
ciently roasted to be eaten, and it is ■ 
favourite article all over the country" ('The 
Land and the Book,' p. 648). Mr. Legh, in 
likemanner, states, in MacMichael's ' Journey, 
1819, that, travelling in harvest-time in the 
country east of the Dead Sea, they one day 
rested near some cornfields, "where one of 
the Arabs, having plucked some green ears 
of com, parched them for us by putting 
them into the fire, and then, when roasted, 
rubbing out the grain in his hands " (Kitto's 
' Pictorial Bible, tw loc. ). Sometimes, how- 
ever, the parched com is otherwise prepared. 
Dr. Robinson says, " In one field, as we 
approached Kubeibeh, nearly 200 reapers 
and gleaners were at work ; the latter being 
nearly as numerous as the former. A few 
were taking their refreshment, and offered 
us some of their 'parched com.' In the 
season of harvest the grains of wheat, not 
yet fully dry and hard, are roasted in a pan 
or on an iron plate, and constitute a veir 
palatable article of food. Tliis is eaten with 
bread, or instead of it. Indeed, the use of it 
is so common at this time among the labour- 
ing classes, that this parched wheat is sold 
in the markets ; and it was among our list 
of articles to be purchased at Hebron for our 
journey to Wady Miisa. The Arabs, it was 
said, prefer it to rice ; but this we did not 
find to be the case. The whole scene of the 
reapers and gleaners, and their 'parched 
com,' gave ns a lively representation of the 
stoiT of Ruth and the ancient harvest-tims 
in the fields of Boaz " (' Biblical Researches,' 
vol. iL p. 394, ed. 1841). Boaz had given 
Ruth a kind of Benjamin's portion of parched 
com. She could not use it all. And she 
ate, and was satisfied, and left over. Care- 
fulW reserving, however, and "basketing 



W, CUW «.»» ..»„^»....,A, «,UU J.V1.V V*»i 

IW reserving, however, and "1 
> the liberiu surplus. 



w 



THE BOOK OP RUTH. 



[CB. u. lo—n 



Ver. 16. — And 8h« rose to glean : and 
Boaz charged his yonng men, saying, £yen 
between the sheaves let her glean, and do 
not affront her. Boaz would probably thus 
speak in the hearing of Ruth herself, so that, 
without any fear of reproach, she might feel 
free to take full advantage of the privilege 
accorded her. Boaz wished her to gather a 
large gleaning, no doubt rightly conjecturing 
that there must have been for some time 
past but little superfluity in the larder of 
Haomi. The space " between the sheaves," 
as distinguished from the spaces outside their 
line, would probably be the part whither the 
maidens conveyed their collected armfals, 
and where they bound them into sheaves. 
It would thus be the place where there would 
be the greatest number of 'waifs.' It would 
also be the place in which unprincipled 
gleaners might have the best opportunity 
for stealing from the sheaves. Boaz felt 
nnbonnded confidence in Kuth, and said to 
the reapers, "Afifront her not," namely, by 
saying or insinuating anything to the effect 
tlut she was either pilfering, on the one 
hand, or making herself too forward, on 
the other. The Vulgate version completely 
merges out of sight the poetic beauty and 
tenderness of the injunction by rendering it 
thus : " Do not hinder her." 

Ver. 16.— And even of set pnrpose draw 
out for her from the bundles, and leave 
them, and let her glean them, and do not 
find fault with her. His kindness grows as 
he sees her, or speaks concerning her. He 
gives additional injunctions in her favour, 
both to the young men and to the maidens, 
though the line of distinction between the 
two sexes dips at times entirely out of sight. 
When the sheaf-makers had gathered an 
armful of stalks, and there seemed to be so 
clean a sweep that none were loft behind, 
then they were of set purpose (de industria) 
to draw out some from the bunches or 
bundles, and leave them lying. The act of 
deliberate, as opposed to unintentional, draw- 
ing, is expressed by the emphatic repetition 



of the verb 



The verb thus re- 



peated was a puzzle to the older expositors, 
inclusive of all the Hebrew commentators. 
But comparative philology has clearly de- 
termined its radical import, and thus illum- 
inated its use in the passage before us. It 
does not here mean " spoil, though that is 
its usual signification. Nor can it mean " let 
fall," as in King James's version. It means 
draw out. Do not find fault with her. 
The word is almost always rendered rebuke 
in our English version ; but the force of 
the preposition may be represented thus : 
"do not chide 'with' her." "It was," 
Bsys Dr. Andrew Thomson, "a thoughtful 
utd delicate form of Undnew to Ruth, thus 



to increase her gleanings, and yet to mak« 
them aU appear the fruit of her own in- 
dustry." "There are persons to be mel 
with in social life who, while possessing 
the more solid qualities of moral excellence, 
are singularly deficient in the more graceful. 
They have honesty, but they Have no 
sensibility ; they have truth, but they are 
strangely wanting in tenderness. They are 
distinguished by whatsoever things are just 
and pure, but not by those which are lovely 
and of good report. You have the marble 
column, but you have not the polish or the 
delicate tracery on its surface ; you have the 
rugged oak, but you miss the jasmine or the 
honeysuckle creeping gracefully around it 
from its roots. But the conduct of Boaz, as 
we stand and hear him giving these direc- 
tions to his reapers, proves the compatibility 
of those two forms of excellence, and how 
the strong and the amiable may meet and 
harmonise in the same character. Indeed, 
they do always meet in the highest forms of 
moral gieatness" ('Studies on the Book of 
Ruth," pp. 119, 120). 

Ver. 17. — And she gleaned in the field 
until the evening, and beat out what she 
had gleaned, and it was about an ephah 
of barley. Gathering together her various 
sheaves, lots, or bundles (see ver. 7), she 
threshed them with some suitable rod or 
simple ' flail ' {flagellum), which she had 
either brought with her in the morning, as 
part of her equipment as a gleaner, or had 
obtained at the hut ; or perhaps, like many 
others, she would make use of a convenient 
stone. Speaking of the village of Huj, near 
Gaza, Robinson says, " We found the lazy 
inhabitants stiU engaged in treading out the 
barley harvest, which their neighbours had 
completed long before. Several women were 
heating out with a stick handfuls of th» 
grain which they seemed to have gleaned. 
One female was grinding with a handmill, 
turning the mill with one hand, and occa- 
sionally dropping in the grain with the 
other ' (' Researches,' vol. ii. p. 385). 
" In the evening," says Dr. W. M. Thom- 
son, "you might see some poor woman or 
maiden, that had been permitted to glean on 
her own account, sitting by the roadside, 
and beating out with a stick or a stone what 
she had gathered, as Ruth did. I have often 
watched this process in various parts of the 
countiy " (' The Land and the Book,' p. 647). 
The dUigent gleaner on Boaz's field found, 
after threshing, that she had nearly an 
ephah of bailey. It would be a considerable 
load for a female to carry — about a bushel. 
Josephus mentions incidentally, in. his ' An- 
tiquities ' (xv. 9, 2), that the Hebrew cw oi 
homer was equivalent to ten Attic fiiStitvoi. 
But as the ephah was exactly the tenth part 
of a cor or homer, it follows that the Hebrew 



OH. n. 10—17.] 



THE BOOK OP RUTH. 



•phah was equivalent to the Attic n'tSi/ivoe. 
Moreover, just as the ephah was the tenth 
part of a homer, so the omer was the tenth 
part of an ephah (Exod. xvi. 36) ; and thus, 
if an omer of barley would be somewhat 
ei^^uivalent for natritive purposes to an omer 



of manna, it would be a sufficient daily 
allowance for a man (see Exod. xvL 16). 
Hence Ruth would take home with her what 
would suffice for several da.ys' sustenance to 
Naomi and herseli 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 10 — 17. — 2%e harvest-field again. Let ns return to the Oriental harvest-field. 
Harvest-fields in general are lively scenes. Emphatically so in the Eost, where 
bright weather may be calculated on with almost absolute certainty. Pleasantry and 
work go hand in hand. Dr. W. M. Thomson, speaking of Philistia, says, " When the 
fog dispersed, the whole plain appeared to be dotted over with harvesting parties ; 
men reaping, women and children gleaning and gathering the grain into bundles, or 
taking care of the flocks, which followed closely upon the footsteps of the gleaners. 
AH seemed to be in good humour, enjoying the cool air of the morning. There was 
singing, alone and in chorus, incessant talking, home-made jokes, and laughing loud 
and long " (' The Land and the Book,' p. 543). The harvest scene as represented 
on the shield of Achilles m2y be recalled (see the eighteenth book of the ' Iliad '). 
1. We find Boaz and Ruth still standing where we left them (vers. 9, 10). Surfely 
some great attraction is detaining the busy husbandman, a 'man of affairs.' '2. 
A group of Graces are tripping round about Ruth. There is, firstly, gratitude, 
always lovely and welcome. If in any soul it be meagre, stinted, stunted, ths 
soil of that soul is shallow. There is, secondly, respectfulness. "She fell on 
her face, and did obeisance to the ground" (ver. 10). Respectfulness is the 
homage that is due to a noble nature, and to hira who is the Creator of it. We 
are to "honour the king." True; but we are likewise to "honour all men" 
(1 Pet. ii. 17), for there is something kingly after all in the nature of all. Then 
there is, thirdly, wonder. " Why have I found favour in thine eyes, so that thou 
takest notice of me, and I a stranger ? " (ver. 10). Some accept attentions and kind- 
nesses as things of course. Some almost exact them, as if they were dues. Not so 
the nobler souls. They wonder when distinction is conferred on them. Moses 
wondered : " Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth 
the children of Israel out of Egypt ? " (Exod. iii. 11). David wondered : " Who am I, 
Lord God ? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto ? " (2 Sam. 
vii. 18). Paul wondered : " Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this 
grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of 
Christ " (Eph. iii. 8). 3. Boaz explained to the wondering stranger why it gratified 
bim to show her attention. " It hath been fully showed unto me, all that thou hast 
done toward thy mother-in-law since the death of thy husband : and that thou hast 
left thy father and thy mother, and the land of thy nativity, and hast come to a 

Eeople whom heretofore thou knewest not" (ver. 11). His spirit seems to kindle as 
e proceeds, so that his words become tipped with brightness and beauty. He 
"winds the robes of ideality around the bareness" of mere facts (J. Ingelow). 
He says, "The Lord requite thy work, and may thy recompense be complete 
from the Lord God of Israel, to trust under whose wings thou art come " (ver. 12). 
Words " fitly spoken I " " Words spoken in due season 1 " " How good they are I " 
A word, in particular, of well-deserved appreciation and commendation is peculiarly 
" good." It goes to the heart, and is often mighty to animate to victorious courage 
and hope. Nobler in its aims than "fame," it is yet, like "fame," a "spiu", that the 
clear spirit doth raise, to scorn delights and live laborious days " (Milton). 4. Note 
the fine expression, " to trust under whose wings thou art come." Compare what the 
Psalmist says : " He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide 
under the shadow of the Almighty." " He shall cover thee with his feathers, and 
under Ms wings shalt thou trust" (Ps. xci. 1, 4). Compare what Jesus said: "0 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even 
as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not " (Matt sdii. 
37). Compare what the Christian poet says : 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. {oh. il 10-17. 



" All my trust on thee is stayed ; 
All my help from thee I bring ; 
Cover my defenceless head 
With the shadow of thy wing." 

6. Jnst a« Boaz was turning to complete the supervision of his harvest-field, Kutb, 
with delicate acknowledgments for the past, prefers a humble request for the future. 
•' May I continue, sir, to find favour in thine eyes ; for indeed thou hast comforted 
me, and cheered the heart of thine handmaid, and yet I hive not the position of one 
of thy maidens " (ver. 13). Thus from one to the other, under the impulse of some 
subtle spontaneity, was the shuttle of respectful feeling shot and re-shot. 6. The 
scene is now shifting. The two separate. Boaz proceeds to attend to the various 
details of his husbandry. Euth returns to the monotony of her gleaning. Both 
exhibit a worthy example of painstaking industry. 7. Time advances. The work 
proceeds. The sun hastens towards its zenith. The hour for siesta is at hand. 
Boaz turns once more in the direction of Euth. He rejoins her, and invites her to 
accompany him to the place of temporary shelter, refreshment, and rest. " At meal- 
time Boaz said to her. Come along hither, and eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel 
in the vinegar " (ver. 14). All the workers — but of course not the gleaners — assemble 
around the master. Euth is seated among the rest, and is carefully attended to. 
" She sat beside the reapers : and Boaz prepared for her a bunch of parched com, 
and she ate, and was satisfied, and left over " (ver. 14). Then there is more work. 
Boaz gives still more liberal instructions to the young men. "Even between the 
sheaves let her glean, and do not afEront her " (ver. 15). " And even of set purpose 
draw out for her from the bundles, and leave them, and let her glean them, and do 
not find fault with her" (ver. 16). At length, at the close of the day, Ruth gathered 
her bundles together, and threshed them, and found that she had about an ephah of 
barley — as much as a woman could be expected to carry. Thus is the dawn of 
Ruth's prosperity growing brighter and brighter, and giving promise of a day that 
shall be as "the bridal of the earth and sky." The Lord is "recompensing her 
work." The shadows are fleeing. 

" As morning in the east, 
Stands winged to mount in day, 
So for a swift surprise of joy 
Our God prepares his way (Gibbons). 

So amnredly will there be a corresponding dayspring from on high to all who, in 
the midst of thickening trials, maintain their integrity, and engage in " works of 
faith " and " labours of love." There may be, there will be, differences in the degree 
of prosperity and reward, even as star differeth from star in magnitude and lustre. 
It is not to be expected that all shall have such reversions on earth aB were granted 
to Job and to Ruth. Nevertheless, none will be forgotten. Every several blade of 
grass will have its own drop of dew. Love on the part of man will be crowned with 
love on the part of God. And when love rises to Jesus, the ideal Son of man, 
then it is capped with more love ; for, says he, " my Father will love him, and we will 
come imto him, and make our abode with him " (John xiv. 23). All three will " sup 
together " (Rev. iii. 20). " Sorrow and sighing will flee away." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 15—17. — Liberality to the poor. The customs recorded in these chapten 
remain — many of them — to the present day. As to gleaning, Robinson sayg, 
" The way led us through open fields, where the people were in the midst of the 
wheat-harvest. The beautiful tracts of grain were full of reapers of the Hen&dy 
Arabs, and also of gleaners almost as numerous. These were mostly women ; and 
this department seemed almost as important as the reaping itself, since the latter is 
done in so slovenly a manner, that not only much falls to the ground, but jlso many 
•talks remain uncut. In one field nearly 200 reapers and gleaners were at work, the 
Utter being nearly as numerous as the f oncer." As to threihing, Robinson mantioni 



OH. It 10—17.] THE BOOK OF RUTH. 41 

that " several women were beating out with a stick handfuls of the grain which they 
seemed to have gleaned." As to the parching of com, the same writer says, " The 
grains of wheat, not yet fully dry ana hard, are roasted in a pan or on an iron plate, 
and eaten along with bread, or instead of it." Boaz showed his practical sympathy 
with the widows of the narrative by giving parched com to Euth to eat, and by 
securing that her gleaning should be even more successful and abundant than was 
usual with the maidens. 

I. Liberality to the poor should accord with the cibcumstanceb of the gives. 

II. It should TAKE A FORM ADAPTED TO THE WANTS OF THE RECIPIENT. 

III. It should BE UNGRDDQINQ AND GRACEFUL IN ITS BESTOWAL. 

IV. It should BE INSPIRED BY THE MEMORY OF THE UNDESERVED BOUNTY OF THl 

GREAT Giver, God. 

V. It should NOT COUNT UPON, though it may have occasion to rejoice in, THB 

GRATITUDE OF THE BENEFICIARY. — ^T. 

Ver. 10. — " I am a stranger I " What a touching word. In some cities there is 
the strangers' burying-ground. There they sleep as they lived, separated from their 
brethren. 

I. The Hebrews were kind to strangers. Their Divine revelation gave them 
injunctions concerning the stranger within their gates. They were to be considerate 
and kind to the cattle ; how much more to those made in the image of God like 
themselves ! The young learnt this lesson ; from earliest years they were taught the 
law while " sitting in the house." Boaz knew all this, and he " lived " it. 

II. Strangers have sensitive hearts. Their experiences make them quick to 
feel insult or blessing. Never can they quite escape the consciousness, " I am a 
stranger." In other lands, under other skies, the stranger carries far-away visions 
of the heart within, which make the spirit pensive. Consequently, care and love are 
intensely appreciated by them. Keligion is the life of love and the death of selfish- 
ness wherever it lives and reigns in the heart. 

III. Strangers in time make a fatherland of the new home. So did Buth. 
New ties sprang up ; for love looks forward. Children take the place of ancestors, 
and we live in them. How often we are tempted to forget our own lot. " Eemember 
that ye were strangers," therefore deal kindly with them. Think how precious 
to you was the fellowship of hearts that stole away your sadness as a stranger at 
school, or in the new city of life and duty. What a consolation it is that we are 
never strangers in our Father's sight, and that everywhere we may find " home " in 
God.— W. M. 8. 

Vers. 12, 13. — " The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee.'' 
Here we see that the character of God is gloriously revealed. It is understood by 
Boaz that God is a God of " rewards," and we need not fear that a mistaken notion 
of rewards and punishments will prevail amongst students of the Bible. God's 
highest blessings are given to the soul ; but it remains true that even in the earthly 
life the outworking of duty is blessing. 

I. Here is the historic name. "The Lord God of Israel." What memories 
cluster around that significant sentence I We see in it a " miniature " »f all Hebrew 
deliverance and mercy. 

II. Here is the comprehensive blessing. " A full reward." That must refer to 
the inner self — to the consciousness of heroic fidelity and filial love. Many rewards 
are precious, but no reward is full that does not " bless us iniieed." 

III. Hebe is the homely analogy. " Under whose wings," &c. All nature is 
taken into the illustrative record of the inspired word. The wing 1 How strong 
without. How easily outspread. How " downy " within. So soft 1 so warm 1 The 
rain cannot reach through the outward covering. Notice how roof-like are the 
arrangements of the feathers, and notice also how complete is the canopy. 

IV. Here is the personal trust. " Thou art come to trust." We must not foi' 
get not alone what God reveals himself as, to us, but what responsibility rests ol 
■•, to " »Bt in the Lord."— W. M. S. 



43 



THE BOOK OF BUTE. 



{oh. il 18~-S8 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER II. 18—28. 



Yer. 18. — And she lifted it np, and went 
into the city : and her mother-in-law beheld 
what she had gleaned. She likewise brought 
forth, and gave to her, what she had left 
over after she was satisfied. It would he 
with gratitude and pride that Ruth would 
let her heavy burden slip off into the hands 
of Naomi. It would be with gratitude and 
wonder that Naomi would behold the pre- 
cious load. Other gentle emotions would 
stir within the mother-in-law's hungry heart 
when her beloved daughter-in-law produced 
and presented the remains of her delightfully 
refreshing repast at the tent. The expres- 
sion, "after she was satisfied," is literally, 
" from her satiety. " 

Ver. 19. — And her mother-in-law said to 
her, Where hast then gleaned to-day 1 and 
where hast thou worked? May he who 
took notice of thee be blessed ! The grate- 
ful eagerness of the mother-in-law to get full 
information overflows in a delightful redund- 
«ncy. "Where hast thou gleaned to-day? 
and where hast thou worked ? " She saw at 
a glance, from the magnitude of the load, 
from the bright and beaming countenance of 
her daughter-in-law, and from the delicious 
parched corn which the master had given 
with his own hands, that the day had been 
crowned with peculiar blessings. The lines 
had fallen in pleasant places. Hence her 
womanly and motherly interest to get full 
particulars. Ruth, on her part, would feel 
as if a kind of inspiration had seized upon 
her tongue. And she showed to her mother- 
in-law with whom she had worked, and she 
said. The name of the man with whom I 
worked to-day is Boaz. A thrill would shoot 
through Naomi's heart as that once familiar 
name fell upon her ears. 

Ver. 20. — And Naomi said to her dangh- 
ter-in-law, Blessed 'of Yahveh be he 
who — . The expression is literally, " Blessed 
'to' Yahveh be he who," that is, "Blessed 
in relation to Yahveh be he who," or 
" Blessed be he 1 I carry the desire and prayer 
up to Yahveh," which just amounts, in 
meaning, to this : " Blessed ' by ' Yahveh be 
he who." See other instances of the same 
construction in Gen. xiv. 19, and Ps. cxv. 
16._ Who has not let go his kindness to the 
living and to the dead. Some take these 
words to be descriptive of Yahveh. Others 
take them to be descriptive of Boaz. If 
they be regarded in the former point of view, 
then the foregoing clause must be rendered, 
not, " Blessed by Yahveh be he who," but, 
"Blessed be he by Yahveh who." Dr. 
Caasel assumes, but without any formal 



reasoning or apparent reason, that ths refer- 
ence of the relative is to Yahveh, and henca 
he makes out an ingenious argument in 
defence of the doctrine, that those who art 
dead to us are yet alive to God — the doctrine 
of immortality. It is strained. Yet Raahe 
thinks that the reference is to Yahreh, inas- 
much as Naomi had as yet no evidence of 
Boaz's kindness to the deceased. The reason 
thus given for carrying the reference np to 
God is certainly unsatisfactory ; for, looking 
at the subject from the human point of view, 
it is obvious that Boaz's peciuiar kindness 
to the living was his kindness to the de- 
ceased ; whereas, if we look at the case from 
the Divine point of view, it is difficult, if 
not impossible, to account for the discrimin- 
ation between the living and the dead. The 
first feeling that sprang up in the heart of 
Naomi at the mention of the name of Boaz 
was one of adoration. The next was a 
generous desire in reference to Boaz himself. 
She prayed that he might be graciously 
recompensed by Yahveh for the kindness he 
had shown that day, both toward the living 
— Ruth and herself — and toward the de- 
ceased — Elimelech and his sons. A man oi 
less noble nature might have been ready, in 
reference to relatives in reduced circum- 
stances, to ignore the present, and to bury 
in oblivion the past. After giving scope to 
her feelings of adoration and benediction, 
Naomi, with the prompt and practical 
directness of a true woman, said to her 
daughter-in-law. The man is near to us, 
adding immediately, and with a rapid glance 
at bright contingencies that were in the 
region of the possible, He is one of our 
peculiar kinsmen (our GoUim). She meant 
that he was one of those peculiarly near 
kinsmen who had a right of re lemption 
over whatever lands may have formerly be- 
longed to her, and the first right of purchase 
over whatever lands might yet remain in 
the possession of herself or of her daughter- 
in-law. Naomi and Ruth, though greatly 
reduced in circumstances, and painfully pent 
up in present straits, were far from being 
paupers. They were proprietors (see ch. iv. 
3, 5). But their property was not, for the 
time being, available for income or susten- 
ance. It had either been fanned ont on 
usufruct or allowed to lie waste. In the 

absence of the yod in •1^?.Slip we have an 
instance oiscriptio defectiva, as distinguished 
from scriptio plena. Such defective manu- 
scription might be expected to occur occa- 
sionally in transcription from dictation, 
when, as here, the presence or the abeenc* 
of the letter made no difference in the pra 



OH. n. 18 — 23.] 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



nnnciation of the reader. Michaelis, however 
('Mosaisches Recht,' § 137), and Gesenius 
('Thesaurus,' in voc), instead of regarJing 
the absence of the yod as an instance of 
tcriptio defectiva, have conjectured that 

7^JD is a noun, or name, meaning the second 
in order of the Goelim. But, notwith- 
standing the ingenuity of the conjecture, 
there is not a shadow of evidence to evince 
that the Hebrews themselves ever knew of 
such a word. Nor does the supposition or 
subsumption of such a word in the least 
facilitate the construction on the one hand, 
or illumine the narrative on the other. 

Ver. 21.— And Rath the Moabitess said. 
It seems to its rather remarkable that Ruth 
should he here again particularised formally 
as "the Moabitess." There is apparently 
no discoverable reason for the re-repetition. 
It is simply antique particularity, nr>t amen- 
able to any literary law— "the said Moab- 
itess." There is a peculiar abruptness in 
the initial words of what follows : — Yea 
also he said to me. Carpzov and Wright 
understand them thus : " ' Yea ' blessed be 
he, ' for ' he said to me. " But the word 
blessed, as used by Naomi, is too far re- 
moved to make it natural for the yea of 
Ruth's remark to fall back upon it. Her 
mind and heart were full. She was pro- 
foundly affected by the kindness that bad 
been shown to her. Hence she piles up her 
representation. "Also," — so may I well 
speak, — "for he said to me." Keep close 
by my young men, until they have finished 
all my harvest. The "young men" are 
not here discriminated from the "young 
women" (see ver. 8). The idea, consequently, 
is not that Ruth was to keep close to them 
in distinction from the young women. It 
was understood that she should work behind 
the young women, who followed in the rear 
of the young men. But it was the express 
desire of Boaz that, instead of exposing 
herself among strangers, on any adjoining 
harvest-fields, she should maintain her posi- 
tion behind his reapers as long as there 
remained any golden crops to reftp. 

Yer. 22. — And Naomi said to Rath her 
danghter-in-Iaw, It is good, my daughter, 
that thou shouldest go with his yonng 
women, and that thon be not set upon in 
another field. Here again we have the 
archaic repetition, "Ruth her daughter-in- 
law." Naomi was grateful for Boaz's invit- 
ation. Compliance with it would be "good," 
both immediately and prospectively. In 
particular, it would save Ruth from running 
the risk of being rudely handled by utter, and 
perhaps rough and unprincipled, strangers. 
"It is good," says Naomi, 'that, ' they ' do 
not set upon thee in another field." She 
lays "they," bat allows the parties she had 



in view to remain, dimly visible, in tht 
shade. No doubt, however, she refers to 
the reapers, binders, gleaners, and other 
workers who might have to be encountered 
' ' in another field. " " Meaning, " says homely 
Richard Bernard, "some lewd and lustful 
men whom Naomi would not so much as 
make mention of." The verb 3"1?3S is often 
rendered in our English veision fall upon. 
It originally means to light upon, whether 
for good or for evU. 

ver. 23.— And she kept close by Boaz'iT 
yonng women to glean. Wright translates 
thus: "And she kept gleaning along with 
the maidens of Boaz. Tiut the maidens of 
Boaz are not represented as gleaning. The 
historical statement of the verso is to be ex- 
plained &om the hortatory statement of ver. 
8 : " Keep close to my young women." Till 
the end of the barley-harvest and the wheat- 
harvest. Ruth's gleaning labours extended 
to the close of the wheat-harvest, during 
which time, no doubt, there would be fre- 
quent opportunities for a growing intimacy 
between the beautiful gleaner and the worthy 
proprietor. Often too, we may rest assured, 
would Boaz be a visitor in the humble home 
of Naomi. " The harvest upon the moun- 
tains," says Dr. Robinson, " ripens of course 
later than in the plains of the Jordan and 
the sea-coast. The barley-harvest precedes 
the wheat-harvest by a week or fortnight. 
On the 4th and 5th of June the people of 
Hebron were just beginning to gather their 
wheat ; on the 11th and 12th the threshing- 
floors on the Mount of Olives were in full 
operation. We had already seen the harvest 
in the same stage of progress on the plains 
of Gaza on the 19th of May ; while at Jericho, 
on the 12th of May, the threshing-floors 
had nearly completed their work " (' Biblical 
Researches,' vol. iL p. 99). "The Syrian 
harvest," says Dr. W. M. Thomson, "ex- 
tends through several months. On the plain 
of Philistia it commences in April and ends 
in June ; and this not only gives ample 
time, but it has this great advantage, that 
the villagers from the mountains can assist 
the farmers on the plain, since their own 
crops are not yet ripe. I was struck with 
this fact while at Mesmia. Several Chris- 
tians from Bethlehem, who had thus come 
to reap, spent the evening at my tent, and 
one of them explained to me the advantages 
from thus labouring on the plain. He not 
only received wages for his own and his 
wife's labour, but his children were permitted 
to follow after them and glean on their own 
account, as Boaz allowed Ruth to do in theii 
native village" ('The Land and the Book,' 
p. 644). When it is said, in the last clause 
of the verse, and she dwelt with her mothaiv 
in-law, the reference is not to be restricted 
to the time that succeeded the iieriod of 



THE BOOR. OF BUTH. 



[oh. n. IS— 23. 



harvesting. The Vulgate indeed connects 
the danse with the following verse, and 
renders it, " After she returned to her mother- 
in-law," pointing the verb thus aB^j^l instead 
of 2^^), The same translation is given to 
the verb by Luther and Goverdale. But 
there is no evidence whatever that Buth 



slept anywhere else than under her mother" 
in-law's root The clause was written, ap- 
parSntly, for the very purpose of bringing 
out clearly before the mind of the reader 
her stainless innocence, and sweet simplicity, 
and never -tiring devotion to her noble 
mother-in-law. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vem. 18 — 23. — Home/rom the harvest-Jield. Evening begins to draw her cnrtaini 
around the little city of Bethlehem. Let us look on this picture, and on that. 1 " On 
this picture." See Naomi. She is wistfully and longingly looking out for her daughter- 
in-law's return. So many a matron looks, evening after evening, for the safe return 
of her husband, her son, her daughter. 2. "And on that." See Euth toiling slowly 
along under her " ephah." Her strength is taxed ; yet she is thankful for the 
precious burden. She is picturing to herself the reception she would receive under 
the lowly roof of her mother-in-law, and ruminating pleasantly on the cheer which 
both herself and her burden would bring to the anxious heart of the dear old iady. 
She is happy, though fatigued. Happy are all other bread-winners who, amid the 
monotony and weariness of daily toil, are cheered with the prospect of ministering to 
the comfort of wife, mother, grandmother or grandfather, sick sister perhaps, or 
little children. 3. At length the long-looked-for gleaner arrives. What a glad 
welcome she receives I — a model welcome, hearty and animating, such as should always 
be accorded to the good and faithful bread-winner. See with what pride and 
gratitude she lets slip off her burden into the hands of Naomi. We read, " And her 
mother-in-law beheld what she had gleaned " (ver. 18). What a looking, what a 
gadng there would be. All ^lat, my daughter f What a wonderful gleaner yon 
must be / Haw could you gather all that t How good to us has lahveh been I 
Here is good food for days to come. In this matter of gratitude millions should be 
as conspicuous as Naomi. " Goodness and mercy " have accompanied them all the 
days of their life. " A table has been spread for them " every day of every year. 
In looking back over life, for ten, twenty, forty, sixty years, they cannot remember 
one single day when they had no food to eat. Even in heathen lands " God has not 
left himself without witness, in that he does good, and gives rain from heaven, and 
fruitful seasons, filling men's hearts with food and gladness " (Acts ziv. 17). 
Every year is "crowned by him with his goodness" (Ps. Ixv. 11). 4. When 
Naomi's spirit had become somewhat calmed, and she was about, as we may 
suppose, to prepare a portion of the gleanings for their simple evening repast, Buth 
produced what she had " left over " of her delicious " parched com." " She brought 
forth, and gave to her, what she had left over after she was satisfied " (ver. 18). 
Naomi's astonishment, gratitude, delight would mount up rapidly. She could 
restrain herself no longer. " Where hast thou gleaned to-day ? and where hast thou 
worked ? May he who took notice of thee be blessed I " " She doth here," says 
Dr. Thomas Fuller, " dart out and ejaculate a prayer, and that at rmers, aiming at 
no particular mark. ' Blessed be he who took notice of thee.' Yet, no doubt, was it 
not in vain ; but God made it light on the head of bountiful Boaz, who deserved it." 
It seems to be in the nature of all great gratitude to ascend to God in praise or 
prayer. For indeed " every good and perfect gift cometh down from him (James 
1. 17). 6. Euth did not keep her mother-in-law in suspense. " She showed her with 
whom she had worked ; and she said, The name of the man with whom I worked to- 
day is Boaz " (ver. 19). It augurs well for both daughters and mothers when there 
are unreserved intercommunications between them. But mothers would require to 
be confidential if they would have their daughters to be confiding. There will be 
ianger of tragedies in the home if daughters are reticent in reference to the affairs 
that are of chief concern at once to their own hearts and to the hearts of their 
parents. The tragedies will be more tragic still if husbands and sons have haunts 
«f which mention cannot be made in the bosom of domestic confidence. " Boaz t " 
Th* name would thrill through Naomi. It instantaneously recalled tender memoiiM 



OH. It 18—28.] THE BOOK OF RUTH. 41 

of the past ; and side by side with these recollections there flitted in before her view 
visions of the future. But her first utterance was a benison, no longer shot " at 
rovers." She gratefully lifted aloft her heart, and said, " Blessed of the Lord be he, 
who has not let go hia kindness to the living and to the dead" (ver. 20). He had, 
it seems, been kind to her and hers long ago. The recollection came fresh to her 
mind. And now there was abundant and gratifying evidence that he was not 
" weary of well-doing." He had still the old kind heart, perhaps kinder than ever. 
With " Boaz " as the theme of conversation, there would not be in all Bethlehem • 
brighter or happier home that evening than the humble cot of Naomi. The genea- 
logical relationship and former kindnesses of their worthy friend would be fully 
elucidated (ver. 20), and Buth would be sure to dwell at length on the invitation 
she had received to continue in his fields all the harvest through (ver. 21). The 
evening would glide rapidly on. While they talked, and while, in the intervals of 
talk, they " mused," the fire within the breast would bum. As it burned, the flame 
would flicker, now to this side, now to that, but still ever upward toward God. 
Boaz had said to Euth — and her heart responded heartily as he said it — that it was 
under the wings of the God of Israel that she had come to cower and be covered. 
She had come, he said, to " trust " in Yahveh. She was resolved that she would. 
Even Naomi would encourage her, and would herself be disposed to revert to the 
sweet significance of her own name — Jah is sweet, and deals sweetly. The hard 
thoughts which she had been tempted in the time of her anguish to entertain would 
be sensibly beginning to thaw and melt. And if one could have read the hearts of 
both, as at length they laid themselves down to rest, perhaps the thoughts of each 
might have been found to be running in the strain of the words of a great descendant, 
as he said and sang, " Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than in the time 
that their corn and their wine increased. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep ; 
for thou, Lord, only makest me dwell in safety " (Ps. iv. 6 — 8). " Tired nature's 
sweet restorer " would not need to be sedulously wooed, on the part of the gleaner 
at least ; and if Naomi's slumber was not so easily obtained, or so uninterruptedly 
retained, yet she would " commune with her own heart on her bed, and be still." 
May we not assume that, when both awoke in the early morning, they were " still 
with God"? 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOEa 

Ver. 20. — Kindred and kindness. When Naomi and Ruth returned to Bethlehem 
they could scarcely have found friends there, but they found kinsmen. They do not 
seem, in their circumstances, to have sought assistance from relatives, or even to 
have brought themselves under the notice of such. Still, Naomi had not lost sight 
of Elimelech's family connections ; and when the name of Boaz was mentioned, she 
recognised it as the name of one of her husband's nearest kindred. 

I. Kindred is a Divine institution. Men have many artificial associations ; bonds 
of sympathy, and of locality, and of common occupation bind them together. But 
kindred is the Divine, the natural tie. 

II. Kindred is at the foundation of social and political life. The patriarchal 
economy was the earliest. The family is the first social unit, out of which springs 
the tribe, the clan, the nation. 

IIL Kindred involves an obligation to consideration and regard. We cannot 
always cherish feelings of congeniality or of respect with reference to all who are 
our kindred according to the flesh. But relatives should not lose sight of on« 
another— should not, if it can be avoided, be estranged from one another. 

IV. Kindred mat, in certain cases, involve the duty of practical help. 
Christian wisdom must here be called in to the counsels of Christian kindness. 

V. Kindred is suggestive and emblematic of Divine relations. Apart from 
human relationship, how could we conceive of God as our Father ? of Christ Jesus M 
our elder Brother ? of ChriBtians as our brethren and sisters in a spiritual family ?— T. 

Ver. W.—EarveO-time. This Book of Ruth is emphatically the book of the hu» 
bandman It pictures the barley-harvest and the wheat-harvest of ancient d»v« 



M 



THE BOOK OP RUTH. 



[OH. n. 18—23 



"Hie primitive manners and usages are interesting, and deserve attentive study. 
But harvest — as here bo vividly brought before us — ^is full of lessons of a spiritual 
kind. E. g. — 

I. Harvest witnesses to thb attbibutes of the Divine Cbeatob. To his power 
and wisdom. To his goodness. To his faithfulness to his promise : " Seed-time 
and harvest shall not cease." 

II. Harvest is a summons to man's gratitude and confidbnob. 

III. Harvest is suggestive of great spiritual truths. There is a moral harvest 
in the history of the human character and of human society. Seed and soil are 
presumed. Development and growth are evidenced. The law operates : " What- 
soever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." The fruit is matured and gathered 
in. The Husbandman — God himself — is interested in the result. To us the result 
is infinitely important. — T. 

Ver. 20. — "Who hath not left ofE his kindness to the living and the dead." The 
prayers of the poor for their helpers are very precious. Naomi remembers the former 
kindnesses that Boaz had shown to the husband of her youth and to her two boys. 

I. Here is continuity op charaotbb. Some leave off kindness because they meet 
with experiences of ingratitude and callousness. The once warm deep within them 
is frozen up by these wintry experiences. But as God continues his mercy through 
all generations, so those who are followers of God as dear children walk in love ; 
that is, it becomes the spirit and habit of their lives. Boaz had not left off his kind- 
ness. Ruth now drinks at the same fountain of considerate care that had refreshed 
Elimelech. 

II. Herb is the good word of a mother. It is well when the mother respects the 
man who may become allied in marriage to one who is akin to her. Naomi says 
to her daughter, " Blessed be he of the Lord." Let those who have become sceptical 
concerning Christianity ask themselves this : Whether should I like to give my child 
in marriage to a Christian or an infidel ? This practical query would suggest many 
thoughts tending to renewed faith, and would stifle for ever many superficial doubts. 



— T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER IIL 



Ter. 1. — ^And Naomi, her motlier-in-law, 
said to her, My daughter, shall not I seek 
out for thee a rest, that it may be well with 
thee ? When Ruth had nothing more to do 
on the harvest-fields, where Boaz appeared 
daUy, and was unremittingly gracious to her, 
she may have fallen into a pensive mood. 
Naomi was quick to note the varying 
'nuances' of feeling, and said "My daughter, 
shall I not seek out for thee a rest ? " The 
expression rest, or resting-place, though in 
itself of generic import, was, when used in 
such ciroumstanoes as environed Ruth, quite 
specific in application, and would be at once 
understood. It was a home to which Naomi 
pointed, a home for her daughter's heart. In 
such a home, if warm and pure, there would 
be repose for the afiections. " That it may 
be well with thee," or, " which shall (or 
may) be good for thee." Either translation 
is warrantable and excellent. The latter is 
the most simple, and is given by Carpzov 
and Rosenmuller ; but the former is in ac- 
cordance with a frequent idiomatic use of 
the expression, in which there is a change 
from the relative in result to the relative m 



aim, so that 3p". IK'S is equivalent to 
np". lyp^ (see Deut. iv. 40 ; vi. 3, 18 ; x. 
11, 25, 28). Naomi did not distinguish 
between rests that would be 'good,' and 
other rests which would not be 'good.' 
Nor did she moralise on the idea of a rest, 
and affirm that it would be ' good ' for her 
widowed daughter-in-law. She assumed that 
every true rest was 'good,' and, on the basis 
of that assumption, she sought out one for 
her devoted Ruth. Hence the superiority 
of the rendering that expresses aim to that 
which expresses the mere prediction of 
result. 

Ter. 2. — And now is not Boaz, with 
whose young women thou wast, our rela- 
tive t Naomi opens her case. She had 
been studying Boaz all through the harvest 
season. She had been studying Ruth too. 
She saw unmistakable evidence of mutual 
responsiveness and attachment. And now 
she had a matured scheme in her head. 
Hence she brings up Boaz's name at once, 
and says, " Is he not our relative ? " riD)]'*!3^ 
a.n abstract term used concretely, meaning 
literally ' ' acquaintance, " but here "relative, 
or "kinsman" (see ch. ii. 1). Lo he If 



OB. m. I — 18.] 



THE BOOK OF BUTH. 



47 



winnowing barley on the thresliing-floor to- 
night. Literally, " Lo, he is winnowing the 
threshing-floor of barley." The Hebrews 
could idiomatically speak of " the threshing- 
floor of barley," meaning "the threshing- 
floor-ful of barley." The barley lay heaped 
up in Boaz's threshing-floor, and he was 
engaged in winnowing it. He threw np 
against the wind the mingled mass that was 
on his floor, after the stalks had been care- 
fully trodden or beaten. "Not far," says 
Dr. Horatio Hackett, "from the site of 
ancient Corinth, I passed a heap of grain, 
which some labourers were employed in 
winnowing. They used for throwing up the 
mingled wheat and chaff a three-pronged 
wooden fork, having a handle three or four 
feet long" (' Hlustrations,' p. 106). "The 
winnowing," says Dr. Kitto, " was performed 
Dy throwing up the grain with a fork against 
the wind, by which the chaif and broken 
■traw were dispersed, and the grain fell to 
the ground. The grain was afterwards passed 
through a sieve to separate the morsels of 
earth and other impurities, and it then 
underwent a final purification by being 
tossed up with wooden scoops, or short- 
handed shovels, such as we see sculptured 
on the monuments of Egypt" ('Illustrations,' 
Ml foe, p. 40). In some of the Egyptian 
Kulptures the winnowers are represented as 
liaving scoops in both hands, fipj^n, to- 

night (Scottic^, "the nicht"). The agri- 
culturist in Palestine and the surrounding 
districts would often carry on his winnowing 
operations after sunset, taking advantage of 
the evening breeze that then blows. The 
Chaldee Targumist makes express reference 
to this breeze, explaining the word to-night 
as meaning Ml the wind which blows by 



Ver. 8. — So then wash thyself, and an- 
oint thyself, and dress thyself. This latter 
phrase is in the original, "and put thy gar- 
ments on thee." The verb ''JjIDB'), with its 
final yod, was the archaic form of the second 
person feminine, though still much cut down 
and contracted from its oldest form. See 
Eaabe's ' Zuriickfiihring,' and note the 
conduct of the verb, in its relation to the 
pronominal suffixes, when these are affixed. 
And go down to the threshing-floor. The 
town of Bethlehem lay on the summit of 
" the narrow ridge of a long gray hiU " 
(Stanley's 'Sinai and Palestine, p. 163), 
while the corn-fields, that gave the fortified 
place its name of Bread-town, stretched out 
oxpandingly in the valleys below. Dr. 
Eobinson says, " We ascended gradually 
toward Bethlehem around the broad head of 
a valley running N.E. to join that under 
Uiir Myim. The town lies on the E. and 



N.E. slope of a long ridge; another dee; 
valley, Wady Ta'Smirah, being on the south 
side, which passes down north of the Frank 
Mountain toward the Dead Sea, receiving 
the valley under MS.r ElySs not far below. 
Toward the west the hill is higher than the 
village, and then sinks down very gradually 
toward Wady Ahmed" (' Biblical Researches,' 
vol. ii. p. 158). Let not your presence be 
known to the man before he has finished 
eating and drinking. It would have been 
imprudent and impolitic to have discovered 
her presence while his servants and himself 
were busied in operations which required to 
be actively prosecuted while the breeze was 
favourable, and the light of the moon service- 
able. Ruth was to wait tUl the servants, 
having finished their work and their repast, 
had retired to their respective homes. The 
master, as Naomi knew, would remain 
gratefully and joyfully on the spot, to keep 
watch in the midst of his cereal treasures, 
and under the still magnificence of the broad 
canopy of heaven. Speaking of Hebron, 
Dr. Robinson says, " Here we needed no 
guard around our tent. The owners of the 
crops came every night and slept upon their 
threshing-floors to guard them, and this we 
had found to be universal in all the region of 
Gaza. We were in the midst of scenes pre- 
cisely like those of the Book of Ruth, when 
Boaz winnowed barley in his threshing-floor, 
and laid himself down at night to guard the 
heap of corn" (' Biblical Researches,' voL ii. 
p. 446). Boaz's heart, w^en all was quiet 
around him, would be fuU of calm and com- 
fort. He would pace about his well-heaped 
threshing-floor contentedly, contemplatively ; 
and, as he paced, and thought, and adored, 
the figure of the beautiful and industrious 
gleaner might persist in coming in within 
the field of meditation. It might linger 
there, and be gladly allowed to linger. 

Ver. 4. — And let it be, when he liei 
down, that then take note of the place 
where he lies; and go, and uncover the 
parts about his feet, and lay thee down ; 
and he shall declare to thee what thoa 
■halt do. The denominative word Vp5|")D — 
freely rendered in King James's version " hia 
feet" — we have rendered ' ' the parts about his 
feet." It is the exact opposite of VpK'SpP, 
which never means "his head," but ia 
always translated correctly either "his pil- 
lows " or "his bolster." It denotes "the 
supports on which the head was laid in 
lying;" and ni^jl"lD, having reference to 
members of the body which do not need 
such supports as the head, simply means "the 
places occupied by the feet. Naomi ven- 
tured on a bold expedient to bring speedy 
'rest' to her daughter-in-law. But wt 



48 



THB BOOK OF RUTH. 



[oh. m. 1—18 



assnme that, mth nnmistakins feminine 
intuition, she saw, on the one nand, that 
Boaz was already deeply attached to Euth, 
and, on the other, that Ruth reciprocated 
his attachment with pure intensity. Most 

Srohably we should also assume that she 
etected in Boaz a peculiar dilHdence that 
caused him to shrink from making decisive 
advances in the way of declaring his affec- 
tion. He had, however, unconsciously 
revealed himself, and made it clear to 
Naomi that he wished to divulge in words 
the depth of his honourable feelings. But 
again and again, as we may suppose, his 
sensitiveness overcame his resolutions. Hence 
Naomi's scheme to bring him to the point of 
declaration. It would have been repre- 
hensible in the extreme had she not been 
absolutely certain of his wishes, on the one 
hand, and of his perfect honour and nn- 
contaoninable purity on the other. And 
evea with that qualification, the scheme 
would have been imprudent and improper, 
and utterly nnfeminine, had it not been the 
case that, in virtue of an ancient and much- 
prized Hebrew law, Ruth was entitled to call 
upon her nearest of kin to fulfil the various 
duties of a responsible kinsman. Still, 
notwithstanding the existence of this law, 
we may rest assured that the sensitive 
gleaner would never have summoned up 
courage to ask Boaz to discharge to her the 
duties of kinship, unless she had been sure 
that the thrills that vibrated within her own 
heart were responsive to subtle touches, on 
his part, of spirit with spirit. 

Ver. 6. — And she said, All that thoa 
sayest I will do. There is no need for 
adopting into the text the K'ri " to me," 
after the expression " All that thou sayest." 
It is a mere "tittle," indeed, whether we 
omit or insert the pronoun ; yet it was not 
found in the manuscripts that lay before the 
Septuagint and Vulgate translators. 

Vers. 6, 7. — ^Aad she went down to the 
threshing-floor, and did according to all 
t Iiat her mother-in-law had enjoined. And 
Boaz ate and drank, and his heart was 
comfortable; and he went to lie down at 
the end of the heap; and she came softly, 
and uncovered the parts about his feet, and 
laid herself down. The translation in King 
James's version, " and his heart was merry," 
ia perhaps stronger than there is any occasion 
for. The word rendered " was merry,"— yiz., 
3D'* — ^is literally " was good." The Septua- 
gint word is ^yaSivSri. After the labours of 
the evening, Boaz had a relish for his simple 
repast. It was good to him. Hence he ate 
and drank to his heart's content, enjo^ng 
with grateful spirit the bounties of a gracious 
Providence. By and by he retired to rest, 
amid visions perchance of a brightened home, 
which iust helped to reflect on his conscious- 



ness a stronger resolution than he had evi 
formed before to make known his afiection 
At length he slept. The Syriac translate 
adds interpretatively, " in a sweet sleep o^ 
the floor." Ruth then stepped cautiously 
forth to play her delicate part. She stolt 
softly to the sheltered spot where he lay. 
She gently uncovered the margin of the 
cleak, which lay over the place where hii 
feet were laid. She laid herself down noise- 
lessly. The Arabic translator adds, "and 
slept beside him" — a most unhappy inter- 
pretation. Nothing but sin would be so &r 
away as sleep from the eyes, and mind, and 
heart of the anxious suitor. 

Ver. 8. — And it came to pasi at midnight 
that the man started in a fright; and he 
bent himself over, and lo, a woman was 
lying at his feet. He had awaked, and, 
feeling something soft and warm at his feet, 
he was startled and affrighted. What could 
it be ? In a moment or two he recovered 
his self-possession, and bending himself up 
and over, or " erooking himself," to see 
and to feel, lo, a woman was lying at his 
feet. The Chaldee Targumist tumbles into 
a ludicrous bathos of taste when endeavour- 
ing to emphasise the startle and shiver which 
Boaz experienced. He says, " He trembled, 
and his flesh became soft as a turnip from 
the agitation. " How could the most peddling 
and paltering of Rabbis succeed in betraying 
himself into such a laughable puerility and 
absurdity ? The explanation, though of 
course it is not the least atom of justification, 
lies in the fact that the Chaldee word for 

"turnip" is UbIj, while the verb that de- 
notes "he bent himself" is the niphal of 
np^. The use of the expression ' ' the man, '' 
in this and several of the adjoining verses, is 
apt to grate a little upon English ears. Let 
us explain and vindicate the term as we may, 
the grating is still felt. No matter though 
we know that " the rank is but the guinea 
stamp," the grating is felt inevitably. It is 
a result of that peculiar growth in living 
language that sphts generic terms into such 
as are specific or semi-specific. We have 
gentleman as well as man, and embarrassment 
is not infi'equently the result of our linguis- 
tic wealth. In the verse before us, and in 
some of those that go before, we should be 
disposed, in our English idiom, to employ the 
proper name : " And it came to pass at mid- 
night that ' Boaz' started in a fright.' 

Ver. 9.— And he said, Who art thouT 
And she said, 1 am Ruth, thy handmaid ; 
and thou hast spread thy wings over thy 
handmaid, for thou art kinsman. The Syriac 
translator spoils the question of Boai by 
metamor[ili03ing it from "Who art thou! ' 
into " What ia thy message?" Tremuloni 
would be the voice of Ruth ■■ die repliedr 



OH. III. 1— 18.j 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



" I am Ruth, thy handmaid." What she 
said in continuance has been veiy generally, 
and by Driver, among others (' Hebrew 
Tenses,' p. 135), misapprehended. Not by 
Raahe, however. It has been regarded as a 
petition presented to Boaz — " Spread thy 
wings (or, thy wing) over thy handmaid, 
for thou art kinsman." The literal trans- 
lation, however, and far the more delicate 
idea, as also far the more effective represent- 
ation, is, " And thou hast spread thy wings 
over thy handmaid, for thou art kinsman." 
Rath explains her position under Boaz's 
coverlet as if it were his own deliberate act. 
Such is her felicitous way of putting the 
ease. It is as if she had said, " The position 
in which thy handmaid actually is exhibits 
the true relation in which thou standest to 
thy handmaid. She is under thy wings. 
Thou hast benignantly spread them over her, 
for thou art kinsman. ' The Masorites have 
correctly regarded 15J3 as a scriptio defec- 
tiva for the dual of the noun, and hence 
have punctuated it ^235, "thy wings." The 
majority of interpreters, however, have as- 
sumed that the word is singular, and have 
hence translated it as if it had been punctu- 
ated ISJ?. The dual reading is to be 
preferred. Boaz himself had represented 
Ruth as having come trustfully under the 
wings of Yahveh (see ch. ii. 12). She ac- 
cepted the representation. It was beautifully 
true. But, as she was well aware that God 
often works through human agency, she now 
recognised the Divine hand in the kindness 
of Boaz. " Thou hast spread thy wings 
over thine handmaid." She was under his 
wings because she had come under the wings 
of Yahveh. She felt like a little timid 
chicken ; hut she had found a refuge. It is 
the wings of tender, gentle, sheltering care 
that are referred to. There is only indirect 
allusion to the typical coverlet under which 
she lay. For thou art kinsman (see ch. ii. 
20). The native modesty of Ruth led her to 
account for her position by a reference to the 
law of kinship. She had rights, and she 
stood upon them. She conceived that Boaz 
had correlative duties to discharge ; but we 
may he sure that she would never have made 
the least reference to her rights, or to the 
correlative duties which she regarded as 
devolving on Boaz, had she not known that 
his heart was already hers. 

Ver. 10. — And he said. Blessed be thou of 
Yahveh, my daughter ; thou hast made thy 
latter kindness better than the former, in 
not going after any young man, whether 
poor or rich. This verse is foil of satisfactory 
evidence that Naomi was perfectly right in 
conjecturing that Boaz, deep in love, was 
restrained only by diffidence from formally 
declaring himself. It shows us too that the 
chief ground of his diffidence was his age. 
BnTH. 



He had been an acquaintance, and the equal 
in years, of Ruth's father-in-law, Elimelech 
and the impression had got hold on him tha^ 
the handsome youn^ widow might feel re 
pu^ance to his suit. Hence, instead o/ 
being in the least degree offended by th« 
steps she had taken, he was relieved, and 
felt full of gratification on the one hand, and 
of gratitude on the other. Blessed be thou 
by Yahveh. Literally, " to Yahveh," i. t. 
"in relation to Yahveh" (see ch. ii 20). 
Hy daughter. His relative elderliness waa 
in his mind. Thou hast made thy latter 
kindness bettar than the former. MichaeUi 
has seized the true meaning of these words : 
" The kindness which thou art showing to 
thy husband, now that he is gone, is still 
greater than what thou didst show to him 
while he lived." Her employment of the 
word "kinsman," or goU, was evidence to 
Boaz that she was thinking of the respect 
which she owed to her husband's memory. 
Her concern in discharging that duty of 
' piety ' struck the heart of Boaz ; and aU 
the more as, in his opinion, she might easily 
have found open doors, had she wished for 
them, in quarters where there was no con- 
nection of kinship with her deceased hus- 
band. " She did not go after any young 
man, whether poor or rich. " She preferred, 
above all such, her first hushand s elderly 
"kinsman." In the original the construc- 
tion is peculiar — " in not going after the 
young men, whether a poor one or a rich 
one." He does not simply mean that she 
was free from vagrant courses and desires. 
Her character lay, to his eye, on a far higher 
level. His meaning is that she deliberately 
refrained from ' ' thinking of any young man. " 
The plural " young men " is to be accounted 
for on the principle that when an alternate 
is assumed or postulated, there is, in actual 
contemplation, a plurality of individuals. 

Ver. 11. — And now, my daughter, fear 
not : all that thou sayest I shall do to thee, 
for it is on all hands known ia the gate of 
my people that thou art a truly capable 
woman. The word ^JQ in the expression 
^JPI nSV}? is of many-sided import, and has 
no"^ synonym in English, German, Latin, or 
Greek. But every side of itd import brings 
into view one or other or mo- e of such affili- 
ated ideas as strength, force, forces, capa- 
bility— whether mental and moral only, or 
also financial ; competency, substantiality, 
ability, bravery. All who had taken notice 
of Ruth perceived that she was mentally and 
morally, as well as physically, a substantial 
and capable woman. She was possessed oi 
fc/rce, both of mind and character. She 
was, in the New England sense^ of the ex- 
pression, a woman of "faculty." She was 
full of resources, and thus adequate to tha 
B 



60 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



[OH. m. 1 — 16. 



position which, as Boat's wife, she would be 
required to fill. There was no levity about 
her, "no nonsense." She was earnest, in- 
dustrious, virtuous, strenuous, brave. There 
was much of the heroine in her character, 
and thus the expression connects itself with 
the masculine application of the distinctive 
and many-sided word, " a mighty man of 
valour." The expression b)^. T\^^ occurs 
in Prov. xii. 4, where, in King James's ver- 
sion, it is, as here and in Prov. xxxi. 10, 
translated " a virtuous woman " — "a virtuous 
woman is a crown to her husband. " But it 
is not so much to moral virtue that there is 
a reference as to that general capacity which 
consists in "large discourse, looking before 
and after" (' Hamlet," iv. 4). Compare the 
masculine expression ?jn"'B'3N in Exod. 
xviii. 21, 25, rendered, in King James's ver- 
sion, " able men," and meaning capable or 
substantial men, who, however, as we learn 
from the additional characteristics that are 
specified, were to be likewise conspicuous for 
high moral worth. In Prov. xxxi. 10 there 
is the same reference to general capacity, as 
is evidenced by the graphic representation 
that follows — a representation that by no 
means exhausts itself in the idea of moral 
virtue. Ibn Esra takes the whole soul out 
of the expression when he interprets it, both 
here and in Proverbs, as meaning " a woman 
possessed of riches. " When Boaz says, "AU 
that thou sayesti will do to thee," he means, 
' 'All that thou hast so winsomely and yet so 
modestly referred to in what thou didst say, 
I am prepared to do to thee." There was 
only one obstacle in the way, and that of a 
somewhat technical description. If that 
should be honourably surmounted, nothing 
would be more agreeable to Boaz's heart than 
to get nearer to Ruth. " For," said he, " it 
is on all hands known in the gate of my 
people that," kc. Literally the phrase is, 
"for all the gate of my people know," a 
strangely inverted but picturesque mode of 
expression. It was not " the gate of the 
people," but "the people of the gate," that 
knew. 

Ver. 12. — And now it is the case of a 
truth that while I am a kinsman, there is yet 
a kinsman nearer than I. Or the rendering 
might with greater brevity be given thus: 
A.nd now of a truth I am a kinsman ; and 
yet there is a kinsman nearer than I. The 
survivals of a very ancient style of elabor- 
ately-detailed composition are here preserved. 
The archaism, however, was not quite ap- 
preciated by the Mazorites, who, in accordance 
with the spirit of the age in which they 
flourished, took but little note of the 
philological development, historical and 
prehistorical, of the language they were 
handling. Hence they suppressed the D^ in 



K'ri, though faithfully preserving it in C'tib. 
The particles, standing up and semi-isolated, 
palseolithic-wise, might be accounted for in 
some such way as is shown in the following 
paraphrase ; "And now (I declare) 'that' of a 
truth (it is the case) ' that if (I declare the 
whole truth) / (am) a kinsman, and also 
there is a kinsman nearer than I." Boaz 
was of that strictly honourable east of mind 
that he could not for a moment entertain 
any project that might amount to a disregard 
of the rights of others, even although these 
rights should Sy violently in the teeth of hia 
own personal desires. 

Ver. 13.— Abide here to-night; tad It 
shall come to pass in the morning, if he 
will act to thee the part of a kinsman, 
well ; he shall act the kinsman's part : and 
if it please him not to act to thee the 
kinsman's part, then snre as Yahveh is 
alive, I will act to thee the kinsman's part. 
Lie still till the morning. Love is quick- 
witted. Boaz's plan of operations would 
formulate itself on the spur of the moment ; 
but the remainder of the night would doubt- 
less be spent in maturing the details of pro- 
cedure. The aim would be to secure, as far 
as honour would permit, the much-wished- 
for prize. There would be, moreover, we 
need not doubt, much conversation between 
them, and mutual consultation, and arrange- 
ment. A large letter, a majuscula, occurs 

in the first word of the verse — '}'^ — ^which 

the smaller Masora ascribes to the Oriental 
or Babylonian textualists. It had, no 
doubt, been at first either a merely acci- 
dental, or a finically capricious, enlargement ; 
but, being found, mysteries had to be ex- 
cogitated to account for it ; — all mere rubbish. 
"To-night" is a perfect translation of 

nV?n, for the to is simply the common 
definite article in one of its peculiar forms, 
perhaps peculiarly crushed and defaced (see 
note on ch. iii. 2). 

Ver. 14. — And she lay at the place of his 
feet tintil morning : and she arose ere yet a 
man could distinguish his neighbour. In 
the original it is "the places of his feet" 
(see ver. 4). Time would rapidly fly past. 
Sleep there would be none to either the 
one or the other. In mutual modesty they 
guarded each other's honour. Thoughts and 
feelings, narratives and projects, would be 
freely interchanged. Their mutual under- 
standing would become complete. At length 
there began to be the first faint tinge oi 
paleness streaking into the dark. Ruth 
arose, and prepared to depart. It is added. 
For he had said,— or, more literally, "And 
he had said," — Let it not be known that 
' the ' woman came to the threshing-floor. 
This has been to critics a puzzling clause. 
The conjunction in the foreground, a mere 



OB. m. 1—18] 



THE BOOK OF BOTH. 



SI 



eoptilative, has occasioned difficulty. It !a 
thoroughly Hebraistic. Bnt of course it 
does not here introduce to notice something 
merely added to what goes before, of the 
nature of a parting injunction or request 
addressed to Buth. The articulated phrase 
"the woman," as distinguished from "a 
woman," the expression in King James's 
version, renders such an Interpretation Im- 
possible. The Targumist explains thus: 
" and he said to Ms young mm." But the 
whole tenor of the preceding narrative pro- 
ceeds on the assumption that there were no 
servants on the premises or at hand. Other 
Babbis, and after them Luther and Cover- 
dale, interpret thus: "and he said in his 
heart," or, "and he thought." Unnatural. 
The difficulty is to be credited, or debited, 
to simplicity of composition, and the habit 
of just addiiig thing to thing aggregatively, 
instead of interweaving them into a complex 
nnity. In the course of their many inter- 
changes of thought and feeling, Boaz had 
expressed a desire, both for Buth's sake and 
for his own, that it should not be known 
that she had come by night to the threshing- 
floor. The narrator, instead of introducing 
this expression of desire in the way in which 
it would directly fall from the lips of Boaz, 
" Let it not be known that thou didst come," 
gives it in the indirect form of speech, the 
oratio obliqua, as his own statement of the 
case. It is as if he had introduced a paren- 
thesis or added a note in the margin. The 
airaC \iy6iuvov d^"}P — instead of Dptfl — 
was most probably not a later form, as 
Bertheau supposes, but an older Hebrew 
form that had died out of use long before 
the days of the Masorites. 

Yer. 15. — And he said, Allow me the 
wrapper which is upon thee, and hold on by 
It ; and she held on by it ; and he measured 
six measures of barley; and he put it on 
her, and went to the city. The expression 
"Allow me," literally, "Give (me)," was 
a current phrase of couitosy. The verb 
employed — 3pJ— was common Semitic pro- 
lerty, ere yet the mother-tongue was sub- 
ivided into Hebrew, Syriac, Chaldee, Arabic. 
The wrapper which is npon thee. The 
word for wrapper occurs nowhere else except 
in Isa. iii. 22, where it is translated, in King 
James's version, "wimple." Here it is 
rendered "vail," and, in the margin, "sheet 
or apron," — aU of them unhappy transla- 
tions. So is the rendering of the Targumist, 
Sni-ID, i e. mdarivm, or " napkin." N. G. 
Schroder discusses the word at great length 
in his masterly ' Commentarius Philologico- 
Criticus de Vestitu Mulierum Hebreearum,' 
pp. 247—277. He would lenAei ii pattium 
tapalla. In consequence of national pecu- 
liarities in articles of dress, espedaUy in 



SI 



ancient times, it ia best to avoid a specific, 
and to employ a generic translation. When 
Boaz said, "Give me the wrapper," he did 
not ask that it should be handed to him. 
He had already put his hand npon it, and 
was engaged in hollowing out a scoop or 
cavity. Hence he said, on the one hand, 
" Allow me," and, on the other, " Hold on 
by it." And he measured six measures of 
barley. The particular measure referred to 
is unspecified. It is not only mere dream 
on the part of the Targumist, but it is dream 
involving almost sheer impossibility, that 
the measiu'es were ledhs, i. e. two ephahs. 
The Targumist had to bolster up his dream 
by adding another, viz., that Buth got mira- 
culously strength to cany the load. Load, 
indeed, there undoubtedly was ; and no doubt 
it would be as g^eat as she could conveniently 
carry. And ukewise, in accordance wim 
the primitive simplicity of manners, fh* 
magnitude of the burden would bo demon* 
stration to Naomi of Boaz's satisfaction witb 
the " measures " which, in fUll mothefliness 
of spirit, she had planned. And he went 
to the city. The Vulgate and Syriac yet- 
sions, as ^so Castellio, Coverdale, and vari- 
ous other translators, but not Luthet, har* 
assumed that we should read K^^l, " and 
she went," instead of t<3>l, "and he went." 
So too Wright. But there seems to be no 
good reason for making the change. If there 
had been no division into verses, then the 
departure of both Boaz and Buth on theil 
respective routes, or in their respective order 
of sequence, would have been recorded close 
together : " and ' he ' went to the city, and 
' she ' went to her mother-in-law " — each, let 
us bear in mind, with the heart elate. 

Ver. 16.— And she went to her mother- 
in-law. And she said, Who art thou, my 
daughter! And she narrated to her all 
that the man had done to her. The ques- 
tion, " Who art thou, my daughter ? " is not 
put by Naomi, as Drusius supposes, because 
it was stiU so dusk that she could not pro- 
perly distinguish Buth. The address, " My 
daughter," shows that she had no difficulty 
in determining who the visitor waa But 
there is something arch intended. "Art 
thou Boaz's betrothed?" Miohaelia trans- 
lates, "What art thou?" Unwarrantably 
as regards the letter, but correctly as regards 
the spirit of the interrogatory. 

Ver. 17.— And she said, These six measures 
of barley he gave to me ; for he said, Thou 
must not go empty to thy mother-in-law. 
The C'tib omission of "to me" after "for 
he said" is most likely to be the original 
reading. A fastidious Eabbi would rathel 
originate this insertion than the omission. 

Ver. 18.— And she said. Sit still, mj 
daughter, till that thou know how the afEaii 
«2 



n 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



[OH. in. 1 — 18, 



will fall out, for tlie man will not rest 
nnless he complete the affair to-day. In 
Baying, "Sit still, my daughter," it is as if 
Naomi had said, " There is no occasion for 
restless anxiety. Let your heart be at ease 
till that thou know how the affair will fall 



out." In the Hebrew the noun is without 
the article. But in English it must be sup. 
plied, unless a plural be employed — "how 
'things' will fall out." ^3■5. Mng, i. e. 
think. Compare the corresponding relation 
between the German tache and tagen. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Ch. iii. — NcMmi't maternal solicitude. This i8 one of those paragraphs of Scrip- 
ture which require delicate handling, but which, for that very reason, are full of 
suggestiveness that comes home to the bosom. Under strange, old-fashioned forma 
of things there was often much real virtue and true nobility of character. 1. It may 
be regarded as certain that while the harvest lasted Boaz and Ruth would be coming 
daily into contact with each other. 2. It may likewise be assumed as certain that 
their minds would from day to day grow into one another, in interest and esteem. 
As intimacy increased, it would reveal, on either side, points of character that were 
fitted to evoke admiration and sincere respect. 3. It is reasonable to suppose that 
Naomi's humble home in Bethlehem would be again and again visited by Boaz. 
There would be various attractions. Naomi herself, as an old and now a far-travelled 
friend, would be able to tell much that would be interesting to the kinsman of 
Elimelech. 4. The Palestinian harvest season would that year, as well as on other 
years, be a lively time. The harvest-home, in particular, would be a joy and a rural 
triumph. It may well be so in all countries. The golden grain is more precious by 
far than grains of gold. It is emphatically the " stafE " on which terrestrial life has 
to lean. One of the chief uses of gold is to buy from the agriculturist, directly or 
circuitously, for the use of those who live in towns and cities, the superfluity o£ 
cereals raised in the harvest-fields. Harvesting operations are thus always interest- 
ing and stirring. Ruth would feel an interest ; and, in consequence of the hearty 
sympathy and favour of Boaz, her whole nature would be stirred. 6. But it is far 
from being improbable that when the gleaning season was ended, so that Ruth had 
to exchange out-of-door for indoor activities, she may have acquired, to the eye of 
her solicitous mother-in-law, an unusually pensive appearance. 6. Naomi would no 
doubt make Ruth a constant study. Every mother, every father, should make every 
individual child in the family circle an individual study. It is not every child, it is 
not every young man, or young woman, whose whole heart can be read off at a 
sitting. Many a mind is many-volumed. Naomi did her best day by day to under^ 
stand her devoted and deeply afEectionate daughter-in-law, and seems to have felt 
increasingly solicitous as she noticed her unwonted thoughtf ulness and reticence. 7. 
Then we must bear in mind that in such a state of .society as then prevailed in 
Bethlehem and Judali, there must have been extremely little scope for female energy 
and industry in business directions. Happily in our time there is, so far as Great 
Britain is concerned, considerable interest taken by philanthropic minds in the 
subject of female education, literary and technical. There are, moreover, even already 
many spheres in which females, not otherwise provided for, can find, in affairs con- 
genial to their tastes and idiosyncrasies, remuneration and employment. In many 
government offices, and in other spheres of activity, females now occupy important 
positions. Nut only do tliey excel in works of taste: whatever requires careful 
attention, combined with delicate manipulation, can be intrusted to their hands. 
There is still, it is true, much to be done to promote the employment and independ- 
ence of single females ; but a beginning has been made, and a point or two beyond 
that beginning have been reached. In the time and sphere of Naomi, however, there 
were no open doors of this kind. And hence, when she was looking out for the 
settlement of her daughter-in-law, she naturally thought only of a ' rest' for her in 
a home of her own. In reference to such a ' rest,' it is the duty of all mothers and 
mothers-in-law to be solicitous, though never obtrusive, in behalf of their children. 
Advice may be tendered, caution may be suggested ; but there must be true sympathy 
on the one hand, and true delicacy of feeling on the other. 

To tarn now more particularly to Boaz — 1. It is reasonable to suppose that Naomi 



OH. m. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF BUTH. 



bad noticed that he looked on Ruth with longing eyes. 2. It is also reasonable to 
suppose that, fro u some cause or other, Boaz felt himself under an unconquerable 
spell of reticence. The cause seems to be revealed in his use again and again of 
the fatherly expression, My daughter, as applied to Buth, He was evidentiy well 
advanced in years. This seems to have been the soil on which his insuperable 
diffidence grew. How to get this diffidence plucked up by the roots was the problem 
which the solicitous Naomi set herself to solve. 3. There was only one way, as it 
appeared to her, in which Boaz's mind could be set free from the spell which put a 
seal on his lips. That was to bring Buth into such relationship to him that he would 
learn her true sentiments on the one hand, and feel put upon his honour on the other. 
Naomi, to efEect this consummation, took advantage of a time-honoured custom, which 
had come down from very remote and primitive times, and was still in full force 
among the Hebrews. She thought of the LevircUe law. This was a law that gave a 
widow, if an heiress, the right to claim, from the nearest of kin to her deceased 
husband, conjugal assistance in the management of her estate. The nearest of 
kin, if thus appealed to for the purpose indicated, had a right to refuae the widow's 
claim, provided he was willing to submit to certain indignities and unpleasant 
formalities, such as being stripped of one of his shoes, and then twitted and hooted 
as Barefoot (Deut zxv. 5^10). But if it should happen to be the case that his feel- 
ings were the reverse of repugnance, then the act of compliance would be at once the 
highest meed of respect which could be paid to the memory of the deceased, and the 
greatest gratification that could be enjoyed by the living. In the case of Buth and 
Boaz, two just conclusions had been arrived at by Naomi. One had reference to 
Buth, and was to the effect that, while it would be impossible for her to initiate action 
that might be regarded as terminating on herself, it would yet be both possible for and 
becoming in her to undertake the initiation of action that had for its aim what was 
due to the name and honour of her deceased husband. The other had reference to 
Boaz, and was to the effect that Us diffider'se, otherwise unconquerable, would be 
conquered if he were put upon his honour, ana saw his way clear to discharge a duty 
to a deceased kinsman. 4. We must, in addition, suppose that Naomi, in making 
arrangement for the midnight interview, had unfaltering confidence in the incor- 
ruptible innocence of Buth, and in the incontaminable purity of Boaz. 5. We are 
likewise entitled to assume that the method of claiming a kinsman's interposition, 
which she laid down for her daughter-in-law's guidance, was no gratuitous invention 
of her own. It is natural to regard it as having been the normal and accredited 
formula of procedure that was in use in " society," for the initiation of such measures 
as were requisite in the application of the Levirate law. 6. It is on this assump- 
tion alone that we can account for the fact that no apology was made by Buth, and 
that no surprise was expressed by Boaz. Instead of surprise, there was only devout 
admiration of Buth's entire demeanour in relation to her deceased husband. He 
said, " Blessed be thou of the Lord, my daughter ; thou hast made thy latter kindness 
better than the former, in not going after any young man, whether poor or rich." It 
is her kindness to the deceased, not her kindness to himself, of which he speaks. 
The kindness she was showing after her husband's decease was, in Boaz's estimation, 
still greater than the kindness she had showed him, or had been able to show hip, 
durinsr his life. A woman, so attractive and so capable as she, might have readily 
founf among the young men many open doors to rest, and ease, and afQuence. But 
she did not for one moment wish to avail herself of any of these openings. She 
wished to do honour to the name and memory of her lamented Machlon, more espe- 
cially in her capacity as the prospective heiress of his property. 7. We may be sure, 
however, that Naomi would never have availed herself of the customs that had got 
fixed by " use and wont " in relation to the Levirate law, unless she had been certain 
that it would be in accordance with the deepest desires of both her friends that they 
should get together in life. 

In the light of these remarks we may now re-read the entire chapter, interposing, 
as we go ajong the successive verses, whatever expository or practical remark may 
seem to be called for. _ , 

Ver. 1. — There is something radically wrong in every home which u nqt a " rort 
to its inmates ; and life without a home is emphatically a life of nnreat. 



M THE BOOK OF KUTH. [oh. m. 1—18. 

Ven. 2—4. — ^Naomi'i solicitude for her devoted daugbter-in-law is beautiful 
and motherly. But the form into which it ran and took shape can never recur 
in the midst of the culture and customs of European society. Even the method 
of winnowing the golden grain of the harvest-field, as referred to in ver. 2, 
is antique and obsolete. So, too, is the method which Boaz adopted to watch 
over his cereal treasures. He constituted himself his own watchman and police- 
man. 

Ver. 6. — Ruth's confidence in Naomi's kindness and wisdom is noteworthy. It 
was no upstart prepossession and blindfold feeling. Naomi had earned it by a long- 
continued course of prudence and sympathy. Boaz too had earned a correspond- 
ing confidence, and hence she did not hesitate to intrust herself to his honour. She 
felt that she was safe. 

Vers. 6, 7. — The expression " his heart was meny " just means that he felt physic- 
ally comfortable, and ready for quiet and sound repose. 

Ver. 8. — When it is said that " the man was afraid, and turned himself," the 
meaning of the latter clause, as it stands in King James's version, would require 
some modification. The idea is not that Boaz turned from one side to another. 
It is that, having started in a fright, in consequence of the presence, to his india- 
tinct consciousness, of something unusual about his feet, he raised himself up and 
bent forward to feel what it was. 

Ver. 9. — His touch had satisfied him that it was a woman who was at his feet. 
Who was she ? Euth at once declared herself, no doubt in accents of sweet modesty. 
The statement with which she follows up the declaration of herself is variously inter- 
preted. In King James's version there are two departures from literality. 1. The 
word skirt is not a literal rendering of the Hebrew term. Wings is the proper trans- 
lation. 2. The entreaty Spread therefore is also a departure from literality. The 
verb is not in the imperative, but in the affirmative — And thou hast spread. It is 
Ruth's own interpretation of the position of affairs. She had come to Judaea to take 
shelter under the wings of Jehovah; and Boaz had, on his part, in harmony with the 
heaveidy kindness of Jehovah, spread over her his wings of terrestrial kindness. 
She thus does not speak at all of Boaz's skirt, or skirts. There was beautiful delicacy 
in her representation. She did not need to enter into particular details. Her posi- 
tion, viewed in the light of custom, explained the whole case. 

Vers. 10, 11. — "And now, my daughter, fear not'' — give not thyself any anxious 
concern in reference to the result. "All the people in tiie gate of my city know that 
thou art a virtuous woman." Yes, she wow virtuous ; and yet she was much more. 
She was endowed with all the capabilities which fitted her for the position she ■wtm 
willing to occupy (see the Exposition). 

Ver. 12. — Note the highly honourable character of Boaz. There was one nearer 
in kinship to Buth than himself. This person, therefore, must receive the first offer. 
Had the case come before Boaz as simply one of personal affection, he would in all 
probability have made no reference to the nearer kinsman. But as it had come 
before him in its relation to the deceased, and connected itself with Buth because of 
her relation to the deceased, he felt that he must act in strictest honour. There were 
rights of property at stake, as well as affections of the heart, and Boaz could be no 
party to deprive any one of such rights. Still we need not doubt that his heart 
thrilled at the thought that the rights involved would not prove an insurmountable 
barrier between himself and Ruth. 

Ver. 13. — Boaz's mind still runs on the lines of a kinsman's duty. There was 
hence something that might be thrust in between the desires of his heart and the 
object toward whom they trembled. 

Ver. 14. — Boaz was desirous to guard the fair name and fame of Ruth, as well aa 
to keep untarnished his own unsullied reputation. 

Ver. 16. — He wished that Naomi might have some tangible evidence of his satis- 
faction. 

Ver. 16. — The question Tf'Ao art thmi t sprang from Naomi's hope that the entire 
■cbeme would issue in success. 

Ver. 17. — The present was, in one point of view, inconsiderable ; but, in anotlie^ 
point of '•new, it was a most suitable gift from one who desired indeed tQ ehow sym- 



CB. m. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



pathy, gratitude, and kindness, but who did not wish, at that stage of the aSair, to 
raise unconditioned expectation which might never be realised. 

Ver. 18. — Naomi, as it were, said to Ruth and to her own heart, Peace, peace. All mil 
be well. All it voeU. The hand of the Almighty is dealing " sweetly" not " biitevly" 
wUk all Hue parties concerned. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. l.-^Marriage, a woman's rest. If Ruth was unselfish, so also was NaomL 
The mother-in-law acted towards the young Moabitess as if she had been her own 
danghter. In seeking a husband for her daughter-in-law Naomi followed the customs 
of her country and her age. (Our English custom is intermediate between the 
French custom, according to which the husband is provided by the negotiations of 
the parents, and the American custom, which leaves daughters to select for them- 
selves.) The case before us was not an ordinary one. For whilst marriage was 
almost universally looked forward to by Hebrew youths and maidens, there were very 
special reasons why Naomi should seek a husband for Kuth. As is implied in the 
text, Naomi desired that her daughter-in-law might find in marriage with Boaz — 

I. A HOME, which should be a rest from her wanderings. 

II. A PEOVISIQN, which should deliver her from the misery and the temptations of 
poverty. 

III. Haffinebs, which should compensate her for the sorrows of her widowhood. 

IV. Pious COMPANIONSHIP, which should be a relief from long fiiendlessness. 
Lessons : — 1. Parents should take thought for their children, and not leave them to 

choose companions and friends and life-associates by chance. Nothing could be 
more disastrous than such neglect and thoughtlessness. 2. Marriage should be 
thought of with deliberation and prayer, both by the young, and by their parents or 
natural guardians. 3. Those who have found rest and prosperity in marriage should 
not omit the duty of gratitude and praise for the care and direction of Divin* 
providence. — ^T. 

Ver. 2. — Diligence in Imsiness. Boaz is an example of a thorough man of business. 
He was wont himself to see to it that the land was well tilled and well reaped. He 
was personally acquainted with the labourers. He even noticed the gleaners. He 
watched the reaping. He superintended the winnowing. He slept on the winnow- 
ing-floor, to protect his com from the designs of robbers. 

I. A BELIGIOnS MAN IS BOUND TO ATTEND TO THE CALLING HE EXEBCISB8. Whether 

tt< landowner, a farmer, a merchant, a tradesman, or a professional man, he ought to 
give his attention to his occupation, and not to neglect his own business to be a meddler 
in that of others. His business is thus more likely to prosper, and his example to 
younger men will be influential and beneficial. 

II. An employer op labour is bound to study the welfare op his servants. 
The present state of society is very difEerent from that in the time of Boaz. Society 
is less patriarchal, and more democratic. But there is still room, both in the house- 
hold and in commercial and agricultural and manufacturing life, for the exercise of 
wise and kindly supervision over those who are employed to labour. 

III. Diligence in business procures a man many advantages. It is foolish to 
despise wealth, though it is easy to over-estimate it. From the narrative it is clear 
that the wealth of Boaz enabled him to secure a charming and virtuous wife, gave 
him great consideration amongst his neighbours and fellow-townsmen. If a man 
neglects the opportunity of acquiring property in order to pursue learning, or to do 
i^ood, he deserves respect ; but if from sloth and heedlessness, he is despised. Wealth 
18 good if it be used for good purposes — for the education of children, for the 
encouragement of learning and virtue, for the well-being of the people at large. — T 

Vers. 6, 6.^ — Filial obedience. Ruth was not Naomi's daughter, yet she acted, and 
with good reason and great propriety, as though she had been such. What holds 
good, therefore, of the relationship described in this book holds good, ^ fortiori, ol 
the relation between parents and children. In modem society the bonds of parent*! 



H THE BOOK OP RUT&. fcH. m. 1—18. 

•■"■■■^^""^■■■^^"""^^^"■^^"■^ ^-"^■■■■■■""— ■■■^"^■'^^^^^"■^^^"^"■^ 

discipline are, especially among the working class, lamentably relaxed. Christian 
people should, in the interests alike of patriotism and religion, do all they can ta 
strengthen these bonds. The text affords us a beautiful example of filial obedience. 

I. Motives to filial obedience. Gratitude should lead the child to obey the parent, 
to whom he owes so very much. The constraint should be the sweet constraint of 
love. Reason should lead to the reflection — The parent has experience of human 
life, in which I am necessarily lacking ; is not a parent's judgment far more likely to 
be sound than is a child's, or even a youth's ? Divine legislation commands children 
to obey their parents. £!. g. the fifth commandment, under the old covenant ; apos- 
tolical admonitions, under the new. The example of the Holy Child, Jesus ! 

II. The ADVANTAGES of filial obedience. Usually, obvious temporal advantages 
ensue upon such a course. This is proverbial and unquestionable. The satisfaction 
of a good conscience is a compensation not to be despised for any sacrifice of per- 
sonal feeling in this matter. The approval of God is most emphatically pronounced 
upon those who honour and obey their parents. And this is usually followed by the 
confidence and admiration of fellow-men. 

Lessons : — 1. Expostulate with the disobedient, 2. Encourage the obedient. — ^T. 

Ver. 7. — The joy of harvest. There is brightness and pleasantness in the view 
this passage gives us of a harvest-time in the vale of Bethlehem. Poets ijxd painters 
have interpreted the heart of humanity in the pictures and the songs in which they 
have represented " the joy of harvest." Boaz, the mighty man of wealth, was not 
only rich and prosperous — he was happy, and free from the moroseness which some- 
times accompanies riches ; he was generous, and free from the miserliness and 
penuriousnesB which often grows with prosperity ; he was considerate, and observed 
and recognised individual cases of need. 

I. It IS BIGHT TO PARTAKE OP THE BOUNTIBS OF God's peovidbncb. Gluttony and 
drunkenness meet with no encouragement from this, or from any other portion of 
Scripture. But no countenance is given to asceticism God " daily loadeth us with 
benefits;" he giveth not only seed to the sower, but "bread to the eater." We 
should eat, drink, and give thanks to him who " openeth his hand and satisfieth the 
wants of every living thing." Sincerity and thoughtfulness should accompany the 
daily blessing and breaking of bread. Christ " came eating and drinking." 

II. It is eight to bb happt and mibthfdl when God has dealt BouNTiFni.LT 
WITH us. There is mirth of a kind attending the carousals and the debaucheries of 
sinners. This mirth is hollow, and will soon be succeeded by regrets. But when 
God's children sit at their Father's table and partake of his bounty, what more 
natural and just than that they should rejoice and sing aloud of his goodness ? These 
gifts and " all things " are theirs I 

m. It 18 BIGHT TO REST WHEN DUTY HAS BEEN FULFILLED AND TASKS ACHIEVKD. 

Some zealous Christians seem to think all repose is sinful, as manifesting indifference 
to the magnitude of the work to be done. But God has made le body so that it 
needs rest, the mind so that it needs relaxation. The quality i li the work will not 
sufEer, but will gain, by timely and moderate repose. — T. 

Ver. 10. — Benediction. A blessing comes appropriately from a senior ; a father 
blesses his son, a venerable patriarch his youthful colleague. Boaz was an elderly 
man, and it seems appropriate that, addressing Ruth, the young widow of his kins- 
man, he should use language of benediction: "Blessed be thou of the Lord, my 
daughter I " 

I. Benediction proceeds from a benevolent disposition. It is the opposite of 
cursing. Sometimes language of benediction is used when there is no spiritual 
reality behind it. In such oases it is a mockery, a counterfeit of benevolence and 
piety. 

II. Benediction implies piety. Belief in God, and in God's willingness to blesi. 
There is a looking up to God on behalf of him who is to be blessed. Without thi» 
the language of blessing is meaningless. 

III. Benedioi'ion is the acknowledgment that from God all good must comj, 
ooMBUixo with thk dbsirb and phayeb that he will BB GBAOious. It is the hallow- 



OH. m. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF BUTH. 



ing of OUT best affections ; it is the making real and personal of oar most solemn 

religious beliefs. 

IV. Benediotion, if habmoniods with God's wnL, secures God's favoub. It is a 
wish, but a wish realised ; a prayer, but a prayer heard and answered in heaven. — T. 

Ver. 11. — A virtttous woman. The circumstances of the narrative read strangely 
to us. But one nation and one age cannot fairly apply its standards to another. 
Nothing is more certain than that the conduct of Naomi, of Euth, and of Boaz was 
perfectly correct, and probably Ruth's proceeding was wise and justifiable. Upon 
her character no breath of suspicion rested ; she was, in the language of the text, 
"a virtuous woman." 

I. Bute's virtue was manifested by her circumspect conduct with befbbencb 
TO YOUNG MEN. " Thou followedst not young men, whether rich or poor." 

II. Her virtue was apparent in heb obedience to heb mother-in-law. 
Instead of taking counsel of her own comparative inexperience, she listened to the 
advice of the sage and prudent Naomi. 

III. Heb vibtde was ackhowledged by all heb acquaintance. " All the city 
aC my people doth know." If there had been anything in the conduct of the poor, 
friendless young foreigner inconsistent with virtue, it would not have been hid. She 
escaped calumny. 

_IV. Heb vibtue led to an honourable mabbiaqb and position in Isbael. "A 
virtuous woman is a crown to her husband." We can believe that Huth verified the 
Deautiful description given in Prov. zxzi. — ^T. 

Vers. 12, 13. —Seyaect for others' rights. The situation in which Boaz found him- 
self was very singular. All that he had heard and all that he had observed of this 
young Moabitess had impressed him favourably. His language and his conduct 
show that Euth had made an impression upon his heart. And it was honourable to 
him that it was so. Her youth, her beauty, her misfortunes, her industry, her cheer- 
fulness, her filial devotedness, her virtue, her piety, all commended her to the judg- 
ment and the affections of the upright and conscientious Boaz. And now, with the 
most perfect modesty, and in the presentation of an imdoubted claim upon him, 
Ruth offered herself to him as his lawful, rightful wife. What hindered him from 
immediately complying with her request, and taking her to his heart and his home ? 
There was one impediment. Another had, if he chose to exercise it, a prior claim. 
Another had the first right to redeem the field of Elimelech, and to espouse the 
heiress, and raise up seed to the departed. And until this person — the nameless 
one — had exercised his option, Boaz did not feel at liberty to act upon the sugges- 
tion of his heart. 

I. Febsonal feelings always incbease the uboency of the claims of selfish- 
ness. " By nature and by practice " men seek their own interest. But experience 
shows us that strong emotion increases the danger of our yielding to such impulses. 

II. WhebE personal feelings ABE CONCEfiNBD THERE IS NEED OF WATCHFULNESS 

AND pbayeb. It is SO casy to wrong others for the sake of our own gratification, 
that it is well to question the arguments and pleas by which our interests are com- 
mended. Boaz must have been tempted, in the circumstances, to say nothing about 
the nearer kinsman, but quietly to accept the proposal of Euth. 

III. TeUE PBINCIPLB, aided by THE POWEB OF EELIGION, WILL ENABLE A MAN TO DO 
THE RIGHT, EVEN THOUGH HIS OWN INTERESTS AND HIS OWN FEELINGS ARE OPPOSED TO 

SUCH A COURSE. Boaz gained the victory over himself, and consented to abide the 
issue of an appeal to the nearer kinsman, although he risked thereby the loss of 
Ruth. Many of the highest illustrations of the nobility possible to man turn upon 
some such situation, and the course which honour and virtue prescribe is the course 
in which true and lasting happiness will be found. — T. 

Vers. 16 — 17. — GenerosUt/. Boaz was " a mighty man of wealth,'' and Naomi and 
Bath were poor, widowed, firiendless, and comparatively strangers. All through the 
narrative Boaz appears as thoughtful, liberal, unselfish, honourable, munificent. Ha 
!• w «iample to tbos9 wboifi Providence has endowed with we^lt^ 



n THE BOOK OF BUTE. [cH. m 1—18. 

I. Wealth is given to thk bich not for their own sake only, but fob the saei 
OF OTHEBS. Men are not the owners, but the stewards, of their possessions. How 
im'^erf ectly this truth is recognised I The only way in which we can give to Christ 
Is by giving to his people. 

II. GENEEOSITT should be PBOPOBTIONATB to the MEAN8 OF THE OIVEB. Both 

his means absolutely and his means relatively, i. e. considering 'the claims upon him 
by virtue of his family, his position, &o. 

III. GeNEBOSITY SHOULD BE PBOPOBTIONATB TO THE NEEDS OF THE BEOIPIENT. 

Those should have the preference who are old, crippled, and helpless ; the widow and 
the orphan. 

IV. Genbeositt should be UNOSTENTATIOUS AND SYMPATHETIC in its Spirit. "Letnot 
thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth." Hardness of manner may spoil 
beneficence. " Bich gifts wax poor when gfivers prove unkind." — T. 

Ver. 18. — Sit still I Naomi showed in her whole conduct not only tender 
feeling and sympathy, and sincere piety, but much shrewdness, foresight, tact, and 
knowledge of human nature. When there was anything for Buth to do she was 
forward in urging her to action. But she knew that there is always a time to wait, 
as well as a time to work ; and she reminded Buth that now evente must be left to 
others — indeed, must be left to God I 

I. The OCCASION for sitting still. According to some, the belief that God works is 
inconsistent with the obligation to work ourselves. The whole idea of the religious 
life, as apprehended by some mistaken minds, is to do nothing, and to leave God to 
do everything. And some, who do not go so far as this, still are blind to the privilege 
of being " workers together with God. When we have done our part, then is the 
time to sit still. The workman has first to labour, then to rest. The day of toil 
comes first, and the night of repose follows. When we can do no more, then is the 
time to sit still. Ask yourself whether you have or have not this reason for re- 
fraining from effort. We sometimes come to the end of our ability ; we have done 
our part, and for us nothing now remains to do. 

II. Motives which sjiould induce thus to sit still. We have to consider that in 
certain cases to do otherwise would be utterly useless. In these cases it is a waste 
of power to make further effort, and a waste of feeling to allow anxiety to distress 
the heart. Thus any other course would be injurious, would destroy or disturb our 
peace of mind. And there are occasions when to be quiet is to trust in the provi- 
dential rule and care of God. So it was with Buth at this conjuncture. The example 
of Christ should not be overlooked. There came a time when he was silent before 
his foes. 

III. The blessing which follows sitting still. 1. Peace of heart. " Best in the 
Lord." 2. Strength. " Your strength is to sit still." " In quietness and confidence 
shall be your strength.'' 3. If God will, prosperity. " He shall give thee thy heart's 
desire." 4. In any case the glory of God, who desires that his people should do his 
will, and leave results to him. — T. 

Ver. 1. — Thoughtful love. " Shall not I seek rest for thee ? " How natural. We 
cannot ever be with those we love. Marriage is God's own ideal, and it is the hap- 
piest estate if his fear dwells in our hearts. 

I. There is no eabthlt best like the best of home. Judges, warriors, states- 
men enjoy the honours of life, and are conscious of pleasure in promotion and dis- 
tinction, but their biographies tell us how they turn to home as the highest joy of all. 
Yes I Nothing can compensate for the loss of a happy home, and we should seek in 
every way to make it a refreshment and a delight by doing our best to promote its 
peace and purity. 

II. The eabthly home is a pabable op heaven. Our Saviour touches our hearts 
•t once when he says, " My Father's house," and when he speaks the exquisite parable 
of the prodigal son. No analogies of city or temple are so powerful in their influence 
over UB as the analogy of home. — W. M. S. 

\vt. %-^The worh of wiimoydng. " Behold, he winnoweth barley to-night.'' A 
world-old process this, the win&owing of the phaS from the wbe»t QqatoinM dtan^ 



«. m. I-^lfl.] THE BOOK OF BDTH. 



69 



•nd commercial life increases^nd creates ever new demands; but the agricultural 
Me IS still the basis of all. You may make new threshing-machines, but you must 
still h^Yo bread. It may be winnowed by steam or hand, but it must be mnnoued. 
A. pleasant Eastern sight: work done m the cool of the evening—" to-night " 

I. Work IS evbe associated bt God with his blessings to man. We must nlant- 
and dig and reap. God sends the sunshine, the sweet air, and the shower. If a man 
will not work, neither shall he eat. A paradise of idlers would soon be a Gehenna 
indeed. No cuise can come to a nation so sad as this : " Abundance of idleness was 
in her sons and her daughters." 

II. Work is never undignified or to be disdained. A gentleman is gentle in 
his work—not because he does no work. It is a false pride that dislikes handiwork. 
Many of the diseases which darken the brain come from the unwise neglect of 
physical exercise. What is sweeter than the fragrance of the upturned soil ? What 
IS more beneficent than the law of labour, which calls forth the exercise of body 
mind,, and spirit ? ' ' 

III. Work of winnowino is a Divine work also. God uses his tribnlum in our 
history.and the tnbulation-work produces experience, patience, hope. When we ar» 
mourning over some sorrow or loss, it is the bruising flail of God's correction. And 
thiscomes at <ill seasons of life, even in the evening of the day. For we shall need 

chastisement evea unto the end. What « doom is that " withont chaBtisement." 

W. M. 81 

Ver. 11. — Ahom ruhiet. "A virtuous woman.* Here is the crown of all beauty. 

What a renown is this of Ruth's. No jewelled necklet, no Eastern retinue, can give 
inch attraction as this. We may have women of genius, and we admire genius ; 
we may. have women of scientific attainment, and God has given no lack of intel- 
lectual endowments to women , but we timtt have virtue. Let the history, of later. 
Rome tell us what the loss of this is. 

I. No Lira is hidden. "All the city of my people doth know that thou art a 
virtuous woman." Every history stands revealed. Concerning. Nehemiah, we read of 
the testimony given in time of national trouble : " There is a man in thy kingdom in 
whose heart is the fear of the noly God." And so this simple-hearted Euth, who 
had JU)t tried to make, herself attractive to the young men, popr or rich, who had been 
modest in manner and heroic in conduct, left the impress of her character on the city. 

II., No LIFE CAN BE BELiOlous THAT IS NOT VIRTUOUS. We may, indeed, have virtue 
of a kind, a morality, of respectability, without religion ; but we cannot be religious 
without morality, for religion does not consist in ceremonies however impressive, or 
days however sacred, or opinions however sound ; but in a life of consecration to 
God, and of obedience to all the sanctities of the moral law. There may be a 
religion of emotionalism merely ; but blessed as it is to feel the true, we must live it 
out as well in common life. 

III. No POWER IS so PERMANENT AS THAT OT HOLT LIFE. Character lives in 
others. We do not die when we pass from earth. Ruth lives to-day. It would be 
interesting to know how many have been led even in this age to devoutness and 
decision by the remembrance of her conduct and the exquisite pathos of her words. 
The Uttle " city " of which our text speaks has passed away, but wherever the word 
of God is known and read, there Ruth reproduces herself in the history of others. 
The very name has become a family name, and is honoured by constant use in every 
generation. — ^W. M. 8. 

Ver. l2.-^Woman*t i^fiuenee. In all history woman has held a place of regal, 
influence. Not by intruding on the sphere of man, not by acting as if there were 
no Divine providence in the more delicate physical constitution of woman which 
incapacitates her for the strain of hardest toil ; but in the ideal of "home," in which 
rihe is to be the 'f abiding " one, filling it with the charm of quiet influence and the 
aacrednesB of seU-sacrificing love. 

I. Here ib a stbanqe conjunction of terms. " Virtuous " comes from the Latin 
tir, which means a man. What then ? Is a woman to be like a man ? Does it 
mean s manly woman ? In one sense it does. For " the man " is taken in ttw 



THE BOOK OF BUTH. 



[OB. IT. 1— 2i 



Scripture as the type of humanity in its best estate. " Show thyself a man," sayi 
David to Solomon. It means all that is pure, and brave, and true, and good. Thug 
" abominable " means something ah homo, to be designated as "away from a man ; " 
■omething altogether alien to his nature. A virtuous woman is a womanwho hag 
strength of resistance to evil, strength of devotion to God, strength of patience and 
endurance in the path of obedience. 

II. Hbrb is the poweb of infldenob. " All the people of my city (or, at th« {^te) 
doth know that thou art a virtuous woman." Certainly. "They that be otherwise 
cannot be hid." What a lesson that is I Character tells everywhere. You may not 
note the current running, but place your boat upon it, and you soon see it. So it 
is with a good life — it bears others in its current. We are all known. Men and 
women are judged at their true worth even in this world, and even the wicked respect 
the upright and the just. It was said of Nehemiah to the king in a time of trouble, 
" There is a man in thy kingdom in whose heart is the fear of the holy God." 

III. Hebe is the seobbt of national globy. It was so in Rome when they could 
■peak with pride of the Boman matron, and it has been so in every nation under 
heaven. A Divine judgment was needed to purify this nation after the days of 
Charles II. Had it not been a time of judgment, the nation, as Charles Kingsley 
says, would have perished. Let the young be taught modesty even in dress and 
demeanour. Let alltiiat is "fast" be frowned upon and made unfashionable. Th* 
grace that CSirist gives is humility with the fear of the Lord. — ^W. M. S. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Ver. I. — And Boaz went up to tlie gate, 
•ad sat there. He " went up," for the city 
■tood, as it still stands, on a ridge (see on 
ch. i. 1 ; iii 6). " And sat there," on one 
of the stones, or stone benches, that were set 
for the accommodation of the townsfolk. 
The gateway in the East often corresponded, 
as a place of meeting, to the forum, or the 
market-place, in the West. Boaz had reason 
to believe that his kinsman would he either 

Eassing out to his fields, or passing in from 
is threshing-floor, through the one gate of 
the city. And lo, the kinsman of whom 
Boaz had spoken was passing ; and he said. 
Ho, such a one ! turn hither and sit here. 
And he tnined and sat down. Boaz called 
his kinsman by his name ; but the writer does 
not name him, either because he could not, 
or because he would not. The phrase " such 
a one," or " so and so," is a purely idiomatic 
English eciuivalent for the purely idiomatic 
Hebrew phrase *|5to?S ^pg. A literal trans- 
lation is impossible. The Latin N. N. corre- 
sponds. 

Ver. 2. — And he took ten men of the 
elderly inhabitants of the city, and he said, 
Sit ye here ; and they sat down. Boaz 
wished to have a full complement of witnesses 
to the important transaction which he con- 
templated. 

Ver. 8.— And he said to the kinsman, 
Kaomi, who has returned firom the land of 
Moab, has resolved to sell the portion of 
land which belonged to our brother Elime- 
Ueh. Boaz, it is evident, had talked over 



with Buth the entire details of ITaoml'a 
plans, and could thus speak authoritatively. 
Naomi, we must suppose, had previously 
taken Ruth into fim confidence, so that 
Boaz could learn at second-hand what in 
other circumstances he would have learned 
from Kaomi herselt The verb which we 
have rendered " has resolved to sell," is 
literally "has sold," and has been so ten- 
dered by many expositors, inclusive «f 
Riegler and Wright. The Syriao translator 
gives the expression thus, "has sold to me." 
The subsec[uent context, however, makes it 
evident that the property had not been sold 
to any one, and consequently not to Boaz. 
The perfect verb is to be accounted for on 
the principle explained by Driver when he 
says, "The perfect is employed to indicate 
actions, the accomplishment of which lies 
indeed in the future, but is regarded as 
dependent upon such an unalterable deter- 
mination of the will that it may be spoken 
of as having actually taken pUce : thus a 
resolution, ijromise, or decree, especially a 
Divine one, is very frequently announced in 
the perfect tense. A striking instance is 
afforded by Ruth (iv. 8) when Boaz, speak- 
ing of Naomi's determination to sell her 
land, says <lpl?J nn?p, UteraUy, 'has sold' 
(has resolved' to seE The English idiom 
would be 'is selling')" ('Treatise on the TJse 
of the Tenses in Hebrew,' pp. 13, 14). In 
King James's English version the verb is 
thus freely rendered "selleth." Luther's 
version is equivalent — heat feU, " offers for 
sale;" or, as Coverdale renders it, "offeretk 
to sell." Vatable freely reuden it M «• 



OB It. 1—22.] 



THE BOOK OP RUTH. 



«l 



have done, " has detennined to sell " [vende/re 
decrevit) • so Drusius (vendere instituit). 
The kind family feeling of Boaz, shining out 
in the expression, " our brother Elimeleoh," 
Is noteworthy. " Brother " was to him a 
homely and gracious term for "near kins- 
man. 

Ver. 4.— And I said (to myself). There 
is little likelihood in the opinion of those 
who maintain, with EosenmiiUer, that the 
expression, "I said," refers to a promise 
which Boaz had made to Euth (see ch. iii. 
13). It is a primitive phrase to denote in- 
ternal resolution. There is a point where 
thought and speech coalesce. Our words 
are thoughts, and our thoughts are words. 
I will uncover thine ear, that is, "I wiU 
lift the locks of hair that may he covering 
the ear, so as to communicate something in 
confidence." But here the phrase is em- 

Sloyed with the specific import of secresy 
ropt out. It is thus somewhat equivalent 
to "I will give thee notice;" only the 
following expression l)psl?, i. e. to say, must 
he read in the light of the undiluted original 
phrase, "I will uncover thine ear to say." 
The whole expression furnishes the most 
heautifiil instance imaginable of the primary 

meaning of "lijxl?. The thing that was to 
he said follows immediately, viz.. Acquire 
it, or Buy it It is as if he had said, " Now 
yon have a chance which may not occur 
again." It is added, in the presence of the 
inhabitants. This, rather than " the assess- 
ors," is the natmral interpretation of the 
participle (D'jJ?'*!;!). It is the translation 
which the word generally receives in the 
very numerous instances in which it occurs. 
There was, so to speak, a fair representation 
of the inhabitants of the city in the casual 
company that had assembled in the gateway. 
And in presence of the elders of my people. 
The natural "aldermen," orunofficial "sena- 
tors," whose presence extemporised for the 
occasion a sufficient court of testators. If 
thou wilt perform the part of a kinsman, 
perform it The translation in King James's 
English version, and in many other versions, 
viz., " If thou wilt redeem it, redeem it," is 
somewhat out of harmony with the nature 
of the case. Naomi was not wishing EUme- 
lech's estate to he redeemed. It was not yet 
in » position to he redeemed. It had not 
been alienated or sold. She wished for it 
not a redeemer, but a purchaser. And as it 
was the right of a Ip^J or kinsman to redeem 
for a reduced brother, if he was able and 
willing, the estate which had been sold to an 
alien (Levit xxv. 25), so it was the privilege 
of the same ht^M or kinsman to get, if the 
reduced brother was wishing to sell, the first 



offer of the estate. It would, in particnlir, 
be at variance with the prerogative of the 
nearest of kin if some other one in the 
circle of the kindred, but not so near, were 
to be offered on sale the usufructuary pos- 
session of the family estate (Levit. xxv. 23, 
27). Hence Boaz recognised the prior pre- 
rogative of his anonymous relative and friend, 
and said to him, " If thou wUt perform the 
part of a kinsman, and buy the property, 
then buy it." It is added, and if he will 
not. Note the use of the third person he, 
instead of the second thou. If the reading 
be correct, then Boaz, in thus speaking, 
must for the moment have turned to the 
witnesses so as to address them. That the 
reading is correct, notwithstanding that 
some MSS. and all the ancient versions 
exhibit the veVb in the second person, is 
rendered probable by the very fact that it is 
the difficult reading. There could be no 
temptation for a transcriber to substitute the 
third person for the second ; there would be 
temptation to substitute the second for the 
third. The unanimity of the ancient ver- 
sions is probably attributable to the habit of 
neglecting absolute literality, and translating 
according to the sense, when the sense was 
clear. Boaz, turning back instantaneously 
to his relative, says. Make thou known to 
me, that I may know, for there is none 
besides thee to act the kinsman's part (with 
the exception of myself), and I come after 
thee. The little clause, "with the excep- 
tion of myself," lies in the sense, or ^int, 
although not in the letter of Boaz's_ address, 
as reported in the text. And he said, I will 
act the kinsman's part He was glad to 
get the opportunity of adding to his own 
patrimonial possession the property that had 
belonged to Elimelech, and which Naomi, in 
her reduced condition, wished to dispose of. 
So far all seemed to go straight against the 
interests of Euth. 

Ver. 5.— And Boai said, In the day when 
thou acqnirest the land from the hand of 
Naomi, and from Ruth the Moahitess, (in 
that day) thou hast acquired the wife of the 
deceased, to establish the name of the de- 
ceased upon his inheritance. So we would 
punctuate and render this verse. Boaz dis- 
tinctly informed his relative that if the land 
was acquired at all by a kinsman, it must be 
acquired with its living appurtenance, Euth 
the Moahitess, so that, by the blessing of 
God, the Fountain of families, there might 
be the opportunity of retaining the possession 
of the property in the line of her deceased 
husband, that line coalescing in the line of 
her second husband. It was the pleasure of 
Naomi and Euth, in offering their property 
for sale, to burden its acquisition, on the 
part of a kinsman, with the condition speci- 
fied. If there snould be fruit after Uw 



62 



THE BOOK Ot RUTS. 



tctt. IV. 1—22. 



marriage, the child would be heir of the 
property, just as if he had been Maohlon's 
son, even though the father should have 
other and older sons by another vrife. 

Ver. 6. — And the kinsman said, I am 
not able to perform, for myself, the kins- 
man's part, lest I should destroy my in- 
heritance. Perform thou, for thyself, the 
kinsman's part devolving on me, for I am 
not able to perform it. The moment that 
Ruth was referred to, as the inseparable 
appurtenance of Eiimelech's estate, a total 
change came over the feelings of the anony- 
mouB relative and the spirit of his dream. 
He " could not," so he strongly put it, per- 
form the kinsman's part The probabilily is 
that he already had a family, but was a 
widower. This being the state of the case, 
it followed that if he should acquire Ruth 
along with her father-in-law's property, there 
might be an addition, perhaps a numerous 
addition, to his family ; and if so, then there 
would be more to provide for during his life- 
time, and at his death an increased sub- 
division of his patrimony. This, as he 
strongly put it, would be to "destroy" his 
patrimony, inasmuch as it might be frittered 
into insignificant fractions. There can be 
no reference, as the Chaldee Targumist 
imagined, to his fear of domestic dissensions. 
Or, if he did indeed think of such a casualty, 
he certainly did not give the idea expression 
to Boaz and the assessors. Cassel takes 
another view. " It must be," he says, " her 
Moabitish nationality that forms the ground, 
such as it is, of the kinsman's refusal. 
Eiimelech's misfortunes had been popularly 
ascribed to his emigration to Moab ; the 
death of Chilion and Machlon to their mar- 
riage with Moabitish women. This it was 
that had endangered their inheritance. The 
goel fean a similar fate. He thinks that he 
ought not to take into his house » woman, 
marriage with whom has already been visited 
with the extinguishment of a family in 
Israel" But if this had been what he 
referred to when he spoke of the " destruc- 
tion " of his inheritance, it was not much in 
harmony with the benevolence which he 
owed to Boaz, and to which he so far gives 
expression in the courtesy of his address, 
that he should have gratuitously urged upon 
his relative what he declined as dangerous 
for himseUl The expressions " for myself" 
and "for thyself " (7 and JJ) are significant. 
The anonymous relative does not conceal the 
idea that it would be only on the ground of 
aoine what would be for his own imterest 
that ne could entertain for consideration the 
proposal of KaomL He likewise assumed 
that if Boaz should be willing to act the 
Unsman's part, it would be simply because 
it oonld he tunied to account for hit own 



interest He did not know that there wai 
in Hoax's heart a love that truly "seeketh 
not her own," but in honour prefers the 
things of another. 

Yer. 7. — ^And this was formerly a custom 
in Israel, on occasion of surrendering righti 
of kinship, or of selling and buying land, in 
order to confirm any matter ; a man drew 
off his shoe and gave it to the other con- 
tracting party. This was attestation in 
Israel. We give a free translation. The 
custom was significant enough. He who 
sold land, or surrendered his right to act as 
a kinsman in buying land, intimated by the 
symbolical act of taking ofiT his shoe, and 
handing it to hia friend, that he freely gave 
up his right to walk upon the soil, in favour 
of the person who had acquired the posses- 
sion. Corresponding symbolical acts, in 
connection with the transfer of lands, have 
been common, and probably still are, in 
many countries. Ko doubt the shoe, after 
being received, would be immediately re- 
turned. 

Ver. 8. — And the kinsman said to Boaz, 
Acquire for thyself ; and drew off his shoe. 
On the instant that he said, "Acquire for 
thyself," viz., the land with its living appur- 
tenant, he drew off his shoe and presented it. 
Josephus allowed his imagination to run off 
with his memonr when, mixing up the his- 
torical case before us with the details of 
the ancient Levirate law (Deut. xxv. 7 — 9), 
which were, in later times at all events, more 
honoured in the breach than in the observ- 
ance, he represents Boaz as "bidding the 
woman loose the man's shoe and spit in his 
face." The actual ceremony was not an 
insult, but a graphic and inoffensive attest- 
ation. Yet it frradually wore out and was 
superseded. No vestige of it remained in 
the days of the writer,, and the Chaldee Tar- 
gumist seems to have been scarcely able to 
realise that such a custom could ever have 
existed. He represents the anonymous kins- 
man as drawing off his "right-hand glove" 
and handing it to Boaz. But take note of 
the German word for "glove," viz., Sand- 
schuh (a hcmd-shoe). 

Ver. 9. — And Boaz said to the elders and 
all the people, Ye are witnesses this day 
that I have acquired the whole estate of 
Elimelech, and the whole estate of Chilion 
and Machlon, from the hand of ITaomL It 
is absolutely necessary that, at this part of 
the narrative, as well as in several other po^ 
tions, we read " between the verses. " Naomi, 
either personally or by representative, must 
have appeared on the scene, to surrender her 
territorial rights and receive the value of the 
estate that nad belonged to her husband. 
But the writer merges in his acconnt Uies* 
coincidents, and hastens on to the consnm- 
mation of his story. In tiie twofold expRN. 



OK. It. 1—22.1 



THE BOOK Of RUTfi. 



^ii. 



sion, " the whole estate of Elimelech, and the 
whole estate of Chilion and Machlon," there 
is a kind of legal particularity. There was 
of course but one estate, but there was a 
succession in the proprietorship. 

Ver. 10. — And likewise Euth the Moab- 
itess, wife of Machlon, have I acquired to 
myself to wife, to establish the name of the 
deceased upon his inheritance, so that the 
name of the deceased may not be cut off 
from among his brethren, and from the gate 
of his place : ye are witnesses this day. 
This, to Boaz, would be by far the most 
delightful part of the day's proceedings. 
His heart would swell with manly pride and 
devout gratitude when he realised, amid all 
the cumbrous technicalities of old Hebrew 
law, that Ruth was his. And he would re- 
joice all the more, as, in virtue of her con- 
nection with Machlon and Elimelech, both of 
their names would still be encircled with 
honour, and might, by the blessing of Yah- 
veh, be linked on distinguishingly and 
lovingly to future generations. Note the 
expressitt, " that the name of the deceased 
may not be cut ofif from among his brethren, 
and from the gate of his place." The 
people who assembled at the gate might on 
some future day be able to say, "This boy 
is the heir of Machlon and Elimelech, who 
once migrated to Moab. " 

Ver. 11. — ^And all the people who were in 
the gateway, and the elders, said. Wit- 
nesses! May Tahveh grant that the wife 
who has come into thy house may be as 
Bachel and Leah, who built, the two of 
them, the house of Israel ! The people of 
the city in general, and the venerable elders 
in particular, were pleased with every step 
that Boaz had taken. They felt that he had 
acted a truly honourable part, at once in 
reference to Naomi, and to Ruth, and to the 
nearest kinsman, and likewise in reference 
to themselves as the representatives of the 
general population. Blessings rose up within 
their hearts, ascended into heaven, and came 
down — charged with something Divine as 
well as something human and humane — in 
showers upon his head, and upon the head 
of his bride. When they prayed that the 
woman who was the choice of their fellow- 
citiaen's heart should be as Rachel and 
Leah, they simply gave expression to the 
intensest desire that Israelites could cherish 
in reference to an esteemed sister. When 
they spoke of Rachel and Leah — the mothers 
of 'Israel — as "building up the house of 
Israel," they first of all compared the 
people to a household, and then they passed 
over from the idea of a household to the 
idea of a house as containing the house- 
hold. They added, more particularly in 
reference to Boaz himself, Do thou manfuUv 
in Ephratah. The expression is somewhat 



peculiar, ringing changes on the peculiar and 
remarkable term that occurs both in ch. ii 
1 and in ch. iiL 11. The expression ia 

^jP'nSfl!. The people meant, " Act thou, . 
the part of a strong, substAntial, worthy, 
man. They added, in a kind of enthusi- ,. 
astic exclamation. Proclaim thy. name in , 
Bethlehem. They had, however, no refer- 
ence to any verbal proclamation, or tribute 
of self-applause. The spirit of ideality bad- 
seized them. They meant, " Act the noble 
part — the part that will without voice pro- 
claim in Bethlehem its own intrinsic noble- 
ness. " 

Yer. 12. —And may thy house be as the 
house of Fharez, whom Tamar bare to 
Judah, (springing) from the seed which 
Tahveh will give to thee of this young 
woman! Pharez's descendants, th? Phat- 
zites, were particularly numerous, an l hence,, 
the good wishes of Boaz's fellow-townsmen 
(see Num. xxvi 20, 21). 

Yer. 13.— And Boaz took Euth, and she 
became to him his wife ; and. he went.in to 
her, and Yahveh gave her oonseption, a^d 
she bore a son. 

Yer. 14. — And the women said to Naomi, 
Blessed be Yahveh, who has given thee a 
kinsman this day! May his name become 
famous in Israel. Of course it is Ruth's 
son who is the kinsman referred to, the 
nearest kinsman, still nearer than Boaz. 
The kinsman was given, said the women, 
"this day," the day when, the child was 
bom. The expression which we have ren.T, 
dered, "who has given thee a kinsman, ''.is, 
literally, "who has not caused to fail to thee 
a kinsman." The sympathetic womtn who 
had gathered together in Boaz's house were 
sanguine, or at least enthusiastically desirous, 
that a son so auspiciously given, after most 
peculiar antecedents, would yet become a 
famous name in Israel. Canon Cook supposes 
that the kinsman referred to by the women 
was not the child, but his father, Boaz 
(' Speaker's Commentary, in loc). Yet it is 
obvious that the kinsman specified was thfr , 
one who, as they, said, had been given, or 
had not been caused to fail, "that day. 
He was, moreover, the one of whom they 
went on to say, "May his name become 
famous in Israel, and may he be to thee a 
restorer of life, and for the support of thine 
old age," &c. Dr. Cook's objections are 
founded on a too narrow view of the func- 
tions devolving on, and of the privileges 
accruing to, a goU. 

Ver. 15.— And may he be to thee a re- 
Btorer of life, and for the support of thin* 
old age: for thy daughter-in-law, who 
loved thee, hath borne him, and she u 
better to thee than seven sons. The number 
1 «w«» suggested an idea of fulness, eon»- 



%i 



THE BOOK OP RUTH. 



[oa. IV. 1—22. 



pleteness, perfection. The whole inhabitants 
of the city knew that Ruth's love to her 
mother-in-law had been indeed transcendent, 
and also that it had been transcendently re- 
tained. 

Yer. 16. — And ITaomi took the boy, and 
placed him in her bosom, and she became 
Ub foster-mother. She became his nurse in 
chief 

Ver. 17. — And the women, her neigh- 
bours, named the child, saying, A son has 
been bom to Naomi ; and they called his 
name Obed. He was the father of Jesse, 
the father of Dayid. " Obed," if a parti- 
ciple of the Hebrew verb 1^0, naturally 
means lerving or serva/nt. No other deriva- 
tion, apparently, can at present be assumed 
(but see Raabe's 'Glossar.'). Josephus gives 
the participial interpretation as a matter of 
course, and Jerome too. If the objective 
correlate of the servitude referred to were 
Yahveh, then the word might be equivalent 
to worshipper. If the name, however, as 
seema to be the case, was imposed first of all 
by the matronly neighbours who had come 
to mingle their joys with those of the 
mother, and of the grandmother in par- 
ticular, then it is not likely that there would 
be an overshadowing reference, either on the 
one hand to servitude in relation to Yahveh, 
or on the other to servitude in the abstract. 
Something simpler would be in harmony 
with their unsophisticated, impressible, and 
purely matronly minds. It is not at all un- 
likely that, in fondling the welcome " New- 
come," and congratulating the overjoyed 
grandmother, they would, with Oriental 
luxuriance of speech and Oriental overflow 
of demonstrativeness, speak of the ' lad ' 
as come home to be a faithful little servant 
to his most excellent grandmother. The 
infirmities of advancing age, aggravated by 
anxieties many, griefs many, bereavements 
many, toils many, privations many, dis- 
appointments many, had been one after 
another accumulanng on " the dear old 
lady." But now a sealed fountain of re- 
vivmg waters had been opened in the wilder- 
ness. Might it for many years overflow ! 
Might the oasis around it widen and stUl 
widen, till the whole solitary place should be 
. blossoming as the rose ! Might the lively 
little child be spared to minister, with bright 
activity and devotedness, to the aged pil- 
grim for the little remainder of her journey ! 
The word which the sympathetic neighbours, 
with net the least intention to propose a 
teal name, had been affectionately oandying 



about, while fondling the child, was accepted 
by Boaz and Kuth. They would say to one 
another, "Yes, just let him be little Ohed 
to his loving grandmother. " Naomi, soothed 
in all her motherly and grandmotherly long- 
ings and aspirations, would seem to have 
yielded, resolving, we may suppose, to train 
the child up to be a servant of Yahveh. 

Vers. 18 — 22. — And these are the lineal 
descendants of Fharez. Fharez begat Hez- 
ron, and Hezron begat Bam, and Bam begat 
Amminadab, and Amminadab begat Kah- 
shou, and Kahshon begat Salmon, and 
Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz begat Obed, 
and Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat, 
David. This is the genealogy of King Daviil . 
and it is therefore an integral part of thu 
genealogy of King David's great descendant, 
his "Lord" and ours. As such it is in- 
corporated entire in the two tables that are 
contained respectively in the first chapter of 
the Gospel according to Matthew, and the 
third of the Gospel according to Luke. Some 
of the names are somewhat Grecised and 
otherwise modified in those New Testament 
tables. Instead of Hezron we have Esrom ; 
instead of Ram we have Aram ; instead of 
Nahshon we have Naason ; instead of Boaz 
we have Boos ; in 1 Chron. ii 11 we have 
Salma instead of Salmon. It has been 
keenly debated by chronologists and gene- 
alogists whether we should regard the list of 
David's lineal ancestors, given here and in 
1 Chron. ii. 10 — 12, as also in Matt. L 3 — 5, 
and Luke iii. 31 — 33, as complete. It is a 
thorny question to handle, and one not ready 
to be finally settled tQl the whole Old Testa- 
ment chronology be adjusted. It is certain 
that in the larger tables of our Lord's gene- 
alogy there was, apparently for mnemonic 
purposes (Matt. i. 17), the mergence of cer- 
tain inconspicuous links (see Matt i 8) ; and 
it would not need to be matter of wonder or 
concern if in that section of these tables 
which contains the genealogy of King David 
there should be a similar lifting up into the 
light, on the one hand, of the more promi- 
nent ancestors, and a shading oif into the 
dark, on the other, of some who were less 
conspicuous. It lies on the surface of the 
genealogy that the loving - kindness and 
tender mercies of Yahveh stretch far beyond 
the confines of the Hebrews, highly favoured 
though that people was. " Is he," asks St. 
Paul, " the God of the Jews only ? Is he 
not also of the Gentiles ! Yes," the sami 
apostle answers, "of the Gentilss aUo' 
(Bom. iii 29). 



DH. IT. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF BDTH. fi| 



H0MILBTIC8. 

Veri. 1 — 12. — The hridoil of Boaz and Ruth. I. Thebb wbrk some obstaolbb in 
THB WAT. There were none, indeed, in Boaz's heart ; it was full of pure esteem 
and love for Buth. There were none in his financial circumstances ; he was able to 
provide amply for her comfort, and for all his own necessities and conveniences. 
There were none in his physical condition ; he had been temperate in all things, and 
was in the enjoyment of health and strength. Neither were there any obstacle! in 
Ruth's heart. It had already sought for refuge under the wings of Boaz's protection 
and sympathy. Nor were ther3 any in her physical, intellectual, or moral condition. 
She was exceptionally " capable " in every respect, and eminently virtuous and good. 
She was filled, and had for long been filled, with the love " that seeketh not her 
own things." Although reduced in circumstances, she really belonged to the very 
class in society in which Boaz himself was moving. Nor were there obstacles on 
the part of Boaz's friends on the one hand, nor on the part of Buth's one precious 
friend on the other. The obstacles were technical, arising out of the legal prerogative 
of a third party. Boaz set himself, in full concert with Buth and Buth's mother-in- 
law, to deal with these obstacles. 

II. Hb did not loiteb ovbb the matteb, or protract the proceedings unfeelingly 
from day to day, week to week, month to month, and even year to year, until " hope 
deferred " ate out every atom of enthusiasm from his own spirit, and made the heart 
of Buth g^ow " Bick. He took steps, without a single day's delay, to get his 
prospects and the prospects of Buth righteously settled (see vers. 1 — 4). 

IIL Yes, "biqhteodsly settled." For it was not so much the simple settlement 
as the righteousness of it that he longed for. He would not gratify his desire to 
obtain Buth — greatly as he esteemed, prized, and desired her — if he could not get her 
righteously and honourably. Hence the forensic scene in the gateway of the city. 

IV. It is AN OLD-WOKLD PiCTtJBB that is drawn in the narrative, unveiling to view 
the grave, solemn manners of primitive but well-mannered times. The city had but 
one gate, through which, therefore, every one who went out or came in must needs 
pass. It would hence become the principal place of concourse for the townsfolk. It 
was the place of primitive marketing and bartering. It was the place of primitive 
judicature. It was, as it were, the senate-hall or parliament-house of the town. The 
elders and fathers " did congregate " there, in the presence of the casual public, to 
discuss the incidents that were transpiring, or the topics that were interesting the 
public mind. It was the place of morning and evening lounge. Boaz was careful 
to be early in the morning at this gateway, and immediately on arrival he took steps 
to secure a judicial settlement, if needed, and, at all events, a complete attestation 
of the facts of any nuptial arrangement that might be made. The people would 
begin to assemble leisurely. They would salute one another courteously. Every one 
would be of staid demeanour. 'There would be no rush, or push, or panting haste. 
"The true Oriental likes to be self-possessed and leisurely. Some would be passing 
out, some passing in ; but all would be ready to pause and hail one another respect- 
fully. Kindly salutations would be directed to Boaz, and returned. _ It would be 
manifest froin his countenance, from the tones of his voice, from his entire demeanoui 
and manner, that he Ttieant business that morning. See him as he moved about, 
stable, yet elastic, and wound up. He invites certain venerated fathers to be seated 
on the stone benches set in a row at the base of the city wall, as he had an affair to 
transact which he wished them by their presence to attest. Other citizens, mean- 
while, one by one, would be arriving on the scene, some of them younger men and 
some older. They are grouped about. They feel that something unusual is in the air. 
At length there is a full conclave, and Boaz opens his case with his kinsman. It wag 
this : ^Naomi, who had so recently returned fcom the land of Moab, was now unfor- 
tunately in such reduced circumstances that she had resolved to sell the property 
which had belonged to her deceased husband. Now then was the opportunity of the 
nearest kinsman. In virtue of being the nearest in kinship, he was entitled to the 
first offer of the property. " Buy it, therefore," said Boaz, "before the inhabitants, 
and before the elders of my people. If thou wilt act the part of the nearest kin» 
BUTH. ' 



ik tat; Book gJ" RuTfl. tea- rt. 1—22. 

man (as thou art entitled to do), then aot it, and buy the property " (ver. 4). The 
kinsman seemed glad that he should have such an opportunity of adding: to his patri- 
monial estate, and accordingly, in presence of the elders and other inhabitants, ha 
lieartily said, " I wUl act the kinsman's part." As he thus spoke there would^ in all 
likelihood, be murmurs of applause round and round. Who could object to the 
kinsman getting the estate if he should offer to pay a liberal price to &e reduced 
widow? It was, in its own little sphere of things, quite a cnsis. Deep-drawing , 
interests, affections, and desires were trembling in the balance. Boaz looked grave. 
But it was evident to perceptive eyes that he had not yet unfolded the whole case to 
view. After the briefest possible pause he resumed, and said, in the presence of the 
judicial conclave, " In the day when thou buyest the land from Naomi, thou must buy 
it not from her only, but from Buth also, as prospective heiress ; and more, thou must 
buy it with Ritth cU present upon it, as its inahaidble appurtenani, in order that the 
name of her deceased husband may, by the blessing o£ the God of Israel, descend . 
with it in the line of her posterity (ver. 6). It was only for a moment that the fate 
of the gentle Moabitess trembled in its scale. The kinsman was not prepared to 
accept the property on Naomi's terms. He feared that new interests would spring 
up to fritter into insignificant patches the property which he already possessed. 
Hence he said to Boaz, in the presence of the elders and the other citizens, " I cannot 
act the part of the nearest kinsman ; do thou it, Boaz, in my room " (ver. 6). Boaz 
would triumph in his heart ; and so, when she became informed of the decision, would 
Naomi ; and so would Ruth. But some legal formalities required to be observed ere 
the renunciation of the prerogative attaching to the nearest kinsman became absolutely 
binding in law. " This,'' says the writer, " was formerly a custom in Israel on occa- 
sion of surrendering rights of kinship, or selling and buying land, in order to con- 
firm every matter. A man drew off his shoe and gave it to the contracting, party. , 
This was attestation in Israel" (ver. 7). Accordingly, the nearest kinsman lin the 
case before us drew off his shoe and tendered it to Boaz, in testimony that he there- 
with resigned all right to walk upon the grotmd in question (ver. 8). .After this 
formality had been completed, and Boaz had courteously, in presence of the assembled 
witnesses, returned the symbolic shoe, he seems to have sent for Naomi and Buth, 
and to have finished with them, in the presence of the people, the arrangement which 
was the most momentous into which he had ever entered, and which promised to be 
big with blessing to others as well as to himself. It was not only a marriage, settle- 
ment; it was a bridal ceremony. The antique benisons of the elders and theothel 
citizens fell round him thick and fast (vers. 9 — 12), and that blessing which maketh 
rich, and to which no sorrow is added, the blessing of the God of families and of all 
family love, descended and crowned the union. 

V. It is infinitely becoming that all things in marriage should be done " decently," 
" IN OEDER," and ABOVE-BOAKD. Let everything clandestine be sensitively avoided. 
Whenever there is anything in marriage or its preliminaries that needs smothering 
up, the wind is sown, and the whirlwind will need to be reaped. 

VI. If stable happiness after marriage be desired, care should be taken to have 
all preliminaries duly, clearly, and righteously pre-arranged, more particularly such 
as have reference to possessions, money, rights, or prerogatives. • There should be 
dlso, especially in these modem times, distinct preliminary arrangements regarding 
the chief manners and customs of the home, and the relationship that' is to be 
sustained to Churches, and Church assemblies and ordinances. Muchi indeed must . 
be left to future and incidental adjustment ; but great regulative principles should be 
mutually settled. 

VII. If, in " the estate of marriage," there be, as there should be and might be, on 
both sides a continual aim after whatsoever things are true, honest, seemly, honour- 
able, just, pure, lovely, virtuous, and praiseworthy, then the light of life will, shine in 
the home and in the heart with inexpressible sweetness and brightness. But if there 
be suspicion, jealousy, hard authority, tyranny, a dictatorial spirit, or any g^ossness, or 
secret faithlessness, or the neglect of courtesy, or the extinguishment of kindness 
&nd daily benevolence, if there be hard selfishness, however giitteringly glozed over 
with a semblance of good manners, then the light of life will be not only: partially, 
but totally ecUpsed. When the selfishness immasks itself to the full, the last feeblt 



OH. IT. 1— S2.] THE BOOK OF BUTH. C7 

flame, flickering in the socket, will die out, and be succeeded by a darkness that is the 
very " blackness of darkness." The true ideal of conjugal relationship is presented 
by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians (ch. v. 25 — 33). The husband's love 
should be as the love of Jesus to his Church. The love of the wife should be as 
the love of the Church to Jesus. Then the marriage is " in the Lord ; " and, what 
is better still, the Ijfe after the marriage is life ^' in the Lord," and life to the Lord. 
It was from ages and generations " a great mystery," but now it is made manifest 
in every Christian home that is Christian indeed. 

Vers. IS — 22. — Little Ohed. A birth, and in particular a first birth, in the homes 
of the " excellent of the earth " is always an interesting and exciting event. What 
multitudes of beginnings there are in childhood I What multitudes of buds and 
beautiful rose-buddings I What possibilities and uncertainties I What wonderful 
littlenesses of hands and feet, and other organs, all so marvellously harmonised and 
complete I What wondrous and wondering eyes, looking, and still looking, as if they 
would really read your very heart I What winsome smiles and early recognitions I 

I. Little Obbd was a toetdnatb child. He had three great privileges. He had 
a good father, a good mother, and a good grandmother. What a blessing I His 
father was one of the most upright, most honourable, most gracious of men. His 
mother was " one among a thousand." She had a large heart, full of singular afEection 
and self-denying devotedness. His grandmother was a woman with bold outline of 
character, but with a capability of yearning and attachment unfathomably deep. 

II. If little Obed grew up, as is likely, in the fear and favouk of God, then what 
was long afterwards said of Timothy might by some one be said of him, " I call to 
remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt at first in thy grand- 
mother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded in thee also " (2 Tim. i. 6). 

III. Fkom his very bieth he would be cradled in love, the threefold love of 
Ruth, Boaz, and Naomi, intertwined into a delightful unity of afEection. 

IV. Great would be tee rejoicings over his advent. 1. Ruth would think of 
Machlon, and rejoice. 2. Naomi would think of Elimelech, and rejoice. 3. Boaz 
would think of both the deceased, and rejoice that their names were not to be cut ofi 
from among their brethren. Then again (1) Ruth would rejoice for her husband's 
sake, whose home would be brighter now than ever. And she would have peculiar 
joy for Naomi's sake, whose fondest wishes and hopes and plans had been so happily 
consummated. (2) Boaz would rejoice over the joy and consolation of Ruth and 
Naomi ; and he would drink from another fountain of joy as he realised that he himself, 
instead of being the terminal link in the genealogical chain, might now have a place 
in the line of future generations. (3) Naomi would rejoice because her deepest 
desires had been brought up into the light, and crowned with the blessing oiE the 
Almighty. No longer was He the embitterer of her lot (ch. i. 20). Her name was 
true, and not to be exchanged for Mara. She was herself again "Naomi," for 
" sweet is Jah." His character is " sweet," his thoughts, his feelings, his plans, bis 
ways, all are "sweet." /-,. j, j u 

V. In another respect would there be peculiar rejoicings over Obed s advent. He 

WAB THE MUCH LONGED-FOE HEIR OF ITVO DISTINCT ESTATES. Let US hope that he 

would be trained up to think of the responsibilities as well as of the privileges that 
would come to him in virtue of being born into a good position in society. 

VI. Hl8 NAME would BE BEAUTIFULLY SIGNIFICANT TO HIM IN PROPORTION AS HIS 

MIND UNFOLDED AND EXPANDED. He would have various ministries to fulfil. A 
ministry to his grandmother. A ministry to his mother. A ministry to his father. 
A ministry to his dependents. A ministry to his friends and neighbours, and 
countrymen in general. Above all, he would have a ministry to the God of hie 
fathers and Of their children's children. It would be his business to be Obed in all 
relations. Even Jesus, out of all compare the greatest of his descendants, became 
Obed, and took upon himself " the form of a servant,;' and took far more than the 
form ; he came " not to be ministered unto, but to minister." 

VII It was the hope of the congratulatory matrons who fondled the welcome 
cbiM.that ho would be to his grandmother "a restorer of life" and "a nourisher 
of bar old ago" (ver. 15*. High is the privilege of children and grand-children 

)■• 2 



68 THE BOOK OF RUTH. Itm. it. 1— «8 

thus to brighten to the aged the evening of life, when the long shadows are stretch- 
ing far away. Happy they who count this a privilege I 

VIII. What a charm is thrown over infant life by the action of Obed's great 
descendant in reference to children. He said, " Suffer the little children to come 
unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven." He took 
them up in his arms, laid his hand upon their heads, and blessed them (Matt. zix. 14 ; 
Mark x. 14 — 16). At another time he called a little child to him and set him in the 
midst of his ambitious disciples, and said, " Except ye be converted, and become as 
little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven " (Matt, xviii. 2, 3) 
In this love for little children Jesus, as in so many other respects, was " the image 
of the invisible God." He shows us exactly what is the heart, and what are the 
heart afEections, of God. Sttch as was the visile Jesus in feelings and character, 
szichis the invisible God. He, therefore, he, even he, is a lover of little children, 
willioat distinction or exception. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1, S. — A primitive cmineil. The writer of this book depicts for os in this 
passage a very picturesque scene. We observe — 1. The place of judgment and piiblie 
business. " Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates . . . throughout 
thy tribes, and they shall judge the people with just judgment." The parents of 
the disobedient son were to " bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the 
gate of his place." Absalom, when plotting against his father's authority, "stood 
beside the way of the gate," and intercepted those that came to the king for judg- 
ment. 2. The court in whose presence important business was transacted — "the 
elders of the city." Such elders were prescribed, as is evident from several passages 
in Deuteronomy ; and the early books of the Old Testament contain frequent refer- 
ences to them and to their duties. Allusion is made to the elders of Succoth, of 
Jezreel, and of this same Bethlehem in the time of Samuel. Ten seems to have 
been what we should call a. quorum. There is wisdom, gravity, deliberation, dignity, 
in the proceedings here recorded. 

I. HnMAH SOCIETY REQUIRES INSTITUTIONS OP LAW AND JUSTICE. The relations 

between man and man must not be determined by chance, or left to the decision of 
force or fraud. " Order is Heaven's first law." 

n. Law and justice should be banctionbd by religion. Religion cannot 
approve of all actions done by all in authority ; but it acknowledges and respects 
government as a Divine institution, and awakens conscience to support justice. 

III. There are certain coNDinoNS in coNroRMiTY with which public business 
should be transacted. 1. Openness and publicity. 2. Solemn and formal ratifi- 
cation and record of important acts. 3. Equality of citizens before the law. 4. As 
much liberty as is compatible with public rights. 6. Integrity and incorruptness on 
the part of those who administer the law. — ^T. 

Vers. 3 — 8. — The goel. Every nation has its own domestic and social usages. 
Among those prevalent in Israel was the relationship of the goel. He was the 
redeemer, or the next kinsman of one deceased, whose duty it was to purchase an 
inheritance in danger of lapsing, or to redeem one lapsed. The duties were defined 
in the Levitical law. According to the custom and regulation known as Levirate, 
he was expected to marry the widow of the deceased, and to raise up seed unto the 
dead, in case no issue were left of the marriage dissolved by death. From this 
Book of Ruth it is clear that the two duties, that with regard to property and thst 
respecting marriage, centered in the same person. Failing the unnamed kinsmar, 
it fell to the lot of Boaz to act the part of the near relative of Ruth's deceased 
husband. Usages and laws diifer, but the fact of kindred remains, and involvei 
many duties. 

I. Human kindred is a Divine appointment. 

II. And is both suggestive and illustrative of religious, of Christian tbuti. 
E. g. of tne fatherhood of God ; of the brotherhood of man ; based upon tha' "^ 
Christ 



OH. IV. 1-22. J THE BOOK OJf BDTH 



Til. KiNDHBD IS AT THE FOUNDATION OP HUMAN LIFE, AS SOCIAL AND POLITICAL. 

IV. Kindred involves consideration and eegaed. 

V. And, wheee oikcumstancbs bender it expedient, practical help. 

Appeal : — Do we recognise the just claims of kindred ? If we do not, is not our 
failure traceable to an imperfect apprehension of spiritual relationships P — ^T. 

Vers. 4, 6. — Our oivn inheritance. " Lest I mar mine own inheritance." How many 
do this ? They have noble inheritances, but in a multitude of ways they mar them. 

I. There is the inheritance of physical health. Most precious ; not to be 
gotten for fine gold. Yet how often it is injured by sloth and sin, by intemperance 
and lust, or by the overtaxed brain, and neglect of the simple economy of health. 

II. There is the inheritance of a good name. This too is a priceless gift. 
More to be desired than gold, yea, than fine gold. Character. It takes years to 
nin — whether for a commercial house or for a personal reputation ; but it takes 
only a moment to lose. How many a son has marred his inheritance 1 The " good 
name" is irrecoverable in the highest sense. Forgiveness may ensue, but the 
memory of evil lives after. 

III. There is the inheritance op a beliqious faith. " My father's God." Then 
my father had a God I There had been a generation to serve him before I was bom I 
Am I to be the first to break the glorious chain, to sever the great procession ? 
"One generation shall praise thy works to another." How beautiful I Is my voice 
to be silent, my thought to be idle, my heart to be cold and dead to God my Saviour? 
Let me think of the unfeigned faith of my grandmother Lois and my mother Eonice, 
and not mar the inheritance through unbelief. — VP. M. S. 

Vers. 9 — 11. — Howmrahle conduct honourably loitnessed. By the " shoe " in the 
context is meant, no doubt, the sandal, which in the East was, and is, the ordinary 
covering of the foot, fastened by means of a thong of leather. Although in a house, 
or in a temple, the sandal was dispensed with, it was always used in walking and 
upon a journey. It was taken off at meals, in every sacred place, and in the presence 
of every sacred person, and on occasion of mourning. The context brings before us 
a symbolical use of the sandal. In early times — for even when this book was 
written the custom was obsolete — it was the usage of the men of Israel, in taking 
possession of any landed property, to pluck off the shoe. This was the survival of 
a still older custom — the planting the foot upon the newly-acquired soil, outwardly 
and visibly to express the taking possession of it, and asserting a right to it as one's 
own. Having, by the permission and at the suggestion of the unnamed kinsman, 
performed this simple symbolical act, Boaz proceeded to address the assembled 
elders of the city, calling them to witness two facts : his purchase of the field of 
Elimelech, and his resolve to take Ruth, the widow of Elimelech's son, as his own 
wife. The elders, in presence of one another, formally and solemnly declared. 
We are witnesses, 

I. A. beligiods mah should be sceupulouslt honourable in the rBANSAcrioNS of 

LIFE. 

II. In nothino is this rule mobb impobtant than in questions afpectinq 
property and in maeeiaqe. 

iii. plfblicity, the pee8encb op competent and veracious, honourable wit- 
NESSES, MAY BE REGARDED AS OP THE HIGHEST IMPORTANCE. Secret marriages and 
underhand proceedings with regard to property are to be avoided. 

IV. A PUBLIC PEOFESSION OP CHEISTIANITT in the PEISBNCB OP WITNESSES IS WISE, 
BIGHT, AND EXPEDIENT. — T. 

Ver. 10. — 77ie nam/e of the dead. Elimelech was dead, Mahlon was dead. But 
to Naomi and to Ruth, who survived, and even to Boaz, the kinsmen of the deceased, 
the dead were sacred. Not only was their memory treasured in the hearts of the 
survivors ; the fact that they had lived exercised an influence, and a very marked in- 
fluejice, over the conduct of those still living. This was human, admirable, and rigEt. 

I. The name of the dead should be sacbbd in every family. We were theirs, 
and they are still ours — ours whilst we live. To forget them would be brutish and 



70 THB BOOK OF RUTH. [oh. it. 1—22. 

inhnman. Their memory should be cherished. Their wishes, within reasonabla 
limits, should be fulfilled. Their example, if good, should be reverently studied and 
diligently copied. 

It 'The name oj the dead is a national possession AHD poweb. " One gener- 
ation 'ttasseth away, and another generation cometh." 'But each generation inherits 
from its predecessor. Patriotism is fostered by the traditions of the great men who 
have gone, and whose memory is the national pride and glory. To us in England 
what' inspiration does " the name of the dead " afford I The heroes, statesmen, 
patriots, saints, discoverers, &c. have left behind them imperishable names. " Let us 
now," says the apocryphal writer, " let us now praise famous men and our fathers 
which begat us." 

IIL The name or the dead ib the inspibation of the wobld'b laboubb and 
HOPES. All great names, save One, are names of the dead, or of those who soon will 
be such. One was dead, but lives again, and for evermore. His undying life gives 
true life and power to the great names of those whom he causes to uve again ; for 
he teaches us that nothing he has sanctified can ever die. 

Query : — What shall our name be when we are with the dead ? — T. 

Yen. 11, 12. — Good wishes. When the marriage of Boaz with Ruth was resolved 
apon, the elders of the city, the bridegroom's neighbours and friends, expressed with 
cordiality their congratulations and good wishes. They wished well to himself, to his 
wife, to his house or family, to his offspring, his seed. 

L Kind wishes abe founded in a pbincifle Divinely planted in human ha- 
TDBE. Sympathy is a principle of human nature. Benevolence is as natural as 
■elfishness, though less powerful over most minds. And we should " rejoice with 
those who do rejoice." 

II. It is right that kind wishes bhotild be bxpbessed in wobds. There is no 
doubt danger lest insincerity should creep into the customary salutations and benedic- 
tions of life ; many compliments are utterly insincere. Tet even the most scrupulous 
and veracious may legitimately utter good wishes. It is churlish to withhold such 
utterances. 

III. Christianitt gives a rich, full meaning to the kind wishes of friend- 
ship. For our religion teaches us to turn every wish into a prayer. It is a suCBcieut 
condemnation of a wish that it cannot take this form. With Christians, " God bless 
you I " should be a hearty and fervent intercession. — ^T. 

Ver. 13. — The birth of a son. With true piety as well as jusHce the author of this 
book refers the blessings of domestic life to him who setteth his people in families, 
and of whom it is said, " Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of 
the womb is his reward." Whenever a child is bom into the world the Spirit of 
wisdom teaches us, as Christians, lessons of the most praucical and valuable kind. 

I. Gratitude to God fob a precious gift. Christian parents feel that they 
receive no gifts so valuable, so dear as the child len bestowed upon them by the 
goodness of God. Thanks are ever due for the l^lvine favour thus shown. 

II. A sense of parental responsibility. He must be stolid and insensible 
indeed who, when his firstborn is placed in his arms, has no thought of the sacred 
charge laid upon him. Gifts are trusts. The parent's desire and prayer shonld be 
for grace to fulfil solemn responsibilities. 

III. Resolutions bbgabdinq education. Remembering that for the first years of 
life a child is almost entirely under the parents' influence, fathers and mothers will 
not only at the first seriously and prayerfully dedicate their offspring to God, but will 
consider how they may train them up in the way they should go, that when they are 
old they may not depart from it. 

IV. A spirit of dependence upon " the Father of the spirits of all flesh " 
FOB A blessing. We cannot too much connect our children with the throne of grace. 
Private and family prayer will be the means of domestic happiness, and will assist 
parents in exercising a watchful care and faithful gmdance, and children in using 
aright the opportunities of improvement with which they are favoured. — T. 



OH. IV. 1—22.] THE BOOK OP RUTH. Tl 

Ver. 13. — The birth-hour. " And she bare a son." Memorable day that 1 Bend 
to the end of the chapter: " There was a Bon bom to Naomi ; and they called his 
name Obed : he is the father of Jesse, the father of David." The old divines used to 
consider that Buth the Moabitess becoming an ancestor of David was a prefigurement 
of the admission of the Gentiles into the Christian Church. Certain it is that the 
Jews did think this a dishonour to David, and Shimei in his revilings is supposed to 
taunt David with his descent from Buth. But the descent of the same true spirit 
is the real descent of honour. 

I. The child's name. Obed, a servant. It may be a remembrancer of duty. Just 
as the motto of the Prince of Wales is — " Ich dien," I serve. Any way it is beauti- 
ful never to despise service. A Christian is to be " meet for the Master's use." 
How many there are who are of no use in the world 1 Some dislike all service, and 
prefer the dainty hand that is never soiled, and the life that is never separated from 
selfishness. 

II. The benediction on Naomi. Naomi was there to receive congratulations. 
What a time for the mother in Israel to be with the new mother 1 There is sacred 
anxiety in such hours in the household. Why should the name of mother-in-law be 
the butt for satire ? Many can testify how precious her care and kindness is in such 
a season. It is easy, but wicked as easy, to satirise a relationship which, if it creates 
responsibilities, confers also kindness which cannot be bought. 

III. The prophecy concerning the babe. How soon infancy merges into youth 
and manhood. In a few years Naomi will be bent and bowed. The white winter of 
age is coming, and then this child shall be a nourisher of Naomi's old age. A desolate 
time indeed for those who have no children's children to brighten their declining days, 
and, if needful, to succour them when friend and helper are gone. But all here is 
traced, as in Hebrew history all is ever traced, to the good hand of God. " Blessed 
be the Lord, which hath not left thee this day without a kinsman." — W. M. S. 

Vers. 14 — 17. — The benevolent happmett of old age. The story of Buth closes 
amidst domestic prosperity and happiness, and amidst neighbourly congratulations. 
And it is observable that Naomi, whose trials and sorrows interest us so deeply at 
the commencement of this book, appears at its close radiant with renewed happiness : 
her daughter-in-law a mother, she herself a grand-parent, surrounded by rejoicing 
neighbours, expressing their congratulations, and invoking blessing upon her and 
those dear to her. The narrative loses sight of Buth in picturing the felicity of her 
mother-in-law. The neighbours who before had asked, " Is this Naomi ? " now 
exclaim, " There is a son born to Naomi : blessed be the Lord, whick hath not left 
thee this day without a kinsman." She is encompassed with the blessings which, in 
the language of our poet, " should accompany old age " — " honour, love, obedience, 
troops of friends." 

I. Unselfishness is bewabded. Naomi had all along thought more of Buth't 
sorrows and of Buth's happiness than of her own. And now this very Buth is made 
the means of her prosperity, comfort, and joy in declining years. 

II. Hopes are fulfilled. It was Naomi's desire that Buth might attain to 
" rest," and her counsels had been directed to this end. Now she sees the Moabitess 
a happy wife, a happy mother. 

III. A JOYOUS PBOSPECT is OPENED UP. The day has been cloudy and stormy, but 
how brightly does the sun shine out at eventide I " A restorer of her life," " a 
nourisher of her old age," is given her. The child Obed becomes her delight, and 
her imaginations picture bis manhood, and his position in an honourable line of 
descent. 

IV. Sympathy enhances happiness. There is mutual reaction here ; Ruth, Naomi, 
and the neighbours, with unselfish congratulations, rejoicings, and prayers, con- 
tribute to one another's welfare. — T. 

Vers. 18 — 22. — The lineage of David. This book closes with a genealogy. 
Readers of the Scriptures may sometimes have felt perplexed at the frequency with 
which genealogical tables occur both in the Old Testament and in the New. There 
ia a sufficient reason for this. 



72 THE BOOK OF BUTH. [ch iv. 1—22 

I. Scripture sanctions thb interest human nature feels in genealogy. No 
one is insensible to his own ancestry, especially if among his progenitors have been 
men of eminence. Interest in ancestry may be carried too far, and may spring from, 
and minister to, a foolish vanity, but in itself it is good. It is a witness to the 
dignity of human nature ; it may be an inspiration to worthy deeds ; it may be an 
incentive to transmit influences of character and culture to posterity. 

II. SCBIPTUBB attaches SPECIAL IMPORTANCE TO THE GENEALOGY OP THE DESCEND- 
ANTS OF Abraham. Israel was the chosen people, and the lineage of the tribes of 
Israel, and especially of Judah, was a matter of national and local, but also of world- 
wide, importance. 

III. Scripture carefully records the genealogy of Christ Jesus. He was the 
Son of man, the Son of David, as well as the Son of God. By evincing this, pro- 
vision was made for commending Jesus to the reverence of the Hebrew people ; for 
making manifest the fulfilment of prophecy, which was thus authenticated ; for pre- 
senting the Saviour in all the power of his true humanity before the himian race, as 
the object of faith, attachment, and devotion. 

Lessons : — 1. The obligations under which we individually may be laid by a pious 
ancestry. 8. Our debt to posterity. 3. The claims of the Son of man apoB ouf 
kMiti.— X. 



HOMILETICAL INDEX 



TO 



THE BOOK OF RUTH. 



CHAPTER I 






CHAPTER III 






mnn 




M« 


THEMI 




MOl 


The Emigrants and their Trials 


.. 


4 


Naomi's Maternal Solicitud* 


^ 


12 


On the Book of Buth 


•». 


6 


Marriage, a Woman's Rest ..a 


• •• 


es 


A Family of Bethlehem 


.» 


S 


Diligence in Business ... 


••1 


es 


Famine and Impoyerishment 


.a. 


6 


Filial Obedience ... 




65 


Emigration „. .~ 


.•a 


6 


The Joy of Harvest 


aaa 


56 


Widowhood ». .» 


a.. 


7 


Benediction 




66 


Uorriage „ .~ 


... 


7 


A Virtuous Woman 


a~ 


67 


Double Desolation » 


... 


8 


Respect for Others' Rights ... 


• ■• 


57 


A Foreign Land ... .~ 


». 


10 


Generosity ... ... 


... 


67 


Longing for the Old Home .^ 


... 


13 


Sit Still I 


... 


58 


Kindness .^ .~ 


... 


14 


Thoughtful Love ... .« 


• •• 


58 


Separation 


... 


14 


The Work of Winnowing ... 


■ •• 


68 


Home Returning ... 


... 


15 


Above Rubies 


• •• 


69 


Benedictions 


... 


15 


Woman's Influence 


• •• 


69 


Devoted Attachment 


a.a 


21 








Constancy 


... 


22 


CHAPTER IV. 






Heart Wonnds Re-opened ... 


a.. 


23 


The Bridal of Boaz and Ruth 




65 


Moral Steadfastness 


aaa 


24 


Little Obed 


.'.'. 


67 


CHAPTER n. 






A Primitive Council ... 
The Goel 


... 


68 
68 


Phe Harvest-Field 


M. 


32 


Our Own Inheritance 


... 


69 


The Gleaner .^ 


t*t 


83 


Honourable Conduct Honourably Wit- 




Her Hap ^ 


... 


33 


nessed ... 


■ •• 


69 


Salutations 


... 


34 


The Name of the Dead 


-■• 


69 


Filial Piety and Fidelity Recognised 




Good Wishes 




70 


and Recompensed 


..a 


34 


The Birth of a Son 


• •> 


70 


The Harvest-Field again ... 


aa.. 


89 


The Birth-Hour ... 


• .. 


71 


Liberality to the Poor 


... 


40 


The Benevolent Happiness of 


Old 




Home from the Harvest-Field 


... 


44 


Age ... 


... 


71 


Kindred and Kindness ... 


aaa 


45 


The Linear of David «. 


.^ 


n 


BarTMt-TisH ^ ~. 


~ 


it 












COHNELI UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 



3 1924 101 104 937 



i^W^ 









iip;i'iilii™ii 



Bii'Jl'S, 




I? 

t;:r'i..i:-i 



:;,! :." 'Mil, ' l-'r .:: : i;:--! ;; :<■.,:•■ » 



tiirfiiiAifiu,- ►, 



;;ii!JifflSMliiMilSffliis!iiyii^iSi(«illffl6K!SiSliiiB 



