
I IT 



' i 1 

i . 

! 1 

i . . . > 

■ i ■ ■ '. ■ 





iiijjiML; 



'wmm 



mm 



1 : f 
1:1 51 






■l:i:J 




' ! il:: 



i 



:[:l!lii' 



CORNELL 
UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY ■ 





Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tiiis book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101105009 



THE 

PULPIT COMMENTARY, 

EDITED BY THE 

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ; 

AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY THE 



VEN. ARCHDEACON F. W. FARRAR, D.D., F.R.S.— RT. REV. H. COTTERILL, D.D., F.R.Sl 

VERY REV. PRINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.-REV. CANON G. RAWLINSON, M.A. 

REV. A. PLUMMER, M.A., D.D. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
Nbw Yobk and Toeonto. 

- .v^ ■ <// 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY 



EDITED BY THE 



REV. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, MX, 

VICAR AND RURAL DEAN OF ST. PANCRAS, AND EXAMINING CHAPLAIN TO THE U>RO 
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER AND BRISTOL'. 



AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXEll, M.A. 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



®3E:poBition anb ^lomiletire : 

THE RIGHT HON. AND RIGHT REV. 
LORD A. C. HERVET, D.D., 

LORD BISHOP OF BATH AND WELLB. 

^omilies bs barions ^ntljore.- 

REV PROF. p. C. BARKER, M.A. REV. PROF. E. JOHNSON, 
REV PROF. R. A. REDFORD, U.A. REV. R. TUCK, B.A. 
REV. W. CLARKSON, B.A. 



VOL. J. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New York and Toronto. 



THE 

ACTS OF THE ArOSTLES. 



INTEODUCTION. 



f 1. Object and Pun or thb Book. 

The most ancient title of the book, as given in the Codex Vaticanus and 
the Codex Bezse — Ilpafas 'AiroordAxov ; ' and properly rendered, both in the 
Anthorized and the Revised Versions, " The Acts of the Apostles " — though 
probably not given to it by the author, sufficiently expresses its general object, 
viz. to give a faithful and authentic record of the doings of the apostles of 
onr Lord Jesus Christ, after he had ascended into heaven, leaving them as 
his responsible agents to carry on the building of his Church on earth. It 
is obvious that, if the authoritative Christian documents had ended with the 
Gospels, we should have been left without any sufficient guidance in regard 
to a multitude of important questions of the utmost moment to the Church 
in all ages. We should have had, indeed, the record of the life and death, 
the resurrection and ascension of the Lord Jesus ; but as to how the holy 
Catholic Church, of which he was the Divine Founder, was to be compacted 
together, how the Lord Jesus would carry on from heaven the work which 
he had begun on earth, what should be the functions of the Holy Ghost, 
how the city of God was to be ruled, how the evangelization of the world 
was to be carried on from age to age, — we should have known almost 
nothing. This second " treatise," therefore, which in St. Luke's design was 
a following up of his own Gospel, but in the design of the Holy Ghost was 
the sequel of the four Gospels, was a most necessary supplement to the 
histories of the life of Christ. 

But beyond this general object, a closer inspection of the book reveals a 
more particular purpose, in which the mind of the author and the purpose 
of the Holy Ghost seem to coincide. 

The true way to judge of the purpose of any book is to see what the book 

' Other titles are ^|><^tls riv 'hiraaTi\mr, T.B., or Tfir h.yi»r 'KroariXm*, K.T. 
ACTS I. * 



INTRODUCTION TO 



actually tells ns, as it is to be presnmed that the execntion corresponds 
with the design. Now, " The Acts of the Apostles " gives ns the history of the 
apostles, generally, to a very limited extent. After the first chapters, which 
relate with such power the founding of the Church at Jerusalem, it tells us 
very little of the work of further evangelization among the Jews ; it tells 
us very little of the history of the mother Church of Jerusalem. After 
the first chapter, the only apostles named at all are Peter, James, John, and 
James the Less.* And of their work, after those first chapters, we learn 
only so much as hears upon the admission of Gentiles into the Church of 
Christ. Peter and John go to Samaria to confirm the converts made there. 
Peter is sent from Joppa to the house of Cornelius the centurion, to preach 
the gospel to the GentUes ; and afterwards declares to the assembled 
Church the mission which he had received, which led to the assent of the 
brethren in Judaea, expressed in the words, " Then hath God also to the 
Gentiles granted repentance unto life" (ch. xi. 18). The apostles and 
elders come together to consider the question of the circumcision of Gentile 
converts, and Peter and James take a prominent part in the discussion and 
in the decision of the question. The preaching of the gospel by Philip to the 
Samaritans and to the Ethiopian eunuch, and the conversion of a great 
number of Gh-eeks at Antioch, are other incidents recorded in the early part 
of the book, which bear directly upon the admission of the Gentiles into 
the Church of Christ. And when it is remembered how very brief these 
early chapters are, and what an extremely small portion of the actions of 
Peter and James the Less, compared with their whole apostolic work, these 
incidents mast have made up, it already becomes manifest that the history 
of Gentile Christianity was the main object which St. Luke had in view. 
But the history of the conversion of the Gentiles to the faith of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and their admission into the Church as fellow-heirs with 
Israel, and of the same body, and partakers of God's promise in Christ, 
through the preaching of the great apostle of the Gentiles, is avowedly 
the subject of the last sixteen chapters of the book. From Antioch the 
capital of the Bast, to Rome the capital of the West, the writer traces in 
these chapters the wonderful history of Gentile Christianity through about 
twenty years of the eventful life of St. Paul, during the last eleven or 
twelve of which he was himself his companion. Here, then, we have a con- 
firmation of what even the first part of the Acts disclosed as to the writer's 
purpose ; and we are able to frame a theory consistent in itself and with the 
known facts as to the object of the book. Assuming the authorship of St. 
Luke and his Gentile birth (see below, S 2), we have an author to whom 
the progress of Gentile Christianity would be a matter of supreme interest. 
This interest, no doubt, attached him, when an opportunity presented itself, 
to the mission of the apostle to the Gentiles. Being a man of education 
and of cultivated mind, the idea of recording what he had seen of St. Paul's 
work would naturally occur to him ; and this again would oonneot itself 
■ If indeed Jamei wm one of the twelve. 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa iU 

with his general interest in the progress of the gospel among the nations of 
the earth ; while, having already written a history of the life and death of 
Jesus, in which his special interest in the Gentiles is very apparent (Luke 
ii. 32 ; xiii. 29 ; ziv. 23 ; xv. 11 ; xx. 16), he would, as a matter of course, 
connect his new work with the former one. 

But assuming that his object was to write the history of Gentile Chris- 
tianity, it is obvious that the history of the first preaching of the gospel at 
Jerusalem was necessary, both to connect his second work with the first, and 
also because in point of fact the mission to the Gentiles sprang from the 
mother Church at Jerusalem. The existence and establishment of the Jewish 
Church was the root from which the Gentile Churches grew ; and the 
Gentile Churches had a common interest with the Jewish in those first great 
events — the election of an apostle in the place of Ji^das, the descent of the 
Holy Ghost at Pentecost, the preaching of Peter and John, the appoint- 
ment of deacons, and the martyrdom of Stephen, at which last event the 
great figure of St. Paul first came upon the stage. 

So that, in assuming St. Luke's purpose in writing the Acts to be to give 
the history of Gentile Christianity, we are supported both by the actual 
features of the book before us, and by the probability that his own position 
as a Gentile Christian, as the companion of St. Paul, and as the friend of 
Theophilus, would give birth to such a design. 

It is no less apparent how the hand of Divine providence and inspiration 
moved him to this choice. St. Luke could not possibly know of himself 
that the Church of the circumcision would come to an end within a few years 
of the time at which he was writing, but that the Church of the uncircum- 
cision would go on growing and spreading and increasing through more than 
eighteen centuries. But God did know it. And therefore it came to pass 
that this record of evangelical work in heathen countries has been preserved 
to us, while the work of the apostle of the circumcision and of hia brethren 
has beau su:^ered to fade from remembrance. 



I 2. Adthob of the Book. 

We have, in the preceding section, assumed St. Luke to be the author of 
the Acts of the Apostles ; but we must now justify the assumption, though 
the fact that there is no reasonable doubt about the matter, and that there is 
a general consent of modem critics on the point, will make it unnecessary 
to enter into any lengthened disquisition. 

The identity of authorship of the Gospel of St. Luke and the Acts of the 
Apostles is manifest from the dedication of both to Theophilus (Luke i. 3 ; 
ch. i. 1), and from the reference by the writer of ch. L 1 to the Gospel 
written by him. The details in ch. i. 1—9 agree closely with Luke xxiv. 
28 — 51 ; and there is a striking resemblance of style, phrases, the use of 
particular words, arrangement of matter, and turn of thought in the two 



r/ INTRODUCTION TO 



books, which is generally recognized by critics of all schools, and which sap- 
ports the unanimous testimony of the early Church, that they are both the 
work of one author. And this resemblance has been latoly brought out 
with remarkable force in one particular, viz. the frequent use of medical 
terms, both in the Gospel and in the Acts — terms which in very many 
instances are found nowhere else in the New Testament (Hobart's ' Medical 
Language of St. Luke : ' Longmans). 

If, then, the Gospel was the work of St. Luke, the Acts of the Apostles 
was BO likewise. That the Gospel was the work of St. Luke is the unani- 
mous testimony of antiquity ; and the internal evidence agrees with all that 
we know of St. Luke — that he was not of the circumcision (Col. iv. 10 — 
14) ; that he was a physician (Col. iv. 14), and consequently a man of liberal 
education. Indeed, even modem hypercriticism generally admits St. Luke's 
authorship.* It may be added that the internal evidence of the Acts of the 
Apostles is also strongly in favour of it. His companionship of St. Paul, 
who styles him " the beloved physician " (Col. iv. 14) ; his presence with St. 
Paul at Rome (2 Tim.iv. 17), compared with the fact that the writer of the 
Acts sailed with St. Paul from Caesarea to Italy (ch. xxvii. 1) and arrived 
at Rome (ch. xxviii. 16), and the utter failure of the attempts to identify 
the author with Timothy (see especially ch. xx. 4, 6) or Silas, or any 
other of St. Paul's companions ; are of themselves strong if not decisive 
testimonies in favour of Luke's authorship. Taken in conjunction with the 
other arguments, they luave the question, as Benan says, " beyond doubt." 
(See below, § 6.) 



S 3. Date or Gomposiiiov. 

Here, again, the inquiry presents no difficulty. The obvious primA facie 
inference from the abrupt termination of the narrative with the notice of 
St. Paul's two years' abode at Rome is undoubtedly the true one. St. Luke 
composed his history at Rome, with the help of St. Paul, and completed 
it early in the year l.D. 63. He may, no doubt, have prepared notes and 
memoranda and abstracts of speeches which he heard delivered, for several 
years before, while he was St. Paul's companion. But the composition of 
the book is due to the comparative leisure of himself and his great master 
during the two years' imprisonment at Rome. It could not, of course, have 
been completed earlier, because the narrative comes down without a break, 
in one continuous flow, to the time of the imprisonment. It could not 
possibly have been written later, because the termination of the book marks 
as plainly as is possible that the writer was writing at the very standpoint 
to which he had brought down his narrative. We may affirm, without any 
fear of being wrong, that St. Paul's trial before Nero, and his acquittal and 

• Renan (' Lea ApAtrea ' ) eays, " It is beyond doubt that the Acta and the third Gospel 
■re by the same aathor i " and adds a little later, " This author ia in very deed Lnke, the 
diacipla of FanL" 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLB& 



his jonmey into Spain (if, indeed, he went to Spain) ' and his second trial 
and martyrdom, had not taken place when St. Luke finished his history, 
becanse it ia ntterly inconceivable that, if they had, he should not have 
mentioned them. Bnt it is highly probable that incidents connected with 
St. Paul's first trial, and consequent immediate departure from Rome, put 
a stop at the moment to all literary work, and that, if St. Luke designed 
continuing his history, his purpose was frustrated by circumstances of which 
we have no certain knowledge. It may have been his employment in 
missionary work ; it may have been other hindrances ; it may have been his 
death ; for we have really no knowledge whatever of St. Luke's life subse- 
quent to the close of the Acts of the Apostles, except the mention of him 
as being still with St. Paul at the time of the writing of his Second Epistle 
to Timothy (2 Tim. iv. 11). If this Epistle were written from Rome during 
St. Paul's second imprisonment, this would bring down our knowledge of 
St. Luke two years later than the close of the Acts. But it is easy to con- 
ceive that even in this case- many causes may have hindered his continuing 
his history. 

It should be added that the fact of the Gospel of St. Luke having been 
written before the Acts (ch. i. 1) presents no difficulty in the way of the 
above date for the composition of the Acts, as St. Paul's two years of 
enforced leisure at Ceesarea while St. Luke was with him afforded as con- 
venient and appropriate a time for the composition of the Gospel with St. 
Paul's help, as the two years at Borne did for the composition of the Acts. 
Meyer's reason (' Introd. to Acts ') for placing the composition of the Gospel 
and consequently of the Acts much later, viz. because the destruction of 
Jerusalem is referred to in our Lord's prophetic discourse in Luke xxi. 20, 
is not worthy of the consideration of a Christian. If the reason is a sound 
one, the Gospel ceases to be of any value, since the writer of it fabricated 
falsehoods. 

f 4. Sources. 

The inquiry into the sources from which St. Luke derived his knowledge 
of the facts which he relates is one the fitness of which St. Luke himself 
assures us of when he is at pains to satisfy us of the sufficiency of his own 
sources of information in respect to the narrative contained in his Gospel ' 
(Luke i. 1 — 4 ; comp. too oh. i. 21 ; x. 39 — 42). It is, then, most satisfactory 
to know that in St. Luke we have not only an author in whom the historical 
instinct was most strong and clear, and in whom a calm judicial spirit and a 
lucid perception of truth were conspicuous qualities, bnt one who had also 

' Dr. Farrar (' Life and Work of St. Panl,' vol. ii. oh. liii.) argnes against the jonmey 
into Spain. But the main strength of the argument rests npon the hypothesis that the 
Epistles to Timothy were written during his last imprisonment at Borne. 

• See OhryBostom'g remarks on St. Lnke's care " to intimate how strictly he may be 
depended upon" in his account of things which he received from othois, and of things 
(rhich he saw and heard himself, in his first homily on the Acts of the Apostle*. 



INTRODUCTION TO 



nnrivalled opportunities of knowing the certainty of those things which 
form the subject of his history. The intimate friend and constant com- 
panion of St. Panl, sharing his missionary labours, hound to him by ties 
of mutual affection, and, especially, passing two several periods of two years 
with him in the quiet and leisure of his confinement as a state prisoner, — 
he must have known all that St. Paul knew on that subject of absorbing 
interest to them both, the progress of the gospel of Christ. Of at least 
twelve years of St. Paul's life he was himself a close observer. Of .the 
time that preceded his own acquaintance with him he could learn all the 
particulars from the apostle's own lips. The characters and actions of all 
the great pillars of the Church were familiar to him, partly from personal 
intercourse and partly from the copious information which he would receive 
from Paul and other contemporaries. Peter, John, James, Barnabas, Silas, 
Timothy, Titus, Apollos, Aquila, Priscilla, and many others were all known 
by him, either personally or through those who were intimately acquainted 
with them. And as his history was composed while he was with St. Paul 
at Rome, he had the means at hand of verifying every statement and 
receiving correction on every doubtful point. It is impossible to conceive 
any one better qualified by position than St. Luke was to be the first Church 
historian. And his simple, clear, and often graphic and copious, narrative 
exactly corresponds with such situation. 

As regards the earlier chapters and the episode from ch. ix. 32 to ch. xii. 20, 
in which St. Peter occupies so prominent a place, and in which his speeches 
and actions are so fuUy described, we cannot say certainly from what source 
St. Luke derived his knowledge. Many things suggest the thought that he 
may have learnt them from St. Peter himself ; or possibly that there may 
have been extant some one or more narratives by an eye-witness, whose 
materials St. Luke incorporated in his own work. These, however, are 
matters of uncertain conjecture, though the internal evidence of full and 
accurate information is unmistakable. But from the moment that Paul 
appears upon the stage, we cannot doubt that he was the chief source of St, 
Luke's information as regards all those transactions which occurred before 
he joined him or at such times as he was separated from him. His own 
observation supplied the rest, with the help of the friends above enumerated. 

It is interesting to remember, further, that St. Luke must have seen many 
of the secular personages whom he introduces in his narrative : possibly 
Herod Agrippa, and presumably his son King Agrippa, Felix, Porcius 
Festus, Ananias the high priest, Publius, and others. At Rome it is likely 
that he would see Nero and some of the principal persons of his court. 

There is no evidence, either in the Gospel or in the Acts, that St. Luke 
ever saw our Lord. The assertion of Epiphanius and of Adamantius (pseudo- 
Origen), that he was one of the seventy, carries no weight with it. It is 
inconsistent vrith St. Luke's own statement (Luke i. 2), and with other 
traditions, which make him a native of Antioch and one of St. Paul's 
converts. This, however, by the way. 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Til 



St. Luke's historical and geograpWcal ' accuracy has been frequently 
observed as an evidence of his acquaintance with secular as well as sacred 
writings. He appears to have been well read in the Septuagint, inclading 
the apocryphal writings. 



§ 6. PlciCB IS THE CanOM. 

Busebias places in the forefront of his list of books generally acknowled<>-ed 
as portions of Holy Scripture (ofioXoyov/j.ei'ai Oelai ypa^aC), the four Gospels 
and " the Book of the Acts of the Apostles (^ rSsv wpdieiov tu>v 'Attoo-toAo)!/ 
ypa.<i>ri) ; " and again he says, " Luke has left us a proof of his skill in spiritual 
healing in two inspired books — his Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles " 
('Hist. Eccl.,' iii. 11, 25), It was probably from ch. xxi. 8, 9, that Papias 
derived his knowledge of the daughters of Philip ; and from ch. i. 23 that 
he knew of " Justus surnamed Barsabas," though he may, of course, have 
known of both from tradition (Eusebius, ' Hist. Eccl.,' iii. 39). The passafR 
in Clement's First Epistle — " What shall we say of David, so highly testified 
off to whom God said, I have found a man after my own heart, David the 
son of Jesse" — if compared with ch. xiii. 22 (especially a's regards the words 
in italics), will be seen to be certainly taken from it. The words tS fieixap- 
rvpmj/iivio, compared with the /juipTvp-qa-as of ch. xiii. 22, .and the tov tov 
lea-frai with the same phrase found in the Acts but not found in Ps. Ixxix. 
20, are very strong evidences of Clement's acquaintance with the Acts. And 
this evidence is confirmed by another distinct verbal quotation from ch. 
XX. 35: "Ye were all of you humble-minded, more willingly giving than 
receiving " ' (St. Clement, ch. ii. and xviii. See also i. 84, ij^eis 6p.ovoia ivl 
TO avTo <nivay(6h/T0's, compared with ch. ii. 1) . There is a less certain reference 
to ch. V. 41 in Hei-mas (' Simil.,' iv. sect. 28) ; but Ignatias's saying in the 
Epistle to the Smyrneans (iii.), that Christ, " after his resurrection, did eat 
and drink with them," is an evident quotation from ch. x. 41. So also his 
saying in the Epistle to the Magnesians (v.), " Every man must go to his 
own place," must be taken from ch. i. 26 ; and the phrase Im to avro, coupled 
as it is with /*to irpoo-eu;^^ /twt Seijo-ts, and with the description of Church 
unity in the same Epistle (sect, vii.), must be taken from ch. i. 15 ; ii. 1,44 ; 
as also that of Polycarp, that the apostles " are gone to their own place 
(«ts TOV o^ctXo/xei'oi' avTois tottov)." There is also another verbal quotation 
in Polycarp (sect. i.^j^Ov rjyapeif o ®eos Xvo-as Tas o'Sti/as toC'ASou, from ch. 
ii. 24, where the substitution of "AZov for Oavdrov is probably caused by 
Oavirav having immediately preceded. Dean Alf ord was of opinion that there 
are not " any references in Justin Martyr which, fairly considered, belong 
to this book "(' Proleg.,' ch. i. sect, v.) ; but there is such a close similarity 

' See Dean Howson's ' EWdential Valne of the Acts of the Apostles,' leot. iv. 

» " Bishop Lightfoot " and " all commentators, Bishop Jacobson, Harnaok, etc., recog- 
nize this as a distinct allnsion to the panage in the Acts " (Introdaction to Acta in 
' Speaker's Courmentary,' p. 333). 



viii INTRODUCTION TO 



of thought and expression in the passage in ch. vii. 20, 22, "Ev ^ KoipS 
iyewqOrj Miootjs . • . eKTedivra 8e auToi/ avtiXaro avrov rj OvyaTtjp 9apa6, koX 
aveOpiij/aTO avToi/ iavry eli iiov' Koi iiraiSivOrj . , . iv irafry (To<j>ia AiyvirTMBv" rjv 
Se Suvaros iv Xoyots koI ev ?pyois avrov, and that in tlie treatise of Justin 
' Ad Graecos Oohortatio : ' Ilap' ots ovk iTi}($rj Mojtr^s fiovov aXXa Kai iraoTjs tSu 
AiyinrTtW iraiSeutraos iitTa<r\eiv rjiiwOrj Sia to viro Ov^arpoi Pa<n\iias eis iraiSoi 
wKaoMrdai ^lapav' . . . &s i(rTOjOov<rtv ol (ro^anaroi tS>v laropiaypa^iDv oi rbv jStiov 
avTov Kcu Tai irpa^eis . • . dvaypai/ratr^ai irpoeXoyxevot, as could hardly arise from 
two independent minds. The sequence of thought, the birth, the adoption, 
the education, the mighty works, are identical in both writers. The same 
m.ay be said of the two other passages adduced by Lardner from Justin ; one 
from the 'First Apology' compared with ch. xui. 27, and the other from 
the ' Dialogue ' compared with ch. xxvi. 22, 23. Here, again, this identity 
of thought and expression in both passages (tovtov ayvorjcravTe^ compared 
with ^yv6rj<Tav, and Traflijros o XpHTTOs compared with iraOtjToi yevrj<r6p.evoi o 
Xpto-Tos) could not be accidental, and can only be accounted for by Justin 
being familiar with the Acts of the Apostles. 

Between the times of Justin and Eusebius there is an abundance of direct 
quotations from the Acts. The first is in the Epistle of the Churches of 
Lyons and Vienna, given by Eusebius, ' Hist. Bccl.,' bk. v. ch. 2, where the 
martyrdom and prayer of Stephen are expressly referred to ; and there are 
many also in Ireriaeus, Clement of Alexandria, TertuUian, Hippolytns, Julius 
Africanus, Origen, and others, which may be found in Westcott's ' Hist, 
of the Canon,' and in Lardner's ' Credibility of the Gospel History.' The 
Book of the Acts is contained in the Muratorian Canon in the West, 
ascribed to about A.D. 170 ; and also in the Peshito-Canon in the East, of 
about the same date ; in the fifty-ninth canon of the Council of Laodicea 
(a.d. 363), the list in which, however, is considered spurious ; in the thirty- 
ninth canon of the Council of Carthage (a.d. 397) ; in the seventy-sixth 
of the Apostolical Canons ; in the list of Cyril of Jerusalem (a.d. 386) 
of Epiphanius of Cyprus (aj>. 403), of Athanasius, of Jerome, and thence- 
forth in the Canon as received by the whole Eastern and Western Churches. 

It is curious to add that though, as we nave seen from the testimony of 
Eusebius, the Acts of the Apostles was reckoned among the uncontested 
books of Holy Scripture, it was a book scarcely known at Constantinople in 
the days of Chrysostom. The passage with which he opens his homilies on 
the Acts has been often quoted: "To many persons this book is so little 
known, both it and its author, that they are not even aware that there ia 
such a book in existence." And what seems yet more strange, even at 
Antioch (St. Luke's reported birthplace), Chrysostom tells us it was 
" strange : " "Strange, and not strange. Not strange, for it belongs to the 
order of Holy Scripture ; and yet strange, because peradventure your ears 
are not accustomed to such a subject. Certainly there are many to whom 
thiB book is not even known" (' Hom. in Princip. Act.,' preached at Antioch).' 

" Bee ' Library of the Fathers," vol. zxxiii. p. 1, note 6. 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



Oa the otlier hand, St. Augustine speaks of the hook as " well known from 
being very frequently read in the Church." ' The Book of the Acts was, by 
long-established custom (in the time of Ohrysostom), read in the Cburches 
(as e.g. at Antioch and in Africa) from Easter to Pentecost (' Library of 
the Fathers,' vol. ixxiii. p. 1, note). 

§ 6. MoDBRS Critioisii; 

An Introduction to the Acts would hardly be complete without a brief 
reference to the views of modern criticism. It is observable, then, that a 
certain number of critics, who seem to think that the main function of 
criticism is to disregard all external evidence, and all internal evidence also 
which chances to agree with the external, deny the authenticity of the book. 
With a strange kind of v(TTepov irporepov logic, instead of inferring the truth 
of the narrative from the overwhelming evidence that it is the narrative of 
an eye-witness and a contemporary, they conclude that it is not the narra- 
tive of a contemporary because it contains statements which they are 
indisposed to admit as true. The account of the ascension of our Lord 
and of the day of Pentecost in ch. iii., of the miracles of Peter and John 
)n the following chapters, and of other supernatural events occurring 
throughout the book, are by the light of nature incredible; and therefore 
the book that contains them cannot be, what the Acts of the Apostles claims 
to be, and what all the evidence proves it to be, the work of a companion 
of St. Paul. It rmist be the work of a later age, say the second century, 
when a legendary history had cropped up, and the mists of time already 
obscured the clear reality of events. 

In addition to this general reason for assigning the work to the second 
century, a further one is found in an hypothesis based upon the imagination 
of the inventor of it (T. C. Banr), viz. that the purpose of the writer of 
the Acts was to afford an historical basis for the reunion of two discordant 
sections of the Church, viz. the followers of St. Peter and the followers of 
St. Paul. The different doctrines preached by the two apostles having 
issued in a strong antagonism between their respective followers, some 
unknown author of the second century wrote this book in order to reconcile 
them, by showing an agreement between their two leaders. The writer, by 
the use of the word " we" (so at least say some of the critics), assumed 
the character of a companion of St. Paul, in order to give greater weight to 
his history ; or, as others say, incorporated a bit of contemporary writing 
in his book without being at the pains to alter the " we." The great ability 
and learning and ingenuity with which F. C. Baur supported his hypothesis 
attracted great attention, and some adhesion to it in Germany. But common 
sense and the laws of evidence seem to be resuming their legitimate power 
We have seen above how Reman, certainly one of the ablest of the freetliink- 

» • De Prsedest. Sanot.,' § 4, quoted in Introduction to Aots in ' Speaker's Commentary-,' 
jx, 349, note .S. 



INTRODUCTION TO 



ing school, expresses his unhesitating belief that Luke is the author of the 
Acts. 

Another theory (MayerhofB, etc.) makes Timothy the author of the Acta 
of the Apostles; and yet another (that of Schleiermacher, De "Wette, and 
Bleek) makes Timothy and not Lnke to have been the companion of Paul 
who apeafai in the first person (we), and Luke to have inserted those 
portions without alteration from Timothy's journal (see Alford's ' Prolegom.') . 
Both these wanton and gratuitous conjectures are contradicted by the plain 
words of ch. xx. 4, 6, where the companions of Paul, of whom Timothy was 
one, are distinctly stated to have gone hefore, while the writer remained with 
Paul (see above, § 2). 

Another theory (Schwanbeck, etc.) makes Silas the author of the book, 
or section of the book ; and yet another at the same time identifies Silas with 
Luke, supposing the names Silas = Silvanus, and Lukas, derived from lucus, 
a grove, to be mere variations of the same name, like Cephas and Peter, 
or Thomas and Didymus. But, besides that this is quite unsupported by 
external evidence, it is inconsistent with ch. xv. 22, 34, 40 ; xvi. ; xvii. ; 
xviii. (jpassim) ; where the " we " ought to have been introduced if the 
writer was one of the actors. It is most unlikely too that Silas should have 
described himself as being one of the " chief men among the brethren " (ch. 
XV. 22). It may be added that the failure of all other hypotheses is an 
additional argument in favour of the authorship of St. Luke. 

The grounds of the adverse criticisms of De Wette, P. C. Baur, Schwegler, 
Zeller, Kostlin, Helgenfeld, and others, are thus summed up by Meyer 
(Introduction, p. 6) : Alleged contradictions with the Pauline Epistles (ch. 
ix. 19, 23, 25— 28; li. 80 compared with Gal. i. 17— 19 and ii. 1 ; ch.xvii. 16, 
et sqq. ; xviii. 22, et seq. ; xxviii. 30, et seg.) ; inadequate accounts (ch. xvi. 
6 ; xviii. 22, et seq. ; xxviii. 30, 31) ; omission of facts (1 Cor. xv. 32 ; 
2 Cor. i. 8 ; xi. 25 ; Bom. xv. 19 ; xvii. 3, 4) ; the partially unhistorio 
character of the first portion of the book ; un- Pauline miracles, speeches, 
and actions (ch. xxviii. 7 — 10 ; xxi. 20, et seq. ; xxiii. 6, et sqq. ; xx. ; xxvi. ; 
approval of apostolic decree, xv.). 

Meyer (ibid., p. 14, note 1) adds, " According to Schwanbeck, the 
redactew of the book has used the four following documents : — (1) A 
biography of Peter ; (2) a rhetorical work on the death of Stephen ; (3) a 
biography of Barnabas ; (4) a memoir of Silas. 

The effect of these mutually destructive criticisms, the distinct failure 
in each case to get over the difficulties which oppose themselves to the 
conclusion attempted to be established, and the thoroughly arbitrary and 
will-hwrlibh nature of the objections made to St. Luke's authorship, and oi 
the assumptions on which opposing hypotheses are grounded, — all this 
leaves the oonolusions to which we came in sections 1 and 2 immovably 
confiimoJL 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



f 7. LiTEBATUBK Of THK AoTB OF TBI APOSTLIS. 

To those wlio desire to study seriously this charming and invalnablr. 
history, it may be useful to indicate a few books which will assist them to 
do BO. Paley's ' Hor^ Paulinas ' still holds its ground as an original argu- 
ment, ingeniously worked out, and capable of constant extension, by which 
the Epistles of St. Paul and the Acts of the Apostles are shown to confirm 
each other, and are made to shed light each upon the other in a way to 
disarm suspicion of collusion, and to stamp both with an unmistakable 
stamp of truth. The great work of Conybeare and Howson ('Life and 
Epistles of St. Paul ') ; the contemporary work of Mr. Lewin, bearing the 
same title ; Canon Farrar's ' Life and Work of St. Paul ; ' Renan's ' Les 
Ap6tres,' and his ' St. Paul ; ' give in different ways all that can be desired 
in the way of historical and geographical illustration to bring out into full 
light the work, the character, the times, of the apostle, and to display the 
veracity, the accuracy, and the simplicity, of his biographer. For direct 
commentaries, it may be sufficient to name those of St. Chrysostom, of 
Dr. John Lightfoot, of Kuinoel (in Latin), of Meyer (translated from the 
German), of Olshausen and Lange (also translated into English), of Bishop 
Wordsworth and Dean Alford, of Dean Plumptre (in the ' New Testament 
Commentary for English Readers,' edited by the Bishop of Gloucester and 
Bristol), of Bishop Jacobson (in the 'Speaker's Commentary'), of Canon 
Cook ; to which, of course, very many more might be added. 

Much additional information bearing upon the Acts may also be gathered 
from commentaries on St. Paul's Epistles, among which may be mentioned 
those of Bishop Ellicott and those of Bishop Lightfoot. And, again, such 
smaller works as Dean Howson's ' Bohlen Lectures,' Smith of Jordanhill 
on ' The Voyage and Shipwreck of St. Paul,' Hobart's ' Medical Language 
of St. Luke,' elucidate particular portions or particular aspects of the book. 
Those who desire to know all that can be said by hostile criticism against 
the credibility or authenticity of the Acts, and the truthfulness and trust- 
worthiness of the author, may search the writings of Baur, Schrader, 
Schwegler, Credner, Overbeck, Zeller, and many others. 



I 8. GHROSOLOCrT. 

" The chronology of the Acts is involved in great difficulties," says Canon 
Cook (Introduction, p. xxxi.) ; and the different conclusions which men of 
equal learning and capacity have arrived at is a sufficient evidence of these 
difficulties. There are, however, two or three fixed points which restrain 
the intermediate divergences within comparatively narrow limits, and 
several other coincidences of persons and things which fix the time of the 
narrative within the compass of three or four years at most. But, on the 
other hand, we have no certainty aa to the year in wWch our history begins. 



xli INTRODUOTION TO 



The exact date of the Crncifixion, in spite of the caiefal statement of Imke 
iii. 1, 2, is uncertain to the extent of four or five years. Some place the 
Feast of Pentecost mentioned in ch. ii. in the year a.d. 28; some A.D. 30; 
and some again A.D. 33. And this is necessarily a cause of iincerfcainty as to 
the date of subsequent events, till we come to A.D. 44.' In that year Herod 
Agrippa died, soon after the death of James (ch. xii.), and in the same 
year we know that Saul and Barnabas went to Jerusalem with the alms of 
the Antiochian Church for the relief of the poor Jews suffering from the 
famine (ch. xi. 30 ; xii. 25). 

Those who think that this visit of St. Paul is the one alluded to in Gal. 
ii. 1, naturally reckon back fourteen years from A.D. 44, and so get A.D. 30 as 
the year of St. Paul's conversion ; and throw back the Pentecost of Acts ii. 
to the earliest possible date, viz. A.D. 28. But those who think the visit to 
Jerusalem spoken of in Gal. ii. 1 is that which is related in ch. xv., are 
■ot BO hampered. Allowing five or six, or even seven years for St. Paul's 
ministry at Antioch after his return from Jerusalem, for his first missionary 
journey, and his long abode at Antioch after his return (ch. xiv. 28), they 
place the visit to Jerusalem in A.D. 49, 50, 61, or 52, and so get from the 
year A.D. 35 to A.D. 38 for the visit of Gal. i. 18, 19 ; and from A.D. 32 to a.d. 35 
as the year of Saul's conversion ; thus leaving three or four years for the 
events recorded in the first six or seven chapters of the Acts, even if the 
year a.d. 30 or 31 is adopted for the Pentecost which followed the Ascension. 
There is, however, yet another doubt as to the reckoning of the fourteen 
years. It is not at all clear whether they are to be counted from the con- 
version mentioned in Gal. i. 15, 16, or from the visit to Peter which took 
place three years after the conversion ; in other words, whether we are to 
reckon fourteen years or seventeen backwards from a.d. 44 to find the date of 
St. Paul's conversion. Nor, again, is there absolute certainty that the visit 
to Jerusalem of ch. xv. and that of Gal. ii. 1 are one and the same. Lewin, 
for instance, identifies the visit just glanced at in ch. xviii. 22 with that of 
Gal. ii. 1 (vol. i. 302). Others, as we have seen, identify with it the visit 
recorded in ch. xi. 30 and xii. 25. So that there is uncertainty on every 
side. 

The next date on which we may, though with less certainty, rely is 
that of St. Paul's first visit to Corinth (ch. xviii.), which followed closely 
on the expulsion of the Jews from Rome by Claudius. This latter event 
took place (almost certainly) in a.d. 52, and, therefore, St. Paul's arrival at 
Corinth happened either in the same year or A.D. 53. 

The arrival of Festus at Csesarea as Procurator of Jndeea, again, is by 
nearly universal consent of modern chronologists, placed in a-.d. 60, whence 
we gather, with certainty, the time of St. Paul's removal to Borne and of 
his two years' imprisonment as from A.D. 61 to A.D. 63. 

Less exact indications of time may be gathered from the presence of 
Gamaliel in the Sanhedrim (ch. v. 34) ; from the mention of ' Aretas Iha 

» " Lb »9«le date fixe dea Actes de» ApAtras " (Reoan, ' Les ApAtreg,' p. nxJiL). 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



king " as being in possession of Damascus at fhe time of St. Paul's escape 
(2 Cot. xi. 32), which is thought to indicate the beginning of the reign of 
Caligula, A.D. 37 ; the famine in the reign of Claudius Csesar (ch. xi. 28), 
who began to reign A.D. 4il ; the proconsulate of Sergins Panlus (ch. xiii. 7), 
who is quoted by Pliny about twenty years after St. Paul's visit to Cyprus ; 
the proconsulate of Gallio (ch. xviii. 12), indicating the reign of Claudius, 
by whom Achaia was given back to the senate, and therefore governed by a 
proconsul ; and lastly, the high priesthood of Ananias (ch. xxiii. 2) and the 
procuratorship of Felix (ch. xxiii. 24), pointing, by their coincidence, to about 
A.n. 58. These indications, though not sufficient for the construction of an 
exact chronology, yet clearly mark a true historical sequence of events 
occurring in their proper place and order, and capable of being arranged 
accurately if ever the events of secular history to which they are tied are 
reduced by further light to an exact chronology. 

The only apparent anachronism in the Acts is the mention of Theudas in 
the speech of Gamaliel given in ch. v. 36. The reader is referred to the 
note on that passage, where it ia attempted to show that the mistake is 
Josephus's, not St. Luke's. 

It is not the purpose of this Introduction to give a scheme of exact chro- 
nology. The materials for it, and the difficulties of constructing such a 
scheme, have been pointed out. Those who desire to enter fully into this 
intricate subject, are referred to Lewin's ' Fasti Sacri,' or to the great works 
of Anger,' Wieseler,* and others ; or, if they merely wish to know the 
principal views of chronologists, to the Synoptic Table in the appendix to the 
second volume of Farrar's ' Life and Works of St. Paul ; ' to Dean Alford's 
' Prolegomena to the Acts ; ' to Bishop "Wordsworth's Chronological 
Synopsis, appended to his Introduction to the Acts ; to the Chronological 
Table with annotations at the end of voL ii. of Conybeare and Howson's 
' St. Paul ; ' and also to the able note at pp. 244 — 252 of vol. i. ; to the 
Chronological Summary in Meyer's Introduction (pp. 17 — 26) ; or to the 
Chronological Table at the end of Dean Plumptre'a *Commen j on 



the Acta.'* 



§ 9. PlAS or THIS COMMENTAEY. 

The Revised Version of the New Testament (a.d. 1881) has been taken 
as the text on which this Commentary is founded. Whenever the Revised 
Version differs from the Authorized Version of A.D. 1611, the words of the 
Authorized Version are appended for comparison. By this means every 
change made by the Revisers is brought to the notice of the reader, whose 

I <De Tempomm in Aotis Apostolomm Ratio.' 

* ' Chronologie des Apostolischen Zeitaltera.' 

• The writer did not beoome acquainted with thii work nntil lie was writing the 
ehronological section of this Introdaotion, and tbe first twenty-two ohapter* were gone 
to fteu and tho tweaty-tliird wholly written. 



xIt introduction to the acts op the apostles. 

judgment is thas directed to the reason or expediency of the change. Tbo 
writer has not thonght it necessary in general to express any opinion on the 
changes made but has done so occasionally in terms of agreement or dis- 
agreement, as the case may he. To discover and elucidate the exact meaning 
of the original ; to illustrate the events narrated by all the helps he conld 
get from other writers ; to help the student to note the peculiarities of the 
diction of the inspired author, as clues to his education, his reading, his 
profession, his genuineness, his age, his fitness for his task ; to mark the 
historical and geographical and general accuracy of the author as evidences 
of the time when he lived, and of his perfect trustworthiness as to all that 
he relates ; and then, both in the Exposition and in the Homiletical remarks, 
to try and make the text so elucidated profitable for correction and instruc- 
tion in righteousness ; — has been the writer's aim, however imperfectly it has 
been attained. The labour it has cost him has been considerable, amidst 
constant interruptions and unnumbered hindrances, but it has been a sweet 
and pleasant labour, full of interest and reward and growing delight, as the 
blessed Book yielded up its treasures of wisdom and truth, and the mind and 
hand of God became more and more risible amidst the words and works 
of man. 

In the notes II.V. denotes Revised Version; A.V. denotes Authorized 
Version ; T.R. Textus Reoeptus, i.e. the Gtreek Text from which the 
Authorized Version was made ; and R.T. Revised Text, i.e. the Greek Text 
from which the Revised Version was made. Whenever the R.V. differs 
from the A.V. in consequence of the R.T. differing from the T.R., this is 
shown by appending to the words of the Authorized Version quoted in the 
note the letters AV. and T.R. In some few cases where the difference in 
the Greek Text makes no difference in the version, the variation in the R.T. 
is not noted. Mere differences of punctuation, or in the use of capitals or 
italics, or vice versd, in the R.Y. as compared with the A.V., are not aot«d 
lithar. 



THE 



ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER L 



Ver. 1. — I made for have I made, A.V. ; 
concerning for of, A.V. ; to teach, for teach, 
A.V. The former treatise ; literally, the first 
lufltory, narrative, or discourse. The form 
of the Greek, Thv fiXv irpuTov, shows that the 
writer had in his miud at the time to con- 
trast the second history, which he was just 
beginning, and that naturally i-hv Sh Siinpov, 
or TovTov Si rhv \iyov, ought, both gramma- 
tically and logically, to have followed. But 
the mention of " the apostles whom he had 
chosen" drew him, as it were, into the 
stream of his history before he was able to 
describe it. Theophilus. The omission of 
the title " most excellent," given to Theo- 
philus in the Gospel (Luke i, 3), is one among 
otlier indications that the publication of the 
Acts followed very closely upon that of the 
Gospel. Began both to do and to teach. 
Some take the phrase as equivalent to did 
and taught; otiiers supply the sense and 
continued until the day, etc. ; or, which is the 
same thing, supply tho terminus a quo, 
making the whole sense equivalent to " all 
that Jesus did and taught from the beginning 
until the day," etc. ; others again, as Bishop 
Wordsworth, gather St. Luke's meaning to 
be that in the Acts he is about to narrate 
the continuance by our Lord in heaven of 
the work which he only began on earth. 
Meyer thinks that, by the insertion of the 
word " began," tlie thing said or done " is in a 
vivid and gi aphio manner douolod according 
to its moment of commoncumeut ; " so that 
our liOrd is represented as at one time 
actively beginning to heal, then to teach, 
then to walk on the sea, and so on. But 
the words " began " and " until the day " 
certainly suggest the beginning and the 
ending of our Lord's ministry, or rather the 
whole ministry from its beginning to its end, | 
BO that the meaning would be "of all that 

ACTS 



Jesus did and taught from first to last." To 
do and to teach. So the disciples on the 
way to Emmaus speak of Jesus as "a Prophet 
mighty in deed and word " (Luke xiiv. 19). 
Compare the stress laid upon the works of 
Christ in ch. x. 38, 39. 

Ver. 2. — Received for taken, A.V. ; com- 
mandment for commandments, A.V. ; after 
that he had given commandment through the 
Holy Ghost for after that he through the 
Holy Ghost had given commandments, A.V. 
The commandment or directions given by 
our Lord to the apostles between the Besur- 
roctioQ and the Ascension are recojdod partly 
in Luke xxiv. 44 — 49 ; Matt, xxviii. 19, 20 ; 
Mark xvi. 15- -18 ; John xxi. ; and yet more 
fully in vers. 3—8 of tlvis chapter. Through 
the Holy Ghost. The sense is certain. Jesus 
gave bis charge to his apostles through the 
Holy Ghost. It was by the Holy Ghost 
abiding in him that ho spake to tliu 
apostles. This is the repeated declaration 
of Holy Scripture. " Tho Spirit of the Lord 
is upon me " (Isa. Ixl. 1 ; Luke iv. 18 ; oh. x. 
38. See also Luke iv. I ; Matt. xiL 28 ; 
Heb. ix. 14 ; and for- the construction, oli. 
xi. 28; xxi. 4). Received up (ai'(Kii<t>eri); 
the same word as is used in the Septuagint 
of Elijah (2 Kings ii. 10, 11). In Lulce xxiv. 
6 it is carried up (a,ve<t)fpeTo). 

Ver. 3. — Proofs for infallible proofs, 
A.V. ; appearing unto them for seen of, 
A.V. ; concerning for pertaining to, A.V. 
The addition of the words by many, proofs 
makes it necessary to understand the 
words showed himself {irapGffTqtrev kavrhv) 
in the sense which it bears both in classic 
anil Seriptural Greek, of proved or detnon- 
siraied : " To whom he gave distinct proofs 
of his being alive after his passion;" the 
proofs follow — being "seen of them" for 
forty days at intervals, taUcing with them, 
and (ver. 9) "being taken up while they 
were looking." Doubtless, too, he had is 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. I. 1—26. 



his mind those other proofs which he records 
in oh. X. 41, and tliose referred to by St. 
Paul (1 Cor. IV. 5 — 8). Fur this sense of 
iraplffTfifu, see ch. xxiv. 13, " to prove ; " and 
Lysias's ' Oration against Eratosthenes ' (p. 
125), whore the almost identical phrase 
occurs which we have here, 'A/x^(JT6pa ravra 
TToAAoiS reic/jLTipiots Trapatrr^ffw, "I will prove 
bolh these things by many certain proofs." 
The A.V. rendering, "infallible proofs," was 
quite justified. Stephanas says, " De oerto 
et indubitato signo dicitur apud Elietoiioos " 
( ' Thesaurus,' 9216) ; and the technical mean- 
ing of r€Ki>,i]fiov in Aristotle is a " demonstrar 
tive proof," as opposed to a anfietov, which 
leaves room for doubt; and in medical writers, 
which is important as regards 8t. Luke, the 
TiKfi-lipiov is the " infallible symptom." St. 
Luke, by the use of the word here, undoubtedly 
meant to express the certainty of the conclu- 
sion based on those proofs. Appearing unto 
them. The Greek 6wTav6iiems, corresponding 
to the (pavepaBels of the Epistle of Barnabas, 
cap. XV., only scours in the New Testament 
in this place. In the Septuagint of 1 Kings 
viii. 8 it is used of the staves of the ark with- 
in the veil, which " were not seen without." 
Tlie idea intended to be conveyed, both by 
the use of this verb and by the use of Siit 
(Ijy the space of), is that our Lord was not 
witli the apostles always, as he was before 
the Resurrection, but that he came and 
again disappeared (St. Chrysostom). They 
were fleeting appearances spreail over forty 
day». The nearly related subbtantive, 
oitTavla, means " a vision," and'is frequently 
used by St. Luke i. 22 ; xxiv. 23 ; xxvi. 19. 
It is also found in 2 Cor. xii. 1. Conoeming 
the kingdom of God ; a subject which had 
deeply engaged tlnjir thoughts (Luke xix. 
11), and on wliich it was most needful that 
they should now be fully instructed, that 
tliey miglit teaoh others (eh. xx. 25). 

Ver. i. — Be charged them not to depart 
fur commanded them that they should not de- 
part, A.V. ; to wait for wait, A.V. ; said he 
foj- eaith he, A.V. ; from me for of me, A.V. 
Being assembled, etc. (B.T. omits iiei' 
auTui') ; more exactly, as he uja$ assembling 
with Uiem (Field, in 'Otium Norvicense ' Jl 
Not to depart from Jerusalem. (See Luke 
xxiv. 49.) It was necessary, according to 
the prophecy, Micah iv. 2 ; Isa. ii. 3, that 
the gospel should go forth from Jerusalem. 
Wait for the promise. (See Luke xxiv. 49.) 
The promise of the Father formed the sub- 
ject of OUT Lord's discourse to the apostles 
on the last night of his earthly life, as 
recorded in John xiv. 16, 17, 26; xv. 26; 
xvi. 7 — 14. He doubtless here refers to that 
conversation, though not, of course, to the 
record of it in the Gospel of St. John. 

Ver. 5. — Indeed for truly, A.V. Ye shall 
be baptised, eto. (Comp. Matt. iii. 11; 



Luke iii. 16 ; John i. 83.) St. Peter refers 
to this saying of the Lord's in his address 
to the Church of Jerusalem (ch. xi. 16), 
and the record of it here may be an indica- 
tion that St. Luke derived his informa- 
tion of these early events from Peter. A 
curious question arises as to the baptism 
of the apostles themselves. When were 
they baptized, and by whom? Chrysostom 
says, " They were baptized by John." But 
it is evident, from John ill. 22; iv. 1, 2, that 
converts were baptized with Christian, as 
distinct from John's, baptism in our Lord's 
lifetime, and hence it may seem probable, 
especially considering that St. Paul was 
baptized, that the apostles may Iiave been 
baptized by Christ (Bishop Wordsworth on 
John iv. 2). If so, the baptism with the 
Holy Ghost at Pentecost was the comple- 
ment of that baptism, not the substitute for 
it. "In our case," says Clirysostom, "both 
(the baptism of water and of the Spirit) take 
place under one act, but then they were 
divided." 

Ver. 6. — They therefore, when for when they 
therefore, A.V. ; him for of him, A.V. ; dost 
thou for wilt thou, A.V. ; restore for restore 
again, A.V. Sost thou at this time, eto.? 
It appears from Luke xix. 11 and xxiv. 
21, as well as from other passages, that the 
apostles expected the kingdom of Christ 
to come immediately. It was most natural, 
therefore, that, after the temporary extinction 
of this hope by tlie Crucifixion, it should 
revive with new force when they saw the 
Lord alive after his passion. They had 
doubtless too been thinking over the promise 
of the baptism of the Holy Spirit " uot many 
days hence." Eestore. (Comp. restitution, 
ch. iii. 21 ; and see Matt. xvii. IL) 

Ver. 7. — Times or seasons for the times or 
the seasons, A.V. ; set within his own authority 
for put in his own power, A.V. It is not for 
you to know, etc. The time of the end ia 
always spoken of as liidden (so Matt. xxiv. 
36; Mark xiii. 32; 1 Thess. v. 1, 2; 2 Pet. 
iii. 10, etc.). Times or seasons. Timet with 
reference to duration, seasons with reference 
to fitness or opportunity. Which the Father. 
The distinctive use of the word " Father " 
here agrees with our Lord's saying in Mark 
xiii. 32, " Neither the Son, but the Father." 
Hath set within his own authority Qi^ova-ta). 
"Hath reserved under his own authority" 
(' Speaker's Commentai-y'); "Has established 
by means of his own plenitude of power " 
(Meyer); *'Hath put or kept in his own 
power" (A. v., and lo Alford). This last 
seems the best. 

Yei.8.—When for after that, A.V.i my 
witnesses for witnesses unto me, A.V. and 
T.E. ; Samaria for in Samaria, A.V. Ta 
shall receive power {Siva/ity) ; a word speci- 
ally used of the [lower of the Holy SpiriJ 



CH. 1. 1— 2G.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



(see oh. vi. 8). "Jesus returned in the 
power of the Spirit " (Luke iv. 14 ; see 
too xxiv. 49); "God anointed Jesus of 
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and wi^i 
power" (oh. x. 38); "Through the power 
of the Holy Ghost " (Rom. xv. 13) ; " The 
demonstration of the Spirit and of power " 
(1 Cor. ii. 4) ; " Strengthened with might 
(Si/i'(i/i60 by his Spirit " (Eph. iii. 16) ; 
" The powers of the world to come " (Heb. 
vi. 6). Mywituesses. This function of the 
apostles, to be witnesses of Christ, is one 
liiuch insisted upon in Scriptuie. So we 
read in ver. 22, " Of these must one become 
[' be ordained,' A.V.] a witness with us of 
his resurrection." So again in ch. x. 40 — 
42, " God . . . showed him openly ; not to 
all the people, but unto witnesses cliosen 
before of God, even to us. . . . And he 
commanded us to testify," etc. (see also 
vers. 39 and 42 of the same chapter; ch. 
xiii. 31 ; Luke xxiv. 48 ; ch. iv. 33 ; xiii. 
31; xiii. 15, 18, 20; xxvi. 16; 1 Pet. v. 1; 
1 John 1 — 3, etc.). 

Ver. 9. — Said for spoken, A.V. ; as they 
were looking for while they beheld, A.V. They 
were to be aiT6iTTat, eye-witnesses, of the 
Lord's ascension, and so it is particularly 
noted that he was taken as they were look- 
ing. He ilid not disappear from their sight 
till he reached the cloud which enveloped 
him. 

Ver. 10. — Were looking for looked, A.V. ; 
into for toward, A.V. ; went for went up, 
A.V. Two men. St. I.uke describes them 
according to their appearance. Tliey were 
really angels. In like manner, in Josh. v. 
13 we read, "There stood a man over 
against him ; " and in Gen. xviii. 2, 16 ; 
xix. 10, 12, 16, we read of "the men;" 
and in Judg. xiii. 6, 8, 10, 11, of "the 
man of God ; " the persons spoken of in 
all these cases being angels (comp. Dan. 
iii. 25 ; viii. 15, 16 ; ix. 21, etc. ; Zech. i. 8, 
10 ; Mark. xvi. 5 ; Luke xxiv. 4). Gabriel, 
too, means " man of God." In white apparel, 
typical of perfect holiness, and of the glory 
which belongs to the inhabitants of heaven 
(comp. Dan. x. 5, 6 ; Matt. xvii. 2 ; xxviii. 3 ; 
Mark ix. 3 ; xvi. 5 ; Luke xxiv. 4 ; Bev. 
vii. 9, 13; iii. 5, 18; Ir. 4; vi. 11; xix. 
8, etc.). 

Ver. 11. — Looking for gating up, A.V. ; 
this for this same, A.V. ; was received for m 
taken, A.V. ; beheld him going for have seen 
him go, A.V. In like manner ; i.e. in a cloud. 
The description of our Lord's second advent 
constantly makes mention of clouds. " Be- 
hold, he Cometh with clouds" (Rev. i. 7). 
" One like the Son of man came with the 
clouds of heaven" (Ban. vii. 13; and so 
Matt. xxvi. 64; Luke xxi. 27, etc.). We 
are reminded of the grand imagery of Ps. 
civ. 3, " Who maketh the olouds his chariot. 



who walketh upon the wing^ of the wind." 
It may be remarked that the above is by far 
the fullest account we have of the ascension 
of our Lord. St. Luke appears to have 
learnt some further particulars concerning 
it in the interval between writing his 
Gospel (Luke xxiv. 50—52) and writing the 
Acts. But allusions to the Ascension are 
frequent (Mark. xvi. 19; John vi. 62; xx 
17; Kom. viii. 34; Eph.iv. 8, 9 ; Phil. ii. i) ; 
Col. iii. 1 ; 1 Tim. iii. 16; 1 Pet. iii. 22, 
etc.). With reference to Zellei's assertion, 
that in St. Luke's Gospel the Ascension is 
represented as taking place on the day o( 
the Resurrection, it may freely be admitted 
that the narrative in the Gospel does not 
mark distinctly the interval of time between 
the different appearances and discourses of 
our Lord from the day of the Resurrection 
to that of the Ascension. It seems to group 
them according to their logical connection 
rather than according to their chronological 
sequence, and to be a general account of 
what Jesus said between the Resurrection 
and the Ascension. But there is nothing 
whatever in the text of St. Luke to indicate 
that what is related in the section xxiv. 44 — 
49 took place at the same time as the things 
related in the preceding verses. And when 
we compare with that section what is con- 
tained in ch. i. 4, 5, it becomes clear that 
it did not. Because the words " assembling 
together with them," in ver. 4, clearly indi- 
cate a different occasion from the apparitions 
on the day of the Resurrection ; and as the 
words in Luke xxiv. 44 — 49 correspond with 
those in ch. i. 4, 5, it must have been also 
on a different occasion that they were 
spoken. Again, the narrative of St. Jolin, 
both in the twentieth and the twenty-first 
chapters, as well as that of Matt, xxviii. 
10, 16; Mark xvi. 7, precludes the possi- 
bility of the Ascension having taken place, 
or having been thought to have taken place, 
on the day of the Resurrection, or for many 
days after, so that to force a meaning upon 
the last chapter of St. Luke's Gospel which 
it does not necessarily bear, and which 
places it at variance with St. Luke's own 
account in the Acts (i. 3; xiii. 31), and 
with the Church traditions as preserved by 
St. Matthew, St. Mark and St. John, is a 
violent and wilful transaction. 

Ver. 12. — Nigh unto for from, A.V. ; 
journey off foi journey, A.V. Olivet, from the 
Vulgate Olivetum. The particular Greek 
form 'EAoiii', Elwon, occurs in the New 
Testament only here. In Luke xix. 29; 
xxi. 37, according to the T.R., and that fol- 
lowed in the R.V., it is 'EKaLui/, of Olives. 
But as St. Luke usually has t^ Spos tup 
'E\aiiij' when he speaks of it as " the Monnt 
of Olives " (Luke xix. 37 ; xxii. 39), and ai 
here he calls it Elsson, which is its name in 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[on. L 1—261 



Josephus (* Jud. Ant.,' vii. 9, 2 ; eee too xx. 
8, 6), it seems probable that in Luke. xix. 
29 ; xxi. 27, we ought to read, with Laeh- 
mann and Tischendorf (see Meyer on Luke 
xix. 29), "E\ai<i>v, Elceon, Olivet. In tlie Old 
Testament, in 2 Sam. xv. 30, it is " the 
R scent of the Olives " (A.V., " the ascent of 
Mount Olivet"); in Zeoh. xiv. 4, " tlie 
Mount of Olives." A sabbath day's journey 
off; i.e. six, or according to Sclileusner, 
seven and a half, furlongs (or two thousand 
cubits). Josephus ('Jud. Ant.,' xx. 8, 6) 
calls it "five furlongs," but he only measured 
to the foot of the hill, whereas St. Luke 
gives the distance from the spot whence 
Christ ascended. Bethany itself, according 
to John xi. 18, was fifteen furlungs from 
Jerusalem. 

Ver. 13. — The upper chancer for an upper 
riHym, A.V. ; where they were abiding for 
wliere abode, A.V. ; sun of Jamei for brother 
o/Vam«8, A.V. The upper ohambar ; perhaps 
the same room where they had eaten the 
Passover with Christ (Luke xxii. 12) ; but 
this is very uncertain, though affirmed by 
Epiphanius, and by Nioephorus, who further 
relates that the very house in which the 
upper chamber was was built into the back 
part of the temple which the Empress 
Helena erected on Mount Sion. The word 
here is birepifov, tbere it is afi^Yeei'. The 
vTr(p$ov (Hebrew n*,^K, 2 Kings iv. 10, 11) 
was the room immediately under the roof ; 
the avdiyeov was synonymous. Where they 
were abiding. A slight change in the order 
of the words, as adopted in the text of tlie 



K.Y., makes Peter and the other apostles 
the nominative case,to the verb " went up," 
instead of, as in the A.V., to " abode." In 
regard to the list of the apostles which 
follows, it may be noticed first, that it is iden- 
tical with that of Luke vi. 14 — 16, except in 
the omission of Judas Iscariot and the order 
in which the apostles are named. The order 
in Luke seems to have followed tliat of natural 
birth and association. The brothers, Peter 
and Andrew, James and Jolin, are classed lo- 
gether ; Philip and Bartholomew, or Nat a- 
nael, go together, and so on. But in this list 
John follows Peter, his Close companion in 
missionary work (ch. iii. 1, etc. ; iv. 12 ; viii. 
14); James follows instead of preceding 
John; and others are classed somewhat 
differently, for reasons probably analogous, 
but which we know not. Of the othor 
lists that in Mark iii. 16 — 19 agrees mott 
nearly with that before us. In all, Bimou 
Peter stands first: The Jude of Luke vi 
16 (comp. Jude 1) and cb. i. 13 is called 
Thaddxui in Matt. x. 3 (" LebbsBus whose 
surname was Thaddssus," A.V.) and in 
Mark iii. 18 ; but no doubt the persons are 
the same. In all the lists Philip stands 
fifth. In three Bartholomew is sixth, while 
in the list in Acts his being named after 
Thomas makes him seventh. In all the 
lists James the son of Alphseus is ninth, 
and Judas Iscariot tlie last, except in the 
Acts, where he is not named, being ulruai ly 
dead. The underwritten columns give the 
foot lists in one view : — 





Matt. X. 2— t. 


Mark iii. 16—19. 




Luke vi 14—16. 




Acts 1. 13. 


1. 


Simon Peter 


1. Simon Peter 


1. 


Simon Peter 


1. 


Simon Peter 


2. 


Andrew 


2. James 


2. 


Andrew 


2. 


John 


3. 


James 


3. John 


3. 


James 


3. 


James 


4. 


John 


4. Andrew 


4. 


John 


4. 


Andrew 


5. 


Philip 


6. Philip 


6. 


Philip 


6. 


Philip 


6. 


Bartholomew 


6. Bartholomew 


6. 


Bartholomew 


6. 


Thomas 


7. 


Thomas 


7. Matthew 


7. 


Matthew 


7. 


Bartholomew 


8. 


Matthew 


8. Thomas 


8. 


Thomas 


8. 


Matthew 


9. 


James son of Al- 


9. James son of Al- 


9. 


James sou of Al- 


9. 


James son of Al- 




phseus 


phsBUS 




phsaus 




ph£8US 


10. 


ThaddsBus 


10. ThaddsBUS 


10. 


Simon the Zealot 


10. 


Simon the Zealot 


11. 


Simon the Canii- 


11. Simon the C.ma- 


11. 


Judas, the son, or 


11 


Jude, the son, or 




neean 


nseun 




broth or, of Jame» 




brother, of James 


12. 


Judas Iscariot 


12. Judas Iscariot 


12. 


Juilas Iscariot 







Ver. 14. — With one acoord eontinued 
steadfastly foi- continued with one accord, 
A.V. ; prayer for prayer and supplication, 
A.V. and T.E. The women. St. Luke, in 
his Gospel, makes frequent mention of the 
women who followed our Lord, and generally 
of things that liappened to women (see 
Luke xxiii. 27, 49, 55; xxiv. 10, 22, etc. 
Sec also Luke vii. 37, etc. ; viii. 23 ; .x. 38, 
45 ; etc.). Wo notice the same tendency 
in the Acts, here, and in ch. ii. 17, 18; v. 



14; ix. 36; xii. 13; xvi. 14, 16; xvii. 4, 34 ; 
xxiii. 26; xxi. 9; xxiv. 24; xxv. 23; etc. 
Mary the mother of Jesus appears here not 
as an object of worship, but as humlly 
joining in the prayers of the Chmch. And 
■with his brethren. The Lord's brethren 
are spoken of by namo in Matt. xiii. 55 us 
"James, and Joses ['Joseph,' ILV.], and 
Simon, and Judas." So also Mark vi. 
3 (see too ch. iv. 81—35). "James tl;e 
Lord's brother" is mentioned by St. Paul 



an, 1. 1-.2G.] 



THE ACTS 01^ THE APOSTLES. 



(Gal. i. 19) ; " the brethren of tlic Tiord " me 
luontioned 1 Oor. ix. 5 ; and again in Jnhn 
vii. 3, 5, 10, "the brethren of Jesus" are 
spoken of. This is not tlie place to enter 
u pon the difficult question of their parentage. 
liut it may su£Sce to say that if James and 
Judas are the two apostles of that name 
(which Alford, however, thinks they cer- 
tainly were not, referring to John vii. 5, 
compared with vi. 67), then the brethren 
here spoken of aa distinct from the apostles 
would be Joses and Simon. 

Ver. 15. — These for those, A.V. ; hrethren 
for disciples, A.V. and T.R. ; and there was 
a multitude of persons gathered together for 
the number of names together were, A.V. ; o 
for OM, A.V. Peter justifies his primacy by 
taking the lead in the first onward move- 
ment of the Church. Names is a common 
Hebraism for "persons" (see Eev. iii. 4; 
Numb, i. 2). Gathered together ; i.e. to one 
place and at one time (see the same phrase, 
ch. ii 1, 44). Wordsworth quotes Ignat., 'Ad 
Magnes ' vii., and Clem. Bom. i. 4, where 
the same phrase, eVl tJ avTh, indicative of 
Church unity occurs. 

Ver. 16. — Brethren, it was needful that 
the Scripture should be fidfilled for men and 
brethren, this Scripture must needs have been 
fulfilled, A.V. ; spake before by the mouth of 
David for by the mouth of David spake before, 
A.V. It was needful, etc. So our Lord de- 
clared, " The Scriptures cannot be broken " 
(John X. 35) ; and " All things must be ful- 
filled which were written," etc. (Luke xxiv. 
25 — 27, 44 — 46). It is most important to oiur 
Christian integrity that we should view the 
Scriptures in the same light as our Lord and 
his apostles did, as containing real prophecies, 
spoken by the Holy Ghost. (Compare the 
manner in which the sixty-ninth psalm is 
here quoted with that of Heb. iii. 7.) So the 
Creed, " I believe in the Holy Gliost, . . . 
who spake by the propliets" (comp. ch. iv. 
25 ; xxviii. 25). Who was guide, etc. If St. 
Peter had only been addressing his brother 
apostles, who were well acquainted with the 
treachery of Judas, it would scarcely have 
been natural to introduce these words ; they 
would have seemed rather to be explanatory 
words added by the historian. But the 
circumstances might be very imperfectly 
known to many of the hundred and twenty 
brethren assembled on this occasion ; and if 
Ko, the reference to Jndas's treachery would 
nut be but of place in St. Peter's mouth. _ 

Ver. 17. — Among for with, A.V. ; received 
his portion in for had obtained part of, A.V. 
For he was numbered, etc. This is said in 
order to show that the passage in the Psalms 
applied strictly to Judas, seeing he had held 
his portion in the ministry and office of an 
apostle (see John vi. 71). His portion; 
liter^y, hit lot; i.e. the portion vhioh fell to 



him by lot. The languagu is taken from the 
Old Testament (see e.g. Josh, xviii. 10, 11 ; 
xix. 1, 10, etc.). Those who received such a 
portion (K\fipov) were clergy. 

Ver. 18. — Obtained for purchased, A.V., an 
unnecessary change ; his iniquity for iniquity, 
A.V. It is obvious .that this verse and ver. 
19, which are placed in a parenthesis in the 
E.V., are not part of St. Peters discourse, 
but are explanatory words inserted by St. 
Luke for the instruction of Theophilus and 
his other readers. Falling headlong; i.e. 
from the tree or gallows on which he hung 
himself (see Matt, xxvii. 3 — 8). The only 
apparent discrepancies in the accounts ot 
St. Matthew and St. Luke in regard to the 
purchase of the field, and the name given to 
it, are that, according to St. Matthew's more 
detailed account, it was the chief priests who 
actually purchased the field with Jndas's 
money, whereas St. Lukesays,less accurately, 
that Judas purchased it. Again, St. Matthew 
explains the name Akel-dama as being given 
to the field because it was the price of the 
" innocent blood " of Jesus betrayed by 
Judas, whereas St. Luke's account rather 
suggests that it was Judas's own blood shed 
in his fall which gave the name. But both 
accounts of the name might be true, some 
understanding Ihe name in one sense and 
some in the other. (Compare the different 
accounts of the name of Beer-sheba in Gen. 
xxi. 31 and xxvi. 32, 33 ; of the origin of 
the proverb, "Is Saul among the prophets?" 
1 Sam. X. 11, 12 and xx. 24; and other 
similar cases.) Though, however, there is 
no serious discrepancy between St. Luke 
and St. Matthew, it is probable, from the 
variations above named, that St. Luke had 
not seen St. Matthew's account. 

Ver, 19. — Became known for was knmon, 
A.V. ; that in their language that field was 
called Akeldama for as that field is called in 
tlteir proper tongue, Aceldama, A.V. and T.E. 

Ver. 20. — Made desolate for desolate, A.V.; 
office (as in margin) for bishopric, A.V. The 
hook of Psalms, one of the recognized divi- 
sions of the canonical Scriptures, as we find 
Luke xxiv. 44, " The law of Moses, and the 
prophets, and the psalms," the last standing 
for the Hagiographa, of which it was the 
first and principal book. Here, however, as 
in Luke xx. 42, it may rather mean the Book 
of Psalms proper. (Forj similar quotations 
from the Psalms, see oh. xiii. 33 — 35 ; Heb. 
i,ii.,iii.,iv., v.,x.,etc.) His office let another 
take. Bishop being the English translitera- 
tion of eTTiffKoiros, bishopric is, of course, 
the literal rendering of iivLa-Kowli ; if taken 
in its wider and more general ser se, as in 
the well-known work of Archdeacon Evans, 
" the bishopric of souls." This same ofiice 
is called a StoKovla (a deaconship), and 
airoffToX-f) (an apostleship) in vers. 17 and 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. 1. 1— ?6, 



25. So St. Panl calls himself SiiKovos (s 
minister) in Eph. iii. 7 ; Col. i. 23, 25, etc. 
So the presbyters of the Church are called 
bishops (oh. xx. 17, 28 ; 1 Tim. i. 1, 2, etc.). 
The ecclesiastical names for the diiferent 
offices in the Church only acquired their 
distinctive nse later, and by the gradual 
growth of custom. In the Septuagint, 
emaKtmi) answers to the Hebrew njf33, 
A.V., "oversight" (Numb. iii. 32; iv. 16, 
etc.). 

Ver. 21.-0/ Ihe men therefore for ahere- 
fore of these men, A.V. ; went out for out, A. V. 
Ver. 22. — The day for that same day, A.V.; 
received for tahen, A.V. ; of these must one 
become for must one be ordained to be, A.V. 
Beginning belongs to the Lord Jesus. He 
began to go in and out among his apostles 
from the time that John baptized, and con- 
tinued to do so till his ascension, the day 
that he was received up (" taken up," A.V.), 
as in ver. 11. This definition of the time of 
our Lord's public ministry exactly agrees 
with Matt. iv. 12 — 25 ; Mark i. ; Luke iii., 
iv. ; John i. 29 — 51. Must one become a 
witness, etc. The resurrection of Christ 
from the dead thus appears to be a cardinal 
iloctrine of the gospel. The whole truth 
cf Christ's mission, the acceptance of his 
sacrifice, tlie consequent forgiveness of sins, 
and all man's hopes of eternal life, turn 
upon it. All the sermons of the apostles 
recorded in the Acts and the Epistles also 
agree with this (see oh. ii., iii., iv.; v. 81, 32 ; 
vi. 56, .59 ; x. 39— il ; xiii. 30, etc. ; Bom. 
i. 4 ; 1 Cor. XV. 4 ; 2 Cor. i. 9, etc. ; 1 Pet. i. 3 ; 
iii.21,22; Rev.i.5,eto.). The great eare taken 
to secure competent witnesses is very 
remarkable. A disciple who had recently 
joined the company might be mistaken; one 
who had been the daily companion of Jesus 
Christ for three years and a half, and knew 
every gesture and every feature of the 
Master with perfect certainty, could not be 
mistaken. 

Ver. 23. — Put forward for appointed, 
A.V. ; Sarsabias for Barsabas, A.V and 
T.B. Joseph called Barsabbas (or Barsabas). 
Nothing more is really known of him. His 
work for Christ has no earthly record, except 
that Papias (Euscb., ' H. E. ,' iii. 39) says that, 
having drunk some deadly poison, by the 
grace of God he sustained no barm. Euse- 
liius elsewhere (i. 12) says that he and 
Matthias were reported to be of the seventy, 
which \b not improbable. The derivation | 



of the name Barsabas, or Barsabbas, is 
unknown ; it seems to be a patronymic (son 
of Sabas,orSabba8),like Bar-Tholomew, Bar- 
Jonas, Bar-Jesus, etc. But it might also be 
descriptive of his qualities, like Bar-nabas, 
Son of Consolation (oh. i" '?6),in which case 
one would expect it to mean the same as 
Justus, as in the case of " Thomas called Di- 
dymus" (John xx. 4 ; where Thomas aadVi- 
dymus both mean " a twin" ); but no Aramean 
■word of this eignifiation is forthcoming. The 
surname Justus, with its derivatives Justimis 
and Justinianus, was not an uncommon 
Boman name. It was also borne by a Jewish 
historian contemporary with Josephus, Justus 
of Tiberias, the son of Pistus (see ' Life of 
Josephus,' §§ 35, 65) and was the surname 
of James the Less. Matthias, not otherwise 
known, but said by Nicephorus to have 
preached and sufferedmartyrdom in Ethiopia. 
Eus^bius (' H. E.,' iii. 24) mentions spurious 
Gospels "of Peter, Thomas, Matthias, and 
others," as quoted by heretics. A work 
called 'The Traditions of Matthias' is re- 
ferred to by Clemens Alexandrinus ( ' Strom,' 
ii. 163). 

Ver. 24. — 0/ these two the one whom for 
whether of these two, A.V. and T.B. 

Ver. 25. — To take the place in this for 
that he may take part of this, A. V. and T.B. ; 
fell away for by transgression fell, A.V. 
(irapefin). The use of irapaPaivw In an in- 
transitive sense for "to transgress, fall away 
from, turn aside from," and the like, is fre- 
quent in the LXX. (Exod. xxxii. 8; Deut. 
xvii. 20, etc.). To his own place. An awful 
phrase, showing that every man has the 
place in eternity which he has made for 
himself in time. If the reading place, in 
the beginning of the verse, is adopted instead 
of the part {xXripov) of the A.V., then there 
is » contrast between the blessed place of 
apostleship, which Judas forfeited, and that 
of traitorship, which he acquired. 

Ver. 26. — They gave lots for them for tliey 
gave forth their lots, A.V. and T.R. (ouroTr for 
avTciv); but the T.R. gives the easiest sense. 
The exact mode of taking the lot does not 
appear. Some think the name of each 
cindidate was written on a tablet, and that 
the first name which fell out of the van after 
it had been shaken was the one chosen. 
Some think the lot was taken by dice. But 
however the taking of the lot was managed, 
the effect was to leave the choice to God in 
answer to prayer. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1—11 —TTie recapitulation. St. Luke is like a traveller, who, having gained a 
eertain summit, before he proceeds on his journey through the new country which is 
opening upon his view, stops and looks back npon the scene which he has traversed, 
but which he is now about to lose sight of. He marks the sites which had attracted 



till. 1. 1—26.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. J 

Ills attention as he journeyed — the rising knoll, the conspicuous wood, the sheet of 
waier, the open plain. But as he looks he spies out other objects which he had not 
noticed before — an ivy-mantled tower, a dwelling-house, a village, a clump of trees, 
which add richness and diversity to the scene[; and so he adds them to his journal or 
to his sketch. In like manner our sacred historian, being about to quit the blessed 
scenes of the life of Jesus Christ which had engaged his pen in the Gospel, and to enter 
upon the history of the Apostolic Church, casts a lingering look upon the closinj; 
days of our Lord's sojourn upon earth, marks again what he had before narrated, 
recapitulates the history of the days which connect the Gospel with the Acts, but 
withal, adds gome striking incidents, throws in some additional words from the lips of 
the Divine Master, and by a few touches of his master-pen heightens the beauty of the 
scene, which was the last parting of Jesus from his Church on earth. The Resurrection 
itself, and the many proofs thereof given to the sight, the hearing, and the handlin<!; oi 
the apostles ; the commandments to the apostles ; the walk to Bethany ; the parting 
blessing; the ascension into heaven; the return of the apostles to Jerusalem; the 
continual prayers and praises of the disciples while they waited there for the promise 
of the Father ; — these had all been duly noted in the closing chapter of the Gospel. But 
St. Luke wished, before entering upon his new ground, to mark more distinctly that 
mysterious border-land between the pre-resurrection and the post-resurrection Churcli ; 
that strange period which belonged neither to the life of Jesus Christ on earth nor 
to the history of his Church, properly speaking — the forty days that intervened between 
the Resurrection and the Ascension. It was important to mark move distinctly than 
he had done in the Gospel that those manifestations of himself to his apostles, and 
that converse in the course of which he had instructed them in the duties of the 
apostolate, were extended over a period of forty days. It was important to do this 
both as strengthening the other proofs of the Resurrection, and also as shouing how 
full a commission the apostles had received for the future ordering and governing of 
the Church. Hence the distinct mention of the forty days, and the somewhat fuller 
report of the conversations between the Lord and his apostles. [3ut the act of the 
Ascension also was to receive some further light. In the Gospel St. Luke had 
m9ntioned the touching fact that it was while in the very act of blessing them that 
Jesus was parted from them. But now he adds, his mind apparently being full of the 
importance of proofs of the things narrated by him, that he was taken up " as they 
were looking," and that they did not lose sight of him till he was enveloped in a cloud. 
He adds also another remarkable circumstance, of which he may not have been 
previously aware, that two angels had appeared to the apostles, as they stood lonkiiig 
with fixed gaze into heaven, and announced to them his sure return. And thus, in 
this recapitulation and expansion of his briefer narrative in the Gospel, he closes with 
the announcement of that crowning glory of the Son of man which has been the hope 
and joy and strength of the Church amidst all her sufferings, the second advent of the 
Lord in the clouds "of heaven. 

Vers. 12—14. The grain of mustard seed. Let us contrast for a moment the 

account here given with the present condition of Christianity in the world. Christianity 
has taken possession of the whole civilized world. The thrones, the laws, the 
institutions of those nations which hold sway in the earth are all based upon the 
"ospel The arts, the sciences, the literature of civilized men are more or less 
Tnipregnated with the doctrine of the New Testament. Take the cathedrals of Europe ; 
what ^n expenditure of thought and skill and wealth they represent I They are among 
the most imposing monuments of human thought and human labour. Look at the 
mass of Christian literature— in poetry, in philosophy, in science, in theology, m sacred 
oratory in general literature. What countless Christian writers have elevated the hum»n 
intelleot, enlarged the borders of knowledge, added dignity to man, and happiness to 
mankind 1 What vast influences, of all sorts, permeating the civihzed worid. we can 
now trace up to the gospel! What multitudes of individual men and women m all 
ages hince Christ, and all over the world, have learnt what the true view of human hfe 
is and have found their whole end of living, and their chief enjoyment of life, and 
their only consolation and support, in the truths which the gospel teaches i How has 
the world been filled with fruits of righteousness, altering the whole aspect of human 



i THE AOTS' Ot THE APOSTLES. fcH. 1. 1-^6. 

Booiety, of which the gosjiel alone was the first seed I Now turn to the beginnings of 
the gospel as here exhibited. One upper chamber at Jerusalem, a city in the last 
days of its troubled existence, oontaiaed the whole number of those who acknowledged 
Christ as their Master. Measured by any worldly standard, anything feebler or more 
absolutely insignificant than that company cannot be imagined. But the grain of 
mustard seed was to become a tree in which the birds of the air should make their 
nests ; the little leaven was to leaven the whole lump ; the stone was to become a 
great mountain which should fill the whole earth. And so it has come to pass that 
the upper chamber at Jerusalem has grown into the Church Catholic, the mother of 
all the saints that are, or have been, or are to be hereafter. What an infinite 
encouragement to our faith Is this I What a ground for adoration of him whose grace 
and power and faithfulness work such marvellous effects 1 What a ground of sure and 
certain hope that he who has carried his work thus far will finish it, to his owii,glory, ■ 
and the exceeding joy of the Church which he has redeemed with his precious blood ! 

Vers. 15 — 26. — The rewards of iniquity. The physical laws by which the material 
„ world is piovorned ore not more fixed and certain than the moral laws which secure to 
iniquity its just reward. Nor has the patient and honest inquirer more difficulty in 
ascertaining those laws than the physicist has in ascertaining the laws of nature by 
observation and experiment. Neither is it peculiar to Holy Scripture to set forth the 
sequences of cause and effect which occur under those moral laws ; the history of the 
world and our own daily experience do so likewise. Holy Scripture does but record 
and exhibit typical and striking instances by which our own observation and experience 
are confirmed. Now, there is one feature common to a great many, perhaps more or 
less to all, acts of iniquity, viz. that they have, so to speak, a double reward. There 
is the reward which the worker contemplated as the fruit of his misdoing ; and there 
is the reward which he lost sight of, but which followed by an inevitable necessity of 
the moral Law of God. Both are clearly exhibited in the awful case of Judas. The 
reward which he looked for, and for the sake of which he betrayed the innocent blood, 
was the possession of thirty pieces of silver. We know the poverty of the Son of man, 
and that he had no silver or gold, no houses or lands,' with which to reward his 
followers. We know how days of toil succeeded one the other during which the gains 
were indeed immense — souls nourished, enlightei(ed, instructed in the Word of God, 
prepared for the kingdom of heaven, weaned from sin, won to righteousness — but not 
such gains as would please the worldly mind. And we know the mind of Judas, that 
it was very covetous and greedy of lucre. We know with what eyes he looked upon 
Mary's costly offering of love, and how he was wont to rob the bag which contained 
the alms for the poor. We can well believe, therefore, that to a mind bo constituted 
and so depraved the possession of thirty pieces of silver appeared no mean reward. It 
would be some consolation for the loss of the portion of the three hundred pence which he 
might have abstracted from the bag had the ointment been sold and the price given to 
the poor. Perhaps he had set his heart upon that very field which was bought wilh 
the price of blood, and which was to become the strangers' burial-ground. Anyhow, 
he got his reward. He did the deed and he got the money, " the reward of iniquity "— 
the reward which he looked for as the fruit of his sin. And sinners very often do get 
their expected reward. Adam and Eve became "as gods, knowing good and evil ; " 
Gehazi obtained his two talents of silver and his two changes of garments ; Ahab got 
possession of the coveted vineyard ; Zimri gained a throne by the slaughter of the 
house of Baasha ; the men of Gibeah slaked their lust on the Levite's concubine : 
hatred, revenge, ambition, continually by iniquity obtain their reward, and the pages 
of Scriptiire and of profane history, as well as our own experience, teem with examples 
of the reward of successful wickedness. But now let us look at the other reward of 
iniquity ; that which Comes in due season as the inevitable fruit of the just judgment 
of God ; th«t of which Horace, heathen as he was, spoke, when he said— 

" Earo antecedentem scelestum 
Deseiuit pede poena claudo." 

JiidM has got his money. Perhaps he has concluded his bargain lor the field. He is 
BO longer a poor D'an like his Master. The former gains of robbery have been swelleu 



ea. L 1-26.] THE ACTS OF TfiE APOSTLES. 9 

by the price of treachery. But he had forgotten hia manhood. He had forgotten that 
man has a conscience, and that a guilty conscience is like the raging sea, which cannot 
be stilled. He had shut his eyes to everything but the reward he coveted. But now 
the storm is rising. Remorse begins her terrible work. Vain regret, agonizing fear, 
terrible self-reproach, unbearable shame, — all rush upon his soul, and distract and tear 
it. The remembrance, perhaps, of the Lord's goodness ; some distinct impressions of hia 
wonderful love ; the recollections, maybe, of some true happiness in his service before the 
curse of covetousness lit upon him ; flashes of the hope once entertained of the kingdom 
of heaven, but now turned into despair ; — these move his heart only to make it cnpable 
of feeling more bitterly what he now was, and what he must be for ever. His whole 
existence a curse by his own exceeding wickedness ! " Good were it for mo if I had not 
been born ! I have no place to hide in from the terrors of God — the terrors of Gfod's 
goodness ! I am, and must be for ever. And God is, and must be for ever I But I 
cannot abide God's presence 1 I cannot abide my own consciousness 1 " Such were the 
maddening thoughts of the son of perdition — of him whose iniquity had gained its 
reward. He tries to rush from consciousness, to escape from himself and from God. 
He flings from him the accursed silver ; but he cannot fling away the guilt of blood. 
And so he takes a halter and hangs himself, and goes to his own place. But let us 
reckon up his gains and losses. He had gained thirty pieces of silver — the reward of his 
iniquity. But he had lost his apostleship, the highest office on earth ; his throne, the 
highest place of man in heaven, under Jesus Christ ; his peace of mind, his sell- 
respect, his power of enjoying life, the esteem of all good men ; any place among men 
save that of shame, and ignominy, and disgrace, and abhorrence. He had lost his own 
soul — his life ; all the pleasures of time, all the joys of eternity. This was " the reward 
of iniquity," which came upon him by the inevitable justice of God. And this is 
written for our learning, that we may ponder it and be wise. And we are led to the 
same conclusion by following up in any other case, and comparing, the twofold 
rewards of iniquity. The conclusion to which we are inevitably led is — 

I. That the three things which are necessary to a man's happiness are : 1. The 
approval of his own conscience. 2. The sense of being approved by God. 3. The 
esteem of his fellow-men, and of all God's rational creatures. 

II. That by iniquity all these three are forfeited, and that the gains or reward of 
iniquity are as inadequate a compensation for such loss as Esau's mess of pottage was 
for the loss of his birthright. The gains, the pleasures, the temporal rewards of 
iniquity, come and go like a dream, like a tale, like a flash of lightning. The eternal 
reward of iniquity abides ; terrible in its undiscovered vastness, awful in its imknown 
horrors, and in its fixity of tenure : fixity written in the phrase which tells us of Judas 
that he went " to his own place." 

III. We learn that every man has the place in eternity which he made his own in 
time. A man's own place in the eternal world is that which falls to him by the 
nnchanging laws of God, according to his choice of good or evil in this world. The 
atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ has, indeed, opened a way of righteousness to those who 
had seemed to have lost it for ever ; but to those who obstinately love darkness rather 
than light, and cling to iniquity in the very face of mercy, there remains in the nature 
of things no other end than that, like Judas, they go each one " to his own place." 



HOMILIES BY VAKIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vera. 1 — 8, — Christ's mission and ours. The introduction to this narrative of " the 
things pertaining to the kingdom of God " suggests to us truths concerning the mission 
of our Divine Lord and also concerning our own. 

I. The. mission of Chbibt. We gather from the opening words of Luke that this 
was' fourfold, and may be included under these heads: 1. Miraculous works. He 
"began to do" (ver. 1). The "mighty works "of Jesus were far from- being mere 
" wonders; " they were (1) deeds of pure beneficence, (2) acts called lor by the circum- 
stances of the hour, making an irresistible appeal to the heart of love and the hand of 
power, (3) illustrations of the Divine principles which he came to establish, as well a« 



10 TAB AITS OF THE APOSTLES, [cH. 1. 1— 26. 

(4) Incidental proofs of heavenly origin and almighty power. 2. Teaching. He began 
"both to do and teach" (ver. 1). The teaching of Ohrist covered all the ground on 
which we most urgently need enlightenment. He taught us all that we want to know 
concerning (1) the nature and disposition of Q-od, including his attitude toward guilty 
souls; (2) the real nature of man, his true heritage and the way by which he could 
return to God ; (3) what constitutes moral excellency in God's sight : how man can do 
and bo that which is due to himself and to all by whom he is surrounded ; (4) the 
truth respecting the future world. 3. Endurance. The story of " his passion " (ver. 3) 
is the story of his life. In the case of all other of the children of men, the narrative of 
the last hours is felt to be but the necessary closing of the chapter. In his case alone 
the relation of the Passion is felt by us all to be the supreme and culminating point, 
the one indispensable feature of his whole career ; that to which everything led up, for 
which everything prepared, compared with which everything else was unimportant. 
Never, at any period of his ministry, did the Son of God so truly and so largely fulfil 
the mission on which he came, as when he was " putting away sin 'by the sacrifice oj 
himself," as when he was betrayed and smitten and reviled, as when he was " lifted 
up" on the cross and "poured out his soul unto death." 4. Life. He came to be the 
holy, loving, patient, truthful, reverent One he was. The historian does not speak here 
of this his exemplary life before his Passion, but we may have it in our mind as a 
complementary thought ; he does, however, refer to his life after the Passion (ver. 3). 
This is divisible into two parts. (1) The forty days on earth. Then he bore witness to the 
reality of his work and the genuineness of his mission: he "showed himself alive . . 
by many infallible proofs." (2) Everlasting life in heaven. He is now doing the 
work of administration. " Jesus began both to do and to teach '' when he was below ; 
he continues now the great work he then began. As he arrested Paul on his way to 
Damascus and charged him to enter his service, as he inspired and directed his servants 
60 that the " acts of the apostles " are his acts through them ; so now he is administer- 
ing the affairs of his blessed kingdom by enlightening, inspiring, governing his Church 
by his Spirit (see ver. 2). 

II. OuB MISSION. We have here indications of the kind and method of service which 
it belongs to us to render. We are : 1. To look expectantly. We too are to " wait for the 
promise of the Father" (ver. 4); often in our Christian life, from its very beginning to 
its very end, asking and waiting. We are to ask, to seek, to knock — if need be, again 
and again ; not impatient to receive, but remembering that God knows when as well as 
how to bestow. 2. To receive gratefully. We too " shall be baptized with the Holy 
Ghost " (ver. 5, and see ver. 8). God will come to us in rich effusion if only we ask 
earnestly and wait patiently ; then we shall receive joyfully, and our hearts will fill 
with sacred and happy gratitude. 3. To submit cheerfully. Our Lord ofttimes says to 
us, " It is not for you to know " (ver. 7). We long to know many things not revealed, 
and this is his reply to our vain curiosity. Or we long to effect impossible things, and 
then he says to us, " It is not for you to do." He imposes limits to our action as well 
as to our knowledge, and within these bounds we must be content to move, rejoicing 
that we are permitted to know anything of him and do anything for him ; rejoicing, 
also, to believe that soon the circle of understanding and accomplishment will be 
immeasurably enlarged. 4. To testify faithfully. " Ye shall be witnesses unto me " 
(ver. 8). It was a far higher function for the apostles to bear witness to Christ — ^to the 
greatness of his person, the beauty and tenderness of his spirit, the fulness and joy nf 
his salvation — than to be the depositaries of heavenly secrets aa to dates and placei 
There is nothing we should so earnestly aspire and so strenuously strive to become, as 
faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ. We cannot conceive of a nobler work than to be, 
by life and lip, bearing testimony to him, constraining our fellow-men to realize his 
readiness to receive, his willingness to forgive, and his power to bless and to ennoble 
them. — 0. 

Vers. 9 — U.— Wisdom in bereavement. We learn from these verses— 

I. That the culmination of hope in one may prove the depth of pbivatioh to 

iNOTHER. For the joy that was set before him Jesus " endured the cross, despising the 

shftme" (Heb. xii. 2). Into that joy he now entered. As the " cloud received him out 

of their sight " (ver. 9), and he returned unto the Father, he took possession of the 



ea. 1. 1— 26j THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 11 

glorious inberitance for which he had paid so jostly a price. But the time of hi« 
exaltation was the hour of his disciples' sorrow. By his departure they lost sight of 
their deiirest Friend, their wise Counsellor, their great T< acher, their honoured Lord. 
So must it be with us. The upright Christian statesman passes to a still larger sphere 
of usefulness and honour, and the nation mourns ; the gifted and devoted pastor is 
called to a celestial ministry, and the Church is bereaved; the bejoved parent is 
translated to the skies, and the family hearth is desolate. 

II. That the attitude of helplessness is one from which we mh.st soon be 
AROUSED. (Vers. 10, 11.) It was natural and right enough that, when the Saviour 
was taken up and disappeared from sight, the disciples should continue to " look 
steadfastly toward heaven ; " their eyes may well have been riveted to the spot in 
inexpressible awe and wonder. Doubtless all thought was swallowed up in simple 
surJDrise and consternation ; they stood in helpless, bewildering astonishment. This 
might last for some minutes, but it could not continue longer. The angels broke in 
upon it, not with the language of reproach, but with the voice of arousing. A kindly 
voice is this. When disposed to give way to helpless awe, or fruitless grief, or inani- 
mate prostration of soul, we may thank the minister of God, in wliatever form he 
may come, who says to us, " Why stand ye gazing ? Arouse ye! All is not lost. The 
past is past, but the future is In front »f you." 

III. That time, with patience, will bring heavenly compensations. (Ver. 11, 
latter part.) Though the Master was taken, he would come again ; and when he returned 
it would, indeed, be " in like manner," etc., but in more glorious form and with more 
splendid surroundings (1 Thess. iy. 16 ; 2 Thess. i. 7 ; Jude 14 ; Rev. i. 7). Moreover, 
he would come again in unlilce manner, but in a way as gracinns and, perhaps, even 
more needful, viz. in the enlightening influences of the Holy Sjiirit (ver. 5). Heaven 
was taking away their Strength and their Joy ; bnt let them wait in holy trustfulness, 
and.Heaven would soon give them ample and blessed compensation. God takes from 
us — from the community and from the individual heart — those that are very dear, 
things that are very precious to us ; then we faint and are grievously distressed ; we 
may be almost paralyzed with our sense of loss and desolation. But there is blessing 
on its way — Divine comfort, solace, strength. The hand that takes our treasures has 
large compensations in reserve. 

IV. That bekbavbmbnt finds a pure and wise relief in communion with God and 
in fellowship with man. (Vers. 12 — 14.) The apostles, roused by the angels' speech, 
"returned unto Jerusalem" and went into the upper room, whore they would meet 
their best friends — those who had the deepest sympathy with ihem — that they might 
commune with them and that they might " continue in prayer and supplication." In 
the time of bereavement and woe we may be tempted to shut ourselves in to our own 
chamber and nurse our grief. Nothing can be more unwise. Let sorrow, indeed, have 
its own chosen loneliness in its first dark hours ; leave it alone with God, with the 
pitiful, patient Saviour. Then let it come forth ; let it go into the " upper room," where 
it can hold fellowship with human friends ; let it go into the sanctuary, where, with the 
people of God, it can pour out its heart in prayer and supplication : it will not be long 
before it finds itself joining with them in the accents of praise. — C. 

Vers. 16—26. — Tlwpaih of sin and the way of th* righteous. The passage treats of 
the miserable end of the traitor apostle and of the elevation of Matthias to the ofBce 
from which " Judas by transgression fell." We are reminded of— 

I. The path of sin. (Vers. 16 — 20.) This is a gradual descent. " No one ever 
became most vile all at once," wrote the Eoman; and he was right. Some men 
descend much more rapidly than others the path of folly and of sin, but no one leaps 
at once from the summit to the foot. We do not suppose that one day Judas was 
devoted to Christ and the next day began to think how he should betray him. 
Probably his evil course was this : first, surprise at the Lord's slower and more quiet 
method of ministering ; then impatience and even positive dissatisfaction with him ; 
then growing doubt of his claims ; then cupidity ; then treachery ; then remorseful 
despair ; then suicide, and the " going to his own place " (ver. 25). Those who from 
being virtuous become vicious men, fall in the same way, i.e. by degrees ; more or less 
dowfy : first, the harbouring of one evil thought and another ; then kxity in word | 



12 THE ACTS 0]^ m& APObl^LliS. [cB. i. l-Se. 

then carelessness and looseness of action ; then occasional transgression; then habitual 
vice; and then the miserable end. Similarly the passage from godliness to absorbiug 
worldliness is thi ough weakening of a sense of obligation ; decline of sacred joy ; relaxa- 
tion of holy habits ; growing abandonment of devotional exercises ; losing the soul in 
temporal anxieties and passing pleasures. In all such cases as that of Judas there is : 
1. A gradual withdrawal of the soul from sympathy and intercourse with its Lord. 2. 
Acta which pain and injure him. 3. A disastrous end — death ; the reprobation of tha 
good and true, the retribution of the righteous Judge. 

n. The WAT OF the hiqhteous. (Vers. 21 — 26.) In the course of Peter, Matt'iias, 
and the other ten apostles, there were three things exceptional and peculiar to their 
position. 1. Bodily attendance on the Lord Jesus Christ (ver. 21). 2. Consequent 
witness-bearing to the facts of his life and his resurrection (ver. 22). 3. Appointment 
by direct Divine selection : in the case of the eleven by the Lord himself at the com- 
mencement of his work, and in the case of Matthias by appeal to supernatural guidance 
(vers. 23 — 26). But though these features were not meant to be perpetual, there are 
those of which they are suggestive which ought to characterize all true and earnest 
followers of Christ. (1) Intimate association with him ; the intimacy which is not 
" after the flesh " (see John xx. 17), but that which is " after a spiritual and heavenly 
manner." (2) Bearing witness to Christ ; not only to the facts of his life and of his 
victory over death, but to the graciousness of his character, the tenderness of his spirit, 
the excellency of his service, the joy of his friendship. (3) Continual resort to the 
throne of grace for Divine guidance. We do not now use " the lot," but none the less 
do we seek, and gain by patient, trustful inquiry, the guidance of our God and Saviour 
as we walk the path of life and as we labour in the field of holy usefulness. — C. 

Vers. 1 — B.—The forty days after the Paision. L Jesus' fbefabatiohs fob 
DBPARTUEB. In the work of God all is continuous. As in nature there is no pause, 
but in autumn we find the new petiole or leaf-stalk already formed when the old leal 
is detached, so in the kingdom of God. There were ages of preparation for Christ's 
coming; and when he came, his life-work was a making ready to go. Full of 
blessing was the ministry of his visible presence ; fuller still was to be that of the 
invisible Spirit. He must go that the Spirit may come (John xvi. 7). The jirogress is 
ever from the visible and finite form to the eternal and infinite spiritual content. 
1. Preparation by special instruction. (John xiv. 15; xv. 12 — 17.) These parting 
commands were charged with the holiest unction; were breathed forth in spiritual 
jMwer, with the deep earnestness and tenderness of a Divine farewell. All his com- 
mands are summed up in the great word " love." They were issued to a select hand, 
and ever remain in the select keeping of the true Church. Obedience to Christ is, in one 
word, the unfolding of love in all life-relations. Christian duties and graces are but the 
various forms which Divine love would stamp on conduct. 2. By manifestations of a 
risen life. His appearances were firmly accredited as real, says St. Luke, using :i 
word not elsewhere found in the New Testament denoting valid proof (cf. Luke xxiv. 
31, 39, 43). This firm persuasion of the reality of the Lord's risen life is the inspiration 
of the early Church; it cannot be explained away without raising more difficult pro- 
blems. The appearances were accompanied by appropriate activity. Ho discoursed on 
these occasions, and on the supreme theme, on religion, on the kingdom of God. 
Christianity is not sensation — wonder for wonder's sake; its principle is intelligence; 
its method is teaching. " Oo and teach " is the great word of the risen One. 3. By 
a particular direction. The apostles were to remain in Jerusalem (Luke xxiv. 49). 
Here were all the conditions of unity provided for : place and time and a common 
attitude of soul. Spiritual force must bo collected in centres, that it may be diflfused 
through the body of the world. 

II. The Chubch in the attitude of waiting. 1. It was for something d^nite — 
the fulfilment of a Divine promise. Promise attends all obedience ; and perhaps the 
highest blessings belong to the patient attitude of the soul, the iinhaste of perfect 
confidence in God. It was the promise of a blessing foreshadowed in past experiences. 
A baptism, therefore a revival and refreshing from aljove like John Baptist's ministry ; 
yet unlike that in that it was to be more excellent. 2. There was something 
ind^nite, therefore, in^the promise. A good not yet tasted, and so not yet conceivable. 



OH. 1. 1—26.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 13 

So is it with all coming good. We know sumethiug of that to be expected from past 
experiences of Divine grace; but the " half has not been told us." The future is ideal, 
and never exactly imitates the past ; while it rests upou the past and elicits its meaninjj;. 
Obey, trust, wait : this is a grand lesson of the Christian life which comes back to uh 
from tliis page. — J. 

Vers. 6 — 8. — Last words. I. Wibtfdlnbsb about the future. A cariosity 
mingled of fear and hope stirs in the disciples' minds. The present oppresses ; we seek 
escape into dreams of a happy past or future. There is an element of truth and of 
illusion in these cravings. 

II. Illusory thoughts of thb future. The cherished dream of Israel for five 
centuries had been the restoration of the temporal power of David's throne. It was a 
fixed idea, and heie reappears. So have we all our fixed ideas, and cannot conceive a 
happy futuie out of their sphere. But God's unfolding realities prove better than our 
sensuous dreams. 

III. Divine evasion of human questioninqs about the future. 1. No fixed 
knowledge of the future, its changes, and those epochs, can be ours. With all our 
science we cannot touch the beginnings, therefore not the issues, of things. History is 
a Divine poem, and God does not permit us to guess at the denouement or catastrophe 
of events. Tlie unexpected happens, and Providence is full of surprises. Enough for 
us to road the unrolling page from day to day, aud subdue our wishes to the actual, 
rather than measure the actual by our wishes. 2. Strength for the future is enough, 
and this may he ours. Power, inner power, spiritual power, in other words, a full and 
vij;;orous life-consciousness, is what we need. This is promised. But not if we are 
seeking sensual aud selfish ends. Power is imparted for God's ends. Only on condition 
that we are given up to God's will can we work for God's ends, or enjoy the power 
thereto. The laws of the kingdom are as strict as any we learn from nature. The 
narrowing of Divine thoughts to our own petty notions of advantage means desertion 
and weakness ; the inclusion of our purposes within the inflnite purpose means 
strength. All true life-acting may be regarded as witness. Each man stands for some 
principle, expresses some leading thought in his action. What do we represent ? 
VVhat tale does our life tell from day to day? What negative or what positive is it 
tliat our individual life makes clear in the scheme of things? The pessimism of 
unbelief or the optimism of profound faith in the laws of God's world ? To witness for 
the eternal Truth and Love gives joy and zest to existence ; to have no report or 
message to bring to others of aught felt or tasted of the good of life is vacancy and 
sadness. The Christian witness is above all of the life of which mere words are » poor 
transcript. If in some way or other our life clearly affirms the goodness of God by 
reflecting bim, this is witness for him. And the ways of witness are manifold as the 
glory of the stars, the colours and forms of the flowers. There are special testimonies 
to special facts or truths which have their place and season and no other ;,but in all 
lilaces and times the whole life-witness silently tells. The "living epistle " is intelligible 

' in every tongue and to all orders of minds. — J. 

Vers. 9 — 11. — TJie uplifting of Jesus. The evangelist employs two different words, 
both meaning " he was taken or lifted up " (vers. 2, 9). 

I. The bignificancb of the uplifting. The human is raised into the Divine. 
The body of humiliation is translated into a form of glory. Exaltation crowns self- 
abasement. The self-emptied One for love's sake becomes the depository for all time 
of the Divine fulness. For our sake the descent from heaven, and the return thither 
still for our sake. Heaven woos earth in the Incarnation, and in the Ascension earth 
is wedded to heaven for ever. It is the pledge of permanent intercourse iind special 
occasional visitations from God to man. " The Ascension— that pole-star of our 
niyht 1 " (E. Irvirjg). 

II. The sionipicance of the oloud. It was ever a symbol of God. It veils, yet 
reveals; hides, yet manifests him. The definite ever passes into the indefinite; the 
"isible form into the fainter symbol. Men may ask, " Where is he who came and loved 
our clay?" The answer is in the cloud-symbol. As in its beauty we see it float 
between heaven and earth half-deuso auJ half- transparent with the »>olar glmy we hav« 



U THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. i. 1—28. 

the image of the vanished Jesus in the world of pious thought. He is the indefinable 
link between the world of sense and the supersensual. We cannot analyze the truth. 
We see it, we feel it, by the spiritual aesthesis ; and this is better than all definition. 

III. Thk significance of the angels' wobds. We gaze into the mysteiious Divine 
beyond of our life. Our limited horizon melts into the Infiaite. What was more 
knowable than the living and loving Jesus of Nazareth? Here at last the spell of 
Divine silence seemed to have been broken, and the uautterable One had uttered 
himself in an articulate voice, and the undeflnable and iuicnitable in form had clothed 
himself in a form recognizable by alL Yet now tliis fornc. melts again into the indefin- 
able ; this voice ceases in a hush of mystery restored. Well may we stand gazing into 
the ether. Was the whole an illusion? Not so; but what God has once revealed 
remains a spiritual possession for all time. And more ; it is the pledge that God will 
lepeat the revelation. Christ will come again; the cluud will reappear; out of the 
mystery voices will again be heard, the express Image will again stand clear for recog- 
nition. Here is a Divine process; out of the indefinable into the definable, back to 
the. indefinable again. Christ appears to disappear, again to reappear ; and so 

" That one Face, far from vanish, rather grows ; 
Becomes our universe that feels and knows 1 " 

Let us think that "every cloud that veileth love itself is love." In those alternate 
ruvealings and hidings of God from us lies the trial of faith, more precious than 
gold. — J. 

Vers. 12 — 26. — The intertill between (he Ascension and Pentecost. I. The scene in 
THE UPPER EOOM. Obedient to the Lord's command, the disciples return to Jerusalem. 
A certain upper chamber, probably in aprivatedwelliug, became the first Christian Church. 
Epiphanius says that when Hadrian came to Jerusalem, he found the temple desolate 
and but few houses standing. This " little church of God," however, remained ; and Nice- 
pfaorus says that the Empress Helena enclosed it in her larger church. It was probably 
the room in which the Supper had been celebrated, and was to be associated with the 
power of the risen, as it had been with the suffering of the humiliated, Christ. 1. Tht 
assembly. It represented all varieties of character, gifts, and graces. Peter the eager, 
John the mystic, James the practical, Thomas the sceptical, and others. The feminine 
element, destined to play so large a part in the life of the Church, was also represented. 
2. Its employment. It was engaged in the highest exercise of the spirit. Prayer is 
action ; as action may be itself a prayer. And there are times of waiting for all, when 
prayer is the only possible action. The transactions between the spirit and God are 
the most real of all, and are ever followed by significant results. It was social prayer. 
True prayer requires both solitude at times and at times society. We need the help of 
one another in the pursuit of truth. Plato spoke of the "joint striving of souls" in 
philosophy. Common prayer is the joint striving of souls to lay hold upon the strength 
of God. " 1 will not let thee go, except thou bless me." It was persevering, continuous 
prayer, as all exertion of the spirit must be to attain worthy ends. Thus was the 
mind of the Church calmed, and its intelligence cleared for insight into the business of 
the kingdom. 

II. The DiscouBBE of Peteb. 1. It rests on the past. He begins by pointing to a 
fulfilment of Scripture. The present event is thus constantly identified in apostolic 
thought with some word from the past. Nothing befalls except by Divine law. And 
in the words of poets and prophets of the past, whatever their original meaning, hints of 
other meanings are to be found. All language is indeed fossil poetry ; and as in the 
earth's strata plants are found to which living organisms correspond, so in the realm of 
moral law past and present are in inner and profound connection. To the traitor 
sketched in Ps. Ixix. (also cix. and Iv.) the features of the unhappy Judas closely 
corresponded. False and wicked relations of coaduct repeat themselves in history, and 
incur the like doom foreshadowed by the prophetic consciousness. 2. It finds hints 
for present duty in the past. The fragment of a verse from a psalmist ran, " His 
ofBoe let another take." Conduct must run on the line of precedents. Often an old 
proverb or example may give us our clue. A memory for the old sayings of Scripture 
■ad other ancient lore may guide the judgment, or serve as a finger-post to the will. 



3H.I.1— 26.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 15 

This miglit run into superstition ; as wlien men in the Middle Ages turned over Virgil's 
pages for a clue to decision in cases of perplexity. But in the case of the apostles there 
is no reason to believe (but the contrary) that their habit, in common with all tlie devouti 
of falling back on old sayings checked the full and free exercise of their independent 
judgment. 

III. The selbotion op a fresh witness of the Resurrection. 1. " Witnesses for 
Christ" is perhaps the largest designation of the " office " to be filled. An " apostle " 
is one sent — a man with a mission ; and the mission is to witness. Of what ? Above 
all of the Resurrection ; for it is this which made the gospel a power in the world. 
" Assurance is given to all men " that Jesus was the Son of God with power, and 
possesses all the functions of majesty, by the resurrection from the dead. We can 
hardly conceive how the gospel should have spread without this testimony. Hence 
•the importance of the present business. 2. The mode of selection. It blends human 
intelligence with the recognition of Divine determination. The call to any function 
proceeds from God, and is contained in the gift or capacity. Yet God requires us 
to co-operate with him through all the s|)here of freedom. The use of means towards 
a decision does not exclude the Divine wisdom, but reposes upon it. The junction 
of the Divine and the human will in such solemn acts is real, though impossible to 
explain. First, then, there is an exercise of human judgment, and two distinguished 
brethren are selcoted. Here the human choice already recognizes the Divine indication 
in the existence of observed gifts and graces. Next there is prayer, sacramentally 
sealing the union of Divine with human thought, aud seeking a fruitful result. Lastly, 
there is the casting of lots, in which the human intelligence confesses its inability for 
the last decision, and surrenders itself utterly to the guidance of God. The lot falls on 
Matthias ; and he is " voted into " the company of the eleven. Two extremes are 
to be avoided in the crises of affairs. One, to passively " leave everything to God," 
which really means to excuse one's self from the trouble of thought. The other, to take 
the whole burden of responsibility on ourselves, which means to move from our point 
of support. Thus we topple over into weakness and deeper uncertainty. Let faith 
be at the root of all our thinking ; the scales of judgment stand firmly on the Wisdom 
that works through and in the activity of finite minds. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The dawn of the gospel day. These verses form an introduction to 
the whole book. The risen Christ is the chief Object in view. The light which 
has been a lowly light upon the earth, is now about to ascend and take its place 
as the Sun of Righteousness in the heavens. Prom thence he will shine upon the 
earth — first upon that part of the earth immediately below the point of his ascent ; 
and from that, as a starting-place, from country to country, till the whole earth is 
enlightened. The Acts begins its narrative at Jerusalem, the metropolis of Palestine, 
and ends it at Rome, the metropolis of the world. Again, we recognize the divinely 
chosen method, the appointment of apostolic witnesses and representatives, who heanl 
the things which Jesus " spake concerning the kingdom of God," and received from 
him " the commandment," or commission, to preach and labour for the spread of the 
glad tidings of the kingdom. And then./ariAer, in these verses, the vital distinction is 
set prominently forth between the kingdom of Christ and the kingdom of this world — 
the indwelling presence and operation of the Holy Ohost, which is represented as first 
in Jesus himself, speaking in him, working in him, promised by hiin, and then as 
besto wed upon the messengers of the kingdom according to " <Ae promise of the Father," 
lepcated by the Son. Thus the great fundamental lines of the Book of the Acts are 
laid down; the kingdom of the risen and glorified Christ proclaimed and spread 
through the world; chosen and constcrated men the representatives and ministers 
of the kingdom ; baptism of the Holy Ghost the prerequisite for Christian work 
and achievement, without which it must not be attempted and cannot be accom- 
plished. — R. 

Ver 1, " Alpha and Omega." " Concerning all that Jesus began both to do and to 

teach.* 'This opening sentence of the Acts, full of significance, as pointing at once 
to the past years of Christ's eaithly ministry and to the future work of his people, 
im Mi Name aid by his power, and connecting them together. He himself ss the 



1« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. 1. 1— 26. 

Alpha of the kingdom, and he is the Omega. His doing and his teaching really one ; 
iu matter and in manner. Divine ; the standard for apostles and all others ; the Acts 
of the Apostles a continuation of the acts of their Master. He only began to do and 
to teach in his ministry ; he went on to manifest himself by the Spirit, according 
to his promise, " He [the Father] shall give you another Comforter [Helper], that he 
nuy be with you for ever" (John xiv. 16). Consider, then — 

I. The pbe-eminbncb of Jesus. A spiritual pre-eminence. The short period of 
his life and ministry ; yet containing deeds and words which have created the world 
afresh. Not the bare history of miracles, or record of religious discourses, but the 
manifestation to the world of the Divine Spirit through a human history, character, 
and speech. 

II. A PBB-EMiNENCB ACKNOWLEDGED IN HEAVEN. " The day when he was received 
up " is distinctly declared to be the consummation of the gospel story ; thei " doing and 
teaching " were not only before men, but before God, on behalf of men. Hence the 
distinction between Christ's ministry and that of all merely human "doers and 
teachers." Gud accepts his pre-eminence, is well-pleased in his testimony — a testimony 
which was wrought out both in active efforts and patient suffering. His pre-eminence 
is prophetic, priestly, kingly. The necessity, especially in our times, of following Christ 
in thought to the right baud of God. He is not merely the highest of the philanthropists 
and the wisest of ihu sages. He is the Heir of all things, " received up" to heaven, 
that " in all things he might have the pre-eminence." 

III. The pre-eminence of Jbs0s is gbaoious. His own ministry is followed by 
the ministry of his apostles. The Acts only the first volume of an endless record 
of gracious ministration, of which Jesus is the Source and his people the instruments. 
Hence the value of the Acts. It helps us to see what a Christ-like ministry is ; how 
it overcomes the world, how it reveals the Spirit. Yet compare the Acts and the 
Gospels, and we are taught how much the servants fall below their Lord. Instances of 
infirmity and sin in apostles. Encouragement in the great lesson, our life linked on to 
Christ's. " Acts " a continuation. Keep close to the doing and teaching of Jesui, 
in its essential features and ruling spirit. — B. 

Ver. 3.— 2%e risen Jesus. " To whom he also showed himself alive after hil 
passion by many proofs, appearing unto them by the space of forty days, and speaking 
the things concerning the kingdom of God." 

L The witnesses. 1. Prepared and iromed for the work. Notshown toall, but to 
those who could look at the miracle in its spiritual aspect, who could see the fulfilment 
of God's Word. 2. The certain knowledge of Christ's resurrection a solemn responsi- 
bility which all were not able to bear. " Nothing secret but that it may come abroad." 
Not to the wise of this world, who know not how to use Divine secrets, but to the 
babes In disposition, simple, humble, self-forgetful, waiting on God. 3. The main 
work of Christ's servants is witnessing, not theorizing ; not building up ecclesiastical 
structures; not seeking dominion over the faith of others ; but "showing forth" the 
great facts. Our preaching should be of the nature of witnessing. " Add to our seal 
that God is true." Although apostles had distinct duties as leaders and founders of 
the visible Church, they share with all the Lord's people the office of witnesses. " Ye 
are my witnesses, saith the Lord." See to it that we speak as those who " know the 
oerfainty of the things." 

XL. The pboofb. The Resurrection must be proved infallibly (rfituriplois) ; that 
is, beyond all reasonable doubt. We must build on a foundation of fact and testimony. 
Our first teachers must be those who could say that they had tasted, handled, felt of 
the Word of Life (1 John i. 1 — 4). Now the proofs were : 1. Appearances of the risen 
Jesus, thirteen in number, in various circumstances, to different kinds of witnesses, 
and with amply sufficient tests of reality. 2. Coincidence of the facts with the words 
of our Lord himself and the promises of the Old Testament. 3. Distinction of the" 
signs and proofs of the Resurrection from any other facts; from the possible mis- 
apprehensions or illusions of disciples. It was unexpected; proved against unbelief; 
with growing assurance ; and with concurrence of many sincere and faithful men who 
knew their responsibility as witnesses. 4. Jesus showed himself alive after Aj§ 
resurrection. The fact to which apostles tesUflcd was not the mystery of the Resm ■ 



OH. I. 1_26.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTliES. Vi 



reotion itself, but the simple fact that Jesus was alive. No one saw him rise, but 
they saw him after he was risen. They might mistake what occurred at the 
sepulchre ; they could make no mistake in talking with a living man, handling him, 
eating with him, and that for forty days and on many occasions, in one another's 
presence. Necessity that we should set the proof of the Resurrection and risen life 
of Jesus first and foremost in our defence of Christianity. It is the key-stone of 
the arch. 

III. The glory oi' (Jod ih the face of Jeshs Chmst. The/orty Jays and their 
influence on the first disciples, and through them on all future ages. 1. The personal 
presence of Jesus lifted up into a more glorious fact. The infirmities gone. The fact uf 
his victory shining in his face. The influence of his condescension ; the risen Jesus 
still the Friend and Companion of his people. The expectation of his return to heaven : 
" I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and my God and your God " (John xx. 
17). The effect on Thomas : "My Lord and my. God! " The necessity that disciples 
should cease to "know Christ after the flesh." Henceforth they felt his presence 
spiritually. 2. Forty days of special instruction " concerning the kingdom of God." 
The history which follows corrects the view sometimes put forward tliat the risen 
Saviour imparted to his apostles any body of ecclesiastical laws. Had they received 
them they would certainly have referred to them. He spoke of the kingdom itself, 
which is not meat and drink, not external ordinances and regulations, not creeds and 
shibboleths ; but " righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost." He called to 
remembrance what he bad preached. He opened their understandings to the meaning 
of the Old Testament. He corrected their worldly views. He showed them the 
relation of the gospel facts to the kingdom : that is, that he could reign by the power 
of these facts. " The Messiah ought to suffer, and to enter info his glory." He led 
them back to Calvary with new faith before he took them, o Olivet. Jesus was 
a Teacher to the last. He is the Way, the Truth, the Life. — ^B. 

Ver. 4. — TOe Divine equipment. " Wait for the promise of ihe Father." The great 
Head of the Church addressing its leaders. The Son of Qc i speaking to those who 
themselves should receive power to become the sons of God, and to lift up the world 
into a Divine household. In the infancy of the Church all depended on simple 
obedience to orders. Immense evil from not waiting for God's time and preparation. 
Here are the two guiding lights — the promise unfolding the prospect, the commandment 
marking out the way. 

I. The UNFOLDED PBOSPEOT. 1. The extent of it. " T/ie Father'' s promise ;" in&nite 
as his love. Though faith was demanded, because sight of the future withheld, still 
the voice was the voice of infinite assurance. 2. The nature of the expectation. 
" Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost." The gift nlready tasted, known by 
experience. We cannot be without " the earnest of the Spirit " if Christ's. We yet 
must look for a fuller baptism, especially as meeting responsibilities and trials, antici- 
pating work and fruits. 

U. 'I'liB WORD OP COMMAND. " Wait." 1. With the word of promise in mind, 
expecting the fulfilment, " not many days hence." 2. In fellowship with one another 
and in prayer, that the heart may be open to the gifts, that they may be poured out 
upon all. 3. At Jerusalem, where the two dispensations meet, where the main action 
auainst the kingdom of darkness can best commence, where the facts of the gospel 
have already preceded you, and you can build on the foundation laid in Zion. 4. In 
self-renunciatiun and faithfulness, not in slothful indifference or depression. While we 
make the best of present opportunities, the larger open to us. Do the work of the 
day in the day, and so wait for the promise of the Father. Individually, here is 
encouragements-grain of mustard seed will grow. Our Father must desire growth in 
us. Collectively, many applications — prospects of the Church and of the world. The 
true method of gathering in the masses, not by departing for Jerusalem before the time, 
but waiting till we are able to send out into the unconverted world the energy bestowed 
upon us. — B. 

Vers. 6—11. The Ascension. Heaven and earth visibly united. Chief points — 

I. The contrast between the earthly, us represented in -the discipfes, with their 

4cn *' 



18 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. l 1— 2& 

Jewish prejudice and thought of " times and seasons/' and the heavenly, in the Lord 
Jesus himself. 

II. The peospbot. Separation for a season. Cloud concealing the glory. Promise 
of return. 

III. Tub fellowship of the disciples with the Master. The mingling together of 
heaven and earth. The witnesses appointed, that to the uttermost part of the earth 
the glory of the risen dawn might be seen, and so a new heaven be revealed over a 
new earth. (Of. the promise made to Nathanael (John i. 51) and Jacob's dream.) — l;. 

Vor. 8. — Witnessing for Ghriit. " Ye shall be my witnesses." 

I. The world through its whole extent needs such a testimony. The facts which 
can be testified without the power of God's Spirit cannot speak the whole of tlie 
Father's mind concerning man. 

II. WlTNBSSIKO FOR ChRIST THE MISSION OF ALL ChBISTIANS. ApOStlcs Only first 

because nearest to Jesus himself; chosen by him, not because above others in merits. 
Witnessing must be as universal in the character and life as the work of the Spirit. 
All speaks of the same Divine fountain from which all flows. The hope of the Church 
and of the world is in the waking up of the witnessing spirit. " Martyrs " we should 
all be in heart, if not in suffering. " Apostolic " in the best sense — " sent out." 

III. 0(JB LIFE-WORK BHOTILD BE THB O0TCOMB OF DiVINB GRACE. " Ye sliall rCCeive 

power." " The Holy Ghost shall come upon you ; " then, being so endued from on high, 
" ye shall be my witnesses." Spiritual life the foundation of all other life. We should 
bo able to know that the time is come for great work, for we should be conscious of 
tlie gifts of God. By no mere conventional forms let us be led away. " fuwcr" the 
great want of J,he Church — spiritual power; not wealth, or organization, or external 
attractions, but that which "comes upon us" from above. Are we working without 
it ? Is our witnessing unto condemnation ? — B. 

Vcr. 9. — 2%e Ascension. Probably the only direct statement of the fact of the 
Ascension is by St. Luke. Other evangelists point to the same consummation, but do 
. nut describe it, for Mark (xvi. 19, 'AO) probably a later addition. As an event, 
corresponds with the miraculous commencement of the Saviour's life, and his many 
tiunouncenients of return to heaven, especially as recorded by St. John. The important 
place of the fact in the Acts, and its manner of relation, show that it is not a mere 
lialo of disci] lie- worship round the head of the Master, but the true beginning of the 
Church's history. Yet, like many other essential facts, only partly presented to the 
cjes of men. There is a doud of mystery, a veil over the secret depths of glory. 
Itegard the Ascension — 

I. In its relation to the Saviour himself. 1. As glorification, and so lifting up 
(J the earthly facts into the higher sphere ; scaling of authority ; hiding of infirmity ; 
manifestation of kingly power; connecting of the three offices of Christ, as Prophet, 
I'riest, and King, with the one centre of his personal existence, his heavenly throne. 

2. As the commencement of the wider ministry of the Spirit. Before his ascension 
Jesus was almost entirely a minister to the Jews ; from henceforth he was, through his 
messengers by the Holy Ghost, the Saviour of the world. 

II. In relation to disoipleb. 1. As the completion of their faith. 2. As the 
correction of their errors, and the help to a more spiritual apprehension of Jesut 

3. As the embodiment of the promise of the Spirit, for the High I'riest had thus visibly 
t^one into the holiest place, and would return with the blessing. 4, As the discipline 
which would draw them together, and help them to realize the fact of their Church life 
as the life of the world. 

III. In relation to the world at la bob. 1. Proclamation of the kingdom ol 
heaven. 2. The setting on high of the gospel facts as a sun in the sky from which 
the light should pour down over all the earth. The Nazarene speaks from heaven. 
'I'ho Crucified is the Glorified. 3. The help of m'en's faith to lay hold of the invisible 
and eternal. He who has so gone, shall so return. "I go to prepare a place for you." 
The end of the world is in that ascension of the world's highest to heaven. — B. 

Yew. JO, 11,-^P# an^eh' mmgt, I. A rei^onstbanob, « Wh^ stand ye loolwog 



OH. L 1—26.] THE AUT8 OF THE APOSTLES. 19 

into heaven?" 1. Against the misuse of signs and appearances. Get at the substanc* 
of tlie fact, and wiste no time and strength on the mere form. 2. Against prying into 
forbidden secrets. Indulgence of fancy in religion. Following the track of sense 
beyond its reach. 3. Spiritual depression and reaction. Christ is still the same. Be 
not afraid or perplexed, but set to work and prepare for his return. 

II. An aknouncbment, " This Jesus shall so come." 1. A personal advent, but not 
necessarily pre-millennial. The cliief meaning of the promise is that this world is to 
be prepared for the return of Christ, therefore is to be made Ids kingdom, so the 
expectation is practical. 2. The similaiity of circumstances is helpful to faith. " Out 
of sight" " a cloud" " taken up" — such terms remind us that we must not look for 
mere sensible indications of the Saviour's descent from heaven ; but in like manner as 
he wont away, so mysteriously that his disciples scarcely knew whether he was gone 
and still gazed after him, so he will appear again " with clouds" and only imperfectly 
seen, until his presence shall be hailed with the shout of the archangel and the trump 
of God. 3. The assurance of the second advent of the Lord should be the summons 
to work, and the comfort of all that feel their loneliness and want in this scene of 
separation from their Saviour's visible presence. *' Till' Jesus comes." The promise 
speaks peace to us. — R. 

Vers. 12 — 14. — The first roll-call of the Church. Notice — 

The GATiiBRiNo-PLACK. 1. Jcrusoltm, with Olivet in the background. Hence- 
forth a new Jerusalem. The descent from the Mount of the Saviour's glory, a sabbath 
day's journey off; return to the duties of life, to new responsibilities, but with a vivid 
remembrance of the parting interview with Jesus. 2. Upper chamber. The grain of 
mustard seed must be sown in the common ground of humanity. Yet the commence- 
ment of Church life must recognize separation from the world as the law of the new- 
kingdom, /e^Zows A (p as the condition of union, subordination and order as helpful to 
activity. 3. The society composed of mingled elements — men and women, apostles and 
disciples, old and young, those attached to Jesus by spiritual bonds alone ; and those 
who were his fleshly kindred, able to minister with .special familiarity of personal 
knowledge. " Mary " and " his brethren." i. Thoii first mutual occupation. "With 
one accord they continued steadfastly in prayer." Not as excluding exhortation and 
other forms of fellowship, but as indicating the pre-eminently devout and b'ilieving 
attitude of their minds. — E. 

Ver. 14. — The Church's first prayer-meeting. I. Thb place it occupies. 1. Under 
the doud of a great trial. The separation from Jesus; the attitude of the Jews of the 
metropolis ; the dependence of a company of poor and persecuted people ; the sense of 
ignorance and feebleness. What could they do but pray, especially as they felt that 
the power had not as yet come?' 2. At the threshold of the Church's history. We 
know what grew out of that first meeting. All great religious movements have 
commenced in prayer. Little the actors have foreseen of the future. Luther nailing 
up his theses. Early meetings of the Wesleys. Modern revivals. The "Acts" a 
commentary upon that spiritual germination of a new life at Jerusalem. Dovelopmenta 
of the individual characters represented by the names. Providence works with grace. 
They that put themselves by prayer into the hands of God are led on by his hand. 

3. In the history of the world, a new social fact which is destined to enlarge until it 
embraces all human interests and associations within itself. A missionary prayer- 
meeting it was, though as yet the herald-spirit had not taken full possession of the 
brethren. They knew that they were sent by Jesus to the uttermost parts of the 
earth. It was a prayer for the baptism which should make all alike messengers of 
the new life. The success of all evangelistic efforts depends on their following this 
example of prayerfulness. ^ 

II. The lessons it teaches. 1. The spirituality of the kingdom of Christ. 2. The 
equality of Christians in the Church. 3. The dependence of Divine gifts on our 
preparation for them, in heart and life. An outpouring of the Spirit in answer to 
prayer is » bestowment of grace, on those who are ready to employ it when it comes. 

4. Mutual recognition in the Divine prosenca the prerequisite to individual callings wd 
■eparftto work. The spi.it of pr»;ei: tbe preserTivUre agaiast divUioo.— B, 



20 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, [ch. 1. 1— 26. 

Vers. 15 — 26. — The ChurcVt fir»t corporate action. I. A glimpse into pmmitivk 
Chubck life, showing : 1. Its purity and simplicity. No pomp, no complicated organi- 
zation, appeal to the body of the Church. 2. Its separation from the world. " The 
names " were recorded in some way, and numbered ; probably a written record kept 
from this time in the upper room. They were all regarded as " brethren." 3. Its 
reverence for Scripture. The quotation of the Apostle Peter is not either exactly from 
the Hebrew nor from the Septuagint, but the manner of it denotes entire subjection to 
scriptural guidance and study of the Messianic prophecies. 4. Obedience to the law 
of Christ. ' In the acknowledged leadership of Peter. In the desire to complete and 
maintain the apostleship. In the strict condition of apostolic testimony recognized, 
the knowledge of the facts from the baptism of John to the Ascension. 5. Realization 
of the presence and guidance of the Divine Spirit. In the appeal by lot ; preceded by 
prayer and thoughtful action in selection of two, and acquiesced in without a difference. 

II. The solid foundations on which Christianity bests. Care taken that the 
witnesses be divinely appointed. The treachery and punishment of Judas thus 
conspicuously mentioned, that the solemnity of the apostolic office may be there 
impressively seen. The whole tone of the transaction is that of men feeling their 
responsibility, not of fanatics carried away with the dream of power, certainly not of 
impostors " cunningly devising " a statement to take the world captive. The reference 
to Scripture shows that the apostles and their brethren would follow the track of the 
Old Testament in their testimony. The publicity of the gospel facts is proclaimed and 
appealed to. " Known to all the dwellers at Jerusalem." 

in. Judgment beginnino at the house of God. (Ver. 16 or 25.) — B. 

Vers. 17 — 19. — The history, character, and end of Judas Itcariot. L An instance of 
SELF-DECEPTION, Its power and fruits. 1. The possibility that only gradually. Judas fell 
away — original basis of narrow-mindedness and self-indulgence leading to love of monej' 
and dishonesty. 2. The light turned into darkness. Near to Jesus, but the conscience, 
oQce perverted, becoming rapidly its own tempter, kicking against convictions, till con- 
victions themselves become impossible, and the Ma.ster, once revered, is hated. 3. The 
higher the elevation of privilege, the deeper the fall. When remorse lays hold of such 
a mind it devours all hope, and casts down headlong. Warning against the beginniDg 
of evil. Appeal to those who have still opportunity of repentance to listen to the voice 
of remonstrance. Jesus gave Jud;is many times the clear note of pitiful admonition, 
which was rejected. 

II. A QBEAT LESSON ON THE DUTY OF God'S PEOPLE IN THEIB RELATION TO CHCBCU 

BisoiPLiNB. The supreme principle must be, not that the Church punishes, but that it 
Bulemnly recognizes the Divine jurisdiction. Judas was in God's hands, and God dealt 
with him. The place was left vacant, to be filled up in dependence on Divine guidance. 
AVe can cut off a name and fill up an office, but we must not lay our hand on persons. 
1'he great error which has worked so fatally in Christendom has been the Church's 
usurping the Divine office of punishment, and calling in the secular arm to do its evil 
will. We should deal with backsliders in the tenderest spirit. At the same time, this 
conspicuous instance serves to keep us in mind that the kingdom of Christ is a real 
reign of sovereign power, and that the events of men's lives, their happiness or misery, 
and what the world calls their fate, all are appointed in harmony with the Divine 
purpose which is being fulfilled in the Church. The appeal to God by lot was a 
recognition of -the same truth. Though an old Jewish custom, it was sanctioned by 
God as helping his people to remember the universality of his rule. It was not a 
blind appeal to chance, but was accompanied with believing prayer and an exercise of 
human wisdom so far as it wont. As at the beginning, so still and always, the Church 
can be purged of its evil only by God, not by man. We must expect a mingled state, 
while we aim at purity and maintain a spiritual oversight and watchful discipline in the 
Church itself. There are two extremes to be avoided : (1) the latitudinarian indifference 
which says,' "Let the world and the Church intermingle without attempt at distinc- 
tion ; " (2) the Pharisaical censoriousness w hich would be constantly pulling up tares, 
and wheat with them, and so tends to disiuiegrate the Church by endless divisions «nd 
separations. Let God be the Judge ; for he has said, " Vengeance is mine." Let the 
prevailing spirit be the charity which " hupeth all things." — R, 



OH. 1. 1—26 ] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLfib. 21 

Ver. 3. — Tlie world's supreme question to the front. "Speaking of the things per- 
taining to the kingdom of God." We hold in our hands, in these words, tlie key, not of 

a brief section of tliis chapter and this book alone, but ratlier of a very long stretch of 
time, and an immensely important and absorbingly interesting stretch of the world's 
history. Matters of the deepest and most touching individual interest, like all the 
charming incident of the four jGrospels, must yield, wc are here tacitly reminded — 
yield both in time and in high equity also— to those of collective, of national, of 
universal interest. All the capacity of Old Testament history, abounding in mono- 
graphs of thrilling human import, long led the way onward to this development. And 
now it might be said the crisis had arrived. All that oven Jesus himself had done 
,ind taught before "his passion" is to be called only a beginning. He had done, indeed, 
unnumbered benefits to unnumbered persons. He bad taufjht unnumbered lessons of 
wisdom and goodness to unnumbered persons. And he had been a light, a wonder, a 
glory, to a nation. But now, after his passion and resurrection, on to his ascension, his 
work shows as though cast in larger mould. Its character s| eaks comprehension 
beyond what it formerly did. And tliis is its simple, grand motto — "the things per- 
taining to the kingdom of God." We have here — 

I. The manifest installation, long awaited, of the one eotal institution of 
THE world. Henceforth the question that shall be to the front for the whole world is 
" the kingdom of God." The kingdom of God and the Church of Christ are not, indeed, 
identities. But they stand in most real correlation. The just analogy of the relation 

, that holds between them is that of the perfect type, the original model to the faithful 
copy — a copy ever realizing greater faithfulness of resemblance. For this supreme 
installation, now come with so little of ceremony, at so unexpected a time, in so 
unexpected and modest a way, the world had waited thousands of years, while " kings 
and prophets" had been on the watch-tower. These had died with "hope deferred," 
but in many cases with faith never stronger than in that dying hour. But further, 
during the last thirty-three years, since in strangest consent a heavenly band of 
angels, and certain shepherds, and certain " wise men of the East," and a certain very 
unwise king, Herod, struck to the heart cowardly, had seemed to set them guing, wave 
after wave of excited expectation and of suspense had swayed to and fro the hearts of 
multitudes. The expectation and the suspense were just now put to rest, and it should 
be a satisfied rest, for " this time," to be soon superseded by an untold period of hard 
work and severe conflict. During the past thirty-three years, this kingdom had been 
foreshadowed, among a thousand things " done " and " taught " that seemed of nearer 
import, by: 1. The distinct preaching of John the Baptist (Matt. iii. 1) and of Jesus 
Christ liimself (Matt. iv. 17). 2. The introduction of it into the model prayer taught 
by Jesus to his disciples, "Thy kingdom come. . . . Thine is the kingdom." 3. The 
many parables of Jesus, of which "the kingdom of God " or " the kingdom of heaven " 
was the subject. 4. The missionary tours of the twelve disciples (Matt. x. 7, 8) and 
of the seventy (Lufie x. 9). 5. The detached observations made by Jesus, having 
" the kingdom " as their subject (Luke ivii. 20 ; John xviii. 33 — 37). But noin, during 
so special a period as the forty days, this subject — " the things pertaining to the 
kingdom of God" — is spoken of as the characteristic and discriminating theme of 
Christ's discourse and instruction to the apostles. The inference is plain. 
n. The indications op the august crisis, when the most akduous wobk, most 

ENNOBLING PRIVILEGE, MOST TREMENDOUS RESPONSIBILITY, WERE DEVOLVED ON HUMAN 

AGENTS. And two things are specially to be noted at this amazing juncture. 1. The 
carrying on of the work of Christ on earth, in the establishing and propagating of the 
kingdom of God, is given into the hands of men. We know nothing like all which 
Jesus said to his apostles during these " forty days." Probably we do not know even 
all the occasions on which he appeared to them and instructed them. But there can 
be no doubt that there was one reason, and only one chief reason, why the theme of 
Christ's conversation or discourse was what we are here told it was. The reason tti.i, 
that the apostles should now be prepared, both in heart and hand, to undertake the 
lead of the great work, as they had never before been prepared, probably not even to 
the conceiving of such a thing. 2. The carrying on of that work, now devolved or 
about immediately to be devolved on the servants by the Master, is— for bo we are 
irresistibly led to conclude— »o< prescribed too closely, is not provided for in anything 



22 THte AC*8 0* TflE AtOSTLfiS. {jlO. l 1- -ZG. 

approaching literal detail. Christ spoke of " the thingt pertaining to " the kingdom oi 
God. One inevitably imagines that under this description principles were imparted— 
possibly enough information savouring of the character of revelation. These would be 
lighted up and warmed by the presence of gracious promise and stirring glimpses of 
the above and of the future. Yet, all as inevitably, one is impressed with the con; 
viction that even that poor earthly judgment of those poor earthly men, who had so 
often slipped and failed even under the eye of the Master, was not fettered, hampered, 
overpowered by the severity of binding detail. We seem to see Jesus doing at that 
germinal time what the history of the Cliurch clearly enough shows he ever has done 
since, throwing himself and his own expensive work and grand sacrifice alike on the 
love and the Judgment of his servantsi It is a marvellous thought of work and honour 
devolved on men I Nor could it be easy to find either a more stirring or inspiring 
stimulus both of love and of wisdom's best efforts. The conjunction of the trust 
Christ offers to repose practically, not on our hearts' love alone, but even on our fallible 
discretion, illustrates the height of his surpassing grace to us, in the very gracefulness 
of the grace. 
III. Tee suggestions of thb bouecb of the knowledob and wisdom that 

UNDER ALL OIRCUMSTANOES WOULD BE REQUIRED. He who " Spake " tO loviug 

disciples, friends, servants, and who instructed them now, would by the very act, 
often repeated before " his passion," but now (it is impossible to refrain from the word) 
with increased sanciiiy after his resurrection, ensure their memory, and their grateful 
memory, of himself. These he would make his own — more surely than the child 
hallows more and more the memory of the father ; more surely than the pupil never 
conquers, nor wishes nor tries to conquer, the reverence he used to feel to a teacher, 
whom he once pictured as possessed of all knowledf^e. To him who gives the grace 
of conversion, we look instinctively for that of sanctifioation ; as to those who give us 
life, we instinctively, unconsciously look for the supi)ort and rearing of that life. " Lo, 
I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world," were words, we may rest 
assured, not heard exactly for the first time in the rapt moments of the literal 
Ascension 1 We are also immediately informed that Christ emphatically directed his 
disciples, now hanging on his lips, to look for and wait for the Holy Spirit, one of 
whose main offices was and ever is to bring to remembrance the things already spoken hy 
Christ. Until, then, " God is all in all," and the mediatorial reign of Christ is resigned, 
he is our one Hope and Trust. He is the Giver of light, knowledge, love. He is the 
one only Head of his Church. He the Saviour aiid the King of men, who now so 
condescendingly " showed himself alive " to the apostles, " after bis passion, being 
seen of them forty days, and speaking of ih« thing* pertaining to (he kingdom of 
aod."—B. 

Ver. 4. — The supreme promise to the Church. "Commanded them that they should 
. . . wait for the promise of the Father." The exact designation here employed to 
describe the gift, and the special gift, of the Holy Ghost — namely, " the promise of the 
Father " — is confined to the wiiting of St. Luke ; as it were, the outcome of his 
assiduous memory. In the Gospel (xxiv. 49) he remembers it to quote it, in its 
completest precision : " Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you." These are 
the two occasions of the occurrence of this expression in Scripture. Other portions of 
Scripture, however, concerned with the same grand SJibject, are quite in harmony willi 
these two picked expressions. They may possibly all date in the first instance from 
the words of the Prophet Joel (ii. 28, 29). But we most thankfully accept the 
reminding words of Jesus, as here distinctly quoted, " which ye have heard of me," as 
good for asserting the independent choice of the designation by an original authority. 
When thus viewed, it will exceed in value the words of the prophet, though treasured 
long, if not in grateful, yet in hopeful memory. We have here — 

I. The mention of the descent, the special descent, of the Holy Spirit, under 
THE title of "the promise of the Father." 1. This title maintains consistently the 
strict fidelity of revelation. The uniform representation of Scripture sets forth everything 
good as originating with the Father. He is the Source. He is the Beginning. What- 
soever conies even nearest of all to him, is still but " in the beginning with him." He 
is the " Giver of every good »nd perfect gift " — of the glorious array of gift that rankg 



Oil, 1—26.] THE ACTS Ol* TilE APUSTLES. 28 

the lirij;l)tcst among its treasures, beyond comparison the brightest, Jesus Christ, "thb 
S.ni ul ihu Father " and the Saviour of the world, and the Holy Spirit, " the promise 
of the Father," and the Eegeoerator and Sanctifier of human hearts. " Thanks be 
unto God for his unspeakable gift," the fit refrain of ten thousand songs — songs of life, 
of light, of warmth, of love, of reason, of memory, of imagination, of hope, of beauty, 
of joy — is nevertheless heard, first of all, in its fullest ton3s, in its richest strains, as the 
refrain of those songs, that celebrate the gift of Jesus to a once prostrate world, and the 
" promise of tlia Father " to that same world just begun to lift its head, and gasp for 
pure air, and to beg for a little light, and a little love and hope. To that doubting 
prayer Of a world crushed under sin and darkness so long, and wrung from it by the 
bitterness of its effectual woe, how large the answer that came down wrapt in the 
"promise of the Father"! And within the narrower limits of Christ's own testimony 
respecting the Holy Spirit, this title preserves the harmony of Scripture. "The 
Father . . . shall give you another Comforter " (John xiv. 16) ; " The Father will 
send . . . the Comforter, the Holy Ghost" (John xiv. 26); "The Spirit of truth, 
which proceedeth from the Father" (John xv. 26). We nfay notice these testimonies 
of (;inist the more observantly, because they grow up lovingly tangled among allusions 
to his own relations to the Spirit, and to the "sending" of him. Of which more 
follows immediately. 2. The title is one that specially honours the Father. Taking 
into account the exact juncture, it may perhaps be viewed as intentionally an almost 
final act for the days of Christ's tarrying on earth, of honour, of obedience, of the 
reverent love of a true, sublime Sonship on the part of Christ toward God the Father. 
Only the day before his crucifixion had Christ spoken with some fulness and in some 
detail of his own relation to the Spirit. That relation must be a very close one, to 
ariswer coriectly to the things which - Jesus then said and implied at well. For 
instance: " I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comfcrter " (John xiv. 
16) ; " The Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name * (John xv. 26) ; 
" The Comforter . . . whom / will send unto you from the Father " (John xv. 26) ; 
" If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you. But if I depart, I will send 
him unto you " (John xvi. 7) ; " The Spirit of truth . . . shall glorify me ; for he 
shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you " (John xvi. 13, 14). Not in the 
whole body of these sayings of Christ is there, indeed, anything that trenches upon tha 
rights of the Father ; yet now the great original Proraiser is justly brought, and is aa it 
were finally left by Christ in the place of first majesty and prominence. 3. The title 
offers, for all devout and reverent thought, to link together that present, which ever 
Kcems so prosaic, so unmemorable with hallowed antiquity, with the saorednesa of the 
|i;ist, with the legitimate enchantment of distance. The promise reminds (and in this 
case most plainly) of the Promiser. And this Promiser of ages past, long waited for, 
not seldom distrusted, sometimes despaired of, is now in a moment or two going to be 
manifested — the faithful Promiser. He is none otlier than the Father everlasting! 
I'lomise adds preciousness to bestowment In several ways — in the very tension of the 
mural nature which it challenges, in the mutual keeping hold of hands (all the while 
liiat the promise subsists), of promiser and promise/', in the educatory processes of varied 
sort that are sure to be transpiring during all the same interval, and, in a word, in the 
preparation of the receiver for the thing prepared for him, as well as in his final supreme 
irratification on receiving it. But come this time, tlie "forecasting of the years" 
past, " the reaching of the hand through time to catch the far-off interest of tears " 
over, and the blank days that have been yield to the dawn of radiance itself. So lang 
Mnses, when now at last he saw the land, " the promise of the Father "— 

"My Father's hope! my childhood's dream I 
The promise from on high I 
Long waited for I its glories beam 
Now wlieu my death is nigh. 



" My death is come, but not decay ; 
Nor eye nor mind is dim ; 
The keenness of youth's vigorous day 
TiurUls in each nerve and limb. 



U THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. i. 1—26. 

" Blest Bcene I thrice welcome after toU — 
If no deceit I view ; 
Oh, might my lips bnt press the Boll, 
And prove the vision true I " (3. H. Newman.) 

And K), in higher stiiiin, chants the apostle : " Faithful is he who hath promised, iu!io 
also will do it." 4. 'i'he title offers in a fresh form, to the sensitive, impressible 
disposition of true disciplcsliip, a pathetic suggestion of the nearness and the continuing 
purpose and the walchiny grace of the Father. Tis all covered by the word promise. 
For a promise must be of something welcome and wished for. A promise has no part 
nor lot with a threat. The only question that lies at the door of promise is the anxious 
one, M to faithfulness ; that assured, the prospect must be a grateful one. So one 
chosen word, an opportune name, a kindly expre^^sion, becomes a suggestion, fruitful and 
fvM of fruitfulness. " The promise of the Father " must ever be the " Comforter " ol 
the Church. 

II. The command to await toobtheb at Jerusalem that descent, oe" baptism," 
OF the Holt Ghost which would constitute the fulfilment of promise. It is 
not necessary to linger over the fact that Jerusalem was to be the scene of the 
" baptism with the Holy Ghost," and the geographical point of departure for the new 
heralds of " the kingdom of God." It was the metropolis of the land ; it was the shrina 
in a shrine. It had been the ecclesiastical gathering-place of the elect people for 
centuries upon centuries, and divinely appointed such. But now, if ever work was to ' 
date from place, the work of Christ might well begin from the place where he suffered, 
and the glory of the dispensation of his Spirit be manifested .where had been first the 
manifestation of his soul's sore " trouble," and his humiliation unto death ! This, the 
first crown after the cross 1 But other suggestions, of more intrinsic importance, arise 
out of this command. 1. The command, by preventing the separation and dispersion 
of the apostles, prepared the way for a manifestation which, if viewed merely as a 
phenomenon, must have been unsurpassed in the experience of the people, whether 
those who saw it or those who felt it as well. No amount of depth of conviction, no 
amount of consequent real stir, could be wondered at after such a scene, or the credible 
report of it only. The impression and the efl'ect must have been justly tremendous 
then aad there. Could we give ourselves leave to imagine for one moment a reproduction 
of that scene in the modern world's metropolis, we know that, taking into consideration 
the scale of modern thought, the character and variety and tenacity of modern scepticism, 
and the wonderfully advanced means of modern communication, nothing short of the 
genuine turning upside down of " the world " might be expected to be the result. The 
atheist, the rationalist, the materialist, the mere scientist, would have a hard task before 
them, and would have hard work to escape the administration prompt of lynch law, as 
it were ! There were, of course, the greatest ends to be secured by that extraordinary 
demonstration proportionate to the time of day, and guarded from effects that would be 
absolutely apiialling through their forcibleness. (1) That demonstration of the Spirit 
would be for ever memorable in the thought and religious life of each individual who 
experienced it. (2) Also its value would be gr<atly enhanced In the mutual witness, 
which was so striking a feature of it. No hour, no moment, was wasted (as after the 
Resurrection) by any attempt called for on the part of one disciple to persuade or to 
inform another. All saw, felt, believed, ^d were divinely elated. (3) It irresistibly 
secured a wide, varied, distant circulation, at a time when this was a thing difficult to 
attain. 2. The command prevented apostles and disciples separating and dispersing to 
attempt in an individual, fitful manner their great Master's work. They are to await 
one united baptism — to have one distinct, in^partial impression made upon them and 
commission entrusted to them. From the first a very needed idea was offered to them, 
that they were not to air their individualities, but to lose self in one glorious congrega- 
tion. 3. The command secured, on the very merits of the case, iheproper preparation of 
the apostles for their work. Not only will they now not go forth in their own individual 
strength and pride, but not in human strength and pride at all. They are allto be 
baptized, and with such a force as the Holy Spirit 1 His life, his light, his love, his 
tongue, are to be theirs. As with Jesus' spoken charge to " the twelve," and again 
to " the seventy," under each permanent or temporary item of direction lay this ona 



ctt.Ll— 26J ME ACTS 0^ THE APOSTLES. 26 

lirinciple, that they were to go forth in the strength of a Stronger than man, so in this 
acted charge, thia marvel of a demonstration of the Spirit, the satoe root-principle i's 
conveyed, be it said, with a thousandfold impressiveoesa. Not one atom of Christ's 
work must they touch in their own strength, nor begin it presumptuously before they are 
sufficiently equipped— ^lareop^t'ed by the Word and the Spirit. That lesson has gone, 
is going, must go down through all time, and all succeeding generationa and portions of 
the Church. Nor is it the least of important lessons buing at this very time taught us, 
by methods often most painful, most humiliating but most healthful, that the work of 
Christ prospers with the man, with the Church, with the age, which is most thoroughly 
characterized by a profoand trust, and effectual, fervent invocation of the Holy 
Spirit— B. 

Vers. 6 — 8. — Graving for forbidden knowledge — its alterative, enlarged, practical 
trust, "They asked of him saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time . . . the earth?" 
The question of the apostles of which St. Luke here tells us we do not find either in 
his Gospel or in that of any of the other evangelists, one among many indications of 
the probability that during " the forty days " much may have transpired between Christ 
and his apostles not left on record. It may nevertheless be noted, in jiassing, that the 
incident happens to be in interesting analogy with such another as that of which we 
read in John xxi. 20 — 23. And except for the fact that it is not put down to the 
account of Peter, we toight probably be pardoned for surmising that it was he again 
who was the prime mover in it. We have here — 

L The SIONB OF EVEN APOSTOLIOCBA VINO AFTER FORBIDDEN KNOWLEDaB. 1. WhoeVCI 

may have promoted the question, " Lord, wilt thou at this time restore the kingdom to 
Israel?" most eagerly, we can feel no difficulty in admitting its very natural character. 
Nor is it at all necessary to affix too mean a construction to the moti\e of the apostles. 
Let it be granted only that their mind was not thoroughly delivered from the idea of a 
"kingdom of Israel" on earth, and we need not straightway therefore conclude that 
their chief thought or wisli was to a " kingdora of Israel " of earth, rather than " of 
heaven " or " of God." 2. And as the quest.oii was not an unnatural one in itself, so 
also it was one that bears the traces of that deeper impression which had been most 
legitimately made on the apostles by the marvels of the death and resurrection of 
Jesus. Whatever might be in store or might not be in store for them in this matter 
of the long-cherished hope of » kingdom, their conviction was stronger and stronger 
grown that Jesus was One who could do this thing, who could be the Founder of such 
a kingdom, and establish it on no doubtful, hazardous, merely adventurous sort of 
footing, but worthily, strongly, and for ever. If other miracles were for a sign of bii 
authority ,and for a grand moral witness of him, this yet more than all else whatsoever : 
his own death issuing in resurrection 1 The space of one moment may have awakened 
again and ripened the impulse to dwell with a fascinated interest on this subject — the 
moment that in which "these sayings sank down into their ears," namely, that " they 
should not depart from Jerusalem/' that they "should wait fnr the promise of the 
Father," and that they should " be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days 
hence." (1) Nevertheless the issue, if nothing else, convicts the question of being 
the wrong one. How often the things that are abuiidantly natural, and to which 
the warmest impulses seem made to lead us on, are for all that thi forbidden — foi- 
bidden, perhaps, by Divine word of mouth even, otherwise by deeper sense in our own 
self and life ! Christ apprizes his interrogators that on the merits of the case, not on 
any mere ceremony, the subject was one "too high " for them—" they cannot attain 
to it." It is for us to remember at the present time that nothing that we knew is 
plainer than the some things we do not know, in matters of religious thought and specu- 
lation, that these "some" things which we do not know are often of the intensest 
speculative interest, are at the same time things not in the position of ihe not clearly 
" revealed," but of the clearly not " revealed," and that the more than likely reason for 
this is, that they are too high for human reason at present, and are kept for " yet the 
little while " of earth, " in the Father's power." Let it, however, be granted that there 
may be other things left unrovealed, which rightly and dcsigmdly keep awake the 
intense speculative thought of the whole Church. They challenge not the presumptuous- 
ness, but the reTe^-ent diligence, of the Church's intellectual life. (2) At a moment a' 



24 THE ACTS OF TflE aPOSTLES. to^i. 1— 86, 

confessed intense practical significance, the question of the disciples was the suggestion 
of a departure to an inopportune subject. Id instances of far inferior magnitude how 
certain it is that we should remarlc upon the untimeliness of the interruption that 
broke in upon some supreme crisis of one liind with matter possibly quite foreign to it I 
(3) Any way, tlie question looked too much in the direction of the old oft-reproved 
thing — of hankering for the form, the show, the handling of dignity and superiority 
and authority, not of the intrinsic but of the wireal kind. (4) Tlie condescending 
familiarity of the Saviour should not have hidden for so much as a moment from the 
apostles' reverence, or from their quickened apprehensions as to the nature of their 
Master, the interval that was between him ami themselves. There can be no doubt 
that they had learned this, that the seed of conviction and godly impression had not 
fallen on trodden, im|iractic;ible soil, and that their opportunity of intilligont apprecia- 
tion of Christ had been increased a thousandfold. Therefore the time — all the time — ■ 
was what courted the attitude of adoring waiting and most heedful listening, rather 
than of sugi^esting the course in which such a Master's instructions, such a Lord's 
vouchsafings, should go. The language of a prophet better suited it: "The Lord is 
in his holy temple : let all . . . keep silence before him 1 " 

II. The distinct denial on the pakt of Christ op the knowledgk craved. Christ 
at once replies in language that we in modern times, at all events, would feci to be very 
emphatic : " It is not lor you to know times and seasons, which the Father hath 
placed in his own power." Notice: 1. The freedom of this direct denial from asperity. 
If positive, it is not arbitrary; if severe in its strictness, it is not harsh ; if decisive, it 
is not unconrteous or ungracious. 2. The loftiness, on the contrary, of ihe reason 
implicitly contained in the denial. The knowledge begged is not withheld as so much 
punishment or rebuke. It is withheld in this light, that it is not a thin.' of man, but 
of the Father — possibly Christ might still mean of the Father alone (Mark xiii. 32). 
But we cannot affiim this with an}' strong conviction, as he now speaks subsequently 
to his resurrection. Now, not the most sensitive disciple-temperament could have need 
to feel wounded at not sharing knowledge afiirmed to belong either exclusively or all 
but exclusively to the supreme Father. 

III. The substitute immediately promised. How often this is the method of Divine 
wisdom and kindness ! How often the analoiiy of providence illustrates it, in the indi- 
vidual life I So rooted 4s it in the spirit of Christ's encouraging and bracing doctrine, 
" Ask, and ye shall have," that even when we ask amiss we very often do have some- 
thing, and have something that we might have missed of had we not asked at all. So 
much does heavenly cave apiiraise a hungering nature, an open mind, a craving heart, if 
it be anything at all within the compass of a right outlook that our desires go forth. 
And while the new gift is not what we asked, how sure it is to prove itself very superior 
in kind, and in its being the corree% adapted gift! 1. The substitute now proffered to 
the anticipation of the interrogators consists in an early and im mense accession of power. 
(1) It is real power. (2) It is power guaranteeing at one and the same time holiness 
to self and usefulness toothers. 2. The substitute both illustrated and was the out- 
come of very noteworthy principles. (1) The principle of diverting mere speculative 
thought, or sentimental thought, or brooding, disheartened thought, by the bracing 
activity of work— work arduous and beneficent. Wonderful is the effectiveness of this 
corrective. It is an alterative safe, healthful, sure of compassing the desired end. 
Nor a whit less so in the light of one of the axioms of Jesns, " He that doeth, . . . shall 
know." (2) The principle that the servants of Christ are witnesses, not prophets. 
They are " hereunto called," to witness to the world's ends, and world without end. 
They are to be quite absolved, if, being faithful witnesses, they refrain from trying the 
wings of prophecy. In all directions, those of philosophy and of science, as well as of 
Christianity, human duty, human strength, human advance, lie rather in meditating and 
digesting the material of memory than in attempting the horoscope ; in interpreting 
the past for the edification and helpful guidance of the present, than in forecasting and 
hazarding prediction. These last tendencies nourish dogmatism, for they bring forth 
what may not be able to be disproved, though it cannot be proved. And they nourish 
" lofty imaginations," and "high thoughts," and luxurious idleness, that consume the 
very time, when every heart should be humility and every hand should be industry. 
Thanki to Jesus, still Master, Teacfler, Friend — fresh thanks to him fnjm his modern 



oa.t.1— 26.J THJil ACTS 01? THE APoSTLES. 21 



disciples, who, when earth and air vibrate again with the shock and the clash of dis- 
cordant theological polemics, still Iseeps his own band faithful to the memory of 
his own commission, that they should be " witnesses unto " him throughout all tha 
world!— B; 

Vera. 9 — 11. — Beavenward gazing recalled to earthward watching. " While they 
hohold, he was taken up ... as ye have seen him go into heaven." The exact aspect of 
the glories of the Ascension depicted here is not found in any of the accounts of the 
evangelists. Happy for us that second thoughts were brought to St. Luke, and that 
we were not left without the beautiful and valuable suggestions that arise from these 
verses 1 The resurrection of Jesus Christ stamped the stamp of undeniable royalty 
upon his brow ; round his brow the Ascension flung royalty's own golden crown — a 
crown of unsurpassed worth and lustre and unfadingness. Well may we pause and 
ponder the brief recital of that marvel of glorification. Let us notice — 

I. The Ascension itself — what is recorded of it. Nothing whatever is said of it in 
the Gospel by St. John. In that by St. Matthew the matter leads up to it, and abruptly 
stops, omitting all description of the great event itselt The language of St. Mark is, " So 
then^after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on 
the right hand of God." The invisible world was for one moment opened to the inspired 
vision of St. Mark, it would seem, as afterwards to that of Stephen. And the account 
of St. Luke in his " former treatise" is, " And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and 
he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he 
loas parted from them, and carried up into heaven." There are a detail and an added touch, 
however, in the passage before us very grateful to read : " When he had spoken these 
things, while they beheld, he was taken up ; and a cloud received him, out of their sight. 
And . . . they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up." In the event itself, its 
unadorned majesty is the characteristic. In the description, the own dignity of brevity 
is pronounced. Thars is reason, as well as sublimity of effect, in both the one and the 
other of theie things. Simplicity and brevity obviate distraction, and attention is 
fixed on the essentials. So we see again the scene with no bodily eye, it is true; men 
to the end of time shall see again and again the scene, it is true, with no bodily eye, 
but with a spiritual distinctness and a vividness that may leave nothing more to be 
asked for that could, in the nature of things, be given. Jesus does not die away on 
mortal view, but he soars away from mortal view, while the accents of his voice are 
still in the ear, "speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God," and repeating 
the " promise of the Father" in the gift of the Holy Ghost. And for what is seen it is 
this : he is borne in an «rausual direction — upward, clear in the eye of sense, till " a 
cloud received him ; " and beyond that cloud, only clear where the eye of faith pierces, 
he is seen " received up into heaven, and ... on the right hand of God." In this 
ascension, therefore, notice : 1. The visibleness of it, as compared, for instance, with the 
departures, whatever they were, of Enoch and of Moses. 2. The deliberateness of it, as 
compared, for instance, with the departure in blaze and speed of Elijah. So much to 
the contrary the manner of ascent of Jesus, that in the all-brief description before us 
there are nevertheless contained as many as four verbal indications of the distinctness of 
the amazing phenomenon ; e.g. " while they beheld . . . out of their sight . . . while 
they looked steadfastly as he went up ... in like manner as ye have seen him go." 
3. The number of witnesses present to see whatever was to be seen. 4. Not a. figment 
of on earthly trace of Jesus after ascension alleged by foe, not a fancy of it alleged 
by friend, as compared, for instance, with such things as we read in 1 Kings xviii. 12 ; 
Luke iv. 1, and as might have been conceivable. 

II. The fascination op the siqht foe the apostles. One thing betrays it and 
describes it — their rapt upward gaze. Beneath this one thing what wealth of sugges- 
tion may lie ! It is probable that the apostles were forewarned of the coming ascension 
of their Master ; of his departure, certainly. At all events prophecy (Ps. xxiv. 7 — 10 ; 
Ixviii. 18 ; Eph. iv. 8), with which it is likely that they were on their own account 
acquainted, likelier that Jesus had made them acquainted, had advised them that the 
departure would be of the nature of an ascension. Yet, judging from the analogy of 
other forewarnings, mercifully vouchsafed but little improved (Luke xxiv. 25 — 2r,44— 
4.G : Jobot xxi, 4 — 6), it is conceivable that the moment found them now off their guard, 



28 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. i. 1—26. 

and little prepared for the consummate event. Again, of the exact methods of Christ's 
departure from his apostles and the women, and others to whom he graciously revealed 
his presence during the forty days, we are not distinctly informed in each several case. 
But in some we are told simply that he " vanished " out of their sight. Let it be 
supposed that this was the method of his going in each case, and we may guide ourselves 
to the conclusion that at most the apostles Imagined that some one of the occasions of 
their being blessed with the sight and the voice of him would inevitably prove the last. 
But what a vision this prepared for them 1 What a transcendent " gift " even of itself! 
His " speaking " suddenly but quietly ends. And while all eyes are calmly, attentively, 
lovingly turned upon the grace of his countenance, " he was taken up." And so their 
eyes also are lifted up, and tlioughts and affections. "A cloud" which receives him 
" out of their sight " arrests their vision, but not their thoughts and affections. They 
still Icjk " steadfastly toward heaven," and seem lost in wonder and in meditation. Wliat 
is it they are seeing, or, so far as they retain the power to think, what is it they think 
tiiey see? What is it they are experiencing while they gaze? 1. This upward gaze 
w:is tlieir last earthly, beholding of Jesus. One wonders not it was prolonged as much 
as possible. That last long look, judging from analogies of inferior matter, how was 
wreathed all the way up with richest remembrances most vividly revived I Well it 
indeed might it be so now, at all events. How fragrant crowd the flowers of memory, 
that nevertheless somewhile seem to mock our grief ! They accord so ill, yet are so 
spontaneous ; again seem to feed it, but fail not at length to help sanctify it, when our 
last earthly look has been taken of the companion we have so well loved and long time 
so cherished. But now, men's eyes were being robbed of the welcomed beholding of a 
Friend of matchless power, and matchless wisdom, and matchless loving-kindness I 
That riveted gaze — who could have wondered had it drunk out for ever the light of 
earthly eyes ? 2. This upward gaze was one that foimd elements of most impressive 
contrast with much of the apostles' former knowledge of Christ. There is a great 
difference between the thoroughest persuasion as to the intrinsic quality of some one 
whom we trust and love, who nevertheless is left lifelong in the cold shade of obscurity, 
and the cheerful light and satisfaction that make us proud sharers of the public success 
and the popularity and the manifestation of our idol. This latter portion Jesus had 
never sought. That he had never done so, nor shown the slightest disposition to do so, 
had been occasionally subject of remark and of petulance to some of even his faithful 
adherents. The disciples of Christ had, as the overwhelming rule, seen his humiliation ; 
and what of his intrinsic, most real glory they had been privileged to see, was nevertheless 
veiled with the garments of humiliation. They had seen his modest subjection, his 
calm, obedient observance of what was due to custom and religious rite, as in his baptism. 
They had seen his great works, his wise words, his holy life, his undeniable innocence, 
all flouted times without number, and yet no remedy, no fire from heaven, no thunder- 
bolt, no conspicuous avenger, came to view. Then they had seen the garden Btrugcle, 
the trial, the Crucifixion. And though they had seen the Transfiguration and the 
Resurrection, yet up to this present time what became even of these? He seems to take 
no visible, practical beneflt from them. But what their eyes now see opens indeed 
their eyes ! One could imagine that volumes of mist, dark masses of cloud, roll away ; 
the obscurities and conflicting perplexities of some years "vanish," and count them- 
selves all for nothing. The steps of Jesus are no longer on the level, no longer down 
to submission more submitting ; depression is no longer the rule. He rises 1 Upward 
is the word I Glory and the realms of air and light are his, and his mode of entrance 
upon these, in its very uniqueness, awakens fresh impulses of unfeigned adoration. It 
is an illustration of how those who wait — wait even unto the end — shall be " satisfied." 
3. This upward gaze was a silent giving of themselves away at last. It made a willing 
weaning for them. Now have they done with " the things that are seen," and with 
self; and they have done with doubt and uncertainty; and they have done with the 
shadows that are felt, in favour of the momentous realities of which faith is henceforth 
the trusted and sufficient custodian. So it was no unfruitful gaze. It was not a flash, 
to leave no permanent effect. It left much more behind it than a mere " glory on the 
BOuL" It war convincing evidence, irremovable conviction ; it was tlie kindling of 
genuine adoration, and a perennial spring of devotion. 
III. Af appaebntly uncuabitable cuallexgb of the attitude of the apostles 



OH. L 1—26.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 29 

AKD AN APPARENTLY INCONCLUSIVB REASON FOR IT, ON THE PART OF TWO MEN, " WHO 

APPEARED IN WHITE APPAREL." The " two men in white apparel" were neither 
phantoms, creatures of the brain, nor spectres, creatures of the air and heavens. The 
expression, no doubt, designates angels ; it is likely enough such as had once been 
" men," such as Moses and Elijah, or two " of the prophets." Their interruption, one 
must inia>;ine, must have been at first unwelcome to the apostles. It seems so at first 
to ourselves. We would have liked to know what close the apostles would have them- 
selves put to their rapt gazing heavenward. Nor is the necessity or the expediency of 
the interruption visible upon the surface. Yet we may remark that : 1. We are, as it 
happens, in ignorance of what might have been the effect upon the spectators of the 
glorious scene of the Ascension, hut for this interruption — the striokenness of a trance, 
for instance. 2. Intently excited states of mind often answer to the corrective of the 
mere sound of the human voice, calmly addressed to them. Marvellous instances of 
this fact are furnished in the history of mental disease. 3. Genuinely exalted feeling 
may " exalt above measure " (2 Cor. xii. 7), and may need a prompt simple treat- 
ment, to obviate the necessity of future much more painful treatment. The simple 
treatment now was interruption, but with the comforting assurance that the separa- 
tion was not absolute and for ever, but distinctly the contrary. 4. Very vivid 
ex periences of joy, of grief, or of an intricately mingled character, while on the one 
hand ^ery prone to absorb undue attention for the present, are at the same time the 
very soil that abundantly rewards the introduction of the seeds of great aspects of the 
future. Nor could there easily be found a more certain example of this than in what is 
now before us. It was of first-rate importance that in the heart and mind of the first 
teachers and preachers of Christianity the second coming of Christ should be closely 
linked with his ascension. The Christian individual and the Christian Church may 
never linger too long in the past. It is a silent, wonderful testimony to the vitality of 
Christ's truth, and its spirit of progress, wide as the world and lasting as the_ world, 
that a tremendous future career and consummation are ever marked for prominence. 
Side by side with the Ascension must the second descent of Christ be kept. Therefore 
side by side were these great facts (so to say) sawn, in the apostolic heart. Further, 
that the descending Christ would be the same — i.e. one of glorified human body, as the 
cloud bore him a minute or two ago out of human sight — was a fact to he deeply 
impressed upon the Church of all time. And tlierefore, ab initio, it is so impressed on 
the apostolic heart, while nothing has yet occurred to efface from them the conviction of 
the real body of Jesus. The words of the " two men in white apparel " are the words of 
studied precision and emphasis. " This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into 
hoaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." We can be 
left in no doubt that the interruption was neither reckless nor heartless. It was not to 
SI oil the infinite serenity, infinite solemnity, infinite charm of moments, that with the 
eve raised heart and soul to heaven. Momentous doctrinal truth was to be safely sealed 
and impressed upon the Church's mind. And the choicest of Heaven's seasons must 
bo ungrudgingly given and unchurlishly accepted — a tribute to the importance of that 
truth ; a token, also, of another noteworthy thing, that the Church was infinitely dear to 
the heart of her Lord at all time ; nor that even the purest joy of a few first apostles 
shall be permitted to stand in the light of the whole Church. In this case there is 
not the atom of a reason to think those apostles would have asked it. They breathe 
no murmur that their delicious reverie was disturbed. 5. Last of all, under any 
circumstances, heavenward gaze, contemplation, seraphic vision, must be exchanged 
a while for earth's duty. That word is sacred, that call is sovereign. We must come 
aown from the mount, whether it be the Mount of Beatitudes, or of Transfiguration, or 
of Olivet. Prayer, praise, and those acts of meditation and devotion that may be of 
sublimest significance, are the aliment of Christian life. It is in "the strength 
of such meat" that we must live the present life, and do the work of the present days, 
and teach the " truth as it is in Jesus," by living, humble example as well as by word. 
And we must ourselves " wait for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ," " comforting 
and edifying one another " (1 Thess. v. 11) with the words of the " two men in white 
•ppareL" — B. 

Yers. 12 14.—^ second interval of thrilling expectation hushing itself in prayer. 



30 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. l 1—26. 



"Then returned tliey unto Jerusalem ... the mother of Jesua, and with his 
brethren." We have here — 

L The record of another period of waiting, charged with thrilling expecta- 
tion. It may be held that a period of just six weeks had elapsed since the very same 
jiersons as are here spoken of had passed through a much briefer interval than the 
ten days they are now passing through, marked, however, very largely by the same 
characteristic of thrilling expectation. Perhaps we may say, in the light of such 
language as that of our Lord himself (Luke xxiv. 25, 26), that it was entirely to be 
set down to the fault of these disciples and women that on that occasion their 
experience was not altogether one of expectation, instead of being so dreadfully dashed 
by gloom, by fear, sometimes by a very near approach to despair. That interval 
of a very short three days may probably have dragged its hours along with fearful 
slowness. It was, however, the time, if faith had apprehended it, which should 
have been brilliant with the light and hope of a rising, and therefore finally vindi- 
cated and manifestly triumphant, Master — of One who had long time patiently stooped 
to suffering, humiliation, insult, it is true, and who had at last bowed his head to 
death, but whose task and subjection were now done, and come the time of " rest from 
his labours," and of glory in his victory. But we know credibly that the interval was 
not thus brightened. Memory was faint, and faith faint-hearted. And the impressions 
of sense that came of Gethsemane, and of the brutal scenes of the judgment hall, and 
of the fierce sufferings of the cross, and the darkness of death, overmastered the plead- 
ing suggestings of faith, and overruled the whispering memories of the vanished Friend's 
•wn words. It was natural, indeed, because to be wrong is, alas ! the very thing that 
)3 so natural with us all ; but we may say that never were three days so wrested of 
their rights. For confident, joyful, ardent expectation were substituted fear, gloom, 
and only the timidest of hopes. And yet there can be no doubt that the beating 
pulse of expectation, though the low-beating, would be our correctest diagnosis of that 
period. And it was now a pulse of expectation, too, but a healthier one by far. Faith 
had had a little rest, a little occasional change to sight these forty days past, and was 
the better, stronger, more willing for it. What an inversion had mercifully occurred to 
them of their iguorance, doubt, fear, in certain cardinal directions — of their estimates of 
impossibility, or at least incredibility I So, after a few enchanting visions and audiences 
of their great Lord, they find themselves " left " again ! But they are not left " comfort- 
less." They do remember now his words. They return to Jerusalem ; they wait. They 
learn a fresh lesson in waiting. Their waiting rests on memories that now glow with 
glory, on a few words of direct command, on other few words of express promise, and 
on one incomparable fact — the Ascension. Things noteworthy in the nature of this 
period of expectation are as follows : — 1. It was waiting for their life-work, which they 
are implicitly forbidden to anticipate. Yet who could call it wasted waiting? The 
hasty, the uncertain, and those who may have other motive inferior to the most real 
motive, sometimes decry a delay, in which they ought to recognize a great meaning 
and a positive use. 2. It was waiting for even liberty to leave a certain place or separate 
from a certain circle of companions or associates. The final reason of this became 
apparent. The startling developments of Pentecost would have been shorn of half their 
intended value, apart firom the solidarity of the apostles and disciples. The conditions 
of our earthly life, and our sphere of Christian ministry and service, often seem both 
tieing and trying. Yet there must be valuable consideration for these, and sometimes 
time does at last surprisingly justify them. 3. It was waiting for a promised mar- 
vellous endowment, not of anything so vulgar as outward wealth, not of anything so 
enviable but dangerous as mere intellectual superhuman illumination, but of the 
undefined, the mysterious, the awful power of the Holy Ghost. With what anxious 
outlook we do sometimes wait! With what mistaken, ill-judged longings! Nay, but 
sometimes past these, with what pardonably trembling, shrinking, fainting, hovering 
fancy we wait 1 But oh, if these disciples and women could have gauged beforehand 
something of that awful gift of the Holy Ghost, what of character, quality, colour, 
would it not have given to their expectation 1 So men have now and again trembled 
before the mystery of their own conversion — before some deep change in their spiritual 
self, and before that supreme exchange of grace and trial here for glory and perpetual 
security above. And so also, for infinite reason, God veils just a while light, beauty, 
the blaM of knowledge, even the finish of holiness, from his own. 



CH.I.1— 26.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 31 

n. A PEBIOD OF WAITING AND OF RICH EXPBOTATrON, UNDEFINED AS TO ITS DDRATION. 

The tension of the disciples on the occasion of the Crucifixion and entombment waa 

relieved, and might have been much more relieved for them. They had been not only 

expressly forewarned of what was to be, but of the time also. And Old Testament type 

and temple parable had offered to deepen the impression on the minds of tlie disciples, 

of the women, aud of the mother herself. Jonah's " three days and three nights," and 

-the " three days" rebuilding of the demolished temple, spoke the duration of the trial, 

daikness, sorrow. But now all that is known, all that has been said, is, " not many 

days hence." And to this, no doubt, the quickened intelligence of rlio apostles and their 

associates would have most naturally argued that the delay could not be really long." 

Christ would never, in the nature of things, keep his disciples' long in an inactivity 

that might degenerate, if prolonged, into indifference or idleness. This exact cri^is 

abounds in aspects and questions of interest. That the apostles should at all be relegated 

to a period of this kind at such a moment inspiring above all others ; that the interval 

shoiild need to be one of some ten days ; that this length of time was not specified to 

them ; and what the ascended Lord's transactions were in that interval above, — are 

suggestions of questions to which none but conjectural and alternative response can be 

offered. But these things may be said about thnm: 1. They bring events and experiences 

of our own individual life, of our combined religious work, of our own entrance and of 

the Church's entrance upon the ftuition of the immortal hope, into close and grateful 

analogy with things that passed and that were ordained dirictly under the eye of pur 

Founder and Lord himself. 2. They are in manifest consonance with the objects and 

moral advantages of very much of our appointed waiting. Once ascertain and announce 

time, and it is manifest that a whole range of moral advantage in our education would 

be swept away, and a vast range of disaster would tyrannously usurp its sacred place. 

3. They help comfort every reverent mind, every humble heart, that instead of its first 

impression being true, that arbitrariness is the hard bondage under which we live, this 

is the very last thing that can be true. And they help to convince of the greatness 

of him who, with all the deep counsel of his own purposes, neither forgets nor is 

baffled in securing the advantage of his own children. 

III. Thk employment of the period of WAITING. 1. It is spent "in prayer." 
Not in an ill-concealed, graceless return to ordinary work, and which might at any other 
time have possibly been, sacred duty, but which was not so now. Times, the honest 
work of which is prayer, may well belong to every good life, 'i'hat of Jesus owned to 
them. And this was just such a time. 2. It is spent in united prayer. " With one 
accord." Persons, voices, hearts, hopes,— all were accordant. What an augury, what 
an example, what a type I 3. It is spent in persevering, united prayer. 1'hey " con- 
tinued." No sense of weariness crept over them; no dulness, no monotony, struck 
them in this their worship and liturgy. 4. To the company and unanimity of the 
apostles were added " the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brethren." 
(1) 'rhere is no priesthood here, nor any proxy of Divine worship and service. Bound 
the apostles are gathered various others, whose worship, prayer, and thoughts are all 
the same. (2) There is here no exaltation of man and depreciation of woman. 'Twaa 
a happy augury, this little early incident before Christianity was fully planted, of the 
place that it would give woman ; and a happy earnest of the fact that nowhere 
does woman rank so high as where Christ and his pure truth have the fairer sway at 
all events, if not yet the perfect sway. (3) Mary, the genuine mother of Jesus, 
acknowledges his Deity. She joins " in prayer ; " and "his brethren" do the same. 
What quiet telling witness to Jesus, and to our "faith and hope toward " him, this 
may justly be felt 1 (4) As Jesus began his earthly career from the stable, so the 
compacted body of his Church begin theirs from " the upper room." It is not the 
temple, it is not even the tabernacle, it is not a consecrated place heretofore. The 
company, the prayer, the o'erhovering Spirit, " waiting ". to alight, — thete consecrate. 
The grandness and sacredness of temple and of church all had and have their meaning 
and their use. But there is truth of so much greater and deeper force in Christ and 
his people, that wherever they are, that is " the house of God and the gate of heaven," 
that is the really grand temple, that the sacred Church. Happy, threefold happy, this 
early picture of Christ's " little flock." " Who shall harm them ? What shall move ? " 
A?»a tbougb but soBfte i\ji weeks bad passed siiioe tbey were seen plunged i» tlje faith- 



42 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. i. 1— 2«, 



less gloom of the three days, this has travelled far into the past. Tt is no wonder. A 
little time suffices for dawn to drive away the darkness. How differently this present 
interval of ten days is passing! So when darkness, storm, and fear are vanishing, 
all is hushed in peaceful prayer, and the Church " waits " with a just and blissful 
expectancy 1 — B. 

Vers. 16 — 20, 25. — Judas, his opportunity and his treatment of it. " Concerning 
Judas, which was guide . . . might go to his own place." The treason of Judas is 
related hy every one of the evangelists ; but his subsequent history no one of them as 
such even alludes to, except St. Matthew. The Evangelist St. Luke, however, here gives 
it, in his capacity of historian of the " Acts of the Apostles." What he reports St. Peter 
as saying is not in verbal harmony with what St. Matthew says. But there is not the 
slightest difficulty in seeing the way to a real and perfect harmony. The only difficulty 
is in declaring absolutely that one way and not another is the authoritative harmony. 
That Judas " fell headlong and burst asunder " is a very easy sequel to his " hanging 
himself." And that the chief priests took jounsel, and determined to buy with the 
abandoned thirty pieces of silver the potter*! field, and to devote it to the burial of 
strangers, is also a very conceivabh sequel. It may be it was but the carrying into 
effect of a bargain which the oaratousness of Judas had contemplated and had 
arranged for — all but the transfer of the money and the thereby " completion of 
purchase." The chiat prisSiS hear of this, and in their perplexity and desire to get rid 
of the accursed thirty pieces of silver, they close at once with the proposing vendor, 
whoever he \^is ; but while they devote their purchase to an object the same, the 
purpose was very different from that which Judas had grown in a covetous mind. We 
may be tolerably sure h« bouglit for some sort of further gain. They adapt (adsit 
OTnen) to a burial-ground. Once, such an end to such a career, of a professed disciple 
of the Lord, was unique, and then, for that reason, it would fascinate study. It not 
long remained so, alas I and for thai reason, that practical, alarming reason, it has 
been suggesting for centuries, and still to (his day it suggests — ay, it demands — solemn, 
heart-searching study. Let us get beneath our eye — 

L What infokmation we have to rest upon in forming a judgment kespectino 
Judas and his ohabacter. 1. He was called in the same way as, at all events, a 
majority of the whole number of the twelve disciples were called. So far as we know, 
there was nothing special or emphatic in the circumstances that accompanied his call 
(Matt. I. 2 — i ; Mark iii. 13 — 19; Luke vi. 12 — 19). St. John says nothing wliatever 
of the call of Judas ; but that he knew something about it is evident from his allu- 
sion to Christ's foreknowledge (John vi. 64, 70, 71). Why Christ, with his admitted 
perfect foreknowledge, did call Judas to be an immediate attendant upon him, is a 
■question that cannot be answered, perhaps. But three things may be remarked upon 
it : (1) That Christ certainly did not do Judas harm, but gave him the grandest possible 
opportunity of help towards subduing whatever may have been his master-sin, by 
permitting his special and constant association with him and his other disciples. 
(2) That at all events Christ did not, in calling Judas to the circle of his disciples, call 
one who would betray wnother, and have favourable opportunity of betraying another 
thereby, but only himself. Jesus bore all the pain and suffered all the loss of what he 
did himself ; he did not scatter harm in the path of others. (3) That after all, in 
deep principle, Jesus did nothing different from what has ever since been transpiring 
under his Name, wherever his Name is known. His Church now — and his Church is his 
representative — admits within its most really hallowed enclosure many a traitor. It 
is true, not with foreknowledge ; it is true, pleading ever, as its apology when discovered, 
its own coxiiessedi faMibility ; and, let it be true also, that it is this which strikes us 
as constituting <Ae difference. But is it to be so regarded? Without leaving out of 
sight for one moment Christ's foreknowledge and infallibility of foreknowledge, we 
must bring into sight the fact that this is traversed by another most evident principle 
and practice on the part of Jesus, which reveal him ever beforehand sharing the lot of 
his Church, and intending to share it in disappointment, in deception on the part of 
others, in woe as in weal. On much the san^e principle that Jesus did not take 
advantage of his ability to command stones ioto bread, so he does not take certain 
kipds of adrantage from his foreknowledge. ^■\>A what we bav? under copsideration 19 



ou 1. 1—26.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 83 

exactly one of these hinds. There are ample and significant indications that the one 
expression, Jesus called unto him " wliom he would" (Mark iii. 13), and our own 
willing estimate of his superlative Jmowledf/e, are to he balanced with other considera- 
(ions, both such as. arise from disciples' choice and disciples' volunteering (John i. 37 — 
42), and from the essential facts of human nature. At all events, we do not know that 
Judas was not a volunteer. He may have been au ardent, enthusiastic volunteer ; he 
may have been a financial expert of his rank and day, who seems to sacrifice bright 
business prospects in following Jesus, who takes credit, too, for it, and who by general 
consent becomes designated treasurer so soon as a treasurer was wanted (Luke viiL 3, 
and elsewhere). Do we not know something to-day of the busy and clever and ready- 
tongued volunteer, and of bis entrance within the pale of the Church visible ? It may, 
in passing, just be noted that in the three parallel Gospels the name of Judas always 
stands last, and is attended by the evangelistic remark, merely posthumous, that he was 
the traitor of his Master. 2. Prom the announcement of the call of the twelve disciples 
np to now, the closing days of Christ's life, not a syllable is to be read of Judas, except 
the damnatory remark of John vi. 71. The question of Jesus preceding that running 
comment belonged, of course, strictly to the occasion, but the running comment itself 
is merely historic. But the closing days are now come. And they bring this man to 
the fore. (1) He finds fault (or otherwise leads the fault-finding of himself and some 
ottiers) with the loving devotion of a woman who, for priceless mercy received, brings 
the only present she knows to bring — a present, no doubt, of what was costliest in her 
tieasures, and admitted by all to be both precious and costly — ointment with which to 
anoint the bead and feet of Jesus. And Judas says, " It's waste." And Judas asks, 
" Why wa« it not sold, and the hard cash put into the Master's bag for the poor, which 
1 carry-?" Yes, and the Evangelist St. John adds, probably in the light of after 
developments, from which be carried too, i.e. from which he stole. And Judas 
incurred the silencing and reproof of the Master, and he does not forget that reproof. 
This was late as the fourth day of the fatal week. (2) At the end, or immediately 
after the end of the very next day (equivalent to the evening which led in the sixth 
day), Judas also asks, " Is it I ? " when the question was — Who among those twelve 
there was the traitor ? and he is pronounced, by the lip and the hand of Jesus, the 
traitor ; and he withdraws from the solemn, sacred, pathetic Supper scene I And 
again he goes with a word of the Master in his hearing, nor forgets it either. (3) Now 
but a few hours of night-time pass, when Judas reappears. ■ It is into the Garden of 
Gethsemane — a place he knew, because he had been there often with a Master who 
loved to go there often — that he enters, no longer, for ever and ever no longer, the disciple 
of Jesus, but now the leader of a band, who lighted a way, that surely much needed 
light, "with lanterns and torches," and who bore " awords and staves " (Matt. iivi. 
47—56 ; Mark xiv. 43—52 ; Luke xxii. 47—53 ; John xviii. 2—12). With a word 
and a kiss Judas betrays his recent Master, who asks him one gentle question, " Friend, 
wherefore art thou come ? " And like a shadow Judas vanishes again from our sight. 
(4) Once more, and once more only, does Judas come himself before us. He comes to 
show a certain violent repenting, an attempt at some sort of restitution and unreserved 
confession of his own individual sin ; and for these the treatment that he gets from 
" the chief priests and elders" seems to ripen remorse and madden despair, and, witneta 
against himself, and jury, and judge, he becdmea his own swift executioner also, all 
ibur in one terrible demonstration T It stands a witness to the end of time (and there 
cannot in this instance be a doubt that eternity looks on) of the avenging force that 
couches in ambush, in the being in whom God has implanted a moral constitution, 
when that constitution is keenly affronted, wounded to the quick repeatedly, and in 
aggravated form sinned against 1 Woe is to that being; it had been better for liiin 
that he had never been born 1 And now we have exhausted all the actual informati. n 
recorded for us respecting the career of Judas. Let us ask — 

II. What deductions regarding the real character of Judab wk mat bb 
WARRANTED TO DRAW FuoM THESE MATERIALS. It has been often thought that the key 
to the opening of his character is held out to us in the one word covetousntss. This 
impression must be supposed to have been derived from the two facts — that ho filched 
from " the bag," and that he asked money for the iniquitous volunteered enterprise of 
liein^ " guide to them that took Jesus." The foundation Is perhaps soiuethlns slendej 



34 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. i. 1— 26 

for what is built upon it. Ijikely enough his tendencies may have looked this way 
Ho may have known a shade too well the use and " the love of money ; " but evideuca 
there is noje that he loved money as a miser loves it. Nor did it seem to stick to hi* 
fingers as it does to those of an essentially covetous man — not, for instance, when he 
threw it down on the temple floor at the priests' feet. May not other causes, that 
moved in deeper groove, and mined their unsuspected approaches in darker and more 
tortuous channel, have determined this monstrous deformity of growth? We believe 
that we have before us, in the unenviable, unwelcome riddle of this character 1. A 
man to whom ambition (veiy probably native to him) was the misguiding, the 
fiituous, the disastrous light. This covetousncss was in him ; it had been looking out 
for its own food ; it had comparatively long time looked in vain. But now, in what 
the history of two thousand years, perhaps rather of four thousand years, has shown 
to be the most dangerous direction of all, the opportunity seemed to open itself 
within tlie ecclesiastical sphere. He sees and snatches at the oppoi tunity. Here is a 
manifest novelty^Jesus ! His pretensions are j^reat, and are far from lacking proba- 
bility. The mighty works he does are supported by significant indications, thougli not so 
popular, by mighty words, and deeper still by the framework of cherished prophecies not 
unknown to Judas, and with which just now the very air, natural, political, religious, is 
rife. The thought enters his mind to become a disciple — it is not altogether business, 
for his heart owns to a gentle upheaving of enthusiasm towards Jesus. He essays to 
become a disciple, puts himself in the way, keeps near and in the right company, and 
finds himself " called " in the sacred circle. Adventure, religiousness, and a practical 
good chance seemed all combined. 2. A man with an immense power of self-deception. 
No form of deception is more aggravated in its character and in its effects than self- 
deception. The victiinizer is the same with the victim. The deadliest harm suffered 
from another may have, even in the supieme moment, some possible compensation for 
the sufferer, in high moral feeling, in the exeroise of high moral grace, such as forgive- 
ness, or patitnce under unmerited, uncaused suffering, nay, in the bare thought tiiat 
one is suffering through another. For now, at all events, the vicariousness of suffering, 
in a wide range of degree, has a charm of real glory. But to have the very faculty of 
self-deceplion is to have one of the worst of enemies while character grows, one of the 
most vengeful of enemies when the day of settlement comes. And Judas, whethei' in 
aiming to become a disciple or in only consenting to it, had little idea of the amount 
of his unfittedness for it. And so the months that flew on increased the untittedness 
and the ignorance by equal strides. 3. A man of amazing power of veiling his real 
self behind an impas.sive exterior, when he gradually came to know that real self, 
and of keepiiis his own secret. (1) Was it not getting time for conscience to show 
itself in the check for Judas, when Jesus said, "Have not I chosen you twelve, and 
one of you is a devil?" (2) Was ever more perilous stuff pent up in the breast, and 
yet not a sign of it on the countenance, nor even in a faltering; tone of voice, when, 
that Last Supper evening, Judas found himself compelled to join the inquirers, and 
brought his lips also to say, " Lord, is it I?" (3) Was it not the very incarnation of 
the own devil's deliberateiiess and of matchless coolness when Judas not only headed 
the cowed procession, armed with swords and staves, and lighted with lanterns and 
torches, into the garden, but that, when he " fell to the ground," he had nerve enough 
so soon to find his feet, and to go on with his work as though he had not fallen, and 
surpassed himself in then step|.ing forth to the very van of the troop, vvho had hitherto 
covered him in part — to say " Hail I " to the Master, no longer his, and to " kiss " him ? 
The very highest moral efforts have been sometimes accomplished just so much the 
more effectively because they have been accompanied by a certain force of moral nervous 
exertion. On this occasion the very highest mmoral effort bore witness to a destitu- 
tion of nervous sensibility hitherto incredible. Surely to the end of the world Judas 
will hold all his own the first place for secretiveness and deliberateness and unper- 
turbedness, both in darkest design and in execution of it. His calm, balanced, impas- 
sive bearing serves him with every one, except with him " who knows the hearts o( 
all men." 4. A man who, finding that he is playing a losing game, or thinking so, 
dares to attempt to retrieve what he counts his error, by heading a dark and desperate 
scheme, and by providing himself (for this was the probable reason of his occasional 
" thefts,'' and of his ^king payment for the betray al) with something in compensation of 



H,i. 1— 26.J THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 35 

the " all he had left," together with the other disciples, when he first " fullowed " Jesus, 
However, now he stakes-" all " on one cast — the event too clearly demonstrates it. Ha 
shows himself not the man to boar disappointment and loss, especially when riled, as 
he probably now felt, by a conviction of having suffered under some delusion. He is 
not of the temper to brook a practical affront, let it have come whence or how it may 1 
He refuses to remain partners with inward discontent one unnecessary, one avoidable 
hour 1 And not the first man of the kind, though the undoubted first of the solemn 
])itch of enormity, he miscalculates — awfully miscalculates — the hour, and in another 
hour is falling into the lowest Tophet, under the name of " the son of perdition " ! 8o 
fell the selfish and typical gambler of this world and time. 5. A man — emphatically 
not " stricken, smitten of God, and afilicted," but — whose branded heart and seared 
cunscience were stricken of Ood, being restored for one moment to their maximum 
vitality, that momeut their very last 1 It is impossible to account for the previous 
phenomena of the history of Judas as recorded, and for this fierce end of his career, 
without believing that he had long been hardening — heart and conscience grievously 
and dreadfully injured. Nemo Jit repente turpissimus. And Peter, the thrice-denier, 
stands close by Judas, the betrayer, to point .with Heaven's own method of distinctness 
the diflerence.' The death-struggle not unfrequently has witnessed to the measure of 
life that body and mind together can claim. And supineness has suddenly snatched 
and for a moment wielded the weapons of preternatural, if not superna,tural, force. 
And it must be that this was the philosophy of Judas doing these three things at once — 
" repenting himself," " confessing his sin," and " hanging himself." The third of this 
series interprets for us the former two. The man who breaks thus, breaks because he 
is intrinsically weak. The keenest potency of feeling, the fullest, simplest confession 
of sin, the unequivocal renunciation of his unholy gain, and this all in the right arena, 
in face of the priests and on the temple floor — and yet these not fullowed by mercy 
and forgiveness, hut' blackened to sight by a self-inflicted dog's death — must proclaim a 
man strengtliless, hopeless, for ever the disinherited " son of perdition." Let us ask— 
in. What implioations mat be involved in the stkangb and kemabkablt 

STRONG EXPRESSION HERB APPLIED TO JuDAS, AS DESCRIPTIVE OF THE END OF HIS 

EARTHLY CAREER. St. Peter says that Judas " fell by transgression " from his apostle- 
ship, " that he might go to his own place." It can scarcely be that Peter, who rose to 
speak thus in the midst of his " brethren," should entirely forget how near he himself 
had been to falling from his apostleship ; and yet there are essential considerations so 
differencing the two cases that we could imagine it possible that, in real fact, he 
never connected them for so much as a moment in his own mind. This the difference — 
not that, having strayed, Peter so soon and with so genuine a penitence came back, and 
not that he had been perfectly sincere and was so sound at heart still, but — that, though 
he undoubtedly fell suddenly by transgression (as Judas fell suddenly), he did not fall 
"that he might go to his own place." He fell that he might get more estranged 
from " his own place," and, regaining his footing, might find himself nearer " placed " 
to his Master, and safer far than before. It is very noticeable that St. Peter does 
not say that Judas went "to his own place" because he "fell by transgression," hut 
that his fall, come at by distinct and flagrant transgression such as admitted neither 
defence nor palliation, made his own way to his own place. Some make a bridge of 
escape, and some cut off from their enemies or for higher reasons from themselves a 
bridge'of escape, hut Judas, "by transgression," actually bridges a way of destruction 
for himself; yes, "by transgression" so pronounced, so aggravated, so enormous, but 
which drew its greatest, its most distinctive peculiarities from what was antecedent to 
it. Its long roots lay in a long past. From these it was nourished till it became 
monstrous. ° Harder than it is to " pluck a rooted sorrow from the memory " did Judas 
find it, arrived at a certain point, to pluck himself from "his own" destruction. The 
disease will now have its course. The road leads to a visible precipice, hut Judas 
cannot stop his driving. The stream bears irresistibly to the gulf. To what do these 
things point? What were the antecedent peculiarities ? 1. Very strong individuality 
of character ungoverned. Such may make very fine character. But it needs very 
skilful management, very strict observation ; a very firm hand must be kept upon it. 
Let it be ever remem bered that it is not likely to he and ts not on side issues that tha 
battle of character, of life, of destiny, is fought. And it is not on side issues that any 



M THE ACTS OF THE APOBTLES. [oh, 1 1— 2& 

maa'g "own place" \b determined. And this is the reason why human judgments ol 
self or of others are so often wrong, because they are so prone to be arrested by the 
glitter or else the glare of what may be a most minor point, a mere detail, a really side 
issue, instead of being of the very web and woof. A man's " own place " is neither 
determined nor ascertained by the side issues, which are so often all that lie visible. 
But there are some potendet of character that do, or otherwise undo, the work. A 
certain strong ^eniitence of Eome force — a thought, a taste, a wish, a passion. And 
when t, man has a character of this sort, his best friend has one gos])el to preach to 
him — this, that his work lies clear as noonday before him; he has an option of 
trembling significance before him ; he is set to master or to be mastered, to guide 
and rule and rise high as the ang'-ls, or — to be lured, drawn, dragged, driven, all the 
appalling way down to "his own place "1 2. Splendid opportunities grossly neglected. 
The same phenomena and facts of character and of growth to the very end, may and 
naturally must be true anywhere, any time. But as the " own place" of Judas was 
dififerent from what could be the " own place " of vast numbers to whom for instance 
the very name of Christ is unknown, so it is fair to take into account the fact that his 
opportunities were, for his time of day and for every time of day to which they oould 
apply, literally splendid. The principle will be very rarely itnobservablo, that in pro- 
portion as opportunity was good, gross neglect of it made the surest ill end, yet surer. 
And make whatever deductions possible, the opportunities of any one of the twelve 
disciples were splendid — then certainly none more splendid than they. To see, to 
hear, to watch such excellence, the excellence of naturalness, of simplicity, of perfect 
truth, of tenderest human kindness, of superhuman holiness, — was it not splendid 
opportunity? To have the personal inspection, occasional correction, deep-sighted 
suggestions, and high warnings, not unmingled with gracious encouragement that 
never bore a tint of flattery, — was it not splendid time of opportunity ? To root 
confidence in such a Worker, not of gaping wonders but of majestic beneficence, — was 
it not splendid opportunity? In brief, to witness that activity, to hear that teaching, 
to study that Model, was a mass of opportunity that all the world beside could not 
give, and that all the world beside ought not to have been able to take away. But 
Judas let the world, or a small portion of the world, take it away — nay, he pitched it 
away himself. And he did this to get on to "his own place." 3. The fearful irri- 
tation (working sometimes underneath even the calmest exterior) of an unreal religious 
profession. The horrors of a false position must be counted to be in good truth 
multiplied infinitely when the false position lies within the domain of religion, and 
when it consists in the unreality of the person, rather than in merely a temporary 
unsuitableness to him of the place or the niche in which he has got fixed. In the 
recesses of a lowly spirit, in the calm retreat and silent shade of religious meditation, 
in the all-sacred shrine of deepest self-surrender and self-consecration, what music of 
angels, what whisperings of the Spirit, what tones of Jesus himself, are heard, and what 
peace that passeth understanding steals blissfully 'in I But of the vacant hollows of 
religious unreality, mocking echoes are the tenants habitual, and winds of the most 
disnjal wail wander endless in them I The heart of Judas was not in his work these 
three years. His concealed irritation must often have been severe. His thoughts were 
neither where his hands or lips were, and chagrin was often his meat day and night 
together. His life was joyless ; and as the sun ripens all good fruits and many a bad 
fruit too, so as surely, though strangely, does the sunlessness of joylessness ripen with 
fearful rapidity and effect the ill fruits of the hypocrite and of religious unreality. And, 
beyond any doubt, it had been n^ now with Judas. Irritation, inside and unseen' 
brings, in bodily disease, many an unhealthy humour to the surface, and out of these 
forms the loathsome tumour, not unfrequently fatal. It is so with the humours and 
the tumours of a religious profession; career, and office, destitute of reality. In no 
other directions do disease and inward injury rankle to so deadly effect. Judas is a 
great Scripture typical warning against the profession, the work, the ministry, and the 
dignity of religion assumed for whatsoever reason, and by whomsoever, without reality. 
This is^ur excellence the usurpation that finds " its own " fall, while the usurper falls by 
some " transgression," little matter what, to find " his own place." 4. The suffering to drift 
along a huge moral wrong in character and life. Judas was guilty, certainly, of such 
moral wrong. He was guilty of it in three directions — as it affected his professed Master 



eft. 1. 1-26.3 *Ste AC*S Of TfiE APOSfLHS. «? 

as it affected his so-called fellow-disciples, and of necessity most of all as it concerned his 
own Boul. If a man lets any serious wrong in liis earthly affairs drift, it in not long 
before he finds it out, for it finds him out. Business rarely indeed drifts right of itself. 
But wrong never drifts right. Least of all does that highest fashion of moral wrong 
ever drift right, when the question lies in the domain that brings into contact that 
which is or ought to be highest in ourselves with that which is indisputably highest 
out of ourselves. All here is matter of consciousness, of real life, of spirit. It is 
past us altogether to say, what we almost irresistibly imagine, that Judas was often on 
the point of making a clean breast of it ; but it is not past us to say that during those 
three years' conscience must have often urged him to confess his mistake, to resign the 
livery he wore, to quit the Master's shammed service, and the disciples' shamed 
society. In that event there .would have been " room for repentance ; " there would 
have been room for help ; there would have been room to remonstrate, to rebuke, to 
revive some spark of grace, to recover yet a soul alive. Prom some loving brother he 
might have heard anticipated the words, " How shall we escape, if we neglect so great 
s ilvation ? " and again, " It is impossible for those who were once enlightened . . , if 
they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance." And the falling away 
might have been at the last averted. But nol Judas has no mercy on his own soul, 
•because he will not be faithful even to it. The betrayer of his Master is the man to be 
the betrayer of himself. At every turn the career of Judas is fraught with solemn 
lessons for every one to whom the grace of discipleship to the Lord Jesus is offered. 
The character of the test ordained for him is scarcely less plainly or less concisely 
written than that ordained for our first parents. Yet, nevertheless, thousands of years 
have not passed away morally in vain in the world's history. And in place of the test 
of an humble, practical obedience to one individual and merely physical command, the 
probation for Judas, and for every one of ourselves, is self-consecration to Jesus, Master 
and Saviour, without one reservation, and personal holiness the sequel. — B. 

Ver. 26. — The earnest of zeal and fidelity exhibited hy the Church expectant. "And 
they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with 
the eleven apostles." The events with which the passage has to do belong to that 
brief but remarkable interval of some eight to ten days during which the eleven 
apostles were bidden to remain in Jerusalem, and were, in a sense, left alone, their 
Master and Saviour having ascended, and the Spirit, the promised Comforter, not 
having yet descended. The brief interval invites not a little conjecture, but so much 
the more than it otherwise might have done, because of the silence broken in this very 
passage. Had the concord of the eleven, and their united worship and services of 
prayer and praise in company with the large circle of the hundred and twenty brethren 
(as given vers. 12 — 14), been our only record of the period, there would have be«n less 
stir of conjecture. But, as it is, we are led to wonder whether, while Jesus spoke to the 
eleven apostles of " the things pertaining to the kingdom of God," he had possibly 
■srarranted them to add one to their number. We can only doubtfuUy answer " No." 
For while, on the one hand, it would seem strange, if Christ had done so, that Peter 
should not quote the fact to the general assembly, on the other hand it does seem very 
strange that Peter should take upon himself to assert the necessity of such a step at 
such a time of 'Tnsuttledness as regards the constitution of the Church. Again, beyond 
the fact that the two, Joseph and Matthias, had been companions of Christ and of the 
disciples from the time of the baptism of John (John i. 26) to the time of the Resur- 
rection, we know nothing of them. We do not know on what principle the two were 
selected first of all from any others who might have answered to the same qualifications 
of having " companied with " the disciples ; we do not know how the casting of lots 
was managed ; we do not know whether Matthias ever really ranked with the apostles 
to any practical purpose, though he was "voted in ; " nor do we know one authentic 
syllable of his succeeding work or of his death. To conjecture is as unsatisfying as 
it is easy. Setting aside any detail of mere curiosity, we should certainly have liked 
to know whether the transaction of this election was authorized ; if it were not, whether 
nevertheless it was legitimate, or whether it was possibly a fresh illustration cf the 
ready zeal, without authority, of Peter. It need scarcely be said, however, that in 
the absence of any evidence or of any strong reason to believe the latter, we fcisuma 
tba legitimateness of the whole proceeding. And on this showing we notice— 



88 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. 1. 1— 20 



I. The devoted zeal of Peter. Ho is a born leader. He had often shown a 
forward zeal. In the/ori uf many, many characters lurks also their weakness. Purified 
from this, the strength becomes apparent again, and the advantage becomes real. It in 
ho who now takes the lead, and says, " It behoves " to fill np the perfect number. 

II. The discekning zeal of Pbtek. He enthrones this great historic fact of the 
resurrection of Jesus in its proper seat in the Church for all time. The " eleven," to 
be now strengthened by one more, are to accept this as their chiefest mission and 
commission, to be " witnesses of the Resurrection." 

III. The correctly prophetic zeal of Peter. He takes it that part of the 
work and of the organizing of the work of Christ is to devolve upon man, and upon 
those who were the already "chosen" apostles, together with the body of his peo|'le 
and disciples. He calls upon all to join, and arranges for all to join in tliis proposed 
election. 

IV. The prayerful and dependent zeal of Peter. Still the wisdom and the 
choice iind the appointment are to rest with him whom we call the Head of the 
Church. It may not be certain that, so far as the terms of Peter's prayer go, he means 
it to be addressed exclusively to the risen Lord, yet even this is most probable ; and 
all the more so from his likely recalling of the words of Jesus himself (John xv. 16 ; 
vi. 70; xxi. 17).— B. 

Ver. 1. — Tlie apparent incompleteness of our Lord^s life. It was but a beginning. 
The word " began " is as characteristic of St. Luke as " straightway " is of St. Mark ; 
it occurs tliirty-one times in his Gospel. The idea of Christ's life on earth as being 
a "beginning" fits well into the Pauline theology, which sets in such prominence the 
present and continuous working of the risen, glorified, living Saviour. 'Jo the 
a] ostles' first view our Lord's earthly life must have seemed a failure ; they could not 
know how it was to be continued and completed. From our enlarged- knowledge we 
can apprehend it as being the necessary introduction to his present and jiermanent 
spiritual work. Illustrations of apparent incompleteness of earthly life may be found 
in the story of Moses, who did not cross the Jordan ; and David, who did not build 
the temple. A man's life is never incomplete if he does well his appointed piece. 

I. The brevity of our Lord's life-work. At the longest computation it 
extended only over three years, and many think the time was even shorter than this. 
Thirty years were spent in secluded preparations ; and we may well ask — What gi'eat 
work could any man accomplish in three brief years? And yet some of the most 
powerful and permanent influences recorded in human history have come from men 
whose lives were short. Illustrations are found in every department of life; and the 
common observation has gained expression in the proverb, " Those whom the gods 
love die young." Life may be very short, and yet very full of power and impulse for 
good. "He liveth long who liveth well." 

II. The sddden stoppage of it. Tal^en away by a violent death, our Lord could 
not make it what men would call " complete," " rounded off." On his last day he had 
to admit that it must remain, to men's view, seemingly imperfect. " I have many 
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now." So with many human lives, 
the close comes suddenly, and we wish we could tarry to get things completed. But 
we must leave them, as Christ did ; and we may be rtstfuUy assure<l that, if our work 
has been good, God will find for it compleleness by finding its Jittinij into his great plan. 

III. The introdtjctory character of it. It was a " beginning," a " jirefaee," 
a "threshold," an "ante-chamber," an outward earthly show to help us in nalizing a 
continuous spiritual reality, 'i he remembrance of what was is to aid us in realizin» 
what IS. And, in a yet fuller sense, that brief human life was to lay the intellectual, 
moral, and religious bases on which the Divine relations with men were from that time 
to rest. " It behoved Christ thus to suffer, and to enter into his glory." 

IV. The continuance of it. Of that "continuance" we have several distinct 
forms of conception ; such as : 1. The work of the Holy Spirit. 2. The actual presence 
of Chri.st in his Church. 3. The permanent oifice of Christ as the one htniian Mediator, 
Intercessor, and High Priest. The relation of the "continuing" work to the "intro- 
ductory " is shown in our Lord's statement concerning the Holy Spirit : " He shall take 
of mine, and shall show it unto you." So far as the continuance of Christ's earthly 



CH. Li— 26.] THE i.CTS OF THE APOSTLES. 3« 

life and influence is concerned, we find it in the holt/ living of Ws Church, and th« 
teachings of apostles and ministers. 

In application, it may be urged that a work so graciously introduced in our Lord'i 
life on earth, and so graciously continued in his present working in his Church, must 
have its completion some day. Such completion is reached in the believer's "full 
sanctification ; " and, for the Church, in that day when the " kingdoms of this world 
shall have become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ," and the "Church" 
shall be the redeemed woiid.^B. T. 

Ver. 1. — Tlie t/rigin of the Oospel records. Luke reminds Theophilus of his having 
written his Gospel, and of the circumstances which called for his labours (comp. Luke i. 
1 — 4). Incidentally we are assured that the historical figure of Christ is the essential 
foundation of the Christian system ; and, therefore, such extreme care was necessary in 
securing authentic records of his words and works. The trustworthiness of our Gospels 
may be efBciently impressed by the illustration and enforcement of the following 
points, which are suggestive enough to be presented without elaboration :— 

I. Show tue lbadino points of apostolic preachino and tkaohino. They were 
facts, of Christ's coming, teaching, personnel, miracles, crucifixion, and resurrection. 

II. In deolakinq these, the apostles invited comparison with the older 
ScElPTUREB. They appealed to existing and recognized inspired writings. 

III. Their facts needed to be set in definite written form. If comparisons 
were to be efficiently made, the precise facts must be assured. As preached, there 
would be variety in the statement of the incidents and expressions of our Lord's life, 
and no suitable basis for faith. 

IV. The materials for bdoh writino must be oatherbd from various 
SOURCES. Each disciple remembered some special thing. Our Lord's mother could 
tell what nobody else could know. Other women had special narratives to give 
Peter, James, and John were on several occasions of importance alone with Christ. 

V. Such materials required the editing of some competent men. Illustrate 
Luke's fitness — as educated, aa Paul's companion, as evidencing a careful, critical habit, 
and as having access to the hest information. 

Show that, of the many Gospels, and parts of Gospels, that may have been written, 
there was a Divine selection oifour. The wisdom of the selection may be pointed out 
and impressed ; and also the special bearing of Luke's two treatises on the basis-facts 
of the Pauline theology. Luke's /oois underlie Paul's doctrines. — R. T. 

Ver. 1. The threefold aspect of our Lord's human life. The aspects that need to 

be so carefully recorded. Two are stated in the text — to do, and to teach ; the third 
we gather from the Gospel itself — to suffer. 

I. Our Lord came to do. It has been said that " conduct is three-fourths of life ; " 
and' upon our Lord's daily life and doings we, first of all, reverently fix our gaze. 

1. He came to live ; to express in pure, beautiful character, and in sweet, self-denyino;, 
helpful intercourse with men, the example of the holy life. Show how this became 
inspiration for all sincere hearts, and conviction for all self-servers and time-servers. 

2. He came to work mighty works. In miracles, of heaUng and of power, revealinsr to 
men the true God and Father, in whom we " live, and move, and have our being ; " and 
making trust in the "living God the Saviour" possible for man. 

II. Our Lord came to teach. And the teaching was in full harmony with the 
life, and unfolded the gracious design and mission of the worhs. 1. He taught the 
people. As in the sermon on the mount, by his parables, and in the temple porch at 
Jerusalem. 2. He taught the disciples. By explanation of parable and miracle, by 
private instructions, by trial missions, and in his modes of dealing with them. 3. He 
taught his enemies. By severe warnings and denunciations, seeking to arouse the sense 
of sin, in which alone lies the hope of salvation. 

III. OuB Lord came to buffer. He couldnot but sufi'er personally, in carrying 
out such a mission ; but he, further, suffered mediately and vicariously, as " bearing 
our sins." For us it " pleased the Lord to bruise him." 

Conclude by working out the harmony of this threefold aspect, in the light oJ 
Christ's perfect and complete obedience to his heavenly Father's will He did, he taught, 



*0 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [pQ.t.l—2B 

-■•'•-'■ ' ' ■■■.—■ ., , I 

he suffered, all that wtll. And also In tbe light of our Redeemer's mission as the Saviout 
of the world. He is therein shown to be the perfect Saviour. — R. T. 

Ver. 2. — The Holy Ohost in Ghrist, The statement in this verse is that our Lord 
spake, ftnd gave his parting injunctions to his disciples, as one who was " filled with 
the Holy Ghost." Christ's Divine nature is set before us in varying forms ; and we 
should take care lest the demands of Christian doctrine so absorb us as to prevent our 
receiving the whole scriptural impression. Especially difficult it is to connect the 
divinity of Christ with the revelation of the Divine Spirit, the Holy Ghost. The 
difficulty is in part occasioned by our failing to associate the Spirit, in the apostles 
anH in the older prophets, with the Holy Ghost in Christ. The differences need to be 
carefully marked, but the samenenBes also neeJ to be brought to light. We do not fully 
realize that Ood can bein man;h\it precisely this is brought home to us by the teaching 
of the Holy Ghost in Christ, the man; and the representation that his human words 
and laws come to us with the perfection and authority stamped by the indwelling 
Holy Ghost. Scripture gives us three distinct representations of the relations of the 
Holy Spirit to Christ himself, to his miracles, and to his teachings, 

I. The Spibit is represknted as coming to Christ. Recall the Bcene of his 
baptism. The symbolic " dove" broodeil over him, or settled on him, and the Spirit 
of God " came upon him." This took place at the very entrance upon his ministry, 
so that throughout his ministry we are to conceive of him as specially endow ed, as 
one in whom dwelt the Spirit " above measure " (see Luke iv. 1 ; John iii. 34). The 
sense in which the Spirit came to Christ needs careful treatment. From his birth 
the Divine Spirit was his Spirit ; and in this lies the deep mystery of his Godhead. 
The Spirit that came to him at his baptism was the specific Divine endowment for the 
ministry to which he was called, and so it and the descent of the Holy Ghost on the 
disciples at Pentecost help to explain each other ; and they show that the Spirit may 
still be with us in a twofold sense. As " bom again," he is our very life ; as called to 
any work, he comes to us as a specific endowment for that work. It is, therefore, right 
to realize the Spirit's permanent dwelling in the believer, and at the same time right to 
pray that he may come to us for special needs. 

n. The Spirit is represented as workino THROtroH Christ. This was our 
Lord's teaching concerning his miracles, and it lies at the basis of his solemn warning 
to the blaspheming Pharisees. The " sin against the Holy Ghost " is shown to be 
precisely this — declaring the miracles of Christ, which manifested the presence and 
power of the Holy Ghost, to have been wrought by devilish agencies. So vital is it to 
tl:e Christian faith and life that we should recognize the Holy Ghost in Christ's mighty 
works, that the sin of the Pharisees is declared to be "beyond forgiveness." In 
measure tiie same is true of the witness and work of Christ's Church now. It is wrought 
in the power of the Holy Ghost. It is mighty only as this conviction dwells in the 
workers, and opens the hearts of those who receive the witness and are the subjects of 
the work. The one. thing that Christ's Church needs is to be lifted up to the solemn 
and inspiring conviction — the Sbly Ohost is with «s. 

III. The Spirit is represented as bpeakino through Christ, This is set 
forth separately because, though, in Christ, miracle and teaching went together, teaching, 
speaking, preaching is the one great agency of his Church, and therefore we do well to 
see the truth in precise relation to «*. To this point our Lord directed the attention 
of the disciples in the " upper chamber." All he had spoken to them had been " given 
him to speak," and just so they might be assured that the Divine Spirit would give 
them right and fitting words. And in our text the last injunctions and counsels and 
commands are directly traced to the Holy Ghost. But, properly regarded, the sphere 
of the Spirit's operation is the human will— tho real source and spring of all activity, 
the centre of the human vitality. From the teaohins of what the Spirit was, beyond 
measure, in Christ, we may learn what the Holy Ghost can be, within measure, in 
man ; what he may be to apostles and to us. 

In conclusion, show, practically, that the necessary condition of the abiding of th<" 
Holy Ghost in Christ was his perfect openness and entire submission to the Spirit's 
lean ; and that this ( 'hrist-like openness is still the one condition of the Spirit's abiding 
and working in us. Impress the warnings of the apostles against the danger of reszsttn^ 
quenching, and grieving the Holy Ghost. — R. T. 



oa. 1 1—26.] tHE ACTS OF TflE APOSTLES. 41 

Ver. 8. — Sensible pronfi of Chrisfs resurrection. The resurrection of our Lord ia 
declared to have been a literal and historical fact, of which satisfactory proofs could be 
given — such proofs as men are accustomed to accept. Here it is stated that our Lord 
" showed himself alive ; " that he " appeared unto the disciples " (see Revised Version) ; 
that the proofs he offered of his restored life virere " infallible," as v^ell as " numerous ; " 
i.e. they were not merely " probable," or " circumstantial," they were such as naturally 
and properly carried conviction. The disciples were not deluded or deoeived>; they 
acted as reasonable men, and accepted the fact of the llesurrection because convinced 
by adequate proofs. But when the historical fact is thus fully assured, we must be 
prepared to receive the further fact which our Lord's ascension declares, viz. that his 
resurrection was essentially a spiritual resurrection. We have in it the assurance that 
he himself, the spiritual person, Jesus, lived ; we have but the formal part of the truth 
before us when we say that his body was restored to life. The bodily manifestationa 
during the forty days were necessary, in order to give the disciples and us such proofs 
as they and we can apprehend, of the real continuance of the life of Jesus himself; 
through these sensible proofs our minds grasp the fact that " he ever liveth." The 
" spiritual " cannot be apprehended by us save by the help of figure, body, and form ; 
and our Lord's whole life on the earth is a gracious bringing home to our carnal minds 
of spiritual truths and realities by sensible appearances and deeds and words. Luke 
briefly declares the sufficiency of the proofs of the Besurrection. Each point may be 
illustrated and enforced by the facts detailed in the Gospels, and by the summary given 
ia 1 Cor. xv. 

L The time covered by the i>EO0F8 wab prolonged. It was forty days. Any 
sudden and passing manifestation of Christ might be explained as a mental delusion 
or a ghostly vision. The time, in this case, gave sufficient opportunity for tebting the 
veritablenoss of Christ's restored life. Spirit-manifestations never remain for forty 



IL The ocoasions on which the proofs were givbii weub mant. For them 
see Paul's summary (1 Cor. xv.). Some were given at Jerusalem; others in Galilee ; 
others, again, at Olivet. Some on the shore ; others on the mountain ; others, again, in 
the house. Some witlKhe sound of voice which all recognized ; others with the showing 
of the crucifixion marks ; others with the sharing of bodily food ; and yet others with 
the signs of the old miraculous |X)wer. Impress the force that lies in cumulative 
evidence. 

III. The witnesses who testify to the proofs weke various. Individual men 
may be selected, such as the sceptical Thomas, or the questioning Philip, and the 
value of their testimony may be shown. But equally important is the witness of 
Peter's intensity and John's insight. Add the evidence of the women, and that of 
" five hundred " disciples, to the majority of whom personal appeal could be made when 
Paul wrote to the Corinthians. Show what a stream of witnesses. They " crowd the 
court." Was ever any fact more adequately assured by sober testimony and sensible 
proofs, such. as ought to carry conviction? 

IV. The subject of Christ's teaohino in the fobtt days was the same. 
The importance of this continuity needs to be carefully shown. Jesus resumed his 
work, carried it on from the point where he left off, completing his personal instructions 
to his disciples, with precise adaptation to his new relations as the risen and ascending 
Lord, and to their new duty as the preachers of his gospel to the world. Eeally in this 
lies the best proof of the Resurrection. 

Impress the security of the foundation fact on which the gospel rests. Christ " is 
risen," and our preaching is " not vain." — R. T. 

Vers. 4, 6. — " The promise of the Father." It was • characteristic feature of our 
Lord's teaching, and more especially of the clo-sing port on-* (if it, that he sought to set 
his Father, not himself, prominently before the minds of his disciples: e.g, " The Father 
that is in me, he doeth the works;" " I do the will (if him who sent me," etc. So, 
when speaking of the gift of the Spirit to the Church, our Lord impresses on the 
disciples that they must think of that Spirit as his Father's gift, made to them /or his 
sake. We are to regard the bestowment of <;he Spirit in difterent ways. 1. He is the 
very Spirit given as Divine endowment for the fulfilling of the old prophets' missions ; 



f8 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. 1. 1—26, 



jivea as Divine endowment for the mission of the apostles and of the Church. 2. He 
's the fulfilment of the assurance that Christ would " come again," to ahide ever with 
his Church. 3. He is sent by the Son. 4. He is the gift of the Father. 6. He is 
sent by the Father and the Son. Allusion may be made to the disputes and separa- 
tion of the Eastern and Western Churches on the subject of the " procession of the Holy 
Ghost ; " and the importance of accepting the " many-sidedness " of Divine revelation 
should be urged, even if intellectually we find ourselves unable to fit the Taried 
aspects into a satisfactory harmony. Our Lord would glorify the Father to our 
thought, by assuring us that the unspeakably precious gift of the Holy Ghost is his 
gift to us, the abiding sign and pledge of his " so great love," and the fulfilment of his 
own " promise " to us. This iioint we take for enlargement and enforcement. 

I. By whom wab the promise made? 1. By God, but by God conceived as the 
" Father ; " so we may find in it signs of the fatherly wisdom, tender consideration, 
and gracious adaptation to our need. Impress how the preciouaness of the Spirit to us 
is enhanced by this assurance — he is our Father's gift. His " Great-heart guide" for 
his jiilgrim sons. 2. By God, but through Christ, who conveys to us our Father's 
promise. See the special occasions (John xiv. 16, 17, 26; xv. 26 ; xvi. 7 — 15, etc.). 
Show how the messenger, through whom the Father's promise is made, enhances the 
value of the promise. An element of tender feeling and" sympathy is added to it. 

II. What does the PEOMisft concern ? Set out its first form, the coming of the 
Holy Ghost, under sensible figures, as a Divine ordination and endowment of the 
ipostles and early Church for their mission. This ordination may be compared with 
that of Christ after his baptism, and the figures under which the Spirit came in the two 
cases should be compared. For Christ, a symbolic dove; for apostles, symbolic wind 
inAjwe. Set out \\» permanent form — the indwelling of the Holy Ghost in the believer, 
is his seal, eamest,andL assurance of the culture of the spiritual life ; and the abiding of 
the Holy Ghost in the Church, as its inspiration'to the fulfilment of its mission. 

HI. Why was such a promise made? 1. Because of the dependency of the 
disciples on Divine aid. Then and now disciples are not " sufiicient of themselves ; " 
" without Christ we can do nothing." 2. Btcauie in carrying out the Divine purpose 
of redemption the bodily presence of Christ had to be removed, and so a sense of 
loneliness and helplessness would oppress the disciples. 3. Because God is ever want- 
ing to help us on from carnal and bodily to spiritual conceptions of himself and his 
work, both in us and by us. 

Conclude by showing how the promise gains character by being called the Father's. 
It is evidently a promise made to sons. Then practically and forcibly impress that our 
Father will only keep his promise if we keep the spirit and temper, the openness and 
obedience, of loving and trusting sonship. — B. T. 

Vers. 6, 7. — Carnal conceptions of Chrisfs kingdom. With these our Lord had to 
do battle all through his ministry. These so filled the minds of his disciples that they 
were unable to receive aright much of his spiritual teachings. Many of our Lord's 
sayings can be explained as being designed to correct this mistake, remove this preju- 
dice, and adequately assure his disciples and us of the spiritual nature of the kingdom 
he came to set up. Though not in precisely the same way, yet quite as truly, the 
visibility and outward circumstance of Christ's Church may, in our day, occupy our 
thought rather than its spiritual character and work, and therefore our Lord's cautions 
to his apostles may be applicable to us. The dream of an " outward and visible " king- 
dom has not yet altogetlier faded, and given place to the sober reality of the existing 
" inward and spiritual " one. Christ is a King, but he is King of truth-seekers ; he is 
" Lord of lambs the lowly, King of saints the holy." Show what the carnal concep- 
tions were that the apostles cherished: the breaking off of the Koman 3'oke; the 
restoration of Israelite independence ; the resumption of the Davidic kingdom under 
the Messiah. Show — 

L Whence these C0NCEPTI0N^ sprano. Distinguish between the tone of prophecy 
and Messianic allusion before and after the " Captivity." Tendency of national circum- 
stances to set prominently the promise of a Deliverer and King, and to set aside tha 
figure of Messiah as a crushed Sufferer. Then show the influence exerted by tha 
Mewianic conception of Daniel, and yet that the Jews did not t^ke it in its entirety. 



oa. 1. 1—26.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 43 



Further point out how the Maccahean princes became Messianic models, and the idea 
cherished was that Messiah would prove to be a national Hero and Saviour, accomplish- 
ing the work permanently which Judas Maccabeus had only achieved temporarily. 
The merely national idea of Messiah cannot be based on a full treatment of the 
Messianic representations of Holy Scripture. 

IL How WERK THESE CONCEPTIONS NOTJMSHED ? Partly by the national condition 
in our Lord's time. Patriotic feeling was crushed down by the strong Roman rule ; 
but patriotism, though it may be crushed down, cannot be crushed out, and indeed 
only becomes more dangerous to oppressors by being silenced. Partly by the hopeless 
condition of religion, which called for a great reformer ; and, in the later monarchy, 
the reformers had been kings. Partly by the personal ambitions of the disciples, as 
illustrated by the request of the sons of Zebedee for the first places in the new conrt. 
To be faithful to the truth has often required resistance to surrounding sentiments and 
circumstances. Such resistance is only made by high-minded men. 

III. How THESE CONCEPTIONS WERE OPPOSED BY Chhist. Take: 1. The general 
tone of his teaching, as illustrated in' the sermon on the mount. 2. The prominence 
in which he set his sufferings, especially after the Transfiguration. 3. The rebuke ol 
those who would use carnal weapons for his defence, as to Peter outside the Garden of 
Gethsemane. 4. The distinct explanation of the nature of his kingship, as stated to 
Pilate. In spite of all his efforts with his disciples, we find the carnal notions of Messial i 
lingering in them (see Luke xix. 11 ; xxiv. 21) ; and they seem to have been revived 
by that very resurrection which should have finally removed them. This is indicated 
in the text. Our Lord's last effort to destroy them is full of wisdom and gentleness. 
He says in effect, " Don't think about it ; bend your whole mind and heart to two 
things — (1) your great life-work, and (2) the Divine presence that will be with you for 
its fulfilment " (ver. 8). The true corrective for intellectiml error is still that which our 
Lord commands, viz. Christian work. — E. T. 

Ver. 9. — The Ascension as the visible sign of the acceptance of the Redeemer. If the 
secret of the Eedeemer's life on the earth be this — that he was working out for us a 
man's obedience to God in a human body and human spheres, then the closing scenes 
of the record of that life may be thus represented. In the struggle of Gethsemane our 
Eedeemer's soul won a full triumph of trust, submission, and obedience. This inward 
soul-triumph was tested and proved, and came off perfectly and triumphantly victorious, 
in the bodily shame and suffering, and even in the death-agony, of Calvary. As a 
" man," his spirit and purpose of obedience, and his actually doing and bearing in 
obedience, were thus perfectly tested and proved. What remained necessary to con- 
stitute him a perfect and all-sufficient burnt offering, to be presented to Gud for us 1 
Manifestly this alone, that God himself should give some adequate and visible sign 
to us that with Christ he was infinitely well pleased, and that he would accept him as 
our Sacrifice. , And just this we have in the Eesurreclion and Ascension. God raised 
him from the dead. God received him to his own right hand in the heavenly places. 
Disciples saw him go up to God; and if Enoch was manifestly accepted of God because 
of his translation ; and if Elijah was declared to be God's prophet by his wondrous 
fire-journey into the unseen world ; much more was the Lord Jesus declared to be the 
" Son of God," and the accepted Sacrifice, by that breaking of grave-bonds, and passing, 
to mortal vision, up within the clouds. Our Eedeemer's work may be said to lack 
completeness until his soul-triumph of trust and submission, and his bodily act of 
obedience, in enduring the cross, as God's will for him, have manifestly and in 
some open way gained the acknowledgment and acceptance of God. The Ascensi(jn 
properly completes the Eesurrection, and both together are the Divine acceptance 
of the perfect Son, and the acceptance, be it remembered, of humanity in him 
who was its Head and Representative. Then two thoughts may be unfolded and 
illustrated — 

I. The Ebsueeection is the acknowledgment of man's victory. That is o( 
Christ, as man, for man ; of man in Christ. It is his victory over self, the evil power; 
and over sin, the evil consequence. Christ mastered self, and obeyed perfectly, as a 
Son. -Christ broke the bonds of death; for the penalties of transgression caimot lie on 
On« who i» infinitely acceptable. Now, in Christ, self is no unbeaten foe 5 and "death 



44 fSa AC*W Of The AtOStLES. [ca L 1-26. 



Lath no more dominion over us." We have hope in the struggle ■with self. We have 
security against the penalties of sin. In Christ death cannot hold us. 

11. The Ascension is the beqinnino of givino the Viotob the Victor's placb 
AND HONOUB. He is " highly exalted, and given a name ahove every name." He is 
" glorified with more than the glory which he had with the Father before the world 
was." Exalted to position of highest honour, to a place of power and authority ; 
entrusted with the " bringing on of sons to glory ; " empowered to give repentance to 
Isriel, and remission of sins ; set on God's right hand, our one Mediator and Intercessor ; 
and "Head over all things to his Church." In heaven we may not conceive him as 
dissociated from the place, relation, and work of earth, but occupying these still in 
relation to us, only in altogether higher, more efficient, and spiritual modes. He is the 
" Captain, or Author, of salvation." Able now, as the ascended Lord, " to save unto the 
uttermost all that come unto Gkxi by him." — ^B. T, 

Vers. 10, 11.— Chrisi's coming again. The scene needs sympathetic description 
Effort should be made to realize the state of mind of the disciples on thus a second time 
losing their Master, and this time losing him in so strange and surprising a manner. 
It would seem that they had been prepared for the Ascension by the singularity of our 
Lord's movements during the forty days. Again and again he seems to have closed a 
time of communion with them by " vanishing out of their sight." On this occasion he 
not only " vanished," but " ascended," went up from them heavenward. As the disciples 
gazed upwards they may have expected an immediate reappearance out of the cloud ; 
it seemed to them some surprising display of their Lord's power and glory. And so 
the truth must be gently broken to them, that they had now finally lost their Lord 
out of visible and sensible apprehension. This was the mission of the angels, who may 
be identified with the two who attended our Lord on his resurrection morning 
(Luke xxiv. 4—7). The point of their message is, " Your Lord will come again some 
day, but not now. He will come in suddenness and in unexpected ways, 'in like 
manner' as ye have seen him go away; and, until he comes, your duty is not 'gazing,' 
but carrying out, in simple and loving obedience, the commands he has left." 
Evidently the angels, while assuring the fact of Christ's " coming again," design to 
correct the mistaken thought of that coming which was in the minds of the disciples. 
The parts of their message may be thus set forth. 

I. The Saviour was, fob the present, gone out op the sphere of the senses. 
For three years the disciples had enjoyed sensible fellowship with their Lord. All 
that time he had been trying to teach them the deeper truth concerning himself and 
his relations with them. For forty days after his resurrection the sensible fellowship 
had been renewed, but under conditions which should have prepared the disciples for 
their Lord's spiritual presence without the aid of sensible manifestations. At the 
Ascension they were plainly taught that the sensible helps were removed; for them 
there was no more " Christ in the flesh." Show how this bore on the culture and 
training of the disciples; and how it recalled the Saxiour's own words, "It is 
expedient for you that I go away." In all training, and not in least religious training, 
it is well for crutches and helps to be presently removed, that we may try -our own 
feet. Illustrate how this is still done for us in the ordering of Providence, as for the 
disciples in the Ascension. "Looking," "gazing," "expecting" visible appearances 
of Christ out of the clouds, is declared by the angels not to be the appropriate duty of 
the hour. 

II. The Savioub had made every provision for them in his bodily absence. 
They are recalled to consider the commands he had left. An immediate duty was 
before them — to wait together at Jerusalem for the gift of the Spirit. A great work 
was entrusted to their charge : they were to be Christ's witnesses through the whole 
world. An all-sufficing prom,ise had been made them — they should " receire power" 
for the efficient carrying out of their work, in the energy of the Holy Ghost. 

III. The Saviour would now come to thkm, but in a transcendekt and 
spiritual WAT. This is really the meaning of the angels' words " in 'ike manner," 
" in a like glorious and surprising manner," not " in a like bodily manner." And, 
according to Christ's own promise, he did at once come again spiritually, to abide in his 
people ; to be " with them always," No conceptions of future sensible manifestations of 



CfflLLl— 26.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 41 

the Son of God slionld be permitted to weaken our conviction that Christ is now with 
u». He has come, he " makes his abode with us." And the present spiritual Christ 
is a present sanctifying power. The coming of Christ again to his Church in some 
sensible form is intended to be a secondary thought ; bearing relation to Christian 
culture as holding Out before ua a high and ennobling object of hope. But it is 
properly to be regarded as " the sweet light away yonder " which cheers us while we 
set heartily to the doing of Chri.-it's work in the world, under the daily inspirations 
and leadings of Christ's spiritual presence. — E. T. 

Vers. 12 — 14. — New associations with the upper chamber. In the Revised Version 
" an upper room " is translated " the upper chamber," which permits us to identify the 
place of the " tarrying of the disciples " with the obamlier in which Christ's last words 
were spoken, and the Lord's Supper was instituted. Show what indications there are 
that some of the disciples had private dwellings in Jerusalem. John took the mother 
of our Lord to hia own home ; Mary, the mother of Mark, had a house to which Puter 
went; Nicodomus, as a ruler, would have a large house; and if Joseph of Arimathsea 
had a private garden and tomb outside the city, we may be sure that he had a mansion 
inside. Recall the suggestions and associations of this " upper chambor."' How full it 
would be of the presence of their Master! How solemn with the rccolleelion of his 
words, and the sufferings through which he had passed I It was a " holy place." Set 
out the individuality of the company — the apostles, tlie women, the disciples. Need 
not' think that all the disciples made by our Lord were assonibleil here. The 
hundred and twenty names only represented those in Jerusalem, and thobe from the 
country who were attending the feast. Fixing attention on the attitude and occupa- 
tions of this company, we see illnstratedT— 

L The union of believers. " One accord." The basis of the accordance was their 
common faith in Christ. It is the only basis of unity for the Church still. One in 
Christ. Brothers because sons. 

II. The waiting op obedient trust. They did not know what was coming. 
They could not have explained their Lord's promise. They did not uudtrstand or 
know, but they could trust, and show the trust by simple obedience. 

III. The occupation of waiting bblibveks. They "continue in prayer."' Prayer, 
which is " the Christian's vital breath," is the Cliuich's " atmosphere." And they who 
are sincerely waiting /or God will be found constantly and earnestly waiting on him. 
For even the fulfilment of his promises God loves " to be inquired of by the house of 
Israel, to do it for them."— E. T. 

Vers. 16 — 19. — Judas, an apostle. That Judas should have been selected by Christ 
has occasioned much difficulty to Bible-readers. It is assumed that our Divine Lord, 
by his omniscient power, must have known what Judas really was, and what Judas 
would ultimately do. But it is so difficult for us to realize that, in gracious conde- 
scension, God put himself, in Christ, within the limitations and conditions of man- 
hood ; and as our Lord would not use his miraculous powers to provide for his own 
necessities, so he would not use his own miraculous knowledge to secure himself 
against the changes and possible crimes of his disciples. Keeping our thought of 
our Lord's divinity back in our minds, we are to see that, in the selection of Judas,, 
our Lord acted as a good and wise teacher might to-day. He estimated the qualities 
of Judas, and his fitness for the apostolic ofSce, and on the ground -of these he called 
him. That Judas had some special fitnes.ses, which others than Christ could i-ecngnize, 
is shown in the fact that all a<:reedto his having the trust of the money ^John xiii. 29). 
Possibly for his practical business abilities he was chosen. Our Lord was conde- 
scendingly pleased to order his human life on the earth by his ordinary intellectual 
abilities as a man, and not by his Divine omniscience. And in this lies the great 
marvel of his humiliation and limitation. Nothing is said, on the occasion of the call 
of the apostles, to mark Judas off in any way. He is, indeed, named last, but this may 
have been due to the subsequent feeling of his brethren against him. That Jesus did 
absolutely know the character of the betrayer is indicated in John vi. 64, 70, 71 ; but 
his allusions to him were not at the time understood by the apostles. The evil side 
of hia chaiaoter comes to view in John xiL 6. His plot for the betrayal of Jesus may 



46 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. 1. 1—26. 



be given in detail. The idea that he deluded himself to suppose that his action would 
bring matters to a crisis, and lead Christ to declare himself and set up his kingdom, 
seouis hardly tenable. If such was his thouglit, his money-loving gaze was set on 
securing the chief place of trust in the new kingdom. His, vice was covetousness. 
These remarks indicate so luUy the line of thought respecting the office and the 
character of Judas, that we need give little more than the main topics needing treat- 
ment. Tlie effort should be made to show that a root of evil lay in the very disposition 
ol Judas; the circumstances in which he was placed ought to have checked its growth, 
and even turned it from evil to good. Instead of this, the circumstances were misused — 
miule to foster the evil into strength; and at last there came blossom and fruitage at 
which Judas himself, a little while befure, would have shuddered. In this there is a 
solemn lesson for all time. We want to keep and cheiish such a daily openness tc 
Ood, ihat his grace shall sanctify all surrounding circumstances and influences to our 
good culture. 

I. The eablt peomise. "Once fair for the celestial city.'' Singulaily privileged in 
call to apostloship. Early sincerity without deptli. Usefulness fur business qualities. 

II. This fatal testings. Privilege was too great. Trust of money tested his one 
great weakness — money-loving. Opportunity of peculation became too great a tempta- 
tion. Life finds scenes that surely test what we really are. 

III. The awful crime. The utter baseness of Judas's action should be fully shown. 
Intense moral imlignation against all betrayers of trusts or of friends is perfectly right. 
The infinite tenderness and long-suffering of the Lord Jesus make this betrayal the 
worst ever known on earth. Is it possible that men nowadays may commit Judas's 
crime ? If so, how ? 

IV. The miserable end. Eemorse came. It is ever bitter and hopeless. It drove 
to suicide. Judas hanged himself in the very field bought with the rewards of his 
iniquity ; and, being heavy, when they cut him down his body was miserably broken 
in its fall. The story adds the uttermost shame to the worst of crimes. 

Learn that owe evil disposition, if unchecked, may poison a whole life ; and that this 
is peculiarly true if the evil disposition be covetousness. — E. T. 

Vers. 16 — 20. — Jewish Christian reading of the Old Testament. The Jews set an 
extraordinary value on their ancient Scriptures. They edited them v\'ith the utmost 
care; counted letters and words to ensure that no changes were made; read in them 
with regularity and order at synagogue-worship; and made elaborate commentaries on 
them. Of all these things details may be given. We notice — 

I. That references to Messiah in the Old Testament were fully becognized 
BY the Jews. A part alttigether from the question — In wliom do we find the Messianic 
promise realized? it is well for us distinctly to see that the Jews always did, and do 
still, clearly recogn e the Messianic feature of their ancient Scriptures. Christians do 
not import tliis element into them. 8o Christians and Jews have a common standing- 
oround and basis of argument. And from this common standpoint the apostles make 
tlieir apieals. With an open Bible they plead for Christ's claim to fulfil the predictions 
conceiiimg Messiah. But we can hardly say that the Jewish modes of reading and 
translating the ancient Scriptures are altogether satisfactory to us as Christians in 
these days. The intense national feeling concerning Messiah made them over-heen to 
discover Messianic allusions, and they had ways of allegorizing and spiritualizing which 
we are unable to appreciate. Some of the so-called proofs, from Old Testament 
Scriplures, given by the apostles a]ipear to us to be illustrations rather than argumen- 
tative proofs. We cannot find any designed reference to Judas Iscariot in the passage 
here taken from the Psalms, only an appropriateness in the historical allusion to oije 
^^ ho, though righteous, was a victim :f treachery. The psalmist presents a parallel case 
10 that of Judas ; but to recognize this suffices for us, and we need not see a definite 
prophecy of the betrayer. Urge the essential unity and harmony of God's Word in its 
great principles, which find repetition in every age. Show that we endeavour first fully 
to apprehend the original, local, and historical reference of a passage, and from it 
gather the principle which may be of permanent application. Further point out that 
distinct Messianic references, many and various in form, can be traced ; but caution is 
accessary, lest we force these und'aly, and add to them upon insufScieut grounds. W« 



OB. 1. 1—20.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 47 

recognize two senses of Scripture, which may be called (1) the literal and historical j 
and (i) the moral and mystical. For the first we need culture, for the second spiritual 
insight and sympathy. Then — if we have tliese fitnesses — to us the Bible seems to b« 
full of Christ, because of the truths he came to declare, and the Itfe he came on earth 
to live — the life of believing and obedient sonship to God. 

II. To THESE Messianic beferenoes in the Old Testament the aposties had a 
QiTicKEKED VISION. They knew well the life-story of the Lord Jesus. They fully 
believed him to be the Messiah. With this in their minds, the Old Testament seemed 
to them to be full of him. But there was some danger of extravagance. They were 
liable to bring the IMessiahship into passages, rather than to find him in them. The 
IJnine Spirit in them needed to be fully followed, as "leading them into all truth." 
At the time of Peter's speech the special gift of the Spirit had not come to the apostles ; 
so we have only Peter's opinion, and must take it for what it may be worth. Impress 
our duty to Qod's sacred Word. The reverence with which it should ever be treated j 
the auxiety we should cherish lest, to any portion of it, we should give a private and 
self-willed interpretation ; the need for constant openness to the leadings of the Holy 
Spiiit; and the certainty tliat he will help lu to find Christ everywhere, the "Alpha 
and Omega " of the Book.— B. T. 

Vers. 21 — 26. — First signs of order in the early Church. In introducing this 
subject, notice may be taken of the idea that the apostolic body must number twelve. 
It was a purely Jewish conception, based on the fact that the tribes composing the 
nation were twelve. But it was a notion suited to the formality of the age, which 
made so much of numbers, and washings, and ordinances, and ceremonies. It does not 
appear that our Lord made any sacredness attach to the number ; nor did he, after hia 
resurrection, make any suggestions as to the filling up of the betrayer's office. It may 
further be shown that the conditions of apostleship laid down by Peter are not other- 
wise indicated. He seems to have gained the idea by dwelling on the fact that the 
apostles were to be. Christ's witnesses ; but our Lord's call to witness was made to 
disciples as well as to apostles. It would rather seem that the one thing essential to 
apostleship was direct appointment to office by the Lord Jesus Christ himself. In this 
view we can fully understand the claim St. Paul makes to the rights, standing, and 
authority of an apostle. The Revised Version makes a suggestive change iu ver. 23, 
reading "they put forward," for "they appointed;" intimating that candidates were 
first solecied by the apostles, and then " put forward " before the entire body of disciples, 
who made the definite choice. Regarded as the first effort to secure system and order 
among the Christian disciples, we may find indications of the early recognition of five 
great practical principles — the five which have been variously powerful in shaping the 
order of the various Christian communities as one or the other of them has gained 
prominence. We do little more than state the principles, leaving the questions of 
their relative values, their adaptations to present religious lile, and their influence on 
thp formation of different ecclesiastical organizations. 

I. The principle ow the need fob offices in the Christian Church. This is 
universally recognized. The offices are arranged with more or less precise copying of 
the e.uly Church models, and with varying sense of the elasticity of the principle. 
One thing needs to be carefully impressed, viz. that all offices are /or use — ^for the order 
and editioation of the Church. 

II. The pbinoiplb of the rights of the community. All being believers, having 
the new life and the indwelling Spirit, — all may and should take part in the proposed 
election. This principle is recognized in all Churches, but is less prominent in some 
than in others. Prudence provides limitations of the claims which it might inspire. 

IIL The principle of the executive bights of Christ. He is the living and 
present Head and Ruler of the Church, and must be thought of as actually presiding; 
not only having given us laws, but actually presiding over their execution. All 
officials in a Church are Christ's ministers and agents, simply carrying out his will. 

IV. The principle of the bight of judicious selection. A large number of 
I uoplc cannot make wise and united selection of suitable men for suitable offices. This 
is a very practical principle, which prudence would have established if for it there had 
been no early Church precedent. It is found useful in all societies and associutiona 
of men. 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. n. 1 — 47. 



V. The PBDtoiPLB of election by the -whole commttnitt. All the Church joined 
in the act of choosing one of the two selected ones. It may be impressed that thes? 
simple and practical principles lie at the very foundation of Ciiurch order, and that the 
healthy working of Church systems depends upon the wise applications made of 
t' em, relative to the circumstances of national and social surroundings, and tbe 
" geuius " of the community ao ordered. — K. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEE II. 



Ver. 1. — Was now come for UMufuUy eome, 
A.V. ; all together for with one accord, A.V. 
and T.B. When the day of Pentecost was 
now oome ; literally, when the day of Pent^- 
coet — i.e. of the fiftieth day — wot in the 
aiurse of being completed. The fiftieth day 
(reckoned from the end of the 16th of 
Nisan, on which Jesus was crucified) was 
actually come, but was not ended (comp. 
Luke ix. . 11). All together ; dfiov for 
S/iiev/uiioi/l but diioduiiaSSv — a favourite 
word in the Acts (oh. iv. 24, note)— seems 
preferable to S/iov, which occurs only in 
St. John. In one place (see ch. i. 15, note). 
The purpose, doubtless, of their coming 
together wus for prayer, as in oh. 1. 14 ; and 
the third hour (9 a.m., ver. 15), the hour of 
offering the morning sacrifice, was close at 
hand (comp. ch. ill. 1 and Lute i. 10). 

Ver. 2. — From heaven a sound for a 
sound from heaven, A.V. ; oa of the rushing 
of a for as of a rushing, A.V. All the 
house ; showing that it was in a private 
dwelling, not in the temple (as in ch. iii. 1) 
that they were assembled (see ch. ii. 46). 
Perhaps the word " church " (i Kvpiaxhs 
olKos) derives its use from these early meet- 
ings of the disciples in a house, as dis- 
tinguished from the temple (rh Uphii). 

Ver. 8. — Tongues parting cunmder for 
(^ven tongues, A.V. ; each one for each, 
A.V. There appeared. They had heard 
the sound, now they see the tongues of fire, 
and then they feel the Spirit working 
in them (see ver. 34). Tongues parting 
asunder. The idea of the cloven tongue, i.e. 
a tongue parted into two, which is thought 
to have been the origin of the mitre, is 
not sugjijested either by the Greek or by 
the circumstances, and is clearly a mistaken 
one. ^la/iepiCS/jLevai means distributing them- 
.Jves or being distributed. From the central 
apparition, or rather place of sound, they 
saw iesuing forth many several tongues, look- 
ing like small flames of fire, and one such 
tongue eat upon each one of tlie brethren or 
disciples present. Each one. ThatChrysos- 
tom is right ('Horn.' iv.) in interpreting 
the each one of this verse of the hundred 
and twenty, and not of the twelve, and the 
all in ver. 4 of all present besides the 



apostles, may be demonstrated. For not 
only must the all of ver. 1 refer to the same 
company as was described in the preceding 
chapter (vers. 15 — 26), but it is quite clear 
in ver. 15 of this chapter that Peter and 
the eleven (ver. 14), standing up separate 
from the body of the disciples, say of them, 
"These are not drunken, as ye suppose;" 
which is a demoristrution that those of 
whom they thus spoke had been speaking 
with tungues (see also ch. x. 44). St. 
Augustine, too, says tliat the hundred and 
twenty all received the Holy Spirit. To 
the same effect Meyer, Wordsworth, Alford 
(who adds, " Not the hundred and twenty 
only, but all the believers in Christ then 
congregated at Jerusalem : " so also Lsmge). 
Parrar well remarks, "It was the consecra- 
tion of a whole Church, ... to be all of 
them a chosen generation, a royal priest- 
hood, a holy nation, a peculiar people" 
('Life of St. Paul,' ch. v.). Lange sayi, 
" Not only the apostles, but all the disciples, 
were filled with the Holy Ghost. . . . There 
is a universal priesthood of all believers, 
and the Holy Ghost is the anointing which 
consecrates and qualifies for this priest- 
hood " (' On the Acts,' Clark's edit., p. 67). 
Ver. 4:.—8pint for Ghost, A.V. Other 
tongues (1 <>)r. xiv. 21; Isa. xxviii. 11); 
the same as the " new tongues "of Mark xvi. 
17. St. Paul speaks of them as " the tongues 
of men and of angels " (1 Cor. xiii. 1), and 
as "kinds of tongues" (1 Cor. xii. 10). 
His habitual phrase is "speaking in [or 
ieith'] a tongue [or tongues] " (1 Cor. xiv. 2, 
4 — 6, etc.), and the verb is always KaXetv, 
as here. What these tongues were on this 
occasion we are explicitly informed in vers. 
6, 8, and 11. They were the tongues of the 
various nationalities present at the feast — 
Parthians, Modes, Elamites, Mesopotamians, 
Egyptians, Phrygians, Arabians, etc. This 
is so clearly and so distinctly stated that it 
is astonishing that any one should deny 
it who accepts St. Luke's account as his- 
torical'. The only room for doubt is whether 
the speakers spoke in these divers languages, 
or the hearers heard in them though the 
speakers spoke in only one toT»guo. But 
not to mention that this is far more diffi- 
cult to imagine, and transf«?rs the miraola 
from those who had the Holy Spirit fc» 



ou. u. 1 — 47.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



4« 



tliosH who had it not, it is against the plain 
language of the text, which tella us that 
" they began to speak with other tongues," 
aud that " every man heard them apeakiug 
in his own language." "Speaking," said 
they, " in our own tongues the mighty works 
of God." There may, indeed, have been 
something ecstatic besides in tliuse utter- 
ances, but there is no reference to such 
made either by St. Lnke oi by the audience 
whose words he reports. The. narrative 
before us does not hint at any after use of 
the gift of tongues for missionary purposes. 
In oh. X. 46 ; xL 15 — 17 ; xix. 6, aa well as 
in the passages above referred to in the 
First Epistle to the Corinthians, the speak- 
ing with tongues is always spoken of — often 
in connection with prophecy — simply as \ 
gift and a manifestation (1 Cor. xii. 7) of 
the power of the Holy Spirit In this case 
und in ch. x. 46 the subject-matter of the 
utterance is the greatness of Ghid's works ; rck 
fjLeya^cTa ToO 6eoO* fjLeya\vv6pTuv rl>y 9fhu, 
In 1 Cor. xlv. 2 it is " mysteries;" in ver. 15, 
" prayers and psalms ; " in ver. 16 it is 
" blessing " and " thanksgiving " {evhoyla 
and cuxapiiTT^a). But nowhere, either in 
Holy Scripture or in the Fathers of the 
three first centuries, is the gift of tongues 
spoken of in connection with preaching to 
foreign nations (see Alford's just remarks). 
Farrar (' Life of St. Paul,' vol. i. pp. 98—101) 
takes the same view, bnt is much less 
distinct in bis conxseption of what is meant 
here by speaking with tongues. He adheres 
to the view of Sohneokenburger, that " the 
tongue was, from its own force and sig- 
nificance, intelligible ec^ually to all who 
heard it ; " he agrees with the dictum of 
Neander that " any foreign languages which 
were spoken on this occasion were only 
sometliing accidental, and not the essential 
element of the language of the Spirit." 
He says, "The voice they uttered was 
awful in its range, in its tones, in its modu- 
lations, in its startling, penetrating, almost 
ippalling power; the words they spoke 
were exalted, intense, passionate, full of 
mystic significance ; the language Ihey used 
was not their ordinary and familiar tongue, 
but was Hebrew,_or Greek, or Latin, or 
Aramaic, or Persian, or Arabic, as some 
overpowering and Dnconscious impulse of 
the moment might direct, . . . and among 
these strange sounds . . . there were some 
which none could Interpret, which rang on 
the air like the voice of barbarous lan- 
guages, and which . . . conveyed no 
definite significance beyond the fact that 
they were reverberations of one and the 
same ecstasy." The writer seems to suggest 
that when any real language was spoken it 
was one more or less known previously by 
the speaker, and that in other cases it wa» 
AUTa. 



no language at all, only thrilling emotional 
•ouuds. Kenan's view of the day of Pente- 
cost is a curious specimen of rationalistio 
interpretation. " One day when the brethren 
were come togethet there was a tempest, 
A violent wind burst open the windows, an« 
the sky was one sheet of fire. In that cli- 
mate tempests are oltea accompanied by an 
extraordinary amount of electric light. The 
atmosphere is ob all sides furrowed with 
jets of flame. On this occasion, whether 
the electric fluid actually passed through 
the room, or Whether the faces of all present 
were suddenly lit up by an extremely briglit 
flash of lightniug, all were convinced that 
the Holy Spirit had entered their assembly, 
and had sat upon the head of each in the 
shape of a tongue of fire. ... In these 
moments of ecstasy, the disciple possessed by 
the Spirit uttered sounds inarticulate and 
incoherent, which the hearers fancied were 
the words of a strange language, and in 
their simplicity tried to interpret . , . They 
listened eagerly to the medley of soundsi 
and explained them by their own extem- 
poraneous thoughts. Each of them had 
recourse to his own native paleit to supply 
some meaning to the unintelligible accents, 
and generally succeeded in affixing to tbeiu 
the thoughts that were uppermost in hit 
own mind " (' Les Apotres,' pp. 66-^68). 
Elsewhere (pp. 64, 65) he suggests that the 
whole conception of ipeaking with toAguet 
arose from tlie anticipation on the part of 
the apostles that great difficulty would 
arise in propagating the gospel from the 
impossibility of learning to speak tha 
necessary languages. The solution with 
some was that, under the ecstasy caused 
by the Holy Spirit, the hearers would be 
able to translate what they heard into their 
own tongue ; otUei s rather thought that by 
the same power the apostles would be able 
to speak any dialect they pleased at tha 
moment. Hence the conception of tiie day 
of Pentecost as described by St Luke I 
Meyer, again, fully admits, as "beyond all 
doubt," that St Luke intended to narrate 
that the persons possessed by the Spirit 
spoke in foreign languages previously un- 
known by them ; but adds that " the sudden 
communication of a facility of_ speaking 
foreign languages is neither logically pos- 
sible nor psychologically and morally con- 
ceivable" (a pretty bold assertion); and 
therefore he sets down St Luke's account 
of what occurred as " a later legendary for- 
mation," based upon the existing yhuirao- 
\a\ltt. Zeller, tiavelling a little further on 
the same road, c6mes to the conclusion that 
"the narrative before us is not based on 
any definite fact" (p. 205). Leaving, how- 
ever, these fanciful varieties of incredulous 
criticism, and interpreting the Btatcmonts of 



50 



THE ACTS OP THE aPOSTLES. 



[cH. u. 1—47. 



thii chapter ly the later spiritual gifts ai 
seen in the Church of Corinth, we conclude 
that the " tongues" were sometimes " tong ues 
of men," foreign languages unknown to the 
speakers, and of course unintelligible to the 
hearers unless any were present, as was 
the case on the day of Pentecost, who 
knew the language; aT>f> sometimes languages 
not of earth but of heaven, " tongues of 
angels." But there is no evidence whatever 
of their being mere gibberish as distinct 
from language, or being language coined 
at the moment by the Holy Ghost All 
that St. Paul says to the Corinthians is fully 
applicable to any language spoken when 
there were none present who understood it. 
The significance of the miracle seems to be 
that it points to the time when all shall be 
one in Christ, and shall all speak and under- 
stand the same speech ; and not only all 
men, but men and angels, " the whole family 
in heaven and earth," " things in the 
heavens and things upon the earth" all 
gathered together in one in Clirist. It 
may also not improbably have been used 
occasionally, as it was on the day of Pente- 
cost, to convey doctrine, knowledge, or ex- 
hortation, to foreign people ; but there is no 
no distinct evidence mat this was the ease. 

Ver. 5. — Nou) for and, A.V. ; frmn for out 
»/, A.V. Dwelling; either Jews come up 
for the feast, or perhaps rather domiciled at 
Jerusalem from motives of piety. 

Ver. 6. — And when this sound (tpairii) woe 
heard for now when this was noised abroad, 
A.V., which the words cannot mean ; speak- 
ing for speak, A.V. This sound. The ques- 
tion still remains whether the sound Qpavif) 
refers to the sound (^xos) of the rushing 
mighty wind mentioned in ver. 2, or to the 
voices of those who spake with tongues. If 
the last, we should rather have expected 
sounds or voices in the plural; and it is 
further in favour of the former that 7£i'o- 
liivris rris {puvrjs rairris seems to take up the 
iyhiro ijxos of ver. 2. The word <^(..v^ is 
applied to irycv/ia in John iii. 8. Nor iu it 
liiely, at first sight, that the disciplrs in tne 
house where they were sitting shouhi have 
spoken loud enough to attract the notice of 
people outside. Whereas the sound of a 
rushing mighty wind, sufliciert (as in ch. 
iii. 31) to shake the house, would naturally 
he heard by passers-by. On the other hand, 
however, (pavii seems to point decisively 
to the human voice (see its use, 1 Cor. 
xiv. 7—10). 

Ver. 7. — Saying for saying one to another, 
A.V. and T.K. Amazed (^IfffTavTo ; see 
ch. viii. 9, note). Galilseans ; describing 
merely their nationality. The Galilseau 
accent was peculiar and well known (see 
Mark siv. 70; hvke wil 59: Matt, uvi 



Ver. 8. — Language for tongue, A.V. Lan- 
guage (SiaKcKTip, as in ch. i. 19). It only 
occurs in the New Testament in the Acts, 
and may mean either language or dialect. 
Here it is properly rendered language, and 
is synonymous with yK^aaai^ in ver. 11. 

Ver. 9. — In Judasa for and in Judsea, A.V. 
Parthians and Medes and Elamites. These 
would be the Israelites of the first dis- 
persion, the descendants of those of the ten 
tribes who were deported by the Assyrians, 
•nd of whom the Afghans are pcrliaps a 
remnant, and of the first Babylojiian cap- 
tivity. Mesopotamia and Babylon were at 
this time in possession of the Parthians. 
Babylon was a great Jewish colony, the 
seat of " the priuces of the Captivity," and 
of one of the great rabbinical schools. 
Judaea. The mention of Judsea here is very 
odd, and can scarcely be right, both from 
its situation between Mesopotamia and 
Cappadocia, and because Jews (Jud«ans) 
are mentioned again in ver. 10 (where, how- 
ever, see note). India, which seems to have 
been in Chrysostom's Codex (' Horn.' iv., end 
of [3]), Idunuea, BUhynia, and Armenia, 
have all been suggested as conjectural 
emendations. One might have expected 
Galatia, with its difi'erent Celtic dialect, 
and which goes with Poutns, Cappadocia, 
and Asia in 1 Pet. i. 1 ; a passage, by the 
way, which shows that there were many 
Jews in those provinces : Aquila, too, was a 
Jew from Pontus (ch. xviii. 2). ATAIA, 
Lydia, would be very like lOTAAIA; but 
all manuscripts read Judiea. 

Ver. 10. — In Phrygia for Phrygia, A.V. ; 
the parts for in the parts, A.V. ; sojourners 
from for strangers of, A.V. ; both Jews for 
Jews, A.V. Asia ; t.e. " the western coast 
region of Asia Minor, including Caria, Lydia, 
and Mysia " (Meyer). " Ionia and Lydia, 
of which Ephesus was the capital, called 
Proconsular Asia" (Wordsworth and 
' Speaker's Commentary.* See ch. ix. 16, 
18 ; Rev. i. 4, etc.). Egypt, etc. These repre- 
sent the third great dispersion, that effected 
by Ptolemy Lagus. Some of this part ot 
the dispersion are mentioned as very hostile 
to Stephen (ch. vi. 9). " Two-fifths of the 
population of Alexandria were Jews." 
" Jews formed one quarter of the population 
of Cyrene " (' Speaker's Commentary.') See 
Matt, xxvii. 32 and ch. xiii. 1). And so- 
journers from Borne, both Jews and proselytes. 
The copula and couples the oi eViSTj^oCi/Tes 
'Pufioioi with the ol KaTuiKOVvTes t^v Meffo- 
vorafiiai', etc., of ver. 9. It is liters'ly, 
those of us who are Eoman sojourners at 
Jerusalem, whether Jews by race or proselytes. 
They were equally Eoman sojourners, 
whether they weie Jews whose hoine was 
at Rome or whether Ihey wt re prosely tes ; 
and it is an iulet'cstiug fact that there wer« 



OH. n. 1 — 47.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



U 



■uek pioselytes in the great capital of the 
heathen world. Scjoumera, as ia ch. xvii. 
21, the strangers sojourning at Athena. 
Many good commentators — Alford, Meyer, 
Leohler (in Lange, ' Bibel. Werke '). etc. — 
take the words " jews and proselytes " as 
applying to the wliole preceding list, not 
to the Boman sojourners only ; but in that 
case one would not expect Cretans and 
Arabians to follow. 

Ver. 11. — Cretans for Cretes, AV. ; speah- 
ing for speak, A.V. ; mighty for wonderful, 
A.V. (to fieyaKfTa). 

Ver. 12. — Perplexed for in doubt, A.V. 
and T.B. 

Ver. IS.^But others for others, A.V. ; they 
are filled, with for these men are full of, A.V. 
New wine ; more literally, sweet wine. These 
mockers, men incapable of serious and 
devout appreciation of the work of the Holy 
iS|)irit, attributed the tension of feeling 
which they saw, and the unintelligible 
wordd which they heard, to the effect of 
wine. So Festus said, " Paul, thou art mad." 
So the unbelieving Jews of Pontua and 
Asia thought it strange that the Christiang 
■hould live holily, and spake evil of them 
in consequence (1 Pet. iv. 4, 14). So lehmael 
mocked Isaac (Gen. xxi. 9) ; and so in all 
times " they that are born after the flesh 
do pei'secute them that are born after the 
Spirit" (Gal. iv. 29). 

Vers. 14 — 16. — Spake forth for said, A.V. ; 
give ear unto for hearken to, A.V. ; hath 
been spoken for was spoken, A.V. But Peter, 
etc. Peter stands up before tlie eleven as 
their primate, foremost in the authority of 
action as in precedence of place; and the 
apostles stand up before the multitude of 
believers, as those to whom Christ committed 
the government of his Church (see ch. i. 15). 
Spake forth (i.ire<l>e4-YiaTo, the same word as 
in ver. 4, " utterance ") ; implying the utter- 
ance of a loud and grave oration. In 
1 Chron. ixvi. it is the phrase of the LXX. 
for those who prophesied with harps. From 
it ia derived the word apophthegm, " a 
remarkable saying" (Johnson's Dictionary). 
Ye that dwell at Jerusalem; the same as 
those described in ver. 5. They were foreign 
Jews who, either for the feast or for other 
causes, had taken up their abode at Jeru- 
salem, and are distinguished from the men 
of JudMa, the Jews who were natives of 
Judsea. Give ear (^Kwr/feo-eO; found only 
here in the New Testament, but frequent in 
the LXX. a* the rendering of the Hebrew 
]']m (*^en. iv. 23; Job xxxiii. 1; Isa. i. 2). 
It is not classical Greek, and seems to have 
been coined by the LXX., as the equivalent 
of the above-named Hebrew word. It seems 
to be u rhetorical phrase. The thing to 
he known unto them was that they saw the 
fulfiloaeut of Joel's prophecy in what hftd 



happened; for it was qnite a mistake to 
attribute it to drunkenness. By the prophet 
(Sick, not xnrh'); spoken by God through the 
prophet. The full phrase occurs in Matt. 
L 22 ; ii. 5, IS. And so it is added in ver. 17, 
« saith God." 

Ver. 17. — Be for eome to pass, A.V. : pour 
forth for pour out, A.V. In the last days. 
This does not agree with either the Hebrew 
or the LXX. in the existing texts, where we 
read merely afterwards ()3 nnx ; /ierit toSto). 
The phrase, " in the last days," which 
occurs in Isa. ii. 2 and elsewhere, denotes 
the days of Messiah. St. Peter is perhaps 
expounding the passage as relating to the 
days of Messiah ; or D'D'n nnnN z may have 
been another reading. Saith God is na 
part of Joel's prophecy, but Peter's words. 
Your young men shall see visions, etc. The 
order of this and the following clause is 
inverted. In the Hebrew and LXX. the 
old men are mentioned first. 

Ver. 18. — Yea and for and, A.V.; pour 
forth for pour out, A.V. ; in those days will 
I potir for I wiU pour . . . in those days, 
A.V. And they shall prophesy. These 
words are not found in the Hebrew or the 
LXX. The LXX. differ from the Hebrew 
in the addition of /ioS after So6\ovs and 
Soi^Ms. The Hebrew has merely " the 
servants and the handmaids," men and 
women of servile condition. 

Ver. 19. — The heaven for heawen, A.V. ; 
on for in, A.V. X will show (Sdra, as in 
Matt. xxiv. 24). This follows the Hebrew 
and the Codex Alexandrinus. The Vatican 
Codex has, Tliey wiU show or give (Sdaao-i). 
In the heavens above, ... on t^e earth 
beneath. Above and beneath are not in the 
Hebrew or the LXX. With these excep- 
tions, the text of the LXX. is followed. 

Ver. 20. — The day of the Lord come, that 
great and notable day for that great and 
notable day of the Lord come, AV. and 
T.K. 

Ver. 21. — Be for eome to pass, A V. 

Ver. 22. — Unto you for among you, A.V. : 
mighty works for miracles, A.V. ; even as ye 
yourseloes know for as ye yourselves also 
knoiB, A.V. Ye men of Israel. This title 
includes both the Jews of Judsea and all 
those of the dispersion, to whatever tribe 
they belonged. Approved of God. Observe 
the distinct reference to the miracles of 
Christ, as the proofs that he came from God, 
the authenticating evidences of his Divine 
mission. So St. Peter again, in his address 
to Cornelius, declares how God anointed 
Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost 
and with power, who went about doing 
good, and healing all that were oppressed 
of the devil ; for God was with him (ch. x. 
38). The miracles of the gospel are, and 
were intended to b^, » deuonstratiou of th« 



ss 



THK ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. u. 1 — 47. 



truth of OhriBtianity, and it 1b at their peril 
that Christians allow themselves to give up 
this argument at the bidding of the sceptic. 
Mighty works and wonders and signs. 
^wa/xfis are pomeri, acts of healing and 
such like, done by the supernatural power 
of the Holy Spirit (see the above refer- 
ence to oh. X. 8S); T^para are wonders OT 
portentt, such as are spoken of by the 
Prophet Jofl, " wonders in heaven above," 
the darkening of the sun, the discoloration 
01 the moon, or any other wonder considered 
only with refeience to its portentous cha- 
rnctor ; ari/ie'ia are signs, not necessarily 
miraculous, but things wliich are proofs, 
either by their miraculous character or from 
the time or mode of their occurrence, of 
the truth of the things spoken. " Miracles, 
Wonders, find signs " occur together in 2 Oor. 
xii. 12. The throe seem to include every 
kind of miracle, or, as Meyer says, miracles 
viewed (1) according to their nature, (2) 
according to their appearance, (3) according 
to their destination or proposed end. Which 
God did by him. So we read Heb. ,i. 2, 
" Through [or ' by '] whom also he made the 
worlds." And so our Ijord said of himself, 
•' My Father worketh hitherto, and I work; " 
and " The Son can do nothing of himself, 
but what he sceth the Father do" (John v. 
17, 19 ; comp. Matt, xxviii. 18). On the 
other hand, our Lord often speaks of his 
own power, M John ii. 19; x. 18 (comp. 
John ii. 11). As Mediator, Christ did all 
things by his Father's appointment, and for 
h.is Father's glory. Even as ye youraelves 
know. Mark the confidence with which 
Peter appeals to their personal knowledge 
of the miracles of Christ. This was a 
fitting preparation for the announcement of 
that mighty power, wonder, and sign wliich 
he was now ahout to proclaim to them — the 
resurrection of the Lord Jesus from the 
dead. 

Ver. 23. — Delivered up for deUverfd, 
A.y. ; by the hand of lawle»» men did 
crueify and slay for ftore taken and by 
wicked hands have crucified and slain, A.V. 
and T.R. The determinate oonnsel. Ood'g 
counsel, (hat Christ sliould suffer for sins, 
wag not a vague, iudistinct purpose, leaving 
much to accident and the fluctuating will 
uf man; it was determinate and defined 
ill respect of time and manner and the 
insti uments used for carrying it out. Fore- 
knowledge is coupled with counsel or will, 
perhaps in order to show ua that the 
counsel or will of God, as far as it com- 
prehends the action of free agents, is indis- 
solubly connected with his foreknowledge, 
and does not involve any force put upon the 
vfill of man. (Compare, with Chrysostom, 
the saying of Joseph to his brethren, " Be 
not "n^y ^>th yourselves, that ye sold iqc 



hither; for Ood did send me before you 
to preserve life " (Gen. xlv. 5) ; also Judg. 
xiv. 4 ; 1 Kings xii. 15, etc./ Selivered up 
(^icSarov, only found here) is by many under- 
stood of the action of Judas in betraying 
Jesus into the hands of his enemies (John 
xix. 11) — e/cSoToy being taken as equivalent 
to what itpiioTov would mean if it were in 
use. But it may with equal propriety be 
applied to the action of the chief priests and 
flders in delivering Jesus to Pontius Pilate 
(Matt, xxvii. 2) to be crucified (Matt, xxvii 
26). Our Lord himself alludes to Pilate's 
power as circumscribed by the will of God 
(John xix. 11, ^ •jrapaSiiovs fi4 (rot: comp. 
Matt. xxvi. 45). By the hand of lawless men. 
" By the hand of " is the common Hebrew ' 
phrase Ti, by means of, through the agency 
of. The Jewish nation (ivSpa 'louSaloi) had 
Crucified the Lord of glory by the hand of 
the heathen Bomans. Lawless, equivalent 
to the sinners of Matt. xxvi. 45 (comp. , for 
the special application of the term to the 
heathen. Gal. ii. 15 ; 1 Cor. ix. 21). 

Ver. 24.— i?at8e<i for hath raited, A.V. ; 
pangs for pains, A.y. Pangs. St. Luke 
follows the LXX., who render the niD '^nn 
or Wn^ of Ps. xviii 5, 6 ; oxvi. S, by aShes 
Savirov, as if the Hebrew word were ^3n 
the pains or pangs of a woman in childbirth, 
whereas it really is bsn, a cor<], as it is ren- 
dered in the margin of Ps. xviii. 5, meaning 
the snare of the fowler. The variation is 
very 8! milar to that of the "fruit of our lips " 
in Heb. xiii. 15, compared with the "calves 
of our lips " of Hos. xiv. 2. It is manifest 
that " loosed " applies better to cordi than 
to pangs. It Was not possible. Wliy, 7wt 
pogsihlet 1. Because of the union of the 
Godhead and mauhoud in the one Person 
of Christ. 2. Because of God's character, 
which makes it impossible tliat one who 
trusts in him should be forsaken, or that 
God's Holy One should see corruption. 3. 
Because the Scripture, which cannot ba 
broken, declared the resuircction of Christ. 

Ver. 25.— Saith for speaketh, A.V. ; he- 
held for foresaw, A.V. The sixteenth psalm 
is ascribed to David in the title prefixed to 
it in the Hebrew and the LXX. Without 
pronouncing the titles to be infallible, we 
must confess that they carry great weight 
with them in the absence of any strong 
internal evidence egiinst them. Meyer 
•peaks of the psalm a» » certainly later than 
David," and Ewald and others ascribe it to 
the time of the Captivity ; but Hitzig thinks 
the internal evidence is in favour of itg be- 
longing to the time before David agcended 
the throne (' Speaker's Commentary '), We 
may safely rest on the authority of St. Peter 
here »nd St. P»ul (ch. va. 35, 86). >pd ^ 



ott. n. 1— 47.] 



TfiE ACTS OF t[IE APOSTLES. 



m 



satisfied that it is really Dayid'B. The 
manner in wliioh it is quoted by the two 
apostles is also very strong evidence that by 
the Jews of that day it was generally ad- 
mitted to be a Messianic psalm. The 
following quotation is verbatim from the 
LXX. 

Ver. 26. — My heart mat glad fbr did my 
heart rejoiee, A.V. ; rejoiced for was glnd, 
A.V. ; my fiesh also for alto my flesh, A.\. ; 
dwell for rest, A.V. 

Ver. 27. — Iladei for hell, A.V. ; give thy 
Uoly One for mffer thine Holy One, A.V., 
surely not so good a rendering. Hades. 
The " hell " of the A.V. is the exact English 
representative of |Srjs. The article In the 
Creed, " He descended into hell," Is based 
upon this text especially, the other two 
alleged in support of it (Eph. iv. 9 ; 1 Pet. 
lii. 18, 19) being less conclusive (see 
Pearson on the Creed, art. v.). It is a pity 
to lose the word " hell " in its true meaning. 
Corruption ; Greek SLa.<pe6pui,v, Hebrew nnt!'. 
The Hebrew word always means a pit (from 
niE*); but tlie LXX. liere render it iia^Bopi, 
as if from nn^ (in Pihel, to destroy, waste ; 
in Hophal and Niphal, to be corrupted, 
spoilt, to rot). In the A,V. it i» rendered 
corruption, here and in Job xvii. 14, where 
it answers to " the worms," in the parallel 
clause. It is very probable that the LXX. 
are right. Nothing is more common than 
for Hebrew verbs to take the meaning of, 
verbs with similar radicals. Holy One. So 
the LXX. and the Keri of the Hebrew text 
But the Cethib has Boly Ones in the plural. 
It is obvious that the singular, Holy One, 
agrees far better with the singulars whiqh 
precede and follow it — my heart, int; glury, 
my flesh, my soul, thou wilt show me.— than 
the plural, which is entirely out of place. 
The two clauses taken together show the 
full liberation of Christ from the dominion 
of death — that of his human soul from hell, 
and that of Ills body from the grave before 
it saw corruption (comp. oh. xill. 34—37). 

Ver. 28. — Modest for hast made, A.V. ; 
unto for to, A.V. ; gladness for joy, AV. 

Ver. 29. — Brethren for men and brethren, 
A.V. ; I may say unto you freely for let 
me freely speah unto yon, A.V. ; both died 
and vas buried for is both dead and buried, 
A, v.; tomb for sepulchre, A.\. Brethren; 
literally, men who are my brethren. Ob- 
serve how gentle and concillntory the 
apostle's language is ; how exactly in 
accordance with his own precept (1 Pet. 
iii. 8, 9), "Not rendering railing for 
railing," etc. In addressing them as 
brethren, he silently claims the good will 
and fairness due to one who was a brother 
in blood and in the faith of the God of 
Israel. Ths patriarch Savid. The term 
patriarch ii elsewhere in Scripture applioi 



only to Abraham and tlie twelve sons of 
Jacob (Heb. vii. 4; ch. vil. 8, 9). It ia 
a title of dignity, signifying the head of 
a house. It seems to be here applied to 
David, because he is spoken of as head 
of the family from which Christ sprang, 
Abraham was the head of the whole Hebrew 
race : '• Abraham our father." The twelve 
patriarchs were the heads of their respective 
tribes. The LXX. use the word traTpi&pxt^ 
as the rendering of nuNn e'^ni, " chief of the 
fathers' houses" (1 Chron. xxiv. 31 ; 2 Chron. 
xix.8; xxvi. 12); -which they elsewhere render 
by &px<'v, or apxh itarpias (Exod. vi. 25, etc.). 
In common parlance, the term is also applied 
to those chief persons who lived before the 
time of Moses, and have their record in his 
books. His tomb is with us, etc Josephus 
speaks of David's tomb (calling it, as St. 
Peter here does, his /uvii/xa) as consisting of 
several chambers, and relates how one of 
these chambers was opened by the high 
priest Hyrcanus, who took from it three 
thousand talents of gold to give to Antiochus 
Pius, who was at that time laying siege to 
Jerusalem. He adds that another chamber 
was opened later by King Herod, who ab- 
. straoted a great quantity of golden ornaments 
from it; but that neither of them penetrated 
to the vaults where the bodies of David and 
Solomon were deposited, because the en- 
trance to them was so carefully concealed, 
lie further mentions that Herod, having 
been terrified by the bursting out of fiames, 
which stopped his further progress, built a 
most cosily marble monument at the entrance 
of the tomb (' Jud. Ant.,' vii. xv. 3 ; xiii. viii. 
4 ; xvi. vii. 1). For the sense, supply " and 
therefore he could not be speaking of him- 
self." The explanation follows that he was 
a prophet, etc. 

Ver. 30, — Being therefore for therefore 
being, A.V. ; that of the fruit of his loins he 
would set one upon for that of the fruit of 
his loins according to the fiesh he would 
raise up Christ to tit on, A.V. and T.B. 
Had sworn, etc. The first record of God's 
promise to David ia in 2 Sam. vii. 11 — 16: 
" The Lord telleth thee that he will make 
thee an house. And ... I will set up thy 
seed after thee, which shall proceed out of 
thy bowels, and will establish his kingdom. 
. . . Thy throne shall be established for 
ever ; " and in ver. 28, David speaks of it 
as God's promise : " Thy words be true, and 
thou hast promised this goodness unto thy 
servant." But there is no mention there of 
an oath. But in Ps. Ixxxix. great stress is 
laid upon God having sworn to David : " I 
have made a covenant with my cliosen, I 
hiivo sworn unto David my servant, Thy 
soed will I establish for ever, and build up 
thy throne to all generations " (vers. 3, 4) , 
and again, ver. 35, " Once have I sworn b/ 



ft4 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. n. 1 — 17, 



my holinese that I will not He nnto David " 
1 Sam. vii. and Pb. Ixxxix. eliould be read 
through carefully (comp. also Isa. Iv. 3; 
oh. xiii. 23). (For the phrase, "I have 
sworn by my holiness," see Amos iv. 2.) 

Ver. 31. — Foreseeing this for seeing this 
before, A.V. ; neither was he left in Hades 
for hii loul was nat left in hell, A.V. and 
T.R. ; nor did his flesh for neither his flesh 
did, A.V. 

Ver. 32. — Did Ood raise up for halh Ood 
raised up, A V. Are witnesses (see ch. i. 22, 
note). 

Ver. 33. — Being therefore for therefore 
being, A.V. ; poured for shed, A.V. ; see for 
now see, A.V. By the right hand, eto. Some 
render it, " Being exalted to the right hand," 
etc. ; or, " Being at the right, hand of God 
exalted." It is very questionable whether 
the Greek will bear the first rendering ; and 
it would have been more natural to express 
the second by fij riip SeJioV. It is best, 
therefore, to take it as the A.V. and Ihe R.V. 
do. The phrase is equivalent to that in 
Ps. icviii. 1, "His right hand, and his 
holy arm, hath gotten him the victory," and 
numerous otiier passages. The promise of 
the Holy Ohost (see ch. i. 4, note). 

Ver. 34. — Ascended not for is not ascended; 
A.V. For David, etc. The ascension of 
Christ is inferred from the previous pro- 
phecy, " Thou wilt show me the path of 
life," etc; and is there distinctly proved 
from Ps. ex. 1, which Peter, (remembering, 
probably, onr Lord's application of it as re- 
corded in Matt. xxii. 42 — 45, which he had 
doubtless heard) shows could not apply to 
David himself, but only to David's Lord. 

Ver. 35.— Till for untU, A.V.; thine eno- 
miei for thy foes, A.V. ; the footstool of thy 
feet for tky footstool, A.V. 

Ver. 36. — Let all the house of Israel there- 
fore for therefore let all the house of Israel, 
A.V. ; him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus 
whom ye crucified for that same Jesus whom 
ye have crueifCed, both Lord and Christ, A.V., 
a change veiy much for the worse, inasmuch 
as the B.V. is not an English phrase, and 
adds nothing to the senee. 

Ver. 37.— The rest for to the rest, A.V.; 
brethren for men and brethren, A.V. 
Pricked in their heart (_KaTfv6yTi<rap). The 
LXX. rendering of Ps. oix. 16 (15, Prayer- 
book), "broken," or "vexed at the heart." 
Gen. xxxiv. 7 it is rendered " grieved." TTnto 
Feter and the rest of the apostles. It is 
important to note from the beginning the 
relative position of Peter and the other 
apostles ; a certain primacy and precedence, 
both in place and in action, he has un- 
doubtedly. He is always named first, and 
he acts first, in preaching both to Jews and 
Gentiles. 'The keys are in his hands, and 
tile door is first oponrd *• he turns th« 



lock. But it is equally clear that he is bnt 
one of the apostles ; he is not Ect over them, 
but acts with them ; he is njot their superior, 
but their fellow; they are not eclipsed by 
his presence, but only animated by his 
example; inquirers after salvation do not 
ask at his mouth only, but of the whole 
college of the apostles. Brethren (see ver. 
29). The Jews and Israelites now hold 
out the right hand of brotherhood to those 
whom before they reviled (ver. 13). What 
shall we do 1 It is a sign of the working of 
God's Spirit in the heart, renewing it to 
repentance, when men feel the need of 
changing their old course of thought and 
action, and inquire anxiously what they 
must do to inherit eternal life (comp. 
Mark x. 17; ch. ix. 6; xvi. 30). 

Ver. 38. — And for then, A.V. ; said (in 
italics) for said, A.V. and T.B. ; repent ye for 
repent, A.V. ; unto for for, A.V. ; your sins 
for sins, A.V. Eepent, etc. We have in this 
short verse the summary of Christian doctrine 
as regards man and God. Kepentance and 
faith on the part of man; forgiveness of 
sins, or justification, and the gift of the 
Holy Ghost, or sanctification, on the part of 
God. And both tliese are expressed in the 
sacrament of baptism, wliich as it were 
ties the act of man to the promise of God. 
For the sacrament expresses man's faith and 
repentance on one side, and God's forgive- 
ness and gift on the other. 

Ver. 39.^ To you is the promise for the 
promise! it unto you, A.V. ; shaU edtt unto 
him for shall call. To you is the promise 
(see ch. i. 4; ii. 33). There is also a referencu 
to^the prophecy in Joel, quoted in vers. 
17—21. To all that are afar off; i.e. the 
Gentiles, as appears clearly from Eph. ii. 
17, where the same phrase is ap| lied to the 
Ephesian Christians, and the Jewish Ciiris- 
tians are spoken of as "those that were 
nigh." The fulfilment to the Gentiles is 
specially recorded (ch. x. 45; xi. 15, 18, 
etc.). Shall caU unto him (comp. Rom. i. 6 • 
viii. 28, 30; ix. 24; 1 Cor. i. 2; Gal. i. 6, 
etc.), which confirm the application of the 
" afar off" to the Gentiles. 

Ver. 40. — Se testified, and exhorted for 
did he testify and exhort, A.V. ; crooked for 
untoward, A.V. Save yourselves, etc. The 
idea is that the crooked generation which 
denied and crucified the Lord is hurrying 
on to their destruction. Those who would 
not perish with them must come out from 
amongst them and be separate from them 
(2 Cor. vi. 19), and seek safety in the ai k 
of Christ's Church (1 Pet. iii 21), as Noah 
did in the ark, and as Lot did in Zoar. So 
the jailer at Philippi, seeking to be saved, 

was baptized straightway (ch. xvi. 30 33). 

This was the drift and end of »U Si FetoT'i 
exhortations. 



en. tt 1—47.] 



THE ACTS OP THfi At*OSTLES. 



g? 



Ver. n.—They then for then they, A.V. ; ' 
received for gladly received, A.V. and T.B. ; 
there were added unto them in (hat day for 
the tame day there were added unto them, 
A.y. Gladly received. The best manu- 
scripts omit euTfifyus, whioli, indeed, is 
superfluous, as the word tmoUxoiuii contains 
in itself the idea of • kind reception— a 
welcome (Luke viii. 40 ; oh. xv. 4 ; xxiv. 3). 

Ver. ii.— Teaching for doctrine, A.V. ; in 
the breaking for and in breaking, A.V. and 
T.B. ; the prayeri for in prayer, A.V. And 
fellowship ; better, as in the margin, in 
felUneehip; not meaning the apostles' fellow- 
ship, but the feUaaship of tho Church — that 
common life of close brotherhood in which 
all that they did was done in common, and 
all that they possessed- was possessed in 
common, so that there seemed to be but onu 
heart and one mind amongst them all. 
Breaking of bread ; in the Holy Eucharist 
(see Matt. xxvi. 26; Mark xiv. 22; Luke 
xxii. 19; xxiv. 30; 1 Cor. xi. 24; x. 16; 
ch. XX. 7). The prayers ; the common prayers 
of the Church. 

Ver. 43. — Fear oame, etc. This seems to 
be spoken of the awe which fell upon the 
whole people, and restrained tliem from 
interfering with the disciples. Just as at 
the first settlement of Israel in the land of 
Canaan God laid the fear of them and the 
dread of them upon all the land (Deut. xi. 
25), so now the fear engendered by the 
events on the day of Pentecost, by the signs 
and wonders which followed and by the 
wonderful unity and holiness of the new- 
bom Church, so wrought upon every soul 
at Jerusalem that all enmity was paralyzed, 
and the disciples had time to multiply 
and to consolidate and establish themselves 
before the storm of persecution fell upon 
them. 

Ver. 44.— Were together (^ir! ri avT6; see 
ch. i. 15, note, and above, ver. 42). Had all 
things common. Just as the Transfigura- 
tion gave a passing glimpse of the state of 
glory, so here we have a specimen of what 
Christian love and unity in its perfection, 
and unchecked by contact with the world 
without, would, and perhaps some day wUl, 
produce. But even at Jerusalem this bright 
vision of a paradise on earth was soon 
troubled by the earthly dissensions recorded 
in ch. vi. ; and the Christian community 
received a timely lessun that things good 
in themselves are not always practicable in 
an evil world, where sluggish virtues require 
the stimulants of bodily wants to draw them 
out and strengthen them, and where hypo- 
crisy often claims the kindly offices which 
are due only to disciples indeed. 

Ver. 45. — They sold for sold, A.y. ; all for 
a22 men, A. V. ; according a» any for at every, 
AT. 



Ver. iS.—Day hy day continuing steal 
fastly for they continuing daily, A.V. ; m 
home for from house to house, A. V. ; they dt i 
take their food for did eat their meat, A.V. 
In the temple. It is very remarkable that 
at this early age of the Church's existence 
Christians did not deem themselves sepa- 
rated from their Jewish brethren, or from 
the _ Old Testament institutions. Chris- 
tianity was but Judaism perfected ; the 
gospel the full blossoming of the Law. The 
first Christian Jews, therefore, did not con- 
ceive of themsi^lves as quitting the religion 
of their fathers, but rather hoped that their 
whole nation would in a short time acknow- 
ledge Jesus to be the Christ. Christian 
institutions, therefore — the prayers, the 
breaking of bread, the prophesyings and 
speaking with tongues, and the apostolic 
teachings — were supplemental to the temple 
service, not antagonistic to it; and tlie 
church took the place rather of the syna- 
gogue than of the temple (see ' Diet, of Bible : ' 
"Synagogue"). At home. This version' 
hardly represents the true idea of the 
origiual ; kot' oIkov represents the private 
Christian place of meeting, as contrasted 
with the temple. The meaning is not that 
every disciple broke bread in his own house, 
but that they broke bread at the house 
where the Christian assemblies were held, 
whether one or more. We have already 
seen the Church gathered together " in an 
upper room " (ch. i, 13), in "one place," in 
"a house" (ch. ii. 1, 2), and "together" 
(ver. 44; see too ch. iv. 31); and we know 
that as the synagogue was called n^sn rra, 
house of prayer, or nwsn n\3, the hcnse ot 
assemblage, so the Christian place of meet- 
ing was called iS Kvpiaichs oTkos, the Lord's 
house, whence the word "church." (For 
breaking bread, see above, ver. 42.) They 
did take their food. The link of connection 
is the iydini or love-feast, which formed an 
important part of the Koivoivia, or common 
life, of the early Christians. The whole 
description is a beautiful picture of Christian 
unity, piety, love, and joy. 

Ver. 47. — To them day by day for to the 
Church daUy, A. V. and T.B. ; those thai were 
being saved for such as should be saved, A.V. 
Added to them day by day. The E.T. has 
instead of rp ixxXniTiq the words iwl rh 
avr6, which in ch. ii, 1 are properly ren- 
dered " in one place," but do not seem to 
be rendered at all in the B.V. of this verse 
In fact, they have no sense unless you con- 
strue them with Tois a-aCo/ievovs, "those 
who escaped to the same place," <.«. to the 
Church. But it seems most probable that 
the words ^irl rii avT6 do really belong tc 
ch. iii. 1, where they are found in the T.B. 
If rp iKKKifalif does not properly belong t< 



M 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[cH. II. 1 — 47. 



the text (it is wanting In A, B, C, Xi ind 
many versions), then irpcxrcrffici inuat be 
taken absolutely, as rrpoireT^eriiray is in ver. 
41, tlie Cliuroh, or the disciples, being 
nnderstood. Those that were being saved. 
The ««liortation in Ter. 40 was •' Save yonr- 
■elvM {ram this orooked generation." Those 



who were added to the Chnrrh were those 
who complied with the exhortation, and 
escaped from complicity with their unbe- 
lieving countrymen. They were the rem- 
nant that escaped. (See the use of ot 
<rai(6iieyoi in the liKX. (ji Ohion. xx. 29^ 
etc.), and sm Mark xvt Ifi.) 



HOMILETICa. 

Vern. 1 — 13. — Tlie unity of (he Spirit. If, with the idea of unity in our minds, we read 
this description of the first outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon the Church, we cannot 
but be struck with the manner in which .that great idea is exhibited and illustrated. 

L There is first the local unity of the Chtj rch. They were all together in one place. 
Many in number, but all of that many come together; drawn by one common impulse 
to merge their separate existences, their various pursuits, thejr divergent vooaiions, 
their several moTements, their independent aotioQs, in one common action, and by that 
action to come together to one place. All the different reasons and motives which 
would have kept them separxte, and which would have attracted them to different 
places, were overcome by the common reason and motive which drew them to one 
' place. Nor must we overlook some of the aspects of this local unity. It reveals to us 
that there was something in the heart of each one of the assembly which felt the need 
of contact with the others, because there was known to be in those others a like nature 
and a like spirit and a like yearning to their own. Ko one felt himself 8u£Scient to 
himself ; there was an outlook in each breast for that which should make up the 
complement of its own wants, and that complement could only be found in the love 
of the brethren. It reveals also that sense which eaeh had of mutual support and 
encouragement, that expectation of strength and co\mtenance to be derived from the 
presence and the comrnunion of the rest. The Christian instinct told each one, "It is 
not good to be alone ; " faith, love, courage, holy enthusiasm, heavenly zeal, power to act 
for Christ and bis kingdom, wisdom to know, and boldness to execute, counsel before 
the time of action comes, and decision when it is come, — all are increased and perfected 
"by that which every joint suppjieth." And then, again, this local unity had its 
immense importance considered Is regard to its outv.ard aspect — the aspect which it 
presented to the world. The individual Simon, or John, or James, might be thrust 
asid^ with contempt as an ignorant enthusiast or an eccentric fanatic ; but the compact 
body of the twelve, with the hundred and twenty firmly attached to them, already 
presented a front to the world imposing from its compactness and the close coherence 
of all its parts. And, in like manner, a little thought will reveal other aspects of this 
local unity. The one temple at Jerusalem had contributed not a little to the unity of 
the twelve tribes, who looked upon It as their common centre, end who met together 
periodically at that one centre for the offices of their common faith. And so this local 
unity of the Church, to whom the upper chamber— consecrated, perhaps, by the Lord's 
presence at the Paschal feast, and endeared by the hours of prayer and waiting passed 
in it between Easter and Pentecost— was the common place of meeting, was a material 
prop and buttress to that spiritual unity of which the Lord Jesus Christ was the true 
Centre. 

JI. But mark next what we may call the objectivb unitt or the Chuboh as con- 
templated by the Holy Ghost It is not only that the disciples felt their unity, and 
displayed it in the local unity of which we have spoken, but God the Holy Ghost looked 
upon them as one, and treated them as one. We read in ver. 3 that " it sat upon each 
one of them J " not upon the apostles only, not upon certain favoured persons, but upon 
each one of the assembled saints. It was the one Spirit filling the one body (see Exposi- 
tion, ver. 3). It is added with emphasis, " I'hey were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and 
began to speak with othei' tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance." Here, then, we 
have clearly and most impressively set before us the unity of the Church in the sight of 
God ; its unity in respecl of privilege and covenanted possession. It is an exposition 
tc practice of St. Paul's saying, " If any man hath not the Spirit of Chrjsti ha i> noM «( 



cs.n. 1— 47.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 61 

Ms ■ (Rom. viil. 9), which is here laid hePore H8. It Is the baptism with the Holy Obost, 
promised by Christ to all hia disciiiles. Here there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither 
male nor female.. Sons and daughters alike, bond and free, apostles and children, are 
all partakers of that one Spirit, because all have been baptized into one body. The 
Invisible bands which tie together in one bundle of spiritual life each particular mem- 
ber of the mystical Body of Christ are discerned by the Holy Ghost. 

III. But thirdly, what we may call the wilfdl unitt of the Church stands out 
prominently in the passage before us : the unity i.e. of will and purpose, resulting from the 
common possession and indwelling of one and the same Spirit, and the fixed desire to 
act together. Their voices were many, but their theme was one — " the mighty works 
of God." Their voices were many, but they had one end. and aim — to proclaim God'a 
glory, to praise God's works, and to draw all men, however diverse, to his blessed wor- 
ship and service. The grand design of uniting all mankind in the faith of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, of bringing men of all creeds and all colours, of all nations and all languages, 
into one close unity and fellowship, was present to all their minds and influenced their 
common action. It was the work they had to do together. The end was dear to each 
single heart among them, but it was to be accomplished by united efifort. And what 
wonders can be accomplished by united effort I Where one spirit runs through and 
moves many wills in one direction with an unbroken movement, and those many wills 
run willingly, harmoniously, and unitedly in their onward course, realizing their union 
with the Divine will, and rejoicing in the harmony of their own several wills, — what can 
withstand them ? It is the waste of force in the antagfinistic movement of the several 
wills which hinders and checks progress; when one thwarts another, and subtracts his 
own motive power from that ot his brother, instead of adding it thereto. Hence the slow 
progress of Christianity in our own day compared with that of the apostolic age ; hence 
the weakness of the Church, its feebler victories over sin, its almost defeats by the spirit 
of infidelity, its apparent inability to cope with the powers of this world. Sundy the 
jontemplation of the unity of the Spirit, as seen on the day of Pentecost, should kindle 
In every Christian breast a longing for a like unity among ourselves. 

IV. We may notice lastly, the prospeotivb unity of the Church in its completeness. 
The long list of nationalities detailed by the historian, when he enumerates Farthians 
and Medes and Elamites, and so many other nations of Europe, Asia, and Africa, as all 
hearing in their own several languages the mighty works of God ; the striking narrative 
of the Holy Spirit of God lighting upon the heads of the Galilasan disciples, and, by 
enabling them to speak with other tongues, removing the barrier of separation between 
man and man caused by the confusion of tongues ; the exhibition of Jerusalem as the 
Christian metropolis, the birthplace of so many sons and daughters, the centre of union 
between the apostles of the Lord and believers " out of every nation under heaven " 
(ver. 6) ; — all this was surely intended to lead our thoughts and our hopes forward to 
that blessed day, seen by St. John in vision, when " the great multitude, which no man 
can number, out of every nation, and of all tribes and peoples and tongues, shall stand 
before the throne aind before the Lamb, arrayed in white rob«9, and palms in their 
hands, crying with a loud voice and saying. Salvation unto our God which sitteth on 
the throne, and unto the Lamb.** It is to this blessed consummation, when all things 
shall be gathered together into one In Christ, that every weary heart should look forward. 
It is a vision of glory to keep before the tnind amidst the strife and discord, the 
divisions and separations, of the existing age. It is light which, seen even at the end ol 
the long perspective of this world's troublous way, should reflect back a softening cheer- 
ing ray upon each step of our wearisome path, and encourage us to press forward with 
unfaltering purpose till we reach Mount Zion, and behold the Church in her glory. 
Then shall the brightness of the Pentecostal day pale before the beauty of that day of 
Christ, and God's purpose will be accomplished in the perfect unity of heart and voice, 
of wHl and purpose, of thought and speech, of work and habitation, of the whole multi- 
tude whom Christ has redeemed and made king* aad priests, that they may reign for 
ever in the new Jerusalem of God. 

Vers. 14 — 36.— •?%« homilu- The first preached sermon was a great event in the 
history of the Church. When we recollect the enormous influence that preaching has 
had »fflong8t mankind'^the preaohing of Feter and John, the preaching of St. fimt, the 



68 THE ACTS OF TflE APOSTLES. t<*- "• 1—*' 

preaching of the Augustines, Ohrysostoms, Basils of the Church ; the preaching of the 
great monks, St. Bernard, St. Francis, Peter the Hermit, and the preaching friars; 
the preaching of the lieformers, Wycliffe, Luther, Tyndale, Latimer ; the preaching of 
the Puritans, Knox, Calamy, Baxter ; the preaching of the Methodists', Wesley, White- 
field, Fletcher; the preaching of the Evangelicals, Newton, Cecil, Simeon, Scott; the 
preaching of the Huguenots, Camisards, Lollards, Vaudois; the preaching of the great 
divines in the Church of England, and of the great pulpit orators outside her pale — we 
cannot but feel that a peculiar interest attaches to the first sermon preached in the 
Christian Church. It was a great occasion, and there was a great preacher raised up 
to profit by it. It will be interesting, as well as instructive, to mark some of the chief 
features of this primary discourse of the Church's inspired primate. 

I. The first thing that strikes one is the intensely pbrsonal chabacteb op this 
SEBMON : I mean its direct, pointed, personal application. The apostle is not reading ap 
essay for the use of men in general; he is not beating the air with philosophical specula- 
tions or rhetorical flourishes; he is aiming a shaft straight at the mind and conscience of 
his hearers. He is speaking with impassioned fervour, albeit also with clear intelligence 
and logical precision, to the men who stand before him ; speaking to them of thingi 
which concerned them specially and individually ; speaking to them with a view to 
influence their conduct decisively, and to aifect their condition presently and eternally. 
Almost everything in his sermon draws its propriety and its pungency from its close 
relation to the circumstances, the actions, the belief, the knowledge, the education, the 
whole character and condition, of those to whom he speaks. The sermon could not 
have been addressed to any other congregation than that to which it was addressed. 
Spoken to the Church of Ephesus, or Corinth, or Home, it would have been out of place 
and without point. Spoken to the men of Judaea and those that dwelt at Jerusalem 
in those eventful days ; to the men of Israel, who were his own brethren in the flesh 
and in the common hope of redemption ; spoken to those who knew the voices of the 
prophets and gloried in David their king, who were expecting the advent of Messiah, 
and yet were partners in the guilt of crucifying the Lord of glory ; — the sermon was 
a sharp arrow, piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and discerning the 
thoughts and intents of their hearts. This feature in St. Peter's sermon ought to be 
noted and imitated by all whose office it is to " preach the Word." ThVis much as to 
the manner of the sermon. But if we turn to the matter of it, we notice — 

II. That all the parts op the sermon lbad up to Jesus Christ crttoified, 
RISEN, AND ascended. The statement of facts, the reasonings, the quotations from 
Scripture, the arguments, the reproofs, the exhortations, — all point to one central object, 
which is Jesus Christ the Lord. Without Christ as the subject-matter and end of the 
preaching, the sermon would go out in darkness. But in the apostle's skilful though 
simple treatment, the Lord Jesus stands out to the soul's view with great distinctness 
and with vivid delineations of his office and work. He appeals to the miracles done by 
Christ in the presence of his hearers, as proofs of his Divine mission. He points to his 
betrayal and passion; he proves his resurrection from the dead, from the united 
testimony of the jury of twelve whom they saw standing up before them, from the 
witness of their own prophets, and from the marvellous signs and sounds which they 
had just seen and heard. And then he brings home to them the awAil guilt of his 
crucifixion, that, their hearts being pricked and pierced with penitential sorrow, they 
may turn to him for forgiveness of their sins and for the reception of his Holy Spirit. 
In this respect also St. Peter is to be imitated by every evangelist and preacher of 
the Word. 

III. Another observable feature In St. Peter's sermon is the deep acquaintance 
with Holt Soeiptubb displayed in it. The descent of the Holy Ghost, the death of 
Jesus, his descent into hell, his resurrection from the dead, his ascension to the right 
hand of God, his office as Christ and Lord, his succession to the throne of his father 
David, are all proved and illustrated by infallible warrants of Holy Soripture. The 
hidden meanings of the Word of Glod, Its prophetic wisdom, its most blessed revelations, 
are all brought forth from the treasury of the preacher's mind, to enrich his discourse 
and to give depth and solidity to his utterance; teaching us that a thorough knowledge 
of Holy Scripture is a necessary qualification of every successful preacher of the gospel 
of Chrut If we add to these the boldness «nd straightforwardness, th« Bincerity uid 



CH. n,l— 47.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 69 

the courtesy, with which the whole discourse was uttered, and the absence of the least 
appearance of egotism or vain-glory in the whole style of his preaching, we shall feel 
that we have indeed a good model in this primary sermon for ua to copy, and that in 
proportion as we frame our own sermons upon this great example we may hope to .be 
like St. Peter in the abundance and fulness of our success. 

IV. And how wonderful in thbib qualitt and in thbib abundance were thk 
PRurre OF THAT peoto-predication of the- gospel. The hearts of stone turned to 
hearts of flesh, and pricked to the quick with the stinging sense of sin ; the blood- 
stained cvucifiers of the Lord hastening to wash away their sins in the mystical waters 
of holy baptism; the bold deniers and blasphemers of the Lord confessing him to be 
both Lord and Christ ; the scoffers who hswi said, " These men are full of new wine," now 
acknowledging them as brethren, and inquiring of them, " What shall we do?" and 
in one hour three thousand souls added to the company of the disciples. From that 
moment the Church stood out before the world as a house built upon an imperishable 
rock. It took its form and shape among men as a building of God, the habitation of 
his Spirit, never to be taken down. And it has stood ever since, defying the power of 
weather and of time ; and it will stand through all the fluctuations of human opinion 
and the convulsions of human institutions, till he whom St. Peter proclaimed as Lord 
and Christ shall appear in his glory, and his Church shall be glorified with him. 
O Lord, add to thy Church daily, through the power of thy preached Word, such as 
shall be laved 1 

Vers. 37 — 47. — Bdy baptism. As the sermon preached by St. Peter on the day ol 
Pentecost was the first sermon preached in the Church of God, so the baptism of which 
we have here an account was the first ministration of that sacrament. Onr Lord's last 
command to his apostles was, " Make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the 
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost" (Matt, xxviii. 19 ; Mark 
xvi. 16; ch. i. 5), and now for the first time that command was carried out. A few 
points of special interest and importance are brought out in the narrative of this first 
Christian baptism. 

L It8 close conkeotion with prbachino. Here St. Peter preaches the Word with 
power, the hearers are pricked in their heart, and by his direction they are baptized, 
and 80 put in possession of the promised salvation. In like manner, in Mark xvi. 16, 
faith comes by hearing the gospel preached, and baptism is the complement of faitli. 
The first baptism of Gentile believers — that recorded in ch. x. 48 — was the frait of St. 
I'eter's sermon to the house of Cornelius. 

II. Its distinctive featubb as the " one baptism for the remission of sins." So 
Ananias said to Saul, " Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins " (ch. xxii. 16). 
And St. Paul teaches that we are baptized into the death of Christ, and so are freed 
from rin. And so in the Baptismal Service we pray that the water may be sanctified 
to the mystical washing away of sin, and that those who come to it may receive 
remission of their sins ; and St. Peter speaks of those who turn away from the holy 
commandment delivered unto them as having forgotten that they were " purged from 
their old sins " (2 Pet. L 9). The element of water points distinctly to this character- 
istic feature of the sacrament of baptism, as appears in the prophecy of Ezekiel, " Then 
will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean : from all your filthiness, 
and from all your idols, will I cleanse you " (Ezck. xxxvi. 25). 

nL Thb necessity of repentance and faith on the part of the baptized, 
as it is written, " Eepent ye, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus 
Christ," where repentance is expressly named, and faith is necessarily implied In the 
phrase, being baptized " in the Name of Jesus Christ." And this is exactly the teaching 
of the Church in the Catechism, where the answer to the question, " What is required 
of persons to be baptized?" is, " Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and faith, 
whereby they stedfastly believe the promises of God made to them in that sacrament." 

IV. The obkat gift promised to those who, having truly repentsd ano 
belikvbd the gospel preached to them, have been baptized into Christ, viz. the 
gift of the Holy Ghost. " Repent, and be baptized . . . and ye shall receive the gift 
of the Holy Ghost For the promise Is unto you, and to your children, and to all that 
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." Upon this promise W9 



«0 THE AOT8 OF THE APOSTLES. Im.ml—i1. 

ehall all do well to fix our thoughts, and to put !n our own individual claim to its 
fulfilment To have the Holy Spirit of God dwelling in us is our birthright, as we 
are Christ's. Our common likeness to Christ as the Head of the Ciiristian family 
depends upon our possession of the portion of the one Spirit which is given to all that 
are Christ's. He is the Fountain of all true wisdom, holiness, and love in man ; and the 
great Christian rite of baptism is manifestly incomplete unless we actually possess 
the great gift which is promised to us in "that sacrament. We shall have read in vain 
the inspired history of the first Christian baptism on the day of Pentecost, when the 
gift of the Holy Ghost to the newly baptized was surrounded with such strildng 
incidents, and its connection with holy baptism was made so visible and apparent, if 
we disconnect in oui own thoughts the grace of baptism with such an actual indwell- 
ing of the Holy Spir.t in our hearts as shall make us holy in thought, word, and deed. 
Rather this striking and, one may say, awful narrative should fall upon the ear of the 
whole Church as a message to urge us who are " afar off" to be at one with those who 
were " near," in surrendering ourselves to the Holy Ghost to dwell among us and in 
us as in the holy temple of God. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1 — 13. — The comini/ of Ood in power. The ascended Saviour was about to 
::ome in mighty power to the disciples. They were in Jerusalem, " waitinsc for the 
promise of the Father ; " doubtless they had no anticipation of the way in which that 
promise would be fulfilled, and must have been struck with the utmost awe and wonder 
when they found themselves wrought upon with such Divine energies. Our thought 
is directed to — 

I. The manifested presence of God. God revealed his presence through the 
media of air and fire ; the one in unusual, indeed supernatural agitation ; the other in 
unkindled, lambent flame. Both air and fire are fitting elements for the vehicle oi 
Divine manifestation ; their ubiquity, their beneficence, the secret and indeed mysterious 
powers which reside in them, the mighty and even awful forces which slumber in 
them, and which, when aroused or kindled, work such terrible results ("Our God is a 
consuming fire"), — these qualities make them suitable agencies to signify the presence 
of the Divine. But while our God is in the elemental forces of nature, both when they 
render their kind and constant ministry to mankind and when they are in unusual and 
quite exceptional activity — though he i» in the soft airs and the life-giving Keats 
which breathe and brighten round us, and though he is in the storm and in the fire 
which rage above and about us — yet the way in which ho manifests himself in answer 
to our earnest prayer and reverent waiting is not thus. Our Lord comes now to us in 
(1) illumination of the mind, (2) enlargement of the heart, (3) multiplication of 
spiritual feculty and force, (4) renewal of the will and the whole spiritual nature — we 
are " filled with the Holy Ghost." 

II. His chosen time. Christ came again to his disciples when they were " all of 
one accord in one place " (ver. 1). When acting together, praying together, feeling 
together, hoping and expecting together, then he appeared in glorious manifestation, 
li we who " wait for his appearing" really desire his coming and would do our best to 
bring him, we must act in liie same way ; we must be united in thought, in feeling, in 

I irayer, in expectation, in activity. 

III. The DiviNB end in speoiai manifestation. It was not only to " sound a 
bell "calling attention to the birth of a new dispensation that Christ thus came in power. 

I I was to convey redeeming truth to many minds and many peoples (vers. 6^ — H). 
" Devout men out of every nation" heard "the wonderful works of God," and carried 
liack with them, whithersoever they returned, the knowledge of the great things God 
had wrought for the children of men. When men say to us "See here I" or "Lo 
therel" "Behold these strange phenomena, these supernatural appearances, these 
remarkable displays of Divine power," etc., let us dismiss them with incredulity unless 
they are working to the Divine end, the spiritual enlightenment and moral elevation 
of mankind. By their fruits vre shall know them. If they " work not the riglkt«ow)- 



OH. n. 1-^7.] THE AOTS OF THE APOSTLES. 61 

ness of God," they are not of him; if they do, they are. So shall we " try th« ipiritg 

whether they are of him." 

IV. OoB HUMAN RESPONSE. (Vers. 12, 13.) The manifestation of Divine powei 
on this occasion excited amazement and incredulity. Of these the former is wholly 
insufficient and the latter altoiether wrona, Onlv too often this is the result in oui 
case. 1. We are surprised when we ought to be simply grateful ; it ought to be a sur- 
prise to us when, in lesponse to our prayer and holy expectation, God does not come 
to us in renewing, fertilizing power. When the Son of mau does come, does he fi(nl 
the expectancy of faith or the astoaishment of unbelief (Luke xviii. 8) ? 2. We aru 
incredulous, and perhaps derisive, when we ought to be congratulatory. Some Ghrisl iaii 
men can account for Divine energy and agency on any principle but the one which 
should be readiest to their mind, viz. that God is with us, willing to appear on our 
behalf, prepared to outpour his Spirit in rich effluence on our souls and on our labours. 
By our incredulity we (1) displease him, (2) hinder the cause we should help, (3) make 
impossible any blessed share for ourselves in the shouts of victory.— >C. 

Vers. 14 — 30. — Truths from Peter'* sermon. A more glorious opportunity than that 
now presenfuJ no man could desire, Petor was the last man in the world likely to let 
it go unused, lie instantly and, no doubt, eagerly appropriated it. lu an animated 
and forcible address he repelled the idea that the apostles were acting under lower 
excitements, and showed that a new era had dawned upon the race, of which they 
should hasten to avail themselves. We gather from his words — 

I. That the source of human inspiration may bb very much higher, a* it 
MAY BB VERY MUCH LOWER, THAN IS SUPPOSED. (Vers. 15^17.) It is true enough that 
what passes fur Divine inspiration is often nothing more or better than earth-born 
excitement, mental or moral heats which are kindled by man and not by God^of the 
desh, fleshly. This is abundantly proved by the test of time, and, in these cases, 
the last state is usually worse than the first. But, on the other hand, it sometimes 
happens that what is ignorantly mistaken for human passion is nothing leas than a 
Divine a£9atus. So here : these men " were not drunken ; " God was " pouring out his 
Spirit " upon them. So has it been in the history of the Christian Church. Men that 
Ck]d has raised up and inspired to do his work have been either contemptuously 

.disregarded, or cruelly decried, or systematically persecuted. Such facts as these 
should make us wait, examine, inquire, before we dismiss as worthless, or denounce as 
evil, those who profess to speak for Christ in ways other than our own. 

II. That the whole history of oub bace is outspread before God, and that 
HIS hand is laid upon it. (Vers, 17 — 20,) The Projjhet Joel tells us what God will 
do. His words are necessarily obscure, for only the facts when they have occurred 
can make clear and plain their full significance. But we perceive that it was Crod's 
purpose, looking on to the future of the world, to pour down at one epoch a very ricli 
efTusion of his Spirit on the race, and to " show wonders " of the most extraordinary 
kind before the end of the dispensation. Everything is foreseen, arranged; the eye 
of God looks on, and all is before him; his hand, too, is stretched out, and at variuu.~ 
points he makes his almighty power to be felt. 

III. That amid all the bogkinos of bevolu'iion there ib onb plaox ok 
UNFAILING SAFETY. (Ver. 21.) " Whosoever shall call on the i^arae of the Lord thall 
be saved." Whatever visions are seen, or dreams are dreamed, or pro|ihosyings are 
uttered on earth ; whatever wonders may be wrou^^ht in heaven, — the man that makes 
God his Befnge has no need to fear; he shall be hidden in tha everlasting arms oi 
strength and love. 

IV. That Divinb furpobk is co-opbrative with human freedom. (Ver. 23.) Chri^i 
Jesus was " delivered by the determinate counsel," etc. ; yet he was not so rieliveroil 
but that they were "wicked hands" that crucilied and slew him. The providence of 
God makes all things possible to us — the noblest achievements and also the darkest 
crimes ; it is our faithfulness which makes us the agents uf the one, and our lin which 
makes us the peri)etrators of the other. 

V. That Hod has made his eternal Son to occupy the throne or the humam 
WORLD. (Vers. 2i — 36.) Peter showed: 1. That David had predicted the resurrection 
of Christ (veri. 25 — 31). 2. That they could bear positive testimony that he had risen 



ea THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1—47. 

from the dead (ver. 32). 3. That prophecy pointed him out as One reigning in power, 
awaiting the final and complete overthrow of all his enemies (vers. 34, 35). Wherefore 
let every knee how to him, every heart be subject to his sway ; for (1) all power as well 
as all authority is his ; (2) on his side, we are sure of victory and blessedness ; (3) 
ranged against him, we shall be overcome, with terrible disaster to ourselves. — C. 

Vers. 37 — 40. — The gospel according to Peter. That which followed immediately 
on the preaching of Peter's sermon brought out the truths of the gospel quite as fully 
and forcibly as the discourse itself. We learn from these verses — 

I. The bange of Divine love. (Ver. 39.) Peter declared, at this the outset of the 
new dispensation, that the range of God's redeeming love would be " exceeding broad." 
1. It was to go from generation to generation: "to you and to your children." 2. It 
was to extend to remotest regions : " to all that are afar off." 3. It was to embrace 
every one whom the summons of the inviting Lord should reach : " as many as the Lord 
our God shall call." Thus, at the beginning, the apostles gave a true idea of the 
fulness of that " kingdom of God " of which their Master had spoken so much, and 
which he lived and died to establish. 

II. The fibst result of Divine truth. (Ver. 37.)' This was (and is) : 1. Spiritual 
agitation. 2. Earnest inquiry. " When they heard this, they were pricked in their 
heart ; " they said, " What shall we do ? " This is the simple, natural, constant course of 
things divine in the heart of man. When the truth of God is faithfully preached, and 
when the seed falls on good soil, there is spiritual agitation ; the soul is smitten, the 
heart pierced ; there are " great searchings of heart ; " the old apathy, self-sufficiency, 
equanimity, is disturbed and broken up, and the spirit is troubled with a deep dis- 
quietude. It discovers that everything is wrong : the past is guilty, the present utterly 
unsatisfactory, the future clouded. Then comes earnest inquiry : " Men and brethren, 
what shall we do?" "Wherewithal shall we come before the Lord?" How shall 
we be forgiven, justified, accepted ? What is the path of reconciliation and peace ? 
Through what spiritual experiences must we pass ? What is the way into the kingdom 
of God? The soul, thus in earnest, turns to the sacred Scriptures or addresses ihoaa 
who speak in the name of Christ. 

IIL The Christian minister's couNSKL TO THE INQUIRING. (Vers. 38, 40.) 1. Repent; 
i.e. turn from sin and selfishness to righteousness and holy service ; abandon the old 
and evil life of folly, thoughtlessness, worldliness, wrong-doing ; put that away with 
shame and sorrow, and enter the opposite path — turn Godwards, truthwards, heaven- 
wards. 2. Accept the Lord Jesus Christ as your Teacher, Lord, Saviour ; be baptized 
into him. Heartily accept him, and honestly avow him, as your Divine Redeemer. 3. 
Separate yourself from the sin which surrounds you ; " save yourselves," etc. (ver. 40) ; 
have no participation in guilt, and have no sympathy or fellowship with sinners, as such. 

IV. The promise of Divine mbboy and indwelling power. These conditions 
fulfilled, there will be : 1. Remission of sins (ver. 38). 2. The indwelling of the Holy 
Ghost (ver. 38). Christ, our almighty Saviour, our Divine Friend, being with us, we 
shall have above us a reconciled heavenly Father to whom we can look up with 
rejoicing, childlike trust and love ; and we shall have within us a Holy Spirit, cleansing 
the thoughts of our heart by his inspiration ; sanctifying our nature ; empowering us foi 
the burden, the witness, and the battle of life ; preparing us for the companionships 
and engagements of immortality. — 0. 

Vers. 41—47. — Spiritual fervour. The Pentecostal outpour was more than s mere 
flashing forth of Divine energy, suddenly emitted and immediately withdrawn ; it was 
the communication of Divine power which remained in the Church and resulted in 
lasting spiritual fervour. This fervour, no doubt, took certain exceptional and tem- 
porary forms. 1. There weie miracles wrought by the apostles (ver. 43). 2. There 
was a community of goods (vers. 44, 45), which was so far from being permanent and 
general, that it only lasted for a short time in the one Church at Jerusalem. 3. There 
was daily temple-worship, necessarily restricted both as to time and place (ver. 46). 
But though there weru these peculiar and exceptional features, there was much in the 
spiritual fervour of those earliest days which belongs to every age of the Ctuistiaa 
Chwrcb, 



OH.n.1— i7.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. «• 

I. It was begotten or Divine influence. We must not dissever this passage 
from all that precedes, but remember that this remarkable manifestation of sacred 
feeling was the outcome of Divine influence. It was the gift of the Holy Ghost, 
descending upon the Church in copious streams of sacred powtT, which brought forth 
these abounding signs of spiritual life. All life in the soul of man is " born from 
above." Whatever lool^s like it, in the shape of extraordinary activity or intense 
feeling, which is not awakened by the Spirit of God, is but the semblance and show of 
it, and is not the vital thing itself. 

II. It was manifested in abiding forms. 1. In open declaration of faith in 
Christ : " They that gladly received his word were baptized " (ver. 41). 2. In attach- 
ment to saving truth : " They continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine " (ver. 42). 
Souls in earnest will not leave the truth by which they have been led to God to 
wander in byways of unsatisfying human fancies ; still less to go off into the high-road 
of error. 3. In fellowship : with man, and also with God fvers. 42, 44, 46). The 
disciples " continued in fellowship, and in brealung of bread ; they " were together ;" 
they "continued with one accord in breaking bread." Here was (1) human fellowship 
— the cordial, frequent associating one with another ; and (2) fellowship with God in 
the Lord's Supper. 4. In prayer (ver. 42) and in praise (ver. 47). The sacred fervour 
wliich often comes as, in part, the result of devotion will spena itself largely in more 
devotion, in private and public " prayers," and in " praising God." Prayer and praise 
are the very atmosphere in which elevated piety lives and breathes and has its being. 
5. In consideration of the needs of others (vers. 44, 45). They who have a real " zeal 
for God," who are devoted to Jesus Christ, will ask themselves what they can do to 
help those who are in need ; how they can best contribute to the comfort, the elevation, 
the well-being of those who are left behind in the race, who are defeated in the battle 
of life. They will show, in some form — different states of society demand different 
methods — sympathy, liberality, succour. 

III. It had nNFAiLiNG BEbuiiTS. 1. In taored jn^'i "They did eat their meat with 
gladness and singleness of heart " (ver. 46). We may reasonably doubt the excellence of 
any spiritual fervour which does not show itself in gladness of heart. 2. In general 
devoutness : " Fear came upon every soul " (ver. 43). If we are heartily and wisely in 
earnest, those who witness our lives will be impressed with the reality of our convic- 
tions, and will pause to ask whence this holy ardour comes. 3. In abounding usefulness 
(vers. 41 — 47). The Lord will add to the Chm'ch continually of those who " are in the 
way of salvation." — C. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — The epoch of the spiritual dispensation. I. The day. The fiftieth 
after the Passover ; the beginning of the great festival of harvest. What associations 
of joy! it was a focus of national life. It was a convenient season for the designs of 
Providence. Jerusalem was thronged, and the multitude was alive with thought. A 
sound now heard from the depths of the world of spirit must vibrate through the 
conscience of mankind for ages. 

IL The sound. As of a mighty blast from heaven, sweeping through the whole 
house from top to bottom. The phenomena of the wind and of the storm have ewer 
been the natural symbolism of Divine presence and power to the human intelligence. 
'I'he sense of hearing is the peculiarly believing sense ; all through the grades of language 
(aith " Cometh by hearing." Now it is the soft voice of love, and now that of power, 
which speaks ; in the zephyr or in the boreal blast. 

111. The LIGHT. The eye, too, is addressed. This is the more sceptical sense, and 
either confirms or corrects the report of the ear. Thomas was in the meeting, and 
would possibly have explained the sound away. The testimony of the eye is needed 
for full satisfaction, and is given. Not one but many tongues, cleft and as of fire, are 
seen ; on the head of each disciple rests a tongue. The picture is that of a wing of 
flame, distributed into manifold parts according to the number of those present. And 
this is the analysis of the symbol : cleansing, all-penetrating Divine activity ; the 
love that consumes evil, and fuses the material of life to ends of refinement ; unity 
of principle with distributive and various operation in this power. As the burning 
ray reveals the gem, so does the disparting flame reveal the love that ever burua 
in tb« centre of things, in the heart of the living God. Here, then, was the " Spirit 



«4 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1— *? 



of power and of lore " made known through ear and eye in inmost conscience and 

feeling. 

IV. The effect. It was fulness of conscious life, which in turn breaks forth in 
wondrous aotiun. All things are for this epoch possible. They begin to speak in 
foreign tongues. Their utterances are felt to be not their own. It is " according as 
the Spirit granted them utterance." They are the iEolian harps on which the wind is 
playing. The best of our speech and thought is in like manner from an inner fulness, 
and is felt not to be our own. What we do as we say " unconsciously," i.e. conscious 
that it is not we but God in us, is our true deed. Mozart could not explain to his 
friend the process of his marvellous musical constructions. At times the thoughts 
flowed into him in full stream, and he merely reported them as they came. We cannot 
artificially bring on the hour of inspiration. We must watch and wait and pray. 
For every faithful heart there are Pentecostal epochs. And of each it will be recorded, 
" suddenly it came," like all Divine comitigSt to leave uidooked-fur power and blessing 
behind. — J. 

Vers. 5 — 13. — The amazement of tht multitude. L Wondbb is oaubbd bt ant 

BBBAE IN THE REGULAR ORDER AND CUSTOM OF THE WORLD. It is SO in the kingdom 

of nature, and here in that of spirit. The country-folk of Galilee were least of all 
likely to acquire the power to speak the tongues of nations vtrith which they were 
seldom or never ia contact. And here unlettered men are found speaking the tongues 
of ancient and cultivated peoples. It is a type and prophecy of what the gospel in its 
bimplicity is to do for all the varieties of mankind. 

II. Wonder was herb enhanced by the matter as well as the manner o* 
THE message. Tho burden of this deliverance in diverse tongues was the " great 
deeds " or " mighty wor^.^ " of God. Notice that power is the great theme. In any 
new beginning of spiritual life or fresh era of revelation, perhaps it may be said, the 
power of God must first be felt by the heart before his mercy and love can be rightly 
received. Our weakness needs the disclosure of the power working within us to make 
all things possible, and our pride may need chastising by the proof that one touch of 
that power brings the wisdom of this World to nought. 

III. The phenomena of the Spirit admit of diverse interpretations. The 
elation and exaltation of the mind produced by the incoming of Divine power outwardly 
resembles the intoxication of wine, and may readily be mistaken for it. With allusion 
to this, doubtless, St. Paul said, " Be not drunk with wine, but be filled with the Spirit " 
(see F. W. Robertson's sermon on this text). This is an example of the coincidence of 
extreme oppoeitss. Spiritual things are spiritually discerned, and only the spiritual 
man c*n distinguish the spurious from the genuine enthusiasm, the superficial effer- 
vescence of bodily excitement from the sublime manifestation of the presence of God 
in the soul. Here, too, lies a trial of faith. The enthusiast is liable to be confounded 
with the madman or the fanatic by the many who judge according to appearances. 
The results can alone show the reality or otherwise of influence. Genuine spiritual 
power ia ever followed by moral regeneration in the community. — J. 

Vers. 14 — 21. — Interpretation of the phenomena of the Spirit. I. Thbt are not 
TO BE CONFOUNDED WITH THOSE OF SENSUOUS INTOXICATION. In this casc the latter 
was not in the least likely, for it was still early morning. Indeed, Peter waves aside 
the explanation with an air of contempt. 

II. They are to be intehpreted by the laws of spiritual experience. 1. The 
teaching of the prophets — the most inspired and enlightened of the raoe^must be fallen 
back upon. The prophet lived near to the fount of truth, and was the mouthpiece of 
the oracles of God. The oracle quoted from Joel lies in the centre of his short roll, 
and burns there like a core of fire. It seems the one portion of his prophecy which 
looks beyond the circumstances of his time, and can only be satisfied by repeated 
fulfilments in ihe course of all future history. 2. The contents of the orade of JoeL- 
(1) At some epoch undefined there is to be an outpouring of God's Spirit upon all man- 
l<ind. ('2) The effect of this will be a general outburst of sacred utterance ; an intense 
inward illuminiition. (3) The whole manifestation is to be accompanied by wonders 
symbolic and significant of a spiritual revelation, and the passing away of old and ou(^ 



OH. n. 1—47.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa <« 

worn customs. (4) It will be an era of deliverance, of salvation. Men will cry to 
Jehovah, of old the Deliverer, and will be heard and saved from their distresses. 
With these prophetic hints the apostle would explain the wondrous events of the day. 
Christianity begins with a new effusion of the Divine into the human, the strengthening 
and illumination of the finite mind, the enlargement of its gifts of expression ; a pro- 
found and general impression of the nearness of Qod, and the joy of a new-found 
freedom and salvation. — J. 

Vers. 22 — 36.— 37le connection of the Christian events. All history has an inner 
logic and meaning, contained in the person and the love of God. The secret links of 
events may be in part traced by us. 

I. The life of Jestjs. 1. His simple and homely humaniti/. " Jesus of Nazareth," 
a name of scorn to many, of unpretentious lowliness to all. 2. His gracious, divinely 
attested career. Though poor and despised of men, the favour of God was upon him. 
And the proof was in the energy which went forth from Jesus. Again we come upon 
the note of power. "Mighty works," or "powers," "wonders" which called attention 
to will introducing change, and " signs," or all-significant acts which pointed to an 
unusual meaning, attested that Jesus was the Organ of Divine power and will. 3. 
This career was public, led in the light of day. The evidence was not only of the 
highest quality, but of the most unquestioned universality : "as you all know." 
• II. The destdtt of Jesus to die. To the superficial observer, or one knowing 
the facts only from the outside — a Jewish or Roman historian of the time — it might 
appear that Jesus perished as Judas the Gaulonite had done, the victim of the conflicts 
of the time. .Jewish and Roman interest and passion seemed to unite against him, and 
he perished, the Victim of hate and misconception. But this was but a small part of 
the truth. To one instructed in the Divine logic of history, the death of Jesus was no 
accident ; it lay in the laws of the moral order, in the " definite counsel and fore- 
knowledge of God." Yet it was an act of wickedness to put him to death. Pos- 
sibly we cannot solve in thought the seeming contradiction of the foreknowledge of 
God and the freedom of man. Enough that we can recognize separately the perfect 
truth of each. 

III. The upraisino op Jesus. God's hand released him from the grasp of death. 
Here, again, was the operation of necessary law. It was impossible that he should be 
mastered by death — he who is the very affirmation of life. The absolute life cannot live 
beneath its negative. And here, again, the past furnishes its hints to the solution 
of the truth of the present. Spiritual life is imperishable ; he who possesses it has an 
immediate consciousness of immortality, and can find parables of the victory of life over 
death everywhere. — J. 

Vers. 25 — 28. — 77ie parable of the Eeswrrection in Davids psalm. The apostlf 
quotes one of the few utterances in the Old Testament which yield with any distmct- 
ness the hope of a life after the grave. But, speaking generally, the psalms, as the 
choicest expressions of the spiritual life of Israel, are " dark sayings " and " parables " 
of higher relations than those to which they immediately refer. In this psalm we 
find— 

I. The immediate sense of the presenob of the lxviko God. And this is a 
presence which, once enjoyed, carries with it the promise of its enjoyment for ever. 
God can never ,be less to me than he is at the moment of my highest spiritual joy in 
the possession of him. This sense of his presence gives perfect security. 

II. The effect is gladness and triumphant hope. The soul will not be left in 
the gloom of Hades, to live on a life but the cold and shadowy reflection of the bright 
life on earth. This cannot be believed and God's goodness bo believed. This cannot 
oe believed and the filial feeling retained. At last all arguments for the immortality of 
the soul fall back upon this deepest basis, the ineradicable conviction of the goodness 
ol God. 

ill. The whole is an argument from the past to the future. " Thou madest 

known ... the ways of life ; thou shalt make me full of gladness." And the argument 

may be applied in a wider sense than that present to the mind of the psalmist. For 

he was a prophet ; and aU prophecy is a germ which unfolds into endless meanings 

ACTS. » 



66 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. n. 1—47. 

which history brings to light. The greatest and most signal fulfilment of the prophecy 
was in the resurrection of Christ. 

IV, This facts, toqetheb with the prophbot, combine in one aeoumbnt fob the 
Bbsubbection. The facts were, that the risen Jesus had been seen by many. That 
now, after an interval from his departure, there had been a remarkable effusion of 
spiritual power. With these must be connected the fact that he had spoken of the 
coming of the Holy Ghost, the " promise of the Father." Putting the whole of the 
facts together, the conclusion was : Jesus, the despised and crucified, had been exalted 
to sovereign dignity, and in reference to Israel especially to the Messiahship ; to be 
anointed Prophet, Priest, and King over his people for ever. The coincidence of 
extreme opposites is to be observed throughout the scheme of the gospel. It is 
illustrated, above all, in the humility and glorification, the weakness and power, tha 
human contempt, and the Divine honour associated with the person of Jesus. — J. 

Vers. 37—47. — Effects of the Divine power upon the heart. I. Compunction. Pear 
is awakened by every drawing near of God to man. And with fear is closely connected 
the sense of sin. Stated from the other side, the truth is : behind the power of God 
lies his holiness, which is as a consuming fire. The deepest seat of fear is not in our 
physical but in our moral instincts. Thus the fear awakened by the revelation of the 
All-holy is itself a witness to the fact that conscience is the central unity of our being. 
Our very self seems threatened when confronted with a Being who judges evil, and i« 
of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. 

II. Instinotivk desire fob action. " What shall we do ? " Let us not take the 
words in the grossest sense of personal fear, and mere desire to escape from some 
imminent outward danger. Why should we ? Brave as lions in the ordinary sense, 
there are men who cannot endure the face of their God. The Object before which all 
must quail is the Spirit revealed in the inmost moral convictions. All religion is a 
striving after inner unity, reconciliation between self and God. And the will is deeply 
concerned in this. It is a good sign when men ask, amidst the pains of a wounded 
conscience — What must 1 dot It implies the feeling of freedom ; the fact that they 
have power and will left. 

m. The WAT or salvation. As indicated in the words of Peter. 1. A change of 
mind. Eepentance. To see its full meaning we should look to the Greek. It is 
lierivom : it is a change of thought from the bad to good, the erroneous to the true, 
or the less true to the more true. Eepentance is not mere feeling; it has not the 
uncertainty of moods and sentiments. It is not a simple change in the weather of the 
soul. It is a distinct alteration of the focus of the intelligence ; it carries with it a 
movement of the will ; in short, it is a revolution in the very ground of the man's being. 
2. The expression of the change of mind. By baptism — a pure and simple rite, signifi- 
cant to every eye and imagination of washing, of cleansing, of recovered purity, for 
intelligence, feeling, and conduct. The acts of the spirit are not complete until they 
have been clothed in outward form. We hardly know ourselves to be changed, and 
certainly others cannot know that we are changed, without the language of the act. 
Sacraments are thus needed both for the believer himself and for the society ; they 
have a subjective and an objective value. 3. 27i« promises of the new life. The 
man who comes out of paganism or ritualism is baptized into Christ, i.e. into a spiritual 
religion which offers promises as well as enjoins duties. (1) Semission of sins. 
Deliverance in its highest and most absolute form. The deliverance which was 
Israel's age-long dream passes out of its lower, sensuous, typical form of national 
freedom and independence into the spiritual form o{ personal freedom and indepen- 
dence of the dark necessity, the fate or bondage of sin. It is the discovery that 
freedom is in this deepest sense a reality which makes Christ's doctrine a great 
moving force in the world. Men grasp at the shadows of freedom, or the mere skirts 
of freedom, until this its true shape is revealed. (2) The gift of the Eoly Qhost. 
Closely connected with the foregoing ; for moral power goes hand in hand with moral 
freedom. Only in freedom from the oppression of sin can the soul become the or^an 
of the Holy Spirit. The wide extent of this promise. To the chosen people— to their 
posterity, and to an undefined multitude of the heathen whom God shall call unto him. 
The universality of the gospel blessings here appears in germ, although from the lip» 



ofl.n.1— 47.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. «7 

of one who afterwards sided with the Judaizen. The progress of Christianity has heen 
marlied hjr the growing appreciation of the part and place of the nations in the 
liingdom of God. 4. Exhortation. " Be saved from the generation of this crookedness," 
says the apostle, jising an idiom of his native Hebrew. Salvation is ever from a 
preunt evil, affecting not only the individual but the society. It is the tyranny of 
custom which weighs upon all. And all that is said in the New Testament about this 
" present evil world," and the " course " of this world, refers to some such predominance 
of immoral habits in' the general life of society. As evil, Proteus-like, changes its forms 
from age to age, lO is the hope and message of salvation eternally fresh and new.— J. 

Vers. 41 — iT.— Effects of the Pentecostal day. I. Immbdiatb chanob on the part 
OP UANT. Three thousand were found receptive to the truth, so powerfully attested 
in word and deed, and submitted to baptism. 

II. Pbksbveeanob in discipleship. That the conversion was genuine i8 shown 
by their diligent attention to the apostolic instruction, and frequentation of the 
Christian society. Perhaps no better tests of genuine change can be found. The 
breaking of bread and the prayers stand for the regular ordinances of religion. Tiie life 
that is of God will ever prove its worth by becoming a social power, by seeking social 
nourishment and common edification. 

III. The spread op a general spirit op ebverbnoe. This, too, is symptomatic 
of an outpouring of the Divine Spirit. It is not without reason we speak of the 
general " tone of society." When and wherever the Church is really alive unto God, 
and Christians have received an unction from the Holy One, public and private life feels 
the infiuenoe ; the newspapers, books, gossip, turn upon serious matters ; and the 
scoffer is shamed. 

IV. OccasionaIi manifestations op Divine power. Wonders and signs by the 
agency of the apostles ; in other words, indications of the Divine presence with chosen 
men, intimating special meanings directing to moral ends. But the occasional ever 
rests upon the constant and permanent. The wonderful ever serves to direct attention 
to the regular and the common. We should forget the beneficent law of spiritual 
things, did not special interruptions arouse us from the stolid apathy of custom. 

V. A NEW MODE OP LIFE INTRODUCED. There was a deep sense of unity, and conse- 
quently delight in fellowship. They met together ; they instinctively sought a perfect 
equality with one another. To carry this out involved in many instances, doubtless, 
great personal sacrifices — the parting with personal property and distribution to the 
needy. It was the best proof of love that could be given, and the best of sincerity. 
Usually the instinct for property is the last thing to go beneath the gracious expulsive 
power of Divine love. They were striving after the brightest ideal of life that Christian 
love can dream of; to make "all men's good each man's rule." A joyous religion 
inspired this conduct. The temple became again what it was designed in idea to be — 
the house of the Father and the home of man. By that sacred hearth there was for a 
time a bright, vie.Dle picture of the spiritual reunion between God and man. They 
" sat at feast, enjoying each the other's good," because all conscious of partaking of the 
bread of God. Joy broke into thanksgivmg, and the dark shadows of mutual envy were 
dispersed. Finally, this life of the new Christian community became an irresistible 
centre of attraction ; and daily men " in the way of salvation " were added to the Church. 
This episode is a type in history of the power and effect of the gospel. That life 
could not continue at this ideal height only reminds us that the actual world presents 
irresistible obstacles to the attainment of our best wishes. That it was manifested, 
though but for a short time, proves the direction of love, and is prophetic of its final 
dominion in the life of mankind.— J. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — 77ie day of Pentecost : the manifestation of the Spirit, L The time 
AND PLACE. Correspondence with the facts of the natural world and of the Jewish 
Church. Harvest festival. Connection with the Passover, from which it was reckoned — 
seven weeks. The gifts of God poured out at Jerusalem, where yet he was about to 
pour out his judgments. The new must be grafted on the old, according to the 
promises in the prophets, that there should still be a remnant according to the election 
of grace. Favourable position of Palestine to be the centre of the world'a raligioui 



68 THE A0T8 OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1—47. 

life. Distinction from Greece and Bome, and the great absolutisms of the East. 
Providential education of the Jews to be the world's messengers in Christ's Name. 
Rebuke of human pride. Not to the wise, not to the wealthy, not to the politically 
powerful, was the function assigned, but to the small and despised people in whom the 
gracious preparation was made, to the Church when it was in the attitude of prayer. 

II. The fobm of manifestation. 1. Tongues ; not swords, not sceptres, but the 
sign of persuasion and moral victory over men's hearts. 2. Fire, changing, subduing, 
penetrating, purifying, irresistible. The element of the world's destruction. So the 
power of truth brings about the overthrow of error and the destruction of the evil 
world. 3. Accompanied with the sound of a mighty rushing wind from heaven, 
symbol of the vastness of the spiritual forces now to be sent upon earth, of their 
mysteriousness of operation, of their su/per-earthly origin ; not brought about by any 
devices or machinery of man's, but the free gift of God, that his Name alone be 
■glorified. 4. Distributed amongst God's people ; " sat upon each of them," " cloven 
tongues," probably referring to the flames being divided into portions — " parting asunder" 
(Revised Version). Whether the all of ver. 1 mean all the twelve apostles alone, or 
all the disciples, is of little consequence, for the promise of the Spirit was declared by 
Peter to be for all flesh (see below). 5. The voice of the Spirit. Either an unknown 
tongue which the Spirit interpreted, partly by inspiration of those who heard it, and 
partly by communication of its meaning to individuals, or the special gift of languages 
imparted for the occasion, by a miraculous elevation of the faculties, so that the 
uneducated Jew spoke a foreign tongue. The former seems the most likely. But the 
one great fact is the utterance of the Spirit's voice. — B. 

Ver. 4. — Baptism of the Holy Ohost. Connect with facts ; the position and respon- 
sibilities of the Church, the promise given, the antecedent state of the world, the need 
of a Divine power for the mission of grace, the importance of such a miracle for the 
confirmation of faith and the establishment of Christianity, the uplifting of the agents 
above natural infirmities, errors, and sins. 

I. A GREAT EPOCH in human history. World filled with many things — thoughts, 
speculations, strivings, powers ; capable of much, but the great want the Spirit. Truth, 
love, life, for a false world — a world at enmity with itself, full of disorder ; a dying 
world, needing to be renewed and restored. 

II. A OKBAT GIFT of God to man. "Suddenly " bestowed ; freely, apart from man's 
claims and merits ; upon all, without respect of persons, for the selection of the few 
believing Jews, with a view to the abolition of Judaism and of all restrictions ; 
abundantly — " all filled," to their own astonishment, with supernatural powers. 
Spiritual gifts above all other gifts. Even science points to a continuous ascent of 
man. He is only highest when he is filled with the Spirit of God. 

III. A GREAT CHANGE in individuals and in the commimity. We may anticipate 
a similar baptism of the Holy Ghost, not with the same external manifestation, but 
with substantially the same elevation of faith and life. Instances of such a baptism 
in great preachers and workers, in lowly men and women, in periods of the Church's 

' history. Suddenly the fact may appear, but, like the first Christians, our duty is to be 
ready for it, waiting, expecting, with one accord, often in one place. Revival of the 
Church, conversion of the world, should be viewed in their relation to this stupendous 
change, and what came out of it. Baptism is consecration. The Holy Ghost is not 

fiven for signs and wonders, but to endow the Church for its mission to the world, 
'he power of utterance is the great test of Divine endowment, not in the sense of 
human eloquence, but in the fulfilment of the Spirit's work, to " convince the world of 
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment" (John xvi. 8 — 10). And so — 

IV. A GBEAT OPENING OF HEAVEN. The One fact of Pentecost is the pledge of the 
future. It is the gate through which we can see endless glory : " angels of Qt)d 
ascending and descending." " All the families of the earth " blessed in the true 
children of Abraham. We must admit of no compromise in the proclamation of suca 
a message. If Christianity is no more than a moral doctrine, then Pentecost is lost in 
the background of a primitive antiquity ; if it is " life from the dead," then we must 
ceaselessly repeat the watchword, " This is lie that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost." 
We om do nothing without a Divine Christ, a Divine Spirit, the promise of tht 



OH. II. 1—47.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 69 



Father, a new creation. To this opened heaven all are alike invited. The conditions 
of such a baptism were proclaimed by Jesua himself on the mount, through all his 
ministry. " Come unto me ; " " Ask, and U shall be given unto you ; " " Walk in the 
light, and be children of light." — R. 

Vers. 5 — 13. — Spiritual facta in a world unprepared to receive them. I. Devout 
MEN may still be living at a very low point of spiritual apprehension and experience 
(ver. 5). To many conscientious and sober-minded people the manifestations of the 
Spirit a perplexity. Hence the importance of a progressive faith, a prayiag and 
expectant attitude. Religion apt to grow stagnant and perfunctory. 

II. The MULTITUDE will be startled by that which comes from heaven. They need to 
be roused and quickened with great and enthusiastic utterances. The natural tendency 
of man is to rest in mere second causes. How could these " Oaliloeana" so speak? 
Yet God has something which each one can feel "his own language." The gospel 
message must be brought home to men's " business and bosoms." Speak to them, not 
in a learned, or philosophical, or theological phraseology, but in a dialect with which 
they are familiar. 

III. There will be vabiett among perplexed hearers. Some will ask for informa- 
tion, others will mock and scorn, revile and blaspheme. Yet the first opposition or 
indifference may be followed by a blessed ingathering of souls. 

IV. The TEW SPEAKERS Compared with the vast sphere represented in the multitude — 
east, west, north, south — reminds us that God hath chosen the weak to confound the 
mighty. The field is the world, but the small beginning is yet an announcement 
of the " wonderful works of God." To him there is no small and great. — E. 

Vers. 14 — 36. — The Spirit speaking through the voice of an apostle. Notice— 

L The SIMPLICITY AND DiBEOTNBSS of the sermou ; beginning with the facts of the 

present, going back to the facts of the past, and ending in the solemn appeal to enter 

the kingdom of Christ. 

II. The BOEIPTUBAL AUTHORITY On which it rests. The ancient promise of Messiah ; 
the glory of the latter days ; the prophetic psalms ; — thus showing that the unbelief of 
those who despised that day of grace was inexcusable. 

III. The INSPIRED BOLDNESS of Utterance. The hearers charged with the rejection 
of the Messiah ; the facts openly proclaimed, and their disproof challenged ; the present, 
ascended glory of Jesus published as the glad tidings which should, if welcomed, 
obliterate the gloom of the last few years in Israel. 

IV. The AFFECTIONATE EARNESTNESS mingling with all the discourse. A true 
Israelite is speaking as a brother to those who were the "house of Israel," over 
which Jesus came to be the Head. — ^R. 

Ver. 21. — The common salvation. " And it shall be," etc. 

I. What it is. 1. Salvation, both present and eternal, in the great day of the Lord ; 
amid the terrors of judgment. 2. Spiritual life, given by God, given to all and of 
every condition, manifested in the life and in the character, opening the eyes of the 
soul to Divine realities and future glories; fiesh receives it, and is made spiritual; 
a new creation is pledged by it ; flesh lifted up into the immortality of heaven. 
3. Salvation through the Name of the Lord, wrought by him, illustrated by the 
wonderful facts of his history, secured by his infinite merit. 

II. The SIMPLE CONDITION. " Call on the Name of the Lord ; " another description 
of faith in Old Testament language, including : 1. The soul's cry for help in the sense of 
sin and misery ; call as one dying. 2. Apprehension of the Saviour. The name is the 
person, the character, the claim, the authority, the promise. 3. Prayerful consecration 
in response to the Divine grace. The day of salvation is light around us. We accept 
the light as the light of life. 4, Universality of the proclamation — " whosoever." 
The spiritual gifts are not poured out upon all, but the moving of a new life is the 
invitation to growth in grace. The words of Joel remind us that there are special 
crises of opportunity, which it is awful sin to slight. Where many are " calling on tht 
Lord," shall we be dumb ? " Who shall abide the day of his coming ? " — ^B. 



70 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1—47. 



Ver. 22. — The Divine humanity. " Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God." 
L The olaik. 1. Viewed in the light of human work. A man, to teach, to atone, 
to lead, as never man did. Compare the human supply of such wants with that 
provided by God Id Christ. 2. Viewed in the light of Scripture promises. The line of 
prediction from the protevangel to the promise of the " Sun of Righteousness with 
healing in his wings." 

II. The proof op the claim. 1. The superhuman character of Christ's humanity ; 
as spotlessly pure, coming forth out of an impure nation and decayed religious lile ; 
as supreme in spiritual qualities — love, self-sacrifice, etc. 2. The direct testimonies 
given by God, at birth, baptism, with a voice from the cloud, etc. 3. The works of the 
Lord himself. Their authority thus solemnly and conspicuously put forth by the 
Apostle Peter ; their embodiment in the gospel ; their harmony with the character 
and mission of the Saviour ; their superiority to all others, before or since. " God 
did them." 

III. Thb appealing foeob op the claim. 1. A " groat salvation 1 " " How can 
we escape, if we neglect " it ? 2. A Man amongst men, touched with fellow-feeling, 
tenderly claiming obedience. 3. A Name which gathers round it the testimony of 
the multitude which no man can number, approved by the facts of salvation in the 
past, waiting to find in us another proof that he is " able to save unto the uttermost," 
etc.— B. 

Ver. 3S,—Boyal bounty. " Being therefore," etc. 

I. Received op the Pathrb. The throne of Christ is the right hand of the 
Father. " Righteousness and peace have kissed each other." The obedience of Christ 
rewarded. The highest manifestation of the Divine in the Man Christ Jesus. The 
only true view of infinite power is that which sees it on Christ's throne as the source 
of the Spirit of life. Man's power destroys, God's power creates and saves. The 
thrones of this world fall, because they are so unlike Christ's throne. 

II. The HiaHEST summit which Jesus reached ; to which he was exalted. Ha did 
not throw off humanity, but carried it with him. For the sake of it he endured 
the cross. The glory of the throne shines through the earthly scenes of his history. 
So we can see the summit of our blessedness beyond and through the steep sides of the 
earthly path. Exalted for us, Jesus shows us that there is a holy ambition which is 
not self-worship, but self-sacrifice. James and John were not reproved for desiring to 
sit beside Jesus, but for desiring it apart from Divine appointment — as mere personal 
favour. 

III. Thb gift itselp. " He hath shed forth this, which ye see and hear." Spiritual 
power is given that it may be manifested ; not in the world's forms, not as ecclesiastics 
have claimed to exhibit it, but with Pentecostal grace — distinguished men, subduing 
and captivating messages. The poverty of the Church without this gift. The evidence 
of its presence in the spirit of loyalty to the King from whose tlirone it descends. 
Christ-like power is what we want. The individual appeal : " Ye see and hear." The 
gift is already bestowed. Why should any be without it ? An appeal (as in ver. 36) 
to the Crucifixion. " Ye slew him ; yet he offers you his grace. Ye said, ' We will 
not have this man to reign over us; ' yet he holds out his sceptre, and invites you 
to sit down with him on his throne." lii not this a love to put on the throne of our 
hearts?— K. 

Vers. 37 — 42. — The day of spiritual wonders. I. Wrought in the heart. Re- 
pentance. Anxious inquiry. Submission to Divine teaching. Separation from the old 
life. Depth of the work revealed in progressive steadfastness. 

II. The fruit of human agency accompanied by Divine power. Preaching, the testi- 
mony of believers, the sight of wonders, the open gate of the Church. 

III. Sealed with the appointed sign of the Spirit. Baptism, both selective and 
consecrative in meaning. It was to separate and to unite. Save yourselves from this 
generation. God calls you unto him. 

IV. Given in great abundance. " Three thousand souls ;" as encouragement to the 
Church ; as a sign of promise and invitation to the world ; as a confirmation of the 
gospel ; a» • preparation for immediate assault upon the mass of unbelief. For though 



on. n.I--47.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 71 



God can work with small and insignificant instrumentalityj he summong his peopl« 
to make great efforts. 

V. The PLEDGE, PROMISE, AND PBOPHEOT of the World's ingathering. Nations shall 
be born iu a day. The wonders of Pentecost may and shall be repeated, though w« 
should not look for the repetition of the exact mode and form. 

VI. The wonderful is a preparation in the spiritual world for the obdbelt anb 
RBGUliAB. (Ver. 42.) As soon as possible the fruits of great revivals and religious 
excitements should be built up into the steadfast system and abiding fellowship. In 
the Church God works, as in the natural world. The new and extraordinary is brought 
at once into relation to the continuous line of progressive life. 

VII. The ordinances op the Church stand immediately connected with its 
most vital point. When the spiritual life was freshest and least formalized, baptism 
and the Lord's Supper were observed. The antidote to sacramentarianism is not dis- 
paragement of that which the Lord himself appointed, but the closer identification of 
the rite with the spiritual grace which gives it reality. The true presence and operation 
of the Spiritis the remedy for all the evils of the professing Church ; making work, 
prayer, teaching, fellowship, the regular and the extraordinary, all alike pure and true 
and heavenly. — B. 

Ver. Zl.—The touVs questions answered. " Now when they heard this,'' etc. 

I. The true beligioub awakening. 1. Distinguished from mere excitement ; from 
educational and conventional preparation for public acknowledgment of Christianity ; 
from an attitude produced by personal influences or circumstances, as a child pressed to 
call itself a Christian by parental affection, or a member of a congregation almost 
unconsciously carried forward to a position which has no true and deep feeling to support 
it. 2. The/r««< of preaching, or other setting forth of the facts of the gospel in relation 
to the individual. The hearera were pricked to tha haart; becaisa they felt the 
application to themselves of the apostle's appeal. He d'.d not employ any irregular or 
even sensational methods ; he proclainled the facts. Ee said, " You are verily guilty ; 
the jaomise is made unto you." Directness of appeal cannot fail of its effects. 3. The 
work of a special bestowal of the Spirit. It was intelligent, conscientious, heartfelt, 

. outspoken. There is no intimation of any abnormal manifestations, but simply the 
calm, earnest question of personal anxiety : " What shall we do ? " Spiritual life begins 
in different ways, but it will always be marked by conviction of sin and acceptance of 
ofiered grace. Heart, conscience, life, — all changed. 

II. The TRUE BEGINNING OF RELIGIOUS LIFE. 1. It is towards Ood. The inner man 
recognizing the facts, responding to the appeal, turning the heart from its perversity 
and selfishness, feeling and acknowledging the greatness of the sin and the danger of 
condemnation. The tendency to multitudinism is one of the most injurious in modem 
life. The gathering of masses, not really changed towards God, into the associations 
of the Church, and so into a state of calm security as to their religious prospects, is a 
barrier to a vital, spiritual advancement. Better the Church should not be increased 
with its thousands, than that they should be mere nominal Christians. 2. It is towards 
man. They addressed themselves to Peter and the rest of the apostles. Religious life 
is not a solitary thing, not a mere matter between the soul and God; but between the 
man and his fellow-man — between the individual believer and the Church of Christ. 
The questions of the anxious and seeking souls should be drawn out by the Church. 
The Church should present itself to the world in such a way that the question^ should 
be both humbly and affectionately asked. There is an authority of superior knowledge 
and experience and tried character which should be able to make itself felt. Yet men 
should see that we are their brethren, and that love to their souls is our ruling motive. 
"What shall we do?" Though we often teach men their moral helplessness and 
nothingness — that Christ has done all — still all true religious life means action ; life must 
reveal energy, express itself in conscious, steadfast effort. The apostle immediately 
directed the awakened people to do something for themselves. " Be baptized ; " " Come 
out and be separate." While it is possible to press an immature religious life to too early 
an acknowledgment, it is well to follow the apostolic precedents, and seal impression 
and resolve, with decided action and public testimony. We must cast ourselves on God. 
We are safer in the Church than in the world. Everywhere there is temptation, but 
the pledged Christian will have help in his holy vows.— B. 



72 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES, [oh. n. 1—47. 

Ver. 39. — Ood^a promise of the Spirit. " For to you is the promise," etc. 

I. Consider it as the need of man, and the fulfilment of that whole dispensation of 
mercy under which man was placed when he fell. 1. Trace it through the bestowmtnts 
of the Old Testament, and show that while God was ever bestowing his Spirit, both in 
special manifestations as in the inspiration of his messengers, and in individual life, 
yet the requirement of man was that in connection with a larger communication of 
truth and redeeming love there should be the lifting up of humanity itself, of the 
spirits of men by Divine gifts. 2. Show that such is Ood's method always. With gifts 
from without he sends gifts within. The gifts of science and discovery accompany an 
elevation of the mind and life of the world. Moreover, it is a Divine gift to be able to 
speak for Christ. 

II. Consider the extent and application of the promise. 1, Apart from all 
restrictions of human merit. Tq the crucifiers of Jesus— Tor God is merciful ; to the Jew, 
notwithstanding his abuse of special privileges ; to the Gentile, notwithstanding igno- 
rance and degradation. 2. Apart from all restrictions of age. To the children as well as 
to the adults ; to the families as well as the beads of households : for though the word 
" children " does not necessarily denote infants, it does not exclude them, and in such 
ways as by the analogy of Scripture we can interpret the "promise to the children," the 
word applies to the youngest. The Jew might well understand it as a covenant, which, 
like that of circumcision, was applied in its signs to the infant. 3. Wider than the 
utmost limits of human knowledge and belief. It is not for us, as it was not for the 
Apostle Peter, to say "whom the Lord our God should call." He has no respect of 
persons. He calls those whom we should not call. Peter himself was soon taught 
that God's purposes cannot be judged by man. The universality of the Spirit is the 
basis of all missionary efforts — the bond of the true Church. — R. 

Vers. 41, 42. — The beginning of great things. " Then they that gladly received his 
word," etc. Trace the instrumentality from the shore of Lake Gennesaret, through the 
fall and restoration of Peter, to the day of Pentecost. One man standing up in that 
multitude endowed with spiritual gifts — with the proclamation of the gospel, or the 
sling and stone with which to conquer. 

I. A woNDBEFDi. TESTIMONY TO THE KiNODOM OF Oheist. 1. The victory over 
prejudice, indifference, fear — all the evil of heart and life. Full-grown men--Jews. 
Jews of that degenerate age, in the midst of Anti-Christian influences, accepting a Word 
which condemned themselves — which incited them to forsake their old life, and count 
all things loss for Christ. Not only moved and partially changed, but wholly converted ; 
ready to be put, by baptism, into the new life opened to them. 2. The vastnus of the 
work accomplished. Not here and there one, but three thousand souls, which, as repre- 
sentatives of families and connections, may be reckoned as at least twenty thousand. 
Scarcely possible that every one should be individually solicited. The work was spiritual, 
miraculous. While there is much in the effect of numbers — the rapid spread of a 
common sentiment by contact of soul with soul, there is in the narrative no appearance 
of undue excitement. We must regard the fact as specially ordained, that there might 
be a mighty impetus given to the gospel at its starting-point. Many of the three 
thousand would become messengers to prepare the way of the Lord in heathen lands. 
3. The signs of anew creation. In that multitude of converts there is no chaotic con- 
fusion, but the order of a new world rising into view. The leadership of apostles ; the 
fellowship ; the observance of the two ordinances of baptism and the Lord's Supper ; the 
recognition of prayer as an expression of faith and dependence on the continual out- 
pouring of the Spirit. The apostolic commencement of the Church must be the model 
to which we continually refer for the corrections of those natural errors of develop- 
ment which, if not so called back to the ideal of the kingdom, will, by mixture with 
the world, destroy the fundamental conception of Christianity. 

II. A GREAT EXAMPLE OF ABIDING SUCCESS IN SPIRITUAL ENTERPRISE. 1. Remark the 

entire simplicity and sincerity of the agents. Much of our failure caused by mixing 
up mere human schemes and inventions with the gospel. Danger of reactions. The 
Word was clearly, boldly, and fully preached, with direct personal appeal to the conscience 
AS well as to the heart. 2. The steadfastness was the result of ai continued use of the 
means of grace — teaching, fellowship, breaking of bread, prayers. We lose many whom 



OH. n. 1—47.] THE AOVS OP THE APOSTLES. 



we reach with our word by not throwing round them quickly the net of our Christian 
community and institutions. 3. A great lesson on the importance of waiting for God's 
time, and being ready to receive the Spirit. All mere got-up revivals result in failure. 
God's Spirit will himself teach us how and when to expect the success. Follow tha 
leadings of Providence. — E. 

Vers. 43 — 47. — The spiritnal commonwealth. The Bible not intended to be a 
statute-book for nations, but a Book of Divine principles, which, while they should 
underlie all legislation, are not intended to supersede the natural development of human 
law. The glimpse into the earliest Church life specially helpful to God's people, indi- 
rectly so tothe world. Confirmation of the Acts in heathen authors, as Lucian, in his 
' Peregiinus Proteus,' who refers to the community of goods and other features of the 
early Church. 

L The edifice op the Christian Churoh bests upon the bupeenatubal. 
Fear on every soul ; signs and wonders. Divine work both in the outward world and 
in the hearts and consciences of men. 

II. The strength of the trsiTiNO bond in the new society is spiritual ; not mere 
companionship, or social instinct, or common necessity, or political aim, but brotherly 
love springing out of faith — a faith showing itself in self-sacrifice and steadfastness. 

III. The speciality and distinctness of the Christian life in the midst of such a 
world. Unselfishness, mutual consideration, compassion for the needy, gladness and 
singleness of heart, devoutness, purity of home life, steadfast continuing in well-doing. 

IV. The mighty effect of a pure Church upon an impure world. The true 
method of spreading religion is not by breaking down the distinctions between Church 
life and worldly life, but by revealing the spiritual power of Christ's kingdom. " They 
had favour with all the people." The people know how to distinguish between reality 
and pretence. They will be always moved by sincerity. The Lord will add to his 
own work. The method which we see in nature is a type of that which is ordained in 
grace. The vigorous life is selected to carry on the increase. Half-hearted Christianity 
cannot convert the world. Multitudinism is a great mistake, as well as mockery of 
Christ. Let the Lord add to the Church ; let not our desires, or even our observances 
of Christian institutions, multiply numbers without increasing strength. — E. 

Ver. 47. — Ood^s work amongst men. " And the Lord added," etc. DifiBculty of 
reading history, especially Christian history, without reading into it our own prejudices 
and opinions. Infancy of the Church an important study ; but as an adult often mis- 
understands a child, so we must beware of misconstruction of the simple facts. Yet 
a great good in getting as near as possible to the purity and unsophisticated artlessness 
of the primitive Church ; a fresher, sweeter, more beautiful life. Connect this last 
verse of the chapter with what goes before. It is all a testimony to the Lord and his 
work. The prejudice against the supernatural is best overcome by pointing to the 
facts of Christian history and life. How could the Church have conquered the world 
unless the Divine had been manifested specially in the human ? The few verses 
which describe the immediate sequel of the day of Pentecost like an open door into the 
new temple, which should take the place of the old. The disciples clung to the 
building in Jerusalem, but they themselves were the prophecy of a higher, spiritual 
edifice which should be filled with a greater glory. 

I. Salvation a fact. " Be saved," or " those being saved." 1. The rescue. 
Salvation from self — as sinful, condemned, corrupt, dying ; from the " imtoward genera- 
tion," t.#. from the world — from the sinful life and habits. If the message was 
understood in Jerusalem, so everywhere. Salvation is coming out of the old world into 
the new. 2. The gracious reception and pledged security. " Saved " — like the fugitive 
passing throuf,h the gate of the fortress. Necessity that there should be a separation 
unto Christ. The baptism was a confession by the mouth " unto salvation ' i.e. unto 
safety within the fold. Not that the fold is itself equivalent to salvation, bat it is the 
pledge of Divine grace. The presence and operation of the Holy Spirit set the promises 
of God clearly before men's eyes. They were invited to put themselves into the 
embrace of Divine power. So still, men are scarcely safe when they despise the fold 
of Christ. 



7i THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1-47. 



II. SpntiTCAL WOEK THE HOPE OF THE WORLD. " Tl.e Lord added to the Chunih " 
(or " to them," Revised Version). Divine in its origin, the grain of mustard seed hai 
never ceased to grow — must spread to the ends of the earth. The difference between 
Church life and ecclesiastical assumptions. The true Church neither a mere assembly 
nor association, but a Divine fact — the body of Christ. The Name of Christ the 
rallying-point, the presence and authority of Christ the power. There was confession — 
open, public, decided ; there was fellowship — true brotherly love ; there was apostolic 
doctrine and order — not formalism, but living obedience to the laws of Christ. 
Sentiment and ceremony not to be substituted for practical religion. The community 
was not communistic. It was not a revolt against laws nor an experiment in politics ; 
it was a simple method of expressing the sense of separation from the world. The 
believers must be provided for at any sacrifice, that they may continue faithful to 
Christ. It was not for the safee of abolishing distinctions, but of substituting the 
spiritual distinction for the falsehood of the world. In Christ Jesus there is neither 
high nor low, rich nor poor ; all are one in him. The true remedy against mammon- 
worship, with all its crowd of evils, is to set human life on the spiritual basis. " Seek 
first the kingdom of God," etc. The renovation of the world will be by the increase of 
the Church. 

III. The open secbet or Chkistianitt the mingling together of Divine power and 
human agency. Incarnation begins the Gospels, the day of Pentecost the Acts. The 
Lord must add to the Church. The Church must confess its own insufficiency, and seek 
the Lord. " Day by day " the addition was made, day by day the blessing falls. Ask 
for it, individually and in fellowship. — E. 

Vers. 1 — 41. — The day of Pentecost, and its immediate gifts. " And when the day 
of Pentecost . . . And the same day there were added about three thousand sculs.'' 
The day of Pentecost is emphatically the complement of the great days of the K6-» 
Testament. The visible glories of this day are the fitting sequel, the almost natural 
sequel, of the more veiled glories of certain days that had preceded it. The heavenly 
lustre and music of the day of incarnation, unique as they were, reached the eye and 
ear of but few. The world was asleep 1 The dread, tremendous glory of the day of 
crucifixion, charged though it was with fullest significance, was not seen to be such at 
the time. The glories of the day of resurrection undeniably opened eyes and hearts 
to the keenest and most thankful appreciation of them, but their appeal was to a very 
limited number. When the calm, sweet, strange glory of Ascension Day revealed a 
vision of literally endless light, the scene undoubtedly began to widen, if only that it 
so heightened. And now but a short interval has passed, and there is a certain 
manifestation given to this day of Pentecost which reflects floods of glory upon the 
Giver, and pours light and hope, new and amazing, upon a world well-nigh prostrate. 
It is the simply told history of this day that is written for us in this chapter. And 
it ^ells us of — 

I. The MAaNiricENT intervention op a suPESNATtrRAii PBESENCB. (Vers. 2 i). 

Observe : 1. The signs of the presence. It is distinguished by (1) the sound of wind, 
apparently without the usual other accompaniments of it to the feeling. (2) The sound of 
wind of irresistible and conquering energy. It is not as when " the Spirit of God moved 
on the face of the " archaic " waters " (Gen. i. 2), and it is not " as summer evening's 
latest sigh, that shuts the rose." No ; nor is it as the " stormy wind and tempest." 
The elements are not in confusion, and the wind is not furious. But it sweeps along 
nevertheless, with a certain irresistible majesty ; rather. It distinctly thus sweeps down 
" from heaven." It is wind that " bears itself down," and is " full of might." (3) 
Its facile pervading and penetrating of " all the house where " the disciples " were 
sitting," St. John, for certain, was there, and learned then the grand original of 
his later — ay, much later — Patmos experience, " I was in the Spirit." All in " that 
house" were enveloped, bathed, "baptized" in the Holy Spirit. (4) An added 
appearance ; an appearance of fire, manifold fire, every several portion of the brit^ht 
burning shaped as the tongue, and one of these speeding to settle on each of the 
startled assembly of disciples. 2. The first and direct results of thx presence. (1) Those 
to whom it was vouchsafed, and who " were sitting in the house," are " all filled with 
the Holy Spirit." This is the testimony, the assertion, of the historian at a somewhat 



ea.n.1— 47.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES, 16 

later period. Whether those who experienced the wonderful force knew in that same 
hour what had thus taken possession of them may be a question. If they knew it not 
in name, they very certainly began to know it in its marvellous nature. We justly 
give our imagination some leave of exercise here, and the more happily if that 
imagination can assist itself in any degree from the materials of our own experience 
of the quickening, invigorating influences of the Spirit in our heart. Evidently in 
degrees, ranging from little to the largest, does that Spirit vouchsafe his visits and his 
work in human hearts. What would it be if we knew him to-day in some really 
large measure! What conviction it would be to the individual heart! What 
commanding joy, inexpressible, overflowing to the very life and soul of any one disciple I 
But if such a visitation were granted to a gathering of disciples — just one meeting of 
Christian people — making account of the different time of day, the greater enlargement 
of scope of the day, the crowded people around, millions for thousands, the rapidity and 
trustworthiness of communication, — surely England itself would scarce contain the 
eicitement, and the Ghurch might well be beside herself for very joy. The mere 
imagination of this will help to reproduce for us some more vivid idea of the surprise 
of that moment, that hour of the day of Pentecost. (2) Those who were thus filled 
with the Holy Spirit are not rapt in ecstatic feeling, do not improvise celestial psalm 
and music, but they speak the many languages of earth. They speak, but the Spirit 
gives them the speech. They speak, but it is now literally fulfilled that the Spirit 
gives tbem in that same hour what they shall speak. The case is one of genuine 
verbal inspiration. There is little doubt, perhaps, that these numerous disciples spoke 
words which they did not understand the meaning of (1 Cor. xiv. 22), nor could have 
" interpreted " had they been called to do so. They uttered sounds, their faculties of 
speech being subject to the mighty and condescending power of the Holy Spirit. 
What of loss of dignity this may at first seem to the disciples, is far more than counter- 
balanced, not only by the suggestions of honour set on the organs of human speech in 
the use of them by One who may for the moment be called the Maker and Giver cf 
them, but also by the gain of a clearly more impressive result. There was far less 
mixture of the human element in the Divine communication that purported to pass 
from the Spirit to the ear and mind of a large number of various-speaking peoples. It 
is the difference to us of a correspondent who indeed uses an amanuensis, as St. Paul 
often did in his Epistles, but who keeps with himself the dictating; of every word. Such 
a one has not left the selection of words, or style, or turn of expression to another ; and 
this is the chief thing we care about, though we should have prized his handwriting 
as well. Nor need it seem at all too far-fetched an inference, if any one hesitated to 
count it a designed arrangement, that through this speaking being so essentially the 
act of the Holy Spirit, a very strong suggestion of the personality of that Spirit should 
be borne in on the disciples then, and much more on disciples of succeeding ages. 
Absolute speech does not come from what is merely an influence, an energy, a power. 
It is the function of a person. And it is one of the highest of prerogatives of the 
human being. The disciples had lost a personal Presence, in the person of Jesus, 
which could never be replaced, and which never was to be replaced till he should " so 
come" again, "in like manner as they had seen him go into heaven." ' And yet, 
though the personal presence of Jesus was not to be replaced by another personal 
presence, it was most surely to be replaced by the presence of a Person. Would it not 
be calculated to assist disciples both to believe correctly and to feel grateful that the 
ever-invisible Spirit was none the less a Personage, a Being — not a vague influence nor 
a phantom ? And now there is probably no cardinal fact of Christianity less honoured, 
less operative, than that of the personality of the Holy Spirit. It is one of the 
lisastrous causes of his being too often " slighted," " sinned against," " grieved," and 
" quenched." 3. Certain incidents in the presence. It is fitted (1) to a certain time. 
" When the day of Pentecost was fully come." The time was certain ; it was fore- 
spoken by Jesus; it was waited for by his disciples. But though certain, alluded to, 
\nd awaited, neither " the day nor the hour " was revealed. (2) To a certain place. 
The place certainly was Jerusalem. And the same Beii:g who told the disciples "not 
to depart from Jerusalem, but wait " there, was one who " knew " also " the place," 
the " one place," of his loved people's loved meeting, as he had once well known " the 
place "of his own agony — the garden. (3) To a certain temper of fesart. "Th^ywere 



T8 THE iLCTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1—47 

all with one accord," i.e. together, " in one place.*" Juxtaposition aud visible associa- 
tion do not always infer the purest of harmony by any means. But they did infer it 
now ; and that the disciples were all with one accord in one place was the real fruit of 
their being all " of one accord." Since that blessed day, true it is — too true — that 
Christ's p«ple have very often been " together " when they have not been " of one 
accord," " of one miud," " having the same love," " like-minded." But it was so now. 
And if it had not been, the grandeur of the day would either never have been at all, or 
would have " set in darkness " and shame. (4) Of undoubted design, to a congregate 
body, and one, comparatively speaking, numerous. No longer to a woman by herself, 
no longer to two disciples alone, no longer to the twelve, or the eleven, but at all events 
to some ten times that number (ch. i. 15). The Spirit often whispers silently, stealthily 
almost, in the ear of the soul most solitary. Not so now. The sacred illumination, 
sacred quickened faculty, and sacred joy shall possess "each" and " all together" of 
that new style of family, that infant Church — that little company of fellow-pilgrims, of 
fellow-voyagers, of a mere handful of an army. They need food, and strength, and com- 
fort, and the inspiration of experiences — never, never to be forgotten — shared together. 
Grand uses frequently come of the Spirit's force over one individual, and him the 
obscnrest of the obscure ; but now grand uses were to come for themselves, for one 
another, for a world, in that the disciples were associated so variously, yet so closely, in 
ecstatic privilege, in unbounded surprise, and in the consentaneous joy of the unwonted 
inspiration that came " wild-murmuring o'er their raptured souls." (5) To an occasion 
that .either admitted of the testimony or invited the challenge of a large and various 
multitude. There were present the comparatively large number of those who 
experienced the power of the Holy Ghost, but there were also near at hand a very 
much larger number of those who soon became spectators of what was transpiring. 
They were not only a large number, but a very various number. They hailed from 
different regions ; they spoke different languages ; their objects and their modes of life 
were, no doubt, very various. It were inconceivable that any collusion should obtain 
here, so far as spectators were concerned. In their excitement, and in the open 
expression of it, so natural, some did challenge, though the pitiful challenge fell still- 
born to the ground. " New wine " never wrought such marvel, each nationality must 
have felt, when addressed touching " the wonderful works of God " in its own language. 
But till then the Parthian, for instance, might set down to " new wine " the discordant 
sounds, as they must seem to him, of a dozen other nationalities. Just so far there 
was reason in the " mocking ; " and, at all events, there was u«« in it. For the " new 
wine" theory found expression, got a hearing, and got a verdict too I Most profitable 
was this occasion, when " the multitude were confounded . . . were all amazed and 
marvelled . . . were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to another. What 
meaneth this? . . . and others mocking said. These men are full of new wine." 
Such awakening, such spirit of inquury and investigation, such clear proof of a readiness 
to challenge appearances rather than succumb too readily and run the chance of 
delusion, made for every man that was there a strong, convinced witness in time to 
come, and in the home and country of each. From being excited spectators, they 
became, man for man, so many intelligent and determined witnesses of " the wonderful 
works of God." From being gaping hearers, they became instructed and impressive 
preachers. And the unsettledness of their mind gave place to deep, unmoved con- 
viction. The adaptation of occasion here gave two great advantages — the advantage 
of satisfactory and conclusive evidence, and that of an effective and willing missionary 
service over large portions of the earth. 

IL A GRAND MANIFESTATION-DAY OF PROPiiEOT. (Vcrs. 16 — 21.) This was a very 
gala-day of prophecy. Often distrusted, often mocked, and often saluted with the 
taunting question, "Where is the promise of his coming?" — noiv the scene which 
stirred all Jerusalem was one " in demonstration of that Spirit and power " which d «'elt 
in it. The day witnessed in matter prophetic the majestic Ibrce of the avalanche, 
overwhelming doubt and disbelief in deep destruction indeed, but carrying no other 
destructiveness with it. The piled predictions of ages past no longer tower aloft so 
proudly and forbiddingly, but they fall at the feet of an amazed, an astounded, but a 
revived and gladdened nation. Or, if the figure be permitted, the ieases of property 
of immeasurable value fall in this day. And that this was a day of justest pride in 



OH. 11.1— 47.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLBa 77 



the career of prophecy, may he testified hy the thought : 1. Of the largeness of the 
contents of it. The volume is an ample one indeed. What treasures it unrolled, and 
all the while seemed to say spontaneously, " This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your 
hearing" I It was an ahounding harvest that was now gathered in ripe, — a rich and 
gladdening vintage. It is not prophecy fulfilled for an individual king or mighty man, 
nor for a caste of priests, nor for a hand of prophets, but it includes "all flesh, . . . 
sons and liaughters, . , . young men, . . . and old men, ... my servants and my 
handmaidens." It proved itself over a wide variety of human character and condition. 
2. Of the intrinsic nature of it. " They shall prophesy." It is a fulfilment in tpirittial 
sort. The Spirit is the great Worker, and spiritual results are still what underlie great 
outer wonders. Living powers of human nature, immensely intensified and diversified, 
— these are the phenomena at all events. They are marked as " the beginning," not of 
" sorrows," not of " tribulation," not of " miracles," hut of " signs " that contain an 
amount and a kind of signifying power far in excess of all which had ever been. Now 
began — whatever its duration should prove to be — this world's last ceon. And strongly 
marked are its characteristics from the first. "All flesh" begin to answer responsive 
to the might of the invisible Spirit, and in a certain sense the very presumption of 
Saul, and of those who were stricken because they touched the sacred ark, begins to 
be the law. Directness of individual contact with whatever should be most holy, for 
each and all, becomes the established, the enthroned religion of the world. 

III. A GLORIOUS DISCLOSURE AND EMPHATIC PROCLAMATION COUCHED IN THE VERT 

WORDS OF AKciENT REVERED PEOPHECT. (Vcr. 21.) That Very prophecy that had 
seemed to cover, now served to proclaim loudly and distinctly the universal mercy of 
the one universal "Lord." The "gracious word" now proceeds from its lip, to begin 
its unresting journey. What a word was this, "And it shall come to pass, that 
whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be saved " ! It is the disclosure 
in broadest daylight of the purpose of ages past; yes, of a purpose that had been 
purposed before the world began. Most assuredly prophecy had held it, and had made 
it visible, but to very few who leheld, though it was before their eyes. The eyes even 
of those to whom it was given to see " were holden that they knew " it not. And 
the vast multitude outside were long time dying without the knowledge or so much 
as one glimpse of it. Of the past three years Jesus had given significant hints of it 
in some of his works, and had whispered it sometimes in the ears of his disciples, and 
had distinctly uttered it in his parting commission, " Go ye into all the world, and 
preach the gospel to every creature." But to the day of Pentecost " is this grace 
given," that it should preach aloud, with a hundred tongues, and a hundred better than 
silver trumpets, the riches of the gospel of Christ. Three things mark what was then 
in particular, and what must ever essentially be the surprising riches of the proclama- 
tion. 1. It is hope to all and every one. 2. It is the call of a human voice alone, no 
doubt drawn deep from the heart, that is the method, the one simple method of acciss 
to that hope. 3. The hope is that of no mere i'espite, subterfuge, soothing relief, but 
-if salvation. Exclnsiveness " is finished ; " ritual, ceremony, sacrifice, the earthly 
priest, — each "is finished;" tantalizing expectancy "is finished;" and everlasting 
salvation is to be had free, by any one and by every one, for the one anguished or 
trustful call of the heart " on the Name of the Lord." It is a fact worthy to be noticed, 
that, as the gospel of Jesus' own public ministry began from the quotation of Isaiah's 
prophecy (Luke iv. 17 — 21 ; Isa. Ixi. IJ, so the gospel of the day of Pentecost begins 
its illustrious career with the motto of a quotation from prophecy (Joel ii. 28 — 32). 
These two links — were they the only ones — how strongly they bind together the 
Scriptures of the old and new covenants, and the covenants themselves I 

IV. The FIRST of the long succession of Christian preachers. (Vers. 14, 29, 38). 
This honour was reserved for Peter, to be the first of that "great company which publish " 
the glad tidings of salvation through Jesus Christ. He had been preparing for this place 
now these three years. He had passed through good fame and through ill, through 
not a little most merited rebuke ; he had passed through, not the discipline of warnteg 
and correction alone, hut also through that of the genial influences and constant 
stimulus of priceless privileges. The memories of the fishing, and the storm, and the 
walking on the water, and the death-chamber, and the brilliant heights of the Trans- 
figuration, and the darkest contrasts of the shades of Gethsemane'a garden, and the 



78 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. Lch. n. 1— 47 

judgment hall, and the look vouchsafed from the very cross after the terrible thrice 
denial, and of all tlie rest, were now all upon him. And he has made, at all events, • 
this impression on us — the impression as of a man of: 1. Native impetuosity of 
temperament. 2. Imperious moral judgments. 3. Liability to fearful lapse. 4. 
Unbounded enthusiasm and devotion to a great and good Master. 5. And mom 
lastly, of a man with the eye of an eagle for the object dear to his heart. 

V. A MODEL TESTIMONY TO " THE TRUTH AS IT IS I^f Jbsus." (Vers. 14 — 36). The 
character of a model Christian sermon may be justly claimed throughout for this address 
of Peter to the multitude. The leading features of it are strongly marked. 1. It is one 
testimony to Christ ; the subject is variously approached, but it is one. Whatever the 
then reason, the subject is not lost sight of nor allowed to linger. Each approach to 
it, each conclusion from it, becomes more telling, till the pronounced assertion confronts 
the people, " Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath 
made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ." 2. It is a 
summary of indisputable historic facts. The incarnation and birth of Jesus are, 
therefore, not adverted to, as perhaps too remote. They did not come directly 
within the range of facts patent to the hearers of Peter. " As ye yourselves know " 
was an argument Peter loved to use. He didn't beg reliance on his judgment, 
opinion, or assertion, but he challenged the knowledge of those to whom he spoke. 
The " Man of Nazareth, . . . the approved of God, ... by miracles and signs and 
wonders . . . the delivered " (though here Peter does insert the transcendent state- 
ment of Divine " foreknowledge " and " counsel "), " the taken, . . . crucified and slain, 
. . . the raised up" from deatli's kingdom and dominion, "the exalted by the right 
hand of God," and the corroboration of these statements of the Resurrection and 
Ascension from the prophecies of their own prized oracles, — these are the vital facts 
summarized now by Peter, 'i'he chain breaks nowhere. Peter is strong in his facts. 
3. There was an unflinching style in the address. The indiscriminate people of Judjea 
»Qd Jenisalem are before Peter, and barely seven weeks are passed since the Crucifixion, 
and Peter brings the guilt home in uncompromising language to the heart and the 
hand of those whom he addresses ; and also declares that the wonders of this day of 
Pentecost, of which the fickle multitude were no doubt the willing witnesses, are all 
the work of that " Man of Nazareth " whom they had disbelieved, ill treated, crucified. 
Many men will bear to be told of their guilt, who won't stand the demonstration of 
their exceeding folly. But the hearers of Peter get both in his faithfulness and 
unflinchingness to his subject. " This Jesus . . . hath shed forth this, which ye now 
see and hear." 4. There was intense earnestness in the address of Peter. This, no 
doubt, went naturally a long way to disarm what might otherwise have seemed the 
offensive character of the matter of his indictment. The instance is an interesting and 
a remarkable one of the very severest rebuke consisting with a kindliness only thinly 
veiled. And without a word of kindness expressed, the impression and effect are 
probably gained by the manifest intense earnestness and strongest conviction of the 
speaker. These things, so that they are not abused, are legitimately within the 
province of the Christian preacher. With this proviso it is given to him to dogmatize, 
only not in his own name; to rebuke in the most uncompromising manner, only not foi 
any offence personal to himself merely ; and to wield the denunciations of the future 
and the unseen, only not otherwise than as drawn, both for matter and for justifiable 
occasion, s-vidi justly drawn, from the warrant of revelation. 

VI. A MODEL CONFESSIONAL OF THE Chiiech. (Vers. 37 — 40.) As was to be expected, 
in no respect is the transition from Judaism to Christianity more worthy of interested 
study than as it offers to view the healthy young growth of Christian institutions, 
taking root amid the ruins of the old and corrupt traditions of the " Jews' religion." Many 
a site that witnessed long time crumbling decay, stones no two of which lay together, 
and the very squalidity of disorder,now witnessed the surprising signs of vigorous, deter- 
mined, and beautiful life. It were well if it had been possible to secure that these should 
not in their turn succumb, in lapse of ti me, to the affronts of human imperfection, and show 
again the pitiful sight of diviner growths within cumbered, choked, and finally killed, by 
fungus, excrescence, and merciless blight. Here, however, we have a fine example of the 
vitality of roused religious life, its own cries, and the methods of treatment with which 
it was blessed to meet. Observe ; 1. The central fact — convicti<m. The conscienca 



OH. n. 1—47.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 79 



Itself k touched, wakens responsive to the touch, and takes upon itself to speak for its 
owner sounds that have the sounds of life. Men hear, and are " pricked in the heart." 
2. The first immediate course resorted to under the circumstances. Those whose hearts 
are thus "pricked," whose conscience is thus touched, begin to make inquiry, and 
inquiry of what they " shall do." They play not the role of excuse for the. past, of 
moralizing reminiscence, or of any other of the pretexts for procrastination. It is the 
moment for undoubted action, for decided action, and, if hon^est ignorance exist as to 
the shape of that action, for prompt inquiry as to the way : " What shall we do ? " 
No doubt, when the men and the time and the circumstances and those to whom thej 
now addressed themselves, — when these all are put together, it must be granted that 
there was here the reality and the best part of genuine confession, 3. Eeligious inter- 
rogatories made, not under the probing of the confessional-expert; not under the 
conditions of morbidness, and U goaded; fwt in secrecy and solitariness. These, as 
between man and his fellow-creature, may be often more than doubtful. But it is in 
opun day that this confessional-scene is placed. And safety invests it, and spiritual 
health and even symptoms of robustness are indicated. 4. Preachers not priest, 
doctrine not ritual, practice not penance, lively repentance not remorseful reflection, 
are the order of that well-omened hour. Yet, to speak of nothing else, if ever remorse- 
ful reflection — something short of remorse itself — might have put in a reasonably 
opportune claim, it was surely now, while Peter's stinging words still rang in their ears ; 
" This Jesus whom ye crucified " (Revised Version). But no ; the answer to the questions 
put at this honourable, open confessional is " Repent," altering at once the thing you 
have leen, though alter you cannot the crucifiying thing that you have done ; "Repent," 
and show it before men, by being " baptized, every one of you," actually in that very 
Name, "the Name of Jesus Christ," whom you rejected and crucified, acknowledging 
thereby that you are bounden to him for " the remission of sins ; " " Repent," and be 
baptized, and enter at once on the inheritance of long promise, " the gift of the Holy 
Ghost." That " gift of the Holy Ghost," (^ter repentance and after baptism and after 
the remission of sins, as distinguished from the prevenient quickening effected by his 
Bacred breath, would be the conclusive, surest token of the absolution of sin. For 
them and for ourselves this may sufficiently distinguish the ever-necessary work- 
ing of the Holy Spirit in quickening the human heart from death, necessary equally 
with Abel and Enoch as with Paul or any man of modern days, from that special 
endowment of the Spirit for other uses, vouchsafed to the " new covenant " from the 
day of Pentecost downward to this day. This is the special grace and crown of the 
Christian Church, though probably still little understood, and its conquering force 
accordingly still little tested. From the language of ver. 40 we may understand that 
we have but a sketch of all that Peter said from the moment that he stood up to vin- 
dicate the prophesying army from the charge of drunkenness, to the moment that 
the actual administration of the rite of baptism began. Unstintingly he " testified," 
unweariedly he " exhorted," and this the burden of his enthusiastic and impassioned 
appeal, that those who heard should show themselves willing, anxious, eager to be 
rescued from the following and from the belongings of an inherently "crooked 
generation." 

VII. A OLOBIOUS AND MOST HBAKT-alADDENINO HARVEST. (Vcr. 41 47). Thtee 

thousand were that day added to the hundred and twenty or thereabout, who began the 
day as believers in Christ. The multiplication was twenty-five for every one. They are 
those who " received his word." It wiU not be going beyond chapter and verse if we regard 
this as equivalent to " receiving the Word." Still, this is not the exact meaning of the 
historian, and as it is very possible that some of these very thousands at some subsequent 
time were guilty of defection, we may prefer to hold that those who came to be thus 
guilty did not receive " with meekness the engrafted Word, which was able to save their 
Bouls." They only caught a transient enthusiasm as they listened to Peter. Any way, 
some then also did not " receive " the word of Peter. " Some " then also " believed and 
some believed not." Some tares then also were mingled with the " good seed." Glorious, 
therefore, as that harvest was of the " latter day," it falls very short of the glory that 
shall be of "the last day." Then no Peter shall baptize, and no Church shall charit- 
ably judge, and no adulteration shall be possible. Then " the angels shall come forth, 
»nd sever the wicked from among the just (Matt. xiii. 49); "The Son of Man shall senc 



80 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1—47 

forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and 
them which do iniquity " (Matt. xiii. 41) ; " The Son of man shall come in his glory, 
and all the holy angels with him. . . . And he shall separate," etc. Meanwhile tn« 
spiritual harvest and ingathering into the Church visible and militant of that day of 
Pentecost was glorious and heart-reviving. The thought of it is so still. It is still 
unique for one time, one place, and one preaching. Yet these are but the clothing of 
circumstance ; and perhaps many a day since, the eye that surveys all, and sees every- 
where at one and the same time, may have witnessed equal proofs of the converting 
power of Word and Spirit, the one spoken by the lip of man, the other teaching that 
lip to speak. — B. 

Vers. 38, 41. — The first practice of baptism as a Christian rite. "Then Peter laid 
unto them, Eepent, and be baptized . . . the Holy Ghost." " Then they that gladly 
received his word were baptized . . . three thousand souls." The sun of the day of 
Pentecost did not set without marking the moment of the inauguration of the rite of 
Christian baptism — a rite which has never ceased to prove the occasion of stir and 
difference of opinion down the history of the Church. Baptism, and the baptism of 
water, was of course a familiar thing to the minds of the disciples of Jesus. It was in 
no sense a novelty, for they had known it from the preaching and the practice of John 
the Baptist. And with the original of even this there can be no doubt the Jewish 
nation as such had long been acquainted. The rite, however, unavoidably invests itself 
with fresh dignity and fresh significance from the time that Jesus, in the intra-val 
between the Resurrection and Ascension, and especially in his very parting words 
before the latter event, enjoined his disciples to observe it, in the sense, not of sub- 
mitting to it themselves at the hands of one another, but of calling others to it and 
administering it to them. They are expressly advised by Jesus that in their own ease 
it would be utterly superseded by the baptism of the Holy Ghost, which the day of 
Pentecost was to bring, and which it now had brought. " This beginning," therefore, 
of baptism in the Name of Jesus Christ may well attract most interested notice. It 
practically owned to certain objects or requirements, whether more explicit or implicit 
in their character. And it is our duty to study it in the appearances it then offered 
to view. 

I. It implied that, given ceetain rAvouRiNa onicnMSTANOES and oppoethnitiw 

OF KNOWLEDGE IN THEIR RELIGIOUS LIFE, MEN ABB CALLED TO ENTER INTO A DEFINITB 

AND FIXED RELATIONSHIP TO Cheist. Oncc the Dovcl appeal to men was, " Eepent : for 
the kingdom of heaven is at hand." Now the more permanent appeal has taken its 
place : " Repent, und be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ." 

II. It supposes that the entrance upon such eelatiokship to Christ be of ttb 
NATURE of a PROFESSION, AND MORE OB LESS PUBLio PROFESSION. Not in the retire- 
ment of sacred shrine, or of more sacred closet, or of most sacred heart alone, must the 
relationship be established. There were reasons why a certain kind of notoriety should 
attend it. That notoriety might be expected to have in it : 1. Some share of useful 
influence on the individual character of the person making profession. 2. Some help- 
ful influence in the founding and holding together of the Christian society. 3, Some 
tribute of grateful and willing acknowledgment to him who once was put to " open 
shame." 

in. It CONTAINED IN IT A TACIT CONFESSION, IN THE VERT NATURE OF THE RITE 
SUBMITTED TO, OF THE TAINT INHERENT IN NATURE, AND OP NATUBe's NEED OF PDBI- 

FicATiON. The indistinctness of prophecy that went before by centuries, and the 
unequivocal distinctness of apostolic language in both history and Epistle, ^ve the 
description of washing, cleansing, purifying, as the symbolic significance of the rite 

of baptism. 

IV. It did NOT, TO ALL APPEARANCE, ABK FOB ANT INQUISITOEIAI. BLEUENT OB 
SEARCHING INVESTIGATION ON THE PART OF THE ADMINISTRATOES OF IT. It WOUld seem 

impossible, in the nature of the circumstances described in the history before us, that 
even apostles, under the highest amount of inspiration, could have done more than 
accept simply the profession of those who offered themselves for baptism. The 
guarantee they took of the very repentance which they urged and preached as the 
Oeepeit matter in question, was only that which belonged to the fact of the people's 



oii.u.1— 47.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 81 

wlllingnegg and desire to be baptized. That was indeed a great and open change 0/ 
mind, or repentance, which brought the people to this point. It seems impossible to 
imagine that baptism was now accepted as anything but the very first step toward 
holiness of heart and life. Those who were baptized did thus much — they " set their 
faces Zionward." These are the appearancei that invest the first occasion of the 
obserrance or use of baptism as a Christian rite. These appearances by themselves 
scarcely amount to the assertion of a permanent institution ; and they can scarcely be 
accounted as speaking with authority the subjects, or the convictions, or the methods 
of its administration for all time and all circumstances, even upon the supposition of its 
permanent obligation. They are not, therefore, the less interesting ; nay, they may 
kindle keener and more observant inquiry. But they need such inquiry, and they 
must be interpreted under the light of Christ's ascending commission to his disciples, 
of obedience to which this is the first possible occasion, and in. the light of the succeed- 
ing history of Christ's followers during the apostolic period. At present baptism may 
be said to hold the place of an initiatory rite. Through that first Christian baptism 
three thousand persons were introduced into the ranks of those who believed in Christ 
as the Messiah, and who were prepared to become learners in his school, and to pat in 
practice (as was immediately seen) his principles. They no longer are of those who 
believe in sacrifices and ceremonial Observances innumerable for "the remission of 
sins," but " in the Name of Jesus Christ." And they are introduced within the 
covenant of promise — that covenant the abiding promise to which was " the gift of 
the Holy Ghost."— B. 

Vers. 42 — 47. — The fir$t rigimt of the body 0/ Ohritfe dieeiplee <u a Christian 
community. " And they continued steadfastly . . . such as should be saved." It may 
be conceded that the history in these verses acknowledges to some appearance of 
repetition. This is appearance, however, rather than reality. The first of these verses 
gives in the highest possible form the headings of a subject which is developed a little 
more fully in the following five verses ; and these same verses find room for a touch or 
two which antedate, though by a very trifling interval, the course of the history. The 
verses invite to an observation of the very first^workings of Christian principle, craving, 
feeling, and practice. It is no more true that there are things most characteristic of 
infant life which drop away by process of time and the advent of maturity, than that 
methods appropriate to the actual infancy of the Christian Church will, as generations 
pass, inevitably be superseded by other methods, stronger, sterner, and to all outside 
appearance far less flexible. Yet, if the man cannot be forecast always in the child, 
for want of enough of the prophet's vision, he can be traced back to the child. And a 
wonderfully tenacious personal identity is the lesson in human nature that is impressed 
on the observer. And well it is for us in the maturer ages of Christian individual life, 
and the Christian Church's life, to refresh ourselves with the sight of the first facts of 
Christian Church life, and of the real principles that must ever be found in the last 
analysis to underlie it. Such a sight is here offered na. The following are the 
principal features of it: — 

I. ThB IHFANT ChTTEUH OBAVBB INSPIRBD INSTBUOnOH, AND IS TUENISHBD WITH IT. 

The call for this had been foreseen by the great Master-teacher himself. In the same 
commission in which he charged his apostles to " make disciples of all nations," he 
enjoined them to teach such disciples " to observe all things I have commanded you." 
Great stress must be laid upon Christ's own teaching. We cannot overvalue it. The 
stress he laid on it himself, by his unwearied labours in it, tells volumes of his own 
practical estimate of its importance. Meantime such an expression as that we find in 
Matt. XV. 9, " Teaching for doctrines the commandments of men," differences for us 
most decisively not any mere question of style, and superiority of style, in the teaching 
that is from above, but the matter itself. The characteristic, then, begun with in the 
description of the new community was this : " They continued steadfastly in the apostles' 
teaching." That was inspired teaching. And let the world stand in need of whatso- 
ever else it is to be laid down emphatically that the Church stands in need of this. 
Inspired teaching is the breath of the Church— its vital air, its light, and the alphabet 
of its knowledge. 

II. The infant Chokch dbaws tooetheb in closest and most beal union. 



82 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. n. 1— 47, 

The " fellowship " spoken of in ver. 42 does not mark merely the fact of associa 
tion with the apostles. Nor does it describe association with one another from the 
attractions of friendship, of new-bom natures, or of worship. It marks a newer thing, 
and, considerir^ the numbers of those concerned, a very new thing. Jesus, with the 
iittle circle of his twelve disciples, had suggested, possibly enough, the germ of thisL 
But the number of twelve or thirteen living together on a common purse, and with no 
selfishly individual object whatsoever in view, was but the suggestion of a principle ; 
and that now, as many scores, or possibly hundreds, should attempt a similar thing, 
was a bold thought ; it was the daring of a high and unwontedly noble impulse, and best 
of all was the deed of it. Those who made up this new community first did a thing, 
that would have been called nothing else than utopianism while only talked about. 
It is something most reinvigorating to a Christian's faith in the hidden possibilities 
of a regenerate human nature, to think of the real proofs of sincerity and of utter 
earnestness that came out of the conduct of men who sold their lands and possessions, and 
brought all to one common stock. It was certainly a beginning of a " new earth," 
and none the less so that it was but temporary in the then form of it. It betrayed 
and it displayed a genius lying in the new-found forces of Christianity never to bo 
forgotten. For a while there was no want and no wealth, except that best wealth, 
absence of want. The snare of wealtli is vanished, and the charm of loving contentment 
smiles in the world. 

III. The infant Church bkinos without hesitation keligion into daily life. 
The " breaking of bread " certainly did not mean simply the taking of the ordinary 
meals of day after day. There could have been nothing remarkable in individual men 
" continuing steadfast " in this. The " breaking of bread " referred to was that of a 
united meal, and this was the particular significance of it. Again, the life of those few 
weeks in Jerusalem would have been a life of mere desultory and unfruitful idleness, 
except for an unusual reality in occupations, which would generally be counted as at 
most the luxurious enjoyments of religious service. But these evidently become the 
works of religious service, and then was the fulfilling of the aAmonition, given some 
years later to the Hebrews (Heb; x. 24, 25), beautifully anticipated. They considered 
" one another, to provoke unto love and to good works," and they did not forsake " the 
assembling of themselves together" for that very purpose. Thus they assemble, and 
thus break bread day after day. On the one hand, we witness association " in breaking 
of bread " with its more or less of direct religious reference brought into the daily home 
and the daily life of those who composed the infant Church ; and, on the other hand, 
we witness religious thought and religious purpose and religious work become for a 
season the staple occupation of " the common days." Perhaps all of us will agree that 
if ever works merited the title of religious, the works of those days did which had for 
their (secular) business the sale of lands and goodi, to the end that " the price " of 
them (ch. v. 1) might go to the common treasury of the new-bom Christian society. 

IV. The infant Chukch still obsebves the temple houes of prayer. The history 
of temple prayer was rightly charged with saoredness to the pious Jew. As up to the 
last Jesus paid all due reverence to both temple and even synagogue also, bo the young 
community of his disciples do not forsake the temple prayers. Public prayer was 
offered three times a day : at the third hour (ch. ii. 15) ; at noonday (Ps. Iv. 17), or 
the sixth hour ; and in the evening, at the ninth hour (ch. iii. 1 ; x. 3). The general 
histoiy of the nation's prayer must naturally have abounded in interest, and many a 
touching allusion is made to it (1 Kings viii. 30 — 38, etc. ; Dan. vi. 10 ; ix. 21 ; Ps. t. 
7 ; xxviii. 2 ; Iv. 17 ; Ixv. 1, 2 ; cxix. 164 ; cxxxviii. 2 ; cxli. 2 ; Isa. Ivi. 7 ; Luke i 
10 ; xviii. 10 ; etc.). But not the least interesting fact in its history is that before us. 
While all things else — sacrifice, and feast, and ceremony, and priest, and the furniture 
of the temple, and its very stones — are doomed and about to disappear, its prayers bud 
out, blossom, bear fruit afresh. The point of living contact with God lasts. The old 
Church and the new join hands here. Prayer is the golden link between these, as it is 
between all earth and heaven. — B. 

Vers. 43 — 47. — The Church's immediate assertion of her own moral fweet. " And 
fear came upon every soul . . . daily such as should be saved." For many an institu- 
tion of human society it is most easy to fix the date for the commenooment of it* 



OH. n. 1—47.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 83 

operation^ and to assign its term. It is one among many of the marks of Christianity 
that, once embodied, it begins its work there and then, and begins it never to pause, 
never to cease, till it is all finished. The peculiar and, at the same time, rightful 
influences of Christianity embodied in human society showed themselves promptly and 
decisively. Nothing artificial could help, nothing arbitrary could hinder, these. And 
if to the last possible moment they stole their march on the world silently, and to that 
same world insensibly, they no sooner come into sight than they are felt also, and 
unmistakably felt. The kingdom of God, that in some sense "cometh not with 
observation," when once come, is ever making a mark, that calls to it all manner of 
observation. It is full to overflowing of influence on the individual heart, on the 
individual life, and on human society. The intrinsic character of Christian principle 
and the possibilities that are in it, are simply and beautifully witnessed to in the very, 
first of the fruits which it bore. , 

L It wrought an unusual fbab. It was an unusual fear, for more reasons than 
one. 1. The fear fell on all. If the " all " here mean the disciples and new converts 
only, yet the gain was great and the phenomenon noteworthy. But the great 
probability is that the " every soul " does not mean to point to those who were now 
enrolled in the new community alone, but to the vast number outside, who saw and 
heard of the apostles' " signs and wonders." The city was still oftentimes because of 
this new portent in the very midst of it. The men of the city " talked often one with 
another.'" There was a temporary, general weaning from indifference, from frivolity, 
and from the zeal of mere earthly business. 2. The source of the fear was unusual. 
It was not that of Sinai. It was not that of wind and storm, earthquake or fire. The 
elements of nature were what they long had been. Just now, at all events, the sun was 
not " turned into darkness, nor the moon into blood." It was a fear that came on men, 
not because of any overwhelmed impression made on the senses, but upon the mind. 
3. The character of the fear was unusual. For it was that of awe and reverence — one 
that awoke inquiry, and provoked irresistibly deeper thinking than those hearts had 
been generally familiar with. It more resembled the fear that ougU to possess men in 
the presence of the facts, responsibilities, and heaven-born opportunities of human life. 
There is no evidence nor even room to suppose that it savoured of anguished fear, or 
slavish fear, or tumultuous apprehension. This is one of the grand legitimate effects 
of Christian impression and conviction on the heart of either converted or unconverted, 
that they reduce to soberness and to some due sense of the things that are, whether 
in heaven or on earth, of which we may have thought previously far too little. 

II. Cecbistianitt bore the fruit op a most unusual unity. The brotherhood 
of humanity now is exampled. And though for many a reason and from many a 
cause, better or worse, its duration was very brief, yet we may say, " It is enough." We 
shall know it again, " in like manner " as we now know it. These two things may be 
most permissibly said to the grief that mourns devoutly its short duration : (1) that 
in very truth it was not really so short as it seemed ; and (2) that but a glimpse of it 
was of use, but a glimpse of it good to behold, but a flash of it such as to leave when it 
had gone, and such as has left, a glory on the Christian soul and on its gaze. 

III. It bore the fruit of a most unusual charity. "To do good and to 
communicate " was not an absolute novelty ; to give, and to give kindly and ungrudg- 
ingly, was not an unheard-of thing ; to feed the poor and give him garments, and to visit 
him, sick and in prison, was exalted moral philosophy, and godly practice too, in and 
from the days of Job. But the charity, and the sacrifice of the just rights of property, 
and the equality of this large family, was, for the thoroughness and the scale of them 
and for the occasion — not one of shipwrecked distress on a desolate shore — something 
very new under the sun. This, again, in outside show and bulk, was of short duration, 
but perhaps not of so short stay as it seems sometimes. And this, too, we shall 
recognize again. 

IV. Christian peinoiplb now bore a very unusual manifold fruit. Yes, not 
only manifold for quantity, but in kind. These, all these together, are found by the 
disciples ; namely, great happiness of heart, great happiness in association with one 
another (as though no " root of bitterness " sprang up), great happiness in worshipping 
God, and great popularity with all the people. They were halcyon days indeed I 
Their peculiarity, as representing the infancy of the Church, irresistibly reminds us ol 



84 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1—41, 

the peculiarity of those early years In the humanity of the now risen, ascended, 
glorified Master himself. There was a time when it was said that " Jesus increased- . . . 
in favour with God and man." It is even so now with the family of his followers. 
The analogy is striking. And it is striking as one novel indication of the condescen- 
sion of the great Lord, who so closely shared, who still bo closely shares, his Church's 
fortunes. For the resemblance must be quoted, not as one that shows the Church 
sharing its Founder's fortunes, but the Founder anticipating his Church's fortunes. In 
both examples how gratefully are we reminded of the legitimate influence, even in this 
world, of goodness 1 And how gratefully are we, by a m&ceforetaste, as it were, assured 
of that " favour " that Jesus and his truth and his faithful disciples must eventually 
command from the judgment of the world, whenever the time shall come I Nor was the 
Divine contentment that spread over and that evidently interpenetrated this newly 
fashioned society one which looked to mere selfishness then or to mere picturesqueness 
now. -The favourable impression that it made on them that were without was useful as 
well as beautiful. It was attractive. And the very same qualities that made it attractive 
made it a safe refuge, home, school, nursery, to those that might own to the Divine 
attraction. To such a society the Lord added daily. And, let it with reverence be 
said, it could not be otherwise ; but if it could, it would not. This is what the Church 
of Christ must be. It must be these all in one. The refuge for the sinner " saved ; " 
his home on earth ; his school ; for many, because of their tender years, also the nur- 
sery of piety and devotion ; but for all, young or old, a nursery, from which heaven is 
looked to as the introduction to the presence and abiding society of the Father himself. 
Thus, now, not the abstraction of a perfection of Christianity unlikely to be yet reached, 
but the oft-erring, oft-deficient embodiment of it in the lives of frail sinful, men, gave 
clear and beautiful proofs of what is the genius of it, of what it has in itself to do, and 
no obscure foreshadowing of the reign of love and peace and joy that Jesus is hastening 
on. — B. 

Yers. 1—4. — The synibols of the Epirifi presence. It Is Important that we mark 
with some precision what actually occurred on this memorable day. On the day o. 
Pentecost the company of disciples met together as usual at the customary hour ol 
morning prayer, but whether in one of the thirty rooms which Josephus tells us were 
connected with the courts of Herod's temple, or in the private house where they lodgqd, 
is uncertain. As we know that they attended morning prayer in the temple (see ch. 
iil. 1), there is much in favour of the scene occurring within the temple precincts. 
There a large company could be readily and conveniently assembled, and there the 
high priest and Levitical guard would have the necessary authority to arrest " dis- 
turbers of the peace." While the apostolic company was engaged in prayer, a sudden 
rushing sound was heard, like that which accompanies an earthquake. It seemed to 
sweep through the room, and fill it with a new and inspiring atmosphere ; and then, 
as each one of them looked in astonishment upon his companion, he saw a central 
flame come and part, settling in divided streams upon each head. The mystic symbols 
soon passed away, but they left the disciples conscious of a new life ; they were as men 
moved beyond themselves by a mighty inward impulse. The glow of a Divine kindling 
was upon their faces, the passion of a Divine urging was within their souls, the freedom 
of a Divine utterance was upon their lips; they began to speak to the people around 
about the Messiahship of Jesus, the crucified. The rumour soon spread among the 
excitable multitudes, gathered from all parts, who were present at the feast. They 
crowded round the apostles ; they felt the influence of their enthusiasm ; they heard one 
and another of them speaking in the familiar language of their birthplace ; they were 
moved by the power of a Divine presence, and that day three thousand bowed the 
knee to Christ. Those disciples had been told to wait for spiritual power — inward, 
heart-power. And the signs that attended the gift were designed to indicate the kind 
of power that came. It was a mighty breath filling them with larger life. They were 
caught up, and encircled as with a great wind of Divine energy, and in this atmosphere 
they breathed more freely, and lived more nobly. F. W. llobertson well expresse» 
this in the following note : — " Just as if the temperature of this northern atmosphere 
were raised suddenly, and a mighty tropical river were to pour its fertilizing inundation 
over the country, the result would be the impartation of a vigorous and gigantie 



OH. n. 1—47.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 86 

growth to the vegetation already in existence, and at the same time the development 
of life in seeds and germs which had long lain latent in the soil, incapable of vegetation 
in the unkindly climate of their birth. Exactly in the same way, the flood of a Divine 
life, poured suddenly into the souls of men, enlarged and ennobled qualities which had 
been used already, and at the same time developed powers which never could have 
become apparent in the cold, low temperature of natural life." It may be well to recall 
the associations of the Feast of Pentecost, especially noting that it was held to com- 
memorate the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai. Then Law came as a series of formal 
commandments ; now Law came as an inward impulse to righteousness ; it was " written 
in the mind and the heart." The symbols designed to show the character of the Spirit's 
work in the disciples are three, viz. wind, fire, tongues. 

L The symbol of the wind. This would recall our Lord's simile used in con- 
versation with the inquiring Nicodemus (John iii. 7, 8), " The wind bloweth where 
it listeth," etc. It would also remind of the later incident when Jesus " breathed on 
them, and said, Eeceive ye the Holy Ghost " (John xx. 22). The figure in the Hebrew 
word for Spirit (ruaeK) is " breath," or " wind," We may note that the wind suggests 
the freeness of the Spirit, the force of the Spirit, and the elevating and inspiring 
influence of the Spirit. 

n. The symbol of the firb. This would recall the words of John the bapdzer, 
" He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." Fire is conceived as the 
great purging and purifying agent. John could not forgive sin, or cleanse souls, or 
sanctify. For this work he prepared the way. Christ cleanses and sanctifies, by his 
Spirit, with a fulness and a power that can only be represented by the work of fire on 
precious metal. A power like fire is needed to destroy and root out self and sin. 

IIL The symbol of the tongues. It is difficult to decide precisely the form of 
the gift that came to these first disciples. Afterwards we find the gift of tongues 
explained as an ecstatic utterance, which required interpretation. Here we may 
assume that the gospel message was delivered by difierent individuals, in different 
languages, and in different parts of the temple courts. We should see that it fulfilled 
the promise made to the disciples of power to witness. The first sign of the power 
came in adaptation to the particular circumstances and needs of the day, and they might 
see in this the assurance that the power would come in adaptation to every day's needs. 
Not always as power to speak a foreign language, but always as power to speak, as the 
freed loosened tongue, as a new tongue, so that they might preach Christ, and witness 
everywhere for the "Prince and Saviour, exalted to give repentance, and remiasion 
of sins." 

Conclude by showing that the symbols teach us this lesson — that the same Spirit 
is still with the Church and with us ; and is as certainly and precisely adapting his 
grace and help to the work and the witness we are called to render. — B. T. 

Ver. 4. — The great lesson of the Pentecost. It seems a strange thing that our Lord, 
when preparing his disciples for the coming of the Spirit, should set a higher value on 
that Spirit's work than on the continuance of his own (John xvi. 7 — 11). The only 
satisfactory explanation is this — that the Spirit's work tms the continuance of his own. 
It continued that Divine presence which was essential to the stability and culture of 
the disciples ; for both while he lived among men and when he passed beyond human 
vision, our Saviour's words were true, " Without me ye can do nothing." No longer 
is Christ outside us, only to be seen by the eye, heard by the ear, and touched by the 
hand ; we are now the " temples of the Holy Ghost ; " he dwelleth with us, and is in us. 
We do not rightly apprehend the scene of Pentecost if we regard it only as the first of 
a series of separate gifts of the Spirit, which may be made in answer to prayer. We 
take a much more comprehensive and truthful view when we regard it as the entrance 
of God the Holy Ghost upon his special mission in relation to the full redemption of 
mankind. It was, as it were, the opening of the heavens, and the sending forth of the 
Divine Spirit, to brood for ever over the waters, quickening life. It was his reception 
in the hearts prepared for him, that he might begin a work which, ever spreading and 
widening, seeks to enthrone God the Father in every heart and every life. As God 
the Son entered and won first a mother's heart, that he might get a standing-ground 
from which to enter the heart of the whole world ; so God the Spirit came into the 



86 IBE AOtB Of TH6 APOSTLBB. [oh. u. 1—«, 

souls of a few disciples first, only that he might extend his sway, spreading from heart 
to heart, entering, subduing, teaching, and sanctifying, ever working for that glorious 
(lay when the " people shall be all holy." We fix attention on this one point : The 
disciples gained, and kept from that day, a deep sense of their entire dependence on 
Ood, and on God as the indwelling, inworhing Spirit. They could never recall that 
"day of Pentecost" without contrasting what they were before it came, and what 
they were after it had passed. There was contrast in their measure of spiritual visior), 
and contrast in the energy and Joy of their work. And so they learned, in a most 
effective way, that their sufficiency was of God. The secret of all moral strength is 
dependence on God — open-heartedness to receive, and simple readiness to obey and work 
out, all the inward impulses and leadings of his Holy Spirit. Because the disciples 
learnt this lesson of Pentecost so well, therefore it can be thus reported concerning 
them, "They went forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, 
and confirming the Word with signs following." 

Application of this lesson may be made to the Christian. 1. We have a Christian 
life to maintain, culture and growth to watch over, higher truth to reach, clusters of 
graces to ripen, and the power of a holy example to wield. But we " are not sufficient 
of ourselves even to think anything as of ourselves." " Our sufficiency is of God." 
We too need the Quickener, Comforter, and Teacher. 2. We too have a conflict to 
wage, and sufferings to bear for our Master. And who " dares to do the warfare at his 
own charges"? We are only strong in Ood either to light or to bear. 3. We too 
have a work to do for Christ, and a witness to render. And we must learn to say after 
the great apostle, "1 can do all things/ through him who strengtheneth me." What 
we need is spiritual power, Spirit-power, the Pentecostal power. When shall we fully 
grasp the inspiring truth — the Holy Qhost is with us! — E. T. 

Vers. 5 — 13. — Men's attitudes toward things beyond explanation. There are marked 
differences in the dispositions of men. At first sight the differences may seem to be so 
many and so great, that it is hopeless to attempt any classification of them. And yet, 
m the relations in which dispositions stand to revealed truth and the mysterious, there 
is a simple division, and a repetition of characteristic attitudts in each age. Observe 
the peculiar phenomena here, which tested the dispositions of the crowding multitudes. 
Uneducated, countrified Qalilceans were speaking to the comprehension of men who 
came from various parts of the earth and used several distinct languages. We do 
not know whether the disciples themselves understood the new words which they were 
empowered to utter, but it is certain that what the hearers heard was no jargon or 
incoherent speech ; it was the story of Christ crucified and risen, given in the languages 
with which they were familiar, Manifestly here was a mystery, something surprising, 
needing explanation, something to exercise thought about ; something which men of 
different dispositions would regard in different ways; something which would bring 
into expression the marked peculiarities of each class. Compare the way in which 
St. Paul's preaching at Athens tested the (lispcsitions of his hearers (ch. xvii. 32> 
"Some mocked, and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter . . . certain 
men clave unto him, and believed." In our passage the attitudes taken towards the 
mystery were, at first two, and afterwards three. 

I. Some were in doubt, and would inquikb fubtheb. (Ver. 12.) They were 
struck with surprise, confused, perplexed. They did not know what to ir.ake of these 
remarkable incidents ; but they were not disposed to put them away from consideration, 
as necessarily delusions or impostures, because beyond a ready explanation. Their 
attitude was a right and a hopeful one. Denial of the " supernatural " is a sij^n of 
mental weakness or prejudiced obstinacy. Doubt about the " supcruatUral " is rational, 
and leads to inquiry, consideration, and due weighing of argument and proof. There 
is '^honest doubt," and merely " wilful doubt." The first disposition finds expression 
in sincere and earnest inquiry for the solution and satisfaction and removal of the 
doubt. The second disposition rejects inquiry, and keeps the doubting, priding itself 
upon its ability to doubt. No proofs can satisfy this class of doubters. Both these 
are still found in our Christian society ; and the times tend to multiply that hopeless 
class that prides itself on doubting. Our Lord gave us the best remedy for the 
doubting disposition when he said, " If any man wiU do his will, he shall know of 
til* Aootriaf.* 



OS.Q. 1— 4?.] TllE ACTS OB" THE APOiSTLES. S? 

II. SoilB MOCKED, AND WOULD SUQGEST EVIL EXPLANATIONS. (Vef. 13.) Such 

dispositions even our Lord had to deal with. Some who saw his miracles declared that 
he wrought them " by the power of the devil ; " showing in this their exceeding folly, 
for our Lord's works were all good and hind and helpful, and not in any sense 
mischievous or hurtful, as the work of devils is. So here, we find some who would not 
■ think, would not doubt, but at once rejected the mystery, and showed their folly 
in their insulting suggestion, " These men are full of new wine." This kind of dis- 
position is a hopeless one. Such men have no susceptibility. No argument or proof 
can reach them. To this class belong the deniers and mockers of the " supernatural " 
in OUT day. The infidel class of all ages and of this has been very largely made up of 
those who were determined not to believe. The hard heart is too often the one great 
hindrance to belief. 

III. Some among the unjiJiEEBS would receive the truth which was declared 
AND attested IN THE 8TBANQB PHENOMENA. Peter's words Were a stem rebuke of 
the " mockers," with whom he would not deign to argue ; he would utter no more 
than the words that should declare their folly. He preached to the doubting and 
inquiring. He may not have satisfied them all that day. Many may have needed to 
think quietly about it all, and seek further for themselves ; but then, even that very 
day, in response to his word, three thousand accepted the Pentecostal wonders as the 
Spirit's witness to Jesus as the " Messiah," and " risen " to become the present, living 
Saviour. Peter gives the example of bringing the doubting and inquiring to God's 
Holy Word : " To the Law and to the testimony." And still there can bo no better 
way of guiding the seeking soul. The mysterious, the supernatural, is a stumbling- 
block in these days of the enthronement of human science, more serious than it has 
been in any previous age. The dispositions of men towards it remain the same ; but 
the company of the scorners, who put the subject away as unworthy of consideration, 
is larger than ever. Yet there are still multitudes of susceptible and open-hearted 
doubters; and, with our Bibles in our hands, and our personal convictions and 
experiences giving tone to our words, wc may hopefully plead with them to recognize 
God in nature, and God beyond natuj;e ; God's working within limnan explanation, 
and God's working beyond human explanation : a sphere " unseen and spiritual," that 
is altogether more real and permanent than the sphere " seen and temporal." 

Urge, in conclusion, that the things of the soul, religion, and Ood must of necessity 
lie in this " beyond," " within," " spiritual," " supersonsuous," sphere. — E. T. 

Vers. 14 — 21. — Prophecies of the times of the Spirit. Some reference may be made 
to the Prophet Joel, the time when he wrote, and the first reference of his prophecy. 
The principles on which we discover Messianic allusions in the Old Testament books 
may be detailed and illustrated. Especially the two following principles : — 1. Any 
reference which cannot fairly be fitted to or exhausted by any passage of history, or 
the history of any individual, may be referred to Messianic times, or to the Messiah 
himself. This principle guides ua both in the Book of Psalms and in the prophets. 
It helps to decide the intention of Joel, in the passage before us, which no page of 
ordinary human history satisfies. 2. Any reference from the Old Testament which 
an inspired" apostle is led to use as proof of the Messiahship of Christ, must be accepted 
as having that for its proper application. On this ground Joel's prophecy must be 
received as dealing with the times and dispensation of the Holy Ghost. The prophecies 
given by the Scripture writers are of the utmost importance, as tending to check the 
material conceptions of the Messiah, which the later circumstances and history of the 
Jewish nation seem to have greatly encouraged. Those prophecies keep prominently 
before men's minds the suffering aspects of Messiah's lite, so suggesting that his power 
would be moral, not material ; and the spiritual aspects of the kingdom he would set 
up, whose features should be " righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost." The 
prophetical figures are often difficult, and need for their apprehension some knowledge 
of the sphere of poetical imagery from which Eastern writers used to draw their 
illustrations. Western composition is more formal and precise ; and we should faa 
careful not to press our associations with prophetic language in front of thoss 
associations which were familiar to the Scripture writer. Forgetting this, men hav« 
mistaken the meaning of the figures given in vers. 19, 20. 



88 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1—47. 

L The dispensation of the Spirit. The leading features of it may be brought 
out by comparing it with the earlier " dispensation of the Law." Under that, God's 
Law was written on " tablet" for men's eyes to read ; under this, God's Law is written 
on hea/rti, and becomes an inward impulse. Under that, goodness was regarded as 
right conduct ; under this, goodness is regarded as right motive inspiring right doing. 
Other similar contrasts may be urged ; and it should be impressed that, in the gift 
of his Son and Spirit, God sought to lay hold of men's souls, and win them, in love 
and trust, for Jiimself. 

IL The effects of thb dispensatios on men. Here Peter explains the present 
signs : the high enthusiasm of the disciples, the bold preaching, the power of the 
tongues, etc. We may go on to show what are the permanent effects, in present-day 
endowments for Christian work and witness. Still we only work truly and successfully 
as we work in the " power of the Holy Ghost." 

III. The signs of its advent in THmas. (Vers. 19, 20.) " The imagery is drawn 
as from one of the great thunderstorms of Palestine. There is a lurid blood-red 
hue of clouds and sky ; there are the fiery flashes, the columns or pillars of smoke- 
like clouds boiling from the abyss. These, in their turn, were probably thought of m 
symbols of bloodshed and fire and smoke, such as are inrolved in the capture and 
destruction of a city like Jerusalem." The fall of Jerusalem was the formal passing 
away of the old dispensation of Mosaism, and the full establishment of the new 
dispensation of the Spirit. 

Press, in conclusion, the sublime hopes for mankind that lie in this " dispensation." 
Especially note ver. 21 : there is now full and free soul-salvation for every one that calls 
upon the Lord in faith. The moral and spiritual redemption can now be applied 
to every open-hearted man by the energy of the abiding, indwelling, regenerating 
Spirit.— B. T. 

Vers. 22 — 28. — Hk first facts of gospel preaching. From the very first the gospel 
preaching was made to rest on an historical basis. Apostles fearlessly appealed to certain 
Known facts, which could not be gainsaid. It has been left to these later times to find 
myth and legend, when the contemporaries of the apostles dare not dispute the literal 
and truthful character of their statements. The interest of Peter's sermon— the first 
gospel sermon — lies mainly in its indicating what were early regarded as the essential 
facts of the gospel, and bo the points to which the faith of men was called. The 
interest of the occasion of this sermon may be shown, and it should be impressed that 
we properly expect, at such a time, the utmost clearness and definiteness. Whatever 
is essential to Christianity surely found expression then, in broad statement and 
general principle. We find — 

L Distinct identification of Jesus. Peter will allow no possibility of confusion 
or mistake. There were doubtless many persons named " Jesus " in the country, but 
he speaks of Jesns of Nazareth; the Teacher who was so well known by this name; 
the man whom the elders of the nation despised and crucified. St. Peter, like St. Paul 
afterwards, testifies for "Jesus," whatever may be the disabilities that seemed to 
attach to him, and however Jew and Greek may despise him. They take Jesus, and 
his whole story, shameful crucifixion and all, and will not let any man doubt who it is 
that they preach. 

IL FiKM ABSEKTioN OF DiviNB POWER IN HIS MIRACLES. " Ood did them by him." 
The miracles as facts could not be denied, but their testimony to the mission, authority, 
and power of Christ might be turned aside if it could be made out that they were 
impostures, clever medical triumphs, or works wrought by Satanic power. Therefore 
St. Peter so earnestly declares that the miracles are signs of Ood^s power in Christ. 
Show how this, once admitted, involves the tri^thfulness, sincerity, and goodness of 
Christ, since God would not work gracious healing works through a 6ad agent; and so 
it follows that Jesus rightly claimed the office and mission of Messiahship. This line 
of argument from the miracles is of permanent value in Christian evidence. Press our 
Lord's words, " Believe for the very works' sake." 

in. OuB Lord's actual crucifixion and acenowledoed death. There is per- 
mitted no dispute ai to the personal guilt of Jesus; he was admittedly innocent, freed 
hnnt charge by every court that tried him, and made a victim to prejudice and malice 



OH. n. 1—47.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 89 



and religious bigotry. There could be no dispute as to his real death on the cross ; 
Peter seems to remind the Jews that their council held the Roman centurion's certificate 
of death, and that council had set " watchmen " to keep the grave. And still there are 
two foundation facts of the gospel system : 1. Jesus was crucified as an innocent man. 
2. Jesus actually yielded up his life on the cross. Show the importance of these facts 
to the doctrine of redemption in Christ's blood. A " lamb without blemish " was the 
only fitting " burnt offering" for humanity ; it was consumed upon the altar, and the 
lacrifice accepted of God. 

IV. Cub Lobd'b bbsuebection ab thk testimony of Divine appkoval. Apostles 
constantly urge the fact that Jesus had risen from the grave. It is significant that 
the men of their day could not deny the fact. Give the lame and poor attempts to 
make out that the disciples had stolen the body. But apostles carefully say Ood raised 
Afj»,_and so publicly declared Eis acceptance of him and of his sacrifice. They do not 
say " he was raised," or " he raised himself." We know, therefore, that with him " God 
is well pleased." Peter seeks to carry home his teachings by appeal to Scripture. His 
plea is this — Jesus, crucified and risen, asks our faith, and to all who believe in him he 
gives « ttemal life."— R. T. 

Vers. 29 — 36. — The first argument for the Resurrection. The apostles distinctly 
witnessed to the facts of the Resurrection, as having come within their own personal 
knowledge. But they also argued from Scripture, that the Lord's resurrection was the 
natural and necessary completion of Messiah's earthly mission. In the above passage 
is given the first spiecimen of such argumentation ; and it should be carefully noted 
that it ia fitted to Eastern rather than to Western modes of thought. The late 
Dr. Robert Vaughan says, " The Oriental intellect is not logical. Its faculty is to a 
high degree intuitive ; it reasons, but it rarely does so formally. It passes to its. con- 
clusions with a subtle celerity, resembling what we see in women, much more than by 
those scientific processes which are familiar to our Western habits of thought." The 
audience which Peter at this time addressed was composed of devout, God-fearing 
Jews, who were attending the feast, and it was therefore especially appropriate that his 
argument should be based upon the Scriptures, and take Scripture form. " The passage 
which he first quotes is taken from Ps. xvi. 8 — 11, and he argues that it could not 
be of himself that the psalmist there spake, for they had evidence that the words could 
not be truly said of him ; but that, having regard to God's promise, he spake of him 
who was to be born from his line, as Identified with himself." The second quotation 
is from Ps. ex., and is taken to suggest that David went down to the grave, and 
" slept with his fathers ; " and the allusion to ascension and place at Jehovah's right 
hand could not possibly apply to him, but must refer to his " greater Son," of whose 
resurrection and ascension the apostles gave their witness. The argument may be 
followed through its several stages. 

L "David plainly speaks of ths EESimKEOTiON and ascension of some one. He 
does not deal, in these psalms, in vague generalities and pious sentiment. He was a 
prophet, and under Divine inspiration, and speaks with distinctness and definiteness. 
We must seek for the person to whom he refers. 

II. Hb could not mean himself. This, indeed, would be the first thought of the 
reader of his words, but it will not bear examination. The expressions are too large ti) 
be satisfied in the experience of any mere man. And, if taken literally, as they should 
be, they cannot be applied to David himself. They must refer to some great one who 
has no earthly sepulchre, because, though he died, he rose, and no tomh holds his body. 
But David's sepulchre was then recognized, and all regarded him as awaiting the 
general resurrection of the just. 

III. He must have befebbed to Messiah. It must have been a prophetic utter- 
ance. And the Messianic character of both these psalms has been generally admitted 
by the Jews; so that Peter's proof-texts would not be disputed by his audience as 
unsuitable. The only difBculty would be the identification of Messiah. To this point 
he leads the argument. 

IV. David's wobds fit the facts which the apostles witnessed conoebninq 
Jesus of Nazabeth. He only had been thus raised after death to the spiritual and 
incorruptible life. He only had passed, after resurrection, into the eternal world without 



90 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa [oh.il 1—4?. 

another expevience of death. He alone met the conditions of the psalmist, and therefore 
he must be the promised Messiah. The other cases of resurrection narrated in Old and 
New Testament Scriptures should be examined, and the points of contrast between 
them and our Lord's case should be carefully noted ; especially the most marked 
peculiarity in our Lord's case, that ascension followed resurrection, whereas all other 
raised persons died a second time. If, then, Jesus be the Christ, the Messiah, to bia 
our "knees should bow, and our tongue confess." — B. T. 

Ver. 33. — The explanation of the signs of Pentecost. Recall what those sensible 
signs had been. We may not think that the sound of the wind was still heard, and it 
seems hardly likely that the tongues of flame continued to rest on the heads of the 
disciples. But the ability to speak in foreign languages was the sign that chiefly 
arrested the people's attention, and this may have continued throughout the day. 
Some of the audience had, no doubt, also seen the " tongues of flame." St. Peter 
here makes three distinct points. 

I. Odd has exalted Jesits of Nazareth. This Jesus, to whom he had been so 
distinctly referring. Here is an advance to a conclusion from the /acts which the 
apostles witnessed. They declared the /acts of resurrection and ascension. St. Peter 
now says — Admit the facts, and what follows ? Surely this : Ood has acknowledged, 
accepted, and exalted Jesus, so affirming his Messiahship, and entrusting him with 
Lordship in the new spiritual kingdom (ver. 35). In no sublimer way could the 
Divine attestation of Jesus have been given. 

II. God has fulfilled the promises hade thbotjgh Christ. Give, from the 
closing chapters of St. John's Gospel, the promises of the Spirit as Teacher and Com- 
forter. The truth of our Saviour rested on the fulfilment of those assurances. Peter 
bids the people see, in Pentecostal signs, the fulfilment of both the general promise of 
the Spirit given through ancient prophets, and the special and precise promises of the 
Holy Ghost given through the Lord Jesus. 

III. Show the gift of the Spirit is the final seal op Christ's claim. He 
is given because Jesus is glorified. As exalted, as entrusted with holy authority and 
power, the Lord Jesus has " shed forth this, which ye now see and hear." The Spirit 
witneBses to Christ, and especially to his present claim, as Lord, to the allegiance of 
every heart, the surrender of every will, and the obedience of every life. — E. T. 

Vers. 37 — 39. — The gospel demands from men. The moral influence exerted by 
St. Peter's speech, in the power of the present Spirit, should be noticed. Many of his 
audience were " pricked in their heart ; " that is, were " stung with remorse at the 
enormity of the wickedness which had been committed in the crucifixion [of Messiah], 
and at the blindness with which the whole nation had closed their eyes to the teaching 
of the prophecies which had spoken of the Messiah." They asked, " What shall we 
do?" — "to escape the penalties which must fall on the nation that has so sinned 
against light and knowledge ; who have had the true Light in their midst, but have 
comprehended it not, and have crucified the Lord of glory." By unfolding and illus- 
trating the intense feelings with which the Jews anticipated the coming of their 
Messiah, we may set forth the terrible revulsion of feeling, a,ni the overwhelming 
shame tliat smote them, when they were convinced that they had actually crucified 
their Messiah, offering him thus the greatest insult, and rendering themselves guilty 
of the gravest crime. St. Peter demands three things — repentance, faith, and confession. 
The first and last of these are distinctly stated, the second is implied. 

I. The gospel demands kepentancb. This was the requirement of John the 
Baptist, and of our Lord when he sent forth his apostles on their trial mission. It is 
the proper and necessary preparation for forgiveness ; it is the state of mind and 
feeling to which alone forgiveness can come, and by whicli alone it can be appreciated. 
Here the conviction of the one particular sin of crucifying Messiah becomes a reve- 
lation of general sinfulness; and so definite repentance is attended with a humiliation 
and humility which can be a lasts of faith, an openness to receive further truth, and 
a condition fitted for a gracious forgiveness. Repentance is still the first gospel 
demand. Possibly modern preaching greatly fails because adequate prominenof is not 
given to it. 



Ob. It 1—47.] THE Acts Ot" TflE APOSTLES. 51 

II. The gospel demands faith. Here the special object of the faith should b« 
dwelt on. The repentance of these Jews involved their believing that Jesus of 
Nazareth was indeed their Messiah. But this was not saving faith. It only crushed 
and humbled. The faith required is personal trust in the living, exalted Lord Jesus 
Christ, the present Saviour, and actual surrender of heart and life to him. It is beli i 
in Us Name as Saviour. This distinction should be fully unfolded and illustrated, 
with earnest pleadings for that/ai'tt, or personal trust, which actually links us to the 
living Saviour. , 

III. The gospel demands confession. This is the real point and meaning of the 
rjte of laptism, which is the public act in which our faith in Christ is declared. If 
we are sincere in our faith we shall be willing to make it known. If we are earnest 
in our faith we shall want to make it known. And Christ's kingdom is to be spread 
by just this confession and acknowledgment of him. Therefore the demand is, "If 
thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart 
that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved." Show that this duty 
of "public confession" is sadly neglected in our day, and there is consequently a 
perilous vagueness, indefiniteness, and indistinctness characteristic of religious life. 
Press the importance of this duty, in relation both to personal soul-culture and to the 
duty of witnessing for the Christ in whom we hope. 

Conclude by showing that the gospel response to those who meet its demands is 
forgiveness, involving acceptance with, God and the privileges of restored sonship ; and 
that this is sealed to us by the gift of the Holy Ghost. — K. T. 

Vers. 41 — 44. — Early impulses of Christian disciples. Estimate the fervour of 
feeling which those knew who had found the Messiah ; had found him altogether 
more glorious, more spiritual, than their highest thoughts had ever conceived, and 
actaally felt the joy of forgiveness from him, and the inward witness of his sealing 
Spirit. It was a time of rapture and intensity, in which all selfish thoughts would be 
easily overcome, and the common joy bind all together in common bonds. In their 
enthusiasm they expected the Lord Jesus to return at once, and therefore they were 
so ready to resign even their worldly goods, and devote all that they possessed to the 
use of the brethren. The custom of large numbers living and eating together is 
familiar to Easterns, and may be illustrated by the daily meals provided for the 
citizens of Sparta. Possibly the first thought that came to the early disciples was 
that they might realize, in the larger sphere, the state of things existing between 
Christ and his apostles when he was in the flesh. Those apostles gave up their trades 
to be with Christ, and he and they had lived together, and had " all things common." 
The company so gathered present the first model of a Church. Circumstances soon 
modified the form of it ; but we keep the essential idea of it, which is this : common 
indebtedness to Christ, and devotion to him, bring men together into a gracious sense 
of brotherhood and fellowship. They recognize their oneness in Christ. 

I. The impulse to fellowship. (Ver. 42.) Or, to gather together. The centre of 
the gathering was naturally the apostolic company. A desire to hear more about 
Christ was awakened, and the converts would not separate. Staying hour after hour, 
there would arise the necessity for meals ; and though this may have been readily met 
on the first day, some order and provision would be necessary as they kept together 
day after day. The impulse to fellowship felt by those sharing common opinions 
and beliefs is constantly recognized, and is the basis of all associations, clubs, and 
societies of men. Those with the common opinions enjoy, and are benefited by, each 
other's fellowship. Therefore the apostle bids us "not forsake the assembling of 
ourselves together, as the manner of some is." Urge that still this natural and proper 
impulse should be nourished and followed. Neglected fellowship is the sign of weak- 
ened impulse, failing " first love," and inadequate impression of the " great grace " 
received in Christ Jesus. 

II. The impulse to belp-saorificb. Others were more thought of than self. 
There was a general desire to imitate Christ by giving up for others. This seems the 
idea in their " having all things common." " Under the strong and general feeling of 
Christian chaiity, which sprang out of Christian unity, men gave as freely as if what 
they had were not really their own, but only held by them in trust for otheta 



93 



THE ACTS or THE APOSTLES. 



[on. in. !•— 2(x 



Practically, wliat was any brother's cam* to be the brethren's ; no man asserted his 
private proprietorship, or 'said that aught of the things that he possessed was his 
own.' " The following points may be illustrated ; — 1. Community of goods is a dream. 
One which earnest and sentimental philanthropists have dreamed over and over again. 
2. Community of goods is an impossibility. Socialistic systems have always broken 
down. If the community could be once established, the disabilities of life and the 
different dispositions of men would immediately introduce irregularities. " Religious 
communisms have generally rested, like the monastic orders, on an ascetic rather than 
a social basis. The fanaticism of the 6terman Anabaptists, indeed, did not lack force, 
but it involved the ruin of society. Becent humanitarian attempts in France and 
America to realize a voluntary communism, wanting a religious motive, have broken 
down " (Dr. Dykes). 3. Community of goods is an extravagant assertion of a true 
and high principle, viz. that whatsoever a man holds, he holds in trust, and in trust 
for the service of others. 4. Community of goods is substantially realized in the 
Christian Church, where, ideally, each seeks not his own but his brother's good. 
" There is no real cure for diseased society except the regeneration of the individual, 
and the individual is regenerated when you have substituted brotherly kindness for 
selfishness as the ruling motive or ground of character." " Just in so far as any man 
takes in the peculiar teaching of the gospel, such as the saving mercy of the Father 
in heaven, our oneness in the incarnate Son, and the binding common life of the Holy 
Ghost — to that extent he will cease to be a difficulty in the way of social economics. 
He will help others as much, and grasp as little for himself, as possible." 

Conclude by pressing the importance of keeping our hearts ever open to the gracious 
and loving impulses of God's Holy Spirit ; and also press the relation to an earnest 
life of charity, brotherhood, and goodness which is found ia "keeping our first 
lomT—K. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEE III. 

Ver. 1. — Were going up for went up to- 
gether, A.V. and T.E. Peter and John. 
The close friendship of these two apostles 
is remarkable. The origin of it appears to 
have been their partnership in the fishing- 
boats in which they pursued their trade as 
fishermen on the Sea of Galilee. For St. 
Luke tells ns that the sons of Zebedee were 
" partners with Simon," and helped him to 
take the miraculous draught of fishes (Luke 
v. 10). We find the two sons of Zebedee 
associated with Peter in the inner circle 
of the Lord's apostles, at the Transfiguration, 
at the raising of Jairus's daughter, and at 
the agony in the Garden of Gethsemane 
(see also Mark xiii. 3). But the yet closer 
friendship of Peter and John first appears 
in their going together to the palace of 
Caiaphas on the night of the betrayal (John 
xviii. 15), and then in the memorable visit to 
the holy sepulchre on the morning of tlie 
Kesiu-reotion (John xx. 2 — 4), and yet again 
in John xxL 7, 20, 21. It is in strict and 
natural sequence to these indications in the 
Gospel that, on opening the first chapters of 
the Acts, we find Peter and John constantly 
acting together in the very van of the Chris- 
tian army (see ch. iii. 1, 3, 11 ; iv. 1 3, ] 9 ; viii. 
11, 25). Xbe houi of prayer ; called in Luke 



i. 10, " the hour of incense," that is, the hour 
of the evening sacrifice, when the people 
stood outside in prayer, while the priest 
within offered the sacrifice and burnt the 
incense (see ch. ii. 46, note). Hence the 
comparison in Ps. cxli. 2, " Le^ my prayer 
be set before thee as incense, and the lift- 
ing up of my hands as the evening sacrifice." 
Ver. 2. — That was lame for lame, A.V.; 
door fox gate, A.y. Door. If any distinction 
is intended between the eipa here and the 
ri\ri of ver. 10 (wliioh is not certain, as eipa 
is often used for a gate), we must understand 
$vpa of thie double doors of the gate described 
by Joeephus. Perhaps the lame man leant 
against one of the open doors. Which is 
called Beautiful. It is not certain what gate 
this was. In the ' Dictionary of the Bible ' it 
is described as " the great eastern gate lead- 
ing from the court of the women to the upper 
court," following apparently Josephus, ' De 
Bell. Jud.,' V. V. 3. But it is impossible to 
reconcile Josephus's two accounts — that in 
the ' Bell. Jud.,' v. v. and that in ' Ant. Jud.,' 
XV. xi. In the former he says distinctly that 
there were ten gates — four on the north, four 
on the south, and two on the east. In the 
latter he says there were three gates on the 
north, three on the south, and one on the east. 
In the former he says that fifteen steps led 
up/rom the ■^omen's enclosure to the great 



OH. in. 1—26.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



93 



gate, exactly opposite the gate of the temple 
itself (SvTiKpu TTJs Tov vaoB iTuAris) ', in the 
latter he sayi very distinctly that women were 
allowed to enter through the g^eat gate on 
the east. With such discrepancies in the 
description of the only eye-witness whose 
evidence has been preserved, it is impossible 
to speak with certainty. But it seems 
probable that there were two gates on the 
east — one the beautiful and costly gate of 
Corinthian brass, elaborately described by 
Josephus, through which the women did 
pass ; the other the greater gate, just oppo- 
site to and above the beautiful gate (^ 
uirip TJ)i> KopuiBlap), leading from the court 
of the women to the inner court ; and that 
Josephus has confounded one with the 
other in his descriptions. Anyhow, the 
beautiful gate was probably on the east. Its 
correct name is said to be the gate of Nicauor. 
The temple. It must be remembered that 
the whole platform, including the porches, 
and the courts of the Gentiles and of the 
women, and the outer court and the court of 
the priests, was called ri hp6v ; the actual 
house was called 6 yaJs; that part of the 
iepSn to which only Israelites were admitted, 
wa» called rh Si-yiov. Josephus also divides 
the precincts into the first, second, and third 
Upiy. The description of this lame man 
laid at the gate of the temple to ask alms 
is very similar to that in Luke xvi 20 of 
Lazarus laid at the rich man's gate ; only 
that the word for laid is in St. Luke iirf' 
$\tito, and liere is irleow. 

Ver. 8. — To receive an alms for an alrm, 
A.V. and T.B. The B.T. has iKt-niiLoaintf 
\a$(7y. 

Ver. 4. — Fastening his eyes (i-Teviaas tts 
avrSy). Comp. Luke iv. 20, " The eyes of 
all were fastened upon him (,'iitrav irtvi- 
(ovTft) ; " and oh. xxii. 56, " looking stead- 
fastly." St Luke also uses the phrase in ch. 
i. 10 ; ili. 12 ; vi. 15 ; vii. 55 ; but it is found 
nowhere else in the Now Testament except 
2 Cor. iii. 7, 13. 

Ver. 5. — From for of, A.V. 

Ver. 6. — But for then, A.V. ; what I have 
that for Buch as I have, A.V. ; vialk for rite 
up and walk, A.V. and T.R. In the name of 
Jesus Christ of Nazareth. What Peter meant 
by " in the Name," he clearly explains in 
vers. 12 and 16, where be shows that they 
did not work the miracle by their own power 
or godliness, but that the lame man was healed 
by the Name of Jesus, iu which he believed. 
So our Lord said of himself, " I am come in 
my Father's Name" (John v. 43; comp. 
John X. 25). Observe the full designation 
of our Lord as " Jesus Christ of Nazareth " 
(toD NaCoipalov), as in ch. iv. 10, and comp. 
Matt. xi. 23. The faith which was the con- 
aition of the healing (iiri ttJ irlffrei, ver. 
16) embraced the humiliation and cross of 



the Christ (as expressed in the word ths 
Naiarene) as well as his power and glory. 

Ver. 7. — Bailed for lifted, A.V.; hit 
anhle-bmiet for anole bonet, A.V. St. Luke's 
medical knowledge discerns the cause o( 
the lameness — a weakness in the ankle- 
bones. 

Ver. 8. — And leaping up, he ttood, and 
began to walk, for and he, leaping up, stood 
and walked, A.V. ; he entered for entered, 
A.V. Into the temple (t^ lep6v). He passed 
through the gate, and mounted the fifteen 
steps which led into the S7iav (see note to 
ver. 2). 

Ver. 10. — Took knowledge ofhim tor knew, 
A.V. Wonder and amazement (8d/i0os); 
any very strong emotion of awe, or admira- 
tion, or astonishment, It occurs elsewhere 
only in Luke iv. 36, where it describes the 
awe and amazement which came upon those 
who witnessed the casting out of the unclean 
spirit from the man in the synagogue at 
Capernaum. The verb Ban0ea) occurs in ch. 
ix.6 intheT.B.,and is rendered "astonished" 
in the A.V., but is omitted in the text of 
the B. V. ; elsewhere only in Mark. i. 27 ; 
X. 24, 82. °EKeaii$os occurs once in ver. 11 
of this chapter ; and iKBa/iP4ofuu in Mark ix. 
15; xiv. 33; xvi. 5, 6; Iko-toitij, an ecstasy, 
mostly used of a state of transport, as ch. x. 
10; xi. 5; xxii. 17. But in the LXX. (Gen. 
xxvii. 33), Mark t. 42 ; xvL 8 ; and Luke 
V. 26, it is used, as here, for a violent 
emotion of aitoniehment and amazement. 

Ver. 11. — He for the lame man which was 
healed, A.V. and T.B. The words of the 
T.B. are thought to have crept into the text 
from the portions read in church beginning 
here, which made it necessary to supply 
them. Held; by the hand or otherwise; 
not clave to in the spiritual sense. The 
porch that is called Solomon's. Josephus 
tells us that King Solomon built up with 
masonry only the eastern side of the 
temple enclosure, and that upon the 
artificial foundation thus formed one erroi, 
or covered colonnade, was built, the other 
sides of the temple in Solomon's time being 
naked and bare of buildings, but that in 
process of time, and by an enormous 
expenditure of treasure, the ground was 
filled up, levelled, and made firm by the 
masonry of huge walls all round, and then 
the circuit of buildings was completed. 
This eastern aroi, or colonnade, was called 
Solomon's porch (see John x. 23). Greatly 
wondering ; iKBan^oi (see note on ver. 10). 

Ver. 12. — At thit man for at this, A.V. ; 
fasten ye your eyet for look ye to eamettly, 
A.V.; godlinen for holiness, A.V.; him for 
this man, A.V. The him at the end of the 
verse requires that the man should have 
been previously mentioned. The A.V. felt 
this, and so, liaving taken it\ raifry as at this, 



94 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. in. 1—26, 



they rendered mriv by this man, as if Peter 
had BuppUeil the want of the verbal mention 
by pointing to him. Fasten ye your eyes. 
(For the use of incviCfiv, see note on ver. 4.) 

Ver. 13. — Servant for Son, A.V. ; before 
the face for in the presence, A.V. ; had for 
was, A.V. J release him for let him go, A.V. 
The God of Abraham, etc. The continuity 
of the New Testament with the Old Testa- 
ment stands out remarkably in St. Peter's 
address. He speaks to the " men of Israel," 
and he connects the present miracle with all 
that God had done to their fathers in days 
gone by. He does not seem conscious of 
any break or transition, or of any change of 
posture or position. Only a new incident, 
long since promised by the prophets, has 
been added. " He thrusts himself upon the 
fathers of old, lest he should appear to be 
introducing a new doctrine " (Chrysostom). 
6od . . . hath glorified his Servant Jesus. 
Servant is manifestly right (so St. Chrysos- 
tom). It is the constant meaning of irais in 
the LXX. ; son is always vios (see ver. 26 ; 
eh. iv. 27, 30). In Matt. lii. 18 the A.V. 
has "servant." (For the Old Testament 
usage, see Isa. xlii. 1 ; lii. 13; liii. II). 
Delivered up ; vapeSiiKare, different from the 
(kSotov of ch. ii. 23 (where see note). The 
word is applied to the action of Judas in 
delivering up Jesus into the hands of the 
chief priests (John tix.. 11), and to the 
action of Pilate in sending Jesus to execution 
(Luke xxiii. 25 ; John xix. 16). Here it is 
spoken of the whole action of the Jews in 
procuring the death of Jesus. Denied 
before the face of Filate. The reference is 
exact to Luke xxiii. 13 — 23. To release 
him. There is a verbal agreement with 
Luke xxiii. 16, 17, 20. 

Ver. 14. — Holy and righteous One for Soly 
One and the Just, AV. ; asked for for desired, 
A.V. 

Ver. 15. — Eaised for hath raised, A.V. 
The Frinoe of life ; a remarkable title here 
given to our Lord, to bring out the contrast 
between him whom they preferred and him 
whom they rejected. Barabbas was a mur- 
derer, one who took away human life for his 
own base ends ; the other was the Prince and 
Author of life, who was coriie into the world, 
not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. 
This title, taken in connection witli the 
preceding declaration, "God hath glorified 
his Servant Jesus," seems almost io be a 
reminiscenceof our Saviour's prayer, " Father, 
. . . glorify thy Son, that tliy Son also may 
glorify thee : as thou hast given him power 
over all flesh, that he should give eternal 
life to as many as thou hast given him " (J obn 
xvii. 1, 2). Jesus himself in very many 
places dwells upon bis own great preroga- 
tive of giving life : " I am come that they 
might have lifd, and . . • have it more abun- 



dantly" (John X. 10); "I am that Bread 
of life;" "I am the living Bread ... if 
any man eat of this bread, he. shall live 
for ever ; '' "I give . . . my flesh for the 
life of the world ; " " Ye will not oome 
unto me that ye might have life ; " " They 
that hear shall live;" "As the Father 
hath life in himself, so hath he given to 
the Son to have life in himself;" "The 
Son of man be lifted up : that whosoever 
bclieveth in him should . . . have eternal 
life ; " " The water that I shall give him 
shall be in him a well of water springing 
up into everlasting life." The word apxiry^s 
applied to Christ is found also in oh. v. 2l , 
and in Heb. ii. 10; xii. 2, rendered the 
"^ Author or Captain of their salvation," " of 
our faith." Whereof we are witnesses (see 
ch. ii. 22, note). The marginal rendering of 
whcm is equally literal, and may be defended 
by reference to oh. i. 8 ; xiii. 31 ; but the 
rendering whereof is in accordance with the 
more frequent phrases (ch. v. 32 ; x. 39, etc.). 
The meaning is practically the same. 

Ver. 16. — By faith in his Name hath this 
for his Name through faith in his Name, A.V. : 
the order of the words is changed from 
that of the A.V., to bring it into accordance 
with the order of the Greek, but with a 
great loss of force in English ; behold for see, 
A.V. ; through for by, A.V. Yea, the faith ; 
rather, and the faith. The two propositions 
are not the same. The first affirms that it 
is the Name of Jesus which has given him 
strength, objectively; the second that the 
faith (subjective) which is through or h/ 
him hath given him perfect soundness. 
There is some obscurity in the exact mean- 
ing of ^ Trta-Tis ri Si' avToS. Some (see Alford, 
i. 1) compare 1 Pet. i. 21, and make God 
the object of the faith of his witnesses, 
Peter and John. Others (Meyer) understand 
that the faitli in the Name of Christ was 
wrought in Peter and John by or through 
Christ's ministry and resurrection. Sut ii 
ia much more consonant with other passages 
(oh. xiv. 9 ; xvi. 81, etc. ; Matt. xv. 28, etc.) 
to understand the faith to be that of the 
man who was healed ; and then the phrase, 
" which is through him," will denote natur- 
ally that it was through Jesus Christ that 
the man's faith brought him into contact, 
so to speak, with God who healed him. 
In the same spirit we read that the lame 
man " praised God " (vera. 8, 9) for the cure 
efieoted through the Name of Jesus Christ ; 
and Peter says (ver. 15), " Whom God raised 
from the dead." The interpretation of the 
phrase ^ 8i' auToB depends upon whether we 
supply an active or « passive word. The 
faith which acts, or worhe, or moves through 
him is one way of understanding it; th« 
faith which i» wrought or produced through 
him 18 the other. The first ia preferable 



OH. III. 1 — 20.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSl'LES. 



Thia perfeot BonndneBi; pointing to what 
they saw with their own eyes while the 
man waa leaping and dancing before them 
{6\o«\ripia, perfect soundness, used only 
here in the New Testament ; it is • medical 
term). 

Ver. 17.— Jn for through, A.V. I wot 
that in ignoranoe, etc. Mark the inimitable 
skill and tenderness with which he who had 
just wounded by his sharp rebuke now binds 
up the wound. All sternness and uncom- 
promising severity before, he is all gentle- 
ness and indulgence now. They were only 
" men of Israel " in ver. 12, now they are 
" brethren." He has an excuse for their 
grievous sin. They did it in ignorance 
(comp. Luke xxiii. 33; 1 Tim. i. 13). Only 
let them see their error and repent of what 
they had done, and their forgiveness waa 
sure. 

Ver. 18. — The things for those things, A.V. ; 
foreshowed for before had showed, A.V. ; the 
prophets for his prophets, A.V. and T.R. ; 
his Christ for Christ, A.V. and T.R. ; fee 
thus fulfilled for he hath so fulfilled, A.V. 
He even excuses their ignorance by showing 
how the determinate counsel and foreknow- 
ledge of God was brought' about through it 
(comp. Gen. xlv. 5, and see above, oh. i. 23). 
Ver. 19. — Turn again for bt converted, 
A. v., with no difference in sense; that so 
there may come seasons of refreshing for when 
the times of refreshing shall come, A.V. 
Tom again. The turning to God is the 
consequence of the change of mind (/iertiyota). 
That so there may come ; rightly for the 
A.V. "when," etc., which the Greek cannot 
mean. What Peter conceives is that if 
Israel turns to God at once in the faith of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, then there will come 
at once those times of refreshing, those 
blessed days of righteousness, and peace, and 
rest, and universal joy, which are the charac- 
teristics of Chi ist's kingdom as foretold by 
the prophets. Those days are delayed by the 
unbelief of Israel. Seasons of refreshing. 
The A. V. " times of refreshing" Is manifestly 
right, though there is no article in the 
Greek. " Seasons of refreshing " seems very 
vague and vapid (see Alford, i. 1, who very 
appropriately and conclusively cites the 
plirase xaipoX iSj/iiv, " the times of the Gen- 
tiles" (Luke xii 24). Meyer also compares 
the irapaKXTiiTiii rov 'I(rpo^\ of Luke ii. 25, 
and so in ver. 21, xp^""" i^'^oKwraffTaatas 
is rendered " the times of restoration." 

Ver. 20. — And that he may send the Christ 
. . . even Jems for and he shall send Jesus 
Christ, A. v.; who hath leen appointed (wpoxe- 
XfipuriJLii>oy,o'ii.. xxiL 14; xxvi. 16) /or j/ou for 
(TrpoK(Kr)pvyiiivov) which before was preached 
unto you, A.V. and T.B. Who hath been 
appointed, etc. Jesus is already designated 
$ud appointed and made (fh. ii. 36) both 



Lord and Christ, but his glorious presence 
with his Church is deferred for a time, 
during which he is in heaven (ver 21). The 
E.V. is siirely very infelicitous here, as if 
there were several Christs, one of whom was 
appointed for Israel. 

Ver. 21. — Restoration (oi restitution, AJV.; 
whereof for which, A.V.; spuhe for hath spolcen, 
A.V. ; Am for aU his, A.V. and T.K. Whom 
the heaven must receive. This is clearly 
right, not as some render it, who must 
occupy heaven. The aorist Se^airBai seems to 
point to the moment when, at the Ascension, 
he was carried up into heaven (Lulce xxiv. 
51). The restoration of aU things (^airoKara- 
ardireiis irdvTav). This must be the same 
operation as our Lord speaks of in Matt. xvii. 
11 : " Elias truly shall first come, and re- 
■tore all things (airofcaToiTT^irei irdvTo) ; " aud 
from the words of Malachi (iv. 5, 6) it would 
seem to be a moral or spiritual restoration 
preparatory to the coming of the Lord. 
If so, the time of restoration is not exactly 
synchronous with the times of refreshing, 
but preparatory to them ; preparatory, too, 
to that restoration of the kingdom to Israel 
of which the apostles spake to the Lord (ch. 
L 6). Probably, however, St. Peter includes 
in his view the immediately following times 
of " the presence of the Lord," just as in St. 
Mark (L 1) the preparatory mission of 
John the Baptist is included in the phraae, 
" Thebeginningof the gospel of Jesus Christ" • 
Whereof God spake. The antecedent to 
" whereof" is " the times" (ver. 24). 

Ver. 22. — Moses indeed said for Moses truly 
said unto the fathers, A.V. and T.K. ; the 
Lord Ood for the Lord your God, A.V. and 
T.R. ; from among for of, A.V. ; to him shall 
ye hearken for him shall ye hear, A V. ; spe<ik 
for say, A.V. Moses mdeed said. Peter now 
verifies his assertion about tlie propHets in 
the previous verse by quoting from Moses, 
and referring to Samuel and those that came 
after. A prophet, etc. The quotation is from 
Dent, xviii. lH — 18. That this was under- 
stood by the Jews to relate to some one great 
prophet who had not yet come, appears from 
the question "Art thou that prophet ? " (John 
i. 21), tad from the saying of the Jews 
after the miracle of the loaves and fishes, 
" This is of a truth that prophet that should 
come into the world " (John vi. 14 ; vii 40). 
St. Peter here teaches that that prophet was 
none other than Christ himself, who was like 
unto Mnses in the fulness of the revelation 
given unto him, in his being a Mediator 
between God and the people, in being the 
Author of a new law — the law of faith and 
love, in building a new tabernacle for God to 
inhabit, even the Church in which he will 
dwell for ever and ever (see Heb. i. 1, 2). 

Ver. 23. — Shall he for come to pass, A.V. ; 
shaU no( hearken to fop uiill not hear, A.V: ; 



M 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa 



[oh. III. 1 — 2fti 



tttterly destroyed for destroyed, A.V. Utterly 
destroyed. The Greek i^oKoBpeiw oceuri 
frequently in the LXX. for the Hebrew 
phrase, "out off from his people" (Gen. xvli. 
14); but in Deut. xviii. 19, the phrase is 
quite different, " I wUl require it of him." 
St. Peter here gives the sense, not the 
ipsissima verba, and thereby marks the 
extreme gravity of the sin of unbelief (see 
John iii. 18). 

Ver. 24. — Them that followed for those that 
follow, A.V. ; they also told for have likewise 
foretold, A.V. From Samuel, etc. Samuel 
and 01 koSeI^s seems to denote what the Jews 
called " the former prophets " — the authors 
of the historical books. The whole phrase, 
therefore, comprehends "all tlie prophets" 
(of whom Samuel and ot Koflel^j were the 
first), to whose testimony concerning himself 
our Lord appeals (Luke xxiv. 27, 44). 

Ver. 25. — Sons for children, A.V. ; your for 
our, A. V. and T.R.,; families for kindreds, A.V. 
Te are the sons of the prophets, meaning that 
they inherited all the promises made by the 
prophets to their fathers. Just as in oh. ii. 
39 he said, " The promise is unto you and 
to youi children " (comp. Rom. ix. i ; xv. 8). 
He thus enforces the solemn obligation of 
giving heed to what the prophets had said 
concerning Christ and his kingdom. In thy 
seed (see Gal. iii. 16). This covenant, into 
which God entered with Abraham, with an 
oath (Qan. xxii. 16, 18), and which was a 



repetition and amplification of the coreiunl 
and promise already recorded in Gen. xii 
1 — 3; XV.; xvii 1 — 8, was made irpht toS» 
varipas, with a view to, in the direction of, the 
fathers, so as to include them and their 
children afler them. It was now fulfilled to 
those whom St. Peter was addressing, as is 
let forth in the next verse. 

Ver. 26. — Servant for Bon Jesus, A.V. and 
T.B. ; your for his, A.V. Unto yon first. In 
virtue of the covenant, the first offer of 
salvation was made to the Jews (see ch. i. 8 ; 
xiii. 26, 46 ; Luke xxiv. 47 ; Eom. iL 10, etc. ; 
oomp. Matt. xv. 24). His Servant (as in ver. 
13). As regards the phrase, "having raised 
up," however natural it is at first sight to 
understand it of the raising from the dead, 
the tenses make it impossible to do so. Nor 
could it be said that God sent Jesus to bless 
them after his resurrection. We must, there- 
fore, understand iyaar-lia-as to be equivalent to 
i^ayelpas, and to mean " having appointed," 
set up, raised up (as the Snglish word is used, 
Luke i. 69; Bom. ix. 17). In this sense 
God raised up his Servant by the incarna- 
tion, birth, anointing, and mission to be the 
Sa^viour. To bless you ; to fulfil to you the 
blessing promised to Abraham's seed. In 
turning away, etc., deliverance from sin being 
the chief blessing which Christ bestows upon 
his people (so ch. v. 31, repentance is spoken 
of as Christ's great gift to Israel). So closed 
the second great apostolic sermon. 



HOMILETICa. 

Ters. 1 — 11. — 77ie unexpected gift. In one of those raptuioni passages In which 
St. Paul tries to make human language express adequate thoughts of God, he speaks of 
God as " able to do exceeding abimdantly above all that we ask or think " (Eph. iii. 20). 
In saying so he does but mark, in one aspect, the distance between the finite and the 
infinite, and show how far the bounty of the infinite Giver outruns the desires of those 
who receive his gifts. The whole revelation of God's dealing: with mankind is a 
continual illustration of this truth. How could it ever have entered into the mind of 
Abram to ask to be made the father of many nations, to be the father of the faithful in 
all ages and in all countries, to be the head of God's elect people, and to have his life 
and his words and his deeds handed down to the posterities .through endless time ? 
How could it ever have entered into the mind of Israel in Egypt to ask to be led dry- 
shod through the Eed Sea, to be fed in the wilderness with bread from heaven, to 
receive the Law from Sinai, and to be put into possession of the land of Canaan ? Or 
how could it ever have entered into the thoughts of a rebellious and fallen world to 
ask that the only begotten Son of God, their Maker and Lord, should be incarnate and 
expiate their guilt by dying for their sins upon the cross? The section before us 
supplies another instance of this exceeding grace of God. A poor cripple, lame from 
his mother's womb, had for upwards of forty years lived in hopeless and helpless 
infirmity. In the merry days of youth, while his companions and equals in years 
were sporting and gambolling in all the freeness of joyous spirits and supple, elastic 
limbs, he was bound down to his pallet, like a bird confined in a cage, or a dog chained 
in his kennel. In early manhood, while others went forth to their work and to their 
labour, earning their daily bread by honourable industry, he was reduced to be a 
mendicant, living in constrained inactivity upon the precarious bounty of others. 



OH.m. 1— 26.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 87 

And 80 it was at the present time. Every day he was carried by some kind hands and 
laid at the Beautiful gate of the temple, in the hope that those who passed to and fro 
to the house of God would look with pity upon his misery and minister to his wants. 
They must have been sad and dreary hours passed in expectancy and frequent disap- 
pointment ; watching the countenances of the passers-by ; overlooked by some, turned 
away from with proud contempt by others ; sharply refused by this well-dressed but hard- 
hearted Sadduoee, and occasionally receiving a mite or a farthing from that ostentatious 
Pharisee ; doubtful whether he would carry home enough to supply his daily meal and 
his necessary raiment. On this occasion he saw two men about ' j go into the temple. 
Perhaps their aspect awakened the hope that there were k?nd, lOving hearts beneath 
their humble garb. Or, maybe, he merely uttered the usufti monotonous prayer like 
that ol the Italian beggurs, " Date qualque cosa per I'amor d Dio." Anyhow, we may 
be sure that his utmost hopes did not go beyond receiving •some small coin at thei 
hands. But when, in answer to the words from Peter's lips, " Look on us," he had 
looked up and probably stretched out his hands to receive the expected alms, instead 
thereof he heard the words, " In the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and 
walk." And in an instant he was whole. No longer a cripple, no longer chained 
down to his bed, no longer a prisoner, he sprang to his feet, he walked, he leapt, he 
danced for very joy, and, singing -praise as he went, he entered the holy courts. Here 
there was an instance of God doing unto men exceeding abundantly above all that they 
ask or think. Here we have a type of the exceeding riches of God's grace, resulting in 
unlooked-for mercies to the children of men. Let us take note of it, and frame our 
estimate of God's character accordingly. Nothing more elevates the tone of a man's 
religion than a worthy conception of God's goodness. It stimulates his love, it kindles 
his adoration, it raises his hopes, it intensifies all his spiritual emotions. Low concep- 
tions of God's nature beget a low standard of love and service. There is nothing like 
a true view of the infinity of the love of God, and of the unsearchable riches of his 
grace in Jesus Christ, to lash all the sluggish emotions of the heart into a holy and 
healthy enthusiasm. " Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it," is another mode of 
expresslag the same blessed truth ; and "Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift," 
is the language of those whose experience coincides with the revelation which Qod has 
given of himself in his holy Word. 

Vers. 12 — 26. — The two judgments. " The Lord seeth not as man seeth ; for man 
looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart " (1 Sam. xvi. 7). 
"That which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God" 
(Luke xvi. 15). " The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the 
head of the corner " (Luke xx. 17). The above passages, with many others, call our 
particular attention to the frequent contrariety between the judgment of men and the 
judgment of God. The section before us gives two striking examples of this con- 
trariety. 

I. The first is the contrariety between the judgment of the men of Israel as to the 
cause of the healing of the lame man, and the truth as declared by the apostles. The 
men of Israel thought that Peter and John had healed him by their own power or 
holiness. Their blind, carnal mind could not see beyond what lay just before them. 
They mistook the instrument for the cause. They could not see the power of Jesus 
Christ in heaven working through the hands of his servants on earth. And this is a 
type of a widely extended human error or false judgment. In the judgment of camsl 
men. however sharp their intellectual sight may be, everything is material, and the 
visible matter has no invisible spirit behind it. Famines, pestilences, earthquakes, 
are in their view natural phenomena with which the hand of God has nothing to do. 
Success or defeat in war, prosperity or adversity to the individual or the nation, are 
owing exclusively to the Wisdom and prowess of men, not to the blessing or 
chastening of (lod. And it is even so in the Church. They see only the outward 
visible signs, and they ignore the inward spiritual grace. Holy baptism is a sign, a 
ceremony, a rite. It has, maybe, a certain significance, a certain admonitory or 
teaching power in their eyes, but they ignore the active, quickening energy of the Holy 
Spirit in the sacrament. The bread and wine in the Lord's Supper are emblems, 
symbols, tokens, but they appieheud not the body and blood of Jesui Christ " which 

ACTS. " 



98 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. m. 1—26^ 

are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful " at the Iiord's table. Sermons, 
if eloquent, able, and stirring, are things of natural power in their estimation, but they 
do not take into account the effectual working of the Holy Ghost accompanying the 
Word preached, and making it the power of God unto salvation. And so it is through- 
out, both in the world and in the Church. The carnal judgment of men takes into 
account only the natural and the material ; those who have the mind and judgment of 
Christ recognize the supernatural and spiritual agency of God. 

n. The other example furnished by this section of the contrariety between the 
judgment of man and the judgment of God is that which is so pointedly put by 
St. Luke, both here and in his Gospel ! the preference given by the Jews to Barabbas 
over Jesus Christ. " Te denied the Holy and Bighteous One, and asked for a 
murderer to be granted unto you, and killed the Prince of life ; whom God raised from 
the dead." Here, then, we have the Lord Jesus, the well-beloved Son of God ; in whom 
he was well pleased ; who always did those things that pleased him ; to whom he said, 
" Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footstool ; " whom God exalted far 
above all rule, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name that is named, 
not only in this world, but also in that which is to come ; to whom he has given " a 
name which is above every name ; that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, 
. . . and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God 
the Father." That was the judgment of God. Now let us see the j udgment of men con- 
cerning this same Jesus. He was in the world, in all the simplicity of his spotless 
righteousness, in all the dignity of his sinless humanity, in the majesty of the Son of 
God ; the fulness of wisdom, of love, and of pure goodness beamed forth in his every 
word and work, but " he was despised and rejected of men." He was reviled as a 
blasphemer, as one that had a devil, as a gluttonous man and a winebibber, as a friend 
of sinners, as a seditious, turbulent man, as one that was not worthy to Uve. So he 
was brought before the judges of the earth, accused, arraigned as a criminal ; smitten, 
bafieted, scourged, spit upon, condemned ; led forth to execution, numbered with the 
transgressors, nailed to the cross, left to die amidst the jeers and taunts of his mur- 
derers. And when Pilate himself offered to release him, the offer was met with the 
cry, " Not this man, but Barabbas ; " and Barabbas was a robber. That was the judg- 
ment of man. And have we not here a type of the firequent contrariety between the 
judgment of men and the judgment of God? The things, the persons, the characters, 
that God approves, find no favour with a corrupt and perverse world ; the things, the 
persons, the sentiments, that God disapproves, receive the praise of men. The opinions 
of the day, the voice of the multitude, the prevailing tone of thought amongst men, are 
no safe criterion of worth and truth. We must ever remember that there are two 
judgments, the judgment of man and the judgment of God, and that these are often 
diverse the one from the other. It should be our constant prayer that God's Holy 
Spirit may give us " a right judgment in all things ; " so that, on the various questions 
of interest which engage the thoughts of our own generation, we may be found in 
harmony, not with the conceits of men, but with the all-seeing mind of Qod> 



HOMILIES BY VABI0U8 AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Welplessnesg and healing. In this interesting incident we have an 
illustration of the urgent spiritual necessities of our race, and of the sufSciency of the 
gospel to meet them. We have — 

L A GEEAT AND SAD CONTRAST. They brought daily to the Beautiful gate of the 
temple a lame beggar, who asked alms of all that entered (vers. 2, 3). What a 
striking contrast is here 1 — the large, strong, handsome gate, wrought by the most 
skilful workmen, intended to add beauty and attractiveness to the magnificent temple, 
an object of keen, universal admiration ; and, laid down at the foot of i^ a poor, ill-clad, 
deformed, helpless beggar, fain to find a miserable existence by asking the pity of all 
that passed through. Such contrasts has sin introduced into this world. If we look 
on this whole fabrio of nature as a temple in which God manifests his presence, 
and 1 our earth, with all its loveliness and grandeur, as one of its beantifol gates. 



OB. in. 1—26.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. »9 

then we see, in strongest and saddest contrast with it, stricken, lielpless, deformed 
human nature — ^man brought down to the very ground, unable to sustain himself, the 
piti I'ul object of compassion : we behold the fair workmanship of God with all its exquisit* 
beauty, and we see sinning, erring, suffering, fallen man by its side. 

II. A picTUBE OF SIN IN ITS STRENGTH. What more forcible illustration of this can 
be found than in a man lame from his birth (ver. 2) ? One born to the heritage of 
mankind, viz. that of voluntary, happy activity; of walking, running, moving, 
whithersoever he would, with free power of motion, in all acts of duty, pleasure, 
affection; — this man doomed to utter helplessness, his deformity or disease becoming 
more rigid and incurable as the months and years pass by 1 What a picture, this, cf 
our human spirit, created to enjoy the heritage of a holy intelligence, viz. that of free 
and happy activity in all the ways of righteousness, piety, usefulness ; of moving 
joyously along all the paths in which God invites his children to walk ; yet, from the 
very beginning, being utterly unable to walk in the way of his commandments, to run 
in the paths of wisdom and of peace, incapable of doing that for which it was called 
into being, and becoming more rigidly and hopelessly fixed in its spiritual incapacity 
year by year. 

III. The intebvention op the oosPBii of God. 1. It demands attention. " Peter, 
. . . with John, said, Look on us " (ver. 4). The gospel of Christ has a right to make 
thi» sarne appeal to all men. No seeking, struggling soul has a right to be regardless 
of its offers. The beneficent and mighty works of Jesus Christ; the profound 
spiritual, truths he uttered; the beautiful and exalted life he lived; the strange and 
wondrous death he died ; the message of love he left behind him ; the adaptation, 
proved by eighteen centuries of human history, of his system to the deepest wants of 
human nature ; — all these conspire to give to the gospel of God the right to demand 
attention — to say, " Look on me ; " see whether there is not in nje the help and healing 
which you need. 2. Jt disclaims certain offices. " Silver and gold have I none," etc. 
(ver. 6). The gospel does not offer to do everything for man which it may be desirable 
should, in some way, be done. It does not propose (1) to effect renovation by revolu- 
tionary social changes, or (2) to bring about immediate improvement in the outward 
conditions of a man's life, or (3) to guarantee bodily health or immunity from temporal 
trouble and domestic loss. It tends to ameliorate the condition of mankind in every 
way, and ultimately it does so ; but its first promise, and that by which it is to be 
tested and judged, is not of this order. 3. It offers one essential service. " In the 
Name of Jesus Christ rise up and walk " (ver. 6). It says to the stricken, wounded 
soul, "Wilt thou be made whole?" To the soul burdened with a sense of sin, it offers 
pardoning love and spiritual peace; to the heart oppressed with care and fear, it offers 
a Divine refuge in which to hide ; to the soul struggling with temptation, an almighty 
Friend ; to the weary traveller, a home of rest and joy. Whatever is the one imperative 
thing, that the gospel of ChrLst presents ; but its offer is inward, spiritual, heavenly. 

IV. The blessed issue. (Vers. 7—10.) This was: 1. Healing to him that had 
been helpless. 2. Gratitude showing itself in praise. 3. Interested attention on the 
part of those outside : " They were filled with wonder and amazement ; " they were in 
a state most favourable for the reception of the truth. When we make an appeal to 
Christ, we are not to be satisfied until we have found spiritual recovery ; until our 
souls are filled with the spirit of thanksgiving ; until our restoration has told upon our 
neighbours as well as on ourselves. — 0. 

Yera, 11 21. The hvman and the Divine. Human and Divine elements ara here 

crowded together, as indeed they are in most if not all of the events of our life. We 

I The human element. 1. Excitement. The man who had been lame, in the excite- 
ment of joy and gratitude, "held Peter and John" (ver. 11), and "all the people ran 
together . . . greatly wondering" (ver. 11). In the region of the Divine is calmness, 
serenity, peace ; in that of the human is agitation, disturbance, excitement. 2. Instru- 
mentality. (Ver. 12.) We do not effect anything of ourselves; we are co-workers with 
God. We depend on his Divine assistance, on the co-operation of forces that are acting 
around and within us, in virtue of his energizing power, for the accomplishment of our 
humblest undertakings. How much more emphatically is this the case in the Bphere of 



100 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch.hi.1— U6. 



sacred usofulnesB, in the oomraunication of spiritual life! There should be, there must 
be, as in the case of Peter and John, fitness for the work and obedience to the word 
and will of Christ ; but after all it is not " our own power or holiness " that " makes 
any man to walk " in the ways of God. 3. Ouilt, qualified by ignorance. Peter charges 
his hearers with positive and terrible crime (vers. 13 — 15) ; he does, indeed, make the 
abatement which is due to ignorance (ver. 17) : they did not " kill the Prince of life," 
knowing that it was he whom they were crucifying. But they remained in guilty 
ignorance of his origin, his character, and his mission; and their ignorance, if it pal- 
liated, did not excuse their crime. We also often " know not what we do " when we 
wrong the innocent, when we sin against ourselves, when we rob God of the glory due 
to his Name. Our ignorance is not left out of the account by the Holy and the Just One; 
nevertheless he adjudges us to be verily guilty, and he condemns us. 4. Penitence, (Ver. 
19.) We are to be changed in our mind, and be converted or turned from our evil ways 
to those which are right, pure, godly. 5. Faith, (Ver. 16.) Peter says that " faith in 
the Name " of Jesus Christ had given the lame man that " perfect soundness " which 
they all beheld. He does not say, or is not reported as saying, that these " men of 
Israel " must believe in him whom they had guiltily slain, but that was either implied 
or expressed in his address to them. " Eepentance toward God, and faith toward our 
Lord Jesus Christ," is the testimony borne by apostles " both to the Jews, and also to 
the Greeks " (ch. xx. 21). 

IL The Divinb element. 1. OverruUvg ivisdom, (Ver. 18.) What God had 
shown beforehand needed to be done, he had, in the ordering of his holy providence, 
caused to take place. Through all these things which happened at Jerusalem, in which 
the hand of man had so large a share, there ran a thread of Divine agency; so that pur- 
poses of heavenly love and wisdom were after all fulfilled. He still "makes the wrath 
of man to praise him." 2. Olorifying the Just and Holy One, (Veis. 13, 15.) God 
is bringing many sons unto glory, as well as the " Captain of our salvation.' He will 
ensure the ultimate acquittal and honouring of those who are reviled and wronged. 
" Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness." 3. Bestoration. (Vers. 12, 
19 — 21.) It was the Divine hand, and no human magic, which healed this lame 
beggar (ver. 12). It is the hand of God which gives such blessed recuperative power 
to our bodily system, and which raises the sick man from the bed of suffering, weakness, 
acute disease, to newness of physical life. It is God who grants to the condemned but 
penitent spirit restoration to his loving favour (" that your sins may be blotted out "), 
and it is he who will one day grant to a renovated world " times ot refreshing," the 
reappearance of Jesus Christ in his heavenly power and glory (vers. 20, 21). There 
is a sense in which (1) there is much that is marvellous in the working and outwork- 
ing of God ; it is so far beyond our finite understanding. But there is also a sense 
in which (2) there is notliing surprising in any acts of restoration or renovation we 
witness. It is only what we should ask for and expect of him. " Why marvel we " at 
that ?— C. 

Vers. 22 — 26.— The greatness of Jesus Christ. These verses may be regarded as 
attesting the unapproachable greatness of the Lord Jesus Christ; they invite us to 
think — 

I. That he was like dnto the greatest op all who PKEOEnED him, but was 
GREATER THAN HE. (Ver. 22.) A greater Legislator than Moses, for his laws should 
last as long as time itself; a better Man, for he was absolutely without sin ; a worthier 
Leader, conducting out of a harder bondage into a truer freedom, unto a land of greater 
promise. 

II. That hib relation to mankwd is such that the rejection of him ib the 
nuiN OF OURSELVES. (Ver, 23.) To be ignorant of some human teachers is to lose a 
valuable heritage, a precious treasure, excellent and elevating enjoyment; but to refuse 
his friendship, to reject his service, is to cut ourselves off from the source of eternal truth 
is to abandon ourselves to the course which ends in spiritual death. ' 

III. That he is The one great Hero or baored Scripture. (Ver. 24.) "The 
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." Sightly read, " all the prophets " testi- 
fied of him, and pointed on to those days in which he lived, suffered, died, and rose 
ftgaio. 



BX. III. 1—26.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 101 

IV. That hb blesses whom he serves with the supreme blbssino. (Ver. 26.) 
What would we give to those whom we would fain serve? Health, fortune, power, 
fame, humau love ? Jesus Christ blesses by " turning away every one from his iniquities." 
What a transcendent blessing is this ! Consider; 1. How much it involves ; viz. the 
removal of the penalty and the power of sin from each individual soul. 2. How much 
it implies ; viz. the restoration of each soul to God (for to fear him, to love him, and to 
Btiive to please him, is the only way to escape from a state of sin), and entrance upon 
eternal life (for the sphere of sin is the region of death, and to be delivered from the 
former is to enter the kingdom of life, the life which is spiritual and eternal). 3. By 
what means it is effected ; viz. (1) by the sacrifice of himself (Heb. ix. 26), and (2) by 
attracting us to himself and his service (John. xii. 32 ; 1 John. iii. 5, 6). 

V. That, coming to bedeem the race, he offers his salvation first to those 
WHO had rejected him. (Vers. 25, 26.) They to whom Peter spoke were "the 
children of the prophets;" but they had ''denied the Holy One and the Just," and 
" killed the Prince of life." Yet to those who h4d so shamefully abused their privileges 
the apostle said, " To you first," etc. Jesus came to "call sinners to repentance," to 
restore those who had fallen the furthest, to cleanse the most leprous, to raise the 
spiritually dead, to win those most utterly estranged and most bitterly opposed to 
himself. So great a Conqueror is he. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — The healing of the lame man. I. The antecedents of the cure. 
Peter and John were going up in company to the temple at the evening hour of prayer. 
Here we see : 1. The fellowship of different orders of minds in Christ. None more diverse 
in character and temperament than the impulsive Peter and the contemplative John. 
2. Prayer one of the bonds of this fellowship, as expressed in the beautiful hymn, 
" How blest the tie that binds I " 3. An example of the profit of set times and seasons 
for worship. (See on the three times of daily prayer — the third, sixth, and ninth hours — 
Dan. vi. 10 and Ps. Iv. 18.) And the good also of a fixed place of prayer. The temple, 
the synagogue, the- Church, or the meeting-house ; each has its hallowed and happy 
associations. How greatly devotion is helped by the imagination, and the imagination 
how dependent upon association, must be obvious to all. 4. The path of true devotion 
is often found to be the path that leads to useful service to others. 

II. The sdffebeb. Lame from his birth, deprived of that power of independent 
activity in which so much of the enjoyment of life consists, he is the type of a deeply 
pitiable class. To have health is so great a blessing, because it carries with it that of 
command over one's powers, and therefore freedom and independence. He was help- 
lessly dependent — borne by others. Such sufferings remind us of the presence of moral 
evil, which can neither be explained nor explained away. But there are compensations.- 
The lame man had friends. Seldom does such misery fail to etir up pity and enlist 
help. -Outward evils are ever balanced in the Divine wisdom by inward good. We 
never know the kindness of man to man till sickness and sorrow reveal it. They 
carried him to one of the splendid gateways of the temple, that he might be in the way 
of the charitable droppings of alms from those that went in. The religious duty of 
almsgiving was preached up by the rabbis incessantly and in the strongest way — even 
to excess, as we may see from Lightfoot and other authors. One noted saying was 
that God suffered the poor to exist that rich men might earn heaven. Our theological 
and our practical views of the subject have changed. But at least we have a good 
examiDle here : we should exert ourselves to place the sufferer within reach of help. 
The great problem of true charity is to bring the supply and the need into practice. 
If the intention be loving and good, something better often comes of it than is hoped 
for, as in this case. The sufferer, intent upon the minor boon, receives the higher blessing. 
So does a living Divine purpose shape our actions to nobler ends than we designed. 

HI. The cube. There is human means with Divine agency. 1. The human mean*. 
The apostles fix their eyes earnestly upon the sufferer. Thus his attention is aroused; 
his thoughts are collected ; he is brought into a concentration of thought and feeling. 
It is not to the wandering mind that God reveals either his thought or his power. 
The eyes must be lifted up to the quarter whence help comes. He who is conscious ol 
bearing God's message to the souls of men may cry, " Look on me ; listen to me I " 
F*ith is not passive ; it is an energy, expressed by looking, listening, coming, doing, 



102 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. m. 1—28. 

Thus only can the electric chain be completed ; the healer and the healed be brought 
into vital contact. Directions must be complied with as the first condition of physical 
healing and of spiritual salvation. The best gift we have for our fellow-men is the 
gift of the head and heart. This is lasting ; others perish in the using. We cannot 
lose the memory nor the blessing of good words. If we have no money to give in 
alms, we may make our fellow-man rich from our heart. Intelligence and sympathy 
are what all men want, and none are thankless for. We I'eap ingratitude where we 
have not really shown our heart. The best spiritual gifts recognize the worth of the 
recipient. Let us treat men as our equals — beings possessed of will. There are possi- 
bilities before them ; let us reckon upon them and believe in them, thus inspiring them 
in their weakness with such healthy belief. 2. The Divine power in the human 
means. We cannot command our fellow-men except in the name of some authority 
which both he and we are subject to. He who can rest his appeals upon the firm words, 
" By order," or " In the name of the queen," or the like, has a might over wavering wills. 
Eeally to govern means first to have obeyed. The " Name " here signified a vast reality. 
" Jesus Christ of Nazareth 1 " It is the symbol of all power in heaven and earth ; supreme, 
unrivalled, purely loving and beneficent. As ministers of Christ, we are servants of 
the Almighty, channels of charity, agents of a kingdom that must prevail. This 
power will be felt both by words and deeds. The tones of Peter's voice thrilled ; his 
bidding awoke the slumbering power of volition ; finally his hand, joined with that 
of the sufferer, completed the union of the Divine agency to save with the suflferer's 
will to be saved. The weak feet and joints became firm; the whilom prostrate one 
leaped up and stood ; from this proceeded to walk ;• finally went with the healers into 
the temple, exultingly to render praise to God. The thankful heart is the best sacrifice 
we can offer to God. Without it, the best crown of the blessing he designs to confei 
is not attained. If men see our state changed, but not our heart, God is defrauded of 
his glory and his due in us. The joy of the comforted heart is the best proof of the 
love of the Comforter. He means our freedom and our joy ; what if we disappoint his 
thought, so that it flowers not and bears no fruit ? 

IV. The consequences op the curb. 1. Popular observation. They identified 
the man. They compared his present and past condition. Comparison is the founda- 
tion of our knowledge of truth. 2. Popular reasoning. They argued that the change 
could proceed only from one cause, and that Divine. The quality of changes points 
to the quality of the cause. Extend this reasoning, and the best, as the most popular, 
argument for Christianity is this : the changes produced by it in man's condition prove 
it to be of origin Divine. 3. Popular amazentent and ecstasy. Such are the words ol 
the historian. Wonder is the reflection of the unusual and the unexpected in the 
mind. And this passes into ecstasy or transport when through the sensuous the 
supersensual, when through the natural the supernatural, appears. If all the course of 
life were common and familiar, God would be forgotten. Were wonders incessantly 
repeated they would become no longer wonders, and their power were lost. God 
shows his hand now and again that the spell of custom may be broken ; hides it that 
we may reflect on what we have seen. Mingled fear and joy ever attend Divine 
revelations ; fear in the thought of our utter dependence, joy in the thought that in 
that very dependence lies our hope and our deliverance. — J. 

Vers. 11 — 26. — Witness of Peter to Jesta. A great congregation, in the mood ol 
wonder and prepared to listen, is before him. He who had once denied his Master in 
a moment of weakness, is now enabled with great power to give testimony of him. 

I, A DISCLAIMER OP INDEPENDENT POWER OB MERIT IN THE APOSTLES. The nOte 

of a genuine mission. The false prophet and the magician neglect nothing that will 
enhance their supposed supernatural character. The apostles insist that they are but 
men, have no power of themselves, are the agents merely of a higher will. So, too, 
peculiar piety on their part is disclaimed. They did not aim at the reputation of 
saints ; they refused to encourage the natural delusion that they must be better than 
other men. This was not the way to popularity, but the simple course of honest 
witnesses for God. 

II. The bbcbnt event traced to its bourok. I. God is the faithful God, God 
iif Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, God of their fathers ; these were dear and time-honoured 



OH. m. 1.^26.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 103 

appellations. With these it now connected that of Father of Jesus. Thus the recent 
is united with the most ancient past. One unfailing bond of Divine constancy and 
love knits the ages into unity, and makes history the unfolding of an increasing pur- 
pose. 2. His love is illustrated by the contrast with human hate. They had repu- 
diated the Holy and Just One, and had begged the life of a murderer in his stead. 
Blindly they had hurried the " Author of life " to an ignominious doom. But who 
can contend against G-od, his power, nay, rather, his love ? The purpose of life is 
victorious over human passion, and God will not suffer men to work out their suicidal 
intents to the full. The Besurrection, be it insisted, then, is the crowning proof of 
indefeasible constancy and will to save men in their own despite. 3. The energy to 
heal ever flows from the risen Christ. Faith is the condition of being blessed. It is 
the movement of the whole soul towards the Divine Benefactor. It is the junction of 
the human with the Divine will, and is the one principle of salvation. 

m. Deduotions fsoh the past. History, and every portion of it, contains a 
Divine logic. Every study of it is idle which does not end with the question — What 
is the meaning for the present ? What resolve is to be taken ? What duty now to be 
discharged? The paths of experience converge towards one goal. 1. The crucifixion 
of Jesus had been an act of ignorance. They " knew not what they did ; " neither 
people nor rulers. It was a mitigation of the crime, and divinely recognized. The 
acts of wrath are blind, and just judgment distinguishes between the evidences of 
passion and the evidences of ingrained perversity in man's acts. 2. It was at the 
same time a fulfilment of prophecy. God permits evil means to work out holy ends. 
The happiest revolutions have often sprung from momentary ignition of wrath and 
resentment. The feeble human heart expends its little explosive force, and silently 
makes an opening for the march of a higher purpose. It was necessary that Christ 
should suffer. Every pleasure is the reaction from a pain ; every birth proceeds from 
travail ; there is no deliverance without spiritual struggle. The most spiritual, the 
most living personality, must agonize and suffer most. This is the law. In the 
suffering of the " Leader of life " it finds its highest expression. Thus did Divine will 
confront human freedom, and the futiUty of resistance is shown. The very efforts of 
blind passion to defeat that will serve only to elicit its meaning. Like blows upon 
a vibrating substance, human sins draw deeper music from the heart of God. 

IV. FbaotioaIi dibections. " Change your mind and turn." If we cannot influence 
the fixed course of things, it is wisdom to be influenced by it. If the Divine purpose 
is not to be bent aside for us, we must bend before it. We cannot change the course 
of fate, but we can change the course of our thoughts and actions. To persist in dis- 
covered error is like fighting against the stars in their courses. Sin is only unfor- 
givable when it is persisted in as sin. The constant promise of the gospel is that 
sin shall no longer be reckoned to a man, t'.;. viewed as a fact of his life, when it has 
been corrected by the will. Our deeper thought teaches us that there is no time for 
God. Our " now " and its self-determination is the question. One solemn moment of 
decision converts the error of the way into the direction of truth and right. 

V. Pbomises of FUT0EE GOOD. 1. Tkey are of indefinable grandeur and attraction. 
We cannot fully analyze the contents of any Divine promise. Its riches exceed 
definition and thought. At the same time, every promise has leading hints to guide 
faith and expectation. Hero " times of refreshing and the '' sending of Jesus " form 
such hints. 2. They point to a goal of history. " The times of the restitution of all 
things." The golden age of paganism was in the remote past; that of Israel and of the 

fospel lies in the distant future. It rests, like all our good, upon nothing less sure than 
>ivine will, and is the subject of prophetic oracles. To define is to limit and to narrow 
•nd to impoverish our noblest ideals. Let us be content, as Peter teaches elsewhere, to 
accept prophecy as a " light shining in a daik place, until the day dawn." 3. They are 
designed to gmide conduct, not to explain the fv,tv/re fully. The prediction in the Law 
cited by Peter received many changing interpretations in the long course of its exist- 
ence. The actual highest fulfilment was not recognized when it came. God ever 
fulfils himself unexpectedly. Meanwhile the delay of fulfilment keeps thought and 
hope awake. 4. The growth and increasing emphasis of prophecy. The sound dies 
not, but gathers in volume as it goes, filling the earth. Do we heed its sound now ? 
I« there no voice of God for us in the instruction and warnings of the greatest spirits ol 



104 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. m. 1—26, 

onr time? Every teacher who bids us strive and aspire towards the ideal, the king- 
dom of God in the spirit, is a prophet, and is charged with a measure of oracular powei 
for his generation. 

VI. The inhkbitanob of the pbesbnt. We too are " sons of the prophets." God 
has spoken to us. Behind us lies the past, with its wonderful lore, its yet unsatisfied 
yearnings. We too are included in the Divine covenant of blessing. The process of 
events set in motion by the eternal Cause continues itself in us. The seed of his 
loving thoughts becomes fertile anew in the spirits of each succeeding' generation, 
and appears in new blossom and fruit. Till " all countries of the earth " shall thus be 
sown and impregnated with the thoughts of God, the process shall continue. Away, 
then, with a de^ theology which seeks for iospiration only in the fulfilled, not also in 
the fulfilling and the to be fulfilled. Let us believe in God, not merely because we 
know that he stirred in men's souls in days of yore, but because we feel him stirring 
in otir own souls now. 

VIL Ordeb in the Divinb pubposb. Israel first, next through Israel the naiiona 
are to be blessed. Spiritual force, like other force, must be concentrated that it may 
be diffused. Other nations have had light, but Israel the intensest. It is the moral 
consciousness which makes humanity ; and in the turning from sin, men are in the 
way of all good, of growing good ; the negation of evil is the affirmation of the principle 
of the spirit. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — The apostles workers of miracles. General Introduction. The 
witnessing vocation of apostles required miracles — as signs of the kingdom of Christ ; 
as attestations of apostolic authority ; as appeals to the world, and to the Jewish 
people especially, to accept the new doctrine ; as corresponding in some measure to 
the miracles of our Lord, and so perpetuating the blessing of his ministry which he 
himself promised in his last discourses, " Another Comforter, that he may abide with 
you for ever " (John xiv. 16). Consider the miracle itself. 

L Its chabaoteb. 1. Purely henevolent. Performed on a beggar, helpless, miser- 
able, altogether unconnected with the new society, unable to reward his benefactors. 
2. Conspicuously reed. At a public spot — the temple; at the ninth hour, when wor- 
shippers would throng to the place ; on one well known to the whole city ; daily laid 
as a public object of pity ; helped by no one before, but now helped through Christ ; 
born lame, therefore not labouring under merely temporary infirmity ; not even asked 
for by the sufferer, but offered freely by the apostles, as by a sudden impulse of Xho 
Spirit. 

n. Its effects. 1. Upon the man himself. It raised him up physically and 
spiritually at the same moment. €k>d often thus speaks to the soul through the body, 
both by affiictions and by visitations of mercy. It turned his wail of misery into songs 
of joy. Take the description of the work upon the man as typical of the course of 
gracious work, the bestowment of a new life and strength, first putting us on our feet 
with sudden leap of heartfelt gladness of faith ; then " beginning to walk," feeling the 
new limbs like a child ; then walking forward " into the temple ; " then " walking and 
leaping and praising God," the conscious participation in blessings making us the 
ministers of joy to others, filling the temple with praise. 2. Upon the apostles and 
through them on the Church and on the world. The important place of the miracle 
as evidence of the Divine mission of the messengers. They themselves could scarcely 
have known what they could do until, by impulse of the Spirit, they put forth the 
energy. The believers who were sharers with apostles of the gifts of the Spirit would 
henceforth expect great things. Jerusalem must have been startled into attention 
and incipient faith. " The people saw him," etc. (vers. 9, 10). Although miracles 
regarded alone would never convert the world, yet in connection with the Word of 
God they powerfully arouse the minds of men. " Wonder and amazement" are God's 
agents in awakening the soul and preparing the ground for the seed of eternal life. 
Another great effect of the miracle was corrective and didactic. No one could doubt 
that the apostles were no self-seekers, no fanatics, no ambitious founders of a new sect : 
out simply heralds of the gospel. What they did was " in the Name of Jesus Christ 
of Nazareth." They began their work upon the poor, they appealed to the impotent 
tod Uu helpleu, they proclaimed their own jKivuny, and yet invited men to riches 



•OH. m. 1—26.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 10» 

such as the world knew not. They showed themselves the sympathizing brothers of 
all mankind, ready to give such as they had to give, without money and without 
price, a pattern of simplicity and spirituality. — B. 

Ver. 6. — Spiritual riches. " Then Peter said," etc. Introduction. The whole scene 
suggestive on the subject of the state of man. The contrast between the man lying 
in squalid misery at the gate of the temple and the splendours of the religious edifice. 
What was that religion which could bear to see such sights daily, and had no message 
for the poor? All gospels must be tried by this test: preach them to the poor. The 
men who wrought the miracle had learnt to cast themselves on Grod for the things of 
this world. They were as poor as the beggar, yet rich in the gifts of God. They had 
access to the Church's offerings, yet, with a very unpriest-like self-denial, could say 
they had nothing. At the gate of the temple, at the hour of prayer, learn this great 
lesson of Divine endowment and prosperity. 

I. A great example of personal wealth. " Such as I have." What was it ? The 
Holy Ghost filling all the nature. Consider the two men, Peter and John. What wealth 
of knowledge, insight, power over the souls of others 1 Even in external aspects, the 
results upon the life of the world traceable to these two names, immeasurable ; yet 
they were both fishermen of Galilee. What they had had been given them by God. 
The endowment which enabled them to heal one whom the world could not lift up. 
Surely an infiaitely greater gift to be able to work such works than any of those 
distinctions of literary genius or artistic skill which the world so extravagantly rewards. 
Such wealth is ours as believers, in greater or less degree — a wealth which no man can 
take from us, which grows by prayer and effort, which cannot die with lis ; " their 
works do follow them." The Church should seek this wealth of the Spirit, not, as 
the false Church has done, the wealth that perishes, lest the money should perish 
with it. 

II. An impressive illustration of God's method of lifting up the world from 
it» ruin. Show that both Church and State have failed. The temple may have 
beautiful gates, but be full of hideous idolatry and shame. The State may abound in 
silver and gold, and yet present to the eye such lamentable pictures of helplessness, 
revealing its own impotence, as the poor mendicant, daily passed by at the most 
public place and the most sacred place- of the city. The present aspect of both the 
professedly religious world and the social condition of our great populations demand a 
confession of man's inability to produce a really happy society. Here there is : 1. The 
Name of Jesus Christ proclaimed as the new power that is wanted, as a redemption 
of the world from sin, setting spiritual life at the root of all other life, healing the 
miseries of nien with compassion and wonderful works, promising the entire renovation 
both of body and soul in another world. 2. The true Church holds the lever in its 
hand by which the world shall be lifted up. We want the two apostles, the Petrine 
spirit of faith, the Johannine spirit of love. We must speak clearly and without 
reserve, in the Name of Christ, not in the name of ecclesiastical power and ritualistic 
display, to the poorest, and without greed of filthy lucre ; and we must prepare to put 
forth such energy and gifts as we have, all alike, and in the spirit of fellowship ; then 
we shall fill the world with praise, and the lame man shall leap as a hart, and the tongue 
of the dumb sing (see Isa. xxxv., as a prediction of the Chm'ch's power over the 
world). The message is individual to the rich and to the poor, " Bise up and walk." 
No life is true lil'e which is not blessed of God. — E. 

Vers. 11 — 26. — A great sermon to a wor^dering multitude. L The audibncs. 
L Different from that previously gathered, which was made up of devout men chiefly, 
who were interested in the strange phenomenon of the tongues. This was a mingled 
multitude, partly of temple worshippers, partly of passers-by, includint;, therefore, 
many who were present at the Crucifixion, who had shouted " Crucify him I " 2. Their 
state of mind. " Greatly wondering," ready to be taught, gazing inquiringly at the 
apostles, almost worshipping them. Strange that they should be so affected after 
having beheld the miracles of the Lord. Probably already deeply touched and filled 
with remorseful feelings by the Crucifixion, beginning to believe in the Kesurrection, 
and so filled with alarm lest they had incurred the righteous wrath of God. Petei 



106 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. nr. 1—26. 

" saw it," that is, the signs of an awakened mind and softened heart. He " answered," 
perhaps cries of astonishment and inquiry. 

II. The BnBJEOT of disoodksb. Not the miracle as a miracle, but the MessiahsMp 
of Jesus, as proved by it, and its practical bearing on those present. 1. The facta of 
the gospel are set face to face with the words of Scripture. The agency of man is 
shown to be entirely under the control of an overruling Providence, " the determinate 
counsel of God." Thus the greatness and graciousness of the faith is at once clearly 
revealed. The miracle falls into its place as a sign of the Divine working. It is the 
Name of Christ to which all is to be ascribed. As the multitude were unconscious 
agents in fulfilling the prophecies, so the apostles are simply ministers proclaiming 
the gospel, inciting their brethren to believe. 2. The nearness of the kingdom of 
God is made the ground of an earnest call to repentance and faith. The tremendous 
responsibility of such a time is declared. If God has been working, how can he pass 
by the wilful disobedience and neglect of those to whom such a message is sent? 
3. The day of grace is heralded. While the guilt of a Saviour's crucifixion is boldly 
pronounced, the gate of life is flung wide open. Peter uses his key well. Times of 
refreshing and gladness will come if impenitence does not hinder them. Jesus has 
been sent to bless you, not to curse you; "to offer up the blood you shed on your 
behalf, not to call it down upon your heads, as you did in your blind passion. It was 
an appeal from fear to faith. Behold the power, but understand that the power is not 
death, but life. Believe and live. A truly gospel message. 

in. An example of apostolio earnestness. 1. Thoroughly pervaded by the 
spirit oi faith. Look, not on us, nor on the healed man, but on Christ. The power 
and the holiness (or " godliness," Revised Version), is not ours, but God's. We are 
mere earthen vessels. The excellency of the power is God's. The firm persuasion 
which gave boldness to the preacher was not mere natural eloquence, or physical 
strength, or temporary elevation in the eyes of the multitude ; but a scriptural faith, 
which rested on the fulfilled promises of God, which saw the facts in the light of 
eternal truth, which grasped the hope of the future — " the restoration of all things." 
2. Directness of appeal. They were not afraid of their faces. They spoke to their 
consciences. The guilt of the crucifiers is charged home upon them. We succeed best 
with men when they feel our hand grappling their conscience ; if only they believe in 
our sincerity and faithfulness. Yet the apostles could not know how such a charge 
would be taken. Wonder might be changed in a fickle multitude into self-justification 
and rage against the prophet who said, " Ye are the men." Compare in this respect 
the New Testament prophets with those of the Old Testament. 3. Sympathy and love 
to souls. Nothing like inhuman pressing the charge or denunciation. They are 
" brethren " still. They did it " in ignorance." They can yet be blesse'd and saved. 
There is " perfect soundness " for them if they will have it. 4. Inspired wisdom and 
heavenly shill. They were " taught of God " how to speak. The startling message 
comes first, " Ye are guilty ; " then the Scripture exposition leading on to the loving 
appeal at the conclusion. Our last note should always be love. Yet the golden thread 
of gospel faithfulness must run through all. A model of preaching. Make the 
beginning, middle, and end, Christ. But let it be Christ the Saviour from sin; not 
Christ the mere Teacher, or Example, or Mystery of God ; but the Messenger of peace 
to dying souls. The sermon, doubtless, is given only in rough sketch, for it probably 
occupied some time, as the miracle was wrought about three o'clock in the afternoon, 
and the sermon was interrupted in the evening. There was time for a discourse of more 
than an hour, so that we may suppose the facts and arguments considerably amplified 
in the delivery. It would seem that some two thousand were converted between the 
day of Pentecost and the close of Peter's sermon in Solomon's porch. It is, therefore, 
likely that a large proportion of that number owed their conversion to this sermon ; 
and they were many of them of the populace. Their identification with the Church 
would, therefore, give great weight to the message, which would be remembered and 
repeated in substance through the city, and hence handed down to the writer of 4he 
Acts. We cannot do better than study such models of simplicity and earnestness,- if 
we would bo blessed with similar success among the people. — B. 

Ver. 1^.— The power of faith. " And his Name," etc 



cam, 1—26.] THE A0T3 OP THE APOSTLES. 107 

I. Thb Name of Chkist the soubok of the poweb. 1. His personal merit an 
Redeemer. He himself worked miracles; not as a mere instrument in the hands of 
God, but as Divine. When he left the world, he appointed his apostles to be his 
representatives, giving them all power in heaven and earth in his Name. He ascended 
to the right hand of God as an accepted Saviour, and from thence sends down the 
gifts. 2. His royalty as Head of the Divine kingdom. The sufferings of the world 
belong to its state of ruin, though not caused by the sin of the individual. The 
kingdom of Christ is set up in the midst of the fallen race to bring about " the 
restitution of all things." The heavens are opened. The light comes down into the 
darkness. 3. His Name as an object of faith. The spiritual draws up the lower world 
into itself. To believe is to lay hold of the hand which exalts us. As Peter laid hold 
of the lame man by the right hand and raised him up, so the representatives of Christ 
lay hold of a dying world ; and whosoever believeth in him shall not perish, but rise 
with him into a new life. 

n. The poweb op faith put forth. 1. From the Church upon the world. By 
" listening to the world's cries, and directing the souls of men to the true Help. By taking 
the sufferers by the hand and calling down upon them the blessing of God. By pro- 
claiming everywhere the gospel of " perfect soundness," in lieu of the world's false 
gospels of imperfect remedies, and as a free gift of God to man. 2. 'From the individual 
soul upon the life. The apostles represent faith ; the lame man, the ruined state of 
our nature. The living principle implanted by grace works an entire healing of the 
whole of humanity. Show that all the evils which belong to our life are in some way 
traceable to the want of faith ; that is, of harmony with God. Vital, practical religion 
lilts up one part of the nature after another. The Christian is the highest style of man. 
The gospel of the Eesurrection preaches a renovation which begins on this side of the 
grave. The power of the risen Christ works through the whole man ; at last gives 
him perfect soundness. The blessed effect of the Name of Jesus in our heart, in our 
circumstances, in our family, in our prospects of the future. Wo cannot receive the 
special gifts poured out on the early Church, which, in the form they then had, were 
intended to serve a temporary purpose, but we can receive that " most excellent gift of 
faith." The Church should not rest satisfied while there is little manifestation of tho 
power of faith in the works accomplished. Why are we content to go to and fro to the 
temple, and see the wretchedness of fellow-creatures, without attempting to remove it ? 
Why is any enterprise reckoned impossible ? No limits to the successes of the Church 
when she is filled with faith. We want to lead the world " leaping and praising God " 
into the temple of his truth. We shall do it, not by argument, not by ritual, not by 
excitement, but by the putting forth of the power of the Holy Ghost. — E, 

Ver. 19. — Conversion. " Eepent ye therefore,'' etc. Tho universal requirement. 
Rulers and people. Ignorant and educated. Near the kingdom, or far off. The end 
to be aimed at by all Christian effort and enterprise. The application of all mighty 
displays of Divine power. The real beginning of individual spiritual life, and of a 
true Church. 

I. The natube op tbtje convebsion. 1. Spiritual change. Not a mere ritualistic 
sensation, or educational development of the character, but being " born again." Repent- 
ance, change of mind, on the ground of facts acknowledged and promises received. The 
announcement of the gift of God prepared the way for the call to repentance. The 
kingdom of heaven is at hand, there/ore repent ; pass through the gate into life. 2. 
Man's co-operation with God. " Eepent and turn again " (Revised Version), " that your 
sins may be blotted out," etc. No amount of feeling is conversion ; no enlightenment 
of the mind, or even devoutness of spirit, supersedes the change of life. The sins are 
blotted out by the blood of Christ as guilt, their burden is removed from the conscience, 
the heart, and the life, when repentance and faith introduce the sinner into the state 
of grace. What the apostle appealed for was a real coming out of the old state into 
the new. We must not be satisfied with mere religiousness, instead of decided con- 
fession of Christ before men. Direct the Word to the individual : " Eepent ye." The 
participation of privilege as children of Abraham, as members of the favoursd nation, 
no release from the obligation to repent. The Church itself needs revival and change. 

II. Encoubagements. 1. The great fact. Conversion is a' leali&y, alnadjr as»D. 



108 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. m. 1—26. 



The Spirit of God is already poured out. The beginning of the new life is before our 
eyes. Others are changed, why not ye ? Distini^uish between the right and wrong 
use of Buch a fact. No necessity to wait for great revivals. Danger of expecting 
excitement to do God's work for us. The actual existence of a living, working Church 
of Christ in our neighbourhood is the great call to us. 2. The offered hlessedness— the 
blotting out of sins. Sense of pardon the spring of the new life. The function of 
thankfulness in practical Christianity. The impossibility of progress without a sense 
of liberty. Hence the defective Christianity of our Churches. No sense of victory over 
sin. 3. The promiied future. " Seasons of refreshing." Return of Jesus Christ. 
Kestitution of all things. The key-note of revelation. The golden horizon of the world. 
Power of hope in awakening energy. " Pilgrim's progress " is towards " the celestial 
city." Turn your lace from the city of Destruction to the city of God. The call to 
repentance should never be a mere denunciatory cry against sin, a mere pointing to the 
overhanging Mount Sinai, which gendereth bondage ; but as the loving invitation to 
rejoice in the " prtsence of the Lord," from which the blessing is ready to come forth. 
Address men not as &r off, but as nigh — within the temple courts, under the 
outspread wings. — B. _ 

Ver. 26. — 2%e mission of Jesus Christ. " Unto yon first," etc. (Bevised Version, 
" Servant," see margin). The Bible its own interpreter. All acknowledge the greatness, 
woriderfulness, perfection of the gospel portrait. Misconstruction of the facts by the 
Jew, by the unbelieving philosopher, by the mere moralist, by the rationalist. The 
last verse of the apostle's sermon a summing up Scripture and facts of history. So 
always revelation and history explain one another. The truly evangelical view of 
Christ the only one that appeals to the universal human heart. 

L The intinite poiwdation on which the gospel bests. Ood raised up his Son 
(Servant) ; Ocd sent him. 1. The twofold aspect of the Divine character thus presented 
to us. /.owe desiring to bless; righteousness vequmng the putting away of iniquities. 
All is from the Father. 2. The person and the work of Christ revealed in their intimate 
union. " Eaised up," comprehending the whole conception of the mediatorial exalta- 
tion of Jesus Christ. Difference between his history and that of any mere human 
agent raised up for action. The necessity for all that we find in the Scripture record. 
God knows it, though we may not see it. 3. The Scripture is not given to be worked 
up by men's devices into mere food for human pride ; it is a piactical Book, the 
foundation laid, to be built upon. Christ was sent to bless us, and we can find the 
blessing only as we seek it practically. 

IL The untvbksal message to the world. 1. The moral state of all men bKows 
the necessity for such a proclamation. " Tour iniquities." The history of the gospel 
reminds us that the most religiously instracted were far from being the most godly. 
The superstitions and oppositions of the world multiply its iniquities. Man cannot 
turn himself to God. 2. The whole gospel must be preached, or its true success cannot 
bo realized. The mutilated Christianity of our time is proving itself impotent. We 
must lead the hearts of men to a person ; we must teach them dependence on a power ; 
we must call them to newness of life, a life already made manifest through Christ, both 
in his history and in the history of his people. Then: 3. The Jfesinj^ should be put first 
and foremost. Blessing which the world has been waiting for from the beginning, which 
it has been prepared for by the dispensations, which it received in germ in Abraham 
and his seed, but which is for all the families of the earth. Hence it was " to the Jew 
first," as the consecrated messenger; but as the patriarchs were taken to the larger 
sphere of Egypt that they might come forth from it prepared to be God's messengers, 
BO Christianity must be taken from its Judaistic standpoint, and put into the central 
position of the world's life, that it may draw to itself Greece and Home, the East and the 
West, the whole nature and existence of humanity. So now the progress of man is 
from the emancipation of the individual, through that of the nation, to the cosmopolitan 
blessedness of mankind as a race. The mission of Christ is to each and to all. — B. 

Ver. 1— ch. Iv. 4. — Peter's second sermon and its results — one evening's good worli. 
The history contained in the Acts of the Apostles continues to be a record of Peter's 
ImA. This great honour is bestowed on the active, earnest, impetuous disciple of the 



OH. HI. 1—26.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 109 



days of Jesus' flesh. And it must be accepted as a certain proof that his repentance 
had been deep and sincere. The name of his loving companion and old brothel 
disciple John is now introduced. But nothing that he may have either said or done is 
nbtioed with any particularity as yet. That he did contribute something in both of 
these sorts, however, is evident from the language of vers. 3 and 11 in this chapter, 
and vers. 1, 13, and 19 of oh. iv. The continued happy and hearty co-operation 
of the two is meantime worthy of notice, and tells its own tale ; and if a conjec- 
ture is to be hazarded at all, none but the most natural need be repaired to — that 
John was feeling the quiet and reverent way to a service which he loved with his 
whole heart, and willingly yielded the precedence to another, Peter, whom he saw, ever 
since the issue of the race of the sacred sepulchre, if not before, to be a born pioneer. 
The really central fact of this portion of Scripture ia another sermon from Peter, with 
its occasion so significant and its results so gladdening. Let us notice— 

L Its very forcible text — a mibacle. The days of discoursing on the descrip- 
tion of what had been were not yet come. Peter founds his discourse on something to 
which he literally pointed his hearers, saying, " Ye see and know " it. Nor has Peter 
now the hard task of exciting attention and interest. These are abundantly excited. 
Deeds have gone before words, certain practice has gone before doctrine. The subject 
is invested vrith life and reality all round, and Peter undoubtedly has the grand 
advantage of speaking to ears that tocmt to listen, because mind and heart are 
inquiring. Yes, Peter discourses upon the text of a miracle. And it is one (1) 
which is verified within the actual knowledge of those whom he addresses; (2) which 
is of an undeniably beneficent kind; (3) which is wrought, not on inanimate or 
unconscious nature, but upon nature both animate and conscious, and yet in addition 
possessed of reason ; (4) which claims some connection evidently with human eye, 
voice, and hand, namely, those of Peter (vers. 4 — 7); (5) which nevertheless appears to 
draw for its deeper potency upon the inspiration of a Name invoked by that very 
Peter; (6) which results not merely in some surprising and most welcomed physical 
effect, but in certain spiritual. manifestations- as well (vers. 8, 9); (7) which derived 
some additional interest and significance from the very place where it was wrought — 
at a gate of the temple ; (8) which found its occasion from a prayer for help, but 
meantime gave help out of all proportion to that which had been asked. Four general 
observations respecting the miracle as a whole should be made. 1. This miracle is 
the first recorded as wrought by the apostles in the new Church. 2. It most 
distinctly professes to be wrought "in the Name of Jesus Christ of NRzareth." 3. It 
created, a widespread interest, and awakened prompt and close scrutiny. 4. It is 
characterized by certain among the whole number of those who considered and 
investigated it as " a notable miracle," and one which they " could not deny," though 
with the very best wishes to deny it. 

II. The audience to whom the sbemon was preached. 1. It is a large and 
evidently altogether miscellaneous assembly. 2. It is an assembly who immediately 
look as though they attributed the miracle to " power " or to " holiness," or both. 3. 1 1 
is an assembly who, in their wonder, excitement, and probably, also, genuine gratitude, 
are ready to attribute that " power " and " holiness " to two fellow-men. 4. It is an 
assembly guarded and corrected upon this matter without an unnecessary moment's 
delay. 

Ill The bembon itself. No picture ever brought out more faithfully or forcibly 
some figure in the landscape, no portrait some feature of countenance, than does this 
once spoken, now written, sermon bring out forcibly and faithfully certain truths. 
Note: 1. The grand subject of it. "Jesus Christ" (vers. 13, 18, 20). And (1) the 
transcendent relationship belonging to Jesus is with unqualified emphasis now asserted. 
He is the " Son of the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob." He is the " Son 
of the God of our fathers." Before the death of Jesus, Peter had boldly borne most 
unequivocal testimony to his own faith in the " Christ, the Son of the living God " 
(Matt. xvi. 17 ; John vi. 69), and, it may be supposed, to that of his fellow-disciples 
at the same time. And Peter had been in that act blessed with the great reward of 
hearing his Lord's own estimate of the special grace bestowed upon him. " Blessed art 
thou, Simon Bar-jona : for flesh and blood bath not revealed it unto thee, but my 
Father which is in heaven." Be this so, it is equally certain that this "generation " 



110 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa [oh. m. 1—26. 

of the " Son Jesns " had not only not been pubUoly preached to the people, but had in 
a sense been suppressed. Far otherwise now. Jesus has suffered, risen, ascended. 
And his right and dignity in this most cardinal respect is to be proclaimed. (2) The 
names to which Jesus has entitled himself by character, by sufferings, and by achieve- 
ments are boldly spoken. He is " the Holy One and the Just ... the Prince of life, 
whom Gk>d hath raised from the dead ; " and he is " that Prophet." (3) His treat- 
ment at the hands of men, and even of those who were at the moment the hearers of 
Peter, with all the aggravations of it, is enlarged upon. It is not only the fearless 
fidelity of Peter that is worthy of note here. Beyond and below this, the method 
itself is to be noted, which consists in going to the very root of the disease, probing it 
to the core. Thus Peter, looking at the guilty in the face, says, " Whom ye delivered 
up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when he was determined to let him go. 
But ye refused the Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto 
you ; and ye killed the Prince of life." And yet it is " his Name . . . that hath made 
this man strong, whom ye see and know . . . and given him this perfect soundness in 
the presence of you all." There is in all this no slurring over of the guilt, of the 
aggravations of it, or of the fact that those who were there and then listeners were the 
abettors of it or accessories to it. (4) His very contrary treatment at the hands of his 
Father, God, is brought into prominence. " God . . . hath glorified his Son Jesus, 
. . . God hath raised him from the dead . . . and to you first hath sent him to bless 
you." This all, involved the vital point. The Jew who could have brought himself 
to believe that God was thus " well pleased " in Jesus, would have been the first to 
condemn himself; and with swift force is this, therefore, brought down upon him, in 
that incontestably he ought to have believed and seen long ago. The Jew is answer- 
able for his guilt and folly, let them be mixed in whatever proportions. Let his 
" ignorance " bear what proportion it may to the sum total of -his fault, his ignorance 
■was his own look out, was not necessary, was inexcusable, and the smart of the con- 
sequences of it he must now become acquainted wit^nand must wince beneath it. 
Peter sees the door opened for him, and be enters in. 'He has his hearers now. The 
link that often seemed missing to them, who had no eyes to see aught except a negation, 
is found, and Peter is determined that eyes shall no longer pretend being shut to it. 
With such crushing effect betimes do circumstances prove providences, and the sudden 
glorious crisis at the Beautiful gate that evening at nine o'clock crowds with conviction, 
and humiliation and shame many a conscience, many a heart. Things are rapidly 
reversing now. This is the hour of Jesus. Peter now puts on his head one crown 
of glory — the crown of thorns in the past ! (5) Lastly, the inherent force of Jesus 
Is asserted. His is a Name — there can, there shall be no denial of it, no mistake 
about it — above every name. With a certain power of repetition, which is not " vain 
repetition," does Peter state it : " And his Name through [by the method of] faith 
in his Name . . . yea, the faith which is through him," is what hath given this man 
" this perfect soundness in the presence of you all." In which grand and emphatic 
statement these two gospel axioms may be found, (a) that Christ is the one Object on 
which faith may try her virtue — " My faith would lay her hand on that dear head of 
thine ; " and, (6) that Christ is the one Object whose virtue—" for virtue went 
out of him" — it is worth faith's while to try. There is unsurpassed virtue in 
Christ, and the access to that virtue, the method of drawing upon it, is by faith. So 
there is unsurpassed virtue in faith also. Christ, and Christ alone, meets, and meets 
abundantly, the want of man, of any and every man. Faith, and faith alone, brings 
Christ »nd man so together that the one imparts and the other receives all that can 
be needed, asked, desired. This must be called the kernel of the apostle's sermon 
now. And it is the kernel of Christianity. This is the essence and distinctiveness of 
Christianity. And beyond a doubt this it is that constitutes its unweloomeness to a 
proud world's heart, its inexpressible welcomeness to an humble, stricken heart, that 
only asks one thing — if now at last its unfathomed depth and unceasing craving may 
be worthily, suEBciently filled. 2. The appeals that follow upon it. Peter is, indeed 
all the while earnestly appealing to the people ; but this appeal is no mere declamation! 
either vague or impassioned. It is grounded, firmly grounded, upon other appeals, (1) 
The first appeal is to events quite recent— to a history within the actual knowledge ol 
sU the nation, but most of all of the city of Jerusalem. The " holy " charactir o/ 



OH. in. 1—26.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 11] 

Jesus, his " just " conduct, his betrayal and repudiation by " his own" his suffering, 
resurrection, and glorification, at least in so far as the Ascension was concerned. (2) 
The second appeal is to their own " oracles," and the prized stores of their own treasured 
prophecies. Peter well knew the just purchase he gained in confronting his audience 
with quotations from their prophets (vers. 18, 21, 22, 24, 25). (3) The third appeal is 
one made to their own conscience. This consisted not only in the plain and uncom- 
promising manner in which Peter brought to their remembrance their most recent 
offences against their own conscience, partly under the cover of ignorance in their 
crucifying of Christ, but beside this in his direct naming of them as sinners. He 
exhorts them not as "the ninety and nine" "which needed no repentance," but 
emphatically as those who needed to " repent," needed to " be converted," needed 
" the blotting out of their sins," needed the " sending of that very Jesus Christ " who 
had been " preached unto " them, though hitherto in vain ; needed the warning of that 
terrible prophecy, that said, " The soul that heareth not shall be destroyed from among 
the people ; " needed to be reminded that they were the " children of the prophets and of " 
a most venerable " covenant ; " and needed to be reminded, withal, of the last highest 
touch added to their privilege and their responsibility, in that to them "first God had 
sent his risen Son," to offer them first the fulness of that richest " blessing," which 
consisted in the "being turned away each from his iniquities" — glorious diversion 
indeed 1 There is not a sentence but was a message to the conscience. Not a sentence but 
what must have " pricked the heart." And not a sentence but what would have been 
a winged barbed arrow, except for the mercy that each time took the aim, and which 
mercy was as "purposed" as the arrow's aim was deliberate. Such a marshalling of 
allegation against hearts and consciences, and the living men to whom they belonged, 
rarely had been, rarely has been. But when it has, true it is that it is in pari materid 
that it has occurred — in the matter of men's treatment of Christ and of their own souls. 
Withal Peter did not distrust the influence of (4) the appeal to hope. Through all the 
faithfulness of plain speaking and the severity of naked truth, kindliness seems to 
betray itself, and to wish to make its deeper existence felt. The prompt disclaiming of 
any special and superior power or holiness in himself and brother apostle was a happy 
beginning on the part of Peter, and tended to put to sleep envy and the spirit of a com- 
- parison that would all have added to the smart of the reproof for conscious wrong-doing. 
Again, Peter does himself (ver. 17) mitigate in some degree their sin, by the suggestion 
of their " ignorance " and of that of their " rulers ; " and in the same breath addresses 
them as " brethren." His allusion to the fulfilling of prophecy amid all the stem facts 
of the " suffering " of Christ had also the germ of hopefulness in it. The " blotting out 
of their sins," and the whisper of " the times of refreshing from the presence of the 
Lord ; " the inspiring quotation of the " Prophet to be raised up from among their 
brethren, like unto " Moses ; and the fixing of the fact that it was on these very exist- 
ing days that the whole ranks of " prophets from Samuel " downwards had concentred 
prophetic attention ; and, last of all, the rehearsing of the old promise to Abraham, 
clenched by the assertion of its being now in course and act of fulfilling ; — surely all 
this was ground thickly sown with the seeds of hope. So absent was the tone of dis- 
paragement and depreciation, when the lips of Peter spoke most stinging truth 1 Great 
is the recuperative energy of souls, when there is any room for hope left. But depre- 
•siation is a cruel foe to hope, if it take effect ; and if it do not take effect, it is sure to 
make more Irreconcilably active the spirit of self-defence and of opposition. Nor 
can we doubt, nor would we wish to doubt, that the sermon of Peter showed one grand 
fulfilment of the promise, that it " should be given in that same hour what they should 
4peak" to those who were called by the Spirit to speak for Jesus. 

IV. The fikbt effects of the sermon. The first effects were a plain augury 
of what occurred very often in later times. These first effects are not all discomfiture. 
Nor are they results that count half and half, with no clear balance either of gain or 
of loss. To count nothing on what may succeed them, the first results show the 
preachers Peter and John hound, the Word they preached not bound. 1. The apostles, 
who preached, are imprisoned — ^for what length of time the sentence discreetly left 
unsaid. The apostles were laid hands on by ecclesiastics, committed by self-interest 
to endeavour to maintain the status quo in the Church and the world — by one 
offidid and by a few self-styled Oteologians, driest of the diy and most erring of the 



lis THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa. [oh. m. 1— 2& 

erring (Matt. xxii. 29 ; Mark xii, 24, 27). 2. The doctrine they had been preaching 
was not imprisoned. " Many " who had heard it " believed." Fresh wings were 
given to it to fly abroad. Either the additional, or more probably the total, number of 
believers was now " five thousand." And the imprisonment of Peter and John is 
certain to have had these two consequences upon them, viz. that fresh thought would 
be stirred up in every one of them, and fresh utterance of the mouth of every one 
of them be provoked. Thus it is very far from being a case of all loss. The " Name 
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth " wrought great things this day, and truth made great 
advance. — B. 

Ver. 25. — The true importa/nce of ancestry — whai it is. These words were some 
of those addressed by Peter to a crowd of wondering and admiring spectators, and 
of attentive hearers also. These were gathered for him by the fact of the man whom 
he had delivered from his lameness resolving to cleave as long as he could to the side 
of his deliverer. The " common people " did on this occasion gladly hear Peter, as 
lormerly they gladly were wont to hear his Master and their own. We are grateful to 
be able to recall these circumstances and this connection of the text; because on 
certain other occasions Peter, Stephen, and Paul, and many a time Jesus himself, had 
to refer to the ancestry of the Jews in order to point severest reproof and condemna- 
tion unrelieved. But it is not so now. Beproof and condemnation are only partly 
oimed at here. We have here — 

I. A WORD or BEMiNDiNQ IN DUE SEASON. The office of reminding may seem but 
An humble one. But how true the friend sometimes who undertakes it — who waits not 
/or some grand occasion of instructing, of informing you of what you did not know, or 
of charming you with the latest discoveries of science or applications of art, but who 
simply brings afresh to your thought what you had long known ! Conscience is such 
a friend wlien we will listen to it. It does not teach what is new, but does remind 
And remonstrate. Ood's Holy Ghost is such a Friend when you will listen to him. 
He both reveals the new and brings to remembrance the old, specially those dear old 
words, of priceless value, of Jesus. The written and spoken Word of God is such a 
friend. How many of its messages are but the pronounced repetitions of your own 
reason, experience ! They are your own judgment and observation, now ushered in with 
all the added impressiveness that comes from the " endorsement " of the Divine page 
and pen. And now Peter tells his hearers no new thing. They had long ago known 
it, and had built much upon i^ Tbey built, though too ignorantly, large part of their 
hopes of aslvation upon thsir being ths children of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Their 
trust was in tha etrrHnaiat God made with Abraham. Their great charter was " Moses 
and the prophets." But had it not often come to this, that they eagerly remembered 
their boasted rights but kept a poor memory for their duties ? They would enforce their 
claims, ignore the correlative demands upon themselves, long more than due I " We 
have Abraham to our father," was their ever-ready cry ; yet they had " killed the 
prophets," and " stoned them that were sent to them," and had " crucified the Prince 
of life." " Of him," says Peter, " all the prophets spoke," from Moses the greatest, and 
Samuel the second greatest. And surely you won't forget that " you are the children 
of those prophets," and won't consent to act unworthily of that relationship I Was not 
this a word of reminding in due season ? And was it not put very kindly by Peter to 
his congregation ? Perhaps all the same tone of thought, all the same suggestion for 
memories, awake enough at the point of rights and claims, but that fade at the point of 
duty and responsibility, characterizes to a very large degree the present day. Men 
do not forget they are Englishmen; they do not forget to boast their freedom. Are 
they touched in one of these or the like respects, they resent it as though the 
apple of their eye was touched. But they forget they are the children of those who got 
these things for them " through much tribulation ; " who fought, suffered, died, for 
their privileges. They forget they ore the children of Eeformers and Protestants, who 
" resisted even unto blood," and for conscience' sake were burned at the stake ; that 
they are children of those who loved, spake, and did the truth, cost what it might. 
It was a very effective point which Peter made when, viewing it as a kindly reminder, 
be said, " Ye are the children of the prophets." 

IL ▲ VOBD coKCEiVED IN THE VEIN OF BEBUKK. While it is not ftt all necessary 



CH. m. 1— 2G.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 113 

to construe the text as the language of stem rebuke, yet it may imply some rebuke. 
And this deserves rebuke, when men are so willing to touch human life at all its points 
of contact with pleasure, self-interest, honour, privilege, but are so very shy of it at 
its points of contact with duty, effort, sacrifice. With the many, the strongest bent, 
deepest inclination of their life is still but what they can get and have, what they 
can say or think to the advantage of themselves. The choice is a mournfully sorry 
one, when it is considered to what it comes. For its one-sidedness it earns rebuke. 
For its cowardice it earns rebuke. For its certain unprofitableness it earns rebuke. 
And not least does it earn rebuke because of its higher opportunities forfeited, and 
nobler passions and principles wasted and alienated. The harvest is too surely reaped, 
of disappointment, vanity, and vexation of spirit, or self-stricken darkness itself. But 
let some one begin life from the diametrically opposite standpoint. Let him accept the 
theory that life is for duty, that it is responsible for the vaster advantages with which 
it began than those with which it was begun by preceding generations, that it calls 
for work more strenuous, and sacrifice more willing, and self-surrender more entire by 
very virtue of the honour and advantage it has drawn from its own forefathers ; and 
that life is shaped for high ends. It will not fail of real fruitfulness ; it will not expire, 
a sorrow and a shame. The gentle suggestive rebuke couched in the text touches the 
essential difference between two such lives. You are not the children of possession, and 
of ease, and of the " rest and be thankful " school ; you are the descendants of a noble, 
strenuous, solemn race. They had large brains, they had hone and muscle about 
them, sinew and nerve were firm and firmly tied, and their heart was capacious. 
Ay, to other sort men ofttimes prefer to trace their lineage ; but to this sort, the 
kindly rebuke of Peter, of the Word and Spirit of God, of his providence, and of our 
own conscience, should oftener turn us and our ambition. 

III. A WORD EQUIVALENT TO A 8TIBBINQ SUMMONS FOB A PEOPLE OF EZTBAORDINABT 

uiQNiTY AND PRIVILEGE. It wilJ be granted that the Jews were such a people. Yet, 
with all their honour and splendour, their unique religious privileges, and their pre- 
eminent political prestige, it must be allowed that they show but a faint type of 
ourselves. They rose to a pinnacle of national greatness, and great was their fall ; 
but it was no mystery. The beginning of it was plain, the course of it was plain. It 
wAs often pointed out by priest, prophet, preacher, and by that man of the people 
themselves, who " was an Israelite indeed." Yet they wrought their own downfall, 
and cruelly undermined their own proud position, because they lost ear, heart, and 
pride for that which was their glory, and to its announcement greatly preferred to 
sound their own trumpet. But were there ever heirs like ourselves? Was there ever 
an heritage like ours? Of what prophets are we the children, when we think of the 
accumulations of knowledge, of conviction, of attestations of God's existence, providence, 
government, revelation, which the stream of time has been bearing down, richest 
freights to our shores? In such sense we are children of no obscure parentage, 
" citizens of no mean city," owning to a history of unsurpassed significance. Ages and 
centuries of the past bend their surprised gaze upon us; they compass us about with clouds 
of witnesses. And when the gentle reminding is passed, and the suggested rebuke 
seems to fail, one thing only remains— impassioned appeal, a summons that must wake 
all but those who are securely dead. Live we, then, worthily of our antecedents, mind- 
ful of our responsibilities as heirs of such apast. Let us flee from unfaithfulness, and 
scorn the seductions of ease, and luxury. Let us purge ourselves from vanity, per- 
vcrseness, and self. Let us pray fur a divinely opened eye, mind, heart. And show 
by God's grace that we have not forgotten, but on the contrary do make it our business 
to remember, whose " children we are."— B, 

Ver. 1. — Habits of public prayer. The Lord Jesua set the example of regular 
attendance on the synagogue services; and both he and his apostles seem to have 
daily attended at the temple at the appointed " hours of prayer," when they were 
resident in the " holy city." Some illustrations may be given of the prayer-habits of 
both Jews and Mohammedans ; and the value, but also peril, of customs of public 
prayer may be pointed out. " We read in Sori])ture of three specified hours of prayer, 
in accordance with which the psalmist speaks of his own custom (Fs. Iv. 17). In like 
manner Daniel prayed 'three times a day' (Dan. vi. 10). The hour or morning 
ACTS. I 



114 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. m. 1—261 

prayer was the third hour ; and Peter went up to the houae-top to pray (ch. x. 9) 
about the sixth hour, which was noon ; and the evening prayer was this to which Peter 
and John were going up." We fix attention on the fact that, though the apostles had 
the new personal " life in Christ," they found public religious service and duties still 
demanded their attention. Soul-life, spiritual life, still needs for its culture " public 
prayer " and " united worship." 

I. The two sides op the devotional life. The private and the public. Both 
are necessary. Each helps the other. Since men are not isolated individuals, their 
personal and private devotions cannot satisfy all their needs and claims. And since 
the individual can never be lost in the crowd, public devotions can never adequately 
express the precise personal needs. Our Lord taught us the duty and value of private 
prayer (Matt. vi. 6). 

IL The relation of public pbayeb to personal cultheb, and to the duty oj 
WITNESSING FOR GoD. Take first to " personal culture." In private devotion there is 
danger of morbid introspection ; public prayer fills our thought with Ood rather than 
man. When alone theseZ/'-sphere may become too prominent; when we join with others 
we are helped io forget self, in common sympathies, desires, and prayers. At homo 
communion and petition are prominent in our prayers; in the assembly of God's people 
the prominent thing is intercession. Besides this, in public worship we are influenced 
by holy sentiment, and swayed by high emotions, and realize the joy of the Divine life. 
These things bear most directly on healthy soul-culture. Farther, it is our bounden 
duty to make solemn public declaration of our belief in God, and submission to his 
authority and rule. Such a declaration we make in the act of going toj and joining 
in public prayer and worship. Our " houses of prayer," and our " hours of prayer," 
and our " millions of worshippers," still attest England's belief in God ; and every one 
should feel jealous lest the fulness and clearness of that testimony should be in the 
least degree impaired. Deal with modern neglect of worship, and the custom of half- 
day worshipping. 

in. The importance of good habits in relation to public pbayeb. Herein we 
have the example of our Lord, of his apostles, and of the saints through all the ages. 
It would be difficult to find the case of one eminently holy man or woman, in all the 
Christian history, who held lightly or neglected the public worship and ordinances' of 
the Church. Such habits should be formed and well watched over in early life. Those 
united together as friends, as husbands and wives, should help each other to maintain 
the habits. For they bear good influence on family life, on social life, and on national 
life. The constant association with Divine things has a gracious and hallowing 
influence, and renews every earnest purpose to live the godly life. The formation and 
maintenance of such good habits is, further, a sign of self-mastery in the spirit of loyalty 
and obedience to God. And such self-mastery is the very beginning and necessary 
foundation of all high morality and virtue. It guarantees that effort will be made to 
enthrone Go'l and duty over bodily passion, and over all life-associations, 

rV. The pkrils of fobmality in public devotions. We may come to share in 
worship "to be seen of men." We may put the sensual (or sensuous) above the 
spiritual. We may find our hearts satisfied with the ceremonial. We may pride our- 
selves upon our regularity. Our very familiarity with worship-forms may lead to 
repetition without thought or feeling. The Judaism of the time of our Lord presents a 
painful instance of how sadly the life may go out of a national religion, leaving only the 
formal observance of ever-multiplying rites and ceremonies. And the Mohammedan, 
dropping prostrate at the sound of tlie muezzin, and incoherently muttering words of 
prayer, warns us of the insidious and fatal peril of formalism in public religion. 

In conclusion, explain and impress the close and direct relation that exists between 
lirivate devotion and public devotion. The life we can put into public worship must 
be the life which has been touched, quickened, and cultured by God into strength, in 
our prayer-chamber at home. We cannot, with any surety, get life at public worship ; 
but we can always bring it with us to the worship. The law works broadly, and it 
may be thus briefly stated : The nourished and kept soul lias life for worship. Then 
" forsake not the assembling of yourselves together, as the manner of some is, and sea 
to It that you carry to the sanctuary of God heart* beating high with lore and 
everence and trust.— R. T. 



OH. in. 1—26.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 115 

Ver. 2.— The kinship hetwem religion and charity. From the exegetical portion of 
the Commentary materials' for the introduction maybe obtained. Such introduotion 
should treat of the suffering poor in the East, showing how necessarily dependent they 
were upon promiscuous charity. With their condition may be contrasted the care for 
the poor in all Christian lands, and the provision of hospitals and institutions for their 
relief. Some account may also be given of Herod's temple, and the position of the gate 
called Beautiful. Josephus says the other gates were overlaid with gold and silver, 
but this one, which was probably the gate on the east, which led from the court of 
the women, was " made of Corinthian bronze, and much surpassed in worth those 
enriched with silver and gold." It may further be shown how this miracle, wrought 
by the agency of St. Peter, resembles -the gracious miracles of healing wrought by our 
Lord himself. The picture of this poor and hopelessly suffering man suggests the 
following topics for meditation : — 

L The dispensations op Divinb feovidenoe bbins bodily disabilities fob boms 
MEMBERS OF THE HUMAN FAMILY. This, as a fact, may be variously illustrated, and it 
may be shown, from our Lord's teachings, that neither bodily infirmities and disabilities, 
nor earthly calamities, are necessarily direct results of personal sin or fault. They are 
oftentimes hereditary consequences of ancestral sin. They are often products of circum- 
stances and conditions of life, over which the sufferer had no control. They may be 
regarded as the great sin-burden lying on the race, and borne more evidently by some 
members /or the sake of ail. So long as the race is sinful, it must have the character 
of its sinfulness marked and impressed by manifest, painful, unsightly, revolting, and 
apparently hopeless forms of " suffering " all around it. The " suffering " as well as 
the "poor " we have always with us. 

II. Such disabilities set some members of the human family upon the bbother- 
HOOD AND charity OP OTHERS. Por, if we look upon them aright, we regard them as 
bearing the common burden, and so bearing oun- burden. We might have been among the 
blind, or dumb, or lame, or idiotic, or paralyzed ; and it is never enough that we thank 
God for our freedom from special disabilities ; ovu: thankfulness only finds its natural 
and proper expression in caring for, helping, and relieving the disabled and distressed. 
Sufferers, wherever they are found, should touch our hearts with tender emotions. We 
should have such; an open, sensitive heart as can take them all in. It is well if we 
show special interest in some particular class of sufferers — the orphan, incurable, lame, 
sick children, deaf and dumb, etc. To take a higher ground, our Lord is the great 
Sufferer, and so the head of all sufferers. Therefore, for his sake, and as showing ovu: 
tender sympathy and love /or him, we should take his suffering brethren into our love 
and care. " Doing it to the least of the brethren is doing it to him." " He that 
loveth God [his Father] should love his brother also." 

III. A NATURAL EXPECTATION LEADS MEN TO LOOK FOE SUOH CHABITY TOWARD THE 

DISABLED FROM THE RELIGIOUS. It is a fact that Systematic efforts for the welfare of 
the naturally disabled are only found in lands where Christian thought and feeling 
prevail. It may be illustrated and enforced : 1. That this connection between religion 
and brotherly charity is natural. It is the fitting impulse of " human kindness " that 
leads us to care for others, but it is the special impulse of that new feeling that comes 
with personal and saving relations.with Christ. 2. That this connection is right. Urged 
as such by Divine command and Divine example, as well as by the example of all 
noble and holy men. 3. This connection has been, in Christian \a,nAs, fairly weU met. 
Show into how varied spheres Christian benevolence and charity may now run. Ask 
earnestly, and with direct applications — Is it true, Individually for us, that our piety 
has cultured into holy vigour our charity 1 If not, it is of little worth to ua or to 
others.— E. T. 

Vers. 6, 16. — The power of Ghrisfs Name, The Revised Version, in its rendering 
of ver. 16, sets the Name forth even more prominently than the Authorized Version. 
It reads, "And by [or, 'on the ground of] faith in his Name hath his Name made this 
man strong." This represents the actual order of the Greek word.s. The incident is 
so graphically described by Luke, that a suggestive picture of the scene may be given 
as introduction. The point of difference between this and our Lord's miracles which 
needs attention is this : Our Lord required signs of faith before he wrought his miraclei 



116 THE ACTS OF THE Ai^OSTLES. ^ch- "i- 1— 2"* 



St. Peter did not wait for such signs in this object of the healing power. Two reasons 
may help to explain the difference. St. Peter had to show the faith which he and tha 
other apostles had in Christ. Signs of their faith were just then the important thing, 
rather than signs of the man's faith. As our Lord acted directly, and not as an agent, 
he could give entire attention to the recipiency, or receptivity, of the objects of his 
power. And we may also say that the miracle was wrought rather for the people's 
sakes than for the man's. It was a call to them to give heed to the apostles' witaess ; 
and therefore St. Peter was, properly, more concerned about the influence of the miracle 
on the people than even about the moral condition of the lame man. St. Peter acted 
on a sudden impulse of the Holy Ghost which dwelt in him, and it was fitting that 
he and the rest of the disciples should keep themselves open to the Spirit's leadings, 
ready to follow and obey the inward inspirations and monitions. Compare Paul's 
respoiiio to Divine direction, in ch. xvi. 6 — 10. We need, in these days, to recover our 
lost faith in the presence and lead of God the Holy Ghost, and to win the attitude of 
watching for his gracious guidance. " As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they 
are the suns of God." St. Peter's explanation of the miracle is that it was wrought 
in the " power of Christ's Name." This we endeavour to understand. 

I. Christ's Name gathers up his rights and attributes. A name should be 
the expression of what a thing is, or what a man is. Nowadays names of persons are 
conventional and without significance ; they are fixed by accident or by sentiment. 
In olden times they held meanings, and were appropriate to individuals ; so a name was 
an explanation or revelation. In sympathy with this it is said that the redeemed are 
to have a " new name " on their foreheads. It will gather up into an expression their 
privilege and their joy as ihe fully redeemed. F. W. Robertson, in his sermon on 
' Jacob wrestling ' (First Series, p. 41), says, "In the Hebrew history are discernible 
three periods distinctly marked, in which names and words bore very difierent 
characters. In the first of these periods names meant truths, and words were the- 
symbols of realities. The characteristics of the names given then were simplicity and 
sincerity. The second period begins about the time of the departure from Egypt, and 
it is characterized by unabated simplicity, with the addition of sublimer thought 
and feeling more intensely religious. The third' period was at its zenith in the time ot 
Christ — words had lost their meaning, and shared the hollow, unreal state of all things. 
Jacob lived in the first age, when men are sincere and truthful and earnest, and 
names exhibit character. To tell Jacob the Name of God was to reveal to him what 
God is and who." " The use of Name as the equivalent of power is very Jewish. It 
grew out of such passages as Ps. cvi. 8, ' He saved them for his Name's sake.' In the 
literature of the Jews great power was attributed to the Name of God, even when only 
inscribed, e.g. as it was said in tradition to have been on the rod of Moses." The 
Name of "Jesus of Nazareth" stands, therefore, for his Messiahship, his mission, his 
infinite worthiness, his accepted work, and his present power. Or, we may say, it 
stands for him, and sets him forth as the present Hedeemer, " able to heal and to save 
unto the uttermost." 

II. Christ's Name involves his spiritual pbesenob. This would be a familiar 
association to the Jew. God was in the bush, but Moses only had his Nunie. God 
delivered Israel from Egypt, but Israel knew him present with them only in his Name. 
They worshipped a God whom they never saw, and only could " exalt by his great 
Name, Jah." And so Jesus Christ was gone out of the sphere of the senses. Eeally, 
however, present still, spiritually present, and working gracious and mighty works 
through faith in his Name. This is all we have of Christ — his Name. And yet for us 
too it is the grasping of the spiritual reality of his presence. 

III. Christ's Name can heal the sick. Because he is present in the Name. 
" The Name did not work as a formula of incantation ; it required, on the part both of 
the worker and receiver, faith in that which the Name represented — the manifestation 
of the Father through the Son." The most striking illustration of the apostle's faith 
in Christ's Name, i.e. Christ's actual presence and power to heal, is found in the recovery 
of iEneas (ch. ix. 34). St. Peter spoke as if he saw Christ there, saying, " .tineas. 
Jesus Christ maketh thee whole." 

IV. Christ's Name can heal the sin-siok soul. For all outward and material 
healings are but illustrations of what Christ is now doing in moral spheres, in our hearts 



oH.m.1— 26j THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. lit 

and lives, if we will, by faith, open to him. And what is called faith is simply this , 
isoul-opening to the living "Saviour, who, in his Divine power ard grace, can come in 
and Ileal, and cleanse, and save. " Behold, I stand at the door and knock," etc! 
Appeal as to whether there has yet been this openness to Christ. Impress that, in all 
healing and saving work, man maybe the agent, hut the power lies in the ^anie, which 
gathers up for us a present living Saviour.-~R, T. 

Ver. ^.-^Besponsibility in the possession of power. Travellers tell us that one of the 
saddest things to be seen in Eastern countries is the crowding of beggars in the 
approaches to Mohammedan mosques, and at the gates of cities and large houses; 
many of them presenting the most painful and revolting pictures of human suffering. 
" The stationing of beggars, especially maimed beggars, at the gate of the temple, was 
evidently suggested by the persuasion that the feelings of those who were proceeding 
to, or had been engaged in, an act of solemn worship, would be more inclined to charity 
and benevolence than at ordinary times " (see ' Bible Lands and Customs,' Van Lenuep, 
vol. ii. p. 754). Fix attention on the words actually spoken to the beggar by St. Peter, 
and consider (1) The consciousness of power, and (2) the responsibility of conscious 
power. 

L The consciousness op power. "Such as 1 have give I thee." St. Peter felt 
that he had something. He knew that he could benefit and bless the sufferer, if not 
in the precise way which the man anticipated. The common power of " silver and 
gold " St. Peter had not ; the far better power, to heal, St. Peter had. What we so 
greatly need is to awake to the consciousness of the power that we have in Christ 
Jesus ; to believe in the abundant and varied powers with which the Church of Christ 
and the individual Christian are endowed. We should expect to see signs of power in 
each' other, as fellow-Christians. God never renews any man by his Spirit without 
also endowing him with a gift, or talent, in trust. Powers differ in different men. 
Each man has his own. Wealth is a power — ^a dreadful power, if it has not been first 
laid on the altar of Christ, and then taken up and used as his ; a glorious power if, 
on starting life, the soul has made a great covenant with Christ, and solemnly vowed 
that whatever may be gained shall be consecrated to him. Intellect is a power. 
Every man who knows a little more than his neighbour has a power. He can teach, 
he can enlighten, he can lead. But a man may have little money and little mind, 
and yet have the trust of that far higher thin^ — spiritual power. He may be able to 
lay hold of, and use for the blessing of others, the "great power of God." That 
" spiritual power " lies dormant too often in us. We need something to work in us as 
in St. Peter, and waken the consciousness of our trust ; something stirring in us mighty 
impulses, shaking us out of our apathy and selfishness, compelling us to say, " A 
witness for Christ has to bo made, and I must help to make it ; a work for Christ has 
to be done, and I must help to do it ; the world has to he won for Christ, and I must 
set to work to win the little piece of the world in which God has been pleased to 
put me." 

IL The EESPONsiBtwir? of conscious powbb. All God's gifts to us are for our 
giving away to others. All God's strength is for use. If he makes an arm strong, it 
is for work. If he makes a voice strong, it is that it may plead with others for him. 
If he makes a heart strong, it is that it may inspire others to nobler things. There 
is no Divine blessing that is intended to rest with us. All blessings that flow to 
us are to flow through us, gain force from us, and flow on in refreshings beyond us. 
If you are compelled to recognize the fact that you could — you could give, you could 
teach, you could sympathize, you could cheer — then upon you rests a solemn responsi- 
bility. What you can do for Christ and for his brethren, you are hound, by all holy 
persuasions and considerations, to do. Such as you have, by gracious trusts from God, 
that you must be ever ready to give and spend and use for the service and the blessing 
ot others,— R.T. 

Vers. 13 — 15. — The apostolic witness to Christ. Our Lord distinctly appointed the 
apostles as his witnesses (Luke _xxiv. 48 ; ch. i. 8). In these their early sermons oi 
addresses, we may find the points which they considered were specially entrusted tc 
them to declare. They would be sure to give first the basis or foundation /ac<« on 



118 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [<*• ^ i— 26' 

which the Christian system rested, and then gradually unfold the various doctrines 
which were emhodied in those facts. Their central, foundation fact was their Lord's 
resurrection. It even seems that, at first, the Resurrection stood out more prominently 
before the apostles' minds than the sacrifical death. The precise proportions and rela- 
tions of the Christian truths became matters of later adjustment ; and, indeed, we are 
$tiU trying to get them complete and satisfactory. Very many of the modern doctrinal 
controversies and sectarian disputes are occasioned by a failing sense of the proportions 
and relations in the whole of truth ; some things are exaggerated and some under- 
estimated ; men fight hard for pieces of truth, as if they were the whole. The true 
work, worthy to engage all our thought and heart, is the fair estimate of all the various 
pieces, and the skilful setting of each in its fitting place. In the early preaching of 
the apostles may also be noticed how they seem to stand aside, so that Christ, their 
Lord and Master, only may be seen and honoured. In this following the example of 
that Master, for he seemed ever to be stepping aside in order that men may fully 
see the Father. And in this also showing to us what is the essential spirit of all 
Christian preaching. The preacher's self must never be prominent ; we may only set 
forth " Christ Jesus the Lord." The scene in " Solomon's porch," or portico, may be 
deseribed. It was on the eastern side of the temple, and " consisted of a double row 
of Corinthian columns, about thirty-seven feet high. It was, like the porticoes of all 
Greek cities, a favourite place of resort, especially as facing the morning sun in winter " 
(John X. 23). In this same portico Jesus himself had taught. The prominent points 
concerning the Lord Jesus presented by St. Peter are — 

I. Jehovah sent and acknowledged him. (Ver. 13.) The word Son would be 
better Servant, and then the passage (Isa. xlii. 1), " Behold my Servant, whom I 
uphold," is at once brought to mind. In addressing the Jews, it was necessary to 
show that no claim was made for Jesus Christ as a new and independent God ; the 
teaching of his divinity was consistent with both the teaching of the Divine Unitt/, 
which was the Jews' great truth, and the teaching of the Divine Trinity, which is 
the great Christian truth. To the Jew a new God must, be a false God, for Jehovah 
is one. Messengers of Jehovah they could receive. Manifestations of Jehovah they 
could accept. The conception of the " Son of God " was not to them an impossible 
one. And therefore our Lord so earnestly pressed that the Father God had sent him ; 
and the apostles urge that Jehovah's seal of acceptance rested on him and on his 
work. This truth is needed still. We cannot rest in the salvation wrought by Christ 
unless we can fully see that it is Ood's salvation (see John iii. 16). 

II. Men denied his mission, and crucified him. (Ver. 13.) St. Peter gives the 
fact — Jesus was " delivered up ; " and the aggravation of the fact— the clamours of 
malice actually overcame the natural sense of justice in the Roman governor. In 
reminding the people of this, St. Peter declares the moral character of their act ; and 
charges home upon the people the guilt of the judicial murder of no less a person than 
the national Messiah. For the actual denial of Christ, see John xix. 15 ; and for the 
purpose of Pilate to release Christ, John xix. 4. The fact of the denial is made 
the basis of the appeal for repentance. The fact of the crucifixion is urged as the 
guarantee of his acttiai death. Such enemies as they were would never leave their 
work imperfect. 

III. He was free from crime, and just before men and God. (Ver. 14.) The 
personal innocence of Jesus aggravates the iniquity of those who secured his death ; 
but It also bears directly upon the work of redemption that he wrought. Had he to 
bear the true burden of penalty for his own sins, he could not be the efScient Burden- 
bearer for others. Had he spot, stain, or blemish, he could not be the acceptable 
sacrifice for humanity, which must be the " Lamb without blemish." Show how much 
IS made, in the Epistles, of the personal innocence and perfect virtue of the Saviour 
•' Holy, harmless, undefiled," etc. 

IV. He was the Prince and Author of salvation and life. (Ver. 15 ) For 
the term " Prince of life," see ch. v. 31 ; Heb. ii. 10 ; xii. 2. It means, " He who is 
the source >fphence hie and salvation flow." The chief thought in St. Peter's mind is 
that of the Eesurreotion. He who conquered death is " Prince of life," and has power 
to give life. St. John also says, « In him was life, and the life was the light of men." 
Our Lord himself said, " I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life ; " " I am come that they 



ott.in.1— 26.] ME AOTS OF tHE APOSTLES. 119 

might have life ; " " I give unto them eternal life." The worthy apprehension of what 
Christ is, and can do, makes the Jewish denial and crucifixion of him seem a mosi 
hateful crime ; and our long neglect of him our unspeakable shame (Heb. ii. 3, 4). 

v. His Mbssiahship, his mission, and his powek to save, aeb, once for all, and 
SUFFICIENTLY, DECLARED IN HIS KESUBEBCTION. (Ver. 15.) If that resurrectiou be a 
fact — and to it all the apostles and disciples give witness, and on the literal truth of 
it St. Paul is even willing to stake the Christian system — then there are important 
inferences to be drawn from the fact, and especially this one : Jestis is tJie Christ. 
Therefore to him every knee should how, and to him every sin-burdened heart should 
seek. So it is seen that the apostles were true preachers, model preachers ; they set 
Jesus forth, and bid all eyes look to him. — B. T. 

Vers. 17, 18. — Man's ruling and God's overruling. St. Peter admits that the 
rejection of Christ was done through ignorance, but he does not allow that this is a 
sufBcient excuse. Ignorance has many degrees, and may arise from many causes. 
It may he viil/ul. It may be a consequence of cherished prejudices, and then it is 
guilty ignorance. " The Jewish multitude were ignorant from want of teaching, their 
rulers from mental perverseness in looking only on one part of the prophecies con- 
cerning the Messiah." For the treatment of the relation of " ignorance " to " guilt," 
compare St. Paul's teachings in ch. xvii. 30 ; 1 Tim. vi. 13. The point which St. Peter 
dwells on in these verses is, that in the rejection and crucifixion of Jesus of Nazareth, 
the Messiah, men appeared to act on their own will and to carry out their own plans ; 
but the deeper fact was that they accomplished the Divine purposes and fulfilled the 
divinely given prophecies. Scripture writers do not discuss the harmony between 
Divine sovereignty and man's free-will ; but they show us man acting freely, and then 
draw aside the veil, and show us Ood's purpose accomplished hy that very action that 
seemed to he so free. And the explanation is this — that all God's plans are formed upon 
perfect consideration of all that will occur ; and this includes the Divine knowledge of 
how men will act, in their free will, in particular circumstances. To him who knows 
man altogether, the precise way in which every man will act, under every set of 
possible circumstances, must be fully anticipated. On this we may further dwell, and 
gain some apprehension of the Divine order. 

I. Man' IS FBEE TO ACT ON VABI0U8 MOTIVES. He docs act by motive. He may be 
moved by differing motives. He will act upon that which seems to be strongest. The 
strength of a motive greatly depends on the disposition and character which it urges. 
There appear to be a vast multitude of motives. Probably they could be greatly 
reduced by classification. The complexity and difficulty of knowing how a man will 
act in given circumstances does not arise from our inability to estimate his motives, 
but from our inability to judge how particular motives will influence him. We can 
tell hy what considerations the Sadducees, Pharisees, and priests were moved to secure 
the death of Jesus. It is this acting of men on motive that gives morai character to 
their acts, and so brings on them the possibility ot guilt. 

II. All human motives, oibcumstancbs, and ohabaoters are known to God. 
The circle of motives that can possibly appeal to man's moral nature God completely 
spans. The precise circumstances under which motives urge in any given case, he 
fully knows and accurately weighs. The force which, under every set of circum- 
stances, every motive will gain on every particular character and disposition, he 
perfectly estimates. And, though it is an almost impossible conception, we must 
conceive of God as looking down the long " stream of time," leaving his creatures free 
to act in all situations, and yet knowing beforehand the decision of every free will in 
every conceivable case. This is the marvel of the Divme foreknowledge. 

TIL All Divine plans are formed upon this perpeot estimate. Especially 
apply to the redemptive plan. In view of what would happen, and what men would do, 
the plan of redemption in the slain Lamb was formed before the foundation of the 
world. Man worked out his own prejudice and passion in the crucifixion of Jesus of 
Nazareth, and God worked out his plan of saving the race by the sacrifice of his only 
begotten Son. That we might know of this overruling, the prophecies of Messiah 
were given. So we see how man's guilt remains in his freedom to act on motive ; 
and yet God's purposes remain unchanged by all men's wilfulness, since the wilfulneM 
WM *&. ftrtknmm and »timUed,—V>, T. 



120 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh, in. 1— 2«. 

Vers. 19, Zl.— Times of refreshing and of restitution. These two words refer to 
the same time. " Without doubt the Apostle Peter, as well as all the disciples, and the 
whole apostolic Church, regarded the coming of Christ as near at hand, but still always 
as something future. This 'coming of Christ ' is to be conceived as coinciding with the 
' times of refreshing,' and his sojourn in the heavenly world closes with his return to the 
earth for the completion of his work. The conversion of men, therefore, and the diffu- 
sion of faith in Christ, are the conditions of the speedy approach of that blessed time " 
(comp. 2 Pet. iii. 9 — 13). " Respecting the sense of the term ' restitution of all things,' 
no doubt can arise if we keep steadily in view the relation of the Redeemer to this 
sinful world ; Christ is the Restorer of the fallen creation, and therefore the word ' resti- 
tution ' derives from his redeeming power its peculiar meaning, viz. that of bringing 
back to an originally pure condition." The Revised Version materially improves the 
reading of these verses : " Repent, . , . that so there may come seasons of refreshing 
from the presence of the Lord." " These times or seasons of refreshing, and those 
'times of restitution or (restoration) of all things which God hath spoken,' both seem 
to refer to the same great hope of the Church, and are connected with the second 
sending forth of Jesus Christ from heaven to earth." Peter had clearer ideas of the 
Messianic kingdom, but he was still trammelled by the national and temporal figures 
under which it had been prophesied. His purpose evidently is to urge the audience to 
an immediate acceptance of Christ, as the way to biing on the establishment of the 
long-promised and glorious Messianic time. And the point of impression for us is 
this — Man's penitence, obedience, and faith prepare the way for the coming of Christ's 
hingdom, and the fulfilment of all the Divine promises. "The faster Israel turned to 
Jesus, the sooner would Jesus return to Israel." By this consideration we are still 
urged to preach the gospel, and persuade men to repent, at home and abroad. 

L The times of refreshing that abb always close at hand. God is ever 
" waiting to bo gracious," as it were watching for opportunities of giving men his rich 
spiritual blessing. Revivals are always close by, when- men's hearts are made humble 
and open and seeking. Does an individual soul set itself upon humiliation and prayer? 
the " times of refreshing " are at hand for it. Does a Church unite in confession and 
supplication ? the " times of refreshing " will come in response to its cry. And this 
assurance should act as a moral persuasion, and urge men to seek for higher and better 
things. " We are not straitened in God." He would bless us more abundantly if we 
were more truly ready for the blessing. " He is able to make all grace abound," etc. 
Taking " times of refreshing " as seasons to be realized now by the soul and by the 
Church, we may obtain illustrations from the Old Testament history, especially 
instances occurring in the later years of the national decline, such as the reformations 
under Hezekiah and Josiah. Or from the New Testament, especially dealing with 
Pentecost. Or from the Christian ages, noticing that such " times " take a variety of 
form and character. Sometimes they are prominently intellectual, as illustrated in 
the revival under Luther and the Port Royalists ; sometimes they are prominently 
practical, as illustrated in the revival under St. Bernard ; sometimes they are promi- 
nently emotional, as illustrated in the revival under Whitefield, and in the Scotch and 
Irish revivals of recent times. Such " times of refreshing " are necessary to the proper 
culture of our spiritual life. Under present conditions, the maintenance of good is so 
difficult. Oftentimes even holy purpose flags, and we become weary in well-doing. So 
in all departments of life we need revival times. Such are our summer restings, our 
Mbbaths, birthdays, etc. If we will but set ourselves in proper attitudes of humility 
and seeking, we shall find God's " refreshing times " ever at hand. Apply especially 
to the calling of men to repentance and faith. Show what power on them we gain 
when, with St. Peter, we can say, " The grace is ready, waiting for you if you will turn. 
Forgiveness is ready. The door of the new kingdom is open ready. Eternal life is 
ready. God waits but your uplook to come in, and save, even you. Repent, that the 
good times may come/or you" 

II. The times op kebtobation that are coming by-and-by. TVe should get some 
fitting ideas of the great plan for the recovery of the fallen race of man. Unquestion- 
ably the worid is a fallen, disordered, ruined world. But God has gracious purposes 
concerning the " restitution," or setting right, " of all things." And our Lord's death 
for hunum redemption %a« the restoration of all things. Our Lord's present spiiituai 



OH., ni. 1—26.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 12i 

work in the " heavenlies " — the moral and spiritual spheres — is the presidency of the 
restoring work. Then we must conceive of some glorioas coming day of restituiion, 
when the Divine plan and purpose shall be fully accomplished. We can only gain 
very imperfect and unworthy ideas of what that day will be ; hut we may gain deep 
impressions of our own relation to its on-coming, and of our own duty to hasten the 
glorious time, by seeing to it that the work of restoring grace is fully wrought in our 
hearts, lives, and spheres, and that the gospel of the living Saviour is so widely 
preached that " every knee may be brought to bow to him." There is a true sense in 
which wt may hasten the day when the Bedeemer " shall see of the travail of his soul, 
shall be satisfied," and shall " deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father." We 
may give ourselves to Christ, and make one more sinner won. We may speak of Christ 
to others, persuade them to repent and believe, and so help to multiply the number ot' 
the saved, who shall be acknowledged in that great day. — B. T. 

Ters. 22, 24. — MoseS wilnesi to the Christ. The first reference of Moses in the words 
used (Deut. xviii. 15) should be carefully noticed. The higher Messianic references ot 
the Old Testament usually underlie an immediate relation to historical events or indi- 
viduals. " As the words stand, taken with their context, they seem to point to the 
appearance of a succession of true prophets, as contrasted with the diviners of Deut. 
xviii. 14 ; and, even with St. Peter's interpretation before us, we may well admit those 
prophets as primary and partial fulfilments of them." It seems that the Jews were fond 
of comparing the promised Messiah with their great prophet and lawgiver, Moses. Of 
this one specimen may be given from the rabbinical writings. "Babbi Berakhiah 
says, ' As was the former redeemer, so shall the latter redeemer be.' While of the 
former redeemer it is said (Exod. iv. 20), ' And Moses took his wife and his sons and 
set thera upon an ass;' so of the latter, for it says (Zech. ix. 9), 'He is lowly and 
riding upon an ass.' And while the former redeemer brought down manna, as it says 
(Exod. xvi. 4), ' Behold I will rain bread from heaven for you ; ' so the latter redeemer 
will bring down manna, for it says (Ps. Ixxii. 16), ' There shall be abundance of corn 
in the land.' And as the former redeemer caused the well to spring up (see Numb. 
xxi. 17) ; so the latter redeemer shall also cause the waters to spring up, for it says (Joel 
iii. 18), 'A fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the 
valley of Shittim.' " Moses dwells upon the facfthat the coming Messiah should be Wee 
him. This comparison may be opened in the following particulars : — 

L Messiah was to be " or the brethren." Our Lord was bom of Jewish race. 
And he was, as a fellow-man, able to understand and to sympathize witht hose whom 
he led. He was a " man of like passions ;" "in all points tempted as we are ; " "able to 
succour them that are tempted." The importance of the actual humanity of our Lord 
in the theological 'systems of St. Paul and St. John should be fully unfolded. And the 
additional interest of his being a Jew may be pointed out. The history of the Jews 
shows that they have a singular power of adapting themselves to all climes, languages, 
nations, and societies ; and that which is true of them is true of our Lord's gospel, as 
bearing, so markedly, the Jewish stamp. It can adapt to all the conditions of mankind, 
and be preached to every creature. 

II. Messiah was to be a Bedeemeb. Like Moses in this, he was to bring a people 
out of bondage, deliver them in a glorious and Divine manner, and lead them until 
theii full redemption was complete in the possession of C.inaan. This comparison may 
be made more minute. And it may be urged that, as the Bedeemer, our Lord asks the 
same surrender to him, in trust, that Moses asked. 

III. Messiah was to be a Lawgiver. This was the great work of Moses. He took 
the entire person, life, and relations of the people into his regulations, settling rules for 
their moral, social, national, and ecclesiastical conditions. And so we come "under 
Law to Christ," who covers with his " new commandments " the whole of our lives and 
associations. " One is our Matter, even Christ." 

IV. Messiah was to be a Teacher. This is the permanent idea of the term 
" prophet "—one who comes between God and the people, as instructing them in the 
Divine will. Both Moses and the Lord Jesus taught the people concerning Qod, sin, 
duty, salvation, character, etc. 

y, Messiah was to be a JnsaK. This Mosei ww presiding tX the chief national 



122 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. t<«-W.l— S>. 

tribunal. And God has " committed all judgment to the Son." He " shall judge th« 
quick and dead." " We must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ." Impress 
from Heb. x. 28, 29, " He that despised Moses' Law died without mercy under two or 
three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he bo thought 
worthy, who hath trodden underfoot the Son of God?" — E. T. 

Ver. 26. — Chritfs mission to the Jews. St. Peter had been speaking of our Lord'» 
resurrection, and it is natural to connect the expression of the text, " having raised up 
his Son Jesus," with that resurrection. The idea, however, seems to be more general — 
God having provided, prepared, given, set forth. Matthew Henry gives the complete 
thought : " God, having raised up his Son Jesus, appointed and authorized him to bo 
a Prince and a Saviour ; and, in confirmation of this, raised him from the dead, sent 
him to bless you, in making tender of his blessing to you. God raised up Jesus when 
he constituted him a Prophet. Some refer the raising of him up to his resurrection, 
which was the renewal of his commission." This is St. Peter's direct appeal to the 
Jews, and declaration of the particular mission of Christ to the Jews. To them the 
gospel was first to be preached. Their former Divine revelation was a gracious pre- 
paration of them for the reception of the new revelation. But the new blessing would 
not come to them merely as a nation ; it would come to each individual, and to the 
whole only through the individual, and depend upon the openness and acceptance oi faith. 
Apostles were to " begin at Jerusalem." The points made prominent by this simple 
appeal are, (1) Ood is the Saviovrj (2) he saves by his Son Jesus/ (3) tlie essence of 
that sodvation is the turning of men away from their iniquities. 

I. God is the Savioue. The apostles always kept to the idea that Christ is the 
Medium of the salvation, and God the source. Sometimes the exigencies of theological 
systems have led to the practical neglect of this important distinction. Ood saves men. 
God's hve is the fountain of redemption. God's wisdom fashions the redemptive plan. 
God's Son executes the redemptive purpose. God is in all, and God must be glorified 
in all. No apostle puts this more plainly than St. Peter. Compare his very forcible 
language in 1 Pet. i, 21, "Who by him do believe in (?od, that raised him up from 
the dead, and gave him glory ; that your faith and hope might be in Ood." 

II. God saves by his Son Jesus Christ. Whom he sent to the earth, and whom 
he raised from the dead. This is Ood's way of salvation. It is the only way. By 
both considerations we are urged to accept it. 

III. The essence of that salvation is the " tukning op men away from theib 
INIQUITIES." The special iniquity dealt with here is the rejection and crucifixion of 
the Lord Jesus ; but that is ever regarded as displaying and proving, in a very impressive 
manner, the fallen and ruined condition of men. It was such a display of malice, pre- 
judice, and hard-hearted wilfulness, as revealed the utter badness and corruption of 
humanity. Show that the root-cause of evil in man is self-love, self-seeking, and self-will. 
In these things lie our iniquity. From them we can only be turned by the love of 
another, the seeking of the good of another, and the enthronement of the will of another. 
Therefore Jesus Christ is set forth, we are bidden to look at him, know him, set our love 
on him, and enthrone him. He can work a mighty saving work in every heart and 
every life that is turned towards him and opened to him. And penitence and faith can 
open our heart-doors. The way and the means to secure " Divine forgiveness," " blotting 
out of sins," and " times of refreshing," are that " repentance " and " turning again " to 
which the apostle has been exhorting the people. This is urged first upon the Jews, 
but it ii the condition of salvation for Jew and Gentile alike. — B. T. 

EXPOSITION. 

^jg^prjrgjj jy the scene Is laid In the court of the temple, 

„ . „ ■ this is very improbable. Josephus ('Ant 

Ver. 1 — ^The oaptam of the temple. Only Jud.,' xx. vi. 2) speaks of an officer ap- 

here and oh. v. 24, and Luke xxli. 4, 52 parently of the temple, who was called 

in the plural. Some have thought that the i aTparrryis, and was certainly a Jew by 

eommander of the Roman garrison of the his name Ananus, and being, as Josephna 

castle of Antonia is here meant. But as relates further ('Bell. Jud.,' ii. lii. 6), th« 



OK. w. 1—37.] 



THE ACTS OS' THE APOS'I'LES. 



123 



■OB of the high priest Ananiai. He also 

mentions the captain of the temple (' Bell. 

Jud.,' vi. V. 3) at the time of the destruction 

of the temple. There can be little doubt, 

therefore, that the captain of the temple here 

spoken of was a priest who had under him 

the Levitioal guard, and whose duty it was 

to keep order in the temple courts in those 

turbulent times. He appears from oh. v. 24, 

26, Luke sxii. 4, 52, and the passages in 

Josephua,to have been an officer of liigh rank. 

Ver. 2.- — Sore troubled for grieved, A. V. ; 

because for fliat, A.V. ; proclaimed in Jesus 

for preached through Jesus, A.V. The 

preaching the resurrection of the Lord 

Jesus as the "Firstfruits of them that 

slept," would be especially obnoxious to 

the Saddueees, " which deny that there is 

any resurrection" (Luke xx. 27). The 

Saddueees were at this time in power (see 

ch. V. 17 ; and comp. ch. xxiii. 6 — 8) ; and 

we learn from Josephua (' Ant. Jud.,' xx. ix. 

1) that the son of this Annas (or Ananus) 

went over to the sect of the Saddueees, being 

himself high priest as his father had been. 

Ver. 3. — Ward for hold, A.V. (see ver. 
18) ; morrow iot next day, A.V. They laid 
hands on them. The harsh persecution of 
the disciples at Jerusalem at this time when 
the Saddueees were in power is in exact ac- 
cordance with Josephus'a statement in the 
passage just referred to, that tlie Saddueees 
were more severe and cruel in their ad- 
ministration of justice than any other Jews. 
Their tenet of no life to come made them 
look to severe punishments in this life. 

Ver. 4 But for howbeit, A. V. ; that fop 

which, A.V. ; came to he for was, A. V. The 
number of the men ; strictly, of the males 
(fivSpaiv) (ch. V. 14), but probably used here 
more loosely of men and women. It is not 
clear whether the five thousand is exclusive 
of or includes the three thousand converts 
at the Feast of Pentecost ; but the grammar 
rather favours the former, as there is nothing 
in the word h.vdpS>v itself to signify "dis- 
ciples," or "believers," and therefore it is 
more naturally referred to those of whom 
it had just been predicated that, having 
beard the Word, they believed it. 

Ver. 5. — ;Were gathered together in Jeru- 
salem for at (ver. 6), A.V. ; or, as it should 
rather be rendered, to — some of them pro- 
bably living in the country. This clause is 
placed in the A.V. at the end of ver. 6 be- 
cause, in the T.K., Annas, Caiaphas, John, 
and Alexander are in the accusative case, 
whereas, in the E.T., they are in t he nomi- 
native case; for which reason the E.V. 
supplies the words " was there " in ver. 6. 
We see here the different classes which 
tomposed the Sanhedrim. 

Ver. 6. — Annas the high priest was there 
for Annas the high priest, A.V. . This is 



the same Annas as is mentioned in Lnks 
iii. 2 and John xviii. 13, and is described as 
" father-in-law to Caiaphas." He is called 
by Josephus, Ananus. The succession of 
the high priests was so irregular, and 
their tenure of the ofBce so micertain, in 
these later years of the Jewish common- 
wealth, being dependent upon the caprice 
of the civil rulers who appointed and de- 
posed them at their pleasure, that it does 
not surprise us to find Annas and Caiaphas 
high priests at the commencement of John 
the Baptist's ministry, then Caiaphas at the 
time of our Lord's passion, and now Annas 
again. It is possible, however, that Annas 
may have continued to be president of the 
Sanhedrim, and be called high priest, even 
wlien not actually so. He seems to have 
lived to old age. He is mentioned by 
Josephus (' Ant. Jud.,' xx. Ix. 1) as having 
had the singular felicity not only of en- 
joying the high priesthood himself for a 
great length of time, but of having five 
sons promoted to the dignity of high priest, 
viz. Eleazar, Jonathan, Theophilus, Mat- 
thias, and Ananus (or Annas). Caiaphas 
(John xviii. 13). Of John and Alexander 
nothing further is known, but Farrar con- 
jeetuies that John may be " the celebrated 
Johanan Ben Zakkai, and Alexander per- 
haps the wealthy brother of Philo " (' Life 
of St. Paul,' i. p. 107). Of the kindred of the 
high priest ; rather, of the high priestly race. 
The high priests were only taken from 
certain families ; the members of which 
were called apxi^peis, or chief priests, A.V. 
(Matt. xvi. 21; xxvi. 47, etc.). Many of 
these would naturally be the near relations 
of the high priest. 

Ver. 7. — Inquired for ashed, A.V. ; in for 
hy, A.V. In what name ; irolos, what, means 
exactly, " what kind." The miiacle might 
have been wrought, as it seemed to them, by 
Beelzebub, or by magic (Luke xv. 15, etc. ; 
ch. xiii. 6; xix. 19, etc.),' as well as by 
Divine power and in the Name of God. 
They asked which it was. In the Greek 
there is an emphasis upon the " ye," which 
is placed last, equal to " such as you," un- 
learned and contemptible men. 

Ver. 8. — Mlders for elders of Israel, A.V. 
and T.B. Filled with the Holy' Ghost ; in 
direct fulfilment of the promise (Mark xiii. 
11 ; Lukexii. 12 ; xxi. 14, 15 ; comp. ch. vii. 
55). St. Peter addresses them with all 
respect (see Matt, xxiii. 2). 

Ver. 9. — Are for be, A.V. ; concerning a 
(good deed) for of the, A.V. ; an (impotent) 
for the, A.V. ; this man for he, A.V. We ; em- 
phatic, probably in response to the emphatic 
"you" at the end of ver. 7. An impoteqj 
man. The i'oUowing oSro:-, this man, makes 
it necessary to supply the definite article, as 
the A.V. has dose, fit Peter atiode* to (be 



12i 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. IV. 1—37 



good deed, t.«. {he henefit done to the lame 
man, being the subject of a criminal inquiry, 
as a tacit condemnation of the unrighteous- 
ness of Buch a course. 

Ver. 10. — Jn (the name) for hy, A.V., and 
again, in (Jiim) for hy, A.V. ; but if h rlvt is 
rightly rendered hy what means, iv t$ ovS- 
iiari and 4v Tsiir^ ought to be rendered as in 
the A.V., by. Be it known unto you all, etc. 
St. Peter skilfully excuses himself from any 
presumption in preaching to the rulers by 
making his words the direct and necessary 
answer to their inquiry. Jesus Christ of 
Nazareth (see ch. iii. 6, note). Whom ye 
crucified, whom God raised. With what 
wonderful consiseness and fonie are the 
great doctrines of the gospel condensed into 
a few words ! The human nature, the 
mediatorial glory, the humiliating but 
atoiiing death, the glorious resurrection (a 
cardinal point in all the apostolic preaching), 
and the present might of Christ to save his 
people on earth, are all set out in half a 
dozen pregnant words. Even in him. The 
apostle thus passes from the Name to him 
whose Name it was. Before you. Howcoiild 
tliey deny what was actually before their eyes? 

Ver. 11. — He for this, A.V. ; the builden 
for builderi, A.V. ; was made for is become, 
A.V. He is the stone. He had just ap- 
pealed to their own senses ; he now adds the 
witness of their own prophets. These had 
declared that the stone which was set at 
nought by the builders should become the 
chief comer-stone ; just as it had come to 
pass. The quotation is from Ps. cxviii. 22 ; 
only St. Luke here substitutes the word 
i^ouBeveiv, to set at nought, for that nsed 
by the LXX., cLTroSoKi/idCeiv, to refuse, or 
reject as unfit. The word i^aveeviTi/ is 
applied directly to our Saviour in Luke 
xxiii. 11, and the similar word, ^{ouSeixieii/, 
in Mark ix. 11. 

Ver. 12. — And in none other it there tdl- 
vation for neither is there salvation in arty 
other, A.V. ; neither is there any other, etc., 
for there is none other, A.V. ; that is given 
for given, A. V. ; wherein for whereby, A.V. 
The eighteenth Article of Religion refers 
directly to this verse as proving that eternal 
salvation can be obtained only by the Name 
of Christ. 

Ver. 13. — Beheld for saw, A.V. ; had 
perceived for perceived, A.V. The boldness ; 
liteially, free or out spnlcenness (ira^jSijo-k), 
and properly nsed with words signifying to 
speak (see ch. ii. 29 ; iv. 29, 31 ; xxviii. 31 ; 
John vii. 13, etc.), and so the verb (Tia^f,ri<ri<i- 
(ecrSai) means " to speak freely and boldly " 
(oh. ix. 27, 29 ; xiii. 46 ; xiv. 8 ; xviii. 26 ; 
xix. 8 ; xxvi. 26 ; elsewhere in the New 
Testament only in Eph. vi. 20; 1 Thess. 
ii. 2). St. Peter had shown his free-spoken- 
nesi in so boldly proclaiming the resurrec- 



tion and mighty power of him whom tha 
rulers he was addressing had crucified. 
Boldness of speech, when combined with 
charity and moderation, is a most important 
grace for a minister of Christ. TTnleamed 
and ignorant men. The term unlearned 
(aypd/jLiiaros) means that they had no "know- 
ledge of Jewish culture " beyond the Scrip- 
tures. Ignorant men (ISiarai) was a technical 
term for those who had not studied in 
rabbinic schools. The word hediot occurs 
frequently in the Talmud (Farrar's ' Life of 
St. Paul,' voL i. p. 106). Xhey took knowledge, 
etc. Annas and Caiaphas or some of their 
people, it is likely, had seen them in the 
high priest's psflaoe (John xviii. 15 — 18). , 

Ver. 14. — Beholding for seeing, A.V. 

Ver. 16. — Wrought through them for done 
by them, A.V. ; to all for to all them, A.V. 
Only here and at ver. 22 and in Luke xxiii. 
8 has mitacle been retained in the B.V. as 
the rendering of aijiida : everywhere else 
it is sign. Wrought through them ; more 
literally, hath come to past through them. 

Ver. 17. — Threaten for straiily threaten, 
A.V. and T.R. The subject of that it spread 
seems to be "a notable miracle." They 
could not deny that it had taken place, but 
they could prevent the knowledge of it 
spreading, by forbidding the apostles to 
speak of the Name of Jesus in which it had 
been wrought. 

Ver. 18. — Cliarged for commanded, A.V. 

Ver. 19. — Bather for more, A.V. 

Ver. 20. — Saw and heard for have teen 
and heard, A.V. We cannot hut speak, etc, 
We have here another instance of Peter's 
boldness of speech under the influence of the 
Holy Ghost. 

Ver. 21. — And they when they, etc., let them 
go for so when they, etc., they let them go, A.V. 

Ver. 22.— More than for above, A.V. ; 
wrought (oi showed, \.Y. Wrought; literally, 
as in ver. It!, came to pass, or happened, or 
took place. 

Ver. 23. — Came for went, A.V. ; {he elders 
for elders, A V. To their own company (comp. 
Mai. iii. 16). The chief priests (o! d.pxifpe7s) ; 
evidently the same as those who were 
described as being " of the kindred of the 
high priest," in ver. 6 (where see note). 

Ver. 24. — They, when they heard it, lifted 
for when they heard that they lifted, A.V. ; 
Lord, thou that didst maJte, or as in margin, 
thou art he that did mahe, for Lord, tJiou art 
God, which hast made, T.B. and A.V. ; the 
heaven and the earth for heaven and earth, 
A.V. With one accord {dfi.oeufu>S6y) occurs 
eleven times in the Acts (ten times in the 
E.T.) and only once elsewhere in the New 
Testament, viz. in Bom. xv. 6. Lord, etc. 
Either the margin or the A.V. is preferable ta 
the E.V», which gives an unmeaning vocative 
pendent. The word here used for " Lord '* 



OH. rr. 1 — 37.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



12S 



Is StawiTris, from which our English word 
" despot " cornea. It means " master, o\Yner," 
in respect of slaves, and " a lord " or " king," 
whose power over his subjects is similar to 
that of a master over slaves. Here, with 
reference to creation and God's unlimited 
power over all that he has made, the Church 
in danger finds support and solace in the 
thought of God's absolute sovereignty. The 
term is applied to God in the New Testa- 
ment elsewhere only in Luke ii. 29 (where 
observe its relation to Sav\ai') ; 2 Pet. ii. 1 ; 
Jude 4, E.T; (of our Saviour); and Rev. vi. 
10, where a-MovKoi airay immediately fol- 
lows, .18 here in ver. 29 does " thy servants." 
In the LXX. it sometimes answers to Elohim, 
and sometimes to Adonai. As regards the 
question how the whole assembly joined in 
this prayer, whether by a common inspira- 
tion, or by repeating the words after him 
that prayed them aloud (Alford), or by 
merely singing the second psalm (Baum- 
garteu), or by all using what was already 
a formulary prepared for the needs of the 
Church (Meyer), it is diiSault - to speaJc 
positively, nor is it of any moment. Another 
possible explanation is that several members 
of the congregation, under the influence of 
tlie Holy Ghost, uttered brief prayers and 
praises, tbe consenting matter of which Lake 
thus puts together. 

Ver. 25.— Who by the Boly Ghost, ly the 
mouth of our father David thy tervant, didst 
nay for who hy the mouth of thy servant David 
hasttaid, T.B. andA.V.; Gentiles toiheathen, 
A.V. ; peoples for people, A.V. Who by the 
Holy Obost, etc. The B.T. here is impossible, 
but the T.K. is perfectly easy and natural. 
The confusion in the manuscripts from which 
the B.T. is formed appears to have arisen 
from a-TS/iaTOs having been accidentally 
mistaken for ■m'eiiJ.aTos, which led to other 
changes. Three readings resulted and seem 
to be combined : 6 Sia toS ruTpds ri/iay AafilS 
v/r^vl or, & Sict TrcetSyuaTos ayiav ehr^vi at the 
original one, i Si& ctoimtos Aa^SiS iraiS(is sou 
eiTtiv, which is preserved in the T.B. 

Ver 26. — Set themselves in array for itooA 
up, A. v.; Anointed for Christ, A.V. Set 
- themselves in array. napta-Tn/u does not 
specially mean " to set themselves in array," 
which implies a battle, of which there is not 
question here, but it means simply "to 
present " or " show themselves " (ch. i. 8) 
"to be ready,'' or, as in ver. 10, "to stand." 
Anointed. The text in the whole citation 
follows the LXX. exactly. 

Ver. 27. — Of a truth in thii city for of a 
truth, A.V. ; Servant for child (as in ch. 
iii. 26), A.V. ; didst anoint for hast anointed, 
A.V. ; peoples for people, A.V. For of a 
truth, etc. The saying just quoted is proved 
to have been the word of God by its exact 
falfilmeut in the h«athen and Jewish rulers 



and peoples who were concerned in th« 
crucifixion of the Lord Christ. In this city. 
This is omitted in the A.V. and T.B., but 
found in most uncials and Fathers, and 
adopted by Wordsworth, Alford, Meyer, Ben- 
gel, eto. Herod. St. Luke (xxiii. 1—12) is 
the only one of the evangelists who records 
the part taken by Herod in conjunction with 
Pontius Pilate in the condemnation of Christ. 
Possibly the inference may be that St. Luke 
was led to record it in bis Gospel from know- 
ing of this application of Ps. ii. to him and 
Pilate. Peoples, in the plural, either because 
of the "many nations" (ch. ii. 5) from 
which the Jews of the dispersion came to 
Jerusalem, or with reference to the twelve 
tribes (see Gen. xxviii. 3, " Thou shalt be 
a multitude of peoples," Hebrew). 

Ver. 28.— To do lot for to do, A.V. ; fore- 
ordained to come to pass for determined before 
to be done, A.V. To do (for the sentiment, 
comp. oh. ii. 23 ; iii. 18). They were gathered 
together for the purpose of executing their 
own will, as they thought, but really to 
fulfil the purpose of God (see also Isa. x. 
5—15 ; xxxvii. 26, 27). See here the com- 
fort to the Church of looking upon God as 
the Seo-jriTj)s of the whole earth. 

Ver. 29. — iooJ: upon for behold, A.V. ; to 
tpeak thy word with all boldness for thatwith 
all boldness they may speah thy word, A.V. 
lord. This time KiJpie (Kyrie), the word in 
the LXX. for Jehovah, and the special desig- 
nation of Jesus Christ (ch. iL 36, etc.), but 
hero applied to God the Father. Look upon ; 
a more forcible rendering than the A.V. Look 
upon, for the purpose of frustrating and 
punishing. The only other place in the 
New Testament where the word (iveiSeiv) 
occurs is in Luke i. 25, where the Lord 
" looked upon" Elisabeth to confer a bless- 
ing upon her. In 2 Chron. xxiv. 22, " Tbe 
Lord look upon it and require it," the LXX. 
have tbe simple verb iSoi instead of eV/Soi. It 
Is beautiful to notice how, in the heat of the 
unjust persecutions, the Church hands over 
her quarrel to her Lord, and is only careful 
that she be not stopped in her work by the 
threatenings of her enemies. To speak thy 
word with all boldness (for the word 
" boldness," see ver. 13, note). 

Ver. 30. — While thou stretchest for by 
itretching, AV. ; thy for thine, A.V. ; through 
for by, A.V.; Servant for child, AV., as in ver. 
27 and ch. iii. 13, 26. While thou stretchest, 
etc. The A.V. seems preferable. It was the 
fact that, while they preached the Word of 
God, the Lord confirmed the Word with 
signs following, which gave them such 
superhuman courage to persevere in the face 
of death and bonds. And this was God's 
method and means of encouraging them. 
And that signs and wonders may be done. 
But this clause ia better rendered, aa Eeza 



126 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[OH. IT. 1—37. 



and Bengel render it, in dependence npon 
(V T^, and by signs and wonders being done, 
as the consequence of the stretching out of 
the hand of Jesus. The other ways of con- 
struing the sentence are either to make 
the clause, " that signs and wonders may 
he done," dependent upon "grant," which 
seems to he the meaning of the A.V., or else 
to take it, as Meyer does, as an independent 
clause, expressing the aim of the stretching 
out of the hand. 

Ver. 31. — Wherein they were gathered for 
when they were assemble^, A.V. When they 
had prayed. When they had finished the 
preceding prayer. The place was shaken, 
perhaps by a mighty wind, as in ch. ii. 2. 
The word (ro^cueo•ea^ is properly used of 
ships or of the sea agitated and tossed by 
the wind; so Matt. xi. 7, "A reed shaken 
by the wind." But it is also applied to the 
rocking caused by an earthquake (ch. xvi. 
26), which may be the kind of shaking here 
meant. In this fresh outpouring of the 
Spirit, whereby they were enabled to speak 
the word of God with boldness, they had a 
direct and immediate answer to their prayer 
(see Isa. Ixv. 24). 

Ver. 32. — Soul for of one soul, A.V. ; and 
not one of them said for neither said any of 
them, A.V. The great _ increase in the 
number of believers had been recorded in 
ver. 4. And the state of public feeling 
alluded to in ver. 21 makes it likely that 
yet more may have been converted to the 
faith. This was very important, no doubt; but 
it was scarcely less sotbat this great multitude 
were one in heart and soul, closely united in 
the bonds of Christian fellowship and love. 

Ver. S3. — Their toitness for witness, A.V. 
(t!i /MpTipiov). Their witness. It was one 
of their chief functions as apostles to bear 
witness to the resurrection of the Lord 
Jesus (see ch. i. 22, note). Great grace, etc. 
Some understand this of the singular favour 
with which the people regarded them. But 
it is better to take it of the grace of God 
which abounded towards them in spiritual 
gifts and abundant unction and rich bless- 
ing, crowning their labours with success. 

Ver. 34. — For neither for neither, A.V.; 
among them any for any among them, A.V. 
One striking proof of the greatness of the 
Divine grace that was upon the Church at 
this time was that there was no such thing 
as want or poverty among them. The 
equality typified in the daily collection of 
manna was literally fulfilled among them 
(2 Cor. viii. 14, 15); for the rich sold their 
houses and lands, and laid the price of them 
at the apostles' feet, to be used for the common 
wanti. The present participle in the Greek 
{jrwKovvTfs , . . imrpaaKoiiiviDv) indicates the 
process as continuing (Meyer). 

Ver. 35. — Laid them for laid them down. 



A.y.; unto each . . . as any one for tmt» 
every man . . . ashe, A.V., a change with- 
out an improvement. Laid them at the 
apostles' feet. A significant token of the 
place occupied by the apostles (as later by 
the bishops of the Church) as the trustees 
and dispensers of the Church's funds as well 
as of the Church's doctrines. Compare 
" Ante pedes prsetoris in foro expensum est 
auri pondo centum " (Cic. pr. Flacco, quoted 
by Alford). We have, too, here an instance 
of the way in which Church institutions rose 
gradually as occasion gave birth to them. 
So the institution of deacons (ch. vi. 2, 3), 
of presbyters or priests (ch. xiv. 23), of 
bishops (1 Tim. i. — iii.), of Confirmation (ch. 
viii. 14 — 17), (ippear to have come about in 
each case pro re nata. 

Ver. 36. — Joseph for .Toses, A. V., as ch. i. 23 ; 
Son of exhortation for Hie son of consolation, 
A.V. ; a man of Cyprus by race for and of 
the country of Cyprus, A.V. Joseph. In the 
variation of manuscripts it is difficult to say 
which is right. Some (Grotius, Alford, etc.) 
consider the two forms as mere variations in 
vrriting the name Joseph. But it seems more 
probable that Joses is the same name as 
Josiah, only without the addition of the 
Divine Name (Jah) at the end (see Simon, 
• Onomast.'). It is found as a proper name in 
the T.B. of Matt. xiii. 55 ; xxvii. 56 ; Mark 
vi. 3 ; XV. 40, 47 ; Luke iii. 29 (Jose) ; and 
is not likely to have been substituted for 
the common name of Joseph. The Codex 
Sinaiticus has Joses only in Mark xv. 40. 
The K.V. has Joseph in Matt. xiii. 55, and 
Joses in Matt, xxvii. 56 ; Mark vi. 3 ; xv. 40, 
47. In Luke iii. 29 the E.V. has Jesus. But 
Joses is probably right both here and in the 
above-cited passages. Barnabas ; literally, 
son of prophecy ; i.e. a prophet, as he is 
called in ch. xviii. 1. Probably his exliorta- 
tions under the influence of the Holy Spirit 
in the Church assemblies were particularly 
stirring and edifying. The Greek version 
of the name, vths irapaKAiiireus, should be 
rendered, as in R.V., Son of exhortation, for 
"son of consolation" is a meaning which 
can hardly be got out of tlie Hebrew. The 
apostles seem here to have followed our 
Lord's example in naming the sons of 
Zebedee, sons of thunder. A man of Cyprus 
by race. The A.V. is less accurate, but it 
gives the sense better. Cyprus was the 
country where he was born and lived, as, it 
is likely, his fathers had done before him. 
But he was hardly, in our sense of the 
words, a Cypriot by race. We know that a 
great many Jews were settled in Cyprus 
(Philo, 'Leg. ad Caium.,' § 36; Josephus, 
' Ant.,' xiii. 4 ; Alford, on oh. xi. 19) ; and wa 
learn from ch. xiii. 5 that in Salamis alona 
there were several synagogues. 

Ver. Zl.— Afield for land, A.V. 



cm nr. 1-37.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 127 



HOMn^ETIOS. 

Ven. 1 — 31. — The first persecution. On observing the phenomena attending the 
introduction and spread of Christianity in the world, one which arrests our attention 
is the persecution which at different times its disciples have met with from the world. 
The Lord Jesus himself, " the Author and Perfecter of our faith," was rejected of men 
and crucified. And when, after his glorious resurrection, the apostles preached the 
faith, and verified tho truth of what they preached by such signal miracles as that 
recorded in oh. iii., iv., and in consequence drew large numbers of people to the faith 
of Jesus Christ, we see the hand of power immediately stretched out to arrest the pro- 
gress of the gospel, and to silence its preachers by threats, imprisoament, and death. 
What were the secret springs of this first persecution, as they are exposed to view in 
the narrative before us ? 

I. Thebe was thb qbnbbal jealousy on the part of human powbe of ant 
GREAT MOVEMENT NOT EMANATING FROM ITSELF. " By what power, or in what name, 
have ye done this ? " was their angry question. " Have any of the rulers believed on 
him ? " was the similar question of the Pharisees in our Lord's lifetime. The same 
jealousy of any free movement, the results of which might be dangerous to the existing 
power, and which implied an independent spirit on the part of those concerned in it, 
is apparent also in the Boman persecutions of Christianity, and in the crucial test of 
loyalty required of the followers of the new doctrines, that they should sacrifice to the 
emperor. The persecutions of Lollards and Protestants by our own monarohs before 
the Beformation, and of Bomanists and Puritans after the Beformatlon, were due in some 
considerable measure to the same impatience of any rival or of any non-dependent 
power whatever. 

IL There was in the case of Annas and his co-rulees a fierce hostility 
TO Peter and John and the rest of the apostles, on the ground of the doctrine 
PRBAOHBD BY THEM. The doctriuo of those in power was Sadduceeism. They were the 
secularists of that day. Their creed was this world, and nothing beyond it. No angel, 
no spirit, no resurrection, no life to come. And this creed they held with a fierceness 
not unusual with those who hold negative doctrines, and repiidiate the bigotry of 
dogmatism. When, therefore, the apostles with marvellous boldness and confidence, 
and with a simplicity of purpose and force of eloquence which carried all before them, 
not only preached generally the doctrine of the Resurrection, but affirmed that Jesus 
Christ, whom Annas and Caiaphas had given up to be crucified, was actually risen 
from the dead, that they had seen him and conversed with him after his resurrection, 
and that by his power and in his Name the lame man had been healed, their indignation 
knew no bounds. They could not deny the miracle, they could not silence the preachers 
by argument. But they could cast them into prison, they could, they thought, silence 
them with threats ; and so they did the one and attempted the other. And so it has 
been since. The pure and holy doctrines of the gospel of Christ have been opposite 
alike to the polytheism of Greece and Borne, to the polygamy of Mahomet, to the 
tenets of Bome. And so those in power who held these various doctrines, have in 
turn drawn the persecuting sword against the faithful who upheld them. It has ever 
been error and the sword against God's truth. 

in. But we can see another reason for the violence of the rulers against the apostles 
of Christ. We may be sure that the crime of delivering Jesus to the Bomans to be 
crucified had not been accomplished without many and sore rebukes of conscience. 
They knew of Christ's blameless life of active goodness and beneficence ; they must 
have heard from many lips of his healing and his kindness to the sick and poor ; they 
had heard his teaching themselves, or had heard of it from others, how wise, how 
instructive, how Divine it was. And yet, in their envy and malice, they had given him 
over to death. At least they hoped that no. voice ^could come from the grave to 
rebuke them,' and that their Victim was silenced for ever. But now they were told 
that he whom they had slain was alive again ; that he whom they had seen hanging 
on the cross was at the right hand of God ; that he whose head had drooped helplessly 
in death was in possession of all power in heaven ; that he had sent his Holy Spirit 
with extraordinary gifts to rest upon his disciples ; that he healed and made alive ; th n t. 



128 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, [ch. rr. 1— 37. 

the marvellous power which they saw in the poor fishermen of Galilee was hii power; 
and that he would come again in glory to reign as the Lord's Christ. Can we doubt 
that their slumbering conscience was aroused to a very troublesome activity, that 
guilt awakened fear and alarm, and that most unwelcome anticipations crowded upon 
their minds ? " Ye have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and intend to bring this 
man's blood upon us," was their angry expostulation and the expression of their fears. 
Clearly, unless these fears brought them to repentance, they would rouse them to hatred - 
and indignation. They did the latter, and this persecution was the result. And 
beyond a doubt this disturbed but not converted conscience lies at the bottom of much 
of the world's hatred of the truth of Christ. Men have sense enough to know that if 
the Word of God is true they are condemned. The doctrines of the gospel are at 
variance with a heart full of adultery and that cannot cease from sin. The same 
word which shows the grace and love of God shows the foulness and hatefulness of sin. 
Men who have settled down into a course of sin ahd wilful ungodliness do not wish Ui 
be disturbed. They wish to sin on in peace. They have no thoughts of renouncing 
all their old ways of thinking and feeling and acting. Whoever disturbs them, and 
breaks in upon their security, is an enemy. The disturbing doctrines are hateful, and 
all the more so if reason or conscience sides with them. And so anger and contempt 
atd vengeance cry down the feeble voice of conscience and prompt the hand to violence 
and persecution. But — 

IV. Note the saints of God undbb persecution. They flinch not, but are bold 
to preach the truth unto bonds and unto death. They do not avenge themselves, but 
commit their cause to God. They flock together not to flght, but to pray, and to 
exhort and comfort one another. And in the end, instead of being dismayed, they are 
strengthened. Their faith is increased in the furnace of affliction ; the Comforter comes 
to them ; and the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church. 

Vers. 32 — 37. — Ghureh unity. We speak in these dark days of unity in Christ, of 
brotherly love, of the communion of saints. But what do we see when we look around 
at the multitude of them that believe ? We see some forty or fifty denominations of 
Christians, all keeping apart from one another, not willing to meet together, to pray 
together, or to receive the Holy Communion together. These different bodies are 
constantly at different degrees of strife with each other; sometimes waging actual war 
one against another, at others engaged in bitter coiitroversies, and carrying on a strife 
of tongues and pens. Even among those who belong to the same religious body what 
difierences of opinion, what unbrotherly denunciations, what schisms, what party 
movements, are constantly breaking out I And yet we look with complacency upon 
this broken surface of Christendom, and make no great effort to correct it. Perhaps, if 
we can get a glimpse of true unity in Christ as it was seen for a while in the Church 
of Jerusalem, we shall be put to shame, and strive after something better. 

In the Church op Jerusalem, then, the whole multitude op believeeb webb 
OF ONE HEART AND BOUL. Bich and pooT, Icamed and simple, Pharisees and Eadducees, 
Lcvites and Jews, were so united in Christ that all other distinctions were lost. 
Selfishness was gone, for each loved his brother as himself. What each man had he aeia 
it not as his own, but as a steward of Christ for the good of all. The love of money 
was swallowed up in the love of Christ. The ordinary worldly life seemed to have 
melted into the life of faith and godliness. Their wants were spiritual, their occupations 
were spiritual, their joys were spiritual. In this happy state, in this clear atmosphere 
of love, the great truths of the gospel shone out with marvellous brightness; the 
resurrection of Christ especially stood out in the lineaments of a distinct reality ; and 
there was a rich glow of grace over the whole Church. The whole body received th« 
apostles' doctrine, submitted to their rule, committed everything to their ordering. It 
were diflicult to say whether the apostolic authority in the Church derived more of its 
vigour from the appointment of Christ, or from the love and reverence of the people. 
The two forces were concentred on the heads of the twelve, and gave them an invincibU 
power. Such was Church unity in those golden days. This is not the place to con- 
sider the causes which have broken to shivers that frame of heavenly beauty. But it 
may be a not unfitting opportunity to entreat all who may read these lines to dwell upon 
the beauty of the scene here depicted by St. Luke, to contrast it with the miserable 



CH. IV. 1—37.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 139 

aspect of our schisms and party divisions, and to make every effort in their own sphere 
to forward unity and godly love, to put aside all stumbling-blocks and hindrances to 
Christian harmony, and to labour after that oneness of heart and soul which ought to 
result from fellowship in the redeeming love of Jesus Christ, and from having one and 
the same hope of sharing the resurrection of life through the resurrection of Jesus 
from the dead. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 21. — Truth from the tribunal. The principles which are illustrated or sug- 
gested here are— 

I. That men in the highest religioits position mat be all wrong in their 
THEOLOGY. The piicsts were grieved that the apostles taught the people that which 
we know to have been God's own truth (ver. 3) . In every age since then, the teaching 
of pure doctrine has been a veritable grief to those who have been regarded by many 
as the religious authorities of the land. 

II. That men in the highest political position mat be using their power 
AGAINST THE WELL-BEING OF THE STATE. The State officials "came upon" the 
apostles of our Lord (ver. 1 ) , and " laid hands on them, and put them in hold " (ver. 3) . 
How often has this scene been re-enacted since then ; the men in office using their 
authority to restrain and silence the teachers of truth, the reformers of national life I 

III. That faithful men have their consolation when opposed and silenced 
BT THE STRONG. That was not a very unhappy evening which Peter and John spent 
in the stronghold of the temple. As they walked within the narrow bounds of their 
captivity, they thought rejoicingly of the "five thousand men" who had heard the 
word they had spoken, and had believed it and been saved by it. Spiritual successes 
are an ample compensation for material discouragements (ch. xvi. 25) . 

IV. That to faithful men God grants courage and constancy according 
TO THEIR DAY. ( Vers. 5 — 13. ) Before the Sanhedrim Peter and John show them- 
selves brave and fearless. There is nothing apologetic about their demeanour, nothing 
supplicatory about their tone. They stand erect and they "speak straight on, " as 
men who stand before God and who speak for him. In truth, they are men in whom 
God dwells (ver. 8) ; hence their noble attitude and their manly spirit. God gives 
them grace according to their day. So will he to us also. Let us be receptive of 
his truth when he speaks to us ; let us be faithful at our post when we speak for 
him ; and then, when the .trial hour shall come, he will nerve us for the scenes 
through which we shall have to pass, and we shall be "strong in the Lord, and in 
the power of his might." 

V. That there is one, and only one, road to heaven. (Ver. 13. ) Many paths 
lead into it ; there are many ruts in the road ; many very different pilgrims along it ; 
many views as we look out on either side of it and at dififerent stages on it. But there 
is only one way : this is found in him who says, " I am the Way. " 

VI. That the spiritual triumphs op Christian truth are the most cogent 
WITNESSES on ITS BEHALF. (Ver. 14. ) In presence of reclaimed drunkenness, silenced 
profanity, cleansed and uplifted impurity, regenerated selfishness, humbled pride, 
what can infidelity or irreverence do? It is dumb ; it is helpless. 

VII. That human error is impotent in its contest with Divine truth. 
(Vers. 16 — 31. ) Authority, in the person of this Jewish Sanhedrim, is ill intentioned 
enough ; it is willing enough to smite ; it considers patiently and earnestly how far it 
dares to go ; it threatens, forbids, threatens still further, and then impotently and 
ignominously releases. Error is often fiercely antagonistic, industriously hostile, 
actively opposed to the truth of God ; but — let us take courage in dark hours — it is 
held under restraint ; there is a point beyond which it cannot go ; it will be compelled 
to relax its hold, and truth will come forth, before long, rejoicing in its liberty. — C. 

Ver. 13. — Association with ohrist. We gather from these words — 
I. That learning is not necessary to goodness. The persecutors of Peter and 
John " perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men " ; not imeducated men, 
acts k 



130 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. iv. 1—37. 

in the worst sense of that term, hut lacking in the higher culture of their time. But 
though thus comparatively unlearned, they were men of strong faith, of true piety, 
of godly zeal, admirahle in the sight of men, acceptable servants of Jesus Christ, 
Human learning is a desirable, but it is far from being a necessary, thing to excellence 
of character or nobility of life. 

II. That coueagb w the conddct of the good will arkest the attentioh 
OF those who ABE IN THE WRONO. "When they saw the boldness cf Peter and 
John . . . they marvelled." Whatever virtues are unappreciated by the ungodly, 
courage always enlists attention and provokes admiration. Be brave, and you will he 
heard ; stand to your colours with undaunted spirit, and men will, however reluctantly, 
yield you their respect. 

III. That association with Jesus Christ will account fob any excellency 
OF chabacteb. When the priests and elders wanted to account to themselves for the 
boldness of these two men they remembered their connection with Clirist, and were no 
longer at fault. That will account for anything that is good. Much intimacy with 
him who " regarded not the person of man " will always make men brave ; frequent 
communion with that Holy One of God will always make men pure of heart ; close 
friendship with him who came to lay down his life for the sheep will always make 
men unselfish, etc. 

IV. That the best thinqb about human chabacteb abb those which abb 
euGGESTivB OF Jesus Christ. There is nothing which is such a tribute to human 
worth as that men are thereby reminded of Christ. What impression are we most anxious 
to convey about ourselves ? The answer to that question will be a sure criterion of our 
spiritual standing. If we are nearing the goal which is set before us, if we are attaining 
to any real lieight of Christian excellency, we shall be truly and earnestly solicitous 
that our constant spirit and daily behaviour will be luggestive of the temper and the 
principles of Jesus Christ our Lord. — 0, 



Vers. 19, 20. — The simpler and the deeper truth. Here we hav 

L A truth which is palpable to all — that when the Divine and the human 
are in conflict, the human must yield to the Divine. "Whether it be right . . . 
judge ye." The judgment required was one that any man could pronounce; the 
question may be answered by the hnmblest understanding. 1. Ordinarily, the com- 
mandments of God and of man are in unison ; it is, as a rule, our duty to God to obey 
the human parent, teacher, magistrate, minister. 2. But occasionally, we are com- 
pelled to believe that God bids us act in a way directly at .variance with the commands 
of man. The apostles now found themselves in this position. Since then martyrs, 
confessors, those who have been persecuted for Christ's sake, in every age and land, 
have found themselves thus placed. And these have included not only the men 
whose names history has preserved and whose praise poetry has aung, bat many 
thousands who have struggled and endured in quiet homes and narrow spheres, whose 
heroism no tongue has told, no pen recorded. 3. Thtn the human authority is nothing 
to the Divine. We must obey God rather than man ; we must give our first allegiance, 
our most dutiful submission, to the Eternal Father, to the Divine Teacher, to the 
King of kings, to the Head of the Church himself. 

II. A truth which is appreciable only by thx best — that we are nnder a 
holy compulsion to testify the truth we know: "We cannot but speak the things 
which we have seen and heard." All can understand that men will speak the truth 
they know when, by so doing, they will gain anything which satisfies their lower 
nature — pecuniary reward, or personal prominence, or the gratification of receiving 
the interested attention of others. But it is not every one who can understand that 
men feel themselves under a holy compulsion to declare what God has revealed to 
them in order to relieve a full and burdened heart. This is a case in which " only tbe 
good discern the good." But those who are in sympathy with God and with heavenly 
wisdom will understand that human hearts may be so impressed with the excellency, 
the beauty, the fruilfnlness, the divinity of truth, that they are positively oppressed 
while they remain silent, until they have " spoken the things they have seen and 
heard." The word is in the heart as "a burning fire shut up in the bones," etc. 
(Jw. 1*. tf; Jub xxxii. 18, 20; Ps. xxxix. 3; 1 Otr. \x. 16). The fact that not 



OH. IV. 1—37.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 181 

only the apostles of our Lord, but thousands of souls since then, have felt thus con- 
strained concerning Christian truth, suggests: 1. That it is a truth of transcendent 
worth which it is foolish and wrong to trifle with. 2. That we have not risen to the 
full height of appreciation of it if we do not feel irresistibly impelled to make it known 
toothers. — C. 

Ver. 22. — Spiritual inflexibility : a sermon to those in the midst of life. The 
words of the text indicate that there was one fact which contributed greatly to sustain 
the miraculous character of the healing act that had been wrought. We might inter- 
polate between this verse and the preceding — there could be no manner of doubt that 
this work was of Qod, " for the man," etc. We instantly recognize the force of the 
reasoning. When a man has suffered for forty years from physical deformity or 
rigidity and is restored in a moment, there is obviously some supernatural power 
brought into exercise. Long continuance in such a caisc immensely aggravates the 
difficulty and enhances the virtue of the cure. In this, as in so many other respects, 
the moral world answers to the material. 

L In the bablieb tkaes the soul is eesponsivb to the touch of tbuth. 
As God made us, and before we are acted upon and injured by the forces of evil, we 
are impressionable and flexible of soul. The mind is eager to learn and ready to 
receive; the conscience is quick to approve or to rebuke; the heart is tender aud 
affectionate, readily responsive to goodness and to love ; the soul is appreciative of 
that which is spiritually fair and beautiful ; the will is open to change if cause be 
shown for reformation and return. This is the time when moral maladies can best be 
cured, when we may well hope that the heart will be healed of its sicknesses, and that 
the spirit will " be made whole " by the great Physician. 

n. Continuanob m sts indueates the soul. When a human soul has continued 
for forty years in an evil habit or in a state of sin, it has become hardened in its way. 
Conscious wrong-doing acts harmfully on every faculty of our nature. 1. It blinds 
" the eyes of the understanding." 2. It hardens the heart. 3. It weakens and blunts 
the conscience so that its stroke is decreasingly effective. , 4. It stiffens and fixes the 
will in its chosen course. Thus it makes the man himself unapproachable, unimpres- 
sionable, incurable. They who are passing on from youth and young manhood into 
middle life, not having entered the kingdom of God, have urgent need to " consider 
their ways." They are reaching the moral condition in which their conversion to 
God is a thing of greatest difficulty and serious unlikelihood. In the Book of Life, if 
their name should be recorded, will it not be added, as a proof of the wonder-working 
power of the Spirit of God, " for the man was forty years old," etc. ? Kemember that 
(1) salvation is never impossible : at twice forty years of age it is within the reach of 
penitence and faith ; but (2) it becomes growingly unlikely as the periods of human 
'ife pass by. The Holy Ghost saith, " To-day."— 0. 

Ver. 23. — Ihe use of freedom. " Being let go, they went to their own company." 
We have here an apt illustration of — 

I. An act incidental to libeett. " Being let go " — the hand of restraint being 
taken off them — " they went to their own company ; " they followed the bent of their 
own inclination, and went to those with whom they were in sympathy. This is the 
constant accompaniment of human freedom. As soon as the parental hand is relaxed, 
as soon as the teacher's eye is off them, as soon as the restraints of home and the 
guardianship of elders are removed, the young take their own course, follow their own 
bent, choose their own company. We never know what men really are until we take 
away the bonds by which we hold them in check, and they go " whithersoever they 
will " — ^whither their own principles allow, and their own tastes direct them. 

II. The wisdom of those who aee besfonsible fob othbes. It is of little use 
to hold the reins so tight that, as long as they are held by a firm hand, there can be no 
wandering. What is to be the event when the reins must be thrown up? What will 
be the course chosen when they whom we guard are " let go " ? If we do nothing 
more and better than carefully imprison within walls of correct behaviour, we shall be 
bitterly disappointed with the result. It is our wisdom and our duty to provide for the 
hour when those for whom we are responsible will be " let go," and when they wUl 



13« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. rr. 1—87, 

assuredly go to their own company — will seek out those persons and those things with 
which they sympathize. We can only do this (1) by implanting right principles, and 
(2) cultivating pure tastes. These, and these only, will lead the young, in the day» 
when they act for themselves, to shun that which is wrong and to pursue that which 
is holy, wise, useful. 

III. The bbsponsibilitibs op fkeedom. Young people I 1. You will soon stand at 
the point where you will decide on your own course. 2. If, then, you are right at 
heart, you will walk in the path of life ; choosing the company of the good, the ways 
of wisdom. 3. If, then, your heart is not right with God, you will be tempted to follow 
an evil bent. It wUl be a most perilous hour with you. (IJ To give way to the lower 
inclinations is to enter the road of ruin. (2) If you love life and hate death, go not 
whither you wotdd, but where conviction tells you you should. Hearken to the heavenly 
vMce which says, " This is the way ; walk ye in it." — 0. 

Vers. 23 — 37. — The resource of the devout, etc. Released from the restraint of law, 
the apostles returned to " their own company," and there they related what they had 
pasised through. We may be sure that the whole of that community of brethren 
entered, with deep and strong sympathy, into the feelings of their two leaders ; they 
all felt that a very critical hour had come to that new cause which they represented. 
Under these circumstances they bethought themselves of — 

L The eesoubce of the devout. " They lifted up their voice to Grod with one 
accord" (ver. 24). They felt, as their prayer indicated, that : 1. AU power was in his 
mighty hand : " Thou art God, who hast made heaven," etc. Vainly would the heathen 
rage, and kings and rulers conspire against the " holy Child Jesus," the Son of the 
living God. 2. A gracious purpose was in his sovereign will. However earthly poten- 
tates might imagine they were carrying everything their own way, they were but 
" doing what his hand and counsel determined before to be done " (ver. 28). 3. He 
could impart a power which would make them superior to all fear of man. They asked 
for boldness of speech (ver. 29), and, with this end in view, for signs of his presence 
(ver. 30). Prayer is the constant, unfailing resort of all holy souls. What time we 
are afraid we must trust in him ; we must flee unto him to hide us. 

II. Divine encoubagement. (Vers. 31 — 33.) The Lord responded to his people's 
prayer, and granted them : (1) a manifest sign of his presence and favour (ver. 31) ; 
(2) the fearlessness of spirit they so much desired (ver. 31) ; (3) power to testify of Christ 
(ver. 33) ; and (4) inward, spiritual confidence and joy : " Great grace was upon them 
all" (ver. 33). God now vouchsafes to his waiting children the blessings they seek of 
him : the assurance of his presence, power to act as his witnesses, success in their 
labours, rest and joy of heart in him and in his service. 

III. The community of the faithful. (Vers. 32, 34 — 37.) The essential part of 
this passage is the opening sentence, " The multitude of them that believed were 
of one heart and of one soul " (ver. 32). The measure which they adopted, viz. a . 
community of goods, was peculiar, exceptional, transitory. It is not a practical method, 
suited to such conditions as those in which we find ourselves. It is not enjoined by 
apostolic word, nor is it sustained by subsequent apostolic practice. It was evidently 
special, local, temporary. But it is essential that those who belong to the same heavenly 
kingdom, and especially those who are members of the same Christian Church, should 
(1) cultivate a true and deep sympathy, " oneness of heart," and (2) take some 
practical measures to supply the wants of the necessitous from the treasury of those 
who have more than they need. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — Chrisfs servants he/ore the tribunal. I. Their apprehension. 
Its causes. 1. The jealousy of those in ecclesiastical power. Caste, privilege, and 
established professions are ever jealous of popular influence. It is ill for learning an(^ 
for religion when they come to be identified with the interests of a class. But neither 
can be shut up to the few. Light and truth are the common property of all. As 
there is no function higher than that of the genuine teacher of religion, so there ia 
none which attracts more suspicion and jealousy. The essence of bigotry is exemplified 
by the Sadduoees. Not believing in the Resurrection, they would put down any 
teaching of it by force. The force of persecution never comes from love of truth, but 



ch.it. 1—37.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 133 



ever from some form of itierest. The temper of the truth-lover is ever for free speech 
and free thought. He knows that the truth, being a beam of God, cannot be quenched, 
and is reflected with all the more glory from the mists of error. Often men mean by 
" the truth " their own opinions and prejudices. History shows, and passion constantly 
ignores, that to put down opinions is impossible. The spirit of man acquires force 
l»th in good and evil by resistance. Let what you consider false be either ignored, or, 
far better, honestly examined and discussed. But, in fact, no absolute falsehood can 
live an hour; and when desire is shown for suppression of free utterance,/ear of the 
truth, not love of it, is betrayed. 2. Another cause was the popular acceptance of 
the gospel. The thousands may be despised as individuals, but their collective 
feeling commands respect. When the multitude wait on a preacher, and their lives 
are changed by his influence, we may be certain that there is a deeper agency at work 
than appears. The very extravagances which attend popular religious movements 
are in their way evidences that men are being acted upon by unwonted spiritual 
power. 

IL Thbik examination. They stood in the presence of the Sanhedrim — the great 
ecclesiastical court and ruling body of the nation. It is a sublime contrast between 
the power that is and the power that is not of the world. The parts of the prisoners 
and the judges are really reversed. Sincerity is ever the judge ; appearances go for 
nothing in the spiritual sphere. 1. The question. The fact is not disputed; the 
question is — How is it to be accounted for? What power, whose Name, had been at 
work here? The surging up of a new power in Church or state is a formidable 
thing. What is its nature? how must we deal with it? is the care of the powers 
that be. 2. The answer. First, a good thing has been admittedly done. Out of 
prostration and weakness a sufferer has been restored to health and freedom. Facts 
are stubborn things. Our acts speak louder than words, and tell for us or against us 
irresistibly. So let us live that the facts of our life may plead for us trumpet-tongued. 
Second, the interpretation of the fact. The name and power of Jesus are behind it. 
Thus does spiritual force rise up and react against those who idly fought against it. 
Here was the crucified One darting a ray of his glory upon suffering. The Resurrec- 
tion : it was no fancy ; it stood illustrated in the person of the restored man in the 
presence of the court. What else was or could be the meaning of the fact ? No 
other explanation is attempted. Accusers and accused stand beneath the shadow of 
a power of which the one are feeble foes, the others mighty agents. Life is full of 
these contrasts, these coincidences of extreme opposites ; power dwindling into impo- 
tence, feebleness lifted, into power. The stone cast aside on the highway proves to be 
the corner-stone of a new building. The rejected of men, who could not save himself, 
becomes revealed the Elect of God, and sole Source of salvation. Contempt of goodness 
is avenged by the manifested contempt of God. 

III. The emotion of the court. The judges are overcome in spite of themselves 
by the extraordinary contrast before them. It is rare that the learned do not feel a 
deep secret contempt for the ignorant and unlettered. An overvaluation of words 
and logic blinds to nalities. But here the calm eloquence of those simple men 
breaks out like the ray of a pure gem hidden in some rough matrix, and dazzles the 
intelligence. Memory is stimulated, and Peter and John are identified as disciples of 
Jesus. There was a combination of evidences which fairly reduced the judges to 
stupefied silence. There stood the well-known figure of the paralytic; side by side 
his confessed healeis; the clear statement of the Divine agency in the case has been 
boldly and impressively given by them ; finally their former connection with Jesus is 
recognized. The whole chain of antecedents and consequents hangs firmly together. 
The logical process in fact and thought is complete. Infinitely better the silence 
which bows before irresistible reasons than the silence which is gained by force. 
Here again extremes meet. Mute are the lips of the unjust, who have evoked 
eloquence from the innocent; the silencers have reduced themselves to dumbness. 
'Tis ever so. When violence seems to have made the truth to retire for a time, it has 
really sent it on a larger arc of travel, from which it will surely return to smite the 
propelling lie. 

IV. The consultation. Policy is consultea when conscience is absent. It is 
dubious, and &w to compromises. There were three courses open: to punish the 



134 Tlifi ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. tr. 1— 37 



apostles — this. In the state of popular feeling, could not be ventured on ; to approve 
their conduct— this was constience' dictate, but conscience was here stifled by a 
powerful conspiracy of interest; the miserable compromise remained — to discharge 
the prisoners for fear of the multitude, to warn them against further teaching in feat 
for themselves. There is danger in all societies and committees of men for the 
conscience. They are more timid than in isolation, and timidity is mean and 
treacherous to the noblest instincts of the heart. Men will back one another up in 
doing things or refraining from doing things, when they would have been more true 
if left to themselves. "Tis a moral trial in these respects to act with others. Shelter 
for our cowardice, stimulus to our active passions, is found in the fellowship of close 
interests. 

V. The PROHrBiTioiT and beibasb. The apostles were no more to " speak in this 
Name," which h.id proved so mighty a spell to loose. More definitely utterance of, and 
teaching in, the Mame are forbidden. The Name stands as usual for all that lies 
behind it — the whole contents of Christian truth. 1. The prohihitiun aimed at an 
impossibility. The mind cannot be chained; the spontaneous movements of the 
spirit cannot be checked by force; the Word of God cannot be bound. Force can only 
act within the laws of nature ; it enters not the kingdom of spirit. 2. The martyr's 
alternative. Shall he obey God or man? The tyrant must tremble when he he:irs 
vhe question put. Physical necessity is on his side ; moral necessity, revealed in the 
conscience, on the other. The one says to the witness — Tou shall not; the other 
replies from his breast — I cannot but. Obedience to God gives confidence and security. 
The tyrant and his victim change places when it is seen that the latter has placed 
himself against the rock of eternal right. 3. The martyr's decision. He will nvt 
obey man rather ttian God. He has one clear principle only — to obey the voice 
in his soul. Immediate consequences form no element of calculation. They may be 
favourable to him, as-now in the physical sense, for the many may be for the moment 
en his side ; or they may be fatal. With eye far fixed on eternity, and ear attent 
upon the Divine voice, he goes forward. He trusts God and is not afraid. His being 
is only safe in devotion to duty. — J. 

Vers. 23 — 31. — The Joy of faith confirmed. The Church, on hearing of the recent 
events, break out into expressions of joy. As usual on such occasions, the voice of 
ancient sacred song becomes their voice. 

I. Our help is in the Creator. Man's need and weakness lead him now to 
shun and now to seek almighty power. There are awful moments when the soul's 
sin seems to have called the lightning and the thunder from the sky, to have awoke 
the threat of the earthquake, the storm, and the sea. Other exultant moments, when 
the solemn sounds of the deep heart of nature are like the cannon of a friendly force 
advancing to a beleaguered city's aid. The most powerful conqueror, like Napoleon 
amidst the snows of Russia, may be in turn conquered by the physical forces of 
nature. The moral forces represented in the will of the Almighty and All-Holy 
cannot be successfully resisted. This is the dfiep truth in the Davidic psalm. 

II, Physical feebleness with moral might. 1. In the case of David and his 
kingdom. Study the historical circumstances reflected in the psalm. Look at the 
tiny kingdom of Judah, placed amidst great foes on every hand. She led a threatened 
life for ages; it seemed impossible she could survive. Yet the small one became a 
thousand, the vine grew in spite of every cropping fox or wasting boar, the little 
lodge in the garden was not overthrown till it had sent forth a ray of light over the 
lands. Moral life, derived from the immediate inspiration of God, was in her. The 
enmity of the world served but to elicit and mature that life. 2. In the case of 
Christ and his kingdom. The like relation is repeated in another form. Corrupt 
Israel joins with pagan Eome in the attempt to suppress the truth and resist the will 
of God. David, the anointed king of Jehovah's selection, is the type, in a. lower 
relation, of Jesus, the anointed Prince in the higher and purely spiritual relation. 
Upon this analogy hope is firmly built. As the great prince of olden time had risen 
in Jehovah's might superior to all his foes, so might his Antitype be expected to lay 
prostrnte faithless Israel's and proud Rome's might beneath his throne of moral 
majesty. 



ca.tv. i-3?.] THE ACTS OV' THE APOSTLES ISA 

III. PbATEB the IN8TBDMENT OF WEAKNESS AND OP STRENGTH. Of weakness, fol 

it implies dependence ; and were our wishes convertible into facts, there would be no 
prayer. Some form of helplessness alone brings men to their knees. Yet it is tha 
expression of strength ; for strength in weakness is the very secret and heart of moral 
energy and of Christian piety. 1. The aim of prayer. It is that the human spirit 
may be united with the Divine, whether in action or in suffering. Action lay before 
the suppliants now — action chiefly or wholly by utterance, which is ever the special 
action of the Christian witness. Boldness in that utterance — the very thing which 
had impressed the Sanhedrim in Peter and John — was the thing needed. The renewal 
of strength must come in prayer. God grants at one time only sufficient for that time. 
He does not allow the accumulation of capital. He lends that we may spend and 
come to him again. But boldness must rest upon the knowledge of facts. So closely 
does courage link with knowledge that the Greek philosopher even said they were 
identical. Without some evidence that God is on our side, we cannot have the heart 
to go on. Where, then, may we look for such evidence ? The apostles sought it in 
the manifestation of Divine energy to cure. This was the signi^cant symbol of his 
presence and of the intention of the gospel in those days. They were justified 
on the ground of experience, clear, repeated, and definite, in expecting this kind of 
encouragement. We, on the ground of our experience, are entitled to expect something 
different, but equally in its way real. Divine energy to heal through ways and means 
not less Divine because natural, we are to seek and make an object of our prayer. 
2. The annoer to prayer. In this case it came in a manner not to be mistaken — by an 
immediate impression on the senses and on the inward consciousness of all. The house 
trembled ; their spirits vibrated to the inner touch of God ; their tongues were loosed, 
and the sought-for fluency and confidence were given. How can we apply this to 
modern times? No sober Christian teacher dares to encourage the expectation of 
such " signs and wonders " now. They belong to a past mode of religious consciousness, 
a disused mode of revelation. For " God fulfils himself in many ways." How impor- 
tant to know in what direction to look for God — the point on our horizon where he may 
be expected to appearl Much, the greater part, must be left to individual experience. 
Let every worshipper seek for the Shechinah in his heart. And in general, let us 
teach that no special manifestation of God is to be expected out of the lines of clear 
intelligent experience. Experience is itself the ordinary and most precious revelation 
of God's will. And the experience of every soul, devoutly read, contains past 
wonders, and prophesies their recurrence. — J. 

Vers. 32 — 37. — A glimpse of ideal social life. Of life, that is, in the idea of the God 
of love. Such glimpses are given doubtless to stimulate our faith and our aspiration ; 
and withdrawn because struggle, not perfect attainment, is the condition of actual liTe. 

I. Social unity. It rested on a common faith, a common ideal, a common 
sentiment. Union with God is the only basis of human social union. Here, from the 
depths of the spirit-life, this principle was for a brief space brought to light. What 
was then made visible fact is constantly the invisible fact and ground of the spiritual 
kingdom. 

II. Its exfbessiok. The abolition of property. Property is the most tenacious of 
institutions, because it is the product and the insurance of the person, the individual, 
the self of each man. Were the self-life, whose instinct is centrifugal and separates us 
irom the commonalty, suspended, in that moment property must cease. For then the 
centripetal instinct, or love, mnst exert its force unfettered. This was what took place 
under the high tide of the Spirit's life in Jerusalem. Men forgot the peculiar in them- 
selves, knew and felt only the universal. One heart, one soul ; the ideal of heroes, 
patriots, philanthropists, was for a fleeting period realized. The magnet of the Name 
that reconciles drew all wills to itself. Necessarily there was an extraordinary access 
of power to individuals, for they drank of the very central source of all power ; as we 
are weak who think self-intercstedly and unsympathetically. And joy must accompany 
this entire emancipation of the spirit from the fetters of self. Nor conld there be that 
sense of indigence which makes us ashamed and cramps our energies. All is for each, 
as each is for all. Self-sacrifice is the last test of love, its only infrangible proof. 
When the pain of self-sacrifice ceases, there the tiiumph of love is complete. And in 



I '8 THE ACTS OF THE' APOSTLES. [oh. ry. 1—37. 

tlie pouring of men's once private property at the apostles' feet, was the Hlustrioui 
evidence of the conquest of the Prince of life over the human heart. As if to clench 
the argument, the special instance of Joseph's sale of his field is given. There is art 
in this. One such definite fact suggests a multitude of others to the imagination. 
Christian ethics simply teach that the inducement to work for wealth is the powei for 
social good. Whenever this is seen to be the theory of wealth acted on in our socijty, 
it will be evidence of a new stirring of Divine love in its heart. — J, 

Vera. 1 — i. — The first persecution. I. The ground op it. 1. Beligiout intolerance — 
" the priests." 2. FoUticdl animosity — " the captain of the temple." A representative 
of Rome, alarmed by the crowd and (earing popular tumult. 3. nationalistic vmhelirj 
— " the Sadducees." The troubles of the Church are thus foreshadowed, proceeding 
from the three different sources which will always unite against the truih. Against 
two facts they rose up: the people were taught; the Resurrection was the substance 
of the teaching. Popular religion is never liked by priests, rulers, and infidels, 'ihey 
are "sore troubled" when the gospel manifests its power. So it was in the Refor- 
mation. The old and corrupt Church gained over the state to its purposes. And soon 
there was a great rising up of the proud intellect of man against the simplicity of the 
message. At the bottom of this combined movement was a stricken conscience. The 
Resurrection condemned them all. They knew it. So still the IJesurrection condemns 
the corruptions of the Chiirch, the desjiotism of the world, and the pride of unbelief. 
We must never reckon on a peaceful victory. The people are not really cared for by 
the high ones of this world. They learn no lessons from the past. Progress must be 
in spite of them. 

II. The maknbe of it. 1. Cautious. " Put them in ward unto the morrow " 
(Revised Version). Fear of the people ; recognition of the power of the apostles ; 
bewilderment in the sense of their own guilty part in the Crucifixion ; pretended respect 
for the forms of justice and self-deceived conventionalism. Underneath punctiliousness 
there is often a great depth of pride and hollow-heartedness. 2. Tentative. It was 
not a full burst of fury against the apostles, but an experiment to see how far they 
would go in their defiance of authorities. It was supposed that a night in prison would 
quell their courage, that an appearance before the Sanhedrim would probably break 
off the rising plant at the root, for it was seen that there was no great display of 
physical force among the sect. 3. Ignorant and perplexed in policy, for there could 
be no decided and deliberate mpvements against the new doctrine on such grounds. 
Nor were the elements of the conspiracy congenial. Priests would care nothing for 
Sadducees, and Roman rulers despised both. They could not have studied either the 
facts of the case or the characters of the apostles. They made a dash upon them in 
the provocation of the moment, hoping to snuff out the light at once. Their ignorance 
of Scripture and worldliness of spirit made them capable of such folly, and the fruit of 
it was a very significant rebuff. 

III. The effect or it. 1. On the Church itself. (See the rest of the chapter.) 
Deepening the spiritual life; promoting brotherly love, prayerfulness, and sympathy; 
pre^ring for future trials ; revealing the utter weakness of the opposition ; fulfilling the 
promise of Christ as to their endowment in the presence of enemies ; magnifying the 
gospel in their sight ; helping them to feel that they must hearken unto God and not unto 
men ; deepening their insight into Scripture and enlarging their prospect of the future 
triumphs of the gospel, which they thought of in the spirit of prophecy. 2. On the 
world. Drawing to them popular sympathy ; making them the talk of Jerusalem, and 
so leading many to inquiry ; testing the hearers whether they were prepared to 
encounter such dangers for Christ. The five thousand would be henceforth drawn 
t^ogether, and the world would see the Church more distinctly. It was well that the 
new doctrine should be manifestly put over against the old. Many may have been 
jierplexed by the reverence which apostles showed for the temple and its worship. 
While still addressing themselves to Jews, it was now plain that to be a disciple of Christ 
was to break away from Judaism. The effect of the miracle would be heightened ; for 
it would be asked, naturally, why the workers of such a cure should be so treated. It 
has never been a success to persecute. It shows weakness in the persecutor ; it reveali 
power in the persecuted; it spreads abroad facts that might otherwise be ignored, 



■H.IV. 1— 37.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 137 



This beginning of the Church's fight with false religion and worldly pride throws great 
light along the ages, and teaches us many a lesson concerning Church history. — E. 

Vers. 5 — 12. — Hie lervants in the footsteps of their Lord, L Compare the ciecum- 
8TANCB8 of thls testimony with those in which Jesus stood. Some of the same were 
present. Actuated by sira'lar feelings against the truth. But notice: 1. Called 
together on the ground of one specific fact — the miracle done (ver. 7) undeniably real. 
2. Witliout any accusation as in the Lord's case. No false witnesses called. 3. In 
appearance, at least, orderly and candid ; inquiring, "By what power, or in what Name, 
have ye done this?" certainly evincing, as does the sequel, considerable reaction from 
the fury of the Crucifixion. Conscience was at work. A sign that the gospel was 
already beginning to lay hold of Jerusalem. 

IL Consider the testimony borne by the apostle. 1. The stibstance of it. It pointed 
to the signs of Divine-power present ; connected those signs with the Name and authority 
of Jesus Christ ; clearly announced the fulfilment of Scripture, and invited all to rejoice 
in the blessings of the gospel. 2. The inspiration of it; seen in its simplicity, bold- 
ness, wisdom, and yet supreme gentleness and love. A perfect respect for the old, and 
yet an entire acceptance of the new with all its consequences. It was not the address 
of a criminal excusing himself, or of a suspected man putting by the misconstructions 
of enemies ; it was the appeal of a herald and inspired ambassador, fulfilling his Divine 
office to be a witness to Jesus. There was in it a sublime indifference to human 
opposition, and yet a corjfidence in the sufficiency of the gospel which could not have 
been of merely human origin. Peter spoke as one " filled with the Holy Ghost," the 
Spirit of truth, life, and love ; as a true Israelite, without one word of disparagement of 
what was represented in that Sanhedrim ; and yet as a true apostle of Christ ; as the 
piiest of that restored temple, of which Jesus was henceforth the Corner-stone ; and as 
a true prophet, able to connect the present with the past and the future, and say, " Thus 
saith the Lord."— B. 

Ver. 12. — The unfolded banner of salvation. " Neither is there salvation in «ny 
other," etc. The contrast between the position of Christ's heralds then and now. They 
pointed to one miracle just wrought ; we point to the whole succession of wonders along 
the line of Christian history. Already the Name of Jesus is "above every name." 
(1) A proclamation ; (2) a warning ; (3) an invitation. 

I. A PROCLAMATION. " Noue other name." 1. The proclamation of witnesses. 
They knew the person, they saw the power, they were subjects of the grace. The 
Name was a history, testified by those who published it. Others could take knowledge 
that they had been with Jesus. So Christians still can speak of the Name as in their 
own hearts and lives " above every name." 2. The proclamation of inspired teachers. 
The name misunderstood among Jews, because salvation itself nothing to them, not 
spiritually regarded. The Name of the " Messiah " represented the promise of atone- 
ment, spiritual deliverance. The apostles themselves taught of Gud, otherwise would 
never have known the secrets of the Name. They proclaimed salvation necessary to 
all, denouncing the self-righteousness of the Jews. 3. The proclamation of sincere 
philanthropists. "Under heaven given among men." The standard set up at Jeru- 
salem, but it meant conquest of the whole world. No name will bear this test but 
Christ's. Other names, Buddha, Confucius, Mohammed, have but a limited range of 
sympathy — divide the world, not unite it. The history of man is a progressive 
preparation of the race to acknowledge a Name which shall be adapted for universal 
recognition and homage. A missionary spirit the test of a true Church. 

II. A WAENING. There are other names among men. Recall the chief dangers of 
our present time. The builders at the temple of human progress are setting at nought 
the corntr-stone. An emasculated Christianity, robbed of its deepest adaptation to the 
wants of men ; a mere bundle of moral principles and examples. The pride of the 
human intellect set on the throne ; in rationalistic criticism ; the dry bones of the Bible 
offered instead of the living reality ; in socialistic theories put in place of spiritual change, 
which alone can produce the fruits of righteousness; in sophistical arguments against 
the leading doctrines of the gospel; and pretended philanthropy, which means nothing 
iut triliirg with' the awful realities <>f sin, and undue exaltation of the material abov« 



i3^ THE Acts Of THfi APOSTLES. [en. tv. 1—37. 



the spiritual interests of men. Other names in the Church. The priest hiding th« 
Saviour ; the ritual shutting out the truth ; sectarianism dishonouring Christ ; 
names of leaders and teachers made into temptations to spiritual pride, and mere 
hero-worship substituted for simple-minded obedience to Christ's commandments. 
Yet the Name above every name in fact, and must be seen to he so. The Name of the 
coming Judge, who, though he find not faith on the eaith, will still destroy all that 
exalteth itself against him, " that God may be all in all." 

III. An invitation. 1. To acceptance of a free gift. " Given amongst men." 
Contrast between Christ's method of helping men and that of the world's teachers. 
2. To separation from a lost cause. The names of the world represent the old things 
which are passing away. Come out and be separate. Name the Name of Christ in 
order to realize salvation. Half-hearted religion uo joy. 3. To anticipation of a final 
victory. As the Name we honour represents a life which went up from the lowliest 
places on earth to the hisfhest in ijeaven, so those who are called after the Name rise 
to the throne to reign with Christ. Will you sell such a birthright for vain delight ? 
Will you forfeit such a prospect for lack of faith ? — R. 

Vers. 13 — 22, — Tfie impotence of unbdief. I. In the presence of facts. The his- 
torical evidence of the gospel must be pressed home on men's consciences. Make 
them acknowledge, " We cannot deny it." The facts of Christian life and character 
before their eyes. Hence the power of great movements lilie those of the evangelical 
revivals. 

II. In contrast with the moral strength of deep conviction and btbaioht- 
FORWARD ALLB8IANCE TO TRiTTH. The shifting of ground, the sophistry, the blasphemy, 
the dishonesty, the malice, and yet the cowardice of modern unbelief. " What shall 
we do to these men f " The question was not " What shall we do with the facts ? " 
but "How shall we escape dealing fairly with them?" Personality is the resort of 
weak and dishonest minds. If they will not believe, they persecute. 

III. In SENSELESS THEEATENINGS AND PRESUMPTION in the presence of the mysteries 
and glories of advancing faith. " That it spread no further among the people." 
Polly of such a policy. The people see through the devices of a false Church — are 
not long deceived by the vain boastings of infidelity. A bold and aggressive method 
must be the hope of the Christian Church in the climax of opposition now reached. 
We must plant ourselves firmly on the rock of undeniable facts, and hearken unto 
God rather than unto men. " All men then will glorify God for what is done." — R. 

Ver. 13. — Witnessing for Christ. "They took knowledge of them, that they had 
been with Jesus." Fulfilment of the promise, " Te shall be witnesses unto me." 
Reward for obedience to the precept, depend on the Spirit. No mere human resources 
applied to ; the men simply spiritual men, bearing witness to Divine facts. 

I. A GREAT CHANGE MADE MANIFEST. Fishermen, Jews, once filled with fear, now 
bold, eloquent, full of the Holy Ghost, proclaiming a doctrine once hateful to them, 
uplifted to a lofty conception of the kingdom of God. The whole explanation in the 
fact they had been with Jesus, as disciples, as chosen out by him for their mission, as 
qualified for it by his gifts of the Spirit. 

II. A GREAT EFFECT PRODUCED. 1. By the clear and decided expression of Christian 
faith. The world is much more impressed by beholding a wonderful contrast to itself, 
than by seeing Christians compromising principles for the sake of enlarging the Church. 
2. By fearless condemnation of evil and proclamation of the kingdom of Christ. We 
should remember that all wickedness is weakness. We must speak like Peter and 
John. We must keep the Head of the corner in view. 3. By the wonderfulness of 
spiritual work and life. Unlearned and ignorant men can render an inca'culable 
service to the cause of Christ by making others marvel, when they speak out boldly 
their humble testimony. But let all who hear it say, " They have been with Jesus." 

III. A GREAT LESSON TAUGHT. 1. To the apostlcs themselves. The power of faith ; 
the protecting presence of God; the safety of boldness; persecution making opportunity; 
the suffering servant honouring the Master. 2. To the council. To judge righteous judg- 
ments ; to learn the method of grace ; to see the errors of the past. But we should be 
warned; for such lessons were in vain, although enforced with such power. 3. T* 



cs, tv. 1— 31] THE ACrs Of Tflfc AIPOSTlMS. 1.:;D 

owrselvts. The whole incident teaches the strength of the spiritual life; the method oi 
the Christian work ; the glory of the believer's prospects. Those that have been with 
Jesus shall share his victories. — B. 

Ver. 20. — The aggressiveness of the gospel. "We cannot but speak the things 
which we have seen and heard." The early history of Christianity a stril^ing proof of 
its Divine origin. Man's method is to wait opportunities, Grod's to create them. Man 
prepares his strength before he puts it forth ; Grod makes his strength pei leot in weak- 
ness. The " foolishness of preaching." Athanasius contra mundum. We must pay 
no heed to the world's scorn and distrust of enthusiasm. 

I. The RELiaioN of Christ aggressive because it is real. " Tlie things which 
we have seen and heard." 1. Not speculative, but simply practical; things of men's 
mural life, things which concern all, things of infinite iraportunce, having their roots in 
I'ternity. 2. Not things of human systems and ecclesiastical dogmas. The apostles 
did not preach either against the Church of Judaism or about the Church government 
of Christianity, but about gospel facts which underlie all systems and must make the 
substance of all creeds. 3. Things of eayenence — " seen and heard." They spoke as 
witnesses ; and the more we can preach as simply bearing testimony to the gospel, the 
more power we have. The various false religions of the world powerless to help 
because they appeal little to fact and experience. 

II. The universal obligation op speaking fob Christ. 1. Speaking before mev. 
The notion of secret disci pleship utterly false. Special value of outspoken faith, both tn 
the believer himself, in confirming, maturing, guiding, clearing the spiritual convictions 
themselves, and in supporting practice by the help of a solemn, recorded vow of service. 
The deeper and the more real the feeling, the more necessity to speak it before otliers. 
2. Speaking to men in Christ's Name. We hearken unto God and ho bills us speak. It 
is a power that grows with exercise. The world requires it more and more. Books can 
never take the place of preaching. In all ages men have looked for and trusled their 
spiritual leaders. The thinu;s of the gospel were not done in a corner, and they must 
b* brought out into public life. Read the Bible in the midday light of modern thought 
and business enterprise ; it is fitted to every stage of human advancement. " Stand 
up for Jesus." — E. 

Vers. 28 — 31. — The two kingdoms in array against one another. I. Thescbiptuhat, 
representation recognized. The Holy Ghost spake it. The view given in Ps. ii. 
corresponds with that which pervades the Bible. The Babel power over against the 
kingdom of God. God making all things to work together for his purposes. The history 
of Jesus Christ a wonderful confirmation of this view. The disciples in their faith and 
fellowship following their Master and accepting the responsibilities of the position. 

II. The spiritual supremacy asserted. 1. By prayer. Appeal to God to justify 
the faith of his people. Martin Luther, "God must save his own Church." As the 
Lord of heaven and earth, the Revealer of his own truth and will, the God of history, 
which shows his faithfulness. 2. By renewed self-consecration. " Grant to thy 
servants boldness." They did not shrink from the conflict, but laid hold of Divine 
strength. 3. By expectation of manifestation of power. The miracle already done was 
but the beginning of great things. We must not be satisfied with mere moral order as 
a testimony to Christianity. We should pray for and expect moral miracles ; not a 
repetition of ancient signs and wonders, but marvels of spiritual life — souls healed, the 
dead raised to life. 

III. The King encouraging the servants of his kingdom. Before the battle closes 
the commander speaks the word of appeal and encouragement along the line of his 
army. When God has appointed us to do great work, he prepares us for it by the 
special gifts of his Spirit. External signs : " The place shaken " — to remind them that 
earthly powers were in God's hand. Spiritual grace vouchsafed : " All filled." The seni e 
of a brotherhood, of an army going forth to fight, deepened by the outpouring of gifte 
upon all. The word spoken " with boldness." Force being made manifest ; perfect love 
casting out fear. We commence from this time a new stage of the history. Persecution is 
aoing its work — calling out the graces of the brotherhood, turning weak men into heroes. 
The simple, devout dependence of those primitive believer* » jsraat szua^s to us. 



140 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [en. iv. 1 -37, 

The Church is lacking in boldness. We must be prepared to grapple with the enemy. 
We must bring their threatenings to God and pray that he will look upon them, 
Above all, we must ask to be filled with the Holy Ghost. — E. 

Vers. 32 — 35. — 2%« host oj Ood drawing together in readineit for action. I. A 
COMMON SPIRIT in the believing multitude. 1. The spirit of faith. 2. Of self-sacrifice. 
3. Of fellowship. 4. Of service. They were of one heart and soul to speak and work 
for the new kingdom. 

II. A ooMMtJNiTT OF UFE AND PBOPERTV. The simple and natural expression of the 
common spirit. Not the modem communism, or anything like it, for that is man's 
experiment to better himself ; but the Christian communism was the believers' expe- 
dient to accomplish the will of God. 

III. A marvellous sign of the Spibit's pkesencb and power. " Great grace upon 
•11." Great power in apostles; great testimony given to Christ. An active, self- 
denying, speaking Church challenging the world. — K. 

Ver. S2.— Christian communism. "And the multitude of them that believed," etc. 
The Bible not a book of politics or earthly legislation. Danger of misapplying its teach- 
ing, by forgetting that it does not dictate formal rules and cieeds, but describes the 
working out of great principles. The social problem of human history — reconciliation 
of individual advancement with social and organic progress ; failure of all merely 
human attempts ; danger of men's experiments ; despondency ; revolution ; selfishness 
of the higher classes : misery of the poor; necessity for change in the material condition 
of society ; recognition of the primary law, the external facts coming forth from the 
internal life. 

I. The SPXRITUAL FACT Set forth. "One heart and soul" in the multitude. 1. 
Cannot be produced by mechanical means. 2. Is the root of all true strength and pros- 
perity in society. 3. Is the gift of the Holy Ghost We should pray for it. The 
great spiritual revivals of history have brought about great moral and social ehanges. 
Reformation ; revival of Wesleys and Whitefield, etc. ; missionary spirit of the present 
century. 

II. The MORAL MIRACLE WTought. The universal self-denial. The confidence in 
a new state of things, though only at present at the threshold. The absorption of 
individuality in brotherhood. A new fact in Jerusalem ; testimony to the power of 
Christ and his doctrine. 

III. The PBACTiOALTEAOHnra EMBODIED in the facts. 1. Depend upon spiritual forces, 
not on political expedients. 2. Let the multitude work out its own form of brother- 
hood, fro 111 the one heart and one soul ; not trust to mere philosophical theorizing and 
dreams of enthusiasts. 3. Preach Christianity as the great uplifting and renewing power 
of the world ; not revolutionary, not by wars and strifes, but by sanctification of the 
multitude of wil Is. 4. Hold up the gospel prophecy to the poor, not to excite in them envy 
of the rich, not to delude them with predictions of a speedy deliverance from necessary 
burdens, but to incite them to the prospect of a larger share in the progressive prosperity 
>f mankind, and to co-operation in the work of uplifting their fellow-men. We should 
be of one heart and soul, rich and poor alike. — E. 

Vers. 36, 37. — A great example of spiritval excellence. The intention of the writer 
is to set in contrast the work of the Spirit in Barnabas and the work of the devil in the 
hearts of Ananias and Sapphira, as also to show to us the relation of character and life 
to one another ; the blessing on those that obey the Spirit, the curse on those that lie 
against the Holy Ghost and resist the will of God in his Church. The difference 
of meaning in "paraklesis," according to some "exhortation," according to others 
" consolation," helps us to keep in mind that the exhortation was consolation; that 
those who preached appeared among men not as mere dry exhorters and teachers, 
but as proclaiming a kingdom which is " righteousness, and peace, and joy in the 
Holy Ghost." 

I. The change wrought in Joseph Barnabas. 1. A Levite, but not passing by th« 
fallen and dying humanity. Notice the contrast between the priesthood of the old 
covenant And the jriesthood of the new; between the man of a corrupt and decayinp 



OH. IT. 1— 37.J THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. ill 



system and the new man in Christ. 2. A Cypriot from a country noted for its self- 
iudulgent luxury and sensuality, yet by the Spirit of Christ delivered from selfishness. 
3. A man of some wealth, becoming poor for Christ's sake and the gospel's, and subjecting 
himselfto the new law of the apostles. The wonders ofthe Middle Ages anticipated. Yet 
our aim should not be to fill the Church's treasuries, but to bless the world with the 
spirit of self-sacrifice. The abuses of the ecclesiastics have always been their not being 
true sons of exhortation and consolation, but " greedy of filthy lucre." 

II. The illustration of gospel principles. 1. Counting all things loss for 
Christ. Losing life to find it. The Church, as well as the individual, is richest and 
happiest when it reckons its whole self as devoted to the work of helping others. 2. 
The sons of exhortation and consolation, i.e. the messengers of mercy, must be 
examples of self-sacrifice, and enforce their precepts with public deeds of generosity, 
and mauifestation of the work of the Spirit in their own lives. The preaching of tlie 
Church will never much affect the world so long as it does not lay its wealth at the 
feet of Christ. 3. The true law of Christ's kingdom is not " Each one for himself and 
by himself," but all faithful to the vocation of the Church. "At the apostles' feet." 
He was a rich man, and probably a highly educated man, but he did not set up a Church 
for himself. He recognized Christ's rule. He was willing to be a servant that he might 
fulfil his ministry of consolation to the world, and so he was immediately recognized 
by those who represented the Master — " surnamed by the apostles." 4. The stamp of 
special, solemn approval is set on faithfulness to conscience in the money matters of the 
Church. There is an eye watching our hand. The money brought should be not merely 
what the world expects to be brought, or what will satisfy the demands of the time and 
maintain our reputation with fellow-Christians, but what the " law of Christ " dictates, 
which is the law of absolute self-denial, and overflowing brotherly affection. We may 
not be a Paul, or an ApoUos, or a Peter, or a John, lacking qualifications for such 
eminence, but we may emulate the example of Joseph Barnabas, and be sons of con- 
solation, channels of blessing and comfort to the world. If we would be so, let us !»y 
what we have at the feet of the apostles, avoiding caprice, self-will, disorder, heresy, 
strife, self-exaltation. There is a true apostolic doctrine and fellowship in the world. 
Cling to it, and cast all to it. — B. 

Vers. 4 — 22. — The first trialqf Christian preachers in a court of jxuigment, and their 
victory. A few words of an historic character lay for us the scene of this trial, put us 
in possession of the question at issue and of the parties, as between whom, if not really 
so, it is to be settled. We are, however, justly at liberty to take note of certain silence 
as well as of certain utterance and preparations for utterance. Those who " laid hands" 
>n Peter and John, " and put them in ward " last night, were silent then as to the 
reason why. No such thing as a civil uproar was hinted at, as matter of apprehension ; 
and no sufficient ecclesiastical reason could, it is evident, be so much as formulated into 
a proposition capable of representing either morals or law. " Being grieved (!) that 
they taught the people, and preached through Jesus the resurrection from the dead," 
is all their case showed last night. And this morning the Sanhedrim — who as much 
for moral as for civil reasons ought to have been examples of something different from 
this — render themselves collectively amenable to the same remarks. It was well for 
all of them that Peter and John were not Romans, either by purchase or by birth (ch. 
xvL 37 ; xxii. 28). On the other hand, the silence of Peter and John themselves on 
this matter is worthy of notice. They remembered something of that great gift, 
greater grace of their Master, and were now learning in practice some lessons of him. 
Sometimes the very achievements of silence are great, and great often the rewards of it 
shall be. They were silent, for the injustice of their imprisonment had been incon- 
venience pe.-sonal to themselves, but just as likely advantage to their Master's cause. 
They were silent, rather than waste time and waken temper as well as prejudice toward 
them in their would-be judges. And they were silent, on the very wise principle ol 
letting " these men alone," that they might run out the more quickly and self- 
condemningly their humiliated career. And it was not long before it was seen to what 
undignified shifts they were brought. Notice — . 

I. The vert ill-shaped indictment. (Ver. 7.) It were, indeed, only by courtesy 
that it could t>e dignified with the name of an indictment at all. The Sanhedrim greatly 



142 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. it. 1—37. 



stood in need of a word from the governor Porcius Festus of just thirty years later, 
when he said to King Agrippa, in reference to Paul, " For it seemeth to me unreasonable 
to send a piisoner, and not withal signify the crimes laid against him "(oh. xxv. 27). 
The Sanhedrim are guilty of this very unreasonableness. 1. They interrogate instead 
of indicting. They are going the way to make themselves beholden to their own 
prisoners for some information and instruction. 2. There is this prima facie weakness 
in the very interrogation, that it is not directed to the character of what has been don«, 
but simply as to how something has been done, that is all the while tacitly admitted to 
be unchallengeable in its nature. 3. However, though their course be ever so much at 
fault for informality and for worse reasons, it has one commanding excellence about it. 
It does go at once to the point. It goes home to what was in their own heart. They 
cannot, in the nature of things, find fault with Peter and John for relieving of his 
lameness a man now "above forty yeai-s old," and who had never been anything but 
lame. And they cannot find fault with them for doing this on a " sabbath day," 
because it was not the sabbath. So it is only left them to try and find something to 
take hold of, in " the kind of power," or " the kind of name," by or in which they had 
" done this thing ; " which, it is noticeable, they do not choose to call here by its right 
name, "a notable miracle," as they do immediately afterwards in their secret con- 
clave (ver. 16). And, further, they may hope to find something to take hold of in " the 
kind " of answer the two apostles may proffer. But this does not prove to be the case ; 
for their discretion, silence, temperateness, cannot be surpassed. If the picture, then, 
of this trial shows the court put in a foolish position, it shows the accused or the 
prisoners in an intrinsically proud position. They are masters of the position, strange 
to say. 

II. The defence. (Vers. 8 — 12.) Notice in this defence : 1. That the method of it 
may be justly assigned to the presence of the Holy Spirit. Peter is emphatically 
described as " filled with the Holy Ghost." 2. That, nevertheless, it is of the simplest 
character. It might be said to be of nature's simplest style. (1) It consists of a mere 
statement of facts. " You ask," says Peter, " of a deed, a ' good deed, done to an 
impotent man.' You ask by what, by what virtue — call it ' power ' or call it a 
' name ' as you will — that impoteat man has taken the advantage of what is contained 
in that good deed." And Peter continues, without a word, or tone, or sign of apology, 
" Be it known to you, and to the whole nation beside, that it is by the virtue of One 
whom you and they know but too well — Jesus of Nazareth, whom you and they 
crucified, and — wonderful contrast of rebuke — whom God raised from the dead. Here 
standing before you, and beside us, your prisoners, is a man, who is more to be 
remarked upon for the fact that he was made whole by that Name, than simply for the 
fact itself, that (as none can deny) he has been made whole — genuinely made whole." 
(2) It consists, further, of a quotation from the Old Testament, of woids most personal 
to the court listening to Peter, and the application of which to them Peter minces not 
at all. Peter speaks just as though it were one of those cases in which truth must and 
will out. There can have been no effrontery in the manner of Peter's utterance, nor 
any appearance of intentional affront, else we cannot imagine that bis sentence would 
have been allowed to come to an end. Often as wrong manner prejudices the interest 
of welcome truth, the present was an instance of the converse how truth of the most 
unwelcome kind got its fair force, being unprejudiced by any fiavour of bitterness, spite, 
taunt, or malignity. (3) It consisted of a word of genuine universal gospel as well. 
Now does even Peter speak a more catholic gospel than he is at the moment conscious 
of. He anticipates in one breath the apostle of the Gentiles, who was yet to come. 
But independently of this, and stopping snort of it, Peter's aim is to speak of that Name 
of Christ as the Name of the only Saviour, rather than to speak of the universal sweep 
of his dominion and virtue. He has got his foot in ; he sees the narrow end of the grand 
wedge in ; he seizes the priceless opportunity, and uses it. The defence had the seeds 
of triumph in it, and it triumphed. 

III. The embabbassment of the coubt. (Vers. 13 — 18.) This was, in very deed, 
a most pronounced embarrassment. It is spoken by the historian in. five plain enough 
statements. The signs of it, also, were probably only too plain, or otherwise the case 
was a great exception to a very general rule. 1. Those who sat in the seat of authority 
were, unfortunately for the position they filled, stricken with amazement. " They 



OH.IV. 1— 37.] THB ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 143 

marvelled * at the imperturbed flow of speech and resolute wielding of argument which 
proceeded from two men who, aa being "unlearned" and unprofessionai men, ought 
rather to have been overawed in the presence of such as themselves — as they thought. 
In the midst of tbeir amazement, however, they either remembered the fact, or saw in 
the very bearing of the men the fact, that they were old associates of Jesus. 2. They 
were fairly stricken with silence. There, present before them — there, at the very side of 
the prisoners, proffering himself as a living monument of their last evening's work — was 
the veritable healed man himself. Such a juxtaposition oi facta ties into silence very 
perverse-wayed tongues. " They can say nothing against it." 3. They are stricken 
with an idea that a private conference with one another may suggest a way out of their 
undignified difficulty. There is always something very suspicious, ominous of impending 
disaster, if the men that love the broadest daylight of public glare suddeuly are for 
retreating into the unloved shade. 4. Betired from public gaze, they fiud themselves 
still stricken with a perplexity that grows no better for deliberation and secret con- 
ference. Fur one thing only do we seem able to admire in any sense these men. They 
have eyes to see, and they have not got to the point of seeing facts to deny them. They 
will not hazard themselves into the position of denying a " notable miracle manifest" 
to all the rest of the world that lives in Jerusalem. But their perplexity is the greater, 
what they shaU do. 6, Because they are fearful of the one thing, truth, which should 
have made them fearless, they are stricken with love of an expedient .simply so insane 
in its certain working that it at once worsened their whole case and plight. They will 
forbid the tide. They will command, " Hitherto shalt thou come, hut no further." 
They will bid to flow back a river that shows an unmistakable force and breadth and 
depth of current. They will threaten and prohibit. Whether they are counted as 
legislators, or statesmen, or judges, they are childish and incompetent. 

IV. Thk decision and followino action of the court. (Ver, 18.) " They 
command" the apostles "not to speak at all nor to teach in the Name of Jesus." 
Thus began the struggle between civil command and human conscience, not indeed 
in the history of the world, but in the history that has ever shown it in most intensi- 
fied form, of the Christian Church. Notice: 1. The parties to this struggle. Traced 
home, they resolve themselves into the vrish of some against the contcience of others. 
2. The intrinsic and even notorious inequality of these. That wish, it is true, will be 
said to be founded upon opinion, ju<lgment, experience, consent of many. But this is 
equivalent to an open betraying of the proportionately easy access to it, of disturbing 
causes — causes that lay it actually open to suspicion, and render it unreliable. Wish 
notoriously tins in being the victim of feeling, and none can be "ignorant of its 
derices." A hundred elements, each one of which is a possible avenue of error, go to 
form that wish or will of the some which then presumes or endeavours to impose upon 
the conscience of other some. On the other hand, conscience, whether it be allowed to 
be more or less of an original faculty or principle of human nature, owns to and justly 
claims a native prerogative, the prerogative of the judge. And it may err. It will 
be liable to err, and has in point of fact often shown itself liable to err — on one side, 
through being uninformed, or ill informed. Yet, whoever flouts it (whether the 
owner of it himself or another for him), is guilty of flouting pro tern. " the powers that 
be," and those powers, powers that " be of God." Say whatsoever may be said to the 
derogation of the individual conscience, that man stands on perilous ground indeed who 
risks what is involved in neglecting his own conscience, or who takes in hand to 
supersede that of others, by his own fiat, under whatsoever name or misnomer it may 
endeavour to pass muster. To very different moral zones of being do the voices of 
external command and of internal command belong. As once a whole world was on 
one side, and Noah and the Divine command on the other, so it is quite possible that 
the whole world might be on one side, and an individual man and his conscience be on 
the other side, and these be in the right. And it was something like this, though not 
this, that was to be seen now. The whole authorities of a nation were in this court 
on one side, and Peter and John on the other ; and these were in the right, and the 
real strength of position lay with them. 3. The unconquerable deep facts of human 
Jiature and life to which these phenomena conduct. For we get here a suggestion and 
a glimpse of the idea according to which God has provided for the security of hij 
mighty grasp on the mighty mass of mankind. Thore is left no doubt which ia the 



144 TUB ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. iv. 1—37. 

mightier. This method of securing a certainty and even facility of hold upon the 
vastest hulk of mankind, to disintegrate it if one corrupt mass, or gradually to 
redintegrate it, without recourse to flood or deluge or any physical force, invites most 
grateful and reverent study. The analogies of physical nature, more and more laid 
bare to light by science, offer many an inferior harmony with it. , God's moral hold 
upon the great mass depends on and is regulated by his hold upon the individual and 
the individual conscience; and often exhibits itself in this shape — that one conscience 
touched will prevail against ten thousand men, will suffice to make " a divided house," 
and put a wonderfully centrifugfil tendency into the constituent parts of what seemed 
a very compact whole. While, on the other hand, thousands and all the influence they 
could wield, and all the torture they could apply to martyrdom itself, will leave the 
conscience unharmed and unmoved. " Command," then, and " threat," varied only by 
" threat " and " command," are the singularly weak weapons to which this embarrassed 
and undignified court now resort. And these soon enough crumble to their touch. 

V. The rebttff sustained bt the cotTRT. (Vers. 19 — 22.) This rebuff contains 
not a few points which make it remaikahle. 1. It is no doubt uttered in a respectful 
tone and manner, but for decision of language and firmness of front it wants nothing. 
It distinctly emphasizes the subordinate character of the jurisdiction of the Sanhedrim; 
it distinctly emphasizes their prisoners' knowledge of it ; and as distinctly it empha- 
sizes the intention of the prisoners to continue to do the things they were commanded 
not to do, and respecting which they were threatened. 2. The rebuff administered by 
Peter and John contains a reiteration of that which was so often the unconcealed 
strength of the apostolic message — the doctrine and impulse of " God," the matters of 
fact, such as they themselves had "seen and heard." Three forces sustained (and 
should still sustaim) the Christian preachers — that they spoke things within their own 
knowledge, that they found themselves -irresistibly moved to speak of these things, 
and tliat their undying conviction was that those things were the things of God. 
Upon what a platform of unassailable strength do they now stand, who hold this reply 
only to prohibition and threat, " Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken 
unto you more than unto God, judge ye : for we cannot but speak the things which 
we have seen and heard " 1 The implications are manifest. That the apostles must do 
what is right ; that by right they mean what is so in the sight of Qod ; that this 
may utterly traverse and contravene the criterion of right with the Sanhedrim ; and 
that they are cognizant of a call to speak which they cannot and will not disobey. 
3. The lebuff so fits in to truth, to time, and to circumstance, that there is nothing left 
for those most smitten by it but to sit down quietly under it. Except for the inanity 
of " further threatening " Peter and John, those who now smart are also like certain 
others, " speechless " (Matt. xxii. 12). So sometimes does God cover with the shield of 
his wondrous protection his servants. They are without a shred of worldly position, 
of influence, of wealth. They sit on no throne, can summon no legions, nor wield one 
Aveapon. Yet arc they themselves kept safe as " the apple of his eye." They gaze, too, 
with the light of the Divine eye tn human hearts, darkened with guilty tumult 
because un loyal to the truth. And it is entrusted to them to wield the weapon of 
unanswerable rebuke. Many a victory falls far short of what it seems. Greater than 
all, it showed, was the victory of Peter and Joha, when the Sanhedrim, after enduring 
keen rebuke and blank rebuff, nevertheless " let them go, finding nothing how they might 
punish them, because of the people: for all men glorified God for that which was 
done." It is so, God protects and exalts and all in one honours his servants with 
highest service in his Name. — B. 

Vers. 23 — 31. — The grateful, emboldened, and prayerful Church, and the Spirlfi 
witness. With all the naturalness of simplest truth, we are told how the apostles, in 
their new character of discharged prisoners, hie away at once to their brethren of tha 
Church. Anil we are in this passage taught how — 

I. The Chubcm should be a home op tenderebt, most FArrnFUL stmpathibs, 
AUD OF holt socLiL iNTBBConRSE. Now it is too often the place of suspicion, dis- 
trust, unhappy emulations. Or it is the place of coldest indifference. None welcome 
the coming, speed the parting, guest. Or it is only the place of an almost selfish 
seeking of the ^rufiered religious instruction, or exhortation, or enjoyment that may, 



OH. IT. 1—37.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, 145 

imder those conditions, scarcely be realized. The germ of the Church ihowed far 
otherwise. The highest type of Church life possible on earth may be confidently 
calculated on to show something very different. And till such difference become 
plain in any part of the Christian Church, it faintly indeed reflects the glorious reality 
above. 

IL The Chttrch shohld be "the Eotal Exohanob" of CHKisxiAir szwa, of 
Chkistian enterprise, an7> of Christian business. The world may know, and all 
the bettor that it sliould know, the achievements of Christ and his truth. But the 
Church should know them still better, and often under very different aspects. Noi 
has the Church anything to conceal of its purposes or its methods ; yet may these 
oftener be hallowed, and be more abounding and richer In grace and the elements of 
success, when considered and matured in the Church. If only we could imagine the 
account in detail which Peter and John now gave " to their own company " of their 
experience, and what their eyes had seen and their ears had heard, and of the irre- 
sistible impressions of the characters of others which had been made upon their 
minds, by the events of the past, say, fifteen hours, since they had been put in ward! 
Kow every ear was attention, gladdened thought smiled on every countenance, and 
praboldened purpose stirred every heart. While anon the " threatenings " (ver. 29), 
that had been among the things which " the chief priests and elders had said to them " 
(vur. 23), received also their due consideration. It is quite to be supposed that no one 
of that "company" but found himself stronger for the joy of that hour, and more 
watchful and forearmed for what of forewarning it had in it. 

ill. The Church should find the place in fullest oeandeur or adoration, 

a HATEFUL praise, APPEAL, AND PRATER, MET TOQETHBB IN ONE SERVICE. Everything 

argues that the scene now before us was one of high inspiration. A large multitude 
of sympathetic souls hear the simplest tidings on a certain subject of the two liberated 
apostles ; and though doubtless some one must have led off the chorus, forthwith the 
wb'le company "lift up their voice to God with one accord." And as we listen to 
that most real orchestra, what is it that we hear them singing? They uplift iirst the 
outburst of adoration; it is the snatch of a song sung by their ancestors a thousand 
jears before (vers. 24 — 26), and it simulates the responsive too. For it quotes the 
confirming word and declaration of God, putting it as if in response to the human 
ascription made first to him: "Lord, thou art God . . . and thou didst say, Why 
do the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things?" We listen still, and 
th( re follows the recitative — a few bars that tell the recent history of the Messiah, the 
anointed Jesus. But these strains do not die off without pronouncing in majesty the 
foreseeing, foredetermining, sovereign counsel that belongs to God. Then follow 
appeal (ver. 29) and prayer (ver. 30), and they both were acceptable and accepted. 
In this appeal and prayer, with the reverent suggestion they venture upon — "by 
stTctching forth thy hand to heal " — there is something touching and pathetic. It were 
as though those who prayed bespoke of their sovereign Friend that he would not over- 
look the " threatenings " wherewith they were threatened, but that he would divinely 
checkmate these by again " stretching forth the healing hand," and again and again 
working " signs and wonders by the Name of Jesus," so that, together with faithfulness 
granted to his servants to speak the word, there might be superadded to them "bold- 
ness " in speaking it. Nothing less befits the character of the Word of God, scarcely 
anything more dishonours it, than to speak it fearfully, half apologetically, or with 
halting accents and uncertain sound. It is worthy to be spoken with that boldness 
which is all its own, and its own least due. Notliing on earth can equal the grandeur 
of a service like this. Such a service cannoP find its habitat except in the Church. 
But has it found it there as often as it might? 

IV. TeK ChUROH should work for one THING — THE EMPHATIC WITNESS OF THE 

Holt Ghost. Christianity is the dispensation of the Spirit. It is very certain that 
the most perfect outline of Christian truth is but a skeleton, and the most complete 
and harmonious and scriptural body of Christian doctrine but a corpse, except as the 
Spirit breathes life and power into them. The skeleton may be a marvel of adaptation 
and symmetry laid bare to the eye of whoever will behold, and the fashioned and 
flUed-in body may be an exquisite model for grace and proportion; but thiy are dead 
till the Spirit gives the life. This is not to be supposed to need any prouf now ; but it 

ACTS. Il 



14« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. iv. 1—37 

it did, the word of Josus himself about his own truth, previous to his death and after 
his resurrection, and the conduct and directions of Jesus previous to his ascension and 
to the diiy of Pentecost, amply prove it. But though it needs no proof, it may very 
largely need enforcement. Probably nothing so stays the advent of the grandest 
effects of Cliristianity as forgelfulness on the part of its piol'essors of the force 
necessary, because divinely aii[iointed, to give it eflfect. The Spirit is not honoured as 
he should be in the Church. The Church does not " look for " his coming, nor wait 
for him, with much longing and with trustful prayer. At this very time and for 
some years past there has been a wonderful activity within the borders of the Church 
— almost preternatural — but, alas 1 not at all relatively evidencing the supernatural. 
" Lo, here 1 " and " Lo, there 1 " has long been the cry ; so-called " levivals " have been 
proclaimed, and the stir of them, at all events, has been seen in most various sections of 
the Church ; undeniably an unwonted industry of head and hand and foot has prevailed 
in the region of. human instrumentality. And tliose who have thus wrought have 
been far too ready to " blow the trumpet and proulaim" a self-made and only self- 
found triumph. But where has the real life been evidenced ? Where have real 
abounding fruits been witnessed? This is a thing not less remarkable than it seems, 
but far more so, and it begs to be approached, not with olfband o.^planation, but with 
exceedingly reverent scrutiny. That many men of incoirupt life and unsuspected 
simplicity of aim have laboured with exti'emest zeal to lay hold upon their fellow-men 
for Christ, and the fruits of their labour have been a grievous gleaning instead of an 
undoubted crop I Collateral explanations and mitigating considerations must yield to 
the one solemn account of it. The Holy Spirit has not been in the midst of that 
work, has not been the beginning and the end of that activity. But what is this which 
we have here? It is a rcfre.'ihing crisis for which truly everything had prepared the 
way. Yes, but without it — if it had not come — everything that had gone before would 
have been dried to the aridity of the sandy desert itself. " When they had finished 
praying, the very place where they were assembled together was shaken." It meant 
the entrance of the Spirit of all power and might. " And the assembled believers were 
all filled with the Holy Ghost" — Pentecost repeats itself — "and they spake the word 
of God with boldness." What thought, what hallowed musing, what prayer of the 
Chvirch, should seek both for itself and for the world another visit of this same 
kind I— B. 

Vers. 32 — 35. — A novel unanimity. It is safe to say that this verse marks one of 
the world's largest moral strides of progress. It is a landmark in itself, of widest 
significance. It is a moral landmark of deepest and mist grateful omen. Travel 
through the whole history of the Old Testament, and you come to no spot that can 
show a sight like this. The nearest approach to it some finger-post prophetic, prophetic 
of nothing else than this. From this landmark the world has confessedly travelled on 
again far. But it is not cither " taken away " or so much as " removed." It stands 
where it did, and it is what it was. And it has become also a beacon. Some beacons 
are for warning, but this for encouragement and for inspiration of the highest degree. 
In the unanimity so novel and surprising found in this passage of sacred history, 
there is no great difiSculty in distinguishing the essential and permanent amid wliat was 
accidental and likely to be temporary. Eighteen centuries iied of the world's and the 
Church's history have not failed to throw on the subject all necessary light. They 
have shown that it was none of the genius of Christianity to reduce the complexity of 
human life and business to a simplicity that would show no problem at all. Christianity 
has far too much genius for this ; its'meaning and its resources alike justly more 
ambitious, almost by an infinite quantity. And they have shown that amid a 
multitude and a variety of elements and interests, of relationships and duties, Christian 
principle, motive, and love have been ever engaged, are still engaging themselves, in 
eliminating , one fellowship, one family. Want shall not be more common than 
resource, nor demand than supply, nor prayer than the loving-kindness which hearh 
and answers, prompt and bountiful. And these things not of physical miracle, but of 
the community of "kindred minds.'' Meanwhile we are permitted to examine the 
conditions of a fellowship that amounted to a imanimity most astonishing. We a'a 
permitted to study it not 'n theory but in actual fact. Notice — 



Oil. IV. 1—37.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 147 

I. The real natcjbe of this unanimity so novel. It is of a moral sort. It is not 
of an intellect lal sort, nor indeed of any other possibly more open to view, but less 
deep and far-reaching than this. " They were of one heart and one soul." They felt 
one, wished, hoped, purposed, and sought, as though, instead of being a " multitude," 
they were " all one." 

II. The source op this dnan.mity so novel. One thing, one thing only, accounts 
for it. It comes from spiritual causes, and is af spiritual birth. It answers to the 
work of deepest impressions and influences made upon whatever was deepest found in 
certain men. It is true that certain some, who had " no depth " in them, and had 
experienced no deep influences, seemed caught by the contagion of it ; but what they 
were really caught by was the contagion of the appearance of it. Long before the sun 
rose to its "scorching heat" they were "withered away." No entrancing Utopian 
doctrine captivated the " multitude." The Holy Spirit wrought deep in their heart. 
No calculations of the doctrines of human society, of science, of economy, showed the 
way to tliis unanimity, but only the unoalculatingness of "souls" moved by that same 
Holy Spirit. The doctrinaire and the professed unbeliever may have their version to 
give of this unanimity, but to the believer in Scripture it is as important to note as it 
is impossible to disbelieve it, that this great phenomenon was the fruit of a suiernaLuial 
Being working in men's hearts. Of all lame philosophies of human life and human 
events, that is the lamest that leaves out the theology of the simplest version of 
Christianity. 

III. Tub visible effects of this unanimity wbiib novel. These visible effects 
were practical in their nature. They were such as both pervaded and penetrated — 
they dominated the life of those in whom they were shown forth. They consisted of 
good deeds. They were the good deeds of genuine "charity." They bespoke the 
extinction (at all events for the time) of selfishness, and they furnished a literal 
example of the fulfilling of " the second great comiuandment," viz. the loving of one's 
neighbour as one's self They were effects that shuwed no laboured attempt, nor even 
the consciousness of effort, and in these very features of them looked the more lil^e 
"the fruits of the 8i)iiit." Nor could they be confounded with mere detached and 
individual good deeds. Tliey were systematic, and if they could be said to leave the 
giver poorer at all, they left him also poorer for all his life. He gave and gave all that 
he had to give in many instances, and therein notably differenced liimself from the 
man who may work himself up or be worked up to the point of giving one large 
subscription, but who has never yet risen to the occasion of giving — in one that largest 
and least— himself, first to " the Lord and then to his people." But this it is that was 
the attested outcome of the unanimity of those disciples, that they gave themselves to 
one another. And of this no account oifers itself but one that carries with it the 
inevitable conclusion, that they had first gi\ en themselves to the Lord. However, it 
is the thing patent with which we have here to do, and that was not the profession of 
a Divine, but the proof of a mutual, love. Pointing to this unusual " multitude," we 
may say — nay, all subsequent times have said — " The works that they did bare witness 
of them." For the rich and those who had, by a voluntary levelling down, and by 
the simplest, most natural organization, put poverty, want, and their attendant evils 
to flight. Artificial distinction on the one hand, and envy on the other, sank swiTt 
below the horizon. Wonderful transformation to be wrought only by the " Holy 
Sjirit " ! While it lasted it showed a dispensation by itself, unique, " elect, precious." 
While it lasted, it exhibited the people of God as " a chosen generation, a royal 
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people," successfully showing forth " the praises 
of him" who had called them "out of darkness" into wliat certainly was "marvellous 

light" 

IV. Evertthino remarkable in this unanimity was bo far forth intensified 
in the multitude of those amongst whom it was proved. The greater multitude 
of any people must carry so much greater variety. Varieties of age and character, of 
position and of past life, must in this multitude have been strikingly represented. But 
all these, whatever they were, did " that one and the selfsame Spirit work '' to a 
harmony and union unknown before. To think of the vast variety of opinion, and 
temper, ani taste^ and feeling, all meekly, obediently, gladly, lowering their pride 1 
Thej swaj themselves iT..to a rest of peace that "the world knoweth not.' And 



148 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [<«. it. 1— 37. 

worthy of observation indeed is this. It shuts' the mouth of the taunt that Christianity 
is the religion of a clique, of the weak, of the few. It is the open augury of a religion 
that is to convince, to unite, and to rule all ; but its rule, the rule that is most binding 
of all rule — that of love. — B. 

Ver. 36 — ch. ▼. 11. — The earliest of the tares, in the field of the Ckureh. The 
age of the Church numbered as yet only its days. The " good seed" had been sown 
in the field by "the Son of man " but a few hours, yet " the enemy . . . the devil " 
had found a prized opportunity to " sow tares," and uses it not in vain. The names 
and history of Ananias and Sapphira are among the best known of all those imbedded 
in Scripture. When the striking episode, however, is detached from its proper place, it 
loses very much of its significance and force. But, taking the time and place of it into 
account, the episode is in the highest degree dramatic. And the reality of the history 
which it recounts, it is which exalts it to that height. It is one of those unwelcome 
products of human nature which mean, in equal proportions, three things — the painful, 
the startling, and the too true. A very crisis of glory is dashed by an incident of 
darkness, sin, and shame. It is dashed thus, however, in the present instance for " about 
the space of three hours" only, when the majesty and integrity of truth are terribly 
vindicated. Let us consider — 

L Tub sin here eecohded. Though it may seem desirable to supplement the wordt 
of the nairntive, the thought and intent of it want nothing. Thus, though it is not so 
worded in the case of Ananias, it is plain that when he brought what any way pur- 
ported to be the full price of his vended "possession" and "laid it at the aijostlcs' 
feet," either interrognted or without interrogation he gave it to be understood that it 
really was the full price. The ground of Peter's suspicion on the matter is not stated. 
■ But a choice of exjilanations of it can easily be offered. Something in the manner of 
the man, even possibly some needless asseveration of the entirety of the price, or some- 
thing disproportionately small in the price brought as the equivalent of the " posses- 
sion" parted with, or the discernment of the inspired and spiritually sensitive apostle, 
not set in motion by any external cause, may quite account for it. In this last sup- 
position Peter will remind us, not unworthily, of Peter's loved Master, in the exercise 
of a certain spontaneous detection, and in preventing any greater mischief by a certain 
promptness of anticipation. Be this as it may, in the analysis of the sin under con- 
sideration it must be that: 1. The first constituent of it is a capital falsehood, and 
this needs no further comment. 2. Falsehood the deceiving purpose of which snfl'ers 
no little aggravation from tlie cruel affront it offers a new-born loving, holy little 
society, and the august representatives and leaders of it, now known for their 
inspiration and for the miracles they had wrought. 3. Falsehood in the matter of a 
religious and voluntary service. 4. Falsehood that was intended to win for those 
guilty of it a reputation for zeal toward God and enthusiasm of liberal love toward 
man, when neither the one nor the other was there. 5. Falsehood that meantime 
was covering, or seeking to cover, no higher style of character than this, viz. to save 
stealthily something from (what is inwardly regarded as) the wreck for self, and yet 
share the contributed beneficence of others. The case was presumably this — a man, 
under the cover of religious motive and resolve, professes to sell all and give all, forsooth 
that he may secretly store some, and be placed at an advantage for getting more. The 
rich yoimg ruler was sincerity, honesty, and enthusiasm, all to perfection, in compa- 
rison of this exhibition. 6. Falsehood that was deliberate. It was not the resii't 
of any sudden gust of temptation. It was deliberate to the extent of being concerted 
between two. I'he unhallowed imagination, thought, resolve, of one heart soon grows 
into the unhallowed covenant of two hearts. Alas, for the sugaoiited picture, for the 
mournful portraitun of human nature, for the dark interior,too faithluUy drawn, of that 
hou»ehold 1 To sum up, then, what has gone before, the direct falsehood of Ananias and 
Sapphira (to call them for the moment one) was not the whole sin, but, bad as it was 
in itscit, was but the outside covering of sins, too strong nevertheless to be held of it. 
" Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment ; and some they follow 
after " (1 Tim. v. 24). The delicacy and exquisiteuess of all the fellowship of circum- 
stance amid which the sin of Ananias and Sapphira saw the light, measure the exJ;eut 
of the i^ont it daied to offer to truth, and augur the fearfulneae vf the doom thai 



•tt.ilf. i-4t.3 tfiE ACn?S OE* THE AtOSTLES. 14E 

should visit that affront. Honoe it comes that we do instinctively understand Peter's 
inspired esftimate of it — that it is a " lie unto the Holy Ghost . . . unto God," and a 
" tempting of the Spirit of the Lord." And in thus estimating the sin, In "the lighi 
of God's light," Peter romiads us of David, who, bowed in deepest anguish for the 
sins of murder and adultery, nevertheless cries to God, "Against thee, thee only, have 
I sinned!" 

II. Pbtbk's own diagnosis of this sin that now presented itself to view. 
There is manifestly a deeper tieatment of such a presentation of human nature open to 
us; but especially was it open to the inspired apostle. Let us follow his gu'danoe 
more exclusively. It wa.» given to him to conduct us deeper down into the retreats of 
luiman hearts, and we do well to use our opportunity to follow him. Peter indis- 
I'Utably finds these three things. He finds : 1. A proffered interference of Satan. 2. 
An accepted interference of him, on the part of Ananias. 3. The issue — a " lie to the 
Holy Ghost." We touch here distinctly the things characteristic of revelation. They 
are, it must be noted, the things resented not by the scoffer only, but by the rationalisr, 
and by science, simply quoad science. The provinces of revelation and science in 
human life, however, are neither contradictory nor mutually exclusive, but they are 
complementary. And the Christian is the rich man because he feels and knows them 
such. We have then here, from the lips of Peter, the first introduction, since the 
ascension of (Jhrist and the descent of the Holy Ghost, of the personality of Satan as 
the antagonist of the Holy Ghost. His work is immediately what reproduces itself 
through the human heart, as not merely " a lie," but a " lie to the Holy Ghost." So 
much for the intrinsic work and the presumably most prized object of Satan. But, 
again, it is not now Satan, but Ananias, who is standing at the bar of Peter — Peter, an 
inspired apostle, and laden with the significant attestation of miracle. And the 
crucial question upon which Peter arraigns Ananias, and is going to found very shortly 
his storn condemnation of him, is this (though somewhat obscured in Authorized Ver- 
sion) : " How is it that Satan has won what ought to be the stronghold of your heart, so 
that you have ' lied to the Holy Ghost ' ? No physical necessity, no moral necessity, n o 
necessity whatever, was laid on you to sell your possession at all. And yet you have 
taken in hand to do this, and 'taken into your heart' to do it, with such superadded 
suggestion of Satan, that you have made your deed the vehicle of a ' lie to the Holy 
Ghost,' and of sharp death to yourself." The supreme event follows for Ananias close 
upon the word of Peter. And a certain irresistible conclusion also for us follows close 
upon the word of Peter — that either we are reading a fable and a lie, or that Ananias 
was the tool of Satan, and was held responsible for becoming so t This is among the 
very first lessons, in the matter of the spiritual relationshijis and facts of human hearts, 
taught under the emphatic "dispensation of the Spiiit." And he can scarcely bo 
envied who risks his own opinion against such a lesson. We cannot consent to suppose 
(though some have supposed it) that Peter's meaning simply amounted to this, that 
Ananias lied to the Holy Ghost because he lied to him, who was inspired of the Holy 
GJiost. No ; Ananias lied to the Holy Ghost in three degrees. He lied to him in being 
false to any genuine impulse that he had at first experienced from hira ; in being false 
still when he knew that he had forsaken his guidance and yet pretended to bfl moved 
practically to join the new society by selling and giving ; and, lastly — and this con- 
summates and sufficiently expresses all — in electing to cast in his lot with S.itan, in 
his capacity of arch-antagonist of the Holy Ghost. Upon the whole consideration of 
the sin of Ananias, it must be concluded that, by human analysis of it, they must 
indeed be "fools" who " make a mock of sin." Yet, under the searching and deep cuttini^ 
of Divine analysis as expressed in Scripture, is not the same conclusion reached wi.h 
tenfold impressiveness ? 

III. The Divinb witness against this sin. 1. It was "a swift witness." The 
tares arc emphatically not allowed to grow with the wheat and abide a later judgment. 
The reason for delay (Matt. xiii. 29) did not exist here. (1) An unerring eye 
detects the bad seed. (2) A steady, unerring hand can uproot the ill growth without 
uprooting also the good growth. 2. It was a witness so swift that no time " for 
repentance," no interval of grace, is granted — possibly because there was literally no 
" place of repentance " (Heb. xii. 17). Was it now that a real instance was founc"* ol 
the "»in againat the Hc'y Giiost," to be "forgi-w^a, neither in this world, neitiei 



150 THE ACTS OP THE APOSi'LES. [oh. tr. 1—37 



in the world to come " (Matt. lii. 32) ? 3. It was a redoubled witness. The second 
instance following so close on the first and in its exact track made impressivenesB itsell 
yet more impressive, as the rapid redoubled peal of thunder strikes a ten/old terror into 
the heart. 4. The witness was timed with a precision that exam/pies how closely the 
eye, the ear, the hand itself ot the supreme Kuler of mankind may be always upon the 
track of human individual life. That eye sees all and to the time. That ear hears all 
and to the time. That hand is close upon all and to the moment of perpetration, an'J 
might stay the deed, or at once reward it or visit it with swift retribution. This is 
not what is generally and to practical purpose believed. The absolute, physical proof 
of it would manifestly take off all its strain from faith, and reduce to nothing the 
moral government of the world. It is enough if example be given, and if the veil now 
and then be drawn aside, or, as in this instance, suddenly rent to the revealing of that 
which is behind. 

IV. The specialty obseuvable in the treatment of this bin. The «wift and 
conclusive visitation of this sin, with arraignment, punishment, and judgment all in 
one, was a method new for anything done as under the Spirit of Christ. During the 
personal ministry of Christ on earth nothing can be instanced to resemble it, except 
the withering of the flg tree, and that does not resemble it. Christ refused to call fire 
from heaven or to permit a sword in the hand of a disciple. And when the unre- 
generate impetuosity of Peter did use the sword, Christ went so far as to undo what it 
had done. Forbearance and long-suffering were unfailing watchwords with Jesus. 
Let us observe that : 1. One thing justifies this summary treatlnent, namely, that the 
agent in it is without doubt none other than the Spirit of detection, of conviction, of 
unerring discernment, of perfect knowledge. Whether this sovereign Spirit, the Holy 
Spirit, led the way rapidly through the instrumentality of Peter, or finally, without 
any use of even the lip of Peter himself, executed swift sentence, the entire respon- 
sibility rested with that same eternal Spirit. 2. One thing may with but little li^ss 
hesitation be counted to explain the reason of this unusual " course of the Spirit," 
namely, the exact crisis at which the tender young society had arrived in certain 
moral aspects. The prompt and peremptory "course of the Spirit" on this occasion 
was not for any external defence of the body of the infant Church, but for the inner 
defence of it, of its very heart, of its self. In this swift visitation, whatever of 
kindness there was, that the communion of the true should not be poisoned by the 
presence of the false, and whatever of stern example there was to operate as an 
immediate counteiactive and deterrent, alike the one and the other meant mercy and 
consideration toward an infant heart. The elements which went to make that heart 
just what it now was have already been passed under review. We know full well 
tliat the Church was not pennitted to depend long for its purity upon such witness 
as this. Kevertheless, the memory of it and of the principle contained in it has 
ever lived, lives still a powerful witness in itself, both for the Church and for the 
world. , 

V. Lastly, the impression produced bt the judgment of this sin. " Great fear 
came on all them that heard these things" (ver. 5); "Great fear came upon all'the 
Church, and upon as many as heird these things " (ver. 11). 1. The impression that 
was produced was one of a henlthful sort. Many times as fear finds fiilse occasion, this 
was an occasion most just. Human hearts need betimes such rousing. " Since the 
fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation 
of the world " (2 Pet. iii. 4), is the languid complaint of the life of far more than those 
from whose lip it is heard. When God is "strict to mark iniquity" now, men begin 
to fear, and they think, and they believe, for an hour at least, in the reality of moral 
distinctions. Pity and shame it is that men do no'i understand and believe that there 
is a sense in which God assuredly is and will ever bo " strict to mark iniquity," so that 
they should " fear before him all the day." It is God's mercy which wakes fear 
betimes by methods such as that under consideration ; for that fear is helpful to 
remind, and to arrest attention, and to suggest omuard thinking. And it is not less 
God's mercy that he does not use such metliod very often. For it would make harder, 
those who will be haid. And it would deprive the willing and obedient of the 
opportunity (1) of testifying what faith they have, and (2) of lestitg that faith, and 
(3) of getting greater strength to it. 2. The impression was one that wrought on 



oa. IV. 1—37.] THE ACTS OF THE AKISTLES. IBi 

Baint and sinner, on the Church and on " all that heard " of whnt had transpired. Th« 
Divine judgment no douht aimed at this twofold ministry, in one and the same 
providence. (1) Though the " fear " were of the nature of a shock to the disciples 
that formed that cheerful and holy society, yet it tended in the directest manner 
possible to recover them from the greater shock of such a sight as this, falsehood and 
hypocrisy and unreality triumphing, or even permitted to breathe amongst them. And 
(2) because the " fear " was of the nature of a shock, it worked caution and the awe 
of reverence on the part of those who were outside the Church. These were very 
forcibly reminded that to be true disciples meant something more and deeper than 
in an hour's enthusiasm joining themselves to a happy company, whose very earnest- 
ness had it in it to enlist a natural sympathy. The sympathy that joins any man to 
the Church of Jesus Christ must be something different from a natural sympathy. It 
must be an inward, deepest sympathy wrought by the Spirit. — B. 

Ver. 8. — The first prisoners for Christ. It appears that by this time the movements 
of the apostles were beginning to he an object of serious concern to tlie religious 
authorities in Jerusalem. Probatly the Sadducee party, which succeeded in securing 
our Lord's death, was still predominant in the great council ; this is indicated by the 
prominence given to the " Resurrection " by the enemies of the disciples. In addition 
to the general annoyance at the public preaching of the apostles, the officials of the 
temple were grieved at the crowding of the people round the new teachers in the 
temple courts. So in the name of order, but really in the spirit of jealousy, they were 
arrested, late in the evening, and put in safe keeping until the next day. Jewish rules 
did not allow judgment to be given at night. Imprisonment was only a precautionary 
measure ; the Jews did not punish by imprisonment. Where mention is made of it, 
as used for punishment, in the Scripture records, the authorities who inflicted it were 
not Jewish. The point to which we now direct attention is, that a confession of moral 
impotence is made in all physical attempts to stop and crush teachers. Intellectual 
and moral error can only be fairly met by the teaching of the corrective truth. Only 
when men fail to conquer by reasoning, can they wish to take up material weapons of 
any kind. When reason fails then men imprison, and heat, and torture, and kill. 
And physical forces never can succeed in cniKliing moral ones. It has been true for 
every age, and is as true as ever to-day, thai " the blood of the martyrs is the seed of 
the Church." Physical restraints are only proper in relation to wrongs that disturb 
the social order. They are wholly out of place in connection with matters of opinion. 

I. These prisoners were only teachers. They only talked to the people. They 
only appealed to mind and judgment. They only announced some new truths. They 
only invited the people's belief. Part of the offence against them arose from the 
known fact that they were unlearned and ignorant men ; not specially trained rabbis, 
and so not regarded as fit to preach. An instance of the class-prejudice which sadly 
prevails still. Illustrate from the story of great missionaries. They have only been 
teachers, yet how often, in different countries, they have excited prejudice and suffered 
persecution 1 The same is still, in measure, true of all great thought-leaders ; all men 
who are " before their time " must expect to be misunderstood and persecuted. 

II. These prisoners taught nothing appectino social order. They did not 
encourage vice or lawlessness. They did not interfere with family life, local govern- 
ment, social customs, or politics. Like their Master, they dealt with broad and 
general principles, expecting these, when implanted, to gain their own growth and 
expressions. Even their little excitement in the temple courts, and temporary inter- 
ference with the temple order, was a matter of no moment. There was no occasion 
for the temple police to interfere with them. 

IIL These prisoners taught nothing affecting ceremonial rites. There were, 
indeed, personal examples of diligent and devout Mosaism; strict in all matters of 
ceremonial duty. They never uttered a word that could be regarded as disrespectful 
to the temple or the Jewish system. They never tried to break one single person 
away from his ceremonial duties. Their teachings were within Judaism, and the 
most jealous conservators of the old system had no good reason for fearing their 
influence. This, however, applies to true Mosaism, and not to the burdensome ritual 
added by the rabbis, against which both our Lord and his disciplei vigorouslv 



Iga mm ACTS OP THE APOStLES. [pti. iV. 1—81 



pleaded. But on this particular occasion the apostles had not even attacked the 
rabbinical system. 

IV. The teachinos o^ these prisoners actually tended to pbebebve social 
OKDEB AKD MAKE BETTFR CITIZENS. Such is everywhere the natural results of tlie 
prviWhing of Christ and tlie teaching of Christianity. Loyalty to Christ helps to 
secu/e loyalty to the eartuly ruler, and thf virtues Christianity cultivates find their 
expreseion in the social and national sphere:*. 1'heii why were these men arrested ? 
Because the men in power were jealous of the influence they were gaining, and feared 
they would lose their own authoriiy and influence on the people. Sel/seirking is at 
the root of all religious persecutiou. Anil because the men who opposed tliem could 
not meet and answer them in argument, they had to fall back upon the unworthy 
weapons of threatening and force (see vers. 16, 17). Impress that no physical bonoii 
have ever yet been forged that could bind in the truth. — B. T. 

Ver. 11. — The despised Stone a sure Foundation. For the Scripture figure here used 
tlu following passages may be compared : — Isa. xxviii. 16 ; Eph. ii. 20 — 22 ; 1 Pet. ii. 7. 
The construction of otir modern buildings does not permit of special importance being 
given to a foundation-stone. We now put in memorial stones. Very probably the 
Scripture figure is taken from the immense work of masonry, found necessary at one 
corner of the temple area, in order to complete the sacred precincts. This corner 
foundation, raised right up out of the valley, made a deep impression on the Jewish 
mind, and was regarded as the foundation of the temple. Some prefer to think that 
reference may be to the virgin rock which was probably covered by the holy of holies. 
A foundation, in the sense of a basis-truth or principle, is necessary for a religious 
system or a personal faith. Here St. Peter's words are addressed to certain persons, 
and we consider — 

L The builders. Such the Sanhedrim regarded themselves as being, because they 
were at the head of the ecclesiastical government of the people ; they settled the order 
of ceremonies, duties, and obligations, and required men virtually to take their religion 
from them. They would advise and direct, and the people should have no will of their 
own in religious matters. Explain that a new rabbinical system had grown up round 
the Mosaic, and crushed out its life. For this rabbinical system, as bringing the people 
entirely under their sway, the members of the Sanhedrim were so jealous. Fix 
attention on the exceeding peril and amazing folly of men in trying to formulate and 
impose a religious system, when one had been fully revealed and its principles 
adequately detailed. No wonder they went astray, binding burdens on men's shoulders 
grievous to Iwar. No wonder they were wholly witsng, both in their foundation and 
in their superstructure. 

II. Theib roOTTDATioif-STONB. What can man's foundation, for any religious 
system he may construct, ever be but works — man's works f There is nothing else 
they can select. If they want anything better, they must give up trying to find it 
or to lay it, and let God both find and lay. Disguise it how we may, call it by what 
skilful names we please, men's foundations for religious systems or personal hopes are 
always self; something we can do ourselves. Illustrate from other systems than 
Christianity, showing that self and self-service and works are the foundations ol 
Brahmanism, Mohammedanism, heathenism, and Catholicism. Those trying to lieel 
confidence in the foundation-stone of self are suie to pass by, and fail to find interest 
or attraction in, the stone God offers to lay in Jesus Christ, the sure Foundation. 
This point may be urged in its application to personal religious seeking and experience. 
Many a man has bad to see the utter ruin of his buildings raised on self, befor« 
he could find interest in, or care to build upon, the lioch of Ages. 

III. The oobreotion of theib mistake. The great Master-Buildcr interfered, 
choosing his own good and wise time. Sanhedrims and rabbi? could only be under- 
builders. Because of their wilful errors he puts them aside, and sets forth the apostles 
in their stead — just as, in older days, he made prophets take the place of incapable 
priests — and bade those apostles lay firmly down the despised ^tone, even Jesus, the 
Nazarone. It is to be the very Head of the corner, and the whole erection of the 
Christian Church is to lean safely up against it and upon it. Impress that still there 
»t« mistaken builders, who pass by Christ, and assume authority to lay other fi ttnda^ 



ja. nr. 1-313 fttE AOtS Of tSEl Ai*OSTLfid. 163 



Vans. And still it is as true as ever it was, that God makes Jesus Christ, for each 
soul's salvation and life, the " tried Stone, the precious Corner-stone, the sure Founda- 
jon ; and he that believeth on him shall not be ashamed." — R. T. 

Ver. 12. — 77ie one saving Name. As one of the earliest preachings of the gospel, 
this sermon contains a striking illustration of the simplicity of the gospel message. 
From it .we m!»y learn what things were set forth as the primary and essential facts of 
""hristianity, before the development of Christian doctrine. Theology is a science 
foiinulated by human genius ; for it we are mainly indebted to Augustine and 
\nselin and Calvin. But it would be a sad thing indeed, for the thousands of " way- 
laring men," if an adequate apprehension of a human theology were essential to personal 
religion. This sermon deals with facts, with the known historical facts of our Lord's 
life, death, and resurrection ; and with the unlenown facts, declared upon the apostilio 
authority, of Christ's office, commission, and authority, as risen and exalted. Upon 
these facts the sermon makes deductions and applications, as in our text. 

I. Salvation. Some have strangely suggested that by this word St. Peter on'y 
refers to bodily healing, and simply asserts that in Jesus Christ is the true miraculous 
power. But we cannot thus lose the deeper meanings and applications of truth. Sin 
is the great human ill, and salvation, to be any salvation at all to man, must deal with 
and compass it. For this sin that has wrought and is working in us wu need " salva- 
tion," and it is but to mock us to say that Christ ib not the Saviour from sin. Show 
what a large, comprehensive word " salvation " is ; compaie it with healing, teaching, 
reforming, etc. It is the word which expresses the deepest need to which any soul 
can ever awake. At the very edge of death the aroused jailor cries, " What must I do 
to be saued ? " Plead as to whether there has yet been open vision to the discovery of 
this master-need. What, indeed, can it profit any one of us to gain the whole woild, 
and have our soul unsaved ? 

II. Salvation by a Name. 1. A name standsfor a person, and includes whatever 
rights may belong to him. Illustrate by the ambassador acting in the name of the 
queen ; travellers finding safety in using the name of Englishmen ; Moses coming 
forth in the Name of Jehovah. So the apostles went forth, spoke and wrought, in the 
Name of Christ. And salvation is by the Name, i.e. by the present rights and power of 
the living Saviour, whom apostles introduced to men. 2. A name standsfor a plea. 
As St. Paul used his name as a Eoman citizen. The Name of Jesus is a sufficient plea 
to secure acquittal, for all due satisfactions have been wrought by Christ. The Name 
of Jesus becomes a sufficient plea to secure acceptance, for all required righteousness 
has been won by Christ ; and we, by faith united to him and bearing his Nam'e, come 
into his power and share his rights. 

Ill Salvatiom only by one Name. "None other name" is designed to be exclusive. 
Then see what it excludes. Few, perhaiis, will now actually substitute something/oc 
Christ, and deliberately say, " I will not be saved by Christ." But there was, in older 
timet, a subtle substituting of fancied ideas about God's mercy ; and there is now 
danger of our substituting knowledge and science. Many will trj' to put something 
along with Christ. Men try to join their own name with Christ's; or they put 
together the Virgin Mary and Christ ; or the Church and Christ ; or even, in subtle 
forms, the Bible and Christ ; or feehngs and Christ. All are wrong things if they aru 
set in thefirst place with Christ; all may be good if kept in their proper second 
■places. For soul-salvation there is only one Name ; the essential tiling is that we stand 
in living relations of faith and love with him whose " Name is above every name." 

IV. Salvation in the one Name fob all. Otherwise it could not be exclusive. If 
it is to be the ouZjr Name, then it must be the all-sufBcient Name, or God would he 
deceiving us in permitting such broad and gracious invitations to be made to us. The 
real wants of men are common to all men. We all want health, love, knowledge, and 
truth ; and it is equally true that we all want /jordon of our trangrcssions, liberty from 
the slavery of self and sin, the life of righteousness, and the hope of the eternal glory. 
" SalYation " gathers up all these, and all these are found in and through Christ Jesus 
only.- 

Conclusion. The way of salvation keeps its simplicity. And "to you is the word ol 
(Li 3 Mlratioa leat." There is one Name — only one Name; believe, and you shall ')• 



164 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. it. 1—37. 

saved. Search the world oyer and the ages through, there is no other ; and yet ona 
day to this Name " every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess." — B. T. 

Ver. 13.— Signs of having been with Jems. We should always keep the thought 
close to us that our spirit and our word and our conduct, as the proftssed disciples 
of the Lord Jesus, are being daily watched; sometimes kindly, sometimes unkindly, 
always keenly. Men do " take knowledge of us." Something must be wrong if our life 
as Christians is not so toned and charactered as to arrest attention. There was some- 
thing about the apostles which puzzled the Sanhedrim : there was more than they were 
able to discern. We may see what actually did impress them, and also what might 
reasonably have impressed them. 

I. The Sanhedrim were struck with the power, the cotniAOB, which the apostles had 
gained from Christ. Power, high personal influence, moral coiiragu, had been character- 
istic of the Lord Jesus. In the apostles power showed itself in firm, noble witnessing 
to the facts they knew and the truths which had been entrusted to them, however 
offensive the facts and the truths might be to the rulers who listened. In us the like 
power, given by Christ, may show itself in stead/aitness to principle, even when that 
may place us in social disability; and in practical consistency, whatever may be our 
surroundings. Illustrate by firm keeping of the sabbath law ; and by such passages 
as " Having done all, stand ; " " Quit you like men, be strong ; " " Endure hardness, as 
a good soldier of Jesus Christ." There is great need of a more steadfast opposition to 
accepted worldly maxims and worldly habits. Christians should dare to be singular 
when Christly principles and the Christly spirit are imperilled. 

II. The Sanhedrim might have been struck with the characters of the apostles, m 
fashioned by Christ. The character of the Lord Jesus had been peculiarly his force, 
and these apostles had come so fully under its influence that tliey bad become, both 
consciously and unconsciously, moulded thereby. They had learned, as Christ's dis- 
ciples, to seek " whatsoever things are true," etc. (Phil. iv. 8). Tlieir natural characters 
were being sanctified ; and, in measure, they were exerting the influence of personal 
moral excellence and virtue, even as their Lord had done. This may be illustrated in 
St. Peter. Pure and lovely cliaracter is still the highest power on men everywhere. 
None can wholly withstand the influence of sweet and saintly lives. 

III. The Sanhedrim might have been struck with the edling pbikciple of the 
apostles' CONDUCT, which they had learned of Christ. It was the principle of the con- 
straining love. Love to Christ, by whom we are redeemed. liove to the brethren 
who share with us in the common redemption. And love to the unsaved, for whom 
we may well desire the unspeakable blessings which we have ourselves received. Love 
is ever seeking to find expression, and will not be satisfied with measures of self- 
sacrifice short of the sell-sacrifice of Christ for our salvation. 

We cannot hope to exert the same infiuence on those about us that was wrought by 
the apostles on the Sanhedrim, until we learn to be oftener with Jesus. And that we 
may be in two ways. 1. In the outward fellowship of the Gospels. We may study them 
better. We may meditate on them more frequently. We may realize more perfectly 
the Christ they reveal, and so "know him," and feel the power of his presence. 
2. We may be with Jesus in the inward fellowship of cherished thoughts. Taking him 
into our hearts as we take our dearest friend, and often holding with him secret soul- 
communings. Then men would plainly see upon us, day by day, the signs that wa 
" have been with Jesus." — R. T. 

Vers. 2.3 — 31. — Praise for safety and prayer for power. " Prom the court-room the 
apostles retired to the Church. Christian confessors win their victories in the face of 
day ; but the strength by which such victories are won is only to be got where Jesus 
got his, in secret. Kemember Luther's broken cries as he lay on his chamber floor at 
early morning on the 18th day of April, 1521 (D'Aiibign^, ' History ofthe Reforraation,* 
bk. vii. ch. viii.). In every crisis of strain and peril through which our lives must pass, at 
every moment of supreme difficulty, Sanhedrim threateuinga. Worms Diets, or whatever 
less thing it be before which our faith and courage quail, there is for us no place of help 
like the secret footstool of Almighty God, nor any weapon like the cry of faith " (Dr. 
Dykes). Notice that the prayer of the disciples is addressed to God, not to Christ AIm 



iH. IV. 1— *■/.] THE ACTS OP THE AtOSTLES. 155 

that in the worship and prayer one voice ?e(?, finding expression for the common feeling, 
ard the rest of the company pi obably responded with " Aniens " spoken aloud. Prom the 
exegdical poition of this commentary the precise meaning and allusions of the prayer 
may be learned. We dwell on two things^ 

I. Man's praise and prayer. Compare other recorded songs and prayers. Espe- 
cially unfold that the praise took the form of a psalm. Compare the so-called " Psalms of 
David." It was a public rejoicina; on account of a Divine deliverance that was of public 
interest. Compare Miriam's song at the Red Seat Impress the duty of recognizing 
God's hand in our lives, and praising him for his " merciful kindnesses." ^heprayer 
took the form of a request for precisely the things needed at the moment, viz. power 
to witness and power to work miracles, in attestation of the truth witnessed. An 
example of directness in prayer. 

II. God's response to man's praise and prater. A renewal of the special grace 
and endowment wih which the apostles had been started on their work. Hentwala 
ofgrcuie are still God's best answers to our prayers (^ Cor. xii. 9). — R. T. 

Ver. 32. — Nothing our own. " The chief way in which at that time a member of 
the Church could express his unshaken devotion to the common cause, or his willingness 
to sacrifice to the last penny for the common weal, was by placing his realized capital 
at the disposal of the brotherhood. The endangered position of the little community 
(through the enmity of the Sadducean party) thus tended to inflame the fervour of its 
charity, and gave a new impetus to that common relief fund which had been started 
at Pentecost." " There can be no question that an expectation of Christ's immediate 
return from heaven, acting along with the unity of thoughts and feelings, made these 
men willing to part with their possessions and goods." Such community of goods has 
always been part of theories of perfect commonwealths. In this case each member of 
the Church held his possessions only as a trust, and was piepiired to yield them up, if 
the exigencies of the brotherhood demanded such a surrender. We have, then, in this 
picture of the early Church, a model of the spirit that should animate the members of 
Christ's Church in all ages. We do not say models of conduct, because the application 
of such models in changing generations becomes uncertain. Models of the essential 
principles, and of the spirit, which we should cherish, are both more helpful and of 
more constant application. The early Church expressed Christian feeling in outward 
forms, just as childhood gets impulsive and unrestrained expression for its sentiments 
and emotions. Their new faith in Christ suddenly brought them close together, and 
made them conscious of new and binding sympathies. There was at first a great gush of 
impulsive brotherhood. Compare the intense feelings animating, and the extraordinary 
sacrifices made, when the year A.D. 1000 drew near, because of the expectation that 
Jesus would return on the first day of that year. The feeling was so far right, but the 
mode of its expression did not gain permanence. Compare the impulse for missions so 
often strongly felt by young Christians. What these men actually did we may not make 
a model. The spirit which led them to do it, and the spirit in which they did it, are 
a model for us all. There are three sentiments that may be cheiished concerning our 
earthly possessions. 

L Wb mat reuard tiiem AS OUR own. Illustrate by the parable of the rich fool, 
who says he will build greater barns, " where I may bestow all my fruit and my 
goods." This is both a false and an unworthy sentiment ; for " what have we that we 
have not received ? " 

II. Wb may REGARD THEM AS CHRIST'S. Compare the sentiment of St. Paul, who 
could say, " To me to live is Christ." 

III. We mat regard them as dubs in trust. Then they become talents for 
whose use we are responsible. And we learn to feel that they are not to be spent for 
self, but used for others ; and self-denial, charity, and self-sacrifice are recognized as the 
first of virtues. Put alongside this sentiment of the early disciples concerning their 
property, the sentiment of the apostles concerning the disciples themselves — " Ye are 
not your own ; " and then we have the twofold feeling which Christians ought ever tc 
cherish ; and our anxiety concerns (1) holding ourselves for the Lord, and (2) holding 
our property at the service of others for Christ's sake. " We are not our own." 
Nothing that w« have is our own. All is Christ's. We are Christ's. And then 



IS* *fifi ACTS OF tflE APOSTLEl^ toa.it.i— §". 



St. Paul arcmea back, that "all things are" really "ovm" ia Christ (1 Oor. iil 
21— 23).— U. T. 

Ver. 33. — " Oreat grace." This expression may refer to the measure of Divine favoni 
resting upon the early disciples; or to the favour which they found among men, who 
could not fail to see and admire the spirit of " self-sacrifice " which was exhihited by 
what they were doing. We dwell on the former of these references. More grace, fre.-^li 
grace, greater grace, rested on them after the imprisonment and deliverance of their 
leaders. We are to understand that the holy fervour manifested by them at this time 
was not accounted for by such things as the incoming of wealthy members or the mul- 
tipljing of their numbers, but by the increase and enlargement of the "grace" that 
rested on thera. " Great grace " is ever the one secret of great spiritual power. Looking 
at the incidents connected with the text, we observe — 

I. This was not the first bbstowmbnt of grace. Recall the scene of the 
Pentecost. Show in what sense that may be spoken of as theirs* coming of the Spirit. 
Explain why that coming was attended with outward signs, and why the presence of 
the Spirit is noinow manifest in such miraculous gifts. The " grace" in us may be as 
great — may be greater — though the attendant signs and expressions differ. Show what 
are the first signs of "grace" working in us. Signs in thought, feeling, conduct, and 
relations. Illustrate by what is said of Saul of Tarsus : " Behold, he prayeth." 

II. That first gift of the Spirit was well received and used. This may 
be illustrated in the earnestness and zeal of the apostles, as well as in the active, devoted, 
and zealous life of those converted under the apostolic teachings. 

III. Beoahsb well received and used, more grace was given. The further 
grace enabled them to suffer nobly and well ; to testify for Christ even before governors 
and kings, and to Tpray together and live together and work together, in loving union 
and mutual forbearance, and charity. An^ so we come to apprehend afresh God's 
great and ever-working law, expressed in the familiar words, " To him that hath shall 
more be given ; " " We are not straitened in God ; " " Then shall ye know, if ye folio * 
on to know the Lord," etc. God's grace is indeed "free," sovereignly free, but he hns 
been pleased to set it under conditions ; and one of the chief conditions is that we shall 
have used wisely and well the grace already received. To those who arefaiiliful in using _ 
grace the promise applies, " He giveth more grace." Then, if we feel the need of and 
long for " great grace," let us see that we deal rightly in response to the leadings ami 
movings of the grace we have. Empty the vessel in service for others, and Gud will be 
sure to refill it. Trim the lamp, and let its light shine brightly all arouad, and God 
will be sure to replenish it with abundance of fresh oil. — B. T. 

Vers. 36, 37. — I%e poiver of a high example. That of Joses, or Barnabas. This man 
was the companion of St. Paul in his first missionary journey (ch. xiii. 2). For his 
character, position, and influence in the Church, etc., see the Commentary. His was 
by no means the only case of self-sacrifice, but it was, for some unexjilained reasons, 
the most striking case, and it was regarded as a typical one. Possibly the subsequent 
influence gained by Barnabas led to the preservation of this narrative of his noble self- 
denial. And we may learn from him what a mission opens for those who can make great 
sactrificesfoT Christ. 

I. EiCHBS ARE often A KBLiGiouB HINDRANCE. Illustrate from our Lord's teaching 
respecting the " camel and the needle's eye." " How hardly shall they that have riches 
enter the kingdom of God ! " " Not many mighty, not many noble, are called." The 
poor in this world are often the "rich in faith." Barnabas's property might have kept 
himfrom Christ, or made him only such a timid and weak disciple as rich Nicodemus 
and rich Joseph of Arimath^a were. 

II. Etches often become a test of religious feblino. Illustrate from the 
case of the "rich young ruler," who had some feelings and desires, but could not 
wholly follow them. Love of position and of wealth was stronger even than longing 
for " eternal life." Compare Demas. 

III. EioHBS may become a edium of religious expression, and bo a means 
OF RELIGIOUS CULTURE. It did in the case of Barnabas. He used his talents and his 
gifts for Christ's service and his Church's good,and he further found out how he might. 



am. V. 1 — 42J 



THE AOTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



15; 



for the same purposes, nse his money and hia lands. Ho was both blessed in himself 
and a means of blessing to others in so doing. Still those who have the trust of riches 
need the impulse of the example of Barnabas, and may even reach tovrards the com- 
pleteness of his self-sacrifice. Explain that there is sometimes an exaggeration io the 
surrender of all property, and assumption of voluntary poverty, which is in no sense 
commended by this example. To use our property wisely and well in the service of 
Christ is a far nobler thing than to shirk our personal responsibility by surrendiring 
it all to others. The lesson to learn from the record concerning Barnabas is that we 
should hold all we have — ^riches, talents, position, influence, everytliini;— at the call and 
service of our living Saviour, and be ready even to sacrifice it all, if in that form we 
are required to testify our " zeal for the Lord." But the imitation of a high example 
has this peril. It may be merely the imitation of the act, and not an act dictated by 
the same motives and done in the same spirit. The followers of " them who throu!;h 
faith and patience inherit the promises " are those, and those only, who act in the halluw- 
ing and ennobling influences of the same " constraining love." We must yield and 
give only /or Chiini's sake, — K. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER y. 



Ver. 1. — Ananias ('Ai'eu'(oj) In Neh. iii. 
23 the Hebrew name n;jjp. (God covers or 
protects) is thus rendered in tlie LXX. 
But the name occurs nowhere else. Tlie 
very common name n"3Fi, Uananiah (God 
is gracions), is also rendered in the LXX. 
Ananias {'Ayavias), and is doubtless the 
name meant here and in oh. ix. 10 ; xxiiL 
2, eto. Sapphira does not occur elsewhere. 
It is either derived from the Aramean 
TXVBr^, beautiful, or from the Hebrew tbd, 
a sapphire. A possession (see ch. ii. 45). 
The kind of possession is not specified by 
the word itself, which applies to houses, 
fields, jewels, and wealth generally ; but 
the nature of the property is shown by tlie 
word x"?'""". applied to it in vers. 3 and 8, 
which means especially " a parcel of ground " 
(John iv. 5), " a field" (ch. i. 18, 19). 

Ver. 3.— Thy for thine, A.V. Peter said. 
It was given to Peter on this occasion, by 
the Holy Ghost, to read the secrets of 
Ananiae's heart, just as it was given to 
Elisha to detect Gehazi's lie (2 Kings v. 25, 
26) ; and the swift punishment inflicted in 
both cases by the word of the man of God — 
leprosy in one case, and sudden death in 
the other^is another point of strong resem- 
blance. To lie to the Holy Ghost. It is 
only one instance among many of the pure 
spiritual atmosphere in which the Church 
then moved, tliat a lie to the apostle was 
a lie to the Holy Ghost under wliose 
guidance and by whose puwer the apostle 
ficted. Ananias's fraud was an ignoring of 
tlip whole spiritual character of the apostles' 
ministry, and was accordingly visited with 
an immediate punishment. The death of 
Aiuniaa wad &hpphiia woa A terrible ful- 



filment of the promfse, "WlioscsoetBr slni 
ye retain, they are retained" (John zz. 
23). 

Ver. 4. — Did it not remain for was it not, 
A.V. ; thy for Ihine own, A.V. ; how it ii 
(hat thou host for why hast thou, A.V. ; Ihy 
heart for thine heart, A.V. Did it not 
remain, etc.? The exact meaning is — Did 
it not remain to thee? i.e. unsold it was 
thine, and when sold the price of it was 
thine. There was no compulsion us regards 
giving it away. The act was one of de- 
liberate hypocrisy— an attempt to deceive 
God himself. 

Ver. 5. — Upon all that heard U for on all 
Hiem that heard these things, A.V. and T.R. 
Gave up the ghost (e|ei^u{e). The same 
word as in. ver. 10 and eh. xii. 23, but I'oimd 
nowhere else in the New Ttstament. Great 
fear, etc. We have here an example of 
punishment which is remedial, not to the 
person punished, but to others, by display- 
ing the just judgment of God as a warning 
against sin. 

Ver. 6. — And wrapped him round for wound 
him up, A.V. ; they carried fur carried, A.V. 
The young men (vedrepoL : called in ver. 10 
veaviffKoi). There does not seem to be bulil- 
cient ground for supposing, with Mejer, 
that a definite class of Church servant:! is 
here meant. The young men of the Church 
would, as a matter of course, perform such 
services as that here spoken of, when directed 
by the vpcafiirepot, the elders, (u age ur 
oiflce. 

Ver. 7. — And it was about, oto. ; boltor 
rendered, with Meyer, and it oame to paas, 
a/ler an interval of three hours, that his ii //V, 
etc. It la u Hebrew idiom (oomp. l.uke 
T. 12). 

Ver. 8. — And Peter anawerod. eta, Vui^t'a 
question gave her the opportunity of (xta- 



168 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. r. i. -42 



fessing the fraud had she been penitent. 
The land (see tote to ver. 1 ). 

Ver. 9. — But for then, A.V. ; they shall 
carry fur carry, A.V. To tempt the Spirit, 
etc.; i.e. thus daringly to put the Holy Ghost 
on trial, whether or no he is able to discern 
tlie thoughts of your evil hraits (oomp. Luke 
iv. 12). The feet of them, etc. The burial, 
including the distance to and fro, had taken 
three hours, and they were just returning 
to the Ciiristiau assembly when Sapphira 
was confirming her guilt as an accomplice 
in her hubband'a lie. 

Ver. 10. — And she fell down immediately 
for then fell she down straightway, A.V. ; 
gave up for yielded up, A.V. ; tliey carried 
her out and buried her for carrying her forth 
buried Iter. She fell down immediately. 
Tlio Spirit who killeth and maketh alive 
thus vindicated bis discernment and his 
power, and t<.'StifiL'd to the truth of his 
prophet St. Peter, by whose mouth he had 
just foretold the death of Sapphira. Gave 
up the ghost (ver. 5, note). Buried her by 
her husband. What a strange example of 
conjugal unity I One in thuir Jewish religion, 
one in their conversion to the faith of Christ, 
one in their hypocrisy, one in tlieir terrible 
death, one in their common gravel one in 
the undying record of thuir guilt in the 
Book which is read by every nation under 
heaven I 

Ver. 11. — The whole Church for all the 
Church, A.V. ; all that heard for as many 
as heard, A.V. The awful death of tlie 
two liars to God not only slruck a salutary 
fear into the minds of the whole Church, 
but filled with awe all outside the Church 
who heard of it; and doubtless gave a 
temporary check to the persecutions, while 
it disposed many to hearken to the apostles* 
preaching. 

Ver. 12. — By the hands of the apostles, 
etc. Two tilings are here remarkable. The 
one ^hat Christianity at its beginnings was 
mightily helped and advanced by miracles 
done in the Name of Jesus Christ. The 
other that the authority of the apostles as 
the rulers of the Church was greatly 
strengthened by these miracles being 
wrought exclusively by their hands. We 
cannot understand either the external rela- 
tions of the Church to the world, or the 
internal relations of the j)eople to their 
spiritual rulers, unless we duly take count 
of these two things. With one accord (see 
ch. iv. 24, note). In Solomon's porch (see 
ch. iii. 11, note). It is quite true to nature 
that Solomon's porch, having been the scene 
of the miracle, became the place of frequent 
concourse. ■ There is a difference of opinion 
among commentators as to whether the all 
refers to the whole Christian laity as in oh. 
U. 1, or to the apostles only Alford thiuki 



the latter, Meyer the former. The opinion 
that the whole body of Christians is meant 
seems most probable, both from the nso of 
the words in oh. ii. 1 and fr.ira tlie phrase 
inoSvfjLo.^hv (especially in connection wilh 
OTravTcs), which seerns more applicable to 
a mixed multitude than to twelve colleagues 
like the apostlus. You could hardly say 
that all the queen's ministers met in a 
Cabinet Council with one accord. There is 
no need for the parenthesis as in the A.V. 

Ver. 13. — But for and, A.V. ; howbeit fur 
but, A.V. Tiie rest seems most naturally 
to mean thoso who were not included in the 
iiravTes, viz. the Jews as distinguished from 
the disciples. The cifeot 'of the miracles 
was that the Jews looked with awe and 
reverence upon the Apostolic Church, and 
none durst join them from mere curiosity 
or with any idle purpose. Dut, on the 
contrary, the people magnified them, treated 
them with the utmost respect, and spoke 
of them with all honour Join himself 
(ico\Aa(r6ai). The word occurs in the New 
Testament ten times, of which seven are in 
St. Luke's Gospel or in the Acts. The other 
three are in St. Paul's Epistles (see for the 
use of it in the sense it has here, Luke iv. 
15 ; ch. viii. 29 ; ix. 26 ; x. 28 ; xvii. 34). 

Ver. 14. — Added to the Lord; as in ch. xi. 
24, not as in margin. Multitudes; TrX^flrj, 
found in the plural nowhere else in the 
New Testament. 

Ver. 15. — Even carried out for brought forth, 
A.V. and T.E. ; that, as Peter came by, at 
the least his shadow for that at the least the 
shadow of Peter passing by, A.V. ; some one 
for some, A.V. Insomuch; not to be referred 
back to the first part of ver. 12, as indicated 
by the parenthesis in the A.V., but to the 
whole description of the Church's glorifica- 
tion in vers. 12 — 14. 

Ver. 16. — And there also came together the 
multitude from for there came also a multi- 
tude out of, A.V. ; about Jerusalem for about 
unto Jerusalem, A.V. ; folk for folks, A.V. j 
that were for whieh were, A.V. And there 
also oame together, etc. One great result 
of these numerous miracles would be to 
manifest that the Lord Jesus was still with 
his Church as truly as when he was upon 
the earth (Malt, xxviii. 20), and this mani- 
festation remains for the c'omfoit of his 
people, even now that such miracles have 
ceased. With regard to what is said in ver. 
15 of the shadow of Peter being thouglit to 
have had a healing power, it may have be^n 
true that it had, as Christ could heal by a 
shadow as well as by a word or touch, but 
we cannot say for certain that it was so ; 
anyhow, it was a marvellona season of 
refreshing to the Chuioh, preparing her for 
the coming trial. 

Ver 17.— But for then, A,V. ; Utey wert 



CH. V. 1—42.] 



THE ACTS OF TnE APOSTLES. 



169 



/(Red for were filled, A.V. ; jealousy for 
indignation, A.V. The high priest rose up. 
It was high time for him and his friends 
the Sadducees to be up and doing, if they 
wished to stop the sprpadiug of tlie faith of 
Jesus Christ and the Resurrection. Which 
is the sect of the Sadducees (ch. iv. 1, 2, 
note). It does not appear that Annas him- 
self was a Sadducee, but his son was, and 
hence it is higlily probable that the Sad- 
ducees sliould have attached tliemselves to 
Annas, and made a tool of him for suppress- 
ing the doctrine of the Besunection. 'ITm 
leot} alpeiTis (see cb. xv. 5; xxiv. 5, 11; 
xxvi. 4 ; xxvlil. 22). The word was applied 
first by Jews to Chiibtians, and tlien by 
Christians to sects (1 Cor. xl. 19 ; Gal. v. 
20; 2 Pet. iL 1). Jealousy scarcely so well 
expresses tlie idea of ,f^Aos here as indigna- 
tion does. In the First Epistle of Clement, 
^\DS il applied to the anger of Cain, of 
Joseph's brethren, of the Israelites against 
MoscB, of the persecution of St. Peter and 
St Paul (iv., v.). It is only occasionally 
that it means that kind of anger which we 
call Jealousy. The high priest and his 
party were indignant at the defiance of 
their authority, and at the success of the 
doctrine which they had made it a special 
object to put down. 

Ver. 18. — Laid hands (as ch. iv. 8, A.V. 
and B.V.) fur laid their hands, A.V. and 
T.B.; inpuhlie ward for in the common prison, 
A.y. Laid hands, etc. Laid their hands is 
equally right, even when avrar is omitted, 
as tlie translation of t&s x^'/"'^- There is 
no difference in the sense in the two render- 
ings, or in the two passages, though in oh. 
It. 3 the phrase is iir40a\or outois tos x"P'^'> 
and here cVe/SoAoi/ ras x^pt^^ aiTav M touj 
iaroa-ToKovs. In public ward. The A.V. is 
more idiomatic and expresses exactly what 
is meant by the phrase tjjp^itei Snuoa'uf. 
Meyer quotes the phrasei rh S-nniaioii in 
Thuoydides, and olicia S-rinoina in Xenophon 
for the common prison (see ch. iv. 3). 

Ver. 19. — An angel for the angel, A.V. ; 
mU for forth, A.V. An angel, etc. The 
phrase is a translation of the Old Testa- 
ment phrase nin; ■!]N^n. But in Hebrew it 
is impossible to insert the definite article 
before rm\, and therefore the phrase is 
properly rendered, " the angel of the Lord." 
In the p:issage before us and other similar 
passages, Viipios seems to stand for rm\, 
and therefore the rendering of the A.V. 
would seem to be right, in spite of what is 
said by eminent grammarians to the con- 
trary. Compare, too, the phrases iShv t\pi\i/-its 
(Luke i. 19); firnj-a 0e«D (Luke iii. 2); (pav^ 
PoanTos (ill. 4) ; and see especially Luke ii. 9, 
where Hyye^os Kvpiou ("the angel of the 
Lord,") and S^£o Kuplov(,'*the glury of the 



Lord ") stand In parallel clauses. The B. V. 
inconsistently renders the frrst " an angel," 
and the second " the glory." In like mannei 
0a)»)l Kupiov (oh. vii. 31) is " the voice ol 
the Lord;" and in Ps. xxix. (xxviii, Sep- 
tuagint) 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, the LXX. hav« 
uniformly (fiavh Kvplov for nin; Vip (see oh. 
viii. 26, note). Out (comp. ch. xii. 7, etc.). 

Ver. 20. -Oo ye for go, A.V. In the 
temple ; not in the house, but in the courts. 
The words of this Life ; i.e. this life which 
is in Christ, whom ye preach, through hii 
resurrection from the dead (comp. John vi. 
68, " Thou hast the words of eternal life ; " 
see too the whole chapter and 1 John i. 
1-3). 

Ver. 21. — This for that, A.V. ; about day- 
breah for early in the morning, A.V. ; 
prison-house for prison, A.V. About day- 
break. In the hot cllm.ite of Jerusalem 
people are about very early in the morning 
(comp. Matt. xxvi. 57, 75). But the high 
priest, etc. The narrative would run more 
clearly if the passage were translated more 
literally. Now when the high priest and 
they that were with him were come (to the 
council-chamber the next day) they called 
together, etc. The narrative is taken up 
from vers. 17, 18. Having (ver. 18) put 
the apostles in prison, they met the next 
morning to decide how to punish them. 
The oonnoil (rh awtSpiov) ; t.e. in the Hebrseo- 
Greek, the Sanhedrim, the great council of 
the nation, consisting of seventy-two mem- 
bers, usually presided over by the high 
priest. It is frequently mentioned in the 
New Testament (Matt. v. 22; xxvi. 59; 
Mark xiv. 55, etc. ; and ch. xxii. 30 ; xziii. 
1, etc. ; above ch. iv. 15). On the present 
occasion, besides the members of the San- 
hedrim, there were gathered together all 
the senate {yepavaia) of the children of 
Israel, an expression which occurs only 
here, but which seems to comprise all the 
elders of the Jews, even though they were 
not members of the Sanhedrim. But some 
(Schleusner, Heinrieh, etc.) understand it 
as merely another phrase for the Sanhedrim, 
added for explanation and amplification. 
The council, of course, were ignorant of the 
escape of the prisoners. The prison-house 
(Sea/iUT^puii') ; " prison " (A.V.) represent* 
^vfjticii in the next verse. 

Ver. 22. — The officers that came for wJitn 
the officers came and, A.V. and T.E. ; and 
they returned for they relumed, A.V. 

Ver. 23. — Prison-house for prison, A.V., 
as in ver. 21 ; we found shut in all safety for 
truly found we shut with all safety, A.V. ; 
at the doors for without before the doors, A.V. 
and T.B. But the within at the end of the 
verse seenw to require th« mthout of the 
T.B. 



lea 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. v. 1— 4a 



Ver. 24. — The captain of the temple for 
the high prietl and the captain, etc., A.V. 
and T.K. ; vordt for things, A.V. ; were 
much perphaed eoncern ing them for doubted 
of them, A.V. The oaptaiu of the temple, 
etc. Meyer, followed by Alford, retaina 
the T.E., in which the word for the high 
jirioBt is 6 hpebs. It ia true that this word 
occurs nowhere else in the New Testament 
for "the high priest." But in the Old 
Testament pj is very frequently used to 
designate the high priest, as Exod. xxix. 
30; XXIV. 19; Numb. iii. 32; 2 Ohron. 
xxfi. 11; 2 Kings xxii. 10; 1 Kings i. 8, 
etc. ; and in such places is represented by 
lepefcj in the LXX. So that St. Luke may 
very probably have used it here where the 
context made the meaning clear, and where 
he intended to use the word apxtepe^s for 
"the chief priests." For the captain, see 
above (ch. iv. 1, note). He was especially 
interested as being, probably, the officer who 
bad arrested the apostles the day before. 
Were muoh perplexed concerning. The 
verb (Simropf'o)), whioh only occurs in the 
New Testament here and ch. ii. 12, x. 17, 
Luke ix. 7, and (in the middle voice) Luke 
xxiv. 4, means properly "to be in doubt 
which road to take," hence generally to be 
in doubt, perplexity. Them may apply 
either to the loorde, the strange things just 
reported to them, or to the apostles about 
whom the tilings were reported. It seems 
most natural to refer it to the wordt. They 
were in doubt and perplexity as to what it 
would all grow to. 

Vor. 25. — And there came one for then 
came one, A.V. ; behold for saying. Behold, 
A.V. and T.B. ; the prison for prison, A.V. ; 
in the temple standing for standing in the 
temple, A.V. Standing implying the calm, 
fearless attitude of the men. TIjere is an 
apparent reference in the mind of the writer 
to the words of the angel in ver. 20, " Go 
ye, and stand and speak." 

Ver. 26. — But without for without, A.V. ; 
lest Hiey should be, omitting Vi/a, for lest they 
should have been, with 'Iva, A.V. and T.B. 
lest they should be, etc. The best way of 
construing the words, whether 'Iva is re- 
tained or not, is to make the clause " lest 
they should be stoned " depend upon " not 
with violence;" putting "for they feared 
the people" into a parenthesis; thus ex- 
plaining why they thought it dangerous to 
use violence. 

Ver. 28. — We straitly charged for did not 
we tlraitly command 1 A.V. and T.R. ; not 
to for that ye should not, A.V. ; teaching 
for doctrine, A.V. We straitly charged, etc. ; 
iirepuiTaw seems to require a question to 
follow. Your teaching (for the command, 
see ch. iv. 18). Intend to bring, etc. Hero 
the leofet of the persecution comes out. 



The guilty conscience winced at every word 
whioli spake of Jesus Christ as living. The 
high priest, too, would not so much as name 
the name of Jesus It was " this name," 
" this man ; " as in the Talmud, Jesus ii 
most frequently spoken of as Teloni, i.e. 
" such a one," in Spanish and Portuguese 
Fulano, or still more oontemptuoualy as " that 
man" (Farrar, 'Life of St. Paul,' vol. i. 
p. 108). This terror of blood-guiltiness is 
a striking comment on the saying recorded 
in Matt, xxvii. 25. 

Ver. 29. — But for then, A.V. ; the aposllen 
for the other apostles, A.V. ; must for ought 
to, A.V. Peter is the spokesman the sen- 
timent is that of the united apostnlnte. 
Must obey God, etc. The rule is a gnl.len 
one for all men, all circumstances, and all 
time (oomp. ch. iv. 19). Peter does not 
deny having received the prohibition, but 
pleads the superior force of the eommand of 
God, as set forth in the following versei. 

Ver. 30. — Banging him for and hanged, 
A.V. The God of our fathers, etc. Observe 
how carefully Peter preserves his own 
brotherhood with the Jews whom he was 
addressing, and the continuity of the New 
Testament with the Old Testament as 
being the sequel of the acts of the same 
God of Israel. Baised up; viz. from the 
dead; iiycLpe, not h/'uTT-n, as ch. iii. 22, 26. 
Borne, however (Oalvin, Bengel, etc.), take 
if^eipe, as here used, to mean "raised up" 
in the wider sense of h/aar^aai, as in the 
T.R. of oh. xiiL 23, where, however, the 
B.T. has iiyaye. Blew; viz. with your own 
hands, as Siex^ipltraaBe means. It unly 
occurs besides in ch. xxvi. 27. 

Ver. dl.—Did God exalt for hath God 
exalted, A.V. ; remission for forgicenest, 
A.V. With his right hand; i.e. by his 
miglity power, as the instrument of Christ's 
exaltation. A Prince (ch. iii. 15, note). 
Repentance first, " a new heart and a new 
spu-it" (Ezek. xxxvL 26), and furgiveno^js 
next (comp. ch. ii. 38 ; iii. 19, etc.). 

Ver. 32. — Witnesses for his witnesses, AY. 
and T.B. ; so is the Holy Ghost for so is alto 
the Holy Ghost, A.V. and T.B. _ We are 
witnesses. Tho direct ri.ferenoe is to the 
command recorded in ch. i. 8, which they 
felt imperatively boimd to obey. So is the 
Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost bare witness 
to the gospel preached by the apostles by 
the powers which lie gave them lo heal and 
work miracles, and by the conversion of 
many who heard the word: "the gospel 
preached with the Holy Ghost sent down 
from heaven" (1 Pet. i. 12). Mark the 
solemnity and authority which Peter claimed 
for the gospel by thus asserting that the 
Holy Ghost was the witnets with t^e 
apostles to the truth of their testimony 
concerning Jesui Christ, 



OH. V. 1—42.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



IGl 



Vet. 33. — But they, when they heard this, 
for when they heard that, they, A.V. ; were 
minded for took coumel, A.V. and T.K. 
(i0ov\ovTo for i$ou\tvoi>To, as also cb. xv. 
39). The word for were out to the heart 
(SUirptovTo) is found only here and in oli. 
vii. 54, where the full phrase is given. It 
means literally, in the active voice, '' to saw 
asunder," and is so used by the LXX. in 
1 Chron. sx. 2. In Heb. ji. 37 it ii the 
simple verb irpla which is used; irpla and 
several of its compounds are surgical terms. 

Ver. Si.— But there for there, A.V. ; in 
honour of for in reputation among, A.V. ; the 
men for the apostles, A.V. and T.B. ; while for 
space, A. V. A Pharisee named Gamaliel. St. 
Luke had mentioned (ch. iv. 1 and v. 17) that 
there was an influential party of Sadduoees 
in the Sanhedrim. He, therefore, now spe- 
cially notes that Gamaliel was a Pharisee. 
There can be no duubt that this alone would 
rather dispose him to resist the violent 
counsels of the Sadducean members, and 
the more so as tlie doctrine of the Besur- 
rection was in question (see ch. zxiii. 6 — 8). 
Moreover, tiamuliel was noted for his 
moderation. That Gamaliel here named 
is the same as that of ch. xxii. 3, at whose 
feet St. Paul was brought up at Jerusalem, 
and who is known in the Talmud as Kabban 
Gamaliel the elder (to distinguish him from 
his grandson of the same name, the younger^ 
the grandson of Hillel, the head of the 
school of HiUel, and at some time president 
of the Sanhedrim, one of the most famous 
of the Jewish doctors (as the title Bahhan, 
borne by only six others, shows), seems 
certain, though it cannot absolutely be 
proved. The description of him as a doctor 
of the law, had in honour of all the people ; 
the allusion to him as a great teacher, 
learned in the perfect manner of the Law of 
the fathers, and one whose greatness would 
be as a shield to his pupils, in ch. xxii. 3 ; 
the exact chronological agreement; the 
weight he possessed in the Sanhedrim, in 
spite of the Sadducean tendencies of the 
nigh priest and his followers; and the 
agreement between his character as written 
in the Talmud and as shown in his siiecoh 
and in the counsel given in it, — seem to place 
Ills identity beyond all reasonable doubt. 
There does not seem to be any foundation 
for the legend in the Clementine Eecog- 
nitlons, that he was in secret a Oliristiau. 
If the prayer used in the synagogues, " Let 
there be no hope to them that apostatize 
from the true religion; and let heretics, 
how many Boever they be, all perish as in 
I moment," be really Lis composition, as the 
lews say, he certainly had no inclination to 
Cliristianity (' Prid. Conn.,' i. 361). 

Ver. 35. — He said for gaid, A.V. ; at 
touching thett men transpoued from the 



order of the A. V. ; are about to do lot intend 
to do, A.V. 

Ver. 36. — Giving himself out for boasting 
himself, A.V. ; dispersed for scattered, A.V. ; 
came for brought, A.V. Rose up Theudas. 
A very serious chronological difficulty arises 
here. The only Theudas known to history 
is the one about whom Joaephus writes 
('Ant. Jud.,' XX. 5), quoted in full by 
Euseljins ('Eocles. Hist.,' ii. 11) as having 
pretended to be a prophet, having lured a 
number of people to follow him to the 
banks of the Jordan, by the assurance that 
he would part the waters of the river, and 
as having been pursued by order of Cuspius 
Fadus, the Procurator of Judaea, when 
numljers of his follower.3 were slain and 
taken prisoners, and Theudas himself had 
his head cut off. But Fadus was procurator 
in the reign of Claudius Csesar, immediately 
after the death of King Agrippa, ten or 
twelve years after the time when Gamaliel 
was speaking, and about thirty years after 
the time at wliich Gamaliel places Tlieudas. 
Assuming St. Luke to be as accurale and 
correct here as he has been proved to be in 
other instances where his historical accuracy 
has been impugned, three ways present 
themselves of explaining the discrepancy. 
1. Josephus may have misplaced the adven- 
ture of Theudas by some accidental error. 
Considering the vast number of Jewish 
insurrections from the death of Herod the 
Great to the destruction of Jerusalem, such 
a mistake is not very improbable. 2. There 
may jjave been two adventurers of the name 
of Theudas, one in the reign of Augustus 
CsBsar, and the other in the reign of 
Claudius ; and so both the historians may 
be right, and the apparent discrepancy 
may have no real existence (see Wordsworth, 
in loc). 3. The person named 1'hendas 
by Gamaliel may be tlie same whom Jose- 
phus speaks of (' Boll. Jud.,' ii. iv. 2) by the 
common name of Simon, as gathering a band 
of robbers aroimd him, and making hiinself 
king at Herod's death (' Sonntag,' cited by 
Meyer, etc.). But he was killed by Gratus, 
and the insurrection suppressed. A variety 
in tliis last mode has also been suggested 
(Kitto's 'Cyolopssdia'), viz. to understand 
Theudas to be an Aramaic form of Theo- 
dotus, and the equivalent Hebrew form of 
Theodotus to be HTins, Matthias, and so the 
person meant by Theuda* to be a certain 
Matthias who with one Judas made an 
iusm'roction, when Herod the Great was 
dying, by tearing down the golden eagle 
which llerod had put over the great gate of 
the temple, and who was burnt alive with 
I lis companions, after defending his deed in 
a speech of great boldness and constancy 
(' Ant. Jud.,' xvii. 6). A consideration of 
^he^e qde^hods of explaining the apparent 



162 



THE ACTS OF THE APuSTLES. 



[oh. t. 1- -iZ 



contradiction between the two historians 
shows that no certainty can without further 
light be arrived at. But it may be observed 
that it is quite impossible to suppose that 
any one so well informed and so accurate as 
St. Luke is could imagine that an event 
that he must have remembered perfectly, if 
it happened under the procuratorship of 
Fadua, had happened before the disturb- 
ances caused by Judas of Galilee, at least 
thirty years before. But it is most certain 
that Josephus's account of Theudas agrees 
better with Gamaliel's notice than that of 
either of the other persons suggested, 
irrespective of the identity of name. The 
first way of explaining the difficulty above 
proposed has, therefore, most probability 
in it. But some further corroboration of 
this exphiiiation may be found in some of 
the detail:: of Theudaa's proceedings given 
by Josephug. He tells us that Theudas 
persuaded a great number of people to 
" collect all their possessions " and follow 
him to the banks of the Jordan, where he 
promised, like a second Elijah, to part the 
■waters for them to pass over ; that they did 
BO, but tl;at Fadus sent a troop of horse 
after them, who slew numbers of them, and 
amongst them their leader. Now, if this 
happened when the business of the census 
was beginning to be agitated, after the 
deposition of Archelaus (a.d. 6 or 7), all is 
plain. Theudas declaimed as a prophet 
agaiust submitting to the census of their 
goods ordered by Aujjustus. The people 
were of the same mind. Theudas persuaded 
them that, if they brought all their goods to 
the banks of the Jordan, he would divide 
the stream and enable them to carry them 
over to the other side out of reach of the 
tax-gatherer. And so they made the attempt. 
But this was an act of rebellion against the 
Boman power, and a method of defeating 
the purpose of the census, which must be 
crushed at once. And so the people were 
pursued and slaughtered. But apart from 
the census of their goods, one sees no motive 
either for the attempt to carry away their 
property, or for the slaughter of an unarmed 
multitude by the Boman cavalry. So that 
the internal evidence is in favour of St. 
Luke's collocation of the incident, at the 
same time that his authority as a contem- 
porary historian is much higher than that 
of Joeephus. Still, one desiderates some 
more satisfactory proof of the error of Jo- 
sephuB, and some account of how he fell 
into it. 

Ver. 87. — Enrolment for taxing, A.V. ; 
some of the for much, A.V. ; cm many for 
even at many, A.Y. ; $cattered abroad for 
ditpersed, A.Y. Judas of Galilee, otherwise 
called the Oautonite, as a native of Gamala, 
ia Qftubpi^if ^e wa^ probably caUe4 « 



Galileean because Galilee <»Aa the seat of hii 
insurrection ( Josephus, ' Ant.,' xviii. i. 1 and 
6; also ' Bell. Jud.,' ii. viii. 1 ; xvii. 8). He 
was the great leader of the Jews in opposing 
the census ordered by Augustus, after the 
deposition of Archelaus, and carried out by 
Cyrenius, or rather P. Sulpicius Quiriiius, 
the Propraetor of Syria, with the assistance 
of Cumanus, the subordinate Governor of 
Judsea. Judas, with Zadoo his coadjutor, was 
the founder of a fourth Jewish sect, nearly 
allied to the Pharisees, and his sedition 
was founded on his philosophic tenets. Jose- 
phus speaks of him as the author of all the 
seditions, tumults, slaughters, sieges, devas- 
tations, plunder, famines, ending with the 
burning of the temple, which afflicted his 
unhappy country. He gives no account of 
his death. But his two sons, James and 
Simon, were crucified by Tiberius Alexander, 
the successor of Cuspius Fadus. Another 
son, Menahem, having collected and armed 
a large band of robbers and other insur- 
gents, after a partially successful attack 
on the Boman camp at Jerusalem, was 
miserably slain. The enrolment (^ airoypatp-r], 
as Luke ii. 1). The purpose of Augustus, 
which had been delayed some years from 
causes not accurately known, perhaps in 
deference to some remonstrance from Herod 
the Great, was now carried into effect. 
Quirinus was sent, apparently the second 
time, as Proprsetor of Syria, to which Judsea 
was now attached, with Cumanus under him 
as Procurator of Judiea, to make a valuation 
of all their property. The Jews had been 
first persuaded by the high priest Joazar, i.e. 
apparently in the end of Herod's reign, or 
the beginning of Archelaus's, to submit to 
what they greatly disliked, but were now 
roused to insurrection by Judas of Galilee 
('Ant.,' xviii. i 1). He also perished. 
Nothing is known of his death beyond 
this notice of it. Scattered abroad. Not 
crushed, for the insurrection broke out again 
and again, having the character of a 
religious war given to it by Judas of 
Galilee. 

Yer. 88. — Be oterQumvm for come to nouohl. 
A.Y. ^' 

Ver. 39.— is for 6«, A.V.; xbUI not be able 
to for cannot, A.Y. ; them for it, A.V. and 
T.B. ; to be fighting for to fight, A.V. 

Yer. 40. — Called unto them (irpofrKaX^a-diJis- 
voi) for simply called, A.Y. ; .they beat them 
arwi charged them for arid beaten them, they 
commanded, A.Y. ; not to tpeah for thai they 
thouUL not tpeah, A.Y. 

Yer. 41.— 2%eo therefore for and they, A.V. , 

dishottour for the Name, for shame for hi> 

Name, A.Y. and T.E. (see 1 Pet. iv. 12—16 ; 

John XT. 21). 

I Yer. i2.— Every day for daHy, A.V. ; ai 

I ftpn>e Cor irt ^erji hous^, A-V- («ee oh, U. 



BH. T. 1—42,] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



163 



note); to preach Jemu at the Christ for 
preadt Jetut Christ, A.V. and T.B. The 
meaning is tliat they daily preached Jesus 
Christ both in the temple and in the house 
or houses whore the disciples were wont to 
meet (see ch. ii. 46, note). The spirit and 
conduct of the apostlea here recorded ia • 



precious example to their succesiori. To 
glory in the cross, to count shame endured 
for Christ's sake the highest honour, and to 
be unwearied and undaunted in teaching 
and preaching Jesus Christ through good 
report and through evil report, ia the true 
character and work of every bishop of souls. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — ^11. — The first hypocrisy. Hitherto all had been bright and beautiful in the 
new-bom Church of God. Brotherly love, disinterested kindness to one another, heroic 
courage in the face of danger, unhesitating devotion to the service of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and an unflinching profession of faith in his Name, had been the common 
characteiistics of the multitude of them that believed. The Church was as the garden 
of the Lord in the midst of the world's wilderness. It was a bright spiing-tide, soon, 
alas 1 to be checked by the cold blasts of selfishness and the love of this world. The 
time of millennial blessedness was not yet come. Satan was not yet bound. On the 
contrary, he was unusually busy, with persecutions from without and temptations from 
within, in his endeavours to hurt and corrupt the children of the kingdom. Indeed, we 
may notice, as a universal feature in the economy of the kingdom of darkness, that every 
great step in advance of the kingdom of light is followed by some corresponding move- 
ment intended to defeat it. The sowing of the gcod seed is the signal for the sowing 
of the tares. The salvation of God is confronted with some counterfeit of Satan. The 
faith of God's elect was opposed, even in the first century, by subtle heresies of man's or 
Satan's devising. The. glorious spread of the gospel in all lands had a counterplot in 
the extraordinary growth of the imposture of Mohammed. The great Reformation in 
the sixteenth century was hindered by the hypocrisies and fanaticism which sprang up 
by its side. And so it was now. The great, enemy of man could not look on the blessed- 
ness of the company of Christians without trying to mar it. He must have some 
portion even within the enclosure of Christ's Church. Even there all must not be guile- 
less truth, all must not be unselfish love. He must have some to do him service even 
though they called Christ their Lord. But how could he find an entrance into those 
holy precincts, how climb up into that heavenly fold? In human character the 
highest rank consists of those who love righteousness for it sown sake, and with various 
degiees of success actually attain to it. There are those among them who attain the 
sublimest heights of virtue and godliness, and there are those who at the best, and 
amidst many stumblings and falls, are only struggling upwards. But they all belong 
to that highest class who really desire to do the will of God and to be conformed to his 
image. But there are others who do not belong to this class at all. They, perhaps, 
admire virtue in others. But especially do they covet the praise and high esteem which 
virtue conciliates to itself. In a religious society they perceive that certain actions 
are praised of men and bring certain pleasurable consequences to the doers of them. 
These fruits of goodness they desire to possess. But then they will not make the 
sacrifices, suffer the losses, endure the privations, which are inseparable from such 
actions. The double heart immediately casts about to find some method of obtaining 
the good without making the sacrifice. To be thought righteous, good, religious, not 
really to be so, becomes the aim and olbject. Fraud, deceit, lies, false pretences, are 
called in to help, and the hypocrite stands, kneels, gives alms, talks religiously, by the 
side of God's true saints, till his hypocrisy is brought to light, and he stands revealed 
as a dissembler before God and man. But meanwhile, in the sight of the world, true 
godliness is discredited by each fresh exposiue of the hypocrite. The defaiuerB of 
God's people are encouraged to say that there is no such thing as the pure love ol Crod 
and disinterested obedience to his will ; and they argue that the most consistent livers 
are only the best dissemblers. There are, doubtless, many other useful lessons to be 
learnt from the study of Haia first hypocrisy in the Church of Gbd. It is good to dwell 
upon this account of it, upon its detection, and upon its awful punishment, because it 
u qolj a type of countless other cases w}iieh have liace happened, and are daily hs^ui 



164 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. T. 1— 42 



pealng, and which, whenever they do happen, do injury to the cause of Christ. Wa 
may learn in this melancholy example how the love of money, or the love of the prais« 
of men, or a greedy appetite of applause, or an ungodly emulation of the fame of other 
men, or the habit of thinking of appearances more than ^f reality, and of putting on a 
religious garb without taking care that our hearts are really moved and guided by the 
Holy Spirit of God, may, almost before we are aware of it, be leading us into the patlis 
of the hypocrite instead of into the way of the just. And in the fearful exposure and 
punishment of these first Christian hypocrites, we may learn how certain it is that 
sooner or later every hidden thought and every secret of the heart will be brought to 
linht ; and that none will be able to stand before the all-searching eye of God but those 
who walk before God in godly sincerity, while they trust with a steadfast fnith in the 
merits of their ahnighty Saviour. But anyhow we may be sure that this example of 
hy[iocrisy by the sii!e of eminent holiness in the primitive Church, is thus set forth in 
its distinctness by the inspired historian, to be a touchstone by which to try future 
actions, to be a type of an evil which would be found to exist in all subsequent ages, 
and to be a warning to the children of God to watch against the very first beginnings 
of declension from simplicity and sincerity in their relations to Almighty God. 

Vers. 12 — 42. — The advancing tide. The gospel of God's grace in Jesus Clnist 
crucified and risen aiain had issued from Jerusalem at the bidding of the Lord. Would 
it ever stop? would it ever cease to advance? would it ever meet with obstacles 
sufiiciently strong to turn back its current and to arrest its progress ? When the 
flowing tide is hurrying towards the shore, some particular wave is checked by an 
opposing rock, and is shivered into spray before it can reach the shore. But wait a 
little and the rock is sunken beneath the waters, and the waves roll on unchecked to 
the ir goal. Sometimes a temporary lull seems to have fallen upon the languid waves, 
and tlirec or lour in succession do not reach the bounds which their predecessors h:iil 
attained. But yet a moment and the tide advances in its unbroken strength, and 
never fails to fulfil its destined course. It is just so with the gospel of Christ. Its 
advance is sure. Its strength is in the unchanging will of God. It has a course to 
run ; it will run it. It has an end to fulfil ; it will fulfil it. Hindrances, obstacbs, 
defiance, it will meet with from man in a thousand varying forms. The opposition of 
hard unbelief in those who boast that they have intellect and philosophy on their side ; 
the opposition of adverse creeds seeking to supplant the true faith ; the fierce perse- 
cutions of ungodly power hoping to stop by force the progress of a hated truth ; tlie 
divisions and dissensions of Christians among themselves; the abounding of iniquiiy 
and the chilling of Christian love; the sudden rise of some heresy or aiiostasy;— • 
those and such like hindrances may occasionally seem to check the onward flow of tlie 
waters of life, and at times to threaten its further advance. But, like the irrcsistil lo 
tide of the mighty ocean, God's purpose is pressing surely on; and by the time 
decreed by his eternal wisdom the whole " earth shall be full of the knowledge of the 
Lord, as tlie waters cover the sea" (Isa. xi. 9). The chapter now before us gives a most 
striking view of this irresistible advance as well as of the obstacles opposed to it. One 
hundred and twenty men and a few poor, weak women are, as it were, the seed whitli 
the hand of the Lord has sown in an uncongenial soil. Immediately around them was 
all the bigotry of Pharisaic Judaism, dinging with desperate and impassioned obstinacy 
to the traditions of their fathers, and ready to kill and be killed on behalf of the Law 
uf Moses, on the one hand ; and the hard, cold scepticism of the Sadducees on the other, 
denying with agnostic incredulity the existence of anything beyond the ken of their 
eyes or the grasp of their hands. In the wider circle of the outside world there was 
t;he iron heathenism of Eome. Imperial tyranny and Ctesarean power ; military force 
and the despotism of the sword ; sensuality of the deepest dye ; idolatry of the most 
aggressive and all-engrossing kind ; philosophies the most adverse to the cross of Christ. 
How and where could the gospel make its way ? Would it not die in the upper room 
where it was bom ? But what do we read? " There were added to the Church about 
three thousand souls ; " " Many believed, and the number of the men was abou' five 
thousand ; " " Believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and 
women;" "The number of the disciples was multiplied;" and so on, marking the 
soijstftpt adva»c^ of tUe Cburoh «f (jK)d. 4nd yet ^U tjie while every effort was bein| 



«.♦.!— 4a.j *HE ACfS OP THte AfoSlLfili W 

mnde to check this advance. There were already "prisons oft." There were the 
ierce tKreatenings of those who had power to execute them ; there were stripes inflictpd ; 
there wm the majesty of the law and the authority of rulers arrayed against them. 
But it was all in vain. The preachers could not be silenced ; the preaching could not 
be stopped; the miracles could not be hid; men's hearts would turn to Christ when 
tliey heard of his grace; multitudes would leave the side of the persecutors and join 
themselves to the persecuted. The tide would flow on. It rushed over the heads of 
the opposing rocks. And then worldly wisdom came in with its prudent counsel, 
" Leave these men alone." And so for a time the work of God went quietly on, 
gathering strength and acquiring solidity from day to day, in preparation for future 
hostility from the world without, and future hindrances from corruption within. But 
these first fortunes of Christianity have left to the Church in all nges a model of the 
conflicts that await her, and of the only method of oblaining victory. They show us 
that through opposition and contradiction, in sunshine and in storm, amidst encourage- 
ments and under depression, the servants of God have to persevere steadily in pio- 
claiming the grace of God and the resurrection of Jesus Christ, have to go forward in 
an unswerving obedience to the commandment of Christ and an unfaltering confidence 
in his almighty power, and that success is sure. "On this rock will I build my 
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." 



HOMILIES liY VAPJOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — ^10.—^ fatal forgetfulnefs. There are several truths which this sad 
incident suggests to us. "We may view them thus — 

I. That a hbw entebfbisb mat survive a very bamaging blow. It was a very 
serious misfortune to the new Church that two of its members should commit a sin 
worthy of death, and pay that terrible penalty in the view of all. The apostles must 
have felt that they and the cause with which they were identified had received a 
severe blow ; but it was far from being a fatal one. It was one from which the cause 
of Christ soon recovered ; nay, it was overruled " for the furtherance of the gospel." Lot 
not any Church or any sacred cause be too much disheartened by a check at the 
beginning. With truth and God on its ride. It will survive and flourish. 

II. That vbbt serious sin mat be ocirasaTED with an act which is outwardly 
VIRTUOUS AND ooDLT. To those who looked on as Ananias and Sapphira brought the 
money they did bring and 'laid it at the feet of the apostles, their action must have 
seemed pious and generous in a very high degree. But we know it to have been 
utterly and even fatally defective. It becomes us to search, with fearless and faithful 
glance those of our deeds which men approve as most commendable, lest, while around 
us is approval and congratulation, there should be entered in the book of account in 
heaven a sin of great enormity against our name. 

III. That wb mat be committing a heinous sin in an action which seems venial 
TO ourselves. In all likelihood, Ananias and Sapphira imagined that they were doing 
Az action which, while it was calculated to w;in respect, was not very, if at all, reprehen- 
sible in itself. They probably reconciled it to their own sense of rectitude. Men do 
so now. In connection with religion and philanthropy they do guilty things which 
kindle the wrath of the righteous Lord, supposing that they are only departing a few 
degrees from Integrity, or are even worthy of praise. " Wiio can understand his errors V 
Cleanse thou me from secret faults." 

IV. That it is a false and most perilous thing to suppose that the good 

CONNECTED WITH ANY COURSE WILL COUNTERBALANCE SOME ONE SERIOUS SIN THEREIN. 

Ananias and Sapphira may have thought that the piety and charity of their conduct 
would more than balance the sin of their deception. They were miserably wrong and 
were fearfully disabused of their mistake, If we wilfully break one of God's plain com- 
mandments, supposing that the virtues of our action will cancel the wrong, and thus 
allow ourselves to fall into deception (as here), or into dishonesty, or into excess, 
or into arrogance and pride, we shall have a sad and, it may be, a rude and awf il 
awakening from our grievous error. 
T, That THERE IS a foroetfulness which is nothing less than fatal. Ananias 



16« THE ACTS OF I'HB APOSTLES. [oh. T. 1—42. 



and Sapphira made a mistake whicli was simply ruinous. They overlooked the fact 
that the Holy Spirit of God was in close connection with his Church, and was acting 
through his servants. They forgot that when they were trying to deceive inspired men 
they were acting falsely in the face of the Divine Inspirer, so that when they imagined 
they were lying unto men they were really lying unto God (ver. 4). For this guilty 
oversight they paid the last penalty of death. Is not their sin too easily reproducible 
and too often re-enacted? Too commonly men guiltily overlook the presence and » 
agency of the Divine Spirit. 1. A Church does so when it is resting in human aitd ' 
earthly advantages for its prosperity ; when the minister trusts to his eloquence, the 
people to those arts and influences which are from below and not from above ; when 
both are i'orgetting that there is an almighty power which is within their reach and 
at the command of believing prayer. 2. The human soul does so when it disregards 
the influences which are at work upon and within it; when it treats lightly the 
pleadings of the pulpit, the warnings of friendship, the prickings of conscience, the 
convictions and impulses which call it to newness of life. Is not this to ain against 
the Holy Ghost, and is not the penalty of it spiritual, eternal death ? — 0. 

Vers. 11 — 16. — Elements of influence. Instead of the sin and death of Ananias 
and Sapphira proving disastrous to the infant Church, the melancholy event was 
followed by a period of extraordinary success. There was a high tide of prosperity ; 
the gospel showed itself a great power in the community (ver. 14). Here are soma 
of the elements of that power. 

I. The terkiblb. " Great fear came upon ... as many as heard these things " 
(ver. 11). " By terrible things in righteouness " God sometimes answers us and 
impresses us. The fearful has a work to do in inspiring awe and leading to 
conviction and conversion. There are awful truths in connection with the gospel 
(Matt. xxi. 44 ; xxiv. 51 ; xxv. 46, etc.), as well as terrible facts happening in the 
providence of God, which do their worii in the mind, solemnizing, subduing, preparing 
for thought, devotion, consecration. 

II. The beneficent. (Vers. 15, 16.) In apostolic times Christian beneficence 
took the form of miraculous healini;, and it was most efficacious in atti^cting and 
winning men. Now it takes other forms hardly less effective. The hospitals of the 
missionary in India and China, and the philanthropic institutions of England, initiated 
and sustained by Christian sympathy and self-sacrifice, are great elements of power. 
Christian kindness, taking a thousand shapes, flowing in a thousand channels, is an 
UDtoM, incalculable influence for good. 

III. The sacbed. " The people magnified them " (ver. 13). To whomsoever this 
applied, wbelher to the apostles only or to the band of believing disciples, it is clear 
that a certain reverence was paid to those who bore about them such marks of close 
association with the Divine. To those who walk with God, who are men of prayer 
and of real devoutness of spirit as well as blamelessness of life, there will attach a 
certain sacredness which will cause them to be " magnified by the people," smd their 
word will be with power. 

IV. The successful. It is clear, from the fifteenth and sixteenth verses, that the 
publicity gained by the " many signs and wonders " of one day brought together a 
still larger congregation of the sick and the expectant the following day. Success in 
Jerusalem begat success in " the cities round about." The moral and spiritual 
triumphs of the truth have been elements of influence of signal worth. What God 
has wrought in opening blind eyes of the mind and cleansing leprous souls has been 
the means of extending the healing and renewing power of Christ on every hand. 
What stronger argument have we than this — What Christ has done for such sad 
and sinful souls he can and will do for you ? 

V. The supernatural. " Signs and wonders " are not now wrought by the hand 
of the ministers of Christ. But the supernatural is with us still, though the miracu- 
lous is gone. In connection with the preached Word, and in answer to believing 
prayer, the iron will is bent and the rocky heart is broken, the blind eyes are opened, 
and from the grave of sin dead souls come forth to newness of life, — 0. 

Ten. 17 — 29. — Three thingt Divin*. The success »{ the Christian cause had the 



m. V. 1—42.3 TfiE Acts Ot rUI: Af OsTLfiis. 10/ 

effect which micjht have been anticipated; it aroused the intense hostility of the 
euemies of the Lord, and their bitter opposition found vent in a speedy arrest and 
imprisonment of the apostles (vers. 17, 18). But man's adversity was God's oppor- 
tunity, and we have — 

I. Divine interposition. (Ver. 19.) How vain all bolts and bars to shut out 
those, whom God would have to enter, to shut in those whom he would have escape I 
The hour had come for his interposing hand, and all the contrivances of man's wrath 
were broken through as if they were but " the spider's most attenuated thread." We 
often wish for the direct interposition of God now; we often ask for it; we often 
wonder that it does not come, thinking that the hour for Divine mnnifestation must 
have arrived. The duty and the wisdom of true piety are (1) to ask God to deliver in 
his own time and way; (2) to expect his delivering hand at some time and in some 
way ; (3) to wait in patient endurance till his time has come ; (4) to recognize his 
gracious hand in whatever ways he may be pleased to act. 

II. A DrvnfE instbttction. " Go, stand and speak ... all the words of this life " 
(ver. 20). Doubtless the apostles well understood what was the tenor of their commis- 
sion. They were to speak all those words which would enlighten their fellow-citizens 
on the great subject of the new spiritual life which they had begun to live. They who 
SI and now in the relation of religious teachers to the men of their own time, may take 
Ihese words of the heavenly messenger as a Divine instruction to themselves. They are 
to " speak all the words of this life;" i.e. (1) to explain and enforce the truth, that 
beneath and beyond the life which is material and temporal is the life which is 
spiritual and eternal ; (2) to make known the conditions on wliich that life is to be 
entered upon — repentance toward God, [and faith in a crucified and risen Saviour; 
'3) to make clear the w ay by which that life is to be sustainrd — by " abiding in him ; " 
(4) to assure all disciples that " this life " is to be perpetuated in the other world. 

III. The DrviNB demand. " We ought to obey God rather than man " (ver. 29). 
God demands our«first obedience — that is the teaching of his Word ; it is also the 
response of our own conscience. We agree, when we consider it, that God lias a claim, 
trauscendently and immeasurably superior to all others, on our allegiance. Tliat Divine 
One who called us ourselves into existence ; by whom we have been endowed with all our 
faculties ; in whom " we live, and move, and have our being; " from whom we have received 
every single blessing we have known; who is the righteous and holy Sovereign of all 
souls throughout the universe of being; on whose will absolutely depends our future 
destiny ; — to him we owe our allegiance in such degree, that any claims man may have 
upon us are " as nothing, and less than nothing." There are many reasons why we 
should yield ourselves to his service — the example of the worthiest and the best of our 
kind ; the excellency, dignity, exaltation of that service ; the present and future 
advantages we gain thereby ; the awful issues of disloj'altj' and persistent rejection, etc. 
But there is one thonght which should weigh the most, and be of itself sufficient — " ice 
ought to obey God." We cannot decline to do so without violating the jilain teaching of 
our moral judgment. When we do yield ourselves to him, we put ourselves In the right 
and have the strong and blessed sanction of our conscience. We should hear the voice 
within, saying daily, hourly, in tones which will not be silenced, " You ought to obey 
God."— 0. 

Vers. 30 — 32. — The cross and the erbton. In this address which Peter delivered to 
the Sanhedrim we have another epitome of the gospel. 

I. The lowest depth of bakthlt shame. "Whom ye slew and hanged on a 
tree " (ver. 30). The Son' of God was " made a little lower than the angels," even a 
Son of man, " for the suffering of death " (Heb. ii. 9). Bfe stooped to the level of our 
humanity, in order that he might " taste death for every man." And he underwent 
that experience in its most dreadful form — in darkness, pain, shame, desertion, inex- 
pressible agony of soul. He went deliberately down to the very lowest point to which 
he could stoop, that he might finish the work the Father had given him to do. 

II. The highest summit of heavenly honoub. " The God of our fathers raised 
up Jesus . . . him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour " 
(vers. 30, 31). " From the highest throne of glory to the cross of deepest woe " he had 
comw; now he reascended from the grave to the throne, to the feat of heavenly power 



168 . THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. t. 1—42. 

and blessedness. He has become an enthroned Eedeemer, a sovereign Saviour, (1) occupy- 
ing the foremost place in heavenly rank, (2) dispensing salvation to the lost children 
of men, and (3) receiving the willing homage, the affectionate service of the multitude he 
has redeemed. What more honourable, enviable, blessed position can we conceive than 
that of One who, seated in the very highest post of honour, is conferring the best of all 
imaginable boons, and is receiving, in return, the freest, richest, most rejoicing wurslii|) 
and service of his redeemed, both of those who are about his person " in the heavens," 
and of those also who are serving him and striving to follow him below ? 

III. The method ok the beignino Savioxtr. He is a Prince and a Saviour, " to give 
repentance . . . and forgiveness of sins." How does the exalted Lord carry on his great 
work as he reigns in heaven ? By giving repentance and remission. 1. He gives to 
human souls a sense of the heinousness of their sin. 2. He dispenses to them, through 
his atoning sacrifice, full and free forgiveness of their sin. Thus he leads men every- 
where away from their iniquity, and restores them to the favour and bo to the happy 
service of the Supreme. 

IV. The blessed CBBTAiNDr wb have of the pact of ma elevation. (Ver. 22.) 
The apostles could assure the council that these thing;s were so ; they could place it 
beyond all doubt, inasmuch as (1) they themselves were witnesses of the facts, and 
(2) the Holy Spirit had confirmed their testimony by the signs and wonders he enabled 
them to work. We too have testimony, both human and Divine. 1. The human 
testimony of the apostles of our Lord ; also of all Christian souls in all succeeding 
generations, who have witnessed for him and the power of his grace ; and also the 
assurance of our contemporaries, who rejoice in the liberty with which he has made 
them free. 2. The Divine testimony of that gracious Spirit of God, Who, though he 
works no signs and wonders around ns, does work conviction, comfort^ sanctity, strength, 
within ui.— <3. 

Vers. 33—42. — Our attitude toward* Ood. There are three attitudes it is possible 
for ns to assume towards our Maker and Saviour. They are those of — 

I. HosTiLiTT. We may "be foimd even to fight against God." It is, indeed, as new 
as it is old for men to contend with God and to oppose themselves to those ends for 
which he is working. 1. Good men do so unwittingly ; as when earnest and holy 
Catholics have persecuted Protestant men and women ; as when devout Protestants 
have thrown obstacles in the way of their more energetic co-religionists who have been 
evangelizing in ways not considered legal and correct ; as when we ignorantly miscon- 
strue the sacred Scriptures, finding out, farther on, that those views we combated were 
in harmony with truth. 2. Bad men do so deliberately and guiltily : (1) when they 
endeavour positively to overturn influences which ihey know to be holy and remedial ; 
(2) when they practically encourage that which they feel to be wrong and hurtful. 

II. NEnTEALiTY. We may take the position which Gamaliel advised with so much 
policy on this occasion : " Let these men alone " (ver. 38). When any sacred cause 
comes up before us, challenging our approval and asking our aid, we may determinately 
stand aloof, declining either to befriend it on the one hand or to withstand it on the other : 
we neither bless nor curse. 1. It is impossible to take a neutral position, upon the whole, 
in relation to Christ. " He that is not with him is against him," as he has said to us. 
Our influence is either telling in favour of his. holy service, of Christian truth, of eternal 
life, or else against these sacred things. 2. It is possible that we may assume a 
neutrality toward particular institutions, usages, movements, habits ; and this neutrality 
may be (1) necessary, because we have not the means of arriving at a judgment at all j 
(2) wise, because we have not yet had the opportunity of coming to an intelligent 
decision; (3) culpable, because cowardly, selfish, unfaithful. 

IIL Cohopebation. (Vers. 40 — 42.) When they had beaten the apostles — an act 
of severe bodily castigation was a grim method of " letting them alone ; " it was probably 
a concession to the party of hostile action — ^they did let them go, with strict prohibitions 
in their ear. We are to be " co-workers with Christ," " workmen together with him ; " 
and we shall become this by ; 1. Speaking for Christ. " Daily in the temple . . . they 
ceased not to teach and to preach Jesus Christ "(ver. 42). In the Church, in the 
school, in the home, — anywhere, everywhere, we too may speak for him ; uttering the 
truth which he ha* taught us t^) prize, more especially upholding him himself at the 



cm. V. 1— 42.J rtlE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 16i 

one groat Tuacher, almighty Saviour, Divine Friend, and rightful Lord of the human 
soul. 2. Suffering for him. The apostles endured sufferiiiL; and shame for his Name; 
they did so gladly, rejoicingly. We may be " counted worthy " to do the same. Many 
t.iousands of men, in heaven or on earth, have had this high honour (Matt. v. 10 — 12; 
1 Pot. iv. 13). And if we are thoroughly true and unflinchingly faithlul to our Lord, 
serving him to the full height of our opportunity, we shall surely (1) suffer bodily incon- 
Vtnionces, fatigue, exhaustion, if not pain and sickness, for his sake; (2) endure the 
dislike and ridicule, if not the blows and imprisonment, of the ungodly. In such ill 
treatment we &aU find occasion for heavenly joy, as they did.— 0. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — Tke sin of heart ; untruth and its punishment. As the shadow 
follows the light, so Christianity has been marked in its progress by a deep and broad- 
ening shadow of hypocrisy. After the glorious picture of sunny days of the Spirit's life 
in the preceding cliapter, a dark view of human deceit is presented. 1'he root of bitter- 
ness springs up amidst the Divine delights of the time, and many are troubled. 

I. The sin of Ananias and Safphiba. Essentially it was the acting of a lie. The 
part of the produce of the sale was put before the apostles as if it had bren the whole. 
Many will act lies who will shun to articulate them. But the value of actions in a 
moral point of view lies in the exprpssion they give to feeling. The motive cannot be 
left out of consideration. This action was intended by the guilty pair to pass with 
others as having a moral quality it had not. The understanding was that the whole 
and unrt'served produce of the sale of property should in every case be given in. The 
act of the couple was intended to be received in this meaning while that meaning did 
not exist. We are responsible for the constructions which we know will in certain 
cases be put upon our actions. And the action of Ananias and Sapphiia is typical of 
all those by which we dishonestly compromise with conscience, or seek to pass umltr 
false colours. There are times when it is a duty to abstain from action, if we know 
that our aclion will convey an impression that is false, have an appearance to which no 
reality corresponds. 

II. Peter's exposure of the bin. His words are deep and mysterious. Let us not 
pretend to fathom them. 1. The dark sowce of crime — " Satan filling the heart." 
The deeds of sin are dark in every sense : they excite shame in the doer ; they shun 
the light ; they are lying in their origin, process, and consummation. 2. The struggle 
involued in sin. The opposition of the good, the striving of the Holy Spirit, is ever felt 
No man lies to his fellow-men until he has first lied to the truth revealed within. 
Discussions about the personality of Satan and of the Holy Ghost are foreign to the 
spirit of the simple New Testament language, and only divert the mind from the 
ST'lftmn truth of immediate inner experience. The meaning of these dread figures of 
spot.i b suS-iently clear without any dialectics. 3. The peculiar aggravation of this 
sin. It had nui tb2 8x:use of overwhelming temptation. They need not have sold the 
prope^liy at all. There was .is law or special apostolic edict requiring it. The fiee 
•pirit of love alone set the practice on foot. Certainly those sins which men commit 
under no pressure of necessity or of sudden and strong coincidences of opportunity 
with desire, are tha worsf. Gratuitous gin, so to speak, shows so diseased a moral state 
that it infers a person will require a temptation to do right, will go wrong without 
temptation at all, It was a fixed and deliberate determination, this act of Ananias, 
taken in the full daylight of conscience. In all probability it was the crowning act of 
a life long directed to counterfeiting goodness. For how true the proverb, that no one 
falls suddenly into the extreme of baseness 1 His life in Judaism had been a counterfeit, 
his conversion a sham, his participation in the joy and power of the time a mockery ; 
the act which he intended to seal his Christian reputation fixing on him the damnation 
of the devil-led impostor. And through all or much of this there doubtless ran a vein of 
profound self-deception. 4. All moral offences are irreligious. This is important, for the 
craft of the heart would often separate morality from religion. But a lie to men is a lie 
to God under all circumstances ; it is he whose light is in the breast which falsehood 
confuses, his truth which is practically denied. There is no genuine morality which is 
not founded on reverence for the living God. And no security that men will speak 
truly or act rightly when the pressure of fear or the mechanical action of habit is not 
felt, except in thaseuM of the eternal imperativa of God. 6, The comjplicity of the wi/t 



ltd THE ACTS OF THE aPOSTLES. {(m.r.l~i2 

in the guilt adds another element of aggravation. The one should have restrained ths 
other. The guilt of their joint act was like a mutual agreement of unfaithfulness. 
The sanctity of marriage rests on the recognition of the covenant between each soul and 
God ; it is broken down and defiled by the common consciousness of a crime. 

III. The judgment. It was sudden, marking the interposition of God. It wa? 
received in both cases in silence — a tacit confession of its justice. Thus did sin loug 
nourished in the heart at last come forth, full-bom, only to meet death. " Sin, whe^ it 
is finished, bringeth forth death." Great dread fell, as well it might, on all who heard 
and on the whole Church. It was like a bolt out of a clear and serene sky. And we shoul 1 
learn the solemn lessons that suggest themselves for every time. 1. Moral danger.s 
lurk near every scene of spiritual manifestation. 2. The highest features of spiritual 
character and action will always find false imitators, and this in the very bosom of thu 
Church. 3. Hence the need of heart-searching for ourselves (for we may be hypocrites 
without knowing it), of constant prudence and vigilance. " Our enemy goeth about." 
" Behold, I have told you before." — J. 

Vers. 12 — 16. — The healing personality of Christ's servants. I. They are vehicles 
OP Divine power. The lips and the hands are consecrated to the service of doinij 
good. Here especially the hands. It is a beautiful organ, the human hand, and may 
stand in Christian thought as the very symbol of beneficence. Signs and wonders are 
wrought, betokening that God is in immediate connection with the agencj' of man, 
that his presence is loving and healing, that Christianity brings in an era of deliverance 
from pain and sickness. 

II. The repellent force of holt peesonalitt. False souls are scared by the 
presence of a true man. They are in polar antagonism to him. They cannot bear his 
direct glance, his clear tones, his indefinable influence. There are those whose pre- 
sence silences the ribald jest and scoff. The holy man awakens dread and love wherever 
he goes. Society seems to divide into its elements as he approaches. He is magnetic. 
Hence the slander of some is an equal testimony to moral greatness with the admiration 
and love of others. 

HI. Its attractive force. The multitude love goodness and revere it in their 
inmost heart. And not for long can the sympathies of the multitude be held except by 
goodness. In this case Divine power set its seal too plainly upon the character and 
work of the apostles to be resisted. In the vast concourse of sick and suii'ering in the 
streets and open places of Jerusalem we have the picture of the effects of Christianity. 
It is and ever has been the religion of the poor and the suffering. It remains the Divine 
will that the Christian minister should be the healer, the comforter. His pattern is to 
be found in the description Christ gave of his own mission in the synagogue at Nazareth 
(Luke iv.), and it is surely a sign of weakness somewhere when the public organs of 
Christianity fail to command the attention and to supply the heart-wants of the lowly 
and the suffering. By the ordinary laws of mind to work for the spiritual help of such 
is better than all the power to work signs and wonders. Let every Christian minister 
be like " Peter's shadow," a refreshment and a rest by his spirit and teaching to weary 
souls.— J. 

Vers. 17 — 26. — Arrest of the apostles. I. The temper of the rttlino powers 
1. Zeal. It is good or evil in its effects, according to the objects to which it is directed. 
There is no mood of which more opposite descriptions have been and may not be with 
justice ^ven. In the excitement of feeling, the fire and fervour which zeal implies, 
egotism may be so easily mistaken for public spirit. Our self-passions may and must 
mix with those of a purer kind. Besentment against injury to our interests or indignity 
to our party, or contempt for our opinions, is constantly mistaken for pure zeal for the 
kingdom of God and the cause of goodness. 2. Whenever anger and violence break 
out it is a proof that the dangerous force of zeal is at work. The only way to correct its 
mischief is by denying any personal interest which is apart from that of the truth. It 
is the clear calm gaze at truth which cools the undue heat of zeal, or gives the force its 
true direction. Here violence showed that egotism was the principle of priestly zeal, 
and passionate interest, divorced from truth. The apostles are seized and put in prison] 



CH.Y. 1— 42.] TttE ACTS OF THE APOSTlES. 17 1 

Zeal is blundering, thinks that force is a remedy for moral feebleness, believes that truth 
and spirit can be put down. 

II. Theib violence divinblt rebuked. The angel of the Lord comes as an emis- 
sary of freedom, for the Word of God cannot be bound. And freedom means new scope 
for duty. God doe» not give liberty to tongue and hand for nothing. 

" If our virtues go not forth from ue, 
Ti* all as one aa though we had them not." 

Freedom imposes duties. If God sets iis free from the fear of man, which muzzles the 
tongue, then let us go and publicly speakj to the people " all the words of this life." 
Again, with freedom courage is given. The apostles go at daybreak to the temple, and 
in the teeth of ecclesiastical prohibition proceed to toach. How truly is courage the gift 
and grace of God 1 Too often we think of it as a mere pagan virtue founded on pride. 
Far otherwise with the true courage of the Christian soldier. " It was a great instruction," 
said Mrs. Hutchinson, in her ' Memoirs,' " that the best and highest courages were 
beams of the Almighty." As every passion and energy of the soul contains its opposite, 
so moral courage contains fear of God, moral cowardice contains the false courage to 
be untrue to God. The apostles, having chosen the fear of God and obedience for their 
guide, knew no other fear. 

III. Renewal OP OPPOSITION. (Vers. 22, etc.) Here is another studyofthe human heart. 
When men are blinded by passion, the strongest arguments and warnings of God seem 
only obstacles on which wrath breaks with the greater vehemence. The news comes that 
the prison is empty, and under significant circumstances. The guard stands as before 
at the door, unconscious of the prisoners' escape. The tidings are confirmed from another 
source. The prisoners have escaped and are again in the temple, teaching. Was not 
this the finger of God? Would not men in their senses, free from the madness of 
passion, have argued that they did wrong to offer violence to a power so majestical and 
so contemptuous of the fetters of force and the ordinary laws of nature ? Yet once 
more the foiled attempt of human force against the will of God is renewed, ami the 
apostles are brought with a gentleness due to the fear of their captors before the tribunal. 

IV. The contest of worldly atjthohitt with spiritual. The Sanhedrim are 
at the outset again baffled and defied. 1. Authority weak without moral support. 
The judges can only helplessly repeat themselves. They refer to their former command 
and ask why it had not been obeyed. As if the apostles had not warned them it should 
not be obeyed. Might without right can only repeat its experiments and its failures ; 
is no match for right which rests upon eternal might. 2. Physical weakness mighty 
in moral support. Here were but a few unarmed men, without armed following, only 
temporarily backed up by the uncertain sympathy of the crowd. What is tlie secret of 
their immovable bearing ? It is moral. Obedience to the higher law is the secret of 
all command over the minds of others. Here again is the coincidence of opposites. The 
servant of self-interest is weak, though he sits on a throne and is surrounded by guards ; 
while one moral will, one divinely determined personality, suffices to set a city in com- 
motion and to overturn established order. 3. Truth irresistible. The truth of the 
place, time, persons, oirpumstances, launched from firm lips, is certain to go home. 
This is infallible. If we fail with the truth, it is because of want of respect to some of 
these conditions. (1) The act of God in raising Jesus is again insisted on. Fearful fact 
in its grandeur, disquieting in its stubbornness,, illustrated now by the events of every 
hour. (2) The guilt of the crucifiers again emphasized. Their own dark passions are 
reflected in the cross of wood, and at the same time God's rebuke of them and dis- 
appointment of them. (3) The exaltation and dominion of Jesus again set forth. At the 
right hand of God; at the apex of the moral universe, he now draws men unto him, 
changing their hearts and pardoning their sins. (4) The living evidence again appealed 
to. We, living, acting men, working works that by the confession of one of your number 
(Nicodemus) no man can do unless God be with him ; we, not in our independent name 
and personality, but as vehicles and agents of a holy power, are the evidence that these 
things are so. And if they are so, then is the power of the Sanhedrim, with all its sup- 
port in Roman arms, the mere shadow and ghost of authority. It ia superseded by that 
of Jesus the true King of Israel. Well may the priests and rulers be cut to the heart 
by a conviction, all the more penetrating because it ia ia the minda of aU,y«t ST«v«dby 



It2 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, loB.v.i—i'i 

none. (1) The root of courage, energy, moral influence, and command Ues in conscience, 
or obedience to God. (2) Wliere men combine against conscience and conspire against 
truth, they undermine the foundations of authority and prepare their own ruin.— -^. 

Vers. 34 — 42. — Power and weakness. I. Innocence an object op hate to the unjust. 
No wound is more deadly than that inflicted by words of truth upon false hearts. If 
the heart will not receive the truth, the truth will pierce through it. And murderous 
counsels show that truth has been denied in the heart. Instead of answering the 
witnesses with reason for reason, the Sanhedrim seek to stop their mouth with earth 
and put them to death. A cause is lost when it can be no longer argued in the court 
of reason, when its only argument is the sword, or the stake, or the rod- or the prison- 
cell. 

II. Sugoestiohb of neutralitt. Gamaliel is the type of common sense undisturbed 
by zeal — of clear judgment unbiassed by prejudice. It is pretty evident that he did 
not sympathize with the apostles ; still less, probably, diil he sympathize with the 
fears or the fanaticism of his colleagues. He is perliaps " old and cold." IJcldom do 
men of stron;; reflective habit feel much interest in novelties in religion. Seldom 
do the observers of life, the students of human history, expect much from sudden 
popular movements or popular teaching. Such was Gamaliel's character. But where 
so little is said there is much room for difference of opinion as to what that character 
really was, how far really inclined to Christ's doctrine, possibly believing in his 
mission, or a disciple in secret. In the absence of further knowledge of the man, we 
may consider his counsel, and draw the following lesson : — 1. Prudence and caution 
are ever seasonable and especially so where there is a temptation to violence and repres- 
sion of others' freedom. We should never act without a clear call to do bo. The 
alternation of inaction is best in doubtful cases. 2. Experience shows that movements 
which have no vitality in them come te aa end if left alone. They die for want of fuel, 
while persecution supplies that fuel on which they live. Such had been the case with 
the insurrection of Judas and that of Theudas. 3. Time is required that the true 
nature of a movement be clearly seen. Many a seed springs up that cannot live ; many 
a threatened man lives long. A new force cannot be judged by the first appearances 
and manifestations. 4. There is always a danger in repression. The force yon seem 
to have quelled for the moment only bursts forth in a new direction. You may, while 
you think to bo putting down your enemy, be rousing up a more formidable one, or 
exposing your.«elf to attack in some unguarded quarter. Above all, you may be con- 
tending against Divine power and will, and inviting its vengeance. 5. Faith in truth, 
utter contempt for falsehood and imposture, is our safest temper. This gives calmness 
under every eraergenoy. The truth can never harm us if we are on its side, nor can it 
he defeated by any power on the other side. After all, this true attitude was Gamaliel's. 
He was a man who understood and believed In the moral laws. Well would it have been 
had the Sanhedrim shared his intelligence and honesty. And had his advice been 
followed at similar crises of religious history, much bloodshed and retardation of the 
good cause would have been avoided. In private life, how many an occasion when there 
is a restless desire to act, to fetter the free action of others, to stop the course of moral 
laws, when the simple question i* pertinent 1— "Can you not — let it alone"? 

III. Weak violbnob. Threats — prison — rods ; to this the Saniiedrim in its might 
resorts against helpless and unarmed men. Rods are for the backs of those who are 
not amenable to reason. The chastisement which is appropiate to the fool is absurdly 
applied to the man who acts from deliberate counsel and proved determination. Blows 
are no match for prayers. The martyr is never in the tyrant's power. He clings to 
God's skirts, and malice cannot touch his sovl. 

IV. The mabttb's jot. Joy of the purest quality and most triumphal power 
starts from the very seed-bed of pain. Pain may be to the soul the expression of God's 
displeasure or of his love. If it is incurred in obedience to him, the soul wears it as a 
testimonial of his goodness. The honour of suffering for God's sake is one of peculiar 
worth. There is a natural feeling that any great suffering entitles the patient to some 
respect. The consciousness of being selected for suffering in the noblest cause ennobles 
the soul. It feels crowned and throned. Our capacity is enlarged both for thought 
juid feeling and for joy by such an experience. It is strengthened, and every fresh ttinL 



CH y. 1— 42.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 173 



faithfully endured, prepaies for new effort, goads to perseverance, and lo defeats tha 
persecutor by the very means of hia own weapons. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The death of Ananias. Baphael's cartoon manifestly founded, not 
on the simple narrative of Acts, but on the corrupt Church's falsification of it. The 
apostles represented on a throne, from which with despotic decree they command men 
to deaih. Our object is not to terrify men into religion and ecclesiastical submission, 
but to win them to Clirist ; to save men's lives, nut to destroy them. Solemn and awful 
as the facts are, they are yet beams from the Sun of Righteousness. 

I. A revelation of the kingdom of Christ. 1. As the kingdom of liyht. Wisdom 
in discernment of spirits and judgment of human character. Distinction between pure 
and false fellowship. Exaltation of the great light-principle of self-sacrifice. 2. As 
the kingdom of righteousness. The act of Ananias was an act of rebellion against the 
first law of the gospel, botli as a lie and as selfishness. 3. As the kingdom of order and 
peace. The rising brotherhood was the germ of a new human society, in which all men 
should be blessed. Ananias sinned against the Holy Ghost, i.e. defied and insulted the 
Spirit in bis new work, trampled on the rising life. As a vindication of ihe kingdom, 
the sentence, I hough it looks at first sight unduly severe, was merciful, as a sign, nut 
merely threatening, but inviting. It cleared the light of clouds. 

II. An instructive example of human weakness and sinfdlnesb. A Judas among 
the apostles, an Ananias among the first believers. We must expect such things 
always. 1. The work of the Spirit is thus shown to be necessary. The deceit of the 
heart. The power of temptation. The influence of a multitude in hiding us from our- 
selves. The possibility of being carried away by a wave of excitement. The lure of 
ambition. Man and wife encouraging one another ; Macbeth and Lady Macbeth. The 
gospel needud to lift up even the ties of nature and renew and strengthen them in the 
grace of God. 2. The Christian Church must be prepared to encounter the facts of human 
fallibility and sin. We must rest upon the supernatural guidance and support. We 
must leave judgment in the hands of God. Peter pronounced no sentence. He simply, 
by spiritual power, proclaimed the truth, and left conviction to work its own work. A 
great lesson in the exercise of discipline. In the case of the wife, the fact became a 
prophecy, by inspiration, in Peter's mind. He saw the work of God beforehand. No 
assumption. 

III. A PRACTICAL ADMONITION. 1. Against selfishness and dishonesty. They kept 
back for themselves part of the price, intending to deceive. 2. Against untruthfulness, 
which was deliberate, prompted by meanness mixed with ambition and desire of display, 
daring against the manifest signs of the Spirit. Not a mere lie unto men, but a 
defiance of God. 3. Against trifling with holy things. They, perhaps, thought that 
what they kept back would not be needed, but they made light of the Spirit's evident 
demand. They did dishonour to the infant Church and to the apostles. 4. Rebellion 
against the Holy Ghost. He put it into their heart to sell their property and join the 
Church. They recognized his command to give up all for Christ. They saw what he 
had done and could do. Yet they did violence to his order and might have produced 
endless confusion in the Church. Fighting against God ia perilous work. — R. 

Vers. 7—11 (or ver. 11). — Conspiracy against God. While much in the previous 
paragraph" repeated here, a new phase of sin presented. It was distinctly on the ground 
of deliberate agreement to tempt the Spirit of the Lord that Sapphira's death was added 
to that of her husband. 

I. The intimate connection of the proclamation of gospel truth and mercy with the 
RENOVATION OF HUMAN SOCIETY. 1. Family life, domestic intimacy, the root of public 
life. We must choose all our relations with the light of God in Christ. 2. The con- 
spiracy of Ananias and Sapphira was a blow at the work of the Spirit in raising up a 
new spiritual life on the basis of self-sacrifice and absolute truthfulness. 3. The awful 
judgment was a proclamation of mercy — Come and hide under this Divine power and 
be safe. 

XL A marvellous display of the spibit of pbophbct poured out on the apostles. 
'I'he words of Peter an example: 1. Of the Spirit of truth and grace in him ; he pro- 
9e*ded wjtji the utmost c^re, publicity, tenderness, pitjr. The wife had the opportunity 



174 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. v. 1—42. 

of repentance, while the appeal was made, not on the ground of terror, for she knew 
nothing, but on the ground of simple truth— Tell me the truth. 2. Of the spirit of 
discernment and, in the Name of the Lord, of prediction. Had not Peter under super- 
natural impulse foreseen the death of the woman, he would not have dared to utter 
such words. As it was, jt w&s a responsibility which none but an inspired man would 
have assumed. Such a fact speaks volumes on the supernatural state of the Church at 
that time. 

III. A GEACious APPLICATION of extraordinary facts. 1. To the Church itself. The 
solemnization of fellowsliip. God thus said, " Take heed how you join my people." The 
ethical set in the light of the spiritual. "Be ye holy." The sins of falsehood, presump- 
tion, avarice, self-confidence, set forth. The Divine kingdom clearly revealed. If God 
is so near, and yet to all who trust in Christ near to bless, how glorious this time ! 
What is he not doing ? and how little need we fear the world's opposition when he can 
strike dead our eneinies? " Stand still and see the salvation." Compare the Israelites 
looking back on Pharaoh's host and forward to the promised land. 2. To the world. 
" All that heard these things." Such facts preached, loudly and widely, where the 
preacher's voice did not reach. We must remember that grace and providence go hand- 
in-hand. Fallow ground broken up by the ploughshare of terrible events and warning 
dispensalions. " Judgment begins at the house of God ; what shall the end be," etc. ? 
Yet the " fear " was a fear mingled with the light of hope ; for these deaths pointed to 
the way of life. The Church was the more conspicuously revealed as a refuge opened 
by God for all. So in the terrible times of human history religion has gone forth with 
special power. What message has philosophy at such times ? Where are the rationalists 
and the doubters in the great crises of the world ? Press home the facts upon those who 
tempt the Spirit of the Lord by untruthfulness, rebellion, indifference, worldliness. — R. 

Vers. 12 — 16. — " Clear shining after rain'' The blessed effects of what at first is 
not fully understood. The outpouring of judgment may be a preparation for the 
outpouring of mercy. The Church has to be made and kept pure ; then the deeper 
the work of grace among God's people becomes the larger the work of the gospel in the 
world. Notice — 

I. An increase in the manifestation of the power or the Spirit. 1. In the working 
of miracles, which had their special value in rousing attention and proving the nearness 
of God's kingdom. 2. In the separation, and magnifying in the eyes of the people, of 
the true Church. The rest durst not join tliem ; the people magnified them. 3. In 
the solidifying of the Church as o society. Solomon's porch ; one accord. 4. In the work 
of conversion. Multitudes — men and women ; notwithstanding the awful deaths. 5. 
In the diffusion of the glad tidings in the surrounding neighbourhood, not as mere idle 
rumour, but as a practical appeal which brought the needy and suffering to the feet of 
Christ. 

II. The unfoldino oeacb of God to mankind. Solomon's porch the place of 
meeting still. The centre of new life in the midst of the old corruption. Invitation to 
both Jews and Gentiles. Public place, yet connected with the temple. The Divine 
society inviting all to new life — a life that healed, that cared for the sick and dying, 
that drew the multitudes, the miracles giving confidence and pointing out the way. 
The manifest testimony of the world to the Church, speaking of man's preparation for 
the gospel. The marvellous progress of the truth in the growth of the Church a, sign 
that the grace was being abundantly bestowed. A time of great awakening and many 
conversions is a time of tremendous responsibility. At least the shadow of the 
messenger falls upon us, as he passes by. It is not said that the shadow healed, but it 
may help to the faith which is a prerequisite. The people magnify the work, though 
they may not receive the blessing. God works generally from the lower to the upper 
strata of society. All great moral changes have begun among the people. The rich will 
resist, for it is hard to them to enter into the kingdom of heaven. The Church must 
look well to itself if it is to be the power of God in the world. The circle of grace 
will widen if only the force keeps going out from the centre. We must avoid the fatal 
mistake of enlarging that circle by mere human methods. Let God do it in his way. 
What we want is not large Churches as communities or wealthy societies, or great signs 
f n4 woodefB wrought is our cities, but^ " believert added to the Lord, iouItitu4«9 lx>% o| 



CH. V. 1— 42.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 17S 

wen and women ; " and they will be " the more added " because the rest dare not join 
themselves unto them because the Spirit of God is manifestly among them. Our 
great danger is impatience and unbelief. Resorting to our own expedients, because we 
think God's methods fail. Out of the dark cloud of Ananiaa's and Sapphira's sin broke 
forth a new baptism of zeal, devotion, and spirituality. — B. 

Vers. 17 — 42. — Second persecution of the Church. Notice : 1. It was the result of 
marvellous success. We must expect such opposition when God gives us power 
among the people. The proud and formal have no liking for that which can ';:« set in 
contrast with their own inefliciency. 2. It proceeded from the sect of the Sadducees, i.e. 
the heretical school. The league betwtcn the high priest and the scoflers was a sad 
sign of religious degeneracy. So it is. When religion decays it becomes the food of 
unbelief. The latitudinarians hate spiritual earnestness. 3. It was weak and timid, 
evidently because there was a reproaching conscience and a growing apprehension in 
the background. The apostles were put into the public ward or prison, but probably not 
very jealously guarded. 4. The empty form of justice and wisdom was maintained — 
the council was summoned, that the weight of ecclesiastical authority might be used to 
crush the feeble apostles, that the people might be awed by the fear of great dignitaries. 
They often are, but the Spirit of God can overcome such fear. 5. Divine wisdom is 
more than human craft. The public trial or examination of the apostles was a public 
proclamation of the weakness of their enemies and the heavenly sanction given to their 
cause. The angelic deliverance of the prisoners became a notorious fact through all 
Jerusalem. The effect on the council, on the captain of the temple, on the popnlace, 
must have been immense. Evidently there was great excitement. " They feared the 
people, lest they should be stoned." 6. The two weak apostles in the presence of the 
council, boldly challenging the contradiction of facts and appealing from man to God — 
a striking manifestation of spiritual power. " We are witnesses, ... so is the Holy 
Ghost." 7. The division in the council between the furious fanatical party and the 
temperate Gamaliel party, reminding us of the division in the nation itself ; some dead 
to the voice of God, others ready to follow it though not recognizing it. The influence 
of Gamaliel a sign of hope; there was a remnant still according to the election of 
grace, and it promised a future restoration of Israel. 8. The whole occurrence a great 
help to the Church, to feel its power, to deepen its devotion, to rejoice in hope of 
victory, to trust in the gracious providence of God. — B. 

Ver. 20. — The Church's mission to the world. " Go, stand and speak," etc. Acts of 
apostles the model for acta of God's people always. Lessons on relation of the Church 
and the world. Gospel began to lay hold of the masses. Envy and hatred of the 
Sadducean party, because a religion which lifted up the people, they thought, would 
lower the wealthy and ease-loving. We must expect social diflSculties as the kingdom 
' of righteousness spreads, but the angel's message is the rule of all times; while oppor- 
tunity offers, stand and speak, not your own message, but "all the words of this life." 
While we listen to the angel's words, we should keep our eye fixed on the unveiled 
secret of Divine strength delivering and protecting all true-hearted preachers of Christ's 
tnitfau 

I. Thk great couhisbion. " Speak ... to the people.'' 1. Copy the example of the 
Master. " Common people heard him gladly." 2. Best on the adaptation of the gospel 
to the people's wants. They are deceived by false teachers, run after false remedies. 
3. Take courage by the facts of the early history of Christianity. All moral progress 
from the people. Illustrate in the course of Christianity in the Roman empire — from 
the cottage to the throne. In the Beformation, especially in England. Lollards. Luther. 
Preaching of the revivalists in the eighteenth and present centuries. 4. Note the events. 
The future in the hands of the people. Speak to them of Christ ; for their power is great, 
and they may abuse it to the destruction of society. Babel-greatness must end in con- 
fusion and misery. 6. Consider the responsibility of Ohristians. Believe, and therefore 
speak; silence is shame. Activity is the hope of the Church, the cure of ita strifes and 
the uprooting of its doubts. 

IL Ths obbat messaok. " All the words of this life." 1. Beaiity — life. Men's 
ifHf struggle i» «vt>ottt l^t, Tet the world full of ^el^noss aboat Ula, 3%m U/t I 



176 TUB ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Loh- ▼• 1— *» 



That lifel We invite the people to live the true life, Christ's life, the life that death 
cannot touch. 2. AnrumnceTneiit. " Words of this life." We proclaim facts, a Divine 
Person, a life that can he described hy example, confirmed by testimony, studied in tha 
written pages. Religion no dream of enthusiasts, no mere sentiment floating lika a 
cloud in tlie air, no empty ritualism, but words of life translated into action. 3. 
philanthropy. "All the words." Different from mere human teachers with their 
reservations and selfishness. Philosophers taught for money. Christ says, " Speak all 
to the people freely." Religion in the hands of priests has made the people enemies, 
but this new message in the temple would shake down the walls of superstition, pre- 
judice, and pride, and build up a new humanity. In our message we must put so much 
heart that the people see we give them all that we hare, because we love their souls 
first and their earthly interests as included in their spiritiiaL welfare. 4. Agyression. 
" Go, stand . . .in the temple;" " Be not afraid of their faces.'- Bold policy always the 
wisest in spiritual things. Special necessity that the desecrated temple should witness 
the faithfulness of Christ's messengers. False religion the great obstacle to progress 
of the gospel. People misunderstand the message ; think of priests as their enemies ; 
have reason to think so. The gospel does not reject what is good in other systwns, 
but plants itself in the midst of the world as it is ; finds in the temple of the old 
religion a standing-place from which to preach the new tidings. Every fresh instance 
of Divine interposition should embolden us. You are free now, go to the work again. 
In all fielils nf labour discouragement must be absolutely excluded. Follow the angels 
of God, and they will point to new platforms. We shall speak with fresh power if we 
refuie to be thwarted by opposition or put out of countenance by sufl'ering. — E. 

Ver. 29. — " We ought to obey God rather than men. " (or, " we must," Revised 
Version). A great principle requires to be seen in the full daylight before it can bo 
made the foundation of gieat action. Fanaticism borrows its strength from the night 
of ignorance, not from the noon of truth. Persecution may vindicate itself ou the 
ground of obedience to God, but it proves itself to have no title to such a principle 
because it destroys freedom, 

I. Thk great kequibembnt. Obedience to God. 1. It is a requirement abundantly 
set forth in the Scriptures, in conscience, in the teaching of providence in connection 
with revealed truth, and especially in that inspired guidau'-e which no true and earnest 
man is left without. 2, Enforced by the work of the Church, by the dangers of the 
world, by the deceitfulness of the heart, by the promises of God's Word. 3. Rewarded 
by the sense of inward strength, by superiority to circumstances, by successes in 
Christian effort — if not in this world fully, in eternity. 

II. The great trial. 1. Human laws, human requirements, human errors, human 
passions, all may say, "Obey the voice of man rather than of God." 2. Compromise 
the great danger of the Church. Under its new disguise of a pantheistic submission to 
inevitable law of development, specially subtle. 3. Lack of moral courage and conviction, 
obscuring iirinciple and magnifying the strength of surrounding obstacles. We need 
the Holy Ghost, upholding the work of God in our own hearts, penetrating the decep- 
tions of the world, arming us with spiritual preparation against inevitable assaults 
from without. 4. Individually the same great question to be settled between ourselves 
and GkxL His controversy. " Yield yourselves to God." — R. 

Ver. 31. — The throne of mercy. " Him hath God exalted," etc. The Jewish temple 
a material symbol of the Divine method of grace. The chief chamber was the place of 
God's glory — the innermost presence-chamber of the great King ; its chief feature, the 
mercy-seat, a proclamation of love to all. Yet access to the blessedness only by the 
appointed way, through the consecrated rites and persons ; thus the wUl and righteous- 
ness of God Buntained at the same time as his mercy. Compare heathen ideas of Divine 
favoiirs — slavish, cruel, degrading, capricious, destiuctive of righteousness both in God 
and in man. Moreover, no heathen system appealed to a universal humanity. 

I. The common want. 1. Deliverance from sin, both by remission and moral 
elevation. Show that the conscience regains satisfaction, the life security, the heart 
peace. 2. A free and unpurchased forgiveness, lest we should be burdened by their 
inec^ualities, destroyed by their despair, seduced by their errors, epslaved by tbeir super- 



OH. 1. 1—42.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Vt 

■tition. 3. Confidence without fanaticism, peace of mind without inertia, and « aense 
of righteousness without pride. 

II. The Divine salvation. 1. It is huilt upon facts — ^a personal history, an acoumu'- 
lation of iiistoric evidence, an ascent from Bethlehem to the heavenly throne. The 
supernatural absolutely necessary to hold up the human spirit in its greatest emergency, 
Oud's right hand must he seen, must he conspicuous. We ca'inot depend on mere 
human sympathy, wisdom, or strength. 2. The twofold character of Christ meets 
the twofold demand of the soul, for the greatness of the King and the compassion of 
the Saviour. The exaltation of Christ was both human and Divine. We recoguize the 
great fact of mediation and reconciliation. ' 3. The one supreme test of sufficiency, the 
gift of the Holy Ghost. We do not appeal to men on the ground that God can save 
them, or that there is in Christianity a satisfactory theory of the atonement, but on the 
ground that the Spirit of God is saving them, that the gift is there — repentance and 
remission. 

AppuoAnoir. What was true of Israel is true of us. The state of the Jewish 
world was the condemnation of all men. If God so wrought for us, "how shall wa 
escape if we neglect so great salvation? " The gift has all God's heart in it. lietura 
his love. — R. 

Vers. 38, 39. — A study of Jewish character : Oamaliel. " And now I say unto 
you," etc. 

I. Reqabd it as the product of Jewish education. 1. Beverence for the Word 
and will of God — in truth and in providence. The Jews possessed in their Scriptures 
a good philosophy of history. Taught that God must triumph. 2. Sense of humanity 
and righteousness deeply pervading all the Jewish system. "Befrain from these 
men." 3. Yet evidence of the corrupt and formal state of the Jewish teachers — tem- 
porizing policy, weakness of conviction, unwillingness to face truth, the ecclesiastical 
spirit in its mildest form. 

II. OoNsruEE IT IN ITS BELATioN TO Chbistianitt. 1. The influence of Gamaliel 
on Saul of Tarsus (see Conybeare and Howson ; Farrar) and so on the history of the 
gospel. 2. The contrast between Gamaliel and his fellow-counsellors in the Sanhedrim 
They agreed to him then, but how about their former action and what followed ? The 
Gamaliel character was then exceptional, 3. The contrast between Gamaliel and the 
apostles. He was prudent, they were earnest. Consider the necessity of following 
conviction. Sweetness and light are not means but ends ; they have to be fought for, 
not rested in, before they are fully obtained. 4. The great appeal : " Lest haply ye be 
found . . . fighting against God." All must acknowledge it. How easily ignored • 
The position of the soul is here indicated ; it is either fighting with God or against 
God. Though Gamaliel did not see it, there is no middle position. " A fearful thing 
to fall into his hands." — B. 

Vers. 41, 42. — The true witnessing spirit. " And they departed," etc 

I. The Name op Chuist the source of it. No such spirit in the world. Heroism 
may sustain strength, but does not give joy, unless it is like tlie apostles'. Had not 
the Name been Divine, how could it have produced such fruits in such men ? 

II. The teaching and pbeachino, both in the temple and at home, must be in 
the martyr spirit. We must expect to sufiur some dishonour. But such a spirit 
invincible and victorious. 

III. The honoub of the Church over against the honour of the world. " Counted 
worthy." God's reckoning. Spiritual worthies. The joy was not only a secret joy. 
it was the foretaste of heaven. Enforce the example. — B. 

Vers. 12 — 16. — Jerusalem's second summer. While we read these fewest versos of 
what was going on in Jerusalem, and of how " multitudes from the cities round about 
Jerusalem" thronged that "mother of them all," to seek, not in vain, healing virtue, 
we seem to be removed by a world's diameter from the Jerusalem that was stricken 
to the heart and its very sky darkened by the Crucifixion. And \\ c also seem removed 
by centuries from the time when certain lips (which could not open but to speak truth 
whether simplest or deepest) had said, " Jerusalem, Jerusalem, . . . behold, youi 
acts. k 



178 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. v, 1—48 

hou86 ia left unto you desolate 1" and when Jesus " wept over it, saying, If thou hadst 
kuown, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong uuto thy peace I 
but now they are hid from thine eyes." On the contrary, we are in fact separated 
only by weeks from the dread solemnities of the Crucifixion, and scarcely by months 
from the lamentations of Jesus over Jerusalem. Yet the sun is shining again ; storm, 
darkness, and nothing less than thechillof severest winter are passed over; and summer 
days, with striking similnrity to the best of those of Jesus himself, burst on Jerusalem, 
Surely it is second summer with Jerusalem. Eeminiscences of bright days, indeed, 
these were, and they were bright in their own brightness ; yet, alas ! to linger but for a 
while. Meantime what a touching evidence they were, for,Jerusalem, of the unro- 
vengefulness of Jesus, of his forgivingness, of the very wisifulness of his loving-kindness 1 
Let us notice the distinguishing features of these days. 

I. ThEV are a OLOKIOUS BBrKODUOTION OF SOME OF THE QBANDBST OF THE DATS OF 

Christ's own ministry. That such a thing could be said with literal truth was part 
(1) of the condescension of Jesus ; again, it came (2) of the genuine reality contained in 
the profession that he wore human nature ; and (3) of the one absorbed interest of his 
heart in the work of man's salvation. The point is surely worthy of attention, so 
beautiful in its own moral bearings ; so significant of the intention of Jesus to share 
his ultimate triumph and glory with his own people, and their captains and princes not 
last ; and so great a contrast to the methods and the " inward thoughts " of the " world " 
and " the kings of the earth." Jesus is not of those who would cut off from the 
followers in his train those who might be successful imitators of his career, sharers of 
his renown. He is exactly the opposite of this. He calls, invites, incites us all to 
seek to be in every best sense imitators of him, and promises that so we shall not fail 
of a just share of his renown. The likeness between these days and days in the 
ministry of Jesus Christ is patent in respect of: 1. The miracles which found a place 
in them. 2. The beneficent character of those same miracles. 3. The abundance and 
the variety of them — ranging from the healing of " the sick " to the healing of those 
"vexed with unclean spirits." 4. The very methods by which the friends of the 
afiSicted compassed the bringing of them within the reach of the " virtue " which in 
some way " came out " of the apostles. The " touch of the hem of the garment " must 
be allowed to be equalled by the derice of securing the chance for some impotent man 
of the " shadow of Peter . . . overshadowing him." 5. The eager, longing, thirsting 
appropriation of such blessings on the part of the masses of the people. Crushed by 
want, by suffering, by sin ; hope, light, nay, almost the mind crushed out of them ; — 
with what irresistible, unceremonious tide do these ever press forward, and sweep 
round or over every obstacle, when genuine help, precious, precious, precious salvation 
proft'ers itself I What care they for Sanhedrim and Sadducee? They are the rulers, and 
the others are cowed and cower before them. 6. The widespread practical success of 
the miracles — "they were healed every one." 7. The moral triumph which "the 
people" accord to the authors, or those who appear as the authors, of their blessings. 
They repudiate sophistication, and " render honour to whom honour is due." Indeed, 
there are not wanting very satisfactory and sufficient indications now that "the 
people," on the one hand, rendered to the apostles the distinction justly due to them as 
the trusted servants of their vanished Master, and, on the other, recognized the fact thai 
" the power was of God." Infidelity was not altogether either the prevalent or the 
hardened fact in some directions then that in some directions it is now. " The people " 
had a great idea of the impregnability of the position of the man who did " works such 
as none other could do," and " such as no man could do save God were with him." 

IL ThBT give now with UNOHALLENOBABLB AUTHORITY THEIR PROPER DIGNITY 

AND STATUS TO THE COMPANY OF THE APOSTLES. Peter and John are the two apostles 
whose names and whose work had hitherto received prominence. Of these Peter has 
been with evident and with Just design by far the more prominent. Till Paul shall 
come upon the scene he will also remain similarly conspicuous. But during these days 
the whole college of the apostles seem to receive the baptism of their work, as on the 
day of Pentecost they had received the baptism of the Spirit for it. They are " all with 
one accord in Solomon's porch. " And the chief evidence of the dignity and status, not 
artificial but real, which were now given to them, may perhaps be best expressed in a 
aoiuewhat antithetical mode of statement, viz. that (1) while " the people magnified 



OH.V. 1— 42.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLESw i;« 

th«m" with hearty acclamation for instant and grateful acknowledgment, (2) "no 
iuan of the rett" (».«. presumably of those who would not care to bo classified altogether 
among "the people," and who would have been quite prepared to snatch at any 
possible dignity at which they could " dare " to snatch) " durst join himself " to those 
apostles. They did not dare this, because their abilities could be immediately put to 
the proof. They did not dare it, because of the waraing, so fresh, of the end of Ananias, 
when he had tampered with the sacredness of the society organized by the apostles. 
And likely enough, in many cases, they did not dare it from a sincere awe and an 
intelligent, respectful reverence for men who were doing the things that the apostles 
were now doing. Any way, the result was obtained that round these apostles was 
drawn the cordon of a moral regard and a moral support, which would be a strong 
comfort to the believers and a strong condemnation to the unbelievers. A very few 
hours were to find the use of this. And a very few hours would show that it inferred 
no danger of the access of superficial vanity or the incursion of deeper pride. 

111. They oo betonb otheb host sacbed days of uibaclb in the dibeot 
SPIRITUAL RESULTS WHICH THEY RECORD. (Ver. 14.) It is quite possible that, among 
the " multitudes both of men and women " who now were " added to the Lord," some 
may have proved apostates as time went on. On the other hand, the supposition would 
be must gratuitous that any disproportionate number turned thus away. The fair 
inference from what is said here and from the tenor of the history that follows would 
be, if anything, in a contrary direction. Assuming this or contenting ourselves readily 
with the other and lower estimate, in tither case we are justified in noting tlje kind 
of use to which at this time miracle was ordained to be subservient. It is not to be 
disputed that the fervent) attachment which bound not a few to the person, yes, and 
to the character and truth, of Jesus during the days of his fiesh was wakened and 
filed by some miracle that he had wrought for them or theirs. Js'or need it be denied 
that that attachment answered to a genuine spiritual change, a change of heart, 
evidi^ncing ilself in a change of life. Nevertheless, it can scarcely be said tliat this was 
the clear rule in the operation of the miracles of Jesus, or that this was their aim. 
Neither, pcrhajis, now was this the primary object of the miracles and " the many signs 
and wonders wrought by the hands of the apostles." But the miracles were distinctly 
the pioneers of those spiritual results. In the track of miracle went a most clBcacious 
working of the convincing and coaverting Spirit I The miracle drew many together ; 
it wakened and held the attention ; it undoubtedly did have this practical and so far 
forth mwal eti'cct, viz. the effect of compelling many to say, " Lo, Ood is here I " and 
to feel it. To deny the possibility of a miracle falls nothing sliort of denying a personal 
God. To allow the fact of any individual miracle is to allow that God is oil'cring to 
the hulp of a poor memory, to the help of a struggle always arduous enough against 
sense and the numbing sway of habit, to the help of conviction itself, tlie enlivening 
touch of his personal presence. Sophistry has a vanity in weaving its web to snare 
miracle, but vainly weaves. The faith that inheres in the world's great heart is too 
strong lor it, and sweeps away that vanity with equal ease and contempt. In the 
track, then, of miracle viewed fur a moment thus, it is quite optional what follows. 
The miracle, like all other mercy, may be to condemnation, as Jesus said, " If I had 
not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin : but now they have no cloak 
for their sin. ... If I had not done among them the works which none other man 
did, they had not had sin " (John xv. 22, 24). The miracle may be what it so often 
was in the very dearest specimens of it, those of Jesus himself, to the great gratifica- 
tion of curiosity — that of people, of priest, and of ruler, and after a while to their 
deeper sleep and their more reckless disbelief. But it may also be all the blessed 
contrary. In the track of what or of whom would the quickening, enlightening, 
convincing, converting Spirit himself rather follow? And this is what was seen now. 
When Jesus liimself wrought his own mightiest works, the Spirit's course seemed 
restiainud. But, wondeiful grace I when his disciples and apostles are facing the world 
and encountering the inevitable dangers involved in doing so, mighty miracles are 
brou^lit home by the mightier Spirit, and spiritual results follow such as maybe, 
described in terms unknown tu the liletime of Jesus himself. " Believers were the more 
added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women." Nevertheless, then were 
plainly fulfilled the words of Jesus to his disciples, " Verily, verily, I say unto you. He 



180 THE ACTS OF TUE APOSTLES. [oh. v. 1—42. 



that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also ; and greater workf than 
these shall he do: because I go unto m3' Father" (John xiv. 12).— B. 

Vers. 17 40. — A grand victory for the truth along the whcU line ; dH the positiunt 

of the enemy taken. The few hours that were cuveied by this portion of the history 
must have been hours charged with confirmation of the faith for the apostles. It is 
not merely that they are again attacked and again get in the end the victory, but 
that every position is carried for them by some strong arm invisible. It is not 
altogether the force of the truth, at least of the truth as spoken and spoken by 
them ; still less is it their own force that gains this glorious and memorable day, 
although doubtless both of these are involved in the day's achievements. But there 
was a " fighting from heaven " for them, " and the stars in their courses fought against " 
their enemies. And as nothing so much daunts an enemy as the impression of this 
latter, so nothing can be conceived more reinforcing to the faith and courage of the 
aimy or the general who have evidence of the former. While, then, the bold and 
faithful utterance of "all the words of this life" was now the loving care of the 
apostles, God's watchful providence and the living Spirit whom Christ sent made the 
"heaven that fought for" them. We may view the present portion of the Church's 
history under this light. It is the history of a succession of incidents, every one of 
which shows the foe as the party signally discomfited. The apostles are still the 
representatives of the Church. They sustain the brunt of any attack. And it is note- 
worthy that at present, so far as we read, no private member of the Church is exposed 
to any similar treatment. Notice, then — 

L The incident of a new teial op the effectiveness of imprisonment. The 
high priest and those who were acting with him had not, it appears, learned the lesson 
which their former failure might well have taught them. It had been attended by 
circumstances and followed by a sequel which should have made a lasting impression 
OQ their memory. But memory's good ofBces were scorned, and wisdom's lessons set 
at nought and lost. The experiment is to be tried again, whether certain facts to 
which the word of the apostles gives great notoriety, with certain comments upon 
them and explanations of them, can be hushed up, and a prison's doors be mightier 
than miracles. This very point was soon settted, and in the shape that should have 
earned conviction and reproof in equal proportions. It is to be remembered that 
the imprisonment policy stands condemned, not altogether necessarily in itself, but 
emphatically, in this case, because the facts to which the apostles gave the notoriety so 
unwelcome to the authoiilies were facts within the knowledge of those same, and 
because the whole action of the apostles had the abundant attestation of surpassing 
miracles. Mouths can be stopped by imprisonment, no doubt. And the method may, 
no doubt, be a legitimate method, even though there be allowed to be prima fade a 
likely moral danger attaching to it. That danger has shown itself so repeatedly and 
so malignantly — in matters of religion to the oppressing of the, conscience, in*matters 
of science to the clouding of the prospects of truth and the growth of knowledge. But 
the point of interest and at the same time the hopelessness of the present conflict 
turned on the fact that the method of imprisonment attempted to stop the mouth of 
Ood's Word and truth. The enemy was confounded signally. An " abundant door " 
of exit from the prison for the apostles made a more than ever "abundant door of 
entrance" for the truth, and it occasioned "great boldness" of utterance of "all the 
words of this life " in the temple of temples, and before the enemy was so much as awake. 

II. The incident of a second trial of arraignment before the councii,. 1. In 
this proceeding embarrassment awaited the council; theystumble upon the very threshold. 
The prisoners are duly sent for, but they are not to be found. The prison is there ; the 
keepers are there ; the doors were shut with all appearance of safety, and if they had 
been opened, there is not a sign of it nor of any violence that might have effected it ; 
the keys are neither lost nor injured ; and the locks are not disobedient to their own 
keys, as though they had been tampered with. Yet to what al) this, when the prison 
itself proves as empty as ever place was ? The ofiBcers return with tale and face, no 
doubt, equally blank ; but blankest of all was the astonishment of those in authority 
under these new circufn stances. That " they were in doubt concerning them " (so. the 
•pestles) was no unnatural, no unlikely account of the case in which " the high priest 



8lLt. 1— 42.J TSB ACTS OP Tafi APOSTLES. m 



naO tbj ciiitain of the temple, and the chief priests " found themselves. And perhaps it 
might have suited them and their reputation about as well if all had ended here. But 
this was not to be. They had meddled with strife, nay, had not " forborne them 
meddling with God" (2 Ghron. xxxv. 21); and they shall not "leave off contention " 
before it has worsted them signally, decisively. For: 2, A sudden reliuf from 
undignified bewilderment leaves them no choice but to go on with a prosecution 
hazardous mi)ch ijiore to thope who prosecute than to those who are prosecuted. 
That by -this time they began to feel this there are not wanting certain indications. 
(1) Though the narrative is very concise, very condensed, it does not omit to desoriba 
the tender handling of the prisoners found speaking in the temple — a tender handling 
the more notable because they were escaped prisoners. " The captain and officers went 
and brought them without violence ; for they feared the people, lest themselves should be 
stoned" — an unfavourable predicament, all things considered, certainly. (2) Presumably 
because the narrative is very condensed it asks a second thought on our part as to 
what is the precise meaning when it is said, " The high priest, and the captain of the 
temple, and the chief priests . . . doubted concerning them[i.e. the apostles], whereunto 
this would grow." We take it that their innermost darkness began to be harassed 
with dawning day ; their innermost mind with dawning convictions that they had a 
very new sort of men to deal with ; their conscience with dawning of a fear very 
unfamiliar to their hitherto manner of bearing themselves toward that same conscience. 
Possibly, more than possibly afterwards, the same messenger who brought word as to 
where the apostles were and what they were doing stated also the apostles' account of 
how they had got out of the prison. He would have ample time to do this while the 
captain and the officers went to bring them. That awkward interval must have been 
filled up somehow by the disniayed court. Nor can there be a doubt that it was filled 
up with abundant talk and question and discussion. Thia or some such view is, it 
appears to us, essentially corroborated by the apparent silence of the court, when the 
apostles were at last ushered into its presence, as to their escape, and by its sedulous 
abstinence from any interrogations upon" the matter. Silence absolute on that subject 
were certainly their best wisdom when they had heard the real facts, and, hearing, had 
seen them with eyes forced open. The silence of the narrative is one thing, and is a 
token of historic accuracy and fidelity. The silence of the court is another thing, and 
is a touch true enough to nature, in fact, a great demonstration of nature, which some- 
times, in the supreme effort to cover defeat, then most convicts itself of defeat. What, 
therefore, with a certain undersweU and muttering of conscience first, and then with 
the unease' wroujght by the plain discovery of how things had been, it may be reasonably 
imagined that the high priest and those associated with him wished already that they 
were well clear of the whole matter. 3. But the moment has come for the arraignment 
itself. It is at all events plain, its meaning and its implications not obscure. " You 
have disobeyed our strict command, have filled Jerusalem with the doctrine we dis- 
approve, and are going far to fix on us the responsibility and possibly the vengeance of 
the blood of this man." Probably a spirit of contempt and an intention to express 
it thinly veiled growing fear, when they use the words, "this name," and "your 
doctrine," and " this man's blood," instead of naming the Name that was already 
" above every name," and naming the doctrine which was certainly not " the doctrine 
nor after the commandments of men" (Col. ii. 82), and naming "the blood which 
speaketh better things than that of Abeh" 4. But the challenge is at once accepted 
by the apostolic band. Tliey admit their disobedienc to human command. They 
assert their obedience to Divine command, and assert the necessity of it — ^its moral 
oiight. They at once honour, by a firm and repeated utterance of it, the Name which 
had just been soirjlf flouted, but which, in very deed, designated One who had known 
the unprecedented transitions of resurrection and ascension, and who owned to the 
titles of Prince and Saviour of mankind. His princely gift is the power of " repentance," 
his saving gift is the " repiission of sins.'' Occupying a position of vast moral purchase 
over their judges, the apostles do not propose to shield these from an iota of theit 
responsibility. They had declined to name the Name of Jesus ; the apostles do not 
shrink at all from naming the name of their sin and guilt, nor forbear to describe them 
as the persons answerable for the blood of Jesus. " Whom ye slew, and hanged on • 
^ee." And so they make out their text. Wfl " ought to obey God." And as God, 



Igg THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. v. 1— 42 



the God of our fathers, was he who " raised " Jesus, and who " exalted " him, we are hit 
" witnesses," in these glorious wonders, of the history of his Son Jesus. Ana x'eter 
adds, in one of the most pronounced of the claims of inspiration peculiar to revelation, 
that, in saying so much, he means that " the Holy Ghost " in them is the real Witness, 
til at Holy Ghost whom God gives to those who obey him. That Ood is to be obeyed, 
probably the now judges of the apostles would not presume to deny. Peter and the 
apostles have made out their case when tbey have proved that this is all to which 
their censured and imprisoned conduct amounts. So the close of their defence clenches 
the opening of it. 

nL The incident of a fresh expbribnob of helpless inoapacitt m the 
conNCiL. This experience was ushered in, indeed, by one of a far more pronounced 
character. In a word which itself expresses an intensity of suffering, we are told 
that they of the council "were cut" to the quick, and in the first paroxysm of agony 
saw no option but to slay their prisoners. The apostles were again called upon to retire 
from the court (ch. iv. 15) while the state of things was deliberated. And " in the 
multitude of counsellors was found safety" of some sort at least, and of some brief 
duration, thanks to the sage prudence that dwelt in one of them, and apparently only 
one. Note here to what different issue men have been cut to the heart. 1. Some to 
deep penitence, contrition, conversion ; so Peter (Luke xxii. 61, 62), and the first 
converts (ch. ii. 67). 2. But other some to deeper condemnation, and suicide either 
actual or moral ; so Judas (Matt, xxvii. 4, 5), and those here described, with many an 
ancestor, many a descendant. The bliudness of intense anger and the malignant action 
of intense chagrin may be ranked among the certain precursors of Incapacity, but here 
they reveal it too. And that we read under these conditions, " they take counsel to 
slay them," serves little more than to make assurance doubly sure that helpless 
floundering is the present order of things at the ostensible seat of justice. 

IV. The incident of a fresh undignified escape from an CNDiaNIFIED POSITION. 

A Pharisee — save the mark I — leads the way out. And the way out leads just back 
by the way they came in. That the members of the council put themselves as far as 
po.ssible just where they were before they stirred at all in the matter is the policy 
which Gamaliel propounds. It comes to this, that he forcibly argues it were by far the 
best thing to eat their own, both words and deeds. The conservative shrewdness and 
blandness of this advice, and of the courteous way in which it is advanced, are equally 
unmistakable and in a sort admirable. It were uncharitable, however, to deny that it 
is open to intrinsic commendation also. 1. Gamaliel has noted and treasured and now 
uses well the lessons of history. 2. Evidently he is before his time, and has a large 
and open eye for the principles of even civil liberty. 3. More remarkably still, be- 
seems to have grasped the principle and the very basis of the principle of religious 
liberty. " These men " (ver. 35) are to be looked at, as some possibly sacred thing 
should be looked at. " These men " (ver. 38) are to be " let alone," as men possibly 
doing " the work of God." And their present would-be judges are to " refrain from " 
them, because they ought themselves to shrink, /or their ovm saA;e, from incurring evcti 
the distant responsibility of " fighting against God." The principle of religious liberty 
always postulates these two aspects — one presenting the view of the harm that may be 
done to others by hampering their moral convictions or nature ; the other the harm 
that may be done to self in challenging the most solemn and critical responsibilities 
which even "angels might fear." 4. It is difficult to resist the impression that 
Gamaliel was one of those who were " not far from the kingdom of God." The narra- 
tive scarcely warrants our saying that he had a leaning to " these men " himself. But 
this "doctor of the law, had in reputation among all the people" (ver. 34), does seem 
to have had this of religion in him, that " he feared God," and that he dared to say it in 
connection with taking a very unpopular side. To the advice of Gamaliel his fellow- 
councillors " agreed," glad to escape the position in which they again found themselves. 
They retreated from it for reasons which Gamaliel takes the credit of putting before 
them, but which should have been before them long before, and should have saved 
them from being where they now were. They do retreat, they know they are in the 
wrong, they are morally again beaten ; but the only thing which would have taken 
from their retreat the description undignified is withheld, for they do not confe»% their 
error. On the contrary, we notice — 



OH.T. 1— 42.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLE&, Ifti 

v. Lastly, the ikcident of a gratuitous BEATnco or the apostles and a 
BARREN COMMAND LAID UPON THEM. Whatever may be thought or charitably hopet' 
of Gamaliel, the adviser in this crisis, very clear it is that those whom he had influenced 
had no deeper sympathies with the grounds of his advice. A;jainst these they now aa 
much sin in principle as if they had laid violent hands on the apostles, accordino; to 
the first dictates of their rage. And so again do these men drop awhile from our sight. 
They drop into the ignominious shade, while it fares far otherwise with their beaten, 
commanded, but withal released prisoners. Cruelty is the covering with which cowardice 
now chooses to take its unavailing chance of concealing defeat already too shameful, 
but which rather adds to it and to the revealing of it. They disappear fiom view, 
" beating " the apostles, and " commanding them not to speak in the Name of Jesus." 
But it is a token of the literal fact that they themselves have been ignominiously 
beaten along the whole line of battle, the apostles and the truth and " the Name of 
Jesus " winning the day. — B. 

Ver. 20. — The theme of themes: the angeV» charge. "Qro, . . . speak ... of this life." 
There can be no doubt as to what is essentially the reference in this expression used 
by the angel. But whence the angel, so to say, borrowed it admits of a thouo;ht 
and a question. The angel speaks of the life involved in the fact of the Resurrection 
— that fact BO unwelcome to the pinched, impoverished Sadducees, who now were tlie 
leading persecutors of the apostles. However great the single fact of the resurmction 
of Jesus, its greatness is magnified by some infinite number, when we regard it as 
an earnest and " firstfruits" of very much in its train. Had it been a uniiiue fact, 
and been designed to remain so, it would have been shorn of the crown of its glory. 
Solitary grandeur and majesty must necessarily have robbed it of its power to thrill 
unnumbered millions with hope and joy, and to point all humanity to the one quarter 
from which light arises to it. And probably the simplest will be tlie best account 
of the angel's naming it " this life." " Go, stand and speak in the temple to the peojile 
all the words of this life," viz. the life which has been the unceasing theme now for 
some days, of your thought, your one unbroken affection, and your testimony. We 
have liere an angel's charge. Let us notice of what it is made up. The angel 
urges — 

I. That the life which is to supersede the present life of earth is now to 
BE the burden of THE APOSTLEs' PREACHiNO. Some persons object to the prominence 
given in preaching to what is to come and the circle of subjects involved therein. 
They think it unnatural, artificial. However, not to do this is to put off again the 
unspeakable advantages of revelation. That the practical duty of the present life should 
be preached by the Christian preacher is a truism. That it should be preached 
without the light of the eternal future, and what is most distinctive of it revealed iu 
Scripture, is to turn the back on the priceless gift of revelation. Hence come the 
mightiest of living practical impulses for right, for elevated, for holy life on earth. 
The mind stirs with a new and wondering gaze; the imagination is divinely tempted 
— not to be either deluded in the nature of what it takes hold upon or defrauded in 
the measure of it; and the heart is reached to its deepest wants. The infinitely 
.enlarged horizon that comes of the revelation of eternal life does neither affect nor 
for a moment wish to alter the foundations of moral truth and of duty. But it does 
throw a light and colour and interest into the very midst of them, and for the mass 
of mankind first brings them into the class of acknowledged practical forces. At any 
time machinery is one thing, and motive force another. Christ's destruction of the 
boundary view death, and his illimitable extension of the boundary view onward to 
eternal life, legitimately make the very essence (not at all of the foundations of 
morality, but) of a very large part of the force of his appeal to mankind. The angel's 
chargo is dead contrary to anything looking in the direction of affecting to be able 
to dispense with his method or to throw it at all into the shade. And the centuries 
that have passed since the angel released the apostles at early dawn from prison, and 
bade them go and preach " the words of this life," have vindicated his charge. The 
preaching that has been filled with moral aphorisms has been dead and barren of force. 
That which has reverently but confidently dealt with the tremendous realities of 
the great future unseen — unseen except by the light of revelation and faith — ^has been 



m faE ACTS Of fSB AfOSTLfiS. [oh. ▼.1-42. 

the preaching that has been fruitful of influence and has shown changed hearts and 
changed lives. 

II. That "this life" shall bb thb subject op unitebsal appeal to "the 
PEOPLE." The distinguishing facts or doctrines of Christianity know no distinction 
of esoteric and exoteric. They are what maj* be understood of the people, and they 
are what may be trusted to the people. Sadduoees and others, not a few who would 
profess themselves conversant with these higher matters of life and its outlook, are 
])utting from them their grand opportunity. But to " the people," " the gospel," " the 
words of this life," are preached, The gospel is to try its genius and its force among 
them, and then it tries it ever, not altogether in vain. It is to be noticed that this 
crowning doctrine or fact of the future life or eternal life is (1) to be announced in 
closest connection with the personal history of Jesus Christ — with his Resurrection ; 
and (2) that it is to be announced with all the fulness and variety of which it may 
admit — "All the words of this life" are to be enlarged on without stint: (a) what 
it is in its own intrinsic self, (6) what it is as gHined for man by Christ, (c) what 
it is Rs illustrated by Christ's own resurrection. 

III. That the appeal shall be pearlesslt made by men, mebb men, men 

UNASSISTED BY ANY EARTHLY POWER AND EXPOSED TO ALL BAKTJILY DANGERS. JcSUS 

Christ has done his work, so far as the part of it on earth was concerned. Angels, 
it clearly appears, have their share too in furthering the work of Christ on earth. 
But their share is of a more indirect kind. When Jesus goes, men, feeble, erring, 
sinful men, are called to take up the work, are honoured to take it up. Let this 
mean what it may, and harmonize with what it may or may not, the fact merits 
probably more thought than all it has yet received. And if it is to be riglitly esti- 
mated, equal regard must be paid to two facts — (J) that man is to be the worker, and 
that (2) the man who is thus to work is to be one " called " and one qualified by the 
Holy Spirit. Thus called and thus equipped within, he is to "go, and stand," at 
though in unassisted strength, and to stand in the place of courted and solemn 
observation, in the publicity. of " the temple," and to take heed that he "speak to the 
people all the words of this life." — B. 

Ver. 41. — Joy in ike fellowship of sham*. "And they departed ... for his Name." 
The great types of Christian character begin to show themselves. The appearances 
which we have here before us are unusual. They mean something very unreal or else 
they begin to speak something true to a higher nature than that commonly found 
among men. It is against the grain of nature to rejoice in suffering and pain ; it is yet 
more against the grain of a high nature to rejoice in " shame." There must have been 
potent causes at work when men are to be found rejoicing in suffering shame, and in 
being " counted worthy to suffer shame." Neglecting the supposition, which wuld 
not be sustained in this case, that there was any affectation on the part of the apostles 
it would be still open to question whether this attitude were a justifiable one, whether 
it were a lovely one, whether it did not betray a disdainful tendency, looking toward 
haughtiness, with regard to their fellow-men. Perhaps these considerations will b« 
best met by simply asking on what grounds and moved by what influences the 
apostles now rejoiced. 

I. They rejoiced nf a certain fellowship op buffebinq. They are not of those 
who stoically glory in " suffering." They are not of those who cynically or self- 
relyingly glory in " shame." They have not courted the one nor flippantly encoun- 
tered the other. And these facts shelter them from blameworthiness, which mi^ht 
otherwise have very possibly lain at their door. It is a shame already existing, and 
which has already dragged a long suffering with it and after it — a shame unoriginated 
oy themselves or by anything in themselves — tliat they are willing, glad, proud to 
share. This at once lends a character to their rejoicing, and lifts it above a common 
kind of joy. There has, indeed, been an abundance of shame in the world, and of 
suffering consequent upon it, that could not in the very nature of things have shed any 
glory on the principals concerned in them. Yet that abundance of shame and suffering 
has found a very field of glory, new untrodden paths of glory, and lofty heights of 
glory for not a few, who, having no part in the guilt, have voluntarily entered into 
fellcwship with the suffering, and the suffering of shame, which it has iny« Irad. And 



ca. V 1— 42.J ME ACTS Oi' TflE AtOSTLM 185 

here may be said to glimmer forth one of the greater moral facts of our nature. To 
offer to share and to be permitted to share the joy and prosperity of another can yield 
little praise to him who offers, may yield some to the person who permits ; but to 
volunteer to share, while innocent one's self, the ignominy and suffering of another is 
all honour to him who volunteers — ^in ordinary cases mostly humiliation to him who 
receives the advantage of that fellowship. To him, however, whose suffering of shame 
the apostles now rejoiced to share, humiliation of tliis kind there was none. 
n. Thet bejoiced in a fellowship of shame which, by the memobibs attachino 

TO IT, WAS TUENED FOB THEM INTO HONOUB AND GLOBY. 1. It " gathered round " 

Christ himself. One whom they knew to be supremely great, supremely good. The 
centre of this fellowship was their own old matchless Friend, who had been such a 
Teacher, such an Example to them ; whom they had seen do so many mighty and 
gracious works for others ; whom they had watched for tliree years, and more and more 
wondered at, admired, and loved ; whom they had seen tried for no offence, and con- 
demned with no guilt on him, and crucified for sins not his own ; whom a self-denying 
grave had restored, and a self-opening hetiven had received ; and of whom a descending 
omnipotent Spirit bad given abundant and most touching attestation that he had not 
forgotten those same disciples, nor the word of his gracious promise to them. 2. It 
" gathered round " One of wliom each of those apostles had, no doubt, his own indi- 
vidual ahd most precious remembrances. 'J'ake one example-^Petcr. What memories 
he had of Jesus 1 And now that, beyond all he believed of Jesus, before he suffered 
death, being " the Son of the living God," he knew him to be such, how intensified 
in significance many of those memories must have become ! — but not least that of bis 
own at one time great reluctance to share his suffering Master's sliame, and his thrice- 
repeated, denial of him 1 What a blessed revelation for Peter 1 And what a forgiving 
condescension of the great Master, that he permits Peter now to take the lead of his 
fellow-disciples, and gives him the opportunity of showing how he would, if he could, 
fain repair his old grievous transgression 1 Personal experience of Jesus Christ brings 
any one of us to a much more hearty and thorough readiness of surrender to him than 
all that mere description of him avails to do, though you add to it a willing admiration. 
3. It " gathered round " One whose suffering and shame the apostles specially knew to 
be so unmerited, so absolutely uncaused by self and unendured for any necessity of 
discipline, improvement, or punishment to self. And yet the suffering and shame had 
been extreme, and, they well knew it, had been homo so patiently, so meekly, and so 
forgivingly. How thinking, grateful hearts must have longed, when now at last they 
were fully enlightened, to share ever bo small a portion of his unmerited shame, though 
he himself had passed on and up, if it should serve his cause ! We wonder nothing at 
the true devotion of those released apostles, but is there no room left for a wonder at 
the rare reproduction amongst ourselves of the same devotion ? Evidently the Spirit 
had wrought in those apostles a real sympathy with the heart of Jesus, so that they 
felt this an honour, not such as the world giveth, that they were permitted, were 
" counted worthy," to stand in any sense on the same level of suffering and of shame 
with him. Though they might not, could not, suffer the same intensity of suffering 
as Jesus, yet they could suffer for the same sort of reasons. 
, III. Thet bejoiced in the fellowship of shame with One who owned to a 
Name in the futubb globy of which they had unqualified faith. " For his 
Name." Doubtless it has been these eighteen centuries the mightiest force and motive 
of all. The apostles did not rejoice to suffer with Jesus or in the track of him merely 
because of their grateful memories, but also because of their exultiiig/attt in him and 
the career that awaited him. Their very love to " his Name " did not feed only on 
past mercies and pensive memories ; these, indeed, were dainty and tender pasturage 
for it ; but it fed also on the stronger food of faith. " For his Name " was equivalent 
to an assertion of all he would do and all he would be to the world, as well as all 
he had done and suffered for it. And hence we are immediately told with what 
redoubled energy, with what gladdened courage, the apostles did not cease to teach and 
to preach Christ " in the temple, and in every house." Well might men rejaie« to be 
" counted worthy to sviffer shame for Ms Name," when that Name means all that hat 
been in living form most loving and most beautiful, and all that is to he greatest and 
iTOit powerful in the world's onward history, till its glory shall culminate in the day 



186 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. t. 1— 4a 



cif triumph in heaven. The apostles loved the Name of Jesus ; they had come to have 
a perfect faith in it ; they had been divinely endowed with a full sympathy with all 
they could understand of it ; and now they were learning, in practical work and in 
suffering, the things which would make them really like to him who bore that Name. 
The " Name " of Christ turned the cross from shame into glory. It now does yet 
more — it turns living men's estimates right round from the false and the unreal to the 
real and the true. That in which they once gloried becomes their shame, and the 
reproach of Christ their riches, honour, and glory. So did this Master of men's hearts, 
sympathies, and lives, among other things that he did by the humiliation and shame 
to which he bowed, secure also disciples and servants of inflexible fidelity and 
quenchless devotion and love. — B. 

Vera. 3,4. — The conviction of Ananias, St. Peter was, by natural disposition and 
the general consent, spokesman and interpreter for the Church. He could not have 
uttered these words to Ananias without a painful recalling of his own sin in the three- 
fold denial of his Lord, and his own conviction of his sin at the sound of the cock- 
crowing. But compare St. Peter's sin with that of Ananias, and show why recovery 
was possible in his case, but only overwhelming judgment in the case of Ananias. 
We must also understand tliat the Holy Spirit gave St. Peter special knowledge of 
Ananias's deception, and guided him in what was said and done. Compare Joshua's 
dealing with Achan. 

I. The conviction as expressed by St. Petek. He urges : 1. That evil, in the shape 
of temptation, had been unresisted. The question " Why ? " implies that resistance to 
the temptation had been possible. Had he resisted the tempter, he would have fled 
from him (Jas. iv. 7). 2. That Ananias was under no kind of compulsion. He was 
not bound by any rule of the Church. If he had brought, and called it, part, or if he 
had brought nothing, he could not have been blamed. If he was moved to sell he 
should honestly set forth what he had done with the money. Man from his fellow- 
man at least looks for sincerity and truthfulness. 3. And that while Ananias had' 
only purposed to deceive the apostles, he had really been trying to deceive God, who 
dwelt, by his Spirit, in the apostles and in the Church. " Or, to state it as Peter stated 
it three hours after to the woman, this couple put God, the all-knowing Spirit, to the 
proof, tried him whether he would let himself and his Holy Church be taken in with 
a lie." 

II. The conviction ab pelt by Ananias. Throughout he must have borne an 
uneasy conscience, and in response to St. Peter's words it smote him hard. Shame and 
guilt overwhelmed him, and may even in parj; be allowed to explain his sudden death. 
Dr. Plumptre says, " In such a case we may rightly trace that union of natural causa- 
tion and Divine purpose which we express in the familiar phrase that speaks of ' the 
visitation of God ' as a cause of death. The shame and agony of detection, the horror 
of conscience not yet dead, were enough to paralyze the powers of life." 

III. The conviction as confibmed by God. In the death of Ananias, and in the 
death taking place in such a sudden and awful manner. " In this case it is plain that 
the death of Ananias is an event supernaturally arranged by a higher power, because^ 
it is connected with the penal sentence of the apostle, which was spoken in the power 
of the Spirit." It may be pointed out that the Divine judgment hero concerns only the 
surlden death, and the veil is not lifted to show us the eternal judi;ment, the secret 
Divine dealings with this so sadly erring disciple. Compare the teachings of such 
pasi^ages as 1 Cor. v. 5 ; 1 Pet. iv. 6. 

Impress that, however our sin may be covered over and hidden from our own view 
now by self-delusions, the time of conviction must come sooner or later. A man must 
presently see his sin as it is, and see himself as he is. The conviction may como 
wholly by Divine inward leadings, it may come through providential circumstances, 
or it may he started by the word of some teacher or friend. Happy, indeed, is he who 
la brought to conviction in time — in time to seek pardon and eternal life in that living 
Saviour who is " exalted to give repentance and remission of sins." — R. T. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — Helpers in tin must he sharers in judgment. The share taken by 
Sapphira was manifestly a prominent and an active one. She and her husband were 



OH. T. 1-42.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 187 

at full accord in the matter ; and her sin is the more aggravated as slie had a Icngei 
time to think it over, and had evidently planned what she would say and do if any 
remarks were made by the apostles or the brethren a.! to the gift of the land. " The 
question asked by St. Peter gave her an opening for rapontance. It had been in her 
power to save her husband by a word of warning protest. It was now in her power to 
clear her own conscience by confession. She misses the one opportunity as she had 
misused the other. The lie which they had agreed upon comes glibly from her lips, 
and the irrevocable word is spoken." 

I. The common judgmbnt. The same fate overtook both, as they had joined 
together in the sin. Compare the cases of Dathan and Abiram. There was union : 
1. In the slow judgment of the deteriorated and debased soul. And this is ever the 
first form of the Divine judgment on the sinner. Hardening of heart, deadening of 
conscience, cherishing of blinding and fatal delusions, are as truly direct judgments of 
God, ever working, as sudden death. This truth needs to be seen more clearly and 
impressed more constantly. 2. In the swift and immediate judgment of the sudden 
death, which, in the second case, was prophetically declared to be God's witness to the 
exceeding heinousness of their sin. The life of all men is in God's hands, and we may 
well " fear him who can cast body and soul into hell." " The lives of all men are in 
his hand. Daily he is cutting them ofif in a moment— even hot with lust or red- 
handed from crime. His doom now and then antedates the slower processes of human 
law. The time and fashion of all our deaths are with him. If one day his mercy 
turned to judgment, and he took from the earth two forfeited lives for the warning and 
the bettering of many, who shall say either that the lesson was dearly bought or that 
the penalty was undeserved ? It is well that men should be taught once for all, by 
sudden d^ath treading swiftly on the heels of detected sin, that the gospel, which 
discovers God's boundless mercy, has not wiped out the sterner attributes of the 
judge" (Dr. Dykes). 

II. The HOBAi. MISSION or Divine judgment. A solemn awe fell on the minds 
of all present. Illustrate by impressions now made by a case of sudden death in 
a congregation, or by such a case as that of Alexis, smitten by lightning at Luther'i 
side. It is said that " great /ear came upon all the Church." The Scripture meanings 
of the word " fear " may be given and illustrated. Here it is a solemn sense of the 
severity and power of God, and of the strictness of his demands. The members now 
felt, as they had never done before, what a serious thing it was to make a Christian 
profession. Dwell on two things. 1. Fear as solemnizing other professors, filling 
them with new thoughts about insincerity, hypocrisy, and covetousness. Eeminding 
them that no man should enter Christ's kingdom without first " sitting down and 
counting the cost." " The true ecdesia must be free from such hypocritical professors, 
or its work could not advance." " God fills our hearts with the spirit of reverence, 
truthfulness, and godly fear, lest another spirit fills us with lies, with greed, with vain- 
glory, and with presumptuous impiety." 2. Fear as deterring would-ie professors. 
Persons in all ages are too ready to take up the mere profession of Christ's Name, and 
such need to be shown that such profession involves responsibilities as well as privileges. 
There is grave danger of our estimating our responsibilities too lightly. The vows of 
Christ ought ever to be a solemn and a holy burden. " What manner of persons ought 
we to be ? " God is " known by the judgments that he executeth." We still need to 
recognize his hand, and we must be careful not to lose the impression of his personality 
in the modem sentiment about law. — B, T. 

>Ver. 13. — Hindrances to belief. These are suggested by the erpression, "Of the rest 
durst no man join himself to them." It seems that the first body of Christian ron- 
verts made Solomon's porch their place of assembly. This they did, probably, for the 
convenience of its situation and arrangement, and possibly for the sake of its association 
with the teachings of their honoured Master. The historian records that while the 
opposition of the Sanhedrim was feared, 'none of the other people who had not yet 
joined the new community ventured to attach themselves intrusively to the Christian) 
body." Whatever conviction may have been wrought by the apostolic teaching and 
miracleg, it w»s repressed, and men were hindered from full confession of their faith in 
Christ. Thi« is the simplest explanation of the expression, but some think that 



m TflE ACTS OP TflE APOSTLES. t<M. r. 1—44 

reference is intended to the " mtiltitude of those who were not yet convertedj but 
whose attention was at the same time arrested by the spiritual power of OLristianity ;" 
or to the " Pharisees, who resorted to the portico, but had not the courage to attach 
themselves to those with whom they really sympathized." It is evident that there 
were many lookers-on, who, from one cause or another, were hindered from belief. 
Dr. Dykes' says, " To the friendly attitude of the common people there stood contrasted, 
exactly as during Jesus' ministry, the displeasure of the official and educated classes. 
. . . Somewhat later a number of the rank-and-file even of the priesthood went over to 
the new faith. At this period, however, aH the sacred and ruling orders appear to 
have been kept aloof from the Church by a public opinion of their own, so strong that 
no individual member of these orders had as yet the courage to oppose it." The term, 
" Of the rest," may include — 

I. The Sanhedrim pabtt. This partly consisted of Sadducees and partly of 
Pharisees. Both were hindered from belief in Christ hy prejudice. Doctrine blinded 
the Sadducees; pride of ritual holiness blinded the Pharisees. Sadducei-s were 
offended by our Lord's miracles and spiritual demands, and hc^elessly enraged by the 
report of his resurrection, which they regarded as a mischievous absurdity and an 
impossibility. Their doctrines prevented their being persuaded. Pharisees' were 
prejudiced to a ritual system in the observance of which alone could salvation come. 
To their notions salvation by faith in a person, and such a person as the Nazarene 
impostor, was, on the face of it, unworthy of intelligent beings. These classes are but 
examples. Still the prejudice of doctrinal notions, and the delusion that somehow 
salvation must be hy works, keep men from Christ. 

IL The adhiskents of the Sanhedmm pabty. All great parties in a state have 
adherents, hangera-on, people who watch and take their cue from them, and hope to 
get their own benefit through the party. These men are always ready to avoid what 
their paity avoids, and to shout what their party shouts. Such men there were in 
Jerusalem at the time of the apostles, and, whatever might be the force of conviction 
and persuasion brought to hear upon them, they were hindered by personal interest. 
Joining the Christians would not answer their ends, and they could not see their way 
to offending the party that was in power. Time-servers never can believe until they 
put away their time-serving. Self-interest and faith cannot dwell together. 

III. The officials of the temple. Priests, Levites, door-keepers, singers, etc. 
These were hindered by the spirit of officialism, one of the most narrowing and 
conservative forces acting on men. The new is always suspected by the official mind. 
The routine and order must not be touched. There was much, both in our Lord's 
teaching and in that of his apostles, that could not fail to grieve and alaim the temple 
officials. And still, stiffened creeds and rigid ecclesiastical forms are often fatal 
hindrances to those who teach the creeds and minister the forms. 

IV. The kich men of the community. These were hindered by observing what 
a poor lot the first Christians were, and class pride kept them from Christ. It was the 
constant sneer of the enemies of the early Church, and is fully expressed by Celsus, 
that the Christians were drawn from the very dregs of society, from the publicans and 
the slaves. Yet we glory in this, that " God hath made the poor of this world rich in 
faith, and heirs of the kingdom." — B. T. 

Vers. 15, 16. — Bodily healings may prepare far spiritual ones. Comparing 
apostolic miracles with those wrought by our Lord, it shoiild be noticed that lie 
showed power over nature by stilling storms, walking on waters, multiplying food, and 
withering trees: but the apostles' power was limited to various forms of bodily danger 
and disease. In each case the miracles illustrated the higher work of those who 
wrought them. Christ's miracles illustrated his Divine claims and mission as the 
revelation to men of the Father. Apostolic miracles illuslrated their mission to preach 
Christ to men as the Healer of the soul's disease, Redeemer from sin's penalties, and 
Saviour from sin. The question is often discussed whether the power of miraculous 
healing has been lost to the Church. Claim to such power has beei made in every 
ago, with more or less confidence, and such claims are made now. Singular and 
interesting instances of bodily healing in response to faith and prayer are narrated by 
sober witnesses; and it may be admitted that there arc certain classes of disease^ 



OH. T. 1—42.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. ISO 

■» bich can be affected aad relieved by the strong will and faith of a fellow-creature. 
But it is difGcult for us to tecognize the properly miraculoui character of such cures. 
We may consider^ 

I. HsAiiiNas ALONE. God has provided in nature sufficient and efficient healing 
agents for all man's diseases. He has given to some among men healing skill, to be 
used in the service of others. No nobler ministry is entrusted to men than that of 
healing. A vast and almost overwhelming mass of human suffering calls for the 
healer's ait. Though some forms of bodily disease are beyond human cure, few, if any, 
are out of the'reach of relieving agencies. Apostolic healings materially differed from 
those of the ordinary doctor. 1. They were immediate. 2. They were without the use 
of medicinal agencies. 3. They were complete, without peril of any return of, the 
disease. 4. They were wrought by spiritual power — and that not the apostles' own, only 
operating through them — reaching the very springs of vitality and giving new life. 
How such healings illustrate the Divine work in sin-sick souls may be fully shown. 

II. Healings with teachings. This was the special feature of the apostolic ministry. 
The end was not reached when a suffering man was cured ; that was but the means to 
a further and higher end, even that soul-healing which comes by the reception of 
Christ the Saviour, whom apostles taught. Illustrate how medical missions are made 
the agency for winning the attention of the heathen to the gospel message. Point out 
what are the particular points of spiritual teaching which gain effective illustration 
from bodily healings ; e.g. : 1. The assertion of a necessary relation between sin and 
suffering. Suffering is no accident, no mere calamity ; it is the divinely appointed 
fruitage and consequence of sin. It is designed to fix the character of sin, to give 
men conviction through feeling, vision, and sympathy, of the evil of sin. When more 
clearly understood, suffering is seen to be the corrective agency through which man 
niay be delivered from sin. 2. The assertion of the Divine relation to suffering. God 
does not pass aside of the diseased or disabled ; every day he is working gracious works 
in sick-rooms and hospitals. Of this his constant work Jesus gave full illustrations in 
his miracles, when he came to " show us the Father ; " and of this apostles renewed 
the assurance when they healed, in Christ's Name, all the sick and suffering ones that 
were brouj^it unto them. 3. The consequent assertion of the Divine relation to sin. 
God would not concern himself with the mere effects; we may be quite sure that ho 
deals with the cause. The great Physician is concerned about our sin. He would not 
that any of us should perish in our sins. And, therefore, when the apostles healed 
a sufferer they preached unto him Jesus, who is precisely this, " God saving men from 
their sins."— R. T. 

Ver. 19. — Angel-help. Angels are constantly referred to in Holy Scripture. The 
angel-Jehovah, or angel of the covenant, who appeared in human form to the patriarchs 
as a sign and foreshadowing of the Incarnation, must he distinguished from the ordinary 
angelic appearances. The Old Testament conception of angels is that they were 
agents or executors of Divine missions to individual men or to communities. Thus 
we have angels visiting Sodom; angel of the pestilence; angels guarding Jacob, etc. 
From the earlier poetical and imaginative point of view, the angels^were veritable 
beings, belonging to other spheres bat able ta communicate with men in the earthly 
spheres. To our more formal and scientific notions, angels are regarded as the 
personification of material agencies, as used by God for moral and religious purposes. 
" He maketh winds his angels, and flames of fire his ministers." Very little can be 
really known about angels, and no doctrine of angelology can be pressed on universal 
acceptance. The New Testament conception of angels is given in Heb. i. 14 (Revised 
Version), " Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to do service for the sake of 
them that shall inherit salvation ? " The precise work of ministry is that entrusted to 
them, and apostolic assertion of the fact of their ministry is probably designed to oppose 
the Sadducees' teaching that " there is neither angel nor spirit." 

I. Angel-help as given to Cheist. Tlie principal instances are : 1. Angel-announco- 
ments and preparations for his birth. 2. Angel-comfortings in the time of his desert 
scmptations (Matt. iv. 11). 3. Angel-strengthenings in the moments of his conflict and 
agony in Gethsemane. 4. Angel-attendance upon his resurrection. 5. Angel-annoimce- 
xaents concerning his ascension and his coming again. From these instances we may 



ISO THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. v. 1— 42. 

learn the kiud of help which angels may be expected to give to Christ's tempted tnd 
tried disciples. 

II. Angel-help as realized by apostles. This took several forms. 1. As 
deliverance from prison (see text, and incident narrated in ch. xii. 7). 2. As communi- 
cating Divine messages (see ch. viii. 26 ; x. 7). 3. As ensuring safety in times of peril 
(seech, xfivii. 23). It may be observed that what may be called the materiaUty of the 
angel began gradually to fade away, and the visionary realization of the angel-help took 
its place. In this we trace the transition to the form in which we now may apprehend 
the help of the angels. No man may expect such actual working in the physical spheres 
as St. Peter knew when his prison doors were opened. Even in St. Paul's time this 
work was done by the natural shakings of the earthquake. 

lU. Angel- help as granted to ub. And we may distinctly affirm that it is granted. 
The only question is — In what manner do we realize the help? Spiritual forces are 
around us. We are influenced, for good and for evil, by unknown agencies. This is as 
yet almost an unstudied Christian phenomenon; one, however, which often brings comfort 
as a sentiment to pious souls. Such angel-help is very properly put into a secondary 
place in our consideration when we have a full and strong conviction that the Lord 
Jesus Christ himself is with us, the Inspiration, Guard, and Guide of our whole life 
and thoughts. They who consciously realize the presence of the Master will make 
comparatively little of the presence of the Master's ministers and servants working out 
his gracious purposes for him. Show with what limitations we may properly cherish 
the idea of angel-help in everything that is good. — K. T. 

Vers. 21 — 24:.— -The hfipelessness of fighting against Qod. The narrative indicates 
that the Sanhedrim had fully entered on the work of checking and crusliing tlae 
party of Christ's disciples. Gamaliel expressed what the nature of their action might 
possibly prove to be— it might be even a " fighting against God." Some effort should 
be made to realize what tliey thought about their work, and how they deluded them- 
selves with the notion that they alone were guardians of the truth of Gud, and in 
opposing the Christian party were really fighting for Qod. It is one of the saddest 
effects of cherished exclusiveness and self-confidence that these things actually blind 
men, and make it impossible for them to receive truth as newly presented to them. A 
little self-criticism, a little skill in testing their own motives, would have revealed to 
these men the low and unworthy passions and prejidices by which they were per- 
mitting themselves to be ruled. So often we need to " see ourselves as others see us,'' 
and may thankfully welcome any light that reveals ourselves to ourselves. These 
men were really " fighting against. God." 

L In fighting against God man mat win apparent and temporary BtrcoEseBS. 
Only apparent, because they always lead men on to attempt further schemes, which 
involve them in utter ruin. Only temporary, because God has the lung ages in which 
to secure the outworking of his purposes. Illustrate by the success of the Sanhedrim 
in the conviction and death of our Lord, and in the imprisonment of the apostles. 

IL In fighting against God man deals with forces beyond his reach. And 
they are sure to master him. Compare man's range of power with God's. Illustrate 
from the treatment of Clirist ; death was man's limit, resurrection was in God's power. 
So with apostles; imprisonment was man's limit, angel-deliverance was in God's power. 
God's miracles then, God's providences and overrulings now, surely mate and master 
man's utmost antagonism. This is true of persecutions, infidelity, or other forms o< 
attack on Christian men, the Christian /oi<A, or the spread of the Kedeemer's kingdom 
— K. T. 

Ver. 31. — The present royalty and rights of Jesus. It is interesting to notice how 
the Jewish conception of Messiah, as a conquering King of the house of David, gave 
form and tone to the earlitr ideas which the apostles had of their risen and ascended 
Saviour. He proved, indeed, to be a Kmg in quite another sense than that in which 
they had regarded him, and at first they felt much disappointment in the crusliing ol 
their national hopes; but still they knew that he was a King, they gradually gained 
slearer notions of the spirituality of his kingdom, and they freely asserted his present 
royal lights, demanding the immediate submission of men to his authority. The 



OH.T. 1— 42.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Ml 

claim of BOTereiguty ia closely joined to tlie promise of salvation. " If Christ seeks to 
rule over men it is that he may save them." It is usual to note the meanings of the 
Besurrection viewed in its relation to the redemptive sclicme ; but it is not so usual 
for Christian teachers to dwell on our Lord's olRce, diunicy, commission, authority, 
and active operations as exalted to the right hand of the Father. The ciiule of 
the Christian doctrine is by no means compleie on tliis side, and the mystery ui 
the Ascension is but very imj^erfectly unfolded. A sentinient has been allowed to 
prevail that Christ is practically absent now from us; the affairs of Christ's Church 
are delegated to the ministry of the Holy Spirit, and Christ is coming some day tu 
assume place and power, and establish an everlasting kingdom here on earth. The 
apostles declare that the Lord is exalted now to his royal princely place. They affirm 
not only that he now has, but also that he now claims, his royal rights. It is not their 
way of putting it to say that " He will take to himself his great power and reign ; " 
they say, " Him hath God exalted," or, as Bevisod Version, " Him did God exalt." 
This is a truth which the modern Church needs to have more fully and frequently 
presented to it. Due attention to it would relieve the tendency to exaggerated 
representations of salvation by faith in our Lord's work. The salvation is revealed 
to faith in the Lord Christ himself, the Prince and Saviour. Christ is actually 
now — 

I. The Pbinok, ob tiib Rulino One. Explain the ancient theocracy as the direct 
rule of Jehovah, and show that the idea is realized spiritually in our Lord's present 
relation to his Church. It should be no disability to regenerate and spiritual men that 
he is unseen. The quickened soul can have spiritual communications, and the secret 
soul-life of the Christian man is his real life. Whoever controls it controls the whole 
bodily life and relations too. In the line of the text it may be shown that, as 
Prince, Christ's law and claim, brought home to men's souls, bow them down to 
penitence ; and Christ has iu full commission the expression of the Divine mercy in 
forgiveness and restoration. 

II. The SiVionB, ob the Saving One. Salvation is not declared to be a result of 
man's faith in Christ's redemptive work, but of man's faith which opens his soul and 
life to the present redemptive workings of the living Saviour. The moral forces now 
actually working §t the subduing, and persuading, and renewing, and sanctifying of 
men are the present and active forces of Christ, the exalted and glorified Saviour. So 
apostles preached unto men "Jesus," bade them open their hearts to his love and 
IKJwer, carry to him the burden of their sins and needs, and expect that he would as 
really — though in a spiritual manner — deal with them as he dealt with the sorrows and 
the sins of men while he was with them in the flesh. This is the great glory of the 
gospel message, and the point of it to which prominence should be given in these oui 
times — "Jesus lives." He is exalted, he holds his commission. His "Fathuf 
workcth hitherto, and he works." As the Prince, he demands our submission and our 
obedience. As our Saviour, he takes our whole case upon him, and delivers, redeems, 
and sanctifies. — B. T. 

Vers. 33 — i2. — The advice of the cautious. Such was Gamaliel. See expository 
portion for an account of him, and of the rabbinical school to which he belonged. 
Interest attaches to him as the teacher of Saul of Tarsus, but how great is the contrast 
between the calm and prudent Gamaliel and the intense and impulsive Saul 1 The 
scene in the Sanhedrim when this honoured teacher rose to calm the prevailing excite- 
ment, and plead for what he would call a " masterly inactivity," may be effectively 
pictured. The situation in which the Sanhedrim vfas placed was an exceedingly 
difficult one, and certainly one which could not be dealt fairly with while the council 
was under the influence of roused prejudices and religious excitement. The cautious 
temperament should be described. Those who have this characteristic quality have 
their place, their influence, and their work ; they are often valuable drags on wheels 
Iriven too hurriedly ; but they have also their disability, and lack the capacity to enjoy 
much that appeals to other natures. They know nothing of emotion, enthusiasm, self- 
forget fulness, or rapture. Such a one was Gamaliel, and his advice is quite a model ol 
that always given by the cautious man. 

L Th* 0A.UTI0U8 MAN i""ALLS BACK ON PEECEDBNT. Gamaliel finds soiue msiftncei 



in 



THE A.OTS OF THE APOSTLEa 



[oB. TL 1 — 16. 



th»t had recently occurred and argnes from them, much as a modem lawyer does 
from the " cases " he can cite. PreLcdents are often very valuable. They are often sad 
hindrances to enterprise. They are always most annoying to those who are of impulslTe 
temperament. They are a' very doubtful good to men of faith in a living God, who 
may be pleased to work in fresh and surprising ways. 

II. The cAtJTious man has confidence in the wobkino op natubal fobces. 
Gamaliel says — Wait and watch the working of these things. Beligious excitements 
tend to exhaust themselves. Mountebanks have no staying power. Leaders of sects 
want money support, and as soon as this is made apparent their followers dwindle 
away. There is little need for any interference, the natural process of exhaustion wiM 
effect all you want. So, still, the cautious man often checks the energy that would dea. 
vigorously with social and moral evils, such as drinking and vice. Earnest men 
cannot wait for the long outworking of natural forces. With faith in the God of 
righteousness, they must enter and deal with the evils as a new redeeming force. 

III. The OAUTiotrs man belies on the effects of time. Though allied to the 
previous consideration, this somewhat differs from it. Time allays excitement ; time 
tests the value of all things. And the very heads of the Jewish religious system might 
surely be satisfied that time would be on their side. But men are " perishing in their 
sins " while we wait ; and the earnest man hears God inspire him to active endeavour 
when he says, " Now is the accepted time." 

IV. The cautious man fbaes to aeouse ob to maxntain public bxcttement. 
And no doubt much-evil attends such excitement, but worse evils attend stagnation. 
Public excitement only alarms those who do not want anything done. The cautious 
among us are always seeking to repress special missions, revivals, and reformations, 
and fear that the blaze blown up so high will soon burn out, and leave only bare cold 
ashes. Men of faith will ever plead that, maybe, the fire so lighted will bum on for 
ever. Cautious men may sometimes do good work by wisely checking over-impulsive- 
Dess and unduly considered schemes. But they may also check enterprise. They who 
would do noble work for God must often do as did the great general — land en th« 
enemy's shores and (urn the boats, — R. T, 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEB VI 



Ver. 1. — Ntyw in these for and t» those, 
A.V. (it is not iKehais, answering to 
Dnn D'D\3,but Toitrcn t)-, multiplying for multi- 
plied, A.V. ; Grecian Jews for Grecians, A.V. 
The Grecian Jews ; the Hdlenists, for this 
is the appellation of them in the Greek; it 
means properly those who spoke Greek or 
otherwise followed Greek usages, applied 
to foreigners, here of course to Jews. Of a 
similiir form and meaning is the word " to 
Judaize," translated "to live as do the Jews" 
(A.V., Gal. il. 14), and the forms " to Demo- 
Bthenize," " to Platonize," "to Attioize," etc. 
Tiie Hellenists were those Jews of the dis- 
persion who lived in countries where Greek 
was spoken, and who themselves spoke 
Greek. It was for the sake of such that the 
Alexandrine Version of the Scriptures, oom- 
mqnly called the LXX.,was made. Hebrews; 
Palestinian and other Jews, who spoke Ara- 
mean (2 Cor. xi. 21 ; Phil. iii. 5 ; ch. xxi. 40), 
BB opposed to the Hellenists. Their widows. 
We leam incidentally by this phrase that 
one of the earliest Christian institutions 
WM an order of widows, who were maintained 



at the oommoo oost. We find them in the 
Church of Joppa (ch. ix. 41), and in the 
Church of Ephesus (1 Tim. v. 3, 9, 10, 11, 
16). They gave themselves to prayer and 
to works df mercy. Daily ; KaBi)ii.epiv6s only 
occurs here in the New Testament, and rarely 
in Greek writers ; i^i).epiv6s, of a daily fever, 
is used by Hippocrates, and may possibly 
have suggested the use of this rare word to 
Luke the physician. 

Ver. 2.— And for then, A.V. ; fit for 
reason, A.V. ; forsake for leave, A.V. It is 
not fit ; literally, pleaMng ; apeaTdv is often 
therendering of 31B in the LXX. ; e.g. Gen. 
xvi 6; Deut. lii. 28. In Exod. xv. 26, 
Deut. vi. 18, etc., it stands for -va^, that 
which is right. Serve tables. TheEnglisli 
reader should remember that the "ministra- 
tion " of ver. 1, the " serve " of tUis verse, 
and the " deacon " which was the name of the 
new ofBccrs, are all forms of the same Greek 
word (SiaKovia, SiaKoveTv, SictKocos). In ver. 
4 " the ministry of the Word " is opposed to 
"the daily ministration" of meat. The 
passage gives a necessary warning to the 
ministers of God's Word not to spend too 
much time and strength upon any leoulal 



JH, VI. X— 15.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



193 



work, even though it he a work of charity. 
They must give themselves to the Word of 
God and to prayer. There are Christian 
laity to serve tables. 

Ver. 3. — Look ye out therefore, Imthren^ 
from for wherefore, brethren, look ye out, A. V. ; 
good for honest, A.V. ; Spirit for IToly Ghost, 
A.V, and T.B,.; of wisdom tor wisdom, A..Y. 
Good report ; literally, home witness to ; i.e. 
well spoken of. So in Heb. xi. 5 it is said of 
Bnoeli that " lie had witness borne to him tliat 
he pleased Crod," and in Heb. xi. 4 of Abel 
that " he had witness borne to him that he 
was righteous ; " and so in oh. x. 22 Gciriielius 
is said to be a man "well reported of by 
all the nation of the Jews." In oh. xvi. 2 
Timothy is said to be " well reported of 
(efj,apTvpe7To) by the brethren." The Spirit. 
The number seven was, perhaps, fixed upon 
with reference to the exigencies of the service, 
some think because there were seven tables 
to be supplied ; and partly perhaps from 
seven being the sacred number, the number 
of completeness — seven Churches, seven 
spirits, seven stars, seven children (1 Sam. 
ii. 5), seven times (Ps. cxix. 164). From 
seven having been the number of the first 
deacons arose the custom in some Churches 
of always having seven deacons, which con- 
tinued some centuries in the Church of Rome. 
One of the Canons of the Council of Neo- 
csBsarea (a.d. 314) enacted that "there ought 
to be but seven deacons in any city," and 
gt. Mark is said to have ordained seven 
deaconsatAlexandria(seeBingham,'Christ. 
Antiq.,' vol. i. p. 232). But the needs of 
the Churches gradually superseded all such 
restrictions. Whom we may appoint. The 
multitude elect, the apostles appoint. The 
apostolate appears as (fie sole ministry of 
the Church at first. From the apostolate is 
Bvolved first the diaconate, afterwards the 
presbyterate, as the need for each arose 
(oh. xiv. 23). 

Ver. 4. — Continue stedfastly in for give 
ourselves amtinually to, A.V. ; <n (the 
ministry) for to, A.V. Stedfastly. _ The 
verb irpoaKapTepiu is of frequent use in the 
Acts (see ch. i. 14; ii.42; v. 46; viii. 13; 
X. 7; see also Col. iv. 2). It is used of 
persons and things to which any one adheres 
closely and perseveringly, which are put 
in the dative case, as here. But sometimes 
it has the prepositions ivox els after it, as in 
ch. V. 46 ; Hist, of Susann. 7 ; Eom. xiii. 6. 

Ver. 5.—Eoly Spirit for Holy Ghost, A.V. 
The mention of Stephen, and the narrative 
which follows leading up from Stephen'* 
martyrdom to St. Paul (ch. vii. 60), show to 
what the writer is tending. He seleoti the 
incidents in the history of the Church at 
Jerusalem which connect themselves most 
directly with that after history which was 
the object he had in view. It has been 

4 em 



thought by some that the Greek character 
of all seven names is an indication that they 
were Hellenists, Such a conclusion, how- 
ever, is not warranted, as many Jews who 
were not Hellenists had Greek or Latin 
names, e.g. Paul, Sylvanus, Aquila, Pris- 
cilla, Marcus, Justus, Petrus, Didymus, etc. 
At the same time, it is likely that some of 
them were. One, Nicolas, was a proselyte. 
The object, doubtless, was to ensure perfect 
fairness of distribution of the Church 
charities. Stephen and Philip (ch. viii. 5, 
etc. ; xxi. 8) are the only two of whom we 
know anything beyond their names. 

Ver. 6. — When they had prayed, they laid 
their hands on them. They did not pray 
without imposition of hands, nor did they 
lay hands on them without prayer. So in 
the sacraments, in confirmation, and ordina- 
tion, the outward sign or rite is accompanied 
by prayer for the thing signified. And 
God's grace is given through the sacrament 
or rite in answer to the prayer of faith (see 
ch. viii. 15, and the Office for Baptism, the 
Prayer of Consecration in the Office for Holy 
Communion, and the Confirmation and 
Ordination Services). (For the laying on 
of hands as a mode of conveying a special 
grace and blessing, see Numb, xxvii. 3; Dent, 
xxxiv. 9 ; Matt. xix. 13 — 15 ; Luke iv. 40 ; 
ch. viii. 17 ; xiii. 3 ; 1 Tim. v. 22 ; Heb. vi. 2.) 

Ver. 7. — Exceedingly for greatly, A.V. 
Were obedient to the faith. Compare the 
phrase, " obedience of faith ' or •' to the 
faith" (Rom. i. 5; xvi. 25) Tiie adclition 
of a great multitude of priests was an im- 
portant incident in the Cliurch's history, 
both as they were a higher order of men, 
and a class very liable to be prejudiced 
against the faith which would rob them of 
their importance. 

Ver. S.— Grace for faith, A.V. and T.K. ; 
wrought for did, A.V. ; signs for miracles, 
A.V. Power (ch. i. 8, note) ; power to work 
miracles especially, but also other spiritual 
power beyond his own natural strength (see 
ver. 10). This power showed itself in the 
signs and wonders which he wrought. 

Ver. 9. — But for then, A.V. ; certain of 
them that were for certain, A.V. ; of the 
Gyrenians and o/ the Alexandrians for 
Oyreniansand Alexandrians, A.V. ; jlstafor 
of Asia, A.V. Of the synagogue, etc. There 
were said to have heen four hundred and 
eighty synagogues in Jerusalem alone in 
the time of our Saviour (Olshaufsen, on Matt. 
iv. 23). But this is probably a fanciful 
number ; only it may be taken rs an indi- 
cation of the great number of such places of 
Jewish worship. Tiberias is said to have 
had twelve synagogues. Ten giown-up 
people was the minimum congregation of a 
synagogue. It seems by the enumeration 
of synagogues ii; ou;" text that the foreign 

ft 



1&>4 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. tl 1 — 15. 



Jews had each their own synagogue at 
Jerusalem, as Chryeostom supposes, where 
men of the same nation attended when tliey 
came to Jerusalem ; for the construction of 
the sentence is to supply before KvpTivalaf and 
again before 'Axe^wSpfoiy the same words 
AS precede Ai^eprivav, viz. Kai tuv ^k ttjs 
ffvvayuyTJs ttjs \eyo^fV7iSt BO as to mean 
" and certain of them that were of the 
synagogue called of the Oyrenians," and so 
on. The very numerous Jews of Cyrene 
and of Alexandria would doubtless require 
each a synagogue for themselvts. The 
Libertines were, as Chrysostom explains it, 
" freedmen of the Eomaus." They are 
thought to consist chiefly of the descendants 
of the Jews who were takrn prisoners by 
Pompey, and deported to Kome, who were 
afterwards emancipated and returned to 
Jiidaja, though some (Jleycr, i. 1) settled 
in Kome. Tacitus, under the year A.D. 19, 
speaks of four thousand Libeitini, infected 
with Jewish or Egyptian superstitions, as 
banished to Sardinia (' Anna!.,' ii. Ixxxv.). 
Many of these must have been Jews. 
Jiisephus, wlio tells the same story as 
Tacitus, though somewhat ditfeiently, says 
they were all Jews ('Ant. Jud.,' xviii. iii. 5). 
The Cyrenians. Cyrene was the chief city 
in North Africa, and a great Jewish colony. 
Nuu.bers of Jews were settled there in the 
time of Ptolemy Lagus (' Cent Apion.,' ii. 4), 
and are said by Jobephus (quoting Strabo) 
to have been a fourth part of the inhabitants 
of the city ('Ant. Jud.,' xiv. vii. 2). Josephus 
also quotes edicts of Augustus and of M. 
Agrippa, confirming to the Jews of Cyrene 
the right to live according to their own 
laws, and specially to send money for the 
temple at Jerusalem (xvi. vi. 5). Jews from 
" the parts of Libya about Cyrene " are 
mentioned in ch. ii. 10 ; Simon, who bore 
our Saviour's cross, was "a man of Cyrene;" 
there were " men of Cyrene " at Jerusalem 
at the time of the persecution that arose 
about Stephen (ch. xi. 19); and "Lucius of 
Cyrene" is mentioned in oh. xiii. 1. It was 
natural, therefore, that the Cyrenians should 
have a synagogue of their own at Jerusalem. 
Of the Alexandrians. Alexandria had a 
Jewish population of 100,000 at this time, 
equal to two-fifths of the whole city. The 
famous Philo, who was in middle age at this 
time, was an Alexandiian, and the Alex- 
andrian Jews were the most learned of their 
race. The Jews botLled in Alexandria in 
the time of Alexander the Great and Ptolemy 
Lagus. The LXX. Version of the Scriptures 
was made at Alexandria primarily for their 
use. We may be sure, therefore, that they 
had a synagogue at Jerusalem. And of them 
of Cilicia. The transition from the African 
Jews to those of Asia is marked by changing 
Une fom) of phfase into xqi r&v d?rb KiAw^m. 



There were many Jews in Cilioia, and this 
doubtless influenced St. Paul in preaching 
there, as well as the fact of its being liis 
own native pio\ incc (see ch. xv. 23, 41 ; Gal. 
i. 21). Joscjihus makes frequent mention 
of the Jews In the wars between the 
Ptolemies and Aiitiochua the Great, with 
whom the Jews sided, and in consequence 
were mucli favo'ued by him. And it is 
thought that many who had been driven 
out fiom their homes by the wars, and oti.urs 
who were brought by him from Babylonia, 
settled in his time in Cilicia, as well as other 
paits of his Asiatic dominions, i-eleucus 
also encouraged the Jews to settle in the 
towns of Asia in his kingdom, by giving 
them the freedom of the cities and putting 
them on an equal footing (laorlfiovs) with 
M.ioedonians and Greeks (' Ant. Jnd.,' xii. 
iii. 1,3). Asia; meaning the same dislrict 
as in ch. u. 9 (where see note). Evidence 
of the abundance of Jews in Asia crops up 
throughout the Acts (xiii. 16, 24, 42, 45 ; 
xiv. 19 ; xvi. 13 ; xviii. 26, 28 ; xix. 17 ; xx. 
21). That the Jews of Asia were very 
bigoted we learn from ch. xxi. 27 (see also 
1 Pet. i. 1). 

Ver. W.—Withdand for reeist, A.V. This 
was a part of the "power" mentioned in 
ver. 8. 

Ver. 11. — Then they suborned, etc. Tho 
resource of those who are worsted in argu- 
ment is violence or treacliery. Blasphemous 
words against Moses. It must be remeiu 
bered that at this time the whole Jewish 
people were in a state of iE-suppressed frenzy 
and most sensitive jealousy for tlie honour 
of the Mosaic institutions — feelings which 
broke out in constant revolts against the 
Koman power. The accusation against the 
apostles of speaking blasphemiis again.i* 
Moses was therefore the moat likely one 
they could have pitched upon to stir up 
ill will against them. 

Ver. 12. — Seized for caught, A.V.; into 
for to, A.V. And they stirred up ; i.e. by 
means of the reports spread by the men 
whom they suborned, and by working upon 
the feelings of the people and the eldirs 
and scribes, these njeji of the synagogues so 
excited them that thoy obtained permission 
to arrest Stephen and bring him before the 
Sanhedrim. 

Ver. 13. — Words for blasphemous teords, 
A.V.andT.R. Set up false witnesses. Tho 
similarity of Stephen's trial to that of our 
Lord is striking. The same set purpose to 
•ilence a true-speaking tongue by death; 
the same base employment of false witnesses ; 
the same wresting of good words into 
oriminal acts ; and the same meekness and 
patience unto death in the righteous martyrs 
Blessed servant to tread so closely in thy 
lord's ateps 1 (comp. M^tt t. 11, 12 ; \ P«ti 



OH. TI. 1—15.] 



THE AOTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



1»& 



iT. 14—16). This holy plaoe; the San- 
hedrim sat in one of the chambers of the 
t(-mple, called Gnzith. This liad been pro- 
hibited by tl]e Bomans, but the prohibition 
was in alieyance iu tho preseat time of 
anarchy (Lewin). 

Ver. 14. — UnU> «» for ut, A.V. We have 
heard him say, etc. These false witnesses, 
like those who distorted our Lord's words 
(Matt xiTi. 61; Jolin ii. 19), doubtless 
based their accusation upon some semblance 
of truth. If Stephen had said anything like 
what Jesus said to the woman of Samaria 
(John iv. 21) or to his disciples (Mark xiii. 
2), or what tlie writer of the Epislle to tho 
Hebrews wrote (viii. 13), or what St. Paul 
wrote to tlip Colossians (ii. 16, 17), his words 
migU\ easily be misrepresented by false 



witnesses, whose purpose it was to sweat 
awiiy his life. This Jesus of Nazareth. The 
phrase is most contemptuous. 'I'his (oStosX 
so often rendered iu tlie A.V. "this fellow" 
(Matt. xxvi. 61, 71; John ix. 29, etc.), is o! 
itself an opprobrious expression (comp. oh. 
Tii. 40), and the d Tfta^apaTos, the Nazareuo, 
is intended to be still more so. 

Ver. 15 — Fastening their eyes for looking 
stedfastly, A V. (see above, eh. iii. 4). 
The council would naturally all look at him, 
in expectation of his answer to the evidence 
just delivered against him. In his face, 
illuminated with a Divine radiance, tliey liad 
an answer which they would have done 
well to listen to (for the brightness of an 
angel's face, comp. Matt, xxviii. 3 ; Dan. x . 
6 ; Rev. x. 1, etc.). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vert. 1 — 8. — Wise counsels. The prosperity of the Church was great. The first 
hypocrisy had been plucked up by the roots and burnt, so to speak, in the presence of 
the whole oongreg.ition. A holy awe had mingled with faith and love to give intense 
reality to the religion of the disciples. The Spirit of God had borne active witness to 
the word of the apostles by signs and wonders ; and the healing of many sick had 
conciliated multitudes and attached them to the Church. The apostles had been 
strengthened and encouraged by the supernatural ministration of an angel bringing 
them forth from prison, and bidding them preach afresh in spite of their enemies; and 
at length their very enemies were silenced, and one of the chief of them had advised 
his fellows, " Leave these men alone." With a fresh bui'st of zeal, the preaching of Christ 
had been carried on, and the number of the disciples was greatly multiplied. But now 
> new danger arose. One of the first institutions of the growing body had been to 
supply the wants of the most desolate class — the widows — and to gladden their hearts 
by a daily ministration of food out of the common fund. But, in the rapid increase of 
numbers, the steps taken at first to secure abundance and fairness in tho distribution 
had proved insufficient. The apostles, who hitherto had been the sole rulers and 
officers of the Church, had greater things to attend to than even the distribution of 
Church charities, and in their aiisetice abuses had arisen. While the widows of the 
Hebrew converts, so called, were well cared for, the Hellenist widows, through some 
partiality on the part of those who had the management of the tables, were 
neglected. They were put off with worse places and scantier fare than their Hebrew 
sisters, or, maybe, found no place at all provided for them. Naturally their friends 
felt aggrieved, and murmured at such inconsiderate treatment. And the Christian 
body, before so closely united in the bonds of love in Jesus Christ, showed signs of 
being split into two bodies, Hebrews and Hellenists. What was to be done? Was 
the danger to be despised, and were the complaints to be slighted because they only 
related to the meat that perisheth ? Were the widows and their friends to be told that 
they ought to be oocui)ied only about that,ineat which endureth unto eternal life, which 
the Son of man would give them freely and impartially, and their grievauces to 
remain unredressed? Or, taking a juster and graver view of the matter, should the 
apostles diminish their spiritual labours, and give up their time and strength to the 
organization of the public charities and the distribution of the daily broad? They did 
neither. But with conspicuous wisdom they at once founded a new order of min, 
whose special business it should be to attend to the daily ministration, and see that 
none were favoured and none left out. And, to conciliate confidence in the thorough 
impartiality of the distribution, they invited the whole Church to elect seven men of 
approved wisdom and piety, to whom this important trust should be committed. I'ha 
pl4n c^ms tp have be^D emiu^ntly successtul, ag ire bear ^o more of miuiu"^ ■^ni 



IM THE ACTSOF THE APOSTLES. [ch. vi 1— 1& 

complaints. The practical lessons to be learnt are these. 1. Never despise other people's 
grievances or make light of them because they do not affect you. Especially let no 
pastor of a flock underrate the temporal and personal vexations of any parishioner who 
may lay them before him. To poor people even small losses seem very serious things. 
And if to the sense of loss there is added a sense of injustice or unfairness, the murmurs 
are very real, and represent deep-seated wounds. They must be kindly and judicially 
attended to. 2. Again, all, and especially the clergy, should feel the full importance of 
impartiality in dealing with their people. Favouritism in dispensing charity or even 
pastoral care must be resolutely eschewed. Nobody must be " neglected " because 
others are preferred. Murmurs are not always loud ; but be sure that any unfair or 
supercilious treatment will rankle in the breast j that, if extended to classes, it will 
make a serious crack in the unity of the Church ; and that it effectually prevents those 
who think themselves unfairly treated from reaping any profit from the ministrations 
of those by whom they think themselves so treated. 3. Lastly, the example of the 
apostles in this matter teaches those in authority not to attempt to do everything 
with their own hands, and not to be jealous of having able coadjutors to do the work 
thoroughly which they themselves of necessity can only do imijurfectly. In leaving 
the choice of the new deacons to the congregation at large, instead of selecting them 
themselves, they showed a thoroughly liberal and wise spirit, and have left a lesson to 
the Church in all ages to trust the laity with all fitting power, and to evoke the latent 
energies of the body, by giving to every capable person some work to do for the glory 
of God and the welfare of his people. 

Vers. 9 — 16. — Fanatidtm. Fanaticism has one respectable feature, that it is sincere. 
The fanatic believes what he asserts to be true, and he is earnest and zealous in the 
maintenance and propagation of his belief. But when we have said thus much we 
have said all that can be said in his favour. In fanaticism there is a culpable neglect 
of the reason which God has given to man to be his guide. The fanatic shuts his eyes 
and closes his ears, and rushes on his way with no more reflection or discrimination 
than a wild bull in its fury. Fanaticism, too, has a fatal tendency to deaden all moral 
considerations and to blunt a man's perceptions of right and wrong. It is in vain to 
look for justice, or fairness, or truth, or mercy, from a fanatic. There is no violence of 
which he is not capable if he thinks his faith is in danger, no wiles and baseness to 
which he will not stoop if he thinks it necessary for the defence of his cause. Murder, 
perjury, bribery, subornation of witnesses, and defamation of opponents by iies and 
slander, have constantly been the weapons by which fanaticism of various kinds has 
ever defended itself. The end justified the means. It is, however, a curious feature in 
the history of fanaticism that it is often so closely allied with self-interest. And this 
is a feature which derogates considerably firom its only merit, that of sincerity. In 
a pure love of truth there is no thought of self-interest. Truth is a holy. Divine thing, 
loved for its own sake. But the fonatic's creed is not pure truth ; and so it seems 
it cannot be loved with the same pure, disinterested love with which truth is loved. 
Hence it has often been the parent of crime ; and hence it is, as we have just said, 
often allied with self-interest. It is so with Mohammedan fanaticism ; it has been so 
and still is with Komish and specially Jesuitical fanaticism; it was so with Puritan 
iind fifth-monarchy fanaticism ; it is so with other existing forms of fanatical and 
unreasonable zeal. In the case before us in this chapter we need not doubt that these 
Hellenistic Jews had a very strong and ardent attachment to the Law of Moses, and 
that their dread and dislike of Stephen's teaching arose from their apprehension 
that Christian doctrine was in its nature destructive of their own tenets. But if their 
attachment to the Law of Moses had been intelligent and pure, they would have 
welcomed the gospel of Christ as being the fulfilment of the Law. If they had been 
actuated by a holy love of God's truth, they would not have sought to uphold the 
Mosaic Institutions by violence, by injustice, and by fraud. Nor can we doubt that, aa 
in the case of the chief priests and scribes and elders, who conspired to take away the 
life of Jesus Christ, so in the case of these heated partisans, the fear of losing their own 
places of influence and power, and having to yield the place of honour to the Galilaean 
teachers whom they hated and despised, had much to do with the unrighteoiw zeal of 
|he members of the Hellenistic synagogues. "The Gliristiau should strive to hi^ve i^ zea' 



«». VL 1— 16.] am Acte oP TaE apostles. m 

for Christ and his glory quite as ardent as that of any fanatic, but at the same time to 
keep the eyes and ears of his reason always open for the correction of any error into 
which he may inadvertently have fallen, and for the addition of any truth which he 
may not hitherto have known. Above all, he will never seek to bear down reason by 
violence, or to defend truth with the carnal weapons of unrighteousness, whetbe^ 
violence or fraud. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1—7. — Prosperity and peace within the Church. These opening verses prove 
to us that a condition of exceptional virtue may abruptly pass into one of common 
infirmity. From the height of holy enthusiasm the Church falls down, by steep and 
quick descent, into the depth of unlovely wrangling. From all the verses of the text 
we gather — 

L That prospbeitt bbtnos dasqbr to a Chbistian Church as well ab to 
INDIVIDUAL SOULS. " When the number of the disciples was multiplied there arose 
a murmuring" (ver. 1). Enlargement often brings with it pride, or false confi- 
dence, or sloth, or worldliness. It is a " slippery place," where there is great danger 
of falling. It is frequently the condition of disagreement and even serious discord. 
When the number is small and the band feeble, each member of the community feels 
that he must stand by the rest, and let all his strength be put out in advancement of 
the common cause ; but when there is a consciousness of strength, the sense of responsi- 
bility is lessened, and men permit themselves to indulge a spirit and to manifest signs 
of impatience, querulousness, complaint. But no Christian Church can afford to have 
any of its members introduce the discordant note. It may, indeed, be lost and silenced 
in the harmonics which prevail j but it may throw everything out of tune and be the 
beginning of endless dissonance and dire confusion. 

II. That tue harmonious action of the Churoh is iaroelt dependent on the 
WISE apportionment of its functions. " It is not reasonable that we [the apostles] 
should leave the Word of God and serve tables " (ver. 2). It was altogether undesirable 
that the apostles of Christ, who were charged with such high fanctioris, should expend 
their strenglh and time in small monetary arrangements. They would probably do 
that ill when they might be doing their own proper work admirably. They wisely 
divided the duties of the Church into two different parts, of which they would take 
one, and leave the other to those whose habits and faculties made therr suitable for its 
discharge : then all went well. If we do not assign functions with discretion, all affairs 
will speedily be out of joint ; the machinery will work with the maximum instead of 
the minimum of friction. Let the minister take his post or posts, and there be found 
in full activity ; let the other officers have theirs, and keep them. Let activity be well 
directed, and there will be peace as well as fruitfulness. 

III. That the officers of the Church often do well to consult the commxtnity 
instead of settling everything themselves. "The twelve called the multitude 
. , . and said, . . . look ye out," etc. (vers. 2, 3). The members of the Church should 
remember that affairs are greatly expedited, order maintained, and peace preserved by 
their delegating much business to a few chosen men ; on the other hand, the leaden 
should remember that even the inspired apostles of our Lord did not stand upon their 
dignity as such, but consulted " the multitude of the disciples," and that what they 
did with propriety we may do with advantage. 

IV. That even fob the humbler duties of the Church some sterling Chris- 
tian geaoeb are needful. The seven men now appointed " to serve tables " were 
to be " men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and wisdom " (ver. 3) ; t.e. they 
were (1) to enjoy a good reputation ; (2) to be spiritual men in whom God dwelt by hia 
Spirit ; (3) to be men of prudence and capacity. They who do not possess these quali- 
fications have no right to expect any position in the Church of Christ. Without the 
conBdence and esteem of their brethren they could not make a good beginning ; with- 
out Christian character they would be out of place altogether ; without requisite gifts 
of the understanding and disposition they would certainly not make a good ending. 

Y, That ws mat expect ministkbial fidelity to bs foua>wkd by AsouNDitiq 



198 tfiS ACTS OP TbE APOSTLES. [ci. «. 1—14 

AND EVEN 8UKPBISIN0 TKruMPns. When the apostles were relieved of other more secnlat 
duties, and " gave themselves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the Word '• 
(ver. 4), then " the Word of God increased " (ver. 7) ; then came abounding success— 
"the number of the disciples multiplied greatly;" surprising success — "a great 
C'lmpany of the priests were obedient to the faith." It does not necessarily follow that 
ministerial faithfulness will be attended with such results ; prayerlessness, or discord., 
or inconsistency on the part of the members may defeat the exertions of the holiest and 
ablest minister of Christ. But, nothing being in the way, the Church itself being in 
tympathy, an earnest, faithful ministry will witness very blessed spiritual results — (1) 
ome that will rejoice, (2) and some also that will surprise the hearts of the holy. 
There will be added unto the Church many, and of these some who seemed utterly and 
liopelessly removed, by their prejudices, their temporal interests, the heinousness of 
their wrong-doing, or their long continuance in sin. — 0. 

Vers. 8 — 15. — 2%« service of the lip and the glory of th» eountenanee. The wise 
step of appointing seven deacons " to serve tables," and thus to liberate the apostles for 
prayer and preaching, like other good causes, had results which reached beyond the 
first object of it. It led to the formation of a most useful body of men, who have 
served Christ and his Church in other things beside mere " tables " or temporalities. It 
brought out Stephen ; and who shall say how much that had to do with the conversion 
of Saul, and so with the evangelization and enlightenment of the world ? We learn — 

L That the faithful discharqe of the loweb duty will lead to entrust- 
MENT with a hioheb ONE. (Vcrs. 8, 9.) Stephen, having acquitted himself well as 
a deacon, and showing powers of speech and argument, was encouraged to visit the 
synagogues, and there " dispute " on behalf of Christian truth. And not only so, but 
God honoured him as the channel of his Divine healing power, and he " did great 
wonders and miracles among the people." It is always wise to begin at or near the 
bottom of the scale ; to do the simplest thing well, and then rise to that which is next 
above it. It is well, in Christian service as in secular callings and in the affairs of 
state, to go through the various grades until the higher and perhaps the highest are 
reached. Faithful work in a humbler sphere will fit for useful and honourable service 
in a higher ; this is true of our life on earth, and will doubtless prove true respecting 
the life which is to come (Matt. xiii. 12 ; Luke xvi. 10). 

n. That ik the service of Christ we must depend fob power with men on 
ORAOE FBOM GoD. Stephen was full of " grace and power " (ver. 8) ; full of power with 
men because full of grace from God. From the Divine resources there came down 
heavenly influences into his soul — illumination, sanctity, zeal — and he was strong to 
interest, to instruct, to convince, to persuade. We shall remain unsuccessful as workers 
for Christ, however great our natural gifts may be, except we have grace from on high 
to penetrate and possess our soul, and we be endued " with all might by his Spirit in 
the inner man." 

III. That Christian controversy has rre place in saored serviob. Stephen 
" disputed " with the Hellenistic Jews in the synagogues (ver. 9), and so effectively 
that "they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake." 
Statement of Christian doctrine and enforcement of Christian truth may take higher 
rank, in usefulness, than the defence of Christian theology ; but the latter has its place 
in the field of sacred service, and those who work elsewhere should not disparage or 
decry it. Everything in its time and in its turn. 

IV. That error, when it is seated in the soul, is often only agoravated by 
the exhibition of the truth. (Vers. 11 — 14.) These men who were in the wrong, 
instead of being enlightened and benefited by Stephen's forcible exposition, were led 
into folly and sin. They hired others to give testimony which was virtually if not 
literally false, and they did their best to compass the violent death of the man who 
was seeking to lead them into the kingdom of truth and hfe. When men are not 
only wrong in theory, but also bad at heart, interested in maintaining that which is 
%lse, any endeavour to enlighten tjiem will oftei), fan the flame of their folly and roust 
to its fullest exercise the perversity which is ii tbeir souls. 

V. That devotednesb is sometimes radiant with heavenly brightness. (Ver. 
15.) We may continue to dis]iute whether the " angel-face " of Stephen was natural w 



OH. vt 1—15.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 19» 

supernatural radiance. It matters little ; but it is of consequence to know Ihnt the higher 
Christian graces will write their sign upon our countenance. As sin makes its sad and 
shameful traces on the frame, so purity, faith, love, devoiion, will make the face to be 
aglow with heavenly light. Nothing but a devoted Christian life could give us such 
angel-faces as some of those which we see worshipping in our sanctuaries and labour- 
ing in our holy fields of love. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — The appointment of deacons. I. The spirit of strife. 1. It arose 
between the Hellenists and the Hebrews, members of the same nation, of the same 
blood, of the same Church, but of different places of birth, education, and, above all, 
of different languages. Language is, perhaps, the greatest divider between man and 
man. So many of those associations which govern the mind are rooted in tlie sound 
of our native tongue. We may notice that Christianity reconciles the difference of 
the Palestinian Jew and the Greek-speaking Jew ; the Book, the New Testament, is 
the thought of the Jew in the tongue of the Greek. 2. It was on a question of 
pecuniary benefit. Most disputes of the bitterest kind in the family life turn on 
questions of money, proi)erty and its distribution. Hence the Christian duty of strict 
justice and exactitude in all dealings with the goods of this world. 3. Jealousy was 
at the root of the strife. No feeling more painful than the sense of neglect and 
of the preference of others. All Christian principle is rooted in love, which alone can 
conquer jealousy. All Christian graces are but forms of the " love that seeketh not 
its own." Love must seek to remove this " root of bitterness," which otherwise will 
trouble many and pollute the pure flow of peace iu the Church. 

II. The calling tooetheb op the Church. To the sense and piety of the 
multitude the appeal of wisdom and of justice may ever be safely made. But without 
strong leading, even Christian congregations may become scenes ol anarchic passion. 
It is composed of many wills. If noue is present to represent with conscientious- 
ness and firmness the will of the Head of the Church, nothing but confusion can be 
expected. When that will is clearly apprehended, and the duty thence arising 
fi'uily laid down, the majority, if not the whole, will be found ready to obey. Such 
was the case at Jerusalem. 

III. The couksel of the apostles. 1. The division of Christian functions is 
necessary. It is not "pleasing," either to the Head of the Church or to the judgment 
of its enlightened members, that callings and duties should be confuseil; above all, that 
the higher calling should suffer in efficiency from being joined with a lower. The 
" Word of God," or thought and utterance in the Church — the Christian ministry 
in the special sense — was the special function of the apostles. The " serving of 
tables " was another kind of function, evidently important and necessary. Bat for 
the two to be fixed in the same persons would have been a want ol congruity, or 
of harmony. For the ministry of the Word freedom from the distractions of business 
is peculiarly necessary. 2. The central function in the Church is that of the teacher. 
If this languish or be in any way fettered, the life of the congregation must suffer. It 
demands a whole man and whole energies. The resolve of the apostles is, therefore, 
to persevere iu prayer and in the ministry of the Word. Those two words sum up 
the life of the preacher. By prayer he draws from the fountain of truth and Divine 
strength ; and in preaching he gives forth that which he has thus received. Without 
the inner communion with God there can be no power to prevail over tlie hearts of 
men. 3. Directions for the appointment of deacons. Seven are to be selected ; the 
number has sacred associations, which were doubtless helpful to the mind. A 
sevenfold band symbolizes strength, Divine presence and assistance. (1) They are to 
bo " full of the Spirit" — an expression which cannot be defined, but the meaning 
of which can be felt. Divine presence in the soul is ever indefinable, and is known 
by its effects on the tone of the man, and on the energy, the gentleness, and persua- 
siveness of his .speech and aetidn. (2) They are to be wise men — who are always 
needed for tasks so delicate as ihat here assi^^ncci iheni. Goodness and sense : these 
are the great qualities needed in Church oflicers evur\ d.iy. Neither weakly good 
men nor merely shtewd.men fulfil the desired qualifications. 

IV. The election. The counsel of the apostles is approved unanimously; and 
feven brethren are chosen cut and presented to the apostles, who rati^ the choic« 



266 tSE AcTS OP THE aI'OSTlES. ten. «• 1— 1& 

of the Churcli by the devout ceremony of the imposition of hands. 1. TIio eminence 
of Stephen. He is specially mentioned as " full of faith and of the Holy Spirit." 
Faith, a most comprehensive word in the New Testament, may mean here either 
constancy, fidelity, or the habit of the living and strong believer. But really the two 
meanings unite. The believing man in the genuine Christian sense is alone the true, 
the steadfast man. The trustworthy man is so because he himself is a truster in God. 
lie who has no certain faith in the Divine is no object of human confidence. 2. The 
obscurity of useful lives. Except of Philip, of whom we have an after glimpse, nothing 
is known of these worthies (ch. viii. 5, 26 ; xxi. 8). " He has not lived amiss whose 
life and death have escaped the notice of the world," said the Eoman poet. The 
" path of a hidden life " is the lot of most Christians. A niche in the temple of fame 
is not set as an object of Christian ambition ; but the approval of the Divine Master is. 
3. There may be good service without the title of servant. These men had no official 
designation of " deacons." They were simply "the seven." It is good to resist the 
weakness for titles and for status in the Christian Church. Good men and useful 
are sometimes spoiled when these imaginary distinctions are placed upon them. So 
susceptible is our fancy that, as dress seems to magnify our personality, so does the 
consciousness of office and rank. We cannot crush vanity by the singularity of 
dropping titles; it will nestle just as well under the affectation of plainness. But 
the simplicity of this example may remind us that there is a danger in vanity for 
the ministers of Christ of every degree. 

V. The subseqttbnt condition of the Church. It is sketched in three features. 
1. The growth of the Divine Word. The Logos, or Word, of God is a very wide expression. 
It includes all spiritual activity and all expressions of it. The meaning, then, is that 
there was a great growth of .spiritual thought and life. And this by the Divine 
favour as human means. When the affairs of any Church are conducted in the spirit 
of wisdom and love, this blessing may be expected. It is foolish to expect manifesta- 
tions of growth and prosperity where these have not been sought and wrought for. 
'2. Growth of numbers. Which is one of the most obvious marks of success. The 
popular reception of a new creed is a mark of its adaptation to the wants of the many 
But we must not infer that the unpopularity of a principle, or a person, or a teaching 
condemns it. There is a popular and an unpopular side to all truth. The divinely 
winiiing aspect of Christianity is not always to be seen ; and there are days when 
the faithful must struggle with discouragement. The prophets with their lofty teaching 
complained that their report was not believed. The gospel, when seen to be the 
source of peace, prosperity, and wealth, is readily believable ; not so widely so when 
it asks for sacrifice and leads to suffering. 3. The submission of the priests. This 
was most significant of all. Ecclesiastical orders are the most stubborn in resistance 
to change ; priests the most conservative of religionists, as prophets are the friends 
(if advance and of freedom. The giving way of the priests was indeed a remarkable 
triumph of Christ and his gospel. The evidence of the facts, the present facts, was 
too strong to be resisted. The evidence of a religion lies at last in its power to help 
and bless the life of society. So long as this evidence is- presented by the Church 
" apologies" for Christianity will for the mass of men be quite unnecessary. — J. 

Vers. 8 — 15. — Stephen's work and witness. I. His spibit dbsceibed. " Full oi 
qrace and power." We can feel rather than define the force of those words. Grace 
is first the favour of God felt in the man's soul, then manifested in his whole bearing, 
tone, conversation, and way of life. The effect is like the cause; the recipient of 
Divine favour makes a deeply favourable impression upon others. Power, again, is 
the Divine will making itself felt in the man as his will ; and the effect is powerful 
upon others. Thus Stephen was a man felt to be spiritually oriyinal. 

II. His activity descbibed. He wrought " signs and wonders " of an extraordinary 
kind among the people. The Jew craved signs and wonders, ami from long habit and 
education was accustomed to see in these the great evidmce uf a Divine mission, 
I'ut true faith is never without power to work some kiud of wonders. Moral 
w onders are the most impressive and the most evidential. 

III. The bisk of opposition to him. Jealousy as usual, and envy, must hava 
1^ . oaipted it. The most fruitful lives invite most criticism. " Stones are not thrown 



eii. vt i— IS.] iHfe AdTS of I'Hfe APOStLtiS. 201 



except at the fruit-laden tree," says the proverb. 1. Its character : disputatious. 
School wit and wisdom are brought to bear against him. When facts cannot bo 
deuied, nor made the foundation of charges, fancies are found to be convenient aa 
material of attack. The man who is mighty in deed shall, if possible, be shown an 
imbecile in argument, a tyro in knowledge. But there are more things in heaven 
and earth than are dreamt of in school philosophy ; and the power of Grod and wisdom 
of Gi'd in his servants set at naught the "disputer" of the world. 2. lit failure. 
The dialecticians were met by simple spiritual wisdom. It was a plain story that 
Stephen had to tell ; its very simplicity and dignity foiled these debaters. 

IV. False accusations. From sophistry to positive lies it is an easy step. If 
dishonesty is in a man's use of words and arguments, ho will be likely to carry it out 
in deeds. If we bribe our reason in the interests of passion, why should we hesitate 
to corrupt the minds of others? Bribed testimony may produce a great effect for a 
time. It can craftily be made closely to resemble the truth. If a teacher upholds 
the spirit of Scripture, he may be represented with the ignorant as despisin^r its letter. 
The charge of " speaking evil against Moses and God " must have been made colour- 
able. Stephen taugiit that the old dispensation was in decay, and tlmt the tomple 
must pass away. This was easily misrepresented as speaking against tho toiuple and 
the old institutions. The institutions of God are living, tlierefore must grow, and 
change their forms from ago to age. To assert the necessity of change may be 
perverted to mean the assertion of the necessity of overthrow. The highest teaching 
is ever most liable to misrepresentation. It cannot respect men's vested interests. 
And interest, with all the " hell-deep instincts " which rally in support of it, can ever 
find plausible arguments against the innovator. Stephen's experience repeats that 
of Jesus and anticipates that of Paul. 

V. Success of the plot. The people were deeply moved ; the temple and all Its 
nacred associations in religion and national feeling were threatened, as they thought. 
The Sanhedrim, the " ciders and scribes," trembled for their power. Stephen was 
appreliended and brought before them. The false witnesses repeat their story. 
Though doubtless verbally true, it was in spirit false. That Jesus of Nazareth should 
" dissolve the sacred place and change the old religious customs " was indeed the 
sublime truth in a sentence. Christianity dissolves Judaism — by fulfilling it. To 
break up one home to found another is not to destroy the first home. To cast off 
an old garment because a new one is needed and at hand, is not to discredit the old. 
Destruction absolute and final is diflferent from abolition with a view to progress. 
The witnesses were thus near to the truth, yet far from it. When opposites meet, 
the idea of dissolution and that of life, the half-truth may be the most malicious of lies. 

VI. Thb dembanouk op Stephen. It was a moment of great trial. The people 
were now again united witli their rulers. The Sanhedrim no longer feared to go 
against the general feeling. It was " Stephen against the world." Among all the 
eyes fastened upon him there was probably no friendly glance. Yet at this moment, 
like the sun breaking through the blackness of a thunder-cloud, a glory of unearthly 
Kplendour irradiated the brow- of the witness. In such moments God chooses to 
sliow his love to his chosen. Forsaken — not forsaken ; cast down — not destroyed ; 
fettered and hemmed in. on every side — yet free; such is the experience of the soul 
that confides in God. It throws itself in the extremity of its helplessness at the feet 
of God — nay, upon his very breast. Never do we know what heights and depths are 
in the kingdom of spirit, till we are thrust into them by the frowns or the force that 
bars all other ways. The spirit touches its height of triumph and joy in the very 
moment when the man to outward appearance is lost. And there are brief moments 
when God reveals his presence in a manner not to be forgotten on that noblest of his 
mirrors, the human countenance. God's eagles rise in the storm ; his stars shine in 
the darkest night. Compare the face of Stephen with that of Moses (2 Cor. ill. 7, 8). 
We learn from Stephen : 1. Tlie might that comes to man through faith and the 
lL>ly Spirit; ability to work, to witness, to suffer. 2. The glory of the martyr. 
Accused, God favours him ; slandered, the truth is illustrated by him ; overcome and 
overclouded, he rises and he shines like the sun in his strength. — J. 

Ver*. 1 — 6. — Institution of deacont. Notice : 1. The increase of officers was the 



202 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. Vt 1— 1& 

atural outcome of increase in number of disciples, illustrating the great principle that 
the life of Christianity develops the organization and not depends upon it. 2. The 
spirit of charity was the underworking cause of the need of more rule. Had there been 
little to distribute, there would have been no ground of complaint. 3. The Jewish 
element was still uppermost in the Church. It was as yet an unordered community ; 
but the two principles of care for the weak and equality among brethren were therr 
to be appealed to. 4. The apostles, while guiding the Church with inspired wisdom, 
usurped no authority as rulers, claimed distinction only as servants of the Lord, called 
the whole body of believers together, and committed this first distinct act of constitu- 
tional appointment to the free vote of the Church as a whole. 5. The men elected 
were the best men spiritually as well as in adaptation to the special office. 6. Thp 
whole transaction was an appeal to Divine direction, being carried through in the spirii 
of prayer and in dependence on the apostolic superintendence of the Church which was 
instituted by Christ himself. 7. The deacons' office wrs instituted for the relief of the 
spiritual officers of the Church. The ministry of the Word is chief in importance. The 
"serving tables" requires character, wisdom, spiritual gifts, but is separated from the 
higher offices of prayer and preaching. The deacons are " business " officers. 
8. Nothing should be done in the Church except by spiritual men, in dependence on 
Divine direction sought by prayer, and in harmony with that form of Christian life 
already appointed. — E. 

Ver. 1. — The first note of strife. " There arose a murmuring,'' etc. Good and evil 
mingled everywhere. Multiiilication of disciples means nmltiplication of interests and 
dangers. Prosperity in Churches has its attendant difficulties. Learn a lesson of 
wisdom and safety from the narrative. Money matters cannot be too carefully and 
spiritually controlled in all Churches. 

I. Thy necessary infirmities of Church i.ifb can be made opportunities of great 
blessing. 1. Let nothing be neglected, either wants or murmurs, but all promptly and 
wisely considered and prayed over. 2. Call out the gifts of the people. No one knows 
what he cannot do. A Church's extremity is often God's opportunity. 3. Keep the 
spwitual and the secular as far as possible in their right places. Let not the business 
claims oppress the minds which should be free to study the Word of God. Aim at the 
development of the Church's knowledge and devotion as supreme. 

n. God's wonderfui. care of his people ; overruling ; inspiring ; by means of 
individual instances and comparatively trivial occasions, providing great precedents and 
rules and guiding facts, which extend their influence over the whole world. So in the 
order of his providence throughout. As humanity develops new capacity and function 
manifested. — E. 

Ver. 4. — An earnest ministry the greatest need and blessing of the Church. " But 
we will give ourselves," etc. 

I. Functional faithfulnebs. "Each in his office wait." 1. Apostles held an 
exceptional position, but in all main respects examples of singleness of mind and 
wisdom. 2. Distinguish between faithfulness in office and officialism. Special gifts 
adapted to special work ; should be stirred up. 3. The hope of the Church is in the 
spirituality of its ministers. If they lower the conception of their office and regard 
themselves as mere popular leaders, they let in a flood of evils both into the pulpit'and 
into the Church. 

II. The world's conversion in the hands of God's people. The chief agency — 
prayer and the ministry of the Word. Charity secondary, not primary. Philanthropy 
is not a substitute for Christianity. Tlie apostles put their own office as preachers 
before that of the deacons. In these times a temptation to put the " tables," the bodily 
necessities, before the spiritual wants. We must wait for results, but Christ understood 
the work of his Church. Stand by the apostolic method, and the end will vindicate it. 
The world must be changed by spiritual lorces. The Church must use all the material 
and social advantages supplied, but not as though they were sufficient by themselves • 
" By my Spirit, saith the Lord."— E. ' 

ytt.l.— The fruitt of faith. " And the Word of God increased," etc. Connect wlti 



oa.n. 1—15.3 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa. m 

the preceding description of a prayerful, obedient, spiritually minded Church. How 
different the result might have been had the murmuring gone on to increase and bocoma 
a strife which would have broken up fellowship, dishonoured the Name of Jesus, and 
stopped the mouths of the preachers 1 

I. The field in which such fruits were gathered — Jerusalem and neii;hbourhood. 
1. In some measure ^rep«red for the new seed. God worlds by a deeply laid method 
of orderly progress. The gospel the beginning of the new world because it was the end 
of the old ; taking up into itself all that was really Divine in Judaism. 2. Broken up 
by the new ministry, so different from that of scribes and Pharisees. 3. A continua- 
tion of Christ's own work, upon the basis of the great facts of his history. 

II. The labotjbees. 1. Apostles. Their spirit and method adapted to achieve 
spiritual success ; informal ; earnest ; devout ; inspired. Accompanied with miraculous 
attestation. 2. The multitude of helievers. All spoke more or less. Their fellowship 
was an eloquent fact. Their order and self-denial and separation from the world. 

III. The harvest. 1. Large. Immense population of Jerusalem ; continually 
changing. 2. Representative of the future. The centre of religious life, sending streams 
of light over the world ; devout men of all nations. Special adaptation of the Jewish 
mind to preaching. Knowledge of the Old Testament. Connection with Greek througn 
Alexandria, with Latin through Bome. 3. Wonderful. Overcoming Jewish prejudice ; 
winning many of the priests, notwithstanding opposition and persecution ; foretelling 
the downfall of Judaism. Multiplication of disciples a spiritual fruit. Let God add to 
the Church. Preserve the distinction between the Church and the world. — E. 

Vers. 8 — 15. — Stephen he/ore the council. The conflict between the spirit of Judaism 
and the Spirit of Christ. Show the importance of this conflict in the early Church, 
lasting for more than a whole generation, lingering into the second century. But 
chiefly brought to an end through one (Saul of Tarsus), himself a trophy of the Spirit, 
exalted out of the very midst of the fiercest fire of Jewish bigotry. 

I. The Divine WITNESS. Stephen. 1. Natural gifts ; Jewish training; Hellenistic. 
Union of faith and freedom. 2. Special gifts of the Spirit. Leader of the seven. 
" Grace and power." Wrought wonders and signs. The wisdom and spirit ; raised the 
highest by Divine afflatus. 

IL The opposnra Judaism. 1. From the foreign synagogues. Therefore probably not 
so much on the ground of a narrow Pharisaism, but as a resistance of the Holy Spirit's 
manifestations in the spirit of rationalism and literalism. 2. The resort to the 
Sanhedrim, already leagued with the Sadducees, and therefore kindred with the 
Alexandrian latitudinarians. Instructive as showing that Judaism was going off intd 
rationalism, as it still does. 3. The falsehood and the violence which wrought in the 
persecution. Suborned men. Appeal to the Pharisaic party, though the synagogues 
had no real sympathy with them. They were not really guardians of the Mosaic 
customs. People, elders, scribes, — all stand up by the Alexandrian party. 

III. The mibaodlous testimony of God to his servant. His face " as the face of 
an angel" (cf. the similar manifestation on the face of Moses). 1. Spiritual mani- 
festation appealing to faith. 2. Testimony to the purity and angelic character of 
Stephen. 3. Contrast between the heavenly and the earthly in the men, the methods, 
the doctrines, and the final results. — B, 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The first crystallizings of ecclesiastical institution. This short section 
has much to say, more to suggest, to us. The day of Pentecost had receded no distance 
whatever into the past; the holy enthusiasm of the days when new-born disciples 
.sold their individual property in order to turn it iuto common propeity was literally 
but of yesterday; and Jerusalem, Christianity's cradle of associations the venerable 
sacredness of which was now superseded by a new, a young, a surpassing sacredness, 
had not yet been left of the apostolic missionaries. If other things were to date their 
" beginning from Jerusalem," things o'f brighter and more blessed omen, so also the 
Church's earliest acquaintance with division and strife was to be made and in part 
jirovided against within the precincts of that same city, centre of cities, and " mother 
of all." However, the strife was not fierce at present, nor the division malignant in 
its type. Yet, looked at under the light of the centuries that have succeeded, then 



S64 ThU AC1?8 Ot* tfia APOSTLPlS. toH- ■"• 1— IS- 

can be now no doubt of the significance of the symptoms which then appeared. Let 
us notice in this passage — 

I. Whfit may be called the first effokt of the Church to put oh form. 
Effort though it was, there can be little doubt that it was most unconscious of its 
nature. The occasion, interesting from a merely historical point of view, is much 
more so from a moral point of view. Hitherto the brief and wonderful career of the 
Church had been all "spirit and life" — stem and bough and twig all concealed 
beneath flower and fruit. Suddenly, however, the rudiments of organization com- 
mence to be seen ; and it was a consequence of some of the less lovely aspects of 
human nature. These do not fail to thrust themselves into notice at a time one 
would have most desired their absence, and while they labour under the rebuke of 
many a faithful suggestion of Christian feeling and principle. Plainly up to this 
time the apostles had themselves distributed the offerings that had been laid at their 
feet (ch. iv. 35 ; comp. with oh. vL 2), availing themselves of just such help as 
might offer. Inspired apostles could not do everything. Though " murmuring " 
might not bo lovely, and very probably was not so now, yet, as they recognize some 
foundation for it, they proceed to propose a remedy (of. Bxod. xviii. 13 — 26). 

II. How IT WAS GUIDED BY APOSTLES INSPIRED. 1. They summou the whole 
body of the disciples together, and point out to them the aspects of the case. 2. They 
throw upon this body of disciples the responsibility of choosing those helpers who 
shall serve the needs of the occasion. 3. They insist on the moral, nay, more, the 
high spiritual, qualifications of these. Though they are only " to bear the vessels of 
the Lord," yet must they in high sense be " pure " and " clean ; " for they must be 
men "of good report, full of the Spirit and of wisdom." 4. By a service most 
ample, of prayer and laying on of hands, they set them apart for what might seem 
their compuratively humble and business kind of duties. Christian dignity and 
honour are set upon the work of these men, as dignity and honour belong to it, in 
the Name of the Master for whom and for whose Church it was to be done. 

III. Some suggestions of general PRmoiPLBS arising from this occasion. 1. 
Division of labour is » principle to be observed within the Church as without it. 
2. A gradation in importance of work (though not necessarily of the workman) is 
plainly imphed by the words of the apostle (ver. 2). 3. The character of Church 
organization, whatever of it there might come to be, seems plainly shadowed forth. 
It is not to be place and office and dignity for the sake of them, or for the show of 
hierarchy. The offices of the Church are not to be the filling up of an a priori con- 
stitution. They are only justifiable in the interests of the «se of the Church, and 
are to be assigned in faithful analogy with the illustrious model-principle of "the 
sabbath made for man, not man for the sabbath." 4. The possession of the S[iirit 
is the foundation-quaUfication of every order of Christian workman. Men " of goud 
report, and ... of wisdom " may be the manifest qualifications of men of business, 
whether Church business or not. But the apostles require that those who are 
" appointed over this business," ije. " to serve tables," shall be also " full of the Holy 
Ghost." 5, The discretion of the Spirit is still reserved — ^unfettered in each order 
and in each individual. For of these seven " deacons," now elected and with solemn 
service set apart, we hear no more, except of two of them ; and both of these are 
doing distinguished work, not as deacons, but as " preaching Christ," and doing " great 
wonders and miracles " (comp. vers. 8, 13 — 15, with ch. vii. and viii. 5 — 8). The 
conclusion of all may be understood to be that the truest Church will be that which 
earnestly bids for life and movement, and allows only so much form as the tide of 
life and the directing of that life may fairly require. — B. 

Ver. 7. — Convincing testimonies to the force of the new faith. " And a great 
company of the priests were obedient to the faith." The obedience of "a great 
company of tae priests to the faith " was beyond a doubt, in the nature of things, 
a commanding witness to the /orce of that faith. When that faith made its successful 
assault upon the serried ranks of such "a company," and persuaded the throwing away 
of weapons so peculiarly their own, and endeared to them by an almost inveterate 
attachment, a great victory was won. The glory and especially the moral impresslve- 
ness of victory will often be proportioned iu the directest manner, not to the strength 



OH. TL 1—15.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 20i 

only, but to the very nature of the opposing forces. Special mention is made of tho 
triumiih of the gospel over this "groat company of priests," not without good reason. 
In addition to the usual causes of the enmity of the human heart to th,3 " faith " of 
Jesus Christ, and which must in all cases be triumphed over, others were present here, 
and such as asked a strong hand to overmaster them. Notice, therefore, that " the 
obedience to the faith " of those here spoken of was — 

I. A TBItTMPH OVEB THE DIFFICULT FOE THAT GOES BY TUB KAMB OF PBEJCDIOB. 

It is very clear that, let alone any of the forms of class prejudice, prejudice itself, 
pure and simple, was at the root of a very large preponderance of the enmity 
shown to Christ and his " faith " on the part of all those who would make any 
assumption of superior knowledge or position. Settled on the lees of self, they had 
no relish for anything that tended to disturb their opinion of self. And this bred 
more of prejudice toward Christ and his truth than of anything else, while the mischief 
of prejudice answers to no name more appropriately than the name Legion. The 
assumption of knowledge, of goodness, of superiority, was the native element of the 
priest in the days of Christ's flesh and of his apostles. Against assumption of this 
kind any one or anything that dared self-assertion dared at the same time the prompt 
•ncauuter of prejudice the most unreasoning. 

XL A TBIDMPH OVEB THE JEALOUS FOB OF PROFESSIONALISM. 1. The simplicity 

alike of the life and of the doctrine of Christ would sin, from a priest's point of view, 
against his own faith in professionalism. 2. The unmistakable language of Christ, 
in reference to the overthrow or the superseding of an order of religious officers, forms, 
ceremonies, and sacrifices, would clearly sin against the same. 3. The very genius of 
the character of Christ would be felt to militate unerringly against it, however feebly 
that genius might be appreciated. 

III. A TEIUMPH OVEB THE BIQOTED AND MALIGN FOB OF PBIE8TISM. The love of 

the priest's office was one of the devoutest feelings with the true priest. As the office 
lay with an appointed class in the constitution of the Jewish people, we cannot say 
that individual preference or bent of disposition decided who should bear it. While 
no constitutional predilection determined the Jew's choice of the ecclesiastic profession, 
it makes perhaps more distinctly visible the effect of the office upon him and his 
character. And very visible for bad was this effect in the time of our Saviour, when an 
earnest and devout priest was the exception. The love and simplicity and devoutness 
of the true priest was indeed " precious in those days." And certain it is, for what- 
ever reason, that " chief priests and elders " led the opposition to Jesus, created it, and 
for the most part utterly constituted it. The same parts they sustained towards the 
apostles now from day to day. Moral blindness and moral insensitivencss are tho con- 
stant avengers of the temper. Two things go far to explain why it should be so. 1. Q'he 
confident and familiar tampering with unseen realities is one. The conventional temper 
will dogmatically pronounce upon the things which ask for the more reverent touch 
in that they are unseen and must be largely xiul<nown. 2. Its pride is to intrude into 
that most sacred domain, the domain of the innermost life of others. The saying 
might have been made for it that it "rushes in where angels would fear to tread." 
And for a bold challenge like this, no one who has at all observed the phenomena of 
man's moral nature can for a moment doubt that the recoil must be perilously 
dangerous. " Have any of the rulers or the Pharisees believed on him ? " was a question 
that came, in point of fact, from the lips of a Pharisee (John vii. 48), but for all that 
was the unwitting tell-tale of saddest and surest facts, deep down in the moral nature of 
nimself and of his most intimately related associates, the priests. And they amounted 
to self-blight's confession — the self-hlight that came of profane presumptuousness 
towards Heaven and arrogant assumption towards the spiritual life of their fellow-men, 
and that consisted of ingrained inveteracy of prejudice, infolded affections, and shrivelled 
sympathies. To throw life and a healthy beat into the hearts of such men has ever 
been beyond human resources. They have been hopeless of the hopeless, and despair 
has been most familiar with their face. The sovereign touch alone can reach their 
case. Great, then, was the victory of the faith on this occasion, for they were " priests," 
and they were " a great company of priests " over whom it prevailed. The force of 
Jesus prevails betimes over every worst form and every worst degree of evil in human 
nature, "Vihs it 4o«s not elway^ is a (^uestiop ^ whjch laan knows not the answey 



206 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. vi. 1—15, 



or at all events not the explanation of the answer. But that force did prevail now, 
and it made a great day and great joy. Greatest of all, however, was the mercy that 
sped not by, but now rested on the wing and alighted with the gift of salvation for 
this unlikeliest company. Let it be the light of hope and the encouragement of effort 
for those who work, amid the darkest, blankest, hardest material. Not less should 
this touch of history warn with most ominous suggestion all those whose native bias; 
whose solemn profession, whose self-undertaken series of duties, charge them with the 
dreadest responsibility, not in its bearing on others only, but " chiefly " and " first " 
on themselves. — B. 

Ver. 15. — The logic of heavenly Itittrt. " And all . . . saw his face as it had been 
the face of an angel." The two occasions of the mention of Stephen have already 
apprised us of an exceptional spirituality marking his character, and it cannot hut be 
that the exceptional splendour and luminousness of his countenance here spoken of aie 
more or less connected with that fact. The hour of martyrdom is drawing on apace 
for Stephen, and he is already raised to that little company which numbered in it — 
Moses in one of the most critical portions of his history (Exod. xxxiv. 29, 30 ; 2 Cor. 
iii. 7), and Jesus himself (Matt. ivlL 2 ; Luke ix. 29) on the Mount of Transfiguration. 
It is being given to Stephen to ripen into an " angel of God " even on earth. The fact 
of the distinct record of Stephen's appearance now justifies our paying even some 
additional attention to what in itself would naturally have attracted our interested 
inquiry. The interest gathers round this central inquiry — Why was such special and 
such peculiar kind of distinction vouchsafed to Stephen? "His face was as it had 
been the face of an angel." 

I. A HIQHLT SPIRITUAL FORCE OP CHARACTER MARKED HIM AS AT LEAST FIT OBJECT 

OF THIS LUSTRE. It is not Open to US to say that this was the cause in any sense, but 
much less the one cause, of the lustre with which the countenance of Stephen shone. 
But we must remark on it as showing the presence of one essential condition. In 
a biography almost as brief (omitting his defence) as that of Enoch, three things are 
reiterated, intimating to us the highly developed spirituality of Stephen. 1. He was 
" full of faith." Every true disciple of Jesus Christ must, no doubt, be " rooted in " 
faith. He must " know whom he believes." But to be "full of faith " probably 
signifies something beyond this. A man may truly have faith, and if he have it he 
will live and " walk " by it, yet may be the very man who will need to have full 
allowance made for him as respects the distinction of faith and sight. Not just so 
the man who is "full of faith." For him faith has come to be such an " evidence of 
things not seen," and such an embodied "suhstance of things hoped for," that his 
" conversation is in heaven " already, and his countenance more really fitted to shine 
<?ith celestial radiance. In fact, we may rest assured there is a great difference 
between even a very genuine possession of feith and a being "full of faith." The 
former is true of very many who are exceedingly far removed from the latter. That 
faith which scripturally and apostolically postulates the distinction of sight has in its 
fulness the r)Ower to efface the very distinction itself has made, and throws two worlds 
into one. We do not at all doubt it was so now with Stephen, who for the fulness of 
faith now lived and thought, spoke and worked, " as seeing him who is invisible " 
(Heb. xi. 27) ; and that was in itself the earnest of a radiant countenance. 2. He wiis 
" full of the Holy Ghost." It must be allowed on all hands that this fact justifies us 
much more in an affirmation of the presence now of something in the nature of a 
predisposing qualification. In the modern Church the work and the fruit of the Spirit 
is grievously underrated. Hence its weakness, hence its want of enterprise, hence its 
comparative deadness. We have ample Scripture warrant for distinguishing degrees 
in tlie Spirit's operation ; nor can we forget how, while to others according to measure 
the gifts of the Spirit are vouchsafed, of One it is said, " God giveth not the Spirit by 
measure " to him (John iii. 34). How intensely full was St. John of the Spirit, when 
as he rather puts it, " I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day" (Rev. 1. 10) I What tlie 
countenance of St. John then was we know not, nor was there one to see it and tell us ; 
but we are in no ignorance of what his rapt state of mind was, and to what the Spirit 
exalted him. It is not, therefore, the unwarranted thing to think that the Spirit's force 
in the nature of the iqan in whom he largely dwells shoidd betoken itself in physict^ 



CH. VI. 1—15.] THE Acrd OF THE APOSTLES. 207 

manifostiition. The legitimate conclusion would rather lead us to a conviction that 
restraint is self-impoMud on the Spirit, in order that his blessed manifestatiim should 
neither over[)o\ver tlio individual in whom ho largely may dwell, nor supersede moral 
attraction and moral evidence for all who stand by. How humiliating how unspeak- 
ably mournful, to think how seldom it appears true of any in these ages that they are 
" full of the Holy Ghost," or that in their case the Spirit needs to shade off any of hia 
effulgence 1 3. He abounded in zeal. The zeal of Jesus and his truth, of Jesus and 
"this life" that came through him, went far "to eat him up" (John ii. 17). Though 
Stephen was not an apostle, and though he wa> and had only just been formally elected 
aud appointed a deacon, yet he did the works of an apostle, and, if we may judge from 
appearances, did much more than the more part of them. He was first to be chosen 
deacon (ver. 5), a circumstance which marks probably not his high spiritual character 
alone, but also his repute for practical dilii^enoe. It is then distinctly testified of him 
(ver. 8) that he " did groat wonders and miracles among the people." Nor this alone. 
He itood to his jinsition, did not refuse to maintain by disputation the truth he had 
epoken, and did no hoM his own that, unscrupulous thougli his opponents were, " they 
were not able to resist tlic wisdom and the spirit by whicli he spake." This was to bo 
a thorough believer aud a thorough-going champion. Argument will often fire the 
passions and light up the countenance ; and holy argument will fire nulile i>assions and 
will make a lustre dawn upon the face. Yet still it is Uod's sovereign act to select hia 
"chosen vessel," and his surpassing mercy that fits any one to be such. 

II. The EESrONSIBILITY OF A HIGHLY CRITICAL OCCASION NOW LAY WITH STEPHEN. 

1. From our modern point nf view, interest in watoliing him now would have been 
possibly not a little increased by the thiiua;ht that we were watching the first layman 
on his trial. Tliough the thing would not have been so worded then, yet we may 
readily imagine a quickened gaze on the part at least of all the apostles, and probably 
of many others. It was gradually diwning upon the Jewish nation and the world 
that a prophet, a priest, an a|)ot>tle, was what he did; and Peter begins to be 
impressed with what leads him soon to say, " Of a truth I perceive that God is no 
respecter of persons, but . . . he that /eareM him and twor^iV/i rjj'/i<eojtsness is accepted 
with him." Neither Peter nor any of his fellow-apostles was an hereditary or trained 
priest, but they were all conscious that they were " called to be apostles." The vast 
circle of the true Christian preachers and prophets begins further still to enlarge when 
Peter and the apostles fall behind a while, and Stephen, just now a plain man and only 
most recently titled deacon, fills up the whole foreground, in an e|)isode of almost 
unsurpassed interest in the whole of the Acts of the Apostles. Since, then, Stephen 
was not " called apostle," the lustre which now lighted up his countenance was in part 
his Master's gracious and bountiful substitute. God does not forget tlie special needs 
of special occasions, and if, as is probably the case, Stephen was nut aware of his own 
appearance, there cannot be a doubt that it secured for him, from the first word of his 
opening defence, a special attention. The occasion was one of special responsibility, 
therefore, for Stephen, inasnmch as he is employed to bring into uncommon promi- 
nence, in one aspect of it, the dawning comprehensiveness of Christianity. 2. The 
number of those present, the very various description of them that they were led on to 
the attack by a very coufederacy of infuriated synagogues, the determined and excited 
tactics resorted to-of false witnesses, wresting words and statements of Stephen out of 
their connection, — all these contributed to give (1) a violence to the occasion, that asked 
lor something unusual to hold it for some moments at least in check. It was an 
occasion to which the interrogatory fits, " Why do the heathen rage, and the people 
imagine vain things?" And it meant mercy to the maddened in heart, far more than 
raspite to Stephen. Against themselves they shall hear, and if ueeds be that they 
may hear, they shall also first see. If thereafter they will still refuse, it is more than 
ever their own deed that proffered mercy turns into judgment. So ui)ou the madness 
and fury of Saul's persecuting journey to Damascus gracious check was placed by the 
directest Divine intcrfei ence. And in this case that interval of calmed time was 
sanctified to the saving of Saul, and of many others throu.^h him. Even beyond wh»t 
we very clearly read, it may be that there were peculiarities in the occasion, and in the 
excited audience that Stephen had now to address, which should explain this peculiarly 
iiracjous-^we had almost said graceful — and considerate interposition of the super- 



408 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. VL 1— IB 

natural. For certainly (2) the event proved that the occasion was, in point of fact, one 
of the most supreme sort. Most remarkable and moat fatal was the thill taken by 
"the people." It had looked as though Jerusalem would not have been in vaiti 
* oegun with in the " preaching of the gospel. It had looked as though that "great 
company of priests" who became "obedient to the faith " deoiiled the tide of victory 
and made the day one ever notable and glorious. But the prospect terribly clouds 
over, and fair hopes are dashed to the ground. This the event proves. But the 
foreseeing eye, the foreknowing great mind, heeded no*; the event, yet treats that 
oncoming decisive struggle as thouj;h there were still hope, and gives it every help, 
if haply Jerusalem may be still snatched from its self-chosen destruction. It is so 
constantly, that God, though he foreknows, still lengthens out the opportunity and the 
offer of grace and help. Behind the fact lies, doubtless, one of the great mysteries, as 
yet unapprehended, nay, untouched, by the apprehension of man. Certain it is that 
foreknowledge with us would peremptorily strip off from us alike impartial conduct 
and courage, whether for what awaited ourselves or for what awaited others. We 
should never keep a steady hand or hold on a steady way. But is Jerusalem in the 
very act of sealing her fate ? — still to the last the hand, the voice, the features of Divine 
pity and love, continue or redouble their appeal. 

III. The sealing of his faithful testimony with his life-blood was now 
IMMINENT FOK STEPHEN. And this is like the grace and free liberality of the Master. 
Has Stephen's career been very short? — yet he has run bravely the race, he has fought 
well the fight. And even before the crown above, and before the glorious witness 
there, he shall have a telling and to-be-remembered witness here also, on the very 
scene of his conflict, and in the very eyes of those whom he sought to save, but who 
sought to destroy him. Either we do often call that a miracle which needs not the 
name, or we very often fail to call that a miracle which begs the name ; for tender 
analogies to the thing wrought now for Stephen have been even frequent since and up 
to the present. When the end comes very near for the faithful, now mellowed his 
feeling and how calmed his temper and how serene his countenance 1 When the last 
hour approaches, how often does physical pain resign her hitherto implacable tyranny, 
and mental aberration subside into a resumption of childlike instead of childish 
disposition and docility of thought and feeling ! When the last moments arrive for 
thos6 who have " struggled long with sins and doubts and fears," but who nevertheleaa 
have been faithful both to work and to love, how often does the actual counti nance 
speak of the peace that reigns undisturbed within, and sights are seen and songs are 
heard which nothing but the callousness of the infidel can possibly deny or throw 
doubt upon ! This very thing was going to be so for Stephen, while he is being stoned. 
But it is anticipated by — shall we say — a brief half-hour. For his last argument he 
shall have more light within than ever before — the logic of very light, and in his last 
gazing ar. I vnapaw.x»d "joVl turned on the gainsaying people bis fece shall reflect the 

Vers. 1, 2. — The call for ordar tn S;s Cliurch. It arose out of the Tcry fact of 
increase. The association of people together demands organization and order. A few 
persons may have such an interest in each other and such a knowledge of each other 
as will enai le them to dwell together in peace without formal rules, and this is 
abundantly illustrated from family life ; but large aggregations of people, mostly 
unknown to each other, that are based only on some common sentiment on a particular 
subject, must be set under rule and order ; society, as distinct from the family, requires 
organization and government. The first occasion of difficulty arose out of the party 
spirit, and out of the jealousy some felt on account of others getting undue advantages. 
These two verses suggest two subjects for consideration. 

I. Thb call fob okueb as made by the people. Sooner or later, society, clubs, 
and nations find out that order is necessary to secure both. the general and the 
individual well-being, comfort, and success in life. Illustrate by the consequences of 
civil commotion, class conflicts, or society jealousies. The same is true within Christ's 
Church. Offences will come. Jealousies and envies do arise. But Church members 
soon cry out for the order and rule which alone can ensure peace, growth, or prosperity. 
tivery inan who joini * commmiit^ has to le^rn that lie must give up his independence 



CM. vt 1—15.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 209 

to some extent, and fit into the order if he is to enjoy the benefits of the communion. 
As against the ambitious and aggressive man, and as against the man who overpi'esses 
his individuality, the Cliuroh, as a whole, calls for order. And in view of the practical 
difficulties that arise when numbers meet, or vvorsliip, or dwell together, orderly arrange- 
ment, and even a central and acknowledged authority, are demanded. It may be 
shown that order need never unduly repress life, and that exactly the order which men 
ask for, in Church and in state, is that which will efficiently repress all forms of 
evil, biit leave the freest possible room aud scope for the due and useful expression of 
individual character and individual gifts. 

II. The call fob obdeb as made by the Chubch leaders. The difBcuUy that 
arose was viewed by the apostles from quite a different side. They felt the increasing 
jiressure of the claims which the enlarging Church made upon their interest, their care, 
and their toil. And they further felt that the work demanded , was both beyond their 
pciwer tu compass, and unsuited to their apostolic mission ; nay, to concern themselves 
with formal things of money and provisions and daily meals was to imperil that very 
spiritual life and cultme on which the due fulfilment of their true mission depended. 
So they called for order in the anangement of the work demanded, and such order would 
at^once meet their need, giving them due relief, and meet the people's need, assuring 
that each class received due attention. It is interesting to note that the apostles con- 
sulted the Church in their scheme for the removal of the difficulty, and it has been 
found wise, both in the Church and in the state, to adopt methods by which the people 
can be made to share in the responsibility of keeping order, and the dignity and impulse 
of a conscious self-government can be assured. 

Impress that both theoretically and practically the Church still needs order and 
government. But these must be secured on two conditions. 1. That order shall never 
crush, only guide, the expressions of life. 2. That order shall secure efiBciency, comfort, 
and peace for all who come within its rules. The Church has in each age known peril 
in two directions. (1) Eesistance to all organization in the supposed interests of the 
individual life. (2) Over-organization giving no room for the natural and healthy 
expressions of life. — B. T. 

Ver. 3. — The true fitness for Church offices. Much interest properly attaches to the 
first instance of election to Church ofiSce, and according to educa.tional or ecclesiastical 
bias prominence is given to one or other of the leading features narrated. It may be 
going too far to assert that here is given an absolute model of all Church elections. 
The details of Church management may well be left to the guidance of Christian 
wisdom and prudence, and need not be made matters of faith. The apostles acted 
upon their best judgment in the difficult circumstances that arose, but in later times 
we find that their experience led them to adopt other modes in filling Church offices. 
In this case the multitude exercise the right of selection, and the apostles retain the 
right of ratifying the choice. The democratical element prevailed, but from the first 
it was put under wise limitations and restraints. " So long as the Christian spirit 
continued to display itself vigorously in the Church, the public voice might well be 
consulted ; but when this spirit afterwards disappeared, it would have been ruinous to 
the Church if the plurality of voices had been allowed to decide. A glance at the 
rudeness of the masses in the Middle Ages may convince us of the necessity of their 
being guided by those above them " (Olshausen). We turn from the controversial 
aspect of the subject to observe what the apostles regarded as constituting true fitiiess 
for any place of service in Christ's Church. Here we may find principles that will be 
of permanent application and interest. 

1. Personal chabactbr. The men selected must be of "honest report;" " good 
report ; " " good repute ; " held in general esteem ; attested ; well reported ot Their 
private character must be such as to win confidence and respect. Their integrity must 
be unquestioned. The importance of personal character may be urged in view of the 
trusts that would be committed to them — trusts of money, trusts of impartial dealing, 
trusts oi just decisions in cases of difficulty, etc. Christian officials must be beyond 
suspicion of interested motives, unfaithfulness, or time-serving. Guarantee of fair an 1 
luiuourable dealing is found in established aud acknowludgud iuiej;rity. Tl.i- it, ,-; ,1 
the first requirement for all who would serve Christ ia ike lesser aud uiaierial, as weU 

ACIB. y 



210 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1—15, 

as in the higher and spiritual, oEBces of the Church. In public esteem they must !)• 
blameless. 

II. Active piett. The persons selected are to be " full of the Holy Ghost/' or " full 
of the Spirit." The Church, to be enabled to judge who had such a baptism, must 
observe some things which were recognized signs of a fulness of the Divine indwelling 
and sealing. They would be two : 1. A high fervour of religious feeling, seen in 
rapidly developed Christian experience, advanced Christian knowledge, and unusual 
prayerfulness. 2. Active and energetic and self-denying labours for the welfare of 
the fellow-Christians and for the spread of the gospel. Men of the self-indulgent type 
are mischievous in Church offices ; men of the retiring and monastic type are unfitted 
for Church offices ; men of characteristic energy and business activity, if these ar» 
combined with warmth and fervour of devotion, are the men " full of the Holy Ghost/ 
who still may nobly serve the Church and the Master. 

III. Practical fitness. The persons selected are also to be " full of wisdoca ; " i.e 
of practical sagacity an'l skill for the management of the particular work to which 
they are called. The Church must seek fitness. Bach man must be set in his right 
place and given his right work. Each can serve best in the sphere for which natural 
disposition and Divine endowment have fitted him. Such men have always been 
provided in the Church, but they usually need to be sought out. The best men are 
very seldom found forward to press themselves into office, but when their fitness ia 
made' plain to others, and leads to their selection and appointment, it is no t^u« 
humility on their part to refuse the service. Impress that counted worthy to ierve ia 
the Christi-aa's supreme honour. — E. T. 

Ver. 4. — The work of the ministry. In no age of the Church has it been more 
necessary than it is in this to exalt the ministry of the Church, to secure its freedom 
fiom secular cares, and to culture its spiritual life and efficiency. Thousands o/ 
Cliristian clergy long to be able to say the words ofour text, and hopelessly repeat aftei 
l)j-. Chalmers, "I am bustled out of my spirituality." We may help to a better under- 
btanding of the work of the ministry if we consider — 

I. Its private and preparatory features. " Give ourselves continually to 
prayer." The term " prayer," as here used, is a comprehensive one, and includes all 
tliat belongs to private piety and soul-culture, the nourishing of the Christian vitality, 
and enriching of the personal spiritual stores of thought, feeling, and truth. Ministers 
know, by a constant experience, how immediately their pleasure and their power in 
their work depend on their personal spiritual conditions. The soul must be full of God 
that is to speak well for God ; and Christian congregations should take it upon them, 
as a burden of duty, to free their pastors from care, both in his family and in the tem- 
poral matters of the Church, so that he may " give himself unto prayer." Prayer may 
here be taken to include : 1. Self-culture — the full mastery of a man's own disposition 
and habits. 2. Mental culture — a sufficient training of the intellectual powers to ensure 
full and wise teaching of the people. 3. Scri}iture-culture — adequate acquaintance with 
the actual contents of God's revealed Word, and quickness of spiritual insight into its 
deeper meanings, suggestions, and mysteries. 4. Soul-culture — that kind of sym- 
pathetic, persuasive force which seems to bring God near to man, in us, and man near 
to God, through us ; the kind of power that only comes to us through " prayer and 
fasting." These things are the absolute essentials of true and successful ministerial 
Work to-day. The men of prayer are the men of power. 

II. Its public and official features. " The ministry of the Word," or the service 
of the revealed Word. This may be set in two forms. 1. The minietry of the Scriptures ; 
not merely in their contents, but in their ajiplications, their examples, warnings, 
counsels, comfortings, etc. " Our ministers are the teachers of a Book, and each has more 
than a lifetime full of labour if he sets his heart upon declaring the whole revealed 
covmsel of God." 2. The ministry of the Christ, as the very essence of the Scriptures, 
In this bringing out the special redemptive features of the Divine relation, and claiming 
personal surrender to, personal obedience to, and personal homage to, the risen, glorified, 
and reigning Lord. " The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." It may be 
further pressed that : (1) The Word, or message of salvation, needs a human ministry ; 
** bjr the foolishness of preaching God would save them that bclievo." (2) That it 



en. T3. 1— i5,j THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 2H 

also needs the entire devotion of men's time and talents and influence. K apostles 
needed to step aside from common cares to keep their efBcienoy for spiritual work, much 
more do the modern clergy in this busy and anxious age. It should seriously be 
considered how far the modern ministry has become weakened, especially in spiritual 
power and pvophet-like energy, by becoming crowded with worldly cares, so that 
private soul-culture is neglected and prayer-preparations are crowded out. Only from 
the " secret place of the Most High " can Christian teachers come forth in power. 
" While they are musing the fire burns ; " and then they can " speak with their 
tongues."— E. T. 

Vers. 5—8. — Stephen, the proto-martyr. Very little is known of his history. And, 
except for the sake of introducing Saul of Tarsus, and indicating the iniluonoe that 
Stephen's teachings and martyrdom exerted upon him, it is difficult for us to trace 
why the brief record of his work and death are preserved for us by St. Luke. We 
judge that he was a Hellenist, by his name ; but it is not known from what country he 
came. He is represented by Epiphanius as one of the seventy disciples chosen by 
Christ. Others think that he was one of St. Peter's converts on the day of Pentecost. 
Dr. Dykes fixes on the point most demanding our attention when he says, " The 
elevation of Stephen to official rank had this for one of its results, that the spiritual 
and intellectual gifts with which God had endowed this man found at once a wider 
and more public sphere. Stephen was more than an almoner. Ho was a deep student 
of the Old Testament, a theologian of unusual insight, a powerful reasoner and an 
advanced Christian. In him, too, we find that promise fulfilloil which had hitherto 
been fulfilled to Peter, the promise of such wisdom in speech as no adversary could 
gainsay. His manner of speech, however, was unlike that of Peter. Peter was a 
witness, and preached by witness-bearing. Stephen was a student, and preached by 
exposition and controversy." We dwell on the mission of Stephen as suggested by 
the terms of the above passages. 

I. He was a man oS' faith. It is twice noticed that he was " full of faith " — an 
expression which may be taken to meau : 1. That he was unusually open and receptive 
to the Christian truth and grace ; for some manuscripts read, " full of grace." 2. Or 
that he was unusually zealous and active in proclaiming Christ. Faith is sometimes 
the equivalent of piety, sometimes of activity. The man of faith is, from one point uf 
view, the man of piety ; from another point of view he is the man of activity, who 
readily overcomes hindrances, and, relying on Divine help, goes on in his work, con- 
sieorating himself wholly to it. Faith is too often thought of as a cherished sentiment ; 
it is for Christians the inspiration of practical life and duty. They should be earnest 
in service, and find the earnestness maintained by their trust. Faith evidently kept 
very near to Stephen the vision of the exalted and living Christ. 

IL Stephen as a man of powee. This was shown in (1) the influence of his 
personal character ; (2) in his indomitable energy and perseverance ; (3) in his stores 
of scriptural knowledge ; (4) in his intellectual gifts ; (5) in his unanswerable argu- 
ments ; (6) in his ability to add miraculous attestations. Men could not resist the 
"wisdom and the Spirit by which he spake." 

III. Stephen as a man moved by the Holt Ghost. Not simply endowed with 
intellectual gifts, but under special constrainings of tlie Holy Ghost; called to a special 
work, and suitably enriched and inspired for that work. Where there is a full conse- 
cration of heart, and an entire openness of life, there the Holy Spirit will come, making 
the man his agent, and assuring to his labours full success. 

IV. Stephen as a man before his time. Only gradually did the true relations 
between Judaism and Christianity dawn upon the apostles. But Stephen saw them, 
and boldly announced them, putting them on men's thoughts, if he might not win for 
them a present acceptance. Perhaps, as a Hellenist, he had not so great prejudices to 
overcome as had the Palestinian Jews. Stephen paid the penalty which usually comes 
to those whose thoughts and teachings are in advance of their age. His enemies were 
quite right. From their point of view he was a most dangerous man — no one of the 
Christian band was so dangerous. But he was one of the noblest of men. He is a 
subUme example. His brief life is an abiding witness. B«iiig dead, he speaks with a 
martyr's voice, bidding us do noble things for Christ, and trust hiu to give us strength 
for the doing.— B. T. 



212 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. vt 1—16 

Ver. 6. — The laying on of hands. This is the first mention of the custom in connec- 
liou with the Christian community. It does not appear that our Lord set apart hii 
aijostlea to their work by any formal ceremony. A little while before his passion he 
" breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Iloly Ghost." The imposition of hands 
was an instance of carrying over and adapting a Jewish custom. " It had an analogous 
meaning in the ritual of Israel (Numb, ixvii. 23) in acts of blessing (Gen. ilviii. 13, 
14) and the transmission of functions." It appears to have been used in the Jewish 
schools on the admission of a scribe to his office as a teacher. " Its primary symbolism 
would seem to be that of the concentration for the moment of all the spiritual energy 
of prayer upon him on whom men lay their hands ; and so of the bestowal of any office 
for which spiritual gifts are required." For other Scripture references, see ch. xiii. 3 ; 
1 Tim. V. 22 ; Heb. vi. 2. " The origin of this rite is to be looked for in patriarchal 
times, when it seems to have been a form simply of solemn benediction, is in Gen. 
xlviii. 14. In the New Testament we find the laying on of hands used by our Lord 
both in blessing and in healing ; and again he promises to his disciples that they too 
should lay hands on the sick and they should recover. At the time when the Epistle 
to the Hebrews was written, the doctrine of the ' laying on of hands ' was one of the 
elements of Christian teaching " (' Diet, of Christian Antiquities ; ' see art. " Impo- 
siiion of Hands" for the ceremonies in which the Christian Church has adapted the 
c ustom). This is an illustration of the importance of preserving valued ancient practices. 
U cannot be said that we have any Divine commands in regard to the laying on of 
l)ands, but the Church has found the practice to be significant and useful. It may bs 
regarded as — 

I. A SIGN OF SELECTION. Por some reason the individual is singled out. For some 
particular office he is chosen. The selection is made by the whole Church. It is repre- 
sented by the act of imposition done by one person, or by several, in the Church's 
name. The public nature of the act gets the individual forth prominently before the 
whole Church as the selected one. 

il. A SIGN OF UNITED coNFiDENOB. This is more fully indicated in the form of impo- 
sition practised by what are known as the Free Churches. At their ordination services 
the laying on of bauds is done by the assembled presbyters, each laying a single hand 
on the head of the selected one, and the custom is mainly valued as an expression of 
mutual confidence in the Divine call of the selected one, and in his spiritual fitness for 
tlie office which ho is about to undertake. It becomes an important part of an ordi- 
nation service as a comforting assurance given to the candidate for office ; and with this 
simple meaning of the rite some of the Free Churches are satisfied. 

III. As A SIGN OF COMMUNICATION. " It was Connected with other acts that presup- 
posed the communication of a spiritual gift. Through well-nigh all changes of polity 
and dogma and ritnal, it has kept its place with Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, 
among the unchanging witnesses of the Church's universality and permanence." 
llaokett takes it as "a symbol of the impartation of the gifts and graces which they 
(the deacons) needed to qualify them for the office." Olshausen says, "The idea 
embraced in the laying on of hands was really just this, that by means of it there was 
iffccteda communication of the Spirit from the individual consecrating to the one 
ordained." Two questions need treatment. 1. Was the imposition an actual imparta- 
tion of Divine gilts or the Divine Spirit ? or was it only the outward symbol or sign of 
a Divine impartation which was beyond man's control? 2. If there was apostolic power 
to communicate the gift or the Spirit, have we sufficient ground for assuming that the 
power is retained by the teachers of the Church whom we regard as the successors of 
the apostles? Decision on and treatment of these questions must depend on our 
ecclesiastical bias. No earnest Christian need fail to realize the spiritual value and 
suggestiveness of this custom. It may, no doubt, be made to serve purely ritual pur- 
poses ; but it may also bo an important and useful Church ordinance, when it is 
observed on due consideration, and with suitable solemnity and prayer. — R, T. 

Vers. 10, 11. — 2%e weaknesi of persecutors. Attention is drawn to the fact, which 
has received frequent illustration through the martyr-ages, that men only resort to 
persecuting tactics when they become conscious of their moral helplessness and theo- 
Epical inefficiency. The persecutor is like the swearer. No man ever needs to <urse 



if his word is known to be truthful. No man ever needs to persecute if he has the right 
on his side, and faith in those moral forces which ever uphold the right. As the line 
of thought is directly based on the incident as narrated in the verses, a brief outline will 
suffice. We find these advocates of strict Judaism — 

L DErEATBD nr argument. (Ver. 10.) Observe that, in Stephen, there was not 
merely controversial skill, adequate knowledge, and a good theme ; there was a spiritual 
power which made him irresistible. Perhaps nothing rouses anger more readily than 
defeat in discussion. Pew men can retain self-control at such times. And the perma- 
nent value of religious public disputations may be very seriously questioned. Happily 
the tone of religious controversy in our times is greatly improved. 

II. Appealing to physical fokcb. Always a sign of weakness. Sadly illustrated 
in Calvin and Servetus, and similar cases of condescending to use the power of the 
magistrate in purely intellectual and moral disputes. Properly, the public magistrate 
has only to do with the breaking of the social order, but it has always been found easy 
to fashion charges cognizable by the magistrate when the real purpose has been to 
silence a triumphant intellectual or religious foe. Truth-lovers never need ask aid from 
the world's coarse government weapons. Magna est Veritas, et prevahbit. 

III. Making alliance with liars. Suborning bad men and prompting false wit- 
nesses. So did the prejudiced Sanhedrim in dealing with our Lord. Honourable men 
descending to the lowest depths to carry out their malicious schemes. Their spirit and 
conduct are fully shown up by the company they keep. Loyalty to the right and to 
Qod cannot endure fellowship with false witnesses. 

IV. Teustino to popular excitement. " They stirred up the people.'' The fickle- 
ness of the populace is proverbial. Their susceptibility to excitement makes them the 
easy tool of the demagogue. And Jewish crowds were remarkable for their sudden 
impulses. Theudas and Judas and Barchocheba played their purposes on this tightly 
strung string. When Stephen's enemies had no fair charge to urge s^ainst him before 
the courts, their only hope of accomplishment for their malicious purposes lay in the 
violence of a popular uprising. Their utter weakness and their shameful badness are 
revealed in their schemes. Seeming to succeed, they really failed more utterly than 
with their arguments. They could kill the body, but what more could they do ? They 
could not fly after the winged words which, like seeds, had found their lodgment in the 
minds and hearts of Barnabas and Saul, and would surely spring up and bear blossom 
and fruitage to" the dismay of all Stephen's enemies. Let the persecutor do his weak 
and foolish work, for " the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church." — B. T. 

Ver. 15. — The angel-face on man. Something of a proverbial character rests on the 
expression, " Saw his face as it had been the face of an angel " (comp. Esth. t. 2, 
Septuagiut). Some think that this description " may be traced to the impression made 
at the time on St. Paul and reported by him to St. Luke." There was " calm dignity," 
but there was something more and better; there was the vision of Christ as present 
with him, and the radiant face was the response he made to the vision. Compare the 
skin of Moses' face shining, and the glory of the Saviour on the Mount of Transfigura- 
tion. "The face of Stephen was already illumined with the radiancy of the new 
Jerusalem." " The words describe the glory that brightened the features of Stephen, 
supported as he was by the consciousness of the Divine favour." Illustrate the truly 
wonderful power of varied expression which is found in the human face. It responds 
at once to the moods of the spirit, changing suddenly at changing moods, and gaining 
fixity of form and feature according to the settled character and habit of the mind. 
What a man is can be read from his face. How true this was of Stephen may bo 
shown by dwelling on the following points: — 

I. The change in Stephen's face was the sign or chekished feeling. It tells 
us the tone and mood of his mind — what he was thinking about, and what he was 
feeling. Tteveals to us the man of God and man of -faith and man of prayer, who 
lived in communion of spirit with the glorified Saviour. Lines of care come into faces 
of worldly Christians. Heart-peace, rest in God, absorbing loTe to Christ, make smile- 
play over the face. "Asa man thinketh in his heart, so is he," and so is he in express 
Bion of countenance. And the pleasant, the angel, face makes holy witness for Christ 
before men, winning them to the love of him who thus can glorify his saints. 



214 



The AdTs OP the apostles. 



[cb, vii. l-*t3Q 



II. The ciiANaE in Stephen's face indicated sui'ekioeity to his SDUKouiJDiNGs. 
Describe them, and show how reasonably we might have looked for alarm and fear. 
Well Stephen knew that all this wild rage and tumult and false witnessing meant 
his death. But there is no quailing. It might have been a day of joy and triumph, to 
judge by Stephen's face. Compare St. Paul's words, " None of these things move me, 
neither c«unt I my life dear unto myself." Outwardly a man may be tossed, tempted, 
tried, imperilled, tortured, but inwardly he may be kept in perfect peace, having his 
mind stayed on God. Such mastery of circumstance is just as truly the great Christian 
triumph now, though our circumstances are rattier those of perplexity and pressure 
than of peril to life and property. Overcoming the world, as StejAen did, we too may 
win and wear the " angel-face." 

III. The chanob in Stephen's face was a response to the conscious nearness of 
Jesus. Of this we have intimation in ch. vii. 56, but we are apt to rcard Storihen's 
exclamation as indicating a sudden and passing vision. It is much more probable that 
it kept with him all through the vnld and exciting scene. Wlien they set liini before 
the council, the " angel-face " was there, and the vision of the Christ was in his soul. 
While he spoke his defence, the Lord stood by him and strengthened him ; and when the 
stones flow about him and struck him down, the vision kept in his soul ; the blinded eyes 
saw it, and it never passed until it became the enrapturing and eternal reality — his bliss 
for evermore to be with Jesus. The light on Stephen's face was the smile that recog- 
nized the best of Friends, who was so graciously fulfilling his promise, and being with his 
suffering people always. That smile told on the persecuting Sanhedrim. They would 
not forget it or ever get the vision out of tlieir minds. It would secretly convict, if it 
did not openly win. Can there be still, and now, in our milder spheres, the angel-face 
on man — on us? And if so, then on what things must the winning and the wearing 
of that angel-face depend ? — B. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER VII. 



Ver. 1. — And the lihjh priest taid for (hen 
said the high priest, A.V. The liigh priest 
spoke as president of the Sanhedrim (see ch. 
ix. 1 and Matt. xxvi. 62). Thoopliilus the 
son oi Annas or his brothcT Jonathan is 
probably meant. 

Ver. 2. — Brethren and fathers for men, 
brethren, aiiA fathers, 'A.V. Saran for 
Charran, A.V. Brethrei and fathers. The 
Greek is &iiSpfs aSf\<po\ (i.e. " men who are 
also my brethren") koI Trarepej. He adds 
"and fathers" out of respect to the elder 
and more dignified portion of the Sanhedrim. 
It secma probable that Stephen, as a Hel- 
lenist Jew, spoke in Greek,' which is borne 
out by the quotations being from the LXX. 
(see Alford), though Meyer and others 
think he spoke in Hebrew. Greek was 
generally understood at this time by all 
educated persons (see Roberts, ' Discussions 
I m Gospels,' ch. ii. — vii.). The speech itself 
is almost universally admitted to boar strong 
internal marks of genuineness and origin- 
ality. But diU'erent estimates have been 
formed of its excellence, and different ex- 
[ilnnations given of its scope and object. 
" Difficult but sti;iking; " "long and prolix;" 
' ,it first sight absurd and out of place;" 

ivoaderful but difficult;" *'of inestimable 



value;" "a speech containing many things 
wliicli don't seem much to the point;" "a 
powerful speech; " a speech combining "the 
address of the advocate and the boldness of 
the martyr;" — are some of the estimates 
that liave been formed of it by modern com- 
mentators. As regards its scope and object, 
the two main clues to it are the accusatins 
which Stephen rose to rebut, and the appli- 
cation with which he ended in vers. 51 — 53. 
If we keep those two things steadily in 
view, we shall not be very far wrong if we 
sny that Stephen sought to clear himself by 
showing, (1) by his historical summary, what 
a true and thorough Israelite he was in 
heart and feeling and fellowsliip with the 
fatliers of his race, and therefore how un- 
likely to speak blasphemous words against 
eitlier Moses op the temple; (2) how Moses 
himself had foretold tlie coming of Christ as 
a prophet like himself, to enunciate some 
new doctrines ; (3) how at every stage of their 
history their fathers had resisted those who 
were sent to them by God, and that now 
his judges were playing the same part. 
Perhaps it may bo further true, as Ohrysos- 
tom explains it (Horn, xv., xvi., xvii.), that 
his intention in tlie early part of the speech 
was to show "that the promise was made 
before the place, before circumcision, before 
sacrifice, before the temple," in accordanc« 



ctt. Vn. 1— CO.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



21S 



with St. Tanl's argumetit (Gal. Hi. 16—18); 
and that therefore the blessings of the 
Abralianiic covenant could not be dependent 
upon the Law or the temple. The God of 
glory. This unusual phrase identifies God, 
of whom Stephen speaks, with the God whose 
visible glory was seen by the patriarchs 
(Gen. xii. 7; xviii. 1; xxvi. 2; xxviii. 12, 
13 ; XXXV. 9 ; Exod. xxiv. 16, 17 ; Numb, 
xvl. 19 ; Isa. vi. ; John xii. 41). St. Paul 
uses a similar phrase, " The Lord of glory" 
(1 Cor. ii. 8). Our father. He thus identi- 
fies himself with his judges, whom he had 
just called "brethren." In Mesopotamia, 
which would be in Hebrew " Aram of the 
two rivers." The exact place, as we learn 
from Gen. xi. 31, was " Ur of the Ghaldees ; " 
whence the Israelites were taught to say 
(Deui xxvi. 5), " An Aramean ready to 
perish was my father." That this appear- 
ance was in Ur, before he dwelt in Haran, 
is manifest from Gen. xi. 31, because it is 
there said that they went forth from Ur 
"to go into the land of Canaan," which 
makes It quite certain that the appearance 
of God to Abraham had preceded their 
leaving Ur, and was the cause of it. And 
this is confirmed by Gen. xv. 7 ; Neh. ix. 7 ; 
and T:flephu8 ('Ant,'i. vii, 1). Moreoverj 
ihe very language of the call shows plainly 
th^l it camo to him when he was living in 
hib native country, among his kindred, and 
in his father's house, i.e. at Ur, not in Haran, 
where they were only sojourners. There is 
nothing the least unusual, in Hebrew nar- 
rative, in the writer going back to any point 
in the preceding narrative with which the 
subsequent narrative is connected. Gen. 
xii. 1 precedes in point of time Gen. xi. 31 ; 
similar examples a;re Gen. xxxvii. 5, 6; 
Judg. XX., passim; I Sara. xvi. 21 compared 
with 1 Sam. xvii. 2S ; 1 Sam. xxii. 20, 21, 
compared with 1 Sam. xxiii. 6; and many 
more. It is, however, of course possible 
that a fresh call may have been given after 
Terah's death, though it is by no means 
necessary to suppose it. Another imaginary 
difficulty arises fiom the statement in Gen. 
xii. 4 that Abraham was seventy-five years 
old when he departed from Haran, that 
Terah lived seventy years and begat Abram, 
Nahor, and Haran, and that Terah died at 
the age of two hundred and five ; and from 
the statement in ver. 4 of this chapter that 
Abram did not leave Haran till Terah's 
death. From which it is concluded that 
Terah must have lived sixty years after 
Abram's departure (70 + 75 -|- 60 = 205). 
But the whole difficulty arises from the 
gratuitous supposition that Abram was 
Terah's firstborn because he is named first. 
If 'I'erah were a hundred anil thirty at the 
birth of Abram, he would be two hundred 
and five when Abram was seventy-five. 



Now, there is absolutely nothing to forbid 
the supposition that such was his age. It 
does not follow that because Abram is named 
first he was the eldest. He might be named 
first as being by far the most illustrious of 
the three. He might be named first because 
the subsequent genealogies — Isaac, Jacob, 
and the twelve Patriarchs — were deduced 
from him. There may, too, have been other 
sonsof Terah, not uamedherebecausenothing 
was going to be said about them. Nahor is 
mentioned because Bebekah was his grand- 
daughter (Gen. xxiv. 15, 24) and Rachel 
his great-granddaughter. And Haran is 
mentioned because he was the father of 
Lot. Others, whether sons or daugl iters, 
would not be mentioned. If Terah, there- 
fore, began to have children when he waa 
seventy, it is quite probable that Abram 
may not have been born till he was a hun- 
dred and thirty. That the son named first 
need not necessarily be the eldest is clear 
from the order in which Shem, Ham, and 
Japheth are named, whereas it appears from 
Gen. ix. 24 that Ham was the youngest, 
and from Gen. x. 2, 21 (acording to the A. V. 
and the LXX., Symmaohus, the Targum of 
Onkelos, and the old Jewish oommentatorsX 
that Japheth was the eldest. In Josh, 
xxiv. 4 God says, " I gave unto Isaac Jacob 
and Esau," though Esau was the elder ; and 
80 Heb. xi. 20. So again in Exod. v. 20 we 
read, "Moses and Aaron" (see also Exod. 
xl. 31 ; Numb. xvi. 43 ; Josh. xxiv. 5 ; 1 
Sam. xii. 6; etc.), though it appears fiom 
1 Chron. vi. 3 that Aaron was the eldest. 
So again we read in Gen. xlviii. 5, " Thy 
two sons, Bphraim and Manasseh," and in 
ver. 20, "God make thee as Ephraim and as 
Manasseh," though in ver. 1 of the same 
chapter they are named according to the 
true order of birth — " Manasseh and 
Ephraim." It is, therefore, an unwarrantable 
Inference that Abram was the eldest son 
because he is named first; and with the 
removal of this inference the difficulty 
vanishes; and Stephen was quite accurate 
when he said that God appeared to Abra- 
ham in Ur, before he dwelt in Haran, and 
that he did not move from Haran till the 
death of Terah. Haran. Gharran in A.V. 
marks the difierence between Haran (pn), 
Lot's father, and the name of the place (Iin). 
It is called « the city of Nahor " (Gen. xxiv. 
10_ compared with Gen. xlvii. 43). It still 
exists as an Arab village, with the name of 
Harr^n (see ' Dictionary of Bible '). 

Ver. 3.— Thy land for thy country, A.V. 

Ver. 4.— Haran for Gharran, A.V. ; God 
removed for he removed, A.V. The land of 
the Chaldaaans. In Gen. xi. 28 Ur is called 
" Ur of the Chaldees." When his father 
was dead (see note to ver. 2> God removed. 



216 



TfiE ACTS OP TfiE APOSTLES. 



tea. vti. 1— ea 



That God Is the subject appenrs from the 
following verbs, "he gave," "he promised." 
The verb fierdKurfv, he removed, is the tech- 
nical word for planting a colony. 'Wherein, 
etc. (cii 5)1/) ; into which ye came and dwelt, 
Ver. 5. — And for yet, A.V. ; in for for a, 
A.V. He gave him none inheritance, etc. 
(comp. Heb. xi. 8, 9). 

Yer. 6. — In a strange land ; a land belong- 
ing to some one else (Heb. xi, 9, yrj hWorpla, 
as here); a land in which he had none inheri- 
tance, not yet become the possession of his 
seed ; for as the writer to the Hebrews says, 
l.e dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob; not 
applicable, therefore, in the first instance 
to Egypt at all. And this sojourning as 
Btrangers and pilgrims lasted altogether 
four hundred and thirty years, viz. two 
hundred and fifteen years in Canaan, and 
two hundred and fifteen in Egypt; which 
agrees exactly with St. Paul's reckoning iu 
round numbers of four hundred years from 
the giving of the promise to Abraham to 
the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai (Qal. 
iii. 17). The "four hundred years" must 
not be taken in connection with the " bond, 
nge" and the ill treatmunt which charac- 
terized the last half of the period, but as 
B]ioken of the whole period during which 
tliey had not possession of the promised 
land. Bring them into bondage. So tlie 
l.XX. ; but the Hebrew, as rendered in 
the A. v., has " and they shall serve them." 
Ijut some (see Gesenius, *Thcs.') render the 
Hebrew as the LXX. do. ronr hundred 
years. This is a round number, as in Gen. 
XV. 13, The exact time, as given iu Exod. 
xii. 40, 41, was four hundred and thirty 
years. 

Ver. 7. — Which for whom, A.V. And 
serve me iu this place. These words are not 
ill Gen. xv., from which the preceding words 
are quoted. Instead of koI Karpeiaov(7i 
fiol iv Tiji tcJttw Toir^, the LXX., following 
the Hebrew, have fxerh. airoa-KeiTjs ttoW^s, 
" with great substance." The words " serve 
me in this place," seem certainly to have 
been suggested by Exod. iii. 12, " Ye shall 
serve God upon this mountain j " but they 
give a perfectly correct account of what 
happened in this case. 

yer. 8. — Jacob the twelve for Jacob begat 
the twelve, A.Y. He gave him the covenant 
of oiroumoision, subsequently to the gift of 
the land by promise. The argument sug- 
gested is apparently the same as St Paul's 
in Eom. iv. 10 — 17. 

Ver. 9. — Moved with Jealousy against 
Joseph, sold him, for moved with e«»« told 
Joseph, A. v., more correctly, and in ac- 
cordance with Gen. xxxvii. 11, LXX.; and 
for bui, A.V. Moved with jealousy, etc. 
Here breaks out that part of Stephen's 
argument which went to «how how the 



Israelites had always ill-used their greatest 
benefactors, and resisted the leaders sent t» 
them by God. 

Ver. 10.— Before for in the sight of, A.V. 
And delivered him, eto. And even so had 
he delivered his servant Jesus from the 
grave, and raised him to eternal life. 

Ver. 11. — Famine for dearth, A.V. ; Egypt 
f(ir the land of Egypt, A.V. and T.K. ; Canaan 
for Chanaan, A.V. 

Ver. 12. — Sent forth for »en« out, A.V. ; 
the first time for first, A.Y. 

Ver. 13. — Bace became manifest for Ttiiulred 
was made Inuywn, A.V. "Kindred" is a 
much better word here, because Joseph's 
"race" was already known to Pharaoh 
(Gen. xli. 12) ; " was made known " is a Car 
better phrase than " became manifest." 

Ver. 14. — And Joseph sent for then sent 
Joseph, A.V. ; called to him Jacob his father 
for culled his father Jacob to him, A.V. 
Three score and fifteen souls. In Gen. xlvi. 
2G, 27, the statement is very precise that 
" all the souls of the house of Jacob, which 
camo -into Egypt, were three score and ten," 
including Joseph and his two sons. More- 
over, the accuracy of the number is tested 
in two ways. First, the names of the sons 
and daughters of each patriarch are given, 
and they are found, on counting them, to 
amount to exactly seventy. And then the 
totals of the descendants of each of Jacob's 
four wives is given separately, and again 
the total is exactly seventy (33 -f- 16 -(- 14 -f 
7 = 70). It is true that the computation in 
ver. 26 does not agree with the above, for it 
makes the number of Jacob's descendants, 
exclusive of Joseph and his two sons, sixty- 
aix instead of sixty-seven, whicli is the 
number according to the two above compu- 
tations, and consequently the total number 
(when Joseph and his two sons are added) 
sixty-nine instead of seventy. But this is 
such a manifest contradiction that it stems 
almost a necessity to suppose a clerical 
error, m for j(3», caused perhaps by the 
preceding wf'd. It is also a singular 
anomaly that, in the enumeration of Leah'i 
descendants, as well as in the genera 
enumeration, Er and Ouan are distinctlj 
reckoned as well as mentioned. Jacob him- 
self is nowhere reckoned in the Bible, thougl, 
he is in the commentaries. But when W( 
turn to the LXX., we find that in Gen. xl\ i 
20 there are added to Manasseh and Bphrairo 
Machir the son and Gilead the grandson 
of Manasseh ; and Suthelah and 'Taam the 
sons, and Edom (meaning Eran, LXX. Eden, 
Numb. xxvi. 36) the grandson, of Epliraini, 
making the dcscendiints of Bachel eighteen 
(it should be nineteen if Huppim, Gen. xlvi 
21, is added) instead of fourteen ; the numbct 
sixty-six of ver. 26 is preserved ; the num- 
ber of Joseph's descendants is given ae nine 



m. ^w. 1—66.3 



TtiE AdM Of THE APOSTLES. 



21? 



(Huppim apparently being now reckoned), 
■which, ailderi to eixty-six, makes sovc'nt^ - 
five; and accordingly in ver. 27 the TyXX. 
read ^vxa\ effiofi-qKovTmrhTe (" seventy-five 
souls "), instead of " three score and ten." 
But except in the addition of these five 
names of Joseph's grand and great-grand- 
children, the LXX. support the Hebjew 
text, even in the strange sixty-eix of ver. 26. 
Stephen, as a Hellenist, naturally follows 
the LXX. But the question arisuo — How are 
we to understand the lists? Gen. xlvi. 8 
says, " Tiiese lire the numrs of the children 
of Israel, which came into Egypt ; " and one 
naturally expects to find the names only of 
those -who are described in vers. 5 — 7 as the 
nii<i;ratory party from Canaan to Egypt. 
This expectation is somewhat disturbed by 
Er and Onan being included In the enume- 
ration. This m ly, however, be accounted for 
by Pharez and Zerah being reckoned as 
their seed. But is it likely that Hczrou 
and Ilamul the sons of Pharez, and the 
ether great-grandsons of Jacob, were born 
bel'oro the desfint into Egypt ? The answer 
to this is that, as Jacob was a hundred 
and thirty years old when he came down to 
Ksjypt (Gen. xlvii. 28), there is no impro- 
biibility in his having great-grandchildren 
(iillowing forty years for a generation) ; on 
tlie contrary, every likelihood that he should. 
But on the other hand, as Joseph could not 
have been above fifty when Jacob came 
down to Egypt (30 -|- U -t- X.), Gen. xli. 46, 
29, 30, it does not seem likely or possible 
that Joseph should have had grown-up 
grandsons and a great-grandson, as the LXX. 
make him huve. Indeed, to all appearance 
Manasseh and Ephraim were unmarried 
young men at the time that Jacob blest'Cd 
them (Gen. ilviii. 11, 16; 1. 23). Tliere- 
fore we may conclude certainly that the 
additional numbers of the LXX. are incor- 
rect, if understood literally, of those who 
came down with Jacob from Canaan to 
Egypt. But there is nothing improbable in 
Benjamin having ten children. Judah, to 
whom grandchildren are attributed, was 
Jacob's fourth son, and might be forty or 
fifty years older than Joseph and Benjamin. 
Asber, to whom also graiidsonsare attributed, 
was the eighth son, and might be twenty 
years older than Joseph and Benjamin. 
Still, considering that Er and Onan are 
reckoned among those who came down to 
Egypt, it would not be surprising to find 
that some of those mentioned in the list 
were born after Jacob's arrival, but included 
on some principle which we do not under- 
stand. In other words, a literal interpreta- 
tion of the statement of the Hebrew Bible 
involve! no impossibilities, but a literal 
interpretation of tlte statement of the LXX. 
does. 



Ver. 15. — And for so, A.V. ; he died, him- 
telf for died, he, A.V. 

Ver. 16. — And they were for and were, 
A.V. ! unto Shechem for into Syehem, A.V., i.e. 
the Hebrew for the Greek form of the name 
(Gen. xxxiv. 2) ; ttmib for sepulchre, A.V. ; 
a price in silver for a sum of money, A.V. ; 
Eamor for Emor, A.V. (Hebrew for Greek 
form) ; in Slieehem for the fatlier of Syehem, 
A.V. and T.E. As regards the statement 
in the text, two distinct transactions seem 
at first sight to be mixed up. One, that 
Abraham bought the field of Maohpelah of 
Ephron the Hittite for a burial-place, where' 
he and Sarah, and Isaac and Bebekah, and 
Jacob and Leah, were buried (Gen. xxiv. 
16, 17, 19; XXV. 9, 10; xxxv. 27—29; xlix. 
29 — 31); the other, that Jacob "bought a 
parcel of a field, ... at the hand of the chil- 
dren of Hamor, Shechem's father, for an hun- 
dred pieces of money," where the bones of 
Joseph were buried by Joshua (JJen. xxxiii. 
19 ; 1. 25 ; Josh. xxiv. 32), and where, ac- 
cording to a tradition still surviving in the 
days of St. Jerome, the other patriarchs 
were also buried (' Epistol.' 86, " She came to 
Sicheni, now called Neapolis (or Nablous), 
and from thence visited the tombs of the 
twelve patriarchs "). See also Jerome, ' De 
Optimo Genere Interpretandi.' " All Jewish 
writers, however, are wholly silent " about 
this tradition, perahps from jealousy of the 
Samaritans (Lightfoot, vol. viii. p. 423). 
And Josephus affirms that all but Joseph 
were buried at Hebron ('Ant. Jud.,' ii. 
viii. 2); and that their beautiful marble 
monuments were to be seen at Hebron in 
his day. In the cave of Maohpelah, however, 
there is no tomb T)f any of the twelve patri- 
archs except Joseph ; and his so-called tomb 
is of a different character and situation from 
the genuine ones (Stanley's 'Lectures on 
Jewish Church,' 1st series, pp. 498 — 500. 
Si e also 'Sermons in the East': 'The 
M' sque of Hebron '). But on looking closer 
at the text it appears pretty certain that only 
Shechem was in Stephen's mind. For first 
he speaks of Shechem at once. And were 
carried over unto Shechem. And adds and 
were laid in the tomb that Abraham bought 
for a price in silver of the sons of Hamor in 
Shechem. Except the one word "Abraham," 
the whole sentence points to Shechem. 
What he says of Shechem is exactly in 
accordance vpith Gen. xxxiii. 18, 19. And 
what he says of their fathers being carried 
over and buried at Shechem is exactly true 
of Joseph's bones, as related in Josh, xxiv 
32. So that the one diflSculty is the wora 
" Abrahum." It seems much more probable 
that this word should have been interpolated 
by some early transcriber, who saw no nomi- 
native case to avifaaTo, and who had in his 
mind a confused recollection of Abraham'i 



213 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[cH. tn. 1—60. 



purchase, than that Stephen, who shows 
such thorough knowledge of the Bible 
history, should have made a gross mistake 
in such a well-known and famous circum- 
stance as the purchase of the field of Maoh- 
pelah, or that Ijuke should have perpetuated 
it had he made it in the hurry of speech. 
It cannot be affirmed with certainty that 
Stephen confirms the story of the other 
patriarchs being buried at Shecliem, though 
possibly he alludes to the tradition. The 
plural, " they were carried," etc., might be 
put generally, though only Joseph was meant 
(as Matt, xxvii. 44 ; xxvi. 8 compared with 
Luke xxiii. 39 ; John xii. 4), or " the bones 
of Joseph " might possibly be the subject, 
though not expressed. Lightfoot — followed 
>by Bishop Wordsworth, who thinks that 
Abraham really did buy a field of Bphron 
in Sychem, when he was there (Gen. xii. 6) — 
would thus be right in supposing that the 
point of Stephen's remark was that the 
patriarchs were buried in Shechem. 

Ver. 17. — A» for when, A.V. ; vouchsafed 
unto for had sworn to, A.V. and T.K. Vouch- 
safed ; Siio\oye7v, in the sense of " to promise," 
as in Matt, xiv. 7, and not unfrequently in 
Greek writers, for d/xvieiv, to swear. 

Ver. 18. — Over Egypt, B.T. ; there arose 
another king for another hing arose, A.V. 

Ver. 19. — Miice for Mndred, A.V., as in 
ver. 13 ; that they should cast out for so 
that they cast out, A.V. ; babes for young 
aiildren, A.V. ' 

Ver. 20. — At which season for in which 
time, A.V. ; he was nourished three months 
in his father's house for nourished up in his 
father's house three months, A.V. Exceeding 
fair (acTTeios t(Jj 0£^). In Exod. ii. 2 it is 
simply asTelos, " a goodly child," A.V,, and 
so in Heb.xi. 23, rendered "a goodly child," 
" a proper, child," A.V. Josophus (' Ant. 
Jud.,' ii. ix. 5, 7) describes Pharaoh's daugh- 
ter as captivated by the size and beauty of 
the child, and as speaking of him to Pharaoh 
as of Divine beauty. And Justin (quoted 
by Whitby) says that the beauty of his 
person was greatly in his favour. 

Ver. 22. — Instriicted for learned, A.V. ; he 
was mighty for was mighty, A. V. ; in his 
words and works for in words and in deeds, 
A.V. and T.B. The statement of Moses 
being instructed in all the wisdom of the 
Egyptians, though not found in Exodus, 
was doubtless true. Josephus makes Ther- 
mentis speak of him as " of a noble under- 
standing ; " and says that he was " brought 
up with much care and diligence." And 
Philo.in his life of Moses(quoted by Whitby), 
says he was sldlled in music, geometry, 
arithmetic, and hieroglyphics, and the whole 
circle of arts and sciences. 

Ver. 23.— Well-nigh for full, A.V. When 
be was precisely forty yearg old (Meyer). 



The exact meaning sccm.s to be " when he 
was in the act of completing forty years," 
The account in Exod. ii. 11 only sayg, " When 
Moses was grown " (jiiyas y4p6fievos, LXX,) ; 
the age of forty years, and the number of 
years, forty, that he sojourned in Midian, as 
given below, ver. 30, are traditional. " There 
are that say that Moses was forty years in 
Pharaoh's palace, forty years in Midian, and 
forty years in the wilderness'' (Tauchum, in 
Exod. ii.). " Moses was forty years in 1 ha- 
raoh's court, and forty years in Midian, and 
forty years he served Israel" (Beresli. Eabb.), 
both quoted by Lightfoot ('Comment, anci 
Exercitations upim the Acts'). The sum 
total of the thr.^e poinds of forty years is 
given as the length of Moses' life, viz. a 
hundred and twenty years (Deut. xxxiv. 7). 

Ver. 24. — Smiting for and smote, A. V. 

Ver. 25. — And he supposed that his brethren 
understood for for he supposed that his bre- 
thren would have understood, A.V. ; was giving 
them deliverance for would deliver them, A.V , 

Ver. 26, — The day following for the next 
day, A.V. ; he appeared for he showed him- 
self, A.V. 

Ver. 28.—Wouldest for wilt, A.V. ; killedst 
for diddest, A.V. 

Ver. 29. — And Moses fled for then fled 
Moses, A.V. ; became a sojourner for was a 
stranger, A.V. ; Midian for Madian, A.V. 

Ver. 30. — Fulfilled for expired, A.V. ; 
an angel appeared for iliere appeared . . , 
an angel, A.V. ; an angd for an angel of the 
Lord, A.V. and T.B. ; Sinai for Siiia, A.V. 

Ver. 31 . — And when for when, A.V. ; behold 
for behold it, A.V. ; there came u, voice of 
the Lord for the voice of the Lord came unto 
him, A.V. There came a voice. The A.V. 
is surely right. The Lord has only one 
voice ; and (panii Kupiov is that voice. The 
grammatical effect of Kupiov upon (pan/ii is to 
make it definite, as in &yyeAas Kupiov (see 
oh. V. 19, note). 

Ver. 32. — Saying, A.V., is omitted ; of 
Isafic and of Jacob for the God of Isaac arid 
the Ood of Jacob, A.V. and T.B. ; and for 
then, A.V. 

Ver. 33. — And the Lord said unto him for 
then said the Lord to him, A.V. ; loose the 
shoes for put off thy shoes, A.V. Loose the 
shoes, etc. In Exod. iii. 5 it is Kia-ai . . . 
4k Tmv TToSZv aou. lamblichus, quoted by 
Meyer, refers the Pythagorean precept, 
" Sacrifice and worship with thy shoes off," 
to an Egyptian custom. The custom of 
Orientals to take off their sandals on enter- 
ing mosques or other sacred places, ai 
existing to the present day, is noticed by 
many travellers (see a Iso Josh. v. 15). 

Ver 34. — I have surely seen (literally, tee- 
ing I have seen — the well-known Hebrew 
idiom for emphatic affirmation) for I hart 
seen,l have «ee», A.V. ; have heard for Ihavi 



<Sfi. Vn. 1—66.] 



THE ACTS OF THK APOSTLES. 



219 



heard, A-V. ; and I am for avd nm, A.V., 
the change is in accordance with the A.V. 
of Exod. iii. 7, 8. 

Ver. 35. — Him hath God sent for the same 
did God tend, A.V. ; both a ruler for a 
ruler, A.V. and T.K. ; with the hand for 
by the hand, A.V. and T.E. (a-bv for ei/), 
but giving no clear sense in English. The 
meaning Beems to be that Moses was to rule 
and save with tlie strength given him by 
the angel. But it is ranch simpler to take 
4y xtipl as equivalent to the common Hebrew 
phrase T3, meaning instrumentality, " by 
means of," " through," and to join It with 
" did send." The angel who spake to Moses 
in the bash in the Name of God was God's 
instrument in sending Moses. When an 
angel gives a message from God, the words 
are always given as spoken by God him- 
self (see e.g. Josh. ii. 1 — 3). In this verse 
Stephen, having with great oratorical skill 
entranced their attention by his recital of 
God's marvellous revelation of himself to 
Moses, now takes them off their guard, and 
shows how their fathers treated Moses j ust 
as they had treated Jesus Christ ; and how 
God in the case of Moses had chosen and 
magnified the very man whom they had 
scornful'y rejected; ju.st as now he had 
exaltfid Jesus Christ to be a Prince and a 
Saviour, whom they had crucified. 

Ver. 30. — This man for he, A.V. ; led 
them foHh for brought them out, A.V. ; having 
wronghl fi/r after that he had showed, A.V. ; 
Egypt for the land of Egypt, A.V. and T.K. 

Ver. 37. — God for the Lord your God, A.V. 
and T.R. ; from among for of, A.V. The K.T. 
omits the words him shaU ye hear, which 
follow in Deut. xviii. 15, and seem to bo 
referred to in Matt. xvii. 5 (aurou aKjuo-eirffE' 
ctuToS d(cou€T6). The addition of the words 
adds much to the point of Stephen's applica- 
tion (see above, ch. iil. 22). 

Ver. 38.— Sinai for Sina, A.V. (Hebrew 
for Greek form) ; living oracles for the lively 
oracles, A.V. In the chnrch, St. Stephen 
probably used the word iKKXtiiria without 
any reference to its special meaning, " the 
Church." It is used in a secular sense in ch. 
xix. 32, 39, and of the congregation of Israel 
in the LXX. of 1 Chron. xiii. 2 ; 1 Maco. 
ii. 56; Eoclus. xliv. 15 ; and elsewhere. In 
Stephen's time it could hardly have become 
widely known as the designation of the flock 
of Christ. On the whole, the marginal 
rendering, " the congregation," seems best, 
but with the idea attached that it was the 
Lord's congregation. The angel which spake. 
It may be doubted whether the phrase, " the 
angel which spake to liim in the mount 
Sinai," refers to the angel spoken of in ver. 
30, or to the angel by whose mouth God 
spake the words of the ten commandments 
j)n Mount Sinai, as recorded in Exod. xx. 



1 — 17; Dcut. y. 1 — 22. Chrysostom and 
most comuientators seem to understand it of 
the angel who gave the Law ; but Whitby, 
not without reason, thinks tlje reference is 
to the burning bush. Living oracles. In 
like manner, St. Paul calls the Holy 
Scriptures "the oracles of God " (Rum. iii. 2), 
and in Heb. v. 12 we read again of " the first 
principles of the oracles of God," and St. 
Peter says, " Let him spoak as the oracles of 
God" (1 Pet. iv. 11). For the force of the 
living or lively oracles, see 1 Pet. i. 2S, 25. 
Stephen magnifies Moses by reminding his 
hearers how he had received the Law from 
God to give to the people. 

Ver. 39. — Obedient for obey, A.V. ; turned 
baclc in tlieir hearts unto Egypt for in their 
hearts turned back again into Egypt, A.V. 
Our fathers wonld not he obedient, though 
God had bestowed such signal marks of 
favour upon them. Turned back in their 
hearts. A striking instance of theii- rejec- 
tion of God's chiefest mercies, 

Ver. 40. — Wliich shall go for to go, A.V. ; 
led us forth for brought us, A.V. 

Ver. 41. — Brought a sacrifice for offered 
sacrifice, A.V. (see Exod. xxxii. G, with 
which the A.V. agrees best; ; hands for oloh 
hands, A.V. ' 

Ver. 42. — But for then, A.V. ; to serve 
for to worship, A.V. ; did ye offer unto me 
slain beasts and sacrifices forty years in the 
wilderness, house of Israel f for (.* ye house 
of Israel, have ye offered, etc., by the space of 
forty years in the wilderness 1 A.V. The 
passage which follows is nearly verbatim et 
literatim the LXX. of Amos v. '. ."i, 27, exci pt 
the well-known substitution of " li:ibylou " 
for " Damascus " in Amos. This, ;Lt\ ording 
to Lightfoot, with whom most conmicntators 
agree, was in accordance with a very 
common practice of readers in the schools 
and pulpits of the Jews, to adapt and ac- 
commodate a text to their own immediate 
purpose, keeping, however, to historical 
truth. Here Stephen points to the Baby- 
lonish Captivity as the punisliment of the 
sins of their fathers, thus warning them of 
more terrible judgments to follow their 
rejection of Christ. 

Ver. 43.— ^nd for yea, A.V. ; the god 
Eephan for your god Bemphan, A.V. and 
T.E. ; the figures iot figures, A. \ . The god 
Bephan. Eephan, or Eaiphan, or Romphan, 
as it is variously written, is the LXX. trans- 
lation of the Hebrew Ghiun in Amos v. 2G. 
The best explanation of this is that Eephan 
is the Coptic name of the planet Saturn, well- 
known of course to the LXX., and that Chi uu 
is the Hebrew and Arabic name of the same 
star, which they therefore translated by 
Eephan. With regard to the difficulty 
which has been felt by many that there is 
BO mention of any such worship of Molocb 



m 



*afi ACTS Ot I'tife At-OsiiLJiS. 



toti. Vit 1—85. 



and Chinn in the wilderness, and that 
sacrifices were continually offered to the 
Lord, it seems to arise from an entire mis- 
conception of the passage in Amos. What 
Amos means to say is that because of the 
treacherous, unfaithful heart of Isruel, as 
shown in the worship of the goldi.n calf 
and all tijeir rebfllions in the wilderness, 
all their sacrifloes were worthless. Just as 
he had said in v. 22, "Though ye offer 
me burnt offerings lind your meat offerings, 
I will not accept tliem : neither will I regard 
the peace offerings of your fat beasts ; " "I 
hate, I despise your feast days ; " " Take 
away from me the noise of thy songs ; for 
I will not hear the melody of thy viols " 
(Amos Y. 21, 23): just as Isaiah also says, 
" To what purpose is the multitude of your 
sncrifices unto me? . . . I am full of the burnt 
offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts 
. . . Bring no more vain oblations ; ... it is 
iniquity, even tlie solemn meeting " (Isa. i. 
11 — 13, etc.) ; and again, " He that killeth 
an ox is as if he slew a man ; he that 
saorificeth a lamb, as if he cut off a dog's 
neck ; he tliat offereth an oblation, as if he 
oft'ered swine's blood " (Isa. Ixvi. 3) : so all 
the eacrihces offered up during forty years 
in the wilderness were no eacrifiees at all, 
and their hypocrisy was clearly seen' when 
they reached the land of Canaan, and, 
according to Moses' prophetic declaration, 
" forsook God which made them . . . and 
saciiiiced unto devils, not to God; to gods 
whom they knew not " (Deut. xxxii. 15 — 
18), such as Chiun and Moloch, Baalim 
and Ashtoreth. This later idolatry was 
tlie fruit and the judicial punishment of 
tlieir first declension and apostasy in the 
wilderness, and led to the Captivity in 
Babylon. It was on seeing their unfaith- 
fulness in the wilderness tliat " God turned 
and gave them up to serve the host of 
heaven." 

Ver. 44. — The testimony for witness, A.V. ; 
even as he appointed who spake for as he liad 
appointed, speaking, A.\. ; figure for /ashion,_ 
A.V. Chrysostom calls attention to the 
mention of tho wilderness, as showing tliat 
God's presence and service were not confined 
tu Jerusalem. 

Ver. 45. — In their turn for that come after, 
(5ia5€{a/tevoi), A.V. ; Joshua (the Hebrew form) 
for Jesus (the Greek form of the name), A.V. ; 
when they entered on the possession of the 
iiidions fur into the possession of the Oentiles, 
A.V. ; whioh God thrust for whom Ood draoe, 
A.V. In their turn; more literally, having 
received it in succession. It only occurs heio 
in the New Testament. Meyer quotes 4 
Maco. Iv. 15, " On the death of t^eleucus, his 
BOH Antiochus received the kingilom in suo- 
' >si.in ;" and classical writers. When they 
„-td, etc. There are three ways of con- 



struing the words iv rji Karairxtafi rap 
iBv&v — (1) as the A.V., taking iv in the sense 
of eis, and making the phrase synonymous 
with the.landof Canaan, the land whioh the 
Gentiles then possessed; (2) in (their) 
taking possession (of the land) of ike Oentiles, 
i.e. when they took, taking KariaXfirts in a 
transitive sense, whioh seems to ba the 
sense of the R.V. ; (3) with Meyer, duririg 
the holding or possession by the Gentiles of the 
land,th at, viz. , into which their fathers brought 
the tabernacle. The first seems the most 
simple and in accordance with the Greek 
of t)ie New Testament, and with what 
follows of the expulsion of the nations before 
the Israelites. 

Ver. 46. — In the sight of for before, A.V. 
Qvciiriov) ; asked for desired, A.V. ; habitation 
for tabernacle, A.V. (/rKiiva/ia), Habitation. 
In Ueut. xxxiii. 18 a-Kivana stands in the 
LXX. for h:^^, and in 2 Pet. 1. 13, v. 14, for 
the human body as the tabernacle or 
temporary dwelling of the soul or spirit. 
And the idea of a temporary or movable 
dwelling seems to suit Stephen's argument 
better than that of a fixed one. The niua'D 
of Pa. cxxxii. 5 (to which perhaps, as well as 
2 Sam. vii. 1 — 6, Stephen refers) is equally 
applicable to a tent. 

Ver. 47. — A home for an house, A.V. The 
oT/cos (the house) of ver. 47, whioli Solomon 
built, scorns to be almost in contrast with 
the ffKiipafia (tlie tabernacle). 

Ver. 48. — Houses (in italics) for tenples, 
A.V. and T.E. The word vao7s (here, I ut not 
in ch. xvii. 24) is omitted in the B.T. In Isa. 
xvi. 12, LXX. (quoted by Meyer), xEipoiro'lTa 
(plural) is used without a substantive for the 
"sanctuary" (eJiipo) of Moab. For the 
sentiment that the infinite God, Creator of 
heaven and earth, cannot be contained in a 
house built by the hands of men, see also 
2 Chron. vi. IS, as well as the passages 
above quoted. Stephen justifies himself 
from the charge of having spoken blasphe- 
mous words against the temple by citing 
Isa. Ixvi. 1. 

Ver. 49. — Hie heaven for heaven, A.V. ; 
(?ie earth the footstool of my feet for earth is 
my footstool, A.V. ; what maniier of house 
for what house, A.V. 

Ver. 50. —Did not my hand make for hath 
not my hand made, A.V. 

Ver. 51. — Stiffnecked ; hard of neck, in- 
flexible. The word a-KK-riporpdxri^os only 
occurs hero in the New Testament. But it 
answers in tlie LXX. tu tlie Hebrew c]^jj-nB'p 
(hard of neck); sec Exod. xxxiii. 3, 5, and 
elsewhere. In applying tliis expression to 
his hearers, Stephen was using the identical 
language of Moses when he conveyed God's 
rebuke to them. Considering that they 
professed to be standing on Mress' aid* 



OH. vn. 1— 60.J 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



121 



against Stephen, this must have made hia 
words doubly cutting to them. Unoiroum- 
oised in heart ; &irepiT/«jTos only occurs here 
in the New Testament, but it is found in 2 
Maco. i. 51; ii. 46; andintheLXX. of Exod. 
xii. 48 ; Judg. xiv. 3 ; 1 Sam. xvii. 26, and 
elsewhere for the Hebrew 'ryp. The word, 
in its application to his Jewish audience, 
contains a whole volume of rebuke. They 
prideil tliemselves on their circumcision, 
they trusted in it as a sure ground of favour 
iu the sight of God; but all the while they 
were on a level with the heathen whom they 
despised, and were to be reckoned among 
the unoircumcised whom they loathed. For 
tliey were without the true circumcision, 
that of the heart. Here again Stephen was 
teaching in the exact spirit and even words 
of Moses and the prophets. See Lev. xxvi. 
41 ; Deut. x. 16 (where Stephen's two re- 
proaches occur together) ; Jer. ix. 26 ; Ezek. 
xliv. 7 ; and many other passages. Compare 
the teaching of St. Paul (Eom. ii. 28, 29 ; 
Phil. iii. 2, 3 ; Col. ii. 11 ; and elsewhere). 

Ver. 52. — IHd not . . . persecute for hare 
not . . . persecuted, A.V. ; Idlled for baoe 
tlain, A.V. ; righteoua for just, A.V. ; ham 
now iecome for have been now, A.V. ; betrayert 
for the letrayen, A.V. The close resemblance 
of Stephen's words to those of our Lord 
recorded in Luke xiii. S3, 34; Matt. v. 12 ; 
xxiii. 30, 31, 34—37, lend some support to 
the tradition that he was one of the seventy, 
and had heard the Lord speak them. But 
the resemblance may have arisen from the 
Spirit by which he spake, " the Spirit of 
Christ which was in" him. 

Ver: 53. — Ye who received for who have 
received, A.V. ; as it was ordained by angels 
lot by the disposition of^ angels, A.V. ;_ kept it 
not for have not kept it, A.V. Ordained by 
angels. This phrase, thus differently 
rendered (els Siarayas aYyiKwv), is one of 
extreme difficulty : SioToyi) means properly 
"appointment," or "ordinance," as in Kom. 
xiii. 2 ; and eis, which has a great variety of 
uses in the Greek of the New Testament, 
means " at," or " upon," or "on the occasion 
of," as Mntt. xii. 41, " At the preaching of 
Jonah." So here they received the Law 
-at" or "on the occasion of," the "order- 
ing" or " appointing " of angels. When the 
angels, who were commissioned by God and 
«poke in his Name, gave the Law, the 
Israelites so received it. The A.V., "by 
the disposition of angels," very nearly ex- 
presses the true sense. Another sense of els 
— "in view of" — comes to nearly the same 
thing. St. Paul speaks of the part taken 
by the angels in the giving of the Law, and 
in language strikingly resembling the text. 
He says of it, that it was " ordained through 
['by,' A.V.] angels." God ordained or 
appomted the Law, but th« angels were the 



instruments or ministers of its promulga- 
tion. And it is also distinctly referred to in 
Deut. xxxiii. 2, where the LXX. read, " On 
his right hand the angels were with him." 
In the foregoing verses theap[)lication which 
Stephen had all through been contemplating 
is hurled with aocumiiluted force at the 
consciences of his hearers, and cuts them 
to the heart, but does not bring them to 
repentance. 

Ver. 54. — Now when for when, A.V. They 
were cut to the heart (see oh. v. 33 and 
notes). 

Ver. 55. — looked up stedfastly (arevlaas) ; 
see ch. vi. 15 ; iii. 4, and note. The glory of 
God; i.e. the visible glory which surrounds 
and proclaims God's near presence (see Exod. 
xxiv. 10, 16, 17 ; I»a. vi. 1—3 ; Ezek. i. 28 ; 
Kev. xxi. 14, 23, etc.). Jesus standing. 
Sitting at the right hand of God is the usual 
attitude ascribed to our Lord in token of his 
victorious rest, and waiting for the day of 
judgment. Here he is seen standing, as 
rising to welcome his faithful martyr, and 
to place on his head the crown of life (Rev. 
ii. 10). Whether Stephen saw these glorious 
things in the flesh or out of the flesh he 
probably knew not himself. 

Ver. 56. — ^The Bon of man. Out Lord** 
usual designation of himself (see Matt, 
vlii. 10; xxvi. 64 ; etc. ; and also Dan. vii 
13), but nowhere but here spoken of Jesus 
by any other.* 

Ver. 51.— But for then, A.V. ; rushed for 
ran, A.V. (jipnitaav). 

Ver. 58. — They cast for cos/, A.V. ; garments 
for clothes, A.V. ; the feet of a young nan for 
a young man's feet, A.V. ; named Saul for 
whose name was Saul, A.V. They oast. 
We have here the identical phrase of Luke 
iv. 29. The witnesses. According to Deut. 
xvii. 7, " tlje hands of the witnesses were to 
be first upon " the idolater " to put him to 
death." They took off their clothes, their 
outer garments, so as to be free to hurl tiie 
stones at their victim with greater force. 
The feet of a young man. The word yeaylas 
is found only here and in ch. xx. 9 ; xxiii. 1", 
18, 22 ; and frequently in the LXX. for the 
Hebrew 1]J 3. A man might be called a veayias 
probably totheage of thirty. Tliisappearanoe 
of Saul upon the stage of St. Luke's narrative 
is an element which will soon change the 
whole current of the narrative, and <livert it 
from Jerusalem to the whole earth. Nothing 
can be more striking than this introduction 
of the young man Saul to our view as an 
accomplice (albeit " ignorantly in unbelief") 
in the martyrdom of Stephen. Who that 
stood there und saw him keeping the clothes 
of the witnesses would have imagined that 

• Eev. i. 13 is scaroely an exoeption. 



tza 



THE ACl-S OF THE APUSTLBS. 



[cH. VII, 1—60, 



he would become the foremost apostle of the 
faith which he sought to destroy from vff the 
face of the earth ? 

Ver. 59.— The Lord (in italics) for Ood 
(in italics), A.V. The A.V. is certainly not 
justified by the context, because the words 
which follow, " Lord Jesus," show to whom 
the invocation was made, even to him whom 
he saw standing at the right hand of God. 
At the same time, the request, Beceive my 
spirit, was a striking aokuowledgment of 
the divinity of Christ. Only he who gave 
the spirit could receive it back again, and 
keep it safe unto the resurrection. Compare 
"Father, into thy hands I commend my 
spirit" (t.uke xxiii. 46). 

Ver. 60.— Cried with a loud Toice. Com- 



pare again Luke xxiii. 46, and with 
Stephen's prayer. Lord, lay not this sin to their 
charge, compare Luke xxiii. 34. He fell 
asleep. Blessed rest after life's toilsome day I 
Blessed contrast with the tumult of passion 
and violence which brouglit him down to 
the gravel How near, too. In his dying 
was that likeness to his Lord advanced, 
which shall be perfected at his appearing 
(1 John iii. 1)1 "Blessed are the deed 
which die in the Lord, . . . that they may 
rest from their labours, and their worka do 
follow them." St. Augustine (' Sermons in 
Pesto Sti. Stephani ; ' Conybeare and How- 
son, vol. i. p. 82) attributes Saul's conversion 
to the prayer of Stephen : ■' Si Stephanus 
non orasset, Ecclesia Faulum non habeiet." 



HOMILBTICS. 

Vera. 1 — 60. — TOc first martyrdom. When we look at the Lord Jesng as our 
Exemplar, though we are conscious that all his excellences of life and character were 
strictly human, and within the range of those human faculties which we possess in 
common with our Lord, yet are we also conscious that the transcendent perfection 
of his human life is what we can never reach. Our Lord's goodness was the goodness 
of man, and yet it is a goodness that we never can attain to. Where his feet stood 
firm, our feet will slip. Where his love triumphed, ours breaks down. Where his 
will moved on undaunted in obedience to his Father's will, ours faints and halts and 
stumbles to its fall. The temptations that he crushed, crush us ; where his spirit was 
clear as sunlight, ours is clouded and mixed. Where he soars in glory, we are heavy 
with sleep ; and where he wrestles in an agony of prayer, we fall asleep for sorrow. His 
courage, his faith, liis humility, his meekness, his constancy, his patience, his firmness, 
his love. Ills zeal, his self-consecration to God, his loving obedience, his transparent 
truth and purity, — we see them, we look upon them with adoring wonder, but when 
we try to imitate them, it is like trying to climb up to the stars ; dt) what we will they 
are at an immeasurable distance above us, inaccessible and unapproachable.] It is, 
therefore, a great help and encouragement to us that, besides the infinite perfection of 
Christ's human nature, we have other examples of saintly men set before us in the 
Word of God, which we may hope to follow more closely, treading even in their very 
steps. The apostle, the evangelist, the martyr, the holy woman, the faithful disciijlo, 
all stand out before us on the pages of Scripture, and we ask ourselves why should 
not we be like them, seeing we have the same Holy Spirit which dwelt in them to 
sanctify us also. The chapter before us invites us to study the character of a true 
martyr, as exemplified in St. Stephen. The model martyr thus is — 

L A WISE MAN AND ONE OF GOOD KEPORT. Not an empty fanatic catching up every 
folly that is started, and carried away by every blast of doctrine ; but a man of solid 
and approved wisdom, discerning things that differ, holding fast that which is good, 
and rejecting the pernicious error though it be the fashion of the day ; one whose 
steady and quiet walk in the paths of godliness has earned him a good report among 
his neighbours. He is well spoken of because he does good quietly, and seeks not the 
praise of men. He is of good rei}ort because he is never hurried into ill-advised action 
undei the influences of temper or self-will, or the contagion of example, or any corrupt 
or selfish motive, but is known constantly to do the thing that is right. 

II. He IB ALSO A MAN OF HiQU sriuiTUAL ATTAINMENT. He is not Only wise and 
npright in all his dealings with men, has not only wisdom and discretion in the 
afiifiirB of this life, but, being filled with the Holy Spirit of God, he has all spiritual 
wisdom likewise. His enlightened reason and his elevated affections soar above the 
world, and are deeply engaged in the things of God and the affairs of the kingdom ol 
ChrihU He Uvea a liiiB oElaith in the Son of God, who loved him and gave himseK foi 
him. 



CH.vu. 1— 60.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 223 

III. His martyr's spirit dobs not allow h-im to lead a life of ease and indo- 
lence. He is ready at the call of the Church to undertake any office or work, however 
burdensome or responsible, for the good of the whole body and the comfort of the 
brethren. He does not seek dignity, or emolument, or the praise of men, as the price 
of his labour, but simply gives himself as Christ's servant to work for Christ and for 
Christ's people. Impartial, fair, equal, and kind in his administration, he soothes 
irritation, allays jealousy, and promotes peace and love. 

IV. His spirit kindles with his work. Being placed on a higher platform, he sees 
more of the spiritual wants of men around him. Having received higher gifts, he looks 
for wider opportunities of exercising them. Every soul won to Christ is as fuel to the 
tlame of his love. Every victory over Satan stirs him up to war more resolutely as 
a good soldier of Jesus Christ. Failures do not daunt him, and success cheers him on. 
Nothing seems impossible with Christ on his sihe. Everything must be attempted 
which may snatch the prey from the destroyer and enlarge the kingdom of light. 

V. But soon the rising opposition of the adversaries of Christ bars his onward 
PROGRESS. The wisdom of the world crosses swords with the wisdom of the spirit. 
Formalism, Pharisaism, priestcraft, superstition, self-righteousness, self-importance, 
ignorance, oombinfe to resist the gracious teaching which would strip men of selfishness 
to clothe them with Christ. At first it is argument against argument and reasoning 
against reasoning. But when the sword of the Spirit begins to cut through the shield 
of carnal disputation, and the sword of the worldly logic becomes blunted against the 
martyr's shield, and the Word of truth becomes too strong for the lying lips to answer, 
then begins a new form of contest. The defeated disputant throws aside his reasonings 
and his cavillings, and takes up the weapons of force and fraud. Prison and rack, fire 
and faggot, the wild beast and the sword, shall answer the arguments which were too 
strong for the reasoner. And how then will the martyr act? Will he be silenced and 
dismayed, or will he stand to his truth and die? He gathers u|) his courage, he looks 
up to God, he confronts his accusers, he lifts up his calm voice, and his speech is as the 
sono of the dying swan. For — 

Vi. In that hour of danger and trial his clear and untrottblbd memory 
gathers up the testimonies to the truth op his doctrine which are scattered 
on the pages of Holy Scripture. Has he preached Jesus Christ whom they denied ? 
Did not their fathers deny Moses their lawgiver and deliverer from Egypt ? Had he 
said that the majestic presence of the living God was not confined to the walls of 
temples made with hands ? Did not Isaiah say the same ? Had he denounced the 
vanity of sacrifices and offerings when offered by uncircumcised hearts and unclean 
hands ? Had not their prophets done so likewise ? He could not retract what he had 
spoken according to the oracles of God. He had spoken the truth, and by the truth he 
•would stand. But were they there to judge him f Nay, but he would judge them. 
They had, indeed, received the Law, but they had broken it. The Holy Ghost had 
spoken to them, but they had resisted him. God's Christ had come to save them, 
and they had betrayed and crucified him. Let them fill up the measure of their 
fathei's ; he was ready to receive death at their hands. 

VIL And then comes the cLosmo scene. The faith as firm as a rock with the 
waves dashing upon it ; the vision of invisible glories swallowing up all things in its 
brightness ; the rapturous confession of Jesus Christ ; the calm committal of hia 
spirit to his safe keeping; the free forgiveness of his cruel murderers; the devout 
prayer of his parting breath ; the peaceful death like an infant's sleep ; earth 
exchanged for heaven ; — and the martyrdom is complete. Complete, but not ended ; 
for the witnessing voice is still ringing in our ears, and tells us that Jesus is the Christ, 
the Sou of the living God, and that we have life through his Nama 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 7.— Living faith. Abraham is well called " the father of the faithful ; * 

r;Owhere, in the Old Testament or in the New, do we meet with any one whose life was 
such an illustration of implicit trust and holy confidence in God as waa bit. If faith ba 



224 THE ACTS OF THE Al'OSTLES. [cu. vn. 1— 60. 

QOt merely the acceptance of a creerl, or the utterance of sacred phrases, or the patronage 
of religious institutions ; if it be a living power in the soul, it will manifest itself in — 

I. Cheerful obedience. (Vers. 2—4.) God bade Abraham leave his home and 
kindred, and he left them. He did not know whither ho was going (Heb. xi. 8), but 
at the call of God he set forth promptly and willingly. So Matthew at the summons 
of the Saviour (Matt. ix. 9). So many thousands since his day; men and women 
who have heard the Master say, " Go," and they have gone, relinquishing all that is 
most cherished by the human heart. When God distinctly speaks to us, whatever he 
may bid us do, at whatever cost we may be required to obey, it behoves us to comply 
instantly and cheerfully. 

IL Trust in the dabkness. (Ver. 5.) Tliere is little faith in trusting God when 
everything is bright and hopeful. When we can see our way we can easily believe that 
it is the right one. Living faith shows itself when y/e "do not see and yet believe '* 
(John XI. 29). Abraham was promised the land of Canaan "for a possession," yet God 
" gave him none inheritance in it." " By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as 
in a strange country" (Heb. li. 9). This might have seemed to him as a " breach of 
promise " (Numb. xiv. 34) on the part of him who brought him out of Chaldsea, but he 
does not seem to have entertained any doubts or misgivings. Moreover, he believed that 
the land would be tlie property of his seed, though " as yet he had no child." " By 
faith also he offered up Isaac," etc. (Heb. xi. 17). Even in the thick darkness, when 
he could not see one step before him, Abraham trusted God. We profess to " walk by 
faith, not by sight" (2 Cor. v. 7), but we are often fearful and doubtful when the way 
is clouded. But it is in the night of adversity that the star of faith must shine. 

" When we in darkness walk. 

Nor feel the heavenly flame, 
Then Is the time to trust our God 

And rest upon his Name." 

ni. ConrFTDENOi; IN THE FUTURE. (Vers. 6, 7.) God told his servant that, after 
being in bondage four hundred years, his seed should serve him in that country. It 
was a long time to look forward to. But the believing patriarch rested in God and 
was satisfied. We are impatient if our schemes do not come to maturity in a very 
brief time ; we cry " failure " when only a small fraction of four centuries is passed 
without the redemption of our hope. We are bound to remember that we " have to 
do " with the Eternal One. We must wait his time, whether it be a day or a thousand 
years. — 0. 

Vers. 8 — 19. — Israel and Egypt : Divine providence. The connection of the people 
of God with the land of Egypt is profoundly interesting, and suggests valuable lessons 
for all time. We are reminded by the text of— 

I. Tub undulatort character of our human life. This in the eventful 
experiences of Joseph (vers. 9, 10). First rejnicing in his father's peculiar favour, then 
sold into Egyptian slavery, then rising to a position of trust in the house of his master, 
then cast iuto prison, then raised to the premiership ; up on the height of comfort, down 
into the depth of misfortune, up again on the crest of honour, then down again into the 
trough of shame, etc. So with Israel the man and Israel the people (vers. 11 — 19). The 
patriarch at first in a position of relief and advantage, then in one of distress and 
disadvantage ; the nation falling into the dark gulf of bitter bondage until raised up 
" with a strong hand and stretched out arm " into liberty. Thus is it with men and 
with nations. With none does the course of things prove to be a straight line, either 
of ascent or of descent. It is always undulatory. Light and shadow, sweetness and 
bitierness, hope and fear, joy and sorrow, alternate from the cradle to the grave. 

II. The ovebrulino providence of God. How clearly Joseph felt that his 
distresses had been overruled by the Divine hand, we know (Gen. 1. 20). We can also 
Reo how the descent into Egypt and even the long slavery in that land of bondage 
were a discipline which wrought ultimate good, of the most solid and enduring kind, 
to IsraeL By the sufferings which they ondurel together in those broiling briokfitlds, 
under tlioso cruel taskuiasters, and 'to which in ha pier times their oons looked back 
with 8uch iut«use emution ; by the marvelluus uelivcr<iiices which they experienced 



OH.vn. 1— 60.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 2l5o 

together in the land of the enemy and in the " great and terrible wilderness,'' and of 
which their descendants sang with such reverence and such rapture ; — by these common 
sufferings and common mercies they were welded together as a nation, they became 
rich in those national memories which are a people's strength, they became a country 
for which, through many a succeeding century, patriots would cheerfully risk all their 
hopes and proudly lay down their lives. We learn these lessons. 1. Be prepared for 
coming changes in circumstance. No man has a right to feel secure in anything but 
in a wise and holy character, in that wliich makes him ready for any event that may 
happen. At any hour human prosperity may pass into adversity, joy into sorrow, 
honour into shame; or at any hour straitness may be exchanged for abundance, 
lowliness for elevation, gloom for gladness. We all urgently need the fixed principles, 
the rest in God, the attachment to tilings eternal and Divine, the heritage in the 
hearenly future, which will keep ds calm in the most agitating vicissitudes of earthly 
fortune. 2. "Trust God when things are at their worst. In the first days of Egyptian 
slavery, and still more in Potiphar's prison, things must have looked dark indeed to 
Joseph. " But God was with him " (vers. 9, 10). It was a terrible time, too, for the 
children of Israel when the king " which knew not Joseph " dealt subtilly with and 
evil entreated them, slaying their young children at their birth (vers. 18, 19) ; but God 
saw their affliction (vers. 34, 35 ; Kxod. iii. 7), and was preparing to send the deliverer 
in due time. And to the upright in any scene of disappointment and distress there will 
arise " light in the darkness" (Ps. cxii. 4). Trust and wait; the longest and severest 
storm will pass, and the sun shine again on the waters of life. 3. Realize that God has 
larj^e and long purposes in view. Jacob died far oif from the promised land, but liis 
bones were to rest there in due course, and there his children were to have a goodly 
heritage. It matters little what happens to us as individuals ; enough if we are taking 
a humble share in working out his great and beneficent designs. — G. 

Vers. 20—39. — The Divine and the humaji. I. Divine intbevbntion. The hand 
of God is sometimes visible though it is usually unseen. We see the Divine working 
in (1) the creation of such a mind as that of Moses ; (2) the fashioning of such a frame 
as was his (ver. 20 ; Heb. xi. 23) ; (3) the deliverance of the cliild from the dangers of 
the river; (4) his being confided to the guardianship and instruction of Pharaoh's 
ilaughter, where he would learn "all the wisdom of the Egyptians" (ver. 22), and thus 
be prepared for future work. We can have no doubt as to the operation of Divine 
wisdom in such a case as this. May we not say — Ex uno disce omnes f May we not 
conclude that there is the handiwork of God in all our lives, il we could but discern it ; 
that he is directing our course ; and that, though it is eviiteutly best for us that we 
should not see so much of Diviufi it tervention as to be unwisely waiting for it or 
injuriously depuudent on it, we may console ourselves with the bilief that " we .we not 
driftwood on the wave," but rather as noble ships which a heavenly hand is steering to 
the desired haven ? 

II. Human nobleness. (Vers. 23—28; see Heb. xi. 24 — 26.) It was "in Moses' heart 
to visit his brethren," and he took their cause in hand in a very practical and dcciaive 
way (ver. 24). He may have been mistaken in the method which he adopted, but 
that is of very small moment. The great thing is that it w«s in his heart to 
sympathize with and succour his brethren. The temptation to become naturalized as 
an Egyptian must have been great indeed. High honours, great wealth, abundant 
gratification of the lower instincts, — these prizes and pleasures, which are dear to men 
in general, were well within his reach. He deliberately chose to forego them all that he 
might play a nobler and braver part. Well has the event justified his choice. For as 
a rich and powerful Egyptian, he would have achieved nothing of any value to man- 
kind ; he would long ago have been forgotten ; but as it is, he has rendered a service to 
the human race second to none that lived before the Saviour, and has a name that will 
never die while the world has any place in its memory for its heroes and its martyrs 
Not on the same splendid scale, but in the snuic estimable, spirit, can we emulate his 
nobility, preferring an honourable affliction to unholy pleasure, a sacred and uijeful life 
among the lowly to ungodly distinction among the great, the service of Christ any- 
where to the smiles and favours of the world. 

III. Divnw MANiFESTATioif. (Veis. 30 — 33, 38.) God there revealed himself tc 

ACTS, ^ 



22a* THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. vn. 1—60 

the bodily seiwes In a wondrous form ; in such form that Moses felt that, in a rery 
unusual degree, he stood near to his Creator. Jesus Christ now manifests himself to ua 
as he does not unto the world : (1) in the privileges of his house and table ; (2) in the 
inspiration and indwelling of his Spirit ; (Jf) in the spiritual wonders he works in the 
hearts and lives of men with whom we have to do. 

IV. Divine compassion. (Ver. 34.) To the toiling and suffering Israelites God 
must liave seemed very far away. It must have appeared to them as if he were blind 
to their miseries, deaf to their sighs and groans, indifferent to their wrongs. But they 
were mistaken. All the while he was observing and pitying them, and was ready to 
interpose at the right time on their behalf. When to our fainting and distrustful heart 
it seems as if our Divine Lord werd unobservant or unmoved, we may rest assured that 
he sees, that he compassionates, that he holds himself ready to put forth his redeeming 
strength on our behalf when the hour for our deliverance has struck. 

V. Human inappbeoiativenbss. (Vers. 35 — 39.) If we were to contend that the 
best and noblest men who have rendered the most signal and splendid service to our 
race are certain to be appreciated according to the height of their virtue and tlje value 
of their help, we should go in the teeth of human history. Some of the very best and 
wisest have iDeen least understood, most despised and ill used. Moses, one of the very 
greatest, " attaining to the first three," most eminent in privilege, in character, in 
accomplishment, was one " whom they refused " (ver. 35), " whom our fathers would 
not obey " (ver. 39). We may work, hoping to be appreciated and honoured of men, 
accepting gladly and gratefully the esteem and the love they award us ; but we must 
not build upon it as a certain recompense of our endeavour. We must be prejiared to do 
without it, to be able to say, " I will work on, ' though the more abundantly I love the 
less am I loved.' " Our true reward is in the smile of the Saviour, the approval of our 
own heart (1 John iii. 21), the consciousness that we are serving our generation, the 
blessing which awaits the faithful in the land of promise. 

VI. Human resemblance to the Divine. (Ver. 37.) The Christ that should come 
was to be "like unto" the faithful servant in the house of God (Heb. iii. 5). As he 
was to be like one of us, so we are to strive to be " like unto him." And we may bear 
his image, breathe his Spirit, live his life, do in our sphere the work he did in his : ." As 
he is, so are we in this world." " As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you." — 0. 

Vers. 39 — 50. — Sin and righteousness. These verses suggest to us some thoughts on 
the nature and the award of sin and of righteousness.- 

I. That sin lIes in the wrono action of the soul. (Vers.' 39, 40.) Stephen 
says that the children of Israel " in their hearts turned back again into Egypt;" they 
were as guilty before God as if they had actually faced round and marched back into 
bondage. The sin was in the spirit of disloyalty and disobedience which dwelt 
within them. " Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, . . . 
blasphemies " (Matt. xv. 19). " As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he " (Prov. 
xxiii. 7). It is the secret thought, the hidden motive, the cherished purpose, the 
lingering desire, the burning passion, that constitutes the essence of the evil in the 
sight of him who looketh on the heart, and not on the outward appearance. Beneath 
a fair exterior some men hide a false and guilty heart ; beneath a broken and faulty 
behaviour others have a soul that is struggling on and out — on to a better life, out of 
the entanglements of an evil but regretted and repudiated past. 

II. That sin's worst penalty is paid in the spiritual deteriobation in which 
it ends. (Vers. 41 — 43.) For their rebelliousness the children of Israel were 
punished by being made to wander in the wilderness, instead of being at once admitted 
to their inheritance; also by being subjected to the rule of foolish and faulty kings like 
Saul, instead of wise and righteous prophets like Samuel ; also by being sent away into 
captivity, even " beyond Babylon." But the worst effect of their sin was in their 
being led into darker and more aggravated evil. Their culpable impatience — " We wot 
not what is become of him " — led them to an act of positive idolatry : " Make us gods 
to go before us ; " and " they made a calf . . . and offered sacrifice unto the idol ; " and 
this act of theirs led on, in course of time, to idolatrous actions more flagrant and 
heinous still (ver, 42); and their wrong-doing culminated in the worship of Moloch, 
aa iaiijuity of the very deepest dye. This is the course and punaUy of sin. Oue wrong 



OH. Til. 1—60.] THE ACTS OJ*" THE APOSTLE^ 227 

act leads to another and a worse ; one sin to a number of transgressions ; and these to 
a habit of iniquity ; and this to a dark, baneful life and a hateful and odious character. 
By fat the worst penalty which sin has to pay is the spiritual damage and deterioration 
to which it leads — the blinded eyes of the understanding, the weakened will, the 
enfeebled conscience, the masterful unbridled passions, the foul soul. Suffering of 
body, exile, loss of worldly prospects, the death of the body, — all these are nothing 
to this spiritual ruin. 

III. That biohteousness is an earnest aspiration and endeavour after God and 
GOODNESS. (Vers. 44 — 46.) It does not consist in the possession o/ privilege} other- 
wise the fathers of the Jewish race — having "the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness" 
and afterwards in the land where the Gentiles were driven out before them (ver. 45), all 
things having been made " according to the fashion " which Moses had seen — would 
assuredly have been godly and holy men. True human rigliteousness is rather found 
in such Oodward aspiration and endeavour as we find in David, the man " who found 
favour before God " (ver. 46). And how came he to enjoy this Divine regard ? Not 
because ho was faultless in behaviour — we could wish he had been far less blame- 
worthy in certain ] particulars than he was — but because he strove earnestly to worship 
and serve God, repenting bitterly when he sinned, struggling on again with contrite 
spirit, continually seeking to gain God's will from his Word, and honestly endeavouiing, 
spite of inward imperfection and outward temptation, to do what he knew to be right. 
This is human goodness ; not angelic purity, not flawless rectitude, but earnest 
seeking after the true and good, hating the evil into which it is betrayed, casting itself 
on Goci's mercy for the past, facing the future with a devout resolve to put away the 
evil thing and walk in the paths of righteousness and integrity. 

IV. That the consolation of righteousness is in the nearness of God to our 
SPIRIT. (Vers. 47 — 50.) David was not permitted to " build an house for the Loi d." 
It was a deep disappointment to him, but he had a very real consolation. God was 
near to him everywhere. Was he not, indeed, much nearer to the father who did not 
build the house, than to the son who did? David might have written (if he did ncit), " I 
am continually with thee " (Ps. Ixxiii. 23). "The Most High dwelleth not in Iciiiples 
made with hands " (ver. 48), and though we do not build him costly and splendid 
sanctuaries, though we should be deprived of the opportunity of meeting him in his 
house at all, yet when we survey " all these things " his hand has made and is sustaining, 
we may feel that he is at our right hand, and that we stand " before the Lord." Nay, 
if we be " in Christ Jesus," we know that, though no magnificent temple can contain 
him, he dwells abidingly within our hearts, to sustain and to sanctify us. — C. 

Vers. 51 — 60. — Illustrations. We have some of the best and one of the worst things 
illustrated in this passage. 

I. Faithfulness finding utterance in vehement reproach. (Vers. 51 — 53.) 
Stirred (as we suppose) by the impatient interruptions of the senators, who at this 
point showed themselves unwilling to listen, Stephen rebuked them in the strong and 
stringent language of the text. They who imagined themselves to be " the cream of 
the cream," the very best specimens of the holiest people, were setting themselves to 
resist the gracious dealings of God, who was willing to bless them with his lullest 
blessing ; they were resisting the " Holy Ghost " and injuring, in the worst of all ways, 
the peo|ile they were chosen to serve. Unqualified condemnation is sometimes the 
duty of the servant of God. Not often, indeed ; for usually it is our wisdom and our 
duty to hold our feelings of indignation in check. But there are times when holy 
resentment should overflow in words of unmeasured indignation, when we shall not 
" deliver our soul " unless we denounce the wrong that has been done and warn acrainat 
the evil which impends. ° 

II. Sin in the moment of exasperation. (Vers. 54, 67, 58.) Sometimes sin is 
checked and cowed by the strong voice of holy censure, and it holds its hand if not its 
tongue. At other times it is only driven by exasperation to say and do its very worst. 
So here, it (I) yielded to frenzy ; (2) proceeded to unmannerly exhibitions of rage-^ 
" they gnashed on him with their teeth ; " and (3) ended in brutal and fatal violence— 
" they stoned him." There is something, not only painful and horrible, but also con- 
temptible in this resort to physical violence. It seems to say, " We cannot answer youi 



228 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. vii. 1— Oa 

words; wecannot resist youv influence. We will do the only thing we can do; we will 
break your bones and draw your blood." Such a fearful sii;ht is sin driven to its worst. 
How needful to keep clear of its dominion ! 

III. lUVINK MANIFESTATIONS IN THE HOUR OF TRIAL. (Vers. 55, 56.) To his 

devoted servant in this tryin;; hour God vouchsafed an exceptional manifestation of 
himself, an extraordinary proof of his Divine favour and assurance of support. We do 
not look for anything of this kind. But to us, if we are true and loyal to our Saviour's 
cause, when the time of special trial comes, our Lord will grant some tokens of ha 
presencri and of his sympathy. He will not leave us alone ; he will come to us. A nd 
if the heavens bo not opened, and if a vision of the Son of man be not granted us, 
we shall have " the comfort of the Holy Ghost," and the strong inward assurance tliat 
he who was with Stephen at this solemn scene is laying beneath us "the everlasting 
arms." 

IV. Christian makttedom and magnanimity. (Vers. 59, 60.) "They stoned 
Stephen . . . and he cried . . . Lord, lay not this sin to their charge." We can 
hardly conceive a nobler end than this : a man sealing his testimony to Christian truth 
with his life-blo(.d, and with his last breath praying for mercy to be grunted to his 
murderers. 'J'o few of us is it thus given," not only to believe on him, but also to si i Her 
for his sake." But in the course of every Christian life there are offered many oppor- 
tunities of (1) showing the martyr spirit, and of (2) acting in the spirit of large-hcMrted- 
ness. Though we may gain no applause for so doing, and expect no notice to be taken 
of it by any chronicler, we may remember that "great is our reward in heaven," tliat 
we have the approval of the Divine Master, when in any sphere and in any degree we 
cheerfully "bear his reproach" and show a generous spirit toward those who do us 
wrong. 

V. A Christian exodus. (Vers. 59, 60.) In the midst of such agitatin:; scenei 
Stephen was perfectly trustful ; he said, " Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." lu the midst 
of such tumult he was calm; it seemed natural to the historian to write of his death as 
if he were going to rest — "he fell asleep." We often look on to the time of our depar- 
ture, and perhaps wonder what will be the manner of our " going out into the liglit." If 
we nourish our faith in Christ as we have the means of doing, by use of sacred jirivilejts 
and seizur* of manifold opportunity, then when the end shall come, in whatsoever form it 
may appear, our hearts will be (1) trustful in our Divine Saviour — we shall tranquilly 
resign our spirits to his charge, as into the hands of our Almighty Friend ; (2) peace/id 
— our death will be to us as a pleasant sleep. Weary with the toil and strife of earth, we 
thall lie down to die as those who commit themselves to the darkness of the night, to 
the restfulness of the couch, in sweet assurance that the eyes which close on this side 
ihe grave will open on the other side, to be filled with the light and to behold the 
glories of immortality. Live in Christ, and you will die in reverent confidence »nd 
unbroken serenity of soul. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 17. — Stephen's addreu : letsons of the patriarchal time. Stephen's view of 
Jesus and his mission rests, as every sound and thoughtful view must do, on the whole 
past history of the nation — as a nation called to a spiritual destiny in the purposes of 
God. 

I. The history of Israel re rooted in Divine revelation. Her Gkid is the " God 
of glory." Power, holiness, perfect freedom, are included in this idea of the " glorious 
God." History is a Divino revelation, because it unfolds his counsel. In times of 
duubt the rulers of a nation, the guides of a community, should retrace the past to its 
bi ginnings, fur a Divine idea lies at the basis of the national life and of every sacred 
institution. 1. Tlie self-revelation of God to Abraham. Every new epoch in religious 
liistory starts with a fresh self-revelation of the spiritual nature and attributes of the 
glorious God. Amidst idolatrous scenes, the depths of Abraham's spirit were stirreti, 
and a light from above shone in. From idols, from SabsBan fetish-worship, he turned, 
" to serve the living and the true God." 2. The call to Abraham. He was to be the 
reformer of religion, the founder of a nation, whose life was to root itself in the 
acknowledgment of a living and a holy, spiritual Being as their God. (1) Such calls 
involve ever sacriflce. Home must be quitted ; its loved associations in fancy and fecl- 
Ujg torn up ; kindred left behind. Jt'is the type of those moral changes aad t^o^ 



«LTii. 1— 60.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. . 229 

consequent sacrifices which accompany God's call to souls at every time. f2) They 
involve the exercise of faith. Future good, in the shape of a new home and land, ara 
promised to the patriarch, but the when and the how of their possession are left — as we 
•ay, to imagination ; as the Bible says, to faith. " He went out, not knowing whither he 
went." It has been said that life is an education by means of "illusions ; " were it not 
bettor to say that life is an education by means of ideals ? They are of their nsLturefuture, 
indefinite, must be left for time to unfold, as with the prospect of good vaguely shadowed 
forth before the mind of Abraham. (3) They require unquestioning obedience. Such 
was that of Abraham. He had nothing to rely on but the promise of God ; all else was 
against him. When he came to the "land," he found no inheritance in it, no resting- 
place for his foot. Spiritual trials consist in the perplexity of the will, caused by the 
contradiction between the unseen truth and the opposition of appearances to it. Facts 
stubbornly resist our ideals ; the world, perhaps, scoffs at the ideals themselves. To 
" endure as seeing him who is invisible," is part of the certain calling, and at the same 
time the high joy, of the called soul. And faithfulness is certain to know repetitions 
and confirmations of the assuring promise. (4) The light of promise ever leads on. It 
is to be remarked that the Divine forecast of the future is not of unmixed brightness. 
A sorrow and a struggle for the young nation is to prepare for its enjoyment of freedom. 
It is to be cradled and rocked in slavery. By the stern and cruel knowledge in itself 
of the tyrant's opjsression, Israel will learn to fly to Jehovah its Deliverer, and find 
in his service emancipation from every secular yoke. (5) Divine institutions confirm 
Divine promises. Israel had its peculiar sacramental institution of circumcision. A 
sacrament is a species of religious language, the more impressive because addressed to 
the eye than merely to the ear. In it an act of God and an act of man are expressed ; 
surrender on the side of man, acceptance and blessing on the side of God. Thus the 
sacrament becomes the channel of tradition ; the tribe and the nation have a common 
and visible bond of union. Such were the Divine beginnings of Israel's life. 

II. Thb btobt op Joseph. His career vf as in many points typical of that of Jesus. 
1. He was the object of envy and unnatural hatred on the part of his brethren. So was 
Jesus envied and hated by the rulers of the nation, and on the like grounds — the mani- 
fest favour of Grod which was with him. Such is the law — superior spiritual energy at 
first arouses opposition (2 Tim. iii. 12). And especially from those nearest of kin 
(Matt. X. 36). Such, too, was the experience of Jesus. Nothing is more painful to the 
heart than to see oiie, hitherto supposed an equal, rising to eminence above our heads. 
The best will suffer from jealousy ; how much more those whose evil is thus set in the 
light of contrast, exposed and condemned I 2. But he enjoyed Divine compensations. 
" God was with him," "delivered him from all his troubles," imparted to him grace 
and wisdom in the presence of the earthly great. So was it with Jesus. Hate and envy 
may be defied by force or intellect ; but better js it when the envious and hateful are 
themselves revealed in their hideousness by the bright shining of God's grace upon the 
good man's life. 3. Again, the wrath of men is often made the instrument of good to 
them. The force which would undermine is made to exalt. Joseph becomes prime 
minister to Pharaoh ; the crucified Jesus is, through his cross, exalted to be Prince and 
Saviour. 4 The living soul will find an opportunity of overcoming evil with good. 
The famine in Canaan g»ve Joseph the opportunity of a glorious revenge. The account 
of his recognition of his brothers, and forgiveness of them, is most touching and rich in 
typical suggestiveness. Those who love allegories may find much food for fancy in the 
details. Those who prefer broad spiritual lessons may also find in the figure of Joseph 
the very ideal of the gentle side of Israel's national character, which was fulfilled in the 
suffering Saviour, who triumphs over his foes by the might of forgiving love. 5. The 
result of the chain of events. The settlement of Israel in Egypt. How strangely is the 
web of destiny spun ! How deeply laid the train of causes and effects which result in 
great histories and revolutions I Any course of events is highly improbable beforehand, 
which after it has taken place unfolds a providential logic and profound design. So with 
Christianity. Nothing can seem beforehand more improbable than the whole story of 
its foundation. At Athens the story of the crucified One was folly, and at Jerusalem a 
scandal. Yet in it lay hidden the wisdom and the power of God. Hatred to Joseph was 
the first moving spring of a long religious history and triumph. Hatred to Jesus was 
aow being proved the spring of his triumph and the mighty prevalence of his religion. 



230 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [en. Vn. 1—66 



Gbd works through the evil passions of men as well as through the good ; and all 
powers in rivalry with love must sooner or later be brought submissively to follow in 
the wake of her eternal progress of blessing. In humiliation and in exaltation Joseph 
presents a lively type of Jesus. And the Sanhedrim must have felt this as they listened 
to the old familiar story of the origin of the nation. They are face to face with the 
fact of a now origin. Will they learn the lesson of the past for the present ? Do we 
learn the lessons of the past for our present ? — J. 

Vers. 17 — 29. — Israel in Egypt : the rise of Moses. We may view these events a« 
typical of the Christian time or as expressive of an inner meaning, a Divine logic of 
history. We may learn, then, from this passage — 

I. That Divixe beginninos in history are never without struggles. The 
people grew and increased, but a sudden check was given to their prosperity by the 
accession of a new king. Israel might have settled in Egypt and have achieved no 
great thing for the world, had not persecution compelled her to struo;gle for existence 
and lor liberty. Times of national danger throw the nation back upon its true conscious- 
ness. They vivify and purify that consciousness. It was England's struggle against 
a tyrant two centuries and a half ago which made England. So the War of Inde- 
pendence made America into a nation. The truth applies to the individual also. We 
may depend upon it that permanent good must sooner or later be struggled for — 
either that it may be gained, or, if gained, that it may be kept. 

II. That the extreme hour op human need ib the hour for Divine inter- 
position ; or, man's extremity is God's opportunity. " When the tale of bricks is full," 
snys the proverb, "then comes Moses." Great stirrings among the people, movements 
towards liberty and .purity of religion, seem to produce at the right moment the 
patriotic leader and the leformer. When the hour comes the man is not wanting. It 
may be argued that until the leader appears the movement is not ripe. God reveals 
his will for change in the words and work of great men. 

III. The significant personality op great men. The child was divinely fair. 
He was wonderfully preserved from death ; rescued by the very daughter of the perse- 
cutor, and cradled in the very house of his foes. His education among one of the most 
richly civilized of ancient peoples was complete ; and the influence of his person was 
most commanding. God does not bestow such graces for nothing. Whenever we see 
such a one marked out by beauty, knowledge, intellectual power above his fellows, we 
are entitled to ask — What is his significance for the world ? What does God mean to do 
with him for the good of mankind ? Again, the life-ideas in such great men are often of 
slow ripening. Not till he was forty years of age did his thoughts turn to the condition 
of his nation, and the delivering purpose come to fruit in his heart. Some men conceive 
much earlier the ambition and the call of their life, and move toward the goal with 
extraordinary velocity and energy. Others appear to be long dormant, like the oak 
that tarries to put forth its leaf in the woodland. Great careers have been run, great 
works achieved, by the age of thirty-seven : Alexander, Raphael, Byron, are well-known 
examples. Cromwell, on the other hand, was about the age of Moses when God called 
him from the fens of Huntingdon to save our nation. The age matters little ; men in 
this respect resemble plants — " Ripeness is all." 

IV. Great trains of events spring from slight visible causes. A singla 
spark is sufficient to fire the train of powder which is to explode the mine. When the 
mind is full of an idea, a trifling circumstance may stimulate all its energies to action. 
A forming purpose waits only for the decisive action to fix and crystallize it. Thus the 
act of Moses in delivering the individual Israelite from his oppressor fixed him in his 
national design. In everything let us follow the lead of God. Let us remember that 
we are here first to be acted upon by him, that we may then act from him upon others. 
If we are really in earnest, the opportunity will never be wanting. Goil makes his ser- 
vants ready for great enterprises by first inspiring them for lesser duties. The large 
and distant project may hold the mere visionary's view ; but the practical and really 
useful man begins with his neighbournext door. The man who actually helps his friend 
in need is the man who may be trusted to help a community or a nation. But how 
many dreamers are there whose projects of amelioration begin and end with eloquent 
speeches or wticles in newspapers 1 The old lesson comes back from Moses' life to •!] 



ca. vn. 1— 60.] THE ACTS OF TflE APOSTLES. 231 

who would do and be somethitig in the world : " Do the thing that lies nearest to thee ; 
the second will have already become clearer." 

V. MOSBS' EXAMPLE WAS THAT OP LOTAITT UNDEH MISCONOBPTIOH. There is 

much pathos in the simple word that he thought his brethren understood that God 
wag delivering them by his hand ; but they did not understand. So mighty is the 
strength derived from the sympathy of numbers, the common soldier becomes a hero 
at its electric touch. So chilbng is misconception and want of sympathy on the part 
of friends, it damps the spirit of the Heaven-born leader. For this reason, wlien we 
sift the examples of moral courage presented by any time, those are the bravest and the 
greatest, and most prove their call of God, who show that they can go on, if needs 
be, not merely in spite of their open enemies, but in spite of their friends. The mis- 
construction of friends will be most felt when the action is in the conscience known 
to be most disinterested and sincere. Moses aims to reconcile contending brethen ; unity 
among themselves is now above all necessary/ His action is misconstrued as ambition 
(ver. 'A8). Thus does the sick man turn on the kindly physician, the subject on his 
prince, the slave on his deliverer. Man often ignores the day of his salvation. Moses, 
like his great Antitype, was baffled in his saving designs by the ignorance and folly of 
those who would not be blessed. But he simply uses prudence and waits for a future 
opportunity. We can hardly construe the flight of Moses otherwise than as an act of 
prudence. He saw his life and with it his design endangered. To have remained would 
have been foolhardiness, often confounded with true courage. He took the course of 
prudence, which is the course of the higher courage. Far easier to rush on an heroic 
death than to nourish a noble purpose under disappointment, solitude, and exile. The 
history of a nation's greatness is summed up in that of its great men. And in the life 
trials and struggles of great men God reveals himself from age to age as the persevering, 
unvanquishable, and loving Saviour of mankind. His undying purpose, manifested in 
all his heroes, is to set us free ; and this in the knowledge of him aud obedience to his 
laws. — J. 

Vers. 30 — 34. — The call of Motet. I. Thb message by fire. Fire is the sign of 
the presence of Jehovah. It denotes spiritual agency in its intensity. Fire penetrates 
and it purifies. It is, therefore, inimical to evil and conservative of good. Darkness of 
mystery is round about God, and when he comes forth from it to reveal himself to 
men it is in the form of fire. It is an emblem of the Holy Spirit. In the bosoms of 
men he glows, and the musing poet bursts forth into inspired song, and the prophet 
into " words that burn and thoughts that breathe of truth and power." When we ask 
that God will answer us by fire, we ask that he will make known his presence in the 
most vivid manner in feeling, and with the most mighty effect on the life. Specially 
the vision of the burning bush was a type of Israel unconsumed notwithstanding its 
fierce persecution in Egypt ; of the glory of his great Representative, the Messiah — 
a bright flame springing from the lowly bush; of the Chuich amidst its agelong 
conflicts and trials; lastly, of all truth, which "like a torch, the more it's shook, it 
shines ; " the more the bieezes of controversy blow about it, the purer and clearer its 
illumination. 

II. The living voice op the Eternal. The sense of hearing as well as that of 
sight is addressed. So ever in the disclosures of the Divine. What we have felt in part 
through the hearing of the ear is illustrated and confirmed by the evidence of the 
more sceptical organ, the eye. Or what we have witnessed with a certainty not to be 
gainsaid, in actual fact is presently interpreted and connected with the great principle 
to which it belongs by some similar voice of teaching. The utterance here is simple. 
It is a declaration that the God of history is the ever-present God. He who was with 
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob is here with Moses. Faith has always its past to fall 
back upon ; it can renew its life in moments of weakness out of the living fount of 
memory. 

III. The wonder and the terror op the Divine presence. First, Moses wonders 
at the burning bush. Wonder is the reflection in feeling of the extraordinary, and it is 
the parent of curiosity. Why and whence, the spirit asks, this irruption into the course 
of nature ? It is the appearnnce of the living God, is the only answer to the question. 
Here wonder passes into fear and trembling, which betray man'g sense of uttef 



ta THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. m. 1— 6a 

dependence In the presence of the Almighty and the All-holy. The sight of tha 
unspeakahle glory ib shrunk from. In ordinary life nature and custom conceal God, 
and mercifully ; for how could one glimpse of absolute truth, of Divine perfection, be 
eudured ? But terror passes into reverence, which is the blending of fear with love 
knd confidence as the mind becomes more inured to the experience. The sandals are 
thrown off, as in the presence of an august sovereign. How good to feel that nature, 
the dnily scene of a wondrous drama, the occasional theatre of magnificent spectacles, 
as in the tempest, the thunder-voices and fiery revelation betokening the presence of 
creative might, — is holy ground ! But the mind becomes deadened by custom. And 
well is it, therefore, that in those places specially consecrated to meetings witli God — the 
church, the private oratory — habits of outward submission and reverence should be 
cultivated which may have their right influence on the whole moods of the soul. 

IV. Thk call. 1. The call of man by God is ever to service on behalf of the 
suffering. All human suffering has an echo in the heart of God. He is the God of all 
compassion. He is not merely love, but love as an active tnll. He determines to 
•ave. Now it is a nation from outward captivity, now a generation from bondage to 
ignorance and fear. Light and health are the images of his energy and influence. 
2. The called man is a man sent. He has a mission, and it is ever a mission to the 
lowly and the meek. So has it been with all the great prophets ; so above all with 
the Christ. "I send thee into Egypt." "Where lies the Egypt to which I am sent, 
and where the fulfilment of my life-call must lie?" the Christian may ask. John 
Howard found his Egypt in the prisons of Europe, and " trod an open but unfrequented 
path to immortality." Our Egypt may be close at hand. Wherever we see an 
obsolete custom, a corrupt habit of thought, an ignorance of any kind, a spell laid upon 
the imagination, or a vice tyrannizing over the will of others, there is a house of 
bondage. God needs the co-operation of many finite deliverers that his design of an 
infinite deliverance may go forward. If we, like Moses and like Elijah and Isaiah, are 
ready with our " Here am I ; send me," it will not be long before we receive our 
directions and our marching orders. — J. 

Vers. 35 — 43. — Moses, and IsraeVs hearing towards him : a figure of Christ. I. Thb 
RKJBCTED OF MEN WAS IN EACH CASE THB HONOURED OF GoD. The Israelites refused 
Moses as their ruler and judge ; and God sent him as ruler and as emancipator to the 
people. Moses went into exile, and there was honoured by a revelation of the glory of 
God ; and with a special mission Jesus had been slain in Jerusalem, and in that very 
eity had come back in the power of the Spirit, to clothe the disciples with fiery 
eloquence, to vibrate through their hearts with power, and to put forth mighty power 
to heal through their means — thus being proved Leader and Saviour of the people. 
Human blindness and folly only bring a new reaction of the power and mercy of God. 
So often with us all. We resist the leading thoughts of the day. We hate the new 
truth which brings change with it, the fresh revelation which calls us to larger freedom. 
We think to silence the new teacher by contempt. But lol in some unexpected 
quarter power breaks forth to seal the teacher and his message, and we are silenced. 

II. The oabbeb of Moses and the correspondence in that of Christ. Grandly 
the figure of the desert lawgiver rises before us in the sketch of Stephen. 1. His 
mighty works. Those in Egypt, when he outdid the profound magicians, and 
established the supremacy of Jehovah over Pharaoh and all the gods of Egypt, were 
one of the originating causes of Israel's freedom. The memory of those deeds lived 
in the heart, could never be forgotten. They laid the foimdation-stones of the great 
structure of their history. So did Jesus lay the foundation of his kingdom in works, 
the power of which and the purport of which he could appeal to as evidence of his 
Divine mission. 2. His prophetic forecast and its fulfilment. The memorable prophecy 
ef the great Teacher to come, found in the Book of Deuteronomy, was one of Israel's 
lights shining in a dark place. Though Stephen does not identify the prophet to come 
with Jesus in so many words, his meaning is evident to all the Sanhedrim. Was there 
a hint in that prediction which was wanting in the actual character of Jesus? And 
if the Sanhedrim had rejected him, how could they fail to incur the judgment 
threatened in that great passage of the Law ? Some of the later parables of Jesus (at 
that of the wicked husbandmen) were also, perhaps, fresh in the recollection of many, 



OB. VTT. 1— CO.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. £33 

Thui) did the lines of ancient and recent evidence converge upon the present, and 
give to it a solemn significance. 3. The renewed contrast of the divinely excepted and 
the htrntanly rejected. (Vers. 38, 39.) Moses was the channel of ancient revelation. 
He received loving words to give to the people. And Jesus had said that the words 
he spake were not his, hut the words of him that sent him. Yet Israel in the desert 
»nd Israel now were fonnd alike unwilling to ohey. The Divine presence was manifestly 
with Moses. In the desert the angel of God was ever at his side. So had it been 
with Jesus. Had not one of this very Sanhedrim confessed to Jesus that God must 
be with him, seeing the works that he did? Yet both Moses and Jesus had been 
rejected. And in both cases, when the voice of God said, " Forward 1 " the heart of 
Israel turned back. In the one case they longed for the comfort and the luxury of 
Egypt, in the other for the sensual joys of an earthly kingdom. Better to retain power 
and position than to go on the idle chase after the ideal and the spiritual ; so the low 
mind, the carnal heart, argues in every age. It was the choice of the flesh and the 
denial of the Spirit that was in each case the cure of the sin, as it is everywhere and 
always. 4. The lapse into idolatry. The worship of a visible form is far easier than 
the lifting of the spirit to an invisible God. Idolatry is the making to one's self a god ; 
Bjiiritual religion is the constant exertion to rise to him who cannot be reproduced in 
finite forms of the intelligence or of art. The element of self-denial or of self-pleasing 
predominates in each and every form of worship. An upward and a downward 
movement is always proceeding in the religious life of a people. Some are ever trying 
to bring God into the service of their passions and interests ; while true religion tries 
to mould all life into conformity with God's will. Idolatry brings penal consequences. 
Men are given up to their hearts' desire. The moral nerve decays. Spiritual energy 
being lost, they become weak in the presence of their enemies. Those touches of 
reminiscence from the past were enough to touch tender chords in the minds of 
Stejihen's hearers.. Well they knew idolatry had been the curse of the nation. 
Defeat, slavery, exile, — all came in its train. All might be traced back to the bitter 
root of disobedience, as that to unbelief in the living God. And what if now a similar 
vista of calamity were opening ; if history were to repeat itself, and disobedience to the 
voice from heaven in Jesus should lead to a final downfall ? Our history mirrors our 
sins and our mistakes. If we do not heed its warnings, nothing can avert our fate. 
No act of disobedience to conscience has passed unpunished in our lives. The worst 
of madness is deliberately to repeat old errors and stereotype our moral failures. 
If the ghosts of the past, as they appear in memory and reflection, do not deter us, 
wh»t will or can ? — J. 

Vers. 44 — 53. — Lessons of sacred -history. I. The sacred places of Israel. 
1. The tahtrnacle. It was the tent of witness or of attestation ; otherwise the " taber- 
nacle of the assembly," or of the congregation. It was the visible centre of Israel's 
natural and spiritual life, the hearth and home of the people and the altar of God. He 
met with them to declare bis will, to make known his laws, and they with one another 
as a community having a common weal. Eeligion is the true foundation of society. 
She is the " oldest and holiest tradition of the earth." When a house of God is erected 
in the wilds of Australia or of America, a centre of civilization is fixed. It is the earthly 
representation of a heavenly reality. Moses made the tabernacle after a Divine archetype 
or model given to him. So worship on earth must ever asjjire to and reflect the "lite 
above," the risen life, the life of spiritual freedom and victory. God is ever saying to 
new societies, as to the new society in the desert, " Make me a house after the pattern 
you have seen ; " that is, have a place and a recognition in your life for the holiest ideals, 
the most sacied purposes of life. 2. The temple. Both the tabernacle and the temple 
were designed and constructed after the analogy of human dwellings ; the tabernaolr> 
^wasbut a more richly furnished tent. As the wealth and power of the nation increased, 
it was fitting that this should be reflected in the greater magnificence of the house of 
Gud ; and as they became settled in the Holy Land, that the tent of the nomad should 

five way to the palace of a King. The temple of Solomon represented in its magni- 
cence the greatness of the victorious kingdom of David. The outward institutions ol 
religion in a people should keep pace with its growth in material prosperity. It is miser- 
able 4jiat the church should be worse furnished than the ordinary dwellings of th« wor 



2S4 THE ACTS OB' THE AtOSTLES. [oa-'^tl— 6a 

shippers, or that the minister of religion should fare in poverty while he supplies their 
spiritual wants. A rich man can surely afford to contribute as much to the pastor's 
necessities as he pays in stipend to his cook. But there are higher truths. The taber- 
nacle passed away ; the temple, as Stephen had predicted, was to pass away ; the spiritual 
Terities eternally remain. 

II. The true sacred place is ever the soul or man. 1. The dwelling of God 
in visible temples is a symbolic thought, the reality to which it points is his inter- 
course with the soul of man. This was the great truth of prophetic teaching. 1'he 
prophets were themselves living illustrations of it. God dwelt in them, spake through 
them, breathed upon them, turned their hearts unto his shrine, communed with them 
face to face, as a man with his Iriend. "The true Shechinah is man," said a great Father 
of the Church. 2. It is the spiritual indwelling which is at the heart of all true 
religion. When it is once grasped, great consequences follow. The priest and the ritual 
»nd the fixed place are no longer necessary. Every one who has a truth from God, and 
feels that it must be spoken, is a prophet. New oracles may be opened at any moment, 
new witnesses may arise, the truth find a fresh utterance from unexpected lips. If this 
truth be not recognized, the sacred building becomes an empty shell, the priests mere 
mummers, the ritual a pantomime. To believe that God can care for splendid temple* 
and ritual, for themselves, is imbecile superstition. To believe that he values all the 
expressions of living and loyal hearts is a part of rational piety. But at the highest point 
of religious intelligence it may be well asked, " What need of temple, when the walls of 
the world are that ?r 3. The denial of the spiritual truth is the source of error, super- 
stition, and crime. The earlier Jews killed the prophets, leaving posterity to find out 
their value and raise their monuments. Posterity did the like. The very men who waved 
the torch of truth more brightly in darkened ages, and those who had the best news to 
tell their times, were silenced and suppressed. The culmination of all was the betrayal 
and murder of Jesus. Such a story of miserable persecution and suicidal hatred of the 
good carries its deep and permanent warnings. How dishonest if we take occasion from 
this passage to form an idle opinion of the peculiar bigotry of the Jews ! Was ever a 
corporation, a body with vested interests, or a Church, known to act otherwise towards 
the new truth and the new teacher ? Has any great teacher in the Christian Cliurch 
been received at first with welcome and owned as "sent from God"? Grudging 
toleration is the most he can expect. Only those who know that religion is an affair of 
the individual soul, not of the Church or the formal confession, will welcome him in 
whom religion now embodies itself, and through whom, in the decay of systems, God 
speaks with freshness and power to the world. — J. 

Vers. 54 — 60. — Tlie martyrdom of Stephen. I. The raqe of convicted ooNSciBHCEa. 
Pierced to the heart with the pain of the sense of guilt, though judges, they gnashed with 
their teeth upon Stephen," like chained dogs who would bite those who would set them 
free." " Contempt pierces through the shell of the tortoise," says the Indian proverb. On 
their high seat they were reached by the stinging words of the servant of Jesus ; their 
obstinacy exposed, the cnntradiction between the part they were playing as the repre- 
sentatives of the Law and outwardly, while their spirit and aims were deadlv opposed 
to its spirit, brought into the .most glowing light. The most hellish of wrath is that 
where the mind is felt to be at variance with itself and seeks a victim on which to 
discharge its fury. If the truth does not convert men, it turns them into its foes. 

II. The inner joy of-tiie martyr. The martyr is he whoso life-interests are bound 
up with the truth, to whom nothing in the world can afford satisfaction in which truth 
and reality are not. He cannot separate his consciousness of life and its sweetness from 
his consciousness of God's liyht and love in him, which are dearer than life. With this 
clear light within his breast, he " sits in the centre and enjoys clear day." " No greater 
thing can man receive, no more august boon can God bestow, than truth," said one of 
the nol)lest of heathen writers, Plutarch. This is the feeling in which the martyr 
lives, in which he is willing to die. And he may be and doubtless is often favoured 
with peculiar visions, which foretell the triumph of truth and of faith. Stephen sees the 
neaven opened, and the crucified One, the " Son of man," standing in the place of glory 
and power, at God's right hand. There are secrets in the life of individual piety which, 
if known, might go far to explain the cheerfulness with which privation or peneoution 



(A vh. 1— 60.] TflE ACtS Ot' TflE AtOSTLfiS. 23S 

has been borne. Gorl opens an inner door into heaven to others inaccessible, and 
Biieaks of things which c.uiiiut be uttered, and offers visions which cannot be described. 
We know little more than the outside of others' lives. The bad man in power, the 
good man in weakness and suflering, each has another side to his life. 

III. Conviction stifled in violence. Here are two resources of hypocrisy. 1. 
To pretend indignation against the person of an opponent. It is easy to feign a pious 
horror of sentiments we do not care to examine, and to cast obliquely the reproach 
of blasphemy upon one who utters truths which are evil in their bearing upon us, 
Jesus, Stephen, Paul, and in their turn all reformers, have had to incur this reproach. 
2. To end the matter by violence. Cast the offender out of the synagogue ; hand him over 
to the civil power ; or put him to death under the show of law and justice. So was 
Stephen done to death. The worst crimes have been dune in the name of law and 
under the cloke of religion. 

IV. T] IE martyr's end. In many features it repeats that of the Master. I.Stephen 
is thrust out of the city, like him who suffered " without the gate." Nor can any man 
expect to live at all places and times the true life, without having to suffer some form 
of social expulsion. In suffering for our convictions we come to know the deeper fel- 
lowship of the spirit of Jesus. Better to go with Jesus " without the gate " and suffer, than 
to tarry within the city and to purchase ease at tlio expense of compliance with evil. 

2. Life is yielded up in prayer. As he had sighed, " Father, into thy hands I commit 
my spirit," so his servant, " Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." As he, " Father, forgive them," 
BO Stephen, " Lay' not this sin to their charge." Love, the animating principle of the 
Christian in life, the secret energy which prompts all his words and deeds in the cause 
of truth, — love is the temper in which he dies. Christ's religion, in teaching us this love 
and making its practice possible, proves itself Divine. And this active love is rooted 
in the sense that we have been loved and sought of God. He who has once found us 
and blessed us with fatherly hand, gives courage for struggle and resignation in defeat. 

3. The effect on others. We think of the young man Saul who stood by. What 
effect upon him had not this spectacle of love in death ? And what evidence amidst 
wild scenes of savage life has not the end of the good man blessing, not cursing his 
foes, given to the love of God and what it can accomplish in the human heart! The 
red Indian, as he binds his captive to the stake, expects him to prove his manhood, 
when escape is hopeless, by bitter taunts and blasphemies to the last. And this is the 
fruit of cruelty in many lands. It is the marvel in human nature, the appearance of 
the lamb where we looked for the lion — the reaction of love against hatred, which 
betokens the presence of a power and a will beyond experience. The life of the world 
had passed into a new phase when men could die in the very arms of love and fall 
asleep with the smile of blessing on their brow. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 53. — Stephen's address in the Sanhedrim. The charge was blasphemy and 
revolution against consecrated authority. The answer was, God by his Spirit has been 
preparing for this time. Jesus is the Messiah. As in former days our fathers resisted 
the Holy Ghost, so now this highest manifestation of his grace in " Jesus Christ." An 
appeal to repentance and faith. Notice — 

I. Tub testimony to the Word op God. Christianity is no novelty discarding 
the past. Yet not a mere development, but a new gift in Christ. A groat lesson on 
the study of the Old Testament, which is too much neglected. A help to trace the 
line of the spiritual manifestations. A warning against unbelief. A declaration of the 
grace of God, apart from human merit. 

II. The boldness of the inspired preacher. Fearlessness of man. Courage of deep 
conviction. Freedom from Jewish prejudiced Gospel liberty not rationalistic licence. 
Spiritual conception of God and his worship. Charge of the Jews. 

I I I. The position of Christianity plainly set forth as the final revelation, and the 
challenge founded upon it. Eeceive the gospel or you resist the Spirit. This position 
evidently rested on the person and work of Christ, "the righteous One," whose 
message was above that "ordained by angels" (see Heb. i., ii.). The circumcision 
of the Old Testament was declared worthless in view of the new circumcision of the 
" heart and ears," otherwise the sign of the new covenant, the baptism of the Holy 
^host. Although eTidentl7 broken off by the murderous riot which ensued, the 



286 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. vii. 1— 6a 



address wad advancing to an appeal to faith on the basis of the new outpouring of the 
Spirit : " Now is the accepted time ; now is the day of salvation." A great example to 
us to lead men through conviction of sin to acceptance of grace — through the sense of 
what they are to the hope of what they may be in Christ. — B. 

Yers. 54 — 60. — TTie proto-martyr. I. An bxamplb. 1. Distinguished /aitt over- 
coming the world, the flesh, the wicked one. 2. Spiritual vision. Heaven opened. 
New world under the government of Clirist. 3. Patience and love, after the example 
of Jesus. The influence of Christ's martyrdom on all other martyrs. The sermon on 
the mount exemplified. 

II. A new Divine seal upon the truth. 1. Sufferings and death in their relation to 
testimony. Necessity of martyrdom in a world like ours. Effect on the popular mind. 
3. Cont»st of the old and the new in the scene. The weakness of the persecutors, 
the strength of the persecuted. The two kingdoms must be set face to face. Righteous- 
ness against falsehood and violence. Argument is renounced, therefore the martyrs 
death is a public exhibition of the enemy's weakness ; he is compelled to resort to vio- 
lence. Show that all through Church history this is the case. The conversion of Con- 
stantine quickly followed the persecution of Diocletian. The cruelty of Rome brought 
about a reaction in the popular mind which paved the way for the Reformation. 3. In 
every darkest hour of Uod's people there is some point of light which holds the future 
within it. Saul is in that scene. His conversion partly the fruit of it. The Spirit 
began to work, goading him with conviction. So the blood of martyrs has always 
seed of truth to water : the blood of Stephen watered conviction in Saul's heart. 4. A 
wonderful testimony to the reality of the work of the Spirit. How the signs increaped ! 
From the gifts of Pentecost to this manifestation of Divine glory to a dying man, 
calling upon Jesus to receive his spirit, and so confirming, as with a light coming 
down directly out of heaven, all the facts of the gospel — ^a risen and glorified Redeemer, 
able to forgive sins, receiving the spirits of his disciples into heaven, giving them com- 
plete victory over the sufferings and darkness of their last hour. May we die the death 
of the righteous 1 — K. 

Vers. 1 — 53. — The recital of a nation' i tpiritual pedigree — it) leading tnggestions. 
Technically the description of a defence may very justly be applied to the long stretch 
of these verses. They no doubt do stand for Stephen's formal defence. He has been 
very mildly challenged by the high priest to say whether the "things" laid to his 
charge " are so." And he loses not a minute in replying. He replies, however, in 
his own way. That way is somewhat Indirect. His tone betrays some sense of his 
being in some sense also master of ^he situation. He tempts us much to feel that 
much may be read between the lines, and we soon come to convince ourselves that 
the real drift of the personal defence is laid on the lines of a national indictment — and 
that national indictment very little else than the barest recital of the pedigree of tlie 
nation in question. Stephen does not make it too apparent at first — any more than 
once on a time Nathan did, when he appeared to condignly judge David— but he puts 
before himself and bearers the nation of Israel as it now is, and takes in hand to say 
what it came from and along what way it has come to this present. The places of judge 
»nd judged almost seem turned, both in the matter and the manner of Stephen. It is 
rery possible that (as Stephen never lived to put in writing nor to repeat what he now 
said) there is some disjointedness in the language as it is now before us, and some lacunoe, 
and (though many doubt the suggestion) that interruptions, especially just at the close, 
determined the form of some parts of Stephen's strong accusation. On the other hand, 
wo have to remember that probably nowhere do we read language fresher from the 
dictate of the Holy Spirit. The recital of the spiritual lineage of this nation reveals — 

I. A SERIES OF PROVIDENTIAL INTERPOSITIONS OP THE MOST MARKED CHARAOTEB. 

These occur in more shapes than one, 1. There is the originating sovereign choice and 
sovereign call of Abraham (ver. 2). 2. The express command to him whither he is to 
go and where awhile to dwell (ver. 3). 3. Express promises vouchsafed to him and 
his seed, and covenant made with him (vers. 6-^8). i. An unfailing, providential 
guidance of him and his linear descendants, Isaac and Jacob and Joseph. This name 
J-»seph doe* not fail to lead Stephen to recite (1) the providence that wonderfully 



OH. vn. 1—60.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES, £37 

overruled the worst of the work of envy ; (2) the providence that exalted Joseph, an 
alien, to Egypt's highest place; (3) the providence that was aiming at and that did 
secure the more remote result of settling awhile the nation in Egypt. 5. The provi- 
dential saving of the life of the infant Moses, educating of him, endowing him with a 
sjdrit of hoth goodness and power, preparing him well by chastening delay and disci- 
[iline, and finally calling him to see and know and take up his mission, after an 
interval of forty years (vers. 23, 30, 34). The name of Moses, again, does not fail to 
lead Stephen to commemorate (1) the chief features of his work, in leading the people 
of Israel out of Egypt and through the Eed Sea, and in his own life's rcmnining forty- 
years' wanderings with those people in the wilJurucss ; (2) ilie distinct jirophccy 
with wliioh his lips were charged, relating to the "Prophet" the Messiah, the late woll- 
knovvn Jesus (ver. 37); (3) the typical "tabernacle in the wilderness," so carefully 
and in minute detail designed in heaven, yet so temporary in ils use for the service 
of the wilderness and the early settlement under Joshua in "the possession of the 
Gentiles." 6, By two hurried touches, the reason of which is scarcely far to find, 
Stephen implies rather than mentions the providence which raised up David to con- 
ceive and Solomon to execute the building of the temple (ch. vi. 14 ; ver. 48); when, 
for whatever txact reason, the climax of the occasion is reached. The moment has 
come for the dropping of the mcie recital of history, every step of which, however, was 
telling its own very plain and very significant tale. In words of flame and impassioned 
thrusts, the solemn, unanswerable, conscience-stinging charge is flung at the packed 
body of accusers and sympathizers. And the force came, not of bad spirit, but of 
the Spirit, the Spirit of truth and conviction, of light and life, and, when needs be, of 
" consuming fire." So far Stejihen's recital of the moral lineage of the people is 
crowded with the tokens of providence. Nay, it is one chain of tokens of Divine love 
and Divine care. But on reading again the recital we find — 

II. A SERIES OF PERVERSE THWAUTING8 AKD " CONTRADICTIONS OF SINNERS." To 

US the things working in the mind of Stephen are not obscure, but even to those who 
heard him, light must have glimmered in before the final disclosure. When this came, 
no man doubted what it meant nor to what it was equivalent. Not exactly side by 
side, and not es.&ctly pari passu with the originating, directing, overruling, and protect- 
ing " dispositions " (ver. 53) of Heaven, but certainly in many a most mournful and 
untoward conjuncture appeared the perverseness of human insubjection and ingratitude 
and presumptuous opposition. The worst growths of ingratitude sprang up where had 
fallen the richest showers of heavenly grace. The worst forms of resistance assorted 
themselves in front of the kindest and most distinguished of heavenly leading. And it 
had been thus too systematically. It had been so once and again, and the indications were 
to the effect that, " So my people love to have it." Thus the whole length of exceptional 
and most beneficent grace was disfigured by the intrusion of surprising ingratitude and 
rebellion ; and of late, Stephen has to show, things have grown worse, nay, they are 
come to a climax. The seed of evil grew up into plain sight. 1. In those " patriarchs, 
moved with envy," who " sold Joseph into Egypt " (ver. 9). 2. In the two' cases, that 
grew upon one another in degree of blindness, when Moses himself was so taken by 
r'rprise in that his own brethren did not perceive his mission, and that it was one for 
thnr benefit, at whatsoever risk to himself (vers. 25, 28, 36). 3. In the rebellion and 
fickleness of Israel under " Mount Sina," and their patent idolatry there, a career of 
crime, Stephen implies, which begun there never got purged out of their system, hut 
brought on the crushing punishment of the Captivity. This was a marvellous stroke 
of Stephen's just rhetoric — suggestion of the Spirit's light and force — to run up in the 
compass of one sentence that initial act of idolatry into the flourishing continuation of 
it which both courted and caused the captivity of ever-memorable shame (vers. 38 — 
43). 4. But never so plainly, never so terribly as now ; the present generation complete 
the circle of the evil works of their fathers. They " resist the Holy Ghost ; " they 
are "'the betrayers and murderers" of him for prophesying of whom men were both 
persecuted and slain by their fathers ; they have not honoured their own " Law," so 
boasted in, in the only acceptable way of honouring it, viz. in the " keeping " of it ; 
and they have branded themselves with the names "stiffnecked and uncircumcised 
in heart and in " their very " ears." These are the formidable interruptions to the 
purity, honour, nobility of their lineage. They are stains on their scutcheons— 



238 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch- ▼"• 1— ^tt 

ineffaceable in themselves. But even all this is as nothing, for they now drag their 
glory in the dust, and are for flinging it away for ever. The recital shows — 

III. A SERIES OF SUGOBSTIVE BBTKIBUTI0N8. This aspect of his subject, it may be 
supposed, Stephen purposed to keep in some check for a time. Yet: 1. It is iinpHeil, 
lor those who certainly well knew all the history of Joseph and his brethren, in tlie 
allusion to the exaltation of Joseph, and his brethren's repairing to him for com, anil 
finally his father and family becoming as it were his permanent guests (vers. 9 — 
14). 2. It is again implied (see the manifest hint of some kind of ver. 35) in the 
justifying of Moses' unconscious taking up of his role as reformer and deliverer of hia 
bretliren (vers. 24 — 26), and in the parallel condemnation of those whose blindness, not 
seeing it, led them to say tauntingly, " Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us? " 
3. It is most emphatically stated of the idolatrous Israelites. God " turned, and gave 
them up " (ver. 42). And the fact of this being able to bo viewed either as one long- 
continued course of retribution or retribution frequently repeated shows that, as Stephen 
approaches the end of his speech, he is preparing to give greater prominence to this 
matter. So far, then, the striking moral features of this history consist of unparalleled 
oppoitunity, reckless disregard of it and Heaven's own distinctest and most inipressiv e 
kind of warnings. But the whole case of Stephen is not over till it is observed how 
he either purposely exhibits or is made the means of e.\liihiting — 

IV. The aim, the use, the lessons of that family lineage, made to bk 

ILLUSTRIOUS, ALL MISERABLY FOBFEITED, AT LEAST FOB THE FAMILY ITSELF. For : 1. T1]U 

aim and use of all, if they had not been absolutely lost, would have obviated liio 
necessity of any defence at all on the part of Stephen ; and in particular would have 
rendered unnecessary his allusion to David, to Solomon, and to the nature of the 
dwelling-place of the " Most High," as also his quotation of the prophet's rapt, inspired, 
and foreseeing language (vers. 46—50). It seems evident that Stephen was far from 
being supremely anxious on the subject of his own personal defence ; he is bent on 
aumething far beyond and above this. But so far as he was at all anxious about it, it 
was here that the point of it lay. Whatever he had said about " this place," and about 
" the customs of Moses," and about " this Jesus of Nazareth," who hsid power to 
" destroy this temple and build it up in three days," and who was the end and aim 
and substance of all "the Law and the prophets," was near to finding its solution, fur 
those who had " ears to hear," at the point at which Stephen is found quoting that 
prophet (ver. 50). But all was lost on those whose nation had been educating fourteen 
hundred years if haply they might see this very thing and not lose it. 2. The lessons 
of a moral and individual nature are now to be yet more shown spilled on the ground. 
Yes, spilled, as Stephen's blood itself was spilled. Instead of having learnt or now 
learning, they are " out to the heart ; " they gnash with their teeth ; they cry out with 
a loud voice ; they st<yp their ears ; they run upon Stephen with one accord ; tliey cast 
him out of the city ; they stone him. It was the evening of hope for many of that 
audience when Stephen began to speak. When he has ended evening has declined 
into a mournful, dark, despairful night. A hundred times they have been warned in 
I heir own family history, and their fathers cry to them from the very tombs. But whxt 
can they hear who "stop their ears"? And what can any hear who do likewise? — B. 

Vers. 23 — 29. — Marks of the horn reform&r. Conversion does not by any means 
purport to create new powers of mind or to substitute new qualities of heart, but to 
direct aright the powers which are already the gifts of nature or creation — to direct 
them to right and worthy objects, and to fill them with right and worthy energy. So 
also inspiration does not purport to override natural sources of knowledge and natural 
gifts, so as to obliterate the prevailing marks of individual character and even individual 
peculiarity. So neither, once more, do what we often call special providences purport 
to make the forces of native character hide themselves, and supersede them by what is 
artificial and in a sense even superficial, thouyh it comes from heaven. It is, indeed, 
doubtful whether we have a very happy phrase in the expression " special " providence. 
1 erhaps we rather mean that providence occasionally strikes us more because it does 
what IS unexpected or what seems to us specially remarkable for some reason or 
another. In any other sense, there certainly was a time when the most "special" 
prunueuce might have seemed to be I'ouad in the fact thstt " wt a sparrow falleth t« 



OH. vn. 1—60.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 23i, 

the ground without " God's " notice," or in the fact that " all the hairs of our head are 
numbered" of God. While, therefore, we may believe readily that Moses was "raised 
up " of God, " called of God," watched over and graciously trained by the providence 
God, this will none the less yield us the opportunity of observing the illustrations of 
the horn reformer which he affords, and of noticing, for important uses, how parallel 
they run to those of one whom we might hesitate to describe as in any similar sense at 
all events " raised " or " called of God." That we may, therefore, the more clearly feel 
how little of the mere made and artificial there was in Moses, we may stop and note 
how the very brief sketch before us reveals some of the plain murks ol' the born 
reformer, whether for the better or the less good. 

I. A MOMENT ARRIVES, CHARGED WITH A STRONG IMPULSE TO FIND A NEW POINT OP 
DEPARTURE FOB LIFE AND WIIATEVEK IS ITS CHIEF MEANING. 1. The illll)ulse COmeS. 

It " came into his heart." It comes, and it comes very much as matter of feeling — out 
of his heart as surely as into it. 2. It comes under some comparatively unpretentious 
guise. Moses has a prompting to " visit his brethren the children of Israel." Out of 
night is not out of mind with him, where it would have been so in a million of cases to 
one. He does not despise, forget, or ignore as much as possible poor relations. His 
heart is toward them, and perhaps at the time conscious of nothing else, ho will " visit " 
them and throw in his lot with them. 3. The impulse is of uncommon strength. (1) It 
asked for the decision of a moral question, and "refusing to be called" what lie was 
not (Heb. xi. 24) ; he quickly settled that. (2) It encountered the adopting of a lot of 
" affliction," and a share of suffering, in place of pride,- wealth, luxury, and power 
(Heb. xi. 25) ; and the choice was unhesitatingly made. (3) It asked force and per- 
spicuity of s))iritual vision, and that far sight that can not merely see afar, but that 
will find " a hand to reach through time," to catch the " far-off interest of tears " — ■ 
that genuine " recompense of reward " (Heb. xi. 26). (4) Lastly, it dares to face the 
wrath of a foster father king, a despot, whose will, whose whim, whose passion, whose 
cruelty would not stop at anything that crossed his purposes ; but " he feared not " 
(Heb. xi. 27), for "he endured as seeing" the King eternal, immortal, and "invisible."' 
These things all help to speak a reality and a strength in the impulse, which promiss 
well to make the prophet master of the man, and which will fit the theory of a born 
reformer, while yet it is matter of theory. 

II. Two SUCCEEDING DAYS REVEAL MoSES THE ONE IN THE CAPACITY OP A WRESTLER, 

AND VERY SUCCESSFUL ONE; THE OTHER CLOTHING HIMSELF IN THE AUTHORITY OF A 

lUDGE AND ARBITER ; IN BOTH OASES UNSOLICITED. ' His action On either day is spon- 
taneous. It was doubtless as great a surprise to the brother he would befriend as to his 
auversary for the time. Yet in either case Moses steps into the various arena, as though 
to the manner born. 1. This stepping boldly into action is very noticeable. How 
w ide often the gulf that separates thought, feeling, wish, conviction, and even resolution 
from action itself! 2. Much more significant is the stepping from Egypt's court and 
palace and lap of luxury into practical conflict of this kind. It meant something 
imusual, and something unworldly and of the right sort unusual. It was the kind of 
thing to hold men who didn't like it spell-bound for at all events twenty-four hours. 
It provoked the question, " From whence hath this man" this autliority and these 
mighty deeds (vers. 22, 28) ? It meant a " new man " (Luther's hymn) on the spot. 

III. A GREAT MARK OF A BORN REFORMER APPEARS NOW IN MoSES, IN THE ABSENCE 

OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS WHICH HE BETRAYS. What he did, what he said, what he tried 
to work, all came to thought, heart, and hand, as things under existing circumstances 
the most natural in the world. He saw himself only in the light of an instrument in 
the hand of Gud, and took for granted that his brethren would see him and all else in the 
same light. Probably his eye did not look on himself at all at the time ; probably at 
the time, even what " he supposed " about his brethren understanding his mission on 
their behalf, was an utterly unconscious supposing. For it is the historian afterwards 
whose language is here read, and it was probably when Moses first received a check, and 
was taken aback by it, that his "supposing" precipitated itself. Circiunstances, oppo- 
sition, persecution, do not fail soon to open the eyes of almost any leformer, specially 
111' liny reformer in matter moral, but it is of the born reformer to plunge prompt, fear-> 
less, nothing hesitating, in mediae res. And Moses did just thU. The PMn and the 
umart sa4 tbeir usel il lessoni were yet to come> 



240 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [en. vil 1— 6a 

IV. It ebmains no poor sign op the born keformbr that at first Mosm 
OVERSTEPS THE MARK. FoT exceptions to this experience are few. Even in a delicious 
uuconsciousncss and simplicity and naturalness lurks that very thing nature, human 
uature, and too much of it ; self, and too much of it. God would not have overstepped 
the mark — never does. All his work fits perfectly to time, to place, to issue. Yet ha 
who holds the threads of all human things in his fingers, and rules the mysterious 
vioibsitude of human history, makes allowance beforehand for their error in his most 
faithful, most willing servants. Their pace must be moderated, and his purpose will 
not be lost, nor so much as suffer. More haste, worse speed for Moses — for the preci|)i- 
tanoy of two days relegates him to forty years' absence from the scene and the holy 
enterprise into which he had flung himself with zeal so passionate. What will forty 
years do for him ? What will they make of him ? They will temper him, subdue 
much the confidence of self, and will make him more meet for the Master's service, at 
tl .e very time that he shall appear less zealous for it. — B. 

Ver. 54. — Behuke, and the ill fruit that comes of just rebuke, refused. In the 
brotherhood of human society there is a place for advice, for persuasion, for encourage- 
ment, lor gentlest reproof, for vehement remonstrance, for beseechful expostulation, for 
all the cuurgy of urgent exhortation, and for rebuke. It must be confessed, however, 
that the ])lace which belongs to rebuke is (if comparison may be given to the word) 
far more unique in its character. Whatever it may intend, it is nothing better than 
the merest impertinence, except under certain very definite conditions. In connection 
with the ill reception, ill even to fatality, given on this occasion to the vigorous rebuke 
of Ste|ihcn, let us take opportunity to consider — . 

I. The rights and jdst grounds of Christian rebuke. 1. All rebuke must mean 
the assertion of authority, and naturally presumes some footing of rightful authority. 
Tlie rebuke of parent, of teacher, of master, of age, of experience, of knowledge, each 
rests on its own special authority. We are, therefore, justified in demanding the 
authority of Christian rebuke or what may claim to be such. And we may ask ai 
what sort its authority professes to be. 2. While some may be prepared most unhesi- 
tatingly to answer these questions, others, and those the very persons most nearly 
affected b}' the answer, may refuse to defer to them or to accept their dicta. Still, this 
will not disprove the authority claimed for the exercise of Christian rebuke, nor put it 
in any other position than some other cases of disputed authority. The decision for 
such persons may be deferred till the dawn of eternity ; and the person who exercises 
rebuke of this solemn sort must be prepared, and will readily acknowledge himself pre- 
pared, to await also the same date and abide its issue. 3. The authority of the man 
who honestly exercises Christian rebuke is of the same sort and in part of the same 
origin with tb»S -^-Voh bids him, for his own sake and for the sake of all others, " have 
no fellowsk'p ^ nkiiarsrw ir.S\ flvil, " but rather reprove " it. It is his native right, if 
he will tat do this very thing, to fl'ir ceaselessly with eviL Reason might have been 
sujposad equal to teaching this. Conscience certainly teaches it. The light of revelation, 
where it is possessed, says it, and the only thing remaining to clinch the rightful act 
of the person who rebukes is present in the fact {where least confessed) of the amen, 
uttered in some way or other by the conscience of the person justly rebuked. The 
honest Christian rebuke claims to rebuke that which is bane, misery, curse, to all the 
world; which, because it is the duty of every one to discountenance and do his best to 
destroy it, infers no presumptuousness in the few who do this, but does infer ?acAe«, 
and most criminal laches, in those who do it not. Men may doubt, disbelieve, deny the 
written authority of revelation, and are answerable for the consequences of doing so. 
But still they are held ; and they are held by a bond they cannot break or rid them- 
selves of, when, being rebuked, their conscience cither honestly owns to the justice of 
the rebuke, or owns to it no less conclusively though in a more painful manner by a 
certain violent refusal of it. And it is evident that the true Christian rebuker is not to 
wait till such time as the person rebuked is ready to confess his faith in things to come 
and his apprehension of things unseen : no ; he is to speak because of his own calm, 
fiim, yet mudest and tenderly compassionate apjjrehension of eternal verities, the things 
of God, of Christ, of the soul, and of eternity. No end of other responsibility lies with 
him who pose* as the Chiistian rebuker ; but i/h«ie truly this, then and then first ig 



eH.vii.1— 60.] THE ACTS OF THE APObTLES. , 241 

his lesponatUlity rightly met. So souls are quickened, and death is startled into life. 
So the messages of revelation are spread vith their sterner significance, and the tender 
words of Jesus are multiplied. So hearts that have heen touched themselves, and souls 
that own to the earnest of salvation within them, illustrate the one compassion left to 
them when, other means having failed and th« tight moment of rebuke having arrived, 
they utter forth the burden with which they are cliarged. And Stephen now spoka 
befCire men many times himself in number, and in repute and worldly estimation- 
many of them — far placed above liiraself ; yet lie assumes the tone and place of authority, 
and plainly speaks the words of authority. Moreover, the character of that auLhority 
is that which beyond a doubt is most offensive to others. It deals in censure, reflects 
on the motives and conduct of men, and of a long line of their ancestors as well ; and 
yet, provide his indictment is true and not slanderous, Stephen is right. Let alone the 
feet that he is fired with the light and the fervent flames of the Holy Spirit, he is right 
on the broadest ground of humanity, on the simplest principles of Christianity, in the 
naiue of truth, and in that service so often forgotten, the kind and faithful service of 
fellow-man. It is by no means a frequent thing to find the man who is ready to sacri^ 
flee himself in order to say and do those things of truth which have for their present 
reward loss evea of life to him, but for their remoter fruit the highest benefit of man- 
kind. 4. But lastly, none who are believers in great leading doctrines of the Christian 
rsligios, and in particular in the doctrine of the Holy Spirit as the force and the prin- 
clplti of life in that dispensation, will for a moment douht that, in the last analysis, hit 
authority is the beginning and the end of the rightful exercise of moral and spiritual 
rebu&e. He finds the right for all those whom he moves in his own sovereign right, 
/uxd his light, knowledge, and impulse conferred, submit to no limit except that which 
io self-imposed. His uncreate freedom, which so often blesses men to make them even 
aons of God, will yield none of its right, nor be robbed of its prerogative. When resisted, 
alighted,," grieved," it freely reproves through human lip; or when on the point of 
being " quenched " for any, it comes freely to rebuke, as now though by human lips 
only in wonls and suggestions, which "cut to the heart " men to whose heart nothing 
but the qualities of hardness and resistance seemed left. The rebuke of God's Spirit, 
albeit coming forth only from man's lips, can no more be restrained than the scathing 
liglitning can be stopped in its mid-career. The rebuke of God's Spirit carries legiti- 
matdy the credentials of its right in its might. And Christian rebuke, in the highest 
sense, postulates just this authority, ought to postulate it, and needs no other. 

II. The ill work that combs of just rebuke dbtkrminedly refused. 1. It 
certainly does not necessarily lose aught of its power to pain. " When they heard 
these things, they were cut to the heart." That certainly means pain, whatever the 
character of the pain. 2. The character of that pain is inevitably all-malignant. It is 
not of the pain that, sudden and sharp, lends itself also to the salutary use of calling 
attention to symptoms of inmost danger. It is a foregone conclusiou that it shall not 
have any beneficial operation of this sort, and in this sad sense too to be forewarned 
proves to be forearmed, namely, against what might be the best of friends. It is left 
to such pain to work all it can, according to its own evil pleasure, purposed in its own 
self, without a single redeeming feature. 3. It stirs up anger's muddiest depths. It 
excises anger to the turn of insanity. Anger rages first, then raves. What else is said, 
what less is true, when it is testified that " they gnaslied on him with their teeth." 
Anger so mastered them that it would not let them heed or even hear its own bast 
Mentor, — " Be ye angry, and sin not." This anger is all sin. It is sin in its cause- 
lessness; it is sin in its excess; it is sin in its character of a demonstration of oppo- 
sition so unequal as against one undefended man ; it is sin against conscience and 
against that Spirit whose mightiest office is to touch livingly the conscience ; it is siu 
in its blind, tumultuous desperation of conduct. 4. According to the intrinsic serious- 
ness or otherwise of the individual occasion, the inevitable tendency of the determined 
refusal to hear rebuke is either to that stricken heart and conscience that are equiva- 
lent to moral paralysis, or to an activity equally frantic and disastrous. The revenge 
which rebuke, unheeded, though it be just, takes is found to vaiy within many degrees. 
Sometimes its work is slow and secret, sometimes it is even " open beforehand " in the 
force of its demonstrations, and those "go before to judgment." It can scarcely he 
otherwise now. The j)resent iuiUiiuc is typical. When arrived at a Mrtain poiut. 



242 THE A0T3 OF THE AP0STLE3, [oh, yn. 1— 6a 

human nature seems to have it in it, rapidly indeed, " to fill up the measures of its 
iniquities." " How much better" is reproof listened to than rebuke resented! But if 
instead we have resented reproof, then how much better is it to listen to rebuke, to 
kits the rod that smites, and, though it smite severely, while still there is left us time 
to pray, " O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displea- 
sure I " For pain and anger in concert know no compassion, and show mercy least of all 
and last of all to those who court their company and soon find themselves their driven 
slaves. Ill is the promise of fair entrance to haven for the vessel that is tossed in 
storms of anger, lashed by those blasts of pain, which are the avengiags of an insulted, 
an aggravated, and disobeyed conscience. — K 

Vers. 55 — 60. — 2%e glory of the martyr. It is not impossible that the foregoing 
defence of Stephen may own to some slight ellipses; if so, to be accounted for partly by 
the fact of his immediate martyrdom, which prevented his rehearsal of it to any penman. 
But if it be not so, and if we have here in due connection all that Stephen said that is, 
material to a right apprehension of the exact i)ositioii of things, then his outburst 
recorded in rers. 51 — 53 is indeed full of suggestion, hints at much that lay behind, 
and invests itself with great additional interest. For we must suppose that his dis- 
cernment, all on fire at that moment, enabled him to see, both in the eyes of the eouncii 
of judges and in some of their movements, perhaps of the most unconscious and 
involuntaiy character, that the crisis had arrived when, without another minute's delay, 
he should deliver himself of truth's scathing rebuke. And this superior illumination and 
quickened intelligence was, perhaps, but the stealing on, and with no very stealthy pace 
either, of the dawn of heavenly light itself. Whatever might be coming upon the 
enraged persecutors, to the brave and dignified persecuted was near at hand the lustre 
of the perfect day, the perfect truth, the perfect love. Let it be that the "age of 
miracles " has passed, how often all along up to the present have last moments of the 
servants of Christ, specially of his suffering ones, been visited in sight and sound 
by quickened percej'tions of the eternal realities 1 With those realities Stephen is 
alreaidy in company in a degree beyond, possibly not in a manner altogether different 
from, manifestations vouchsafed in later days. The circumstances surrounding the 
death of Stephen have ever attracted special attention. The death is a martj'rdom ; it 
is the first distinct martyrdom for the name of Jesus. It is in some aspects of it not 
an altogether unworthy or unfaithful copy from the great original, and it is, on the 
other side, a type of many a close to earthly life which should hereafter come to pass. 
The surroundings of the death of Stephen well justify the gaze of all who pass by the 
way, the breathless listening of all who have an ear to hear, the deeper inquiry of all 
who are moved to deeper faith. And they reward these, abundantly reward them. 
There can be no mistake as to where the closing scene legan. It began from the point 
at which the enemies of Stephen " gnashed their teeth on him." And from thii 
beginning of what may well be called here " the pain, the bliss of dying," we may 
notice the things which shall seem chiefly to distinguish the death of the firtt 
Christian martyr — a death which is plainly offered for an open vision to all the world. 

I. The " FULL " POSSESSION " or the Holy Ghost" on the part op the marttb. This 
had long commanded life for Stephen and for his work.' This had made him "full of 
faith " and " full of power," and able to " work great wonders and miracles among the 
people." This commands all Christian life, energy, and usefulness. It is the secret of life, 
but, more than that, the strong, sure force of it. And as the Holy Ghost had been the 
mighty Quickener of spiritual life and " work and wonder " for Stephen while he lived, so 
he is with him the strong Director and Supporter when he must face death. None can 
tell all the force of the Holy Spirit. He who has most only knows up to what he has ; 
hut is it not very plain, as the more a man has of him so he is the more strong and the 
more full of spiritual life and work, that we may therefore safely conclude that witk 
him rests the complete transforming of our nature, no doubt, as well body as soul assL 
spirit ? Well may it be that we need not to " fear them who kill the body only," 
when we have with us One, the Holy Spirit, who can, who does vanquish their killing 
work, even while they are yet in the act, himself pouring fuller streams of life into the 
soul. Is it not greatly to be feared that the modern Church is guilty (though uncon- 
■ciously, yet guilty in that very thing) of dishonouring the Spirit? We dishonour the 



JH.ra.1-^.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa 243 

Siiirit (1) in not owning our entire dependence on him for spiritual life; (2) in not 
taking far higher views than we generally do of the circle of his influence aud of the 
degree of it ; and (3) in not obeying, and that both sensitively and trustingly, such 
impulses as he does graciously vouchsafe. 

11. A POWER OF THE BYE TO SEE BEYOND THE USUAIi HUMAN POWER OP BIQHT. 

Glorious is the contrast, and surely it must have been all designed, when Stephen can 
turn away his saddened gaze from the vision of malignant, hostile, and infuriate faces, 
to what an opened heaven now proffers to his sight. But even a more essential glory 
than the substituted objects of vision may be said to have been found in the new-born 
or all but Lew-born realization of the power itself that lay sleeping there so long — 
sleeping and confined beneath the eyelid of flesh all life's length, till the moment had 
come before "the last trump" to startle it into proving its unknown gift. So we 
live daily amid the presence of most momentous realities, nor know by how fine a veil, 
bow frail a partition, they are separated from our sight, while any moment may do one 
or both of these same things for us — rend open the veil or give the piercing sight to 
see through, past, and far, far above all the hindrances of sense and matter, kt them be 
what they may. Glory now dawns on the horizon for Stephen ; while he is yet in the 
strangest place and with a repulsive foreground, the distance is most radiant. It is 
far less of a miracle than a very simple fulfilment of assertions of Scripture and 
assurances of spiritual natures. The pure — " blessed are the pure in heart : for they 
shall see God." He " looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God." 

III. The bight op beauties most sionipicantly appropriate to Stephen. It 
may be observed that, alike, the historian affirms the resplendent objects that Stephen's 
elevated gaze beheld, aud also gives in quotation the words of his lips, uttered while 
yet his eyes beheld the ecstatic sight. We cannot err in understanding that what 
tStephen said he saw was keenly noticed and thought of by the historian and many a 
contemporary devout brother. Nor can we miss for ourselves the point — the less that 
this is the only occasion on which we find Jesus Christ directly styled " the Son of 
man " by any one but himself (but see Kev. i. 13). For announcing, defending, advo- 
cating these facts ; for preaching them with a zeal and faith in them that would not be 
silenced and could not be gaiusaid, — it was that Stephen was in his present place and 
position. The facts were these exactly : that (1) the Jesus, whom they were none 
of them unwilling to call " Son' of man" and who called himself so, was, though 
" betrayed and murdered," not only " Son of man ; " and (2) that he now stood, 
manifest in the opened heaven, in a position that offered no doubtful evidence of all 
the rest. This had been the preaching of Peter and the rest of the apostles and of 
Stephen — that the Jesus whom the Jews had slain was "exalted to the right hand 
of God." Yes J is Stephen going to seal his testimony with his blood? before that 
shall be, Gud will seal his testimony, and give to Stephen the vision of what is close 
awaiting his sacrifice. The "everlasting gates" are already flung "open." The 
" King of glory" has already gone through. Glory in all its effulgence is there, 
fur God and Jesus, the Light and Glory, the Strength and Love of the universe, are 

I here; and "an abundant entrance" is about to be given to Stephen. Oh what 

a sight for Stephen! What a contrast ! What an infinite reward I What supreme 
urace of Heaven 1 And what a thought for us ! Jesus is there, and he is " standing " 
Lliere, to take at the first possible moment the hand of Stephen, and welcome his 
foot to the golden floor. The correspondence between the work of Stephen aud the 
peril into which he had been brought by it, and the gracious manifestations now made 
Lo liim, tells its own tale. 

IV. A faithful and emphatic fulfilment up to the last moment of tub 
bight parts op earthly duty. Now literally hurried away by force by his enemies, 
we are not told of any struggle whatever on his part, nor of any murmur, nor of auy 
expression of mstinotive horror and dread. But we are told: 1. How, when the first storm 
of stones gave him the clear signal of what was to be expected for earth, he " calls upuu 
God," aud, by no means forgetting the full meaning of his own " preaching and faith," 
crieSj " Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." The care of his own soul is ever the first duty 
of any man. 2. And how, with marvellous memory, he (1) does not omit to prav 
for li's murderers ; nor (2) omits to " kneel down," as he prays, " Lord, lay not this sin tii 
their charge." We have in all this, not the signs of an enthusiast merely or a fanatie 



t44 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. vii. 1— 60. 

Eere is gomething very different — a man with the splendour of the glory of God and the 
realities of heaven and the exalted Jesus bursting ou his vision, and yet, amid stor i » 
of stones, recalled to prayer for himself and thu trustful committing of his soul to iho 
charge of Jesus, and to intercession on bended knees for his murderers. To disregaid 
the suggestions of the patience of Stephen, the dying charge of his spirit, and the .pray ir 
for those who kill him, in their power to recall the temper and the trust aud the foi- 
givingness of his great Master and Saviour, were to disregard Christ's own grandest 
achievements. Of such achievements his force, his word, his Spirit, have now wrought 
ju Stephen so early an illustrious and ever-enduring monument. Nor, amid all the 
rest of the splendour of the surroundings of Stephen's departing from this world, v. as 
there any more intrinsic mark of what it all meant than the copy which he himsuU 
exhibited of a character and a portrait " after the Master" — the Master Jesus. 

V. A WORD APPLIED IN THE NARRATIVE TO DESCRIBE THE DEATH OF TUB MABTYU 
AS SINGULARLY IN HABUOKT WITH THE WHOLE WORLD'S IRRESISTIBLE CONVICTION 
OF THE PERFECT PEACE OF THE SPIRIT, AS IT WOULD SEEM INAPPROPRIATE TO THS 

BUFFERINGS OF THE BODY. " And when he bad said this, he/ell asleep." The beautiful 
expression was not unknown nor unused before Christians used it; but men may be 
pardoned if they felt (perhaps against strict letter of fact) it could never be appropri- 
ately drawn upon without Christian revelation. But its use now, its use in the circum- 
stances presented here, is a sign and a mark indeed. This is not some occasion where 
truth is complimentarily sacrificed, and facts dragged in disgraceful chains in the train 
of words. On the contrary,/oc<s, in spite of all appearances, Aeepei facts, despite the sight 
and the sounds and stones that are flying ahoui, facts that insist on giving expression 
to themselves, triumph over words and over all opposing forces, and demand that, as the 
last thing we know of Stephen in this world, we shall know this — that his death was as 
though a "sleep," and his yielding to it as though he yiehled to Heaven's gracious 
remedy for nature's deepest need — sleep ! " He fell asleep " — in Jesus (1 Thess. It. li). 
'■ Well done, good and faithful servant " — " faithful unto death." And in death alsc 
faithful — a faithful witness of the Lord's faithfulness to Lis owu. 

"He fell asleep in Christ his Lord; 
He gave to him to kelp 
The soul Ills great love had redeemed. 
Then calmly went to sleep. 

"And as a tired bird folds its wing 
Sure of the morning light, 
He laid him down in trusting faith, 
And dreaded not the night" 

s. 

Veri. ^-53. — StepJien's defence. It was usual in the court of the Sanhedrim to 
allow an accused person to plead guilty or not gnilty, and to speak in his own del'ence. 
As this address of Stephen's is his defence, we must know of what he was accused. 
Generally it may be said that he was a blasphemer of God and the Law ; but, to under- 
stand how such a charge could possibly be made, we must appreciate the intense and 
superstitious feeling concerning Mosaism which characterized the rulers of that day 
The more manifestly that the spiritual life faded out of the older system, the more 
intensely the people clung to its mere forms and traditions; jealousy of it as a 
national system had taken the place of faithfulness to it as a revelation of God and a 
means of grace. Stephen was " the first man who dared to think that the gospel of 
Jesus was a Divine step forward, a new economy of God, which the existing Hebraic 
institutions might indeed refuse to accept, but which, in that case, would not only dis- 
pense with, but in the end overturn, the Hebraic institutions." So far as a charge was 
brought against Stephen, it closely resembled that brought against our Lord. The false 
witnesses declared that they had heard him say " that this Jesus of Nazareth shall 
destroy this place [i.e. the temple], and shall change the customs which Moses delivered 
us." But while this was the definite charge, we find that the real offence must have 
been his bold and unqualified assertion of the Messiahship and divinity of Christ. 
Stephen's crime, in the eyes of bigoted Jewish rulers, was his discernment of th« 



en. Tit. 1— GO.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 245 

spirituality of Christ's m'ssion ; bnt this Stephen snw on its anta;nnistic side, and 
therefore we cannot wonder that ho shniild excite sucli prejudice against himself. 
Olshausen well says, " 'I'he Jews, with a disposition of mind that looked to outward 
things, did not rightly comprehend the thoughts of Stephen, but took a distorted 
view of them. What he had represented as a consequence of the operation of the Spirit 
of Christ, whose design it was to consecrate the world as a great temple of God, and 
to guide religion from externals to the heart, that the Jews conceived as a pni'pose to 
be accomplished by violence, and thus they ascribed to him the dostmction of the 
temple and the abolition of Jewish usages — things which he had never attempted." 
W« may dwell on — 

I. The form of the speech as adapted to the Jewish AtrDiEscB. It is a his 
torical resume. With such a Jewish audience is always pleaserl, and for such marked 
attention and interest can now be secured. It is remarkable : 1. For the knowledge of 
!-^cripture which it reveals — ^a knowledge not concerned only with facts and persona, but 
with principles and their permanent applications. 2. For the skill with which he 
selected his Scripture points ; so that not until " he had patiently traversed the whole 
period from Abraham to Solomon, selecting such facts as made for his own case, and 
setting them in skilful array, did he suffer one word to escape him at which even his 
most adverse hearer could take open exception." Stephen illustrates for us the 
power that lies in (1) command of Scripture; (2) self-command ; (3) skill in the art 
of rhetoric and of argument ; (4) spiritual insight of the deeper meanings of Divine 
revelation. 

II. The relation op the speech to the specific charges. He was accused of 
teaching what would materially change the old Jewish customs. He replies in effect 
(I) that God had given a new revelation, and that he was only asking them to hear 
God's message and receive God's Messenger; and [2) that, in rejecting a new message 
from God, they were only acting as their fathers had done in all the previous genera- 
tions. This Stephen, in a very subtle way, hinted at by his historical references ; but 
he reserved the full unfolding of it until the close of his speech. Then he presses two 
1 oints home upon the heart and conscience of his audience. (1) In reference to the 
charijc that he proposed the destruction of the temple and its ritual, he urged that 
God's direct spiritual dealings witli men were and always had been stiictly independent 
of forms, or ritual, or temple. And (2) in reference to the Jewish rejection of Jesus 
as the Messiah, he urged that the Jews,'«nder every succeeding form of Divine revela- 
tion, had resisted the Spirit. Dr. Dykes says, '• As often as it had pleased God, 
through chosen messengers of his will, to lead Israel forward through a new moment 
of change into a fresh spiritual epoch of blessing, so often had God's thoughts been 
misunderstood, his purposes hindered, and his messenger rejected by the bulk of Israel. 
This had been their national failing — to cling to the present and material, whenever 
God was calling them to higher spiritual good. This they had done so often that their 
doing it now, by rejecting a spiritual Christ and idolizing a material temple, was only 
of a piece with their entire history." We must suppose that the excitement of the 
Sanhedrim, who detected his point, and the clamour of the crowd, who followed the 
cue given by the council, reached at last such a height that Stephen could only close his 
speech suddenly with the few intense words given us in vers. 51 — 53. It was a noble 
boldness and a sublime testimony, but we cannot wonder that it fed the flame of excite- 
ment and made a violent death lor the heroic champion almost a certainty. There are 
times in life when what colder natures call imprudence is the immediate duty to 
w hich men are called. Stephen's burning words have carried their conviction to human 
consciences through the long Christian ages. Literature has no intenser warning 
against losing the spiritual by doggedly clinging to the bare and formal and literaL 
— B.T. 

Ver. 6, etc. — The ethics of Scripture quotation. Much has been said, in modern 
times, about the importance of quoting from other writers or speakers with the utipost 
correctness and [irccision, giving the exact language in which the other mind clothed 
its thought. And, from the point of view of a somewhat narrow theory of inspiration, 
it has ijeen urged that all scriptural quotations should give the very words of the 
"Scripture writer. Against making this bondage injurious and painful, two couBidera< 



us THE ACTS OF TUE APOSTLES. [c&. til I— 6a 

tioTiR Tiiii> be ]Tos('nteil. 1. It may be noticed that the Scripturos, as we have them, are 
trail slat iuns, i.e. they are the thoughts of the inspired wiiters expressed in words chosen 
by other men, and there is no reason why men nowadays, who can grasp the thought 
of the original writer, should not give it expression in other, better-choson, and better- 
adapted terms. 2. It may be shown that the apostles and New Testament speakers and 
wiiters did not put thenjA'lves under any such severe limitations. They quoted freely, 
jealous of the sense, but not imduly concerned about repeating the precise phraseology. 
Of this we have instances in Stephen's speech, to which we direct attention ; premising 
that our space does not admit of our pointing out every instance of deviation or addition, 
and that we can only attempt to open an interesting line of study. It is to be noticed 
that Stephen quotes from the Septuagint translation rather than from the original 
Scriptures, but even from the Septuagint he makes what seem to be important altera- 
tions ; and he blends traditional references with Scripture quotations, as if some 
recognized authority attached to them. It is very probable that " ancient genuine 
elements were preserved traditionally among the Jews, which received their highei 
confirmation by admission into the New Testament. If we consider the genera 
prevalence of oral traditinn among all ancient nations, and particularly the stationarj 
posture of things which was common among the Jews, such a descent of genuin* 
traditionary elements through a succession of centuries will lose the astonishing 
character which it seems to have." Illustrations may be given of the following 
points : — 

I. Translation affects the literalitt, bttt need not affect the tbuth. Show 
that: 1. Truth must get a form ot words if it is to be communicated to and received 
by men, whose intercourse is so largely dependent on language. '2. A particular truth 
is not, of necessity, confined to one particular form of words. Each man may give it 
his own form of expression, and, conceivably, each man's form may adequately 
represent the truth, and convey it to another mind. 3. The utmost importance would 
attach to the ip.iissima verba of Scripture, if they could be recovered. 4. That they 
cannot be recovered, and can only be known in translation, may be designed to convince 
us of the comparative unimportance of the mere form. 5. The Bible is translated into 
many languages, and in its varied dress it is found efiSciently to retain its spirit and 
its power. 

II. Memory affects the literality, but need not affect the truth. Stephen 
spoke from memory ; St. Paul, in his writings, quotes Irom memory. Ministers and 
teachers must often quote from memory. The power of menmry is of two kinds — 
(!) the power to retain exact words ; (2) the power to retain the thought, the truth, 
or the principle, which found expression in the words. It may be easily said that the 
verbal memory is alone the correct one, but, more carefully considered, we would 
recognize the superior correctness of the memory that held the truth rather than 
the words. 

III. With dub care to preserve the literai,itt, we bhotjld havb more care 
ABOUT GAiNiNO SPIRITUAL HOLD OF THE TRUTH. Of this Stephen gives effective 
example. And it may be shown that a precise and adequate expression of any truth 
depends, not on the exact remembrance of a form of words or an accepted creed, bnt 
on spirilual insight, on the clearness of our visions of the truth; he who tees the truth 
will never find it difficult to make his brother see it too. — B. T. 

Ver. 37. — A Prophet Kite Moses. The reference Is to Deut. xviii. 18, and, as Intro- 
duction, the difficulties which Moses found in executing his mission may be vividly 
described. In Stephen's day it was the fashion to exalt Moses and the Mosaic system, 
but this was done m fiirgetlulness of the facts connected with Moses' career. Again and 
again his leadeisliip was refused. The stiff-neckedness and unspiritualiiy of the people 
tried him very sorely ; once, to so great an extent, that he spake unadvisedly with his 
lips, and threw down the tables of the Law. This Moses, in whom now they trusted, 
they were i. t really willing to heed, any more than their fathers had been ; for Moses 
had himself prophesied of the Messiah, and any one who chose could make the com- 
parison between Moses and .Jesus of Nazareth, and see that the one answered to the 
other just as the great lawgiver had indicated. Some of the points of similarity between 
Moses and Messiah may be con^^dered and illustrated. 



c*. TO. 1—60,] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. i47 

I. Each had a Divuie call. Both in chilJliood : Moses in his mysterious pre- 
servation ; Messiali in liis mysterious birth. Both in early manhood (each early 
relatively to the age they lived) : Moses in the vision of the flaming bush ; Messiah 
in the dove- vision and heavenly voice at his baptism. 

II. Each had a special pbepabation. Moses in the experience of the Egyptian 
court and in the solitudes of Horeb; Messiah in the experiences of the carpenter'* 
house at Nazareth, and in the temptations of the Jordan desert. 

III. Each foukded a dispensation. Moses, one which was both an adranc« and 
a decline from the older patristic dispensation ; an advance as a fuller revelation of 
God's will, and a decline as imprisoning spiritual truth, for a time and purpose, in slifl 
religious rites and ceiemonies. Messiah, one which was in every way an advance, 
liberating men from all ritual bonds, and bringing to open hearts the fuller revelalioiis 
of the Father. 

IV. Bach was a new spiritual roitcs. As bringing Ood near to men ; e^thibit- 
inn' afresh his claims, and revealing himself. Every man who sect God thereby becomes 
a power on his fellows. Moses, in a surprising manner, saw God on Sinai ; and with 
his vision there may be compared our Lord's vision on the Mount of Transfigurmion. 

V. Each was a teacher. Precisely of that which man could not gain liy any 
studies and inquiries of his own. Both were (1) moral teachers ; (2) religious tcaclitrs ; 
(3) teachers of a specific Divine truth ; (4) each enabled, by the power of miracle, to 
attest their teaching claims. 

VI. Bach claimed a hearing on Divink authority. Moses made it continually 
known that God sent him and God spake by him. Messiah made it fully jtiiowu 
that he did not speak of himself, but the words which the Father gave him he gave 
forth to men. This claim, based on Divine authority, Stephen presses on the attention 
of the Sanhedrim, urging^ that it makes their rejection of Christ positively criminaL 

YII, Bach were rejected Bt their own qenebation. See ver. 35 and compare th« 
rejection of Messiah. 

Impress that the many-sided and abimdant proofs that Jesus is indeed the Christ, 
the Son of God, and the Saviour, bring his personal claims closely home to us, and 
make great indeed the guilt of our rejecting him. "How shall we escape, if we 
neglect so great salvation ? " — K. T. 

Vers. 55, 56. — Visions of tlie risen Christ. It is hardly to be doubted that St. Paul 
preserved the record of these incidents ; and we may realize how such a cry from the 
persecuted Nazarene, as we have in the text, would fix itself in the thought and 
memory of one so religious and so impulsive |as St. Paul. It would be most vividly 
recalled to mind when he too was smitten down with the glory on the Damascus road, 
and himself heard the voice of Jesus, the risen and exalted One. Evidently the thing 
that most impressed St. Paul was Stephen's firm conviction that the crucified Josus 
was risen, living, exalted, glorified. Divine. However intensely St. Paul resisted this 
conviction at first, it had more power on him than he estimated. And the scene is a 
most impressive one. The howling mob ; the reverend officials, borne away from all 
their proprieties by lanatical excitement; the young Pharisee, too aristocratic to take 
any actual part in carrying off the victim, or throwing the stones, helping to raise the 
excitement with stirring words ; and amidst all the noise and the violence, the man of 
God, calm, rapt beyond present scenes, seeing the unseen, and uttering a last splendid 
testimony to the one truth he had laboured to declare. Say what men may of the 
Impoptor of Nazareth, who was shamefully crucified, Stephen saw him living, and 
"standing on the right hand of God." We need not think that there was any 
" external spectacle ;" the vision was that kind of internal vision men have had when in 
a state of ecstasy. The fact of the vision was " inferred partly, we may believe, from 
vlie rapt, fixed expression of the martyr's face, partly from the words that followed, 
interpreting that upward gaze." The vision may be treated as — 

I. A comfort to the persecuted one. Recall the promises of the Saviour's 
presence always with his people, but especially when they should be brought before 
kings and governors for his Name's sake. Even making due account of the excitement 
produced by the surroundings of martyrdom, and its power to raise a heroic spirit, it 
nas never been found an easy thing to face torture and death. But the story cf th« 



S48 THE ACTS Otf THE APOSTLES. {pa. m. 1—60. 



mart3-r8 {jrovides abundant illustratioi of the varied ways in which Christ has com- 
forted his witnesses. Stephen was comforted by the vision in three ways. 1. It 
aBsured him that what he had testified was true. Christ was living and exalted. 2, 
It declared that he was not suffering alone. The Christ was in fullest sympathy with 
him. 3. And it encouraged him to full trust in all his Lord's promises of strength and 
grace for the enduring and final triumph over his foes. The vision seemed to say, 
" When thou passeat through the waters, I will be with thee." 

IL A CONFIRMATION OP THE CHRISTIAN TRUTH. At different times different pai Is of 
the Christian truth have been the citadtl or the redan round which the chief fijihting 
lias raged, and on which the issue of battle has depended. In the early Church the 
conflict w»8 mainly over the question of our Lord's resurrection from the dead. Two 
tilings were seen to depend on this resurrection. 1, Our Lord's claim to Messiahship. 
'I. The spiritual character of our Lord's mission. If risen and exalted, his kingly 
authorities are declared to be no coarse earthly dominion ; he is King of souls, Deliverer 
of sinners, the living One who saves. 

III. A WITNESS AGAINST Stephbn's perbecutoes. And that the witness was 
effective is shown in its increasing their rage, A dying testimony that was more 
effective than anything he had spoken in life. But the hated name, spoken of as 
being at God's right hand in the glory, " let loose the tide of rage which awe had for a 
moment frozen, and with illegal tumult, councillors and bystanders, turned through 
sheer passion into a mob, swept him from the chamber with s rush, and hurried him 
for execution beyond the northern city gate." 

The times have brought round again the most serious conflict over the truth of th« 
Resurrection. Show thie importance of Stephen's life-testimony to this fact, especially 
as being given when men would have refuted it if they could, and could if it had not 
been true. Show how the dying testimony sealed the witness of Stephen's life. — E. T. 

Ver. 58. — Our introduction to the greatest of apostles. It is only casually mentioned 
that " the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose name was 
Saul," and yet how much is declared in the brief sentence I It is our first sight of the 
zealous young Pharisee from Tarsus. It is at once an indication of his character and 
spirit. We see the impulsiveness that has taken up so violent an opposition to the 
Nazareue impostor and all his followers. If Saul cannot be allowed to throw the 
actual stones, seeing he was not one of the witnesses, he will do the next thing — he 
will hold the clothes of the men who have stripped themselves in order to do more 
cfBoiently their deadly work. It was the occasion on which Saul gained an impression 
which he never afterwards lost, and which resulted in what would surprise no one so 
much as it did himself, in leading him to take up and carry on that very witness and 
work for which the heroic Stephen died. The age of Saul at this time xjannot be 
certainly known. We may assume that he was under thirty years old, Three points 
may receive consideration in the picture that our text presents to us. 

I. Saul sharino by his presence. He " was consenting unto Stephen's death." 
" He gave his voice against him." He watched over the clothes. He regarded the 
scene with satisfaction. A delusion sometimes possesses men that they cannot be 
guilty of a crime unless they took actual part in it. Saul had nobler moral sentiments. 
The approver is as guilty as the actor; for he also would have done the thing had 
opportunity served. But how searching and how serious becomes the consideration 
that, before God, we may be judgi d guilty on the ground of our approval and consent I 
With what limitations and qualifications must this point be pressed? St. Paul does 
HOt hesitate to take on himself the guilt of Stephen's death, though he never lifted a 
8toiie. 

I L Saul avoidino shabino in the execution. This may be explained on one or other 
of the following grounds: — 1. The law of the execution, which required the witnesscti 
against the victim to effect and complete the death. 2, Ihe position Saul occupied as 
<n\p. of the judges. He gave his vote, and it is never regarded as becoming in a judge 
to execute his own sentence. Whether Saul was a member of the actual Sanhedrim, or 
of some committee appointed to deal with these followers of Jesus of Nazareth, doci 
not appear. 3, Aristocratic sentiments might keep Saul from actually engaging in 
Itbe stoning. Nothing could firee Saul from his share of the guilt of Stephen's death. 



«h.ttH— 66.3 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 241 

III, SAlJIi REOEIVINO iMPnESSloNS A8 AN ON-LOOKER. Endeavour to estimate his 
conflict of feeling. While actually watching, rage and hatred may have prevailed, but 
lii§ mind was receiving its picture of the calm and heroic sufferer; and presently Saul 
lost sight of jiidgeg, witnesses, and crowds, and the vision on his soul alone was before 
him. He saw the saintly man fall asleep ; he heard again those dying cries ; he seemed 
to look through and see what Stephen saw, the Son of man glorified; and, strive how 
he would to blot out the vision, it was there ; rush desperately into persecuting ways 
how he might, still the vision was there. Stephen, we may fairly say, awalrcned Saul 
to anxiety, and prepared the way for that vision of Christ which bowed duwn Saul's 
pride and won hirn to penitence, to faith, and to service. Better than the fable of the 
phcenix is the truth of Saul. Out of Stephen's death he sprang to a nobler, longer life 
of witness for the living Christ than Stephen could have lived. Death is often found 
the way, and the only way, to life. "Dying, and beliold we live." — R. T. 

Vera. 59, 60.^-N6ble dying arzes. Some account may be given of the mode of 
securing death by stoning. The practice is first heard of in the deserts of stony 
Arabia, this mode having been suggested probably by the abundance of stones, and the 
fiital elfect with which they were often employed in broils among the peojilo. Originally 
the people merely pelted their victim, but something like form and rule were subse- 
quently introduced. A crier marched before the man appointed to die, proclaiming 
his offenpe. He was taken outside the town. The witnesses against hira were required 
to cast the first stones. But the victim was usually placed on an elevation, and 
thrown down from this, before he was crushed with the stones flung upon him. For 
full details, see Kitto's ' Bibl. Ulus.,' viii. 63. It was the mode of execution usual for 
the crimes of blasphemy and- idolatry (see Deut. xiii. 9, 10; xvii. 5 — 7). Stephen's 
dying cries should be compared with those of our Lord Jesus Christ, in order that 
the measures in which Stephen caught the Christly spirit may be realized. 

I. The pbesencb 6f Christ to his spirit made Stephen dead to the presence of 
nis FOES. In this we learn the secret of our elevation above the world, care, suffering, 
or trouble. It lies in our being so full of "Christ and things Divine " as to have no room 
for them. Our hearts may be so full of God's presence, ami so restful in the assurance 
of his acceptance and smile, that we may say, " None of these things move me." " If 
God be for us, who can be against us ? " One of the greatest practical endeavours of life 
should be to bring and to keep Christ closely near to heart and thought. If outward 
circumstances reach to such an extremity as in the case of Stephen, we shall then say 
with hin), " Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." 

II. To HIM WHO WAB SO NEAR, STEPHEN PRAYED FOR HIMSELF. ObsorVO that : 1. His 

prayer indicates submissive acceptance of the fact that he must die. He does not ask 
fir any bodily deliverance, any miracle-working for his personal rtl'aso. Compare in 
this our Lord's submission when his life came to its close. 2. His prayer indicates 
suiieriority to bodily suffering. There is no petition for relief from pain or even for 
.siioedy release. Exactly what was God's will for him he would bear right through. 
Compare our Lord's triumph in Gethsemane, and his going forth to bodily suffermga 
calm and trustful. Stephen fulfilled his Lord's words, that his disciples should drmk 
of the "cup" that he drank of. 3. And his prayer indicates supreme concern, but 
absolute confidence concerning his soul and his future. 1'here is no tone of question- 
ing ! with full faith in the Lord .Tesus, he commends his spirit to him— a last and 
ui -aestionin'' testimony to his faith in the living, spiritual Christ. 

I'll To EIM IN WHOM HE HAD SUCH CONFIDENCE HE PRAYED FOR HIS FOBS. Compare 

our Lord's words, "Father, forgive them ; for they know not what they do." In the 
older days of political execution by the axe, the headsman used to kneel and ask the 
forgiveness of the victim, before proceeding to place his head upon the block. Stephen 
kntw how blinded by prejudice and false notions of religion his persecutors were, and 
he gives a beautiful illustration of heavenl}-, Divine chanty m thus pleading for his 
very mui-derers. One point should not be lost sight of. Even in this last word of the 
noble n>an be asserted his characteristic truth once more. The Lord J. sus is living, 
and the exalted Saviour, for be controls the charging and the pnt"«li'>'g <>» B»n- 
"Lord lay not this sin to their charge "—an unmeaning prayer if he had not fuUy 
believed tbat Jesus had power on earth to deal with, to punish, and to lorgive md. 



2S) 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[ct. TUL 1 — 40. 



Close by showinf; the wondrous calmness and the exquisite tenderness of the wordi 
of the narrative, " He fell asleep." We hear the howlings of the people, the whirr and 
smash of the stones, but amid it all and " in the arms of Jesus," the saint and hero 
and martyr softly " falls asleep "—asleep to earth, waking to heaven and peace and the 
eternal smile of the living Christ, for whose sake he died. — B. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER VIIL 



Vpt. 1. — There arose on thai day for at 
that time there wae, A.V. ; in fur at, A.V. 
Saul was consenting to his death. St. Paul's 
repeated reference to this sad episode in his 
life is very touching (see cli. xxii. 20; 
1 Cor. XV. 9 ; 1 Tim. i. 13). (For the word 
auvivBoKeiv, to consent, see ch. xxii. 20; 
Luke xi. 48 ; Bom. i. 32 ; 1 Cor. vii. 12.) 
Arose on that day. The ph rase is manifestly 
the Hebrew one, Ninn nvs, so constantly used 
in Isaiah and the other prophets, not of a 
single day, but of a longer or shorter time, 
and means, as the A.V. has it, "at that time," 
not the particular Tuesday or Wednesday 
on which Stephen was killed. If St. Luke 
had meant to state that the persecution set 
in the very day on which Stephen was 
stoned, he would have expressed it much 
more pointedly, and used a different word 
from^eVtTo. It is otherwise with ch. ii. 41 
and Luke xvii. 31, where the context 
defines the meaning, and confines it to a 
specified day ; just as the equivalent Hebrew 
phrase is as commonly applied to a literal 
day as to a time or period. The context 
shows which is the sense in which it is used. 
Here the thing spoken of, the persecution, 
did not take place on a day. It lasted many 
days. Therefore rifi^pa means here " time." 
They were all scattered. Just as the wind 
blows the seed to a distance to fructify in 
dififerent places. Except the apostles. Ti,ey, 
like faithful watchmen, remained at their 
post, to confirm the souls of those disciples 
wlio for one reason or another were unable 
to flee (for of course the word atl must not 
be pressed strictly), and to exhoit them to 
continue in the faith, as St. Paul did Inter 
at Ly Bti a, loonium, and Antioch (ch. xiv. 22 ), 
and to keep up the nucleus of the Church 
i a the metropolis of Christendom. 

Ver. 2. — Buried for carried to his hurial 
(the last three words in italics), A.V. 
Devout men; Ai/Spej ev\nDe7s. This word 
is applied to Simeon (Luke ii. 25), and to 
tlie Jews who were assembled at Jerusalem 
nu tlie day of Pentecost (ch. ii. 5), and, 
iiccording to the R.T., to Ananias (ch. xxii. 
1 2) J but occurs nowhere else in the New 
I'estamont. It is not certain, therefore, that 
these men were Christians, though they 
mii^ht be. If not, they were pious Jews, 



men who feared God, and still loved Stephen 
as being himsilf a devout Jew though lie 
was a disciple. Buried. SuyKo^uffa oecurrs 
only here in the New Testament; but ils 
common use for carrying corn to a barn or 
granary seems to iudicate that "carrying tn 
his burial" of the A.V. is the most exnrt 
rendering. The word is said also tn be 
applied to the acts preparatory to buri-.il — 
closing the eyes, washing, anointin;,' ilie 
borly, and so on ; but this meaning is le^ii 
certain than that of " carrying." 

Ver. 3. — But for as for, A.V. ; laid icaste 
for he made havoc of, A.V. From the dis- 
persion of the disciples will flow the 
narrative in this present chapter. It is 
therefore mentioned first. From the per- 
secution of Saul will flow the narrative in 
ch. ix. and to the end of the book. 
Stepheu's burial completes the preceding 
narrative. 

Ver. i. — They therefore for therefore they, 
A.V. ; about for everywhere, A.V. Went 
about; t.e. from place to place, and whei- 
ever they went they preached the Wor.l. 
AtepxofiM here is used in the same sense as 
in ver. 40, and in eh. i. 38 ; xviL 23 ; x.v. 25, 
and elsewhere. 

Ver. 5. — And for then, A.V. ; proclaimed 
unto Ikem the Christ fur preached Christ unio 
them, A.V. Philip ; the deacon and evangelist 
(oh. vi. 7; xxi. 8), not the apostle. As 
regards Samaria, it is always used in the 
New Testament of the country, not of the 
city, which at this time was called Sebaste, 
from 2E^a(rT((s, i.e. Augustus Ciesar (see ch. 
XXV. 21, 26, etc. ; John iv. 5 ; and Josephus, 
' Ant. Jud.,' XV. vii. 9). Whether, therefore, 
we read with the T.E. iriMv, or with the li.T. 
tV ■n-6Ktv, we must understand Samaria to 
mean the country, and probably the city 
to be the capital, Sebaste. Alford, however, 
with many others, thinks that Byohcm is 
meant, as in John iv. 5. 

Ver. 6. — The multitudes gam heed wilh 
one accord for the 'people with one accord 
gate heed, A.V. ; the for those (things), A.V. 
that were epolcen by Philip fur wliich Philip 
spake, A.V. ; when they heard and saw the 
signs for hearing and seeing the miracles, A.V. 
Ndte St. Luke's favourite word, wilJi oiie 
accord (above, ch. ii. 1, note). 

Ver. 7. — From many of those which had 
unclean spirits, they came oui crying with a 



cii. VIII. 1 — 40. 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



£61 



loud voice for unolean spirits, crying mith 
loiid voice, crime out of mamj that were 
possessed with them, A.V. ; that were palsied 
for taken with pahies, A.V. rrom many of 
those, etc. The E.T. is represented by the 
margin, but it is nonsense. The different 
rendering depends upon whether iryeu/xaro 
iicdBapra is taken as the subject to i^'fipxero, 
or as the object after exovra. In one case, 
vi/eifiara or aura, must be understood after 
ixivToiv, as in the A.V., which inserts with 
them in italics ; in the other, the snme word 
must be understood before ^l^px^To, as in 
the R.V., which inserts they. The latter 
construction seems right, but the sense la 
the same, and the A.V. is much the neatest 
rendering. That were palsied. The purpose 
and effect of miracles is here clearly shown, 
to attract attention, and to evidence to the 
hearers and seers tliat the workers of 
miracles are God's messengers, and that 
the Word which they preach is God's Word. 

Ver. 8.— Much for great, A.V. and T.E. 
Much joy. The joy was caused partly by 
the healing of their sick, and partly by the 
glad tidings of the gospel of peace (comp. 
Matt. xiii. 20 ; 1 Pet. i. 8). 

Ver. 9. — Simon hy name for called Simon, 
A.V. ; the city for the same city, A.V. ; 
amazed for bewitched, A.V. (here and in 
ver. 13). Amazed. In Luke xxiv. 22 the 
same word (^^liarniu) is rendered " made us 
astonished" in the A.V. ; and in ch. ii. 7, 
12, and elsewhere, in an intransitive sense, 
" were amazed." It has also the meaning of 
" being out of one's mind,'' or " beside one's 
self" (Mark iii. 21 ; 2 Cor. v. 13), but never 
that of " bewitching " or " being bewitched." 
As regards Simon, commonly sumamed 
Magus, from his magic arts, it is doubtful 
whether he is the same Simon as is mentioned 
by JoEcphus ('Ant. Jud.,' xx. vii 2) as 
being employed by Felix the Procurator of 
Judsea, in the reign of Claudius (oh. xxiii. 
25), to bewitch Drusilla into forsaking her 
husband, King Azizns, and marrying Ijim, 
which she did (ch. xxiv 24). Tlie doubt 
arises from Josephus stating that Simon to 
be a Cypriot (Khrpiov yivos), whereas Justin 
Martyr says of Simon Magus that he was 
airi KiifiTis ^eyo/iii/ris TIttuv, a native of 
Gitton, or Githon, a village of l-amaria. It 
has b<en thought that Gitton may be a 
mistake of Justin's for Citium, in Cyprus 
(Farrar's 'Life of St. Paul,' vol i. pp 260, 
362; Alford.etc). The after history of Simon 
Magus is full of fable. He is spoken of by 
IreniBus and other early writers as the 
inventor or founder of heresy. (For a list 
of authorities concerning Simon, see Farmr's 
• Life of St. Paul,' vol. i. p. 260, note : Alford, 
i. 6; ' Bible Dictionary ; ' and a good article 
in 'Diet, of Biog. and Mythol.') 

Yer. 10.— TAo* power of God which it 



called Oreat for the great power of God, A.V. 
-and T.E. That power of God, etc. The 
revised text inserts Ka\ovfj.€rij hefore fieydx-q. 
Origen says of Simon that his disciples, thi 
Simonians, called him " The Power of God." 
('Contra Gels.,' Ub. v. 62, where see Delarue's 
note). According toTertuUian ('DeAnima'), 
he gave himself out as the supreme Father, 
with other blasphemies. According to St. 
Jerome on Matt. xxiv. 5, he speaks of him- 
self indifferent writings as the Word of God, 
as the Paraclete, the Almighty, the Fnlness 
of God. 

Ver. 11. — They gave heed to him for to 
him they had regard, A.V. ; amazed for 
beieitched, A.V. ; his sorceries for sorceries, 
A.V. 

Ver. 12. — Good tidings for the things, A.V. 
and T.E. 

Ver. 13. — And for then, A.V. ; also himself 
helieved for himself believed also, A. V. ; being 
baptized for wlien he was baptized, A.V. ; 
beholding signs and great miracles wrought, 
he was amazed for wondered, beholding the 
miracles and signs which were done. Con- 
tinued with (V •"'poaKaprepai'') ; see ch. 1 14 ; 
iii. 46 ; vi. 4 ; x. 7. St. Paul uses the word 
in Eom. xii. 12; xiii 6; Col. iv. 2; and the 
substantive formed from it (TvpotrKaprepTicris) 
once, Eph. vi. 18. Elsewhere in the New 
Testament it occurs only in Mark iii. 9. But 
it is found in Hist, of Sus. 6. Amazed (see 
note on ver. 9). In Simon we have the first 
example of one who, having been baptized 
into Jesus Christ, lived to disgrace and 
corrupt the faith which he professed. He 
was an instance of the tares sown among the 
wheat, and of the seed which sprang up 
quickly being as quickly destroyed. He is 
an instance also of the truth of our Lord's 
saying, " Ye cannot serve God and mammon." 

Ver. 14. — The apostles (see ver. 1). 
They sent unto them Fet^r send John. The 
selection of these two chief apostles shows 
the great importance attached to the con- 
version of the S.imaritans. The joint act 
of the college of apostles in sending them 
demonstrates that Peter was not a pope, 
but a brother apostle, albeit their primate; 
and that the government of the Church was 
in the apostolate, not in one of the number. 

Ver. 15. — That they might receive the 
Holy Ghost. Why was it needful that two 
apostles should come down to Samaria and 
pray, with laying on of hands, for the newly 
baptized that they might receive the Holy 
Ghost ? There is no mention of such prayer 
or such imposition of hands in the case of 
the first three thousand who were baptized. 
They were told by St. Peter, " Be baptized 
every one of you, , , , and ye shall receive 
the gift of the Holy Ghost " (ch. ii. 38i 
and they were baptized, and doubtless did 
receive the HoJy f^ke^ Sck^ *s Sifise 



m 



THE A.OTS OP THE APOStLES. 



[da. vm. 1—10. 



any mention of sncih things In the c-isr! of 
the Bubsequent thousands who were baptized 
«it Jerusalem on the apostles' preaching. 
Why, then, was it lo in Samaria? To 
answer this question, we must observe the 
dijferenco in the circumstances. The bap- 
t\anf at Jerusalem were performed by the 
apoatles tbemielvef. The Holy Ghost was 
Riven upon their promise and assurance. 
But in Samaria the preaching and the 
baptizing were done by the scattered dis- 
ciples. Tliere wai a danger of many inde- 
pendent bodies springing up, owing no 
allegiance to the apostles, and cemented 
by no bonds to the mother Church. But 
Christ's Church was to be one — mnny 
members, but one body. The apostolate 
was to be the governing power of the whole 
Church, by the will and ordinance of Christ. 
Hence there was a manifest reason why, 
when the gospel spread beyond Judsaa, 
these visible spiritual gifts should be given 
only through the laying on of tlie apostles' 
hands, and by the intervention of tlielr 
prayers. This had a manifest and striking 
influence in marking and preserving the 
unity of the Church, and in marking and 
maintaining the sovereignty of the apostolic 
rule. For precisely the same reason has 
the Catholic and Apostolic Church in all 
ages (ch. xii. 5, 6; Heb. vi. 2) maintained 
the rite of confirmation, " after the example 
of the holy apostles." Besides the other 
(jreat I >cuetits connected with it, its influence 
in binding up in the unity of the Church 
the numerous parishes of the diocese, 
insteaii of letting them become independent 
congregations, is very great. Observe, too, 
how prayer and the laying on of hands are 
tied together. Neither is valid without 
the other, In this case, as at Pentecost, 
the extraordinary gift of thn Holy Ghost 
was conferred. In confirmation, now that 
miracles liave ceased, it is the ordinary and 
invi.sible grace of the Holy Spirit that is to 
be looked for. 

Ver. 16. — Had been for were, A.V. ; into 
for in, A.V. Into the name. In seems pre- 
ferable (corop. Matt. x. 41, 42). The use 
of the prepositions in the New Testament is 
much intluenoed by the Hebrew, through 
thelanguageoftheLXX. As regards baptism 
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, here and 
ver, 39, T.B. ; oh. i. 48 ; xix. 5, we are not 
to suppose that any other formula was 
nsi'd than that prescribed by our Lord 
(Matt, xxviii. 19). But as baptism was 
IJreceded by a confession of faith similar to 
that in our own Bnptismal Service, so it 
was a true description to speak of baptism 
48 being in the Name of Jcbuh Christ. 

Ver. 18. — Nuw for and, A.V. ; the laying 
Tur laying, A.V. 

Vcv. id.—Mji lands for hands, A.V. 



Would toGol t'lat epirit'ial pnwors in the 
Church had never been prostituted to base 
purposes of worldly gain, and that all the 
servants of Christ )iad shown themselves as 
superior to "filthy lucre" as Piter and 
Elisha were I But the particular oflcnoe 
called simfmy has but a very faint analogy 
to the act of Simon. 

Ver. 20. — Silver inr money, AJV.; to obtain 
the gift of God for that the gift of God may 
be purchased, A.V. (rightly, KToo-ffoi is tlie 
middle voice). Silver. This is a chnnge of 
very doubtful necessity ; ipyiptov, like the 
French orjfTi^, is frequently used for "^oney" 
generally, without any reference to the 
particular metal of whiih it is made. Some- 
times, indeed, it is used in opposition to 
"golrl," as ch. iii. 6 and xx. 33, and then it 
is properly rendered "silver." Here the 
Kevisers' rea=^on, doubtless, was to reserve 
" money " as the rendering of xp<);itaTa (vers. 
19, 20). St. I'eter's answer is remarkable, not 
only for the warmth with which he repudiates 
the proffered bribe, bnt also for the jealous 
humility with which he affirms that the 
gifts of the Spirit were not his to give, but 
were the gift of God (see ch. iii. 12 — 16). 

Ver. 21. — Before God for in the sight of 
Gnd, A.V. Thou hast neither part nor lot. 
The "covetous shall not inherit the king- 
dom of God" (1 Cor. vi. 10; oomp. Ps. x. 3; 
Luke xvi 14; 1 Tim. iii. 3). The phrase, eV 
T^ xdyif! toiStm, rendered in this matter, 
seems to be more fitly rendered in the mnrgiii, 
"in this Word," t.e. the Word of life, the 
Word of salvation, which we preauh (see 
ch. V. 20 ! X. 36 ; xiii. 26). 

Ver. 22— 2%e Lord for God, A.V. and 
T.E.; thy for thine, A.V.; shall for may, 
A.V. Eepeut. The terrible words, " Thy 
money perish with thee," had not expressed 
Peter's wish for his destruction. But they 
were the wounds of a friend speaking sliarp 
things to pierce, if possible, a callous con- 
science. In the hope that that conscience 
had been picroeil, he now urges repentnnoe. 
And yet still, dealing skilfully with so bad 
a ease, he speaks of the forgiveness dojibt- 
fully, "if perhaps." The sin was a very 
grievous one; the wound must not be berleS 
too hastily. " There is a sin unto death," 

Ver. 23.- See for perceive, A.V. In the 
gall of bitterness, etc. The passage from 
which both this expression and the similar 
one in Heb. xii. 15 are taken is manifestly 
Ueut.xxix. 18, where the Greek ofthoLXX. 
has, l>l(a &va (piouTa 4vxo\^ Kal iriKpia- The 
context there also shows conclusively that 
the "gall and bitterness" ("wormwood," 
A.V.) of which Moses speato is the spirit 
of idolatry or defection from God springing 
up in some professing member of the Churcif, 
and defiling and corrupting others, as it ii 
expoumied in Heb. xii. 15, 16. This, as St, 



cm. vm. 1—40.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



263 



Peter sow, wag exactly the case with Simon, 
wl;o;^e lieart was not straight with God, 
but " ha.l turned away from hiin," as it is 
said in Deuteronomy. Though baptized, he 
was still an idolater in heart, and likely to 
trouble many. " Tlie gall of bitterness " 
the same as "gall anil wormwood," or 

bitterness." " Gall," or " bile," is in clas- 
sical Greek and other languages a synonym 
for " bitternesi," especidlly in a figurative 
sense (see Lam. iil. 15, 19— m/cpia koI xo^'ht 
LXX.). The uncommon phrase, the bond of 
iniquity, seems to be boirowed from Isa. 
Iviii. 6, where theLXX. have the same words, 
hie Tr&VTa crii/Seaiiov iSiKias, " loose the 
bands of wickedness," A.V. Simon wai 
still bound in these bands. 

Ver. 24. — And Simon answiered for then 
untaered Sinwn, A. Y. : for me to the Lard foi 
to the Lord for me, A.V. ; the for thesej A.Y, 
Fray ye, etc. ; addressed to both Peter and 
John, who were acting together, and whose 
prayers bad been seen to be effectual (ver. 
1 5) in proouriug the gift of the Holy Ghost, 
In like manner, Fharaoli, under the influ- 
ence of terror at God's judgments, had asked 
again and again for the prayers of Moses 
and Aaron (^xod. viii. 8, 28; ix. 27, 28; 
X. 16, 17, etc.). But in ueitlier case was 
tliis an evidence of true conversion of heart. 

Ver. 25. — They therefore for and they, A. V. ; 
epoken for preaehed, A.V. ; to many for in 
many, A.V. 

Ver. 26. — But an angel for and the angel, 
A.V. ; the same is for which is, A.V. An 
angel. " The angel," as in A.V., is right, 
just as Svo/iaKvplov (Matt. xxi. 9; xxiii. 39; 
Luke xix. 38, etc.) and rip; a^_ in Hebrew 
mean "the Name of the Lord," not "a 
Name" (see da. v. 19 ; vii. 31, notes). The 
south, meaning that part of judtea which 
was called "the south country;" Hebrew 
aun (Gen. xx. 1 ; xxiv. 62 ; etc.). This 
is generally rendered in the LXX. by irphs 
Ai';8o or TTpbs vorov. But in 1 Sam. xx. 41, 
' in Symmachus, iiea-riij.Ppla. stands as the 
rendering of aijn. As regards the words, 
the same is desert, it is observable that in 
Numb, xxi 1 and Dent, xxxiv. 3 epTi/ios is 
the LXX. rendering of D3jn , and that part of 
the country is called "the wilderness of 
Judaea." The words of the angel, therefore, 
mean, not that Gaza is desert, nor that the 
ruad itself is desert, but that the country 
to whiuh he was directing Philip's journey 
was part of that knovsn as the desert ; oBtjj 
does not refer to dS6s or to TdCa, but to 
Xo'pa, understood as contained in tpriiios. 
The meaning of the whole sentence I take 
to be as follows :—« Take thy journey in 
l_or, 'by'] the south [comp. Luke xv. 14; oh. 
V. 15; xi 1; xiii. 1] as far as [sVs 'nntans 
looum velterminum ad quern' (Schluusnci)] 



the road that goes from Jerusalem to Gaza, 
wheie tlie country is desert." I'hilip wa6 
to proceed from Samaria along the south 
country till he came to where the Jerusalem 
road met his road. That district, he is 
reminded, wus desert, part, i.e., of the desert 
of Judfisa. The spot wag probably selected 
for that very reason, as affording the privacy 
necessary for the eunuch to read in his 
chariot, and for Philip to join him and 
expound the Word of God to him. Chry- 
sostom (followed by others) takes Hara 
li.eari)x^piav in the sense of "at noonday 
in the most violent heat," though he also 
renders it " southwards " (Hum., xix.). 

Ver. 27. — Was over for had the charge of, 
A.V. ; wlw for and, A.V. Candace. Accord- 
ing to Pliny, the queens of Ethiopia, who 
reigned at Meroe, were so named through a 
long course of years (' Nat. Hist.,' vi. 35 — 37). 
Dion Cassius speaks of a warlike Queen of 
Ethiopia of that name, who was brought to 
terms by Cains Petronius in the year ▲.u.o. 
732 (liv. 5, 4). Eusebius (' Eccl. Hist.,' Ub. ii. 
cap. i.) says that the custom still continued 
in his day of the Ethiopians being governed 
by a queen. Had Acme to Jerusalem, r.tc. 
He was doubtless a proselyte of the gite. 
Eusebius, in the place above cited, speaks (if 
him as the first Gentile convert, and as the 
firstfruits of the faithful iji the whole world. 
He adds, as Irenaeus before him had hiute.l 
(iii. xlL 8), that he is reported to have preached 
the gospel to the Ethiopians, by which the 
prophecy of Fs. ixviii. 31 was fulfilled. Lalur 
traditions speak of Candace as baptized by 
him. 

Ver. 28. — And he was for was, A.V. ; was 
reading for reiid, A.V. ; Isaiah for Esaiaa, 
A. v., the Hebrew for the Greek form. The 
diffusion of the Holy Scriptures among the 
Gentiles by means of the Jewish dispersion 
and the facility given to Gentiles tor read. 
ing the Scriptures by their translation into 
Greek at Alexandria, and by the universal 
use of the Greek language through the con- 
quests of Alexander the Great, are striking 
instanoes of the providence of God working 
all things after the counsel of his own will. 

Ver. 29.— ^nd for then, A.V. 

Ver. 30. — Ban ioi ran thither, A.V.; read- 
ing Isaiah the prophet for read the prophet 
Esaias, A.V. and "T.K. Heard him. He was 
reading aloud. In Hebrew, the word for " to 
read" (Nip) moans "to call," "to proclaim 
aloud." Hence the heri, that which is read, 
as distinguished from the cethib, that whicb 
is written. Beading Isaiah the prophet. The 
same providence which sent Philip to meet 
him in the desert doubtless direitcd his read- 
ing to the fifty-third chapter of the groat 
evangelical prophet. 

Ver. 31. — One shall for man eltoM, A.V , 



204 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[cH. viii, 1 — 40. 



and T.B. ; fc« hieought Philip to cmne up and 
tit teith him for lie desired Philip that ha 
woulrl, etc., A.V. He besougM, eto. The 
Immility and thirst for instruction of this 
gnat courtier are very remarkable, and the 
instance of the joint use of the written Word 
md the living teacher is noteworthy. 

Ver. 32.— Now theplace for the place, A-V. ; 
was reading for read, A.V. ; as a lamb , . , 
is dumb for like a lamb dumb, A.V. ; he 
openeth not for opened lie not, A.V. As a 
lamb . . . is dumb. The A.V. of this clause 
beenis to me preferable as a rendering of the 
Greek, though tlie Hebrew has np^W, "is 
dumb." But this may be rendered " which 
is dumb." As regards the word mpioxht 
rendered plaoe, and considered as the ante- 
cedent to which, the use of it by Cicero ('Ad 
Attic.,' xiii. 25) for a whole parngraph, and 
the employment in the Syriac Version of this 
passage of the technical word whicii denotes 
a "section" or " paragraph," and the Vulgate 
rendering, Loans . . , quern (Schleusner), as 
well as the etymology of tlie word, which 
means "acircuit,"or"circurafiience," within 
which something is contained — all strongly 
point to the rendering in the text. Meyer, 
however, and others make ttjs ypa(f>rjs the 
antecedent to fip, and construe, '' The con- 
tents of the Scripture wliich he was reading," 
and refer to 1 Pet. ii. 6. 

Ver. 33. — His generathn who shall declare f 
for and who sliall declare his generation 1 A.V. 
and T.K. The preceding quotation is taken 
verbatim from the LXX., which, however, 
varies somewliat fiom the Hebrew. In this 
verse, for the Hebrew as rendered in the 
A. v., ^' He was taken from prison and from 
judgment," tlie LXX. has, "In his humilia- 
tion his judgment was taken away," having 
evidently read in their copy hBDB'p 'ni'pD, or 
perhaps invy?i "Through [or, 'in'] hisoppres- 
sion [humiliation] his judgment was taken 
away." Mr. Oheyne translates the Hebrew, 
" Through oppression and through a juilg- 
ment [sentence] ho was taken away [to 
death].^' Vox tl.e Hebrew of the A.V., " He 
was out off out of the land of the livinjf," 
the LXX. has, "His life is taken from the 
earth," where they must h.ive read vn, " his 
life," 08 the subject of the verb, instead of 
D"n, the living, taken in construction with 
y-iN, the earth. The differences, however, are 
not material in regard to the general meaning; 
of the passage. His generation who shall 
declarel Tlie explanation of this diiBcult 
expre.ssiDnbelonL'8toacoinmentiiryon I- iah 
Here it must suffice to say that thi expl na- 
tion most in accoidance with ihe m> ,ini il; of 
the Hebrew words (nnt;" and i""i), wiili ihf 
context, and with the turn of thounlit in 
Isft xxxviii. 10 — 12 and Jer. xl. 19, is that 



given in the' Speaker's Commentary:' "Who 
will consider, give serious thought to, his 
life or age, seeing it is so prematurely out 
off?" which is merely another way of saying 
that Messiah should "be cut off" (Dan. ix. 
26; " from the land of the living, that his 
Name bo no more remembered " (Jeremiah, 
as above). It was the frustration of this 
hope of Jesus being forgotten in consequence 
of liis death that so troubled the Sanhedrim 
(eh. V. 28). 

Ver. 34.— Ofter for oWier man, A.V. The 
eunuch's intelligent question gave Philip 
exactly the opening he required for preach- 
ing to him Jesus, the Messiah of whom all 
the prophets spake by the Holy Ghost (1 Pet. 
L 10, 11). 

Ver. 35. — And for then, A.V. ; beginning 
from this Sariplure for beganat the same Scrip- 
ture, A.V. ; preached for and preached, A.V. 

Ver. 36. — The way for their way, A.V. ; 
saith for said, A.V. ; behold for see, A.V. 
Here is water. " When we were at Ti 11-el- 
Hasy, ami saw the water standing along the 
bottom of the adjacent wady, we could not 
but remark the coincidence of several oirouin- 
stances with the account of the euuueli's 
baptism. This water is on the most direct 
roud from Beit Jibrin (Eleutheroplis)to Gaza, 
on the most southern road from Jerusalem, 
and in the midst of a country now ' desert,' 
i.e. witliout villages or fixed habitations. 
There is no other sinjilar water on this road " 
(Bobinson, ' Bibl. Res.,' vol. ii. p. 34.5). There 
were three reads from Jerusalem to Gaza, of 
which the one above described still exists, 
"and actually passes through the desert" 
(ibid. p. 514). What doth Mnder me to bo 
baptized ? This question clearly shosvs that 
the doctrine of baptism had formed part of 
Philip's preaching, as it had of Peter (eh. i. 
38). 

Ver. 37.— The whole of ver. 37 of tlie A V. 
is omitted in the B.T., on the authority of 
the best existing manusoripts. But on the 
other hand, Irenseus, in the third book 
against Heresies, ch. xii. 8, distinctly quotes 
a portion of this verse. The eunuch, he says, 
when he asked to be baptized said, nitrTEucii 
rbv vihv rod ®€ov etvat rbu 'lijcrodi' XptiTTov: 
and Cyprian, in his third book of Testi- 
monies, xliii., quotes the other part of the 
verse. In proof of the thesis that " whoever 
believes may be immediately baptized," he 
says, " In the Acts of the Apostles [when the 
eunuch said]. Behold water, what doth hin- 
der me to be liaptized? Philip answered. If 
thnii hclii lost wit. I all thine heart, thou 
ina\r,-l.'' f»" til, it in the serond and third 

cr In io- i; anlerior to the oldest exist- 

in nianii- M|>ts, tnis entire verse must 
' havL^ heun luiiini in the codices both of iha 
I Greek and Latin Ohuiolies. 



CH. vin. 1—10.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



260 



Ver. 38. — Both went down for went dawn 
both, A.V. Notiiing can be more graphic 
than the simple narrative of thi.s interesting 
and important bapiisni. Surely Luke must 
liave heard , '. from Philip's own mouth (see 
oil. xxi. 8—10). 

Ver. 39. — Came up for were come up, A.V. ; 
and the eunuch for that the eunuch, A.V. ; 
for he went for and he went, A.V. The 
eunuL-h made no attempt to follow Philip, 
but went on his road to Egypt, his whole 
heart filled with the new joy of Chiist's sal- 
vation. 

Ver. 40. — He preached the gospel to all 
the cities for he preached in all the cities, A.V. 
The sudden raptuie of Philip by the Spirit, 



and his transportation to Azotus, or Ashdod, 
reminds us forcibly of 1 Kings xviii. 12, and 
of the suoucssive journeys of lilijah just prior 
to his translition. In Philip's case we may 
suppose a kind of trance, which was not 
enJed till he found himself at Azotus. 
Passing through. For Siepxo/iai (there ren- 
dered " went abuut "), see ver. 4, note. To 
CiBsirea ; where wo find him domiciled (ch. 
xxi. 8). Sucli coincidences, appearing in the 
narrative without any explanation, are strong 
marks of truth. " Ho jouruoyed northward 
from Ashdod, pi rhaps through Elu-on, Ra- 
mah, Joppa, and the plaiu of Sharon " 
(Moyer). 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — 7%e fruits ofpeneeution. Persecution is Satan's instrument for check- 
ing and, if possible, destroying the truth of God. Our Saviour reminds us, in the 
sermon on the mount, how the prophets, who spake to the people in the Name of Gud, 
had been persecuted of old; and foretold how the propliets and wise men and scribes 
whom he would send should, in like manner, be scourged and persecuted, killed and 
crucified. And the history of the Church, from the first imprisonment of the apostles 
related in ch. iv. down to the present day, shows the truth of the prediction. Some 
of the springs and causes of persecution were noted in the homiletics on ch. iv. 1 — 31. 
Our attention shall now be turned to the fruits of persecution. 

I. The first effect op the pbrseoution that arose upon the death of 
Stephen was the dispersion of the disciples. In accordance with the Lord's 
directions (Matt. x. 23), they fled, to save their lives, from the city of Jerusalem to 
the neighbouring cities of Judaea and Samaria. But wherever they wont they preached 
the Word. Thus the immediate effect of the persecution raised at Jerusalem for the 
extirpation of the faith of Jesus Christ was that that faith was carried into cities and 
districts and countries where it might never have been lieard of but for the per- 
secutions. Samaria heard the gospel ; it was deposited in the heart of the eunuch 
for dissemination in Ethiopia. From Azotus to CiBsarea it was proclaimed alouri. 
It passed on to Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antiooh. It took deep root in Antioch, 
and was passed on from thence through all Asia and on into Europe. 

II. Anothek effect of the persecution was the beeakino down of opposing 
BABBiERS OP HABIT, OPINION, AND PREJUDICE. If the rulers and priests, the scribes 
and Pharisees, had accepted the gospel, it might have been a very hard matter to 
separate it from circumcision and from the temple and from exclusive Judaism. 
It might have been very long before Jewish Christians would have turned in a spirit 
of love and brotheihood to their Samaritan neighbours, or seut a messenger to Ethiopia, 
or planted the first community who called themselves Christians in the great heathen 
city of Antioch. Endless scruples, hesitations, difficulties, would have barred the way. 
But persecution quickened with a marvellous impulse the logic of reason and bene- 
volence, ay, and of faith too. By the force of circumstances, the persecuted disciples, 
expelled from country and home by their own flesh and blood, found themselves 
drawn into the closest bonds with those who were not Jews, and as it were compelled 
to tell them of the love of Jesus, and then to feel that that love made them both one. 
It would have taken generations, perhaps, to do what persecution did in a day. 
Persecution cut the Gordian knot which the fingers of human reason would, perhaps, 
never have untied; and the great persecutor himself might never have become tlie 
great chief and prince that he was in the Church of the Gentiles, had it not been for 
the part that he had played in persecuting it in times past. 

III. Nob MUST we oveulook ^he influence or persecution, when bndubib 

M THIS TBUB MABTTB'B SPIRIT, IN DBBPENINO AND HEIOHTSNINO THE FAITH,. rilH 



26« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [en. toi. 1— 40 

BBAL, AND THE LOVE OF THE DisoiPLB. The fire of the Spiritual life in the soul 
of tliu saint bums brightest in the darkest hours of earthly tribulation. The love ol 
Clirist, the hope of glory, the preciousness of the gospel, are never, perhaps, felt in their 
living power so fully as when the lights and fires of earthly joy and comforts are 
extinguished. Then, in the presence, so to speak, of Christ's unveiled power and glory, 
charity and boldness, zeal and self-sacrifice, are at their highest pitch, and the making 
known to others tho glad tidin;j;s of great joy seems to be the only thing worth living 
for. So that the fruit of persecution is to be seen in a noble army of martj is and 
confessors, qualified to the very highest extent, and eager in the very highest degree, 
tu preach far and wide the unsearchable riches of Christ, and in extraordinary accessions 
to the numbers of the persecuted Church. 
IV. Other fruits of persecution, such as exhibitino to the bteb of thb 

WOBLD THE REALITY OF THAT RELIGION WHICH THEY DESPISE, HOLDING DP TO ITS 
ADMIRATION THE TRUE CHARACTERS OF THOSE WHOM IT PERSECUTES, AND SHOWIXO 
THE HOPELESSNESS OF STAMPING OUT THAT FIRE WHICH IS FED FROM THE LIVE C0AL9 

OF God's altae in heaven, and many more, it would be east to enumerate. 
But these must suffice to teach us that *he malice of Satan is no match for the powi r 
of God ; but that the Church will eventually shine forth in all the brighter beauty 
of holiness for the efforts that have been made for her disfigurement and utter over- 
throw. 

Taw. >—£•! — 'rhs first heretic. The appearance of Simon Magus in the list of the 
first converts to the faith, and his enrolment among the baptized members of the 
Church, must not be overlooked or passed hastily by, if we would profit by the exhaus- 
tive teaching supplied by the Acts of the Apcstles for the use of the Church in all ages. 
When the student of Church history begins his studies expecting to find a record 
of faith and holiness, and to trace the triumphant victories of truth over falsehood 
through a succession of ages, and to feast his mind with the wise words and the 
righteous works of a succession of saints, he is soon disappointed and paired to find 
that Church history brings liim inw) contact with some of the worst phases of human 
nature. The human mind never shows to greater disadvantage than when its contact 
with Divine truth stirs up all the foul sediment at the bottom of it, and suggests forms 
<^f deceit and duplicity, and varieties of impurity and dishonesty, and specialities 
of baseness and selfishness, which could have had no existence but for such contact 
with what is spiritual and heavenly. We might have been prepared for the rejection 
(if truth by the children of the wicked one, and even for those acts of hatred and 
violence by which unbelief seeks to put out the light of truth. Apostles in prison, 
iind Stephen lying lifeless on the ground, and a Sanhedrim of priests and scribes and 
ciders solemnly forbidding the preaching of the gospel, are events that we might have 
anticipated, and which, though they shock, do not so much surprise us. But a 
reception of the truth of the gospel going so far as to lead the receiver to holy baptism, 
and yet immediately allied with sordid motives, and coexisting with imposture and 
sorcery, and issuing in a life devoted to the depravation of the gospel and to the 
hindering of men's salvation, is an unexpected and a perplexing phenomenon. And 
yet it is the history of most heresies. Even in those days when the profi'ssion of 
the faith of Clirist subjected men to persecution, and when the Christian body was 
a comparatively small one with a strongly defined character of purity and holinesn, 
we find men joining the Church's ranks only to pollute them, and then to separate 
themselves and to found some accursed heresy. Either the motive was vile from the 
first, or the rcstrainia Imposed by Christianity were found too severe for the half- 
converted heart, and the heresy was framed to reconcile the claims of the reason which 
was convinoei with those of the passions which refused to be subdued. Simon appears 
to have bee.a chiefly attracted and overawed by the miracles which he saw wrought 
in the Name of Christ. It then occurred to him that he might pursue his old career 
of sorcery more successfully than ever if he could obtain some partnership in the 
thaumaturgy which had astonished him. He anticipated richer harvests of gain as a 
Christian cotferring spiritual powers by the laying on of hands than as a magician 
amazing raei, by his sorceries. And so he offer^ Peter money. The frothy levity 
if his uat'u:a was shown as much by his terror at Peter's rebuke u it had been b} 



OH. viii. 1— 40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 257 

his offer of a bribe to the apostle. And this rapid succession of sorcery, belief, baptism, 
simony, confusion, was the sure index of a heart still held fast by the bonds of iniquity, 
and the natural prelude to a life of base cunning, using holy things for base purposes 
of unholy gain. The career of Simon, as of many of the early heretics whom the 
Fathers denounce with such terrible severity, seems to leave us this lesson — that 
contact with holy things, if it does not convert, hardens the heart ; that the light of 
(Jhrist, if it does not purify the soul, plunges it into deeper darkness ; and that 
familiarity with spiritual powers, which does not subdue and sanctify, has a tendency 
to stimulate the intelligence only to give it access into lower depths of intellectual 
wickedness and more deadly fdn. 

Vers. 25—40. — 2%e Word written preparing the way for the Word preached. The 
conversion of the Ethiopian eunuch is a great text on missionary work. It illustrates 
with singular force and clearness the double need of the Bible and the preacher to 
bring men to the knowledge of Christ crucified. Without the evangelist to teach him, 
this seeker after truth might long have groped in vain after the meaning of the 
prophet ; and if his mind had not been exercised by musings on the prophet, the 
evangelist would neither have had the opportunity to teach nor would his teaching 
have had such success. It was the concurrence of the two that brought this illustrious 
convert within the gates of the city of God. Hence the conclusion that the written 
Word and the preached Word are concurrent factors in the conversion of men to God ; 
that both are necessary, and that neither of them can safely be dispensed with. The 
written Word, being " given by inspiration of God," is, as far as it goes, perfect and 
infallible, and yet it is not of itself sufBcient. The preached Word, albeit far inferior, 
as being liable to error, imperfect and fallible, is yet necessary as the complement 
of the testimony of Scripture. The written Word stands immovable, the touchstone 
^{ truth, the standard of doctrine, the referee in doubt, the pattern and model, the 
crucible of error, the court of final appeal in all controversies of faith. The preached 
Word varied, modified, by circumstances of time and place, drawing its colouring, 
its clothing, its fashion, from its immediate surroundings, presents the eternal truth 
in the garb most suited to the wants and capacities of those with whom it deals. But 
in doing this it is liable to err. Then tlie sole appeal is to the written Word of G^d. 
All teaching not in accordance with it, however venerable for ago and for the authority 
by which it is supported, must be mercilessly cut off. Blessed is that Church whose 
doctors explain but never darken the revelations of Holy Scripture. Blessed are the 
people wliose teachers guide them into the meaning of Holy Scripture, but never turn 
them from it. Happy is that disciple whose mind, being deeply imbued with the 
truths of the Word of God, is aided by a faithlul evangelist to adjust those truths 
ill their true proportion and relation to each other, and to fill up their interstices with 
harmonious and homogeneous materials. As regards missionary work, the lesson is, 
sow the Bible broadcast to prepare the way for the foot of the missionary. Let the 
version of the Holy Scriptures given to each nation in his own tongue be to the 
niodern world what the version of the LXX. was to the old; so that the evangelist 
may find the ground already ploughed, and ready to receive the seed of eternal life, 
when he preaches the salvation which is by Jesus Christ. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 
Vers. 1 — 4. — Perversion and restoration. These verses suggest — 

I. How PAB FBOM EIGHT FBELINO WILL WKONO THOUGHTS LEAD MEN ASTBAl. 

" Saul was consenting [rejoicing] unto his death " (ver. 1). " Saul made havoc of [was 
ravaging] the Church," etc. (ver. 3). The death of the first martyr, which was so utterly 
shameful to those who compassed it, and so deeply regrettable from a human estimate, 
was, in the eyes of Saul, a thing in which to triumph with savage pleasure. And this 
dreadful satisfaction of his grew out of strong religious convictions — he haled Stephen 
bo passionately because he clung to " the Law " so tenaciously. Nor was this his only 
iiiauifestation of distorted feeling. He was not satisfied with the stoning of Stephen ; he 
joined heartily in the persecution which broke up Christian ffimilies and caused their 



2S8 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. viii. 1—4* 

~ " " ■■"' "■■' - — 

general dispersion (ver. 2), himself being the most pvnminont agent of the council ; 
neither ordinary humanity, nor the gentleness whioU should come with a liberal 
education, nor the tenderness which is diie to womanly leeVmg, laying any restraint upon 
him. Every wiser, kinder, more generous sentiment was lost in a violent, relentless, 
unpitying fanaticism. So does error pervert the mind and distort the impulses and 
abuse the energies of the soul. Before we lend ourselves to any cause, before we plunge 
into any strife, let us very carefully and devoutly weigh the question whether we are 
really right, whether our traditions are not leading us astray as men's inherited nctiong 
have led them astray from the truth, whether, before we act with a burning zeal, we 
must not alter our positioner even change our side. Not till we have an intelligent 
assurance that we are in the right should we act with enthusiasm and severity ; else we 
may be cherishing feelings and doing actions which are diabolical rather than Divine. 

II. How MUCH HOLT BABNESTNESS MAT BE CAIiLED TO SUFFER. I'he Christians of 

those early times were called : 1. To sympathize, with painful intensity, with a suffering 
man. If Saul was consenting to his death, with what lacerated and bleeding hearts did 
his Christian friends see the first martyr diel They " made great lamentation over him " 
(ver. 2). 2. To be distressed for a bereaved and weakened Church. Tiie cause of Christ 
conld ill spare (so they would naturally fefel) such an eloquent and earnest advocate tus 
he whose tongue had been so cruelly silenced; they must have lamented the loss which, 
as men bent on a high and noble mission, they had sustained. 3. To endure serious 
trouble in their own circumstances. There was " great persecution . . . and they were all 
scattered abroad" (ver. 1). This must have involved a painful severance of family ties 
and a serious disturbance in business life. Holy earnestness has similar sufferings to 
endure now. (1) Its personal attachments are peculiarly deep and its sympathies 
peculiarly strong. When injury or death conies to the objects of them, there is cor- 
responding pain and sorrow of soul. (2) It is often deeply distressed for the cause ot 
Christ in its times of loss, weakness, wrong. (3) It suffers, in virtue of its fidelity, from 
the scorn, the opposition, the persecution, in some form or other, of those who are the 
enemies of God and truth. But, thus doing, it treads closely in the footsteps of the best 
of men, and in those of the Divine Master himself. And thus suffering vsith him, it 
will be crowned with his honour and joy (Eom. viii. 17 ; 2 Tim. ii. 12 ; 1 Pet. iv. 13). 
HI. How WONDKOUSLT GoD 0VERRDLB8 BTBRYTHrNO. (Ver. 4.) He (1) used the 
machinations of the enemy and (2) recompensed the faithfulness of the suffering Church 
by causing the dispersion of the disciples to result in " the furtherance of the gospel." 
What misguided men hoped would be a death-blow to the new " way " proved to be a 
valuable stroke on its behalf, increasing the number of its active witnesses, and multi- 
jilying its adherents largely. So shall it be with the evil designs of the wicked ; they 
will be made to subserve the gracious purposes of God. 1. How vain and foolish, as 
well as guilty, is it to fight against Godl 2. How confidently may we who are 
co-workers with him await the issue! The angry and threatening storm which is on 
the horizon will perhaps only speed the good vessel of the truth and bring har sooner 
to the haven. — C. 

Vers. 6 — 25. — Success and disappointment in Christian work. I. A large measurb 
OF SUCCESS. We must consider : 1. The special obstacles in the way, viz. (1) the 
people of Samaria were to some extent alien ; they were likely to be less friendly than 
those who were wholly foreign, for their connection with the Jews as their near neigh- 
bours had led to the bitterest jealousies and animosities. (2) They were under the 
spell of a skilful and powerful impostor (vers. 9 — 11). 2. The means by which success 
was gained. (1) Philip presented to the people the one great truth which they needed 
to know : ho " preached Christ unto them " (ver. 5). Obstacles mnst be mighty indeed 
if there are not found hearts to respond when a once crucified, now exalted Saviour is 
preached, whose death is the sacrifice for sin, and who offers himself to our souls as our 
living Lord and unchanging Friend. (2) The preached truth was confirmed by striking 
and gladdening proofs of Divine power : they gave heed, " seeing the miracles which he 
did " (ver. 6) ; and great wonders were wrought in their midst, so numerous and bene- 
ficent that " there was great joy in that city." 3. The magnitude of the success. (1) 
They gave unanimous attention; "with one accord they gave heed" (ver. 6). (2) 
Ti^ey bbliflTed w»d avowfd tl^eir faitU : " they were baptised, both raea mi woro*;) " 



«H. Tin. 1—40.) THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 259 

(ver. 12). (3) The impostor himself made profession of faith (ver. 13). 4. Confirma- 
tion of it, both human and Diviae. (1) Human : the apostles sent down Peter and 
John, who witnessed and owned the work as genuine (vers. 14, 15). (2) Divine : tht 
Holy Gliost descended upon them, in (doubtless) miraculous bestowments (ver. 17). 

IL A 8BBI0US DISCOURAGEMENT. There is no more disheartening blow which can 
fall on the heart of an earnest Christian worker than to find that his converts have not 
really changed their mind, but only their creed. Very bitter must have been the cup 
to the Christian community in Samaria when Simon made the miserable exhibition of 
himself recorded in the text (vers. 18, 19). Either he had been utterly insincere 
throughout, or, as is more likely, he was convinced that Philip and the apnstles were 
masters of some great powers he had not been able to gain ; but completely mistook the 
character of their mission, thinking they were out on an errand of self-aggrandizement. 
Whether Simon's was a guilty simulation or a blasphemous error, it was rebuked with an 
almost terrible severity (vers. 20 — 23), which evidently affected and even affrighted the 
sorcerer (ver. 24). In tones of unwonted sternness, such as the occasion required, Peter 
rejected the infamous proposal to receive money for theimpartation of Divine power, and 
assured Simon that he was still in the very depth of folly and of sin, from which nothing 
l)ut repentance could deliver him. 1. We also may have a large measure of success in 
our work. We have all the materials of success, if we will use them : the needed saving 
truth; the beneficent agencies which spring from Christian sources, and which commend 
the Christian cause ; the presence in the Church of the Holy Spirit of God. 2. We shall 
always be liable to disappointment. Some whom we believe to be possessed of the truth 
and to be brought beneath its vital power will prove to be only just touched by it, or 
to be mere pretenders and deceivers. 3. Spite of painful drawbacks, we may thank God 
for good work done. It was with joyous and grateful hearts, we may be sure, that the 
apostles " returned to Jerusalem " (ver. 25). They had not forgotten Simon's defection ; 
tliey would never for;;et that disappointing moment when he made his humiliating ofifi r. 
But, after all, he was in the dark and far background ; in front of him and in full view 
of their gladdened souls was the testimony they had borne for their Master, the Church 
they had gathered, the good work they had wrought in Samaria. — C. 

Vers. 26 — 40. — The Christian teacher and disciple. We have an interesting anrl 
instructive instance of one man submitting himself to the teaching of another, and 
deriving from him a sudden transforming influence which most beneficially affected l^is 
whole after-life. Such teaching might well come ultimately from God, as in truth it 
did ; for we learn — 

I. That the Christian teacher is to place himself continually under 
Divine direction. Philip had some advantages which we do not now enjoy. " The 
angel of the Lord spake unto him" audibly (ver. 26), and gave him definite instructions 
whither he should go : "Arise, and go toward the south," etc. " The Spirit said unto 
Philip, Go near, and join thyself," etc. (ver. 29). When his work was finished here, " the 
Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip " (ver. 39). But though we have not now these 
outward, unmistakable manifestations, we have the " mind of Christ ;" we may consult 
and know his will, if (1) we intelligently and devoutly study his Word, (2) unselfishly 
regard the leadings of his providence, (3) earnestly ask for the promptings of his Divine 
Spirit. We are earnestly to desire to go only where we are sent of God, to address our- 
selves to those whom he would have us influence, and to stay no longer than he has work 
for us to do there, 

II. That Christ has subjects to secure fob his kingdom other than thosb 
WE should hatb expected. Which of the apostles would have imagined that the 
next convert to Christianity at this time would bo " a man of Ethiopia, b eunuch of 
great authority," etc. (ver. 26) ? Yet such was the mind Df Clirist. We are too apt to 
think we can tell whence the disciples will be drawn, by whom the table will be fur- 
nished with guests. But our Master has surprises for us here as elsewhere. We must 
not, in thought, limit the range of his redeeming love or converting power. It may nut 
be the poor in need of some enrichment, but the rich in need of some higher wealth ; not 
the lowly wanting some honour, but the honourable craving some truer dignity ; it may 

. not be the children of privilege familiar with the truth, but the sons of ignorance at 
guperstition, or even tl»9 cbjl^f*? of ipfideUty far froi^ th? wj«4om of (^o4i— it m»^ 



2iii> THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. vui. 1— 4Q 

be these and not those whom the Lord of love and power means to call and win aiid 
bless. 

IIL That God has much eni.iohtbhuent to ebpabt through human agency. 
Here is human ignorance and misapprehension (ver. 30) : a sense of utter helplessness 
without guidance from some friendly hand (ver. 31) ; invitation to him that knows and 
will explain (ver. 31). Without the enlightenment which some men have it in their 
Ijower to impart, everything is dark, meaningless, obscure, perplexing, — facts in ii«turo, 
laws of God, utterances of the Divine Word. Then comes the illuminating flash, anil the 
mists roll away, the objects are Clear in the sunlight, the path is plain. How wise to 
seek, how excellent to render, the light which, by God's kind blessing, one human mind 
may shed on the highest of themes into the most troubled souls 1 

IV. That tee bacrificial sufferings of Christ are the grand theme of tuv. 
Christian teacher. (Vers. 32 — 35.) What passage in all the Hebrew Scri|itur(.s could 
Philip have preferred to this as a text for his teaching? This supreme fiict in tbe his- 
tory of our race is the theme on which to dwell, in which to find a ilecpeuiiig interest, 
from which to draw motive and inspiration, with which to lascinate the people, !o which 
to be continually returning. 

V. That the convinced disciple should forthwith avow his oonviotion ts 
the appointed ways. (Vers. 36 — 38.) 

VI. That the ^dll eeception op Christian truth will be followed by deep 
and abiding joy. (Ver. 39.) " He went on his way rejoicing." 

VII. That the Christian teacher makes success an inspiration to fubtbeb 
HOLT actiyttt. (Ver. 40.) — C. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — Incidents of persecution and dispersion. I. A gliufbe op Saul the 
PBRBBOUTOB. Though brief and passing, it is very significant. He was a party to the 
execution of Stephen. Saul was full of ignorance and blind passion. What he after- 
wards felt about his conduct is expressed in 1 1'im. i. 3. This example should be a 
standing warning to us against trust in mere feeling and enthusiasm. The fumes of 
anger and violence are no signs of pure glowing zeal for the truth, but rather of the 
spirit that is set on fire of hell. It Is when we are most passionately excited in the cause 
of party conflict that we have most need to be on oui guard. Bitter was the remorse 
ol Saul of Tarsus for his complicity in the murder of Stephen. Hard was it for him 
to forgive himself. It was the triumph of Divine love in his heart when he could trust 
that through it he had been forgiven. 

II. The bppects op persecution. It leads to dispersion, and dispersion to the dis- 
semination of the truth. Through the country of Judaea and Samaria the scattered 
ones went, leaving in every village, in every house and heart, stirring memories, new 
thoughts. And Saul, like a ravaging wolf, went on his blind course. There is a general 
historical lesson here. Persecution is ever the symptom of intellectual change. The 
old dragon is ever ready to devour the child of the woman. The hellish Python would 
wrestle with the glorious Apollo. Herod would put to death the child Jesus. Saul 
would slay the infant Church. But the victory of eternal light and love is not doubtful. 
"They that were scattered in different directions went indifferent directions evangelizing 
the world." How beautiful is this 1 The true weapon with which to meet the sword is 
the Word. Tbe policy of the persecutor is of all the blindest. He stimulates the move- 
ment he aims to crush. In every manly spirit opposition rouses new energy. We 
love more dearly the truth for which we have to fight and suffer. It is in the laws «{ 
tbe spiritual world that persecutions should ever bring a violent reaction in favour of the 
principles of the persecuted. When Christianity is patronized it becomes corrupt. 
When through persecution it is thrown back upon the ground of its first principles, it 
springs up with new life and vigour. 

III. The wobk of Philip. Well does it stand in contrast with that of Saul in this 
glimpse of early Christianity. Saul, the wolf amidst the fold, breathing out threats and 
slaughter; Philip, as the shepherd, feeding and healing and comforting. Again and 
again we have the repetition of the true effects of Christianity. Good words are spoken, 
which command attention and do good to the soul ; good deeds are done to tbe suliering 
tiody, which are evident " signs " of a Divine presence and power to heal, and there- 
f. re of » Divine and loving will. And joy ever brcal^s out—the reflection of recovered 



oa.vin.1— 46J THE ACTS 0^ TfiE APOSTLES. 561 

freedom in the body and the soul — in every city. These, then, are the constant evi- 
dences of Ohristianity. No other " apologetic " can be needed, for this is invincible. 
Without it the subtlest arguments are unavailing. 

IV. Thb tbiumph of Chbistianitt ovbb BUPEBSTinoir. Simon the Magua is the 
type of those who work upon the imagination of the people, as contrasted with the true 
Christian teacher 'who appeals to the conscience. What was to decide between the 
genuine teacher and healer and the eloquent and skilful quack ? Close is the shadow to 
the light in all the course of the gospel. In the individual conscience lies tlie test. To 
that God speaks ; that in every age is the mirror of the truth. And to the truth and to 
Gtod the conscience of the impostor bears witness. Simon believed in the word of Philip, 
and became by baptism a professor of the new creed. It is said that he was astonished 
at the signs and great wonders which occurred. What we call " sensationalism " in the 
mind, the craving for the wonder, is the spurious form of a true instinct. Men must 
see in order to be convinced ; when conviction is attained, they can afterwards walk by 
faith in regions where sight is not possible. We never change the habit of our thought 
until we find something inexplicable where before all was plain and simple— something 
wondrous where we only recognized the commonplace. To ask for belief without giving 
evidence is to insult the conscience, to refuse belief when the evidence is clear is to deny 
to one's self the possibility of guidance when the evidence is not altogether clear. Let 
men take the evidence which is clear to' them, and act upon it; that is safe for the time, 
and the rest will become clearer by-and-by. But the case of Simon shows how void 
is any kind of mere conviction unless it be followed by the corresponding act of will. 
Simon was convinced, but not converted. The light penetrated his intelligence, but 
failed to move his heart. — J. 

Vers. 24, 25. — The impostor unmasked. L Thb mission of Peter akd John, 
Samaria — there is an emphasis on this.word — ^had received the Word of God. There 
was something significant in this conversion. The gospel was already proving itself 
a power to reconcile and break down distinctions long rooted and deeply felt. So 
important an occasion called for the services of the two leading apostles, Peter and 
John. These go down and pray for the new converts, that they may receive the Holy 
Ghost. Power and purity, the joy and freedom of the Christian life, are associated 
with this baptism ; as repentance or a preparatory change of life was associated with 
that of John the Baptist. It is difScult to undlerstand how such gifts as those we 
associate with spiritual religion could be conveyed by the physical act of Imposition 
of hands. Nor are we required to believe that the imposition of hands was in any 
way (xmsally related to the spiritual result, or even instrumentaily. It was an 
external association, an appa/rent not a real connection, such as might well deceive 
the unspiritual observer. 

II. The self-deception of the unspiritual man. Simon perceives the solemn 
act of laying on of hands; he perceives that something follows — a spiritual power in the 
converts, and he mistakenly infers that the apostles are magicians, who can bestow at 
their pbasure supernatural gifts. What man can bestow may be bought from man. 
Had the apostles been like Tetzel, the friar who went about in Luther's time selling 
indulgences, it would have been natural to offer them, and for them to receive pay- 
ment for the communication of the power. But spiritual things are spiritually 
discerned ; and " the carnal mind understands not the things of the Spirit of God." 
WTien the heart has not been awakened, when the man has not been born into the 
kingdom of Gud, there is constantly the danger of confounding things that differ. 
Money cannot buy thought, nor feeling, nor inward power ; though it can buy action 
and the imitation of reality, but not reality itself. Simon confounds the outward 
phenomena of the Spirit with the essence and meaning. 

III. The unspibitual man's error exposed. 1. The sin of Simon is that of the 
money-loving man. His faith is in it; he believes that it "answers all things," not 
only in reference to this world, but in reference to the kingdom of God. He is the 
type of a class. There are those who secretly believe they can patronize the ministers 
of Christ, and purchase for themselves an interest in the kingdom of God. The power 
of wealth so subtly mingles with all Christian work, and piofusely used may so readily 
acquire for its possessor the reputation of sanctity. But the inuaortal antipathy of 



2^2 l-jaE ACTfS OF TfiE AtOSTtES. 'jM. rm, 1—40 

the spirit of the gospel, as the free energy of the holy God in men's souls, casts oflf in 
one word of the apostle these vile counterfeits, which ever obtain cuiToncy side by 
side with it in the world. The apostle whose word has been in the very act of healing, 
" Silver and gold have I none," exclaims, " Thy money perish with thee I " 2. A 
bosom sin will separate a man from the kingdom of God. The kingdom of God is 
within. It is a spiritual state and a spiritual system of motives. He has no part or 
lot in it who does not see that it aims at the fulfilment of our life by the subjugation 
of the lower motives and the instatement of the higher in the rightful empire of the 
soul. Simon's heart was not "straight" before God. He was trying to juggle witli 
him who searches the heart; to keep the lower passions in full action, if possible, 
under the mask of piety. His is the type of perhaps the deadliest sin that Christianity 
has occasioned in the world. As the shadow follows the sun, so does hypocrisy follow 
close on the heels of genuine piety; Iiisineerity is the sin of sins. Wliat filth is in 
the bodily habit, that untruth is in the soul. The man is aware of his sin. It is no 
blindness of iiassion, but the deliberate admission of an habitual lie to the feelings an<l 
the thoughts. It is a poison or gall infusing its influence into the whole life of the mind. 
It is a bondage, and no liberty ia possible under the tyranny of inward falsehood. 
Thug is the character of the impostor exposed by the pure light of the truth. He is 
seen to preteild a faith of which his heart knows nothing ; he regards the gifts of the 
Holy Spirit as the means of base gain ; and he knows no higher motive to repentance 
than slavish fear of punishment. The spirit of the gospel is illustrated in St. Peter by 
the strong contrast. It sternly points out man's sins and tracks them to their source in 
the heart ; chastises the sinner, but at the same time holds out the duty of repentance 
and the hope of forgiveness to the worst. — J. 

Vers. 26 — 40. — Philip and the Ethiopian. This incident teaches us — 

I. That men ik the way of duty mat receive undstjal guidance. The angel of 
the Lord spoke to Philip, and gave him directions as to the course he should take in 
his missionary journey. How are we to understand the mode of this interference ? 
We are told that rationalist expositors assume that the angel appeared to Philip in 
a dream; Isr the word "Bisel" is spoken. But then it is replied that there is nu 
mention of the night-time nor of a couch. And in ver. 26 there is no mention of 
a vision. Avoid rationalism, which is the attempt to exercise clear intelligence upon 
things best left in a sacred obscurity, or chiaro-oscuro. The point is not so much to 
understand how the Divine intimation came, as to recognize the fact that it did come. 
Cns^es of sudden and irresistible impressions of the kind aie not uncommon and aru 
well attested. But there are a thousand coincidences in life which we do not notice, 
and which may nevertheless be equally real evidences of a higher intelligence directing 
the human wiU, and "a good man's steps are ordered of the Lord, and he delighteth in 
hla way." 

II. There is ko buce tbiko as ohakcx nr life. Two men meet on the road, the 
railway, in a foreign city, " casually," as tliey say j and something flows from the 
meeting which influences the after-life of one or both. In the present meeting, notice : 
1. The stranger's nationality. He is from Ethiopia, from the south of Egypt. Some 
say of Jewish extraction ; for he was reading the great Jewish prophet ; but perhaps it 
was not so. 2. His rank. He was a " potentate " in his land, the grand treasurer of the 
queen, Gandace being the official title of the queens of Ethiopia, as Pharaoh was that 
of the kings of Egypt. 3. His religious helief. Whether he was a " proselyte of the 
gate " or no cannot be decided. But his errand was to Jerusalem, to pray. Therefore 
in his African home he had learned to' know and to worship the God of Israel, It 
looks like a case of independent conviction, and therefore the more interesting ; some- 
what like that of the Roman centurion in the Gospel. He was reading in all probability 
in a copy of the Scptuagint, or Greek translation of the Scriptures. This version hail 
been diffused from Alexandria through Egypt, and was doubtless well known to all the 
educated class, Philip receives an intimation, not this time from " an angel," but 
from " the Spirit," to go and join himself to the chariot of the Ethiopian. 

III. The Word of God a commoh bonp of intbeebt and sympathy. The teacher 
is led by Providence to the disciple, who is found beforehand prepared to receive the 
Lvacher'* inatriction, and craving it. The teacher and the disciple have need of one 



OH. vin. 1— 40.] THE ACTS 01" THE APOSTLES. 264 

•notlier. The teacher has much to impart, the disciple much to receive ; and each in 
a way changea his part with the other, for we leam as we teach and teach in learning. 
The passage the Ethiopian was reading is one of the most significant of the Old 
Testament. It contains the picture of the Servant of Jehovah, the Hepresentativa of 
Israel. It ia the emhodiment of Israel's spiritual ideal. Meekness under injuries; 
lowly estate in the world and exposure to persecution ; ohscurity in the eyes of men ; 
■nch are the traits of Israel's Hero, in the passage the Ethiopian is reading. Well may 
he ask, " Who is this unique figure portrayed hy the prophet's pen ? — the prophet him- 
self or another?" Then Philip proceeds to unfold from this text the whole evangel, 
which centres in the person of Jesus. He is the Divine Figure, the living Embodiment 
of the prophet's meaning, the Fulfiller of Israel's long history. 

IV. CoNVEBSloN FBODUOED BY OONVIOTIOH. We may notice: 1. The preparation 
for change in personal reflection. The serious mind, the attentive gaze fixed on the 
records of religion, the desire to leam, the willingness to be taught, precede conversion 
in this case, and are the more attractive traits in one of high rank like the Ethiopian. 
We can only profit by the teacher when we have first used our own spiritual energy 
to the utmost. "To him that hath shall be given." 2. The prompt decision. New 
thought ever impels to new action. The light comes that we may use it. " What sliall 
I do? " is the question of the conscience so soon as it is aroused and quickened by the 
light. The Ethiopian at once " decides for Christ" — the Christ he has learned to know 
through the study of the prophet and the preaching of the evangelist. And as Philip 
vanishes, a blessing is left on the heart of his disciple never to be effaced. The whole 
yields an important lesson on the value of opportunity, and how it should be seized 
both by teacher and by disciple. In interviews like these, like angels' visits, God is 
revealed, truth is sown in the heart, and influences are set at wurk which never 
c « «— . — J. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — The enemy coming in like a flood. I. The flood of rNiqniTT called 
roitTH BY THE ouTPOUBiNO OF THE HoLT Ghost. 1. The corruption of the Jewish 
state. Instances in the case of Saul of Tarsus, assenting to the dealh of Stephen. 
The organized persecution as an answer to the gospel. The insincerity of those who 
pretended to accept Gamaliel's wise counsel. Their real cowardice in nut venturing to 
lay hold of the apostles. 2. The persecution had now a leader in Saul. It was a more 
decided arraying of the priestly power against the new sect ; a house-to-house visita- 
tion with assumed legal authority. This was to push forward the conflict between the 
two kingdoms as nothing else could. It was to give definite aim to the persecution, 
and so to prepare the way for the more decided lifting up of the standard against it by 
the Spirit of God in the conversion of Saul. 

II. The brbakino cp of the fiest form op Chuech life, pkeparatoet to a 
HiGHEB, wiDBK, AND MORE ACTIVE. 1. Fellowship is very precious, but activity still 
more so. Loving one another should prepare us to love the world. The temporary 
expedient of Christian communism gave way before the world's violence ; it was a help 
to the realization of Church life, but not an abiding rule of action. 2. Stephen's 
funeral and the Church's lamentation would deeply impress upon all dependence, not 
on individual instruments, but on the Spirit of God, How little it was thought that the 
chief persecutor would soon himself be the chief preacher! 3. Those scattered abroad 
carried with them a body of facts, both the Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles so far, 
which helped them to dispense with the immediate superintendence of the apostles. 
So the New Testament would begin to be formed in that first persecution. The 
believers all over Judaea and Samaria, speaking to one another and to their neij;hbours 
of the things that tliey themselves most surely believed. How little Saul's "laying 
waste" the Church harmed it! Learn the lesson of confidence in the overruling 
Saviour. " He maketh the wrath of man to praise him." — B. 

Ver. 2. — The grave leside the Church. " And devout men carried Stephen," etc 
I. Death the exaltation of Christian character. Devout men carried him. Theii 
hope was the rainbow on the cloud of lamentation. The fellowship of Church Ufa 
helps us to appreciate excellence. The greatest and best testimony when devout men 
fe«l the loss. 



264 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oe. tvo. 1—46. 



n. The oomtbast between the grave of the good man fallen asleep in Jesus md 
laid to rest by the hands of lamenting brethren, and the grave of : 1. The worldlin -. 
2. TheinfideL 3. The doubter. 4. The backslider. 6. The isolated and un brotherly 
CSiristian, who has not lived in the hearts of devout men. Try to live so that you will 
be lamented when you die. 

IIL The effect on the world of a great Christian life. "He being dead yet 
■peaketh." President Gurfield. Great lamentation is often great proclamation of 
truth. The cross. The Book of Martyrs. — B. 

Ver. 4. — 77m first flight of the Word. "Therefore they that were scattered abroad," 
etc. It pleased God by the foolishness of preachin;; to save the world. Providence 
and grace work hand-in-hand. The Church needed to be taught by discipline. Jeru- 
salem a natural centre of religious life. But a centre of radiation, not concentration. 

L Pbeaching the Wobd the greatest function of the Christian Church. 1. The 
Word preachtd was the Word given. Apostles gave it. It was pre-eminently Chriut's 
Word. It was given by the Holy Ghost with special gifts and wisdom — " confirmod " 
unto us. 2. The Word preached was the Word tried. Conversion ph)ved it. Church 
life illustrated it. The attitude of the corrupt Jewish Church showed that it w:i9 
a new Word that was required for the world. 3. Preaching preceded writing. In^li- 
vidual testimony. The baptism of persecution followed the baptism of inspiration. 
The world wants not speculative truth, but practical — the Word of life. "Taste s-'d 
sw," etc. 

II. Uhitebsal BEsroNBiBiLiTT for the spread of truth. 1. The true concepti'.n 
of the Church — a body of believers. They believe and therefore speak. Possession of 
the Word is responsibility. 2. The state of the world demands activity in every 
believer. 3. The pastoral office quite consistent with the fulfilment of this universal 
duty. The jjr;'mj inter pares should stimulate all to work. 

III. The leadings of Providence are the true guidance of spiritual activity. 
" Scattered abroad " against their will. Doors opened. Opportunity enlarged. Trouble 
sanctified. 1. It is dangerous to anticipate Divine preparation. 2. Watch in the 
night, for the darkest hour precedes ^hc dawn. 3. Keep a true and firm centre from 
which to go and to which to return. Jerusalem still remains the seat of apostolic 
wisdom and authority. God is not the author of confusion. The greatest activity 
need not break up orderly religious life. Revivals and evangelistic aggression should 
always maintain a rallying-point. Seek out not " quiet resting-places," but spheres of 
labour. Let God appoint the peace. — R. 

Vers. 5 — 8. — Bamaria evangelized. I. The steppinq-stonb to work among the 
QentUes. Half heathen. 

II. The peepaeation fob Christ. The Pentateuch. The false teaching of Simon 
and others. Mental and moral degradation. 

III. A specimen of spiritual want and privation. Unclean spirits. Palsied. 
Lame. The multitudes under the dominion of physical and spiritual disease. Adapta- 
tion of the new nnessage to universal humanity. 

IV. Tub means employed. Preacliing the Christ. Signs and wonders. The two 
great facts — a personal Redeemer the object of faith ; a Divine power at hand able to 
lift up the fallen, to subdue the evil, to heal the sick, to change the world. — R. 

Ver. 8, — Missions to the masses. " And there was great joy in that city." City life, 
its two sides of good and evil. The victims of ignorance. Vice. False teaching. 
Old enmities. Sorcery. Bodily disease. " The multitudes " pressing on one another 
The world's joys ruinous, deceptive, consuming, filthy, degrading, biding the light 
of truth. Ko remedy in civilization, science, social 6cheme3,-mere intellectual 
growth. 

I. The gospel a proclaraition of gbbat jot to our cities. 1. To the individual heart. 
2. To houses and families. 3. To communities, lleli^iuu the only safe basis of social 
progress. The Christ preached as Redeemer of humanity. Illustrate from the actual 
results, both in our own cities and in heathendom. Indirect influence of Christianity 
on the physical condition. Healing ministry of Christ still continued. The life w 



efl.tm,l-i6,] ffiE ACTS OP THE AtOSTLES. i6t 

man lengthened during the last three centuries, since the truth had fuller sway over 
the thoughts of men and their universal activity. Science the outgrowth of the civil 
and religious liberty obtained by the victories of spiritual heroes. 

II. God works great results with bmjlll instbu mentalities. Philip was one mau 
among multitudes. 1. An encouragement to all mission work both at home and 
abroad. 2. A lesson as to method. " He proclaimed the Christ unto them." The 
people will " give heed " when the message is adapted to their wants. 3. A manifesta- 
tion of Divine energy. Philip alone was powerless. The Spirit wrought with him. 
Moral miracles still accompany faithful preaching. The signs may differ, but still be 
equally striking and convincing. Witness the work done by Wesley and Whitelield. 
4. A prophecy of the future. Great joy in all cities. Samaria might recall the visit 
of Jesus to Sychar. Some work already done there. So in the world generally, 
a foundation on which Christian messengers can labour. The heathen world has its 
measure of light, though mingled with joyless gloom of superstition and falsehood. 
When the multitudes give heed to the preaching of the Christ, what may not be 
anticipated? " Great joy " instead of great wars and great famines and great desola- 
tion : the great joy of universal progress and a redeemed humanity acknowledging and 
glorifying Christ. What is our joy ? What is the joy of our neighbours? Cast out 
the lies and let the Spirit of life come in. — B. 

Vers. 9 — 13. — 2%e spirit of lies cast out. Simon an example of the kind of 
deceivers under whose spell the ancient world was taken captive. Samaria half 
heathen. " Salvation is of the Jews " (cf. John iv.). A striking instance showing that 
a dim twilight of knowledge is the condition favourable to the growth of falsehood and 
superstition. They would not have given heed to Simon had they studied the whole 
Scripture. Tet the gospel found a ready soil because the true wonders could be 
opposed to the false. 

I. The state op the world apaet from Christ. Given up to " strong delusion to 
believe lies." 1. Abuse of human learning and philosophy. Simon probably versed in 
ancient lore. 2. The distinction between sorcery and magic and true science, and the 
wonders of human progress, has been the fruit of Christian teaching and the develop- 
ment of the kingdom of God. 3. The signs of man's birthright still traceable in his 
degrading bondage. Subjection to the power of God. Readiness to worship. Idea of 
a Divine kingdom. 

II. The viotobt of the truth over the falsehood. 1. Good tidings — liberty, 
peace, joy — " without money and without price." 2. Power manifested. This is the 
true kingdom, not such as Simon pretended to show. 3. Subjugation of all — even 
Simon himself. As in Egypt, the miracles of God are infinitely more wonderful than 
the deceits of the false teachers. So let us learn confidence in the gospel message. 
We may yet bring the very deceivers themselves to the feet of Christ. The world 
will be amazed as the gospel reveals its power. " Have faith in God." — VL, 

Vers. 14 — ^24.— 2%« ^irit of mammon in the Christian Church. Peter and John 
represented the apostolic authority, but not as something to bo imposed on believers, 
but as linking them with the source of spiritual gifts. Simon represented the spirit 
of this world in the Church — the sins of ambition, covetousness, hypocrisy, priestcraft, 
intimately connected with the one fatal error of admitting the world's calculations 
into the Church. " He^offered them money." The Church has listened to such offers far 
too much. The Simon-spirit, the mixture of sorcery and faith, has filled some portions 
of the professed Church with lies and mammon-worship. Notice— 

I, The TB0B apostolic spirit manifested. 1. Dependence on prayer, 2, Separation 
of spiritual gifts from all money considerations, 3. Detection and denimciation of the 
false and sordid. 

II. The Church's danoeb from the laxness of discipline. 1. Those that have 
"neither part nor lot in this matter" must be kept out of the number of God's 
people. 2. Especially must the ministry be preserved from every form of simony. 
3. The bold and fearless course on the part of those in office is much the safest 
Hypocrisy is weakness. Simon will succumb to Peter, if Peter only speaks out tli« 
Word of Gud, aod stands up for purity of faith and conscientiousness. Better a pooi 



26« Titfi ACTS 0¥ THE AtOSTLES. [oh. vm. 1— 4a 

Church with spiritual gifts, than a treasury full of hypocrites' offerings and no Holy 
Ghost descending on the world. — B. 

Vers. 25 — 40. — The second flight of the gotpel. Samaria evangelized both by Philip 
and the apostles, and both in the city and country districts — a preparation of the 
Church for yet greater expansion. Necessity that such a flight as from Samaria to 
the desert on the way to Ethiopia should be supernaturally commanded. The step- 
by -step process of openiug the Jewish mind to the idea of a world-message. The eunuch 
was a proselyte of tho gate, so would be regarded as holding an intermediate position. 
Contrast this childhood of the Church with our advanced knowledge of the Divine 
purposes. Moreover, at that time no New Testament. The work to be done must 
await the instruments. The gospel cannot be preached fully till the apostles have 
fulfilled their testimony. — B. 

Ver. 35. — Jesus the Hope of tJie world. " Then Philip opened his mouth," etc. The 
two lines meeting in the desert. The Ethiopian traveller led on by Providence ; the 
evangelist led by the angelic message ; ignorant of one another, yet both in their way 
following Divine guidance. The importance of that meeting-place to the world's 
future, both as opening the South and East to the gospel, and as helping the Church to 
look away to the ends of tlie earth. The underlying facts, the Old Testament and its 
work. Proselytes. Devout men. Isaiah preparing for Christ. " Of whom speaketh the 
prophet ? " The world was ready and asking questions, and the Church was prepared 
to answer them. The Spirit presiding over all. 

I. Jesus the Beoinnino and the End of all God's revelations. 1. Atonement 
the great want of the world. 2. The gospel facts fulfilments of the Old Testament 
prophecies. 3. A personal Redeemer preached as an object of faith, the satisfaction of 
the heart. 

II. The PBEAOHtNO OF jE8n8 THE TBVB OFENINO OF THE CnnROH'S LIPS TO THE 

WORLD. 1. In distinction from mere dry theology, vague sentiment, or barren si^ecula- 
tion. 2. With no feeble or uncertain sound he opened his mouth. Boldness, direct- 
ness, persuasiveness, faithfulness, he preached to him. 3. Scriptural preaching the 
great demand of the age. Beginning on a firm foundation of the written Word and 
the convictions of hearers. 

IIL DrVINELT GIVEN OPPORTtTNITT HUMBLY USED PRODUCTIVE OF OBEAT KESULTS. 

1. Missionary work should recognize the preparation God makes in men's minds fur 
his truth. 2. Individuals the objects of gracious communications, that messengers may 
be raised up who shall carry the Word into the strongholds of heathenism. Weshonlii 
always follow the Spirit. 3. Deserts rejoicing, prophecy of a recovered world. Tlio 
nations shall be baptized. But we must see to it that we preach unto them Jesus.— K. 

Ver. 39. — The way of pleasantness. "He went on his way rejoicing." 

I. A RETROSPECT. 1. Heathenism compared with Christianity, 2. A state of doubt 
and inquiry compared with knowledge, faith, decision, open dedication. 3. Loneliness 
changed into fellowship ; some one helping and guiding ; remembered instructions, and 
opened Scripture. 

II. A PROSPECT. The way of rejoicing opened. 1. Sense of reconciliation. Tnward 
peace. Joy "springing up as a well of water into everlasting life." 2. Hopes for him- 
self and for others. He was carrying the gospel to his home, to his duties, his anxieties, 
his sovereign, his fellow-countrymen. 3. A baptized man rejoicing in the sense of 
Divine approval of his conscience and a new position in life. We get rid of much 
difficulty both within and without by public confession of Christ. We draw' round 
our souls the visible tokens of Divine presence and favour. We associate ourselves 
with God'a people in every age, and feel that our way is — 

"The way the holy prophets went — 
Ood's highway from banishment," 

Recognize tho turning-point. Take the straight road that leads through « joyfal 
obedience to glory. — It. 

Veil. 1 — 4. — Discordant elements obedient to the accomplishing of one fwrpose. 



m. nn. 1—40.] THE ACTS Oi' THii. A^OSTLEg. ^1 

This short paragraph is not only full of incident, but of strangely contrary kind of 
iiioideut. It seems at fiist a mere medley of facts, history's patchwork, or like some 
mosaic pretending to no harmony at alL This first impression, however, soon passes 
off, and each incident of the group assumes yet clearer outline and is seen to fit into 
its place. The fact still remains, however, that the materials are of very antagonistic 
kiud, and the wonder still remains, broadening more and more clearly to view, that 
out of all the variety a sovereign power is working a certain unity of result. The 
martyrdom is at the centre of the subject yet. It is the key of the position. It 
makes a landmark consjiicuous far and wide, and a date for ever memorable. And 
this paragraph develops to view a fivefold energy resulting from the martyrdom. 

I. It beings out in broad relief other than the late humbling aspects op 
HUMAN NATURE. (Vcr. 2.) Other hearts than those that beat in the breasts of the 
Sanhedrim are in Jerusalem, other hands than those that stone are at this very 
moment outside its walls. The triumph has not been an unqualified one. The 
contrast is a wonderful relief to the strain put on faith, a welcome restorer of hope for 
human outlook. And one and the same hour shows no doubtful sign of those sternest 
V orks, those tenderest oftices of which the angel of Christianity would through all the 
aces be witness. The storm is spent, and men seek in the morning to bury them — 
tlio dead washed ashore. The battle is over, and in the evening men gather their 
slaughtered to bui-y them. The cross has done its work, and the sacred body is 
" begged," and with tenderest care and service is buried. The stoning has finished, 
and devout men carry mangled limbs to honoured burial. Christianity has her 
chivalry, and the chivalry of Christianity is that purest affection which, mingled with 
purest faith, before all reverences and mourns her fallen heroes and warriors, though 
she never excused thi'ra while they lived a duty, nor exempted them a pang while 
they struggled anil taught. Most impressive is that which is left to our imagination 
to fill up. When the last stone had been thrown, and the echoes of howling murderers 
bad died away, and the mob had swept by, — then " devout men carried Stephen to his 
burial, and made great lamentation over him." 

II. It finds out the tkub disciples, and scatters them bach with his fruitful 
INFLUENCE PAR AND WIDE. (Vcr. 1.) Persecution — a thing of darkest deeds, a very 
word of dread — ^has ever had some crop of most beneficent results. Of it it may 
emphatically be said, " Now no chastening for the present s«emeth to be joyous, but 
grievous : nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruits of righteousness unto 
them which are exercised thereby." Persecution: 1. 2Vjes the sincerity of character. 
2. It ascertains the dominance of faith or its comparative weakness. 3. It gives 
faith much stronger hold on its proper object or objects. 4. It chases away vast 
quantities of vague thought, vaguer feeling, mists that have long misled, aud a habit 
of doubt that has gone far to undermine the nobility of Christian life. 5. It exerts 
a vast benefit on others. If this be not part of its intention, it is a grand overruled 
use of it. The happy hour often is touched with the taint of selfishness. The members 
of happiest family are so united to one another that they render an unfairly small 
contribution to the happiness that should touch their borders too on all sides. And it 
has in point of fact often been so with the Church, till, " when persecution arises " (which 
" persecution " may " arise " from very various causes, and appear in very various shapes), 
it is broken in upon, and thoso who composed it are separated and spread and many 
a missionary is made (ver. 1). 

III. It FINDS OUT THE "CALLED apostles" — TRUE TO THEIB CALL. (Ver. 1.) The 

believers were scattered. Some voice, some power, or some pure impulse tied the 
apostles. The post of duty remains so for them, though it become the post of danger. 
They are to remain yet in Jerusalem, to guide, to comfort, to keep together the lessened 
flock, and to face- fearlessly the enemy. This word, "except the apostles," should be 
heard like a trumpet-call by the leaders of Christ's flock, at all times, in all places. 
And does it not indicate that leaders there ought to be, and in this sense, ranks of 
service — better so called than ranks of office and dignities — in the Church of Christ ? 
The analogy of all nature says, " Yes," supported not only by the " call " and the special 
" inspiring " of apostles, but by such a /act as that which underlies this exception. 
" except the apostles." It is left meantime open to us to imagine only why this crisis 
wa* not used by those who persecuted to turn a fierce tide of opposition upon th« 



m . THE ACTS OB* THE APOSTLES. [<m. -rai. l-40i 

»pottlM themselves. They inust have heen easy to find, and they must haTe heen 
kuown to he at the root of the whole matter. The most probable account of th« 
matter seems to us to he that the Sanhedrim had already had enough of them, and iu 
interfering with them had been so humblingly worsted (see homilies on oh. iv., v.). 

IV. It finds out Saul, to bet ah indelible mark, not on him, but batheb in 
nm. It will seem to the reader at first, perhaps, that it is none but the historian who 
sets a mark on Saul, and that the mark which he sets is none but an outward mark, 
though he repeats it three times (ch. vii. 58, 60 ; viii. 3). Second thoughts will persuade 
him of something very different. As sure as ever sureness was, mark surer far than 
even Cain's mark is being set upon Saul, set where nothing can endanger its lasting 
depth. Ineffaceable memories are furnishing the secret cabinet of his mind; thoughts 
and resolutions and strong forces of conviction are beiug stored there, that no future 
crowd of cares, or throng of occupations, or tumults of mirth should avail to drive out. 
In the whole scene Saul takes three parts. 1. He takes a. passive part, or what may 
scorn mostly so (ch. vii. 58), and then a picture was buing photographed on an inner tablet 
iu its stillness, accurate, full, sale, to be permanent also. It was destined for a while, 
indeed, to be overlaid by other images, iieeting and vain, but after a while to brighten 
out and become, perhaps, brightest of all except one. 2. Saul takes a consenting part 
(ch. vii. 60). He says nothing against the martyrdom ; he looks approval of it. Do they 
ask whether it is all right and to his mind? — his answer is in the afBrmative. 3. Saul 
lakes an active part. Full of zeal, full of fury, full of impetuous, imperious, intolerant 
determination, he "makes havoc of the Church, entering into every house, and haling 
men and women, commits them to prison" (ver. o). He is mercilessly marking 
himsdf, unless you say that, with triple mark, another hand, a gracious one, is mark- 
ing him for mercy — Jesus Christ's own " pattern of all long-suffering" (1 Tim. i. 15). 
Tes ; the Saul of Stephen's martyrdom ; the Saul who permitted the polluted garments 
of those that stoned that saintliest Stephen to lie at his feet for safety's sake ; who 
made himself a consenting accomplice of the causeless murder, and who then girded 
himself up to the full stretch of his mighty enerjry to presume to "make havoc" of 
the flock of Jesus, will make a good pattern indeed, a pattern hard to improve upon — 
" ]):ittern of the all long-suffering " of that same " Jesus." 

V. It finds utterances abundant, binoing, fab and wide, fob " peeachino 
Christ," a thousand-fold fob the one lovinq voice that had been hushed. (Ver. 
4.) And no thonght outside of the rapture of his own soul, delivered unto the glory 
of God, of Christ, of heaven, couW nave been more welcome than this to Stephen. 
His murderous, stoned death, he would have said, was already amply and blessedly 
revenged. The one thing, " preaching Christ," that caused his death, was multiplied 
immediately a thousand-fold by that very thing — his death. In his death Samson 
.slew more than all he had slain while he lived in his mighty manhood. Unenviable 
achievement ! Fame unblessed 1 His seed perish from the earth 1 But Stephen in his 
death becomes the means of the offer of life, and doubtless of lifo too to more, 
innumerably more than all whom he could reach with all his sainti]' force while he 
lived. Honoured servant ! Deathless renown ! His seed " the noble ari»y of martyrs," 
and converts exceeding the drops of morning dewl No unworthy pendant to tha 
thrilling sacred tale of Scripture itself is the proverb that takes date tro n *bis one : 
" The blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church."— B. 

Ver. 8. — New-found joy. " And there was great joy in that city." Tl>e poinel ot 
Jesus begins now its own aggressive but beneficent march. Twice already fias it 
passed through the most solemn baptism of blood. Its' birth, its infancy, iis home, 
its early struggles outside its owu eacred home, and its baptisms can never be for- 
gotten. Yet it is time for the young giant to essay his powers, and, without a weapon, 
to try what intrinsic foroo may count for. Apostolic preaching and achievement are 
still for a short time hold in abeyance by the history. It is almost as though open , 
ground were being prepared for the entrance of Saul into the great champion's place. 
Ktephen, stridden down, is immediately replaced, not by an apostle, but by the second 
nf those who had been specially set apart for the care of tables. Philip, who comes to 
be named Philip the Evangelist, is to the front. At the message of persecution, when 
many, apparently with no little concert and in no little order of movement, travel 



en. nil 1—40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 2fl9 

elsewhenSj he goes "down to the city of Samaria." Whether it were he or they, it 
cannot he supposed that they imagined that they and their gospel were sure, hy mere 
change of place, of escaping persecution. They probably saw very clearly and were 
very sure of the reverse of this — nor less sure that they carried with them what 
would again and again win for itself and for them the heartiest welcome, waken the 
truest joy, reap a harvest of unending gratitude. And such was now the earliest 
experience of Philip. How kindly camo the brief sunshine in place of persecution's 
biting blast! So God often helps his faithful ones on another stage, and ordains that 
his own cause shall triumph through alternate storm and sunshine. The city of 
Samaria found great joy, after a short period of Philip's visit. Let us consider this 
joy, what account it can give of itself. 

I. It was a jot that had foundation on which to rest. It came of " Christ 
preached " and Christ ^j-owed among the people. Philip ^reocAerf Christ, and this is 
clearly stated first. His preaching was attended with signs and wonders following. 
Notice : 1. That the exact nature of those signs and wonders — miracles of healing to 
the body — does not derogate from the great principle here forcibly illustrated. Some 
may think that because present ages are not ages of bodily miracles, neither the 
preaching nor the preacher of the gospel has a chance to compare with that of Philip's 
time. But the mistake is patent. The criterion is not that one bodily kind of miracle 
should he'forthcoming, but that some practical fruit should certainly be found. Christ 
preached must have some result of a practical kind. Christ is not among men to bo 
nothing among them, to be no force among them, to be an indifferent possession, or to 
be mere passing excitement. No time is to be wasted, with Christ as the pretence 
of it, as he never wasted any. 2. The practical efflsct of Christ preached must b(^, 
really and everything taken into account, good in itself and in its bearing. It is true 
that awhile much of what shall seem of an opposite character may be stirred up. It 
is true also that Christ preached and refused must be condemnation to those who 
refuse. And it is true that much of Christ's practical work, while it is in progress, lies 
in discriminating, in moral judgment of men, in separating and showing the infinite 
disparity there is between certain kinds "of ground" on which the seed of his Word 
falls. These things nothing hinder the fact that, if Christ has been at work, it may 
be shown and must be shown that good has been at work, and goodness come thereof. 
3. The practical good effect of Christ preached is not disadvantaged in the present day 
by the absence of physical signs and wonders. These were the shadows, not the things 
that now purport to have succeeded them. They were but simple, elementary types 
compared with the substance of which they forewarned. It might with much more 
verisimilitude be said that the physical miracles of Jesus Christ and his apostles 
shared the class of disadvantages attendant upon his own personal presence in the flesh 
— when men might love the person rather than the character, the body rather than 
the soul, the limb restored rather than the soul saved. Where to-day, Christ being 
preached, sins are forsaken, hearts are changed, lives do different works and those the 
works of godliness, the miracle is not what makes men alone wonder and throng ami 
be glad exceedingly, but it makes them and hosts of angels also wonder, throng, and bo 
glad to Heaven's joyfullest music. 4. The jjractical good effect of Christ preached 
is Iwund to be efficacious in attracting " the people." We here read that they " with 
one accord gave heed " to the things that were spoken, because of the things that were 
done. Though many an individual has by one method or another shut himself, alas I 
too surely, too successfully, out of grace, this has never yet been found true of the mass 
of people (unless it be judicially the case for a while with the Jew) when the gospel 
has been preached amongst them. So soon as some real fruits have become apparent, 
standers-hy, ay, and passers-by, not a few, look, and gaze, and ask, and move toward that 
truth that can act, and then they yield ere long in tumult of devotion and unbounded 
subjection to it. No work, no public movement, no sample of revolution even, ever 
showed more genuinely the signs of adaptation for spreading (ay, to the idea of 
"covering the earth, as the waters cover the seas") than" Christ preached'' has 
shown. It offers us a grand idea of what the scene will be, what the rate of growth - 
what the grand transformation of scene, when the set conditions, the " set time " shall 
have come. 6. Christ's gospel does not only not disdain these conditions of its accept- 
ance, but proposes them and gives prominence to them and desires to be itself tested 



870 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. via 1—40 

by tliem. (1) Jesus Christ has been a wonderful TeacJ^er is this worid. The civilized 
worid now gives him the teacher's chair. All other teachers pale their ineffectual Jiglit 
in his presence. And when they shine, shine only in proportion to the light they borrow 
from him. (2) Jesus Christ has been also a wonderful Example of character — Pattern 
of patterns, Model of models ; how perfectly sculptured ! how adorably complete ! (oj 
But the one leading wonderful characteristic to which he lays claim, and justest claim, 
is that of Saviour : not what he teaches ; not what he instances and illustrates of 
suiprising greatness, goodness, grace; but what he does an^l will do. Therefore no 
barren word, nor word of dialectic skill, nor word of elegant culture, nor of poetic 
fancy, nor of proluuntlcst theologic theme, shall dare to offer to pass current for " Christ 
preached." This moans false profession, audacious blaspheiuy, guiltiest tamperiiij; 
with sacredest things, unless it mean conviction for sin, contrition for guilty heart, 
conversion of nature, and unrnistaken change of lifel Then first would the gospel uf 
Christ put ulT its glory, and he himself descend from his undisputed place, when any 
diminishmcnt wore made in the slightest iota, "one jot or one tittle," of these their 
unique and venerable and practical proffers. Well might there be "great joy in that 
city," when into it there graciously entered the presence which met the deep, the 
groaning, sighing, almost despairing and worn demand of "the people"! It carried 
in its very voice its evidence ; in its deeds its attraction ; in its varied rich message 
its circle of reward. And as with bountifnl hand it strewed its blessings, a willing, 
grateful, jubilant crowd gathered round, and one filled with new joy. 

II. It was a jo¥ that had the elements op likely duration in it. 1. Soma 
joyed who received the full blessing themselves. If any were dispossessed of unclean 
spirits ; if any palsied were tlirilled with all the old energy and new added thereto ; if the 
lame were made to walk and to leap; — these were stibstantial benefits, undoubted bless- 
ings, never " to be repented " or forgotten. 2. Some joyed whose chiefest joy, reached 
by the way of sympathy, was for those who were dear to them, those whom they knew 
though not dear to them, those whom perhaps they did not know at all nor had ever seen 
till they now see their joy. For In the wide circumference of a genuine human heart 
and in its capacious spaciousness there was room, and there is still room, for sympathy 
to find its sweetest, daintiest food in all these ways. And the joy of sympathy, some 
of the sacredest that fringes human life, dwells in a secret pavilion, which no piofane 
fickleness shall easily molest, when Cliri.st is the origin of it. 3. Many joyed by tlie 
stirring novelty of so new, so bright a hope, and that hope was neither delusive nor " for 
ft while" only. 4. Some, perhaps many, possibly very many, genuinely knew the real 
dawn of celestial light, of spiritual health, of salvation for the soul. That was a joy 
incontestably of likely duration. It was deep and large and limitless. 

III. It was joy that had in it the earnest op the eternal upper jot. However 
little conscious " the people" might be of any such thought, not the less might it have 
btrong hold on them. But it is not impossible that they were in some measure con- 
scious of it, yet the possession of the present be so true, so welcome a good, that thoy 
do not stop to ask of the future or the upper. It matters not either way; there wm 
surely such an earnest in the joy that filled them now. 1. Was it not an unparallekil 
scene and experience for them ? Had they ever known anything on earth to surpass 
it or to parallel it ? 2. Was it not a most genuine rehearsal of " the former things beirjg 
passed away"? Were pain, and disease, and deprivation of strength, and deprivation 
of limb — and the tyranny of evil spirits — relaxing their various grasp, nay, resigning it ; 
and did it not look far on to the time when God would also go so far as to wipe away 
every tear from every eye? Was the joy all round, every eye full of it, every tongue 
full of it, every ear full of it, every heart full of it ; and did not this go far to make it 
a universal joy ? 3. Was it a joy that came of any other parentage than heaven ? 
Did science bring it, or art, or even the glowing glories of creation bathed in golden sun- 
light? No; God sent it, »nd Jesus brought it, and the Spirit made it flow full and 
abound. Tltis answers to the heavenly joy. Though one and another individual fell 
short of the soul's real light and the heart s deepest joy, if the scene looked like an end 
"of all our woe," it must have looked something like an end of all our "sin,'' and 
justly sends on our enraptured anticipations tc the tipie whei^ both shall ht^ve v)M)ifihQ4 
in |he iierfect imd eternal joy. — B- 



o«.^in. 1— 40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 271 

Vers. 9 — 24. — TTie type of one stricken with rtHtgion-lUndneat. It may be at onca 
allowed that it were difficult to measure with any exactness the amount of moral guilt 
in Simon Magus. Happily we are not called to do this. That we cannot do it will 
not hinder our noticing the phenomena of what may well strike upon our own know- 
ledge and our own light ap an amazing development of the very obliquity itself of 
moral or spiritual vision. Confessedly with most various amount and kind of effect 
does the glory of the natural sun strike on the profusion of the objects) of nature. 
What brilliant effects some ot these return I what rich and mellowed effects, others 1 
How do some seem to give out all they have in gratitude's welcome, and others rest in 
their joy 1 till, when we come to the range of human life, we can by.no means count 
upon any correspondingly uniform or correspondingly varying responses. Now some- 
thing within asserts itself greater, more sullen, more given to contrailiction and 
resenting of external force than the coldest granite, the gloomiest yew, the dreariest of 
scenery. Tet these things within men make no such stubborn and successful fight 
against a whole world's source of light and heat as they do often against the pure 
light of truth, the purer light of God in the face of Jesus Christ, the purest and most 
vitalizing force of light of all — God in the searching gaze of the Holy Spirit. An 
early type of this religion-blindness of human nature is before us. Wherever 
the slightest allowance may possibly bo made for the individual in whom it is now 
illustrated so broadly and undisguisedly, there must the indictment press but the 
more heavily on the state of fallen nature itself. Let us notice respecting this religion- 
blindness— 

L In what et stood self- convicted. 1. It was in the presence of the greatest 
power of heaven that could be on earth, and (to begin with) did not stand in awe of 
it, nor recognized it as a presence to inspire awe. On occasions of far less direct mani- 
festations of the like great power of God, it had been far otherwise with Peter, and often 
had it been far otherwise with the miscellaneous multitude ; and in particular on occa- 
sion of a manifestation of strong resemblance to the present — on the day of Pentecost- 
it was far otherwise with such a multitude. But Simon, a picked man, a taught man, a 
man acquainted with "mysteries," is not cognizant ofhigh emotions, of deep stirrings of 
the moral nature, as were they; but stands thure still with covered head, with thoughts 
that run on business, and with a hand ready outstretched to do businsss 1 2. It was in 
that presence, with moreover the strongest added symptoms that an unwonted holiness 
attached to it, and yet it was eager and was presumptuous to challenge intrinsic 
responsibilities in partnership with it. Forwardness to rush into responsibilities of 
the most sacred kind has always meant but one thing, and rarely enough led to any 
but one end. " And yet the foivvardness with which Simon may now be charged was 
not that of hasty impulse, of youth and its inexperience, of inconsiderate rashness. It 
has to be cre,dited with a much worse and more ingrained genius. It was a calculating 
eagerness, an old and far too familiar impulse to be longer justly called impulse at all, 
the unaffected outcome of a heart indurate with self. Tliis sort can surely no further 
go than when it intrudes its .callous candidature for the most sacred partnership that 
Heaven itself has to name, nor suspects that it is at all specially to blame in doing so. 
3. It was in that presence, and dares to offer money, that with it may be purchased 
A share of its most sacred prerogative or own natnre. The "corruptible things" ot 
"silver and gold" are proposed as an exchange value for the most incorruptible, living 
Holy Spirit I Once Judas, for the getting of money to himself, volunteers to be the 
betrayer of Jesus ; but in real fact, human insolence of thought dared a higher flight of 
incredible audacity when it purposed to part with money for the attempted purchase 
of the gift of the Holy Ghost. Then not the leader of the rebel angels who kept not 
their first estate, more really affronted the holiness and the majesty and the sovereignty 
of God, than did Simon in that thought of his heart and word of his lip. In which 
lay implicit in part, and in part explicit, (1) the treasonous thought that the sovereign 
gifts of God could be swayed by human inducement, and (2) the impious thought that 
money could avail as the inducement. If there be any eye at all which sees but yet 
sees not the utter disparity between the symbol that makes the exchange value of one 
earthly thing against another earthly thing, and Heaven's gift most critical, most 
mysterious, most gracious of all gifts, then that eye is colour-blind with the worst 
depriygWop, it \» emptieij of its oyra proper n»t4re, religious rays baTS T«nly struck 



272 rHE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ot. Yin. 1—40. 

upon it, and the light that is in it is darkness — "how great!" Confusion teorsi 
confounded is therefore at least one motto of the transaction proposed by Simot ; for, 
fearful as was the degree of it, its darltcst condemning lies in the kind of matter in 
which it exercised itself (Ps. cxxxi. 1). 4. It was in that presence, and did not 
humbly, earnestly pray for a personal experience of its mighty and gracious energy, 
but only to have the official dignity, the self-exalting dignity, or tho literally gainful 
dignity of being the channel of conducting it to others. What could be more suspicious ? 
Wiiat more unnattiral ? What more hollow, whenthe question once becomes a quusticin 
of matter of the highest concernment ? How can any man sincerely work for the salvation 
of another who has never found, never sought his own ? How can any man purpose to 
be the servant of G<5d and of God's Spirit in order to convey spiritual gilt and spiritual 
grace and sanctification to others, if be is not himself in constant and living recipienea 
of the same kind of gifts? Yet many propose this thing unconsciously which Simon 
proposed in so many most outspoken words. For how often are men glad to think 
of or even to see the devil cast out of others (Luke x. 20), who have never sought 
deliverance themselves, and never submitted to the humbling stroke that should break 
the chain of their own captivity to himl And how many with the lip speak 
patronizingly of Christianity and pray for the spread of true religion, who never 
illustrate the possession of it? Confessedly there are some outer things which one may 
be the means of conveying to others by the mere hand, and as the mere deputy of sonic 
original giver ; hut as certainly the attempt is as impious as it is impossible in otfier 
things. The higher you ascend in gift, the more absolute and patent is the inherent 
impossibility, until, after you have traversed all the ascending realms of mental 
bestovrment and attainments, you roach that realm of pure spirit ; crossing over into it, 
you cease for ever to assume to convey to others, except that " which yon have heard 
. . . seen . . . looked upon, and your hand has handled" in the matter " of the Word 
oflife." It might be that the blind man should pray if haply he might find the way to 
give sight to other blind — though still most strange if he pray not for himself, " Lord, 
that I might receive my sight." But if the case be that of a man spiritually blind, who 
prays and with his prayer offers money that he may be the " chosen vessel " for com- 
manding spiritual light to others benighted as yet, yet prays not for spiritual sight 
himself, you say he is the most benighted of all, blind indeed, and, short of limiting 
God's power in the gift of repentance and the grace of his pardon thereupon, you say 
self-stricken, hopelessly blind I And of this there is every dread appearance in the 
instance of Simon. 

II. In what rr foujtd its pbedibfosiiio causes. 1. In a long career of profession. 
Simon's very profession was to make profession. And it was of the very essence of 
dangerous profession, since it was profession about self. Self was the object as well as 
the subject. The ill odour in which self-assertion, as a mere individual act, is held ii 
well admitted. But how much worse when this has become habit I worst of all when 
it has become the bread and livelihood of a man. "Giving out that himself was some 
great one " sounds the irony of biography. It was all that and more for him. 2. In 
a professional career that rested on the basis of deception. "Of long time he had 
bewitched the people with sorceries." Whatever reality there was in the sources from 
which he derived power to work " sorcery," there was no reality of benefit flowing to a 
deluded people from his works. When " they all gave heed to him, from the least to 
the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God," they were " all " the victims 
of Simon's most purposed and systematic deception. And however much they were to 
blame, he more by far who prostituted persuasive powers to mislead and to rob his fellow- 
creatures, instead of to guide and enrich them. By all this, whatever else, whatever 
harm he did to others, he was effectually branding his own conscience with a hot iron, 
and putting out his own inner light. 3, In the habitual recourse to methods which, 
so far as they were not mere deception, were the result of some sort of league with the 
powers of evU. Whether this were really so, and if so to what degree it obtained, may 
be held moot points still ; but two things must be said on the subject. (1) That it is 
hard to escape the conviction that the Scriptures of both the Old and New Testaments 
purport to say so and to give that impression. And (2) that if it be not proved that 
in notable periods of mankind's history bad men were permitted to be in some real 
leaj^ue with the uoseen powers of evil and darknessj it is not yet disprove^- Now, t\^ 



OH. VM. 1—40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 278 

tampering with the unseen is erer hazardous, the mere familiarity of that kind 
dangerous ; but disastrous in the highest degree it is to enter into relations with such 
powers. Samson taken of the Philistines (Judg. xvi, 21) is a type, but a very feeble 
one still, of that enthralled captive. 4. Tet once more, howorer badly things were 
looking for Simon, one thing might have stayed the filling up of the full measure of his 
iniquities — might have stayed the utter extinction of the moral eyesight ; namely, if 
he had kept well within the domain of his darkened self and career, and not tried that 
worst attempt, to ally his evil unrenounced to the good. Long had he known the 
pride, the flattery, tliu intoxicating effect of a large and enthusiastic following. The 
hour came when he saw all this slipping away from him, and he follows — follows those 
who once followed him. It is significantly said, that " then," i.e. in the rear, not in the 
van, " he himself believed also." But it was no " belief with tlie heart," and none " to 
righteousness." And every step that he took by the side of Philip, as he " beheld and 
wondered at the miracles and signs which were done " by him, was a calculating step. 
He beheld with envious stirrings within ; he wondered, and not least, how by any 
means he might become a sharer of tliat which he eyed with envy. That moment 
marked his fall certain. It was tlie turning-point. This thought filled his sordid 
ambition, to keep his darkness and get some light to work it to better result. And it 
was the supreme insult, the last wound to his moral nature. 

111. In what sokt of condition it found itself in the end. 1. It found for 
the first part of its reward the most trenchant and unsparing denunciation. Thii 
denunciation was just as justice could be, but it was of the severest and most scathing 
that Scripture records (ver. 20). 2. It brought upon itself uncompromising exposure. 
The character is weighed and declared wanting. The heart is analyzed and is pro- 
nounced " not right." It is brought under " the eye of God " and is ruled wrong by 
that unerring estimate Cvers. 21, 23). 3. It courted the visitation of a humiliating 
exhortation (ver. 22). Simon had been " baptized," so that, thuugh he might writht 
under the spiritual inquisition made of him and this spiritual monition addressed to 
him, he had put himself where he could not refuse to bear stripes. That his submitting 
to baptism and his continuing with Philip made some demand on his pride, and would 
bear some traces of patronizing condescension, is very possible ; but none the less haa 
he placed himself where the stripe cannot be evaded. 4. It ended the scene in an 
unmasked acknowledgment of miserable insincerity. Simon vanishes from our view, 
unregretted under any circumstances, for we cannot say that he was " not far from the 
kingdom of Ood ; " but none the less so for the unwelcome echoes of his latest voice 
left on the ear. No tide of " repentance " stirs him to the depth ; no movement of 
Bweet penitence begins to sway to and fro a yielding heart ; no manly attitude in him 
wakens within us a particle of sympathy for an humbled career ; no publican's prayer 
and broken-hearted petition for pity and the extended hand of mercy, " strong to save," 
part asunder his bloodless lips. All the contrary — a stranger still to his own guilt 
without a dawning or even dreaming conception of sin's exceeding sinfulness, he can 
only find it in him to beg with unreal tone and with cowardly simulation that those 
who have found him out will pray that his sins may not find Attn out. He would fain 
ask that they take on themselves the responsibility of praying the hypocrite's prayer, 
to pray the prayer which it is " an abomination " to pray — that his sins may not be 
reckoned against him, though unrepented their guilt, unpardoned their aggravation, and 
unsought any saving shelter fur his own soul. Such a prayer never rose accepted ; it 
never rose at all ; it never had the wing on which to rise. It must needs drop out of 
view, as Simon now out of our view, into the uncoveuanted, unknown. — R, 

Vers. 26—39. — A life true to light led to the Light true to life. From one of the 
most unwelcome exhibitions of human nature, we are led with grateful relief to an 
episode full of hope and the very suggestion of sunshine for the world. This alternate 
light and shade of a written record of human life, which exhibits alike the appearances 
of a compendious description and a crowded epitome, is so far a very faithful reflection 
of the tenor of human history. And the faithfulness of the reflection goes some way 
to tell whose hand held the pencil of such graphic effect. Incident abounds in the 
paragraph marked by these verses. But it is no disjointed, incoherent collection of 
incidents. They come together, " bone to his bone," " sinew and flesh oome up upon 

ACTS. T 



274 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. vin. 1—44 

them," and " skin covers them above,'' and they make into a most living whole. Theie 
incidents of our history group around two subjects. Let ua notice — 

I. What ib eecorded here op a life that was tbue to its light. 1. The subject 
of this fragment of biography is an Ethiopian. Though a fragment, it conducts to the 
most critical portion of life, and puts the key of it into our hand. He is a firstfruits 
of the fulfilment of the propliecy that was written, " Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her 
hands unto God " (Ps. Ixviii. 31) ; and in the desolacy too rapidly drawing on ot 
Jerusalem, Zion was still to say, " This man was born in her " (ver. 28 ; Ps. Ixxxvii. 5). 
The Ethiopian cannot " change his skin," but God can change a darkened heart, and 
this he is doing. By what route the Divine ray of light reached tlie Ethiopian's mind 
we know not, but that in man's deepest darkness that light oftentimes loves most 
suddenly to spring up, we do know. He was not one who had been brought up in the 
light of revelation, but was now following that which was given him. 2. The subject 
of this fragment of biography was a man of peace, doubtless of wealth also, " of great 
authority," and with near relations of o£Bce to royalty. Yet he is an instance ot 
exception to the tyrannical entanglements of the " cares of this world, and the deceit- 
fulness of riches, and the lust of other things entering in to choke the- Word." He is 
not of those rich of whom it is said by unerring lips, " How hardly shall they that 
have riches enter into the kingdom of God ! " He strives to enter in, and strives at 
the right time. He is not leaving it till too late — the " too late " of those who " shall 
seek . . . and not be able." This, again, was obeying and being very faithfully ruled 
by the light that was in him. 3. The subject of this fragment of biography is come upon 
using the advantages of his position, state, wealth, for direct religious ends. He has 
been to Jerusalem to worship. He is returning. He has by his resources of money 
and of influence possessed himself of the Scriptures, or a portion of them, comparatively 
so difficult to obtain ; and while yet on his journey he is reading them. He is dwelling 
on what he has heard read in Jerusalem, and is referring to something that had fixed bis 
attention and wakened his wonder. Air, and light, and sun, and movement of the 
chariot, and presumably voices of some attendants, are playing disregarded upon his 
senses, while his soul is communing with itself and the things written in that scarcely 
understood Scripture — all interested. He is scarcely outside ; lie is crossing the threshold 
in the very porch of the living Church — of God's own glorious temple and manifestation 
of truth to man. He is reading in "Esaias the prophet;" and is reading in "the place" 
of places, where " some soft hand invisible " has guided his eye. The sacred parable of 
some six centuries old — but which, within the last some six months, has, unknown 
to him, blossomed for a mission of perpetual youth — has arrested him. He roads and 
Wonders and inquires, " Of whom speaketh the prophet this — ' He was led as a sheep to 
the slaughter : and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth : 
in his humiliation his judgment was taken away : and who shall declare his genera- 
tion? for his life is talsen from the earth'?" The man who has got to that "story," 
sacred story, sweet story, strange story, and can't pass it, won't pass it, but lingers 
over it, muses it, asks in the very spirit of prayer for its interpretation, looks very like 
a man who is not putting out his light, not dishonouring it, but is following it and on 
the way to improve it and find it brighter. 4. Arrived a very little further in know- 
ledge, the subject of this partial biography is resolved without an unnecessary moment's 
delay to " make profession." Let him belong to what nation he may, let him wear 
what livery he may, let him jeopardize what splendid place of earthly promotion he 
may, he will take the Name of Christ. He has found the truth, and he reco;j;nizea it, 
and not an hour will he lose or risk his " part and lot in the matter." His " heart is 
right in the sight of God," and it is because God's light has come to be in him. What 
light he had he followed, and it " shone upon the road that led him to the Lamb ; " 
and he was satisfied, and " went on his way rejoicing." 

II. What is beoorded here of unseen and tttteblt nitsusPEOTED AOENonsB at wobk 
BEFBIENDINO THE ETHIOPIAN. There Were such agencies, and this is first to be noticed. 
It is plainly written where it can be written, that it may .be the better understood and 
believed in the times innumerable when it cannot bo written. Life flows on often 
apparently by itself; but what unthought-of tributaries there are to its stream I Or, if 
they are thought of and even seen, how little is made of them, with how little faitli or 
devoutness are they mused overt Nay, even when acknowledged aa providtnees, the 



OH. yui. 1—40.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 271 

utterance of that word seems to discharge all debt connected with it. It is not treated 
as a sacred symbol of untold depth and breadth, and a mercy of meaning only thinly 
veiled beneath it. 1. We may be very sure that the eunuch would have been first to 
desire to acknowledge the help that he had received from Philip. What he may have 
thought of his sudden appearance, of his placing himself so as to overhear his reading 
of that sacred scroll,'and of his addressing to him the somewhat gratuitous question, 
" Understandest thou what thou readest ? " we know not, but eyident it is that be botii 
courteously and gladly received the proffered intrusion, nor regarded it as intrusion. 
He was well repaid. Philip expounds to him the Scripture, and " preaches to him 
Jesus;" and soon after is the minister to him of baptism, and nor asks nor takes 
fee or reward, but, so soon as his service is fulfilled, he has vanished. Was all this 
chance ? If the Ethiopian thought it was, or did not think it was not, it may be in 
some measure forgiven alike to his education and want of education. But he does not 
.strike us as the man certain to fail or likely to fail in matters of spiritual discernment. 
Be this as it may, we know that there was no chance about it, but distinct design and 
preparation. So this visible human contribution of help, gratefully received and no 
doubt unstintedly acknowledged in the heart of the Ethiopian, owned to an unseen 
friendly power. It was a notable instance of a " stranger " Ijeing " unawares an angel." 
And our human friends, and the visits of their sympathy, their voice to encourage, or 
to exhort, or to rebuke, may often be " angels' visits." Pity two things — (1) that 
they are not in fact more often so ; and (2) that we do not oftener recognize them 
and use them as such, when they are in truth so ordained. 2. More remote still, there 
was friendly agency, unknown, unsuspected by the man who took all the benefit of it. 
Philip himself did not come; he was sent. And the Ethiopian's greater and devouter 
thanks belong to him who sent. So it was once that there was " no eye to pity, no 
arm to save." And the majesty and sovereignty and might of highest heaven inter- 
posed. And to these behind and above all means and methods and " instruments," 
belong the glory, gratitude, and' endless praise. The "angel of the Lord" (ver. 26) 
appeared to Philip, and told him the way in which he should go ; and Philip went, 
obedient, unquestioning, though there was room for two or three questions. Like 
Abraham, " he went/' presumably (ver. 29), at present, " not knowing " why he went, 
though he did know the unpromising "desert" where. And this was no chance, nor 
was it what happened as a sign and wonder in the one solitary history of this Ethiopian. 
It is what often is taking place. It is in human life, not deserted, forsaken, " despised " 
of God, to be also often befriended, and most graciously befriended by him. 3. A third 
friendly interference is vouchsafed in the behalf of the Ethiopian. Philip has reached 
" the way from Jerusalem to Gaza ; " and probably he knows the " desert " heat and 
drought, and tlie unrefreshing barrenness of the route. And he is going to cross the 
path of the traveller's chariot, or rather be left behind of it and miss it. We med not 
suppose that Philip was not wishful to be " instant in season and out of season." But 
for whatever reason, he needs the direction of " the Spirit " (ver. 29), and that Spirit 
interposes and instructs and commands. These are of the gracious Spirit's chiefest 
functions — to arrest, to inform, to command. And still it is all for the help of the 
unwitting Ethiopian travelling from the worship of Jerusalem, using well even travel- 
ling-time, and living true to such light as he had. The fuller day was near at hand 
for hini. Long time, perhaps, had glimmering rays been straying in, and he had 
wondered what they meant, and they had made him long for more light and feel for it 
with many a groping. Thus "he that seeketh findeth." Full conviction, full satis- 
faction, full faith and peace and joy are his reward (ver. 39). — B. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — Providence making missionaries. The disciples of the Lord Jesus were 
to be missionaries, going everywhere and preaching his gospul to every creature. But 
they were to begin at Jerusalem, and there wait for " the promise of the Father " — the 
Divine endowment of the Holy Ghost. Then they were simply to follow the openings 
of Divine providence and the impulses and leadings of the Divine Spirit. They 
evidently at first scarcely understood what their work was, or how it was to be begun. 
Prejudices hindered them ; ditKculties blocked their way ; it would seem to them that 
their lives would be imperilled by exciting public attention to them ; and on the day 
of Pentecost they were simply borne beyond themselves and abcve their fears, and 



Zn THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. nn. 1— « 

were led to sptak, freely and bravely, all they knew of Christ's resurrection and powei 
U) save. At first their witness was rendered in Jerusalem, and they waited on 
Providtnce for further guidance. The way for more extended work presently opened, 
but it was in very strange and unexpected ways. Out of seeming disaster and dis- 
comfiture came the plain indication of what their missionary work was to be. 

I. Personal pekil camb. The Kevised Version gives the better reading of yer. 1 : 
" There arose on that day a great persecution." It would seem " that the crowd which 
stoned Stephen oi.tside the gate rushed back with its blood up, or, as Calvin says, like 
a wild beast which has once tasted blood, and throw itself there and then upon the 
company of brethren who, perchance, had met to pray secretly in their upper room for 
the brother who before men was playing so well his honourable and perilous part." The 
wild things which an excited mob will do have received abundant illustration in all 
ages, and recent illustration in the partial destruction of Alexandria. But the Christian 
diiciples had more than this to fear. Such riotings of mobs last, at the most, but a few 
days. The Sauheilrim had now determined to persecute, and, if possible, destroy, the 
Kazarene sect ; and from their systematic efforts, the disciples could only gain safety 
by flight. " A favourable juncture had come for the bigots," but it was, in the 
ordering of God's providence, the favourable juncture for commencing missionary 
work. We must always seek to judge, not what peril, suffering, persecution, or the 
arresting of cur work may seem to be, but what they prove to be, when they have come 
fully under the Divine overrulings. 

II. EscAFi; FROM THE PEBIL BCATTEBED THEM. Broke Up the daily meals and the 
life in common ; made the apostles hide away out of reach ; and drove the disciples 
into the country districts — into Samaria, where Jewish fanatics would hardly venture, 
and even away as far as Damascus, wliere we subsequently find Ananias. It is 
remarkable that at this time the persecution does not seem to have reached the apostles, 
and it has been suggested that it was directed against that section of the disciples which 
followed Stephen, and attacked, in greater or less degree, the Mosaic system. Dean 
Plumptre says, " It was probable, in the nature of the case, that the Hellenistic disciples, 
who had been represented by Stephen, should suffer more than the others." Missionary 
records contain many illustrations of persecution making opportunity. The scattering 
was limited at first to the neighbouring districts, but it started the missionary idea, 
and then the whole world was felt to be the sphere for the missionaries of the cross. 
Show how travel, migration, and commerce have scattered men over the world, and 
made providential openings for Chiistian works. " There is that scattersth and yet 
increaseth " is illustrated in these early disciples. 

III. They told of Christ wherevek they went. The persecution opened their 
mouths, made them bold, filled them with fervour and zeal; the silent ones now 
preached the glad tidings. Persecution puts new life and energy into the persecuted, 
things die out ,if left alone, that grow into power if we attempt to crush them. Men 
learn to value things which others would forcibly pluck from them. The weakness of 
our modem witness to Christ is mainly due to -the general acceptance of our message. 
We should speak it nobly if we had to suffer or to die for it. Then the " lips of the 
dumb would speak." Trouble and calamity and difficulty made the first missionaries, 
and it has made the best ever since. Impress that the Christian law is this — wherever 
the providence of God may lead you or dnve you, le therefor Christ. — ^R. T. 

Ver. 8. — Intense againtt Christ may become intense for him. The indications given 
in this verse of Saul's intensity should be noticed ; he added personal cruelties to 
judicial severity, manifested almost an insane ferocity and wanton brutality, as he 
afterwards acknowledged (ch. xxvL 11). The grounds of Saul's prejudice against 
Christ and Christianity should be carefully traced, as the nature of his mistaken 
sentiments helps to explain the entire change of his thoughts and conduct when Christ 
spoke to him from heaven. A Pharisee such as Saul would have a general offence 
against Christ (1) as having deluded the people, and led them away from their proper 
teachers ; (2) as daring to claim the Messiahship, when he was known to bu only a 
poor Nazarene oirpenter. But he would have further and deeper grounds of offence 
in the facts (3) that Jesus had openly opposed and endeavoured to discredit the 
Pharisee class to which he belonged ; (4) that Jesus was proved to have wrought sliani 



«.vm.l— 4d.3 THE ACTS Of THE APOSTLRS. ^11 

miracles by the fact that he could not deliver himself from the cross ; ind (5) that it 
was A public insult to the intelligence of the people for these disciples tn ^o on asserting 
that this crucified impostor had risen from the dead, and had ascended to heaven, and 
was now showing signs of his Divine power. Saul thought he had a plain case and 
good grounds for his persecuting aeal ; and so he had, assuming that his view was 
•Jorrect. But, suppose he was wrong, and Jesus after all was Messiah? Suppose it 
could be shown him in a moment that Jesus was alive and exalted ? Then the very 
foundations of all his arguments were plucked away, and a new im|)ulse urged him to 
consecrate himself, once for all, to the service of Jesus the Nazarene. 

I. The intensity op an imfolsivb chaeacteb. Illustrate from the Saul who was 
the first king of Israel ; from incidents in the life of the Apostle Peter, and from the 
later story of Saul, or Paul. This intensity often does good service ; it overleaps 
difficulties which hinder the quieter and calmer class of men. It bears others along on 
its own tide of impetuosity. It becomes holy boldness, wise enterprise, and steadfast 
endurance when it is duly toned, sanctified, and guided by the indwelling Holy Grhost. 
There is more or less of impulsiveness in each of the apostles of whom anything is 
narrated. James and John followed the impulse stirred by the Master's call, and left 
their fisher-work and fisher-folk, to become servants of Christ and fishers of men ; and an 
impulsive spirit is sealed in I he surname which our Lord fixed upon them. Matthew 
seems immediately to have obeyed, and left the receipt of custom, when the Master 
touched his heart with the call, " Follow me;" and it was evidently in the intensity of 
deep feeling that he gathered his friends to a parting feast. Thomas speaks impetuotisly, 
" Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails ... I will not believe ; " 
and still more impetuously he cries, " My Lord and my God," when constrained to 
believe by the condescending grace of the Redeemer. Peter represents to us the 
exaggeration of impulsiveness ; and he never reveals his character more fully than when 
smitten down, penitent and broken-hearted, because of the second cock-crowing and 
the Saviour's reproachful look. 

IL The weakness of the impulsivb ohabaoteh. This finds expression in such 
things as : 1. A disposition to overvalue mere religious feeling. 2. To take up new ideas 
or new schemes, under the urgings of sentiment rather than sound judgment. 3. A 
tendency to give up schemes with as little thought as they were taken up. 4. A 
foolish expectation that every one must be as intense as the impulsive one is. 5. And 
an inability fairly to estimate the reasons that make slow progress alone safe and sure. 
In the Christian life, as in common life, seasons of undue elevation are sure to be followed 
by seasons of undue depression, and such seasons are very disappointing and humiliating. 
St. Peter illustrates the weaknesses of the impulsive. Our Lord had even to reprove 
him severely. 

From Saul, or Paul, may be shown the solid excellence of character which the naturally 
impulsive man may gain when piety, principle, and noble sentiments come to rule and 
guide and tone his impulses. Some of the grandest sentences of St. Paul's Epistles are 
the utterances possible only to a sanctified man of intensity and strong impulses : e.g. 
PhiL L 21— 23.— B. T. 

Ver. 6. — Preaching Christ. The expression here used is a frequent one in the Acts 
of the Apostles ; e.g. " preaching the gospel ; " " preached the Word ; " " preaching 
peace by Jesus Christ ; " "ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ ;" "preaching 
the Lord Jesus;" "Jesus whom Paul preached;" "according to the preaching of 
Jesus." The proper idea of preaching is " heralding," " proclaiming," declaring a 
message; and the old prophets of Judaism were true preachers; so were the angels at 
Bethlehem, and so was John the Baptist. Philip the evangelist went to Samaria, 
where there was quite as intense an expectation of the Messiah as could be found amonc 
the Jews, and to the Samaritans Philip proclaimed that Messiah, or Christ, had come, 
in the person of Jesus of Nazareth, and that his resurrection — which was abundantly 
proved — was the crowning attestation and proof that he was the Christ, the Son of the 
Most High God. What is involved and included in " preaching Christ " may best bo 
found by the consideration of a few illustrative cases. 1. Christ preached himself to 
the two disciples on the way to Emmaus ; and his points were the necessity for the 
Bufferings of Christ and his subsequent resurrection, and the absolute truth of tha 



8?8 TflE AC*f S OP THE AtOSTLES. t^H- ^^- ^—^^ 

Mes-^iahship and Lordship of Christ. 2. Christ's command, " Go into all the world," etc , 
Bends us back to the announctraent of the angels at Bethlehem ; they preached a 
Saviour, not a salvation. 3. The apostles preached Christ at Pentecost, and at the 
healing of the lame man, and declared Jesus as both having died and risen again, and 
being exalted with present saving power. 4. Stephen preached, in his defence, the 
Messiahship and death of the Lord Jesus, closing with a firm declaration that he was 
risen. 5. Philip preached unto the eunuch, and his subject was Jesus the Key to the 
prophecies, sufleriug and triumphant. 6. St. Paul preached to the Philippian jailor, 
" Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ." The peculiarity of the early preaching evidently 
was the presentation to men of a personal, living Saviour, with whom men may have 
personal dealings for their full salvation. Then true preaching must present a living 
Christ to men as having done all for them, able to be all to them, and to do all »n 
them, and so (he true preaching of Christ covers his whole redemptive work. Preaching 
Christ sets him forth before men in his cradle, on his cross, and with his crown. 

I. In his cradle. Or, Christ in incarnation, the Divine Man. This is the mystery 
of Betiilehem. It may be shown (1) that the Man Christ Jesus reveals God to man, and 
man to himself ; (2) givesexaniple of the human life that can alone be acceptable to 
God ; and (3) is the assurance of the Divine sympathy with sinning, suffering man. 
He " took not on him the nature of angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham," 
and " being found in fashion as a man " he is able to save us men. 

II. On HI8 CB0S8. Or, Christ in sacrifice, the Divine Sufferer. This is the mystery 
of Calvary. A suffering Saviour shows : 1. The intensity of gin : its utmost effort 
crucified him. 2. The helplessness of sin. It did its worst, and was defeated. " It 
was not possible that he should be holden of it." A suffering Saviour : 3. Attracts men. 
"I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me." No persuasions can so 
urge and win men as those that come from the cross where our Sin-bearer died. 4. 
Eenioves out of the way the hindiances to our fellowship with God. " The Lord hath 
laid on him the iniquity of us all." 

III. With his crown. Or, Christ in triumph, the Divine King. This is the mystery 
of Olivet. The kingly Jesus is : 1. The &pxvyov. Leader of his people, " the Captain 
of their salvation," their Bringer-on. 2. The Head and Lord of the new kingdom, 
"exalted to give repentance and remission." "Head over all things to his Church." 
3. The Bestower of the Holy Spirit, which is bis present inward agency, himself abid- 
ing with us and in us. '■ 

So we preach Christ, the Man ; the Divine Man ; ours, our Brother ; and with this 
preaching we arouse interest in him. We preach Christ, the Sufferer, who draws us 
to himself in sympathy and love. " Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by ? behold, 
»nd see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow." We preach Christ the King, and 
bid you bow down now and submit to his gracious and holy reign. — R. T. 

Vers. 9 — 13. — Warnings from Simon Magus, "His name indicates • Jewish or 
Samaritan origin." He appears as the type of a class but too common at the time — 
that of Jews trading on the mysterious prestige of their race and the credulity of the 
heathen, claiming supernatural power exercised through charms and incantations. For 
other illustrations, give account of Elymas (ch. xiii. 6) ; the " vagabond Jews, exorcists," 
at Ephesus (ch. lix. 13) ; the so-called Simon of Cyprus mentioned by Josephus ; and 
Apollonius of Tyana. Explain the state of the times ; men were thoroughly dissatisfied 
with the empty formalities of religion, and were sick of the routine demands of rab- 
binical trailitions, and were more or less distinctly yearning and crying for the spiritual 
Their thought and feeling laid them open to the influence of the sorcerer and juggler, 
who appeared to be possessed of mysterious and spiritual power. "All OTer the 
known world, the nations were at that critical hour in history agitated by a vague 
unrest and a feverish anticipation of some impending change. Everywhere men 
wu-ned dissatisfied from their ancestral divinities and worn-out beliefs. Everywhere 
they turned in their uncertainty to foreign superstitions, and welcomed any religian 
which professed to reveal the unknown. Along with this came a strange longing to 
penetrate the secrets of the world, to communicate with the invisible. To persons in 
this expectant and restless condition there could be no lack of prophets. Asia bred 
*em, Egypt ripened them, the West swarmed with them.* 



CH. vin. 1— 40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 27S 

I. Simon's acknowledqment or a Divinb ronoE in Chkistianity. The degree of 
his sincerity in professing belief and submitting to the rite of baptism needs careful 
cousidoration. He may have been carried away by feeling. Ho may have been 
guileful throughout, and only seen a higher force in the power of the apostles than he 
knew of, and designed to get the control of this force for his own purposes. Or the two 
may have blended. He may have been carried away. At first he may have sincerely 
taken up with Christianity, but soon yielded to a guileful spirit, which suggested that 
a splendid fortune could be made out of the new force. But whatever Simon's motives 
may have been, we have from him an important testimony to the genuine persuasion 
and power accompanying the early preaching, and to the truth of the miraculous 
powers exerted by the apostles. Simon well understood the ways of sorcerers and 
juggleni, and he knew and openly acknowledged that the apostles were not such. Show 
the importance of the testimony to Christ and Christianity rendered by those outside, 
and even opposed, such as Rousseau, Napoleon, J. S. Mill, etc. 

II. Simon's mistake in pbofbssino bblief in Christianitt. Because true disciple- 
Ehip is no mere profession, no sudden excited impulse, no vanishing sentiment, but a 
sober, calm judgment, a full and hearty surrender, an entire consecration of heart and 
life to Christ. Simon did not sit down first and count the cost. Simon had no idea 
of taking a lowly place in Christ's service. He wanted still to be " some great one." 
He was " weighed in the balances, and found wanting," when Christ's testings came. 
" He that would be great among you, let him be your servant." " He that exalteth 
himself shall be abased." Show with what mistaken notions men take up the 
Christian profession now, and how certainly life tests and tries them, and they fail 
in the testing day. Simon's faith had not a moral, only an intellectual basis. He 
expressed no compunction for having deceived the people and blasphemed God. The 
whole ethical side of Christianity, its power of bringing man into peace with God, 
and of making man like God, was shut against him. For that he had no ear. 
Against that his heart was closed. Ho believed, therefore, witliout being converted. 
Impress how the money-getting spirit had so hardened Simon's mind that it was 
iifiicult to gain access for the Christian truth and claims. " How hardly shall they 
that tinist in riches enter into the kingdom of heaven t "— R. T. 

Vers, 14 — 17. — The gift of the Holy Ohost, There are signs of an inipartation of 
the Spirit by the apostles which we do not appear to understand fully, because it differs 
from any impartation of the Spirit with which we have experience. The apostles were 
enabled to repeat for their disciples their own experience. They were first called to dis- 
cipleship and then endovied for work. So those to whom apostles preached were first 
brought into the new kingdom by faith and confession, and then sealed and entrusted 
with particular gifts for service by the Holy Spirit of promise. The apostles were at first 
the only agents through whom this further gift of the Spirit came. How far they were 
permitted to pass this agency in the giving of the Spirit on to their successors has 
been a matter which the various sections of Christ's Church have regarded differently. 
Two things require study and consideration. 

L The nature and object of this gift of the Holt Ghost. It was evidently 
regarded as essential to the full standing of the Christian. A man must be converted 
and sealed. St. Paul found at Ephesus some disciples who knew only John's baptism, 
and he asked them this, as a searching, testing question, " Have ye received the Holy 
Ghost since ye believed ? " as if this alone could be accepted as the assurance of their 
full Christian standing. The gift or endowment may be regarded. 1. In relation to 
the apostles as agents. They never assumed that the gift came /rom them ; it only came 
through them. God might have sent his Spirit directly and apart from any human 
agency. Probably he used the human means in order that the source whence the gift 
same should be recognized and men should not treat it as an accident, but as a trust ; 
also that its connection with Christ should be recognized, and the use of the endowments 
in Christ's service should be realized. It was a bestowment entirely within the 
Christian limits. 2. In relation to the believers, who were the recipients of the gift. 
It was a sealing them as Christ's.' It was a taking of them over to Christ's service. It 
was a solemn convincement that a new and Divine life was in them, and so a sublime 
■rging to purity of life and an ennobling assurance of all-sufficient present grace for 



286 tHSl ACTS Of THE APOSTLES. [oft. no. 1—46. 

whatever they had to do and whatever to bear. It waa a holy rest for personal feeling ; 
they were plainly accepted of God. It was a holy urging to Christly labours; they 
had the powers, they must find their spheres. 3. In relation to the Church, which 
was benefited by the various endowments as calculated to meet all its various needs. 
Theie points assume that the indications of the Spirit's coming on the disciples were 
■uch as we find at Pentecost. There was some gift of tongues, or preaching, or praying 
— some outward sign which all could realize. Show that if the Spirit now comes to 
the believer in quieter modes, no essential difference is made in the purpose of his 
coming. He is with us now to comfort us with assurance of Ml salvation ; and to 
inspire and guide as in the devotion of our powers to the service of others and of the 
Church. 

XL Thi mods akd obdeb or this mPABTAXioN of the Spibit. Observe that it is 
never regarded, any more than the early Church miracles, as an independent act of the 
apostles. It is only effective : 1. After prayer, which puts the apostle in right frame 
to become the agent or medium, and which directs public attention away from the 
apostles to the real source whence the gift comes. 2. On the laying on of hands. A 
significant act, by which the vital force filling the apostle seemed to stream forth into 
the disciple, and the recipient shared in the Divine Spirit-life. If some indication 
of a gift, talent, or endowment appeared, as a consequence, it need not be anything 
new ; it might be the characteristic quality or faculty infused with new life and energy. 
But in those days no man received the Spirit apart from some sign of force for service 
in the Church. This Simon noticed, and it set him upon evil thought. And still 
Ood's Spirit comes on prayer, is recognized by the spiritually minded, and is the energy 
for all holy labours.-— R. T. 

Vers. 27 — 39. — The inquiring proselyte. Give some account of Ethiopia, of the queen 
of that day, of the office the eunuch occupied, and of the probable means by which he 
had been made a Jewish proselyte. He was one of those men anion}; the heathen who 
had been awakened to spiritual anxiety by the ever-working Spirit of Gtod. He may 
have had some Jewish connections, through whom he had come to know of Jehovah. 
We can recognize in him : 1. An inquirer. 2. A spiritually awakened inquirer, one who 
had come to see that his own personal relations with God were matters of extreme 
importance. 3. A wise seeker, who had found the revealed Word of God, and was 
searching it in full confidence that therein was the " eternal life." To such a seekei 
help will never be long withheld. " God waiteth to be gracious." Philip was divinaly 
guided to meet the eunuch on his return from the holy city, and to join him in the 
chariot just when he was hopelessly puzzled with his reading. The passage which 
engaged his attention was one which opened up the applications of truth to sinful souls. 
The great chapter of the evangelical Isaiah deals with human sins, calling them trans- 
gressions ; and it discloses that wonderful scheme of Divine wisdom and love by which 
those transgressions were vicariously borne, and borne away. Philip preached unto him 
Jesus, who " was wounded for our trangressions," on whom the " Lord laid the iniquity 
of us all," whose " soul was made an offering for sin ; " who now saves his people from 
their sins ; from the penalty of their sins, by the virtue of his great sacrifice, from the 
power of their sinfulness by the cleansing energies of his Holy Spirit. With opened 
soul the eunuch listened, and the truth dawned upon him ; Christ, the Messiah, the 
Saviour, was revealed to him. He believed the record, and longed at once to seal in 
baptism his faith and love to the crucified One. He thus simply declares his faith, " I 
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God." What was this eunuch's faith ? and can 
we learn from him what the saving faith is? Evidently it was a simple acceptance o( 
and confidence in the testimony rendered by Philip to Christ, based as the testimony was 
«pon the revealed Word of God. And that is faith still — receiving the record which 
God hath given ns of his Son, and acting on the record. Faith is the great difficulty 
in the way of seekers, yet, when it is won, it seems strange that so simple a matter 
should have hindered. Some of the expressions and figures of Scripture may help us. 

L To BELIEVE Df Christ is to appbehend ob lay hold of him. As St. Peter, 
sinking in the waters, put out his hand and grasped the offered hand of Christ, so our 
souls, sinking in sin and despair, by faith lay hold of the strong, rescuing Saviour. 

II. To believe at Chbibt ib to beoeite him. As the imprisoned debtor welcotBM 



Oft. tm. 1—40.3 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 281 



and receiTes the man who brings into his cell the money of his ransom, ao our sonls, 
by futh, welcome and receive him by whose precious blood we have been bought out of 
ourprison-house of sin. 

III. To BELIEVE IN ChbIST IS TO BOLL OUR BURDEN UPON HIM. To shift the Weight 

of all the trouble and anxiety from our own shoulders, and let Christ bear it all for us ; 
as one might do who had an important trial coming on, but trusted the whole matter 
to his skilful lawyer-friend. 

IV. To BELIEVE IN CiiRisT IS TO' APPLY TO Hii)!. As the hungry and the thirsty 
apply for food and drink, so the hungry soul applies to Christ for the bread which, if a 
man eats, he lives for ever. 

V. To BELIEVE Df Chribt 18 TO COME TO HIM. To flee to him as the villagers flee 
into the strongholds before invading armies ; as the doomed man fled into the sanctuary 
to lay hold of the horns of the altar, or as the manslayer fled before the avenger of blood 
to gain the shelter of the city of refuge. So the soul enters the stronghold of Christ, 
takes sanctnaiy with Christ, passes within the gates of Christ, the Refuge for the 
tinner. 

VI. To BELIEVE IN Chbibt 18 TO LEAH UPON HUf , TO STAT UPON HIM, as we lean Upon 
a staff for support. Christ is the strong Staff, on which the soul, with all its eternal 
interests, may safely lean ; Christ is the healthy, strong Friend, on whom the sick, 
fainting, weary soul may wholly rely. 

VIL To BELIEVE IN Christ is to adhere to him, to cleave to him. As the drown- 
ing man clutches so must we grasp, cling to, cleave to, the Lord Jesus, binding the 
soul to him as with everlasting bands. With so many and so simple illustrations, how 
well you may bo urged now — even now — to believe on the Son of God, and find the 
pardon he speaks, the life he gives, and the love with which he will make you his 
own for tver ! — B. T, 

Ver. 36. — Testing the imptthe to confetsion. The eunuch knew how his own 
proselytism had been sealed. When he accepted the Jewish faith, he made confession 
of it by the rite of baptism. So now, when he had accepted a new faith, his first 
impulse was the desire to seal it by a renewal of the rite, and the site of the water 
reminded him of the possibility of making his confession of Christ there and then. 
Though ver. 37 is not found in the Revised Version, and may he only an editor's 
explanation that has crept into the text, we may be quite sure that Philip would not 
baptize the eunuch in response to his impulsive request without some such test as 
this — ^a test which would bring out whether his faith was whole-hearted and sincere. 
He must know if his belief was belief with all the heart. On this test, which needs to 
be still put to would-be confessors, we may dwell. 

I. Belief of the heart is the belief or sincere conviction. A man becomes 
intellectually convinced that Jesus Christ is the Saviour. That conviction may come 
by very different agencies adapted to individuals. Mere ideas never urge to faith, /?oti- 
victions do. 

IL Belief of the heart is the belief of deep feeling. The intellectual grasp of 
truth is not enough. The sense of sin and the gratitude for salvation urge the out- 
going of trustful affections towards the Saviour. 

III. Belief of the heart finds expression in practical resolve. First an 
entire decision for Christ ; then a full and unreserved consecration to him ; then a 
turning round of our whole life to his obedience, and a daily devotion of our powers 
and talents to his service. But this belief with tlie heart is no mere fitting association 
of the first act of confession ; it needs to be daily maintained, growing knowledge of 
Christ giving fuller apprehensions of him, and our hearts lovingly responding to all we 
can learn and know. Heart-belief alone can ensure the active, noble, and self-denying 
Chrirtian life.— R. T. 



28a 



THB ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



[cH. IX. 1—43. 



KXPOSITION. 



OHATIKK IX. 



Ver. 1. — But for and, A.V. ; breathing 
fcjr breathing out, A.V. ; threatening for 
chreatenings, A.V. Threatening and slaugh- 
ter. The phrase e/iirceW aTreiXris, k.t.X., is 
rather a diiScult one, and is variously ex- 
plained. Schleusner takes the genitives in 
" threatening and slaughter " as genitives 
of the thing desired, "panting after threat- 
ening and slaughter " (coinp. Amos ii. 7). 
Meyer explains it " out of the threatenings 
and mm-der [in his heart] breathing hard at 
the disciples "—an expression indicating 
passion. Alford, taking nearly the sense 
of the A. v., makes " threatenings and 
slaughter " to be as it were the very material 
of his breath, whether breathed out or 
breathed in. Considering that iiurviu means 
" to breathe in," ns distinguished from iK-irvite, 
"to breathe out," and that these two are 
opposed to each other in Hippocrates (see 
Sclilevisner), the A.V. breathing out cannot 
be justified ; nor is it likely that " Luke the 
physician " would forget the distinction. 
The difficulty is to explain the genitive case 
of " threatenings" and "slaughter." The 
high priest ; probably the same person who 
is so desoribed in ch. vii. 1 (where see note). 
If the year with which we are now dealing 
was the year a.d. 85, Caiapbas was high 
priest But Alford, Lewin, Farrar, and 
others place Saul's conversion in a.d. 37, 
when TheopbiluB, son of Annas or Ananus, 
was high priest (Chron. Table in Alford's 
'Proleg. te Acts'). 

Ver. 2. — Asked for detired, A.V. ; unto for 
to, A.V. ; any that were of the Way for any 
of thie Kay, A.V. ; whether men, etc., for 
whether they were men, etc., A.V. ; to for 
unto, A.V. To Samasons. No special 
reason is given why Damascus is singled 
out But it is clear Irom vers. 10 and 13 
that there was already a considerable 
number of Cliristiau Jews at Damascus. And 
this, with the tact ot there being a great 
multitude of Jews settled there, was a sufli- 
oient reason why Saul should ask for letters 
toeach of the synagoguesat Damascus, direct- 
ing them to send any Christians who might 
be found amongst them bound to Jerusalem to 
be tried there before the Sanhedrim. There 
m^ have been thirty or forty synagogues 
at Damascus, and not less tlinn forty thousand 
resident Jews. Of the Way ; t.<. holding 
the doctrine of Christ. Thus in ch. zviii. 
25, 26, the Cliristian faith is spoken of as 
" the way of the liOrd " and " the way of 
God." In ch. xix. 9, 23; xxii. 4 ; ixiv. 14, 
22, it is called, as here, simply " tlie Way," 
Evidently, therefore, for a time " the Way " 



was the term by which the faith of CShrist 
was spoken of chiefly, perhaps, among the 
Jews, The term means a peenliar doctrine 
or sect. Its application to Christians aji- 
parently lasted only so long as Chriotianity 
was considered to be a modification or 
peculiar form of Judaism, and its frequent 
use in the Acts is therefore an evidence of 
the early composition of the book. 

Ver. 3. — It came to pass that he drew nigh 
unto for he came near, A.V. : shone for 
shined, A.V,; out of for from, A.V, and 
T.B. 

Ver. 4.— Fell upon tor fell to, A.V. 
Some, as Lord Lyttelton and Lewin (' Life of 
St. Paul,' vol. i, p. 48), from the expressions, 
" fell to the ground," •' fell to the earth," infer 
that Saul was "himself mounted, and his 
followers some mounted and some on foot." 
And Farrar also, for other reasons, sup- 
pose.s that Saul and bis companions rode 
horses or mules. Tiie journey, he sayg, was 
nearly a hundred and fifty miles, and the 
roads rough, bad, and steep; and Saul was 
travelling as the legate of the high priest. 
Slill it is strange that no one expression 
should point distinctly to the party being 
on horseback, which " falling to tlie earth," 
or "ground," certainly do not. Wliile, on 
the other hand, the phrases, "Arise," " stood 
speechless," "led him by the hand," seem 
rather to point to his being on foot. 
Lange well compares the double invocation, 
Saul, Saul ! with those similar ones, 
"Abraham, Abraham I " " Samuel, Samuel ! " 
" Jerusalem, Jerusalem I " " Simon, Simon I " 
(tten. xxii. 11 ; 1 Sam. iii. 10 ; Matt, xxiii. 27 ; 
Luke xxii. 31). 

Ver. 5.— i/e for the Lord, A.V. and T.R, 
The rcot of ver. 5 in the A.V,, " It is hard 
for thee tu kick against the pricks" and the 
first part of ver. 6, " And he trembling and 
astonished, said, Lord, what wilt thou have 
me to do 7 And the Lord said unto him," 
are omitted in the B.T. They have, in fact, 
no manuscript authority (Meyer ; Alford) ; 
and not much patristic authority, or from 
versions, and are omitted by all modern 
editors. They seem to be taken from the 
parallel narratives in eh. xxii, 8 — 10 ; xxvi. 
14. The proverb, " It is hard," etc., is only 
found in ch. xxvi. 14 (where see note). 

Ver. 6. — Bise, and enter into th* My tot 
Arise, and go, etc., A.V. 

Ver. 7. — Thatjourneyed for which journeyed, 
A.V. ; Me voice for a voice, A.V. ; beholding 
for seeing, A.V. Speechless ; 4vyeol (or rather 
iveol) is found nowhere else in the New 
Testament, but is not uncommon in the LXX. 
(e.g. Isa. Ivi. 10) and in classical Greek. 
Here it means speechless from terror, struck 



CH. rs. 1—43.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



283 



dumb. The description liere given by St. 
Luke seems to be contradictory in two 
particulars to St. Paul's own account in oh. 
xxii. 9 and xxvi. 14. For St. Paul's com- 
panions are said here to have " stood speech- 
less ; " but in oh. xxvi. 14 they were '' all 
fallen to the earth." Here they " hear the 
voice," but in ch.- xxii, 9 they " heard not 
the voice of him that spake." It is obvious, 
however, that in such descriptions all 
depends upon the particular moment of the 
transactiiin described which happens to be 
uppermost in the mind of the speaker or 
writer at the time, and the particular pur- 
pose in relation to -which he is giving the 
description. Thus at one moment the 
spectators might be standing dumfounded, 
and at the next they might be prostrate on 
the ground, or vice versa. Either deboription 
of their attitude would be a true one, though 
not true with regard to the same moment. 
Again, if the purpose of the speaker was to 
affirm that the whole company were con- 
scious of both the vision and the sound of 
a voice speaking, but that only Saul saw 
the Divine Speaker, the description "hearing 
the voice, but beholding no man " would be 
the natural one. Whereas, if the purpose 
was to express that Saul alone heard the 
words spoken to him by the Lord, the de- 
•oripiionof hisoompauions,"Theysawindeed 
the light . . . but tliey heard not the voice 
of him tliat spake to me," would be equally 
natural. 

Ver. 8. — Nothing for no man, A.V. and 
T.R. ; and for but, A.V. Nothing (ouSei/ for 
ovSiva). 6o the best manuscripts and 
editions The idea is, not like that in 
Matt. ivil. 8 that when he opened his 
eyes the person seen in vision had disap- 
peared, but simply that his eyesight was 
gone, " for the glory of that light," and he 
could see nothing, but had to be led like a 
blind man (see ch. xxii. 11). 

Ver. 9. — Did neither for neither did, A.V. 
The same reason, we may venture to think, 
which caused the interposition of three days' 
blindness between Saul's conversion and his 
baptism, led Saul himself to pass tliose days 
in a voluntary self-abasement. His sin in 
persecuting the Oliurch of God and its 
Divine Head, his guilt in assisting at the 
death of God's saints, and in rejecting the 
testimony to Christ's resurrection, had been 
very great. These three days of blindness 
and of fasting were therefore a fitting pre- 
paration for the grace of forgiveness about 
to be so freely and fully given to him (1 Tim. 
i. 12 — 16). What thoughts must have passed 
tij rough Saul's mind during those three 
days 1 Before passing on, it may be well to 
observe that it is to this appearance to him 
of Jesus Christ that St. Paul undoubtedly 
refers when he says (1 Cor. ix. 1), " Have not 



I Been Jesus Christ?" and again (1 Cor. 
XV. 8), " Last of all, he was seen of me al«o," 
where he puts this appearance of Jesus to 
himself on a par with those to Peter and 
James and the other apostles, which made 
them competent witnesses of the resurrection 
of Ohribt. And so in ver. 17 of this chapier 
Ananias says, " The Lord Jesus whicii was 
seen by thee" (i 6(j>8ets o-oi) ; and Barnabas 
(ver. 27), when he brought Saul to the 
apostles, related "how lie had seen the Lord 
in the way." And in ch. xxii. 14 Ananias 
says, " God hath appointed thee to see the 
BighteouB One." Moreover the description 
in ver. 7 of Saul's fellow-travellers, that they 
"saw no man," implies, by contrast, tliat 
Saul did. The reticence of both St. Paul and 
St. Luke as to what lie saw, and what was the 
appearance of the Lord Jesus, seenu to arise 
from profound reverence and awe, such as 
St. Paul speaks of in 2 Cor. xii. 4, It may 
be also worth remarking how this appearance 
, of Christ was deferred till he was quite close 
to Damascus, according to one tradition only 
a quarter of a mile from the gates, but 
according to Porter, whom Farrar and Lewiu 
follow, at a distance of about ten miles, at 
a village called Cauoab. So the intervention 
of the angel by which Isaac's life was spared 
was not till Abraham had the knife in his 
hand to slay his son; and Peter's prison 
doors were opened not till the very night 
before he was to have been bronght forth 
to death. Faith and patience are thug 
strengthened, and God's intervention is 
more marked. There is not the slightest 
trace in the narrative of what the fancy of 
many has suggested, that Saul's uneasy 
conscience was wrought up into a paroxysm 
as he approached Damascus, and so prepared 
the way for the vision of Christ. Even Canon 
Farrar's eloquent description of what he 
supposes to have been the thoughts which 
agitated Saul's mind on his eventful journey 
seems hardly to rest on anv solid base (see 
' Life of St. Paul,' vol. i. cti. x.). 

Ver. 10. — Noa for and, A.V. ; and the 
Lord said unto Mm for and to him said the 
Lord, A.V. Behold, I am here. The regular 
Hebrew answer (Gen. xxii. 1 ; 1 Sam. iii. 
4, 6, 8, etc.). 

Ver. 11. — To for into, A.V. ; named for 
catted, A.V. ; o man of Tarsus for of Tarsus, 
A.V. The street j piM< usually the narrower 
lanes in a town as distinguished from the 
irAoTcioi, or wide streets. So Luke xiv. 21, 
" The streets and lanes of the city," and the 
LXX.- in Isa. xv. 3, couple irAareTat and 
piifioi. Here, however, the ',crm applies to 
the principal street of tlie city, which runs 
quite straight from the east to the west 
gate, and is a mile long. It still exists, 
and is called the Sultany Street ; but instead 

of being the wide "■'id ap)***H^ "^ atraat it wn.« 



284 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[ca; nc 1 — i3. 



in the nprstolio age, a htmdred feet wide, 
with oolonnadee separating the two footways 
on the side from the central road, and 
adorned with a triumphal arch, it is con- 
tracted into a narrow mean passage (ses 
Lewin, vol. In. 69). 

Ver. 12.— H« hath $een for Kath teen in a 
vMon, A.y. and T.B. ; laying hit hands for 
putting hit hand, A.Y. and T.B. 

Ver. 13. — But for then, A.V. ; from many 
tat by many, A.V. ; did for ?iath done, A.V, 
Ananias'B answer shows his profound nston- 
ishment, mixed with douht and misgiving, 
at the commission given to him. It shows, 
too, how the news of Saul's commission had 
preceded him, and caused terror among the 
disciples at Damascus. Little did Ananias 
suspect that this dreaded enemy would be 
the channel of God's richest blessings to 
his Church throughout all ages until the 
coming of Christ. How empty our fears 
often are I how ignorant are we where our 
chief good lies hid I But God knows. Let 
us trust him. 

Ver. U.— Upon for on, A.V. That call 
upon thy name. So also ver. 21 ; Bom. z. 
12, 13; 1 Cor. i. 2; and above, ch. vii. 59, 
this same phrase describes the believer who 
makes his prayer to the Lord Jesus and 
trusts in his Name for salvation. 

Ver. 15. — A. chosen vessel (comp. Gal. 
iL 15 , Bom. iz. 21, 22). To bear my name 
before the Oentiles (see ch. zxii. 21 ; xxvi. 
17, 18; Bom. zv. 16; Gul. ii. 7— 9, etc.) and 
kings (ch. xzv. ; xxvi. ; 2 Tim. iv. 16, 17, 
with reference to Nero), and the children of 
Israel. The Gentiles are named before 
the children of Israel, because St. Paul's 
specbil call was to be the apostle of the 
Gentiles. But we know that even St. Paul's 
practice was to preach Christ to the Jews 
^rst, in every city where there were Jews. 

Ver. 16.— Jfany for great, A.V. St Paul's 
whole life was the fulfilment of this word 
of Christ (see 2 Cor. xi. 23—27; vi. 4—10). 

Ver. 17. — Departed for went his way, A.V. ; 
laying for putting, A.V. ; who appeared for 
that appeared, A.V. ; which thou earnest for 
at, etc., A.V. ; mayett for mightest, A.V. 
The laying on of hands is the medium of 
conveying any special grace. Here it pre- 
cedes the baptism, and was the channel of 
restoring sight to his eyes. Doubtless he 
did not receive the Holy Ghost till after 
bis baptism (see oh. ii. 38.) 

Ver. 18. — Straightway for immediately, 
A.V. ; CM t( were for at it had been, A.V. ; 
reeeived hit sight for received tight forthwith, 
A.V. and T.B. ; he arote for arose, A.V. 
As It were scales (Xeir^Scs); tcalet, oiflaket; 
any thin substance which peals off; a fre- 
quent term in Greek medical writers. And 
was baptized. It is a curious difference 
betweM St Paul and tha other apostles 



that, if they were baptized at all, which !i 
doubtful, they must have been baptized by 
Christ himself; whereas St. Paul received 
his baptism at the hands of Ananias. This 
is one mark of his being " born out of due 
time." And yet he was not behind the 
rery chiefest apostles. 

Ver. 19 — He took food and for when he 
had received meat he, A.V.; and he wai for 
then wat Saul, A.V. and T.B. Some com- 
mentators would interpose the journey to 
Arabia (mentioned Gal. i. 17) between vers. 
19 and 20 ; and this seems to be the inten- 
tion of the A. v., where the clause com- 
mencing with Then (ver. 19) seems to wind 
up and close the preceding narrative. This 
too is the view strongly supported by Canon 
Farrar, vol. i. ch. xi., and by Lewin. Alfoid 
places the journey to Arabia in the time 
comprised in ver. 22 ; others before ver. 22 ; 
Neander, Meyer, and others, in the time 
comprised in the "many days" of ver. 23. 
And this last is undoubtedly the easiest, 
were it not for the considerations urged by 
Farrar with great force as to the probability 
of St. Paul seeking a period of retirement 
after his conversion before commencing any 
public preaching, and the further counte- 
nance given to this view by Gal. i. 17, where 
St. Paul certainly says of himself that 
cvScu;, immediately, after his conversion ho 
" went away to Arabia." Taking all things 
into consideration, and supposingthat either 
Luke was not aware of the sojourn in 
Arabia, or that he omitted from his notes 
some brief notice of it immediately pre- 
ceding the description of Saul's preaching in 
Damascus, which explained the following 
EuflEui, it seems best to understand the 
latter part of ver. 19 and all that follows as 
subsequent to his return from Arabia ; and 
to conclude that he only stayed at Damascus 
fiiifpas rivas, a few days, after his conversion, 
and tlien retired to Arabia. It may b« 
observed, too, that this interpretation give* 
a significance to the mention of the ** certain 
days" which otherwise it has not There 
is a further difference of opinion as to what 
is meant by Arabia. The most common 
view is that Auranitis, bordering upon 
Arabia Deserta, and reckoned ai part of 
Arabia, not above two days' journey from 
Damascus, is the country meant. But others 
understand It in its more strictly Hebrew 
sense of the Peninsula of Sinai (Farrar, vol. 
1. p. 212, and Ezcursus iz. ; Dean Howson 
on Galatians in 'Speaker's Commentary;' 
Bishop Lightfoot on Gal. i. 17)." This view 
is decidedly strengthened by the fact that, 
in the fourth chapter of the Epistle to the 
Galutians, St. Paul clearly means by Arahia 
the Peninsula of Arabia, where Sinai was 
(Gal. iv. 25). On the assumption that tha 
Sinaitio Peninsula is meant, Bishop Li^lit- 



OH. IX. 1 — i3j 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



S8fi 



foot says, "He was attracted thither by a 
spirit akia to that which formerly had 
driven Elijah to the same region. Standing 
on the threshold of the new oovenant, he 
was anxious to look upon the birthplace of 
the old ; that, dwelling for a while in seclu- 
sion in the presence of the mount that 
burned with fire, he might ponder over 
the transient glories of the ministration of 
death, and apprehend its real purpose in 
relation to the more glorious covenant which 
was now to supplant it" His journey to 
Arabia need not necessarily have occupied 
more than two or three months. It seems 
certain that he did not preach there, because 
he says (ch. xxvi. 20), "I declared to them 
at Damascus first" etc. (see another coinci- 
dence between the Acts and the Epistle to 
the Galatians in ch. xiii. 2, note). 

Ver. 20. — In the synagogues he proolaimed 
Jesus for he preached Christ in the synagogues, 
A.V. and T.B. The preponderance of 
mauuscript authority, and the Si/o/m of ver. 

21, and the Sri olr6s iirTty d Xptar6s of ver. 

22, seem conclusive in favour of Jesus rather 
than Christ. As regards the expression 
straightway, we must understand it as de- 
Eci'iptive of Saul's action upon his return 
from Arabia. Is it possible that St. Luke uses 
it with the same meaning as he may have 
huard St. Paul use it in when speaking of 
his Damascus preaching, in the same sense 
as St. Paul actually does speak in Gal. i. 17, 
viz. as expressing that he did not wait for 
authority from the apostles, but at once, 
fretjh from the Divine call, and having a 
direct commission from Christ himself, 
entered upon his apostolic ministry ? If the 
Epistle to the Galatians was written A.D. 58, 
it would be just about the time that St 
Luke joined St. Paul, and might be com- 
mencing to collect materials for his history. 
8o tliat the phrase in the Galatians and 
the phrase is this twentieth verse might 
rually be the expression of one thought 
committed to paper by St. Paul on the one 
hand, and uttered in the ear of Luke on 
the other. It is a confirmation of this view 
that in 2 Corinthians, written about the 
same time, there is also an account of Saul'i 
escape &om Damascus. In the synagogues; 
the very synagogues (ver. 2) to wliich the 
letters of the high priest were addressed, 
empowering him to arrest either man or 
woman who called upon the Name of Jesus, 
and bring them as prisoners to Jerusalem 
to be tried before the Sanhedrim. No 
wonder they were amazed. 

Ver. 21.— And for but, A.V.; that inJeru- 
lalem made havoe of for tluU destroyed them 
(which called on this Name) tn Jerusalem, 
A.V. ; and he had come hither /or this intent 
for and came hither for that intent, A.V., 
difierently stopped; b^ore for unto, A.T. 



The chief priests. The plural seems (o 
mark how the high priesthood at this period 
was passed from one to another. Oaiaphas, 
Annas, Jonathan, and Theophilus would all 
be included under the term. 

Ver. 22.— The Christ for very Christ, A.V. 
The repetition of the phrase 8ti olris lanv 
(vers. 20 and 22) is remarkable. As already 
observed, it presupposes the mention of 
Jesus, of whom it is thus predicated that he 
is both " the Son of God " and " the Christ " 
(comp. oh. ii. 32, 36 ; iv. 11, etc.). Observe 
the incidental proof of the general expecta- 
tion of the Jews that Christ should come 
in this description of the apostolic preaching 
as directed to the one point that Jesus of 
Nazareth was the Christ. 

Ver. 23.— When for after that, A.V. ; UmIc 
counsel together for took counsel, A.V. The 
phrase many days is quite elastic enough 
to comprehend whatever time remained to 
make up tlie three ^ears (Gal. i. 18) which 
Bt Paul tells us intervened between his 
oonversion and his visit to Jerusalem (see 
ver. 43; oh. xviii. 18; xxxviL 7; xiv. 3). 
Luke frequently uses tKay6s for '*many" 
(Luke vii. 11; viii. 27; zziii. 8). So in 
Hebrew, n>sn d'b;, many days, is applied to 
considerable portions of time. In 1 Kings 
ii. 38, 39, it is applied to three years. 

Ver. 2^.— Their plot (im^ouXi)) heoame 
knoion for their laying await was knmen, 
A.V. ; to Saul for of &ud, A.V. ; the gates 
also for ilie gales, A.V. and T.B. ; VuU they 
might for to, A.V. ; a colon instead of full 
point at end of verse. 

Ver. 25.— £ut for then, A V. ; Ui dUciyUt 
for Ote disciples, A.V. and T.B. ; through for 
Ity, A.V.; lowering him in for tn, A.V. 
Lowering him, etc. The A.Y. givee the 
sense freely ; and combining the ven> KaO^Kor 
with the partieiple x^^^^'''^^* translates 
both by the one word "let him dofrn." 
The by of the A.V. seems preferable to the 
through of the B.V., as through suggesta 
the idea, which eannot be intended, of 
making a hole in the wall. The escape of 
the spies from Jericho, as described in Joeh. 
ii. 15, was exactly in the same way, except 
that they had only • rope to descend 1^, 
whereas St Paul had a rope-basket Jui 
the description of his escape given by St 
Paul to the Corinthians (2 Cor. xi. 83X he 
uses the same word for "let down" 
(IxahiirBriy), tells us he was let down " by 
the wall," B.V. Si& roS rflxovt, with the 
additional particular that he got out through 
the window, Sth tvplSos, and that it waa 
• iTttpydnit B basket made of lopes (which 
describes the kind of basket somewhat mora 
accurately than the rmipls here used) in 
which he waa let do?ni (see note on ver. 
20). The passage in 2 Corinthians glvea 
iia a further iateieating aooonnt of how the 



286 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. IX. 1 — iS, 



Jewi vent abont to accompliBh their pnrpoge 
of killing Paul. It seems that at this time, 
either in reTolt against the Bomans or by 
permission of Caligula (it is not known 
certainly which), a certain Arotas, or 
Hareth, King of Arabia Petrea, included 
Damascus in his dominions for a time, i.e. 
through the reigns of Caligula and Claudius. 
He appointed an ethiiaroh, who was doubt- 
less a Jew, to rule the large Jewish popu- 
lation according to their Law, and who was 
the ready tool of the unbelieving Jews, 
using his power as governor to have the 
gates kept day and night so as to prevent 
Saul's escape. But he that keepetli Israel 
neither slumbered nor slept, and by his 
watehful providence Saul escaped from their 
hands. As regards the B.Y., his disciples 
for the disciple$, Alford adopts the reading 
\a$ilyrfs Sh ot /taflTjTal auT^v, and holds 
auToS of the B.T. to he simply a mistake for 
xvTiv, caused by the situation of alirili/ after 
\a$di/Tis. The B.T. cannot be right. " The 
disciples " is St. Luke's regular expression 
for "Christians" (oh. vi. 1, 2, 7; ix. 10, 19, 
26; xiv. 22; xxi. 16), and is our Lord's 
name for his followers, but is never used by 
an apostle of his own followers (see 1 Cor. i 
12,13; iii. 4— 7). 

Ver. 26.— H« for Saul, A.V. and T.E.; 
and they were for but, etc., A.V. ; not be- 
lieving for and believed not, A.V. The 
narrative thus far exactly agrees with Gal. 
i. 17, 18, which, howevtr, supplies the 
motive of the journey to Jerusalem, which 
is not here mentioned, viz. to see Peter. It 
seems strange to some commentators that 
the news of Saul having become a zealous 
Christian should not have reached Jerusalem 
after an interval of three years. But first, 
we do not know how much of those three 
years was spent in Arabia, nor how much 
the unsettled state of Damascus may have in- 
terrupted the usual communication between 
Jerusalem and Damascus, nor how suspicious 
of evil the poor persecuted disciples at 
Jerusalem may have been. They knew of 
the fierceness of Saul's zeal as a persecutor 
by their own experience ; they knew of him 
as a disciple only by report. It may have 
been only an instance of the truth of 
Horace's maxim, " Segnius Irritant animos 
demissa per aurea quam quos sunt ocoulis 
subjecta fidelibus." 

Ver. 27. — How at Damaeeus he had 
preached boldly foi how he had preached 
boldly at Damascus, A.V. As regards the 
statement that' Barnabas took him, and 
brought him to the apostles, which some 
have thought inconsistent with Gal. i. 18, 
19, it is obvious to remark that St. Liike's 
account is fully justified by the fact that 
St. Paul did, on Barnabas's introduction, 
make the acquaintance of Peter, and, as it 



seems, pass fifteen days as his guest (Gal. t 
18); and while there, did also see James 
the Lord's brother. The other apostlei 
were probably absent from Jerusalem during 
thiit fortnight ; but Barnabas did, it seems, 
at a Church assembly, in the presence of 
James and, no doubt, the elders of the 
Church, give the astonishing narrative of 
Saul's conversion. This removed their 
suspicions and their fears, and he was freely, 
during the rest of his brief stay, admitted 
as a brother to their assemblies, and took 
part in preaching the gospel ia the syna- 
gogues. 

Ver. 28. — Going in for coming in, A.V. 

Ver. 29. — Preaching boldly, etc., the and 
of the T.K. is omitted, and this clause con- 
nected with the preceding one; ffte Lord 
for the Lord Jesus, A.V. and T.R. ; he 
tpake for he spake boldly, A.V. (The Tra/I- 
pTiJiaC^nevos (translated preaching boldl;/) 
4v rS ivifiari Kvptov, is in the K.T. separated 
from eA(iA6i); the Oreeian Jews for the 
Oreaians, A.V., as in ch. vi. 1 ; to hiU for to 
slay, A.V. The Grecian Jews ; or, Hellenists 
(margin). St. Stephen was a Hellenist, 
and it was among the Hellenists that his 
evangelical labours chiefly lay and from 
whose enmity he met his death. Saul 
showed his dauntless spirit, and perhaps 
his deep compunction at the part he had 
taken in Stephen's death, by thus encounter- 
ing their bitter and unrelenting enmity. 

Ver. 30. — And when the brethren knew it 
for which when the brethren knew, A.V. St. 
Paul gives another reason for his hasty 
departure from Jerusalem in his speech from 
the castle stairs (ch. xxii. 17—21). Caesarea, 
when standingalone,meansC«sareaSi>-«f onjs, 
or TlapdMos, or Sebaste, the seaport and 
Roman garrison of that name, as dis- 
tinguiehed from Caesarea Philippi (see 
Alford's note on oh. viii. 30), and is alwavs 
BO used by St. Luke (viii. 40; x. 1, 24; 
xviii. 22; ixi. 8, 16; xxiii. 23, 33; xxv. 1, 
4, 6; xxvii. 1, 2, showing it was a seaport). 
There is no reasonable doubt that it means 
the same place here. A seaport, near to 
Jerusalem, and with Boman protection, 
aflortling access to Tarsus either by sea or 
land as should seem best, was the natural 
place for Paul's friends to take him to. If 
furtlier proof were wanting, it could be found 
in the phrase, "brought him down," as 
compared with the converse, "gone up" 
(oh. xviii. 22), " ascended " (oh. xxv. 1), when 
the journey was from Csesarea to Jerusalem. 
To Tarsus. A glance at the map will show 
that, starting from Caesarea, a person might 
either go by land along the sea-coast of 
Phoenicia, through Acre, Tyre, Sidon, 
Beyrout, Tripolis, Antioch, Issus, to Tarsus; 
or by sea to any of the intermediate ports 
between Cusarea and Tarsus, or rather the 



OH. IX 1—43.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



287 



artificial Laibour at the mouth of the 
OydnuB which formed the seaport of 
Tarsus. It is not improbable that Paul 
landed at SeL uoia, since he says (Gal. i. 21) 
that he came at this time " into the regions 
of Syria and Cilicia," which is exactly what 
he would have done if he bad landed at 
at Seleucia, tlie seaport of Antioch. 

Ver. 31. — So the Church . . . had peace, 
being edified for Ihen had the Churchet 
rest, . . . and were edified, A.V. and T.B. j 
was multiplied for were multiplied, A.V. 
and T.B. It is thought that the attention 
of the Jews to the progress of the faith of 
JeiuB Christ was diverted at this time, and 
their active hostility stayed, by the still 
greater danger to the Jews' religion which 
arose from Caligula's intention of placing a 
statue to himself as a god in the holy of 
holies. Thus did God's gracious providence 
intervene to give rest to bis harassed saints, 
and to build up his Church in numbers, in 
holiness,and in heavenly comfort. Especially 
Paul had auotUer breathing-time, which 
may have been the more required if, as is 
thought, one at least of the five scourgings 
mentioned in 2 Oor. xii. 21 had been 
inflicted at Damascus, and one of the three 
shipwrecks alluded to in the same passage 
had been undergone in the dangerous 
coasting voyage from Csesai ea to Seleucia. 

Ver. 32. — Went for passed, A.V. ; all parts 
(Sii iroyTaii') for all quarters, A. V. All parts, 
Alford, following Meyer, understands 
" through all the saints," which is scarcely 
so well. The current of St. Luke's narrative 
is here temporarily diverted from St. Paul, 
in order to trace that portion of St. Peter's 
apostolic work, which led immediately to 
that opening of the door of faith to the 
Gentiles in which Peter was to have the 
priority in point of time (Matt. xvi. 18, 19), 
but Paul the chief burden of labour and 
danger (Gal. ii. 7 — 9; Rom. xi. 13), and 
which was also the main subject of St. 
Luke's history. He came downj Lydda 
(afterwards called Diospolis, now Ludd), 
being more than half-way between Jerusalem 
and the sea-coast at Joppa. 

Ver. 33. — For he was palmed for and was 
lick of the palsy, A.V. 

Ver. Si. — Bealeth thee for maketh thee 
mhole, A.V. ; straightuiay he arOM for ht 
aroto immediately, A. V. JesoB Christ healeth 
thee. The juxtaposition, laTat ire 'I'riaois, 
looks almost like an intentional play upon 
the sound. Some of the Fathers who did 
not know Hebrew derived the name 'Iqa-oSs 
from iiofuu, and the Anglo-Saxon name for 
the Saviour Hselend, the Healer, seems 
to have the same origin. Arise and make 
thy bed. Not (says Meyer), "Henceforth 
make thine own bed," but, as the force of 
the imperativa aorist requires, make thy bed 



now, both as a token of his mlnioDlons core, 
and that he migljt carry it away (Mark ii. 
9 — 12). iEneas is a Greek name, not identical 
with .aSneas (AiVe(aj), but occurring in 
Thuoydides and elsewhere. If it was a 
Hebrew name, it might be derived from 
on )^j?, " (whom) the eye spareth." It is un- 
certain whether .^neas was a disciple or not. 

Ver. 35. — fn Sharon for at Saron, A.V. ; 
they turned Tor turned, A.V. In Sharon, 
The Grtek represents the Hebrew fit^, 
Sharon, which is the name of the rich plain 
which stretches from Joppa to Cwsarea (see 
Isa. xxxiii. 9). The name still lingers in 
the village of Saron. They turned; inani- 
festly an improvement on the A.V., as giving 
the sense of o'ktyes, viz. that all who saw 
the paralytic walking, turned, as a conse- 
quence, to the Lord, in whose Name the 
wonderful miracle had been wrought. A 
very extfnsive conversion of the people of 
Lydda and of Sharon is signified. 

Ver. 36. — Joppa ; now Jaffa, the ancient 
seaport of Jerusalem (Jonah i. 3; 2 Cliron. 
ii. 16). It was in, the tribe of Dan (Josh, 
xix. 46). A certain disciple; a female 
disciple, as the word means ; /j.aS-tiTpia only 
occurs liere in the New Testament and rarely 
elsewhere. labitha; the Aramean form of 
the Hebrew OX, a gazelle, or in Greek 
Dorcas. The beauty and grace of tlie 
gazelle made it an appropriate name for a 
woman. Some have thought, with proba- 
bility, that she was a deaconess of the 
Church. The thirty-eighth verse shows 
that there was already a Church at Joppa. 
About half the population of seven thousand 
are said to be still Christians. Compare 
the qualifications of a widow as set forth by 
St. Paul (1 Tim. t. 10). The phrase, good 
works, is quite Pauline (Eph. ii. 10 ; Col. i. 
10; Titus ii. 7; 1 Tim. ii. 10). Almsdeeds. 
The word alms (from iXeniioavvii) is one of 
those Greek words which has been domiciled 
in the English language tbronghthe Church. 
So bishop, priest, deacon, Kipte iXe-nrrov, 
trisagian, ttole. Paschal, Litany, Liturgy, 
and many others. 

Ver. 37.— Fell sick for viassiek,A.y. ; and 
when they had washed her for whom when 
they had washed, A.V. For the phrase in 
those days, oomp. ch. vi 1. The days here 
meant are those while Peter was in those 
parts. An upper chamber {mepifov), as in 
ch. i. 18. The upper chamber was much more 
private and quiet than a room on the ground 
floor (see 2 Kings iv. 10, 11)l 

Ver. 38.— As for foramueh a*, A.V. ; 
mto for to, A.V. ; the disciples, hearing 
. . . sent for and the disciples had heard 
. . . they tent, A.V. ; two tn«n unto kim for 
unto him two men, A.V. ; MreaUng fol 
desiring, A.V. ; delay not fc» come on unto «• 



»8 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



[cH, IX. 1—43. 



for ikat he would not delay to eome to fhem, 
A.y. and T.B. It is impossible to say 
whether any vague hope that Dorcas might 
be restored to life by Peter's prayers 
animated those who sent for Peter, and who 
hod either seen or heard of the mitacles 
wronght by him at Jerusalem before the 
persecution (ch. t. 15), or whether it only 
was that they felt the need of comfort and 
■uppoit in BO great a sorrow. Two men; 
■o oh. X. 7. Cornelius sends two of his 
household serrants (comp. ch. xilL 2; xt. 
22). In unsafe times and by dangerous 
roods, it was customary to send two mes- 
sengers, both for mutuar protection and 
that, if anything hnppened to one, the other 
might still deliver the message. It was also 
a secniity against fraud. 

Ver. 39. — And for then, A.y. ; and when 
for icAon, A.V. All the widows. The article 
may denote all the widows for whom Dorcas 
had made garments, which the middle voice 
(jhttStMnififvai), found only here, indicates 
perhaps that they had on them at the time. 
But it is quite as probable that at x^pi' 
means the Church widows, as in ch. vi. 1 and 
1 Tim. V. 9, and that we have here an indica- 
tion that the model of the Jerusalem Church 
was followed in all the daughter Churches. 
Dorcas's almsdeeds would naturally have 
for their first object the widows of her own 
communion. As naturally would they all 
come to meet the apostle at her house. 

Vor, 40. — Turning for turning Mm, A.V. ; 
he (aid for laid, A.Y. Feter*^ action in 
putting them all forth seems to have been 
framed on the model of that scene at which 
he had been present when Jesus raised the 
daughter of Jairus (see Luke viii. 54 
rT.B.] ; Matt. ix. 25 ; Mark v. 40). Privacy 
lor the more earnest concentrated prayer 
was doubtless what he sought. Kneeled 
Aown ; BtXt TJt yiyara. The same expression 



as in ch. vii. 60; xx. 86; xxL 5; Luke xxU. 41. 
It occurs also in Mark xv. 19. Tabitha, arise, 
^Exactly the same address aa our Lord's 
" Talitha cumi " (Mark v. 40), but, as Lange 
observes, with this difference, that in tha 
ease of Peter it was preceded by prayer; 
comp. also Luke viL 14 (where the Arameaa 
address was probably ui tiie same form); 
John xi. 43. 

Ver. 41.— Bowed for lifted, A.V.; edCUng 
for teA«n he had called, A.V. ; he prctented 
for preiented, A.Y. The saints and widows ; 
by which we learn that others of tha 
Christians of Joppa besides the widows had 
come to meet Peter, as was to be expected. 

Yer. 42. — It became known lot it mm 
known, A.Y. ; on for in, A.y. Aa in ver. 
35, the result of the healing of the palsied 
man at Lydda was that very many " turned 
to the Lord," so here the like effect was 
produced at Joppa by the restoration of 
Dorcas to life, litany believed on the Lord. 
And St. John tells us (xx. 31) that the very 
purpose of the record which he wrote of the 
miracles of Christ is "that we may believe 
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of Gk>d ; 
and that believing tee may have life in Us 
Name." 

Yer. iS.— Abode for tarried, A.V. Kaay 
days (rinipat iKoviis) ; the same phrase as ver. 
23; spoken of a time of indeterminate length. 
Here probably it means some months, 
during which Peter would be evangelizing 
the whole neighbourhood. The Jews are 
said to have considered the trade of a tanner 
nnolean ; but if this were so, it would not 
be safe to infer that Peter was already 
indifferent to ceremonial uncleanness. We 
know he was not so (oh. x. 14), but probably 
in his line of lite he could not act up to 
all the nicer dislinotiona at the stiiotest 
Pharisees 



HOMILETICS. 

VetK. 1 — 31. — The Ethiopian ehangee his skin. Of all the remarkabl* evento In Ibm 
history of human psychology, probably the most remarkable is the conversion of 
8t. Fai^, the memory of which is continually celebrated in the Church on the 25th of 
January. It may be viewed— 

L As AD KviTBNCB OF THH TBDTH OF Ohbistiaititt, St Paul llved. He preached 
the gospel with astonishing vigour and success. Kumeioua Churches were founded 
by him in Asia and Europe. These are facts aa certain m Ekcts can be. He wrote 
Epistles also to different communities of Christians, and these writings are extant at 
the present day. By these writings we can form an accurate judgment of St. Paul'l 
intellectual faculties, of the force of his character, of the extent of his knowledge. 
By these writings we can form an estimate of his moral qualities. We can judge for 
ourselves whether, on the one hand, lie was a fanatic, an impostor, or a knave ; and, 
on the other, whether he was one of the noblest, sincerest, and most high-minded men 
with whom we have ever come in contact. These writings, besides exhibiting an 
unquenchable zeal for the Christian faith, lasting through yews of toil and suffering, 



OH. li. 1—43.] THE A0T8 OF THE APOSTLES. 289 

tell iu also dintiuctly, though incidentally, of a time when the writer was as vehe- 
mently opposed to the Christian faith as he afterwards became attached to it. They 
contain, too, clear eTideoces of that education in the Jews' religion, and that impreg- 
nation with Jewish ductrine and tradition, which were likely to have had the same 
intiuence upon his mind which the same causes had upon the minds of so many of 
his ablest and most learned lellow-countrymen. They also display those qualities 
of disinterestedness, courage, and decision, which make it to the highest degree 
improbable that he should have changed his mind lightly or without conviction oi 
due cause for doing so. But he did change from a vehement and fierce persecutor to 
a preacher of unrivalled zeal and power, and a daily martyr of unsurpassed patience 
and constancy. But these same Epistles also tell us, still incidentally but also still 
distinctly, the cause of this change. It was nothing less than the visible appearing 
and the audible voice of the Lord Jesus Christ himself, of him whom he knew to have 
been crucified, but whom he now saw and heard in his effulgent glory, living and 
potent in inefiable majesty. It was that sight, too bright for mortal eyes, and that 
voice of exquisite tenderness in its complaint, which had in an instant overborne his 
unbelief and melted his obdurate heart, even as his body was swayed in terror to the 
ground. Did St. Paul know, or did he not know, the cause of his conversion ? Did 
he invent a lie, or did he speak the truth, when he wove this history, or allusions to 
it, into his Epistles to the Galatians, the Corinthians, the I'hilippians, and Timothy? 
But even if it were possible to doubt the man whom we know as we know St. Paul, we 
have his account corroborated and developed by a contemporary writer of unimpeached 
and unimpeachable accuracy and truth, tie gives us iu this chapter his own account 
of this wonderful conversion, and he reports to us two several accounts of it given by 
St. Paul himself — when on his defence before the people at Jerusalem, and again when 
on his trial before King Agiippa at Csesarea. Did St. Luke write a lie when he 
reported these utterances ot his noble and saintly friend? or did he speak the truth 
which he had such abundant opportunities of accurately knowing ? There is no fact 
in history more certain than St. Paul's conversion, and there is no more unanswerable 
evidence of the truth of Christ's gospel than this same conversion grounded upon the 
revelation in the way to Damascus. 

II. We mat see in St. Paul's convbhsion vividly pobtratbd the leabinq 
DOOTBINKS OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH. What was it which arrested the persecutor in 
his furious course, which turned back the whole current of his thoughts, which 
wrought in him that noble inconsistency, that holy apostasy from his previous 
convictions, which have placed him at the head of Christian teachers and confessors ? 
It was the clear knowledge conveyed to him by his owu senses of sight and hearing 
that Jesus Christ of Nazareth was risen, was alive, was glorified. He knew tliat he 
had been tried at the bar of Pilate, condemned, crucified, buried. He had thought 
that sentence a just one. He had thought that that life, closed in ignominy and 
shame, was closed for ever, and that his own Jews' religion had thereby triumphed and 
been confirmed. Now he knew that God had reversed that sentence, and had raised 
Jesus from the dead, and declared him in so doing to be his own eternal Son, both 
Lord and Christ. His previous convictions were thus refuted by the fact of the life 
and glory and Godhead of the Lord Jesus. The truth of the mission of Jesus Christ 
was thus in an instant established by irrefragable proof. Henceforth Jesus Christ was 
his Lord, his Guide, his Teacher, his Master, his almighty Saviour. Henceforth hip 
own body and soul, his life, and all his powers, liis whole capacity of doing and 
suffering, were Christ's, wholly and only Christ's. Here then we see, as in a glass, 
what our own religion must be. It must consist in a lull assurance of faith that Jesus' 
Christ is risen and lives for ever in the power of his Godhead, and in the consecration 
of ourselves to his service in the power of a personal love, devotion, and attachment 
— those of a person to a Person — to last while life lasts, and to be perfected ui the life 
beyond the grave. 

IIL The con version op St. Padl gives us also a vividp oetbaiture of thb mind 

AND CHABAOTEE OF GoD, AS THEY SHINE IN THE FACE OF JbSUS ChRIST. This is 

St. Paid's own view of it : " For this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesu* 
Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should here- 
alter believe on him to life everlasting" (1 Tim. L 16). We ha\u ucre apuUern of the 

*CX|. y 



290 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. «. 1—48. 



infinite, eternal mercy of God. The threatening and slaughter of the persecutor are 
met and overcome by love. The ignorance and unbelief which caused the blasphemies 
•nd injuries are taken note of, and these are wei<;hed in the scales of mercy and are 
forgiven. The electing grace, the predestinating love, brushes aside these obstacleii, 
and the blaspheming tongue is made eloquent with adoration and praise, and the 
breath which was once all threatening and slaughter now breathes nothing but the 
word of peace and salvation. Such is the mercy and wondrous grace of God our Saviour. 
IV. Wb have here a study dt psyoholooy. Ignorance may be real. Prejudices, 
blinding prejudices, may be real, and unbelief may have some excuse, or at least some 
palliation. It is not, indeed, blameless — ^it never can be, because tht single eye of 
a pure heart ought always to discern the true light from Heaven wheresoever it shines. 
Still, it may be that, with real conscientiousness, and under a mistaken view of duty, 
and with a blinding devotion to certain tenets of philosophy or religion which have 
been received without due care, and concurrently with a zeal for God and for supposed 
truth, a man may reject aad even hate the truth. He may mistake his own opinions 
for Divine truth, and so be bitterly opposed to whatever opposes them. And he may 
misconceive of the truth and ignorantly believe that it sanctions this or that error 
laconsistent with the fundamental principles of righteousness and godliness. Had 
iSt. Paul from the first really known Jesus Christ, and had he known the worthlessuess 
of Levitical or Pharisaic righteousness, he would never have been found in the ranks 
of the enemies of Christ. But he acted in ignorance and in unbelief. When the scales 
full off the eyes of his understanding, the rebound of his spirit toward his Lord was 
instantaneous. Prom this we learn a lesson of caution in judging even the unbeliever. 
There may be some cause of his unbelief which we know not of, but which God knows, 
and will peihaps some day remove. Then the sceptic will come with a bruised and 
hunnble spirit to Christ, and the Ethiopian will change his skin. 

Vera. 32—43. — The fisher of mm. "The Church had rest," wo read In ver. 31, 

" thruughout all Judaea and Galilee." Not so the primate of the Church. The Church's 
rest fiom persecution was his season of work. A brief glimpse of his work may be 
edifying to us. We saw something of his ministry at Jerusalem in the earlier chapters 
of this book — preaching, praying, praising, healing, protesting, resisting, suffering, 
perplexing bis enemies, exhorting and comforting the saints. We saw him carefully 
building up the Chiurch — baptizing, breaking the bread of life, appointing fresh 
ministries, repairing the walls of the new Jerusalem with his weapons of war in his 
hand. We saw him the faithful administrator of the Church's discipline, her 
courageous confessor, breasting the storm of persecution at his post, and maintaining 
the centre of Christian unity with his brother apostles at Jerusalem. Then we saw him 

E reaching the gospel in the villages of Samaria, confirming the baptized, rebuking the 
ypocrite, and returning to the post of danger at Jerusalem. And now again we see 
him actively at work. We see his care for all the Churches, his tender anxiety for all 
the disciples who had been folded in Christ's fold in those days of danger and alarm, 
lest the hour of rest and prosperity should bring greater dangers to them than the day 
of persecution had done. He goes forth into all quarters where any disciples were, and, 
not content with former conquests, he so wrought by word and deed that many more 
were added to the Lord. Now he speaks to iEneas the word of healing at Lydda ; now 
he passes on to the chamber of death at Joppa. Always ready with outstretched hand, 
or speaking mouth, or words of prayer, to fulfil his ministry and be a fisher of men for 
Christ. Blessed Peter 1 glorious apostle 1 great primate of the Church I opener of the 
door to Jews and Gentiles 1 we praise God for thy mighty works wrought in the Name 
of Jesus Christ. We pray him to give more such pastors to his feeble flock, to bind 
up that which is broken, to bring again that which is driven away, to seek out that 
which is lost, that there may bo once again "one fold under one Shepherd," and that all 
they who do confess the Name of Jesus Chriiit may b« united in out comipunioa ti<i 
t'«Uowfhi^ to the glory of his great Nau^ 



WL 11,1—43.] THE ACTS OF THE AP0STLE8. »1 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Conversion. We hare here an instaQce aad a picture of couveiaion— • 
of a human soul pursuing the wrong course, being arrested by the Divine hand, and 
submitting itself willingly to the rule of Christ. 

I. A HUMAN BOtJL FDBSuiNQ IT8 OWN WBONO counsB. Paul was moviug with the 
whole force of his strong and ardent nature in the direction of active persecution of the 
friends of Christ (vera. 1, 2, 5). Sin sometimes takes this special form now. More 
often it takes the shape of (1) guilty indulgence, or (2) utter worldliness, or (3) confirmed 
unbelief and rejection of the truth, or (4) indecision and procrastination. But whatever 
particular form it takes,,its essential nature is this — that the soul which was created to 
love, hononr, and please God is pursuing another and an opposite path ; it is found in 
highways or byways of evil. It is not with God, with Christ, but against him (Matt, 
xii. 30). It itself is not in active sympathy with him, rejoicing in him, delighting in 
his truth and hap]iy in his service ; and all the influences, both those which (as in the 
case of Saul at this time) are the direct result of conscious effort, and those which flow 
spontaneously and unconsciously from the life, are hostile to his truth and to his 
kingdom. 

II. The Divine arrest. (Vers. 3 — 5.) Paul tells us (Phil. iii. 12) that he was 
" apprehended of Christ Jesus. Christ laid hold upon him as he was going on his 
guilty way, arrested him in his own name, and charged him to turn round and pursue 
another and a better course. The Saviour's interposition in his case was unusually 
sudden, and it was exceedingly striking in its form (see vers. 3—5). It is seldom that 
the hand of the heavenly Lord is laid so manifestly, so powerfully, on the human heart. 
Yet it is being continually laid upon us, and we now are being arrested by him, with 
effectual power in redeeming love. 1. Christ's arrest of us is sometimes sudden, but 
more often gradual. Sometimes a man who has been proceeding far in some way of 
folly and of sin is instantly convinced that he is guilty and foolish; in an hour, in 
a moment, the truth of God flashes into his soul and lights up the dark depths within, 
and it shines upon and illumines the dreary and fatal path before him, and he stops 
and turns. More frequently the Lord of love and power works gradually in the heart ; 
by degrees he insinuates his heavenly truth, and gradually makes the soul to see and to 
feel that the way of selfishness and of sin is a path wliich must no longer be pursued, 
from which it must escape for its life. 2. The Divine arrest is sometimes by extra- 
ordinary but usually by ordinary means. Occasionally God comes in power to the 
human soul, by some vision of the night or of the day, or by some very remarkable 
ordering of his providence, by some experience which is shared by no other or by 
a very few ; but commonly the hand of his renewing power is laid upon us by ordinary 
means, by the gracious influences of a Christian home, by the appeals of the Christian 
minister or teacher, by the sickness which brings death and judgment into full view, 
or by the loss which compels us to feel that we do need and must secure a Divine 
Friend who can succour and console in the drear and lonely hour of Ufe. 

III. The soul's submission to the Divine will. The first result of feeling the 
pressure of the Divine hand may be, perhaps generally is, spiritual agitation. We 
may be "trembling and astonished" (ver. 6), or, if not moved so' powerfully, we shall 
be agitated, earnestly concerned, exceedingly solicitous ; we shall be as those thoroughly 
awakened who have been partially asleep, our spiritual faculty of inquiry will be 
called into fullest exercise. But the main and all-important result is spiritiial iubmisnoa 
— readiness and eagerness to accept the rule of Christ. The question of Saul will be 
the question of our heart, now reduced to loyalty and self-surrender, " Lord, what 
wilt thou have me to do ? " ChrLst will tell us that he wants us to trust him, to follou, 
him, to work for him. And these three things we shall gladly do. But the victory 
is gained, the one supreme step is taken, death is left behind, and the gates of life are 
before us, when, responding to his merciful and mighty touch, we submit ourselves 
to his sovereign will, when we turn round in spirit and say, "Lord, wlutt wilt thou 
have me to do? " — C. 

Ver. 6.— Tilt gofKis of Qod. There U probably some truth In the familiar sayiftg^ 



292 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. ix. 1— 4a. 

" If Stephen had not prayed, Paul had not preached." The iufluenco of the sight of 
that martynlom, and especially of that magnanimous prayer, may have had much to 
do with concerting Saul the persecuting Pharisee into Paul the faithful apostle. For 
what could our Lord have meant by saying, "It is hard for thee to kick against the 
goads," but that, as it is a vain, useless, and hurtful thing for the yoked ox to struggle 
against that which is inciting it to its work, so was it a useless and hurtful thing 
for Saul to be rebelling against those scruples, heart-searchings, convictions, which 
were urging him to enter a new and better path? This may seem inconsistent with 
the language which has just been used (ver. 1) ; but we must renn mber that vehemence 
is never quite so violent as when it begins to suspect itself to be in the wrong ; that 
persecution is never so passionate, fanaticism never so fierce, as when it is most 
impressed with the goudness and innocency of its victim. Vour Legree never strikes 
so murderous a blow as when he finds himself face to face with a Christian hero and 
feels himself to be thoroughly condemned. So Saul never breathed out such threatening 
and slaughter as when the sight of Stephen's blood-stained body was still before his 
eyes, and the sound of his generous intercession still lingered in his ear. But he was 
beginning to think tSat, after all, perhaps those Christians were in the right and that 
he was in the wrong, and that he must either shut his eyes hard aijainst the light or 
change his course. By vio ent su|.)pression of these new thoughts, by stifling all 
scruples with strong hand, by kicking against the goads of God, he found himself 
on the way lo Damascus to worry and harry the servants of Christ. There the Lord 
whom he was to serve so faithfully met him and told him he was doing a hard thing 
in thus struggling against the Heaven-sent promptings which urged him to take the 
true and right path. 

I. The prevalence of inwabd btbitoolb. Few things more pathetic have come 
down to us from ancient times than that lament of the Roman poet, "I see the better 
things and approve ; I follow the worse." How many have to make the same sorrowful 
confession now! Around us are souls struggling (1) with passion, (2) with earthly 
ambition, (3) with pride, (4) with disposition to wait for some favourable future. 
These find themselves urged by the goads of God — conscience, the sacred Scriptures, 
human ministry, the Divine Sjirit — to take the better course, but their lower instincts 
and evil habits cause them to strive against these higher impulses. 

II. Its pnoFoiTKD mistake. 1. It is a miserable thing in a man's own experience 
to be living a life of vice, or worldliness, or selfishness, of indecision, when the soul 
is conscious of a Divine voice calling it to higher things — to pursue a path which is 
known and felt to be the wrong one. This is a wretched life to live ; there is no peace, 
no spiritual rest, no lasting joy ; there is distraction, discontent, rebellion. It is hard 
for a human soul to kick against the goads of God. 2. It is a regrettalh thing, 
judged from outside. Those who look on — " the cloud of witnesses " — see witli unspeak- 
able sorrow a human heart spending its powers and wasting its life in battling with 
its purer and nobler aspirations. There is no more saddening sight to a Christ-like 
spirit than that of a human heart thus striving with the influences which come from 
heaven to raise and to redeem it. 3. It is a guilty thing. No man can continue to 
do that without storing up for himself " wrath against the day of wrath." 

III. The one wise course to take. There is only one thing for such a man to 
do — he must yield himself at once to God's gracious forces. He must be the " prisoner 
of the Lnrd," that he may become " the freedman of Christ.'' He must go on whither 
his Ecdeomer is urging him — on to full self-surrender; on to sacred and happy service; 
and so on to the heavenly kingdom. — G. 

Vers. 10 — 18. — Christ's treatment of us and our obedience to him. I. That Christ 

■AT CALL us TO WORK WHICH WILL BE AT FIRST PERPLEXING. (Vers. 10 — 14.) Nothing 

which Christ could have given Ananias to do would have surprised him more than 
the duty withwhich he was entrusted. It filled him with astonishment and perplexity. 
Instead of immediately acquiescing, he raised a strong objection (vers. 13, 14). It 
seemed impossible to him that this should be his mission ; nevertheless it was so, and 
the obedient disciple of Damascus never did a better morning's work than when he 
conveyed sight to the eyes and gladness to the heart of the last and greatest of the 
npostleiw We mjty be summoned by our Lord, either through the promptings of iit 



OB. a. 1—43.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 293 

own Sj^'rit or through the instrumentality of his Church, to do work which at flrsj 
seems surprising, undesirable, useless. We may be invited to appeal to those we deem 
unlikely to welcome us, to address ourselTO)! to apparently unremunerative toil, to 
cultivate ground which looks sterile to our eye ; but it may be that we are really 
called of Christ to do a most needed and useful work. 

II. That Christ onlt knows what is the banob of cub spiKiTnAi. oapacitt. 
(Ver. 15.) There may be very much more of spiritual power resilient in us or in our 
neighbours than we have any conception of. How many have lived and died with 
vast possibilities of good in their nature never realized I Their talent has been buried. 
Has not our Master some good or even some great work for us to achieve ? May we 
not, like Ananias, be instrumental in leading forward some servant of Christ who has 
great capacities of usefulness in him ? We must malce the most and best of ourselves 
and of others ; only our Lord and theirs knows how much it is in us and in them to 
accomplish. 

III. That Christ mat call us to the hiohest post it is ever given to his 
SERVANTS to FILL. (Ver. 16.) He may summon us to " suffer for his Name's sake." 
We never reach so lofty an altitude, never come so near to the Master himself, never 
so nobly serve our kind, as when we^ willingly and cheerfully suffer for the kingdom 
of heaven's sake; then we may "rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is our reward 
in heaven." 

IV. That the spirit of obedibnoe is never more trtjlt manifest than when 
WE DO WORK FROM WHICH WE SHRINK. (VcT. 17.) When it is in our human nature 
to shrink from any duty, but when, from regard to our Master's will, we address 
ourselves to it, then we do that which is acceptable to him. It is at variance with 
our material interests, against our inclinations, opposed to our taste* and views ; 
"nevertheless at Christ's word we will " do what is desired (see Luke v. 5). Ananins 
shrinks from approaching the arch-persecutor ; nevertheless at Christ's bidding he goes, 
takes a friendly tone and does a brotherly deei 

V. That wa should at once acknowledqe our Divine Rbdbbmeb. (Ver. 18.) 
As soon as the scales had fallen from his eyes and he received sight, as soon as he 
'lad been favoured with this further confirmation that he was under the teaching and 

eading of the Son of God himself, Paul "arose and was baptized." JSIo interval 
alapsed between the time when he was free to act as one redeemed and healed of 
Christ, and his action of open acknowledgment of conversion to the faith. We do 
well to wait till we are thoroughly assured of our whole-hearted reception of Jesus 
Christ before we confess him before men ; but as soon as we clearly see that he is our 
Lord and that we are his disciples, it is (1) our simple duty, as it is (2) our valuable 
privilege, to honour our Redeemer by an open declaratiou of attachment to him, and 
to join ourselves to his disciples (ver. 19). — 0. 

Vers. 19 — 30. — The texture of hitman life. Of how many threads is this human 
life woven 1 Through what changeful experiences do we pass, even in a short period 
of our course 1 In the brief period — possibly three years— .oovered by our text, we 
find Paul undergoing various fluctuations of good and evil. It is suggestive of the 
nature and character of our common human life. We may gather them up thus — • 

L The pleasant. Paul had the pleasure of: 1. Congenial fellowship. He was 
" with the disciples ... at Damascus" (ver. 19); " he was with them coming in and 
going out at Jerusalem" (vers. 37, 28). Few things shed more sunshine on our earthly 
path than the genial society of those with whom we are one in thought and aim. 
2. Conscious growth in moral and spiritual power in dealing with men. He increased 
in strength (ver. 22). 3, Fearless action on behalf of the true and right (ver. 29), 
These are joys, deep and full, to a human spirit — to be growing in influence, and to 
be playinga brave and noble part in the strife of life. 

II. The painful. 1. The distrust of those with whom we are In sympathy. Paul 
"assayed to join himself to the disciples: but they were afraid," etc. (ver. 26). It is 
a very painful wound to the spirit to be distrusted by those to whom we really belong. 
To have our sincerity doubted, to have our purity questioned, to be looked at askance 
rather than with kindly and gracious eye, — this is one of the keen, cutting miseries 
oi life, 2. Persecution for oonscieuce' sake (vers. 23, 24, 29). This ma^ go fu short OH 



M THE Ada's OP til& Ak)STLE9. t<m. flL i-4i 

" seeking our life to take it away ; " it may not paas beyond the sneering word or the 
curling lip, and yet it may introduce great bitterness into the cup of life. 3. Humi- 
liation. Paul never seems to have forgotten the incident of his being let down in 
a basket (ver. 25). He felt the humiliation of it. Anything which wounds our self- 
respect makes a lasting, often a lifelong, scar on the sonl. 

III. The needful. 1. Solitude. It is not stated in the text, but we know from 
his letters that at this juncture (probably between vers. 19 and 20) Paul went into 
Arabia (Gral. i. 17) ; there he spent much time alone with God ; there he oommuned 
with his own spirit, " looking before and after ; " there he re-read and read anew the 
Scriptures which he imagined he understood before, but now found to be other an J 
more than he had supposed. We urgently need this element of solitude. We arc 
not enough, alone ; more of quiet meditation, of communion with the Father of spirits, 
of reverent contemplation, would calm, steady, purify, ennoble us. 2. Social activity. 
(Vers. 20, 22, 29.) Whether or not we "preach Christ," "confounding" and "dis- 
puting," we must come into contact, and sometimes into collision with men. We 
need to know how to do this wisely and rightly, at times showing the fearless spirit, 
at times the spirit of discretion, at times the spirit of conciliation, always the spirit 
of Christ. • 

IV. The elevated. (Ver. 30.) This chapter simply tells us that the brethren 
brought Paul to CsBsarea and sent liim to Tarsus. But Paul himself elsewhere informs 
us (ch. xxii. 17, 18) that the Lord Jesus Christ manifested himself to him and 
desired him to leave Jerusalem. We do not look for such trances and visions now, 
but we do look, or should do so, for manifestations, indwellings, influences of tho 
Divine Spirit (vf God, so that we ourselves and our whole human life may be guided 
and sanctified of God. Of such elements are all our lives woven. We must gratefully 
accept and so sanctify the pleasant, meekly and cheerfully endure the p;iinful, wisely 
employ the necessary, and reverently avail ourselves of the elevated ; thus will our 
lives be blessed of God, thus will they speak his praise and spread his truth, thus 
will they lead to his presence and glory. — C. 

Ver. 31.-— TOe opportunity and obligation of the Church. I. That a time of 

TRANQtrlLLITT MAY BE AND SHOULD BE A PERIOD OF PEOOEESS. "The Churchcs had 

rest, . . . and were edified, . . . were multiplied." The time of rest is too often one of 
inglorious repose, of unworthy indulgence, or even fatal luxury and corruption. But 
when the molesting hand of persecution is taken away, it is possible for the Church 
to put forth all its strength — to enter on a path of unflagging activity, of holy enter- 
prise, and of gratifying enlargement. 

II. That the Church should never be wtthoot a sentiment of saobed awe. 
It should always be walking "in the fear of the Lord." Love, trust, joy in Christ, 
should be the element in which it lives ; but it must never take leave of its deepest 
reverence and awe. It must walk " in fear," (1) realizing the near presence of its 
observant Lord, the Lord of righteousness and purity (Rev. ii. 1) ; (2) remembering 
that it is held by him responsible for the extension of his kingdom, for the conversion 
of the world (2 Cor. v. 19); recollecting that, if it should lose its sanctity, there is no 
human power by which it can hope to be restored (Matt. v. 13). 

III. That the Church requires to be continually sustained by influences 
WHICH are distinctively Divinb. " Multiplied by the exhortation [comfort, ministry] 
of the Holy Spirit." No perfectness of machinery, no eloquence of human oratory, 
no promptings of emulation, no pressure of authority, no earth-born influences of any 
kind or number, will suQice to sustain a Church in living power. It must be multi- 
plied by the ministry of the Holy Spirit. It must secure the teaching which is animated 
by the Spirit of God ; it must be listening to the doctrine which is communicated 
by the Spirit ; it must have the indwelling of the Spirit in the minds and hearts of 
its members ; it must be looking to the ever-living power of the Spirit to make all its 
agencies and operations effectual. 

IV. That the Chdech of Christ should bb advancing as a divinely erected 
structure. The Church " was edified," built up ; it rose as a structure rises — gradually 
nnd in due proportions. The Church of Christ should, in the increase which it makes, 
possess the characteristics o< the bust buildiug— it should (1) attain to a stately size, 



oa.ik.i— 43.] *flE ACl^S of TSE AtOSTLES, 203 

should " multiply," grow in numbers and in the extent of ground it covers ; (2) bocom* 
more beautiful in aspect ; (3) acquire increasing strength. — 0. 

Vers. 32 — i3. — The miraculous and the supernatureU, In these verses we have 
two instances of the miraculous ; and we may consider what was the worth of that 
element then, and why it has passed away ; we may also consider the truth that the 
supernatural— tlie directly though not visibly Divine — still abides and will continually 
endure. 

L Thb rationale or the Chbistiam hibaole, wrought in the apostolic age. Then 
it was (or seems to us to have been) necessary. 1. It was regarded as of the very 
essence of a new Divine system. Any doctrine which was to supersede the Law, and 
which (lid not carry with it the credentials of "wonderful works," would have had 
no prospect or possibility of success. 2. It was a power of great potency in the aga 
in wliich it was granted. Witness the text, among many others : " All that dwelt at 
Lydda and Saron . . . turned to the Lord " (vor. 35) ; " It was known throughout all 
Joppa ; and many believed in the Lord " (ver. 42). 3. The early Church had to 
struggle agaiust fearful odds, and might well be strengthened with a special and 
exceptional force. It had to contend witli inveterate and all but impregnable prejudices, 
with powerful material interests, with worldly wisdom, with crushing political powers 
arrayed against it with drawn sword; it was a handful of weak men and women, 
destitute of resources, "unlearned and ignorant," against a world in arms, against 
many millions inflamed with passionate hatred or filled with supercilious contempt. 
At such a stage it might well be reinforced with such help as the miraculous would 
yield it. 

II. The explanation of its disoontinttance. It was a power, very valuable when 
widely used, but liable to great abuse. The time might soon come when its presence 
would be harmful rather than helpful, when Christian men would be disposed to rely 
on the marvellous rather than the spiritual. That time did come, and it came earlier 
than wo might have thought (see 1 Corinthians). Therefore it was mercifully with- 
drawn. Its continuance would only have been to leave in the Church's hand a weapon 
by which it would have wounded itself. 

III. Its nebdlesskess now. Now we should be able to dispense with such 
adventitious aid. 1. The wealth, the culture, the political power, the resources which 
give strength to human societies, are now on the side of Christian truth. 2. We are 
equipped with one weapon in particular which serves us instead of the miraculous — 
scientific knowledge and skill. The principal wonders which the apostles wrought 
were works of healing or restoring, like that of healing ^neas (ver. 34) and that of 
restoring Dorcas (vers. 40, 41). Now we are able to go to the heathen, with the Bible 
in one hand and the pharmacopoeia in the other, and thus we can impress, heal, and 
win them. The medical missionary of the nineteenth century is aa well famished for 
his beneficent work as the Corinthian Christian of the first. 

IV. The abidino presence op the Divine. 1. A power, distinctively Divine, still 
brings the dead to life. A more wonderful and far more blessed work is wrought 
when, to a soul " dead in trespasses and sins," Christ now says, " Arise," and it " opens 
Its eyes" (ver. 40) to see light in God's light, to behold the truth in its excellency and 
power. More wonderful, because it is a greater work to revive a dead spiiit than to 
resuscitate a dead Ijody — the one act is in the kingdom of the moral, the other of the 
mechanical ; more blessed, for eternal life is an inestimably greater boon to impart than 
the prolongation for a few years of earthly existence. Dorcas had to die again and 
be again Ijewailed. 2. A power, directly and positively Divine, still confers spiritual 
health on those who have been spiritually paralyzed. By his renewing power, by the 
touch of his own reviving hand, " Jesus Christ makes whole " (ver. 34) those who havo 
been lethargic, indifferent, worldly, idle; and they arise. — 0. 

Vers. 1—8. — Saul on his way to Damascus. I. The picrunE of thb pbhsbodtob. It 
is almast the picture of a monster. It resembles the idea uf the fearful dragon-monster, 
which breathes forth smoke and flame, and threatens to devour the sun and moon and 
stars. Saul is inspired by a murderous feeling against the disciples of Christ. He himself 
•Iterwatds recognised tliat to persecute them was to persecute him (1 Tim. L 13). Zeu] 



29« THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. ix- 1— 4* 

for God without knowledge la another of his own descriptions of his state of mind 
(Bona. X. 2). It leads directly to the devilish love of destruction (John viii. 44). Wb 
can distinguish pure from carnal zeal only by the effects : the one impels us to build 
up, the other to destroy ; the one to save men's lives, the other to slay, and making 
a solitude to call it peace. But there are deep problems in the life of mind. Never 
is a man madly irritated against an o])inion, violent against a cause or a person, but 
it is a symptom of a struggle within. The mau is really at war with himself, A 
conviction ia reluctantly forcing its way upon bira; ho feels the goads of conicience, 
and vents his resentment u| on objects outside of himself. 

II. The persecutoe checked in uis causer. Notice the accompaDiments of the 
revelation. They are: 1. Outward. A light out of heaven like lightning plays around 
the persecutor. He falls to the earth like a thunder-struck man. In this position 
the impressions of the ear come in to enhance those of the eye. A voice is heard 
calling him by name: " Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me ? " 2. Inward, Saul 
has no difficulty in putting these things to^;ether and drawing the true inference from 
them. "Who art thou. Lord?" betrays his suspicion, perhaps his certainty, that the 
voice is that of the crucified One, aiainht whose might he has been striving. And the 
voice returns, " I am Jesus whom thou persecutest." Then follows the direction to go 
into Damascus and to await further orders. When the outward phenomena and 
the inward revelation are so closely interwoven, it is difficult to separate the one from 
the other, and unnecessary to do so. ISut the point to fix attention upon is this — 
that revelation is always in the soul. IIow the now truth comes to us is not of so 
much importance as what permanent deposit it leaves behind it. " It pleased God to 
reveal his Son in me," said the quondam persecutor. 'J he true mystery and wonder 
lie in the soul ; all else is superficial and subsidiary compared with that. By what 
passes within we may interpret what passes without, but not vice versa. This scene is 
far more impressive and sheds a clear light on the conflicts of our own being, if we see in 
it a man cast down by the sudden splendour and terror of a conviction against which 
he had long been struggling. It is said that we never understand a truth until we 
have striven against it. He whom we have battled against as a deadly foe becomes 
our lifelong master when we are once fairly defeated at his hands. 

in. Other meanings in the event. 1. Here was a personal appearance of Jegua. 
Jesus lives I This is the thought which comforts his friends, and strikes terror into his 
foes. "1 am he that is, and was, and is to come." "lam the living one! "(Rev. i. 4, 18), 
Never was this revelation of the living Christ' forgotten by Saul. It afterwards became 
a main subject of his preaching, as it was the core of his creed. The living Christ 
is, indeed, the expression to us of the living and loving personality of God, of the will 
to save and to redeem evermore. 2. It was an appearance of Jesus in glory. The 
sjilendour and terror which surround him bespeak his sovereign might. " Why dost 
thou jiersecute m«T" It is vain as well as wrong to contend agamst One to. whose 
holiness and majesty the conscience bears its uuerring witness. Saul seemed to think 
that he was wrestling against flesh and blood when be harried those defenceless 
Christians; and that by weapons of flesh and blood Christianity might be overcome. 
But behold the majestic figure of One who comes with clouds. To offer him the show 
of violence is the extreme of irreverence and of folly. Never was this lesson forgotten. 
Our sins against our fellow-Christians are sins against Christ. We insult the love 
that suffered for us, and the majesty that rules and judges us. 3. Tet it was a revela- 
tion of the glwified humanity of Jesus. Saul saw him and heard him speak (ver. 17 ; 
xxvii. 15). The Redeemer glorifies the human form and nature which he wore on 
earth. Here lay a seed of St. Paul's teaching on the spiritual body which glorified 
saints are to wear. Earth and heaven, the seen and the unseen world, are for ever 
joined and reconciled in the Ixjdy in which he lived, suffered, rose, and reigns. 4. It 
was a revelativn of extpiisite Divine lovt and grace. (1) Towards the persecuted. Their 
■orrows are the sorrows of Jesus. He makes their sufferings his own (Matt. xxv. 45). 
His exaltation and glory do not lift hira out of their reach. He reigns to throw the 
Bgii of his providence and protection over the defenceless flock of his little ones. 
He Li the Head, and all the members are in vital union with him, and receive from tha 
fulness of his llf*. (2) Towards the persecutor. Sin in its extreme of violence and 
febellioB ia ' «nd tin weapons struck fitom the haad^if tbv rebel— not 



OH. DC 1—43.] tSE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 297 

by the tyrsnt's force, but by the gentleness of Divine love. " Where sin had abounded, 
grace did much more abound " (Kom. t. 20). "lis hard to kick against such goads. 
Condemnation hardens the rebel in his opposition; gentleness melts his heart and 
converts him into au ally and a friend. " Galilean, thou hast conquered ! " The 
conversion ot Saul is a type of the whole spirit and method of the gospel. Unlike the 
kingdoms of this world, which rest on force and must repel violence by violence, it 
rests on the negation of force, the eternal affirmation of love. It is strong in its weak- 
ness, and converts foes into friends by gaining the victory over the intelligence and 
the conscience. — J. 

Yen. 10 — 19. — Said and Ananiat. I. The ministet of man to mak. After the 
direct revelation through the terror of the lightning and the thunderbolt, comes the 
mediate revelation through the familiar voice and manner of one's fellow-man. Ananias 
is not an apostle ; he is a disciple, a member of the Church sim[)ly, entrusted with no 
particular office or position. Possibly the reason for this was that Paul might not be 
dependent on any of the other apostles. He was, he said, " an apostle, not from men 
nor by men, but by Jesus Christ." But the general lesson is on the unofficial service 
of Christians to others. Officialism often biings Christianity into suspicion. Tho 
genuine service of private Christians is always of value and always an evidence of the 
Spirit of Christ. 

II. The hopefulness of the act or pbatbb. The good disciple is directed to 
go to Saul, " for behold, he prayeth ! " A pregnant word by which to describe the 
condition of a converted sinner. He prays ; therefore he is no longer a persecutor of 
Jesus, but a captive of his grace, subject of his love. He prays ; therefore his heart 
is emptied of its former hate towards the brethren, and is filled with meekness and 
charity. The expression also betokens the gracious mind of the speaker. The Lord 
looks down with pity on the broken heart prostrate belore him in prayer. And the 
Church are in like manner to turn to him, as ona though lost yet found, no longer 
a foe but a friend, " Behold, he prays 1 " 

III. The IMPBE38I0K8 ATTEKDiNO coNVERBiON. Saul has Been the messenger of 
Christ coming in and laying his hands on him that he may receive his sight, 
It is by its associations that any great event in the outward world or in the mind 
fixes itself on the memory. Paul was to look back upon those days as an inexhaustible 
fund of deepest spiritual impressions. He shall be able to say, " I received my office 
as apostle not from man but from Jesils Christ." He shall be for ever cured of his 
Pharisaic wisdom and pride of the flesh. He was not reasoned into Christianity, but 
the living Christ was revealed in him, in ways too manifold and various to be mistaken. 

IV. The btartlino chanob often involved in convbbsion. Ananias hesitates. 
The acts of men are standing evidence of their disposition. What safer guide can wo 
have ? Yet the Divine voice quells the hesitation of Ananias. Saul is a chosen vessel, 
instrument, or tool, fashioned by the Divine hand and lor the Divine purposes. In the 
mysterious world of the humau heart all things are possible to God — even as elsewhere. 
The volcanic fire which is working beneath the convulsions of the earthquake is 
a formative as well as a destructive agent. The passionate outbreaks of a man against 
a principle or a party are often a sign of internal change going on. Saul was to be 
fashioned as an instrument for the greatest work, perhaps, ever committed to man — 
the bearing of the Name, t'.e, the message and doctrine of Christ to the Gentiles, to 
confront and shake the powers of the world with the power of the crucified One. Such 
a missionary must need no common training. He must have known the depths of the 
evil of his own heart, the heights of redeeming grace. That Christ could conquer the 
proud and stubborn Pharisee, and turn Saul into Paul, was a prophecy of tHe nature 
of his progressive conquests over mankind. 

V. Chbist's chosen one chosen fob sufferino. (Ver, 16.) Christ will show the 
newly called, not what things he is to enjoy, what honours he is to reap, but what 
things he must suffer. Never was prophet called of God without some adumbration 
of future suffering, of struggle painAil to flesh and blood. With us all there is some- 
thing awful and repellent in the forms of duty. It is the " stern daughter of the voice 
of God." Yet in obedience alone can we enjoy true freedom and the presence of God 
]a. the souL And the greater the strength given, the greater will be the struggles 



M faa Acts Ot- TbB APOS*LEa tea. ti. x-4a 

imposed, the pain to be endured, the inner sense of joy and triumph to be experienced. 
To follow Christ truly is no soft and sentimental thing — it is an enterprise which taxM 
manhood to iti utmost. To him may be applied the words of the poet— ■ 

" Btem Lawgiver I yet thou dost wear 
The Godhead's most benignant grao*; 
KoT know we anything so fair 
As is the smile upon thy face." 

VI. Deliverancb and stuenqth imparted by Cueist. Ananias comes with hie 
cheering messnge and his inspired acts to emancipate the body and soul of Saul. 1. JIb 
is to see again. The fir.st view of new truth " blinds with excess of light." Pretently 
the scales fall, and the eyes are found to have new powers of perception. We may 
find a parable here. The exchange of fleshly wisdom and narrow views for spiritual 
insight and wide command of the field of vision seems at first a loss. We can see 
nothing (or a time ; the old horizon has vanished. Presently the darkness lifts, the 
dawn appears ; we are in a new scene, and " behold, all things are become new." 
2. He is to be filled with the Boly Ohost. The moment of the break-down of all our 
old system of thought and life is that of extreme weakness. It is that self-emptiness 
which is utterly painful, but prepares for the incoming and indwelling of Divine power 
— the Holy Spirit. 3. Baptism as an epoch of life. It closes one era, it opens another. 
T%e putting on of Christ — the essential thing in baptism — involves renniiciation on 
the one hand, fresh choice on the other. God sets us free that we may serve him. 

" I myself commend 
Unto thy guidance from this hour ; 
Oh, let my weakness have an end I *' 

To live out in our own experience the call, and conversion, and initiation of Saul is tc 
get to the heart of human nature and of the relation of Christ to that nature. — J. 

Vers. 19 — 25. — Saul at Damascus. I. His pbbachino. In those very synagogues 
where he had determined to make victims of the followers of Jesus, he was found owning 
and pri'claiming his Name. And his proclamation was that Jesus was the SonofOod. 
This was, perliaps, a new truth to the Christian Church — or at least in the clear recog- 
nition and definite expression it has now — and^must have come with extraordinary power 
from lips that were learned and eloquent and charged with the profound conviction 
of one whose thoughts had undergone an entire revulsion. " I believe, therefore have 
I spoken." The Divine Son; his life and love, his work for mankind ; — this is the heart 
of all Christian preaching. 

II. The effects or nis pheachino. Astonishment at the change of feeling and 
of conduct in Sanl. Astonishment breeds curiosity and gives rise to inquiry and 
information. Wonder at the extraordinary phenomena of nature is the parent of 
science. Wonder at the extraordinary phenomena in the kingdom of God gives birth 
to conviction and to reverence and piety. A change of heart and life is the standing 
moral miracle. When he whom we have known as passionate, proud, and fierce 
is seen to be meekly giving up all worldly advantages for the sake of a despised cause, 
counting things that had been good loss for the excellency of a new knowledge, it is an 
evidence not to be resisted. " Fool I " must have been the verdict of his friends of the 
Sanhedrim on his conduct. " For Christ's sake " was the secret in the breast of Saul. 

III. The obowib of Saul in power. Mighty is the energy of truth newly found 
and grasped, with power to nerve the will and impart influence over others. The 
man of convictions, and with the courage of them, is the true conqueror. Second-hand 
opiniona and inherited prejudices cannot stand against original force in the moral 
sphere. This is the Christ ; one man believed it with all his soul, and triumphed over 
the world in its hatred and ignorance. But the growth of moral power in an individual 
calls up the dark shapes of envy and jealousy. Secret and cowardly opposition is the 
compliment which passion offers, the testimony it bears to the forms of clear, calm 
truth. Malice lurks and lies in wait to destroy what it fears to encounter in the open 
field. Energy in difl'using light and truth will be certain to evoke a corresponding 
energy out of the kingdom of darkuess to obscure and to destroy. So did the storm 



ea. li. 1-413 1?afe Ad*S 01^ I'life At'OSTLi'S. 20li 

gather about Saul's devoted head. But the servants of God bear a charmed life urtil 
their work is done. Already the promise of the Saviour, that Saul must suffer many 
tilings, is being fulfilled. In trouble and the deliverance out of it Qod is made known 
to our spirits as our God and our Saviour. — J. 

Vers. 26 — 30. — SaiiTs visit to Jerusalem. I. Suspicion aotj coldness KNCOtTNTBKED. 
Saul finds no welcome at Jerusalem, no confidence, but distrast. It is hard to live 
down the records of past life. And never was the proud quondam Pharisee permitted 
to forget his lesson of humility. Well might this be the meaning of the " thorn in the 
flesh." Our impression of the man is that of a fierce and impetuous temper, the force 
of which, having been used for the devil, was now to be used in the service of Christ. 
The genuineness of his conversion, Calvin remarks, is shown by the fact that, having 
been himself a persecutor, he can now endure persecution with calmness. 

II. CoMFOBT IN A FRIEND. Yet Saul had a most sensitive and loving heart, yearning 
for sympathy, grateful for kindness and love. How full of meaning on another occasion 
his words, "God, who comfovteth those that are cast down, comforted us by the coming 
of Titus"! Then the affectionate Barnabas takes him by the hand, and performs the 
offices of friendship on his behalf. The scene carries its teaching on the nature and 
offices of friendship. 1. 7^e friend takes us hy the handinthehouioi need. His loyalty 
and courage compensate us for the coldness of the world. Who so self-reliant as not to 
need a sponsor on occasions ? One draught of true human love will refresh us in the 
desert of others' coldness. And doubtless, if we have been true to love, love will b« 
found for us at the hour of need. 2. He will say for us what we cannot tay /or our- 
selves. Barnabas tells Saul's story when Saul himself is not believed. The ideas of the 
Paraclete, or Advocate, of the Fiiend that sticketh closer than a brother, of the Witness 
on our behalf, are found again in the highest Christian relations. Christ fulfils to 
the soul the highest ideal of friendship. Let the recollection of our dependence on 
ministry ever incline the heart to humility and correct the excess of self-reliance. 
Through Barnabas, Saul is received as a brother, and the old enmity and distrust is 
forgotten. To be obstinately set against old sinners, to refuse a kindly oblivion to 
the past, is to ignore the grice which delights to heal and to forgive. 

III. Fresh danoers. Following in the steps of Stephen, Saul disputed with the 
Hellenists. There was a resurrection of the martyr's spiiit in the martyr's murderer. 
Enmity is again aroused ; again Saul's life is in danger ; and again, through friendly 
providence, the way of escape is opened. , Thus through early combats, the Christian 
soldier's courage is tried and experience is gained for future struggles.— J, 

Vers. 31 — 43. — Works of peace. It is a bright picture of happy and prosperous 
Church life that here opens. Peace "lay like a shaft of light athwart the land" of 
Judaea, Galilee, and Samaria. The work of edification, ever silent and sure like the 
growth of the tall palm, went on. There was the spirit of reverence and the sense of 
comfort and of joy in the presence of the Holy Spirit. That nation is happy whose 
life contributes few incidents that startle, changes that dismay, revolutions and wars 
that attract attention. Who can calculate the value of a day's sunshine to the earth ? 
Who can tabulate the results of a year's peaceful intercourse ? Quiet Church life is 
not resultless ; and to obtain it demands and implies more of prayer and effort than that 
which is spasmodic and sensational. 

I The VISIT of Peteb to Ltdda. He finds there the paralytic .Slneas. The 
bedndaen sufi'erer may be viewed as a type of all prostration, physical and moral, 
which Christ comes to heal. "Jesus Christ is healing thee ! " such is the abidinir word 
of the Christian apostle and minister, further reaching in its application to the inward 
than to the outward life. And if it be a fact that healing energy is ever flowing 
from Christ, a moral hope and a moral energy is derivable from the fact. " Rise and 
act for thyself" is the command which the Christian minister may give, founded on 
the fact that the energy is imparted to the will in trust on Divine power. " And 
straightway he arose." The rise of any soul out of weakness into strength, out of 
self-despair into confidence and freedom, implies two things — (1) the Divine agency 
to heal ; (2) the human will co-operating with the Divine. In the absence of either of 
these factors there is no transition from one stat^ to another. Wbtasfsr seife 3» war 



500 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. ix. 1-— 4*. 

version taTccs place and is observed, the minds of the spectators are turned towardi 
that higher siiurce of power. They " turn to the Lord " in reverent recognition, in 
devout thankfulness, in earnest expectation, 

n. The raisino of Dorcas. 1. The sketch of a use/td life. Dorcas is full of good 

works and alms. The " eye for pity, and the hand open as day for melting charity," 

was hers. Pity, compassion, the feeling for those who are less happy than ourselvos, 

is the habit which above all the gospel teaches and cultivates in the soul. The loving 

simple hMrt has a place not less important to fill in ministry to others than the clear 

intellect And the powerful will. The tears and gratitude of the widows were a noble 

testimony to Dorcas and her character. She was a centre of the true " sweetuess and 

light" in the community, a fountain of pure Christian love. "In the possession of 

one such example a Church has a great spiritual capital. When such a one dies, 

God will raise up followers, for love never dies." 2. The office of raining fi om the dead. 

Was not this entrusted to Peter, that it might be a parable to all times of this truth — 

that God gives to chosen men in the Church the power to raise others out of death 

into life, that is, instrumentally ? The Resurrection is spiritually repeated whenever 

the word of power reaches the conscience. Peter puts all the mourners out of the room, 

kneels down and prays. This was after the example of the Master. Solitude, silence, 

and prayer prepare for all exertion of spiritual activity. However great the powei 

entrusted to the minister of God, he must still use it in dependence upon him. 

However urgent the call from men, the Divine will must first be consulted before 

it is obeyed. From dependence on God comes all independence of other conditions. 

To use the imperative mood with others, we must have learned the submissive mood 

before him. The word, " Tabitha, arise I " and the stretching out of the hand to the 

prostrate one, — these acts had their antecedents in the spiritual sphere. We cannot 

comprehend a miracle ; but we may be well assured that it follows a Divine though 

hidden law. God has reason in all his acts. In the giving of the lost but restored one 

again to her friends we have a prophecy of future restoration of those whom we have 

loved and lost. There are moments when the power of God is put forth to realize our 

most loving wishes and to satisfy the unquenchable aspirations of the heart. Our 

friends "live in God" as Dorcas and Lazarus lived in him, and death is but a 

semblance for pious souls. Would that we had that profound knowledge of the power 

and love of God which should enable us to see the wondrous in the common I Faith 

will be produced and will be increased wherever our passage through the world, our 

visits and our words, arc followed by a joy like that redected on the Church at Joppa 

by the visit and ministry of Peter, — J, 

Vers. 1 — 9. — The sign from heaven. The state of the Chnrdh and the world calling 
for such a sign. The want of a greater spirit among the apostles, to undertake the 
new leadership as the gospel went forth to challenge the whole worli The awakening 
mind of the disciples — Samaria, Philip and the eunuch, Caasarea (oh, viii. 40), all 
pointed to a new epoch. The hour was there ; but where was the man f Peculiar 
qualifications necessary — ^intellect ; culture ; burning zeal ; personal experience of the 
power of Christ. Notice— 

L The challbnob met. 1. Saul represented persecution. A successful raid at 
Damascus would be a decisive blow at the new sect. Preparation made. If prisoners 
could be brought bound to Jerusalem, an appeal could be made to crush the heresy. 
2. The challenge was made to the utmost. He was Buffered to draw nigh to Damascus, 
and was surrounded by his fellow-persecutors. 3. The blow which struck him down 
was distinctly supernatural, a sign from heaven. Jesus did not fight with carnal 
weapons. He smote with " light out of heaven," and a voice addressing the heart and 
conscience. 

II, The man ohoseh Ain> called. 1. His previous history showed the work ol 
(Jod'i Spirit. His question, " Wlio art thou. Lord ? " His remembrance of Stephen and 
his words. His immediate submission. 2. The manner of Saul's conversion a pre- 
paration of his soul for the part he was to take in the Church's work. It was greatly 
independent of human agency (cf. Augustine ; Luther). It was a miracle which to hira 
became the moral basis of all other miracles. It enabled him to say, " I have seen 
(he Lord Christ;" vnA gave him at once an apostolic position. 3, The overwhelming 



eiLix.1— 43.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 801 

aature of the evidence »nd the deep spiritual work of those few days prepared such a 
mind as Paul's for grappling with the mysteries of faith. The eyes were shut that 
they might he opened the more clearly to spiritual realities. It was especially 
neoessary that Saul should begin his new life feeling that Jesus was able to do all 
things, that he was revealing his Diviue liingdom in the earth. 

lU. The obace manifested. 1. The gentleness and compassion. The snme stroke 
might have slain. The enemy was loved, not hated ; the shamo of Lis defeat partly 
nidden from onlookers. 2. The wonderful change wrought by the Spirit: the per- 
secutor turned into the foremost apostle. 3. The gift of such a man to the Church 
and to the world. Think of what Paul has been to those who came after him. The 
treasures of knowledge, the marvels of personal history. Especially the fact of his 
conversion itself as an evidence of the truth of Christianity, Lord Lyttelton and 
many others convinced by it. Standing miracle which no one can resist except by 
subterfuge. The effect on the Church at the time and on the Jewish world. A great 
conversion is always a great converting power. 

Application. 1. There is a gate of grace close by the gate of sin. Paul was going 
to Damascus to do evil. Jesus met him to turn him on the path of life. 2. The new 
world may be entered blindfold, yet if we do what the Lord tells us to do our eyes will 
b« opened at last. — B. 

Vers. 10 — 19. — Baptism of St. Paul. While the conversion was independently of 
Human agency, the new life awakened was immediately called up by Divine appoint- 
ment into fellowship with the life of the Church. The baptism is here plainly a, 
Divine seal upon the individual, an invitation to the privileges of the Church, a 
consecration to higher life and service. 

L The chosen vessel marked out by the Lord. 1. By the supernatural signs — 
the vision; the communication of Ananias and its results; the opened eyes of J;he 
new convert. 2. The introduction of Saul among the circle of believeis at Damascus. 
They would receive him as not only a converted man, but one of whom the Lord 
predicted such things. 

IL The two brethren united in praise. 1. The joy of Ananias over Saul ; the 
joy of Saul in the salutation of brotherly love. 2. An answer to prayer. Darkness 
turned to light. 3. A release from the captivity of an anxious solitude. Such a 
mindlieeded quickly to be delivered from the danger of too great a reaction. The 
sympathy of an experienced Christian with a young convert is unspeakably precious. 
The introduction to Ananias was an introduction to the Church at Damascus, which, 
while no doubt wholly Jewish, was yet prepared by its training in that city for the 
reception of such a man. They would be less startled then at the announcement that 
he would go to the Gentiles. Thus God works all things according to the good 
pleasure of his will. The converted Saul opens his eyes in Vamascus. 

III. Special consecration of the newly won soul to higher service by the gifts of 
the Holy Ghost. 1. The baptism was an acceptance on haul's part of the Lord's 
commission. He knew that he would have much to do for Christ. He remembered 
the past and desired to make up for it by entire devotedness to him whom he had 
persecuted. 2. Extraordinary conversion is a preparation for extraordinary service. 
The days of darkness are days of wrestling prayer. The foundations of the new life 
were laid deep. Augustine ; Luther; Bunjan; Chalmers. Grace abounding to one who 
has felt himself the chief of sinners becomes abounding strength to do the Lord's work. 
Preachers who have no deep experience to fall back upon cannot speak to the hearts 
of others. 3. The special gifts of the Holy Ghost bestowed through the ministration 
of Ananias. A miraculous power at once descended on Saul, and lie felt himself 
lifted out of the ordinary current of his life and set in a higher level of experience and 
faculty. — B. 

Ver. 12.— A tpirittud wonder. " Behold, he prayeth I " " Behold ! " The Church, 

the world, invited to look on the sight. The enemy, the Pharisee, the warrior, behold 
his hands clasped in prayer, countenance bathed in tears, voice uttering petitions. 
Look into that house of Judas; it might have been filled with mourning; it is ths 
«e«ne of a spiritual victory. -We can look b^ck and look forward ; what he was, what 



302 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. ix. 1—43, 



he will be. Gi-uat mercy in the blinding stroke, shutting him up in his own thoughts. 
His cry was, "What wilt thou have me to do?" Gracious answer to the prayer. 
Contrast between the prayers which Saul of Tarsus had previously offered, and that 
■ worthy prayer of penitence and faith. Every event the summing up of the past and 
prophecy of the future, like a seed which represents former and following: harvests. 
Epochs in £[iiritual history which face both ways. A representative fact ; " Behsld it 1 " 
« he prayeth." 

I. A GKBAT BPIBITDAL CHANGE. 1. In the mind. Thoughts of Jesus. Acceptance 
of Messiahship. Overthrow of legalism. Satisfaction of understanding in the Diviue 
authority manifested. Exaltation of Israel. We must be changed in our thoughts. 
" What think ye of Christ ? " 2. In the heart. The persecutor penetrated with the 
f.eling of Divine love. The perverse will, kicking against cousoience, against the 
reproach whicli like a goad was left by the remembrance of Stephen's death. Personal 
sense of sin the root of a true conversion. " I am the man." 3. In the conduct. 
Obedience to the heavenly vision. Tractable as a child ; led by the Spirit. The 
prayer recounts that his face was turned towards the new way. Christianity not a 
mere change of views or sentiments, but a proclaimed rule of life. Walk in the way, 
Oliedience. 

II. An epoch in SPiRircAL histobt. Little could Saul foresee his own future, yet 
tliat Peniel was the introduction of a prince of God to iiis kingdom. What a step from 
the chamber in Judas's house at Damascus to Rome's imperial palace! 1. Prayer the 
preparation for activity. Jesus in the mountain solitude. All great spiritual heroes 
before they have gone down into the battle-field. 2. Prayer the lifting up of the fallen. 
Peace with God. Reopened eyes. A blotted-out past. The goads of conscience 
exchanged for the light of a new life, the message of a reconciled Father, the commission 
of the heavenly King to his chosen ambassadors. 3. Prayer the pledge of fellowship. 
He prayeth ; go and pray with him. Private prayer and public prayer closely con- 
nected together. Reli;j;ion is not a secret thing. " Behold ! " We should take know- 
ledge of the state of souls around us. Those that feel prompted to secret prayer .should 
welcome the visit of the Christian brother, and the appeal to take the Name of Christ 
upon them, and the place which ia appointed us both in the fellowship and work of the 
(Jhurch. — B. 

Vers. 19 — 22. — The new convert proving his sincerity. L The gbacb of God 
ELEVATING THE NATURAL MAN. Characteristics of Saul appearing in the new phase 
of his life. 1. Intelligence. He is ready to grapple with subtle antagonists. He 
seizes the great central truth of the gospel — the Messiahship of Jesus. He employs his 
vast knowledge of the Old Testament Scriptures. 2. Boldness and energy. Not even 
waiting for opportunity, but making it ; entering the synagogues, producing amazement 
by his vehemence. 3. Self-surrender to Christ, as before consuming zeal for the Law. 
Where he was expected as the persecutor, there he appears as the convert. All aeose 
of shame swallowed up in devotion to Christ. 

II. The true method or spiRiTTJAii advancement. He "increased the more in 
strength." 1. Conviction deepens by speaking. Many lose strength by remaining 
silent. Work for Christ lifts up the heart. The idle ones doubt ; the active ones are 
cheerful. 2. The sense of victory a great help, both to individuals and the Church. 
A bold aggressive policy specially demanded. In proving the doctrine, we must 
advance into the midst of the opponents. Especially should those that can speak of 
sreat grace not be ashamed of Jesus. Personal testimonies have remarkable power. 
Let the world be amazed. 3. The gifts of the Spirit should not be restrained. Some- 
thing for each one to do. If we cannot speak, we can proclaim Christ by the active 
life of benevolence. The disciples at Damascus gained great strength from the example 
of Saul. An earnest Church creates an earnest minister, and an earnest minister &u 
earnest Church. — E. 

Vers. 23, 24. — The newfaifK exposed to trial. All manifeatationg of God's Spiiit 
iivc up the opposition of the evil one. The bold faith drives back tie enemy into 
ambush. Conspiracy against truth always means confession of weakness. The falsa 
ChuKh takes counsel to kill. But God knows how to deliver the godly out of t«mi)tatiuu», 



OH. DL 1—43.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 803 

I. CoNSiDBR TBI EFFECT UPON Saul HIMSELF— on his faith, on his future, on kii 
Bphit, as preparing him for suffering and humiliation for Christ. We never know what 
our religion is to us till we suffer for it and feel what it is in suffering. 

II. CoNSlDEB THE EFFECT ON THE Ghuboh AND THE woBLD. The persecutor perse- 
cuted. The faith of the new convert shown to he strong enough to stand such a trial. 
The seal of the Lord put upon his servant. He was dealt with as many of the prophets. 
We must remember that we " fill up that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ 
for his Body's sake, which is the Church," Be patient — B. 

Vers. 26 — 30.— 2%« Church's seal upon the raeto acquisition. Jerusalem. Its 
infiuence on all the Church. Natural doubt of the change. Difference between the 
character of Saul and that of the leading apostles. Barnabas fitted to be a mediator, 
both by his loving disposition and large-miudedness as a Gypriot. 

I. A simple, candid declabation of facts the true foundation of confidence. 
Spiritual men cannot resist the evidence of the Spirit. 

II. Bbotheblt syupatht may accomplish much in times of perplexity, both in 
helping us to overcome natural feeling and in facilitating pBrsonal intercourse. 

III. The tbue Chbistian laeoubeb will prove his own work. Let the facts speak 
for themselves. Preach boldly, and all must acknowledge the Lord's presence. 

IV. Affliotionb help fellowship and mutual confidence. — B. 

Ver. 31. — Edification. " Then had the Churches rest," etc. (cf. Revised Version). 
The events of the past had been exciting, stimulating activity, spreading the Word. 
But excitement checks growth in character. Wonderful appointment of Providenoik— 
the leader of the persecution becoming; the chief example of Christian activity. 

L The bight use of a time of peace and best. 1. The cultivation of hrotherly 
intercourse. The (Jhurchea (or the Church) throughout Judaea, Samaria, and Galilee, 
in a time of peace, could communicate with the apostles and with each other. 2. The 
exercise of spiritual gifts, knowledge, prophecy, tongues, etc., the study of Scriptures, 
especially with a view to future claims on the Church's activity. 3. The mani- 
festation of steadfast Christian character: "Walking in the fear of the Lord." The 
times of external danger less suited for the observation of individual graces. 

IL The Chueoh of Christ a spibitual edifice. The foundation is Christ. The 
superstructure is: 1. Eminently simple; not a hierarchy, not a complicated system of 
•cclesiastical ofSces, not an imitation of civil society, but the amplification of the germ 
leen in the upper room at Jerusalem. 2. Spiritual. Full of the Holy Ghost ; not 
built up with worldly materials; maintaining discipline, purity, fellowship. 3. 
Multiplied from within, not from without ; by its own graces coming forth on the world ; 
not by mere accession of material resources or combination with worldly elements. 
Take care that our multiplication ia genuine. — B. 

Vers. 32—35. — Wonderful ministry of the Apostle Peter. Introduction to what is 
about to be described — the extension of the apostolic ministry to the Gentiles. " Peter 
went through all quarters," i.e. where there were already Churches of believers. The 
general superintendence of the apostles was not in the way of despotic rule, but 
brotherly guidance. Situation of Lydda on the way to Joppa and so to Caesarea. But 
Peter's intention went no further than Joppa, i.e. not beyond the limits of present 
fellowship. The Holy Ghost leads him further. The healing of the palsied ^neas 
a sign to the neighbourhood. 

L Jesus Chbist thb bubstanoe of the apostle's mintstbt. The servant behind 
the Master. 

II. Thb testimont of man accompanied by the poweb of God. Miracles were 
accessory as proclaiming the kingdom of Christ in distinction from a mere messiige of 
preachers, ^neas the healed man would preach the Word with power. 

IIL The bafid spbbad of the gospel in the nbiohboukhood a witness to thb 
apostolic authokity of Peteb. They " turned to the Lord," but were doubtless 
introduced to the Church through the apostle. The record is preserved that Peter's 
position ma^ be iindetrstood. The^e is ho necessity to accept the Boman CikthoUe view 



304 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Loh. Bt, 1— 43. 

of Peter's supremacy ; but it is necessary to maintain the apostolic guidance and leader- 
ship of tiie early Cliurch, otherwise the New Testament itself loses its authority. — B. 

Vers. 36—43. — The raising of Dorcas. The contrast between the ancient and 
rr,.-)dern world, changing somewhat the relation of almsdoeds to the rest of Christian 
life; but the poor always with us. The special province of woman in the Church. 
The individuality of the charity, not a society, but Dorcas the woman. 

I. Faith working by love. 1. Show that Dorcas was not a mere philanthropic 
worker, but a true believer. 2. The disciples at once sent for Peter, believing that he 
represented a Divine power at work, hoping that something might be accomplished, at 
all events believing that the Spirit of the Lord would cast out the gloom of their sorrow. 
3. It was an atmosphere of true faith in which such a miracle could be wrought. 4. 
The character and work of Dorcas typical of the influence of Christianity in the world ; 
distinguishing it from all other religions ; caring for the weak, lifting up women, sanc- 
tifying sorrow. 

II. The threshold of the Gentilb world. Peter many days at Joppa. A place 
where a vast and mingled ;)opulation. The raising of the dead a great sign both to the 
ivorld and to Peter himself. The loving character of the new doctrine set forth ; a 
special appeal to the heathen. The rapid spread of the gospel an immense encourage- 
ment and elevation of the apostle's mind. All preparing him for the revelation about 
to be made. Peter and Dorcas hand-in-hand at the gate of the Gentiles, full of signi- 
ficance. We shall lay hold of the outlying masses of the population by Dorcas-like 
activity. Women will wonderfully help in the spread of Christianity. The true power 
of Christ is that which ministers. — H, 

Vers. 1 — 5. — T/ie one question of conversion. With this paragraph the landmark 
of the history changes. The conspicuous figure of Paul is seen, and is not again lost to 
sight till a certain Lord's day morning dawns on the Isle Patmos. The differences 
that exist in the life and lot of various men often awaken thought in those who think 
enough, oftener envy or murmur in those who fail to think enough. It is a notable 
token of the character of such envy that, when excited, it is almost invariably in those 
instances which show differences of worldly lot or providential circumstance. But 
amid all the differences that might legitimately surprise, none can for a moment compare 
in intrinsic significance with tliat which gave, still gives, ever will give, undying renown 
to Saul — that he is, and is set forth as the type of conversion. He stands before us as 
remarkable in many ways — as an apostle; as a writer of many Epistles, ever studied, 
never wearied of; as a first missionary to the Gentiles, and most bold preacher of the 
gospel ; as the planter and settler of so many ] primitive Churches far and vride ; ai d as a 
man of such endurance and of so many hairbreadth escapes, that men would tay lor the 
one he had an iron constitution, for the other he wore a charmed life. But he ii most 
known, he is apparently most intended to be known, by just what belongs to his con- 
version. The tale of Saul without his conversion (which he repeats within our knowledge 
twice for himself, how many times more we cannot say) would be an instance, and in 
the intensest form too, of the play of ' Hamlet ' without Hamlet. Would that there 
were those, and many of them, who, coveting " the best gifts," coveted this unworldly 
distinction — the thoroughness, the conspicuousness, the ever-enduring practical results 
of such a conversion I But how unusual is this ambition! The prominence given to 
the conversion of Saul cannot mean less than this, that it is a sample. Yet is it not 
put where it is to stand there in solitary unique grandeur, inapproachable, but that it 
may be approached, studied, reproduced. Let us look into it at the moment of its 
crisis, the moment when such unwonted words started to the lips of Saul, " Lord, what 
wilt thou have me to do ? " 

I. In this question is found the outspoken confession of past dabknkbs, 
IGNOBANCE, MISTAKE. Conversion reveals to a man, not only many other very important 
things, as time goes on, of which he had never dreamt, but it surprisingly persuades 
him of this to begin with — that he does not know something which he thought he did 
know, perhaps thought he knew particularly well. What an astonishing thing to hear 
Saul asking, of all other questions, such a one as this, " Who art thou, Lord f " This 
is a gre^t point to gain. Saul had thought h« did know this, and knew thaX Jesus w^s 



CH. IX. 1-43.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. »06 

not one to be called hia "Lord" or "Lord" at alL 1. He had pnt his own idea and 
his own impresBion on Christ ; but not the right ones, and of the right he was ignorant 
and destitute. How many do this I No name, perhaps, Iwtter linown to them than 
the Name of Jesus, no nature less known or more mistaken. It is the darkness which 
belongs (1) to nature ; (2) to wilful neglect and habit. 2. The very wrongness of those 
ideas and impressions were the measure of the persistency with which they were held 
and the Intemperateness with which they were expressed. Paul afterwards tells us 
this *' I verily thought with myself that I ought to do many things eontrary to the 
Name of Jesus of Nazareth," and he developed his " thought " into the acts of violent 
persecution. But when Saul utters the cry of the text it is because he is just beginning 
the escape — the escape of his life, the escape /or his life — from that long dark mistake, 
that native delusion and ignorance. And afterwards he does not excuse his wrong 
" thought," but condemns himself with deepest contrition as ** the chief of sinners. 
Saul was utterly in the wrong before his conversion ; and is not every one else utterly 
in the wrong until his conversion ? What a solemn responsibility this one thing is in 
life, to make up the mind how to think, to speak, to act towards Christ ! 

IL LJ this question is FOmJB THE EVIDENCE OF THE AWAKENING OF A HSW ABD 

KEEN DESiRB. 1. Past darkuess and mistake (specially in proportion to its moral 
blamableness), not only may incur the deep-settled habit, but they generally do so. 
They strangle, till they kill, anything like a natural healthy desire for real light, real 
knowledge. They seem to be able to go to the length of destroying the power for all 
further use on earth. Then what a power it must be that is needed to speak life, 
strength, use again into that palsy I 2. The one unvarying testimony of Scripture 
witnesses to one great silent Power, alone able " to create a clean heart, and to renem 
a right spirit" within man. It is that great Power which wakens again in the deep 
disused of human nature the keen desire to know, the relish of true knowledge, the 
thirst for light and love and the liberty of Christ. As on that day so eventful Saul 
joarneyed in hot haste over the hot sands to Damascus, but with raging heart hottest 
of all, a new future is opening for him, for a new future is opening in him, ere yet the 
echoes of his brief question die on the air. When in the intolerable blaze of that bright 
light that passed the brilliance of the noonday sun he fell to the earth, and when the 
heavenly voice of the risen One twice summoned him, "calling him by his name," it 
may well be that, if there were anything to waken after too long sleep confessed, it 
now should " hear and live." And it was so. Some power has reached and touched 
the vital germ within, yet unextinct, and it owns to the sudden impulse. There is no 
more genmne evidence of God's mighty Spitl^^ being savingly at work than when every 
hindrance, every excuse, every delay, falls back, and you press on simply to ask for 
Christ. Then human nature's want, sin, misery, are arrived at the door of Heaven's 
infinite wealth, happiness, vrillingness. Keen is the force of human appetite and keener 
the edge of passion ; keen are our worldly desires and keener our mad wrath ; but 
keenest of all and ever conquering u the force of the desire to know Christ, when it is 
the Spirit of God who puts it into the heart and kindles its flame. And does not this 
sample-conversion history guide us most closely to see what are the Spirit's real ways 
with our natures, which n^d. first obstructions removed, and thereupon force and life 
restored ? The treatment shall be such as reveals to him who experiences it at one 
glance the world of darkness and error and sin that has been so long wititin, but 
close upon that tells him of new, strange, and blessed life astir within also. 

III. In this question IB DIBOEBNIBLE the humbled and AIiABUBD self TUBMINa 
BOUND and BECOMINa BEALLT BEADY TO EXEBOISB A BIMFLB, DEEP TBU8T. HoW many 

" hope " they are ready, " think " they are ready, have some sort and some amount of 
" wish " to be ready, but of whom all the truth is, they are not really ready to trust 
Christ I They are not really reaiiy to cast themselves on mercy, nor to acknowledge 
that " this is the work they have to do," namely, " to believe on him whom Qod hath 
sent." They are not yet really ready to believe that salvation is to be had by trust 
and not by any other way ; by trust in Christ, and trust illimitable. Yet is there nc 
surer, no safer article of all our faith. And healthy life and fruit are only where faith 
is rooted in Christ, and root to finest tendril and branch to finest twig do all derive 
their nourishment and their sap from him. 80 Saul's question and the sharp, direct 
tutitbod of it ugnify then, evidently enough, both the hopeful and the trustful state into 
Acna. z 



306 THE ACTS OF TUE APOSTLES. [oh. ix. 1— *3. 

which he had come, or was ready immediately " by the grace of God " to come. Men 
sometimes ask a question indifferent to its answer; they sometimes ask a question for 
the sake of the merest information ; they sometimes ask a question for some critical 
jiurpose or to block a question waiting on themselves ; but this question was none of 
these. This is like a question indeed. Angels listen to it, and listen to its answer too, 
to ring out Heaven's wild " Amen." Jesus listened, and a soul was saved. Travel, then, 
the circle of " the earth and tlic world" and " the heavens," and there is not a question 
we could address to any or all of them which could equal the momentousness of this, 
when, at last turning to Christ, a man asks, " Who art thou, Lord ? " To Jesus Saul 
had borne himself ever so proudly, as many, many do now — their will ungiven to him, 
their trust flitting everywhere else but not settled on him, their love and allegiance 
unyielded to him ; and when Ae, even he, asked, " Who art thou, Lord?" it meant the 
coming down for ever of pride. So the confession which we have seen to hide here, 
and the keen desire wo have seen to bud forth here, led to the utter renunciation of 
self-trust, and to the simplest and most entire trust in Christ. Nose can ask this 
question for you ; you must ask it yourself. None can answer it but Jesus, and he 
will answer it. — B. 

Ver. 5. — The consideratenest of a love already infinite. " It is hard for thee to kick 
against the pricks." [Afcie. — There is ample evidence that Paul himself narrates these 
details of his conversion (ch. xxvi. 14), and that their proper place is not here. They 
will, however, be considered here, and reference made to this place from ch. xxii. 10 ; 
xxvi. 14.] Saul, when now he was called Paul, and after he had been some while in 
the service of Christ, himself tells us what passed in those wonderful moments when 
Christ and the Spirit wrestled with him thrown prostrate to the earth. They are never 
forgotten by him, nor will ho for a moment try to hide those details describing Heaven's 
remonstrances with him where they might most infer humiliation to himself. The 
humiliation of Saul at this time has its counterpart in some sort in the condescending- 
ness of Christ. The risen Lord will still use human language and human figure, even 
to employing a proverb. The proverb needs no explanation, and the interpretation of 
it needs only illustration and enforcement. And it may be led up to profitably by 
inferior applications of it which none will gainsay. How, then, will they be able to 
gainsay that illustration of it and that application of it which Jesus himself thinks it 
worth while to utter from an open window of heaven ? 

I. It is hard to kick against the earthly lot assigned to us. That lot is a 
very complex thing, but it is made up of some very manifest elements. It is a com- 
bination of the date in time's long calendar at which our life is placed, of the bodily 
and the mental endowments which we own, of the circumstances and surroundings 
which we inherit, and of the very dispositions which belonged to those who went before 
us — our parents' and theirs. None can give any account of these elements, but every 
maa has to use them and to seek to use them to the best advantage. Some of them 
no man ever finds fault with or murmurs because of them, or most rarely. Very, very 
few ever complain that they live now, for instance, and did not live long ago— that they 
live now and not rather a century or two hence. They see, they feel that to do this 
were insanity itself: and they do not kick against their lot in this respect. Yet they 
often do in other respects. WuU, this is hard — hard as for the bird of plumage to beat 
against the wires of its cage ; nay, harder far than that. It is hard for loss of time, 
for loss of temper, for loss of strength, for loss of trusting loving obedience, and because 
no good can come of it, no success can be gained in the vain, Utopian, and worse than 
foolish struggle. Let every man struggle in his lot to improve himself, and he will not 
fail to improve it also. But let him never ." kick " against it ; for so, if hurt at fill, he 
hurts himself the more. He " kicks against the pricks." 

II. It is hard to kick against duty. The discipline of duty may often be painful 
at present. There is none, however, more strengthening and health-giving. Many a 
heavy burden becomes lighter if borne manfully. It always becomes more irritating 
in proportion as it is not willingly taken up and borne. And duty knows how to take 
keen revenge. When its obligations are only partially and grudgingly discharged, the 
penalty it assigns is the misery of utter dissatisfaction ; and when they are altogether 
neglected, the penalty is a forfeiture of unknown amount and kind. 



OH. IX. 1-43.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLESk 807 

IIL It n hard to kick aoaikst conboisnok. If the conscience is alive and In full 
life, to sin against it in both disobeying it and also taking the ofTonsiTe, makei iti 
reproach tenfold. If it be already half dead, it hastens its destruction for the present 
life ; and if it be " on the point of death," the death-stroke now falls. 

IV. It is hard to kick against any force that is plainly greater in beqbek 
OB that 18 SUPERIOR IN KIND. If it be Only greater in degree, the peril lies in the 
inevitable morcilessiiess of the opponent. He holds the vain straggler in his grip. 
And if it be a greater force because it is superior in kind, then he who struggles 
struggles " against hia own soul," and drives the deadly disease within. 

V. But all these are faint warnings of what hardness may mean, when a Han's soul 
AND eternal life, Christ AND THE SpiRiT, are ou tlie one side ; and the man himself, 
driven in darkness, error, and recklessness, is on the other. 1. It is hard, intrinsically 
so, hard on every account and in every bearing of it, to go against the interest of your 
ouTi soul. The soul is so inestimably valuable, the injury so inestimably cruel. 
Eternal life is so unboundedly to be desired, the loss of it so unboundedly to be dreaded 
and wailed over. Baul was doing this very thing, beneath all other guise and disguise, 
wheu his career was sto]iped. If he could have had his way, his way shut him right 
out from " life, life eternal," and led him straightcst path to death. And all the while 
he had been resisting light and evidence, miracles and signs and mighty wonders of 
apostles and of Stephen, which had availed with others; he was kicking against the 
highest welfare and interests of himself. Convictions are some of our strongest friends, 
and to kick against them is to inflict some of the keenest of pain and most cruel of 
injury upon self. 2. It is hard, essentially s6, to resist the hand as kind as it is strong, 
as strong as it is kind, of Jesus, "Strong to save" is, indeed, his truest name and 
his best-loved name. But if he is to the last refused in this force, it must be, alas ! he 
is swift to destroy. It is especially hard to resist Jesus : (1) Because he means nothing 
but kindness. (2) Because his meaning makes no mistake, incurs no slip nor charge 
of good intention only, and he does nothing but kindness. (3) Because he first did so 
much and suffered so much for one only purpose — that he might be qualified to show 
that kindness to the full. (4) Because his is the initiative always, in proffering that 
kindness to those whoso initiative always is the front of hostility to himself. (5) 
Because all his kind meaning and his kind doing are in the train of perfect knowledge. 
Ue knows all that we shall want^to bear us through and to bear us up on high, all 
that we shall want to save us from falling through and falling into " the lowest hell." 
What folly we often observe it to be to stand np against or to neglect knowledge 
superior to our own! But ohl but what extent and what kind of superior knowledge 
Ld tJn»1 

• No eye but lili might ever bear 
To gaze all down that drear abym. 
Because noue ever saw so clear 
The shore beyond of endless bliu t " 

■ The giddy waves so restless hurled. 
The vexed pulse of this feverish world, 
He views and counts with steady sight, 
Used to behold the Infinite I " 

(6) Beoaus« Mm refused, him lost, there is no other can plead our cause In our last 
extremity, there is no other Saviour 1 When such a one speaks, touches, urges, then 
the sinner who resists him is one who has no mercy, no mercy at all on himself, " body 
or soul." 3. It is hard, most ruinously so, to resent the persuading address of the 
Spirit. Hardening as it is to neglect the lessons of reason, the persuasions of the aflfection 
of others, the call of duty, the dictates of conscience, and the Word and work and 
impassioned invitation of Jesus, this is the worst of all — to resist and reject the Spirit. 
For he is the life itself. Light and Life are his twofold name. All round creation 
light will be attended ere long with symptoms of life; and nowhere round the whole 
sweep of creation does consent to dwell with perfect darkness. They seem almost 
synonymous, perhaps, but as they are not the same in nature, so neither can they be 
counted the same in grace. And still, therefore, this twofold name speaks something ol 
the quality and pierogativo of the Spirit. Ue briugs Christ himself ati ! his %iv.\ lud 



308 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. n- 1—41 

his cross to the sinner's heart, and if ho is refused, then finally all is refused. Hence 
the awful trembling emphasis which Scripture lays on the pleading exhortation that 
we sliglit not, grieve not, quench not, the Spirit. And hard indeed it must be counted 
to " kick agniubt him." (1) He is so silent a Friend. (2) He is so gentle a Friend. (3) 
He is so close a Friend. (4) He is so sensitive a Friend. (5) He is so condescending a 
Friend — in him it is that God dwells in the humble and contrite sinner's heart (')) 
He is so cheerful and gladdening and sanctifying a Friend. (7) He more than hahus 
our gricfri— he dries them up. He more than doubles our joy — he multiplies it a 
million fuUl, till it is already "full of glory." His symiiiithy is perfect. (8) He is our 
indispensable Friend, if we are to be loosed from sin, to be created anew, to take hold 
of Jesus, and to find salvation. Against the united, loving, determined, and pre- 
determined force of Jesus and the Spirit, 'twas hard indeed for Saul to strive. Love and 
power — amazing grace 1 — have hold upon liim, nor mean to relax their gracious grasp. 
If he struggles, he but prolongs his own fierce inner conflict, multijilies his own sub- 
sequent pangs of memory and conscience. So Saul and every convened man are in a 
hand from which no power shall ever pluck them. — B. 

Ver. 6. — The act of capitulation. TOe moment had. come for Saul. His conversion 
is a fact accoiniilished. He speaks to it by speaking its reliable evidences. Short, 
undoubtedly sharp, and as it now appears decisive, had the conflict within been, but it 
is now over. And the fight over finds out the two results — the soldier unwoundod and 
the victory won. The moment had come also for Jesus. What preparations bis had 
been I What work he had accomplished! What "sufferings" he had endured! What 
shame he had borne 1 And his mighty power and mightier love have now triumphel. 
He too has his victory, has taken, and without blood, his captive, and has bound that 
captive to him, a willing captive for ever and ever. That nionunt of double victory — 
of Jesus over the human heart, and of a man's better over liis worse self by the grace 
of the Spirit — two victoiies, yet but one, is described by one of the Ijest of our lacred 
hymn-writers, and could scarcely be better set forth- - 

" 'Tis done 1 the great traneaction's done I 
I am my Lord's and be ia mine I 
Ue called me and I followed on. 
Glad to confess the voice Divine." 

The question on Saul's lip (in the text) speaks, we say, the sure mouieuc of hia con- 
version. Mucli may prepare the way fur tliat moment — thought and feeling, honest 
doubt and dishonest, fear and shame and strife, convictions stifled, purposes dislionoured, 
resolutions broken, and perversest kicking against the pricks. But these are but the 
always mournful, often shameful, last show of sword-play of the wicked one, who knows 
no pity for the subject he is so soon to lose, and when he must leave his old abode would 
then most discredit it. And therefore in this question, may we not find in simplest, 
clearest outline, the suggestions of what are the real facts inrolved in conversion ? 
They are — 

I. The distinct besigninq or trust in skijp. That surrender will mean the 
surrender of: 1. Self-guidance. 2. Much more of self-will, the determination that selt 
shall rule and shape alL 3. The worki of self. 4. The loved ends that have only self 
or self supremely in view. 5. Must of all, the last remnant of an idea that self can 
procure its own salvation. For here ia a man who possibly less leaned on fellow- 
creature than any other man who ever lived. But let him oonie to know Jesus, and his 
first question thereupon is the childlike, leaning, humble question, " Lord, what wilt 
thou have me to do?" 

II. The takinq uf akd flaih profission of unditided alleoianok to thk Lobd 
Jesus Cubist. The converted is not all at sea. That is what he once was, but not 
what he is now. He has not to seek and calculate between different and competing 
matters. That was once large part of his deep-seated unease and dissatisfaction, when 
"other lords many had dominion over him." But now he knows to whom his 
undivided allegiance belongs. That undivided allegiance takes him to Jesus Chri.-<t 
as: 1. Unrivalled and undisputed Teacher. Ho sees, knows, fools, that Jesus has^won 
thi« place all his own— the one grand Bevealer of the deepest things of the Spirit la 



ML nt 1—43.] THE ACTS Of TSB APOSTLES. tOS 

vum md of the state of man and of the future for man. And all other knowledge he 
feels to he necessarily suhordinate to this. 2. Perfect Example. No sculptured model 
■0 perfect for example as the delineated character, the written life of Jesus, the impress 
that is made on the attentive observer of his work and word and manner. Here is the 
iculptor seen, indeed, and his sculpture worth the studying. And Christ's true con- 
vert will be this kind of true student of him also. He will well know the place at his 
feet, and his own right attitude as he sits there watching. 3. Master and Lord. He 
will feel that his strength and devotion belong to him. " What has he done for me f 
a/ad what for him shM J not dot" 4. One alone Saviottr. Whatever his trust or 
hope for his own future life and for his soul may once have been, he finds all now in 
" Jesus only." And if he were conscious of, careful for none at all before, now how 
earnestly he clings to Jesus, because of this — " Saviour " his dearest name, " mighty 
to save " his dearest attraotiun I Oh, with what passionate adoration of gratitude and 
of love did Paul sing, and since him unnumbered millions of others have sung it, " My 
dear Redeemer and my Lord" I Thus Saul, in his first allegiance to Jesus, calls him 
" Lord," and asks him nothing else but as to what are his instructions : " What wilt 
thou have me to do? " 

IIL Tub altbrbd practical wfb. Conversion means a changed heart, cbsnged 
thoughts, changed feeling, a changed air and light. But it means nothing if it do not 
mean also a genuinely, pi-actically changed career. No sublime enjoyment, no rich 
experienoe, no flight of sanctified imagination, no foretaste in saintly, heavenly com- 
muningfl with unseen realities, of "the joys" that are to come, shall satisfy Jesus, 
nor can satisfy Scripture's conception and representation of the convert of Christ. His 
life must be " Christ ; " and lie must await death to know his full " gain." His life 
must be • witness to Christ, albeit it be first strong witness against his old past self, 
and ever a quiet rebuke of those who live not after the same rule. 'J'he amazement 
and the solemn dread of those minutes of blindness and strongest excitement, when 
Saul lay on the earth, and was already summoned as it were to the bar of his Maker, did 
not prevent him, as a true convert and as type of a true convert, asking for his practical 
work. " Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ? " In our ignorance, perh aps we should, 
d priori, have thought a more reasonable question, a more modest question, a more 
reverent question, might have been, " Lord, where wilt thou have me to go "' — go hide 
myself? " Where wilt thou have me go," that I may shed bitter tears and do penance 
for the past. " Where wilt thou have me go," that I may pass through the fires of 
some purgatory, and he proved by some solemn ordeal ? But no, the qiie.stion cannot 
be mistaken, misreported, or altered. It is, " What wilt thou have me to do ? " And 
Jesufl tells him, and does n.ot say now, " This is the work of God, that you believe on 
me." He tells him, and it proves very shortly, how really he had " to (lo," to " spend 
and be spent," " to labour more abundantly than they all," and to prove bis conversion 
by his changed life and its fruits. For vain, unspeakably vain, the profession of a 
changed heart and the hopes of Christ and of heaven, without the proof that lies in the 
changed life. — B. 

Ver. 9^-"The sequestrated mul. In the wonders of the conversion of Sanl ire ar« 
greatly impressed with the close regard paid to the needs of human nature. It is not 
all miracle, nor must it be so viewed. Amazing is the grace of what cannot be wn- 
Btrued as anything less than superhuman intervention. An adoring surprise is cer- 
tainly not diminished when we notice how that intervention condescends so soon, so 
readilyi to make itself at home with the harmonies of human nature. It does not affect 
to disdain them, nor does it dispense with them, because of the majesty of Its own 
omnipotence, but rather emphatically "condescends to the low estate of men." For the 
experienoe of intense excitement through which Saul had just passed is sure, upon the 
reckonings of human nature by itself, to be decisive of his future. If it do not make 
him, it will most surely undo him for ever. He may " be exalted above measure " or 
ho may be depressed "above measure." Either of these two extremes is a constart 
result in human life of whatever might come nearest to such excitement and impres- 
sion as those here described. In the presence of a position so critical, it does not follow 
that nature is entirely helpless nor that miracles must be implored. In succeeding 
itegfeeg repose, silence, even darkness will be prescribed, and we shall be told unerringly 



810 THE ACTS OP TflE APOSTLESl IpK. tx. 1—48 

that life or death Is the alternative Issue of attenrling upon such prescription or neg- 
lecting it. And this is a principle abserved in the marvels of the conversion of Saul. 
That which may be viewed as proif of intervention supeihumaa does its short, sharp 
work, to he followed by the immediate resumption of methods which human wisdom 
and human experience would dictate. The experience of Saul here narrated may h» 
regarded as it was — 

L The conseqcencb of deep mental, bpibitual impression. No douht the exceed- 
ing brightness of the " light that shined about him from heaven" may be credited with 
a natural power to infer the- blinding of his eyes. But the same light " fell round 
about them that journeyed with " Saul, and they saw that light (see the accounts in 
ch. xxii., xxvi.), and yet it had no blinding effect upon them — at all events no effect i 
the kind lasting three days. In fact, for Saul it was but the signal of the light that 
flashed upon the inner eye that belonged to him. But it is of God, and it is not below 
the Spirit of God to assert and to prove the completest mastery over man — body, soul, 
and spirit. And the continued loss of sight and the continuous fast are justly regarded 
as the result of the deep mental, spiritual impression now made on Saul. That impres- 
sion was of the nature of : 1. The shock of inordinate surprise. Not an idea, not a fear, 
not the vaguest surmise had come near the strong horseman of such an ariesting check. 
2. The shock of overmatched force. The weak and tender and gentle will yield and 
bend. It is a matter of breaking to others, and if the heart break not, who can imagine 
the strain ? 2%at heart will be rocked to its foundation. 3. The shock of a flood of mental 
conviction, and so far forth illumination, breaking in upon an estranged nature and 
terrifying by the dark shadows it casts proportioued to its own lustre. 4. The shock 
of the rapid rising of the tides of penitential grief, and grief that energetically stirs up 
repentance. 6. The shock of compunction for ingratitude and all the past hostility of 
a hating heart when mercy began to dawn and love began to be born. 6. The shock 
of one mere glimpse through the merest chink of the sepulchral soul into the outer and 
upper and most inspiring light. 7. The shook of a real change. What busy but 
amazed, aching, anguished tumult within that soul ! And who shall stay bodily sense 
and bodily appetite from resigning and retreating from that scene and confessing them- 
selves merely the subordinate and temporary ? 

II. The gbaoioub provision or Divine thought fob tbt deeper impression and 
FOB LASTING BBSULT. Very stroug impressions, if made very rapidly, may very rapidly 
pass away. Explain it as we may or leave it unexplained, the fact is too well ascer- 
tained. How very vivid sometimes the dream that visits us ! how exceedingly difficult 
to throw it off for the first minutes of waking I but after those few first minutes are 
past, no mist climbed the mountain-side, nor morning cloud the heaven, quicker to 
vanish than that dream and its impression vanish. And so it is evident that every- 
thing is not necessarily gained or surely gained when vivid effects, ay, effects howso- 
ever vivid, are gained. .1 Vivid impression needs the staying effect of reflection. 2. 
Vivid impressions which are also of the most startling personal character need the con- 
ciliating influences of some calm familiarity with them. They must be faced, must be 
looked at so that they may be recognized again, must be granted the opportunity of 
revealing their lovely aspects as well as their bright or powerful aspects. 3. The vivid 
impressions that belong to a heart touched by the Spirit of God particularly demand to 
dwell a while with that Spirit, and dwell as though quite ahne with him, (1) that he 
may be honoured ; (2) that, he may work his work amid the absorbed and the undivided, 
undistracted attention of that human heart. In what ineffable communion with the 
Father supreme, with the Saviour and Mediator Jesus, and with eternal realities, will 
the Spirit then engage the yielding heart ! It is not that the Spirit cannot work apace, 
but, as in everything else, it is that man cannot — he is slow, slow indeed, asjcompared with 
that Spirit's swift power. 4. Strong convictions do none the less need the confirming 
effect of deliberate resolution, of some contributing and very conscious effort on our own 
side. 5. The most right resolutions need that we summon our whole self, after care- 
fully " counting the cost," to prove moral courage and spiritual vigour by taking some 
practical step. It is Jesus himself who lays the stress on " counting the cost," for those 
who would be his followers, do his work, " enl^r the kingdom of God." And to changed 
objects of life, methods of life, and society in life, such as those to which Saul — ay, to 
which any true convert — is called, needs it not the entrance by unmistakable, confessed 



OH. nc 1—43.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 811 

ielf-renunciation ? Of the honesty and thoroughness of such' self-renunoiation It is at 
all events no feeble symbol when sense and appetite resign their grip, generally ao 
tyrannicaL And now in no parable, but in most literal truth, Saul is befriended by 
Divine forethought and care. The strong man is taken out of his own keeping. When 
he was his old self, he had indeed " girded himself and walked whither he would ; " but 
now he is too glad to " stretch forth his hand, and that another should gird him " and 
lead him whither ho had never, never thought of going. It was the completing so far 
of God's great love to him, and Jesus' great compassion toward him. He is delivered, 
fairly delivered from himself for three days. He sees not, eats not, drinks not. Neither 
does he go out to this present world by the beautiful gate of the eye, nor does the support 
of the outer world come so much as to his body. He is sequestered with the Spirit, \yho 
reveals to him the errors of the past and something of the destiny of the future; who 
makes him to know Jesus and himself — the fulness and grace of the one, the poverty and 
insufficiency of the other. The plain facts for Snul again and again speak with lessons 
most needed for us and for all time. They suggest to us what meditation we need, 
what devotion, what divorce from sight and from appetite which may so seduce the 
soul, what grateful and close communion with God, obedience to the Spirit, and trust 
in the Saviour, and how the safest augury for the future is that we do break with 
the past. Wonderful and fascinating to imagination Saul's " retreat " of three days. 
To the things that then transpired, however, we need not be and ought not to be entire 
strangers. We may learn what Saul learned if we will go where he learned them, and 
may ere long gay for ourselves— 

" There if thy Spirit touch the sonl - 

And giace her mean abode, 
Oh, with what peace and joy and love 
She communes with her God I" 

B. 

Ver. 11. — The siqht tliat Jesus notei. These words, spoken by Jesus himself from 
heaven to one disciple of his and about another, the very yoiiugcst of all, single out 
a fact, and point to it as a sight worthy to be observed. The fact is in itself a very 
simple one, in the judgment of many a very ordinary one, in the unheeding judgment 
of most men an exceedingly uninteresting and unimportant one. Nor would it be easy 
to find a more clearly outlined illustration of the different estimate of earth and heaven, 
of Jesus and of erring man, than that found here. Jesus points to the sight of a man 
on his knees as one worthy to be beheld — to the fact of a man praying as one to engage 
attention, deep regard, and practically altered conduct on the part of his fellow-men. 
This is the simplest statement of the history that is before us. And it may be objected 
that, thout^h it be a true statement so far, it is true only in this instance, or, if not only, 
yet that it is to such a degree exceptionally true here, that it may not be drawn into a 
precedent. But the burden of proof of such a position will fall upon those who shall 
hesitate to admit that one and the same essential element of note worthiness attaches 
to the same situation, the same spectacle, wherever it presents itself. This, then, which 
was a spectacle to the Lord Jesus, and of which he speaks to his disciples in that very 
light, may well interest the gaze and devout thought of all generations — " Behold, ha 
prayeth 1 " 

L Let us consider, first, what different descriptions may be ^ven in answer to the 
question, " What is it to prat ? " since Jesus gives such prominence to the act. 1. It is 
the first sign of some great change. It betrays something novel that has been at work, 
unseen but not unfelt. It portends much to come. 2. It is itself the first movement 
of spiritual life, the new-born infant's trial of the spirituallungs, and first lifting of them 
up and first breathing of spiritual air, the first voice of the " babe in Christ." 3. Its 
form may be a single word, a simplest sentence ; one gentlest sigh may bear it up 
all the way to heaven, one passionate cry may speed it up; one upward glance ot 
the eye may reveal it to that benignant eye which is ever bended down in com- 
passion on us ; one big solitary tear, that drops into the earth and can no more be 
gathered up, will be "counted" for it by him who doth "count all our tears. '" 
4. The time it takes may be a moment, the twinkling of an eye, or it may be the 
exercise of agonized hours. 



112 THB ACTS OF THE APOSTLTIS. [oh. ix. 1—431 

IL We may ask, "Who ib thh mating man? and what his state?" The man 
who prays is the man who has come into a certain new state towards God-^ state 
thmt makes him desire also to come in a very new attitude into his presence. 1. It is 
the state of one who has discovered a need of a kind, a depth, an amount, and »n 
urgency ha had never dreamt of hefore. 2. It is the state of one who has become 
ready and anxious to make a thorough confession. Pride has gone. Self-satiBfactiou 
has gone. Tnut in the world's short resources has gone. Blindedness and delusion 
are dissipated. 8. It Is the state of one who has been shaken by conviction of sin. 
The first prayer is not for mercies temporal, but for mercy— the mercy that a creature 
wants who has been growing up a long time, but not growing up in either perfect or 
even conscious relations with his Creator-Father. Conviction is the grandest inter- 
preting exposition of the prophet's dictum, "Be sure your sin will find you out" 
(Numb, xxxii. 23). 4. It is the state of one who, let him be what he may, let him 
have been, have done, what he may, toward God, or toward man, or toward his own 
heart and conscience, has been visited by some glimmering ray of light, and has felt 
the warmth of some feeble flame of hope. Beal prayer and absolute despair, real 
prayer and utter darkness, never go tognther. So prayer is the pulie of vitality. It* 
feeblest expression is the radiation of the spark of God's light, life, love, not extinct. 
6. It is the case of one long sore sick, for whom the crisis of fatal danger is past, the 
disease stayed, and on whom, with more than the fondest solicitude of the tenderest 
parent, the Lord Jesus looks down and vouchsafes to point out the blessed symptoms, 
saying, " Behold, he prayeth 1 " 

III. Let us consider who it ib that is here spoken of as pbatiko. He is a 
Jew, well taught, of pious forefathers, of strict Pharisee school, full of earnestness, free 
from immorality, given to striving for superiority and profiting above his equals, and 
given to saying prayers. 8o that, whatever a certain kind of liglit and moral chaiacter 
and virtue might avail, he had the benefit of them. On the other hand, " the light 
that was in him was darkness ; " his zeal was bigotry ; his high character was to the 
scale of human measurement only ; he had never touched deep ground ; he was a sinner 
and didn't know it ; he persecuted " saints " and didn't know it ; he kept the raiment, 
and consented to the stoning, of them that stoned Stephen, and didn't know what he 
was doing or what they were doing, — till now, in the full career of a very successful 
" breathing out of tlireateniugs and slaughters," he is flung to the ground, and becomes 
as one stunned. Yet spoken to, he knows the Lord, and in a moment owns his rightful 
Master by word. The prayers of the crucified Jesus, and of the first martyr Stephen — 
"Lord, lay not this sin to their charge;" "Father, torglve them; tor they Know 
not what they do" — are answered; and he who was just now breathing out those 
threatenings and slaughters, now breathes the deep, earnest, pleading accents ol 
prayer. And there is no mistake, deception, nor unconscious delusion ; for he who 
knew all says, and hushes every doubt and objection while he says it, " Behold, 
he prayeth 1 " 

IV. Let us notice, lastly, why Jebus sats, " Behold 1 " 1. To the risen Jesus, at 
all events, no real surprise could be possible. Only a God's wonder — whatever that 
may be — might be understood here, if the charmed words had been words of 
soliloquy. But they are not words of soliloquy. They are condescendingly spoken 
in order to diswrm the very faithlessness of human distrust, which, nevertheless, 
insisted on expressing itself. Jesus calls attention to what may teach us a large 
lesson of liberality, of charity, but above all of trust in the force victorious and 
" more than conquering " of his gospel and his Name, 3. Jesus calls attention to 
what we may think little of, and think amiss therein. Many are the things we think 
little of — little sins, to wit— of which he thinks much, to bate them. Many are the 
things we think little of— little kindnesses, little cups of cold water, to wit — of which 
he thinks much, to love them. And much — oh, how much ! — ^will waken our 
astonished attention one day, soon to come, that moves us with not a ripple of either 
surprise or interest now. Still, he that hath ears to hear may hear now that heavenly 
"Behold!" It speaks in most striking contrast to the "Lol here," and "Lo 
there," of earth and men. 3. Jesus says, "Behold 1 " because be would call atten- 
tion to. a change that was a pattern miracle of his power and grace. He calls at- 
tention to it, not as unique, but as a model instance. Such a character revolu'ion- 
iied Such a life and force of life, and combined elements of life, and charactw- 



to. DC. 1^3.] THE ACTS OF THB APOSTLES, 313 

Utics not all nnmingled bad, changed I What, then, shall not Christ and the 
Spirit be able to do I Eighteen centuries have justified that " Behold I " in both these 
aspects — 88 pointing out a model conversion in Saul's conversion, and as vindicat- 
ing it as but the first of an amazing and glorious series. 4. Jesus, in saying " Behold I" 
teaches us where to look, and so also where not to look, in ourselves ror evidence 
of real change. All objection, all inquisition, all human dogma, all ecclesiastical 
domination and forging of creed and formula and fetters, — perish they all before 
the decisive "Behold I" of Jesus — "Behold, ho prayethl" Before this sight 
buniau presumption may well be silenced, ai before it "ijatan trembles," In con- 
clusion, still, alas 1 for once that the gracious finger points while the gracious Hp saya, 
" Behold, he prayeth I " how often must it be said, " J3ehold, he prayeth not " I 'i hough 
there be every reason to pray, every encouragement to pray, how many pray not 1 
Yet no monarch on the most powerful and majestic throne, and wielding the mightiest 
sway, is in very deed to compare for one moment with the man whuse attitude is on 
his knees before God. Who can describe the new alacrity with which in due time 
that man rsgaina his feet ? Though Saul had laboured aovrndantly under the wrong 
master, after that praying he " laboured more abtmdantly, yet not ne, but— the grace 
of God that was in him," and in him through that praying. — B, 

Ver, 15. — TTie chokt of per/eet forgivingnesB. Ananias demurs to the errand assigned. 
It was not altogether unnatural that be should do so. His hesitation, however, does 
aot resemble that of Moses. And, in expressing the grounds of it, he was only 
occupying by anticipation the position which it would become necessary to occupy 
wheu any and ail actual interposition of the great Head of the Church should be 
withdrawn. Then, as it is to this day, it became among the most critical cares and 
the most solemn responsihilities of the Church and of its leaders, its "pastors and 
elders," to consider what prudence may permit, and act as much with the wisdom of 
the serpent as with the innocuousness of the dove. The hesitation of Ananias does 
nut appear to be reproved, but is plainly overruled ; and we are therein reminded still 
how — 

I. An ill REPUTATION AKONO MEN WILt NOT DETER THE CHOICE OF JeBUB, The 

" things that are highly esteemed among men " are not only sometimes " held in 
abomination in the sight of God," but the things that are with justice lightly " esteemed 
among men" are taken up sometimes by God, that he may in them magnify his 
transforming power. 1. lieputation is an uncertain guide. It is even particularly 
so, perhaps it may be said, when it is a good reputation ; for how " many that are first 
shall be last"! 2. The tyranny of reputatiiyn is not for a moment recognized by Jesus. 
As peremptorily as be would bid the worst sinner depart from the error of his way, as 
lovingly as he would persuade the most ditreputable to " sin no more," so graciously 
does he receive such also ; and let the censorious world say what it will, he discoun- 
tenances the censoriousness by word, and here emphatically discountenances by deed, 
what might contain the germ of the principle. It is a thing to be much thought upon 
by the true disciples of Christ. The world and • wyrldly Ohurch aggravate the 
difficulty of the returning sinner. This is the opposite of the way of Jesus. Jesus 
helps a man to recover his character ; he helps his struggles while he does so ; he shows 
him sympathy, and," though he fall" many a time in the struggle, graciously watches 
him and upholds him again and again that he be not " utterly cast down." It is a 
proverb that the world keeps the man down who is down. And when the Ohurch 
approaches anything of the like kind, it means to say that it is only in name the 
Church, and is drained miserably dry of the Spirit. 

U. The unlikeuebt antecedents do not ibiohtbr Jesus raoM hib choice. 
Ananias did not misstate anything, did not exaggerate the case against Saul, was not 
overridden by strange tales untrue. But he did fear ; he had a nurvous apprehension ; 
he had not up to that moment learned, what probably he did at that moment learn 
and from that moment never forgot, the proud reach of the power of Christ. How 
long it is before any of us attain to the right conception of Jesus and his heart and 
his hand I We still think him such as ourself, only something greater, greatly greater ■ 
something better, and very much hotter. We need to see that he is divinely greater] 
iivindy better, and all that divine means. 1. The antecedents of a man's life may 
largely betoken its r«al lent. 2. They will largely have uiad« his habit*, ft, Thav 



3U THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [au.i^l—ia 

will almost inevitaWy colour all lils future way of viewing things. But to these three 
things the answer for Jesus is that he, ay, he alone, can reverst bent, can undo 
hahit, and can give to see light in God's light (Ps. xxxvi. 9). 

IIL None op that kesentmbnt that borrows bo much vitalitt from lively 
MEMORT OP PAST INJURY BELONGS TO Jesus. Genuinely to forgive is acknowledged 
to ho one of the highest moral achievements of human nature. Nevertheless, tliera 
are ascending degrees even to this virtue; and when some men are satisfied that they 
have done their most and their hest, all that nature admits of or that God demands, 
it must he allowed that these men are hut beginning their higher flight. To forijiva 
the bitterest opponent In these senses — that you love him again or for the first time, 
as the case may he ; that you sympathize with him and accept his sympathy ; work 
with him and accept his work and devotion — nay, select him as your chief man, and 
set him forth and forward as your champion; — is a type of forgiveness rarely reproduced. 
With sublimity of ease Jesus does all this now. Not Peter, not John, not James, but 
this wild enemy, Saul, is the man he called and honoured " to bear his Name before 
the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel." His sins shall not be rememhered 
against him for ever. They are, then, really blotted out. He is not forgiven, but put 
rather low down ; forgiven, but kept rather down, lest he should not he fit to be quite 
trusted ; forgiven, but in deepest truth left still a marked man. No ; if he is marked 
it is for honour, for renown, for grace, and for the unfading crown of glory. In sight 
of this proof of the perfection of forgiveness that is with Jesus, w« may well sing— • 

"Mighty Lord, so high above ns. 

Loving Bri thcr, all our own. 
Who win help us, who will love us, 

Like to thee, who all hast known? 
■Who so gentle to the sinners 

As the soul that never fell? 
Who so strong to make us winners 

Of the height he won so well ?" 

IV. In thb CHOiuB OP Jestjs we stand in the presence op one or the 

DLTIMATB MYSTERIES OF HUMAN EXISTENCE AND HUMAN RELATION TO GOD. When 

we ponder this subject, if we side with the infidel, we ridicule and at the same time 
we are putting ourselves nowhere. If we side with the reverent, we are in the depths 
too deep for us. The choosing of Jesus is mystery, unfathomable mystery for us. 
1. It is mystery because he gives no account of it nor will be arraigned nor questioned 
concerning it. 2. It is mystery, because not all our reason, nor all our reverent study 
of the oracles, nor all our diligent search of history, nor all our scrutiny of human will 
and character, can trace the law of that choosing. It baflles us in reason and in fact. 
Its startling anomalies presented to our view in closest juxtaposition, its sudden 
appea-aace in the most unexpected place, and its equally conspicuous and impressive 
absence, speak the mystery of sovereignty. 3. It is mystery in the wonders which it 
reveals of surpassing condescension, grace, and clinging love. While reason still stands 
afar off in cold repulsion and haughty distance, hearts draw near. And for its last 
achievement it works out this harmony for all those, without one exception, who have 
hecome the ohjects of it ; they adore the free grace that has drawn and brought them ; 
they condemn in the same breath the perverseness and folly and guilt in themselves, 
which left them so long outside. — B. 

Ver. 16. — Jesus' far-seeing compassion appearing in an unexpected way. That Saul, 
when now called Paul, did indeed suffer many and great things for Jesus' "Name's 
sake," is most true. He knew it when he sufl'ered them ; he knew it also by anticipa- 
tion (oh. XX. 23; xi. 11) — a kind of knowledge that to many would be of the most 
harassing and distressing consequence ; and he knew it as he looked hack (2 Cor. xi. 
23—31; 
it, hut, 

which I . 

come to pass. But it is another question why he is forewarned of it, and why Jesui 
assures Ananias that he shall be so forewarned. Nor can it escape our notice that 




CH. IX. 1—43.1 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 815 

much significance is intended to lie in the statement as here introduced. Let iu 
consider this announcement of Jesus— 

L In its application to Ananias. It is intended to remove the objection of 
Ananias, by suggestiag to him : 1. That Christ did not overlook, had not overloolted, 
the specialty of the cass. 2. That Christ would be himself answerable for the 
education of Saul for his worlc, failing the antecedents that Ananias supposed would 
have been of more auspicious promise. 3. That that education would not fail to be 
what, in its character and the severity of its discipline, would both (1) attest the 
reality of the change passed upon Saul and (2) confirm and deepen that change. 
4. Possibly Christ may, in the mode of his reply, desire also very condescendingly to 
still any smallest germ of (1) personal envy or (2) forwardness to suspicion lurking in 
the character of Ananias. It is very certain that the mischief of these two very things, 
unacknowledged and covered over with finer words, has amounted to a total result of 
very great disaster during the career of the Church, ever since the personal intervention 
of Jesus has been absent. Uow often did Jesus in the days of his flesh stand by the 
sorry sinner round whom surged the murmur of the envious multitude! But the 
half-stifled and cautious envy and suspicion of the wary individual has often proved 
itself a more ciuol enemy to souls, and must be a more offensive obstacle, in the eye* 
of Jesus, to his work making way in some poor guilty but struggling souL Certain 
it is that— 

' Since onr dear Lord in bliss reposed. 
High above mortal ken," 

his Church has, times without number, made to pass through severest quarantine heart- 
broken volunteert for his service. Tiie effects have been all deteriorating and disastrous. 
They would have been ruinous save for the still steady, if invisible, rule and headship 
of Jesus Christ. The Church (whether only so named or so in deed and in truth), 
mistaking duty and right, has failed in such cases to note sufficiently the Divine 
treatment as here illustrated in the three days' blindness and- fasting of Saul, succeeded 
by the confidence and trust of the great Master, given immediately in the kindliest 
and most unreserved manner. 

II. In its application to SacIi himsblp. Jesus bids Ananias lose no time, but 
" go " at once to bear to Saul the message, so far as the way could be prepared for it by 
human lips; and herein suggests to us to notice certain relations of this language to 
Saul. 1. Christ, having chosen his servant, apprises him both faithfully and early of 
what awaits him. No false, nor tempting, nor too favourable gloss is put by him on 
his own " most worthy " service. 2. He apprises him also of what is expected of him. 
If Jesus show to any one, whether in the ways of apostolic time or in the ways of time 
present, " how great things he shall suffer for his Name's sake," " how great things " 
life and circumstance and earthly lot are likely to make him " suffer," " how great 
things " his divinest directest call sliall impose upon him to " suffer," — it must be that he 
is addressing a call to him that shall invoke all his heroism. It is very much as though 
the condescending Jesus did here introduce the Christian hero into the possible ranks 
of his own blessed Church. All must come of him, all does surely come of him ; but if 
it be possible, something shall be credited to the range of human virtue. MKcifestly 
Saul was a good instance by which to set forth this. He had been conspicuous j he had 
been a hero olsome sort ; he had shown lavish energy, which shall no longer be sacrificed 
to lavish waste. Thus from the first Jesus gives a tone to certain of his servants — those, 
to wit, who are of the sort to answer to it readily and really. Life and labour and the 
success of real usefulness do often largely own to original impulse and early impression. 
The high-pitched thought and purpose and feeling of youth and of first effort are rarely 
lost, when they are genuine to begin with. They tell and count and swell to the echo 
as year and period pass by. Nor can it be denied that many a true Christian life falls 
under the condemnation of being a feeble and an unfruitful life, because it was not at 
toe ^rst appealed to with ^otoer. It never got the idea of trenchancy. And indecisicai 
— its watchword — was snare and delusion to it. 3. He apprises him of what may be cal- 
culated upon, as acting like a certain and safe check to both pride or vanity and splf-con- 
fidence. How many have fallen upon the very threshold of what would have been a 
great spiritual career through one or both of these things 1 And the pride ecclesiastical 



m THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. toH.DLi— 4l 

and the .;elf-confideoce that " lords it oyer the faith " of others are just two of the tnost 
pronounced pestilences of human nature. From the fright and the fire and the faintness 
of the " three days " which Saul had now known, it were wdl that be should not he 
brought out at once to the light and " the cheerful sun " and the splendid hopoH and 
prospeots of a great career. It is better that an annealing interval find place. It is 
safer that his thought and heart find tonic in a Saviour's call and in a Master's demand 
' — that he familiarize himself with the outlook of suflfering, and great suffering. 4. 
Though lastly, yet most of all, Jesus will connect everything in Saul's thought now 
with himulf. How great, how true, how kind waa this philosophy 1 Saul has sinneil 
no end against Christ, and he shall suffer no end for " his Name's sake." What healing 
for Saul's soul that foretelling announcement I Saul has persecuted fiercely those who 
were dear to Christ unspeakably, and he shall bear the brunt of fiercest persecution for 
the sake of Christ and in the service of his loved ones. It is the only compensation 
for his self-respect, it is some anodyne for his inward smart, and, though an undiscein- 
lag world would never have thought it, it is the supreme mark of Christ's sweet for- 
givingness, of his delicate oonsideratenesi, of his tenderest sympathy. "I will show 
him how great things he must," etc.— B. 

Vera. 17— '19.— 'J parable in things ^ritiial. We entertain no doubt that we have 

■ here a simplest history of what actually occurred. We doubt no less that the oliiefeat 

interest and significance of the record lie in the spiritual history that underlies it. 

Nay, more, though we read facts of outer life, they do nothing more than outline those 

of an inner life, which Jesus notices, loves, helps, and even makes. Notice — 

1. Ths ohahob that passes on Saul. He receives his sight. For three days he 
had been blind in a bodily sunse, but for probably three and thirty years he had been 
blind in the other sense. And this is just what he had been. He had not been vicious, 
immoral, sottish, nor au infidel, nor irreverent toward all religious triitli and feeling. 
But he had been blind — blind to the very type of human nature. And his blindness 
is but the type of that of every one of vs, till he " receives his sight from the Lord 
Jesus." 

U. Thb human hand and voice bt aid or which the blessino is conveyed. If 
Jesus had been in a literal sense upon the earth, he would have spoken to tSaul, he 
would have laid his own hands upon him. The actual ministry,. the visible ministry, 
is passed, however, now into human agency. This was a plain-spoken statement of it, 
How great the honour laid on men ! and how ftreat their responsibility by this devolution 
of the highest and holiest functions ! How full of solemn and inspiring suggeslion, too 
little traced out in devout thought by US' — that the actual work which for a space of 
time Jesus' own voice and hand had attended tOj are now to be attended to by man, 
fellow-man. 1. That work, that ministry of service to the soul of a fellow-creature, 
finds out very soon and very surely all that is of the nature of sympathy. It tries 
sympathy, it wakes it, it increases it. The fearful Ananias and distrustful of one honr 
ago finds, and no doubt honestly, the word " brother " now on his lip — " Brother Saul." 
2. Jesus himself became genuinely a Brother to those he came to save, not by virtue of 
his Divine power and practical pity only. That his might be the very type of brother- 
liness, he took our nature on him, and made himself Brother (Heb. ii. 11, 17), And 
when he ascended, his representatives are to be found in those who were men alone. 
That what might seem the unnecessary thing is here done, in a man being sent with 
the mere message of regiven sight, and the mere formality of " laying on hands " where 
no virtue could pass, must mean all the more to set honour on the spiritual work which 
one man should do lor others. 

III. The one Divine source from which, nevertheless, all saving help came. 
1. Jesus sends Ananias. He has directed him, and wheie necessary corrected him also. 
He has fixed the time, and liastens the lingering step of Ananias. 2. Jesus, who 
" began the good work," perfects it. The Jesus who met Saul in the way and 
peiemptorily reined up his career is the Jesus who gives him now light and liberty and 
his commission. The miracle is the miracle of Jesus ; his the power, the will, the love, 
the sovereign grace. Nor can this be too well remembered by the servants of Christ, 
iu all they do now toward the salvation of a fellow-man. Those who will most readily 
adnut Uiat the touch of their hand can do nothing to work sight for the blind, ar« 



01LIX.1— 43.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. »17 

not always quite so clear that their voice, their wisdom, their perauasion, their m»*,tal 
Influence on a fellow-tMing'a mental state, are correspondingly impotent in and oj 
thmudvei, Tet it is so. The lore of Jesus and the command of the Spirit, and these 
aione, " make dead sinners live." Of one thing we may be convinced, that, had Ananias 
only spoken a hollow word of respect to Jesus, and flattered himself that the healing 
and sight-giving were going to be his own, the miracle would have broken down in the 
middle, if it h.M. got so far, as Peter sank in the middle of his walking upon the sea. 
Does the preacher, does the teacher, does the pastor, rememlier this principle constantly 
enough? Do they possess an unfeigned humility of faith in it? 

IV. The AB8GBTI0N OF THE INDWEUJNO OF THE HoLT Ghost. 1, The work of the 
Holy Ghost is announced. 2, The presence of the Holy Ghost is announced aa 
the result of the sending of Jesus Christ (John xvi. 7), 3. The commanding need ot 
the Holy Ghost for a renewed man and an enlightened man, that he may remain surely 
so, is strongly enough implied : " That thou mightest be filled with the Holy Ghost." 
Nothing so hinders the spread of Christianity, the force of Ohristian life, the conrerBion 
of souls, as the neglect or the indifference shown to the work of the Holy Spirit. 
Christianity is in the fullest sense '.' the dispensation of the Spirit," and yet prayer for 
that Spirit, dependence upon him, understanding of him, are often all of the vaguest. 
The power ana persuasion and grandeur of Christ and the cross of Christ only move 
into vitality as the Spirit takes of them and brings them to men's hearts. We do all 
and always need the Holy Spirit for both conversion and for sanctification, and for 
knowing and doing acceptably any service for God, for Christ, in man's heart niid life. 

V. The sions following the wobd and the LATiNa on of the hands of An anus. 
They followed just a» though it were by his own " power and holiness " that this 
miracle was wrought. So in otir spiritual work, we should look for results. We should 
feel their cheering effect. We should delight in them. We should be grateful and 
honoured exceedingly that we are permitted to be instruments in the " mighty hand " 
for doing them. But, meantime, we are bound never to forget how fearful the robbery 
and the guilt if we give not all the glory to God, to Jesus, to the Spirit. — B. 

Ver. 21. — Amazemenfs opportitnity. The amazement of the disciples of Jesus, and 

ef others also who heard Saul preaching at Damascus, may be pronounced natural 

enough under any circumstances and in any view of it. Yet- distinct and emphatic 

^ mention of it asks for a somewhat more careful observation and scrutiny of its nature 

and peculiar features. Notice— 

L. The oattbe of this amazement. 1. That Saul, a bitter opponent heretofore of 
Christ and his truth, now preaches Christ, the whole Christ, and nothing but Christ. 
He preaches " the whole Christ " in this sense, that, as we are told, he uplifts the 
central and so to speak crucial fact about Christ, " that he is the Son of God." This 
once granted " with the heart," all else follows. He has not yielded upon some side 
aspects of the matter, and for some politic reasons joined a remarl<able movement. But 
he has yield -id the stronghold of his own unbelief, and has acknowledged the impreg- 
nable character of the stronghold that he had been striving to batter down, to under- 
mine, to " utterly " destroy. 2. That Saul, a notorious opponent of Christ, comes now 
to preach in the places where his change of front would also become most notoriously 
confessed, and where it in turn would be the mark and butt of keen opposition. He 
preached Christ " in the synagogues." 3, That, with the most unreserved and appa- 
rently even unconscious self-forgetfulness, Saul mingles in this work side by side with 
men, for the apprehension of whom, and for the conveying of whom "bound to 
Jerusalem," he had in his pocket official authorizations. '4. That Saul does this 
" straightway," without finding delay a possible thing, without waiting for anything 
of the nature of diplomatic introduction. There is something or other &esh in his 
heart, and it comes with all promptness and naturalness and force, full of it* freshness 
into bis life. 

IL The bdbjeots oi- thm amabement. 1. They were in part disciples. It Is impos- 
sible to say that all those who were amazed were of the number of either disciples or 
non-disciples. It is said "all" that "heard him "were amazed. These must have 
consisted of both disciples and non-disciples. The one had not left off entirely to 
frequent the synagogue, and the others would, M a mattst of course, be found in some 



818 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. «, 1—43 

wrt of number there. So far as they were strictly disciples, their amazement marks 
no doubt, on the one hand, grateful and adoring impression ; but, on the other, it is not 
altogether free from the imputation of betraying that the glories of the Spirit's power 
in conversion, and the force of the truth and call of Jesus, were at present only dawning 
upon their minds. We still speak of remarkabh conversions, chiefly because they are 
BO rare. We have had enough instances of them to satisfy us as to what the force of 
conversion is on every kind of sinner, in every kind of nature, and in every " nation." 
We are ever to magnify Christ and the Spirit, and gratefully to acknowledge their 
triumphs in conversion, but the expression ot amazement may sometimes derogate from 
their honour. Perhaps the conversion of Saul was not only the most remarkable 
conversion that had yet taken place, but was the only one that, all things together, had 
stood out uniquely enough to compel attention individually. 2. They were in part 
unconvinced Jews, who, dead in formality, still frequented the synagogues in Damascus. 
The K/iyenng' and somewhat /ee6?e/o»to and knowledge of the disciples finds somLtbing 
to counterbalance it, perhaps to some little degree, in the quickly aroused criticism and 
spirit of observation on the part of others less enlightened than they. The indirect 
influences of Christ and of his truth are many and effective. His enemies, and the force 
and the violence and the cruelty of their oppositibn, he often makes tributary to the 
advancement of his cause. Many who had hitherto willingly spread opposition, and 
opposition only, now become the means of spreading tidings of how the chief of the 
opposition had thrown up the contest and joined heart and hand to help. And they 
spread this ominous fact in the most contagious manner. It is by the manner of 
wondering, excited question, and question that wraps up in a sentence or two the salient 
and really telling aspects of the whole matter. The astonishment of the godly is often 
deep down in their own souls or sacred in the converse of one another ; the astonish- 
ment of the ungodly is sure to be loud on their lip. But when this latter largely rein- 
forces the former, both advantages are secured, and the march of victory advances to 
the step of both friends and foes. It was so now, and throughout the whole people fat 
and wide notoriety was as the consequence given to the conversion of Saul — a notoriety 
which had its share in bringing on the "Churches' rest" spoken of in ver. 31. 

III. Thb bbbults of the AMAJiBMKST. I. A Very wide hearing was gained irre- 
siatibly, not for the truths of Christianity alone, but for its triumphs as well. One 
triumph is itself a sermon better than a thousand merely spoken seimons. And now 
this triumph-sermon, this sermon of sermons, is proclaimed and repeated by thousands 
of lips. 2. Even when first impressions had died away, substantial increase of faith 
and hope was left in the character of all " disciples." They had without doubt known 
already striking instances of changed opinion and feeling and life among those to whom 
Christ had been preached, and for whom his mighty works had been done. But this 
was not what is generally meant by a remarkable conversion. The grand feature here 
was not the reform from an unholy life, but the reform from an uncompromising anta- 
gonist into a devoted and very powerful champion. This would be a comparatively new 
and a most refreshing testimony to disciples of the nature and the force of the new 
treasure they had in the gospel of Jesus Christ. 3. Slumbering enmity and indifference 
to Christ in those who were not disciples were brought into the shape in which they 
would be best dealt with — malignant enmity and active resistance. Now " the sinners " 
and " those who were at ease " wake themselves. Here is found a foeman worthy 
indeed of their " steel," if they had weapon of the make. But they had not. They, 
therefore, conspire and " watch day and night," to learn how vain the attempt to take 
those whom Christ holds so safe in his hand and love. The fruit of confessed amazis» 
ment and undoubted amazement at the mighty deeds of Christ must ever be either 
hearty obedience to him, or ui understanding more blinded and life aggravated to 
perverseness itself. — B. 

Ver. 25. — The beginning of perils for Faid. To this beginning of " perils " Paul 
will often in later days of life have looked back. He did not live to any prolonged 
period, but if he had, there is not a length of life so long nor charged with changes so 
violent as to be able to cut off from us the effects of the touching compa isons and the 
telling contrasts of beginning and ending. Many a broken portion of life offers us such 
effects i but how muw more moving those of life itself I Long was the list of ptiiU 



OT,ix.l— 43.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 31fe 

and gufferitigi, varied and sharp the discipline of them ; but when the rehearsal of them 
comes (U Cor. xi. 16 — 33), it speaks a perseverance unbroken, a courage unquenched, a 
heart, fidelity, love, stronger and more determined than ever. That rehearsal somewhat 
remarkably closes with the mention of the first peril of Paul, as here given us, us 
though his memory, deliberately travelling backward, reached last that which life 
brought to him first. The opportunity may be seized for considering at least one side 
of the great service of suffering. It must be a ministry full of exprtnion, full of mean- 
ing, full of deep feeling, and, if not made fvdl of use also, it must be of all loss " most 
miserable." In the present connection let us observe that — 

I. It TB8TB A CAUSE, OF WHAT 80ET IT IS. With rare exceptions, it may be said 
that the cause which bears the test of suffering, and of much suffering, will be a cause 
alike great and good. Human hearts, strong though they be, are not strong enough to 
bear gratuitously a vast amount of suffering. The vast amount of the worst sort of 
suffering that sin entails, that comes inevitably in its wake, is of course not in the 
place for a test, and cannot operate as such. The abundant presence of it, therefore, 
where it is, does not invalidate the position. The cause that asks suffering to espouse 
It, to sustain it, to carry it to completion, is self-hedged around as with some sovereign 
safeguard. The frivolous will not come near it, and the great multitude will pay no 
court to it. But : 1. If it arrest the attention, kindle the enthusiasm, win the practical 
confidence of a few, and those, perhaps, the thoughtful, the useful, the unselfish, it is 
a considerable augury of something'substantial and substantial good in it. 2. Enthu- 
siasm can do very great things for an hour. It will encounter and even court any 
amount of suffering. We cannot, therefore, consider taking service in a cause that 
imposes suffering any decisive test. The test, however, becomes much more decisive 
when that service is persevered in, still entailing suffering, year after year, and on to 
the maturity of life. 3. The highest kind of human test is reached when the cause is 
one persevered in to the very end of life, through suffering all the way and almost every 
step. The enterprise that can secure this allegiance says as much for itself as any 
enterprise on earth can, and the best. And this is abundantly the case with Christianity. 
When Saul embraced it it meant peril, and labour, and privation, and much direct 
suffering. But, " being persuaded of it, he embraced it," and was faithful to it through 
the succeeding periods and phases of his own earthly career, and up to the very last. 
Then in old age, beaten and weather-beaten, in prison and in chains and bonds, he 
docs not dream of repenting or of recanting, but says," I am not ashamed," and bids 
others follow in his steps (2 Tim. i. 12). If it had been a flowery path and an easy 
career, Paul's perseverance would have been no argument for it. But because it was a 
suffering career, his perseverance spoke, not his praise alone, but that of his Master's 
cause yet more. How many a cause will waken enthusiasm ! how few will sustain it ! 
How many will beg it I how few reward it I There is the difference of a world, ay, of 
two worlds, between the two. 

TI. SuFFERiNa TESTS A MAN, OF WHAT 80BT HE 18. If any One persevere in fighting 
a suffering battle, it is certainly so far forth an argument for the object of the battle. 
But if he do not fight the buttle, or beginning do not carry out to the end the struggle, 
it by no means condemns the cause. The question will have to be settled whether blame 
lie with the cause or whether it do not rather lie with the person. 1. Suffering for the 
individual tries high moral quality and improves it. 2. Suffering tries many individual 
virtues and graces — those of faith, of hope, of perseverance, of love that fires cannot 
bum away nor death destroy. And it unfailingly improves them. 3. Suffering 
certainly- tends to fix and give cXeax " widence" to an unearthly type of character. 4. 
Suffering lends distinctness to conviction, to purpose, to achievement. It is a disinfect- 
ant, an alterative, and a tonic all in one. Pleasure and indulgence enfeeble, that ia, they 
tend to enfeeble and to enervate, once past a very moderate amount. Suffering, ihort 
of an excessive amount of it, makes keen the faculty, the sight, the soul itself I Wonder- 
ful is its bracing effect on body and mind, on heart and life. 

III. Suffering becomes souetimeb the oooabion of a gbeat mobal display in 
THX WOBLD. Beside the uses of suffering in the good fruits it produces on individual 
character ; and beside its use as a test, whether of worth in an enterprise or of strength 
in a person, it cannot be denied that it lends itself to special moral service, often on a 
larg* Kale and in a wide theatre. Against it all nature rubjla. For that very rc^ibou, 



820 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTL' [oh. ix. 1— 4i 



when it is ToluDtarily encountered, patiently borne, and embraced even to the cross, 
to stoning, to torture, and the stake, the world has no help for it but to notice what ii 
transpiring. An unwilling world is put into the dilemma that it is either convinced 
or convicted. The confession is wrested from all beholders that there is something 
present which l>egi and deserves close scrutiny and respectful attention, or that they 
are in any given instance deserting precedents that in all others they have observed. 
When the testimony of sufTering is sliown forth in one, the force of it will partly 
depend on the notoriety that his conduct may win, and it may undoubtedly be 
weakened by the suspicion of individual eccentricity until this again be rebutted. But 
Krheh the testimony is borne by many and for a length of time, it is equivalent to the 
presence of a new and very real moral force among mankind. Many of the grandest 
and most impressive triumphs of Christianity have been owing to this, and many of its 
most significant impulses have been due to it. Men and suffering have calmly faced 
one another, have measured the force of one another ; neither have shrunk from the 
wager — men have not fled and Buffering has not yielded up its sting. And yet they 
have made common cause, and have made also most wonderfully effective fight. 
Something in man, given him from without and from above, has made hiu. tearless of 
what all nature made him to fear. It is an exhibition in the arena of the world ; it 
never fails of having witnesses ; it always leaves its traces. And the Paul of perils and 
sufferings ever stands one of the clearest and noblest illustrations of a great and effectual 
moral display. — B, 

Vers. 26 — 30.— ^n HI odowr and its remedy. The odour of character and " ill report " 
are two very different things. The character of most fragrance may be in worst 
" report." Was it not true of Jesus ? The noblest personages that have graced the 
world have often been temporarily' of ill report, but not, correctly speaking, of ill odour. 
Of all ill odour none is a hundredth part so bad as the ill odour of character. Notice— 

I. Its chief fointi of strong condbmnation. 1. It is an intrinsic shame to the 
person of whom it is true. It is the result of what he is and what he says and what 
he does, and not of the mistakes others may possibly make respecting him in any of 
these particulars. 2. It is a virulent c^tsintegrant of human society and love. It turns 
the place and opportunity of attraction into those of repulsion, and substitutes for the 
union of trust the disunion of suspicion, 3, It is cruelty to all those who are of the 
same kind by nature. Some kind of sin, beside all the black front it shows as such to 
God, adds the aggravation of widespread and keenly felt domestic misery. 4. It is a 
very fountain of /ear to an indefinite number of others. The character that is cor- 
rectly answerable to the description of one of ill odour is an offence to those who have 
to come in contact with it, and to those who /ear lett they should come in contact with 
it, 6, It is constantly diffusing its noxious and malarious influences, and not least 
when perhaps for a brief while least observed, 

II. Thb beugdt. There is one remedy, oni only, that goes to the root of the matter. 
That character must be changed. Come what may, let what may seem risked, through 
whatsoever experience of suffering and anguish of a new birth, nothing short of a real 
and penetrating change will avail. Nothing partial, no outride improvement, no mere 
mitigation of his style of word or deed, could have reconciled " disciples at Jerusalem " 
or anywhere else to Saul, had there not been proof patent of radical change. The source 
of the old ill must be cut off, and in such wise that it comes to be the natural thing to 
men to feel convinced that it is really and undoubtedly cut off, 

III. The room that thbrb is fob thb exbboisb of bbotherlt charity wtthau 
Men who go by the name of Christian do often suspect when they should not, and 
distrust too long. The example of Jesus i> clear against such conduct and such a 
disposition. To the worst sinner he was prompt to give the band of hope and the band 
of help, and to shield them from the glance and the pointed finger of tauntings drawn 
from tlie past. We may admit that the eye of Jesus recognized genuineness, and his 
lip could pronounce upon it with a certainty shut out from ourselves. None the less 
must we recognize his principle, and honour it by using it, Barnabas now took Saui 
by the hand, and showed him the brotherly kindness the spirit of which the great 
Master first gave to the Church. And it is agreeable to observe how " apostlef * 
•»1 " brethrefi " thereupon believed in Saul, and acted as though they believed w 



OH. IX. 1—43.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. $21 

him. Grateful is it at one and the same time to see how the trust reposed in Bar- 
nabas quite sufficed to counteract the distrust that had been so naturally felt toward* 
Saul. Broad as is the line, therefore, that separates the repentant man from the sinner ; 
uncompromising as our conduct must be in having no fellowship with darkness ; and 
trenchant as our fidelity to doctrine as it were ; — yet for all this amount of reason, the 
more promptly, gladly, and trustfully must we give heart and hand to the repentant, 
whatsoever they have been heretofore. From the moment Jesus pardons, receives, and 
sets to work one who has long and deeply insulted him, we must pardon, " receive as a 
brother beloved," and welcome as a fellow-labourer that man. Nor ever forget that to 
suspect and distrust a moment too long, or to wonder past believing, is to put ourselves 
into the last position that we would wish or mean to occupy. For our immovable and 
gladdest creed is that Christ can do all things in human heart and human life. — B, 

Ver. 31. — History a sermon. The simplest matters of fact are sometimes weighted 
with impression and charged with instruction. And in like manner, the simplest-told 
history sometimes preaches the most suggestive of sermons. Notice three things in 
this briefly described episode of history. 

L The best which the Church had. 1. It was a rest from the actual sufferings 
of persecution. 2. It was a rest from the constant and tearing anxieties involved in 
the fear of persecution. Foreboding kills many whom no actual suffering would kill. 
3. It was a rest from the literal moving about from place to place, either with the 
chance of eluding persecution or as the consequence of it. In all of tliese respects 
the mercy of Christ is not forgetful of the need of the Church : (1) As repose is one of 
the first necessities of each individual that composes it. Storm, trouble, conflict, operate 
as useful tests of character and fidelity, and they may be said to add some sort of 
strength. But for growth and nourishment and sound health rest is one of the first 
conditions. (2) As repose is one of the first necessities for giving scope to the character 
and action of the Church as a whole. One of the divinest tests of the Church is its 
spontaneous love and its spirit of co-operation. Those who are in similar want, similar 
sorrow, similar danger, similar fear, do not find any difficulty in harmonizing, drawing 
near together, co-operating. But the scene is often changed when it is all fair weather. 
Therefore fair weather itself is necessary (a) for trying character and hardening 
character, and (i) for giving the time and the opportimity for combining in works of 
holy activity. Note well what a various thing Christian character and life make. They 
ITS of many elements ; they need not a hard, stiff, monotonous, unbending treatment. 
But they need the revolution of the seasons, and can bear it too. They need blast and 
tempest, and are responsive to summer eveniug's softest sigh also. They need many a 
caution, many an anxious watchiQ!^, many an anguished heart-searching, but also they 
need to luxuriate awhile in the rest of calm, of happiness, of love. 

II. The peace which pkevailed dubdio best. The enemy which might have 
taken opportunity to eater, one whcia the most experienced would have feared the 
most, did not enter. The true motto, " Peace, as in aJl Churches of the saints " (1 Cor. 
xiv. 33), was their welcome watchword now. Best from without is often the very 
signal for confusion and discord within. The concord that comes of a common enemy 
known to be no distance off is something far inferior to the concord that comes from 
real intrinsic causes. This only can give us any slightest foretaste of the deep calm 
of heaven. 1. How pleasant this calm peace within must have been, as a mer« contrast 
to what had been! 2. How welcome it must have lieen, as introduciiig the followers 
and disciples of Jesus to their first acquaintance with a thoroughly new set of ideas, 
new range of affections, new work of this life, and new scope of life itself I 3, How 
delightful this peace, for the sake of the actual converse of disciples with disciples, and 
of Church with Church! They had met, perhaps, in the relations of business, and of 
pleasure, and of a dead formalism of religion, and in the discussion of the humiliation 
of the political bondage under which they were now living ; but what unwontud peace 
this was to have " their conversation in heaven," to find it " building "-time in the best 
sense, to "walk in the fear of the Lord," waA to know the "comfort of the Holy 
Ghof.t"! The "fellowship of kindred minds" is indeed not necessarily "like to that 
above ; " but the fellowship of such kindred minds is undoubtedly and blessedly 
" like to that above." 



322 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. ix, 1—43. 

in. The inobbase of the Chtjrch. Intervals of rest give the opportunity of 
growth, and intervals of peace within are deep, solid, firm, growing itself. But neither 
the Church nor the individual Christian can he right in considering exclusively, or 
anjoying exclusively without consideration, its own possibilities of inward growth. 
The Church was now not only "edified" in itself, and "settled," " stahlished," 
" strengthened," but " it was multiplied." No doubt, even in times of severest tribula- 
tion, it was added to, and persecution by no means closed its roll and cut oflF its recruits. 
But now the Church — the destined depository of Divine power in part, and the honoured 
fellow-labourer with Divine unseen actors — was beginning to Iinow its work and to 
feel its high force and to be conscious of its most responsible privileges. The very 
simple and beautif;l description before us warrants us to say that the consistent 
" walk " of the Church, and the deep heart-felt experience on the part of the Church 
of what is most characteristic above all things else whatsoever of her existence and 
nature, namely, "the comfort of the Holy Ghost," are tJie best adapted human means 
for the increase of tlie Church, for the impression of the world, for the conversion of 
the sinners. " The power is of God " under any and all circumstances. The " foolish- 
ness of preaching" is the positive and declared method of making known what the 
gospel of Christ is and what it proffers. But for impression on others, so far as 
human action goes, the Christian man who " walks in the fear of the Lord " availeth 
much. And for pressure upon the unbelieving world, pressure upon its eye, ear, 
judgment, and conscience, pressure constant, close, and unevadible, there is nothing 
like the advance of a host that " walks in the fear of the Lord," and that enjoys " the 
comfort of the Holy Ghost." 1. Consistent Christian life speaks itself. This lias 
always been a potent presence and an irresistible argument. The absence of it is 
damnatory, on all sides and in all senses — to the person who, makes hollow profession, 
damnatory of that hoUowness ; to the world damnatory of any inclination to he found 
in the camp of such hollowness. For, wonderful though it be that the world will 
condone and will have fellowship with other hollowness, most blessed and advantageous 
it is that it kicks at, scorns, and exposes the hollowness of mere profession of Christ. 

2. "The comfort of the Holy Ghost" is an experience, and it is of what is deepest 
down in human hearts. Yet is it not for that reason invisible. It betrays itself in 
the eye; it betokens itself in the language and the very tone of that langjtage; 
it heams forth in all the deed of the man whom the Spirit who gives it vouchsafes 
to inhabit. When the Holy Ghost becomes the Master, the gracious, condescending, 
comforting Master of any man, or of the Church, or any part of the Church, then 
these become the persuasive masters of others, and the choicest, chiefest attraction of 
the world. The "Church is multiplied" then, and the "excellency of the power 
is of God " still. This little episode of history, then, is a sermon, and teaches us what 
a practical sermon the life of every Church and every Christian may preach. — B. 

Vers. 32 — 35. — One specimen of Christian activity. The history has for some little 
while veiled the Apostle Petei' from view. He now appears again in an episode tliat 
catches our attention the more because of the things it leaves unsaid. Let iu notice - 

I. The more hemarkablb features of the bbief narrative. 1. The picture is 
put before our eye, by the mere touch of the sacred pen, of the full measure of activity 
that characterizes Peter. He is not at home. He is " not slothful " and self-indulgent. 
He is at work, and for work's sake travelling " through all parts." 2. The fond 
inclining of Peter's heart is seen. He " comes down also to the saints which dwelt at 
Lydda." He comes down to refresh brethren and to be refreshed by them. He comes 
to see the little nucleus of believers, to give them " some token for good," to give 
them another hostage of their work, to give them an example, and to take from them 
that which they had to give and yet be no losers — Christian sympathy and joy. 

3. The silence observed respecting jEneas, who he was. Is there not justification for 
supposing that he was already one of " the saints " ? For : (1) Peter seems to have found 
liim among such. (2) Peter asks him no question to elicit knowledge or faith, hope 
or love ; nor does he seem to ask anything of Peter either for body or mind. (3) Peter 
appears to use the Name of Jesus Christ as a name known already to .ffineas, and 
addresses him apparently with the ease of brotherly familiarity and of Chiistiap 
bomelioess, 4. fbe ij?)roe<lii\te blessing "givejj" though uvaAvA, «wsought y^ 



CH. IX, 1—43.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa 823 



"found" (Luke xi. 9, 10). Much as Jesus loves and teaches that we should ask, 
seek, and knock for his blessings, it must be a sight acceptable to him to see the 
patience of bodily suffering that asks nothing. 5. The great attention called hereby 
to the Lord. The little villages were " born " again in a day (Isa. Ixvi. 8). Lydda 
and Saron " saw the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God," and they 
"blossomed as the rose" (isa. xxxv. 1, 2). 

11. The more rbmarkablb lessons or this brief naeeativk. 1. The re&eshing 
suggestion given to us of the force that lies in the genuine activity of one Christian. 
2. The wisdom, amid all our visitings, of visiting Christians and little communities of 
Christians, who may dwell apart, in the village and the hamlet, afar fi:om the stir 
of the large masses of the people. When with such, there will be sure to be much to 
be given and much to be gotten by the genuine. 3. The grand opportunities that 
seem to come, where our faithlessness least anticipates it, when only we are very simply 
walking in duty's path. Those are really the opportunities Heaven sent, and the 
likeliest of all to be fruitful of immortal good. Our grander preparations do not at 
all infallibly correspond with Heaven's grander opportunities. Explain it as we may, 
though the explanation is in no sense far to seek, the laboured preparations of even 
Christian men ill harmonize with the sublime ease of the Spirit's acliievements. But 
to humble prayer, humble work, untiring activity, opportunities seem to come which 
are really Heaven's earliest, freshest sending. 4. The pity that sees and forgets not, 
sees and visits, and visits that it may see, the patient sufferer. One type of this wo 
know, one only we adore. But how it ought to rivet our gaze and our admiration, 
and constrain our reverent, loving imitation! The impotent man at the pool of 
Bethesda, who had "had his infirmity thirty and eight years," gains the notice 
of Jesus' eye above all the rest. The ^iieas who " for eight years had kept his bed 
because he was palsied," has the eye of the risen Jesus and Lord upon him, and Peter 
is sent to him. At one and the same time it is true that Jesus does all and that 
Peter is learning in his work to be like Jesus. 5. The widespread advantages of one 
real stroke of work done in the Name of " Jesus Christ." There is no doubt a self- 
spreading force in Christian truth and in Christian good. For they are both what are 
wanted by men. And nothing so much wanted, so deeply wanted. Let men 
unsophisticated, let men whose real nature has not yet been utterly lost to the devil, 
only get a " taste " of the good that Christ has to give, that Christ is, and that Christ 
can work in mind and heart, and they will " hunger and thirst " for him. But we 
have to remember that, in order to this, we must take care that it is the Name of 
Jesus we preach, the pure truth of Jesus we teach, the life of Jesus we exhibit, and 
ths! deep, unquenchable love of Jesus that is in our own heart. — B. 

Vers. 36 — 43. — The emjihatic mark of Divine approbation which Christianity putt 
upon womanly kindness, in what may seem an humble sphere, and upon genuinely felt 
yratitude for it. The narrative is the more interesting as being the first subsequent 
to the Ascension, and among the Acts of the Apostles, which brings the deeds, the 
character, and the fame of a Christian woman into prominence. The share that 
Christianity has contributed in honouring women, and in raising them to occupy their 
own proper place, has been often acknowledged. Omitting what Christ's own word 
and deed helped to this end, the narrative now before us may be said to be the 
beginning of a long stream of illustration of it. Let us notice — 

1. The DEcisrvB mark of respect here put on humble but praotioai. fbmininb 
GOODNESS. The mark, in few words, consisted in a miracle wrought to restore to life 
a woman " full of good works and almsdeeds," who was out off in the midst of her 
usefulness. But what are the things that may be remarked in more detail of this 
miracle ? 1. It was wrought, not for a case of long sufTering, or for some agonized form 
of suffering that might necessarily touch any heart with a deep compassion. 2, It 
was not wrought to restore to the service of this world one who had already largely 
figured in its high places. It is not position, wealth, great natural power and endow- 
ment, distinguished character, philanthropy of renown, nor even great learning, that 
is the object of honour. We do not at all take the idea that the heaven will fall 
if this gap which death has made be not somehow or other rapidly filled up. 3. It 
WM not touching youth, fashion, beauty, accomplishment, Bor even th« moum^ 



324 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. n. 1— 4a 

mother of a, family — that disthroned queen of the domestic heaven, whose vacant 
throne dashes dismay into so many true hearts, and fills all the house with darkness 
and a sense of desertion. It was no such pensive, pathetic, importnnate, natural 
sadness that begged the mercy of miracle. 4, The object of the miracle was a woman, 
"full of good works and ahnsdeedi." We are kept a brief while in suspense as 
to the nature of her " good works," but are at once apprised that her " alms " are not 
almsgivings, but " almsdeeds." So it is not an instance of a wealthy woman 
lamented from a very superficial sorrow of survivors. And then it proves that her 
" good works " (though we are not by any means constrained to suppose that they 
were literally all comprehended under this description) were such as to be sufficiently 
typified by the humble handiwork of soiasors and needle and thimble, "coats and 
garments," and th^se, not for the "rising generation" and "the hope of the nation," 
but forsooth for "widows." Yet it is such a person and such a woman who is 
restored to life, and no doubt to the humble but beneficent round of such a life again. 
And to Ihii woman alone of women is given the space in all Scripture to tell the record 
in full of miraculous restoring of life. These are some of her ever-memorable 
characteristics. (1) She worked, and was known for working, rather than for anything 
else. (2) She worked " abundantly," perhaps " more than they all." She worked so 
abundantly that she is described as "/aW of good works." (3) Her works aijned at 
one thing — being useful works, and they succeedc^d in attaining that at which they 
aimed. They succeeded because they were prnctical and not merely theoretical, 
practicable and not Utopian. (4) She worked humbly and for the humble, and 
remembered the spirit of the proverb that bids not be so wasteful of what we have 
or what we are as to " cast our pearls before swine." What waste there is in a world 
already poor, because that with labour and with material the right thing is not 
wrought nor offered to the right person I Yet Jesus taught his disciples against even 
this sort of error, when he told them to go and preach in other places when the people 
would not hear them where they were. He would not have any of us waste our time 
and his precious Word-seed, nor eat our heart in one place, when we might be 
enlarging it in another. (5) She did what came first to do— first to her own ability, 
first to her own means, first to the want that was nearest to her in place and nearest 
to her in feminine alliance, first to the suggestion of Providence, instead of first to the 
idle swellings of an ambitious heart within. And how often did God smile on that 
woman's work, and Jesus own it, whose Spirit had first quickened the heart from 
which all came ! But now, even now already, had come a day ripe for manifestation. 
There is to be a glorious " demonstration of the Spirit and of power." She who had 
loved so well and been beloved so well, snatched a day from sight and life, is restored 
to sight and life, still awhile longer to bless and be "blessed." 

II. The decisive marks of bespeot here put on simplk oratttude, though rr 
WERE BUT GRATITUDE TO A FELLOW-BEING. The miracle, humanly speaking, owed its 
working to the deep feeling, so genuine and so earnest, which pervaded all who had 
known Dorcas. The feeling was the right kind of feeling, not wii«tefully overwhelming, 
but quickening to thought and action. Perhaps the illness was sharp and short. She 
is dead before they know how dangerously ill she is. But " the disciples " have their 
memory about them. They remember that they have heard of Peter at Lydda and 
of what he has been doing there for ^neas. It is eight miles off, but some of them 
sojn clear the ground. And Peter does not feel affronted at being begged " not to 
dday." And he comes and sees how grieved all were. Evidently it little entered 
into the mind of the many that it was a case for a miracle of restoring to life. But 
love and gratitude and grief, without " anticipation of favours to come," made the 
widows come with their impromptu exhibition of garments, and with their gratelui 
reminiscences uttered forth. Well, that Peter was on the spot was the result of 
a real feeling and gratitude ; and come, be does not find himself come to a dead or 
a dead-alive Church and congregation. Fai^ ol/herwise ; and it was the very crisis and 
point of the occasion. Peter couldn't help but reoaU the dear Master's words and 
action, so far as they were apropos to the occasion — and it was only in a degree that 

they were apropos to this occasion — "Why make ye this ado and weep? the woman " 

(Mark v. 30). But no, he says no more at present, but he does just the same thing 
(s Jeaus did; he puts them all out, and goes and prays, and pleads and wing bis 



«tt.nt.l— 43.] THE ACTS OV THB APOSTLfiS. i25 



instrnetions and his force alone. If dying should be a quiet scene, nor harsh sound 
of earthly life disturb its solemn experiences, who knows what the coming to life may 
be, and what it may require, and what may best suit it? Ah I perhaps in reality, not 
in merely the recovered life of this present, but in the real, perhaps there the waking 
life may open its eye to see " Jesus only " (as it was once on the Transfiguration 
Mount), and its ear to hear in new-horn exquisite sense the whispering of Jesus. And 
that will ask peace and silence and the banishment of earthly life, its crowd of sight 
and of sound. But as the Lord appeared to Zacharias in the holy place, while the 
expectant people were shut without, so did the mighty Lord appear to Peter in that 
holy chamber, and from the upper chamber of death didn't it become the antechamber 
of heavenly life indeed? And all this was condescending honour put upon human 
gratitude. It entered into " the ears of the Lord Cktd of sabaoth," and he descended 
with power to reward it. 

Ill, ThB DECISIYE M ABE8 OF HbAVBN'8 MOST KINDLY BTMPATHT WITH EDKAN LIFB- 

wAHTs. The scene would seem almost unmatched in Scripture, in just this one respect. 
Here is no question of love direct to God, to Christ, to their work on earth as such. 
But it is an occasion of innocent feeling, yet earth's sort of feeling; innocent excitement, 
yet caused, not by the loss of a great spiritual benefactor like the Master or like Stephen, 
but by the loss of a kindly, good-hearted, and most homely and neighbourly bene- 
factor. Yet the power of the Divine Spirit owns it. And as Jesus in the days of his 
flesh condescends to the genial atmosphere of the marriage feast, and made them yet 
more wine there, so does he in his perhaps yet mightier power, but certainly mightier 
majesty and glory, condescend to the sympathies and regrets of this widow group and 
disciples' gathering. He reminds us surely of his constant, gentle, faithful care for 
us. " What we shall eat, and what we shall drink, and wherewithal we shall be 
clothed," — he shows us that he has not forgotten his early words hereupon, nor those 
other words, in which he has taught us that he will accept our works for his " little 
ones," and for his poor and needy ones, as works done personally to himselfl — B. 

Ver. 2. — " TVie Way." This seems to have been the earliest name for what we now 
call Christianity. That it was used as a distinctive appellation of the Christian religion 
may be seen by comparing ch. xix. 9, 23 ; xxii. 4; xxiv. 14, 22. A fuller expression 
. is employed in 2 Pet. ii. 2, " By reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil 
spoken of." Our Lord had used the term in a very significant manner, saying, " I am 
the Way " (John xiv. 6) ; and the previous prophetic figure of the Messianic times— 
" An highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called The way of holiness " — 
would be in the memory of the disciples, and therefore they would be likely to accept 
the term if it was first started by their persecutors. Compare the name " Christian," 
which began as a taunt, and became accepted as an honourable title. In introducing 
this subject, reference may be made to the interesting fact that, from this point, Luke's 
record becomes almost entirely an account of St. Paul's labours, probably because 
round him centred the missionary work of the early Church, and he was its greatest 
representative. The kind of religious authority over all Jews exercised by the &in- 
h^rim, and the limitations of its power to imprisonment and beating and 
excommunication, require consideration. Saul probably went to Damascus for two 
reasons — (1) because in the scattering the disciples were likely to have found shelter 
there; and (2) because many Jews dwelt there, and especially those Greek Jews, who 
were most likely to become converts to the broad principles as taught by Stephen's 
party. It was against thii particular party that Saul was so greatly incensed. Their 
teaching most effectually plucked the ground from beneath mere formal Judaism. 
Reverting to the term, " the Way," as descriptive of the Christian religion, and filling it 
with the la: ger meaning of our later knowledge, we may notice that it is 

L A WAY OF THisrEiNO. It is characteristic of Christianity that it has its own 
peculiar toay of thinking about (1) God, (2) man, (3) sin, (4) redemption. Its " way 
of thinking" is placed under the guidance of special Divine revelation. And the 
•tarting-point of its thinking is that Grod has, " in these last days, spoken unto us 
by his Son." Probably the exact reference in this verse is to that " way of thinking " 
which Stephen introduced and taught, because that appeared to present special points 
of antagonism to the doctrine and aathority of the Sanhedrim. There is still a " why 



S2e tHfi AO'fS OJ- THE AtOSTLBS. tcH.tt.l-4a 

of thinking" cliaracteristic of Christ's disciples. With a large liberty there are well- 
defined lines beyond which the thiuking, being unloyal to Christ, is unworthy of the 
Christian name. 

II. A w^T OF FEBLma. Every true disciple is distinguished by his admiration 
for, his trust in, and his love to, the Lord Jesus Christ. In the early Church the 
loyalty and the love were so strong that the disciples could endure shame and death 
for his sake. And still our " way of feeling" about Christ should mark us ofif from all 
the world; men should "take knowledge of us that we have been with Jesus," that 
he has won our very hearts, and that to us henceforth "to live is Christ." Impress 
the important bearing of sustained high feeling on the power and joy of the Christian 
life. 

III. A WAT OF WOBKINO. Besides the general modes of working characteriitic 
of Christians, for the glory of God and the good of men, attention should be given to 
Stephen's way of working against mere formalism and ritualism, and in favour of 
spiritual rilip;ion ; and the need for similar " ways of working" in each recurring over- 
civilized period should be impressed. 

IV. A WAT OF LIVING. By their fruits of godliness and charity the early Christians 
were known. The Christi.m " way " is a " way of holiness," not of mere separateness, 
but of consecration ; a way of laying all possessions or attainments on God's altar, and 
a way of using all powers and opportunities for God's service. — R. T. 

Ver. 6. — The •power of a revelation. There are solemn seasons in the life of every 
man, e.g. birthdays, times of sickness, first leaving bopie. Of all such days, perhaps 
the most solemn, ihe one with the wider consequences, is the time of our conversion. 
It is not usual for the Scriptiiies to give us — what we find in modern biographies — 
detailed accounts of the precise experiences of such times ; e.g. of Lydia we only know 
that " the Lord opened her heart," and of the jailor at Philippi that, in sudden alarm, 
he cried out, " What must I do to be saved ? " ,We may, therefore, ask why so full an 
account is given us of the experience of Saul of Tarsus? The answer is found in his 
subsequent prominence as a Christian mis.sionary, and in the necessity for assuring the 
fact that so bitter a persecutor and so zealous a Pharisee was really changed into 
a disci(ile. Some have further suggested that he was intended, in the Divine providence, 
to take the place from which Judas by transgression fell, and that it must be publicly- 
known how he had received his direct commission from the risen Lord, if he was to be 
recognized as one of the apostolic band. The conversion of men is, in mode, as varied 
as are their minds, characters, and circumstances. Yet there are some essential things 
wliich may be well studied in connection with this narrative of the conversion of Saul 
of Tarsus. 

I, Saul's prepakation fob beoefvino a Divine revelation. Every true con- 
version is effected by a revelation of God to the sonl. It need not be a visible revela- 
tion, such as was suitable to other times. It must be an awakening of the soul to the 
apprehension of Divine things, and a direct dealing of God with the awakened soul. 
This cardinal truth must never be lost sight of in our aetive use of Christian means and' 
agencies. The unre,:ienerate man does not know God; he caimot apjirehend the holiness, 
the claim, or the love of God. These must be unfolded to him by revelation. As illus- 
trations of what is meant by " conversion by revelation," see the vision of God to Jacob 
at Bethel, and the voice of God to Samuel in the night hours, when he was but a youth. 
But the capacity to receive a Divine revelation depends on previous preparations, and 
we have to inquire — How was Saul of Tarsus prepared ? In answer the following things 
must be carefully treated : — 1. His education and early associations as a Je«' and as a 
Pharisee. This involved considerable knowledge of Scripture, and a theory of the pos- 
sibility of Divine communications with the individual. 2. His naturally impulsive 
and impetuous dis[iosition, which led him to undei take things in an intense way, but 
loft him exposed to the peril of sudden change of opinion and conduct, and to the 
danger of giving up an enterprise as suddenly as he had begun it. This disposition 
prepared him to be influenced by the sudden surprise on the Damascus road. 3. The 
ideas about .Jesus Christ which he gained from the party at Jerusalem to which he 
belonged. Those ideas rested altogether on this proposition : " The impostor Jesus is 
not riten/rom tht dtad," If it could be proved or shown that he wls, then the wbolf 



m. It. 1-4S.] I'Mfi Adi's of in^ APOstLEi i^^ 

doctrine concerning him held by Pharisee and Sadducee fell down about them, as a 
house built on the sand in a day of storms. And so God overrules men's lives now to 
prepare them for his revelations. Illustrate by the ways in which (1) the satiety of 
pleasure, (2) the pollutions of |vice, (3) prolonged scepticism, (4) failure of efiorts, 
(6) serious illness, (6) the naturally inquiring mind, or (7) sudden bereavementl, are 
overruled to become Divine preparations for our " days of grace." 

II. The effect of the bevelation on the mind of Saul. To his Jewish 
notions the light from heaven would seem to be manifestly Divine, and hia first 
thought would be that God was honouring him with a commission to exterminate the 
Nazarenes. It must have come to him with startling and painful surprise that the 
voice speaking from heaven to him should be the voice of Jesus of Nazareth. His pre- 
judices were crushed down in a moment. Jesus was not an impostor; he was accepted 
of God. Jesus was not dead ; he spoke out of heaven. In Saul's response there is : 1. 
Conviction. If Jesus is after all the Messiah, then what have I been doing? Nothing 
leu than fighting against the God I thought I was serving. There was no need for 
him to search his life and try to find every particular sin ; for he felt the sin of unbelief. 
And unbelief is sin against every attribute of God, against his (1) justice, (2) holiness, 

(3) wisdom, (4) love. Observe that this conviction of sin was felt by one who was 
outwardly morah And the true conviction is not the finding of some dark, polluting 
deeds in our life ; it is the feeling of the pollution, the godlessuess, the self-seeking of 
our evil hearts. In his response is : 2. Penitence. Men may be convicted, and go no 
further. Penitence involves (1) the sense of sin as committed against God, — illustrate 
by sentences of David, Peter to Ananias, and Prodigal Son ; (2) sorrow for sin and 
earnest purpose to forsake it ; (3) submission, as in this incident the proud Pharisee 
becomes as simple as a child ; (4) surrender, a special act of yielding tuill and heart 
and life to Christ. What, then, is essential to a true conversion to God ? (1) Not any 
particular form of experience, (2) not any precise time, but (3) the sense of sin and 

(4) a full surrender to Christ. The difference between common faith and saving faith is 
mainly this — saving faith is faith with a sense of need and personal application. 

IIL The evidences tuat Sadl had received a Divine revelation. 1, Changed 
inward life: " Behold, he prayeth 1" 2. Changed outward conduct. Contrast him keep- 
ing the clothes of them that slew Stephen, and preaching at Damascus the very faith 
he had sought to destroy. 

Appeal to those whom God has been preparing by hia providential orderings to receive 
his revelation. Maybe that revelation comes through this message. If so, what will 
your response to it be ? — R. T. 

Vers. 8, 9. — Blind eyes, hut open tout. Attention Is invited to what Is suggested 
by the interesting fact that, after seeing the vision, Saul remained blind, and so 
absorbed in thought as to be wholly indifferent to food, for three days. That there are 
miraculous features in the circumstances attending Saul's conversion can hardly be 
denied, but some incline to exaggerate the miraculous features, while others put them 
under too severe limitations. We need not assume a miraculous blindness, or so serious 
a matter as a lightning stroke. The phenomena rather suggest a sunstroke of a severe 
but temporary character. In the Divine order this was arranged to give the surprised 
and humbled man an opportunity for quietness and loneliness, that he might carry on, 
and carry out to a conclusion, the conflict which had been begun by hearing the voice 
of him whom hd had called the Nazarene impostor speaking from heaven, and 
•peaking words of power and command to him. And it was also designed as a 
continuing physical effect which would assure Saul of the reality of his heavenly 
vision. & endeavouring to estimate the thoughts of Saul's time of blindness, consider 
that— 

I. Saitl had knowledob. General knowledge, as an educated man, belonging to 
the well-to-do classes. Special knowledge, as trained in the best Jewish schools; 
especially as having a kind of collegiate culture, as a Pharisee, in the highly esteemed 
school of Gamaliel. And a precise and wide knowledge of both Holy Scripture and 
rabbinical tradition, which must have included the grounds for expecting the coming 
Messiah the Prince. Saul would not need even hii Bible in those lonely hours, foi 
memory brought abundant subjects of thought. Illustrate the advantage of early 



328 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. nL 1— 4S 

teaching of God's Word. Thus we become prepared to make the best of the sudden 
occasions of life. 

II. Saul had now oained thb ket to his knowlbdob. The key was this — ^the 
Messiah has come. He was Jesus of Nazareth. He is risen, liyihg, exalted. Show 
how this cleared the mystery from the fact that Jesus had Eeen a sufferer, and brought 
light on the spiritual character of the Messiahship. Ulustrate by the preaching of 
rhilip to the eunuch. But — 

III. SaCL needed a time of qniETNEBS FOB TBB DUX AFFLIOATION OF THIS UCT. 

It had to explain the prophecy that Messiah should be born at Bethlehem, and be of 
the lineage of David. It must explain the figures of the King and Conqueror under 
which Messiah had been presented. Saul must think over the grounds on which his 
prejudiced opposition had rested, and over all that was involved in the proved fact that 
Jesus was risen from the dead and had won God's acceptance. For with his eyes 
blinded, and the ordinary cravings of his body dead, Saul saw with his soul — spiritual 
things were gaining clearness. Set out what Saul began to see vHth his stnii, concern- 
ing Jesos, concerning his own past and future, and show what revulsions of feeling in 
such an impulsive man the new soul-visions occasioned. 

In practical application, dwell on the desire for loneliness and quietness ; and for 
mfditation, which those feel who are, by any gracious agency, smitten with conviction; 
and the relations of such quiet times to full decision and consecration. So much good 
work begun in souls is lost, proving but as " morning cloud and early dew," for want 
of quiet meditative times following upon convictions and impressions. Seasons of 
loneliness, meditation, and prayer are as truly needed for newly awakened souls, as 
shady, covered times for slips, or plants, newly potted, in order that they may 
get safe-rooted. Those who are wise to win souls will learn of GK>d'g providing this 
blind season for the awakened and humbled SauL — B. T. 

Ver. 16. — God's chosen vessels. Take the single sentence, " He is a chosen rewel 
unto me ;" literally, " a vessel of election." Illustrate by the apostle's own figure of the 
" potter bavins; power over the clay," and refer to prophetic illustrations taken from 
the potter's wheel and art. Here, however, the meaning of "vessel" may rather be 
" instrument," or " tool." In every age God has called forth special workers, fitted for 
the occasions ; " with the hour always comes the man." In the ordering of God's jaovi- 
dence, the time had come for the extension of Christianity to the Gentiles, and now we 
are directed to Saul as God's chosen vessel, or instrument, for this work. From his case 
may be illustrated the following points concerning " God's chosen vessels :" — 

I. Thby are prepared fob theib work Br HIS PEOYiDENCB. After showlng bow 
Saul was being fitted by his earlier experiences, find further illustration in the earlier 
careers of Joseph, Moses, David, etc. And show how our Lord's secluded life at 
Nazareth may be regarded as his preparation-time. Careful observance of men and life 
»ad work now brings again and again to view the wonderful \^ays in which they have 
been prepared for the .stern work of their full manhood. The fact is so fully recognized 
•s to have passed into a proverb, and we say, " The child is father to the man." 
Then it follows that the wise training of our children should include the careful culture 
of any special gift or endowment of which we may see indications. 

II. Thbt abb found in God's own time. It is not enough that a man should 
find out what he can do ; he must wait on God to teach him the time for the doing, and 
the sphere in which his work is to be done. Saul had yet to wait some time before his 
life-sphere was pointed out to him. But we need have no fear. Willing servants are 
never left idle, and when Qoi's work is ready he will call to it the workmen he has 
prepared. A North-country proverb is, " The tools come to the hands of him who can 
use them ; " and God's people can tell strange stories of the gracious orderings of provi- 
dence that brought their great life-work to their hands. 

IIL UiOHTT TO DO THE Lobd's wobk. Because the appointment to a particular 
serrlM carries with it the assurance that sufficient grace for the work will be given. 
FitneM is not enough, if it stand alone ; it must be followed up by daily grace for 
efficient working. Compare Moses willing to go on to further journeyings only if the 
Ijord would go with him ; and the Apostle Paul " able to do all things through him 
who (tiengthened him." We can always do what God oalls u to do. We an wron^ 



cit. IX.1— 43.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLER 82S 



a^ Moses, Jeremiah, and Jonah were wrong, if we shrink back or flee from the Lord'i 
work. , 

IV. AoKNOWLEDOKD BT God's OWN PEOPLE. Sooner or later, Grod's chosen vessels ar<. 
found out by the Divine signs which accompany their labour. There may be temporary 
prejudice on account, of their former life, as in the case of Saul, or on account of the 
particular form and feature of their work ; but if God acknowledges a man's service with 
his benedictions, God's people are usually ready to acknowledge it too. If in a very 
strict sense some only can be called " G-od's chosen vessels," in a large and comforting 
sense the term may be applied to <tll God's people, for each of whom he surely finds 
work and the grace needed for doing it weU. — B. T. 

Ver. 20. — SauVs firtt lermom. Revised Version, " And straightway in the syna- 
gogues he proclaimed Jesus, that he is the Son of God." " The point to which all the 
effort of the apostle was first directed was naturally the Messiahship of Jesus, and that 
in the higher view in which Christianity exhibits the Messiah, namely, as the Son of 
God " (Olshausen). Very different ideas are entertained as to the advisability of 
encouraging young converts to begin preaching at once. The difficulty arose in the 
China mission field, and the .lew convert earnestly pleaded to be allowed to tell the 
little he did know, and so grow to know more. This principle Saul followed, beginning 
at once to "preach the faith which once he destroyed," and he made the opportunities 
just where he was, going into the synagogues, and using his privilege as a rabbi to read 
and expound the Scriptures. The text briefly indicates what truth Saul had gripped, 
and, taken with ver. 22, it shows how large his grip was, and that it concerned the 
very basis-truth of Christianity. He saw that — 

I. The Christ had cohe. Explain that " Christ " is the Greek equivalent of the 
HebrBw word " Messiah," and would often be wisely changed for the Hebrew term. 
Deal with (1) the foregoing prophecies of Messiah, showing how they had given tone to 
the national and religious sentiment; (2) the actual expectation of the coming of 
IVIessiah about that time, which seems to have possessed both the Jews and the Gentiles. 
The practical question dividing public opinion at the time was the question which 
divides the Jew and the Gentile up to this present hour ; it was this — Had Messiah 
come, or had he not come ? Saul was now able to deal with this question, and he 
proclaimed openly that Messiah had come. Show the importance of this step, and how 
it narrowed the field of inquiry for all those pious souls who " looked for redemption 
in Israel." 

n. The Chbist oaue in the pebbon or Jes0S of Nazabsth. The better manuscripts 
give the reading, " preached Jesus." If Messiah - had come, had he been recogniwd, 
and acknowledged ? Saul firmly answered, " Yes ; Messiah was Jesus of Nazareth, the 
Prophet, Teacher, Healer, holy Man, who was crucified, had risen from the dead, and 
was exalted to Iroaven." Surely this was a great theme for his preaching, one demand- 
1/ig txplanation, argument, evidence, and the "accent of his own conviction." But 
Saul had seen more than even this, and so fuither proclaimed that — 

IIL Jesus the Cn.BTfr< '^as the Son of God. Explain that term as (1) compared 
with " Son of man , ' and (2) as gaining to the apostles its deeper and f<iller meaning, 
'i'o Saul had evidently come an insight into the glorious mystery of the Incarnation. 
He realized (1) that Jesus was the Christ in • high spiritual sense ; (2) that Jesus was 
entrusted with a present power to save and to sanctify ; (3) that Jesus had IMvine 
rights, and made Divine claims to the immediate surrender to him of the heart and 
will and lives of men. So it is evident that Saul grasped at once the very essence of 
the gospel, and the very centre of that doctrinal system which, urged by the necessities 
of the Churches, his genius developed. There is still no more searching test of our 
reli^ous condition than can be found in the question, " What think ye of Christ ? 
Whose Son is he? " If we feel that we must say, " He is the Son of God," then we 
are bound to bow our souls before him, seek his grace, accept his salvation, acknow- 
ledge his ftnthority, and bind on our whole lives the livery of his service.— B. T. 

Ver. 31. — T%e relation hetroten edifying and multiplying. For the precise meaning 
and the New Testament use of the term " edified,^ consult the Exposition. The 
" rest " secured for th« Church at this time follow^ P^^ on ^ nmoval of Saul bom 



m tats Adts of tat; AfosTLtes. tcH.ii.i— 43. 



the p\rty of the persecutors, in which he had been the most active member j nono 
■eemed ready to take up the work which had so completely dropped from his hands, 
and by his secession the whole party was depressed and disorganized. But U followed 
chiefly on the fact that the attention of the Jewish rulers was turned away from the 
disciples to resist an attempt made by Caligula to have his statue erected in the temple 
at Jerusalem. The importance of resting-times for nations, Churches, and individuals 
should be shown, and the ways in which they usiiiilly come may be pointed out. 
Their value is illustrated in connection with our text, from which it appears that when, 
in a resting-time, the Church was edified, it was found to be also multiplied ; or, to 
express it in other forms, internal culture ii tJi4 bett guarantee of external tuccesB. We 
dwell on two things. 

I. SouL-ouLTUBB AND ITS mTERNAL SIGNS. Piety, from the Christian point of view, 
is a new and spiritual life, with which our souls are quickened by the Holy Ghost. 
But in its beginnings it is young, feeble, untested life, like that of the young seedling 
or xilant. Culture is demanded. The young life must be nourished into strength; 
and while the expressions of the life, in leaf and branch and flower, need to be watched 
and guided aright, the gaidener's supreme anxiety is to maintain and to increase the 
vitality. And so, while apostles give good counsel for the ordering of Christian amduct, 
their supreme anxiety concerns the culture of the soul's life. They would have their 
disciples " grow in grace and in the knowledge [experimental] of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ." It is to such forms of " edification " that Churches are directed in their 
quiet resting-times. Two signs were given as indicating that this " edifying " work 
was healthily progressing. 1. There was holy walking. " Walking in the fear of the 
Lord." Christian conduct and conversation was " as becometh the gospel of Christ." 
The relations of the members to each other were kindly and brotherly, and the character 
of the disciples was increasingly satisfactory. 2. There were signs of heart-joy. The 
disciples were evidently enjoying the "comfort of the Holy Ghost" — the inward sealing 
of the Spirit, the power of his impulses to righteousness, aud that happy sense of adoption 
which he gives. When the soul is efficiently cultured, its signs are apparent in these 
two things — joy in God, and holy living. Joy in Gbd includes joy in his worship and 
his work. Holy living includes the nourishing of all graces and virtues' into fulness 
and beauty and power. Illustrate by the commendations of the living Christ to such 
Churches as Ephesus, Smyrna, and Philadelphia. 

II. SouL-cuLTiTKB AND ITS BXTBBNAii POWEB. For evidently the two things, edifi- 
cation and multiplication, are intentionally connected, and the one is, in some important 
respects, the cause of the other. We may say that multiplying a Church is one of the 
certain consequences of its edifying, for the well-nourished and truly spiritual Church 
has power: 1. By its witness. Such life must find expression. (1) There is the silent 
yet mighty force of its unconscious influence. (2) There are the active labours to which 
it is inspired. 2. By its attraction. For wherever there is holy walking and evident 
heart-joy in God men are inclined to join the company. Such heart-joy all would 
find. Such holy walking seems to say, " Come with us, and we will do you good ; for 
verily the Lord is with us." Distinguish carefully between the spasmodic and impul- 
■ive successes of revival times, and the steady witness and work of edified Cuurohea 
and edified Christians in all ages. And conclude by impressing the moral value of the 
forces that strictly tend to edification, such as the example and character of our saintly 
ones, and the labours of those who instruct in Christian truth and duty. Such forces 
are sometimes most imperfectly estimated and are even undervalued, because their results 
are not easily counted; yet God's Word teaches us that iu the way of edifying comes 
the truest power for multiplying. — B, T. 

Ver. 34. — A bodily absent Christ may be a spiritually present power. Attention Is 
directed to the remarkable fact that St. Peter spoke to .^neas as if the Lord Jesus were 
actually present in the room ; and that he was present is proved by the healing which 
followed upon the invoking of his power: " Jesus Christ maketh thee whole 1 " The 
words must have sounded very strangely to those who first heard them. They sound 
strangely to us. Jesus Christ was not there. No one saw him. No calming look from 
Jesus quieted the sufferer. No hand of Jesus touched and quickened into life the sickly 
man. No roice of Jesus spoke the words of healing power. The Jesus of Bethesd^, 



dfi. It. 1—4^.] IrflE ACTS 0£' Tflfi AtOSl^LfiS. <^1 

and Nain, and Capernaum, and Bethany was not there. Some might have said, " Jesuj 
is dead," and might tell how they saw him die. And if others urged that nevertheless 
he lived, they might say, "Ah! yes; lives far away in heaven, among the angels." 
They had seen him go up, and a white cloud sailed across and hid him from view ; and 
since that day no human eye had looked into his face or seen the print of his feet. To 
many of us one of the gravest difficulties is to reconcile the apparent contradiction^ 
Jesus is in the glory ; Jesus is here. Jesus sits on the throne ; Jesus dwells in the open, 
trusting heart. And our difficulty is not met hy urging that Jesus himself is in the 
glory, but his influence is here, his power is here, his Spirit is here; for we do not 
want to know about his influence, but about his personal presence, which carries and 
assures his influence. What we find it so hard to realize is that the only true being is 
spiritual being. Christ is a spiritual being ; we are spiritual beings ; so we can be really 
together, though the material thing space may seem to be a woeful divider. Two spirits 
can come together ; and if one spirit be weak, depeniient, suflfuring, and the other strong, 
loving, and glorious, there may be wondrous and gracious intercommunions, and Jesus 
may make palsied jEncas whole. The striking thing in our text is the declaration that 
Jesus was actually tliere, and there to heal. Then we inquire — 

I. What abb tue eyes that can see such a peesekt Christ? For it is quite 
proper to say that both St. Peter and .fflneas saiv Jesus there. We so highly value the 
use of our bodily eyes that we fail to realize our soul-eyes. There are some striking 
instances in Scripture of the weakness of our bodily vision, and of our power to' see what 
the eye never looks on; e.g. Sodomites wearying themselves to find the door; the 
prophet's servant seeing the guardian angels all round the mountains ; so Saul !iaw 
nothing, and yet everything, when smitten down at Damascus. See also the hoiden 
eyes of the disciples on the way to Emmaus. This eye of the spirit, that brings Jesus 
near, we call faith. It is to the soul what the eye is to the body. It strains through 
the spiritual atmosphere, and makes real and clear spiritual objects. And the present 
Christ, so beheld, becomes to us a comfort and a joy unspeakable ; telling as a gracious 
elevator on our whole daily life, sanctifying everything with the conviction, Christ ia 
with me here. 

II. What is the condition which can feel Christ's presence? Need and 
suffering, especially spiritual need and spiritual suffering, are the great quickeners of 
sensibility. 'I'he soul that needeth Christ soon makes the joyous discovery that Christ 
needeth the soul, and has already come seeking it. Sin-sick souls want the Physician 
nigh, and it is still the great gospel to men that we may stand before them and open 
and quicken their spiritual vision as we say, "Lookl Jesus Christ maketh thee 
wholel"— B.T. 

Ver. 40. — Apostolic and other reswrreetiona. There are only eight cases of resurrection 
from the dead recorded in the Bible. Elijah raised the widow's son at Zarephath. 
Elisha raised the Shunammite's son. By contact with Elisha's body in his grave, .1 
dead man was quickened. Our Lord raised the daughter of Jairus ; the son of the 
widow of Nain ; and Lazarus of Bethany. St. Peter raised the charitable Dorcas. 
St. Paul restored the fallen Eutychus. Keeping these cases in mind, we may compare 
them with the resurrection of our Lord, and learn much from the distinct peculiarities 
of his resurrection. 

I. Is ALL other cases DEATH TOOK PLACE UNDER THE QUIET CONDITIONS OF ORDINART 

disease, but our Loed DIED BY A DEATH OF VIOLENCE. The little lad at Shunem was 
smitten by a sunstroke. The maiden at Jairus's house was struck down by fever. Over 
the fading hours of Lazarus's sickness loving sisters watched. Dorcas was for some 
days at least ill. Eutychus alone seems to have died by sudden accident. But our 
Lord's was death in the prime of life, in the fulness of health and strength ; death borne 
when all the human faculties were in full vigour and exercise ; death by the hand of 
violence ; death judicially arranged ; death voluntarily submitted to. Show that the 
difference is explained by our Lord's relation to human sin. 

II. Other besubkections were effected through some human agenot, the 

DiTINE power worked BY SOME HUMAN MEDIUM ; IN THE CASE OF OUR LoRD THERE 

WAS ifo HUHAN AGENCY WHATEVER. At Zarephath and at Shunem there were prophet-:, 
prayeM, and painful efforts, to which alone returning life responded. St. Peter went into 



3S2 



THE ACTS OF THK APOSTLES. 



[oh. X. 1 — 48 



the fleath-chsmber of Dorcas, prayed, and spoke words of faith and power. Paul fell 
on and embraced the dead Eutychus. But our Lord " had life in himself," and so ht 
roie. In the grey of the dawning of that glorious Easter morn, he rose. No hand ol 
power, no wizard*! wand, no prophet's outstretched body, touched the sleeping King. 
He rose ; that is all. Show what of his Divine nature is declared to us in this unique 
and sublime fact. He was " God manifest in the flesh." 

IIL All othbb eesurbeotions were merely temporabt renewals or baethly 
LIFE CNDEB'THK SAME OLD EARTHLY CONDITIONS. Lazarus was restored for just a few 
more years to his home and brotherhood, by-and-by to die again even as he died at 
first. Dorcas came back but to make a few more garments for the widows and the poor. 
and then to die again, and be hopelessly laid out for burial a second time in that uppei 
chamber. Nobody was ever raised from the dead to live afresh sort of life under new 
conditions. They simply took up the thread of their old lives, as if there had been no 
strange break in them. The little lad ran out to his father among the reapers, just as 
he had done 1}efore that sad sunstroke. The maiden grew on into her womanhood as 
if she had never closed her eyes to the light in that time of burning fever. And the 
lad went to work again at Nain, to keep a home for his poor widowed mother. But 
in the case of our Lord there was no mere continuation of the old earthly life. The 
Resurrection links on to the Ascension, and Jesus risen is Jesus glorified. 

IV. All other persons were brought back from the grave only to fall into 
ITS power again. We think of them with feelings in which much sadness mingles ; for 
tlicy were tivice dead. But "Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; death 
hath no more dominion over him." He liveth again; and now he liveth for ever. 
Man's power to bless his fellow-man is sorely limited ; for he must die. Chiist's power 
to bless is unlimited ; for he will never die. His resurrection was to a deathless and 
eternal life ; there are no limitations that can ever check, on Christ's side, the beneficent 
operations of his grace. " Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost 
who come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them."— B. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEB X. 



Ver. 1. — Now (here teas (two last words in 
italics) for there wo» (in roman), A.V. and 
T.R. ; ComeUufhy name fox called Cornelius, 
A.V. A glance at the map will show that 
Ceesarea (see note to ch. iz. 30) was but a 
ihort distance, some thirty miles, from Joppa, 
It was doubtless with a view to Peter's 
momentous errand to Ctesarea that Luke 
recorded his previous visit to Lydda and 
liis residence at Joppa, consequent upon the 
restoring of Dorcas to life : the originei of 
Gen tile Christianity being the prime object of 
the Acts (see Introduction to the Acts). The 
Italian hand; or, cohort {aireipa). The airflpa, 
or cohort, was used in two senses. When 
spoken of strictly Boman troops, it meant the 
tenth part of • legion, and consisted of 
from four hundred and twenty-five to five 
hundred or six hundred men, according to 
the strength of the legion. Its commander 
was called a chiliaich, and it was divided 
into eenturies, each commanded by a cen- 
turion. But when ipoken of auxiliary 
provincial troops, it meant a regiment of 
abont a thousand men ( Josephns, ' Bell. Jud.,' 
Ui. 42). It is in this last sense probably 
that tt U need hei*. Josephus, in th« 



passage above quoted, speaks of five snch 
auxiliary cohorts coming from Ctesarea to 
join Vespasian's army, and he tells us in 
another place (' Bell. Jud.,' ii. 18, 7) that 
the principal portion of the Boman army at 
CsBsarea were Syrians. It is pretty certain, 
therefore, that the Italian cohort here spoken 
of were auxiliaries, so called as being made 
up in whole or in part of Italians, probably 
volunteers or velonet (Farrar, vol. i 278, 
note). Another reason for this conclusion 
is that it does not seem likely that one of 
the diviiions of a legion should have a name 
(though it was very common for the legions 
themselves to be distinguished, in addition 
to their number, prima, seounda, decima, etc., 
by such names as Italica, Parthica, Augusta, 
etc.), but that separate regiments would 
naturally have appropriate names for the 
same reason that the legions had. Thus, 
besides the Italian cohort here named, we 
have the Augustan cohort in oh. xxvii. 1. 
It might be Important for the teourity of 
the procurator, in so turbulent a province as 
Judsea, to have at least one cohort of Italian 
soldiers at the seat of government. Benan 
(' Apdtres,' p. 202) thinks the full name of 
the cohort may have been "CJohnrs prima 
Augusta Italica oivium Bomanorum ; " wid 



OB. X. 1 — 18.J 



THE A0T8 OP THE APOSTLEa 



833 



add* that there were in the whole empire 
not fewer than thirty-two cohorts bearing 
the name of Italian. 

Ver. 2.— Who for tohieh, A.V. A devout 
man (Eu<re0^s); and in ver. 7. It is an 
interesting question as to what was the pre- 
cise religious status of CJornelius, whether he 
was a proselyte in any technical sense. But 
the whole narrative, in which he is spoken 
of simply as a Gentile and nnciroumoised, 
seems to indicate that, though he had learnt 
from the Jews to worship the true Ood, and 
from the Jewi^ Scriptures read or lieard 
in the synagogue to practise those virtues 
which went up fur a memorial before God, 
yet he was in uo sense a proselyte. It is 
pleasant tu think that there may have been 
many such in the different countries where 
the Jews w ro dispersed (oomp. oh. xiii. 16, 
and probably uli. xi. 20). 

Ver. 3. — Openly for evidently, A.Y.; at it 
were about for abou/, A.V. and T.B. ; unto 
for to, and to for unto, A.V. Openly; or, 
evidently ^ipavepas), indicates the distinctness 
and certainty of the vision. It was, as 
Meyer says, a clear angelic appearance ; 
there was no indistinctness or confusion 
about it, and consequently it left no kind of 
doubt in the mind of Cornelius. An angel ; 
or rather, the angel f the addition of God 
defines it (see ch. v. 19, note). 

Ver. 4. — Ee, fattening hia eyea upon toi 
when he looked on, A.V. {areviaas, as oh. iii. 4, 
etc.); and being affrighted fur he aat a/raid 
and, A.V.; gone for eome, A.V. Por a 
memorial; i.r. thy prayers and thine alms 
iTO set is the sight of God, and are the 
cause of his now remembering thee and 
pending this mespage to thee. Cornelius's 
good works were the fruit of his faitli in 
God as revealed in the Old Testament. 

Ver. 5. — Fetch for call for, A.V. ; one (in 
italics) for one (in romau), A.V. and T.B. ; 
wJu) it eurnamed for whose turrMme it, A.V. 
Peter is always used by St. Luke, rather 
than Cephas. 

Ver. 6. — The last clause in the AV. and 
T.B., " he shall tell thee," etc., i« omitted in 
the B.V. 

Ver. l.—That for uihioh, A.V.; him for 
Cornelius, A.V. and T.B. Two of his house- 
hold servants (see ch. ix. 38, note). Corne- 
lius's faith and piety were like Abraham's^ 
he taught his household to keep the way of 
the Lord, and to do justice and judgment 
(Qen. iviii. 19). 

Ver. 8. — Having reheaned for when he had 
aedared, A.Y. ; M (hingt for all these things, 
A.V. 

Ver. 9. — Now on for on, A.V. ; viere for 
teen*, A.V. The house-top ; tlie quietest and 
moat retired place in an Eastern house 
(comp. 1 Sam. ix. 25, 26). It is not incon- 
sistent with I his that the house -tt-'p could 



also be made a place of special publicity, 
from its height and open space (see Luke 
zii. 3). About the sixth hour. Noon, the 
second of the three hours of prayer among 
the Jews, called "the midday prayer." 
The last was the ninth hour (ch. iii. 1) and 
the first the third hour, nine in the 
morning (oh. ii. 15). See Pa. Iv. 17, 

Ver. 10. — Hungry for very hungry, A.V. ; 
desired to eat for would have eaten, A.V. 
Hungry. The word so rendered (irp6<miiias) 
occurs nowhere else either in the Xew 
Testament or in any other writer. Po.ssibly 
he, like Cornelius (ver. 30), had been fasting 
till the time of prayer. A trance (^Ka-Tacrii) 
expresses a state of transition from: the 
ordinary state into a new or different state. 
Applied to a man, it denotes that state in 
which the external senses and the volition 
are suspended, and all his impressions are 
derived from within (see ch. xi. 5; xxii. 
17). It is also used to express great astonish- 
ment (Luke V. 26 ; ch. iii. 10 ; Mark v. 42). 
In the LXX. of Gen. ii. 21 it is spoken of 
Adam's deep sleep, and in Gen. xxvii. 33 of 
Isaac's exceeding trembling, and elsewhere 
of strong emotions. 

Ver. 11.— J36 beholdeth the for taw, A.V. ; 
descending for descending unto him, A.V. 
and T.B. ; were for had been, A.V. ; let 
down by four earners upon the earth for knit 
at the four corners and let down to tite earth, 
A.V. and T.B. The vessel coming down 
from the open heavens implied that the 
command to eat what was contained in it 
was given by revelation. The things sent 
were from God, and the command to eat 
was from God. Peter's hunger had prepared 
the way fur the particular form of the 
vision. 

Ver. 12.—Beatlt and ereepina things of 
the earth for beasts of the earth, and wild 
beasts, and creeping things, A.V. and T.B. ; 
heaven for air, A.V. The distinction 
between clean and unclean was very sharply 
drawn in the Levitical Law (Lev. xi. ; see 
especially vers. 41 — 44 and xx. 25; Deut. 
xiv. 3 — 20). Peter's astonishment must, 
therefore, have been exceeding great at the 
command to slay and eat. And so his 
answer in ver. 14 shows. And yet our Lord 
had taught him the same truth (Matt. xv. 
10 — 20, or still more distinctly Mark viii. 
14—23). 

Ver. 14. — And unclean for or unclean, A.V. 
and T.B. It is rather a striking testimony 
to Peter's religious character as a Jew 
before his call to the apostolate, that, poor 
Galilean fisherman as he was, unlearned 
and ignorant, he had yet always conscien- 
tiously obeyed the Law of Moses in regard 
to things clean and unclean (comp. Dan. 
i. 8 — 15). The address, Lord (Kipi^, suems 
certainly to recognize the voice as that of 



334 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. X. 1— 4a 



Christ, which bIbo agrees with the descent 
of the vessel from heaven. The auswer is 
very similar to the refusals in Matt. xvL 22 ; 
John xiii. 8. 

Ver. 15. — A voice for (he voice, A.V. ; 
came for spake, A.V. ; make not for that call 
not, A.V. What God hath cleansed, etc. 
" Tiie Law was our schoolmaster [' tutor,' 
E.V.] to bring us to Christ." But now, 
under the gospel of faith, we are no longer 
under a schoolmaster. There is neither Jew 
nor Greek. " Old things are passed away, 
and all things are become new." 

Ver. 16. — And this for (hit, A.V. ; straight- 
way the vessel for tlie vessel . . . again, A.V. 
and T.B. This was done thrice ; t.e. as is 
clear from the previous " the second time ; " 
the same voice addressed to him the third 
time a direction to eat. The repetition 
three times of the same injunction was to 
give certainty (oomp. Gen. xli. 32). For 
the repetition of the tame words, comp. 
Matt. xxvi. 44. The receiving of the vessel 
again into heaven merely indicated the 
termination of the vision. The interpreta- 
tion of it was to follow ver. 19 and following 
verses (see esp:ciiilly ver. 28), and was 
further emphasized by what is related in 
vers. 44 — 46 and ch. xi. 1 5 — 17. 

Ver. 17. — Was much perplexed for doubted, 
A.V. ; the for this, A.V. ; might for should, 
A.V. ; that for which, A.V. ; by for from, 
A.V. ; having made inquiry . . . stood for 
had made enquiry . . . and stood, A.V. 
The gate (iru\tiv) ; the porch or gate into 
the court of an Eastern house. In ch. xii. 13 
we have " the door of the gate " (see Matt, 
xxvi. 71 ; Luke xvi. 20, etc.). 

Ver. 18. — Lodging for lodged, A.V. 

Ver. 19. — And while for while, A.V. 
Thoughi (Suntuiiov/jievov, B.T.), stronger than 
the ii>evii.oviJ.4voO of the T.B. ; thought over 
through and through; considered in all its 
bearings. It only occurs here and two or 
thi'ee times in Cyril and other Church 
■,vriters. Th« Spirit (so ch. li. 12). In ch. 
xiii. 2 it is rh Tvvevixa rh iSryiov. 

Ver. 20. — Bid arise for arise therefore, 
A.V. ; nothing doubting for doubting nothing, 
A.V. But arise. The but answers the 
unexpressed idea — Do not hesitate, do not 
delay, but go at once. For I have sent 
them. This is one of the many passages 
wliich distinctly mark the personality of the 
Holy Spirit (comp. oh. viii. 29; xiii. 2; 
XX. 28, etc.). Here, too, we may uotice the 
working of God's providence, under whose 
direction Peter's tiioughts and Cornelims's 
message meet at the same point, like men 
working from opposite ends of a tunnel and 
meeting at the same spot. 

Ver 21. — And for then, A.V. ; the men for 
the men which were xent unto him from 
Corndiug. A-V. Mid T.B,. 



Ver. 22. — A centurion for (he centurion, 
A.V. ; righteous fot just, A.y,; well reported 
of for of good report among, A.V. ; of God 
(in italics) fotfrom God (in roman), A.V. ; a 
fioly fur an holy, A.V. ; from thee for of thee, 
AV. Eighteotis; as Matt. L 19 (comp. 
the description of Cornelius in ver. 10). The 
mention here of his being well reported Oi 
by all the nation of the Jews is an additional 
trait (comp. Luke vii. 2 — 5). For the ex- 
pression, "of good report" (iiapTupov/j.fyos), 
see ch. vi. 3, note. Of God. The rendering, 
" warned from God," however, fairly repre- 
sents expniJ.aTt(r8Tj, because xp'^Mari^o^a' does 
not mean " to be warned," but " to be divine- 
ly warned." Xpniiiarl^effBaf iiapa OeoS airu- 
KaXuti/iv SfxearBai (Theophylaet). See the 
frequent use of the word in tiie New Testa- 
ment (Matt. ii. 12; Luke ii. 26; Heb. viii. 
5 ; xi. 7, etc.). Josephus frequently uses the 
verb in the active voiue in the same sense. 
To hear words firom thee. A Hebrew turn of 
expression. 

Ver. 23. — So he called for (hen called he, 
A.V. ; he arose and went forth for Peter 
went away, A.V. and T.E. ; certain of the 
brethren for certain brethren, A.V. And 
lodged them is rather a feeble rendering 
of e|eVi<rey. The same word is rendered 
entertained in Heb. xiii. 2, whicli is nearer 
the sense ; " to entertain as a guest." Tlie 
word carries with it that he showed them 
hospitality, and thus broke down the wall 
of partition between hira and them. " He 
gave them friendly treatment, and made 
them at home with him " (Chrysostom). (For 
^eiilCo/juu, see ver. 32.) He arose and went 
forth. This was on the morrow of their 
arrival. It was two days' journey from 
Csesarea to Joppa, and two days' journey 
back again, the distance being thirty miles. 
They would probably stop tlie night at 
Apollonia, whieh was half-way, on the coast 
road. Certain of the brethren. Tlie ready 
missionary spirit of the lirst disciples is here 
apparent (comp. ch. xx. 4). 

Ver. 24. — On the morrow for the morrow 
after, A.V. ; was waiting for waited, A.V.; 
having called for and had called, A.V. ; and 
his near for and near, A.V. On the morrow. 
The addition of after in A.V. makes the sense 
clearer. They entered into Caesarea. A 
memorable event, being the first invasion 
of the Eoman empire by the soldiers of the 
cross. His near friends. We have here a 
proof of the strong faith of Cornelius. He 
did not doubt the angel's promise (■?ere. 5 
and 6). We see his brotherly loye. He 
invited his friends to come and liear the 
message of salvation ; those whom, as 
Chrysostom suggests, he had himself brought 
to a better mind. 

Ver. 25. — When it came to pass that Peter 
(tfitered tot o^s feler u>at coming in, A.V 



CH. i. 1—48.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



ass 



The cominentators all notice tho ungram- 
in&tical phrase, ^'jeVsro rod eicrcAdeii/, of the 
R.T. If seems to be a mixture of two con- 
structions — iy4v€To rov flffeK^^lv rhj/ nerpov 
and iis S^ ela'TJ\dei> 6 Ufrpos. But probably 
the T.B. ia right. Worshipped him ; not 
necessarily as a god, because irpoaKwe'iv (with 
a dutive or an accusative, or, as here, without 
any oa»e, Hebrew ninr-i»n) is constantly 
nsed to expresi that prostration which 
Orientals practised before those whom they 
wished to honour; e.g. Gen. xxiii. 7, 12; 
xxziii. 3, G, 7, etc. But Peter's answer 
shows that he siiw in it greater honour than 
ought to be paid by one man to another 
(see ch. xiv. 15). 
Ver. 26.— Raited for took, A.V. 
Ver. 27.— IHndelh for found, A.V. ; many 
Home for many that were come, A.V. 

Ver. 28. — Ye yourselves for ye, A.V. ; to 
join himself for to keep company, A.V. ; and 
yet unto me hath God showed for but God 
hath showed me, A.V. Ye yourselves know. 
It was Dotorinus among the Romans tbat 
the Jews kept themselves aloof from other 
people. Hence the accusation against them, 
in common with Christians, of being haters 
of the human race. Tacitus says of them 
that they hated all people, except their 
own countrymen, as their enemies, and 
refused to eat or intermarry with them 
( " Separati epulis disoreti oubilibus ; " 
•Hist.,' V. 6). The word a\K6(j>v\os, one of 
another nation, occurs only here in the New 
Testament, but is common in the LXX. 
often as a synonym for " Philistines " (see 
Jutlg. Hi. 3, etc.). T'ais rather refutes 
Meyer's remark that " the designation (of 
Gentiles) heie is tenderly forbearing." 

Ver. 29. — Wherefore also I came for there- 
fore came I unto you, A.V. ; when for as soon 
08, A.V. ; with what for for what, A.V. ; 
ye tent for ye have sent, A.V. 

Ver. 3(1. — Until this hour, 1 wa» heeping 
the ninth hour of prayer for I was fatting 
until tliis hour, and at the ninth hour I 
prayed, A.V. and T.E. ; apparel for clothing, 
A.V. Four days ago. This was the fourth 
day (see ver. 23, note). Until this hour, 
etc. Tlie reading of tho E.T. is not 
adopted by Meyer or Alford, and the B.V. 
is anintelligible. The A.V. seems to give 
the meaning clearly and accurately. Until 
this hour probably denotes the sixth hour, 
midday, as In ver. 9. Peter's journey 
would naturally have been taken in the 
cool of the early morning. Starting at 
5 or 6 a.m., five hours, with perhaps an 
hour's halt, would bring him to the end of 
his fifteen miles' journey by 11 or 12 a.m. 
Apparel. The same phrase, iaSi/s Xa/iirpi, 
in used by St. Luke (xxiii. 11). In the 
di'scription of the transfiguration a •trongei 
expression i^ ufed, d^arTpairTwv, dazzling. 



Ver. SI.— Saith for laid, A.V. 
Ver. 32. — Unto thee for hither, A.V. ; who 
it lumamed for whose surname is, A.V. ; 
lodgeth for it lodged, A.V. ({ev^feroi in the 
middle voice; for the active, see above, 
ver. 23) ; Simon for one Simon, A.V. Tho 
clause which follows in the A.V., "who 
when he oometh shall speak unto thee," 
is omitted in the E.T. and B.V. 

Ver. 33. — Forthwith for immediately, A.V., 
we are for are we, A.V. ; in the siglit of for 
before, A.V. ; have been for are, A.V. ; tha 
Lord for God, A.V. and T.E. 
Ver. Si.— And for then, A.V. 
Ver. 35. — Acceptable to for accepted with, 
A.V. As regards the truth that Ood is no 
respecter of persons, wliich the present inci- 
dent had brouglit home so vividly to Peter's 
apprehension, there can be no difficulty in 
understanding it. Cornelius was devout, 
he feared God, he was fruitful in prayer 
and almsgiving. God did not say to him, 
"All this would have been accepted in a 
Jew, but cannot be noticed in a Gentile." 
But, Gentile as he was, his prayers and alms 
went up for a memorial before God. If the 
things done were good in tliemselves, they 
were equally good whoever did them. God 
is no respecter of persons to accept or reject 
one or another, because of who he 4t, and 
not because of what he does (Eph. vi. 8). 
The rule is glory, honour, and peace to 
every one that worketh f,'ood, to the Jew 
first and also to the Gentile, for there ik 
no respect of persons with God (Rom. ii. 
10, 11). The word ir/joirwn-oA^n-TT^s (respecter 
of persons) occurs only here at all; irpa- 
(r<u7ro\7)7rW« (to accept or respect persons), 
once only, in Jas. ii. 9 ; wpoa-awoKiiifita 
(respect of persons), Rom. ii. 11; Eph. ri. 
9 ; Col. iii. 25; Jas. ii. 1. The same ideaia 
expressed by irp6ffwjrov Kaii^iveip^ by whioh 
the LXX. render the Hebrew n'ja !<»], 
and by irpiiaairov 9av/j,d(iiy, by which they 
also render it and the kindred phrase, 
□'3snn (see Lev. xix. 15; Dent. x. 17, 
etc.). The first phrase occurs iu Luke xi. 21 
and Gal. ii. 6 ; the latter only in Jude 16, 
where it is rightly rendered in the R.V., 
" showing respect of persons." Another 
phrase is airpofrtciroXTjTrrws (without respect 
of persons), 1 Pet. i. 17, and $\eireii> els 
Tp6(rumoii (to regard the person), Matt. xxU. 
16; Markxii. 14. 

Ver. 36.— J3"« for God, A.V. ; preaching 
gotd tidingt of pea^x for preaching peaxe, 
A.V. 

Ver. 37. — That saying ye yourselves hnow 
for that ward, I tay, ye know, A.V. ; be- 
ginning for and began, A.V. The construc- 
tion of vers. 36, 37, and 38, is somewhat 
difficult, but by far the easiest and most 
natqral way, both as regards granuuftr «ad 



398 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. z. 1—4S. 



seme, U to make i/iiis olSare govern rhv 
\6yov directly : " You, Gentiles, well know 
the word which God sent to the Israelites, 
when be caused the gospel of peace to be 
preached to them, the word, namely, which 
came [ri yfviiJLivov ^^/la— comp. especially 
Luke iii. 2] tlirougliout all Judiea," etc 
(ver. 36), "about Jesus of Nazartth, how 
t|iat God anointed him," etc In the above 
sentence, t^ yev6ficvoi' ^tjtia is in apposition 
with rhv \6yo¥, but amplifies and explain* 
it ; and again '\it(Tovv rhv imh Na^iuir, 
with all that follows down to the end of 
ver. 39, is a still further explanation of the 
/i^juo, and a summary of that gospel which, 
as Corneliuaalready knew, had been preached 
to the Jews by Jesus himself. The paren- 
thesis, " He is Lord of all," ia most op- 
portunely inserted, that hif hearers might 
know that Jesus of Nazareth was Lord of 
the Gentiles as well as of the Jews. The 
words \6yos and ^/la are synonymous, as in 
Ter. 44 and in 1 Pet. i. 23, 25 (see Luke 
iii. 2; Gph. vi. 17), and are better both 
expressed by the English word, as in the 
A.V., than by word and saying, as in the 
E.V. 

Ver. 38. — Even Je$u* of Nazareth, Row 
that God anointed him for hmo God anointed 
Jetut of Nazareth. The reference to the 
anointing (Isa. Ixi. 1; Luke iv. 18, 21; 
Matt. i. 16, 17; ch. iv. 27) was necessary 
to represent him as God's Christ (see ch. is. 
22). For the designation, of Nazareth, comp. 
ch. ii. 22; iii. 26; iv. 10; vi. 14; Luke 
xxiv. 20. Oppressed of the devil. This 
ascription of disease to Satan agrees with 
Job li. 7 and Luke xiiL 16. The word 
rendered " oppressed " (jiarttXwaarevaii,f»ovs) 
occurs in the New Testament only here 
and Jaa. iL 6, but, with its substantive 
xo-aivvaiTrda, is found repeatedly in the 
LXX. and the Apocrypha, and in classical 
Greek, though rarely. A good example of 
its force is Exod. i. 18, and of the lub- 
stantive Exod. vi. 7. It means " to rule 
over oppressively, and by force." In the 
explanatory addition, Tor Ood was with him, 
Peter teaches what our Lord himself and 
Bt, John in liis Gospel so constantly do, that 
our Lord's miracles were wrought by the 
power of Ged (see «.j)f. John v. 17, 19, 30; 
v'ii. 28 ; viii. 28 ; ix. 3, 4 ; Luke xi. 20, etc). 
The unity of the Son with the Father would 
be taught later. 

Ver. 89. — Coimtry for land, A.V. ; wAom 
aUo for whom, A.y. and T.B. ; hanging him 
for and hanged, A.Y. 

Yer. 40. — Oave him to he mad* manifett 
for thowed him openly, A.V. 

Yer. 41. — 7%a( were ohoten for ehoun, 
AM' Peter here again brings forward the 



special apostolic ofSce of being witnesses 
of Christ! resnrrectirr (me oh. i 8, 21, 
22; ii. 32; iii. 15; iv. 33; v. 82; xiii.31; 
xxvi. 16, as well as vers. 89 and 42 of this 
chapter). This constant reference to the 
testimony of eye-witnesses is an indication 
of the thoroughly historical character of 
Christianity, and of the importance of 
Christian evidences. The new matter which 
Peter was to bring before Cornelius and hie 
company begins at ver. 40, but with the 
prefatory remarks in ver. 39, which both 
attest the truth of what Cornelius already 
knew and prepare for the following revela- 
tion. Who did eat and drink (see Luke 
xxiv. SO, 41—43 ; John xxi. 12, etc.). 

Yer. 42. — Charged for commanded, AY.; 
thii it he which it for it it Tie which was, 
A.V. To be the Judge, etc. This statement 
involves the re^iurrection of the dead (comp. 
Jolm v. 21—29; Bev. xx. 11, 12). It is 
easy to see how the creeds would be formed 
from the repetition of short doctrinal state- 
ments like this (see 1 C!or. xv. 3, 4). 

Ver. 43. — Bear for give, A.Y. ; every one 
that for whoeoever, A.V. ; on him for in him, 
A.Y. Here we have another article of the 
Creed, the forgiveness of sins, preached too 
in immediate anticipation of iMiptism, on the 
profession of faith in Jesus Christ (ver. 48). 
Comp. ch. viii. 37 (T.B.) and 38. 

Yer. 45. — Amazed for attoniehed, A.V. 
They of the oiroumoision would doubtless 
be the brethren from Joppa who accompanied 
Peter (ver. 23), A more striking confirma- 
tion of Peter's vision cannot be conceived 
than this descent of the Holy Ghost upon 
the unciroumcised. How could they any 
longer be reckoned common or unclean 
whom God thus cleansed with his Holy 
Spirit? 

Ver. 46.— 7or they heard them, etc. This 
was the incontrovertible evidence of their 
reception of the Holy Ghost (see oh. xL 
15—18, and il 4 and 11, and note on ver. 4). 

Yer. 47.— nfc« water for wafer, A.V. They 
actually had the Spirit, which God himself 
supplied; could any one object to their 
having the water also, which was the part 
of the sacrament which it rested with man 
to supply, in order to complete the new 
birth (John iii. S)? 

Yer. i8.-~Jetui ChriU for the Lord, A.Y. 
and T.B. No one forbidding or objecting, 
Peter immediately ordered that they should 
be baptized. He does not appear to have 
baptized them himself, any more than St. 
Paul did his converts (1 Cor. i. 13— 17)k 
They prayed him to tarry with them, na 
doubt that they might receive fuller instruc- 
tion in the faith of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
into which they had been baplixed. 



(W,x.l— 48.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 837 



HOMILETICa 

Vers. 1 — 33. — The indenture. The meeting of Peter and Cornelius is one of thoso 
liinges upon which, small as they seem at the moment, vast interests turn. It was one 
of those moments when revolutions in the whole state of human society are at the 
birtli ; when that is being unconsciously enacted by the doers which will powerfully 
affect mankind to the end of time and beyond it. From the call of Abraham to the 
death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus, the covenanted mercies of God had been 
restricted within the narrow bounds of the Hebrew race. The very ordinances which 
were necessary to preserve them as a separate people, able to have the custody of the 
great truth of the unity of God, and of the great promise of a Messiah which slv>uld 
come, erected an impassable barrier between them and the rest of mankind. But this 
state of things was designed to be only temporary, and to pass away when it had 
accomplished the purpose for which it was set up. The time was to come when that 
knowledge of God which had been confined in the narrow reservoir of the Jewish 
people was to burst its embankment and flood the whole world with truth. But the 
embankments were very strong. The institutions which were intended to isolate the 
seed of Abraham had done their work well. The mind of the Jew was built in by a 
wall of prejudice, which it might have seemed impossible to break down. But it was to 
be broken down, and that by the hand of God. The manner of doing it was remark- 
able. Among the things which powerfully persuade the human mind ooincidencet 
occupy a foremost place. An event which, happening alone, might not have any very 
commanding power, happening concurrently with another event which has distinct 
marks of special relation to it, acquires enormous influence. And when all possibility 
of human agency in producing the coincidence is removed, the sense of a Divine purpose 
falls irresistibly upon the mind, and with a peculiar energy of conviction. The edges 
of two events, wholly inilependent as far as the will of man goes, fitting into one 
another with the preci'^ion of the two edges of an indenture, produce the absolute 
certainty that the two events were foreordained of God, and have their unity in his 
eternal purpose. Such a coincidence broke down the barrier in Peter's mind between 
Jew and Gentile, and was the first beginning of that wonderful movement which 
transferred the religion of the Jews, purified and spiritualized, to the possession of the 
Gentile, and brought Japheth to dwell in the tents of Shera. Little did the good men 
whom Cornelius sent to Joppa think what would be the results of their embassy to 
Simon ; and even Simon Peter, when lie went with them to Csasarea, probably scarcely 
understood the magnitude of his errand. He opened the gates with the keys of his 
apostolic office, but scarcely realized the multitudes who would enter through them to 
the kingdom of heaven. To us there is something wonderfully instructive in standing 
where we can see the simultaneous events on both sides of the wall. The messengers 
of Cornelius wending their way to Joppa, to find the unknown teacher. Peter praying 
and seeing his vision, and perplexed about its meaning, in utter ignorance that the 
Italians were approaching his door and bringing its interpretation with them. Their 
arrival makes the vision plain, and the voice of the Spirit within him concurs with the 
YOice of the men without. One sees at once the irresistible effect of such a cciincidence 
in overcoming the strongest prejudices, and forcing upon a reluctant mind the convic- 
tion that duty lay in a hitherto untrodden path. " Then hath God also to the Gentiles 
;^ranted repentance unto life " was the just conclusion to which all who heard it were 
brought. And even so in our own lives, if we watch with a careful eye, shall we see 
many coincidences of a like nature giving us the clearest evidence of God's watchful 
care for us, revealing distinctly his hand and his purpose, and making our own path 
of duty clear in the light of his providential ordering. Sometimes it will be a coinci- 
dence between our thoughts and feelings and the events which come unexpectedly 
upon us; sometimes a coincidence between our own thoughts and the thoughts of 
others previously unknown to us. It may be some word of wisdom coming home to 
us at some crisis in our life ; some guide sent to us at the very moment when we were 
in danger of losing our way ; or some comfort poured into our heart by a stranger "in 
his amplicity ; " but anyhow a coincidence in which the two edges of the indentare so 
Mas. B 



338 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. x. 1—48 

manifestly fit into one another that we are constrained to hold our peace and to glorifj 
God, and say, " This is God's work." 

Vers. 34 — 48. — The great surprise. How seldom do things turn out as we expect ! 
What frequent proofs we have (hat God's thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his 
ways as our ways 1 And yet wo are always making iron cages in which we think to 
confine the operations of God's Spirit, as well as the thoughts of men, and are surprised 
when either God or men rel'ustd to be confined within their bars. The pride of caste is 
perhaps that which, more than any other one cause, tends to mislead our judgment and 
to narrow our conceptions. The Jews thought that all God's grace and favour was 
reserved for themselves alone. The Pharisees thought that true holiness was confined 
within the still narrower circle of their own sect. The Romanist conceives of salvation 
as tied within the four corners of the Church of Home. Each narrow sect thinks of 
itself as being exclusively the people of God. Even various parties in the Church can 
hardly think of grace being found in any party not their own. The great truth that 
burst upon Peter's mind, th;it God is no respecter of persons, is one which we are all 
very slow to admit. Peter and his comiianions learnt it with astonishment when the 
Holy Ghost fell upon the mixed multitude in the house of Cornelius. They were, 
perhaps, lialf surprised at their own liberality in sitting in the same room with the 
uncircumcised soldiers of the Italian cohort, when lo I all difference between them was 
•wept away in an instant, and, to the utter amazement of the condescending .Jews, those 
Gentiles spake with tongues and magnified God. Tliey had received the very same gift 
of the Holy Ghost wliich the Jewish disciples had received on the day of Pentecost. 
They were on an equal footing with them. The middle wall of partition was fallen to 
the ground. There was not any longer Jew and Gentile, bond and free — they were all 
one in Christ. " One body, and one Spirit, even as they were called in one hope of 
tlieir calling ; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, who was 
over all, and through all, and in all." It was a great surprise, but it was a great and 
new discovery of the hidden mind of God, a blessed manifestation of the width of tha+ 
saving glace » hich embraces all who believe those glorious truths which Peter opened 
his month to declare to the assembled company. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Piety, its place, its associations, and its reward. We gather — 

I. That God has his servants in unexpected places. We look for piety in certain 
quarters where it may be supposed to flourish ; in others we do not look to see it ; yet 
in these latter it may be found. Who would have expected that a centurion in a 
Roman regiment would prove to be a worshipper of God — one that " feared God with 
all his house"? He and his family must have been living in a way that contrasted 
strangely with the gieat majority of those in a similar position. We must never con- 
clude that men are irreligious because of the class to which they belong or of the 
occupation in which they are engaged. Sometimes, in spite of the most uncongenial 
surroundings, and sometimes taking part in avocations which few godly men could 
possibly embrace, there are found simple-hearted and sincere Christian men. Christ 
has his servants, not only on the exposed hillside and the open plain, but in the most 
secluded glen, bidden where no eye can see them, living in the very last place where 
we should go to finl them. 

II. That piety should be inseparably associated with charity. Cornelius wae 
"a devout man, . , . who gave much alms to the people" (ver. 2). In certain lands and 
at certain times, as in the country and at the period to which our text belongs, devotion 
and almsgiving were very closely conjoined in the public mind. It is quite possible, 
as was then too painfully evident, that these may be found existing together in outward 
form, with no acceptableness to God. But it is not the less true that God demands of 
us that reverent thought directed toward him should be found in close connection with 
generous thought directed toward our brother (see 1 John iv. 20). Christian charity 
should be both deep and broad. 1. It should spring from a deep seEse of the wortl 



OH. X 1—48.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 839 

of human souls whom Christ pities and seeks to save. 2. It should extend beyond 
occasional gifts to those who are in extremity of want. It should include an intelligent 
endeavour to do that which is nally best for the lasting well-being of the people. 

III. That a spirit of devout inquiry is one sure sign of genuineness in eelmion. 
Taking the expression, "Thy prayers ... are come up for a memorial" (ver. 4) with "he 
shall tell thee what thou oughtcst to do" (ver. 6), we conclude that Curuelius was 
deeply conscious that he neeJoil to know more of God than he knew, and that he was 
prayerfully endeavouring to lind his way into the path of truth and heavenly wisdom. 
This is a mark of reality. Those who complacently conclude that they know all that 
is to be known, that wisdom dwells with them as in its chief home, that they have no 
need for spiritual solicitude as to themselves, — these are they whose piety we may dis- 
trust. But the humble and earnest seeker after more lii^ht and truth is the man about 
whose moral integjity there cannot be two opinions. He bears the stamp of sincerity 
on his brow. 

IV. That God will fulfil the desire op him who is thus seeking and striving. 
God gave to this devout inquirer that which he sotight. He granted him a vision, and 
instfucted him ho\v to obtain the further truth he needed that he might find rest unto 
his soul (vers. 3 — 6). Thus he will treat us also. Only wc must fulfil his Divine and 
constant conditions, viz. : 1. Earnest, repeated, jiatient inquiry (Matt. vii. 7, 8). ,2. 
Living up to the light we have (John vii. 17). Half-hearted or impatient prayer will 
wait in vain for the door to be opened into the kingdom. Inconsistent piety will never 
know the doctrine which is of God. But let a man seek with his whole soul and let 
him live according to the known will of God, and then let him " rest in the Lord, and 
■wait patiently /or him," and God will give him his heart's desires (Ps. xxxvii. 4, 7). — C. 

Vert. 9 — 48. — Man in God's sight ; or. Divine imparliaUty. The incident of the 
conversion of Cornelius is suggestive of some important truths, but of one in particular, 
viz. the perfectness of the Divine .impartiality. We look flr^t, however, at — 

I. The part of the physical in the apprehension of tub spiritual. Peter went 
up to pray (ver. 9) ; but he was very hungry and desired bodily refreshment (ver. 10). 
This state of body was probably favourable to his " falling into a trance " (ver. 11) ; 
however that may be, it evidently had something to do with the character of the vision 
which he beheld. The contents of the great sheet, the invitation to " kill and eat," 
answered very closely to his physical cravings. In truth, our spiritual apprehensions 
depend in no small degree on our bodily condition. We may safely conclude that: 1. 
Fasting, as such, has a very small place, if it have any at all, in the Christian dispensa- 
tion. (It had only the very smallest in the Law, though Pharisaic accretions had made 
it a prominent feature of Jewish piety in our Lord's time.) 2. Abstinence rather than 
indulgence is favourable to spiritual apprehension. 8. Bodily health is the best condi- 
tion for religious service. 

II. The absolute nothingness of our physical distinctions in the sight op the 
Supreme. Peter did not at first perceive the full significance of the vision, in which 
he was bidden to partake of anything before him : he " doubted what this vision should 
mean" (ver. 17). But the coincidence of the vision with the coming of the messen- 
gers of Cornelius, and the statement of the centurion himself, removed all difficulty and 
doubt, and he used the noble words recorded (vers. 34, 35). Not that he meant to say 
that God was indifferent to the consideration whether men believed what was true or 
what was false ; that is a gross perversion of his language, which the apostle would 
have resented with the greatest indignation. He meant that God regarded with equa'/l 
acceptance all who held and loved the trutK, whether they were sons of Abraham or 
whether they stood quite outside the sacred circle. The lesson for us is that most 
valuable one, viz. that no physical distinctions of any kind affect our position in the 
sight of God. " The accident of birth " has no bearing on our place in his kingdom. 
Neither age, nor sex, nor class, nor race has anything whatever to do with the estimate 
he forms of us or with the sphere he will assign us. This absolute indifi'erence on God's 
part to distinctions of which we make so much, applies: 1. To the remission of sina 
now ; that dopcnrls wholly on our spiritual relation to Jesus Christ (ver. 43). 2. To hia 
judgment of na after death ; that also will he decided by our attitude towards him 
(ver. 42> 3. To bis communication of special gifts (vers. 44, 45). This impartialitj 



340 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. x. 1— 44 

should be copied by us and, particularly, made applicable to the standing we giye t« 
men in the visible Church (vers. 47, 48). 

III. Odb common belation to God the sottbcb of human sacrbdness. " What 
God hath cleansed, call not thou common " (ver. 15). Probably or possibly it may 
have been intended by this vision to confirm and illustrate the words of our Lord when 
he " made all things pure " (new rendering). But, however this may be, the words 
certainly denote that we are not to consider common or profane those whom God has 
redeemed from profanity. And who are these ? Not only (1) those of our race who have 
been actually redeemed and renewed — those who are " washed and cleansed and sancti- 
fied by the renewing of the Holy Ghost ; " but also — and this is the main thought — (2) 
all the children of men in virtue of their common relation to the Divine Father and 
Saviour. As those who are "all his ofispring," and who are all free to become his sons 
and daughters by spiritual resemblance ; as those for whom the Son of God shed his 
blood and to whom be sends his message of love and life, — all are worthy of our 
'« honour " (1 Pet. ii. 17) ; none are to be " lightly esteemed." — 0. 

Ver. 38. — The imitahh and inimitable in Jesus Christ. I. That in Christ which 

IS inimitable by ds. 1. God sent him on a mission altogether higher than our own. 
He " anointed him " to be the Eedeemer of a world, to be its Saviour by suffering and 
dying in its stead, by revealing truth which it could not possibly have discovered. 2. 
God dwelt in Lim as he does not and could not do in us. He was anointed " with 
the Holy Ghost," and God "gave not the Spirit hi/ measure unto him." 3. He was 
armed with a power which was irresistible : the " winds aud the waves obeyed " him ; 
sickness fled at his touch ; death itself was obedient to his voice ; the spirit-world 
owned his presence and yielded to his authority ; he " healed all that were possessed 
of the devil." Our function in the world, our posesssion by God, our power over the 
forces around us, — this is in striking contrast with the work and present power of Jesus 
Christ. 

II. That in Chkist which is imitable by us. 1. We are charged with a holy and 
benign mission ; we are " anointed " to do a good if not a great work in the world (see 
John XI. 21). We are " sent" by our Lord to "bear witness unto the truth," both in 
word and tieed ; " to work and speak and think for him ; " to " serve our generation by 
the will of God." 2. We are to be those in whom God dwells by his Spirit (see 1 Cor. 
iii. 16 ; 2 Cor. vi. 16 ; Eph. ii. 22). 3. We are to be possessed of spiritual power (Eph. 
iii. 16, 19 ; vi. 10 ; Col. i. 11). 4. We are to be the sources and channels of blessing ; we 
are to "go about doing good" (Heb. xiii. 16). We may "do good " everywhere and 
always — the smile of encouragement, the look of love, the sigh of sympathy, the touch 
of kindness, the word of truth, the act of integrity, every manifestation of the Spirit of 
Christ is "doing good." And all is to bo duuu under the same condition. For: 5. We 
are to have the continual presence and sanction of our heavenly Father : " God was 
with him."— C. 

Vers. 1—8. — The pious centurion. I. The scene of the stobt. It was at 
Ctesarea, Hitherto we have heard of Jud»a, Samaria, and Galilee. Here the fiery 
baptism had descended, and here the martyrs had sealed their testimony in blood. Now 
the second part of the early Church history begins, and the great thought of the 
gospel, the conversion of the Gentiles to Christ, begins to be an accomplished fact. 

II. The Gentile subject of conversion. 1. A centurion ; a captain ; aicildier. 
An old proverb says that " There is no fsiith and piety with men who loUow the camp." 
Not always so, and Cornelius is an early type of those who have united the calling of 
the soldier with simple faith and loyalty to a Divine Master. Whatever view be taken 
of the mililary profession, such an example makes it clear that God has liis chosen in 
places, as it may seem to us, the most unlikely, in callings the most unfavourable, as 
we may think, to the growth of piety. But in reality, reli>jion shows its power in 
transmuting tlie raw material of external circumstance. Were piety dependent on 
happy external circumstances, it would be merely a matter of grace of manners. We 
cannot expect elegance of the boor, refinement of savages and roughs, but the sparks of 
Divine love may be struck from the roughest flint of human nature. Those characters 
which present uatmally the greatest resistance to the gospel become often its brightest 



011.x, 1-48.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 841 

U'ustnttions when subdued by the power of the truth. 2. Moral preparation for the 
gotpel. He was pious, recognizing the reality of religion, reverencing God in the liife 
of the household, and practising known duties with diligence and zeal. Almsgiving, 
it i§ well known, was commended and enjoined by the rabbis as the chief duty in 
religion. And this was connected with the habit of constant devotion. Not to self- 
neglected hearts does God come ; not on eyes unused to watch does the vision ot 
heavenly forms beam. The oratory is the reception-room for God, and the heart is the 
true oratory. 3. Fulfilment of secret yearnings. He sees and hears that which satis- 
fies deep desires of his heait. He beholds an angel of the Lord coming in to him, and 
hears his name pronounced, "Cornelius!" Let us not distract ourselves by considering 
whether this was a dream. The point is not how the centurion saw and heard, but what 
he saw and heard ; not the mode but the matter of the revelation. Evidently here 
was a Divine visit— a personal and particular visit — a visit of Divine recognition, 
sympathy, and blessing. We may notice : (1) The invariable fear excited in the soul by 
Divine revelations. The brave soldier feels it, no less than Moses the stern leader of 
men, or Tsaiah the leal-hearted prophet, or Peter the rock-like and bold. " Woe is 
me ; for I am a man of unclean lips ; " '• Hide thy face, or I die ;" — such is the language of 
those to whom God appears and speaks. (2) This is followed by inquiry, " What may 
God's will with one so selected and singled out be ? What is it. Lord ? " So Isaiah, 
after the vision in the temple, expresses his readiness for service, " Here am I ; send me." 
4. Clear direetions of providences. " Send men to Joppa, and cause Simon Peter to be 
fetched." Here, again, is the ministry of man to man. That Cornelius is bidden to 
send for Peter, and that Peter is bound to follow him, shows, not that Cornelius is 
turning to Judaism, but that the kingdom of God is turning to the Gentiles. Cornelius, 
with prompt and soldier-like despatch, sends two servants under the escort of a soldier 
to Joppa. We should be ready to meet our mercies half-way, as unhappily we are too 
ready to meet our troubles. — J. 

Vers. 9—17. — 3%e ecstasy and vision of Peter. I. The attitude of prateb. How 
constantly is the act and the habit of prayer mentioned in the course of this history — 
on the part of the community and on the part of Individuals I Peter and Cornelius, the 
Jew and the Gentile, are in communion with God at the same moment ; and it is thus 
shown that true fellowship between man and man on earth is conditioned by fellowship 
with G«l. Souls far apart in space are near and at one by means of this mystic tie. 
It was the calm noonday hour, when, as the ancients were wont to say, " Pan sleeps." 
All the mighty heart of nature is at rest, and the very houses of Joppa at his feet 
might seem to be asleep. But the living God slumbers not ; watching over his faithful 
ones and listening to their prayers. Fixed hours of prayer may be usefnl and blessed. 
The thought of uniting with others at the same hour may strengthen devotion. But 
it is an abuse if the fixed hour only is employed in prayer, so as to make devotion 
outside it superfluous. - 

II. The vision. 1. Its character is determined both by the physical and the natural 
state of the apostle. The rapture of his spirit in devotion causes a drain on the forces 
of the body, and, like the Lord in the desert, he is hungry. The noonday meal is 
preparing. At this moment the ecstasy comes upon him, and the earthly need is stilled 
by the heavenly revelation. The food of the spiritual man is to know and do God's 
will, and he can learn, with St. Paul, how to be full and to be hungry, how to abound 
and to suffer need. 2. Its particular features. The vast vessel, like a sieet let down 
by its four corners from heaven, contains a miscellaneous collection of quadrupeds, 
reptiles, and birds. Thus the first impression is shocking to a strict believer in and 
observer of the Mosaic ritual. The confusion of the clean with the unclean, the 
profane with the holy, is that which he abhors with all his soul. It is, in fact, the 
visible presentment of the feelings of repugnance with which Peter must secretly have 
viewed the drawing of the Gentiles with the Jews into the kingdom of God. 3. The 
Divine voice. " Slay and eat." Here the Divine resistance to natural and acquired 
prejudice reaches its height. If we would be followers of the Truth, and make 
progress in the knowledge of God, we must be prepared to meet with such rebuffs. 
Prejudices we have thought to be a clear and integral part of our faith must be overcome 
when the call comes to us to emerge into larger views and clearer light. The most 



342 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. I. 1—48. 



mysterious elements in such struggles is that we seem to be placed in strife with the 
holiest traditions and best associations of our Rarlier life. But it is when the fight begina 
within the man that he becomes worth nothing. And never do ideas become cloar, 
never is the higher generalization grasped, except as the result of such stfuggles. As 
Saul, in the zeal of the old faith, kicked against the goads of his new convictions, 
so was Peter now repugnaut to that new truth which was breaking in with bo much 
power upon his mind. In both cases it was a wider view of the kingdom of Ood, a 
more lovini; interpretation of his purposes to mankind, which was struggling for 
admission to the intellect and heart. Never let us fear the generalization of our ideas 
and feelings of the truth. The change, in uprooting the old, gives us something far 
better to put in its place. The resistance of Peter on this occasion is so like him — 
sharp, stubborn, peremptory. " Never, Lord ! " When Peter spoke thus it was a sign 
that he was about to give way, either on the side of frood or evil. So had he said on former 
occasions : " I will never forsake thee." " Thou shalt never wash my feet 1 " And wo 
know what followed. So in this instance. In each case there was a right feelina; com- 
bined with a wrong or ignorant thought. Ignorance of self precipitates into rash 
resolves ; ignornnce of the grace of Christ and of the power of truth leads to mistaken 
obstinacy and resistance. 4. Tfie repeated voice. This time in explanation of the 
command. What God has cleansed, men are not to deem common. This is a deep 
and pregnant- word. The distinction of clean and unclean animals was (1) a sanitary 
distinction ; (2) a ceremonial distinction founded upon that ; (3) therefore a relative and 
temporary distinction. Apart from the special pufposes for wliich the distinction holds 
good, the general truth of universal and eternal ai)plication obtains — that all creatures 
of God arc good and to be received with thanksgiving. So deeply important is this 
truth, it is repeated over and over again, that it may not possibly bu for.;otten, that it 
cannot henceforth be ignored. (1) Ceremonial, local, national distinctions are for a time ; 
truth and love are universal. (2) The local must give way gradually before the 
imiversal ; the truth which reveals differences before the truth which reconciles. (3) 
The truth for which a sect contends, once clearly established, cannot be lost. But the 
universal truth of the gospel absorbs both it and all partial definitions of truth with 
■tself.— J. 

Vers. 17 — 23. — Peter's visit to Ccesarea. I. The call to action roLLowiNa thb 
EEVELATION OF FAITH. Peter was in perplexity at this astounding vision of the sheet 
let down froin heaven. Every Jewish prejudice was confuted by it, and a new view 
of the purpose of God in the gospel, quite dazzling to his unaccustomed sight, was 
opened. Well might he hesitate. But when God gives us a new view of truth and 
duty, it is not long before he calls us to act upon it. So in this case. Often do feelings 
in the mind thus coincide with outward occurrences. They join hands and irresistibly 
indicate the will of God. While Peter is inquiring the meaning of what he had seen, 
he is being inquired for by the strangers at the door. Then comes the inward intimation 
of the Spirit : " Lo, three men are seeking for theo." 

II. The clearness and bxplicitness op the Divine call. "Arise, go down, go 
with them, doubt nothing ; I have sent them." Happy for us when the path of duty 
is made equally clear. Let us remember that the light is given to those who are 
sincere, and serve God in simplicity of heart. And when the clear call is heard, 
unliesitiitingly must be the obedience. " Immediately I conferred not with flesh and 
blood." The habit of conferring with flesh and blood, i.e. with inclination and dis- 
inclination, obscures the conscience, and, perhaps, destroys our hope of future inspira- 
tions. " I never rise so high," said Cromwell, " as when I know not whither I am 
going," that is, in obedience to the Divine call. So Peter went forth to meet the men. 

III. The meaning of the call explained. Cornelius, a Roman centurion, has sent 
for him. A just and pious man is he, the servant says. Here, then, the vision begins 
to explain itself. What has the Roman to do with the Jew? Everything, if God 
brings them together. And that this was here the case was too evid;nt to be ignored. 
For while God was revealing his will in one way to Peter in a vision, drawing the 
thought of the apostle toward the Gentile, in another way he was speaking to the 
Roman, impelling him to send to the apostle, that he might listen to his teaching. 
What secret attractions Of Providence bring lives together I Do we sufficiently considej 



CH.1.1— 48.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 84S 



thia? The great lesson reflected both from the conduct of Peter and that of Cornelius 
is that we should be prompt to obey Divine calls, whether to do good or to seek good. 
Willingness to receive and to give is the great condition of being rightly led. To speak 
good words to others may be, for some, the noblest function ; to listen to them, for 
others, the greatest means of blessing. It is the Divine will to bring the speaker and 
the hearer together, the teacher and the disciple. Let each, then, be true to the Toica 
within. — J. 

Vers. 23 — 34. — Peter and Cornelius. I. The becbption op the Cheistian apostle 
BT THE Gentile convert. Here were Jew, Gentile, and Christian visibly brought 
into juncturs and unity in the persons of these two men. 1. The Roman officer gives 
a noble reception to Peter, at once a true Jew and a true Christian, by calling together 
his kindred aud friends. He desires that others may partake of spiritual gifts and 
blessings — a true mark of love. We become poor by giving earthly goods away ; rich 
by imparting of those that are spiritual. Perhaps there is commonly too much reserve 
in such relations. We assume reluctance where we might meet with a ready response 
on the part of friends to such invitations. 2. Cornelius feels deep reverence for the 
person of the apostle ; fell at his feet on his entrance, to do him homage. The Romans 
were an intensely religious people in their way. They recognized the niimen, or Divine 
power, in all the great objects of the creation. It was a profound mystical instinct, 
needing only proper direction. 

II. The Christian apostle's demeanour towards the Gentile oonteet. " Rise I 
I also am a man." " Depart from me ; for I am a sinful man, Lord ! " had been his 
oonfcssion to Jesus ; and on this he had been appointed fisher of men. Perhaps he 
remembers that incident now, and, in view of the respect and preparations of Cornelius, 
repeats, " I am also a man." " Cornelius does too much in his reverence towards a 
living and genuine saint; then how can prayer to the images of saints be justified?" 
No true successor of Peter is he, nor has he Peter's humble mind, who suffers his feet 
to be kissed. The worship of the instrument obscures the honour of the Divine Agent. 
The word of Peter rebukes, not only the worship of saints, but all excessive herp- 
reverence and worship paid to great men in the Church. 

III. The connection of events explained. 1. There was a great prejudice to be 
overcome. (Ver. 28.) The prejudice of the Jew against intercourse with the stranger. 
No barrier in nature, no mountain to be crossed or travelled, river to be forded, waste 
to be reclaimed, is comparable to the obstinacy and difficulty of prejudice, most of 
all of religious prejudice. And where in all the pages of history do we find a prejudice 
equal in strength to that of the Jew against the Gentile? 2. The Divine victory over 
prejudice. God had shown that " no man is to he called common or unclean," Immense 
word ! Not yet has its meaning been exhausted ; not yet, perhaps, begun to be truly 
unfolded. How profound the strength and the comfort which flows from such a clear 
word of God 1 For the preacher, teacher, missionary, every kind of worker for anthropic 
good, it is a clear light, a clue to hand and heart ahke. The ideal human nature is 
pure and beautiful, for God made it — whatever actual human nature in the individual 
may he. 'Tis this thought gives inspiration. Peter will not hesitate to -come to the 
Gentile's house when be is filled with it ; and we may face the facts of the life of the 
nations, as they are now being so abundantly unfolded to us by scientific inquiry, 
with intelligent interest and cheerful hope, with the light of the gospel resting broadly 
over the whole field of inquiry. Such is the impulse which has brought Peter hither. 
But why have they sent for him ? The answer will disclose : 3. Further coincidences. 
Cornelius now relates his vision. He, too, had been praying and seeking. To him, too, 
an apocalypse had been given ; and the Divine finger had pointed Jew-wards, as to 
Peterit had pointed Gen tile- wards. Equally Divine is the call ; with equal promptness 
obeyed. Cornelius has sent, Peter has done well to come. Happy meeting, divinely 
brought about, and pregnant with Divine consequences 1 Such a series of events 
indicates God's hand, prepares the mind to listen to God's voice. The inarticulate 
voice of events is his voice, and it prepares us to listen to that which is clear and 
definite. — J. 

Vers. 34 — 43. — Discourse of Peter at Ccesarea. I. The equal justice anu lov« of 



344 tHE ACTS OP THE AtOSTLES. [ch. x, l--4a 

God. He is no respecter of persons. The conditions of acceptance in Ms sight an 
everywhere and for all men the same, viz. reverence and rightness of moral conduct. 
Boes this imply, it matters not what a man helieves, so long as he fears God and does 
what is right? Certainly, helief is not immediately under the control of the will. But 
indirectly it so far is that we are bound to keep our minds open to the light, and to 
seek some belief that may guide conduct. The truth is that the reverence and the 
moral rectitude spoken of cannot exist apart from the root of faith in a supersensual 
order and Divine Law. Indifferentism is not recommended nor excused. But the truth 
that it is only the genuine qualities of the heart, the real disposition of the will, not 
external associations nor advantages of birth, which constitute true worth in God's 
Fight. And any other principle of Divine dealing than this would shock the conscience 
as unjust. 

II. REOAPirniiATioN OF THB GOSPEL. 1. It was a good message of peace sent to the 
sons of Israel. He says nothing about natural reliijion and thi; universal conscience, on 
which St. Paul dwells in the Romans. The gospel is pre-eminently a message by man 
to man ; by a selected people as ministered to the race. It was diffused through the 
Holy Land, and its substance was well known. 2. Its substance — Jesus : his person, 
his sanctified character, and his mighty deeds. His life of perpetual beneficence, his 
healing of those under the bondage of disease and of ignorance. It was manifest to 
men that God was with him, setting the seal of power upon his character and deeds. 
3. The existence of living witnesses to those truths. The apostles were witnesses of the 
facts in the physical world on which Christianity was founded. Christian teachers 
and Christian men now are witnesses of the facts in the moral world which are eternal, 
md which interpret the physical facts. 4. The death and resurrection of Jesus. The 
suflfering and the triumph of love ; here lies the very kernel of the gospel. This 
triumphant Christ has been made manifest to chosen witnesses — to his close com- 
panions and intimate associates during his earthly life. And they have a commission 
to make proclamation of these truths to tlie people, and to testify that he is appointed 
Judge of tlie living and the dead. Finally, the gospel has the confirmation of prophecy ; 
and all who believe on him may receive the remission of their sins. Here, then, is 
a useful summary of the gospel. (1) Peace through Jesus Christ, who has livel, 
suffered, and risen for men. (2) This is a message to all men, and a call to salvation. 
(3) Its aim is univeisal human blessedness. — J. 

Vers. 44 — 48. — Descent of thf Spirit at Ocesarea. Let us notice the following 
particulars in connection with this visitation : — 

I. Ever the Holt Spirit comes upon men or connection with the reception 
OP the truth. So at Pentecost ; so here. The fallini; of the rain from heaven is 
concurrent with the germination of the seed. It can hardly be said that either is first 
or second. Each is the necessary condition of the other. If we desire to secure the 
heavenly words, we must preach the Word — " be instant in season and out of season." 

n. EVbB a new revelation BRIKaS WITH IT ASTONISHMENT AND PERPLEXITY. 

The believing Jew could not understand this outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon the 
heathen; nor how they could be found speaking with tongues and glorifying God- 
To us it seems natural enough that the great purpose of God, the generous germ- 
thoughts of eternal truth and love, should break forth into larger meaning and wider 
development. But there is a lesson for us here. We are all slow to see the large 
consequences of the truth we hold and teach. It surprises us, and alas! not always 
with a joyous surprise, when we find people accepting the consequences of our own 
doctrines, and proving that they have taken seriously what perhaps we preached with 
•oly half a heart. 

IIL Love and truth prevail along with evert manifestation of the Holt 
Spirit. It is Peter, the very personification of the Jewish and exclusive spirit, who 
now pleads for the reception of the new converts. We never understand a truth till 
we have striven against if. Then we become enthusiasts for it when it has conquered 
our own heart and intelligence. The representative of the " circumcision," that is, 
of the exclusive or Jewish view of the gospel, is now the very champion, hot merely 
of toleration, but of a free and loving reception of the heathen converts to the felow- 
ship of Ohnst. The case of Peter, like that of Paul, shows how the best advucatei 



ett.i.l-48.J m& ACTS OB* THE APOSTLBS. «« 

of a holy cause are often, it may be always, to be found amongst those who have been 
its sincere opponents. Thus do extremes meet ; thus out of weakness comes strength, 
from bitterness sweetness ; thus does the gracioas and gentle will of God select foes 
to turn them into friends. But we shall see in the next section the further victory 
of DiTine love over the narrowness and hate of the human heart.— ^. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — The Spirit of Ood in the Oentile world. Oa/iarea. Boman spirit 
there. Philip's visit (see ch. viii. 40). Herod's influea«e. Possible contact of Cornelius 
with gospel truth. Necessity that the entrance of the Church on its new territory 
shenld be solemn, authorized, undoubtedly Hrm, because of the subsequent controversies 
which would be largely settled by reverting to the facts. 

I. Cornelius a ttpb of the religiuus heathen under the influence of the Spirit. 

1. Uevotion may be sincere, while unenlightened ; yet neeiling the higher teaching. 

2. Almsgiving, when accompanied by prayer, a sign of real religion. 3. Household 
piety. The true man lives his faith, however imperfect. As best he could he feared 
Q>)d in the regulation of his life. ' » 

II. SuPBHHATURAL HELP leads ou the seeking minds. The resources which were 
open to the heathen world insufBcient. Philosophy dumb on the greatest questions. 
Heathen priests mostly deceivers. Cornelius was not satisfied. Sense of sin awakened. 
The heathen must be evangelized, even though we admit that their religious position 
is not absolutely hopeless. The gospel is not a mere individual message ; it proclaims 
a remedy for universal ills.' The centurion was a man of great influence. His con- 
version would open the way of the truth to many others. 

in. Lessons fok God's people to be learnt from those without. 1. Responsibility 
for light. 2. Position to be faithfully employed for God. 3. Family religion — even 
soldiers in the house had learnt devoutiiess from their master. 4. Follow the leadings 
of God's voice. — B. 

Vers. 9 — 16 (or ver. 15). — 2%« light of heaven on the open gate of a new world. 
Review the preparations made for the revelation to be now vouchsafed. The teaching 
of Christ. His commission to his apostles. Stephen ; Paul ; Samaria. Peter'^ 
charge of the key. His visit to Joppa. His mind probably already at work on th 
problem. 

I. The two worlds face to face — the heathen and the Jewish, both the seem 
of spiritual manifestations. The two streams of grace flowing, ready to commingle it 
one broad river of new life. 1. Take the two men as types of the two different forms 
of thought and faith — Peter and Cornelius. 2. Both worlds need supernatural com- 
munications. Jews had abused privilege. Gentiles had trampled underfoot the 
remnants of Divine tradition. 3. The new world, that is, the new humanity to be 
called forth, a union of the Jewish and the Gentile. Christ making peaca (Eph. ii. 
11—22). 

II. The light desoendino from heaven at the open gate. 1, Such a vision 
requisite to dispel the darkness of Peter'i mind arjd to assure his faith. He was 
practically weak (see his controversy with Paul, Gal. ii.). 2. A reversion to the 
oi iginal position of man in creation. All distinctions of clean and unclean subsequent 
to creation (see Gen. L). 3. Authority removes what authority had prescribed. " Ood 
hath cleansed." 4. While the vision must have loosened prejudice, it was not itself 
commandment. It prepares the way, shows the open door, but is not itself a sub- 
stitute for God's Spirit. Learn from this that all such help should be used in depen- 
dence on the still higher help, the direct teaching of God's Spirit, both by facts anil 
words. — ^B» 

Vers. 17 — 23. — TAe finger-post of Providence. It is well when we can look «way 
from visions to facts, and deal with living men. Opportunity for action often disperse's 
the cloud of perplexity. The vision in the memory, the men at the gate, the Spirit 
presiding over all. 

I. God's method illustrated. 1. The subjective and the objective united. The 
siiirit within is experience. The work of grace in the outward world, 2. Providential 
guidance is vouchsased. The facts that will help us are at the gate. 3. There is 



346 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. L™. x.1-48 

a background of the supernatural to wliich we are able to refer for authovity — the Spirit 
in the Word, In the living Churches, in the world. 

II. Believing obbdibncb exemplified. 1. Natural feeling overcome in the presence 
of undoubted Divine commandment. 2. A new enterprise faced, in dependence on 
Divine support. 3. Wisdom humbly seeking light that it may be followed. 4. The 
Spirit's seal recognized by the spiritual man. " If any man will do his will, he shall 
know of the doctrine," etc. Doubt too often a moral defect. — R. 

Vers. 23—43. — The first trumpet-sound of the gospel in the heathen world. I. A 
RBPEBSBNTATIVB ASSEMBLY. 1. ComeliuB, hls kinsmen, his near friends, probably 
some of them devout soldiers. 2. Peter, his brethren from Joppa. The different states 
of mind. Inquiry after truth, perplexity as to duty. The helplessness of the heathen 
world well set forth in Cornelius's salutation. The sense of darkness and spiritual want 
a temptation to worship men instead of God. The false Church accepts such worship. 
The true says, " Stnnd up 1 I myself also am a man." 

II. The light of God the only true light in which differences are removed and 
blessings are recognized. Peter brings into that light his Jewish prejudice, and it 
vanishes. Cornelius brings into it his desire for knowledge and equality with all God's 
children, and it is abundantly satisfied. So in the controversies of men, let them meet 
together " in the sight of God," and to hear his voice, and all will be well. 

III. The trumpet-sounds awaking the Gentile world. 1. The personal Redeemer. 

2. The witnessing Church. 3. The universal invitation. *Th« true evangel — the true 
liberty, equality, and fraternity. The Holy Spirit spake by Peter's mouth.— R. 

Ver. 34. — " Ood is no respecter of persons.'' A great truth exemplified in fact 
becomes like a new revelation. What Simon Peter perceived in the setting of real 
life he had often acknowledged before. [t was the application that was requisite. 
Difference between holding a truth and being held by it. 

I. A condemnation or self-kighteousness. Not person, but his own Divine 
righteousness does he respect. The acceptance of the sinner is not a personal favour, but 
a manifcstalion of that which is perfect — the righteousness of Christ. Ritualism 
supposes God capable of being turned aside from his perfect justice. The intolerance 
of bigotry. Class distinctions in the Church, Priestcraft. 

II. A CONDEMNATION OF UNBELIBP, in the form of distrust and despondency. Nothing 
acceptable in fell-reproaches except as they are sincere and accompanied with active 
efforts to do his will. 

III. The motto of the Christian ambassador, whether in carrying the message to 
the degraded classes of our own population or to the hiathen. One gospel for rich and 
poor, cultivated and uncultivated. 

IV. The note of the true Church. That which will not recognize the universal 
brotherhood of men will not be the Church of the future. Coincidence of providential 
teaching with the teaching of the Bible. The world will acknowledge no form of 
Christianity which respects persons. The history of the last centUry showed that a 
false Christianity produces atheism. — R, 

Ver. 36. — The universoU proclamation. "Preaching peace by Jesus Christ." Taking 
Cornelius as an example of a devout heathen, show that the world needed a new 
proclamation of peace, both to individuals and to nations. A personal name must be 
announced ; for it must be preached, not by wars and worldly power, but by persuasion 
and appeal to tlie heart. 

L The message — peace. 1. Peace between man and God in atonement. 2. Peace 
rising up as a wellspring of new life in the heart. 3. Peace ordering the life. 

II, The preacher — Jesus Christ. 1. Not destroying the Law, but fulfilling it. 
The gospel preached from the first. 2. The power of the message is in the messenger. 
Personal power. Power of love. Power of Divine supremacy inviting confidence. 

3. Jesus Christ preached in his people, by his Church, in the embodiment of the Word. 
Test of all doctrines claiming to uplift humanity — Will they bear to be made the basis 
of fellowship? Rationalism has never been able to form a Clmrcb. Jesus preached 
and preaches still a peaceful revolution which shall totally change the world. 



fla. 1. 1— 48.] THE ACTS OF THE AP0STLE3. 847 

III. The atjdiesce. 1. None excluded. No other condition would liarmonize with 
DOth the messa'j;e and the preacher. 2. Christianity preaches peace in states and 
among the contending nations, not by substituting spiritual principles for • laws, 
because it is not the preacher's province to legislate, but by proclaiming the Word of 
Jesus Christ. 3. The mission of the Cliurch to the homes of men, not the peace of 
blind submission, intellectual and moral death, but the peace of Jesus Christ, the life 
of God in the soul of man, flowing out into the surrounding world. Is it peace — within, 
without?— B. 

Ver 38. — The great Philanthropist. "Who went about doing good." The true 
criterion by which Christianity must be tried is its'adaptatiou to the world's necessities. 
The text of Peter's sermon was Jesus Christ. " We are witnesses " of what he was, 
what ho did, how God testified his authority. 

I. The wobld's great want. 1. Deeds, not words. Failure of all mere human 
schemes of pliilanthropy. 2. A benevolence working from a spiritual basis. External 
reform insufficient. 3. Universality. " All the ends of the eaith shall see this 
salvation." 4. A permanent motive to philanthropy, National, legislative, personal 
efforts apt to die out. 

II. The woeld's QKBAT RESOXJBCB. - 1. Philanthropy Springing out of re%i<m. The 
deepest springs of humanity touclied. The lowest and highest united together. 
Eeverence for the weak a truly Christian sentiment; absent from all heatlienism. 
Destroyed by science unless guarded by higher motive. 2. A Divine hope at the root 
of all effort. The kingdom of heaven was what Jesus proclaimed. Not relief merely, 
but restoration. 3. A. perfect Example. The character of Christ acknowledged even by 
opponents to be uniq^ue. Its influence on his disciples inexhaustible. The method of 
Jesus a great guiding fact — "he went about doing good," not waiting for organization, 
or merely presiding over others, or sitting on an inaccessible throne of dignity, but 
doing the work by personal, individual ministration. 

III. The touchstone of truth. 1. Apply it to the claims of rival religions. 
" Doing good." 2. Apply it to the prevalent tendencies of modern society. Philo- 
■sophical scepticism. Socialistic , experiments. Rationalistic criticism. Lowering 
Christianity to a mere republication of morality. 3. Apply it to individuals. Are we 
treading in the footsteps of Jesus as he went about doing good? Is there an impelling 
motive, a generous self-sacrifice, a single-minded simplicity in us, likS his? — B. 

Ver. 42. — The Saviour's charge to his ministers. " He commanded us to preach 
unto the people." No secrets in the Christian religion. Apostles witnesses for the 
sake of others. The key opened the door, and then was flung away. Baptism of the 
Holy Ghost preceded the universal message. 

I. The divinest woek of God's people — to peeach. 1. The greatness of the work 
rests upon the gi'eatness of the necessity. Teaching can never be dispensed with. 
The root of a true faith is knowledge. Popular ignorance immeasurable. 2. No 
ritualistic display can supersede preaching. Nor is devotion the whole of worship. 
As a moral force, Christianity must be preached to men, both conscience and heart. 
3. Preaching is the most simple and pure channel of connection from soul to soul. 
The Spirit flows through the Word. 

II. The chief aim of God's ministees most be to ebach the people. 1. No 
sophistry should blind us to the fact that the proclamation of gospel truth is the first 
duty of Christians. 2. The Word preached must be the Word wliich is adapted to the 
people. No power like that of evangelical truth. 3. Churches must guard against 
being " at ease in Zion." Edification is best aimed at through aggressive efforts on the 
surrounding population. Intellectual preaching must be suboidinated to popular 
wants. An educated ministiy is the want of the times, but the education, Uke all 
other means employed, must be full of the Holy Ghost. 

III. The Master's commission the suppoet of the Church's hopes. 1. Direct 
charge must silence all questioning and all speculation. 2. Jesus Christ reads the 
future. Let the commander give the orders. Then his predictions of victory will be 
fulfilled. 3. The reflex action of zealous fulfilment of the charge on the Church's own 
feith and experience. Those who do much for the people the happiest Christians, th^ 



94g THE ACTS OV THE APOSTLES. [cB- »; 1— 4& 

moit assured believers. The triumphs of practical Christianity wW be its best 
evidence. What we vr« doing, both as individuals and as Churches, to preack to the 
people? — B. 

Ver. 43. — Faith directed fo it$ highent ohfect. "To him give all the prophets 
witness," etc. Peter's climax. He led his hearers up the ascent of faith, and bid them 
see Jesus on the height, above all, summing up all in himself, before all eyes, testified 
to by all witnesses from the beginning. 

I, The two testimonies here set forth — the witness of the written Word, th« 
witness of the unwritten work of the Spirit in the heart. 1. The union of these 
the ground of • sinner's confidence. Faith lays hold of the object. 2. The world is 
invited to examine these two witnesses for Christ. The Bible, as the Book of the 
prophets, stands not alone. God writes a Bible in his Church, in great examples of his 
Spirit's work; in the consciences of men. We must appeal to both. Review the 
course of revelation side by side with the facts of spiritual history. Great revivals 
accompanied by great openings of the Word. 

II. The woblp-witb blessedness. 1. Remission of sins the foundation on which 
all spiritual, moral, and physical change must be built up. No compromise with 
a lower doctrine. The promise of the Spirit is to faith. The kingdom proclaimed is 
not man's kingdom, but God's. 2. The Name of Jesus is the centre of all religious 
reformation. Apostolic successes were due to the unflinching steadfastness of the 
ambassadors. 8. Connect the conclusion of Peter's sermon with the preceding testimony. 
Faith is acceptance, not of any Christ, but of the Christ to whom all tbo prophets 
witnessed. Practical religion is based upon intelligent understanding of the object of 
faith. It is obedience to the truth. — B. 

Vers. 44~-i8.— The first Gentile Church. 1. Importance of the event as remoiving all 
doubt and opening the new future. Ths Holy Ghost his own witness. To resist such 
evidence would be blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. 2. The immediate consecra- 
tion and public sealing of the work by baptism a striking example of obedience to the 
Spirit, and shows us that we should bear in mind always how much profession and 
consecration bear on the interests of Christ's kingdom. 3. Apostolic authority is great, 
but is itself subject to the Spirit. Inspiration in the people of God blends with 
inspiration in his specially anointed messengers. Wherever he shows us that his Spirit 
has already been poured out, let us hasten to bear witness to it. So shall wo 
strengthen our own faith and enlarge the Church. The whole history, thus concluded, 
a lesson on the blessing attending a simple following the guidance of the Spirit. Peter 
an example of a heart enlarged by simplicity.— B. 

Vers. 1 — i9.— Broadening foundations. The promises of God to " Abraham and 
his seed for ever " are not going to be diminished now, but something of the extent of 
tliem is to be made more plain. Nothing shall be taken from the Jew which he is 
w illing to have and to keep ; but much is going to be given, with a manifestation 
unknown before, to the Gentile. With some form of vision, of dream, of angel-appear- 
ance, the covenant of long ages ago was made with the patriarch, and it seems that now, 
some nineteen centuries later, similar au.s;ust realities shall be graciously put into 
movement, to inaugurate the abundant entrance of the whole Gentile world to the 
blessings of revealed religion. Multifarious as the detail of this chapter is, it is knit 
together by strongest bonds. It is one in spirit and in subject, and its impression is 
one. It is the moving drama-like representation of a very real and very significant 
transition in universal history. We are in the presence of a landmark that shall be 
seen far and wide and to the end of time. And we may observe— 

I. In whom this great transition is illustrated. Confessedly indications of it 
had not been wanting, while Jesus lived on earth, in the eulogy he pronounced upon 
the faitt of such as the centurion whose servant was ill, and the Syro-phoenician 
woman. And within the actual ministry of Peter as an apostle, the Ethiopian eunuch, 
his conversion and baptism, had given similar indications. But more than indications 
are now arrived. The time is ripe for manifestation. And the illustration, nay, the full 
and distinct announcing, of the universal privileges and universal blessings of th« 



at. X. 1—48,] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 84S 

gospel of Christ are made in the personal history of Cornelius, 1. He is m Soman. 
No larger, better type of the world could be chosen. 2. He is a Roman of the profession 
of arms. No profession could be chosen fitter to yield in fullest surrender to the 
message of the Prince of peace. 3. He is a man of large and liberal heart, of large and 
open eye. One detail after another of this history betrays it. 4. He is already of 
a religious and devout disposition. He is held in honour for his practical goodness 
among the people. His character as a religious man is regarded by them as a consistent 
character. But past these, he has been a genuine seeker after God in prayer. Though 
a Gentile, he had a soul like that of the true Israelite. His gaze was to the East ; he 
would not bow down to the West. Some of the gospel's grandest triumphs are, and are 
set forth in Scripture as, over the worst lives. But signally the grandest revelations of 
truth and of things to come have been vouchsafed to the pure and the watchful, those 
devout in heart and devoted in life — ay, from Enoch to the shepherds of Bethlehem, 
and on by the Ethiopian and Cornelius to John of Patmos. 

II. In what iiANNEK THIS OBEAT TBANSiTioN IS F0RMUI.ATED, The On* great effect 
is that we are impressed with the Divine initiative and the Divine conduct in even 
the details of what took place. The Divine purpose shall be carried out with Divine 
attention. 1. A vision, and an angel in the vision, appear to Cornelius. Instruction lies, 
no doubt, both in what is said to Cornelius in this vision, and what is left eren to him 
to fill up. (1) He is graciously and approvingly advised that his "prayers," though 
he was not of the favoured nation, and his " alms " liave been noticed of Heaven, and 
have been accepted. They have availed — even as though they had been " incense " 
and the " evening sacrifice." (2) He is told to send to a certain place for " Peter," 
whose name, possibly enough, he had heard by this time ; whom, however, it is evident 
he did not personally know, both from the mode in which the angel described him, and 
from what we read of the way in which Cornelius received him (vers. 5, 6, 25). (3) He 
is left to gather that Heaven's own clock has signified that the time is ripe for some 
event on earth worthy of its marking, and, with exemplary promptitude, he does to the 
letter what he is commanded — and waits the issue. Let alone what was left to Cor- 
nelius to surmise, it is left to us also to imagine how this interval was passed by him — 
how devoutly he mused, how surely he expected what was divinely worth the having 
from the manner in which communication had been made to him, how he talked about 
it with any like-minded, and invited such together, that with himself they might share 
the privilege and responsibility of receiving the illustrious visitor, and hearing his 
mission. 2, A trance, and a vision in the trance, a voice distinctly repeated, and the 
direction of the Spirit (ver. 19), are given to Peter. These were to act as (1) strong 
impulse to him ; (2) deeper instruction in the understanding of the one universal God 
and Saviour, and one large family of mankind "of one blood," though spread among 
mauy a nation of the earth ; (3) literal guidance in the path of duty, and especially 
when the close of the trance and vision was timed to the hour of the arrival of the 
embassy from Cornelius. A wondering and awed and asking mind in Peter is in some 
measure satisfied as well as relieved by the errand and practical work to which he is 
immediately challenged by the three messengers. We may note that all this is mere 
myth and idle tale on the page of Scripture, or that it strongly begs our study of provi- 
dence and a very grateful faith in such providence. Though the age of virion and 
trance be passed, the age of providence and of the Spirit has not passed and never will 
pass. 3, A dciiigned and manifestly adapted meeting of instructor and instructed 
carries on what may be designated without irreverence the divinely planned programme 
of the occasion. Companions and witnesses go with Peter, who has already entertained 
for one night in the same " lod^ng " with himself the strange messengers of Cornelius, 
and arrived at the abode of Cornelius the next day but one after the " trance." Peter 
finds a little congregation of Gentiles to see him and receive,' not so much him, as God's 
Word by him. All these things must be viewed as the arrangements and preparation 
for that which was to follow, and to prove itself the great object in the Divine purpose. 
Forces lon^ estranged are led toward one another in happiest and most impressive 
omens, and very soon they find themselves one in one " Lord of all." Often have thers 
been larger congregations to hear Peter and brother apostles and the true successors 
of these to the present ; rarely have there been more expectant or more rightly and 
devoutly prepared. 4, God's own great sermon to the world is now spoken b/ lips 



aSO THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. x. 1— 4& 

prepared to speak to hearts prepared to receive. The text is that God accepts ever^ 
man wlio is ready " to walk humbly with him, to do justice and to love mercy " 
(Micah vi. 8). And the real sermon consists of this, that Jesus Christ is the only way 
hereto. His Name, his anointing, his unwearied goodness, his oneness with God, his 
crucifying, his rising from the grave, his charge to the apostles in that mystic. forty 
days that they now should preach him " to all the world," as, in iine, Jwlge of living and 
dead, — these are the touching, thrilling, inspiring heads of Peter's discourse, a summary 
of the wa)- of life. And the practical exhortation in the conclusion amounts to this, 
that to Jesus all men are to have recourse — Jie, the one object of faith for the forgive- 
ness of sins : " Every one that believeth on him shall, through his Name receive 
remission of sins." With these words the errand of Peter was very nearly finished. 
Tlie virions and the trance, the intimations of the Spirit, and the journeyings to and fro 
of messuiigers, the expectant Cornoliua and friends, have all found their meaning; face to 
face with one another. Men might little think to-day what lay in that brief address 
of Peter, or that matter of such precious import could lie in so simple a rehearsal. Yet 
it was so. Those few words of Peter were even burdened with the material of hope, 
comfort, joy. They were like the charter of liberty, of right, of wealth, to a household 
and a nation. They were really such a charter to the world. 

HI. The sanction by which this great transition is confirmed and obownbd. 
This consisted in the descent of the Holy Ghost, with his wondrous powers. It was 
another scene of Pentecost ; nay, it wns the other scene of Pentecost, its counterpart. 
Pentecost in its divinest significance, let us say, in the Divine eye itself, awaited this 
perfecting. The world, it is true, docs not yet lie at the feet of Jesus, but " this clay is 
salvation " proclaimed to the world, and " the Son of man" is announced as " come to 
seek and to save that which was lost," of whatsoever nation, tribe, tongue. Again, 
" there was great joy in that city " and in that house. Notice : 1. The stress that is 
laid on " those of the circumcision " being witnesses of the effects of the descent of the 
Holy Spirit " upon the Gentiles." 2. Tlie respect shown to the administration of .the 
initiatory rite of baptism. 3. The little stress that is laid upon the matter who should 
be the administerers of that rite. It is only .said that Peter uttered foith the 
deciding word that this congregation of Gentiles, upon whom the gift of the Holy 
Ghost had fallen, and who were showing manifestly forth his "gifts," ''should be 
baptized in the Name of the Lord." We are reminded of the words of Paul, " I thank 
God I baptized none of you, save," etc. (1 Cor. i. 14). The apparent abstinence on the 
part of Peter now, and the language of Paul subsequently, whatever else may possibly 
underlie them both, may certainly be justly understood to " magnify the office " and 
the work of preaching. In how little honour do we sometimes hold that which was 
now honoured so liighly alike by the anxious longing and attention of Cornelius and his 
friends ; by the conduct of Peter ; and by the Divine preparation of vision, trance, the 
S|iirit, and some coincident providences! The " words" of Jesus are "spirit and are 
life." Near the fount itself they were sometimes honoured as such. They spread light 
and life. They have lost nothing of their own force as time has gone on, nor ever will 
to time's end, though men may neglect or reject. — B. 

Vers. 2, 22. — Devout heathen. To correct the tendency to limit the operations ol 
Divine grace to particular sections, classes, or nations, the Scriptures record instances 
of true dovoutness and sincere piety both before and outside the Abrahamic covenant. 
The comforting and inspiring truth of the Divine call and election man has too often 
changed into a doctrine of Divine favouritism, involving the soveieign and groundless 
choice of some, and the consequent repudiation and hopeless condition of many. We 
should evei seek to hold the truth which God is pleased to reveal with a jealousy of 
ourselves, lest we should unduly apply it to the disadvantage of others. Our God has 
said, " All souls are mine ; " he maketh " his sun to rise upon the evil and upon the 
good." And if he claims the right to judge all mankind, he must have given them all 
knowledge, opportunities, and measures of grace. While fully realizing that the only 
book revelation has been made to the Jew and the Christian, and that the great 
revelation of God to man has been made in the person of the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
that this revelation is the key to, and the completion of, all others, we need not refus* 
to admit that God has had gracious access to the minds and hearts of heathen peobleii, 



CH. X.1— 48.] THE ACTS OE" THE APOSTLBa 35? 

and hM guided, in measures that seemed wise, their gropings and setkings after him. 
One of th-; remarkable cases is that of Cornelius the Boman centurion, a man declared 
to be of pious character, and to have won the Divine acceptance. As illustrating the 
above statements, mention may be made of Melohizedek, Balaam, Araunah, etc. 
Accepting the fact that there may be genuine religion among the heathen, we may ask 
bv what signs may we hopefully recognize it, and then turn to the story of Cornelius 
fur aid in making answer. 

I. The first sign is belief in God, as distinguished from the gods. The conception 
of one supreme Being is more common among the heathen than we are wont to admit. 
It is often lost sight of by the prominence that is given to subordinate divinities, and 
the elaborate worship rendered to them. It is often sadly limited and deteriorated by 
the notion of a second being, who is regarded as a rival of the supreme Being, and 
energetically destroying his work. Polytlieism and dualism represent tho two evil 
tendencies of man's religious natuie ; but wo may reasonably hope that not a few of the 
heathen have, like Cornelius, risen above the prevailing sentiments, and held firmly their 
faith in one supreme God. And we must, in all charity, assume that tliure may be a 
personal trust of heart on the living God, when the intellectual conceptions of him, and 
of his relations with men, are very imperfect and unworthy. To be acoe]>table, a man's 
religion must include faith in one God ; and we must remember that this was the first 
great fact and truth revealed to men, and, however men may have blotted it over in 
their souls, they have not blotted it out. 

II. The second sign is such apprehension of God as bbinos feab. The Bible use 
(if the word " fear " should be carefully explained. It is the word which most suitably 
expresses the proper attitude of men towards God, It includes owe, reverence, worship, 
and obedience, and may be best illustrated by the feelings entertained by a good child 
towards a good and noble parent. The sense of Divine authority should make us fear 
to do wrong, and the sense of Divine holiness should make us /ear to approach unpre- 
paredly his presence or to take his Name in vain. "Fear," as an equivalent for 
" worship," needs explanation, and, rightly explained, it will be seen that it is the very 
essence of religion, so far as religion affects man's feeling. Wrong senses of the term 
fear may be considered. Fear which crushes hope and keeps us from God must be 
wrong ; as is also fear that makes us unwilling to accept the grace he offers. 

III. The third sign is such appbbhension of God as leads to pbaybb. Not merely 
to prayer as a sudden act, forced on by calamity or distress, but to praj er as the daily 
expression of the cherished spirit of dependence on God — a daily leaning on God and 
waiting for him, which is indicated by the description of Cornelius as a " devout man." 
Miss Cobbe strikingly says, " Our belief in the personality of God is in a peculiar 
manner allied to the moral side of religion. lu proportion as that moral side is 
developed in us, so, we may almost say, is the clearness of our conviction that it is 
indeed a living God who rules the world, and no mere creative intelligence.- Now, this 
moral side comes out only in its full lumiuousness in prayer. Prayer is in its essence 
the approach of the finite and fallible moral agent to its infinite moral Lord, to whom 
it is conscious of erring allegiance, and to whom it comes for forgiveness and strength, 
lu such prayer all the moral life bursts into vivid consciousness. In prayer there 
comes to us the true revelation of the personality of God." Illustrate by the charac- 
teristic feature of the converted Saul of Tarsus, " Behold, he prayeth 1 " 

IV. The fourth sign we may speak of as the results of true eelioion in pbacticai 
charities. These are signs, because they are the natural and necessary fruitao^e and 
expression of true piety. Eight ideas of God tone our relations with our fellovv-men, 
so that we can be " kind even to the unthankful and the unholy." Cornelius is marked' 
as one who " gave much alms to the people." The more internal features of true piety 
are, of necessity, beyond our reading ; but our Lord taught us that by men's fruits in 
conduct we might know them, and that, if there is ever the Divine life in souls, it will 
force its way out into practical charities and goodness of conduct. When, therefore 
we find those we call " heathen " exhibiting Christian virtues, we may reasonably hope' 
that there is a right-hear tedness towards God of which these are the expressions. By 
the story of Cornelius we are taught that God may make more or less open responses 
to such devout and prayerful souls by visions, revelations, or inward communications 
witnes«ins thus their acceptance, and guiding the open toul to righteousneM «ud irutli! 



3i> THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLESL [on. S. I— 4& 

It is true for all the world that " if any man will do his will, he shall know of tha 
doctrine." While this subject needs to be treated with great pmdence, and strongl/ 
dogmatic statements should be avoided, we may gain from it some relief from the 
pressure of our questioning as to the salvability of the heathen, and we may conceir* 
how the heathen state may become a moral preparation for Christianity. It ig an 
important feature of modern missionary enterprise that those who preach Christ's 
gospel seek to find points of contact in the heathen mind and religious sentiments, 
Knd.,axpect to discover that God has been beforehand with them, prepaiing men's hearts 
to reooire the wonderful message of Divine salvation by a Divine sacrifice. — B. T. 

Vers. 6, 6,— The intimacy of Divine knowledge. Tliis is a striking passage when 
thoughtfully considered. The doctrine of Divine omniscience we may accept without 
having any adequate conception of it, or feeling any practical impression attending on 
our faith. The ease with which a general truth or priuciple may be held, while it yet 
remains ineffective on the life, has often been urged on us. The skilful teacher seeks 
to set forth the general truth in some particular instance, and expects that the truth 
will thus be seen clearly and grasped firmly. We have an instance in the passage 
before us. Cornelius had some appropriate ideas concerning God's omniscience and 
omnipresence, yet we may be sure that they had never been practical, real, and search- 
ing thoughts to him, until the angel showed thnt God knew all about him and all 
about Peter, his name, lodging, host, etc. In our chiMish days we were often frightened 
by being reminded of the words, " Thou God seest me." It is well if in our manhood 
we can have such a revelation of the marvellous minuteness, yet more marvellous 
tenderness and graciousness, of the Divine inspection. David's joy in the omniscience 
and omnipresence of God, as indicated in such psalms as the hundred and forty-ninth, 
may be referred to. " The Lord knoweth them that are his." We may notice the 
points in the passage which suggest the intimacy and exactness of God's daily know- 
ledge of us. 

I. God knows oub itaues. Oar tumame, by which we are commonly known to th« 
world, and even our Christian name, by which we are known to our intimate friends. 
He knew Peter the fisherman, but he knew him as Simon. This includes God's 
knowledge of all that our fellow-men, with whom we have to do in daily business, 
know of us ; and his further knowledge of all that our most intimate relatives could 
tell of our character and disposition. There may be some things of private thought or 
conduct which we would gladly keep from God; even these are " naked and open onto 
the eyes of him with whom we have to do." 

II. Oub emplotuemt. God knew that this other Simon was s tanner by trade. 
We somehow dissociate the common occupations of life from the thought of God, but 
he watches us in daily work. And we may surely feel that he judges day by day the 
spirit in which our daily work is done. '* Whereunto a man b called, therein let him 
abide with God." 

IIL Thb situation of oub eoubb. God knew that this tanner's house was " by 
the seaside," placed there, probably, for the conveniences of his trade. Ko God knows 
our precise circumstances and surroundings, and the exact influence which these things 
bear upon us. And if he knows all this, we may confidently rest assured that he ii 
ready and willing to be the power that helps us to overcome our disabilities, and master 
our difficulties, and live for him " even where Satan's seat is," if our kt should be cast 
ta such scenes. 

lY. Oub relation to thb fauilt. Bringing his inspections to bear on the family 
circle, he knows the place of each one. He knew that Peter was only a lodger. Then 
he can give each one the needed grace for worthily occupying his place, and faithfully 
maintaining his relations and doing the consequent duties. Apart from the revelation 
of the humanity and sympathetic brotherhood of Christ, as " God manifest in the 
flesh," so minute a Divine knowledge would only appal us, crushing down energy, effort, 
4nd hope. Kow we glory in the thought of the perfect knowledge, for he who besets 
us behind and before is our Father, whom we know well through his Sou and out 
Brother, the " Man Christ Jesus."— B. T. 

Yns. 14, 16. — Nothing common *n Qed"* tight. Introduce hy an account of St. 



OK. X. 1— 4fl.] THE ACTS OB* THE APOSTLES, 858 

Peter's vibiun, observing how it affected the mind of one who was so thoroughly- 
imbued with Jewish notions. In oUr Lord's time the laws of the cluan and unclean 
were scrupulously observed, and the apostles had not yet realized how the new spirit 
of Christ's kingdom was to set them free from the bondages and the limitations of the 
Jewish ceremonial. God wouldj by this vision, correct two of the prevailing mistakes. 
' I. That his favour was granted only to . ceitain defined classes and individuals of 
mankind. He " so loved the world," 2. That Mi service was found in the obedience 
of merely external regulations, that once had their usefulness and their meaning, but 
were not necessarily expressions of heart-love and devotion. The first mistake was 
correctedi in the Vision, by the outstretched sheet, which was a figure of the wide 
world, and the four corners as the directions into which the gospel was now to be 
borne forth into all the world. The second mistake was corrected by the obliteration 
of all formal distinctions in the announcement that what God has Cleansed man may 
not call common, for God will receive the love and trust and worship of " whosoever 
will/' Dean Plumptre says, " In the intei'pretation of the vision, all that belongs to 
humuiity had been taken up into heaVen, (1) when man's nature was assumed by 
the eternal Word in the Incarnation (John i. 14), and (2) when that nature had been 
rai&ed in the Ascension to the heaven of heavens." We may consider — 

L The univebsAIi truth as hbbB stated and illustbaTEd. " What God hath 
cleansed, that call not thou common." God affirms that the Whole earth is free to 
receive thia message of the gospel, all disabilities and barriers are for ever removed, 
And he recognizes no longer the distinctions of elect ahd non-elect ; " To tSie Gentiles 
also is granted repentance unto life." It may be shown (1) that Gud, as Greater and 
Preserver, cares for his whole world ; (2) that, as the fatherly Kuler, he is concerned 
for tlie moral well-being- of the whole world; (3) that, as dealing With wilful and 
rebellious children, we must conceive that he seuks to accomplish tlie salvation of all. 
This truth is the very life of our missionary labour. We are bidden to preach the 
gospel "to every creature," with a perfoct assurance that God would have "all men to 
be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth." This truth is often embraced 
with diHiculty, after strong conflict With limiting prejudices; it is often held as mere 
sentiment ; aud perhaps on few men is it the inspiration to noble labours and sacrifices 
that it was designed to be. How it would Urge us to missionary work, if we really 
believed thit Christ wants every man to Come to him, and Would have ils bring theml 

II. TiiB LIMITATIONS OF THIS TRUTH toUND IN JUDAISM. SpBclal faVour to one 
])articular race — or, as we may better express it, the Special Call of one race to a 
j>articular work or witness — does not assume or Involve the Divine indifference to the 
rest ; we might more wisely say that all spebial calls of the few Were made for the 
sake of the whole, and God's love to the m/fld made him commit a S]^ecial revelation 
to the ti-ust of the Jew. The distinction between " clean and unclean " in the food 
represented a distinction of clean and unclean between Jew &nd Gentile. But 
" unclean " things were still God's, and used by him for other purposes, thoUgh not 
just for food. They were not despised or rejected things, but each had its mission. 
And so Gentiles Were not oUt of God's care and favour because JeVrS were in. They 
too occupied the places he assigned and did the work he \«illed. It may further be 
shown that the Jewish limitations were designedly (1) UtHpOrary, (2) educational — 
preparatory to the advent of Christ, in whom And by Whom the Divine thought for 
;:he whole race could be fully reVealed. 

III. ThB removal of the UMltATIONS tiNDEB triE CttBlS'WAN stSTEM. Which 

deals with man as man, apart from any local and temporary distinctions of (I) 
!ilitioaality, (2) class, (3) genius, (4) ItHSation, or (5) eieremouial cleanness. The 
go«pel is for the " sons of men." Jew and Gentile, Greek ahd Kbihan, bund and free, 
meet as sinners at the feet of Christ, to receive the forgiveness of Sins atld the life 
everlasting. Now there is nothing common ih Ged's sight. Every soul is a priceless 
soul, fbr it has been bought with prectoua blood, the ih^t« iMrifice of the Son of 
God.— R. T. 

Vers. It, 18. — Providences may Irtthdate YtvddtitM. The effect of the Vision on 
the mind of St. Peter is indicated In the simple expression, "doubted Ih himself what 
this vision which he had seen should mean." He waa puzzled and set anxiously 
A0I8. 2 a 



3M THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. x. 1— 48. 

thinkirifr by it. He realized Divine teaching in it, but was not sure about the acopt 
of it. He saw clearly eimugh that it obliterated, for him at least, the old distinction 
of meats ; but he was set questioning whether there was not some deeper, some under- 
lying meaning, for tlie sake of which it had been granted. Was it not like a parable, 
simple enough, at first siglit, for a child to understand, but so rich in mearting and 
suggestion that a man might meditate therein day and night, and find rich reward? 
St. Peter might well be puzzled, for there seemed to be nothing that could give him 
the key to the further and more spiritual meanings. That key came in the events of 
the day — came by the orderings of Divine providence. Following along the line God 
raarkcil out for him, St. Peter came naturally upon the unfolding of the mystery, and 
understood the vision and revelation. This we may show more fully. 

I. St. Petbk impbbssed with a Divine revelation. To a Jew, familiar with 
the varied visions and direct communications of God granted to his fathers, this vision 
of the descending sheet would suggest no such doubts as would trouble our minds. 
He would not be likely to wonder over whether it was a delusion, or the dream of a 
disordered frame. St. Peter would accept it at once as a gracious revelation of the 
Divine will to him. His only anxiety concerned its true and proper interpretation. 
Two things need careful illustration. 1. The various modes of Divine revelation to 
individuals, for the general good, in all ages. It should be pointed out that (1) the 
mode adopted, whether voice, personal appearance, angelic ministry, dream, or yision, 
was exactly suited to the individual communicated with, and the time and circum- 
stances of the communication; (2) that the message, though sent to individuals, was 
never sent for the sake of the individual alone; it was always designed for others, to 
whom he must become the minister. Just as (it has often been pointed out) our Lord 
never wrought his miracles for himself, only for the immediate physical, or ultimate 
moral and spiritual good, of others. 2. The receptivity of St. Peter, who, by a season 
of loneliness, meditation, and prayerful communion with God, was in a state of mind 
and feeling that fitted him to receive such a vision. Still it is true that the inward 
communications of God's love and truth demand an openness of soul such as at. Peter 
cherished. If we do not know them, in forms and ways suited to our thoughts and 
our times, it must be because in us there are no fitnesses and preparations. 

II. St. Peter doubting the meaning of the revelation. Thi.s may not have 
been a prolonged state of mind, nor was it a distressing state. Explain how many 
moods of mind are expressed by the single term doubting. There is the doubting : 
1. 0/ simple uncertainty ; the proofs are not reasonably sufficient to lead us to a 
conclusion, and the matter must be held in suspense. 2. 0/ criticism, which muat 
get to the root of a matter, and test and try the reasoning by which any fact or truth 
is declared. 3. 0/ scepticism, which has a bias or prejudice, and by it is led to require 
unreasonable tests and proofs; such a spirit persists in doubting when a matter is 
fairly and adequately explained. 4. Of infidelity, which makes a foregone conclusion 
a basis for doubt and denial. This spirit is usually most credulous in some matters, 
and stubbornly unwilling to believe in other matters. St. Peter's was the simple but 
earnest questioning of a man who really wanted to get at the truth and the meaning 
of his surprising vision. 

III. St. Peter called to act, and bo pdt aside his doubtings. Often the best 
cure for doubting is a call to present action. It is good advice that bids troubled souls 
do Christian work. Light on the most puzzling questions often comes to us when 
engaged in works of love ; and, if the light does not come, the burden of the questions 
ceases to press heavily on us. St. Peter, in his doubtings, was called to meet the 
messengers from Cornelius, and to arrange as soon as possible to return with them on 
their journey. Activity stopped the brooding and doubting, and God made it the 
very way to the mastery of the doubts. 

IV. St. Peter finding that in the way of obedience comes light. He 
followed God's providential leadings, responded to the inward voice, obeyed in a'.l 
simplicity, went, not knowing quite for what purpose, and, in the line of God's 
providence, found the unfolding of his vision, and learned the deep truth about which 
Le bad been so anxiously questioning. Led to tbe house of the devout heathen, who 
was a man accepted of God, he was delivered from the Jewish bondage of the "clean 
<ind tb« unplpap i " he st^w ihftt th? gospel of life in Christ Joeus ww for Oeutile 



CH.X.1— 48.] THK ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 865 

well as Jew; and he delivered this testimony: "Now I perceive that God is no 
respecter of persons ; hut in every nation he that fcareth him, and worlieth righteousness, 
is accepted with him." In ways quite as clear, in fact, though it may be not bo sensibly 
plain to us, God's providences still unfold God's Word and will ; and he who will 
obediently follow as God leads shall surely find the heart-rest of spiritual apprehensions 
of the Divine truth.— E. T. 

Ver. 33." — Oood hearers. Rcture the company assembled in Cornelius's house. It 
was composed of the God-fearing, devout people in the neighbourhood ; and, in their 
attitude, interest, and openness of heart, we mny find the example of the " good hearer," 
to whom God's Word may come with power, and in whom it may be made fruitful. 
The following are the marks of the "good hearer," of which we may be reminded by 
the text : — There will be — 

t Thk due sense op God's presence. " We are all here present before God." Though 
that presence now finds no outward or symbolic expression in cloud or flame, it is 
inwardly realized, and has now on men's hearts its due solemnizing effect. The true 
worshipper can say, " Surely God is in this place." 

II. Full bbsolve and intent. The company had not gathered according to custom 
or merely to please each other ; all were purposed to come, and had set their minds upon 
hearing what St. Peter might have to say. Cornelius had awakened this earnestness 
by telling of his vision. 

IIL Dub openness of heart. They were prepared to put all prejudice aside, 
" and hear all things commanded of God." The open-hearted listen to all, receiving 
what God sends, not merely what may please them or accord with their doctrinal 
views or prejudices. 

IV. Consciousness that what God commands will have to be done. The only 
good listener is the obedient listener, who goes forth to life prepared to cany out God's 
will as it may be revealed to him, and determined to tone all life by the principles 
which God may announce. Illustrate by the parable of the Sower and the seei. — B. T. 

Vers. 34, 35. — Believers outside Judaism. Several important and interesting cases, 
taken from the old Scripture histories, may serve to illustrate this conviction which 
now came to St. Peter, and found suggestive expression in our text. The point of his 
testimony is that the one living and true God of the whole earth has been and is 
graciously concerned in the religious life of the human race as a whole, apart from any 
special revelations which he may be pleased to make to any portions of the race. From 
the religious point of view, the " God of the whole earth must he be called." 

I. Mblchizedek in the patriarchal period. Wc know very little about the 
religious condition of Palestine in the days of Abraham. Hastily we say that doubtless 
the Canaanite idolatries absolutely prevailed, for " the Canaanite was then in the land." 
But the figure of Melchizedek is, as it were, thrust into the Scripture narrative as if on 
purpose to correct such hastily formed notions. Abraham is clearly the elect of God, 
separated from his Chaldean surroundings in order to witness to the great truths of the 
Divine unity and spirituahty. And yet, coming into the land that was promised to his 
descendants, he finds believers in the Most High God, presided over by a king-priest, 
to whom Abraham feels that he must pay homage and give tithes. It has been well 
said that " when Abraham received the blessing of Melchizedek, and tendered to him 
his reverent homasje, it is a likeness of the recognition which true historical faith will 
always humbly receive and gratefully render when it comes in contact with the older 
and everlasting instincts of that religion which the ' Most High God, Possessor of 
heaven and earth,' has implanted in nature and in the heart of man, in ' the power of 
an endless life.' " So, in the very starting of Judaism, in the very lifetime of its 
founder and father, we find Gud directing our attention to real and acceptable religious 
life outside the Abrahamic election. 

IL Balaam in the period of the Jewish WANDBBnras. Without attempting to 
form a full judgment of Balaam's religious standing, we must admit that he was a 
prophet of God, to whom God made communications ; and whatever may have been 
his religion, it was certainly distinct from Judaism. " In his career is seen that 
repognitioB of Divine inspiration pi+tside the Jewish people, whicjj \k9 warrowne** ol 



3S« 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[cH. xt 1-^ 



modern tiines has been so eager to deny, but which the Scriptures are always ready t* 
acknowl^ge, and, by acknowledging, admit within the pale ot the universal Churtifa tht 
higher spirits of every age and Of every nation." 

ni. Job At THE TIME OP tiiE HAnoKAL CLIMAX. There is little room for doubting 
that, WhfeiitiTcr Job himself niay hare lived, the book bearing his name Was written ia 
the Solomonic age, and represents the religious sentiments of that time, And the Ixiok 
represents the man Job as good, perfect, upright, fearing God, and eschewing evil ; but 
he is not a Jew, he is an Arab Chi6f dr the Wealthy prince of some city ill distant U* ; 
the Very selection of such a hero for the story plainly showiug belief in vital godliness 
outside the Jewish limits. Kot a trace of Mosaic religion hi^s been found in tne book, 
and therefore it iB evident that the writer jtccepta the fact thit true tkud accep^Abl* 
piety ti>ay exist apart from the Mosaic covenant. 

IV. Naaman AMD Nineveh in the tihe of the national DECtiKit. We placA 
these two together, but they may be treated separately. Naaman is a Syrian, but 
Ood's prophet makes ho difficulty about recognising the Sincerity of his religion, and 
he requires of him ho coufbrmity to Je\^i8h regulations. The Kinevites are penitent 
l>efore the one. living God, and their repentance is even set on record aS ah e^amplt) 
to the Wilful Jews. So again and again did God, in the olden times, correct tlie 
exolUSiVehess of his people's feeling, ahd force them to think of him as the G4d of the 
whole earth. And when our Lord Jesus came aiuOtag men as the Divinfi TeaChef, 
we find him also correcting the same exclusive spirit by blessing Roman ceuturiOba, 
Samaritan villagers, and Syro-phoehiclan women ] commahditag that his gospel should 
be preached to the whole world ; sendihg Paul " far hence Unto the Gentiles ; " callibg 
Cornelius into the fellowship of the redeemed i saving the eunuch of ah African ^Uecn ; 
and moving Paul to witness for the universal redeeming love of GOd, in Atnenifth 
agotH ahd before Roman tribunals. That the heathen had some religion God did not 
make a reasoh for withholding from them bis fUllei' revelation; neither should we 
so argue. Our very sympathy with heatheii souls groping for the light should increase 
our longing to give them what we have In our trUst, the " light bf the kikOwledge olf 
the glory of God in the &ce of Jesus Christ." — R. T. 

iTeft. Sr-'-ia.— 27ie goipiil ftir the AMttAeri. Under the Diviue ihspiration, Bt. Peter 
preached the gospel to this company of devout Gentiles ; and we can find both (1) What 
is the essehce of the gospel message, and (2) what are the points of it specially suitable 
(ot preseiitation to the heathen mind, by a careful study of St. Peter'A speech on this 
occasion. As the points are very simple, aud the illustration of them very abuhdaht 
and familiar, we need only bdefiy State the several headthgS. 'llie gospel ii the 
declaration to men Of the personal Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the demand 
of ihstant acceptance of him and yielding the will and heart and life (o himi It 
must deal fully and efficiently with— 

I. ThS Caaist who lived. " God ahoiuted JeSUs of Nazareth With the Holy Qhoit 
and With power, who went about doing good." 

IL Tbi: CuAMT WHO DiBb. '* Whom they slew and hahged on a tree." 

III. Tax CHittsT WER> tiviis. ** mm God raised up the third day, and Showed tdlii 
oprtily." 

lY^ TiBE Obbibi' wad OAti Sayb faori sm Now. " Whosoever believeth in him than 
receive remission Of liua,'^ Upoh this gospel, belleviugly declared to men, eVeh t6 lh« 
heathen, we may still he assuhid that the power of the Holy Ghost shall tc»%, ihd it 
shall prove, ti to ihii cnmiiaby ia the house of Corneliuii, • word of "et«i>«i«< Hn«* 
— B.T« 



EXPOSITION 



CHAPTKB XL 



▼e». 1.— ^01* for atid, A.V.i the hinlhten 
for bttlhnn, A.V.; aUo bad tot had <dto, 
AVt We can imagine how rapidly the 
qewt af the great ravolution would travel to 



the metropoUa of Jewish ChHstiahlty, iHA 
what a stir it would make in that comma- 
nity. It does not appear What View Jtmii 
and the other apoutles took. 

Ver. 2.— They that were of the euonmoisloii. 
At fliSt light thisphiase^ whidh was Mtuni 



at, «i. 1— 30i] 



THE ACTS OP tUE AtOSTLEa 



361 



enough ia ob. x. 4S, eaens an nnnatural one 
in tbe then condition of the Church, when 
all tbe membere of it were "of the oir- 
oumcision," And there were no Gentile oon- 
verta At all. But the explanation of it is 
to be found in the circumstanee of St. Luke 
himself being a Gentile; perhaps also, as 
Alford suggests, in his use of language 
■uited to the time when he wrote. It is 
an indication, too, of the purpose of 8t. Luke 
in writing his history, viz. tn obronicle the 
progress of Gentile Christianity. Peter, 
having completed his rounds (ch. ix. 32), 
returned to Jerusalem, which was still the 
abode of the apostles. He was, no doubt, 
anxiougtocommune with' his brother apostlea 
upon the momentous matter of the Gentile 
o in verts; but he was at once attacked by 
the bigotry of the zealous Jews. 

Ver, 3..^Thoa wentest vl, etc. The cir- 
oumstance of his eating with Cornelius and 
bis fiiends is not expressly recorded in ch. 
X., but almost necessarily follows from what' 
is there steted. It had been seized upon 
•a the chief sting in their report by those 
who brought the news to Jerusalem. Ob- 
serve the total absence of anything like 
papal domination on the part of Peter, 

Ver- i,"^ Began and expounded the matter 
*nto them in order for rehearsed, the matter 
from the begmninif,and expounded it hy order 
unto them, A.V. 

Ver. S,-~Be>e»nd{ng for deecend, A.V.; 
leere for had been, A. v. ; unto for to, A.V. 

Ver. 6. — Tfte fom-footed, for /ow-footed, 
A.V.; heaven for air, A.V. 

Ver. 7. — AUoavoice for a voice, A.V. and 
T.B. ; riie tor arise, A.V. ; hill for tlay, A.V. 

Ver, 8. — Ever for at any time, A.V. 

Ver. 9. — A voice atwwered the second time 
0ut of for the voice answered me again from, 
A.V. and T.R. ; mahe fyi call, A.V. 

Ver. 10.— Thrice for three times, A.V. 

Ver. ll.~-Forthu>ith for immediately, A.V,; 
three men stood hefore the home in which we 
mere for there were three men already come 
mtto the houie where I was, A.V. and T.B. ; 
having been sent for Mitt, A.V, 

Ver. 12. — Making no distinetian tor nothing 
doubting, A.V. and T.G. ; and , , . also for 
moFsoeer, A.V. Uaking no distinction, Tlie 
reading adopted here in the B.T. is Staxpt- 
yaura Instead of Sicucpivif/tei/ai' in the T.B. 
The verb SuMfUfuy Ivthe active voice means 
to "make a distinction*' or "dlffercnoe" 
between odo and another, as in ob. xv. 9. 
But in tbe middle voice SiaKptveaeat means 
"to doubt" or "hesitate," a« in ch. x. 20. 
It leePM highly Improbable that the two 
passages, vhioh ought to be identical, should 
thus difier, while employing the very same 
Terb, Some manuscripts, which Alford 
follows, omit tbe clause /mSky SinKpivifurw 
•Itogetber These six hTrthren; showing that 



Peter had brought the brethren from Joppa 
(now specified as six) with him to Jerusalem 
to substantiate his account ; a plain indica- 
tion that he anticipated some opposition. 

Ver. 13.— Told for showed, A.V.: the angd 
for an angel, A.V,; standing in his house 
and saying for to his house which stood and 
said unto him, A.V. ; send for send men, 
A.V, and T.B. ; fetch for call for, A,V. 

Ver. U.— Speak unto for teU, A.V. ; thou 
lhalt be saved, thou, etc., for thou and iM tiiy 
house shall be smved, A.V. 

Ver. 15. — Even as for as, A.V. 

Ver. 16. — And I remembered tat then 
remembered I, A.V. This is a new incident 
not mentioned in oh. x. The reference is 
to oh. i. 5. This saying of the Lord being 
thus referred to by Peter looks as if Peter 
might have furnished many of the partioulara 
in the first twelve chapters to Luke. 

Ver. 17. — If tor forasmuch . . . as, A.V. ; 
unto them for them, A.V. ; did also for did, 
A.V. ; when we for who, A.V. ; who for what, 
A.V. Tbe saying, Who was I, that I oonid 
withstand (KwAuirai) ? corresponds to ch. x. 
47, "Can any man forbid (icukvaai.) water?" 

Ver. 18. — And when for when, A.V.; 
then to tlte Gentiles also hath God granted 
for then hath God alto to the Gentiles granted, 
A,V. Tbe fitness of tbe method adopted 
by the Divine wisdom for effecting this first 
reception of Gentiles into the Church upon 
an equal footing with the Jews is apparent 
from its success in quieting tbe jealous 
prejudices of the Jews, and preserving the 
peace of the Church. It was still, however, 
long before the exclusive spirit of Judaism 
was quenebed (see oh. xv. and Gal. i. 6, 
7: ii. 4, U. 18, 13; v. 58—12; Pbii iii. 
2, etc.). 

Ver. l9.'-~They tker^ore that for now thay 
which, A. V. ; tribulation for persecution, A. V. ; 
Phosnida for Phenice, A.V.; speaking for 
preaching, A.V.: save only to Jems for hut 
unto the Jews only, A.V. Scattered abroad ; 
as in «b. vili. 1, to which point of time the 
narrative now reverts. Tribulation (e\l}f>n). 
The word in oh. viii. 1 for " perseoution " is 
imyitit, ]Pbcenloia. "The strip of coast, 
one hundred and twenty miles long, and 
about twelve broad, from the river £leu- 
therufl" (o a little south of Oarmel, as br 
m Dora, including, therefore, Bidon and 
Tyre, but excluding Cmsarea. The name 
was preserved in the great Tyrian oolony of 
Cartilage, as appears in the ethnio forms, 
I'senus, Panictts, and Pnnious, applied to 
the Carthaginians. ' We are all familiar with 
the "Punic Wars," Pmiea fides, the 
'Pwnulus of Plautus, ete. Cyprus lies off the 
coast of Pfaosnicia, in sight of it, and was 
very early colonized by the Phoeniciani 
Philo and Josephiia both speak of the Jewish 



I'fiE Acts oe* the ApOstLiSs. 



fon. XI. 1— 3ei 



populalinn in Cyprus. Aiitioch,' the capital 
of the Greek Uingilnrn of Syria, ou the river 
Orontes, built by the first kin,?, Seleuoue 
Nicator, in honour of his father AntioohuB, 
who was one of Alexander the Great's 
generals. It lay about one hundred and 
eighty miles noith of the northern frontier of 
Phoenicia. There was a large population of 
Jews, whom Seleuons attracted to his new 
city by giving them equal political privi- 
leges with the Greeks. It was reckoned by 
Josephus to be the third city iu importance 
of the whole Roman empire, Borne and Alex- 
andria being the two first. 

Ver. 20. — But there were some of them . . . 
who foi and eome of them were . . which, A.V.; 
the Qreeks also for the Grecians, A.V. and 
T.R. This last is a most important variation 
of reading — 'EAA.^i'ar, Greeks, for'EAXTji'iVTai, 
Grecians, i.e. Grecian Jews, or Hellenists. 
It is supported, however, by strong authority 
of manuscripts, versions, and Fathers, and 
is accepted by Grotius, Witsius, Griesbach, 
Lachman, Tischendorf, Meyer, Conybeare 
and Howson, Alford, Westcott, Bishop Light- 
font, and the ' Sjietiker's Commentary ' (ap- 
parently) and most modem ciitiaa. It is 
also strongly argued that the internal 
evidence proves 'EAXi>ar to be the right 
reading, because the statement that the men 
of Cyprus and Cyrene preached the gospel 
to them is contrasted with the action of 
the otliers, who preached to the Jews only. 
Obviously, therefore, these Hellenes were 
not Jews. Moreover, there was nothing 
novel in the conversion and admission into 
the Church of Hellenistic Jews (see oh. ii. 
5, etc. ; ix. 22, 29). And these very preachers 
were in all probability Hellenists themselves. 
Bishop Wordsworth, however, on the con- 
trary, defends, though with doubt, the 
reading 'EKKtiviirTas ; and argues that even 
if 'EWrjvas is the right reading, it must 
mean the same as 'EWnyiffTas. Ho also hints 
that it might mean " pioselytea " (see ch. 
xiv. 1, where the Hellenes attend the 
synagogue, and ch. xvii. 4). But there is 
no evidence that these were proselytes any 
Vnore than Cornelius was. The Hellenes, or 
Greeks, here were probably nneircumoised 
Greeks who feared God, like Cornelius, and 
attended the synagogue worship (see 
Meyer on oh. xiv. 1 ). It is very likely that 
in Antioch, where the Jews occupied such 
• prominent position, some of the Greek 
inhabitants should be attracted by their 
doctrines and worship, repelled, perhaps, by 
the prevalent superstitions and proJiigate 
levity of the groat city. 

' Renan reckons the population at above 
500,000 souls. (For a glowing description 
of its splendour, see ' Les Apotres,' oh. xii. ; 
Also Conybeare and Howson, vol. i. ch. iv. ; 
L«wiD| vol. i. ch. Ti) 



Ver. 21. — Thathelieved turned for believed 
and turned, A.V. and T.R. The hand of the 
Iiord ; i.e. hU power working with them and 
tlirough them. Compare the frequent phrase 
in the Old Testament, " with a mighty hand 
and a stretched out arm" (see too ch. iv. 
30; Luke i. 66). 

Ver. 22. — And the report concerning them 
for (hen tidings of these things, A.V. ; to fat 
unto, A.V. ; at far as for thni he should go as 
far as, A.V. and T.R. The news of this 
accession of Gentiles to the Church was 
quickly carried to Jerusalem, with the same 
motive, probably, that brought thither the 
account of the baptism of Cornelius and his 
liousehold, as we read in vers. 1 — 3 of this 
chapter. The conduct of the Church in 
sending so excellent and temperate a person 
as Barnabas (as we read in the next verse), 
the friend of Saul (ch. ix. 27) and a favourer 
of preaching the gospel to Gentiles (ch. xiii. 
1, 2) to inspect the work at Antioch, is an 
indication that they had already heard the 
account of the conversion of Cornelius from 
the mouth of Pe'ter, and were already led to 
the conclusion, " Then to the Gentiles also 
hath God granted repentance unto life I " 
There is no clue wliatever to the length of 
time that elapsed between the flight from 
persecution and the arrival at Antioch, ex- 
cept that Saul had had time to sojourn three 
years in Arabia, to come to Jerusaiem, and 
from thence to go and settle at Tarsus, where 
Barnabus found him ; tlius loavin=; abundant 
time for Peter'i operations in Judiea ani 
Csesarea. 

Ver. 23. — Was come for eame, A.V. ; h» 
exhorted for exhorted, A.V. Had seen the 
grace of God ; i.e. had seen the number and 
the truth of the conversions of Gentiles 
effected by God's grace. He exhorted them 
all (ToptKoAei irdvTas); thus showing himself 
a true vihs irapaK\riafios, son of exhortation 
(see ch. iv. 36, note). Cleave unto the Lord ; 
irpotrixiveiv, to abide, continue, persevere in 
(comp. ch. xiii. 43 ; I Tim. v. 5). In 2 Tim. 
iii. 14 it is simply fieve. The frequent 
exhortations to perseverance and steadfast- 
ness should warn us of the great danger of 
falling away fiom the faitli, under the 
pressure of temptation. 

Ver. 21. — A good man. The predominant 
idea in a.ya66s is simply " gnodness," raoral 
excellence. So in Matt. xix. 16, "Good 
Muster." To which our Lord answers 
" There is none good but One." In Luke 
xxiii. 50 Joseph of Ariiiiathaia is i,viip iyadht 
Kai StKaios, " a good man and a righteoiis." 
In Matt. V. 45 irovripoi koI ayaBol, " the evil 
and the good," are contrasted. In classical 
Greek the common plirase, KaKhs K'ayaS6s, 
describes an honoural)lo and good man. It 
is pleasing to read this testimony from 
Luke, Paul's companion and frieuf?. rull 



ctt. la. 1—30,] 



I'HJil ACl'S 01* tnii AtfOtSTLliS. 



550 



of the Holy OhoSt and of faith. So Stephen 
is described (ch. vi. 5) as " full of faitli and 
of the Holy Spirit." The Holy Spirit ia 
Bpoken of in both places as a Spirit of power 
aTid demonstration in preaching the Word. 
No reason is apparent why the R.T., having 
altered Ghost to Spirit in ch. vi. 5, retains 
Ghost here. Uuoh people, etc.; the direct 
consequence of the energy of the Holy 
Ghost in Bamabas's ministry. 

Ver. 25. — And he went forth for then 
departed Barnabas, A.V. and T.H. ; to seek 
for for for to seek, A.V. Observe the re- 
markable providence which had made use 
nf the violence of the Hellenist Jews at 
Jerusalem to drive Saul to Tarsus, where 
he would be close at hand to take up the I 
work so unexpecteiUy prepared for him at , 
Antioch. " It was in the spring of the year 
A.D. 43, or just ten years after the Crucifixion, 
that Barnabas proceeded to Tarsus, found 
Saul, and brought him to Antiouh" (Lewiu, 
I. 98). From Seleuoia to the port of Tarsus 
would be about a twelve hours' sail ; or, by 
land, a journey of about eighty miles would 
bring him to Tarsus from Antioch. 

Ver. 26. — Even for a whole year for a 
whole year, A.V. and T.B. ; they were 
gathered together for they assembled them- 
selves, A.V. ; and that the disciples for and 
the disciples, A.V. The phrase iv rrj IkkKiio lif 
occurs again in 1 Cor. xi. 18 (T.B.), where 
it has, as here, very nearly the sense of " in 
the church," as a place of meeting, It 
should be " in," not " with." The "Church " 
is the assembly of disciples gathered together 
in their bouse of meeting. Were called; 
XPW''"^''^'") ^'"'8 '^^ name of. It is a 
peculiar use of the word occurring in the 
New Testament only in Bom. vii. 3 besides, 
but found also in Polybius, Strabo, Josephus, 
and some otiior writers. Its common mean- 
ing is, in the passive voice, " to be warned 
of God," as in ch. x. 22, where see note. 
Christians. It was a memorable event in 
the histnry of the Church when the name 
of Christians, which has distinguished them 
for nearly eighteen centuries and a half, was 
given to the disciples of Christ. Hitherto 
they had been called among themselves dis- 
ciples, and brethren, and saints, and, by the 
Jews, men "of the Way" (ch. ix. 2), or 
"Nazarenes" (ch. xxiv. 5), but now they 
received the name of Christians, as followers 
of Christ, from the outside world, and ac- 
cepted it themselves (ch. xxvi. 28; 1 Pet. 
iv. 16), From the Latin form of the word 
Christian*, i.e. followers of Christ (like 
Herodians, followers of Herod ; Marians, 
Pompeians, partisans of Marius and Pom- 
pey; Csesariani, Ciceronian!, Vitelliaui, 
Flaviani, etc. ; Conybeare and Howson, vol. 
L 130; Lewin, vol. i. 97), the designation 
miut have been invented by the Gentiles, 



either by the Boraan court or camp at 
Antioch, or by the Greek population, in- 
fluenced as they were by Boman forms 
of speech current amongst them (compare 
the GrsBco- Oriental Ncstorians, Arians, 
etc.). We may be sure that Christiann, 
i.e. followers of Messiah, is not a name 
likely to have been given by Jews. There 
is no evidence either of its having been 
given in derision. The well-known account 
of Tacitus is " Vulgus Christianos appella- 
bat. Auctor nominis ejus Christus, Tiberio 
impcritante, per Pentium Pilatum supplicio 
affectus erat" ('Annal.,' xv. 44). Suidaa 
says that those who had been previously 
called Nazarenes and Galileans, in the reign 
of Claudius Csasar, when Euodius had been 
made Bishop of Antioch by Peter, had their 
name changed into that of Christiana. He 
seems to refer to the statement of Malalas 
(quuted by Conybeare and Howson, i. 131), 
" that they who had been before called 
Nazaienes and Galileans received the name 
of Ghrislians in the time of Euodius, who 
succeeded St. Peter as Bishop of Antioch, 
and who himself gave them this name." 
Malalas is thought to have lived somewhere 
between the sixth and ninth centuries, at 
Byzantium, A beautiful passage in the 
Clementine Liturgy is also quoted at p. 130 : 
" We give thee thanks that we ore called 
by the Name of thy Christ, and are thus 
reckoned as thine own," where the allusion 
is to Jas. ii. 7. The name Christian is 
frequent in the epistles of Ignatius, the 
Bishop of Antioch ; Poly carp's dying words 
were, " I am a Christian " (Bishop Words- 
worth). 

Ver. 27. — Now for and, A.V. ; there earn* 
down for came, A.V. (see ch. xviii. 22). Pro- 
phets ; a recognized order in the Church at 
that tune (ch. ii. 17, 18; xiii. 1; xx. 23; 
xxi. 9, 10; 1 Cor. xii. 28, 29; Bph. iv. 11). 
The news of the accession of the Gentiles 
to the Church of Antioch would naturally 
lead to such prophets being either sent by 
the Church of Jerusalem or coming of their 
own accord. 

Ver. 28. — A great famine for great dearth, 
A.V. ; over for throughout, A.V. ; Claudim 
for Claudius Gassar, A.V. and T.B. The 
world ; ri oiKovfievri, the inhabited earth, the 
common expression for the whole Roman 
empire. But the expression must be taken 
here as hyperbolical, just as Josephus says 
that Ahab sent messengers to search tor 
Elijah, KOTO irSiroi' riiv oiKovfiivTiv, where, 
of course, only the neighbouring countries 
to Judsea can be meant, strictly speaking 
(' Ant. Jud.,' viii. xiii. 4). But there is no 
evidence to show that ri oKovuhii is ever % 
technical term for Jud sea. See the use o( 
the word by Luke (Luke ii. 1 ; iv. 5 ; xxL 
26 ; oh. xvii. 6, 31 ; xix. 27 ; xxiv. 5), In 



360 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa. 



[en. «■ 1—30 



point of fact, the predicted fatninp, which 
began in tlie fourth year of Claudius Csbbv 
(a.I). 44) and lasted till A.D. 48, fell upon 
Judeea exclusively, as far as appears from 
Josephus ('Ant. Jud.,' iii xt, 3; xx. ii. 5, 
T. ii), and was very severe there. Ishmael 
was high priest at the time; and Helena, 
Queen of Adiabene, fetched large supplies of 
corn from Egypt and of flgs from Cyprus to 
Jerusalem, to supply the wants of the people. 
Eusebius (<Eccl. aist.,' ii. 8) speaks of this 
famine as . having {vevailed ** over the 
world," and as being recorded by authors 
hostile to Christianity, but mentions no 
names and gives no particulars (*Eccl, Hist.,' 
ii 8), but in the twelfth chapter of the same 
book he limits it to t^v 'lovSalav, Judtea. 
There were several other historical famines 
tn the reign of Claudius, but they can 
hardly be included in the prophecy of 
Agabns. The prophet Agabus is mentioned 
again in ch. xxl. 10, and again as coming 
&om Judaea. Benan ascribes the poverty- 
stricken condition of the Jerusalem Chris- 
tians to their communistic institutions. 

Ver. 29.— .ind for then, A.V.: that for 
which, A.V. This is the first example of 
the practice, so much encouraged by St. 
Panl, of the Gentile Olmrohes contributing 
to the wants of the poor Christians of the 
mother Church of Jerusalem (Eom. xv. 25 — 
27; 1 Cor. xvi. 1; 2 Cor. ix.; Gal. U. 10, 
etc.). 

Ver. 80, — Bending for and tent, A,V. ; 
hand for hands, A.V. Sending (airoirrtt- 
^oKTej). Those by whom they sent were 
larivTokoi (2 Cor. viii. 23), messengers, or 
apostles. To the elders. This is the first 
mention of presbyters, or elders, in the 
Church at Jerusalem, which was now fully 
organized. James the Less was the resident 
apostle (?) and bishop; with him were the 
presbyters (ch. xxi. 18); and under them 
again the seven deacons (ch. vt, 5, 6), The 
presbyters of the Church of Jerusalem are 
mentioned again in ch. xv. 2, 4, 6, 22, 23 ; 
xvL 4; xxi. 18; Jas. v. 18, where, how- 
ever, the elders of other Churches in Jndeea 
may possibly be included. A diliiculty 
arises with regard to Saul's mission to 
Jerusalem with Barnabas, as to bow to 
reconcile it with Gal. ii. 1, which speaks 
of St. Paul's second visit to Jerusalem as 
taking place fourteen yenrs after his first, 
whereas this visit could not be above four 
or Jive years after. But there are three 
by])"tlieseB abont the visit to Jerusalem 
rul'orred to in Qal. 11. 1. The first identifies 



It with the visit here recorded. 2, Tht 
second identifies it with that related in oh, 
XV. 2, etc., which is supported by most oJF 
the best authorities ancient and modem 
(see note on cb. xv.). S. The third, which 
IS advocated by Lewln (* Life of St. Paul,' 
vol. L 302, etc.), identifies it with tlie visit 
recorded in ch. xviii. 22. As regnrds the 
first, with which we are now concerned, 
though at first sight you would have ex- 
pected St. Paul's next visit to Jerusalem 
after his conversion to be the one alluded 
to in Gal. ii,, yet the following cironmsliinoes 
make this impossible. (1) The date of the 
visit named in Gal. ii., which is distinctly 
stated to be fourteen ytars after that re- 
corded in ch. IX. 26 (lireiTa Sitk SeKaTonripar 
iTiiv iriLhtv Mfiv", K.T.\,). (2) When St. 
Paul went to Jerusalem on the occasion 
adverted to in Gal. ii, " he laid before them 
the gospel which he preached among the 
Gentiles." But at the time of this visit he 
had not yet begun his labours among the 
Gentiles (^v tow tBi/eiri), to which he was 
only called after his return (ch. xiii. 2). (3) 
On the occasion spoken of in Gal. 11., Paul 
and Barnabas were received by the chief 
apostles, and must have passed a consider- 
able time at Jerusalem, with many oon- 
Bultations and meetings, public and private. 
But on this occasion, as far as appears, 
their visit was a very hasty one, and they 
saw no one but the presbyters, and returned 
as soon as they had handed over the coUeo- 
tiou to them (ch. xii. 25). The conclusioiii 
therefore, seems quite certain that this if 
not the visit referred to in Gal. ti. And the 
hasty nature of this visit explains at ones 
why St. Paul made no count of it in his 
statement to the Galatians, It had no 
bearing upon the course of his argument- 
It was not a visit to Jerusalem in the sense 
in which he was speaking, and he saw 
none of the apostles. The state of the 
Church at the time, James the son of Zebe- 
dee killed, Peter in prison or lately escaped 
" to another place " (ch. xii. 11), the other 
apostles very likely dispersed, made it in*- 
possible. He therefore took no count of it 
in his statement to the Galatians, This 
seems quite a sufBoient explanation (see 
the note of Bishop EUicott on Gal. IL, 1, 
and Bishop Lighuoot's convincing remarks 
at p. 113 of his ' Epistle to the Galatians'). 
There is no occasion to resort to the violent 
expeilient of Benan, and say that Saul did 
not go with Bornabas at this time. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 28. — TTie myntery. The beginning and the close of this chapter refer t» 
•rents of precisely similar character, which took place almost simultaneously, at oil 
•rents without any concert or communication, in Palestine and in Syria ; the reoep- 



08. tt. 1—30.] THE ACTS OF THE At»0STLE9. 361 

tion of the Word of Qoi by (Jentiles, and their admission into the Church of Gbd. It ia 
difficult for us, after the lapse of eighteen centuries and a half, during which this has 
>)een the rule of the kingdom of heaven, to realize the startling strangeness of such an 
event when first brought to the knowledge of the then Church of Christ. That a wall 
of partition, which seemed to be built upon immovable foundations, and which had 
defied every effort to break it down through a period of between one and two thousand 
years, should suddenly fall flat down at the blast of the gospel trumpet, like the walk 
of Jericho of old ; that a hidden purpose of God, which had been veiled and concealed 
for so mariy ages, should suddenly flash out and stand clearly revealed to the eyes of 
mankind at two remote spots of the earth ; must have struck with astonishment the 
minds of the Jews of that age. St. Paul himself, after many years of successful work 
as the Apostle of the Gentiles, cannot speak without emotion and wonder of the great 
revolution in the religion of mankind. The admission of the Gentiles to be partakers 
of God's promise in Christ by the gospel, and to be fellow-citizens with the saints, and 
of the household of God, was the great mystery which in other ages had not been made 
known to the sons of men, but was at length revealed to the apostles and prophets by 
the Spirit. His heart swelled, and his utterance rose as he recited that "Unto me, who 
am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the 
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ ; and to make all men see what is the fellow- 
ship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath been hid in fflod, who 
created all things by Jesus Christ : to the intent that now unto the principalities and 
powers in heavenly places might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God, 
according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord " (Eph. iii. 
1 — 1\), And certainly we ought not to allow familiarity with this dispensation of the 
Divine wisdom to breed in us any contempt or overlooking of its infinite importance. 
The destinies of the human race, in its varieties of intellect, and civilization, and creed, 
and morals, and social and political institutions, ought ever to be a matter of the 
deepest concern to us. We nave the certain knowledge that the door of repentance 
and faifb is thrown open to all mankind. We know that God is no respecter of persons, 
and we know that Jesus Christ died for the sins of the whole world. If the Word of 
God could win its way in a cohort of Italian soldiers quartered in an Oriental city ; if 
much people, in the dissolute city of Antioch, overrun as it was with every kind of 
Ruperstition and extravagance of vice and luxury and pleasure, listened to the teaching 
of Barnabas and Saul, and were added to the Lord ; surely we ought not to be faint- 
hearted in communicating to the whole world, whether heathen, or Mohammedan, or 
Buddhist, the Word of truth which we have received of God. Oh for a simultaneous 
breathing of the Divine Spirit, which may quicken dead souls in every nation under 
heaven, and oiake Churches of Christ to spring up in vigour and beauty in all the dark 
"laoaa of the earth, to the praiso^of the glory of God's grace in Jesus Christl 

HOMILIES BY VAM US AUTHORS. 

ftn. 1 — lB.-—I{eeiification and enlargement It was not to be expected that so 
great an innovation as that of free communion with a Gentile would pass unchallenged 
in Jerusalem. Nor did it escape the criticism and condemnation of the " apostles and 
brethren " there (vers. 1, Z), S'roin the interesting and animated scene described in 
the text, we coaclude>« 

I. That oood mbn abb oooasionai.lt found doino that which seems hiohlt obn- 
euBABLS TO THE ooDiiT. We can hardly reaUze the intensity of the indignation which 
breathed and glowed in the awusing words, " Thou wentest in to men unoircumcised, 
and didst eat with them " (ver, 3), Peter had done an act which was wholly irregu- 
lar and positively unlawful. What did he mean by it? We know that he had simply 
foltowed the Instructions which he bad received from Christ, and that he could not 
possibly have acted otherwise without downright disobedience. How many times, in 
what varioua sphere*, under what different eondfitions, have good men found themselves 
placed by their very faithfulness in a position of "contention " (ver. 2) with thdr 
Iretbren, either respecting (1) a point of doctrine {e.g. " the Reformation "), or (2) a 
matter oi Church government (e^, the way in which the Church should be officered (X 



3^2 tllli ACTS Ot' Tlffi A]?OSTLEa [ch. xi. 1— 3d 



the relation in wliicli it slioiild stand to the civil power), or (3) a method of evangeliza- 
tion, or (4) the position which should be taken tovvai-J other Christian communities I 
In these and similar matters the best and wisest of men have occasionally found them- 
selves compel loil to confront the strong censures of those with whom they were in 
communion. It is a most painful position to have to excite the indignation of good 
men, but it may be our plain and bounden duty so to do. 

II. That often a simple narration of the facts is the best possiblb defence. 
" Peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and expounded it by order " (ver. 4). 
fie told the whole story in its simplicity (vers. 5 — 16). That was enough : it disarmed 
his accusers ; they had nothing to reply ; they accepted his defence ; " They held their 
peace " (ver. 18). If some of them went no further than ceasing to complain, others 
acknowledged that a new step was taken, and that the Church was warranted in "going 
forward." It is often, if not always, the wisest of all plans to let the simple facts speak 
for us. If our complaining brethren knew as much as we know, they would not condemn. 
We have but to let in the light, and we shall be acquitted and perhaps commended. 

III. That God will vindicate his own. Peter's one great argument was that he 
had done everything under Divine direction (see vers. 5, 9, 12, 15, 16). He summed it 
all up in the strong, overwhelming consideration, " What was I that I could withstand 
God? "(ver. 17). By his marked and mauilest interposition, God_ had sustained his 
servant, and had given him the means of justifying his conduct when it came before 
the tribunal of his fellows. If wisdom is not always justified of her children at once, it 
will be in time. Unto the upright there will arise light in the darkness (Ps. cxii. 4). 
God m:iy desire his servant to place himself in an attitude of opposition to his friends, 
and to bear the pain of their blows ; but he will at length — later, if not sooner — vindi- 
cate that servant, and give him the greater honour for thesliame he bore at his bidding. 

IV. That we should keep ourselves free for the exculpation of men and for 
OUR own spiritual enlargement. The apostles and brethren had to own that Peter 
was right, and, at the same time, to receive into their mind a larger and nobler view of 
Christian truth. Happily they were free to do so ; otherwise there would have been a 
-bitter separation and an injurious rupture. 1. However wrong good men may seem to 
us to be, let us remember that it is possible that it is we and not they who are mistaken. 
We may be very confident we are right, but it is the most positive who are the moat 
fallible of men. 2. Let us be ready to enlarge our view as God gives us light. " He 
has yet more light and truth to break forth from his Word." Wisdom does not dwell 
with us. Out of the heavenly treasury there are riches of truth still to be dispensed. 
A docile Church will ever be learning and acquiring. There are some men who, by 
their guilty stubbornness, will block the way of the chariot of God ; there are others 
who will take up the stones and ]irepare the path that it may go swiftly on its 
benignant course. Let ours be the spirit of the apostles and brethren at Jerusalem, who, 
when they had listened and learned, said, " Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted 
repentance unto life." — 0, 

Vers. 19 — 26. — The many ways and the one work of Ood. It is interesting to gee 
how God works in many ways toward one end, and how, from the first day of the 
Ciiristian era, he has been acting on the world and on the Church, making all things to 
move toward one glorious issue. 

I. The many ways of God's workino. We may be reminded : 1. How he defeats 
his enemies. " They which were scattered abroad upon the persecution . . . travelled 
. . . preaching the Word," etc. (ver. 19). If the enemies of the truth had been its best 
friends, they could not possibly have taken a course more favourable to its circulation 
and establishment than the one they took. God overrules the designs of his foes, and 
turns their attacks upon his kingdom into actual support. Again and again has the 
enmity, the cruelty, the violence, the cunning of sin been compelled to subserve the 
interests of righteousness. Mischief smites down the standing corn of truth, but, so 
doing, it sows living seed from which a large harvest will rise. 2. How he teaches his 
friends. Those who were scattered abroad went " preaching the Word to none but unto 
Uie Jews only" (ver. 19). They did not understand that the gospel was intended for 
mankind: this was an enlargement of view which the Christian Church had then to 
gain. Its Divine Master had to teach it this most necessary lesson. How should be do 



dii.«Ll— 36j "nm ACTS OP TtlE AJ?OSTLfia ft6S 



thU? He Tnip;ht have done so (1) by the direct inspiralion of his Holy Spirit ; or (2) 
tj inaiiifosling himself to some one of the apostles and conveying through him his 
mind on the matter. But he chose to do tliis (3) by the teaching of his providence. 
" Some of them " — we do not know who, some whose names are lost and will never 
be discovered — some men from Cyprus and Gyrene, " when they were come to Antioch, 
sp»ke unto the Greeks [not ' Grecians '], preaching the Lord Jesus." And this unpre- 
meditated, iircgular work proved to be mai-vellously successful (see ver. 21). When 
the Church at Jerusalem heard of these unauthorized proceedings, they despatched 
Barnabas to inquire into the matter (see ver. 22). The nobility of his character and 
excellency of his spirit triumphed over the narrowness of his views, and, instead of 
disowning and discouraging the work, he acknowledged its Divine origin and furthered it 
to the height of his power. A nd thus the seal of apostolic sanction was set to the broader 
aim and the larger hope. Thus God leads us into his kingdom of truth. He places us 
in such circumstances that we take right steps without realizing all the consequences 
therein involved, and then our convictions rise to the height of our actions. 3. How God 
uses his servants. " Then departed Barnabas ... to seek Saul " (ver. 25). Barnabas 
served God and his race in one way, Saul in another. Barnabas was not the man to do 
what Piml afterwards did. He had not the evangelizing, organizing, literary faculty 
in anything like the same degree in which his illustrious colleague possessed it. But 
he served the Church and the world in his own way. It was a valualile conlribution 
to the cause of Christ and of the kingdom of God to introduce llie dintriisteil convert to 
the confidence of the Church (ch. ix. 27), and to give him sueh an opeuing for the 
exercise and training of his varied powers as that he now enjoyed at Antiocli ; it was 
an eminent and precious service thus to place on a firm fouling and lo bring into the 
foreground the man who was to be the means of doing such work as I'aul accomplished 
for mankind. What immeasurable service have the fathers and motliers and teachers 
of our great reformers, evapgelists, preachers, etc., rendered their race! Other men have 
other spheres to fill ; that of Paul was the sphere of abounding activity. We may bo 
sure that he had a great deal to do during those twelve months at Anliucli,iu " teaching 
many people" (ver, 26). Some in quieter, others in more active scenes ; some in virtue 
of intellectual, others by means of moral and spiritual gifts; some by their influence 
on a few influential men, others by their action on the multitude ; sojue by impressing 
their convictions on men by direct personal appeal, others by organizing and arranging ; 
all in the way chosen of God and pleasing to him, play their part and do their work in 
their hour of opportunity. 

II. The one work of God. At Antioch it became convenient to distinguish the 
converts to the new faith by some name which marked them off from the Jews ; they 
were called " Christians." It is a mark which speaks of the rising tide of truth. It 
reminds us that God was working out a grand design, far, far beyond the elevation of a 
favoured nation, viz. the redepiption of the whole race of man by faith in Jesus Christ; 
be was and is engaged in " reconciling the world unto himself in Christ." — CL 

Vers. 27 — 30. — Ood's hounty and our well-leing The reference, in these verses, to 
" a great dearth throughout all the world " (ver. 28), and to the sending of relief by 
the disciples, according to their several ability, to the brethren in Judjea (ver. 29), may 
suggest to us thoughts concerning the provision which God has made for us in his 
Divine goodness and also in his Divine wisdom. We look at— 

I. His PROVISION FOR OUR Tt:MroRAL WELL-BBINQ. The great multitudes of mankind, 
the hundreds of thousands of millions are fed, year after year, age ufter age ; and many 
hundreds of millions more might lie sustained if all the use were made that might be of 
the opportunities open to us. God, in his bounty, provides what vve want in (1) fruit- 
ful and extensive soil, (2) multiplv ing seed, (3) agricultural knowledge (Isa. xxviii. 26), 
(4) materials for implements of husbandj-y, (5) all nourishing and ripening agencies. 

II. His considebation of our piety. God gives us our bread, our maintenance, in 
such a way that we are almost compelled to acknowledge his hand in the harvest. 
Evidently we did not produce the soil nor make the seed ; evidently we cannot cause it 
to fertilize and grow; evidently it is his sun that shines and his rain that falls on our 
fields. The ordinary processes as by which the seed is multiplied are snch sf direct our 
©yes to heaven. And often, in his wisdom, he holds his hand, be withdraws tlie sunshin« 



3ft4 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. toH.aul-^ft 

or keeps back his clouds, he sends dearth as'" in the days of Claudius Caa8«r"(ver. 28), 
and then men are cntistrnlned to remember that there is work being done in the soil and 
in the sky which they cannot control, and in regard to which they must look up to God 
the Giver of all, whose is the earth with its fulness, and ask of him, and plead with him, 
and, it may be, humble themselves before him. 

in. His reqabd fob our iNTELiiECTUAL AND MORAL wELt-BEiNO. I, Intellectual. 
Gk)d teaches us (Isa, xxviii.), but he leaves much to be discovered by our own mental 
labour. Agriculture provides a very wide and a very noble field for observation, experi- 
ment, contrivance ; it tasks and trains the mind. 2. Moral. We cannot secure our 
harvests without (1) industry, (2) combination, (3) patience (Jas, T. 7). The abundance, 
and indeed superabundance, of the earth's yield is such that (4) there is enough for the 
supply of those engaged in other pursuits ; hence there is room for all kinds of labour 
beside that of agriculture — for the pursuit of art, and for the teaching of religious truth 
and training in the religious life. Those who have received the bread of eternal life 
from the lips of others can furnish, as Antioch now supplied Jerusalem, the bread of 
this temporal life to those to whom they are under spiritual obligation. The abun- 
dance which prevails in some districts — and famine is never universal-ogives the 
opportunity of (5) showing practical kindness. On this occasion there was sufficient 
in Syria for its own need and for the distress in Judaja, and the Ciiristians of Antioch 
contributed to supply the wants of those at Jerusalem. 

We should (1) receive God's temporal mercies with the gratitude which belongs to 
piety ; (2) distribute of our abundance to those who have a claim on us, either on 
account. of the spiritual favours they have conferred or in virtue of their special 
necessity. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 18. — The spirit of sect and the spirit of the gosptt, |. Seotabian 
SUSPICIONS. In Judaea are the head-quarters of this sectarian spirit. There it centres 
and rankles. The very tidings which fill the generous spirit with joy fill the 
sectarian with jealousy. They hear that the Gentiles have received the VVord of God. 
Happy news I Alas that any should regard them otherwise I But to the ideas of the 
sectarian any change is appalling which threatens to break down the fence and wall 
of the sect, and compel him to widen the extent of his fellowship. So the sectarians 
quarrel with Peter. Their charge is that he has yisited the unclrcumclsed heathen and 
eaten with them, 

II, The truth elicited bt orPosiTioN. God overrules all things for good, makes 
the wrath of man to praise him, brings the truth into clearer manirestatlon by the 
very means of resistance to it. Let ns not be too severe on the sectarian, if he be 
honest in his opposition. Far more pernicious the hypocritical friend than the sincere 
and downright foe. Were every innovation tamely submitted to without Inquiry, 
progress would not be so sound. It is by overcoming objectors that truth triumphs, 
not by silencing them. And again, facts are the best arguments. Once more Peter 
relates the vision at Joppa, To overcome others' objections, the best way Is to show 
how our own objections have been overcome. The great point of opposition is the 
repugnance, inborn and strengthened by education, of the Jew to certain objects 
viewed by him as common or unclean. The great difficulty of overcoming the feeling 
lies in the fact that it is interwoven with .11 the best associations of the mind. The 
man, having learned the idea of holiness by means of a sharp physical distinction, 
fears that he shall lose the idea itself if that distinction be obliterated. No mere 
arguments in words will avail. But Peter can exhibit the argument of facts. Their 
fitting into one another with an invincible Divine logic can neither be defied nor 
refuted. The coincidence of the revelation to the centurion and to Peter has been 
already dwelt upon in previous sections. The end is the falling of the Holy Spirit 
upon the disciples at the very moment when the Jew and the Gentiles are brought 
together and Peter opens his mouth to speak. 

III. The truth of the present liohtb up the pbophetio deolarationb of thb 
FAST. Words deep in meaning slumber In the mind until the revealing event takes 
place. Then they are suddenly quickened into life and start up in all their power. 
Peter remembers She word of the Lord on the baptism of the Holy Spirit. It is ht 
tmtrast t'^ that ol John at the opening of the evangelical en. It lur^xMsM that qf 



OH. XLl— aaj THE ACTS OF THE AP0STLE8. 36S 



John M the positive surpbsiies the negative ; the entrance into hleSsing, the denial of 
and departure from evil. The conclu^ioti, then, of the whole is that the facts are 
irresistible. In these lie the dear intimations of providential will. Neither apostle 
nor angel can contend against facts, whether they refer to the outer world and are 
construed by sciuntifio law, Or to the inner world and are knoWn by the devout soul as 
revelations and inspirations. The Gentile is placed on an equality with the Jew in 
reference to the bleiisings of the gospel ; one does not stand in the vestibule, the other 
in the interior of the new temple, but both are gathered to the heart of God, who 
reconciles us to himself by Jesus Christ. A common faith in him entitles us all to 
the appellation " sons of God," afad therefore brethren amongst one another : " Te are all 
one in Christ Jesus." Thus, When the hour strikes, docs God Silence controversy, 
causes his voice alone to be heard, add presently draws forth a burst of praise from 
human hearts. Te« ; at bottom the heart loves truth, and craves the revelation of 
lovet "God then hath given the nations repentance unto life!" The signs of the 
times point to a similar revolution of the large and generous spirit of the gospel. 
May wo be reai^y to meet it, and not be found amongst those who contend against the 
light and figl^, vgaiust Ood, but amongst those who herald with joy and thankfulness 
the approach ul' ilie new dawui for the Sun of tiighteousness shall arise to those that 
fear his Name with healing in his wing3.->— J, 

Yen. 19 — i%.~Foumiing ^ fh» Chwchat Antioeh. I. Tas beCondabt causes of 
THK FOUNDATION. Christians had been dispersed by the persecution. And thus there 
went a stream of believers through Phoenicia, Cyprus, ^nd the district of Antioeh, 
charged with the Divine message, living seminaries of the word Of love. Persecution, 
in breaking Up communities, diffuses their spiritual contents, as when the box of precious 
unguent is broken a sweet perfume is diffused abroad. As a rule, these emissaries 
addressed themselves only to the Jews. But some there were who had seized the 
larger truth of the gospel and the time, and proclaimed the gospel to the Greeks also. 
On the day of Pentecost men from Gyrene are named as present, witnesses of the 
power of the Holy Spirit. Better fitted are they to carry ))ack the gospel to their 
countrymen than those born Jews. God knows where to find the proper labourers for 
any harvest which he has ripening. 

IL Thb success of the mission. The hand of the Lord, the Divine power, was 
with them, and in large numbers converts and believers were forthcoming. Is not the 
hand of the Lord ever stretched forth when his blessing is sought, his commands 
obeyed ? AH through these profoundly interastiug details, do we not clearly see that 
God requires human eo-opcratiou ? We bind the hands of God — to use a bold figure- 
when wo do not faithfully deliver his truth, the truth which the time is bidding US 
to utter. It was the generous and world-wide application of the gospel which was 
followed by the Divihe sonctioit and blessing. Aa it was then, so iuay we expect it 
to Im now and ever. 

IIL The visit of Barnabas. 1. The Church at Jerusalem, hearing of the progress 
of the truth at Antioeh, despatch Bariiabas thither. They are quite otherwise dis- 
posed than upon a former occasion (ver. 1, sqq.). Peter had then to meet a storta of 
objections to his holding intercourse with the heathen. But now the same Church 
sends without hesitation Barnabas to further the good work. Thus gradually does 
God uufold his ways, and opposition gives way before his manifested counsels, as 
the frost-bound snows before the sun of the spriug-^time^ 2. And when Barnabas saw 
the grace of God, he was glad. The spiritual eye discerns spiritual things. As God 
is BO respecter of persons, neither is he who lives in the fellowship of God's mind. 
It is no question of the human instrument, but of the Divine results ; not of the 
channels of the grace, bdt of that pure grace itselfi 3. Barnabas proves himself true to 
his name and clmracter, and proves his fitness for the mission. Good and holy himself, 
his exhortations tend to goodness and holiness. Let them cleave to God With the fall 
purpose of the heart; Kver a salutary counsel^-to walk by the same rule, to mind 
the same thing, to stand in the old ways and inquire for the well-trodden paths. 
Religion is an attitude of the soul, a habit of the Will. The constant Divine Object 
."equires constancy in us ; let us be true to him as the magnet to the pole. It is good 
to btamu a Christian, better to ie a Christian, best of all to endure as a Christian and 



36« THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLKS. [oh. xr. 1— 3a 

inherit the promise of the crown of life. Here, too, we see the qualities of the true 
teacher — to be good and upright in life-conversation, to be full of the holy confidence 
which faith inspires, and of that contagious inspiration which God's Indwelliug 
imparts. 

IV. The result of blessing. A "considerable multitude added to the Lord." 
And this, it seems, in consequence of the visit of Barnabas. How mighty the power 
of one energetic will, one faithful heart, of a man who can say with all his heart, 
" I believe," and whose life backs up his word 1 So successful is the work, so full the 
net of the gospel fisher, that Barnabas has to seek the aid of Saul. Another proof 
of the pure and humble temper of Barnabas. Evidently he did not desire to make 
himself the great man at Antioch. The greatness of the work and of his Master 
engrossed his thoughts. Nor does Saul thrust himself forward, but comes when 
sought. It is a picture of friendship and comradeship in the service of Chriiit. Plato 
rhapsodized of the joint striving of two souls after knowledge and truth; but nobler 
and sweeter is tlie joint striving of two souls to serve the Saviour of men and promote 
his kingdom of peace and love in souls. Memorable year in the annals of Christianity 1 
Here were the disciples first called Christians — followers of the Christ, of the Anointed 
One ; themselves anointed by the same Spirit and to the same life-work. Let us go 
back to the origin of our name, that we may understand its meaning. The notes of 
the true Christian are and ever were, the anointing of the Holy Ghost and with power, 
and the life seen to be busy, like that of the Master, in "doing good."— J. 

Vers. 1 — 18. — The Church of Ood set <m the new foundation of liberty. 1. The only 
stable foundation of si'ibitual fellowship. Mutual confidence. Common dependence 
on the Spirit of Ood. Free speech. Entire understanding of the rule of life. Peter 
himself cannot be allowed to violate accepted principles without being called to account. 
He frankly explains and justifies his conduct. The old leaven of Judaism was at work ; 
but the antidote was there — obedience to the Spirit. 

II. The true conditions of spiritual advancement. The individual not despotically 
silenced, but called to his true place as one of the community, a member of the body, 
supplying his portion of new light. The standard of reference, not Peter's private 
opinion, or the Church's decision after discussion, but the manifestation of the Spirit in 
facts and undoubted testimony. There were seven trustworthy,witnesses. " Who was 
I, that 1 could withstand Ood f " Difference between such a revelation and those private, 
isolated assertions of inspiration such as Swedenborg's and others. 

III. The breaking down op the "middle wall of partition" between Jew and 
Gentile ; glory to God. The old circumcision superseded by the new baptism, 
licpentance granted to alL The bee gift of the Spirit. — K. 

Vers. 19 — 26. — A new centre of evangelistic work. Antioch. Another hold upon 
the Gentile world. More important than Caesarea. Next to Alexandria. Intellectual 
culture; commercial. A sphere prepared for SauL 

L The ministry employed. Lay agency. Persecution compelling the Church to 
enlarge its borders. The circumstances opening the door to the Gentiles. Probably 
little success among Jews. The multitudes of Greeks at Antioch. The Greek mind 
prepared for inquiry. The state of the heathen world well represented there. 

II. The Divine testimony given. The hand of the Lord with them. The Spirit 
outpoured. Possibly not so much in miraculous signs, but in conversions. 

III. "Thb message preached. " The Lord jesits." Not speculations to catch 
philosopher*, but facts to lay hold of hearts. Not preached in a tone of ecclesiastical 
authority, but by laymen full of the Holy Ghost. 

IV. Thk two centres united — Jerusalem and Antioch. Apostolic ministry and 
lay agency. Barnabas, an Intermediate representative man. The kind of man required ; 
not lax in his views of truth, but " a good man," full of kindly spirit, an inspired 
man, a firm believer. Thus the expansion of the Church wag no rending of the body 
of Christ, but simple growth, spiritual life seeking its development. 

V. The school of the Church opened. Antioch a groat catechetical centre'. 
Barnabas aimed at instruction and cditication, that they hlinuUi cleave unto the Lord. 

9e Called in Sfwi, m more eminently i^da^ted tlwu Uiwaejf fuf work i» s«cb » a^kw> 



ci^. ii. 1— 30.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 861 

The humility of both men exemplified. Both fitted to be masters, because both simple- 
minded. Teacliirxj must accompany evangelization, or the work will fall to pieces. 
A whole year they taught much people ; hence their steadfastness at Antioch. 

VI. The world's tkstimony to the new life. "Called Christians." Antioch 
saw a distinct society arising ; gave it a name, separated it in thought both from 
Judaism and heathenism. Recognized that the substance of it was Christ; that tlio 
members of it were like Christ and lived for Christ. The providential appointment of 
the name signalized the new start bf the Church on its mission, with Saul at the head 
of it, to evangelize the world. An interesting line of progress from Jerusalem to 
Antioch. Divine guidance. — B. 

Ver. 26. — The Ohri$tian name. "And tbe disciples were called Christians first in 
Antioch." Three groat cities identified with Christian history in a special manner — 
Jerusalem, Antioch, and Home. The birth of the religion ; its triumph in full man- 
hood over the world ; and between the.se two points its baptism as the religion of the 
East and West alike. Describe position and influence) of the city. The name not 
given by Jews, as recognizing that Jesus was Messiah. Not by disci pies, as other names 
in use — "believers," "brethren," "saints," "friends." Nor by Divine direction. It 
was either a name of reproach or a convenient designation of a rapidly enlarging 
society. Consider — 

I. The name given. 1. Personal, testifying to the pre-eminence of Christ in the 
first preaching. The facts came before the doctrines, as they always should. 2. A 
name of distinction. Separation from the world. Baptism in his Name. Worship of 
Christ. Spirit of Christ. "See how these Christians love one another." Contrast 
with heathen world. 3. Prophetic. Christ expected to return. Judge of all the 
earth. Despondency the main feature of heathenism. Christians preached hope. 
The Besurrection and Ascension. Not as others, children of the night, but children of 
the light. 

II. Tub nabib honourbd. " Called Christians." 1. The life should be evident 
before it is named. Baptismal regeneration is condemned by such a fact. 2. If the 
world looks upon tbe life, it will name it; let us see to it that it names it after Christ. 
It should be the sign of convers;\tion, and the testimony to a spiritual work. 3. The 
privilege is to wear the name. Aie we ashamed of it? Secret disciples an anomaly. 
Connect the profession with te.aohing at Antioch, and the name will be itself a 
publication of the truth. 4. It is not what we are called that will decide our final 
state, but what we are. Let all who name his Najiio dejiart from iniquity. "Chris- 
tendom " is an empty mockery. Seek the baptism of tlie Holy Ghost. — B. 

Vers. 27 — 30. — Practical sympathy between Jew and Qentile. I. The test of heal 
union must be an appeal to self-sacrifice. Antioch was wealthy ; Judita was poor. 
The prophets came from Jerusalem ; the return was relief sent to poor brethren, both 
as a sign of obedience to the Spirit and as a pledge of future oneness. There could 
be no more decided evidence that the Gentile converts were really incorporated into 
the apostolic Church. 

II. The prophetic element quite consistent with the maintenance of a settled 
«RDEB in the spiritual life. The extraordinary manifestations of the Spirit must be 
listinguished from the ordinary work of the Church. The collected relief was sent to 
" the elders." The hands of Barnabas and Saul carried it. Thus the new Gentile 
community at Antioch did not break away from the original centre at Jerusalem. It 
was not Saul's aim to disacknowledge those who had preceded him ; but, while care- 
fully maintaining the connection, preserving independence. 

III. WiLLlNOHOOD the principle of the Church's charity, f Every man according 
to his ability." " God loveth a cheerful giver." No sign of ecclesiastical rate-laying. 
Until the Church became corrupt, it had no need of any other law than spiritual 
law.— B. 

Ver. 18,— A model Church meeting. The worst hindrances to the spread of Chris- 
I ianity and to its bold upon the world have always been found to be, not so much the 
imtive oppodi^jop q( ikv hupiw twt, «or tl»o djuip^ gpHfljc^ wi^h S^tw w4 with ein, 



368 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oa iL 1-^ 

but those indirect conSicts which are entailed by : 1. The inconsistencies of Christiahl 
ia their individual life. 2. The "contentiuni" of Christians in their Autual oi 
collective life. We have before us a threatening instance of this latter kind, and an 
agreeable example of the way in which it was averted. Notice^ 

L A THBEATKNINO INSTANCE OF CONTENTION AMONG A BODY OF CfiBISTlANB. Wt 

read that " when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they that were of the circumcisiotl 
contended with him." Though the more unfavourable turn 6f the word as nbW Used 
by us need not be pressed, yet it certainly implies, as it stands, dissatisfaction #ith 
what he had done, and not the gentlest or suavest manner exhibited in calling him to 
accouat for it. 1. Contentions within Christian communities are in their simplest 
principle and beginning justifiable. It need not be said of them, as of offences, " Woe 
to him by whom they come ! " though it may, nay, almost must, be said Of them, that 
they "will come." It is for this reason, because the Church on earth is, as amo&gst 
its own members, its own guardian. It acknowledges the headship Of Christ. It 
acknowledges the rule of the Spirit. It does not acknowledge any earthly lord, any 
vicar of Christ, any earthly sovereign authority. Hence it is answerable for its otim 
doctrine and for its own discipline within its own pale. And investigation, debate, 
yea, all the formality of judicial trial (so that neither motives, methods, nor weapdns 
are carnal), are within its province. 2. Contentions within Christian communities 
very generally arise on some plausible ground, to say the least. It was certainly so 
now. It is highly important to discriminate as fal' as possible between what is really 
legitimate and what is merely plausible. Of the first are — (1) 2eal of scriptural doctrine 
and revealed fact ; (2) zeal of a holy and consistent life. But of the second are — 
(1) mere love of precedent; (2) ascription of motives; (3) generally scant charily. 
8. Contentions within Christian communities fix stern responsibility oh those Who stir 
them, only second to that of those who cause them, when this is really doUe. 4. Con- 
tentions within Christian communities detnand as much, as sbletnUly as auy position 
whatsoever in life, singleness of eye and a pure conscience. Feeling, personal feeling, 
party feeling, priestly feeling, and even the perfection of ignorant prejudice, hare, in 
probably the saddest preponderance of history, profanely trampled on the ground and 
made it mournfully all their own. Nor is there any more hollo* hy|)ocri6y, more 
miserable mockery, more insulting blasphemy, than when these coutiterfeit zeal for 
the Lord of hosts and a pure and sensitive conscience. 

II. A GRATEFUL EXAMPLE OF THE METHOD BY WHICH IT #aS AVJRTED. It takes 

two persons to make a bargain, and two to make a quarrel ; and, if a recoticlliation is 
to be genuine and have in it the elements of lasting, both parties must do their sbat^. 
It was so now. 1. Peter did what lay in him to remove cause of offence and to 
explain difficulty. (1) He seems to have been taxed in a somewhat poiut-blauk 
style. Yet he does not rein himself up, though he does rein temper in. He does not 
stand on his dignity, and refuse any account of himself and doings till he is addressed 
in a somewhat milder and ii ore deferential style. (2) He does not assert Sitdply th^t 
what he had done he had dune under an overpowering conviction " of duty " — « phrase 
among the worst abused of moral phrases. (3) He does not assert jxisilively, even 
though he had good right to know it, that what he had done was right and all Hght, 
and no two opinions about it with any man of understanding and principle. (4) 
Discarding all irritating and aggravating beginnings, he even waives any expiresilldii 
of claim to the confidence of " the brethren," and instead, at once conciliatingly tells 
his tale. Be tells it all from the beginning to the end succinctly. He uar^teii the 
revelations made to him (vers. 5 — lU). He states the facts. Which could be easUy 
disproved if incorrect (ver. 11). He instances his "six brethren ** cotnpanidiis, Who 
were witnesses of all he had done, and were now in the position of witnesses fw him 
(ver. 12). He tempts out their memory by just quoting his own (Ver. 16). And in 
closing even he does not pronounce a dogmatic verdict fot Self, but rather aska a 
verdict, and whether his hearers think the case admits of any verdict different from 
what he had in his conduct practically given It is well worthy of notice how diffei'Snt 
the result might have been if Peter had at all, in a hectoring tone, begun with this 
question. But he did not begin with it ; and when, with Christian gentleheSi, tie iio'w 
closes with it, all are ready in their answer to acquit him of blama. They Mb With 
his eye and are one with him. 2. On the other hand, those who had U firSt poiubly 



0H.XI.1— 30.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLBa S69 

rather peremptorily challenged Peter's conduct may be observed with some commen- 
dation now. Presumably these were some of his fellow "apostles and brethren" 
(vers. 1, 2). And of their disposition it is to be noted favourably that : (1) K they 
had begun by putting themsulves a little in the wrong so far as their tone was 
concerned, they do not theiefoie persist in it. The injurer is often the last to give 
in and forgive. So frequent is' the occurrence and so fraught with mischief, that this 
may be callud one of the "devices of Satan," that even Christian men will cleave to 
tne thing they have said, let alone quite the subject of it, because they have once said 
it in'a wrong manner. Eye and mind and heart get sealed up in deference to one 
humiliating fact, that they have uttered so much sound in wrong tone. Well, this 
was not the case now with those who called Peter to account. (2) 'I'hey give Peter 
a patient, and no doubt what soon became a riveted, hearing. (3) They accept 
unquestioningly every statement that he makes, so far as it purported to be a state- 
ment of fact. There is no quibbling nor attempt at cross-questioning. This was 
Peter's due under any circumstances. But even fellow-Cihristians are chary sometimes 
in the matter of justice to one another. (4) At the right yielding-point they do yield 
heartily. To " hold their peace " was a very victory of goodness. Better than this, 
while they "hold their peate" from blaming Peter, they open their mouth to "glorify 
Qod," Their mode of yielding bespeaks truth and honesty in them at the first, if 
even these manifested themselves forth in a manner a trifle unceremonious. Doubt, 
perplexity, a little vexation, clouded brow, all went in a moment. Pent-up anxiety 
and distrust are relieved. They are glad to hear and be persuaded by the things now 
" rehearsed to them " of Peter. They are not envious and still exclusive, but welcome 
the admission of the large Gentile brotherhood to the family of God and to " repent- 
ance unto life." And the end of that meeting was peace and joy — yes, peace and joy 
in the Holy Ghost. We may give our better feelings leave to flow and our higher imagi- 
nation to play while we think of the reconciliation, hearty and unfeigned, that those 
happy moments witnessed between Peter and the brethren. Nor shall we doubt that, 
for his fidelity and unflinching consistency in a moment'* trying " ill report," he is 
henceforth held in higher honour and surer trust by those same brethren. — B. 

Vers. 23, 24. — The surprises of the grace of Qod. Some six or seven yean had 
passed since the martyrdom of Stephen, and "the persecution that arose about 
Stephen." The winds of persecution had now borne far and wide the seeds of Christian 
truth and faith. In the " ground " of Jewish hearts alone, however, for the greater 
part of this time had the seed " fallen," so far as men's intentions and purposes had 
scattered it. In individual cases, however, it had inevitably fallen elsewhere; and 
besides, as carried by some " Grecians " of the number of the " scattered," so it was 
freely given, by these at least, to Grecians again, who were not of the pure " Hebrews," 
and not of " the circumcised." Many " Grecians " thus " believed, and turned to the 
Lord " (ver. 21). The sacred history returns in some degree upon its steps to speak 
of these things, and to record, after the signal given of the fulness of the Gentiles 
being brought in, how it had meantime been faring with these more nondescript 
Grecians. There is a certain degree of the enigmatic in these two verses. To remove 
this will at the same time unfold the truth which the Spirit may have intended to 
teach in this place. We seem to see — 

L An element of bcclesiastioai. authobitt. " Tidings " that presumably were 
Df the best kind, and could mean nothing hut good, are apparently not received as 
«uch, and are visited with some sort of scrutiny. The facts are exactly so. But it is 
to be noted that the authority that moved was one that moved itself and is not an 
instance of an individual usurping ecclesiastical authority. The authority is not 
either arbitrary or that of an external hand. It is the Church itself. And it is the 
Church who delegates one evidently held in high honour, though not an apostle, to go 
to a long distance to inquire into the " tidings " that have reached itself at Jerusalem. 

II. An INOPPOBT0NB BXEBCI8E OF BCCLESIASTIOAL AUTHOBITT. If the tidings 

were on the face of them good, credible in the nature of things, or rather in the nature 
of what the Church now well knew to be the operation of the Divine Spirit, why need 
the Church assume the attitude of caution and do the action of apparent suspicion? 
1. It is most grateful to note the first dawning exercise of in&nt powers and discretion 

ACTS. 2 B 



370 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLBa [cii. xi. 1—30. 

on the part of the Church. Thii it learnt partly " from above," partly also from bitter 
and humbled experience of its own. It had already had the faithless within it, and 
the attempts of the worst worldliness (as in the instance of Simon Magus) to enter 
within its sacred fold. 2. The real gist of anxiety and of the inquiry proposed turned, 
no doubt, upon this great new gospel that was now coming upon those who had them- 
selves received the gospel in very deed, and which only shook their faith (if it did 
shake their faith) lest it be too great, too good, to be true. The "mighty works" ol 
God are being wrought upon and among all, Gentiles and Grecians, as they had been 
on the day of Pentecost at Jerusalem. Well may the Church stop and turn aside to 
see this great sight, and to find out for certain that it is not a vision and that they 
do not dream. 3. The Church, as results proved, did not act for the sake of mere 
caution or for the mere sake of enlightenment, least of all from love of cold and 
suspicious criticism, but, if things were real and true, also to give the right hand of 
fellowship to those who, like its own present members, were " called." 

HI. One special cbitebion looked foe by Barnabas, and ouiDiNa him. No 
details lie on the page for us, no sealed instructions are mentioned, no open instruc- 
tions, no parting suggestions even; and nothing is said of all the thoughts and feelings 
that chased one another or amid which the very soul' of Barnabas mused as he 
travelled afar. No ; but we are not left without the necessary clue. He reached his 
destination, and apparently does not hold or offer to hold any court, and call 
witnesses, and loftily and inquisitorially investigate the state of things. With a 
large and open eye he surveys the scene. He looks and sees the proofs of " the grace 
of God " given to them at Antioch, even " the uncircumcised." He listens, and hears 
the sounds that attest "the grace of God" given to them. He mingles with them, 
and he sees the works that none could do unless " the grace of God " were given to 
them. And he is satisfied. The tree is known by its fruits, and there can be no 
mistake what the fruits are now. Would that the same simplicity of method ol 
judging one another were the one method known and followed now and ever! For 
this beautiful expression, "the grace of God," does not stand for mere feeling and 
experience or profession of the same, but rather for those " works " and " fruits of the 
Spirit " which only could come of the imparted grace of God. 

IV. The veby gladness of heabt itself of a holt man. It is emphatically 
said, " He was glad." 1. It was a relief to an anxious, inquiring mind, on a subject 
of thrilling interest. How it had weighed on the mind of Barnabas all his journey — 
the question itself, and his responsibility as delegated to examine into it ! 2. It was 
a relief to Barnabas to think he could speak with such thorough confidence, and in no 
halting tone at all, to those who had sent him, when he should render his account to 
them. 3. It was all joy to his heart to think how day dawned at last on the whole 
world. What startling, ravishing prospects must have sometimes beeii revealed by 
the Spirit to the apostles and the early disciples and brethren in those days I 

v. The mindfulness of a holt man, even when excited by jot. 1. Barnabas 
was mindful of his own duty, to speak the word of exhortation even in the midst of a 
scene full of present brightness, hope, confidence. 2. He was mindful of the ever- 
existing temptation to go back to the world, to love the world, to yield in enthusiasm's 
hour, but to relapse in the long days of heat and toil and trial. And therefore the 
burden of his exhortation was that they should " deave to the Lord," and that " with 
purpose of heart they should cleave to the Lord." 

VI. A SOMEWHAT INOPPORTUNE MIXTURE OF COMMENDATION OF BaRNABAS AND BIS 

individual chabaoteb with much mobe seeious matteb. Let it seem so; let it be 
SO. Yet this is the condescension of God. This is the sympathy of Jesus. This is 
the Spirit's comforting aid and honour shown to those who are true. However, as the 
sacred and abiding page of Scripture inscribes these things to the honour and glory of 
Barnabas, in the midst of m£(tter which all redounded only to the honour and glory 
of God, we may obsei-ve that the character here given to Barnabas : 1. Justified his 
(election tor a uew and delicate and important embassy. 2. Explains the very deep, 
full, genial joy of his heart, its openness to conviction, and its freedom from the least 
and last taint of Jewish envy and Jewish exclusiveness. 3. Proves withal that it was 
God's Spirit who was in all," working within" him, when he came, when he saw, when 
he judged rightly, when he was profoundly impressed, when ho was glad to the bottom 



OH. XI. 1-30.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 871 

of his heart, and also when he did not forget duty and solemn trying times to coma 
amid the sympathies and consratulatings of bright hours. For he was "full of the 
Holy Ghjst."— B, 

Vers. 25, 26. — An early eo-pastorate. The chronology of the period reaching from 
the martyrdom of Stephen to the mission of Barnabas to Antioch is obscure, and has 
at present indeed refused to yield up to us dates — as, for instance, leading dates -aflfecting 
Saul — of the utmost interest. It is, however, exceedingly probable that six full years 
had now passed since the conversion of Saul. During the whole of this time he has 
heen — we may say it without a doubt, though perhaps it were not easy to find actual 
chapter and verse for the statement — " preaching Christ." He has been removed from 
one station to another for safety's sake twice. He has latterly been for some time at 
Tarsus, his native place, and it is of his employment during his stay at Tarsus that we 
know least. While, as already said, there is scarcely room to doubt that there 
emphatically he would be preaching Christ, it would seem a little remarkable if he 
did so through a period of one or two years with impunity. Hither, however, Barnabas 
now comes, to seek a colleague and efficient help in his work at Antioch. Very brief 
are the touches of the pen which convey to us the situation here. But they portray, 
nevertheless, something so natural and almost homely, that it is not difficult, and is 
pleasant and instructive, to fill in the detail of the picture. 

1. BaBNABAB FINOS AN UNEXPECTED AND A GRAND FIELD OF LAB0I7B AT AnTIOOB. 

1. He came on one errand ; he stays on another, and that a great enterprise. He came 
to inquire about the justifiableness of certain goings on. He is forced to become part 
and parcel of them, and to embark in them heart and hand and voice. 2. He observes 
" that a great door and elTectual is opened before him " (1 Cor. xvi. 9). Antioch, for 
its situation, its buildings, and its very various and important people — for its Jewish 
population, for its Greek fashion, and its Soman military, and its business and com- 
mercial connections — cannot be surpassed as a place of importance for preaching Christ 
from the first moment that it is apparent that not Jews only, but Gentiles also, Qreck 
and Roman, are to bo embraced within the blessings of the covenant. 3. When 
already " much people was added unto the Lord," and " a greai number had believed 
and turned unto the Lord," his heart is " touched with compassion " (as his Master's 
once and often was) when he saw " the sheep without a shepherd," and " the fields 
white to harvest," and the harvest one of superlative promise, " but the labourers few." 
And no doubt he " prayed the Lord of the harvest," and got his answer. 

IL Barnabas consults as to one thing alone. 1. He wishes, if it be possible, to 
compass the work. 2. He knows no grain of envy or jealousy or selfish ambition, 
3. He will lose a few weeks of time if he may return armed better by far for the work, 
for he bethinks himself (or otherwise in answer to his prayer has, been reminded 
divinely) of one of remarkable conversion and of surpassing energy. Be will be a 
hkely helpmeet. Barnabas has already walked arm-in-arm with him in Jerusalem, 
and lias been surety for him with the Church in Jerusalem. With this strong man, 
who has now been tried, been ripening in comparative retirement, and bas borne the 
trial, would he wish to be associated in besieging, with a view to take, this tempting 
citadel of Antioch. He is keeping up his character as given us in the preceding 
verses. He is " full of the Holy Ghost and of faith." His eye is single, his best reason 
and mental judgment are given to the question before him. His motives are pure and 
his conscience sensitive. 4. He is going to have his man. He will not miss of Saul. 
He journeys after him to seek him. He believes not in messages nor proxies. He finds 
him and brings him to Antioch. 

IlL Barnabas and Saul believb in oo-opbeatiok. 1. They believe in brotherly 
love. It was a somewhat new thing to believe in, in some aspects of it. Not a few 
natural kinds of love unite us together. But brotherly love came in largely with the 
followers of Jesus, viz. that kind of love which brought two men to -work together 
for religious ends. 2. They believe in the practical advantages of two working together. 
(1) One sustains the purpose of the other. (2) The weak side of one character is com- 
pensated by the forte of the other. (3) Many an enterprise must pine for want of 
Bullicicnt support at the hand of one alone, which may be easily compassed by two, 
aud leave them sfill spare energy. 3. They disbelieve in uuwortiiy rivalry, in cob»> 



372 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oa. xi. 1—30 

pariiong, in personal ambition. Yet nmo, eighteen centuries later, these very things are 
occasionally Leard as among the standard objectiona to two disciples of Jesus Christ 
being linked together in equal service for him. 

IV. Baknabas and Saul give themselves fob a whole yeae to buildino up 
AND EDIFYING THE Chdrcii AT Aktiooh. 1. The importance of Church life begins to 
be recognized, both for itself and for its witness, in the midst of a great people outside. 
2. Even nature itself " is vindicating the need and the advantage of teachers and 
pastors and examples." " TIj ey assembled themselves with the Church, and taught much 
people." It was not all evangelization, nor all missionary journeys, even in earliest 
days of Christianity. And this is more remarkable in the light of an example, when 
we remember that the good work at Antioch had sprung up of what in brief might be 
called " self-sown seed." Those of the dispersion whose hearts burned within them 
had been, under tlie Spirit, the beginning of the work. And it was on account of the 
proportions to which their work had grown, and the fame of it that travelled to 
Jerusalem, that Barnabas had been sent to visit Antioch. The flock only need to be 
hungry to look for a shepherd, and the hungry flock do not fail to look up to the 
shepherd that feeds it. 3. The love of Barnabas and Saul must have been met by much 
love on the part of those " in and out among whom " they went, teaching them many 
things. This is the Church love. This is the secret of Church harmony. This the 
humble beginning alike of the holiness and the happiness of the Church above. 

V. The ministky conjoint of Babnabas and Saul is blessed. It is blessed in two 
directions. 1. It cannot be said to be a conclusion too remote or far-fetched when 
we assert that there is evidence of the witness that ministry was to the outside world. 
That " the disciples were first called Christians at Antioch " and at this time means 
nothing less than these two things. (1) They take a status in the world; and this has 
been verified by history. World-wide their name is known. (2) That status is given 
them, even if in partial ridicule, hy the world. The Church of disciples, of saints, of 
brethren, of followers of Jesus, of Nazarunes, made its mark upon them of busy, 
prosperous. Intelligent Antioch. They are not a ragged regiment, nor a rope of sand, 
nor a quarrelsome litigious clique. They have been doing work and have been living 
consistently. 2. That ministry has prepared those among whom it was exercised both 
to feel promptly compassion for their brethren who were to be visited by famine and 
j)Overty in Jud^a, showing it also promptly by a practical charity and generosity, 
and also to convey that expression of love in a becoming and grateful manner. Great 
was the goodness of Barnabas, and great and good was the united ministry and work of 
him and his chosen, sought colleague, Saul. — ^B. 

Veri. 4 — 17. — The efficient answer to ohfeetori. A man always takes an individual 
line, in opinion or in conduct, in peril of being misunderstood and called to account by 
his fellows. And yet the intellectual and moral advance of the i-ace is made only by 
the pressure forward of individuals who, on some ground, refuse to keep in the old lines, 
and persist in making their own way even in districts marked by common sentiment 
as " dangerous." It is often the precise mission of youth to check the strongly 
conservative tendency around them, and utter fresh truth, or at least truth in fresh 
forms. This is illustrated in the case of St. Peter. He had come to grasp a truth 
which was a heresy from his own older standpoint, and a heresy to those with whom 
he had been working ; but he knew it was truth, so, at the peril of being misunderstood, 
he acted upon the truth. He now knew that Christ'i gospel was for Gentile as well 
as Jew, so he fearlessly went into the Gtentile's house, and there preached the Word 
of life, and baptized the believing household. And he was misunderstood and called to 
account. The passage before us is his efl^ective defence : to it there could be no reply. 
He rehearses the whole matter, and says, " God led me, and I followed. God taught 
ue, «nd I believed. God sealed my work with the witness of his Spirit, and I know 1 
have his acceptance." This is the answer which the sincere man who acts out of the 
common line may make to all who oppose or object. " I do but follow the Divine 
leadings and teachings ; God sets my witness, and the testimony I make must be at 
least a portion of the truth of God." 

I. God still opbnb hu tehtu to individual souls. We do notrindeed, expect new 
revelations. There is a sense in which the book-revelation in the Scriptures is complete : 



«. It 1-30.3 ftlG ACTS OP TttE APoStLCS. 873 

no man may add thereto or taTte therefrom ; and no man's testimony can be of any 
value save as it can be tested by the revealed Word. And yet, though this may be 
fully admitted, we may recognize the fact that, through spiritual insight or through 
intellectual skill, men do bring to light missed and hidden things, or they do set 
received truths in forms that are new, and by their newness arrest thought and even 
arouse opposition. In this way every truth of the Divine revelation is brought promi- 
nently before men's thoughts every few years. God sends among us great thought- 
lenders ; stirs, by their preachings or writings, the stagnancy of religious thought, and 
mnkes fresh and living to us truths which had become mere dead formalities. St. Peter 
had but a fresh hold of an ancient truth, one long revealed by psalmist and prophet : 
still, he had iuch » new grip as made him a power ; even the agent that fulfilled 
Christ's will, and "opened the kingdom of heaven to all believert." 

IL The individual with a pbesh truth must expect opposition. It will 
surely come from : 1. His fellow-workers, who will feel a secret jealousy of his being 
made the medium of Divine communications, and who will keenly feel how the new 
truth interferes with their teachings. 2. Those of conservative tendency, who think 
the absolute and final truth is in their charge. 3. The earnest but timid people who fear 
that everything fresh must put God's truth in peril. 4. The friends of theological or 
ecclesiastical sj/stems, who consider their systems complete and needing no changes, nor 
having any open places in which new trnth may fit. St. Peter found that an imperfect 
report of his doings at Caesarea had gone before him to Jerusalem, and when he himself 
reached the holy city, he was assailed from the very narrowest platform, and accused 
of the very small sin from our point of view, but very large sin from the Jewish point 
of view, of " eating with the uncircumcised." He very wisely refused a discussion on 
this mere feature of the matter, and explained fully what had happened. Those who 
contend often take a mere point of detail, and are best met and answered by putting 
the question in dispute on the broadest, deepest grounds. 

Ill Pkoof of Divinb lbadinos ought to silence all opposition. This ii the 
great lesson of St. Peter's conduct and narrative. All through he pleads that he only 
recognized and followed the Divine will as revealed both to him and to others. God 
spoke to him in trance, and vision, and providence, and inward impulse. God spoke to 
Cornelius by angel-form and angel-voice. God sealed the work of St. Peter with the 
gift of his Spirit, and, as a faithful and true man, he could only go where God led him, 
and speak as God bade him. To his audience it was the best of all answers, the one 
that would disarm all opposition. A sincere Jew must be loyal to God's will, how- 
ever it might be revealed, and however strange to his feeling it might seem. And this 
is essentially the answer which every thought-leader and every advanced teacher now 
must be prepared to make and to prove. If he only speaks, as a man, some religious 
fancies and feelings of his own, we are rightly sceptical ; but if it is plain to us that a 
man has been " taught of God," and if we can see signs of acceptance and Divine bene- 
diction on his work, then we too must hear his testimony with open and unprejudiced 
minds, seeking grace to enable us to express our old faith in the new form, or to add the 
new thought to our received doctrines. God may, indeed, not speak to us now by 
dream, or trance, or vision, or voice ; but we need not therefore think that direct com- 
munication with our soul is impossible. Still we may say, " Speak, Lord ; for thy 
servant heareth ;" and still we have with us that Holy Ghost, whose work it is " to lead 
us into all truth, and to show us things to come." And it should be our abiding con- 
viction and inspiration that " the Lord hath yet more light and truth to break forth 
from his Word."— B. T. 

Ver. 16. — Well-stored memoriet. A ttipic suggested by the expression iji' Si. Peter, 
"Then remembered I the word of the Lord." Some explanation may be given of 
" memory " as a distinct mental faculty, but the one on which the acquisition and 
increase of knowledge greatly depend. A faculty capable of culture, but taking different 
features in difl'erent individuals. Some have verbal memories, others memory for prin- 
ciples. Some have trained memories in particular subjects, but little power to retain 
general knowledge. Formal aids to memory are suggested, but its true culture lies in 
its use. As a mental faculty, it comes under Christian sanctifying, as well as Intc 
Christian use. In ordinary education attention is paid to the training of this power, 



271 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xi. 1—30. 

and in the Divine culture attention to it is equally needed. It may even be said of our 
Lord's preparation of tiis apostles for their work, thnt he stored their memories with hi« 
wotds and his works, so that there might be the material on which the Holy Spirit 
could hereafter work, " bringing all things up into remembrance " on fitting occasions. 
Consider — 

L Stobing memories. Illustrate what anxious work this is to the parent, the 
■ehool teacher, and the professor. Due effort is made to ensure (1) adequate stores ; 
(2) well-arranged stores; (3) clearly apprehended stores; (4) moral stores. Two things 
are found necessary to the holding of things in memory — (1) they must be clearly 
apprehended ; (2) they must be sufficiently repeated. It is found that we hold things 
in measures of safety dependent on the amount of attention which we have given to 
ihem. Apply these principles to the storing of our memories with religious facts and 
principles ; dwelling on the importance of requiring the young to learn the Scriptures, 
of demanding from our Christian teachers clearness of statement and efficient repetition ; 
showing that, as in St. Peter's case, a man only has the right truth or principle at com- 
mand, on occasions of need, if these have previously been lodged in the memory. The 
skill with which our Lord, in his time of temptation, fetched the right weapons from 
the Scripture armoiiry with which to defeat and silence his foe, reveals to us the 
fact that his memory had been well stored with Scripture during his childhood and 
youth. The duty of seeing that our own mind is well furnished, and that the minds 
of those directly under our influence are well furnished, wth Scripture facts and truths 
and principles, should be earnestly pressed. We can do no better service to the young 
than to fill up their thoughts and hearts with "thoughts of Christ and things Divine." 

II. Kebpino memokt-stobbs. There is one great law which applies to the efficient 
retention of any kind of knowledge we may have. It is that we keep adding more 
stores of the same kind. We virtually lose out of memory ikcts relating to botany or 
astronomy nnless we keep on adding to them new botanical or astronomical facts. And 
the same law applies to religious things — they will fade down and seem to die out 
of meiifbry unless we constantly add to them. We retain by increasing. Show how 
this should be a powerful motive urging us to keep up our daily soul-culture, our read- 
ing of the Word, our meditations in the Divine truth, our attendance on the means of 
grace. We cannot keep what we have unless we set ourselves in the way to get more. 

HI. Using memobt-stobes. Just this St. Peter does in connection with our text. 
Something occurred which suggested a sentence his Lord had once employed. He 
hardly knew that he had put it among his memory-stores, but he had been attentive to 
every word that fell from his Master's lips, and they came up before him at the moment 
when he could use them wisely. We often think that there must be much more in 
our memories than can ever be of service to us, and we even think that it is useless 
to teach the young so much of Scripture and of Catechism and of hymns. But no man 
can foretell what situations unfolding life may make for him, or what moral demands 
it will present. Take any life, and it will be found full of surprises, and it is a very 
great thing to ensure that we are reasonably prepared for all possible situations. St. 
Peter could not have imagined himself in the house of Cornelius and set upon using 
that particular sentence. So we shall find, as life progresses, that (1) occasions come for 
the use of our memory-stores ; (2) circumstances help to recall them ; and (3) God's 
Spirit brings thom up before us, and aids us in finding their proper application and use. 

The well-furnished godly memory is no accident. It is a part of the Christian 
culture, and therefore, for ourselves and for those on whom we are called to exert our 
influence, we come under solemn and weighty responsibilities. An interesting 
illustration of the use of a godly memory in time of pressure and need is found in 
Ezra viii. 21 — 23, where Ezra's remembrance of God's promises to and gracious ways 
with his people in the olden time, gave him strength for an arduous and perilous 
undertaking. — B. T. 

Ver. 18. — " Bepentance unto life." This expression is not the one which we should 
expect the Christian brethren to use in the circumstances. The sentence would seem 
clearer to us if it read, "Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted admission into the 
kingdom of Christ," or " to share in the salvation of Christ." The prominence of the 
word " repentance," and its place as the initial step to "life," are remarkable and sug- 



oa. XL 1—30.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES, 375 

gestive. Repentance is not made of so much importance in our presentations of th« 
gospel as it was by the apostles, but for their use of it we may find some adeqiiafe 
reasons. 1. The teaching of John the Baptist, and his requirement of repentance as 
preparatory to the reception of Messiah, retained its influence upon them. 2. Wtion 
their Master had sent them out on their trial mission, he had given them this distinrt 
message, " Repent : for, the kingdom of heaven is at hand." 3. When their Lord liiid 
been shamefully crucified, by the schemes of the leaders and representatives of tiie 
nation, and they had been confirmed in their belief in his Messiahship by his 
resurrection and ascension, they felt that the judicial murder of the Messiah was the 
greatest of national crimes, and so they realized how essential was repentance as preced- 
ing a profession of faith iii him. They had spoken to Jews who, as a nation, through 
its representatives, had said, " His blood be on us and on our children," and therefore 
St. Peter, when answering their question, " What shall we do ? " on the day of Pentecost, 
said, " Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Clirist for the 
remission of sins " (ch. ii. 38). And in his sermon following on the healing of the 
lame man, he said, "Repent ye therefore, and be converted" (ch. iii. 19). And when 
called to plead before the great council, he further declared concerning Christ, " Him 
hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repent- 
ance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins" (ch. v. 31). Having this prominent to their 
minds as the very gist and essence of the gospel message, the Jerusalem disciples spoke 
in accordance with it when they accepted St. Peter's explanations, and said, " Then 
hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life." The force of the combi- 
nation of these terms, " repentance " and " life," will be felt if we consider — 

I. Repentakob ab thb first gospel demand. The distinct meaning of the term 
should be noticed, and the precise meaning of the two Greek equivalents for our one word 
" repentance " may be pointed out. It is in the higher sense that the term is used by 
the apostles, and it includes (1) conviction of sin ; (2) sorrow for sin ; (3) desire to be 
delivered from sin ; (4) serious purpose to put away and resist sin. If the gospel were 
merely some educational or even some moral scheme for elevating the race, it need 
make no demand for " repentance." It is a scheme for the deliverance of men from the 
penalty and the power of sin, and this it can never effect save as it can work along the 
line of man's own will. And the only sign and expression of a man's sense of sin and 
d&sire to be freed from it is this "repentance" which the gospel demands. It is the 
only attitude which the gospel can meet, the only state of mind and feeling with which 
it can deal. A man Is closed in and buttressed against Divine salvation, redemption 
by grace, until he " truly and unfeignedly repents," and so feels the need and value of 
Divine forgiveness, healing, and life. This point may be fully illustrated and enforced, 
and it may be shown that still the preaching of the gospel fails that does not make first 
demand for repentance. St. Paul's great address to the learned Athenians has this for 
its point and application : " The times of this ignorance God winked at ; but now com- 
mandeth all men everywhere to repent" (ch. xvii. 30). 

II. Repentance is the first bion of life. The way in which our Lord made his 
disciples familiar with the term "life "should be pointed out. Right relations with 
God are spoken of as " life," " eternal life." Those relations into which we may come 
through the Lord Jesus Christ are emphatically recognized as " life ; " the only true, 
eternal, spiritual life. It is this " life " into which the disciples recognize that the 
Gentiles are admitted. When this is fully apprehended, the place of repentance in 
relation to the life will be readily recognized. To feel sin and the need of a Saviour ia 
the first sign of the life ; it is its first breath; with it the life necessarily begins. Men 
absorbed in self find a new life when self is crushed in the dust. Men " dead in trespasses 
and sins " are raised up, to look and breathe and speak, when sorrow for sin comea to 
them. This is well illustrated in T. Moore's familiar poem of ' Paradise and the Peri,' 
in 'Lalla Rookh.' The most precious thing on earth, that which may even open 
heaven's gate to the banished peri, ia the tear that falls from the eye of the penitent 
■inner, 

III. BBapENTANO* GIVES PliAOS TO LiFB. It IS here called " repentance unto life." 
Repentance is a step up to something else. Repentance is a temporary condition of 
mind and feeling, through which a man passes to something better; something perma- 
nent. Show how it passes (1) into the joyous sense of forgiveness ; (2) into the blessed 



8?6 THE AOTB OJ" THE APOSTLJIB. [ot.*!.!— 30. 

life of trust In the living Savionr; and (3) into the infinite happiness of setting our 
love upon Christ, and finding ourselves sanctified hy the responses and gracious 
workings of his love to us. 

Id conclusion, urge that repentance is still the one and only threshold of life. 
" Humbled " vf e must be " under God's gracious hand," before we can be " exalted in 
his due time." We dare not hold back to-day our Lord's demand of " repentance unto 
life."— R. T. 

Ver. 2i.—0ood Barndbat, We have had this man introduced to ns before, but bii 
character Is most fully described in this passage. It may reasonably be asked why St. 
Luke, in writing the Book of the Acts, should take this opportunity of recording the 
received opinion about Barnabas. The. most simple answer is that he had subsequently 
to record the dispute between St. Paul and St. Barnabas over Mark, and he was therefore 
anxious to ensure that his readers did not get a wrong Impression, from that incident, 
of the temper and spirit of Mark's relative. Deeply as we may regret that sad mis- 
understanding between the two earnest missionaries, we must not let it throw its dark 
shadows over Barnabas, for " ho was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of 
faith." The immediate occasion of sending Barnabas to Antioch has been differently 
explained. It is remarked, in ver. 19, that the scattered disciples went " as far as to 
Antioch," but they " preached the Word to none but unto the Jews only.'' Then it is 
noticed that some preachers came from Cyprus and Gyrene to Antioch, and they 
preached unto the Orecians. Now this term may mean either Hellenistic Jews or 
Gentiles. The best manuscripts have the word Greeks, and this should be distinctly 
referred to the heathen, or Gentile, population. If it were so that these disciples 
preached the gospel to the heathen, and news of this came to the Church at Jerusalem 
soon after St. Peter's accoimt of what had taken place at Csesarea, there was good 
ground for sending Barnabas to inquire into matters at Antioch, to explain the new 
view of the sco})e of the gospel as revealed to St. Peter, and to ensure harmonious 
working between those who laboured for the Jew and those who laboured for the Gentile. 
If this was the mission of Barnabas, it is important for us to be told concerning his 
personal character ; for upon it the success of his mission would very largely depend. 
Only a man of great goodness and generous feeling would be likely to meet aright the 
difSculties that 'would be presented. There are many circumstances in life in which 
" character " can do more and better than " talent," and talent wins its noblest triumphs 
when it is united with and sanctified by godly character. Three things are apecially 
noticed in relation to Barnabas. 

L Hb was oood in charaotbb. " A good man." Our attention is directed by this 
term to his natural excellences of disposition. There was amiability, kindness of 
purpose and manner, generosity of spirit, considerateness for others, and readiness even 
to sacrifice his own things for the good of others. He was just the kind of man to win 
the confidence and esteem of all those among whom he worked ; and it would seem that 
his very failing, in the matter of his dispute with St. Paul, arose from the warmth of 
his affection for his young relative Mark, and his too great readiness to make excuses 
for him. " His very faiUng leaned to virtue's side." His " goodness " may be seen 
and iUostrated from each of the .incidents in which he is introduced to us. 1. He 
seems to have set the example of devoting his property to the needs of the early Church 
(ch. iv. 36). 2. He it was who overcame the apostolic suspicion of the newly con- 
verted Saul, in the generosity of his trustful disposition. When they were all afraid of 
Saul, " Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles," ete. (ch. ix. 26 — 2H). 
3. His trustfulness is further shown in his making Saul, the new convert, his 
companion in his missionary labours. It may be urged that, while Christianity 
masters and corrects naturally bad dispositions, it wins its noblest and most beautiful 
triumphs when it inspires and sanctifies the naturally amiable and generous and 
trustful disposition. It is a thing to be ever devoutly thankful to God for, if he has 
^T*u us characters that may win the love and esteem and confidence of our fellow-men. 

XL He was FnLii of taith. This is something more than natural trustfulness, 
thongh closely allied to it. Two things may be included. 1. He had a strong grip 
of the gospel truth, and was not troubled with weakening and depressing doubts. He 
hold, fast and firmly, the Messiahship and the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and all that 



.XI. 1—30.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 3t7 



these InTolved. And only men of failh can be men of real power as God's witnessei 
and preachers. Men do not want to hoar from ministers about their questionings and 
doublings. The great cry is, " What do you know of Gtod and truth and duty ? What 
do you believe ? " 2. He had a clear vision of the broader aspects of the Christian 
system. He was a follower of Stephen. He was prepared for the admission of the 
Gentiles to Christian privileges. And so he was just the man to go down to Antioch 
and deal with the difficulties that might arise from breaking down the old Jewish 
bondages. And there is constant demand for such men of faith, who can hopefuliy 
accept the passing changes of thought and feeling within the Church, even when the} 
cannot personally sympathize with them. We need men of faith in the sense of broad 
outlooking and high hope for the future. 

III. Hk was full op the Holt Ghost. That Holy Ghost came as the seal of all 
sincere believers, but it is here suggested that the measures and degrees of his gracious 
inward workings directly depend on the moods and attitudes and character of the man. 
And here lies the practical application of our subject. Barnabas, because he was a good 
man and full of.faith, was also full of the Holy Ghost. And we shall find that anxious 
and careful oiilture of Christian character will also open our hearts, lives, and workings 
to the full energies of God the Holy Ghost. — R. T. 

Ver. 26. — Antiochene Christians. "And the disciples were called Christians first in 
Antioch." Before this time they seem to have had no recognized name. Others may 
have called them " Nazarenes," or perhaps " Galilajans." They spoke of their teaching' 
as " the Way," but do not seem to have found any other name for themselves than thai 
of " disciples." It was left to oircumslances to provide a name which all might accept, 
and, though the origin of the name " Christian " is very strange, its appropriateness has 
been universally recognized. The very essence of the gospel is the presentation (I 
Christ to men, and the pressure of his claims to men's love and trust ; and therefore 
those who receive Christ as their Saviour, and obey him as their Lord, are properly 
denominated " Christians." It is usual to call disciples after the name of their master ur 
teacher, as may be seen in the terms " Mohammedan," " Buddhist," " Wesleyan," etc. 
Sometimes classes of men are named after the central principle which they have adopted. 
This we cannot do, because our central principle is " Christ "—not even some trul h 
about Christ, but Christ himself. So we can have no name but that which the people 
of Antioch found when they discovered how prominently Christ was set forth in the 
early preaching. 

I. The thought of those who fibst named the disciples " Christians." It has 
often been pointed out that the name was started as a nickname. The idea of making so 
much of One who was known to have been crucified as a malefactor and impostor may 
well have excited the ridicule of humorous people, and we know how constantly the 
disciples were taunted with worshipping the Crucified. A caricature of the early times 
has been discovered, representing a person, with the head of an ass, stretched upon a 
cross, and a figure kneeling before it. Underneath is this inscription : " Alezamenos 
worshipping his God." In this spirit the name was first given, much as the term 
" Methodists " was applied to the followers of Wesley. 

II. The thought op those who accepted the name. Perhaps in their modesty 
they did not think themselves worthy to bear their Master's name ; but when others 
gave it to them they felt that they could accept it. And no name could be to them so 
honoured. Their hesitation, however, might have arisen from another cause. To accept 
a distinctive title was to break away from Judaism, and take a position as a separate 
and independent sect. We can well understand how the disciples would hesitate to 
accept so defined a position. They thought of themselves as still Jews, seeking, some 
would say, the reformation of Judaism ; and others would say, the spiritual fulfilment 
of Judaism ; but anything savouring of sectarianism or separation would be distressing 
to them. Yet many times in Church history men have been compelled to take decided 
positions against their own wills, but their distinctness and separateness have proved to 
be for the world's permanent good. 

III. The thought of those who now beab the name. For so many persons its 
deeper significance has faded out. It is so universally applied, and made so all-inclusive, 
•8 to hav» become a meaningless term. And yet how full of force and inspiration it 



i78 



TEE ACTb OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xn. 1—23 



should be to us (1) for the sake of the history which the term embodies — the long story 
of Christian witness and str.ig>;le ; and (2) for the depths of meaning which we may 
now find in it, for to us it may mean not merely " followers or disciples of Christ," but 
Ohrist-like men and women, who are daily being " changed into his image from glory 
to glory," and who want to be " like him in all things " 1 — ^E. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XTI. 



Ver. 1. — Put for ttretehed, AV. ; afflict 
tor vex, A.V. The phrase, About that time, 
as in cb. xix. 23, points to what had ju:it 
before been related (Meyer). The inter- 
position of the narrative in this chajiter 
between ch. xi. 20 and xii. 25 evidently 
implies that the bulk or rntlier the chief of 
the events narrated happened in the in- 
terval. Which of the events was the chief 
in the mind of the narrator with reference 
to hia general narrative, and what are the 
coincidences which he wished to note, it is 
not easy to say with certainty. The narra ti vo 
in this chapter doubtless overlaps at both 
ends the embassy of Paul and Barnabas, but 
perhaps the object was to show the harasseil 
state of the Church fiom famine and persecu- 
tion at the time that Paul and Barnabas 
were at Jerusalem. Herod tlie king here 
mentioned is Herod Agrippa I., grandson of 
Herod the Great, and son of Aristobulus 
and Bernlce. During the reign of Tiberius 
he resided at Itome, in alternate favour and 
disgrace, sometimes banished, sometimes 
u prisoner, sometimes a guest at the im- 
perial court. He waa a great friend of 
Cains Caesar Caligula, and, on his succeeding 
to the empire on the death of Tiberius, was 
promoted by liim to the tetrarchy of Herod 
Philip, with the title of king. He was 
further advanced three years afterwards to 
the tetrarchy of Herod Antipas; and, on 
tlie accession of Claudius to the throne, 
Judsea and Samaria were added to hia 
dominions, which now comprised the whole 
kingdom of his grandfather, Herod the 
Great. Agrippa, in spite of his close in- 
timacy with Drusua, Caligula, Claudius, and 
other Koman magnates, was " exactly care- 
ful in the observance of the laws of his 
country, not allowing a day to pass without 
its appointed sacrifice ; " and he had given 
proof of his strong Jewish feeling by inter- 
posing his whole influence with Caligula to 
prevent his statue being placed in ine holy 
of holies. This spirit accounts for his 
enmity against the Church. He waa a man 
of very expensive and luxurious babita, but 
not without some great qualities. 

Ver. 2.— James, the son of Zebedee, or 
James the Elder, to whom, with his brother 
John, OUT Lord gave the surname of Boan- 



erges (which ia a corruption of tfif •»), goni 
of thunder. Nothing is recorded of him in 
the Acts but his presence in the upper room 
at Jerusalem after the Ascension (oh. i. IH), 
and this hia martyrdom, which was tiie fnl- 
filment of our Lord's prediction in Matt. xx. 
23. His being singled out by Herod for 
death in company with Peter is rather an 
indication of his zeal and activity in tlie 
Lord's servicO, though we know nothing ol 
his work. Eusebius relates an anecdule ot 
liis martyrdom, extracted from the lost 
work of Clement of Alexandiia, called the 
"TwoTvtrSvfis (or in Latin Adumbrationef), 
which Clement professed to have received 
by tradition from his predecessora^ to the 
effect that the informer who accused James 
was BO struck with his constancy in con- 
fessing Christ before the judge, that he 
came forward and confessed himself a 
Christian too. The two were then led off 
to execution together ; and on the way the 
informer asked James's forgiveness. After 
a moment's hesitation, James said to him, 
"Peace be unto tliee," and kissed liim. 
They were then both beheaded (' Eccl. 
Hist.,' ii. ix.). As Clement flourished about 
A.D. 190, the tradition need not have passed 
through more than three persona. It has 
been thought strange that Luke relates the 
death of a chief apostle with sucli brevity. 
But it did not bear on the main object of 
his work. Lightfoot ('Works,' voL viii. p. 
282, etc.) mentions a fanciful story related by 
Bahanua Maurus, that about this time the 
apostles composed the Apostles' Creed, each 
contributing one clause, and that the clanse 
contributed by James the brother of John 
was, " And in Jesus Christ his only Son our 
Lord." 

Ver. 3. — When for because, A.V.; that il 
pleased for it pleased, A.V. ; proceeded for 
proceeded further, A.V. ; seize for take, A.V. ; 
and those for then, A.V. He proceeded to 
seize (itpoiriBiTo avWaPtiv) is a Hebraism. 
TliiB trait of his pleasing the Jews is in 
exact accordance with Josephns's description 
of him, as t^ jSioSv iv fiijniiilif x''^P<"'i loving 
popularity, and as being very kind and 
sympathizing with the Jewish people, and 
liking to live much at Jerusalem ('Ant. Jud^ 
xix. vii. 3). The days of unleavened bread ; 
t'.e. as expressed by Luke xxii. 1, "The 
Feast of Unleavened Bread, which is called 



OH. XII. 1—25.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES 



879 



the Paisover." It lasted seven days (Exod. 
lii. 15—18), from the 14th to the 2lBt of 
Nisan, or Abib( Exod. xii. 18—20; Lev. xxiii. 
5, 6; Deut. xvi. 1 — 4), the Passover being 
eaten on the night of the 14th. 

Ver. 4. — Taken for apprehended, A.V. ; 
guard for keep, A.Y. ; the Pattover for 
Matter, A.V. Fonr quaternions; i.e. four 
bands of four soldiers each, which were on 
guard in succession through the four watches 
of the night — one quaternion for each watch, 
the Passover. TUia is a decided improve- 
ment, as the use of the word " Eastor " im- 
plies that the Christian feast is here meant. 
But perhaps " Feast of the Passover " would 
have been better, as showing that the whole 
seven days are intended. This is, perhaps, 
tlje meaning of rh triaxa in Jolin xviii. 23, 
and certainly is its meaning here. We have 
another characteristic trait of the religion 
of Agrippa, and of his sympathy with the 
feelings of the Jews about the Law, that he 
would not allow a trial on a capital charge, 
or an execution, to take place during the 
Feast of Unleavened Bread (comp. John 
xviii. 8). To bring him forth to the people. 
Still the s»me desire uppermost, to pro- 
pitiate the people by gifts or shows, or 
by blood ; hvayayetv means exactly " to 
bring up" (oh. ix. 39; Rom. x. 7, etc.), 
either on to a stage or on some high ground, 
where all the people could see him con- 
demned, which would be as good to them 
as an auto da fi \o & Spanish. mob, or a 
gladiatorial elaugliter to a Boman audience 
(see ver. 11). 

Ver. 5. — The prium for prison, A. V. ; 
carnettly for without (seating, A.V. (^ixTevtis, 
or as in the B.T. ^ktcpws, has the sense of 
intensity rather than duration ; see Luke 
xxu. 14, T.B. ; 1 Pet. i. 22 ; iv. 8). As the 
liist of the days of unleavened bread 
a pproBched, the prayers of the Church would 
be more and more intense in their earnest- 
ness. We have but to read the preceding 
chapttrs to judge how preciouB to the 
Church the life of Peter must have been. 

Ver. Q.— Wat ahout to hring for would 
have brought, A.V. ; guards for the keepers, 
A.V. What a picture we have here I The 
dungeon; the double oiiain fastening the 
prisoner to two soldiers; the other two 
soldiers of the quaternion keeping watch 
at the first and second ward, or station ; the 
iron gate securely fastened ; the population 
of the great city expecting with the morning 
light to be gratified with the blood of the 
victim of their bigotry ; the king having 
made his arrangements for the imposing 
spectacle which was to ingratiate him with 
his people and obtain the applause he so 
dearly loved ; and then the servant of 
Jesus Christ sleeping calmly imder the 
shadow of God's wings; and, a, little way off, 



the Church keeping her solemn watch and 
pouring forth her intensest prayers through 
the silence of the night I And the issue, 
the triumph of the few and the weak 
over all the power of the many .and the 
strong. 

Ver. 7. — An angel for the angel, A.V. 
(see note on oh. v. 19); ttood by him for 
came upon him, A.V. (comp. Luke ii. 9); 
eell for prison, A.V. ; awoke him for raited 
him up, A.V. (Ifiyiip^r avThv) ; risB for arise, 
A.V. Cell. The word olicTi/ia, a dwelling, 
was used by the Athenians as an euphemism 
for o priton. It only occurs here in the 
New Testament, though it is a common 
Greek word. His chains fell off from his 
hands, showing that each iiand had been 
chained to a soldier. The loosening of the 
chains would enable him to rise without 
necessarily awakening the soldiers to whom 
he was fastened, and who would feel no 
difference in the chain which was attached 
to them. 

Ver. 8. — He did to fox, to he did, A.V. 
Thy garment Q/xdriov) ; especially the outer 
garment, which was worn over the k"^", or 
tunic (see Matt. ix. 20, 21; xiv. 36; xxiii. 
5, etc;). The girding, therefore, applied to 
the inner garments, and ircpijSoAoi; to the 
cloak which went over tlicm. 

Ver. 9.— Followed for followed him, A.V. 
and T.B. ; he wist for wist, A.V. 

Ver. lO.—And when tor when, A.V. ; into 
for unto, A.V. ; its for his, A.V. ; straightway 
for /orttwitt, A.V. The first and the second 
ward. The <fu\oK<), here rendered "warO," 
may mean either the station where thfl 
guard was posted or the guard itself. One 
street ; ^vfvti, asinch.ix.ll, note. Departed ; 
oWffTjj, in contrast to iirearr), rendered "stood 
by " in ver. 7. 

Ver. ll.-^Truth for surety, A.V. ; tent 
forth for sent, A.V. ; deliiered for hath 
delivered, A.V. Peter's iccognition of the 
Lord's band in sending bid angel is exactly 
echoed in the Collect for Miohaelmsts Day, 
"Grant that as tl:y holy angels alway do 
thee service in heaven, so by thy appoint- 
ment they may succour and defend ns on 
earth." 

Ver. 12. — And were praying for praying, 
A.V. When he had considered ; better, with 
Meyer and Alford, wlrnn he perceived it, viz. 
the truth of his deliverance. Mary the 
mother of John was aunt to Barnabas (Col. 
iv. 10). If Paul and Barnabas were not in 
her house at the time (which there is -no 
evidence that they were), it is likely that 
all the particulars of Peter's escape may 
have been communicated to Paijil by John 
Mark, and by him repeated to Luke. That 
tliey went to the house of Mary before their 
return seems certain from their taking Mark 
with them to Antioch (ver. 25), iK)«8ibly to 



396 



TSE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



[en. xtt 1—2 



ileliver him from the flanper Christians were 
In at Joriisnlnn nt this lime. 

Ver. 13.- ]Vhen he for as Peter, A.V. and 
T.R. ; maid for damsel, A.V. ; to answer for 
to hearken, A.V. (uTroKoCo-ai). The door of 
the gate (sec ch. x. 17, note). To hearken 
or listen seems the best remlering. It is 
I he phrase proper to a doorkeeper, whose 
biisincsR it is to go to the door and listen 
when any one knocks, and find out what 
their bu^iness is before opening the door. 
This is the primary sense of the word ; that 
of answeriiiy after listening is a secondary 
sense. At a time of such alarm to Cliristians 
a knock at the door in the dead of the night 
would carry terror with it, and careful 
listening to ascertain whether there was- 
more than one person, and then to asic who 
was there and what WM his business, was 
the natural course. 

Ver. 14. — Joy for gladneti, A.V. ; that for 
how, A.V. When she knew Peter's voice. 
This evidence of Peter's intiinaey with tlie 
■family of Mary is in remarkable agreement 
with 1 Pet. V. 13, " Greet Marcus my son." 

Ver. 15.—Confldently for constantly, A.V. 
(for the same use of Su(rx''plC'>l^<"t see Luke 
xxii. 59) ; and they said for then said they, 
A.V. It is his angel; meaning probably 
his gnardian angel (Matt, xviii. 10). But 
the expression is obscure, and we do not 
know exactly the, nature of the belief on 
which it was grounded. They must have . 
thought that perhaps Peter had been put to 
death in prison that very night, and that 
his angel, speaking with his voice, was sent 
to announce it to the Church. The narrative 
is a striking instance how " slow of heart 
to believe " are even the most devout. Tliey 
were praying very earnestly for Peter's life; 
their prayer was granted ; and yet the 
announcement of it only draws out the 
answer, " Thou art mad 1 " and tlien, as an 
alternative, the explauution, " It is his 
angel 1" 

Ver. 16. — Opened for opened the door, 
A.V. ; they . . . and for and . . . they, 
A.V. ; amazed for astonished, A.V. (see ch. 
viii. 9, note). 

Ver. 17. — Brought him forth for brought 
him, A.V. ; tell for go show, A.V. ; to for 
into, A.V. Beckoning, etc.; Karatreliras r^ 
Xfip'i (see ch. ziii. 16 ; xix. 33 ; xxi. 40). It is 
the action of one having something to say 
and bespeaking silence while he says it. 
TTnto James. This, of course, is the same 
James as is mentioned in Gal. i. 19 as " the 
Lord's brother," and who, in Gal. ii. 9, 12, 
and ch. xv. 12 and xxi. 18, as well as here, 
appears as occupying a peculiar place in the 
Church at Jerusalem, viz. as all antiquity 
testifies, as Bishop of Jerusalem. So Hege- 
sippuf, quoted by Eusebius ('Eccl. Hi8t.,'ii. 
i'i), " James the Lord's brother, called by 



universal consent the Just, received the 
government of the Church together with 
the apostles ; " and in ii. 1 lie quotes Clement 
of Alexandria as saying that, after the 
Ascension, Peter, James, and John selected 
James the Just, the Lord's brother, to be 
the first Bishop of Jerusalem. And Euse- 
bius gives it as the general testimony of 
antiquity that James the Just, the Lord's 
brother, was the first who sat on the epis- 
copal throne of Jerusalem. But who he 
was exactly is a point much controverted. 
The three hypotheses are: 1. "That he was 
the son of Alphssus or Clopas and Mary, 
sister to tlie blessed Virgin, and therefore 
our Lord's cousin-german, and called his 
brother by a common Hebrew idiom. Accord- 
ing to this theory he was one of the twelve 
(Luke vi. 15), as he appears to be in Gal. i. 
19, though this is not certain (see Bishop 
Lightfoot, in loc.}. 2. That he was the son 
of Joseph by his first wife, and so step- 
brother to the Lord, which is Eusebius's 
explanation (' Eocl. Hist,' ii. 1). 3. Th.at 
he was in the full sense the Lord's brother, 
being the son of Joseph and Mary. This is 
the opinion of Alford (in loo.), fully argued 
in the 'Proleg. to the Epistle of James,' 
and of Meyer, Credner, and many German 
commentators. According to these two last 
hypotheses, he was not one of the twelve. 
"The apostolic constitutions distinguish 
between James the son of Alphseus, the 
apostle, and James the brother of the Lord, 
d iwlvKoiros " (Meyer). It may be added 
that oh. i. 14 separates the brethren of the 
Lord from the apostles, who are enumerated 
in the preeeding verses. The hypothesis 
which identiiies James the Lord's brother 
with James the son of Alphtens or Clopas 
and Mary is well argued in Smith's 
' Dictionary of the Bible,' art. " James " (see 
also the able Introduction to the Epistle ot 
James in the ' Speaker's Commentary '). It 
seems impossible to come to a certain 
conclusion. The weakest point in the 
hypothesis which identifies James the 
Lord's brother with the son of Alphceus is 
that it fails to account for the distinction 
clearly made between the Lord's brothers 
and the apostles in such passages as John 
ii. 12; vii. 3, 5, 10; oh. i. 13; Matt. xii. 4G, 
49 ; 1 Cor. ix. 5. For the effect of these 
passages is scarcely neutralized by Gal. i. 
19. But then, on the other hand, the 
hypoti.eais that the Lord's bretluen, includ- 
ing James and Joses, were the children of 
Joseph and Mary, seems to be flatly contra- 
dicted by the mention of Mary the wife ot 
Clopas as being " the mother of James and 
Joses " (Mark xv. 40 ; John xix. 25). He went 
to another place. Whether Luke was not 
informed what the place was, or whether 
thera WM some reason why ho did not 



OH. xn. 1 — 25.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



88J 



mention it, we cannot tell. The Venerable 
Bede ('Prolog, in Expos, in Act. Apost.'), 
Boionius, and other authorities of the 
Church of Borne, say he went to Rome, and 
commenced his episcopate of Borne at this 
time. Dr. Lightfoot thinks it more probable 
that he went to Autioch (' Gomm. on Acts,' 
in vol. viii. pp. 273, 289). Some guesi 
CcBsarea; but there is no clue really. 

Ver. 19. — Guards for keepers, A.V.J 
tarried there for there abode, A.V. 

Ver. 20. — Now he for and Herod, A.V. 
and T.R. ; and for but, A.V. ; they asked for 
for desired, A.V. ; fed from for nmtrished by, 
A.V. Highly displeased (eu)iaiia.xS»>) ; only 
here in the New Testament, but used by 
Polybiui, w well as the kindred word 
tfivxo/iaxf^i', in the sense of having a hostile 
spirit against any one, maintaining a strong 
resentment It describes a state of feeling 
which may exist before war, during war, 
and after war when only a hollow peace 
htts been made. Tyre and Sidon at this 
time were semi-indepcndont cities under the 
Boman supremacy. The occasion of Herod's 
displeasure is nut known. Chamberlain; 
literally, the officer over his bedchamber — his 
chief groom of the chambers — an office 
Which would give him easy access to the 
king's private ear. Was fed. This com- 
merce, by which Palestine supplied Tyre 
and Sidon with wheat in return for timber, 
was as old as the time of Solomon at least 
(1 Kings V. 9, II); eoo too Ezek. xxvii. 17, 
and the decree of Cnligula, in which he 
speaks of the largo exportation of com to 
Sidon from the Jewish harbour of Joppa 
(' Ant Jud.,' liv. x. G). 

Ver. 31. — Arrayed himself tor arrayed, 
A.V. ; and sat for sat, A.V. and T.B. ; on 
(?t« throne for upon his throne, A.V. On the 
throne. Brj/ia does not mean "the king's 
tiirone,'' and is nowhere so rendered in the 
A.V. but here. It means any raised stage 
or platform upon which a judge, or an orator, 
or any one wishing to address an assembly, 
standi. Here it means a high platform in 
the theatre at Coisarea, from whence the 
king, raised above the rest of the audience, 
could both see the games and make his 
speech to the people. 

Ver. 22, — Shouted for gave a shout, A.V. i 
the voice for it is the voice, A.V, 

Ver. 23. — An angel for the angel, A.V. (oh. 
v. 19, note> 

Ver. 24.— The word of God grew and 
multiplied in Jerusalem and the neighbour- 
hood, in spite of Agrippa's persecution. 
The blood of the martyr James was the 
seed of the Church, and the speedy 
vengeance taken by God upon the perse- 
cutor doubtless gave fresh courage to his 
people to confess the Name of Jesus Christ. 
As regards the preceding aoeouitt iMf Heiod 



Agrippa's death, It b corroborated in the 
most remarkable manner by the narrative 
in Josephus (' Ant. Jud.,'xix. viii. 2). He 
there tells that when he hail been three 
years King of all Judiea (see ver. 1, note) he 
went to Ctesarea. And that on occasion of 
a festival celebrated "for the safety of 
Ciesar" (some think to celebrate his return 
from* Britain, while otherj, as Wieseler, 
think that they were the ordinary Quinquen- 
nalia, celebrated in the iirovinoes), he 
exhibited games and spectacles in honour 
of Claudius. On the second day of these 
games, when a vast number of people were 
assembled in the theatre, Agrippa came in, 
clothed in a garment wholly made of silver, 
which reflected the rays of the morning sun 
with a most dazzlintj and awful brilliancy. 
Whereupon his flatterers cried out that he 
was a god, and offered prayer to him. The 
king, he adds, did not rebuke tUem nor 
reject their impious flattery. He was 
presently seized with a violent pain in his 
bowels, which soon became so intense that 
ho was carried out of the theatre to his 
palace, and expired after five days of ex- 
cruciating pain. It is curio u.s that in the 
above account Josephus says tJiat Agrippa 
saw an owl sitting over his head, which he 
recognized as a messenger (a77f\o>') of evil 
to him. Eusebius, quoting Josephus (' Eccl. 
Hist.,' ii. X.), leaves out thi: owl, and says 
that Agrippa saw an an<;el sitting over his 
head, whom he recoguize.l as the cause of his 
sufferings. Whiston, in a note, seeks to 
exonerate Eusebius from unfairness in the 
quotation, by sug'j;esting that the manuscript 
of Eusebius is in this place corrupt; but 
Bede quotes Josephus just as Eusebius 
dues, unless perchance he is quoting him at 
socond.hand from Eusebius. 

Ver. 25. — Ministration lot ministry, A.V. ; 
iaJcing for and took, A.V. The fact here 
stated of their taking John Mark with thein, 
is very iuteresting in connection with ver. 
12. Whether or no Saul and Barnabas 
were in the house of Mary at the time of 
Peter's deliverance from prison, they evi- 
dently went there shortly before or shortly 
after. As regards the sequence of events 
related in this chapter, it is by no means 
necessary to suppose that Barnabas and 
Saul did not leave Jerusalem till after the 
death of Agrippa. Luke, cunnccting the 
death of Agrippa with his muriler of James 
and his intended miuder of Peter, as Euse- 
bius and Clirysostom and others rightly say, 
would naturally follow up the narrative of 
the persecution by the narrative of the 
persecutor's awful death; and then go on 
to relate the return of the two apostles to 
Antiooh in continuation of ch. xi. 30. We 
have no means of deciding whether, in pomt 
of fact, tkoy returned before or tfter 



382 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xil 1 — 25. 



Agrippa's death. It seems most probable 
that tney returned before, as, uudur tlie 
circumstances, they would uot tarry at 



Jerusalem lon<;er than was necosaaiy foi 
the fuUilmeu^ of their miniitiatioiL 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1 — 25. — 3%e world and th& Church. There is, perhaps, no passage in Holy 
Scripture which contrasts more sharply the principles of the world and of the Church 
respectively, and the practice flowing from those principles, than the chapter before us. 
The results of each s^nd out no less sharply defined. 

I. The woeldlt principlb and practick. Not right, or truth, or justice, but self- 
seeking policy; to gain some selfish end without regard to the will of God or the 
welfare of man ; the unscrupulous use of any means by which the wished-for end can 
be attained; the employment of craft or violence, according to circumstances; utter 
contempt for the rights and feelings of others ; utter disregard for the happiness of 
individuals or communities which stand in the way ; taking everything into a man's 
own hands; — in a word, self-will and self-seeking, as the beginning and ending of 
human action. 

n. The Chuboe, or Christian, principle. To do the will of God irrespective of 
lelf-will ; to love all men, " specially those that are of the household of faith," and con- 
sequently to work ill to no man, however great the apparent gain may be ; to suffer, 
rather than do, wrong; to endure evil meekly and patiently; to helji and comfort 
others in their time of need at his own cost ; to leave all in the hands of God. 

III. The REBUiiTS of each. 1. The ivorldly policy ends in failure. The well-laid 
schemes end in disappointment ; momentary successes slide into defeat and iliscomfiture ; 
expected glory turns into lasting shame. 2. The Christian practice, on the contrary, 
though its beginnings may he in clouds and darkness, ends in sunshine and in light. 
Bight has a vital principle in it. It bursts out into success at last. Being linked to 
the will of God, it partakes of the power and life of God. Momentary sliame turns into 
lasting glory. The cross becomes the crown. Sec all this exemplified in the history 
before us. Agrippa was the perfect type of a successful man of the world. The friend 
of emperors and kings; himself a prosperous king of fair character for the times, of 
pleasing manners, and considerable power of kingcraft, he stood high among his eiiuals 
and contemporaries. His liberality and magnificence secured him a lair share of 
admiration and popularity among his subjects. His zeal for religious observances, his 
scrupulous peifonnance of the rites and ceremonies of the Jewish Law, brought him a 
fair amount of respect from the priests and I'harisees of his day. And this popularity 
was as the breath of his nostrils. To be applauded ; to be well spoken of; to be admired ; 
to make a sensation wherever he appeared ; to be on terms of friendship with Tiberius, 
with Drusus, with Caligula, with Claudius ; to be a great man among the petty depend- 
ent kings of the neighbouring countries ; and to be an authority with the priests and 
people of the Jews ; — all this was his ambition, was what he lived for. As to the meftns 
of obtaining it he was not scrupulous. By flatteries, by mean compliances, by large 
expenditure of money, and even by shedding innocent blood, this end of self-idolatry 
was to be compassed. The murder of a saint like James, the imprisonment and intended 
execution of an apostle like Peter, were in his eyes on a par with splendid games or 
magnificent largesses, as means of purchasing or retaining the good pleasure of the 
Jews, perhaps with the further design of strengthening his influence with Claudius by 
showing how he could keep a turbulent province in quiet subjection to imperial Borne. 
And so at last he seemed to have attained the highest pinnacle of the coveted glory 
when, all glittering with the silver robe, which reflected the rays of the morning sun, 
and seated on the bema to make his oration to the people, he was greeted with acclama- 
tions which told him he was no longer a mere mortal in their eyes, and that he spoke, 
not with the voice of a man, but with the voice of God. Five days of agony, and he lay 
amidst all his splendour a lifeless corpse. Now let us turn to the Church. We have 
four pictures presented tr us of Church life. 1. The love of the Church of Antiockfor 
their unseen brethren of the Church of Jerusalem. They were poor themselves, it is 
likely; they had dangers, and difKcul ties, and trants, and necessities, no doubt, at home 



««. ui. 1— 25.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. «83 



But no sooner do they hear of the approaching famine in Judaaa than they make 
collections, every man according to his ability, for the relief of their fellow-Christians, 
and send two of their most trusted members to carry the gift from Antioch to Jeru- 
salem. Surely a beau .if ul sight, that loving-cup passed from Gentile to Jew, a pledge 
of their unity in Jesus Christ. 2. The defence of the Church of Jerusalem against the 
tyranny of thf world. The strong hand of unscrupulous power has slain one of theii 
most valiant leaders. Another greater still is shut up in a dungeon, expecting immediate 
death. The whole Church is in danger of destruction. It must defend itself against 
its terrible foe ; it must sharpen its sword ; it must put on its armour ; it must prepare 
for the fight. And how does it do this? Our second picture shows us. It is night. 
The great city is hushed in sleep ; its hum has ceased. The we.iry are at rest. The 
prisoner's eyes are closed in forgetfulness, and all things are shrouded in darkness. But 
in one house in the city sleep has no place. Under its roof are gathered together many 
of the soldiers of Jesus Christ. And in that dead hour of the niglit they are watching 
unto prayer. From one and another the voice of prayer and supplication is going up to 
Heaven — prayer for Peter's safety; prayer for the preservation of the Church; prayer 
for the mighty help of the Holy Ghost; prayer for holy patience; prayer for holy 
courage ; prayer for wisdom how to act and for strength to act ; prayer lor the weak in 
faith ; prayer for the tempted and irresolute ; prayer for their enemies, persecutors, and 
slanderers ; — in short, every variety of the cry, " Lead us not into temptation, but deliver 
us from evil I " is breaking the stillness of the night, and is the Church's preparation for 
battle and for victory. 3 and 4. We have in these the portraiture of two individual 
members of Ood's Church. The first, James, we see only in his death — the blessed death 
of a martyr of Jesus Christ ; a death which tells of the life which went before, and 
also of the life that shall follow after and have no end. He was a son of thunder in 
his assaults upon the strongholds of Satan; a witness for Jesus Christ and his cross 
and his salvation, before the hard materialism of Roman power, and the withered 
formalism of Jewish bigotry and hypocrisy. As we think of him, as of his saintly 
brother John, we think of the unworldly I'aith with which, leaving his father and all 
that he had in this world, he was obedient without delay to the calling of Jesus Christ ; 
we think of the indignant zeal which flashed out when the Master whom he loved was 
rejected by the Samaritans ; we think of him as persevering steadily, through ten years 
of opposition and contradiction from elders, and priests, and Pharisees, and Sadducees, 
in the 6ne great purpose for which he lived, at the end of which, as he had long since 
been warned by the Lord, there was a cup of suffering to be drunk, and a baptism of 
blood to be baptized with. But he shrank' not nor drew back. To him to live was 
Christ, and to die was gain. And so his end came^the end of his toil. But 8urelj he 
is among those whom his brother John saw in vision half a century afterwards : " I saw 
the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, 
. . . and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years." Blessed in his death 
and glorious in his resurrection, he will shine forth with a brighter glory in the kingdom 
• of his Father than Agrippa his murderer did in his silver robe of marvellous texture in 
the theatre of Csesarea. Our last portrait is that of Simon Peter, the Galilsean fisher- 
man, called by Jesus Christ to be fisher of men. What a life was his I — gathering three 
thousand souls into his net at the very first haul ; laying the foundations of that 
building which during eighteen centuries and a half has gone on growing towards those 
vast proportions which will at last fill the whole earth and mingle with the skies in 
its length, and breadth, and depth, and height ; unlocking the gates of the kingdom of 
heaven with his keys of office for myriads and millions to enter in. What a life of 
toil and danger 1— journeying, preaching, healing, teaching, like his Divine Master before 
him, with his life ever in his hand; now escaping, now returning to the scene of 
persecution, but always intent upon the work ot Christ. Ah 1 surely he has fallen at 
lastj; the hand of the tyrant has found him out He is fast in prison. He is fastened 
with two chains to his jailors. He is sleeping his last sleep on earth: To-morrow's 
sun will rise upon him for the last time, and before it is noon he will have joined his 
brother James in the land where all things are forgotten. So thought man. So thought 
the Jews. So thought Agrippa. So thought Peter himself when he closed his eyes 
in sleep under the protection of God's wings. So had God not ordfuned. The night 
watches had advanced. The great city lay in stillness and darkness. The sons of toil 



884 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xu. 1—25. 

and of pleasure had all left the busy thoroughfares, and the streets were a desert. But 
lo ! the iron gate of the pi ison opens noiselessly upon its hinges, and two men issue 
forth into the open way. They walk rapidly along, and then one vanishes and only one 
is left. He stops for a moment's thought, and then goes to the house of Mary. Yet 
•mother moment, and he is in the midst of a praying Church, wliich he never tnought to 
have seen again in the flesh ; and the brethren are all around their great primate, whom 
they thought to have seen no more for ever. It was a great surprise. But how great 
the joy to know that it was God's doing 1 Now they knew that their dangers, their 
sorrows, their fears, and their prayers, were all linown of God. Now they knew that 
their lives were precious in God's sight, and that ho that was for them was stronger 
than he that was against them. Peter's hour was not yet come ; his work was not yet 
finished, and till it was, all the power of Herod and all the expectation of the people of 
the Jews would be baffled and disappointed, not a hair of bis head should perish ; 
and instead of the Church being wasted and destroyed, the Word of (Sod should grow 
and multiply. It is growing and mulliplying still. Peter's work is not yet finished. 
What he began is still going on. The overeeers are still feeding the flock of Christ; 
and they with him, when the chief Shepherd shall appear, shall receive » en>wn of 
glory that fadeth not away. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS ATJTHOEa 

Vers. 1 — 19, 24. — Sin in high places. Sin has many aspects, «nd It U Dot only 
curious but instructive to see how it shows itself under different conditions. Here we 
have it manifesting its evil spirit in "high places." Herod's action at this juncture 
reminds us of — 

I. Its contemptuousnesb. " Herod . . . stretched forth his hands to vex certain 
of the Church " (ver. 1). He did not stay to inquire whether these men were in the 
right or not. They had with them the most convincing credentials — strong evidence, 
miraculous power, a truth which met the necessities of the human heart and life ; but 
all this went for nothing. From his place of power he looked down superciliously on 
tins new " way," and with a light heart he determined to vex its adherents. How often 
does a high place beget an unseemly, unwholesome, injurious arrogance which, smiting 
others, inflicts a death-blow on itself! 

II. Its BBDTALiTT. " And he killed James . . . with the sword "(ver. 2). What was 
the life of an enthusiast to him? "He commanded that the keepers should be put to 
death " (ver. 19). What signified it to him that a few soldiers were executed ? It would 
not spoil his meal nor disturb his slumber that, at his bidding, a few of his fellow-men 
had their lives cut short and that their families and friends were mourning. This was 
the spirit of the age, an unchristian age : it was especially the spirit of human tyranny. 
The ruler on his throne, too often attained by violence and cunning, was indifferent to 
the blood he shed, to the rights he violated, to the sorrows he caused. Such has been 
the history of sin in high places from the beginning until now, front one end ot the 
earth to the other. 

III. Its meanness. " Because he saw it pleased the Jews," he proceeded further 
(ver. 8) in the same course. What a miserable reason for imprisonment and execution 
of subjects 1 Not because any crime had been committed, or any folly wrought, or any 
danger incurred ; but " because it.pleased the Jews" more violence was to be done, more 
wrong inflicted, more grief and lamentation called forth. To such shameful depth 
will sin in high places stoop, "justice" prostituting its high vocation (1 Pet. iL 14) 
to win a mean and despicable popularity at the expense of innocence and truth. 

IV. Its iufotekce. 1. How vun are bolts and bars to shut in a man whom God 
intends to be his asent among men (vers. 4 — 10 ; see ch. v. 19 ; xvi. 26) I 2. How 
vain are swords to slay and prison doors to confine the living truth of God 1 A James 
may be killed and a Peter imprisoned, but the chapter which narrates these ineideuts 
of human tyranny does not close without recording that " the Word of God grew and 
multiplied." We may learn these two lessons. (1) We may well be contented with 
our humbler lot. Obscurity and comparative powerlessness are far less altraciive to an 
ordinary eye than eminence and power. But who of ui can say that « " high place " 



OH. xn. 1—25.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 885 

might not prove to be a " slippery place," wherein viitue and purity would fall, never 
to rise again ; or on which some of the finer graces would be dulled and dimmed, even 
if some of the sadder sins were not nourished and practised ? (2) We may well rejoice 
to be on the side of the Lord our Saviour. His cause will meet with such checks as 
this chapter records ; there will be times when his disciples will mourn the loss of one 
champion and be alarmed for the safety of another ; but unhoped-for deliverance will 
come, God will appear for us in' ways we dare not expect, and the end will be the 
growth and multiplying of his living and life-giving Word. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 19, 25.— The strength and weahnesa of Christian, discipIesMp. These verses 
bring out very strikingly the fact that there is both power and weakness in us who are 
the followers of Christ. We see it — 

I. In apostolic functions. The apostles of our Lord were invested by their Divine 
Master with unusual powers. The Holy Ghost descended upon them and conferred 
great gifts on them (see ch. v. 15, 16 ; ix. 31 — 41). Peter was the chief channel through 
which this Divine efficacy flowed. But while he was charged to do such great things 
for others, he was not permitted to do anything for himself; hia function of working 
miracles stopped when he was personally concerned ; he was not at liberty to open a 
bolted prison door that he himself might escape. We may find a certain illustration 
of this strength and weakness in the case of those who have such strength to arouse the 
souls and stir the activities of others, but who are painfully and pitifully weak in con- 
trolling their own spirit. 

n. Ik apostolic and ordinary Christian expebienob. One short verse (ver. 2) 
disposes of the fate of the Apostle James. We have no graphic account, as in Stephen's 
case, of his martyrdom. But it is enough that we know the event. We naturally 
place it beside the predictive words of the Lord (Mark x. 38, 39). And we see here 
how weak and yet how strong Christian discipleship can be. Weak enough (1) to 
cherish a mistaken ambition (Mark x. 37) ; (2) to under-estimate altogether the suiier- 
ings of its Lord — they said, " We can ; " (3) to under-estimate the severity of its own 
martyr-witness, for James and John had little thought at that time of the future 
that was in store for them. Strong enough to accept with cheerfulness the trying lot 
when called upon to endure it. We may take it, though we are not told it, that James 
drank without a moment's hesitation the bitter cup of sudden and violent death when 
Herod's sword was drawn to slay him. How frequently do we find the same thing 
with us now 1 At one hour, the weakness of serious misconception of Christian truth 
or of Christian life, or, it may be, serious failure to attain the spirit or illustrate the 
principle of Christ; at another hour, beautiful resignation to the will, or admirable 
exemplification of the truth, or noble devotedness to the work, of the Lord. 1. We 
should not judge hastily ; the error or shortcoming of one period may be more than 
redeemed by the excellency or even heroism of another. 2. We need not be exceedingly 
depressed by our own failure ; we should be truly penitent when really at fault, but'we 
may hope that, further on, our Master will give us an opportunity of drinkino- of his 
cup, of having fellowship with his sufferings. ° 

HI. In the matter op devotion. " Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church 
unto God for Peter " (ver. 5). It may be confidently concluded that the " many who 
were gathered together praying" at Mary's house (ver. 12) were asking for his deliver- 
ance. His escape, then, should have been the very thing they were expecting. If their 
strength had not been exercised in weakness, they would have anticipated the knock at 
the door, which they refused to believe was from the hand of Peter. We know how 
great was their astonishment that their prayers were heard and answered (vers 15 16) 
Prayer is the strength of the Christian man, of the Christian Church; but when in the 
yery act and exercise of this our privilege and power, how great is our weakness! for 
how unspiritual is, too often, our word! how languid our strain! how slight our hone! 
how faint and feeble our expectation ! . ° ^ 

IV. In O0B relations with oue fellows. (Ver. 25.) Barnabas and Saul returned 
from their ministry in Jerusalem, carrying with them the blessings of the poor whom 
they had relieved. But they also carried with them one, John Mark, who was to he the 
occasion of a bitter quarrel and a lifelong separation. While they were reioicins in 
their hearts that the ties between the brethren of Antioch «id Jerusalem were aa 



386 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa [oh. xn. 1—25. 

happily strengthened, there stood by their side a man whose action was to cut in 
twain the bond which bound them in loving and active brotherhood. As fellow- 
members of the Church, we feel and do many things which bring out into bold relief 
our most Godlike affections and aspirations ; but as those who worship and work 
.side by side, we often do things which give displeasure to our Lord and abould give 
pain to ourselves. — C. 

Vers. 20 — 23. — Buman pride and Divine retribution. The main lesson which this 
incident conveys is the folly of human presumption. But there are side truths which 
^he narrative suggests. 1. The interdependence of one nation on another: "Their 
^untry was nourished by the king's country " (ver. 20). One land has metals in 
abundance ; another has com ; another, cotton ; another, timber, etc. It was clearly the 
intention of the Father of all that all peoples Should live in close friendship and con- 
stant intercourse with one another. Yet the heathen idea was that the natural 
relation between neighbouring nations was war. The motto of Christianity is 
" Peace;" its spirit is that of brotherhood; its counsel and fruit are active interchange 
of services and resources. 2. The evil of autocracy : "Herod was highly displeased with 
them of Tyre and Sidon " (ver. 20). It may have been some slight affront he had 
received, and which he was determined to avenge. All responsibility rested with him, 
and the caprice or resentment of one single soul would have been sufiScient to plunge 
the thousands of Tyre and Sidon — men, women, and children — into terror and distress. 
We may unite to thank God that the sword is being taken out of the hand of the 
autocrat. 3. The drawbacks to human greatness. Herod Agrippa was a man in a very 
fine position, and he was no doubt envied by thousands of his subjects; doubtless he 
often congratulated himself on the success of his subtlety. Yet he was (1) much at 
the mercy of venal counsellors, — ^probably rich presents had found their way into tlie 
treasury of Blastus before that chamberlain spoke honeyed words of peace in Herufl's 
ear (ver. 20) ; (2) the dupe of base flatterers (ver. 22), — he must either have been con- 
stantly engaged in weighing words and distinguishing the false from the sincere, or 
rise he must have been continually deceived. But to read the lesson of the text we 
turn to— 

I. The height to which human presumption wHiL rise. The scene which is briefly 
sketched in the text (ver. 21) has been more fully described elsewhere (see Farrar's 
' Life of St. Paul,' ii. pp. 315 — 317). It may seem incredible to those who move in humble 
spheres that a mortal man could ever be so inflated with a sense of his own greatness 
as to accept Divine honours when they were offered. History, however, fully proves 
that ariogance may rise even as high as this. " The spirit of self-exaggeration," " the 
insolent exaltation of himself," with which Channing charges Napoleon Bonaparte, is a 
spirit which has been exemplifled in every age and nation in greater or less degrej. 
The acquisition of honour does not satisfy but only inflames amlation, and from height 
to height it rises until, leaving far behind it merely unwarrantable hope, it reaches 
shameful arrogance and even, as here, a horrible impiety. 

II. The depth to which it must fall. It ends in shame and ruin. Sometimes, 
as here, in terrible torture. It is noticeable that some of the worst persecutors of their 
race have come to a frightful end at death : witness, Herod the Great ; this man, his 
grandson ; Antiochus Epiphanes ; Philip II. of Spain, etc. But where this is not the 
case, the end is dishonour. God " will not give his glory to another." Pride must 
perish, and great must be its fall. From its high pedestal it topples down. No angel- 
hand is needed to secure the overthrow ; its foundations are certain to be undermined, 
and the god who was at the summit lies, a broken and shattered idol, at the base. 

III. The significance ok Herod's death. It sa^s to those who wonder at the 
lelays of providence and speak of — 

" Truth for ever on the scaffold, 
Wrong for ever on the throne," 

V\fMt! God will reveal himself in righteousness. Go into the sanctuary (Ps 
Ix^ii. 17) ; look back on the page of history, and understand their end ; and see 
wKat "the end of the Lord" is. Wait a while, and the enthroned king, enrobed in 
issued silver, receiving the ftcclatnatjous of the people, acce{)tin§ tb*ir aBcrij>ticns oJf 



0H.XII.1— 25.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



Jeity— behold ! he lies writhing in awful agony ; he passes away • he is dust of the 
ground. And that despised sect, smitten, suffering, degraded — ^"oeholdl it rises to 
honour, to power, to influence; it will be enthroned on the intelligence and con- 
science of mankind. Herod Agrippa gave up the ghost, " but the Word of God grew 
and multiplied" (ver. 24).— C. 

Vers. 1 — 25. — llie persecution at Jerusalem, I. The puttino to death of James. 
AND THE SEIZURE OF Petbr. Tho narrative of the former event is short and dry. But 
remarks a commentator, whatever the reason of this may be, it is certain that the Hoi} 
Spirit, by whose inspiration this history was given, manifested a peculiar wisdom in 
this very brevity. The holy silence is a sign to us that that which is highest and 
most pleasing to God is not precisely that of which men love to know and speak. " Our 
life is hid with Christ in God." The peculiar life in life, and tlie holy dying in death, 
these are hidden with Christ in God, not merely from the world, but from the 
children of God ; precious, nevertheless, before God, a work following the soul into 
eternity. The frivolous persecutor, who has been an enemy of the Jews, now, to 
please them, sacrifices the Christians. The cruelty and frivolity of tyrants has been 
permitted to work much evil and cause much bloodshed. Our only consolation in 
meditating on such facts is to reflect that Christianity is an ideal system, and has 
compensations not of this world. 

II. The DELIVERANCE OP Peter. 1. His imprisonment fell in the days of unleavened 
bread — the Passover-time; doubtless reminding him, not only of the passion and resur- 
rection of the Saviour, but of his own frailty and denial of him. Now was the prophecy 
of Jesus fulfilled : " Hereafter thou shaft follow me." All in the scene, the memories, 
the immediate prospects before Peter's mind disposed him to sad and serious thuught. 
2. The strong guard placed over him seems to bear witness to the respect felt for his per- 
son, the fear of his influence. The parts of the prisoner and that of the tyrant are often 
really reversed; he is at peace, they tremble when they have him most in thf;ir power. 
-Behind the sc«ne a purpose was working mightier than all human force. The perse- 
cutors intended to bring him after the Passover feast ; but God intends to save him. 
Herod plots Peter's death, while God wills the preservation of Peter and the death of the 
murderer. Another view of spiritual force working to counteract physical force is given 
in the statement of the unceasing prayer of the Church on Peter's behalf. " God can 
refuse nothing to a praying Church." " One true prayer can strike down the whole 
power of hell ; why not Herod with his sixteen soldiers?" " By the blood and prayers 
of Christians Herod's arm was maimed, his sceptre broken, and the Roman empire 
brought to ruins." Peter in the prison may remind us to pray, " That it may please 
thee to show pity upon all prisoners and captives!" Meanwhile Peter sleeps; as a 
child flung into the strong arms of a father, so in the extremity of his distress he has 
flung himself on God, and rests. And over him Divine love watches with all the 
tenderness of the parent's eye and heart. 3. The delivering angel. The angels are 
ministers of God to the bodies and souls of the " heirs of salvation." Whether we 
speak of angels, or of instruments, or providential means, the truth at bottom is the 
same. All agents and instruments may be considered Divine which are set in motion 
by the Divine power and love, and providentially meet the need of the hour. So too 
the shining effulgence which accompanies the angel's visit. We do not expect such 
phenomena now ; but the light in the heart, the joy which comes of having surrendere 1 
the soul to God and of being conscious of his presence, is not less real than ever. " To 
the upright there ariseth light in the darkness." We may if we please allegorize what 
follows to our own account. "Arise quickly!" and the chains fell fix)m°his hands. 
For the word of the Lord no iron is too hard, no stone nor bolt too strong. There are 
worse prisons than those of stone. 

"Stone walls do not a prison make, 
Nor iron bars a cage." 

It is our own fettered thoughts which cramp and oppress the soul. Again, with the 
Divine command, " Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals," the power to obey comes. 
And so again when he is bidden to cast around him his garment and to follow. A 
r««M«», attentive to the Bmallest details, is digoovered in every call to duty and frte'loui 



388 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. xii. 1—25. 

And all this passes as in a dream. So often when swift help and wondrous deliverances 
come by the Divine hand. " When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we 
were as them that dreamed." So doubtless in the last conflict, the escape from life and 
all its troubles will appear as a dream to the departing soul. So swiftly on, through 
the 6rst and second guard, to the iron gate leading into the city, which opens of its 
own accord ; the street is reached, and the angel departs. The extraordinary and the 
marvellous lasts no longer than it is needed. We are governed and guided by constant 
laW; which is the expression of loving and constant will. We are taught by experience 
to build on the constancy of law; but lest we should adore law instead of Grod, he 
appears from, time to time from behind law, as will, personality, love. The knowledge 
left behind on Peter's mind is that God has interfered for his deliverance from the 
hands of his enemies. That is the lesson for us, whenever by a change of circumstances, 
not to be foreseen and not to be commanded by human forethought, God's ways with 
us give rise in retrospect and reflection to thankfulness. We see not the good hand 
that is leading us, the wisdom that causes all things to work together for good, before 
we have reached the goal and end of his purpose. 

III. Peter's EBDNioN WITH THE DISCIPLES. 1. Notice the coincidences of events. For 
hia refreshment, Peter is led from the cold prison and the rough society of suldiers into 
that of praying brethren. And they who had been in the depth of trouble because of 
his supposed loss, behold the beloved brother in the midst of them — for the strengthen- 
ing of their faith. 2. I'he struggle of faith with unbelief. Here, though they hixd been 
praying, and praying doubtless for Peter's release, when the answer comes, they find it 
difiScult to accept and believe. How true is this to the human heart I People are not 
conscious that they are not quite sincere in their prayers until some event like this 
brinp them face to face with their own thought. When Rhoda tells the simple news 
of joy, they reply, " Thou art mad I " Faith in the heart says, " God can work wonders 
if he will ; " an opposite feeling says, " It is not likely that he will work them." A man 
may argue, " My faith in the goodness of God is shadowy, but my faith in the constancy 
of his laws in nature is absolute : it is the contrast of one faith with another." We 
cannot find a solution to this contradiction ; but it does seem in the course of events 
as if it were solved for us by a higher light and leading. 3. The result. Petor con- 
tinues knocking, till those within open, see him, and are astounded. After grasping 
their hands in friendship, he tells the story of his deliverance, bids them repeat it to 
James and the brethren, then departs to another place. So had the Lord commanded 
(Matt. X. 13). The protection of Providence does not supersede the exercise of caution 
and prudence ; it should rather encourage us to observe these. By removing Peter, the 
main pillar of the community, the Chui'ch was taught that no one man was indispen- 
sable to its existence and welfare. They were to learn to stand without him. The 
break of day brought a great disturbance among the soldiers. " Wliat haJ become of 
Peter ? " Herod takes prompt measures for his arrest, and betakes himself to Csesarea. 
So ends an episode of apostohc history. We may extract from it the following lessons : 
— (1) The time of trial is the time of Divine education. Faith in the trial of fire is 
proved more precious than the gold which perisheth. " Clount it all joy when ye fall 
into divers temptations." (2) Brotherly love in affliction, in watching and waiting ; 
power of soul in rest and endurance ; Divine power in healing and saving ; — these are 
the fruits and energies which spring up in the soil of persecution ;' these the " precious 
jiearls for which men dive in sorrow's sacred stream." (3) The arms and defences of the 
Church against its foes are — unflinching courage in witness, calm patience in sucGfering, 
unwearied urgency in prayer. — J. 

Vers. 20 — 25. — The death of Eerod. L Thk oibodmstanceb. In the height of his 
power and haughtiness he is suddenly cast down. While raising himself arrogantly 
against the Majesty on high, by that Majesty he is brought low and put to shame. 
Also it is while he is being sought by petitioners, and hailed by the flattering voice ol 
the multitude as a god. These features. have all the elements of the most solemn 
tragedy. The messenger of Divine judgment smites him straightway, and he perishes 
miserably. 

II. Its moral. 1. " Because he gave not the glory to God " is the reason of the 
judgment. To God alone belongs honour. He is the Fountain of power, the Foundation 



OH. xiL 1— 25.J THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 3S9 

of all staWlity. He who forsaVos God ruins himself and causes destruction to otherB. 
God " resists the proud, but gives srace to the humble." 2. The moral is seen also in 
contrast. Those who honour God, as Barnabas and Saul, receive honour from God. 
The persecutor is cast down, while the persecuted flourish and the work goes on. The 
blood of the- martyr waters the field of the Church, and the tyrant fertiliwa it with 
his bones. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 19. — Herodian persecution of the Church. Connection of events showing 
the working of Divine providence. After Stephen's murder, Caligula porsecuted the 
Jews; hence the diversion of their enmity coincident with conversion of Saul. On 
the accession of Claudius, a time of comparative peace. Appointment of Herod Agrippa 
renewed their hopes ; hence their attempt to crush the Church. The contrast between 
the Jews and the Christians is seen at this point. They put themselves in the 
hands of Agrippa, appointed successor to Herod Philip, with the whole Syrian 
province under him, by their persecutor Caligula, and lately under Olaulius, receivins; 
Judaea and Samaria; so that he was equal in power to his grandfather, llurod the Grent. 
He was a shameless blas|ihemer, and feared neither God nor man. Yot the Jewish 
rulers, in their exasp 'ration, incited him against the Christians. The simplicity of the 
narrative testifies to the simplicity and sincerity of the disciples. The second martyr- 
dom has only a single line given to it. But how eloquent the silence! 'J'he position 
of Peter was a more piorainont one. Herod's wickedness became bolder. He aimed 
a blow at the very leader of the Church. Contrast the two histories of James and 
John — one so early out ofif, the other surviving to the end of the century. The 
narrative illustrates — 

I. The SUPEBINTENDINQ OAKB OP GoD OVER HIS PEOPLE. 

n. The powek of faith in sustaining courage and calmness in timb of tkiai,. 
Peter slept. 

III. The efficacy of prater. 

IV. The CONTRAST betwekn the einodom OP God and the kingdom of this 
WORLD. 1. The ease of Divine victory. 2. The peaceful brotherhood over against the 
cruel tyranny of Herod. 3. The manifestation of the Spirit contrasted with the vain 
show of power and display of authority. Withdrawment of Herod to Cffisarea a sign 
of defeat. — B. 

Vers. 20 — 23. — Judgment on the royal persecutor. I. The worldly policy, and 
WHAT IT LEADS TO. Idolatry. Blasphemy. The atmosphere of corruption attacks 
the vitals. The man lives in a moral pest-house. He himself is at last devoured by 
the filth of his own sins. Examples in all history. The French king in eighteenth 
century. Napoleon. III. 

II. The CERTAINTY OF DiviNE PROTECTiOH. He takes away the evil man. He 
disperses the dark cloud. Blessed are those that wait on his will. — B. 

Ver. ZL—Sametified affliction. "But the Word of God grew and multiplied." 
I. The troubles are blessinos in disouisb. 1. Drawing the believers together. 
2. Revealing the weakness of enemies. 3. Calling out faith and prayerfulness. 
4. Occasioning new manifestations of Divine power on behalf of the Church. 

n. Thb kingdom op God under Divine contbol and indbpendent of human 
agbnot. a time of famine and persecution and mourning, but still a time of increase 
The earthly rulers against the Word, but still it grows. The Church afflicted, but still 
speaking to the world, and its speech all the more powerful that it comes forth from 
the troubled depths of suffering hearts. Instances. The blood of the martyrs the seed 
of the Church. Madagascar. When we are weak then are we strong. « Not by might 
nor by power, but by God's Spirit."— R. ' 

Ver. 25— ch. xiil. Z.— Ordination of Baniabas and Saul to the missionary work. 
I. The spirit of ministration will always find its opportunities opened to it. Aatioch 
full of the zeal of new converts. Signs of the S^rit there. Eminent men— repiaaentin" 
both wide sympathies and considerable culture and iutelleotual power, probably 
IMOompanied with some wealth. r r j 



390 THE ACTS OF TIlE ArOSlL^a fcii. XIL 1— ^6 

II. The NEW ENTBBPRI8K should be undertaken in the spirit of prayerful depeiulence 
and Eelf-coijsecration. 

III. Obdinatioh an act of brotherhood and recognition of spiritual gifts as essential 
to the ministry. 

IV. DivifrK OBAOE unites with human judgment and effort. Barnabas and Saul 
had approved themselves faithful by their visit to Jerusalem. Commendation by th« 
brethren there ; desire to enter on the larger field ; apparent fitness fur it. Loss as it 
was to Antioch, a Church which looks far afield for its blessings always receives them 
abundantly. " There is that scatteretb, and yet increaseth." — ^B. 

Ver. 5. — The Church in prayer. The prirriitive Church is here found, amid 
circumstances so full of interest that they even tempt attention, in prayer for an 
acknowledged leader, a prized tencher and pastor and an undoubted apostle. The 
Church now is praying to God for one thing, in submission to his will — that Peter 
may le spared to it and spared to the world. The essentials of effectual prayer 
ih the Church cannot differ intrinsically from those in the individual; but they are 
strikingly presented to the mind here. Under the one word " prayer," a variety of 
spiritual exercise, as is well known, is. continually included, viz. the outpourinc;s of 
adoration of the one great Object of prayer, the according of grateful praise and thanks 
to him, the penitential confession of oar sin, and self-humiliation on account of it. 
But there are very many who will join in all this, and from the heart believe in it, who 
yield either no assent or a heartless assent to what is after all the chief thing in prayer, 
its chief wonder and chief privilege, nt,me\y, petition. Without studying the theory, 
let us notice one striking instance of the practice of prayer. True theory is never 
overthrown by fact, but facts often put to rout theory falsely w called, and expose its 
weak points. We may observe, then — 

L The qualities that uabeed the pbateb ob petition of the Chuech. 1. It 
was most distinct in its object. The safety of Peter is the one desire of the heart of all 
who joined to pray. Individual prayer and private prayer are very likely to become 
vague, vague and multifarious, vague and indisoriminating, vague and inevitably 
indifferent. Perhaps the tendencies of public and united prayer are yet more exposed 
to this snare, for the obvious reasons (1) that the thoughts of many hearts must be 
considered for; and (2) that intercession, which must be the memory of many in want, 
will generally form a large portion of that prayer. It is well when heart and mind 
and devotion follow each of these with intelligent distinctness. 2. Sincerity of faith 
marked the Church's prayer at this crisis. He who cometh to God in prayer must 
believe (1) that he is ; but (2) none the less that he lends a willing, gracious ear to 
prayer ; in order (3) that he may duly, in his own wise time and wise way, answer it, 
and do nothing less than answer it. Prayer with the mock humility of a timid fear 
that it is presumptuous to pray, never brought a blessing. The heart's glory in prayer 
is, if (with George Herbert) it " gasp out," Et vult et potest, of God as the Object and 
the Hearer of prayer. 3. Great ewrnestness in petition was displayed by the Church. 
The heart's desire and prayer to God on the part of those composing it was for the saving 
of Peter's life. Herod is known to be full of cruelty. He has just " killed with the 
sword James the brother of John." And he is known to be goaded on by that worst 
stine the sting of "desiring to please" certain fellow-creatures. There is only One 
with whom we are safe, and always safe, in wishing and aiming to please him. Far 
enough off from Herod's eye and thought was that One. He was torn, and therefore in 
turn cruelly and guiltily tore others, by a vain, weak, contemptible desire for a moment 
to " please the Jews." The Church did not cower but did pray accordingly, prayed with 
earnestness. 4. Patience marked this great instance of prayer. It was, nevertheless 
not the patience of silence, but of speech ; it was not the patience of sitting down with 
folded hands, but of kneeling down with clasped hands; it was the patience a* 
importunity, that very characteristic to which Jesus himself in the days of hia Uesb 
eave such prominence and such conspicuous honour (Luke xvih. 1—8). 

II PbAYBB was IK NO SENSE AT A DISCOUNT BE0AU8B IT WAS AN AGE OF M™ACLB, 

AND OF ABOUNDING MiBAOLB. 1. However couspicuously God does the work, and the 
Word of Christ is strong, and the Holy Spirit's energy is essential and must be 
confesMd, nothing is diminished of the act of prayer (if we may for a moment so call 



eft. til. 1—26.] THE ACl'S OF THE APOSTLES. 891 



it) in all this history. Men pray, pray constantly, pray even hefore miracle, and 
prayer is an actual deed honoured of Heaven. It has been truly said that a correct 
alias for the Acts of the Apostles would be " The Acts of the Holy Ghost," and this 
U most true. Another not altogether inapt style of the book might be " The Acts of 
Prayer." For here they abound and in the most significant situation, from those of 
the first chapter (i. 14, 24) to that of the last (xxviii. 8). 2. The distinctness and 
proDoptness of reply to prayer, which miracles wrought made occasionally very evident, 
even had the tendency to increase faith in prayer. Men would not lie by and do ' 
nothing when they remembered how only yesterday God graciously and marvellously 
interposed undeniably for even eye of sense. Yet the lesson that the temporary 
dispensation of miracle should have taught the Church for evermore, when miracle of 
sense was gone is, alas! often lost now. Need the thing signified be lost and wastefully 
sacrificed because the mere outside sign is gone? It is all our own fault if we do not 
oftcner see for ourselves the fulfilment of the word of Jesus, " Ye shall see greater 
things than these." It is undeniable that one spiritual miracle, e.g., that of the 
conversion of Saul, counted for more, counts still for more, will ever count for more, 
than all the miracles wrought upon the body, that ever were. Let the Church's prayer 
to-day oftener challenge some spiritual miracle, and who will doubt the issue? 

III. In conclusion, two things might be well observed, as justly to be gathered from 
this subject. 1. That the very heart of prayer lies in petition. Petition may be 
considered as the crucial question which prayer involves, and the crowning privilege 
of it. The petition of the sinner for mercy, pardon, salvation, being ever to be ranked 
as the typical petition. 2. That it may be placed among the moral defences of prayer, 
that the qualities which make it real, which make it strong, which make it a con- 
vincing and mighty power, are just the same with tliose which make work real, 
strong, and full of fruit. Distinctness of object, sincerity of faith in your practical 
object, earnestness in the pursuit of it, and patient, persevering determination are the 
qualities that win the day. And they do so by the verdict of the world. It is an 
indication that prayer and work have known one another this long time, and, so far 
from disclaiming a family relationship, persistently assert it. They are the union <rf 
the Divine and the human. — B. 

Vers. 6—17. — 0«e instance of the manner of Divine worMng. When we read the 
"mighty works" of Jesus or of those commissioned by him, whether apostles or 
angels, it is an easy thing to permit our attention to be diverted from anything else 
contained in them, under the influence of the fascination of the power which they 
display. For this very thing is often done, and the moral quality, the moral beauty, and 
even the moral imitableness of what we call the miracle, is ignored. The loss is as 
gratuitous as it is wasteful, nor is it free from an element of perverseness, when it 
exhibits us stricken by the wonder of the power we cannot, negligent of the grace we 
might, learn. Meantime the various character and aspect of the miracles recorded in 
Scripture are leither less astonishing nor less pleasing than the various colour and hue 
and fragrance of the flowers of the garden. The impretssion may be described as a whole 
as the charm latent, or sometimes less latent than evident, in the Divine working. To 
contemplate this must ever add to our sense of Divine grasefuiness, may in some 
fles;ree improve our own approach to it and growth in it. Let us in this sense 
consider the Divine interposition here recorded. For whatever reason, it is mercifully 
resolved on. Prayer unceasing has brought help. The Divine wisdom has determined 
the trencha&t and decisive character of the help. And in humbled yet grateful and 
joyous feeling nevertheless, we may note the contrasts suggested by the Divine work 
and too much of our own. Observe — 

L Ibb actcal light which is thrown hound about Divine wobk. (Ver. 7.) 
"Clouds and darkness are round about" God himself, his incomprehensible character, 
his hidden purposes, his sovercii^n will. This is very true. But when he comes to 
work distinctly for men and among them, his footstips are not in the stealthy dark. 
The angel comes in light, and the prison is lighted up, « huuver is a<vake to see and 
whoever has eyes to see. 

II. Thb finished coMPiiBTBNBBS OF THAT woEKiua. The angel brings all necessary 
Instruction; does all that could be needful, or helpful; condescends to the meanest 



892 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. m. 1— 2& 

iuatractions. He strikes Peter so as to awake him ; he gives him a hand ; he tells hiir. 
to he quiet ; he snaps the chains off his hands ; he bids him dress and put on his shoes, 
and throw his garment about him, and follow whither he would lead. All the work is 
known and facile, and orderly and swift, without grating or a jar, and to such a degree 
that the very subject of it can think it is a vision and dream of an unbroken sleep. 

III. The L0VINQ-KINDNBB8 OP DiviNB WOBKING. Often as we murmuringly and 
impatiently may chide what seems its lingering, halting step, when it comes how 
grateful its advent I how true to exact need and to the nick of occasion 1 How simple 
in its helpfulness and real in its usefulness! There is so little sound of profession 
about it, but all is deed. 

IV. Its condescendikq willingness to fobm pakt of human woekino. The 
interposition that w most marked for its superhuman element does not hold itself in 
lofty and haughty isolation, but begins from some human suggestion, and leaves just 
as though it put the rest trustingly into man's hand again. The angel did all that 
was needful to get Peter outside the prison, and passed with him safely the first ward 
and the second ward, and through the iron gate that knew the step of its master and 
opened of its own accord, and " through one street," and then departed. And Peter 
sees after that for himself, and understands and carries on the work, showing himself 
to many praying friends (ver. 12), sending express word to "James and the brethren" 
(ver. 17), and putting himself beyond present danger, as one more mindful of Divine 
protection and goodness than rashly courting danger and notoriety. 

V. The joyful sueprisb it will repeatedly spread. From the rescued Peter 
himself to the delighted damsel Rhoda, to the party of the pious praying at the house 
of her of the auspicious name, Mary, to the fellow-apostle James and to the brethren, 
the tones of gladsome surprise die down, only to wake and revive again and again. 
The echoes of human sorrows, sighs, wails, are not, after all, the only echoes heard in 
this world. These others ring through the circles of the earth's air and the heaven's 
with lighter, merrier bound, and fail not to give some forewarning of the endless echoes 
of " gladness and joy and singing " that shall be ere long. 

VI. After all, its supreme and decisive confusion or human opposition. 
Many an earthly conflict, settled with all the wisdom and devotion that human mind 
and heart can bring to bear, seems still left an unsettled conflict. The wound is not 
certainly healed up; the difference is not absolutely removed; the victory is not 
really satisfactory. But how is it when God interposes? How is it when Jesus 
speaks, whether to wind and sea or to saint or sinner? How is it when the Spirit 
comes upon the scene into the heart ? And this was well illustrated now. Where 
now are the prison, and the chains, and the soldiers, and the keepers? And where is 
the guilty temporizer himself, Herod? They none of them can bear the light of that 
next morning. They cannot "abide the day of his coming." After no " small stir," 
the soldiers lose rank, the keepers lose life, Herod abundantly loses dignity, and " goes 
down from Judaa to Caesarea, and there abides," probably sorry he ever went up or 
be^an to care " to please the Jews." And past the storm, the song of the servant of 
Christ is heard, repeating itself and confirmed, "Now I know of a surety, that the 
Lord hath sent his an^el, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from 
all the expectation of the people of the Jews." Who so safe, who so blessed as those 
"delivered" by the Lord from their foes and his, and kept thenceforth in hw sure 
place and the secret hiding-place of his pavilion?— B. 

Vers, il— 23.— Hollow grandeur exposed. There is no donbt that the time of 
our Saviour and the apostles was a time which witnessed some of the worst, the lowest 
and the most mnlign forms of bodily disease. Similarly the time owned to some of 
the most monstrous types of moral deformity. The same chapter that tells us of the 
kindly, pitiful, "very present help in time of trouble" that the mnocent and God- 
fearing Feter found, records, as if for telling contrast's sake, the judgment that was 
divinely aimed at Herod, " suddenly and without remedy" visited on one who now 
had filled up the measure of his iniquities. A triple type of cruelty, vain-glory, and 
irreliaion is here before us. It is, however, more particularly the crowning and at 
the same time killmK point of a godless career which demands now attention. 



OH. XII. 1—25.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLE& iSS 

' I. A GRAND RECEPTION. 1. It is a reCcption given by Herod. He wields great 
powei j lie is conscioua of it. It is no moral power. It is the result of no intelleotual 
force ; of no lofty character ; of no social attractiveness ; of no love to be kind, 
courteoUB, helpful in smoothing the ruggeduess and softening the hardness of daily 
life and work. He is on no sort of level whatsoever with thoso whom he is pleased to 
allow to swell his vanity and feed the bad fires of his heirt. 2. It is a reception given 
to a large number of those who were for the moment in the position, not of mere 
subjects, but of abject dependents on Herod. They had already felt his "high 
displeasure." Because of it they feared for their very bread. More ignorant than he, 
and driven by the supreme motives of desire of livelihood and business, they have 
already succumbed, bribing probably Herod's chamberlain, and crouching in their 
approach to make representations to himself. Yes ; they were driven by motiae the 
pinch of which he had never been likely to know. 3. It was • reception which was 
to be a token of reconciliation ; but a reconciliation founded on the entire yielding of 
the one part and the undisputed victory of the other. That victory was certainly 
the victory of might, and with every probability the victory of mi^ht over right. 
There had been no genuine compromise, no giving and taking, no kindly considerate- 
ness for aggrieved feeling and " wounded spirit." Therefore the grand reception was 
all to the honour and glory of one called Herod Agrippa the First. 

II. A GRAND SPEECH. Not OBo word of this speech is saved on the page of history. 
And that loss we may without hesitation count gain. It spares pain to others, and 
spares something of distinctness of outline to the shame and disgrace attaching to 
Herod. The circumstances, however, suit nothing else than what shall profess and 
purport to be a grand speech. The " day " is fixed ; there is nothing of an impromptu 
character about the occasion. The "royal apparel" is brought into requisition ; the 
eyes of many beholders shall flash in the reflection of gold and colour, to learn a vulgar 
wonder and to improve in the commonest covetousnesa. And the "throne" is set 
and mounted. None can doubt of what sort the "oration" that followed. It is 
magniloquence. It is condescendingness. It is self-glorification. It is (on approaching 
the subject which brought the enjbassy) sham magnanimity. And under cover of 
this is a manifesto of take all or the utmost possible, give nothing or the least con- 
ceivable. The grandeur of the oration was the grandeur of hollow brass. How much 
grand speech differs from (1) simple, truthful speech ; (2) speech the unmixed object 
of which is usefulness; (3) kindly and sympathetic speech; (4) speech of unaffected 
gracefulness and beauty 1 

in. A GRAND SHOUT. That shout entered into the ears of Herod like the very 
ministry of satisfaction itself — satisfaction in its most exigent degree, self-satisfaction. 
Supreme vanity must love a shout rather than articulate language for obvious reasons. 
The vague looms larger, goes further, amplifies to the gift of the excited imagination, 
and cannot be held bound afterwards to jus'ify Itself. But this shout found words ai 
well, and grand words they were indeed, if true. " The gods are come down to us in 
the likeness of men" (ch. xiv. 11) was a testimony, if mistaken in its form, yet true to 
some extent in its spirit. And if the present testimony have any such substance of 
truth and of honesty in it, It shall be accepted according to that which it hath, and not 
condemned for that which it hath not. The words, too, of this shouting are grandly 
chosen; they are sententious; they are in a sense antithetic; they speak the perfection 
of commendation for human tongue, which the psalmist would tell us is " the glory " 
of man's frame. " It is the voice of a god, and not of a man ! " Herod had taken his 
seat, and "not angels' voices "could for his ears "have yielded sweeter music" than 
that shout and the recitative that rose out of it. The supreme point of a delicious 
intoxication of the conscience's very worst opiate had that moment arrived. 

ly. A GRAND EXPOSURE. 1. Hcrod IB proclaimed before men and angels and before 
all time, as much as though all time were there and then present, as a typical instance 
of the man who knows not that his "chief end is to glorify God." Either he know; 
it not, or he forgets it at an awful moment, or he defies it at the turning moment of 
his existence. Long proving-time has been his— the decisive crucial moment hai 
come. And this— this, alas I — is its revelation. 2. Herod's " grand speech," of which 
not one word remains to ua (and possibly enough few of its words were heaid 
Intelligently by » people who were wrought up and highly excited), is proclaimed tg 



394 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xil 1— 25 

be one that has had for its sole ohject to lead up to this profane glorificatioa ol 
self, and has been guilty of forgetfulness to glorify God or even of denying glory to 
God. 3. The very shout of the people and the voice that gave subsequent articu- 
lateness to the shout are proclaimed to be really less their shout and their voice than 
those of Herod himself. Their throats and lips made the sound, but he- found the 
breath for it, and all else, as, e.g. the place, occasion, motive, or inducement. A finale 
of this kind had been premeditated, if not prearranged and actually organized and 
got up. (1) The people bad a thousand pressing inducements or temptations to do as 
they did, and to lend their voices for a moment to a cry which their hearts very 
probably abhorred ; their temptations were as numerous as all the reasons for which 
they loved the "nourishment" of "their country." And they shall be undoubtedly 
judged for what they did, and judged with righteous judgment, when their time 
too is ripe. But they had not the opportunity of knowledge and the sovereign ease 
and self-disposition which were at the command of Herod. (2) Herod is tenfold 
guilty ; he is wrong himself without anything to account for it but the worst cancerous 
craving of a wicked heart, and he leads a number of innocent " sheep " (2 Sam. xxiv. 
17) into temptation, sin, danger. It is evident — nay, 'tis the one revelation involved 
in the expnsi of this memorable moment — that the all-seeing eye, the all-just judgment, 
the casting vote of Heaven, the verdict that puts an end to all dispute, credTts the 
major responsibility, the overwhelmingly preponderant responsibility for what had' 
taken place — to the account of Herod. 4. Position, power, splendour, wealth, an 
earthly throne, arbitrary governing, and all the rest of it, are proclaimed here at their 
true worth. They are shown up as the flimsy covering only of the real in a man, let 
that real be what it may. They don't keep the weather out; they don't keep 
disease out ; they don't keep malignant and loathsome disease out ; they don't 
shield conscience, heart, or body; they don't keep God out, no, not for a moment. 
But they do avail to do one thing — they suffice to throw out into amazing prominence 
the contrast between truth and falsehood, when God enters into judgment, and casts 
down those whom he never uplifted, and "removes the diadem and takes off the 
crown " (Bzek. xxi. 26), and rends in twain the gorgeous royal raiment, none of which 
his hand had bestowed. Then even on earth is seen the manifest beginning of the 
" everlasting shame and contempt." 5. Last of all, it is here emphatically proclaimed 
that to omit to take right action and to omit to utter right speech may sometimes 
justly be exposed to bear all the same blame as to do and to speak the wrong. The 
apostles once and again, when offered Divine honours, exerted themselves with the 
utmost energy to refuse it, and gave their abhorrence of the idolatrous offering to be 
abundantly plain. This was the least that Herod should have done, and what he 
surely would have done if he had not already willingly "regarded iniquity in his 
heart." So, when the people gave a great shout and said, " It is the voice of a god, 
and not of a man ! " and Herod never protested a word, it is the same as if he had done 
all the preparation, pulled the wires, and spoken the impious words himself. For God 
searoheth and trieth and knoweth " the thoughts and intents of the heart." And he 
will not be robbed of his own. — B. 

Ver. 6. — The power of united prayer. This subject is not here to be treated in its 
more general bearings, only so far as it finds illustration in the circumstances connected 
with the text, and in the sentence, " Prayer was made earnestly of the Church imtb 
God for him ;" i.e. for imprisoned St. Peter. The persecution of the early Christians 
arose from distinctly different causes ; and the narrative associated with this text 
introduces a distinctly new kind of persecution. Previously the Sanhedrim, as the 
central authority among the Jews in all matters of religious doctrine and discipline, 
had endeavoured to crush the young, and to their view mischievous, sect. Now Herod, 
as the re|iresentative of the 8tat«, endeavoured to destroy the party by aiming directly 
at its leaders ; and this he did for what we may call " diplomatic" reasons. It may be 
well to notice that the Herod introduced here was Herod Agrippa I., son of Aristobulus, 
and grandson of Herod the Great; and that the events occurred about a.d. 41. 
According to Josephus, Agrippa desired to be thought a devout Jew, and so would 
easily be excited to persecute the Christian party, when he found that this would ensure 
for him the confidence of the leading Jews. With Herod's scheme for striking down 



CH.ml— 25.] THE ACTa OP 1HE APOSTLIia. 8SS 

the chief teachers, compare Diocletian's suhsequent sclierae for finding and burning thi 
Christian books. Neither scheme was allowed to succeed. Another point of importance 
in introducing the subject is the recognized position of leadership which St. Peter had 
evidently gained. St. James, as one of the three specially favoured disciples, may have 
been equally prominent. Of St. John we learn very little during the first period of the 
«arly Church history. St. James's sudden removal left St. Peter the recognized head of 
the Christian sect. It appears that only. the intervention of the feast-time (humanly 
speaking), preserved St. Peter from the sudden fate which overtook St. James. The 
delay, during which St. Peter was in prison, gave opportunity for human intercessions 
and Divine interventions. Some may serve God in a yielded life, others by being made 
the subjects of Divine rescuings and deliverances. The first thing to be noticed in the 
narrative ig— 

L Helplessness thbough circumstances. The Church was thoroughly overborne 
by the suddenness, activity, and vigour of this new persecution. They could do 
nothing. St. James was gone ; St. Peter was in prison. They did not know where 
the next blow would fall. They could not open the prison doors. They were 
paralyzed. And so it often is with us in life. We incline to say, " All these things 
are against me." Our way seems to be blocked in all directions, as truly as was the 
way of the fleeing Israelites when the Red Sea rolled before them, the mountains 
hemmed them in, and a raging foe pressed on their rear. At times in our lives we 
are compelled to feel that we can do nothing ; and the experience is a great testing 
of patience, faith, and feeling. Compare David, convinced that circumstances were 
hopelessly against him, and despairingly saying, " I shall now perish one day by the 
hand of Saul." 

XL Appeal to the Lobd op cirodmstanoeb. This is always left to us. It is our 
last possibility, and it is our best. 1. It is important that we realize fully that our 
God can control all circumstances. Nothing is too hard for him. He may not always 
show his mastery by miracle, but he can always prove his mastery by his providences. 
It is our belief that over all laws, relations, and orderings of events our living God 
presides, never loosing his hands or failing to guide all so as to fit into and, either 
quickly or slowly, work out his gracious purposes. 2. We must realize that to know 
the power of our God may not suffice ; we must personally inquire of him, ootnmend our 
case to his care, and submit ourselves to his leadings. For all the arrangements of our 
circumstances, as well as for all supplies of grace, " he will be inquired of by the house 
of Israel to do it for them." The Divine foreknowledge and omniscience may never be 
so presented as to lift off men the claim of prayer. Whatsoever may be our trouble or 
our need, we may pray ; we must pray, God would have us " cast our care on him." 
So the disciples were doing the best thing possible, altogether the most hopeful tMng 
when they " prayed earnestly " for the imprisoned St. Peter. 

III. The fobcb op united pkaybe to overcome circumstances. It has pleased 
God to give special assurances to those who unite in prayer. God responds to the faith 
and fervour of the individual seeker ; but in all matters of general interest, in every- 
thmg bearing upon the well-being and progress of his Church, God wants us to blend 
together m our supplications. " If two of you shall agree on earth as touching any- 
thing that they .^haU ask, it shall be done for them of my Father." By this requirement 
God: 1. Checks the tendency to isolation and to distinction of interests among his 
people, bmding them ever closer together in the expression of their common wants' 2 
Assures earnestness and fervour of feeling, as one devout soul inspires another 3 Prel 
pares the way for his answer by ensuring a state of mind fitted to receive the answer 
and make it a blessing indeed. 4. Is enabled to respond by ordering the circumstances 
ot his providence so as to secure the general good of many rather than the particular 
desires ol one. It may be shown, in conclusion, how a common point of interest or 
a common trouble may serve to bring many souls together ia • blessed unify of 
■prayer. — K. T. ' •> 

Vers. 7— 10.— Miraculous deliverances. The series of miracles wrought by eur Lord 
during his ministry, and the miracles associated with the history and work of his 
apostles, require to be very carefully compared. Sometimes miracles were wrou-ht h/ 
tne apostlesi as agents, and sometimes /or them as teachers whott r^ri ilirr i* m» 



396 THE ACTS OP TUB APOSTLES. [ch. xn. 1— 25. 

important to preserve. And yet, when God would secure the deliverance of his 
imperilled servants, he did not always employ miraculous agencies. Paul and Silas 
were imprisoned at Philippi, but thoy were rescued by natural means ; an earthquake 
proved effective to the loosening of their bonds, and the jolting open of the prison doois. 
There must have been some special reasons for the miraculous form in which St. Petei'f 
deliverance was efifeoted. Two things require attention, as introductory to this subject. 
1. The nature of New Testament miracles, and their particular mission to the age in 
which they were wrought. 2. The ideas of angelic ministry which had passed over to 
the apostles from Judaic associations. The intervention of angels had occurred again 
and again in the earlier history, and such an event as St. Peter's rescue would not start 
doubts in a Jewish mind. God's revelations to men, " in sundry ways and in divers 
manners," were better apprehended by Jews then than by Christians now. From this 
incident we may be led to consider — 

I. Thk employment of the mibacdIiOUS. Here should be given an historical review 
of Divine interventions, with some classification of their character and of the circum- 
stances under which the miracles were wrought. It will be found that there are cases 
in which (1) natural agencies su£Sced, under the ordering of Divine providence, to 
remove the difficulty; (2) in which miraculous intervention did not come when we 
might reasonably have expected ; (3) and in which miraculous agencies were used when 
we did not expect them. These points may be illustrated to show that the employment 
of the miraculous is (a) a matter of Divine sovereignty, and never offered in response to 
any compulsion of man or of circumstances ; and (b) that it is therefore still a Divine 
reserve, and we dare not affirm that the age of miracles is past, because the employment 
of them is to be regarded as entirely dependent on the Divine judgment and will j and 
as that will acts upon considerations of the higher and spiritual well-being of man, it 
may quite conceivably be that in some of man's moral states the miraculous may be 
the most efficient moral force. It is true that miracles may not be wisely employed 
in a characteristically scientific age such as ours may be called ; but the scientific is 
only a passing feature, and from it there may conceivably come a rebound to a charac- 
teristically imaginative, or as some might call it superstitious, age, to which miracle 
might again make efficient appeaL The incident of St. Peter's release is a peculiar case 
of employment of the miraculous— peculiar in that (1) it differs materially from all the 
other apostolic miracles; and (2) in that it carries the style of Old Testament miracles 
over into the New, and is to be classed with the deliverance of the three Hebrew 
youths from the furnace, and of Daniel from the lions. 

II. The limitations of the MiRAcnLOUS. These are even more striking than the 
uses. In the case of our Lord's miracles the general principle of the limitation is indi- 
cated. Miracles he never wrought for the supply of his own needs, only for the exertion 
of a gracious moral influence on others. These two limitations may be illustrated. 1. 
A miracle is never wrought unless it can be made the enforcement or illustration of 
some moral truth. 2. A miracle is never wrought unless those in whose behalf it is 
wrought are in a duly receptive state of mind and feeling, and so can be benefited by the 
miracle. It does not affect this principle of limitation that some of those who are 
lelated to a miracle may be rather hardened by it than taught and blessed. St. Peter 

not miraculously delivered for his own sake, but for the sake of the confidence 




to be in harmony. 4. To the precise underlying purpose for the sake of which it is 
wrought. On these principles we may even discern miraculous workmgs in these our 
times, though they take forms of adaptation to our thought and associations, and are 
not after the precise Old Testament or New Testament patterns. We look for direct 
Divine agencies in the moral and spiritual rather than in the physical and material world. 
IV. The ebsultb attained by the miraculous. How far it can be used as evi- 
dence or proof needs to be carefully considered. Wiser men only use miracies as 
auxiliary evidence of the truth of Christianity. And for this use the character of the 
miracle rather than the power in the miracle are of chief importance. In connection 
with our text we find one result on which it may be profitable to dwell in conclusion. 
The Divine rescue of St. Peter brought to the praying and persecuted Church a •««#« oj 



OH. xn. 1—25.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 897 

Oois protective presence. So suddenly had persecution burst upou them, so over- 
wheltuing did it seem, that they were for the moment paralyzed with fear — just as the 
servant of Blisha was when the Syrian army surrounded the house — and nothing could 
so immediately and efficiently recall them to calmness and trust as this wonderful rescu« 
of St. Peter, convincing them, as it did, how tenderly near to them was their living 
and almighty Lord. Such a moral result will in every age suffice to explain a Divine 
miraculous revelation or intervention. — K. T. 

Ver. 15. — Testimony versus reasoning. The subject is suggested by the persistence 
of Bhoda and the incredulity of the disciples. Upon the evidence of her senses Bhoda 
constantly affirmed that it was St. Peter who stood at the gate. The disciples 
vigorously argued that it could not be he, and tried to reason away her testimonyi 
St. Peter was in prison, and it was simply impossible that he could be knocking at 
the gate. So much is made in our time of the demand for lacts and evidence and 
verification of all statements, and it is so often assumed that reasoning can destroy 
testimony, or that testimony, as we have it on the Christian tljeme, is insufficient 
to support our elaborate reasoning, that the trustworthiness of each, and the relations 
in which each stands to the other, may be profitably considered. 

I. The importance of testimony. Our senses are the appointed media for our 
communication with the outer world, and they are both the first and constant sources 
of our knowledge. We learn to trust them. We readily receive the testimony of 
others as to what they have seen and heard, and, with limitations, as to what they 
have felt. There is, then, (1) knowledge received directly upon the testimony of our 
own senses ; and (2) knowledge received indirectly upon the testimony of others who tell 
us what they know through the senses. And as the sphere directly open to each one 
of us is very limited, we are very largely dependent for our knowledge on the testimony 
of others, upon such witness of personal knowledge as Ehoda gave. In the matters of 
the Christian religion we are wholly dependent on this indirect witness of the senses. 
What the apostles themselves saw, and tasted, and handled, and felt of the Word of 
life, that they declare unto us. The four (Jospels come to us as the testimony of the 
senses of men who looked on Christ, lived with him, listened to him, and knew him 
in the intimacy of a close and dear friendship. We cannot too constantly or too 
earnestly urge that Christianity rests upon a bails of sensible facts, nnd that of them 
we have the testimony directly from the very persons who witnessed them. Therefore, 
though all the world may please to declare that we are mad, as the disciples said that 
Ilhoda was, we too shall constantly affirm that it is even so as we have testified. 
No facts of human history can be received by us save on principles which compel us 
also to receive the facts of our Eedeemer's life and death. 

IL Human TESTIMONY must always be uncertain. This should be fully admitted. 
It ia uncertain, liecause (1) our senses may be untrained and so unfit to receive 
impressions; or (2) diseased, and so likely to receive distorted impressions; or (3) the 
subjects with which they are concerned may be altogether new to us, and we may 
thus be unprepared duly to correct impression. Still, so far as the bare facts are con- 
cerned, the uncertainty is not such as to prove a practical disability. In the range 
of fact men are found generally to agree. 

IIL Human keabonino is necbssaeily uhobbtaih. As in the case of the disciples 
who reasoned against Ehoda. The uncertainty comes out of: 1. Prejudice and bias 
(see the idola of Bacon). 2. Insufficient facts; some of the worst reasoning is 
explained by incomplete knowledge of the facts on which the reasoning i» based. 
3. False methods (see the/allacies explained in hooks on logic). 

IV. ThB TEUTH mat be beached by wise BBASONING upon 8UFM0IBNT TBSTIllONy. 

To receive testimony alone may be mere credulity. To receive upon argument alone 
may be to yield to mere human force, to the power of superior intellect. But with 
due inquiry into basis-facts, and careful reasoning upon the facts, we may arrive at 
satisfying apprehensions of the truth. Apply to the acceptance ot Christianity, with 
Its difficulty of the miraculous. The four Gospels are a fourfold testimony to the great 
Christian facts. We must build our reasoning on the facts ; juat as those disciples 
should have received Ehoda's fact, and followed it iip with their reasoning and not 
inade their reasoning oppose the fitcts. — E. T. 



393- THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. in. 1—25. 

Vers. 22, 23.— The sin of (^ccepUng Divine honours. The explanation of this 
incident is given in the exegetical portion of this Commentary. Several points of 
interest come out upon comparison of the Scripture narrative with that given by 
Josephus. The Jewish historian is fuller on the adulation offered to Herod than is 
St. Luke. He notices the remarkable silver garment which Herod wore on the 
occasion, and the effect it produced on the people, adding that " presently his flatterers 
cried out, one from one place and another from another, though not for his good, that he 
was a god. And they added, ' Be thou merciful to us, for although we have hitherto 
reverenced thee only as a man, yet shall we henceforth own thee as superior to mortal 
natnre.' Upon this the king did neither rebuke them nor reject their impious flattery." 
St. Luke distinctly makes the same charge, stating that he was smitten because he 
gave not God the glory. He permitted himself to listen to and accept the flattery, and 
(ailed to see that in so doing he openly and publicly insulted the Divine majesty. 
This God never will permit. He is jealous — in the high sense of that term — of his 
sole and sovereign rights, and immediately punishes all who dare to claim the honour 
which is due alone to him. Flattery of the creature may never rise to this height. 
Man can commit no sin so heinous as that of assuming Divine honours and rights. 
The most striking illustration is that of Nebuchadnezzar, whose pride swelled to a 
claim of Divine power and honour, and was, immediately upon his boastful utterance, 
smitten of God with a most humiliating disease. It is said that Antiuchus the Great, 
because he sinned in a similar high-handed way, was brought low by a disease like 
that which afflicted Herod. We may consider some of the reasons why there is such 
jealousy of the Divine rights, and why Jehovah's honour he will never give to another, 

L The sole claim of God is essential to cue right relations with him. We 
are required to love God with all our heart, and mind, and soul, and strength. We 
cannot unless he be indeed the one and only God. We are to recognize our relations 
with him as Creator, and to admit the claims which this relationship brings. But we 
cannot conceive of two Creators ; he hath made ns, and he alone. Our life is to be 
under his present gracious lead ; in all our ways we are to acknowledge him, and to 
feel that he directs our paths ; but only confusion can come into our thought and life 
if our daily allegiance is to be in any sense divided, Sin only gains its heinousness in 
our sight when it is thought of as committed against the one supreme will, and 
redemption has no point if it be not our recovery to the harmony of that one will. 
lUustraitions may be taken from the confusion created by duali.stic and polytheistic 
systems. Men never could be quite sure that they had propitiated the right god, and 
a constant 'anxiety wore away the hearts of even the sincerely pious. 

II. The sole claim of God is the foundation op morals. The connection 
between the two tables of the Law needs to be carefully ^ionsidered. " Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself" is an injunction without force save as it follows on the 
great command to " love God with all our heart." The life of morality is love to the 
one living God. The spirit of sonship is the inspiration of brotherhood. If a man 
truly loves God he will love his brother also. Illustrate from the uncertainty of all 
moral systems associated with polytheism. Some of the gods became even the patrons 
of impurity and immorality. Our one God being the " ideal of goodness," his service 
must be wholly pure. ' 

III. The claim of man to Divine honours reveals his utmost degradation. 
The claim has been mi.de again and again, but only by men utterly abandoned, 
mastered by pride and self-conceit, and only after the crushing down of all reverence. 
Self-will may go great lengths and keep within human linwts ; it becomes Satanic 
when it dares to rival God and claim for itself Divine rights. When such heart- 
baseness is declared, the man must come under the immediate and awful judgments of 
God, even as Herod did. — B. T. 

Ver 24— TOe growings of the Word. The terms used here indicate a continuous 
expansion. "Grew and multiplied" is a blending of figures, and does not easily fit 
into the term, " Word of God." Probably St. Luke associated the word with our 
Lord's parable' of the " sower ; " and thought of it as seed, growing up and bringing 
forth its hundredfold. Two things are suggested by the sentence taken as a text 
< St Lukf uotices, «s 4 rcjnsrkable thing, that, in spite of »U X\e persegutions m 



CH. HI. 1—25.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 399 



hindrances of those evU times, the Word of God grew. 2. And that a sudden revival 
of zeal, earnestness, and success followed on the dreadful judgment and sudden 
removal of the Church's great persecutor. It is to the first of these two points that 
we now direct attention. 

I. The apparent hindrances of troublous tihes. The recent history of Mada- 
gascar Christianity provides most effective illustration ; or instances may be found in 
the histories of Lollards, Waldenses. etc. Persecuting times seem to be ruinous ; their 
influence is directed to (1) the removal of the Christian leaders ; (2) the silencing 
of Christian teachers and writers ; (3) the stoppage of Christian worship ; (4) the 
destruction of Christian books, and especially of the Divine Word. But it has never 
been found that physical violence has been more than apparent hindrance. The 
nearest approach ever made to success is probably the crushing of French Protestantism 
by the Massacre of St. Bartholomew. We are learning well the lesson that intellectual 
evils must be met by intellectual resistances and corrections, and that moral evils 
must be removed by moral agencies. "The weapons of our Christian warfare are not 
carnal, but spiritual," and it is vain work for any to oppose us with mere shield and 
sword and spear. Illustrate from the martyrdom of John Brown, the advocate of 
freedom for the slave. Persecution seemed to succeed, and 

" John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the grave. 
But his soul is marching on" — 

marching on to triumph in the vast lands of America, and inarching on to another 
glorious victory in the newly found highlands of mighty Africa. Persecution cannot 
stop the onward progress of man's thought or man's love. 

n. The real helpfulness of troublous times. The marvel is that the seed 
actually grows and multiplies in such times. We think the rainstorms hopelessly 
beat down the young and tender blades. Nay, they really nourish the roots, and 
pre[iare for vigorous upspringing and richer fruitage. Moral harvests wave where 
martyrs' blood was shed. We may recognize the helpfulness of troublous times if we 
notice: 1. How they tend, to bind men together. Differences of opinion and judgment 
are for a time forgotten. The common ground is fully recognized. Suffering throws 
each one upon the loving interest and care of the others, and lessons of the Christian 
brotherhood are then learned as they can be under no other circumstances. Prosperity 
and times of peace tend to bring prominently forward men's diversities, and in such 
times sects are multiplied. Troublous times make men forget their peculiarities in 
facing a common foe and in sharing a common woe. 2. How they increase enthusiasm 
and develop energy. Nothing calls forth the latent powers of men like resistance to 
liberty of opinion. Let a scientific truth be opposed, and the whole energy of the 
discoverer is called forth for its maintenance, and to him that truth grows tenfold 
more important and more precious. So with the Christian verities, we "earnestly 
contend for the faith once delivered to the saints" only when that faith is being 
contended against. 3. How they bring men more fully to lean on the Divine power. 
They bring that sense of personal helplessness which makes us cling to the assurance, 
"Greater is he who is with us than all who can be against us." We feel we may 
walk alone if it is all light about us. We must lean hard on God if it is night- time 
and stormy all about us. 4. How they draw public attention to the Christian 
workers._ There is no advertising agent comparable for a moment in efficiency witli 
persecution. Age after age Christ's enemies have done Christ's work, and witnessed 
among all lands for him, as they have martyred his servants and persecuted his 
Church. Suffering has a sacred power on human hearts everywhere, and Christ's 
suffering Church wins men for Christ. — B. T. 

Ver. 25.— The character of John Mark. This man is not introduced to us for the 
first time in this verse, but this may be regarded as his formal introduction. For the 
sketch of his life, which should prepare for our study of his character, our readers 
are referred to our Commentary on St. Mark's Gospel. We only recall to mind a few 
prominent points. 1. He was evidently at this time a comparatively young man. 2. 
He was directly associated with the early disciples, as they seem to have met at hii 
mpther'* bouse. 3. It is more tb»n probable that he bad personally known the l^ov^ 



400 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa [ot. xm. 1 32, 



Jesus Christ. 4. He was closely related to Barnabas, being his sister's son. 6. Ha 
was, very probably, a rich young man, and devoted his wealth to the missionary work 
of the Church. 6. His office, as minister or attendant on Barnabas and Paul, was one 
necessitated by the difficulties and perils of travelling in those times. 7. In spirit and 
character John Mark should be carefully compared with Timolhy. We note that he 
always occupies a subordinate position, but that there was a precise sphere which he 
could occupy, and a useful work given him to do. His failure from missionary work 
may be regarded as an indication that he had not, at that time, found his proper 
sphere. The man who was to prepare a written Gospel had not the kind of boldness 
and enerjry that was necessary for dangerous travelling. As suggestive and openinj; 
the way for a full study of his character, we notice that he was tincere, studious, timid, 
Jmpulsive, and patient. 

1. Sincere. His failure was in no way a sign of unfaithfulness to Christ. He left 
Barnabas and Saul, but he did not cease to minister to Christ. Tears after he ia 
gpoken of for his profitableness, and he was evidently a sincere Christian. It may be 
shown how sincerity is the leading Christian virtue, and how it will abide and sanctify 
all varieties of disposition, character, talent, and adaptations for service. We can all 
be sincere. 

U. Studious. Of a meditative and thoughtful habit, finding" his right place when 
collecting the records of our Lord's words and deeds, and possibly doing so under 
St. Peter's supervision. God needs studious men, but they are seldom fitted for any 
other than their owii particular work. They are hardly ever prepared for the public 
conflicts of life, and they have even some characteristic moral frailties. St. Paul knew 
the weakness of the studious Tinothy, and bids him "endure hardness as a good 
soldier of Jesus Christ." 

III. Timid. This was the secret of his unwillingness to venture on the perilous 
journey into Asia Minor. Shrinking from danger, and even from exertion and enter- 
prise. Such men never can ba leaders. They had better stay at home. They seldom 
can he men of great faith. Their mental history matches their material history — they 
are timid about the truth, seldom quite sure of their own hold of it, and ever ready to 
join the foolish cry, ** The Church is in danger." We get no heroic champions from 
the class to which John Mark belonged. 

IV. Impulsitb. Some have thought that the young man who was nearly arrested 
with Chriit was John Mark, and that he had heard the noise, and impulsively rushed 
cut of his house to see what was going on, and had forgotten his outer robe. The same 
impulsiveness is seen in his refusing to go on with the missionaries. But notice how 
it differs from the impulsiveness of St. Peter or of St. Paul. It was a kind of negative 
impulsiveness, not urging him to do, but keeping him from doing. A dangerous spirit 
to cherish into strength. 

* V. Patient. This wo may se* illustrated in his Gospel, remembering that he hnd 
not the personal experiences of St. Matthew or St. John, and had to collect and collate 

his materials. . i. t- ., , 

Prom John Mark we may learn these tmngs, 1. A man has his own particular 
work for which he is divinely fitted. 2. If a man makes the mistake of trying to do 
somebody else's work, it is a blessed thing that God's providence stops him, and turni 
him into the path where he may work efficiently and successfully.— fi. T. 



EXPOSITION. 
CHAPTER xra. 



Ver. 1. — At Anttoch, in (he Churtih that 
was there for tn Oie Church that was at 
Aniioch, A.V.; prophets, etc., for certain 
profhets, etc., A.V. and T.B. ; Barnabas, 
eta., for as Barnabas, etc., A.V.; Bymeon for 
Simeon, A.V. ; the foster-brother of for which 
had been brought up with, A.V. At Antiooh, 
in th« Church, etc. Karh tV oiaav iicK\i)- 



fftav rather mean* "the existing Chnroh," 
just as ai oJffoi ^{ouo-foi means "the existing 
powers," "the powers that be," in Bom. 
xiii. 1, A.V. and T.B. The Oien Chureh 
seems more the meaning than the Chureh 
there. Luke writes from the standpoint o( 
many years later. Prophets were a regular 
part of the ministry of the then Church 
(see ch. xi. 27; xxi. 9, 10; Bom. iil.6, 7; 
1 Cor. xii. 10, 28 ; xiii. 2, etc. ; xiv. 1, 3,ek., 



OH. XIU. 1 — 52.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



401 



22, 21, 31, 32; Eph. iv. 11. See also note 
on ch. iv. 26). leaoliers (SiSatncaAoi) are 
coupled with prophets, as here, in 1 Cor. 
xii. 28, 29 J Eph. iv. 11. The teaeJien 
would appear to differ from the piophets 
in that they were not under the ccstatio 
influence of the Holy Spirit, and did not 
utter exhortations or prophecies in a poetio 
strain, but wore expouudurs of Christian 
truth, under the teaching of the Spirit. 
What they spoke was called a Sttaxi (1 Cor. 
sXy. 26), and their function was SiSaanaKia, 
as Bom. xii. 7, where SiSaaicaKia is reckoned 
among the x'^p'"'lJ-<va, the gifts of the Holy 
Ghost. It was forbidden to women to 
teach (SiSd<rKeiv : 1 Tim. ii. 12), though 
they miglit prophesy (ch. xxi. 9). It ia 
thought by Meyer, Alford, and others that 
the position of the particles re attaching 
the two following names to Barnabas in the 
first place, and one name following to 
Manaen in the second, indicates that Bar- 
nabas, Symeon, and Lucius were piophets, 
and Manaen and Saul teachers. Lucius 
has by some been falsely identified with 
St. Luke. The foster-brother; aivTfo^os 
may equally mean a foster-brother, one 
nursed at the same time at the same breast, 
which would indicate that Mauaen's mother 
was wet-nurse to Herod the tetrarch ; or a 
playmate, which would indicate that he had 
been eodalie to Herod. It is only found 
here in the New Testament, but is used by 
Xenophon, Plutarch, etc., and in 1 Mace, 
i. 7 ; 2 Maco. ix. 29. In this chapter and 
onwards the scene of the great drama of 
Christianity is transferred from Jerusalem 
to Antioch. The first part, which hag 
hitherto been played by Peter and John 
and James, is now taken up by Barnabas 
and Saul, soon, however, to be ola.s8ed as 
Paul and Barnabas. 

Ver. 2.— And a» for as, A.V. They 
ministered; i.e. not, as Meyer explains it, 
the whole Churoh, but the prophets and 
teachers, doubtless at an assembly of the 
Church. The word hwrovpyovvTav, here 
rendered " they ministered " (from which 
the word "Liturgy" is derived), signifies any 
solemn ministration, or holy service. In 
the Old Testament the LXX. use it as the 
rendering of m», to minister (often with the 
addition " to God," or " to the Lord "), which 
18 a general word applying to the ministra- 
tions of priests and Levites (Exod. xzvlii. 
35 ; Numb. viii. 26, eto.). Hence its use in 
Heb. X. 11 (see too Luke i. 23; Heb. ix. 21). 
Joshua too is called Moses' minister (nii!>'D) 
in Josh. i. 1, etc., and the angels are called 
\eiToufiyma itveiiiaTo, "ministering spirits" 
(Heb. i. 14). Just as the Churoh trang- 
ierred from the Jewish congregation so 
many other wordu and thing's, so also the 
use of the words \tnuufyU, Kti-TQup-yiir, to 
AC'i'6. 



signify " Divine service," without specify- 
ing the particular office, whether prayer, or 
preaching, or Holy Communion, or ordina- 
tion, or any other part of the worghip of 
God. Its classical use was to designate 
any office performed by an individual for 
the public good. Hence in the New Testa- 
ment its application to Church alms (2 Cor. 
ix. 12), to gifts for the support of the 
ministry (Phil. ii. 30), to the office of 
magistrates (Rom. xiii. 6), eto. The re- 
stricted application of the term Kenov^la 
to the service used in the celebration of the 
Eucharist was of much later growth, as is 
evident from Chrysostom explaining the 
word here of preaching. "What means 
ministering? Preaching" (Horn, xxvli.). 
It seems to have arisen &om the fact that 
the first forms of prayer were those com- 
posed for the ofGce of the Holy Communion. 
This passage, therefore, does not giye the 
slightest support to fasting Communion. 
Wiiat was the exact occasion of the service 
and fast here Spoken of it is impossible to 
say. The Holy Ohost said, etc. This is the 
origin of the question in the Ordination of 
Deacons, "Do you trust that you are in- 
wardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take 
upon you this office ? " Separate me (atpopl- 
ffare). The act of siparation, or ordination, 
would be by the laying on of the hands of 
Symeon and Lucius and Manaen, as Chry- 
sostom says (at least of the two last named), 
in the presence of the whole Church, but 
the separation by the Holy Ghost, at least 
as regards Saul (i hipopiaas /le), had been 
from his mother's womb (Gal. i 15). Ob- 
serve, too, the KoKiiras of GaL i. 15, and 
the irj>oaiciKMifi.M here. This is another 
instance of the very close resemblance 
between parts of the Acts and the Epistle 
to the Galatians, which looks as if St. Paul 
was writing it about the same time as he 
was giving to St. Luke the details of his 
own history (seo ch. viii. 19, note). The 
ordination was to the apnstohite (Chrysos- 
tom). Barnabas and Saul are never called 
apostles till after their ordination or oonse- 
oratiou (ch. xiv. 14). 

Ver. 8. — Then for and, A.V. It does not 
follow that the laying on of hands was on 
the same day. On the contrary, the mention 
of the fasting again in this verse makes 
it impossible so to understand it. Doubt- 
less, on receiving this intimation of the 
Spirit, they fixed a day for the ordination, 
and prepared for it by fasting and prayer. 
The ember days of the Church before 
ordinations are in accordance with this 
precedent of Holy Scripture. With this 
departure of Barnabas and Saul commences 
the second and main part of the Acts of the 
apostles. 

Ver. 4.— Wmt down ia for deporftd imto, 



102 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[cH. xm. 1—52, 



A.V. (KarriKBov). Seleacia was the Boa-port 
of Autinch, about sixteen miles from it, and 
five miles north of the mouth of the 
Oiontes. It was a free city by a grant 
from Pompey. It is now in ruins, but " the 
masonry of the once magnificent port of 
Seleucia is in so good a state that" it 
niiglit be repaired and cleared out "for 
■bout £31,000" (Colonel Chesney, quoted in 
Lewin, i. p. 119). They sailed to Cyprus. 
Barnabas, no doubt, took the lead, and was 
nuturally drawn to bis native island of 
Cyprus — within a hundred miles of Seleucia, 
and, on a clear day, visible from it. The 
number of -Jews in the island, and the 
partial evangelization of it which had 
already taken place (ch. xi. 19, 20), and 
which promised them assistance and sup- 
port, no doubt fui'ther influenced them. 
John Mark went with them, as we learn 
from .tlie fifth and thirteenth verses, and 
possibly other brethren as deacons and 
luinistei'B (see next note). Tijey sailed 
straight to Salamis, "a convenient and 
capacious harbour," in the centre of the 
eastern end of the island, and the principal 
or one of the principal towns. It had a 
large population of Jews. It was destroyed 
ill the reign of Trajan, in consequence of a 
terrible insurrection of the Jews, in which 
they massacred 240,000 of the Gentile 
population. No Jew was ever after allowed 
to land iu Cyprus. 

Ver. 5. — Frodaimed for preached, A.V. ; 
as their attendant for to their minister, A,\. 
(Jmnpirmv). It JB a word taken from the 
synagogue, where it denotes an inferior 
minibter (see Luke iv. 20). In ch. v. 22 
the uTTTipeTat are the apparitors of the high 
priest. Here it is synonymous with SidKovos, 
a deacon. John was to Barnabas and Saul 
what Joshua was to Moses, Elisha to 
Elijah, eto. Peter, When he went to 
Csesaiea, was accompanied by six brethren 
(ch. xi. 12). 

Ver. 6. — The whole island for the isle, A.V. 
and T.B. Faphos; on tlic south coast at the 
further extremity of the island, now Baffa. 
It had once a convenient harbour, which ia 
now choked up from neglect. The chief 
temple of the Cyprian Venus was here. A 
certain sorcerer. The Greek word nciyos, 
whence magic and magician, is the same as 
in Matt. ii. 1 is rendered " wise men," But 
here, as in ch. viii. 9, it has a bad sense. 
It is a Persian word, and in its original use 
designated a Persian religious caste, famous 
for their knowledge, wisdom, and purity of 
religious faith. They were attached to the 
court of the Babylonian monarchs, and 
were deemed to liave great skill in astrology, 
111 interpretation of dreams, and the like 
(see Dan. i. 20 ; iv. 7 [4 in the LXX.]). In 
Jer.xsxix, S, 13, the name Bab-mag seems 



to mean " the chief of the magi." But in 
process of time the word "magus" came 
to mean a sorcerer, a magician, a praotiser 
of dark arts, as e.g. Simon Magna (see the 
chapter on magic in Pliny, ' Nat. Hist.,' lib. 
XXX. cap. i.). 

Ver. 7. — The proeoneul for the deputy cf 
the country, A.V. ; o man of understanding 
for a prudent man, A.V. ; tJie same for who, 
A.V. ; unto him fox for, A.V, ; sought for 
desired, A.V. The proconsul (Sa/BiTraros); 
here and vers. 8, 12. This is an instance of 
Luke's great accuracy. Cyprus had become 
a proconsular province in the reign of 
Claudius, having previously been one of 
the emperor's provinces governed by a 
propraetor, or legatus.' A man of under- 
standing (wSpl auverif). Svi>fTis is a rare 
word in the New Testament, and is always 
translated in the A.V. "prudent" (see 
Matt. xi. 25; Luke x. 21; 1 Cor. i. 19). 
It is common in the LXX., where it Tepre> 
sents the Hebrew words )'3p, )aj, ^'?to, and 
D3n, all signifying "intelligence," "skill," 
"knowledge," and the like. The sub- 
stantive aivfdis has the same scope (see 
Luke ii. 47; Eph. iii. 4; Col. i. 9, etc.); 
oi/Jip avvfTos, tlierefore, means something 
more than "a prudent man." It means a 
man of knowledge and superior intelligence 
and understanding. And such was Sergius 
Paulus, a noble Boman, who is twice named 
by Pliny in the list of authors placed at the 
commencement of his work as the authori- 
ties from whom he derived the rnattir 
contained in the several books. It is not 
a, little remarkable that the two books, lib. 
ii. and lib, xviii., for which Sergius Paulus 
is quoted are just tliose which contain 
accounts of the heavenly bodies, and prog- 
nostications from the sun and moon and 
stars, from thunder, from the clouds, and 
such like things, which doubtless formed 
the staple of Elymas's science ; so tliat there 
can be little doubt that Sergius Paulus had 
Elymas with him, that he miglit learn from 
him such matters as might be useful for the 
book which he was writing. Tliere is also 
a curious passage in lib. xxx. cap. i. of the 
'Hist. Nat.' (quoted by Lewin, vol. i. p. 
128), in which Pliny, after enumerating the 
most famous teachers of magic, Zoroaster, 
Orthanes, Pythagoras, and others, adds, 
"There is also another school of miigio 
which springs fium Moses and Jannes, who 
were Jews, but many thousand years later 

• Howson and Lewin give from Akerman 
a coin of Claudius Ctesar, with the reverse, 
Kwplav ittX Koixifiov Tlp6K\ov ivdwdrov. 
Cominius Proclus is thought to have been 
the successor of Sergius Paulus in the pro 
consulate of Cyprus. 



OH. xm. 1—62.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



403 



than Zoroaster ; bo much more recent is the 
school of Cyprus ; " showing that he knew 
of a school of magic art at Cyprus taught 
by Jews, and leading us to infer that he 
had acquired this Imowledge eitlier from 
the pen or the mouth of Sergius Paulus. 
Anyhow, a remarkable confirmation of St. 
Luke's narrative. Another Sergius Paulus, 
who might be a son or grandson of the pro- 
consul, is highly commended by Galen for 
his eminent philosophical attainments 
(Lewin, vol. i. p. 127). One L. Sergius 
Paulus was consul suifeotus in a.d. 94, 
another in a.d. 168. Kenan thinks they may 
have been descendants of the Sergius Paulus 
in the text. 

Ver. 8. — Turn aside for turn away, A.V. ; 
%troc(msul for deputy, A.V. Elymas, from 
the Arabic elim, plural oulema, a wise 
man, a wizard, a magician. But Eenau 
thinks this derivation doubtful. Elymas 
witlistood Barnabas and Saul just as 
Jiinuos and Jambres withstood Moses (2 
Tim. iii. S,avT iaTifiraii). 

Ver. 9. — But for (hen, A.V. ; in also for 
aho is, A.V. ; fastened for set, A.V. (above, 
ch. iii. 4, note). Who is also called Paul. 
The explanation of Jerome, Augustine, Bede, 
and many modern commentators, as Meyer, 
Olshausen, etc., and not rejected by Kenan, 
is that Saul took the name of Paul on the 
occasion of this remarkable and important 
conversion of Sergius Paulus. Saul's future 
intercourse witli Gentiles made it desirable 
tliat, after the common custom of the Jews 
of Ills day — as seen in Peter, Stephen, Mark, 
Lucius, Jason, Crispus, Justus, Niger, 
Aquila, Priscilla, Drusilla etc. — he should 
have a Gentile name, and so, in honour 
of his illustrious convert, or in memory of 
his conversion, or at the special request of 
Sergius Paulus (Baronius), he took the 
name of Paul, which in sound was not 
unlike his Hebrew name. The fact of this 
chanf^e of name being recorded by St. Luke 
at tliis precise moment makes tliis the most 
simple and natural explanation. Compare 
Gideon's change of name to Jerubbaal 
(Jttdg. vi. 32 ; vii. 1 ; viii. 29, 35). Alford, 
on the other hand, thinks it strange tbtt 
any one should make such a mistake as 
Jerome's, and says that " this notice mark* 
the transition from the former part of his 
history "— ." gathered from the narratives of 
others " — to " the joint memoirs of himself 
and St. Paul." But this gives no account 
of the coincidence of the two Pauls, nor is 
it true that the latter half of the Acts begins 
here. It began at ver. 1, and the name of 
Baul has been retained three times in the 
early part of this chapter. Farrar speaks of 
this explanation as "long and deservedly 
abandoned," and as having in it an element 
of vulgarity. Howaou thinks that Pau2 had 



long been his Eoman name, but that tho 
conversion of Sergius Paulus, aa it were, 
stereotyped the Koman name as that by 
which the apostle was henceforth to be 
known. The idea of Augustine and others, 
that he took the name of Paul (^paulus, 
small) from humility, to indicate that he 
was " the least " of the apostles, is fanciful. 
Neither is Chrysostum's assertion, that he 
changed his name at his ordination or 
conseci atiou, borne out by the facts. Kenan 
(' Saint Paul,' i. 19) notes that " Paul " was 
a very common name in Cilicia. No cer- 
tainty can be arrived at in the matter. 

Ver. 10. — All guile and'all villainy for all 
tuhtilty and all mischief, A.V. ; son for ehUd, 
A.V. The word paSiovfiyla, reckless conduct, 
villainy, wickedness, is only found here in 
the New*Testament. The kindred form 
(}tfSiovpyr\ij.a) occurs in ch. xviii. 14. Thou son 
of the devil (comp. John viii. 38, 44 ; 1 John 
iii. 10). Elymas showed himself a child of 
the devil in his endeavour's to resist the 
trutli of the gospel, and substitute his own 
- falsehoods and imposture. Compare the 
severity of Peter's language in rebuking 
Simon Magus (ch. viii. 20 — 23). Probably, 
too, he accused (JSii^aKsv) Paul and Bar- 
nabas, and traduced their motives before 
the proconsul, when he saw his own 
influence being undermined, and his gains 
likely to be stopped. 

Ver. 11. — Is upon thee j or rather, against 
thee (Matt. x. 21; xxvi. 55; Luke xi. 17; 
and ver. 50 of this chapter). For a season. 
It has been well observed that this limita- 
tion in time is an indication that there was 
place for repentance. It was a remedial 
chastisement. A mist (axA-iis) ; only here in 
the New Testament ; but it is a medical 
term, very common in Hippocrates, to express 
a darkening and dimming of the eyes by 
cataract or other disease. As regards the 
reason why the particular punishment of 
blindness was inflicted upon Elymas, it 
might be to put a forcible interruption upon 
those observations of the stars and clouds 
by which the magician pretended to foresee 
the future. It would exhibit, too, to Sergius 
Paulus the utter helplessness of the great 
necromancer. Some to lead him by the 
hand (x£ipo7aj7oi)j), as Saul had needed 
Xeipi>rt<i>yovvTas when he was struck blind by 
the vision of the Saviour's glory (oh. ix. 8).. 

Ver. 12. — The proconsul for the deputy, 
A.V. ; teaching for doctrine, A.V. Believed. 
We cannot, perhaps, conclude positively 
from this that Sergius was baptized and 
became an avowed Christian, though the 
usual language of the Acts rather leads us 
to infer it (see ver. 48 ; oh. 11. 44 ; iv. 4 ; viU. 
12, 13 ; xi. 21 ; xix. 18). Farrar thinks that 
if so mnrked a person had become a lifelong 
convert, we should have heard of him as sueh 



104 



TEE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xni. 1— 52i 



in other writings. Eenan says, "La con- 
vereion d'un Komain de cct ordre, & cette 
epoque est chose absnliiment inadmissible." 
Alford ami Olsliausen speak doubtfully. 
Lange and Howsoii and Meyer look upon 
him as a geuulue convert. The 'Speaker's 
Commentary ' speaks of him as " the first- 
fruits of heathenism." Being astonished at 
the teaohing. " For the connection of the 
judgment concerning the doctrine with the 
miracle seen, comp. Mark i. 27 " (Meyer). 

Ver. ] 3. — Now for now when, A.V. ; set 
sail for loosed, A.V. ; and came for they 
came, A.V. ; departed . , . and returned for 
departing . . . returned, A.V. A very 
marked cliange may here bi observed in 
the relations of Barnabas and Paul. 
Hitherto Barnabas has always occupied 
the first rank. It has been "Bainabas 
and Saul " (ch. xi. 30 ; xii. 25 ; vers. 2, 7). 
But now the whole mission, including 
Barnabas, is described as ol irepl riv XlavKov, 
Paul and his company, and ever after it is 
■sually " Paul and Barnabas" (vers. 43, 46, 
50 ; ch. XV. 2, 22, K5) ; though in ch. xiv. 14 
and XV. 12, 25, the old order is retained. 
Eenan dwells mucli on the beauty of Bar- 
nabas's character as seen in his cheerful 
acquiescence in this change of relative 
position, and his single-minded devotion 
to tlie success of the work. Came to Ferga, 
the capital of Paniphylia, in that part of the 
coast of Asia Minor which looks due south. 
Ferga was about seven and a half miles 
inland, on the river Oestrus, which is navi- 
gable. There was a constant inlercourse 
between Paphos the capital of Cyprus, and 
Perga the capital of Pamphylia, fostered 
probably by the two fumpus temples of 
Venus and Diana. The word for set sail 
{avaxSevTis) is a nautical term, meaning 
sailing from the shore or harbour into the 
open sea (see oh. xvi. 11 ; xxi. 1 ; xxvii. 12 ; 
Luke viii. 22). At Peiga John Mark left 
thea Perhaps his position as Barnabas's 
cousin was less pleasant now that Paul took 
the first place ; perhaps his courage failed 
him now that tliey were fairly launched out 
into the heathen world, where, unlike 
Cyprus, his Jewish kinsmen were a small 
minority, and the dangers and fatigues were 
great. Pamphylia was now governed by a 
proprietor, being an imperial province. Its 
name denotes that it was inhabited by a 
mixed race — men of all tribes, aborigines, 
Oilioiaus, Greeks, etc. 

Ver. 14. — They, passing through from 
Perga, eame for uhen they departed from 
Perga (hey eame, A.V. ; of for in, A.V. ; 
they went for went, A.V. Travelling due 
north into the interior for over a hundred 
miles, they would reach Antiooh in Pisidia, 
now a Boman colony. It would be a dilfi- 
•olt and dangerous road, infested with 



robbers (2 Cor. xi 26), mountainous, 
rugged, and passing through an untamed 
and half-savage population. Pisidia was 
part of the province of Galatia. The direc- 
tion of their route was probably determined 
by the locality of the Jewish populations, 
which were always their first object, and 
their door of access to the more pious 
heathen. Sat down ; perhaps, as many think, 
on the seat of the rabbis — those "chief 
seats in the synagogues," which our Lord 
rebukes the scribes for loving (Mark xii. 
39), but which "Paul as a former Sanhe- 
driet, and Barnabas as a Levite," had a fair 
claim to occupy ; but more jirobably on the 
seats of ordinary worshippers, where, how- 
ever, the presence of strangers would at once 
be noticed. 

Ver. 15. — Brethren for ye men and brethren, 
A.V. The order of the synagogue service 
was first the prayers, read by the Sheliach, 
or angel of the synagogue, the people stand- 
ing. Then came the reading of the Law in 
Hebrew by the reader, and tije interpretation 
by the interpreter, who, outside of Judaja, 
generally used tlie version of the LXX. 
This reading, or lesson, was called the Fara- 
ehah. Next came the reading aiid inter- 
preting of the prophets,called the if apAtoraA, 
either by the regular reader or by any one 
invited by the ruler of the synagogue (Luke 
iv. 16, 17). Then came the Midrash, the 
exposition or sermon, which Paul under- 
took at the invitation of the ruler of the 
synagogue. Our Lord at Nazareth seems 
to have delivered the Midrash sitting (Luke 
iv. 20) ; here St. Paul stands (ver. It!). 

Ver. 16. — And for then, A.V. ; the for his, 
A.V. ; hearken for give audience, A.V. 
Beckoning with the hand (see oh. xii. 17, 
note). Ye that fear God; addressed to the 
devout heathen who attended the synagogue 
service (see ch. x. 2, note, and 22 ; ver. 13 of 
this chapter; xv. 21 ; xvl 14; xviL 4, 17; 
xviii. 7). 

Ver. 17. — Israd for of Israel, A.V. ; 
sojourned for dwelt as stvanoers, A.V. ; a for 
on, A.V. ; led he them forth for brought he 
them out, A.V. The word ijifiuaev, exalted, 
is thought by some to be borrowed from the 
LXX. of Isa. i. 2 ('npai-), " 1 have brought 
up " (A. v.), but this is very doubtful, as 6<f:6a 
is frequently used in the New Testament in 
the sense of exalting from a low to a high 
estate (see Matt. xi. 23; xxiii. 12; Luke i. 
52 ; X. 15 ; xiv. 11 ; oh. ii. 33 ; see too Gen. 
xii. 52 (LXX., Cod. Vat.) and xlviii. 19). 
The resemblance of this exordium to that of 
Stephen's -speech in ch. vii. must strike 
every one. The natural conclusion is that 
that' speech made a deep impression upon St. 
Paul when he heard it at Stephen's triaL 
The common purpose in the two speeches is 
to conciliate and gain the attention of th« 



en. ttn. 1— KIJ 



tflE ACTS Of tfiE APOSTLfiS. 



4(k 



Jewish hearers by dwelling Upnn the great 
event9 of the history of their fathers, of 
which they were proud, and claiming for 
Christians an equal heritage in that history. 
The speeches diverge in that Stephen 
sought to sliow in that history instances 
of the same stubborn unbelief in theii 
fathers Which hail led the children to 
crucify the Lord of glory; but St. Paul 
rather sought to show how the promises 
made td their fathevs had their fulfihnent 
iu that Jesus whom he preached unto them, 
and how the crucifixion of Christ by the 
Jerusalem Jews was an exact fulfilment of 
the Law and the prophets which ha'l just 
been read to them in the synau:ogue. In lioth 
speeches it is a great point to exhibit 
Christianity as the true development of 
Judaism (comp. Heb. i. 1 and throughout). 

Ver. 18.— For about for about, A.V. 
Suffered he their manners Urpomip6pniTev). 
This word rpovoci)op4w, to bear or put up 
with any one's (perverise) manners, is found 
nowhere else in the New Testament. But 
in the Cod Alex of the LXX. it is the 
rendering of Deut. i. 31, instetid of eVpotp<!- 
pyio-^y, he bare or cnrfipd, as a nursing 
father carries his child, wiiiiih is the read- 
of the Cod. Vat. and of the margin of the 
B.T. here. The Hebiew nb'3, is capable of 
ei tiler sense. From this quotation from 
Uouterouomy it is ounjeotured that the Far- 
nthah on this OcoaaiuU was from Deut. i., and 
if tlio Ci|/aiir6i/ of vol'. 17 is taken from Isa. i., 
Iliat would seem to have been the Saphtorah, 
and it is curious that Deut. L and Isa, i. 
are read in the synagogues now on the 
same sabbath (but see note on ver. 17). 
Forty years is iu variably the" time assigned 
to tlie dwelling in the wilderness (Exod. 
xvi. 35; Numb. xiv. 33, 34; xxxii. 13; 
xx-fiii. 38 ; Deut. i. 3; Ps. xcv. 10, etc.). 

Vers, 19, 20.— Conaon for Gharumn, A.V.; 
lie gave them their land for an inheritance, 
for about four hundred and fifty years : and 
after these things he gave them judges, etc., 
for he divided their iand unto them by lot : 
and after that he gave unto therm judges 
about Ote space of four hundred and fifty 
yean, etc., A.V. and T.R. It is difiacult to 
say what is the meaning of the K.T, in 
regard to the four hundred and fifty years, 
what U the terminus a quo or ad quern 
intended by it. The usual explanations of 
the reading of the R.T, (adopted by Laoh- 
man, Bishop Wordsworth, and others) is that 
tl e years are dated from tlie birth of Isaac, 
a id that the meaning is that tlie promise to 
give the land to the seed of Abraham was 
attuiiUy performed within four hundred and 
fifty years (oii erfcri) (after the analogy of 
Gal. iii. 17), which gives a good sense and 
is not at all improbable (see Bishop Words- 
worth's note).. The reading of the T.B. has 



grave objections on the score of chronology 
as well as grammar. Duration of time is 
expressed by the accusative case, as vers. 18 
and 21 ; the measure of time in which 
a thing is done by the dative. Bo that 
the natural rendering of the T.E. would be 
that he gave them judges four hundred and 
fifty years after the entrance intoJOanaan; 
which of course cannot be the meaning. 
The other objection is that, if the times of 
the judges from the final conquest of the 
land to the judgeship of Samuel was four 
hundred and fllty years, the whole timo 
from the Exodus to the building of the 
temple must have been about six hundred 
and forty years ' (37 from death of Moses 
to Othniel + 480, + 30 for judgeship of 
Samuel, + 40 of Saul's reign, +40 for David's 
roigu, + 3 years of Solomon, + and the 40 
years in the wilderness), whereM 1 Kings 
vi, 1 gives the time as four hundred and 
eighty years; while the genealogies sup- 
pose a much shorter time — about two 
hundred and eighty years. It is an im- 
mense gain, therefore, to get rid of this four 
hundred and fifty years for the time of the 
judges, and by the well-supported reading 
of the R.T. to get a calculation in agreement 
with Gal. iii. 17 and with the chronology of 
thetimes. Qavethem. . . for an inheritance. 
The T.E, has KaTeKKtipoS6rri<rev, the R.T. 
has Kci.TiicKii\poii6ji.i\aev, which words are not 
unfiequently interchanged in different 
codices of the LXX. (see Josh. xix. 51; 
Deut. i. 38 ; Xxi. 16, etc). They have nearly 
iilentioal meanings, " to give as an inherit- 
ance by lot." Neither word ocoun else- 
where in the New- Testament. 

Ver. 21. — Ashed for. ioT desired, A.V. ; 
Kish for Cis, A.V.; for for by, A.V. The 
forty years assigned to Saiil may very 
probably include the seven years and six 
mouths (2 Sam. v. 5) which elapsed before 
David's kingdom was established over all 
Israul, while the house of Saul was still iu 
power. The first twenty or thirty years of 
his reign after the rescue of Jabesh-gilead 
are passed over in absolute silence. The 
narrative from 1 Bam. xiii. to xxxi. relates 
only to about the last ten years of his life 
(for the correction of the A.V. of 1 Sam. xiii. 
1, see ' Speaker's Commentary '). 

Ver. 22. — Raised wp for raised up unto 
them, A.V. and T.E. ; bare witness for gave 
testimony, A.V. ; my for mine own, A.V. ; do 
loi fulfil, A.\.; who for which, A.V. This 
is not an exact quotation, but the combined 
meaning of 1 Sam. xiii, 14 and Ps. Ixxxix. 
21. 

' According to Afrioanus, 784 ; Clemens 
Alexandrinus, 641 ; Theophilus,] 566 ; Pas- 
chal Chronicle, 632; GeorgiusSyncellus,659, 
and St. Paul, according to Eusebius, 600 
Josephus, 992, 



loe 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



[ra, xin. 1— 6a 



Ver. 23. — Promise for hie promise, A.V. ; 
broMfjht for raised, A.V. and T.K. (comp. 
lea. xlviii. 15; Heb. 1. G). Tliis verse loads 
to the great announcement which Paul had 
to make of the next great step in God's 
dealings with Israel, for which the pre- 
ceding ones of the redemption from Egyptian 
bondage, and the kingdom of David, were 
preparatory, viz. the actual coming of the 
Son of David, the Messiah, to save his 
people Israel. 

Ver. 24. — His coming (rrjs sl(r6Sov); his 
•ntrance upon his ministry, with reference 
to the iShs (the way) of Isa. xl. 3 and Mai. 
iii. 1 (for the use of eia6Sos, see 1 Thess. 
i. 9 ; 2 Thess. ii. 1). 

Ver. 25. — Was fulfilling (or fulfilled, A. V. ; 
what suppose ye for whom think ye, A.V. 
and T.E. ; the shoes of whose feet for whose 
shoes of his feet, A.V. ; unloose for hose, A.V. 
St. Paul, as reported by Luke, follows very 
closely the nariative in Luke iii. 3, etc. 
Compare the words npoKripi^avTos 'Iw&vvov 
. , . ^ajCTifffia fieravoias with Luke iii. 3, 
Krjpiffffav ^iknTiff^a n^ravoias. Compare Uph 
Trpoffdnrov Trjs ei(r6Sov with T^ o5bl/ Kvpiov, 
Luke iii. 4. Compaie Uavrl rS \a$ 'l(rpaii\ 
with the mention in Luke iii. 9, 10, of the 
multitudes of the people, and the enumera- 
tion of the different classes of people. Com- 
pare the question, "^^ horn [or, 'what'] think 
ye that 1 am ? " with the statement in Luke 
iii. 15, that all men were musino; in their 
hearts of John whether he were the Christ 
or not. CJompaie the construction of tlie 
phraae, "'Epx^T"' )ueT* e/*6, oV ouk elfil S^foy rh 
vTTohTjfjia Ttov voZtcif \vtrai with Luke iii. 16; 
and in ver. 26 compare the Tiol yivavs 
'A^paafjL with the UaT€pa exofiev rhv 'A^padfi, 
and the TeVca t^ 'APpaifi of Luke iii. 8. 
Tl lere is also a strong resemblance to John i. 
19 — 28. St. Paul fortifies his own witness 
to Jesus as the Christ by that of John the 
Baptist, probably from knowing that many 
of his hearers believed that John was a 
prophet (see Luke IX. 6; Matt. xxi. 26; 
comp. Peter's •ddress, cli. x. 37). 

Ver. 26. — Brethren for men and brethren, 
A. v., as ver. 15; fliose among you that fear 
for whosoever among you feareth, A.V. ; to us 
for to you, A.V. and T.R. ; sent forth for sent, 
A.V. and T.B. The same address in sub- 
stance as that in ver. 16, comprising tlie 
Jews and the devout heathen. To us ; see 
ver. 33 ; but on the other hand (ver. 38), " to 
you," seems preferable. This salvation j 
proceeding from the Saviour, mentioned in 
ver. 23 (comp. ch. z. 36, " The word which 
God sent"). 

Ver. 27. — In for at, A.V. ; nor for nor yet, 
A.V ; sahbalhfoT sabbath day, A.Y.; fulfilled 
. . , by for they have fulfilled . . . in, A.V. 
For they, etc. It is not clear what is the 
fonjc of the 70^ in th i s verse. Meyei (follow- 



in g Chrysostom), Alford, a.nf. Mher*, mnfce U 
mark the con trast between th«Jewsa«dreased 
by Paul and the Jews at Jerusalem. " This 
salvation is sent forth to yon [according to 
Bengel, 'from Jerusalem,' according toothers, 
' from God '], for the Jerusalem Jew t have 
rejected Christ." And in consequ-ace of 
their rejection, you, who had no sfare in 
crucifying the Lord of glory, are invited 
to take their place. But it may be tc-ken as 
expressing the cause why this salvation ia 
complete and capable of being oifvred to 
them. This salvation is preached to you 
because, througli the instrumentatity of 
those that dwell at Jerusalem, all that was 
written in the Scriptures concerning Christ 
has been fulfilled. Christ has been crucified 
and raised from the dead, and ko now 
remission of sins is procleimed «o you 
through him (vers. 38,39; comp. ch. iii. 
13—20). Which are read every nabbath. 
Note the value of the constant reading ot 
Holy Scripture in the congregation. 

Ver. 28. — Asked they of for desired they, 
A.V. The narrative of this verse is exactly 
that of Luke xxiii. 4, 5, 14 — 23. 

Ver. 29. — All tM^gs that i.^erf for all that 
was, A.V. ; tomb for sepulekre, A.V. The 
referenoe .1 to his being crucitied between 
two thieves (Luke xxiii. 32, \iS), to parting 
his raiment among them (ibid, 84) to offering 
him vinegar (ibid. 36), to the -ommendation 
of liis spirit to his Father (il-Jd. 46). The 
words Ka0eA(JyT6y and i87}Kar els iivtifi^'iov 
are the same as Luke .\xiii. 53, ' 5 (/ij^jua and 
Ij.iiriiJie'uiv being interchanged). 

Ver. 31. — For many days fot many days, 
A.V. ; that for which, A.V. ; «i» >are now tor 
who are, A.V. and T.B. St. Pa^il thus con 
firms the statement in eh. i. 3 (sua note to oh. 
i. 11). From Galilee to Jerus^eu. Who an. 
meant? and what ascent from Galilee tc 
Jerusalem is here intended ? Tbo answer tc 
the first question is, the elov«A apostles 
whose special ofiice it was to beat witness tt 
the resurrection of the Lord Jesi])t(ch. i. 22, 
note). The answer to the secoAd is, that 
the ascent from Galilee, where uogt of out 
Lord's appearances tuck place, to J«cusalem, 
shortly before the Ascension,is her* mtended, 
and that this passage is a distibot recog- 
nition by St. Luke of the Galilssa*! Appear- 
ances. Tliere Is, as is well knoits, great 
obscurity, and apparent ditcrepanciM in the 
accounts of our Lord's, appearances rfterthe 
Eesurreetion. St. Matthew seems to place 
them exclusively in Galilee (iVIatt. xsrai. 7, 
10, 16). St. Mark likewise (xvi. 7); l»ntin 
the section 9 — 20 he mentions the a^eotr- 
anee to Mary Magdalene and to tb* two 
disciples on the way to Emmaus, but gives 
no ciue as to where the appearance t% Oe 
eleven took place. St. Luke seems to fi*M« 
them exclusively in Judasa. but trerj m i- 



OH. xin. 1—52.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



407 



onsly puts a mention of Galilee in the 
angel's month in- the very place where, 
according to St. Matthew, he announced the 
Lord's appearance in Galilee. St. John, 
again places the three first appearances in 
Jerusalem (John xx.), but describes at length 
a third as having taken place in Galilee 
(John xxi. 2, 14). St. Paul (1 Cor. xv. 6) 
speaks of an appearance to five humlred 
brethren at once, which in all probability 
took place in Galilee, as -only a hundred 
and twenty names were numbered at 
Jerusalem (oh. i, 15). It is, therefore, satis- 
factory to have this confirmation of the 
residence of the apostles in Galilee between 
the Besurrectiou and the Aseeusiuu in St. 
Luke's report of St. Paul's speech. Observe 
that St. Paul distinctly separates himself 
from tliese witnesses by the emphatic ri/jius 
in ver. 32. 

Ver. 32. — Brir^ yos, good tidings of the 
promise made for declare unto you glad 
tidings how that the promise which was made, 
A.V. 

Ver. 33.— Emo that God for Ood, A.V. 
(" how that " being in ver. 82) ; oar children 
for »8 their children, A.V. and T.R. ; raised 
np for hath raised up. . , again, A.V. ; as also 
it if for as it is also, A.V. Our children. 
The reading of the K.T is not adopted by 
Meyer or Alford, and is scarcely an improve- 
ment upon the T.B. There can be no 
reasonable doubt that i,vturTJ](ra,s, raised up, 
means here, as in ver. 44, raised from the 
dead. Observe with what skill the apostle 
speaks of the resurrection of Jesus Christ as 
the fulfilment of God's promise to their 
fathers, which it was to be presumed they 
were anxiously expecting. The second psalm. 
Many manuscripts and editions have, " the 
first," because the first paalm was often 
reckoned not numerically but as an intro- 
duction to the whole book, so that the second 
psalm was numbered as the first. This is 
probably the reason why the eighteen 
psalms as reckoned by the Jews include Ps. 
xix., though Joshua bin Levi explains it by 
the rejection of the second psalm, on account, 
no doubt, of its testimony to Messiah as God's 
begotten Son. But the rabbins generally 
acknowledge the application of this psalm 
to Messiah (Lightfoot, ' Exercit. on tlie 
Acts '). Thou art my Son, etc. This appli- 
catioi. if the second psalm to the Resurrec- 
tion is oest explained by Rom. i. 4. The 
reference in both passages to David is 
remarkable (vers. 22, 23). Christ, who was 
begotten of the Father before all worlds, was 
declared before men and angels to be the 
Son of God, when he was raised from the 
dead in the power of an endless life. 

Ver. 34 — Bath spoken for said, A.V. ; 
hply and sure hlessings for sure mercies, A.V. 
No more to return to corruption. This is 



added to shnw that Christ's resurrection was 
a final victory over death ; not like that o( 
Lazarus, or the Shunammite's son, or Jairus'a 
daughter, but, as St. Paul himself says 
(Kom. vi. 9), " Christ being raised from the 
dead dieth no more, death hath no more 
dominion over him." Here he tells us that 
this eternal exemption of Christ from death 
was promised or signified in Isa. Iv. 3, which 
he quotes from the LXX., only abbreviating 
the Siaflijo-o/iai, k.t.\., into Stiffoi, I will give. 
What, then, is me.mt by the Htrta Aa^alS to 
wurrd ? The Hebrew has D'jp.Njri T]! npn, 
which can mean nothing else hut "the sure 
mercies of David," the favour and mercy 
promised to David in Goil's everlasting 
covenant, well ordered in all things and 
sure. And in like manner, in 2 ChroB. vi. 
42, So-m Aa/3!S means " the mercies of God to 
David." And if we turn to the account of 
this covenanted mercy in 2 Sam. vii., we 
shall see that it comprises the setting of 
David's seed upon his throne for ever (see 
specially vers. 12 —16). In ver. 1 5 it is 
said, 1JBD -PD\ ^h non, " My mercy shall not 
depart from liiin." And in the next verse 
his bouse and his kingdom are described 
as being uhy'^ )Dw "sure," or "established 
for ever," which, when applied to the personal 
Christ, the Son of David, manifestly implies 
his eternal exemption from death and cor- 
ruption (see also Ps. cxxxii. 4). The sense 
of the Hebrew, therefore, is clear and certain, 
and it is equally certain that the LXX. 
meant to represent this sense in the version 
here quoted by St. Paul. "Oo-ior, though 
properly meaning " holy, pious," and thence 
" mild " and " merciful " (c/pjji/iiciij, Hesyoh.) 
as applied to man, came to be applied in 
the same senses to God (Rev. xv. 4; xvi. 
5; and here and in the LXX.' Beyond 
doubt, therefore, the passage before us is 
rightly rendered in the A.V., "the sure 
mercies of David ; " the plural, 8<ria, repre- 
sents the O'lpn of the Hebrew. Clemens 
Alex, (quoted by Schleusner) uses it in the 
same way for " mercies or " benefits : " n6<ra 
auT^ 6(pel\ofjLetf Siria: " For how many mercies 
are we indebted to Christ!" In a similar 
way, the Latin pietas is used for God's 
"justice " or "kindness" ('.aSneid,' ii. 536; v. 
688). " Trini pulses pietatem " (on a sepul- 
chral monument, a.d. 1427) : " Beat at the 
door of God's mercy." 

• Gronovius, in his note on '.^lian. V. H.,' 
viii. 1, where he ascribes to Saios the primi- 
tive sense of what is "just" and "due," 
from man either to God or to his fellow- 
man, adds, " Tribuunt quidem LXX. interp 
etiam Deo rh S(nov: sedetiam tumsignificat 
quoddam quasi officium benignitatis in 
homines pios, Deo decorum." 



908 



THE ACTS OF THB APOSTLES. 



[oa. tm. 1—62 



Ver. 85. — Beeaute for wherefore, A.V. and 
T.E. ; than wilt not give for thoa nhnlt not 
suffer, A.V. (see oh ii.'27, note) ; thy fur thin6, 
A.V. It is remnikable that St. Peter and St. 
PbuI should both quote this sixteenth pealm, 
and use preciaely the same argumeut. 

Ver. 36. — In his own generation served thB 
counsel of Qod for served his oion generation 
by the will' of God, A.V. Many good oorh- 
mentutors constiue the wofda as the E.'l'. 
does, only some, instead of in his owli 
generation, render " for," I'.fii for the good 
ef, ''his own generation." But the A.V. is 
the most natural division of the sentence, 
and gives the best sense, only the punctu- 
ation should connect the words " by the 
will of God " with " fell on sleep." There is 
an [illusion to 2 Sam. vii. 12 and 1 Kings ii. 
], 10, and it is intimated that God was still 
caring for David in his death. But there 
was this vast difference between David and 
Christ. David had a work to do limited to 
his own generation, and when that work 
was done he died and saw corruption. But 
Christ had a work to carry on for eterual 
generations, and so be rose and saw no 
corruption. 

Ver. 37. — Raised up for raised again, A.V. 
''Hyeip^v, " raised from the death of eleep," 
as oh. V. 30 ; 1 Cor. xv. 42—44 ; 2 Cor. i*. 
14 ; Eph. V. 14, etc. The two words {avl- 
(TTjj/ii and iyelpw) are ootiibiiied in ch. xii. 
7. 'Eyetpu is " to arouse," or " awaken ; " 
avlaTii/u, to " make to get up." Or in the 
passive cyflpofjMi to be "awakened," and 
in the neuter, avisrnv, to " get up." 

Ver. 38. — Brethren for men and brethren, 
A. v., as before, \ ers. 26 and 15 ; proclaimed 
fox preached, A.V. ; remission tor llie forgive- 
ness, A.V. 

Ver. 39. — Every one that believeth is for all 
that believe are, A.V. Here, then, is the 
great gospel message of grace, " the gospel of 
the grace of God," as St. Paul speaks in oh. 
XX. 24 ; the proclamation, consequent upon 
the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus, 
of a free and full forgiveness of sins to all 
that repent and believe the gospel (ch. XS. 
21); see ch. ii. 38; iii. 19; iv. 12; V. 31; 
Col. i. 14, eto., arid Matt. i. 21 ; Luke i. 77. 
Note, too, how adroitly the a\jostle poihts 
but the superiority of the gospel which he 
w as preaching to thetn Over the Law, and the 
pre-eminence of Christ over Moses. 

Ver. 40. — Spoken for ipoken of, A.V. 

Ver. 41. — If one for though a man, A.V. 
"Though" best expresses the ihv and the 
'3 of tile Hebrew. The passage is quoted 
nearly Verbatim from the LXX. of Hab. i. 
S. The diiference from the Hebrew arises 
from the LX.X. having read in their copy 
D nja, proud, arrogant men (KorKippovtiTeiOifor 
D'^/s, among the heathen, as is clear from 



their rendering the Hebrew I3i3, in Hab. i. 
13 and ii. 5, by the Same Word (Kaf ai^pdl/oSj/rai 
and lettTa^pocrjT^s)' The rendering sal 
a<pat>(ir$riTe, and perish, for the Hebrew 
inorj (another fbrm of the preceding verb 
iriDtin, which in the A.V. is construed with 
it, and the two together rendered " wonder 
marvellously"), is not so easily explained. 
The two best expl.inations seem to be (I) 
that the LXX. read inpnrT\ inan instead of 
the present order of the words, and so 
rendered the first word BavfidiraTe, wonder, 
and, taking the next word from another root, 
Dan, rendered it a(l>wl<r6TiTf, perish ; (2) that, 
reading the woids in the same order in 
which they now stand in the Hebrew text, 
they rendered the first Sav/iiiraTf, Or, With the 
intensive addition, Oavitairii}, and took the 
second in the sense it has in Arabic, " to be 
altertd " or " chan;;ed for the worse," and 
expressed it by a<paviir6riTe, meaning" Chanite 
countenance flora fear and astonishment." 
And in favour of this explanation the use o( 
4i>>a>'ifot/iri rh Trp6ifiaTra id Matt. vi. 16 (" they 
disfigure theif Caces ") is quoted (see Bosen- 
miiller on Hal), i. 6). St. Paul took the 
LXX. as he found it. Perhaps he saw 
signs in some of that unbelief and perverse 
opposition which afterwards broke out (ver. 
45), and so was led to close his sermon with 
words of awful warning. 

Ver. 42. — And as they ment out for when 
the Jews were gone out of the tynagogue, A.V 
and T.R. ; they for the Gentiles, A.V. and 
T.R. ; spoken for prear.hed, A.V. They be- 
sought. The B.T. is that of Chryaostom 
and the best manuscripts, and is adopted 
by Meyer, Olshausen, Lange, Alford, Bishop 
Wordsworth, the ' Speaker's Commentary,' 
etc. There is a difference of opinion as to 
who is meant by they. The simplest ex- 
planation is that they means Paul aud Bar- 
nabas, who went out of tiie synagogue before 
the formal dismissal of the Congregation; 
and, as they were going out, received an 
invitatiou to repeat their iustructiott on the 
next sabbath. 

Ver. 43. — The Synagogue brolee up for the 
eongregation was broken up, A.V. ; the devout 
for religious, A. V. ; urged for persuaded, A.V. 
This verse manifestly describes something 
BUbseqtlent to the event recorded in the 
preceding. The congregation had asked 
Paul and Barnabas, perhups through the 
ruler of the synagogue, to return next 
Sabbath. But when tlie congregation broke 
up, many Jews and devout proselytes fol- 
lowed Paul and Barnabas to their own house 
and received further instructions and exhor- 
tation to continue in the grace of God. No 
doubt Bai-nabas had his full share in this 
more private ministry of exhortation (oh. iv. 
i!6, note, and 3d. 23). (For tho meaning sA 



flk. tat. 1—62.] 



TBfi ACTS 0^ THfi APoSTLESl 



m 



"to eontinne in the grace of God," see Gal. 
V.4.) 

Ver. 44. — Sahhath for $abhath day, A.V. ; 
almott the whole city mat gathered for came 
almost the whole city, A.V. We may sup- 
pose that as many as could crowded into 
the synagogue, and tliat a multitude stood 
outside in the street. 

Ver. 45. — Seahuiy for envy, A.V. ; eontra- 
dictai the things for spaiie against those things, 
A.V. ! and blasphemed for eotitfadiotitig and 
Kilasphemtng, A.V. and T.B. Jealousy. 
Neither Word exactly expresses the (rjKos. 
The indignation of ver. 17, A.V. (where see 
note), is nearer the sense; though jealousy 
of the influence of the two strangers may 
have entered into the fierce passion which 
was stirred up in the Jewish mind, as well 
as jealousy for their own religiun, which 
they saw was being superseded by the doc- 
trine of Paul. 

Ver. i6.— And for then, A.V. and T.R.; 
*pofte out holdly for waited hold, A.V. ; be for 
have been, A.V. ; seeing for but seeing, A.V. 
and T.B. ; thrust for put, A.V. ; eternal for 
eveflaiting, A.V. Spake out boldly. Observe 
that Barnabas as well as Paul resented the 
unseemly opposition of the Jews. It was 
necessary. The necessity arose from the com- 
mand of Christ (Luke xxiv. 47 ; ch. i. 8 ; iii. 
26). It is in accordance with this purpose of 
God that St. Paul says of the gospel that " it 
is the power of God unto salvation ... to 
the Jew first, and also to the Greek " (Eom. i. 
16). Compare, too, our Lord's Baying (Matt. 
XV. 24) and the Woman's reply (ibid. 27). In 
point of fact, this had been the practice of 
Paul and Barnabas no less than of Peter, 
and w«8 the very motive that had brought 
them to Antiooh. Lo, we turn to the 
Gentiles. These were, indeed, bnld words to 
speak in a Jewish synagogue ; the speakers 
had doubtless sought courage from the 
Holy Ghost (see ch. iv. 29). 

Ver. 47. — For a light for to be a light, 
A.V. ; the uttermost part for the ends, A.V. 
The quotation is from the LXS. (Cod. 
Alex,) of Isa. xlix. 6. Oompare the frequent 
quotations by St. Paul from Isaiah in Eom. 
XV. The additional words which appear in 
the LXX.t tts SioS^Hi)!' 76i>iivs, have no 
counterpart in the Hebrew, and are probably 
corrupt. The application of the passage is, 
God declared liis purpose by Isaiah, that his 
Servant Hesi<iah should be tlie Light and 
Salvation of the Gentiles, and we are com- 
missioned to give effect to that purpose by 
our pretifehing. 

Ver. 48. — As for when, A. V. ; Ood for the 
Lord, A.V. and T.R. As many as were 
ordained to eternal life believed. This can 
only refer to the predestination or election 
of God, viewed as the moving cause of their 
foith (oomp. Eph. i 4, 5, 11, 12; Phil. i. 



6 ; 2 Tim. ii. 9 ; 1 Pet. i. 2. See the Seven, 
teenth Article of Religion). 

Ver. 49. — Spread abroad for publishedt 
A.V. As the persecution after the death 
of Steplien led to the preaching of the Word 
in Jiidsea and Samaria and beyond, so here 
the contradiction and opposition of the Jews 
led to the free preaching of tlie gospel for 
the first time among the heathen population 
of Pisidia. 

Ver. SO. — Urged on for stirred up, A.V.; 
the devout women of honourable estate for fta 
devout and honourable women, A.V. and 
T.B. ; stirred up a for raised, A.V. ; cast them 
out of their borders for expelled them out of 
their coasts, AY. Urged on (irapiirpwav). 
The word only occurs here in the New 
Testament, and is -not common elsewhere. 
The devout women of honourable estate: 
fiax^lJ-'"' is, literally, well-formed; then 
decent, becoming ; and then honourable, well- 
to-do (Comp. ch. xvii. 4, ywaiicSJv t&v irpthTwv^. 
See Mark xv. 43, where Joseph of Ariftiathiea 
is described as cuo-x'^M'"'' 0ovK^ut{is, "an 
honourable counsellor." Tlie devout women 
(at <rcp6fievai) were the Gentile proselytes 
who worshipped God, as in ver. 43. So of 
Lydia (ch. xvi. 14), and of "the devout 
Greeks" (ch, xvil 4, 17; xviii. 7). The 
chief men (tous irptlJTous), as in oh. xvii. 4 
(yvyaiKwu tuv irp^Ttav)* 

Ver. 51.-^They shook off the dust, etc.; 
according to the Lord's injunction (Luke 
ix. 5; oomp. ch. xviii. 6). And came unto 
Iconium; a distance of about sixty miles 
south-east, a five days' journey (Kenan). 
Iconium lay on the high road from Antioch 
in Syria to Ephesus. It is now called 
Cogni, and has a population of nearly thirty 
thousand souls. Iconium is assigned by 
Xenophou to Phrygia; by others to Pisidia; 
and again by others (Cicero, Strabo, etc.) to 
Lycaonia. At this time it was the capital of 
a separate tetrarchy (Lewiii, 'Saint Paul'), 
but Kenan calls it " the capital of Lycaonia" 
(' Saint Paul,' p. 41). 

V«T. 52.— And the disciples, etc. Nothing 
can be moio beautiful than this description. 
In spite of the persecution, in spite of the 
danger, in spite of the banishment of their 
teachers, the disciples were filled with joy 
and with the Holy Ghost (see 1 ThesB. i. 6,- 
Heb. X. 34). With regard to this important 
incident at Antiooh, Kuuiin observes on its 
powerful influence in turning St. Paul's 
mind more decisively to the conversion of 
the Gentiles as the great object of his 
apostleship. He adds, "The character of 
that great soul was to have » boundles.q 
power of expansion. I know none to be com- 
pared witli it in respect of its inexhaustible 
freshness, its unlimited resources of will, and 
readiness to make the most of every oppor- 
tunity, except that of Alexander the Great." 



ilO THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh, xm. 1—62, 



HOMILETICS. 

Vera, 1—15. — The invasion of heaihendom. It has been >vell reiiiSlrked that Antioch 
was the true centre of direct missions to the heathen world. An Ethiopian ounuch, 
and a Eoaaan centurion, had indeed been gathered into the fold of Christ. But they 
were both closely connected with the land of Judah, and their conversion had not led 
to any further extension of the gospel of Christ. At Antioch the seed of Christian 
truth first fell in abundance upon heathen soil ; from Antioch first went forth the 
preachers of the gospel with the express purpose of disseminating it among the nations 
of mankind. It is a deeply interesting study to mark the various steps by which the 
providence of God broui;ht about this great event. There was first the moulding ol 
the great soul of Saul into a fitting instrument for this momentous ministry by the 
circumstances of his conversion. The tenderness of heart caused by the memory of 
liis persecution of the Church of God; the gradual loosening of the ties which bound 
him to the Jews' religion, through the bigotry, the distrust, and the repulses of his 
Jewish countrymen, which drove him from Jerusalem; the friendship of the kind and 
sympathetic Barnabas; his enforced retreat to his native Tarsus, within easy distance 
of Antioch; — these were the preparatory steps by which God was bringing about 
his great purpose. Then, as the work grew among the Gentiles, Barnabas was sent to 
Antioch by the Church of Jerusalem ; thence, needing more help, he went to Tarsus 
and sought Saul and brought him to Antioch. Then followed a full year's ministry 
in that great heathen city. That year brought a rich experience of things sad and of 
things joyful ; experience of heathen darkness, experience of God's grace ; widening 
knowledge of the thoughts, the wants, the misery of heathenism ; deepening know- 
ledge of the power of a preached gospel ; a further loosening of the strait bands of 
Judaism as lettering Christian liberty. And then, when the ground was thus pre- 
pared, came tlie direct call of the Holy Ghost, " Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the 
work whereunto I have called them." And what a work it was ! It requires some 
knowledge of the degradation of human nature as manifested in all the vileness of the 
voluptuousness and impostures of the East, in the incredible and growing flagitiousness 
of the once noble Roman character under the shameful profligacies of the empire, and 
of the general spread of vice, oppression, and cruelty in the Roman world, to take 
a just measure of the work to which Barnabas and Saul were called. It was a work 
of hopeless difficulty if measured by the strength of man ; it was a work of incalcu- 
lable importance if measured by its world-wide influences and results — a work than 
which no greater has ever been undertaken either by man or for man. To revolu- 
tionize the whole relations of man with God ; to upset and root out all the old thoughts 
of the whole world concerning God and the service of God; to give a new direction to 
man's thoughts about himself, about his duty, and about eternity ; to transform human 
life from sin to holiness ; and to do all this by the power of words, — was the task given 
to Barnabas and Saul. And they did it. That we know and love God ; that we 
believe in Jesus Christ for the remission of our sins; that. we live righteous lives; that 
we have a good hope of the resurrection to eternal life — ^is -the fruit of the mission of 
Barnabas and Saul. They invaded heathendom with the sword of faith, and heathen- 
dom fell before their onslaught. O God, raise up in our days such soldiers of the 
cross that all the kingdoms of the world may become the kingdoms nf the Lord and 
of his Christ I 

Vers. 16 — 41. — 2%e New Testament in the Old, The expositioni of the Scriptures 
of the Old Testament by the writers and speakers of the New Testament are worthy 
of our deepest attention. Not only do they draw out from those Scriptures particular 
instruction which of ourselves we should never, perhaps, have found there, but they 
supply us with irrefragable proofs of the unity of purpose which ordained the long 
sequence of events themselves, through many centuries, and also ordained that a faith- 
ful record of them should be preserved in the sacred archives of the Jewish people. 
There is probably no evidence of more overwhelming power of conviction, when once 
it is grasped, that the Scriptures are from God, and that they are a revelation of the 
very mind of God, than that which is supplied by the continuity of events whose 



OH, xm. 1— 52.] IHB ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 411 



historical truth rests upon a solid basis, and whose meaning and purpose receive their 
only and full explanation in another set of events whose basis of historical evidence is 
no less firm and solid than the former. This double testimony to the truth of the 
gospel, supplied by the direct evidence of those who went in and out with the Lord 
Jesus, on the one hand, and by the prophetic preparation for those events, and the 
significant types of them, exhibited centmies before, on the other hand, together form 
a moral demonatration which, when apprehended, is simply irresistible. It is this 
which gives such force to those apostolic and other sermons which are recorded in this 
Book of the Acts. In this sermon of St. Paul's we have the election of Israel to be 
the people of God, their redemption fi'om Rgy|)tian bondage, their planting in the land 
of Canaan according to God's promise, first held up to view. Could any one deny the 
truth of those events ? Were not the Jewish people still in actual possession of the 
land of Canaan ? Living in the midst of heathens, wore they not, and were not they 
alone, worshippers of the true and living God? Did they not possess the sacred 
oracles? And if they went back century by century, did they not come to the time 
when the seven nations of Canaan possessed the land, and when their fathers dis- 
possessed them of it? If they went further back still, was there not the Egyptian 
bondage described in their ancient records, living in their traditions and sacred songs, 
engraved in the monuments and annals of Egypt? Yes ; God had dealt with them as 
he had dealt with no other people. They were the children of miracle, the heirs of 
Divine promises, the depositaries of a Divine plan, the ordained instruments of a great 
and eternal purpose. Every page of their history proved it, as that history was slowly 
unfolded in the course of successive ages. And the purpose itself was partially revealed 
from time to time. Let them bethink themselves of David and his throne ; his humble 
origin, and his exalted power; the hand which raised him, the promises which sur- 
rounded him, the expectations which clung to his name. Did he nut live in the hearts 
and hopes of the people through ages of oppression and wron'j;? Did not his name 
still glow on the page of prophecy, as the heir of mercy, as the future prince of 
Israeij as the founder of Israel's glory? What did all these things mean? What 
was the hidden truth that swelled and was ready to burst under all these images? 
What was the womb of firae so big wiih in the days which had come upon them ? 
There was an answer, and one only answer, to these questions. The history of their 
fathers was explained by ope and only one fact, and that was the birth of Jesus Christ, 
of the seed of Abraham and of the lineage of David, to be the Saviour of Israel, and 
not of Israel only, but also of the whole world. And he Paul was there to tell them 
of Jesus Christ : how he was born in the city of David ; how John the Baptist bore 
witness of him; how in him was fulfilled all that was written in the Law of Moses 
and in the prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning the Christ that should come. Let 
them turn to those prophets and to those Psalms, and see what was there written 
concerning the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow. It had all been 
fulfilled. The Man of sorrows had been despised and rejected ; his hands and ids feet 
had been pierced on the tree ; they had parted his raiment among them and cast lots 
npon his vesture ; he had gone to the grave and to hell ; he had risen again and 
seen no corruption ; his old companions had seen him many days after his resurrection ; 
they had eaten and drunk with him, and in their sight he had gone up to heaven. 
What further proof could they have that he was very Christ, the promised Saviour, 
the Son of David, of whose kingdom there should be no end ? Let them believe in 
him, and he would justify them from all their sins. Let them not by their unhelief 
bring upon themselves the curse denounced by the prophet upon the despisers of God's 
Word. Thus it was tliat the fulfilment in the New Testament of all the types and 
promises of the Old was as the seal of God to the truth of both. The testimony of 
nearly two thousand years, in which words, deeds, persons, things, events, pointed 
with steady consistency to one Person that should come, was all concentrated upon 
Jesus Christ, who did come in the fulness of time. And the 1850 years which have 
elapsed since Jesus rose again have added their testimony, too, to all that went before. 
So that our age will be altogether without excuse if, shutting its eyes to the light of 
truth, it rejects the Son of God and misses the great salvation which be has Ivoughi 
to our unfiil and fallen world. 



414 tm ACTS 0* tHfi AtOS*Ll!8. l<m. tm. 1-614 



Vers. 42-— 52. — TJe savour of death and of life. We have here • ihemorabla 
example of the same gospel being a savour of Ufa to some and of death to others, 
according to the reception given to it in the heart of the heai'ers. Here was a mixed 
congregation of Jews and proselytes and Geatiles. They had all the same advantages ; 
they all heard the same gospel at tho mouth of the same preacher. Some, when they 
heard, believed ; a hunger sprang up in their souls to hear and to know more of tho 
MtTttion of God. They followed the preachers out of the synagogue ; they hung upon 
their words ; they listened to their exhortations. The next sabbath found them in the 
Synagogue again. We can imagine that the pressing thought in their hearts was, 
"What must I do to be saved?" We can imagine how they struggled out of the 
darkness into the light of Christ ; how the new message of redeeming love and justifying 
grace kindled new thoughts in their inmost souls; how they followed the words which 
led them till they found peace and life in Jesus Christ. The gospel was to them " a 
savour of life unto life." But others heard and believed not. Their conscience was 
not pricked with sin ; their souls were not moved by the love of God ; they did not 
yearn after more light, more knowledge of the glorious Lord ; they were not humbled 
before the cross; but their self-love was wounded, their pride was aroused, jealousy 
and hatred were kindled within them at the success of the gospel. They spurned the 
truth which would lower their importance j they scorned the light in which their own 
glory would grow pale 5 they hated the goodness before which their own goodness 
withered into sin. They knew Christ only to contradict him ; they knew bis Word 
only to blaspheme him. The gospel of God's grace had come to them, but their last 
state was worse than the first. The gospel was to them " a savour of death unto death." 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS ADTHOHS. 

Vtrs. 1 — S. — An illustrious Church. Antecedently it might have been expected 
that the Church of Jerusalem would prove to be the most influential and illustrious oi 
all Christian comni unities, and that Irom all lands and ages men would look back to it 
as the most potent factor in the early history of " our holy religion." But in this 
respect it must give place to " the Church that was at Antioch." This community was 
remarkable for four things. 

I. Its human composition. (Ver. 1.) Great names have been entered on the rolls 
of many Churches ; but very few indeed, if any, could compare with the list which 
included the names of Barnabas and Saul, as well as that of a man (Manaen) who 
was the foster-brother of Herod Antipas. A t;hurch is influential, not onlv according to 
the number of souls it can count in its communion, but according to the character of 
the men who are included in its ranks. A Church which can win and can train and 
send forth a most useful minister, or a most successful missionary, or a most powerful 
writer, may do a work which, in the balances of Heaven, weighs more than that ol 
another which has five times its number on the lists. Nowhere more than here does 
quality, character, spiritual worth, tell in the estimate of truth and wisdom. 

II. Its Divine indwellino. The Church at Antioch had " prophets and teachers" 
(ter. 1). This statement implies that there were those amongst the brethien who 
received occasionally such Divine impulse that they spoke under the consciousness of 
his inspiration. And to them, or to one of them, the Spirit of God made known the 
Divine will that they should set apart two of their number for special work (ver. 2). 
Evidently this Church was one in which, as in a temple, the Holy Ghost dwelt. The 
fact of the indwelling of the Spirit is not, indeed, anything which is itself remarkable ; 
for no Church of which this cannot ha said is worthy of its name. But of " the 
Church that was at Antioch " this was strikingly and eminently true, if we may take 
this short passage of its history as of a piece with the rest. 

III. Its BELiaious activity. We know that Barnabas and Saul " taught mudi 
people " (oh. xi. 26) ; the work of evangelization went on actively at Antioch. We may 
gather from our text — " they ministered to the Lord, and fasted " — that the Church 
was diligent in its devotions; not only worshipping when it was convenient, and 
agreeable to the flesh, but to the extent of self-denial : twice in two verses we read ol 



OH. xm. 1—52.] THE ACTS OF THE AP0STLB8. 418 

the members fasting (vers. 2, 3). Pasting, for the sake of fasting or with a view of 
pleasing Christ, is not enjoined, and both the words of our Lord and the genius of his 
religion discourage rather than encourage it. But we shall undoubtedly do well to 
pursue our work and to maintain our worship — "ministering unto tlie Lord" — up to 
and within the line of self-control and even self-denial; not only not giving the reins 
to our bodily cravings, but checking these and restricting ourselves beyond that which 
is positively demanded, if by so doing we can worship God more spiritually or work 
more effectively for our fellows. 

IV. Its obedient enteance on an appabentlt hopeless enterpbisk. (Vers. 2, 3.) 
The Church was commanded by its Lord to send two of its members on the errand of 
son verting the Gentiles, "and . . , they sent them away." It was not its part to 
" reason why," but to obey. Had it reckoned the likelihood of the case, dwelt on the 
difficulties in the way of .succe.ss, measured the might and number of its adversaries, 
weighed the strength of two Jews against the learning, the prejudice, the milit:iry 
forces, the material interests, the social customs, the evil habits, the inwrought 
unrighteousness of a bitterly and even passiopately hostile world, it would have 
hesitated, it would have refrained. But it did not measure these things. It heard 
the sovereign sound of its Divine Leader's voice, and it proceeded unquestioningly to 
obey. It " sent them away." And they went forth — those two men — unpractised in 
the wiles of the world ; poor ; unarmed ; unequipped with any forces which, on 
mere human lines, could avail anything ; determined to preach a doctrine which would 
be received with the haughtiest contempt, which would clash with men's strongest 
interests and smite their most cherished sins; — they went forth, with the confi- 
dence of the Church behind them (ver. 3), with the hand of the Lord upon them, 
with the hope of his welcome and his reward before them. It was a splendid action 
of an illustrious Church, and the nearer we can approach it in our own times and in 
our own communities, the dearer shall we be to our Master and the greater service 
■hkll we render to our race. — 0. 

Vers. 4 — 13. — Frowardness and frailty. The two leading points in this passage 
•!« the frowardness of Bar-jesus and the frailty of Mark. But there are other incidental 
lessons" which spring up by the way. We may learn as we pass : 1. That good loork 
for others comes home with a blessing be/ore long. Some of the scattered Christians 
were men of Cyprus, " who, when they, were come to Antioch, spake unto the Greeks " 
(ch. xi. 20); and here are men from the Church which the Cypriots helped to form 
coming to evangelize Cyprus (ver. 4). " Give, and it shall be given unto you." 2. That 
the success of any great work it not to he measured by the fruit of the first endeavour, 
"We read that " when they were at Salamis, they preached the Word of God in the 
synagogues " (;ver. 5) ; but we do not read of any conversions to the faith. It is fair to 
infer that their earliest attempt was, if not disappointing, far from a marked success ; 
but -they were not daunted thereby. 3. That it is well worth while for youthful 
aspiration to attend on mature and established piety. " They had also John to their 
minister" (ver. 5). Mark may have been little more than the courier of the apostles, 
but it was no mean service he was rendering the Church and the world if he did his 
duty thus. 4. That when religion is cast out superstition is sure to enter. Where God 
is unhonoured the people will resort to the "sorcerer" (ver. 6), the soothsayer, the 
spiritualist, etc 

I. That mah mat depart bo fab from EBOTrruDE as to deliberately falsify 
THE TRUTH OF GoD. (Vers. 6—8.) "Wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways 
of the Lord ? " Here was a man who, for the purpose of retaining a lucrative position, 
was dtterminately opposing the truth. Many have been his predecessors and many 
his successors, who have not scrupled to " fight against God," to act in such a way 
that they have made what they knew to be right seem to be wrong, what they knew 
to be wholesome and helpful seem to be injurious ; they have twisted round and per- 
verted the right line of heavenly wisdom; they have not only "called good evil and 
evil geod," but striven, for some base motive, to make it seem thus in the eyes of 
men, nulutely and wantonly deceiving them. 

II. That the time comes fob burnino nnjiaNATioN and strono QrvEOTivi: 
«0 full of all Bubtilty and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all 



414 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. xm. 1— 52 

lighteousnesg I " (ver. 10). It is not often allowible for men to speak thus to on« 
auother. As a rule, wo must follow the example of the archangel, and instead of 
" bringing a railing accusation, say. The Lord rebuke thee." But there are occasions 
when we du well to be angry, when we should rather sin by not being righteously 
angry than by even passionate indignation. When men are palpably ruining others in 
order to fill their own treasury, undoubtedly keeping others out of the kingdom in order 
to secure their own base objects, it is not only permissible but laudable to let our holy 
indignation boil over in scathing condemnation and rebuke. 

in. That judgment has its part to play in the Divine boonoiiy. (Ver. 11.) 
It was, of course, only in virtue of the inspiration under which he was acLing (see 
ver. 1) that Paul pronounced this judgment on Blymas. It was a very unusual 
occurrence. Our Lord himself never, so far as we know, used his almighty power to 
punish a human being; with the exception of the banning of the fig tree, all his works 
were those of beneficence. Yet we need to remember that judgment is a part of his 
whole system. He does condemn and smite. The storm uproots the tree ; the locusts 
lay bare the fruitful field; disease paralyzes the human form; death does its closing 
work ; spiritual blindness darkens the mind and spiritual hardness encrusts the soul, — 
at his holy and awful bidding. The pleasant theories of the universe, which leave 
judgment out of the account, are fair enough to look at, but they are not true; they are 
false to the facts of the case as these meet us in many forms and in every sphere of 
human life. 

IV. That the best human bubboundings will not ensure spiritual steadfast- 
ness. (Ver. 13.) We might have thought that the presence of such men as Barnabas and 
Saul would have ensured the stability of John Mark ; but it did not. Though under the 
influence of one man whose unswerving devotedness to Christ has never been surpassed, 
he yielded to his inclination to return home rather than brave the hazards and endure 
the privations of missionacy work in Asia Minor. Nothing will secure our spiritual 
steadfastness but the indwelling of Divine power. We must abide in Christ that he 
may abide in us by his Spirit. It is only when we are " strengthened with all might 
by his Spirit in the inner man," when we are " strong in the Lord and in the power 
sf his might," that we are really safe and secure. "When I am weak, then am I 
strong."— G. 

Vers. 14 — 41. — The Christian faith. The Apostle of the Gentiles goes first to the 
synagogue of the Jews (ver. 14). This partly, perhaps, because he would be most at 
home there and find a readier audience (ver. 15) ; partly in accordance with the words 
of the Lord (Luke xxiv. 47). At liberty to speak by the courtesy of his countrymen, 
Paul preached the discourse which we have in the text concerning the faith of Christ. 
He shows — 

L Its bash in histobioal fact. (Vers. 17 — 22, 31.) It is a matter of history. 
That history commences with the call of Abraham and the redemption of Israel from 
the bondage of Egypt (ver. 17) ; it includes the life in the wilderness (ver. 18) and the 
aarly years'in the land of promise (vers. 19, 20); it contains the choice of a monarchy 
(ver. 21) and the elevation of David (ver. 22). From beginning to end, the faitli of 
Christ rests on the solid ground of established facts ; it does not depend on dreauis and 
visions, nor on logical deductions or intuitions of the human reason ; it is built on 
well-attested facts ; " That which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, 
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, . . . that which we have 
seen and heard declare we unto you'' (1 John i. 1 — 3). Not "cunningly devised 
fables," but facts of which truthful men were "eye-witnesses" (1 Pet. i. 16), are the 
material on which Christian doctrine rests. 

II. Its culmination in a living One. (Vers. 23 — 37.) " God raised unto Israel 
a Saviour, Jesus " (ver. 23) ; One of supreme rank and majesty, whose shoes the great 
I'aptist was "not worthy to loose" (ver. 25); One slain by his own people, but raised 
from the dead by the favour and the power of God (vers. 27 — 30) ; One whose immortality 
is the fulfilment of the Divine word (vers. 32 — 37). In Christianity everything gathers 
round, centres in, Jesus Christ himself. We are not compelled to subscribe to certain 
profound propositions, nor to conform to a number of minute requirements either in 
daiusstlo or social life or devotional habit ; we are desired to accept a once-crucified aad 



OH. xin. 1-52.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 415 

now risen One— "a Saviour, Jesus"— as the almighty Saviour, living Lord, Divine 
Friend, he offers to be to us alL 

III. Its OABDiNAL DOCTBiNB. (Vers. 38, 39.) " Through this man is preached unto 
you the Torgiveness of sins ; " " By him all that believe are justified," etc. There can be 
no real religious life without the conscious enjoyment of God's favour ; and this cannot 
be attained until sin has been forgiven. The initial step into the kingdom of God is, 
therefore, the remission of sins, the justification of the sinner before God. This is the 
cardinal doctrine of the gospel of Christ j " This [he said] is my blood of the new testa- 
ment, which is shed for many fur the remission of sins " (Matt. xxvi. 28). There may 
come times when this doctrine will be neglected, but to it mankind will continually 
retura ; for it is the sense of sin and the consciousness of condemnation which stand 
between the soul of man and its heritage in God, and it is the forgiveness of sin and 
the justification of the sinner which open the gates of the kingdom of peace, of joy, ot 
eternal life. 

IV. Its globious comprehensiveness. " Men of Israel, and ye that fear Ood, give 
audience" (ver. 16; "Glnldren of the stock of Abraham,! ant£ whosoever among you, 
feareth Ood, to you is the word of this salvation sent " (ver. 26) ; " By him cM that 
believe are justified " (ver. 39). Already the old and narrowing traditions had been 
broken ; already the strong prejudices had melted away ; alreaily the hearts of men had 
been enlarged, and Gentiles and Jews were invited to believe and to be saved. As mis- 
sionary work proceeded, and as more light from heaven broke in, the world-embracing 
thought of God became clearer and fuller to the minds of men. 

V. The dbgenot oir its claim. (Vers. 40, 41.) A most sad succession of steps — 
despise — wonder — perish ; but one that has been taken by thousands of the children ot 
men. We cannot oppose ourselves to a " i^reat salvation " without being bruised and 
broken by our folly (Matt. xxi. 4i). The height of blessedness and dignity to which 
we rise if we accept a Divine Saviour marks the depth of shame and woe to which we 
fall if we reject him.^G. 

Vers. 42- — 52. — Mmisterial success. I. That it is a real ministerial gain to 
EXCiTS BELIQI0U8 INQUIRY. (Vers. 42 — 44.) It was a considerable success to have 
called forth the interest of the Gentile audience, so that they begged to hear the same 
truths stated again (ver. 42). It was the beginning of " the grace of God " in their hearts 
(T»r. 43) ; it resulted in the excitement of still more extensive inquiry, so that " the 
whole city " was agitated and solicitous (ver. 44). We may thank God for the com- 
mencement of religious life, for the sprouting of the seed, for the first signs of spiritual 
awakening ; we need not hesitate to ascribe this to the hand of God ou the heart of 
man. 

II. That such awakening must be faithfully jollowed up by the Christian 
TEACHER. Paul and Barnabas " persuaded them to continue," etc. (ver. 43). We must 
not only plant, but water (1 Cor. iii. 6). We should watch for the first signs of religious 
earnestness, and promptly follow up what has been wrought, by wise, earnest, devout 
encouragement. 

III. That the Christian teacher should avail himself of every providential 
OPENING. (Vers. 45 — 47.) The rejection of the gospel by the Jews might have led some 
half-hearted missionaries to abandon their work. But to those who were here at woik 
It simply acted as an incentive to go forth into a wider field. They took the shutting 
of one gate to mean entrance through another ; the blocking of one way to prove that 
the finger of God was pointing in another direction, where more ground was to be 
cultivated and larger harvests were to be reaped. So must we strive to gain good from 
apparent evil, and look on every adverse event as showing us what other and what 
better thing our Master would have us do. 

IV. That God's work will be wrought in spitk of man's enmity, and bven by 
MEANS OF IT. The violent and determined opposition of the Jews (ver. 45) led the 
a^wstles to a conclusion in favour of more extensive Christian labour earlier than they 
could otherwise have reached it. The language of Paul (ver. 46) indicates no little 
tension of feeling. The enemies of the truth urged onward the chariot of the kingdom, 
aud it rolled forward at full speed. And the fervent words of the apostle met with a 
prompt and earnest response (ver. 48) ; the Gentiles " glorified God," and many ul 



41« THE ACrS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xm. 1— 6a 

them yielded an intelligent, saving faith to the truths presented. So much of centrifugal 
force was there in the enmity of the Jews that the gospel was carried far and wide, 
and " the Word of the Lord was published throughout all the region " (ver. 49). A 
happy thing it is for us that often " vaulting ambition o'erleaps itself and comes down 
on the other side," that the wnith of man does occasionally and incidentally work 
the righteousness and grace of God, that the industry of evil builds up the walls it is 
seeking to undermine. 

V. That ministerial success is certain to be dashed with some rasAPPoiNTiiENr, 
and that the Christian teacher must mingle reproach with invitation (vers. 50, 51). 

VI. That faithful work mat fill the minister op Chkist with holt jot. 
(Ver. 52.) There is a gladness, an exultation, which may find a home in the teacher's 
heart which is not holy, and when it cannot be said that be is " filled with joy and the 
holy Ghost;" that is, when he Is congratulating himself with a satisfaction that is 
selfish, earthly, unspiritual. But when his joy is pure, disinterested. Christian j when 
he rejoices because Christ is being honoured and men are being raised and blessed, then 
is his heart happy with a joy with which the Holy Spirit is closely associated, and which 
"sanctifies and satisfies the soul.'! — C. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — Ordination of Barnabas and Saul. 1. Thk true wealth of a 
Chuboh. There were prcjphets and teachers at Antioch. Nothing is said about its 
wealth in money, only about its wealth in men. A religious comuiunity may possess 
splendid buildings, wealthy members ; may command amply all the e.\trrnal appliances 
of worship and work ; but unless it has men, it has not strength. Intelligence and 
enthusiasm, piety and genius, constitute the true forces of the Uliurch. Without these, 
it is feeble with all its worldly resources ; with these, it is mighty in poverty. 

11. The consecration of the first MissioNAriES. 1. It was preceded by prayer 
and fasting. The moderation of the body gives fr>«dom and clearuess to the judgment. 
There is nothing artificial in the true proceedings of spiritual man. The bodily and the 
spiritual life cannot be both affirmed at the same time. In denying the body we affirm 
the Spirit. In casting off the weights of sense we rise into the purer air. 2. It was 
uccompaiiied by laying on of hands. "Order is Heaven's first law," and in the Church 
" let all things be done decently and in ocisr." The act marks peculiar selection out 
of the mass of men, and for special and peculiar ends of work. From Antioch iu its 
strength and spiritual prosperity went forth the first missionaries. This is an example. 
When we are full of thought we long to speak or otherwise give it to tlie world. When 
the fire burns within the soul the tongue cannot be mute. In like maimer, a vigorous 
Church will be a missionary Church; the falling off of missionary interest is a 
symptom that we have less hold upon the truth or have lost the fulness of love from 
the heart. — J. 

Vers. 4 — 12. — The mission in Cyprus. I. The false PRorHi':T. Bar-jeans may 
stand as the type of one class of foes with whom Christiauity has to contend. He is 
described as a " mage " and a " false prophet." It appears that he gave himself the 
title of Elyiiias (to which word the modern Turkish ulema corresponds) — " wise man '' 
par excellence. The essence of the magic calling is the pretension to override the 
laws of nature and providence in obedience to the wishes and phantasies and caprices 
of the individual. It would make imagination and feeling the test of truth and right^ 
rather than the fixed truth and Word of God. The spirit of this false prophet is seer 
in his attaching himself to the proconsul, as the pai-asite attaches itself to the sounr 
life, and in the endeavour to divert him from Christianity. Here is a test of the false 
spirit in the teacher. If we really love the truth and possess it, we have no desire 
to divert the course of argument from other minds. The more light and discussion, the 
better for the truth. Suspect the man who tries to silence another by clamour or 
prejudice the ear of the audience against him. 

II. The true apostle. Paul had been " sent by the Holy Spirit," and now be ia 
filled by the " Holy Spirit." This gives him boldness and directness in dealing with 
the impostor. 1. There are times when denunciation may be used by the servant of 
Christ; for there are times when evil, stripped of its disguises, is mai ifest, and uu 
terms csn be held with it. And the denunciation of the apostle points U) the secret 



OH. xm. 1—52.] THE i.OTS OF THE APOSTLES. 417 

root of evil in the false prophet's life, and which poisons all his teaching. There ia 
craft, guile, the design to deceive others for private ends. Then there is a certain 
liglitaess a).d rec&?essraess ^of conduct connected with this, denoted hy a peculiar Greek 
word (ra&'oarjrm). The false teacher will respect no truth and no sanctity which 
stands in the way of his ohjects and ends. Such a man may well be called a " child 
of -the devil." The idea of the devil is that of an accuser or slanderer; and the false 
prophet will stick at no lies to serve his ends. He is the foe of all that is good, and 
must be ; for the good and right, resting on the principle of truth, is deadly opposed to 
him, the living lie. He is the pej;verter of the Lord's straight ways. While the 
servants of God proclaim, in 'the words of the ancient prophet, the levelling of 
inequalities and the making of the crooked straight, the object oY the deceiver is to 
twist the straight into crookedness, and bring back old chaos and disorder. Such are 
the arrows of dennnciation launched at his head ; such, in brief words, are the traits of 
the deceiver, drawn by the firm hand of the apostle. 2. The occasional revelation of 
Divine judgment against the ungodly. Such acts as that of Paul, in virtue of a Divine 
authority, in their occasional character, reveal a general principle of judgment. " Tbe 
hand of the Lord is upon thee," not to strengthen and to illuminate, but to weaken and 
to deprive of light. Tlie unused or misused sense decays. " From him that hath not 
shall be taken even that which he hath." If we use not our intelligence in the cause 
of truth, we cannot expect to retain it in its clearness. And if our conscience is not 
guided by love, it will become darkened. And if the light within becomes darkness, 
how great is that darkness 1 At the same time, mercy mingles with judgment. It is 
for a season only, that the opportunity for reformation and repentance may be given, 
and blessed the suspensions of activities which we have misused, if, in the enforced 
silence and privation, we are led to reflection and back to God. 

III. Conversion follows the manifestation of the truth. The fall of error 
means the establishment of a conviction in the mind. The overthrow of a lie delights 
the spirit, which is ma(!e for truth. Falsehood tempts and enthralls when it appeals 
to our passions ; let the falsehood be exposed, and spiritual emancipation follows. Fear 
and astonishment are often the means God employs to break up the fatal slumbers of 
the soul. They are like volcanic forces, which prepare lor the working of the genial 
forces of nature. Every conversion implies in the subject of it the knowledge of the 
superiority of truth over falsehood, the presence of the soul at a moral victory. Truth 
in conquering us, sets us free. — J. 

Vers. 13— 52.— Patii's missionary discourse at Antioch in Pisidia. We are intro- 
duced to one of those synagogue scenes which are of so much interest in connection 
with the eaily progress of Christianity. Here the gospel fought its foes and triumphed 
by the logic of love ; here the seeds were sown which sprang up to cover the world 
with fruit. According to the ordinary practice, the officers of the synagogue invite 
the strangers to address the congregation. Paul rises. His address falls naturally into 
parts. It resembles in general argument and tenor that of Stephen before the Sanhedrim. 
We may gather from it what were the great reasons which convinced and led to the 
conversion of the Jews. 

L The PROVIDENTIAL couBSB OF Isbael's HiBTOBT. 1. There wM the Divine tfleclion 
of a people, not to be for themselves favourites of God, but to be his light and salvation 
to the ends of the earth. 2. There was the wondrous deliverance of this people out of 
the oppressor's hand— from the land of Egypt. On this memory of a surpassing Divine 
power joined with Divine goodness, the historic consciousness of the nation was based 
3. There was the 'desert discipline : the giving of the Law, the enforcement of holi- 
ness-Chastisement, purification, education in obedience. 4. The expulsion of the 
Oanaanite tribes and the foundation of a settled system of government. This too was 
a great epoch ; and Israel could not refer to it without the consciousness of 'her 'high 
mission as a nation— called of God to supersede the weak, effete idolatrous nations of 
the land, and to diffuse holier manners, purer laws. 5. i'ne epoch of the kines The 
brilliant but erring Saul; the hero David and his glorious era. Every nation has 
some similar or analogous points m its history on which its memory rests • landmarks 
of Its way ; prophetic moments containing the future ; sowing-times for future hirvest.s • 
endeavours towards an ideal. Think of our own Magna Charta. our Civil War oiir 

ACTS. a» 



418 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [ch. xm. 1— 52. 

Eevolntion, our struggle for existence, our chastisements, and our triumphs. Israel'j 
history is the mirror in which every nation may view its own, and trace the hand of tha 
same world-guiding providence. 

IL The consummation of Israel's history. In Jesus the line of Israel's greatness 
was continued. He was of the seed of David according to the flesh. There was an 
echo of glorious memories in him. He came to revive the kingdom of David and the 
ascendency of Israel, although in a far different way from that expected by his coun- 
trymen. The testimony of the Baptist was mighty in favour of Jesus. No prophet in 
these latter days had commanded greater reverence than John the Baptist, the great 
religious reformer, a preacher of repentance. Now he had distinctly waived his claims 
to be the Messiah, and had pointed to Jesus ; had retired before him with the most 
lowly confession of inferiority. When we see a great man sincerely willing to take a 
second place in the presence of a new-comer, it is a witness of the greatest mompsi to 
the latter's superiority. The highest human elevation of charactfer — such a», John's—- 
can only bend before the Divine. " To you, then," may Paul well say to the Jews, " and 
that not on the ground of my asseition, but the witness of the g;^atest man held in 
honour by you, the second Elijah, is tliis salvation sent, this good news delivered." 

II. The conddct of the Sanhedrim to Jesus e^lflained. Paul is aware that 
he has a great prejudice in the minds of his hearers to overcome— the great " scandal 
of the cross." 1. The ignorance of the rulers. They did not understand the voices 
of the prophets, nor the meaning of the Scriptures constantly read in their synagogues. 
But their ignorance was little excuse for them. They ought to have known better. 
If we choose to look at facts in one light only — that of our wishes or prejudices — we 
suppress a part of the truth; and when this suppressed truth rises up from an 
unexpected quarter to confront us, the sense of self-condemnation cannot be overcome. 
The Sanhedrim saw in Jesus the embodiment of suppressed truth, and they hated liira. 
I* ■saa like the uprising of a ghost long thought to have been laid. 2. What they 
ca»''d not meet with i-eason they tried to quell by violence. Jesus was tried, with 
cue result of establishing his innocence. No crime, no fault, no disobedience to the 
Law, no rebellion against order, could be proved. Yet he was handed to the Roman 
governor, and his death was a judicial murder. 3. Thus prophecy was unconsciously 
fulfilled. A suffering Messiah had been foretold, and had now been revealed in a death 
of martyrdom. Behind the innocence of the sufferer and the guilt of his murderers 
a purpose of eternal wisdom and love had wrought and fulfilled itself. It is this 
insight into Divine thoughts which can alone relieve the dreadful tragedies of human 
passions and events. While in one point of view the death of Jesus is a scene of 
horror and of darkness, and the thought of it a scandal to the Jew and a folly to the 
Greek, in another it is a revelation of a Divine love which conquers hate and forgives 
even guilty ignorance, and converts a revelation of weakness into a revelation of 
wisdom and of power. 

m. The Resurrection. Without this crowning fact the rest had been incomplete. 
A suffering Messiah would have been a witness of the peoples' sin ; a Messiah rising 
triumphant over death could alone bespeak the victory of Divine love over human 
hate and sin. Here, then, comes the core of the message. The apostles can never 
forget that they are " witnesses of the Resurrection." And this was good news — the 
fulfilment of a promise made to the fathers in olden time. The apostles found in 
psalms and prophecies of the past which referred in the first instance to events then 
passing and persons then living, an ideal or prophetic element. " Thou art my Son, 
this day have I begotten thee ; " these words, perhaps referable in the first instance to 
Solomon, can only in the apostolic thought be properly satisfied in Christ. And so 
with the other citation. The promise to continue the Divine covenant in the line of 
the kings is fulfilled above all in Jesus. We must recollect that the kingdom of 
Judah and the national life as a whole was ideal ; that is, it pointed to meanings not 
at any time within the visible field of experience. If we grasp this thought, it may 
help us to understand how the apostles viewed Scripture, and how they quoted it; not 
so much for its literal and primary as for its spiritual and prophetic meaning. The 
Holy One of God was not to see corruption. But David passed away and mixed with 
ilust It is, then, in David's "greater Son " that this prophecy must be tulfiUed, of ftc 
uipon uiiiiblc Hud iuiwortil life, 



OH. xra. 1— 62.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 419 

rV. The remission of sins. Through this risen One the blessed boon is proclaimed. 
The life, the death, the resurrection, would be simply a grand Divine drama, an object 
of contemplation, a piece of magnificent poetry, were there no practical result like this 
flowing from it. But it means victory and release from sin. Surrender to the Divine 
ideal, affiance in the Anointed of God, means deliverance and peace, not to be obtained 
by laborious obedience to the moral or ceremonial Law. Faith is whole-hearted 
surrender to the Divine Object. It is not a mere act of intelligence, nor yielding of 
the alTections, nor decision of the will ; but the giving up one's self to Christ. It is 
this which brings the full blessing of Divine peace upon the heart, and nothing short 
of this can do so. 

V. Final warning. How shall men escape if they reject so great salvation? 
Refuse love, and wrath only can be expected. Similarly does Stephen's speecn end 
with a sharp note of warning. Our heart is stirred by contrasted motives. We move 
between two poles of emotion. To be drawn by love is to be repelled by fear. The 
one motive or the other may have the greater weight with different minds, or with 
the same mind in different moods. Let us thankfully recognize that, whether the 
gispel touches the chord of love or of fear, it aims at our salvation. "Save, Lord, by 
love or fear I "—J. 

Vers. 42 — 52. — Jewish jealottty. The result of the preaching of Paul at Antioch 
was the conversion of many Jews and Gentile proselytes to the Christian faith. To 
these the exhortation, appropriate to all new converts, was given : " Abide in the grace 
of God." 

I. The oatheeino of the multitodb. There is always some reason for the 
gathering of the crowd. Its fancy is easily excited. It is attracted by the wonderful 
and the noveh Here it was no mere sensationalism; it was the desire to bear the 
Word of God which drew them together. At its heart the multitude loves truth. 
Well it may ; for it craves salvation from misery, and knows that this is to be found 
in truth alone. Often is the multitude deceived in thought, and mistakes sound for 
sense ; but not for long. 

II. The rise of Jewish envt. The causes of which are not difficult to explain. 
The new-comer has laid hold upon the people and gained their ear. It is at last the 
multitude to whom the teacher and the ruler must appeal, and from whom he must 
derive his influence. Popularity invites jealousy and attracts hate from the unsuccessful. 
Rare indeed is the magnanimity shown by John the Baptist : " He must increase, but 
I must decrease." To be willing that monopoly of privileges should pass away and 
that all should equally share the light and the love of God, is the spirit of the gospel, 
which opposes Jewish exclusiveness and jealousy. 

UI. The destination of the oospel. 1. First to the Jews. Not for their own 
merits' sake, but because of the promises of God, who cannot deny himself, and, despite 
our unfaithfulness, remains faithful. But the blessings of the gospel are freely oflered 
to free men. They may, therefore, be rejected. In the freedom of choice lies biound- 
less possibility of good and boundless responsibility for evil. 2. Those who reject it are 
sdf cast away. " Ye cast away yourselves, and do not think yourselves worthy of 
eternal life." It is never that God thinks us unworthy of the best, but that we do 
not rise to seek it. Self-neglecting, as the great poet teaches, is a viler sin than self- 
love. We prefer our prejudices to the truth, our passions and pleasures to God's 
will, the material to the spiritual and ideal good ; and thus turn against ourselves in acts 
that are suicidal. Men shut themselves out of heaven while they shut themselves in 
with narrowness and contempt of truth. 3. Opportunity passes to those who are ready 
for it. The Gentiles, in their sorrow and depression, needed oomfoit, and greeted the 
good news of the love of God. The kingdom of God and the mission of the Messiah 
were for all who needed its blessings. The gospel is a light and a saving power in 
mankind. Those who are satisfied with their own state, outward or inward, will turn 
away from it ; they cannot relish a message which implies the inward misery of thos« 
to whom it is addressed. But the sad and the sick hail it with joy, and find in it 
the power of God unto salvation. And the Word of God spreads over the whola 
land. 4. The inflvsnce of women, in the diffusion of Christianity. Women can 
powerfully help or bidder the course of any raovemw* » t|ie worl4, especially any 



420 TOE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oa. xm. 1— 54 



religious movement. Here certain feelings in their minds ar<i appealed to, antagonistic 
to the gospel. It would be easy to misrepresent it. These proselyte women might 
say that they had learned to be religious without the gospel, and what could it do 
more for them ? Or it might be represented that it subverted sound piety,, whereas it 
really fulfils every noble ideal learned elsewhere. Among the proselytes to Judaism 
we see elsewhere that it received a warm welcome. The lesson from such incidents ii 
the practical one — that we should test any new teaching for ourselves, not accept 
reports at second hand. The seeming new is often not true ; the new and the true are 
ever the fulfilment of the old. — J. 

Vers. 4 — 12. — The gospel m Cyprus. Break in the narrative, the second portion, 
referring to the missionary labours of St. Paul, reminding us that the chief purpose 
of the book is to describe the growth of the Church, not directly its constitution or- 
doctrines or discipline. Notice — 

I. The tentative chaeacter of this first missionary journey, which embraced 
Cyprus, Pampbylia, Pisidia, Lycaonia, and so back through Attalia to Antioch. The 
Church at Antioch kept in view, and the report of the work brought back to it. This 
showed that the double aspect of the work was remembered — its bearing on the world 
and its bearing on the Church itself. All aggressive efforts should be thus held closely 
to the vital centre of fellowship. Paul and his companions did not aim at preaching 
themselves, but Christ. So diffusion is strength, not weakness. 

II. The faithful observance of the Lord's rule, TO the Jew first. Thus the mission 
of God's ancient people still recognized. The unity of truth. The continuity of grace. 
" Salvation is of the Jews." 

III. The spiritual condition or Ctpeus a type of that or the world. 
Coirupt synagogues, side by side with heathen ignorance and superstition. JBar-Jesiu, 
or Elymas, between the Gentiles and Christ; false prophecy hiding the true. So in 
Europe during the Middle Ages. The infidelity which broke out in the French 
Revolution the natural product of a monstrous travesty of Christianity. Yet there is 
hope in " the men of understanding " to whom the gospel can appeal. 

IV. Miraculous manifestation brought in to break the spell of falsehood. Paul's 
first miracle. He wrought it when under the special influence of the Holy Ghost. 
No vindictive feeling in the apostle, but a simple obedience to the voice of the Spirit. 
The miracle was one of mercy, both as regards Sergius Paulus and the heathen 
population generally. Nothing would more open the way of the gospel. People that 
were accustomed to magic could be easily impressed by such a sign, especially as it 
fell on the sorcerer. May it not be that some such influences •afe to be watclied against 
in modern society ? Those in high station often listen to spiritualists, thinking to aid 
their own weakness by such means. Yet the wonders of the gospel far greater than 
all the deceits of false prophets. We may safely employ the feeling of astonishment, 
if only we sanctify it by the preaching of the Word. — E. 

Vefg. 13 — 15. — A rapid Journey hy sea and land, Paphos tc Perga. Perga through 
Pisidia to Antiochia, the northern extremity of the province. 

I. John Mark sepaiated and returned to Jerusalem. Probably a failure of spiritual 
courage. Yet notice the change which afterwards occurred. He is, according to 
many, the evangelist; perhaps Jewish in feeling, and hence attaching himself more to 
Peter. Sign of the Jewish prejudice still at work, and the difficulties in store for the 
Church. 

II. The providential preparation of Paul for his entire devotion to the Gentiles. 
1. There was no self-assertion in it. He simply followed the leading of events. We 
should watch the guidance of God in our work. 2. The attitude of the Jews of 
Antioch showed that the Word was brought to them in a respectful and reverent 
manner. 3. Glimpse into the synagogue life shows what an opportunity the Jews 
had among the heathen. The Law and the prophets still read. On that foundation 
t he gospel was placed. The Law was the schoolmaster to bring the nations to Christ, 
but the schooling was corrupt. — B. 

Vers, 16 — 43. — PauVi sermon in the synagogue at Antioch. I. The main pusposh 



OH. XJtL I— 52.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 421 

of It — ^to prove the Messiahship of Jesus, and therefore to proclaim the gate of life 
open. History of Divine grace pointing to day of salvation. The course of thought 
in Paul's own mind, which led him to faith. 

II. The MAIN STKBNQTH of the argument — the facts of the Saviour's death and 
resurrection. Paul could speak with special emphasis, though prudently avoided 
hringing in at this point his own conversion. 

III. The SPIRITUAL APPEAL twofold. 1. You need this salvation ; for the Law of 
Moses will not justify you. 2. How can you escape if you neglect it? resist not the 
Holy Ghost. 

IV. The MARKED EFFECT of sincerity and earnestness. 1. Inquiry. It is much to 
break throuuh stolid indifference. 2. Devout attention led to laith. Many followed 
them; that ia, declared themselves convinced. Fruit gathered even among the 
.Tews. — R. 

Ver. 22. — The character of David. " And when he had removed him,*" etc. Divint 
testimony to the character as one of the most wonderful. 

L All grew out of consecrated ground. No evolution explains such a man. The 
prace of God from a child. Converse with nature in his shcjiherd life (see Words- 
worth's ' Excursion '). Forgetfulness of self. Patience. Courage and fortitude. But 
all led up to Divine anointing. 

II. Fashioned by providential dealings. Sufferings in the school of affliction. 
His discipline in conflict with Saul. 

III. A MINGLED character. Great faults besirle great virtues. Tempted by luxury. 
Yet illustrating in his recovery that same grace which had raised him to the height. 
Goodness and severity of God. Our David is perfect. — B. 

Ver. 38. — The proclamation. " Be it known unto you, therefore, men and brethren," 
etc. The change in the world since Paul was at Antioch ; yet the ijroclamatiou as 
necessary as ever. The nearer we come to apostolic simplicity, the greater our success. 
Nothing but the gospel can accomplish the work, and that because it changes the heart 
through the forgiveness of sins. 

I. The FREEDOM of the ' proclamation. Forgiveness, not purchased or vrrought out, 
but simply announced. 

II. The invitation to faith. Through this Man, whose Name can be published, 
whose authority we testify. Religion is not a self-constructed edifice of spiritual 
leelings to which the Name of Christ is attached to give it a Christian sanction; it is 
the fruit of faith, and faith is surrender to the authority of Christ. 

III. Knowledge the root of responsibility. " Be it known unto you ; " therefore, 
as made known, take heed that you incur not the guilt of its rejection. A very small 
amount of knowledge enough to point to the " Man Christ Jesus." But if the light bo 
darkness, by neglect, perversity, prtjudice, pride, bow great that darkness! — ^R. 

Vers. 44 — 52. — Jewish opposition overruled to the world's good. I. Thk test of 
snfOBEiTY applied to the professedly zealous. The city stirred by those who " followed 
not with them." The true zeal is that which is actuated by the true charity, which 
" rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in truth." 

II. The best success is that which is obtained by simply following Ditinb 
DIRECTION. " It was necessaiy " to encounter the prejudice of the Jews, but the work 
of the world's evangelization was promoted by the causes which seemed to thwart it. 

III. Those that exalt themselves are abased. To thrust opportunity away is 
to judge ourselves unworthy of eternal life. The facts will be condemnation, without 
human accusation. 

IV. The universality of the gospel is its original charter of right to possession 
of all nations. The light was created before the sun, and the grace of God preceded 
the call of the Jews. The patriarchal religion testifies to the breadth of the 
message. 

V. Persecution is the last resort of defeated opponents of truth. When arguments 
fail, try abuse. The old priestly sinrit at work, " urging on devout women." 

yi. Motement is the law of life. If Antioch shuts its gates, Iconium opens a 



i'h TflE AC^S OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. an. 1—64 



new sphere. The messengers must think first of the work — lart of themselveft 
Ohtie East, ohne Bast — B. 

Ver. 52. — Spiritual joy. "And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy 
Ghost." At the conclusion of a narrative descriptive of varied experiences both of the 
messengers and of the Church. 

I. The jot of tbue disciples in the midst of troubles. 1. Joy of personal faith, 
which is promoted by discipline. If all went smoothly with us we sliould lose strength 
by the ease and self-indulgence which we should be apt to cherish. 2. Joy in the 
spread of the Oospel. The world opposes, false religion opposes, bnt the truth makes 
way. 

II. The presence of the Holt Ghost in the Church, independent of human 
guidance, Paul and Barnabas expelled, but the disciples taught and led by the Spirit. 
We must not glor}' in men. The great resource of the Church is fellowship. Even 
the spread of truth largely independent of particular agencies. The Word speaks for 
itself. The Spirit works often without apparent use of human instrumentality. 

III. The uplifted heart and the uplifted testimony. Joy and the Holy Ghost. 
We should show the world that religious joy is above all other. Victories, if given, 
should be recounted. We should often meet together to tell of Divine wonders. The 
bold and joyful spirit especially needful, as the present day is full of growing unbelief 
and indifference. — B. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — An ordination service. This chapter is very interesting, ss finding 
for us the real starting-point of Saul's grand missionary labours; as recording the 
change of his name to Paul (ver. 9) ; as altering the order hitherto observed in 
mentioning it, from " Bamabas and Saul " to " Paul and Barnabsis " (vers. 2, 8 ; comp. 
with vers. 13, 43) ; and lastly, as forming the commencement of a long sketch of history 
almost exclusively occupied with his acts and career alone. For reasons which doubt- 
less came of the Holy Spirit, of his purpose, his motions, and his sanctifying guidance, 
Paul now takes the foreground and henceforth is kept in it. His early character and 
career had been marked, his " call " had been marked, his waiting and trial since had 
been marked, and now marked for ever on the page of Scripture and upon the genius 
of Christ's Church was the stamp of his work and devotion. The preamble alike of the 
chapter and of this long sketch of history is filled in with the very brief recital of 
the ordination of Barnabas and Saul to missionary labour. Let us observe what is 
distinctly recorded as the condition of things at this juncture, and what thereupon 
the course of things. 

I. The Church appears as the unit ecolesiastioaIi. This is worth observing, if 
only for the honour thereby done the Church. But yet more for the suggestions that 
arise from it, as indicating that it is the point of departure condescendingly recognized 
by Heaven itself, by Christ and the Spirit — of duty, of work, of character, of privilege 
to men. Wherever the Church, it is the living centre, where dwells the Spirit, around 
which warmest and most intelligent affection, devotion, and enthusiasm should gather, 
even beyond those owned to by David and the most pious of the Jews toward Jerusalem 
and Zion (Ps. cxxxvii. 4 — 6). No metropolitan centre of officialism, it purports to be 
and is ordained to be a living fountain head. This is the " rest of the Lord " (Ps. 
cxxxii. 8, 14). This is where his people find rest. This the spot from which the 
heralds of everlasting truth set out, and of which they say again and again,." All my 
springs are in thee " (Ps. Ixxxvii. 7). 

II. Emphatic mention is made op five men in the Church. They are prophets 
and teachers. 1. Though every Christian man should be a spring of good to others and 
a true minister in the Church, the New Testament, far from dishonouring the idea of 
orders among those who compose it, here evidently enough countenances it. 2. The 
personnel of these five excites interest. Barnabas, who stands first, we know, and Saul, 
who stands last. Lucius is an African, and is mentioned again (Rom. xvi. 21). The 
epithet attached to Symeon marks something interesting, though we cannot say certainly 
what. While a volume of interest uuderiies what is added to the name of Manaen i 
It is a signal case, indeed, of " one being taken and the other left." 3. The holy 
engagements of these five men is emphasized. They are warming the fire ; they are 



fcft.xfat 1^-61] I'tlfi ACts Of tat, AiPOSTLfi^. tlh 

keeping warm the Church; they arc prevailing in prayer with God; they are subduin;^ 
the body and Iteeping it under subjection. How often might five men save and bless 
a Church, and call down richest blessing on it 1 

in. Emphatic honour is set on these five men. 1. The Spirit "speaketh 
expressly " to them, in the midst of their prayer and fastings and devotion (ch. x. 3, 4, 
10, 19, 30). It is possible that this occasion may have found the Church gathered 
together also, but it cannot be affirmed that it was so. Any way, there were more than 
" two or three gathered together in the Name " of Christ, 2. The Spirit spealis another 
" call " to them. The forces of the Church are growing. Two of the five are " called " 
to go far away to the Gentiles. The other three are " called " to " separate " the two 
designated for " the work." " Doubting nothing " and " without gainsaying," they do 
this. Still does the Spirit keep the choosing and the designating, and should be 
honoured and glorified for doing so, And still does the Spirit delegate the outer and 
visible carrying out of his will to the ministers of the Church. Note : (1) What a happy 
" separating " this compared with the many of which the Church, and, alas! the world, 
has heard, through all the succeeding centuries! (2) The method of "separating" 
Barnabas and Saul. It is (a) after fasting ; (6) by prayer ; and (c) with the accom- 
panying sign of laying on of hands. (3) The i)robable object and advantages of this 
service. If there seem any ceremony about it, it is not vain ceremony. It is full of 
meaning, and may be full of use and advantage, (a) An object, high, holy, not 
self-serving, is very distinctly placed before those thus ordained, (b) They are reminded 
that the eyes of witnesses are upon them, (c) They are reminded that he who calls 
them to be " separated " will hear their call to him when perils abound, when flesh is 
weary, when the heart is sore and weary, when enemies press in, and when all thinsrs 
seem against them, (d) They are taught that in this " one thing " they now do, their 
Master and their Judge, the one Being to whom they are res[ionsible, is above, the great 
invisible but ever sympathizing One. How blessed and how useful have the memories 
of self-consecration often been in the subsequent periods of life ! The heart has dwelt 
with them and been refreshed and enriched by them. And what added impression, 
stimulus, and sustained energy have often come to us in the memory of those, if only of 
earth, who once heard our vows and witnessed our consecration I But these have most 
possessed the heart and ruled it and governed it entirely, when to the rest has been 
added the unswerving conviction that the Spirit called, and that it was his call and 
nothing less than his, that we once heard and never could forget. — B. 

Vers. 11, 12.— Ohsf ruction of the truth summarily visited: the blighter Uighted. 
We can imagine something of the earngstness of Barnabas and Saul as they set out on 
their new mission, feeling that they had " the fulness of the blessing of the gospel of 
Christ " in their charge. Others felt this too, or, if they did not feel it, feared it. And 
one, in his iniquitous attempt to neutralize the force of it, courts his own discomfiture 
and strengthens the cause he had designed to undermine. Notice 

I. The gdilt heeb punished. It has been already in trenchant language denounced 
(vers. 9, 13), but deed is to follow word. The guilt had certain aggravations. 1. It is 
the guilt of a man averse himself to light and conviction. 2. It is the guilt of a man 
who was thus averse chiefly because he saw true light, would stop his dark ways and 
probably put an end " to his gains." 3. It is the guilt of a man who had loved it long, 
and long habituated himself to a career of decejition of others and taking Heaven's 
Name in vain. 4. It is the gnilt of one who, misled himself, sets himself to mislead 
others. 6. It is the guilt of one who would mislead another in matter of deepest 
dearest, tenderest moment to him. 6. It is the guilt of one who will do this in those 
sensitive, critical moments when decision trembles in the balance, and his fellow-man 
^looking to the light and inclining to it. 7. It is the guilt of a man who will lay 
himself out to crush with tenfold vigour the events of the conversion of one whose 
good character, position, and influence would count for much if he should turn to the 
light. So correspondingly great would be the forfeiture and destruction of good, the 
responsibility of which would lie at the door of the tempter. 

II. The punishment itself. 1. Blymas has protended, probably for a lon<>, lone 
time, to work SL^ns and wonders among a deluded people. He shall now in punishme.,? 
incurred by the filling up of the full measure of his iniquities loaru %vho,t. a real eigii 



424 TnK ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, [cH. xin. 1— 52 



anrl wonder and miracle are, in his own painful experience. How mnoh had he taken 
nut of others in money and in credulity! He shall be reminded of the past. 2. He 
tried to keep another in the dark and amid the groping and the wandering. He bimsell 
shall know the grievousness of darkness and the humiliation of groping and the bitter 
dissatisfaction of the wanderer. 3. He tried to take away from another the help of a good 
strong hand divinely proffered him. He shall know what it Is to have to beg the 
lending of even a human hami himself. 4. Yet hope and " room for repentano* " are 
not pronounced for ever closed for Elymas. And the punishment awarded him is less 
than the injury he had sonsht to inflict — less by far. 

III. The leading effects of the punishment. 1. It removes the transgressor off 
the ground. 2. It effectually confounds his endeavours, and turns him into an impres- 
sive witness to that truth which he had resisted for himself and tried to take the 
comfort of from another. 3. It produces strong failh and admiring astonishment 
and grateful acceptance of " the truth as it is in Jesus," on the part of the deputy 
threatened in his highest interests. 4. It leaves a long warning, in the stricken blind- 
ness of Elymas, though it was but temporary, of the verdict that Christ passes on the 
heinousness of that sin which consists in attempting to bliglit the opening religious 
growth and knowledge of any. 5. In the temporary character of the blindness of 
Elymas, provision was secured for a cert^tin resuscitation of the whole matter, in his own 
memory and in that of many others, whensoever he might regain vision. 6. An evident 
proof is given how God both rules and overrules, can convert and does convert, all 
the efforts of his opponents against him " to the furtherance of the gospel." For this 
was literally the issue of the conduct of one whom not the bitterness of a prejudiced 
tongue, but the sober truth of an insjiired apostle, describes as " full of all snbtilty 
and mischief, a child of the devil, an enemy of all righteousness, and an unceasing 
perverter of the right ways of the Lord." — B. 

Vers. 14 — 41. — Ai> other faithful sermon to the Jew. It is pleasant to observe the 
traces, in every possible place, of the grace still held out to the Jew. It vindicates with 
empliasis "the long-suffering" of God, and the continuing force of the dying prayer 
of him whom those Jews " slew and hanged on a tree." And, though in a less degree, 
it is pleasant to observe how messengers and apostles, when they reach a new town, 
pay their first visit to the synagogue. This very thing the Apostle of the Oentile* 
now does. It has been the order of the two companions since they set out from the 
former Antioch (vers. 4, 5), but now arrived at " Antioch in Pisidia," and Paul dis- 
tinctly taking the lead, the same course is observed. " Paul and his company " (ver. 
13) " went into the synagogue on the sabhath day, and sat down." They are 
strangers, and " after the reading of the Law and the prophets," they are invited by 
the rulers of the synagogue to speak. Sergius Paulus (ver. 7) sent for them when 
they were at Paphos, and " desired to hear the Word of God." And now again they 
spoke from all the better vantage-ground, in that they were invited to speak. The 
occasion proved a memorable one. And its memorableness turned on Paul's " word of 
exhortation " to a Jewish audience. Notice — 

I. The one determined object of this " word of exhortation." (Vers. 38, 39.) 
It is to fix sole, undivided attention on the " Man " (ver. 38) Jesus, as the Ohtainer of 
forgiveness of sins for men, though not himself necessarily the actual Forgiver, and as 
the Justifier of all men who believe in him, from the demands of responsibilities of which 
they would fain be free. This is the key-note of Paul's preaching, and we hear it dis- 
tinctly sounded on this the first great occasion of his authoritative pronouncements. 
It marks the standpoint of his practical theology. And it is the burden of his 
apostolic mission. Nothing lies nearer his own heart, nothing Is spoken more plainly 
on his lip, whether he converses with himself, a sinner, or would appeal to others, 
sinners, It is the core of the truth ; it is tlie bone and marrow of the gospel itself. 
Therefore: 1. Paul preaches the "Man Christ Jesus." 2. Paul preaches him as the 
only One who obtains forgiveness (let him obtain it as he may) for the burdened 
sinner. 3. Paul preaches him as the living, all-efficient Justifier of men before God. 
4. Paul preaches him as the " real " (John xv. 1), after all the typical and figurativ* 
(ver. 39) 

U. ThB BTBiiaUT, DIKECT BOAD ALONG WHICH PaCL TBAVELS TO HIS ONE OETEB- 



DH. Tm. 1— 52.] THE ACTfe OF THE APOSTLES. 426 



HIKED OBJECT. There is no touch of " the Socratic argument " here. Paul takes, it 
is true, a little while to reach his grand point. But he goes by no covert approaoli 
towards it. He paves the way, and may be said to smooth the way, but it is all ic 
full daylight. The brief yet effective historical survey which Paul takes of Israel may 
bo compared, for object and matter and manner, with those of Peter (ch. ii.) and 
(though in less degree) of Stephen (ch. vii.). Witliout invidiousness it may be said, 
however, that Paul's brevity, pointedness, trenchancy in this address, could not be 
surpassed. He introduces Christ, from the moment of God's election of Abraham to 
" the raising up Jesus again " from a death and grave which had set not one stigma 
of corruption on him. And in a moment or two he has confronted his whole audience 
in that Antioch synagogue with two portraits like life and life-size — the one the 
portrait of their " own nation and people, the Jews," and the other the portrait of the 
crucified, " dead, and buried," but risen One. This introductory survey of Paul owns 
to the greatest fidelity to fact and fidelity to the conscience of those who listened. 
The evidences of promise sacred to every memory, of genealogy that in point of fact 
had been m indisputed as it was indisputable, of prophet of old, of that greatest 
" prophet born of women " (Luke vii. 28) — John the Baptist, of modem time, and of 
"sacred psalm," are all marshalled. And at present the effect seemed likely to be 
irresisfible. The " men of Israel, and they that feared God " from happy association 
with them, and " the Gentiles," or some chance representatives of them, seem to be, 
not indeed chained to the spot (ver. 42), not entranced, not bewitched, but deeply 
impressed and thoughtful without being embittered. 

III. The faithful warning and powerful bemonstkanoe that closed " the 
woKD or exhortation." The word of trumpet-warning is Paul's own. He clenches 
it, albeit, with quotation from " the Scriptures," which should add the force that comes 
of sacred reverence's claim. "EepentI" cried John the Baptist. "Beware I" cries 
Paul, " lest you fail to repent ; " as so many had failed to do since John the Baptist's cry. 
Tney heard the quotation, and often as they had heard it before and knew it so well, 
or it would have lost much of its significance and aptness on the lip of Paul, they had 
never thought of it in this light, they had never dreamt it could have foretold of 
them or be any description of them. Yet what a wonderful picture it had been of a 
nation, for at all events some three years, and of their sons and daughters some 
thirteen years more already ! What a true picture of that " highly favoured" nation 1 
They had beheld and despised ; they had wondered and had— perished, yes, already too 
many of them — perished. And that from no convulsion of nature, or collapse of 
heaven, or irremediable pestilence, or sword of coiquering foe, but because, though 
they were given to behold things that kings and prophets and righteous men of their 
ancestors for centuries had desired in vain, they " despised " what they beheld. So 
must perish all who will "in no wise believe a work which" Heaven itself works in 
the very midst of them, and which is " declared" to them with the voice of power, of 
loTiS of patient importunity, b"t is " despised and rejected." — B. 

y^t. 36. — Present service, promised sleep. This allusion to the known devotion of 
David during his life, and to his " rest from his labours " in the " sleep " that hid 
him awhile from life, has been introduced in connection with Paul's vindication of 
Ae resurrection of "the Man" Jesus — that cardinal fact of Christianity and con- 
spicuous topstone of the multiform Christian edifice. This, foretold in the shape 
of a shadowy typical promise made to David, to lie like seed long buried, had of late 
iprung up and shown surprising blossom, and indeed had already borne glorious fruit, 
even in him who " rose from the dead " and " became the firstfruits of them that 
»lept ia him." The allusion in itself meanwhile is grateful and instructive. And 
when the son goes down brightly and purely then does this lesser light sparkle. It 
covers five practical suggestions. 

I. The plain duty of the servant of Christ — this, to "serve." This is a 
great word, a greater thing — to serve. Long time it was not so considered, till Jesus 
rose on the world, and, with ever-illustrious career of self-sacrifice, was among us as 
" he that served," and said it as well, " Whosoever will be chief among you, let him 
be yonr servant." He who bare our sins, who carried our sorrows, who suffered our 
Itripes, who murmured not beneath oiif infirmities, who staunched so many a bleeding 



4i'd tfifi ACTS oP Ttlfi Af OSTLES to». int 1—69. 

wound of humanity, nor refused to stoop to w.\<h and to wipe its liot and dusty feet,— 
he grafted this heavenly shoot on the wild, selSsh, unpromising stock of human 
nature. And it is the memory of him, his obedience and his service and his devotion, 
*^at again and again reproduces the like, the vital motive of the humblest service 
and gladdest obedience of each true inmate of his Church. If any man would know 
the real secret of real position in the Church of Christ, let him learn: 1. To serve. 
2. To serve Christ. 3. To serve him faithfully and closely and continuingly. 2%is 
man will find his way to serve his fellow-men and " generation " without fail— the 
poor, the humble, the untaught, the sinful, and those who already with himself wait 
on one Lord. 

II. The rule aocobdino to which otra seevino must be obdered — " bt the will 
05" God." If we do really serve our generation, there can be no doubt that we are in 
the path of duty, and accordingly in harmony with " the will of God." At the same 
time, it is too possible to spend a large amount of time, of energy, of property, thinking 
jou do God service, when you are doing no such thing. The safer way is to hegin by 
seeing to it that the work is accordino; to the will of God. This should be the very 
first thing in work, greater or less (1 Cor. x. 31). So sang the quaint George Herbert, 
whoie enrthly song merged so well in the heavenly song, these two centuries ago — • 

" Teach me, my God and King, 

In all things thee to see, 
And what I do in auj'lhing. 

To do it as for tliee. 

"All may of thee partake ; 

Nothing can be so mean 
But with this tinctm'e— ' for thy sak«% 

Will not grow bright and clean. 

"A servant witli this clause 

Miikes drudgery divine ; 
Who sweeps a room as for thy lawa, 

Makes that and the action fine. 

" Tliis is the famous stone 

That turneth all to gold ; 
For that which God doth touch and owB 

Cannot for less be told." 

It )■ most Important to remember that very much in our serving depends on : 1. Our 
pwpose to serve God's will. For God whose power to overrule is so often and so 
strikinsly seen all-coextensive with his power to rule, often employs men to further 
his purposes, and to serve their generation, who never consecrated a single intelligent 
purpose or energy consciously to him. Far from such nnconscious, ungrateful, even 
unwilling doers of his work should we be. The generation of such is indeed served, in 
one sense, according to God's will ; but it is no thanks to them. 2. Our care to do the 
thing best approved as God's will. Bight purpose and good intention have too often 
been the cover of a certain non-performance of the things that would be most true to 
the will of God. The Till of God is to be consulted, not merely in the" spring of our 
work, but carefu41y, humbly, all the way down the accomjiUshment of the purpose his 
grace may have originated in the heart. 

III. The humility with which we should serve. We are to serve "our own 
generation." A faithful memory of this will save: 1. Waste aspirations. Pride is 
often at the root of great desires, personal feeling the motive of great schemes, lack of 
humility the direct cause of idle disappointment. 2. Seeking the unattainable distant, 
instead of that which we may most certainly touch because it is close by us. The 
present time, the present place, the present task are the time, the sphere, the toilfor 
the servant of Christ. Between dreams of the past and visions of the future, the price- 
less opportunity of practical duty has too often irrevocably slippej past. 3. Sighing 
foi more strength, or more knowledge, or more wealth, instead of using at once our 
available strength, and improving soberly our given talents, one, two, or ten. There 
are many who wait for a showy opportunity of serving Christ and his Church, with 



ck. xnt 1—52.1 teJ! AC*rS OF TtlE AtOSTLEk 4 ^" 

ears shut to one of tlie sweetest utterances that even he spoke, respecting the "cup of 
Cold water;" and with eyes closed to the widow woman of the mite by the treasury, to 
whom the Lord did not close his eyes, and to whom he even called the attention of 
others. 4. An actual lessening of moral strength and diniiniahment of that enlarged 
opportunity which is the invariable sequel of faithfulness " in few things." The time 
is neither very slow in its coming nor at all doubtful when the shoulders of those who 
have been faithful in few things and in very little things bend beneath the weight of 
most honourable burdens of responsibilities. Not a few of those who once did on the 
humblest scale the work of their generation, and neither bargained for nor dreamt of 
posthumous fame, stand now in niches or aisles of the Church, and " dead, yet speak " 
with a voice to edify and to thrill generations to come. Of one such instance we know 
to a certainty, that of the woman who most spontaneously and at her own individual 
expense thought to serve her generation by richly anointing the body of her Lord so 
loved to the burying, and received the promise, now for two thousand years fulfilled, 
" Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, there also 
shall this, that this woman hath done, be spoken of for a memorial of her." 

IV. The ample room to serve — a generation. Just now to serve only one's 
generation seemed little. But ia it so? A generation. For what does the word 
stand? 1. For what an important length of timel 2. For what a multitude and 
variety of people! 3. For what a weight of solemn, thrilling interests in human 
affairs ! 4. For what a trial of individual consistency and education of individual 
character I Only the infinite mind can read that volume through — the volume of one 
generation. Yes ; there is no great distance to lend enchantment to the view, and no so 
picturesque vista, and no vague, flattering, indefinite sco|)e ; yet how full, how ample is 
the definite scope I " Blessed are those servants," who through a generation length, or 
from youth even to old age, are found in this sense, " expecting their Lord." 

V. The comforting designation given to the end op such a lifb-bbrvicb. 
"David fell on sleep." It is sweet language indeed. But how often we lose the 
sweetness of it 1 Tlia servant of Christ need not call that death which bounds the 
days of earth and shuts the bodily eye to the liglit of an earthly sun. It is but night. 
Night, grateful night, bounds the day of life, speedily merging in that grandest morning, 
the morning of the resurrection. It is but sleep. Sleep in Jesus, equally deep, soft, 
restful, closes the eyes of his wearied servant, surely renews his youth, and soon wakes 
into life everlasting and the light tliat is in God's presence. - Let us learn the name 
Jesus himself gave to death, anii learn it to love it. Now we work, we watch, we pray 
— soon we shall sleep on and take our rest. And our awakening from it will be 
ineffable light and knowledge and love. — B. 

Vers. 46, 47. — Unexpected interprefationi. "Ye judge yourselves unworthy of 
everlasting life." The gentle, pitying character of the immense preponderance of the 
language of Jesus to men speaks and has ever spoken his condescending acquaintance 
with human nature, and his sympathetic acquaintance with those of the springs of 
human action that lie deep in feeling. His spirit in these respects was not altogether 
unworthily caught by his apostles, and notably by the one time disciple, now apostle, 
John. There came times ami occasions, however, both in the converse of the Master 
himself with sinful men, and of his servants with their fellow-men, when words of 
kindaess to the ear w^uld be the very signal of unkindness to the soul and untruth- 
fulness to its higiest interests. And the plain and "bold" language of Paul and 
Damabas now, needing no extenuation at our hands, and little enough of explanation, 
offers a forcible and most striking suggestion, how often, through nil the coverings ot 
gracious and forbearing language, the polished shaft of naked truth must be threatening 
to pierce, let the crash be what it may. The statement to which Paul now committed 
himself may be regarded as saying very significantly that — 

I, Men never more effeothallt pronounce judgment on themselves than 
when they are pronounoinq judgment on Christ. This is true in two leading cases 
1. If men are pronouncing judgment unfavourable to Christ — as, for instance, in sup- 
posed answer to such a question as his own, "What think ye of Clirist?" — ^they aro 
pronouncing nothing less than decisive condemnation of themselves. 2. If they are 
Viumbly and in the genuine spirit of trying to feel their way, giving out from tJDW 



428 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xm. 1— 6^ 

to time some testimony of their growing and growingly grateful appreciation of 
Christ and of his truth, they then are proving their own growth in lilf eness to him. 
They are unconsciously giving the measure of how far the " day dawns" with them, 
and how high the " day-star arises in their hearts," or even how far they have got on 
that path which is like " the shiu'Dg light, which shineth more and more unto the 
perfect day." 

II. Men's putting fbom them the Wobd of God as now oivbn in Chbibt is doino 

NOTHINO LESS THAN POTTING FROM THEM THE PROSPECT OF EVERLASTING LIFE. 1. The 

dogmatic tone of ih'i apostle is to be noted. This is not the [lersonal prerogative of 
Paul or of any one else ; it is the claimed, asserted, demanded right of Christianity. 
Christianity gives its account of it, and a good and competent account. If this be 
not so, Chri»tiimity must go. But if it be so, he must go who will not have its reign 
over him. 2. Momeutous and awful as is- the issue to which Paul leaves now the 
refusing Jews, he lays the whole responsibility of it upon them. They were " filled 
with envy," they " spake against the things which were spoken by Paul," they "con- 
tradicted and blasphemed," they " put from " them the " Word of God ; " and Paul rules 
that theiis is the undivided folly of forfeiting " everlasting life," as though they 
seriously "judged themselves unworthy of it." 

III. The SIMPLEST facts of some sorts of human conduct, WHEN TRANSLATED 
INTO WORDS, SOUND LIKE THE PUREST, MOST UNDISGUISED SATIRE. Nothing COUld be 

further Irom the pride and presumption of a Jew, of the type of those who were now 
before Paul, than to think himself " unworthy of everlasting life," or indeed of any 
other thino whatsoever, either great or good, which could beliad. Yet nothing could 
be truer than that his conduct amounted to that, ran a terrible risk of ending in it, 
and,Tinrepented, unaltered, could in fact end in nothing else. For it may be stated 
thus — that (1) the message of Christ, (2) the credentials of every kind of Christ, and (3) 
the deep, incontestable, universal needs of the heart and lile of man, are such that, 
whether a man be Jew or Gentile, so only he be made fairly acquainted with Jesus 
and " the Word of God " in liim, he is " inexcusable " if he " put these away from " him. 
Nothing, it might be supposed, could rationally (though then not rightly') explain the 
conduct except it were the profoundest humility of a publican of the publicans. But 
thit, we know, would forget the prayer of the publican, though it might commemorate 
his deepest humiliation of self-reproach and sense of " un worthiness." Yet is this too 
sadly often found the case with men in matters of religion. Without humility, they 
pursue a line of conduct which only the extreme of self-reproach could rationally and 
temporarily account for. Other reason, indeed, in very truth there may be, must be 
—unutterable folly, blindest infatuation, amazing recklessness, and vmcalculating 
force of passion and envy, and withal guilt's own chosen particular type of hardness; 
these or their like must at the last be found answerable. But when they are sum- 
moned for their last answer, this will be the irony of their situation, that, furthest 
removed of all from pure and modest and self-upbraiding humility, they counterfeited 
it, and, in the name of that.counterfeit, " would not come to Jesus that they might 
have life " everlasting. An inspired apostle gave this unexpected interpretation of the 
state of thino-s in the instance before us; how many more such, alasl will "the day 
reveal"?— B. 

Vers, 42 — 52. — TJie dash of two worlds in Christ, It may certainly bo said that 
the Jews had long been a world by themselves. In one fashion this had been the 
ordaining of Heaven itself, though they had wrested the true idea of things to a false. 
And in matter of fact, the whole of the rest of the earth had been another world. It 
was but too true now that places were to change, and, while the lofty fell, the lowly 
were exalted. The climax was scarcely reached as yet chronologically, but the passage 
of the history before us may most justly be looked at as setting forth very strikingly 
the climax in its nature. Notice — 

L The opening siqhsl, The place is the synagogue, the place of the Jew. The 
service is on the sabbath, the service and the sabbath both of the Jew. The congrega- 
tion is in the first place almost exclusively the congregation of the Jew and of those 
who had now some time been allied to him as proselytes. These had heard read the 
Law »nd the pr(f pliets, and had, in addition, heard thereupon exposition and exhortation, 



OH. iiii. 1— 52.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 429 

the freshest in style, from two of their own race. The service is over, and they leave, 
when (1) in some form or another, by deputation or by the importunate acclamation of 
many together, the Gentiles beg that next sabbath they may be given to hear the same 
Word preached. It seems that their application was at all events not refused. But (2) 
Paul and Barnabas turn not their back upon those who had been listening to them, 
nor give them any sign of tlie cold shoulder, but the contrary. They speak to them, 
and beg them to value and " to continue in the grace of God." 

II. The qbeat disclosure. The. next sabbath day has come round. There is still 
a standing synagogue ; there are still " Law and prophets and blest psalm ; " there are 
still an ample number of Jews and of proselytes to make a congregation, and a good 
one. But the synagogue has come to look like an antiquated, useless, and qnite dis- 
proportionate building. It is not equal to the needs of the day, nor anything like it. 
1. " Almost the whole city is come together to hear the Word of God." 2. The second 
{.■art of the great disclosure is that the Jews cannot take it with any equanimity even, 
that they are to be thus swamped by the outsiders. " Envy " rules them. 3. The 
third act in the disclosure is that they will try to resist the tide of a greater force 
than the ocean. They " speak aiiainst " what last sabbath they did not speak against. 
They commit themselves to speak against the word spoken by Paul, and they add 
contradiction and blasphemy. 4. And the fourth act in the disclosure is that Paul 
and Barnabas both close with them, no longer in argument — argument is waste when 
"contradiction and bias; liemy " are begun — but in an authoritative and boM declara- 
tion of their own mission. The viry hour has come to say that the privileges, long 
neglected and now refused, shall not waste nor be "drawn up again into heaven," but 
shall be fully, freely, publicly offered to all the world ; " For the mouth of the Lord 
hath spoken it" (ver. 47). 

III. The day's issue. It is threefold. 1. The strangers and outsiders are filled 
with gladness and gratitude. They do not refuse to take the " leavings " of haughty 
and exclusive Jews. - Nor do they think them, call them, or find them " crumbs from 
the Master's table." No; they see their day, their opiicrtunity, their feast, and, hungry, 
sit down to it as a banquet indeed. They are " glad ; " they glorify the Word of the 
Lord;" they "believe; " they are "filled with joy and with the Holy Ghost." For they 
felt that that "day salvation had come to their house." 2. The disconcerted Jew, 
most disconcerted of all because he inwardly knew he had forfeited, of his own sur- 
rendeir, his chiefest blessing and distinction, will not let things lie. He will raise the 
" rtspectahle" the " orthodox" part of the city, and even women of the devout and 
honourable, »nd chief men of the city, who " cared for none of these things " probably 
in their heart. And all these join to persecute the two men, Paul and Barnabas. And 
they expel them. 3. These two servants of Christ hear the echoes of a voice which 
perhaps thiey had not heard itself (Luke x. 11). Ami they hear the call of duty (Matt. 
I. 23) elsewhere, and do not forget that the time is 'precious, that daylight will soon 
have gone, and that it is theirs to " work while it is day." — B. 

Vers. 2, 3. — Mwnan separation to Divine missioni. The point to which attention 
may be directed is that the living Lord, presiding in his Church, selects the persons to 
do his work, but requires the Church to make outward and formal recognition of his 
selection. Christ adls to work. The Church separates to work. This subject may 
be introduced by illustrations of the ways in which God was pleased to communicate 
his will under the older dispensations, as e.g. by the vision and message of ange's, by 
the mission of prophets, by inward impulses. We may recognize a steaily advance 
towards the more spiritual ways in which God communicates his will to the New 
Testament Church; sometimes directly inspiring the individual member; at other 
times revealing his will to some that, through them, it might be communicated to all. 
The indwelling Spirit is now the medium of Divine revelation to men. So indwelling, 
he becomes the constant inspiration of thought, feeling, judgment, and action. The 
Holy Qhost, conceived as the abiding Divine presence in the tJhurch, said, " Separate 
me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them." It has been 
suggested that the will of the Fnly Ghost was known "through the lips of the 
prophets, speaking as by a sudden burst of simultaneous inspiration." 

I. T^B Divme aWiOtmbht w wobk and wobkem. 1. God has a work for each ose 



430 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xiu. 1— 62, 



of his creatures to do. This truth is illustrated in the infinite variety of things whicli 
God has made on the earth. Each minutest creature has his place, his work, and his 
fitness for doing it. As we ascend in the scale of being, the work becomes more com- 
plex ; and it is difficult for us to realize that the same thing can be true of man, who is 
endowed with self-will and is free to choose his own way. Yet we do hold that, in 
the Divine omniscience and government, a work is appointed for every man, and that, 
for the doing of that precise work, each man is brought into being at a particular time 
and endowed with particular abilities. A perfect order on earth could be attained if 
each individual fitted precisely into the place and work to which he has been divinely 
assigned. 2. But God not only has a variety of forms of work, he has a perfect know- 
ledge of the men who can best do it. Sometimes the Divine sovereignty is spoken of 
in a way that cannot honour God. It is assumed that he acts upon a bare exercise ot 
will, and without the necessity for consideration. But the ca j of our text rather 
shows that the Divine selections are always made upon due estimate of the fitnesi of 
the individuals. Barnabas and Saul were evidently just the men to undertake this 
new mission to the Gentiles. It follows from this view of the Divine calls to work 
that it can never be a true humility that refuses a Divine call ; Moses and Jeremiah 
were both in the wrong when they hesitated and shrank back from a duty which God 
laid upon them. We may be quite sure that we can do whatsoever God requires us to 
do. 3. And it may further be shown that God has the full right to call forth any one 
of his servants to serve him in any way that he may please. Moses must come from 
the deserts, Gideon from the winepress, David from the sheepfolds, Elisha from his 
ploughing;, and John from his fishing, if the "Lord hath need of him." 

IL The human kbcoonition of the Divine allotment. It may be said — ^Is not the 
Divine allotment of workers and their work sufficient ? and why should more than this 
be necessary? In reply, it may be pointed out that God deals with us as communities, 
and recognizes our mutual relations, and'our influence one upon another. For the sake 
of the blessing which one man's call may be to many, he requires that it shall be 
publicly and openly recognized. In this way his claims, his presence, and his abiding 
relations to all work and workers may be freshly impressed upon the Church. Ordina- 
tion and dedication services are firuitful in blessing to the Churches. It may be well 
to point out: 1. The value of forms, services, and devout ceremonials. 2. The most 
profitable and helpful foi-ms such services may take, noting and explaining that, in the 
ordination of Barnabas and Saul, there was union in fasting and in prayer, with the 
solemn " laying on of hands." 3. The purposes that may be served by such public 
dedications^(l) increased feeling of responsibility on the part of the persons dedicated ; 
(2) assured interest of the congregation iu their work ; (8) impulse to others to devote 
themselves to Christian work. — K. T. 

Vers. 2, 4. — J%e presidency of the Holy Ghost. "The Holy Guost said;" "Being 
sent forth by the Holy Ghost." Seriously erroneous views of the presidency of the 
Holy Ghost in the Ciuristian Church or Churches make it necessary that the true and 
' scriptural teaching on the subject should be explained. It is assumed, by some sections, 
that this presidency secures the absolute truth of whatever may be said at such a meet- 
ing, and the infallibility of every decision to which such a meeting may be led. But 
the Holy Spirit is not present to secure results, only to guide deliberations. God is 
present with man in no such sense as involves the mastery of man's free thought and 
will, and changing him into a mere created thing. The distinction is an essential one, 
tliough it may be difficult to grasp. We may illustrate from the relations between the 
branch and the vine. The life in the branch is the life of the vine ; but the branch is 
fi ee to take its own shapings under various external influences. At the same time, it is 
still true that the vine- life controls and overrules the very shapings of the branch, in its 
own secret ways. Presidency, inspiration, guidance, and control we may have in the 
abiding and indwelling Holy Ghost ; but infallibility for the individual, the community, 
or the Church, it is no part of his work to ensure. Considering what may be learned 
concerning the presidency of the Holy Spirit from the Scriptures, we notice — 

I. The figure as seen in the old prophets. Divine communications were made, 
in the earlier days of the world, to individuals upon due occasion, and orauular res[iou.sea 
were wa^e by the high pest, through Urjtn and T^mp^im. iWt w tjie tinges q( ti^t 



OH. xni. 1— 52.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 431 

prophets vra meet with a most important advance in the Divine relations. More or lest 
coustantly God dwells with and abides in those prophets, and their relation to the 
Divine was the foroshailowing and preparation for the abiding relations of the Holy 
Ghost with the believer and the Church. The " Word of the Lord" came to the prophets, 
but, besides this, there was an openness and sensitiveness to Divine leadings which 
could be thus expressed : " The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me." Other points will 
come out upon a study of the nature of prophetic inspiration, and especially this one. as 
bearing on the point now before us, that the Holy Ghost used the individuality of the 
prophet, and became only the life and force behind it, and so prepared for the Cliristian 
times when, in this way, all the Lord's people are pruphets. The progression of 
Divine truth is well illustrated in the history of the relations of the Spirit of God 
with men. 

IL The fact ab eepbbsbnted in the thbockaoy. The very essence of the idea of 
the.theocracy was the invisible presence and rule of God with men. God was witli 
them — always with them. Yet they never saw him. Somehow he was in them. 
He knew all their concerns. He was appropriately afTocted by all their doings. He 
could bo " grieved," " quenched," " resisted," and even " driven away." Present with 
them, he inspired and guided all the national life ; ho toned and sanctified all the 
family and social life. The sublimest sentiment of Mosaism was that of the indwell- 
ing presence of Jehovah. Then, when the fulness of times came, the Jehovah -fii^ure 
could pass aside, with its kingliness and mystery, giving place to the Father (holy 
Father, righteous Father) ; and the sense of God's near presence and close though 
invisible relations could be realized in the conception of the abiding, indwelling Holy 
Ghost, who leads us into all truth and righteousness. 

HI. The feeling as realized in a movinq and quidino of o0b judgjibnt, will, 
AND BEBOLTE. In Seeking to avoid the merely sentimental, we must take heed that we 
miss or undervalue no truth. And Cliristian experience abundantly confirms the 
position that there is almost real sense in which open hearts feel the inward movingf 
of tiio Holy Ghost, and may rely on the Divine inward guidance of judgment and 
will. The Church, too, may plead that her experience confirms the testimony of the 
individual Christian. ' This subject should be so treated as to deal with men's 
practical difficulty — How can we know we have Divine guidance in our business and 
family affairs now? If God's Spirit dwells in us, we now have the actual inspiration 
and direction of our judgment, will, pmpase, and decision. — K. T. 

Ver. 7. — Seekers after Ood. This jiassage Introduces to us a Boman official, speaks 
of him in generally good terms as a " prudent man," but lets us know something of his 
secret feelings and his unrest of heart, by adding that be " desired to hear the Word of 
God," The way in which heathen religions prepared the way for the gospel is often 
pointed out, but we have not yet adequately apprehended the fact that a Divine work 
of preparation was carried on in many heathen souls ; such instances as this of Scrgius 
Paulus being properly treated as prominent examples of a general fact. It is to the 
yearning of the heathen heart for the true God and the eternal life that St. Paul makes 
his appeals ; and in later missionary work remarkable instances have been met with of 
soul-seeking for God, before the missionaries brought the gospel light. We ought, 
indeed, to expect to find men everywhere seeking after Gud, seeing that " he hath made 
of one blood all nations to dwell upon the earth," and has never " left himself with 
out a witness ; " but a conception of the exclusiveness of the revelation in Christ has so 
occupied Christian thought that the noble conception of Christ's revelation as the ulti- 
mate issue and completion of all other revelations, is only now gaining acceptance. 
Men have so strongly felt the antagonistic sides of the heathen religions that they have 
failed to ask whether earnest souls within utterly corrupt systems may not be 

"Infants crying in the night: 
Infants crying for the light ; 
And with no language but aery." 

I lean Plumptro gives an interesting inscription — the date of which Is, howevei, 

I ntertain, ami may be of the second or third century after Christ — found at Galgoi, in 
tyjirus, whwh sltows a ^'cucning after spinetbing itiigher tb«»n tlje polytheism of G'i^uqb 



432 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. xm. 1— 62, 

It reads thus : " Thou, the one God, the greatest, the most glorious Name, help us all, 
we beseech thee." The unrest and anxious Inquiring of Sergius Fauliis are further 
indicated ic the fact that he had come into the power of Elymas the sorcerer, who 
evidently persua»led him that he could settle all his doubts. The subject introduced 
by this incident may bo considered under the following divisions : — 

I. The natubal disposition of man to seek foe God. Remember St. Augustine'k 
words, " Man is made for God, and can find no rest tiU he finds rest in him." Seeking 
Ood is necessary to the dependent creature, who must lean, and must find some one on 
whom he may perfectly lean. " A belief in some personal power, the arbiter of man's 
destiny, above and beyund himself, is a primary necessity of the human mind. Man- 
kind can never dispense with this belief, however superfluous in certain cases and for 
a time it may seem to be to the individual " (Canon Parrar). Much hasjbeen made of 
the fact that some tribes of men have been found which had no name for God, and 
indeed no knowledge of him or concern to hear about him ; but it may fairly be urged, 
from the utterly degraded condition of these tribes, that men have never lost their care 
for God uutil they have virtually lost their manhood. Degraded to be like the beasts, 
they cease to have uplouking eyes and yearning hearts. Humanity is knit in brother- 
hood by its great united cry for its Father. 

IL The things that may temporarily satisfy the seeking. These take one of 
three forms ; either : 1. The absorption of a man in purely material and selfish interests, 
which may overlay and crush down the soul's great needs ; just as now the world and 
its business and pleasure so often silence the soul's cry in the Christian. 2. The teach- 
ings of a philosophy which attempts to put " thoughts " and " ideas " in the place of a 
living being. 3. So-called false religions, which give unworthy views of God, but, by 
ceremonial, seek to satisfy the religious instinct. Such religions offer, what man 
appears to need, a doctrine about God, and a cult or worship of him. It may be 
shown that, in subtle forms, men are enticed from their seekings, even in these Christian 
days, by one or other of these evil influences. 

III. The unrest which sooner or later bbtdbnb. For man can only find 
prrmanent rest in that which is true. The false has no " staying power." it may 
seem to fit at one time, but life advances, new needs arise, new thoughts stir within, 
and the false theory will no longer serve, — the man finds himself looking out again, as 
anxiously as in the early days, and with the feeling that life is passing and the time 
for the quest is brief, for the truth and God wherein are final rest. Sooner or later a 
man wakes up from his sleep of delusion, leels the darkness all about him, and puts out 
his hand, feeling after God, if haply he may find him. The unrest that surely comes 
to men within the world's care and pleasure, within sceptical philosophies, and within 
merely ceremonial reli,L|,ions, is our constant plea for the preachmg of the gospel and the 
revelation to men of God, in Christ manifest. 

IV. The response which God surely makes when a whole soul is turned 
TO him. He waiteth to be gracious, stands at the door ready for the opening, really 
wants every man to be saved, in the mystery of his great Fatherhood has a real need 
of souls, desires their love, finds his own joy in their trust, and so is sure to respond 
when men turn and seek him. And finding God, and coming into personal relations 
with him, is the end of man's quest. Against God, and everything in life is hard and 
dark and wrong. Apart from God, and all life and relations lie bathed in the lurid 
glow of stormy passion and self-will. With God, and earth, life, duty, and fellowship 
catch the soft, sweet sunlight, and everything takes on its beauty and perfection. It 
we have God we have all ; and we have all in God, in the God whom St. Paul preached, 
of whose glory Jesus the Man is the express and blessed image. — B. T. 

Vers. 24, 25. — John Baptisfi relations with Christ. These verses are part of an 
address which should have peculiar interest for us, seeing it is the first recorded speech 
of St. Paul the missionary, and gives us intimation of the ix)int8 which were promi- 
nently before his mind as the themes of his ministry. It is singular to find St. Paul 
from this time more prominent than the elder man, Barnabas. It may be an example ol 
the commonly observed fact that, sooner or later, the man of power and adaptation 
comes to the front place. St. Paul's power as a speaker is shown in tliis address. He wag 
not ft rhetorician, and was only in the higher sense eloquent. He wai, too intense to 



OH. xiiL 1— 52.] THE ACTS OF THE APuSTLKS. 434 

be careful of mere form, and his speech was always liable to suJden biealis and halts, 
through the rapidity with which new thoughts were suggested and side issues forced 
into consideration. His power lay in the intensity of liis convictions, which gave a 
doamatic and convincing force to the expression of his views ; and in his strong 
sympathy with his audience, which made him quick to adapt himself to them, and so 
to press home his thought. In this address we may notice : 1. His characteristic atti- 
tude, standing up and beckoning with the hand (ch. xvii. 22 ; xxi. 40 ; xxiii. 1 ; xxvi. 1). 
2. His conciliatory introductions : he always strives first to be sure of a common 
platform with his audience. 3. His skill in dealing with the early histories ; which 
served his purposes in two ways — (1) by securing tiie attention of his Jewish audiences, 
which are to this day always pleased with reviews of the national history; and (2) by 
bringing out the preparatory character of the earlier dispensation, and fitting his gospel 
message to it as a completion. 4. His firm handling of the facts connected with the 
mission of Jesus of Nazareth : hi s innocence ; his death as a victim of ecclesiastical 
enmity ; his resurrection. 5. His simple ofi'er of pai don and life in the name of the 
glorified, living Saviour. It is not conceivable that the gospel, in its very essence, can 
be more succinctly expressed than it has been by the Apostle Paul, in his missionary 
speeches (see especially here vers. 26, 32, 38, 39_). 6. His force of passionate pleading 
and application of the truth to individuals, as shown in vers. 10, 41. It is to be noted 
that St. Paul always makes his a|ipeal to both the intelligence and the heart, and the 
verses now before us for consideration show how he oft'cnd proofs of his statements 
which were well within the comprehension of his audience. A sentiment prevailed 
generally among the Jewish i-ace concerning John the Baptist. St. Paul takes advan- 
tage of it, and shows how John gave ids indn-ect and direct witness to the Messiahship 
of Jesus of Nazareth. It may be true that John's testimony to Jesus was of more 
value to a Jewish than to a Christian audience, but we question whether sufBcient has 
ever yet been made of it as one of our best evidences to the truth of Christianity. 
Three things require careful study and efficient illustration. 

I. Jonti's PBOPUiST-OHAUAOTEn. In fixing attention on John the Baptizer, men have 
lost sight of his more important relations as John the Prophet. " All men counted John 
as a prophet," the last of the line of men wlioiu God was pleased to raise up, for a time, 
as the expounders to men of his will — the voices that spoke to niou his message. It was 
the very essence of the ]irophet that he had a uiessaL^e from God to deliver, and a right 
to arrest men and compel them to listen to it. John's message was his mission, and his 
baptizing rite was but an accident or mode of expressing and sealing his message. Wo 
should ask — What did John say to men in the Name of God ? not, U hat rite did John 
perform ? 

II. JoHll's PBBPARATOBY WORK. This St. Paul dwells on. John never assumed 
that he had a message complete in itself, or that what he demnndcd was all, or even 
ths greatest thing, men needed. He was a herald, but his heralding assumed the close 
approach of the King. He was a mender of ways, but only to get ready for the royal 
progress. He demanded repentance, but only thnt men might be ready to receive the 
forgiveness and life which the King was coming to bestow. To stop with John is on 
the face of it absurd. There is no going on from John save to Christ. 

III. John's direct testimony. Tliere should have been no need for this. And yet 
it forms a most valuable Ihik, especially to Jews. John witnessed plainly that he had 
prepared the way for Jesus of Nazareth, that -he was the Lamb of God to take away 
sins, and that God had given to him visible and audible testimony that Jesus was the 
expected Messiah and Saviour. Accept John as prophet, w« must accept Jesus as 
Messiah.— B. T. 

Ver. 36.— Serving one's generation. Literally, " ministered to his own generation." 
The place of this text in St. Paul's address should be noticed. In it he reaches the 
height of his argument. The passage is an endeavour to show that SNl Testament 
prophecy could not be exhausted in the persons whom its first reference might seem to 
concern. It was not even true if its applications were thus limited. Its references 
were to Messiah ; they all met in Jesus of Nazareth, and therefore he must be acknow- 
ledged as Messiah. He presented to his audience one crucial test. David says in one 
psalm, " Thou shalt not suffer thine Holy One to see corruption." Now, could that 

ACTS. 2 V 



m THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. xiu. 1 -62. 

possibly be limited in its application to David himself? Our text is the overwhelming 
answer: " David, after he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on 
sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption." The words could only be 
true of Messiah. They were true of Jesus' of Nazareth. The seal of his Messiahship 
was his resurrection. We fix attention now on the description given of David as a 
man who " served his own generation," Dean Plumptrc says, " There is, perhaps, a 
suggested contrast between the limits within which the woik of service to mankind 
done by any mere man, however j^reat and powerful, is necessarily confined, and the 
wide, far-reaching, endless ministry to the whole human family which belongs to the 
Sbn of man." If God is pleased to spare a man so long as to reach the fulness of old 
age, that man really lives through nearly three generations ; and yet it is only upon 
one of them that even he can exeit an active influence. The first generation moulds 
him, with its various educational forces. The second generation he may distinctly 
impress with his own individuality; of it he may become one of the potent forces. 
On the third he can only exert a passive influence; he is, for the most part, out of 
sympathy with it, and he presently finds that he had better step aside, and let the 
current of life and thought pass on. No matter how long we may live, no one of us 
can influence more than just our one generation of thirty years or more. Some men 
serve their generation by being before it, and giving expression in it to the thoughts 
and truths and sentiments which properly belong to the age that is yet to be. Such 
men do a great work by anticipating the coming time and preventing the transitions 
and changes from becoming too abrupt. Such men must accept the peril of being 
misunderstood, and called hard names until they die, and the new generation recog- 
nizes in them its heroes, forerunners, and apostles. Some men belong precisely to 
their own generation : they are exactly adapted to it; they never get beyond it ; they 
are born into its thought and feeling ; they live in it, work for it, worthily express it, 
and pass away with it ; usually leaving no name only the good fruitage and the silent 
seeding of their good works. These are the thousands of the unknown ones, but they 
are the " salt of the earth." And some men seem to be always in the past generation. 
Their thoughts and feelings all belong to times past and gone. A queer, old-fashioned 
life they live amongst us, and their very talk sounds strange. And yet these links we 
need, lest, ih the pride of our present attainments, we should try to break the bonds of 
the holy and the good that have gone on before us. No generation dares forget the past 
out of which it has come. But no generation can afford to keep only a downward and 
a backward look ; it must lift up its head, peer away yonder, and hail the " good time 
coming." We may all serve our generation in three ways. 

I. We mat witness fob God in it. Every generation wants men and women 
who really believe in God, and make it plain to everybody that they do believe in him. 
In one form or in another, the belief in the living God is put in peril in each succeeding 
generation. Sometimes the unbelief is intellectual, and sometimes it is practical ; but 
every generation produces its " fools " and its " wicked," who secretly or openly say, 
" There is no God." Then we may minister to our generation by a clear and constant 
witness to the living God ; not as by our word only, but by the impression we make on 
men that we are actually living under the " great Taskmaster's eye ; " by the signs we 
show that all our life is spent in his fear ; and by the tone of all our thought, relation- 
ship, and duty, which plainly indicates the abiding sense of his presence. Thus David 
served his generation, bringing the sense of God to men whenever he came into relations 
with them ; and it is the honour of Mohammed that he laid this down as the very 
foundation of Islamism, " There is no God but God." 

II. We mat serve cub own GBNEBATION by being cue best POSSIliLE IN IT. For 

every generation needs, in all its spheres, such models and examples as may be to it a 
constant inspiration. And exactly what we all may do, wherever our lot is cast, is this 
— keep the moral standard- up, and raise the moral standard higher. And this can only 
be done by lives, by examples, by personal character. What we are may be the leavening 
fiirce of our generation in our sphere. But it would seem that, in this respect, David 
B.i.lly failed. We cannot say that he served his generation by being the best possible 
in it. And yet, maybe, if we rightly knew his age, we might come to feel that he did 
Lveu taking into account his grievous fall, the main current of his life was, to hia 
people, a high and inspiring example ; a stream of influence that made for righteous- 



c-j. XIII. 1—52.] THE 1.CTS OF THE APOSTLES. 433 

nosa. And certainly we may find the perfect example of the " best " in David's greater 
Son. 

III. We mat minister to oub generation by manpullt ebsisting the bvit.s 
THAT may affliot IT. Por every generation has its conflicts, and wants its hcly 
warriors, its brave soldiers, as well as its noble leaders. Evil is active in every age. 
The enemy of Grod and righteousness "goeth about as a roaring lion, seelcing whom lie 
may devour." It is true that we best oppose to evil the solid, steadfast, quiet persistence 
of godly character ; but we are not fully faithful to our God or our generation if we 
let any phase of social, political, or moral evil grow up in our midst unchallenged and 
unre^stod. And in this our Lord has left us his holy example. There is a sublime 
force in his fearless denunciations of Pharisaic conceit and Sadducean laxity. He 
always called things by their right names, and sought, with wholesome reproofs and 
warnings, to purify a corrupt generation. And the man who faithfully serves his 
generation may be sure of this — ^his influence will never fade out, wiU never die. And 
God will show one day how he helped on bis kingdom of righteousness and peace. 
— R.T. 

Ver. 38. — Forgiveness of sins: To illustrate how the gospel message has ever bomo 
on this " forgiveness of sins," compare for the teaching of John the Baptist, Mark i. 4 ; 
Luke ii. 3 : of our Lord himself. Matt. ix. 2, 6 ; Luke vii. 47 ; xxiv. 47 : of St. Peter, ch. 
ii. 38 ; v. 31 ; x. 43. See another instance of St. Paul's^ teaching on the subject (oh. xxvi. 
18). Taken with its context, the passage is a striking one, as showing how deeply St. 
Paul was, from the first, impressed by the fact that the Mosaic Law was inefficient as a 
guide to true righteousness ; and by the fact that forgiveness, as an act of grace, and not 
bestowed on any form of human merit, was the very essence of the gospel announce- 
ment to men. This subject is, however, so familiar, that there seems little need for 
more than the suggestion of an order in wliich thought may hopefully be guided. 

I. Distinguish sins from ceremonial offences. Observe the distinction so 
carefully made in Heb. ix. 9, 13, 14, 23 ; and note : 1. Ceremonial offences are 
limited by human regulations; sins are indicated liy Divine Law. 2. Ceremonial 
offences concern only such persons as come under the ceremonial rules ; sins attach to 
all mankind, because related to God's moral law for all his creatures. 3. Treatment of 
ceremonial offences may illustrate, but can only illustrate. Divine methods of dealing 
with sin. 4. Sius, and not ceremonial offences, are dealt with by the Heaven-sent 
Saviour. The heinousness, hatefulness, and evil influences of men's sins may be shown, 
and the greatness of a redemptive scheme that can meet all the mischief caueed by sin, 
should be ex|ilained. 

II. Forgiveness of sins is man's supreme want. Not man's only want, but the 
real root of all his wants, because other right relations can only follow on his right 
relations with God. Sin is, in essence, self-will, and finds expression in rebellious actioas ; 
therefore the way of the. removal of sin must be repentaace, which is the humbling 
of the self-will, and forgiveness, which removes the expressions and consequences of 
the self-will. It may be that man's sin was at first pressed home upoa men by the 
apostles in its greatest manifestation — the rejection and crucifixion of the Son of God; 
but this supreme act of iniquity did but reveal the utter baseness, badness, and corruption 
of the human heart and life. On this point see the teachings of St. Paul in Bom. iiL 
9—19. 

II I. Such forgiveness is administered by the risen Christ. Prospectively, he 
had power on earth to forgive sins, but in that he did but declare his right, and 
illustrate the power he now has to " give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins." 
Direct from the living Saviour to the sinner's own soul must now come the message of 
Divine forgiveness. On the basis of his finished and accepted sacrifice, to our Lord 
Jesus Christ is now entrusted the power to grant absolution and remission of sins to all 
who " truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his holy gospel." And the declaration to 
men of a full and free forgiveness, actually now ministered to them by the living Saviour, 
as the beginning of his proposed work of delivering them from all sin's power and thral- 
dom, is the very point of the message which we must bear to men. Not men's firailties 
only, nor men's mistakes, nor meu's intellectual errors, nor men's hereditary tendencies, 
nor iiien's faults in the eye of " class " or " society ; " but distinctly men'* sins, men'i 



43« 



TIIK ACTS 01*' THE APOSTLES. 



[CH. XIV. 1—28. 



wilfulnesses, and wickednesses, and defiances of God, and breakings of law, and crucify- 
ing of God's Son, — thest; the infinite love has found out how to reach ; a' d it speaks 
from the lips of the " once dead, but now risen, living, and glorified Christ," free full 
forgiveness of all, even the blotting out for ever of scarlet and crimson stains. — B, X, 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



Ver. 1. — Entered for went both, A.V. ; Jews 
for tlie Jews, A.V. ; and for and also, A.V. ; 
Greeks for the Greeks, A.V. Observe how in 
every case Greeks are found attending the 
synagogue. So spake, etc. This illustrates 
the statement in Kom. x. 17, that "faith 
Cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word 
of God." 

Ver. 2. — Tlie Jews that were disobedient for 
the unbelieving Jews, A.V. and T.R. ; stirred 
up the souls of the Gentiles, and made them, 
eta., for stirred up the Gentiles, and made 
their minds, etc., A.V. The Jews that were 
disobedient. The E.T. (iireiflijo-ayTej) may 
equally and even better be rendered, the 
Jews that were unbelieving (comp. Jolin 
iii. 36, where tnareiav and hreieSiii are 
opposed to each other, and Eom. xi. 30—32, 
where the idea of belief is far more appro- 
priate than that of obedience). Stirred up 
the souls, etc. St. Paul speaks with much 
warmth of the constant opposition of the 
Jews, " forbidding us to B()eak to the Gentiles 
that they might be saved " (1 Thess. ti. 14 
—16). 

Ver. 3.— They tarried there for abode they, 
A.V. ; bare witness for qave testimony, 
A.V. ; granting for and granted, A.V. For 
the pljrase long time (iKavup xp^""")-! comp. 
eh. xxvii. 9, "much time," and "many 
days" (vtiepcu iKavaC), ch. ix. 23. So also 
Luke viii. 27, " long time," or " for a long 
time " (eV xpo""" tKavwv). Speaking boldly 
(T!afpriaia(6ixivot) in the iord(67rl Tiji Kupiijo); 
t.e. having the Lord for their support. It 
waa the special prayer of the Church that 
God would "grant to his Bervants that they 
might speak the Woid with all boldness 
(jUeTairao^T^frfayirtiffT/s)," and in answer to that 
prayer tlioy were enabled to speak "the 
Word of God with boldness" (oli. iv. 29, 
31 ; oomp. ch. ix. 29 ; xviii. 26 ; xix. 8 ; 1 
Thess. ii. 2, etc.). It was no small evidence 
of the power of the Holy Ghost that the 
apostles were able to speuk with such uncom- 
promising fidelity in the face of such bitter 
opposition. Signs and wonders, etc. See 
Mark xvi. 17—20 ; oomp. too ch. iv. 30, 
which also ind catos that we ought, perhnps, 
to understaiiil here tw Kvplcf of God the 
Father rather than of " his holy Servant 
ifeBus." 
Ver. 4.— Was divided {iaxiaeri) ; hence 



■ax^iTiia,a schism (see John vii. 43; Jx. 16: 
X. 19 ; 1 Oor. i. 10 '. 

Ver. 5. — Made an onset for an assault 
made, A.V. ; of the Jews for also of the Jews, 
A. v.; to entreat them shamef ally for to use 
them despitefuUy, A.V., as 1 Thess. ii. 2. 
As regards Spfi.'fi, neither the A. V. assault nor 
the E.V. onset expresses it exactly. 'Op/t^ 
means the strong beut of the mind, as in 
Jas. iii. 4, where it expresses the strong 
will of the steersman directing the ship 
against the force of the winds. Here it 
means that both Jews with their rulers, and 
Gentiles, under the influence of violent 
passion, had determined and agreed to assault 
Paul and Barnabas. To entreat them shame- 
fully. "r$pis and i&piCa denote " violence," 
as Matt. xxii. 6; Luke xviii. 32 ; 2 Cor. xii. 
10. It is sometimes used of corporal punish- 
ment, even legally inflicted, as Prov. xix. 18 
(LX.\.). 

Vers. 6, 7. — Became aware for were ware, 
A.V. (<rui/<5iii/T6j), see ch. xii. 12; the cities 
of Lycaonia, Jyystra, and Derbe, for Lystra 
and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, A.V. ; the 
region for unto the region, A.V. ; round 
about for that lieth round about, A.V. They 
preached ; were preaching — not once or twice, 
but continuously. Lystra and Derbe were 
cities of soutliern Lycaonia, obscure and 
remote from civilization, situated north of 
Mount Taurus, in a cold arid country some- 
where between Ak Ghieul on the north, and 
the volcanic region of Karadagh on the 
south. They seem to have been included 
at this time in the dominions of Antioohus, 
king of Commagene (Lewin). Lystra is 
thought to be now represented by Bin-bir 
Kilissete (the thousand and one churches) 
(Lewin and Renan), though this is doubtful ; , 
and Derbe distant about twenty miles from 
Lystra, and the capital of that part of Lyca- 
onia called Isaurica, is thonght to be 
the modern Dioli (Hamilton, Renan, etc.) ; 
others, however, place it nearer the White 
Lake, Ah Ghieul, where the ruins of an 
ancient town are found. 

Ver. 8. — At Lystra there sat, etc., for there 
sat . . . at Lystra, A.V. ; a cripple for heing 
a cripple, A.V. and T.E. 

Ver. 9. — Speaking for speak, A.V. ; fatten- 
ing his eyes upon for stedfastly beholdiu r;, A.V. 
(see above, ch. i. 10 ; iii. 4, etc.) ; seeing for 
perceiving, A.V. ; made whole for healed, A.V. 
Heard The force of the imperfect feu. 



CU. ilV. i--28j 



Tiiii AUTS OJ? TH£ AfOSl'LfiS. 



431 



wonldjperliaps, be better given by " listen ed " 
to Paul speaking. There is great resem- 
blance between this miracle of healinij, and 
that of the lame man laiil at the gate of the 
temple, who was healed by Peter (ch. iii. 2 — 
10), and, not unnatuially, considerable 
identity of expression in the narratives. Both 
men were lame from their birth ; the apostles 
fastened their eyes upon both ; both, when 
healed, leaped and walked; and in both eases 
the miiaclu had a great effect upon the 
multitudes who beheld it. Zeller (vol. ii. 
p. 6), with characteristic reckUssness, infers 
that " this narrative was ... merely in imita- 
tion of the early miraculous story of Peter ; " 
and so relegates both it and the subsequent 
narrative to the regions of fable. 

Ver. 10. — Leaped up for leaped, A.V. 

Ver. 11. — Multiludea for people, A.V. ; 
voice for voices, A.V. In the speech of Lyoa- 
ouia. It is not known what the language 
of Lycaonia was, whether Cappudocian, or 
Celtic, or Lycian ; but we learn incidentally 
from StephLinus Byzantinus, that there was 
a Lyoaonian language, for he tells us that 
Oelhia (as some write the name Derbe) was 
the Lycaoniau for &picev9os, a juniper tree or 
berry. No other Lycaonian word is known 
(see " Jablouskii Disquis. de Ling. Lycaon," 
in Stephan., ' Thesaur.'). The Lycaonians 
doubtless understood Greek as the language 
of intercommunication all over Eomau Asia, 
but among themselves would speak their 
native dialect. The belief that the gods 
were come down in the likeness of men, and 
that these gods were Jupiter and Hermes, 
or Mercury, was most natural to Lycaonians, 
who were conversant with, and doubtless 
believed, the Phrygian legend of Philemon 
and Baucis, who entertained hospitably 
Jupiter and Hermes, when no one else would 
take them in, and whose cottage was by the 
gods turned into a temple (when all tlio 
neighbourhood was drowned by a flood), 
of which they were made priest and 
priestess during life, and simultaneously 
metamorpliosLd into an oak and lime tree 
when their life ended (Ovid, ' Metamorph.,' 
viii. 611, etc.). Ovid places the scene of the 
legend at Tyana, the site of which has been 
ascertained by Hamilton to be near Erekli, in 
Cappadooia, close to the borders of Lycaon ia. 
The moral drawn in thw legend itself seems 
to have been that which influenced the 
people of Lycaonia in their conduct towards 
the two strangers : " Oura pii dis sunt, et 
qui ooluere coluntur," which may be Eng- 
lished, "Them that honour me 1 will honour" 
(1 Sam. ii. 30). 

Ver. 12. — Mercury for Mercurius, A V. 
For the Latin Jupiter and Mercury the 
Ureek original has Zeus and Heimcs. 
Jupiter is Jovis Pater, where Jovis or Diovisnr 
Uif-s (in Uiespiter) is the Latin form of Z ua 



gen. Afoj. Mercury is Herme* in his special 
character as the god of markets and trade. 
But the Lycaonians here thought of him 
in his principal oljaracter of herald and 
messenger of the gods, and hence the god of 
eloquence and speech. 

Ver. 13. — And for then, A.V. ; whose temple 
was before the city for which was before their 
city, A.V. and T.R. ; the multitudes for the 
people; A.V., as in ver. 12. The priest ol 
Jupiter. The words, S Sh Upehs to? Aihs toS 
SvTos, K,r.\., may be construed in two ways — 
either as in the A.V., or the priest of the 
temple of Jupiter, etc., understanding, by a 
common elli|ise, hpov, or, vauS, after AtSs, as 
in the Latin phrase,"TJbi ad Diansa veneris;" 
" When you come to the temple of Diana," 
etc. But it is not a Greek phrase to speak 
of Jupiter being before the city, meaning 
the temple of Jupiter. Therefore the proper 
way of translating is to take the full phrase 
as being 6 Upeits tov Ai6s v(wv or lepuu, the 
article toB belonging to vaov, and Aiii being, 
as in so many instances, without the article 
(see Matt., 'Gr. Gr.,' 281). The gates; viz. 
of the city. The temple was just outside 
the gates; the lame man, it is likely, sat 
inside near the gates through which men 
were passing in and out. Paul and Barnabaa 
would address the people in the square or 
open space inside the gates. Seeing a stir 
at the gates, and hearing that it was the 
priest of Jupiter coming with oxen an'l gar- 
lands to sacriflce to them, they immediately 
ran forward to prevent it. The ox was the 
proper sacrifice for Jupiter. 

Ver. 14. — But . . . heard of it for whic\ 
. . . heard of, A.V. ; garments for clothes, A.V. ; 
sprang forth for ran in, A.V. ; multitudes for 
people, A. v., as before. The conduct of Bar- 
nabas and Paul, in abhorring the honours 
offered to them, has been well contrasted 
with the profane vanity of Herod iu accepting 
Divine honours (eh. xii. 23). 

Ver.. 15. — Bring you good tidings fox preach 
unto you, A.V.; vain things for vanities, A.V. ; 
who for which, A.V. ; the heaven and the earth 
for heaven and earth, A.V. ; that in tliem i» 
for things that are therein, A.V. For the 
declaration. We also are men of like passions 
with you, compare Peter's saying to Cornelius 
(ch, X. 26), " Stand up ; I myself also am a 
man." St. Paul finely contrasts the utter 
vanity, i.e. the impotence, lifelessness, use- 
lessness, and unprofitableness of the idols, 
with the power of the Jiving God, who by his 
word created heaven and earth and sea, and 
filled them all with beauty, shape, and life. 

Ver. 16. — The generations gone by for timei 
past, A.V. ; the nations for nations, A.V. 

Ver. 17. — And yet for nevertheless, A.V. ; 
you from heaven rains for us rain from 
heaven, A.V. and T.K. ; your for our, A.V. 
and T.K. Obaerve how the apoatle adapts 



iU 



THti ACi*S Of THE aPOSTLES, 



t»)it. tttr. 1~ -28 



bis preaching to his hearers. How different 
this address to the heathen Lycaonians from 
tlioso to Jews and proselytes I Here he leads 
them from nature to God ; there from pro- 
phecy to Jesus. 

Ver. 18. — The multitudes for the people, 
A.V. ; from doing for tjuit they had not 
done, A.V. 

Vcr. 19. — But there came Jewt thither for 
and there came thither certain Jews; A.V. ; 
and having persuaded the multitudes, they 
stonedluiwhopersuaded thepeople,and having 
stoned, A.V. ; and dragged for dreio, A.V. ; 
that he was dead for he had been dead, A.V. 
But there came Jews, etc. Observe the per- 
sistent en mity of the unbelieving Jews. The 
same fickleness of the multitude which led 
those who had cried, " Hosanna I " to turn 
round and say, "(Jrncify him I " here led those 
who would have worshipped Paul as a god, 
now to stune him as a blaspliemer. Tills is, 
doubtless, the instancfe to which St. Paul 
alludes when he says " Once was I stoned," 
(2 Cor. xi. 25). 

Ver. 20. — JSut for howbeit, A.V. ; entered 
for came, A.V. ; on the morrow for the next 
day, A.V. ; went forth for departed, A.V. 
It is pleasing to observe the fidelity of the 
converts, who, in the face of violence and 
death, clave to the apostle, even when they 
thought he was dead. It does not appear 
liow Baniabas escaped. 

Ver 21. — Made many disciples for taught 
mavy, A.V. ; returned for returned again, 
A.V.; to Antioch for Antioch, A..\. Made 
many disciples (ua0jjT€iJ(ra»'T6s iKavohs)', comp. 
.Matt, xxviii. 19. Wliat admirable constancy 
ti us to run fresh risks to life and limb in 
order to win souls to Christ I 

Ver. 22. — Exhorting for and exhorting, 
A.V. ; through many tribulations we must for 
we must through much tribulation, A.V. St. 
Paul spoke from his own experience : " In 
labours more abundant, in stri]ies above 
measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths 
oft," etc. (2 Cor. xi. 23—27 ; see too 2 Tim. 
iii. 10 — 12). It is very touching to see the 
tender care of the apostles for the young con- 
verts, lest they should fall away in time of 
persecution (see ch. xv 36; 1 Thess. iii. 1, 
5, 8; 1 Pet. V. 8— 10). 

Ver. 23. — Appointed for them for ordained 
them, A.V. (xei^'OT;)i'i'troj'Tes); had believed 
for beliened, A.V. The original meaning of 
Xiiporovfca is "to stretch out the hand," and 
the substantive x^'poxoi/fa is used in the 
LXX. of Isa. Iviii. 9 for " the putting forth 
of the finger " of the A.V. But the common 
meaning of the verb is " to vote by stretching 
out the hand " and hence " to elect " by a 
ihow of handd (2 Cor. viii. 19), or simply 
" to appoint," without any reference to voting. 
In the choice of an apostle the election was 
by lot (oh. i. 26), in the appointment of 



deacons the choice was by tho people, how 
indicnted we are not told (ch. vi. 5); ttio 
question here, on which commentators dis- . 
agree, is whether the use of the word 
X^tpoTovew indicates voting by the people, 
selection by the apostles, or simple creation 
or appointment. As x^tporovTiffavres is pre- 
dicated of Paul and Barnabas, it cannot 
possibly refer to voting by the people, wIjo 
are inclufled in the aurois as tliose on whrse 
behalf the x^'porofla was made. It seems 
simplest and most in accordance with the 
classical use of the word and its use in ch. 
X. 41 (TrpoKex^tpoTovTjfievois'), to take it in the 
sense of crention or appointment (see Steph., 
' Tliesaur.'). There is no reference to the 
laying on of hands. Elders (see ch. xi. 30, 
note; xx. 17; and especially Titus i. 5, 7, 
where we see that irpeafivrepos was synony- 
mous witii eiriaKoiros). From npetr^vTepos 
is formed presttr, priest, in French prestre, 
pritre. Gump. ch. xiii. 3, for lasting and 
prayer as accompaniments of ordination. 
Hence in the Church ordinations are pre- 
ceded by the Ember days. They commended 
them to the lord (comp. ch. xx. 32). In 
ver. 26 the word used is napaSthoiiivoi. 

Vers. 24, 25. — They passed through for after 
they had passed throughout, A.V. ; and for 
they, A.V. ; spoken for preaclied, A.V. ; to 
for into, A.V. Paul and Barnabas had come 
from Cyprus to Perga (see ch. xiii. 13, note). 
Thence to Antioch, Icouium, Ijystra, and 
Derbe. They now returned from Derbe by 
Lystra, Iconium, Antioch, Perga. But, 
instead of taking ship at Perga, after preach- 
ing the Word there they went down to 
Attalia, now Adalia or Satalia, the chief 
seaport of Pamphylia, some miles west of 
the mouth of the Cestius, probably hearing 
that a ship was about to sail thence to 
Antioch. It does not appear that they made 
any converts or even preached at Attalia. 

Ver. 26. — Tliey sailed for sailed, A.V. ; 
comiidtted for recommended, A.V. ; had ful- 
filled (oi fulfilled, A.V. 

Ver. 27.— ^H things for aU, A.V. ; how 
that for hov), A.V. ; a door for the door, A.V. 
A door. The door is prefer.ible, because 
"the faith" limits the ilnor to one kind of 
opening. In Col. iv. 3 the case is a little 
different bi.th in the A.V. and the R.V., 
though in the latter " the door ol' the Word " 
would be a truer rendering. Observe how 
the leading idea of the narrative is the con- 
version of the GentUes. (See Introduction 
to tlie Acts.) 

Ver. 28.— Iliey tarried fur there they 
abode, A.V. ; no little for long, A.V. Bishop 
Pearson reckons it a little more than a year , 
Lewin, " about a year ; " Eenau, " iieveral 
months." No accurate statement can be 
gathered from St. Luke's indefinite expres- 
nion. With this chapter closes the acoount 



Ofi. MV. 1—28.] 



tllfi ACTS ot* THb; Ai*os'rLt;s. 



439 



of 8t Paul's flnt missionary tour. Cony- 
bcare uu.l Howson (pp. 177, 213) assign to 
it a duration of about nine months, from 
early spring, March, to November, when the 
sea would be closed; bringing him to Pei'ga 
in May, and thence for the next five or six 
months into the mountains of Pisidia, where 
it was the custom for the inhabitants of the 
lowlands to congregate during the hot 
months. Others, however, as Lewin (pp. 
li&, 157), think the circuit must have 



occupied " about two years ; " Wiesele? (p. 
22 1), " move than ono year ; " but Renan 
assigns to it " five years " (" Saint Paul," p. 
55). " Conjectural estimates v.nry between 
two and eight years " (' Spealcer's Oom- 
mentary '). Lewin's estimateis, perhaps, the 
most probable. Whatever the exact period 
may have been, it was a time fruitful in 
consequences to the immortal interesta of 
mankind. 



E0MILETIC3. 

Vers. 1 — 28. — The Word and the miracle. In the advancement of the kingdom of 
God on earth, whether by our Lord liiniself in the days of his flesh, or by the apostles 
after his ascension, two great instruments were in constant and simultaneous use — 
the preaching of the Word of God and tlie working of miracles. In the Gospels it is 
difficult to say which was the most prominent featuie of our Lord's life — his preaching 
the Word or his mighty works of power. He himself places them side by side in his 
description of his own course : " The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the 
lepers are cleansed, . . . the dead are raised up," and " the poor have the gospel preached 
to them " (Luke vji. 22). Many reasons may be assigned for this. The miracle gave 
authority to the Word before the Word had time to assert its own authority in the 
conscience and reason of the hearer. The miracle awakened attention by its irresistible 
surprise. The miracle was a witness to coniirm the doubtful and the wavering. 
Then again the miracle, having matter for its seat, testified to the sovereignty over all 
nature — the body, the sea, the air, the fruits of the earth, the grave — of him whose 
word was preached. Again, being that evil had set its two feet, one upon the body, the 
other upon the soul of men, producing in the one pain, sickness, infirmity, and death, 
and in the other sin, sorrow, and guilt, the double action of the miracle, healing, restoring, 
raising, the body, and of the Word, justifying, purifying, and sanctifying the soul, 
exhibited the true nature of the kingdom of God as the destruction of evil and the 
establishment of eternal joy and life. So that the miracle, besides its other functions, 
was a necessary complement of the Word in holding up a true picture of that kingdom 
of God which Jesus Christ was sent to found and to establish for ever. But now, having 
seen the common work of the Word and the miracle, let us note certain importajit 
differences in their respective functions. The miracle ddes not sanctify. It does not 
renew the inner man after the imnge of God. It does not pric6 the conscience, or 
soften the hard heart, or give wisdom, or produce love. It surprises, it alarms, it 
evidences, it displays power and goodness, it corroborates the Word, but it is not in 
itself a spiritual power. Hence of the number who saw Christ's miracles, how very 
few became his disciples ! Of the ten lepers that were cleansed only one gave glory to 
God. Nearly ten thousand ate of the loaves and fishes ; how many ate of that bread 
which came down from heaven? The whole Sanhedrim knew of the lame man whu 
was healed at the beautiful gate of the. temple, but they were only the more eager to 
.silence the voices of those who spake of Jesus and the Eesurrection. The priests ol 
Jupiter and the whole populace of Lystra were ready to worship Barnabas and Paul 
because of the healing of the cripple, but they were as ready immediately afterwards to 
stone them and cast them out of their city. But the Word of God is a creative, 
ijiiickening power in the soul. Its entrance gives light ; its action gives life ; its fruit is 
bve ; It does sanctify ; and it saves. At Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra, and at Derbe, 
the Word preached by Paul brought faith, and life, and joy, and salvation, both to Jews 
und Greeks. By the Word which they heard and believed they were brought to God, 
begotten unto life, quickened with Christ, made heirs of the Kesurrection and of the 
kingdom uf God. Everything that can enrich, and beautify, and comfort, and exalt a 
human being, is wrought by the Word of God received unto the heart. Let us, then, 
pviie the Word of God ; let us love it ; let us cherish it in our bopoms ; let us yield 



446 !tHEl Acts Ot* Tflfi APOStLfiS. [ch. iiV. 1-28 



ourselves to its teaching, its action, ltd power ; let us hide it in our secret soul ; let ua 
never be content till it has brought forth fruit a hundredfold in our lives to tha glory 
of God the Father. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Apostolic (ministerial) experience. I. The PRiviLEaB of rBBACHiNO. 
The apostles at Iconium "so spake" (ver. 1), i.e. with such force, persuasiveness, 
fidelity, that "a great multitude believed " (ver. 1); "they abode speaking boldly in 
the Lord" (ver. 3), i.e. they urged the truth with fearless vigour, their confidence being 
grounded on God's presence and sujiport ; " there they preached the gospel " (ver. 7). 
There is no vocation which any man can engage in which gives such scope for the 
exercise of his highest powtrs as that of tlie (.Jljristian minister or missionary. To 
preach the gospel of the grace of God as it should and may be proclaimed, is to do that 
in which the fullest intellectual energy, the utmost spirituality, the largest beneficence, 
the greatest strength of will, all the supreme faculties of redeemed and elevated man- 
hood, should be lavishly poured forth. 

II. The disohabge of subsidiary duties. It was an apostolic function to work 
miraculous cures : " signs and wonders were done by their hands " (ver. 3). This does 
not fall to our share, but it is always the missionary's and frequently the minister's 
office — as an auxiliary to his more spiritual work — to try to heal bodily complaints; 
and always is it his concern to devise and cncnurage those institutions and habits 
which tend to health, harmony, comfort, domestic peace. 

III. The joy op ebaping spiritual results. How deeply gratified must have been 
the hearts of the apostles as they saw that " multitude " of Jews-and Greeks "acknow- 
ledging the truth and power of the gospel which they were preaching (ver. 1) I All the 
harvest is not to be reaped here ; much of it " after many days ; " much of it by other 
hands (John iv. 38). But God does give increase for our own eyes to see and our own 
hands to reap. And of all the joys with which he fills our human hearts there are 
few, if any, comparable to that of seeing the pleasure of tlie Lord prosper in our hand 
(Isa. liii. 10). 

IV. The pain op witnessing opposition. It must have been with a keen pang that 
Paul and Barnabas witnessed the evil machinations of those " unbelieving Jews " (ver. 
2), hindering, as they must have done, the good work which was proceeding. Too 
often the Christian teacher has to look on at such scenes and grieve at the sad mischief 
which is being wrought. At such times he can only cast himself on God, fleeing to 
the Eock of his refuge, remembering that it is the work of the Infinite and Almighty 
One in which he is engaged. 

V. The duty of persistency. It Is not by a slight obstacle that the Christian work- 
man is to be daunted. He is to act like Nehemiah, whom neither the menaces nor the 
stratagems of his enemies could move. He is to act as Paul and Barnabas did, who 
" long time abode, speaking boldly in the Lord " (ver. 3). He is to show himself a faith- 
ful servant of his fearless Master, ready to encounter the contempt, or the ridicule, 
or^the slander, or the turbulence of the evil-minded, so long as there is any good to be 
accomplished by his steadfastness. But it is not to be forgotten that there is — 

VL The possidle necessity fob retirement. (Vers. 5, 6.) When the time comes 
that it is quite clear that persistency would only involve the one side in the guilt of 
murder and the other in the complete arrest of usefulness, tlien must the Lord's counsel 
be taken (Matt. x. 23). The hour comes when continuance in peril is not faithfulness, 
but foolhardiness; not commendable martyr-zeal, but censurable indiscretion. Wo 
must use our intelligence to discriminate between the two; but for retirement when 
'persistency is useless and even mischievous, we have the example of our Lord himself 
(Matt. xii. 15), and of his apostles here. — C. 

Vers. 7 — 20. — T!ie insufficient and the efficacious. We ask such questions as these— 
What is it that will convince the minds and convert the souls of men? What avails 
to establish the kingdom of Christ in any town or neighbourhood? What will secure 
the practical acceptance of Divine truth ? The answer is that some things are strong 
but insufficient ; one thing only is efficacious. 



ca.xiv.l-28J mn ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 441 



I. Thk iNBUPFiciENT. 1. The hand of Qod in nature does not suffice. "Thi 
living God which made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are thersin," 
has " not left himself without witness " anywhere ; everywhere ho has " done good, 
•nd sent rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and 
gladness" (vers. 15 — 17), pouring out, with the lavish hand of Divine beneficence, 
beauty and plenty, love and joy, peaceful memories and inspiring hopes, on to the path 
and into the heart of man. But what nations of the earth has this great gift of his 
hand saved from the most shameful and pernicious idolatry ? How many thousands of 
hearts are there to-day that are not drawn by this tu filial gratitude and holy service ? 
2. 'fhe miraculous does not avail (vers. 8 — 13, 18). The healing of the man who had 
been lame from his birth, so far from producing a favourable effect and leading to a 
general acceptance of the Divine message, led to an outburst of idoliitrous zeal. The 
people immediately deified the human agents and set about to worship them. If we 
turn back to the pages in which the miraculous appears — to the times of Moses, Samuel, 
Elijah, Elisha; or if we consider the treatment of our Divine Master himself, whose 
beneficent power reached so many human homes ; or if we go on to the gifts (miraculous) 
enjoyed by the Corinthian Church, if indeed they can be truly said to have enjoyed 
them ; — whithersoever we look, we see that the effect of the visibly supernatural was 
far less potent for good than we, in its absence, should have imagined it would be. 
Those who wait for the marked and unmistakable interposition of God before they 
take the one right step into the kingdom of Christ, before they "lay hold on eternal 
life," are most seriously imperilling tlicir own souls (see Luke xvi. 31). 3. The exhibi- 
tion of holy zeal is not suEScient (vers. 14 — 17). Though Paul and Barnabas energeti- 
cally disclaimed any title to be treated as gods, and resolutely refused the proffered 
honours, and though they were labouring without remuneration, and giving every 
possible proof of their disinterested love, yet thoy did not suc&ed in winning the strong 
esteem of the Lycaonians; these men proved fickle and faithless. Very soon indeed 
the hands that were diligently employed in paying sacrifice to the apostles were busy in 
hurling stones at them. Enthusiasm and even holiest heroism will not of itself prevail 
against the prejudice and jiassion of unrighteousness. 

II. ■The efficacious. We know that there were disciples gained at Lystra, for they 
stood round and slieltered Paul when he was murderously assailed (ver. 20). We also 
know that these disciples were gained by the preaching of the gospel (ver, 7). We 
are not told hei'e, but we are abundantly assured elsewhere, that the preaching of the 
truth was made effectual by the agency of the Holy Spirit of God. _So that we may 
^ay that (1) Divine truth was the weapon, (2) the Holy Gliost the agent, (3) human 
faith (see ver. 9, illustration) the condition, of the successful work of the apostles at 
Lystra, as these will be of all efficacious ministry everywhere now. — 0. 

Vers. 21 — 23. — The Christian leader and the novitiate. Driven from Lystra by 
the turbiilence of the people, Paul and Barnabas went to Durbe, and there they 
"preached the gospel;" they seem to have been unmolested, and consequently they 
" taught many people " (ver. 21). Having travelled so far eastward towards Antiooh, 
it became a question whether they should go on or return. Thus we come, as they 
came, to consider— 

L The function op the Christian leader in relation to the Christian novice. 
We gather from the action of the apostles on this occasion that it is the teacher's duty ; 
1. To be earnestly concerned for his young disciples, and to go out of his way to serve 
them. It would ccrtaiuly have been the more desirable course, "after the flesh," to 
go through the Cilician Gates, and so home to Antioch, rather than return and face 
the enraged populace from whom thoy had been obliged to flee. But a deep sense of 
what was due to those whom they had induaid to forsake their old faith and enter on 
a new and trying course constrained thera to forego the inviting and to pursuo the 
perilous path. To encourasje those who are beginning to live the Divine lil'o and who 
will probably find thcin Salves beset with unexpected aud serious difficullies, we should 
hold ourselves ready tj go far out of our way and to run some serious risks. 2. To 
impart additional instruction. The apostles not only repeated what they had said 
bel'ore, but they added sound Christian doctrine ; especially they taught that we must 
exjpect to bear the burdens before we enter into the glory of our Lord ; that it is 



U9 THE ACTS OF tllE APCSTLES. [cti. Xiv. 1-28. 

through mnch tribulation we enter the kingdom (ver. 22). Christian truth is large and 
deep. It has its portion for tho idolater, another for the novitiate, another for the 
matured. The true Christian leader is he who varies his instruction in accordance 
with the spiritual condition of his disciples. 3. To exert a powerful personal influence. 
The apostles " confirmed the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the 
faith " (vcr. 22) ; i.e. they brought to bear on their minds and hearts all the moral 
influence which they could exert by the weight of their love and their urgent 
solicitation ; they appealed to them by every consideration which would touch their 
souls to remain steadfast in the faith, loyal to the Lord their Saviour. 4. To make 
permanent provision for Christian culture (ver. 23). 6. To make them the object of 
earnest prayer (ver. 23). 

II. The pakt of the disciplk. This is : 1. To recognize the earnestness of his 
spiritual guide, and to give him his best attention. We have no truer friend, none 
to whom we owe more, not one who has a greater claim on our reverent regard, 
than the teacher who has led us to God. 2. To expect a fair share of struggle and 
endurance. There is no kingdom, and certainly not the kingdom of God, to be entered 
without trying and even painful experiences. The Christian disciple jnust lay his 
account with this fact : he is to understand that whoever will follow Christ must take 
up his cross to do so (Matt. xvi. 24); that there will be ridicule to be endured, 
opposition to be overcome, disappointments to be surmounted, inward evils to be 
subdued, many things that will demand a holy and elevated fortitude. 3. To submit 
to those who are appointed to exeicise authority — the " elders in every Church ; " and 
to avail himself of those means of grace and growth which they may institute. 4. To 
keep in view the consummation of Christian hope, the blessed kingdom of God. When 
trials thicken and duties multiply, when the new and better life is shadowed with dark 
clouds, when the way is long and toilsome, then the disciple is to look on and up, beyond 
the plains and hills of earth to the heavenly Zion, beyond the sufl'erings of the present 
to the glory which is to be revealed. — C 

Vers. 2i—29. — The work of God. This first famous missionary tour had lome 
features quite peculiar to itself and is, in some respects, inimitable by us. But in 
other aspects it may be regarded as a typical work of Gdd. 

L It was begun in God. It was (1) prompted by hfs Spirit (ch. xiii. 2,4); (2) 
entered upon after scekiug Divine guidance (ver. 26). Paul and Barnabas went forth, 
the conscious workmen of God himself. They felt that what would be done through 
their instrumentality would be done " by God with them." All was, as all should ever 
be, " begun in him." 

II. In his strength it was oaemed on and completed. In hi> strength. The 
eniire account, from beginning to end, conveys the idea tliat the apostles sought and 
found their streuLith in a Divine source ; indeed, nothing less would have sustained them 
under the difBculties and sufferings of their mission. It was carried on and completed. 
It was a work " which they fulfilled " (1) spite of Mark's discouraging defection (ch. 
xiii. 13); (2) notwithstanding the physical difficulties of travelling and the active 
animosity of the Jews ; (3) though every personal consideration would have led them 
to conclude it earlier (ver. 21). Undeterred by any checks, untempted by any induce- 
ments, they went quite through their work — God's work — and did not cease to toil and to 
endure nntil everything was done they could do, not only to intioduce but to establish 
the Christian faith in the heart of the heathen land they visited. Well is it for the 
Christian workman when it can be said of him that he " ful filled " or finished his work. 
Sometimes (1) weariness, or (2) timidity, or (3) disi-alisfattion, or (4) dissension overtakes 
the labourer even in the field of holy love, and he lays down his weapon and forsakes 
bis work. Not his is the crown and the " Well done 1 " at the hand and the lips of the 
Lord. 

III. It was crowned by a recital to those whom they represented. Paul and 
Barnabas were undoubtedly sent of God ; but tliey also went as members of the 
Church at Antioch. That Church regarded them as its representatives, followed them 
with its sympathies, sustained them by its prayers, and received them back with its 
warmest welcome. And to that Church, gathered together for the purpose, they 
recounted " all that God had done with them " — a most suitable crown to a noble work. 



<*. XiT. 1— 28.] TflE ACTS OJS' THE APOS'ILES. AH 



With eager, sympathetic, rejoicing spirits the assembly must have received the 
nariative. How grateful must have been the psalms, how fervent the prayers, how 
heartfelt the congratulations, that followed 1 A work is not crowned until its story has 
been told to those who had a real and living part in its initintiou and its procedure. 

IV. It was followed by invigorating best (ver. 28) — the rest of (1) happy 
human fellowship and (2) appreciated service. — 0. 

Ver. 27. — " The door of faith." When may it be said that God has "opened the 
door of faith" through which men may enter? This is true, as described in the text 
when — 

I. The Christian faith is first presented to those who have been brought 
UP IN SOME form of ERROR. It was Opened, through tlie hand of Paul, to the Gentiles, 
and multitudes entered in tljereat. This may be said when — 

II. The Christian faith is taught to children. Then it is gradually widened 
as their intelligence opens; it is' not long before it is sufficiently open for the soul tc 
pass through and hold intimate and living converse with the Divine Friend. 

III. The Christian faith is first presented to the mind in an appreciable 
form. Always essentially and fundamentally the same, the truth may be represented 
in such form as to be wholly inappreciable by some minds ; but, on the other hand, it 
may be unfolded in such wise as exactly to meet the needs and satisfy the cravings ol 
the soul. Then there is an opening through which the satisfied intellect can pass, and 
where the soul may I'eed and be sustained. Or when — 

IV. The Christian faith is first urged on the conscience with Divine power. 
When all material considerations sink into insignificance and the soul feels, profoundly, 
that the living truth of God as revealed in Jesus Christ is the one supreme and 
sovereign thing, then the door is opened wide, through which the soul should pass 
without delay, for on the iuner side of it is (1) rectitude, (2) peace, (3) usefulness, 
(4) eternal life. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — The gospel at Iconium. There was a series of acts and events luch 

as seem typical of the progress of the gospel elsewhere. 

I. Faitiii'ul and successful preaching of the Word. Many, Jews and Greeks, 
believed. This is the one test of true preaching. Is the truth " commended to the 
conscience " ? Are great moral laws brought out distinctly, so tliat the heart of the 
people leaps up, in truth set free ? He who preaches out of his heart alone reaches to 
the heart. The arguments that have convinced ourselves are the arguments that can 
alone be expected to convince others. 

II. Oi'PosiTioN AROUSED. Jewish prejudice still stands in the path of the gospel. 
But the gospel acquires force as it goes, and actually roots itself the more firmly in 
men's minds from the very fact that it is able to surmount opposition. 

III. Concurrent Divine testimony. God gives his servants power to work and 
to effect good. Deeds of good done to the suflering body or mind are silent words ; 
just as true words are spiritual deeds. We do not look fur miracles, but we ought to 
look for " signs " that God is with ua in the word we speak and the work we do for 
others. 

IV. Divided results. A split takes place in the multitude : some siding with the 
Jews, some with the apostles. It is by opposition of opinions and feelings that the 
world is carried on. It does not follow, because division takes place, on the entrance of 
a new light, that it will be |iermanent. God's method seems to be to lead men through 
divisions to deeper unity; by ex[ierience of the futility of partial opinions to the deeper 
insight which reconciles and satisfies. These divisions were prophetic of what has 
ever to be in the history of the Church. Ever has there been division marked at 
every era of new light and progress. He is in the right who follows the light within ; 
all who seek to follow the living Saviour,. and such alone, enjoy under every name 
that is supposed to divide, " the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace." — J. 

Vers. 8 — 20. — Etaling of the lame man aJt Lystra. The event is chiefly remarkable 
for the elfect it produced upon the minds of the people of the country und the illustration 
tf the apostolic temper and spirit thereby called forth. 



444 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. t<w. ut. i— 28, 



I. The swcferbr and his paith. 1. His complaint was congenital, and, according 
to ordinary ways of thinking, incurable. This brings all the more his faith into relief. 
It is the very power and property of faith to conquer what seems to reason unconquerable. 
It is impossible to show that any diseases are in themselves incurable ; they may 
baffle human skill, but not the healing energy of God. 2. " Faith comes by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God." 'i'he sufferer seizes on the truth that God is a Saviour, 
and that in him is to be found full, present, immediate salvation from passing ills. 
Faith lealizes the unseen as if it were the seen. 3. Faith recognized by the minister 
of God. Paul sees that the lame man has faith to be healed. There is sympathy 
l>etween souls in God. The minister of God's mercy, of Christ's saving energy, is 
directed to his object, and the object is directed to him. If God has entrusted us with 
a good to dispense, it will not be long before we find the soul who needs it. So Paul 
bids the suilerer arise ; the word ol authority is echoed by the consciousness of new 
power in the sufferer's breast: he rises, he walks, he bounds with joy. It is a 
representation of what ever will take place and does take place when true words are 
spoken to the souls of men. Oh, let us believe in the energies of the soul, by which 
we may lay hold on Divine power in our own weakness, both that we may receive 
good and impart it to others I 

li. The effect on the multitude. 1. They thought that they were receiving a 
visit from the gods. The air of the ancient world was lull of such stories. Doubtless 
the story of Zeus visiting Pliilemon and Baucis was well known to them. These 
so-called " myths" contain a deep meaning; they are prophecies of the human heart, 
of that intercourse between God and man which the gospel declares to be the fact of 
facts in religion. 2. They were mistaken in the modeoi the truth. Paul was not Zeus, 
nor was Barnabas Hermes. But they were not mistaken as to the substance of the 
truth. They were mistaken in offering worship to men like themselves, but not 
mistaken in the heart-instinct by which they recognized behind the healing power put 
forth the energy of God. The understanding may be in error when the heart speaks 
true. When this is the case, instruction, missionary effort, has always hopeful ground 
to work upon. The error and unbelief of the heart alone is invincible and fatal. 

III. Tm ooNDircT of the apostles. 1. Their horror and indignation. They rend 
their garments, and rush into the crowd with exclamations of astonishment and anger-. 
We must be capable of a holy anger if we are capable of a holy love. Worship belongs 
to the Divine alone. What would the apostles say now to the worship of their bones 
or other relics, real or pretended ? 2. Their clear protest. " We too are men of 
like passions." Sufferiutt, sorrowing humanity is no object of such honours. To accept 
them is to dishonour the Divine majesty, and to do injustice at the same time to 
ordinary humanity. The true teacher will never magnify himself, and will ask for 
nothing more than serious attention to his arguments and teachings. If the teacher 
shows that he considers himself on a level with ordinary humanity, the uncon-werted 
and self-humiliated will look up with hope of their own deliverance from misery ; and 
the awakened are warned not to confound the imperfections of the teacher with the 
substance of his message. The treasure is in enrthen vessels, that the excellency of 
the power may be of God, "wid not of us. 3. True views of God set forth. (1)' He is 
the living God ; and all in the world not derived from him and resting on him is of no 
value. All worship directed to finite objects misses its supreme mark, and is a vanity, a 
" nothing." The idol itself is " nothing in the world." " All love is lost save upon God 
alone." (2) He is the Creator. This is a thought brought into emj basis in t'ne preaching 
and teaching of St. Paul, as in his Epistle to the Romans and his discourse on Mars' 
Hill. Having made all things, he contains aU things in himself. Man is his creature ; 
and if man offers even his whole self upon the altar to God, God but receives his own. 
(3) He respects the freedom of man. The nations were suffered to walk in their own 
ways and to work out their own course of life. And in their aberrations they justified 
the truth and ways of God. Our freedom is our solemn heritage for weal or for woe. No 
explanation can be found for the dark facts of human sin, except that which goes back 
to the freedom of the soul to decide between good and evil. (4) The unfailing goodness 
of God. The seasons fail not ; food and enjoyment are provided out of the abundance 
or the earth. In every happy aid healthy mood of mind the heart breaks into song, 
ano thanks God for the boon of existence. In every gunny scene, every glimpse of 



CH. iiT. 1— 28.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 446 



pure and healthy happiness and domestic joy, there is tho reflection of the "joy of 
God to see a happy world." " Grod is wisdom, God is love ; " — this is the refraiu ol tlie 
heart true to itself; nor can the occasional discords of bodily pain or mental perplesitv 
mar the sweetness of the music or obscure the clearness of the evidence. — J. 

Vers. 21 — ^28. — Setwm to Antioch: a picture of apostolic activity. The scene 
quickly changed at Lystra. The multitude, wrought upon by Jews from Antioch and 
Iconium, rise up against Paul, and stone their late hero and god. Fickle world, which 
now brings garlands and now stones 1 " Every generation stones by-and-by its own 
gods, but every time has its own method of stoning." The boldest antagonists of the 
kingdom of darkness arouse most foes ; Paul is stoned, not Barnabas. Perliaps his own 
act comes back upon him in stoning Stephen ; certainly it must be present to his mind. 
God makes of our own past evil acts whips to scourge us or stones to pelt us. But 
Paul rises from the ground. " Rejoice not, O mine enemy, for though I fall I shall 
rise again." The story is told of Numidicus at Carthage, in the time of Cyprian, that, 
half burned and stoned, he lay as dead. His daughters came to bury him, whereupon 
he arose and went into the city. The next day, foUowiug the maroliing orders, " When 
they persecute you in one city, flee into another," Paul goes forth with Barnabas to 
Derbe. Now comes a rapid sketch of busy labour. 

I. Chabactbbistics of the Christian preachisr. 1. He is not to be oast down by 
disappointment nor defeated by opposition. Faith, tried by fire, proves its endnring 
quality. The more the apostle suffers, the more glowing becomes liis love. He returns, 
as if by irresistible attraction, to the scene of defeat. It is just those souls which resist 
us that we must mark out for conquest ; they will be well worth perseverance to gain. 
2. He is ever seeking for new worlds to conquer for the kingdom of Christ. Ever 
planting and propagating the Word in virgin ground, the motto of the missionary is, 
" To-morrow to fresh fields and pastures new." 3. His cares and duties are manifold. 
This is suggestively brought out by the different words employed. He " evangelizes ; " 
i.e. he announces the good news of the kingdom ; he proclaims, or preaches, in the 
proper sense, Christ. Next, he " instructs " (^naeriTeieiv) the converts, so that they 
become disciples, i.e. men taught and ever learning more of Christian truth. He also 
" strengthens," or "confirms," Christian believers, by calling to mind and applying the 
old truths. He " exhorts," bringing the force of personal love and suasion to bear on 
the will, " speaking from the heart to the heart." To keep men in the faith is no less 
an anxiety than to bring them into it. 4. He is the comforter. He sheds a light upon 
man's troubles, by showing that it is through them the path lies to the kingdom 
of God. 

"The path of Bonow, and that path alone. 
Leads to that land where sorrow is unkaown." 

Christianity glorifies suffering ; apart from it, wa sink amidst them into a cheerless 
pessimism or a blind resignation. 5. He has to take part in the government and 
guidance of communities. The appointment of ofBctrs over the dilfereut Churches 
is here mentioned. Ciiristianity is a social as well as an individual life, and social life 
must have its organization. If we carefully study this short passage (vers. 21 — ^23), 
we find in it a compendium of the Christian minister's duties. Truly— 

*"Tis not a cause of small import 
The pastor's care demands." 

n. TbB BLBSSINOg ATTENDANT ON THE PRBACHINQ OF THE OOSPEL. 1. BeflcX 

Llessings on the mind and heart of the preacher; assurance through suffering and trial 
and experience of Divine help. Even if a man sees but little present fruit of his labour, 
he has reason to thank God for the effect upon bis own spirit and character of a work 
so holy on the souls of others. Discimus docendo—We learn by teaching ; and he that 
watereth is watered himself. 2. To those who receive the message. Instead of the 
wild irregularity of passion and fancy. Christian order and sobriety takes possession of 
the soul. Idle fables are driven out by the Divine Word. 3. To the supporters and 
messengers of missionary work. Joyous was the welcome, great the thanksgiving at 
Antioch when the missionaries came back. A.nd so ever; refreshment 'of faith, 



446 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. xiv. 1—28 



broadening of gympathios, quickcuing of intelligence, ever follows upon the receipt ol 
good news from the fields of Christian work, and opening of new doors to the fie« 
passage of the Word. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Faithful service : Iconium. I. The magnanimity of the preachers ; 
though badly used by the Jews of Antioch, they still return good for evil. 

II. The first success of the Woed, when there was no decided attempt to thwart 
it, a powerful testimony to its adaptation both to Jews and Gentiles. 

III. The tenacity and bnpurancb of the representatives of truth must be set over 
against the fickleness of their heaiers and the obstinacy and envy of evil-minded men. 
The Lord bears witness to us when we speak boldly in his Name. 

IV. There is a limit to zeal. It must not uuiiecessiuily sacrifice life. Ply to 
other places when the testimony is persistently rejected. " Cast not pearls before swine." 
The true wisdom is seen exemplified in this instance. The preachers remained at their 
post until their lives were actually in danger, and God said clearly, " Go." — B. 

Vers. 8 — 18. — The light shining in darkness : Lystra. The heathenish state of 
the population. So much the brighter seemed the light. The effect of the miracle 
on the cripple. A warning against making a supeistitious use of men's credulity 
— as the Romish Church has done. 

I. A BEAL tbial of THE APOSTLES 1. Of ihAt faithfulness to the truth. Had they 
been willing, as the Church afterwards was, to mingle heathenism with Christianity, 
they might have accomplished more in captivating the minds of the people. 2. Of thcil 
humility and self-sacrificing zeal. They put aside men's worship that they might be • 
free to serve God. What an example to their successors ! 3. Of their inspired loisdom 
and discretion. They knew how to restrain an excited people whose homage might 
easily be turned into fury, They made the occasion an opportunity for preaching a 
gospel of love and purity. 

II. An EXAMPLE OF THE WOBLD'S WANT OF THE TBUTH AS IT IS IN JbSUS. 1. Gaping 

after wonders. Led by priests; worshipping men of like passions with themselves. 
Ignorant of the true character of God. Ungrateful in the midst of his abundant 
mercies. Unobservant of the witness which he bears to himself in nature and in the 
course of providence. 2. The glad tidings biought into the midst of such a world. At 
first not understood ; but the preachers must follow the example of the apostles, and, 
beginning at the testimony which surrounds men in their own life, lead them to the 
higher truth of revelation. Missionaries should study the field in which they labour. — R. 

Vers. 19 — 28. — Dangers and successes. The unstable multitude open to rapid changes 
of feeling. " Hosanna ! " to day ; " Crucify him ! " to-morrow. Paul's miraculous escajje 
a great help to the faith of disciples. Possibly his suffering a reason for speedy return 
to Antioch. 

L The expebibncb of the fiest missionaby joubnby a pebpaeation fob the 
FUTtTEE. 1. The necessity of patience. 2. The importance of makin'j; the work 
thorough and confirming the weak. 3. The relation of aggressive work to orderly Church 
life. Both in the new Churches elders appointed, and at Antioch all rehearsed. 

II. The preoiousness of eisinq faith eequiees a jealods watchfulness, even at the 
risk of personal suffering. It was dangerous for Paul and Barnabas to visit the same 
places again, but " the souls of the disciples " were more in their eyes than their own 
comfort or even safety. 1. True confirmation is a.recognition of present grace. 2. The 
experience of the more advanced should help the new converts and the young. The 
Church has much neglected this duty. 3. Trouble must always attend faith. 
The blessi-igs which we care not to fight for we shall soon lose. 4. The appointment 
of superintending elders is apostolic. They were doubtless from among the new 
Churches themtjelves, but chosen with discretion and in dependence on the blessing of 
God. All done with prayer and self-denial. The presence of the Lord the one true 
sanction. 

IIL Thb eeheaesal of spiritual successes a great encouragement to God's people. 
1. In the gathered Church, not merely in private; fur the Chmch is the true centr» 
from which all proceeds and to which all is brought. 2. The true missionary work 



oa. XIT. 1— 28.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 447 

is that which the Church maintains in its united capacity. Individual and isolated 
effurts are not so likely to be blessed. 3. The special importance of the mission of Paul 
and liarnabas in showing the open door of faith to tlie Gentiles. Sucli a fact could 
not liave wieldftl the same inHueuce had it not been rehearsed thus solemnly to the 
assembled brethiea. Autioch was now the pledged source of light to the Gentile 
world. — B. 

Ver. 22. — Spiritual conflrmation. "Confirming the souls of the disciples." Connect 
with the narrative, showini; that spiritual aggressiveness at Antiooh was the sign of 
a deep and true spiritual life. The haste and siipeificiality of the teaching from place 
to place. Confinuation not a ceremony, but a process. 

I. Confirmation of faith. Continue in the faith — botji objective and subjective ; 
not a creed alone, if that was given at all, but the real root of spiritual life. Faith 
was discipleship. 

II. Confirmation in the fullowshipof the Chubch. " Ordained [or, 'appointed"] 
them elders in every Church." A settled ministry ; an orderly maintenance of 
worship. Preparation for work in the neighbourhood. 

III. Confirmation of hope. The kingdom ia view. Work towards the future. 
Tribulation prepares for higher life. — B. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — The calm force of the gospel amid many distractions of men. This 
portion of the history names Paul and l}arnabas to us for the first time as aposHes 
(ver. 4). It is noticeable also as substituting the expression, " preaching the gospel," 
for speaking " the Word of God " (ver. 7;. But it is remarkable much more as giving 
us such a distinct impression of the way in which the new truth, " the gospel," bore 
itself amid many a variety of opposition and unexpected combinalions of foes. Let 
notice some of the groupings amid which the gospel made its way, either with tL. 
help or against their hindrance. 

I. A LARGE NUMBER OF JbWS AND GbBBKS BEUEVINO FOBM THE FIBST OBOUP. As 

the gospel is still persistently first preached to the Jew and from the pulpit that the 
synagogue constituted, so it seems that generally some of the Jews (and of course uot 
unfrequently Greeks with them) believed. Now, however, it is a great multitude of 
these. Probably the early and trenchant conquests of the gospel again availed to 
waken all the bitterest and more* active hostility in the new scene, whatever it might 
be, of labour. The first group shows Jew against Jew therefore. 

II. The Jews who did not believe condescend to ally to thghseltes the 
Gentiles, and this is the second qbodp. Jew and Gentile seldom worked together for 
good — at least not in any way directly or indirectly connected with religious matters. 
But now not only do tb^y coiiibine forces for evil, but it is at Ihe instance of the Jew. 
"Th« same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together" (Luke xxiii. 12). Very 
true it is any way that enmity against Christ and the gospel of his truth and love will 
need all the combined force [lossible, and will need to try every possible variety of 
combination, not then to succeed, but to prove to itself how vain its opposition and 
anger are. 

HI. The whole city itself coNSTiTniES the material op the next grouping. 
And this grouping is one that shows, a whole city: 1. Not divided into its orcMnary 
numerous civil, political, or ecclesiastical divisions. It owns to a very simple classifica- 
tion indeed. It is rent in just twain. 2. And the separating line, traversing all other 
considerations, is determined simply by men's attitude with regard to these two men 
lately arrived at Iconium after expulsion from Antioch. The question has come to be—' 
Who " hold " with ihese two men, or who do not hold with them ? — for " holding with the 
Jews " is merely the converse of this. Whatever may be true of these two men and of 
their word, evident it was in those days and in that city that they were forces that had 
'■■) be reckoned with. And go where the gospel will, this at least has always been found. 

IV. The next gboup exhibits a multitude op Gentiles, Jews, and their eulkbs. 
They are not, indeed, openly and compactly and homogeneously massed together, but 
they are ready to sink all differences for twenty-four hours, and are preparing to do so, 
that In untrained multitude they may try the effect ol brute force. Thesa were 
meditating an assault ujwn the two unarmed defenceless preachers. They were 



US THE ACTS OF TUE APOSTLES. [ch. xtr. 1— 28. 

organizing themselves, truly after very rough sort, for this purpose. And If the 
purpose he ever done, when it is done there will soon be an end of their harmony. 

V. The last group consists of thk two apostles and a third with them, though 
INVISIBLE. These, passing from the midst of an angry people, went their way to preach 
the Slime gospel, serve the same Master, trust the same Saviour, but to do these things 
elsewhere. They " flee," not for fear, not from cowardice, not from love of their own 
life, but from love of the life of their gospel and their mission, and in obedience to the 
plain command of the great Captain (Luke x. 23). How strong that gospel was ! 
How strong their heart was! And these gave strength both to limb to go elsewhere 
and to voice to speak and preach elsewhere. Often must those apostles and their 
converts too of the Jews have thought of the old words of impassioned prophetic expostu- 
lation; "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? the kings 
of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord and 
against his Anointed." For they are " broken as with a rod of iron ; " they are dashed 
" in piecis like a potter's vessel." But Jesus and his gospel survive, and reign with a 
reign further and wider ; they strew blessings their whole way along, and wake ten 
tljousand voices of praise. — B. 

Vers. 8 — 18. — Tliree ivstaneet of faith. The contents of these verses are rery 
diversified and very full. Yet a certain unity attaches to them, and from this point of 
view they will be now regarded. Paul and Barnabas have now reached a people who 
are almost exclusively Gentiles, and Gentiles of the Gentiles. Tlie miracle with 
which this paragraph opens may be supposai to find its place here by the miiul of the 
Spirit, less fur its own particulars, interesting and instructive as they are, than for tlie 
sequel, wliich shows the effect of miracle upon heathen, and the way in which 
the apostles dualt with that effect. We may regard the passage as exemplifying three 
various faiths, various because they were different in their degree, and different in yet 
more essential respect, in their intelligence. 

I. The faith of the ckipple. It is to be assumed that he was not a Jew, but a 
heathen. He hears Paul, presumably therein for the first time hearing pure truth, 
whether Paul is speaking of the things of revealed religion or of natural reli;^ion. The 
incident ma> have helped Paul to his subsequent language: "So then faith comelh 
by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God " (Horn. x. 17). Paul speaks. The lame 
man listens. He listens more and yet more keenly. The " seed of the Word " is fall- 
ing " into good ground." Paul's eye falls on him. Afterwards it is riveted by him. 
The interesled, eager, imploring eye of the lame man is met by the divinely enlightenedj 
divinely discerning, and divinely giving eye of Paul. Paul is led, as the consequence, 
10 see that he has "faith to be healed." The question of a miracle lies with the 
omnipotence of God, but the question of when that omnipotence shall be exercised may 
lie (beyond what we think, and beyond what we can at present track) with the 
individual man. For this is in the deepest sense the mystery of human life and human 
accountability ; nor can we even say where the line runs that distinguishes between the 
agency of God's Sjiirit, in the greatest miracles of all, the conversion of the heart, and 
the freedom of man's will. The language we have here may mean either (1) distinctly 
that Paul saw that the lame man had the faith upon which the omnipotent Word 
would take effect, not by hare right of its omnipotence alone, but also by the more 
hidden harmony and sympathy of a sensitive, a quickened, a trusting, and an obedient 
heart ; or (2) that Paul saw that the lame man had already received the divinest gift 
of all the Word of Ood, and that he was therefore a fitter vessel to be " chosen " both 
to receive himself the lesser grace, and also to set forth to others the abundant grace 
of God. Meantime the less enlightened the nature and the less informed the actual 
mind of the lame man, the more are we conducted to some discrimination of faith's 
purest essence — its trustingness, its self-surrender, its clinging confessed dependence. 

IL The faith op the people who beheld. 1. Their faith was of those who did 
believe, and did not either shut their eyes,-or quibble, or blaspheme. 2. Their faith was 
of those who attributed the work of a miracle to powers distinctly higher. They were 
not of those who once said of Jesus himself, " He casteth out devils through Beelzebub 
the chief of the devils." Nor were they of those who set it down to sorcery and 
witchcraft. What highest they know de facto, to that they gave or desired to give 



OH. xiT. i— 28.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLE* 449 

glory. 3. But their faith was of those who, believing, believed " ignorantly," believed 
absolutely wrongly, and believed far more wrongly (now by Scripture's most emphdtio 
assertion) than eould be justiBed in any way. 4. Their faith exhibited that leading 
mark of the lowest kind of faith which must link on the wonder done to the nearest 
manifest doer. It gets to a god, but it is its own god peculiarly. It gets to a god, 
but not to the Spirit and the Invisible, much less to the one invisible Spirit ; nay, its 
way of getting to a god is by bringing its gods to itself " in the likeness of men." It 
has not reached to the conception of the great power, the great goodness, the great 
Being before all, who "giveth to all life and breath and all thiilgs," and, among those 
all things, knowledge of his own Will, and power to execute it, betimes in the fulness 
of its majesty. 5. But when all has been justly said to the disparagement of the faitk 
of these heathen men of Lystra, it may be put to their credit, that, even in nature's 
darkness, they did not believe in a faith barren of works ; in which respect, at least, 
they may often be taken as rising up in judgment against the children of the light and 
of the day. 

III. Thb paith op the apostles. 1. It was in the first place without doubt the 
pure faith that was wrought in thepa by the Holy Spirit. It was by this that Paul 
recogr-ized the opportunity, and discerned in the cripple the real thing that was a'.so in 
himself, and taught him to speak that word " with a loud voice. Stand upright on thy 
feet." 2. The "faith that dwelt in" the apostle was one that made the ignorance 
of the really Divine, now illustrated before their very eyes, and now taking advantage 
of their very persons, so harrowingly painful. Their impetuous rushing among the 
people, and rending of their clothes, and mingled expostulation and instruction 
addressed to the people, all prove the intensely exercised state of their own mind, 
almost to agony of anguish. And the anguish was the reflection of just this — an 
enlightened, a pure, a high faith. Many dark outer deeds had Barnabas and Paul too 
often seen, from which, nevertheless, their inmost soul took less wound than from this, 
when the enthusiastic heathen of Lystra would fain, have sacrificed to them. 3. The 
faith of the apostles was that which struck horror into them at the very thought, if 
hajily they should " rob God " of his own or suem to share his undivided honour. 
May they not be considered in this light as holding out an example to all their 
spiritual successors, to fear, as much as they would fear anything, lest they should be 
found at any time to " sacrifice unto their net, and to burn incense unto their drag " 
(Hab. i. 16), or lest they should accept the offerings of flattery to themselves which 
should be only offerings of praise to Christ. What a wonderful guide for the noblest 
life earth can kuOw comes of the enlarged, developed, mature faith of an experienced 
Christian 1 — B. 

Veri. 19, 20.—" Once was I ttoned" (2 Cor. xi. 25). The brevity of the record 
of the incident of these verses may, perhaps, point to the modesty of PauL Probably 
the historian of the Acts of the^ Apostles was not at this time with Paul and Barnabas 
at Lystra. Paul is his informant, therefore, of what now befell him. The event was 
treasured, as well it might be, among the great perils and sufferings, but also among 
the great deliverances of Paul's career. The event, as bo briefly detailed, nevertheless 
teaches — 

I. Tea PERSISTENT OPPOSITION .oJ THE flBEAT EirEUT. They of Icouium and 
Antiocli are, after all, his agents, and, incited by him, pursue Paul and Barnabas hei«. 

II. The early FOHGETPCLNESS of good and the BEEP-SBATED INaaATlTUDE OF 

HUMAN natube. Those who were thus persuaded to stone Paul were of the very 
people who had offered, as it were the day before, to sacrifice to him as God. It is 
a re|ietition of the " Hosannal " of yesterday being turned into the " Crucify, crucify I " 
of to-day. 

IIL The height of human akd of Ohmbtian faithfulness mat vekt possiblt 
FOB A time dstensift oe PRODUCE DANGEB. Perhaps the people of Lystra would 
never have been " persuaded " to stone Paul, if Paul and Barnabas had not yesterday 
■0 faithfully sought to persuade them that they were but men like themselves. And 
probably the emissaries of Iconium and Autioch would not have dared to fgtce the 
wild enthusiasm of Lystra, with their evil insinuation and malign attempts. 

IV. God boks not fobget to bjj faithfuIj f(j those wijo abe faithful to him. 
*0T% a a 



150 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. xrr. 1— 28. 



And Paul, who had wrought through the mighty power of God, miracles for the 
deliverance of others, is the subject of a miracle himself now. And it is the Divine 
favour, as no humm minister of it served the occasion. Paul has been stoned, drawn 
out of the ci ty ; foe and friend take him for dead — nay, perhaps he was so ; if not, there 
was but a little " step indeed between him and death." Yet he rises up, uncalled by 
human voice, unhelped by human hand, and comes into the city. 

V. The dnquenched connAGE op Paul. He does not now " flee to another city." 
He comes into that city. He could well trust the God who had delivered him and 
would deliver him "in deaths oft." And he was well prepared to echo the words 
of the psalmist, " This God is my God for ever and ever, and he will be my Guide ever 
imto death." 

VL That asaim and again the enemy op Christ makes a HUMiHATiNa failure 
OP IT. The enemy's work is exposed and is undone. Christ triumphs with fresh 
manifestation. And his truth and glory are spread. — B. 

Vers. 21 — ^28. — The return home. The furthest limit of the mission of Paul and 
Barnabas is not reached till their visit is paid to Derbe. After the recovery by miracle 
of Paul from his stoning, the next day he advances with Barnabas to Derbe. And 
after some time spent there and much work done, of which no details are given, the 
two apostles set their face homeward. And it is evident that the Spirit still leads 
them. For— 

I. With thobouoh knowledge of the ground, their courage fails them not. 
The apostles return by the route and the towns and cities by which they had come. 
It is wonderful, and indeed it is often of the merciful consideration of Heaven, how 
brave men may be toward unforeseen dangers and difficulties. How often, however, 
does courage vanish after a taste of real work and real difficulty! Not so now. The 
apostles will face again, if necessary, all which they had before encountered. 

II. Their ministry is still rich in fruitfulnbss. The object of the apostles 
follows closely in the tracks of the very well-ascertained needs of new converts. 
They would : 1. Confirm them. 2. Exhort them to steadfastness and endurance " even 
unto the end." 3. They would tarry to instruct them in aspects among the deepest 
of the Divine life — ;that men " must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom 
of God." There were " musts " in the lite, the journeys, the sufferings, the death of 
the great Captain of our salvation himself. And " musts " there must be in the life 
and work and discipline of his followers. 4. They would also begin to organize Church 
life in place after place, and "ordain elders" in the new Churches.' 5. They show an 
example of their faith in prayer and fasting and "commending" individuals ant 
Churches to the Lord, of their faith and of their life. All these activities of thought, 
speech, aifection, and deed were tokens and were the trustworthy tokens of men who 
were still led by the Spirit, and who were still following that lead. 

III. They bring their mission to its close, and themselves home to thbib 
starting-point, in so exemplary a manner. 1. They honour the Church of God's 
appointment, by calling it together on their return to receive their report. Next to 
being the servants of Christ, we are the servants of the Church, and ought to hold 
ourselves so far forth answerable to it. 2. They do not carelessly forget or only 
slightingly remember how by the prayers and fasting of that very Church, they also, 
months and years before, had been commended to the grace of God. 3. They give, in 
some instructive, impressive, and reassuring detail, a rehearsal of (1) " all that God had 
done with them," and (2) how indisputably God "had opened the door of faith unto 
the Gentiles." 4. There awhile, in the holy fellowship of that Church, they rest from 
their harder labours. They recruit their souls in the healthy air and the genial 
comfurt of that society, after years of fierce conflict and almost perpetual anxiousness 
and keen persecution. Happy servants, happy Church, "in the midst of whom God" 
is pruseut, shedding light, peace, joy, upon all 1^ — B. 

Ver. 2. — Sinderers of Christian fVorJt. The apostle elsewhere expresses In a 
leutence what was the common experience of his missionary life. He says (1 Cor. xvi. 
^)t " -^ great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries." 
iijd we wue* gtiU accept tl^e fi^pt that, if vye will ^o any syeci^l work, or waniCe»t is 



BB. xrr. 1— 28.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES, 451 



work »ny energy or individuality, we shall jsoon have persons opposing, misrepresent- 
ing, and hindering us. Here, in the very outset of St. Paul's missionary career, the 
influence of the "unbelieving Jews" is indicated, and this fanatical Jewish party 
persistently followed up the apostle wherever he went, trying to destroy his work and 
create prejudice against him. It may be said — What great things St. Paul would have 
accomplished if he had not been checked by these himlerers ! But a deeper view of the 
influence permanently exerted on the Church by St. Paul's life and writings would 
rather lead us to say — What sublime things St. Paul did accomplish in spite of the 
hinderers, and even out of the very impulse excited by their opposition ; for in this, 
too, God made " the wrath of man to praise him " ! More and more clearly is it now 
seen that a man's moral nobility is gained, not by silent, unresisted growths, but by 
the steady, persistent, often imperilling, conflict with adverse influences and open foea 
And that which is true in the individual life is true of the composite Church life. 
We may thank God that he has overruled, for the Church's permanent good, the 
hinderers, the opposers, the persecutors. We may consider (1) the sources whence 
hindrances come, getting illustrations from the older times, and making applications 
to our own ; (2) the influences which hindrances may have upon the mind and feeling 
of the workers ; and (3) the influences which they have upon the growth and progress 
of Christ's Church. 

I. Thg sources wheitob cohe the hindbanoeb to Christian work. They have 
always come both from without and from within the Church ; but our thought is now 
chiefly confined to hindrances comina from without. Hinderers are generally : 1. Persons 
of antagonistic disposition, who ^iways take " the other side," are quick to imagine 
some evil in everything attempted, see no good in anything with which they are 
unassociated, and have a sort of natural horror of things that are new. 2.' Or persons 
who have strong religious prejudices, which they feel the fresh thing tends to unrier- 
mine, and for which they consequently fight as if they were the truth of God. 3. Or 
persons who cling to doctrinal forms or to ceremonial rites, and fail to see that God 
may send forth floods of new life, too mighty to be kept within tbtir prescrilied river- 
banks, and so they vainly try to hold back God's fioods. 4. Or persons who 
have no faith in the future, and cannot trust God to oversee and overrule the future, 
even as he does the present and has done the past. 5. Or persons whose temporal 
condition may be injuriously affected by the new enterprise; as illustrated by the 
shrine-makers of Ephesus. , The phases which these hindrances take in modern life 
need to be carefully observed and thought out. 

IT. The influences which hindrances mat hate upon the mind and feeling 
OF THE WORKERS. Those influences, of course, differ according to the disposition of the 
workers. We may divide them into these classes. 1. Hindrances will dishearten and 
depress some. It is characteristic of some that they are sunshine workers, and give 
up easily when the least cloud-shadow passes across. These are usually weakly in 
body and nervously sensitive, and they need encouraging and the frequent kindly word. 
2. Hindrances will keep up in some a "dogged persistency." This expression is not 
the most graceful one, but no other so well expresses their condition of feeling. Like 
Nehemiah, they simply keep on, let other men talk, send messages, or do what they 
will; and if they say anything to the hinJerers, it is only this, "We are doinc 
a great work, therefore we cannot come dow», " 3. And hindrances arouse some to 
new and nobler activity. The spirit of the ik^dier is in them, and the very presence 
of a foe, and the very difficulties of an enterprise, touch and awaken the noblest within 
them. Direct application to present-day Church-workers shobld be made, and the 
duty of resisting the undue influence of hinderers pressed home. 

IIL The influences exerted by hindrances on the growth and fbosrebb of 
Christ's Church. Apply to : 1. Internal growth in spirituality, in development ol 
doctrine, in practical application of principle to details of life. 2. External prog-ess. 
Hinderers give publicity to the Christian Church, calling the attention of many who 
would otherwise not hear of it. Hinderers waken the natural sympathy of men 
for a resisted and persecuted thing. 3. Hinderers increase the evangelizing and 
aggressive fervour of the Church, apd so, by means of the hinderers, Christ's kingdom 
steadily advances. Illustrate by the persecutions of the early Church, the history 
oi IJnglish Prote^taptismj sod the tal? pf pJ^risUftn lif? m M»dftg^gv»r, fjje O^Hfc|i 



452 THE ACTS OF THE APOSfLBa [oh. ht. 1— 2a 



may have "many adveraaiieB/' but she learn* how to make their very enmity hei 
inspiration. — IL. T. 

Yer. 15. — No gods, only Ood. The subject may be introduced by such a sketch of 
the incidents as will bring prominently forward these points. 1. The apostles wrought 
a miracalous healing. 2. Their act was seriously misconceived. 3. Pagan sentiments 
overwhelmed the Christian teaching. 4. The apostles most deeply felt the insult 
which the proposed sacrifice offered to the Divine honour and sole claim. Remember 
that the first and supreme truth to a Jew is the unity and spirituality of God, and 
observe that this should be as firmly and jealously conserved by the Christian as by 
the Jew. One of the most marked features of the pious man in all ages is supreme 
jealousy of Gud's sole honour. In descriliing the miracle out of which the incidents 
grew, the necessity for a moral preparation before we can receive Divine intervention 
and deliverance may be pointed out. Men may be set so as to receive, or so as to be 
indifferent to, God's saving grace. Our Lord pleads thus, " Ye lOill not come unto 
me." " The evident eagerness of this cripple marked him out to the quick insight of 
the apostle as one on whom a work of power could be wrought. It is evident on the 
face of the narrative that it was not every cripple or evei^^ sufferer that Paul would 
have attempted to heal; it was only such as, so to speak, met half-way the exertion of 
spiiitual power by their own ardent faith." Fixing attention on the serious error of 
the excited populace, and the earnest efforts of the apostles to correct it, we notice — 

I. The katubal aegumbnt from mibaoles. We mean the first impulsive idea of 
them likely to spring up in men's minds. Things that are evidently beyond human 
power must be wrought by Divine power, and persons by whom the wondrous work 
is wrought must be Divine persons. Such reasoning was strengthened by the legends 
and superstitions of heathenism, and it may be shown that there lingered in the 
particular district of Lycaonia, traditions of incarnations of the deity (sec instances in 
the exegetical portion of this Commentary). But the first and natural argument from 
miracles cannot be sustained when knowledge is advanced and critical thinking gains 
power. That they are wrought by Divine power and signs of Divine presence is not 
the only possible explanation of them. Men properly test their so-called miraculous 
character, and then they test the agency by which they are wrought. Therefore God 
never bears upon men with the force of miracles alone, and we are led to consider, 

II. Ths BELATioN OF lUBACLKS TO TEACuiNa. This close aud necessary connection 
the heathen could not see, and to this day many Christians do not see. A miracle is 
nothing standing by itself; It may be most valuable as related to, aud the exposition 
or illustration of, some truth. Benan says rightly that the ancient heathen had no 
conception of a miracle as the evidence of a doctrine. And Archbishop Tlench points 
out that our Lord's miracles are never called merely wonders, " because the ethical 
meaning of the miracle would be wholly lost were blank astonishment or gaping 
wonder all which they aroused. They are also ' signs ' and pledges of something 
more than and beyond themselves." It may be urged that miracles are never 
wrought save for the sake of the truth. Even when they are at first sight attesta- 
tions of a person, they confirm our faith in him only for the sake of the truth which 
he brings, and they only fulfil their mission when they produce in us receptivity to 
the truth taught. This is fully illustrated in the incidents connected with our text. 
1'he people stayed with what the miracle seemed to say concerning the persons 
Barnabas aud Saul. The apostles earnestly urged that the miracle was but designed 
to open their hearts to the truth. Much of the dilSculty felt concerning the mira- 
culous, would be removed if we dwelt more fully on its moral use, as produdng a 
receptivity for the truth. 

III. Tub tfachino or this hibacls oahb out uobk olkablt thbouqh ths 
MISTAKE HADE coNCEBNiNa IT. It had been designed to aid in securing attention to 
the apostles' message as sent from Qod, It came to be a means of correcting men's 
fundamental error on the being of God. Ordinarily the truth received may be left to 
push out cherished error. Monotheism, conceived from the Christian standpoint, will 
of itself destroy all polytheistic conceptions. But sometimes fundamental doctrinal 
errors need to be resolutely dealt with. The apostles dare not dishonour their Master 
by permitting a vital error to be cherished. So, at the utmost personal peril, they 



OB. XIV. 1— 2a] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, 4r..: 

declare that tbere are no gods ; there is only God ; and that they themaelvea are 
only men, his servants, who are permitted to put forth gracious power, as a persuasion 
to men to recseivo his blessed message of pardon and life. — B. T. 

Ver, 16. — Ood"! ways with the wttiom. Attention is called to the sentence, " Who, 
in tiroes past," or in bygone generations, " suffered all nations," or all the heathen, " to 
walk in their own ways," On this sentence Olshausen writes, " In the first place, 
Paul contrasts the present time, as the time of the Messiah, with former times, in which 
the heathen world, .with no such light as the Jewish nation possessed, lived on in their 
own ways. In this thought is to be found the apology for the design of the people of 
Lystra, so blasphemous considered in itself But again, this situation of the Gentile 
world was not sufficient to free them altogether from guilt, for Nature herself, with all 
the wonderful arrangements which she exhibits, furnished the means of rising to the 
idea of the true God, who summonedthe wliole fabric into being." 

I, God hap " ways with the itations." A common sentiment has long prevailed 
that God altogether left the heathen nations alone, doing nothing for their intellectual 
or their moral life, and only preserving their physical being by his providence. It is a 
sentiment which can only be cherished go long as men do not thmk, and so long as 
they limit the teachings of the Divine Word by their prejiidiccB. "The God of the 
whole earth must he be called," and " all souls are his." If they are his, he must be 
concerned in their well-being in every respect, and can never have stood aloof from 
their mental, moral, and spiritual needs. It pleased God to grant a special revelation 
to the Jews for the whole world's sake ; but this does not assume that he gave no 
revelations at all to others. In comparison, God's ways with the nations may be 
called a " leaving them to their own devices ; " but he watched over them while thus 
carrying out seli'devised plans, and overruled even this to become a kind of preparation 
for that gospel revelation which could be made to the whole world. Each nation 
worked out a great experiment ; we cannot always be sure what each experiment was, 
but we can see it precisely in some cases. It may have been— Can man's final good 
come through his imagination, or through his intellect, or through his artistic taste, or 
through his govemmental faculties, or through his activities and energies ? Put gene- 
rally, we may say that God's vvays with the nations were to let them be free to find 
out for themselves whether in man's own nature there was any power by which he 
could free himself from sin and secure the perfection of his being. Such an experiment 
or series of experiments had to be made in the interests of the whole race, and only 
when the failure of all such experiments was well proved could the revelation of salvation 
for men by a Divine intervention be made, Man must find out that he cannot save 
himself before he wiU be willing to look up and say, " Lord, help me I " The following 
passage from F. W, Kobertson expresses the same view of God's ways with the nations 
in another and a suggestive form: — "Kecollect that the Bible contains only a record of 
the Divine dealings with a single nation; his proceedings with the minds of other 
peoples are not recorded. That large other world — no less God's world than Israel was, 
though in their bigotry the Jews thought Jehovah was their own exclusive property — 
scarcely is, scarcely could be, named on the page of Scripture except in its external 
relation to Israel. But at times, figures as it were cross the rim of Judaism, when 
brought in contact with it, and passing for a moment as dim shadows, do yet tell us 
hints of a oommunication and a revelation going. on unsuspected. We are told, for 
example, of Job ; no Jew, but an Arabian emir, who beneath the tents of Uz contrived 
to solve the question to his heart which still perplexes us through life — the coexistence 
of evil with Divine benevolence ; one who wrestled with Ggd as Jacob did, and strove to 
know the shrouded Name, and hoped to find that it was love. We find Naaman the- 
Syrian, and Nebuchadnezzar the Babylonian, imder the providential and loving disci- 
pline of God, Bahab the Gentile is saved by faith. The Syro-phoenician woman by 
her sick daughter's bedside, amidst the ravings of insanity, recognizes, without human 
assistance, the sublime and consoling truth of a universal Father's love in the midst of 
apparent partiality. The 'Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the 
world' had not left them In darkness," How this may be applied to God's ways 
with heathen nations now requires to be thought out The universal revelation ijt 
Christ J«8U8 yet requirei to ba uoiversallj made known. 



454 THE ACTS 0^ THE APO&TLM IcH. tt9. i—^. 

n. God's ways with the nations will bb itltimatelt vindioatbd. To theii 
view and to our view there is much that seems to need vindicating. For instance, (1) 
is there not much sign of favouritism in the Divine ways ? (2) do not multitudes of 
men morally perish while God withholds from them his revelation ? (3) however the 
experiment may serve the great interest of the race, it brings the ruin of the individual; 
and (4) the darkness into which man sinks when left alone is so awful tliat even the 
gospel light seems powerless to dispel it. In such ways we find utterance for our 
questionings and doubts. And yet already God's ways are being justified. 1. We are 
getting fuUer and worthier conceptions of the Divine Being himself, which bring a 
most restful assurance that what he does for all his creatures is more than right, is 
lovingly right. 2. Philosophy is helping us to a truer knowledge of the individual 
man, and of the purpose of race and climatic diversities of man, and enabling ua to 
conceive how God may deal with humanity as a whole, and with each part in the 
interest* of the whole. 3. The Christian revelation declares that the mystery of earth 
will be unfolded by-and-l>y, and will even pass out of our thought as we contemplate 
the exceeding glory of its perfected redemption. 4. Christian missions are spreading 
the one saving revelation of God amongst the nations in a way that assures of the 
coming fulfilment of our largest hopes. Till the day of vindication fully dawns, we 
must strive to understand better God's ways, and above all to make full present 
response to God's grace in Christ Jesus as revealed unto tu. — B. T. 

Ver. 17. — The witness of harvest-times. For the point as presented to a very 
different audience, see Bom. L 19, 20 ; ch. xvii. 28. It has been remarked that the 
Greek words here used by the apostle are " so distinctly rhythmical that they suggest 
the thought that St. Paul quotes from some hymn of praise which he had heard in a 
harvest or vintage festival, and which, as with the altar to the Unknown God at 
Athens, he claims as due to him whum men ignorantly worshipped." A sentence 
from Neander may give the key-note to the sermon. He says, " The whole creation, 
as a revelation of God, especially of his almightiness and goodness, is designed to arouse 
the spirit of man to a perception of the inward revelation of God." Introduce the 
subject by a picture of the scene connected with it. An occasion was made for 
rieclaring the relations of nature with religion. Fix thought on the one natarenscene 
of harvest, and apply St. Paul's teaching ; first showing how fully in harmony with 
his views this representation was, and what support Holy Scripture gives to it. 

I. God hay speak to bis cbeatubes by the voice of nature, and he does thus 
SPEAK to them all. 1. God must use some agency in revealing his mind to his 
creatures. 2. The agency he uses must be in relation to our bodily senses. 3. It 
need not be fashioned into precise words, because man's heart can be reached through 
the eye, the ear, the taste, as well as by verbal statements. Dlustrate the impressions 
of beautiful landscape, music of the waters, thunderstorms, etc. Any of the things 
that man can feel God can use to convey his mind and message to him. The voices 
of God in nature are translated for us by our poets, who are — if they fit into their true 
mission — ministers of God's will to men, or rather, ministers revealing God himself 
to men. See how the psalmist recognizes the universal witness of this nature-voice : 
"Their sound is gone out through all the earth, their words to the end of the 
world ; " and apply especially to the harvest-time of earth, which knits the millions 
of earth together in the joyful recognition of God's loving care and providing mercies. 

II. What of this nature-witness to (Jod may all men beoeive ? 1. The truth 
of the Divine unity ; for it is plain to all that nature is a design — some one person's 
design. Its perfect harmonies suggest this. And increasing knowledge corrects the 
notion of two agents, which men have been tempted to accept, when impressed with 
the seemingly injurious forces working in nature. Science, in making more plain the 
perfect harmony of all nature-forces, is giving her testimony to the unity of God. 
And then comes on us this consideration : if there be but one God, our supreme concern 
is to be in right relations with him. 2. The truth that he is infinite in power ; for 
nature shows us that he is infinite in resources. 3. Tlie truth that he is infinitely 
good; for nature shows him to us fitting all things together to secure the general 
well-being. Kature suggests the attractiveness and beautifi iness of God. 

III. What more than this can nature witness of God to the Christian? 



te.Xiv.i— ^.] IME AOtS d^ TitB A^OSTL^S. 4SS 

The Christian man cotaes back upon nature with the illuminations of that higher and 
fuller revelation which has for a time absorbed him — from tho virion of God, manifest 
in Christ Jesus, which was so glorious as for a while to occupy his thought and feeling - 
wholly. But coming back with these new thoughts of God, he flads Nature has new 
voices and new messages, and her provisions tell him : 1. Of God's care. 2. Of God's 
long-suffering and mercy ; for be knows now that man has no deserts upon which he 
might claim, and positive ill deserts which might reasonably lead to the removal of 
his common eveiy-day mercies. 3. Of God's great love to man's soul, which seems 
shown by its overflow in God's gracious provision in nature for all the wants of his 
body. 4. Of God's faithfulness to all his promises, which are assured in his yearly 
fulfilment of that earliest promise that "seud-'.ime and harvest . . . shall not cease." 
Press, in conclusion, how St. Paul urges that the proper influence of nature is a 
constant and mighty persuasion to turn from all our vanities to the loving and hearty 
service of the one living God, and to accept of the full salvation which ha has provided 
in the person of his Sou Jesus Christ. — B. T. 

Ver. 22. — Tlirough tribulation to the kingdom. The force of a man's preaching 
must, to a great extent, come out of his personal experiences, and new experiences 
will give his preaching new force. This is illustrated in the associations of our text. 
The apostle was in measure fitted, by all he bad borne and suffered, for exhorting the 
disciples and comforting and confirming the Churches ; but be had just passed through 
a new and almost overwhelming experience. Excited by Jews from Antioch and 
Iconium, the people at Lystra had violently stoned Paul, and, thinking they had 
killed him, had dragged his body outside their city gates. " Paul, liable at all times 
to the swoons which accompany nervous organizations, had been stunned, but not 
killed ; and while the disciples stood in an agonized group aronnd what they thought 
to be his corpse, he recovered his consciousness, and raised himself from the ground." 
But he must have been terribly bruised and suffering, and it would seem that he never 
fully recovered the eB'ects of this scene. This new experience had put a new tone of 
tenderness upon his ministrations; and, when visiting again the Churches, he could 
add this new assurance, " that we must through much tribulation enter into the king- 
dom of God." His thought has been familiarized to the Christian mind by the verse— 

"The path of sorrow, and that path alone, 
Leads to that land where sorrow is unknown." 

L Tribulation as part op cub human lot. "Man is born to trouble as the 
sparks fly upward." It is often said that a world of sinners must be, and indeed had 
better be, a world of sufferers. Troubles take a variety of forms, but they come into 
every individual life and into every form of associated life. They are necessary results 
of: 1. The disorder which man's sin has produced in God's world. 2. The lost self- 
control which sin has occasioned to each man. 3. The wilfulness which persists in 
adjusting human relations to man's idea and pleasure, rather than according to God's 
order. 4. The hereditary evils left from the past of men's iniquity. 

II. Tribulation as takkn up into the Divine ministry. This is at once sealed 
and explained by the word "tribulation," as the Christian synonym for earthly troubles. 
The Latin origin of the word, as taken from tribulum, the threshing-roller, should be 
explained. The sorrows of life may seem but as the crushing of a great roller; they 
are but the separating of the chaff from the wheat, and tho gracious means by which 
the sufferer is sanctified. The Christian system proposes no less a thing than the full 
recovery of s man from sin and his full confirmation in holiness, and it uses a variety 
of agencies for tlie perfecting of its work ; but it should ever be a wonder and a joy to 
ns that it should propose to take over the whole burden of human sorrow and trouble 
and use even it for effecting its blessed design. So, though no affliction can, even to 
the Christian, seem other than grievous, not joyous, yet we may be sure that God's 
hand — God's good hand — is upon it all, and that " afterward it will yield the peaceable 
fruits of righteousnesa,, if only we are duly exercised thereby." And at last it even 
comes to be the glory of the Christian that he is under God's tribulum ; and the glory 
of the Christians by-and-by that "they have come out of great tribulation, and havt 
V»shed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb." 



45ft TfiE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. (<m.xrr.l—^. 

in. Tbibciation ab belated to the kingdom we hope to I5NTER. Whether w« 
conceive the kingdom as entered now or as to be entered when we pass from earthly 
spheres, the one essential feature of it is holiness, full deliverance from sin. That 
kingdom "nothing enteieth that defileth or that maketh a lie." As a matter of actual 
experience, it may be urged and illustrated that the " meetness for the inheritance of 
the saints in lig'nt" can only be wrought out of trouble. Trials, testings, discoveries 
of secret sins, even the humiliations of afSiction, bear directly on the fitness for the 
kingdom. When we feel what heaven is, we find out what a great work is to be dene 
to meeten ub for it. — B. T. 

Ter. 28. — Prayer as a recommendation to the grace of God. The Syrian Antioeh Is 
here referred to as the place " from whence the two great missionaries had been recom- 
mended to the grace of God," and from ch. xiii. 3 we learn in what this recommendation 
to the grace of God consisted : " And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid Aeir 
hands on them, they sent them away." We fix attention, then, on the point that we 
know what were the prayers of these Antiochene disciples. They were intercessory 
prayers, and they, lovingly commended the Christian labourers to the grace of God. 
When prayer, for any reasons, cannot be precise and definite request for particular 
things, it can still be offered, and take this every-way satisfactory form, a commendation 
of those for whom we pray to the grace of God. We may sliow how (1) such a kind o( 
prayer may satisfy our love and our longing for the good of others ; and (2) how it may 
secure for them even better blessings than any precise requests, based only on our 
thought of their well-being. What can we do so well for our friends as bring down 
over them the hallowing shadow of the Pather-God ? 

L Such prater mat satisft oub love and lonqino fob the good of othebs. 
For, after all, just the one thing we want for them is to have God for their portion. No 
Inquests for temporal blessings can adequately express our hearts' desires. Ask what 
we may, we feel that we have not asked enough or asked the best things. So we get 
no rest in prayer for others until we learn simply to commend them to the grace of God. 
The same may be shown by pointing out that our knowledge of our friends' needs is 
never adequate, and we may make serious error by asking unsuitably. There can be no 
mistake if we ask for them God's grace. 

n. SlTCH FBATEB 8ECUBES THE BEST BLESSINGS FOB OUB FBIEND8. For In having 

God they have all. To be within the grace and keeping and supply of God is to have 
the best blessings, in fittest adaptations. Illustration should be taken from the first 
missionary journey of Barnabas and Paul. They were prospered and preserved hecatise 
they were within the grace of God. — B. T. 

Ver. 27. — " The ioor offaithr The narrative of the returned missionaries, m given 
to the assembled Church at Antioeh, took two forms — in part it was a personal narrative 
of what they bad done and suffered ; and in part it was a re^iort of the acceptance which 
the go^iel message had received in the countries they had visited. And in this part of 
their account, one thing appeared to them to be of peculiar interest — God had manifestly 
" opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles." The expression is a sufiSciently striking 
one to be made the subject of earnest meditation. Two ways of explaining it may be 
suggested. 1. God had given them large and free access to the Gentiles for the preach- 
ing of the faith in Christ. 2. God had manifestly made faith, not circumcision, the 
ground of admission to his kingdom ; and so the Gentiles could be saved. Gospel 
privileges were offered to every one that believed. For St. Paul's use of this figure of the 
"door" variously applied, see 1 Cor. xvi. 9 ; 2 Cor. ii. 12 ; Col. iv. 3 ; and comp. Rev. ilL 8. 
The figure is a suggestive one. The special fevour of God had been enjoyed by the 
Jews, and in a manner limited to them. They had been, as it were, shut np with God in 
his house ; none else might come in, for the door was sliut. But now, in the greatness 
of God's mercy to men, he had opened the door, made a new and most gracious condition 
of admission, and invited " whosoever would " to enter in. The grace of this was too 
surprising to the Jewish mind, and it was a long time ere it could receive the truth. 
Such testimonies as Barnabas and Paul brought from Gentile lands did much to 
establish the free right of all believing men to enter the one Fatbei*! house, through hii 
gradoualj opened door. 



(m.*w.l— S8J TSa ACTS OF ThB At»OSl:LEB. 461 

I. Th« Christian missionaries found tbeb access to thb Gkntilbs. They had 
gone forth fully understanding that the door was open to preach the gospel to the Jews. 
They knew that, wherever they went, they could enter the synagogues, expound the 
Scriptures, and preach Christ; but events that happened brought home to them the 
conviction that Jewish privileges were no longer exclusive, and that God had " granted 
unto the Gentiles also repentance unto life." Recall the incidents which brought to the 
missionaries this conviction. They found Divine providence leading them to speak to 
Gentile audiences. They found that Divine grace had been before them, creating in 
the Gentile mind a preparedness for and a susceptibility to the gospel message. And 
they found that the condition of entrance into the new gospel standing and gospel 
privileges was one which the Gentiles could meet, since /oi'i/i is common to human 
nature, and in no sense special to any one race. It would even seem that the mission- 
aries felt their work among the Gentiles to be more hopeful than that among the Jews. 
And it led them to cherish serious thoughts about the vast work to be done among the 
Gentile nations, now God had so evidently opened the door to them all. Illustrate from 
the way in which the Church of Christ has been led on to preach the gospel to one 
nation after another, by the opening of providential doors ; especially illustrating Irom 
China, and more recently Central Africa. The inspiration of Christian missions is this 
fact, " God has opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles." 

II. The Christian missionabieb had learned to declare that faith, and 

FAITH ALONE, WAS THB GROUND OP ADMISSION MTO God's KINGDOM. They addressed 

an audience that was still largely under Jewish mental bonds. Even the early 
disciples seem for a long time to have cherished the idea that Christianity was only a 
reformation of Judaism. The very apostles could not readily accept the truth of sal- 
vation ly faith alone. They thought that at least the Jewish requirement of circum- 
cision must be made. But Barnabas and Paul rendered their testimony to the fact of 
their finding the " faith-condition " quite sufficient. They had required no other ol 
their Guntile converts, and God had sealed them by the gift of his Spirit, and they had 
manifested every sign of the true Christian life. Faith is the only door into the king- 
dom, but there is no entrance save by this door. Still the gospel message is, "B»'ieve 
on th« Lord Jesus Christy and thou ittmXt b« wed." — E. T. 



HOMILETICAL INDEX 

TO 

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



VOLUME L 



CHAPTEE L 



The Recapitulation ... .- 6 

The Grain of Mustard Seed ... 7 

The Bewarda of Iniquity ... ... 8 

Christ's Mission and ours ,m ••• 9 

Wisdom in Bereavement ... ... 10 

The Path of Sin and the Way of the 

Bighteons ... ... ... H 

The Forty Days after the Passion ... 12 

Last Words ... „. ^. IS 

The Uplifting of Jesns ... ... 13 

The Interral between the Ascension 

and Pentecost ... ... ... 14 

The Dawn of the Gospel Day ... 15 

" Alpha and Omega " ... ... 16 

The Bisen Jesns ... ... ... 16 

The Dirine Equipment ... ... 17 

The Ascension : Hearen and Earth 

visibly united ... ... 17) 18 

Witnessing for Christ ... ... 18 

The Angels' Message ... ... 18 

The First BoU-Call of the Church ... 19 

The Church's First Prayer-Meeting... 19 

The Church's First Corporate Action 20 
The History, Character, and End of 

Judas Isoariot ... ... ... 20 

The World's Supreme Question to 

the Front ... ... ... 21 

The Supreme Promise to the Church 22 
Cnring for Forbidden Knowledge — 



THlin M« 

its Alterative Enlarged, Ftraotioal 
Trust... ... ... ... 25 

Heavenward Gazing recalled to 
Karthward Watching ... ... 27 

A Second Interval of Thrilling Ex- 
pectation hushing itself in Prayer 29 

Judas, his Opportunity and his Treat- 
ment of it ... ... ... 82 

The Earnest of Zeal and Fidelity ex. 
hibited by the Church Expectant... 81) 

The Apparent Incompleteness of oar 
Lord's Life ... ... ... 88 

The Origin of the Gospel Beoords ... 89 

The Threefold Aspect of onr Lord's 
Human Life ... ... ... 39 

The Holy Ghost in Christ... ... 40 

Sensible Proofs of Christ's Besnrreo- 
tion ... ... ... ... 41 

" The Promise of the Father" ... 41 

Carnal Conceptions of Christ's King- 
dom ... ... ... ... 42 

The AscensioB as the Visible Sign of 
the Acceptance of the Bedeemer ... 43 

Christ's Coming Again ... ... 41 

New Associations with the Upper 
Chamber ... ... ... 45 

Judas, an Apostle ... ... 45 

Jewish Christian Beading of the Old 
Testament ... ... ... 46 

First Signs of Order in the Early 
Church ... .„ ,. 47 



INDEX. 



CHAPTER n. 



rAOK 

56 
57 
59 
60 
61 



The Unity of the Spirit ... 
The Homily ... ... 

Holy Baptism 

The Coming of God in Power 

Truths from Peter's Sermon 

The Gospel according to Petet ... 62 

Spiritual Fervour ... ... 62 

The Epoch of the Spiritual Dispensa- 
tion ... ... ... ... 63 

The Amazement of the Multitude ... 64 
Interpretation of the Phenomena of 
the Spirit ... ... ... 64 

The Connection of the Christian 
Events ... ... ... 65 

The Parable of the Besnrrection in 
Darid's Psalm ... ... ... 65 

Effects of the Divine Power upon the 
Heart ... ... ,.. 66 

Effects of the Pentecostal Day ... 67 
The Day of Pentecost : the Manifes- 

tation of the Spirit ... 67i 74 

Baptism of the Holy Ghost ... 68 

Spiritual Facts in a World unprepared 
to receive them ... ... 69 

The Spirit speaking through the 
Voice of an Apostle ,,. ... 69 

The Common Salvation ... ... 69 

The Divine Humanity ... ... 70 

Boysl Bounty ... ... ... 70 

The Day of Spiritual WondeM ... 70 
The Soul'i Questions answered ... 71 
God's Promise of the Spirit ... 72 

The Beginning of Great Thing! ... 72 
The Spiritual Commonwealth ... 73 

God'e Work amongst Men... ... 73 

The First Practice of Baptism as » 
Christian Bite ... ... ... 80 

The First B^gime of the Body of 
Christ's Disciplei as a Christian 
Oommunity ... ... ... 81 

The Church's Immediate Assertion of 
her own Moral Forces ... ... 82 

The Symbols of the Spirit's Presence 84 
The Great Lesson of the Pentecost ... 85 
Men's Attitudes toward Things be- 
yond Explanation ... ... 86 

Prophecies of the Times of the Spirit 87 
The I'jnt Facts of Gospel Freaohing 88 
The First Arg^ument for the Besur- 
reotion ... ... ... 89 



THun rMi 

The Explanation of the Signs of 
Pentecost ... ... ... 90 

The Gospel Demands from Men ... 90 
Early Impulses of Christian Disciples 91 



CHAPTER in. 




The Unexpected Gift 


... 96 


The Two Judgments 


... 97 


Helplessness and Healing... 


... 98 


The Human and the Divine 


... 99 


The Greatness of Jesus Christ 


... 100 


The Healing of the Lame Man 


... 101 



Witness of Peter to Jesus ... 102, 117 

The Apostles Workers of Miracles ... 104 

Spiritual Riches ... ... ... 105 

A Great Sermon to • Wondering 

Multitude ... ... ... 105 

The Power of Faith ._ ... 106 

Conversion ... ... ... 107 

The Mission of Jesus Christ ... 108 
Peter's Second Sermon and its Results 

— One Evening's Good Work ... 108 
The True Importance of Ancestry — 

what it is ... ... ... 112 

Habits of Public Prayer ... ... 113 

The Kinship between Religion and 

Charity ... ... ... 115 

The Power of Christ's Name ... lU 
Responsibility in the Possession of 

Power ... ... ... 117 

Man's Ruling and God's Orermling 119 
Times of Refreshing and of Restitu- 
tion • ■• — ... ... 120 

Moses* Witness to the Christ ... 121 

Christ's Mission to the Jews ,„ 183 



CHAPTER IV. 

The First Persecution ... I17, 136 

Church Unity ... „ ... igs 

Truth from the Tribunal ... ,„ 129 

Association with Christ ... ... 129 

The Simpler and the Deeper Truth... 180 
Spiritual Inflexibility! a Sermon to 

those in the Midst of Life ... 131 

The Use of Freedom ... ... 181 

The Resource of the Devont, etc. ... 182 

Christ's Servants before the Tribunal 182 

The Joy of Faith confirmed ... 184 

A Glimpse of Ideal Social Life .„ 18C 



INDEX. 



Ui 



The Serranta ia the Footsteps tt 
their Lord ... ... ... 137 

The Unfolded Banner of Salvatioa ... 137 
The Impotenoe of Unbelief ... 138 

Witneasing for Ofariat ... ... 138 

The Aggreiiirenesi of the Gospel ... 139 
The Two Eingdoma in Array againat 
one Another ... ... ... 139 

The Host of Gk)d drawing together in 
BeadinesB for Action ... ... 140 

Obriatian Communism ... ... 140 

A Great Example of Spiritaal BxoeU 

lence ... •■• 1*0 

The First Trial of Ohristian Preachers 
in a Oonrt of Judgment, and their 

Tietory • ... 1*1 

The Grateful, Emboldened, and 
Prayerful Church, and the Spirit's 
Witness ... ... ... 144 

A Kovel Unanimity ... ... 146 

The Earliest of the Tares in the Field 
ol the Church ... ... ... 148 

The First Prisoners for Christ ... 151 
The Despised Stone a Sure Founda- 
tion ... ... ... ... 152 

The One Saving Name ... ~ ... 153 
Signs of having been vrith JesUs ... 154 
Praise for Safety and Prayer for 
Power ... ... ... 154 

Nothing our own... ... „• 155 

"Great Grace" ... ... ^ 156 

Ths Power of a High Example m« 156 



OHAPTEB 


V. 






The First Hypocrisy 
The Advancing Tide 
A IVital Forgetfnlness 
Elements of Influence 


••• 
•M 


••• 
••• 


163 

164 
105 
166 


Three Things Divine 
The Cross and the Crown 
Our Attitude towards Goc 


• •• 


•■• 


IGO 
167 
168 



The Sin of Heart : Untruth and its 

Punishment ... ... ... 169 

The Healing Personality of Christ's 

Servants ... .» ... 170 

Arrest of the Apostles «• ••• 170 

Power and Weakness «• — 172 

The Death of Ananias .m — 173 

Conspiracy against God ,., ,„ 173 

"Clear Shining after Eaiti" ... 174 

Second Peraeoutiofl of the Churoh ... 175 



TnxHK VMS 

The Church's Mission to the World ... VJ6 
" We ought to obey God rather than 

Men" 176 

The Throne of Meroy ... ... 176 

A Study of Jewish Character: Ga- 
maliel... ... ... ... 177 

The True Witnessing Spirit ... 177 

Jerusalem's Second Summer ... 177 
A Grand Victory for the Truth along 

the Whole Line, eto. ... ... 180 

The Theme oS Themes i the Angel's 

Charge ... ... ... 183 

Joy in the Fellowship of Shame ... 184 

The Conviction of Ananias ... 186 
Helpers in Sin must be Sharers Ls 

Judgment ... ... ... 186 

Hindrances to Belief ... ... 187 

Bodily Healings may prepare for 

Spiritual Ones... ... ... 188 

Angel-Help ... ... ... 189 

The Hopelessness of Fighting against 

God ... ... ... ... 190 

The Present Boyalty and Bights of 

Jesus... ... ... .M IfiO 

The Advice of the Cautious «• Ul 



CHAPTEE Vl 

Wise Counsels ... »• «• Vt5 

Fanaticism ... ... ... 196 

Prosperity and Peace within the 

Church ... ... ... 197 

The Service of the Lip and the Glory 

of the Conntenance ... ... 198 

The Appointment of Deacons „• 19:) 

Stephen's Work and Witness .^ 800 

Institution of Deacons ... .„ 201 

The First Note of Strife ... ... 202 

An Earnest Ministry the Greatest 

Need and Blessing of the Church... 202 

The Fruits of Faith ... ... 202 

Stephen before the Council ... 203 
The First CrystalUzings of Ecclesi- 
astical Institation ... ... 203 

Convincing Testimonies to the Force 

of the New Faith ... ... 204 

The Logic of Heavenly Lustre ... 206 

The Call for Order in the Church ... 208 

The True Fitness for Church Offices 209 

Tbe Work of the Ministry... ... 210 

Stephen, the Proto.Mart;fr .. ^H 



It 



INDEX. 



TJttaa PA OB 

The Laying on of Hands ... ... 212 

The Weakness of Ferseouton ... 212 

The AngeUFace 3n Man ... ... S18 

CHAPTER VII. 

The First Martyrdom ... 222, 234, 236 

Living Faith ... ... ... 223 

Israel and Egypt: Divine Providence 224 

The Divine and the Haman . . . 225 

Sin and Bighteoosness ... ... 226 

lllnstrations ... ... ... 227 

Stephen's Address: Lessons of the 

Patriarchal Time ... ... 228 

Israel in Egypt : the Bise of Moses... 230 

The Call of Moses ... ... 231 

Moses, and Israel's Bearing towards 

him : a Figure of Christ ... 232 

Lessons of Sacred History... ... 233 

Stephen's Address in the Sanhedrim 235 
The Secital of a, Nation's Spiritual 

Pedigree — its Leading Suggestions 236 

Marks of the Bom Reformer ... 238 
Rebuke, and the 111 Faith that cornea 

of Jnst Eebuke, refused ... ... 240 

I1»e Slory of the Martyr ... ... 242 

Stephen's Defence ... ... 244 

The Ethics of Scriptnre Quotation ... 245 

A Prophet like Moses ... ... 246 

Visions of the Risen Christ ... 247 
Oar Introduction to the Greatest of 

Apostles ... ... ... 248 

Noble Dying Cries ... m. 849 

CHAPTER VIII. 

The Pi-nits of Persecution ... 855 

The First Heretic ... ... 256 

The Word Written preparing the Way 

for the Word Preached ... ... 257 

Perversion and Restoration ... 257 
Success and Disappointment in Chris- 
tian Work ... ... ... 258 

The Christian Teacher and Disciple... 259 
Incidents of Persecution and Disper- 
sion ... ... ... ... 260 

The Impostor nmnasked ... ... 261 

Philip and the Ethiopian ... ... 262 

The Enemy coming in like a Flood ... 263 

The Grave beside the Church ... 263 

The First FUght of ihe Word ... 264 

i^m»ri» OTan^elized ,,, ,,. |64 



TREm Ti.QM 

Missions to the Masses ... >.• 264 

The Spiritof Lies cast out... ... 865 

The Spirit of Mammon in the Chris- 
tian Church ... ... ... 265 

The Second Flight of the Gospel ... 266 

Jesns the Hope of the World ... 266 

The Way of Pleasantness... ... 266 

Discordant Elements obedient to the 

Accomplishment of One Purpose ... 266 

New-Found Joy ... ... ... 268 

The Type of One stricken with Re- 
ligious Bliudness ... ... 271 

A Life true to Light led to the Light 

true to Life ... ... ... 278 

Providence making Missionaries ... 275 
Intense against Christ may become 

Intense for him ... ... 276 

Preaching Christ... ... ... 277 

Warnings from Simon Magus ... 278 

The Gift of the Holy Ghost ... 279 

The Inquiring Proselyte ... ... 280 

Testing the Impulse to Confession ... 281 

CHAPTER IX. 

The Ethiopian changes his Sldn ... 288 

The Fisher of Men ... ... 290 

Conversion ... ... ... 291 

The Goads of God ... ... 291 

Christ's Treatment of us and onr Obe- 
dience to him ... ... ... 292 

The Texture of Human Life ... 293 

The Opportunity and Obligation of 

the Church ... ... ... 294 

The Miraculous and the Supernatural 265 

Saul on his Way to Damascus ... 295 

Saul and Ananias ... ... 297 

Saul at Damascus ... ... 298 

Saul's Visit to Jerusalem ... ,.. 299 

Works of Peace ... .„ ... 299 

The Sign from Heaven ... ... 300 

Baptism of St. Paul ... ... 30I 

A Spiritual Wonder ... ... 801 

The New Convert proving his Sin- 

cerity... ... ... ... 302 

The New Faith exposed to Trial ,,. 802 
The Church's Seal upon the New 

Acquisition ... ... ... 803 

Edification ... ... ... 803 

Wonderfol Ministry of the Apostle 

Peter ... ... ... 308 

The Baising of Poroi^ ,., „, |KH 



INDEX. 



rAaa 

The One Qneation of Conversion ... 304 
The Consideratenessof a Love already 

Infinite ... ... ... 806 

The Act of Capitalation ... ... 308 

The gequeatrated Sonl ... ... 809 

The Sight that Jesas notei ... 311 
The Choice of Perfect ForgiTeneu ... 313 
Jesna' Far-Seeing Compassion appear- 
ing in an Unexpected Way ... 314 
A Parable in Things Spiritual ... 316 
Amazement's Opportanity ... 317 
The Beginning of Perils for Pan) ... 318 
An ni Odour and its Remedy ... 320 
History a Sermon ... ... 321 

One Specimen of Christian Activity 322 
The Emphatic Mark of Divine Appro- 
bation which Christianity puts upon 

.Womanly Kindness, etc. ... 323 

"The Way" ... ... ... 325 

The Power of a Revelation ... 326 

Blind Eyes, but Open Soul ... 327 

God's Chosen Vessels ... ... 328 

Saul's First Sermons ... ... 829 

The Belation between Edifying and 

Multiplying ... ... ... 329 

A Bodily Absent Christ may be a 

Spiritually Present Power ... 330 

ApoBtolio and other Resurrections ... 831 

CHAPTER X. 

The Indenture ... ... ... 837 

The Great Surprise ... ... 338 

Piety, its Place, its Associations, and 

its Reward ... ... ... 338 

Man in God's Sight ; or. Divine Im- 
partiality ... ... ... 839 

The Imitable and Inimitable in Jesus 

Christ ... ... ... 840 

The Pious Centurion ... ... 840 

The Ecstasy and Vision of Peter ... 841 

Peter's Visit to Csesarea ... m. 842 

Peter and Cornelius ... ... 343 

Discourse of Peter at Ciesares ... 343 

Descent of the Spirit at Csesarea ... 344 
The Spirit of God in the Gentile 

World: Csesarea ... ... 846 

The Light of Heaven on the Open 

Gate of a New World ... ... 345 

The Fiuger-Post of Providence ... 345 
The First Trumpet-Sound of the 

©gspel !» the Me^ihf^ WorW . „ 3^6 



THKIIR PAGS 

" God is no Respecter of Persons "• ... 846 

The Universal Proclamation ... 846 

The Great Philanthropist ... ... 347 

The Saviour's Charge to his Ministers 347 

Faith directed to its Highest Object 3 18 

The First Gentile Church ... ... 348 

Broadening Foundations ... ... 348 

Devont Heathen ... ... ... 850 

The Intimacy of Divine Knowledge 852 

Nothing Common in God's Sight ... 352 
Providences may translate BeveU- 

tions ... ... ... ••■ 353 

Ciood Hearers ... ... ... 855 

Believers outside Judaism ... ... 855 

The Gospel for the Heathen ... 856 

CHAPTER XI. 

The Mystery ... ... - ... 860 

Rectification and Enlargement ... 361 
The any Ways and the One Work 

of God ... ... ... 362 

God's Bounty and our Well-Being ... 363 
The Spirit of Sect and the Spirit of 

the Gospel ... ... ... 364 

Founding of the Church at Antioch... 365 
The Church of God set on the New 

Foundation of Liberty ... ... 366 

A New Centre of Evaugelistic Work : 

Antioch ... ... ... 866 

The Christian Name ... ... 367 

Practical Sympathy between Jaw and 

Gentile ... ... ... 307 

A Model Church Meeting ... ... 367 

The Surprises of the Grace of God ... 369 

An Early Co-Pastorate ... ... 871 

The Efficient Answer to Objectors ... 372 

Well-Stored Memories ... ... 873 

" Repentance onto Life " ... „• 874 

Good Barnabas ... ... ,„ 876 

Antiochene Christians ... ,^ 877 

CHAPTER XXL 

The World and the Churoh ... 882 

Sin in High Places ... ... 384 

The Strength and Weakness of Chris- 
tian Discipleship ... ... 885 

Human Pride and Divine Retribution 886 

The Persecution at Jerusalem ... 887 

The Death of Herod ... ... 888 

^erodjim yefiecBtion of ^hp 0^^r9tl §|J» 



INDEX. 



Judgment on the Boyal Perseontor... 389 

Sanctified Affliction ... ... 889 

Ordination uf Barnabas and Saul to 

the Missionary Work ... ... 889 

The Chnrcb in Prayer ... ... 890 

One Instance of the Manner of Divine 

Working ... ... ... 891 

Hollow Grandeur exposed ... ... 892 

The Power of United Prayer ... 891 

Miiticnloiis Doliveraucei . . ... 895 

Testimony versus Keagoning ... 897 

The Sin of Accepting Dirine Ilonoar* 398 

Tho Growings of the Word ... 898 

The Character of John Mark „. 899 



VHAPTBE XIII. 

The Inrasion of Heathendom ... 4111 

The New Testament in tho Old ... 410 

The Savour of Death and of Lif» ... 412 

An Illustrious Church ... ... 412 

Frowardness and Frailty ... ... 41ii 

The Christian Faith ... ... 414 

Ministerial Success ... ... 415 

Ordination af Barnabas and Sanl ... 416 
The MJBBiOB in Oypm» ... 416,420 
Paul's Missionary Discomrso at Antioch 

iaPisidia ... ... ... 417 

Jemsh Jealousy ... ... ... 419 

A Rapid Journey by Sea ind Land . . . 420 
Paul's Sermon in the Synagogue kt 

Antiooh ... ... ... 420 

The Character of David ... ... 421 

The Proclamation ... ... 421 

Jewish Opposition overruled to the 

World's Good ... ... ... 421 

Spiritual Joy ... ... ... 422 

An Ordination Service ... ... 422 

Obstruction of the Truth summarily 

▼iaited : the Blighter blighted ... 423 



TaEm MSI 

Another Faithful Sermon to the Jew 424 

Present Service, Promised Sleep ... 425 

Unexpected Interpretations ... 427 

The Clash of Two Worlds in Christ ... 428 

Human Separation to Divine Misaiona 429 

The Presidency of the Holy Ghost ... 430 

Seekers after God ... ... 431 

John Baptist's llelations with Christ 432 

Serving One's Generation ... ... 433 

Fcirg;iveness of Sins ... „. 436 

CHAPTER XIV. 

The Word and tho Miracle ^ 439 

Apostolic Experience ... ... 440 

The Insufficient and the Efficaoions ., 440 
The Christian Leader and the Novi- 
tiate ... ... ... ... 441 

The Work of God ... ... 442 

" The Door of Faith" .„ 443, 458 

The Gospel at Iconinm ... ... 443 

Healing of the Lame Man at Lystra 443 
Eeturn to Antiooh : a Picture of Apos- 
tolic Activity ... ... ... 445 

Faithful Service : Iconinm ... 446 
The Light shining in Darkness: 

Lystra ... ... ... 446 

Dangers and Successes ... ... 446 

Spiritual Confirmation ... ... 447 

The Calm Force of the Gospel amid 

Many Distractions of Men ... 447 

Three Instances of Faith ... ... 448 

" Once was I stoned " ... ... 44» 

The Return Home ... ^ 450 

Hinderers of Christian Work ... 450 

No Gods, only God ... „. 452 

God's Ways with the Nations ... 453 

The Witness of Harvest-fimes ... 454 

Through Tribulation to the Kingdom 455 
Prayer as a Recommendation to the 

Grace of God ... ,» ^ 466 



Mil 



